 Perspectives
Moving treatment-free remission into mainstream clinical practice
in CML
Timothy P. Hughes and David M. Ross
Haematology, SA Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia; and South Australian Health & Medical Research Institute,
Adelaide, Australia
The dramatic success of tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) has led to the widespread
perception that chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML) has become another chronic dis-
ease, where lifelong commitment to phar-
macologiccontrolis the paradigm.Recent
trials demonstrate that some CML pa-
tients who have achieved stable deep
molecular response can safely cease their
therapy without relapsing (treatment free
remission [TFR]). Furthermore, those who
are unsuccessful in their cessation at-
tempt can safely re-establish remission
afterrestartingtheirTKI therapy.Basedon
the accumulated data on TFR, we propose
that it is now time to change our ap-
proach for the many CML patients who
have achieved a stable deep molecular re-
sponse on long-term TKI therapy. Perhaps
half of these patients could successfully
achieve TFR if offered the opportunity. For
many of these patients ongoing therapy is
impairing quality of life and imposing a
heavy financial burden while arguably
achieving nothing. This recommendation
is based on the evident safety of cessa-
tion attempts and TFR in the clinical trial
setting. We acknowledge that there are
potential risks associated with cessation
attempts in wider clinical practice, but this
should not deter us. Instead we need to
establish criteria for safe and appropriate
TKI cessation. Clinical trials will enable us
to define the best strategies to achieve
TFR, but clinicians need guidance today
about how to approach this issue with
their patients. We outline circumstances
in which it would be in the patient’s best
interest to continue TKI, as well as
criteria for a safe TFR attempt. (Blood.
2016;128(1):17-23)
Introduction
As the era of up-front stem cell transplantation for chronic phase
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) came to an end, it was proposed that
lifelong imatinib treatment might offer an “operational cure,” durable
freedom from disease progression and disease-related symptoms and
signs. A decade later, the field has moved on to the more ambitious goal
of operational cure without the need for continuing tyrosine kinase
inhibitor(TKI)treatment.Indoingso,wemustalwaysbearinmindthat
patients with a good response to TKI treatment should not be exposed
to unnecessary risk. Stopping effective treatment has until now been
largelyconfinedtotheclinicaltrialsetting.Inthisarticle,weacknowledge
that many patients with a sustained deep molecular response would stop
their TKI if they could do so safely, and we discuss patient selection
criteriaandinstitutionalrequirementsfortheprovisionofsafemonitoring
and reinstitution of TKI treatment outside a clinical trial.
Success of TKI therapy
The introduction of imatinib, and subsequent TKIs, for the treatment of
CML in the early chronic phase has been one of the great success stories
of modern medicine. The natural history of CML has been dramatically
altered, so that patients who might once have died of progressive disease
within 5 to 7 years of diagnosis are now more likely to die of other causes
than from CML.1 Results from the United States Surveillance, Epide-
miology,andEndResults(SEER)databasefromtheperiod2000to2005
showed that the proportion of deaths in CML patients from cancers other
than CML slightly exceeded those attributed to CML (36.1% vs 34.9%,
respectively), with a further 29% of deaths from nonmalignant causes.1
There has been a corresponding increase in the overall survival of
CML patients. Chronic phase CML patients treated with TKIs in
clinical trials in the MD Anderson Cancer Center since 2000 had a
5-year overall survival estimated at 94.7% relative to the general
population of the United States.2 Results from clinical trials in centers
of excellence are frequently better than “real world” results, but
population-based registries also confirm the improvement in survival
since the introduction of TKIs. Based on data primarily from the first
half of the decade in which TKIs were introduced, the 5-year relative
survivalwas;70%,incomparisonwithrelativesurvivalaslowas10%
to 20% a decade earlier when interferon (IFN)-a or allogeneicstem cell
transplantation was the standard of care.3 More recent data are likely to
be better still: in the same population-based study, the 5-year relative
survival for CML patients diagnosed in 2002 was 63% and increased to
80% for patients diagnosed in 2006.
Assuming that the incidence of CML is relatively constant, the
prevalence of the disease is dependent on patient survival. In fact,
the incidence is likely increasing in most developed countries where
the median age of the population is increasing. Considering the near-
normal relative survival of CML patients, the number of patients living
with CML is rising dramatically. One study projected that the peak
prevalenceofCMLwillbereachedaroundtheyear2050,with;180 000
CML patients living in the United States at that time (an approximate
ninefold increase since the year 2000).4 In this context, the provision
oflifelongTKItreatmentisasubstantialandgrowingfinancialburden
for CML patients and health funding agencies. Generic imatinib is
now available in some countries, but TKIs remain unaffordable for
many patients, especially those for whom imatinib is not the preferred
choice.
Submitted January 26, 2016; accepted March 22, 2016. Prepublished online
as Blood First Edition paper, March 24, 2016; DOI 10.1182/blood-2016-01-
694265.
© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology
BLOOD, 7 JULY 2016 x VOLUME 128, NUMBER 1
17
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 Deep molecular response
The phase 3 International Randomized Study of Interferon and STI571
(IRIS) trial compared imatinib with IFN plus cytarabine and showed
a significant improvement in progression-free survival for patients
randomized to the TKI, even though the majority of patients in the IFN
arm crossed over to imatinib.5 This was accompanied by unprecedented
rates of cytogenetic response: a complete cytogenetic response was
observed in 8.5% of patients treated with IFN vs 73.8% of patients treated
with imatinib. The level of minimal residual disease (MRD) achieved in
chronic phase CML patients is so much better with TKI treatment that, in
the great majority of patients, cytogenetic analysis is no longer informa-
tive after the first 6 months of TKI treatment.6 This therapeutic success
ultimately led to the widespread adoption of molecular monitoring by
sensitive real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction for Breakpoint Cluster Region-Abelson murine leukemia viral
oncogene homolog1(BCR-ABL)transcripts(RQ-PCR).Inturn,thegoals
oftreatmentareincreasinglybasedonmoleculardefinitions,asoutlinedin
therespectiveguidelinesoftheEuropeanLeukemiaNet7andtheNational
Comprehensive Cancer Network (available at www.nccn.org).
In the first 2 years of TKI treatment, the achievement of a major
molecular response (MMR; BCR-ABL #0.1%) is a primary goal of
treatment, because it is associated with very high rates of progression-
free survival.8 Many patients achieve MMR in the first 6 to 12 months
of treatment, but a large fraction of these patients will have a further
reduction in the level of MRD with continuing TKI treatment, leading
to progressively deeper molecular responses and even undetectable
MRD (UMRD).9 The level of MRD that is undetectable is determined
by the lower limit of detection of the assay in use. PCR-based methods
vary in efficiency from run to run, as can RNA extraction. Sample
quality may also vary, especially if there is a delay from collection to
RNA stabilization. This inherent variability makes it difficult to stan-
dardize UMRD. Consequently, there has been a move away from
reportingUMRDtoreportingafixedlevelofmolecularresponse.10The
lower limit of detection of RQ-PCR currently averages around MR4.5
(BCR-ABL #0.0032%), so that UMRD and MR4.5 are approximately
equivalent in many laboratories today. MR4.5 includes both patients
with detectable BCR-ABL #0.0032% and patients with undetectable
BCR-ABL in a sample with a calculated detection limit of $4.5 logs
below standardized baseline.
MR4.5 occurs in ;20% of imatinib-treated patients in the first 2
to 3 years, but this proportion rises to ;40% after 5 to 7 years.9 This
progressive slow recruitment of patients to MR4.5 raises the possibility
that with very prolonged treatment, the level of MRD may continue to
fall,aslong as effectivetreatmentis continued.Using more potentTKIs,
such as nilotinib and dasatinib, the rates of MR4.5 in the first 2 years are
higher,11,12 and it is hoped that this will ultimately lead to even higher
proportions of patients with MR4.5. In the phase 3 Evaluating Nilotinib
Efficacy and Safety in Clinical Trials newly diagnosed (ENESTnd)
study,therateofMR4.5by4yearswas40%withnilotinib300mgtwice
daily vs 23% with imatinib 400 mg daily.11 In the Dasatinib Versus
Imatinib Study in Treatment-Naive CML Patients (DASISION) study
comparing dasatinib 100 mg with imatinib 400 mg daily, MR4.5 was
achieved by 3 years in 22% vs 12% of patients, respectively.12
Problems with ongoing TKI therapy
Atrulysuccessfulchemotherapyisonethatisgivenforafiniteperiodof
time and is then no longer needed. This is a paradigm that most people
are familiar with, following the example of cytotoxic chemotherapy for
acute leukemia or Hodgkin lymphoma. For many CML patients, the
chronicillnessthattheyareawareofisnotCML,butasyndromeofTKI
side effects. In our experience, most patients who have achieved a deep
molecular response eventually ask whether they can stop their TKI.
A study of patients treated with several TKIs found that approxi-
mately one-third of patients experienced moderate to severe TKI-related
side effects.13 Importantly, the severity of TKI side effects tended to
remain relatively constant over time. A study undertaken in imatinib-
treated patients showed impaired physical and mental health status in
patients,60yearsofage,whereasolderCMLpatientsonaveragehada
health status comparable to age-matched controls.14
In addition to these chronic TKI toxicities, there is growing aware-
nessofotheruncommon,butpotentiallyserious,risksoflong-termTKI
treatment that may emerge after months or years. These risks include
pleural effusion and pulmonary hypertension with dasatinib15 and
vascularevents with nilotinib.16Imatinib appearsto berelativelyfree of
such late toxicities, but an accelerated decline in glomerular filtration
rate has been reported.17 None of the TKIs are recommended for
patients trying to conceive or during pregnancy or lactation.
Treatment-free remission: current status
More than 20 years ago, it was reported that someCML patients treated
with IFN could remain in stable cytogenetic remission after their
IFN was stopped, despite having detectable BCR-ABL by reverse
transcriptase-PCR.18 In 2002, Mahon and colleagues reported on a
small number of patients with UMRD during IFN treatment, who
stopped IFN and remained in molecular remission.19 Patients in that
study who had achieved MMR, but not UMRD, all showed molecular
relapse. The maintenance of UMRD, or MRD detectable at a stable low
level, without the need for ongoing treatment is commonly termed a
treatment-free remission (TFR). The French CML Intergroup went on
to report TFR in the Stop Imatinib (STIM) study in ;40% of 100
imatinib-treated patients who had maintained UMRD for $2 years.20
In this study, half of the patients had received prior therapy with IFN,
and the remainder were treated de novo with imatinib. The Australasian
Leukaemia & Lymphoma Group Trial of Withdrawing Imatinib in
StableRemission(TWISTER)studyreportedalmostidenticalresultsin
40 patients with similar clinical characteristics.21 Both studies reported
a higher TFR rate in patients with prior IFN exposure, although this
observationispotentiallyconfoundedbya selectionbias,because high-
risk patients may have been unlikely to remain on IFN for long enough
to benefit from the switch to imatinib. Both studies reportedhigher TFR
rates in Sokal low-risk patients, although this difference was not
statistically significant in the smaller Australian study. Both studies
also reported that most patients regained UMRD within 3 to 6 months of
restartingimatinibtreatmentinresponsetoaconservativeRQ-PCR–defined
trigger. In TWISTER, this trigger was loss of UMRD with any 2
consecutivepositive RQ-PCRresults.InSTIM,the triggeralsoincluded
a requirement for a significant (10-fold) rise in BCR-ABL between the
first and subsequent RQ-PCR measurements.
A follow-up study (A-STIM; According to STIM) from the French
group enrolled 80 patients, again with a similar mix of de novo patients
and prior IFN treatment.22 A-STIM tested the use of a less stringent
definition of molecular relapse as the trigger to restart therapy. Patients
who lost UMRD remained under close observation, and imatinib was
restarted only at loss of MMR. This enabled the investigators to
determine the TFR rate using both the original STIM definition and the
newer MMR-based definition. The TFR rate using the STIM definition
18
HUGHES and ROSS
BLOOD, 7 JULY 2016 x VOLUME 128, NUMBER 1
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 was close to that of the 2 earlier studies, but a higher proportion of
patients (64% at 2 years) maintained MMR without treatment. In
contrast to the original STIM study, no effect of Sokal score was seen.
Whetherthisdifferenceisrelatedtotherelativelysmallnumbersofhigh-
riskpatientsorwhethertheeffectofSokalscorediffersbetween“grades”
of TFR (UMRD vs MMR) is unclear. Remarkably, some patients in
MMR with detectable BCR-ABL mRNA have maintained a stable level
ofresponseforperiodsinexcessof2years,whereasthedoublingtimeof
BCR-ABL without treatment (,14 days) is normally such that
cytogenetic or hematologic relapse would have been expected.23 The
biology underlying this observation is an area of active study.
The large, multinational European Stop Kinase Inhibitor study
(EuroSKI) study is enrolling patients treated with multiple TKIs, and uses
both a less stringent entry criterion of MR4.0 for $12 months and the less
stringent retreatment trigger: loss of MMR. At the time of the latest
abstract, ;480 patients had been enrolled, but outcome data were
reported for only the first 100 patients with $6 months of follow-up.24
At this early time point, the TFR (MMR) rate was similar to A-STIM,
but these results require confirmation with longer follow-up.
Updated results of the Korean Imatinib Discontinuation Study
(KIDS) were recently published on a cohort of 82 patients who had
received up-front imatinib (and 8 patients with prior IFN).25 Fifty-nine
Criteria
Institutional criteria met (per table 1)
Sokal score at diagnosis
BCR-ABL transcript at diagnosis
CML past history
Response to first line TKI therapy
Duration of all TKI therapy
Duration of deep molecular response
monitored in a standardized laboratory
All green lights: strong recommendation to consider TKI withdrawal
Any yellow lights: only consider TKI withdrawal in high priority circumstances
(e.g. significant toxicity or planned pregnancy)
Any red lights: TKI withdrawal not recommended except in clinical trial
Depth of deep molecular response
Yes
Non-high
Typical -
B2A2 or B3A2
(e13a2 or e14a2)
CP only
Optimal
> 8 years
> 2 years
MR4.5
-
High
Atypical, but
can be
accurately
quantified
Resistance or
KD mutation
Warning
3–8 years
1–2 years
MR4.0
No
-
Not
quantifiable
Prior AP or
BC
Failure
< 3 years
< 1 year
Not in MR4.0
Green
Yellow
Red
Figure 1. Criteria to guide selection of patients suitable for a TFR attempt. KD, kinase domain; AP, accelerated phase; BC, blast crisis.
Table 1. Summary of key inclusion criteria and TKI retreatment triggers used in clinical trials
Study
TKI
Number of patients
reported
Required depth of
MR
Minimum duration of MR
(years)
Trigger to resume
TKI
STIM20
Imatinib (6prior IFN)
100
UMRD (MR5.0)
2
Loss of UMRD*
TWISTER21
Imatinib (6prior IFN)
40
UMRD (MR4.5)
2
Loss of UMRD
A-STIM22
Imatinib (6prior IFN)
80
UMRD†
2
Loss of MMR
EuroSKI24
Imatinib/nilotinib/dasatinib
200
MR4.0
1
Loss of MMR
Stop
2GTKI28
Nilotinib/dasatinib first and second
line
52
UMRD (MR4.5)
2
Loss of MMR
KIDS25
Imatinib (6prior IFN)
90
UMRD (MR4.5)
2
Loss of MMR
HOVON32
Imatinib
18
UMRD (MR4.5)
2
Loss of UMRD
DADI27
Second-line dasatinib
63
MR4.0
1
Loss of MR4.0
STIM226
Imatinib
124
UMRD (MR4.5)
2
Loss of UMRD
DADI, Dasatinib Discontinuation study; HOVON, Stichting Hemato-Oncologie voor Volwassenen Nederland.
*A-STIM allowed occasional low level positive RQ-PCR results during the 2 years of UMRD.
†Loss of UMRD in STIM and STIM2 was defined as $2 consecutive samples with detectable BCR-ABL and a 1-log increase; in TWISTER and the HOVON study, any 2
consecutive samples at any level were considered loss of UMRD.
BLOOD, 7 JULY 2016 x VOLUME 128, NUMBER 1
TREATMENT-FREE REMISSION IN CML
19
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 percent of the 90 patients remained in MMR at 2 years. The French
group has reported interim results of the STIM2 study in abstract.26 This
study is enrolling only patients treated de novo with imatinib. The
preliminary analysis showed a TFR (MMR) rate that was similar to
KIDS and A-STIM at ;60%.26 First-line TKI treatment represents the
bulk of contemporary patients, and studies in first-line patients will give
bring the opportunity to study the effect of Sokal score and imatinib
responsekineticswithouttheconfoundingeffectsofpriorIFNtreatment.
The key inclusion criteria used in TFR studies to date and the respective
triggers for restarting TKI therapy are summarized in Table 1.
Data on TFR after more potent TKIs are currently very limited, but
major studies are underway with both nilotinib and dasatinib. The first
prospectiveTFRstudywithdasatinibwasrecentlyreportedfromJapan.
The DADI study enrolled 63 patients treated with dasatinib second line
after imatinib.27 Most of the patients switched due to intolerance or
“patient preference,” with only 21% having European Leukemia Net
suboptimal response to imatinib or treatment failure. Using loss of
MR4.0 as the trigger to restart dasatinib, Imagawa and colleagues
reported a TFR rateof 58% among those patients switching to dasatinib
due to intolerance or patient preference. The TFR rate was only 8% in
those with suboptimal response to imatinib. A lower rate of TFR for
patients on a second-line TKI after suboptimal imatinib response was
also seen in the preliminary results of the Stop 2GTKI study.28 The
negative effect of prior suboptimal response was less striking in that
study with TFR (MMR) sustained at 12 months in 42% of patients
switching for inadequate response vs 67% of the remaining patients.
The minimum duration of TKI therapy required for inclusion in
several TFR clinical trials has been as short as 3 years, but it is important
to be aware that very few patients have successfully discontinued
therapyaftersuchashorttime.ThemediandurationoftotalTKItherapy
was typically ;5 to 8 years in the studies mentioned above. In the large
EuroSKI study, only 16% of patients had ,5 years of prior TKI
treatment.24 A longer duration of TKI treatment has been associated
with a higher probability of maintaining TFR: this difference was
statistically significant in some studies20,24,29 but not all.27,30 Yet,
other studies have shown no effect of total TKI duration.21,22,31,32
These were all retrospective analyses, differing in treatment history
or molecular response/relapse definitions and often with relatively
small numbers of patients. It is not possible to draw firm conclusions
from these data, but there is a suggestion that attempting TFR after a
shorter duration of TKI treatment may reduce the likelihood of a
successful outcome. This observation leads to several clinically
important questions. Is there an optimum duration of TKI treatment
prior to attempting TFR, beyond which there is little or no further
improvement in the probability of maintaining TFR? If so, it is likely
that this duration will vary between patients, and there is a need for
clinical or laboratory biomarkers that may improve prediction of TFR.
Second, if a patient stops therapy “prematurely” (when he or she might
havemaintainedTFRafterseveralyearsofadditionalTKItherapy),has
that person’s longer-term chance of TFR been compromised by the
initial failed attempt at TFR?
Risks associated with a TFR attempt
For a patient in deep molecular remission continuing on TKI therapy,
the risk of experiencing disease progression and dying from CML is
negligible. In this context, any excess risk of CML progression is
unacceptable in a patient without significant TKI toxicity. From all
of the published reports of TFR to date, involving .1000 patients,
we are aware of only 1 such case. This patient was not typical of the
contemporary CML population and had started imatinib 10 years
after her original diagnosis of CML. She lost MMR after stopping
imatinib and was responsive to retreatment, but 8.5 months later
developed blast crisis.22
An imatinib withdrawal syndrome consisting of diffuse myalgia/
arthralgia may be encountered. In most cases, this syndrome can
be managed with simple analgesia or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs.Itcanpersistformonthsbutisusuallyself-limiting.33Occasional
cases are severe enough to warrant prednisolone treatment. There are
numerous reportsof improvement in inflammatory arthritis during TKI
therapy, and we encountered 1 patient in whom a TKI “withdrawal
syndrome” turned out to be a flare of undiagnosed rheumatoid arthritis
thatwaspresumablymaskedbyTKItreatment.TheKIDSinvestigators
reported that patients with an imatinib withdrawal syndrome had a
higher probability of maintaining TFR.25
An issue that has not been formally explored is the psychological
impact of being off TKI therapy. Some patients might experience
significant anxiety relating to concerns of relapse, and almost 50% of
patients in an Italian survey said that they would be afraid of losing
theirdisease response.34It isalsopossiblethatpatients who are offered
a TFR attempt might misinterpret this as permission to reduce or omit
doses.
Which patients should not be considered for a
TFR attempt?
There are rare CML patients, ;2% to 3% of all newly diagnosed cases,
with atypical BCR-ABL transcripts that cannot be monitored on the
BCR-ABL International Scale. For these patients, clinically important
RQ-PCR end points, such as MMR or MR4.5, cannot be measured
with certainty. Therefore, these patients are not suitable candidates
for a TFR attempt. Similarly, there are occasional patients whose
original BCR-ABL transcript type at diagnosis is not known (eg, Ph-
positive patients who did not have RQ-PCR early in treatment).
There is a small risk that such a patient has atypical transcripts,
where an apparent low level of MRD will be misleading. These
patients may not be suitable to attempt TFR.
In patients with a prior history of TKI resistance, it is clear that the
probability of maintaining TFR is lower, and patients should be made
aware of this when discussing the option of TFR. A TFR attempt may
still be appropriate in such patients if their quality of life is impaired by
significant TKI toxicity. Almost all of the statements made about TFR
are referring to adult chronic phase CML patients with no prior history
of accelerated phase or blast crisis. In patients who have achieved a
second chronic phase, we would be very reluctant ever to stop TKI
outside of a clinical trial.
Given the rarity of CML in childhood, there are only very limited
reports of TFR in children.35,36 The available information is concor-
dant with the adult experience, and we would not preclude children
from attempting TFR. However, this would be an area where clinical
trials would be especially important and should always be considered
the first priority when considering a TKI withdrawal attempt.
Table 2. Institutional requirements for safe supervision of TFR
1. Availability of high quality internationally standardized, accurate, sensitive RQ-
PCR laboratory
2. Rapid turn-around of RQ-PCR test results, within 4 weeks
3. Capacity to provide RQ-PCR tests every 4-6 weeks, when required
4. Structured follow-up established to enable rapid intervention if BCR-ABL is rising
20
HUGHES and ROSS
BLOOD, 7 JULY 2016 x VOLUME 128, NUMBER 1
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 Children and adolescents face special issues related to growth, self-
image, and fertility, and because their lifelong duration of treatment
will be so much greater, their potential for TKI toxicity must be
greater. Advanced age is not a contraindication to TFR, and age does
not appear to be a risk factor for molecular relapse. It is reported that
the impairment of quality of life in older patients on TKIs is less than
in younger patients,14 and therefore the incentive to attempt TFR
may be less in older patients. Conversely, older patients may be at
higher risk of specific TKI toxicities, such as pleural effusion and
arterial thrombosis, and these risks need to be taken into account.
Some of the key factors that determine a patient’s suitability for a
TFR attempt are summarized in Figure 1.
How should TKI withdrawal attempts
be managed?
The provision of timely RQ-PCR results is crucial to the safety of
patients undergoing a TFR attempt. Most patients failing a TFR
attempt do so with an exponential increase in BCR-ABL, rising ;1
log per month. Consequently, there is a need for results to be
available rapidly so that they can be acted on. The sensitivity of
RQ-PCR testing is also crucial, both for assessing eligibility
(confirming deep molecular response) and to detect impending
relapse as soon as possible. Because most relapses occur within
6 months of stopping TKI, we would recommend close monitoring
during that time. If high-quality RQ-PCR is not available or cannot
be provided frequently and promptly, then a TFR attempt cannot
be undertaken safely. It is also important that the RQ-PCR assay
has been standardized and expressed on the International Scale so
that the values of MR4.5 and MMR can be reliably determined.37
Institutional requirements for TFR are summarized in Table 2.
Patients who are unwilling or unable to comply with frequent
monitoring should not be offered a TFR attempt.
For patients remaining in TFR beyond the first 6 months, the risk of
relapse is lower, and less frequent testing, eg, every 2 to 3 months, may
be sufficient. The question of how long to continue monitoring is more
difficult toanswer. The latest reported loss of TFR was at 42 months, so
there is clearly a need for monitoring beyond the first few years. In
the CML allograft setting late relapses (beyond 5 years) do occur,
averaging ;0.5% to 1% per year.38 At present, the number of TFR
patients with reported follow-up in excess of 5 years is so small that we
cannotreliablyestimatetheriskoflaterelapse.Untilsuchinformationis
available, we would recommend indefinite RQ-PCR monitoring every
3 months.
Where the criteria for a safe TFR attempt are met (see Figure 1), the
first step toward TKI withdrawal is a detailed conversation with the
patient to ensure that he or she is fully informed of the potential risks
and benefits and aware of the need for close follow-up. To minimize
unnecessary anxiety, it is important to explain that molecular relapse is
completely different from hematologic relapse and that clinically
relevant consequences of molecular relapse are rare. Some vignettes
to illustrate issues in the decision-making process are presented in
Table 3.
Areas of future investigation
Several studies of IFN in combination with TKI have been
completed in recent years or are in progress. Rates of deep molecular
response in 2 independent studies in France and Scandinavia were
higher in the pegylated IFN-imatinib combination arm than in the
standard imatinib arm,39,40 but no such difference was seen in
the equivalent arms of the German CML IV study.41 TFR rates
for patients achieving deep molecular response with combination
Table 3. Informed decision-making for TFR candidates: practical examples
Case summary
Recommendation
Case 1: A 58-year-old woman has been taking imatinib 400 mg daily for
10 years. She has ongoing mild myalgia and arthralgia, but overall
she reports that her quality of life is as good as that of many of her
friends. She has maintained UMRD for 8 years.
In favor of a cessation attempt. Informed that there is a .50% likelihood that
TFR could be achieved, but that the risks of stopping need to be weighed
carefully against the risks of continuing, which in this case were very
low. She decided not to stop TKI at this stage, saying that imatinib had
been a normal part of her life for many years. Stopping imatinib would
mean having more frequent blood tests, which she saw as an
inconvenience with no meaningful gain. She was worried about the
hypothetical risk that a period off therapy might lead to a loss of sensitivity
to imatinib, arguing that even if this risk is small it is a risk that she
need not take.
Case 2: A 78-year-old man treated with CML on imatinib 400 mg daily
for 6 years. He has never achieved UMRD, but has maintained MR4.0
for the last 2 years. He is considering TKI cessation because of side
effects (diarrhea and anemia).
In favor of a cessation attempt. Chances of TFR may be ,50%, because he
has received ,8 years of TKI therapy and has only achieved MR4.0.
However, he has substantial side effects, which in this case would be
sufficient justification for a cessation attempt. Counseling here is
important so that he understands the high probability that TKI withdrawal
will not be successful.
Case 3: A 31-year-old woman with CML diagnosed 4.5 years ago. She
received imatinib 600 mg daily for 2 years and then switched to
nilotinib due to failure to achieve MMR. She rapidly achieved MR4.5
on nilotinib, which she has now maintained for 2 years.
Against proceeding with a cessation attempt at this stage. Recommended
persisting with nilotinib for another 2 years and then consider a cessation
attempt. The probability of TFR at this stage given the poor response
to imatinib and the relatively short total duration of TKI is likely to be
,50%. A premature attempt may significantly delay the time when she
can successfully achieve TFR. Recognizing that fertility declines rapidly
past the age of 30, there is a significant risk that the patient will go ahead
without physician support and adequate monitoring. Some clinicians
would stop TKI and use IFN as maintenance therapy in this situation.
BLOOD, 7 JULY 2016 x VOLUME 128, NUMBER 1
TREATMENT-FREE REMISSION IN CML
21
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 therapy have not yet been reported. These data may help to clarify
whether a finite period of IFN exposure does have a durable effect
on the probability of TFR.
Approximately 40% to 60% of patients with a deep molecular
response stopping TKI will require retreatment and regain a deep
molecular response. What hope is there for a second attempt at TFR?
There is a report on the outcome of a small number of patients from the
French TFR studies attempting TFR for a second time.42 The duration
of UMRD prior to the second attempt was no longer than the period of
UMRD prior to the first attempt, yet ;20% of these patients remained
in TFR at the time of the report. This is another surprising observation:
the TKI and the depth of molecular response were unchanged, yet
the outcome was different. Enabling patients to have a second
attempt at TFR is likely to become an active area of investigation.
The rational selection of alternative (or additional) therapies will
depend on an improved understanding of the biological factors that
determine TFR.
The divergent outcomes of patients in TFR studies with similar
levels of minimal residual disease argue that additional biological
factors have a major impact on outcome. Some of the most promising
research into this question has been in the field of immunology. In
several studies, natural killer (NK) cell numbers (or functional subsets
of NK cells) have been shown to be higher in patients who sustain TFR
than in those who experience molecular response.27,43,44 Immunologic
anergy may be a feature of CML, and diverse immunologic effector
responses including T-cell cytotoxicity and NK-cell effects may be
involved.45,46 Which of these markers of immune function is most
relevantisnotyetclear,andnoneofthesestudieshaveyetdemonstrated
that an immunologic end point has positive predictive value for sub-
sequent TFR, independent of clinical parameters. The availability of a
biomarkerthataccuratelypredictsaveryhighorverylowprobabilityof
TFR would be a significant step forward.
Enormous progress has been made in the quantification of
BCR-ABL transcripts by RQ-PCR, but the measurement error of
any PCR assay is increased by stochastic effects at low levels of
the target, and a more sensitive assay could mitigate this effect. In
addition, we and others have compared the quantification of BCR-
ABL in genomic DNA and RNA in serial samples and have shown
that individual patients may have consistently higher or lower
expression of BCR-ABL mRNA for a given number of CML
cells.47,48 This interindividual difference results in a measurement
bias whereby RQ-PCR may underestimate the level of residual
disease in some patients. Although genomic Q-PCR for BCR-ABL
is not widely available, it is a promising research tool to elucidate the
relationship between MRD and TFR outcome.
Not if, but when and how
In our opinion, the safety data from the TFR studies reported to date are
sufficiently reassuring that we feel comfortable in offering all eligible
patients a supervised test of TKI withdrawal. The optimum eligi-
bility criteria are open to debate, but the available data suggest that
patients should have a minimum of 12 months of deep molecular
response with MR4.0 or better. A history of prior TKI resistance
should be viewed as a relative contraindication to attempting TFR,
and such patients should be aware of their higher risk of relapse
before making a decision. There is some evidence that a longer
duration of treatment/deep molecular response is associated with a
higher probability of TFR, but there must be a practical balance
between the additional burden of prolonged treatment and the
potential to improve the TFR rate. There are still many unanswered
questions concerning TFR, so eligible patients should be strongly
encouraged to participate in clinical trials where possible. The
absence of a suitable trial should not preclude a patient from
stopping TKI treatment, but outside the structure of a clinical trial, it
would be useful to have consensus recommendations to guide those
clinicians for whom TFR represents a new area of practice.
We proposed some criteria for patient selection and some criteria
for institutional capability to supervise a TFR attempt, primarily
access to timely and accurate standardized RQ-PCR results. If all
of these criteria can be met, then we believe that TFR should become
a routine part of clinical practice. Unfortunately, in many regions of
the world, the availability of quality RQ-PCR is not sufficient,
which means that TFR cannot be attempted safely. This poses a
dilemma for many clinicians who recognize that some of their patients
could otherwise be appropriately offered an attempt at TFR. This
represents a new challenge for the global CML community.
Authorship
Contribution: T.P.H. and D.M.R. wrote the paper.
Conflict-of-interest disclosure: T.P.H. has received research
funding and honoraria from Novartis, BMS, and Ariad. D.M.R.
has received research funding from Novartis and honoraria from
Novartis and BMS.
Correspondence: Timothy Hughes, South Australian Health &
Medical Research Institute, PO Box 11060, Adelaide, SA 5001,
Australia; e-mail: tim.hughes@sahmri.com.
References
1. Brunner AM, Campigotto F, Sadrzadeh H, et al.
Trends in all-cause mortality among patients with
chronic myeloid leukemia: a Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results database
analysis. Cancer. 2013;119(14):2620-2629.
2. Sasaki K, Strom SS, O’Brien S, et al. Relative
survival in patients with chronic-phase chronic
myeloid leukaemia in the tyrosine-kinase inhibitor
era: analysis of patient data from six prospective
clinical trials. Lancet Haematol. 2015;2(5):
e186-e193.
3. Pulte D, Barnes B, Jansen L, et al; GEKID Cancer
Survival Working Group. Population level survival
of patients with chronic myelocytic leukemia in
Germany compared to the US in the early 21st
century. J Hematol Oncol. 2013;6(1):70.
4. Huang X, Cortes J, Kantarjian H. Estimations of
the increasing prevalence and plateau prevalence
of chronic myeloid leukemia in the era of tyrosine
kinase inhibitor therapy. Cancer. 2012;118(12):
3123-3127.
5. O’Brien SG, Guilhot F, Larson RA, et al; IRIS
Investigators. Imatinib compared with interferon
and low-dose cytarabine for newly diagnosed
chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J
Med. 2003;348(11):994-1004.
6. Ross DM, Branford S, Moore S, Hughes TP.
Limited clinical value of regular bone marrow
cytogenetic analysis in imatinib-treated chronic
phase CML patients monitored by RQ-PCR for
BCR-ABL. Leukemia. 2006;20(4):664-670.
7. Baccarani M, Deininger MW, Rosti G, et al.
European LeukemiaNet recommendations for the
management of chronic myeloid leukemia: 2013.
Blood. 2013;122(6):872-884.
8. Hughes TP, Kaeda J, Branford S, et al;
International Randomised Study of Interferon
versus STI571 (IRIS) Study Group. Frequency of
major molecular responses to imatinib or
interferon alfa plus cytarabine in newly diagnosed
chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2003;
349(15):1423-1432.
9. Branford S, Seymour JF, Grigg A, et al. BCR-
ABL messenger RNA levels continue to decline
in patients with chronic phase chronic
myeloid leukemia treated with imatinib for
more than 5 years and approximately half of all
first-line treated patients have stable
undetectable BCR-ABL using strict sensitivity
criteria. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13(23):
7080-7085.
10. Cross NC, White HE, Colomer D, et al. Laboratory
recommendations for scoring deep molecular
22
HUGHES and ROSS
BLOOD, 7 JULY 2016 x VOLUME 128, NUMBER 1
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 responses following treatment for chronic myeloid
leukemia. Leukemia. 2015;29(5):999-1003.
11. Hughes TP, Saglio G, Kantarjian HM, et al. Early
molecular response predicts outcomes in patients
with chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic phase
treated with frontline nilotinib or imatinib. Blood.
2014;123(9):1353-1360.
12. Jabbour E, Kantarjian HM, Saglio G, et al. Early
response with dasatinib or imatinib in chronic
myeloid leukemia: 3-year follow-up from a
randomized phase 3 trial (DASISION). Blood.
2014;123(4):494-500.
13. Williams LA, Garcia Gonzalez AG, Ault P, et al.
Measuring the symptom burden associated with
the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood.
2013;122(5):641-647.
14. Efficace F, Baccarani M, Breccia M, et al;
GIMEMA. Health-related quality of life in chronic
myeloid leukemia patients receiving long-term
therapy with imatinib compared with the general
population. Blood. 2011;118(17):4554-4560.
15. Kantarjian HM, Shah NP, Cortes JE, et al.
Dasatinib or imatinib in newly diagnosed chronic-
phase chronic myeloid leukemia: 2-year follow-up
from a randomized phase 3 trial (DASISION).
Blood. 2012;119(5):1123-1129.
16. Chai-Adisaksopha C, Lam W, Hillis C. Major
arterial events in patients with chronic myeloid
leukemia treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors:
a meta-analysis [published online ahead of print
October 20, 2015]. Leuk Lymphoma.
17. Yilmaz M, Lahoti A, O’Brien S, et al. Estimated
glomerular filtration rate changes in patients with
chronic myeloid leukemia treated with tyrosine
kinase inhibitors. Cancer. 2015;121(21):
3894-3904.
18. Lee MS, Kantarjian H, Talpaz M, et al. Detection
of minimal residual disease by polymerase chain
reaction in Philadelphia chromosome-positive
chronic myelogenous leukemia following
interferon therapy. Blood. 1992;79(8):1920-1923.
19. Mahon FX, Delbrel X, Cony-Makhoul P, et al.
Follow-up of complete cytogenetic remission in
patients with chronic myeloid leukemia after
cessation of interferon alfa. J Clin Oncol. 2002;
20(1):214-220.
20. Mahon FX, R´
ea D, Guilhot J, et al; Intergroupe
Franc
¸ais des Leuc´
emies My´
elo¨
ıdes Chroniques.
Discontinuation of imatinib in patients with chronic
myeloid leukaemia who have maintained
complete molecular remission for at least 2 years:
the prospective, multicentre Stop Imatinib (STIM)
trial. Lancet Oncol. 2010;11(11):1029-1035.
21. Ross DM, Branford S, Seymour JF, et al. Safety
and efficacy of imatinib cessation for CML
patients with stable undetectable minimal residual
disease: results from the TWISTER study.
Blood. 2013;122(4):515-522.
22. Rousselot P, Charbonnier A, Cony-Makhoul P,
et al. Loss of major molecular response as a
trigger for restarting tyrosine kinase inhibitor
therapy in patients with chronic-phase chronic
myelogenous leukemia who have stopped
imatinib after durable undetectable disease.
J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(5):424-430.
23. Branford S, Yeung DT, Prime JA, et al. BCR-
ABL1 doubling times more reliably assess the
dynamics of CML relapse compared with the
BCR-ABL1 fold rise: implications for monitoring
and management. Blood. 2012;119(18):
4264-4271.
24. Mahon FX, Richter J, Guilhot J, et al. Interim
analysis of a pan European stop tyrosine kinase
inhibitor trial in chronic myeloid leukemia: the
EURO-SKI study [abstract]. Blood. 2014;124(21).
Abstract 151.
25. Lee SE, Choi SY, Song HY, et al. Imatinib
withdrawal syndrome and longer duration of
imatinib have a close association with a lower
molecular relapse after treatment discontinuation:
the KID study [published online ahead of print
February 17, 2016]. Haematologica. doi:10.3324/
haematol.2015.139899.
26. Mahon FX, Nicolini FE, No¨
el MP, et al.
Preliminary report of the STIM2 study: a
multicenter stop imatinib trial for chronic phase
chronic myeloid leukemia de novo patients on
imatinib [abstract]. Blood. 2013;122(21). Abstract
654.
27. Imagawa J, Tanaka H, Okada M, et al; DADI Trial
Group. Discontinuation of dasatinib in patients
with chronic myeloid leukaemia who have
maintained deep molecular response for longer
than 1 year (DADI trial): a multicentre phase 2
trial. Lancet Haematol. 2015;2(12):e528-e535.
28. Rea D, Nicolini F, Tulliez M, et al. Dasatinib or
nilotinib discontinuation in chronic phase (CP)-
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) patients (pts)
with durably undetectable BCR-ABL transcripts:
interim analysis of the STOP 2G-TKI study with a
minimum follow-up of 12 Months: on behalf of the
French CML Group Filmc [abstract]. Blood. 2014;
124(21). Abstract 811.
29. Takahashi N, Kyo T, Maeda Y, et al.
Discontinuation of imatinib in Japanese patients
with chronic myeloid leukemia. Haematologica.
2012;97(6):903-906.
30. Benjamini O, Kantarjian H, Rios MB, et al.
Patient-driven discontinuation of tyrosine kinase
inhibitors: single institution experience.
Leuk Lymphoma. 2013;55:2879-2886.
31. Yhim HY, Lee NR, Song EK, et al. Imatinib
mesylate discontinuation in patients with chronic
myeloid leukemia who have received front-line
imatinib mesylate therapy and achieved complete
molecular response. Leuk Res. 2012;36(6):
689-693.
32. Thielen N, van der Holt B, Cornelissen JJ, et al.
Imatinib discontinuation in chronic phase myeloid
leukaemia patients in sustained complete
molecular response: a randomised trial of the
Dutch-Belgian Cooperative Trial for Haemato-
Oncology (HOVON). Eur J Cancer. 2013;49(15):
3242-3246.
33. Richter J, S¨
oderlund S, L¨
ubking A, et al.
Musculoskeletal pain in patients with chronic
myeloid leukemia after discontinuation of imatinib:
a tyrosine kinase inhibitor withdrawal syndrome?
J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(25):2821-2823.
34. Breccia M, Efficace F, Sica S, et al. Adherence
and future discontinuation of tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in chronic phase chronic myeloid
leukemia. A patient-based survey on 1133
patients. Leuk Res. 2015;39(10):1055-1059.
35. Giona F, Saglio G, Moleti ML, et al. Treatment-
free remission after imatinib discontinuation is
possible in paediatric patients with chronic
myeloid leukaemia. Br J Haematol. 2015;168(2):
305-308.
36. Millot F, Claviez A, Leverger G, Corbaciglu S,
Groll AH, Suttorp M. Imatinib cessation in children
and adolescents with chronic myeloid leukemia in
chronic phase. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014;61(2):
355-357.
37. Hughes T, Deininger M, Hochhaus A, et al.
Monitoring CML patients responding to treatment
with tyrosine kinase inhibitors: review and
recommendations for harmonizing current
methodology for detecting BCR-ABL transcripts
and kinase domain mutations and for expressing
results. Blood. 2006;108(1):28-37.
38. Goldman JM, Majhail NS, Klein JP, et al. Relapse
and late mortality in 5-year survivors of
myeloablative allogeneic hematopoietic cell
transplantation for chronic myeloid leukemia in
first chronic phase. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(11):
1888-1895.
39. Simonsson B, Gedde-Dahl T, Markev¨
arn B, et al;
Nordic CML Study Group. Combination of
pegylated IFN-a2b with imatinib increases
molecular response rates in patients with low-
or intermediate-risk chronic myeloid leukemia.
Blood. 2011;118(12):3228-3235.
40. Preudhomme C, Guilhot J, Nicolini FE, et al;
SPIRIT Investigators; France Intergroupe des
Leuc´
emies My´
elo¨
ıdes Chroniques (Fi-LMC).
Imatinib plus peginterferon alfa-2a in chronic
myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2010;363(26):
2511-2521.
41. Hehlmann R, M¨
uller MC, Lauseker M, et al. Deep
molecular response is reached by the majority of
patients treated with imatinib, predicts survival,
and is achieved more quickly by optimized high-
dose imatinib: results from the randomized CML-
study IV. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(5):415-423.
42. Legros L, Rousselot P, Giraudier S, et al. Second
attempt to discontinue imatinib in CP-CML
patients with a second sustained complete
molecular response. Blood. 2012;120(9):
1959-1960.
43. Ilander MM, Olsson-Str¨
omberg U, L¨
ahteenm¨
aki
H, et al. Early disease relapse after tyrosine
kinase inhibitor treatment discontinuation in CML
is related both to low number and impaired
function of NK-cells chronic myeloid leukemia:
therapy [abstract]. Blood. 2014;124(21). Abstract
812.
44. Rea D, Dulphy N, Henry G, et al. Low natural
killer (NK) cell counts and functionality are
associated with molecular relapse after imatinib
discontinuation in patients (pts) with chronic
phase (CP)-chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) with
undetectable BCR-ABL transcripts for at least 2
years: preliminary results from Immunostim, on
behalf of STIM Investigators [abstract]. Blood.
2013;122(21). Abstract 856.
45. Mumprecht S, Sch¨
urch C, Schwaller J,
Solenthaler M, Ochsenbein AF. Programmed
death 1 signaling on chronic myeloid leukemia-
specific T cells results in T-cell exhaustion and
disease progression. Blood. 2009;114(8):
1528-1536.
46. Burchert A, M¨
uller MC, Kostrewa P, et al.
Sustained molecular response with interferon alfa
maintenance after induction therapy with imatinib
plus interferon alfa in patients with chronic
myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(8):
1429-1435.
47. Alikian M, Ellery P, Forbes M, et al. Next-
generation sequencing-assisted DNA-based
digital PCR for a personalized approach to the
detection and quantification of residual disease in
chronic myeloid leukemia patients. J Mol Diagn.
2016;18(2):176-189.
48. Latham S, Bartley PA, Budgen B, et al. BCR-
ABL1 expression, RT-qPCR and treatment
decisions in chronic myeloid leukaemia [published
online ahead of print February 2, 2016].
J Clin Pathol. doi:10.1136/jclinpath-2015-203538.
BLOOD, 7 JULY 2016 x VOLUME 128, NUMBER 1
TREATMENT-FREE REMISSION IN CML
23
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
 online March 24, 2016
 originally published
doi:10.1182/blood-2016-01-694265
2016 128: 17-23
 
 
Timothy P. Hughes and David M. Ross
 
CML
Moving treatment-free remission into mainstream clinical practice in
 
http://www.bloodjournal.org/content/128/1/17.full.html
Updated information and services can be found at:
 (223 articles)
Perspectives
    
 (1961 articles)
Myeloid Neoplasia
    
 (5409 articles)
Free Research Articles
    
 (4963 articles)
Clinical Trials and Observations
    
Articles on similar topics can be found in the following Blood collections
http://www.bloodjournal.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml#repub_requests
Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at:
http://www.bloodjournal.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml#reprints
Information about ordering reprints may be found online at:
http://www.bloodjournal.org/site/subscriptions/index.xhtml
Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at:
  
Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology; all rights reserved.
of Hematology, 2021 L St, NW, Suite 900, Washington DC 20036.
Blood (print ISSN 0006-4971, online ISSN 1528-0020), is published weekly by the American Society
For personal use only.
on June 1, 2019. 
by guest 
 
www.bloodjournal.org
From 
