 CONTINUING MEDICAL EDUCATION
Continuing Medical Education Activity in
Academic Emergency Medicine
CME Editor: Corey Heitz, MD
Authors: Katie E. Hughes, MD, Scott M. Lewis, BA, Laurence Katz, MD, and Jonathan
Jones, MD
Article Title: Safety of Computer Interpretation of Normal Triage Electrocardiograms
If you wish to receive free CME credit for this activity, please refer to the website: http://www.wiley
healthlearning.com/aem.
Accreditation and Designation Statement:
Blackwell Futura Media Services designates this journal-based
CME activity for a maximum of 1 AMA PRA Category 1 Credit
TM.
Physicians should only claim credit commensurate with the
extent of their participation in the activity.
Blackwell Futura Media Services is accredited by the
Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education to
provide continuing medical education for physicians.
Educational Objectives
After reading the article, participants should be able to dis-
cuss whether the computer reading of “normal” on an
EKG can be used in clinical decision making.
Activity Disclosures
This activity received no commercial support.
Faculty Disclosures:
CME Editor: Corey Heitz, MD, has no relevant financial
relationships to disclose.
Authors: Katie E. Hughes, MD, Scott M. Lewis, BA, Laur-
ence Katz, MD, and Jonathan Jones, MD have no relevant
financial relationships to disclose.
This manuscript underwent peer review in line with the
standards of editorial integrity and publication ethics main-
tained by Academic Emergency Medicine. The peer review-
ers have no relevant financial relationships. The peer review
process for Academic Emergency Medicine is double-
blinded. As such, the identities of the reviewers are not
disclosed in line with the standard accepted practices of
medical journal peer review.
Conflicts of interest have been identified and resolved in
accordance with Blackwell Futura Media Services’ Policy on
Activity Disclosure and Conflict of Interest.
Instructions on Receiving Free CME Credit
For information on applicability and acceptance of CME
credit for this activity, please consult your professional
licensing board.
This activity is designed to be completed within an hour;
physicians should claim only those credits that reflect the
time actually spent in the activity. To successfully earn
credit, participants must complete the activity during the
valid credit period, which is up to two years from initial
publication. Additionally, up to 3 attempts and a score of
80% or better is needed to pass the post test.
Follow these steps to earn credit:
•
Log on to http://www.wileyhealthlearning.com
•
Read the target audience, educational objectives,
and activity disclosures.
•
Read the article in print or online format.
•
Reflect on the article.
•
Access the CME Exam, and choose the best
answer to each question.
•
Complete the required evaluation component of
the activity.
This activity will be available for CME credit for twelve
months following its publication date. At that time, it will
be reviewed and potentially updated and extended for an
additional twelve months.
 BRIEF REPORT
Safety of Computer Interpretation of
Normal Triage Electrocardiograms
Katie E. Hughes, MD, Scott M. Lewis, Laurence Katz, MD, and Jonathan Jones, MD
ABSTRACT
Objectives: Frequent interruptions within the emergency department may lead to errors that negatively impact
patient care. The immediate review of electrocardiograms (ECGs) obtained from triage patients is one source of
interruption. Limiting triage ECGs requiring immediate attending review to those interpreted by the computer as
abnormal may be one way to reduce interruption. We hypothesize that triage ECGs interpreted by the computer
as “normal ECG” are unlikely to have clinical significance that would affect triage care.
Methods: All triage ECGs performed at the University of North Carolina were collected between November 14,
2014, and March 3, 2015, according to a standard nursing triage protocol using GE machines running Marquette
12SL software. Triage ECGs with a computer interpretation of “normal ECG” were compared to an attending
cardiologist’s final interpretation. Triage ECGs for which the cardiologist’s interpretation differed from the
computer interpretation of normal ECG were presented to two emergency physicians (EPs) blinded to the goals of
the study. The physicians were asked to evaluate the ECG for clinical significance. Clinical significance was
defined as any change from normal that would alter triage care. Triage ECGs were considered true negatives if
either the cardiologist agreed with the normal computer interpretation or if both EPs agreed that the ECG did not
show clinical significance.
Results: A total of 855 triage ECGs were collected over 16 weeks. A total of 222 (26%) were interpreted by the
computer as normal. The negative predictive value for a triage ECGs interpreted by the computer as “normal”
was calculated to be 99% (95% confidence interval = 97% to 99%). Of the ECGs with a computer interpretation
of normal ECG, 13 had an interpretation by an attending cardiologist other than normal. Two attending EPs
reviewed these triage ECGs. One of the 13 ECGs was found to have clinical significance that would alter triage
care by one of the EPs. The stated triage intervention was “bed immediately.”
Conclusions: Our data suggest that triage ECGs identified by the computer as normal are unlikely to have
clinical significance that would change triage care. Eliminating physician review of triage ECGs with a computer
interpretation of normal may be a safe way to improve patient care by decreasing physician interruptions.
E
CGs are frequently initiated in triage through
nursing protocols to avoid delays in care due to
long waiting room times. In accordance with Ameri-
can Heart Association guidelines, ECGs obtained in
triage are brought to the attending emergency physi-
cian (EP) for immediate interpretation within 10 min-
utes of arrival to the emergency department (ED).1
While
this
strategy
may
reduce
the
time
to
interpretation of the ECG, this constant flow of triage
ECGs may interrupt the EP from direct patient care.
Studies suggest EP interruptions are frequent2 and
may lead to increased medical errors.3,4 An auto-
mated
approach
that
accurately
identifies
normal
ECGs may obviate the need for immediate EP review
of these ECGs and reduce the frequency of interrup-
tion of patient care.
From the Department of Emergency Medicine (KEH, LK, JJ) and the School of Medicine (SML), University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.
Received May 13, 2016; revision received July 27, 2016; accepted July 27, 2016.
The abstract for this manuscript was presented at the American College of Emergency Physicians Research Forum, Boston, MA, October 26,
2015.
The authors have no relevant financial information or potential conflicts to disclose.
Supervising Editor: Brian C. Hiestand, MD, MPH.
Address for correspondence and reprints: Katie E. Hughes, MD; e-mail: kehughes@gmail.com.
ACADEMIC EMERGENCY MEDICINE 2017;24:120–124.
© 2016 by the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine
doi: 10.1111/acem.13067
ISSN 1069-6563
PII ISSN 1069-6563583
121
 There are limited studies investigating whether a
computer can reliably identify normal triage ECGs in
adult patients.5,6 We hypothesized that triage ECGs
interpreted as “normal” by computer analysis would
not have immediate clinical significance and therefore
would not warrant immediate EP review.
METHODS
Study Design
This was a prospective cohort study. The study was
approved by the institutional review board at the
University of North Carolina (UNC).
Study Setting and Population
All patients that had triage ECGs obtained at the
UNC adult ED between November 14, 2014, and
March 3, 2015, were included in the study. ECGs
were performed by technicians and triage nurses
according to a standard triage protocol. ECGs were
excluded from the study if the patient was less than
18 years of age. The nurse triage ECG protocol
requires obtaining an ECG on patients with a chief
complaint of chest pain; chest pressure; chest tight-
ness; weakness; unusual fatigue; palpitations; syncope;
dyspnea; or any atypical symptoms such as nausea and
vomiting or pain in the jaw, upper back, or upper
abdomen. ECGs were obtained within 10 minutes of
arrival and immediately given to an attending emer-
gency medicine physician for review.
ECGs were obtained with a GE MAC 5500 machi-
nes and interpreted using Marquette 12SL. All ECGs
obtained within the ED were uploaded to a secure
hospital server. Board-certified cardiologists blinded to
the study reviewed the ECGs and entered the final
interpretation into the medical records.
Study Protocol
ECGs performed according to triage protocol during
the designated study period were prospectively col-
lected. A chart review was performed to determine the
cardiologist’s final interpretation, patient chief com-
plaint, and ED disposition of triage ECGs reported as
normal by computer interpretation.
Data Analysis
Each ECG interpreted by the computer as normal
ECG was compared to the cardiologist’s final interpre-
tation.
If the cardiologist interpretation
was also
normal ECG this was considered an accurate com-
puter interpretation. If the cardiologist’s interpretation
differed from normal, these ECG’s were presented to
two board-certified EPs blinded to patient presentation,
patient care, and the goals of the study. The EPs were
asked to evaluate the ECG for clinical significance.
Clinical significance was defined as an ECG change
from normal ECG that would alter standard triage
care.
Triage ECGs were considered truly normal if either
the cardiologist agreed with the normal computer inter-
pretation or if both EPs agreed that the ECG’s find-
ings would not alter the triage care. The negative
predictive value (NPV) of a computer normal ECG
was determined. Confidence intervals (CIs) were calcu-
lated using Wilson’s method of CI on a proportion.
A sample size of 379 ECGs with a normal computer
interpretation would be necessary to obtain a NPV of
100% with a lower limit 95% CI of >99% assuming
no false negatives.
RESULTS
A total of 855 triage ECGs were collected over
16 weeks. A total of 222 of these (26%) were inter-
preted by the computer as normal ECG and five of
the ECGs were interpreted as STEMI. The NPV for a
computer interpretation of normal ECG was 99%
(95% CI = 97% to 99%). Of the subset of triage
ECGs with a computer interpretation of normal ECG,
13 had an interpretation by an attending cardiologist
other than normal (Table 1). Two attending EPs
reviewed these 13 triage ECGs. One of the 13 ECGs,
with an “abnormal” cardiology interpretation, was
interpreted by one of the two EPs as having an abnor-
mality that would alter triage care. The stated interven-
tion by this physician was “bed immediately” from
triage.
Subsequent
chart
review
showed
that
the
patient was discharged from the ED to follow-up for a
next-day stress test, which was within normal limits.
None of the 222 computer-interpreted normal ECGs
were interpreted as a STEMI or other interpretation
necessitating immediate catheterization lab activation
by either cardiology or two ED physicians.
DISCUSSION
Emergency physicians routinely multitask while manag-
ing
time-dependent
disease
processes.
Additional
responsibilities are time depleting and may cause loss of
122
Hughes et al. • COMPUTER INTERPRETATION OF NORMAL TRIAGE ECGS
 fidelity for complex thought processes or outright forget-
ting to return to important tasks. The results of our
study confirm that a large percentage of ECGs per-
formed in triage are normal. Eliminating the need to
immediately review computer interpreted normal ECGs
may reduce some time burdens experienced by EPs.
The results of this study are consistent with prior
studies showing a high NPV for the computer inter-
pretation of normal ECG.5 Significant advances have
been made since the first computer program was
designed to detect abnormal ECGs in 1961.7 In spite
of these advances the sensitivity of computer detection
of ECGs requiring time-sensitive interventions such as
STEMIs remains low.8 One advantage physicians
retain when interpreting ECGs is the ability to use
clinical history when acting on the results of ECGs. It
seems unlikely that computer interpretation will com-
pletely replace physician interpretation; however, it
may be possible for the computer to identify clinically
insignificant ECGs. Our data suggest that it may not
be necessary for the EP to immediately review com-
puter normal ECGs. This strategy has the potential to
reduce interruptions in direct patient care provided by
EP physicians.
LIMITATIONS
There are a number of study limitations. First, our sam-
ple size was small. A larger sample size will be required
to confirm the safety of the delayed review of computer-
interpreted normal ECGs. Additionally since the overall
incidence of STEMI in the ED population is low9 our
small sample size lead to few patients presenting with
STEMI. Second, the Marquette 12SL ECG computer
analysis software was used in a university hospital set-
ting, so our findings may not extrapolate to other clini-
cal
settings.
Finally,
the
attending
cardiologists
interpreting the ECGs were not blinded to the computer
interpretation, which may lead to bias.
CONCLUSIONS
The findings of our study suggest that computer-inter-
preted normal triage electrocardiograms may not need
immediate review. No delay in patient care or poor
outcome was associated with computer-interpreted nor-
mal electrocardiograms. Limiting immediate review of
computer-interpreted triage electrocardiograms desig-
nated as abnormal has the potential to reduce inter-
ruptions in patient care.
References
1. Antman EM, Anbe DT, Armstrong PW, et al. American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines, ACC/AHA guidelines for
the management of patients with ST-elevation myocardial
infarction. Circulation 2004;110:588–636.
Table 1
Cardiologist and ED Physician Interpretations for the Subset Computer “Normal” ECGs Interpreted by a Cardiologist as Abnormal
ED Physician 1
ED Physician 2
Cardiologist Interpretation
Interpretation
Triage
Disposition
Interpretation
Triage
Disposition
ECG1
Sinus arrhythmia
Normal
No change
Normal
No change
ECG2
Nonspecific T-wave abnormality
Normal with RSR0
No change
Normal
No change
ECG3
Nonspecific T-wave abnormality
Nonspecific ST changes
No change
Normal
No change
ECG4
Rightward axis for age, otherwise
WNL
Normal
No change
Normal
No change
ECG5
Nonspecific ST abnormality
Normal
No change
Short PR
No change
ECG6
Minor nonspecific T-wave abnormality
Normal
No change
Normal
No change
ECG7
Nonspecific ST abnormality
Long QT, nonspecific ST
changes, essentially normal
No change
Normal
No change
ECG8
Normal variant RSR0 pattern in V1,
WNL
Nonspecific changes,
essentially normal
No change
Normal
No change
ECG9
Poor data quality, interpretation may
be adversely affected
Poor baseline,
essentially normal
No change
Normal
No change
ECG10
Nonspecific ST abnormality
Lateral/inferior ST changes
No change
Normal
No change
ECG11
Nonspecific ST abnormality
Normal
No change
Normal
No change
ECG12
Left-axis deviation, poor R-wave
progression in precordial leads
T-wave flattening
anterolateral leads
No change
ST elevation aVR,
ST depression
lead II, T-wave
inversion lead III
Bed
immediately
from triage
ECG13
Rightward axis, nonspecific
T-wave abnormality
T-wave flattening
inferior leads
No change
Normal
No change
ACADEMIC EMERGENCY MEDICINE • January 2017, Vol. 24, No. 1 • www.aemj.org
123
 2. Chisholm CD, Collison EK, Nelson DR, Wordell WH.
Emergency department workplace interruptions: are emer-
gency
physicians
“interrupt-driven”
and
“multitasking”?
Acad Emerg Med 2000;7:1239–43.
3. Westbrook JI, Woods A, Rob MI, Dunsmuir WT, Day
DO. Association of interruptions with an increased risk
and severity of medication administration errors. Arch
Intern Med 2010;170:683–69.
4. Westbrook JI, Coiera E, Dunsmuir WT, et al. The impact
of interruptions on clinical task completion. Qual Saf
Health Care 2010;19:284e28.
5. Mulcahy D, Mulcahy R, Reardon B, Graham DR. Can a
computer diagnosis of “normal ECG” be trusted? Ir J Med
Sci 1986;155:416–8.
6. Snyder CS, Fenrich AL, Friedman RA, Marcias C, O’Reilly
K, Kertesz NJ. The emergency department versus the
computer: which is the better electrocardiographer? Pediatr
Cardiol 2003;4:364–8.
7. Pipberger HV, Dunn RA, Berson AS. Computer methods
in electrocardiology. Annu Rev Biophys Bioeng 1975;4:15–
42.
8. Clark EN, Sejersten M, Clemmensen P, Macfarlane PW.
Automated electrocardiogram interpretation programs ver-
sus cardiologists’ triage decision making based on teletrans-
mitted data in patients with suspected acute coronary
syndrome. Am J Cardiol 2010;106:1696–702.
9. Ward MJ, Kripalani S, Zhu Y, et al. Incidence of emer-
gency department visits for ST-elevation myocardial infarc-
tion in a recent 6-year period in the United States. Am J
Cardiol 2015;115:167–170.
124
Hughes et al. • COMPUTER INTERPRETATION OF NORMAL TRIAGE ECGS
