 Macrophages Facilitate Electrical Conduction in the Heart
Maarten Hulsmans1,†, Sebastian Clauss2,3,4,†, Ling Xiao2,†, Aaron D. Aguirre1,2, Kevin R. 
King1, Alan Hanley2,5, William J. Hucker2, Eike M. Wülfers6,7, Gunnar Seemann6,7, Gabriel 
Courties1, Yoshiko Iwamoto1, Yuan Sun1, Andrej J. Savol8, Hendrik B. Sager1, Kory J. 
Lavine9, Gregory A. Fishbein10, Diane E. Capen1, Nicolas Da Silva1, Lucile Miquerol11, 
Hiroko Wakimoto12, Christine E. Seidman12,13,14, Jonathan G. Seidman12, Ruslan I. 
Sadreyev8,15, Kamila Naxerova12, Richard N. Mitchell10, Dennis Brown1, Peter Libby13, 
Ralph Weissleder1,16, Filip K. Swirski1, Peter Kohl6,7,17, Claudio Vinegoni1, David J. 
Milan2,18, Patrick T. Ellinor2,18, and Matthias Nahrendorf1,2,19,*
1Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02114, USA 2Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA 3Department of Medicine I, 
University Hospital Munich, Campus Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich (LMU), 
81377 Munich, Germany 4DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site 
Munich, Munich Heart Alliance (MHA), Munich, Germany 5Cardiovascular Research Center, 
National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland 6Institute for Experimental Cardiovascular 
Medicine, University Heart Center Freiburg, Bad Krozingen, 79110 Freiburg, Germany 7Faculty of 
Medicine, Albert-Ludwigs University, 79110 Freiburg, Germany 8Department of Molecular Biology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA 
9Center for Cardiovascular Research, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63110, USA 10Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA 11Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, IBDM, 
Marseille, France 12Department of Genetics, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA 13Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department 
of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA 14Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815, USA 
15Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02114, USA 16Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
*Correspondence: mnahrendorf@mgh.harvard.edu (lead contact).
19Lead Contact
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
M.H., S.C., L.X., A.D.A and K.R.K. performed experiments, collected, analyzed and discussed data. A.H., W.J.H., E.M.W., G.S., 
G.C., Y.I., Y.S., A.J.S., H.B.S., K.J.L., D.E.C., N.D.S., L.M., K.N. and C.V. performed experiments and collected data. G.A.F. and 
R.N.M. provided human tissues. H.K., C.E.S., J.G.S., R.I.S., D.B., P.L., R.W., F.K.S., P.K., C.V., D.J.M. and P.T.E. conceived 
experiments and discussed results and strategy. M.N. conceived, designed and directed the study. M.H. and M.N. wrote the 
manuscript, which was revised and approved by all authors.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2017 April 20; 169(3): 510–522.e20. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.03.050.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Massachusetts 02115, USA 17Cardiac Biophysics and Systems Biology, National Heart and Lung 
Institute, Imperial College London, London SW36NP
, UK 18Program in Population and Medical 
Genetics, The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA
SUMMARY
Organ-specific functions of tissue-resident macrophages in the steady-state heart are unknown. 
Here we show that cardiac macrophages facilitate electrical conduction through the distal 
atrioventricular node, where conducting cells densely intersperse with elongated macrophages 
expressing connexin 43. When coupled to spontaneously beating cardiomyocytes via connexin 43-
containing gap junctions, cardiac macrophages have a negative resting membrane potential and 
depolarize in synchrony with cardiomyocytes. Conversely, macrophages render the resting 
membrane potential of cardiomyocytes more positive and, according to computational modeling, 
accelerate their repolarization. Photostimulation of channelrhodopsin 2-expressing macrophages 
improves atrioventricular conduction, while conditional deletion of connexin 43 in macrophages 
and congenital lack of macrophages delay atrioventricular conduction. In the Cd11bDTR mouse, 
macrophage ablation induces progressive atrioventricular block. These observations implicate 
macrophages in normal and aberrant cardiac conduction.
Graphical Abstract
Keywords
Macrophages; Heart; Atrioventricular node; Electrical conduction; Connexin 43; Gap junctions; 
Tissue clearing; Single-cell RNA-sequencing; Optogenetics; Computational modeling
Hulsmans et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 INTRODUCTION
Studies in the late 19th century described macrophages as phagocytic cells that defend the 
organism against pathogens (Metchnikoff, 1892). More recently, it became clear that 
resident macrophages populate all tissues and pursue organ-specific functions. For instance, 
macrophages contribute to thermogenesis regulation in adipose tissue (Nguyen et al., 2011), 
iron recycling in the spleen and liver (Theurl et al., 2016) and synaptic pruning in the brain 
(Paolicelli et al., 2011). These non-canonical activities highlight macrophages’ functional 
diversity and emphasize their ability to execute tissue-specific tasks beyond host defense 
(Davies et al., 2013).
The cardiac conduction system coordinates the heart’s electrical activation. Electrical 
impulse generation begins in the sinoatrial (SA) node and sequentially propagates activation 
of the atria, atrioventricular (AV) node, His and Purkinje systems and ventricles. By 
providing the only electrical connection between the atria and ventricles, the AV node plays 
an essential role. First described by Tawara in 1906 (Tawara, 1906), the AV node is located 
at the base of the right atrium and contains cardiomyocytes with distinct action potentials 
(Billette, 1987). Clinically, AV block delays or abolishes atrial impulse conduction to the 
ventricles, which can lead to hemodynamic deterioration, syncope and death if not treated 
with pacemaker implantation (Rubart and Zipes, 2008).
Macrophages are an intrinsic part of the healthy working myocardium, where they appear as 
spindle-like cells interspersed among myocytes, fibroblasts and endothelial cells (Pinto et 
al., 2012; Heidt et al., 2014; Epelman et al., 2014). Cardiac healing after injury requires 
macrophages (Swirski and Nahrendorf, 2013); however, in contrast to other organs, specific 
functions of cardiac macrophages in the steady-state are unknown. Here we report resident 
macrophages’ abundance in the distal AV node and show that they contribute to cardiac 
conduction.
RESULTS
Macrophages Abound in the AV Node
Resident macrophages are present in the left ventricle (LV), but prior work did not report on 
intra-organ heterogeneity. It therefore remained unclear whether macrophages distribute 
homogeneously throughout the heart and whether any reside in the conduction system. To 
investigate macrophages’ presence and spatial distribution, we optically cleared and imaged 
entire AV nodes of Cx3cr1GFP/+ mice, an extensively validated reporter strain in which green 
fluorescent protein identifies cardiac macrophages (Pinto et al., 2012; Heidt et al., 2014; 
Molawi et al., 2014), by confocal microscopy (Figure 1A). We found that HCN4-expressing 
cardiomyocytes (Biel et al., 2009), particularly in the lower nodal or AV bundle, frequently 
intersperse with macrophages (Figure 1B). Macrophages assume an elongated, spindle-
shaped appearance with far-reaching cytoplasmic projections (Figure 1C) that often 
approximate stromal AV (Figure S1A) and SA node (Figure S1B) cells. The average cell 
surface area of an AV node macrophage is 149 ± 24 μm2 (mean ± SEM, n = 17), which is 
similar to the cell surface area of an LV free wall macrophage (155 ± 15 μm2, n = 15, p = 
0.850, Student’s t test). To study the morphological characteristics of AV node macrophages 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 by electron microscopy, we labeled GFP+ macrophages in Cx3cr1GFP/+ mice with 
diaminobenzidine (DAB). DAB+ macrophages display long cellular processes that closely 
associate with cardiomyocytes as well as extracellular matrix (Figures 1D and S1C). In the 
mouse heart, the majority of CD45+ leukocytes are CD11b+ F4/80+ Ly6Clow macrophages. 
Co-expression of CD64 and CX3CR1 and the lack of CD11c and CD103 expression confirm 
that these cells are macrophages and not dendritic cells (Figures S1D and S1E). Flow 
cytometry, quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) of FACS-purified cardiac cells and 
immunofluorescence histology (Figures S1E–S1I) concur that CX3CR1+ cells are 
macrophages and confirm that Cx3cr1GFP/+ mice are an appropriate strain to study 
macrophages in the AV node; however, comparative studies using other macrophage-specific 
reporter systems such as Csf1rCreER mice may be valuable.
To compare macrophage numbers in the AV node and LV myocardium, we investigated 
microdissected tissue by flow cytometry and histology. The mouse AV node has a higher 
macrophage density than the LV (Figures 2A and 2B).
Steady-state myocardial tissue-resident macrophages primarily arise from embryonic yolk-
sac progenitors and perpetuate independently of monocytes through in situ proliferation 
(Epelman et al., 2014; Heidt et al., 2014;). Using parabiosis, we determined that circulating 
cells contributed minimally to AV node macrophages, similar to LV free wall macrophages 
(Figure 2C).
Single-cell RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) of mouse AV node macrophages isolated by flow 
sorting showed cellular subsets that are also present elsewhere in the heart (Epelman et al., 
2014) (Figure 2D). These macrophage subsets displayed the characteristic core macrophage 
gene signature suggested by the Immunological Genome Project (Gautier et al., 2012) 
(Figure S2A) and separated based on their expression of major histocompatibility complex 
class II (H2) and chemokine receptor 2 (Ccr2) (Figures S2B–S2D). RNA-seq and qPCR 
revealed that AV node and LV macrophages express ion channels and exchangers (Figures 
S2E and S2F), while deposited microarray data (Pinto et al., 2012) show cardiac 
macrophages’ enrichment of genes associated with conduction (Figure S2G). Thus, murine 
AV node macrophages have an expression profile similar to that of ventricular resident 
macrophages, and macrophages from both regions express genes involved in electrical 
conduction.
We also studied macrophages in six human AV nodes (please see STAR Methods section for 
clinical information on autopsy cases). Fresh AV nodes were harvested within 24 hours after 
death and underwent optical clearing after staining with the well-validated human 
macrophage markers CD68 and CD163 (Murray and Wynn, 2011). Confocal microscopy of 
500 μm thick tissue slabs revealed that, in analogy to mice, macrophages distribute 
heterogeneously and are more abundant in human AV nodes than in working myocardium 
(Figures 3A–3C). In addition to the AV node, macrophages also enriched in the central 
fibrous body (Figures 3C and S3A). As in mice, human AV node macrophages exhibit a 
spindle-shaped appearance with long-reaching protrusions (Figure 3D), which establish 
close contact with stromal cells (Figure S3B).
Hulsmans et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Connexin 43 Connects Macrophages with Myocytes
Gap junctions, which are formed by connexin (Cx) proteins, connect the cytoplasm of two 
adjacent cells to enable their communication (Unger et al., 1999). Most tissues as well as 
immune cells express Cx43 (Oviedo-Orta and Howard Evans, 2004). Cx43-containing gap 
junctions electrically couple cardiomyocytes, enable electrical impulse propagation and 
consequently coordinate synchronous heart muscle contractions (Shibata and Yamamoto, 
1977). In addition, Cx43-containing gap junctions couple cardiomyocytes with non-
cardiomyocytes, which can then alter the electrophysiological properties of cardiomyocytes 
(Ongstad and Kohl, 2016).
To determine if AV node macrophages express proteins that give rise to gap junctions, we 
evaluated six connexins found in leukocytes (Neijssen et al., 2007) in FACS-purified cells 
harvested from microdissected AV nodes. AV node macrophages mainly express Cx43 
(Figure 4A). We next sorted macrophages from the LV and right ventricular (RV) free wall 
and compared their Cx43 levels with AV node macrophages. In agreement with the RNA-
seq data that imply AV node and other cardiac resident macrophages have similar expression 
profiles (Figure 2D), we found that macrophages from all three cardiac regions express 
Cx43 (Figure 4B). Because cardiomyocytes express Cx43 at high levels, we ensured the 
purity and identity of sorted AV node macrophages by measuring different macrophage- 
(Gautier et al., 2012) and cardiomyocyte-specific markers (Park and Fishman, 2011) in 
FACS-purified cells. We also included peritoneal macrophages as a negative control 
population. All macrophage samples display a characteristic macrophage signature (Figure 
S4A) and lack expression of cardiomyocyte-specific genes (Figure S4B). As reported 
previously, peritoneal macrophages express Gata6 (Rosas et al., 2014), but AV node 
macrophages do not (Figure S4B).
We then analyzed the Cx43 protein expression in AV node macrophages by whole-mount 
immunofluorescence in the lower AV node, an area in which conducting cells express this 
connexin (Nikolski et al., 2003; Hucker et al., 2008). Cx43 marked, on average, three 
punctate contact points between CX3CR1+ macrophages and HCN4+ cardiomyocytes, 
suggesting gap unction-mediated intercellular communication between these cell types in 
the distal AV node (Figures 4C and S4C). Likewise, the human AV bundle shows punctate 
Cx43+ gap junctions between CD163+ macrophages and conducting cardiomyocytes 
(Figures S4D and S4E). Electron microscopy also visualized direct membrane-membrane 
contact between AV node macrophages and conducting cardiomyocytes (Figure 4D). 
Together, these observations indicate the presence of gap junctions between conducting cells 
and AV node macrophages.
Macrophages Electrically Modulate Myocytes
Since gap junctions electrotonically couple heterotypic cells (Rook et al., 1992), we next 
tested the hypothesis that macrophages enter electrotonic communication with adjacent 
cardiomyocytes. When cultured together, FACS-purified GFP+ cardiac macrophages closely 
interact with neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes (Movie S1). As observed in vivo, Cx43 
localized at sites of macrophage-cardiomyocyte interaction (3 ± 0.2 punctate contact points, 
mean ± SEM, n = 64, 2 independent experiments), thereby indicating gap junction 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 communication between these cell types in culture (Figure 4E). We then used whole-cell 
patch clamp to investigate the membrane potential of cardiac macrophages attached to 
cardiomyocytes. Texas Red+ dextran entering GFP+ macrophages from the micropipette 
(Figure 4F) confirms that the membrane potential we recorded derived from macrophages. 
Spontaneously-beating cardiomyocytes displayed typical resting membrane and action 
potentials (Nerbonne et al., 2001) (Figure 4G). The resting membrane potential in solitary 
cardiac macrophages is depolarized relative to that of cardiomyocytes (Figure 4G). We 
documented values between −35 and −3 mV that correspond well with data reported for 
human monocyte-derived and mouse peritoneal macrophages (Gallin and Gallin, 1977; 
Gallin and Livengood, 1980) (Figure 4H). There was no spontaneous depolarization in 
solitary cardiac macrophages (Figure 4G). Next, we co-cultured FACS-purified cardiac 
macrophages with neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes for three days and then recorded the 
membrane potential in macrophages connected to beating cardiomyocytes. 23% of these 
macrophages rhythmically depolarized with a distinct action potential-like morphology that 
was characterized by a slowed upstroke and reduced maximal polarization when compared 
to cardiomyocytes (Figure 4G). These cardiomyocyte-linked macrophages’ resting 
membrane potentials were more negative than those of solitary macrophages, thus 
documenting electrical coupling (Figure 4H). We recorded irregular depolarization in 
another 23% of co-cultured macrophages and lack of activity in the remaining 54% (Figure 
S4F). Macrophages with any kind of depolarization, either regular or irregular, had a more 
negative resting membrane potential than non-depolarizing macrophages (Figure S4G). To 
simultaneously record action potential-related fluorescence changes in macrophages and 
cardiomyocytes, we examined cardiomyocyte-driven macrophage depolarization using the 
ANNINE-6plus voltage-sensitive dye. These data show that macrophage action potentials 
are synchronous with action potentials of directly coupled cardiomyocytes (Figures S4H and 
S4I).
Are cardiac macrophages passive bystanders or do they influence conduction? To address 
this question, we investigated whether macrophages change the electrical properties of 
coupled cardiomyocytes. Indeed, macrophages render cardiomyocyte resting membrane 
potentials more positive, an effect that was reversed by pharmacological Cx43 blockade 
(Figure 4I). In control experiments, inhibition of Cx43-mediated gap junctions in solitary 
cardiomyocytes did not change their resting membrane potential (Figure S4J). Voltage dye 
imaging documented deterioration of macrophage-cardiomyocyte cross talk after gap 
junction inhibition (Figure S4K).
To explore the consequences of the observed communication between macrophages and 
cardiomyocytes, we pursued mathematical modeling of electrical interactions between 
macrophages and AV cardiomyocytes (see STAR Methods section for model parameters). 
Recapitulating the experimental data (Figure 4I), modeling indicates that the cardiomyocyte 
resting membrane potential is more depolarized when the cell is coupled to a macrophage, 
an effect that increases with gap junction conductance (Figure S4L). Modeling further 
suggests that coupling increasing numbers of macrophages accelerates cardiomyocyte 
repolarization (Figure 4J). For example, coupling three macrophages to an AV bundle 
cardiomyocyte, a ratio supported by histology (3 ± 0.3, mean ± SEM, n = 17 in 5 mice; 
Figures 1, 4C, S1A and S3B), decreases cardiomyocyte action potential duration from 30 ms 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to 21 ms while depolarizing the resting membrane potential from −69 mV to −52 mV 
(Figures 4K and 4L), assuming a gap junction conductance of 1 nS. In vivo, a shorter action 
potential duration would decrease the myocyte’s effective refractory period and increase the 
frequency at which it can be depolarized. A higher resting membrane potential would 
facilitate depolarization with less stimulation. Both alterations facilitate AV conduction at 
higher frequencies. These results correspond well with prior conceptual models of 
electrotonic interactions between cardiomyocytes and electrically non-excitable cells (Kohl 
and Gourdie, 2014).
To investigate cell-cell communication directly in the AV node, we expressed the 
photoactivatable channelrhodopsin 2 (ChR2) (Fenno et al., 2011) in macrophages to control 
their membrane potential. When illuminated, the cation channel ChR2 undergoes a 
conformational change that results in an immediate increase in ionic permeability with high 
conductance for Na+ (Nagel et al., 2003). We posited that light-triggered cation influx into 
macrophages and their resulting depolarization should alter AV node conduction if the cells 
are electrotonically coupled to conducting cardiomyocytes. To this end, we bred tamoxifen-
inducible Cx3cr1CreER with ChR2fl/fl mice, hereafter denoted Cx3cr1 ChR2, to obtain mice 
in which tamoxifen treatment triggers ChR2 expression in macrophages. First, we validated 
macrophage-specific expression of the tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase fusion protein 
(CreER) by measuring YFP fluorescence in heart tissue, as YFP is co-expressed with 
CreER. We found that YFP signal colocalizes with CX3CR1+ macrophages whereas 
cardiomyocytes are YFP negative (Figure S5A). In addition, after tamoxifen treatment, AV 
node macrophages specifically expressed the ChR2 protein, which is fused with YFP 
(Figure S5B). We then Langendorff-perfused hearts isolated from Cx3cr1 ChR2 mice and 
inserted a fiber optic cannula into the right atrium to directly illuminate the AV node region 
(please see Figures 5A and 5B for experimental setup). We assessed AV node conduction by 
ECG during rapid electrical atrial pacing, comparing continuous 470 nm wavelength 
illumination with no illumination. To evaluate, with high temporal resolution, the effect of 
ChR2-induced macrophage depolarization on AV node function, we counted the conducted 
atrial stimuli between two non-conducted impulses during rapid pacing-induced 
Wenckebach block. We observed improved AV node conduction during photostimulation of 
macrophages in hearts harvested from Cx3cr1 ChR2 mice (n = 5). When the light was 
switched on, the number of conducted atrial stimuli between two non-conducted impulses 
rose (Figures 5C and 5D). In Cx3cr1wt/CreER control hearts (n = 4), we observed no 
difference between illuminated and non-illuminated states (Figure 5D). Illumination of the 
right atrium or LV free wall in Cx3cr1 ChR2 hearts did not alter the number of conducted 
atrial stimuli (Figure S5C). Thus, opening the cation channel ChR2 in macrophages 
facilitates AV node conduction during rapid pacing. Modeling indicates that ChR2-induced 
tonic depolarization of macrophages reduces the minimum heterocellular coupling required 
to achieve macrophage-mediated passive action potential conduction between otherwise 
unconnected cardiomyocytes (Figures S5D and S5E). Taken together, these observations 
suggest that cardiac macrophages can electrically couple to cardiomyocytes via gap 
junctions containing Cx43. This leads to cyclical macrophage depolarization, modulates 
cardiomyocytes’ electrophysiological properties and improves AV nodal conduction.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Deleting Cx43 in Macrophages Delays AV Conduction
The experiments described above indicate that macrophages present in the AV node may 
facilitate conduction. To test this hypothesis in loss-of-function experiments, and to directly 
investigate the importance of Cx43 in macrophages, we bred mice, hereafter denoted Cx3cr1 
Cx43−/−, in which tamoxifen treatment deletes Cx43 in CX3CR1-expressing cells. In the AV 
node, all CX3CR1+ cells are macrophages (Figures S1D-S1I and S4A). All mice underwent 
analysis seven days after tamoxifen treatment (Figure 6A). Genomic PCR-based 
examination of the wild-type (Cx43wt), floxed intact (Cx43fl) and recombined (Cx43Δ) 
alleles of the Cx43 gene in FACS-purified CX3CR1+ cardiac macrophages showed effective 
Cx43 deletion in cardiac macrophages after tamoxifen treatment (Figure S6A). mRNA 
analysis supported these findings (Figure S6B). The overall myocardial Cx43 protein level 
did not change, thereby indicating unaltered Cx43 expression in other cardiac cells (Figure 
S6C).
To determine how macrophage-specific Cx43 deletion affects AV nodal function, we 
performed an in vivo electrophysiological (EP) study on Cx3cr1 Cx43−/− mice and littermate 
controls. The PR interval, AH interval and AV node effective refractory period were 
prolonged in Cx3cr1 Cx43−/− mice (Figure 6B and Table S1). We examined three additional 
parameters of AV nodal function including the pacing cycle lengths at which Wenckebach 
conduction, 2:1 conduction and ventriculo-atrial Wenckebach conduction occur. In Cx3cr1 
Cx43−/− mice, each of these parameters was prolonged, a change that indicates impaired AV 
conduction (Figure 6B). Representative surface ECG tracings of an AV Wenckebach block 
in control and Cx3cr1 Cx43−/− mice are shown in Figure 6C. There is progressive PR 
prolongation prior to AV block, which develops at a slower pacing rate in Cx3cr1 Cx43−/− 
mice compared to controls. The ventricular effective refractory period was also prolonged in 
Cx3cr1 Cx43−/− mice (Table S1). We did not observe differences in either sinus node 
function or atrial refractory period (Table S1), and compromised AV conduction in Cx3cr1 
Cx43−/− mice was not accompanied by altered AV node macrophage numbers (Figures 6D 
and 6E). These data indicate that Cx43 is required for macrophage facilitation of AV node 
conduction.
To explore the effect of congenital macrophage loss on AV node conduction, we performed 
an EP study in Csf1op mice, which lack Csf1-dependent tissue macrophages in many organs 
(Cecchini et al., 1994). The absence of AV node macrophages in Csf1op mice (Figures 6F 
and 6G) prolonged the PR interval, AV node effective refractory period as well as the pacing 
cycle lengths at which Wenckebach conduction and 2:1 conduction occurred (Figure 6H and 
Table S1). Interestingly, we also observed an increase in the atrial and ventricular refractory 
period of Csf1op mice (Table S1).
Macrophage Ablation Induces AV Block
Cd11bDTR mice express a diphtheria toxin (DT)-inducible system controlled by the human 
CD11b promoter that enables efficient depletion of myeloid cells, including resident cardiac 
macrophages (Heidt et al., 2014). We monitored these mice continuously by implantable 
ECG telemetry after macrophage ablation (Figure 7A). In the heart, myeloid cell expression 
of CD11b and CX3CR1 correlates closely, with the exception of neutrophils (Figure S7A). 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Maximum depletion of AV node macrophages happened three days after a single dose of 25 
ng/g body weight DT (Figure 7B). Within one day of DT injection, all mice monitored by 
telemetry developed first degree AV block (Figure 7C) that progressively evolved into 
second and third degree AV block (Figure 7D). Complete AV block coincided with the time 
point of peak AV node macrophage depletion. Lower DT doses led to less pronounced AV 
node macrophage depletion and a lower incidence of AV block (Figure S7B). AV block after 
macrophage depletion in Cd11bDTR mice has not been previously reported, including in our 
own prior work (Heidt et al., 2014), since ECG is not commonly monitored in 
immunological studies.
To determine whether the observed phenotype resulted from DT-related toxicity, we injected 
C57BL/6 mice with DT and monitored their surface ECG. DT neither altered the number of 
AV node macrophages in C57BL/6 mice (Figure 7B) nor induced AV block (Figure 7C). 
Moreover, DT did not induce AV block in Cx3cr1GFP/+ mice joined in parabiosis with 
Cd11bDTR mice, which did develop AV block while in parabiosis, thereby indicating that 
circulating factors do not contribute to the observed phenotype (Figure 7E). At the time of 
complete AV block, we did not observe myocyte death (Figure S7C) or fibrosis (Figure 
S7D) in AV nodes of Cd11bDTR mice. Because blood electrolyte levels may influence 
conduction, we measured serum potassium and magnesium levels, which were unchanged in 
mice with AV block (Figure S7E). Injections of isoproterenol, epinephrine and atropine did 
not attenuate the AV block (Figure S7F). This suggests the AV block induced by 
macrophage ablation did not result from imbalanced autonomic nervous control.
When we pursued macrophage depletion with clodronate liposomes (Epelman et al., 2014), 
flow cytometry of microdissected AV nodes indicated incomplete macrophage depletion 
(37% decrease in AV node macrophages). We observed no AV node conduction 
abnormalities via either ECG telemetry or EP study (data not shown). The absence of an AV 
node phenotype when using clodronate liposomes is likely due to the incomplete depletion 
of tissue-resident macrophages in the AV node.
Three loss-of-function experiments indicate that macrophages facilitate AV node 
conduction; however, the observed phenotypes differ in their severity. To better understand 
the observed differences, we used RNA-seq to compare the whole transcriptome of AV node 
tissue microdissected from control, Cx3cr1 Cx43−/− and macrophage-depleted Cd11bDTR 
hearts. The transcriptional profile of Cx3cr1 Cx43−/− AV nodes resembled control nodal 
tissue with only four genes significantly dysregulated while macrophage depletion led to a 
distinct expression profile characterized by 1,329 differentially expressed genes (FDR < 
0.05; Figure S7G and Tables S2 and S3). Genes associated with cardiac conduction are 
expressed at lower levels in macrophage-depleted AV nodes than in controls (Figure S7H). 
Thus, deletion of Cx43 in macrophages had mild effects, while depleting the cells changed 
the AV node expression profile, and consequently its function, more drastically. These data 
suggest that AV node macrophages engage in additional, Cx43-independent tasks that may 
or may not be related to conduction.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DISCUSSION
The presence of numerous resident macrophages in the normal myocardium has only 
recently gained recognition, a development aided by flow cytometry staining of cell surface 
marker combinations in tissue and macrophage-specific expression of fluorescent proteins 
(Pinto et al., 2012; Epelman et al., 2014; Heidt et al., 2014). Here, we employed optical 
clearing in combination with either cell-specific reporter gene expression or surface marker 
staining to image macrophages in whole AV nodes, thus documenting intra-organ 
macrophage heterogeneity in mice and humans. Moreover, we show that macrophages 
couple electrically to cardiomyocytes in the distal AV node via Cx43-containing gap 
junctions. The presence of Cx43-containing gap junctions in AV node tissue has previously 
been reported in humans, rabbits and rats (Hucker et al., 2008; Nisbet et al., 2016; Yoo et al., 
2006). Cx43 shows relatively little expression within the compact node but is observed in the 
lower nodal bundle (Temple et al., 2013). This Cx43-expressing region of the distal AV node 
contains a particularly dense macrophage population in mice and humans. The impaired AV 
node conduction we observed in macrophage-specific Cx43 knockout mice indicates the 
functional significance of Cx43 in the mouse AV node. While AV node function was most 
notably affected, we also observed conduction abnormalities in the atria and ventricles of 
Cx3cr1 Cx43−/− and Csf1op mice. These data parallel our observations that cardiac 
macrophages isolated from working myocardium express Cx43, that single AV node 
macrophage RNA-seq data cluster according to subsets inhabiting the left ventricular 
myocardium and that normal murine atrial tissues, including the SA node, contain 
macrophages. We speculate that macrophages may play a role in conduction abnormalities 
beyond the AV node, perhaps including atrial fibrillation and ischemia-induced ventricular 
arrhythmias. In addition to these common clinical problems, future studies should 
investigate macrophages’ role in inherited conduction abnormalities and in the development 
of the conduction system.
Cardiomyocytes drive rhythmic depolarizations in electrotonically coupled macrophages, 
which in turn alter the electrophysiological properties of coupled cardiomyocytes. 
Macrophages’ electrotonic load depolarizes resting cardiomyocytes, reduces their action 
potential upstroke velocity and overshoot and aids early repolarization. These alternations 
shorten the cardiomyocyte action potential and ultimately allow for higher rates of 
conducted beats. While depolarization of the resting membrane potential in working 
cardiomyocytes can impair excitation and conduction due to sodium channel inactivation, 
depolarization of AV nodal cells depends chiefly on calcium channels, which have less 
prominent voltage-dependent inactivation (Catterall, 2011). This phenomenon, also referred 
to as ‘single-sided coupling’, during which the electrotonic load effects will dominate, is 
supported by our experimental data. In addition, passive conduction via macrophages, as 
described for other non-myocytes (Kohl and Gourdie, 2014), may pass on excitatory stimuli 
between AV node myocytes that are not in direct electrical contact (‘double-sided 
coupling’). In any case, we found that optogenetic depolarization of AV node macrophages 
improves AV conduction. Impaired AV node conduction after i) macrophage-specific Cx43 
depletion, ii) congenital lack of macrophages and iii) acute macrophage depletion adds 
further evidence that these cells facilitate nodal conduction.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Clinically, AV block is a common indication for pacemaker implantation, yet up to 60% of 
AV block cases occur for unknown reasons (Zoob and Smith, 1963). Macrophages change in 
phenotype and number in response to myocardial infarction (Swirski and Nahrendorf, 2013) 
and heart failure (Sager et al., 2016), conditions associated with sudden cardiac death as a 
result of ventricular arrhythmias (Bunch et al., 2007). Moreover, diabetes-induced activation 
of cardiac macrophages induces arrhythmias through IL-1β production (Monnerat et al., 
2016). Other inflammatory diseases of the heart, including Chagas, Lyme, sarcoid and 
myocarditis cause conduction abnormalities. It will be important to determine if these 
conditions produce AV block solely by affecting cardiomyocytes and specialized conducting 
tissues, as is commonly assumed, or if cardiac macrophages, which rapidly adapt their 
phenotype to inflammatory environments, are involved. Understanding macrophages’ 
contributions to normal cardiac conduction and to abnormalities in heart rhythm may yield 
new pathophysiologic insight and suggest novel therapeutic strategies that focus on 
modulating macrophages.
STAR METHODS
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be 
fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Matthias Nahrendorf (mnahrendorf@mgh.harvard.edu).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Humans—Human AV node tissues were obtained from fully de-identified heart specimens 
collected during routine autopsy of patients with no known cardiac conduction disease. 
Patients were 62 ± 5 years old (mean ± SEM, n = 6, 50% male) and their final diagnoses 
were metastatic lung cancer with multiple pulmonary embolisms; 1 to 2-day-old transmural 
myocardial infarction with cardiogenic shock; chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation with graft-versus-host disease and diffuse alveolar 
damage; myxoid leiomyosarcoma with pneumonia and sepsis; community acquired 
pneumonia and diffuse alveolar damage; and leiomyosarcoma and pneumonia. Tissue 
sampling was approved by the Partners Healthcare Institutional Review Board under 
protocol #2015P001827. All patients gave written informed consent.
Mice—Genotyping for each strain was performed as described on the Jackson Laboratory 
website. All experiments were performed with 8- to 40-week-old male and female animals 
and were carried out using age- and gender-matched groups. One- to 2-day-old male and 
female C57BL/6 pups were used to isolate neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes. All mice were 
maintained in a pathogen-free environment of the Massachusetts General Hospital animal 
facility, and all animal experiments were approved by the Subcommittee on Animal 
Research Care at Massachusetts General Hospital.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 METHOD DETAILS
In vivo Interventions
Mice were put into parabiosis using either C57BL/6 and Cx3cr1GFP/+ or Cd11bDTR and 
Cx3cr1GFP/+ mice as described previously (Heidt et al., 2014). Tamoxifen was given as a 
solution in corn oil (Sigma-Aldrich) to Cx3cr1wt/CreER ChR2wt/fl or Cx3cr1wt/CreER Cx43fl/fl 
mice by intraperitoneal injection. Animals received 5 doses of 2 mg of tamoxifen with a 
separation of 24 hours between doses. Cx3cr1wt/CreER ChR2wt/fl and Cx3cr1wt/CreER 
Cx43fl/fl mice were analyzed 2 and 7 days post-tamoxifen treatment, respectively. 
Macrophage depletion was achieved by a single intraperitoneal injection of diphtheria toxin 
(DT; 5, 15 or 25 ng/g body weight) in Cd11bDTR mice (Heidt et al., 2014). C57BL/6 mice 
injected with DT were used as controls. Clodronate liposomes were kindly provided by Dr. 
Kory J. Lavine and contained 18 mg of clodronate per mL of liposomes. Depletion studies 
were performed by intraperitoneal injection of 100 μL / 30 g mouse (Epelman et al., 2014).
EP Study
EP studies were performed under general anaesthesia induced by administering 5% 
isoflurane driven by an oxygen source into an induction chamber. Anaesthesia was 
subsequently maintained with 1–2% isoflurane in 95% O2. For EP study, an octapolar 
catheter (EPR-800) was inserted into the right jugular vein and positioned in the right atrium 
and ventricle. Programmed electrical stimulation was performed using a standard protocol 
with 120 ms and 100 ms drive trains and single extrastimuli to measure function of the AV 
node and the conduction properties of atrial and ventricular tissue. The Wenckebach cycle 
length was measured by progressively faster atrial pacing rates. Retrograde (VA) conduction 
cycle length was measured by progressively slower ventricular pacing rates. Sinus node 
function was determined by measuring the sinus node recovery time (SNRT) following 30 
seconds of pacing at three cycle lengths (120, 100 and 80 ms). SNRT was divided by the 
basic cycle length to adjust for the intrinsic heart rate.
Ambulatory ECG Telemetry
Continuous ambulatory ECG telemetry was performed by implanting an ETA-F10 
transmitter during general anaesthesia with isoflurane. The transmitter was implanted in the 
abdomen and the leads were tunneled subcutaneously to the upper right and lower left chest 
resulting in a lead II position. Telemetry data was recorded continuously via a receiver 
placed under the mouse cage. Data analysis was performed using LabChart Pro software.
Surface ECG
Mice were anesthetized as described above and surface ECG was recorded using 
subcutaneous electrodes connected to the Animal Bio amplifier and PowerLab station (AD 
Instruments). The ECG channel was filtered between 0.3 and 1000 Hz and analyzed using 
LabChart Pro software. Atropine (1 mg/kg), epinephrine (2 mg/kg) or isoproterenol (20 
mg/kg) were administered intravenously, and changes were examined before and after 
injection.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Optogenetics
Two days after tamoxifen treatment, Cx3cr1wt/CreER (control) and Cx3cr1wt/CreER ChR2wt/fl 
(Cx3cr1 ChR2) mice were euthanized and the hearts were perfused in a custom-built, 
horizontal perfusion bath in Langendorff mode with oxygenized Krebs-Henseleit solution 
containing (in mM): 118 NaCl, 4.7 KCl, 1.6 CaCl2, 1.2 MgSO4, 24.9 NaHCO3, 1.2 KH2PO4 
and 11.1 Dextrose, pH 7.4 (all Sigma-Aldrich). Recording and electrical pacing electrodes 
were connected to the heart, and the endocardial surface overlying the AV node was exposed 
by carefully opening the right atrial free wall above the AV groove. Mean perfusion pressure 
was maintained at between 60–80 mmHg throughout the experiment and adequacy of the 
preparation was determined by robust return of sinus rhythm in the perfused heart and visual 
evidence of vigorous contraction. The location of the AV node was identified grossly under a 
dissecting microscope. The Wenckebach cycle length was first determined without 
illumination by determining the electrical stimulation atrial pacing rate at which progressive 
PR interval prolongation occurred, culminating in a non-conducted atrial impulse due to AV 
block. The heart was subsequently electrically paced at the determined Wenckebach cycle 
length and the AV node was subjected to alternating 10-second cycles with and without 
continuous AV node illumination. Continuous illumination of the exposed AV node, right 
atrium or LV free wall was performed using a 400 μm core fiber optic cannula coupled to a 
470 nm LED (ThorLabs) at light intensities of 55.7 mW/mm2. The recorded ECG tracings 
were analyzed using LabChart Pro software. The average number of conducted atrial stimuli 
between two non-conducted impulses during rapid pacing-induced Wenckebach block was 
determined for each light off and on cycle.
Tissue Processing
Peripheral blood for flow cytometric analysis was collected by retro-orbital bleeding using 
heparinized capillary tubes (BD Diagnostic Systems) and red blood cells were lysed with 1x 
red blood cell lysis buffer (BioLegend). To determine electrolyte levels, blood was collected 
by cardiac puncture and electrolytes were measured on serum with EasyLyte PLUS analyzer 
(Medica). For organ harvest, mice were perfused through the LV with 10 mL of ice-cold 
PBS. Hearts were excised and processed as whole or subjected to AV node microdissection 
as described previously (Moskowitz et al., 2007). Briefly, the triangle of Koch, which 
contains the AV node, was excised by using the following landmarks: ostium of the coronary 
sinus, tendon of Todaro and septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve. The presence of the AV 
node was confirmed with HCN4 and acetylcholinesterase staining (see below). After 
harvest, cardiac tissues were minced into small pieces and subjected to enzymatic digestion 
with 450 U/mL collagenase I, 125 U/mL collagenase XI, 60 U/mL DNase I, and 60 U/mL 
hyaluronidase (all Sigma-Aldrich) for 20 minutes (microdissected AV node, LV free wall 
and RV free wall) or 1 hour (whole heart) at 37°C under agitation. Tissues were then 
triturated and cells filtered through a 40 μm nylon mesh (Falcon), washed and centrifuged to 
obtain single-cell suspensions. Peritoneal cells were recovered by lavage with 5 mL of ice-
cold PBS supplemented with 3% fetal bovine serum and 2 mM EDTA.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Flow Cytometry
Isolated cells were first stained at 4°C in FACS bu ffer (PBS supplemented with 0.5% 
bovine serum albumin) with mouse hematopoietic lineage markers including phycoerythrin 
(PE)- or biotin-conjugated anti-mouse antibodies directed against B220 (1:600), CD49b 
(1:1200), CD90.2 (1:3000), Ly6G (1:600), NK1.1 (1:600) and Ter119 (1:600). This was 
followed by a second staining for CX3CR1 (1:600), CD11b (1:600), CD11c (1:600), CD31 
(1:400), CD45 (1:600), CD64 (1:600), CD103 (1:600), CD115 (1:600), F4/80 (1:600), Ly6C 
(1:600), MEFSK4 (1:20) and/or Pacific Orange-conjugated streptavidin (1:600). Monocytes 
were identified as (B220/CD49b/CD90.2/Ly6G/NK1.1/Ter119)low CD11bhigh CD115high 
Ly6Clow/high. Cardiac macrophages were identified as (B220/CD49b/CD90.2/CD103/Ly6G/
NK1.1/Ter119)low CD45high CD11bhigh Ly6Clow/int F4/80high and cardiac fibroblasts as 
CD31low CD45low MEFSK4high. Data were acquired on an LSRII (BD Biosciences) and 
analyzed with FlowJo software.
Cell Sorting
To isolate peritoneal macrophages, depletion of undesired cells including lymphocytes was 
performed using MACS depletion columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions 
(Miltenyi Biotec). Briefly, single cell suspensions after peritoneal lavage were stained using 
a cocktail of PE-conjugated antibodies directed against B220, CD49b, CD90.2, NK1.1 and 
Ter119, followed by incubation with anti-PE microbeads. The enrichment of peritoneal 
macrophages was evaluated by flow cytometry. To purify macrophages from AV node, LV 
free wall or RV free wall tissues, digested samples were stained with hematopoietic lineage 
markers, CD11b, CD45, F4/80 and Ly6C, and macrophages were FACS-sorted using a 
FACSAria II cell sorter (BD Biosciences). DAPI was used as a cell viability marker. To 
isolate cardiac macrophages and fibroblasts from whole heart for qPCR analysis, digested 
tissue samples were stained with hematopoietic lineage markers, CD11b, CD31, CD45, 
DAPI, F4/80, Ly6C and MEFSK4, and FACS-sorted using a FACSAria II cell sorter. To 
isolate cardiac macrophages from UbcGFP hearts for in vitro experiments, digested tissue 
samples were first enriched for CD11b+ cells using CD11b microbeads and MACS columns 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Next, cells were stained with hematopoietic 
lineage markers, CD45.2, F4/80 and Ly6C, and FACS-sorted using a FACSAria II cell 
sorter.
Isolation and Culture of Neonatal Mouse Cardiomyocytes
Neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes were isolated by use of enzymatic dissociation. One- to 2-
day-old pups were sacrificed, the hearts removed and the ventricles harvested. The tissue 
was dissociated in HBSS containing 0.1% trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) overnight at 4°C under 
agitation, followed by three consecutive digestion steps in HBSS containing 335 U/mL 
collagenase II (Worthington Biochemical Corporation) for 2 minutes at 37°C with gentle 
agitation. The digest was filtered through a 40 μm nylon mesh, washed and resuspended in 
mouse culture medium which consisted of DMEM supplemented with 14% FBS and 2% 
penicillin/streptomycin. Cell suspensions were preplated into 100 mm cell tissue culture 
dishes and incubated at 37°C for 45 minutes to allow preferential attachment of non-
myocyte cell populations and enrichment of the cardiomyocyte population. For whole-cell 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 patch clamp and voltage dye imaging, cardiac cells remaining in suspension were collected 
and seeded at a density of 0.2–1x105 cells/cm2 on 5 or 8 mm cover slips (Warner 
Instruments) stamped with fibronectin in a line pattern and pre-seeded with 5x104 FACS-
purified GFP+ cardiac macrophages. For real-time acquisition microscopy, cardiomyocytes 
were seeded at a density of 1x104 cells/cm2 on 35 mm glass-bottom dishes (MatTek 
Corporation) stamped with fibronectin in a line-pattern and pre-seeded with 7x104 FACS-
purified GFP+ cardiac macrophages. Medium exchanges were performed on the first day 
after seeding and every other day thereafter with mouse culture medium supplemented with 
1 μM cytosine β-D-arabinofuranoside hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich). Experiments were 
performed on day 3.
Whole-cell Patch Clamp
Membrane potentials were recorded with whole-cell patch clamp technique in tight-seal 
current-clamp mode at 37°C. Borosilicate-glass electrodes f illed with pipette solution had 4 
to 6 MΩ tip resistance, and were connected with an Axopatch 200B amplifier and a Digidata 
1440A A/D converter. Data were analyzed with Clampfit. The bath solution contained (in 
mM): 136 NaCl, 5.4 KCl, 1.8 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, 0.33 NaH2PO4, 10 Dextrose and 5 HEPES, 
pH 7.4; and the pipette solution contained (in mM): 110 K-aspartate, 20 KCl, 1 MgCl2, 5 
MgATP, 0.1 GTP, 10 HEPES, 5 Na-Phosphocreatine and 0.05 EGTA, pH 7.3 (all Sigma-
Aldrich). To identify the patched cell, the pipette was additionally loaded with 0.2 mg/mL 
Texas Red+ dextran (MW 3000). To block Cx43-mediated gap junction communication, 200 
μM of the Cx43-mimetic peptide Gap26 was added to the bath solution during patch clamp 
recording.
Voltage Dye Imaging
Cardiomyocyte-macrophage co-cultures were loaded with 4 μM of ANNINE-6plus for 5 
minutes in Tyrode’s solution containing (in mM): 140 NaCl, 5.4 KCl, 1.8 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, 
10 glucose and 10 HEPES, pH 7.4 (all Sigma-Aldrich). After washing, cover slips were 
transferred to Tyrode’s solution containing 20 μM of blebbistatin to uncouple the excitation-
contraction process in cardiomyocytes. To optically detect action potentials, line scans were 
obtained from the surface membranes of cardiomyocytes and attached macrophages using an 
Olympus IV100 microscope. The acquired line scans were filtered with a collaborative filter 
to increase the signal-to-noise ratio and analyzed in Matlab as previously described (Bu et 
al., 2009). In detail, the average signal intensity of each successive line in the line scan 
image corresponding to the membrane of the cell of interest was calculated to obtain the 
time course of the averaged fluorescence [F(t)]. The time course of normalized fractional 
fluorescence changes [ΔF/F0(t)], where ΔF is F(t) – F0(t) and F0(t) is the baseline trace, was 
subsequently determined for the cardiomyocyte and attached macrophage. To block Cx43-
mediated gap junction communication, 200 μM of the Cx43-mimetic peptide Gap26 was 
added to the Tyrode’s solution during line scan imaging.
Real-Time Acquisition Microscopy
Cardiomyocyte-macrophage co-cultures were imaged using an Olympus VivaView FL 
incubator microscope in stream acquisition mode. The acquired images were processed 
using MetaMorph software.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Histology
Immunofluorescence Staining—To eliminate blood contamination, hearts were 
perfused with 10 mL of ice-cold PBS. Hearts from Cx3cr1GFP/+ mice were fixed using 
periodate-lysine-paraformaldehyde (PLP) for 1 hour at room temperature, washed in PBS 
and embedded in OCT compound. Hearts from Cx3cr1 ChR2, Cx3cr1 Cx43−/−, Csf1op and 
Cd11bDTR mice were directly embedded in OCT. Serial frozen 6 to 25 μm sections were 
prepared and acetylcholinesterase staining was carried out to identify the AV node. The 
selected sections from Cx3cr1GFP/+ hearts were fixed with 4% PFA for 5 minutes, washed in 
PBS and then blocked with 4% normal goat or rabbit serum in PBS for 30 minutes at room 
temperature. For F4/80 staining, sections were additionally treated with 0.3% Triton X-100 
in PBS for 30 minutes at room temperature. After blocking, sections were incubated with a 
rat anti-mouse CD64, rat anti-mouse CD68, rat anti-mouse MerTK, rat anti-mouse F4/80, 
rabbit anti-mouse collagen I, rabbit anti-mouse DDR2, rabbit anti-mouse periostin or guinea 
pig anti-mouse vimentin antibody overnight at 4°C, followed by a biotinylated rabbit anti-
rat, goat anti-rabbit or goat anti-guinea pig IgG antibody for 45 minutes and DyLight 649-
streptavidin for 30 minutes at room temperature. The sections were additionally incubated 
with a chicken anti-GFP antibody overnight at 4°C. Alexa F luor 488 goat anti-chicken IgY 
antibody was used as a secondary antibody. The selected sections from Cx3cr1 ChR2, 
Cx3cr1 Cx43−/−, Csf1op and Cd11bDTR hearts were fixed with 10% formalin for 5 minutes, 
washed and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 30 minutes. The tissue 
sections were then blocked with 4% normal goat serum in PBS for 30 minutes at room 
temperature. After blocking, sections were incubated with a rabbit anti-mouse HCN4 
antibody (Alomone Labs) overnight at 4°C, followed by a biotinylated goat anti-rabbit IgG 
antibody for 45 minutes and DyLight 649-streptavidin for 30 minutes at room temperature. 
The sections from Cx3cr1 ChR2 hearts were additionally incubated with a chicken anti-GFP 
antibody overnight at 4°C. Alexa Fluor 568 goat anti-chicken IgY antibody was used as a 
secondary antibody. The sections from Cx3cr1 Cx43−/− and Csf1op hearts were additionally 
incubated with a rat anti-mouse CD68 antibody for 2 hours at room temperature. Alexa 
Fluor 568 goat anti-rat IgG antibody was used as a secondary antibody. TUNEL staining 
was performed using DeadEnd Fluorometric TUNEL system according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol and DAPI was applied for nuclear counterstaining. Cover slips 
seeded with cardiomyocytes and GFP+ FACS-purified cardiac macrophages were fixed with 
4% PFA for 10 minutes at room temperature. After washing, cells were permeabilized with 
0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 10 minutes at room temperature, washed and blocked in 
blocking solution (PBS containing 10% goat serum, 0.1% Tween-20 and 0.3 M glycine) for 
1 hour at room temperature. Cells were then stained with rabbit anti-mouse Cx43 antibody 
in blocking solution for 1 hour at room temperature, followed by incubation with Alexa 
Fluor 647 goat anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody for 1 hour at room temperature. After 
washing, cells were stained with Alexa Fluor 568 anti-desmin antibody and DAPI was 
applied for nuclear counterstaining. All images were captured using an Olympus FV1000 or 
a Nikon 80i fluorescence microscope and processed with ImageJ software.
Whole-mount Immunofluorescence Staining—AV nodes from Cx3cr1GFP/+ mice 
were harvested as described above and SA nodes were microdissected as part of the right 
atrium at the junction of the crista terminalis with the superior and inferior vena cava, and 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the intercaval region between the two great veins. Both nodal tissues were fixed using PLP 
for 1 hour at room temperature, washed in PBS, and processed as whole or embedded in 4% 
agarose and cut in 300 μm sections using a Pelco 101 vibratome. Tissues were then washed 
in 1% Triton X-100 diluted in PBS, and blocked and permeabilized in blocking solution 
(PBS containing 20% goat or donkey serum, 1% Triton X-100 and 0.2% sodium azide) for 1 
hour at room temperature. AV and SA nodes were stained with chicken anti-GFP, rabbit anti-
mouse Cx43 (AV node) or goat anti-mouse Cx40 (SA node) and rat anti-mouse HCN4 
(Abcam) antibodies in blocking solution for 7 days at 4°C. After washing, samples were 
incubated with Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-chicken IgY, Alexa Fluor 568 goat anti-rabbit IgG 
(AV node) or Alexa Fluor 568 donkey anti-goat IgG (SA node) and Alexa Fluor 647 goat 
anti-rat IgG secondary antibodies for 7 days at 4°C. For fibrobl ast quantification, sections 
were incubated with PDGFRα-APC antibody overnight at 4°C and DAPI was applied for 
nuclear counterstaining. Human AV node tissues were fixed using 4% PFA for 24 hours at 
4°C. Tissues were washed in PBS, embedded in 4% agarose and 500 μm sections were cut 
using a Pelco 101 vibratome. The sections were then washed in PBS containing 2% Triton 
X-100 and 20% DMSO, followed by blocking and permeabilization in blocking solution 
(PBS containing 20% goat serum, 2% Triton X-100, 20% DMSO and 0.2% sodium azide) 
for 1 hour at room temperature. Tissue sections were stained with mouse anti-human CD68 
(clone EBM11) or mouse anti-human CD163 and rabbit anti-human Cx43 antibodies in 
blocking solution for 7 days at 4°C. After washing, samples were incubated with Alexa 
Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse IgG and Alexa Fluor 568 goat anti-rabbit IgG secondary 
antibodies for 7 days at 4°C. To visualize nuclei and delineate cells in mouse and human AV 
nodes, tissues were incubated with DAPI and the membrane stain Alexa Fluor 647 WGA 
overnight at 4°C . Stained tissues were then optically cleared and imaged.
Optical Clearing—Mouse and human tissues were cleared using RapiClear 1.49 by 
immersion in the clearing solution for 1 hour at room temperature. The cleared tissues were 
then mounted on a custom-made sample holder and imaged using an Olympus FV1000 
microscope. Collagen deposition in human tissues was investigated with second-harmonic 
generation (SHG) in multiphoton microscopy. Acquired images were processed with Amira 
3D or ImageJ software.
Immunohistochemistry—Human and mouse AV node samples were stained with 
Masson’s trichrome to identify the cardiac conduction tissue and to determine collagen 
content after macrophage depletion in Cd11bDTR mice. Briefly, sections were fixed with 
10% formalin for 30 minutes at room temperature and incubated in Bouin’s fixative solution 
overnight at room temperature. The nuclei were stained with the mixture of Weigert’s iron 
hematoxylin solution A and B, and Masson’s trichrome staining was carried out according 
to the manufacturer’s instructions. To identify human cardiac macrophages, the paraffin-
embedded tissue was first deparaffinized and antigen retrieval was performed using sodium 
citrate, pH 6.0 (BD Biosciences). In order to block endogenous peroxidase activity, the 
tissue sections were incubated in 1% H2O2 diluted in dH2O for 10 minutes and rinsed in 
dH2O and PBS. The sections were then blocked with 4% horse serum in PBS for 30 minutes 
at room temperature and incubated with a mouse anti-human CD68 antibody (clone: KP1) 
overnight at 4°C. A biot inylated horse anti-mouse IgG antibody was applied for 30 minutes 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 at room temperature. For color development, the VectaStain ABC kit and AEC substrate 
were used. All the slides were counterstained with Harris hematoxylin and scanned with 
NanoZoomer 2.0-RS (Hamamatsu). Sections were analyzed at 20x magnification using 
ImageJ or iVision software.
Electron Microscopy—Hearts from Cx3cr1GFP/+ mice were fixed using PLP solution and 
frozen 50 μm sections were incubated in 0.3% H2O2 diluted in PBS for 10 minutes, followed 
by incubation with PBS containing 1% BSA and 0.05% saponin for 1 hour at room 
temperature. A rabbit anti-GFP antibody was applied to the sections and incubated overnight 
at 4°C. The tissue sections were washed and incubated with a biotinylated goat anti-rabbit 
IgG antibody for 2 hours at room temperature. After washing, sections were incubated with 
VectaStain ABC reagent for 30 minutes at room temperature, washed and then fixed with 
PBS containing 1% glutaraldehyde and 5% sucrose for 30 minutes at room temperature. For 
color development, diaminobenzidine solution was applied followed by 1% H2O2 in dH2O. 
The sections were washed and incubated with 1% osmium tetroxide in 0.1 M sodium 
cacodylate buffer on ice for 30 minutes. Prior to embedding, sections were dehydrated and 
allowed to pre-infiltrate in a 1:1 mix of Eponate resin and propylene oxide overnight at room 
temperature with gentle agitation. Sections were then infiltrated with fresh 100% Eponate 
resin and polymerized for 1–2 days at 60°C. Polymerized sections were trimmed and 
oriented such that the targeted AV node region would lie at the sectioning face. Thin sections 
were cut using a Leica EM UC7 ultramicrotome, collected onto formvar-coated grids, 
stained with uranyl acetate and Reynold’s lead citrate and examined in a JEOL JEM 1011 
transmission electron microscope at 80 kV. Images were collected using an AMT digital 
imaging system (Advanced Microscopy Techniques).
YFP Target-to-Background Ratio (TBR) Measurement
Cx3cr1wt/wt and Cx3cr1wt/CreER mice were intravenously injected with 4 μg of CX3CR1-PE 
and Sca1-APC antibodies to label tissue-resident macrophages and endothelial cells, 
respectively. After 30 minutes of in vivo labeling, mice were perfused through the LV with 
10 mL of ice-cold PBS. Hearts were then mounted between two long coverslips and imaged 
using an Olympus IV100 microscope. Z-stack images acquired at 1 μm steps were analyzed 
in Matlab with custom developed functions. Semi-automatic thresholding-based algorithms 
were used for TBR measurements. A BM3D filter method was implemented for noise 
reduction to increase the overall signal-to-noise ratio.
Western Blot
Total protein was extracted from heart tissue in RIPA lysis buffer supplemented with a 
protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. Protein concentration was measured using a BCA 
assay. Lysates of 3 μg were then subjected to electrophoresis using the NuPAGE Novex Gel 
system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were blotted to nitrocellulose membrane using the 
iBlot Gel Transfer system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. Anti-mouse Cx43 antibody, anti-mouse GAPDH antibody and HRP-coupled 
secondary antibodies were used. Signals were visualized with chemiluminescent substrate 
and densitometric analysis was performed with ImageJ.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PCR Confirmation of the Deletion of the Cx43 Allele
Genomic DNA from FACS-purified cardiac macrophages was isolated with the DNeasy 
Blood & Tissue kit and used in PCR with two pairs of Cx43-specific primers for detecting 
Cx43fl or Cx43wt alleles, and for detecting the Cx43 allele lacking the floxed fragment. To 
normalize the amount of input DNA, specific primers to the Cx3cr1wt gene were used.
qPCR
Total RNA from whole AV node tissue was extracted using the RNeasy Micro kit or from 
FACS-purified cells using the PicoPure RNA isolation kit according to the manufacturer’s 
protocol. First-strand cDNA was synthesized using the High-Capacity RNA-to-cDNA kit 
and pre-amplified using the TaqMan PreAmp Master Mix kit according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. TaqMan gene expression assays were used to quantify target 
genes. The relative changes were normalized to Gapdh mRNA using the 2−ΔΔCT method.
Bulk RNA-Seq
Total RNA from whole AV node tissue was extracted using the RNeasy Micro kit according 
to the manufacturer’s protocol. The RNA quality was assessed with the RNA 6000 Pico 
assay kit using the Agilent Bioanalyzer. Sequencing-ready cDNA libraries were prepared 
using the NEBNext Ultra RNA Directional Library Prep kit for Illumina following the 
manufacturer’s protocol. Bioanalyzer traces were used to confirm library size distribution. 
The libraries were quantified by qPCR using the KAPA Library Quantification kit and then 
sequenced as single-end 50 base reads on a Illumina HiSeq 2000 in high-output mode.
Single-Cell RNA-Seq
AV node macrophages were FACS-purified from whole AV node tissue as described above, 
which included two singlet gates to avoid collection of doublets. Single macrophages were 
then captured using the Fluidigm C1 microfluidic chip designed for 5 to 10 μm cells 
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. A concentration of 1.8x105 cells per mL was used 
for chip loading. After cell capture, chips were examined visually to identify empty 
chambers and chambers containing more than one cell, which were excluded from later 
analysis. Cell lysis and cDNA synthesis were performed on-chip with the SMARTer Ultra 
Low RNA kit for the Fluidigm C1 system. Amplified cDNA was validated and quantified on 
an Agilent Bioanalyzer with the High Sensitivity DNA chip. Illumina libraries were then 
constructed in 96-well plates using the Nextera XT DNA Sample Preparation kit according 
to a modified protocol supplied by Fluidigm. Constructed libraries were validated and 
quantified with the High Sensitivity DNA chip, and subsequently normalized and pooled to 
equal concentrations. The pooled libraries were quantified by qPCR and sequenced as 
single-end 50 base reads on a Illumina HiSeq 2000 in high-output mode.
RNA-Seq and Microarray Data Analysis
Bulk RNA-Seq—Transcriptome mapping was performed with STAR v2.3.0 (Dobin et al., 
2013) using the Ensembl 67 release exon/splice-junction annotations. Approximately 65–
78% of reads mapped uniquely. Read counts for individual genes were calculated using the 
unstranded count feature in HTSeq v0.6.0 (Anders et al., 2015). Differential expression 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analysis was performed using the exactTest routine of the edgeR R package (Robinson et al., 
2010) after normalizing read counts and including only those genes with counts per million 
(cpm) > 1 for two or more replicates. Differentially expressed genes were then defined as 
those genes with > 2-fold change in expression and false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05. 
Hierarchical clustering of differentially expressed genes was performed with the heatmap.2 
function in the R gplots library. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was performed as 
described previously (Mootha et al., 2003). Input rankings were based on the sign of the fold 
change multiplied by the inverse of the p value. Genes involved in cardiac conduction (gene 
ontology term GO:0061337, 38 unique members) were downloaded from the QuickGO 
Browser (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/QuickGO/).
Single-Cell RNA-Seq—Transcriptome mapping (73–87% reads were uniquely mapped) 
and counts per gene calculations were performed in the same manner as with the bulk RNA-
seq data. The 76 cells with the most reads (260K – 6.3M, median 2.1M) were selected for 
further analysis. Expression thresholding for detected genes and calculation of 
overdispersion (i.e., higher than expected variance) was performed with SCDE (Kharchenko 
et al., 2014) using the clean.counts and pagoda.varnorm routines, respectively, which 
resulted in 9,235 genes retained for further analysis. Hierarchical clustering of the 200 most 
overdispersed genes was performed using the heatmap.2 function in the R gplots library. To 
group cells into three co-expression categories based on H2 and Ccr2 expression levels, we 
performed spectral clustering on their joint distribution based on log2(cpm) values (specc 
command in the factoextra R library). Then, the two clusters with lowest average H2 
expression were joined to form a larger cluster shown in orange in Figure S2B. Raw single-
cell RNA-seq data of ventricular cardiomyocytes were downloaded from Gene Expression 
Omnibus database, accession number GSE56638 (Dueck et al., 2015), and normalized using 
the cpm() routine in edgeR (Robinson et al., 2010).
Microarray—Raw microarray data from (Pinto et al., 2012) were downloaded from 
ArrayExpress (www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress), accession number E-MEXP-3347, and 
normalized using the robust multi-array average (Irizarry et al., 2003). GSEA was performed 
using standard parameters (gene set permutation, signal-to-noise ratio as a ranking metric).
Computational Modeling
Macrophages were modeled as unexcitable cells based on a previously published model 
(Sachse et al., 2008), which was adjusted using the experimental whole-cell patch clamp 
data recorded for cardiac macrophages in this study (Figures 4G, 4H, S4F and S4G). The 
resulting macrophage model comprises an inwardly rectifying potassium current and an 
unspecific background current. Table S4 shows the constants of the model. Potassium 
concentrations were set to match experimental conditions. The remaining parameters Cm, 
Gb, and GKir were fitted to the experimental whole-cell patch clamp data. The membrane 
capacitance of the model, Cm, was set to the mean of the measured macrophage membrane 
capacitances (n = 18). The conductance of the unspecific background current, Gb, was set to 
the inverse of the mean of measured membrane resistances (n = 9). Finally, the maximal 
conductance of the potassium channel, GKir, was adapted such that the resulting resting 
membrane potential matched the measurements (n = 20). The resulting resting membrane 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 potential also served as initial value for the membrane potential Vm of the model. A 
mathematical model of a rabbit AV bundle cardiomyocyte (Inada et al., 2009) was adapted 
to mouse cells to be able to estimate the effects of macrophage coupling to an AV bundle 
cardiomyocyte. The rabbit model was modified such that the action potential duration 
(APD90) was reduced from 48 ms to 30 ms, a physiological value for mouse atrial 
cardiomyocytes (Xu et al., 1999). For this purpose, we introduced two scaling factors for the 
time constants of gating variables that correspond to the currents ICa,L, and Ito. Namely, in 
the altered model it is 
 for ∈ {d, r, pi} where 
 is the corresponding original value 
from the unaltered model. The resulting scaling factors of the modified model were sd = 
0.5182 and sr = 7.0239.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All statistical analyses were conducted with GraphPad Prism software. Data are presented as 
mean ± SEM. The sample size for each experiment and the replicate number of experiments 
are reported in the text, Figures and Figure Legends. The data were tested for normality 
using the D’Agostino-Pearson normality test. Statistical significance was assessed by the 
two-sided Student’s t test for normally distributed data. If normal distribution assumption 
was not valid, statistical significance was evaluated using the two-sided Mann-Whitney test 
or the two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test. For multiple comparisons, nonparametric Kruskal-
Wallis tests followed by Dunn’s posttest were performed. The Mantel-Cox test was used to 
compare onset of AV block in DT-treated mice. P values of 0.05 or less were considered to 
denote significance. Animal group sizes were as low as possible and empirically chosen. No 
statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size and animals were randomly 
assigned to treatment groups.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
Data Resources
The transcriptome sequencing data for whole AV node tissues and all single cells have been 
deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus database under ID codes GSE86306 and 
GSE86310, respectively.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank M. Weglarz, M. Handley and A. Galvin for assistance with cell sorting; I. Klier for help with telemetric 
ECG analysis and K. Joyes for editing the manuscript. This work was funded in part by federal funds from the 
National Institutes of Health NS084863, HL128264, HL114477, HL117829, HL092577, HL105780 and 
HL096576. The General Hospital Corporation has filed a patent application (62/294,765) with the U.S. Patent and 
Trademark Office. The application is entitled “Targeting Macrophages to Modulate Electrical Conduction in the 
Heart” and names M.H., M.N. and R.W. as inventors. RNA sequencing and data analysis were performed at the 
Massachusetts General Hospital NextGen Core. Electron microscopy was performed in the Microscopy Core of the 
Center for Systems Biology/Program in Membrane Biology, which is partially supported by an Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease Grant DK43351 and a Boston Area Diabetes and Endocrinology Research Center (BADERC) 
Award DK57521. M.H. was supported by the Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek-Vlaanderen. S.C. was 
supported by a Marie Curie International Outgoing Fellowship within the 7th European Community Framework 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Program (PIOF-GA-2012-328352) and by the German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK). A.D.A. was 
supported by the American Heart Association (14FTF20380185). H.B.S. was funded by Deutsche 
Forschungsgemeinschaft (SA1668/2-1). P.K. was supported by the European Research Council Advanced Grant 
CardioNect and the Baden Wurttemberg ‘Sonderlinie Medizin’. P.T.E was supported by an Established Investigator 
Award from the American Heart Association (13EIA14220013) and by the Fondation Leducq (14CVD01). M.N. 
was supported by the MGH Research Scholar Program.
References
Anders S, Pyl PT, Huber W. HTSeq--a Python framework to work with high-throughput sequencing 
data. Bioinformatics. 2015; 31:166–169. [PubMed: 25260700] 
Biel M, Wahl-Schott C, Michalakis S, Zong X. Hyperpolarization-activated cation channels: from 
genes to function. Physiol Rev. 2009; 89:847–885. [PubMed: 19584315] 
Billette J. Atrioventricular nodal activation during periodic premature stimulation of the atrium. Am J 
Physiol. 1987; 252:H163–77. [PubMed: 3812708] 
Bu G, Adams H, Berbari EJ, Rubart M. Uniform action potential repolarization within the sarcolemma 
of in situ ventricular cardiomyocytes. Biophys J. 2009; 96:2532–2546. [PubMed: 19289075] 
Bunch TJ, Hohnloser SH, Gersh BJ. Mechanisms of sudden cardiac death in myocardial infarction 
survivors: insights from the randomized trials of implantable cardioverter-defibrillators. Circulation. 
2007; 115:2451–2457. [PubMed: 17485594] 
Catterall WA. Voltage-gated calcium channels. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2011; 3:a003947. 
[PubMed: 21746798] 
Cecchini MG, Dominguez MG, Mocci S, Wetterwald A, Felix R, Fleisch H, Chisholm O, Hofstetter 
W, Pollard JW, Stanley ER. Role of colony stimulating factor-1 in the establishment and regulation 
of tissue macrophages during postnatal development of the mouse. Development. 1994; 120:1357–
1372. [PubMed: 8050349] 
Davies LC, Jenkins SJ, Allen JE, Taylor PR. Tissue-resident macrophages. Nat Immunol. 2013; 
14:986–995. [PubMed: 24048120] 
Dobin A, Davis CA, Schlesinger F, Drenkow J, Zaleski C, Jha S, Batut P, Chaisson M, Gingeras TR. 
STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics. 2013; 29:15–21. [PubMed: 23104886] 
Dueck H, Khaladkar M, Kim TK, Spaethling JM, Francis C, Suresh S, Fisher SA, Seale P, Beck SG, 
Bartfai T, et al. Deep sequencing reveals cell-type-specific patterns of single-cell transcriptome 
variation. Genome Biol. 2015; 16:122. [PubMed: 26056000] 
Epelman S, Lavine KJ, Beaudin AE, Sojka DK, Carrero JA, Calderon B, Brija T, Gautier EL, Ivanov 
S, Satpathy AT, et al. Embryonic and adult-derived resident cardiac macrophages are maintained 
through distinct mechanisms at steady state and during inflammation. Immunity. 2014; 40:91–104. 
[PubMed: 24439267] 
Fenno L, Yizhar O, Deisseroth K. The development and application of optogenetics. Annu Rev 
Neurosci. 2011; 34:389–412. [PubMed: 21692661] 
Gallin EK, Gallin JI. Interaction of chemotactic factors with human macrophages. Induction of 
transmembrane potential changes. J Cell Biol. 1977; 75:277–289. [PubMed: 410816] 
Gallin EK, Livengood DR. Nonlinear current-voltage relationships in cultured macrophages. J Cell 
Biol. 1980; 85:160–165. [PubMed: 7364871] 
Gautier EL, Shay T, Miller J, Greter M, Jakubzick C, Ivanov S, Helft J, Chow A, Elpek KG, Gordonov 
S, et al. Gene-expression profiles and transcriptional regulatory pathways that underlie the identity 
and diversity of mouse tissue macrophages. Nat Immunol. 2012; 13:1118–1128. [PubMed: 
23023392] 
Heidt T, Courties G, Dutta P, Sager HB, Sebas M, Iwamoto Y, Sun Y, Da Silva N, Panizzi P, van der 
Laan AM, et al. Differential contribution of monocytes to heart macrophages in steady-state and 
after myocardial infarction. Circ Res. 2014; 115:284–295. [PubMed: 24786973] 
Hucker WJ, McCain ML, Laughner JI, Iaizzo PA, Efimov IR. Connexin 43 expression delineates two 
discrete pathways in the human atrioventricular junction. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2008; 291:204–
215. [PubMed: 18085635] 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Inada S, Hancox JC, Zhang H, Boyett MR. One-dimensional mathematical model of the 
atrioventricular node including atrio-nodal, nodal, and nodal-his cells. Biophys J. 2009; 97:2117–
2127. [PubMed: 19843444] 
Irizarry RA, Hobbs B, Collin F, Beazer-Barclay YD, Antonellis KJ, Scherf U, Speed TP. Exploration, 
normalization, and summaries of high density oligonucleotide array probe level data. Biostatistics. 
2003; 4:249–264. [PubMed: 12925520] 
Kharchenko PV, Silberstein L, Scadden DT. Bayesian approach to single-cell differential expression 
analysis. Nat Methods. 2014; 11:740–742. [PubMed: 24836921] 
Kohl P, Gourdie RG. Fibroblast-myocyte electrotonic coupling: does it occur in native cardiac tissue. J 
Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014; 70:37–46. [PubMed: 24412581] 
Mazzini E, Massimiliano L, Penna G, Rescigno M. Oral tolerance can be established via gap junction 
transfer of fed antigens from CX3CR1+ macrophages to CD103+ dendritic cells. Immunity. 2014; 
40:248–261. [PubMed: 24462723] 
Metchnikoff, É. Leçons Sur La Pathologie Comparée De L’inflammation. Paris: Masson; 1892. 
Molawi K, Wolf Y, Kandalla PK, Favret J, Hagemeyer N, Frenzel K, Pinto AR, Klapproth K, Henri S, 
Malissen B, et al. Progressive replacement of embryo-derived cardiac macrophages with age. J 
Exp Med. 2014; 211:2151–2158. [PubMed: 25245760] 
Monnerat G, Alarcón ML, Vasconcellos LR, Hochman-Mendez C, Brasil G, Bassani RA, Casis O, 
Malan D, Travassos LH, Sepúlveda M, et al. Macrophage-dependent IL-1β production induces 
cardiac arrhythmias in diabetic mice. Nat Commun. 2016; 7:13344. [PubMed: 27882934] 
Mootha VK, Lindgren CM, Eriksson KF, Subramanian A, Sihag S, Lehar J, Puigserver P, Carlsson E, 
Ridderstråle M, Laurila E, et al. PGC-1alpha-responsive genes involved in oxidative 
phosphorylation are coordinately downregulated in human diabetes. Nat Genet. 2003; 34:267–273. 
[PubMed: 12808457] 
Moskowitz IP, Kim JB, Moore ML, Wolf CM, Peterson MA, Shendure J, Nobrega MA, Yokota Y, 
Berul C, Izumo S, et al. A molecular pathway including Id2, Tbx5, and Nkx2–5 required for 
cardiac conduction system development. Cell. 2007; 129:1365–1376. [PubMed: 17604724] 
Murray PJ, Wynn TA. Protective and pathogenic functions of macrophage subsets. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2011; 11:723–737. [PubMed: 21997792] 
Nagel G, Szellas T, Huhn W, Kateriya S, Adeishvili N, Berthold P, Ollig D, Hegemann P, Bamberg E. 
Channelrhodopsin-2, a directly light-gated cation-selective membrane channel. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A. 2003; 100:13940–13945. [PubMed: 14615590] 
Neijssen J, Pang B, Neefjes J. Gap junction-mediated intercellular communication in the immune 
system. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2007; 94:207–218. [PubMed: 17467043] 
Nerbonne JM, Nichols CG, Schwarz TL, Escande D. Genetic manipulation of cardiac K(+) channel 
function in mice: what have we learned, and where do we go from here. Circ Res. 2001; 89:944–
956. [PubMed: 11717150] 
Nguyen KD, Qiu Y, Cui X, Goh YP, Mwangi J, David T, Mukundan L, Brombacher F, Locksley RM, 
Chawla A. Alternatively activated macrophages produce catecholamines to sustain adaptive 
thermogenesis. Nature. 2011; 480:104–108. [PubMed: 22101429] 
Nikolski VP, Jones SA, Lancaster MK, Boyett MR, Efimov IR. Cx43 and dual-pathway 
electrophysiology of the atrioventricular node and atrioventricular nodal reentry. Circ Res. 2003; 
92:469–475. [PubMed: 12600895] 
Nisbet AM, Camelliti P, Walker NL, Burton FL, Cobbe SM, Kohl P, Smith GL. Prolongation of atrio-
ventricular node conduction in a rabbit model of ischaemic cardiomyopathy: Role of fibrosis and 
connexin remodelling. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2016; 94:54–64. [PubMed: 27021518] 
Ongstad E, Kohl P. Fibroblast-myocyte coupling in the heart: Potential relevance for therapeutic 
interventions. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2016; 91:238–246. [PubMed: 26774702] 
Oviedo-Orta E, Howard Evans W. Gap junctions and connexin-mediated communication in the 
immune system. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004; 1662:102–112. [PubMed: 15033582] 
Paolicelli RC, Bolasco G, Pagani F, Maggi L, Scianni M, Panzanelli P, Giustetto M, Ferreira TA, 
Guiducci E, Dumas L, et al. Synaptic pruning by microglia is necessary for normal brain 
development. Science. 2011; 333:1456–1458. [PubMed: 21778362] 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Park DS, Fishman GI. The cardiac conduction system. Circulation. 2011; 123:904–915. [PubMed: 
21357845] 
Pinto AR, Paolicelli R, Salimova E, Gospocic J, Slonimsky E, Bilbao-Cortes D, Godwin JW, 
Rosenthal NA. An abundant tissue macrophage population in the adult murine heart with a distinct 
alternatively-activated macrophage profile. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e36814. [PubMed: 22590615] 
Robinson MD, McCarthy DJ, Smyth GK. edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression 
analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:139–140. [PubMed: 19910308] 
Rook MB, van Ginneken AC, de Jonge B, el Aoumari A, Gros D, Jongsma HJ. Differences in gap 
junction channels between cardiac myocytes, fibroblasts, and heterologous pairs. Am J Physiol. 
1992; 263:C959–77. [PubMed: 1279981] 
Rosas M, Davies LC, Giles PJ, Liao CT, Kharfan B, Stone TC, O’Donnell VB, Fraser DJ, Jones SA, 
Taylor PR. The transcription factor Gata6 links tissue macrophage phenotype and proliferative 
renewal. Science. 2014; 344:645–648. [PubMed: 24762537] 
Rubart, M., Zipes, DP. Arrhythmias, sudden death and syncope. In: Libby, P.Bonow, RO.Mann, DL., 
Zipes, D., editors. Braunwald’s Heart Disease. Philadelphia: Suanders Elsevier; 2008. p. 909-921.
Sachse FB, Moreno AP, Abildskov JA. Electrophysiological modeling of fibroblasts and their 
interaction with myocytes. Ann Biomed Eng. 2008; 36:41–56. [PubMed: 17999190] 
Sager HB, Hulsmans M, Lavine KJ, Beltrami Moreira MB, Heidt T, Courties G, Sun Y, Iwamoto Y, 
Tricot B, Khan OF, et al. Proliferation and recruitment contribute to myocardial macrophage 
expansion in chronic heart failure. Circ Res. 2016; 119:853–864. [PubMed: 27444755] 
Shibata Y, Yamamoto T. Gap junctions in the cardiac muscle cells of the lamprey. Cell Tissue Res. 
1977; 178:477–482. [PubMed: 870202] 
Swirski FK, Nahrendorf M. Leukocyte behavior in atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, and heart 
failure. Science. 2013; 339:161–166. [PubMed: 23307733] 
Tawara, S. Das Reizleitungssystem Des Säugetierherzens: Eine Anatomisch-Histologische Studie Über 
Das Atrioventrikularbündel Und Der Purkinjeschen Fäden. Jena: Verlag von Gustav Fischer; 1906. 
Temple IP, Inada S, Dobrzynski H, Boyett MR. Connexins and the atrioventricular node. Heart 
Rhythm. 2013; 10:297–304. [PubMed: 23085482] 
Theurl I, Hilgendorf I, Nairz M, Tymoszuk P, Haschka D, Asshoff M, He S, Gerhardt LM, Holderried 
TA, Seifert M, et al. On-demand erythrocyte disposal and iron recycling requires transient 
macrophages in the liver. Nat Med. 2016; 22:945–951. [PubMed: 27428900] 
Unger VM, Kumar NM, Gilula NB, Yeager M. Three-dimensional structure of a recombinant gap 
junction membrane channel. Science. 1999; 283:1176–1180. [PubMed: 10024245] 
Xu H, Li H, Nerbonne JM. Elimination of the transient outward current and action potential 
prolongation in mouse atrial myocytes expressing a dominant negative Kv4 alpha subunit. J 
Physiol. 1999; 519(Pt 1):11–21. [PubMed: 10432335] 
Yoo S, Dobrzynski H, Fedorov VV, Xu SZ, Yamanushi TT, Jones SA, Yamamoto M, Nikolski VP, 
Efimov IR, Boyett MR. Localization of Na+ channel isoforms at the atrioventricular junction and 
atrioventricular node in the rat. Circulation. 2006; 114:1360–1371. [PubMed: 16966585] 
Zoob M, Smith KS. The Aetiology of complete heart-block. Br Med J. 1963; 2:1149–1153. [PubMed: 
14060910] 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Resident Cardiac Macrophages in the AV Node
(A) Volumetric reconstruction of confocal microscopy after optical clearing of the 
atrioventricular (AV) node in a Cx3cr1GFP/+ mouse stained with HCN4 (red). The node is 
orientated along the AV groove extending from the compact node (CN) into the proximal 
His bundle. Dashed square indicates the lower nodal or AV bundle. CFB, central fibrous 
body; IAS and IVS, interatrial and interventricular septum.
(B) Higher magnification of dashed square in (A).
(C) 3D rendering of GFP+ macrophages in the AV bundle.
(D) Electron microscopy of a DAB+ macrophage in the AV node of a Cx3cr1GFP/+ mouse 
stained with a primary antibody for GFP. Arrow indicates nucleus, arrowheads indicate 
cellular processes.
See also Figure S1.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. The AV Node Enriches for Macrophages
(A) Flow cytometric macrophage quantification in microdissected AV node and left 
ventricular (LV) free wall of C57BL/6 mice. (Left) Representative flow cytometry plots; 
(right) number of macrophages per mg of heart tissue. Data are mean ± SEM, n = 12 mice 
from 4 independent experiments, **p < 0.01, Student’s t test.
(B) (Left) Representative immunofluorescence images of the AV node and LV free wall of a 
Cx3cr1GFP/+ mouse stained for HCN4 (red) and nuclei (blue), or PDGFRα (red) and nuclei 
(blue). (Right) Percentage of positive staining per region of interest (ROI). Data are mean ± 
SEM, n = 3–6 mice from 2 independent experiments, **p < 0.01, Kruskal-Wallis test 
followed by Dunn’s posttest.
(C) Macrophage chimerism in the LV free wall and AV node, and monocyte chimerism in 
the blood of C57BL/6 mice that had been joined in parabiosis with Cx3cr1GFP/+ mice for 12 
weeks (mean ± SEM, n = 3 [AV node] and n = 7 [LV free wall and blood] from 2 
independent experiments).
(D) (Top) Workflow; (bottom) heat map of expression levels (cpm, counts per million) 
among top 200 overdispersed genes from RNA-seq data of 76 AV node macrophages. 
Hulsmans et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Unsupervised clustering reflects three macrophage subsets according to expression levels of 
H2 and Ccr2 (orange, MHCIIlowCCR2low; green, MHCIIhighCCR2high; purple, 
MHCIIhighCCR2low).
See also Figure S2
Hulsmans et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Macrophages in the Human AV Node
(A) Masson’s trichrome stain of human tissue to identify the AV node. IAS and IVS, 
interatrial and interventricular septum.
(B) Immunohistochemical stain for CD68 in human working myocardium and AV node. 
Data are mean ± SEM, n = 20 to 30 high-power fields per section, ****p < 0.0001, Student’s 
t test.
(C) Volumetric reconstruction of confocal microscopy after optical clearing of a 500 μm 
section of the human AV bundle stained with CD68 (green). Autofluorescence signal (AF, 
red) was used for visualization of tissue morphology. Dashed area indicates the AV bundle. 
CFB, central fibrous body.
(D) Maximum projection images of CD68+ and CD163+ macrophages in the human AV 
bundle.
See also Figure S3.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. AV Node Macrophages Couple to Conducting Cardiomyocytes and Alter Their 
Electrophysiological Properties
(A) Relative connexin (Cx) expression levels in FACS-purified AV node macrophages by 
qPCR (n = 4 to 6 from 2 independent experiments).
(B) Cx43 levels by qPCR in macrophages FACS-sorted from AV node, and LV and RV free 
wall. n = 6 to 9 from 2 independent experiments.
(C) Whole-mount immunofluorescence microscopy of AV lower nodal area from a 
Cx3cr1GFP/+ mouse stained with Cx43 (red) and HCN4 (white). Arrowheads indicate Cx43 
colocalization with GFP+ macrophages (green).
(D) Electron microscopy image of a direct membrane contact (arrow) between a DAB+ 
macrophage and a cardiomyocyte in AV node tissue of a Cx3cr1GFP/+ mouse stained for 
GFP. The nodal cardiomyocyte is characterized by its typical high mitochondrial content and 
junctional contact with the neighboring myocyte (arrowhead).
(E) Immunofluorescence image of a co-cultured desmin+ neonatal mouse cardiomyocyte 
(white) and GFP+ cardiac macrophage (green) stained with Cx43 (red, arrow), illustrating 
setup for patch clamp experiments (F-I). The cells are grown on cover slips coated with 
fibronectin in a line pattern.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (F) Immunofluorescence images of dextran diffusion during whole-cell patch clamp with a 
dextran-loaded pipette. (Top) Arrowhead indicates GFP+ cardiac macrophage (green); 
(bottom) Texas Red+ dextran (red) diffusion into macrophage.
(G and H) Spontaneous recordings (G) and resting membrane potential (H) of solitary 
cardiac macrophages (n = 20) and macrophages attached to cardiomyocytes (n = 43) by 
whole-cell patch clamp. Data are mean ± SEM from 13 independent experiments, **p < 
0.01, nonparametric Mann-Whitney test. Rhythmic depolarization was observed in 10/43 
macrophages attached to cardiomyocytes.
(I) Resting membrane potential of solitary cardiomyocytes (n = 13) and cardiomyocytes 
coupled to macrophages before (n = 14) and after (n = 7) addition of the Cx43 inhibitor 
Gap26. Data are mean ± SEM from 3 independent experiments, *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01, 
Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s posttest.
(J) Mathematical modeling of ‘single-sided coupling’ between one AV bundle 
cardiomyocyte and an increasing number of cardiac macrophages. The graph shows the AV 
bundle cardiomyocyte membrane potential uncoupled or coupled to one, two or four cardiac 
macrophages at a junctional conductance of 1 nS.
(K and L) Computational modeling of resting membrane potential (K) and action potential 
duration (L) of an AV bundle cardiomyocyte coupled to an increasing number of cardiac 
macrophages.
See also Figure S4 and Movie S1.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Optogenetics Stimulation of AV Node Macrophages Improves Nodal Conduction
(A) Experimental outline. Hearts of Cx3cr1wt/CreER (control) or tamoxifen-treated 
Cx3cr1wt/CreER ChR2wt/fl (Cx3cr1 ChR2) mice were perfused in a Langendorff setup. 
Recording and pacing electrodes were connected to the heart and illumination with a fiber 
optic cannula was focused on the AV node.
(B) Images illustrating the optogenetics experimental setup during a light off and on cycle.
(C) Representative ECG recordings from a Cx3cr1 ChR2 heart illustrating the number of 
conducted atrial stimuli between two non-conducted impulses of a Wenckebach period 
during light off and on cycles. Arrows indicate failure of conduction leading to missing QRS 
complexes. Stim, stimulation.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (D) Representative bar graphs of a control and Cx3cr1 ChR2 heart showing the number of 
conducted atrial stimuli between two non-conducted impulses of a Wenckebach period 
during light off and on cycles. Data are mean ± SEM, *p < 0.05, Kruskal-Wallis test 
followed by Dunn’s posttest.
See also Figure S5.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 32
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Cx43 Deletion in Macrophages and Congenital Lack of Macrophages Delay AV 
Conduction
(A) Experimental outline of the electrophysiological (EP) study performed on mice lacking 
Cx43 in macrophages.
(B) AV node effective refractory period at 120 ms pacing frequency, and pacing cycle 
lengths at which Wenckebach conduction, 2:1 conduction and ventriculo-atrial (VA) 
Wenckebach conduction occurred in control (n = 5 to 9) and Cx3cr1 Cx43−/− (n = 6 to 8) 
mice. Data are mean ± SEM, 2 independent experiments, *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01, Student’s 
t test and nonparametric Mann-Whitney test.
(C) Surface ECG from control and Cx3cr1 Cx43−/− mice illustrating the Wenckebach cycle 
length. Arrows indicate missing QRS complexes. Stim, stimulation.
(D) Flow cytometric quantification of AV node macrophages in control and Cx3cr1 Cx43−/− 
mice. Data are mean ± SEM, n = 6 mice per group, nonparametric Mann-Whitney test.
(E) Immunofluorescence images of control and Cx3cr1 Cx43−/− AV node stained for CD68 
(green) and HCN4 (red).
(F) Quantification of AV node macrophages in control (n = 5) and Csf1op (n = 4) mice by 
flow cytometry. Data are mean ± SEM, 3 independent experiments, *p < 0.05, nonparametric 
Mann-Whitney test.
(G) Immunofluorescence image of a Csf1op AV node stained for CD68 (green) and HCN4 
(red).
(H) AV node effective refractory period at 120 ms pacing frequency, and pacing cycle 
lengths at which Wenckebach and 2:1 conduction occurred in control (n = 8) and Csf1op (n = 
7) mice. Data are mean ± SEM, 4 independent experiments, *p < 0.05, nonparametric Mann-
Whitney test.
See also Figure S6 and Table S1.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 33
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Macrophage Ablation Induces AV Block
(A) Experimental outline. DT, diphtheria toxin.
(B) Flow cytometric quantification of AV node macrophages three days after intraperitoneal 
injection of DT (25 ng/g) into C57BL/6 and Cd11bDTR mice. Data are mean ± SEM, n = 6 
mice per group, **p < 0.01, nonparametric Mann-Whitney test.
(C) Onset of first degree AV block in Cd11bDTR (n = 6) and C57BL/6 (n = 10) animals after 
DT injection (DT dose: 25 ng/g, 2 independent experiments, ****p < 0.0001, Mantel-Cox 
test).
(D) Telemetric ECG recordings before and after DT injection (25 ng/g) in Cd11bDTR mice. 
Arrows indicate non-conducted P waves in second degree AV block.
(E) Surface ECG of Cd11bDTR and Cx3cr1GFP/+ parabionts three days after DT injection 
(DT dose: 25 ng/g, mean ± SEM, n = 3 parabiosis pairs).
See also Figure S7 and Tables S2 and S3.
Hulsmans et al.
Page 34
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
