 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 04 April 2019
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00722
Edited by:
Marc Jones,
Manchester Metropolitan University,
United Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Bin Jiang,
The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong
Simon Bell,
The University of Edinburgh,
United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
MaryCarol R. Hunter
mchunter@umich.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Environmental Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 11 July 2018
Accepted: 15 March 2019
Published: 04 April 2019
Citation:
Hunter MR, Gillespie BW and
Chen SY-P (2019) Urban Nature
Experiences Reduce Stress
in the Context of Daily Life Based on
Salivary Biomarkers.
Front. Psychol. 10:722.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00722
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce
Stress in the Context of Daily Life
Based on Salivary Biomarkers
MaryCarol R. Hunter1*, Brenda W. Gillespie2 and Sophie Yu-Pu Chen3
1 School for Environment and Sustainability, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 2 Consulting for Statistics,
Computing, and Analytics Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 3 Department of Biostatistics,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States
Stress reduction through contact with nature is well established, but far less is known
about the contribution of contact parameters – duration, frequency, and nature quality.
This study describes the relationship between duration of a nature experience (NE), and
changes in two physiological biomarkers of stress – salivary cortisol and alpha-amylase.
It is the first study to employ long-term, repeated-measure assessment and the first
evaluation wherein study participants are free to choose the time of day, duration, and
the place of a NE in response to personal preference and changing daily schedules.
During an 8-week study period, 36 urban dwellers were asked to have a NE, defined as
spending time in an outdoor place that brings a sense of contact with nature, at least
three times a week for a duration of 10 min or more. Their goal was compliance within
the context of unpredictable opportunity for taking a nature pill. Participants provided
saliva samples before and after a NE at four points over the study period. Before-NE
samples established the diurnal trajectory of each stress indicator and these were in line
with published outcomes of more closely controlled experiments. For salivary cortisol,
an NE produced a 21.3%/hour drop beyond that of the hormone’s 11.7% diurnal drop.
The efficiency of a nature pill per time expended was greatest between 20 and 30 min,
after which benefits continued to accrue, but at a reduced rate. For salivary alpha-
amylase, there was a 28.1%/h drop after adjusting for its diurnal rise of 3.5%/h, but
only for participants that were least active sitting or sitting with some walking. Activity
type did not influence cortisol response. The methods for this adaptive management
study of nature-based restoration break new ground in addressing some complexities
of measuring an effective nature dose in the context of normal daily life, while bypassing
the limitations of a clinical pharmacology dose–response study. The results provide a
validated starting point for healthcare practitioners prescribing a nature pill to those
in their care. This line of inquiry is timely in light of expanding urbanization and rising
healthcare costs.
Keywords: nature pill, stress reduction, adaptive intervention, cortisol, amylase, mental well-being, duration
prescription, affordable healthcare
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
1
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 2
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
INTRODUCTION
Exposure to nature has great benefits (Hartig et al., 2011;
Ward Thompson, 2011; Bratman et al., 2012; Haluza et al., 2014;
van den Bosch and Ode Sang, 2017), key among them
being a better state of mental well-being (for example,
Berman et al., 2008; Logan and Selhub, 2012; Hartig et al., 2014;
Bratman et al., 2015; Hansen et al., 2017). While many studies
show a positive influence of nature exposure on health and
well-being, there is little understanding about how much or
in what form a nature experience (NE) should be for best
effect. Healthcare providers in North America and Europe have
begun to write nature prescriptions, often called “
nature pills,”
using common sense and interpretation of published research
to motivate patients to take a nature break (James et al., 2017;
Wessel, 2017). Likewise civic organizations and non-profits are
emerging in support of the nature-well-being treatment such
as the Mood Walks program in Canada1, the Nature Sacred
program of the TKF Foundation2 in the United States, the Dose
of Nature project in the United Kingdom (Bloomfield, 2017), and
the Coastrek program in Australia (Buckley et al., 2016). Laudable
examples aside, there are no quantitative studies on the frequency
of nature pill prescribing and what exactly is being dispensed.
There is a clear need for research that specifies the parameters of a
nature pill that best support mental health. This line of inquiry on
pro-active healthcare is timely in light of rising healthcare costs
worldwide and the impact of growing urbanization that limits
access to nature (WHO, 2016).
Dose–
response approaches to the study of the nature-well-
being relationship have recently been used to quantify how much
and what kind of nature produces positive effects on human
well-being. Theoretical frameworks for hypothesis testing and
operationalizing methods have been put forward to identify the
impact of duration, frequency, and intensity of a NE on health
and well-being (Sullivan et al., 2014; Hunter and Askarinejad,
2015; Shanahan et al., 2015; Frumkin et al., 2017; Van den Berg,
2017). Shanahan et al. (2015) charted a framework for a more
holistic consideration of what to account for in dose–
response
studies. The authors also discuss the key attributes of a dose–
response model to identify threshold dose recommendations
for specific health outcomes. Like others, they conclude that
most research on parameters of a nature pill are too coarse, for
example, urban versus “
natural”settings, percent of foliage or
green space in sight or nearby, duration of the nature interface
is set by the researcher, and experiments that are often done
indoors in lab settings. Frumkin et al. (2017) offer a research
agenda on nature contact-health relationships while detailing the
complexities of quantifying “
dose.”
Empirical approaches to the study of the nature dose–
well-being response relationship are varied and have provided
rich ways to deconstruct how the duration, frequency, and
intensity of a nature dose contribute to physical and mental
well-being,
and
how
social,
economic,
and
demographic
factors adjust a dose–
response relationship (Jiang et al., 2014;
1moodwalks.ca
2naturesacred.org
Shanahan et al., 2016; Cox et al., 2017a; Frumkin et al., 2017). In
population-level studies, spatially grouped measures of human
health and well-being are interpreted relative to the amount
(dose) of nearby nature, for example, street tree density
per 17 ha (Kardan et al., 2015), tree canopy per postal code
(Cox et al., 2017b), and degree of urbanization per postal code
(Cox et al., 2018).
Our ultimate goal is to articulate a “
nature prescription”for
use by healthcare providers as a preventive, self-administered
health care treatment for mental well-being that is low in cost and
effective in everyday settings. Full articulation of a prescription
involves knowing the efficacy of which pill, at what dose, and
how often. From this broad arena, we chose to start by examining
the duration aspect of efficacy using objective assessment of
physiological stress.
The dose–
response for duration of nature exposure has been
measured in a variety of ways, with the subjective assessment
of mental state dominating (e.g., mood, ability to focus, and
perceived level of stress, anxiety, or contentment). The subjective
nature of self-report data for professional healthcare treatment
decisions is considered less desirable than objectively sourced
data (Van den Berg, 2017), such as change in blood pressure,
heart rate, and stress hormone level. Consequently, we chose two
biomarkers of physiological stress –salivary cortisol and salivary
alpha-amylase, to quantify the change in physiological stress in
response to the duration of nature exposure. In nature restoration
studies, the hormone cortisol has proven to be an attractive
biomarker of stress as it is sampled in a relatively non-invasive
way through saliva collection (e.g., Ward Thompson et al., 2012;
Jiang et al., 2014; Gidlow et al., 2016).
The utility of cortisol and amylase as biomarkers is predicated
on being able to separate the nature exposure effect from
the natural diurnal shift in production. Moreover, cortisol and
amylase have distinct diurnal patterns. Salivary cortisol is highest
in the morning after a brief pulse upon awakening and then
drops through the day and into the night. By contrast, amylase
has a distinct drop in the first hour after waking and a steady
increase toward evening (Nater et al., 2007). The circadian
rhythm of cortisol production in humans has seasonal shifts
being lower in summertime, coinciding with earlier sunrise time
(Hadlow et al., 2014). For amylase, the impact of day length
is unstudied in humans, but in rats, the diurnal rhythm of
alpha-amylase production changes under different photoperiod
treatments (Bellavia et al., 1990). Collectively, these findings
underscore the need to account for time of day for both
biomarkers when interpreting the body’
s response to nature
interventions. Most researchers accommodate the diurnal shifts
by conducting experiments at roughly the same time of day,
assuming the bias of diurnal change will be of equal impact
regardless of day length and across participants regardless of
treatment group. This approach has merit but limits what can be
learned and might lead to mistaken conclusions.
Published studies using physiological criteria to investigate
the impact of NE on stress are typically based on a single fixed
duration time, with 15 and 30 min being the most common over
a range of 10–
90 min. Conclusions about the ability of a NE to
influence well-being emerge from relative comparisons (paired
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
2
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 3
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
t-test or analysis of variance) between the treatment (NE) and a
control (typically an intensely urban experience). Consequently,
none of these studies can be used to interpret threshold effects –
minimum time for a nature pill effect, or duration-based efficacy.
What is needed is a sampling method that provides nature
response data over a continuum of duration times.
In terms of experimental design, randomized clinical trials
(RCTs) are the gold standard for objective information on
optimal dosing/exposure and the effectiveness of different types
of intervention for different user groups. But, investigations
about the restorative value of nature exposure are generally
unsuited for the exacting protocol of an RCT. The most
unavoidable conflict arises when participants and researchers
cannot be blinded to the identity of the intervention, thereby
introducing a perception bias (Van den Berg, 2017). Another
challenge is achieving participant compliance with a behavior-
based intervention (Olem et al., 2009) that (a) must be managed
within the messy context of daily life, (b) is in the realm of
preventive care (versus acute care), and (c) requires more time
and effort than just taking a pill.
In
developing
an
alternative
approach
to
the
RCT,
our experimental design was inspired by the research of
Collins et al. (2004) and Murphy et al. (2007) on adaptive
intervention strategies to prevent and treat conditions that have
behavioral components such as mental illness and substance
abuse. Here, the course of treatment is adjusted in real time in
response to what does and does not work for the individual. The
behavior adaptability aspect of this approach is well suited to our
goal of measuring the impact of self-directed nature exposure on
mental well-being in the context of daily life for a healthy-normal
population. The key difference is that our participants develop
their own set of decision rules to comply with a prescribed
minimum of three nature pills per week.
The experimental design presented here allows the participant
to adjust terms of the nature intervention (duration, nature
quality, and when it happened) for their convenience, while
abiding by a set of ground rules. The goal of this adaptive
intervention strategy is to introduce variation in nature pill
duration and to embrace the backdrop of stress variation in
daily life for a realistic estimate of effective dose. During the 8-
week experiment, participants were asked to maintain a behavior
regime of 3 NEs a week. Over the 2-month period, there were
four tests of physiological stress, taken at the discretion of the
participant (although they were asked to do so approximately
every 2 weeks). Throughout the experimental period, each
participant was able to customize the nature intervention in
response to the constraints and unpredictability of real life by
having control of the date, time of day (anytime from 1 h after
rising until nightfall), and duration (10 min or more) of the
NE. Use of this adaptive approach also intends to reduce some
of the motivation problems that are inherent to interventions
that demand greater effort and more planning than taking a
pill on schedule.
The protocols for personally customized nature pills produced
data that required a different analytical approach. In other
stress studies using cortisol and amylase markers, the diurnal
change in cortisol (daytime falling) and amylase (daytime rising)
is accommodated in one of two ways. Either the participant
is sampled repeatedly through the preceding day or the day
of the intervention (and typically in clinical settings, for
example, Rohleder and Nater, 2009) to establish the personal
diurnal slope, or it is assumed that stress testing at the same
time of day eliminates the contribution of diurnal change
(e.g., Hansen et al., 2017). Neither protocol was useful for an
experimental design based on adaptive management for self-care.
To estimate a reliable nature pill prescription for members of
the normal, healthy population, we present a new approach to
accommodate diurnal fluctuation in the stress markers.
Our experimental goal is to investigate how relatively a short
NE influences stress level within the context of everyday life using
objective physiological indicators of stress. We use a repeated
measures experimental design to (1) estimate the duration of an
effective nature pill; (2) evaluate the impact of a NE on stress
under conditions typical of the participant’
s daily life using an
adaptive management approach; and (3) distinguish the diurnal
response of the stress markers from the nature pill effect. Because
proactive health care is foundational to reducing health care
costs, another goal is to identify experimental approaches that
improve the time and cost efficiency of research about behavioral
self-care in support of better mental health.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Selection of the Stress Biomarkers
The definition of stress varies among fields and specialties
depending on what’
s in focus –perception of stress, behavioral
response to stress, and neurophysiological response to stress.
This study investigated the latter, using two known physiological
biomarkers of stress. Like a pharmaceutical under test, the
treatment – a NE, was evaluated for its competency as de-
stressor rather than a stressor. The established biomarkers of
stress – salivary cortisol and salivary alpha-amylase (hereafter,
cortisol and amylase), have different pathways. The autonomic
nervous system initiates adjustment to stress with signals from
the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis which controls
cortisol, and the sympathetic adrenal medullary (SAM) axis
which controls amylase (Kirschbaum and Hellhammer, 1994;
Nater and Rohleder, 2009). These biomarkers are easily
sampled in field settings using non-invasive, self-administered
collection of saliva samples (Yamaguchi and Shetty, 2011;
Nater et al., 2013b).
Cortisol is the primary stress hormone. It mediates the
physical pathways of many metabolic processes involved
with
homeostasis
including
that
of
immune
function.
Prolonged elevation of cortisol interferes with learning and
memory, lowers immune function and bone density, and
increases blood pressure, cholesterol, heart disease, and weight
(McEwen, 2008; Lupien et al., 2009). In a study of demographic
and socioeconomic differences in daytime trajectories of cortisol,
Karlamangla et al. (2013) analyzed data from the Midlife in
the United States Study (MIDUS), and found differences in
the diurnal rhythm of salivary cortisol based on age, gender,
ethnicity, and education. They conclude that sampling cortisol of
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
3
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 4
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
each participant over multiple days of a study (four times in this
case) would ensure a better capture of the daytime diurnal cycle
to explain some of the variation owing to differences in waking
time, sleep duration, and workday versus weekend day status.
Salivary amylase is an enzyme produced by the digestive
system. It is responsive to both physical and psychological
stressors (Nater et al., 2007; Breines et al., 2015) and is used
increasingly for stress evaluation portrayed by the sympathetic
nervous system – SAM (Nater and Rohleder, 2009). Amylase
is a useful marker to investigate the stress response to physical
stressors (e.g., exercise, Koibuchi and Suzuki, 2014) and mental
stressors (e.g., psychosocial distress (Rohleder et al., 2004;
Obayashi, 2013). Amylase is also used to study of value of
interventions for stress relief, most often involving physically
passive interventions such as listening to music or reading (e.g.,
Linnemann et al., 2015). There are four studies on the impact of
outdoor experience on amylase response (Kondo et al., 2018).
For amylase, there are no gender differences in diurnal
response (Nater et al., 2007), although research on the complexity
of the gender factor regarding the biological stress response has
yet to provide a clear resolution on this point for either cortisol or
amylase (Strahler et al., 2017). Research about age-based changes
in amylase production has mixed outcomes regarding diurnal
changes and response to stress (Rohleder and Nater, 2009), but it
is clear that the stress response is different for very young children
and the elderly (Strahler et al., 2017). Amylase production is
much more sensitive to environmental input than is cortisol. For
example, amylase is stimulated by caffeine, food or chewing itself,
and exercise, and is inhibited by smoking, chronic drinking, some
medicines (Nater et al., 2007). Consequently, it is important to
control or account for interference from those environmental
variables known to adjust amylase response.
Study Group
Participants were recruited via email announcements and flyers
directed to faculty and staff at the University of Michigan
and members of several local non-profit organizations in Ann
Arbor, MI, United States. Recruitment focused on members of
the normal, healthy population, age 18 and over, interested in
spending more time outdoors in green spaces. Participants were
self-selected. A minimum sample size of 30 was calculated (SAS
R
�
software, version 9.4, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, United States)
based on having 86% power to detect an R2 of 0.25 using
linear regression. The study had approval from the Institutional
Review Board of the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
United States (IRB # HUM00089147).
In all, 44 participants were recruited, and 36 provided
sufficient reliable data. Of these 92% were female (33). The mean
age overall was 45.8 years (SD = 13.35, range 22–
68). The sample
was 86% white (31) of which two were of Hispanic ethnicity, 6%
Asian (2), and 8% all others (3). Thirty-six participants had an
average of 3.22 NEs (out of four, SD = 0.87).
Sampling Scheme
In accordance with our goal of defining a nature prescription
for everyday life, the experimental design let participants use
adaptive management to better support the behavior of taking
a nature pill. Participants completed an 8-week summer study
starting in mid-June 2014. The goal was to have a NE at least
three times a week on days of their choice. During a NE, they
could sit, walk, or do both in an outdoor location of their choice.
The NE was defined as anywhere outside that, in the opinion of
the participant, included a sufficiency of natural elements to feel
like a nature interaction. Participants understood they were free to
adjust the place, time of day, and duration of the NE in response
to changing daily circumstances to best accommodate their goal.
The ground rules stipulated the following. The saliva sampling
must take place in daylight, at least 1 h after waking and be
completed before nightfall. For the 30 min before saliva was
taken, there could be no eating, drinking, or toothpaste. The
NE itself could not include aerobic exercise in order to limit
the opportunity for an exercise-based rise in endocannabinoids.
Use of social media, the internet, phone calls, conversations, or
reading were also to be avoided.
Collection and Analysis of
Saliva Samples
Participants provided saliva samples just before and just after a
NE on 4 days during the 8-week experimental period. They were
encouraged to do this at the end of the first, third, fifth, and
seventh week. The collection period ran from June 17 to August
21, 2014 with a median sampling date of July 22, 2014. Almost
all NEs took place in the Ann Arbor, Michigan area. Over this
period, sunrise in Southeast Michigan occurred between 5:58 and
6:49 a.m. and sunset occurred between 8:47 and 9:14 p.m.3. Prior
to each NE, (pre-NE) samples were collected as early as 7:03 a.m.
and as late as 11:28 p.m.; some samples were taken outside the
requested window of “
before nightfall.”
Training for saliva collection took place at orientation
meetings where participants signed consent forms at the outset.
Each participant received a small carrier with a pouch that held
a blue ice pack and four pairs of Salivette tubes (produced by
Sarstedt Inc.) with labels titled BEFORE or AFTER. During
orientation, participants under supervision did a test run
(without the NE, but with two saliva collections at least 10 min
apart) using the following protocol. Just before a NE, the
participant placed a cotton roll from the BEFORE Salivette tube
into their mouth, chewed on it for 1–
2 min (until fully wet),
returned the cotton roll to the BEFORE tube, re-capped, and
labeled it with their unique three-letter ID plus date and time. The
process was repeated just after the NE ended using the vial labeled
AFTER. At this point, the participant reported whether they had
been “
sitting,”“
sitting and walking”
, “
walking,”or “
other”during
the NE. When “
other”was chosen, the activity type was specified.
Participants also answered questions about their compliance (or
lack of it) with the ground rules listed above.
Although saliva can be stored at room temperature for
up to 3 weeks, freezing or at least refrigeration will prevent
mold and bacterial growth (Rohleder and Nater, 2009).
Consequently, participants were asked to store samples in a
home or office freezer until the 8-week testing period was
over at which point their entire sample set was delivered
3http://www.sunrisesunset.com/usa/Michigan.asp
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
4
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 5
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
to the lab in the carrier with an ice pack. Thereafter,
samples
were
stored
at
−20◦C.
All
protocols
regarding
thermal conditions of samples during transport and storage
are in keeping with good practice for stability of cortisol
(Garde and Hansen, 2005; Nalla et al., 2015) and amylase
(Rohleder and Nater, 2009).
Frozen samples were assayed in a single batch 1 month
after the close of the study for cortisol and 8 months
after the study close for amylase. Concentrations of salivary
cortisol and salivary alpha-amylase were measured at the
Core Assay Facility, University of Michigan’
s Department of
Psychology using commercially available kits from Salimetrics.
Each assay was run in duplicate. Cortisol level was reported
as µg/dL. Amylase level was reported in enzyme units per
milliliter (U/mL), a number that reflects the amount of enzyme
that catalyzes the conversion of 1 mmol of substrate per
minute (Rohleder and Nater, 2009). The inter-assay coefficient
of variation (CV) was 34% for cortisol and 65% for amylase.
The intra-assay CV was 7.0% for cortisol and 3.7% for amylase.
Analytical sensitivity for both stress markers was <0.007 µg/dL
according to the kit manufacturer. All duplicate measures passed
the check for similarity.
Statistical Analyses
The presence of diurnal cycles in cortisol and amylase highlighted
the need to account for time of day. Consequently, a novel
approach for accommodating time of day was developed
and
adopted.
The
samples
taken
pre-NE
collectively
established the diurnal trajectory of the study population.
A
comparison
of
stress
indicator
levels
before
(diurnal
component) and after a NE (diurnal + NE components)
allowed interpretation about the impact of the NE with
the natural cycles of diurnal shift in biomarkers accounted
for.
We
also
investigated
effects
of
participant
activity
types (sitting and walking), as well as the effect of nightfall
onset on cortisol and amylase levels. Finally, the efficiency
of a NE in reducing stress relative to NE duration was
evaluated. A mixed model regression approach accounted
for multiple measurements per participant. The model was
used to establish the diurnal trajectory and to evaluate the
effect of a NE on stress. Biomarkers were log-transformed
to adjust for the non-linearity in each diurnal cycle. All
analyses
were
conducted
using
SAS
R
�
software,
version
9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, United States) unless
otherwise specified.
Sample exclusions were as follows. For seven NEs, at least one
of the two paired outcomes (the pre-NE and post-NE samples)
was not eligible. The amylase assay result was missing for two
NEs, one a pre-NE and one a post-NE, so the existing data
from the NE pair member was removed from consideration.
Two amylase samples with levels greater than three SDs from
the mean (>500 U/mL) were removed as were their NE pair
members. One participant reported bicycling as the activity
during three NEs. The pre and post samples for each were
removed because of the capacity of aerobic exercise to influence
amylase production.
RESULTS
Both stress biomarkers indicated a reduction in stress in
response to a NE.
Cortisol
A NE resulted in a 21.3%/h drop in cortisol beyond that
of the hormone’
s 11.7% diurnal drop. The efficiency of
a nature pill per time expended was greatest between 20
and 30 min, after which benefits continued to accrue, but
at a reduced rate.
Diurnal Response of Cortisol in Sample
The diurnal response was established with saliva samples
collected just pre-NE. The Loess smoothing function was applied
to untransformed data (Figure 1) for better visualization. The
smoothed line shows a substantial drop in cortisol between
waking and approximately 10 a.m., followed by a gentler
decrease for the rest of the day. This pattern is consistent with
published reports including one where subjects provided hourly
saliva samples over the course of 1 day of normal activities
(Nater et al., 2007).
To interpret the rate of change in cortisol over time,
cortisol values were linearized by a natural log transformation
(Figure
2).
This
transformation
reduces
the
right-sided
skew in the distribution of cortisol. A linear mixed model
regression analysis of the transformed data estimated the
diurnal drop in the sample population cortisol to be 11% per
hour (n = 110) between morning and nightfall. This result
provides a baseline for the diurnal drop, and enables us to
distinguish the diurnal component of a change in cortisol level
from a NE effect.
FIGURE 1 | Characterizing the untransformed diurnal response of salivary
cortisol using saliva samples taken prior to a nature experience (pre- NE);
n = 110 NE measurements from 36 subjects; the smoothing parameter
controls the flexibility of the Loess line.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
5
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 6
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
FIGURE 2 | Diurnal response of the natural log-transformed cortisol from
saliva samples taken prior to a nature experience (pre-NE); n = 110 NE
measurements from n = 36 subjects. A linear mixed model accounts for
repeated measures per participant and estimates the relationship as log
cortisol = –0.641 – 0.117 ∗(time of day in hours); p < 0.0001 for slope; the
predictor “time of day” explained 41.6% of level-1 (fixed effects) variance and
51.5% of level-2 (subject-level) variance.
Separating Diurnal Response From Estimates of
Nature-Based Stress Relief
The addition of a NE duration variable (length of a NE in
minutes) to the mixed model of log cortisol on time of day
(diurnal effect) shows that a NE produced a cortisol drop nearly
two times greater than the average diurnal drop expected during
the period of the NE (Table 1). After accounting for the 11.7% per
hour diurnal drop in cortisol in this model, NEs accounted for an
additional 21.3% per hour drop.
The role of duration on the magnitude of the cortisol response
is visualized in Figure 3 as the degree of divergence between the
two slopes –one for diurnal change and the other combining NE
and diurnal effects over time. In the absence of a NE effect on
cortisol, the coefficient for NE duration would be approximately
zero, and the two regression lines would coincide. The divergence
between the two regression lines indicates a NE effect on stress
relief, as manifested by a cortisol drop.
Efficiency of a Nature Experience in Reducing Stress
in Terms of Time Expended
To move closer to the goal of defining a reliable prescription,
we used a step function model to locate the duration threshold
FIGURE 3 | Visualizing the contributions to cortisol change from diurnal
effects and nature experience effects based on model results in Table 1.
A scatterplot shows the change in log cortisol levels (post-NE – pre-NE log
cortisol) relative to duration (length of an NE in minutes); n = 110 NEs. The
position of the horizontal dotted line indicates an absence of both diurnal and
NE duration effects on cortisol. The blue dashed line shows the estimated
diurnal decrease in cortisol (11.7% per hour) while the red solid line shows the
estimated combined diurnal and NE duration effects on cortisol level. The
difference between the blue dashed line for diurnal effect and the red solid line
is the additional effect of the nature pill. The data points (gray dots) represent
the observed change in natural log cortisol levels of study participants.
for stress relief and the duration of greatest efficiency for stress
reduction. A linear mixed model regression with change in log
cortisol per hour = time of day (of saliva sampling) + NE
duration interval (categorical) + NE duration (minutes) was
fitted to the sample. Time of day for pre-NE samples captures
the impact of a natural diurnal drop over the course of a NE.
The NE duration interval variable, a categorical variable for the
step function, was created with quartile partitioning. Because
the NE start and stop times were reported in full minutes,
the quartile partitioning is not at exactly 25%. The intervals
shown in Table 2 gave the most equitable distribution of samples
while accommodating the left-skewed distribution of the NE
duration variable.
A step function model of NE duration (Table 2) shows a
significant reduction in the stress hormone cortisol after a NE
greater than 20 min. Stress relief was most efficiently gained
when a nature pill lasted between 21 and 30 min when cortisol
dropped at a rate of 18.5% per hour beyond diurnal effects.
TABLE 1 | Estimating the change in cortisol by duration of the nature experience (NE duration in hours), after accounting for the natural diurnal effect (time of day).
Effect
dfA
Beta
Standard error
p-value
% Cortisol decrease per hourB
Intercept
−0.542
0.1952
0.0064
Time of day (diurnal effect)
109
−0.124
0.01179
<0.0001
11.7%
Length of NE (NE duration)
128
−0.239
0.05815
<0.0001
21.3%
ADenominator degrees of freedom BCalculated as e beta estimate – 1. The diurnal effect is expressed as percent change per hour of log cortisol. Linear mixed models were
used to account for multiple NEs per person (36 subjects, n = 220 saliva samples from 110 NEs). This model explains 26.9% of level-1 (residual – repeated measure)
variance, 47.9% of level-2 (subject-level) variance, and 53.7% of level-3 (timepoint-level) variance.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
6
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 7
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
TABLE 2 | Efficiency of a nature experience in reducing stress in terms of time expended.
Effect
n
Beta
Standard error
p-value
% Cortisol
drop/hourA
Intercept
110
−0.52
0.197
0.009
Time of day (diurnal
effect)
110
−0.125
0.0119
<0.0001
11.7%
Duration interval:
length of NE (min)
per quartileB
NE frequency for
each minute in
the interval
n/% of total
sample
% Cortisol drop
beyond diurnal
effectA
Q1: 7–14 min
1,2,1,2,5,7,7,3
28/25.5%
−0.0864
0.0561
0.13
8.3%
Q2: 15–20 min
5,2,8,1,6,5
27/24.5%
−0.0375
0.0572
0.51
3.7%
Q3: 21–30 min
4,1,3,2,6,4,3,1,1,5
30/27.3%
−0.2048
0.0545
0.0003
18.5%
Q4:>30 min
1,1,2,1,1,1,1,2,1,2,1,
1,1,1,1,1,1,2,1,1,1
25/22.7%
−0.1214
0.0600
0.045
11.4%
ACalculated as ebeta estimate – 1. BReported in minutes, calculated as proportion of an hour. Mixed models of log cortisol levels as predicted by diurnal effects (time of day)
using a linear function and by duration of a nature experience using a step function. The step function estimates are calculated for each quartile interval (Q) separately
and are not cumulative. This model explains 26.7% of level-1 residual [repeated measure] variance, and 45.9% of level-2 [subject-level] variance, and 53.4% of level-3
[timepoint-level] variance.
FIGURE 4 | A visual comparison of cortisol response to NE duration with
linear (gray solid line) and step function regressions (solid red line segments)
based on the results shown in Tables 1 and 2. As in Figure 2, the blue
dashed line represents the diurnal effect of change in log cortisol. The
difference between the blue dashed line and the red solid line segments
represents the nature experience effect in addition to the diurnal effect.
Thereafter, benefits continue to accrue, but at a reduced rate of
11.4% per hour.
A visual comparison of linear and step function regressions
for the cortisol response to NE duration provides insight on
the nature of the variation in the linear model (Figure 4).
Investigation using a step function offers a way to uncover the
relative restoration efficiency of different nature pill durations
and provides a guidance on optimal duration of a nature pill in
terms of cortisol drop/stress relief efficiency.
Amylase
A NE resulted in a 28.1%/h drop in amylase after adjusting for
its diurnal rise of 3.5%/h, but only for participants that were least
FIGURE 5 | Characterizing the untransformed diurnal response of salivary
amylase in our sample using pre-nature experience (NE) amylase levels for all
NEs; n = 110 NEs from 36 subjects; the smoothing parameter controls the
flexibility of the Loess line.
active sitting or sitting with some walking. Activity type did not
influence cortisol response.
Establishing the Diurnal Response of Amylase
Salivary amylase levels measured pre-NE showed the expected
diurnal form of untransformed data: a rise from morning to
some point in the evening after which, amylase falls until
morning (Figure 5).
After log transformation to normalize pre-NE amylase data
(due to its right-sided skew), a linear mixed model for diurnal
effect was fitted to the data (n = 110): log amylase = 3.8 +
0.027∗(time of day in hours). The 95% CI for the slope was
(−0.0036, 0.05763), indicating that the slope was not significantly
different from zero (p-value = 0.084). This was unexpected
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
7
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 8
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
given the outcomes in other field studies showing a rising
diurnal amylase response (e.g., Nater et al., 2013b). Our study
differed from others by its inclusion of saliva samples from NEs
completed after nightfall. Although the impact of day length
on amylase production is unstudied in humans, its production
changes when under different photoperiod treatments in rats
(Bellavia et al., 1990). In our study, all NEs began sometime after
dawn but seven of the 110 NEs ended after dark –in violation of
the ground rules given to participants. Consequently, we tested a
set of hypotheses to identify the time of day when the direction of
amylase production shifted. This investigation became the basis
for deciding which saliva samples would not be included.
Estimating the Time of Directional Shift in Diurnal
Amylase Response
The investigation used two approaches to identify a reliable
cutoff point for NE data inclusion based on the timing of the
shift in the direction of diurnal amylase production. First, we
compared the slopes from a set of linear mixed models using
NE datasets that had cutoff times set one hour apart from 6
p.m. through midnight. This approach gave the opportunity
to compare our results with those of several other studies
that ended between 4 and 8 p.m. The mixed model with
the largest slope (beta) came with NEs completed by 9 p.m.
(Table 3). Nine in the evening was close to the average sunset
time of all NEs – 9:04 p.m., during the experimental period
that ran from June 17 (sunset at 9:14 p.m.) to August 21
(sunset at 8:47 p.m.).
Next, we considered the role of sunset time, specific
for the date of each NE. Data on time of sunset (civil
twilight) in Ann Arbor, MI, United States, in 2014 came from
http://www.sunrisesunset.com/usa/Michigan.asp. The best linear
fit for the amylase diurnal response came from the data set
delimited by a sunset criterion: post-NE saliva samples were taken
before the time of sunset on the NE date (Table 3). Consequently,
the remaining analyses of amylase response include only those
103 NEs that ended before sunset. It is of note that a comparable
test with cortisol data showed that inclusion of the NE’
s
happening post sunset had no influence on the diurnal trajectory
of falling cortisol based on model fit. This was expected as there
FIGURE 6 | Diurnal response of amylase for NEs completed by sunset
(n = 103). A mixed model accounts for repeated measures per participant and
estimated the relationship as log amylase = 3.7 + 0.036∗(time of day in hours),
95% CI for slope (0.0051, 0.067), p = 0.023. The predictor “time of day”
explained 4.3% of level-1 (fixed effects) variance and 4.8% of level-2
(subject-level) variance. The position and flex of the Loess line (dashed) nearly
mimics the path of the model’s regression line, corroborating the model fit.
is no shift in the direction of diurnal production of cortisol until
a rapid escalation upon morning rising (Hadlow et al., 2014).
We established the diurnal baseline response of amylase
using pre-NE saliva samples from NEs that ended before sunset
(n = 103; Figure 6). The diurnal rise in amylase over the day until
sunset was estimated at 3.7%/h, based on the slope (0.036) from
the linear mixed model fitted to pre-NE log amylase: (e 0.036−1).
Effect of Different Types of Physical Activity on
Amylase
No significant effect of NE duration on amylase was detected in a
linear mixed model that controlled for diurnal effect (p = 0.21,
beta = −0.116, n = 103 NEs). The discrepancy between this
result and that of the cortisol biomarker led us to reconsider
a key assumption of the amylase model: that activity type did
not differentially influence amylase response. Note that most
TABLE 3 | Mixed model linear regressions of pre-NE log amylase on time of day using eight subsets of the data, each differing by the latest time of the post-NE
saliva sample.
Pre-NE samples from NEs ending as late as:
Beta
p-value
n
Subject number
Den df
6:00 p.m.
0.04640
0.1374
67
33
54.2
7:00 p.m.
0.04339
0.0681
79
34
61.2
8:00 p.m.
0.03149
0.0871
91
34
68.5
Sunset – time varies
0.03584
0.0230
103
35
78.7
9:00 p.m.
0.03253
0.0393
100
35
75.0
10:00 p.m.
0.02831
0.0622
108
36
84.1
11:00 p.m.
0.03064
0.0529
109
36
84.1
12:00 a.m.
0.02699
0.0835
110
36
88.9
Each hourly interval includes all NEs that started after 7 a.m. and ended by the time shown. By contrast, the sunset model includes NEs that ended by the time of sunset
on the date of the NE. Regression slopes and p-values are reported. Denominator (Den) degrees of freedom (df) reflect the amount of information for regression error in
the correlated repeated measures data.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
8
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 9
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
research on the amylase-physiological stress relationship focuses
on athlete training and implies that amylase is elevated only with
more intense activity types (Koibuchi and Suzuki, 2014; Peinado
et al., 2014). The following paragraphs reveal how we determined
that (a) sitting and sitting+walking during a NE produced very
similar outcomes in terms of amylase production despite sample
size differences; (b) amylase production in the non-aerobic
walkers was extremely different than amylase production in the
two sitting groups; and (c) the amylase response when sitting or
sitting+walking was very similar to that of the stress hormone
cortisol (which is not sensitive to activity type).
To test our assumption, we needed to determine whether
participant and activity type were confounded in this repeated
measure design. We found that 36 participants did not choose
the same activity type for each NE: 21 participants engaged in
31 “
sitting”NEs, 12 participants engaged in 17 sitting+walking
NEs, and 23 participants engaged in 55 “
walking”NEs. The
average diversity of activity types per individual was 1.64 out of
3 (SE = 1.05); 44% stuck with one activity type, 47% used two
types, and 8% used all types.
Next, we looked for differences in amylase response as a
function of activity type. A linear mixed model with a three-
category covariate for activity type (sitting; sitting+walking;
walking only) was fitted to the log transformed amylase data
(Table 4, Model 1). Activity type was associated with a notable
difference in amylase response (with diurnal changes accounted
for): a walking NE produced a 4% drop per hour versus a
sitting NE (34% drop per hour) or a sitting+walking NE
(30% drop per hour).
Next, we grouped data from the two lowest exertion classes
(sitting and sitting+walking) based on the similarity of the
amylase responses (i.e., regression slopes). The linear mixed
model with a two-category covariate for activity type (Table 4,
Model 2) showed that lower exertion nature pills had an amylase
drop of 27.9% per hour (with diurnal changes accounted for).
Higher exertion nature pills had amylase changes that were
indistinguishable from the baseline diurnal condition. Figure 7
visualizes these relationships.
Unlike cortisol, amylase data could not be used to estimate
what duration period was most efficient for stress reduction
because separation by activity type led to inadequate sample size.
FIGURE 7 | Visualizing the contributions to amylase change from start to end
of the NE due to diurnal effects and nature experience effects for two activity
types; based on model results in Table 4. A scatterplot shows the change in
natural log amylase levels (post-NE – pre-NE) relative to duration (length of an
NE in minutes); n = 103 NEs. The position of the horizontal dotted line (black)
indicates an absence of diurnal and NE duration effects on amylase. The blue
dashed line estimates the diurnal increase in amylase (+3.5%/h) while the solid
lines (red for NEs while sitting and yellow for NEs while walking) estimate the
combined effects of the circadian cycle and duration of an NE on amylase
level. The difference between the blue dashed line for diurnal effect and the
red solid line is the additional effect of the nature pill. The data points (gray
dots) represent the observed change in natural log amylase levels of
study participants.
It is important to point out that the regression of cortisol on
NE duration produced the same slope for low and high exertion
categories (Table 5). Based on a comparison of low exertion
conditions such as sitting (Table 6), we conclude that the NE-
based decline in cortisol and amylase are comparable when a
nature pill is taken, but that cortisol is a more robust biomarker
for field studies.
DISCUSSION
The field study presented here offers the first estimates of the
impact of NE duration on stress level in the context of normal
TABLE 4 | The effect of physical activity type on amylase.
Activity type (# participants, #NEs)
Time of day (h)/diurnal effect
Length of NE (h)/duration
n
Beta
p
Beta
p
Model 1. Activity levels
Sitting (21, NE = 31)
62
0.034
0.013
−0.34
0.08
Sitting + walking (11, NE = 17)
34
−0.30
0.30
Walkers (23, NE = 55)
110
−0.04
0.70
Model 2. Activity levels grouped
Sitting and sitting + walking (NE = 50)
96
0.034
0.013
−0.33
0.047
Walkers (NE = 55)
110
−0.04
0.702
Mixed model linear regressions of log amylase on time of day (diurnal effect), duration of the nature experience, and activity type during the NE. Model 1 includes three
activity levels; Model 2 collapses “sitting” and “sitting + walking” to distinguish the two lower activity groups from the highest activity group “walkers” (n = 206 amylase
measures from 103 NEs).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
9
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 10
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
TABLE 5 | Effect of physical activity type on cortisol.
Activity type (# participants, #NEs)
Time of day (h)/diurnal effect
Length of NE (h)/duration
n
Beta (SE)
p
Beta (SE)
p
Sitting (21, 33) and Sitting+walking (11, 17)
100
−0.124 (0.012)
<0.0001
−0.240 (0.010)
0.023
Walkers (23,60)
120
−0.239 (0.068)
0.0006
Mixed model linear regression of log cortisol on time of day (diurnal effect), duration of the nature experience, and two activity groups (n = 220 from 110 NEs).
TABLE 6 | Rate of change in two stress biomarkers per hour due to underlying circadian rhythm (diurnal effect) and activity types; based on model outcomes for cortisol
in Table 5 (NE = 110) and for amylase in Table 4, Model 2 (NE = 103).
Effect
Model beta
% Cortisol change/hour
Model beta
% Amylase change/hour
Diurnal effect
−0.124
−11.7%
+0.034
+3.5%
NE duration while sitting or sitting + walking
−0.240
−21.3%
−0.33
−28.1%
NE duration while walking only
−0.239
−21.3%
−0.04
−3.9%
For negative slopes, % drop is calculated as (1 – e beta estimate); for positive slopes, % rise is calculated as (e beta estimate – 1).
daily life. Spending time with nature produced a significant drop
in the stress hormone cortisol, with the duration of the NE
contributing to the amount of stress reduction. The research
also breaks new ground in the following ways, primarily by
addressing some of the complexities of measuring an effective
nature dose. First, it directly investigates the duration aspect
of a successful nature pill prescription in the context of real
life. Second, the 8-week field experiment enabled repeated
measures of each participant in different contexts, thereby
allowing the circumstance of an individual’
s daily life into
prescription development of the nature pill. Third, an adaptive
management approach allowed participants to self-manage the
time, place, and duration of each nature pill to offset the inevitable
challenges of scheduling a non-essential activity. Fourth, a novel
approach to data evaluation offers a way to distinguish nature
pill effects from diurnal effects without repeated invasive saliva
sampling for baseline physiological status throughout the day
of an NE. Finally, the results provide a validated starting
point for healthcare practitioners prescribing a nature pill to
those in their care.
Cortisol
Cortisol Response: Recommendation for a Nature Pill
Prescription in Terms of Duration
Two models with good fit investigate the trajectory of cortisol
in terms of duration of the NE. The linear model of change
in log cortisol on NE duration predicts a stress reduction of
21.3% per hour. Because people find it difficult to make time
for self-care, a step function model asked the question: what
is shortest duration needed to achieve benefit? We found that
stress relief is significantly and most efficiently gained (18.5%
cortisol drop/h) when the nature pill lasted between 20 and
30 min, and significant benefits continued to accrue thereafter at
a somewhat reduced rate (11.4%/h). This is a useful and robust
starting point for a nature pill script because it emerged from an
adaptive management platform, embracing the typical variation
in how people make or use their free time. Needless to say, the
true functional form of the response will require further testing
with a larger sample size, an expansion of the duration times
(especially < 10 and 31–
60 min), and sample populations with
a broader age and gender representation.
Distinguishing Nature Pill Effects From Diurnal
Changes in the Stress Markers
A population response to NEs is a useful basis for defining
parameters of a nature pill prescription where parameters are
largely controlled by the participant rather than the researcher.
We were able to evaluate the impact of a NE in situ, using
a population approach to provide a reliable estimate of the
baseline diurnal pattern of each stress marker. Mixed model
regression to handle repeated measures could distinguish the
difference between an expected change in stress markers (diurnal
effect) and realized change in stress markers at the end of a
NE (NE-based effect).
Accurate assessment of diurnal drop of cortisol is key to
accurate assessment of a nature pill effect. Further support that
our diurnal cortisol drop of 11.7% per hour is robust comes
from the results of three repeated measures studies with similar
outcomes to ours, despite differences in experimental goals. In
all cases, participants went about their daily life during the
study. The key difference between our study and the studies
described below is that our study estimated the diurnal response
of cortisol with a single saliva sample (pre-NE sample) per
participant on each sampling day. The other studies estimated
diurnal cortisol with four to five saliva samples per participant
on each sampling day.
Laudenslager et al. (2013) reported an 11.0% per hour drop in
diurnal cortisol over a period of 10 hours beginning 30 min after
waking (p < 0.0001; 95% CI: −13, −9%). The study was focused
on testing a novel saliva collection device to support participant-
controlled field sampling. The study had a similar sample to ours:
32 participants, 81% female, 18% were not Caucasian, and the age
range was roughly the same as our study. The only restriction
on participants’behavior was to avoid eating, teeth brushing,
and drinking liquids within 15 min before saliva sampling. The
design used repeated measures: each participant collected saliva
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
10
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 11
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
for 3 consecutive days at four time points in the day. A linear
mixed model regression included log transformed cortisol data
and collection time of day. There was some allowed flexibility in
the collection time of saliva: at awakening (flexible), 30 min post
awakening, just before lunch (flexible), and 10 h after waking.
Compliance with collection time for the second and fourth
sample of the day was not perfect, yet tolerance testing for 7.5
and 15 min offsets revealed no significant effect.
In a study of quality of life in relation to demographic and
socioeconomic differences, Karlamangla et al. (2013) analyzed
data from 1693 participants whose ages fell within the same
range as our study; 57% female and 86% Caucasian. Participants
provided saliva samples on 4 days over a week’
s period that
included both weekdays and weekend days. On each sampling
day, saliva was taken: at awakening (flexible), around 30 min post
awakening, just before lunch (flexible), and at bedtime (flexible;
median bedtime was 10:30 p.m.). This produced significant
variability in actual time of sampling and allowed examination
of cortisol level across the entire day in the sample population
“
to get a general idea of the shape of the mean daytime cortisol
trajectory”(pg. 4). They reported a cortisol diurnal drop of 8.1%
(beta = −0.084) for a 10.5 h period that began 4.5 h after rising.
This temporal division of data was enabled by a high sample
size (>24K cortisol data points), and the use of the more flexible
linear spline model. Their model was also indexed on “
time since
waking”and adjusted for a participant’
s average length of waking
day, length of sleep the previous night, waking time on day of
measurement, and weekend versus workday status.
Nater et al. (2013b) report a mean diurnal cortisol drop of
12.2% (beta = −0.13) in an investigation of diurnal cortisol and
amylase profiles over adult life span. The study included 185
participants (median age of 49, 51% female, 74% Caucasian) who
provided a saliva sample five times per day on each of seven
test days over a 10-day testing period. The estimate of mean
diurnal cortisol drop was based on the difference in cortisol level
at waking and the last sample of the day (9:00 p.m.), taking
respective time of day into account. Sample times throughout the
day were: at awakening, 30 min later, 9 a.m., 12 p.m., 3 p.m.,6
p.m., and 9 p.m. At these times, participants provided a saliva
sample and answered a questionnaire.
In light of these comparisons, we conclude that our
experimental design and analytical approach offers an efficient
way to investigate the value of self-care behaviors in preventive
health care that rely on adaptive management. Our approach
is also an alternative to experimental designs that require
more control over participant behavior, such as pharmacology
dose–
response or clinical trial testing. We recognize that our
experimental approach is possible largely because the nature pill
intervention is not dangerous if misused. The relative safety of a
nature pill in any dose is one reason that health care professionals
around the country feel comfortable prescribing nature pills to
patients without the benefit of guiding data.
Comparison of Cortisol Results From Other Outdoor
Studies of the Nature Effect
The results of our repeated measures study can be considered
in light of field studies that use cortisol to assess the impact
of single episodes of nature exposure on psychological stress.
Japanese studies of Shinrinyoku –immersing oneself in nature
by mindfully using all five senses (Tsunetsugu et al., 2010;
Hansen et al., 2017) have provided recurrent support for the
ability of nature to reduce stress. The protocols are well
considered and meticulous and are akin to those of most other
field tests of nature’
s stress reducing potential.
Park et al. (2010) complied data from many studies done
under exacting conditions that compared salivary cortisol levels
of male college students (n = 280) who spent time in forest and
nearby urban settings (the control) in 24 National Forests of
Japan. Subjects were housed in controlled settings on the nights
preceding testing days. In each National Forest and at the same
time of day, 12 participants spent 15 min sitting while viewing
either the forest (n = 6) or a nearby urban setting (n = 6).
Participants were tested likewise on a consecutive day in the
alternative setting (random crossover trial). Before and after a
15-min test interval, saliva was collected (comparable to our
method). A pairwise means comparison of the two treatments
(forest versus urban setting) showed that the average salivary
cortisol level of participants was 13.4% lower after 15 min
of forest viewing while sitting compared to urban viewing.
For just over a third of the sample group (∼75), the 15-min
sitting period was preceded by a 15-min walking period in
the forest. Cortisol was 15.8% lower after 15 min of forest
walking compared to participant’
s response to walking in the
urban setting. Diurnal effect was ignored as testing time was
approximately the same for both treatments. Using the same
experimental approach, Park et al. (2012) expanded the database
to include 420 participants at 35 different forests throughout
Japan. They reported that participants walked their assigned
areas for 16 ± 5 min, then sat and viewed the area for
14 ± 2 min. They reported a 12.4% drop in salivary cortisol
after the forest experience compared to the urban experience.
Kobayashi et al. (2017) point out that although the time of saliva
collection varied from 9 a.m. to 12 p.m., each participant was
measured at approximately the same time on each experimental
day for both environments.
Unlike the Shinrinyoku research, our study yields NE
outcomes in terms of an hourly rate of stress reduction after
diurnal effects are taken into account. Our linear model reveals
the overall stress reduction of cortisol at 21.3% per hour.
Interpolation from this model predicts a 10.6% cortisol drop
after a 30 min NE. By contrast, the Shinrinyoku studies report
a 12–
15% cortisol drop after a 15-min period of forest sitting.
We consider these outcomes quite similar considering that
several modifiers are likely in play. Acclimation to field setting:
Shinrinyoku participants spent time getting accustomed to the
setting before the first cortisol sample was taken (walking from
transport to the field site and spending time at the field site for
several other physiological measures). Additionally, participants
had a low stimuli common experience for at least 12 h preceding
the field test. By contrast, our experiment had significantly lower
level of control over participant behavior before and during the
field tests because of the adaptive intervention strategy. Quality
of the “
nature”setting: Shinrinyoku took place in national park
settings which brought sensory continuity to the experience of
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
11
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 12
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
all participants and offered a consistently high opportunity for
a sense of nature immersion. By contrast, there was variation
in our participant’
s choice of each NE setting, typically in urban
green space near enough to be convenient. Finally, Shinrinyoku
testing was done over 2 days with participants removed from
their daily routine and led under the direction of researchers
versus the adaptive management situation that requires a self-
motivated decision to take a nature break when time permits
within daily life. Overall, we think that the results of our
adaptive intervention dose–
response study are coherent with
other studies given the differences outlined above. The source of
these differences also makes clear the need to move forward with
a focus on additional dose–
response studies that use comparable
methods to identify minimum dose recommendations for specific
health outcomes.
Amylase
Amylase Response: Corroboration With NE-Based
Cortisol Response
It is of note that our amylase results for the impact of a
NE on stress corroborate those of cortisol. When low exertion
nature pills were evaluated, the degree of restoration indicated
by amylase (28.1% per hour, n = 50 NE) is comparable to that
of cortisol (21.3% per hour, n = 110 NEs). The slightly larger
restoration value for amylase may be related to differences in
time of production and release of these stress markers. In a study
of response to acute stress, salivary alpha-amylase response was
faster than cortisol (Takai et al., 2004).
As with cortisol, our analytical approach required a reliable
estimate of the amylase diurnal baseline. Our study showed a
3.5% rise in amylase from 1 h after rising until sunset. We
could find only two relevant studies reporting diurnal amylase
response in terms of a slope. Both gave results comparable to
ours. Nater et al. (2013a) report a mean diurnal amylase rise of
4.1% (beta = +0.04) in an investigation of diurnal cortisol and
amylase profiles over adult life span. Details about this work are
given above (section “
Amylase”
).
Out et al. (2013) reported a 2.15% increase in salivary amylase
from waking to evening in a repeated measure study (n = 122
participants) involving five saliva samples per day for each of
3 days in five sampling periods between August and February.
These data also indicated that variation in diurnal response
within an individual varied by less than 1%. From this, Out
et al. (2013) and others cited in their paper suggest that diurnal
amylase profile is relatively stable compared to the response to
momentary stress and ongoing moderate stress of both physical
and psychological origin.
The Utility of Using Salivary Amylase for Studies of
Nature-Based Stress Relief
The inclusion of salivary amylase in this NE study adds to
the growing body of information about the value of using
this stress marker in restoration studies. Using amylase to
evaluate calming interventions such as communing with nature
uncovered two confounding effects: the sensitivity of amylase to
physical exertion and time of sunset.
Amylase Sensitivity to Time of Sunset
Our data define a diurnal rise in amylase of 3.5% per hour over
daylight hours, based on an 8-week study period in summer. The
sampling period was confined to 1 h after rising to time of sunset,
eliminating those samples from participants who bypassed the
request to take the nature pill “
before dark.”The data analysis
ultimately included only those NEs that ended before sunset
time on the NE date. These criteria led to the best model fit for
linearity in the log-transformed data (Table 3). The decision to
use sunset time as the cut point for data inclusion gains support
from other research studies that did not detect a problematic
point of downturn in diurnal amylase during the evening hours.
For example, the latest time of day for sampling include 8 p.m.
(Nater et al., 2007), 9 p.m. (Out et al., 2013), and (unspecified)
bedtime (Karlamangla et al., 2013). Nonetheless, all of these
results underscore the need to control for time of day when doing
research where amylase is the stress marker.
The role of sunset time through the year on diurnal cycle of
alpha-amylase needs formal investigation. At present, we know of
only one other study, with rats, indicating an effect of sunset time
on alpha-amylase. Bellavia et al. (1990) reported that the diurnal
pattern of production disappeared when photoperiod changed to
constant light or constant dark for 15 days. Based on our results,
we hypothesize that time of year and latitude, both of which
contribute to day length and sunset time, will adjust the temporal
form of diurnal amylase production. It is particularly important
to learn more about the role of day length variation in studies
about nature restoration because evening often affords working
people greater flexibility for self-care. New research on the after
dark trajectory of amylase diurnal production is also of great
interest because an after-dark nature pill affords the opportunity
to investigate non-visual aspects of nature restoration, a critical
but relatively unstudied aspect of our relationship with the
environment (Franco et al., 2017).
Amylase Sensitivity to Physical Exertion
We were somewhat surprised that casual walking produced such
a noticeable effect on salivary amylase production. In terms of
this stress marker, the drop in amylase after a walking nature pill
was small (4% per hour) and indistinguishable from the diurnal
baseline. By contrast, under low exertion – sitting or sitting
with some walking, the nature pill produced a 28% per hour
drop in amylase after accounting for the diurnal baseline. In a
literature review that focused on high intensity exercise, Koibuchi
and Suzuki (2014) concluded that exercise upregulates salivary
amylase. The few studies that involved low intensity exercise did
not show amylase elevation: a 30-min light gymnastics program
for the elderly and relaxed 20-min walks in either forest or
urban settings by university students. In our experiments, the
assumption that non-aerobic walking would not constitute a
physical stressor was wrong.
In another experiment using self-report data on psychological
response rather than physiological response, the impact of
exercise intensity also showed up. Barton and Pretty (2010)
evaluated the effect of green exercise (activity in the presence
of nature) on subjective ratings of mood and self-esteem from
over 1200 participants, each involved in one of 10 experiments
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
12
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 13
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
carried out over a 6-year period in the United Kingdom.
Estimates of dose–
response relationships in terms of green
exercise duration and intensity showed significant benefits to
mental well-being after even short engagements with green
exercise – as little as 5 min, with positive effects diminishing
over duration periods up to a half day, then rising with durations
up to a full day. Improvements to self-esteem and mood during
their first duration period (less than an hour –a duration that
is coincidental with that in our experiment) were greater for the
lower intensity green exercise (e.g., walking) compared to more
intense exercise (e.g., cycling).
Limitations and Potential
To develop a robust basis for prescribing a nature pill, more
research is needed on the role of NE duration, frequency, and
the perceived quality of the nature experienced (beyond the
natural versus urban environment dichotomy) in the delivery
of positive effects. Key among the challenges is the need for
a large and diverse sample size because the diurnal form of
cortisol and amylase production changes with age and stress level
(Strahler et al., 2017), socioeconomic factors (Karlamangla et al.,
2013), and lifestyle factors such as sleeping patterns (Van Lenten
and Doane, 2016). A truly functional form of the nature pill
prescription will emerge from testing a more diverse participant
pool (gender, age, and lifestyle) from a diversity of settings
(habitat types, both familiar and novel), and across seasons. The
experimental approach described here can efficiently support the
large sample size needed to accommodate these factors.
Researchers have discussed the difficulty with adherence in
prescribed behavior testing (Olem et al., 2009; McCahon et al.,
2015). In our experiment, we balanced stringency with adaptive
adherence opportunities in order to get a realistic assessment of
the value of NEs under normal circumstances. For example, the
requirements to make time for repeated NEs with limitations
on ingesting, social exchange, and aerobic exercise, etc., were
balanced by the freedom choose when, where, and duration
(beyond 10 min) of a NE. That said, the use of self-selected
participants who were more likely to adhere to the parameters
of the experiment could have biased the results if the benefits of
nature are more readily gained by those who are willing to spend
or enjoy spending their free time in this way. Future experiments
would benefit from a participant group that showed the range
of interest in NEs but were equally rewarded (e.g., money) for
adherence regardless of natural inclination.
Our study had 36 participants, a sample size that is twice that
of the median sample size in 18 studies on the same topic (see
review by Kondo et al., 2018). However, our sample size for the
number of nature pills with a saliva collection was not sufficient to
fully investigate duration times at either end of the spectrum (i.e.,
under 10 min and over 30 min). Additional research is needed on
this aspect of nature pill duration.
The usefulness of amylase in this study was reduced by
confounding effects of physical exertion and time of sunset. These
effects can be handled through experimental design and post hoc
data cleaning. But why use amylase when cortisol is without these
limitations? There is opportunity for efficient and cost-effective
self-monitoring of amylase with technologies that are already in
the marketplace. For example, amylase can be readily measured
in the field using a phone app and an add-on sampling device
that attaches to the phone (Zhang et al., 2015). Such devices are
valuable for athletic training because exertion stress data (e.g.,
aerobic threshold) can be used to formulate an effective training
plan (Akizuki et al., 2014). To be useful for tracking mental
stress, however, it would appear that low physical exertion is
required. To demonstrate the ability of their smart-phone-based
potentiometric biosensor to test psychological status, Zhang et al.
(2015) evaluated salivary amylase in sitting participants before
and after exposure to images from the affective picture system
(IAPS), known to induce positive and negative emotions. The
outcome was in good agreement with a published report of
the same test using traditional collection and sample analysis
methods for amylase level.
Our experimental approach for assessing the restorative power
of a NE offers an efficiency and clarity that can be used to better
address questions about duration, frequency, attenuation, and
the efficacious quality of the nature encountered, particularly in
an urban setting (Bratman et al., 2012; Hunter and Askarinejad,
2015; Cox et al., 2017a; Frumkin et al., 2017). Answers to these
questions will also support better-informed economic models
and policy decisions aimed at containing personal, societal, and
health care costs (Kardan et al., 2015; Wolf et al., 2015; Shanahan
et al., 2016) and, ultimately, support the cultural uptake of more
time outside/less time on-screen4.
CONCLUSION
The methods for this adaptive management study of nature-
based restoration break new ground in addressing some of the
complexities of measuring an effective nature dose in the context
of normal daily life. Our approach was empirically field tested in
the service of measuring the relationship between the duration
time of a NE and stress level using physiological biomarkers. The
stress markers revealed that taking a nature pill reduces stress by
21%/h (salivary cortisol) and 28%/h (salivary amylase). When the
duration of the NE is between 20 and 30 min, the gain in benefit
is most efficient.
This work is novel in several ways.
(1) Results came from an experimental approach that can
efficiently distinguish the contribution of a nature-based
stress reduction from the concomitant diurnal change of
a stress marker.
(2) The experimental design bypasses the need for participants
to take multiple saliva samples throughout each testing day
to establish a personal diurnal curve. Instead, one saliva
collection (pre-NE) per sample date established a diurnal
form of the stress markers that was comparable to the
diurnal trajectory in other outdoor studies.
(3) Unlike previous studies, this one included repeated-
measures testing of the same individuals over 2 months,
4https://www.apha.org/policies-and-advocacy/public-health-policy-
statements/policy-database/2014/07/08/09/18/improving-health-and-wellness-
through-access-to-nature
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
13
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 14
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
allowing us to capture the realism of changing psychological
and
physiological
states
and
reactions
to
changing
environmental context for each participant.
(4) The experimental format is unique for nature restoration
research in its use of an adaptive management design.
Participants
had
significant
control
in
how
they
“
medicated” themselves in terms of when, where, and
length of a NE. This flexibility is essential for establishing
and maintaining self-care behaviors in the face of
responsibilities to others, lifestyle, and personal preference.
(5) The data analysis demonstrates how to quantify parameters
of a nature prescription using a population approach for
evaluation of nature exposure along a duration continuum
set by participants.
The outcomes of our experiment are coherent with those of
studies of stress biomarkers involving much greater control and
much higher sample sizes. Moreover, the empirical results on
stress reduction relative to the duration of a NE offer a validated
starting point for healthcare practitioners prescribing a nature
pill to those in their care. We think that our methodological
approach for parameterizing a prescription (duration, frequency,
and nature quality) for the nature pill is a tool that can be used
by a field of study poised for new insights on the contributions of
age, gender, seasonality, physical context, and cultural context to
the effectiveness of nature exposure on well-being.
ETHICS STATEMENT
This
study
was
carried
out
in
accordance
with
the
recommendations of the Institutional Review Board of the
University of Michigan, IRB-Health Sciences and Behavioral
Sciences (HSBS) committee, with written informed consent
from all subjects. All subjects gave written informed consent
in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The protocol was
approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States (IRB # HUM00089147).
Regarding exemption status, the IRB committee has also
determined that the study, as currently described, is now exempt
from ongoing IRB review, per the following federal exemption
category: research in which study activity is limited to analysis of
identifiable data. For purposes of this research study, all research
subject interactions and interventions have been completed
and the data continue to contain subject identifiers or links.
The research is not federally funded, regulated by the FDA, or
conducted under a Certificate of Confidentiality.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MH made substantial contributions to the conception of the
work, the experimental design, the acquisition of data, the
analysis and interpretation of data, and drafting the manuscript
and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work in
ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any
part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. BG
made substantial contributions to the analysis and interpretation
of data and revising the manuscript critically for important
intellectual content. SC made substantial contributions to the
analysis of data and revising the manuscript critically for
important intellectual content.
FUNDING
This research was funded by grants from the University of
Michigan’
s MCubed program and the TKF Foundation.
REFERENCES
Akizuki, K., Yazaki, S., Echizenya, Y., and Ohashi, Y. (2014). Anaerobic threshold
and salivary alpha-amylase during incremental exercise. J. Phys. Ther. Sci. 26,
1059–
1063. doi: 10.1589/jpts.26.1059
Barton, J., and Pretty, J. (2010). ‘
What is the best dose of nature and green exercise
for improving mental health? A multi-study analysis’
. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44,
3947–
3955. doi: 10.1021/es903183r
Bellavia, S., Sanz, E., Chiarenza, A., Sereno, R., and Vermouth, N. (1990). Circadian
rhythm of alpha-amylase in rat parotid gland. Acta Odontol. Latinoam 5, 13–
23.
Berman, M. G., Jonides, J., and Kaplan, S. (2008). The cognitive benefits of
interacting with nature. Psychol. Sci. 19, 1207–
1212. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.
2008.02225.x
Bloomfield, D. (2017). What makes nature-based interventions for mental health
successful? BJPsych Int. 14, 82–
85.
Bratman, G. N., Daily, G. C., Levy, B. J., and Gross, J. J. (2015). The benefits of
nature experience: improved affect and cognition. Landsc. Urban Plan. 138,
41–
50. doi: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2015.02.005
Bratman, G. N., Hamilton, J. P., and Daily, G. C. (2012). The impacts of nature
experience on human cognitive function and mental health. Ann. N. Y. Acad.
Sci. 1249, 118–
136. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06400.x
Breines, J. G., McInnis, C. M., Kuras, Y. I., Thoma, M. V., Gianferante, D.,
Hanlin, L., et al. (2015). Self-compassionate young adults show lower salivary
alpha-amylase responses to repeated psychosocial stress. Self Identity 14,
390–
402. doi: 10.1080/15298868.2015.1005659
Buckley, R. C., Westaway, D., and Brough, P. (2016). Social mechanisms to get
people outdoors: bimodal distribution of interest in nature? Front. Public Health
4:257. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2016.00257
Collins, L. M., Murphy, S. A., and Bierman, K. L. (2004). A conceptual framework
for adaptive preventive interventions. Prevent. Sci. 5, 185–
196. doi: 10.1023/b:
prev.0000037641.26017.00
Cox, D. T. C., Shanahan, D. F., Hudson, H. L., Fuller, R. A., Anderson, K.,
Hancock, S., et al. (2017a). Doses of nearby nature simultaneously associated
with multiple health benefits. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 14:172.
doi: 10.3390/ijerph14020172
Cox, D. T. C., Shanahan, D. F., Hudson, H. L., Fuller, R. A., and Gaston, K. J. (2018).
‘
The impact of urbanisation on nature dose and the implications for human
health’
. Landsc. Urban Plan. 179, 72–
80. doi: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2018.07.013
Cox, D. T. C., Shanahan, D. F., Hudson, H. L., Plummer, K. E., Siriwardena, G. M.,
Fuller, R. A., et al. (2017b). Doses of neighborhood nature: the benefits for
mental health of living with nature. Bioscience 67, 147–
155. doi: 10.1093/biosci/
biw173
Franco, L. S., Shanahan, D. F., and Fuller, R. A. (2017). A review of the benefits of
nature experiences: more than meets the eye. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health
14:864. doi: 10.3390/ijerph14080864
Frumkin, H., Bratman, G. N., Breslow, S. J., Cochran, B., Kahn, P. H., Lawler, J. J.,
et al. (2017). Nature contact and human health: a research agenda. Environ.
Health Perspect. 125:075001. doi: 10.1289/ehp1663
Garde, A. H., and Hansen, A. M. (2005). Long-term stability of salivary cortisol.
Scand. J. Clin. Lab. Invest. 65, 433–
436. doi: 10.1080/00365510510025773
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
14
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 15
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
Gidlow, C. J., Jones, M. V., Hurst, G., Masterson, D., Clark-Carter, D., Tarvainen,
M. P., et al. (2016). Where to put your best foot forward: psycho-physiological
responses to walking in natural and urban environments. J. Environ. Psychol.
45, 22–
29. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2015.11.003
Hadlow, N. C., Brown, S., Wardrop, R., and Henley, D. (2014). The effects
of season, daylight saving and time of sunrise on serum cortisol in a large
population. Chronobiol. Int. 31, 243–
251. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2013.844162
Haluza, D., Schonbauer, R., and Cervinka, R. (2014). Green perspectives for
public health: a narrative review on the physiological effects of experiencing
outdoor nature. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 11, 5445–
5461. doi: 10.3390/
ijerph110505445
Hansen, M. M., Jones, R., and Tocchini, K. (2017). Shinrin-Yoku (Forest Bathing)
and nature therapy: a state-of-the-art review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health
14:48. doi: 10.3390/ijerph14080851
Hartig, T., Mitchell, R., de Vries, S., and Frumkin, H. (2014). Nature and health.
Annu. Rev. Public Health 35, 207–
228. doi: 10.1146/annurev-publhealth-
032013-182443
Hartig, T., van den Berg, A. E., Hagerhall, C. M., Tomalak, M., Bauer, N.,
Hansmann, R., et al. (2011). Health Benefits of Nature Experience: Psychological,
Social and Cultural Processes. New York, NY: Springer.
Hunter, M. R., and Askarinejad, A. (2015). Designer’
s approach for scene selection
in tests of preference and restoration along a continuum of natural to manmade
environments. Front. Psychol. 6:1228. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01228
James, A. K., Hess, P., Perkins, M. E., Taveras, E. M., and Scirica, C. S.
(2017). Prescribing outdoor play: outdoors Rx. Clin. Pediatr. 56, 519–
524.
doi: 10.1177/0009922816677805
Jiang, B., Chang, C. Y., and Sullivan, W. C. (2014). A dose of nature: tree cover,
stress reduction, and gender differences. Landsc. Urban Plan. 132, 26–
36. doi:
10.1016/j.landurbplan.2014.08.005
Kardan, O., Gozdyra, P., Misic, B., Moola, F., Palmer, L. J., Paus, T., et al. (2015).
Neighborhood greenspace and health in a large urban center. Sci. Rep. 5:11610.
doi: 10.1038/srep11610
Karlamangla, A. S., Friedman, E. M., Seeman, T. E., Stawksi, R. S., and
Almeida, D. M. (2013). Daytime trajectories of cortisol: demographic
and socioeconomic differences. Findings from the national study of daily
experiences. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38, 2585–
2597. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.
2013.06.010
Kirschbaum,
C.,
and
Hellhammer,
D.
H.
(1994).
Salivary
cortisol
in
psychoneuroendocrine research - recent developments and applicatioNS.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 19, 313–
333. doi: 10.1016/0306-4530(94)90013-2
Kobayashi, H., Song, C., Ikei, H., Park, B.-J., Lee, J., Kagawa, T. et al. (2017).
Population-based study on the effect of a forest environment on salivary
cortisol concentration. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 14:E931. doi: 10.3390/
ijerph14080931
Koibuchi, E. R. I., and Suzuki, Y. (2014). Exercise upregulates salivary amylase
in humans (Review). Exp. Ther. Med. 7, 773–
777. doi: 10.3892/etm.2014.
1497
Kondo, M. C., Jacoby, S. F., and South, E. C. (2018). Does spending time outdoors
reduce stress? A review of real-time stress response to outdoor environments.
Health Place 51, 136–
150. doi: 10.1016/j.healthplace.2018.03.001
Laudenslager, M. L., Calderone, J., Philips, S., Natvig, C., and Carlson, N. E. (2013).
Diurnal patterns of salivary cortisol and DHEA using a novel collection device:
electronic monitoring confirms accurate recording of collection time using this
device. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38, 1596–
1606. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.
01.006
Linnemann, A., Ditzen, B., Strahler, J., Doerr, J. M., and Nater, U. M. (2015). Music
listening as a means of stress reduction in daily life. Psychoneuroendocrinology
60, 82–
90. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2015.06.008
Logan, A. C., and Selhub, E. M. (2012). Vis Medicatrix naturae: Does nature
"minister to the mind"? Biopsychosoc. Med. 6: 11. doi: 10.1186/1751-0759-6-11
Lupien, S. J., McEwen, B. S., Gunnar, M. R., and Heim, C. (2009). Effects of
stress throughout the lifespan on the brain, behaviour and cognition. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 10, 434–
445. doi: 10.1038/nrn2639
McCahon, D., Daley, A. J., Jones, J., Haslop, R., Shajpal, A., Taylor, A., et al. (2015).
Enhancing adherence in trials promoting change in diet and physical activity
in individuals with a diagnosis of colorectal adenoma; a systematic review of
behavioural intervention approaches. BMC Cancer 15:13. doi: 10.1186/s12885-
015-1502-8
McEwen, B. S. (2008). Central effects of stress hormones in health and disease:
Understanding the protective and damaging effects of stress and stress
mediators. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 583, 174–
185. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.11.07t
Murphy, S. A., Collins, L. M., and Rush, A. J. (2007). Customizing treatment to
the patient: adaptive treatment strategies. Drug Alcohol Depend. 88(Suppl. 2),
S1–
S3. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2007.02.001
Nalla, A. A., Thomsen, G., Knudsen, G. M., and Frokjaer, V. G. (2015). The
effect of storage conditions on salivary cortisol concentrations using an Enzyme
Immunoassay. Scand. J. Clin. Lab. Investig. 75, 92–
95. doi: 10.3109/00365513.
2014.985252
Nater, U. M., Hoppmann, C. A., and Scott, S. B. (2013a). Diurnal profiles of
salivary cortisol and alpha-amylase change across the adult lifespan: Evidence
from repeated daily life assessments. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38, 3167–
3171.
doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.09.008
Nater, U. M., and Rohleder, N. (2009). Salivary alpha-amylase as a non-invasive
biomarker for the sympathetic nervous system: current state of research.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 34, 486–
496. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2009.01.014
Nater, U. M., Rohleder, N., Schlotz, W., Ehlert, U., and Kirschbaum, C.
(2007). Determinants of the diurnal course of salivary alpha-amylase.
Psychoneuroendocrinology
32,
392–
401.
doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2007.
02.007
Nater, U. M., Skoluda, N., and Strahler, J. (2013b). Biomarkers of stress in
behavioural medicine. Curr. Opin. Psychiatr. 26, 440–
445. doi: 10.1097/YCO.
0b013e328363b4ed
Obayashi, K. (2013). Salivary mental stress proteins. Clin. Chim. Acta 425, 196–
201.
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2013.07.028
Olem, D., Sharp, K. M., and Johnson, M. O. (2009). Challenges with engaging
participants in behavioral intervention research trials. Open Access J. Clin. Trials
1, 17–
21. doi: 10.2147/OAJCT.S6841
Out, D., Granger, D. A., Sephton, S. E., and Segerstrom, S. C. (2013). Disentangling
sources of individual differences in diurnal salivary α-amylase: reliability,
stability and sensitivity to context. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38, 367–
375. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2012.06.013
Park, B. J., Tsunetsugu, Y., Kasetani, T., Kagawa, T., and Miyazaki, Y. (2010). The
physiological effects of Shinrin-yoku (taking in the forest atmosphere or forest
bathing): evidence from field experiments in 24 forests across Japan. Environ.
Health Prevent. Med. 15, 18–
26. doi: 10.1007/s12199-009-0086-9
Park, B.-J., Tsunetsugu, Y., Lee, J., Kagawa, T., and Miyazaki, Y. (2012). “
Effect of
the forest environment on physiological relaxation—The results of field tests at
35 sites throughout Japan,”in Forest Medicine, ed. Q. Li (New York, NY: Nova
Science Publishers), 55–
65.
Peinado, A. B., Rojo, J. J., Calderón, F. J., and Maffulli, N. (2014). Responses to
increasing exercise upon reaching the anaerobic threshold, and their control by
the central nervous system. BMC Sports Sci. Med. Rehabil. 6:17. doi: 10.1186/
2052-1847-6-17
Rohleder, N., and Nater, U. M. (2009). Determinants of salivary alpha-amylase
in humans and methodological considerations. Psychoneuroendocrinology 34,
469–
485. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2008.12.004
Rohleder, N., Nater, U. M., Wolf, J. M., Ehlert, U., and Kirschbaum, C. (2004).
“
Psychosocial stress-induced activation of salivary alpha-amylase - An indicator
of sympathetic activity?,” in Biobehavioral Stress Response: Protective and
Damaging Effects, eds R. Yehuda and B. McEwen (New York, NY: New York
Acad Sciences), 258–
263.
Shanahan, D. F., Bush, R., Gaston, K. J., Lin, B. B., Dean, J., Barbe, E., et al. (2016).
Health benefits from nature experiences depend on dose. Sci. Rep. 6:28551.
doi: 10.1038/srep28551
Shanahan, D. F., Fuller, R. A., Bush, R., Lin, B. B., and Gaston, K. J. (2015). The
health benefits of urban nature: How much do we need? Bioscience 65, 476–
485.
doi: 10.1093/biosci/biv032
Strahler,
J.,
Skoluda,
N.,
Kappert,
M.
B.,
and
Nater,
U.
M.
(2017).
Simultaneous
measurement
of
salivary
cortisol
and
alpha-amylase:
application and recommendations. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 83, 657–
677.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.08.015
Sullivan, W. C., Frumkin, H., Jackson, R. J., and Chang, C. Y. (2014). ‘
Gaia
meets Asclepius: creating healthy places’
. Landsc. Urban Plan. 127, 182–
184.
doi: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2014.03.005
Takai, N., Yamaguchi, M., Aragaki, T., Eto, K., Uchihashi, K., and Nishikawa, Y.
(2004). Effect of psychological stress on the salivary cortisol and amylase levels
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
15
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
 fpsyg-10-00722
April 1, 2019
Time: 18:38
# 16
Hunter et al.
Urban Nature Experiences Reduce Stress
in healthy young adults. Arch. Oral Biol. 49, 963–
968. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.
2004.06.007
Tsunetsugu, Y., Park, B.-J., and Miyazaki, Y. (2010). Trends in research related to
“
Shinrin-yoku”(taking in the forest atmosphere or forest bathing) in Japan.
Environ. Health Prevent. Med. 15, 27–
37. doi: 10.1007/s12199-009-0091-z
Van den Berg, A. E. (2017). From green space to green prescriptions: challenges
and opportunities for research and practice. Front. Psychol. 8:268. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2017.00268
van den Bosch, M., and Ode Sang, Å (2017). Urban natural environments as
nature-based solutions for improved public health – A systematic review
of reviews. Environ. Res. 158(Suppl. C), 373–
384. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2017.
05.040
Van Lenten, S. A., and Doane, L. D. (2016). Examining multiple sleep behaviors
and diurnal salivary cortisol and alpha-amylase: within- and between-person
associations. Psychoneuroendocrinology 68, 100–
110. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.
2016.02.017
Ward Thompson, C. (2011). ‘
Linking landscape and health: the recurring theme’
.
Landsc. Urban Plan. 99, 187–
195. doi: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2010.10.006
Ward Thompson, C., Roe, J., Aspinall, P., Mitchell, R., Clow, A., and Miller, D.
(2012). More green space is linked to less stress in deprived communities:
evidence from salivary cortisol patterns. Landsc. Urban Plan. 105, 221–
229.
doi: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2011.12.015
Wessel, L. A. (2017). Shifting gears: engaging nurse practitioners in prescribing
time outdoors. J. Nurse Pract. 13, 89–
96. doi: 10.1016/j.nurpra.2016.06.013
WHO (2016). World Health Organization: Health as the Pulse of the New
Urban Agenda: United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban
Development. Geneva: WHO.
Wolf, K. L., Measells, M. K., Grado, S. C., and Robbins, A. S. T. (2015). Economic
values of metro nature health benefits: a life course approach. Urban For. Urban
Green. 14, 694–
701. doi: 10.1016/j.ufug.2015.06.009
Yamaguchi, M., and Shetty, V. (2011). Salivary sensors for quantification
of stress response biomarker. Electrochemistry 79, 442–
446. doi: 10.5796/
electrochemistry.79.442
Zhang, L., Yang, W. T., Yang, Y. K., Liu, H., and Gu, Z. Z. (2015).
Smartphone-based point-of-care testing of salivary alpha-amylase for personal
psychological measurement. Analyst 140, 7399–
7406. doi: 10.1039/c5an
01664a
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Hunter, Gillespie and Chen. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
16
April 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 722
