 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Preferential uptake of antioxidant 
carbon nanoparticles by T lymphocytes 
for immunomodulation
Redwan Huq1,2, Errol L. G. Samuel3, William K. A. Sikkema3, Lizanne G. Nilewski3, 
Thomas Lee1,4, Mark R. Tanner1,5, Fatima S. Khan1, Paul C. Porter6, Rajeev B. Tajhya1,2, 
Rutvik S. Patel1, Taeko Inoue1,2, Robia G. Pautler1, David B. Corry6,7, James M. Tour3,8 & 
Christine Beeton1,7,9
Autoimmune diseases mediated by a type of white blood cell—T lymphocytes—are currently treated 
using mainly broad-spectrum immunosuppressants that can lead to adverse side effects. Antioxidants 
represent an alternative approach for therapy of autoimmune disorders; however, dietary antioxidants 
are insufficient to play this role. Antioxidant carbon nanoparticles scavenge reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) with higher efficacy than dietary and endogenous antioxidants. Furthermore, the affinity of 
carbon nanoparticles for specific cell types represents an emerging tactic for cell-targeted therapy. 
Here, we report that nontoxic poly(ethylene glycol)-functionalized hydrophilic carbon clusters (PEG-
HCCs), known scavengers of the ROS superoxide (O2
•−) and hydroxyl radical, are preferentially 
internalized by T lymphocytes over other splenic immune cells. We use this selectivity to inhibit  
T cell activation without affecting major functions of macrophages, antigen-presenting cells that are 
crucial for T cell activation. We also demonstrate the in vivo effectiveness of PEG-HCCs in reducing  
T lymphocyte-mediated inflammation in delayed-type hypersensitivity and in experimental 
autoimmune encephalomyelitis, an animal model of multiple sclerosis. Our results suggest 
the preferential targeting of PEG-HCCs to T lymphocytes as a novel approach for T lymphocyte 
immunomodulation in autoimmune diseases without affecting other immune cells.
Autoimmune diseases are characterized by loss of tolerance of the immune system for auto-antigens and the 
subsequent damage to the body caused by its own immune cells. One type of immune cell, T lymphocytes, are 
important participants in the pathogenesis of a large number of autoimmune diseases1. While the etiology of 
autoimmunity is not fully understood, a variety of factors including genetic susceptibility and environment trig-
gers, such as infections, can lead to the loss of self-tolerance by T cells and consequently their ability to distin-
guish self from non-self, causing these cells to target one’s own organs and tissues2. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a 
classic example of one of the many tissue-specific chronic T cell-mediated autoimmune diseases. In MS, T cells 
are thought in many instances to be targeting myelin—the insulating cover of neurons in the brain and spinal 
cord—leading to neurodegeneration, a wide range of physical and mental symptoms, and shortened life span3. 
Many current therapeutics for autoimmune diseases function as broad-spectrum immunosuppressants that target 
a variety of immune cells or other mediators of inflammation. They share a common trait: the potential to induce 
a wide range of serious side effects including increased risk of life-threatening infections and cancer4,5.
Excessive production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) has been implicated in the pathogenesis of multiple 
T cell-mediated autoimmune diseases4,6–9. Indeed, the significance of ROS as a therapeutic target for MS has 
1Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. 
2Graduate Program in Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA. 3Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA. 4Graduate Program in Immunology, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. 5Graduate Program in Translational Biology and Molecular 
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. 6Department of Medicine, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. 7Biology of Inflammation Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 
77030, USA. 8The NanoCarbon Center, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA. 9Center for Drug Discovery, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. Correspondence and requests for materials should be 
addressed to J.M.T. (email: tour@rice.edu) or C.B. (email: beeton@bcm.edu)
received: 15 July 2016
Accepted: 31 August 2016
Published: 22 September 2016
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
been highlighted with dimethyl fumarate, an approved therapeutic for this disease10. Dimethyl fumarate was first 
tested for efficacy in MS because of its ability to activate the nuclear factor E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), a leucine 
zipper transcription factor, which in turn induces the transcription of antioxidant response element-driven genes 
and the production of an array of detoxifying antioxidant proteins10,11. While dimethyl fumarate is beneficial 
in MS, it induces the apoptosis of activated T cells, leading to deleterious lymphopenia and potent and broad 
immunosuppression in all immune cells12. In addition, Nrf2 levels decrease with age, suggesting a potential loss 
of Nrf2-mediated efficacy of dimethyl fumarate in older patients13. Finally, studies in Nrf2−/− mice demonstrated 
that dimethyl fumarate affects immune cell functions in a Nrf2-independent manner14.
Endogenous and dietary antioxidants, such as vitamins C and E, have shown only modest clinical efficacy in 
autoimmunity6,8, likely due to their poor selectivity for radical annihilation, limited stoichiometric capacity, and 
dependence on detoxifying molecules15. Thus, these are not promising candidates for therapeutic intervention 
for autoimmune diseases. Moreover, antioxidant dietary supplements require the administration of high doses, 
which increases mortality, likely due to their indiscriminate effects on all ROS16. A more targeted approach to 
modulating specific ROS involved in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases is likely to display benefits with 
fewer side effects. Interestingly, low levels of intracellular, but not extracellular, superoxide radicals (O2
•−), which 
are ROS produced by the mitochondria in response to T cell receptor engagement during T cell activation, act as 
a crucial second messenger during T lymphocyte activation17–21. Since most current therapies for autoimmune 
diseases are broad-spectrum immunosuppressants associated with deleterious side effects4,5, intracellular O2
•− 
represents an attractive target for modulating T cell activity.
Functionalized carbon nanomaterials, such as fullerenes, single-walled and multiwalled carbon nanotubes, 
exhibit antioxidant properties superior to those of dietary antioxidants and have been used in a wide range of 
medical applications including preclinical studies of inflammatory arthritis and neurodegenerative diseases15,22. 
Carbon nanomaterials have also demonstrated remarkable affinity towards particular cell types and consequently 
have been used as shuttles for targeted drug delivery23. A major challenge precluding the translation of carbon 
nanomaterials into the clinic has been their associated cellular toxicity24. However, nanomaterials that are hydro-
philic, have no trace metals and that do not form fibrous aggregates, are associated with little to no toxicity15. One 
such example is poly(ethylene glycol)-functionalized hydrophilic carbon clusters (PEG-HCCs), which have been 
used as both as a nanovector25 and as an antioxidant in the context of traumatic brain injury15. Indeed, high doses 
of PEG-HCCs have induced no acute toxicity involving the heart, liver, kidney, spleen or brain in extended mouse 
studies25. In addition, PEG-HCCs possess clear benefits over currently available antioxidants by specifically and 
more effectively scavenging O2
•− and its derivative, hydroxyl radical15,23,25,26. Interestingly, PEG-HCCs accumu-
late in the spleen of rodents25, a secondary lymphoid organ. Consequently, here, we determined the ability of 
splenic immune cells to internalize PEG-HCCs and the ability of the nanoparticles to alter immune cell function 
and inflammation, ex vivo and in vivo.
Results
PEG-HCCs are preferentially internalized by T lymphocytes over other splenic immune cells. 
 
As PEG-HCCs were detectable in the spleens of rodents following systemic administration25, we investigated 
whether splenic immune cells internalize PEG-HCCs in vivo. We first verified that PEG-HCCs contain accept-
ably low levels27 of endotoxins (Supplementary Table S1). We then determined their pharmacokinetics in rats by 
performing an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) on serum samples collected after a single subcuta-
neous injection of 2 mg/kg in the scruff of the neck, a dose previously shown effective in rat studies of traumatic 
brain injury15. Maximum circulating levels of PEG-HCCs (0.6 μ 
g/mL) were reached 24 h after injection (Fig. 1a), 
likely due to the formation of a subcutaneous slow-release depot, previously observed with other hydrophilic 
compounds28. The circulating half-life following this peak was 27 h, higher than previously reported after intrave-
nous delivery of PEG-HCCs25, again likely due to a slow release of the nanoparticles from the site of injection28. 
These data demonstrate subcutaneous bioavailability and sufficient circulating levels of PEG-HCCs for in vivo 
use in rats. Based on our pharmacokinetic results, we injected rats subcutaneously with 2 mg/kg PEG-HCCs; 24 h 
later, at the peak of circulation levels, we prepared single-cell suspensions from the spleen, thymus, and inguinal 
lymph nodes draining the injection site (Supplementary Fig. S1). Cells were then washed, labeled with antibodies 
to cell surface markers of immune cells, fixed, and incubated with anti-PEG antibodies to detect the nanoparticles 
by multi-parametric flow cytometry (FCM) (Supplementary Figs S1 and S2). Cells were either left intact before 
anti-PEG staining to detect PEG-HCCs at the cell surface, or they were permeabilized before addition of the 
anti-PEG antibodies to detect PEG-HCCs both at the cell surface and inside the cells (Supplementary Fig. S1). 
 
We obtained a stronger signal from the anti-PEG antibodies after permeabilization of splenic T lymphocytes 
(Fig. 1b, left), demonstrating internalization of the nanoparticles by these cells. In contrast, macrophages, neutro-
phils, B lymphocytes, and natural killer lymphocytes in the spleen showed no difference in PEG-HCCs staining 
whether the cells were permeabilized or not prior to incubation with anti-PEG antibodies, showing that these 
immune cells do not internalize PEG-HCCs. No internalization of PEG-HCCs was detected in dendritic cells but 
the sample size for this population was relatively low in rat splenic preparations compared to the other cell types 
analyzed (Supplementary Fig. S2b). This result demonstrates that in vivo, PEG-HCCs are preferentially internal-
ized by T cells over other splenic immune cells. This is in sharp contrast to results obtained with other nanoparti-
cles that are internalized by phagocytic cells, such as macrophages or dendritic cells, rather than lymphocytes29–32. 
Data were confirmed in the spleen by immunohistochemistry using paraffin-embedded sections from spleens 
collected 24 h after subcutaneous administration of PEG-HCCs and double-stained for CD3, a marker of 
T cells, and PEG (Supplementary Fig. S3). PEG-HCCs were not internalized by immune cells in the inguinal 
lymph nodes (Fig. 1b, right), although they could be observed in the intact tissue (Supplementary Fig. S4), 
 
suggesting PEG-HCCs may not remain in the lymph nodes sufficiently long enough to be internalized by 
 
T cells, unlike in the spleen, a known site of PEG-HCC accumulation25. Interestingly, India ink (carbon black), 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
Figure 1. PEG-HCCs are preferentially internalized by T lymphocytes. (a) PEG-HCC levels in rat serum 
determined by anti-PEG ELISA after a single subcutaneous injection of 2 mg/kg body weight PEG-HCCs (left) 
(n = 5 rats/time-point). Data fit to a single exponential decay to calculate circulating half-life of 27 h (right). (b) FCM 
quantification of immune cell uptake of PEG-HCCs from spleen (left, n = 9 rats) and lymph nodes (right, n = 6 rats), 
collected 24 h after subcutaneous injection. The increased PEG signal after cell permeabilization is indicative of 
nanoparticle internalization; analyzed with two-way ANOVA. (c) Quantification of FCM data showing preferential 
uptake of PEG-HCCs by T cells over other splenic immune cells ex vivo (n = 3 spleens, two-way ANOVA). 
Mean ± s.e.m. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
which has been used extensively as a tracer for lymphatics, also flows through lymph nodes. By histology, India 
ink is only detected in the lymphatics and inside macrophages in the lymph nodes of rodents, not in the B or 
 
T lymphocyte zones33. Our data suggest that PEG-HCCs follow a similar path through lymphatics after subcuta-
neous injection but are not internalized by macrophages and are not in contact long enough with T lymphocytes 
for detectable internalization. Furthermore, PEG-HCCs could not be detected in the thymus, an organ crucial 
for T lymphocyte maturation, suggesting that T cell maturation will not be affected by the nanoparticles. We next 
determined whether this in vivo selectivity of PEG-HCCs for T lymphocytes over other splenic immune cells is 
maintained ex vivo. Based on the maximal levels reached in rat serum by the nanoparticles after a single injection 
of 2 mg/kg, we incubated rat splenocytes ex vivo with 0.1 μ 
g/mL PEG-HCCs and found that, similar to our in vivo 
findings, the nanoparticles were detectable inside T cells but not other splenic immune cells (Fig. 1c).
To demonstrate the reliability of our FCM technique for PEG-HCC detection, we used thermogravimetric 
analysis to show that the PEG moieties remain attached to HCCs in the incubation conditions used in our assays 
(Supplementary Fig. S5). In addition, we performed the flow cytometric analysis with splenocytes incubated in 
the absence of PEG-HCCs or labeled with secondary antibodies in the absence of primary anti-PEG antibodies, 
showing minimal positive staining and therefore verifying selectivity of the detection (Supplementary Fig. S6). 
 
Similarly, a PEG signal was not detected in spleen sections from rats that had received vehicle instead of 
PEG-HCCs (Supplementary Fig. S3). Finally, nanoparticles were not detectable in dead T cells, which are readily 
permeable, thus precluding a non-specific uptake mechanism (Supplementary Fig. S7).
Kinetics of PEG-HCC entry and exit from T cells. 
To determine if PEG-HCCs enter T cells via active 
processes, we incubated cells at 4 °C or with sodium azide and found that both conditions attenuated nanoparticle 
internalization. Chlorpromazine, an inhibitor of clathrin-mediated endocytosis abrogated PEG-HCC internal-
ization, unlike filipin II, an inhibitor of caveolin-mediated endocytosis, thus demonstrating that T lymphocytes 
internalize PEG-HCCs via clathrin-mediated endocytosis (Fig. 2a). Next, we examined the kinetics of PEG-HCC 
uptake by T lymphocytes and found maximal intracellular levels after a 25 min incubation at 37 °C; increasing 
incubation time did not further increase internalization levels (Fig. 2b and Supplementary Fig. S8). We then used 
transmission electron microscopy to probe the subcellular localization of PEG-HCCs (0.1 μ 
g/mL) in T cells and 
observed bundles of the nanoparticles in mitochondria. At higher doses (10 μ 
g/mL), PEG-HCCs were also visu-
alized at the cell membrane (Fig. 2c and larger images in Supplementary Fig. S9).
Accumulation of nanomaterials in cells would increase the risk for toxicity; we therefore assessed the abil-
ity of T cells to release or degrade the PEG-HCCs. When T lymphocytes were incubated with PEG-HCCs for 
30 min to allow internalization, washed, and maintained in media at 37 °C, both external and internal levels of 
PEG-HCCs decreased over 6 h (Fig. 2d and Supplementary Fig. S8), demonstrating that the nanoparticles do not 
accumulate inside the T cells over time. To determine whether this loss in detection is due to rapid degradation 
or exit from the cells, we performed a cell-based sandwich ELISA (Supplementary Fig. S10). In the absence of 
cells, PEG-HCCs were readily detected and saturated the detection signal (Fig. 2e). When T lymphocytes loaded 
with increasing concentrations of PEG-HCCs were placed onto the antibody-coated plate for 5 h, PEG-HCCs 
were detected in a dose-dependent manner, indicating that PEG-HCCs exit the T lymphocytes. Importantly, 
unconjugated mPEG-NH2 (5000 kDa) alone was not detected by the assay, providing further confirmation that 
the anti-PEG antibodies used throughout this study can only detect conjugated PEG moieties as claimed by its 
manufacturer.
PEG-HCC internalization is not biased towards major T cell subsets. 
Since PEG-HCCS are not 
internalized by all T cells, we used FCM to determine whether the nanoparticles are preferentially targeted to 
specific T lymphocyte subsets. We began our analysis with two major subpopulations of T cells: naïve (CD62L+) 
and memory (CD62L−) T cells (Fig. 3a), and helper (CD4+) and cytotoxic (CD8+) T cells (Fig. 3b); all of which 
internalize PEG-HCCs to a similar extent. Next, we determined whether PEG-HCCs distinguish between resting 
T cells and T cells activated with a mitogen; T lymphocyte activation improved nanoparticle uptake, although 
resting T lymphocytes could internalize them too (Fig. 3b). As our data had indicated that PEG-HCCs entered 
approximately 5–10% of T cells, we investigated T cell subsets present at a lower frequency in the spleen. We first 
analyzed δ 
γ 
 T cells that represent a small fraction of all T cells and also which play a role in autoimmunity34, but 
found no difference between these and other T cells in terms of PEG-HCC internalization (Fig. 3c). Additionally, 
we studied primary T helper 1 (TH1)-polarized effector memory T cells, a population implicated in some auto-
immune diseases35, and found that PEG-HCCs were also internalized by these cells to a similar extent as other 
 
T cells (Fig. 3d). Taken together, these findings suggest that, while PEG-HCCs are preferentially internalized by 
 
T cells over other splenic immune cells, they do not target a specific subset of T cells.
PEG-HCCs inhibit the activation of rat and human T lymphocytes. 
We assessed the consequences 
of PEG-HCC internalization on ex vivo T cell activity. PEG-HCCs induced a reduction in both intracellular 
O2
•− levels and proliferation of antigen-stimulated ovalbumin-specific or myelin basic protein-specific primary 
rat CD4+ T cells (Fig. 4a,b and Supplementary Fig. S11)36–38. Human peripheral blood T cells or rat splenic 
T cells (Supplementary Fig. S12) stimulated with mitogens were similarly sensitive to PEG-HCCs. In contrast, 
mPEG-NH2 (5000 kDa), used alone as a control, did not affect T cell proliferation (Supplementary Fig. S13), 
whereas non-PEGylated HCCs did inhibit proliferation (Supplementary Fig. S11). However, unlike PEG-HCCs, 
HCCs flocculate rapidly in water (Supplementary Fig. S11), precluding their in vivo use.
Washing away excess PEG-HCCs and then immediately stimulating the rat T cells did not alter their effect 
on proliferation (Fig. 4c). In contrast, stimulating the T cells 6 h after washout rescued the inhibitory effect on 
proliferation (Fig. 4c), demonstrating that the nanoparticles need to be internalized to decrease T lymphocyte 
activity. This result is in alignment with the kinetics shown in Fig. 2d and suggests that PEG-HCCs exert a 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
reversible effect on T cell activity. We also compared the efficacy of PEG-HCCs with that of vitamin C and trolox 
(water-soluble analog of vitamin E) and found that these two well-characterized antioxidants had no effect on T 
lymphocyte proliferation (Fig. 4d), suggesting the higher antioxidant capacity of PEG-HCCs26 is necessary for 
Figure 2. PEG-HCCs are internalized by T lymphocytes via clathrin-mediated endocytosis and do not 
accumulate inside the cells. (a) Rat splenic T cell uptake of PEG-HCCs, analyzed by FCM, at 37 °C or 4 °C and 
after incubation with sodium azide, filipin III, or chlorpromazine (n = 4 spleen preparations; 4000 live T cell 
singlets analyzed per sample). (b) Kinetics of nanoparticle internalization in splenic T cells incubated for the 
indicated times with 0.1 μ 
g/mL PEG-HCCs prior to FCM (n = 3 spleen preparations, two-tailed Student’s t test). 
(c) Subcellular localization of PEG-HCCs in T cells, visualized by transmission electron microscopy, loaded 
with no PEG-HCCs (left) or a low (0.1 μ 
g/mL, middle) or high (10 μ 
g/mL, right) dose of PEG-HCCs. Arrows 
point to bundles of PEG-HCCs. Nucleus (Nu); mitochondrion (M); cell membrane (CM); lamellar body (LB); 
endosome (E). Scale bars, 400 nm. See Supplementary Fig. S10 for more images. (d) Kinetics of nanoparticle 
loss in splenic T cells incubated for 30 min with 0.1 μ 
g/mL PEG-HCCs, washed, and analyzed by FCM after the 
indicated times (n = 3 spleen preparations, two-tailed Student’s t test). (e) PEG-HCC exit from splenic T cells 
measured by a cell-based sandwich ELISA (n = 3 experiments, one-way ANOVA). Mean ± s.e.m. *P < 0.05, 
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
this inhibitory effect. Finally, we used FCM to examine the effects of PEG-HCCs on the production of proinflam-
matory cytokines involved in autoimmune diseases, such as MS, by antigen- or mitogen- stimulated T cells and 
found a ~30% reduction in the intracellular levels of the TH1 cytokines interleukin (IL)-2 and interferon (IFN)-γ 
, but no effect on expression levels of the TH17 cytokine IL-17A (Fig. 4e and Supplementary Fig. S14), suggesting 
distinct cell signaling pathways are altered by PEG-HCCs.
Dimethyl fumarate induces the apoptosis of activated T cells12. To determine whether the observed effects of 
PEG-HCCs on T cell proliferation and cytokine production were due to nanoparticle cytotoxicity, we used FCM 
to analyze cell death in ovalbumin-specific and myelin basic protein-specific rat T cells incubated with PEG-HCCs 
or HCCs prior to stimulation and found no changes in cell viability (Fig. 4f and Supplementary Fig. S11). 
 
In addition, treating unstimulated T cells with PEG-HCCs did not affect their basal homeostatic proliferation in 
the absence of antigen or exogenous cytokines (Supplementary Fig. S15), suggesting that an increase in intracel-
lular O2
•− levels during T lymphocyte activation17–21 is necessary for PEG-HCCs to alter cellular function.
PEG-HCCs leave key functions of macrophages unaltered. 
We demonstrated in Fig. 1 that mac-
rophages do not internalize PEG-HCCs in vivo or ex vivo. However, because macrophages critically regulate 
 
T cell function through a variety of mechanisms, including chemoattractant production, phagocytosis, and 
antigen processing and presentation, we determined whether PEG-HCCs influenced any of these macrophage 
activities. We stimulated primary rat splenic macrophages with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to induce the secretion 
of T lymphocyte chemoattractants, as measured by the ability of macrophage culture supernatants to induce 
 
T cell migration through transwell membranes. Adding PEG-HCCs during macrophage stimulation did not 
affect T lymphocyte migration (Fig. 5a), demonstrating that the nanoparticles do not alter the production of T 
cell chemoattractants by macrophages. Additionally, incubating unstimulated T lymphocytes with PEG-HCCs 
did not alter their migration (Fig. 5a), in agreement with our finding that PEG-HCCs do not affect unstimulated 
 
T cells. We further found that, unlike other nanoparticles39, PEG-HCCs do not affect phagocytosis by mac-
rophages (Fig. 5b and Supplementary Fig. S16). To measure antigen processing and presentation, macrophages 
were loaded with ovalbumin, washed, and provided ovalbumin-specific T cells; T cell proliferation was used to 
Figure 3. PEG-HCCs internalization is improved in activated T cells but is not biased towards major  
T cell subsets. (a) PEG-HCC internalization in naïve (CD3+CD62L+) and memory (CD3+CD62L−) rat splenic 
T cells, analyzed by FCM (n = 3 splenic preparations). (b) PEG-HCC internalization in helper (CD3+CD4+, 
left) and cytotoxic (CD3+CD8+, right) rat splenic T cells, analyzed by FCM (n = 3 splenic preparations).  
A separate group of rat splenocytes cells were also stimulated with the mitogen, concanavalin A (1 μ 
g/mL). 
(c) PEG-HCC internalization in the δ 
γ T cell subset (CD3+δ 
γ 
+) as compared to non-δ 
γ T cells (CD3+δ 
γ 
−) 
from rat splenocytes, analyzed by FCM (n = 3 splenic preparations). (d) PEG-HCC internalization in primary 
CD3+CD4+, TH1-polarized effector memory rat T cells, analyzed by FCM (n = 3 splenic preparations). 
Mean ± s.e.m. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
Figure 4. PEG-HCCs scavenge intracellular O2
•− and suppress T lymphocyte activity. (a), Detection of 
O2
•− levels by DHE fluorescence and FCM in primary ovalbumin-specific rat T cells. Cells were stained with 
dihydroethidium (DHE), incubated with the indicated concentrations of PEG-HCCs, and stimulated with 
phorbol 12-myristate-acetate (PMA) and ionomycin to induce intracellular O2
•− production. Unstained cells 
and unstimulated cells are shown as controls (n = 3 replicates, one-way ANOVA). (b) Proliferation of antigen-
stimulated ovalbumin-specific T cells, measured by [3H] thymidine incorporation, in the presence of the indicated 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
assess adequate antigen processing and presentation (Supplementary Fig. S17). T cell proliferation was unaf-
fected when PEG-HCCs were added to macrophages upon ovalbumin-loading, demonstrating a lack of effects 
of PEG-HCCs on antigen processing and presentation by macrophages (Fig. 5c). However, the addition of 
PEG-HCCs to macrophages at the same time as the T cells led to a reduction in T cell proliferation (Fig. 5c), 
similar to our findings in Fig. 4b.
In addition to their role as antigen-presenting cells, macrophages play a central part in pathogen defense. 
We therefore tested the effects of PEG-HCCs on the ability of macrophages to prevent the growth of the 
fungus Aspergillus niger and found no fungistatic effects (Fig. 5d). As a control, we verified that PEG-HCCs 
alone do not induce fungistasis (Supplementary Fig. S18). These results indicate that PEG-HCCs do not 
alter major functions of macrophages, likely as a result of the inability of these cells to internalize the 
nanoparticles.
PEG-HCCs are effective in reducing memory T lymphocyte reactions in vivo. 
The intriguing pref-
erential immunomodulatory properties of PEG-HCCs on T lymphocytes over other splenic immune cells encour-
aged us to examine their effects in T lymphocyte-mediated inflammation. We chose delayed-type hypersensitivity 
(DTH), also known as type IV hypersensitivity, as a first model as it is a well-characterized model of inflammation 
mediated by memory T lymphocytes that have had previous encounter with their antigen. We elicited an active 
DTH response against ovalbumin in rats40 and found that a single subcutaneous injection of 2 mg/kg PEG-HCCs, 
at either time of immunization or challenge, was sufficient to decrease inflammation (Fig. 6a). A similar result 
was obtained in the adoptive model of DTH elicited by the injection of antigen-stimulated GFP-transduced 
ovalbumin-specific T cells, followed by ovalbumin challenge (Fig. 6b)38,41. Detection of the GFP-transduced 
ovalbumin-specific T cells by FCM at the site of inflammation showed no difference in homing of the T cells after 
vehicle or PEG-HCC treatment (Fig. 6b). This result suggests that the effects of PEG-HCCs on DTH are due to 
impaired T cell reactivation in situ, as found with some T lymphocyte-directed immunomodulators38, rather than 
homing inhibition as seen with other T cell immunomodulators42.
These beneficial effects of PEG-HCCs on active and adoptive DTH prompted us to test the effects of 
PEG-HCCs in rats with active acute experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a model of MS. 
Subcutaneous treatment with 2 mg/kg PEG-HCCs every three days (equivalent to three circulating half-lives 
based on our pharmacokinetics data), starting after the onset of clinical signs, reduced disease severity (Fig. 6c, 
Supplementary Movie S1 and Movie S2). Histologic analysis of spinal cords collected from EAE rats at peak of dis-
ease (day 12 post-immunization) revealed a decrease in inflammatory foci (Fig. 6d), suggesting that PEG-HCCs 
reduce immune cell infiltration into the central nervous system.
Discussion
In summary, we have demonstrated that the antioxidant carbon nanoparticles, PEG-HCCs, are immunomodu-
lators that preferentially target T lymphocytes. We established that, unlike other nanoparticles that mainly target 
phagocytic cells17–21, PEG-HCCs are preferentially internalized by T lymphocytes over other immune cells. While 
we were not able to identify a single mechanism responsible for this preferential uptake, our data indicate that 
PEG-HCCs enter the cells mainly via clathrin-mediated endocytosis, similar to other carbon nanoparticles43. We 
took advantage of the unique property of PEG-HCCs to favor T cells to demonstrate that PEG-HCCs scavenge 
intracellular O2
•− produced via antigen-stimulation of T cells and, consequently, reversibly inhibit proliferation 
and the production of proinflammatory cytokines without cytotoxicity. Our findings are in line with studies 
demonstrating the use of antioxidants to attenuate T cell activation induced by mitogens or antigens21. We estab-
lished that the inhibition of T cell activity by PEG-HCCs was not due to an extraneous effect on chemoattrac-
tion, phagocytosis, or antigen processing and presentation by macrophages, which are essential steps utilized by 
antigen-presenting cells for the physiological activation of T cells44.
A major implication of these data is that the inability to internalize PEG-HCCs allows key immune func-
tions of macrophages to remain unaltered. This demonstrates that PEG-HCCs are selective for some immune 
cells and suggests that pathogen defense by macrophages remains intact. However, additional work is required 
to elucidate the effects of PEG-HCCs on T lymphocyte subpopulations that help to maintain self-tolerance 
such as regulatory T cells45. Furthermore, future studies will be necessary to determine if PEG-HCCs affect 
the use of O2
•− as a microbicidal agent by neutrophils46. However, the significance of our ex vivo results on T 
cell activity by PEG-HCCs was clearly demonstrated by the findings that administration of these nanoparticles 
concentrations of PEG-HCCs. Unstimulated cells are shown as controls (n = 3 experiments). (c) Ovalbumin-
specific T cells were incubated with PEG-HCCs for 30 min. Cells were then either antigen-stimulated without 
washing PEG-HCCs away (stimulated after 0 h), or washed to remove excess PEG-HCCs and stimulated 
immediately (washed, stimulated after 0 h) or 6 h later (washed, stimulated after 6 h) for the measurement of 
T cell proliferation. Unstimulated cells are shown as controls (n = 3 experiments). (d) Comparison of PEG-
HCCs with vitamin C and trolox on the proliferation of antigen-stimulated ovalbumin-specific T cells (n = 3 
replicates). (e) Detection by FCM of intracellular proinflammatory cytokines IL-2 (left), IFN-γ (middle) in 
antigen-stimulated GFP-transduced T cells, and IL-17A (right) in lymph node T cells incubated with the indicated 
concentrations of PEG-HCCs. Unstimulated cells are shown as controls (n = 3 experiments). (f) Quantification of 
cell death by FCM in T cells left unstimulated, antigen-stimulated, incubated with PEG-HCCs prior to antigen-
stimulation, or antigen-stimulated and treated with staurosporine. Left, representative FCM histograms. Right, 
data quantification (n = 
 3 replicates, one-way ANOVA). Mean ± s.e.m. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, 
****P < 0.0001.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
into rat models led to a reduction in DTH response, immune infiltration into the spinal cord, and EAE scores. 
Together, these data suggest that PEG-HCCs are attractive new tools for treating T cell-mediated autoimmune 
diseases.
Figure 5. Inability to internalize PEG-HCCs leaves key macrophage functions unaltered. (a) Percentage 
of migratory ovalbumin-specific T cells through a 5 μ 
m transwell filter when the bottom chamber contained 
supernatant from LPS-stimulated macrophage cultures, used as a readout for adequate macrophage production 
of T cell chemoattractants. Green bars: Macrophages incubated with PEG-HCCs during LPS-stimulation and 
T cells left untreated. Blue bars: Macrophages left untreated during LPS-stimulation and T cells incubated 
with PEG-HCCs and washed prior to the transwell assay. Bottom chambers containing medium alone, 
medium supplemented with 5% FBS, or supernatant from unstimulated macrophages are shown as controls 
(n = 3 replicates). (b) Left, representative images of macrophage phagocytosis of Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated 
bioparticles (green) in the absence of nanoparticles (control) or in the presence of PEG-HCCs or Fe3O4 
nanoparticles. Macrophage nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Right, quantification of the phagocytosis 
assay (n = 100 cells/rat; N = 3 rats spleens, two-tailed Student’s t test). Scale bars, 5 μ 
m. (c) Proliferation of 
ovalbumin-specific T cells stimulated in the presence of antigen-loaded macrophages, used to gauge adequate 
macrophage antigen processing and presentation. Green bars: Macrophages incubated with PEG-HCCs during 
antigen loading. Blue bars: PEG-HCCs added at same time as T cells. Macrophages not loaded with antigen 
(unstimulated) were used as a control (n = 3 experiments). (d) Aspergillus niger fungus growth prevention by 
rat splenic macrophages treated with the indicated doses of PEG-HCCs (n = 3 experiments). Mean ± s.e.m. 
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
Methods
Animals. 
Female inbred Lewis rats were purchased from Charles River and group-housed in autoclaved 
cages with irradiated rodent chow and water ad libitum in a facility approved by the American Association for 
Laboratory Animal Science. Thymus donors were 38–42 days old. All remaining studies used rats aged 43–48 
days old. All procedures were in accordance with National Institutes of Health guidelines and approved by the 
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Baylor College of Medicine. Animals were euthanized following 
guidelines from the American Veterinary Medical Association.
Figure 6. Administration of PEG-HCCs suppresses T lymphocyte–mediated inflammation and 
ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. (a) An active DTH reaction was induced against 
ovalbumin in rats. Rats received either saline (vehicle) or PEG-HCCs (2 mg/kg body weight, subcutaneous) at 
time of immunization or challenge. Difference in ear thicknesses for each rat was measured 48 h after challenge. 
Healthy unimmunized rats are shown as a control (n = 5 rats per group). (b) Adoptive DTH induced in rats via 
adoptive transfer of antigen-activated GFP-transduced ovalbumin specific primary rat T cells. Treatment and 
ear measurements (left) identical to a. Detection of GFP-transduced ovalbumin-specific T cells in ears using 
FCM (right). Healthy rats that did not receive adoptive transfer or challenge are shown as a control (n = 10 rats 
in vehicle group; 9 rats in PEG-HCC-treated group). (c) Clinical scores of rats with acute active EAE, treated 
with saline (vehicle) or 2 mg/kg PEG-HCCs subcutaneously every 3 days, beginning at onset of disease signs 
(n = 6 rats per group). (d) Histological analysis of spinal cord gray matter collected from rats with EAE at 
the peak of disease (day 12 post-immunization) and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Left, representative 
images. Arrows point to immune infiltrates. Scale bars, 100 μ 
m. Right, quantification of degree of immune 
infiltration from eight random fields of view (n = 3 rats per group). Mean ± s.e.m. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, 
***P < 0.001.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
Cells. 
Splenocytes were isolated from spleens of naïve rats47. Mononuclear splenocytes were isolated using 
Histopaque-1077 (Sigma-Aldrich)48. Human peripheral blood cells were isolated from buffy coats (Gulf Coast 
Regional Blood Center, Houston, TX). Primary Lewis rat GFP-transduced ovalbumin-specific T cells were a kind 
gift from Alexander Flügel (Munich, Germany)37. Primary Lewis rat myelin basic protein-specific T cells were 
a kind gift from Evelyne Béraud (Université de la Méditerranée, Marseilles, France)36. As antigen-presenting 
cells for ovalbumin-specific or myelin-basic protein-specific T cell stimulation, either rat splenic macrophages or 
irradiated (30 Gy) rat thymocytes were used47. Lymph node cells were isolated from inguinal lymph nodes of rats 
with EAE at the peak of disease (day 12 post-immunization) by preparing a single-cell suspension using 70 μ 
m 
cell strainers. Cells were cultured as described49 unless specified otherwise.
Nanoparticles. 
For all experiments, PEG-HCCs and HCCs were prepared as described25. The materials were 
purified by size using crossflow (tangential) filtration. All samples were sterile-filtered before storage and fur-
ther use. The starting source of carbon has remained unchanged since the first publication on PEG-HCCs25. 
PEG-HCCs are stable for > 
5 months in solution at neutral pH. Acid (pH < 
 2) will cause amide bond cleav-
age over long times at room temperature, and base (pH > 
 10) will cause further fragmentation of HCCs over 
time. However, there are no changes in Raman, IR or XPS over months in neutral water50. Endotoxin levels in 
PEG-HCCs were measured using ToxinSensor Chromogenic LAL Endotoxin Assay Kit (GenScript) using the 
manufacturer’s protocol.
Pharmacokinetics. 
Blood was drawn51 at various time points after a single subcutaneous injection of 2 mg/kg 
 
body weight of PEG-HCCs in the scruff of the neck. Serum levels of PEG-HCCs were quantitated using a 
PEGylated protein ELISA kit (Enzo Life Sciences). Circulating half-life was determined by fitting the data to a 
single exponential decay.
Flow cytometry. 
Cells were washed with ice-cold FCM buffer (PBS + 
 2% goat serum + 
 2% BSA), stained 
with antibodies (Table S2) and fixed with ice-cold PBS + 
 1% paraformaldehyde. Data were acquired on a 
FACSCanto II or LSRFortessa (Becton Dickinson) with the FACSDiva software within the Cytometry and Cell 
Sorting core at Baylor College of Medicine, and analyzed using FlowJo software (Treestar). For each sample, dou-
blet discrimination was performed and 30,000 events were acquired.
Cellular uptake of PEG-HCCs. 
Freshly isolated rat splenocytes were resuspended (1 × 
 106 cells/mL) in 
medium + 
 5% FBS and incubated with or without PEG-HCCs (0.1 μ 
g/mL) for the indicated times at 37 °C, 5% 
CO2 unless indicated in the figure caption. Cells were then washed with FCM buffer and incubated with purified 
mouse IgG (Life Technologies) to block Fcγ 
II/Fcγ 
III receptors. Cells were stained with antibodies (Table S2) 
directed against surface markers, washed, and fixed. Cells were either left intact or permeabilized with freshly pre-
pared 0.5% saponin (EMD Millipore) in FCM buffer, and then stained for PEG-HCCs with an anti-PEG antibody 
and analyzed by FCM (Supplementary Figs S1 and S2). Saponin was selected as the detergent as Tween-20 and 
Triton X-100 contain PEG and can produce false positive signals. 25 mM sodium azide (Sigma-Aldrich) was used 
to inhibit active transport processes; 1 μ 
g/mL filipin III (Cayman Chemical) was used to block caveolin-mediated 
endocytosis; 10 μ 
g/mL chlorpromazine (Sigma-Aldrich) was used to inhibit clathrin-mediated endocytosis52. 
Background signal from the anti-PEG antibody in the absence of PEG-HCCs was subtracted during analysis.
Immunohistochemistry. 
Rats were injected with 2 mg/kg PEG-HCCs subcutaneously, humanely euth-
anized after 24 h and paraffin-embedded spleen sections were prepared. Sections were dewaxed with xylene 
(Fisher), hydrated through a gradient of ethanol, and washed in PBS. Antigen-recovery was performed using 
pre-heated sodium citrate buffer (10 mM, pH 6.5) for 15 min in microwave. Sections were cooled to room tem-
perature and non-specific staining was prevented by incubating sections overnight in PBS + 
 5% goat serum + 
 5% 
BSA. Sections were incubated with anti-CD3 and anti-PEG antibodies for 2 h at room temperature, washed with 
PBS, and incubated with secondary conjugate antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Sections were then washed 
and dehydrated in 100% ethanol through a gradient, soaked with xylene and mounted with SlowFade mountant 
with DAPI. Representative photos were taken at 10× 
 magnification on an Olympus IX71 epifluorescence micro-
scope equipped with an Olympus Qcolor 5 camera and the SimplePCI software, v.6.6.0.053.
Thermogravimetric analysis. 
Two mL of 1 mg/mL PEG-HCCs were incubated for 0, 1, and 24 h at 37 °C 
with 2 mL of fresh Lewis rat serum passed through a 100,000 MWCO filter (Amicon Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter 
Unit). PEG-HCCs were isolated from serum by filtration through a second 100,000 MWCO filter and washed 
with 4 mL of deionized water three times. Remaining water was removed from PEG-HCCs by evaporation under 
reduced pressure and analyzed by thermogravimetric analysis (TA Instruments Q-600 Simultaneous TGA/DSC) 
to determine the mass percentages of PEG in the PEG-HCCs.
Transmission electron microscopy. 
Ovalbumin-specific rat T cells (2 × 
 106 cells) were resuspended in 
medium + 
 5% FBS and incubated with or without PEG-HCCs (0.1 or 10 μ 
g/mL) for 30 min at 37 °C, 5% CO2. 
Cells were washed with PBS and pelleted by centrifuge for processing and imaging by the Integrated Microscopy 
Core at Baylor College of Medicine. Four separate pellets were dispersed in ice-cold modified Karnovsky’s fixative 
in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer at pH 7.37 for 2.5 hours. The suspension was re-pelleted at 6000 RPM for 10 min, super-
natant decanted, and cells quenched in 0.4% FSG for 25 min. Pellets remained fixed to the side of 1.5 mL tubes 
and were processed in the tube for the remainder of the protocol. After 3 × 
 5 min washes with 0.1 M cacodylate 
buffer, the pellets were osmicated for 45 min and then held overnight in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer. The following 
morning, pellets were rinsed in 4 × 
 5 min ddH2O and dehydrated in 100% ethanol through a gradient series of 
ethanol. Pellets were gradually infiltrated through a gradient series of plastic-ethanol mixtures and left to infiltrate 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
overnight in 100% plastic without catalyst. This was followed by several changes in pure plastic with catalyst, 
then pellets were embedded in Spurr Low Viscosity resin and polymerized at 62 °C for 3 days. Ultra-thin sections 
were cut on a Diatome Ultra45 knife using a Leica U6 ultramicrotome. Sections were collected on 150 hex-mesh 
copper grids, stained with saturated aqueous uranyl acetate and counter-stained with Reynold’s lead citrate. The 
stained sections were viewed on a Hitachi H7500 transmission electron microscope and images were captured 
using an AMT XR-16 digital camera and AMT Image Capture software, v602.600.51.
Measurement of PEG-HCC exit from the T lymphocytes. 
Immulon 4 HBX flat-bottom 96-well 
plates were coated with purified anti-PEG antibodies (Table S2, 100 μ 
l, 5 μ 
g/mL) at 4 °C for 24 h. Resting 
ovalbumin-specific rat T cells were resuspended (1 × 
 106 cells/mL) in medium + 
 5% FBS and incubated with or 
without PEG-HCCs (0.1–100 μ 
g/mL) for 30 min at 37 °C, 5% CO2. Cells were washed thoroughly with medium 
while the antibody-containing plate was washed with PBS. Cells were seeded into the plate (1 × 105 per well) and 
incubated for 5 h at 37 °C, 5% CO2. Cells were removed from the plate that was washed thoroughly with PBS. 
Biotinylated anti-PEG antibodies (Table S2) were added to wells (1 μ 
g/mL), and incubated for 1 h at room temper-
ature. The plate was washed thoroughly with PBS after which streptavidin conjugated to alkaline phosphatase was 
added to each well (1 μ 
g/mL), and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. The plate was washed thoroughly 
and 1-step p-nitrophenyl phosphate (PNPP) substrate (ThermoScientific) was added to each well, incubated for 
15–30 min at room temperature to allow color development, and 2 N sodium hydroxide was added to each well 
to stop the reaction. Absorbance was measured at 405 nm on a Multiscan EX plate reader (ThermoScientific).
Superoxide measurement. 
Ovalbumin-specific rat T cells were resuspended in RPMI 1640 medium 
(1 × 
 106 cells/mL) without supplements or serum, plated in a 6-well culture dish and loaded with 5 μ 
M dihydro-
ethidium (Life Technologies) for 30 min at 37 °C, 5% CO2. Cells were washed with RPMI 1640 and incubated 
with or without PEG-HCCs (0.1–100 μ 
g/mL) for 30 min at 37 °C, 5% CO2. Cells were washed with PBS + 
 1% BSA 
and stimulated with 50 ng/mL PMA and 1 μ 
g/mL ionomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 min prior to FCM analysis.
T lymphocyte proliferation. 
Ovalbumin-specific or myelin basic protein-specific rat T cells were resus-
pended in medium + 
 5% FBS and seeded in a 96-well plate (5 × 
 104 per well) in the presence of irradiated rat 
thymocytes (2 × 
 106 per well), serving as antigen-presenting cells38,54–56. Rat mononuclear splenocytes and human 
peripheral blood cells were resuspended in medium + 
 5% FBS and seeded in a 96-well plate (1 × 
 105 per well)40,57. 
Cells were incubated with or without antioxidants: trolox (Sigma-Aldrich), vitamin C (Sigma-Aldrich), PEG-HCCs, 
or HCCs for 30 min at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Ovalbumin-specific and myelin basic protein-specific rat T cells were 
stimulated with 10 μ 
g/mL ovalbumin or guinea pig myelin basic protein (Sigma-Aldrich), respectively36,38,58. 
Rat mononuclear splenocytes and human peripheral blood cells were stimulated with 1 μ 
g/mL concanavalin A or 
phytohemagglutinin, respectively36,59. Cells were cultured for 72 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2, and 1 μ 
Ci [3H] thymidine 
(MP Biomedicals) was added to each well during the final 16–18 h of incubation. Cells were then lysed by freezing 
and DNA was harvested on fiberglass filters using a cell harvester (Inotech Biosystems International). [3H] thy-
midine incorporation was measured on a β 
-scintillation counter (Beckman Coulter).
Cytokine production by T lymphocytes. 
Ovalbumin-specific rat T cells and cells isolated from the drain-
ing lymph nodes of rats with EAE at peak of disease were resuspended (5 × 
 104 cells/mL) in medium + 
 5% FBS 
and incubated with or without PEG-HCCs (10, 100 μ 
g/mL) for 30 min at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Ovalbumin-specific 
T cells were stimulated by irradiated rat thymocytes (2 × 
 106 cells/mL) pre-incubated with 10 μ 
g/mL ovalbumin 
for 2 h. Lymph node cells were stimulated with 50 ng/mL PMA and 1 μ 
g/mL ionomycin. To inhibit cytokine secre-
tion, 10 μ 
g/mL brefeldin A (eBioscience) was immediately added to all wells. Cells were then cultured 4 h at 37 °C 
and 5% CO2, fixed, and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich). Ovalbumin-specific T cells were 
stained with anti-IL-2 and anti-IFN-γ 
 antibodies, while lymph node cells were stained with an anti-IL-17A anti-
body, and appropriate secondary antibodies (Supplementary Table S2), and then analyzed by flow cytometry59.
Antigen processing and presentation by macrophages. 
Freshly isolated rat splenic macrophages 
were resuspended in medium + 
 10% FBS, seeded in a 96-well plate (2 × 
 104 per well), incubated with 10 μ 
g/mL 
ovalbumin for 2 h to allow cells to adhere and process antigen, and then washed with PBS. Ovalbumin-specific rat 
T cells were resuspended in medium + 
 10% FBS and added to the macrophages (1 × 
 104 per well). Macrophages 
were incubated with or without PEG-HCCs (15–120 μ 
g/mL), for 30 min at 37 °C, 5% CO2, either at the same 
time as antigen loading or upon addition of T cells (Supplementary Fig. S18). An effect on macrophage antigen 
processing and presentation by PEG-HCCs was gauged by comparing T cell proliferation against vehicle-treated 
stimulated cells.
Cytotoxicity assays. 
Cytotoxicity in response to PEG-HCCs was measured by FCM60. More details are 
provided in the Supplementary Information. Ovalbumin-specific and myelin basic protein-specific rat T cells 
were resuspended (1 × 
 106 cells/mL) in medium + 5% FBS and incubated with or without PEG-HCCs or HCCs 
(100 μ 
g/mL) for 30 min at 37 °C and 5% CO2 prior to stimulation with 10 μ 
g/mL ovalbumin and myelin basic 
protein, respectively. Cells were cultured for 72 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Positive control wells received 0.5 μ 
M 
staurosporine (EMD Millipore) during the last 16 h to induce cell death. Cells were then washed and stained with 
7-aminoactinomycin D (Sigma-Aldrich) to detect dead cells, and analyzed by FCM.
Macrophage chemokine production and T cell migration. 
Freshly isolated rat macrophages were 
resuspended (2 × 
 106 cells/mL) in medium + 10% FBS and cultured overnight at 37 °C and 5% CO2 to allow 
macrophages to adhere. Cells were washed with PBS to remove non-adherent cells and incubated with or without 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
13
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
PEG-HCCs (15, 120 μ 
g/mL) for 30 min at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Macrophages were then stimulated with 10 ng/mL 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)61. After 24 h incubation at 37 °C and 5% CO2, 0.6 mL supernatant was transferred to the 
bottom chamber of a 5 μ 
m 24-well transwell filter plate (Costar) to serve as chemoattractant. Ovalbumin-specific 
T cells were resuspended (1 × 
 106 cells/mL) in serum-free medium, incubated with or without PEG-HCCs (15, 
120 μ 
g/mL) for 30 min at 37 °C and 5% CO2, and 2 × 
 105 cells were seeded in each transwell insert. As an input 
control, 2 × 
 105 T cells were placed in the bottom chamber of one well without a transwell insert. The transwell 
plate was incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 4 h, prior to counting the bottom chambers for migratory T cells 
using a hemocytometer. Percent migratory cells was calculated using the following equation:  = 
 [(number of cells 
in bottom chamber)/(number of cells in input control)] × 
 100. Chemoattractant containing either medium alone, 
medium + 10% FBS, or supernatant from unstimulated macrophages are shown as controls.
Phagocytosis assays. 
Freshly isolated rat splenocytes (8 × 
 106 cells/mL) were plated in chamber slides 
(Lab-Tek) for 2 h to allow macrophages to adhere. Slides were washed with PBS to remove non-adherent cells and 
remaining macrophages were incubated with or without PEG-HCCs (1–60 μ 
g/mL) for 30 min at 37 °C, 5% CO2. 
Incubation with iron(II,III) oxide (Fe3O4) nanoparticles (25 μ 
g/mL) served as a control for phagocytosis inhibition39. 
Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated zymosan A bioparticles (Life Technologies) were then added to macrophages fol-
lowing manufacturer’s instructions. Slides were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2, fixed, and mounted 
with SlowFade with DAPI (Life Technologies). Representative photos were taken at 10× 
 magnification with an 
Olympus IX71 epifluorescence microscope. Percent of phagocytizing cells was calculated in eight random fields 
of view using the following equation:  = 
 [(number of macrophages with engulfed bioparticles)/(total number of 
macrophages)] × 100.
Macrophage fungistatic assay. 
The ability of splenic macrophages to prevent growth of Aspergillus niger was 
tested as described62. Splenic macrophages were isolated by adhesion as described above and plated into 24 well plates 
(0.2 × 
 106 cells/well) until adherent. Cells were treated with PEG-HCCs and Aspergillus niger (200 conidia/well) 
 
were added before a 24 h incubation at 37 °C, 5% CO2 and enumeration of hyphal growth.
Delayed-type hypersensitivity induction and monitoring. 
For induction of active DTH, rats were 
immunized in the lower flank using ovalbumin emulsified in complete Freund’s adjuvant (Difco)63. For induc-
tion of adoptive DTH, GFP-transduced ovalbumin-specific rat T cells were activated ex vivo by stimulation with 
10 μ 
g/mL ovalbumin in the presence of irradiated rat thymocytes, serving as antigen-presenting cells38,54. Cells 
were incubated 48 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2 and then injected intraperitoneally into rats (1 × 
 106 T cells/rat). Rats 
were randomly selected to receive a single subcutaneous injection in the scruff of the neck of saline (vehicle) or 
PEG-HCCs (2 mg/kg body weight) either at the time of immunization (active DTH only) or at time of challenge. 
One week after immunization or two days after adoptive transfer, animals were challenged with ovalbumin dis-
solved in PBS in the pinna of one ear and a sham injection of PBS in the opposite ear38,54. At 48 h post-challenge, 
ear swelling was measured using a spring-loaded micrometer (Mitutoyo) and the difference in ear thickness was 
calculated for each animal. Rats with adoptive DTH were humanely euthanized immediately after DTH measure-
ment. After cardiac perfusion with saline, ears were collected and single-cell suspensions were prepared using a 
70 μ 
m cell strainer prior to flow cytometry analysis to detect GFP transduced cells at the site of inflammation38.
Acute active EAE induction and histology. 
EAE was induced by immunizing rats with an emulsion 
of guinea pig myelin basic protein (Sigma-Aldrich) in complete Freund’s adjuvant supplemented to a final con-
centration of 4 mg/mL heat-killed Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Ra (Difco) at the base of the tail. Rats were 
randomly selected to receive subcutaneous treatment with saline (Vehicle) or PEG-HCCs (2 mg/kg body weight) 
beginning at onset of clinical signs and continued every three days until the vehicle-treated rats spontaneously 
recovered. Rats were weighed and scored twice daily using the following scale: 0 – no disease signs; 0.5 – distal 
limp tail; 1 – fully limp tail; 2 – mild paraparesis; 3 – moderate paraparesis; 3.5 – one hind leg paralyzed; 4 – both 
hind legs paralyzed; 5 – hind leg paralysis and incontinence; 6 – moribund, requires immediate euthanasia28,38,64.
Randomly selected rats with EAE were humanely euthanized at the peak of disease (day 12 
post-immunization). After cardiac perfusion with saline65, spinal columns were removed and fixed in 10% buff-
ered formalin. The lumbar region of the spinal cord was carefully dissected, embedded in paraffin, sectioned and 
stained with hematoxylin and eosin within the Pathology and Histology facility at Baylor College of Medicine. 
Slides were scored blindly by two investigators for the degree of immune cell infiltration into the gray matter of 
the spinal from three randomly selected cross-sections from each animal: 0 – none; 1 – low (1–10%); 2 – mod-
erate (11–50%); 3 – high (51–100%). Representative photos were taken at 40× 
 magnification with an upright 
Olympus BX41 microscope equipped with a QImaging QICAM Fast1394 camera and the QCapture Pro software 
v6.0.0.412.
Statistical analysis. 
All data are expressed as means ± 
 standard error of the mean (s.e.m). Parametric sta-
tistical methods were utilized to achieve sufficient statistical power with small sample sizes (n < 
 4); Bonferonni 
post-hoc tests were used for pairwise comparisons. All remaining analyses utilized non-parametric methods: a 
two-tailed Mann-Whitney test for comparisons between two groups, a Kruskal-Wallis test and Dunns post-hoc 
tests for comparisons between three or more groups; EAE data was analyzed using a Wilcoxon matched pairs test. 
All analyses utilized a significance level of P < 0.05 and were performed using Prism (GraphPad).
References
1. Shapenko, A., Leipe, J., Lipsky, P. E. & Schulze-Koops, H. The role of the T cell in autoimmune inflammation. Arthritis Res. Ther. 7 
(Suppl 2), S4 (2005).
2. Marrack, P., Kappler, J. & Kotzin, B. L. Autoimmune disease: why and where it occurs. Nat. Med. 7, 899–905 (2001).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
14
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
3. Legroux, L. & Arbour, N. Multiple sclerosis and T lymphocytes: an entangled story. J. Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 10, 528–546 (2015).
4. Ontaneda, D., Hyland, M. & Cohen, J. A. Multiple Sclerosis: New Insights in Pathogenesis and Novel Therapeutics. Annu. Rev. Med. 
63, 389–404 (2012).
5. Rosman, Z., Shoenfeld, Y. & Zandman-Goddard, G. Biologic therapy for autoimmune diseases: an update. In BMC Med. 11 88 
(2013).
6. Gilgun-Sherki, Y., Melamed, E. & Offen, D. The role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis: the need for effective 
antioxidant therapy. J. Neurol. 251, 261–268 (2004).
7. Padgett, L. E., Broniowska, K. A., Hansen, P. A., Corbett, J. A. & Tse, H. M. The role of reactive oxygen species and proinflammatory 
cytokines in type 1 diabetes pathogenesis. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1281, 16–35 (2013).
8. Rosenbaum, C. C., O’Mathuna, D. P., Chavez, M. & Shields, K. Antioxidants and antiinflammatory dietary supplements for 
osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. Altern. Ther. Health Med. 16, 32–40 (2010).
9. van Horssen, J., Witte, M. E., Schreibelt, G. & de Vries, H. E. Radical changes in multiple sclerosis pathogenesis. Biochim. Biophys. 
Acta 1812, 141–150 (2011).
10. Kappos, L. et al. Efficacy and safety of oral fumarate in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: a multicentre, 
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase IIb study. Lancet 372, 1463–1472 (2008).
11. Linker, R. A. & Gold, R. Dimethyl fumarate for treatment of multiple sclerosis: mechanism of action, effectiveness, and side effects. 
Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep. 13, 394 (2013).
12. Gill, A. J. & Kolson, D. L. Dimethyl fumarate modulation of immune and antioxidant responses: application to HIV therapy. Crit. 
Rev. Immunol. 33, 307–359 (2013).
13. Rahman, M. M., Sykiotis, G. P., Nishimura, M., Bodmer, R. & Bohmann, D. Declining signal dependence of Nrf2-MafS-regulated 
gene expression correlates with aging phenotypes. Aging Cell 4, 554–562 (2013).
14. Schulze-Topphoff, U. et al. Dimethyl fumarate treatment induces adaptive and innate immune modulation independent of Nrf2. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, 4777–4782 (2016).
15. Bitner, B. R. et al. Antioxidant carbon particles improve cerebrovascular dysfunction following traumatic brain injury. ACS Nano. 6, 
8007–8014 (2012).
16. Bjelakovic, G., Nikolova, D., Gluud, L. L., Simonetti, R. G. & Gluud, C. Mortality in randomized trials of antioxidant supplements 
for primary and secondary prevention: systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 297, 842–857 (2007).
17. Belikov, A. V., Schraven, B. & Simeoni, L. TCR-triggered extracellular superoxide production is not required for T-cell activation. 
Cell. Commun. Signal 12, 50 (2014).
18. Devadas, S., Zaritsaya, L., Rhee, S. G., Oberley, L. & Williams, M. S. Discrete generation of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide by T 
cell receptor stimulation: selective regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase activation and fas ligand expression. J. Exp. Med. 
195, 59–70 (2002).
19. Kaminski, M. M. et al. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species control T cell activation by regulating IL-2 and IL-4 expression: 
mechanism of ciprofloxacin-mediated immunosuppression. J. Immunol. 184, 4827–4841 (2010).
20. Sena, L. A. et al. Mitochondria are required for antigen-specific T cell activation through reactive oxygen species signaling. Immunity 
38, 1–12 (2013).
21. Williams, M. S. & Kwon, J. T cell receptor stimulation, reactive oxygen species, and cell signaling. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 37, 
1144–1151 (2004).
22. Yudoh, K., Karasawa, R., Masuko, K. & Kato, T. Water-soluble fullerene (C60) inhibits the development of arthritis in the rat model 
of arthritis. Int. J. Nanomed. 4, 217–225 (2009).
23. Marcano, D. C. et al. Design of poly(ethylene glycol)-functionalized hydrophilic carbon clusters for targeted therapy of 
cerebrovascular dysfunction in mild traumatic brain injury. J. Neurotrauma. 30, 789–796 (2013).
24. Drezek, R. A. & Tour, J. M. Is nanotechnology too broad to practise? Nat. Nanotechnol. 5, 168–169 (2010).
25. Berlin, J. M. et al. Effective drug delivery, in vitro and in vivo, by carbon-based nanovectors noncovalently loaded with unmodified 
Paclitaxel. ACS Nano 4, 4621–4636 (2010).
26. Samuel, E. L. et al. Highly efficient conversion of superoxide to oxygen using hydrophilic carbon clusters. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
112, 2343–2348 (2015).
27. Malyala, P. & Singh, M. Endotoxin limits in formulations for preclinical research. J. Pharm. Sci. 97, 2041–2044 (2007).
28. Tarcha, E. J. et al. Durable pharmacological responses from the peptide ShK-186, a specific Kv1.3 channel inhibitor that suppresses 
T cell mediators of autoimmune diseases. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 342, 642–653 (2012).
29. Song, G., Petschauer, J. S., Madden, A. J. & Zamboni, W. C. Nanoparticles and the mononuclear phagocyte system: pharmacokinetics 
and applications for inflammatory diseases. Curr. Rheumatol. Rev. 10, 22–34 (2014).
30. Gustafson, H. H., Holt-Casper, D., Grainger, D. W. & Ghandehari, H. Nanoparticle Uptake: The Phagocyte Problem. Nano Today 10, 
487–510 (2015).
31. Getts, D. R., Shea, L. D., Miller, S. D. & King, N. J. Harnessing nanoparticles for immune modulation. Trends Immunol. 36, 419–427 
(2015).
32. Weissleder, R., Nahrendorf, M. & Pittet, M. J. Imaging macrophages with nanoparticles. Nat. Mater. 13, 125–138 (2014).
33. Rusznyák, I., Földi, M., Szabó, G. & Youlten, L. Lymphatics and Lymph Circulation (Second Edition), (Elsevier, 1967).
34. Su, D., Shen, M., Li, X. & Sun, L. Roles of gd T cells in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. J. Immunol. Res. 2013, 985756 
(2013).
35. Antonelli, A., Ferrari, S. M., Corrado, A., Di Domenicantonio, A. & Fallahi, P. Autoimmune thyroid disorders. Autoimmun. Rev. 14, 
174–180 (2015).
36. Beeton, C. et al. Selective blocking of voltage-gated K+ channels improves experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and inhibits 
T cell activation. J. Immunol. 166, 936–944 (2001).
37. Flugel, A., Willem, M., Berkowicz, T. & Wekerle, H. Gene transfer into CD4+ 
 T lymphocytes: green fluorescent protein-engineered, 
encephalitogenic T cells illuminate brain autoimmune responses. Nat. Med. 5, 843–847 (1999).
38. Matheu, M. P. et al. Imaging of effector memory T cells during a delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction and suppression by Kv1.3 
channel block. Immunity 29, 602–614 (2008).
39. Kodali, V. et al. Dysregulation of macrophage activation profiles by engineered nanoparticles. ACS Nano 7, 6997–7010 (2013).
40. Beeton, C. et al. Targeting effector memory T cells with a selective peptide inhibitor of Kv1.3 channels for therapy of autoimmune 
diseases. Mol. Pharmacol. 67, 1369–1381 (2005).
41. Beeton, C. & Chandy, K. G. Induction and monitoring of adoptive delayed type hypersensitivity in rats. J. Vis. Exp. 8, e325 (2007).
42. Brinkmann, V. et al. Fingolimod (FTY720): discovery and development of an oral drug to treat multiple sclerosis. Nat. Rev. Drug 
Discov. 9, 883–897 (2010).
43. Rastogi, V. et al. Carbon nanotubes: an emerging drug carrier for targeting cancer cells. J. Drug. Deliv. 2014, 670815 (2014).
44. Jenkins, M. K. et al. In vivo activation of antigen-specific CD4 T cells. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 19, 23–45 (2001).
45. Dejaco, C., Duftner, C., Grubeck-Loebenstein, B. & Schirmer, M. Imbalance of regulatory T cells in human autoimmune diseases. 
Immunology 117, 289–300 (2006).
46. Fang, F. C. Antimicrobial reactive oxygen and nitrogen species: concepts and controversies. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2, 820–832 (2004).
47. Beeton, C. & Chandy, K. G. Preparing T cell growth factor from rat splenocytes. J. Vis. Exp. 9, e402 (2007).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
15
Scientific RepoRts | 6:33808 | DOI: 10.1038/srep33808
48. Beeton, C. & Chandy, K. G. Enrichment of natural killer cells from human blood using the RosetteSep kit from StemCell 
Technologies. J. Vis. Exp. 8, e326 (2007).
49. Chang, S. C. et al. Expression and isotopic labeling of the potassium channel blocker ShK toxin as a thioredoxin fusion protein in 
bacteria. Toxicon 60, 840–850 (2012).
50. Sano, D. et al. Noncovalent assembly of targeted carbon nanovectors enables synergistic drug and radiation cancer therapy in vivo. 
ACS Nano 6, 2497–2505 (2012).
51. Beeton, C. & Chandy, K. G. Drawing blood from the saphenous vein of rats and by cardiac puncture. J. Vis. Exp. 7, e266 (2007).
52. Lacerda, L. et al. Translocation mechanisms of chemically functionalised carbon nanotubes across plasma membranes. Biomaterials 
33, 3334–3343 (2012).
53. Beeton, C. et al. Kv1.3 channels are a therapeutic target for T cell-mediated autoimmune diseases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 
17414–17419 (2006).
54. Beeton, C. & Chandy, K. G. Induction and monitoring of adoptive delayed-type hypersensitivity in rats. J. Vis. Exp. 8, e325 (2007).
55. Rashid, M. H. et al. A potent and selective peptide blocker of the Kv1.3 channel: prediction from free-energy simulations and 
experimental confirmation. Plos ONE 8, e78712 (2013).
56. Rashid, M. H. et al. A potent and Kv1.3-selective analogue of the scorpion toxin HsTX1 as a potential therapeutic for autoimmune 
diseases. Sci. Rep. 4, 4509 (2014).
57. Wulff, H. et al. The voltage-gated Kv1.3 K+ channel in effector memory T cells as new target for MS. J. Clin. Invest. 111, 1703–1713 (2003).
58. Beeton, C. et al. Selective blockade of T lymphocyte K+ channels ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a model 
for multiple sclerosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 13942–13947 (2001).
59. Koshy, S. et al. Blocking Kv1.3 channels inhibits Th2 lymphocyte function and treats a rat model of asthma. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 
12623–12632 (2014).
60. Hu, X. et al. KCa1.1 potassium channels regulate key pro-inflammatory and invasive properties of fibroblast-like synoviocytes in 
rheumatoid arthritis. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 4014–4022 (2012).
61. Kopydlowski, K. M. et al. Regulation of macrophage chemokine expression by lipopolysaccharide in vitro and in vivo. J. Immunol. 
163, 1537–1544 (1999).
62. Millien, V
. O. et al. Cleavage of fibrinogen by proteinases elicits allergic responses through Toll-like receptor 4. Science 341, 792–796 (2013).
63. Beeton, C. & Chandy, K. G. Induction and monitoring of active delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH) in rats. J. Vis. Exp. 6, e237 (2007).
64. Beeton, C., Garcia, A. & Chandy, K. G. Induction and clinical scoring of chronic-relapsing experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis. J. Vis. Exp. 5, e224 (2007).
65. Beeton, C. & Chandy, K. G. Isolation of mononuclear cells from the central nervous system of rats with EAE. J. Vis. Exp. 10, e527 (2007).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Baylor College of Medicine and the National Multiple Sclerosis Society award 
PP1715 (to C.B.). R.H. was supported by T32 award HL007676 and M.R.T. by T32 awards GM088129 and 
AI053831 and by F31 award AR069960 from the National Institutes of Health. The Baylor College of Medicine 
Cytometry & Cell Sorting and Pathology & Histology cores are supported in part by funding from the National 
Institutes of Health (RR024574, AI036211, and CA125123) and the Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center. The Integrated 
Microscopy Core at Baylor College of Medicine is supported in part by funding from the National Institutes 
of Health (HD007495, DK56338, and CA125123), the Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, and the John S. Dunn 
Gulf Coast Consortium for Chemical Genomics. The work at Rice University was supported by the Traumatic 
Brain Injury Consortium, funded by the US Army (W81XHW-08-2-0143), and the National Institutes of Health 
through Baylor College of Medicine (DK093802). We kindly thank Huilong Fei (Department of Chemistry, 
Rice University) for providing the iron(II,III) oxide nanoparticles, Alexander Flügel (Max-Planck Institute, 
Martinsried, Germany) for providing the GFP-transduced ovalbumin-specific CD4+ Lewis rat T cells, and 
Evelyne Béraud (Université de la Méditerranée, Marseilles, France) for providing the myelin basic protein-specific 
CD4+ Lewis rat T cells.
Author Contributions
R.H. designed and performed experiments, analyzed and interpreted data and wrote the manuscript. E.L.G.S., 
W.K.A.S., L.G.N. and J.M.T. synthesized the PEG-HCCs. W.K.A.S., T.L., M.R.T., F.S.K., P.C.P., R.B.T., R.S.P. and 
T.I. performed experiments and analyzed data. R.G.P., D.B.C. and J.M.T. discussed results and commented on the 
manuscript. C.B. designed the experiments and wrote the manuscript. All authors have given approval to the final 
version of the manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: R.H., E.L.G.S., T.I., R.G.P., J.M.T., and C.B. are inventors on a patent application 
claiming PEG-HCCs as T lymphocyte immunomodulators for the treatment of inflammatory diseases. The 
patent rights are owned by Rice University and Baylor College of Medicine. These patents have been licensed to 
Acelerox, LLC in which J.M.T. owns stock. All potential conflicts of interest are managed through the respective 
institutional offices of research compliance. The other authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Huq, R. et al. Preferential uptake of antioxidant carbon nanoparticles by T lymphocytes 
for immunomodulation. Sci. Rep. 6, 33808; doi: 10.1038/srep33808 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 
© The Author(s) 2016
