 Loss of motivation is a common syndrome observed 
across neurological and psychiatric disorders. In recent 
years, researchers have identified lack of motivation 
(also termed amotivation) among substantial pro-
portions of individuals with stroke1; traumatic brain 
injury2,3; common neurodegenerative diseases including 
Alzheimer’s disease4,5, Parkinson’s disease6,7 and vascu-
lar dementia8; rarer disorders such as frontotemporal 
dementia9 and Huntington’s disease10; and psychiatric 
conditions such as major depressive disorder (MDD)11,12 
and schizophrenia13,14 (Box 1).
Several syndromes associated with diminished moti-
vation have been described15. Historically, reports of 
these syndromes arose from diverse medical and psycho-
logical experts in the 19th century16. Although different 
terminologies were used for different patient groups — 
sometimes rather loosely and interchangeably — these 
phenomena are now recognized to overlap greatly.
In neurological disorders, amotivation is typically 
categorized as the syndrome of apathy, which itself is 
defined as diminished motivation for physical, cogni-
tive or emotional activity17–19. In psychiatry, although 
the term apathy has also been used, amotivation is more 
often referred to in the context of either anhedonia20 or 
negative symptoms21. Classically, anhedonia was defined 
by the French psychologist Ribot as an inability to 
experience pleasure. However, this definition was later 
broadened in psychiatric diagnostic criteria to include 
a motivational component — that is, a loss of interest 
or pleasure in previously rewarding activities22. Recent 
research suggests that there might be some common 
mechanisms underlying both apathy and anhedonia.
Findings from studies of behaviour, computational 
models, neuropharmacological or optogenetic manipu-
lations, brain lesions, deep brain stimulation (DBS) and 
neuroimaging — in humans and in animal models — have 
 
identified the brain systems that are dysfunctional in amo-
tivated states. The results implicate disruption of mech-
anisms underlying the way in which reward is processed 
to motivate behaviour22–25. In this Review, we explain 
 
how, broadly speaking, these mechanisms can be concep-
tualized within the framework of effort- 
based decision 
making for rewards26,27 — that is, how the potential bene-
fit or reward for performing an activity is evaluated with 
respect to the cost in effort required to attain it.
The mechanisms underlying such decision making 
seem to be affected in people with amotivation associ-
ated with different brain disorders, regardless of under-
lying pathology, suggesting that it might be timely to 
develop a transdiagnostic approach that cuts across 
traditional diagnostic boundaries. Here, we examine 
whether such an approach might indeed be useful by 
focusing on apathy and anhedonia, and their associ-
ated neural and behavioural signatures, across different 
neurological and psychiatric disorders.
Definitions
Although there has been debate, most experts now con-
sider apathy to be a syndrome. One set of criteria19 for 
apathy builds on previous conceptualizations28,29 and 
has been validated across neurological and psychiatric 
conditions. These criteria define apathy as loss or reduc-
tion of motivation compared with an individual’s previous 
state; associated with decreases in at least two out of three 
of goal- 
directed behaviour, cognitive activity or emotion; 
causing clinically significant impairment in everyday life; 
but not explained by physical or motor disability, reduced 
consciousness or drugs19. However, this definition might 
not capture all aspects of apathy. For example, recent 
research has identified social apathy — reduced interest 
in interacting with other people30,31 — as another possible 
component or dimension of the syndrome.
Motivation
A reason or reasons for acting 
or behaving in a particular way.
Negative symptoms
Thoughts, feelings or 
behaviours normally present 
that are absent or diminished.
Neuroscience of apathy and 
anhedonia: a transdiagnostic approach
Masud Husain  
1* and Jonathan P. Roiser  
2
Abstract | Apathy and anhedonia are common syndromes of motivation that are associated with a 
wide range of brain disorders and have no established therapies. Research using animal models 
suggests that a useful framework for understanding motivated behaviour lies in effort- 
based 
decision making for reward. The neurobiological mechanisms underpinning such decisions have 
now begun to be determined in individuals with apathy or anhedonia, providing an important 
foundation for developing new treatments. The findings suggest that there might be some shared 
mechanisms between both syndromes. A transdiagnostic approach that cuts across traditional 
disease boundaries provides a potentially useful means for understanding these conditions.
1Nuffield Department of 
Clinical Neurosciences and 
Department of Experimental 
Psychology, University of 
Oxford. John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Oxford, UK.
2Institute of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, University 
College London, London, UK.
*e- 
mail: masud.husain@
ndcn.ox.ac.uk
https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41583-018-0029-9
REVIEwS
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | NeuroscieNce
 Some clinicians also use the terms avolition21 or abulia16. 
People with avolition or abulia encounter difficulty in ini-
tiating behaviours but can perform the same actions when 
verbally prompted to do so. Avolition can be a prominent 
negative symptom of schizophrenia21. An extreme form of 
avolition is akinetic mutism, which is characterized by little 
or no self- 
generated movement or speech32.
Anhedonia is defined as consistently and markedly 
diminished interest or pleasure in almost all daily activ-
ities. Although originally conceptualized as a lack of 
pleasurable experience, for several decades psychiatrists 
have recognized that this symptom may also reflect a 
loss of interest (that is, the motivation) to act in order to 
seek pleasure22. This distinction is important for recent 
conceptualizations of amotivational syndromes, which 
consider anhedonia to share some aspects of apathy. It 
is also important for animal models of anhedonia, in 
which affective experiences of pleasure are challenging 
to measure, but motivation to obtain rewards is far eas-
ier to investigate. Similar to apathy, anhedonia might 
exist for different dimensions, with dissociable axes of 
loss of interest or pleasure in social activities, sensory 
experiences, hobbies or food and drink33. Fractionation 
of apathy and anhedonia into components potentially 
provides a way to examine similarities between the 
syndromes at a fine- 
grain level.
Along with depressed mood, anhedonia is one of the 
cardinal symptoms of MDD. According to the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition 
(DSM-5)34, patients meet criteria for MDD if they have 
five or more symptoms, one of which must be either 
depressed mood or anhedonia. However, anhedonia can 
occur outside of MDD. For example, it has long been 
recognized as a negative symptom of schizophrenia, and 
is increasingly appreciated to be an important compo-
nent of post- 
traumatic stress disorder, eating disorders 
and substance use disorder35.
Anhedonia and apathy are measured using either 
questionnaires filled by the patient or caregiver, or a 
structured interview performed by the clinician (Box 1). 
The closeness of apathy and anhedonia as syndrome 
constructs is emphasized by the few studies that have 
DSM- 
IV field trials
Reports on the first attempts 
to apply the diagnostic criteria 
laid down in the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, Fourth Edition 
in real- 
world settings.
Avolition
Inability to perform self- 
directed, purposeful activities.
Abulia
Reduced spontaneous verbal, 
motor, cognitive and emotional 
behaviours.
Akinetic mutism
Loss of ability to self- 
initiate 
limb movement and speech.
Box 1 | Measurement and prevalence of apathy and anhedonia
Clinically, apathy and anhedonia are measured using either self- 
report questionnaires or structured interviews13,17–19,163. 
Popular anhedonia questionnaires13,163 include the scale for Physical anhedonia and the scale for social anhedonia (which 
focus on lifetime hedonic responses to specific environmental stimuli), the snaith–Hamilton Pleasure scale (which is more 
general and includes less culturally bound questions, rated over recent days) and the temporal experience of Pleasure scale 
(which attempts to distinguish the hedonic and appetitive components of anhedonia). several questionnaires for apathy 
exist, with two commonly used ones being the apathy evaluation scale and the apathy scale17–19.
in interviews, scores are commonly derived using questions from measures such as the scale for the assessment of 
Negative symptoms in schizophrenia, although such scales usually feature only a small number of items specifically 
relating to amotivation13. However, structured interviews specifically focused on apathy (such as the Lille apathy rating 
scale) and anhedonia (for example, the Clinical assessment interview for Negative symptoms and the Brief Negative 
symptom scale) have been developed164.
estimates of apathy in neurological disorders vary depending on the scales used and the selection criteria, but some 
reported mean prevalence rates are shown in the table. reliable data regarding anhedonia in some of these groups are 
sparse, largely because studies in neurological disorders focus on apathy. However, in one investigation conducted in 
Parkinson’s disease, almost all patients who were apathetic were also anhedonic, whereas almost one- 
third of the sample 
fulfilled criteria for anhedonia without having apathy165.
anhedonia is extremely common in depression, with both population- 
based surveys166 and DSM- 
IV field trials167 
suggesting a prevalence of 85–95% in major depressive disorder (MDD), on the basis of responses to a single question. 
studies using questionnaires (with cut- 
offs defined by the authors of the scale) report clinically significant anhedonia in 
37% of MDD patients11. in schizophrenia, anhedonia has been reported to vary in prevalence from 45% when assessed 
using questionnaires11 to ~80% using clinical interviews13. anhedonia and apathy can occur within the same individual, as 
reported in both schizophrenia40 and Parkinson’s disease36.
apathy has a severe impact on the quality of life of both the patient and the carer as well as on functional independence 
and prognosis18. the severity of anhedonia varies greatly within a patient group and correlates with more severe symptoms, 
poorer treatment response and low self- 
reported quality of life in depression39, and poor functional outcome in 
schizophrenia168.
Disorder
Apathy in population (%)
refs
Anhedonia in population (%)
refs
Alzheimer’s disease
49
4
61
5
Frontotemporal dementia
72
9
–
–
Huntington’s disease
47
10
–
–
Major depressive disorder
38
12
37
11
Parkinson’s disease
40
6
46
7
Schizophrenia
47
14
45
11
Stroke
36
1
–
–
Traumatic brain injury
61
2
22
3
Vascular dementia
65
8
–
–
‘–’ indicates when anhedonia has not been reliably estimated in a patient population.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrn
Reviews
 examined both in clinical populations. In Parkinson’s 
disease, for example, some investigators have reported 
significant positive correlations between scores on 
apathy and anhedonia scales36. In schizophrenia, apa-
thy and anhedonia usually cluster together as negative 
symptoms37–39, and the severity of apathy correlates with 
scores of anhedonia, avolition or asociality40 as well as 
with global negative symptom scores41. However, some 
reports also show that anhedonia — at least in terms 
of inability to experience pleasure — can be dissociable 
from apathy (for example, in Parkinson’s disease)42.
These findings demonstrate how important it might be 
to deconstruct apathy and anhedonia into component pro-
cesses, rather than to consider them as single, monolithic 
entities. To the best of our knowledge, such an approach, 
using either behavioural experimental studies or compu-
tational modelling, has not hitherto been used to com-
pare mechanisms underlying both apathy and anhedonia 
within the same individual or patient group (Box 1).
Aspects of apathy and anhedonia may also be related 
to two common symptoms: anergia and fatigue. People 
with anergia complain of feeling sluggish, being drained 
or lacking strength even without exerting themselves, 
whereas fatigue refers to tiredness following activity, 
either physical or mental. It is not uncommon to find 
patients who articulate lack of motivation in terms of 
lacking energy or being fatigued. When apathy, anhe-
donia and fatigue are evaluated concurrently, there 
are significant positive correlations between all of 
these symptoms31, for example in Parkinson’s disease43. 
Furthermore, the Tenth Revision of the International 
Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) criteria for MDD 
include fatigue or low energy as a cardinal symptom, in 
addition to anhedonia and depressed mood.
Anergia and fatigue can also occur in individuals 
without depression — for example, in systemic illnesses 
or chronic fatigue syndrome. An important question is 
whether, in addition to any peripheral muscular factors, 
there might be central motivational contributions to 
these symptoms. Similarly, apathy and anhedonia are 
now recognized to occur not only in the context of clin-
ical diagnoses but also, in milder forms, in the general 
population, particularly with ageing44,45. This realization 
has led some researchers to investigate whether there 
might be a neurobiological basis to these symptoms 
 
in otherwise healthy individuals46, with ageing47–49 or in 
people at high risk of developing depression50. Across 
several different studies, in young and old people, both 
structural and functional brain activity changes have 
been identified46–50, including in frontal and basal gan-
glia regions identified in patient groups discussed below 
 
(see Brain regions below).
Behavioural approaches
Given the importance and clinical impact of disorders of 
motivation, several paradigms have been developed to 
examine such behavioural changes in animal models25. 
In turn, some of these have led to analogous tests for 
humans, including various clinical populations24. 
Broadly speaking, many of the animal- 
model tasks can 
be considered to examine one or more of the decision, 
appetitive, consummatory or learning phases of behaviour, 
although different authors vary in their classification of 
these phases20,23,25. Despite a lack of complete agreement, 
one area of consensus is that there might be several 
mechanisms — or combinations of mechanisms — 
 
that underlie amotivation in people51. This notion has 
important implications for treatments. Here, we examine 
apathy and anhedonia using the conceptual frame-
work of mechanisms deployed in effort- 
based decision 
making for rewards (FIg. 1).
Option generation. One important component in 
effort- 
based decision making for rewards is the abil-
ity to first generate options for behaviour52 — whether 
self- 
generated or cued by environmental stimuli. Many 
patients with amotivational syndromes can perform 
behaviours when prompted by others but experience 
difficulty in initiating activities themselves.
Testing volitional generation of behavioural options 
is challenging in animals. In humans, participants can 
be tested for their ability to generate as many options as 
possible for real- 
life scenarios (for example, “It’s a sunny 
day. What could you do?”). Few studies testing option 
generation have been performed in clinical populations; 
however, one has shown that the degree of apathy in 
individuals with schizophrenia correlated inversely with 
their ability to generate options41. Another study failed 
to find a relationship between option generation and 
apathy in individuals with Parkinson’s disease but did 
reveal a strong relationship with apathy scores in healthy 
people53. Option generation tasks are very similar to tests 
of fluency, an index of (frontal) executive control, raising 
the possibility that, in some individuals, symptoms of 
amotivation may be driven by executive dysfunction54.
Decision making leading to option selection. Even 
if the ability to generate options is intact, individuals 
might experience difficulty in selecting between possible 
options, especially when a decision made now may affect 
which decisions are available in the future. Many factors 
affect such selection, including: subjective valuation of 
potential outcomes; risk or probability of obtaining the 
reward (which can lead to probabilistic discounting of 
the subjective value of a reward); devaluation of rewards 
due to waiting (known as temporal discounting); and per-
ception of the effort required to gain the reward (leading 
to effort discounting of reward)55. Individuals with 
Parkinson’s disease and apathy are less inclined to make 
a physical effort for rewards56, particularly low levels of 
reward57, than people with Parkinson’s disease without 
apathy. The ability to settle on a choice — rather than 
vacillate — is also an important aspect of decision making 
for reward, especially if options are similar in value or 
numerous. However, this has not been compared in peo-
ple with and without apathy. In extreme states of amotiva-
tion, any effort might be considered too costly, such that 
no action is performed, regardless of the potential reward.
Anticipation. Once an individual has selected an 
option, they typically experience motivational arousal 
(evidenced by physiological measures such as changes 
in heart rate or pupil dilation) in anticipation of action 
and/or reward58. For example, people normally show 
Anergia
Loss of energy.
Fatigue
Weariness or diminished ability 
following mental or physical 
activity.
Appetitive
Approach or goal- 
seeking 
phase of behaviour.
Consummatory
Completion or consummation 
phase of behaviour.
Learning
Acquisition of information, in 
this case to alter future 
behaviour.
Fluency
The number of examples 
generated of a verbal category 
(for example, words beginning 
with the letter F) or a non- 
verbal category (for instance, 
different patterns on a dot 
array using four straight lines).
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | NeuroscieNce
Reviews
 anticipatory pupil dilatation that scales with potential 
reward magnitude in advance of making speeded move-
ments to obtain reward. This pupil response is blunted 
 
in some patients with apathy59 (FIg. 2a,b).
Action and effort. The initiation, maintenance and 
invigoration of action together constitute part of appet-
itive behaviour — for example, the locomotor approach 
of an animal to a potentially rewarding experience, such 
as food. Appetitive behaviour has been referred to as a 
measure of ‘wanting’ (distinct from ‘liking’; see below)23, 
although some caution against the use of subjective 
terms in reference to animal studies.
Tasks used to study appetitive components of behav-
iour often measure how much physical effort an animal 
is willing to allocate to obtain a reward. For example, 
in progressive ratio tasks, the number of lever presses 
a rat has to make to obtain a set reward progressively 
increases until the animal reaches its ‘breaking point’ and 
is no longer willing to exert further effort25. Similarly, in 
a variation of the T- 
maze, rodents must decide between 
scaling a barrier to obtain highly rewarding food and a 
low- 
effort, low- 
reward food option60 (FIg. 2c). In humans, 
effort allocation can be manipulated using the number 
of button presses, the speed of response or the amount 
of force exerted to obtain rewards (FIg. 2d–f). Often, 
such tasks use choice behaviour as an indication of 
willingness to exert effort56,61–63.
Fewer studies have examined willingness to allo-
cate cognitive effort. Rodents might, for example, have 
to choose to opt for a highly demanding attention trial 
(detect a brief illumination) over a low- 
demand one 
(detect a prolonged illumination) to obtain a greater 
reward64. In humans too, researchers have probed 
willingness to expend mental effort (in tasks that place 
high demands on attention or working memory) ver-
sus physical effort (squeezing tightly on hand- 
held 
dynamometers)65,66. These studies have shown both 
common and dissociable brain region contributions to 
effort- 
based decision making for rewards in the cog-
nitive and physical effort domains65,66. One important 
aspect of effort tasks is that the highly effortful option 
must be achievable; otherwise, any observed changes in 
decision making could relate to probability discounting, 
not effort discounting.
A paradigm commonly used to assess ‘wanting’, 
originally developed in rodents, is Pavlovian– 
instrumental transfer (PIT). PIT involves three stages: 
Pavlovian (passive) conditioning pairing an initially 
neutral stimulus (such as a tone or light) with a reward-
ing outcome (food); instrumental (active, choice- 
based) 
association between an action (pressing a lever) and the 
rewarding outcome; and, finally, the PIT phase itself — 
the presentation of the Pavlovian conditioned stimulus 
(CS; that is, the tone or light) during instrumental per-
formance — usually during extinction (that is, without 
delivery of rewarding outcomes). Presentation of the 
(unrelated) CS causes an invigoration of instrumental 
responding (known as the PIT effect), and is inter-
preted as reflecting incentive salience, or wanting67. 
Human analogues of the PIT task have been developed, 
with some evidence that the PIT effect is attenuated in 
individuals with depression68.
Hedonic impact. Consummatory behaviour refers to 
the achievement of a goal — for example, eating food. 
Some refer to this as the ‘liking’ phase of motivated 
behaviour23. One probe used to index consummatory 
Pavlovian–instrumental 
transfer
(PIT). The influence of an 
irrelevant conditioned stimulus 
on ongoing instrumental 
behaviour.
Apathy
Anhedonia
Syndrome
Behavioural components
Learning from outcomes
Option generation
Cost–benefit decision
Option selection
Anticipatory phase
Preparation for action
Self-generated or
environmentally cued
Valuation of options 
according to reward, 
effort, time and risk
Motivational arousal
Initiating action and 
sustaining effort
Appetitive/approach 
phase of behaviour
Invigoration of action
Interacting with 
behavioural goal
Consummatory phase of 
behaviour
Hedonic impact
Fig. 1 | Mechanisms underlying effort- 
based decision making to obtain 
rewards. The clinical syndromes of apathy and anhedonia seem to overlap, 
sharing some possible underlying mechanisms. In the field of effort- 
based 
decision making for reward, several possible processes have been identified, 
some of which are displayed here. First, before an action is initiated, it might 
be important to generate potential options for behaviour. These might be 
self- 
initiated or cued by changes in the surrounding environment. Next, the 
possible options need to be evaluated in terms of their costs (effort, time 
required and associated risks) versus their benefits (potential reward) before an 
 
option for behaviour is selected. Anticipation of reward and preparation for 
action are associated with physiological changes (in heart rate and pupil 
dilatation) linked to motivational arousal. Premotor and motor mechanisms 
are engaged to initiate, invigorate and sustain appetitive or approach 
behaviour. Interacting with the behavioural goal consists of the 
consummatory phase, which may lead to a positive (hedonic) or negative 
impact. Finally 
, learning from outcomes to alter weighting of costs and 
benefits in subsequent decision making is important for optimizing option 
selection in the future. In principle, lack of motivation — manifest as apathy 
or anhedonia — might occur due to dysfunction at any one or more 
 
of these stages.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrn
Reviews
 Auditory cue
Max reward
Target
Saccade
a
c
b
d
f
e
0
0.0
–0.5
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Time (ms)
Pupil reward sensitivity
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Choose task
Probability: 88%
Low 
effort:
$1.00
High
effort:
$2.37
Ready?
Button press
High effort for 
large reward
Low effort for 
small reward
Reward 
(number 
of apples)
Effort
(voluntary 
contraction 
needed)
Yes
No
1
1
2
3
3
4
5
6
9
12
15
Reward level
Effort level
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
% Yes
PD and apathy
PD without apathy 
Time
0p, 10p, 50p
Fig. 2 | Behavioural paradigms for assessing amotivation. a | A speeded saccade for reward task 
, in which the 
monetary reward depends on the speed of response. The reward on offer is announced at the beginning of each trial, 
before the saccade target is presented. b | On this task 
, participants’ pupils normally dilate more with greater anticipated 
reward (after the auditory cue announcing maximum reward on offer). Reward sensitivity of the pupils is blunted in 
individuals with Parkinson’s disease (PD) and apathy compared with individuals with PD but without apathy59. Shaded 
area represents standard error of the mean. c | Rodent T- 
maze experiments reveal that depletion of dopamine in the 
nucleus accumbens or lesions of the anterior cingulate cortex shifts rats from a strategy of working hard for large 
rewards (scaling an obstacle, indicated by dashed line, to obtain the large reward) to opting for a smaller reward that 
requires far less effort60,90. d | An effort task that requires human participants to select between low or high physical  
effort options (number of button presses) associated with different levels of reward61. e | Effort task in which human 
participants decide to accept or reject offers in which different levels of reward are available for different levels of 
physical effort (grip force). The image on the screen displays the reward on offer (depicted as the number of apples  
on a tree) and the force required to obtain that level of reward (indicated by the height of the yellow line on the tree 
trunk). f | On this task 
, the likelihood of accepting offers increases with reward on offer and decreases with increasing 
effort required46. Parts a and b are adapted from ReF.59, CC-BY-4.0. Part c is adapted with permission from ReF.174, Elsevier. 
Part d is adapted with permission from ReF.61, American Psychological Association. Parts e and f are adapted from ReF.46, 
CC- 
BY-4.0.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | NeuroscieNce
Reviews
 behaviour in animal models is the sucrose preference 
test: rodents given the choice between water and dilute 
sucrose solution develop a preference for the latter. 
Animals that have been exposed to chronic mild stress 
(a model of depression) show decreased preference for 
sucrose69, taken to indicate reduced hedonic capacity. 
Direct pleasure from the consummatory phase of behav-
iour has also been indexed by the facial expressions of 
rodents and primates in response to sweet versus bitter 
substances23. However, several studies in humans sug-
gest that hedonic aspects of the consummatory phase 
(measured by self- 
reported pleasure in response to 
sweet tastes) may be intact in people with schizophre-
nia with pronounced negative symptoms24 or MDD70, 
raising the question of how appropriate decreased lik-
ing (as assessed through sucrose preference or facial 
expression) in rodents is as a model of anhedonia 
 
in humans.
Learning. Finally, an important aspect of effort- 
based 
decision making for reward is how individuals learn 
from the outcomes of their actions to guide future 
selections. This concept is known as reinforcement 
learning — that is, how rewards or losses associated 
with a stimulus or an action alter subsequent behav-
iours through updates to stimulus value. Learning can 
be assessed by examining how choices change over time 
in response to feedback. In early work, this was often 
achieved by analysing performance on early versus late 
trials in, for example, the Iowa gambling task71, revealing 
differences between patient groups and healthy volun-
teers in terms of poorer learning of the most reward-
ing selections over time72. However, the interpretation 
of such differences is challenging, as several pro-
cesses could potentially contribute (including option 
selection, hedonic impact and learning). A fruitful 
alternative approach to data analysis that has gained 
popularity in recent years is to use computational 
modelling73.
Computational modelling
Computational models (BoxeS 2,3) leverage the richness 
of observed data (for example, patterns of behaviour 
that evolve on a trial- 
by-trial basis) to provide insight 
into which processes are important in driving individual 
differences51. For example, a difficult, partially rewarded 
perceptual task was developed to examine anhedonia. 
The task revealed reliable, replicable differences in 
 
what the authors call reward responsiveness (which 
measures the bias towards selecting the stimulus more 
frequently associated with reward) between con-
trol participants and individuals with depression74. 
However, alterations in several processes — including 
learning, reward valuation or simply perceptual dis-
crimination — could potentially contribute to this 
reward responsiveness measure.
Application of a computational model (similar to 
that in Box 3) to a large number of data sets produced 
Box 2 | utility of computational modelling of behaviour
a computational approach can provide useful insights into what may drive observed patterns of behaviour. 
Computational models have increasingly been applied to tasks assessing motivation and decision making. in contrast to 
standard (‘descriptive’) data analyses, computational approaches start by creating a generative model that includes the 
processes thought to be involved in task performance, specified in a mathematically precise form (an example is shown in 
Box 3). Models usually contain a number of free parameters, each of which governs the influence of a specific process on 
information processing and behavioural output. Parameters are estimated from the data and can often capture patterns 
that would not be immediately evident from a descriptive analysis (for example, patterns that evolve over time during 
learning). the estimated parameters can be used to summarize the data alongside traditional descriptive measures as 
they can distil large amounts of information and are hypothesized to relate to specific cognitive processes73. uncertainty 
estimates can also be generated for each parameter at the individual subject level.
Model fitting
Model fitting involves adjusting the parameter values in the model until the pattern of output (for example, choices) that 
it makes matches, as closely as possible, that of the real participant169. the estimation process also produces a measure of 
model fit. Often, several different model architectures will be compared (model selection), with parameters extracted 
from the winning model. to avoid overfitting, the fit of a model is balanced against its complexity (which is related to the 
number of free parameters). Parameters across several models can also be averaged, which can be useful if data from 
different individuals are best fit by different models (although this makes sense only if models are structurally similar).
a crucial process is model checking — that is, testing whether the model faithfully reproduces the observed data — 
which may, in turn, lead to the construction of a better model. it is also important to check how accurately parameters 
can be recovered; this involves generating data from the model using known parameters, which should then be 
estimable. if parameter recovery fails, the model requires revision.
Limitations of the computational approach
there are certain limitations of the computational approach to consider170. First, although modern desktop computers 
can quickly implement simple models and estimation methods (for example, maximum likelihood), more complex 
procedures (such as sampling) can be slow and thus not very practical. second, parameters can be interpreted in multiple 
ways. For example, the inverse temperature parameter (β in Box 3) of the softmax function can be interpreted in terms of 
consistency, exploration or valuation, limiting the interpretation of such models. third, even simple models can contain 
redundant parameters, which can result in poor estimation. Fourth, as with any statistical analysis, larger data sets will 
tend to favour more complex models. this point limits the utility of model comparison, as which model is favoured  
will depend in part on the amount of data included in the model. indeed, some investigators eschew model comparison 
altogether, advocating a model- 
checking approach171.
Iowa Gambling task
A neuropsychological test of 
decision making for reward.
Reward responsiveness
The development of a bias 
towards a more frequently 
rewarded stimulus.
Overfitting
When a model becomes too 
complex (has too many 
parameters) and begins to 
describe random error in the 
data rather than the 
relationships between 
variables.
Inverse temperature 
parameter
A constant in the softmax 
decision rule. It affects the 
steepness of the function 
around the inflexion point, 
resulting in more consistent 
choices at higher values.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrn
Reviews
 a clearer interpretation: symptoms of anhedonia were 
associated not with differences in incremental learning 
or perceptual discrimination but instead with blunted 
expected value of reward at the time of decision75 
(FIg. 1). In a different context, computational model-
ling of data from a reinforcement learning task in indi-
viduals with schizophrenia again revealed an apparent 
sparing of incremental learning, with the overall level 
of poor performance predominantly accounted for by 
impairments of working memory (which can be impor-
tant in learning tasks owing to the time delay between 
stimuli and outcomes)76. Thus, the use of computa-
tional models in these studies helped to dissect the 
different cognitive processes involved in reward tasks, 
showing that learning per se is apparently spared in 
anhedonia, and that instead differences in behaviour 
Incremental learning
Learning over trials.
Box 3 | example of a simple computational model
the example below assumes that participants perform a task in which two stimuli, a and B, are associated with high and 
low probabilities of reward, respectively172. Participants must learn the contingencies and select the high- 
probability 
reward stimulus to perform well. a common way of modelling this type of task is to specify a learning rule (how stimulus or 
action values are updated over time) and a decision rule (how decisions are made based on those associations).
Learning rule (value updating)
Learning rules are often based on the prediction error — the discrepancy between actual and expected outcomes116:
δ
r t
v t
= ( )− ( )
(1)
δ is the prediction error, which can be positive or negative (better or worse than expected, respectively). r(t) is the reward 
outcome (0 or 1) received on trial t. v(t) is the value of the choice, which depends on the strength of the stimulus–outcome 
association and thus varies over the experiment, and which evolves over time (depicted in part a of the figure). the model 
then updates the value:
v t
v t
α δ
( + 1) = ( ) + *
(2)
the stimulus value for a new trial is equal to its value on the previous trial, plus the prediction error δ weighted by α, the 
learning rate parameter. in other words, α specifies the degree of influence of the prediction error. α can be interpreted as 
the speed of learning, or the influence of recent outcomes — the higher the α value, the stronger influence of recent 
outcomes. Part a of the figure shows the effect of varying the value of α (different coloured lines) on value learning over  
50 trials, of which 80% are rewarded and 20% not rewarded (at identical points in the game).
Decision rule (choosing options based on value)
when modelling decision making, one possible assumption would be that the higher- 
value stimulus is always chosen. 
However, in reality, organisms rarely behave in this manner and instead occasionally explore low- 
value options.  
One decision rule that incorporates the occasional opting for the lower- 
value option uses the softmax function173.
p
v t
v t
v
t
(A) =
exp(β*
( ))
(exp(β*
( )) + exp(β*
( )))
(3)
A
A
B
p(a) is the probability of choosing a and is proportional to the difference in value between option a and option B.  
the inverse temperature parameter, β, governs how consistently the model chooses the higher- 
value stimulus. the higher 
the β value, the more deterministically the algorithm chooses the higher- 
value option (or, alternatively put, the less 
exploratory its choices), especially when the values are similar. Part b of the figure shows the effect of varying the value of β 
(coloured lines) on choices between options that are similar (centre of x- 
axis) or very different (extremes of x- 
axis) in value.
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.4
0.3
0.6
0.5
0.8
1.0
0.9
0.7
–1.0
–0.8 –0.6 –0.4 –0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability of choosing option A
Value difference between options A and B
Trial number
Associative value
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0.025
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.8
0.5
1
2
4
8
16
Values of α
Values of β
a
b
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | NeuroscieNce
Reviews
 on tests of reward processing are accounted for by 
 
other processes.
Computational modelling has also demonstrated 
that improvements in apathy scores in individuals with 
Parkinson’s disease who were taking dopaminergic 
medication were associated with greater reward sen-
sitivity (that is, the expected value of reward) but not 
with changes in effort sensitivity56. Conversely, healthy 
individuals taking a selective serotonin- 
reuptake inhib-
itor produced more effort, which modelling revealed to 
be due to reduced effort costs, rather than increases in 
reward sensitivity77. Although to date there has been little 
systematic use of modelling in this field, these examples 
show how using a computational approach can illumi-
nate how specific cognitive processes map onto different 
symptom profiles and treatments.
Brain regions
Reports of previously well people suddenly developing 
profound amotivation following strokes or other focal 
lesions have implicated a set of brain regions that seem 
to be crucial for motivated behaviour in humans78. 
These include the basal ganglia (particularly ventral 
aspects including the globus pallidus and ventral stri-
atum (vStr)), parts of the anterior cingulate cortex 
(ACC) and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), 
which is often referred to as medial orbitofrontal 
 
cortex (OFC)32,79–83.
Early experimental DBS studies in people institu-
tionalized for psychiatric disorders reported that they 
might gain pleasure from self- 
stimulation of electrodes 
implanted in the septal region, which included the 
nucleus accumbens (NAc) — part of the vStr — and 
ventral pallidum84. However, a more scrutinous assess-
ment suggested that stimulation might in fact have led 
to patients merely wanting to engage in more pleasur-
able activities85. More recent human DBS studies show 
that ACC stimulation can induce the expectation of an 
imminent challenge that the patient feels determined to 
overcome86. Furthermore, DBS of the subgenual ACC 
was suggested to ameliorate symptoms of depression 
in some individuals who had been resistant to treat-
ment with drugs87, although a larger trial did not find a 
significant effect of such stimulation88.
Findings from many investigations in animals also 
converge on a pivotal role in motivation for a network 
of brain regions that includes ventral basal ganglia struc-
tures (including the NAc and ventral pallidum), the ACC, 
the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and the basolateral 
amygdala (BLA)26,85 (FIg. 3). The VTA is the source of wide-
spread dopamine (DA) projections to the vStr (known as 
the mesolimbic DA system); to the ACC and the PFC (the 
mesocortical DA system); and to the amygdala.
Reward and effort valuation. In rodents, lesions of the 
NAc or ACC, disconnection of the NAc from the ACC or 
inactivation of the BLA or BLA–ACC connections can 
all profoundly affect motivation, with reduced willing-
ness to allocate effort for rewards89–92. In monkeys too, 
injection of bicuculline (a GABA receptor antagonist) 
into the vStr and putamen reduces the frequency of 
 
self- 
initiated actions to collect reward93.
By contrast, classical intracranial self- 
stimulation 
studies — and, more recently, optogenetic methods — 
have revealed that rodents will choose to work in order to 
receive stimulation of the VTA, of the medial forebrain 
bundle (which includes the mesolimbic DA pathway) 
or of parts of the lateral and posterior hypothalamus94,95. 
One pioneering study combined optogenetic stimula-
tion with functional MRI (fMRI) and electrophysiolog-
ical recordings in rats (FIg. 4). Stimulation of the medial 
prefrontal cortex (mPFC) reduced reward- 
seeking 
behaviour, assessed for example by sucrose preference. 
mPFC stimulation also blunted the striatal activation 
and reward seeking elicited by optogenetic stimulation 
of VTA DA neurons; animals that preferred places where 
they received VTA stimulation no longer did so when 
the mPFC was simultaneously stimulated95. The authors 
consider this to be a potential model for anhedonic 
behaviour.
A recent meta- 
analysis of human fMRI studies has 
suggested that whereas the vmPFC, vStr and midbrain 
regions including the VTA preferentially signal reward, 
the ACC and the anterior insula are key nodes that signal 
effort51. Activation of the ACC and/or the supplementary 
motor area (SMA) occurs when people perform effort- 
based decision- 
making tasks46,96–98. One study reported 
that the level of dorsomedial frontal activation during 
the decision- 
making phase was positively correlated 
with behavioural apathy scores in healthy individuals46. 
This finding might indicate that people who are more 
apathetic are confronted by a greater brain- 
energetic cost 
when making cost–benefit decisions about whether the 
physical effort required is worth the reward on offer; 
that is, when they perform a subjective valuation of a 
potential reward. Intriguingly, disruption of activity 
in the SMA — but not in the primary motor cortex — 
 
using transcranial magnetic stimulation also leads to 
a decrease in perceived effort level99; therefore, this 
region might be a crucial node in the evaluation of effort 
allocation.
Integration of reward and effort signals. Several neu-
roimaging studies in healthy humans have attempted to 
examine the basis of cost–benefit decision making when 
effort is required to obtain rewards51 (FIg. 1). Activation of 
the vStr or pallidum varies positively with the magnitude 
of prospective reward and, in some reports, has been 
reported to be negatively modulated by prospective 
effort, revealing an interaction between reward and 
effort signals65,96,100. ACC activity is positively correlated 
with the degree of physical effort but negatively related 
to reward46,97,101. Thus, some authors argue that the 
 
ACC plays a key role in integrating costs (effort) and 
benefits (reward) to compute the net value of performing 
an action51.
Investigation of cognitive and physical effort has 
revealed both common and unique brain- 
activation 
patterns65,66. One study found that reward devaluation 
by both types of effort was represented within a common 
network including the ACC and other dorsomedial fron-
tal regions, the anterior insula and the dorsolateral PFC66. 
Importantly, activation in these ‘domain- 
general’ regions 
also co- 
varied positively with effort and negatively 
 
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrn
Reviews
 with reward, suggesting that these parameters might be 
integrated within these areas. By contrast, activity within 
the amygdala seemed to reflect processing of the value 
of rewards associated specifically with cognitive effort.
Option selection and option generation. Intriguingly, 
when people have to select from reward–effort combi-
nations, the activation of ACC or SMA corresponds to 
the difference in reward or effort levels of the chosen and 
unchosen options98. This finding suggests that these dor-
somedial frontal regions might be important for option 
selection after the valuation of the potential behavioural 
options that are presented to an individual (FIg. 1). Which 
brain regions are involved in self- 
generated options for 
behaviour remains to be established, but some data point 
to a role of the pre- 
SMA and possibly the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex102,103.
Brain regions in apathy and anhedonia. Neuroimaging 
studies across various human neurodegenerative con-
ditions have revealed that apathy is strongly associated 
with atrophy of or functional disruption of the dorsal 
ACC (dACC), vmPFC or OFC, vStr and VTA, as well 
as brain regions connected to these areas27. Intriguingly, 
work examining neural correlates of anhedonia in 
patients with depression has implicated a largely con-
vergent network of brain regions that show blunted 
activation, relative to controls, when performing tasks 
involving appetitive, cost–benefit decision and con-
summatory or learning phases of reward processing. In 
depression, activation is reduced in regions including the 
vStr, caudate, vmPFC or OFC and dACC (although con-
tradictory results were reported in the dACC in different 
studies)104–106.
Although the precise pattern of regions observed to 
show blunted responses in depression is not identical 
across studies, some of this inconsistency is attribut-
able to clinical heterogeneity (with frequent reports 
that the degree of blunting correlates with the sever-
ity of anhedonic symptoms104) and the use of differ-
ent paradigms. For example, a recent investigation 
reported no differences between depressed and non- 
depressed groups in reward- 
prediction error signals in 
 
the vStr107, part of learning from outcomes (FIg. 1), 
in contrast to earlier findings using different fMRI 
 
paradigms104–106.
a
b
0.00
VTA
Insular 
cortex
Ventral striatum
0.05
–0.05
–0.10
–0.20
–0.30
–0.15
–0.25
0.10
No depressive symptoms (n = 535)
Anhedonia (n = 72)
Low mood and anhedonia (n = 182)
Low mood (n = 509)
Left vStr
Right vStr
*
*
*
*
ACC
Amygdala
dmPFC
vmPFC
VP
NAc
Fig. 3 | Brain regions implicated in motivation, apathy and anhedonia. a | Frontostriatal circuits implicated in 
motivation to act for rewards and effort- 
based decision making include the dopaminergic projection from the ventral 
tegmental area (VTA) to the ventral striatum (vStr), which includes the nucleus accumbens (NAc) and ventral pallidum (VP). 
Striatal regions project, via the thalamus, to different parts of the medial prefrontal cortex, including the ventromedial 
prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). These regions 
in turn project back to the basal ganglia. b | Activation (blood- 
oxygen-level- 
dependent (BOLD) response) of the vStr in 
response to anticipation of reward on a monetary incentive task is reduced in adolescents with depressive symptoms, 
especially anhedonia108. The graph shows normalized levels of activation in different groups of adolescents; asterisks 
denote statistical significance. Part b is reprinted with permission from the American Journal of Psychiatry (copyright  
2015), American Psychiatric Association. All rights reserved108.
Reward- 
prediction error
A computational quantity 
indicating the difference 
between expected and actual 
outcomes.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | NeuroscieNce
Reviews
 The results from investigations in adults with 
depression discussed above are consistent with a large 
study of motivational processing in a predominantly 
healthy community sample of adolescents (of whom a 
minority experienced clinical depression), which iden-
tified a robust inverse relationship between vStr activa-
tion during the anticipatory phase of reward processing 
(FIg. 1) and depressive symptoms, especially anhedonia 
(FIg. 3b), as well as future risk of depression108. A simi-
lar picture is evident during the anticipatory phase in 
studies of anhedonic individuals with schizophrenia109, 
although the ubiquitous use of antipsychotic medi-
cations, which block DA transmission, complicates 
their interpretation. A meta- 
analysis of 33 studies in 
depression and 24 studies in schizophrenia (with par-
adigms tapping several of the processes depicted in 
FIg. 1) concluded that reward- 
related responses were 
reliably blunted in the caudate, putamen and ACC in 
both diagnoses110.
Neuromodulators
A large literature exists on the effect of pharmacologi-
cal manipulations of neurotransmitters on motivational 
processing in animals. Other investigations have cor-
related motivation with monoamine neurotransmitter 
release, measured using microdialysis or fast- 
scan cyclic 
voltammetry (FSCV) concurrently with behaviour111. 
Some studies have manipulated midbrain monoaminergic 
neurons directly using optogenetic methods95.
Dopamine in animal studies. The first evidence for 
a role of DA in motivation came from findings that 
depleting DA — using the neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopa-
mine (6-OHDA) — led to robust reductions in instru-
mental conditioned responding (an aspect of sustaining 
effort; FIg. 1) that were reversed by amphetamine (which 
enhances DA signalling)112,113. Later, direct microinjec-
tions of DA agonists and antagonists into the NAc of 
rats revealed, respectively, increases and decreases in 
conditioned reinforcement114. Similar manipulations 
also affect performance in the same direction on PIT67 
and effort expenditure tasks26,115: for example, DA antag-
onists reduce vigour and preference for high- 
effort–
high- 
reward options, suggesting that DA profoundly 
influences the decision and action phases of reward 
processing.
Importantly, hedonic responses during the receipt of 
primary reward (that is, during the consummatory phase 
of reward processing; FIg. 1) are not affected by DA in 
rats67 but are altered by opiate manipulation23. More 
recent work shows that adenosine A2A receptor antago-
nists can reverse deficits in effort allocation produced by 
several interventions (for example, DA receptor antago-
nists or tetrabenazine, a drug that depletes DA), poten-
tially by acting on adenosine A2A receptors that colocalize 
with DA D2 receptors in the striatum and NAc26.
There is also good evidence that DA is involved in 
learning (FIg. 1), with an influential study showing that 
phasic DA neuron firing in the midbrain temporally 
corresponds to the evolution of reward- 
prediction 
errors116 (Box 2). This finding has since been con-
firmed using optogenetic methods117,118 and has led to 
a proposed distinction between the functions of tonic 
DA signals, which are proposed to play a primary 
role in encoding action and effort, and phasic DA 
signals, which are hypothesized to influence reward 
learning115,119.
However, the dichotomy between tonic and phasic 
DA has been challenged by FSCV findings. When rats 
navigate mazes to retrieve rewards, NAc DA signals 
ramp up slowly as animals come closer to their goals 
(action and anticipation; FIg. 1), scaling with reward 
magnitude111. These DA ramping signals might repre-
sent the estimated expected value of reward, which in 
turn might be used in cost–benefit decisions to evaluate 
Primary reward
Rewarding stimuli that facilitate 
survival of an organism or its 
offspring, such as food, water 
and sex.
Stimulation of DA neurons
Silencing of DA neurons
Elevated cortical excitability
Top-down control of striatal 
DA signalling
VTA
Str
mPFC
↑ Reward-seeking
↑ BOLD activity
↓ Reward-seeking
↓ BOLD activity
↓ Reward-seeking
↑ Synchrony
↓ Reward-seeking
↓ DA response
Striatal BOLD
Striatal BOLD
Fig. 4 | optogenetic study of effort- 
based decision making in rodents. Stimulation of 
dopamine (DA) neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA 
; red) led to increased blood- 
oxygen-level- 
dependent (BOLD) activity in the striatum (Str 
; grey) and animals choosing 
to work for such stimulation. This effect appeared to be dopaminergic, because a DA 
receptor antagonist blocked both effects. Optogenetic silencing of VTA DA neurons led 
to reduced reward- 
seeking and striatal BOLD signal. Focal stimulation of the medial 
prefrontal cortex (mPFC) that altered neural synchrony also suppressed reward seeking 
and blunted the effects of optogenetic VTA DA stimulation both on striatal BOLD 
response and reward seeking95. Figure adapted with permission from ReF.95, AAAS.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrn
Reviews
 whether it is worth engaging in effortful activity120. 
Intriguingly, DA release seems to be contingent on 
action (and therefore effort), not just valuation, because 
when rats perform a rewarded go/no- 
go task, DA signals 
are attenuated when animals must inhibit movement to 
obtain a reward121.
Together, these findings suggest that the tonic–phasic 
DA hypothesis might require revision, and that instead 
a unitary account, in which phasic signals simultane-
ously influence both valuation and learning, might pro-
vide a better explanation for the role of DA in reward 
processing122 — with phasic DA signals before choice 
affecting valuation and propensity to deploy effort, and 
those during consummation affecting learning120.
Dopamine in human studies. Human psychopharmacol-
ogy studies have been largely consistent with the evidence 
linking DA to effort- 
based decision making for reward 
in animals123. Dietary depletion of DA precursors, which 
reduces DA synthesis124, attenuates participants’ sen-
sitivity to rewards during decision making125 and also 
increases punishment learning relative to reward learn-
ing126, with some reporting corresponding reductions in 
reward- 
elicited blood- 
oxygen-level- 
dependent (BOLD) 
responses in the striatum127. Research using DA receptor 
antagonists to block transmission has yielded less consist-
ent results, possibly owing to doses used and the actions 
of these compounds on other monoamine systems and 
inhibitory autoreceptors123. l- 
DOPA (l-3,4-dihydroxy-
phenylalanine; which increases DA synthesis), amphet-
amine and methylphenidate (which block DA reuptake) 
and D2/3 receptor agonists generally increase several of the 
aspects depicted in FIg. 1, including speed128 and vigour129 
of responses (that is, affecting action); effortful62 and 
risky130 choices (influencing cost–benefit decision mak-
ing); reward learning131; and associated reward- 
related 
striatal BOLD responses (reviewed in ReF.109)123.
Despite the clear evidence that DA transmission, 
especially in the striatum, has a central role in con-
trolling motivated behaviour, standard pharmacological 
treatments for depression do not target the DA system132. 
To our knowledge, besides a few pilot studies of agome-
latine133 (an atypical antidepressant that disinhibits DA 
release through its action on serotonin 5-HT2c recep-
tors), there has never been a trial specifically focused 
on treating anhedonia. However, a D2/3 receptor agonist, 
piribedil, was reported to be successful in treating apa-
thy in DBS- 
treated individuals with Parkinson’s disease 
who subsequently have their DA drug dose reduced134. 
Dopaminergic drugs also enhance effort- 
based deci-
sion making in Parkinson’s disease by boosting reward 
sensitivity56,57. Finally, a cholinesterase inhibitor has 
also been reported to confer improvement in apathy in 
Parkinson’s disease, although whether this is via effects on 
effort- 
based decision making has not been established135.
Interestingly, ketamine, which antagonizes NMDA 
receptors and is effective in treatment- 
resistant depres-
sion (in which anhedonia is common)136, has profound 
facilitatory downstream effects on DA transmission137. 
Ketamine has also been reported to be effective in ame-
liorating anhedonia over and above general depressive 
symptoms, with reductions in anhedonia associated 
with increases in resting- 
state metabolism in the vStr 
and ACC138. Further studies are needed to investigate 
whether ketamine can improve symptoms of amotivation 
in disorders besides treatment- 
resistant depression.
A few studies have linked DA to motivational symp-
toms in individuals with neurological and psychiatric 
disorders using positron emission tomography (PET). In 
depression, striatal D2/3 receptor binding was negatively 
correlated with anhedonia139. In Parkinson’s disease140 
and anhedonic depression141, there is also a negative 
relationship between striatal DA transporter binding 
and amotivation, and in cannabis users, apathy is asso-
ciated with low DA synthesis capacity142. These attenu-
ations of DA function may in part be caused by chronic 
inflammation143, which is common in disorders in which 
fatigue, anhedonia and apathy are prominent144.
Serotonin in animal studies. The other major neurotrans-
mitter linked to motivation is serotonin (5-HT). A com-
mon finding from neurophysiological studies is that there 
are opponent interactions between 5-HT and DA145. For 
example, drugs acting at the 5-HT2C receptor can modulate 
DA release from neurons of the mesolimbic and mesocor-
tical pathways. The 5-HT2C receptor antagonist SB-242084 
increases the number and duration of effortful responses 
that rats will make for food rewards; this observation could 
be explained by changes in either the decision- 
making or 
action phases of reward processing146 (FIg. 1).
One influential computational account — based in 
part on evidence that 5-HT plays a role in inhibiting 
action in the face of aversive stimuli147 and in learned 
helplessness148 (in which motivational responding is 
reduced) — has hypothesized that DA signals predic-
tion errors for reward whereas 5-HT signals those for 
punishment (that is, part of learning149; FIg. 1). More 
recent theoretical formulations propose a more nuanced 
picture, suggesting that 5-HT may promote Pavlovian 
(reflexive) inhibitory control (which could be related to 
either decision making or action)150.
Empirical research has suggested that a simple rela-
tionship between 5-HT and aversive processing is an over-
simplification151. Recordings made directly from neurons 
in the dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN), a major source of 
5-HT neurons, show that firing is modulated by the size 
 
of upcoming reward (related to anticipation; FIg. 1), sim-
ilar to the pattern observed in DA neurons152, although 
with considerable heterogeneity among DRN neurons, 
which are not all serotonergic. Optogenetic stimulation 
of identified 5-HT DRN neurons results in increased 
patience for rewards delivered after a cued delay (part of 
decision making153; FIg. 1). Other optogenetic studies stim-
ulating DRN neurons report that stimulation is reinforc-
ing and elicits a greater propensity to exert effort (again, 
reflecting part of decision making; FIg. 1). However, this 
effect is not solely related to 5-HT release as some of the 
stimulated DRN neurons were glutamatergic154.
Serotonin in human studies. Pharmacological manip-
ulations of 5-HT in humans have provided some con-
sistent effects. Dietary depletion of a 5-HT precursor 
reliably results in reduced behavioural inhibition in 
the face of potential punishment (that is, disinhibition, 
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | NeuroscieNce
Reviews
 reflecting increased vigour155; FIg. 1), a conclusion sup-
ported by neuroimaging156. Other reports show that 
5-HT precursor depletion reduced representation of 
expected reward value during decision making in a 
learning task (as assessed using computational model-
ling)157 and reduced the speed of responding for reward158 
(part of action; FIg. 1). Another investigation in healthy 
volunteers (also discussed in the Computational mod-
elling section above) demonstrated that both acute and 
chronic administration of a selective serotonin- 
reuptake 
inhibitor affected decision making, reducing effort costs 
but not reward valuation77 (FIg. 1). Notably, apathy in 
Parkinson’s disease has been associated with low 5-HT 
transporter binding, which some researchers interpret 
as a measure of neuronal integrity, in vStr and ACC159. 
However, in general, the role of 5-HT in motivation is far 
from clear and requires substantial further empirical work.
Summary. Extensive investigations have suggested that 
the DA and 5-HT systems modulate several aspects of 
effort- 
based decision making for rewards. However, the 
findings do not suggest that there is a simple mapping 
of each of these neurotransmitter systems to the compo-
nents identified from behavioural studies (FIg. 1). Rather, 
the results seem to suggest more complex involvement 
of these neuromodulators, and very few studies to date 
have examined their interaction with one another in 
shaping motivated behaviour. These considerations 
have implications for development of new therapies for 
apathy and anhedonia. Given the complexity of each 
behavioural syndrome — with dissociable component 
processes and potentially different patterns of behav-
ioural deficit across individuals labelled as having the 
same syndrome – it seems unlikely that a single drug 
therapy would be appropriate for all patients.
Conclusions
This Review of diverse sets of data from human and 
animal model experiments reveals some of the mech-
anisms that might be involved in the genesis of apathy 
and anhedonia, and provides a framework for devel-
oping potential treatments. To move forward, it seems 
crucial to establish which underlying brain mechanisms 
contribute to a syndrome of amotivation, such as apa-
thy or anhedonia, in an individual patient. Using clinical 
definitions might not be sufficient to capture these (see 
also ReF.24), as different constellations of disrupted mech-
anisms might occur in different individuals. Moreover, 
the pattern of deficits need not be disease specific. 
Hence, future research will need to focus on elucidating 
the mechanisms that underpin a behavioural syndrome.
As we have seen, anhedonia and apathy are strongly 
related across different disorders when both have been 
measured using clinical scales36,39,40. However, there is not 
a perfect overlap; therefore, the question arises as to which 
mechanisms might be common to both and which might 
be unique to each of these syndromes. The development of 
new questionnaires provides one way to address this ques-
tion. One of them now attempts to distinguish between 
anticipatory and consummatory aspects of motivation but 
has not always been useful in making distinctions between 
these two processes in clinical groups160. However, it must 
be borne in mind that these are subjective assessments 
that do not necessarily provide the granularity required.
Perhaps a better way to establish whether there are any 
fundamental differences between apathy and anhedonia 
might be to fractionate behaviour and examine underlying 
components, such as those delineated in FIg. 1. To improve 
phenotyping in this way would require a battery of behav-
ioural paradigms, ideally combined with computational 
modelling (BoxeS 2,3). To investigate whether dysfunc-
tion of the same brain regions underlies the disruptions 
of reward- 
related behaviour observed across brain dis-
orders would require the application of a core battery of 
functional imaging tasks across clinical diagnoses.
Although both apathy and anhedonia are clinically 
debilitating and have a profound impact on quality 
of life, there have been few attempts to develop phar-
macological treatments132. This seems an area ripe for 
investigation, given the clear clinical need and close 
correspondence between behavioural tests developed 
for humans and animal models. The results of pharma-
cological modulation and stimulation in rodent mod-
els have revealed the complexity of neurotransmitter 
involvement in motivated behaviour. Nevertheless, 
they provide hope that it might be possible to develop 
treatments targeted to components of effort- 
based 
decision making for reward. Such efforts might be rel-
evant to psychological therapies as well. For example, 
behavioural activation therapy for depression, which spe-
cifically targets goal- 
directed behaviour, can be as effec-
tive as cognitive behavioural therapy161. In addition, several 
psychosocial interventions, including cognitive behav-
ioural therapy or exercise therapy, seem to be modestly 
effective in treating negative symptoms in schizophre-
nia, although better- 
controlled studies are required to 
establish their efficacy162.
These considerations suggest that for further progress 
in this field, it is essential to understand the mechanisms 
underlying the ‘surface manifestations’ of apathy and 
anhedonia — the clinical presentation — and to charac-
terize the phenotype more carefully in individual cases. 
The ultimate aim would be to use this framework to 
develop personalized treatments — pharmacological or 
psychological — for patients suffering from debilitating 
motivational symptoms.
Published online xx xx xxxx
Behavioural activation 
therapy
A psychological therapy that 
focuses on activity scheduling 
to encourage patients to 
approach activities that they 
avoid and on analysing 
processes (for example, 
rumination) that serve as forms 
of avoidance.
Cognitive behavioural 
therapy
A psychological therapy that 
aims to assist a person to 
change their thinking and 
behaviour by practising 
effective strategies to decrease 
symptoms and distress.
1. 
Caeiro, L., Ferro, J. M. & Costa, J. Apathy secondary 
to stroke: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. 
Cerebrovasc. Dis. 35, 23–39 (2013).
2. 
Starkstein, S. E. & Pahissa, J. Apathy following 
traumatic brain injury. Psychiatr. Clin. North Am. 37, 
103–112 (2014).
3. 
Seel, R. T
. et al. Depression after traumatic brain 
injury: a National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research Model Systems multicenter 
investigation. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 84,  
177–184 (2003).
4. 
Zhao, Q.-F
. et al. The prevalence of neuropsychiatric 
symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease: systematic review and 
meta- 
analysis. J. Affect. Disord. 190, 264–271 (2016).
5. 
Lopez, O. L. et al. Psychiatric symptoms vary with the 
severity of dementia in probable Alzheimer’s disease. 
J. Neuropsychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 15, 346–353 
(2003).
6. 
den Brok, M. G. H. E. et al. Apathy in  
Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review and  
meta- 
analysis. Mov. Disord. 30, 759–769  
(2015).
7. 
Lemke, M. R., Brecht, H. M., Koester, J., Kraus, P
. H. 
& Reichmann, H. Anhedonia, depression, and motor 
functioning in Parkinson’s disease during treatment 
with pramipexole. J. Neuropsychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 
17, 214–220 (2005).
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrn
Reviews
 8. 
Staekenborg, S. S. et al. Behavioural and 
psychological symptoms in vascular dementia; 
differences between small- and large- 
vessel disease.  
J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 81, 547–551 
(2010).
9. 
Chow, T
. W. et al. Apathy symptom profile and 
behavioral associations in frontotemporal dementia 
versus dementia of Alzheimer type. Arch. Neurol. 66, 
888–893 (2009).
10. van Duijn, E. et al. Neuropsychiatric symptoms in a 
European Huntington’s disease cohort (REGISTRY).  
J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 85, 1411–1418 
(2014).
11. Pelizza, L. & Ferrari, A. Anhedonia in schizophrenia 
and major depression: state or trait? Ann. Gen. 
Psychiatry 8, 22 (2009).
12. Yuen, G. S. et al. Apathy in late- 
life depression: 
common, persistent, and disabling. Am. J. Geriatr. 
Psychiatry 23, 488–494 (2015).
13. Horan, W. P
., Kring, A. M. & Blanchard, J. J. 
Anhedonia in schizophrenia: a review of assessment 
strategies. Schizophr. Bull. 32, 259–273 (2006).
14. Yazbek, H. et al. The Lille Apathy Rating Scale (LARS): 
exploring its psychometric properties in schizophrenia. 
Schizophr. Res. 157, 278–284 (2014).
15. Brown, R. G. & Pluck, G. Negative symptoms: the 
‘pathology’ of motivation and goal- 
directed behaviour. 
T
rends Neurosci. 23, 412–417 (2000).
16. Prange, S. et al. Historical crossroads in the 
conceptual delineation of apathy in Parkinson’s 
disease. Brain 141, 613–619 (2018).
17. Starkstein, S. E. & Leentjens, A. F. G. The nosological 
position of apathy in clinical practice. J. Neurol. 
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 79, 1088–1092 (2008).
18. Lanctôt, K. L. et al. Apathy associated with 
neurocognitive disorders: recent progress and future 
directions. Alzheimers Dement. 13, 84–100 (2017).
19. Robert, P
. et al. Proposed diagnostic criteria for 
apathy in Alzheimer’s disease and other 
neuropsychiatric disorders. Eur. Psychiatry 24, 
98–104 (2009).
20. Thomsen, K. R., Whybrow, P
. C. & Kringelbach, M. L. 
Reconceptualizing anhedonia: novel perspectives on 
balancing the pleasure networks in the human brain. 
Front. Behav. Neurosci. 9, 49 (2015).
21. Foussias, G. & Remington, G. Negative symptoms in 
schizophrenia: avolition and Occam’s razor. Schizophr. 
Bull. 36, 359–369 (2010).
22. T
readway, M. T
. & Zald, D. H. Reconsidering anhedonia 
in depression: lessons from translational neuroscience. 
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 35, 537–555 (2011).  
This helpful overview provides mechanistic insights 
on anhedonia in human depression.
23. Berridge, K. C. & Robinson, T
. E. Parsing reward. 
T
rends Neurosci. 26, 507–513 (2003).
24. Barch, D. M., Pagliaccio, D. & Luking, K. Mechanisms 
underlying motivational deficits in psychopathology: 
similarities and differences in depression and 
schizophrenia. Curr. T
op. Behav. Neurosci. 27,  
411–449 (2016).  
This is a comprehensive current review of evidence 
for possible underlying behavioural components of 
amotivation across depression and schizophrenia.
25. Der- 
Avakian, A., Barnes, S. A., Markou, A. & 
Pizzagalli, D. A. T
ranslational assessment of reward 
and motivational deficits in psychiatric disorders. 
Curr. T
op. Behav. Neurosci. 28, 231–262 (2015).  
This overview relates animal models to human 
disorders of motivation in psychiatric diagnoses.
26. Salamone, J. D., Yohn, S. E., López- 
Cruz, L., San 
Miguel, N. & Correa, M. Activational and effort- 
related 
aspects of motivation: neural mechanisms and 
implications for psychopathology. Brain 139,  
1325–1347 (2016).  
This is a comprehensive review of animal and 
human experiments investigating the brain 
mechanisms of effort- 
related decision making for 
reward, and how these relate to anhedonia and 
apathy.
27. Le Heron, C., Apps, M. A. J. & Husain, M. The 
anatomy of apathy: a neurocognitive framework for 
amotivated behaviour. Neuropsychologia https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2017.07.003 
(2017).  
This is a review of neuroimaging studies of apathy 
across neurological diseases demonstrating many 
common patterns of regional brain changes.
28. Marin, R. S. Apathy: a neuropsychiatric syndrome.  
J. Neuropsychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 3, 243–254 (1991).
29. Starkstein, S. E., Petracca, G., Chemerinski, E. & 
Kremer, J. Syndromic validity of apathy in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Am. J. Psychiatry 158, 872–877 (2001).
30. Sockeel, P
. et al. The Lille apathy rating scale (LARS), 
a new instrument for detecting and quantifying 
apathy: validation in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurol. 
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 77, 579–584 (2006).
31. Ang, Y.-S., Lockwood, P
., Apps, M. A. J., Muhammed, 
K. & Husain, M. Distinct subtypes of apathy revealed 
by the apathy motivation index. PLoS ONE 12, 
e0169938 (2017).
32. Németh, G., Hegedüs, K. & Molnár, L. Akinetic mutism 
associated with bicingular lesions: clinicopathological 
and functional anatomical correlates. Eur. Arch. 
Psychiatry Neurol. Sci. 237, 218–222 (1988).
33. Rizvi, S. J. et al. Development and validation of the 
Dimensional Anhedonia Rating Scale (DARS) in a 
community sample and individuals with major 
depression. Psychiatry Res. 229, 109–119 (2015).
34. American Psychiatric Association & American 
Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5 (American 
Psychiatric Association, WA, 2013).
35. Shankman, S. A. et al. in Anhedonia: A Comprehensive 
Handbook Volume 1 (ed. Ritsner, M.) 3–22 (Springer, 
Netherlands, 2014).
36. Assogna, F., Cravello, L., Caltagirone, C. & Spalletta, G. 
 
Anhedonia in Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review 
of the literature. Mov. Disord. 26, 1825–1834 
(2011).
37. Blanchard, J. J. & Cohen, A. S. The structure of 
negative symptoms within schizophrenia: implications 
for assessment. Schizophr. Bull. 32, 238–245 (2006).
38. Foussias, G., Agid, O., Fervaha, G. & Remington, G. 
Negative symptoms of schizophrenia: clinical features, 
relevance to real world functioning and specificity 
versus other CNS disorders. Eur. 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 24, 693–709 (2014).
39. Kaiser, S. et al. Individual negative symptoms and 
domains — relevance for assessment, 
pathomechanisms and treatment. Schizophr. Res. 
186, 39–45 (2017).
40. Bischof, M. et al. The brief negative symptom scale: 
validation of the German translation and convergent 
validity with self- 
rated anhedonia and observer- 
rated 
apathy. BMC Psychiatry 16, 415 (2016).
41. Hartmann, M. N. et al. Apathy in schizophrenia  
as a deficit in the generation of options for action. 
J. Abnorm. Psychol. 124, 309–318 (2015).  
This is one of the few studies that have examined 
the possibility that a deficit in generating options 
for behaviour might be associated with apathy in 
humans.
42. Isella, V. et al. Physical anhedonia in Parkinson’s 
disease. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 74,  
1308–1311 (2003).
43. Skorvanek, M. et al. The associations between 
fatigue, apathy, and depression in Parkinson’s disease. 
Acta Neurol. Scand. 131, 80–87 (2015).
44. Lampe, I. K., Kahn, R. S. & Heeren, T
. J. Apathy, 
anhedonia, and psychomotor retardation in elderly 
psychiatric patients and healthy elderly individuals.  
J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Neurol. 14, 11–16 (2001).
45. Brodaty, H., Altendorf, A., Withall, A. & Sachdev, P
. 
Do people become more apathetic as they grow older? 
A longitudinal study in healthy individuals. Int. 
Psychogeriatr. 22, 426–436 (2010).
46. Bonnelle, V., Manohar, S., Behrens, T
. & Husain, M. 
Individual differences in premotor brain systems 
underlie behavioral apathy. Cereb. Cortex 26, bhv247 
(2016).
47. Lavretsky, H. et al. The MRI brain correlates of 
depressed mood, anhedonia, apathy, and anergia in 
older adults with and without cognitive impairment or 
dementia. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 23, 1040–1050 
(2008).
48. Grool, A. M. et al. Structural MRI correlates of apathy 
symptoms in older persons without dementia: AGES- 
Reykjavik Study. Neurology 82, 1628–1635 (2014).
49. Kawagoe, T
., Onoda, K. & Yamaguchi, S. Apathy and 
executive function in healthy elderly — resting state 
fMRI study. Front. Aging Neurosci. 9, 124 (2017).
50. Rzepa, E., Fisk, J. & McCabe, C. Blunted neural 
response to anticipation, effort and consummation of 
reward and aversion in adolescents with depression 
symptomatology. J. Psychopharmacol. 31, 303–311 
(2017).
51. Pessiglione, M., Vinckier, F., Bouret, S., Daunizeau, J. 
& Le Bouc, R. Why not try harder? Computational 
approach to motivation deficits in neuro- 
psychiatric 
diseases. Brain https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awx278 
(2017).
52. Sinha, N., Manohar, S. & Husain, M. Impulsivity and 
apathy in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neuropsychol. 7, 
255–283 (2013).
53. Ang, Y.-S. et al. Dopamine modulates option 
generation for behaviour. Curr. Biol. 28, 1561–1569 
(2018).
54. Robinson, G., Shallice, T
., Bozzali, M. & Cipolotti, L. 
The differing roles of the frontal cortex in fluency tests. 
Brain 135, 2202–2214 (2012).
55. Glimcher, P
. W., Fehr, E. & Camerer, C. (eds). 
Neuroeconomics: Decision Making and The Brain. 
(Elsevier Academic Press, London, 2014).
56. Le Bouc, R. et al. Computational dissection of 
dopamine motor and motivational functions in 
humans. J. Neurosci. 36, 6623–6633 (2016).  
This study combines empirical findings with 
computational modelling to pinpoint impaired 
reward processing in Parkinson's disease.
57. Le Heron, C. et al. Distinct effects of apathy and 
dopamine on effort- 
based decision- 
making in 
Parkinson’s disease. Brain 141, 1455–1469 (2018).
58. Brehm, J. W. & Self, E. A. The intensity of motivation. 
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 40, 109–131 (1989).
59. Muhammed, K. et al. Reward sensitivity deficits 
modulated by dopamine are associated with apathy in 
Parkinson’s disease. Brain 139, 2706–2721 (2016).
60. Salamone, J. D., Cousins, M. S. & Bucher, S. Anhedonia 
or anergia? Effects of haloperidol and nucleus 
accumbens dopamine depletion on instrumental 
response selection in a T
- 
maze cost/benefit procedure. 
Behav. Brain Res. 65, 221–229 (1994).
61. T
readway, M. T
., Bossaller, N. A., Shelton, R. C. &  
Zald, D. H. Effort- 
based decision- 
making in major 
depressive disorder: a translational model of 
motivational anhedonia. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 121, 
553–558 (2012).
62. Chong, T
. T
.-J. et al. Dopamine enhances willingness to 
exert effort for reward in Parkinson’s disease. Cortex 
69, 40–46 (2015).
63. Murray, G. K. et al. Incentive motivation in first- 
episode 
psychosis: a behavioural study. BMC Psychiatry 8, 34 
(2008).
64. Hosking, J. G., Cocker, P
. J. & Winstanley, C. A. 
Dissociable contributions of anterior cingulate cortex 
and basolateral amygdala on a rodent cost/benefit 
decision- 
making task of cognitive effort. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 39, 1558–1567 (2014).
65. Schmidt, L., Lebreton, M., Cléry- 
Melin, M.-L., 
Daunizeau, J. & Pessiglione, M. Neural mechanisms 
underlying motivation of mental versus physical effort. 
PLoS Biol. 10, e1001266 (2012).
66. Chong, T
. T
.-J. et al. Neurocomputational mechanisms 
underlying subjective valuation of effort costs. PLoS 
Biol. 15, e1002598 (2017).
67. Berridge, K. C. & Robinson, T
. E. What is the role of 
dopamine in reward: hedonic impact, reward learning, 
or incentive salience? Brain Res. Rev. 28, 309–369 
(1998).  
This landmark experimental paper examines the 
role of DA in appetitive and consummatory reward 
processing, providing clear evidence that the 
former, but not the latter, is disrupted by profound 
DA depletion.
68. Huys, Q. J. M. et al. The specificity of Pavlovian 
regulation is associated with recovery from 
depression. Psychol. Med. 46, 1027–1035 (2016).
69. Willner, P
. The chronic mild stress (CMS) model of 
depression: history, evaluation and usage. Neurobiol. 
Stress 6, 78–93 (2017).
70. Huys, Q. J. M., Daw, N. D. & Dayan, P
. Depression: a 
decision- 
theoretic analysis. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 38, 
1–23 (2015).  
This article provides a clear explanation from a 
computational neuroscience perspective of the 
different aspects of motivational processing that 
may underlie depressive symptoms.
71. Bechara, A., Damasio, H., T
ranel, D. & Damasio, A. R. 
Deciding advantageously before knowing the 
advantageous strategy. Science 275, 1293–1295 
(1997).
72. Evens, R., Hoefler, M., Biber, K. & Lueken, U. The Iowa 
Gambling T
ask in Parkinson’s disease: a meta- 
analysis 
on effects of disease and medication. 
Neuropsychologia 91, 163–172 (2016).
73. Adams, R. A., Huys, Q. J. M. & Roiser, J. P
. 
Computational psychiatry: towards a mathematically 
informed understanding of mental illness. J. Neurol. 
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 87, 53–63 (2016).
74. Henriques, J. B., Glowacki, J. M. & Davidson, R. J. 
Reward fails to alter response bias in depression.  
J. Abnorm. Psychol. 103, 460–466 (1994).
75. Huys, Q. J., Pizzagalli, D. A., Bogdan, R. & Dayan, P
. 
Mapping anhedonia onto reinforcement learning: a 
behavioural meta- 
analysis. Biol. Mood Anxiety Disord. 
3, 12 (2013).
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | NeuroscieNce
Reviews
 76. Collins, A. G. E., Brown, J. K., Gold, J. M., Waltz, J. A. 
& Frank, M. J. Working memory contributions to 
reinforcement learning impairments in Schizophrenia. 
J. Neurosci. 34, 13747–13756 (2014).
77. Meyniel, F. et al. A specific role for serotonin in 
overcoming effort cost. eLife 5, e17282 (2016).
78. Levy, R. & Dubois, B. Apathy and the functional 
anatomy of the prefrontal cortex- 
basal ganglia circuits. 
Cereb. Cortex 16, 916–928 (2005).
79. Barris, R. W. & Schuman, H. R. Bilateral anterior 
cingulate gyrus lesions; syndrome of the anterior 
cingulate gyri. Neurology 3, 44–52 (1953).
80. Laplane, D. et al. Obsessive- 
compulsive and other 
behavioural changes with bilateral basal ganglia 
lesions. A neuropsychological, magnetic resonance 
imaging and positron tomography study. Brain 112, 
699–725 (1989).
81. Adam, R. et al. Dopamine reverses reward insensitivity 
in apathy following globus pallidus lesions. Cortex 49, 
1292–1303 (2013).
82. Kang, S. Y. & Kim, J. S. Anterior cerebral artery 
infarction: stroke mechanism and clinical- 
imaging 
study in 100 patients. Neurology 70, 2386–2393 
(2008).
83. Manohar, S. G. & Husain, M. Human ventromedial 
prefrontal lesions alter incentivisation by reward. 
Cortex 76, 104–120 (2016).
84. Heath, R. G. Pleasure and brain activity in man. Deep 
and surface electroencephalograms during orgasm.  
J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 154, 3–18 (1972).
85. Berridge, K. C. & Kringelbach, M. L. Pleasure systems 
in the brain. Neuron 86, 646–664 (2015).
86. Parvizi, J., Rangarajan, V., Shirer, W. R., Desai, N. & 
Greicius, M. D. The will to persevere induced by 
electrical stimulation of the human cingulate gyrus. 
Neuron 80, 1359–1367 (2013).
87. Mayberg, H. S. et al. Deep brain stimulation for 
treatment- 
resistant depression. Neuron 45, 651–660 
(2005).
88. Holtzheimer, P
. E. et al. Subcallosal cingulate deep 
brain stimulation for treatment- 
resistant depression: a 
multisite, randomised, sham- 
controlled trial. Lancet 
Psychiatry 4, 839–849 (2017).
89. Rudebeck, P
. H., Walton, M. E., Smyth, A. N., 
Bannerman, D. M. & Rushworth, M. F. S. Separate 
neural pathways process different decision costs. Nat. 
Neurosci. 9, 1161–1168 (2006).
90. Walton, M. E., Kennerley, S. W., Bannerman, D. M., 
Phillips, P
. E. M. & Rushworth, M. F. S. Weighing up 
the benefits of work: behavioral and neural analyses of 
effort- 
related decision making. Neural Netw. 19, 
1302–1314 (2006).
91. Floresco, S. B. & Ghods- 
Sharifi, S. Amygdala- 
prefrontal cortical circuitry regulates effort- 
based 
decision making. Cereb. Cortex 17, 251–260  
(2007).
92. Hauber, W. & Sommer, S. Prefrontostriatal circuitry 
regulates effort- 
related decision making. Cereb. Cortex 
19, 2240–2247 (2009).
93. Worbe, Y. et al. Behavioral and movement disorders 
induced by local inhibitory dysfunction in primate 
striatum. Cereb. Cortex 19, 1844–1856 (2009).
94. Wise, R. A. Addictive drugs and brain stimulation 
reward. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 319–340 (1996).
95. Ferenczi, E. A. et al. Prefrontal cortical regulation of 
brainwide circuit dynamics and reward- 
related 
behavior. Science 351, aac9698 (2016).  
This pioneering experimental study combines fMRI 
with simultaneous optogenetic stimulation of both 
DA and mPFC neurons. Stimulating DA neurons 
increased (and silencing reduced) vStr responses 
and reward- 
seeking behaviour, which was blunted 
by mPFC stimulation.
96. Croxson, P
. L., Walton, M. E., O’Reilly, J. X.,  
Behrens, T
. E. J. & Rushworth, M. F. S. Effort- 
based 
cost- 
benefit valuation and the human brain.  
J. Neurosci. 29, 4531–4541 (2009).
97. Skvortsova, V., Palminteri, S. & Pessiglione, M. 
Learning to minimize efforts versus maximizing 
rewards: computational principles and neural 
correlates. J. Neurosci. 34, 15621–15630 (2014).
98. Klein- 
Flugge, M. C., Kennerley, S. W., Friston, K. & 
Bestmann, S. Neural signatures of value comparison 
in human cingulate cortex during decisions requiring 
an effort- 
reward trade- 
off. J. Neurosci. 36,  
10002–10015 (2016).
99. Zenon, A., Sidibe, M. & Olivier, E. Disrupting the 
supplementary motor area makes physical effort 
appear less effortful. J. Neurosci. 35, 8737–8744 
(2015).
100. Kroemer, N. B. et al. Balancing reward and work: 
anticipatory brain activation in NAcc and VTA predict 
effort differentially. Neuroimage 102, 510–519 
(2014).
101. Kurniawan, I. T
., Guitart- 
Masip, M., Dayan, P
. &  
Dolan, R. J. Effort and valuation in the brain: the 
effects of anticipation and execution. J. Neurosci. 33, 
6160–6169 (2013).
102. Lau, H. C., Rogers, R. D., Haggard, P
. & Passingham, R. E. 
Attention to intention. Science 303, 1208–1210 
(2004).
103. Nachev, P
., Kennard, C. & Husain, M. Functional role 
of the supplementary and pre- 
supplementary motor 
areas. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 856–869 (2008).
104. Pizzagalli, D. A. et al. Reduced caudate and nucleus 
accumbens response to rewards in unmedicated 
individuals with major depressive disorder. Am. J. 
Psychiatry 166, 702–710 (2009).
105. Knutson, B., Bhanji, J. P
., Cooney, R. E., Atlas, L. Y. & 
Gotlib, I. H. Neural responses to monetary incentives 
in major depression. Biol. Psychiatry 63, 686–692 
(2008).
106. Gorka, S. M. et al. Neural response to reward 
anticipation in those with depression with and without 
panic disorder. J. Affect. Disord. 164, 50–56 (2014).
107. Rutledge, R. B. et al. Association of neural and 
emotional impacts of reward prediction errors with 
major depression. JAMA Psychiatry 74, 790 (2017).
108. Stringaris, A. et al. The brain’s response to reward 
anticipation and depression in adolescence: 
dimensionality, specificity, and longitudinal predictions 
in a community- 
based sample. Am. J. Psychiatry 172, 
1215–1223 (2015).
109. Ziauddeen, H. & Murray, G. K. The relevance of reward 
pathways for schizophrenia. Curr. Opin. Psychiatry 23, 
91–96 (2010).
110. Zhang, B. et al. Mapping anhedonia- 
specific 
dysfunction in a transdiagnostic approach: an ALE 
meta- 
analysis. Brain Imaging Behav. 10, 920–939 
(2016).
111. Howe, M. W., Tierney, P
. L., Sandberg, S. G.,  
Phillips, P
. E. M. & Graybiel, A. M. Prolonged 
dopamine signalling in striatum signals proximity and 
value of distant rewards. Nature 500, 575–579 
(2013).
112. Robbins, T
. W., Roberts, D. C. & Koob, G. F. Effects of 
D- 
amphetamine and apomorphine upon operant 
behavior and schedule- 
induced licking in rats with 
6-hydroxydopamine- 
induced lesions of the nucleus 
accumbens. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 224, 662–673 
(1983).
113. T
aylor, J. R. & Robbins, T
. W. Enhanced behavioural 
control by conditioned reinforcers following 
microinjections of d- 
amphetamine into the nucleus 
accumbens. Psychopharmacology. 84, 405–412 
(1984).
114. Cador, M., T
aylor, J. R. & Robbins, T
. W. Potentiation 
of the effects of reward- 
related stimuli by 
dopaminergic- 
dependent mechanisms in the nucleus 
accumbens. Psychopharmacoloy 104, 377–385 
(1991).
115. Salamone, J. D. & Correa, M. The mysterious 
motivational functions of mesolimbic dopamine. 
Neuron 76, 470–485 (2012).
116. Schultz, W., Dayan, P
. & Montague, P
. R. A neural 
substrate of prediction and reward. Science 275, 
1593–1599 (1997).
117. Chang, C. Y. et al. Brief optogenetic inhibition of 
dopamine neurons mimics endogenous negative 
reward prediction errors. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 111–116 
(2016).
118. Steinberg, E. E. et al. A causal link between prediction 
errors, dopamine neurons and learning. Nat. 
Neurosci. 16, 966–973 (2013).
119. Niv, Y., Daw, N. D., Joel, D. & Dayan, P
. T
onic 
dopamine: opportunity costs and the control of 
response vigor. Psychopharmacology 191, 507–520 
(2007).
120. Hamid, A. A. et al. Mesolimbic dopamine signals the 
value of work. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 117–126 (2015).  
In this investigation, microdialysis and voltammetry 
were used to measure DA release in the NAc. DA 
levels co- 
varied with reward rate and motivational 
vigour, and also encoded value. The authors 
conclude that DA conveys a signal regarding the 
available reward for investment of effort.
121. Syed, E. C. J. et al. Action initiation shapes mesolimbic 
dopamine encoding of future rewards. Nat. Neurosci. 
19, 34–36 (2015).  
This study used FSCV to demonstrate that DA is 
released in the vStr when animals are required to 
make an action to obtain a reward, and that DA 
release is attenuated when inhibition of movement 
is required.
122. Collins, A. G. E. & Frank, M. J. Surprise! Dopamine 
signals mix action, value and error. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 
3–5 (2016).
123. Martins, D., Mehta, M. A. & Prata, D. The “highs and 
lows” of the human brain on dopaminergics: evidence 
from neuropharmacology. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 
80, 351–371 (2017).  
This article presents a systematic review of 
behavioural and neural effects of DA manipulations 
in humans.
124. Leyton, M. et al. Decreasing amphetamine- 
induced 
dopamine release by acute phenylalanine/tyrosine 
depletion: a PET/[11C]raclopride study in healthy men. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 29, 427–432 (2003).
125. Roiser, J. P
. et al. The subjective and cognitive effects 
of acute phenylalanine and tyrosine depletion in 
patients recovered from depression. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 30, 775–785 (2005).
126. Robinson, O. J., Standing, H. R., DeVito, E. E., Cools, R. 
& Sahakian, B. J. Dopamine precursor depletion 
improves punishment prediction during reversal 
learning in healthy females but not males. 
Psychopharmacology 211, 187–195 (2010).
127. Bjork, J. M., Grant, S. J., Chen, G. & Hommer, D. W. 
Dietary tyrosine/phenylalanine depletion effects on 
behavioral and brain signatures of human 
motivational processing. Neuropsychopharmacology 
39, 595–604 (2014).
128. Guitart- 
Masip, M. et al. Action controls dopaminergic 
enhancement of reward representations. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 109, 7511–7516 (2012).
129. Zenon, A., Devesse, S. & Olivier, E. Dopamine 
manipulation affects response vigor independently of 
opportunity cost. J. Neurosci. 36, 9516–9525 
(2016).
130. Rutledge, R. B., Skandali, N., Dayan, P
. & Dolan, R. J. 
Dopaminergic modulation of decision making and 
subjective well- 
being. J. Neurosci. 35, 9811–9822 
(2015).
131. Chowdhury, R. et al. Dopamine restores reward 
prediction errors in old age. Nat. Neurosci. 16,  
648–653 (2013).
132. Argyropoulos, S. V. & Nutt, D. J. Anhedonia revisited: 
is there a role for dopamine- 
targeting drugs for 
depression? J. Psychopharmacol. 27, 869–877 (2013).
133. Di Giannantonio, M. & Martinotti, G. Anhedonia and 
major depression: the role of agomelatine. Eur. 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 22, S505–S510 (2012).
134. Thobois, S. et al. Parkinsonian apathy responds to 
dopaminergic stimulation of D2/D3 receptors with 
piribedil. Brain 136, 1568–1577 (2013).
135. Devos, D. et al. Rivastigmine in apathetic but 
dementia and depression- 
free patients with 
Parkinson’s disease: a double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled, randomised clinical trial. J. Neurol. 
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 85, 668–674 (2014).
136. McGirr, A. et al. A systematic review and meta- 
analysis 
of randomized, double- 
blind, placebo- 
controlled trials 
of ketamine in the rapid treatment of major depressive 
episodes. Psychol. Med. 45, 693–704 (2015).
137. Kokkinou, M., Ashok, A. H. & Howes, O. D. The effects 
of ketamine on dopaminergic function: meta- 
analysis 
and review of the implications for neuropsychiatric 
disorders. Mol. Psychiatry 23, 59–69 (2017).
138. Lally, N. et al. Anti- 
anhedonic effect of ketamine and 
its neural correlates in treatment- 
resistant bipolar 
depression. T
ransl Psychiatry 4, e469 (2014).
139. Peciña, M. et al. Striatal dopamine D2/3 receptor- 
mediated neurotransmission in major depression: 
implications for anhedonia, anxiety and treatment 
response. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 27, 977–986 
(2017).
140. Remy, P
., Doder, M., Lees, A., T
urjanski, N. & Brooks, D. 
Depression in Parkinson’s disease: loss of dopamine 
and noradrenaline innervation in the limbic system. 
Brain 128, 1314–1322 (2005).
141. Sarchiapone, M. et al. Dopamine transporter binding 
in depressed patients with anhedonia. Psychiatry Res. 
147, 243–248 (2006).
142. Bloomfield, M. A. P
., Morgan, C. J. A., Kapur, S., 
Curran, H. V. & Howes, O. D. The link between 
dopamine function and apathy in cannabis users: an 
[18F]-DOPA PET imaging study. Psychopharmacology 
231, 2251–2259 (2014).
143. Felger, J. C. & T
readway, M. T
. Inflammation effects on 
motivation and motor activity: role of dopamine. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 42, 216–241 (2017). 
This paper presents a clear account of the links 
between the immune and DA systems, including 
how inflammation may result in a decrease in DA 
transmission, leading to symptoms related to 
amotivation.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrn
Reviews
 144. Felger, J. C. & Miller, A. H. Cytokine effects on the 
basal ganglia and dopamine function: the subcortical 
source of inflammatory malaise. Front. 
Neuroendocrinol. 33, 315–327 (2012).
145. Kapur, S. & Remington, G. Serotonin–dopamine 
interaction and its relevance to schizophrenia.  
Am. J. Psychiatry 153, 466–476 (1996).
146. Bailey, M. R. et al. The effects of pharmacological 
modulation of the serotonin 2C receptor on goal- 
directed behavior in mice. Psychopharmacology 233, 
615–624 (2016).
147. Deakin, J. F. W. & Graeff, F. G. 5-HT and mechanisms 
of defence. J. Psychopharmacol. 5, 305–315 (1991).
148. Maier, S. F. & Watkins, L. R. Stressor controllability 
and learned helplessness: the roles of the dorsal raphe 
nucleus, serotonin, and corticotropin- 
releasing factor. 
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 29, 829–841 (2005).
149. Daw, N. D., Kakade, S. & Dayan, P
. Opponent 
interactions between serotonin and dopamine. Neural 
Netw. 15, 603–616 (2002).
150. Boureau, Y.-L. & Dayan, P
. Opponency revisited: 
competition and cooperation between dopamine and 
serotonin. Neuropsychopharmacology 36, 74–97 
(2011).
151. Kranz, G. S., Kasper, S. & Lanzenberger, R. Reward 
and the serotonergic system. Neuroscience 166, 
1023–1035 (2010).
152. Nakamura, K., Matsumoto, M. & Hikosaka, O. 
Reward- 
dependent modulation of neuronal activity in 
the primate dorsal raphe nucleus. J. Neurosci. 28, 
5331–5343 (2008).
153. Fonseca, M. S., Murakami, M. & Mainen, Z. F. 
Activation of dorsal raphe serotonergic neurons 
promotes waiting but is not reinforcing. Curr. Biol. 25, 
306–315 (2015).
154. Luo, M., Zhou, J. & Liu, Z. Reward processing by the 
dorsal raphe nucleus: 5-HT and beyond. Learn. Mem. 
22, 452–460 (2015).
155. Faulkner, P
. & Deakin, J. F. W. The role of serotonin in 
reward, punishment and behavioural inhibition in 
humans: insights from studies with acute tryptophan 
depletion. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 46, 365–378 
(2014).
156. Macoveanu, J. Serotonergic modulation of reward and 
punishment: evidence from pharmacological fMRI 
studies. Brain Res. 1556, 19–27 (2014).
157. Seymour, B., Daw, N. D., Roiser, J. P
., Dayan, P
. & 
Dolan, R. Serotonin selectively modulates reward 
value in human decision- 
making. J. Neurosci. 32, 
5833–5842 (2012).
158. Cools, R. et al. T
ryptophan depletion disrupts the 
motivational guidance of goal- 
directed behavior as a 
function of trait impulsivity. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 30, 1362–1373 (2005).
159. Maillet, A. et al. The prominent role of serotonergic 
degeneration in apathy, anxiety and depression in 
de novo Parkinson’s disease. Brain 139, 2486–2502 
(2016).
160. Da Silva, S. et al. Investigating consummatory and 
anticipatory pleasure across motivation deficits in 
schizophrenia and healthy controls. Psychiatry Res. 
254, 112–117 (2017).
161. Richards, D. A. et al. Cost and outcome of behavioural 
activation versus Cognitive Behavioural Therapy for 
Depression (COBRA): a randomised, controlled,  
non- 
inferiority trial. Lancet 388, 871–880 (2016).
162. Lutgens, D., Gariepy, G. & Malla, A. Psychological and 
psychosocial interventions for negative symptoms in 
psychosis: systematic review and meta- 
analysis.  
Br. J. Psychiatry 210, 324–332 (2017).
163. Rizvi, S. J., Pizzagalli, D. A., Sproule, B. A. &  
Kennedy, S. H. Assessing anhedonia in depression: 
potentials and pitfalls. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 65, 
21–35 (2016).  
This is a thorough review of questionnaire, 
interview and behavioural measurements 
commonly used to assess anhedonia in humans and 
behavioural tests assessing related constructs in 
animals.
164. Strauss, G. P
. & Gold, J. M. A. Psychometric 
comparison of the clinical assessment interview for 
negative symptoms and the brief negative symptom 
scale. Schizophr. Bull. 42, 1384–1394 (2016).
165. Kaji, Y. & Hirata, K. Apathy and anhedonia in 
Parkinson’s disease. ISRN Neurol. 2011, 219427 
(2011).
166. Haarasilta, L., Marttunen, M., Kaprio, J. & Aro, H.  
The 12-month prevalence and characteristics of major 
depressive episode in a representative nationwide 
sample of adolescents and young adults. Psychol. 
Med. 31, 1169–1179 (2001).
167. Keller, M. B. et al. Results of the DSM- 
IV mood 
disorders field trial. Am. J. Psychiatry 152, 843–849 
(1995).
168. Kiwanuka, J. N., Strauss, G. P
., McMahon, R. P
. & 
Gold, J. M. Psychological predictors of functional 
outcome in people with schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res. 
157, 299–304 (2014).
169. Daw, N. D. Decision Making, Affect, and Learning (eds 
Delgado, M. R., Phelps, E. A. & Robbins, T
. W.) 3–38 
(Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 2011).
170. Anticevic, A. & Murray, J. D. (eds) Computational 
Psychiatry: Mathematical Modeling of Mental Illness. 
(Academic Press, Elsevier, London, 2017).
171. Gelman, A. & Shalizi, C. R. Philosophy and the practice 
of Bayesian statistics. Br. J. Math. Stat. Psychol. 66, 
8–38 (2013).
172. Pessiglione, M., Seymour, B., Flandin, G., Dolan, R. J. 
& Frith, C. D. Dopamine- 
dependent prediction errors 
underpin reward- 
seeking behaviour in humans. Nature 
442, 1042–1045 (2006).
173. Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Reinforcement Learning: 
An Introduction (MIT Press, Cambridge, 1998).
174. Assadi, S. M., Yücel, M. & Pantelis, C. Dopamine 
modulates neural networks involved in effort- 
based 
decision- 
making. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 33,  
383–393 (2009).
Acknowledgements
M.H. and J.P
.R. are supported by awards from the Wellcome 
Trust. M.H. is also supported by the UK National Institute 
 
for Health Research (NIHR) Oxford Biomedical Research Centre 
and the Wellcome T
rust Centre for Integrative Neuroimaging, 
Oxford. J.P
.R. is also supported by the Leverhulme T
rust.
Author contributions
Both authors researched data for the article, made substan-
tial contributions to discussion of the content, wrote the man-
uscript and reviewed or edited the manuscript before 
submission.
Competing interests
M.H. has received an honorarium from Eli Lilly for speaking 
at their UK annual research symposium in 2017. J.P.R. 
 
is a consultant for Cambridge Cognition Ltd, Takeda 
 
and GE.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Reviewer information
Nature Reviews Neuroscience thanks J. Salamone and the 
other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the 
peer review of this work.
© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
Nature reviews | NeuroscieNce
Reviews
