 Heritable and Nonheritable Pathways to Early
Callous-Unemotional Behaviors
Luke W. Hyde, Ph.D., Rebecca Waller, Ph.D., Christopher J. Trentacosta, Ph.D., Daniel S. Shaw, Ph.D.,
Jenae M. Neiderhiser, Ph.D., Jody M. Ganiban, Ph.D., David Reiss, M.D., Leslie D. Leve, Ph.D.
Objective: Callous-unemotional behaviors in early childhood
signal higher risk for trajectories of antisocial behavior and
callous-unemotional traits that culminate in later diagnoses
of conduct disorder, antisocial personality disorder, and psy-
chopathy. Studies demonstrate high heritability of callous-
unemotional traits, but little research has examined specific
heritable pathways to early callous-unemotional behaviors.
Studies also indicate that positive parenting protects against
the development of callous-unemotional traits, but genetically
informed designs have not been used to confirm that these
relationships are not the product of gene-environment corre-
lations. In a sample of adopted children and their biological and
adoptive mothers, the authors tested novel heritable and non-
heritable pathways to preschool callous-unemotional behaviors.
Method: In an adoption cohort of 561 families, history of
severe antisocial behavior assessed in biological mothers and
observations of adoptive mother positive reinforcement
at 18 months were examined as predictors of callous-
unemotional behaviors at 27 months.
Results:Despitelimitedornocontactwithoffspring,biological
motherantisocialbehaviorpredictedearlycallous-unemotional
behaviors. Adoptive mother positive reinforcement protected
against early callous-unemotional behaviors. High levels of
adoptive mother positive reinforcement buffered the effects
of heritable risk for callous-unemotional behaviors posed
by biological mother antisocial behavior.
Conclusions: The findings elucidate heritable and nonheritable
pathways to early callous-unemotional behaviors. The
results provide a specific heritable pathway to callous-
unemotional behaviors and compelling evidence that
parenting is an important nonheritable factor in the de-
velopment of callous-unemotional behaviors. The finding
that positive reinforcement buffered heritable risk for
callous-unemotional behaviors has important translational
implications for the prevention of trajectories to serious
antisocial behavior.
Am J Psychiatry 2016; 173:903–910; doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.15111381
Serious antisocial behavior is a key feature of the psychiatric
diagnoses of conduct disorder in youths and antisocial per-
sonality disorder in adults. Given their high cost, serious
antisocial behaviors, such as aggression, violence, and rule
breaking, are a major public health concern. For example, a
recent study found that each adolescent diagnosed with
conduct disorder cost society $14,000 more per year than
other high-risk adolescents (1). With a lifetime prevalence of
10% for conduct disorder (2), the financial implications of
antisocialbehaviorarestaggering.Additionally,thesebehaviors
have broader, immeasurable occupational, health, social, and
emotional costs for perpetrators, victims, and their families.
Decades of research have shown that the most severe trajec-
toriesofantisocialbehaviorstartinearlychildhood(3–5).Thus,
prevention programs have begun to target children at younger
ages, when behavior may be more malleable and life course
trajectories can be more easily modified (6). However, the
effectiveness of interventions remains limited, and the marked
heterogeneity of individuals with antisocial behavior may con-
tribute to this problem (7). If the etiologies of specific forms
of antisocial behavior can be established, then more effective
targeted, personalized interventions can be developed.
To address heterogeneity in early-onset antisocial be-
havior, a specifier was added to the diagnosis of conduct
disorder in DSM-5 to assess the presence of callous-
unemotional traits (“limited prosocial emotions”). Callous-
unemotionaltraits,characterizedbylowempathy,callousness,
and low interpersonal emotions, identify youths with severe,
chronic, and stable antisocial behavior (8). Studies demon-
strating distinct neural correlates and higher heritability of
antisocialbehaviorinthepresenceofcallous-unemotionaltraits
suggest that antisocial behavior with and without callous-
unemotional traits has different etiological pathways (9–11).
However, as most research on callous-unemotional traits has
See related features: Editorial by Dr. Viding and Dr. Pingault (p. 862), CME course (p. 945), AJP Audio (online), and Video by Dr. Pine (online)
Am J Psychiatry 173:9, September 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
903
ARTICLES
 focusedonlatechildhoodandadolescence,weknowlittleabout
the developmental origins of callous-unemotional traits.
To address this gap, researchers have begun studying
callous-unemotional-like behaviors (e.g., lack of guilt, low fear)
in the toddler and preschool periods and found that these
behaviors identify children with a more severe and homoge-
neous trajectory of early behavior problems (12). Similar to
callous-unemotional traits measured in adolescence, early
callous-unemotional behaviors are associated with lowerlevels
of guilt, empathy, and moral regulation and higher levels of
proactiveaggression(13).Thesebehaviors,measuredasearlyas
age 3, predict more severe antisocial behavior (13) and callous-
unemotional traits at age 10, over and above other preschool
antisocial behaviors (14). Thus, early callous-unemotional be-
haviors predict more severe antisocial behavior trajectories
and the development of callous-unemotional traits in later
childhood, and they may help identify those in most need for
early intervention (14). However, we know little about the
etiology of these early emerging behaviors.
Twin studies suggest that callous-unemotional traits in
middle childhood are highly heritable (heritability estimates
range from 0.45 to 0.67) (9). However, twin studies of callous-
unemotional traits have not identified specific heritable
parental traits that put children at greater risk for callous-
unemotional behaviors (although see reference 15). An im-
portant parental behavior that may signal genetic risk for
callous-unemotional behaviors is biological parents’ antisocial
behavior.Specifically,historyofsevereantisocialbehaviormay
be indicative of heritable pathways to callous-unemotional
behaviors because of the overlap between later callous-
unemotional traits, psychopathy, and severe antisocial be-
havior (8). Although establishing these heritable pathways to
callous-unemotionalbehaviorsiscriticalforunderstandingthe
development of callous-unemotional behaviors and severe
antisocial behavior more broadly, children typically receive
both genes and rearing environments (e.g., parenting) from
their parents. Such gene-environment correlations, present in
most observational study designs, make it difficult to differ-
entiate genetic from environmental contributions. An adop-
tion design, particularly one in which children are adopted
soon after birth, allows for an examination of heritable and
nonheritable pathways because biological parents do not
provide the rearing environment. Thus, the first goal of the
present study was to use an adoption design to examine
inherited pathways from biological mothers’ antisocial be-
havior to early child callous-unemotional behaviors.
Whereas much research on callous-unemotional traits
in youths has focused on biological correlates of callous-
unemotional traits (10), a growing literature has shown that
dimensions ofparenting, including harshness andwarmth, are
important in the development of callous-unemotional traits
(16), and even callous-unemotional behaviors as early as age
2 (17). Recent studies suggest that specific aspects of positive
parenting, including warmth and positive reinforcement,
are particularly important for protecting against the devel-
opment of callous-unemotional behaviors (18) by contingently
reinforcing positive child behavior and nurturing a warm
parent-child relationship (16, 19). Studies that examine how
positive parenting behaviors are related to the develop-
ment of callous-unemotional behaviors are critical to
translational work, because these aspects of parenting are
a major malleable target for interventions for antisocial
behavior.
However, most typical studies of biological parents rearing
their own children cannot rule out the possibility that asso-
ciations between parenting and child behavior are attributable
to genes that influence both parenting and child behavior
(15, 20), a notion supported by a monozygotic twin differences
study finding little evidence for harsh parenting as a nonshared
environmentalpredictorofcallous-unemotionalbehaviors(15).
Thus, genetically informed research is needed to examine
whether positive parenting directly contributes to the devel-
opment of callous-unemotional behaviors beyond shared
genes.Recently,weshowedthefirstevidenceforanonheritable
parenting pathway in the present sample (14) by demonstrat-
ing a negative correlation between adoptive parents’ positive
parenting and children’s callous-unemotional behaviors when
children were 27 months old. Although this adoption design
eliminated passive gene-environment correlation, the findings
were cross-sectional. Thus, these results could reflect the
impact of evocative gene-environment correlation in which
child callous-unemotional behaviors evoke lower parental
warmth. Therefore, research is needed to test whether di-
mensions of positive parenting predict lower levels of callous-
unemotional behaviors prospectively, while controlling for
earlier callous-unemotional behaviors and their potential
evocative effects, as well as heritable pathways from birth
parents.Thus,oursecondaimwastoexamineprospectivelinks
between positive parentingandcallous-unemotional behaviors
in early childhood within an adoption study.
Finally, because parenting-focused interventions often
aim to reroute the trajectory of children with early forms of
antisocial behavior by increasing positive parenting (21, 22),
an important question is whether positive parenting can
protect against the emergence of callous-unemotional be-
haviors in the context of high genetic risk for these behaviors.
From the perspective of translational research, it is not
sufficient to show that positive parenting predicts lower
levels of callous-unemotional behaviors over time, but that
positive parenting protects youths with the highest genetic
risk from developing or maintaining high levels of callous-
unemotional behaviors (20). Thus, our third aim was to
examine whether the heritable risk posed by antisocial
biological mothers could be reduced by adoptive mothers’
positive parenting behaviors.
In the present study, we tested novel heritable and
nonheritable pathways to preschool callous-unemotional be-
haviors in a sample of 561 children and their families from the
Early Growth and Development Study (EGDS), a landmark
prospective adoption study with multi-informant measures of
biologicalandadoptiveparentsaswellaslongitudinalmeasures
of early child behavior. The present study builds on a recent
904
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:9, September 2016
HERITABLE AND NONHERITABLE PATHWAYS TO EARLY CALLOUS-UNEMOTIONAL BEHAVIORS
 study (14) in which we established the factor structure of a
measure of early callous-unemotional behaviors in the EGDS,
demonstrated that parent reports of callous-unemotional be-
haviors at 27 months predicted teacher-reported antisocial
behavior at age 7 over and above other dimensions of early
antisocial behavior (i.e., oppositional and attention-deficit be-
haviors), and found a negative cross-sectional correlation be-
tween children’s callous-unemotional behaviors and adoptive
parents’ positive parenting when children were 27 months old.
To further this work and examine heritable, nonheritable,
and gene-environment interaction pathways prospectively, we
examined whether biological mothers’ self-reports of severe
antisocial behavior predicted greater adoptive parent reports
of child callous-unemotional behaviors at 27 months after
accounting for other forms of early behavior problems (op-
positional and attention-deficit behaviors). Moreover, we
incorporated a longitudinal component by testing whether
observationsofadoptivemothers’positivereinforcementwhen
children were 18 months old predicted lower levels of callous-
unemotionalbehaviorsat27months.Finally,wetestedwhether
parenting moderated inherited influences on callous-
unemotional behaviors by examining whether the link
between biological parent antisocial behavior and child
callous-unemotional behaviors was significantly attenu-
ated for children whose adoptive mothers demonstrated
high levels of positive reinforcement.
METHOD
Sample
This study used data from the EGDS, a linked set of partic-
ipants including 561 adopted children (42.8% of them fe-
male), their adoptive parents (567 adoptive mothers, 552
adoptive fathers, including 41 same-sex parent families), and
their biological mothers (N=554) and fathers (N=208).
Children were adopted within a few days after birth
(median=2 days; range=0–91 days), limiting the extent to
which biological parents influenced their child via postnatal
environmental effects (23). The children of the sample are
relatively racially and ethnically diverse (55.6% Caucasian,
19.3% multiracial, 13% African-American, 10.9% Latino). The
sample was recruited in two cohorts. Further information
about the sample, including recruitment, consent, and pro-
cedures, is available elsewhere (23, 24).
Measures
Dimensions of early externalizing. We assessed dimensions of
early externalizing behaviors at 27 months using adoptive
mother report on items from the preschool Child Behavior
Checklist(25).Specifically,weusedathree-factormodelwith
17 items that form separable callous-unemotional, opposi-
tional, and attention-deficit behavior scales. This factor
structure has been replicated in five independent samples
and was the focus of our previous work in EGDS (14) (see the
Supplemental Methods section in the data supplement that
accompanies the online edition of this article).
Biological mother antisocial behavior. We assessed biological
mother antisocial behavior when adoptive children were
3–6 months old using 47 items from the self-reported com-
puterized Diagnostic Interview Schedule (26, 27). To assess
a phenotype closely related to callous-unemotional traits, we
also created a measure of “severe antisocial behavior” using
the10mostsevereantisocial/illegalitemsinthismeasure(see
the Supplemental Methods section).
Observed adoptive mother positive reinforcement. Adoptive
mothers’ use of positive reinforcement was observed in the
home when children were 18 months old via microsocial
coding of a 3-minute cleanup task. Videos of this interac-
tion were coded using the Child Free Play and Compliance
Task Coding Manual (K. Pears and M. Ayers, unpublished
manual, 2005). Mothers’ utterances containing positive
reinforcement (e.g.,“good job,” “thanks for picking that up”)
were summed, leading to a proportion of positive rein-
forcement based on the length of the task. Fifteen percent of
the videos were coded by two independent coders; aver-
age intercoder agreement was 88% (overall kappa=0.71).
This variable was coded only for cohort 1 (N=334) and was
treated as planned “missing” in all models. Results were
identical when we examined only cohort 1 (see Table S1 in
the online data supplement).
Covariates. Consistent with previous publications from
EGDS, we included child gender, adoption openness (level
of contact between biological and adoptive families) (28),
and an index of perinatal risk (29) as covariates in all models.
Analytic Strategy
All analyses were carried out inMplus,version 7.2,using mean
and variance adjusted weighted least squares estimation (30)
(seethe SupplementalMethods section). Wemodeledcallous-
unemotional behaviors within a three-factor framework that
accounted for the overlap of callous-unemotional with
attention-deficit and oppositional behaviors (14). For our first
aim,weusedstructuralequationmodelingtoassesstheunique
effect of biological mother antisocial behavior on callous-
unemotional, oppositional, and attention-deficit behaviors
while controlling for gender, adoption openness, and perinatal
complications. For our second aim, we examined whether
adoptive mother positive reinforcement predicted callous-
unemotional behaviors by adding this variable to the previous
model. By testing this stringent model, we examined whether
positive reinforcement contributed to callous-unemotional
behaviors over and above the biological mother’s inherited
contributions.Inasecondstep,weincludedcallous-unemotional
behaviors at 18 months to ensure that any effects were not the
result of evocative effects of children’s higher levels of earlier
callous-unemotional behaviors on parenting. For our third aim,
we tested an interaction in which an interaction term (biological
mother antisocial behavior by adoptive mother positive re-
inforcement) was added to the model (see Figure 1).
Am J Psychiatry 173:9, September 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
905
HYDE ET AL.
 RESULTS
Does Biological Mother Antisocial Behavior Predict
Early Child Callous-Unemotional Behaviors?
Evidence was found for heritable risk in a main effect of
biological mother severe antisocial behavior on child callous-
unemotional behaviors at 27 months (B=0.13, SE=0.04,
b=0.16, p,0.01). This effect took into account overlap with
attention-deficit and oppositional behaviors, as well as the
effects of child gender, adoption openness, and perinatal
complications. Effects were unique to callous-unemotional
behaviors: biological mother antisocial behavior did not
predict attention-deficit or oppositional behavior.
Does Adoptive Mother Positive Reinforcement Predict
Early Child Callous-Unemotional Behaviors?
When observed adoptive mother positive reinforcement was
added into the previous model, biological mother antisocial
behavior continued to predict child callous-unemotional
behaviors, while higher levels of observed adoptive mother
positive reinforcement at 18 months uniquely predicted
lower levels of child callous-unemotional behaviors at
27 months (B=22.38, SE=0.94, b=20.19, p,0.001). This
adoptive mother parenting effect remained when we con-
trolled for evocative effect of callous-unemotional behaviors
at 18 months (B=23.00, SE=1.2, b=20.19, p,0.01).
Does Adoptive Mother Positive Reinforcement Buffer
Heritable Risk For Callous-Unemotional Behaviors?
Finally, an interaction was evident between adoptive mother
observed positive reinforcement and biological mother anti-
social behavior (see Table 1 and Figure 1). This interaction
(Figure 2) showed that at low, but not high, levels of observed
positive reinforcement of adoptive mothers, biological mother
antisocial behavior predicted child callous-unemotional be-
haviors (low: B=0.17, SE=0.08, b=0.24, p,0.05; high: B=0.01,
SE=0.01, b=0.01, p.0.90).
DISCUSSION
We report the first evidence of a specific gene-environment
interaction that shapes heritable and nonheritable pathways
to early callous-unemotional behaviors with a novel geneti-
cally informed design that allows for stronger conclusions
than past studies. We found a specific heritable pathway
to callous-unemotional behaviors, as biological mother
FIGURE 1. Heritable and Nonheritable Pathways to Callous-Unemotional Behaviors in the Toddler Yearsa
Callous-
unemotional
behaviors
Attention-deficit
behaviors
Oppositional
behaviors
Biological mother severe 
antisocial behavior 
Adoptive mother 
observed positive 
reinforcement
Biological mother
severe antisocial behavior
× adoptive mother
observed positive
reinforcement
Gender
Adoption openness
Perinatal 
complications
0.16** 
–0.19** 
–0.15** 
–0.17** 
0.75***
0.73***
0.71***
a Severe biological mother antisocial behavior predicts adoptive child callous-unemotional behaviors, but the effect is buffered by adoptive parent
positive reinforcement.
*p,0.05. **p,0.01. ***p,0.001.
906
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:9, September 2016
HERITABLE AND NONHERITABLE PATHWAYS TO EARLY CALLOUS-UNEMOTIONAL BEHAVIORS
 antisocial behavior predicted child callous-unemotional be-
haviors in the late toddler period. We also demonstrated that
parenting prospectively predicts early callous-unemotional
behaviorsevenwhenparentsarenotgeneticallyrelatedtothe
child.Additionally,wefoundanimportantgene-environment
interaction whereby more positively reinforcing mothers
buffered inherited risk for early callous-unemotional be-
haviors. In contrast, the combination of both heritable
and nonheritable risk was related to the highest levels of
callous-unemotional behaviors. These findings highlight
both heritable and nonheritable pathways to callous-
unemotional behaviors, but they also emphasize that ulti-
mately, callous-unemotional behaviors are the product of an
interaction between pathways. Evidence for the importance
of parenting in the face of inherited risk is critical for
parenting-focused intervention efforts, as the results em-
phasize that positive reinforcement from parents can help
buffer existing genetic risk, even in children at high risk for
persistent antisocial behavior. This message is particularly
important when discussing a “highly heritable” set of be-
haviors, because these findings emphasize that heritability
is not destiny. Even children with risk for later callous-
unemotional behaviors can have their behavior sculpted by
high levels of positive reinforcement.
This study is the first, to our knowledge, that identifies
a specific heritable pathway to early callous-unemotional
behaviors. This pathway was particularly strong when we
focused on the most serious maternal antisocial behavior,
implying that serious antisocial behavior is a more precise
phenotype for understanding heritable risk for early
callous-unemotional behaviors. Our findings provide a di-
rect test of one possible heritable pathway suggested by
recent findings from Dadds and colleagues (31), who found
that paternal psychopathic fearlessness was related to low
child eye contact in early childhood during an interac-
tion task. As poor eye contact has been studied as an
endophenotype for callous-unemotional traits, this re-
search has been interpreted as supporting a possible genetic
link from parental psychopathic traits to mechanisms in-
volved in the development of child callous-unemotional
traits (32). Our results add a direct test of a heritable
pathway by showing that biological parents’ (in this case
mothers’) severe antisocial behavior predicts early callous-
unemotional behaviors, even when that parent is not rearing
the child. Given theoretical links between later callous-
unemotional traits and interpersonal deficits found in adult
psychopathy, it would have been ideal to examine whether
biological parent psychopathic traits were related to early
callous-unemotional behaviors. Unfortunately, this construct
has not been measured in the EGDS. However, the more
serious antisocial behavior items we did measure may tap a
TABLE 1. Biological Mother Severe Antisocial Behavior, Adoptive Mother Positive Reinforcement, and Their Interaction Predict
Callous-Unemotional, Attention-Deficit, and Oppositional Behavior Factor Scores at 27 Monthsa
Child Behaviors at 27 Months
Callous-Unemotional Behaviors
Attention-Deficit Behaviors
Oppositional Behaviors
Biological and Adoptive Mother Behaviors
B
SE
b
B
SE
b
B
SE
b
Biological mother: severe antisocial behavior
0.13
0.05
0.16**
0.07
0.04
0.09
0.06
0.04
0.08
Adoptive mother: observed positive
reinforcement
–2.48
0.93
–0.19**
–0.84
0.75
–0.07
–1.92
0.81
–0.15*
Interaction term
–1.38
0.52
–0.17**
–0.08
0.38
–0.01
–0.37
0.55
–0.05
a Model fit statistics: x2=498.92, df=209, p,0.001; comparative fit index=0.94, Tucker-Lewis index=0.93, root mean square error of approximation=0.044 (95%
CI=0.04–0.06). These parameters come from the model shown in Figure 1. All models control for child gender, perinatal complications, and adoption openness.
*p,0.05. **p,0.01.
FIGURE 2. High Levels of Adoptive Mother Positive Reinforcement
at 18 Months Buffer the Heritable Effects of Biological Mother
Antisocial Behavior on Child Callous-Unemotional Behaviors at
27 Monthsa
Biological mother self-reported antisocial behavior
(number of lifetime antisocial behaviors endorsed)
30
20
10
0
Callous-unemotional behavior at 27 months (factor score)
3
2
1
0
–1
Low
High
Low
High
Adoptive mother observed 
positive reinforcement
at 18 months
a Extracted callous-unemotional behavior factor scores account for
covariance with attention-deficit and oppositional behaviors plotted
against biological mothers’ self-reported antisocial behavior at high
versus low levels of observed positive reinforcement among adoptive
mothers, using a median split. Note that to show the full variability in this
interaction, the full version (47 items) of biological mother antisocial
behavior measure was used for display purposes.
Am J Psychiatry 173:9, September 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
907
HYDE ET AL.
 phenotype more closely related to callous-unemotional
traits in the parent (8, 33). Future work could elucidate
whether specific traits associated with psychopathy (e.g.,
fearlessness) mediate heritable pathways between serious
parental antisocial behavior and child callous-unemotional
behaviors.
Beyond heritable pathways, our results provide con-
vincing evidence that parenting is important in the de-
velopment of callous-unemotional behaviors. Through an
adoption design and by examining prospective relation-
ships between parental positive reinforcement and child
callous-unemotional behaviors, we exclude some impor-
tant gene-environment correlation confounders present in
previous research (16). We measured these processes
during a critical developmental period: Parenting during
the toddler years becomes increasingly difficult as toddlers
gain more mobility and autonomy without concomitant
self-regulation skills. Thus, parenting during these years is
critical to promoting positive behavior trajectories (6).
Empathy, prosocial behavior, and guilt also develop during
this period (34), making it an important time in the
pathway toward the development of callous-unemotional
traits and serious antisocial behavior (14). Moreover,
as early callous-unemotional behaviors may also evoke
harsher parenting (19), preventing callous-unemotional be-
haviors early in life may attenuate the development of
transactional, cascading coercive cycles of behavior between
parents and children that contribute to serious antisocial
behavior (35).
Our findings are striking in demonstrating direct effects
of positive reinforcement on callous-unemotional behaviors
even in the absence of shared inherited vulnerability and
evocative effects. Positive reinforcement may be particularly
important for preventing callous-unemotional behaviors, as
a mutually warm relationship can set the foundation for
the development of empathic concern (19, 36). Our findings
augment studies in early childhood demonstrating that re-
duced quality of positive affective interactions between
parent andchild, including lower eyecontact, lower observed
dyadic warmth, and lower maternal sensitivity, appears to be
a risk factor for callous-unemotional behaviors (16, 31, 37).
Thus, not surprisingly, high levels of positive reinforcement
by adoptive mothers were effective at buffering inherited
risk, attenuating the effect of biological mother antiso-
cial behavior on later callous-unemotional behaviors. This
interaction emphasizes the malleability of early callous-
unemotional behaviors and suggests that positive rein-
forcement should be emphasized in interventions for early
callous-unemotional behaviors (18).
Although our study had several strengths, including an
innovative adoption design with a large number of children
adopted soon after birth, observational measures of par-
enting, and assessment of callous-unemotional behaviors
during a critical developmental period, it also has a few
limitations. We did not measure psychopathy or related
constructs in biological parents. However, our measure of
severe antisocial behavior uniquely predicted callous-
unemotional behaviors, and not other dimensions of anti-
social behavior, suggesting specificity in this heritable
pathway. Second, although there was variability in early
child
callous-unemotional
behaviors,
this
community
sample contained few children already showing clinical
levels of antisocial behavior. Third, our sample of adopted
children and participating biological families and adop-
tive families may not represent the general population:
Adoptive families had greater resources (i.e., family in-
come .$100,000 per year) and fewer risk factors, while
biological families had lower resources and more risk fac-
tors for antisocial behavior than families in the general
population. In translating these findings to clinical settings,
it is important to consider the relatively high heritability
estimates for callous-unemotional traits (38) and our find-
ings of heritable associations between parent antisocial be-
havior and child callous-unemotional behaviors. Thus, in
a “typical” family, children with high levels of callous-
unemotional behaviors, who are in the most need of posi-
tive parenting, are also more likely to have parents with
greater genetic risk and more contextual risk factors for
antisocial behavior (e.g., low income, high family stress), who
may engage in harsher forms of parenting (15). These parents
also may be less likely to seek intervention services. Thus, our
adoption findings show “what can be” in a natural experi-
ment, but interventions must contend with the challenges of
implementing parenting interventions in biological family
contexts that may require more engagement and family
support to implement sustained positive parenting change.
Interventions that meet families in their communities, have
regular contact with families, increase social support, and
increase motivation for change may be more effective in
engaging these families in which children have high heritable
and nonheritable risk (21). Finally, our analyses focused only
on mothers because we were missing substantial data for
biological and adoptive fathers on our variables (only 33%
and 37% data for each, respectively). Thus, we may be
underestimating heritable effects by exclusively examining
biological mothers’ contributions and not probing the ex-
tent to which fathers contribute to pathways to callous-
unemotional behaviors. Moreover, it should be noted that
parenting was coded within only one EGDS cohort, although
resultswereidentical using onlycohort 1data (see Table S2 in
the online data supplement).
In sum, we found compelling evidence that severe ma-
ternal antisocial behavior increases risk for early callous-
unemotional behaviors in offspring via genetic pathways.
However,positivereinforcementfromadoptivemotherswasa
nonheritable predictor of lower levels of callous-unemotional
behaviors, and it buffered against heritable risk. These find-
ings highlight a specific gene-environment interaction in the
developmentofcallous-unemotionalbehaviorsandemphasize
that positive parenting can reduce risk for early warning signs
of future antisocial behavior. This conclusion emphasizes the
importance of positive reinforcement in parenting-based
908
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:9, September 2016
HERITABLE AND NONHERITABLE PATHWAYS TO EARLY CALLOUS-UNEMOTIONAL BEHAVIORS
 interventions for callous-unemotional behaviors and pro-
vides a critical message for parents and others working with
children with early antisocial behavior: Early callous-
unemotional behaviors are heritable and can identify those
at risk for continued antisocial behavior; however, these be-
haviorsaremalleable,andpositivereinforcementfromparents
can alter these risky pathways.
AUTHOR AND ARTICLE INFORMATION
From the Department of Psychology, the Center for Human Growth and
Development,andtheInstituteforSocialResearch,UniversityofMichigan,
AnnArbor;theDepartmentofPsychology,WayneStateUniversity,Detroit;
the Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh;
the Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania State University, University
Park; the Department of Psychology, George Washington University,
Washington, D.C.; the Yale Child Study Center, Yale University, New
Haven, Conn.; and the Prevention Science Institute, University of Oregon,
Eugene.
Address correspondence to Dr. Hyde (lukehyde@umich.edu).
The Early Growth and Development Study was supported by grant R01
HD042608 from National Institute of Child Health and Human Devel-
opment, NIDA, and the Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research,
NIH; and grant R01 DA020585 from NIDA, NIMH and the Office of Be-
havioral and Social Sciences Research, NIH. Dr. Trentacosta was addi-
tionally supported by NIMH Mentored Research Scientist Development
Award K01 MH082926.
The authors thank the biological parents and adoptive families who
participated in this study and the adoption agencies who helped with the
recruitment of study participants. They also gratefully acknowledge Rand
Conger,JohnReid,XiaojiaGe,andLauraScaramellafortheircontributions
to the larger project.
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of the National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development or NIH.
The authors report no financial relationships with commercial interests.
Received Nov. 3, 2015; revision received Jan. 20, 2016; accepted Feb. 22,
2016; published online April 8, 2016.
REFERENCES
1. Foster EM, Jones DE: The high costs of aggression: public expen-
ditures resulting from conduct disorder. Am J Public Health 2005;
95:1767–1772
2. Nock MK, Kazdin AE, Hiripi E, et al: Prevalence, subtypes, and
correlates of DSM-IV conduct disorder in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Psychol Med 2006; 36:699–710
3. Shaw DS, Gilliom M, Ingoldsby EM, et al: Trajectories leading to
school-age conduct problems. Dev Psychol 2003; 39:189–200
4. Moffitt TE, Caspi A, Harrington H, et al: Males on the life-course-
persistentandadolescence-limitedantisocialpathways:follow-upat
age 26 years. Dev Psychopathol 2002; 14:179–207
5. Loeber R, Dishion T: Early predictors of male delinquency: a review.
Psychol Bull 1983; 94:68–99
6. Shaw DS: Future directions for research on the development and
prevention of early conduct problems. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol
2013; 42:418–428
7. Frick PJ, Morris AS: Temperament and developmental pathways
to conduct problems. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol 2004; 33:
54–68
8. Frick PJ, Ray JV, Thornton LC, et al: Can callous-unemotional traits
enhance the understanding, diagnosis, and treatment of serious
conduct problems in children and adolescents? A comprehensive
review. Psychol Bull 2014; 140:1–57
9. Viding E, Fontaine NMG, McCrory EJ: Antisocial behaviour in
children with and without callous-unemotional traits. J R Soc Med
2012; 105:195–200
10. Hyde LW, Shaw DS, Hariri AR: Understanding youth antisocial
behavior using neuroscience through a developmental psychopa-
thology lens: review, integration, and directions for research. Dev
Rev 2013; 33:168–223
11. Blair RJR, Leibenluft E, Pine DS: Conduct disorder and callous-
unemotional traits in youth. N Engl J Med 2014; 371:2207–2216
12. Hyde LW, Shaw DS, Gardner F, et al: Dimensions of callousness in
early childhood: links to problem behavior and family intervention
effectiveness. Dev Psychopathol 2013; 25:347–363
13. Waller R, Hyde LW, Grabell AS, et al: Differential associations
of early callous-unemotional, oppositional, and ADHD behaviors:
multiple domains within early-starting conduct problems? J Child
Psychol Psychiatry 2015; 56:657–666
14. Waller R, Shaw DS, Neiderhiser JM, et al: Toward an understanding
of the role of the environment in the development of early callous
behavior. J Pers (Epub ahead of print, Aug 20, 2015)
15. Viding E, FontaineNM,Oliver BR,et al: Negativeparentaldiscipline,
conduct problems, and callous-unemotional traits: monozygotic
twin differences study. Br J Psychiatry 2009; 195:414–419
16. Waller R, Gardner F, Hyde LW: What are the associations between
parenting, callous-unemotional traits, and antisocial behavior in
youth? A systematic review of evidence. Clin Psychol Rev 2013; 33:
593–608
17. WallerR,GardnerF,HydeLW,etal:Doharshandpositiveparenting
predict parent reports of deceitful-callous behavior in early child-
hood? J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2012; 53:946–953
18. Pasalich DS, Witkiewitz K, McMahon RJ, et al: Indirect effects of
the fast track intervention on conduct disorder symptoms and
callous-unemotional traits: distinct pathways involving discipline
and warmth. J Abnorm Child Psychol (Epub ahead of print,
Aug 20, 2015)
19. Waller R, Gardner F, Viding E, et al: Bidirectional associations be-
tween parental warmth, callous unemotional behavior, and behavior
problems in high-risk preschoolers. J Abnorm Child Psychol 2014;
42:1275–1285
20. Leve LD, Harold GT, Ge X, et al: Refining intervention targets in
family-basedresearch:lessonsfromquantitativebehavioralgenetics.
Perspect Psychol Sci 2010; 5:516–526
21. Dishion TJ, Shaw D, Connell A, et al: The family check-up with high-
risk indigent families: preventing problem behavior by increasing
parents’ positive behavior support in early childhood. Child Dev
2008; 79:1395–1414
22. Kazdin AE: Parent management training: evidence, outcomes, and
issues. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1997; 36:1349–1356
23. Leve LD, Neiderhiser JM, Shaw DS, et al: The Early Growth and
Development Study: a prospective adoption study from birth
through middle childhood. Twin Res Hum Genet 2013; 16:
412–423
24. Leve LD, Neiderhiser JM, Ge X, et al: The Early Growth and De-
velopment Study: a prospective adoption design. Twin Res Hum
Genet 2007; 10:84–95
25. Achenbach TM, Rescorla L: ASEBA Preschool Forms and Profiles:
An Integrated System of Multi-Informant Assessment. Research
Center for Children, Youth, and Families, University of Vermont,
Burlington, 2000
26. BlouinAG,PerezEL,BlouinJH:Computerizedadministrationofthe
Diagnostic Interview Schedule. Psychiatry Res 1988; 23:335–344
27. Kerr DC, Leve LD, Harold GT, et al: Influences of biological and
adoptive mothers’ depression and antisocial behavior on adoptees’
early behavior trajectories. J Abnorm Child Psychol 2013; 41:
723–734
28. Ge X, Natsuaki MN, Martin DM, et al: Bridging the divide: openness
in adoption and postadoption psychosocial adjustment among birth
and adoptive parents. J Fam Psychol 2008; 22:529–540
Am J Psychiatry 173:9, September 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
909
HYDE ET AL.
 29. McNeil TF, Cantor-Graae E, Sjöström K: Obstetric complications as
antecedents of schizophrenia: empirical effects of using different
obstetric complication scales. J Psychiatr Res 1994; 28:519–530
30. Muthen LK, Muthen BO: Mplus User’s Guide, 7th ed. Los Angeles,
Muthén & Muthén, 2014
31. Dadds MR, Allen JL, Oliver BR, et al: Love, eye contact, and the
developmental origins of empathy v psychopathy. Br J Psychiatry
2012; 200:191–196
32. Hyde LW, Waller R, Burt SA: Commentary:Improving treatmentfor
youth with callous-unemotional traits through the intersection of
basic and applied science: reflections on Dadds et al (2014). J Child
Psychol Psychiatry 2014; 55:781–783
33. Patrick CJ: Antisocial personality disorder and psychopathy, in
PersonalityDisorders:TowardtheDSM-V.EditedbyO’DonohueW,
Fowler KA, Lilienfield SO. Thousand Oaks, Calif, Sage Publications,
2007
34. Zahn-Waxler C, Radke-Yarrow M: The origins of empathic concern.
Motiv Emot 1990; 14:107–130
35. Patterson GR, DeBaryshe BD, Ramsey E: A developmental per-
spective on antisocial behavior. Am Psychol 1989; 44:329–335
36. MacDonald K: Warmth as a developmental construct: an evolu-
tionary analysis. Child Dev 1992; 63:753–773
37. Bedford R, Pickles A, Sharp H, et al: Reduced face preference in
infancy: a developmental precursor to callous-unemotional traits?
Biol Psychiatry 2015; 78:144–150
38. Viding E, Blair RJR, Moffitt TE, et al: Evidence for substantial
genetic risk for psychopathy in 7-year-olds. J Child Psychol Psy-
chiatry 2005; 46:592–597
910
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:9, September 2016
HERITABLE AND NONHERITABLE PATHWAYS TO EARLY CALLOUS-UNEMOTIONAL BEHAVIORS
