 Implementing Genome-Driven Oncology
David M. Hyman1,5, Barry S. Taylor2,3,4, and José Baselga1,2,5,*
1Department of Medicine, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA
2Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA
3Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA
4Marie-Josée and Henry R. Kravis Center for Molecular Oncology Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA
5Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA
Abstract
Early successes in identifying and targeting individual oncogenic drivers, together with the 
increasing feasibility of sequencing tumor genomes, have brought forth the promise of genome-
driven oncology care. As we expand the breadth and depth of genomic analyses, the biological and 
clinical complexity of its implementation will be unparalleled. Challenges include target 
credentialing and validation, implementing drug combinations, clinical trial designs, targeting 
tumor heterogeneity, and deploying technologies beyond DNA sequencing, among others. We 
review how contemporary approaches are tackling these challenges and will ultimately serve as an 
engine for biological discovery and increase our insight into cancer and its treatment.
Introduction
Cancer is a disease of the genome, and major strides have been made in our understanding 
and treatment of this heterogeneous collection of diseases, beginning with the initial 
identification of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes to the development of the first 
generation of targeted therapies and culminating in the full annotation of the genomic 
landscape of the most common cancer types (Kandoth et al., 2013). Much of this progress 
can be traced to technological advances in sequencing, from capillary-based sequencing 
technologies to the modern massively parallel sequencing of today, collectively known as 
next-generation sequencing. These advances have enabled the routine genomic study of 
every tumor at the point of care and will redefine clinical management and translational 
research in transformative ways. Detailed genomic characterization of tumors is already 
driving the definition of a new taxonomy of human cancers that will, ultimately, complement 
current histology-based classifications (Hoadley et al., 2014). Routine genomic profiling will 
also improve prognostication of clinical outcomes, as has already been achieved with human 
epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) amplifications in breast cancer and mutations in 
FLT3, NPM1, KIT, and CEBPA in acute myelogenous leukemia. The farthest reaching 
*Correspondence: baselgaj@mskcc.org. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2017 February 09; 168(4): 584–599. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.015.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 consequence of routine tumor profiling, however, will be the identification of genetically 
driven tumor dependencies and vulnerabilities that will lead to the further development of 
precision therapies and combinatorial treatment approaches. In fact, as a preview of this 
concept, there are already a plethora of genomic alterations for which targeted therapies 
have been approved.
Although the promise of such progress is immense, there are many obstacles to broad 
implementation of genome-based cancer care. These challenges are both practical and 
scientific. Soon, all cancer patients will have the opportunity to obtain detailed genomic 
profiles of their tumors, but this is only the first and perhaps easiest step. How do we 
differentiate between therapeutically actionable alterations and biologically neutral 
passenger changes? How do we manage and prioritize the biologic credentialing of the large 
number of novel alterations now routinely identified through prospective tumor genomic-
screening programs? How can we utilize genome-driven clinical trials to accelerate the 
biologic investigation of incompletely characterized alterations now that they are routinely 
being identified in patients receiving ongoing care? What strategies will be most effective in 
engendering prolonged response to targeted therapy and mitigating the consequences of 
tumor heterogeneity and acquired resistance? How do we ensure that our ever-expanding 
knowledge of the cancer genome and the therapeutic vulnerabilities encoded therein are 
shared among the biomedical community in a manner that maximizes further discovery? 
What depth and breadth of genomic characterization of each cancer type will be required, 
and how do we incorporate technologies in the clinic beyond DNA sequencing? How can we 
improve the efficiency of genomic hypotheses testing in the clinic, and how do we ensure we 
are learning the most we can from each treated patient? Finally, how do we target mutations 
that individually occur rarely but, in aggregate, affect a large proportion of the cancer 
population? Here, we review how contemporary approaches in precision oncology are 
beginning to address these key challenges and, in so doing, serve as an engine for biological 
discovery that will ultimately increase our insight into this complex set of diseases.
At the outset, we recognize that as with any new field of science and medicine, a diversity of 
views on the value of this approach is inevitable. The emerging field of precision medicine is 
no different, and some authoritative voices have raised appropriate concerns (Tannock and 
Hickman, 2016; Voest and Bernards, 2016). First, it has been pointed out that despite the 
immense complexity of the task at hand, there is a lack of much-needed collaboration among 
cancer institutions, and even in those situations in which tumor sequencing takes place, there 
is a low rate of patient participation in genomically matched trials. There is truth in this 
concern, and later on in this review, we will touch on some ongoing collaborative initiatives 
that are precisely aimed at addressing the current fragmentation of efforts and inefficiency in 
clinical trials participation. Another far more serious criticism questions whether this 
approach will work at all to begin with (Tannock and Hickman, 2016). In support of this 
view, one recently published randomized trial (the SHIVA study) found equivalent outcomes 
when patients with multiple tumor types were randomized to receive genomically matched 
versus conventional therapy (Le Tourneau et al., 2014). This study was designed to explore 
the off-label use of marketed drugs in a variety of unvalidated genomic alterations in 
multiple tumor types and provides good evidence of the inadequacy of legacy clinical trial 
paradigms for evaluating genome-driven medicine. The study was underpowered, the 
Hyman et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 genomic alterations had not been validated as optimal targets, and the therapies used were 
not best in class but rather commercially available agents. For example, any alteration 
present in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway led to treatment with the mTOR inhibitor 
everolimus despite the fact that there is strong evidence that PTEN deletions and PI3k/AKT 
mutations do not confer sensitivity to this agent. Our reaction, therefore, to this type of study 
is that the complexity of genomically driven oncology strongly argues that more narrowly 
focused studies that ask questions about specific genomic alterations or drugs rather than 
large randomized studies attempting to evaluate the entire approach will yield the most 
informative data.
In short, we believe that both the underlying science and early clinical successes of precision 
oncology support an optimistic viewpoint, and although we acknowledge the significant 
challenges that lay ahead, we have strived here to present a critically self-reflective but 
solutions-focused perspective on the field.
The Current and Emerging Clinical Landscape of Precision Oncology
Limited genomic data are already being used to guide diagnosis, inform prognosis, and 
support treatment decisions in a variety of cancers. The pioneering example of molecularly 
driven cancer medicine was the development and use of the kinase inhibitor imatinib for the 
treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemias (CML) that harbor the BCR-ABL1 balanced 
chromosomal translocation (Druker et al., 2006). For patients with this previously lethal 
form of leukemia, imatinib has dramatically improved their outcomes to the point that the 
survival of CML patients is now nearly identical to that of the general population (Bower et 
al., 2016). Similarly, the advent of HER2-targeted therapies for the treatment of women with 
newly diagnosed metastatic HER2-positive breast cancer has radically changed the outcome 
of what was until recently the most lethal form of breast cancer. A woman diagnosed with 
metastatic HER2-positive breast cancer can now anticipate a median survival of almost 5 
years through the use of state-of-the-art dual-HER2 blockade compared to just 20 months 
prior to the advent of these therapies (Slamon et al., 2001; Swain et al., 2015). Moreover, the 
addition of HER2-directed therapy to routine chemotherapy for patients with early-stage 
HER2-positive breast cancer has improved cure rates by 35%–50% (Piccart-Gebhart et al., 
2005).
From these early breakthrough therapies to today, cancer patients are benefiting from a 
diverse array of therapies targeting genomic somatic aberrations in their tumors, including 
amplifications, gain-of-function mutations, and structural rearrangements, as well as 
germline loss-of-function mutations in at least 11 different genes arising in 10 different 
cancer types (Table 1). These therapies have not only transformed the lives of many patients 
but also provided a powerful validation of the approach of precision cancer medicine. 
Individual genomic findings are also used to forgo therapies that are unlikely to result in 
clinical benefit, such as KRAS, NRAS, and BRAF mutations in colorectal cancers that 
would otherwise receive anti-epidermal growth factor (EGFR)-targeted therapies (De Roock 
et al., 2010). These approved targeted therapies, administered on the basis of genomic 
observations in patients, represent a new era in cancer therapy. In fact, genomic profiling in 
some form is now required for the appropriate clinical management of a variety of tumor 
Hyman et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 types, including melanoma, gliomas, some sarcomas, as well as carcinomas of the lung, 
breast, thyroid, ovary, and colon.
How then will ever-larger-scale prospective sequencing efforts further advance our field? We 
propose that emerging evidence indicates that a widespread implementation of prospective 
next-generation sequencing will be transformational at several levels. Large-scale 
sequencing studies have demonstrated that nearly all of the genomic alterations currently 
used to guide the selection of targeted therapy within specific disease contexts also occur 
across a variety of other cancer types, albeit typically at low frequencies (Chang et al., 2016; 
Kandoth et al., 2013). Targeting these clinically validated predictive biomarkers in a wider 
array of tumor types, therefore, is an opportunity to immediately extend the benefits of 
precision oncology to a broader population of patients and has been a major focus of recent 
clinical development efforts. Evidence is growing that this approach will work for at least 
some genomic alterations, but in a context-and tumor-dependent fashion. For instance, 
BRAF V600 mutations are found in approximately half of cutaneous melanomas, and the 
use of RAF and MEK inhibitors in these patients has been shown to improve survival, 
leading to the approval of four drugs targeting this pathway (Robert et al., 2015). However, 
nearly two-thirds of all BRAF V600 mutations occur in non-melanoma cancers, suggesting 
that this therapeutic strategy may be applicable to a much larger number of patients. Clinical 
trials have been conducted in tumor types in which the overall incidence of BRAF V600 
mutations is sufficient to conduct disease-specific studies. These efforts have already 
identified clinical activity of these inhibitors in lung cancer, hairy cell leukemia, and thyroid 
cancer (Brose et al., 2016; Planchard et al., 2016; Tiacci et al., 2015).
Testing the efficacy of targeting BRAF V600 mutations in the broad array of cancer types 
that uncommonly harbor this alteration has been far more challenging and spurred the 
development of new clinical study paradigms. One increasingly important approach to 
treating patients with rare genomic variants has been the use of multiple-tumor-type, 
genomically selected “basket” studies. These studies revisit the tumor type as the traditional 
organizing principle of a clinical trial and instead group patients by the genomic alterations 
present in their tumors, thereby reflecting an increasingly accepted reclassification of human 
cancers not based on the organ of their origin but instead on the molecular abnormalities that 
drive their growth and progression (Hoadley et al., 2014). In this way, patients whose tumors 
harbor the qualifying genomic alterations are eligible for treatment regardless of cancer type. 
Tumor types anticipated to have a sufficient prevalence of the alteration(s) of interest are 
enrolled to their own “basket,” whereas all other patients are grouped in a remaining “all-
comers” cohort. These studies recognize that response may be conditioned by the disease 
context in which the genomic alteration arises and therefore analyze efficacy independently 
for any tumor type that enrolls a sufficient number of patients. A variety of statistical designs 
have been utilized in these basket studies, and these approaches have been continuously 
iterated with each successive generation of studies (Cunanan et al., 2016). In doing so, 
basket trials have become a very efficient means of generating clinical efficacy datasets 
across a broad variety of tumor types treated with therapy targeting shared genomic 
alterations. The early results of these studies have already begun to change clinical practice. 
In the case of BRAF V600, we recently completed a basket study that is expected to lead to 
regulatory approval of the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib in several additional tumor types, 
Hyman et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 including a group of rare disorders collectively known as histiocytoses for which no active 
therapies were previously available (Hyman et al., 2015a). A similar basket study approach 
was undertaken to determine the efficacy of the poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) 
inhibitor olaparib in various solid tumors harboring loss-of-function germline BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 alterations. This study led directly to the first regulatory approval of a PARP 
inhibitor for women with germline BRCA1/2-associated ovarian cancer, as well as initial 
proof of efficacy in prostate and pancreas cancer (Kaufman et al., 2015).
Expanding the Druggable Genome
Expanding the use of therapy targeting previously validated genomic biomarkers in a larger 
set of tumor types is only the first step in broadening the utility of precision oncology. 
Maximizing the potential of genome-driven oncology will require understanding the clinical 
significance of a much broader set of potentially actionable alterations, both within specific 
tumor types and in a tumor-agnostic manner for targets where actionability is not 
conditioned by tumor lineage.
The successful targeting of BRAF and PARP in multiple tumor types suggests that targeting 
even rare genomic alterations independent of tumor type may be applicable to other driver 
genes as well. There are more than 30 promising genomic targets today (Table 2). This list is 
only a first iteration of a continuous process, and we anticipate the number of targets will 
continue to expand at a vibrant pace, although the final number of gene targets is difficult to 
predict. The cumulative work establishing these targets has already markedly increased the 
fraction of patients who are now believed to harbor at least one potentially actionable 
genomic alteration (Figure 1). Unlike the more common genomic alterations described 
above, however, many of these emerging targets are rare across all tumor types. An example 
of this phenomenon is the activating E17K mutation in AKT1, which leads to its pathologic 
localization to the plasma membrane, causing constitutive downstream signaling of the 
PI3K-AKT-mTOR axis (Carpten et al., 2007). AKT1 E17K is found in ~3% of cases of 
breast cancer and is even less common in endometrial, ovarian, cervical, lung, colorectal, 
and prostate cancers, as well as several additional tumor types (Bleeker et al., 2008). No 
single tumor type has a sufficient prevalence of AKT1 E17K to allow for a traditional 
disease-focused drug development strategy. Instead, and like BRAF before it, this AKT1 
mutation is especially well suited for clinical hypothesis validation within a basket study. 
Indeed, AKT inhibitors have recently shown marked efficacy in AKT1 E17K-mutation-
positive solid tumors in a basket study, and clinical development is now progressing toward 
regulatory approval (Hyman et al., 2015b). Similarly, a basket study of the pan-HER kinase 
inhibitor neratinib in solid tumors harboring activating mutations in ERBB2 and ERBB3, 
which also occur infrequently across a large number of cancer types, has reported promising 
preliminary results (Bose et al., 2013; Hyman et al., 2016).
However, unlike AKT1, where the vast majority of activating mutations occur at a single 
allele, activating mutations in ERBB2 are distributed throughout the extracellular, 
juxtamembrane, and kinase domains of the gene encoding for the transmembrane HER2 
tyrosine kinase receptor. Thus far, more than 10 recurrent missense mutations, in addition to 
various insertions and even rarer in-frame fusions, have been described. Moreover, the 
Hyman et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pattern of ERBB2 mutations varies by tumor type (Chang et al., 2016). Consequently, 
responses to HER2-targeted therapy in ERBB2-mutant tumors may be dependent, in part, on 
potential differences in function of each mutation, as well as each variant’s sensitivity to 
pharmacological inhibition with a specific inhibitor. Indeed, the unique biochemical 
properties of individual genomic variants within the same gene have been a recurrent 
observation across oncogenes such as BRAF and KRAS, as well as tumor suppressors such 
as TP53 (Halevy et al., 1990; Karnoub and Weinberg, 2008; Yao et al., 2015). These 
genomic nuances add significant complexity to the interpretation of genomic data and 
clinical decision making. Furthermore, as with the basket studies mentioned above, 
responses can be conditioned by the tissue of origin, and this must therefore be taken into 
account. Given the multitude of factors that can condition response to therapy, larger studies 
that enroll sufficient numbers of patients with different mutant alleles and tumor types are 
necessary to reach definitive conclusions regarding such intricacies.
Additional strategies exist to expand the druggable genome beyond the targeting of 
individual gain-of-function missense variants. There are increasing efforts to target a 
growing number of kinase fusions in various cancer types. As first exemplified by BCR-
ABL1 in leukemia, targeting structural rearrangements resulting in constitutively activated 
kinases can lead to dramatic efficacy and has become a renewed focus of precision oncology. 
Drugs targeting kinase fusions involving ALK, ROS1, ABL1, PDGFRA, and PDGFRB have 
already transformed the care of patients with lung cancer, leukemia, and sarcoma. The 
increasing adoption of DNA-and especially RNA-sequencing technologies capable of 
detecting dozens of known and novel kinase fusions have demonstrated that these genomic 
events are more common and implicate a larger number of kinases and tumor types than 
previously recognized (Stransky et al., 2014). As a result, ongoing studies are already 
evaluating targeted therapy in additional sets of fusions involving RET, FGFR1, FGFR2, 
FGFR3, NRG1, BRAF, RAF1, NTRK1, NTRK2, NTRK3, and PRKCA across a diversity of 
cancer types (Drilon et al., 2016b; Tabernero et al., 2015). In fact, preliminary data from 
studies targeting these novel kinase fusions suggest that the rate and depth of response as 
well as the diversity of tumor histologies that will be sensitive may be greater than for many 
of the current clinically credentialed missense mutations. As mentioned, we have been 
particularly struck by the greater magnitude of responses observed when targeting many of 
these “fusion gene targets” and speculate that these difficult-to-acquire genomic alterations 
may indicate a higher level of oncogenic dependency on these complex lesions. For instance, 
fusions involving the neurotrophic receptor tyrosine kinases (NTRK1, 2, and 3) occur in 
approximately 0.5% of diverse solid tumors and hematological malignancies, for which 
NTRK inhibitors have demonstrated nearly uniform response (D.S. Hong et al., 2016; 
AACR Annual Meeting abstract; Vaishnavi et al., 2015). As a consequence of these 
impressive early clinical results, the US Food and Drug Administration recently granted 
Breakthrough Therapy Designation to one of these agents for the treatment of any solid 
tumor harboring an NTRK-fusion transcript, regardless of cancer lineage (Loxo, 2016). We 
are, therefore, finally on the verge of seeing a genomically targeted therapy approved and 
used based solely on the presence of a genomic alteration, regardless of the tumor type in 
which it arises. Similar data have emerged from studies of selective fibroblast growth factor 
receptor (FGFR) inhibitors in FGFR2/3 fusion-positive cancers, including 
Hyman et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cholangiocarcinomas, bladder cancers, and gliomas (Tabernero et al., 2015). Although these 
results targeting kinase fusions are exciting for the field, they raise a key challenge. Many of 
these gene fusions are also present, and sometimes enriched, in pediatric cancers for which 
optimal available therapies are lacking. Historically, targeted drug development in pediatrics 
has lagged beyond that for adults, and pediatric patients have become a sadly underserved 
population when it comes to precision medicine. To begin to address this deficit, we have 
recently had success progressively lowering the minimum permitted age in several 
genomically driven studies, a change prompted by the dramatic responses observed in adults 
and the enthusiastic support of health regulators.
Navigating Biological Complexity in Precision Oncology
Credentialing Therapeutically Actionable Mutations
The shift toward larger panel and whole-exome sequencing has led to the identification of 
increasing numbers of somatic mutations in potentially actionable cancer genes, the vast 
majority of which lack biological or clinical validation. This knowledge gap significantly 
impairs our ability to fully utilize data generated by prospective profiling to guide patient 
care and to implement comprehensive precision-oncology programs. To begin unraveling the 
biological complexity of both common and rare alleles, we must create a systematic 
framework to catalog genomic alterations and characterize their frequency within and across 
cancer types. Large-scale consortia efforts such as The Cancer Genome Atlas have provided 
a vital first step but have predominantly studied primary untreated tumors, and of the 33 
unique cancer types profiled to date, only 9 qualify as rare tumors (http://
cancergenome.nih.gov/). On the other hand, prospective clinical sequencing initiatives 
reflect a greater diversity and distribution of cancer types seen in patients with advanced 
disease, the group most in need of new individualized treatment strategies (Hyman et al., 
2015c). Moreover, many of these samples are collected after the tumors have been exposed 
to prior therapies and therefore possess mutations that only arise upon selective therapeutic 
pressure, such as activating mutations in ESR1 (the gene encoding for the estrogen receptor 
[ER]) in patients with ER-positive advanced breast cancers that have progressed after anti-
estrogen therapies (Toy et al., 2013).
Assembling large representative databases of clinically sequenced cancers is only the first 
step toward saturating the discovery, and eventual clinical validation, of actionable variants. 
The next step is the development of a mutational taxonomy that classifies each aberration on 
the basis of its abnormal function and druggability. To this end, computational frameworks 
have been developed for analyzing large-scale sequencing data in order to identify individual 
positions and genes recurrently mutated, both within individual tumor types and across 
cancers, more often than expected in the absence of selection (Chang et al., 2016; Lawrence 
et al., 2014). Such statistically principled approaches that operationalize different facets of 
how mutations, both driver and passenger, accrue in cancer genomes will become 
increasingly necessary as the community aggregates larger datasets where repeated 
observations of even passenger alterations are expected. These early efforts have begun to 
bear fruit, identifying previously uncharacterized and potentially druggable variants, and 
have the potential to significantly expand the proportion of patients that may benefit from 
Hyman et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 precision-oncology approaches. For instance, a recent analysis of PIK3CA hotspots in more 
than 11,000 sequenced tumors identified not only the well-characterized helical and kinase 
domain mutations E545 and H1047 but also 16 additional statistically significant recurrent 
alterations (Chang et al., 2016). These additional hotspots accounted for 32% of all the 
PIK3CA mutations observed in the overall cohort, potentially significantly expanding the 
number of patients eligible for inhibitors targeting this pathway. It remains unknown when, 
as a community, we will saturate the detection of rare recurrent mutations in PIK3CA and 
other clinically actionable genes such as ERBB2, EGFR, and MET. Such efforts will also 
help the basic and translational cancer research community to prioritize biologic 
investigation or novel variants and, in doing so, facilitate new target discovery.
Novel allele prioritization is necessary, but not sufficient. The mutational diversity in already 
therapeutically actionable genes is profound and, in many cases, may reflect differences in 
phenotype that translate into unique pharmacologic dependencies that in silico approaches 
alone cannot capture reliably. For example, BRAF V600 is among the most common 
somatic mutations in cancer and results in a constitutively active oncoprotein that signals as 
a RAF monomer (Davies et al., 2002). Consequently, BRAF V600 is sensitive to RAF 
inhibitors that preferentially bind activated RAF monomers (Bollag et al., 2010). Conversely, 
less frequent but recurrent BRAF variants including K601, L597, and G469 similarly lead to 
constitutive BRAF activation but signal primarily as homodimers and are insensitive to 
pharmacologic inhibition with first-generation RAF inhibitors (Poulikakos et al., 2011; Yao 
et al., 2015). Still other BRAF mutations such as V599 and G465 impair BRAF kinase 
activity but appear to activate MEK through RAS-dependent mechanisms (Wan et al., 2004). 
Finally, the impact of many other BRAF mutations, including many occurring outside of the 
kinase domain, on RAF/RAS signaling are still uncharacterized. Computational approaches 
alone cannot yet reliably predict the class to which a previously uncharacterized BRAF 
variant belongs and therefore cannot be used to guide selection of pharmacologic therapy. 
Moreover, purely genomic approaches do not account for signaling pathway cross-talk and 
feedback mechanisms that cloud simple genotype-drug response relationships but are 
responsible for clinically important observations such as the lack of response of KRAS 
mutant tumors to MEK inhibitors.
How then do we begin to capture at scale these nuances among an enormous number of as 
yet to be tested alleles? Interrogating each of these experimentally is time prohibitive. 
Conversely, techniques that facilitate rapid biochemical characterization of large numbers of 
individual genomic variants simultaneously have been developed to address this need (Kim 
et al., 2016; Kitzman et al., 2015). Utilizing recent advances in synthetic biology, these 
massively parallel functional genomic approaches use high-throughput methodologies to 
characterize the preliminary function of nearly all possible missense mutations within target 
genes or pathways of interest. Work is now underway using these methods to build large 
catalogs of the biochemical properties of thousands of individual missense mutations. This 
approach is exemplified by a recent report on the phenotypic characterization of a 
comprehensive set of MAPK1 (ERK2) missense mutants (Brenan et al., 2016). Employing 
saturation mutagenesis using a DNA synthesis-based approach (mutagenesis by integrated 
TilEs; Melnikov et al., 2014), these investigators were able to screen 6,810 of 6,821 possible 
(99.84%) MAPK1 missense mutants for gain and loss of function, as well as drug 
Hyman et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sensitivity. This screen confirmed that previously identified recurrently mutated alleles such 
as MAPK1 E322 were gain of function but, importantly, also identified other candidate 
functional alleles that are not yet known to be recurrent in existing tumor-sequencing 
databases. Soon, these technologies will mature such that mutations can be studied in high 
throughput in vivo and test a broader panel of molecular and biochemical phenotypes. This 
high-throughput strategy for allele prioritization can then be followed by traditional 
functional genetic studies of greater depth using a variety of modern molecular biology 
techniques, including CRISPR gene editing.
Although it is clear that a combination of multiple approaches are necessary to scale up the 
generation of essential preclinical data of a large number of candidate alleles, those efforts 
are primarily focused on exploring individual alleles in isolation. However, this is not 
typically how these alleles arise in patient tumors. Indeed, one of the open questions in 
precision oncology is how best to intervene therapeutically in patients whose tumors present 
with multiple actionable mutations. To complicate things further, the tumor 
microenvironment may also dictate how a particular patient will respond to therapy targeting 
a specific genetic alteration. For example, in colon cancers, but curiously not in other tumor 
types, inhibiting BRAF V600 is partially reversed by abundant EGF in the 
microenvironment, which activates a bypass pathway (Prahallad et al., 2012). Ultimately, 
this dependency framework will be necessary to guide rational drug combinations, as well as 
to prioritize targeting of one of potentially multiple alterations in genomically complex 
tumors.
A New Model for Accelerated Clinical Testing
The scale and potential biological complexity of still uncharacterized genomic variants may 
not be addressable through traditional clinical testing paradigms. The absence of detailed 
biochemical profiling of each genomic alteration is also a principal challenge to physicians 
trying to incorporate somatic mutational data into novel treatments for patients with 
advanced cancers and in need of such therapies. Biomarker development has historically 
proceeded from basic target discovery to biologic validation, culminating in clinical testing. 
Although this process has supported significant advancements, the time necessary to validate 
each target in this manner is impractical for many of the aforementioned reasons. In a 
reversal of fortunes, the clinical validation of a target is now frequently occurring prior to its 
full biological and functional characterization in the laboratory. We have begun to 
demonstrate that genome-driven clinical trials designed to evaluate laboratory-derived 
hypotheses can also be used to biologically credential new targets that have not undergone 
extensive biologic investigation, thus accelerating drug development (Figure 2). In this 
model, clinical studies can become platforms for exploring the functional consequences of 
novel genomic alterations detected in the same patient populations. Such studies can inform 
laboratory studies that, in turn, refine our understanding of the role these genomic 
aberrations play in disease pathogenesis, drug response, and resistance. Although 
unconventional in approach, many of the patients currently having their tumors genomically 
profiled are heavily pretreated and have no remaining standard therapeutic options. What 
level of evidence supporting the actionability of a potential genomic target should be 
required in this setting? A proof-of-principle of this approach was recently undertaken in a 
Hyman et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 heavily pretreated patient with breast cancer with an ERBB2 L869R mutant tumor treated on 
a basket study with an ERBB2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor (neratinib) for solid tumors 
harboring ERBB2 mutations (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01953926). At the time, this patient’s 
tumor was identified as harboring an ERBB2 mutation; this particular variant was not known 
to be recurrent and had not been functionally characterized. However, it was noted that the 
ERBB2 L869 allele is paralogous to EGFR L861, a known activating EGFR mutation that is 
sensitive to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (Yang et al., 2015). Moreover, computational 
and three-dimensional modeling of ERBB2, EGFR, and the paralogous residue mutations 
predicted a similar constitutively activating signaling phenotype. On the basis of these 
findings, as well as the absence of standard therapeutic options for the patient, she was 
enrolled onto the study and ultimately achieved a partial response lasting for more than 1 
year (Hyman et al., 2016). In addition to the significant benefit afforded this patient, this 
response simultaneously provides valuable insight into the biologic function of the novel 
L869R allele.
In the absence of comprehensive biochemical profiling of all possible mutations in 
commonly mutated oncogenes, it is essential that we establish principled approaches for 
analyzing novel variants in this way to determine whether and how they should be acted 
upon. Under this model, computational frameworks that combine analysis of statistically 
significant recurrence, sequence paralogy, and protein structure can be useful if applied 
judicially and when there are no more-definitive biologic data. Stakeholders, including 
physicians and their patients, must then decide whether the predictions generated by these 
multifaceted analyses, which cannot replace biologic validation, provide sufficient 
preliminary evidence to justify acting on them. This assessment must necessarily take into 
account the alternative treatment options available, to the extent any exist, as a greater 
degree of speculation may be appropriate in patients with no alternative evidence-based 
options. The goal here is to direct these patients to clinical studies that will collect and report 
treatment outcome in a way that contributes to the overall knowledge base while at the same 
time offering a real possibility of clinical benefit. Responses in this setting are essential 
clinical evidence that, even when anecdotal, can prompt extensive biological exploration of a 
given allele using traditional molecular biology techniques, studies that might also be 
performed in parallel to clinical testing via a co-clinical trial approach. Although these 
responses can be extremely informative, the absence of response cannot similarly be taken 
as conclusive evidence of the absence of biologic function and, therefore, should not a priori 
stifle further biologic evaluation of novel alleles.
The approach of enrolling patients with candidate but incompletely characterized genomic 
drivers can be paired with other study best practices, including generation of advanced 
models such as organoids and patient-derived xenografts, that can be used to further explore 
basic biology (when paired to the clinical outcome) from the patient who contributed the 
sample. Moreover, these patient-derived models permit us to study not only the initial 
response phenotype but also the adaptive signaling responses that underlie these outcomes.
Hyman et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Managing Tumor Heterogeneity and Acquired Resistance
Tumors and the potentially therapeutically actionable mutations that drive them evolve 
constantly from an ancestral cell and as a function of therapy, resulting in both temporal and 
spatial genomic heterogeneity (Gerlinger et al., 2012). Next-generation sequencing has 
transformed our understanding of intratumoral heterogeneity, and this phenomenon has been 
implicated in both the development of acquired resistance and lesion-specific differential 
response to targeted therapy (Diaz et al., 2012; Misale et al., 2012; Russo et al., 2016). 
Despite this, the degree to which this tumor heterogeneity will ultimately impact the utility 
of genome-driven oncology remains unclear.
From a therapeutic perspective, the early truncal mutations that are essential oncogenic 
drivers are typically shared by all sites of disease, even in patients with advanced and 
heavily pretreated cancers, a fact that may mitigate some of the potential consequences of 
intratumoral heterogeneity. As an example, BRAF V600 mutations first arise in dysplastic 
nevi before they progress to malignant melanoma and remain as a key tumoral dependency 
despite the marked genomic heterogeneity characteristic of melanomas as a result of UV-
induced DNA damage. Nevertheless, therapy targeting even a truncal mutation will still alter 
the cellular milieu as the incumbent oncogene-addicted clone is depleted, facilitating a 
permissive environment for the outgrowth of cellular populations that were previously less 
fit. Hence, under the pressure of selective targeted therapy, these initial subclonal genomic 
mediators of acquired resistance often become the dominant clone, as exemplified by the 
emergence of EGFR T790M in EGFR mutant non-small cell lung cancer patients treated 
with first-generation inhibitors (Hata et al., 2016). Even in instances where more complex 
polyclonal resistance emerges (different co-existing cell populations driven by genetically 
distinct mechanisms of resistance), these alterations often converge on specific genes or 
pathways, suggesting that even these scenarios could be managed with drugs or drug 
combinations that target this evolutionary bottleneck (Juric et al., 2015).
The eventual development of acquired resistance has, therefore, been a near universal 
observation with targeted cancer therapy. Although the individual mechanisms underlying 
this are varied, two are common–target reactivation due to secondary genomic alterations or 
activation of upstream effectors and pathway reactivation mediated by activation of 
downstream or bypass effectors. The recognition that resistance to targeted therapies is often 
mediated by secondary mutation of the drug target has already led to the development of 
drugs that maintain efficacy despite these tumor adaptations. Resistance to imatinib in BCR-
ABL1 fusion-positive CML is driven almost entirely by secondary mutations in the drug-
binding site, ATP-binding pocket, catalytic domain, and activation loop (Milojkovic and 
Apperley, 2009). Identification of these mechanisms has led to the development and 
subsequent approval of even more potent BCR-ABL1 tyrosine kinase inhibitors that 
maintain activity in the setting of various secondary mutations (Cortes et al., 2012; Saglio et 
al., 2010). Similarly, second-and third-generation inhibitors targeting EGFR mutant and 
ALK fusion-positive non-small cell lung cancer have been successfully developed to manage 
on-target resistance (Jänne et al., 2015; Shaw et al., 2014,2016).
Acquired resistance can also be driven by activation of bypass mechanisms via genomic 
alterations affecting upstream and downstream effectors and through pathway-independent 
Hyman et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mechanisms whose identification has uncovered biochemically important facets of key 
cancer genes and pathways. For example, the increased expression of the androgen receptor 
in castrate-resistant metastatic prostate cancers ultimately led to the discovery of their 
continued dependence on androgen signaling despite apparent resistance to androgen 
deprivation and first-generation antagonists. This insight ultimately led to the successful 
development of second-generation androgen receptor inhibitors (Chen et al., 2004; Scher et 
al., 2012). Similarly, identification of new mutations in the ligand-binding domain of ESR1 
in patients with ER-positive breast cancer treated with certain classes of antiestrogens led to 
the discovery that these mutations induce ligand-independent, ER-dependent gene 
transcription (Toy et al., 2013). This, in turn, has led to the development of selective ER 
degraders (Lai et al., 2015). Recently, deletions of JAK2 and B2M were implicated in 
resistance to programmed death 1 (PD-1) checkpoint blockade in melanoma, alluding to the 
critical role these effectors may play in patients with regard to tumor-antigen presentation 
and immune surveillance (Zaretsky et al., 2016).
Undoubtedly, acquired resistance will impact every facet of precision oncology. This is not 
an indictment of the therapeutic approach but will require us to develop strategies to affect 
more durable responses in our patients. The identification of many of the aforementioned 
mechanisms of resistance has revealed novel biochemical and signaling phenotypes and 
demonstrated first principles of how multiple signaling pathways interact via cross-talk and 
feedback. As a result, drug combinations, when applied in a biologically rational and 
synergistic manner, can delay the onset of resistance (Baselga et al., 2012; Turner et al., 
2015). On the other hand, although preclinical modeling may nominate potential 
mechanisms of resistance, few of these mechanisms may manifest clinically in patients. This 
further emphasizes the importance of prospectively identifying the genetic alterations 
acquired with, or selected by, treatment in the clinic and in real time to focus biologic 
investigation. In this manner, acquired resistance is teaching us as much about underlying 
biological dependencies as is the identification of sensitizing lesions.
Data and Knowledge Sharing
Accomplishing our goals will necessitate data and knowledge sharing by the clinical and 
biomedical community. Indeed, the mutational heterogeneity and complexity of human 
cancers is greater than can be reflected by the data any single center or commercial lab can 
generate. Recognizing the critical importance of collaboration, early on our center developed 
an institution-wide genomics biospecimen protocol (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01775072) that 
includes a framework for genomic data sharing that can raise important privacy concerns 
(Hyman et al., 2015c). The use of similar genomic biospecimen protocols has become a 
common feature of academic centers pursuing precision-oncology programs, and we view 
this as critical to the success of the field. Maximizing the utility of now federated genomic 
datasets will require not only consent for data sharing but also bioinformatic approaches to 
harmonizing variants generated by disparate sequencing platforms, each with their own 
unique tissue requirements, performance characteristics, and variant calling pipelines. To 
address this need, the American Association of Cancer Research (AACR) has launched 
Project GENIE (Genomics, Evidence, Neoplasia, Information, Exchange), which is 
developing a regulatory-grade registry that aggregates and links clinical sequencing data 
Hyman et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 from tens of thousands of cancer patients treated at multiple international academic medical 
centers. Unlike commercial laboratories that have limited clinical annotation and no follow-
up on the samples they receive, institutional datasets have longitudinal follow-ups that when 
aggregated are uniquely powered to answer previously unaddressed questions. For instance, 
EGFR inhibitors are currently approved for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancers with 
the most common mutational hotspots, including L858R and exon 19 deletions. Little is 
known, however, about less common EGFR variants (such as mutations in exon 18) and how 
they might similarly guide evidence-based prescribing practices for these widely available 
agents. Efforts to address this knowledge gap have been unable to aggregate sufficiently 
large numbers of patients. Project GENIE and related efforts are well suited to answer these 
outstanding questions and immediately expand the proportion of patients who receive and 
benefit from precision oncology. Other complementary public and private efforts, including 
the NIH Genomic Data Commons (Grossman et al., 2016), the Global Alliance for 
Genomics and Health (Siu et al., 2016), and Molecular Evidence Development Consortium 
(http://med-c.org/), are aggregating such genomic data to evaluate clinical utility. In fact, 
data sharing was a cornerstone recommendation of the Blue Ribbon Panel Report issued as 
part of Vice President Biden’s Cancer Moonshot initiative.
Sharing data is only one piece of this puzzle. How do we similarly curate, standardize, and 
aggregate knowledge about the biological and clinical relevance of individual genomic 
alterations to guide principled clinical decision making in prospectively sequenced patients? 
The medical genetics community has long recognized the value of high-quality 
interpretations of individual genomic variants, which are relied upon to make definitive 
recommendations to patients involving complex issues such as cancer screening, risk-
reducing surgery, and reproduction. To facilitate this decision making, this community has 
created a number of resources, most prominently ClinVar (https://www. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
clinvar/) (Landrum et al., 2016). To similarly systematically curate somatic variants, a 
number of clinical knowledge bases have been created, including OncoKB (oncokb.org), 
MyCancerGenome (mycancergenome.org), CIViC (civic.genome.wustl.edu), Cancer 
Genome Interpreter (CGI, cancergenomeinterpreter.org), CANDL (candl.osu.edu), and the 
Personalized Cancer Medicine Knowledge Base (https://pct.mdanderson.org/). Like ClinVar, 
these knowledge bases have established levels of actionability and support community 
contribution with expert curation. Centralization, standardization, and timely updates of 
these critical data resources are necessary and could be catalyzed by a single national or 
international effort so that a single principled recommendation per variant can be 
democratized to any treating oncologist.
Next-Generation Sequencing in the Clinic
An essential pillar of precision oncology is ensuring that we identify, at the point of care and 
in every cancer patient, the genomic alterations on which the growth and progression of their 
diseases depend. A practical and technical challenge to implementing this paradigm has 
been the limited quantity and quality of tumor material typically available for testing. To 
establish an initial cancer diagnosis, patients often undergo only a small tumor core biopsy 
or fine-needle aspiration. A portion of this material is consumed for standard diagnostic 
evaluation. Moreover, nearly all surgical and biopsy specimens are fixed in formalin and 
Hyman et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 may be stored for years in suboptimal conditions before they are utilized for profiling. 
Biopsies and surgical specimens are frequently mixed with stromal tissue, further limiting 
tumor content. These limitations in tissue quality and quantity make obtaining 
comprehensive whole-genome sequencing, whole-transcriptome sequencing, and 
phosphoproteomics impractical or even impossible for many cancer patients.
Despite these limitations, DNA enrichment and sequencing technologies have matured to the 
point where they can now generate reliable results on individual tumors within clinically 
meaningful time frames using small amounts of paraffin-embedded tumor tissue. These 
approaches have varied from small gene panels that sequence only recurrently mutated 
“hotspot” positions (Meric-Bernstam et al., 2015) to targeted gene panels typically 
sequencing the entire coding regions of 50–500 genes (Hyman et al., 2015c) to whole-
exome and -genome sequencing. Smaller hotspot-based panels, which typically utilize 
amplicon-based sequencing, miss many of the less common but potentially actionable 
alterations that in aggregate constitute the majority of genomic variants in cancer and, in 
addition, are not well suited for detecting copy-number alterations and structural 
rearrangements. Conversely, larger targeted panels, which typically utilize hybridization 
enrichment, can sequence the entire coding region of targeted genes, are capable of detecting 
copy-number alterations, as well as select structural rearrangements, and cover most, if not 
all, of the genomic targets for which there are currently drugs in clinical development. 
Importantly, these hybrid capture platforms perform well with small tumor specimens and 
provide sufficient sensitivity for the detection of actionable alterations in samples with low 
tumor purity. In addition, these panels can be easily expanded to include new genomic 
content as the actionable genome expands. Consequently, targeted gene panels using this 
technology have been favored by many of the high-volume academic institutions and 
commercial laboratories pioneering the use of this testing (Cheng et al., 2015; Frampton et 
al., 2013). Although broader whole-exome sequencing provides the opportunity to detect 
recurrent alterations in genes not previously implicated in cancer, and is therefore useful for 
discovery, it requires more input DNA, typically offers lower coverage, and often has less 
sensitivity for structural rearrangements due to limited sequencing of intronic regions 
(Beltran et al., 2015). Whole-genome sequencing similarly offers lower coverage and also 
remains cost prohibitive and therefore impractical for most patients. In the near term, these 
different approaches will continue to represent tradeoffs in terms of sequencing breadth, 
depth, and practicality of overall adoption. In weighing these tradeoffs, we believe that the 
rarity of promising genomic alterations currently dictates that clinical genomic profiling 
strategies be optimized to screen more patients using sufficiently broad targeted gene panels 
rather than fewer patients with even more comprehensive assays. Although even further 
from clinical implementation, single-cell DNA and RNA sequencing are also actively being 
investigated as a means of providing unprecedented resolution into the heterogeneity of each 
tumor, as well as its microenvironment (Tirosh et al., 2016)
The increased sensitivity afforded by targeted next-generation sequencing has substantially 
improved our ability to identify known actionable alterations in patients and has also led to 
the discovery of new potentially druggable alterations. One recent example is MET splice 
site mutations, which promote MET exon 14 skipping that results in augmented MET kinase 
activity through loss of ubiquitin-mediated degradation and appear sensitive to MET 
Hyman et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 inhibitors such as crizotinib (A. Drilon et al., 2016a; ASCO Annual Meeting abstract; 
Peschard et al., 2001). These heterogeneous alterations, which are present in ~3% of lung 
adenocarcinomas and rarely in other cancer types, can span 200 bases and are not easily 
detected by hotspot-based sequencing approaches (Frampton et al., 2015).
Technical advances are now accelerating the development of genomic profiling strategies 
suitable for sequencing tumor-derived cell free DNA (cfDNA) from plasma with high 
sensitivity and specificity. These assays combine deep targeted hybrid capture sequencing 
with the use of unique molecular identifiers that allow for the differentiation of sequencing 
artifacts from very low-allele-frequency mutations (Kivioja et al., 2011; Lanman et al., 
2015). The potential advantages of cfDNA, also known as a “liquid biopsy,” compared to 
tumor sequencing are many. Tumor biopsies are complex, invasive, and expensive, which 
precludes their widespread implementation and repeated use in patients. Conversely, cfDNA 
only requires a blood draw and can be repeated as frequently as clinically indicated with 
little risk to the patient. Furthermore, cfDNA sequencing may better capture the genomic 
heterogeneity of patient disease by detecting mutations that are both shared and private to 
individual tumor sites. cfDNA sequencing can also be used to monitor response to targeted 
therapy. In fact, real-time analysis of cfDNA may determine response to therapy within days 
of treatment initiation, as opposed to weeks with conventional imaging studies. As the 
sensitivity and specificity of cfDNA profiling improves, as does our ability to interpret the 
presence and biological significance of rare mutations in circulation, we envision the power 
of cfDNA being utilized as a screening tool to detect early-stage cancers, when the 
likelihood of cure would be far higher.
The Reach of Precision Oncology into the Germline: The Case for 
Integrated Testing
The growing compendium of germline polymorphisms established by large-scale projects 
such as the EXaC consortium (http://exac.broadinstitute.org/) has improved the ability to 
distinguish between somatic and germline variants in tumor-only prospective sequencing. 
Despite this progress, these databases are under-represented by individuals of non-European 
ancestry and do not entirely address private germline variations that are unlikely to be 
sufficiently captured without orders of magnitude of additional germline data, if ever. As a 
result, clinical tumor sequencing, where inaccurate variant classification could potentially 
lead to improper treatment selection, is increasingly utilizing patient-matched normal 
controls with the primary objective of distinguishing between germline and somatic variants. 
However, matched germline sequencing also facilitates simultaneous diagnosis of cancer 
predisposition syndromes that are themselves therapeutically actionable. Early evidence 
from large-scale clinical sequencing initiatives suggests a higher rate of pathologic germline 
variants in both adult and pediatric cancer patients than would be predicted from 
conventional germline screening guidelines based on personal and family history (Schrader 
et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2015). The utility of detecting germline mutations has been 
recently highlighted in prostate cancer, for which putative loss-of-function germline 
mutations in BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, BRCA1, and PALB2 are found in nearly 12% of 
patients, a rate higher than expected (Pritchard et al., 2016). Importantly, these genomic 
Hyman et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 alterations are all potentially targetable with PARP inhibitors, as well as other inhibitors of 
DNA-damage repair or DNA-damaging agents. Similarly, defects in mismatch repair 
through germline, somatic, and epigenetic mechanisms may be targetable with immune 
checkpoint blockade and are readily detectable through tumor and matched germline 
sequencing (Le et al., 2015). These findings demonstrate that combined tumor and matched 
germline sequencing not only improves the detection of somatic mutations but also 
simplifies comprehensive testing for cancer patients while further expanding the scope of 
actionable alterations. Moreover, although variants of unknown significance plague the 
clinical interpretation of most germline alleles, combined analysis with the corresponding 
tumor that reveals somatic loss of heterozygosity can implicate a germline variant of 
uncertain significance in the absence of functional data and perhaps inform therapy in 
advanced patients who otherwise lack treatment options. Therefore, such integrative analysis 
may provide insights that individual testing cannot capture.
A Future for Genome-Driven Oncology
We have described a framework that can begin to successfully navigate the scientific 
challenges and broaden the scope and utility of genome-driven oncology. Equally important 
will be optimizing the way we evaluate the resulting genomic hypotheses in the clinic. 
Maximizing progress will require us to improve every step in the precision medicine 
ecosystem, beginning with how we sequence patients, identifying the best targets from this 
testing, notifying stakeholders, improving access to relevant clinical studies, and finally, 
making sure these studies are appropriately designed to advance the field.
The Hallmarks of a Precision-Oncology Study: Learning More from Each 
Patient
Clinical studies evaluating a genomic-driven hypothesis should be designed to learn from 
each case in an unprecedented way. To capture maximal information from each enrolled 
patient, precision-oncology studies should include, when possible, not only traditional 
clinical response evaluation but also the systematic analysis of patient-derived biospecimens 
and even potential clinical strategies to overcome adaptive or acquired resistance in real time 
(Figure 3). We propose that the hallmarks of a modern precision-oncology study include 
four primary scientific objectives: identification of the target, confirmation of target 
inhibition, biologic credentialing of the target, and description of the mechanisms underlying 
acquired resistance. Collection and analysis of biospecimens should be organized around, 
and driven by, these key objectives. For example, pretreatment tumor and liquid biopsies 
should be used to confirm the presence of the target and define the broader genomic context 
in which it arises. Confirmation of target engagement and early adaptive responses to target 
inhibition can be evaluated by tumor biopsies obtained shortly after the initiation of 
treatment, when early compensatory feedback mechanisms that may modify treatment 
efficacy can be observed, potentially nominating rational combinatorial strategies. Target 
engagement can also be assessed through functional imaging studies, such as 18F-
fluoroestradiol positron emission tomography (PET), or indirectly via analysis of circulating 
cfDNA, exosomes, and tumor cells. Biologic target validation can be greatly facilitated 
Hyman et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 through generation of patient-derived xenografts or organoids at the time of tumor biopsy. 
As described earlier, the identification of mechanisms that result in de novo and acquired 
resistance in patients is critical and often requires comparative analysis of pre-and post-
treatment tumor using a variety of experimental approaches, including DNA and RNA 
sequencing, phosphoprotein analysis, and immune profiling. Interrogating tumor-derived 
cfDNA from plasma can also identify the emergence of resistance at an early stage and 
identify clonal evolution as a response to therapy that may facilitate the addition of other 
agents or lead to a switch to alternative targeted agents entirely in order to prevent 
progression of disease (Dawson et al., 2013; Thress et al., 2015). This approach can provide 
rapid clinical confirmation of underlying resistance mechanisms nominated by preclinical 
models even when treating small numbers of patients. The study of circulating tumor cells 
can be considered when key study-related biological questions require intact cells, and it can 
be visualized as a “live liquid biopsy” where cells can be interrogated in an unprecedented 
fashion (Yu et al., 2013). Similarly, tumor-derived exosomes appear to contain not only 
DNA but also RNA, microRNA, proteins, and lipids from cancer cells and provide an 
opportunity for the non-invasive, multidimensional profiling of cancer (Hoshino et al., 
2015). The viability of this approach has been facilitated by techniques that selectively 
enrich for tumor-derived exosomes (Melo et al., 2015). Finally, for those patients who 
ultimately succumb to their disease, rapid autopsy programs can provide invaluable insights 
as well as sustaining models to further accelerate drug development (Juric et al., 2015).
Unexplored Facets of Sensitizing Biomarkers
Optimizing genome-driven oncology will likely demand that we move beyond simple 
classifications of biomarkers as being present or absent in a given patient. Additional facets 
of a genomic alteration, including absolute copy number, clonality, and zygosity, may 
condition its function or modify response to targeted therapy. Advanced analytical 
techniques, originally developed to generate precise estimates of subclonal heterogeneity, 
allele-specific absolute copy number, and zygosity from whole-exome sequencing, are now 
being scaled down to targeted sequencing data to address this unmet need (Carter et al., 
2012; Shen and Seshan, 2016).
An important and still unresolved clinical question is the degree to which subclonal 
heterogeneity of a sensitizing genomic biomarker affects the likelihood of response. With 
modern analytic techniques, it is now possible to catalog the clonality of the individual 
genomic variants within a single sequenced site and incorporate evolutionary inference to 
identify the order in which they were acquired within “molecular” time. These analyses will 
provide unique insights into how tumors evolve and permit an additional dimension of 
genotype-to-response-phenotype correlation. Similarly, copy-number estimates made by 
most clinically implemented next-generation sequencing bioinformatic pipelines do not 
currently correct for tumor purity or provide estimates of allele-specific absolute copy 
number. An increasing body of evidence, however, suggests that high absolute copy number 
of gene amplifications, including MET and FGFR2, are necessary to condition response 
(D.R. Camidge et al., 2014; ASCO Annual Meeting abstract; Pearson et al., 2016). As a 
result, standardized reporting of allele-specific absolute copy number will enhance the 
optimal genomic selection of patients when targeting oncogene amplifications.
Hyman et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Understanding the zygosity of genomic alterations involving tumor-suppressor genes may 
also be important for targeted therapies that exploit synthetic lethality. For instance, PARP 
inhibitors have shown efficacy in treating homologous recombination-deficient (HRD) 
tumors with deleterious germline BRCA1/2 mutations. One clinically important question is 
whether PARP inhibitors may also be effective in patients whose tumors harbor homologous 
recombination deficiency driven by somatic mutations. Preliminary data suggest that 
somatic alterations in key HRD genes may require biallelic inactivation to sensitize tumors 
to PARP inhibitors (Mateo et al., 2015). Computational techniques capable of determining 
whether somatic truncating variants in HRD genes are accompanied by loss of 
heterozygosity of the remaining wild-type allele may therefore be necessary to optimally 
select patients for these therapies. Similarly, recent data demonstrate that biallelic loss of 
SMARCA4 (BRG1) and SMARCB1 (INI1) in rhabdoid carcinomas and epithelioid 
sarcomas, respectively, may be targetable with EZH2 inhibitors (Kim et al., 2015). Efforts 
are currently underway to extend this therapeutic strategy to a wider range of epigenetic 
modifiers, including BAP1 and ARID1A (Bitler et al., 2015; LaFave et al., 2015).
DNA-based signatures are also emerging as an important tool with which to select targeted 
therapy. For example, several DNA-based gene signatures have been developed to detect the 
genomic instability associated with homologous recombination deficiency caused by 
inactivation of BRCA1, BRCA2, and potentially a variety of other related genes (Telli et al., 
2016). Demonstrating the potential value of this approach, a recent phase III study in ovarian 
cancer utilizing a DNA-based homologous recombination signature demonstrated that 
signature-positive patients treated with the PARP inhibitor niraparib versus placebo had a 
near tripling of their progression-free survival (12.9 versus 3.8 months) compared to 
signature-negative patients (Mirza et al., 2016). These homologous recombination-
deficiency signatures, also sometimes referred to as “BRCA-ness” or “genome scar” assays, 
also demonstrate how the field will begin to extend precision-oncology approaches into 
tumor types, such as prostate and pancreatic cancer, that otherwise do not harbor frequent 
actionable genomic variants.
Moving beyond DNA
Although DNA sequencing provides a wealth of information, genomic alterations are only 
one of several important biologic drivers of cancer. As a consequence, it is understood that 
DNA sequencing will not be sufficient to optimally select patients for all classes of targeted 
therapy. In the laboratory, high-throughput technologies, including RNA sequencing, 
genomewide DNA methylation profiling, microRNA profiling, and phosphoprotein arrays, 
have been extensively used to further improve our understanding of the biologic 
dependencies of cancer. Of these various technologies, the one that is closest to the clinic is 
RNA sequencing, also sometimes referred to as transcriptome sequencing. The incremental 
value of RNA sequencing in addition to existing DNA sequencing is two-fold. First, when 
compared to targeted or whole-exome DNA sequencing, RNA sequencing is better suited to 
detecting structural rearrangements resulting in fusion gene products. Along these lines, we 
have recently instituted in our center a “cancer of unknown driver” initiative whereby 
cancers for which prospective targeted DNA sequencing fails to identify a genomic driver 
are reflexed to targeted RNA sequencing with the goal of identifying cryptogenic kinase 
Hyman et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 fusions. This approach has already identified novel and potentially actionable kinase fusions 
involving NTRK1/2/3, FGFR2/3, BRAF, NRG1, RET, ERBB2, and AKT1. Similar 
approaches have been adopted by some high-volume commercial laboratories in cancer 
types such as sarcomas and hematologic malignancies in which the diversity of potential 
gene fusions cannot be efficiency interrogated by targeted DNA-based methods (He et al., 
2016). In addition to enhanced detecting sensitivity for structural rearrangements in the 
genome, RNA sequencing offers the ability to measure the transcription of both mutant and 
wild-type proteins. In breast cancer, earlier approaches to measuring gene-expression 
profiling are already being used to provide a more refined prognosis than that based on 
standard clinical risk factors alone and, in doing so, guide treatment decisions (Cardoso et 
al., 2016). The understanding of the transcriptome at the point of care in each patient will 
provide an invaluable additional dimension of information, and we believe it is the next 
frontier for precision oncology. Pilot programs have already begun evaluating the feasibility 
of incorporating broader RNA sequencing into prospective precision-medicine programs 
(Roychowdhury et al., 2011). The preliminary results have been encouraging but are limited 
by the quantity and type of tumor material required, as well as challenges associated with 
scaling this approach to larger patient volumes. Over time, we expect these technical, 
scientific, and financial obstacles to be solved, and we must begin to consider now how to 
begin to incorporate these technologies into the clinic.
Expanding Accessibility and Enrollment to Precision-Oncology Studies
The timely and efficient execution of precision-oncology studies, like those we detail here, 
represents a true engineering challenge on top of an already inefficient clinical-trials model. 
In fact, less than 5% of cancer patients are enrolled into clinical trials. Therefore, lack of 
execution represents a real threat that needs to be addressed. The components of this 
engineering problem include routine tumor sequencing as a central component of cancer 
care, the input and annotation of genomic findings into the medical records, and both patient 
and physician education. Furthermore, robust methods for connecting patients with rare 
actionable alterations to clinical trials targeting these genomic variants are needed. Within 
our own institution, we have developed a system that automatically identifies, tracks, and 
recruits patients with qualifying genomic alterations to the appropriate genome-driven study 
(Eubank et al., 2016). This system has allowed treating physicians to rely on domain experts 
to interpret the actionability of individual genomic alterations and identify relevant and 
immediately available treatment opportunities for their patients. The broader field urgently 
needs a similar centralized genomic “clearing house” wherein the results of clinical genomic 
sequencing can be shared and matched in real time against the qualifying genomic 
alterations being targeted by individual studies nationwide. Unlike current static study 
registries such as ClinicalTrials.gov, such a system would ensure a privacy-compliant two-
way exchange between patients and study sponsors who could indicate the specific genomic 
variants of interest and provide a path to enrollment for qualifying patients. Several groups, 
including the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health, are working to develop such a 
resource (Siu et al., 2016).
Facilitating the identification of highly relevant and immediately available genomically 
matched studies is only the first step; patients must be able to readily access these studies. 
Hyman et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Geographical considerations remain an important barrier to study access. The current 
generation of precision-oncology studies are beginning to address this problem in a number 
of ways, from supporting patient travel to study centers to bringing the study to the patient 
once they are identified. These efforts have significantly improved access to genomically 
matched therapy studies in the community, where the majority of cancer patients continue to 
be treated. Access to genomically matched therapy has also been improved by the 
consolidation of precision-oncology trials into larger protocols that have alternatively been 
referred to as “master,” “umbrella,” or “molecular allocation” studies. These protocols 
generally offer multiple therapeutic options matched to the patient’s individual tumor 
genome. Several of these studies, such as the iSpy2 (NCT01042379), Lung-MAP 
(NCT02154490), ALCHEMIST (NCT02194738), and BATTLE-2 (NCT01248247) trials, 
have explored genomically defined subtypes of specific cancers. Master protocols can also 
offer treatment across a variety of tumor types and, in this way, essentially become a 
collection of individual basket studies; these include NCI-MATCH (NCT02465060), 
MyPathway (NCT02091141), and the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) 
Targeted Agent and Profiling Utilization Registry (TAPUR) (NCT02693535). The most 
ambitious effort to date is the NCI-MATCH study, which is anticipated to have more than 30 
unique treatment arms assigned primarily on the basis of genomic selection criteria. Unlike 
many related efforts, NCI-MATCH incorporates centralized high-multiplexed tumor 
genomic screening, with the plan to biopsy and sequence 6,000 patients. This feature has 
made NCI-MATCH particularly attractive to community oncologists who might otherwise 
not have access to high-quality tumor genetic screening.
Conclusion
This is a transformative time for cancer therapy. The feasibility of establishing the detailed 
molecular portraits of individual cancers, even at the point of care, is no longer the primary 
obstacle to progress. Similarly, new highly potent and selective purpose-built inhibitors are 
being developed at a time when our understanding of actionable mutations in cancer 
genomes is improving steadily, resulting in continuous erosion of the market share of what 
has been called the undruggable genome. What is most lacking, therefore, is the knowledge 
of how best to use these new and powerful tools that are already available to us. In short, we 
have an engineering problem. The strategies we propose here establish a framework to begin 
to address this critical knowledge and implementation gap. We cannot achieve the progress 
needed with conventional approaches. Rapid progress demands a new degree of 
collaboration and information exchange between basic and translational laboratory scientists 
and clinical investigators acting as equal partners. Evaluating the genomic hypotheses that 
emerge from this collaboration will require us to improve the efficiency with which we 
sequence patients, annotate results, identify accountable alterations, notify involved parties, 
enroll into relevant studies, and finally, interpret the outcome and iterate as necessary. If we 
do so, we will finally have the tools to make truly transformative insights into the basic 
biology of cancer and its treatment.
Hyman et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
We thank Alison M. Schram and Maurizio Scaltriti for their critical reading of this manuscript, Jianjiong Gao and 
Nikolaus Schultz for clinical annotation of sequenced specimens, and Scott Johnson for assistance with medical 
graphics. The authors acknowledge support from the Prostate Cancer Foundation, the Sontag Foundation, the Josie 
Robertson Foundation, the Breast Cancer Research Foundation, the Geoffrey Beene Cancer Research Center, the 
Marie-Josée and Henry R. Kravis Center for Molecular Oncology, Cycle for Survival, and National Institutes of 
Health awards R01 CA190642-01A1 (J.B.), P50 CA092629 (B.S.T.), R01 CA207244 (D.M.H. and B.S.T.), U54 
OD202355 (B.S.T.), and P30 CA008748. J.B. is a member of the scientific advisory board of GRAIL.
References
Baselga J, Campone M, Piccart M, Burris HA 3rd, Rugo HS, Sahmoud T, Noguchi S, Gnant M, 
Pritchard KI, Lebrun F, et al. Everolimus in postmenopausal hormone-receptor-positive advanced 
breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366:520–529. [PubMed: 22149876] 
Beltran H, Eng K, Mosquera JM, Sigaras A, Romanel A, Rennert H, Kossai M, Pauli C, Faltas B, 
Fontugne J, et al. Whole-exome sequencing of metastatic cancer and biomarkers of treatment 
response. JAMA Oncol. 2015; 1:466–474. [PubMed: 26181256] 
Bitler BG, Aird KM, Garipov A, Li H, Amatangelo M, Kossenkov AV, Schultz DC, Liu Q, Shih IeM, 
Conejo-Garcia JR, et al. Synthetic lethality by targeting EZH2 methyltransferase activity in 
ARIDIA-mutated cancers. Nat Med. 2015; 21:231–238. [PubMed: 25686104] 
Bleeker FE, Felicioni L, Buttitta F, Lamba S, Cardone L, Rodolfo M, Scarpa A, Leenstra S, Frattini M, 
Barbareschi M, et al. AKT1(E17K) in human solid tumours. Oncogene. 2008; 27:5648–5650. 
[PubMed: 18504432] 
Bollag G, Hirth P, Tsai J, Zhang J, Ibrahim PN, Cho H, Spevak W, Zhang C, Zhang Y, Habets G, et al. 
Clinical efficacy of a RAF inhibitor needs broad target blockade in BRAF-mutant melanoma. 
Nature. 2010; 467:596–599. [PubMed: 20823850] 
Bose R, Kavuri SM, Searleman AC, Shen W, Shen D, Koboldt DC, Monsey J, Goel N, Aronson AB, 
Li S, et al. Activating HER2 mutations in HER2 gene amplification negative breast cancer. Cancer 
Discov. 2013; 3:224–237. [PubMed: 23220880] 
Bower H, Björkholm M, Dickman PW, Hoglund M, Lambert PC, Andersson TM. Life expectancy of 
patients with chronic myeloid leukemia approaches the life expectancy of the general population. J 
Clin Oncol. 2016; 34:2851–2857. [PubMed: 27325849] 
Brenan L, Andreev A, Cohen O, Pantel S, Kamburov A, Cacchiarelli D, Persky NS, Zhu C, Bagul M, 
Goetz EM, et al. Phenotypic characterization of a comprehensive set of MAPK1/ERK2 missense 
mutants. Cell Rep. 2016; 17:1171–1183. [PubMed: 27760319] 
Brose MS, Cabanillas ME, Cohen EE, Wirth LJ, Riehl T, Yue H, Sherman SI, Sherman EJ. 
Vemurafenib in patients with BRAF(V600E)-positive metastatic or unresectable papillary thyroid 
cancer refractory to radioactive iodine: a non-randomised, multicentre, open-label, phase 2 trial. 
Lancet Oncol. 2016; 17:1272–1282. [PubMed: 27460442] 
Cardoso F, van’t Veer LJ, Bogaerts J, Slaets L, Viale G, Delaloge S, Pierga JY, Brain E, Causeret S, 
DeLorenzi M, et al. MINDACT Investigators. 70-gene signature as an aid to treatment decisions in 
early-stage breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2016; 375:717–729. [PubMed: 27557300] 
Carpten JD, Faber AL, Horn C, Donoho GP, Briggs SL, Robbins CM, Hostetter G, Boguslawski S, 
Moses TY, Savage S, et al. Atransforming mutation in the pleckstrin homology domain of AKT1 
in cancer. Nature. 2007; 448:439–444. [PubMed: 17611497] 
Carter SL, Cibulskis K, Helman E, McKenna A, Shen H, Zack T, Laird PW, Onofrio RC, Winckler W, 
Weir BA, et al. Absolute quantification of somatic DNA alterations in human cancer. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2012; 30:413–421. [PubMed: 22544022] 
Chang MT, Asthana S, Gao SP, Lee BH, Chapman JS, Kandoth C, Gao J, Socci ND, Solit DB, Olshen 
AB, et al. Identifying recurrent mutations in cancerrevealswidespread lineagediversityand 
mutational specificity. Nat Biotechnol. 2016; 34:155–163. [PubMed: 26619011] 
Chen CD, Welsbie DS, Tran C, Baek SH, Chen R, Vessella R, Rosenfeld MG, Sawyers CL. 
Moleculardeterminants of resistance to antiandrogen therapy. Nat Med. 2004; 10:33–39. [PubMed: 
14702632] 
Hyman et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cheng DT, Mitchell TN, Zehir A, Shah RH, Benayed R, Syed A, Chandramohan R, Liu ZY, Won HH, 
Scott SN, et al. Memorial Sloan Kettering-Integrated Mutation Profiling of Actionable Cancer 
Targets (MSK-IMPACT): A hybridization capture-based next-generation sequencing clinical 
assayforsolid tumor molecular oncology. J Mol Diagn. 2015; 17:251–264. [PubMed: 25801821] 
Cortes JE, Kantarjian H, Shah NP, Bixby D, Mauro MJ, Flinn I, O’Hare T, Hu S, Narasimhan NI, 
Rivera VM, et al. Ponatinib in refractory Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemias. N Engl J 
Med. 2012; 367:2075–2088. [PubMed: 23190221] 
Cunanan KM, Gonen M, Shen R, Hyman DM, Riely GJ, Begg CB, Iasonos A. Basket trials in 
oncology: a trade-off between complexity and efficiency. J Clin Oncol. 2016; 35:271–273. 
[PubMed: 27893325] 
Davies H, Bignell GR, Cox C, Stephens P, Edkins S, Clegg S, Teague J, Woffendin H, Garnett MJ, 
Bottomley W, et al. Mutations of the BRAF gene in human cancer. Nature. 2002; 417:949–954. 
[PubMed: 12068308] 
Dawson SJ, Tsui DW, Murtaza M, Biggs H, Rueda OM, Chin SF, Dunning MJ, Gale D, Forshew T, 
Mahler-Araujo B, et al. Analysis ofcirculating tumor DNAto monitor metastatic breast cancer. N 
Engl J Med. 2013; 368:1199–1209. [PubMed: 23484797] 
De Roock W, Claes B, Bernasconi D, De Schutter J, Biesmans B, Fountzilas G, Kalogeras KT, Kotoula 
V, Papamichael D, Laurent-Puig P, et al. Effects of KRAS, BRAF, NRAS, and PIK3CA mutations 
on the efficacy of cetuximab plus chemotherapy in chemotherapy-refractory metastatic colorectal 
cancer: a retrospective consortium analysis. Lancet Oncol. 2010; 11:753–762. [PubMed: 
20619739] 
Diaz LA Jr, Williams RT, Wu J, Kinde I, Hecht JR, Berlin J, Allen B, Bozic I, Reiter JG, Nowak MA, 
et al. The molecularevolution of acquired resistance to targeted EGFR blockade in colorectal 
cancers. Nature. 2012; 486:537–540. [PubMed: 22722843] 
Drilon A, Rekhtman N, Arcila M, Wang L, Ni A, Albano M, Van Voorthuysen M, Somwar R, Smith 
RS, Montecalvo J, et al. Cabozantinib in patients with advanced RET-rearranged non-small-cell 
lung cancer: an open-label, single-centre, phase 2, single-arm trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016b; 17:1653–
1660. [PubMed: 27825636] 
Druker BJ, Guilhot F, O’Brien SG, Gathmann I, Kantarjian H, Gattermann N, Deininger MW, Silver 
RT, Goldman JM, Stone RM, et al. IRIS Investigators. Five-year follow-up of patients receiving 
imatinib for chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2006; 355:2408–2417. [PubMed: 
17151364] 
Eubank MH, Hyman DM, Kanakamedala AD, Gardos SM, Wills JM, Stetson PD. Automated 
eligibility screening and monitoring for genotype-driven precision oncology trials. J Am Med 
Inform Assoc. 2016; 23:777–781. [PubMed: 27016727] 
Frampton GM, Fichtenholtz A, Otto GA, Wang K, Downing SR, He J, Schnall-Levin M, White J, 
Sanford EM, An P, et al. Development and validation of a clinical cancer genomic profiling test 
based on massively parallel DNA sequencing. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:1023–1031. [PubMed: 
24142049] 
Frampton GM, Ali SM, Rosenzweig M, Chmielecki J, Lu X, Bauer TM, Akimov M, Bufill JA, Lee C, 
Jentz D, et al. Activation of MET via diverse exon 14 splicing alterationsoccurs in 
multipletumortypes and confers clinical sensitivity to MET inhibitors. Cancer Discov. 2015; 
5:850–859. [PubMed: 25971938] 
Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, Larkin J, Endesfelder D, Gronroos E, Martinez P, Matthews N, 
Stewart A, Tarpey P, et al. Intratumor heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by 
multiregion sequencing. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366:883–892. [PubMed: 22397650] 
Grossman RL, Heath AP, Ferretti V, Varmus HE, Lowy DR, Kibbe WA, Staudt LM. Toward a shared 
vision for cancer genomic data. N Engl J Med. 2016; 375:1109–1112. [PubMed: 27653561] 
Halevy O, Michalovitz D, Oren M. Different tumor-derived p53 mutants exhibit distinct biological 
activities. Science. 1990; 250:113–116. [PubMed: 2218501] 
Hata AN, Niederst MJ, Archibald HL, Gomez-Caraballo M, Siddiqui FM, Mulvey HE, Maruvka YE, 
Ji F, Bhang HE, Krishnamurthy Radhakrishna V, et al. Tumor cells can follow distinct evolutionary 
paths to become resistant to epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition. Nat Med. 2016; 22:262–
269. [PubMed: 26828195] 
Hyman et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 He J, Abdel-Wahab O, Nahas MK, Wang K, Rampal RK, Intlekofer AM, Patel J, Krivstov A, 
Frampton GM, Young LE, et al. Integrated genomic DNA/RNA profiling of hematologic 
malignancies in the clinical setting. Blood. 2016; 127:3004–3014. [PubMed: 26966091] 
Hoadley KA, Yau C, Wolf DM, Cherniack AD, Tamborero D, Ng S, Leiserson MD, Niu B, McLellan 
MD, Uzunangelov V, et al. Multiplatform analysis of 12 cancer types reveals molecular 
classification within and across tissues of origin. Cell. 2014; 158:929–944. [PubMed: 25109877] 
Hoshino A, Costa-Silva B, Shen TL, Rodrigues G, Hashimoto A, Tesic Mark M, Molina H, Kohsaka 
S, Di Giannatale A, Ceder S, et al. Tumour exosome integrins determine organotropic metastasis. 
Nature. 2015; 527:329–335. [PubMed: 26524530] 
Hyman DM, Puzanov I, Subbiah V, Faris JE, Chau I, Blay JY, Wolf J, Raje NS, Diamond EL, 
Hollebecque A, et al. Vemurafenib in multiple nonmelanoma cancers with BRAF V600 mutations. 
N Engl J Med. 2015a; 373:726–736. [PubMed: 26287849] 
Hyman DM, Smyth L, Bedard PL, Oza A, Dean E, Armstrong A, Lima J, Bando H, Kabos P, Perez-
Fidalgo JA, et al. AZD5363, a catalytic pan-Akt inhibitor, in Akt1 E17K mutation positive 
advanced solid tumors. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015b; 14 Abstract B109. 
Hyman DM, Solit DB, Arcila ME, Cheng DT, Sabbatini P, Baselga J, Berger MF, Ladanyi M. 
Precision medicine at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center: clinical next-generation 
sequencing enabling next-generation targeted therapy trials. Drug Discov Today. 2015c; 20:1422–
1428. [PubMed: 26320725] 
Hyman DM, Piha-Paul S, Rodon J, Saura C, Puzanov I, Shapiro G, Loi S, Joensuu H, Hanrahan A, 
Modi S, et al. Neratinib for ERBB2 mutant, HER2 non-amplified, metastatic breast cancer: 
Preliminary analysis from a multicenter, open-label, multi-histology phase II basket trial. Cancer 
Res. 2016; 76 Abstract PD5–05. 
Jänne PA, Yang JC, Kim DW, Planchard D, Ohe Y, Ramalingam SS, Ahn MJ, Kim SW, Su WC, Horn 
L, et al. AZD9291 in EGFR inhibitor-resistant non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015; 
372:1689–1699. [PubMed: 25923549] 
Juric D, Castel P, Griffith M, Griffith OL, Won HH, Ellis H, Ebbesen SH, Ainscough BJ, Ramu A, Iyer 
G, et al. Convergent loss of PTEN leads to clinical resistance to a PI(3)Kα inhibitor. Nature. 2015; 
518:240–244. [PubMed: 25409150] 
Kandoth C, McLellan MD, Vandin F, Ye K, Niu B, Lu C, Xie M, Zhang Q, McMichael JF, 
Wyczalkowski MA, et al. Mutational landscape and significance across 12 major cancer types. 
Nature. 2013; 502:333–339. [PubMed: 24132290] 
Karnoub AE, Weinberg RA. Ras oncogenes: split personalities. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2008; 9:517–
531. [PubMed: 18568040] 
Kaufman B, Shapira-Frommer R, Schmutzler RK, Audeh MW, Friedlander M, Balmaña J, Mitchell G, 
Fried G, Stemmer SM, Hubert A, et al. Olaparib monotherapy in patients with advanced cancer 
and a germline BRCA1/2 mutation. J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33:244–250. [PubMed: 25366685] 
Kim E, Ilic N, Shrestha Y, Zou L, Kamburov A, Zhu C, Yang X, Lubonja R, Tran N, Nguyen C, et al. 
Systematic functional interrogation of rare cancer variants identifies oncogenic alleles. Cancer 
Discov. 2016; 6:714–726. [PubMed: 27147599] 
Kim KH, Kim W, Howard TP, Vazquez F, Tsherniak A, Wu JN, Wang W, Haswell JR, Walensky LD, 
Hahn WC, et al. SWI/SNF-mutant cancers depend on catalytic and non-catalytic activity of EZH2. 
Nat Med. 2015; 21:1491–1496. [PubMed: 26552009] 
Kitzman JO, Starita LM, Lo RS, Fields S, Shendure J. Massively parallel single-amino-acid 
mutagenesis. Nat Methods. 2015; 12:203–206. 4, 206. [PubMed: 25559584] 
Kivioja T, Vähärautio A, Karlsson K, Bonke M, Enge M, Linnarsson S, Taipale J. Counting absolute 
numbers of molecules using unique molecular identifiers. Nat Methods. 2011; 9:72–74. [PubMed: 
22101854] 
LaFave LM, Béguelin W, Koche R, Teater M, Spitzer B, Chramiec A, Papalexi E, Keller MD, Hricik 
T, Konstantinoff K, et al. Loss of BAP1 function leads to EZH2-dependent transformation. Nat 
Med. 2015; 21:1344–1349. [PubMed: 26437366] 
Lai A, Kahraman M, Govek S, Nagasawa J, Bonnefous C, Julien J, Douglas K, Sensintaffar J, Lu N, 
Lee KJ, et al. Identification of GDC-0810 (ARN-810), an orally bioavailable selective estrogen 
Hyman et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 receptor degrader (SERD) that demonstrates robust activity in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer 
xenografts. J Med Chem. 2015; 58:4888–4904. [PubMed: 25879485] 
Landrum MJ, Lee JM, Benson M, Brown G, Chao C, Chitipiralla S, Gu B, Hart J, Hoffman D, Hoover 
J, et al. ClinVar: public archive of interpretations of clinically relevant variants. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2016; 44(D1):D862–D868. [PubMed: 26582918] 
Lanman RB, Mortimer SA, Zill OA, Sebisanovic D, Lopez R, Blau S, Collisson EA, Divers SG, Hoon 
DS, Kopetz ES, et al. Analytical and clinical validation of a digital sequencing panel for 
quantitative, highly accurate evaluation of cell-free circulating tumor DNA. PLoS ONE. 2015; 
10:e0140712. [PubMed: 26474073] 
Lawrence MS, Stojanov P, Mermel CH, Robinson JT, Garraway LA, Golub TR, Meyerson M, Gabriel 
SB, Lander ES, Getz G. Discovery and saturation analysis of cancer genes across 21 tumour types. 
Nature. 2014; 505:495–501. [PubMed: 24390350] 
Le DT, Uram JN, Wang H, Bartlett BR, Kemberling H, Eyring AD, Skora AD, Luber BS, Azad NS, 
Laheru D, et al. PD-1 blockade in tumors with mismatch-repair deficiency. N Engl J Med. 2015; 
372:2509–2520. [PubMed: 26028255] 
Le Tourneau C, Paoletti X, Servant N, Bièche I, Gentien D, Rio Frio T, Vincent-Salomon A, Servois V, 
Romejon J, Mariani O, et al. Randomised proof-of-concept phase II trial comparing targeted 
therapy based on tumour molecular profiling vs conventional therapy in patients with refractory 
cancer: results of the feasibility part of the SHIVA trial. Br J Cancer. 2014; 111:17–24. [PubMed: 
24762958] 
Loxo. Press release: Loxo Oncology receives breakthrough therapy designation from US Food and 
Drug Administration for LOXO-101. 2016. https://ir.loxooncology.com/press-releases/loxo-
oncology-receives-breakthrough-therapy-designation-from-u.s.-food-and-drug-administration-for-
loxo-101
Mateo J, Carreira S, Sandhu S, Miranda S, Mossop H, Perez-Lopez R, Nava Rodrigues D, Robinson 
D, Omlin A, Tunariu N, et al. DNA-repair defects and olaparib in metastatic prostate cancer. N 
Engl J Med. 2015; 373:1697–1708. [PubMed: 26510020] 
Melnikov A, Rogov P, Wang L, Gnirke A, Mikkelsen TS. Comprehensive mutational scanning of a 
kinase in vivo reveals substrate-dependent fitness landscapes. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014; 42:e112. 
[PubMed: 24914046] 
Melo SA, Luecke LB, Kahlert C, Fernandez AF, Gammon ST, Kaye J, LeBleu VS, Mittendorf EA, 
Weitz J, Rahbari N, et al. Glypican-1 identifies cancer exosomes and detects early pancreatic 
cancer. Nature. 2015; 523:177–182. [PubMed: 26106858] 
Meric-Bernstam F, Brusco L, Shaw K, Horombe C, Kopetz S, Davies MA, Routbort M, Piha-Paul SA, 
Janku F, Ueno N, et al. Feasibility of large-scale genomic testing to facilitate enrollment onto 
genomically matched clinical trials. J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33:2753–2762. [PubMed: 26014291] 
Milojkovic D, Apperley J. Mechanisms of resistance to imatinib and second-generation tyrosine 
inhibitors in chronic myeloid leukemia. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:7519–7527. [PubMed: 
20008852] 
Mirza MR, Monk BJ, Herrstedt J, Oza AM, Mahner S, Redondo A, Fabbro M, Ledermann JA, Lorusso 
D, Vergote I, et al. Niraparib maintenance therapy in platinum-sensitive, recurrent ovarian cancer. 
N Engl J Med. 2016; 375:2154–2164. [PubMed: 27717299] 
Misale S, Yaeger R, Hobor S, Scala E, Janakiraman M, Liska D, Valtorta E, Schiavo R, Buscarino M, 
Siravegna G, et al. Emergence of KRAS mutations and acquired resistance to anti-EGFR therapy 
in colorectal cancer. Nature. 2012; 486:532–536. [PubMed: 22722830] 
Pearson A, Smyth E, Babina IS, Herrera-Abreu MT, Tarazona N, Peckitt C, Kilgour E, Smith NR, Geh 
C, Rooney C, et al. High-level clonal FGFR amplification and response to FGFR inhibition in a 
translational clinical trial. Cancer Discov. 2016; 6:838–851. [PubMed: 27179038] 
Peschard P, Fournier TM, Lamorte L, Naujokas MA, Band H, Langdon WY, Park M. Mutation of the 
c-Cbl TKB domain binding site on the Met receptor tyrosine kinase converts it into a transforming 
protein. Mol Cell. 2001; 8:995–1004. [PubMed: 11741535] 
Piccart-Gebhart MJ, Procter M, Leyland-Jones B, Goldhirsch A, Untch M, Smith I, Gianni L, Baselga 
J, Bell R, Jackisch C, et al. Trastuzumab after adjuvant chemotherapy in HER2-positive breast 
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005; 353:1659–1672. [PubMed: 16236737] 
Hyman et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Planchard D, Kim TM, Mazieres J, Quoix E, Riely G, Barlesi F, Souquet PJ, Smit EF, Groen HJ, Kelly 
RJ, et al. Dabrafenib in patients with BRAF(V600E)-positive advanced non-small-cell lung 
cancer: a single-arm, multicentre, open-label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016; 17:642–650. 
[PubMed: 27080216] 
Poulikakos PI, Persaud Y, Janakiraman M, Kong X, Ng C, Moriceau G, Shi H, Atefi M, Titz B, Gabay 
MT, et al. RAF inhibitor resistance is mediated by dimerization of aberrantly spliced 
BRAF(V600E). Nature. 2011; 480:387–390. [PubMed: 22113612] 
Prahallad A, Sun C, Huang S, Di Nicolantonio F, Salazar R, Zecchin D, Beijersbergen RL, Bardelli A, 
Bernards R. Unresponsiveness of colon cancer to BRAF(V600E) inhibition through feedback 
activation of EGFR. Nature. 2012; 483:100–103. [PubMed: 22281684] 
Pritchard CC, Mateo J, Walsh MF, De Sarkar N, Abida W, Beltran H, Garofalo A, Gulati R, Carreira S, 
Eeles R, et al. Inherited DNA-repair gene mutations in men with metastatic prostate cancer. N 
Engl J Med. 2016; 375:443–53. [PubMed: 27433846] 
Robert C, Karaszewska B, Schachter J, Rutkowski P, Mackiewicz A, Stroiakovski D, Lichinitser M, 
Dummer R, Grange F, Mortier L, et al. Improved overall survival in melanoma with combined 
dabrafenib and trametinib. N Engl J Med. 2015; 372:30–39. [PubMed: 25399551] 
Roychowdhury S, Iyer MK, Robinson DR, Lonigro RJ, Wu YM, Cao X, Kalyana-Sundaram S, Sam L, 
Balbin OA, Quist MJ, et al. Personalized oncology through integrative high-throughput 
sequencing: a pilot study. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:111ra121.
Russo M, Siravegna G, Blaszkowsky LS, Corti G, Crisafulli G, Ahronian LG, Mussolin B, Kwak EL, 
Buscarino M, Lazzari L, et al. Tumor heterogeneity and lesion-specific response to targeted 
therapy in colorectal cancer. Cancer Discov. 2016; 6:147–153. [PubMed: 26644315] 
Saglio G, Kim DW, Issaragrisil S, le Coutre P, Etienne G, Lobo C, Pasquini R, Clark RE, Hochhaus A, 
Hughes TP, et al. Nilotinib versus imatinib for newly diagnosed chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl 
J Med. 2010; 362:2251–2259. [PubMed: 20525993] 
Scher HI, Fizazi K, Saad F, Taplin ME, Sternberg CN, Miller K, de Wit R, Mulders P, Chi KN, Shore 
ND, et al. Increased survival with enzalutamide in prostate cancer after chemotherapy. N Engl J 
Med. 2012; 367:1187–1197. [PubMed: 22894553] 
Schrader KA, Cheng DT, Joseph V, Prasad M, Walsh M, Zehir A, Ni A, Thomas T, Benayed R, Ashraf 
A, et al. Germline variants in targeted tumor sequencing using matched normal DNA. JAMA 
Oncol. 2016; 2:104–111. [PubMed: 26556299] 
Shaw AT, Kim DW, Mehra R, Tan DS, Felip E, Chow LQ, Camidge DR, Vansteenkiste J, Sharma S, 
De Pas T, et al. Ceritinib in ALK-rearranged non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2014; 
370:1189–1197. [PubMed: 24670165] 
Shaw AT, Friboulet L, Leshchiner I, Gainor JF, Bergqvist S, Brooun A, Burke BJ, Deng YL, Liu W, 
Dardaei L, et al. Resensitization to crizotinib by the lorlatinib ALK resistance mutation L1198F. N 
Engl J Med. 2016; 374:54–61. [PubMed: 26698910] 
Shen R, Seshan VE. FACETS: allele-specific copy number and clonal heterogeneity analysis tool for 
high-throughput DNA sequencing. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016; 44:e131. [PubMed: 27270079] 
Siu LL, Lawler M, Haussier D, Knoppers BM, Lewin J, Vis DJ, Liao RG, Andre F, Banks I, Barrett 
JC, et al. Facilitating a culture of responsible and effective sharing of cancer genome data. Nat 
Med. 2016; 22:464–471. [PubMed: 27149219] 
Slamon DJ, Leyland-Jones B, Shak S, Fuchs H, Paton V, Bajamonde A, Fleming T, Eiermann W, 
Wolter J, Pegram M, et al. Use of chemotherapy plus a monoclonal antibody against HER2 for 
metastatic breast cancer that overexpresses HER2. N Engl J Med. 2001; 344:783–792. [PubMed: 
11248153] 
Stransky N, Cerami E, Schalm S, Kim JL, Lengauer C. The landscape of kinase fusions in cancer. Nat 
Commun. 2014; 5:4846. [PubMed: 25204415] 
Swain SM, Baselga J, Kim SB, Ro J, Semiglazov V, Campone M, Ciruelos E, Ferrero JM, 
Schneeweiss A, Heeson S, et al. Pertuzumab, trastuzumab, and docetaxel in HER2-positive 
metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015; 372:724–734. [PubMed: 25693012] 
Tabernero J, Bahleda R, Dienstmann R, Infante JR, Mita A, Italiano A, Calvo E, Moreno V, Adamo B, 
Gazzah A, et al. Phase I dose-escalation study of JNJ-42756493, an oral pan-fibroblast growth 
Hyman et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 factor receptor inhibitor, in patients with advanced solid tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33:3401–
3408. [PubMed: 26324363] 
Tannock IF, Hickman JA. Limits to personalized cancer medicine. N Engl J Med. 2016; 375:1289–
1294. [PubMed: 27682039] 
Telli ML, Timms KM, Reid J, Hennessy B, Mills GB, Jensen KC, Szallasi Z, Barry WT, Winer EP, 
Tung NM, et al. Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) score predicts response to 
platinum-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with triple-negative breast cancer. Clin 
Cancer Res. 2016; 22:3764–3773. [PubMed: 26957554] 
Thress KS, Paweletz CP, Felip E, Cho BC, Stetson D, Dougherty B, Lai Z, Markovets A, Vivancos A, 
Kuang Y, et al. Acquired EGFR C797S mutation mediates resistance to AZD9291 in non-small 
cell lung cancer harboring EGFR T790M. Nat Med. 2015; 21:560–562. [PubMed: 25939061] 
Tiacci E, Park JH, De Carolis L, Chung SS, Broccoli A, Scott S, Zaja F, Devlin S, Pulsoni A, Chung 
YR, et al. Targeting mutant BRAF in relapsed or refractory hairy-cell leukemia. N Engl J Med. 
2015; 373:1733–1747. [PubMed: 26352686] 
Tirosh I, Izar B, Prakadan SM, Wadsworth MH 2nd, Treacy D, Trombetta JJ, Rotem A, Rodman C, 
Lian C, Murphy G, et al. Dissecting the multicellular ecosystem of metastatic melanoma by single-
cell RNA-seq. Science. 2016; 352:189–196. [PubMed: 27124452] 
Toy W, Shen Y, Won H, Green B, Sakr RA, Will M, Li Z, Gala K, Fanning S, King TA, et al. ESR1 
ligand-binding domain mutations in hormone-resistant breast cancer. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:1439–
1445. [PubMed: 24185512] 
Turner NC, Ro J, André F, Loi S, Verma S, Iwata H, Harbeck N, Loibl S, Huang Bartlett C, Zhang K, 
et al. Palbociclib in hormone-receptor-positive advanced breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015; 
373:209–219. [PubMed: 26030518] 
Vaishnavi A, Le AT, Doebele RC. TRKing down an old oncogene in a new era of targeted therapy. 
Cancer Discov. 2015; 5:25–34. [PubMed: 25527197] 
Voest EE, Bernards R. DNA-guided precision medicine for cancer: a case of irrational exuberance? 
Cancer Discov. 2016; 6:130–132. [PubMed: 26851184] 
Wan PT, Garnett MJ, Roe SM, Lee S, Niculescu-Duvaz D, Good VM, Jones CM, Marshall CJ, 
Springer CJ, Barford D, Marais R, Cancer Genome Project. Mechanism of activation of the RAF-
ERK signaling pathway by oncogenic mutations of B-RAF. Cell. 2004; 116:855–867. [PubMed: 
15035987] 
Yang JC, Sequist LV, Geater SL, Tsai CM, Mok TS, Schuler M, Yamamoto N, Yu CJ, Ou SH, Zhou C, 
et al. Clinical activity of afatinib in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer harbouring 
uncommon EGFR mutations: a combined post-hoc analysis of LUX-Lung 2, LUX-Lung 3, and 
LUX-Lung 6. Lancet Oncol. 2015; 16:830–838. [PubMed: 26051236] 
Yao Z, Torres NM, Tao A, Gao Y, Luo L, Li Q, de Stanchina E, Abdel-Wahab O, Solit DB, Poulikakos 
PI, Rosen N. BRAF mutants evade ERK-dependent feedback bydifferent mechanisms that 
determine their sensitivity to pharmacologic inhibition. Cancer Cell. 2015; 28:370–383. [PubMed: 
26343582] 
Yu M, Bardia A, Wittner BS, Stott SL, Smas ME, Ting DT, Isakoff SJ, Ciciliano JC, Wells MN, Shah 
AM, et al. Circulating breast tumor cells exhibit dynamic changes in epithelial and mesenchymal 
composition. Science. 2013; 339:580–584. [PubMed: 23372014] 
Zaretsky JM, Garcia-Diaz A, Shin DS, Escuin-Ordinas H, Hugo W, Hu-Lieskovan S, Torrejon DY, 
Abril-Rodriguez G, Sandoval S, Barthly L, et al. Mutations associated with acquired resistanceto 
PD-1 blockade in melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2016; 375:819–829. [PubMed: 27433843] 
Zhang J, Walsh MF, Wu G, Edmonson MN, Gruber TA, Easton J, Hedges D, Ma X, Zhou X, Yergeau 
DA, et al. Germline mutations in predisposition genes in pediatric cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015; 
373:2336–2346. [PubMed: 26580448] 
Hyman et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Druggable Alterations in Oncology Today and in the Near Future
The percent of patients by cancer type harboring a biomarker that, at present, guides the use 
of either FDA-approved or standard-of-care therapies (open circles) compared to the fraction 
of patients in the same tumor type harboring a genomic alteration with compelling clinical 
evidence that it predicts response to a drug but neither the genomic biomarker nor the drug 
are standard-of-care yet in that indication represented by an arrow.
Hyman et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Approaches to Novel Target Validation
Discovery of a novel target is traditionally followed by biologic validation before proceeding 
with clinical credentialing. This “monogenic” low-throughput process involves evaluation of 
one genomic alteration at a time. Next-generation sequencing at the point of care now 
routinely identifies novel genomic alterations in patients who are in need of new treatment 
strategies and cannot wait for initial biologic validation. In a “polygenic” high-throughput 
model, novel genomic alterations observed in patients undergo an initial prequalification 
using a computational framework that considers allelic recurrence, paralogy, structure, 
expression, and gene dosage to evaluate the likelihood of clinical relevance. Patients whose 
tumors harbor qualifying alterations that are identified as potentially activating can then be 
enrolled in genome-driven clinical trials and the responses observed, potentially providing 
initial clinical credentialing before biologic characterization. In this model, clinical studies 
become platforms for exploring the functional consequences of novel genomic alterations 
detected in the same patient populations.
Hyman et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. The Hallmarks of a Precision-Oncology Study
Shown are multiple facets of a modern oncology trial that not only refines a biomarker 
hypothesis in a scientifically principled manner but also can serve as an engine to drive new 
scientific discoveries. The hallmarks of a modern precision-oncology study include four 
primary scientific objectives: identification of the target, confirmation of target inhibition, 
biologic credentialing of the target, and description of the mechanisms underlying acquired 
resistance. Collection and analysis of biospecimens should be organized around, and driven 
by, these key objectives.
Hyman et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Hyman et al.
Page 30
Table 1
Genes Used to Guide FDA-Approved Therapies
Mutations Used to Select Targeted Therapy
ABL1
CML, ALL
EGFR
lung cancer
ALK
lung cancer
ROS1
lung cancer
BRAF
melanoma
ERBB2
breast and gastric cancer
KIT
gastrointestinal stromal tumor
PDGFRA
leukemia, MDS
PDGFRB
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
BRCA1 and BRCA2 (germline)
ovarian cancer
Mutations Used to Select against Targeted Therapy
KRAS
colorectal cancer
NRAS
colorectal cancer
BRAF
colorectal cancer
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Hyman et al.
Page 31
Table 2
Genes with Clinical Evidence Supporting Them as Targets for Drug Development
Gene
Alteration(s)
RET
M918, fusions
MET
exon 14 splice, amplifications
AKT1
E17K
ERBB2
activating missense mutations
FGFR1/2/3
fusions, amplifications, activating missense mutations
FLT3
ITD, D835
IDH1
R132
IDH2
R140
MAP2K1 (MEK1)
activating missense mutations
MTOR
activating missense mutations
BRAF
non-V600-activating mutations, fusions
NTRK1/2/3
fusions
NRG1
fusions
PIK3CA
activating missense mutations
Homologous recombination deficiencies (BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, RAD50, ATM, 
RAD51, RAD51B/C/D, FANCA, CHEK1/2)
inactivating alterations
ARAF
S214
EGFR
rare activating missense mutations, insertions
TSC1/2
inactivating alterations
SMARCA4
inactivating alterations
SMARRB1
inactivating alterations
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 09.
