 Impact of Hypertension on Cognitive Function:
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
Costantino Iadecola, MD, Chair, Kristine Yaffe, MD, Co-Chair, José Biller, MD, FAHA, Lisa C. 
Bratzke, PhD, FAHA, Frank M. Faraci, PhD, FAHA, Philip B. Gorelick, MD, FAHA, Martha 
Gulati, MD, MS, FAHA, Hooman Kamel, MD, David S. Knopman, MD, Lenore J. Launer, MD, 
Jane S. Saczynski, PhD, Sudha Seshadri, MD, and Adina Zeki Al Hazzouri, PhD on behalf of 
the American Heart Association Council on Hypertension; Council on Clinical Cardiology; 
Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke 
Nursing; Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research; and Stroke Council
Abstract
Background—Age-related dementia, most commonly caused by Alzheimer disease or 
cerebrovascular factors (vascular dementia), is a major public health threat. Chronic arterial 
hypertension is a well-established risk factor for both types of dementia, but the link between 
hypertension and its treatment and cognition remains poorly understood. In this scientific 
statement, a multidisciplinary team of experts examines the impact of hypertension on cognition to 
assess the state of the knowledge, to identify gaps, and to provide future directions.
Methods—Authors with relevant expertise were selected to contribute to this statement in 
accordance with the American Heart Association conflict-of-interest management policy. Panel 
members were assigned topics relevant to their areas of expertise, reviewed the literature, and 
summarized the available data.
Results—Hypertension disrupts the structure and function of cerebral blood vessels, leads to 
ischemic damage of white matter regions critical for cognitive function, and may promote 
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the 
express permission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://www.heart.org/
HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permission-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request 
Form” appears on the right side of the page.
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an 
outside relationship or a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the 
writing group are required to complete and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that might be perceived 
as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on June 10, 2016, 
and the American Heart Association Executive Committee on July 20, 2016. A copy of the document is available at http://
professional.heart.org/statements by using either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse by Topic” area. To purchase 
additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Iadecola C, Yaffe K, Biller J, Bratzke LC, Faraci FM, 
Gorelick PB, Gulati M, Kamel H, Knopman DS, Launer LJ, Saczynski JS, Seshadri S, Al Hazzouri AZ; on behalf of the American 
Heart Association Council on Hypertension; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; 
Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research; and Stroke Council. Impact of 
hypertension on cognitive function: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA 
statements and guidelines development, visit http://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” drop-down 
menu, then click “Publication Development.”
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Published in final edited form as:
Hypertension. 2016 December ; 68(6): e67–e94. doi:10.1161/HYP.0000000000000053.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Alzheimer pathology. There is strong evidence of a deleterious influence of midlife hypertension 
on late-life cognitive function, but the cognitive impact of late-life hypertension is less clear. 
Observational studies demonstrated a cumulative effect of hypertension on cerebrovascular 
damage, but evidence from clinical trials that antihypertensive treatment improves cognition is not 
conclusive.
Conclusions—After carefully reviewing the literature, the group concluded that there were 
insufficient data to make evidence-based recommendations. However, judicious treatment of 
hypertension, taking into account goals of care and individual characteristics (eg, age and 
comorbidities), seems justified to safeguard vascular health and, as a consequence, brain health.
Keywords
AHA Scientific Statements; Alzheimer disease; biomarkers; blood pressure; clinical trials; 
neuroimaging; therapy; vascular cognitive impairment
Dementia is a progressive and typically irreversible deterioration of cognitive function that is 
most often seen in older adults.1 Dementia is one of the most common neurological 
disorders, affecting an estimated 30 to 40 million people worldwide. The number of 
individuals with dementia is anticipated to triple by 2050 as a result of the aging of the 
population, demographic shifts, and lack of disease-modifying treatments, with an 
associated cost exceeding $1.1 trillion.2 Alzheimer disease (AD) and cerebrovascular 
diseases are the 2 leading causes of cognitive impairment, accounting for ≈80% of cases and 
often having a mixture of both pathologies.3 The term vascular cognitive impairment (VCI) 
indicates the entire range of cognitive deficits caused by vascular factors, whereas vascular 
dementia refers to the more severe cases of VCI in which the cognitive decline affects day-
to-day functioning negatively.3
Among vascular risk factors, chronic arterial hypertension is a major contributor to cognitive 
impairment.3 Hypertension, a highly prevalent disease affecting an estimated 80 million 
people in the United States and 1 billion individuals worldwide,4 is the leading cause of 
global disease burden and overall health loss.5 The brain is one of the main target organs 
affected by hypertension. Thus, excluding age, hypertension is the most important risk factor 
for cerebrovascular pathology leading to stroke and dementia. The harmful effects of 
hypertension on cognitive function have been recognized at least since the 1960s, when a 
study on psychomotor speed of air traffic controllers and pilots demonstrated reduced 
performance in individuals with hypertension.6 Hypertension has been associated with 
reduced abstract reasoning (executive dysfunction), slowing of mental processing speed, 
and, less frequently, memory deficits.7
Although dementia caused by AD and vascular dementia have traditionally been considered 
distinct nosological entities, increasing evidence indicates that these conditions often 
coexist.8,9 Thus, the neuropathological hallmarks of AD, amyloid plaques and 
neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), are frequently associated with microcerebrovascular and 
macro-cerebrovascular lesions in 40% to 50% of individuals with a clinical diagnosis of 
AD.10,11 In addition, ischemic lesions markedly enhance the impact of AD pathology on 
cognitive function.12,13 Furthermore, traditional cardiovascular risk factors have been 
Iadecola et al.
Page 2
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 suggested to play a role in AD,14 and some estimates indicate that risk factor reduction, 
including treatment of hypertension, could reduce the incidence of clinically diagnosed AD 
up to 30%.15
Cerebral blood vessels are the main target of the deleterious effects of hypertension on the 
brain.16 The resulting structural and functional cerebrovascular alterations underlie many of 
the neuropathological abnormalities responsible for the cognitive deficits, including white 
matter damage, micro-infarcts, microbleeds, silent brain infarcts, and brain atrophy.17 
Hypertension is the most powerful modifiable risk factor for the cerebrovascular damage, 
and the dramatic reduction in stroke mortality over the past several decades has been 
attributed to the treatment of hypertension.18,19 Surprisingly, however, the impact of 
hypertension and its treatment on cognitive impairment has been more difficult to assess, 
and several key questions remain to be answered.
Considering the growing public health import of dementia,1 a critical appraisal of current 
knowledge of the cognitive function associated with hypertension is warranted. Although the 
role of vascular risk factors in cognitive impairment has been addressed in other American 
Heart Association statements,3 there is a strong rationale for an in-depth evaluation of the 
specific role of hypertension. First, the effect of hypertension was previously examined in 
the context of several other risk factors causing vascular dementia, and a detailed analysis of 
the evidence was not provided.3 Second, new epidemiological data and imaging approaches 
have provided further insight into the relationship between hypertension and dementia and 
the cognitive domains that are predominantly affected. Third, the interaction between 
hypertension and AD pathology, a critical issue for both conditions, was not previously 
examined in detail. Therefore, an expert assessment is needed to update healthcare 
professionals on recent advances made in this field, to bring to the forefront outstanding 
questions, and to chart a path for future research directions.
The present statement seeks to provide an appraisal of the contribution of hypertension to 
age-related cognitive dysfunction. This statement refers primarily to the effects of chronic 
arterial hypertension. For simplicity, however, the term hypertension is used throughout the 
text. We first examine the effects of hypertension on the pathobiology of the cerebral 
circulation, focusing on the structural and functional changes induced by chronic elevations 
in blood pressure (BP) on the cerebral vasculature. The cognitive domains most affected by 
hypertension are then reviewed, highlighting their unique features and their differences from 
other causes of dementia. The evidence from observational studies of the effect of 
hypertension on cognition is presented, followed by evidence from randomized, clinical 
trials of BP treatment and on the cognitive effect of hypertension treatment over the life 
course. Subsequent sections focus on the interaction of hypertension with other risk factors 
and the association between hypertension and AD. The final section provides an overall 
summary of the evidence, identifies knowledge gaps, and provides future directions for 
advancing the field.
Iadecola et al.
Page 3
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Methods
Authors with expertise in vascular pathophysiology, epidemiology, neuroimaging, 
neuropathology, and cognitive science pertaining to the effects of hypertension on the brain 
were selected to contribute to this statement. Selection of the writing group was performed 
in accordance with the American Heart Association conflict-of-interest management policy. 
Topics for the statement were identified by the chair and co-chair and revised with input 
from the writing group. Subgroups of experts for each of the topics were established and 
charged with writing the section of the statement pertaining to their expertise. Each 
subgroup performed a search of the relevant English literature considered for inclusion in 
this statement using an up-to-date search strategy of reference databases and appropriate 
search terms. In addition to identifying the article reporting the main cognitive outcomes, we 
also reviewed, if relevant, the report on the primary outcome of the trial and on the trial 
design. Because of the heterogeneity of the studies spanning several decades, rigid inclusion/
exclusion criteria could not generally be applied. We did not use a data abstraction tool. 
Conflicts were resolved by group consensus. The search also included a review of 
bibliographies and manual searches of key articles. Drafts of each section were written and 
sent to the chair and co-chair of the writing group for editing and elimination of redundancy. 
The edited sections were returned to the group members for clarification and revision and 
sent back to the chair and co-chair. The sections were then assembled in a single document 
that was sent back to the members for discussion and comments. On the basis of these 
discussions and consensus, the sections were then edited accordingly by the primary author 
and returned to the chair and co-chair for further editing. The final document was circulated 
among all members of the writing group, and once consensus was reached, the final 
document was submitted for independent peer review. After peer review, the final document 
was approved for publication by the American Heart Association Council on Hypertension, 
Stroke Council, and Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee. After careful review of 
the available data, the group determined that there were insufficient data to make evidence-
based recommendations. Therefore, specific recommendations are not provided.
Effects of Hypertension on Cerebrovascular Structure and Function
The cerebral vasculature is the main target of the deleterious effects of hypertension on the 
brain. Most of the vascular alterations induced by hypertension contribute to cognitive 
impairment by leading to hypoperfusion, ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke, and white matter 
injury. This section outlines the major changes that occur in the cerebral vasculature during 
hypertension, focusing on the structure and function of large and small cerebral vessels, 
progression of atherosclerosis, and blood-brain barrier (BBB) integrity.
Vascular Structure
In humans as in animal models, hypertension is associated with changes in structure of the 
vascular wall of large, medium, and small cerebral vessels (arterioles, capillaries, and 
venules). At the different levels of the cerebrovascular tree, endothelial and smooth muscle 
cells are closely associated with brain cells (astrocytes, neurons, microglia) and perivascular 
cells, constituting the neurovascular unit.20
Iadecola et al.
Page 4
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Atherosclerosis—Hypertension promotes atherosclerosis in both extracranial and 
intracranial arteries feeding the brain and accelerates the progression of intracranial 
atherosclerosis.21 Advanced atherosclerotic lesions impair blood flow and are a major site of 
thrombogenesis.
Vascular Remodeling and Stiffening—Hypertrophic remodeling consists of 
hypertrophy of smooth muscle cells resulting in an increased cross-sectional area of the 
arterial or arteriolar wall and a reduction in the vessel lumen.22,23 Inward remodeling is a 
rearrangement of the vessel wall that results in a reduction in lumen diameter.24 Both forms 
of remodeling are seen in cerebral arteries and arterioles in experimental models of 
hypertension, with supporting evidence in human hypertension as well.23–25 Chronic 
hypertension also induces deposition of collagen and fibronectin and elastin fragmentation 
of the vessel wall, leading to increased stiffness of large cerebral arteries.26 In smaller 
arterioles, as a result of disruption of the BBB (see Blood-Brain Barrier below), an 
inflammatory reaction may ensue that is associated with the production of reactive oxygen 
species and protease upregulation.27 Clinical measures of aortic and large-artery stiffening 
are good predictors of cerebrovascular events and VCI.28–30
Small-Vessel Disease—Hypertension causes typical alterations in small arteries and 
arterioles supplying the subcortical and basal ganglia white matter, resulting in small-vessel 
disease (SVD), a major cause of lacunar strokes and cerebral hemispheric white matter 
damage.17 These subcortical vessels might be more vulnerable to the mechanical stresses 
caused by hypertension because of their short linear path from larger vessels at the base of 
the brain.16,31 The typical pathological substrate of hypertensive SVD is arteriolosclerosis,17 
which is characterized by loss of smooth muscle cells, deposits of fibro-hyaline material, 
narrowing of the lumen, and thickening of the vessel wall (lipohyalinosis). In more advanced 
cases, fibrinoid necrosis of the vessel wall results in vessel rupture and hemorrhage (intrace-
rebral hemorrhage and microbleeds).
Microvascular Rarefaction—Loss of microvessels occurs in hypertension and during 
aging.32,33 Such changes, in concert with vascular remodeling and stiffening, are thought to 
contribute to the progressive reduction in resting cerebral blood flow (CBF) associated with 
hypertension.34–36 Rarefaction may also reduce the potential for a compensatory collateral 
circulation in conditions of vascular insufficiency or occlusion.
Mechanisms—The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and angiotensin II are key 
determinants of structural changes during hypertension. The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system is a major therapeutic target in patients with essential or primary hypertension,37 but 
the mechanisms of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system activation remain to be established. 
Whereas increases in circulating angiotensin II occur in renovascular and obesity-associated 
hypertension,38 plasma angiotensin II is not elevated in the majority of patients with 
essential hypertension.39 Rather, local angiotensin II production and signaling in brain, 
vessels, and other tissues may drive hypertension and the associated vascular changes.37,40
Angiotensin II has also been implicated in plaque composition and instability, which may 
underlie the effects of hypertension on atherosclerosis progression.41,42 Interestingly, 
Iadecola et al.
Page 5
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 intracranial atherosclerosis has also been linked to AD. It has been postulated that the 
hypoperfusion caused by arterial stenosis may lead to reduced amyloid-β (Aβ) clearance 
and increased Aβ production by activating β-secretase, a protease involved in Aβ cleavage 
from the amyloid precursor protein.43 In turn, Aβ can promote atherosclerosis by inducing 
inflammation, endothelial dysfunction, and oxidative stress.20,43 Angiotensin II can also 
promote Aβ cleavage from amyloid precursor protein by activating β- and γ-secretase and 
aggravate the vascular dysfunction induced by Aβ.44,45
Angiotensin II can induce inward and hypertrophic remodeling and vascular stiffening.22 
Remodeling is mediated by free radicals produced by the enzyme NADPH oxidase and 
hypertrophy by activation of epidermal growth factor receptor probably resulting from 
mechanical stress and other mechanisms.46,47 Mechanisms of large-artery stiffening may 
also include mechanical stress leading to activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase 
and T-cell–mediated interleukin-17 production.48 The factors mediating rarefaction have not 
been elucidated, but vascular oxidative stress may suppress the production and action of 
trophic factors, resulting in vascular atrophy.27 In addition, loss of endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase–derived nitric oxide may also be a factor in micro-vascular rarefaction.32,33 Aging 
and hypertension may act in an additive fashion because hypertension causes premature 
rarefaction with aging.32 The mechanisms of hypertension-induced SVD are thought to be 
diverse and may include endothelial dysfunction, BBB alterations leading to extravasation of 
plasma proteins, vascular inflammation, and microthrombi (Blood-Brain Barrier section).
Vascular Function
Chronic hypertension exerts profound effects on cerebrovascular function, disrupting major 
factors regulating the cerebral circulation. These include endothelium-dependent 
mechanisms, neurovascular coupling, and autoregulation.
Endothelium-Dependent Mechanisms—Endothelial cells are a major determinant of 
vascular tone. By the release of vasoactive factors such as nitric oxide and prostanoids, along 
with endothelium-dependent hyperpolarization, these cells influence the contractile state of 
smooth muscle and regulate CBF in response to neurochemical, metabolic, and mechanical 
signals (shear stress acting on the vessel lumen).49–51 Therefore, endothelial cells are critical 
in regulating the distribution of microvascular flow at the local level.22,52 In addition, the 
endothelium protects vessels against thrombosis, atherogenesis, and formation of vascular 
Aβ deposits in AD.22,49 Hypertension disrupts endothelial cell function, leading to a 
reduction of the ability of endothelial cells to regulate microvascular flow and to exert their 
antithrombotic and antiatherogenic effects.22 Thus, changes in endothelial function may play 
a role in the effects of hypertension in reducing resting CBF and promoting atherosclerosis 
and Aβ accumulation and have been associated with stroke, VCI, white matter disease, and 
AD.53–56
Neurovascular Coupling—Increases in cellular activity in the brain require proportional 
increases in blood flow, often called neurovascular coupling or functional hyperemia.27,57 
Neurovascular coupling ensures adequate delivery of oxygen, glucose, and other nutrients 
during cellular activation, along with removal of metabolic byproducts. In response to neural 
Iadecola et al.
Page 6
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 activation, neurons and glia produce signals that communicate with vascular cells, resulting 
in increases in blood flow highly restricted to the activated areas.27,57 In experimental 
models as in humans, hypertension attenuates the increase in CBF induced by neural 
activity.16,58 The resulting mismatch between energy demands and blood flow delivery, 
along with reduced basal CBF, is thought to contribute to the cognitive decline induced by 
hypertension.16,27
Autoregulation—In humans as in animals, CBF remains relatively constant over a wide 
range of mean arterial pressures (perfusion pressures; ≈60–150 mm Hg),50,59,60 a property 
of the cerebral circulation called autoregulation. Cerebral autoregulation depends on the 
intrinsic ability of vascular muscle to constrict when transmural pressure increases 
(myogenic tone and reactivity) and to relax when transmural pressure decreases. 
Hypertension leads to a right shift of the relationship between BP and CBF (autoregulation 
curve), so that the same level of cerebral perfusion occurs at higher levels of BP.61 This shift 
protects the cerebral circulation from the damaging effects of high BP but can also cause 
ischemic brain injury if sudden or large reductions in BP occur. Even in normotensive 
individuals, sudden large rises in arterial pressure can overwhelm autoregula-tory 
mechanisms, resulting in massive CBF increases, BBB damage, and cerebral edema, as 
observed in hypertensive encephalopathy and the posterior reversible encephalopathy 
syndrome.62–64 In turn, acute hypotension leads to decreases in CBF, causing “watershed” 
infarcts in border zones between adjacent arterial territories.27,50
Mechanisms—Hypertension-induced vascular oxidative stress has been implicated in the 
alterations in endothelium-dependent responses and functional hyperemia. In models of 
angiotensin II–dependent hypertension, NADPH oxidase is a major source of oxidative 
stress,16 but the cells producing the radicals at the vascular level have not been identified. 
Evidence of oxidative stress has been reported in the brain of individuals with SVD and 
white matter damage.65 The mechanisms of the shift of autoregulation may involve 
hypertension-induced changes in myogenic responses and mechanical consequences of 
vascular remodeling and stiffening.16 The shift in autoregulation is especially damaging to 
the periventricular white matter, which is supplied by terminal branches arising from 
separate arterial territories and thus is most susceptible to hypoperfusion.66,67 Accordingly, 
the severity of white matter injury correlates with the magnitude of autoregulatory 
dysfunction.68 In genetic models of hypertension, there is evidence that increased myogenic 
tone, endothelial dysfunction, and inward remodeling can be prevented with 
pharmacological targeting of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.69 However, much 
less is known about the extent to which hypertension-induced vascular changes are 
reversible. Further work is needed to determine which cerebrovascular end points that are 
affected by hypertension are also reversible and amenable to treatment.
Blood-Brain Barrier
The structural and molecular features of the BBB are key for normal brain function in that 
they control the bidirectional movement of ions, molecules, and cells between blood and 
brain.70,71 The BBB results from the unique properties of cerebral endothelial cells that are 
adjoined by tight junction, have minimal vesicular transport across their cytoplasm 
Iadecola et al.
Page 7
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (transcytosis), and are enriched with plasmalemmal influx and efflux transporters regulating 
the exchange of molecules between blood and brain and vice versa.70,71 However, BBB 
integrity is also influenced by other cell types, including astrocytes and pericytes (intramural 
vascular cells present at the level of capillaries), as well as the extracellular matrix.70–72
Hypertension has profound effects on the BBB. Chronic hypertension is associated with 
BBB disruption in animal models and in humans.73,74 Loss of BBB integrity may be an 
early event in the pathogenesis of SVD.73,75,76 In genetically hypertensive rats as in models 
of angiotensin II–dependent hypertension, reductions in CBF, loss of tight junction proteins, 
loss of BBB integrity, and white matter lesions have all been described.77,78 Loss of BBB 
integrity has also been described in hypertensive patients79,80 in association with SVD and 
white matter damage.74,75,79 The mechanisms of the effect have not been fully elucidated, 
but one hypothesis is that hypoxia, caused by reduced CBF in susceptible white matter 
regions, leads to activation of hypoxia inducible factor-1α–dependent genes, including 
metalloproteases, which may promote BBB damage.81 Cellular elements beside endothelial 
cells are also involved in the BBB dysfunction. Pericytes, which are required for 
maintenance of the BBB,82 may undergo degeneration during hypertension,83 suggesting 
that loss or dysfunction of these cells may also contribute to disruption of BBB integrity. 
Extravasation of plasma proteins leading to vascular and perivascular inflammation and 
microvascular thrombosis are thought to be key pathogenic consequences of the BBB 
disruption contributing to white matter damage through inflammatory mediators and reactive 
oxygen and nitrogen species, but conclusive evidence is lacking, especially in humans.27
Summary of Evidence
Hypertension induces adaptive changes in cerebral blood vessels that reduce stress on the 
vessel wall and protect downstream arterioles, capillaries, and venules from potentially 
damaging fluctuations in arterial pressure.23 However, these structural alterations, in concert 
with the associated impairment of critical vascular regulatory mechanisms, may result in 
CBF reductions in regions of the subcortical white matter at risk for vascular insufficiency. 
Angiotensin II–dependent vascular oxidative stress is a critical factor in both the structural 
and functional cerebrovascular alterations induced by hypertension. In addition, alterations 
of endothelial cells and the BBB represent a key early event in SVD, but the pathogenic 
mechanisms remain poorly defined. An unexpected reciprocal interaction between 
hypertension and AD pathology has emerged whereby the hypertensive vasculopathy 
exacerbates the accumulation of Aβ in brain and acts in concert with Aβ to suppress vital 
cerebrovascular regulatory mechanisms. Although it remains to be established whether the 
deleterious effects of hypertension on cognition are reversible or lessened by treatment, 
experimental evidence suggests that some vascular changes induced by hypertension may be 
reversible with appropriate treatments.
Cognitive Domains Targeted by Hypertension
This section describes the specific cognitive domains targeted by hypertension. Although the 
majority of early studies examining cognitive function in individuals with hypertension such 
as the MMSE (Mini-Mental Status Examination) have focused on global cognitive outcomes 
Iadecola et al.
Page 8
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 or composite measures of several cognitive tests, there is a growing literature on specific 
domains of cognitive function and possible differential association with hypertension. 
Studies focused on identifying specific domains may contribute to identifying the 
mechanism by which hypertension impairs cognitive function, for example, microvascular 
effects versus brain atrophy, and informing the development, timing, and evaluation of 
pharmacological and behavioral interventions, for example, disease self-management and 
medication adherence. Cognitive function is assessed in studies of hypertension with a 
number of measures. The most common measures administered in these studies assess the 
specific domains of memory, executive function, and processing speed.
Memory
Memory function includes tests of short-term memory, verbal learning, and working 
memory. Common short-term memory tasks include the Digits Forward Test, in which the 
subject is asked to repeat strings of numbers in same order in which they were read,84 and 
immediate recall tasks, in which the subject is asked to recite back a list of words 
immediately after hearing them (eg, first trial of the Rey Auditory Learning Test).85,86 
Delayed memory is then assessed, usually after a 30-minute interval, with recall of short 
verbal stories or lists. Delayed memory can also be evaluated with 5-minute delayed recall, 
after a brief distraction task, of a list of words that have been used in sentences to promote 
encoding.84,87 Working memory tasks also tap into executive function. The most common 
measure is the Digits Backwards Test, in which the subject is asked to repeat a string of 
words in the reverse order that they were read.84
Executive Function
Executive function involves multiple brain processes and consequently is the cognitive 
domain that is most difficult to assess and has the most heterogeneity in measurements 
across studies. Of note, the widely used MMSE does not test domains related to executive 
function. Executive function is of particular importance for daily life because of the role it 
plays in decision making and problem solving, critical tasks for self-management of chronic 
illnesses. The most common tests used were the Controlled Oral Word Association Test 
(word fluency), category fluency (eg, animal naming), and the Trail Making Test Part B. The 
word fluency test requires subjects to generate as many words as possible beginning with the 
same letter of the alphabet (F, A, or S) in 60 seconds.88,89 Category fluency, in which 
subjects are asked to name as many words as possible in a single category, for example, 
animals, is also used but is less difficult.90 On average, older adults without cognitive 
impairment generate 12 to 16 words per minute and 19 to 22 animals per minute.89 The Trail 
Making Test has 2 parts, A and B.91,92 In part A, the subject is timed while drawing a 
continuous line to connect consecutive numbers (1–25). Part B times how long a subject 
takes to draw a continuous line connecting alternating letters (A–L) and numbers (1–13). 
The total time for Part B or the difference between the 2 parts (time for part B minus time 
for part A) is used as the outcome, with higher scores reflecting poorer performance. The 
difference score attempts to remove the speed element from the test evaluation and thus is 
more commonly used to examine executive function.89
Iadecola et al.
Page 9
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Speed of Processing
Although not a cognitive domain, reduced speed of processing leads to declines in other 
domains. Many tests of processing speed also tap into attention and may be referenced as 
attention tasks. The 2 most common speed of processing/attention tasks are the Digit 
Symbol Substitution Test and the Trail Making Test Part A. The Digit Symbol Substitution 
Test is a paper and pencil task in which the subject is given 90 seconds to translate numbers 
into symbols using a key at the top of a page.84 The total number of correct responses is 
used as the score. The Trail Making Test Part A, described above, uses the time required to 
draw a continuous line to connect numbers (1–25), with higher scores reflecting poorer 
(slower) performance.
Domains Affected by Hypertension Versus Clinically Diagnosed AD
There is moderately strong evidence to support the claim that impaired and declining speed 
of processing and executive function are the most commonly encountered cognitive changes 
associated with hypertension.93–98 The pattern of cognitive impairment associated with 
hypertension is often distinguished from the pattern associated with neurodegenerative 
dementias such as AD by the lack of consistent findings for an impact of hypertension on 
memory function, a defining characteristic of clinically diagnosed AD. However, the issue is 
complicated by the fact that hypertension, in addition to acting through cerebrovascular 
mechanisms, may be a risk factor for AD pathology (Effects of Hypertension on 
Cerebrovascular Structure and Function section and Hypertension and AD section).
Summary of Evidence and Methodological Considerations
Although the evidence for an effect of late-life hypertension on specific cognitive domains is 
not conclusive, a few studies suggest that controlling BP from midlife to late life may 
provide a strategy to decrease the risk of late-life cognitive impairment, particularly in 
processing speed and executive function.94,96,99,100 There is stronger and more consistent 
evidence for an association with systolic BP (SBP) than for diastolic BP (DBP), although 
this comparison has not been made uniformly across studies. This question warrants further 
examination.
Several methodological issues prevent direct comparison or meta-analysis of studies. 
Assessment of cognitive function is not standardized across studies, resulting in 
inconsistency in the domains assessed and even differences in the tests used to assess a 
single domain, with the most heterogeneity for the executive function. An effort by the 
National Institute of Neurologic Disorders and Stroke and the Canadian Stroke Network to 
harmonize assessment batteries for VCI offers standardized batteries of well-validated 
instruments for various interview lengths (eg, 60, 30, and 5 minutes).101 In addition, there is 
considerable variability in the potentially confounding factors controlled across studies of 
hypertension and cognition. Most studies adjust for age, sex, and education. Fewer adjust for 
additional cardiovascular risk factors such as smoking, comorbid conditions (eg, diabetes 
mellitus), and body mass index.
Iadecola et al.
Page 10
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hypertension and Cognition: Observational Studies
The goal of this section is to summarize the evidence from observational studies on the 
relationship between BP and hypertension and cognitive health. The section is organized 
into 2 main subsections: evidence from cross-sectional studies and evidence from 
longitudinal studies. Each section is then further divided into the following categories based 
on the age at which BP was measured: midlife (age, 40–64 years), late life (age, 65–84 
years), and oldest old (age ≥85 years). We report findings on global cognition using 
measures such as the MMSE or the modified MMSE, and we report findings on specific 
cognitive domains such as executive function, memory, and processing speed (Cognitive 
Domains Targeted By Hypertension section).
Cross-Sectional Evidence on the Association Between BP and Cognition
Late-Life BP—Evidence from cross-sectional studies has focused primarily on BP and 
cognition in late life. The evidence is mixed, with some studies suggesting that exposure to 
high BP is associated with worse cognitive function but other studies reporting the opposite 
association, a U-shaped association, or no association.
Several studies that examined the cross-sectional association between BP in late life and 
cognition suggested that having hypertension or exposure to high BP is associated with 
worse cognitive function.97,102–105 Examples of such studies include the ARIC study 
(Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities) and NHANES (the National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey). Early findings from the ARIC study showed that subjects with a 
diagnosis of hypertension, defined as SBP ≥160 mm Hg or DBP ≥90 mm Hg, had lower 
scores on tests of processing speed and word fluency compared with those without 
hypertension.97 More recent findings from NHANES similarly showed that having 
hypertension or high BP (SBP ≥140 mm Hg or DBP ≥90 mm Hg) at ≥70 years of age was 
associated with worse performance on a test of global cognition.105 However, other studies 
reported the opposite; that is, exposure to high BP in late life was associated with better 
cognitive performance.106,107 For example, in the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study, having an 
SBP ≥160 mm Hg was associated with 51% lower odds of poor performance on a test of 
global cognition compared with having an SBP of <100 mm Hg.106 A few other studies 
reported a U-shaped association.108 For example, in less educated members of the Baltimore 
Longitudinal Study on Aging, both high and low DBPs were associated with poor 
performance on a neuropsychological test battery, including tests of executive function and 
confrontation naming (Boston Naming Test).108 Furthermore, the Framingham Heart Study 
reported no cross-sectional association between BP in late life and cognitive function.109
Oldest Old BP (≥85 Years of Age)—Findings from a study in centenarians in Australia 
showed a cross-sectional association between BP and cognition such that higher SBP was 
correlated with better performance on a test of global cognition.110 More recent findings 
from the 90+ Study in a retirement community in Southern California showed that the 
prevalence of hypertension did not differ between those who are cognitively normal and 
those with mild cognitive impairment (MCI).111 However, the prevalence of hypertension 
Iadecola et al.
Page 11
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 was greatest in those with nonamnestic MCI compared with other MCIs, thus suggesting 
that hypertension-related cognitive impairment involves skills other than memory.
Longitudinal Evidence on the Association Between BP and Cognition
Longitudinal studies offer a better study design than cross-sectional studies by ensuring a 
temporal association between a putative exposure and outcome. When repeated assessments 
of cognitive function are available, a rate of cognitive decline can also be calculated that may 
provide insight into the cause of cognitive impairment.
BP in Adolescence—A recent study in adolescents of the Seychelles Child Development 
study failed to find associations between BP measured at 12 to 15 years of age and cognitive 
function measured at both 17 and 19 years of age.112 It may be that underlying physiological 
mechanisms linking hypertension and cognition may not be in play at such a young age. It is 
also possible that the tests used do not capture the variability in cognition that is associated 
with high BP at a young age.
Midlife BP—Recent findings in subjects of the CARDIA) study (Coronary Artery Risk 
Development in Young Adults) with mean age of 25 years at baseline showed that higher 
burden of SBP over 25 years from young adulthood to middle age was associated with worse 
performance on several cognitive tests in midlife, including verbal memory, processing 
speed, and executive function, when the cohort was a mean of 50 years of age.93 CARDIA is 
among the few studies that examined early to midlife BP and cognitive function in midlife. 
There is more substantial evidence addressing the longitudinal association between midlife 
BP and cognitive function in late life.98,103,106,113–115 Overall, these studies consistently 
showed that having high SBP or a hypertension diagnosis in midlife was associated with 
worse cognitive performance in late life. Examples of such studies include the Framingham 
study,113 which showed that higher SBP and DBP (increments of 10 mm Hg) in stroke-free 
individuals in midlife were associated with worse performance on a composite global 
cognitive score and measures of attention and memory. Similarly, in the Honolulu-Asia 
Aging Study,106 having a high SBP (≥160 mm Hg) in midlife was associated with a 2-fold 
increased risk of poor cognitive function on a test of global cognition 25 years later from a 
fully adjusted model. Findings from the Maine-Syracuse Longitudinal Study showed that 
higher baseline BP (increments of 10 mm Hg) was associated with worse cognitive 
performance and a decline in visualization and fluid abilities up to 20 years later.115 Even 
pre-hypertension, defined as SBP of 120 to 139 mm Hg/DBP of 80 to 89 mm Hg, in middle-
aged women of the Women’s Health and Aging Project was associated with reduced 
cognitive function on processing speed and verbal memory a decade later.116
However, few other studies reported either a U-shaped association or no association between 
midlife BP and cognition in late life. For example, the SABRE study (Southall and Brent 
Revisited) showed a U-shaped association between low and high DBP and cognitive 
impairment, measured as a composite cognitive score, 20 years later.117 In addition, a recent 
study in members of a French cohort of middle-aged adults showed that elevated BP 
(SBP/DBP ≥130/85 mm Hg) or treatment in midlife was not associated with cognitive 
function, measured as a composite score and on subtests, nearly a decade later.118
Iadecola et al.
Page 12
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Evidence on the association between midlife BP exposure and rate of cognitive change is 
scarce. Findings from the Framingham Offspring Cohort Study suggested that having 
midlife hypertension or an SBP ≥140 mm Hg was associated with faster annual decline in 
executive function.99 A recent study in subjects of the Maastricht Aging Study suggested 
that having midlife hypertension at baseline (ie, prevalent hypertension) was associated with 
cognitive decline at 6 and 12 years of follow-up on domains of verbal memory, executive 
function, and processing speed.96 The cognitive decline observed in individuals developing 
hypertension after baseline (ie, incident hypertension) was more modest compared with the 
decline in those with prevalent hypertension, potentially suggesting that duration of 
exposure also may play a role. Another recent study in members of ARIC showed that 
midlife hypertension was associated with a significantly greater decline in global cognitive 
function over 20 years. Similar findings were observed with higher SBP in whites but not in 
blacks.94
Late-Life BP—Several studies have examined the association between late-life BP and 
cognitive function measured several years after BP was measured. Findings from these 
studies are inconsistent. Several large-scale studies such as the Chicago Health and Aging 
Project,119 the Longitudinal Study on Aging,120 the Sacramento Area Latino Study on 
Aging,121 and WHIMS (Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study)122 failed to find an 
association. However, other studies reported a U-shaped association107,123 or a linear 
association.95,124,125 For example, results from the Duke Population Studies of the Elderly 
found a U-shaped association between SBP and cognitive decline over 3 years, although this 
association was observed only in white subjects.123 Results from ELSA (English 
Longitudinal Study on Aging) showed linear associations such that higher SBP and DBP 
were associated with lower scores on a global cognitive index and a memory index ≈8 years 
later. Further findings showed that having an SBP ≥160 mm Hg was associated with worse 
performance on the global and memory cognitive indexes 8 years later compared with 
having an SBP <140 mm Hg.124 The ARIC study95 showed that having hypertension at 
baseline, defined as SBP/DBP ≥140/90 mm Hg or taking antihypertensive medications, was 
associated with a decline in processing speed over a 6-year period. Findings in community-
dwelling members without dementia of the Women’s Health and Aging Study II showed that 
having an SBP ≥160 mm Hg was associated with a greater incidence of cognitive 
impairment over a 9-year period as measured on executive function.125
Oldest Old BP—There are only a handful of longitudinal studies of BP and cognition in 
the oldest old. Findings from the Leiden 85-Plus study were inconsistent; although some 
findings did not show an association between BP and change in global cognitive function 
over 3 years,126 other analyses of the same study showed that a 10–mm Hg increase in SBP 
was associated with better cognitive performance on a global test and several domain-
specific tests.127 These results were further confirmed in a more recent analysis.128 
Furthermore, recent findings in subjects of the Newcastle 85+ study showed that having high 
BP, defined as SBP/DBP ≥130/85 mm Hg or treatment, was associated with better global 
cognitive function over 5 years.129
Iadecola et al.
Page 13
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Summary of Evidence
There is consistent evidence that BP in midlife is associated with altered cognitive function 
in both midlife and late life. The association of BP in late life and oldest old age with 
cognition is less clear, with evidence of both harmful and beneficial effects of high BP on 
cognition. Associations were observed mostly with tests of global cognition and executive 
function, which is not surprising given that vascular risk factors influence executive 
functioning to a greater extent and are not necessarily related to memory (Cognitive 
Domains Targeted by Hypertension section). The inconsistency of results across studies, 
especially in older age, may reflect differences in the cognitive domains assessed, 
differences in aspects of study design, including length of follow-up and how the rate of 
cognitive change was modeled, differences in characteristics of the study populations and 
varying age ranges, and adjustment for shared determinants that may confound the 
hypertension-cognition association. Reverse causation may also contribute to the observed 
association between BP and cognition, especially in studies with cross-sectional design. 
Cognitive impairment is a process that unfolds over decades, thus presenting a challenge to 
establishing temporality. More research is needed to elucidate the causal link between BP 
and cognition and to better understand the role of medication in the observed associations. 
The relationship between BP and cognitive function remains relatively underexplored in 
minority and racially or ethnically diverse populations. Finally, there remain inadequate 
examination and reporting of potential sex differences in the effects of BP and hypertension 
on cognition. Future studies need to closely examine and report sex-specific associations.
Interaction With Other Risk Factors, Including Genetics
This section explores the possible impact of cardiovascular and other risk factors on the 
cognitive deficit associated with hypertension, focusing on age, sex, race/ethnicity, obesity 
and central obesity, metabolic syndrome/insulin resistance/diabetes mellitus, inflammatory 
biomarkers, lipids, smoking, occupation, education, diet, and air pollution. Possible 
interactions with atrial fibrillation, arterial stiffness, cardiac function, carotid intima-media 
thickness/stenosis, and stroke were not examined because these intermediate subclinical and 
clinical disease states could lie along the causal pathway between hypertension and 
cognitive impairment. However, genetic factors that might underlie both hypertension and 
cognition were also examined, focusing on genes such as APOE that are known to affect 
cognition independently, genes thought to be associated with vascular dementia and a 
vascular pattern of cognitive impairment, and genes affecting the risk of stroke, 
hypertension, and cognitive impairment.
Interaction With Age, Sex, and Metabolic Traits
Age—An interaction with age has been shown in multiple studies, with higher BP and 
hypertensive status being associated with worse cognition in younger130 and middle-aged 
adults (Hypertension Treatment Over the Life Course section). On the other hand, either a J-
shaped association of SBP with cognition108 or an association of higher DBP with better 
cognition and slower rates of decline in cognition was noted in older adults. Thus, a study of 
centenarians showed a positive association between SBP and cognitive performance.110 This 
age interaction has been shown both for cognitive function in individuals free of dementia 
Iadecola et al.
Page 14
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and when the end point of clinical dementia or AD was considered (Hypertension and AD 
section). Conversely, analysis of 1695 Framingham Study subjects failed to show an 
interaction with age over the 55- to 88-year range when individuals with concomitant stroke 
were excluded, and a study of 1130 subjects in the ARIC study also showed no age 
interaction.100,131
Sex—The interaction of male or female sex with hypertension in affecting cognition has not 
been investigated in detail, although a single study of 1034 women suggested an interaction 
of hypertension with menopausal status. Among postmenopausal women, cognitive 
performance on the Mini-Boston Naming Test was worse in hypertensive women compared 
with normotensive women, whereas among premenopausal women, no difference was 
observed between hypertensive and normotensive women.132
Metabolic Traits—An interaction of various metabolic and vascular risk factors such as 
diabetes mellitus with hypertension has been documented to increase the risk of stroke133 
and thus to indirectly increase the risk of dementia. However, studies that have looked for an 
interaction of diabetes mellitus with hypertension and an adverse impact on cognition have 
typically found independent, additive effects rather than a synergistic interaction of these 2 
risk factors.134 Among the various metabolic dysfunctions noted in diabetes mellitus, insulin 
resistance appears most likely to interact with hypertension. A measure of central obesity 
(having a waist-to-hip ratio in the top quartile) was noted to have a synergistic interaction 
with severity (Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, 
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure stage) of hypertension on the impact on 
visual memory performance in the Framingham Offspring study,135 and a small study has 
reported an adverse impact of concurrent elevations in BMI, waist-to-hip ratio, and insulin 
resistance (homeostatic model assessment–insulin resistance) on cognition in hypertensive 
patients.53 Either no evidence or limited evidence was found for interactions of BP or 
hypertension with smoking, occupation, education, diet, and air pollution on their impact on 
cognition, although several of these risk factors are known to have synergistic interactions 
with hypertension in increasing the risk of cardiovascular events, including clinical stroke.
Interaction With Circulating Biomarkers
In a small study from Maastricht, in hypertensive individuals, higher circulating levels of 
markers of endothelial activation (eg, vascular cellular adhesion molecules and selections) 
and of inflammation (eg, C-reactive protein) were found to be associated with worse 
cognition, and in a Japanese study that has not been replicated, pentraxin-3, another marker 
of inflammation, was associated with worse cognition in hypertensive individuals. However, 
these studies included only hypertensive individuals and could not specifically assess 
possible interactions between BP and inflammation.136 There are only a few reports of 
interactions between adverse lipid profiles (elevated low-density lipoprotein, lower high-
density lipoprotein, and higher triglycerides) and BP in their impact on cognition137; these 
seem to be in the setting of a metabolic syndrome with concomitant insulin resistance or 
explained by an APOE ε4 genotype.
Iadecola et al.
Page 15
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Interaction With Genetic Markers
An interaction between the APOE ε4 allele and many cardiovascular risk factors in their 
impact on cognition has been shown in various studies, and this appears to be true for 
hypertension in most138,139 but not all of these studies.140 The Honolulu-Asia Aging Study 
followed up 3065 Japanese American men over 26 years and observed an interaction of the 
APOE ε4 genotype and an SBP ≥160 mm Hg in their impact on cognition with relative risks 
of 2.6 and 13, respectively, of impaired cognition when individuals who had hypertension 
but no APOE ε4 allele and those with both risk factors were compared with a control group 
with neither.141 An Australian study of 1467 community subjects who were 60 to 64 years 
of age at baseline and examined for cognitive performance 3 times over 8 years noted that 
the APOE-hypertension interaction, but not a APOE–mean arterial pressure interaction, was 
associated with a small but statistically significant increase in the rate of decline of episodic 
memory, verbal ability, and global cognition.142 A similar interaction was demonstrated in 
563 subjects of the Seattle Longitudinal Study in whom cognitive change was assessed over 
a 21-year period.143 Recently, several genetic variants have been identified to determine 
cognitive performance in the domains of verbal memory, fluid intelligence (the general 
intelligence factor), and executive function in older adults. In these older adults, a variant in 
the KIBRA gene showed an association with worse verbal memory, an effect that was 
restricted to individuals with hypertension and was larger in hypertensive women compared 
with men.144
Summary of Evidence
There are limited data on possible interactions between demographic, genetic, and vascular 
risk factors and hypertension in their impact on age-related cognitive decline and risk of AD. 
Age is an important factor, with high BPs in midlife and lower BPs in late life increasing the 
risk of poor cognition. Menopausal status, insulin resistance, inflammation, and the APOE 
ε4 genotype may each potentiate cognitive decline in hypertensive individuals. The 
mechanisms underlying these putative interactions remain uncertain, although in the case of 
APOE, the tau pathway has been implicated in a few studies.
Hypertension and AD
Hypertension is an important vascular risk factor and may influence the risk of MCI or 
dementia resulting from AD, the neuropathological findings in AD, and the corresponding 
neuroimaging and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers. The purpose of this section is to 
explore the relationship between hypertension and the risk for AD and its neuropathological 
manifestations, as well as neuroimaging and CSF biomarkers.
Hypertension and AD Risk: Epidemiological Studies
Examination of the associations between elevated BP and the risk of clinically diagnosed 
AD is complicated by several factors, and the associations remain poorly understood. 
Observational studies suggest that higher BPs before the age of 65 to 70 years increase the 
risk of AD. In older adults, lower SBP appears to be associated with an increased risk of 
developing AD, whereas higher DBP may lower risk. Genetic variants associated with 
Iadecola et al.
Page 16
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 higher BP may reduce the risk of developing AD pathology.145 Here, we summarize the 
epidemiological evidence and then discuss the challenges in interpretation.
Epidemiological Evidence—Cross-sectional analyses in the Hisayama Study,146 in the 
Canadian Health and Aging Study,147 and in a convenience sample of 1259 Medicare 
enrollees148 showed an association of high BP with greater overall risk of dementia and with 
risk of vascular dementia but not with risk of clinically diagnosed AD. The Women’s Health 
Initiative showed an association of higher BP with greater risks of incident MCI and 
dementia that disappeared after adjustment for possible confounders.122 The Kungsholmen 
study found no association of BP with dementia risk over 6 years of follow-up except at the 
extremes of SBP (>180 mm Hg) and DBP (<65 mm Hg).149 In contrast, other studies in 
older adults suggest a protective effect of mild hypertension on AD dementia risk.150–154 A 
U-shaped association with the lowest risk for AD dementia in individuals with a DBP in the 
70– to 90–mm Hg range was noted in the Chicago Health and Aging Project.119 Unlike the 
findings in older adults, recent studies have observed an association of higher midlife BPs or 
midlife categorical hypertension with increased late-life dementia risk, including studies in 
Finnish,155,156 Japanese Northern Californian,157 and Hawaiian cohorts.158 However, these 
studies did not separately examine the risks of developing AD versus vascular dementia.
Challenges—Hypertension, however defined, is associated with an increased risk of stroke 
in a graded, continuous manner, and stroke, in turn, increases the risk of dementia.12,159 
Many epidemiological studies are confident in their clinical diagnosis of dementia but 
acknowledge uncertainty resulting from limited resources in assigning a subtype of 
dementia. Thus, if individuals with hypertension were more likely to manifest clinical 
symptoms of dementia at the same stage of AD pathology, this could lead to a spurious 
association of hypertension with AD dementia. Conversely, individuals with hypertension 
are also more likely to be categorized as having vascular or mixed dementia rather than 
“pure” AD, and this diagnostic bias could result in an apparent protective effect of 
hypertension on clinically diagnosed AD.
Another reason for the complexity of the association between BP and AD is the many ways 
in which BP can be assessed (SBP, DBP, pulse pressure,160 mean arterial pressure, and 
arterial stiffness measured as carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity on tonometry) and the 
differential impact of each dimension on brain health and AD pathology. SBP in individuals 
at higher risk of subsequent dementia may rise faster starting in midlife and decline faster at 
older ages compared with SBP in other individuals.161
There appears to be a progressive decline in BP in the early stages of dementia that may be 
attributable directly to the neurodegenerative process affecting brainstem and hypothalamic 
nuclei regulating arterial pressure and systemic metabolism,162,163 may result from the 
associated systemic changes such as weight loss and increased frailty, or may be secondary 
to the onset of cardiovascular diseases such as myocardial infarction and congestive heart 
failure that can reduce the ability of the heart to maintain systemic and cerebral perfusion 
pressures. Thus, BPs measured 1 to 10 years before the onset of clinical AD may be biased 
by reverse causality and may not represent the pressures experienced before the onset of the 
AD pathological process.
Iadecola et al.
Page 17
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In summarizing the literature, 2 recent weighted meta-analyses of cohort studies, including 6 
studies of individuals with MCI164 and 28 studies of cognitively normal individuals, that 
specifically considered the end point of clinically diagnosed AD165 failed to find an 
association of any BP measure with risk of developing AD, whereas an earlier meta-analysis 
of 18 cohort and case-control studies had suggested an association of elevated midlife DBP 
with increased risk of AD and an inverse association of late-life hypertension with lower risk 
of AD; both effects were small.166 Secular trends in the treatment of hypertension in midlife 
might be having an impact. The risk for dementia in Japanese American subjects treated 
with anti-hypertensives for >12 years starting in midlife was lower compared with the risk in 
hypertensive indiduals not on treatment (for dementia: hazard ratio, 0.40; 95% confidence 
interval, 0.22–0.75; and for AD: hazard ratio, 0.35; 95% confidence interval, 0.16–0.78) and 
was similar to the risk in normotensive individuals.167 An added consideration is that 
antihypertensives may have class-specific effects on AD pathology that are independent of 
their BP-lowering effect168,169 (Effects of Hypertension on Cerebrovascular Structure and 
Function section). In this regard, it is of interest that individuals with genetic variants 
associated with higher BP and use of antihy-pertensive agents have a reduced risk of AD.145
Hypertension and AD Neuropathology
In all of its target organs, hypertension causes dysfunction through alterations in vascular 
function (Effects of Hypertension on Cerebrovascular Structure and Function section). 
However, there are some reports that hypertension might have an impact on AD pathology. 
In Japanese American men (n=243) in the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study, there was an 
association between midlife BP and burden of NFTs at death, roughly 3 to 4 decades 
later.170 Elevated SBP at midlife was associated with low brain weight and neocortical and 
hip-pocampal neuritic plaques, whereas elevated DBP at midlife was associated with 
increased NFTs in the hippocampus. Another clinical-pathological study from the Bronx, 
NY,171 that included both men and women (n=291) found that medication-treated 
hypertensive indivduals had significantly lower levels of neuritic plaques and NFTs 
compared with nonhypertensive individuals. Untreated hypertensive individuals had more 
NFTs and neuritic plaques than the treated hypertensive individuals but were not different 
from the normotensive individuals. The authors emphasized the role of antihypertensive 
medications over hypertension itself because of the pattern of results in treated versus 
untreated hypertensive individuals and suggested a protective effect of medications. A 
clinical-pathological study involving 84 individuals with neuropathological diagnoses of AD 
with or without cerebrovascular changes from San Diego172 found that antemortem vascular 
risk factors that included hypertension but also diabetes mellitus, heart failure, atrial 
fibrillation, peripheral vascular disease, and smoking were associated with lower Braak 
stage. The study was underpowered to examine hypertension by itself. Because it is difficult 
to quantify cerebrovascular changes, these results could have been attributable to greater 
vascular burden. Along those lines, an earlier study from this group found that pulse 
pressure was associated with cerebrovascular lesions (large-vessel atherosclerosis, infarcts of 
any size) at autopsy,173 along with no associations with Braak stage or amyloid angiopathy. 
A study from Seattle Group Health reported an association between systolic hypertension 
and the presence of >2 microinfarcts in younger subjects (age, 65–80 years), but there were 
no associations with AD-type lesions (Braak stage or Consortium to Establish a Registry for 
Iadecola et al.
Page 18
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Alzheimer’s Disease plaque score) or Lewy bodies.174 There were no associations with 
vascular lesions in older individuals (>80 years old at entry).
In summary, the evidence linking antemortem hypertension to postmortem 
neuropathological changes seen in AD is modest and confounded by differential survival, 
indication bias, and small numbers. Although results from the Honolulu-Asia Aging 
Study170 support the idea of an overlap between hypertension and AD pathophysiology, 
other reports do not. With antemortem amyloid and tau positron emission tomography (PET) 
imaging now available, prospects for determining the true relationship between hypertension 
and AD pathological changes are much brighter.
Impact of Hypertension on Biomarkers and Association With AD
Hypertension and AD-type pathophysiology appear to share a common pathogenesis in 
several imaging features: white matter hyperintensities (WMHs), cerebral microbleeds, and 
brain volume/atrophy.
White Matter Hyperintensities—WMHs, as detected by fluid-attenuated inversion 
recovery magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), are widely regarded as lesions associated with 
cerebrovascular disease175–177 (see elsewhere for a discussion of relevant white matter 
imaging modalities75,178,179). Hypertension is the most important risk factor for the 
development of WMH.99,180–182 Hypertension in general,180,183–185 high SBP,99,185–190 
high DBP,186,189,191–193 low DBP,194 pulse pressure,185 mean arterial pressure,195,196 pulse 
wave velocity,197 and arterial stiffness198 have all been associated with WMHs, and it is not 
clear that one measure of BP predominates over the others in magnitude of the association. 
Treatment adds considerable complexity to the relationship between hypertension and 
WMH, but a few clinical trials have shown that WMH progression is reduced with 
antihypertensive treatment.199,200 Diffusion tensor imaging is another imaging technique for 
examining anatomic integrity in white matter. Changes in fractional anisotropy or mean 
diffusivity have been associated with some aspect of hypertension,201–206 although not 
invariably.207 Carriage of the APOE ε4 genotype has been associated with higher levels and 
faster rates of accumulation of WMH in some studies208,209 but not others.210 Some studies 
have claimed that the combination of hypertension and carriage of the APOE ε4 genotype 
was linked to more WMHs.211,212 We found no studies claiming interactions at the 
mechanistic level between hypertensive pathophysiological process and AD 
pathophysiological processes on WMH burden. On the other hand, there is evidence that 
cerebrovascular disease and AD pathophysiology have at least additive effects at the clinical 
level.213–216 Thus, although cerebrovascular mechanisms do not worsen AD processes, the 
combination of the two may lead to earlier and greater cognitive decline.
Cortical Microbleeds—Cortical microbleeds, microhemorrhages of 1 to 3 mm in 
diameter that often are attributable to cerebral amyloid angiopathy,217 are also associated 
with hypertension.182,218–221 Deep locations, that is, the putamen and thalamus, are much 
more likely to be associated with hypertension, whereas cortical locations are more likely to 
be associated with carriage of the APOE ε4 allele209,222,223 or with elevated Aβ levels by 
PET imaging.224 In patients with AD, hypertension increased the likelihood of cortical 
Iadecola et al.
Page 19
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 microbleeds,225 but that effect could be additive or interactive. We otherwise uncovered no 
evidence for or against an interaction between hypertension and Aβ burden for cortical 
microbleeds. Cortical microbleeds are modestly related to cognition197,226 but not to decline 
in individuals with AD.227
Brain Atrophy—In some reports, loss of brain volume has been associated with 
hypertension,190,194,228,229 mean arterial pressure,196 or arterial stiffness,198 but other 
studies failed to demonstrate the association99,195,230,231 (Beauchet et al232 provide further 
discussion). Treatment effects might confound the interpretation of associations.233 The 
mechanisms whereby hypertension causes brain volume loss are not clear. To the extent that 
WMHs are also associated with brain volume,208,234–240 the effects of hypertension on brain 
volume could be mediated via loss of white matter integrity. Other potential mechanisms 
could include microinfarction, remote effects of axonal injury in white matter, and an 
interaction with AD processes such as trafficking of damaged proteins in the perivascular 
spaces.241 Hypotension and falling BP over time are also associated with loss of brain 
volume.242 Indeed, the U-shaped relationship between BP and brain integrity is an important 
feature of the relationship between BP and late-life cognitive impairment (Hypertension and 
Cognition: Observational Studies section).
Aβ PET Imaging—Only a few studies have examined associations between hypertension 
and Aβ levels by PET imaging. In a subset of subjects from a ginkgo clinical trial who 
underwent Pittsburgh compound B PET imaging, there was an association between pulse 
wave velocity and higher brain amyloid levels243 that was independent of BP and APOE ε4 
genotype. In a group of middle-aged volunteers, an association of SBP and pulse pressure 
with burden of Aβ by PET imaging was seen,244 but in older individuals, concurrent DBP 
but not SBP was associated with Aβ burden by Pittsburgh compound B PET.245 Another 
study found an interaction between the APOE ε4 genotype and hypertension and Pittsburgh 
compound B PET.246 This same group also found a main effect for pulse pressure.
CSF Biomarkers for AD—We found only a few studies that examined associations of BP 
and CSF markers of AD. In a group of cognitively normal individuals who had CSF 
examinations, there was an association of pulse pressure with increased phospho-tau and 
reduced Aβ42,247 a finding that was replicated in an independent cohort.248 Another study 
of CSF biomarkers showed an interaction between the APOE ε4 allele (especially ε4 
homozygosity) and hypertension in elevating CSF tau and phospho-tau levels.249 However, 
in that study, there was no similar interaction of hypertension and carriage of an ε4 allele on 
CSF Aβ levels. The relevance of these findings to the progression of AD requires further 
study.
Summary of Evidence
Several epidemiological and clinical pathological studies have reported a link between 
hypertension and AD. However, a challenge to the interpretation of the relationship between 
hypertension and AD is the substantial lag from the onset of the study of hypertension to the 
time of pathological diagnosis of AD. The growing availability of amyloid PET imaging and 
structural MRI offers the opportunity to better understand the role of hypertension and brain 
Iadecola et al.
Page 20
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pathology in vivo. In population-based or special (enriched) cohort studies, large sample 
sizes would be needed to distinguish separate roles for SBP, DBP, pulse pressure, mean 
arterial pressure, and carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity on each of the imaging features. 
Longitudinal studies would be needed to assign priority to assessing hypoperfusion, white 
matter changes, cortical volumetric changes, microbleeds, and amyloid accumulation to 
understand their interrelationships. Future imaging techniques that can detect specific target 
involvement will be needed to understand what cells or cellular elements are the site of the 
initial pathogenic insult of hypertension. The cell types and end points that are most 
amenable to therapy are still unclear.
Hypertension and Cognition: Clinical Trials of BP Lowering
This section examines available data from clinical trials on the effect of hypertension 
treatment on cognitive function. We excluded studies that were not randomized, prospective 
trials with a primary or secondary outcome relating to cognitive status. Using the search 
criteria outlined in Methods, we identified 27 trials for consideration. We considered criteria 
based on sample size and excluded studies with <500 individuals per treatment arm. This is 
an arbitrary cut point based on a generic power analysis using data reported by Hypertension 
in the HYVET-COG (Very Elderly Trial Cognitive Function Assessment) for dementia 
events (36 of 1000 in the control group and 24 of 1000 in the treatment group250) and 
differences in end-trial MMSE measured in SYST-EUR (Systolic Hypertension in 
Europe).251 All studies were further assessed for bias according to the Cochrane 
Collaborations checklist.252
Trial Descriptions
Nine trials met the general inclusion criteria. Most trials testing cognition were based on the 
total main trial population (SPS3 [Secondary Prevention of Small Subcortical Strokes Trial], 
PROGRESS [Perindopril Protection Against Recurrent Stroke Study], SCOPE [Study on 
Cognition and Prognosis in the Elderly], PROFESS [Prevention Regimen for Effectively 
Avoiding Second Strokes], ONTARGET [Ongoing Telmisartan Alone and in Combination 
With Ramipril Global Endpoint Trial], TRANSCEND [Telmisartan Randomised Assessment 
Study in ACE Intolerant Subjects With Cardiovascular Disease], and SHEP [Systolic 
Hypertension in the Elderly Program]), were ancillary studies embedded in a subsample of 
the main trial,253 or included selected sites (SYST-EUR251). Sample sizes ranged from 1439 
to 25 620, and mean patient age ranged from 62 to 83 years. Follow-up time ranged from ≈2 
years (SYST-EUR)251 to ≈5 years (ONTARGET/TRANSCEND254). Two trials were 
stopped early because they reached their primary end point (SYST-EUR251 and HYVET250). 
The SPS3 antiplatelet arms were stopped early because of futility and evidence of harm.255
Target populations for the trials differed. The main inclusion of some trials was based on BP 
levels256 (SHEP257 and HYVET250,251) or resistance to a particular class of 
antihypertensives (TRANSCEND).254 Other trials included patients with cardiovascular 
disease or at high risk for cardiovascular events: The ACCORD MIND trial (Action to 
Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes–Memory in Diabetes) included individuals with 
long-standing diabetes mellitus at high risk for cardiovascular events253; ONTARGET 
Iadecola et al.
Page 21
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 included patients with subclinical evidence of cardiovascular risk254; and some trials 
included patients with a recent to more remote history of different stroke subtypes, that is, 
ischemic and lacunar (PROFESS, SPS3, and PROGRESS).258–261
The mean BP levels at baseline have declined over time, consistent with evolving evidence 
supporting lower BP treatment goals. Thus, the earlier trials (SHEP,262 SYST-EUR,251 and 
SCOPE256) included people now classified in the stage 2 hypertension range. More recent 
trials included patients with qualifying BP levels that fell into the stage 1 hypertension 
range, so mean baseline BPs were lower.
Treatment protocols have also changed, and designs have become more complex. The range 
of designs include testing a single drug against placebo (TRANSCEND254; a single drug 
versus placebo, allowing open-label antihypertensive treatment in the placebo arm if needed 
in SCOPE256) or a primary drug followed by a standardized step procedure with a protocol-
driven sequence for adding additional drugs (HYVET,250 SYST-EUR,251 SHEP,257 and 
SCOPE256) or without specified BP goals (SPS3,259 PROFESS,258 PROGRESS,260 and 
ONTARGET/TRANSCEND254) ACCORD MIND253 tested 2 therapeutic strategies with 
different SBP goals, <120 versus <140 mm Hg. Several trials used a 2-by-2 factorial design 
that allowed a test of >1 intervention. The 2-by-2 factorial of SPS3 had 2 arms comparing 
different SBP goal–defined therapeutic strategies and comparing a dual antiplatelet therapy 
with aspirin plus placebo.259 The PROFESS trial had 4 arms that tested antiplatelets, 
angiotensin II receptor inhibitors, and placebo258; ONTARGET had 3 arms comparing an 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, angiotensin II receptor inhibitors, and a 
combination of drugs.254 The achieved reduction in BP (SBP/DBP) ranged from −0.9/0.6 in 
the telmisartan versus ramipril arm in the ONTARGET trial254 to 15/5.9 in HYVET.250
Cognitive Outcomes
The most widely used test, as a single and primary outcome, has been the MMSE, which is a 
30-point test of global cognition. The SPS3 trial259 used the Cognitive Abilities Screening 
Instrument, another, longer test of global cognitive function. ACCORD MIND253 had as its 
primary outcome psychomotor speed (Digit Symbol Substitution Test; Cognitive Domains 
Targeted by Hypertension section). The MMSE score was used in several metrics to define 
outcome, including the absolute MMSE score, percent scoring <24 (HYVET,250 
ONTARGET,254 SCOPE,256 and PROGRESS260), or a drop of 3 points (PROGRESS260). 
The MMSE was also used as a screening instrument to identify people for additional workup 
for dementia (HYVET250 and PROGRESS260) or to define dementia (ONTARGET254). The 
second most frequent outcome was dementia, which was diagnosed by investigator-assessed 
and specialist-confirmed diagnosis of dementia (ONTARGET254 and PROFESS clinical 
impression258), a local investigator following international criteria (SCOPE256), and an 
examination of screen-positive individuals by a local specialist following international 
guidelines and then central adjudication (PROGRESS260; SCOPE,256 SYSTEUR,250,251 and 
SHEP257). Trials that aimed to subtype the dementia used the Hachinski ischemic score263 
in addition to the MMSE and clinical assessment to assess the likelihood of a cardiovascular 
contribution and a computed tomography scan to image cerebrovascular lesions.
Iadecola et al.
Page 22
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Other Measures of Brain Function and Structure
Three trials had imaging substudies (MIND,253 PROFESS,264 and PROGRESS199) to test 
whether the intervention was related to the development or progression of pathology in the 
brain, as measured by MRI. PROFESS imaged 777 people on average 27 months apart; in 
that subsample, there were no differences between treatment groups264 in BP levels or in the 
outcome, progression of WMHs assessed by fluid-attenuated inversion recovery MRI. In the 
PROGRESS substudy of 192 subjects followed up for 36 months, a significant slowing of 
WMH progression was detected between treatment groups.199 The 314 MRIs acquired at 
baseline and 40 months later in ACCORD MIND showed that total brain volume had 
declined more in the group with intensive versus standard strategy to lower BP.253 Few trials 
assessed >1 cognitive function in all (SPS3)253,259 or a subsample of subjects (SHEP262 and 
SCOPE265). A SCOPE substudy (n=257)265 found suggestive evidence of a small effect of 
treatment on attention and episodic memory tests but not working memory or executive 
function. Other trials found no treatment differences in test scores.253,259,262
Results of Clinical Trials
Only 1 trial, SYST-EUR, had a marginally significant result suggesting the treatment benefit 
of reducing dementia (21 versus 11 patients; P=0.05), an effect that persisted during an open 
follow-up phase.251,266 The PROGRESS trial, using a definition of “dementia (or cognitive 
decline) after stroke” and “other dementia (cognitive decline),” found a significantly 
(P=0.03) reduced risk in the patients with treated dementia after stroke compared with 
control subjects (43 versus 65) and an overall reduction in cognitive decline in the treated 
group, with the difference attributable mainly to the cognitive decline with stroke group.260 
Other trials report no differences on cognitive test performance between intervention and 
control arms. Post hoc analyses in several trials indicate that within treatment arms, there 
was a negative association of more cognitive decline in those with a smaller decrease in BP 
(SYST-EUR and ONTARGET).251,259
Evidence for a Particular Class of Antihypertensive Drug—A meta-analysis in 
2011 of 8 trials reviewed here found that overall there was no effect of BP lowering on the 
risk for dementia.267 However, there was a suggestion that calcium channel blockers may 
slightly reduce the incidence of dementia, but the authors note that the benefit could be 
attributable mostly to the amount of BP lowering achieved in those trials. Such comparisons 
point out the difficulty in identifying any one drug class as being particularly beneficial for 
cognition: There is a confounding between baseline BP, number of drug classes used to 
lower BP, and the amount of BP lowering achieved in the trials. The evidence suggests that 
there is no Class A evidence for treating hypertensive patients (>160/90 mm Hg) with no 
apparent cardiovascular disease to preserve cognition. At lower levels of BP and in trials 
based on patients with preexisting cardiovascular disease, the existing trials have been 
uniformly negative. However, this conclusion should be tempered given several sources of 
bias in these trials and the strength of the trials to test the hypotheses. These are examined 
next.
Iadecola et al.
Page 23
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Possible Sources of Bias and Heterogeneity of Results
Five studies reported the power of their analyses to detect treatment differences related to the 
cognitive outcomes.250,251,253,258,260 There is a possibility that the trials using the MMSE as 
their primary outcome were underpowered for the small differences that have been reported. 
In multicenter, multicultural studies, standardized assessment of dementia is important, 
particularly for mild cases of dementia, for which the cutoff for clinical dementia can vary 
substantially. Several trials reporting dementia outcomes do not provide sufficient 
information to determine whether and how assessments of dementia followed standardized 
protocols to fulfill international guidelines (ONTARGET,254 PROFESS,258 SCOPE,256 
PROGRESS260, HYVET,250 SYST-EUR,251 and SHEP262). There is also a lack of 
documentation about the blinding of the individuals administering tests or rendering a 
dementia diagnosis.
Separation of BP levels between treatment arms was, in some of the trials testing specific 
drugs, attenuated because the control group was treated with antihypertensive drugs. This 
was a particular issue in the early trials when ethics guidelines called for treating very high 
BP (SCOPE,256 SHEP,262 and SYST-EUR266), although the definition of very high varied.
Finally, negative trial results could be attributable, in some trials, to the loss of data from 
those who either did not receive the full BP intervention or missed cognitive assessments.
Possibility of Finding Effects and Sources of Heterogeneity
Even in the absence of specific bias in implementation or reporting, it is important to 
consider the overall question of whether the trials were appropriately designed to test the 
efficacy of BP lowering to reduce cognitive decline/dementia. One factor to consider is 
whether the outcome measured was appropriate for the subjects’ age. The MMSE or a 
similar test of global cognition was used as the only cognitive measure250,254,256,258,259 in 
subjects from 60 to 65 years of age. Others were investigating dementia in patients of that 
age. This age range is likely too young to see a detectable change on the MMSE because 
that test has a low ceiling and a nonlinear pattern of change and is unlikely to provide cases 
of incident dementia, which begins to increase in incidence after 80 years of age. 
Furthermore, the MMSE was designed to screen for cognitive deficits caused by AD and 
may miss some of the major cognitive changes thought to accompany vascular-related 
cognitive impairment.3
Another issue about the strength of the completed trials investigating BP lowering and 
cognition is the likelihood of detecting clinically relevant outcomes during the short 
intervention periods. Several trials included a relatively cognitively healthy group with a 
mean MMSE score of 29 of 30 points. Post hoc analyses of several studies suggested that 
those who were more cognitively compromised, but still without dementia, may benefit 
more from short-term interventions (SCOPE268 and ONTARGET/TRANSCEND254).
Finally, if loss to follow-up or stopping treatment is related to cognitive impairment, then 
differences between treatment arms may be attenuated, with negative results. A simulation 
analysis based on SHEP269 suggested that if those with cardiovascular disease who dropped 
Iadecola et al.
Page 24
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 out of the trial were also cognitively impaired and had stayed in the trial, different, positive 
results of the intervention might have been detected.
Summary of Evidence
Early trials treating patients with very high baseline BP suggested that lowering BP at these 
levels might be efficacious. However, issues related to the choice of outcomes relative to the 
age of the trial population, possible bias caused by sample attrition, and questions about 
quality control protocols raise the question of whether the hypothesis of cognitive benefit 
from BP lowering has been adequately tested. Furthermore, bringing in new imaging-based 
outcomes to better understand the response to therapy and its relation to cognitive outcomes 
would enhance these trials. Trials recently ending should shed more light on this question. 
One trial, the SPRINT trial (Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial),270 with target 
treatment goals for elevated BP ended early because of efficacy on the main cardiovascular 
events271 but has extensive data on brain health. Results from SPRINT-MIND (SPRINT 
Memory and Cognition in Decreased Hypertension) will be available next year. In the 
interim, careful control of BP might be a reasonable course of action, taking into account 
age and comorbidities.
Hypertension Treatment Over the Life Course
Managing BP to maintain cognitive health will likely require taking into account the 
complex relationship among BP, age, the presence of comorbidities, and antihypertensive 
therapy. In this section, we review available evidence that sheds light on the expected 
cognitive benefit of treating hypertension across the life course.
Treatment of Hypertension in Children and Adolescents
Clinically apparent vascular disease rarely occurs in children and adolescents. However, 
preclinical risk factors for vascular disease such as hypertension appear to have become 
more prevalent in the past few decades.272–274 The basis for this rise in pediatric 
hypertension is unclear but may be explained in part by an increase in the rate of 
obesity.275,276
Given the rarity of pediatric vascular events such as stroke, little evidence directly ties 
pediatric hypertension to subsequent vascular outcomes during childhood and adolescence. 
However, 3 factors implicate childhood hypertension in the subsequent development of 
adverse outcomes in adulthood. First, childhood and adolescent hypertension often continues 
into adulthood. Moderate correlations have been found between BP during childhood and 
BP years later,277,278 which suggests that early-life hypertension will often persist into later 
life stages in which it is a well-established risk factor for vascular events and cognitive 
impairment. Second, prospective cohort studies have found associations between childhood 
vascular risk factors such as hypertension and the presence of subclinical atherosclerotic 
lesions on autopsies of study subjects who died in young adulthood as a result of accidental 
trauma.279,280 Similarly, hypertension in early life has been linked to in vivo measures of 
vascular dysfunction such as left ventricular hypertrophy on echocardiogram and carotid 
intima-media thickness on ultrasound.281 Such findings place childhood hypertension on the 
Iadecola et al.
Page 25
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pathway to preclinical vascular dysfunction, which in turn has been strongly linked to 
clinical vascular events such as stroke and heart failure. This parallels the pathway seen with 
adult-onset hypertension. Finally, the childhood presence of metabolic syndrome, of which 
hypertension is an integral part, has been directly associated with clinical vascular outcomes 
in early adulthood.282 Taken together, these findings indicate that hypertension in early life 
not only serves as a prelude to hypertension in adulthood but also has already begun to have 
insidious effects on the vascular system that predispose to symptomatic vascular disease 
early in life. In addition, several small studies have raised the suggestion that elevated BP 
has immediate adverse implications for cognitive function even in childhood.283–285
No randomized, clinical trial has evaluated the effect of antihypertensive therapy on clinical 
outcomes or markers of end-organ damage in the pediatric population.286 The considerations 
above provide a plausible rationale for carefully treating hypertension in children and 
adolescents in the hope of preventing vascular events and cognitive impairment in 
adulthood. However, several cautionary points apply. The long-term safety of 
pharmacological treatment in children’s growth has not been studied.286 This supports a 
preferential emphasis on lifestyle modification, especially weight loss, before resorting to 
pharmacological therapy. Furthermore, many children with hypertension no longer manifest 
elevated BP in adulthood.277,278 This uncertainty about the long-term durability of 
childhood hypertension calls for continual reassessment of BP and whether pharmacological 
therapy is needed, especially in patients who have successfully lost weight.276
Treatment of Hypertension in Young Adults
Most cases of hypertension in individuals <40 years of age involve isolated diastolic 
hypertension.287 This often progresses to also involve systolic hypertension as patients enter 
middle age.288 Furthermore, even across the fifth decade of life, a strong association remains 
between increasing DBP and cardiovascular events such as myocardial infarction.289 This 
natural history argues for attempts to reduce BP even in young adults, especially in patients 
who manifest any evidence of end-organ injury. Across randomized trials of anti-
hypertensive therapy, the relative benefits of treatment and of specific classes of drugs do not 
appear to vary on the basis of whether patients were >65 or <65 years of age.290 However, 
randomized, clinical trials have not been performed to specifically assess the benefits of 
pharmacological treatment of hypertension in young adults. In this context, 
nonpharmacological measures may be an especially compelling first-line approach. The 
PREMIER trial enrolled 810 relatively young adults (mean age, 50 years) with stage 1 
hypertension (mean BP, ≈135/85 mm Hg) who were not receiving antihypertensive therapy. 
Subjects were randomly enrolled to a brief session of advice about factors affecting BP or to 
1 of 2 intensive behavioral interventions. At 6 months, the intensive interventions led to an 
≈4–mm Hg reduction in SBP.291 This suggests that intensive nonpharmacological 
interventions in young adulthood may prevent the onset of hypertension or at least may 
delay the need for pharmacological therapy until later in midlife.
Treatment of Hypertension in Midlife
Numerous randomized, clinical trials in middle-aged populations have shown that 
antihypertensive therapy substantially decreases the risk of adverse cardiovascular events 
Iadecola et al.
Page 26
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 such as stroke.292–295 Some of these trials included measures of cognition. As discussed in 
the Interaction With Other Risk Factors, Including Genetics section, trial results do not 
clearly support or refute a beneficial effect of antihypertensive therapy in preserving 
cognition.296–300
Furthermore, by midlife, hypertension often occurs in the context of other systemic vascular 
risk factors such as dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus, obesity, a sedentary lifestyle, and 
exposure to tobacco and environmental pollutants. Recent evidence from a large, 
randomized, clinical trial suggests that an overarching strategy for modifying these vascular 
risk factors helps to preserve cognition in individuals in their 60s and 70s.301
Finally, both clinically overt stroke and silent brain infarcts appear to lie on the causal 
pathway to cognitive impairment,159,302,303 so widespread adoption of antihypertensive 
therapy to prevent stroke is likely to also result in improvements in cognition over the long 
term. A recent comparison of cognitive outcomes between 2 successive cohorts of elderly 
subjects born about a decade apart demonstrated better cognition in the later-born cohort.304 
These findings follow several prior reports to the same effect. An analysis of long-term care 
surveys from the United States across the 1980s and 1990s first suggested a temporal decline 
in the prevalence of dementia.305 This pattern was corroborated by a separate US 
population–based survey that found an ≈5% decrease in the prevalence of cognitive 
impairment between 1993 and 2002.306 Similar patterns have been found in analyses from 
Sweden and England.307,308 These secular trends may have been driven by less exposure to 
adverse environmental influences such as pollution and greater exposure to antihypertensive 
therapy. However, such ecological conclusions cannot be drawn without more detailed data 
(Hypertension and Cognition: Clinical Trials of BP Lowering).
Overall, although robust evidence is lacking to prove that antihypertensive therapy in middle 
age provides a cognitive benefit, such a benefit appears likely on the basis of the 
epidemiological considerations above. Given the expected burden of cognitive impairment 
and dementia in an aging population, this suggestion of benefit provides a strong rationale 
for randomized, clinical trials of antihypertensive therapy designed primarily to test the 
hypothesis that aggressive control of hypertension during middle age can delay cognitive 
decline in later life. Although antihypertensive therapy in midlife is already supported by 
evidence of its benefit in reducing clinical events such as stroke, more robust evidence of its 
role in cognition would have important implications for our understanding of the 
pathogenesis of dementia. The results of the ongoing SPRINT-MIND trial (Interaction With 
Other Risk Factors, Including Genetics section) may help shed light on this question.
Treatment of Hypertension in Late Life
Randomized, clinical trials did not shed much light on whether antihypertensive treatment 
protects cognitive function (Interaction With Other Risk Factors, Including Genetics 
section), but this uncertainty has been especially important in the very elderly. As discussed 
above, this population was well represented in HYVET (mean age, ≈84 years),250 but other 
randomized, clinical trials of antihypertensive therapy have enrolled few patients >80 years 
of age.292–295 Furthermore, several observational studies have found that low BP, 
particularly low DBP, is associated with cognitive and physical decline in the 
Iadecola et al.
Page 27
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 elderly107,128,149,154,309–311 (Hypertension and Cognition: Observational Studies 
section).
It is unclear whether the relationship between low BP and cognitive decline in late life 
reflects a dysfunctional autonomic nervous system resulting in low BP, low BP leading to 
progressive hypoperfusion and brain atrophy, or some combination of these and other 
factors. Clearly, much more research is needed on the complex relationships among BP, 
antihypertensive treatment, frailty and multimorbidity, and cognitive and functional status in 
the oldest old. In the meantime, it may be reasonable to consider frailty and multimorbidity 
as a factor in decisions about antihypertensive therapy in late life. This is especially the case 
in patients who manifest intolerance of antihypertensive therapy in the form of symptoms 
such as orthostatic hypotension.312 On the other hand, the results of the recently completed 
SPRINT trial, which included the oldest old, support the hypothesis that pharmacological 
treatment of elevated SBP reduces the risk of stroke and could help preserve cognition. The 
hope is that more detailed subgroup analyses of this age group will shed more light on the 
risks and benefits of antihypertensive treatment in the oldest old.
It is possible that better treatment of vascular risk factors earlier in life will reduce the 
prevalence of frailty in late life. Aging is associated with a progressive increase in SBP that 
occurs in the setting of stiffening of the arterial system313 (Effects of Hypertension on 
Cerebrovascular Structure and Function section). Indirect evidence suggests that aggressive 
treatment of early-life and midlife vascular risk factors may retard the progression of these 
pathological changes. Caloric restriction, low-sodium diet, increased levels of exercise, and 
low exposure to hypertension have all been associated with less arterial stiffening.314–318 If 
this is the case, then early treatment of hypertension and other vascular risk factors may both 
lessen the need for antihypertensive therapy and increase its safety in late life.
Summary of Evidence
Direct evidence from randomized, clinical trials does not allow conclusive recommendations 
about treating hypertension throughout the life span to protect cognition. Observational 
studies suggest that hypertension causes an accumulating burden of vascular injury across all 
stages of life, but paradoxically, the end stages of vascular disease in frail elderly patients 
may be marked by low BP. Such considerations support the use of antihypertensive therapy 
throughout middle age and then continued efforts at judicious control of BP in elderly 
patients who appear likely to tolerate it. Results of randomized, clinical trials are awaited to 
prove the likely hypothesis that good control of BP and other vascular risk factors across the 
life span will help to stem the tide of cognitive impairment and dementia that would 
otherwise be expected with a continually aging population.
Overall Summary and Future Directions
We have provided a broad overview of the cognitive impact of chronic hypertension. 
Hypertension disrupts the structure of cerebral blood vessels, promotes atherosclerosis, and 
impairs vital cerebrovascular regulatory mechanisms. These vascular changes increase the 
susceptibility of the brain to ischemic injury, especially in vulnerable white matter regions 
critical for cognitive function, and may promote AD pathology. The evidence to date points 
Iadecola et al.
Page 28
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 strongly to a deleterious influence of midlife hypertension on cognitive function in midlife 
and late life. Executive function and processing speed seem to be the cognitive domains 
most affected, but memory can also be impaired. Therefore, it can be difficult to differentiate 
VCI from AD solely on the basis of the neurocognitive deficits. Although the data are not 
conclusive, there is evidence of an association between higher late-life BP and better 
cognition, highlighting the complexities of recommending uniform levels of BP across the 
life course. In addition to aging, menopausal status, APOE ε4 genotype, insulin resistance, 
systemic inflammation, and other comorbidities may potentiate the cognitive decline in 
individuals with hypertension.
Less clear are the effects of hypertension treatment on cognitive function. Observational 
studies have demonstrated a cumulative effect of hypertension on cerebrovascular damage, 
but evidence from randomized, double-blind, clinical trials that treatment of high BP at any 
stage over the life course improves cognition is far from conclusive. An intriguing 
relationship has emerged between hypertension and AD, raising the prospect that a chronic 
elevation in BP aggravates AD pathology, contributing to dementia. These findings are 
critically important because they raise the possibility that treatment of hypertension may also 
contribute to reduce the development or progression AD. Because no evidence-based 
recommendations can be made at this time, treatment of high BP in midlife and judicious 
use of antihypertensives in late life, taking into account cerebrovascular status and 
comorbidities, seem justified.3
Our analysis of the evidence also revealed a number of knowledge gaps that need to be 
addressed to gain a better understanding of the pathobiology and clinical impact of 
hypertension and to develop preventive and therapeutic strategies. One of the most 
promising aspects of an association between hypertension and dementia, including AD, is 
the prospect of prevention or early treatment as a strategy to reduce downstream cognitive 
impairment. Indeed, given how prevalent hypertension is and that there are many accessible 
and effective drugs, treatment of hypertension may prove to be one of the best ways to 
prevent or delay dementia. However, numerous questions and caveats remain. These are 
considered next.
How hypertension acts on cerebral arteries, the micro-circulation, and other cellular 
elements in the neurovascular unit to produce changes in structure and function has not been 
fully elucidated. As we gain a better understanding of how the cells of the neurovascular unit 
and elsewhere interact to regulate cerebrovascular homeostasis and BBB permeability in the 
normal state, studies should also probe how hypertension interferes with the signaling 
pathways regulating such interactions in different districts of the cerebrovascular tree. The 
resulting knowledge may provide insight into the regional susceptibility of cerebral vessels 
to the effects of hypertension, that is, subcortical white matter and basal ganglia. The relative 
impact of the neurohumoral signals driving the elevation in BP and the mechanical forces 
acting on the vessel walls to induce changes in vascular cells and the extracellular matrix 
need to be explored further. While elucidating how hypertension may lead to brain damage, 
these investigations could point to new therapeutic targets to prevent or ameliorate the 
deleterious effect of hypertension on the brain and may unveil class-specific effects on 
pathological processes driving cognitive impairment. Better use of available models and new 
Iadecola et al.
Page 29
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experimental models that more closely reflect chronic hypertension in humans may be 
needed to generate translationally relevant results.
A key question concerns how the structural and functional effects of hypertension on the 
brain lead to cognitive impairment. WMHs and other brain lesions produced by SVD could 
reduce the connectivity, speed, timing, and spatial precision of the communication among 
brain regions critical for cognition (eg, the prefrontal cortex, cingulated cortex, and sensory 
regions), leading to psychomotor slowing and executive dysfunction.27 On the other hand, 
hypoperfusion and reduced neurovascular coupling could induce brain dysfunction by 
depriving the energy-demanding regions involved in cognition of oxygen and glucose.319 
Hypertension-induced amyloid production and deposition could also play a role by 
promoting AD pathology. In the long run, whole brain and hippocampal atrophy are also 
likely to contribute by further reducing the processing power of the brain. Although these 
mechanisms are all plausible, supporting human data on their relative impact throughout the 
life course are lacking. Studies using connectomic-based approaches to investigate how 
hypertension affects brain networks in the presence or absence of structural damage 
(WMHs, silent strokes, etc) are now feasible and could provide new mechanistic insights. In 
addition, brain imaging approaches to investigate the relationship among CBF, cerebral 
energy metabolism, BBB permeability, and amyloid deposition could clarify the interaction 
among these different pathogenic factors and provide new biomarkers for risk assessment 
and early disease identification.
Whether treatment as early in the life course as possible, for example, hypertension in 
adolescence, would offer advantages for dementia prevention or pose too many side effects 
or other risks that would offset early and aggressive treatment is a critical question. This is 
particularly a concern at the extremes of the life span. It may be that childhood or early 
adulthood treatment is not cost-effective or the side effects outweigh the advantages. 
Similarly, in very late life, aggressive treatment may be more problematic than helpful. 
Although it is challenging to conduct a trial that covers much of the life span, adding 
sensitive and state-of-the-art cognitive outcomes to ongoing hypertension studies would be 
cost-effective and highly informative. Furthermore, advanced statistical methods could be 
applied to existing data sets to gain additional insight and to help better plan future trials. 
Trials should also include biomarkers of AD and other dementias because they may be 
helpful surrogate markers and may suggest new ways to identify hypertensive individuals at 
increased risk for cognitive impairment.
Related questions pertain to the trajectory of the cognitive decline in the hypertensive 
population and to the factors determining vulnerability. Although cognitive impairment is 
well documented in people with hypertension, little is known about the temporal dynamics 
of cognitive change in this population. Prospective studies documenting the rate and timing 
of cognitive changes and identifying factors that may predict cognitive decline, for example, 
adherence to BP medication regimens or BP control and development of other 
comorbidities, would be highly relevant. Furthermore, in the AD and diabetic populations, 
brain changes may occur decades before cognitive changes.320,321 It is unknown when the 
brain is most vulnerable to the deleterious effects of hypertension. Prospective studies that 
Iadecola et al.
Page 30
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 use state-of-the-art neuroimaging techniques and prehypertension samples would provide 
valuable insight into this brain-behavior relationship.
The effects of other comorbid illnesses, that is, clusters of comorbidities that combined with 
hypertension may have a greater cognitive impact, remain to be defined. It is well 
documented that multiple chronic illnesses, for example, diabetes mellitus, renal 
insufficiency/failure, and heart failure, are associated with cognitive impairment.3 
Furthermore, 3 of 4 individuals >65 years of suffer from ≥2 chronic illnesses (ie, 
multimorbidity).322 No research to date has examined the effect of multimorbidity on 
cognition; therefore, future studies should be designed around novel analysis techniques (eg, 
latent class analysis) to explore whether certain clusters of chronic illnesses are more 
predictive of cognitive impairment.
The cognitive tests that are most sensitive to changes in cognition across the life course also 
remain to be defined. As documented in this statement, cognitive tests vary dramatically 
between studies, making comparison of findings across studies difficult. Furthermore, the 
most commonly used instrument, the MMSE, is a measure of global cognition and is not as 
sensitive to subtle but clinically significant changes in cognition as domain-specific 
measures.323 Given the inconsistency in cognitive measures, it is difficult to determine 
which neuropsychological tests are most sensitive to the cognitive changes that occur within 
the hypertensive population. Studies to document the psychometric properties of 
comprehensive neuropsychological batteries are needed to better determine which cognitive 
measures are most sensitive in hypertension across the life span.
Although some studies provided hints that certain classes of antihypertensive drugs may be 
more effective at improving cognition or lowering cognitive decline, most of these studies 
were underpowered or without equivalent cognitive end points. To better guide treatment, 
much more information will be needed on class of drugs and possibly how the efficacy of 
drugs may differ by sex and ethnicity. Future trials should ensure a diverse population that is 
large enough to detect the efficacy of drugs on subpopulations and ensure that more uniform 
cognitive outcomes are used. The question of the differential effect of treating SBP versus 
DBP is also understudied and has important clinical implications for risk assessment.
Furthermore, although the preponderance of evidence suggests that hypertension, especially 
at midlife, is a risk factor for late-life cognitive impairment and dementia, several 
fundamental issues remain unanswered. Among these is how hypertension interacts with key 
pathogenic factors involved in neurodegeneration such as tau and Aβ in promoting 
neurodegenerative disease.44,45 The complicated interplay between cerebrovascular 
dysfunction and the production and clearance of these proteins through trans-vascular, 
perivascular, and paravascular pathways324,325 is an important area for further investigation. 
The role of the dural lymphatics326 in these clearance processes and the impact that 
hypertension has on lymphatic drainage remain to be assessed. These investigations may 
help address the role of hypertension in the alterations in amyloid trafficking observed in 
AD and in the evolution of neurodegeneration. With the advent of new neuroimaging 
techniques, especially amyloid and tau imaging, and biomarkers that can track preclinical 
disease, it may be possible to assess these interactions more readily.
Iadecola et al.
Page 31
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In summary, basic, clinical, and neuropathological investigations have made remarkable 
progress in improving the understanding of the effect of hypertension on the brain 
vasculature and cognitive health, but much remains to be learned. Although there is 
substantial evidence that hypertension leads to cognitive impairment, an effect attributed to 
oxidative stress-driven cerebrovascular dysfunction and damage, the underlying cellular and 
molecular mechanisms remain incompletely understood. In addition, a critically important 
question still unanswered is whether treating hypertension prevents or reverses cognitive 
decline. Whereas difficulties in carrying on longitudinal studies for decades have played a 
role, the lack of appropriate and uniform cognitive outcomes across studies has also been a 
complicating factor. A complex relationship of hypertension with ethnicity, age, sex, and 
cerebrovascular risk factors has emerged, making it difficult to assess treatment 
effectiveness. The upcoming release of the results of the SPRINT-MIND trial may help fill 
some of these knowledge gaps. Despite numerous outstanding questions and caveats, 
personalized treatment of hypertension, taking into account age, sex, APOE genotype, 
metabolic traits, comorbidities, etc, remains a most promising and eminently feasible 
approach to safeguard vascular health and, as a consequence, brain heath. Antihypertensive 
drugs are generally safe and widely available, but there is still much to be learned about how 
to best use them over the life course in the presence of comorbidities and whether specific 
classes of drugs may confer cognitive benefits beyond BP lowering. New discoveries in the 
cellular and molecular pathology of the cerebrovascular tree and associated cells, coupled 
with the use of new imaging tools, biomarkers, and genomic-proteomic approaches in 
clinical trials, offer the prospect to address these unanswered questions and to develop new 
treatments to mitigate the devastating impact of hypertension on cognitive health.
Iadecola et al.
Page 32
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Disclosures
Writing Group Disclosures. 
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as 
actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. 
A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more 
during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person 
owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the 
fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than 
“significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
‡Dr Saczynski is now at Northeastern University.
Iadecola et al.
Page 33
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Reviewer Disclosures. 
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or 
reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which 
all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be 
“significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% 
or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock 
or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A 
relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding 
definition.
*Modest.
References
1. Dementia: A Public Health Priority. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2012. 
2. Prince M, Bryce R, Albanese E, Wimo A, Ribeiro W, Ferri CP. The global prevalence of dementia: a 
systematic review and metaanalysis. Alzheimers Dement. 2013; 9:63–75.e2. DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.
2012.11.007 [PubMed: 23305823] 
3. Gorelick PB, Scuteri A, Black SE, Decarli C, Greenberg SM, Iadecola C, Launer LJ, Laurent S, 
Lopez OL, Nyenhuis D, Petersen RC, Schneider JA, Tzourio C, Arnett DK, Bennett DA, Chui HC, 
Higashida RT, Lindquist R, Nilsson PM, Roman GC, Sellke FW, Seshadri S, on behalf of the 
American Heart Association Stroke Council, Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on 
Cardiovascular Nursing, Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention, and Council on 
Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia. Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and 
dementia: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American 
Stroke Association. Stroke. 2011; 42:2672–2713. DOI: 10.1161/STR.0b013e3182299496 [PubMed: 
21778438] 
4. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, Arnett DK, Blaha MJ, Cushman M, de Ferranti S, Després JP, 
Fullerton HJ, Howard VJ, Huffman MD, Judd SE, Kissela BM, Lackland DT, Lichtman JH, 
Lisabeth LD, Liu S, Mackey RH, Matchar DB, McGuire DK, Mohler ER 3rd, Moy CS, Muntner P, 
Mussolino ME, Nasir K, Neumar RW, Nichol G, Palaniappan L, Pandey DK, Reeves MJ, Rodriguez 
CJ, Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi A, Turan TN, Virani SS, Willey JZ, Woo D, Yeh RW, Turner MB, 
American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart 
disease and stroke statistics–2015 update: a report from the American Heart Association [published 
corrections appear in Circulation. 2015;131:e535 and Circulation. 2016;133:e417]. Circulation. 
2015; 131:e29–e322. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000152 [PubMed: 25520374] 
5. Lim SS, Vos T, Flaxman AD, Danaei G, Shibuya K, Adair-Rohani H, Amann M, Anderson HR, 
Andrews KG, Aryee M, Atkinson C, Bacchus LJ, Bahalim AN, Balakrishnan K, Balmes J, Barker-
Collo S, Baxter A, Bell ML, Blore JD, Blyth F, Bonner C, Borges G, Bourne R, Boussinesq M, 
Brauer M, Brooks P, Bruce NG, Brunekreef B, Bryan-Hancock C, Bucello C, Buchbinder R, Bull F, 
Burnett RT, Byers TE, Calabria B, Carapetis J, Carnahan E, Chafe Z, Charlson F, Chen H, Chen JS, 
Cheng AT, Child JC, Cohen A, Colson KE, Cowie BC, Darby S, Darling S, Davis A, Degenhardt L, 
Dentener F, Des Jarlais DC, Devries K, Dherani M, Ding EL, Dorsey ER, Driscoll T, Edmond K, 
Ali SE, Engell RE, Erwin PJ, Fahimi S, Falder G, Farzadfar F, Ferrari A, Finucane MM, Flaxman S, 
Fowkes FG, Freedman G, Freeman MK, Gakidou E, Ghosh S, Giovannucci E, Gmel G, Graham K, 
Iadecola et al.
Page 34
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Grainger R, Grant B, Gunnell D, Gutierrez HR, Hall W, Hoek HW, Hogan A, Hosgood HD 3rd, 
Hoy D, Hu H, Hubbell BJ, Hutchings SJ, Ibeanusi SE, Jacklyn GL, Jasrasaria R, Jonas JB, Kan H, 
Kanis JA, Kassebaum N, Kawakami N, Khang YH, Khatibzadeh S, Khoo JP, Kok C, Laden F, 
Lalloo R, Lan Q, Lathlean T, Leasher JL, Leigh J, Li Y, Lin JK, Lipshultz SE, London S, Lozano R, 
Lu Y, Mak J, Malekzadeh R, Mallinger L, Marcenes W, March L, Marks R, Martin R, McGale P, 
McGrath J, Mehta S, Mensah GA, Merriman TR, Micha R, Michaud C, Mishra V, Mohd Hanafiah 
K, Mokdad AA, Morawska L, Mozaffarian D, Murphy T, Naghavi M, Neal B, Nelson PK, Nolla 
JM, Norman R, Olives C, Omer SB, Orchard J, Osborne R, Ostro B, Page A, Pandey KD, Parry CD, 
Passmore E, Patra J, Pearce N, Pelizzari PM, Petzold M, Phillips MR, Pope D, Pope CA 3rd, 
Powles J, Rao M, Razavi H, Rehfuess EA, Rehm JT, Ritz B, Rivara FP, Roberts T, Robinson C, 
Rodriguez-Portales JA, Romieu I, Room R, Rosenfeld LC, Roy A, Rushton L, Salomon JA, 
Sampson U, Sanchez-Riera L, Sanman E, Sapkota A, Seedat S, Shi P, Shield K, Shivakoti R, Singh 
GM, Sleet DA, Smith E, Smith KR, Stapelberg NJ, Steenland K, Stöckl H, Stovner LJ, Straif K, 
Straney L, Thurston GD, Tran JH, Van Dingenen R, van Donkelaar A, Veerman JL, Vijayakumar L, 
Weintraub R, Weissman MM, White RA, Whiteford H, Wiersma ST, Wilkinson JD, Williams HC, 
Williams W, Wilson N, Woolf AD, Yip P, Zielinski JM, Lopez AD, Murray CJ, Ezzati M, AlMazroa 
MA, Memish ZA. A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 
risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a systematic analysis for the Global 
Burden of Disease Study 2010 [published corrections appear in Lancet. 2013;381:628 and Lancet. 
2013;381:1276]. Lancet. 2012; 380:2224–2260. DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61766-8 [PubMed: 
23245609] 
6. Elias MF, Goodell AL, Dore GA. Hypertension and cognitive functioning: a perspective in historical 
context. Hypertension. 2012; 60:260–268. DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.186429 
[PubMed: 22753214] 
7. Gąsecki D, Kwarciany M, Nyka W, Narkiewicz K. Hypertension, brain damage and cognitive 
decline. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2013; 15:547–558. DOI: 10.1007/s11906-013-0398-4 [PubMed: 
24146223] 
8. Iadecola C, Gorelick PB. Converging pathogenic mechanisms in vascular and neurodegenerative 
dementia. Stroke. 2003; 34:335–337. [PubMed: 12574528] 
9. Attems J, Jellinger KA. The overlap between vascular disease and Alzheimer’s disease: lessons 
from pathology. BMC Med. 2014; 12:206.doi: 10.1186/s12916-014-0206-2 [PubMed: 25385447] 
10. Toledo JB, Arnold SE, Raible K, Brettschneider J, Xie SX, Grossman M, Monsell SE, Kukull WA, 
Trojanowski JQ. Contribution of cerebrovascular disease in autopsy confirmed neurodegenerative 
disease cases in the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Centre. Brain. 2013; 136(pt 9):2697–2706. 
DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt188 [PubMed: 23842566] 
11. Schneider JA, Arvanitakis Z, Leurgans SE, Bennett DA. The neuropathology of probable 
Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment. Ann Neurol. 2009; 66:200–208. DOI: 10.1002/
ana.21706 [PubMed: 19743450] 
12. Snowdon DA, Greiner LH, Mortimer JA, Riley KP, Greiner PA, Markesbery WR. Brain infarction 
and the clinical expression of Alzheimer disease: the Nun Study. JAMA. 1997; 277:813–817. 
[PubMed: 9052711] 
13. Chui HC, Zarow C, Mack WJ, Ellis WG, Zheng L, Jagust WJ, Mungas D, Reed BR, Kramer JH, 
Decarli CC, Weiner MW, Vinters HV. Cognitive impact of subcortical vascular and Alzheimer’s 
disease pathology. Ann Neurol. 2006; 60:677–687. DOI: 10.1002/ana.21009 [PubMed: 17192928] 
14. Chui HC, Ramirez-Gomez L. Clinical and imaging features of mixed Alzheimer and vascular 
pathologies. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2015; 7:21.doi: 10.1186/s13195-015-0104-7 [PubMed: 
25722748] 
15. Norton S, Matthews FE, Barnes DE, Yaffe K, Brayne C. Potential for primary prevention of 
Alzheimer’s disease: an analysis of population-based data [published correction appears in Lancet 
Neurol. 2014;13:1020]. Lancet Neurol. 2014; 13:788–794. DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70136-X 
[PubMed: 25030513] 
16. Faraco G, Iadecola C. Hypertension: a harbinger of stroke and dementia. Hypertension. 2013; 
62:810–817. DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.01063 [PubMed: 23980072] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 35
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 17. Pantoni L. Cerebral small vessel disease: from pathogenesis and clinical characteristics to 
therapeutic challenges. Lancet Neurol. 2010; 9:689–701. DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70104-6 
[PubMed: 20610345] 
18. Moser M, Roccella EJ. The treatment of hypertension: a remarkable success story. J Clin 
Hypertens (Greenwich). 2013; 15:88–91. DOI: 10.1111/jch.12033 [PubMed: 23339725] 
19. Lackland DT, Roccella EJ, Deutsch AF, Fornage M, George MG, Howard G, Kissela BM, Kittner 
SJ, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Schwamm LH, Smith EE, Towfighi A, on behalf of the American 
Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on 
Quality of Care and Outcomes Research; Council on Functional Genomics and Translational 
Biology. Factors influencing the decline in stroke mortality: a statement from the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014; 45:315–353. DOI: 10.1161/01.str.
0000437068.30550.cf [PubMed: 24309587] 
20. Iadecola C. Neurovascular regulation in the normal brain and in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2004; 5:347–360. DOI: 10.1038/nrn1387 [PubMed: 15100718] 
21. Ritz K, Denswil NP, Stam OC, van Lieshout JJ, Daemen MJ. Cause and mechanisms of 
intracranial atherosclerosis. Circulation. 2014; 130:1407–1414. DOI: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.114.011147 [PubMed: 25311618] 
22. Faraci FM. Protecting against vascular disease in brain. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011; 
300:H1566–H1582. DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.01310.2010 [PubMed: 21335467] 
23. Laurent S, Boutouyrie P. The structural factor of hypertension: large and small artery alterations. 
Circ Res. 2015; 116:1007–1021. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.303596 [PubMed: 25767286] 
24. Baumbach GL, Heistad DD. Remodeling of cerebral arterioles in chronic hypertension. 
Hypertension. 1989; 13(pt 2):968–972. [PubMed: 2737731] 
25. Rizzoni D, De Ciuceis C, Porteri E, Paiardi S, Boari GE, Mortini P, Cornali C, Cenzato M, Rodella 
LF, Borsani E, Rizzardi N, Platto C, Rezzani R, Rosei EA. Altered structure of small cerebral 
arteries in patients with essential hypertension. J Hypertens. 2009; 27:838–845. DOI: 10.1097/
HJH.0b013e32832401ea [PubMed: 19300112] 
26. Faconti L, Bruno RM, Ghiadoni L, Taddei S, Virdis A. Ventricular and vascular stiffening in aging 
and hypertension. Curr Hypertens Rev. 2015; 11:100–109. [PubMed: 26022209] 
27. Iadecola C. The pathobiology of vascular dementia. Neuron. 2013; 80:844–866. DOI: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2013.10.008 [PubMed: 24267647] 
28. Henskens LH, Kroon AA, van Oostenbrugge RJ, Gronenschild EH, Fuss-Lejeune MM, Hofman 
PA, Lodder J, de Leeuw PW. Increased aortic pulse wave velocity is associated with silent cerebral 
small-vessel disease in hypertensive patients. Hypertension. 2008; 52:1120–1126. DOI: 10.1161/
HYPERTENSIONAHA.108.119024 [PubMed: 18852384] 
29. Yang EY, Chambless L, Sharrett AR, Virani SS, Liu X, Tang Z, Boerwinkle E, Ballantyne CM, 
Nambi V. Carotid arterial wall characteristics are associated with incident ischemic stroke but not 
coronary heart disease in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Stroke. 2012; 
43:103–108. DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.626200 [PubMed: 22033999] 
30. Zeki Al Hazzouri A, Newman AB, Simonsick E, Sink KM, Sutton Tyrrell K, Watson N, Satterfield 
S, Harris T, Yaffe K, Health ABCS. Pulse wave velocity and cognitive decline in elders: the 
Health, Aging, and Body Composition Study. Stroke. 2013; 44:388–393. DOI: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.112.673533 [PubMed: 23321445] 
31. Mitchell GF. Cerebral small vessel disease: role of aortic stiffness and pulsatile hemodynamics. J 
Hypertens. 2015; 33:2025–2028. DOI: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000000717 [PubMed: 26431191] 
32. Moore SM, Zhang H, Maeda N, Doerschuk CM, Faber JE. Cardiovascular risk factors cause 
premature rarefaction of the collateral circulation and greater ischemic tissue injury. Angiogenesis. 
2015; 18:265–281. DOI: 10.1007/s10456-015-9465-6 [PubMed: 25862671] 
33. Faber JE, Zhang H, Lassance-Soares RM, Prabhakar P, Najafi AH, Burnett MS, Epstein SE. Aging 
causes collateral rarefaction and increased severity of ischemic injury in multiple tissues. 
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011; 31:1748–1756. DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.227314 
[PubMed: 21617137] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 36
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 34. Li Y, Shen Q, Huang S, Li W, Muir ER, Long JA, Duong TQ. Cerebral angiography, blood flow 
and vascular reactivity in progressive hypertension. Neuroimage. 2015; 111:329–337. DOI: 
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.02.053 [PubMed: 25731987] 
35. Muller M, van der Graaf Y, Visseren FL, Mali WP, Geerlings MI, SMART Study Group. 
Hypertension and longitudinal changes in cerebral blood flow: the SMART-MR study. Ann 
Neurol. 2012; 71:825–833. DOI: 10.1002/ana.23554 [PubMed: 22447734] 
36. De Ciuceis C, Cornali C, Porteri E, Mardighian D, Pinardi C, Fontanella MM, Rodella LF, Rezzani 
R, Rizzoni D, Boari GE, Rosei EA, Gasparotti R. Cerebral small-resistance artery structure and 
cerebral blood flow in normotensive subjects and hypertensive patients. Neuroradiology. 2014; 
56:1103–1111. DOI: 10.1007/s00234-014-1423-2 [PubMed: 25204449] 
37. Te Riet L, van Esch JH, Roks AJ, van den Meiracker AH, Danser AH. Hypertension: renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone system alterations. Circ Res. 2015; 116:960–975. DOI: 10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.116.303587 [PubMed: 25767283] 
38. Hall JE, do Carmo JM, da Silva AA, Wang Z, Hall ME. Obesity-induced hypertension: interaction 
of neurohumoral and renal mechanisms. Circ Res. 2015; 116:991–1006. DOI: 10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.116.305697 [PubMed: 25767285] 
39. Romero JC, Reckelhoff JF. State-of-the-art lecture: role of angiotensin and oxidative stress in 
essential hypertension. Hypertension. 1999; 34(pt 2):943–949. [PubMed: 10523389] 
40. Young CN, Davisson RL. Angiotensin-II, the brain, and hypertension: an update. Hypertension. 
2015; 66:920–926. DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.03624 [PubMed: 26324508] 
41. Daugherty A, Rateri DL, Lu H, Inagami T, Cassis LA. Hypercholesterolemia stimulates 
angiotensin peptide synthesis and contributes to atherosclerosis through the AT1A receptor. 
Circulation. 2004; 110:3849–3857. DOI: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000150540.54220.C4 [PubMed: 
15596561] 
42. Aono J, Suzuki J, Iwai M, Horiuchi M, Nagai T, Nishimura K, Inoue K, Ogimoto A, Okayama H, 
Higaki J. Deletion of the angiotensin II type 1a receptor prevents atherosclerotic plaque rupture in 
apolipoprotein E-/-mice [published correction appears in Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 
2014;34:e18]. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012; 32:1453–1459. DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.
112.249516 [PubMed: 22460554] 
43. Gupta A, Iadecola C. Impaired Aβ clearance: a potential link between atherosclerosis and 
Alzheimer’s disease. Front Aging Neurosci. 2015; 7:115.doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2015.00115 [PubMed: 
26136682] 
44. Liu J, Liu S, Matsumoto Y, Murakami S, Sugakawa Y, Kami A, Tanabe C, Maeda T, Michikawa 
M, Komano H, Zou K. Angiotensin type 1a receptor deficiency decreases amyloid β-protein 
generation and ameliorates brain amyloid pathology. Sci Rep. 2015; 5:12059.doi: 10.1038/
srep12059 [PubMed: 26154270] 
45. Faraco G, Park L, Zhou P, Luo W, Paul SM, Anrather J, Iadecola C. Hypertension enhances Aβ-
induced neurovascular dysfunction, promotes β-secretase activity, and leads to amyloidogenic 
processing of APP. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2016; 36:241–252. DOI: 10.1038/jcbfm.2015.79 
[PubMed: 25920959] 
46. Chan SL, Baumbach GL. Deficiency of Nox2 prevents angiotensin II-induced inward remodeling 
in cerebral arterioles. Front Physiol. 2013; 4:133.doi: 10.3389/fphys.2013.00133 [PubMed: 
23805104] 
47. Chan SL, Umesalma S, Baumbach GL. Epidermal growth factor receptor is critical for angiotensin 
II-mediated hypertrophy in cerebral arterioles. Hypertension. 2015; 65:806–812. DOI: 10.1161/
HYPERTENSIONAHA.114.04794 [PubMed: 25733240] 
48. Wu J, Thabet SR, Kirabo A, Trott DW, Saleh MA, Xiao L, Madhur MS, Chen W, Harrison DG. 
Inflammation and mechanical stretch promote aortic stiffening in hypertension through activation 
of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase. Circ Res. 2014; 114:616–625. DOI: 10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.114.302157 [PubMed: 24347665] 
49. Katusic ZS, Austin SA. Endothelial nitric oxide: protector of a healthy mind. Eur Heart J. 2014; 
35:888–894. DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/eht544 [PubMed: 24357508] 
50. Cipolla, MJ. The Cerebral Circulation. San Rafael, CA: Morgan & Claypool Life Sciences; 2009. 
p. 1-59.
Iadecola et al.
Page 37
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 51. Andresen J, Shafi NI, Bryan RM Jr. Endothelial influences on cerebro-vascular tone. J Appl 
Physiol (1985). 2006; 100:318–327. DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00937.2005 [PubMed: 16357085] 
52. Chen BR, Kozberg MG, Bouchard MB, Shaik MA, Hillman EM. A critical role for the vascular 
endothelium in functional neurovascular coupling in the brain. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014; 
3:e000787.doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.000787 [PubMed: 24926076] 
53. Di Marco LY, Venneri A, Farkas E, Evans PC, Marzo A, Frangi AF. Vascular dysfunction in the 
pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease: a review of endothelium-mediated mechanisms and ensuing 
vicious circles. Neurobiol Dis. 2015; 82:593–606. DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.08.014 [PubMed: 
26311408] 
54. Madden JA. Role of the vascular endothelium and plaque in acute ischemic stroke. Neurology. 
2012; 79(suppl 1):S58–S62. DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182695836 [PubMed: 23008414] 
55. Poggesi A, Pasi M, Pescini F, Pantoni L, Inzitari D. Circulating biologic markers of endothelial 
dysfunction in cerebral small vessel disease: a review. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2016; 36:72–94. 
DOI: 10.1038/jcbfm.2015.116 [PubMed: 26058695] 
56. Hoth KF, Tate DF, Poppas A, Forman DE, Gunstad J, Moser DJ, Paul RH, Jefferson AL, Haley AP, 
Cohen RA. Endothelial function and white matter hyperintensities in older adults with 
cardiovascular disease. Stroke. 2007; 38:308–312. DOI: 10.1161/01.STR.0000254517.04275.3f 
[PubMed: 17204686] 
57. Hillman EM. Coupling mechanism and significance of the BOLD signal: a status report. Annu Rev 
Neurosci. 2014; 37:161–181. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-071013-014111 [PubMed: 25032494] 
58. Jennings JR, Muldoon MF, Ryan C, Price JC, Greer P, Sutton-Tyrrell K, van der Veen FM, Meltzer 
CC. Reduced cerebral blood flow response and compensation among patients with untreated 
hypertension. Neurology. 2005; 64:1358–1365. DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000158283.28251.3C 
[PubMed: 15851723] 
59. van Beek AH, Claassen JA, Rikkert MG, Jansen RW. Cerebral autoregulation: an overview of 
current concepts and methodology with special focus on the elderly. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 
2008; 28:1071–1085. DOI: 10.1038/jcbfm.2008.13 [PubMed: 18349877] 
60. Jordan JD, Powers WJ. Cerebral autoregulation and acute ischemic stroke. Am J Hypertens. 2012; 
25:946–950. DOI: 10.1038/ajh.2012.53 [PubMed: 22573015] 
61. Traon AP, Costes-Salon MC, Galinier M, Fourcade J, Larrue V. Dynamics of cerebral blood flow 
autoregulation in hypertensive patients [published correction appears in J Neurol Sci. 
2002;201:91]. J Neurol Sci. 2002; 195:139–144. [PubMed: 11897244] 
62. Fugate JE, Rabinstein AA. Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome: clinical and radiological 
manifestations, pathophysiology, and outstanding questions [published correction appears in 
Lancet Neurol. 2014;14:874]. Lancet Neurol. 2015; 14:914–925. DOI: 10.1016/
S1474-4422(15)00111-8 [PubMed: 26184985] 
63. Price RS, Kasner SE. Hypertension and hypertensive encephalopathy. Handb Clin Neurol. 2014; 
119:161–167. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-7020-4086-3.00012-6 [PubMed: 24365295] 
64. Varon J, Marik PE. Clinical review: the management of hypertensive crises. Crit Care. 2003; 
7:374–384. DOI: 10.1186/cc2351 [PubMed: 12974970] 
65. Back SA, Kroenke CD, Sherman LS, Lawrence G, Gong X, Taber EN, Sonnen JA, Larson EB, 
Montine TJ. White matter lesions defined by diffusion tensor imaging in older adults. Ann Neurol. 
2011; 70:465–476. DOI: 10.1002/ana.22484 [PubMed: 21905080] 
66. Feekes JA, Cassell MD. The vascular supply of the functional compartments of the human 
striatum. Brain. 2006; 129(pt 8):2189–2201. DOI: 10.1093/brain/awl158 [PubMed: 16815876] 
67. Feekes JA, Hsu SW, Chaloupka JC, Cassell MD. Tertiary microvascular territories define lacunar 
infarcts in the basal ganglia. Ann Neurol. 2005; 58:18–30. DOI: 10.1002/ana.20505 [PubMed: 
15900563] 
68. Purkayastha S, Fadar O, Mehregan A, Salat DH, Moscufo N, Meier DS, Guttmann CR, Fisher ND, 
Lipsitz LA, Sorond FA. Impaired cere-brovascular hemodynamics are associated with cerebral 
white matter damage. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2014; 34:228–234. DOI: 10.1038/jcbfm.
2013.180 [PubMed: 24129749] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 38
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 69. Pires PW, Dams Ramos CM, Matin N, Dorrance AM. The effects of hypertension on the cerebral 
circulation. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2013; 304:H1598–H1614. DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.
00490.2012 [PubMed: 23585139] 
70. Tietz S, Engelhardt B. Brain barriers: crosstalk between complex tight junctions and adherens 
junctions. J Cell Biol. 2015; 209:493–506. DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201412147 [PubMed: 26008742] 
71. Zhao Z, Nelson AR, Betsholtz C, Zlokovic BV. Establishment and dysfunction of the blood-brain 
barrier. Cell. 2015; 163:1064–1078. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.067 [PubMed: 26590417] 
72. Winkler EA, Sagare AP, Zlokovic BV. The pericyte: a forgotten cell type with important 
implications for Alzheimer’s disease? Brain Pathol. 2014; 24:371–386. DOI: 10.1111/bpa.12152 
[PubMed: 24946075] 
73. Rosenberg GA. Neurological diseases in relation to the blood-brain barrier. J Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab. 2012; 32:1139–1151. DOI: 10.1038/jcbfm.2011.197 [PubMed: 22252235] 
74. Huisa BN, Caprihan A, Thompson J, Prestopnik J, Qualls CR, Rosenberg GA. Long-term blood-
brain barrier permeability changes in Binswanger disease. Stroke. 2015; 46:2413–2418. DOI: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.009589 [PubMed: 26205374] 
75. Wardlaw JM, Smith C, Dichgans M. Mechanisms of sporadic cerebral small vessel disease: 
insights from neuroimaging [published correction appears in Lancet. 2013;12:532]. Lancet Neurol. 
2013; 12:483–497. DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70060-7 [PubMed: 23602162] 
76. Joutel A, Faraci FM. Cerebral small vessel disease: insights and opportunities from mouse models 
of collagen IV-related small vessel disease and cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with 
subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy. Stroke. 2014; 45:1215–1221. DOI: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.113.002878 [PubMed: 24503668] 
77. Nakagawa T, Hasegawa Y, Uekawa K, Ma M, Katayama T, Sueta D, Toyama K, Kataoka K, 
Koibuchi N, Maeda M, Kuratsu J, Kim-Mitsuyama S. Renal denervation prevents stroke and brain 
injury via attenuation of oxidative stress in hypertensive rats. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013; 
2:e000375.doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000375 [PubMed: 24125845] 
78. Toth P, Tucsek Z, Sosnowska D, Gautam T, Mitschelen M, Tarantini S, Deak F, Koller A, Sonntag 
WE, Csiszar A, Ungvari Z. Age-related autoregulatory dysfunction and cerebromicrovascular 
injury in mice with angiotensin II-induced hypertension. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2013; 
33:1732–1742. DOI: 10.1038/jcbfm.2013.143 [PubMed: 23942363] 
79. Akiguchi I, Tomimoto H, Suenaga T, Wakita H, Budka H. Blood-brain barrier dysfunction in 
Binswanger’s disease; an immunohistochemical study. Acta Neuropathol. 1998; 95:78–84. 
[PubMed: 9452825] 
80. Dankbaar JW, Hom J, Schneider T, Cheng SC, Lau BC, van der Schaaf I, Virmani S, Pohlman S, 
Wintermark M. Age- and anatomy-related values of blood-brain barrier permeability measured by 
perfusion-CT in non-stroke patients. J Neuroradiol. 2009; 36:219–227. DOI: 10.1016/j.neurad.
2009.01.001 [PubMed: 19251320] 
81. Rosenberg GA, Wallin A, Wardlaw JM, Markus HS, Montaner J, Wolfson L, Iadecola C, Zlokovic 
BV, Joutel A, Dichgans M, Duering M, Schmidt R, Korczyn AD, Grinberg LT, Chui HC, 
Hachinski V. Consensus statement for diagnosis of subcortical small vessel disease. J Cereb Blood 
Flow Metab. 2016; 36:6–25. DOI: 10.1038/jcbfm.2015.172 [PubMed: 26198175] 
82. Armulik A, Genové G, Betsholtz C. Pericytes: developmental, physiological, and pathological 
perspectives, problems, and promises. Dev Cell. 2011; 21:193–215. DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.
2011.07.001 [PubMed: 21839917] 
83. Suzuki K, Masawa N, Sakata N, Takatama M. Pathologic evidence of microvascular rarefaction in 
the brain of renal hypertensive rats. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2003; 12:8–16. DOI: 10.1053/jscd.
2003.1 [PubMed: 17903898] 
84. Wechsler, D. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised. New York, NY: Psychological Corp; 
1981. 
85. Schmidt, M. Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test: A Handbook. Los Angeles, CA: Western 
Psychological Services; 1996. 
86. Rosenberg SJ, Ryan JJ, Prifitera A. Rey Auditory-Verbal Learning Test performance of patients 
with and without memory impairment. J Clin Psychol. 1984; 40:785–787. [PubMed: 6746989] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 39
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 87. Knopman DS, Ryberg S. A verbal memory test with high predictive accuracy for dementia of the 
Alzheimer type. Arch Neurol. 1989; 46:141–145. [PubMed: 2916953] 
88. Benton, AL., Hamsher, JDS., Sivan, AB. Multilingual Aphasia Examination. Iowa City, IA: AJA 
Associates; 1989. 
89. Lezak, M. Neuropsychological Assessment. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2004. 
90. Morris JC, Heyman A, Mohs RC, Hughes JP, van Belle G, Fillenbaum G, Mellits ED, Clark C. The 
Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease (CERAD), part I: clinical and 
neuropsychological assessment of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology. 1989; 39:1159–1165. 
[PubMed: 2771064] 
91. Army Individual Test Battery: Manual of Directions and Scoring. Washington, DC: War 
Department, Adjutant General’s Office; 1944. 
92. Reitan R. Validity of the Trail Making Test as an indicator of organic brain damage. Perceptual and 
Motor Skills. 1958; 18:271–276.
93. Yaffe K, Vittinghoff E, Pletcher MJ, Hoang TD, Launer LJ, Whitmer R, Coker LH, Sidney S. Early 
adult to midlife cardiovascular risk factors and cognitive function. Circulation. 2014; 129:1560–
1567. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.004798 [PubMed: 24687777] 
94. Gottesman RF, Schneider AL, Albert M, Alonso A, Bandeen-Roche K, Coker L, Coresh J, 
Knopman D, Power MC, Rawlings A, Sharrett AR, Wruck LM, Mosley TH. Midlife hypertension 
and 20-year cognitive change: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities neurocognitive study. 
JAMA Neurol. 2014; 71:1218–1227. DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.1646 [PubMed: 25090106] 
95. Knopman D, Boland LL, Mosley T, Howard G, Liao D, Szklo M, McGovern P, Folsom AR, 
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study Investigators. Cardiovascular risk factors and 
cognitive decline in middle-aged adults. Neurology. 2001; 56:42–48. [PubMed: 11148234] 
96. Köhler S, Baars MA, Spauwen P, Schievink S, Verhey FR, van Boxtel MJ. Temporal evolution of 
cognitive changes in incident hypertension: prospective cohort study across the adult age span. 
Hypertension. 2014; 63:245–251. DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.02096 [PubMed: 
24296281] 
97. Cerhan JR, Folsom AR, Mortimer JA, Shahar E, Knopman DS, McGovern PG, Hays MA, Crum 
LD, Heiss G. Correlates of cognitive function in middle-aged adults: Atherosclerosis Risk in 
Communities (ARIC) Study Investigators. Gerontology. 1998; 44:95–105. [PubMed: 9523221] 
98. Swan GE, Carmelli D, Larue A. Systolic blood pressure tracking over 25 to 30 years and cognitive 
performance in older adults. Stroke. 1998; 29:2334–2340. [PubMed: 9804644] 
99. Debette S, Seshadri S, Beiser A, Au R, Himali JJ, Palumbo C, Wolf PA, DeCarli C. Midlife 
vascular risk factor exposure accelerates structural brain aging and cognitive decline. Neurology. 
2011; 77:461–468. DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318227b227 [PubMed: 21810696] 
100. Knopman DS, Mosley TH, Catellier DJ, Coker LH, Fourteen-year longitudinal study of vascular 
risk factors, APOE genotype, and cognition: the ARIC MRI Study. longitudinal study of vascular 
risk factors, APOE genotype, and cognition: the ARIC MRI Study. Alzheimers Dement. 2009; 
5:207–214. DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2009.01.027 [PubMed: 19362884] 
101. Hachinski V, Iadecola C, Petersen RC, Breteler MM, Nyenhuis DL, Black SE, Powers WJ, 
DeCarli C, Merino JG, Kalaria RN, Vinters HV, Holtzman DM, Rosenberg GA, Wallin A, 
Dichgans M, Marler JR, Leblanc GG. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke-
Canadian Stroke Network vascular cognitive impairment harmonization standards [published 
correction appears in Stroke. 2007;38:1118]. Stroke. 2006; 37:2220–2241. DOI: 
10.1161/01.STR.0000237236.88823.47 [PubMed: 16917086] 
102. Starr JM, Whalley LJ, Inch S, Shering PA. Blood pressure and cognitive function in healthy old 
people. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1993; 41:753–756. [PubMed: 8315187] 
103. Kilander L, Nyman H, Boberg M, Hansson L, Lithell H. Hypertension is related to cognitive 
impairment: a 20-year follow-up of 999 men. Hypertension. 1998; 31:780–786. [PubMed: 
9495261] 
104. Kuo HK, Sorond F, Iloputaife I, Gagnon M, Milberg W, Lipsitz LA. Effect of blood pressure on 
cognitive functions in elderly persons. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2004; 59:1191–1194. 
[PubMed: 15602074] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 40
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 105. Obisesan TO, Obisesan OA, Martins S, Alamgir L, Bond V, Maxwell C, Gillum RF. High blood 
pressure, hypertension, and high pulse pressure are associated with poorer cognitive function in 
persons aged 60 and older: the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 2008; 56:501–509. DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01592.x [PubMed: 18179496] 
106. Launer LJ, Masaki K, Petrovitch H, Foley D, Havlik RJ. The association between midlife blood 
pressure levels and late-life cognitive function: the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study. JAMA. 1995; 
274:1846–1851. [PubMed: 7500533] 
107. Guo Z, Fratiglioni L, Winblad B, Viitanen M. Blood pressure and performance on the Mini-
Mental State Examination in the very old: cross-sectional and longitudinal data from the 
Kungsholmen Project. Am J Epidemiol. 1997; 145:1106–1113. [PubMed: 9199540] 
108. Waldstein SR, Giggey PP, Thayer JF, Zonderman AB. Nonlinear relations of blood pressure to 
cognitive function: the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. Hypertension. 2005; 45:374–379. 
DOI: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000156744.44218.74 [PubMed: 15699446] 
109. Farmer ME, White LR, Abbott RD, Kittner SJ, Kaplan E, Wolz MM, Brody JA, Wolf PA. Blood 
pressure and cognitive performance: the Framingham Study. Am J Epidemiol. 1987; 126:1103–
1114. [PubMed: 3687920] 
110. Richmond R, Law J, Kay-Lambkin F. Higher blood pressure associated with higher cognition and 
functionality among centenarians in Australia. Am J Hypertens. 2011; 24:299–303. DOI: 
10.1038/ajh.2010.236 [PubMed: 21164496] 
111. Peltz CB, Corrada MM, Berlau DJ, Kawas CH. Cognitive impairment in nondemented oldest-old: 
prevalence and relationship to cardiovascular risk factors. Alzheimers Dement. 2012; 8:87–94. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.02.008 [PubMed: 22055654] 
112. Lyngdoh T, Viswanathan B, Kobrosly R, van Wijngaarden E, Huber B, Davidson PW, Cory-
Slechta DA, Strain JJ, Myers GJ, Bovet P. Blood pressure and cognitive function: a prospective 
analysis among adolescents in Seychelles [published correction appears in J Hypertens. 
2013;31:2105]. J Hypertens. 2013; 31:1175–1182. DOI: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283604176 
[PubMed: 23572201] 
113. Elias MF, Wolf PA, D’Agostino RB, Cobb J, White LR. Untreated blood pressure level is 
inversely related to cognitive functioning: the Framingham Study. Am J Epidemiol. 1993; 
138:353–364. [PubMed: 8213741] 
114. Kilander L, Nyman H, Boberg M, Lithell H. The association between low diastolic blood pressure 
in middle age and cognitive function in old age: a population-based study. Age Ageing. 2000; 
29:243–248. [PubMed: 10855907] 
115. Elias PK, Elias MF, Robbins MA, Budge MM. Blood pressure-related cognitive decline: does age 
make a difference? Hypertension. 2004; 44:631–636. DOI: 10.1161/01.HYP.
0000145858.07252.99 [PubMed: 15466661] 
116. Chen KH, Henderson VW, Stolwyk RJ, Dennerstein L, Szoeke C. Prehypertension in midlife is 
associated with worse cognition a decade later in middle-aged and older women. Age Ageing. 
2015; 44:439–445. DOI: 10.1093/ageing/afv026 [PubMed: 25814553] 
117. Taylor C, Tillin T, Chaturvedi N, Dewey M, Ferri CP, Hughes A, Prince M, Richards M, Shah A, 
Stewart R. Midlife hypertensive status and cognitive function 20 years later: the Southall and 
Brent revisited study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2013; 61:1489–1498. DOI: 10.1111/jgs.12416 [PubMed: 
24028355] 
118. Kesse-Guyot E, Julia C, Andreeva V, Fezeu L, Hercberg S, Galan P. Evidence of a cumulative 
effect of cardiometabolic disorders at midlife and subsequent cognitive function. Age Ageing. 
2015; 44:648–654. DOI: 10.1093/ageing/afv053 [PubMed: 25918184] 
119. Hebert LE, Scherr PA, Bennett DA, Bienias JL, Wilson RS, Morris MC, Evans DA. Blood 
pressure and late-life cognitive function change: a biracial longitudinal population study. 
Neurology. 2004; 62:2021–2024. [PubMed: 15184608] 
120. Solfrizzi V, Panza F, Colacicco AM, D’Introno A, Capurso C, Torres F, Grigoletto F, Maggi S, 
Del Parigi A, Reiman EM, Caselli RJ, Scafato E, Farchi G, Capurso A, Italian Longitudinal 
Study on Aging Working Group. Vascular risk factors, incidence of MCI, and rates of 
progression to dementia. Neurology. 2004; 63:1882–1891. [PubMed: 15557506] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 41
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 121. Yaffe K, Haan M, Blackwell T, Cherkasova E, Whitmer RA, West N. Metabolic syndrome and 
cognitive decline in elderly Latinos: findings from the Sacramento Area Latino Study of Aging 
study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2007; 55:758–762. DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01139.x [PubMed: 
17493197] 
122. Johnson KC, Margolis KL, Espeland MA, Colenda CC, Fillit H, Manson JE, Masaki KH, Mouton 
CP, Prineas R, Robinson JG, Wassertheil-Smoller S, Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study 
and Women’s Health Initiative Investigators. A prospective study of the effect of hypertension 
and baseline blood pressure on cognitive decline and dementia in postmenopausal women: the 
Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008; 56:1449–1458. DOI: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.2008.01806.x [PubMed: 18637980] 
123. Bohannon AD, Fillenbaum GG, Pieper CF, Hanlon JT, Blazer DG. Relationship of race/ethnicity 
and blood pressure to change in cognitive function. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2002; 50:424–429. 
[PubMed: 11943035] 
124. Dregan A, Stewart R, Gulliford MC. Cardiovascular risk factors and cognitive decline in adults 
aged 50 and over: a population-based cohort study. Age Ageing. 2013; 42:338–345. DOI: 
10.1093/ageing/afs166 [PubMed: 23179255] 
125. Yasar S, Ko JY, Nothelle S, Mielke MM, Carlson MC. Evaluation of the effect of systolic blood 
pressure and pulse pressure on cognitive function: the Women’s Health and Aging Study II. 
PLoS One. 2011; 6:e27976.doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027976 [PubMed: 22174760] 
126. van Vliet P, Westendorp RG, van Heemst D, de Craen AJ, Oleksik AM. Cognitive decline 
precedes late-life longitudinal changes in vascular risk factors. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 
2010; 81:1028–1032. DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2009.182519 [PubMed: 20543187] 
127. Euser SM, van Bemmel T, Schram MT, Gussekloo J, Hofman A, Westendorp RG, Breteler MM. 
The effect of age on the association between blood pressure and cognitive function later in life. J 
Am Geriatr Soc. 2009; 57:1232–1237. DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2009.02264.x [PubMed: 
19453303] 
128. Sabayan B, Oleksik AM, Maier AB, van Buchem MA, Poortvliet RK, de Ruijter W, Gussekloo J, 
de Craen AJ, Westendorp RG. High blood pressure and resilience to physical and cognitive 
decline in the oldest old: the Leiden 85-plus Study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2012; 60:2014–2019. DOI: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.2012.04203.x [PubMed: 23126669] 
129. Harrison SL, Stephan BC, Siervo M, Granic A, Davies K, Wesnes KA, Kirkwood TB, Robinson 
L, Jagger C. Is there an association between metabolic syndrome and cognitive function in very 
old adults? The Newcastle 85+ Study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2015; 63:667–675. DOI: 10.1111/jgs.
13358 [PubMed: 25850570] 
130. Suhr JA, Stewart JC, France CR. The relationship between blood pressure and cognitive 
performance in the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III). 
Psychosom Med. 2004; 66:291–297. [PubMed: 15184686] 
131. Elias MF, D’Agostino RB, Elias PK, Wolf PA. Neuropsychological test performance, cognitive 
functioning, blood pressure, and age: the Framingham Heart Study. Exp Aging Res. 1995; 
21:369–391. DOI: 10.1080/03610739508253991 [PubMed: 8595803] 
132. Zilberman JM, Cerezo GH, Del Sueldo M, Fernandez-Pérez C, Martell-Claros N, Vicario A. 
Association between hypertension, menopause, and cognition in women. J Clin Hypertens 
(Greenwich). 2015; 17:970–976. DOI: 10.1111/jch.12643 [PubMed: 26252810] 
133. Wolf PA, D’Agostino RB, Belanger AJ, Kannel WB. Probability of stroke: a risk profile from the 
Framingham Study. Stroke. 1991; 22:312–318. [PubMed: 2003301] 
134. Elias PK, Elias MF, D’Agostino RB, Cupples LA, Wilson PW, Silbershatz H, Wolf PA. NIDDM 
and blood pressure as risk factors for poor cognitive performance: the Framingham Study. 
Diabetes Care. 1997; 20:1388–1395. [PubMed: 9283785] 
135. Wolf PA, Beiser A, Elias MF, Au R, Vasan RS, Seshadri S. Relation of obesity to cognitive 
function: importance of central obesity and synergistic influence of concomitant hypertension: 
the Framingham Heart Study. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2007; 4:111–116. [PubMed: 17430232] 
136. Uiterwijk R, Huijts M, Staals J, Rouhl RP, De Leeuw PW, Kroon AA, Van Oostenbrugge RJ. 
Endothelial activation is associated with cognitive performance in patients with hypertension. 
Am J Hypertens. 2016; 29:464–469. DOI: 10.1093/ajh/hpv122 [PubMed: 26271106] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 42
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 137. Kovács KR, Bajkó Z, Szekeres CC, Csapó K, Oláh L, Magyar MT, Molnár S, Czuriga D, Kardos 
L, Burainé AB, Bereczki D, Soltész P, Csiba L. Elevated LDL-C combined with hypertension 
worsens subclinical vascular impairment and cognitive function. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2014; 
8:550–560. DOI: 10.1016/j.jash.2014.04.007 [PubMed: 25151317] 
138. Bangen KJ, Beiser A, Delano-Wood L, Nation DA, Lamar M, Libon DJ, Bondi MW, Seshadri S, 
Wolf PA, Au R. APOE genotype modifies the relationship between midlife vascular risk factors 
and later cognitive decline. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2013; 22:1361–1369. DOI: 10.1016/
j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2013.03.013 [PubMed: 23601373] 
139. Haan MN, Shemanski L, Jagust WJ, Manolio TA, Kuller L. The role of APOE epsilon4 in 
modulating effects of other risk factors for cognitive decline in elderly persons. JAMA. 1999; 
282:40–46. [PubMed: 10404910] 
140. Carmelli D, Swan GE, Reed T, Miller B, Wolf PA, Jarvik GP, Schellenberg GD. Midlife 
cardiovascular risk factors, ApoE, and cognitive decline in elderly male twins. Neurology. 1998; 
50:1580–1585. [PubMed: 9633697] 
141. Peila R, White LR, Petrovich H, Masaki K, Ross GW, Havlik RJ, Launer LJ. Joint effect of the 
APOE gene and midlife systolic blood pressure on late-life cognitive impairment: the Honolulu-
Asia Aging Study. Stroke. 2001; 32:2882–2889. [PubMed: 11739991] 
142. Andrews S, Das D, Anstey KJ, Easteal S. Interactive effect of APOE genotype and blood pressure 
on cognitive decline: the PATH through life study. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015; 44:1087–1098. DOI: 
10.3233/JAD-140630 [PubMed: 25672766] 
143. de Frias CM, Schaie KW, Willis SL. Hypertension moderates the effect of APOE on 21-year 
cognitive trajectories. Psychol Aging. 2014; 29:431–439. DOI: 10.1037/a0036828 [PubMed: 
24956008] 
144. Wersching H, Guske K, Hasenkamp S, Hagedorn C, Schiwek S, Jansen S, Witte V, Wellmann J, 
Lohmann H, Duning K, Kremerskothen J, Knecht S, Brand E, Floel A. Impact of common 
KIBRA allele on human cognitive functions. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011; 36:1296–1304. 
DOI: 10.1038/npp.2011.16 [PubMed: 21346737] 
145. Østergaard SD, Mukherjee S, Sharp SJ, Proitsi P, Lotta LA, Day F, Perry JR, Boehme KL, Walter 
S, Kauwe JS, Gibbons LE, Alzheimer’s Disease Genetics Consortium; GERAD1 Consortium; 
EPIC-InterAct Consortium. Larson EB, Powell JF, Langenberg C, Crane PK, Wareham NJ, Scott 
RA. Associations between potentially modifiable risk factors and Alzheimer disease: a mendelian 
randomization study. PLoS Med. 2015; 12:e1001841.doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001841 
[PubMed: 26079503] 
146. Yoshitake T, Kiyohara Y, Kato I, Ohmura T, Iwamoto H, Nakayama K, Ohmori S, Nomiyama K, 
Kawano H, Ueda K, Sueishi K, Tsuneyoshi M, Fujishima M. Incidence and risk factors of 
vascular dementia and Alzheimer’s disease in a defined elderly Japanese population: the 
Hisayama Study. Neurology. 1995; 45:1161–1168. [PubMed: 7783883] 
147. Oveisgharan S, Hachinski V. Hypertension, executive dysfunction, and progression to dementia: 
the Canadian Study of Health and Aging. Arch Neurol. 2010; 67:187–192. DOI: 10.1001/
archneurol.2009.312 [PubMed: 20142526] 
148. Posner HB, Tang MX, Luchsinger J, Lantigua R, Stern Y, Mayeux R. The relationship of 
hypertension in the elderly to AD, vascular dementia, and cognitive function. Neurology. 2002; 
58:1175–1181. [PubMed: 11971083] 
149. Qiu C, von Strauss E, Fastbom J, Winblad B, Fratiglioni L. Low blood pressure and risk of 
dementia in the Kungsholmen project: a 6-year follow-up study. Arch Neurol. 2003; 60:223–228. 
[PubMed: 12580707] 
150. Skoog I, Lernfelt B, Landahl S, Palmertz B, Andreasson LA, Nilsson L, Persson G, Odén A, 
Svanborg A. 15-Year longitudinal study of blood pressure and dementia. Lancet. 1996; 
347:1141–1145. [PubMed: 8609748] 
151. Ruitenberg A, Skoog I, Ott A, Aevarsson O, Witteman JC, Lernfelt B, van Harskamp F, Hofman 
A, Breteler MM. Blood pressure and risk of dementia: results from the Rotterdam study and the 
Gothenburg H-70 Study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2001; 12:33–39. doi: 51233. [PubMed: 
11125239] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 43
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 152. Qiu C, von Strauss E, Winblad B, Fratiglioni L. Decline in blood pressure over time and risk of 
dementia: a longitudinal study from the Kungsholmen project. Stroke. 2004; 35:1810–1815. 
DOI: 10.1161/01.STR.0000133128.42462.ef [PubMed: 15232128] 
153. Kokmen E, Beard CM, Chandra V, Offord KP, Schoenberg BS, Ballard DJ. Clinical risk factors 
for Alzheimer’s disease: a population-based case-control study. Neurology. 1991; 41:1393–1397. 
[PubMed: 1891088] 
154. Verghese J, Lipton RB, Hall CB, Kuslansky G, Katz MJ. Low blood pressure and the risk of 
dementia in very old individuals. Neurology. 2003; 61:1667–1672. [PubMed: 14694027] 
155. Kivipelto M, Helkala EL, Hänninen T, Laakso MP, Hallikainen M, Alhainen K, Soininen H, 
Tuomilehto J, Nissinen A. Midlife vascular risk factors and late-life mild cognitive impairment: a 
population-based study. Neurology. 2001; 56:1683–1689. [PubMed: 11425934] 
156. Kivipelto M, Helkala EL, Laakso MP, Hänninen T, Hallikainen M, Alhainen K, Soininen H, 
Tuomilehto J, Nissinen A. Midlife vascular risk factors and Alzheimer’s disease in later life: 
longitudinal, population based study. BMJ. 2001; 322:1447–1451. [PubMed: 11408299] 
157. Whitmer RA, Sidney S, Selby J, Johnston SC, Yaffe K. Midlife cardiovascular risk factors and 
risk of dementia in late life. Neurology. 2005; 64:277–281. DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.
0000149519.47454.F2 [PubMed: 15668425] 
158. Launer LJ, Ross GW, Petrovitch H, Masaki K, Foley D, White LR, Havlik RJ. Midlife blood 
pressure and dementia: the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study. Neurobiol Aging. 2000; 21:49–55. 
[PubMed: 10794848] 
159. Ivan CS, Seshadri S, Beiser A, Au R, Kase CS, Kelly-Hayes M, Wolf PA. Dementia after stroke: 
the Framingham Study. Stroke. 2004; 35:1264–1268. DOI: 10.1161/01.STR.
0000127810.92616.78 [PubMed: 15118167] 
160. Waldstein SR, Rice SC, Thayer JF, Najjar SS, Scuteri A, Zonderman AB. Pulse pressure and 
pulse wave velocity are related to cognitive decline in the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of 
Aging. Hypertension. 2008; 51:99–104. DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.107.093674 
[PubMed: 18025297] 
161. Stewart R, Xue QL, Masaki K, Petrovitch H, Ross GW, White LR, Launer LJ. Change in blood 
pressure and incident dementia: a 32-year prospective study. Hypertension. 2009; 54:233–240. 
DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.128744 [PubMed: 19564551] 
162. Ishii M, Iadecola C. Metabolic and non-cognitive manifestations of Alzheimer’s disease: the 
hypothalamus as both culprit and target of pathology. Cell Metab. 2015; 22:761–776. DOI: 
10.1016/j.cmet.2015.08.016 [PubMed: 26365177] 
163. Iadecola C, Davisson RL. Hypertension and cerebrovascular dysfunction. Cell Metab. 2008; 
7:476–484. DOI: 10.1016/j.cmet.2008.03.010 [PubMed: 18522829] 
164. Li JQ, Tan L, Wang HF, Tan MS, Tan L, Xu W, Zhao QF, Wang J, Jiang T, Yu JT. Risk factors for 
predicting progression from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2016; 87:476–484. 
DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2014-310095 [PubMed: 26001840] 
165. Xu W, Tan L, Wang HF, Jiang T, Tan MS, Tan L, Zhao QF, Li JQ, Wang J, Yu JT. Meta-analysis 
of modifiable risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015; 
86:1299–1306. DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2015-310548 [PubMed: 26294005] 
166. Power MC, Weuve J, Gagne JJ, McQueen MB, Viswanathan A, Blacker D. The association 
between blood pressure and incident Alzheimer disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Epidemiology. 2011; 22:646–659. DOI: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e31822708b5 [PubMed: 21705906] 
167. Peila R, White LR, Masaki K, Petrovitch H, Launer LJ. Reducing the risk of dementia: efficacy of 
long-term treatment of hypertension. Stroke. 2006; 37:1165–1170. DOI: 10.1161/01.STR.
0000217653.01615.93 [PubMed: 16601212] 
168. Khachaturian AS, Zandi PP, Lyketsos CG, Hayden KM, Skoog I, Norton MC, Tschanz JT, Mayer 
LS, Welsh-Bohmer KA, Breitner JC. Antihypertensive medication use and incident Alzheimer 
disease: the Cache County Study. Arch Neurol. 2006; 63:686–692. DOI: 10.1001/archneur.
63.5.noc60013 [PubMed: 16533956] 
169. Seshadri S. Delaying dementia: can antihypertensives prevent Alzheimer dementia? Neurology. 
2013; 81:860–862. DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182a35296 [PubMed: 23911755] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 44
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 170. Petrovitch H, White LR, Izmirilian G, Ross GW, Havlik RJ, Markesbery W, Nelson J, Davis DG, 
Hardman J, Foley DJ, Launer LJ. Midlife blood pressure and neuritic plaques, neurofibrillary 
tangles, and brain weight at death: the HAAS: Honolulu-Asia Aging Study. Neurobiol Aging. 
2000; 21:57–62. [PubMed: 10794849] 
171. Hoffman LB, Schmeidler J, Lesser GT, Beeri MS, Purohit DP, Grossman HT, Haroutunian V. 
Less Alzheimer disease neuropathology in medicated hypertensive than nonhypertensive persons. 
Neurology. 2009; 72:1720–1726. DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000345881.82856.d5 [PubMed: 
19228583] 
172. Bangen KJ, Nation DA, Delano-Wood L, Weissberger GH, Hansen LA, Galasko DR, Salmon DP, 
Bondi MW. Aggregate effects of vascular risk factors on cerebrovascular changes in autopsy-
confirmed Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 2015; 11:394–403.e1. DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.
2013.12.025 [PubMed: 25022538] 
173. Nation DA, Delano-Wood L, Bangen KJ, Wierenga CE, Jak AJ, Hansen LA, Galasko DR, 
Salmon DP, Bondi MW. Antemortem pulse pressure elevation predicts cerebrovascular disease in 
autopsy-confirmed Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012; 30:595–603. DOI: 10.3233/
JAD-2012-111697 [PubMed: 22451309] 
174. Wang LY, Larson EB, Sonnen JA, Shofer JB, McCormick W, Bowen JD, Montine TJ, Li G. Blood 
pressure and brain injury in older adults: findings from a community-based autopsy study. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 2009; 57:1975–1981. DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2009.02493.x [PubMed: 
19793158] 
175. Young VG, Halliday GM, Kril JJ. Neuropathologic correlates of white matter hyperintensities. 
Neurology. 2008; 71:804–811. DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000319691.50117.54 [PubMed: 
18685136] 
176. Fernando MS, Simpson JE, Matthews F, Brayne C, Lewis CE, Barber R, Kalaria RN, Forster G, 
Esteves F, Wharton SB, Shaw PJ, O’Brien JT, Ince PG, MRC Cognitive Function and Ageing 
Neuropathology Study Group. White matter lesions in an unselected cohort of the elderly: 
molecular pathology suggests origin from chronic hypoperfusion injury. Stroke. 2006; 37:1391–
1398. DOI: 10.1161/01.STR.0000221308.94473.14 [PubMed: 16627790] 
177. Erten-Lyons D, Woltjer R, Kaye J, Mattek N, Dodge HH, Green S, Tran H, Howieson DB, Wild 
K, Silbert LC. Neuropathologic basis of white matter hyperintensity accumulation with advanced 
age. Neurology. 2013; 81:977–983. DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182a43e45 [PubMed: 
23935177] 
178. He J, Wong VS, Fletcher E, Maillard P, Lee DY, Iosif AM, Singh B, Martinez O, Roach AE, 
Lockhart SN, Beckett L, Mungas D, Farias ST, Carmichael O, DeCarli C. The contributions of 
MRI-based measures of gray matter, white matter hyperintensity, and white matter integrity to 
late-life cognition. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2012; 33:1797–1803. DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A3048 
[PubMed: 22538073] 
179. Gouw AA, Seewann A, van der Flier WM, Barkhof F, Rozemuller AM, Scheltens P, Geurts JJ. 
Heterogeneity of small vessel disease: a systematic review of MRI and histopathology 
correlations. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2011; 82:126–135. DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2009.204685 
[PubMed: 20935330] 
180. van Dijk EJ, Prins ND, Vrooman HA, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, Breteler MM. Progression of 
cerebral small vessel disease in relation to risk factors and cognitive consequences: Rotterdam 
Scan study. Stroke. 2008; 39:2712–2719. DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.513176 [PubMed: 
18635849] 
181. Gouw AA, van der Flier WM, Fazekas F, van Straaten EC, Pantoni L, Poggesi A, Inzitari D, 
Erkinjuntti T, Wahlund LO, Waldemar G, Schmidt R, Scheltens P, Barkhof F, LADIS Study 
Group. Progression of white matter hyperintensities and incidence of new lacunes over a 3-year 
period: the Leukoaraiosis and Disability Study. Stroke. 2008; 39:1414–1420. DOI: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.107.498535 [PubMed: 18323505] 
182. Muller M, Sigurdsson S, Kjartansson O, Aspelund T, Lopez OL, Jonnson PV, Harris TB, van 
Buchem M, Gudnason V, Launer LJ, Age, Gene/Environment Susceptibility-Reykjavik Study 
Investigators. Joint effect of mid- and late-life blood pressure on the brain: the AGES-Reykjavik 
study [published correction appears in Neurology. 2014;83:867]. Neurology. 2014; 82:2187–
2195. DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000517 [PubMed: 24898928] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 45
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 183. Dufouil C, de Kersaint-Gilly A, Besançon V, Levy C, Auffray E, Brunnereau L, Alpérovitch A, 
Tzourio C. Longitudinal study of blood pressure and white matter hyperintensities: the EVA MRI 
Cohort. Neurology. 2001; 56:921–926. [PubMed: 11294930] 
184. Henskens LH, Kroon AA, van Oostenbrugge RJ, Gronenschild EH, Hofman PA, Lodder J, de 
Leeuw PW. Associations of ambulatory blood pressure levels with white matter hyperintensity 
volumes in hypertensive patients. J Hypertens. 2009; 27:1446–1452. DOI: 10.1097/HJH.
0b013e32832b5204 [PubMed: 19502993] 
185. Liao D, Cooper L, Cai J, Toole J, Bryan N, Burke G, Shahar E, Nieto J, Mosley T, Heiss G. The 
prevalence and severity of white matter lesions, their relationship with age, ethnicity, gender, and 
cardiovascular disease risk factors: the ARIC Study. Neuroepidemiology. 1997; 16:149–162. 
[PubMed: 9159770] 
186. de Leeuw FE, de Groot JC, Oudkerk M, Witteman JC, Hofman A, van Gijn J, Breteler MM. A 
follow-up study of blood pressure and cerebral white matter lesions. Ann Neurol. 1999; 46:827–
833. [PubMed: 10589534] 
187. Gottesman RF, Coresh J, Catellier DJ, Sharrett AR, Rose KM, Coker LH, Shibata DK, Knopman 
DS, Jack CR, Mosley TH Jr. Blood pressure and white-matter disease progression in a biethnic 
cohort: Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Stroke. 2010; 41:3–8. DOI: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.109.566992 [PubMed: 19926835] 
188. Swan GE, DeCarli C, Miller BL, Reed T, Wolf PA, Jack LM, Carmelli D. Association of midlife 
blood pressure to late-life cognitive decline and brain morphology. Neurology. 1998; 51:986–
993. [PubMed: 9781518] 
189. van Dijk EJ, Breteler MM, Schmidt R, Berger K, Nilsson LG, Oudkerk M, Pajak A, Sans S, de 
Ridder M, Dufouil C, Fuhrer R, Giampaoli S, Launer LJ, Hofman A, CASCADE Consortium. 
The association between blood pressure, hypertension, and cerebral white matter lesions: 
Cardiovascular Determinants of Dementia Study. Hypertension. 2004; 44:625–630. DOI: 
10.1161/01.HYP.0000145857.98904.20 [PubMed: 15466662] 
190. Havlik RJ, Foley DJ, Sayer B, Masaki K, White L, Launer LJ. Variability in midlife systolic 
blood pressure is related to late-life brain white matter lesions: the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study. 
Stroke. 2002; 33:26–30. [PubMed: 11779884] 
191. Longstreth WT Jr, Arnold AM, Beauchamp NJ Jr, Manolio TA, Lefkowitz D, Jungreis C, Hirsch 
CH, O’Leary DH, Furberg CD. Incidence, manifestations, and predictors of worsening white 
matter on serial cranial magnetic resonance imaging in the elderly: the Cardiovascular Health 
Study. Stroke. 2005; 36:56–61. DOI: 10.1161/01.STR.0000149625.99732.69 [PubMed: 
15569873] 
192. Marcus J, Gardener H, Rundek T, Elkind MS, Sacco RL, Decarli C, Wright CB. Baseline and 
longitudinal increases in diastolic blood pressure are associated with greater white matter 
hyperintensity volume: the Northern Manhattan Study. Stroke. 2011; 42:2639–2641. DOI: 
10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.617571 [PubMed: 21836088] 
193. Veldink JH, Scheltens P, Jonker C, Launer LJ. Progression of cerebral white matter 
hyperintensities on MRI is related to diastolic blood pressure. Neurology. 1998; 51:319–320. 
[PubMed: 9674838] 
194. den Heijer T, Launer LJ, Prins ND, van Dijk EJ, Vermeer SE, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, Breteler 
MM. Association between blood pressure, white matter lesions, and atrophy of the medial 
temporal lobe. Neurology. 2005; 64:263–267. DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000149641.55751.2E 
[PubMed: 15668423] 
195. Allan CL, Zsoldos E, Filippini N, Sexton CE, Topiwala A, Valkanova V, Singh-Manoux A, Tabák 
AG, Shipley MJ, Mackay C, Ebmeier KP, Kivimäki M. Lifetime hypertension as a predictor of 
brain structure in older adults: cohort study with a 28-year follow-up. Br J Psychiatry. 2015; 
206:308–315. DOI: 10.1192/bjp.bp.114.153536 [PubMed: 25497301] 
196. Tsao CW, Seshadri S, Beiser AS, Westwood AJ, Decarli C, Au R, Himali JJ, Hamburg NM, Vita 
JA, Levy D, Larson MG, Benjamin EJ, Wolf PA, Vasan RS, Mitchell GF. Relations of arterial 
stiffness and endothelial function to brain aging in the community. Neurology. 2013; 81:984–991. 
DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182a43e1c [PubMed: 23935179] 
197. Poels MM, Ikram MA, van der Lugt A, Hofman A, Niessen WJ, Krestin GP, Breteler MM, 
Vernooij MW. Cerebral microbleeds are associated with worse cognitive function: the Rotterdam 
Iadecola et al.
Page 46
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Scan Study. Neurology. 2012; 78:326–333. DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182452928 [PubMed: 
22262748] 
198. Jochemsen HM, Muller M, Bots ML, Scheltens P, Vincken KL, Mali WP, van der Graaf Y, 
Geerlings MI, SMART Study Group. Arterial stiffness and progression of structural brain 
changes: the SMART-MR study. Neurology. 2015; 84:448–455. DOI: 10.1212/WNL.
0000000000001201 [PubMed: 25552578] 
199. Dufouil C, Chalmers J, Coskun O, Besançon V, Bousser MG, Guillon P, MacMahon S, Mazoyer 
B, Neal B, Woodward M, Tzourio-Mazoyer N, Tzourio C, PROGRESS MRI Substudy 
Investigators. Effects of blood pressure lowering on cerebral white matter hyperintensities in 
patients with stroke: the PROGRESS (Perindopril Protection Against Recurrent Stroke Study) 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging Substudy. Circulation. 2005; 112:1644–1650. DOI: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.104.501163 [PubMed: 16145004] 
200. Firbank MJ, Wiseman RM, Burton EJ, Saxby BK, O’Brien JT, Ford GA. Brain atrophy and white 
matter hyperintensity change in older adults and relationship to blood pressure: brain atrophy, 
WMH change and blood pressure. J Neurol. 2007; 254:713–721. DOI: 10.1007/
s00415-006-0238-4 [PubMed: 17446997] 
201. Wang R, Fratiglioni L, Laukka EJ, Lövdén M, Kalpouzos G, Keller L, Graff C, Salami A, 
Bäckman L, Qiu C. Effects of vascular risk factors and APOE ε4 on white matter integrity and 
cognitive decline. Neurology. 2015; 84:1128–1135. DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001379 
[PubMed: 25672924] 
202. Gons RA, de Laat KF, van Norden AG, van Oudheusden LJ, van Uden IW, Norris DG, Zwiers 
MP, de Leeuw FE. Hypertension and cerebral diffusion tensor imaging in small vessel disease. 
Stroke. 2010; 41:2801–2806. DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.597237 [PubMed: 21030696] 
203. Kennedy KM, Raz N. Pattern of normal age-related regional differences in white matter 
microstructure is modified by vascular risk. Brain Res. 2009; 1297:41–56. DOI: 10.1016/
j.brainres.2009.08.058 [PubMed: 19712671] 
204. Leritz EC, Salat DH, Milberg WP, Williams VJ, Chapman CE, Grande LJ, Rudolph JL, Schnyer 
DM, Barber CE, Lipsitz LA, McGlinchey RE. Variation in blood pressure is associated with 
white matter microstructure but not cognition in African Americans. Neuropsychology. 2010; 
24:199–208. DOI: 10.1037/a0018108 [PubMed: 20230114] 
205. Maclullich AM, Ferguson KJ, Reid LM, Deary IJ, Starr JM, Seckl JR, Bastin ME, Wardlaw JM. 
Higher systolic blood pressure is associated with increased water diffusivity in normal-appearing 
white matter. Stroke. 2009; 40:3869–3871. DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.109.547877 [PubMed: 
19850898] 
206. Maillard P, Seshadri S, Beiser A, Himali JJ, Au R, Fletcher E, Carmichael O, Wolf PA, DeCarli C. 
Effects of systolic blood pressure on white-matter integrity in young adults in the Framingham 
Heart Study: a cross-sectional study. Lancet Neurol. 2012; 11:1039–1047. DOI: 10.1016/
S1474-4422(12)70241-7 [PubMed: 23122892] 
207. Maillard P, Carmichael OT, Reed B, Mungas D, DeCarli C. Cooccurrence of vascular risk factors 
and late-life white-matter integrity changes. Neurobiol Aging. 2015; 36:1670–1677. DOI: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.01.007 [PubMed: 25666995] 
208. Godin O, Maillard P, Crivello F, Alpérovitch A, Mazoyer B, Tzourio C, Dufouil C. Association of 
white-matter lesions with brain atrophy markers: the three-city Dijon MRI study. Cerebrovasc 
Dis. 2009; 28:177–184. DOI: 10.1159/000226117 [PubMed: 19556771] 
209. Schilling S, DeStefano AL, Sachdev PS, Choi SH, Mather KA, DeCarli CD, Wen W, Høgh P, Raz 
N, Au R, Beiser A, Wolf PA, Romero JR, Zhu YC, Lunetta KL, Farrer L, Dufouil C, Kuller LH, 
Mazoyer B, Seshadri S, Tzourio C, Debette S. APOE genotype and MRI markers of cere-
brovascular disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. Neurology. 2013; 81:292–300. DOI: 
10.1212/WNL.0b013e31829bfda4 [PubMed: 23858411] 
210. Grimmer T, Faust M, Auer F, Alexopoulos P, Förstl H, Henriksen G, Perneczky R, Sorg C, 
Yousefi BH, Drzezga A, Kurz A. White matter hyper-intensities predict amyloid increase in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 2012; 33:2766–2773. DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.
2012.01.016 [PubMed: 22410648] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 47
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 211. de Leeuw FE, Richard F, de Groot JC, van Duijn CM, Hofman A, Van Gijn J, Breteler MM. 
Interaction between hypertension, apoE, and cerebral white matter lesions. Stroke. 2004; 
35:1057–1060. DOI: 10.1161/01.STR.0000125859.71051.83 [PubMed: 15060316] 
212. Høgh P, Garde E, Mortensen EL, Jørgensen OS, Krabbe K, Waldemar G. The apolipoprotein E 
epsilon4-allele and antihypertensive treatment are associated with increased risk of cerebral MRI 
white matter hyperintensities. Acta Neurol Scand. 2007; 115:248–253. DOI: 10.1111/j.
1600-0404.2006.00779.x [PubMed: 17376122] 
213. Schneider JA, Boyle PA, Arvanitakis Z, Bienias JL, Bennett DA. Subcortical infarcts, 
Alzheimer’s disease pathology, and memory function in older persons. Ann Neurol. 2007; 62:59–
66. DOI: 10.1002/ana.21142 [PubMed: 17503514] 
214. Arvanitakis Z, Leurgans SE, Barnes LL, Bennett DA, Schneider JA. Microinfarct pathology, 
dementia, and cognitive systems. Stroke. 2011; 42:722–727. DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.
110.595082 [PubMed: 21212395] 
215. White L. Brain lesions at autopsy in older Japanese-American men as related to cognitive 
impairment and dementia in the final years of life: a summary report from the Honolulu-Asia 
Aging Study. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009; 18:713–725. DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1178 [PubMed: 
19661625] 
216. Sonnen JA, Santa Cruz K, Hemmy LS, Woltjer R, Leverenz JB, Montine KS, Jack CR, Kaye J, 
Lim K, Larson EB, White L, Montine TJ. Ecology of the aging human brain. Arch Neurol. 2011; 
68:1049–1056. DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.157 [PubMed: 21825242] 
217. De Reuck JL. Histopathological stainings and definitions of vascular disruptions in the elderly 
brain. Exp Gerontol. 2012; 47:834–837. DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2012.03.012 [PubMed: 22484252] 
218. Gao Z, Wang W, Wang Z, Zhao X, Shang Y, Guo Y, Gong M, Yang L, Shi X, Xu X, An N, Wu W. 
Cerebral microbleeds are associated with deep white matter hyperintensities, but only in 
hypertensive patients. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e91637.doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091637 [PubMed: 
24626222] 
219. Henskens LH, van Oostenbrugge RJ, Kroon AA, de Leeuw PW, Lodder J. Brain microbleeds are 
associated with ambulatory blood pressure levels in a hypertensive population. Hypertension. 
2008; 51:62–68. DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.107.100610 [PubMed: 18071062] 
220. Goos JD, Henneman WJ, Sluimer JD, Vrenken H, Sluimer IC, Barkhof F, Blankenstein MA, 
Scheltens PH, van der Flier WM. Incidence of cerebral microbleeds: a longitudinal study in a 
memory clinic population. Neurology. 2010; 74:1954–1960. DOI: 10.1212/WNL.
0b013e3181e396ea [PubMed: 20548041] 
221. Hara M, Yakushiji Y, Nannri H, Sasaki S, Noguchi T, Nishiyama M, Hirotsu T, Nakajima J, Hara 
H. Joint effect of hypertension and lifestyle-related risk factors on the risk of brain microbleeds 
in healthy individuals. Hypertens Res. 2013; 36:789–794. DOI: 10.1038/hr.2013.26 [PubMed: 
23575379] 
222. Poels MM, Vernooij MW, Ikram MA, Hofman A, Krestin GP, van der Lugt A, Breteler MM. 
Prevalence and risk factors of cerebral microbleeds: an update of the Rotterdam scan study. 
Stroke. 2010; 41(suppl):S103–S106. DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.595181 [PubMed: 
20876479] 
223. Romero JR, Preis SR, Beiser A, DeCarli C, Viswanathan A, Martinez-Ramirez S, Kase CS, Wolf 
PA, Seshadri S. Risk factors, stroke prevention treatments, and prevalence of cerebral 
microbleeds in the Framingham Heart Study. Stroke. 2014; 45:1492–1494. DOI: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.114.004130 [PubMed: 24713533] 
224. Park JH, Seo SW, Kim C, Kim GH, Noh HJ, Kim ST, Kwak KC, Yoon U, Lee JM, Lee JW, Shin 
JS, Kim CH, Noh Y, Cho H, Kim HJ, Yoon CW, Oh SJ, Kim JS, Choe YS, Lee KH, Lee JH, 
Ewers M, Weiner MW, Werring DJ, Na DL. Pathogenesis of cerebral microbleeds: in vivo 
imaging of amyloid and subcortical ischemic small vessel disease in 226 individuals with 
cognitive impairment. Ann Neurol. 2013; 73:584–593. DOI: 10.1002/ana.23845 [PubMed: 
23495089] 
225. Shams S, Martola J, Granberg T, Li X, Shams M, Fereshtehnejad SM, Cavallin L, Aspelin P, 
Kristoffersen-Wiberg M, Wahlund LO. Cerebral microbleeds: different prevalence, topography, 
and risk factors depending on dementia diagnosis: the Karolinska Imaging Dementia Study. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2015; 36:661–666. DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A4176 [PubMed: 25523590] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 48
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 226. Qiu C, Cotch MF, Sigurdsson S, Jonsson PV, Jonsdottir MK, Sveinbjrnsdottir S, Eiriksdottir G, 
Klein R, Harris TB, van Buchem MA, Gudnason V, Launer LJ. Cerebral microbleeds, 
retinopathy, and dementia: the AGES-Reykjavik Study. Neurology. 2010; 75:2221–2228. DOI: 
10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182020349 [PubMed: 21172845] 
227. van der Vlies AE, Goos JD, Barkhof F, Scheltens P, van der Flier WM. Microbleeds do not affect 
rate of cognitive decline in Alzheimer disease. Neurology. 2012; 79:763–769. DOI: 10.1212/
WNL.0b013e3182661f91 [PubMed: 22875093] 
228. de Jong LW, Forsberg LE, Vidal JS, Sigurdsson S, Zijdenbos AP, Garcia M, Eiriksdottir G, 
Gudnason V, van Buchem MA, Launer LJ. Different susceptibility of medial temporal lobe and 
basal ganglia atrophy rates to vascular risk factors. Neurobiol Aging. 2014; 35:72–78. DOI: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.07.009 [PubMed: 23992618] 
229. Jennings JR, Mendelson DN, Muldoon MF, Ryan CM, Gianaros PJ, Raz N, Aizenstein H. 
Regional grey matter shrinks in hypertensive individuals despite successful lowering of blood 
pressure. J Hum Hypertens. 2012; 26:295–305. DOI: 10.1038/jhh.2011.31 [PubMed: 21490622] 
230. Knopman DS, Penman AD, Catellier DJ, Coker LH, Shibata DK, Sharrett AR, Mosley TH Jr. 
Vascular risk factors and longitudinal changes on brain MRI: the ARIC Study. Neurology. 2011; 
76:1879–1885. DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31821d753f [PubMed: 21543737] 
231. Vlek AL, Visseren FL, Kappelle LJ, Geerlings MI, Vincken KL, Mali WP, van der Graaf Y, 
SMART Study Group. Blood pressure and progression of cerebral atrophy in patients with 
vascular disease. Am J Hypertens. 2009; 22:1183–1189. DOI: 10.1038/ajh.2009.166 [PubMed: 
19745819] 
232. Beauchet O, Celle S, Roche F, Bartha R, Montero-Odasso M, Allali G, Annweiler C. Blood 
pressure levels and brain volume reduction: a systematic review and meta-analysis [published 
correction appears in J Hypertens. 2013;31:2106]. J Hypertens. 2013; 31:1502–1516. DOI: 
10.1097/HJH.0b013e32836184b5 [PubMed: 23811995] 
233. Korf ES, White LR, Scheltens P, Launer LJ. Midlife blood pressure and the risk of hippocampal 
atrophy: the Honolulu Asia Aging Study. Hypertension. 2004; 44:29–34. DOI: 10.1161/01.HYP.
0000132475.32317.bb [PubMed: 15159381] 
234. Korf ES, Scheltens P, Barkhof F, de Leeuw FE. Blood pressure, white matter lesions and medial 
temporal lobe atrophy: closing the gap between vascular pathology and Alzheimer’s disease? 
Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2005; 20:331–337. DOI: 10.1159/000088464 [PubMed: 16179827] 
235. Guzman VA, Carmichael OT, Schwarz C, Tosto G, Zimmerman ME, Brickman AM, Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. White matter hyperintensities and amyloid are independently 
associated with entorhinal cortex volume among individuals with mild cognitive impairment. 
Alzheimers Dement. 2013; 9(suppl):S124–S131. DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.11.009 [PubMed: 
23375566] 
236. de Leeuw FE, Barkhof F, Scheltens P. White matter lesions and hippo-campal atrophy in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology. 2004; 62:310–312. [PubMed: 14745078] 
237. Raji CA, Lopez OL, Kuller LH, Carmichael OT, Longstreth WT Jr, Gach HM, Boardman J, 
Bernick CB, Thompson PM, Becker JT. White matter lesions and brain gray matter volume in 
cognitively normal elders. Neurobiol Aging. 2012; 33:834.e7–847.e16.
238. Nitkunan A, Lanfranconi S, Charlton RA, Barrick TR, Markus HS. Brain atrophy and cerebral 
small vessel disease: a prospective followup study. Stroke. 2011; 42:133–138. DOI: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.110.594267 [PubMed: 21148440] 
239. Tuladhar AM, Reid AT, Shumskaya E, de Laat KF, van Norden AG, van Dijk EJ, Norris DG, de 
Leeuw FE. Relationship between white matter hyperintensities, cortical thickness, and cognition. 
Stroke. 2015; 46:425–432. DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.007146 [PubMed: 25572411] 
240. Kloppenborg RP, Nederkoorn PJ, Grool AM, Vincken KL, Mali WP, Vermeulen M, van der Graaf 
Y, Geerlings MI, SMART Study Group. Cerebral small-vessel disease and progression of brain 
atrophy: the SMART-MR study. Neurology. 2012; 79:2029–2036. DOI: 10.1212/WNL.
0b013e3182749f02 [PubMed: 23115210] 
241. Iliff JJ, Wang M, Liao Y, Plogg BA, Peng W, Gundersen GA, Benveniste H, Vates GE, Deane R, 
Goldman SA, Nagelhus EA, Nedergaard M. A paravascular pathway facilitates CSF flow through 
the brain parenchyma and the clearance of interstitial solutes, including amyloid β. Sci Transl 
Med. 2012; 4:147ra111.doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3003748
Iadecola et al.
Page 49
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 242. Jochemsen HM, Muller M, Visseren FL, Scheltens P, Vincken KL, Mali WP, van der Graaf Y, 
Geerlings MI, SMART Study Group. Blood pressure and progression of brain atrophy: the 
SMART-MR Study. JAMA Neurol. 2013; 70:1046–1053. DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.217 
[PubMed: 23753860] 
243. Hughes TM, Kuller LH, Barinas-Mitchell EJ, Mackey RH, McDade EM, Klunk WE, Aizenstein 
HJ, Cohen AD, Snitz BE, Mathis CA, Dekosky ST, Lopez OL. Pulse wave velocity is associated 
with β-amyloid deposition in the brains of very elderly adults. Neurology. 2013; 81:1711–1718. 
DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000435301.64776.37 [PubMed: 24132374] 
244. Langbaum JB, Chen K, Launer LJ, Fleisher AS, Lee W, Liu X, Protas HD, Reeder SA, Bandy D, 
Yu M, Caselli RJ, Reiman EM. Blood pressure is associated with higher brain amyloid burden 
and lower glucose metabolism in healthy late middle-age persons. Neurobiol Aging. 2012; 
33:827.e11–827.e19. DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.06.020
245. Toledo JB, Toledo E, Weiner MW, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Lee VM, Shaw LM, Trojanowski JQ, 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Cardiovascular risk factors, cortisol, and amyloid-
β deposition in Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Alzheimers Dement. 2012; 8:483–
489. DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.08.008 [PubMed: 23102118] 
246. Rodrigue KM, Rieck JR, Kennedy KM, Devous MD Sr, Diaz-Arrastia R, Park DC. Risk factors 
for β-amyloid deposition in healthy aging: vascular and genetic effects. JAMA Neurol. 2013; 
70:600–606. DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.1342 [PubMed: 23553344] 
247. Nation DA, Edland SD, Bondi MW, Salmon DP, Delano-Wood L, Peskind ER, Quinn JF, Galasko 
DR. Pulse pressure is associated with Alzheimer biomarkers in cognitively normal older adults. 
Neurology. 2013; 81:2024–2027. DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000436935.47657.78 [PubMed: 
24225352] 
248. Nation DA, Edmonds EC, Bangen KJ, Delano-Wood L, Scanlon BK, Han SD, Edland SD, 
Salmon DP, Galasko DR, Bondi MW, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Investigators. 
Pulse pressure in relation to tau-mediated neurodegeneration, cerebral amyloidosis, and 
progression to dementia in very old adults. JAMA Neurol. 2015; 72:546–553. DOI: 10.1001/
jamaneurol.2014.4477 [PubMed: 25822631] 
249. Kester MI, van der Flier WM, Mandic G, Blankenstein MA, Scheltens P, Muller M. Joint effect of 
hypertension and APOE genotype on CSF bio-markers for Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers 
Dis. 2010; 20:1083–1090. DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2010-091198 [PubMed: 20413898] 
250. Peters R, Beckett N, Forette F, Tuomilehto J, Clarke R, Ritchie C, Waldman A, Walton I, Poulter 
R, Ma S, Comsa M, Burch L, Fletcher A, Bulpitt C, HYVET Investigators. Incident dementia and 
blood pressure lowering in the Hypertension in the Very Elderly Trial Cognitive Function 
Assessment (HYVET-COG): a double-blind, placebo controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2008; 
7:683–689. DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(08)70143-1 [PubMed: 18614402] 
251. Forette F, Seux ML, Staessen JA, Thijs L, Birkenhäger WH, Babarskiene MR, Babeanu S, 
Bossini A, Gil-Extremera B, Girerd X, Laks T, Lilov E, Moisseyev V, Tuomilehto J, Vanhanen H, 
Webster J, Yodfat Y, Fagard R. Prevention of dementia in randomised double-blind placebo-
controlled Systolic Hypertension in Europe (Syst-Eur) trial. Lancet. 1998; 352:1347–1351. 
[PubMed: 9802273] 
252. Higgins JP, Altman DG, Gøtzsche PC, Jüni P, Moher D, Oxman AD, Savovic J, Schulz KF, 
Weeks L, Sterne JA, Cochrane Bias Methods Group; Cochrane Statistical Methods Group. The 
Cochrane Collaboration’s tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials. BMJ. 2011; 
343:d5928. [PubMed: 22008217] 
253. Williamson JD, Launer LJ, Bryan RN, Coker LH, Lazar RM, Gerstein HC, Murray AM, Sullivan 
MD, Horowitz KR, Ding J, Marcovina S, Lovato L, Lovato J, Margolis KL, Davatzikos C, 
Barzilay J, Ginsberg HN, Linz PE, Miller ME, Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes 
Memory in Diabetes Investigators. Cognitive function and brain structure in persons with type 2 
diabetes mellitus after intensive lowering of blood pressure and lipid levels: a randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA Intern Med. 2014; 174:324–333. DOI: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.13656 
[PubMed: 24493100] 
254. Anderson C, Teo K, Gao P, Arima H, Dans A, Unger T, Commerford P, Dyal L, Schumacher H, 
Pogue J, Paolasso E, Holwerda N, Chazova I, Binbrek A, Young J, Yusuf S, ONTARGET and 
TRANSCEND Investigators. Renin-angiotensin system blockade and cognitive function in 
Iadecola et al.
Page 50
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 patients at high risk of cardiovascular disease: analysis of data from the ONTARGET and 
TRANSCEND studies. Lancet Neurol. 2011; 10:43–53. DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70250-7 
[PubMed: 20980201] 
255. SPS3 Investigators. Benavente OR, Hart RG, McClure LA, Szychowski JM, Coffey CS, Pearce 
LA. Effects of clopidogrel added to aspirin in patients with recent lacunar stroke. N Engl J Med. 
2012; 367:817–825. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1204133 [PubMed: 22931315] 
256. Lithell H, Hansson L, Skoog I, Elmfeldt D, Hofman A, Olofsson B, Trenkwalder P, Zanchetti A, 
SCOPE Study Group. The Study on Cognition and Prognosis in the Elderly (SCOPE): principal 
results of a randomized double-blind intervention trial. J Hypertens. 2003; 21:875–886. DOI: 
10.1097/01.hjh.0000059028.82022.89 [PubMed: 12714861] 
257. Prevention of stroke by antihypertensive drug treatment in older persons with isolated systolic 
hypertension: final results of the Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program (SHEP): SHEP 
Cooperative Research Group. JAMA. 1991; 265:3255–3264. DOI: 10.1001/jama.
1991.03460240051027 [PubMed: 2046107] 
258. Diener HC, Sacco RL, Yusuf S, Cotton D, Ounpuu S, Lawton WA, Palesch Y, Martin RH, Albers 
GW, Bath P, Bornstein N, Chan BP, Chen ST, Cunha L, Dahlöf B, De Keyser J, Donnan GA, 
Estol C, Gorelick P, Gu V, Hermansson K, Hilbrich L, Kaste M, Lu C, Machnig T, Pais P, 
Roberts R, Skvortsova V, Teal P, Toni D, VanderMaelen C, Voigt T, Weber M, Yoon BW, 
Prevention Regimen for Effectively Avoiding Second Strokes (PRoFESS) Study Group. Effects 
of aspirin plus extended-release dipyridamole versus clopidogrel and telmisartan on disability 
and cognitive function after recurrent stroke in patients with ischaemic stroke in the Prevention 
Regimen for Effectively Avoiding Second Strokes (PRoFESS) trial: a double-blind, active and 
placebo-controlled study [published correction appears in Lancet Neurol. 2008;7:985]. Lancet 
Neurol. 2008; 7:875–884. DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(08)70198-4 [PubMed: 18757238] 
259. Pearce LA, McClure LA, Anderson DC, Jacova C, Sharma M, Hart RG, Benavente OR, SPS3 
Investigators. Effects of long-term blood pressure lowering and dual antiplatelet treatment on 
cognitive function in patients with recent lacunar stroke: a secondary analysis from the SPS3 
randomised trial. Lancet Neurol. 2014; 13:1177–1185. DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70224-8 
[PubMed: 25453457] 
260. Tzourio C, Anderson C, Chapman N, Woodward M, Neal B, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, 
PROGRESS Collaborative Group. Effects of blood pressure lowering with perindopril and 
indapamide therapy on dementia and cognitive decline in patients with cerebrovascular disease. 
Arch Intern Med. 2003; 163:1069–1075. DOI: 10.1001/archinte.163.9.1069 [PubMed: 
12742805] 
261. Hornslien AG, Sandset EC, Bath PM, Wyller TB, Berge E, Scandinavian Candesartan Acute 
Stroke Trial Study Group. Effects of candesartan in acute stroke on cognitive function and quality 
of life: results from the Scandinavian Candesartan Acute Stroke Trial. Stroke. 2013; 44:2022–
2024. DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.001022 [PubMed: 23660849] 
262. Applegate WB, Pressel S, Wittes J, Luhr J, Shekelle RB, Camel GH, Greenlick MR, Hadley E, 
Moye L, Perry HM Jr, Schron E, Wegener V. Impact of the treatment of isolated systolic 
hypertension on behavioral variables: results from the Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly 
Program. Arch Intern Med. 1994; 154:2154–2160. [PubMed: 7944835] 
263. Hachinski VC, Iliff LD, Zilhka E, Du Boulay GH, McAllister VL, Marshall J, Russell RW, 
Symon L. Cerebral blood flow in dementia. Arch Neurol. 1975; 32:632–637. [PubMed: 1164215] 
264. Weber R, Weimar C, Blatchford J, Hermansson K, Wanke I, Möller-Hartmann C, Gizewski ER, 
Forsting M, Demchuk AM, Sacco RL, Saver JL, Warach S, Diener HC, Diehl A, PRoFESS 
Imaging Substudy Group. Telmisartan on top of antihypertensive treatment does not prevent 
progression of cerebral white matter lesions in the Prevention Regimen for Effectively Avoiding 
Second Strokes (PRoFESS) MRI substudy. Stroke. 2012; 43:2336–2342. DOI: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.111.648576 [PubMed: 22738922] 
265. Saxby BK, Harrington F, Wesnes KA, McKeith IG, Ford GA. Candesartan and cognitive decline 
in older patients with hypertension: a substudy of the SCOPE trial. Neurology. 2008; 70(pt 2):
1858–1866. DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000311447.85948.78 [PubMed: 18458219] 
266. Forette F, Seux ML, Staessen JA, Thijs L, Babarskiene MR, Babeanu S, Bossini A, Fagard R, Gil-
Extremera B, Laks T, Kobalava Z, Sarti C, Tuomilehto J, Vanhanen H, Webster J, Yodfat Y, 
Iadecola et al.
Page 51
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Birkenhäger WH, Systolic Hypertension in Europe Investigators. The prevention of dementia 
with antihypertensive treatment: new evidence from the Systolic Hypertension in Europe (Syst-
Eur) study [published correction appears in Arch Intern Med. 2003;163:241]. Arch Intern Med. 
2002; 162:2046–2052. [PubMed: 12374512] 
267. Staessen JA, Thijs L, Richart T, Odili AN, Birkenhäger WH. Placebo-controlled trials of blood 
pressure-lowering therapies for primary prevention of dementia. Hypertension. 2011; 57:e6–e7. 
DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.110.165142 [PubMed: 21189407] 
268. Skoog I, Lithell H, Hansson L, Elmfeldt D, Hofman A, Olofsson B, Trenkwalder P, Zanchetti A, 
SCOPE Study Group. Effect of baseline cognitive function and antihypertensive treatment on 
cognitive and cardiovascular outcomes: Study on COgnition and Prognosis in the Elderly 
(SCOPE). Am J Hypertens. 2005; 18:1052–1059. DOI: 10.1016/j.amjhyper.2005.02.013 
[PubMed: 16109319] 
269. Di Bari M, Pahor M, Franse LV, Shorr RI, Wan JY, Ferrucci L, Somes GW, Applegate WB. 
Dementia and disability outcomes in large hypertension trials: lessons learned from the Systolic 
Hypertension in the Elderly Program (SHEP) trial. Am J Epidemiol. 2001; 153:72–78. [PubMed: 
11159149] 
270. Ambrosius WT, Sink KM, Foy CG, Berlowitz DR, Cheung AK, Cushman WC, Fine LJ, Goff DC 
Jr, Johnson KC, Killeen AA, Lewis CE, Oparil S, Reboussin DM, Rocco MV, Snyder JK, 
Williamson JD, Wright JT Jr, Whelton PK, SPRINT Study Research Group. The design and 
rationale of a multicenter clinical trial comparing two strategies for control of systolic blood 
pressure: the Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial (SPRINT). Clin Trials. 2014; 11:532–
546. DOI: 10.1177/1740774514537404 [PubMed: 24902920] 
271. SPRINT Research Group. Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, Whelton PK, Snyder JK, Sink KM, 
Rocco MV, Reboussin DM, Rahman M, Oparil S, Lewis CE, Kimmel PL, Johnson KC, Goff DC 
Jr, Fine LJ, Cutler JA, Cushman WC, Cheung AK, Ambrosius WT. A randomized trial of 
intensive versus standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med. 2015; 373:2103–2116. DOI: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1511939 [PubMed: 26551272] 
272. Din-Dzietham R, Liu Y, Bielo MV, Shamsa F. High blood pressure trends in children and 
adolescents in national surveys, 1963 to 2002. Circulation. 2007; 116:1488–1496. DOI: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.106.683243 [PubMed: 17846287] 
273. Riley M, Bluhm B. High blood pressure in children and adolescents. Am Fam Physician. 2012; 
85:693–700. [PubMed: 22534345] 
274. Flynn JT, Daniels SR, Hayman LL, Maahs DM, McCrindle BW, Mitsnefes M, Zachariah JP, 
Urbina EM, on behalf of the American Heart Association Atherosclerosis, Hypertension and 
Obesity in Youth Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young. Update: 
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in children and adolescents: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Hypertension. 2014; 63:1116–1135. DOI: 10.1161/HYP.
0000000000000007 [PubMed: 24591341] 
275. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, McDowell MA, Tabak CJ, Flegal KM. Prevalence of 
overweight and obesity in the United States, 1999-2004. JAMA. 2006; 295:1549–1555. DOI: 
10.1001/jama.295.13.1549 [PubMed: 16595758] 
276. Chen W, Bao W, Begum S, Elkasabany A, Srinivasan SR, Berenson GS. Age-related patterns of 
the clustering of cardiovascular risk variables of syndrome X from childhood to young adulthood 
in a population made up of black and white subjects: the Bogalusa Heart Study. Diabetes. 2000; 
49:1042–1048. [PubMed: 10866058] 
277. Shear CL, Burke GL, Freedman DS, Berenson GS. Value of childhood blood pressure 
measurements and family history in predicting future blood pressure status: results from 8 years 
of follow-up in the Bogalusa Heart Study. Pediatrics. 1986; 77:862–869. [PubMed: 3714379] 
278. Klumbiene J, Sileikiene L, Milasauskiene Z, Zaborskis A, Shatchkute A. The relationship of 
childhood to adult blood pressure: longitudinal study of juvenile hypertension in Lithuania. J 
Hypertens. 2000; 18:531–538. [PubMed: 10826554] 
279. Strong JP, Malcom GT, McMahan CA, Tracy RE, Newman WP 3rd, Herderick EE, Cornhill JF. 
Prevalence and extent of atherosclerosis in adolescents and young adults: implications for 
prevention from the Pathobiological Determinants of Atherosclerosis in Youth Study. JAMA. 
1999; 281:727–735. [PubMed: 10052443] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 52
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 280. Berenson GS, Srinivasan SR, Bao W, Newman WP 3rd, Tracy RE, Wattigney WA. Association 
between multiple cardiovascular risk factors and atherosclerosis in children and young adults: the 
Bogalusa Heart Study. N Engl J Med. 1998; 338:1650–1656. DOI: 10.1056/
NEJM199806043382302 [PubMed: 9614255] 
281. Kollias A, Dafni M, Poulidakis E, Ntineri A, Stergiou GS. Out-of-office blood pressure and target 
organ damage in children and adolescents: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Hypertens. 
2014; 32:2315–2331. DOI: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000000384 [PubMed: 25304469] 
282. Morrison JA, Friedman LA, Gray-McGuire C. Metabolic syndrome in childhood predicts adult 
cardiovascular disease 25 years later: the Princeton Lipid Research Clinics Follow-up Study. 
Pediatrics. 2007; 120:340–345. DOI: 10.1542/peds.2006-1699 [PubMed: 17671060] 
283. Lande MB, Kaczorowski JM, Auinger P, Schwartz GJ, Weitzman M. Elevated blood pressure and 
decreased cognitive function among school-age children and adolescents in the United States. J 
Pediatr. 2003; 143:720–724. DOI: 10.1067/S0022-3476(03)00412-8 [PubMed: 14657815] 
284. Adams HR, Szilagyi PG, Gebhardt L, Lande MB. Learning and attention problems among 
children with pediatric primary hypertension. Pediatrics. 2010; 126:e1425–e1429. DOI: 10.1542/
peds.2010-1899 [PubMed: 21059718] 
285. Krause I, Cleper R, Kovalski Y, Sinai L, Davidovits M. Changes in behavior as an early symptom 
of renovascular hypertension in children. Pediatr Nephrol. 2009; 24:2271–2274. DOI: 10.1007/
s00467-009-1205-y [PubMed: 19444479] 
286. Chaturvedi S, Lipszyc DH, Licht C, Craig JC, Parekh R. Pharmacological interventions for 
hypertension in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014:CD008117. [PubMed: 24488616] 
287. Franklin SS, Jacobs MJ, Wong ND, L’Italien GJ, Lapuerta P. Predominance of isolated systolic 
hypertension among middle-aged and elderly US hypertensives: analysis based on National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) III. Hypertension. 2001; 37:869–874. 
[PubMed: 11244010] 
288. Franklin SS, Pio JR, Wong ND, Larson MG, Leip EP, Vasan RS, Levy D. Predictors of new-onset 
diastolic and systolic hypertension: the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 2005; 111:1121–
1127. DOI: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000157159.39889.EC [PubMed: 15723980] 
289. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, Peto R, Collins R, Prospective Studies Collaboration. Age-
specific relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual 
data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies [published correction appears in Lancet. 
2003;361:1060]. Lancet. 2002; 360:1903–1913. [PubMed: 12493255] 
290. Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists’ Collaboration. Turnbull F, Neal B, Ninomiya T, 
Algert C, Arima H, Barzi F, Bulpitt C, Chalmers J, Fagard R, Gleason A, Heritier S, Li N, 
Perkovic V, Woodward M, MacMahon S. Effects of different regimens to lower blood pressure 
on major cardiovascular events in older and younger adults: meta-analysis of randomised trials. 
BMJ. 2008; 336:1121–1123. [PubMed: 18480116] 
291. Appel LJ, Champagne CM, Harsha DW, Cooper LS, Obarzanek E, Elmer PJ, Stevens VJ, Vollmer 
WM, Lin PH, Svetkey LP, Stedman SW, Young DR, Writing Group of the PREMIER 
Collaborative Research Group. Effects of comprehensive lifestyle modification on blood pressure 
control: main results of the PREMIER clinical trial. JAMA. 2003; 289:2083–2093. DOI: 
10.1001/jama.289.16.2083 [PubMed: 12709466] 
292. Musini VM, Tejani AM, Bassett K, Wright JM. Pharmacotherapy for hypertension in the elderly. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009:CD000028. [PubMed: 19821263] 
293. Law MR, Morris JK, Wald NJ. Use of blood pressure lowering drugs in the prevention of 
cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of 147 randomised trials in the context of expectations 
from prospective epidemiological studies. BMJ. 2009; 338:b1665. [PubMed: 19454737] 
294. Webb AJ, Fischer U, Mehta Z, Rothwell PM. Effects of antihypertensive-drug class on 
interindividual variation in blood pressure and risk of stroke: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Lancet. 2010; 375:906–915. DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60235-8 [PubMed: 
20226989] 
295. Sundström J, Arima H, Jackson R, Turnbull F, Rahimi K, Chalmers J, Woodward M, Neal B, 
Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists’ Collaboration. Effects of blood pressure reduction 
in mild hypertension: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2015; 162:184–
191. DOI: 10.7326/M14-0773 [PubMed: 25531552] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 53
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 296. Birns J, Morris R, Donaldson N, Kalra L. The effects of blood pressure reduction on cognitive 
function: a review of effects based on pooled data from clinical trials. J Hypertens. 2006; 
24:1907–1914. DOI: 10.1097/01.hjh.0000244934.81180.16 [PubMed: 16957545] 
297. Feigin V, Ratnasabapathy Y, Anderson C. Does blood pressure lowering treatment prevents 
dementia or cognitive decline in patients with cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease? J 
Neurol Sci. 2005; 229–230:151–155. DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2004.11.020
298. McGuinness B, Todd S, Passmore AP, Bullock R. Systematic review: blood pressure lowering in 
patients without prior cerebrovascular disease for prevention of cognitive impairment and 
dementia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008; 79:4–5. DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2007.118505 
[PubMed: 18079296] 
299. McGuinness B, Todd S, Passmore P, Bullock R. Blood pressure lowering in patients without prior 
cerebrovascular disease for prevention of cognitive impairment and dementia. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2009:CD004034. [PubMed: 19821318] 
300. Gifford KA, Badaracco M, Liu D, Tripodis Y, Gentile A, Lu Z, Palmisano J, Jefferson AL. Blood 
pressure and cognition among older adults: a meta-analysis. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2013; 
28:649–664. DOI: 10.1093/arclin/act046 [PubMed: 23838685] 
301. Ngandu T, Lehtisalo J, Solomon A, Levälahti E, Ahtiluoto S, Antikainen R, Bäckman L, 
Hänninen T, Jula A, Laatikainen T, Lindström J, Mangialasche F, Paajanen T, Pajala S, Peltonen 
M, Rauramaa R, Stigsdotter-Neely A, Strandberg T, Tuomilehto J, Soininen H, Kivipelto M. A 2 
year multidomain intervention of diet, exercise, cognitive training, and vascular risk monitoring 
versus control to prevent cognitive decline in at-risk elderly people (FINGER): a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2015; 385:2255–2263. DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60461-5 [PubMed: 
25771249] 
302. Makin SD, Turpin S, Dennis MS, Wardlaw JM. Cognitive impairment after lacunar stroke: 
systematic review and meta-analysis of incidence, prevalence and comparison with other stroke 
subtypes. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013; 84:893–900. DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2012-303645 
[PubMed: 23457225] 
303. Vermeer SE, Prins ND, den Heijer T, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, Breteler MM. Silent brain infarcts 
and the risk of dementia and cognitive decline. N Engl J Med. 2003; 348:1215–1222. DOI: 
10.1056/NEJMoa022066 [PubMed: 12660385] 
304. Christensen K, Thinggaard M, Oksuzyan A, Steenstrup T, Andersen-Ranberg K, Jeune B, McGue 
M, Vaupel JW. Physical and cognitive functioning of people older than 90 years: a comparison of 
two Danish cohorts born 10 years apart. Lancet. 2013; 382:1507–1513. DOI: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(13)60777-1 [PubMed: 23849796] 
305. Manton KC, Gu XL, Ukraintseva SV. Declining prevalence of dementia in the U.S. elderly 
population. Adv Gerontol. 2005; 16:30–37. [PubMed: 16075674] 
306. Langa KM, Larson EB, Karlawish JH, Cutler DM, Kabeto MU, Kim SY, Rosen AB. Trends in the 
prevalence and mortality of cognitive impairment in the United States: is there evidence of a 
compression of cognitive morbidity? Alzheimers Dement. 2008; 4:134–144. DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.
2008.01.001 [PubMed: 18631957] 
307. Qiu C, von Strauss E, Bäckman L, Winblad B, Fratiglioni L. Twenty-year changes in dementia 
occurrence suggest decreasing incidence in central Stockholm, Sweden. Neurology. 2013; 
80:1888–1894. DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318292a2f9 [PubMed: 23596063] 
308. Matthews FE, Arthur A, Barnes LE, Bond J, Jagger C, Robinson L, Brayne C, Medical Research 
Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Collaboration. A two-decade comparison of prevalence 
of dementia in individuals aged 65 years and older from three geographical areas of England: 
results of the Cognitive Function and Ageing Study I and II. Lancet. 2013; 382:1405–1412. DOI: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61570-6 [PubMed: 23871492] 
309. Qiu C, Winblad B, Fratiglioni L. Low diastolic pressure and risk of dementia in very old people: a 
longitudinal study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2009; 28:213–219. DOI: 10.1159/000236913 
[PubMed: 19752556] 
310. Glynn RJ, Beckett LA, Hebert LE, Morris MC, Scherr PA, Evans DA. Current and remote blood 
pressure and cognitive decline. JAMA. 1999; 281:438–445. [PubMed: 9952204] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 54
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 311. Morris MC, Scherr PA, Hebert LE, Glynn RJ, Bennett DA, Evans DA. Association of incident 
Alzheimer disease and blood pressure measured from 13 years before to 2 years after diagnosis 
in a large community study. Arch Neurol. 2001; 58:1640–1646. [PubMed: 11594923] 
312. Luukinen H, Koski K, Laippala P, Kivelä SL. Prognosis of diastolic and systolic orthostatic 
hypotension in older persons. Arch Intern Med. 1999; 159:273–280. [PubMed: 9989539] 
313. Mitchell GF, Parise H, Benjamin EJ, Larson MG, Keyes MJ, Vita JA, Vasan RS, Levy D. Changes 
in arterial stiffness and wave reflection with advancing age in healthy men and women: the 
Framingham Heart Study. Hypertension. 2004; 43:1239–1245. DOI: 10.1161/01.HYP.
0000128420.01881.aa [PubMed: 15123572] 
314. Avolio AP, Deng FQ, Li WQ, Luo YF, Huang ZD, Xing LF, O’Rourke MF. Effects of aging on 
arterial distensibility in populations with high and low prevalence of hypertension: comparison 
between urban and rural communities in China. Circulation. 1985; 71:202–210. [PubMed: 
3965165] 
315. Fontana L, Meyer TE, Klein S, Holloszy JO. Long-term calorie restriction is highly effective in 
reducing the risk for atherosclerosis in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:6659–
6663. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0308291101 [PubMed: 15096581] 
316. Meyer TE, Kovács SJ, Ehsani AA, Klein S, Holloszy JO, Fontana L. Long-term caloric restriction 
ameliorates the decline in diastolic function in humans. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006; 47:398–402. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.08.069 [PubMed: 16412867] 
317. García-Ortiz L, Recio-Rodríguez JI, Schmidt-Trucksäss A, Puigdomenech-Puig E, Martínez-
Vizcaíno V, Fernández-Alonso C, Rubio-Galan J, Agudo- Conde C, Patino-Alonso MC, 
Rodríguez-Sánchez E, Gómez-Marcos MA, EVIDENT Group. Relationship between objectively 
measured physical activity and cardiovascular aging in the general population: the EVIDENT 
trial. Atherosclerosis. 2014; 233:434–440. DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.01.021 [PubMed: 
24530775] 
318. Seals DR, Tanaka H, Clevenger CM, Monahan KD, Reiling MJ, Hiatt WR, Davy KP, DeSouza 
CA. Blood pressure reductions with exercise and sodium restriction in postmenopausal women 
with elevated systolic pressure: role of arterial stiffness. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001; 38:506–513. 
[PubMed: 11499745] 
319. Beason-Held LL, Moghekar A, Zonderman AB, Kraut MA, Resnick SM. Longitudinal changes in 
cerebral blood flow in the older hypertensive brain. Stroke. 2007; 38:1766–1773. DOI: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.106.477109 [PubMed: 17510458] 
320. Willette AA, Xu G, Johnson SC, Birdsill AC, Jonaitis EM, Sager MA, Hermann BP, La Rue A, 
Asthana S, Bendlin BB. Insulin resistance, brain atrophy, and cognitive performance in late 
middle-aged adults. Diabetes Care. 2013; 36:443–449. DOI: 10.2337/dc12-0922 [PubMed: 
23069842] 
321. Jack CR Jr, Knopman DS, Jagust WJ, Petersen RC, Weiner MW, Aisen PS, Shaw LM, Vemuri P, 
Wiste HJ, Weigand SD, Lesnick TG, Pankratz VS, Donohue MC, Trojanowski JQ. Tracking 
pathophysiological processes in Alzheimer’s disease: an updated hypothetical model of dynamic 
biomarkers. Lancet Neurol. 2013; 12:207–216. DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70291-0 [PubMed: 
23332364] 
322. Anderson, G. Chronic Care: Making the Case for Ongoing Care. Princeton, NJ: Robert Woods 
Johnson Foundation; 2010. 
323. Bauer L, Pozehl B, Hertzog M, Johnson J, Zimmerman L, Filipi M. A brief neuropsychological 
battery for use in the chronic heart failure population. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2012; 11:223–230. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcnurse.2011.03.007 [PubMed: 21514892] 
324. Tarasoff-Conway JM, Carare RO, Osorio RS, Glodzik L, Butler T, Fieremans E, Axel L, Rusinek 
H, Nicholson C, Zlokovic BV, Frangione B, Blennow K, Ménard J, Zetterberg H, Wisniewski T, 
de Leon MJ. Clearance systems in the brain-implications for Alzheimer disease [published 
correction appears in Nat Rev Neurol. 2016;12:248]. Nat Rev Neurol. 2015; 11:457–470. DOI: 
10.1038/nrneurol.2015.119 [PubMed: 26195256] 
325. Roberts KF, Elbert DL, Kasten TP, Patterson BW, Sigurdson WC, Connors RE, Ovod V, Munsell 
LY, Mawuenyega KG, Miller-Thomas MM, Moran CJ, Cross DT 3rd, Derdeyn CP, Bateman RJ. 
Amyloid-β efflux from the central nervous system into the plasma. Ann Neurol. 2014; 76:837–
844. DOI: 10.1002/ana.24270 [PubMed: 25205593] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 55
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 326. Louveau A, Smirnov I, Keyes TJ, Eccles JD, Rouhani SJ, Peske JD, Derecki NC, Castle D, 
Mandell JW, Lee KS, Harris TH, Kipnis J. Structural and functional features of central nervous 
system lymphatic vessels [published correction appears in Nature. 2016;533:278]. Nature. 2015; 
523:337–341. DOI: 10.1038/nature14432 [PubMed: 26030524] 
Iadecola et al.
Page 56
Hypertension. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
