 Clinical Infectious Diseases
IDSA and Surviving Sepsis Guideline • CID 2018:66 (15 May) • 1631
Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) POSITION 
STATEMENT: Why IDSA Did Not Endorse the Surviving 
Sepsis Campaign Guidelines
IDSA Sepsis Task Force*
IDSA did not endorse the 2016 Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines despite being represented in the working group that drafted 
the guidelines document. Leadership from the IDSA, the Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines, and the Society of Critical Care 
Medicine had numerous amicable discussions primarily regarding the bolded, rated guidelines recommendations. Our societies had 
different perspectives, however, regarding the interpretation of the major studies that informed the guidelines’ recommendations, 
thus leading us to different conclusions and different perspectives on the recommendations. IDSA consequently elected not to 
 
endorse the guidelines. IDSA nonetheless hopes to be able to continue collaborating with the Surviving Sepsis Campaign and the 
Society of Critical Care Medicine to resolve our differences and to develop further strategies together to prevent sepsis and septic 
shock as well as reduce death and disability from these conditions both nationally and globally.
Keywords. Surviving Sepsis; Guidelines; Endorsement; IDSA.
The 2016 Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines were published 
under the auspices of the Society of Critical Care Medicine 
(SCCM) and the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine 
(ESICM) [1]. After a great deal of deliberation and discussion 
with SCCM, the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) 
reluctantly elected not to endorse these guidelines.
IDSA admires the formidable work the Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign has done to improve care and outcomes for patients 
with sepsis and septic shock. The Surviving Sepsis Campaign 
has raised awareness about sepsis, emphasized the impor-
tance of early recognition, and focused attention on the need 
to treat septic patients aggressively and expeditiously with evi-
dence-based interventions. Nonetheless, IDSA did not agree 
with many important aspects of the Surviving Sepsis Campaign 
Guidelines.
The IDSA’s delegate to the Surviving Sepsis Campaign’s writ-
ing committee discussed these differences of opinion with the 
writing committee, the Surviving Sepsis Campaign leadership, 
and with the leaders of IDSA and SCCM. Unfortunately, our 2 
societies were unable to reach consensus on some of the guide-
lines’ pivotal recommendations and their associated explanatory 
text within the publication deadline set by the Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign and SCCM. Thus, the IDSA decided to withhold its 
endorsement. This article summarizes some of IDSA’s specific 
concerns.
DISTINGUISHING SEPSIS FROM NONINFECTIOUS 
SYNDROMES
IDSA’s major concern with the guidelines is its failure to 
acknowledge the practical difficulties clinicians often face 
when trying to diagnose sepsis. It is often unclear whether or 
not infection is present and whether or not organ dysfunction 
is due to infection. Studies suggest that up to 40% of patients 
admitted to intensive care units with a diagnosis of sepsis do 
not have an infection and thus do not actually have sepsis [2]. 
Hence, the benefits of treating patients who are infected need to 
be balanced against the harms of treating patients who at first 
appear as if they might have infections but in fact do not.
The Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines do not differen-
tiate between patients with suspected sepsis and suspected septic 
shock. The definitions of sepsis and septic shock have under-
gone evolution over the past 15 years, and different documents 
continue to use different versions of the definitions, which 
can lead to confusion [3–9]. Unfortunately, none of the itera-
tions of definitions provides optimal sensitivity or specificity. 
However, regardless of which definitions are used for sepsis and 
septic shock, conflating suspected sepsis with suspected septic 
shock leads to one-size-fits-all recommendations. If there is a 
possibility that a patient with shock might have an infection, 
it is understandable and appropriate to administer broad spec-
trum antibiotics and fluids immediately. Clearly, if the patient 
is infected, there is little margin for error. For patients with less 
severe disease and in whom the presence of infection is uncer-
tain, there is often more time to gather additional diagnostic 
V I E W P O I N T S
Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society of America 2017. 
This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/cix997
Received 1 July 2017; editorial decision 18 October 2017; accepted 8 November 2017; pub-
lished online November 22, 2017.
*IDSA Sepsis Task Force Members listed in Acknowledgements.
Correspondence: H. Masur, MD, Chief, Critical Care Medicine, Dept Bldg 10, Rm 2C145, 10 
Center Dr, MSC 1662, Bethesda, MD 20892-1662 (hmasur@nih.gov).
Clinical Infectious Diseases®  2018;66(10):1631–5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/10/1631/4645414 by guest on 03 June 2019
 1632 • CID 2018:66 (15 May) • IDSA Sepsis Task Force
data to generate a more informed and precise therapeutic plan. 
If the clinician decides that infection is plausible, antibiotics 
can and should be administered promptly [10, 11]. In many 
cases, however, patients that initially seemed as if they might be 
infected turn out to have noninfectious conditions, or infections 
that do not benefit from antibacterial agents, for example, viral 
infections. Such patients stand only to suffer potential harm 
from antibiotics. Moreover, overuse of antibiotics has negative 
consequences for hospital populations in general in addition to 
the specific patient receiving treatment. This risk is worth tak-
ing for a patient in shock, but we do not believe the risk should 
be entered lightly in patients with less severe illness where there 
is often time to gather more data before committing the patient 
to antibiotics.
TIME 
TO INITIATION OF EMPIRIC ANTIBIOTIC 
THERAPY
Employers and health plans rightfully turn to professional 
guidelines when developing quality measures. Unfortunately 
this can become problematic when guideline recommendations 
are overly rigid [12]. The Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines 
recommend “that administration of IV antimicrobials be initi-
ated as soon as possible after recognition and within 1 hour for 
both sepsis and septic shock (strong recommendation, moder-
ate quality of evidence; grade applies to both conditions).”
IDSA agrees that antimicrobials should be initiated as soon 
as possible to patients with severe infections. We are fearful, 
however, that stipulating an aggressive, fixed time period "from 
the time of recognition" may lead to unintended consequences, 
namely, an increased likelihood that broad-spectrum antibiot-
ics will be given more frequently to uninfected patients with 
syndromes that look like infections in the rush to meet the fixed 
frame stipulated for infected patients.
Several of the senior authors of Surviving Sepsis Campaign 
Guidelines published an explanatory article regarding the 2016 
Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines that states: “First, the rec-
ommendation for antibiotic administration within an hour of 
diagnosis of sepsis is a lofty goal of care, judged to be ideal for 
the patient but not yet standard care … This is one among sev-
eral ‘aspirational recommendations’ considered by the experts to 
represent best practice that individual practitioners and healthcare 
teams should strive to operationalize” [13]. Of note, other guide-
lines or bundles from CMS [7] and Institute for Healthcare Quality 
Improvement [8, 9] propose that 3 hours is a reasonable target.
None of these organizations, however, including the 
Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines, provide clear guidance 
on precisely how to measure adherence. To adhere to best prac-
tices recommended by the guidelines, providers need specific 
directions. The guidelines do not define how “time to antibiot-
ics” is measured in terms of either a starting point or the end-
point. There are several possible starting points such as time of 
first fever documented by vital signs, time of first health care 
provider contact, time of emergency room admission, time to 
positive sepsis screening, time of first documentation of organ 
dysfunction, or time of first antibiotic order. Similarly, there are 
many possible measured endpoints such as time to initiation 
of first antibiotic, time to initiation of all antibiotics, or time to 
initiation of appropriate antibiotics. Regulatory agencies might 
thus make their own definitions. Individual hospitals might 
advertise their quality by making their own easily attained 
parameters and showing better performance than comparator 
organizations that use more stringent definitions.
We agree in principle with the desirability of “prompt” 
 
administration of antibiotics for documented or suspected 
infection. Analogous to hypertension, one might consider sepsis 
to be a medical urgency, and septic shock to be a medical emer-
gency. Unfortunately, however, unlike severe hypertension, 
myocardial infarct, or stroke, there is no objective event, elec-
trocardiogram, or vital sign that would define sepsis or septic 
shock with any specificity.
We do think it is feasible and constructive to propose a rec-
ommendation that is easily measured and likely to improve 
care, that is, a recommendation that encourages acceleration 
of antibiotic delivery. Thus the emphasis would be on acceler-
ating drug delivery once the clinician makes the decision that 
antibiotics are appropriate and writes a stat order and removes 
emphasis on recognition that might be interpreted as time of 
emergency room registration, time of first fever, etc. Such a rec-
ommendation is supported by observational data: “For patients 
with presumed sepsis or septic shock, the administration of each 
antibiotic ordered should be initiated promptly, with health care 
systems working to reduce that time to as short a duration as 
feasible” [10, 14–17]. We currently would not define whether 
“promptly” should be interpreted as 1 hour, 2 hours, 3 hours, 
or something else until a comprehensive review by stakehold-
ers to assess the feasibility of implementation [18, 19]. Thus, for 
patients who appear to be in septic shock, the provider would 
optimally make a rapid assessment, recognize that starting anti-
biotics is an emergency, and signal the healthcare team of this 
need by entering a stat order. Pharmacy and nursing in turn 
would collaborate to assure that antibiotics are immediately 
available and immediately administered, working to reduce the 
measured time from order placement to initiation of adminis-
tration for each and every antibiotic. For a patient who appeared 
to be septic but was not in shock, the provider might choose to 
obtain additional or even sequential data to determine if infec-
tion were in fact the inciting cause. If the assessment was that 
antibiotics were needed for this medical urgency, the health-
care team would then ensure that each and every stat antibiotic 
ordered was promptly administered.
BLOOD CULTURES AND IV ACCESS CATHETERS
The identification of the organism causing sepsis or septic 
shock is obviously an important part of any set of guidelines for 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/10/1631/4645414 by guest on 03 June 2019
 IDSA and Surviving Sepsis Guideline • CID 2018:66 (15 May) • 1633
clinicians because such identification is pivotal for administer-
ing optimal therapeutic interventions. For diagnostic tests that 
have been in use for many years, a standard approach to doc-
umenting the cause of sepsis or septic shock has been to draw 
blood cultures, as well as to perform diagnostic studies on other 
appropriate fluids and tissues. The guidelines endorse drawing 
at least two blood cultures before starting antimicrobial therapy, 
including one blood culture drawn peripherally and one drawn 
through an intravenous catheter. This seems eminently reason-
able. However, the information recommending two cultures is 
relegated to a bolded “Remark” that is not rated, and informa-
tion about drawing blood cultures from a peripheral site plus 
one (or all) catheters is buried in subsequent text. The guide-
lines do not address whether to draw blood cultures from all 
catheters and all lumens, or how to prioritize catheters if there 
are multiple catheters and lumens in place. Later in the docu-
ment the guidelines provide advice about removing catheters 
if such devices are “a possible” source of infection. However, in 
a septic patient with a catheter, especially a catheter that has 
been in place for several days and used multiple times, isn’t the 
catheter always a “possible” source? In addition, clinicians are 
given little guidance about tunnel infection, exit infection, or 
strategies for removal of implanted or temporary devices. We 
think the guidelines should have clearly recommended remov-
ing catheters in patients with refractory shock, hard to treat 
organisms, or persistent bacteremia. Readers could be referred 
to other sources, but experience suggests that having pivotal 
information in one place maximizes the likelihood that such 
information will be accessed [20].
COMBINATION AND MULTIDRUG 
THERAPY
A major contribution of these guidelines should be advice 
on which antimicrobial agents to choose for empiric and for 
targeted therapy. The classification and terminology of anti-
microbial therapy (Table 6) in the document is confusing. The 
distinction between multidrug and combination therapy is 
probably not obvious to either casual readers of the document 
or even to those who carefully read Table 6. This table provides 
definitions for “empiric,” “targeted/definitive,” “multi-drug,” 
and “combination” therapy. These are not widely held defini-
tions, and their distinction between combination therapy (2 or 
more active agents prescribed to accelerate pathogen clearance 
rather than to broaden antimicrobial coverage), and multid-
rug therapy (therapy with multiple antimicrobials to broaden 
coverage for empiric therapy or to accelerate pathogen clear-
ance, includes combination therapy) would not be obvious to 
many readers or even to some experts in the field. In many sen-
tences that discuss therapy, the term “combination” therapy is 
used when, in fact, with their definitions, they should be using 
the term “multidrug” therapy.
The guidelines suggest that treating septic shock with 2 
antibiotics, both active against a patient’s known pathogens, 
for “several days” is likely to be clinically useful. They recom-
mend continuing combination therapy with 2 active agents 
until there is clinical improvement and/or evidence of infec-
tion resolution, regardless of when susceptibility results 
return. We do not believe that there are robust data to sup-
port these recommendations [21, 22]. We believe the avail-
able data support the empiric use of 2 agents active against 
gram-negative bacilli for empiric treatment of septic shock 
in order to increase the chance of having at least one active 
agent administered. Once susceptibilities return, however, 
and demonstrate that there is at least one active agent with 
published evidence for clinical benefit, we believe the avail-
able data suggest there is no evidence to support continuing 
2 gram-negative agents as opposed to using one active agent. 
Indeed one section of the guidelines advocates “that empiric 
antimicrobial therapy be narrowed once pathogen identifica-
tion and sensitivities are established and/or adequate clinical 
improvement is noted…” only to apparently be contradicted 
subsequently: “several days of combination therapy is bio-
logically plausible and is likely to be clinically useful.”
Indeed, the concept of “combination therapy” as defined in 
this document is troubling. The guidelines define “combin-
ation therapy” as multidrug regimens that accelerate pathogen 
clearance, inhibit toxin production, or provide immunomod-
ulatory effects. The evidence for the hypothesis that “combin-
ation therapy” accelerates pathogen clearance is controversial 
in situations where a highly susceptible pathogen can be 
treated with a single highly active agent. The guidelines cite 
an observational propensity-matched analysis and meta-anal-
ysis/meta-regression analyses to support this approach [23–
34], but there were substantial limitations to these 2 studies as 
described in details elsewhere [21]. A randomized controlled 
trial [33] of this strategy, however, showed no benefit of com-
bination therapy versus monotherapy for patients with sepsis 
or septic shock (indeed, there were significantly more adverse 
effects and a trend toward higher mortality rates in patients 
with septic shock randomized to combination vs monother-
apy) [33]. From a process perspective, it is also less than opti-
mal that a rated statement is placed in the text rather than as 
a bolded recommendation, even if the recommendation for 
combination therapy against a sensitive organism is “a weak 
recommendation based on low quality of evidence.”
Multiple statements within the guidelines imply that most 
patients with sepsis or septic shock often harbor antimicro-
bial resistant pathogens. This is not consistent with the avail-
able evidence and could encourage clinicians to use more 
antimicrobial agents than would otherwise be indicated. 
Multidrug empiric antibiotic therapy is appropriate for 
patients with risk factors for multidrug-resistant organisms 
but is not necessarily required upfront for all patients with 
sepsis, particularly in hospitals with low levels of antimicro-
bial resistance.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/10/1631/4645414 by guest on 03 June 2019
 1634 • CID 2018:66 (15 May) • IDSA Sepsis Task Force
PROCALCITONIN
Biomarkers and molecular tests could be very useful to estab-
lish quickly and accurately whether syndromes are caused by 
infection and, in the case of molecular tests, what the causative 
organism is and what resistance genes it harbors. The Surviving 
Sepsis Campaign Guidelines endorses the use of procalcitonin, 
in accordance with other guidelines [35]. Procalcitonin levels 
have been shown to rise within 4–6 hours in response to invasive 
bacterial infection. However, the Surviving Sepsis Campaign 
Guidelines do not provide specific and evidence-based recom-
mendations that providers can follow. The failure to provide 
specific guidance leaves readers with the task of finding another 
source to operationalize the recommendation.
The guidelines indicate that procalcitonin “can be used” in 
septic patients, but what do the words “can be used” indicate to 
the clinician because many tests “can be used.” The issue rather 
is “should they be used?” The guidelines also specifically suggest 
that procalcitonin is a biomarker that is useful for determining 
when to stop antibiotics in patients who have “limited evidence 
of sepsis,” a patient population that is not defined. Our interpre-
tation of the literature is that randomized controlled trials dem-
onstrate that procalcitonin guidance for duration of antibiotic 
therapy is feasible and safe in critically ill patients with infections 
[36, 37]. We are unaware of data supporting the guidelines’ rec-
ommendation to use procalcitonin in patients with “limited evi-
dence of sepsis” even if it were clear what population this refers to.
PHARMACOKINETICS/PHARMACODYNAMICS
The recommendations for optimizing pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics are also lacking in specifics. If the Surviving 
Sepsis Campaign Guidelines deem that there is evidence that 
prolonged dosing administration of certain antimicrobial 
agents, for instance, is beneficial, they should indicate to clini-
cians how to operationalize such an approach, and they should 
distinguish how to administer stat antibiotics (in some cases a 
rapid bolus) and how to administer subsequent doses.
PROLONGED PROPHYLAXIS
The Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines recommend against 
“sustained systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis in patients with 
severe inflammatory states of noninfectious origin.
” This sug-
gests that “nonsustained” antibiotic courses are indicated. IDSA 
recognizes that there are many situations when empiric therapy 
is reasonable. However, IDSA believes that if there is no infection, 
there is no indication for antibiotic therapy. The Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign’s subsequent text suggests that the authors may actu-
ally be referring to infection prevention rather than treatment. 
Indeed, elsewhere the guidelines suggest “brief antibiotic proph-
ylaxis for specific invasive procedures may be appropriate.
” We 
obviously believe that infection prevention is a critical priority 
for all hospitals, but it is a large and complex topic that is already 
well covered by other dedicated guidelines. The Surviving Sepsis 
Campaign Guidelines should either refer to these other Guidelines 
or provide a better description of what aspects of infection preven-
tion and prophylaxis they are referring to.
DURATION OF 
THERAPY
Lastly, the Surviving Sepsis Campaign recommends treating 
most patients with sepsis or septic shock with 7–10 days of 
antibiotics. IDSA believes that is an oversimplified approach 
and risks treating some infections inadequately and others 
excessively. This recommendation contradicts the preponder-
ance of evidence from randomized controlled trials, systematic 
reviews, and guidelines that have shown the safety and efficacy 
of shorter therapeutic courses for certain infections: 4 days for 
intra-abdominal infections and abscesses with source control 
[38]; 5 days for community-acquired pneumonia [39–41], 7 
days or less for nosocomial pneumonia [35, 42, 43]; and 7 days 
or less for acute pyelonephritis [44]. It is difficult for a guide-
line document to give specific advice on duration of therapy 
given the complex host and microbial interactions unique to 
each patient. We would suggest summarizing treatment dur-
ation considerations and recommendations per condition 
rather than trying to establish general recommendations for all 
different conditions.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, IDSA had multiple substantial disagreements 
with the Surviving Sepsis Campaign’s recommendations. We are 
disappointed that IDSA and SCCM were unable to resolve these 
issues before the Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines were 
released. We hope we will be able to collaborate with SCCM 
and the Surviving Sepsis Campaign to find common ground for 
future guidelines. The IDSA strongly believes that patients and 
healthcare providers are best served if professional societies can 
speak with one voice on topics that are shared across specialties.
Notes
Acknowledgments. Members of IDSA Sepsis Task Force include Andre 
C. Kalil, MD, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska; 
David N. Gilbert, MD, Providence Portland Medical Center, Portland, 
Oregon; Dean L. Winslow, MD, Stanford University Medical Center, 
Palo Alto, California; Henry Masur, MD, NiH Clinical Center, Bethesda, 
Maryland; Michael Klompas, MD, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
 
Massachusetts. Dr. Masur represented IDSA on the writing committee for 
the Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines section on the diagnosis and 
therapy of microbial infections.
Financial support. This research was supported in part by the Intramural 
Research Program of the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center.
Potential conflict of interest. No author has a conflict of interest 
related to this submission. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for 
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors con-
sider relevant to the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/10/1631/4645414 by guest on 03 June 2019
 IDSA and Surviving Sepsis Guideline • CID 2018:66 (15 May) • 1635
References
1. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign: international 
guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock: 2016. Crit Care Med 2017; 
45:486–552.
2. Klein Klouwenberg PM, Cremer OL, van Vught LA, et al. Likelihood of infection 
in patients with presumed sepsis at the time of intensive care unit admission: a 
cohort study. Crit Care 2015; 19:319.
3. Bone RC, Balk RA, Cerra FB, et al. Definitions for sepsis and organ failure 
and guidelines for the use of innovative therapies in sepsis. The ACCP/SCCM 
Consensus Conference Committee. American College of Chest Physicians/
Society of Critical Care Medicine. Chest 1992; 101:1644–55.
4. Levy MM, Fink MP, Marshall JC. SCCM/ESICM/ACCP/ATS/SIS International 
Sepsis Definitions Conference. Crit Care Med 2003; 31:1250–6.
5. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. Septic shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 
2016; 315:801–10.
6. Sterling SA, Puskarich MA, Glass AF, Guirgis F, Jones AE. The impact of the sep-
sis-3 septic shock definition on previously defined septic shock patients. Crit Care 
Med 2017; 45:1436–42.
7. SEP-1: Early Management Bundle, Severe Sepsis/Septic Shock. Available at: https://
www.mhanet.com/mhaimages/Sepsis_FactSheet.pdf. Accessed 29 August 2017.
8. National Quality Forum. NQF #0500 Severe sepsis and septic shock: manage-
ment bundle. Available at http://www.qualityforum.org/WorkArea/linkit.aspx-
?LinkIdentifier=id&ItemID=71548. Accessed 28 August 2017.
9. Institute for Healthcare Improvement. Severe sepsis bundles. Available at http://www.
ihi.org/resources/Pages/Tools/SevereSepsisBundles.aspx. Accessed 28 August 2017.
10. Kalil AC, Johnson DW, Lisco SJ, Sun J. Early goal-directed therapy for sepsis: a 
novel solution for discordant survival outcomes in clinical trials. Crit Care Med 
2017; 45:607–14.
11. Bloos F, Thomas-Rüddel D, Rüddel H, et al.; MEDUSA Study Group. Impact of com-
pliance with infection management guidelines on outcome in patients with severe 
sepsis: a prospective observational multi-center study. Crit Care 2014; 18:R42.
12. Garber AM. Evidence-based guidelines as a foundation for performance incen-
tives. Health Aff 2005; 24:174–9.
13. Dellinger RP, Schorr CA, Levy MM. A users’ guide to the 2016 surviving sepsis 
guidelines. Crit Care Med 2017; 45:381–5.
14. Kumar A, Roberts D, Wood KE, et al. Duration of hypotension before initiation 
of effective antimicrobial therapy is the critical determinant of survival in human 
septic shock. Crit Care Med 2006; 34:1589–96.
15. Seymour CW, Gesten F, Prescott HC, et al. Time to treatment and mortality dur-
ing mandated emergency care for sepsis. N Engl J Med 2017; 376:2235–44.
16. Ferrer R, Martin-Loeches I, Phillips G, et al. Empiric antibiotic treatment reduces 
mortality in severe sepsis and septic shock from the first hour: results from a 
guideline-based performance improvement program. Crit Care Med 2014; 
42:1749–55.
17. Sterling SA, Miller WR, Pryor J, Puskarich MA, Jones AE. The impact of timing 
of antibiotics on outcomes in severe sepsis and septic shock: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2015; 43:1907–15.
18. Singer M. Antibiotics for sepsis—does each hour really count? or is it 
incestuous amplification? Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2017. doi: 10.1164/
rccm.201703-0621ED.
19. Liu VX, Fielding-Singh V, Greene JD, et al. The timing of early antibiotics and 
hospital mortality in sepsis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2017. doi: 10.1164/
rccm.201609-1848OC.
20. IDSA guidelines for the diagnosis and management of intravascular catheter-re-
lated bloodstream infection. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 49:1770–1.
21. Klompas M. Monotherapy is adequate for septic shock due to gram-negative 
organisms. Crit Care Med 2017; 45:1930–2.
22. Kalil AC. Antibiotic combination therapy for patients with gram-negative septic 
shock. Crit Care Med 2017; 45:1933–1936.
23. Kumar A, Safdar N, Kethireddy S, Chateau D. A survival benefit of combination 
antibiotic therapy for serious infections associated with sepsis and septic shock is 
contingent only on the risk of death: a meta-analytic/meta-regression study. Crit 
Care Med 2010; 38:1651–64.
24. Kumar A, Zarychanski R, Light B, et al.; Cooperative Antimicrobial Therapy of 
Septic Shock (CATSS) Database Research Group. Early combination antibiotic 
therapy yields improved survival compared with monotherapy in septic shock: a 
propensity-matched analysis. Crit Care Med 2010; 38:1773–85.
25. Al-Hasan MN, Wilson JW, Lahr BD, et al. Beta-lactam and fluoroquinolone 
combination antibiotic therapy for bacteremia caused by gram-negative bacilli. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2009; 53:1386–94.
26. Delannoy PY, Boussekey N, Devos P, et al. Impact of combination therapy with 
aminoglycosides on the outcome of ICU-acquired bacteraemias. Eur J Clin 
Microbiol Infect Dis 2012; 31:2293–9.
27. Díaz-Martín A, Martínez-González ML, Ferrer R, et al.; Edusepsis Study Group. 
Antibiotic prescription patterns in the empiric therapy of severe sepsis: combin-
ation of antimicrobials with different mechanisms of action reduces mortality. 
Crit Care 2012; 16:R223.
28. Martin-Loeches I, Lisboa T, Rodriguez A, et al. Combination antibiotic therapy 
with macrolides improves survival in intubated patients with community-ac-
quired pneumonia. Intensive Care Med 2010; 36:612–20.
29. Paul M, Lador A, Grozinsky-Glasberg S, Leibovici L. Beta lactam antibiotic mon-
otherapy versus beta lactam-aminoglycoside antibiotic combination therapy for 
sepsis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014:CD003344.
30. Kumar A, Zarychanski R, Light B, et al.; Cooperative Antimicrobial Therapy of 
Septic Shock (CATSS) Database Research Group. Early combination antibiotic 
therapy yields improved survival compared with monotherapy in septic shock: a 
propensity-matched analysis. Crit Care Med 2010; 38:1773–85.
31. Safdar N, Handelsman J, Maki DG. Does combination antimicrobial therapy 
reduce mortality in gram-negative bacteraemia? A meta-analysis. Lancet Infect 
Dis 2004; 4:519–27.
32. Hu Y, Li L, Li W, et al. Combination antibiotic therapy versus monotherapy for 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteraemia: a meta-analysis of retrospective and pro-
spective studies. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2013; 42:492–6.
33. Brunkhorst FM, Oppert M, Marx G, et al.; German Study Group Competence 
Network Sepsis (SepNet). Effect of empirical treatment with moxifloxacin and 
meropenem vs meropenem on sepsis-related organ dysfunction in patients with 
severe sepsis: a randomized trial. JAMA 2012; 307:2390–9.
34. Baddour LM, Yu VL, Klugman KP, et al.; International Pneumococcal Study 
Group. Combination antibiotic therapy lowers mortality among severely ill 
patients with pneumococcal bacteremia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004; 
170:440–4.
35. Kalil AC, Metersky ML, Klompas M, et al. Management of adults with hospi-
tal-acquired and ventilator-associated pneumonia: 2016 clinical practice guide-
lines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the American Thoracic 
Society. Clin Infect Dis 2016; 63:e61–e111.
36. de Jong E, van Oers JA, Beishuizen A, et al. Efficacy and safety of procalcitonin 
guidance in reducing the duration of antibiotic treatment in critically ill patients: 
a randomised, controlled, open-label trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2016; 16:819–27.
37. Bouadma L, Luyt CE, Tubach F, et al.; PRORATA trial group. Use of procal-
citonin to reduce patients’ exposure to antibiotics in intensive care units 
(PRORATA trial): a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2010; 
375:463–74.
38. Sawyer RG, Claridge JA, Nathens AB, et al. Trial of short-course antimicrobial 
therapy for intraabdominal infection. N Engl J Med 2015; 372:1996–2005.
39. Uranga A, España PP, Bilbao A, et al. Duration of antibiotic treatment in commu-
nity-acquired pneumonia: a multicenter randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern 
Med 2016; 176:1257–65.
40. el Moussaoui R, de Borgie CA, van den Broek P, et al. Effectiveness of discon-
tinuing antibiotic treatment after three days versus eight days in mild to mod-
erate-severe community acquired pneumonia: randomised, double blind study. 
BMJ 2006; 332:1355.
41. Dunbar LM, Wunderink RG, Habib MP, et al. High-dose, short-course levofloxa-
cin for community-acquired pneumonia: a new treatment paradigm. Clin Infect 
Dis 2003; 37:752–60.
42. Chastre J, Wolff M, Fagon JY, et al.; PneumA Trial Group. Comparison of 8 vs 
15 days of antibiotic therapy for ventilator-associated pneumonia in adults: a ran-
domized trial. JAMA 2003; 290:2588–98.
43. Singh N, Rogers P, Atwood CW, Wagener MM, Yu VL. Short-course empiric anti-
biotic therapy for patients with pulmonary infiltrates in the intensive care unit: 
a proposed solution for indiscriminate antibiotic prescription. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2000; 162:505–11.
44. Eliakim-Raz N, Yahav D, Paul M, Leibovici L. Duration of antibiotic treatment 
for acute pyelonephritis and septic urinary tract infection—7 days or less versus 
longer treatment: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. J Antimicrob Chemother 2013; 68:2183–91.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/10/1631/4645414 by guest on 03 June 2019
