 D I A B E T E S  &  M E T A B O L I S M  J O U R N A L
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons At-
tribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/) 
which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Copyright © 2016 Korean Diabetes Association 
http://e-dmj.org
Diabetes Metab J 2016;40:46-53
Protective Effects of Ginger (Zingiber officinale) Extract 
against Diabetes-Induced Heart Abnormality in Rats
Behrouz Ilkhanizadeh1, Alireza Shirpoor2, Mohamad hasan Khadem Ansari3, Samira Nemati2, Yusef Rasmi3
Departments of 1Pathology, 2Physiology, 3Biochemistry, Urmia University of Medical Sciences Faculty of Medicine, Urmia, Iran
Background: Diabetic cardiomyopathy is an important causal factor in morbidity and mortality among diabetic patients, and 
currently, no effective means are available to reverse its pathological progress. The purpose of the present study was to investigate 
the effect of ginger extract on apolipoproteins (apo) A and B, hyperhomocysteinemia, cathepsin G and leptin changes, as well as 
cardiac fibrosis and heart muscle cell proliferation under hyperglycemic conditions in vivo. 
Methods: Twenty-four male Wistar rats were divided into three groups, namely: control, non-treated diabetic, and ginger ex-
tract-treated diabetic groups. The ginger extract-treated diabetic group received a 50 mg daily dose of ginger extract intragastri-
cally for 6 weeks. 
Results: The results revealed concurrent significant increases in plasma C-reactive protein (CRP), homocysteine (Hcy), cathep-
sin G and apoB levels and decreases in apoA and leptin levels in the non-treated diabetic group compared to the control group. 
Moreover, heart structural changes, including fibrosis and heart muscle cell proliferation, were observed in non-treated diabetic 
rats compared to the control rats. Significant amelioration of changes in the heart structure together with restoration of the ele-
vated levels of Hcy and CRP, leptin, cathepsin G, and apoA and B were found in the ginger extract-treated diabetic group com-
pared to the non-treated diabetic group. 
Conclusion: The findings indicated that ginger extract significantly reduces heart structural abnormalities in diabetic rats and 
that these effects might be associated with improvements in serum apo, leptin, cathepsin G, and Hcy levels and with the antioxi-
dant properties of ginger extract.
Keywords: Diabetes; Ginger; Heart; Leptin; Rats 
Corresponding author: Alireza Shirpoor 
 http://orcid.org/000-0002 3663-6823
Department of Physiology, Urmia University of Medical Sciences Faculty of 
Medicine, Urmia, Iran 
E-mail: ashirpoor@yahoo.com
Received: Aug. 2, 2015; Accepted: Oct. 12, 2015
INTRODUCTION
Cardiovascular complications resulting from diabetes are the 
main cause of death in diabetic patients; indeed, more than 
65% of deaths among diabetic patients are associated with heart 
failure and vascular abnormalities [1]. Histological changes in-
cluding apoptosis, fibrosis, hypertrophy, autonomic neuropa-
thy, alterations in Ca2+ transport, as well as intracellular Ca2+ 
homeostasis, which are induced in the heart by diabetes, have 
been documented in recent articles [2-4]. Compelling evidence 
indicates that diabetes causes heart abnormalities through oxi-
dative stress and inflammation. Certain markers of inflamma-
tion and oxidative stress such as C-reactive protein (CRP), in-
terleukin 6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), oxidized 
low density lipoprotein (LDL), and protein oxidation, as well as 
homocysteine (Hcy), have repeatedly been associated with dia-
betes-related cardiomyopathy in different settings [5]. Never-
theless, few studies have examined possible associations be-
tween other parts of the inflammatory process (such as cathep-
sin G and leptin) and heart structural changes (such as fibrosis 
Original Article
Pathophysiology
http://dx.doi.org/10.4093/dmj.2016.40.1.46
pISSN 2233-6079 · eISSN 2233-6087
 47
Ginger and diabetes-induced heart abnormality
Diabetes Metab J 2016;40:46-53
http://e-dmj.org
and heart muscle cell proliferation) under hyperglycemic con-
ditions and diabetes. Cathepsin G is best known as a neutrophil 
and mast cell-derived serine protease, and its role in the pro-
gression of heart failure has recently become more evident 
[6,7]. Recently, the adipocyte-derived leptin has attracted atten-
tion due to its ambiguous role in cardiovascular function. Many 
studies have demonstrated that elevated leptin levels are signifi-
cantly correlated with heart failure and myocardial infarction, 
probably through the increased production of proinflammato-
ry cytokines and oxidative stress [8,9]. Other studies have 
found that low leptin levels (as occur in genetic models of 
leptin deficiency) increase the incidence of hypertension, ath-
erosclerosis, and myocardial infarction [10,11]. Accordingly, 
the relationship between leptin levels and the incidence of car-
diovascular system dysfunction appears biphasic and complex. 
Currently, daily insulin administration is the main intervention 
strategy for decreasing mortality in diabetic patients. Insulin 
therapy reduces hyperglycemia and glycosylated hemoglobin, 
and delays some diabetes-related morbidity. However, even 
with insulin therapy, some secondary complications associated 
with diabetes including heart disease, neuropathy, and hyper-
tension remain overwhelming conditions in diabetic patients 
[12]. In addition, the lipogenic and cholesterologenic actions of 
insulin therapy on the one hand and the increased risk of hypo-
glycemia on the other lead to devastating and fatal results in 
patients under long-term insulin treatment [13]. Furthermore, 
the effect of insulin therapy on serum leptin is biphasic and 
complex. It has been reported that acute insulin treatment in-
creases the serum level of leptin in rats and humans [14]. Con-
tradictorily, it has also been reported that acute insulin expo-
sure does not regulate leptin levels in human subjects [15,16]. 
For these reasons, improved alternative anti-diabetic approach-
es are urgently needed. In addition, naturally derived anti-oxi-
dants appear more favorable for reducing diabetes-induced 
side effects in diabetic patients. Among plants containing natu-
ral anti-oxidants, ginger exhibits unique antioxidant, and anti-
inflammatory properties [17].
 The aim of the present study was to examine the protective 
effect of ginger on heart structural changes induced by diabe-
tes in which cathepsin G and leptin play a central role. The 
study also examined whether treatment with ginger can re-
store altered oxidative and inflammatory stress agents in the 
heart of STZ-induced diabetic rats.
METHODS
All procedures utilizing rats were performed according to the 
“Principles of Laboratory Animal Care’’ (NIH publication no. 
85–23, revised 1985) and were approved by the Urmia Univer-
sity of Medical Sciences Animal Care Committee. Twenty-four 
6-month-old male Wistar rats with initial body weights of ap-
proximately 220±20 g and normal blood glucose levels (145±5 
mg/dL) were included in this study. The rats were divided into 
three groups (eight animals in each): control (C), non-treated 
diabetic (NTD), and ginger extract-treated diabetic (GETD) 
groups. Diabetes was induced in 16 rats by a single intraperito-
neal injection of STZ (60 mg/kg), which was buffered in cold 
sodium citrate (pH 4.5). Forty-eight hours after the STZ injec-
tion, hyperglycemia was determined by measuring the tail vein 
blood glucose content using a glucose oxidase-based Biosystem 
kit (Biosystems, Barcelona, Spain). Rats with blood glucose of 
higher than 300 mg/dL were considered diabetic.
 In addition to their regular diet, GETD rats daily received 50 
mg/kg body weight of hydroalcoholic ginger extract solution in 
tap water (20% w/v) intragastrically by gavage. The control and 
NTD groups were treated with vehicle only (tap water).
 For ginger extraction, dried ginger rhizome (origin: China) 
was purchased from a local market and powdered in an elec-
tric grinder. A hydroalcoholic extract was prepared by mixing 
3 kg of powder with 6 L of 70% ethanol in a suitable container 
and incubating at room temperature for 72 hours. The extract 
was then filtered through filter paper and concentrated using a 
rotary evaporator. The obtained extract was stored in a refrig-
erator until use. 
 The rats were anesthetized using 10% chloral hydrate (0.5 
mL/kg body weight, IP) after 6 weeks of treatment, and the 
depth of anesthesia was assessed by pinching a hind paw. After 
weighing the rats, the thoracic cavity was opened, and blood 
samples were collected directly from the hearts; within 30 min-
utes of collection, the samples were mixed with ethylenediami-
netetraacetic acid as an anticoagulant and then centrifuged at 
4,000 ×g for 20 minutes. The plasma samples were stored at 
–80°C without repeated freeze-thaw cycles. Next, the heart was 
dissected. The excised heart was freed from adventitial tissues, 
fat, and blood clots, and then weighed. Then, the entire left ven-
tricular wall (without septum) was excised from the heart, 
weighed, and divided into two parts. For histopathological in-
vestigation, a part of the ventricle was fixed in buffered formalin 
and embedded in paraffin after standard dehydration methods.
 48
Ilkhanizadeh B, et al.
Diabetes Metab J 2016;40:46-53
http://e-dmj.org
 For biochemical analysis, other parts of the ventricle were 
washed with ice-cold physiological saline and then dried on 
filter papers. An ice-cold extraction buffer (10% wt/vol) con-
taining 50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) was added, and the 
sample was subsequently homogenized using Ultra Turrax 
(T10B; IKA, Staufen, Germany). The homogenates were then 
centrifuged at 10,000 ×g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The superna-
tants were collected and stored at –80°C until analyzed.
Biochemical assay
The concentration of cathepsin G in the rat heart was measured 
using a solid phase enzyme immunoassay method (Cathepsin 
G Kit; AESKULISA, Dresden, Germany) following the manu-
facturer’s instructions. Hcy levels were measured using an Axis 
Shield kit (Axis Shield, Dundee, UK) following the manufac-
turer’s recommended protocol.
 The level of CRP in the serum was assessed using nephelo-
metric methods and MININEPHTM following the manufac-
turer’s instructions (ZK044.L.R; The Binding Site Ltd., Birming-
ham, UK). Apolipoprotein (apo) A and B amounts were mea-
sured using the nephelometric method and the Mono Binding 
kit (Binding Site, Birmingham, UK) according to the manufac-
turer’s guidelines. The amount of leptin was measured using a 
commercial enzyme immunoassay kit (Labor Diagnostika 
Nord GmbH, Nordhorn, Germany).
Histopathological examination
Histological sections (5-μm thick) from paraffin-embedded 
heart tissues were subjected to histopathological staining. Har-
ris’ H&E staining protocols were applied to evaluate the gen-
eral structure of the heart and morphological changes.
 To assess the heart and coronary vessel proliferation rates, a 
proliferation cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) anti-body staining 
protocol was used in accordance with the included instruc-
tions. Briefly, tissue sections (4-µm thick) from paraffin-em-
bedded heart tissues were stained by Monoclonal anti-PCNA 
antibody (Dako Denmark A/S, Glostrup, Denmark) after tis-
sue processing including deparaffinization, rehydration by 
gradual ethanol passage, and final washing in Tris buffer.
 Optimal results were achieved using the EnVisio visualiza-
tion system (Dako Denmark A/S). Hematoxylin was used as a 
counterstain. Appropriate negative controls were included in 
the assessment. Moreover, all slides were independently in-
spected by two expert pathologists. PCNA-positive indices 
were considered indicators of muscle cell proliferation.
 To assess the percentage of PCNA-positive indices, all cells 
contained in each cross section (between 3 and 5 cross sec-
tions) of the heart and the coronary artery were scored. The 
samples were scored based on the PCNA-positive indices as 
follows: normal, PCNA-positive indices present in less than 
5% of muscle cells; mild, PCNA-positive indices present in less 
than 25% of muscle cells; mild to moderate, PCNA-positive 
indices present in 25% to 50% of muscle cells; moderate to se-
vere, PCNA-positive indices present in 50% to 75% of muscle 
cells; and severe, PCNA-positive indices present in 75% to 
100% of muscle cells. To evaluate the heart and coronary ves-
sel fibrosis, 4-µm heart tissue sections were stained with Mas-
son Trichrome, following the manufacturer’s instructions 
(Asia Pajohesh, Amol, Iran). The severity of tissue fibrosis was 
assessed using the semi-quantitative method described by 
Ashcroft et al. [18]. A score ranging from 0 (normal heart) to 8 
(total fibrosis) was allocated. Heart fibrosis was scored as fol-
lows: grade 0, normal heart; grade 1, minimal fibrosis thicken-
ing of the myocardial or coronary vessel walls; grades 2 and 3, 
moderate thickening of the myocardial or coronary vessels 
walls without obvious damage to the heart tissue structure; 
grades 4 and 5, increased fibrosis with definite damage to the 
heart architecture and the formation of fibrosis bands or small 
fibrosis masses; grades 6 and 7, severe structure distortion and 
large fibrosis areas; and grade 8, total fibrotic obliteration. 
Statistical analysis
The normal distribution of data within each group was veri-
fied using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Significant differ-
ences between the groups were tested by performing a one-
way analysis of variance using SPSS version 16 (SPSS Inc., 
Chicago, IL, USA), followed by Tukey post hoc test. For each 
test, the data are expressed as the mean±standard deviation, 
and P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS 
Plasma apoB levels were significantly higher in the NTD group 
than in the control group (P=0.001). No significant difference 
in plasma apoB level was found between the control and GETD 
groups (P=0.89). The plasma apoA level was significantly lower 
in the NTD group than that in the control group (P=0.0001). 
Ginger extract administration significantly increased the apoA 
level compared with the NTD group (P=0.012), but the plasma 
apoA level in this group remained significantly lower than that 
 49
Ginger and diabetes-induced heart abnormality
Diabetes Metab J 2016;40:46-53
http://e-dmj.org
in the control group (P=0.001). The apoB/apoA ratio was sig-
nificantly higher in the NTD group than in the control group 
(P=0.001). No significant differences in the apoB/apoA ratio 
were found between the GETD group and the control group 
(Table 1). 
 The amounts of cathepsin G and Hcy in heart tissue were 
significantly higher in the NTD group than in the control 
group (P=0.0001) but were significantly lower in the GETD 
group than in the NTD group (P=0.001).
 The plasma CRP level was significantly higher in NTD rats 
than in control rats (P=0.001). Ginger extract treatment signif-
icantly decreased plasma levels of CRP compared to the NTD 
group (P=0.001), but levels remained significantly higher than 
those in the control group (P=0.001). The plasma leptin level 
in NTD group was significantly lower than that in the control 
group (P=0.001). Ginger extract treatment significantly in-
creased the plasma level of leptin compared to that in the NTD 
group (P=0.001), but leptin levels remained significantly lower 
than those measured in the control group (P=0.05) (Table 1).
 There were no significant differences in body weight among 
the groups at the study outset. Body weight and body weight 
gain were significantly lower in the NTD group compared to 
the control group at the end of the study (P=0.001). Ginger ex-
tract treatment enhanced body weight and body weight gain 
non-significantly compared to the NTD group (P=0.26). Body 
weight and body weight gain were significantly lower in the 
GEDP group than in the control group (P=0.05) (Table 1).
 The ratio of heart myocytes proliferated cells (PCNA posi-
tive indices) in the heart tissue of the control, NTD, and GETD 
groups were 4%±1%, 47%±3%, and 14%±4%, respectively. 
The PCNA-positive indices (as indicators of proliferation) were 
significantly higher in NTD hearts than in control hearts 
(P=0.002). Treatment with ginger extract significantly reduced 
the PCNA-positive indices compared to those found in the 
NTD group, but the indices in the GETD group remained sig-
nificantly higher than those in the control group (P=0.001) 
(Fig. 1). PCNA-positive indices in the coronary vessel smooth 
muscle cells of NTD rats (51%±2%) were significantly higher 
than those in cells of the control rats (3%±1%; P=0.001). Gin-
ger extract consumption with ethanol significantly decreased 
PCNA-positive indices (4%±1%) compared to those found in 
the NTD group (P=0.05). PCNA-positive indices did not sig-
nificantly differ between the GETD and control groups (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2 shows the microscopic fibrosis scores found in the 
heart tissue of rats of the different groups. The lesion score of 
the heart tissues of rats in the control group was 0 and that of 
rats in the NTD group was 2.5 (moderate thickening without 
obvious damage to the heart architecture); the latter was sig-
nificantly higher than that of the control group (P=0.022). No 
significant differences were found between the GETD group 
and the control group (Fig. 2).
DISCUSSION 
The results of the current study showed that diabetes induced 
significant increases in cathepsin G, CRP, Hcy, and apoB. 
Moreover, the amounts of leptin and apoA were decreased. 
Structural changes including moderate fibrosis and mild to 
moderate heart and coronary muscle cell proliferation were 
also present in the hearts of diabetic rats when compared to the 
hearts of control group rats. All of these favor cardiovascular 
abnormalities. Significant amelioration or restoration of the 
heart tissue alterations and biochemical changes to those seen 
in the controls was found in the ginger extract-treated rats. 
 In the current study, the apoA and apoB levels in the NTD 
group were significantly different from those in the control 
group; apoB levels and the apoB/apoA ratios were significantly 
higher and apoA levels were significantly lower in the NTD 
group than those in the control group.
 ApoA and apoB are included in the spectrum of lipopro-
teins such as those involved in LDL, very LDL, lipoprotein, 
and high density lipoprotein and determine the metabolic fate 
of these lipoproteins [19]. In general, apoB carries lipids from 
the liver and gut to tissues that use lipids, whereas apoA con-
Table 1. Effect of ginger extract on diabetes-induced changes 
in plasma apolipoproteins, leptin, cathepsin G, CRP, and Hcy
Variable
Control
Diabetes
Diabetes-ginger
ApoA, g/L
141±2.7
106±3.7a
126±3.9a,b
ApoB, g/L
110±4.5
170±5.2a
112±2.3b
ApoB/ApoA
0.77±0.03
1.61±0.04a
0.85±0.014b
Leptin, ng/mL
4.5±0.15
2.8±0.1a
3.18±0.9a,b
Cathepsin G, U/mL
4.37±1
8.9±0.37a
5.1±0.24b
CRP, mg/L
2.29±0.1
7.8±0.39a
4.8±0.29a,b
Hcy, µmol/L
3.15±0.23
4.57±0.12a
2.78±0.19b
Values are presented as mean±standard error for 8 rats per group.
CRP, C-reactive protein; Hcy, homocysteine; ApoA, apolipoprotein 
A; ApoB, apolipoprotein B.
aDenotes significant difference (P<0.05) compared to the control, 
bDenotes significant difference (P<0.05) compared to the diabetic 
group.
 50
Ilkhanizadeh B, et al.
Diabetes Metab J 2016;40:46-53
http://e-dmj.org
tains particles that mediate reverse lipid transport and carries 
excess lipids from peripheral tissues to the liver [19]. The con-
centrations of apoA and apoB are measured to assess cardio-
vascular disease because these concentrations reflect the parti-
cle numbers of corresponding lipoprotein classes and thus the 
opposite aspects cardiovascular risks [20]. A high apoB/apoA 
ratio designates a high number of atherogenic lipoprotein par-
ticles, which are likely to be deposited in the arterial wall [20]. 
Here, dramatic increases in apoB levels and apoB/apoA ratios 
were observed, together with coronary and heart muscle cell 
proliferation in the NTD group; these changes might favor the 
arterial deposition of lipids and consequent complications in-
cluding proliferation. Another important finding of this study 
was the significantly lower leptin levels in the NTD group when 
compared to the levels in the control group.
 Recently, the role of the adipocyte-derived molecule leptin 
in maintaining normal energy homeostasis has been well doc-
umented [21]. Leptin adjusts the energy balance through cen-
tral and peripheral pathways. Energy balance is centrally regu-
lated by leptin through the inhibition of neuropeptide Y, which 
is the strongest stimulator of the hunger center. In addition, 
leptin stimulates the secretion of melanocyte-stimulating hor-
mone, which also inhibits the appetite [22]. Peripherally, leptin 
adjusts the energy balance by modulating lipolysis and glucose 
tolerance by increasing the expression of enzymes that influ-
ence gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis [22,23]. According to 
previous studies, leptin has specific effects on the heart due to 
the expression of several isoforms of leptin receptors in the 
myocardium and in isolated cardiac myocytes [24]. A graph 
plotting the amount of leptin against cardiovascular function 
forms a U-shaped curve. In individuals with normoglycaemia 
and leptin sensitivity, in addition to its role in energy metabo-
lism and homeostasis in myocytes, leptin reduces blood pres-
sure by affecting mechanisms such as vasodilation through the 
release of nitric oxide from the endothelium [25,26]. Mean-
while, accumulating evidence obtained in animal and human 
studies indicates a positive correlation between hyperlepti-
nemia and structural and functional abnormalities of the heart 
(such as metabolic abnormalities, stroke, fibrosis, hypertrophy, 
hypertension, and heart failure) [27,28].
 Indeed, abnormal energy homeostasis events, such as in-
creased fatty acid utilization and decreased glucose utilization 
together with enhanced collagen deposition and matrix metal-
loproteinase activities have also been seen in rodent models that 
lack of leptin its receptors, thus resulting in diabetes or obesity 
[29,30]. In this study, STZ-diabetic rats presented reduced levels 
of plasma leptin, as seen in previous studies [30,31]. In addition, 
in the present study, leptin-deficient diabetic rats exhibited 
Fig. 1. Immunohistochemical staining of heart and coronary tissue for proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) indicate the pro-
liferation of heart muscle (A-C) and coronary smooth muscle cells (D-F) in the diabetic group compared to the control group. 
Ginger extract treatment along diabetes reduced cell proliferation in both tissues (×400). PCNA positive indices (arrows).
A
B
C
D
E
F
Control
Diabetes
Diabetes+ginger
Control
Diabetes
Diabetes+ginger
Fig. 2. (A-C) Masson trichrome staining showing fibrosis bonds in the heart tissue of diabetic rats compared to the control group. 
No fibrosis bond or accumulation was observed in the heart tissue of the ginger-extract treated group (×400). Fibrosis bond (arrow).
A
B
C
Control
Diabetes
Diabetes+ginger
 51
Ginger and diabetes-induced heart abnormality
Diabetes Metab J 2016;40:46-53
http://e-dmj.org
moderate fibrosis and muscle cell proliferation in heart tissue. 
Whether these structural changes were the results of leptin defi-
ciency remains unclear. Previous studies indicated fibrosis of 
the heart tissue in obese animals with hyperleptinemia and in 
diabetic animals with leptin deficiency [30,32]. In this study, 
moderate fibrosis and mild to moderate cell proliferation were 
found in the heart and coronary vessels of STZ-diabetic rats. 
 Although fibrosis and vascular cell proliferation have been 
identified to be of potential significance for the pathogenesis 
and development of heart failure and atherosclerosis [33], the 
underlying mechanisms of heart cell proliferation and fibrosis 
have not been substantially investigated in diabetic hearts. 
Strong evidence exists showing that inflammatory biomarkers 
are essential components of fibrosis and muscle cell prolifera-
tion in heart tissue [34,35].
 Our recent studies indicated that plasma serine proteases, 
proinflammatory cytokines, and cell adhesion molecules are 
elevated in STZ-diabetic rats [36,37]. Due to the pivotal role of 
cathepsin G in tissue fibrosis, we examined the relationship 
between cathepsin G changes and heart cell proliferation and 
fibrosis in diabetic rats. Interestingly, we found that cathepsin 
G levels were increased with heart tissue fibrosis and prolifera-
tion in STZ-diabetic rats. To our knowledge, no other study 
has yet investigated the association between heart muscle cell 
proliferation, fibrosis, and cathepsin G as induced by diabetes 
in rats.
 A positive association was recently reported between ca-
thepsin G elevation and heart tissue fibrosis. Cathepsin G in-
duces myocyte hypertrophy and necrosis, and increases fibro-
sis by converting angiotension I to angiotension II [7]. Angio-
tension II, as a pro-fibrotic and pro-inflammatory mediator, 
activates the transforming growth factor β pathway, resulting 
in myocyte necrosis, hypertrophy, and fibrosis [6,7].
 Secondly, we examined the effect of ginger extract on rescu-
ing the heart structural alteration, leptin, and inflammatory re-
sponses that are induced by diabetes in heart tissue. Previous 
work by us and others has shown that ginger administration 
has helpful features and protects against diabetes-induced ab-
normalities [38,39]. The protective effect of ginger results from 
its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. Due to the 
antioxidants contained in ginger, ginger supplementation in-
creases the total antioxidant capacity and reduces lipid and 
protein oxidation in diabetes and other oxidative stress condi-
tions [38,40]. Accordingly, if the diabetes milieu induces func-
tional and structural abnormalities through oxidative stress, as 
confirmed by previous studies, the effect of ginger supplemen-
tation on rescuing these abnormalities will be due to its antioxi-
dant properties. It has also been shown that ginger has anti-in-
flammatory effects and suppresses the expression of pro-in-
flammatory cytokines such as TNF-α and inhibits of the ara-
chidonic acid cascade [41,42]. Mechanistically, the ginger com-
pounds gingerol and shogaol inhibit prostaglandin and leukot-
riene biosynthesis through the suppression of 5-lipooxygenase 
synthetase [42]. Although various studies have shown the ben-
eficial effects of ginger supplementation on inflammatory cyto-
kines such as TNF-α, IL-6, protaglandins, and leukotrienes, 
this is the first in vivo study to demonstrate the protective effect 
of ginger extract against cathepsin G, together with heart tissue 
fibrosis and muscle cell proliferation, in diabetic hearts. Anoth-
er interesting result was the elevation of leptin levels in the 
GETD group compared to the diabetic group. As mentioned 
above, at normal plasma levels, leptin plays a pivotal role not 
only in energy homeostasis but also in optimal cardiac func-
tion. Recent studies have indicated that leptin therapy alone re-
verses hyperglycemia and deaths caused by insulin signaling 
deficiencies [43], although the underlying mechanism of this 
golden effect of leptin is unknown. To our knowledge, the pres-
ent study is the first to demonstrate that ginger supplementa-
tion improves leptin levels in diabetics and might be used in the 
management and treatment of diabetes-induced abnormities.
 In conclusion, several notable findings were observed in this 
study. The rats with STZ-induced diabetes generated cathepsin 
G at higher levels and exhibited higher levels of Hcy, CRP
, and 
apoB, as well as lower levels of apoA and leptin. In addition, we 
observed evidence of heart structure alterations, such as mod-
erate fibrosis and mild to moderate heart and coronary muscle 
cell proliferation in the diabetic rats (compared to the control 
rats). Furthermore, the administration of ginger extract allevi-
ated these structural changes and restored the levels of inflam-
matory cytokines, apoA and apoB, Hcy, and leptin in the ex-
perimental group (compared to the control group). These re-
storative effects of ginger extract support the hypothesis that di-
abetes-related alterations in the heart structure are caused by 
oxidative stress together with inflammatory responses and 
leptin deficiency. Further research is required to elucidate the 
details of the mechanisms by which ginger extract exerts its res-
cue effects against diabetes-related complications; such infor-
mation would enable the development of feasible alternatives to 
insulin therapy for the treatment of diabetes complications.
 52
Ilkhanizadeh B, et al.
Diabetes Metab J 2016;40:46-53
http://e-dmj.org
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 
No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was re-
ported.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research was supported by a grant from the Office of the 
Vice Chancellor for Research and Technology, Urmia Univer-
sity of Medical Sciences, Urmia, Iran.
REFERENCES
1. Poornima IG, Parikh P
, Shannon RP
. Diabetic cardiomyopathy: 
the search for a unifying hypothesis. Circ Res 2006;98:596-605.
2. Shirpoor A, Salami S, Khadem-Ansari MH, Ilkhanizadeh B, 
Pakdel FG, Khademvatani K. Cardioprotective effect of vita-
min E: rescues of diabetes-induced cardiac malfunction, oxi-
dative stress, and apoptosis in rat. J Diabetes Complications 
2009;23:310-6.
3. Zhao J, Randive R, Stewart JA. Molecular mechanisms of AGE/
RAGE-mediated fibrosis in the diabetic heart. World J Diabetes 
2014;5:860-7.
4. Okatan EN, Tuncay E, Turan B. Cardioprotective effect of sele-
nium via modulation of cardiac ryanodine receptor calcium 
release channels in diabetic rat cardiomyocytes through thio-
redoxin system. J Nutr Biochem 2013;24:2110-8.
5. Westermann D, Rutschow S, Jager S, Linderer A, Anker S, Riad 
A, Unger T, Schultheiss HP
, Pauschinger M, Tschope C. Contri-
butions of inflammation and cardiac matrix metalloproteinase 
activity to cardiac failure in diabetic cardiomyopathy: the role 
of angiotensin type 1 receptor antagonism. Diabetes 2007;56: 
641-6.
6. Jahanyar J, Youker KA, Loebe M, Assad-Kottner C, Koerner 
MM, Torre-Amione G, Noon GP
. Mast cell-derived cathepsin 
g: a possible role in the adverse remodeling of the failing hu-
man heart. J Surg Res 2007;140:199-203.
7. Reilly CF, Tewksbury DA, Schechter NM, Travis J. Rapid con-
version of angiotensin I to angiotensin II by neutrophil and 
mast cell proteinases. J Biol Chem 1982;257:8619-22.
8. Soderberg S, Stegmayr B, Ahlbeck-Glader C, Slunga-Birgan-
der L, Ahren B, Olsson T. High leptin levels are associated with 
stroke. Cerebrovasc Dis 2003;15:63-9.
9. Wannamethee SG, Shaper AG, Whincup PH, Lennon L, Sattar 
N. Obesity and risk of incident heart failure in older men with 
and without pre-existing coronary heart disease: does leptin 
have a role? J Am Coll Cardiol 2011;58:1870-7.
10. Ku IA, Farzaneh-Far R, Vittinghoff E, Zhang MH, Na B, 
Whooley MA. Association of low leptin with cardiovascular 
events and mortality in patients with stable coronary artery dis-
ease: the Heart and Soul Study. Atherosclerosis 2011;217:503-8.
11. Hou N, Luo JD. Leptin and cardiovascular diseases. Clin Exp 
Pharmacol Physiol 2011;38:905-13.
12. Bluestone JA, Herold K, Eisenbarth G. Genetics, pathogenesis 
and clinical interventions in type 1 diabetes. Nature 2010;464: 
1293-300.
13. Liu HY, Cao SY, Hong T, Han J, Liu Z, Cao W
. Insulin is a stron-
ger inducer of insulin resistance than hyperglycemia in mice 
with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM). J Biol Chem 2009;284: 
27090-100.
14. Utriainen T, Malmstrom R, Makimattila S, Yki-Jarvinen H. 
Supraphysiological hyperinsulinemia increases plasma leptin 
concentrations after 4 h in normal subjects. Diabetes 1996;45: 
1364-6.
15. Kolaczynski JW
, Nyce MR, Considine RV
, Boden G, Nolan JJ, 
Henry R, Mudaliar SR, Olefsky J, Caro JF. Acute and chronic 
effects of insulin on leptin production in humans: studies in 
vivo and in vitro. Diabetes 1996;45:699-701.
16. Boden G, Chen X, Kolaczynski JW
, Polansky M. Effects of pro-
longed hyperinsulinemia on serum leptin in normal human 
subjects. J Clin Invest 1997;100:1107-13.
17. Nile SH, Park SW
. Chromatographic analysis, antioxidant, an-
ti-inflammatory, and xanthine oxidase inhibitory activities of 
ginger extracts and its reference compounds. Ind Crops Prod 
2015;70:238-44.
18. Ashcroft T, Simpson JM, Timbrell V
. Simple method of esti-
mating severity of pulmonary fibrosis on a numerical scale. J 
Clin Pathol 1988;41:467-70.
19. Marcovina S, Packard CJ. Measurement and meaning of apoli-
poprotein AI and apolipoprotein B plasma levels. J Intern Med 
2006;259:437-46.
20. Walldius G, Jungner I. The apoB/apoA-I ratio: a strong, new 
risk factor for cardiovascular disease and a target for lipid-low-
ering therapy: a review of the evidence. J Intern Med 2006;259: 
493-519.
21. Ahima RS, Osei SY. Leptin signaling. Physiol Behav 2004;81: 
223-41.
22. Kalra SP
. Central leptin insufficiency syndrome: an interactive 
etiology for obesity, metabolic and neural diseases and for de-
signing new therapeutic interventions. Peptides 2008;29:127-38.
 53
Ginger and diabetes-induced heart abnormality
Diabetes Metab J 2016;40:46-53
http://e-dmj.org
23. Gutierrez-Juarez R, Obici S, Rossetti L. Melanocortin-inde-
pendent effects of leptin on hepatic glucose fluxes. J Biol Chem 
2004;279:49704-15.
24. Rajapurohitam V, Gan XT, Kirshenbaum LA, Karmazyn M. 
The obesity-associated peptide leptin induces hypertrophy in 
neonatal rat ventricular myocytes. Circ Res 2003;93:277-9.
25. Lembo G, Vecchione C, Fratta L, Marino G, Trimarco V
, d’
Amati 
G, Trimarco B. Leptin induces direct vasodilation through dis-
tinct endothelial mechanisms. Diabetes 2000;49:293-7.
26. Vecchione C, Maffei A, Colella S, Aretini A, Poulet R, Frati G, 
Gentile MT, Fratta L, Trimarco V, Trimarco B, Lembo G. 
Leptin effect on endothelial nitric oxide is mediated through 
Akt-endothelial nitric oxide synthase phosphorylation path-
way. Diabetes 2002;51:168-73.
27. Sweeney G. Cardiovascular effects of leptin. Nat Rev Cardiol 
2010;7:22-9.
28. Guzman-Ruiz R, Somoza B, Gil-Ortega M, Merino B, Cano V
, 
Attane C, Castan-Laurell I, Valet P, Fernandez-Alfonso MS, 
Ruiz-Gayo M. Sensitivity of cardiac carnitine palmitoyltrans-
ferase to malonyl-CoA is regulated by leptin: similarities with 
a model of endogenous hyperleptinemia. Endocrinology 2010; 
151:1010-8.
29. Abel ED, Litwin SE, Sweeney G. Cardiac remodeling in obesi-
ty. Physiol Rev 2008;88:389-419.
30. McGaffin KR, Witham WG, Yester KA, Romano LC, O’Doherty 
RM, McTiernan CF, O’Donnell CP
. Cardiac-specific leptin re-
ceptor deletion exacerbates ischaemic heart failure in mice. 
Cardiovasc Res 2011;89:60-71.
31. Schram K, Sweeney G. Implications of myocardial matrix re-
modeling by adipokines in obesity-related heart failure. Trends 
Cardiovasc Med 2008;18:199-205.
32. Zibadi S, Cordova F, Slack EH, Watson RR, Larson DF. Leptin’s 
regulation of obesity-induced cardiac extracellular matrix re-
modeling. Cardiovasc Toxicol 2011;11:325-33.
33. Shirpoor A, Norouzi L, Khadem Ansari MH, Ilkhanizadeh B, 
Gharaaghaji R. Vasoprotective effect of vitamin E: rescue of 
ethanol-induced atherosclerosis and inflammatory stress in rat 
vascular wall. Int Immunopharmacol 2013;16:498-504.
34. Passino C, Barison A, Vergaro G, Gabutti A, Borrelli C, Emdin 
M, Clerico A. Markers of fibrosis, inflammation, and remodel-
ing pathways in heart failure. Clin Chim Acta 2015;443:29-38.
35. Shirpoor A, Nemati S, Ansari MH, Ilkhanizadeh B. The protec-
tive effect of vitamin E against prenatal and early postnatal eth-
anol treatment-induced heart abnormality in rats: a 3-month 
follow-up study. Int Immunopharmacol 2015;26:72-9.
36. Shirpoor A, Khadem Ansari MH, Heshmatian B, Ilkhanizadeh 
B, Noruzi L, Abdollahzadeh N, Saboory E. Decreased blood 
pressure with a corresponding decrease in adhesive molecules 
in diabetic rats caused by vitamin E administration. J Diabetes 
2012;4:362-8.
37. Alireza S, Leila N, Siamak S, Mohammad-Hasan KA, Behrouz 
I. Effects of vitamin E on pathological changes induced by dia-
betes in rat lungs. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 2013;185:593-9.
38. Taghizadeh Afshari A, Shirpoor A, Farshid A, Saadatian R, 
Rasmi Y, Saboory E, Ilkhanizadeh B, Allameh A. The effect of 
ginger on diabetic nephropathy, plasma antioxidant capacity 
and lipid peroxidation in rats. Food Chem 2007;101:148-53.
39. Shanmugam KR, Mallikarjuna K, Nishanth K, Kuo CH, Sathy-
avelu Reddy K. Protective effect of dietary ginger on antioxi-
dant enzymes and oxidative damage in experimental diabetic 
rat tissues. Food Chem 2011;124:1436-42.
40. Ramudu SK, Korivi M, Kesireddy N, Chen CY, Kuo CH, Kes-
ireddy SR. Ginger feeding protects against renal oxidative dam-
age caused by alcohol consumption in rats. J Ren Nutr 2011;21: 
263-70.
41. Isa Y, Miyakawa Y, Yanagisawa M, Goto T, Kang MS, Kawada 
T, Morimitsu Y, Kubota K, Tsuda T. 6-Shogaol and 6-gingerol, 
the pungent of ginger, inhibit TNF-alpha mediated downregu-
lation of adiponectin expression via different mechanisms in 
3T3-L1 adipocytes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2008;373: 
429-34.
42. Srivastava KC, Mustafa T. Ginger (Zingiber officinale) in rheu-
matism and musculoskeletal disorders. Med Hypotheses 1992; 
39:342-8.
43. German JP
, Wisse BE, Thaler JP
, Oh IS, Sarruf DA, Ogimoto K, 
Kaiyala KJ, Fischer JD, Matsen ME, Taborsky GJ Jr, Schwartz 
MW, Morton GJ. Leptin deficiency causes insulin resistance 
induced by uncontrolled diabetes. Diabetes 2010;59:1626-34.
