 CURRENT OPINION
Fuel for the Work Required: A Theoretical Framework
for Carbohydrate Periodization and the Glycogen Threshold
Hypothesis
Samuel G. Impey1 • Mark A. Hearris1 • Kelly M. Hammond1 • Jonathan D. Bartlett2 •
Julien Louis1 • Graeme L. Close1 • James P. Morton1
Published online: 16 February 2018
� The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Abstract Deliberately training with reduced carbohydrate
(CHO) availability to enhance endurance-training-induced
metabolic adaptations of skeletal muscle (i.e. the ‘train low,
compete high’ paradigm) is a hot topic within sport nutrition.
Train-low studies involve periodically training (e.g., 30–50%
of training sessions) with reduced CHO availability, where
train-low models include twice per day training, fasted
training, post-exercise CHO restriction and ‘sleep low, train
low’. When compared with high CHO availability, data
suggest that augmented cell signalling (73% of 11 studies),
gene expression (75% of 12 studies) and training-induced
increases in oxidative enzyme activity/protein content (78%
of 9 studies) associated with ‘train low’ are especially
apparent when training sessions are commenced within a
specific range of muscle glycogen concentrations. Nonethe-
less, such muscle adaptations do not always translate to
improved exercise performance (e.g. 37 and 63% of 11
studies show improvements or no change, respectively).
Herein, we present our rationale for the glycogen threshold
hypothesis, a window of muscle glycogen concentrations that
simultaneously permits completion of required training
workloads and activation of the molecular machinery regu-
lating training adaptations. We also present the ‘fuel for the
work required’ paradigm (representative of an amalgamation
of train-low models) whereby CHO availability is adjusted in
accordance with the demands of the upcoming training ses-
sion(s). In order to strategically implement train-low ses-
sions, our challenge now is to quantify the glycogen cost of
habitual training sessions (so as to inform the attainment of
any potential threshold) and ensure absolute training inten-
sity is not compromised, while also creating a metabolic
milieu conducive to facilitating the endurance phenotype.
Key Points
Periodically completing endurance training sessions
(e.g. 30–50% of training sessions) with reduced
carbohydrate (CHO) availability modulates the
activation of acute cell signalling pathways (73% of
11 studies), promotes training-induced oxidative
adaptations of skeletal muscle (78% of 9 studies)
and, in some instances, improves exercise
performance (although only 37% of 11 studies
demonstrated performance improvements).
We propose the presence of a muscle glycogen
threshold whereby exceeding a critical absolute level
of glycogen depletion during training is especially
potent in modulating the activation of acute and
chronic skeletal muscle adaptations associated with
‘train low’.
Future research should attempt to quantify the
glycogen and CHO cost of endurance athletes’
typical training sessions so as to increase our
understanding of the exercise conditions that may
elicit the proposed glycogen threshold and thereby
inform practical application of ‘fuel for the work
required’ paradigm.
& James P. Morton
J.P.Morton@ljmu.ac.uk
1
Research Institute for Sport and Exercise Sciences, Liverpool
John Moores University, Tom Reilly Building, Byrom St
Campus, Liverpool L3 3AF, UK
2
Institute of Sport, Exercise and Active Living (ISEAL),
Victoria University, Footscray Park, Ballarat Road,
Melbourne, VIC 8001, Australia
123
Sports Med (2018) 48:1031–1048
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-018-0867-7
 1 Introduction
The principle of ensuring sufficient carbohydrate (CHO)
availability before, during and after training and competi-
tion is widely recognized as the fundamental nutritional
priority for athletic populations. Indeed, the foundation of
current sport nutrition guidelines [1] were developed by
Scandinavian researchers in the late 1960s with the intro-
duction of the muscle biopsy technique [2–5] and the
classical ‘super-compensation’ model of CHO loading. In
another landmark study in 1981, Sherman and colleagues
[6] observed similar magnitudes of glycogen super-com-
pensation with a less severe protocol (i.e., without the
exhaustive exercise and CHO restriction phase), whereby
several days of a combined exercise taper and moderate
CHO intake (e.g. 5 g kg-1 body mass) is followed by
3 days of higher CHO intake (8 g kg-1 body mass). While
these data have practical application from a precompetition
perspective, one of the most overlooked components of this
study is that no differences in half-marathon running per-
formance (as completed on an outdoor 220 m running
track) were observed between trials, despite differing pre-
exercise muscle glycogen status. The authors allude to this
finding when discussing their data:
‘‘The performance times indicate that carbohydrate
loading was of no benefit to performance during the
20.9 km run. In fact, performance times were actually
slower in the trials with higher levels of muscle
glycogen. This suggests that anything above a mini-
mal level of muscle glycogen is unnecessary for
performance of a given intensity and duration. More
importantly, the practical question may not be how
much can I super-compensate but rather, does my diet
contain enough carbohydrate to maintain adequate
stores of muscle glycogen on a day-to-day basis for
training and performance runs?’’ (p. 117).
In addition to competitive performance, the same lead
author subsequently challenged the concept that insufficient
daily CHO intake on consecutive training days reduces mus-
cle glycogen availability to a level that impairs training
capacity [7, 8]. While such sentiments are undoubtedly
dependent on the prescribed training workloads, almost
30 years later the above interpretation and insight appears
more relevant than ever. Indeed, with the introduction of
molecular biology techniques into the sport and exercise sci-
ences, we are now in the era of ‘nutrient-gene interactions’
whereby the nutritional modulation of endurance training
adaptation is a contemporary area of investigation. Since the
seminal work of Hansen et al. [9] suggested that some adap-
tations to physical activity may require a ‘cycling’ of muscle
glycogen stores, the role of glycogen availability as a training
regulator has gained increased popularity among athletic cir-
cles [10]. This body of work has largely focused on the effi-
cacy of the periodic ‘train low (smart), compete high’
paradigm whereby selected training sessions are deliberately
completed with reduced CHO availability so as to activate
molecular pathways that regulate skeletal muscle adaptation
(see Fig. 1). In contrast, it is recommended that both key
training sessions and competition always be undertaken with
high CHO availability so as to promote performance and
recovery [11, 12]. Nonetheless, the optimal approach for
which to practically apply periods of ‘train low’ (now com-
monly referred to as CHO periodization) into an overall ath-
letic training programme is not currently understood.
Accordingly, the aim of this article is to present a con-
temporary overview of CHO periodization strategies for
training from both a theoretical and practical perspective.
We begin by outlining the effects of various train-low
paradigms on modulating cell signalling pathways, training
adaptations and exercise performance. We then present our
rationale for the ‘glycogen threshold hypothesis’, a window
of absolute muscle glycogen concentration of which
training sessions could be commenced within so as to
provide a metabolic milieu that is conducive to modulating
cell signalling. We close by presenting a practical model of
CHO periodization according to the principle of ‘fuel for
the work required’. As opposed to chronic periods of CHO
restriction, this model suggests that CHO availability
should be manipulated day-to-day and meal-by-meal
according to the intensity, duration and specific training
goals. With this in mind, we define CHO availability as the
sum of the endogenous (i.e., muscle and liver glycogen)
and exogenous CHO (i.e. CHO consumed before and/or
during exercise) that is available to sustain the required
training intensity and duration. According to this definition,
it is possible to have insufficient CHO availability (even if
exercise is commenced with high pre-exercise muscle
glycogen stores) if an inadequate dose of CHO is con-
sumed during exercise to sustain the desired workload [13].
Alternatively, it is possible to commence exercise with
reduced muscle glycogen yet still be considered to have
sufficient CHO availability if the exogenous CHO con-
sumed during exercise permits the completion of the
required training intensity and duration [14].
2 Carbohydrate (CHO) Restriction Enhances Cell
Signalling and Gene Expression, and Modulates
Components of Training Adaptation
and Exercise Performance
Researchers have used a variety of acute and chronic train-
low interventions to investigate the efficacy of CHO
restriction and periodization on training adaptations and
1032
S. G. Impey et al.
123
 exercise performance. An overview of specific train-low
models is discussed below and relevant experimental
details from seminal studies are summarized in Table 1.
Additionally, key outcomes from such studies are also
categorized under the measures of cell signalling, gene
expression, enzymatic changes and performance outcomes,
according to positive changes, no change or negative
changes (see Table 2). Despite the evidence supporting
enhanced
skeletal
muscle
adaptations
with
CHO
Fig. 1 Schematic overview of the potential exercise-nutrient-sensi-
tive cell signalling pathways regulating the enhanced mitochondrial
adaptations associated with training with low CHO availability. (1)
Reduced muscle glycogen enhances both AMPK and p38MAPK
phosphorylation that results in (2) activation and translocation of
PGC-1a and p53 to the mitochondria and nucleus. (3) Upon entry into
the nucleus, PGC-1a co-activates additional transcription factors (i.e.
NRF1/2) to increase the expression of COX subunits and Tfam, as
well as autoregulating its own expression. In the mitochondria, PGC-
1a co-activates Tfam to coordinate regulation of mtDNA, and induces
expression of key mitochondrial proteins of the electron transport
chain, e.g. COX subunits. Similar to PGC-1a, p53 also translocates to
the mitochondria to modulate Tfam activity and mtDNA expression,
and to the nucleus where it functions to increase expression of
proteins involved in mitochondrial fission and fusion (DRP-1 and
MFN-2) and electron transport chain proteins. (4) Exercising in
conditions of reduced CHO availability increases adipose tissue and
intramuscular lipolysis via increased circulating adrenaline concen-
trations. (5) The resulting elevation in FFA activates the nuclear
transcription factor, PPARd, to increase expression of proteins
involved in lipid metabolism, such as CPT1, PDK4, CD36 and
HSL. (6) However, consuming pre-exercise meals rich in CHO and/or
CHO during exercise can downregulate lipolysis (thereby negating
FFA-mediated signalling), as well as reducing both AMPK and
p38MAPK activity, thus having negative implications for downstream
regulators. (7) High-fat feeding can also modulate PPARd signalling
and upregulate genes with regulatory roles in lipid metabolism (and
downregulate CHO metabolism), although high-fat diets may also
reduce
muscle
protein
synthesis
via
impaired
mTOR-p70S6K
signalling, despite feeding leucine-rich protein. 4EBP1 eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1, AMPK AMP-
activated protein kinase, CHO carbohydrate, CD36 cluster of
differentiation 36, COX cytochrome c oxidase, CPT1 carnitine
palmitoyltransferase 1, Drp1 dynamin-related protein 1, FA fatty
acid, FABP fatty acid binding protein, GLU glucose, GLUT4 glucose
transporter type 4, HSL hormone-sensitive lipase, IMTG intramuscu-
lar triglycerides, LAT1 large neutral amino acid transporter, LEU
leucine, Mfn2 mitofusion-2, mTORC1 mammalian target of rapamy-
cin complex 1, p38MAPK p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase, p53
tumor protein 53,
p70S6K ribosomal protein S6 kinase, PDK4
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4, PGC-1a peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-a, PPARd peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor, Tfam mitochondrial transcription fac-
tor A
CHO Restriction, Train Low and Training Adaptation
1033
123
 restriction, it is noteworthy that such adaptations do not
always translate to improved exercise performance.
2.1 Twice Per Day Training
On the basis that reduced pre- [15] and post-exercise [16]
muscle glycogen availability augments expression of genes
regulating substrate utilization and mitochondrial biogen-
esis, initial training studies adopted a ‘training twice every
second day versus once daily’ research design. In this
approach, subjects complete a morning training session to
reduce muscle glycogen followed by several hours of
reduced CHO intake so that the second training session of
the day is commenced with reduced muscle glycogen.
Using this model, 3–10 weeks of ‘train low’ increases
oxidative enzyme activity [9, 17–19], whole body [17, 19]
and intramuscular lipid utilization [19] and improves
exercise capacity [9] and performance [20]. It is difficult to
ascertain if the enhanced training response is mediated by
the upregulation of transcriptional responses induced by
CHO restriction in recovery from the morning exercise
session and/or the enhanced cell signalling responses
[21–24] associated with commencing the afternoon train-
ing session with reduced muscle glycogen. In addition to
low glycogen availability, there may also be compounding
effects of stacking training sessions in close temporal
proximity where altering the mechanical, metabolic and
hormonal environment may also modulate the enhanced
training response. Notwithstanding a potential reduction in
absolute training intensity in the afternoon session [17], the
twice per day model provides a practical framework
whereby the accumulative total time with reduced muscle
glycogen is increased. Depending on the length of the
interval between the first and second session (i.e. recover
low) and the actual duration of the second training session
(i.e. train low), the accumulated low glycogen period could
range from 3 to 8 h.
2.2 Fasted Training
Exercising fasted represents a simpler model of ‘train low’
whereby breakfast is consumed after a morning training
session. In this model, pre-exercise muscle glycogen is not
different between fasted or fed conditions, but liver
glycogen and circulating glucose is higher during fed
conditions. In contrast, increased free fatty acid (FFA)
availability and lipid oxidation occur in fasted conditions
when exercise is matched for intensity, duration and work
performed [25]. Depending on the timing of CHO feeding
in relation to the commencement of exercise (e.g.[60 min
before exercise versus \10 min before and/or during
exercise), such differences in FFA availability may mani-
fest from the beginning of exercise [25] or not until after
30–40 min of exercise, respectively [26]. Exercising fasted
increases AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activity
[27] and post-exercise gene expression [28, 29], while
several
weeks of fasted training increases oxidative
enzyme activity [30], lipid transport protein content [31]
and resting glycogen storage [32]. However, it is note-
worthy that such adaptations are likely regulated via CHO
restriction as opposed to true fasted conditions. Indeed,
consuming approximately 20 g of whey protein before and
during
CHO-restricted
training
sessions
still
permits
mobilization of FFAs [33] and activation of the AMPK
signalling axis [34], while also improving net muscle
protein balance [35].
2.3 Sleep Low, Train Low
In the ‘sleep low, train low’ model, participants perform an
evening training session, restrict CHO during overnight
recovery, and then complete a fasted training session the
following morning. The accumulative total time with
reduced
muscle
glycogen
could
therefore
extend
to
12–14 h depending on the timing and duration of the
training sessions and sleep period. Acute models of ‘sleep
low, train low’ (where morning exercise is commenced
with glycogen \200 mmol/kg dw) enhance the activation
of AMPK, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38) and
tumour protein p53 (p53) signalling [36–38], although
responses are attenuated if trained cyclists complete a
morning steady-state session (thus suggesting that both
intensity and training status are important) where pre- and
post-exercise glycogen content is 350 and 250 mmol/
kg dw, respectively [39]. Using a sleep-low model similar
to that used by Lane and colleagues [39], Marquet et al.
[40, 41] observed that 1–3 weeks of sleep-low training in
elite triathletes and cyclists improves cycling efficiency
(3.1%), 20 km cycling time-trial performance (3.2%) and
10 km running performance (2.9%) compared with tradi-
tional train-high approaches. At present, the extent of CHO
restriction required to elicit conditions considered best
representative of ‘sleep low’ are not well-defined. How-
ever, it is noteworthy that studies demonstrating beneficial
effects on cell signalling [38] and performance adaptations
[40, 41] have completely restricted CHO after the evening
training session and after subjects were fed a protein-only
meal or beverage. Nonetheless, similar to other train-low
models, the sleep-low paradigm is subject to the obvious
limitations of lack of a placebo controlled, double-blinded
design. Such limitations are particularly relevant where
performance improvements have been observed with only
three sessions of ‘sleep low, train low’ [41].
1034
S. G. Impey et al.
123
 Table 1 Overview of the methodological details and study outcomes of acute and chronic train-low studies according to the relevant train-low paradigm
Reference
Subjects
Duration
Exercise protocol and glycogen status
(mmol/kg dw)
Skeletal muscle adaptations
Exercise performance
outcomes
Twice per day model
Hansen et al. [9]
7 Untrained men
10 weeks
5 days 9 week
Knee extensor exercise. One leg trained
50% of sessions with low glycogen
(LOW), while the other trained all
sessions with high glycogen (HIGH).
Second session glycogen in LOW—pre:
200, post: 100 mmol/kg dw,
respectively
Greater increase in CS activity in the LOW
condition
Increased b-HAD activity in the LOW
condition only
Improved TTE for knee
extensor exercise
Yeo et al. [17]
14 trained male
cyclists/triathletes
3 weeks
4 9 week
100 min steady-state cycling (63% PPO)
followed by 8 9 5-min intervals at
maximal pace either 2 h (LOW) or 24 h
(HIGH) later. Pre-interval exercise
glycogen—LOW: 256, HIGH: 390. Post-
exercise glycogen—LOW: 124, HIGH:
229
Increased CS and b-HAD activity in the
LOW condition only
Increased COXIV protein content in the
LOW condition only
Similar improvements (10%)
in 60-min TT for both
groups
Morton et al. [18]
23 active men
6 weeks
4 9 week
6 9 3-min running (90% VO2max).
NORM trained once per day, while
LOW ? PLA and LOW ? GLU trained
twice per day (every other day).
LOW ? GLU ingested CHO before and
during every second training session. Pre
exercise glycogen—LOW: 232 and 253,
HIGH: 412 and 387 in the gastrocnemius
and vastus lateralis, respectively. Post-
exercise glycogen—LOW: 107 and 176,
HIGH: 240 and 262 in the gastrocnemius
and vastus lateralis, respectively
Greater increase in SDH activity in
LOW ? PLA compared with LOW ? GLU
and NORM
Similar improvements in
VO2max and YoYoIR2 for
all groups
Yeo et al. [23]
12 trained male
cyclists/triathletes
Acute exercise
100-min steady-state cycling (63% PPO)
followed by 8 9 5-min intervals at
maximal pace either 2 h (LOW) or 24 h
(HIGH) later. Pre-interval exercise
glycogen—LOW: 256, HIGH: 390. Post-
exercise glycogen—LOW: 124, HIGH:
229
Greater phosphorylation of AMPKThr172 in
LOW
NA
CHO Restriction, Train Low and Training Adaptation
1035
123
 Table 1 continued
Reference
Subjects
Duration
Exercise protocol and glycogen status
(mmol/kg dw)
Skeletal muscle adaptations
Exercise performance
outcomes
Hulston et al. [19]
14 trained male
cyclists
3 weeks
6 9 week
90-min cycling at 70% VO2max followed
by (2 h apart) HIT (8 9 5 min) in the
LOW group. The HIGH group performed
alternate days of either steady state or
HIT cycling. Acute glycogen status not
measured
b-HAD protein content increased in LOW
only
Increased fat utilization from muscle
triglycerides in LOW only
Similar improvements in
60-min TT for both groups
Cochran et al. [22]
10 Active men
Acute exercise
HIT cycling (5 9 4-min at 90–95% heart
rate reserve) twice per day (separated by
3 h). One group consumed CHO
(2.3 g.kg) between sessions (HIGH),
whereas the other group restricted CHO
intake (LOW). Pre-pm exercise
glycogen—LOW: 256, HIGH: 390.
Post-exercise glycogen—LOW: 124,
HIGH: 229
Greater phosphorylation of p38MAPK in
LOW following pm exercise
Similar increase in PGC-1a and COXIV gene
expression
NA
Cochran et al. [20]
18 Active men
2 weeks
3 days 9 week
HIT cycling (5 9 4 min at 60% PPO)
twice per day (separated by 3 h). One
group consumed CHO (2.3 g kg)
between sessions (HIGH), whereas the
other group restricted CHO intake
(LOW). Acute glycogen status not
measured
Similar increase in maximal CS activity and
protein content of both CS and COXIV
Greater improvement in
250-kJ TT performance in
the LOW group
Fasted training model
Akerstrom et al. [27]
9 Active men
Acute exercise
2 h one-legged knee extensor exercise
(60% Wmax) in either a fasted (FAST) or
fed (exogenous CHO during; FED)
state. Pre-exercise glycogen: 500 mmol/
kg dw in both groups. Post-exercise
glycogen: 300 and 200 in the FED and
FAST states, respectively
Reduced AMPKa2 activity in FED
NA
Lee-Young et al. [49]
9 Active men
Acute exercise
120-min cycling (65% VO2peak) exercise
in either a fasted (FAST) or fed
(exogenous CHO during; FED) state.
Pre-exercise glycogen: 500 mmol/
kg dw in both groups. Post-exercise
glycogen: 150 and 100 in the FED and
FAST states, respectively
Similar increases in AMPKa2 activity and
AMPKa2Thr172 and ACC-bSer222
phosphorylation
NA
De Bock et al. [31]
20 Active men
6 weeks
3 9 week
1–2 h cycling (75% VO2peak). One group
trained in the fasted state (FAST), with
the other consuming CHO before and
during exercise (FED). Acute glycogen
status not measured
FABP increased in the FAST condition only
NA
1036
S. G. Impey et al.
123
 Table 1 continued
Reference
Subjects
Duration
Exercise protocol and glycogen status
(mmol/kg dw)
Skeletal muscle adaptations
Exercise performance
outcomes
Nybo et al. [32]
15 untrained men
8 weeks
3–4 9 week
3–6 min of high-intensity intervals
(70–85% VO2max). Subjects received
either CHO or PLA during exercise.
Acute glycogen status not measured
Greater increases in b-HAD activity and
basal muscle glycogen content in the PLA
group only
Similar improvements in peak
power, VO2max and 15-min
TT performance
Van Proeyen et al. [30]
20 active men
6 weeks
4 9 week
1–1.5 h cycling (70% VO2max). One
group trained in the fasted state (FAST),
with the other consuming CHO before
and during exercise (FED). Acute
glycogen status not measured
CS and b-HAD maximal activity increased in
the FAST condition only
Similar improvements in 1-h
TT performance in both
groups
Sleep-low model
Pilegaard et al. [15]
Study A: 6 active
men
Study B: 6 active
men
Acute exercise
Acute exercise
Study A: 1-legged glycogen-depleting
exercise followed by 2-legged cycling
(2 h at 45% VO2max) on the subsequent
day. Pre-exercise glycogen—LOW:
337, HIGH: 609. Post-exercise
glycogen—LOW: 306, HIGH: 423
Study B: 3 h of 2-legged knee extensor
exercise with either NORM or LOW
glycogen. Pre-exercise glycogen—
LOW: 240, HIGH: 398. Post-exercise
glycogen—LOW: 101, HIGH: 153
Study A: Enhanced gene expression of
PDK4, LPL and HKII at rest in LOW only
Studies A and B: Enhanced gene expression
of PDK4 and UCP3 post-exercise in LOW
only
NA
NA
Wojtaszewski et al. [36]
8 Trained men
Acute exercise
60-min cycling at 70% VO2peak with
either LOW or HIGH muscle glycogen
(from exercise/diet manipulation the
previous day). Pre-exercise glycogen—
LOW: 163, HIGH: 909. Post-exercise
glycogen—LOW: 150, HIGH: 400
Increased AMPKa2 activity in LOW only
Greater phosphorylation of ACCSer221 in
LOW
NA
Chan et al. [37]
8 active men
Acute exercise
60-min cycling (70% VO2peak) with either
HIGH or LOW glycogen (achieved by
exercise/diet manipulation the previous
evening). Pre-exercise glycogen—
LOW: 163, HIGH: 375. Post-exercise
glycogen—LOW: 17, HIGH: 102
Greater phosphorylation of p38MAPK in
LOW
Enhanced gene expression of IL-6 in LOW
NA
Steinberg et al. [21]
7 active men
Acute exercise
60-min cycling at 70% VO2max with
either LOW or NORM muscle
glycogen. Pre-exercise glycoge—LOW:
150, HIGH: 390. Post-exercise
glycogen—LOW: 17, HIGH: 111
Greater AMPKa2 activity, phosphorylation
of ACCSer221 and nuclear translocation of
AMPKa2 in LOW only
Enhanced gene expression of GLUT4 in
LOW
NA
CHO Restriction, Train Low and Training Adaptation
1037
123
 Table 1 continued
Reference
Subjects
Duration
Exercise protocol and glycogen status
(mmol/kg dw)
Skeletal muscle adaptations
Exercise performance
outcomes
Bartlett et al. [38]
8 active men
Acute exercise
HIT running (6 9 3 min at 90% VO2max).
The LOW group performed glycogen-
depleting cycling the night before and
restricted CHO overnight. The HIGH
group consumed a high-CHO breakfast
and CHO during exercise. Pre-exercise
glycogen – LOW: 100, HIGH: 500.
Post-exercise glycogen—LOW: 80,
HIGH: 300
Phosphorylation of ACCSer79 and p53Ser15 in
LOW only
Enhanced gene expression of PGC-1a,
PDK4, Tfam and COXIV in LOW
NA
Psilander et al. [24]
10 trained male
cyclists
Acute exercise
6 9 10-min cycling (64% VO2max) with
either HIGH or LOW glycogen (achieved
by exercise/diet manipulation 14 h
previously). Pre-exercise glycogen—
LOW: 166, HIGH: 478. Post-exercise
glycogen—LOW: 130, HIGH: 477
Enhanced gene expression of PGC-1a in
LOW
Increased gene expression of PDK4 and
COXIV in LOW only
NA
Lane et al. [39]
7 trained male
cyclists
Acute exercise
Evening bout of high-intensity cycling
(8 9 5 min at 82.5% PPO) followed by
120-min steady-state cycling (50%
PPO) the subsequent morning. The
LOW group restricted CHO overnight,
whereas the HIGH group consumed a
high-CHO diet (4 g.kg BM). Pre-
exercise glycogen—LOW: 349, HIGH:
459. Post-exercise glycogen—LOW:
266, HIGH: 338
Greater phosphorylation of ACCSer79 post-
AM exercise in LOW
Enhanced gene expression of CD36, FABP3
and PDK4 post-AM exercise in LOW
NA
Marquet et al. [40]
21 male triathletes
3 weeks
6 9 week
HIT (8 9 5 min cycling at 85% MAP or
6 9 5-min running at individual 10-km
intensity) in the evening followed by
LIT (60-min cycling at 65% MAP) the
subsequent morning. One group
consumed CHO between training
sessions (HIGH), whereas the other
group restricted CHO intake (LOW).
Acute glycogen status not measured
NA
Improved 10-km running TT
performance and improved
TTE cycling (150% peak
aerobic power) in the LOW
group only
Marquet et al. [41]
11 trained male
cyclists
1 week
6 9 week
HIT (8 9 5-min cycling at 85% MAP) in
the evening followed by LIT (60-min
cycling at 65% MAP) the subsequent
morning. One group consumed CHO
between training sessions (HIGH),
whereas the other group restricted CHO
intake (LOW). Acute glycogen status
not measured
NA
Improved 20-km cycling TT
performance in the LOW
group only
1038
S. G. Impey et al.
123
 Table 1 continued
Reference
Subjects
Duration
Exercise protocol and glycogen status
(mmol/kg dw)
Skeletal muscle adaptations
Exercise performance
outcomes
Recover-low model
Pilegaard et al. [16]
9 active men
Acute exercise
75-min cycling (75% VO2max) followed
by 24 h recovery with either HIGH or
LOW CHO diet. Glycogen was restored
to 576 and 348 with HIGH and LOW
CHO diets, respectively, at 24 h
Gene expression of PDK4, UCP3, LPL and
CPT1 remained elevated for 8–24 h with
CHO restriction post-exercise
NA
Jensen et al. [54]
15 male triathletes
Acute exercise
4-h cycling (56% VO2max) followed by
4 h recovery feeding with either HIGH
(1 g.kg.h) or LOW (water only) CHO.
Post-exercise glycogen—LOW: 234,
HIGH: 245. 4-h glycogen—LOW: 264,
HIGH: 444
Similar gene expression of PGC-1a, Tfam,
NRF-1, COXIV, PDK4, LPL, PPAR, UCP3
and GLUT4 in both groups
NA
High-fat feeding
Hammond et al. [43]
10 active men
Acute exercise
High-intensity running (8 9 5 min at
85% VO2peak) followed by steady-state
running (60 min at 70% VO2peak) 3.5 h
later. Steady-state running was either
commenced with high or low (but high
fat) CHO availability. Muscle glycogen
was similar in both groups (200 mmol/
kg dw) post-steady-state running
p70S6K activity was suppressed with high-fat
feeding
Similar gene expression of PGC-1a, p53, CS,
Tfam, PPAR and ERRa in both groups
NA
Periodized model
Impey et al. [48]
11 amateur male
cyclists
Acute exercise
Based on the principle of ‘fuel for the
work required’. 4 9 30 s HIT cycling
(150% PPO) and 45 min steady-state
cycling (50% PPO) followed by 1 min
efforts (80% PPO) until exhaustion with
either HIGH or LOW glycogen (by
previous exercise/diet manipulation for
36 h previously). The HIGH group
consumed CHO before, during and after
exercise, whereas the LOW group
consumed leucine-enriched protein
36 h of prior CHO restriction enhanced p53,
SIRT1 and Tfam gene expression. CHO
restriction before and during exercise
induced work-efficient AMPK signalling.
Post-exercise CHO restriction and keeping
glycogen \100 mmol/kg dw reduced
p70S6K activity
Exercise capacity (1-min
efforts at 80% PPO)
enhanced in HIGH trial (158
vs. 100 min)
Burke et al. [45]
22 international
male race walkers
3 weeks
7 9 week
3 weeks of intensified training (race
walking, resistance training, cross
training). Athletes consumed three
different diets across the training period:
(a) high CHO; (b) LCHF; (c) periodized
CHO intake with periods of low CHO
training. Acute glycogen status not
measured
NA
Similar improvements in
VO2peak between all groups
Improved 10-km race times in
the high CHO and
periodized CHO groups (no
change in LCHF)
LCHF diet increased the O2
cost of race walking
CHO Restriction, Train Low and Training Adaptation
1039
123
 2.4 High-Fat Feeding
In addition to manipulating CHO availability, it is possible
that associated elevations in circulating FFA availability
also regulate relevant cell signalling pathways. Indeed, the
exercise-induced activation of p38MAPK is suppressed
with pharmacological ablation of FFA availability [42].
Nonetheless, while we acknowledge the potential role of
acute FFA-mediated signalling (as occurring secondary to
the primary intervention of CHO manipulation), it is
unlikely that CHO restriction in combination with chronic
high-fat feeding is beneficial for training adaptations.
Indeed, 1–5 days of high-fat feeding reduces the expres-
sion [43] and activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase
(PDH) complex [44], ultimately impairing CHO oxidation
and high-intensity performance. Furthermore, Burke et al.
[45] observed that exercise economy and performance
were negatively impacted in elite race walkers following
3 weeks of a high-fat diet when compared with periodized
and high CHO availability. Emerging data also suggest that
high-fat feeding may impair muscle protein synthesis [46],
potentially via reduced activation of mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) and ribosomal protein S6 kinase
(p70S6K) signalling [43].
2.5 Amalgamation of Train-Low Paradigms
and CHO Restriction-Induced Calorie
Restriction
In the real-world environments of elite endurance athletes,
it is likely that athletes practice an amalgamation of the
aforementioned train-low paradigms (either through default
of their current training structure or via coach and sport
scientist-led practices), as opposed to undertaking one
strategy in isolation. Additionally, elite athletes may also
undertake 20–30 h of training per week, whereas many of
the study designs reviewed thus far have utilized training
programmes of \10 h per week. The complexity of prac-
tical train-low models is exacerbated by observations that
endurance athletes practice day-to-day or longer-term
periods of energy periodization (as opposed to CHO per se)
in an attempt to reduce body and fat mass in preparation for
competition [10, 47] (Morton, unpublished observations).
Indeed, the performance improvements observed by Mar-
quet et al. [40] were also associated with a 1 kg reduction
in fat mass induced by the sleep-low model. Notwith-
standing reductions in body mass, it is indeed possible that
many of the skeletal muscle adaptations associated with
‘train low’ are mediated by repeated and transient periods
of energy restriction as opposed to CHO restriction per se.
We observed that the post-exercise expression of peroxi-
some proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator
1-a (PGC-1a), p53, mitochondrial transcription factor A
Table 1 continued
Reference
Subjects
Duration
Exercise protocol and glycogen status
(mmol/kg dw)
Skeletal muscle adaptations
Exercise performance
outcomes
Gejl et al. [55]
26 elite male
endurance
athletes
4 weeks
7 9 week
4 weeks of intensified training. Athletes
either performed all sessions with high
CHO availability or followed a
periodized model, performing three
sessions per week with reduced CHO
availability. Glycogen content was
400 mmol/kg dw following LOW
carbohydrate availability training
session
Similar increase in maximal CS activity
No increase in b-HAD activity in either
group
Similar improvement in
VO2max and 30-min TT
performance between
groups
Where possible, muscle glycogen status of the relevant experimental trials is also cited
b-HAD 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, ACC acetyl-CoA carboxylase, AMPK AMP-activated protein kinase, BM Body Mass, CHO carbohydrate, CD36 cluster of differentiation 36, CPT1
carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1, CS citrate synthase, COX cytochrome c oxidase, ERRa estrogen-related receptor a, FABP3 fatty acid binding protein, GLU glucose, GLUT4 glucose transporter
type 4, HIT high-intensity training, HKII hexokinase II, IL interleukin, LCHF low-carbohydrate, high-fat, LIT low intensity training, LPL lipoprotein lipase, MAP maximal aerobic power, NA
not available, NORM normal, NRF-1 nuclear respiratory factor 1, p38MAPK p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase, p53 tumor protein 53, p70S6K ribosomal protein S6 kinase, PDK4 pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase 4, PGC-1a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-a, PLA placebo, PM post meridian, PPAR peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor, PPO
peak power output, SIRT1 NAD-dependent deacetylase sirtuin-1, SDH succinate dehydrogenase, Tfam transcription factor A, TT time trial, TTE time to exhaustion, UCP3 uncoupling protein 3,
VO2max maximum rate of oxygen consumption, VO2peak peak rate of oxygen consumption, Wmax Watt maximum, YoYoIR2 Yo-Yo intermittent recovery test 2
1040
S. G. Impey et al.
123
 (Tfam) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR) messenger RNA (mRNA) were elevated with
similar magnitude and time-course when a low CHO and
high-fat diet was consumed versus an isoenergetic high-
CHO feeding strategy [43]. Such data conflict with previ-
ous observations from our laboratory [38], where post-ex-
ercise CHO and calorie restriction augments the expression
of many of the aforementioned genes. Given the similari-
ties in metabolic adaptation to both CHO and calorie
restriction, such data raise the question as to whether the
enhanced mitochondrial responses observed when training
low are actually due to transient periods of calorie
restriction (as mediated by a reduction in CHO intake) as
opposed to CHO restriction per se. This point is especially
relevant given that many endurance athletes present daily
with transient periods of both CHO and calorie restriction
due to multiple training sessions per day, as well as longer-
term periods of suboptimal energy availability [47].
3 The Glycogen Threshold Hypothesis: Muscle
and Performance Adaptations Associated
with CHO Restriction Occur Within a Range
of Absolute Muscle Glycogen Concentrations
Given that the enhanced training response associated with
‘train low’ is potentially mediated by muscle glycogen
availability, it is prudent to consider the absolute glycogen
concentrations required to facilitate the response. In this
regard, examination of available train-low studies (see
Table 1) demonstrates that adaptations associated with
CHO restriction are particularly evident when absolute pre-
exercise muscle glycogen concentrations are B 300 mmol/
kg dw. However, restoring post-exercise glycogen levels to
[500 mmol/kg dw attenuates exercise-induced changes in
gene expression [16], and keeping glycogen (and energy) at
critically low post-exercise levels (i.e.\100 mmol/kg dw)
may reduce the regulation of protein synthesis pathways
[48]. CHO feeding during exercise also attenuates AMPK-
mediated signalling but only when glycogen sparing occurs
[27, 49]. However, it should be noted that commencing
exercise with \200 mmol/kg dw is likely to impair train-
ing intensity due to the lack of muscle substrate and impact
on the contractile capacity of muscle cells via impaired
calcium regulation [50–52]. Additionally, repetitive daily
training in the face of a reduction in CHO availability (so
as to reduce pre-exercise muscle glycogen concentration)
may increase susceptibility to illness [53]. On this basis,
such data suggest the presence of a muscle glycogen
threshold whereby a critical absolute level of glycogen
depletion must be induced for significant activation of cell
signalling pathways to occur on the proviso, of course, that
the
desired
training
workload and
intensity can
be
completed without any maladaptations. In this way, the
glycogen threshold provides a metabolic window of muscle
glycogen concentrations (e.g. 300–100 mmol/kg dw) that is
permissive to facilitating the required training intensity,
acute cell signalling responses and post-exercise remod-
elling processes (see Fig. 2). Nonetheless, the potential
presence of a glycogen threshold is not to say that indi-
viduals will not adapt to endurance training if they do not
exercise within a suggested threshold. Rather, such a
threshold illustrates the possibility that the enhanced
adaptations associated with ‘train low’ are especially
prominent once a certain level of glycogen depletion has
occurred. We also acknowledge the between-subject vari-
ations in glycogen depletion that is often observed within
the literature, and how this may also influence any potential
glycogen threshold range (individual subject responses are
also displayed in Fig. 2 for the data presented from the
authors’ laboratory).
4 Fuel for the Work Required: Practical
Application of the Glycogen Threshold
Hypothesis
The studies reviewed thus far have typically adopted
matched work exercise protocols whereby CHO availabil-
ity is manipulated prior to training sessions consisting of
identical intensity, duration and work performed. More
recently, we also adopted an experimental design in which
participants completed an exhaustive exercise capacity test
in conditions of high or low pre-exercise muscle glycogen
(600 and 300 mmol/kg dw, respectively) [48]. All partici-
pants cycled for longer in the high trial versus the low trial,
with average exercise capacity increased by 60 min. We
observed identical cell signalling and post-exercise gene
responses between trials (e.g. AMPK-PGC-1a) despite the
completion of less work performed in the low glycogen
trial. However, it is acknowledged that to stimulate other
endurance-related adaptations (e.g. central changes such as
cardiac hypertrophy), high glycogen conditions would be
superior, given that it would allow for the completion of
more work performed and, of course, an elevated heart rate
for a much longer training duration. Moreover, at the
muscular level it appears that commencing exercise with
high muscle glycogen requires the completion of consid-
erably more work in order to elicit comparable cell sig-
nalling and muscle remodelling responses than those
occurring when exercise is commenced with low muscle
glycogen. In this situation, it is suggested that subjects
eventually surpass a critical level of glycogen depletion,
thereby completing a proportion of exercise within the
glycogen threshold required to stimulate cell signalling.
Given
that
elite
endurance
athletes
rarely
complete
CHO Restriction, Train Low and Training Adaptation
1041
123
 Table 2 Summary of key outcomes from train-low studies as categorized under the measures of cell signalling, gene expression, enzymatic
changes and performance outcomes. Studies are presented according to those demonstrating positive changes, no change or negative changes
Positive
No/equivalent change
Negative
Muscle (n = 25)
Signalling (n = 11)
73% (n = 8)
Steinberg et al. [21]
Cochran et al. [22]
Yeo et al. [23]
Akerstrom et al. [27]
Wojtaszewski et al. [36]
Chan et al. [37]
Bartlett et al. [38]
Lane et al. [39]
27% (n = 3)
Hammond et al. [43]
Impey et al. [48]
Lee-Young et al. [49]
0%
Gene expression (n = 12)
75% (n = 9)
Pilegaard et al. [15a, b]
Pilegaard et al. [16]
Steinberg et al. [21]
Psilander et al. [24]
Chan et al. [37]
Bartlett et al. [38]
Lane et al. [39]
Impey et al. [48]
25% (n = 3)
Cochran et al. [22]
Hammond et al. [43]
Jensen et al. [54]
0%
Enzyme activity/protein content (n = 9)
78% (n = 7)
Hansen et al. [9]
Yeo et al. [17]
Morton et al. [18]
Hulston et al. [19]
Van Proeyen et al. [30]
De Bock et al. [31]
Nybo et al. [32]
22% (n = 2)
Cochran et al. [20]
Gejl et al. [52]
0%
Physiological responses
Lipid oxidation (n = 17)
47% (n = 8)
Yeo et al. [17]
Hulston et al. [19]
Akerstrom et al. [27]
Wojtaszewski et al. [36]
Bartlett et al. [38]
Lane et al. [39]
Hammond et al. [43]
Impey et al. [48]
53% (n = 9)
Pilegaard et al. [15a]
Marquet et al. [40, 41]
Van Proeyen et al. [30]
De Bock et al. [31]
Nybo et al. [32]
Burke et al. [45]
Lee-Young et al. [49]
Gejl et al. [52]
0%
Efficiency/economy (n = 2)
50% (n = 1)
Marquet et al. [40]
50% (n = 1)
Burke et al. [45]
Performance
Exercise performance changes (n = 11)
37% (n = 4)
Hansen et al. [9]
Cochran et al. [20]
Marquet et al. [40, 41]
63% (n = 7)
Yeo et al. [17]
Morton et al. [18]
Hulston et al. [19]
Van Proeyen et al. [30]
Nybo et al. [32]
Burke et al. [45]
Gejl et al. [52]
0%
1042
S. G. Impey et al.
123
 identical sessions or train with maximal intensity (or to
exhaustion) on consecutive training sessions, either within
or between days, such data support the concept of ‘fuelling
for the work required’, whereby CHO availability is
adjusted in accordance with the demands of the specific
training session to be completed. In this way, absolute daily
CHO intake and distribution can be modified so that key
sessions are performed within or close to the suggested
muscle glycogen threshold. As initially alluded to by
Sherman et al. [6], the question that emerges therefore is
not how much an athlete can super-compensate their
glycogen stores but rather does the athlete’s diet contain
enough CHO to maintain training intensity while also
creating a consistent metabolic milieu that is conducive to
facilitating training adaptations. Using the sport of road
cycling, we present a theoretical overview of the model in
Table 3.
5 Critical Reflections and Limitations on Practical
Application of the Glycogen Threshold
Hypothesis
Despite the theoretical rationale for periodic train-low
sessions and the potential presence of a glycogen threshold,
there are many obvious challenges in bringing this to life in
applied practice. Crucially, our understanding of the
glycogen and CHO cost of the habitual training sessions
undertaken by elite athletes is not well known, thus limit-
ing our ability to prescribe training sessions that may elicit
any glycogen threshold. Indeed, rates of glycogen utiliza-
tion are not linear and are dependent on substrate avail-
ability, training status, intensity and duration, all of which
can modify the regulation of glycogenolysis via hormonal
control or allosteric regulation. Furthermore, any potential
glycogen threshold is also likely to be training-status-
specific and heavily dependent on the characteristics of the
exercise modality in question, e.g. a lower absolute
threshold may be present for a metabolically based sport
such as cycling (non-weight-bearing activity with a lower
eccentric load), whereas a higher threshold may be present
in
running,
given
that
weight
bearing,
eccentric
contractions and higher neuromuscular loads are present.
While examination of relevant studies (see Fig. 3 for a
sampling of experimental data from cycling studies) pro-
vides some indication of the intensity and duration (against
a background of differences in pre-exercise glycogen sta-
tus) that would be required to sufficiently deplete an ath-
lete’s glycogen close to or within the glycogen threshold,
considerable assumptions must be made. Indeed, given the
lack of technology available to non-invasively quantify
muscle glycogen, practical application of the glycogen
threshold hypothesis relies heavily on practitioners’ theo-
retical knowledge of glycogen utilization with their specific
sport and, moreover, detailed assessment of an athlete’s
previous day(s) training loads and macronutrient intake in
order to formulate appropriate guidance for future training
sessions. To this end, awareness of relevant sport-specific
literature coupled with both external (e.g. power outputs,
running velocities) and internal (e.g. heart rate, blood lac-
tate, ratings of perceived exertion) assessment of training
load can be collectively used in conjunction with labora-
tory assessments of substrate utilization so as to estimate
the potential CHO cost of real-world training sessions.
Considerable
debate
is
also
likely
to
exist
among
researchers and practitioners as to what amount of dietary
CHO actually equates to the red, amber and green (RAG)
ratings outlined in Table 3, and, undoubtedly, further sport-
specific studies are warranted.
6 Conclusions
The emergence of CHO availability (specifically muscle
glycogen concentration) as a regulator of training adapta-
tion is now an accepted area of research that has practical
implications for athlete training strategies. While this is a
hot topic among athletes, coaches and sport scientists, the
optimal periodization strategy to implement periods of
CHO restriction into an overall training programme is not
well understood. Furthermore, practical models of CHO
(and energy) periodization are likely to be highly specific
to the training structure and culture of the sport in question,
as well as the athlete’s specific training goals. Accordingly,
Table 2 continued
Positive
No/equivalent change
Negative
Impaired training intensity (n = 3)
0%
0%
100% (n = 3)
Yeo et al. [17]
Hulston et al. [19]
Lane et al. [56]
CHO Restriction, Train Low and Training Adaptation
1043
123
 Fig. 2 Overview of studies supporting the glycogen threshold
hypothesis. Studies are categorized into those examining a cell
signalling, b gene expression and c muscle contractile capacity and
post-exercise signalling. In a and b, the green bars represent the trial
within the specific study that has been completed with high muscle
glycogen, and the red bars represent the trial completed with low
muscle glycogen. The length of the bar in both instances corresponds
to the pre- and post-exercise muscle glycogen concentration. Addi-
tionally, in studies from the authors’ laboratory (Bartlett et al. [38]
and Impey et al. [48]), black and white circles represent individual
subjects’ pre- and post-exercise muscle glycogen concentrations,
respectively. In c, a variety of CHO manipulation protocols have been
adopted to examine the effect of high (green bars) and low (red bars)
muscle glycogen concentration on contractile properties and post-
exercise cell signalling. The shaded area represents a potential muscle
glycogen threshold in which exercise should be commenced (albeit
specific to the training status of the participants studied in these
investigations). AMPK AMP-activated protein kinase, ACC acetyl-
CoA carboxylase, Ca2? calcium, COX cytochrome c oxidase,
p38MAPK p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase, p70S6K ribosomal
protein S6 kinase, PDK4 pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4, PGC-1a
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-a,
Tfam mitochondrial transcription factor A
1044
S. G. Impey et al.
123
 we have merely presented a hypothetical framework of
fuelling for the work required to illustrate how isolated
train-low models can be amalgamated to produce day-by-
day and meal-by-meal manipulation of CHO availability.
While we readily acknowledge the requirement for sport-
specific models and long-term training studies (especially
to demonstrate if train-low muscle adaptations actually
correspond to meaningful changes in exercise perfor-
mance), we also pose several fundamental questions that
are relevant across many sporting models. First, does the
presence of a ‘graded’ muscle glycogen threshold really
exist, and, if so, how is this affected by training status?
Second, should train-low sessions always be left to low-
intensity-type sessions or is it the deliberate completion of
a high-intensity session (even at the expense of a potential
reduction in absolute workload) that is really required to
create the metabolic milieu that is conducive to signalling?
Third, what is the minimal CHO intake and glycogen
concentration required to facilitate periods of ‘train low’
without compromising absolute training intensity during
specific sessions? Fourth, is the enhanced training response
associated with ‘train low’ regulated by CHO and/or
energy restriction, and, if the latter, how do we periodize
and structure such training interventions without inducing
maladaptations? Finally, are there novel molecular targets
and protein modifications/localization that also contribute
Table 3 Theoretical overview of the ‘fuel for the work required’ model
Training Session 
CHO Feeding Schedule
Pre-Training Meal
During Training
Post-Training Meal
Evening Meal
Day 1:
4-6 hours high-intensity
session consisting of 
multiple intervals >lactate 
threshold
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
LOW
Day 2:
3-5 hours low-intensity
steady state session at 
intensity < lactate 
threshold
LOW
LOW
HIGH
HIGH
Day 3:
3 hours high-intensity
session consisting of 
multiple intervals > lactate 
threshold. 
HIGH
MEDIUM
HIGH
MEDIUM
Day 4:
< 1 hour recovery session 
at intensity <lactate 
threshold
LOW
LOW
HIGH
HIGH
The model is presented for an elite endurance athlete (e.g. road cyclist) who trains once per day on 4 consecutive days where each session
commences at 10:00 am each day. In this example, the athlete has four main feeding points and the CHO content of each timepoint is colour
coded according to a red, amber or green (RAG) rating that represents low, medium and high CHO intake. Note that we have not prescribed
specific CHO quantities and deliberately chose a RAG rating so as to highlight the necessity for flexibility in relation to athlete history, training
status and specific training goals, etc. Rather, the model is simply presented to illustrate how train-low paradigms can be amalgamated to adjust
CHO availability day-by-day and meal-by-meal according to the demands of the specific training session across the 4-day training block. In this
example, high CHO intake is advised before, during and after the training session on day 1 (e.g. ‘train high’), but reduced in the evening meal to
facilitate sleep low and train low for a lower-intensity session on day 2 (i.e. likely commenced with reduced muscle glycogen and withholding or
reducing CHO content of the pre-training meal). Following completion of the second training session, high CHO availability is prescribed for the
remainder of day 2 so as to promote glycogen storage in preparation for a higher absolute workload and intensity on day 3. Given that day 4 is a
designated recovery day of much lower duration and intensity, CHO intake is then reduced in the evening of day 3 and breakfast of day 4, but is
then increased throughout the remainder of day 4 in order to prepare for another 4-day training block. The model should be adjusted according to
the number of feeding points and training sessions that are to be undertaken on each day, e.g. a marathon runner [7] would have a different CHO
periodization model than a cyclist. Careful day-to-day periodization in a meal-by-meal manner (as opposed to chronic periods of CHO restriction
or CHO feeding) is likely to maintain metabolic flexibility and still allow the completion of high-intensity and prolonged duration workloads on
heavy training days, e.g. interval-type sessions undertaken above lactate threshold. Intuitively, ‘train low’ may be best left to those training
sessions that are not CHO-dependent and where the intensity and duration is not likely to be compromised by reduced CHO availability (e.g.
steady-state-type training sessions performed at intensities below the lactate threshold). Additionally, the model may also provide a framework to
aid body mass loss given that train-low sessions on lower-intensity training days may allow for the creation of energy deficits without negating
training intensity
CHO carbohydrate
CHO Restriction, Train Low and Training Adaptation
1045
123
 to the regulation of nutrient and exercise sensitive path-
ways? When considered this way, it is remarkable that the
study of only 500 g of substrate (the approximate whole-
body storage of CHO) remains as exciting as ever.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of Interest Samuel Impey, Mark Hearris, Kelly Hammond,
Jonathan Bartlett, Julien Louis, Graeme Close and James Morton
declare that they have no conflicts of interest.
Funding No sources of funding were used to assist in the preparation
of this manuscript.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were
made.
References
1. Thomas DT, Erdman KA, Burke LM. American college of sports
medicine joint position statement. nutrition and athletic perfor-
mance. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2016;48:543–68.
2. Bergstrom J, Hermansen L, Hultman E, Saltin B. Diet, muscle
glycogen
and
physical
performance.
Acta
Physiol
Scand.
1967;71:140–50.
3. Bergstrom J, Hultman E. Muscle glycogen synthesis after exer-
cise: an enhancing factor localized to the muscle cells in man.
Nature. 1966;16:309–10.
4. Bergstrom J, Hultman E. The effect of exercise on muscle
glycogen and electrolytes in normals. Scand J Clin Lab Invest.
1966;18:16–20.
5. Hermansen L, Hultman E, Saltin B. Muscle glycogen during
prolonged severe exercise. Acta Physiol Scand. 1967;71:129–39.
6. Sherman WM, Costill DL, Fink WJ, Miller JM. Effect of exer-
cise-diet manipulation on muscle glycogen and its subsequent
utilization during performance. Int J Sports Med. 1981;2:114–8.
7. Sherman WM, Wimer GS. Insufficient dietary carbohydrate
during training? Does it impair athletic performance? Int J Sport
Nutr. 1991;1:28–44.
8. Sherman WM, Doyle JA, Lamb DR, Strauss RH. Dietary car-
bohydrate, muscle glycogen, and exercise performance during
7 days of training. Am J Clin Nutr. 1993;57:27–31.
9. Hansen AK, Fischer CP, Plomgaard P, Andersen JL, Saltin B,
Pedersen BK. Skeletal muscle adaptation: training twice every
second day vs. training once daily. J Appl Physiol. 2005;98:93–9.
10. Stellingwerff T. Case Study: nutrition and training periodization
in three elite marathon runners. Int J Sport Nutri Exerc Metab.
2012;22:392–400.
11. Hawley JA, Morton JP. Ramping up the signal: promoting
endurance training adaptation in skeletal muscle by nutritional
manipulation. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2014;41:608–13.
12. Bartlett JD, Hawley JA, Morton JP. Carbohydrate availability and
exercise training adaptation: too much of a good thing? Eur J
Sport Sci. 2015;15:3–12.
13. Coyle EF, Coggan AR, Hemmert MK, Ivy JL. Muscle glycogen
utilization during strenuous exercise when fed carbohydrate.
J Appl Physiol. 1986;61:165–72.
14. Wildrick JJ, Costill DL, Fink WJ, Hickey MS, McConnell GK,
Tanaka H. Carbohydrate feedings and exercise performance:
effect of initial muscle glycogen concentration. J Appl Physiol.
1993;74:2998–3005.
15. Pilegaard H, Keller C, Steensberg A, Helge JW, Pedersen BK,
Saltin B, Neufer PD. Influence of pre-exercise muscle glycogen
content on exercise-induced transcriptional regulation of meta-
bolic genes. J Physiol. 2002;541:261–71.
16. Pilegaard H, Osada T, Andersen LT, Helge JW, Saltin B, Neufer
PD. Substrate availability and transcriptional regulation of
metabolic genes in human skeletal muscle during recovery from
exercise. Metabolism. 2005;54:1048–55.
17. Yeo WK, Paton CD, Garnham AP, Burke LM, Carey AL, Hawley
JA. Skeletal muscle adaptation and performance responses to
once versus twice every second day endurance training regimens.
J Appl Physiol. 2008;105:1462–70.
Fig. 3 Muscle glycogen
utilization according to studies
incorporating varied exercise
intensity, duration, and pre-
exercise muscle glycogen
concentration. Such data
illustrate how the pattern of
glycogen use can vary
(according to the interactive
effects of the aforementioned
parameters) and how this should
be considered in relation to the
proposed glycogen threshold
(shaded area). Data represent a
sampling from studies compiled
from cycling exercise protocols
only and represent glycogen use
in the vastus lateralis muscle
1046
S. G. Impey et al.
123
 18. Morton JP, Croft L, Bartlett JD, MacLaren DP, Reilly T, Evans L,
McArdle A, Drust B. Reduced carbohydrate availability does not
modulate training-induced heat shock protein adaptations but
does up regulate oxidative enzyme activity in human skeletal
muscle. J Appl Physiol. 2009;106:1513–21.
19. Hulston CJ, Venables MC, Mann CH, Martin C, Philp A, Baar K,
Jeukendrup AE. Training with low muscle glycogen enhances fat
metabolism in well-trained cyclists. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
2010;42:2046–55.
20. Cochran AJ, Myslik F, Maclnnis MJ, Percival ME, Bishop D,
Tarnopolsky MA, Gibala MJ. Manipulating carbohydrate avail-
ability between twice-daily sessions of high-intensity interval
training over 2 weeks improves time-trial performance. Int J
Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 2015;25:463–70.
21. Steinberg GR, Watt MJ, McGee SL, Chan S, Hargreaves M,
Febbraio MA, Stapleton D, Kemp BE. Reduced glycogen avail-
ability is associated with increased AMPKalpha2 activity, nuclear
AMPKalpha2 protein abundance, and GLUT4 mRNA expression
in contracting human skeletal muscle. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab.
2006;31:302–12.
22. Cochran AJ, Little JP, Tarnopolsky MA, Gibala MJ. Carbohy-
drate feeding during recovery alters the skeletal muscle metabolic
response to repeated sessions of high-intensity interval exercise in
humans. J Appl Physiol. 2010;108:628–36.
23. Yeo WK, McGee SL, Carey AL, Paton CD, Garnham AP, Har-
greaves M, Hawley JA. Acute signalling responses to intense
endurance training commenced with low or normal muscle
glycogen. Exp Physiol. 2010;95:351–8.
24. Psilander N, Frank P, Flockhart M, Sahlin K. Exercise with low
glycogen increases PGC-1a gene expression in human skeletal
muscle. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2013;113:951–63.
25. Horowitz JF, Mora-Rodriguez R, Byerley LO, Coyle EF.
Lipolytic suppression following carbohydrate ingestion limits fat
oxidation during exercise. Am J Physiol. 1997;273:768–75.
26. Arkinstall MJ, Bruce CR, Nikolopoulos V, Garnham AP, Hawley
JA. Effect of carbohydrate ingestion on metabolism during run-
ning and cycling. J Appl Physiol. 2001;91:2125–34.
27. Akerstrom TCA, Birk JB, Klein DK, Erikstrup C, Plomgaard P,
Pedersen BK, Wojtaszewski J. Oral glucose ingestion attenuates
exercise-induced activation of 50-AMP-activated protein kinase
in human skeletal muscle. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
2006;342:949–55.
28. Civitarese AE, Hesselink MK, Russell AP, Ravussin E, Schrau-
wen P. Glucose ingestion during exercise blunts exercise-induced
gene expression of skeletal muscle fat oxidative genes. Am J
Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2005;289:1023–9.
29. Cluberton LJ, McGee SL, Murphy RM, Hargreaves M. Effect of
carbohydrate ingestion on exercise-induced alterations in meta-
bolic gene expression. J Appl Physiol. 2005;99:1359–63.
30. Van Proeyen K, Szlufcik K, Nielens H, Ramaekers M, Hespel P.
Beneficial metabolic adaptations due to endurance exercise
training in the fasted state. J Appl Physiol. 2011;110:236–45.
31. De Bock K, Derave W, Eijnde BO, Hesselink MK, Koninckx E,
Rose AJ, Schrauwen P, Bonen A, Richter EA, Hespel P. Effect of
training in the fasted state on metabolic responses during exercise
with carbohydrate intake. J Appl Phyiol. 2008;104:1045–55.
32. Nybo L, Pedersen K, Christensen B, Aagaard P, Brandt N, Kiens
B. Impact of carbohydrate supplementation during endurance
training on glycogen storage and performance. Acta Physiol.
2009;197:117–27.
33. Impey SG, Smith D, Robinson AL, Owens DJ, Bartlett JD, Smith
K, Limb M, Tang J, Fraser WD, Close GL, Morton JP. Leucine-
enriched protein feeding does not impair exercise-induced free
fatty acid availability and lipid oxidation: beneficial implications
for training in carbohydrate-restricted states. Amino Acids.
2015;47:407–16.
34. Taylor C, Bartlett JD, van de Graaf CS, Louhelainen J, Coyne V,
Iqbal Z, MacLaren DP, Gregson W, Close GL, Morton JP. Pro-
tein ingestion does not impair exercise-induced AMPK signalling
when in a glycogen-depleted state: implications for train-low
compete-high. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2013;113:1457–68.
35. Hulston CJ, Wolsk E, Grøndahl TS, Yfanti C, Van Hall G. Pro-
tein intake does not increase vastus lateralis muscle protein
synthesis
during
cycling.
Med
Sci
Sports
Exerc.
2011;43:1635–42.
36. Wojtaszewski JF, MacDonald C, Nielsen JN, Hellsten Y, Hardie
DG, Kemp BE, Kiens B, Richter EA. Regulation of 50AMP-
activated protein kinase activity and substrate utilization in
exercising human skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol Endocrinol
Metab. 2003;284:E812–22.
37. Chan S, McGee SL, Watt MJ, Hargreaves M, Febbraio MA.
Altering dietary nutrient intake that reduces glycogen content
leads to phosphorylation of nuclear p38 MAP kinase in human
skeletal muscle: association with IL-6 gene transcription during
contraction. FASEB J. 2004;18:1785–7.
38. Bartlett JD, Louhelainen J, Iqbal Z, Cochran AJ, Gibala MJ,
Gregson W, Close GL, Drust B, Morton JP. Reduced carbohy-
drate availability enhances exercise-induced p53 signalling in
human skeletal muscle: implications for mitochondrial biogene-
sis. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2013;304:450–8.
39. Lane SC, Camera DM, Lassiter DG, Areta JL, Bird SR, Yeo WK,
Jeacocke NA, Krook A, Zierath JR, Burke LM, Hawley JA.
Effects of sleeping with reduced carbohydrate availability on
acute training responses. J Appl Physiol. 2015;119:643–55.
40. Marquet LA, Brisswalter J, Louis J, Tiollier E, Burke LM,
Hawley JA, Hausswirth C. Enhanced endurance performance by
periodization of carbohydrate intake: ‘‘Sleep low’’ strategy. Med
Sci Sports Exerc. 2016;48:663–72.
41. Marquet LA, Hausswirth C, Molle O, Hawley JA, Burke LM,
Tiollier E, Brisswalter J. Periodization of carbohydrate intake:
short-term effect on performance. Nutrients. 2016;8:755.
42. Zbinden-Foncea H, van Loon LJ, Raymackers JM, Francaux M,
Deldicque L. Contribution of nonesterified fatty acids to mitogen-
activated protein kinase activation in human skeletal muscle
during endurance exercise. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab.
2013;23:201–9.
43. Hammond KM, Impey SG, Currell K, Mitchell N, Shepherd SO,
Jeromson S, Hawley JA, Close GL, Hamilton LD, Sharples AP,
Morton JP. Postexercise high-fat feeding suppresses p70S6K1
activity in human skeletal muscle. Med Sci Sport Exerc.
2016;48:2108–17.
44. Stellingwerff T, Spriet LL, Watt MJ, Kimber NE, Hargreaves M,
Hawley
JA,
Burke
LM.
Decreased
PDH
activation
and
glycogenolysis during exercise following fat adaptation with
carbohydrate restoration. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab.
2006;290:380–8.
45. Burke LM, Ross ML, Garvican-Lewis LA, Welvaert M, Heikura
IA, Forbes SG, Mirtschin JG, Cato LE, Strobel N, Sharma AP,
Hawley JA. Low carbohydrate, high fat diet impairs exercise
economy and negates the performance benefit from intensified
training in elite race walkers. J Physiol. 2017;595:2785–807.
46. Stephens FB, Chee C, Wall BT, Murton AJ, Shannon CE, van
Loon LJ, Tsintzas K. Lipid-induced insulin resistance is associ-
ated with an impaired skeletal muscle protein synthetic response
to amino acid ingestion in healthy young men. Diabetes.
2015;64:1615–20.
47. Vogt S, Heinrich L, Schumacher YO, Grosshauser M, Blum A,
Ko
¨nig D, Berg A, Schmid A. Energy intake and energy expen-
diture of elite cyclists during preseason training. Int J Sports Med.
2005;26:701–6.
48. Impey SG, Hammond KM, Shepherd SO, Sharples AP, Stewart
C, Limb M, Smith K, Philp A, Jeromson S, Hamilton DL, Close
CHO Restriction, Train Low and Training Adaptation
1047
123
 GL, Morton JP. Fuel for the work required: a practical approach
to amalgamating train-low paradigms for endurance athletes.
Physiol Rep. 2016;4:e12803.
49. Lee-Young RS, Palmer MJ, Linden KC, LePlastrier K, Canny BJ,
Hargreaves M, Wadley GD, Kemp BE, McConell GK. Carbo-
hydrate ingestion does not alter skeletal muscle AMPK signalling
during exercise in humans. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab.
2006;291:566–73.
50. Ørtenblad N, Nielsen J, Saltin B, Holmberg H-C. Role of
glycogen availability in sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2? kinetics in
human skeletal muscle. J Physiol. 2011;589:711–25.
51. Duhamel TA, Perco JG, Green HJ. Manipulation of dietary car-
bohydrates after prolonged effort modifies muscle sarcoplasmic
reticulum responses in exercising males. Am J Physiol Regul
Integr Comp Physiol. 2006;291:1100–10.
52. Gejl KD, Hvid LG, Frandsen U, Jensen K, Sahlin K, Ørtenblad N.
Muscle glycogen content modifies SR Ca2? release rate in elite
endurance athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2014;46:496–505.
53. Costa RJ, Jones GE, Lamb KL, Coleman R, Williams JH. The
effects of a high carbohydrate diet on cortisol and salivary
immunoglobulin A (s-IgA) during a period of increase exercise
workload amongst Olympic and Ironman triathletes. Int J Sports
Med. 2005;26:880–6.
54. Jensen L, Gejl KD, Ørtenblad N, Nielsen JL, Bech RD, Nygaard
T, Sahlin K, Frandsen U. Carbohydrate restricted recovery from
long term endurance exercise does not affect gene responses
involved in mitochondrial biogenesis in highly trained athletes.
Physiol Rep. 2015;12:e121814.
55. Gejl KD, Thams L, Hansen M, Rokkedal-Lausch T, Plomgaard P,
Nybo L, Larsen FJ, Cardinale DA, Jensen K, Holmberg HC,
Vissing K, Ørtenblad N. No superior adaptations to carbohydrate
periodization in elite endurance athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
2017;49(12):2486–97.
56. Lane SC, Areta JL, Bird SR, Coffey VG, Burke LM, Desbrow B,
Karagounis LG, Hawley JA. Caffeine ingestion and cycling
power output in a low or normal muscle glycogen state. Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 2013;45:1577–84.
57. Gollnick PD, Piehl K, Saltin B. Selective glycogen depletion
pattern in human skeletal muscle fibres after exercise of varying
intensity
and
at
varying
pedalling
rates.
J
Physiol.
1974;241:45–57.
58. De Bock K, Derave W, Ramaekers M, Richter EA, Hespel P.
Fiber type-specific muscle glycogen sparing due to carbohydrate
intake before and during exercise. J Appl Physiol. 2007;102
(1):183–8.
1048
S. G. Impey et al.
123
