 Lymphocytes eject interferogenic mitochondrial
DNA webs in response to CpG and non-CpG
oligodeoxynucleotides of class C
Björn Ingelssona, Daniel Söderbergb, Tobias Strida, Anita Söderberga,1, Ann-Charlotte Bergha, Vesa Loittoa,
Kourosh Lotfib,c, Mårten Segelmarkb,d, Giannis Spyroua, and Anders Roséna,2
aDepartment of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, SE-581 85 Linköping, Sweden; bDepartment of Medical and Health Sciences,
Linköping University, SE-581 85 Linköping, Sweden; cDepartment of Hematology, Linköping University, SE-581 85 Linköping, Sweden; and dDepartment of
Nephrology, Linköping University, SE-581 85 Linköping, Sweden
Edited by Dennis A. Carson, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, and approved December 11, 2017 (received for review July 11, 2017)
Circulating mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is receiving increasing
attention as a danger-associated molecular pattern in conditions
such as autoimmunity, cancer, and trauma. We report here that
human lymphocytes [B cells, T cells, natural killer (NK) cells], mono-
cytes, and neutrophils derived from healthy blood donors, as well
as B cells from chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients, rapidly eject
mtDNA as web filament structures upon recognition of CpG and
non-CpG oligodeoxynucleotides of class C. The release was
quenched by ZnCl2, independent of cell death (apoptosis, necrosis,
necroptosis, autophagy), and continued in the presence of TLR9
signaling inhibitors. B-cell mtDNA webs were distinct from neutro-
phil extracellular traps concerning structure, reactive oxygen spe-
cies (ROS) dependence, and were devoid of antibacterial proteins.
mtDNA webs acted as rapid (within minutes) messengers, priming
antiviral type I IFN production. In summary, our findings point at a
previously unrecognized role for lymphocytes in antimicrobial de-
fense, utilizing mtDNA webs as signals in synergy with cytokines
and natural antibodies, and cast light on the interplay between
mitochondria and the immune system.
mitochondrial DNA release | immune DNA sensing | lymphocyte signaling |
DAMP | CpG-C
C
ellular receptors in our innate immune system such as nat-
ural antibodies on B cells, scavenger receptors, and recently
discovered immune DNA sensors are programmed to recog-
nize, and respond to, pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs) present on foreign microbes, as well as recognition of
danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), released by
damaged cells (1, 2). Recently, it was shown that mitochondria,
having an ancestral bacterial origin, release DAMP structures
including mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), ATP, mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM), N-formyl peptides, succinate,
and cardiolipin (3). Released mtDNA participates in inflam-
matory responses via different pathways. In the cGAS/STING
pathway, mtDNA participates in cell-intrinsic triggering of in-
nate immune responses and antiviral signaling, and triggers type
I IFN release (4–6). Similar to bacterial and viral DNA, mtDNA
is enriched in unmethylated CpG dinucleotide motifs, which
exhibit strong immunostimulatory effects (7). Unmethylated
CpG oligodeoxyribonucleotides (ODNs) are recognized by
endosomal Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9), which is expressed at
high levels in plasmacytoid dendritic cells and B cells. TLR9-
ligand binding stimulates proliferation, Ig production, and se-
cretion of IL-6, IL-12, and IFN-ɣ (8–11). mtDNA also stimulates
proinflammatory cytokine release via activation of the AIM2 and
NLRP3 inflammasomes (12, 13).
The spectacular neutrophil discharge of decondensed genomic
DNA strands complexed with antibacterial proteins, such as
neutrophil elastase and myeloperoxidase, termed neutrophil
extracellular traps (NETs), was previously found to be triggered
by bacterial PAMPs and phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) (14).
Release was associated with a particular form of cell death,
NETosis, without spreading of harmful granule enzymes and
histones (14, 15). Later, it was observed that extracellular traps
(ETs) could be generated by live cells that released mtDNA
instead of nuclear DNA (16–19). Notably, Itagaki et al. (20)
found that cell-free mtDNA, released in trauma patients, itself
induced classical, suicidal, NETosis via a reactive oxygen species
(ROS)-dependent TLR9 pathway. Although beneficial for path-
ogen clearance, circulating DNA constitutes a potential risk for
autoantibody induction if not rapidly cleared. Both nuclear and
mtDNA ETs show proinflammatory characteristics and have been
detected in clinical conditions such as autoimmunity, HIV, and
cancer (21–24).
In this study, we report the previously unrecognized finding
that lymphocytes [B cells, T cells, natural killer (NK) cells], as
well as monocytes and neutrophils, upon treatment with CpG-C
and non–CpG-C, rapidly release mtDNA as long elastic fila-
ments that we call webs. The web release was induced in a
pathway independent from B-cell antigen receptor (BCR),
TLR9, STING, and AIM2 signaling, independent from ROS and
cell death (apoptosis, necrosis, necroptosis, autophagy). Isolated
web protein composition analyzed by mass spectrometry was
different from NETs. Once released, the mtDNA webs primed
Significance
Release of pathogen- and danger-associated molecular pat-
terns (PAMPs and DAMPs) contributes to inflammatory re-
sponses and antiviral signaling. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is
a potent DAMP molecule observed in blood circulation of
trauma, autoimmune, HIV, and certain cancer patients. Here,
we report a previously unrecognized lymphocyte feature that
CpG and non-CpG oligodeoxynucleotides of class C promptly
induce release of mtDNA as extracellular web-like structures.
Lymphocyte mtDNA webs provoked antiviral type I IFN pro-
duction in peripheral blood mononuclear cells but were devoid
of bactericidal proteins. Notably, cells remained viable after the
release. Our findings imply an alternative role for lymphocytes
in antiviral signaling by utilizing their mtDNA as a rapid sig-
naling molecule to communicate danger.
Author contributions: B.I., D.S., G.S., and A.R. designed research; B.I., D.S., T.S., A.S.,
A.-C.B., V.L., and A.R. performed research; K.L. and G.S. contributed new reagents/analytic
tools; B.I., D.S., T.S., A.S., A.-C.B., V.L., K.L., M.S., G.S., and A.R. analyzed data; and B.I., G.S.,
and A.R. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Published under the PNAS license.
1Deceased March 5, 2017.
2To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: anders.rosen@liu.se.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1711950115/-/DCSupplemental.
E478–E487
|
PNAS
|
Published online January 2, 2018
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711950115
 antiviral type I IFN secretion in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs). Thus, a scenario emerges where immune cells
may utilize mtDNA as rapid danger messenger molecule acting
in synergy with cytokines and natural antibodies.
Results
B Lymphocytes Release Extracellular DNA Webs After Sensing GC-Rich
Oligonucleotides. Natural antibodies recognizing modified epi-
topes on proteins, lipids, and DNA are produced by innate B1-
like B cells and by chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) B cells
(25, 26). DNA released into circulation is a potentially harmful
DAMP, and its removal is essential to avoid autoimmune reac-
tions (24). In the process of studying binding of natural auto-
antibodies derived from CLL B cells (26, 27) to NET structures,
we observed that these CLL B cells not only produced antibodies
to NETs, but also could release ET-like structures themselves.
This finding prompted us to search for potential inducers of
B-cell ETs. Unexpectedly, in a panel of 18 known NET inducers
and B-cell activators (Fig. 1 and SI Materials and Methods), CpG
oligonucleotide of class C (ODN 2395; hereinafter referred to as
CpG-C, unless otherwise stated) was the only stimuli that in-
duced release of ET-like structures (Fig. 1 A–C). These webs
were sensitive to DNase treatment, implicating DNA content
(Fig. 1D). Untreated cells or CpG-C treatment of isolated cell
supernatants, in which cells were removed by centrifugation, did
not generate these fibrous DNA structures (Fig. 1 E and F and
Fig. S1A). These B-cell DNA webs were flexible and fragile, that
is, sensitive to paraformaldehyde fixation, compared with PMA-
induced NETs. Therefore, onward analyses of B-cell DNA webs
were performed by live-cell fluorescence microscopy and agarose
gel electrophoresis. Released DNA isolated from cell culture
media revealed a distinct large-sized DNA fragment exclusively
found in CpG-C–exposed cultures as analyzed in agarose gel
electrophoresis (Fig. 1G).
We expanded the analysis to a panel of CD5+/CD19+ leuke-
mic B-cell samples isolated from 14 treatment-naive CLL pa-
tients, as well as to six CD19+/CD20+ and two B1-like CD5+/
CD19+ B-cell samples from healthy blood donors and found all
to produce DNA webs in response to CpG-C. Thus, DNA re-
lease was not restricted to leukemic B cells or B1-like B cells. In
expanded analyses to other PBMC subpopulations, we found
that all tested cells (B cells, T cells, NK cells, and monocytes)
released DNA webs in response to CpG-C (Fig. 1H and Fig.
S1B). In addition, neutrophils also released CpG-C–induced
DNA webs that appeared different from PMA-induced NETs
(Fig. 1 I and J). Notably, the electrophoretic migration pattern of
CpG-C–induced DNA webs in agarose gels was compared with
PMA-induced NETs and found to be markedly different. DNA
released upon CpG-C treatment migrated as a uniform-sized
fragment, while PMA-induced NETs consisted of large-sized
DNA with strongly retarded gel entry, implicating a different
and larger structural composition (Fig. 1K, lanes 2 and 3). In-
hibition of NADPH oxidase by apocynin did not prevent CpG-
C–stimulated neutrophils from releasing DNA webs, whereas
PMA-induced NETs were abolished, indicating a different re-
lease mechanism (Fig. 1K, lanes 5 and 6, and Fig. S1C). We also
tested whether nonimmune cells could generate webs. However,
CpG-C did not trigger web release from primary foreskin fi-
broblasts, HepG2 liver carcinoma epithelial cells, and HEK
293 embryonic kidney epithelial cells (Fig. S1D). Therefore, we
decided to study the DNA release from B cells in detail.
Released B-Cell Webs Are of mtDNA Origin. DNA sequencing of the
characteristic fragment observed in Fig. 1G disclosed high
abundance of mtDNA, a finding that was verified by PCR using
primers specific for mitochondrial or nuclear DNA (Fig. 2A and
Fig. S2 A and B). The apparent size of the released mtDNA was,
however, significantly larger than expected for mtDNA. Purifi-
cation of released DNA by removal of cell culture media com-
ponents, changed the apparent size to that of purified mtDNA
(Fig. 2B). A reverse-step experiment was performed in which
purified mtDNA was added to cell culture media. This resulted
in a retarded migration and an apparent size similar to that of
uncleaned webs (Fig. 2B), suggesting that presence of cell culture
media affects mtDNA mobility. We also observed that DNA
Fig. 1.
CpG-C ODN prompts B cells to release DNA as long extracellular webs.
(A–C) Visualization of extracellular DNA in cell culture medium after treatment
of CLL B cells with CpG-C using live-cell microscopy with Nikon Eclipse with a 4×
objective, and Zeiss Axiovert with 10× and 40× objectives, respectively.
(D) Treatment of released DNA with DNase I for 30 min. (E) Extracellular
nucleic acid staining in untreated control samples. (F) CpG-C ODN in cell
supernatants after removal of cells. Cells were incubated in cell culture media
for 3 h before cells were removed by centrifugation and further incubated
with CpG-C for 3 h. (G) Agarose gel electrophoresis separation of collected
extracellular DNA from cell supernatants after incubation of CLL B cells with
indicated stimuli revealed a characteristic DNA fragment present only in
samples from CpG-C–treated cells (indicated by an arrow). (H) Analysis of DNA
webs produced by B cells, T cells, NK cells, and monocytes in agarose gels.
(I and J) Microscope images (4× objective) showing DNA release from PMA-
and CpG-C–stimulated neutrophils, respectively. (K) Agarose gel electrophoresis
of extracellular DNA collected from neutrophils treated with PMA or CpG-C in
the presence or not of apocynin.
Ingelsson et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 2, 2018
|
E479
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 migration was hampered by presence of SYTOX Green nucleic
acid stain (Fig. S2C). Of note, PCR analysis of DNA isolated
from collected supernatant, using nuclear DNA-specific primers,
did not show presence of any nuclear DNA (Fig. 2C). In con-
trast, mtDNA could be amplified in <1% of the sample (Fig.
2D). Spontaneous release of mtDNA fragments has been pre-
viously reported (28), and we also observed that mtDNA was
amplified in untreated samples, albeit to a significantly lower
extent (mean ratio of CpG-C treated/untreated, 2.0; SD, ±0.4;
P < 0.005; n = 4). However, since no large-size DNA was ob-
served in supernatants of untreated cells (Fig. 1G), our results
show that CpG-C specifically induce release of webs consisting of
full-size mtDNA rather than fragments. Copy number analysis of
DNA remaining in cells after CpG-C treatment, using droplet
digital PCR, did however not reveal any significant change in
mtDNA copy number compared with untreated cells (Fig. S2D).
Increasing
concentrations
of
CpG-C
resulted
in
dose-
dependent release of mtDNA from B cells (Fig. 2E and Fig.
S2E), and kinetic analysis revealed increase of mtDNA webs
within cell supernatants over time (Fig. 2F). Of note, CpG-C was
localized rapidly in the cells (Fig. S2F) but appeared not to align
with the released mtDNA as analyzed with FITC-labeled CpG-C
(Fig. S2G).
mtDNA Web Casting in B Cells Is Uncoupled from Cytokine Release.
CpG-ODNs are known ligands of TLR9, but interestingly CpG
recognition by TLR9 differs between immune cells depending on
the ODN class (29). These classes differ both in the primary and
secondary structure (Fig. 3A). B cells are known to release cy-
tokines in response to ODNs of B and C classes (8). As we only
found CpG of the C class to induce mtDNA-web ejection from B
cells, we wanted to analyze the involvement of TLR9 in this
event further. Secretion of different cytokines, IL-10, IL-1, IL-6,
IFN-α2, and TNF (Fig. 3B and Fig. S3 A–D), after stimulation of
CLL B cells with CpG-A, CpG-B, and CpG-C for 6 h, was
compared with mtDNA web release data described in Fig. 1G.
CpG-A neither generated IL-10 nor webs, whereas both CpG-B
and CpG-C provoked IL-10 secretion, but remarkably only CpG-C
induced mtDNA webs. Negative controls of TLR9 pathway
signaling, ODNs lacking the CpG structural motif (non-CpG;
e.g., GpC-B and GpC-C), did not induce IL-10 secretion com-
pared with untreated cells (Fig. 3B), indicating the importance of
the CpG-structural motif for cytokine production via TLR9.
Chloroquine, an inhibitor of TLR9 signaling, abolished IL-
10 secretion from CpG-B– and CpG-C–stimulated cells, verify-
ing TLR9 pathway block (Fig. 3B). Importantly, chloroquine did
not compromise CpG-C–induced mtDNA release (Fig. 3C),
suggesting an endosomal TLR9-independent pathway.
mtDNA Webs Are Induced in a TLR9-Independent Pathway. The ob-
servation that CpG-B induced TLR9-dependent cytokine secre-
tion, but not mtDNA web release, prompted us to carefully
analyze different CpG ODN classes for the ability to induce
mtDNA webs. The amount of released webs from CLL B cells
treated with 1.25 μg/mL (180 nM) CpG-C for 2 h was used as a
reference. CLL B cells were also treated at 180 or 360 nM with
CpG-A, CpG-B, GpC-C, and the inhibitory ODN TTAGGG
(A151) known to block CpG signaling. Remarkably, the non–
CpG-C control, GpC-C, induced mtDNA release in a dose-
dependent manner (Fig. 3D and Fig. S3D), emphasizing that
the CpG-motif per se is not crucial for mtDNA web release. No
web release was observed for CpG-A, CpG-B, and A151, as
shown by gel electrophoresis and immunofluorescence (Fig. 3D
and Fig. S3E). Since only C-class ODNs were found to stimulate
webs, two additional C-class ODNs (ODN D-SL03 and ODN
M362) as well as a P-class ODN (ODN 21798) were analyzed.
P-class ODN 21798 is similar to the CpG-C ODN 2395 used in
our previous experiments, but holds an extra CpG motif and one
additional stem-loop motif (Fig. S3F). Both ODN D-SL03 and
ODN 21798 induced web release, while no or very low amounts
of webs could be observed after stimulation by ODN M362 (Fig.
S3 G–I). The ODN sequences and secondary structures (Fig. 3A
and Fig. S3F) indicate a common GC-rich stem-loop motif at the
3′ end for the stimulating ODNs, reminiscent of certain viral
G-rich Y-form DNA motifs (30).
Combination of ODNs of the other classes with CpG-C did
not reduce web release compared with stimulation by CpG-C
alone (Fig. S3J), indicating that CpG-C targets a unique sensor
to which no competitive binding of CpG-A, CpG-B, nor
A151 occur. A TLR9-independent pathway is further supported
by the finding that additional inhibitors of TLR9 signaling,
rolipram and wortmannin (31, 32), also did not prevent the re-
lease of mtDNA upon CpG-C treatment (Table 1 and Fig. S4A).
In addition to endosomal expression, B cells express TLR9 on
the plasma membrane (33). However, we observed no inhibitory
(or stimulatory) effect of B-cell DNA web formation in the
Fig. 2.
Rapid dose-dependent release of mtDNA from B cells upon CpG-C
exposure. (A) PCR analysis of the characteristic band observed in Fig. 1G with
specific primers for both mitochondrial and nuclear-encoded genes using
total cell DNA as control. (B) Comparison of purified mtDNA and isolated
mtDNA webs in agarose gels. DNA was either purified by removal of cell
culture media components (“cleaned”) or mixed with RPMI 1640 before
electrophoresis. (C) PCR analysis of total isolated DNA released from un-
treated and CpG-C–treated cells using a primer specific for a nuclear enco-
ded gene (actb). Total DNA isolated from CLL B cells at different template
amounts was used as positive control. (D) PCR analysis of DNA released from
untreated and CpG-C–treated cells using a primer specific for a mitochondria
encoded gene (atp6). The analysis was made by varying the number of PCR
cycles, and the ratio CpG-C treated/untreated was calculated by measuring
band intensities (n = 4). (E) Agarose gel separation of extracellular DNA
collected from cells treated with increasing amounts of CpG-C revealed
concentration dependence of mtDNA release. The asterisk (*) denotes the
medium control containing CpG-C in the absence of cells. (F) A representa-
tive gel showing the time dependence of mtDNA release from B cells upon
CpG-C treatment during 4 h (n = 3).
E480
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711950115
Ingelsson et al.
 presence of anti-TLR9 antibodies (Fig. S4A), despite the fact
that both CpG-C and the TLR9 antibody did bind to cell surface
(Fig. S4B). We found that B cells and T cells produced mtDNA
webs at similar levels (Fig. 1H). However, TLR9 is known to be
expressed at higher levels in B cells (10) and immunoblotting
using a TLR9-specific antibody revealed much less TLR9 in
T cells and neutrophils compared with B cells (Fig. 3E), also
suggesting a TLR9-independent mechanism of web release.
B-Cell Webs Induce Release of Type I IFN from PBMCs. As mtDNA
has been reported to act as a DAMP molecule with interfero-
genic and proinflammatory properties, we wanted to examine
whether B-cell mtDNA webs also could elicit a similar response.
Webs from GpC-C–treated CLL B cells were collected and in-
cubated with PBMCs (Materials and Methods). PBMCs exposed
to webs for 16 h released significant amounts of type I IFN (IFN-α)
(P < 0.005; Fig. 4A) but not IL-1β (Fig. S5 A and B). Importantly,
B-cell supernatants devoid of webs (i.e., supernatants from
CLL cells not exposed to GpC-C; “untreated”) could not in-
duce IFN-α secretion (Fig. 4A). Interestingly, DNase treatment
of webs amplified the IFN-α production (P < 0.0005). Although
the characteristic web fragment in agarose gels could not be
observed after DNase treatment, the gene for mitochondrial
cytochrome b could still be amplified by PCR (Fig. S5 C–E).
DNase digest DNA into oligonucleotides and mononucleotides,
and obviously these smaller web fragments were more inter-
ferogenic. The GpC-C control induced detectable IFN-α secretion
but to a significantly lower extent than webs (webs vs. GpC-C
control, P < 0.05), most likely due to GpC-C retention in the
sample. GpC-C is not known to induce IFN-α by itself, but as
GpC-C stimulate PBMCs to release webs, GpC-C contamination
within the web sample could contribute to the observed IFN-α
(Fig. 4A). The supernatant of GpC-C–exposed CLL B cells used
for PBMC stimulation contained no IFN-α (Fig. 4B).
mtDNA Web Casting Is Inhibited by Zn2+ and Hypothermia. Potential
mechanisms behind B-cell mtDNA web release were investigated
by intervening cellular pathways with appropriate inhibitors
(Table 1). For comparison, we analyzed their capacity of inhib-
iting PMA-induced NETs in parallel (Fig. S6A). The results are
presented in Fig. 3F and Figs. S4 and S6B. Strikingly, although
several inhibitors effectively inhibited NET release, only treat-
ment with ZnCl2 prevented CpG-C–induced B-cell webs (Fig.
3F). Importantly, cell viability was not compromised by ZnCl2
(Fig. S4 D and E). Hypothermia (+4 °C) showed similar in-
hibition of web formation (Fig. 3F).
The mode of action of inhibitors along with affected pathways is
illustrated in Fig. 5. To summarize, we found no effect on web
release by blocking BCR, TLR9, cGAS/STING, and AIM2 infla-
mmasome signaling pathways. Inhibitors of cell death (apoptosis,
necrosis, necroptosis, autophagy), ROS formation, and endo-
cytosis were also ineffective. Cyclosporin A, previously reported
to inhibit release of mtDNA fragments (28), did not affect
web release.
Although hypothermia and zinc sensitivity specify active bi-
ological processes, both treatments intervene with multiple cel-
lular processes and insight in mechanistic details of mtDNA web
casting renders further studies.
mtDNA Web Casting Is Not Accompanied by ROS/Reactive Nitrogen
Species nor Cell Death. Inhibitors and scavengers of ROS had no
effect on mtDNA release (Table 1), which argues for a ROS-
independent mechanism. To verify this, various reactive species,
that is, hydrogen peroxide, peroxynitrite, hydroxyl radicals, nitric
Fig. 3.
Impact of different CpG classes on cytokine secretion and web release. (A) Sequences and mfold predictions of secondary structures of the ODNs used. The
structures with the lowest Gibbs free energy for each ODN are presented. Cytosine and guanine bases are highlighted. (B) IL-10 concentrations in the supernatants
of CLL B cells after 6 h of incubation with indicated ODNs with or without the presence of chloroquine (10 μM). Data are expressed as picograms per milliliter and
show the mean plotted for each individual experiment (n = 3). *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.0005 (one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s post hoc test), #P < 0.05, ###P <
0.0005 [one-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s post hoc test for pairwise comparisons (CpG-B vs. CpG-B plus chloroquine; CpG-C vs. CpG-C plus chloroquine)]. (C) The
effect of chloroquine on mtDNA web release after incubation with 1.25 μg/mL CpG-C was analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis and DNA staining (n = 3).
(D) Extracellular DNA collected from cell supernatants after 2-h incubation of B cells with indicated ODNs at two different concentrations was analyzed using
agarose gel electrophoresis and DNA staining. CpG-C (180 nM corresponding to 1.25 μg/mL) was used as a reference (n = 3). (E) Immunoblot showing the presence
of TLR9 in B cells, T cells, and neutrophils. Proteins corresponding to equal number of cells were separated using SDS/PAGE and immunoblotting toward actin was
used as a loading control. (F) The effect of ZnCl2 and hypothermia on mtDNA web release analyzed using agarose gel electrophoresis.
Ingelsson et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 2, 2018
|
E481
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 oxide, and peroxy radicals, were probed. Indeed, neither CLL B
cells nor neutrophils were found to increase ROS/reactive ni-
trogen species (RNS) after CpG-C stimulation (Fig. 6A). How-
ever, as expected, high ROS levels were observed in PMA-
stimulated neutrophils, used as a positive control. Generation
of mitochondrial superoxide was analyzed using MitoSOX Red,
which specifically targets mitochondria. No production of mito-
chondrial superoxide was observed in CpG-C–stimulated cells,
while PMA induced an intense formation of superoxide in neu-
trophils (Fig. S6 C and D).
mtDNA web release could not be blocked by inhibitors of cell
death (Q-VD-OPh, necrostatin-1, and wortmannin; Table 1 and
Fig. S4A), and analysis of necrosis revealed no effect after CpG-
C exposure. This is in clear contrast to PMA treatment of neu-
trophils, which had a potent cytotoxic effect (Fig. 6B). Moni-
toring cell viability and apoptosis within the same sample did not
reveal any effect on cell viability upon CpG-C treatment (Fig.
6C). No significant variations in caspase 3/7 activity were ob-
served, in contrast to staurosporine-exposed cells that had a high
caspase 3/7 activity.
In addition, active metabolism was not affected by CpG-C
compared with untreated cells, while metabolism in staurosporine-
exposed cells was hampered (Fig. S6E). Similarly, cellular ATP
levels were not compromised compared with untreated and
CpG-B–treated cells, suggesting no mitochondrial dysfunction
(Fig. 6D). Inhibition of the mitochondrial electron transport
Table 1.
Effects of signal pathway inhibitors on B-cell mtDNA web release and NET formation
Treatment
Mode of action
Concentrations
tested
Inhibition of mtDNA
web release
Inhibition of
NETs
TLR9 signaling inhibitors
Chloroquine
Prevents endosome formation and TLR9 signaling
10 μM
No
No
Rolipram
PDE4 inhibitor; inhibits intracellular TLR9 signaling
20 μM
No
No
Wortmannin
PI3K and autophagy inhibitor; also inhibits the
uptake and colocalization of CpG DNA with TLR9
4–10 μM
No
No
Anti-TLR9 antibody
Binds to TLR9 on plasma membrane
10 μg/mL
No
NT
BCR signaling inhibitors
PP2
Inhibits Src family kinases
1 μM
No
No
Syk inhibitor II
Inhibitor of Syk; can also inhibit PKCe, PKCβII, ZAP-70,
Btk, and Itk at higher concentrations
10 μM
No
Yes**
ROS inhibitors/scavengers
Apocynin
Inhibitor of NADPH oxidase activity
0.1–1 mM
No
Yes**
DPI
Inhibitor of NADPH oxidase activity
2.5–10 μM
No
Yes**
Catalase
Catalyzes the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide
to water and oxygen
1,000 U/mL
No
Yes**
PEG-catalase
PEG-catalase can cross plasma membrane and act
intracellular
1,000 U/mL
No
Yes*
Superoxide dismutase (SOD)
Catalyzes the dismutation of superoxide radicals to
hydrogen peroxide and molecular oxygen
50–200 U/mL
No
No
PEG-SOD
PEG-SOD can cross the plasma membrane and act
intracellular
200 U/mL
No
No
N-Acetyl cysteine (NAC)
Antioxidant
5 mM
No
No
Deferoxamine mesylate
Dextran conjugated; iron chelator; inhibitor of
Fenton chemistry
1,000 μM
No
No
Ferrostatin-1
Inhibitor of ferroptosis acting as a lipid ROS
scavenger
5 μM
No
No
Rotenone
Modulator of mitochondrial electron transport
chain
2.5 μM
No
No
MitoQ
Mitochondria-targeted antioxidant
1 μM
No
No
Inhibitors of cell death and
endocytosis
Nec1
Inhibitor of necroptosis
10 μM
No
No
Q-VD-OPh
Pan-caspase inhibitor
10 μM
No
No
Cytochalasin D
Depolymerizes F-actin; inhibitor of endocytosis
2.5–10 μM
No
Yes**
Dansylcadaverine
Inhibitor of clathrin-dependent endocytosis
25–100 μM
No
No
Miscellaneous
Cyclosporin A
Immunosuppressant; also found to inhibit the
release of mtDNA fragments by inhibiting of
mitochondria pore opening
1–40 μM
No
NT
Hypothermia
Affects multiple cellular processes, that is, inhibition
of endocytosis
Incubation at +4 °C
Yes
Yes**
Quinacrine
Inhibitor of inflammation; nonspecific inhibitor of
cGAS/STING signaling
5–10 μM
No
NT
ZnCl2
Inhibits several cellular processes including cysteine
proteases, iron uptake, lymphocyte proliferation,
MAP kinases, endonucleases, and TNF-induced
cytolysis
0.01–1 mM
Yes
Yes*
*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; NT, not tested.
E482
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711950115
Ingelsson et al.
 chain by antimycin A or rotenone did, however, completely
abolish ATP production.
B-Cell Webs Are Devoid of Bactericidal Proteins. Considering that
the fragile nature of released mtDNA may preclude isolation of
mtDNA web-associated proteins using methods previously de-
scribed for NET protein isolation (34), we developed an extra-
cellular DNA isolation method taking advantage of the
interaction between DNA and silicate glass beads (SI
Materials and Methods). This method allowed identification of
the majority of the PMA-induced NET-associated proteins pre-
viously described (34), including several bactericidal proteins
(Table S1), thus verifying the reliability of our method. We ana-
lyzed isolated webs from 10 CpG-C–treated CLL B-cell cultures
and 10 control samples [e.g., untreated (n = 7) and CpG-A treated
(n = 3)]. However, none of the proteins associated with NETs
could be found within B-cell mtDNA webs (Dataset S1). The
proteins presented in Dataset S1 represent those proteins that
were found to differ in spectral counts by a factor of >1.5. It
should be noted that the samples overall contained very small
amounts of proteins, and some of the identified proteins should
possibly be regarded as contaminants (e.g., keratin and comple-
ment C4). However, the webs are clearly devoid of proteins with
antimicrobial properties. The absence of antibacterial proteins in
the webs underline the difference to NETs. The antibacterial
properties of NETs and mtDNA webs were also tested on Escherichia
coli. Released B-cell webs were incubated with E. coli DH5α and found
not to compromise the number of colony-forming bacteria (Fig. 6E).
Thus, we conclude that B-cell mtDNA webs are unique and differ from
previously reported NETs of nuclear DNA or mtDNA origin.
The mitochondrial transcription factor TFAM regulates the
degree of mtDNA packing into nucleoids (35). As mass spec-
trometry did not reveal any TFAM associated with the webs, we
made a more dedicated analysis of TFAM using immunoblotting.
We could not detect any TFAM in the extracellular fraction (cell
supernatant-containing webs) measured after 4 h of CpG-C treat-
ment, indicating low, if any, amounts of TFAM to be released along
with the webs (Fig. 6F). However, we observed an intense increase
of intracellular TFAM levels in CpG-C–exposed cells compared
with untreated cells (Fig. 6F). Thus, CpG-C treatment and/or loss
of mtDNA stimulate the cell to increase the levels of TFAM, which
have a strong impact on mitochondria biogenesis (36).
Discussion
The physiological importance of cell-free circulating mtDNA as
a pathogenic factor and DAMP molecule in inflammatory dis-
eases, autoimmunity, cancer, trauma, and bacterial and viral
infections, is extensively reviewed in recent publications (3, 7, 24,
37–40). In this study, we report on a previously unrecognized
feature of human immune cells: B cells, T cells, NK cells,
monocytes, and neutrophils release interferogenic mtDNA webs
extracellularly upon exposure to short CpG and non-CpG ODNs
of class C. Previously described NET stimuli, such as bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or PMA, did not generate mtDNA
webs. Webs were rapidly released from viable cells, indepen-
dently of ROS, and were devoid of proteins that trap and kill
bacteria, such as granule proteins observed in NETs. Consider-
ing the inducing stimuli and effector cell function, our results
suggest that lymphocytes utilize mtDNA webs as rapid extra-
cellular messenger molecules and provide alternative roles for
mtDNA in antimicrobial signaling.
Derived from a bacterial ancestor, mitochondria share many
features with bacteria, including a circular DNA genome with
unmethylated CpG motifs (41). As the innate immune system
recognizes conserved bacterial molecules, mitochondrial constit-
uents are similarly immunogenic (38, 40, 42). It was previously
reported that proinflammatory and antiinflammatory cytokines
are produced by activated plasmacytoid dendritic cells and B cells
in response to unmethylated CpG-containing DAMP motifs (10,
11). West and Shadel (40) discuss that unique aspects of mtDNA,
such as its length, conformation, sequence, and degree of oxida-
tion, govern its differential agonist activities, which may explain
why mtDNA release does not uniformly activate both proin-
flammatory and type I IFN responses (40).
In accordance, we found that the lymphocyte-derived mtDNA
webs effectively primed type I IFN production in PBMCs and that
enzymatic cleavages of webs into shorter lengths amplified type I
IFN response. This finding underlines the interferogenic charac-
teristics of mtDNA previously reported by others (5, 6, 24). No-
tably, mtDNA is recognized by more than one immune signaling
pathway. While Zhang et al. (7) found that mtDNA, released into
circulation after injury, activated neutrophils and caused in-
flammatory responses via TLR9, White et al. (5), Rongvaux et al.
(6), and West et al. (4) showed that mtDNA escaping mitochondria
during apoptosis or herpes simplex virus 1 exposure, engaged the
cGAS/STING signaling pathway to induce type I IFN. Moreover,
oxidized mtDNA binds to, and activates, the NLRP3 inflamma-
some, leading to production of IL-1β (13). mtDNA also promotes
neutrophil adhesion and, noteworthy, acts as a potent inducer of
NETs that further raise the inflammatory pressure (3, 20, 43). West
et al. (4) highlight the role of mtDNA as a participant in cell-
intrinsic triggering of innate immune responses and antiviral sig-
naling. Thus, based on these observations, studies by Zhang et al.
(7), and our findings, we propose that mtDNA also acts as an
extrinsic trigger of innate immune responses.
mtDNA is highly susceptible to oxidation, and oxidized
mtDNA is enriched in NETs from systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) or IFN-primed healthy neutrophils. These oxidized
mtDNA induce mRNA expression and secretion of type I IFN,
TNF, and IL-6 (24, 44). In autoimmune conditions, besides SLE,
increased oxidized mtDNA was found in synovial fluids and
plasma of rheumatoid arthritis (45), and in patients with gran-
ulomatosis with polyangiitis (46). The pivotal study by Zhang
Fig. 4.
Webs prime type I IFN secretion. (A) IFN-α levels in PBMC cultures were
analyzed after 16-h stimulation with web-containing supernatants (“webs”) or
supernatants from mock-treated CLL cells (“untreated”). PBMCs cultured in
fresh medium were used as negative control (“control”). The additional con-
trol, GpC-C ODN without cells, was treated in the same way as the web sample
(“GpC-C”). Samples were also digested with DNase. (B) IFN-α levels in super-
natants before PBMC exposure. Data shown represent mean values from three
different B-cell web donor preparations (●, ■, and ▲, respectively). The
measured IFN-α concentrations for DNase-treated webs were above the linear
range for the assay and are viewed as >800 pg/mL. **P < 0.005, ***P < 0.0005,
one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s post hoc test. #P < 0.05, ###P < 0.0005,
one-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s post hoc test for pairwise comparisons
(webs vs. GpC-C and webs plus DNase vs. webs).
Ingelsson et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 2, 2018
|
E483
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 Fig. 5.
Summary of pathway analysis. I. Unique signaling pathway responding to CpG-C/GpC-C ODNs. B cells responded to unmethylated CpG-C and GpC-C oligo-
deoxynucleotides, but not to CpG-A and CpG-B, by releasing mtDNA webs. The release/signal transduction was inhibited by hypothermia and ZnCl2 (Fig. 3F). Cyclosporin
A act as an inhibitor of mitochondria pore opening and prevents the release of mtDNA fragments. However, the release of mtDNA webs was not inhibited by
cyclosporin A (Fig. S4A). Endocytosis of CpG-C or GpC-C is apparently not required for B-cell mtDNA web development as two different inhibitors of endocytosis, cy-
tochalasin D and dansylcadaverine, were unable to prevent mtDNA ejection (Fig. S4A). II. Evidence for B-cell receptor (BCR) independent pathway. BCR signaling is
activated by ligation with anti-IgM F(ab′)2. However, treatment of B cells with anti-IgM F(ab′)2 did not induce mtDNA release (Fig. 1G). Inhibition of BCR downstream
signaling molecules, using the inhibitors PP2, Syk inihibitor II, and wortmannin did not hamper mtDNA web release. The targets of these inhibitors, kinases Lyn, Syk, and
PI3K, are crucial for BCR signaling acting as transmitters of the activation signal into cytoplasmic signaling pathways (Fig. S4A). III. Evidence for TLR9-independent
pathway. The most convincing evidence for a TLR9-independent mechanism of mtDNA web release is (i) lack of CpG-motif requirement (i.e., also non-CpG-C can
stimulate web release) and (ii) insensitivity to endosomal inhibitor chloroquine and the fact that cells with low levels of TLR9 can also produce mtDNA webs (Fig. 3 C and
E). See Fig. 3 and connected text for more comprehensive explanation of TLR9 redundancy in web release. IV. Evidence for STING-independent pathway. Stimulation of
STING (followed by translocation to perinuclear vesicles) induces type I IFN release. We found no (or weak) type I IFN release from B cells treated with GpC-C, although
GpC-C generated mtDNA web release (Fig. S6B). Moreover, STING agonist 2′3′-cGAMP did not induce mtDNA web release. Also, quinacrine, a nonspecific inhibitor of
STING signaling, did not prevent CpG-C–induced mtDNA web release. We also showed that CLL B cells, despite expressing low levels of STING, could release mtDNA webs
(Fig. S6B). V. Evidence for AIM2-inflammasome–independent pathway. Inhibition of key enzymes, AIM2 and caspase-1, in inflammasome signaling did not affect mtDNA
web release. In addition, IL-1β secretion, normally high upon AIM2 stimulation, was absent or very low in three different donor B-cell samples (Fig. S3D). VI. Evidence for
ROS-independent mechanism. ROS has a fundamental role in NET release. Inhibitors of ROS formation (i.e., DPI and apocynin) and ROS scavengers (i.e., SOD, catalase,
NAC, MitoQ, and ferrostatin-1) did, however, not affect mtDNA web release (Fig. S4A). Neither did treatment with inhibitors of mitochondrial electron transport chain
and Fenton chemistry (i.e., rotenone and deferoxamine mesylate). See Fig. 6 and related text for more extensive analysis of ROS.
E484
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711950115
Ingelsson et al.
 et al. (7) showed that circulating mitochondrial-derived formyl
peptides and DNA are causing inflammation in response to in-
jury, advocating that the release is a key link between trauma,
inflammation, and systemic inflammatory response syndrome.
Elevated levels of circulating mtDNA in plasma have also been
found in patients during HIV infection. Levels of mtDNA did
not correlate with number of T cells nor with markers of immune
activation. Significant correlation was, however, observed with
plasma virus load, potentially contributing to the chronic in-
flammatory state observed in the disease (22). Bacterial in-
fections, for example, by Streptococcus pneumoniae, increase
mtDNA in circulation via TLR9 in acute kidney injury patients
(47). Increased mtDNA plasma levels are also observed in car-
diovascular conditions, in diseases of aging, and in malignancies
(38, 40). Interestingly, our initial observations on mtDNA re-
lease were seen in B lymphocytes derived from CLL patients.
These were recently shown to have significantly increased
mtDNA copy number (48). As noted above, circulating DNA
constitute a potential risk for autoantibody induction if not
rapidly cleared. Presence of anti-DNA autoantibodies in CLL
and SLE (25) underlines the importance of further studies in
understanding the impact of mtDNA in the pathogenesis.
Previously, it was reported that fragments of mtDNA escaped
from mitochondria into the cytosol by opening of the mito-
chondrial permeability transition pore, a release that could be
blocked by cyclosporin A (28). In contrast, we found that CpG-C
stimulated release of full-size mtDNA (e.g., not as fragments)
and that discharge was insensitive to cyclosporin A. Although
mtDNA was ejected, cell viability, mtDNA copy number, and
mitochondrial ATP levels seemed uncompromised in the B cells.
The mitochondria holds more copies of mtDNA than required to
sustain oxidative phosphorylation, implicating additional roles
for mtDNA, possibly related to mitochondrial signaling and
immune functions, as suggested (40). High TFAM levels have
been shown to correlate with increased mtDNA copy number
(35, 49–51). Since we observed unaltered mtDNA copy number
along with intense increase of TFAM levels upon CpG-C treat-
ment, it is possible that mitochondria are compensating for the
release by mtDNA replication.
Generally, our results suggest that release is an active process
and not a result of cell damage. These findings are also supported
by the fact that apoptotic pathways, as a rule, do not generate IFN
production, whereas we found that CpG-C and GpC-C generated
type I IFN production via the release of mtDNA webs, reminis-
cent of viral infection. In accordance, White and Kile (52) also
noted that virally induced mtDNA stress, causing release of
mtDNA into the cytosol, is distinct from apoptotic mtDNA re-
lease. This may suggest that the GC-rich stem-loop ODNs used in
our study are recognized in a pathway that induces mtDNA stress
in analogy to certain viruses. Despite recent observations, the
mechanism of mtDNA release is still to be clarified, as pointed out
recently by West and Shadel (40) and others (4, 52). It is not
known how the two levels of mtDNA discharge, first into cytosol
then into extracellular space, are regulated (3), but cellular stress
is discussed as a primary factor for liberation of mitochondrial
DAMPs. Viral infection priming mitochondrial antiviral signaling
protein (MAVS)-signalosome located on the outer mitochondrial
membrane is probably one of these potent stressors as discussed in
detail by Jin et al. (39). Another mechanism was proposed by
Caielli et al. (44) who suggested that release of mtDNA requires
fusion of mitochondrial membranes with plasma membrane. This
hypothesis has, however, yet to be proven.
We speculate that only mitochondria that replicate or transcribe
their DNA at the time of CpG-C exposure can eject their DNA.
Unlike nuclear DNA, mtDNA is not associated with histones,
but organized into compact DNA–protein complexes, nucleoids,
which are composed of proteins for mtDNA packaging as well as
transcription and replication factors. TFAM plays a key role in the
packing of mtDNA into nucleoids. Low levels of TFAM generate
a loosely packed nucleoid, while high levels result in a compact
state. Transcription of mtDNA occurs when the nucleoid is loose
and elongated, while it is inhibited in the compact state (35). Since
both our mass spectrometry and immunoblotting analyses showed
no concomitant TFAM release along with webs, this implicates
Fig. 6.
mtDNA release is ROS and cell death independent. (A) Analysis of
ROS/RNS formation in CLL B cells and neutrophils exposed to indicated
stimuli for 1 h. (B) Activity of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in cell super-
natants after treatment of CLL B cells and neutrophils with CpG-C or PMA
was measured as an indicator of necrosis (loss of plasma membrane in-
tegrity). LDH activity is expressed as percentage of maximal activity obtained
by complete cell lysis. Individual results from three experiments are shown.
(C) Cell viability and apoptosis were analyzed in the same sample using the
ApoTox-Glo Triplex assay. Untreated cells were used as control sample to
which all samples were compared (n = 3). (D) Measurements of ATP pro-
duction after treatment with CpG-C or CpG-B for 2 h (n = 3). ATP production
in untreated cells (control) was assumed to be 100%. Inhibitors of mito-
chondrial electron transport chain, antimycin and rotenone, were used as
negative controls. (E) The impact of CLL B-cell mtDNA webs on E. coli via-
bility (colony formation) was analyzed (n = 3). Isolated NETs were included as
a control of the assay. The number of colony-forming bacteria in super-
natants of untreated CLL B cells was assumed to be 100%. No statistically
difference was observed for webs vs. untreated (unpaired t test). (F) Immunoblot
showing the amounts of intracellular and extracellular TFAM levels upon
treatment with CpG-C for 4 h. Proteins corresponding to equal number of cells
(2 × 105) were separated using SDS/PAGE, and immunoblotting toward actin
was used as a loading control. For the extracellular samples, cell culture
supernatants from 2 × 105 cells were precipitated and resuspended in SDS/
PAGE sample buffer before electrophoresis. Experiments were repeated three
times and generated the following CpG-C/untreated ratios for TFAM: 7.6, 6.2,
and 26.6. (A–D) *P < 0.05, **P < 0.005, ***P < 0.0005, one-way ANOVA fol-
lowed by Dunnett’s post hoc test.
Ingelsson et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 2, 2018
|
E485
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
 that the level of TFAM physically associated with the mtDNA to
be released is low—reminiscent of the loose and elongated nu-
cleoid observed during transcription.
What are the features of the ODNs used in this study? Our
finding that webs were released independently of TLR9 was
surprising. It is puzzling why three C-class CpG ODNs, both
CpG and non-CpG, as well as P-class ODN 21798 generate
intense mtDNA web release but not A- and B-classes nor C-
class ODN M362. While CpG-motifs are required for cytokine
release via TLR9 (53), the CpG motifs are apparently re-
dundant for mtDNA web release. One similarity between web-
stimulating ODNs is the predicted GC-rich stem-loop structure
present at the 3′, not found in CpG-A, CpG-B, A151, nor ODN
M362 (Fig. 4A and Fig. S3F). It is possible that this 3′ duplex
formation is needed for recognition. Recently, Herzner et al.
(30) revealed that unique G-rich stem-loop structures, named
Y-form DNA, present in endogenous retroviruses and HIV-1,
trigger innate cGAS-dependent responses and type I IFN
production. The GC-rich structures used in our study contain
unpaired guanosines in the closed loop. The structures are not
identical but are reminiscent of the short G-rich viral ODNs in
Herzner et al.’s study, in which unpaired guanosines are
flanking the dsDNA stems. However, we find that the ODNs in
our study are devoid of cGAS/STING-stimulatory activity;
GpC-C did not induce IFN production and the cGAS/STING
inhibitor quinacrine could not inhibit web release. Interestingly,
however, albeit the initial signaling routes are distinct, the final
outcome in terms of antiviral IFN production, as triggered by
webs in our study, is comparable.
Zinc and hypothermia treatments were the only conditions
found to prevent liberation of mtDNA webs. As both treat-
ments affect several cellular processes, clues regarding the
release mechanism are limited. Zinc is predicted to bind
∼3,000 human proteins (54), and zinc treatment severely im-
peded mitochondrial functions (i.e., altered metabolism and
less ATP production) by inhibiting several mitochondrial en-
zymes (55). Zinc has also been shown to impair the nucleotide
binding ability of a viral-RNA binding protein associated with
regulation of MAVS antiviral signaling (56, 57), implicating
that zinc similarly may affect recognition of CpG-C and GpC-C
by certain DNA sensors. The web-triggering ODN structures
used in the present study render further detailed examination
including identification of nucleic acid origin (be it modified
self-DNA, viral or bacterial DNA) of the stimulating GC-rich
ligand and its receptor. Our results contribute to an un-
derstanding that the immune system may utilize many different
cell populations, a variety of inducing stimuli, and release of
mtDNA with discrete compositions/structures to signal danger.
mtDNA functions and interactions are still to be explored
concerning mode of release and role in antiviral regulation,
which are important aspects for understanding mitochondrial
interactions with the immune system.
Conclusions
Taken together, our findings that B cells, T cells, and NK cells, as
well as monocytes and neutrophils, release mtDNA webs extra-
cellularly in response to certain short GC-rich ODNs, highlight
the role of mtDNA as a rapid extrinsic antiviral messenger mol-
ecule. These findings accentuate the importance of lymphocyte-
derived mtDNA DAMPs in innate immune signaling and
should be taken into account when examining the excessive type
I IFN production seen in different autoinflammatory diseases
and cancer.
Materials and Methods
Ethics
Statements.
Experiments
involving
human
subjects
were
done
according to the recommendations of the local research ethics committee of
Linköping University. Informed consent was obtained from all patients
according to the Declaration of Helsinki.
Immune Cell Isolation. PBMCs were isolated from peripheral whole blood
drawn from healthy adults and treatment-naive CLL patients by centrifu-
gation in a Ficoll-Hypaque density gradients. B cells, T cells, NK cells, and
monocytes were further isolated either by negative or positive selection using
microbeads or by flow cytometry. Neutrophils were isolated from peripheral
whole blood of healthy adults by gradient centrifugation in Percoll. For
detailed description, see SI Text.
Stimulation and Visualization of mtDNA Web Formation. A total of 3 × 105 cells
per well at a cell density of 2 × 106 cells per mL was seeded in 48-well plates
in fresh complete RPMI medium 1640 supplemented with 2% heat-
inactivated FBS. Cells were stimulated for 4 h with various immune-
stimulating agents (SI Text). CpG-C ODN 2395 and ODN 2395 control (GpC-C)
(Miltenyi Biotec) were added to cells at a final concentration of 1.25 μg/mL
and incubated at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Released DNA was stained with SYTOX
Green (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and visualized using Nikon Eclipse E600W
fluorescence microscope equipped with a Nikon DS Ri1 digital camera or with
Zeiss Axiovert 200M inverted fluorescence microscope using the AxioCam
MRm CCD camera. Degradation of released DNA was generated by addition of
DNase I (Sigma-Aldrich) to a final concentration of 10 U/mL and incubation at
37 °C for 30 min.
Collection and Quantification of Extracellular DNA from Cell Supernatants.
Following staining of DNA with SYTOX Green and a gentle resuspension,
cell supernatants were transferred to microcentrifuge tubes using Sigmacote-
treated tips and centrifuged at 1,000 × g for 5 min to pellet cells. DNA-
containing supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes and dried under
vacuum. Dried samples were reconstituted and loaded on 0.8% agarose gels,
and DNA was separated with 100 V for 2 h and subsequently imaged in
ChemiDoc MP System (Bio-Rad). Relative quantification of the characteristic
fragment was done by analyzing band intensities using the Image Lab
software (version 4.1; Bio-Rad).
Generation of Webs and Stimulation of PBMCs. A total of 8 × 106 CLL B cells in
4 mL of RPMI 1640 supplemented with 2% FBS was treated or mock treated
with 2.5 μg/mL GpC-C for 4 h before supernatants were collected and
centrifuged (300 × g for 5 min followed by 4,000 × g for 5 min). Sub-
sequently, supernatants were washed twice with PBS in Amicon Ultra-
30 filter devices (Merck Millipore). Samples were split in two, of which one
was treated with DNase before three additional PBS washes in Amicon Ultra-
30. After the final wash, samples were volume-adjusted with RPMI 1640.
GpC-C in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 2% FBS without cells was treated in
the same way as the non-DNase–treated samples. Aliquots were saved for
analysis of IFN-α.
A total of 1 × 106 isolated healthy donor PBMCs was incubated with the
above-described samples for 16 h at 37 °C in 200 μL of RPMI 1640 supple-
mented with 5% FBS. A negative control, PBMCs in fresh cell culture media
were also included. Samples were run in duplicates on three occasions using
different CLL B-cell and PBMC donors. Following incubation, cell super-
natants were collected by centrifugation at 300 × g for 5 min before
IFN-α2 levels were analyzed using ELISAs (Mabtech) according to the man-
ufacturer’s recommendation.
Statistical Methods. Statistical calculations were performed using GraphPad
Prism, version 7.03 (GraphPad Software). For the statistical analysis of three or
more groups, one-way ANOVA was applied followed by Dunnett’s post hoc
test for multiple comparison or Sidak’s post hoc test for pairwise compari-
sons. Differences between two groups were assessed using Student’s t test.
Statistically significant differences were indicated with asterisks: *P < 0.05,
**P < 0.005, or ***P < 0.0005. In Figs. 3B and 4, significant differences
for pairwise comparisons are indicated with a number sign: #P < 0.05 or
###P < 0.0005.
Additional methods used in the manuscript can be found as SI Text.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We are grateful to Dr. Maria V. Turkina in the mass
spectrometry core facility (Faculty of Medicine, Linköping University) for
professional support. We thank Drs. Marie Larsson, Jonas Blomberg, Colm
Nestor, Mikael Lindgren, and Ida Eriksson for valuable comments on the
manuscript. This work was financed by grants from the Linköping Medical
Society (to B.I. and A.-C.B.); Linköping University and ALF grants, Region
Östergötland, Sweden (to A.R.); Linköping University Cancer start-up grant
(to A.R.); and Ingrid Asp Foundation (M.S.) and Swedish Cancer Society.
E486
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711950115
Ingelsson et al.
 1. Paludan SR, Bowie AG (2013) Immune sensing of DNA. Immunity 38:870–880.
2. Takeuchi O, Akira S (2010) Pattern recognition receptors and inflammation. Cell 140:
805–820.
3. Nakahira K, Hisata S, Choi AM (2015) The roles of mitochondrial damage-associated
molecular patterns in diseases. Antioxid Redox Signal 23:1329–1350.
4. West AP, et al. (2015) Mitochondrial DNA stress primes the antiviral innate immune
response. Nature 520:553–557.
5. White MJ, et al. (2014) Apoptotic caspases suppress mtDNA-induced STING-mediated
type I IFN production. Cell 159:1549–1562.
6. Rongvaux A, et al. (2014) Apoptotic caspases prevent the induction of type I inter-
ferons by mitochondrial DNA. Cell 159:1563–1577.
7. Zhang Q, et al. (2010) Circulating mitochondrial DAMPs cause inflammatory responses
to injury. Nature 464:104–107.
8. Krieg AM, et al. (1995) CpG motifs in bacterial DNA trigger direct B-cell activation.
Nature 374:546–549.
9. Klinman DM, Yi AK, Beaucage SL, Conover J, Krieg AM (1996) CpG motifs present in
bacteria DNA rapidly induce lymphocytes to secrete interleukin 6, interleukin 12, and
interferon gamma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:2879–2883.
10. Bauer S, et al. (2001) Human TLR9 confers responsiveness to bacterial DNA via species-
specific CpG motif recognition. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:9237–9242.
11. Hemmi H, et al. (2000) A Toll-like receptor recognizes bacterial DNA. Nature 408:
740–745.
12. Nakahira K, et al. (2011) Autophagy proteins regulate innate immune responses by
inhibiting the release of mitochondrial DNA mediated by the NALP3 inflammasome.
Nat Immunol 12:222–230.
13. Shimada K, et al. (2012) Oxidized mitochondrial DNA activates the NLRP3 in-
flammasome during apoptosis. Immunity 36:401–414.
14. Brinkmann V, et al. (2004) Neutrophil extracellular traps kill bacteria. Science 303:
1532–1535.
15. Fuchs TA, et al. (2007) Novel cell death program leads to neutrophil extracellular
traps. J Cell Biol 176:231–241.
16. Morshed M, et al. (2014) NADPH oxidase-independent formation of extracellular DNA
traps by basophils. J Immunol 192:5314–5323.
17. Yousefi S, et al. (2008) Catapult-like release of mitochondrial DNA by eosinophils
contributes to antibacterial defense. Nat Med 14:949–953.
18. Yousefi S, Mihalache C, Kozlowski E, Schmid I, Simon HU (2009) Viable neutrophils
release mitochondrial DNA to form neutrophil extracellular traps. Cell Death Differ
16:1438–1444.
19. Yousefi S, et al. (2015) Basophils exhibit antibacterial activity through extracellular
trap formation. Allergy 70:1184–1188.
20. Itagaki K, et al. (2015) Mitochondrial DNA released by trauma induces neutrophil
extracellular traps. PLoS One 10:e0120549.
21. Thieblemont N, Wright HL, Edwards SW, Witko-Sarsat V (2016) Human neutrophils in
auto-immunity. Semin Immunol 28:159–173.
22. Cossarizza A, et al. (2011) Increased plasma levels of extracellular mitochondrial DNA
during HIV infection: A new role for mitochondrial damage-associated molecular
patterns during inflammation. Mitochondrion 11:750–755.
23. Liu S, Feng M, Guan W (2016) Mitochondrial DNA sensing by STING signaling par-
ticipates in inflammation, cancer and beyond. Int J Cancer 139:736–741.
24. Lood C, et al. (2016) Neutrophil extracellular traps enriched in oxidized mitochondrial
DNA are interferogenic and contribute to lupus-like disease. Nat Med 22:146–153.
25. Sthoeger ZM, et al. (1989) Production of autoantibodies by CD5-expressing B lym-
phocytes from patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Exp Med 169:255–268.
26. Lanemo Myhrinder A, et al. (2008) A new perspective: Molecular motifs on oxidized
LDL, apoptotic cells, and bacteria are targets for chronic lymphocytic leukemia anti-
bodies. Blood 111:3838–3848.
27. Bergh AC, et al. (2014) Silenced B-cell receptor response to autoantigen in a poor-
prognostic subset of chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Haematologica 99:1722–1730.
28. Patrushev M, et al. (2004) Mitochondrial permeability transition triggers the release
of mtDNA fragments. Cell Mol Life Sci 61:3100–3103.
29. Verthelyi D, Zeuner RA (2003) Differential signaling by CpG DNA in DCs and B cells:
Not just TLR9. Trends Immunol 24:519–522.
30. Herzner AM, et al. (2015) Sequence-specific activation of the DNA sensor cGAS by
Y-form DNA structures as found in primary HIV-1 cDNA. Nat Immunol 16:1025–1033.
31. Tan Y, et al. (2015) Inhibition of type 4 cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase blocks
intracellular TLR signaling in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and normal hematopoietic
cells. J Immunol 194:101–112.
32. Ishii KJ, et al. (2002) Potential role of phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase, rather than DNA-
dependent protein kinase, in CpG DNA-induced immune activation. J Exp Med 196:
269–274.
33. Guerrier T, et al. (2014) TLR9 expressed on plasma membrane acts as a negative
regulator of human B cell response. J Autoimmun 51:23–29.
34. Urban CF, et al. (2009) Neutrophil extracellular traps contain calprotectin, a cytosolic
protein complex involved in host defense against Candida albicans. PLoS Pathog 5:
e1000639.
35. Kukat C, et al. (2015) Cross-strand binding of TFAM to a single mtDNA molecule forms
the mitochondrial nucleoid. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:11288–11293.
36. Picca A, Lezza AM (2015) Regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis through TFAM-
mitochondrial DNA interactions: Useful insights from aging and calorie restriction
studies. Mitochondrion 25:67–75.
37. Weinberg SE, Sena LA, Chandel NS (2015) Mitochondria in the regulation of innate
and adaptive immunity. Immunity 42:406–417.
38. Boyapati RK, Tamborska A, Dorward DA, Ho GT (2017) Advances in the un-
derstanding of mitochondrial DNA as a pathogenic factor in inflammatory diseases.
F1000Res 6:169.
39. Jin HS, Suh HW, Kim SJ, Jo EK (2017) Mitochondrial control of innate immunity and
inflammation. Immune Netw 17:77–88.
40. West AP, Shadel GS (2017) Mitochondrial DNA in innate immune responses and in-
flammatory pathology. Nat Rev Immunol 17:363–375.
41. Hong EE, Okitsu CY, Smith AD, Hsieh CL (2013) Regionally specific and genome-wide
analyses conclusively demonstrate the absence of CpG methylation in human mito-
chondrial DNA. Mol Cell Biol 33:2683–2690.
42. Collins LV, Hajizadeh S, Holme E, Jonsson IM, Tarkowski A (2004) Endogenously oxi-
dized mitochondrial DNA induces in vivo and in vitro inflammatory responses.
J Leukoc Biol 75:995–1000.
43. Sørensen OE, Borregaard N (2016) Neutrophil extracellular traps—the dark side of
neutrophils. J Clin Invest 126:1612–1620.
44. Caielli S, et al. (2016) Oxidized mitochondrial nucleoids released by neutrophils drive
type I interferon production in human lupus. J Exp Med 213:697–713.
45. Hajizadeh S, DeGroot J, TeKoppele JM, Tarkowski A, Collins LV (2003) Extracellular
mitochondrial DNA and oxidatively damaged DNA in synovial fluid of patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res Ther 5:R234–R240.
46. Surmiak MP, et al. (2015) Circulating mitochondrial DNA in serum of patients with
granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Clin Exp Immunol 181:150–155.
47. Tsuji N, et al. (2016) Role of mitochondrial DNA in septic AKI via Toll-like receptor 9.
J Am Soc Nephrol 27:2009–2020.
48. Hosnijeh FS, et al. (2014) Mitochondrial DNA copy number and future risk of B-cell
lymphoma in a nested case-control study in the prospective EPIC cohort. Blood 124:
530–535.
49. Ekstrand MI, et al. (2004) Mitochondrial transcription factor A regulates mtDNA copy
number in mammals. Hum Mol Genet 13:935–944.
50. Ikeda M, et al. (2015) Overexpression of TFAM or twinkle increases mtDNA copy
number and facilitates cardioprotection associated with limited mitochondrial oxi-
dative stress. PLoS One 10:e0119687.
51. Chakrabarty S, et al. (2014) Upregulation of TFAM and mitochondria copy number in
human lymphoblastoid cells. Mitochondrion 15:52–58.
52. White MJ, Kile BT (2015) Stressed mitochondria sound the alarm. Immunol Cell Biol
93:427–428.
53. Vollmer J, et al. (2004) Characterization of three CpG oligodeoxynucleotide classes
with distinct immunostimulatory activities. Eur J Immunol 34:251–262.
54. Maret W (2013) Zinc biochemistry: From a single zinc enzyme to a key element of life.
Adv Nutr 4:82–91.
55. Lemire J, Mailloux R, Appanna VD (2008) Zinc toxicity alters mitochondrial metabo-
lism and leads to decreased ATP production in hepatocytes. J Appl Toxicol 28:
175–182.
56. Yabe-Wada T, et al. (2016) TLR signals posttranscriptionally regulate the cytokine
trafficking mediator sortilin. Sci Rep 6:26566.
57. Zhou X, You F, Chen H, Jiang Z (2012) Poly(C)-binding protein 1 (PCBP1) mediates
housekeeping degradation of mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS). Cell Res 22:
717–727.
58. Söderberg D, et al. (2015) Increased levels of neutrophil extracellular trap remnants in
the circulation of patients with small vessel vasculitis, but an inverse correlation to
anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies during remission. Rheumatology (Oxford) 54:
2085–2094.
59. Malik AN, Shahni R, Rodriguez-de-Ledesma A, Laftah A, Cunningham P (2011) Mi-
tochondrial DNA as a non-invasive biomarker: Accurate quantification using real time
quantitative PCR without co-amplification of pseudogenes and dilution bias. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 412:1–7.
60. Buenrostro JD, Giresi PG, Zaba LC, Chang HY, Greenleaf WJ (2013) Transposition of
native chromatin for fast and sensitive epigenomic profiling of open chromatin, DNA-
binding proteins and nucleosome position. Nat Methods 10:1213–1218.
61. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL (2009) Ultrafast and memory-efficient
alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol 10:R25.
62. Langmead B, Salzberg SL (2012) Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat
Methods 9:357–359.
63. Heinz S, et al. (2010) Simple combinations of lineage-determining transcription fac-
tors prime cis-regulatory elements required for macrophage and B cell identities. Mol
Cell 38:576–589.
64. Kent WJ, et al. (2002) The human genome browser at UCSC. Genome Res 12:
996–1006.
65. Nesvizhskii AI, Keller A, Kolker E, Aebersold R (2003) A statistical model for identi-
fying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry. Anal Chem 75:4646–4658.
Ingelsson et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 2, 2018
|
E487
IMMUNOLOGY AND
INFLAMMATION
PNAS PLUS
