 IAS Towards an HIV Cure Symposium:
people focused, science driven
18–19 July 2015, Vancouver, Canada
Sarah Fidler1, John Thornhill1, Eva Malatinkova2, Robert Reinhard3,
Rosanne Lamplough4, Jintanat Ananworanich5 and Ann Chahroudi6
1 Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, UK
2 HIV Translational Research Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University and
Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium
3 University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; and Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Canada
4 International AIDS Society, Geneva, Switzerland
5 The Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, Bethesda, MD, USA;
United States Military HIV Research Program, Bethesda, MD, USA
6 Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine Atlanta, Georgia, USA
Abstract
The International AIDS Society (IAS) convened the Towards an HIV Cure Symposium on 18–19 July 2015 in Vancouver,
Canada, bringing together researchers and community to discuss the most recent advances in our understanding of HIV
latency, reservoirs and a summary of the current clinical approaches towards an HIV cure.
The symposium objectives were to: (1) gather researchers and stakeholders to present, review, and discuss the latest
research towards an HIV cure; (2) promote cross-disciplinary global interactions between basic, clinical and social scientists;
and (3) provide a platform for sharing information among scientists, clinicians, funders, media and civil society. The symposium
examined basic molecular science and animal model data, and emerging and ongoing clinical trial results to prioritise
strategies and determine the viral and immune responses that could lead to HIV remission without antiretroviral therapy.
This report summarises some of the major findings discussed during the symposium.
Introduction
The symposium, chaired by Françoise Barré-Sinoussi, Steven Deeks
and Sharon Lewin, brought together over 300 registrants, including
virologists, molecular biologists, immunologists, clinicians, members
of organisations of people living with HIV and funders. The
scientific gathering included both invited speakers (Table 1) and
a selection of oral and poster abstracts presenting the most recent
advances in basic and translational science and clinical research.
This report summarises some of the major findings discussed during
the symposium (www.iasociety.org/What-we-do/Towards-an-
HIV-Cure/Events/2015-Symposium).
Overview
Results from the START trial [1] and the final report from the
HPTN052 study [2] have identified a clear clinical and public health
benefit for immediate antiretroviral therapy (ART) irrespective of
CD4 T cell count. There is no longer equipoise to the question
of when to start ART, and accordingly, it is anticipated that
international and national ART guidelines will move to recommend
immediate initiation of ART for all people living with HIV [3]. It
is in this setting that the HIV cure research agenda fits. People
living with HIV need access to long-term ART. Earlier initiation
of ART enhances immune recovery [4–7] and limits the size of
the HIV reservoir [8].
In the absence of definitive measures of viral reservoirs, there was
much debate about the need to develop an agreed definition of
both ‘cure’ and ‘remission’ of HIV infection. For this article,
reflecting the meeting, remission is defined as controlled plasma
viraemia off therapy, but with detectable measures of viral
infection, such as detectable HIV-DNA. HIV cure is defined by
undetectable measures of infection from any body site off ART.
Dan Kuritzkes [9], currently leading the adult ACTG trials
network, began the workshop by summarising the progress over
the 7 years since the first, and to date only, successful case of
cured HIV infection: the Berlin patient. He noted that several
other similar cases of stem-cell transplant recipients, from both
CCR5-deletion and wild-type donors, have subsequently been
unsuccessful. He reviewed the current literature and clinical
studies using latency-reversing agents (LRAs) including HDAC
inhibitors: romidepsin, panobinostat and vorinostat in primates
and humans. Whilst many in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo studies
have identified some level of viral reactivation, he concluded
that currently available LRAs, used with ART alone, are unlikely
to be sufficient to confer either remission or cure for the
majority of people living with HIV.
It is recognised that recently infected individuals might be best
placed for future cure research strategies. This is a function of
the smaller size of the reservoir, better response to ART and the
relatively preserved immune function described in this group;
however, stopping therapy, even amongst this group, risks clinical
progression and re-seeding of the viral reservoir unless very close
viral monitoring is maintained and ART is reinitiated at the first
sign of viral recrudescence. An important expert panel debate
during the two-day meeting discussed the ethical issues and
importance of clear communication on the relative risks and
benefits of treatment interruption, the concerns of viral rebound
for the individual, immune activation and inflammation, and the
risk of onward viral transmission.
Quantification of viral persistence
The major barrier to an HIV cure is the pool of latently infected
cells, persisting despite long-term suppressive ART (Figures 1 and
2). To quantify the viral persistence and to identify a surrogate
marker of persisting HIV reservoir is of primary importance for
designing and monitoring the intervention in cure strategies.
However, it remains challenging to accurately measure the true
reservoir that is replication-competent and fuels viral rebound once
the therapy is interrupted. Furthermore, it is unclear whether the
reservoir is in dynamic equilibrium with peripheral blood and
tissues, where and within which cells it is located, and to what
extent.
Journal of Virus Eradication 2015; 1: 276–281
CONFERENCE REPORT
© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Virus Eradication published by Mediscript Ltd
This is an open access article published under the terms of a Creative Commons License.
276
 The majority of integrated proviruses are defective, but potentially
can be transcribed. This may complicate the measurement of
latency reversal using PCR-based assays, such as cell-associated
(CA) HIV-RNA quantification. Ross Pollack et al. [10] demonstrated
that patient-derived defective HIV-1 proviruses containing large
internal deletions can be transcribed and translated following
CD3/CD28 co-stimulation. They reconstructed 11 full-length
defective proviral clones from HIV-1-infected individuals and
showed that it is largely dependent on an intact tat gene. They
found that these defective proviruses are also capable of producing
HIV-1 viral proteins, depending on an intact tat and rev gene.
Therefore, HIV transcription from defective proviruses should be
considered in the measurement of latency reversal, where
identification of the proviral components (single genes or a
specific region of the proviral genome) required for defective
proviruses to be transcribed may help to design more accurate
assays.
In the search for early predictors of immunological response to
ART, Alexander Pasternak et al. [11] showed that the CA HIV-1
unspliced (US) to multiply spliced (MS) RNA ratio at 12 weeks‘
ART positively correlated with markers of immune activation and
apoptosis and predicted lower CD4+ T cell count at 96 weeks‘ ART.
In a cohort of 28 HIV-infected patients, they longitudinally
measured at 0, 12, 24, 48, and 96 weeks of virologically
suppressive ART the total and episomal (2-L
TR circles) HIV-1 DNA,
US and MS (total and tat/rev) CA HIV-1 RNA, as well as
immunological markers (CD4+ and CD8+ T cell activation,
proliferation, senescence, apoptosis, exhaustion, thymic migration,
Treg/Th17 and CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets). A higher US/MS
RNA ratio might reflect the higher frequency of HIV-infected cells
in the later stages of the viral life cycle, which is characterised
by expression of viral proteins and presentation of antigens. Dr
Pasternak concluded that such cells could exert pressure on the
host immune system, causing persistent immune activation and
contributing to poor immunological response to ART. Put another
way, the US/MS RNA ratio might be an indicator of the relative
Table 1. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium invited speakers
Opening Keynote
Daniel Kuritzkes
Brigham & Women‘s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, USA
Community Presentation
Matthew Sharp
Long-Term Survivor, HIV Education and Advocacy Consultant, USA
Closing Lecture
Stephen Locarnini
Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, Australia
Overview Speakers: Oral Abstract
Sessions
John Mascola
Vaccine Research Center, NIAID, NIH, USA
Marcus Altfeld
Heinrich-Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Germany
James Riley
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, USA
Sarah Fidler
Imperial College London, United Kingdom
Roundtable Discussion: Advancing
Paediatric HIV Cure Research
Marie Elizabeth Theunissen
FAMCRU, South Africa
Hugo Soudeyns
CHU Saint-Justine Research Center and Université de Montréal, Canada
Deborah Persaud
Johns Hopkins University, USA
Ann Chahroudi
Emory University School of Medicine, USA
Daria Hazuda
Merck, USA
Roundtable Discussion: Combination
Therapy Trials
Brigitte Autran
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, CIMI-Paris, UPMC/INSERM U1135, France
Joseph Eron
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA
Irina Tcherepanova
Argos Therapeutics, Inc., USA
Jeffrey Lifson
Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, USA
David Evans
Project Inform, USA
Roundtable Discussion: Key
Partnerships: Community & Private
Sector
David Margolis
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA
Andrew Spaltenstein
GlaxoSmithKline, USA
Lynda Dee
CARE CAB; AIDS Action Baltimore, USA
Erik Iverson
Infectious Diseases Research Institute, USA
Veronica Miller
UC Berkeley; Forum for HIV Collaborative Research, USA
Figure 1. Barriers to an HIV cure. Reprinted with kind permission from N Chomont
Figure 2. Cure strategies. Reprinted with kind permission from N Chomont
IAS Towards an HIV Cure Symposium 277
Journal of Virus Eradication 2015; 1: 276–281
CONFERENCE REPORT
 abundance of (re-) activated HIV-infected CD4+ T cells and the
persistence of such cells might be caused by increased immune
activation. It remains unclear whether persistence of the active
HIV reservoir is a cause or a consequence of persistent immune
activation and apoptosis.
To assess the effect of very prolonged therapy on the genetic
composition of the HIV-DNA reservoir and the relationship
between the genetic composition and the level of HIV-RNA
transcripts, Eunok Lee et al. [12] examined HIV-DNA sequences
within different T cell subsets from peripheral blood and rectal
biopsies of individuals on ART for >15 years. They collected
samples from two patients with therapy initiated during early, and
four during chronic infection, and performed single-proviral
Gag-pol sequencing and the TILDA (tat/rev induced limiting
dilution assay) to measure the frequency of cells with inducible
HIV MS RNA. They demonstrated that the distribution of HIV
genetic material among memory subsets varied dramatically across
the cohort and showed that TEM were marked by clonal expansions
with distinctive HIV-DNA, which may reflect random antigen-driven
cellular proliferation. Their genetic analysis revealed that
proliferative bursts can be attenuated by cellular restriction factors
or by death of cells expressing replication-competent virus.
Furthermore, all subjects had inducible HIV MS RNA in memory
T cell subsets. HIV MS RNA was lower in TEM from individuals with
expanded hypermutant populations.
Immunology of HIV/SIV persistence
A better understanding of the immunological features of HIV
persistence may allow for specific targeting of the virus reservoir
with immune-directed therapies. This is an exciting new approach
used in contemporary cancer therapy and may hold promise for
HIV cure as well. Here we highlight several presentations that
broaden our knowledge of the interaction of the immune system
with virus persistence in the setting of successful ART, but also
suggest that this interaction may be more complex than previously
realised.
Glen Chew et al. [13] showed their work on checkpoint regulators
of CD8+ T cell function. The primary focus was on the expression
ofT cell Ig and ITIM domain (TIGIT) on HIV-specific CD8+T cells.
TIGIT is a molecule that is expressed on the surface of T and NK
cells and binds to CD155 on dendritic cells leading to IL-10
production. Expression ofTIGIT on CD4+T cells has been previously
shown to be positively associated with levels of integrated DNA
[14,15]. Chew et al. hypothesised that during progressive HIV
infection [13], TIGIT surface expression would mark an expanded
population of dysfunctionalT cells and novel monoclonal antibodies
targeting TIGIT would restore anti-HIV-specific T cell responses.
The data presented suggest thatTIGIT is expressed on the majority
of HIV-specific CD8+ T cells but that these T cells are deficient in
interferon gamma production as well as the ability to degranulate
after stimulation. Blockade ofTIGIT may therefore promote CD8+
T cell killing of cells expressing HIV antigens and could be considered
as a kill component of a ‘kick and kill’ strategy.The study included
103 HIV-infected patients: 20 non-controllers, 20 elite controllers,
39 ART-suppressed individuals, 24 acutely infected individuals and
20 HIV-uninfected controls. They found a significant expansion
ofTIGIT+CD8+T cells during chronic infection and a non-significant
trend in acute HIV infection. TIGIT expression remained elevated
despite viral suppression and was associated with CD4+ HIV-DNA.
Furthermore, TIGIT+ and TIGIT+PD-1+CD8+T cells inversely
correlated with CD4 cell count and single blockade of TIGIT led
to a significant increase of interferon gamma response to HIV Gag.
Their findings suggested thatTIGIT might be a novel curative HIV
target along with other checkpoint receptors.
Interestingly, data from the SPARTAC trial presented by Sarah Fidler
[5], identified that high levels of CD8+ T cells expressing Tim-3
and CD4+ T cells expressing PD-1, Tim-3 or Lag-3 pre-therapy
predicted a faster time to viral rebound following treatment
interruption. These three presentations [5,13,14] highlight the
importance of understanding how HIV-related immune exhaustion
is a critical element not only in identifying persistently infected
cells, but also in driving maintenance of the reservoir due to
ineffective immune clearance.
Colleen McGary et al. [16] presented data on the expression of
co-inhibitory receptors on CD4+ T cell reservoirs. In this study,
rhesus macaques were infected with SIV and then treated with
ART to achieve at least 3 months of virological suppression. At
this time animals were sacrificed and CD4+ T cells expressing
specific immune checkpoint markers were sorted from blood and
multiple tissues and SIV DNA measured. CTLA4+ CD4+ T cells were
enriched in SIV-DNA in PBMCs, lymph nodes, spleen, and
gastrointestinal mucosa and, overall, CTLA4+ and PD-1+ CD4+
T cells made up >75% of the CD4+ T cell reservoir (as measured
by SIV DNA) leading to the conclusion that a combination of PD-1
and CTLA4 blockade may be a clinically useful strategy to disrupt
HIV/SIV persistence.
Gene expression pathways involved in immune reconstitution and
the size of the HIV reservoir were described by Khader Ghneim
et al. [17]. This work utilised patient samples from the CLIF and
UCSF SCOPE cohorts to generate transcriptional and metabolic
profiles of two groups of immunological non-responders compared
to immunological responders. A high level of inducible HIV-RNA
as measured by TILDA was associated with expression of anti-
inflammatory genes including IL-10 and STAT1 in one group of
immunological non-responders.The FOXO3 and interferon pathway
genes further distinguished these groups of patients and were
correlated with host and bacterial metabolites. The authors
mechanistically linked these observations by proposing that
bacterial metabolites upregulate FOXO3A expression that in turn
triggers FoxP3 and regulatory T cells resulting in an increased size
of the HIV reservoir. Further results from this comprehensive
analysis are poised to provide mechanistic elucidation of the
intricate balance of pro- and anti-inflammatory pathways in
controlling HIV persistence.
Remi Fromentin et al. [14] hypothesised that HIV persistence
during ART was associated with markers ofT cell activation, homing
and proliferation, and by performing fuzzy forests analysis they
identified the top 100 immunological predictors that were most
strongly associated with virological markers. They showed that high
CA HIV US RNA was strongly associated with activating IFN-
signalling pathways in T cells (pSTAT1-3) and a high number of
cells containing integrated HIV-DNA with low CD4 cell count and
higher frequency of cells expressing markers of proliferation and
activation (2B4, LAG3, TIGIT on central memory CD4 T cells and
HLA-DR and CD38 on CD8 T cells). Using a cohort of virologically
suppressed patients from the DARE Collaboratory (DARE48) on
ART for >3 years (VL<50 copies/ml and CD4 count >350 cells/μl).
They measured ~600 variables that could be associated with HIV
persistence, including inflammation, T cell activation, proliferation
and exhaustion, type I interferon signalling, along with total and
integrated HIV-DNA, 2-LTR circles and CA HIV US RNA. Instead
of linking individual immunological markers with each of the
measures of virus persistence, the authors performed fuzzy forests
analysis to utilise an algorithm that identifies networks of variables
and enables clustering of ‘modules’ (groups of measurements that
are biologically associated) to detect top predictors of the outcome
of interest. The random forests analysis suggested that HIV
persisted through different mechanisms (latency and replication)
CONFERENCE REPORT
Journal of Virus Eradication 2015; 1: 276–281
278
S Fidler et al.
 associated with distinct immunological markers and these markers
may establish the framework for the development and monitoring
of novel curative immunotherapies. Intriguingly, each of the
reservoir assessments was associated with a unique pattern of
biomarkers providing a detailed yet broad overview of virus
persistence. One caveat to this study is that replication-competent
virus was not included as a virological variable.
As evidenced by these and other presentations at the 2015
Towards an HIV Cure Symposium, there is a great effort towards
characterising immunological biomarkers that can identify
subgroups of patients who may or may not respond to specific
curative approaches. The ‘Holy Grail’ of such research would be
to develop a profile of markers that predict post-treatment control
thereby enabling treatment interruption to be undertaken with
relative confidence. We are not at this stage of HIV care yet, and
it is likely that a deeper knowledge of the fundamental
immunology of HIV persistence, including an appreciation of
tissue-based T cell homeostasis, which was not a focus of this
meeting, will be needed to achieve this goal.
Paediatric HIV ‘
cure’
There are unique features of paediatric HIV that may be relevant
to HIV cure and towards learning for future interventions. Most
children are infected with HIV at birth. Immediate ART is the
standard of care worldwide allowing for treatment initiation very
close to the onset of infection. Newborns have virtually no memory
CD4+ T cells, which are a prime target for HIV infection. They also
have immune tolerance that may be less conducive to HIV
replication. If HIV is left untreated, however, children progress to
AIDS rapidly with one-third dying during the first year of life.
HIV remission is extremely rare in children. The Mississippi baby
was in remission for 27 months after very early ART was started
at 30 hours of life. At this meeting, Asier Saez-Cirion et al. [18]
reported an HIV remission case in a 19-year-old perinatally
HIV-infected adolescent. In the ANRS CO10 EPF paediatric cohort
followed since 1996, 100 children received ART prior to age 6
months. Subsequently, 15 interrupted their ART after a median
time of 33 months and while HIV-RNA was below 500 copies/ml.
Of these 15, 13 rapidly lost virological control, one controlled
viraemia for more than 3 years and one continued to have
suppressed viraemia for more than 12 years. This latter case of
long-term HIV remission was a female baby born to an HIV-infected
mother who had advanced disease. The baby received zidovudine
at birth until 6 weeks of age. Her HIV-RNA and HIV-DNA were
undetectable at days 3 and 14, suggesting that HIV was
transmitted during delivery. HIV-DNA was then detected at 1 and
2 months of age. HIV-RNA was 144,600 copies/ml at 6 weeks
followed by a rapid rise to 2,170,000 copies/ml at 12 weeks at
which time she initiated zidovudine, didanosine, lamivudine and
ritonavir. Rapid viral suppression was achieved but during the first
2 years, she had short periods of ART interruption in which
HIV-RNA rose to 75,190 and 97,000 copies/ml, respectively. Her
ART was discontinued and she was lost to follow-up at age 5.8
years. She returned to care a year later and was found to have
viral suppression below 50 copies/ml. Between 2013 and 2015,
HIV-RNA was consistently below 10 copies/ml and HIV-DNA was
2.1–2.5 log/106 PBMC. Her CD4 cell count was normal. Further
work-up revealed features similar to the post-treatment controllers
in the VISCONTI cohort. She had replication-competent virus, weak
HIV-specific CD8+ T cell responses and no favourable HLA types
known to be associated with elite-controller status.
Major research efforts towards HIV cure are ongoing in several
parts of the world. The Early Pediatric Initiation-Canada Child Cure
Cohort Study (EPIC4) is an example of a countrywide study in
Canada investigating the size of the reservoir, immune recovery
and HIV-specific immunity following early ART. The Canadians are
evaluating five comparative groups of children based on timing
of ART from birth and virological response, with 93 children
enrolled at the time of symposium. IMPAACT (International
Maternal Pediatric Adolescent AIDS Clinical Trials Network) trials
have focused on three groups of children based on timing of ART
from birth: very early (<48 hours), early (<12 weeks) and late (>12
weeks). Ongoing studies aim to evaluate early ART alone or in
addition to broadly neutralising antibody to mitigate HIV reservoirs,
and to investigate anatomic reservoirs and relationship of reservoirs
and the developing immune system.
There are important ethical considerations regarding testing of
novel therapies and treatment interruption in children. Infant
macaque models can be invaluable in informing paediatric HIV
pathogenesis and mechanisms of interventions. This animal model
can be used to test suppressive ART regimens to mimic treatment
of HIV-infected neonates, for example to test very early treatment
versus later ART to elucidate potential mechanisms of remission.
Tissue reservoirs can also be fully characterised. The traditional
paradigm for studying new drugs is that safety and
pharmacokinetics needs to be first established in adults. However,
for HIV cure research, early treated infants may have the highest
likelihood of controlling virus, providing a rationale for studying
appropriate interventions in this group first. Understanding
potential differences in perinatal versus adult infection relevant
to reservoirs and cure is critical for designing and justifying
intervention studies in children. There was a call for concerted
international collaborative efforts on paediatric HIV cure as well
as closer collaborations between adult and paediatric cure
researchers.
Community involvement in HIV cure-related
research
Matthew Sharp [19], educator, AIDS activist, long-term survivor
and gene therapy trial participant, provided a community
perspective in an opening symposium address. His theme
connected the origins of AIDS activism in the 1980s with the major
advocacy work to ‘End AIDS’ today that must now combine
implementation science with innovation and discovery. A tribute
recognising the recent passing of AIDS activist, Bob Munk,
highlighted the persistent efforts over the years of many who
became adept out of necessity and empathy with the full clinical,
social and research needs of all who have HIV.
Current advocacy for HIV cure preceded Martin Delaney‘s almost
single-handed promotion and public recognition of Gero Hutter‘s
innovative cure of Timothy Brown 7 years ago. Delaney, then the
head of San Francisco‘s Project Inform, joined others to push for
immune-based therapies to improve upon the first antiretroviral
drugs and their considerable limitations to prolong survival and
add to quality of life. Research collaboratories are named in honour
of Delaney‘s push to research. Although cure research is now
prominently embedded in scientific conference agendas and
occupies a position of priority, effective strategies are illusive. Many
community myths and misunderstandings remain. Many wonder
whether there will ever be a cure.
In this context, the workshop panel discussion on advancing
paediatric HIV cure research also highlighted some important
community issues. First, there is misperception of what HIV cure
and remission mean in the community. Community distrust towards
researchers is partially fuelled by unclear definitions and
inconsistent use of terms in various contexts. A South African
survey revealed significant paediatric and adolescent group
engagement challenges.These include lived realities that HIV status
IAS Towards an HIV Cure Symposium 279
Journal of Virus Eradication 2015; 1: 276–281
CONFERENCE REPORT
 disclosure is ‘not an option’ for many, widespread peer pressures
and rejections, personal satisfaction with effective ART compared
to theoretical cures, and the need for educational efforts about
cure study that these populations can relate to. It is important
to engage the community early and provide feedback to research
participants of the study outcomes.
In the later panel discussion on combination therapy, David Evans
[20] helped to frame other trial participants‘ concerns by asking
that issues of long-lasting impacts of immune-modulating
strategies and added complexity of informed consents for
combination trials be considered.
Some evolving principles to guide research proposed by Matt Sharp
were:
• Cures should be accessible and available to all in need;
• Trials must include women and underrepresented
populations;
• Ensure full access to necessary resources (reagents, means to
work with animal models, etc.) and sample repositories;
• Researchers should investigate multiple approaches and not
rush to judgement to simplify a complex approach that
shows promise;
• Study social, behavioural and ethical issues in HIV cure
research (e.g. therapeutic misconception);
• Seek biomarkers that can drive go/no-go decisions about
strategies;
• Ensure collaboration between basic, clinical and social
science research; and
• Don‘t discard non-curative interventions that may provide
clinical benefits (e.g. for immunological non-responders to
ART).
He also recognised a piloted open-source educational tool, the
CUREiculum, that educates the public about the current state of
cure research. Necessary improvements to the tool are in progress.
Finally, Matt Sharp reflected on tendencies within his own US
networks indicating some lack of interest or engagement with cure
research, even in the face of significant new discoveries supporting
a viable scientific agenda. Complexity and novelty may feed this
phenomenon. Cure research must be made an integral part of
efforts to ‘End AIDS’ by means of available treatment and
prevention. He warned against an imbalance of effort and advocacy
that might inadvertently follow upon the necessary investment
in health improvements we must secure from current therapies
and prevention advances.
Clinical trials including combination therapies
The need for combination therapies in clinical trials aimed at HIV
cure was a feature of many presentations at this year‘s symposium.
A panel discussion raised a number of key issues for consideration
when developing such studies, including: the optimal patient
population in which to test new interventions (chronic versus acute
HIV infection); what endpoints to use in order to inform success
in such studies (HIV-DNA, cell-associated RNA, virus outgrowth
assays, etc.); and whether the true test of success may ultimately
require a treatment interruption. Furthermore, there was a
discussion about the study design that should be used to assess
combination interventions: should these be small proof-of-concept
studies in the first instance, or studies with larger sample sizes
powered to detect a smaller effect of treatment. No formal decision
was reached but critical inputs from community as well as
researchers are needed to facilitate development of novel
intervention studies.
Many HIV latency-reversing approaches include the use of
therapeutic vaccinations [21–26]. Marcus Altfeld [27] reviewed
the current research on immune recognition after viral activation
approaches. BrigitteAutran presented a review of recently published
HIV combination therapy trials. EraMune 02 [28] was a randomised,
PhaseIIclinicaltrialinvestigatingtheeffectoftherapeuticvaccination
(VRC HIV-DNA plasmid plus rAd5) plus ART intensification on
HIV-DNA in peripheral blood. This study showed that the median
amount of HIV-DNA did not change significantly between baseline
and week 56 in theART intensification plus vaccine group compared
with control. A previous study by the same group, EraMune 01
[29], investigated IL-7 plus ART intensification, which induced CD4
T cell expansion but did not decrease the total HIV-1 DNA reservoir
in both peripheral blood and rectal cells. Irina Tcherepanova et al.
[30] presented the results of a dendritic cell-based vaccine
(AGS-004) trial.This Phase IIb randomised double-blind placebo-
controlled study showed no significant impact on HIV viral load
after treatment interruption; however, improved HIV immune
responses, as measured by CD8+CD28+CD45RA- measurements
≥ two-fold above baseline were observed. Further studies using
this vaccine in combination with vorinostat and PD-1/PD-L1 are
planned. While many therapeutic vaccine studies report good safety
and immunogenicity, with the exception of one study [21] there
remains a lack of data showing vaccine conferred significant changes
in measures of viral reservoirs from ART + vaccine alone [22–26].
It is therefore likely that a combination of latency-reversing agents
with immune-based therapy will be required to have greater impact
on reservoirs.
Tung et al. shared data from a first in human replication-defective
HIV vaccine study (HIVAX). This novel vaccine was found to be
safe and immunogenic with a significant reduction in HIV-1 viral
load post treatment interruption when compared to historical
controls [26]. Alternative therapeutic approaches were discussed,
including the use of agents that block HIV-1 transcription or
production and ‘silence’ the HIV-1 latent reservoir, such as the
tyrosine kinase inhibitor dasatinib. Susana Valente presented [31]
in vitro data at the main IAS conference on a novel agent,
cortistatin A, a Tat inhibitor that blocks Tat/TAR activity with the
aim of switching off viral transcription with resulting long-term
or deep latency.
Newer combinations investigating more potent latency reversing
agents are under way including the Bionor study using the latency
reversing agent romidepsin plus a therapeutic vaccine (Vacc4X),
and the RIVER study (Prime Boost Vaccine and Vorinostat) in the
UK [5]. Safety and efficacy of a combination prime-boost vaccine
approach amongst treated acutely infected adults enrolled into
a trial in Barcelona (BCN01) were presented showing enhanced
HIV-specific CD8 T cell responses amongst vaccinated treated
subjects. This study will now enrol individuals into an additional
intervention including romidepsin [24].
Jeffrey Lifson [32] presented on the utility of the non-human
primate model (NHPM) in developing future combination therapy
strategies, he highlighted the strength of this model in terms
experimental control and latitude, particularly in the assessment
of tissue reservoirs. This was illustrated by Policicchio et al. [33]
who showed romidepsin can effectively reverse SIV latency in the
NHPM. Furthermore, work by Peterson et al. on zinc finger
nucleases (ZFN) demonstrated for the first time successful
long-term multi-lineage engraftment of ZFN-edited, CCR5-deleted
HSCs in an NHP transplantation model [34].
To conclude, there was a great interest in combination approaches
to reversal of HIV latency as part of clinical and NHP studies with
CONFERENCE REPORT
Journal of Virus Eradication 2015; 1: 276–281
280
S Fidler et al.
 development of novel algorithms that can direct optimal participant
selection for proof-of-concept studies. These need to be done
in close collaboration with basic scientists who can better establish
an agreed array of viral reservoir quantification and characterisation
assays.
Acknowledgements
The IAS 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium was supported
by the National Institutes of Health, Office of AIDS Research
(NIH-OAR), the French National Agency for Research on AIDS and
Viral Hepatitis (ANRS), the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR), Bristol-Myers Squibb, Gilead, GlaxoSmithKline, ViiV
Healthcare, MSD, Sanofi Aventis, Sanofi Pasteur, the Réseau
SIDA/MI du FRSQ and Sidaction.
We thank Nicolas Chomont for his kind permission to use Figures
1 and 2, which were from his presentation ‘From care to cure’
during Plenary MOPL01 at the 8th IAS Conference on HIV
Pathogenesis, Treatment and Prevention, July 2015, Vancouver,
Canada.
Disclaimer
The views expressed are those of the authors and should not be
construed to represent the positions of the US Army or the
Department of Defense.
References
1.
Insight Start Study Group. Initiation of antiretroviral therapy in early asymptomatic
HIV Infection. N Engl J Med 2015 [Epub ahead of print].
2.
Cohen M, Chen Y, McCauley M et al. Final results of the HPTN 052 randomized
controlled trial: antiretroviral therapy prevents HIV transmission. 8th IAS Conference
on HIV Pathogenesis, Treatment and Prevention. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada.
Abstract MOAC0101LB.
3.
Doherty M. New directions in the 2015 WHO Consolidated ARV Guidelines. 8th
IAS Conference on HIV Pathogenesis, Treatment and Prevention. July 2015.
Vancouver, Canada. Presentation SUSA0608. Available at: http://pag.ias2015.org
(accessed August 2015).
4.
Autran B. Combination therapy trials for cure: clinical investigation and trial
design. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada.
Presentation.
Available
at:
www.iasociety.org/Web/WebContent/File/
HIV_Cure_Symposium_2015/Day1/Presentations/CCT-Autran.pdf (accessed August
2015).
5.
Fidler S. CHERUB: Collaboration in HIV eradication in the UK; predictors of PTC
and viral reactivation strategies. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015.
Vancouver, Canada. Presentation: Oral Abstract Session 4 – Immunology and
Persistence. Available at: www.iasociety.org/What-we-do/Towards-an-HIV-Cure/
Events/2015-Symposium/Day-2 (accessed August 2015).
6.
Cao W, Mehraj V, Trottier B et al. Early initiation rather than prolonged duration
of antiretroviral therapy in HIV infection contributes to reducing CD8 T-cell elevation:
relevance for clinical outcome. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015.
Vancouver, Canada. Abstract PE51 LB.
7.
Thornhill J, Inshaw P, Kaleebu P et al. CD4/CD8 ratio at ART initiation as a predictor
of viral rebound following interruption of ART initiated in primary HIV infection.
2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada. Abstract PE53
LB.
8.
Malatinkova E, De Spiegelaere W, Bonczkowski P et al. Long-term early antiretroviral
therapy limits the HIV-1 reservoir size as compared to later treatment initiation but
not to levels found in long-term non-progressors. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure
Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada. Abstract PE56.
9.
Kuritzkes D. Progress and challenges in HIV cure research. 2015 Towards an HIV
Cure Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada. Presentation: Keynote address.
Available at: www.iasociety.org/What-we-do/Towards-an-HIV-Cure/Events/
2015-Symposium/Day-1 (accessed August 2015).
10. Pollack R, Bruner K, Ho Y-C, Siliciano R. Patient-derived defective HIV-1 proviruses
containing large internal deletions can be transcribed and translated. 2015
Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada. Abstract OA3-2.
11. Pasternak A, Scherpenisse M, Berkhout B. Cell-associated HIV-1 unspliced to
multiply spliced RNA ratio at 12 weeks ART correlates with markers of immune
activation and apoptosis and predicts the CD4+ T-cell count at 96 weeks‘ ART.
2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada. Abstract
OA3-3.
12. Lee E, Hiener B, Bacchetti P et al. Distinct HIV genetic populations in effector memory
T-cells after prolonged therapy. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015.
Vancouver, Canada. Abstract OA3-4.
13. Chew G, Fujita T, Clayton K et al. Investigating the role of the immune checkpoint
receptor TIGIT in T cells during HIV disease progression and as a target for immune
restoration. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada.
Abstract OA3-5 LB.
14. Fromentin R, Ramirez CM, Khoury G et al. Immunological markers associated with
HIV persistence during ART identified by iterated conditional random forests analysis.
2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada. Abstract
OA3-1.
15. van der Sluis RM, Kumar NA, Evans VA et al. PD1 identifies latently HIV-infected
non proliferating and proliferating CD4+ T cells. Conference on Retroviruses and
Opportunistic Infections. February 2015. Boston, MA, USA. Abstract 388.
16. McGary C, Paganini S, Cervasi B et al. CTLA-4-expressing memory CD4+ T-cells are
critical contributors to SIV viral persistence. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium.
July 2015. Vancouver, Canada. Abstract OA1-1.
17. Ghneim K, Ahlers J, Fourati S et al. Trancriptomics and metabolomics identify
inflammatory profiles that segregate subjects with high and low inducible HIV
reservoir. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada.
Abstract OA4-1.
18. Frange P, Faye A, Avettand-Fenoel V et al. HIV-1 virological remission for more
than 11 years after interruption of early initiated antiretroviral therapy in a perinatally
infected child. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada.
Abstract OA4-4 LB.
19. Sharp M. Community involvement in HIV cure-related research: not just guinea pigs.
2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. Vancouver, Canada. Presentation: Community
speaker. Available at: www.iasociety.org/What-we-do/Towards-an-HIV-Cure/
Events/2015-Symposium/Day-1 (accessed August 2015).
20. Evans D. Considerations about combination anti-latency strategies and the needs
and concerns of PLWHIV. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. Vancouver, Canada.
Presentation: Roundtable – Combination Therapy Trials. Available at:
www.iasociety.org/What-we-do/Towards-an-HIV-Cure/Events/2015-
Symposium/Day-1 (accessed August 2015).
21. Rockstroh JK, Asmuth D, Pantaleo G et al. Reduction in total HIV-1 proviral DNA
following re-boost immunizations using the peptide-based therapeutic vaccine
candidate, Vacc-4x, during ART. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015.
Vancouver, Canada. Abstract PE64.
22. Katlama C, Rockstroh JR, Gatell J et al. VAC-3S immunotherapeutic HIV vaccine
combined with ART is immunogenic and safe. Phase II Initial Analysis of the
IPROTECT1 Multicenter European Study. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium.
July 2015. Vancouver, Canada. Abstract PE66.
23. Toussaint H. A first-in-human phase I/II trial demonstrates the safety and the
immunogenicity of a lentiviral-based therapeutic HIV vaccine eliciting potent
polyfunctional multispecific CD8 and CD4 T-cell responses in HIV-infected individual.
2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada. Abstract PE62
LB.
24. Mothe B, Manzardo C, Coll P et al. Safety and immunogenicity of ChAd.HIVconsv
and MVA.HIVconsv therapeutic vaccines in a cohort of early treated HIV-1 infected
individuals. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada.
Abstract PE46.
25. Ho Tsong Fang R, Launay O, Rouzioux C et al. VAC-3S, a safe immunotherapeutic
HIV vaccine decreased total HIV DNA and increased D4/CD8 ratio: Phase I final
results. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada.
Abstract PE67 LB.
26. Tung F, Tung J, Pallikkuth S et al. A novel therapeutic HIV-1 vaccine trial in patients
under HAART. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada.
Abstract OA4-5 LB.
27. Altfeld M. Immune recognition following latency reversal. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure
Symposium. Vancouver, Canada. Presentation: Oral Abstract Session 2 – Activating
Latent HIV Infection in vitro and in vivo. Available at: www.iasociety.org/What-we-
do/Towards-an-HIV-Cure/Events/2015-Symposium/Day-1 (accessed August 2015).
28. Achenbach CJ, Assoumou L, Deeks SG et al. Effect of therapeutic intensification
followed by HIV DNA prime and rAd5 boost vaccination on HIV-specific immunity
and HIV reservoir (EraMune 02): A multicentre randomised clinical trial. Lancet HIV
2015; 2: e82–e91.
29. Katlama C, Lambert S, Lecardonnel F et al. Effects of IL-7 on cell-associated DNA
in blood and rectal tissue: the ERAMUNE 01 study. 7th IAS Conference on HIV
Pathogenesis, Treatment and Prevention. July 2013. Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Abstract
TULBPE24.
30. Tcherepanova I, Krisko J, Harris J et al. Polyvalent immune responses correlate with
lower number of HIV infected CD4 T-cells in chronically infected subjects treated
with autologous RNA pulsed DC therapy. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium.
July 2015. Vancouver, Canada. Abstract PE29.
31. Valente S. Silencing the HIV reservoir. 8th IAS Conference on HIV Pathogenesis,
Treatment and Prevention. Vancouver, Canada. Abstract MOSY0203.
32. Lifson JD. The role of nonhuman primate studies in preparation for combination
‘cure’ studies in humans. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July 2015.
Vancouver, Canada. Presentation: Roundtable – Combination Therapy Trials. Available
at:
www.iasociety.org/What-we-do/Towards-an-HIV-Cure/Events/2015-
Symposium/Day-1 (accessed August 2015).
33. Policicchio B, Brocca-Cofano E, Xu C et al. Latency reversal Agent romidepsin
reactivates latent virus in two rhesus macaque models of controlled SIV infection
in the absence of antiretroviral therapy. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure Symposium. July
2015. Abstract OA2-2.
34. Peterson C, Wang J, Polacino P et al. Zinc finger nuclease gene editing for functional
cure in a nonhuman primate model of HIV/AIDS. 2015 Towards an HIV Cure
Symposium. July 2015. Vancouver, Canada. Abstract OA4-3.
IAS Towards an HIV Cure Symposium 281
Journal of Virus Eradication 2015; 1: 276–281
CONFERENCE REPORT
