 Fine-mapping inflammatory bowel disease loci to single variant 
resolution
Hailiang Huang1,2,*,§, Ming Fang3,4,*, Luke Jostins5,6,*, Maša Umićević Mirkov7, Gabrielle 
Boucher8, Carl A Anderson7, Vibeke Andersen9,10, Isabelle Cleynen11, Adrian Cortes5, 
François Crins3,4, Mauro D'Amato12,13, Valérie Deffontaine3,4, Julia Dimitrieva3,4, Elisa 
Docampo3,4, Mahmoud Elansary3,4, Kyle Kai-How Farh1,2,14, Andre Franke15, Ann-Stephan 
Gori3,4, Philippe Goyette8, Jonas Halfvarson16, Talin Haritunians17, Jo Knight18, Ian C 
Lawrance19,20, Charlie W Lees21, Edouard Louis3,22, Rob Mariman3,4, Theo Meuwissen23, 
Myriam Mni3,4, Yukihide Momozawa3,4,24, Miles Parkes25, Sarah L Spain26,27, Emilie 
Théâtre3,4, Gosia Trynka7, Jack Satsangi21, Suzanne van Sommeren28, Severine 
Vermeire11,29, Ramnik J Xavier2,30, International IBD Genetics Consortium†, Rinse K 
Weersma28, Richard H Duerr31,32, Christopher G Mathew26,33, John D Rioux8,34, Dermot PB 
McGovern17, Judy H Cho35, Michel Georges3,4,§, Mark J Daly1,2,§, and Jeffrey C Barrett7,§
1Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 2Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA 3Unit of Medical Genomics, Groupe Interdisciplinaire de Génoprotéomique 
Appliquée (GIGA-R) Research Center, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium 4Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium 5Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, 
University of Oxford, Headington, UK 6Christ Church, University of Oxford, St Aldates, UK 
7Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton (Cambridge), UK 8Research Center, Montreal Heart 
Institute, Montréal, Québec, Canada 9Medical Department, Viborg Regional Hospital, Viborg, 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.H. (hhuang@atgu.mgh.harvard.edu), M.G. 
(michel.georges@ulg.ac.be), M.J.D. (mjdaly@atgu.mgh.harvard.edu) or J.C.B. (barrett@sanger.ac.uk).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
§These authors contributed equally to this work (corresponding authors).
†A full list of members and affiliations appears in the Supplementary Information
Author Contributions Overall project supervision and management: M.J.D. J.C.B, M.G. Fine-mapping algorithms: H.H., M.F., L.J. 
TFBS analyses: H.H., K.F. Epigenetic analyses: M.U.M., G.T. eQTL dataset generation: E.L., E.T., J.D., E.D., M.E., R.M., M.M., 
Y.M., V.D., A.G. eQTL analyses: M.F., J.D., L.J., A.C. Variance component analysis: T.M., M.F. Contribution to overall statistical 
analyses: G.B. Primary drafting of the manuscript: M.J.D., J.C.B, M.G., H.H., L.J. Major contribution to drafting of the manuscript: 
M.F., M.U.M., J.H.C., D.P.B.M., J.D.R., C.G.M., R.H.D., R.K.W. The remaining authors contributed to the study conception, design, 
genotyping QC and/or writing of the manuscript. All authors saw, had the opportunity to comment on, and approved the final draft.
Author Information The study protocols were approved by the institutional review board (IRB) at each center involved with 
recruitment. Informed consent and permission to share the data were obtained from all subjects, in compliance with the guidelines 
specified by the recruiting center's IRB.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Code availability
Computer code used in this study is provided in the ‘Software availability’ sections in Supplementary Methods.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the international IBD Genetics Consortium but restrictions apply to 
the availability of these data, which were used under license for the current study, and so are not publicly available. Data are however 
available from the authors upon reasonable request and with permission of the international IBD Genetics Consortium.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 July 13; 547(7662): 173–178. doi:10.1038/nature22969.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Denmark 10Organ Center, Hospital of Southern Jutland Aabenraa, Aabenraa, Denmark 
11Department of Clinical and experimental medicine, Translational Research in GastroIntestinal 
Disorders (TARGID), Katholieke Universiteit (KU) Leuven, Leuven, Belgium 12Clinical 
Epidemiology Unit, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden 
13Department of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases, BioDonostia Health Research Institute San 
Sebastian, and IKERBASQUE Basque Foundation for Science Bilbao, Bilbao, Spain 14Illumina, 
San Diego, California, USA 15Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University 
of Kiel, Kiel, Germany 16Department of Gastroenterology, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro 
University, Örebro, Sweden 17F
.Widjaja Foundation Inflammatory Bowel and Immunobiology 
Research Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA 18Data Science 
Institute and Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University, LA1 4YG, UK 19Centre for 
Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, Saint John of God Hospital, Subiaco, WA, Australia 20Harry 
Perkins Institute for Medical Research, School of Medicine and Pharmacology, University of 
Western Australia, Murdoch, WA, Australia 21Gastrointestinal Unit, Wester General Hospital 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 22Division of Gastroenterology, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire (CHU) de Liège, Liège, Belgium 23Livestock and Aquacultural Sciences, Norwegian 
University of Life Sciences, Ås, Norway 24Laboratory for Genotyping Development, Center for 
Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan 25Inflammatory Bowel Disease Research 
Group, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK 26Department of Medical and Molecular 
Genetics, King's College London, London, UK 27Centre for Therapeutic Target Validation, 
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton (Cambridge), UK 28Department of Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology, University of Groningen and University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, 
The Netherlands 29Division of Gastroenterology, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, 
Belgium 30Gastroenterology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA 31Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, 
Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA 32Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public 
Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 33Sydney Brenner Institute for Molecular Bioscience, 
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa 34Faculté de Médecine, Université 
de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada 35Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut, USA
Summary
The inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) are chronic gastrointestinal inflammatory disorders that 
affect millions worldwide. Genome-wide association studies have identified 200 IBD-associated 
loci, but few have been conclusively resolved to specific functional variants. Here we report fine-
mapping of 94 IBD loci using high-density genotyping in 67,852 individuals. We pinpointed 18 
associations to a single causal variant with >95% certainty, and an additional 27 associations to a 
single variant with >50% certainty. These 45 variants are significantly enriched for protein-coding 
changes (n=13), direct disruption of transcription factor binding sites (n=3) and tissue specific 
epigenetic marks (n=10), with the latter category showing enrichment in specific immune cells 
among associations stronger in CD and in gut mucosa among associations stronger in UC. The 
results of this study suggest that high-resolution fine-mapping in large samples can convert many 
Huang et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 GWAS discoveries into statistically convincing causal variants, providing a powerful substrate for 
experimental elucidation of disease mechanisms.
The inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) are a group of chronic, debilitating disorders of the 
gastrointestinal tract with peak onset in adolescence and early adulthood. More than 1.4 
million people are affected in the USA alone1, with an estimated direct healthcare cost of 
$6.3 billion/year. IBD affects millions worldwide, and is rising in prevalence, particularly in 
pediatric and non-European ancestry populations2. IBD has two subtypes, ulcerative colitis 
(UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD), which have distinct presentations and treatment courses. To 
date, 200 genomic loci have been associated with IBD3,4, but only a handful have been 
conclusively ascribed to a specific causal variant with direct insight into the underlying 
disease biology. This scenario is common to all genetically complex diseases, where the 
pace of identifying associated loci outstrips that of defining specific molecular mechanisms 
and extracting biological insight from each association.
The widespread correlation structure of the human genome (known as linkage 
disequilibrium, or LD) often results in similar evidence for association among many 
neighboring variants. However, unless LD is perfect (r2 = 1), it is possible, with a 
sufficiently large sample size, to statistically resolve causal variants from neighbors even at 
high levels of correlation (Extended Data Figure 1 and ref 5). Novel statistical approaches 
applied to very large datasets that address this problem6 require that the highly correlated 
variants are directly genotyped or imputed with certainty. Truly high-resolution mapping 
data, when combined with increasingly sophisticated and comprehensive public databases 
annotating the putative regulatory function of DNA variants, are likely to reveal novel 
insights into disease pathogenesis7–9 and the mechanisms of disease-associated variants.
Genetic architecture of associated loci
We genotyped 67,852 individuals of European ancestry, including 33,595 IBD (18,967 CD 
and 14,628 UC) and 34,257 healthy controls using the Illumina™ Immunochip (Extended 
Data Table 1). This genotyping array was designed to include all known variants from 
European individuals in the February 2010 release of the 1000 Genomes Project10,11 in 187 
high-density regions known to be associated to one or more immune-mediated diseases12. 
Because fine-mapping uses subtle differences in strength of association between tightly 
correlated variants to infer which is most likely to be causal, it is particularly sensitive to 
data quality. We therefore performed stringent quality control to remove genotyping errors 
and batch effects (Methods). We imputed into this dataset from the 1000 Genomes reference 
panel13,14 to fill in variants missing from the Immunochip, or filtered out by our quality 
control (Extended Data Figure 2). We then evaluated the 97 high-density regions that had 
previous IBD associations3 and contained at least one variant that showed significant 
association (Methods) in this data set. The major histocompatibility complex was excluded 
from these analyses as fine-mapping has been reported elsewhere15.
We applied three complementary Bayesian fine-mapping methods that used different priors 
and model selection strategies to identify independent association signals within a region, 
and to assign a posterior probability of causality to each variant (Supplementary Methods 
Huang et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 and Extended Data Figure 2). For each independent signal detected by each method, we 
sorted all variants by the posterior probability of association, and added variants to the 
‘credible set’ of associated variants until the sum of their posterior probability exceeded 
95% – that is, the credible set contains the minimum list of DNA variants that are >95% 
likely to contain the causal variant (Figure 1). These sets ranged in size from one to > 400 
variants. We merged these results and subsequently focused only on signals where an 
overlapping credible set of variants was identified by at least two of the three methods and 
all variants were either directly genotyped or imputed with INFO score > 0.4 (Methods and 
Figure 1).
In three out of 97 regions, a consistent credible set could not be identified; when multiple 
independent effects exist in a region of very high LD, multiple distinct fine-mapping 
solutions may not be distinguishable (Supplementary Note). Sixty-eight of the remaining 94 
regions contain a single association, while 26 harbor two or more independent signals, for a 
total of 139 independent associations defined across the 94 regions (Figure 2a). Only IL23R 
and NOD2 (both previously established to contain multiple associated protein-coding 
variants16) contain more than three independent signals. Consistent with previous reports3, 
the vast majority of signals are associated with both CD and UC, though many of these have 
a significantly stronger association with one subtype. For the purposes of enrichment 
analyses below, we compared 79 signals that are more strongly associated with CD to 23 
signals that are more strongly associated with UC (the remaining 37 were equally associated 
with both subtypes, Supplementary Table 1).
Using a restricted maximum likelihood mixed model approach17, we evaluated the 
proportion of total variance in disease risk attributed to these 94 regions and how much of 
that is explained by the 139 specific associations. We estimated that 25% of CD risk was 
explained by the specific associations described here, out of a total of 28% explained by 
these loci (correspondingly for UC: 17% out of 22%). The single strongest signals in each 
region contribute 76% of this variance explained and the remaining associations contribute 
24% (Extended Data Figure 3), highlighting the importance of secondary and tertiary 
associations in GWAS results15,18.
Associations mapped to a single variant
For 18 signals, the 95% credible set consisted of a single variant (‘single variant credible 
sets’), and for 24 others the credible set consisted of two to five variants (Figure 2b). The 
single variant credible sets included five previously reported coding variants: three in NOD2 
(fs1007insC, R702W, G908R), a rare protective allele in IL23R (V362I) and a splice variant 
in CARD9 (c.IVS11+1G>C) 16,19. The remaining single variant credible sets were 
comprised of three missense variants (I170V in SMAD3, I923V in IFIH1 and N289S in 
NOD2), four intronic variants (in IL2RA, LRRK2, NOD2 and RTEL1/TNFRSF6B) and six 
intergenic variants (located 3.7kb downstream of GPR35; 3.9kb upstream of PRDM1; within 
a EP300 binding site 39.9 kb upstream of IKZF1; 500 bp before the transcription start site of 
JAK2; 9.4kb upstream of NKX2-3; and 3.5kb downstream from HNF4A) (Table 1). Of note, 
while physical proximity does not guarantee functional relevance, the credible set of variants 
for 30 associated loci now implicates a specific gene either because it resides within 50 kb of 
Huang et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 only that gene or has a coding variant with >50% probability – improved from only 3 so 
refined using an earlier HapMap-based definition. Using the same definitions, the total 
number of potential candidate genes was reduced from 669 to 233. Examples of IBD 
candidate genes clearly prioritized in our data are described in the Supplementary Box, and a 
customizable browser (http://finemapping.broadinstitute.org/) is available to review the 
detailed fine-mapping results.
Associated protein coding variants
We first annotated the possible functional consequences of the IBD variants by their effect 
on the amino acid sequences of proteins. Thirteen out of 45 variants (Figure 2c) that have 
>50% posterior probability are non-synonymous (Table 1), an 18-fold enrichment 
(enrichment P=2x10-13, Fisher’s exact test) relative to randomly drawn variants in our 
regions (Figure 3a). By contrast, only one variant with >50% probability is synonymous 
(enrichment P=0.42). All common coding variants previously reported to affect IBD risk are 
included in a 95% credible set including: IL23R (R381Q, V362I and G149R); CARD9 
(c.IVS11+1G>C and S12N); NOD2 (S431L, R702W, V793M, N852S and G908R, 
fs1007insC); ATG16L1 (T300A); PTPN22 (R620W); and FUT2 (W154X). While this 
enrichment of coding variation (Figure 3a) provides assurance about the accuracy of our 
approach, it does not suggest that 30% of all associations are caused by coding variants; 
rather, it is almost certainly the case that associated coding variants have stronger effect 
sizes, making them easier to fine-map.
Associated non-coding variants
We next examined conserved nucleotides in high confidence binding site motifs of 84 
transcription factor (TF) families20 (Methods). There was a significant positive correlation 
between TF motif disruption and IBD association posterior probability (P=0.006, logistic 
regression) (Figure 3a), including three variants with >50% probability (two >95%). In the 
RTEL1/TNFRSF6B region, rs6062496 is predicted to disrupt a TF binding site (TFBS) for 
EBF1, a TF involved in the maintenance of B cell identity and prevention of alternative fates 
in committed cells21. A low frequency (3.6%) protective allele at rs74465132 creates a 
binding site for EP300 less than 40kbp upstream of IKZF1. The third notable example of 
TFBS disruption, although not in a single variant credible set, is detailed in the 
Supplementary Box for the association at SMAD3.
Recent studies have shown that trait associated variants are enriched for epigenetic marks 
highlighting cell type specific regulatory regions9,22,23. We compared our credible sets 
with ChIPseq peaks corresponding to chromatin immunoprecipitation with H3K4me1, 
H3K4me3 and H3K27ac (shown previously22,23 to highlight enhancers, promoters and 
active regulatory elements, respectively) in 120 adult and fetal tissues, assayed by the 
Roadmap Epigenomics Mapping Consortium24 (Figure 3b). Using a threshold of 
P=1.3x10-4 (0.05 corrected for 360 tests), we observed significant enrichment of H3K4me1 
in 6 immune cell types and for H3K27ac in 2 gastrointestinal (gut) samples (sigmoid colon 
and rectal mucosa) (Figure 3b and Supplementary Table 2). The subset of signals that are 
Huang et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 more strongly associated with CD overlap more with immune cell chromatin peaks, whereas 
UC signals overlap more with gut chromatin peaks (Supplementary Table 2).
These three chromatin marks are correlated both within tissues (we observe additional signal 
in other marks in the tissues described above) and across related tissues. We therefore 
defined a set of “core immune peaks” for H3K4me1 and “core gut peaks” for H3K27ac as 
the set of overlapping peaks in all enriched immune cell and gut tissue types, respectively. 
These two sets of peaks are independently significant and capture the observed enrichment 
compared to “control peaks” made up of the same number of ChIPseq peaks across our 94 
regions in non-immune and non-gut tissues (Figure 3c,d). These two tracks summarize our 
epigenetic-GWAS overlap signal, and the combined excess over the baseline suggests that a 
substantial number of regions, particularly those not mapped to coding variants, may 
ultimately be explained by functional variation in recognizable enhancer/promoter elements.
Overlap with expression QTLs
Variants that change enhancer or promoter activity might change gene expression, and 
baseline expression of many genes has been found to be regulated by genetic variation25–
27. Indeed, it has been suggested that these so-called expression quantitative trait loci 
(eQTLs) underlie a large proportion of GWAS associations25,28. We therefore searched for 
variants that are both in an IBD-associated credible set with 50 or fewer variants, and the 
most significantly associated eQTL variant for a gene in a study29 of peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMC) from 2,752 twins. Sixty-eight of the 76 regions with signals 
fine-mapped to ≤ 50 variants harbor at least one significant eQTL (affecting a gene within 1 
Mb with P < 10-5). Despite this abundance of eQTLs in fine-mapped regions, only 3 credible 
sets include the most significantly associated eQTL variants, compared with 3.7 expected by 
chance (Methods). Data from a more recent study30 using PBMCs from 8,086 individuals 
did not yield a substantively different outcome, demonstrating a modest but non-significant 
enrichment (8 observed overlaps, 4.2 expected by chance, P=0.06). Using a more lenient 
definition of overlap which requires the lead eQTL variant to be in LD (R2 > 0.4) with an 
IBD credible set variant increased the number of potential overlaps but again these numbers 
were not greater than chance expectation.
As PBMCs are a heterogeneous collection of immune cell populations, cell type-specific 
signals or signals corresponding to genes expressed most prominently in non-immune 
tissues may be missed. We therefore tested the enrichment of eQTLs that overlap credible 
sets in five primary immune cell populations (CD4+, CD8+, CD19+, CD14+ and CD15+), 
platelets, and three distinct intestinal locations (rectum, colon and ileum) isolated from 350 
healthy individuals (Methods). We observed a significant enrichment of credible SNP/eQTL 
overlaps in CD4+ cells and ileum (Extended Data Table 2): three and two credible sets 
overlapped eQTLs, respectively, compared to 0.4 and 0.3 expected by chance (P=0.005 and 
0.020). An enrichment was also observed for the naïve CD14+ cells from another study31: 
eight overlaps observed compared to 2.7 expected by chance (P=0.001). We did not observe 
enrichment of overlaps in stimulated (with interferon or lipopolysaccharide) CD14+ cells 
from the same source (Extended Data Table 2).
Huang et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 We investigated eQTL overlaps more deeply by applying two colocalization approaches (one 
frequentist, one Bayesian, Methods) to the our cell-separated dataset where primary 
genotype and expression data were available. We confirmed greater than expected overlap 
with eQTLs in CD4+ and ileum described above (Figure 4 and Extended Data Table 2). 
These CD4+ colocalized eQTLs also had stronger overlap with CD4+ ChIPseq peaks than 
our other credible sets, further supporting a regulatory causal mechanism. The number of 
colocalizations in other purified cell types and tissues was largely indistinguishable from 
what we expect under the null using either method, except for moderate enrichment in 
rectum (4 observed and 1.4 expected, P=0.039, Frequentist approach) and colon (3 observed 
and 0.8 expected, P=0.04, Bayesian approach). Only two of these colocalizations correspond 
to an IBD variant with causal probability > 50% (Table 1 and Extended Data Figure 4a).
Discussion
We have performed fine-mapping of 94 previously reported genetic risk loci for IBD. 
Rigorous quality control followed by an integration of three novel fine-mapping methods 
generated lists of genetic variants accounting for 139 independent associations across these 
loci. Our methods are concordant with an existing fine-mapping method6 (67 of 68 credible 
sets in single signal regions overlap, including exact matches for all single variant credible 
sets), and provide extensions to support the phenotype assignment (CD, UC or IBD) and the 
conditional estimation of multiple credible sets in loci with multiple independent signals. 
The use of multiple methods allowed us to focus our downstream analyses on loci where the 
choice of fine-mapping method did not substantially alter conclusions about the biology of 
IBD. Our results improve on previous fine-mapping efforts using a preset LD threshold32 
(e.g. r2> 0.6) (Extended Data Figure 5) by formally modeling the posterior probability of 
association of every variant. Much of this resolution derives from the very large sample size 
we employed, because the number of variants in a credible set decreases with increasing 
significance (P=0.0069).
The high-density of genotyping also aids in improved resolution. For instance, the primary 
association at IL2RA has now been mapped to a single variant associated with CD, 
rs61839660. This variant was not present in the Hapmap 3 reference panel and was therefore 
not reported in earlier studies3,33 (nearby tagging variants, rs12722489 and rs12722515, 
were reported instead). Imputation using the 1000 genomes reference panel and the largest 
assembled GWAS dataset3 did not separate rs61839660 from its neighbors (unpublished 
results), due to the loss of information in imputation using the limited reference. Only direct 
genotyping, available in the immunochip high-density regions, permitted the conclusive 
identification of the causal variant.
Accurate fine-mapping should, in many instances, ultimately point to the same variant 
across diseases in shared loci. Among our single-variant credible sets, we fine-mapped a UC 
association to a rare missense variant (I923V) in IFIH1, which is also associated with type 1 
diabetes (T1D)37 with an opposite direction of effect (Supplementary Box). The intronic 
variant noted above (rs61839660, AF=9%) in IL2RA was also similarly associated with 
T1D, again with a discordant directional effect38 (Supplementary Box). Simultaneous high-
Huang et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 resolution fine-mapping in multiple diseases should therefore better clarify both shared and 
distinct biology.
Resolution of fine-mapping can be further improved by leveraging LD from other 
ethnicities34. However, the sample size from other ethnicities we have collected is small 
compared with European samples (9,846 across East-Asian, South-Asian and Middle-
Eastern). Limited access to matched imputation reference panels from all cohorts and the 
fact that the smaller non-European sets are not from populations (e.g., African-derived) with 
narrower LD also suggest that gains in fine-mapping accuracy would be limited at this time. 
Ultimately this effort will be aided by more substantial investment in genotyping non-
European population samples and by developing and applying more robust trans-ethnic fine-
mapping algorithms.
A new release of the 1000 genomes (phase 3)35 and the UK10K36 project have introduced 
new variants that were not present in the reference panel in our study. Our major findings 
remain the same using this new reference panel: the 18 single-variant credible sets are not in 
high LD (r2 > 0.95) with any new variants in either new dataset, and the 1,426 variants in 
IBD associations mapped to ≤50 variants are in high LD with only 47 new variants (3.3% of 
the total size of these credible sets, Supplementary Table 1). Given that this release 
represents a near complete catalogue of variants with minor allele frequency (MAF) > 1% in 
European populations, we believe our current fine mapping results are likely to be robust, 
especially for common variant associations. High-resolution fine-mapping demonstrates that 
causal variants are significantly enriched for variants that alter protein coding variants or 
disrupt transcription factor binding motifs. Enrichment was also observed in H3K4me1 
marks in immune related cell types and H3K27ac marks in sigmoid colon and rectal 
mucosal tissues, with CD loci demonstrating a stronger immune signature and UC loci more 
enriched for gut tissues (P values are 0.014, 0.0005 and 0.0013 respectively for H3K4me1, 
H3K27ac and H3K4me3; chi-square test). By contrast, overall enrichment of eQTLs is quite 
modest compared with prior reports and not seen strongly in excess of chance in our well-
refined credible sets (≤ 50 variants). This result underscores the importance of high-
resolution mapping and the careful incorporation of the high background rate of eQTLs. It is 
worth noting that evaluating the overlap between two distinct mapping results is 
fundamentally different than comparing genetic mapping results to fixed genomic features, 
and depends on both mappings being well resolved. While these data challenge the 
paradigm that easily surveyed baseline eQTLs explain a large proportion of non-coding 
GWAS signals, the modest excesses observed in smaller but cell-specific data sets suggest 
that much larger tissue or cell-specific studies (and under the correct stimuli or 
developmental time points) will resolve the contribution of eQTLs to GWAS hits.
Resolving multiple independent associations may often help target the causal gene more 
precisely. For example, the SMAD3 locus hosts a non-synonymous variant and a variant 
disrupting the conserved transcription factor binding site (also overlapping the H3K27ac 
marker in gut tissues), unambiguously articulating a role in disease and providing an allelic 
series for further experimental inquiry. Similarly, the TYK2 locus has been mapped to a non-
synonymous variant and a variant disrupting a conserved transcription factor binding site 
(http://finemapping.broadinstitute.org/).
Huang et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 One-hundred and sixteen associations have been fine-mapped to ≤ 50 variants. Among them, 
27 associations contain coding variants, 20 contain variants disrupting transcription factor 
binding motifs, and 45 are within histone H3K4me1 or H3K27ac marked DNA regions. The 
best-resolved associations - 45 variants having >50% posterior probabilities for being causal 
(Table 1) – are similarly significantly enriched for variants with known or presumed function 
from genome annotation. Of these, 13 variants cause non-synonymous change in amino 
acids, three disrupt a conserved TF binding motif, ten are within histone H3K4me1 or 
H3K27ac marked DNA regions in disease-relevant tissues, and two colocalize with a 
significant cis-eQTL (Extended Data Figure 4a). Risk alleles of these variants can be found 
throughout the allele frequency spectrum, with protein coding variants having somewhat 
larger effects and more extreme risk allele frequencies (Extended Data Figure 6a-c).
This analysis, however, leaves 21 non-coding variants (Extended Data Figure 4b), all of 
which have >50% probabilities to be causal (five have >95%), that are not located within 
known motifs, annotated elements, nor in any experimentally determined ChIPseq peaks or 
eQTL credible sets yet discovered. While we have identified a statistically compelling set of 
genuine associations (often intronic or within 10 kb of strong candidate genes), we can make 
little inference about function. For example, the intronic single-variant credible set of 
LRRK2 has no annotation, eQTL or ChIPseq peak of note. This underscores the 
incompleteness of our knowledge regarding the function of non-coding DNA and its role in 
disease, and calls for comprehensive studies on transcriptome and epigenome in a wide 
range of cell lines and stimulation conditions. That the majority of the best-refined non-
coding associations have no available annotation is perhaps sobering with respect to how 
well we may currently be able to interpret non-coding variation in medical sequencing 
efforts. It does suggest, however, that detailed fine-mapping of GWAS signals down to single 
variants, combined with emerging high-throughput genome-editing methodology, may be 
among the most effective ways to advance to a greater understanding of the biology of the 
non-coding genome.
Methods
Genotyping and QC
We genotyped 35,197 unaffected and 35,346 affected individuals (20,155 CD and 15,191 
UC) using the Immunochip array. Genotypes were called using optiCall40 for 192,402 
autosomal variants before QC. We removed variants with missing data rate >2% across the 
whole dataset, or >10% in any one batch, and variants that failed (FDR < 10-5 in either the 
whole dataset or at least two batches) tests for: a) Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in controls; 
b) differential missingness between cases and controls; c) different allele frequency across 
different batches in controls, CD or UC. We also removed non-coding variants that were 
present in the 1000 Genomes pilot stage but were not in the subsequent Phase I integrated 
variant set (March 2012 release) and had not been in releases 2 or 3 of HapMap as these 
mostly represent false positives from the 1000 Genomes pilot, which often genotype poorly. 
Where a variant failed in exactly one batch we set all genotypes to missing for that batch (to 
be reimputed later) and included the site if it passed in the remainder of the batches. We 
removed individuals that had >2% missing data, had significantly higher or lower (defined 
Huang et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 as FDR<0.01) inbreeding coefficient (F), or were duplicated or related (PI_HAT ≥ 0.4, 
calculated from the LD pruned dataset described below), by sequentially removing the 
individual with the largest number of related samples until no related samples remain. We 
projected all remaining samples onto principal component axes generated from HapMap 3, 
and classified their ancestry using a Gaussian mixture model fitted to the European (CEU
+TSI), African (YRI+LWK+ASW+MKK), East Asian (CHB+JPT) and South Asian (GIH) 
HapMap samples. We removed all samples that were classified as non-European, or that lay 
more than 8 standard deviations from the European cluster. After QC, there were 67,852 
European-derived samples with valid diagnosis (healthy control, CD or UC), and 161,681 
genotyped variants available for downstream analyses.
Linkage-disequilibrium pruning and principal components analysis
From the clean dataset we removed variants in long range LD41 or with MAF < 0.05, and 
then pruned 3 times using the ‘--indep’ option in PLINK (with window size of 50, step size 
of 5 and VIF threshold of 1.25). Principal component axes were generated within controls 
using this LD pruned dataset (18,123 variants). The axes were then projected to cases to 
generate the principal components for all samples. The analysis was performed using our in-
house C code (https://github.com/hailianghuang/efficientPCA) and LAPACK package42 for 
efficiency.
Controlling for population structure, batch effects and other confounders
We used 2,853 “background SNPs” present on the Immunochip but not known to be 
associated with immune disorders to calculate the genomic inflation factor λGC. After 
including the first five principal components calculated above as covariates, λGC = 1.29, 
1.25 and 1.31 for CD, UC and IBD (adding additional principal components did not further 
reduce λGC, Extended Data Table 3a). Because our genotype data were processed in 15 
batches with variable ratios of cases to controls, we conducted two analyses to ensure 
possible batch effects were adequately controlled. First, we split the samples into a 
“balanced” cohort with studies that have both cases and controls and an “imbalanced” cohort 
with studies that have exclusively cases or controls (Extended Data Table 1). As λGC under 
polygenic inheritance scales with the sample size43, we randomly down-sampled the full 
dataset to match the sample size of the balanced and the imbalanced cohorts respectively. 
We tested for association in these subsets of our data (and included batch ID as a covariate in 
the balanced cohort), and found the λGC from the balanced and imbalanced cohorts to be 
within the 95% confidence interval of size matched values from our full data, suggesting that 
batch effects are not systematically inflating our association statistics (Extended Data Table 
3b). We also performed a heterogeneity test for the odds ratio (OR) of lead variants in each 
credible set using the balanced and imbalanced cohorts, and observed no significant 
heterogeneity after Bonferroni correction (Supplementary Table 3).
We next sought to disentangle the contributions of polygenic inheritance and uncorrected 
population structure in our observed λGC. LD score regression44 is able to differentiate 
these two effects, but requires genome-wide data, so is not possible in our Immunochip 
dataset. Instead, we compared λGC and λ1000 values calculated using the same set of 
background SNPs from the largest IBD meta-analysis with genome-wide data45. For both 
Huang et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 CD and UC the λ1000 values in our Immunochip study (1.012 and 1.012) were equal or less 
than those in the genome-wide study (1.016 and 1.012). Furthermore, LD score regression 
on the genome-wide data shows that the majority of inflation is caused by polygenic risk 
(LD score intercept = 1.09 for both CD and UC, compared to λGC = 1.23 and 1.29). 
Together, these results show that our residual inflation is consistent with polygenic signal 
and modest residual confounding. We tested what effect correcting for the LD score 
intercept of 1.09 would have on posterior probabilities and credible sets and found no major 
differences compared to uncorrected values. The full comparison of λ values is shown in 
Extended Data Table 3c.
Imputation
Imputation was performed separately in each Immunochip autosomal high-density region 
(185 total) from the 1000 Genomes Phase I integrated haplotype reference panel. To prevent 
the edge effect, we extended each side of the high density regions by 50kbp. Two 
imputations were performed sequentially (Extended Data Figure 2) using software and 
parameters as described below. The first imputation was performed immediately after the 
quality control, from which the major results were manually inspected (Manual cluster plot 
inspection, Methods). The second imputation was performed after removing variants that 
failed the manual cluster plot inspection. We used SHAPEIT46,47 (versions: first 
imputation: v2.r644, second imputation: v2.r769) to pre-phase the genotypes, followed by 
IMPUTE213,14 (versions: first: 2.2.2, second: 2.3.0) to perform the imputation. The 
reference panels were downloaded from the IMPUTE2 website (first: Mar 2012 release, 
second: Dec 2013 release). After the second imputation, there were 388,432 variants with 
good imputation quality (INFO > 0.4). These include 99.9% of variants with MAF ≥0.05, 
99.3% of variants with 0.05>MAF ≥0.01, and 63.0% of variants with MAF < 0.01 
(Extended Data Figure 6d-f), with similar success rates for both coding and non-coding 
variants, making it unlikely that missing variants substantially affect our fine-mapping 
conclusions.
Manual cluster plot inspection
Variants that had posterior probability greater than 50% or in credible sets mapped to ≤ 10 
variants were manually inspected using Evoker v2.248. Each variant was inspected by three 
independent reviewers (ten reviewers participated) and scored as pass, fail or maybe. 
Reviewers were blinded to the posterior probability of these variants. We removed variants 
that received one or more fails, or received less than 2 passes. 220 out of 276 inspected 
variants passed this inspection, and 53 of 56 failed variants were restored by imputation. 
There is no difference in MAF between the failed and the passed variants (P=0.66). A 
further cluster plot inspection flagged two additional failed variants after removing the failed 
variants from the first inspection and redoing the imputation and analysis. Dramatic 
clustering errors accounted for 27/58 flagged variants, which were eliminated from final 
credible sets. The remaining 31 had only minor issues, and the imputed data for these 
remained in our final credible sets, with marginally smaller posteriors (mean of the 
difference: 9.8%, P=0.06, paired t test).
Huang et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Establishing a P value threshold
We used a multiple testing corrected P value threshold for associations of 1.35 x 10-6, which 
was established by permutation. We generated 200 permuted datasets by randomly shuffling 
phenotypes across samples and carried out association analyses for each permutation across 
all variants in high-density regions that overlap IBD-associated loci3. We stored (i) all the 
point-wise P values (αS), as well as (ii) the “best” P values (αB) of each of the 200 permuted 
datasets. We then computed the empirical, experiment-wide P value (αM)(corrected for 
multiple testing) for each of the tests as its rank/200 with respect to the 200 αB. We then 
estimated the number of independent tests performed in the studied regions, n, as the slope 
of the regression of log(1-αM) on log(1-αS), knowing that αM = 1 − (1−αS)n, yielding a 
value of 37,056. The P value threshold was determined as 0.05/n ≈ 1.35 x 10-6.
Detecting and fine-mapping association signals
We used three fine-mapping methods (Supplementary Methods) to detect independent 
signals and create credible sets across 97 Immunochip autosomal high-density regions that 
contained at least one variant with p < 1.35 x 10-6. Our process for merging the results of the 
three methods is described below and illustrated in Figure 1a.
1.
We merged signals from different methods if their credible sets overlapped. To 
ensure a conservative credible set, this new merged credible set included all 
variants from all merged signals (the union of constituent credible sets). We 
assigned each variant in the merged credible sets a posterior probability equal to 
the average of the probabilities from the methods that reported this signal. To 
filter out technical artifacts we required genotyped variants in small credible sets 
to pass manual cluster plot inspection (see above) and all imputed variants to 
have INFO > 0.4. For signals reported by only one or two methods that contain 
only imputed variants (i.e. no directly genotyped variants), we additionally 
required at least one variant with INFO > 0.8 and MAF > 0.01.
2.
We next assigned each signal to a provisional combination of lead variant and 
phenotype (CD, UC or IBD) that maximized the marginal likelihood of equation 
8 in Supplementary Methods.
3.
At loci with >1 signals, we built a multivariate model with all signals reported by 
all three methods, and tested all possible combinations of adding signals reported 
by one or two methods, as long as they still had p < 1.35 x 10-6 when jointly 
fitted in the multi-signal model. We selected the combination with the highest 
joint marginal likelihood (equation 8 in Supplementary Methods).
Phenotype assignment of signals
The provisional phenotype assignment carried out during the signal merging described 
above is merely a point estimate, and does not capture the uncertainty associated with the 
phenotypic assignment. We therefore recomputed the assignment of each signal as CD-
specific, UC-specific or shared using the Bayesian multinomial model from fine-mapping 
method 2, Empirical covariance prior with Laplace approximation49, as it is designed to 
assess evidence of sharing in the presence of potentially correlated effect sizes. For the lead 
Huang et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 variant for each credible set, we calculated the marginal likelihoods as in equation 13 from 
Supplementary Methods, restricting either βUC = 0 (for the CD-only model) or βCD = 0 (for 
the UC-only model), as well as using the unconstrained prior (for the associated-to-both 
model). We then calculated the log Bayes factor in favor of sharing, i.e. the log of the ratio 
of marginal likelihoods between the associated-to-both model and the best of the single-
phenotype associated models. These sharing log Bayes factors are given in Supplementary 
Table 1 (column ‘sharingBF’), and are a probabilistic assessment of phenotype assignment: 
for instance, the log Bayes factor of 97.4 for the primary signal at IL23R suggests a very 
high certainty that this signal is shared across both CD and UC, whereas the log Bayes factor 
of 0.4 for the primary signal at FUT2 is more ambiguous. In addition to providing the log 
Bayes factor itself, we also applied a log Bayes factor cut-off of 10 to select variants with 
strong evidence of being shared across phenotypes.
Final filters
These procedures generated some signals where all three methods largely agreed, and some 
where they differed. While the signals where the methods disagree are of interest for 
methods development, here we chose to focus on the most concordant signals, as they are 
most straightforward to interpret biologically. We therefore discarded all signals found by 
only one method (which completely removed one locus), and two loci where the ratio of 
marginal likelihoods (equation 8 in Supplementary Methods) for the best model and the 
second-best model was < 10 (Supplementary Notes). After these filters (Extended Data 
Figure 7) we considered 139 signals from 94 regions (containing a total of 181,232 variants) 
to be confidently fine-mapped, and took them forward for subsequent analysis.
Estimating the variance explained by the fine-mapping
We used a mixed model framework to estimate the total risk variance attributable to the IBD 
risk loci, and to the signals identified in the fine-mapping. We used the GCTA software 
package50 to compute a gametic relationship matrix (G-matrix) using genotype dosage 
information for the genotyped variants in the high-density regions (which we will call GHD). 
We then fit a variety of variance component models by restricted maximum likelihood 
analysis using an underlying liability threshold model implemented with the DMU 
package51. The first model is a standard heritability mixed-model that includes fixed effects 
for five principal components (to correct for stratification) and a random effect summarizing 
the contribution of all variants in the fine-mapping regions, such that the liabilities across all 
individuals are distributed according to
where λ1 is thus the variance explained by all variants in fine-mapping regions, which we 
estimate. We then fitted a model that included an additional random effect for the 
contribution of the lead variants that have been specifically identified (with G-matrix 
Gsignals), such that the liability is distributed as
Huang et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 The variance explained by the signals under consideration is then given by the reduction in 
the variance explained by all variants in the fine-mapping regions between the two models 
(λ1−λ′1). We used this approach to estimate what fraction of this variance was accounted 
for by (i) the single strongest signals in each region (as would be typically done prior to fine-
mapping), or (ii) all signals identified in fine-mapping. We used Cox and Snell’s method52 
to estimate the variance explained across individual signals (Extended Data Figure 3b) for 
computational efficiency.
Overlap between transcription factor binding motifs and causal variants
For each motif in the ENCODE TF ChIP-seq data (http://compbio.mit.edu/encode-motifs/, 
accessed Nov 2014)20, we calculated the overall information content (IC) as the sum of IC 
for each position53, and only considered motifs with overall IC ≥ 14 bits (equivalent to 7 
perfectly conserved positions). For every variant in a high-density region we determined 
whether it creates or disrupts a motif at a high-information site (IC ≥ 1.8).
Overlap between epigenetic signatures and causal variants
For each combination of 120 tissues and three histone marks (H3K4me1, H3K4me3 and 
H3K27ac) from the Roadmap Epigenome Project we calculated an overlap score, equal to 
the sum of fine-mapping posterior probabilities for all variants in peaks of that histone mark 
in that tissue. We generated a null distribution of this score for each tissue/mark by shifting 
chromatin marks randomly (between 0bp and 44.53Mbp, the length of all high-density 
regions) and circularly (peaks at the end of the region shifted to the beginning of the region) 
over the high-density regions while keeping the same inter-peak distances. To summarize 
these correlated results across many cell and tissue types we defined a set of “core” 
H3K4me1 immune and H3K27ac gut peaks as sets of overlapping peaks in cells that showed 
the strongest enrichment. Intersects were made using bedtools v2.24.0 default settings54. 
We selected 6 immune cell types for H3K4me1 and 3 gut cell types for H3K27ac 
(Supplementary Table 2). We also chose controls (Supplementary Table 2) from non-
immune and non-gut cell types with similar density of peaks in the fine-mapped regions as 
compared to immune/gut cell types to confirm the tissue-specificity of the overlap. We used 
the phenotype assignments (described above) in dissecting the enrichment for the CD and 
UC signals. Sixty-five CD and 21 UC signals that were mapped to ≤ 50 variants were used 
in this analysis.
Published eQTL summary statistics
We used eQTL summary statistics from three published studies:
•
Peripheral blood eQTLs from the GODOT study29 of 2,752 twins, reporting loci 
with MAF>0.5%. Imputation was performed using the 1000 genomes reference 
panel11.
•
Peripheral blood eQTLs from the Westra et al. study30 of 8,086 individuals, 
including variants with MAF>5%. Imputation was performed using the HapMap 
2 CEU population reference panel55.
Huang et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 •
CD14+ monocyte eQTLs from Table S2 in Fairfax et al.31, comprised of 432 
European individuals, measured in a naïve state and after stimulation with 
interferon-γ or lipopolysaccharide (for 2 or 24 hours), reporting loci with 
MAF>4% and FDR<0.05. Imputation was performed using the 1000 genomes 
reference panel10.
Processing and quality control of new eQTL ULg dataset
A detailed description of the ULg dataset is in preparation (Momozawa et al., in 
preparation). Briefly, we collected venous blood and intestinal biopsies at three locations 
(ileum, transverse colon and rectum) from 350 healthy individuals of European descent, 
average age 54 (range 17-87), 56% female. SNPs were genotyped on Illumina Human 
OmniExpress v1.0 arrays interrogating 730,525 variants, and SNPs and individuals were 
subject to standard QC procedures using call rate, Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, MAF ≥ 
0.05, and consistency between declared and genotype-based sex as criteria. We further 
imputed genotypes at ~7 million variants on the entire cohort using the Impute2 software 
package13 and the 1,000 Genomes Project as reference population (Phase 3 integrated 
variant set, released 12 Oct 2014) 11,14. From the blood, we purified CD4+, CD8+, CD19+, 
CD14+ and CD15+ cells by positive selection, and platelets (CD45-negative) by negative 
selection. RNA from all leucocyte samples and intestinal biopsies was hybridized on 
Illumina Human HT-12 arrays v4. After standard QC, raw fluorescent intensities were 
variance stabilized56 and quantile normalized57 using the lumi R package58, and were 
corrected for sex, age, smoking status, number of probes with expression level significantly 
above background as fixed effects and array number (sentrix id) as random effect. For each 
probe with measureable expression (detection P value < 0.05 in >25% of samples) we tested 
for cis-eQTLs at all variants within a 500 kbp window. The nominal P value of the best SNP 
within a cis-window was Sidak-corrected for the window-specific number of independent 
tests. The number of independent test in each window was estimated exactly in the same 
manner as for the number of independent test for fine-mapping methods (Establishing a P 
value threshold, Methods). We estimated false discovery rates (q-values) from the resulting 
P values across all probes using the qvalue R package59. 480 cis-eQTL with FDR ≤ 0.10 for 
which the lead SNPs (i.e. the SNP yielding the best P value for the cis-eQTL) mapped 
within the 97 high-density regions (94 fine-mapped plus 3 unresolved) were retained for 
further analyses.
Naïve colocalization using lead SNPs
We calculated the number of IBD credible sets that contain a lead eQTL variant in a 
particular tissue (“observed”). This number is then compared to the background number of 
overlaps (“expected”):
where Ni is the total number of variants in region i in 1000 genomes with an allele frequency 
greater than a certain threshold (equal to the threshold used for the original eQTL study), Ci 
is the number of these variants that lie in IBD credible sets, and S is a set of regions that 
Huang et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 have at least one significant eQTL. We simulated 1,000 trials per region with binomial 
probability equal to the regional background overlap rate: 
 Empirical P 
values were estimated by comparing the observed number of overlaps with the simulated 
number of the overlaps. More specifically, P value is defined as the proportion of trails that 
have equal or more overlaps in the simulations than the observed.
Frequentist colocalization using conditional P values
We next used conditional association to test for evidence of colocalization, as described in 
Nica et al.25. This method compares the P value of association for the lead SNP of an eQTL 
before and after conditioning on the SNP with the highest posterior in the credible set, and 
measures the drop in –log(P). An empirical P value for this drop is then calculated by 
comparing it to the drop for all variants in the high-density region. Because this method 
requires full genotypes we could only apply it to the ULg dataset (MAF > 5%). An empirical 
P value ≤ 0.05 was considered as evidence that the corresponding credible set is colocalized 
with the corresponding cis-eQTL. To evaluate whether our fine-mapping associations 
colocalized with cis-eQTL more often than expected by chance we counted the number of 
credible sets affecting at least one cis-eQTL with P≤0.05, and compared how often this 
number was matched or exceeded by 1,000 sets of variants that were randomly selected yet 
distributed amongst the loci in accordance with the real credible sets. The number of variants 
per set is same as the number of credible sets in this eQTL analysis (MAF matched, 
size≤50), shown in Extended Data Table 2.
Bayesian colocalization using Bayes factors
Finally, we used the Bayesian colocalization methodology described by Giambartolomei et 
al.60, modified to use the credible sets and posteriors generated by our fine-mapping 
methods (similarly only applicable to the ULg full genotype data). The method takes as 
input a pair of IBD and eQTL signals, with corresponding credible sets SIBD and SeQTL, and 
posteriors for each variant 
 (with 
). Credible sets and 
posteriors were generated for eQTL signals using the Bayesian quantitative association 
mode in SNPTest (with default parameters), with credible sets in regions with multiple 
independent signals generated conditional on all other signals. Our method calculates a 
Bayes factor (BF) summarizing the evidence in favor of a colocalized model (i.e. a single 
underlying causal variant between the IBD and eQTL signals) compared to a non-
colocalized model (where different causal variants are driving the two signals), given by the 
ratio of marginal likelihoods
The marginal likelihood for the colocalized model (i.e. hypothesis H4 in Giambartolomei et 
al.) is given by
Huang et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 and the marginal likelihood for the model where the signals are not colocalized (i.e., 
hypothesis H3) is given by:
In both cases, N is the total number of variants in the region. We only count towards N 
variants that have r2 > 0.2 with either the lead eQTL variant or the lead IBD variant.
To measure enrichment in colocalization BFs compared to the null, we carried out a 
permutation analysis. In this analysis, we randomly reassigned eQTL signals to new fine-
mapping regions to generate a set of simulated null datasets. This is carried out using the 
following scheme on variants and credible sets with the same MAF cut-off as the eQTL 
dataset (ULg, MAF > 5%):
1.
Estimate the standarized effect size βg for each eQTL signal g, equal to standard 
deviation increase in gene expression for each dose of the minor allele.
2.
Randomly reassign each eQTL signal to a new fine-mapping region, and then 
select a new causal variant with a MAF within 1 percentage point of the lead 
variant from the real signal. If multiple such variants exist, select one at random. 
If no such variants exist, pick the variant with the closest MAF.
3.
Generate new simulated gene expression signals for each individual from Normal 
 where xj is the individual’s minor allele dosage at the 
new causal variant and f is the minor allele frequency.
4.
Carry out fine-mapping and calculate colocalization BFs for each pair of (real) 
IBD signal and (simulated) eQTL signal.
5.
Repeat stages 2-4 1000 times for each tissue type
We can use these permuted BFs to calculate P values for each IBD credible set, given by the 
proportion of time the permuted BFs were as large or greater than the one observed in the 
real dataset. To generate a high-quality set of colocalized eQTL and IBD signals, we take all 
IBD signals that have the colocalization BF > 2, P < 0.01 and r2 (with the eQTL variant) 
>0.8.
Huang et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Power of the fine-mapping analysis.
Power (y axis) to identify the causal variant in a correlated pair (strength of correlation 
shown by color) increases with the significance of the association (x axis), and therefore 
with sample size and effect size. The vertical dashed line shows the genome-wide 
significance level. To estimate the relationship between the strength of association and our 
ability to fine-map it, we assumed that the association has only two causal variant 
candidates, and we defined the signal as successfully fine-mapped if the ratio of Bayes 
factors between the true causal variant and the non-causal variant is greater than 10 (a 91% 
posterior, assuming equal priors for the two candidate variants). Using equation (8) in 
Supplementary Methods, we have
Huang et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 in which θ* is maximum likelihood estimate of the parameter values. The log-likelihood 
ratio follows a chi-square distribution:
in which λ is the chi-square statistic of the lead variant and r is the correlation coefficient 
between the two variants. Because of the additive property of the chi-square distribution, 
logBF follows a non-central chi-square distribution with 1 degree of freedom and non-
centrality parameter λ(1 – r2)/2. Therefore, the power can calculated as the probability that 
logBF > log(10), given by the cumulative distribution function of the non-central chi-
squared distribution.
Huang et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 2. Procedures in the fine-mapping analysis.
Details for each stage are described in Methods. The dashed line means the imputation was 
performed only once after the manual inspection (not iteratively).
Huang et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 3. Variance explained.
Variance explained by secondary, tertiary, … variants as a fraction of the primary signal at 
each locus.
Huang et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 4. Functional annotations.
a, Functional annotation for 45 variants having posterior probability > 50%. b, Functional 
annotation for 116 association signals that are fine-mapped to ≤ 50 variants. Annotations are 
defined in Methods. We additionally grouped eQTLs into “Immune/Blood” (CD4+, CD8+, 
CD19+, CD14+ CD15+, platelets) and “Gut” (ileum, transverse colon and rectum). The 
eQTLs were generated from the ULg dataset using the “frequentist colocalization using 
conditional P values” approach (Methods).
Huang et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 5. Size of credible sets.
Comparison of credible set sizes for primary signals using each of our fine-mapping 
methods (methods 1, 2 and 3), the combined approach (as adopted in final results) and the 
approach described in Maller et al.6 (y axis) and the R2 > 0.6 cut-off (x axis). Fine-mapping 
maps most signals to smaller numbers of variants.
Huang et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 6. Distributions of the allele frequency and the imputation quality.
Panels a-c: distribution of the risk allele frequency for 45 variants having > 50% posterior 
probability plotted against (a) posterior probability, (b) significance of the association as –
log10(P), and (c) odds ratio of the association. Variants are color coded according to their 
functions. Odds ratio for IBD associations was the larger of odds ratios for CD and UC. 
Panels d-f: distribution of imputation quality (INFO measure from the IMPUTE2 program) 
for variants having MAF ≥5% (d), between 5% and 1% (e) and <1% (f).
Extended Data Figure 7. Merging and adjudicating signals across methods.
The number of signals for each method is shown in the brackets, and for each method a 
black bar indicates a signal with p < 1.35 x 10–6, and a grey bar a signal that does not reach 
that threshold. The colored bar shows the final status of each signal after merging and model 
selection (Methods). “Low info” corresponds to INFO < 0.8 (the threshold used for signals 
reported by 1 or 2 methods) and “rare and imputed” to MAF < 0.01 and no genotyped 
variants in the credible set, regardless of INFO (Methods).
Huang et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Table 1
Study samples.
Genotyped samples in each batch for healthy controls (Control), Crohn’s disease (CD) and 
ulcerative colitis (UC). Batches were grouped into cohorts for further analysis (Controlling 
for population structure, batch effects and other confounders, Methods).
Batch
Control
CD
UC
Cohort
IMSGC
5740
0
0
imbalanced
NIDDK
1786
3653
3020
balanced
D. Ellinghaus
4559
2696
1006
balanced
E. Theatre
713
1109
559
balanced
H. Huang
3
551
316
imbalanced
J. Barrett
4397
2715
2835
balanced
K. Fransen
1598
1234
430
balanced
L. Jostins
1354
1252
1063
balanced
P. Gregersen
1611
0
0
imbalanced
R. Duerr
1696
321
1611
balanced
S. Rich
4259
0
0
imbalanced
S. Sommeren
107
77
201
balanced
S. Vermeire
922
1539
838
balanced
T. Balschun
5511
1882
1683
balanced
T. Haritunians
1
1938
1066
imbalanced
Extended Data Table 2
Colocalization with eQTL.
The number of IBD credible sets that colocalize with eQTLs using the naïve, frequentist and 
Bayesian approaches. Significant observations are boldfaced. ‘Number of credible sets’ 
reports the number of credible sets that have MAF above the cut-off.
Tissue/cell line
Method
Overlaps observed
Overlaps Expected
P value
Dataset
MAF cut-off
Number 
of 
credible 
sets
whole blood
Naïve
3
3.7
0.746
GODOT
0.005
113
whole blood
8
4.2
0.060
Westra
0.05
95
CD14 naïve
8
2.7
0.001
Fairfax
0.04
98
CD14 IFN stimulated
4
3.2
0.398
Fairfax
0.04
98
CD14 LPS 2h 
stimulated
1
2.1
0.869
Fairfax
0.04
98
CD14 LPS 24h 
stimulated
5
2.5
0.106
Fairfax
0.04
98
CD4
3
0.4
0.005
ULg
0.05
95
CD8
1
0.3
0.306
ULg
0.05
95
CD14
0
0.2
1.000
ULg
0.05
95
CD15
1
0.2
0.199
ULg
0.05
95
Huang et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Tissue/cell line
Method
Overlaps observed
Overlaps Expected
P value
Dataset
MAF cut-off
Number 
of 
credible 
sets
CD19
0
0.1
1.000
ULg
0.05
95
platelets
0
0.0
1.000
ULg
0.05
95
ileum
2
0.3
0.020
ULg
0.05
95
colon
1
0.2
0.202
ULg
0.05
95
rectum
1
0.2
0.189
ULg
0.05
95
CD4
Frequentist
6
1.9
0.013
ULg
0.05
95
CD8
3
1.5
0.186
ULg
0.05
95
CD14
4
2.3
0.180
ULg
0.05
95
CD15
1
1.8
0.863
ULg
0.05
95
CD19
0
1.4
1.000
ULg
0.05
95
platelets
0
0.1
1.000
ULg
0.05
95
ileum
4
1.1
0.018
ULg
0.05
95
colon
3
1.7
0.216
ULg
0.05
95
rectum
4
1.4
0.039
ULg
0.05
95
CD4
Bayesian
4
1.0
0.010
ULg
0.05
95
CD8
1
0.8
0.566
ULg
0.05
95
CD14
1
0.9
0.595
ULg
0.05
95
CD15
0
0.7
1.000
ULg
0.05
95
CD19
0
0.6
1.000
ULg
0.05
95
platelets
0
0.1
1.000
ULg
0.05
95
ileum
2
0.4
0.069
ULg
0.05
95
colon
3
0.8
0.040
ULg
0.05
95
rectum
2
0.6
0.124
ULg
0.05
95
Huang et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Table 3
Genomic inflation.
Genomic inflation factors and LD score regression intercept for Crohn’s disease (CD), 
ulcerative colitis (UC) and both (IBD). a, Genomic inflation factors using the first four, five 
and six principal components. The factors were calculated using 2,853 background variants 
from the Immunochip. b, Genomic inflation factors for subsets of the data (using five 
principal components for the same 2,853 background variants). Balanced, imbalanced and 
down-sampled cohorts are defined in Methods. Numbers in brackets indicate the 95% 
confidence interval for the inflation factors (only estimated for the down-sampled cohorts). 
c, LD score regression intercept and genomic inflation factors (λGC and λ1000) from the 
largest IBD meta-analyses with genome-wide data (CD:GWAS and UC:GWAS).
a
CD
UC
IBD
PC 1-4
1.41
1.31
1.38
PC 1-5
1.29
1.25
1.31
PC 1-6
1.28
1.25
1.32
b
CD
UC
IBD
Balanced cohort
1.24
1.21
1.20
Down-sampled (balanced)
1.24 (1.14-1.36)
1.21 (1.11-1.31)
1.23 (1.14-1.36)
Imbalanced cohort
1.02
1.08
1.00
Down-sampled (imbalanced)
1.08 (0.97-1.23)
1.04 (0.96-1.16)
1.07 (0.95-1.21)
All samples
1.29
1.25
1.31
c
genome-wide
“background SNPS”
LDscore intercept
λGC
λ1000
λGC
λ1000
CD: lmmunochip (this study)
-
-
-
1.29
1.012
CD: GWAS
1.09
1.23
1.014
1.28
1.016
UC: lmmunochip (this study)
-
-
-
1.25
1.012
UC: GWAS
1.09
1.29
1.016
1.21
1.012
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank Mariya Khan and Bang Wong for their assistance in designing illustrations, and Katie de Lange for 
helpful comments on the Supplementary Methods. Support from the following grants: M.J.D. and R.J.X.: 
Huang et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 P30DK43351, U01DK062432, R01DK64869, Helmsley grant 2015PG-IBD001 and CCFA. C.A.A. and J.C.B: 
Wellcome Trust grant 098051. M.G.:WELBIO (CAUSIBD), BELSPO (BeMGI), Fédération Wallonie-Bruxelles 
(ARC IBD@Ulg), and Région Wallonne (CIBLES, FEDER). H.H.: ASHG/Charles J. Epstein Trainee Award. J.L.: 
Wellcome Trust 098759/Z/12/Z. D.M.: Olle Engkvist Foundation and Swedish Research Council (grants 2010-2976 
and 2013-3862). R.K.W.: VIDI grant (016.136.308) from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research. 
J.D.R.: Canada Research Chair, NIDDK grants DK064869 and DK062432, CIHR #GPG-102170 from the 
Canadian Institutes of Health, GPH-129341 from Genome Canada and Génome Québec, and Crohn’s Colitis 
Canada. J.H.C.: DK062429, DK062422, DK092235, DK106593, and the Sanford J. Grossman Charitable Trust. 
R.H.D.: Inflammatory Bowel Disease Genetic Research Chair at the University of Pittsburgh, U01DK062420 and 
R01CA141743. E.D.: Marie-Curie Fellowship. A-S.G: FNRS and Fonds Léon Fredericq fellowships. J.H.: Örebro 
University Hospital Research Foundation and the Swedish Research Council (grant no. 521 2011 2764). C.G.M. 
and M.P.: NIHR Biomedical Research Centre awards to Guy's & St Thomas' NHS Trust / King's College London 
and to Addenbrooke’s Hospital / University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine. D.E.: German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research (SysInflame grant 01ZX1306A), DFG Excellence Cluster No. 306 
“Inflammation at Interfaces”. A.F: professorship of Foundation for Experimental Medicine (Zuerich, Switzerland). 
D.P.B.M.: DK062413, AI067068, U54DE023789-01, 305479 from the European Union, and The Leona M. and 
Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust. Additional acknowledgements for the original data are in the Supplementary 
Information.
References
1. Kappelman MD, et al. Direct health care costs of Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis in US 
children and adults. Gastroenterology. 2008; 135:1907–1913. [PubMed: 18854185] 
2. Molodecky NA, et al. Increasing incidence and prevalence of the inflammatory bowel diseases with 
time, based on systematic review. Gastroenterology. 2012; 142:46–54.e42. quiz e30. [PubMed: 
22001864] 
3. Jostins L, et al. Host–microbe interactions have shaped the genetic architecture of inflammatory 
bowel disease. Nature. 2012; 491:119–124. [PubMed: 23128233] 
4. Liu JZ, et al. Association analyses identify 38 susceptibility loci for inflammatory bowel disease and 
highlight shared genetic risk across populations. Nat Genet. 2015; doi: 10.1038/ng.3359
5. van de Bunt M, et al. Evaluating the Performance of Fine-Mapping Strategies at Common Variant 
GWAS Loci. PLoS Genet. 2015; 11:e1005535. [PubMed: 26406328] 
6. Maller JB, et al. Bayesian refinement of association signals for 14 loci in 3 common diseases. Nat 
Genet. 2012; 44:1294–1301. [PubMed: 23104008] 
7. Yang J, et al. FTO genotype is associated with phenotypic variability of body mass index. Nature. 
2012; 490:267–272. [PubMed: 22982992] 
8. International Multiple Sclerosis Genetics Consortium (IMSGC). Analysis of immune-related loci 
identifies 48 new susceptibility variants for multiple sclerosis. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:1353–1360. 
[PubMed: 24076602] 
9. Onengut-Gumuscu S, et al. Fine mapping of type 1 diabetes susceptibility loci and evidence for 
colocalization of causal variants with lymphoid gene enhancers. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:381–386. 
[PubMed: 25751624] 
10. 1000 Genomes Project Consortium. An integrated map of genetic variation from 1,092 human 
genomes. Nature. 2012; 491:56–65. [PubMed: 23128226] 
11. 1000 Genomes Project Consortium. A map of human genome variation from population-scale 
sequencing. Nature. 2010; 467:1061–1073. [PubMed: 20981092] 
12. Jostins, L. Using Next-Generation Genomic Datasets In Disease Association. The University of 
Cambridge; 2012. 
13. Howie BN, Donnelly P, Marchini J. A flexible and accurate genotype imputation method for the 
next generation of genome-wide association studies. PLoS Genet. 2009; 5:e1000529. [PubMed: 
19543373] 
14. Howie B, Marchini J, Stephens M. Genotype imputation with thousands of genomes. G3 
(Bethesda). 2011; 1:457–470. [PubMed: 22384356] 
15. Goyette P, et al. High-density mapping of the MHC identifies a shared role for HLA-DRB1*01:03 
in inflammatory bowel diseases and heterozygous advantage in ulcerative colitis. Nat Genet. 2015; 
doi: 10.1038/ng.3176
Huang et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 16. Rivas MA, et al. Deep resequencing of GWAS loci identifies independent rare variants associated 
with inflammatory bowel disease. Nat Genet. 2011; 43:1066–1073. [PubMed: 21983784] 
17. Yang J, et al. Genome partitioning of genetic variation for complex traits using common SNPs. Nat 
Genet. 2011; 43:519–525. [PubMed: 21552263] 
18. Huang H, Chanda P, Alonso A, Bader JS, Arking DE. Gene-based tests of association. PLoS 
Genet. 2011; 7:e1002177. [PubMed: 21829371] 
19. Momozawa Y, et al. Resequencing of positional candidates identifies low frequency IL23R coding 
variants protecting against inflammatory bowel disease. Nat Genet. 2011; 43:43–47. [PubMed: 
21151126] 
20. Kheradpour P, Kellis M. Systematic discovery and characterization of regulatory motifs in 
ENCODE TF binding experiments. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014; 42:2976–2987. [PubMed: 
24335146] 
21. Nechanitzky R, et al. Transcription factor EBF1 is essential for the maintenance of B cell identity 
and prevention of alternative fates in committed cells. Nat Immunol. 2013; 14:867–875. [PubMed: 
23812095] 
22. Trynka G, et al. Chromatin marks identify critical cell types for fine mapping complex trait 
variants. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:124–130. [PubMed: 23263488] 
23. Farh KK-H, et al. Genetic and epigenetic fine mapping of causal autoimmune disease variants. 
Nature. 2015; 518:337–343. [PubMed: 25363779] 
24. Bernstein BE, et al. The NIH Roadmap Epigenomics Mapping Consortium. 2010; 28:1045–1048.
25. Nica AC, et al. Candidate causal regulatory effects by integration of expression QTLs with 
complex trait genetic associations. PLoS Genet. 2010; 6:e1000895. [PubMed: 20369022] 
26. Lappalainen T, et al. Transcriptome and genome sequencing uncovers functional variation in 
humans. Nature. 2013; 501:506–511. [PubMed: 24037378] 
27. Wallace C, et al. Statistical colocalization of monocyte gene expression and genetic risk variants 
for type 1 diabetes. Human Molecular Genetics. 2012; 21:2815–2824. [PubMed: 22403184] 
28. Dubois PCA, et al. Multiple common variants for celiac disease influencing immune gene 
expression. Nat Genet. 2010; 42:295–302. [PubMed: 20190752] 
29. Wright FA, et al. Heritability and genomics of gene expression in peripheral blood. Nat Genet. 
2014; 46:430–437. [PubMed: 24728292] 
30. Westra H-J, et al. Systematic identification of trans eQTLs as putative drivers of known disease 
associations. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:1238–1243. [PubMed: 24013639] 
31. Fairfax BP, et al. Innate immune activity conditions the effect of regulatory variants upon monocyte 
gene expression. 2014; 343 1246949–+ 
32. Ripke S, et al. Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature. 2014; 
511:421–427. [PubMed: 25056061] 
33. Franke A, et al. Genome-wide meta-analysis increases to 71 the number of confirmed Crohn's 
disease susceptibility loci. Nat Genet. 2010; 42:1118–1125. [PubMed: 21102463] 
34. Spain SL, Barrett JC. Strategies for fine-mapping complex traits. Human Molecular Genetics. 
2015; 24:R111–9. [PubMed: 26157023] 
35. 1000 Genomes Project Consortium. A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature. 2015; 
526:68–74. [PubMed: 26432245] 
36. UK10K Consortium. The UK10K project identifies rare variants in health and disease. Nature. 
2015; doi: 10.1038/nature14962
37. Nejentsev S, Walker N, Riches D, Egholm M, Todd JA. Rare variants of IFIH1, a gene implicated 
in antiviral responses, protect against type 1 diabetes. 2009; 324:387–389.
38. Huang J, Ellinghaus D, Franke A, Howie B, Li Y. 1000 Genomes-based imputation identifies novel 
and refined associations for the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium phase 1 Data. Eur J 
Hum Genet. 2012; 20:801–805. [PubMed: 22293688] 
39. Roadmap Epigenomics Consortium. Integrative analysis of 111 reference human epigenomes. 
Nature. 2015; 518:317–330. [PubMed: 25693563] 
40. Shah TS, et al. optiCall: a robust genotype-calling algorithm for rare, low-frequency and common 
variants. 2012; 28:1598–1603.
Huang et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 41. Price AL, et al. Long-Range LD Can Confound Genome Scans in Admixed Populations. Am J 
Hum Genet. 2008; 83:132–135. [PubMed: 18606306] 
42. Anderson, E., et al. LAPACK Users' Guide. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics; 1999. 
43. Yang J, et al. Genomic inflation factors under polygenic inheritance. European Journal of Human 
Genetics. 2011; 19:807–812. [PubMed: 21407268] 
44. Bulik-Sullivan BK, et al. LD Score regression distinguishes confounding from polygenicity in 
genome-wide association studies. Nat Genet. 2015; doi: 10.1038/ng.3211
45. de Lange KM, et al. Genome-wide association study implicates immune activation of multiple 
integrin genes in inflammatory bowel disease. Nat Genet. 2017; doi: 10.1038/ng.3760
46. Delaneau O, Marchini J, Zagury J-F. A linear complexity phasing method for thousands of 
genomes. Nature Methods. 2011; 9:179–181. [PubMed: 22138821] 
47. Delaneau O, Zagury J-F, Marchini J. Improved whole-chromosome phasing for disease and 
population genetic studies. Nature Methods. 2012; 10:5–6.
48. Morris JA, Randall JC, Maller JB, Barrett JC. Evoker: a visualization tool for genotype intensity 
data. 2010; 26:1786–1787.
49. Jostins L, McVean G. Trinculo: Bayesian and frequentist multinomial logistic regression for 
genome-wide association studies of multi-category phenotypes. Bioinformatics. 2016; doi: 
10.1093/bioinformatics/btw075
50. Yang J, Lee SH, Goddard ME, Visscher PM. GCTA: A Tool for Genome-wide Complex Trait 
Analysis. The American Journal of Human Genetics. 2011; 88:76–82. [PubMed: 21167468] 
51. Madsen P, Su G, Labouriau R, Christensen F. DMU-a package for analyzing multivariate mixed 
models. Proceedings of the Ninth World Congress on Genetics Applied to Livestock Production. 
2010
52. Cox, DR., Snell, EJ. Analysis of Binary Data, Second Edition. CRC Press; 1989. 
53. D'haeseleer P. What are DNA sequence motifs? 2006; 24:423–425.
54. Quinlan AR, Hall IM. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features. 2010; 
26:841–842.
55. Gibbs RA, et al. The International HapMap Project. Nature. 2003; 426:789–796. [PubMed: 
14685227] 
56. Lin SM, Du P, Huber W, Kibbe WA. Model-based variance-stabilizing transformation for Illumina 
microarray data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008; 36:e11–e11. [PubMed: 18178591] 
57. Bolstad BM, Irizarry RA, Astrand M, Speed TP. A comparison of normalization methods for high 
density oligonucleotide array data based on variance and bias. 2003; 19:185–193.
58. Du P, Kibbe WA, Lin SM. lumi: a pipeline for processing Illumina microarray. 2008; 24:1547–
1548.
59. Dabney A, Storey JD, Warnes G. Q-value estimation for false discovery rate control. R package 
version. 2006; 1
60. Giambartolomei C, et al. Bayesian test for colocalisation between pairs of genetic association 
studies using summary statistics. PLoS Genet. 2014; 10:e1004383. [PubMed: 24830394] 
Huang et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Fine-mapping procedure and output using the SMAD3 region as an example.
a, 1) We merge overlapping signals across methods; 2) select a lead variant (black triangle) 
and phenotype (color); and 3) choose the best model. Details for each step are available in 
Methods. b, Example fine-mapping output. This region has been mapped to two independent 
signals. For each signal, we report the phenotype it is associated with (colored), the variants 
in the credible set, and their posterior probabilities.
Huang et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Summary of fine-mapped associations.
a, Independent signals. Sixty-eight loci containing one association and 26 loci containing 
multiple associations. b, Number of variants in credible sets. 18 associations were fine-
mapped to a single variant, and 116 to ≤ 50 variants. c, Distribution of the posterior 
probability of the variants in credible sets having ≤ 50 variants.
Huang et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Functional annotation of causal variants.
a, Proportion of credible variants that are protein coding, disrupt/create transcription factor 
binding motif sites (TFBS) or are synonymous, sorted by posterior probability. b, Epigenetic 
peaks overlapping credible variants in cell and tissue types from the Roadmap Epigenomics 
Consortium39. Significant enrichment has been marked with asterisks. Proportion of 
credible variants that overlap (c) core immune peaks for H4K4me1or (d) core gut peaks for 
H3K27ac (Methods). In panels a, c and d, the vertical dotted lines mark 50% posterior 
probability and the horizontal dashed lines show the background proportions of each 
functional category.
Huang et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. Number of credible sets that colocalize eQTLs.
Distributions of the number of colocalizations by chance (violins) and observed number of 
colocalizations with p-values (dots). Both the background and the observed numbers were 
calculated using the “Frequentist colocalization using conditional P values” approach 
(Methods).
Huang et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
  Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Huang et al.
Page 35
Table 1
Variants having posterior probability >50%.
Variant
Chr
Position
Ns
Phe
AF
Prob
INFO
Func
Annotation
Signals mapped to a single variant
rs7307562
12
40724960
2
CD
0.398
0.999
1
LRRK2(intronic)
rs2066844
16
50745926
10
CD
0.063
0.999
0.8
C
NOD2(R702W)
rs2066845
16
50756540
10
CD
0.022
0.999
1
C
NOD2(G908R)
rs6017342
20
43065028
2
UC
0.544
0.999
1
E
HNF4A (downstream),
Gut_H3K27ac
rs61839660
10
6094697
2
CD
0.094
0.999
1
E
IL2RA(intronic),
Immune_H3K4me1
rs5743293
16
50763781
10
CD
0.964
0.999
1
C
NOD2(fs1007insC)
rs6062496
20
62329099
1
IBD
0.587
0.996
1
T
RTEL1-TNFRSF6B(ncRNA_intronic),
EBF1 TFBS
rs141992399
9
139259592
3
IBD
0.005
0.995
1
C
CARD9(1434+1G>C)
rs35667974
2
163124637
1
UC
0.021
0.994
1
C
IFIH1(I923V)
rs74465132
7
50304782
3
IBD
0.034
0.994
1
T,E
IKZF1(upstream),
EP300 TFBS,
Immune_H3K4me1
rs4676408
2
241574401
1
UC
0.508
0.994
0.99
GPR35(downstream)
rs5743271
16
50744688
10
CD
0.007
0.993
1
C
NOD2(N289S)
rs10748781
10
101283330
2
IBD
0.55
0.990
1
E
NKX2-3(upstream),
Gut_H3K27ac
rs35874463
15
67457698
2
IBD
0.054
0.989
1
C,E
SMAD3(I170V),
Gut_H3K27ac
rs72796367
16
50762771
10
CD
0.023
0.983
1
NOD2(intronic)
rs1887428
9
4984530
1
IBD
0.603
0.974
0.97
JAK2(upstream)
rs41313262
1
67705900
5
CD
0.014
0.973
1
C
IL23R(V362I)
rs28701841
6
106530330
2
CD
0.116
0.971
1
PRDM1(upstream)
Signals mapped to 2-50 variants and the lead variant has posterior probability > 50%
rs76418789
1
67648596
5
CD
0.006
0.937
0.59
C
IL23R(G149R)
rs7711427
5
40414886
3
CD
0.633
0.919
1
rs1736137
21
16806695
2
CD
0.407
0.879
1
rs104895444
16
50746199
10
CD
0.003
0.865
1
C
NOD2(V793M)
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
  Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Huang et al.
Page 36
Variant
Chr
Position
Ns
Phe
AF
Prob
INFO
Func
Annotation
rs56167332
5
158827769
2
IBD
0.353
0.845
1
IL12B
rs104895467
16
50750810
10
CD
0.002
0.833
1
C
NOD2(N852S)
rs630923
11
118754353
2
CD
0.153
0.820
0.98
rs3812565
9
139272502
3
IBD
0.402
0.815
1
Q
eQTL of INPP5E in CD4 and CD8; CARD9 in CD14
rs4655215
1
20137714
3
UC
0.763
0.784
1
E
Gut_H3K27ac
rs145530718
19
10568883
3
CD
0.023
0.762
0.97
rs6426833
1
20171860
3
UC
0.555
0.752
1
chr20:
43258079
20
43258079
2
CD
0.041
0.736
0.88
rs17229679
2
199560757
2
UC
0.028
0.716
1
rs4728142
7
128573967
1
UC
0.448
0.664
1
E
Immune_H3K4me1
rs2143178
22
39660829
2
IBD
0.157
0.662
1
T,E
NFKB TFBS, Gut_H3K27ac
rs34536443
19
10463118
3
CD
0.038
0.649
1
C
TYK2(P1104A)
rs138425259
16
50663477
10
UC
0.009
0.648
0.92
rs146029108
9
139329966
3
CD
0.036
0.643
0.92
rs12722504
10
6089777
2
CD
0.26
0.615
1
rs60542850
19
10488360
3
IBD
0.17
0.591
0.89
rs2188962
5
131770805
1
CD
0.44
0.590
1
E,Q
Gut_H3K27ac,
eQTL of SLC22A5 in CD14, CD15 and IL
rs2019262
1
67679990
5
IBD
0.4
0.586
1
rs3024493
1
206943968
2
IBD
0.171
0.537
1
E
Immune_H3K4me1
rs7915475
10
64381668
3
CD
0.304
0.528
1
rs77981966
2
43777964
1
CD
0.077
0.521
1
rs9889296
17
32570547
1
CD
0.264
0.512
1
rs2476601
1
114377568
1
CD
0.908
0.508
1
C
PTPN22(W620R)
Ns: number of independent signals in the locus. Phe: phenotype. AF: allele frequency. Prob: posterior probability for being a causal variant. INFO: imputation. Func: functional annotations -- coding (C), 
disrupting transcription factor binding sites (T), overlapping epigenetic peaks (E) and colocalization with eQTL (Q).
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 28.
