 Human adaptive immunity rescues an inborn error of innate 
immunity
Laura Israel1,2, Ying Wang3, Katarzyna Bulek4, Erika Della Mina1,2, Zhao Zhang3, Chrabieh 
Pedergnagna1,2, Maya Vincent1,2, Nicole A. Lemmens5, Vanessa Sancho-Shimizu1,2,6, Marc 
Descatoire7, Théo Lasseau1,2, Elisabeth Israelsson8, Lazaro Lorenzo1,2, Ling Yun1,2, Aziz 
Belkadi1,2, Andrew Moran9, Leonard E. Weisman10, François Vandenesh11, Frederic 
Batteux12, Sandra Weller7, Michael Levin6, Jethro Herberg6, Avinash Abhyankar13, Carolina 
Prando13, Yuval Itan13, Willem van Wamel5, Capucine Picard1,2,14,15, Laurent Abel1,2,13, 
Damien Chaussabel8, Xiaoxia Li4, Bruce Beutler3, Peter D. Arkwright9, Jean-Laurent 
Casanova1,2,13,14,16,*,#, and Anne Puel1,2,13,*
1Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM U1163, 75015 
Paris, France, EU
2Imagine Institute, Paris Descartes University, 75015 Paris, France, EU
3Center for the Genetics of Host Defense, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas 75390-8505, USA
4Department of Immunology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44106 USA
5Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands, EU
6Department of Virology, Imperial College London, Norfolk Place, London W2 1 PG, UK; 
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medicine, Imperial College London, Norfolk Place, London 
W2 1 PG, UK
7INSERM U1151-CNRS UMR 8253, Paris Descartes University, Necker-Enfants Malades Medical 
School-Broussais, 75014 Paris, France, EU
8Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Seattle WA 98101, Washington, USA
9University of Manchester, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester M13 9WL, UK
10Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Correspondence: JLC (jean-laurent.casanova@rockefeller.edu) or AP (anne.puel@inserm.fr).
*Equal contributions
#Lead contact
Author contributions: None of the authors of this manuscript have a financial interest related to this work. L.I., A.P. and J.L.C. 
designed the study and wrote the manuscript. L.I., Y.W., K.B., E.D.M., Z.Z., M.C., T.L., E.L., L.L., L.Y., A.M. and S.W. performed 
the experiments. Y.W., K.B., E.D.M. equally contributed to the manuscript. V.P., A.B., A.A., C.Pr. and Y.I conducted exome, linkage 
and statistical analysis. P.D.A., L.E.W., M.L., and J.H. provided material from the patients and reagents. V.S.S, M.D., F.V., C.Pi., L.A., 
D.C., X.L., and B.B. provided expertise and feedback. J.L.C., A.P. and L.A secured funding. P.D.A conducted the medical follow-up, 
provided expertise and critical reading. All the authors critically reviewed the manuscript.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2017 February 23; 168(5): 789–800.e10. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.01.039.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11French National Reference Center for Staphylococci, Hospices Civils of Lyon, 69677, Bron 
Cedex, France, EU
12Department of Biological Immunology, Cochin Hospital 75679 Paris, France, EU
13St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The 
Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA
14Pediatric Hematology-Immunology Unit, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Necker 
Hospital, 75010 Paris, France, EU
15Study Center for Primary Immunodeficiencies, AP-HP
, Necker Hospital, 75015 Paris, France, 
EU
16Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, 10065, USA
Graphical abstract
Adaptive immunity can compensate for a defect in the innate immune response, as seen with 
humans lacking a key TLR adaptor who can mount an antibody response to a bacterial pathogen.
Summary
The molecular basis of the incomplete penetrance of monogenic disorders is unclear. We describe 
here eight related individuals with autosomal recessive TIRAP deficiency. Life-threatening 
staphylococcal disease occurred during childhood in the proband, but not in the other seven 
homozygotes. Responses to all TLR1/2, TLR2/6, and TLR4 agonists were impaired in the 
fibroblasts and leukocytes of all TIRAP-deficient individuals. However, the whole-blood response 
to the TLR2/6 agonist staphylococcal lipoteichoic acid (LTA) was abolished only in the index 
case, the only family member lacking LTA-specific Abs. This defective response was reversed in 
the patient, but not in IRAK-4-deficient individuals, by anti-LTA mAb. Anti-LTA mAb also 
rescued the macrophage response in mice lacking TIRAP, but not TLR2 or MyD88. Thus, 
acquired anti-LTA Abs rescue TLR2-dependent immunity to staphylococcal LTA in individuals 
Israel et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with inherited TIRAP deficiency, accounting for incomplete penetrance. Combined TIRAP and 
anti-LTA Ab deficiencies underlie staphylococcal disease in this patient.
Introduction
Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram-positive bacterium that colonizes the skin and nostrils of 
most healthy individuals (Li et al., 2015; Mulcahy and McLoughlin, 2016). It is also a 
common cause of human diseases, ranging from minor cutaneous infections to invasive 
hematogenous infections, as observed in children and young adults with necrotizing 
staphylococcal pneumonitis (Gillet et al., 2002). Most severe staphylococcal diseases remain 
unexplained. Various acquired immunodeficiencies, including those resulting from infection 
with human immunodeficiency virus, hemodialysis, chemotherapy, intravenous drug use, 
central catheters and vascular lines, increase the likelihood of severe staphylococcal disease 
(Lowy, 1998). The pathogenesis of invasive staphylococcal disease is complex in such 
settings, often involving neutropenia, skin breaches, or both. Alternatively, severe 
staphylococcal disease may result from various single-gene inborn errors of immunity, 
including disorders of phagocytes in particular (Zhang et al., 2015). Disorders of the TLR 
and IL-1R pathway, inborn errors of NF-κB, severe congenital neutropenia, chronic 
granulomatous disease, leukocyte adhesion deficiency, and autosomal dominant hyper IgE 
syndrome have all been implicated in severe staphylococcal disease (Bousfiha et al., 2015). 
All these defects affect phagocytes, albeit in different ways. Clinical features differ between 
patients with staphylococcal disease, reflecting the diversity of the underlying inborn errors.
Autosomal recessive MyD88 and IRAK-4 deficiencies selectively impair signaling via the 
TLR and IL-1R pathway (Picard et al., 2003; von Bernuth et al., 2008). More than 80 
patients with these deficiencies have been diagnosed worldwide (reviewed in (Picard et al., 
2010)). These patients are susceptible to invasive bacterial infections, particularly those 
caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae, but also those caused by S. aureus. They also develop 
superficial staphylococcal infections (Picard et al., 2011). Leukocytes from patients with 
deficiencies of IRAK-4 or MyD88 do not respond to activation via IL-1Rs or TLRs other 
than TLR3, which signals via TRIF but not MyD88, and TLR4, which signals via TRIF or 
MyD88. The molecular and cellular basis of staphylococcal disease in these patients remains 
unknown. We investigated this aspect, by testing the hypothesis that severe staphylococcal 
disease in otherwise healthy children may be caused by mutations in other genes of the TLR 
and IL-1R pathway (Casanova, 2015b).
Results
Homozygous TIRAP R121W mutation in a child with severe staphylococcal infection
We investigated a nine-year-old girl admitted to the intensive care unit with pneumonia and 
sepsis caused by Panton Valentine Leukocidin (PVL)-producing S. aureus, at the age of 
three months (P1, V.1, Figure 1A). She was born to consanguineous parents of Pakistani 
descent living in the United Kingdom. The presumed complete genetic tree was assessed by 
inferring relationships with King software based on genome-wide SNP genotyping 
(Manichaikul et al., 2010) (Figure 1A and Figure S1A). Known genetic etiologies of PIDs 
Israel et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 associated with life-threatening staphylococcal diseases were excluded by whole-exome 
sequencing (WES) and Sanger sequencing. We searched for rare variants (MAF<1%), and 
identified a homozygous substitution, c.361C>T, in exon 5 of TIRAP, which encodes a TIR 
domain-containing adapter of TLR2 and TLR4 (Fitzgerald et al., 2001; Horng et al., 2001; 
Yamamoto et al., 2002a). We confirmed the TIRAP mutation by Sanger sequencing of P1's 
genomic DNA extracted from whole blood cells (WBC), Epstein-Barr virus-immortalized B 
lymphocytes (EBV-B cells), and SV40-immortalized fibroblasts (SV40 fibroblasts) (Figure 
1B). This missense variant results in the replacement of the arginine residue in position 121 
of the TIR domain of TIRAP with a tryptophan residue (R121W) (Figure 1C). The R121 
residue of TIRAP has been strongly conserved throughout evolution (Figure 1D). It is also 
conserved in 21 of the other 26 human molecules containing a TIR domain identified to date 
(e.g. R196 in MyD88, Figure S1B).
In silico analysis with CADD and MSC predicted that the R121W variant would be 
deleterious (Itan et al., 2016; Kircher et al., 2014). The TIRAP gene is well conserved in the 
human population, with a neutrality index of 0.2346 (McDonald and Kreitman, 1991) and a 
GDI of 5.46 (Itan et al., 2015). No other rare or common variants of TIRAP were found in 
P1. No rare bi-allelic mutations were found in other genes of the TIR pathway, including 
those encoding individual TLRs and the other three TLR adaptors (TRAM, SARM and 
TRIF). Moreover, no other candidate variant was identified in the linkage regions defined by 
parametric multipoint linkage analysis (methods section) or among the other 107 non-
synonymous rare homozygous variants found in P1 (Table S1). The patient was therefore 
homozygous for a potentially deleterious rare allele of TIRAP.
Homozygosity for the rare R121W variant in seven healthy relatives
This variant was not detected in 140 Pakistani individuals from the CEPH-HGD panel. Eight 
heterozygous, but no homozygous individuals were reported among 57,085 individuals from 
the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAc) database (minor allele frequency 
(MAF)=0.00007). This variant was detected, in the heterozygous state, in three of 3,033 
individuals (6,066 chromosomes) in our in-house exome database. This patient was therefore 
homozygous for a rare TIRAP missense allele, with a MAF of less than 1/10,000. 
Surprisingly, however, seven relatives of P1 were also found to be homozygous for the 
R121W TIRAP mutation, including the proband's father (aged 33 years), four of the father's 
siblings (aged 20 to 28 years) and both his parents (aged 53 and 54 years) (Figure 1A). None 
of these individuals carried TIRAP polymorphisms. The proband's mother and younger 
sister were heterozygous for the R121W allele. None of these relatives, whether 
heterozygous or homozygous for the TIRAP allele, had ever suffered from any severe 
infection, including staphylococcal infections in particular. Thus, eight individuals from a 
consanguineous Pakistani kindred, including a child with severe staphylococcal infection 
and seven asymptomatic adults, were homozygous for a rare and probably deleterious 
TIRAP allele. These data suggested that P1 had autosomal recessive TIRAP deficiency, with 
incomplete penetrance for severe staphylococcal disease. We therefore investigated whether 
the eight individuals had TIRAP deficiency, and the mechanisms underlying incomplete 
clinical penetrance.
Israel et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Normal mRNA and protein levels for the R121W TIRAP allele
Human TIRAP encodes two isoforms (Figure 1C) generated by four different transcripts. 
Two transcripts (NM_001039661.1 and NM_001318777) encode isoform A, which contains 
221 amino acids (aa), (23.8 kDa), whereas the other two transcripts (NM_001318776 and 
NM_148910) encode isoform B, which contains 235 aa (25.3 kDa). The R121W mutation is 
located in exon 5 of reference transcript (encoding a sequence present in all isoforms). We 
assessed the impact of the mutation, by inserting the WT and R121W alleles into 
pCDNA3.1-V5 vectors encoding a C-terminally tagged version of each of the isoforms of 
TIRAP. Following the transient transfection of HEK 293T cells, the R121W allele yielded 
levels of both isoforms (A and B) about 50% lower than those obtained with the WT allele 
(Figure 1E). This suggested that both R121W TIRAP isoforms were somewhat less stable 
than the WT isoforms, at least when tagged molecules were overproduced in HEK 293T 
cells. We then evaluated TIRAP mRNA levels for both isoforms by RT-qPCR and RT-PCR 
in SV40 fibroblasts from P1, her father (R121W/W), and her mother (R121W/WT), and by 
RT-qPCR in EBV-B cells from P1, and PBMCs from P1 and her aunt (R121W/W) (Figure 
1F and Figure S1C and S1D). P1, her father, mother, and aunt had mRNA levels within the 
normal range for the controls, with transcripts encoding isoform A predominating in the 
three cell types tested, and in all individuals tested. We were unable to detect the endogenous 
expression of either of the two TIRAP isoforms, by western blotting (WB), in SV40 
fibroblasts from healthy controls, whereas TIRAP protein levels in control EBV-B cells 
varied considerably between individuals, consistent with the variability of mRNA levels 
between controls (data not shown, Figure 1F). In PBMCs from healthy controls only a 24 
kDa protein, probably corresponding to isoform A, was detected, consistent with RT-qPCR 
results (Figure 1G). Homozygous family members had normal levels of this isoform of 
TIRAP in PBMCs. Overall, these data suggested that the R121W mutation had no detectable 
impact on mRNA or protein levels in circulating leukocytes.
Impaired subcellular localization of TIRAP R121W isoforms
We assessed the subcellular distribution of the mutant TIRAP molecules. Fluorescence 
microscopy of HEK 293T cells transiently transfected with a pcDNA3.1 vector encoding the 
WT form of TIRAP V5-tagged and labeled with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-V5 
antibodies showed WT TIRAP to be present in precise small dots in the cytoplasm, whereas 
transfection with the R121W TIRAP construct resulted in diffuse cytoplasmic staining 
(Figure 2A). For the quantification of this subcellular localization phenotype, we 
cotransfected cells with constructs encoding V5-tagged WT TIRAP and either myc-tagged 
WT or R121W TIRAP, and then assessed the colocalization of the encoded proteins by 
determining Pearson's correlation coefficient (PCC) (Figure 2B). WT TIRAP had a PCC of 
0.85 for colocalization with itself, whereas its PCC for colocalization with R121W was 0.25 
(p < 0.0001). The R121W mutation therefore impaired the subcellular localization of 
TIRAP. We then investigated whether this cellular localization defect had an impact on the 
colocalization of TIRAP with its partner, MyD88. We obtained a PCC of 0.6 for the 
colocalization of WT TIRAP and MyD88, whereas the PCC for the colocalization of 
R121W TIRAP and MyD88 was 0.2 (Figure 2C) (p < 0.0001). These data suggest that the 
R121W mutation impairs TIRAP trafficking within cells, thereby reducing the accessibility 
of this molecule to MyD88.
Israel et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Impaired interaction of the TIRAP R121W isoforms with TLR2 and MyD88
Following stimulation, TLR2 or TLR4 recruits TIRAP, which recruits MyD88 to the 
receptor complex through TIR domain interactions (Horng et al., 2001; Yamamoto et al., 
2002b). The TIR domain interactions between MyD88 and TLR2 or TLR4 have been 
characterized in structural studies (Nada et al., 2012; Ohnishi et al., 2009). Four residues of 
MyD88 have been identified as essential for this interaction, including R196, which is 
mutated (R196C) in three MyD88-deficient patients (von Bernuth et al., 2008). The R196 
residue of MyD88 corresponds to the R121 residue of TIRAP (Figure S1B) (Valkov et al., 
2011). Like the R196C mutation of MyD88, the R121W mutation of TIRAP seems to have 
at most a modest impact on protein levels (Figure 1G). The R121W mutation may impair the 
interaction of TIRAP with MyD88, thereby preventing downstream signaling and the 
activation of target gene transcription. The R121W mutation may also impair TIRAP 
interaction with TLR2 and TLR4 (Lin et al., 2012). We tested these hypotheses, by first 
performing in vitro co-immunoprecipitation assays in HEK 293T cells transfected with the 
WT and R121W TIRAP isoforms A and B, together with TLR2 or MyD88. Both WT 
TIRAP isoforms interacted with TLR2, whereas this interaction was strongly impaired when 
HEK 293T cells were transfected with the R121W TIRAP isoforms (Figure 2D). Similarly, 
both WT TIRAP isoforms interacted with MyD88, whereas this interaction was strongly 
impaired when HEK 293T cells were transfected with either R121W TIRAP isoform (Figure 
2E). We also assessed TLR2/MyD88 co-immunoprecipitation after PAM2CSK4 (PAM2) 
stimulation, in SV40 fibroblasts from healthy controls, P1's mother (heterozygous for 
TIRAP), and P1 and her father, who are both homozygous for the mutant form of TIRAP 
(Figure 2F). The co-immunoprecipitation of TLR2 and MyD88 was observed upon TLR2 
stimulation in both control and R121W-heterozygous fibroblasts, but not in R121W-
homozygous fibroblasts, whereas MyD88-mutant fibroblasts (L93P/R196C) displayed an 
intermediate pattern. These data suggest that the R121W mutation disrupts the interaction of 
both TIRAP isoforms with their TLR2 (and presumably TLR4) and MyD88 partners. These 
data, therefore, suggest that individuals homozygous for R121W have a complete functional 
deficiency of TIRAP.
The R121W TIRAP allele is loss-of-function
The transient transfection of SV40 fibroblasts from P1 and her father with a vector encoding 
WT TIRAP isoform A or B induced IL-6 production to levels similar to those in transfected 
control cells (Figure 3A). With this high background, the increase in response to TLR2 or 
TLR4 stimulation was only modest, in both cell types (data not shown). By contrast, the 
transfection of these SV40 fibroblasts with constructs encoding either of the R121W TIRAP 
isoforms had no effect (Figure 3A). Overexpression of the WT MyD88 allele in SV40 
fibroblasts from the control, P1, her father or a MyD88-deficient patient led to the 
constitutive activation of IL-6 production, but the overproduction of WT TIRAP in MyD88-
deficient fibroblasts did not. Moreover, the stable transfection of fibroblasts from P1 or her 
father with lentiviral particles encoding WT TIRAP isoform A or B, or both, rescued 
constitutive IL-6 production, whereas no such rescue was observed after stable transfection 
with the R121W TIRAP construct or the empty vector (Figure S2A). Finally, the 
overproduction of each TIRAP WT isoform in HEK 293T cells, as already shown for 
TIRAP isoform A, induced constitutive activation of the NF-κB pathway and IL-6 
Israel et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 production (Figure 3B and (Horng et al., 2001)), whereas no such activation was observed 
following the overproduction of TIRAP R121W isoforms. Thus, the R121W TIRAP allele is 
loss-of-function, at least for constitutive and MyD88-dependent IL-6 induction following 
overexpression in fibroblasts.
Impaired responses via TLR2 and TLR4 in fibroblasts homozygous for R121W
TLR2 heterodimerizes with TLR1 for the recognition of triacylated lipopeptides (Jin et al., 
2007), which are present in most Gram-positive bacteria, including S. aureus (Kurokawa et 
al., 2009), and with TLR6 for the recognition of diacylated lipopeptides, also present in S. 
aureus (Buwitt-Beckmann et al., 2006). It also polymerizes with TLR6 and CD36 for the 
recognition of staphylococcal lipoteichoic acid (LTA) from most Gram-positive bacteria, 
including S. aureus (Jimenez-Dalmaroni et al., 2009), as reviewed by (Zahringer et al., 
2008). TLR4 recognizes LPS from Gram-negative bacteria (Poltorak et al., 1998). 
Macrophages and dendritic cells from TIRAP-deficient mice display abolished responses to 
the stimulation of TLR1/2, TLR2/6, and TLR4, and splenocyte proliferation in response to 
LPS is impaired (Horng et al., 2002; Yamamoto et al., 2002a). Human SV40 fibroblasts 
express TLR2 at their surface (data not shown). We thus assessed their cytokine production 
following stimulation with TLR2 and TLR4 agonists (PAM2 and FSL-1, two TLR2/6 
synthetic agonists; purified LTA from S. aureus, another TLR2/6 agonist; PAM3CSK4 
(PAM3), a synthetic TLR1/2 agonist; LPS and synthetic lipid A, two TLR4 agonists). We 
detected cytokine production by control fibroblasts upon stimulation by all these agonists. 
The response to PAM2, was both TLR2- and TIRAP-dependent, as demonstrated by the 
inhibition of IL-6 induction by siRNAs specific for TLR2 and TIRAP (Figure S2B), 
respectively, but not by scrambled siRNA. The responses to LPS and lipid A were also 
TLR4- and TIRAP-dependent (data not shown). Little or no IL-6 induction was observed in 
response to PAM2, LTA, FSL-1, PAM3, LPS, lipid A, and heat-killed S. aureus (HKSA), in 
SV40 fibroblasts from P1 and her father (both R121WW), or in IRAK-4- and NEMO-
deficient cells (Figure 3C). However, unlike IRAK-4- and NEMO-deficient cells, SV40 
fibroblasts from P1 and her father responded normally to IL-1β. All SV40 fibroblasts other 
than NEMO-deficient cells responded to TNF-α and poly(I:C) (a TLR3 agonist in human 
fibroblasts) (Zhang et al., 2007). These data suggest that homozygosity for the R121W allele 
abolishes TLR1/2 and TLR2/6 responses and strongly impairs TLR4 responses in human 
fibroblasts, consistent with the findings reported for TIRAP-deficient mouse macrophages 
and dendritic cells (Horng et al., 2002; Yamamoto et al., 2002a).
Impairment of phagocyte responses via TLR2 and TLR4 in R121W TIRAP homozygotes
We investigated P1's leukocyte responses to TLR2 and TLR4 agonists. CD62L (L-selectin) 
is a transmembrane protein cleaved by the metalloproteinase TACE upon TLR stimulation 
(Peschon et al., 1998). CD62L shedding in response to the stimulation of all TLRs other 
than TLR3 is abolished in granulocytes from IRAK-4- and MyD88-deficient patients (von 
Bernuth et al., 2006).. The granulocytes from six R121W/W individuals tested displayed 
impaired CD62L shedding in response to 1 h of stimulation with the TLR2 (PAM2, FSL-1, 
LTA, and PAM3) and TLR4 agonists (LPS) tested, when compared with two healthy controls 
and P1's heterozygous mother, but their response to PMA was normal (Figure 3D). In 
addition, the stimulation of PBMCs with various doses of PAM2, FSL-1, LTA, PAM3, and 
Israel et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 LPS for 3 h showed no intracellular labeling for IL-6 and TNF-α in CD14+ cells, 
particularly at low agonist concentrations (Figure 3E and Figure S2C). Similarly, 
transcriptome analysis after the stimulation of P1's whole blood for 2 h suggested that the 
induction of gene expression in response to PAM2, FSL-1, or LTA was abolished and that 
the induction of gene expression in response to PAM3 or LPS was impaired but not 
abolished (Figure S2D). These data suggest that granulocytes from R121W TIRAP 
homozygotes do not respond to the stimulation of TLR1/2, TLR2/6, and TLR4, whereas 
their monocytes do not respond to TLR2/6 and respond poorly to TLR1/2 and TLR4.
Residual responses to high concentrations of TLR agonists in monocytes homozygous for 
R121W TIRAP
After 3 h of stimulation, the responses of monocytes from R121W-homozygous PBMCs to 
low doses (10 ng/ml) of PAM3 were abolished, but the levels of production of both IL-6 and 
TNF-α in response to agonist stimulation at concentrations above 1 μg/ml were similar to 
those of healthy controls, suggesting the existence of TIRAP-independent responses to high 
concentrations of PAM3 and, possibly, other TLR2 agonists, at least in some cell types 
(Figure 3E and Figure S2C). An effect of contaminants is unlikely, as the agonist used was 
synthetic. Moreover, low levels of TNF-α induction were observed in response to LPS 
stimulation in CD14+ cells from the R121W-homozygous PBMCs tested. After 48 h of 
stimulation, IL-6 production in response to PAM3 (1 μg/ml) was normal in the PBMCs of all 
homozygous individuals tested, whereas it was profoundly impaired but not abolished in 
response to LPS (1 ng/ml) and lipid A (1 μg/ml); responses to PAM2 (1 μg/ml), FSL-1 (100 
ng/ml), and LTA (1 μg/ml) were abolished (Figure 4A and Figure S3A). These results 
confirm the deleterious effect of the R121W allele on TLR2 and TLR4 responses in 
leukocytes. However, the normal induction of IL-6 production observed in R121W/W 
monocytes in response to TLR1/2 stimulation with PAM3, at late time points and high 
concentrations of agonist (and, to a lesser extent, in response to stimulation with LPS and 
lipid A) further suggests that TIRAP may be redundant in such circumstances, as we ruled 
out the possibility of the mutant TIRAP protein having residual activity. Alternatively, PAM3 
and LPS/lipid A may also be recognized independently of TLR2 and TLR4, respectively. In 
the absence of TLR2- or TLR4-deficient subjects, given that the R121W TIRAP allele is 
loss-of-function, we can conclude that these late responses to high concentrations of TLR 
agonists were probably either TIRAP- or TLR-independent.
Impaired whole-blood response to LTA and lack of anti-LTA Abs in P1
In all individuals homozygous for the TIRAP R121W allele tested, IL-6 production by 
whole blood in response to 48 h of TLR2/6 stimulation with PAM2 and FLS-1 was impaired, 
whereas normal levels of IL-6 were produced in response to TLR1/2 stimulation with PAM3 
and TLR4 stimulation with LPS and lipid A (Figure 4B and Figure S3A). However, the 
induction of IL-6 via TLR2/6 in response to LTA was reproducibly abolished in the whole 
blood of P1, whereas a normal response was observed for the other individuals homozygous 
for R121W TIRAP tested (Figure 4B). We investigated this striking difference in cellular 
phenotype, which we considered to be of potential clinical relevance as only P1 suffered 
from staphylococcal disease. The leukocyte response to LTA response is mediated 
principally by TLR2/6 heterodimers acting in concert with CD36 (Jimenez-Dalmaroni et al., 
Israel et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2009), but anti-LTA Abs have been shown to enhance this response through the recognition 
of their invariant IgG domain by CD32 (Bunk et al., 2010). The response to LTA was 
impaired in PBMCs, granulocytes, and monocytes from all R121W homozygotes (including 
P1), but normal in the whole blood of all these individuals other than P1. We therefore used 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) to test for the presence of circulating anti-
LTA Abs in the plasma of individuals from this kindred. P1 was the only member of this 
kindred for whom anti-LTA IgG Abs were reproducibly undetectable in 10 plasma samples 
taken between the ages of four months and nine years. No maternal anti-LTA antibodies 
were detected in the plasma of P1 during the infectious episode. By contrast, the six relatives 
homozygous for R121W TIRAP tested and P1's mother (R121W/WT) had high titers of 
anti-LTA Abs (Figure 4C). P1 had high titers of Abs directed against H. influenzae, 
pneumococcal polysaccharides, tetanus, diphtheria toxins, and 68 other staphylococcal 
antigens, such as PVL and hemolysin-α (Figure S3B and Table S2). P1 was unique among 
the eight R121W homozygotes in three ways: her whole blood did not respond to LTA, she 
had no LTA-specific Abs in her plasma, and she suffered from invasive staphylococcal 
disease.
Rescue of the whole-blood LTA response in P1 with LTA-specific mAbs
We investigated whether the lack of anti-LTA IgG was responsible for the lack of whole-
blood responses to LTA, by testing 26 healthy adults, 22 healthy children, 246 sick children 
(67 with invasive staphylococcal infections and 179 with other infections), seven patients 
with MyD88 or IRAK-4 deficiency (all of whom presented staphylococcal disease), and 10 
patients with severe PVL+ S. aureus pneumonia for the presence of specific anti-LTA Abs 
(Figure 4C). All healthy adults and IRAK-4- and MyD88-deficient patients, most of the 
children (62%), whether healthy (96%), with S. aureus infections (72%) or with other types 
of infections (54%), and up to 60% of the patients with severe PVL+ S. aureus pneumonia, 
had high levels of serum anti-LTA Abs. Three of this last group of patients had a normal 
whole-blood response to LTA stimulation, one to eight months after infection (data not 
shown). Thus, the age at which serum anti-LTA IgG antibodies appear varies in the 
population, even after staphylococcal disease, consistent with previous reports (Wergeland et 
al., 1989). Our results also indicate that the absence of anti-LTA IgG does not influence the 
whole-blood response to LTA in TIRAP-expressing individuals (data not shown). IL-6 
production in response to LTA stimulation was restored by incubating P1's PBMCs with 
LTA-responsive control plasma, suggesting that circulating anti-LTA Abs may rescue TIRAP 
deficiency (Figure S3C). We tested this hypothesis, by adding a chimeric mouse anti-LTA 
mAb to whole blood from healthy controls, P1, her aunt, and an IRAK-4-deficient patient, or 
to PBMCs from healthy controls and P1 (Figure 4D and 4E and Figure S4A). This restored 
IL-6 production in response to LTA stimulation in whole blood and PBMCs from P1, 
whereas an isotypic control mAb (directed against RSV) had no effect. Monocytes were the 
principal producers of IL-6 upon LTA stimulation in the presence of anti-LTA mAb (Figure 
S4B) (Bunk et al., 2010). The specific lack of anti-LTA Abs in the plasma of P1 therefore 
accounts for the abolition of IL-6 induction in the whole blood of this particular R121W 
homozygote in response to LTA stimulation via TLR2/6. The only R121W TIRAP 
homozygote to display catastrophic staphylococcal disease (P1) mounted no antibody 
response to LTA and her whole blood was unable to respond to LTA. The LTA-specific mAb 
Israel et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 did not rescue the response of IRAK-4-deficient cells, suggesting that the response of these 
cells is mediated by the canonical TLR2-MyD88 pathway. However, no TLR2- and MyD88-
deficient individuals were available for study.
Anti-LTA mAb restores the LTA response in TIRAP-deficient mouse macrophages
We tested this model in mice. Like MyD88- and TLR2-deficient human macrophages, 
TIRAP-deficient mouse macrophages do not respond to TLR2 stimulation (Horng et al., 
2001; Yamamoto et al., 2002a). We investigated whether the addition of exogenous anti-LTA 
antibodies restored the response to TLR stimulation. We first determined whether such Abs 
were present in mouse sera. No anti-LTA Abs were detected by ELISA in the 15 mice used 
for the study (data not shown). Mouse peritoneal macrophages from WT B6, Tirap-/-, 
Myd88-/- and Tlr2-/- mice (n>3) were then treated with LTA or low doses of PAM3 for 24 h, 
and the production of IL-6 and TNF-α was assessed in the presence and absence of 
exogenous anti-LTA or isotype control Abs. As in cells from P1, anti-LTA Abs restored the 
production of IL-6 and TNF-α in response to LTA, but not PAM3, in TIRAP-deficient mouse 
macrophages (Figure 4F and Figure S4C), whereas no such restoration was observed with 
the isotype control mAb. MyD88- and TLR2-deficient macrophages did not respond in this 
way to the addition of anti-LTA mAb. These findings unequivocally demonstrate that the 
TIRAP-independent mechanism compensating for TIRAP deficiency in the presence of anti-
LTA Abs in mice, and, by inference, in humans, is dependent not only on IRAK4 but also on 
both TLR2 and MyD88. These data establish a plausible mechanism for the occurrence of 
staphylococcal disease in P1 but not in any of the other seven TIRAP-deficient individuals. 
The lack of anti-LTA IgG results in a failure to compensate for TIRAP deficiency, 
preventing leukocyte responses to staphylococcal LTA via TLR2/6, thereby accounting for 
invasive staphylococcal disease.
Discussion
We describe here a large family with autosomal recessive TIRAP deficiency. Eight family 
members are homozygous for the rare TIRAP R121W mutation affecting the TIR domain. 
TIRAP has been shown to play a crucial role in the TLR2- and TLR4-mediated and MyD88-
dependent pathways in mice, as an adapter between these two TLRs and MyD88. Our data 
show that the R121W TIRAP allele is loss-of-function, as opposed to hypomorphic, because 
it cannot interact with upstream TLRs and downstream MyD88. TIRAP-deficient mouse 
macrophages display impaired activation of NF-κB in response to the stimulation of TLR2 
and TLR4 by MALP2, PGN (peptidoglycans) (TLR2/6), BLP (bacterial lipopeptides) 
(TLR1/2) and LPS, respectively. LPS-induced splenocyte proliferation and cytokine 
production are also impaired in TIRAP-deficient mice, which are resistant to LPS-induced 
septic shock (Horng et al., 2002; Yamamoto et al., 2002a). Consistently, fibroblasts, 
granulocytes, and monocytes from TIRAP-deficient humans do not respond to TLR2/6 
agonists PAM2, FSL-1, and LTA. However, residual activation of the TLR2 pathway was 
recently reported in mouse TIRAP-deficient macrophages, in response to high 
concentrations of PAM3 (TLR1/2) and MALP2 (TLR2/6) (Kenny et al., 2009). Moreover, 
prolongation or enhancement of the interaction between mouse TLR2 and its agonists PAM2 
(TLR2/6) and PAM3 (TLR1/2) can induce TIRAP-independent responses, whereas MyD88 
Israel et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 remains strictly required for all TLR2-dependent responses (Cole et al., 2010). These 
findings suggest that the response of R121W/W monocytes to high concentrations of or 
prolonged stimulation with PAM3 may be due to TIRAP-independent responses mediated 
via TLR1/2 and MyD88. Likewise, residual responses to LPS/lipid A in the patients may be 
TLR4-and MyD88-dependent. Our study thus provides the first comprehensive description 
of inherited TIRAP deficiency in humans, highlighting the essential role of this protein for 
TLR2/6 signaling. Our results also confirm that TIRAP is less critical than MyD88 and 
IRAK-4 for TLR1/2 and TLR4 responses, as it can be bypassed by increasing agonist 
concentration or the duration of stimulation.
The mouse TLR2 pathway plays an important role in host defense against S. aureus 
(Takeuchi et al., 2000). Humans with inherited IRAK-4 and MyD88 deficiencies are also 
prone to staphylococcal disease (reviewed in (Picard et al., 2010)), indicating that the human 
TIR signaling pathway is essential for protective immunity to S. aureus. The specific 
contribution of individual human TLRs and IL-1Rs has remained unclear (Casanova et al., 
2011). We show that homozygosity for the loss-of-function R121W allele of TIRAP 
severely impairs, but does not abolish responses to TLR1/2 and TLR4 stimulation, whereas 
it abolishes responses to TLR2/6 stimulation. Impaired responses to TLR2 are much more 
likely than impaired responses to TLR4 to have contributed to the development of 
staphylococcal disease in P1, as S. aureus is a Gram-positive bacterium that contains both 
TLR1/2 and TLR2/6 agonists, including LTA in particular, but does not produce LPS (Lowy, 
1998). However, the TIRAP mutation alone is not sufficient to account for P1's 
staphylococcal disease, as none of the other seven affected relatives had had any serious 
staphylococcal infections, despite frequent exposure to these commensal bacteria. The 
bacterial load in the initial inoculum, or the nature of the strain may influence the ability of 
TIRAP-deficient individuals to mount a protective immune response. It may therefore be 
relevant that P1 was infected with a PVL-positive strain of S. aureus; these relatively rare 
staphylococci are known to be more pathogenic in humans (Gillet et al., 2002). The 
observed clinical differences may also reflect the young age at which P1 encountered this 
pathogenic strain of S. aureus. The proband has been doing well for the last nine years, 
perhaps partly due to her robust Ab response to all staphylococcal antigens tested other than 
LTA. She is, however, on antibiotic prophylaxis (without IgG substitution, which would 
provide LTA-specific Abs, Figure S4D), making it impossible to draw firm conclusions 
concerning the efficacy of her current immune response to staphylococci.
A more likely hypothesis is based on the observation that P1 was the only TIRAP-deficient 
individual in the kindred to display a complete lack of whole-blood TLR2/6-dependent 
responses to staphylococcal LTA. This lack of response was causally related to the specific 
absence of circulating Abs against LTA in P1, as the phenotype was not only specific to this 
patient and absent from the other seven TIRAP-deficient relatives, but also complemented 
by the addition of LTA-specific mAbs to cells from P1. Monocytes are responsible for the 
response of TIRAP-deficient whole blood and PBMC to LTA in the presence of LTA-
specific Abs. Moreover, TIRAP-deficient mouse macrophages responded to LTA via TLR2 
in the presence of LTA-specific Abs. This Ab defect may, again, reflect the young age of P1, 
as LTA Abs first appear during childhood and their levels increase into adolescence, with 
considerable inter-individual variability (Dryla et al., 2005; Wergeland et al., 1989). If this 
Israel et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 is, indeed, the case, then the lack of staphylococcal disease during childhood in the other 
R121W homozygotes may have resulted from the staphylococci encountered being 
insufficiently virulent to cause disease, an earlier Ab response to LTA (triggered by any 
Gram-positive bacterium), or both. The normal levels of anti-LTA Abs in IRAK-4- and 
MyD88-deficient children (and the six TIRAP-deficient individuals other than P1 tested) 
indicate that a deficiency of TLR signaling pathways does not account for the lack of anti-
LTA Ab production in P1. Furthermore, IRAK-4-deficient patients lack IL-6 production by 
whole blood in response to LTA (Figure S4A), despite presenting high titers of endogenous 
anti-LTA Abs, and even in the presence of exogenous anti-LTA mAb, indicating that the 
response to LTA mediated by anti-LTA Ab is TIRAP-independent but IRAK-4-dependent. 
Moreover, the LTA responses of mouse macrophages lacking MyD88 or TLR2 are not 
rescued by LTA-specific Abs, unlike those of TIRAP-deficient macrophages. The TIRAP-
independent pathway rescued by LTA-specific Abs is therefore also TLR2- and MyD88-
dependent. This rescue is probably mediated by the Fc receptor CD32 (Bunk et al., 2010), 
although CD32-deficient humans and mice were not tested.
The sustained lack of anti-LTA Abs in P1 is probably intrinsic and remains unexplained. 
However, this is not a unique feature, as approximately half the children under the age of 
nine years with no history of staphylococcal disease tested here had no detectable anti-LTA 
Abs. P1's serum was not tested before disease onset, but the observed Ab defect is unlikely 
to be a consequence of staphylococcal disease, as infection should have triggered the Ab 
response, and other children with staphylococcal disease (even with clinical phenotypes 
identical to that of this patient) produce such Abs. This defect is not the sole cause of the 
staphylococcal disease observed in P1, as children with various forms of Ab deficiency, 
including agammaglobulinemia, are not prone to such staphylococcal disease (Conley et al., 
2009). The combined effects of a lack of anti-LTA Abs and the inherited TIRAP deficiency 
(i.e. of an acquired adaptive deficiency and an inborn innate deficiency) therefore underlie 
staphylococcal disease in this particular patient (Casanova et al., 2014). In the other 
individuals, IgG-dependent, adaptive immunity to LTA operates as a somatic modifier, 
selectively rescuing the inborn error of TIRAP, which disrupts TLR2-, TIRAP-, and 
MyD88-dependent innate immunity to LTA and staphylococci. This specific observation 
does not explain why staphylococcal (and pneumococcal) diseases become less frequent 
from adolescence onward in patients with inherited MyD88 or IRAK-4 deficiencies, whose 
cells do not respond to LTA in the presence of LTA-specific Abs. However, it suggests that 
other mechanisms of acquired immunity may be at work. In these patients, adaptive 
immunity is more likely to compensate (via pathways other than IRAK-4-MyD88) than to 
rescue (via the IRAK-4-MyD88 pathway itself) innate immunity. Nevertheless, our findings 
show that the clinical penetrance of an inborn error of innate immunity may be determined 
by adaptive immunity. This finding is consistent with twin studies in humans, which have 
revealed heritability to be lower for adaptive immunity than for innate immunity (Brodin et 
al., 2015; Casanova, 2015a). The somatic diversity of adaptive immune responses can 
compensate or even rescue inborn errors of innate immunity.
Israel et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 STAR Methods
1) Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing
Further information and requests for reagents may be directed to the lead contact author 
Jean-Laurent Casanova (St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, 
Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, USA; jean-
laurent.casanova@rockefeller.edu)
2) Experimental Model and Subject Details
Clinical samples—PBMCs and blood experiments were performed using fresh blood 
collected in heparinized tubes from healthy volunteer obtained from French National Blood 
Service (The Etablissement Français du Sang), the patient and her family, as well as from 
one IRAK4-/- patient.
All plasma studies were conducted using archival plasma samples from 26 healthy adults, 22 
healthy children, 67 children with invasive staphylococcal infections, 179 children with 
other type of infections), 7 patients with MyD88 or IRAK-4 deficiency and 10 patients with 
severe PVL+ S. aureus pneumonia
The experiments described here were conducted in accordance with local, national and 
international regulations and were approved by the French Ethics committee (ID-RCB: 
2010-A00650-39), ANSM, (French National Agency for Medicines and Health Products 
Safety; B100713-40) and by the French Ministry of Research (IE-2010-547). Informed 
consent was obtained from all patients or their families, in the case of minors, in accordance 
with the World Medical Association, the Helsinki Declaration, and EU directives.
Cell lines—Primary human fibroblasts were grown from skin biopsy specimens and 
immortalized with SV40 T antigen (SV40 fibroblasts). They were cultured in DMEM 
(Gibco BRL, Invitrogen, USA) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum 
(FBS) (Gibco BRL, Invitrogen, USA). All cells were grown at 37°C, under an atmosphere 
containing 5% CO2. The IRAK-4- and MyD88-deficient fibroblasts have been described 
elsewhere (Picard et al., 2003; von Bernuth et al., 2008). NEMO-deficient fibroblasts were 
derived from a female fetus with a completely skewed pattern of X inactivation expressing 
the del4-10 NEMO allele.
Mice—MyD88-/-mice was purchased from The Jackson Laboratory. Tiraptor/tor and 
Tlr2lan/lan mice were generated on a pure C57BL/6J background by ENU mutagenesis and 
are described at http://mutagenetix.utsouthwestern.edu. Animals were housed in an animal 
facility on a 12 h/12 hr light/dark cycle with free access to food and water. All experimental 
procedures using mice were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee 
(IACUC) of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, and were conducted in 
accordance with institutionally approved protocols and guidelines for animal care and use.
All the mice were maintained at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in 
accordance with institutionally approved protocols.
Israel et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3) Method Details
Case report—We investigated a six-year-old girl of Pakistani origin, born full term, to 
second-degree consanguineous parents living in the United Kingdom (P1, V.1, 
Supplementary Figure S1). She received four injections of a pentavalent vaccine against 
Haemophilus influenzae type b, Diphtheria, Bordetella pertussis, tetanus and poliovirus at 
the ages of 2, 4, 6 and 36 months. She also received three injections of a seven-valent 
conjugate vaccine against pneumococcus (Prevenar®) at the ages of 2, 4 and 13 months and 
three injections of a conjugate meningococcus C vaccine at the ages of 3, 4 and 12 months. 
She received two injections of MMR vaccine. At the age of three months, she presented an 
acute respiratory illness leading to respiratory failure. PVL-producing S. aureus was 
identified as the cause of pneumonia and sepsis. On admission to the intensive care unit, the 
patient's C-reactive protein concentration was 52 mg/l (0 – 6), peaking at 180 mg/l 24 hours 
later. The patient displayed a marked acidosis, with a pH of 6.9. Conventional respiratory 
and circulatory support with inotropes failed and she required seven days of extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation. Her staphylococcal infection was treated with a combination of 
intravenous clindamycin and linezolid. She made a complete recovery from this life-
threatening illness and has remained well, with no further infective episodes, but on 
prophylactic cotrimoxazole treatment, over the last four years. Routine immunological 
results for phagocytes, complement, Ig (IgM 0.49 g/l, IgG 7.56 g/l, IgA 0.31 g/l at 3 
months), antibody production, and for T and B cells were normal.
Genetic analysis—Human genomic DNA was isolated from polymorphonuclear (PMN) 
cells obtained from freshly collected whole blood by centrifugation on a Ficoll-Paque Plus 
gradient (GE Healthcare, GE Healthcare, Saclay, France), peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells (PBMCs) or cell lines (EBV-transformed B cells or SV40-immortalized fibroblasts). 
The cells were lysed by incubation overnight at 37°C in extraction buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 
7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, and 10 mg/ml proteinase K). DNA was isolated by phenol/
chloroform extraction, precipitated in ethanol and resuspended in 10 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 1 
mM EDTA. Human RNA was isolated from SV40-transformed fibroblasts with Trizol 
reagent (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Paisley, UK), according to the manufacturer's 
instructions. RNA was reverse-transcribed with Superscript II reverse transcriptase 
(Invitrogen Life Technologies, Paisley, UK). PCR amplification was performed with the 
AmpliTaq DNA polymerase (Applied Biosystems, California, USA) and the GeneAmp PCR 
system 9700 (Applied Biosystem, California, USA). We amplified the full-length cDNA and 
the three coding exons of TIRAP separately. The conditions and primer sequences used for 
PCR amplification of the coding exons, including the flanking intron regions or cDNA 
sequences, are available upon request. The PCR amplicons were verified by electrophoresis 
in a 1% agarose gel and purified by centrifugation through Sephadex G-50 Superfine resin 
(GE Healthcare, Saclay, France) on multiscreen MAHV-N45 filter plates (Millipore, 
Molshein, France). The PCR products were sequenced by dideoxyribonucleotide termination 
methods, with the BigDye Terminator kit v3.1 (Applied Biosystem, California, USA) and 
appropriate primers (also available upon demand). Sequencing products were also purified 
by centrifugation through Sephadex G-50 Superfine resin and analyzed on an ABI Prism 
3700 (Applied Biosystem, California, USA). Sequence files and chromatograms were 
Israel et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analyzed with Genalys Software v3.3 from CNG, France (Takahashi et al., 2003) and 
Sequence Scanner Software v1.0 (Applied Biosystem, California, USA).
Exome sequencing—Massively parallel sequencing: Genomic DNA extracted from the 
patient's whole blood was sheared with a Covaris S2 ultrasonicator (Covaris). An adaptor-
ligated library was prepared with the Paired-End Sample Prep kit V1 (Illumina). Exome 
sequencing was performed with the Agilent Sureselect All Exons kit V4 of the Agilent 
Sureselect all exons kit V4+UTR (Table S3). We generated 2×100 base-pair (bp) paired-end 
reads on an Illumina HiSeq 2000.
Sequence alignment, variant calling, and annotation—The sequences were aligned 
with the human genome reference sequence (hg19 build), with BWA aligner (Li and Durbin, 
2009). Downstream processing was carried out with the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK)
(McKenna et al.), SAMtools(Li and Durbin, 2009), and Picard Tools (http://
picard.sourceforge.net). Substitution calls were made with a GATK Unified Genotyper, 
whereas indel calls were made with a GATK IndelGenotyperV2. All calls with a read 
coverage ≤ 2× and a Phred-scaled SNP quality ≤ 20 were filtered out. All the variants were 
annotated with the GATK Genomic Annotator.
Genotyping and linkage analysis—Five members of this family (the proband, her 
parents, and her paternal grandparents) were genotyped with the Affymetrix Genome-wide 
SNP 6.0 array. Five other members (two uncles, two aunts and the proband's sister) were 
genotyped with the Affymetrix Human Mapping 250K Nsp Array. Genotype calling was 
achieved with Affymetrix Power Tools (http://www.affymetrix.com/partners_programs/
programs/developer/tools/powertools.affx), for all 10 family members. We discarded 
monomorphic SNPs, SNPs with a call rate lower than 100% and SNPs presenting more than 
one Mendelian inconsistency within the family. SNPs were further filtered with population-
based filters. We then used 117,517 high-quality SNP markers for linkage analysis. 
Parametric multipoint linkage analysis was carried out with Merlin software (Abecasis et al., 
2002; Purcell et al., 2007). The family founders and HapMap CEU trios were used to 
estimate allele frequencies and to define linkage clusters, with an r2 threshold of 0.4.
Due to the high degree of inbreeding in this family and regarding lack of precise information 
about consanguinity loops, we performed different linkage analyses based on different 
models:
- A first analysis assuming autosomal-recessive inheritance with complete penetrance 
(homozygosity mapping), with a single loop of consanguinity at the level of the 
proband's parents;
- A second analysis assuming autosomal-recessive inheritance with complete 
penetrance (homozygosity mapping), with two loops of consanguinity at the levels of 
the proband's parents and grandparents.
Each of these two analyses were performed twice, with the disease status of healthy 
individuals homozygous for the TIRAP mutation taken as ‘healthy’ or ‘unknown’. Regions 
linked with an ‘unknown’ disease status included TIRAP as a candidate gene. This gene was 
Israel et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 not included in regions linked to a disease status of ‘healthy’. The proband and her relatives 
(father, grandparents, aunt and uncles) carried the same haplotype for TIRAP. We used a 
combination of this analysis and exome sequence to search for potential modifier genes.
Kinship calculation—Kinship coefficients (the probability that two alleles sampled at 
random from two individuals are identical by state) were calculated with KING robust 
(Manichaikul et al., 2010).
Quantitative PCR—Total RNA was extracted from 0.5million EBV-B cells or 0.5 SV-40 
fibroblasts or 0.1 million of PBMCs, with the ZR RNA MicroPrepZymo (ZR1061, Zymo 
research, California, USA), according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA was reverse-
transcribed with Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Life Technologies, California, USA). 
Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed using 2 different probes (TaqMan Gene 
Expression Assays Life Technologies custom probes for isoform A and B, sequences 
available in the key resource table), with an initial denaturation at 95°C for 20 s, followed by 
40 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 3 s and annealing/extension at 60°C for 30 s. mRNA 
levels are expressed relative to GUS mRNA levels, as determined by the 2-DDC(t) method. 
Error bars were calculated from at least two independent experiments.
Cell lysis, immunoprecipitation, and immunoblotting—Cells were lysed in a lysis 
buffer containing 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 120 mM NaCl, 2 mM KCl, 1% Triton X-100, 
and 2 mM EDTA supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete, Roche) and 
phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (PhoStop, Roche). Laemmli buffer supplemented with DTT 
was added to clear supernatants.
For immunoprecipitation, cells were lysed in lysis buffer (0.5% Triton X-100, 20 mM 
HEPES (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 12.5 mM b-glycerophosphate, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM 
NaF, 2 mM dithiothreitol, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2 mM EGTA, 20 mM aprotinin, 1 
mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride). Cell extracts were incubated overnight at 4°C with 1 ug 
of the appropriate antibody and 20 μl of protein G Sepharose beads (prewashed and 
resuspended in lysis buffer at a 1:1 ratio). The beads were washed four times with lysis 
buffer.
Samples were separated by SDS–PAGE and the proteins were transferred onto a PVDF 
membrane. The membrane was blocked by incubation in TBS supplemented with 0.1% 
Tween 20 and 5% skimmed milk powder, and incubated with the primary antibody, followed 
by the appropriate horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody. Immunoreactive 
proteins were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence.
TIRAP cloning, overexpression and cell complementation—Complementary DNA 
was generated from RNA extracted from SV40-fibroblasts and the full-length A and B 
isoforms of TIRAP were amplified by PCR and inserted into a pCDNA3 vector with a C-
terminal V5 tag. Site-directed mutagenesis was performed on the cDNAs for both isoforms, 
to introduce the R121W mutation. The primers used are available upon request. Sequencing 
confirmed that the mutation was incorporated, with no other alteration to the construct.
Israel et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HEK293T cells were transfected with 1ug of each plasmid in 6cm petri dish with calcium 
phosphate (Thermofisher) according to manufacturer instructions. 36 hours later, cells were 
collected and lysed according to protocol above.
TIRAP-deficient and MyD88-deficient SV40-fibroblasts were transfected with 100 ng of 
empty pCDNA3 vector, pCDNA3-TIRAP-V5 vectors encoding isoform A WT, isoform B 
WT, isoform A with the R121W mutation, isoform B with the mutation, or pCDNA3-
MyD88-V5, with the LTX transfection kit (Invitrogen, SARL, France), used according to the 
manufacturer's instructions. Twenty-four hours later, cells were stimulated by incubation 
with various ligands for 24 hours. The supernatants were harvested and IL-6 production was 
assessed by ELISA.
Immunostaining—HEK 293T cells stably transfected with a TLR2 construct (Invivogen) 
were plated and transfected with 1 μg in total of plasmids encoding the WT or mutant 
TIRAP, or MyD88, in IBIDI eight-well microslides. They were stained 36 hours after 
transfection, washed in 0.01% Tween in PBS, fixed by incubation with 4% PFA for 30 
minutes and permeabilized by incubation with 0.3% Triton for 30 minutes on ice. Cells were 
then blocked by incubation in 3% BSA and 10% goat serum for 1 hour and stained with 
1/500 anti-V5 (mouse) Ab or 1/500 anti-myc (rabbit) (both from Invitrogen) for 1 hour. 
Secondary antibodies were then added. The cells were incubated for one hour in the dark 
and images were captured with an ApoTome microscope (Carl-Zeiss). Pearson's correlation 
coefficients were calculated with Image J software (JacoP plugin).
SV-40 stimulation and cytokine determinations by ELISA—Twenty-four hours 
before stimulation, 1×105 SV40 fibroblasts were plated in 1 ml of DMEM supplemented 
with 2% FBS per well in a 24-well plate. Cells were either left unstimulated or were 
stimulated for 24 hours with different ligands: 10 ng/ml IL-1β (R&D Systems), 20 ng/ml 
TNF-α (R&D Systems), 25 μg/ml poly(I:C) (polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid from GE 
Healthcare) and TLR2 ligands: 1 μg/ml PAM2CSK4, 1 μg/ml PAM3CSK4, 1 μg/ml purified 
LTA-SA, 100 ng/ml FSL-1 (all from Invivogen), 1μg/ml of LPS (from Sigma)
Twenty-four hours later, supernatants were collected and IL-6 levels were assessed by 
ELISA, with the Sanquin kit, used according to the manufacturer's instructions. Samples and 
antibodies were diluted in 1 × HPE dilution buffer (M1940 Sanquin). Milk was used for 
blocking, and antibody binding was detected with streptavidin-conjugated horseradish 
peroxidase (M2032, Sanquin) and the TMB microwell peroxidase substrate (50-76-00 KPL). 
Finally, the reaction was stopped by adding 1.8 M H2SO4. Optical density was determined 
with an MRX microplate reader (Thermolab System).
CD62L shedding—We stimulated 100 μl of fresh blood by incubation for one hour with 
various TLR agonists, at 37°C, under an atmosphere containing 5% CO2. After activation, 
the red blood cells were lysed by incubation in extraction buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 1 mM 
EDTA, 0.5% SDS) for 5 minutes and washed twice in PBS. Cells were then labeled with 
anti-CD62L (BD) antibody and captured by flow cytometry. The analysis was performed on 
granulocytes gated according to size and granulosity (FCS/SSC settings).
Israel et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Whole-blood activation—Blood samples were collected in tubes containing heparin and 
were tested, generally after 24 hours of transport at room temperature. Blood was diluted 1:2 
in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco BRL, Invitrogen, USA). Aliquots of diluted blood were 
dispensed into a 48-well plate and incubated at 37°C, under an atmosphere containing 5% 
CO2, under different sets of conditions: with medium alone (non-stimulated), with agonists 
of different receptors (20 ng/ml IL-1β (R&D Systems), 10 ng/ml TNF-α (R&D Systems), 
25 μg/ml poly(I:C) (polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid from GE Healthcare) and TLR2 ligands: 
1 ug/ml PAM2CSK4, 1 ug/ml PAM3CSK4, 1 μg/ml purified LTA-SA, 100 ng/ml FSL-1, 500 
ug/ml of lipidA (all from Invivogen), 1 ng/ml of LPS Salmonella enterica serotype 
minnesota Re 595 (Sigma) or with 10-7 M PMA/ 10-5 M ionomycin (as positive control of 
stimulation) in presence of 10ug/ml of polymixin B. Supernatants were collected after 48 
hours and stored at -20°C until their use for cytokine determinations by ELISA. Exogenous 
monoclonal anti-LTA Ab (Pagibaximab) was obtained through collaboration with 
Biosynexus Incorporated (Gaithersburg, MD, USA) and palivizumab (Synagis®, Abbott) 
was used as an isotypic control. These mAb were used at 0.5 or 1mg/ml.
Flow cytometry—PBMCs were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS at a 
density of 2 × 106 cells/ml. They were stimulated for 3 hours with TLR agonists or left 
unstimulated. Concomitantly to stimulation, protein transport was blocked with GolgiPlug 
(BD Biosciences). Cells were labeled with anti-CD14 (BD), anti-CD19 (BD) and anti-CD3 
antibodies (Miltenyi Biotec). They were fixed and permeabilized (BD, 554722) and then 
stained with antibodies against IL-6 (BD) or TNF-α (BD). PBMCs were captured by flow 
cytometry with a BD Canto II machine and FACS Diva software. The data were analyzed 
with FACS Diva or FlowJo software (Tree Star).
Detection of plasmatic antibodies—ELISA plates were coated with 10 μg/ml of 
purified LTA from S. aureus (Invivogen) by incubation for 1 h at 37°C, and blocked by 
incubation with 5% milk in PBS for 1 h at room temperature. Plasma isolated from fresh 
blood collected into heparin was diluted 1/20, 1/100 and 1/500 and incubated on the plate 
for 1 h at room temperature. Anti-LTA antibodies were detected with peroxidase-conjugated 
goat anti-human IgG antibodies and the TMB microwell peroxidase substrate (50-76-00 
KPL). The reaction was stopped by adding H2SO4 (1.8 M). Optical density was determined 
with an MRX microplate reader (Thermolab Systems).
For IVIgs a starting dilution at 10 mg/ml was made to get closer from human plasma 
concentration of Igs. Then, OD was assessed at the following dilutions 1/20, 1/100, 1/500, 
1/2500, 1/7500, 1/22500.
Luminex analyses for antibodies detection—IgG levels against 70 recombinant S. 
aureus proteins were measured in serum samples using a bead-based flow cytometry 
technique (xMAP®; Luminex® Corporation, Austin, TX, USA), as previously described 
(den Reijer et al., 2016). All measurements were taken in duplicate, and the median 
fluorescence inten-sities (MFIs), a semiquantitative measure of antibody levels, were 
averaged. Duplicate measurements for which the coefficient of variation was larger than 
25 % were excluded from further analysis. All measurements were corrected for non-
Israel et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 specific background signal by subtracting the MFIs of control beads not coupled to any 
protein.
Monocytes negative selection—PBMCs were collected and washed four times at 300× 
g for 10 min with RPMI 1640. Monocytes were isolated from PBMCs by negative magnetic 
isolation (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany). Briefly, PBMCs were incubated with FcR Blocking 
reagent (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany) and with a cocktail of biotinylated antibodies against 
CD3, CD7, CD16, CD19, CD56, CD123 and Glycophorin A for 10min on ice. Then cells 
were incubated with magnetic bead-conjugated anti-biotin antibodies for 15 min on ice and 
applied onto MACS LS columns. Cells passing the column without binding were collected 
as monocytes fraction, and the monocyte-depleted PBMCs were collected by eluting the 
bound cell fraction. Each fraction were added at a density of 250.000 cells/well in RPMI, 
5%FBS. Prior to stimulation with PAM3 and LTA (performed according to the conditions 
described for PBMCs activation in a total volume of 250ul) monoclonal anti-LTA antibodies 
(pagibaximab, 1mg/ml) or isotypic control (palivizumab, anti-RSV, 1mg/ml) were added to 
each fraction. Il-6 production was assessed by ELISA after 24 hours stimulation.
Mouse macrophage stimulation—A total of 1×105 mouse peritoneal macrophages 
from wild type B6 or mutant mice (n≥3) (MyD88-/-, Tiraptor/tor, Tlr2lan/lan) were treated with 
40ng/ml of PAM3CSK4 or 1ug/ml of purified LTA from S. aureus for 24 h and supplemented 
with 0.5mg/ml of either isotype control (anti-RSV antibody) or anti-LTA antibodies. 
Supernatants were collected and analyzed by mouse IL-6 and TNF ELISA.
4) Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as the means ± SEM or SD (indicated in the legend for each figure). The 
significance of differences between groups was evaluated using t-test. The p value < 0.05 
was considered significant.
Statistical parameters including the exact value of n, precision measures (mean ± s.e.m) and 
statistical significance are reported in the Figures and the Figure Legends when necessary. 
Data are judged to be statistically significant when p < 0.05 by one-tailed Student's T-Test, 
where appropriate. In figures, asterisks denote statistical significance (*, p < 0.05; **, p < 
0.01). Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated with PRISM and statistical 
significance is based upon the assumption that values exhibit a Gaussian distribution. 
Statistical analysis was performed in Graph Pad PRISM 6 or 7.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank the patient and her family for participating in the study and all the members of both branches of the 
laboratory for discussions. We thank J Bustamante and SY Zhang for providing the plasma samples, S Fahy, J 
Flatot, M Courat, L Amar and Y Nemiroskaya for their assistance. We also thank R Desvaux and N Goudin for 
their help at the imaging platform. We thank Biosynexus Incorporated, Gaithersburg, MD USA for providing us 
with pagibaximab (anti-LTA Ab). The Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases is supported by 
INSERM, Paris Descartes University, the Imagine Institute, ANR-10-LABX-62-IBEID, ANR-2012-
Israel et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BSV3-0003-02, ANR-10-IAHU-01, the St. Giles Foundation, the National Center for Research Resources, and the 
National Center for Advancing Sciences (NCATS) grant number 8UL1TR000043 from the National Institutes of 
Health, and The Rockefeller University. This work was partly supported by the Innovative Medicines Initiative Joint 
Undertaking under grant agreement no. [115523], COMBACTE, from the European Union's FP7/2007-2013 and 
EFPIA. Laura Israel was supported by Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale. Carolina Prando was supported by 
the Thrasher Research Fund and Yuval Itan was supported by the AXA Research Fund.
References
Abecasis GR, Cherny SS, Cookson WO, Cardon LR. Merlin--rapid analysis of dense genetic maps 
using sparse gene flow trees. Nat Genet. 2002; 30:97–101. [PubMed: 11731797] 
Bousfiha A, Jeddane L, Al-Herz W, Ailal F, Casanova JL, Chatila T, Conley ME, Cunningham-
Rundles C, Etzioni A, Franco JL, et al. The 2015 IUIS Phenotypic Classification for Primary 
Immunodeficiencies. J Clin Immunol. 2015; 35:727–738. [PubMed: 26445875] 
Brodin P, Jojic V, Gao T, Bhattacharya S, Angel CJ, Furman D, Shen-Orr S, Dekker CL, Swan GE, 
Butte AJ, et al. Variation in the human immune system is largely driven by non-heritable influences. 
Cell. 2015; 160:37–47. [PubMed: 25594173] 
Bunk S, Sigel S, Metzdorf D, Sharif O, Triantafilou K, Triantafilou M, Hartung T, Knapp S, von 
Aulock S. Internalization and coreceptor expression are critical for TLR2-mediated recognition of 
lipoteichoic acid in human peripheral blood. J Immunol. 2010; 185:3708–3717. [PubMed: 
20713893] 
Buwitt-Beckmann U, Heine H, Wiesmuller KH, Jung G, Brock R, Akira S, Ulmer AJ. TLR1- and 
TLR6-independent recognition of bacterial lipopeptides. J Biol Chem. 2006; 281:9049–9057. 
[PubMed: 16455646] 
Casanova JL. Human genetic basis of interindividual variability in the course of infection. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2015a; 112:E7118–7127. [PubMed: 26621739] 
Casanova JL. Severe infectious diseases of childhood as monogenic inborn errors of immunity. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015b; 112:E7128–7137. [PubMed: 26621750] 
Casanova JL, Abel L, Quintana-Murci L. Human TLRs and IL-1Rs in host defense: natural insights 
from evolutionary, epidemiological, and clinical genetics. Annu Rev Immunol. 2011; 29:447–491. 
[PubMed: 21219179] 
Casanova JL, Conley ME, Seligman SJ, Abel L, Notarangelo LD. Guidelines for genetic studies in 
single patients: lessons from primary immunodeficiencies. J Exp Med. 2014; 211:2137–2149. 
[PubMed: 25311508] 
Cole LE, Laird MH, Seekatz A, Santiago A, Jiang Z, Barry E, Shirey KA, Fitzgerald KA, Vogel SN. 
Phagosomal retention of Francisella tularensis results in TIRAP/Mal-independent TLR2 signaling. 
J Leukoc Biol. 2010; 87:275–281. [PubMed: 19889726] 
Conley ME, Dobbs AK, Farmer DM, Kilic S, Paris K, Grigoriadou S, Coustan-Smith E, Howard V, 
Campana D. Primary B cell immunodeficiencies: comparisons and contrasts. Annu Rev Immunol. 
2009; 27:199–227. [PubMed: 19302039] 
den Reijer PM, Sandker M, Snijders SV, Tavakol M, Hendrickx AP, van Wamel WJ. Combining in 
vitro protein detection and in vivo antibody detection identifies potential vaccine targets against 
Staphylococcus aureus during osteomyelitis. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2016
Dryla A, Prustomersky S, Gelbmann D, Hanner M, Bettinger E, Kocsis B, Kustos T, Henics T, Meinke 
A, Nagy E. Comparison of antibody repertoires against Staphylococcus aureus in healthy 
individuals and in acutely infected patients. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2005; 12:387–398. 
[PubMed: 15753252] 
Fitzgerald KA, Palsson-McDermott EM, Bowie AG, Jefferies CA, Mansell AS, Brady G, Brint E, 
Dunne A, Gray P, Harte MT, et al. Mal (MyD88-adapter-like) is required for Toll-like receptor-4 
signal transduction. Nature. 2001; 413:78–83. [PubMed: 11544529] 
Gillet Y, Issartel B, Vanhems P, Fournet JC, Lina G, Bes M, Vandenesch F, Piemont Y, Brousse N, 
Floret D, et al. Association between Staphylococcus aureus strains carrying gene for Panton-
Valentine leukocidin and highly lethal necrotising pneumonia in young immunocompetent 
patients. Lancet. 2002; 359:753–759. [PubMed: 11888586] 
Israel et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Horng T, Barton GM, Flavell RA, Medzhitov R. The adaptor molecule TIRAP provides signalling 
specificity for Toll-like receptors. Nature. 2002; 420:329–333. [PubMed: 12447442] 
Horng T, Barton GM, Medzhitov R. TIRAP: an adapter molecule in the Toll signaling pathway. Nat 
Immunol. 2001; 2:835–841. [PubMed: 11526399] 
Itan Y, Shang L, Boisson B, Ciancanelli MJ, Markle JG, Martinez-Barricarte R, Scott E, Shah I, 
Stenson PD, Gleeson J, et al. The mutation significance cutoff: gene-level thresholds for variant 
predictions. Nat Methods. 2016; 13:109–110. [PubMed: 26820543] 
Itan Y, Shang L, Boisson B, Patin E, Bolze A, Moncada-Velez M, Scott E, Ciancanelli MJ, Lafaille 
FG, Markle JG, et al. The human gene damage index as a gene-level approach to prioritizing 
exome variants. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112:13615–13620. [PubMed: 26483451] 
Jimenez-Dalmaroni MJ, Xiao N, Corper AL, Verdino P, Ainge GD, Larsen DS, Painter GF, Rudd PM, 
Dwek RA, Hoebe K, et al. Soluble CD36 ectodomain binds negatively charged diacylglycerol 
ligands and acts as a co-receptor for TLR2. PLoS One. 2009; 4:e7411. [PubMed: 19847289] 
Jin MS, Kim SE, Heo JY, Lee ME, Kim HM, Paik SG, Lee H, Lee JO. Crystal structure of the TLR1-
TLR2 heterodimer induced by binding of a tri-acylated lipopeptide. Cell. 2007; 130:1071–1082. 
[PubMed: 17889651] 
Kenny EF, Talbot S, Gong M, Golenbock DT, Bryant CE, O'Neill LA. MyD88 adaptor-like is not 
essential for TLR2 signaling and inhibits signaling by TLR3. J Immunol. 2009; 183:3642–3651. 
[PubMed: 19717524] 
Kircher M, Witten DM, Jain P, O'Roak BJ, Cooper GM, Shendure J. A general framework for 
estimating the relative pathogenicity of human genetic variants. Nat Genet. 2014; 46:310–315. 
[PubMed: 24487276] 
Kurokawa K, Lee H, Roh KB, Asanuma M, Kim YS, Nakayama H, Shiratsuchi A, Choi Y, Takeuchi 
O, Kang HJ, et al. The Triacylated ATP Binding Cluster Transporter Substrate-binding Lipoprotein 
of Staphylococcus aureus Functions as a Native Ligand for Toll-like Receptor 2. J Biol Chem. 
2009; 284:8406–8411. [PubMed: 19139093] 
Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. 
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1754–1760. [PubMed: 19451168] 
Li Z, Peres AG, Damian AC, Madrenas J. Immunomodulation and Disease Tolerance to 
Staphylococcus aureus. Pathogens. 2015; 4:793–815. [PubMed: 26580658] 
Lin Z, Lu J, Zhou W, Shen Y. Structural insights into TIR domain specificity of the bridging adaptor 
Mal in TLR4 signaling. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e34202. [PubMed: 22485159] 
Lowy FD. Staphylococcus aureus infections. N Engl J Med. 1998; 339:520–532. [PubMed: 9709046] 
Manichaikul A, Mychaleckyj JC, Rich SS, Daly K, Sale M, Chen WM. Robust relationship inference 
in genome-wide association studies. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:2867–2873. [PubMed: 20926424] 
McDonald JH, Kreitman M. Adaptive protein evolution at the Adh locus in Drosophila. Nature. 1991; 
351:652–654. [PubMed: 1904993] 
McKenna A, Hanna M, Banks E, Sivachenko A, Cibulskis K, Kernytsky A, Garimella K, Altshuler D, 
Gabriel S, Daly M, et al. The Genome Analysis Toolkit: a MapReduce framework for analyzing 
next-generation DNA sequencing data. Genome Res. 2010; 20:1297–1303. [PubMed: 20644199] 
Mulcahy ME, McLoughlin RM. Host-Bacterial Crosstalk Determines Staphylococcus aureus Nasal 
Colonization. Trends Microbiol. 2016; 24:872–886. [PubMed: 27474529] 
Nada M, Ohnishi H, Tochio H, Kato Z, Kimura T, Kubota K, Yamamoto T, Kamatari YO, Tsutsumi N, 
Shirakawa M, et al. Molecular analysis of the binding mode of Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) 
domain proteins during TLR2 signaling. Mol Immunol. 2012; 52:108–116. [PubMed: 22673208] 
Ohnishi H, Tochio H, Kato Z, Orii KE, Li A, Kimura T, Hiroaki H, Kondo N, Shirakawa M. Structural 
basis for the multiple interactions of the MyD88 TIR domain in TLR4 signaling. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2009; 106:10260–10265. [PubMed: 19506249] 
Peschon JJ, Slack JL, Reddy P, Stocking KL, Sunnarborg SW, Lee DC, Russell WE, Castner BJ, 
Johnson RS, Fitzner JN, et al. An essential role for ectodomain shedding in mammalian 
development. Science. 1998; 282:1281–1284. [PubMed: 9812885] 
Picard C, Casanova JL, Puel A. Infectious diseases in patients with IRAK-4, MyD88, NEMO, or 
IkappaBalpha deficiency. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2011; 24:490–497. [PubMed: 21734245] 
Israel et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Picard C, Puel A, Bonnet M, Ku CL, Bustamante J, Yang K, Soudais C, Dupuis S, Feinberg J, Fieschi 
C, et al. Pyogenic bacterial infections in humans with IRAK-4 deficiency. Science. 2003; 
299:2076–2079. [PubMed: 12637671] 
Picard C, von Bernuth H, Ghandil P, Chrabieh M, Levy O, Arkwright PD, McDonald D, Geha RS, 
Takada H, Krause JC, et al. Clinical features and outcome of patients with IRAK-4 and MyD88 
deficiency. Medicine (Baltimore). 2010; 89:403–425. [PubMed: 21057262] 
Poltorak A, He X, Smirnova I, Liu MY, Van Huffel C, Du X, Birdwell D, Alejos E, Silva M, Galanos 
C, et al. Defective LPS signaling in C3H/HeJ and C57BL/10ScCr mice: mutations in Tlr4 gene. 
Science. 1998; 282:2085–2088. [PubMed: 9851930] 
Purcell S, Neale B, Todd-Brown K, Thomas L, Ferreira MA, Bender D, Maller J, Sklar P, de Bakker 
PI, Daly MJ, et al. PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage 
analyses. Am J Hum Genet. 2007; 81:559–575. [PubMed: 17701901] 
Takahashi M, Matsuda F, Margetic N, Lathrop M. Automated identification of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms from sequencing data. J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2003; 1:253–265. [PubMed: 
15290772] 
Takeuchi O, Hoshino K, Akira S. Cutting edge: TLR2-deficient and MyD88-deficient mice are highly 
susceptible to Staphylococcus aureus infection. J Immunol. 2000; 165:5392–5396. [PubMed: 
11067888] 
Valkov E, Stamp A, Dimaio F, Baker D, Verstak B, Roversi P, Kellie S, Sweet MJ, Mansell A, Gay NJ, 
et al. Crystal structure of Toll-like receptor adaptor MAL/TIRAP reveals the molecular basis for 
signal transduction and disease protection. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:14879–14884. 
[PubMed: 21873236] 
von Bernuth H, Ku CL, Rodriguez-Gallego C, Zhang S, Garty BZ, Marodi L, Chapel H, Chrabieh M, 
Miller RL, Picard C, et al. A fast procedure for the detection of defects in Toll-like receptor 
signaling. Pediatrics. 2006; 118:2498–2503. [PubMed: 17142536] 
von Bernuth H, Picard C, Jin Z, Pankla R, Xiao H, Ku CL, Chrabieh M, Mustapha IB, Ghandil P, 
Camcioglu Y, et al. Pyogenic bacterial infections in humans with MyD88 deficiency. Science. 
2008; 321:691–696. [PubMed: 18669862] 
Wergeland HI, Haaheim LR, Natas OB, Wesenberg F, Oeding P. Antibodies to staphylococcal 
peptidoglycan and its peptide epitopes, teichoic acid, and lipoteichoic acid in sera from blood 
donors and patients with staphylococcal infections. J Clin Microbiol. 1989; 27:1286–1291. 
[PubMed: 2473994] 
Yamamoto M, Sato S, Hemmi H, Sanjo H, Uematsu S, Kaisho T, Hoshino K, Takeuchi O, Kobayashi 
M, Fujita T, et al. Essential role for TIRAP in activation of the signalling cascade shared by TLR2 
and TLR4. Nature. 2002a; 420:324–329. [PubMed: 12447441] 
Yamamoto M, Sato S, Mori K, Hoshino K, Takeuchi O, Takeda K, Akira S. Cutting edge: a novel Toll/
IL-1 receptor domain-containing adapter that preferentially activates the IFN-beta promoter in the 
Toll-like receptor signaling. J Immunol. 2002b; 169:6668–6672. [PubMed: 12471095] 
Zahringer U, Lindner B, Inamura S, Heine H, Alexander C. TLR2 - promiscuous or specific? A critical 
re-evaluation of a receptor expressing apparent broad specificity. Immunobiology. 2008; 213:205–
224. [PubMed: 18406368] 
Zhang SY, Jouanguy E, Ugolini S, Smahi A, Elain G, Romero P, Segal D, Sancho-Shimizu V, Lorenzo 
L, Puel A, et al. TLR3 deficiency in patients with herpes simplex encephalitis. Science. 2007; 
317:1522–1527. [PubMed: 17872438] 
Zhang Y, Su HC, Lenardo MJ. Genomics is rapidly advancing precision medicine for immunological 
disorders. Nat Immunol. 2015; 16:1001–1004. [PubMed: 26382860] 
Israel et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
Inherited TIRAP deficiency impairs cellular responses to TLR2 and TLR4 
stimulation
•
Human TIRAP is redundant for protective immunity against most 
microorganisms
•
Anti-LTA antibodies rescue TLR2-dependent responses to LTA in TIRAP-
deficient cells
•
TIRAP deficiency causes staphylococcal disease in the absence of anti-LTA 
antibodies
Israel et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. The TIRAP R121W mutation is a rare mutation affecting the TIR domain of TIRAP, 
with a modest impact at the mRNA and protein levels
A. Pedigree of the kindred, with allele segregation. Each generation is identified with a 
roman numeral (from I to V), and each individual with an Arabic numeral (from left to 
right). The patient (P1) with clinical infectious disease is shown in black and indicated with 
an arrow. The relationships between individuals in gray were extrapolated according to the 
estimated kinship coefficients (Figure S1).
B. Electrophoregram of TIRAP genomic DNA sequences from a healthy control and the 
patient (V.1).
C. Schematic representation of TIRAP, showing the PIP2 domain, the PEST domain, the 
TIR domain and the coding exons. The R121W mutation in the TIR domain is indicated in 
red.
D. Conservation of the R121 amino acid in the TIR domain of TIRAP in 16 species.
E. HEK 293 T cells were transfected for 48 h with either TIRAP isoforms (A and B), in the 
WT form or with the R121W mutation. Western blot was performed on whole-cell extracts 
with a mouse monoclonal anti-TIRAP antibody and an anti-V5 tag antibody (n=3).
F. Reverse transcription-quantitative PCR was performed to determine the levels of the 
transcripts encoding TIRAP isoforms A and B in SV40 fibroblasts (from five controls, P1, 
P1's father and mother), PBMCs (from 9 controls, P1, and P1's aunt) and EBV-B cells (from 
5 controls and P1). SV40 fibroblasts stably transfected with the cDNA encoding either 
isoform A or B were used as controls to test probe specificity. TIRAP mRNA levels 
encoding isoform A or B are expressed relative to GAPDH mRNA levels (2ΔΔC(t) method). 
For each probe, the results were normalized relative to one of the controls, for which the 
value had been set to 1. Error bars show SD (n=2).
Israel et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 G. TIRAP protein levels in PBMCs from two controls, P1's father and P1, as determined by 
western blotting with an anti-TIRAP mouse mAb. Image J software was used for 
quantification (n=1). Error bars show SD
Israel et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. The R121W mutation impairs the cellular localization of TIRAP and interaction with 
its partners MyD88 and TLR2
A. HEK 293T cells were transfected with a construct encoding a V5-tagged WT or mutant 
isoform A of TIRAP for 36 h and then labeled with an Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-V5 
antibody. Analyses were carried out by ApoTome fluorescence microscopy. The images 
shown are representative of three independent experiments and correspond to >95% of the 
images obtained (30 images were acquired per experiment).
B. Cells were cotransfected with constructs encoding TIRAP WT-V5 and either myc-tagged 
WT TIRAP or myc-tagged R121W TIRAP in (B) or cotransfected with constructs encoding 
myc-tagged MyD88 and either V5-tagged WT TIRAP or R121W TIRAP in (C). V5-tagged 
proteins were labeled with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-V5 antibodies and myc-tagged 
proteins were labeled with Alexa Fluor 555-conjugated anti-myc antibodies. Colocalization 
analysis was performed with Image J software, by calculating Pearson's correlation 
coefficient (PCC). Three independent experiments were performed and 30 cells were 
analyzed in each experiment. Error bars show the SD.
D. HEK 293T cells were cotransfected with constructs encoding both the TIRAP A and B 
isoforms with a V5 tag, WT or mutated, and with a construct encoding HA-tagged TLR2 
(D) or and with a construct encoding M2-tagged MyD88 (E). HA or M2 
immunoprecipitations and V5 immunoblotting were then performed on total cell extracts 
(n=2).
F. Co-immunoprecipitation of TLR2 and MyD88 with or without PAM2 stimulation for 10 
and 30 min, in SV40 fibroblasts from a control (WT/WT), the P1's mother (R121W/WT), a 
MyD88-mutated patient (MyD88 L93P/R196C), and P1 and her father (both R121W/W) 
(n=2).
Israel et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. The TIRAP R121W allele is loss of function
A. IL-6 induction in SV40 fibroblasts from a healthy control, P1, her father, and MyD88-
deficient cells, upon transfection with WT or mutant TIRAP isoforms. IL-6 production was 
measured by ELISA in cells transfected with an empty vector, WT or mutant isoforms A and 
B, or in MyD88-deficient cells transfected with WT MyD88 (n=3). Error bars show SEM.
B. NF-κB luciferase assay in HEK 293T cells stably expressing a NF-κB-driven luciferase 
reporter plasmid upon transfection with WT or R121W TIRAP isoform A or B, (n=3). Error 
bars show SEM.
C. SV40 fibroblasts from healthy controls, P1, her father, an IRAK-4-deficient patient and 
NEMO-deficient fibroblasts were stimulated with TLR1/2 (PAM3), TLR2/6 (PAM2, purified 
LTA-SA, FSL-1), TLR3 (poly(I:C)) and TLR4 (LPS and lipid A) ligands, in addition to 
heat-killed S. aureus (HKSA) IL-1β (IL-1R) and TNF-α (TNF-αR). IL-6 production was 
assessed by ELISA in supernatants collected 24 h after stimulation and (n=3). Error bars 
show SEM.
D. Granulocyte L-selectin shedding assessed in several family members (III. 1, IV. 1-5 and 
V.1) after 1 h of stimulation with PAM2, PAM3, FSL-1, purified LTA, LPS and PMA as an 
activation control. Mean fluorescence intensity was determined by flow cytometry after the 
extracellular staining of CD62L. * p values < 0.05 (unpaired t-test) (n=1).
E. PBMCs from several family members (III. 1, IV. 1 to 5 and V.1) were stimulated with 
PAM2, FSL-1, LTA, PAM3 and LPS for 3 h, subjected to anti-CD3, anti-CD19 and anti-
CD14 extracellular staining and IL-6 intracellular staining. The proportion of CD14+ cells 
positive for IL-6 is shown. 10,000 CD14+ cells were acquired. Each data point represents the 
mean of all individuals ± SEM.
Israel et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. The lack of anti-LTA Abs in P1's plasma accounts for the defective whole-blood 
response to LTA
A. IL-6 production by PBMCs from controls, P1, her father (IV.2) and aunt (IV.5) upon 
stimulation with PAM3, PAM2 FSL-1, LTA and LPS for 48 h. (n=2)
B. IL-6 production by whole blood in II.3, III.1, IV.1 to 6 and V.1 after 48 h of stimulation 
with PAM3, PAM2, FSL-1, LTA, and LPS. The assay was performed several times and each 
point represents the mean for one individual. Whole blood from P1 was tested five times for 
FSL-1 stimulation, six for LTA, seven for PAM3and LTA and eight times for PAM2. Whole 
blood from other individuals was tested once (II.1), twice (III.1, IV.2, IV.3, IV.4, IV.5) or 
three times (IV.6) for each stimulus.
C. Tests for the presence of specific anti-LTA antibodies in plasma detected by ELISA are 
shown for a 1/100 dilution, tests were also performed at dilutions 1/20, 1/100, 1/500 (not 
shown).
D. Complementation of the defective IL-6 production in response to LTA stimulation in 
whole blood from the patient, by the addition of anti-LTA mAb (pagibaximab) (0.5 or 1 mg/
ml). Comparison with the isotype control (0.5 or 1 mg/ml; palivizumab, anti-RSV). (n=2) 
(p=0.001, unpaired t-test). Error bars show SEM.
E. Complementation of impaired IL-6 production in response to LTA stimulation in PBMCs 
from P1 by the addition of anti-LTA mAbs. IL-6 production by control or P1 PBMCs after 
48 h of stimulation with PAM3 or LTA in the presence of 10% FCS, 1 mg/ml exogenous 
isotype control mAbs or 1 mg/ml anti-LTA mAbs. Error bars show SEM (n=4).
F. Peritoneal macrophages from WT B6, Myd88-/-, Tiraptor/tor and TLR2lan/lan mice (n>3) 
were stimulated with PAM3 or LTA or left unstimulated and complemented with 0.5 mg/ml 
Israel et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 anti-LTA Abs (pagibaximab) or isotype control (anti-RSV, palivizumab). IL-6 production 
was assessed by ELISA. Error bars show SEM.
Israel et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
