 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Telemedicine in Prehospital Stroke Evaluation
and Thrombolysis
Taking Stroke Treatment to the Doorstep
Ahmed Itrat, MD; Ather Taqui, MD; Russell Cerejo, MD; Farren Briggs, PhD, ScM; Sung-Min Cho, MD;
Natalie Organek, MD; Andrew P. Reimer, PhD, RN; Stacey Winners, MSc; Peter Rasmussen, MD;
Muhammad S. Hussain, MD, FRCP; Ken Uchino, MD;
for the Cleveland Pre-Hospital Acute Stroke Treatment (PHAST) Group
IMPORTANCE Mobile stroke treatment units (MSTUs) with on-site treatment teams that
include a vascular neurologist can provide thrombolysis in the prehospital setting faster than
treatment in the hospital. These units can be made more resource efficient if the need for an
on-site neurologist can be eliminated by relying solely on telemedicine for physician
presence.
OBJECTIVE To test whether telemedicine is reliable and remote physician presence is
adequate for acute stroke treatment using an MSTU.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS Prospective observational study conducted between
July 18 and November 1, 2014. The dates of the study analysis were November 1, 2014, to
March 30, 2015. The setting was a community-based study assessing telemedicine success of
the MSTU in Cleveland, Ohio. Participants were the first 100 residents of Cleveland who had
an acute onset of stroke-like symptoms between 8 AM and 8 PM and were evaluated by the
MSTU after the implementation of the MSTU program at the Cleveland Clinic. A vascular
neurologist evaluated the first 100 patients via telemedicine, and a neuroradiologist remotely
assessed images obtained by mobile computed tomography (CT). Data were entered into the
medical record and a prospective registry.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES The study compared the evaluation and treatment of
patients on the MSTU with a control group of patients brought to the emergency department
via ambulance during the same year. Process times were measured from the time the patient
entered the door of the MSTU or emergency department, and any problems encountered
during his or her evaluation were recorded.
RESULTS Ninety-nine of 100 patients were evaluated successfully. The median duration of
telemedicine evaluation was 20 minutes (interquartile range [IQR], 14-27 minutes). One
connection failure was due to crew error, and the patient was transported to the nearest
emergency department. There were 6 telemedicine disconnections, none of which lasted
longer than 60 seconds or affected clinical care. Times from the door to CT completion (13
minutes [IQR, 9-21 minutes]) and from the door to intravenous thrombolysis (32 minutes
[IQR, 24-47 minutes]) were significantly shorter in the MSTU group compared with the
control group (18 minutes [IQR, 12-26 minutes] and 58 minutes [IQR, 53-68 minutes],
respectively). Times to CT interpretation did not differ significantly between the groups.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE An MSTU using telemedicine is feasible, with a low rate of
technical failure, and may provide an avenue for reducing the high cost of such systems.
JAMA Neurol. 2016;73(2):162-168. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.3849
Published online December 7, 2015.
Editorial page 153
Supplemental content at
jamaneurology.com
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com and
CME Questions page 248
Author Affiliations: Cerebrovascular
Center, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
Ohio (Itrat, Taqui, Cerejo, Winners,
Rasmussen, Hussain, Uchino);
Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, School of Medicine,
Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, Ohio (Briggs); Department
of Neurology, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio (Cho, Organek);
Critical Care Transport Team,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio
(Reimer); Frances Payne Bolton
School of Nursing, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
(Reimer).
Group Information: The Cleveland
Pre-Hospital Acute Stroke Treatment
(PHAST) Group members are listed at
the end of this article.
Corresponding Author: Ken Uchino,
MD, Cerebrovascular Center,
Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Ave,
S80, Cleveland, OH 44195 (uchinok
@ccf.org).
Research
Original Investigation
162
(Reprinted)
jamaneurology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
A
cutestrokethrombolytictreatmentistimesensitiveand
isusuallydeliveredwiththecoordinationofprehospital
careprovidersandneurologists,physicians,andnurses
intheemergencydepartment(ED).Basedondatafromapooled
analysis of major intravenous tissue plasminogen activator (IV-
tPA) trials, benefit is greater with early IV-tPA administration.1
Many patients are unable to obtain acute stroke treatment
because of delays in presentation to the hospital. Studies2-4 ex-
ploringprehospitaldelaysinstrokecarehaverevealedthatonly
15%to60%ofpatientshavingastrokeareabletoreachthehos-
pital within 3 hours of symptom onset and demonstrated that
thisproportionhasnotdecreasedoverthelast10years.Recently,
mobilestrokeunitshavebeenshowntoreducethetimetoevalu-
ation and thrombolysis in Germany.5,6 These systems use an
ambulanceequippedwithacomputedtomography(CT)system
and laboratory testing that brings personnel, including a
neurologist, to the scene. Unlike other mobile stroke treatment
units (MSTUs), the Cleveland Clinic MSTU solely uses tele-
medicine for physician presence. Telemedicine allows the
remote presence of medical expertise and has wide clinical ap-
plications,includingtheevaluationofpatientswithacutestroke,
whichhasproventobehighlyreliablecomparedwithin-person
assessment.7-13Twocost-effectivenessanalysesofmobilestroke
unit systems have suggested favorable economics, especially if
the need for on-site expertise can be eliminated by relying on
telemedicine.14,15 We report our initial experience with and the
feasibility of an MSTU in Cleveland, Ohio, including the use of
telemedicine as a substitute for physician presence, and com-
pare the time efficiency of stroke evaluation in EDs.
Methods
Mobile Stroke Treatment Unit
The Cleveland Clinic MSTU was planned and executed as a
ClevelandClinicinitiativeinpartnershipwiththeCityofCleve-
land, the Cleveland Emergency Medical Service (EMS), and
other participating hospitals within Cleveland. The MSTU is
equippedwithamobileCTsystem(CereTom;NeuroLogicaCor-
poration).Theonboardstaffconsistsofaregisterednurse,para-
medic, emergency medical technician, and CT technologist
(eTable1intheSupplement).Avascularneurologist(VN)evalu-
ates the patient via telemedicine, and a neuroradiologist re-
motely assesses images obtained by CT (Figure 1). Tele-
medicine and CT images are transferred via a network
(long-term evolution; Verizon Wireless). The portable point-
of-care laboratory equipment is able to measure the follow-
ing: international normalized ratio (CoaguChek XS Pro; Roche
Diagnostics), blood glucose and electrolyte levels (i-STAT Sys-
tem; Abbott Laboratories), and hemoglobin level and platelet
and leukocyte counts (pocH 100i Hematology Analyzer; Sys-
mex Corporation). The MSTU also carries alteplase, antihy-
pertensive agents, and other medications required for acute
stroke and emergency care (eTable 2 in the Supplement lists
all medications available).
Patients and Procedures
The Cleveland Clinic MSTU became operational on July 18,
2014. In its initial phase, the MSTU was active 12 hours daily
7 days a week from 8 AM to 8 PM and responded within the
City of Cleveland (Figure 2). An orientation and descriptive
handbook was provided to all individuals considered to be
potentially involved with patient care on the MSTU, includ-
ing all VNs, vascular neurology fellow trainees, emergency
medical technician personnel, technicians, emergency phy-
sicians, and nursing staff at the Cleveland Clinic. Two weeks
of mock MSTU scenarios between July 1 and July 17, 2014,
were conducted before the start date, including simulations
of stroke alerts that tested physician preparedness, equip-
ment reliability, and telecommunication. In addition, we
continued to conduct mock stroke alerts for quality improve-
ment purposes.
Figure 1. Mobile Stroke Treatment Unit
A
B
C
D
A, External view. B, Internal view with
a computed tomography imaging
system. C, Telemedicine unit at
center, with laboratory testing
equipment on the counter at the
right. D, Team in action.
Telemedicine in Prehospital Stroke Evaluation and Thrombolysis
Original Investigation Research
jamaneurology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Neurology
February 2016
Volume 73, Number 2
163
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
The City of Cleveland spans 77.7 square miles, with an es-
timated population of 390 113 and a median household in-
come of $26 556 annually.16 The parking base of the MSTU dur-
ingtheinitialphasewasatthemaincampusofClevelandClinic
hospital, which is located approximately 4 miles east of down-
townCleveland(Figure2).Foranyambulancedispatchforpos-
sible stroke within the city, the EMS dispatcher activates both
the standard city ambulance and the MSTU. The city EMS team
establishes scene safety and performs initial patient evalua-
tion, including administration of the Cincinnati Prehospital
Stroke Scale.17 If stroke is still suspected, the city EMS trans-
fers care to the MSTU team. The MSTU team obtains a brief
history and assesses any instability before transferring the
patient to the MSTU. For patients who are deemed not to
have stroke by the city EMS team, the MSTU activation is
canceled. For any simultaneous stroke calls the MSTU
receives, it acts on a first-come, first-served basis and only
responds to the second call after the first mission is com-
plete. Otherwise, the city EMS team proceeds without
MSTU involvement.
Once the patient is inside the ambulance, the MSTU team
monitors vital signs and performs a secondary head-to-toe
assessment.Duringinitialassessment,theCTtechnologistreg-
isters the patient into the hospital electronic medical record.
Thiselectronicmedicalrecordisavailableforviewingfromany
of the hospitals within the Cleveland Clinic system. A physi-
cian is notified to order the CT and laboratory tests via the elec-
tronic medical record system and is able to prepare for the tele-
medicineencounter,includingpriormedicalrecordreview.On
completion of the assessment, head CT is obtained. Once the
CT is complete and the data transfer begins, the team obtains
intravenous access to collect necessary blood samples to run
the point-of-care testing and to secure appropriate access for
the potential administration of intravenous medications and
contrast. Once the blood samples are collected, the point-of-
care tests are conducted by a team member. The patient is re-
positioned to optimize the telemedicine view while another
team member guides the patient through the National Insti-
tutes of Health Stroke Scale, which is led by the VN via tele-
medicine. Treatment, including intravenous thrombolysis, is
started on-site, when indicated, and is continued during trans-
port to the receiving hospital.
The decision to transport to a particular hospital is made
basedonpatientpreference,proximity,hospitalresources,and
stroke type and severity. Any patient with severe stroke re-
quiring potential endovascular treatment is triaged to a com-
prehensive stroke center. For patients with minor deficits or
those receiving only IV-tPA, the closest Joint Commission
stroke-certified hospital is chosen unless the patient prefers
an alternate location. While the MSTU is in transit to the hos-
pital,theVNconductsaphysician-to-physicianreportwiththe
accepting physician at the destination ED. A receiving neu-
rologist is also directly contacted if IV-tPA was administered.
The MSTU nurse calls the receiving facility with a brief report
and estimated time of arrival. On arrival, the MSTU team trans-
fers care of the patient to the receiving staff, gives a verbal re-
port and a copy of the CT images on a compact disc, and pro-
vides an abbreviated report sheet that includes patient
demographics, vital signs, and administered medications. If
the patient is transported to the main Cleveland Clinic hospi-
tal, the VN notifies the stroke team to receive the patient and
obtains a hospital bed in the neurological intensive care unit
for the patient, bypassing the ED.
Telemedicine
The telemedicine network and portable equipment used in
our MSTU is based on the same technology as existing
hospital-based telemedicine systems, with a remote
control, high-resolution medical-grade digital camera
(RP-Xpress; InTouch Health). This camera is mounted on
Figure 2. Cleveland Map and Mobile Stroke Treatment Unit (MSTU) Transfers
Primary stroke
center or stroke
certified hospital
Comprehensive
stroke center
MSTU base
The dark outline shows the City of
Cleveland proper. Dots indicate
hospitals capable of triaging patients
with stroke.
Research Original Investigation
Telemedicine in Prehospital Stroke Evaluation and Thrombolysis
164
JAMA Neurology
February 2016
Volume 73, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jamaneurology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
the inner aspect of the entry gate of the ambulance to maxi-
mize the field of vision (Figure 1).
Data Collection
Datawereprospectivelycollected,includingdemographics,time
of the stroke call (alarm time), time of arrival to the scene, time
ofpatiententryintotheMSTU(doortime),videolog-inandlog-
out times, time of CT and laboratory testing, time of arrival to
the hospital, and time of IV-tPA treatment, where applicable.
Probableacuteischemicstrokewasrecordediftherewasamod-
erate to strong suspicion of an ischemic stroke during the pa-
tient evaluation based on clinical or radiological features. Pos-
sibleacuteischemicstrokewasdiagnosedifsuspicionofstroke
was less and no clear stroke mimic was identified. Study data
werecollectedandmanagedusingresearchelectronicdatacap-
ture(REDCap),asecure,web-basedapplicationdesignedtosup-
port data capture for research studies.18
The comparison group consisted of patients seen at EDs
in the Cleveland Clinic health system directly by the City of
Cleveland EMS between 8 AM and 8 PM from January 1 to De-
cember 31, 2014, for whom a stroke alert was activated within
30 minutes of arrival to the ED. To ensure that we had a com-
parable group, 30 minutes was chosen to exclude patients who
did not initially have stroke symptoms or patients who were
not transported by EMS.
Ethics
The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at
the Cleveland Clinic. No informed consent was obtained for
thisobservationalstudy,andresearchdatawereobtainedfrom
clinical care and quality assurance records. The dates of the
study analysis were November 1, 2014, to March 30, 2015.
Statistical Analysis
The aims of the analyses were to assess the operation of the
MSTU, including successful team evaluation and telemedi-
cine connection, and to compare the time efficiency of the
MSTU evaluation compared with the control ED evaluation.
Times were expressed as medians, and interquartile ranges
(IQRs) were calculated. A nonparametric Wilcoxon rank sum
test was used to compared the median times from the door to
video log-in, CT completion, laboratory test results, and IV-
tPA administration. Data analyses were performed using sta-
tistical software (JMP, version 10.0; SAS Institute Inc).
Results
Demographics and Initial Diagnosis
DuringourinitialphasebetweenJuly18andNovember1,2014,
theMSTUwasdeployed317times,ofwhich217dispatcheswere
canceled before on-site arrival. The remaining 100 patients
(31.5%) underwent urgent evaluation in the MSTU (Figure 3).
A demographic profile of these patients is summarized in
Table 1. An initial diagnosis of probable acute ischemic stroke
was made in 33 patients (33.0%). Twenty-six of these pa-
tients (78.8%) were transferred to 1 of 3 comprehensive stroke
centers. The remaining 7 patients (21.2%) received care at a
Joint Commission stroke-certified hospital.
Successful Evaluation and Treatment
Atelemedicineencounterwassuccessfullycompletedin99pa-
tients (99.0%). There was one instance when the power sup-
ply to the telemedicine station on the MSTU was not switched
onandvideocouldnotbeinitiated,whichwasattributedtocrew
error. However, the MSTU transported the patient with preno-
tification to the nearest ED where the remainder of the stroke
evaluationwasperformed.Ninety-threeevaluationswerecon-
ductedwithoutanytransmissiondisruptions(Table2).Theme-
dian door to video log-in time was 11 minutes (IQR, 7-17 min-
utes), and the median video log-in duration was 20 minutes
(IQR, 14-27 minutes) (Table 1). There were 6 instances of video
disconnection,ofwhich5werebecauseofanareaofpoorwire-
less reception. One disconnection was due to the use of a tab-
let computer by the VN to log into the telemedicine system,
which was not compatible with the devices on the MSTU. No
video disconnections lasted longer than 60 seconds, and they
did not affect clinical care, as judged by the VN.
Ninety-ninepatients(99.0%)underwentnoncontrasthead
CT in the MSTU (Table 2). One patient could not undergo CT
Figure 3. Flowchart Showing Triage and Initial Diagnoses on the Mobile Stroke Treatment Unit
for the First 100 Evaluations
33 Probable acute
ischemic stroke
16 IV-tPA
30 Possible acute
ischemic stroke
4 Transient ischemic
attack
217 Cancellations
5 Intracranial
hemorrhage
28 Not
cerebrovascular
317 Alerts
100 Evaluations
IV-tPA indicates intravenous tissue
plasminogen activator.
Telemedicine in Prehospital Stroke Evaluation and Thrombolysis
Original Investigation Research
jamaneurology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Neurology
February 2016
Volume 73, Number 2
165
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
because of hemodynamic instability requiring advanced car-
diac life support. There were 5 instances of CT delays, includ-
ing patient agitation (n = 3) and network delays in image trans-
fer(n = 2).Sixteenpatients(16.0%)receivedIV-tPAintheMSTU
(Table 1). One additional patient who underwent CT was a can-
didate for IV-tPA on the MSTU but could not be evaluated be-
cause of video failure. This patient was brought to the near-
estEDandwasadministeredIV-tPAconventionallyafterreview
of the portable CT images.
Process Time on the MSTU
One hundred patients on the MSTU and 56 comparison pa-
tients evaluated in the EDs were similar in age and stroke se-
verity (Table 1). On the MSTU, the median door to CT comple-
tion time was 13 minutes (IQR, 9-21 minutes), the median door
to CT read time was 25 minutes (IQR, 20-29 minutes), the me-
dian door to international normalized ratio result time was 13
minutes (IQR, 7-18 minutes), and the median door to intrave-
nous thrombolysis time was 32 minutes (IQR, 24-47 min-
utes). The median door to CT completion time, door to inter-
national normalized ratio result time, and time to IV-tPA
administration were shorter in the MSTU group. For the 16 pa-
tients who received intravenous thrombolysis, the time to
thrombolysis was reduced by 26 minutes compared with ED
controls (32 vs 58 minutes, P < .001). The median times from
the door to CT read were similar in both groups at 25 minutes
(P = .59). Table 1 also lists various transport times associated
with MSTU activation and dispatch.
Discussion
We present our initial field experience using a dedicated pre-
hospital stroke ambulance and treatment delivery system
equipped with telemedicine. The usefulness of mobile stroke
unit care in shortening the time to thrombolysis has been
demonstrated recently in Europe; however, these studies5,6,19
were designed with the need for an on-site neurologist. We
demonstrate successful incorporation of telemedicine into
the MSTU in Cleveland, rendering the presence of a physician
on the mobile unit unnecessary. During the first 3½ months
of service, the MSTU managed and transported 100 patients
who had initial symptoms suspicious of stroke based on the
emergency call intake. The MSTU was able to approach all
neighborhoods of Cleveland, and patient race/ethnicity char-
acteristics matched closely with the city statistics.16 Most
assessments by the city EMS before transferring the patient
into the MSTU were short. Using telecommunication, we
were able to ensure safe and timely transfer of patients based
on their geographic location.
The use of telemedicine in stroke care is not new,8 and its
usefulness in prehospital stroke evaluation and triage has
been explored in several feasibility studies,20-23 more so
since the concept of mobile stroke units was introduced in
2003 by Fassbender et al.20 However, most of these investi-
gations were conceptual studies and used simulated sce-
narios. A pilot study24 assessing telemedicine feasibility in a
prehospital setting in Aachen, Germany, showed that such a
system is feasible but faced connectivity telemedicine issues
and delayed door to imaging times. Improvement of wireless
network communication over the last few years has allowed
transmission of high-quality video data over cellular net-
works. In our initial phase, telemedicine in the MSTU was
highly successful. The VN was available via video at the time
of the patient’
s entry into the MSTU but per our protocol
waited for the CT to be completed before logging in by video.
This wait was reflected in the median door to video log-in
time of 11 minutes. This time was also spent constructively by
Table 1. Patient Characteristics and Evaluation Process Times
Variable
MSTU
(n = 100)
Controls
(n = 56)
P Value
Age, median (IQR), y
62 (53-76)
64 (57-79)
.22
Female sex, No. (%)
54 (54.0)
32 (57.1)
.70
Race/ethnicity, No. (%)
African American
63 (63.0)
38 (67.9)
.12
Non-Hispanic white
29 (29.0)
9 (16.1)
Other
8 (8.0)
7 (12.5)
Initial National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score, median (IQR)a
6.0 (2-12)
6.5 (2-13)
.70
IV-tPA, No. (%)
16 (16.0)
13 (23.2)
.30
Process time, median (IQR), min
MSTU activation to scene arrival
12 (8-14)
NA
NA
On-scene time until entry into the MSTUb
8 (5-11)
NA
NA
Door to CT completion
13 (9-21)
18 (12-26)
.003
Door to CT read
25 (20-29)
25 (19-35)
.59
Door to international normalized ratio result
13 (7-18)
44 (36-61)
<.001
Door to IV-tPA
32 (24-47)
58 (53-68)
<.001
Door to video log-in
11 (7-17)
NA
NA
Video duration
20 (14-27)
NA
NA
Total MSTU use from activation until arrival at destination hospital
per episode
86 (78-93)
NA
NA
Abbreviations: CT, computed
tomography; IQR, interquartile range;
IV-tPA, intravenous tissue
plasminogen activator; MSTU, mobile
stroke treatment unit;
NA, not applicable.
a Measured in the MSTU via
telemedicine.
bDefined as the time spent by the
crew at the site before transfer into
the MSTU.
Research Original Investigation
Telemedicine in Prehospital Stroke Evaluation and Thrombolysis
166
JAMA Neurology
February 2016
Volume 73, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jamaneurology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
the physician using the medical record to check for any perti-
nent history if available. Only 6.0% (6 of 100) of our tele-
medicine evaluations encountered technical difficulties
(Table 2), most due to pockets of poor network reception.
This result was compared with a feasibility study by Wu
et al13 using a fourth-generation (4G)/long-term evolution
network, which encountered an 85% success rate in 40 simu-
lated scenarios in Houston, Texas, as well as a 98% success
rate by Van Hooff et al,7 who used a 3G network in Brussels,
Belgium. In the latter study, the screen resolution had to be
reduced to ensure undisrupted video streaming.7,13 In our
evaluation, when faced with a technical disruption, the
encounter was instantly switched to a regular telephone call
until the physician was reconnected by video. In 2 of the net-
work failures, the connection was restored after the ambu-
lance moved 3 m in the direction of a stronger signal. None of
our delays lasted longer than 1 minute, and there was no
effect on patient care. Even in cases of technical delay or dif-
ficulty, factors responsible were identified and corrected
immediately if possible. In the single instance when a tele-
medicine connection could not be established, having the
specialized crew with significant stroke experience on board
aided in rapid treatment on arrival at the receiving hospital.
Based on the crew’
s evaluation and review of the portable
CT, a quick confirmatory examination was performed, and
IV-tPA was administered rapidly.
We were able to complete CT in almost all patients, ex-
cept for one instance when the patient required advanced car-
diac life support. The onboard CT system had no technical dif-
ficulties or power breakdowns. Some delays in obtaining CT
were related to patient characteristics such as excessive agi-
tationormedicaloptimization.Exceptfor2instances,CTtrans-
mission to a radiologist was rapid, and the CT was read within
a median of 12 minutes from completion, resulting in the same
time to CT reading as in the ED. The CT was also available to
view rapidly at the VN workstation, and a preliminary deci-
sion on IV-tPA administration could be made.
To demonstrate feasibility, we hypothesized that the pro-
cesstimesfromwhenthepatiententeredthedooroftheMSTU
should be similar or shorter compared with ED controls. The
MSTU process times met the in-hospital time targets to CT and
thrombolysis.25Ourdatademonstratedthattheevaluationand
treatment were not only comparable to ED times but also
shorter in terms of CT, laboratory processing, and thrombo-
lytic administration. Intravenous thrombolysis was success-
fully administered to 48.5% (16 of 33) of patients with sus-
pected stroke and was delivered quickly in the MSTU. The
shortest time from the door to IV-tPA administration was 11
minutes, which highlights the potential application of MS-
TUs in delivering early thrombolysis to patients with stroke
thereby reducing disability.
While studies14,15 have modeled mobile stroke units to be
cost-effective from the societal perspective, our investiga-
tion implies further reduction in operational costs of MSTUs.
Obviating the need for an on-site neurologist and neuroradi-
ologist would allow multiple mobile units to be operated un-
der a single physician or units to be operated that are geo-
graphically distant from the physician. However, our results
should be interpreted in light of some limitations. The small
sample size of this study does not demonstrate proof of safety.
Also, the absence of data on 217 canceled dispatches may in-
troduceascertainmentbias.Only33.0%(33of100)oftheevalu-
ationswereinitiallydeemedtorepresentacuteischemicstroke,
but the MSTU protocol was created with high sensitivity for
evaluation on the MSTU rather than high specificity for
stroke. Further studies should investigate the characteris-
tics of patients who are missed by the screening process and
demonstrate whether screening methods can be optimized.
A larger study in Berlin, Germany, similarly reported that
30.3% (614 of 2027) of deployments were for patients with
ischemic stroke.6 Our control group comprised only one
hospital system with 9 hospitals because we did not have
access to patient data from other hospitals in Cleveland.
However, using rigorous inclusion criteria and restricting
our analysis to only the City of Cleveland EMS, we believe
that this control group represents the typical stroke popula-
tion of Cleveland.
Conclusions
Itisfeasibletoperformprehospitalstrokeevaluationandtreat-
ment using a telemedicine-enabled MSTU. The system would
allow a physician to cover multiple MSTUs and broaden the
geographic coverage, rendering the concept more efficient and
cost-effective.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: October 13, 2015.
Published Online: December 7, 2015.
doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.3849.
Author Contributions: Dr Uchino had full access to
all the data in the study and takes responsibility for
the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis.
Study concept and design: Hussain, Uchino.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Itrat,
Taqui, Cerejo, Cho, Organek, Winners.
Drafting of the manuscript: Itrat, Cerejo, Reimer,
Hussain, Uchino.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Reimer, Hussain, Uchino.
Statistical analysis: Itrat, Taqui, Briggs, Uchino.
Table 2. Prehospital Telemedicine and Computed
Tomography (CT) Feasibility
Variable
Value
(n = 100)
Telemedicine encounter without disruption, No. (%)
93 (93.0)
Telemedicine disruption, No.
7
Network issue
5
Crew error
1
Other technical issue
1
CT completion, No. (%)
99 (99.0)
CT delay, No.
5
Patient agitation
3
Network delay
2
Telemedicine in Prehospital Stroke Evaluation and Thrombolysis
Original Investigation Research
jamaneurology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Neurology
February 2016
Volume 73, Number 2
167
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Obtained funding: Rasmussen.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Briggs, Reimer, Winners.
Study supervision: Hussain, Uchino.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Funding/Support: The Cleveland Clinic mobile
stroke treatment unit was jointly funded by The
Milton and Tamar Maltz Family Foundation and the
Cleveland Clinic.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding sources
had no role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, or interpretation
of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the
manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript
for publication.
Group Information: The Cleveland Pre-Hospital
Acute Stroke Treatment (PHAST) Group members
were the following: Stroke Neurology: Megan
Donohue, MD, Muhammad Shazam Hussain, MD,
Irene L. Katzan, MD, MS, Zeshaun Khawaja, MD, Mei
Lu, MD, PhD, Andrew Russman, DO, Gabor Toth,
MD, Ken Uchino, MD, Dolora Wisco, MD. Stroke
Fellows: Russell Cerejo, MD, Ahmed Itrat, MD, Seby
John, MD, Ather Taqui, MD, Ramnath Santosh
Ramanathan, MD, Daniel Vela Duarte, MD, Atif
Zafar, MD. Neurology Residents: Andrew Blake
Buletko, MD, Natalie Organek, DO, Sung Cho, DO,
Lelia Sheikhi, MD. Neurocritical Care: Jennifer A.
Frontera, MD, Edward M. Manno, MD, Christine
Ahrens, PharmD. Mobile Stroke Treatment Unit:
Peter A. Rasmussen, MD, Stacey Winners.
Radiology: Paul Ruggieri, MD, Sarah Stock, MD.
Cleveland Clinic Critical Care Transport: Fredric
Hustey, MD, Andrew P. Reimer, PhD, RN. Cleveland
Clinic Stroke Program: Margaret Stecker, RN,
Maureen Buttrick, RN, Wendy Smith, RN, Amy
Richmond. Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve University:
Farren Briggs, PhD. City of Cleveland: Edward J.
Eckart, former Commissioner of Emergency
Medical Services, Nicole Carlton, Acting
Commissioner of Emergency Medical Services. The
MetroHealth System, Cleveland: Jon Schrock, MD.
Additional Contributions: We thank the team
member shown in Figure 1 for granting permission
to publish this information.
REFERENCES
1. Emberson J, Lees KR, Lyden P, et al; Stroke
Thrombolysis Trialists’Collaborative Group. Effect
of treatment delay, age, and stroke severity on the
effects of intravenous thrombolysis with alteplase
for acute ischaemic stroke: a meta-analysis of
individual patient data from randomised trials. Lancet.
2014;384(9958):1929-1935.
2. Reeves MJ, Arora S, Broderick JP, et al; Paul
Coverdell Prototype Registries Writing Group.
Acute stroke care in the US: results from 4 pilot
prototypes of the Paul Coverdell National Acute
Stroke Registry. Stroke. 2005;36(6):1232-1240.
3. Tong D, Reeves MJ, Hernandez AF, et al. Times
from symptom onset to hospital arrival in the Get
with the Guidelines–Stroke Program 2002 to 2009:
temporal trends and implications. Stroke. 2012;43
(7):1912-1917.
4. Fassbender K, Balucani C, Walter S, Levine SR,
Haass A, Grotta J. Streamlining of prehospital
stroke management: the golden hour. Lancet Neurol.
2013;12(6):585-596.
5. Kostopoulos P, Walter S, Haass A, et al. Mobile
stroke unit for diagnosis-based triage of persons
with suspected stroke. Neurology. 2012;78(23):
1849-1852.
6. Ebinger M, Winter B, Wendt M, et al; STEMO
Consortium. Effect of the use of ambulance-based
thrombolysis on time to thrombolysis in acute
ischemic stroke: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA.
2014;311(16):1622-1631.
7. Van Hooff RJ, De Smedt A, De Raedt S, et al.
Unassisted assessment of stroke severity using
telemedicine. Stroke. 2013;44(5):1249-1255.
8. Levine SR, Gorman M. “Telestroke”: the
application of telemedicine for stroke. Stroke. 1999;
30(2):464-469.
9. Amarenco P, Nadjar M. Telemedicine for
improving emergent management of acute
cerebrovascular syndromes. Int J Stroke. 2007;2(1):
47-50.
10. Meyer BC, Raman R, Hemmen T, et al. Efficacy
of site-independent telemedicine in the STRokE
DOC trial: a randomised, blinded, prospective
study. Lancet Neurol. 2008;7(9):787-795.
11. Demaerschalk BM, Bobrow BJ, Raman R, et al;
Stroke Team Remote Evaluation Using a Digital
Observation Camera (STRokE DOC) in Arizona—The
Initial Mayo Clinic Experience (AZ TIME)
Investigators. CT interpretation in a telestroke
network: agreement among a spoke radiologist,
hub vascular neurologist, and hub neuroradiologist.
Stroke. 2012;43(11):3095-3097.
12. Müller-Barna P, Hubert GJ, Boy S, et al.
TeleStroke units serving as a model of care in rural
areas: 10-year experience of the TeleMedical
Project for Integrative Stroke Care. Stroke. 2014;45
(9):2739-2744.
13. Wu TC, Nguyen C, Ankrom C, et al. Prehospital
utility of rapid stroke evaluation using in-ambulance
telemedicine: a pilot feasibility study. Stroke. 2014;
45(8):2342-2347.
14. Gyrd-Hansen D, Olsen KR, Bollweg K, Kronborg
C, Ebinger M, Audebert HJ. Cost-effectiveness
estimate of prehospital thrombolysis: results of the
PHANTOM-S Study. Neurology. 2015;84(11):1090-
1097.
15. Dietrich M, Walter S, Ragoschke-Schumm A,
et al. Is prehospital treatment of acute stroke too
expensive? an economic evaluation based on the
first trial. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2014;38(6):457-463.
16. United States Census Bureau. State & County
QuickFacts. Data derived from Population Estimates,
American Community Survey, Census of Population
and Housing, County Business Patterns, Economic
Census, Survey of Business Owners, Building Permits,
Census of Governments. http://quickfacts.census.gov
/qfd/states/00000.html. Revised September 30,
2015. Accessed October 27, 2015.
17. Kothari RU, Pancioli A, Liu T, Brott T, Broderick J.
Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale: reproducibility
and validity. Ann Emerg Med. 1999;33(4):373-378.
18. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez
N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture
(REDCap): a metadata-driven methodology and
workflow process for providing translational
research informatics support. J Biomed Inform.
2009;42(2):377-381.
19. Walter S, Kostopoulos P, Haass A, et al.
Diagnosis and treatment of patients with stroke in a
mobile stroke unit versus in hospital: a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11(5):397-404.
20. Fassbender K, Walter S, Liu Y, et al. “Mobile
stroke unit”for hyperacute stroke treatment. Stroke.
2003;34(6):e44. doi:10.1161/01.STR.0000075573
.22885.3B.
21. LaMonte MP, Cullen J, Gagliano DM, et al; Brain
Attack Team. TeleBAT: mobile telemedicine for the
Brain Attack Team. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2000;
9(3):128-135.
22. LaMonte MP, Xiao Y, Hu PF, et al. Shortening
time to stroke treatment using ambulance
telemedicine: TeleBAT. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis.
2004;13(4):148-154.
23. Liman TG, Winter B, Waldschmidt C, et al.
Telestroke ambulances in prehospital stroke
management: concept and pilot feasibility study.
Stroke. 2012;43(8):2086-2090.
24. Bergrath S, Reich A, Rossaint R, et al. Feasibility
of prehospital teleconsultation in acute stroke:
a pilot study in clinical routine. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):
e36796. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0036796.
25. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke. Recommendations: Acute Hospital Care
Panel. In: Proceedings of a National Symposium on
Rapid Identification and Treatment of Acute Stroke;
December 12-13, 1996; Location unknown.
Research Original Investigation
Telemedicine in Prehospital Stroke Evaluation and Thrombolysis
168
JAMA Neurology
February 2016
Volume 73, Number 2
(Reprinted)
jamaneurology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
