 Copyright 2015 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Association of Patient Self-esteem With Perceived Outcome
After Face-lift Surgery
Andrew Jacono, MD; Ryan P. Chastant, MD; Greg Dibelius, MD
IMPORTANCE It is well understood that optimal psychological health is imperative to success
in aesthetic surgical procedures. Self-esteem is a very sensitive psychological factor that can
influence patients’ motivations for seeking surgery as well as their perceptions of outcomes.
OBJECTIVE To use the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSES) to correlate the outcome of
rhytidectomy as perceived by the patient to further understand the association of
self-esteem and the results of aesthetic facial rejuvenation.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS A prospective study was conducted of 59 consecutive
patients undergoing rhytidectomy perfomed by a single surgeon at a private practice from
July 1 to October 31, 2013. The RSES was used to establish preoperative baseline scores and
scores at a 6-month postoperative follow-up. A paired t test was used to compare statistical
data before and after surgery. Change in self-esteem and the patient’s evaluation of the
surgical outcome was assessed. Analysis was conducted from July 1 to December 1, 2014.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Patients’ change in self-esteem level after rhytidectomy, as
assessed by the RSES.
RESULTS Of the 59 patients, 50 completed a 6-month postoperative questionnaire; mean
age was 58 years (range, 37-73 years); 48 were women; and 44 were nonsmokers. The mean
difference between baseline and 6-month scores showed an increase of 0.3 (baseline, 24.3;
6-month follow-up, 24.6), which was not statistically significant (P = .69). Subdivision of
patients into groups by self-esteem level showed a statistically significant improvement in
self-esteem after surgery in the group with low self-esteem, with a mean difference in the
RSES score of 3.7 (P = .01), whereas the group with high self-esteem showed a decrease in the
RSES score of –3.1 (P = .03) and the group with average self-esteem showed a nonsignificant
increase of 0.5 in the RSES score (P = .59). The perceived change in youthful appearance
(mean, 8.9 years) did not correlate with self-esteem changes.
CONCLUSIONS AND REVELANCE Patient’s self-esteem before surgery may partially determine
the quality-of-life outcome after surgery. Patients with low preoperative self-esteem saw an
increase in self-esteem after surgery, those with average preoperative self-esteem
experienced no change, and those with high preoperative self-esteem experienced a
decrease in self-esteem after surgery. In our study, self-esteem measurements did not
correlate directly with the positive effect of the surgical outcome, as patients showed no
mean change in self-esteem, but patients thought that they appeared a mean of 8.9 years
younger after their face-lift surgery. These findings underscore the complex nature of the
human psyche as it relates to aesthetic surgery and demonstrates that patients exhibit a wide
spectrum of psychological reactions after face-lift surgery.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE 2.
JAMA Facial Plast Surg. doi:10.1001/jamafacial.2015.1460
Published online October 29, 2015.
Author Affiliations: New York Center
for Facial Plastic and Laser Surgery,
New York (Jacono); Acadian Facial
Plastic Surgery, Lafayette, Louisiana
(Chastant); Department of
Otolarygnology/Head and Neck
Surgery, New York Eye Ear Infirmary,
New York (Dibelius).
Corresponding Author: Andrew
Jacono, MD, New York Center for
Facial Plastic and Laser Surgery,
990 Fifth Ave, New York, NY 10075.
Research
Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
E1
Copyright 2015 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archfaci.jamanetwork.com/ by a AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY User  on 10/31/2015
 Copyright 2015 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
F
ace-lift surgery has the ability to restore the appearance
ofyouthtotheagingface.Resultshavetraditionallybeen
evaluated and reported from the physician’
s perspective
byreviewingphotographicevidenceofthereliabilityanddura-
bility of specific anatomical changes, or evaluating safety out-
comes such as the rates of specific complications. What may be
more difficult to evaluate is the effect of a surgical intervention
on the emotional well-being of the patient. As with all cosmetic
surgery,psychosocialfactorsweighheavilyinboththedecision
toundergosurgeryaswellasdefiningtheoutcomefromthepa-
tient’
s perspective. With the number of face-lift procedures
steadilyincreasingbynearly30%since1997,1itbecomesincreas-
ingly imperative to understand the psychosocial effects of this
popularprocedure.Thispatientperspectivemustbeincorporated
with that of the surgeon to better understand progress and suc-
cess in the field of aesthetic plastic surgery.
Reporting the outcomes of highly subjective psychosocial
parameters inherently leads to difficulty making generalizable
conclusions.Severalstudieshaveinvestigatedtheresultsofvari-
oustreatmentsfortheagingface,includingface-liftsurgery,with
aprimaryfocusonpatientsatisfaction.2,3Whilethesereportsof-
ferimportantinsightintothenatureoftheseinterventions,itbe-
comes difficult to extrapolate generalizable meaning from the
data reported given the diversity of survey instruments, study
protocols,patientpopulations,andsurgicaltechniques,among
amultitudeofotherfactors.Asaresult,thedevelopmentanduse
of validated instruments has become an essential focus of out-
comesresearch.Recently,theFACE-Qinstrument(FACE-Q.org)
has been validated for specific use in assessing the outcome of
facialcosmeticprocedures.4Itrepresentsacomprehensiveout-
comesbatteryofmorethan40scalesencompassingthedomains
of facial appearance, adverse effects, process of care, and qual-
ity of life.
Although closely related, patient satisfaction and self-
esteem are not equivalent terms. Self-esteem represents a spe-
cific psychometric concept defined as the individual’
s con-
cept of self-worth. The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSES) is
an established validated psychometric battery that has been
in widespread clinical use since its publication in 1965.5 It has
been used to evaluate diverse patient populations across mul-
tipledisciplines,includingcosmeticfacialplasticsurgery.With
respect to the aging face, it has been used to report improve-
ments in self-esteem after both surgery and injectable
treatments.6-8 Its primary advantages in reporting outcomes
include its established validity and simplicity of use.
We aim to contribute to the existing knowledge regarding
the psychosocial effects of aesthetic facial surgery by conduct-
ingaprospectiveevaluationofchangesinself-esteemusingthe
RSES in patients undergoing face-lift surgery. This evaluation
willbecorrelatedwiththeoutcomeoftheface-liftsurgeryasper-
ceived by the patient to further understand the association of
self-esteem and the result of aesthetic facial surgery.
Methods
Fifty-nine consecutive patients undergoing rhytidectomy in a
private practice (A.J.) were enrolled in the study from July 1 to
October31,2013.AnalysiswasconductedfromJuly1toDecem-
ber 1, 2014. The study was conducted in accordance with the
DeclarationofHelsinki.9Patientconsentwasnotrequiredasall
patient information was deidentified. All patients underwent
minimalaccessdeep-planeextendedrhytidectomy,atechnique
that has been previously described.10 Data from the RSES were
prospectivelycollectedonpatientsundergoingface-liftsurgery
performed by a single surgeon at 2 time points: a preoperative
baseline and a 6-month postoperative follow-up. The RSES is a
10-item survey that evaluates self-esteem (Box). Each item is
ratedeitherstronglyagree,agree,disagree,orstronglydisagree.
Responses are scored from 0 to 3 per item, for a total maximum
scoreof30.Negativelywordeditems(numbers3,5,8,9,and10)
are scored in reverse fashion, such that a higher score indicates
increased self-esteem.
Additional data collected included other concomitant aes-
thetictreatmentsbeingperformedatthesametimeastheface-
lift surgery, history of psychiatric illness given by the patient
on intake to the practice (eg, depression, bipolar disease), hav-
ingexperiencedarecenttraumaticevent(eg,deathofaspouse,
divorce) in the last 12 months, body mass index, and smoking
status. Any postoperative complications of face-lift surgery
were recorded, including hematoma, infection, facial nerve in-
jury, and sloughing of skin.
Data from the RSES were tabulated on a scale of 0 to 30 in
accordancewithacceptedscoringpractices,withahigherscore
representing higher self-esteem. Scores typically range from
15 to 25; however, normative data are best determined by com-
paring descriptive population data with data of similar study
populations.5,11
An additional data point collected 6 months postopera-
tively was the answer to the question “How many years
younger do you think you look after surgery?” Responses to
this question were taken as an integer value. This outcome will
be correlated with any change in self-esteem score.
A paired t test was used to compare statistical data on pa-
tients before and after surgery. Statistical analysis was per-
formed using GraphPad QuickCalcs software (GraphPad Soft-
ware) and Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Corporation).
Box. Rosenberg Self-esteem Scale
Each item is rated either strongly agree, agree, disagree, or
strongly disagree. Responses are scored from 0 to 3 per item, for a
total maximum score of 30. Negatively worded items (numbers 3,
5, 8, 9, and 10) are scored in reverse fashion such that a higher
score indicates increased self-esteem.
1. I feel that I am a person of worth, at least on an equal plane
with others.
2. I feel that I have a number of good qualities.
3. All in all, I am inclined to feel that I am a failure.
4. I am able to do things as well as most other people.
5. I feel I do not have much to be proud of.
6. I take a positive attitude toward myself.
7. On the whole, I am satisfied with myself.
8. I wish I could have more respect for myself.
9. I certainly feel useless at times.
10. At times, I think I am no good at all.
Research Original Investigation
Patient Self-esteem With Perceived Outcome After Face-lift Surgery
E2
JAMA Facial Plastic Surgery
Published online October 29, 2015
(Reprinted)
jamafacialplasticsurgery.com
Copyright 2015 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archfaci.jamanetwork.com/ by a AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY User  on 10/31/2015
 Copyright 2015 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Results
Of the 59 patients enrolled, 50 completed the 6-month postop-
erativequestionnaire;9werelosttofollow-up.Meanpatientage
was 58 years (range, 37-73 years); 48 patients were women and
2weremen.Forty-fourpatients(88%)werenonsmokers(Table).
The50patientswhocompletedthe6-monthpostoperative
questionnaire had a mean (SD) preoperative RSES score of 24.3
(4.5) (range, 14-30), a median score of 25, and a mode of 30
(Figure).Twenty-fourpatients(48%)experiencedanincreasein
RSES scores at 6 months, while 15 patients (30%) experienced a
decreaseand11(22%)experiencednochange.Themeanchange
for patients whose RSES score increased was 4, while the mean
change for patients whose score decreased was –5.5.
Themeansofthebaselinevs6-monthfollow-upRSESscores
werecomparedusingpairedttests.Overall,themeandifference
betweenthe6-monthRSESandbaselinescoreswasanincrease
of 0.3 (baseline, 24.3; 6-month, 24.6). This difference was not
statistically significant (P = .69). Similarly, a linear regression
modelplottingthechangeinRSESscoreasafunctionofthebase-
lineRSESscoredidnotdemonstrateanysignificantassociation
(R2 = 0.26).Patientsperceivedthattheyappearedameanof8.9
years younger at 6 months after their face-lift surgery.
ThepostoperativechangesinRSESscoreswerefurtherana-
lyzed by subdividing the group into patients with high self-
esteem, average self-esteem, and low self-esteem at base-
line, based approximately on our population statistics. High
self-esteem was defined as 1 SD above the mean (RSES score,
≥29), average self-esteem was defined as within 1 SD of the
mean (RSES score, 21-28), and low self-esteem was defined as
1 SD below the mean (RSES score, ≤20). In the group of pa-
tients with low self-esteem, the mean RSES score improved
fromabaselinemeanRSESscoreof18.3toapostoperativevalue
of 22. This change was statistically significant (mean differ-
ence, 3.7; P = .01). The group of patients with high self-
esteemshowedastatisticallysignificantdecreaseinRSESscore
from a baseline value of 29.7 to a postoperative value of 26.6
(mean difference, –3.1; P = .03). The group with average self-
esteem showed an increase of 0.5 in the RSES score, but this
difference was not statistically significant (P = .59).
Multivariable regression analysis was performed on ret-
rospective data incorporating age and body mass index data
into the model. In this model, baseline RSES score, age, and
body mass index did not have a significant association with
change in RSES score (R2 = 0.40). Self-reported recent crisis
(P = .40), history of psychiatric treatment (P = .10), and smok-
ing history (P = .60) did not show a significant association with
change in RSES score. Neither the presence of a concomitant
procedure (P = .24) nor type of procedure (upper blepharo-
plasty, P = .70; lower blepharoplasty, P = .21; brow-lift, P = 1.0;
carbon dioxide laser resurfacing, P = .29) had any significant
association with change in RSES score.
There was only 1 patient with a significant complication,
ahematomarequiringevacuationintheoperatingroom.There
were no infections, sloughing of skin, or facial nerve injuries
in this group.
Discussion
Our results of 50 patients showed that nearly half the patients
experiencedanincreaseinself-esteem,consistentwithotherre-
portsintheliterature2,3,6,7,12andwithanecdotalexperiencewith
theprocedure.However,theoveralldifferencebetweenthemean
preoperativeandpostoperativeRSESscoreswasnotstatistically
significant.Inourstudy,self-esteemmeasurementsdonotcor-
relatedirectlywiththepositiveeffectofthesurgicaloutcomebe-
cause patients showed no mean change in RSES scores but be-
lievedthattheyappearedameanof8.9yearsyoungeraftertheir
Figure. Histogram of Baseline Self-esteem Characteristics
in the Study Population
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 >30
6
7
8
9
10
4
5
3
2
1
0
Baseline RSES Score
Frequency, No.
Baseline Rosenberg Self-esteem Scale (RSES) scores and the frequency with
which each score occurred in the patient population.
Table. Patient Information
Characteristic
Valuea
Age, mean (range), y
58 (37-73)
Sex
Male
2 (4)
Female
48 (96)
BMI, mean (SD)
23 (3)
Smoking status
Smoker
6 (12)
Nonsmoker
44 (88)
Concomitant procedures
Blepharoplasty
Upper
16 (32)
Lower
16 (32)
Carbon dioxide laser
15 (30)
Brow-lift
5 (10)
Recent traumatic event
Yes
7 (14)
No
43 (86)
Previous psychiatric history
Yes
2 (4)
No
48 (96)
Abbreviation: BMI, body mass index (calculated as weight in kilograms divided
by height in meters squared).
a Data are presented as number (percentage) of patients unless otherwise
indicated.
Patient Self-esteem With Perceived Outcome After Face-lift Surgery
Original Investigation Research
jamafacialplasticsurgery.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Facial Plastic Surgery
Published online October 29, 2015
E3
Copyright 2015 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archfaci.jamanetwork.com/ by a AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY User  on 10/31/2015
 Copyright 2015 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
face-lift surgery. This finding underscores the complex nature
of the human psyche as it relates to aesthetic surgery and dem-
onstrates that patients exhibit a wide spectrum of psychologi-
cal reactions after face-lift surgery.
The RSES has been used to report self-esteem outcomes in
agingpatientsundergoingfacialrejuvenationprocedures.Alves
et al6 conducted a prospective evaluation of 32 patients under-
goingrhytidoplastywhowerefollowedupat2and6monthsaf-
tertheprocedure.Inthatstudy,RSESscoresshowedstatistically
significantimprovementinself-esteematbothpostoperativetime
points. Baseline scores improved at 2 months by a mean RSES
score of 3.6 and at 6 months by a mean RSES score of 4.5. They
concluded that “changes in this domain were intense, showing
thatsurgeryhadadirectinfluenceonthesepatients’self-esteem,
whichsufferedsignificantpositiveimpactaftersurgery.
”6(p514)An-
other portion of their study identified a statistically significant
improvement in mental health subscale scores on the 36-Item
ShortFormHealthSurvey,anothervalidatedpsychometricinstru-
ment,particularlywithrespecttodepressionandanxiety.Thus,
itseemslikelythatthepatientsintheAlvesetalstudyunderwent
aclinicallymeaningfulchangeintheirmentalhealthstatusand
self-esteemduringthecourseofpostoperativefollow-up.Simi-
larly,inastudyofblepharoplastybyVianaetal,13 baselineRSES
scores improved at the 6-month follow-up by an average of 1.5.
Theself-esteemof31patients(62%)improvedafterthesurgery.
Similarresultshavealsobeenreportedfornonsurgicalinterven-
tionssuchasbotulinumtoxinandhyaluronicacidfillerinjection.8
Theresultsofthesestudiessupporttheargumentthattreatment
of the aging face has a significant general health benefit.
We identified divergent trends between subgroups of our
studypopulationdefinedbybaselineself-esteemthatmaypar-
tially explain the lack of an overall difference as well as pro-
vide insight into the psychosocial changes occurring in our pa-
tient population following rhytidectomy. Specifically, patients
with high self-esteem preoperatively tended to have a de-
crease in self-esteem at the 6-month follow-up while pa-
tients with lower self-esteem preoperatively tended to ex-
hibit an increase in self-esteem at the same time point. The
changesinthesegroupsachievedstatisticalsignificance.Inad-
dition, patients with baseline RSES scores at or near the mean
value did not undergo any statistically significant changes in
self-esteem. Almost one-fourth of our population did not ex-
perience any change in RSES scores between the 2 time points.
We believe that this finding may support the theory that pa-
tients with average or above-average self-esteem do not re-
quire improvement in their self-esteem and are undergoing
face-lift surgery simply to look younger, not feel emotionally
more whole; however, patients with lower self-esteem may
seek plastic surgery to improve their low self-esteem.
The skewing of the population toward the upper limit of
the RSES score may have imposed a ceiling effect, in which
changes in self-esteem at the upper end of the spectrum would
be more difficult to measure accurately. Nonetheless, the de-
creasenotedintheRSESscoresofthepatientsinthegroupwith
high self-esteem achieved statistical significance. The effect
sizesinourstudyarecomparablewiththoseseeninothersimi-
lar studies reported in the literature6-8 and seem likely to be
clinically meaningful. The mode baseline RSES score of our
population was very high (score of 30), suggesting that a sig-
nificant number of patients undergoing face-lift surgery may
have expected to sustain a worsening of self-esteem 6 months
after the procedure.
To further understand these trends, we evaluated any psy-
chosocialstressorsthatmayhaveskewedthisgroup’
sresults.Nei-
therself-reportedrecentcrisisnorahistoryofpsychiatricillness
showedanysignificantassociationwithachangeinRSESscore;
however,theseself-reporteddatamaymisrepresentthetruein-
cidence of subclinical (or clinical) depression or other psychiat-
ric illness. In 1980, Goin et al12 published a prospective study of
postoperativepsychologicalchangesin50femalepatientswho
hadundergoneface-liftsurgeryandidentifiedpsychologicalfac-
torssignificantlyrelatedtoworseningofdepressivesymptoms.
Their study revealed a rate of postoperative depression of ap-
proximately30%thatwasprimarilyattributedtoasubsetofpa-
tientswhoexperiencedanexacerbationofapreexistingdepres-
sive syndrome or an unmasking of a subclinical depression. In
an attempt to elucidate factors contributing to this reaction, 2
groupsofpatientswereidentifiedwhosustainedalastingdepres-
sionafterintervention:thosewhoincurredsymptomsafewdays
aftersurgeryandthosewhoincurredsymptoms2to3weeksaf-
tersurgery.Psychometricanalysesrevealedthattheformergroup
was composed of women who were independent and control-
lingandwerelikelytoexperiencealossofcontrolrelatedtopost-
operative restrictions early after surgery. These patients devel-
opedanaversiontodependency,aswellasfrustrationaboutthe
inabilitytocontroltheagingprocess.Thelattergroupwaschar-
acterizedbywomenwhoexhibitedapassive-dependentperson-
alityandfoundthemselveswithinitialemotionalsupportfrom
family and friends early in the postoperative period but devel-
opeddepressivesymptomsasthisearlysupportwaswithdrawn.
This study shed light on the specific role of surgery in unmask-
ingsubclinicaldepressivetendenciesassocialandphysicalfac-
torsshiftduringthepostoperativeperiod.Otherstudieshavesup-
ported commonly held notions that factors, such as unrealistic
patientexpectations,malesex,genderreassignmentprocedures,
sensory changes, and the presence of body dysmorphic disor-
der or other personality disorders, are associated with negative
outcomes.14,15
Reviews of the literature generally report improvement of
psychosocialoutcomesaftercosmeticsurgeryofalltypes,2,3,14-19
whichhashelpedestablishthenotionthataestheticsurgeryhas
real and substantive health benefits. However, it is prudent for
thesurgeontounderstandthecomplexityandpotentialpitfalls
ofthisreportedphenomenon.Forexample,theliteratureonthis
subjectisvulnerabletoreportingbias.Patientswhoagreetopar-
ticipateinthesetypesofstudiesmaybemorelikelytoreportposi-
tivechangeswhilephysiciansreportingonthesestudiesmayun-
consciouslydothesame.Inaddition,specifictypesofaesthetic
proceduresmayaffectapatient’
spsychedifferently.Analysisof
surgeryfortheagingfaceandrhinoplastyhassuggestedthatthe
2 procedures affect different psychometric domains of quality
of life.16 A distinction has been made between procedures that
areconsideredrestorativeandthosethatcreategenderreassign-
ment, with the latter requiring a greater psychological
adjustment.14 Surgery for the aging face aims to restore the ap-
pearanceofyouthandthereforemaybelesspsychologicallyde-
Research Original Investigation
Patient Self-esteem With Perceived Outcome After Face-lift Surgery
E4
JAMA Facial Plastic Surgery
Published online October 29, 2015
(Reprinted)
jamafacialplasticsurgery.com
Copyright 2015 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archfaci.jamanetwork.com/ by a AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY User  on 10/31/2015
 Copyright 2015 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
mandingofthepatient.Whenviewedfromthisperspective,we
foundthatthepatientsinthisseriesbelievedthattheyappeared
ameanof8.9yearsyoungeraftertheirsurgery.However,under-
standingtheassociationofthechangedperceptionofage,itself
aprimarygoalofface-liftsurgery,witheventualchangesinself-
esteemorotherpsychosocialfactorsisinvariablyacomplexand
multifactorial issue.
This study has limitations. Many patients included in this
study underwent concomitant procedures with rhytidec-
tomy, which were not controlled for. These procedures may
affect the measured results compared with patients who un-
derwent face-lift surgery alone. The central concept of the psy-
chological interplay of surgery for the aging face on self-
esteem is unchanged. However, further studies to evaluate the
subtleties of the effects of undergoing face-lift surgery alone
vs face-lift surgery with ancillary procedures would provide
further information on this matter.
Conclusions
Changes occurring within the context of human psychology
are often more than direct and logical outcomes of a surgical
intervention. A sophisticated interplay of psychosocial and
physical changes evolves during the postoperative period to
influence the individual outcome. We included the RSES in
the evaluation of our patients’outcomes after face-lift sur-
gery as a psychometric adjunct and identified an interesting
pattern of change in the postoperative period. Specifically, a
patient’
s self-esteem before surgery may partially determine
the quality-of-life outcome after surgery. We found that
patients with low preoperative self-esteem had an increase in
self-esteem after surgery, those with average preoperative
self-esteem experienced no change, and those with high pre-
operative self-esteem experienced a decrease in self-esteem
after surgery. However, the overall difference between the
mean preoperative and postoperative self-esteem scores was
not statistically significant. In our study, self-esteem mea-
surements do not correlate directly with the positive effect of
the surgical outcome because patients showed no mean
change in self-esteem but believed that they appeared to be a
mean of 8.9 years younger after their face-lift surgery. This
finding underscores the complex nature of the human
psyche as it relates to aesthetic surgery and demonstrates
that patients exhibit a wide spectrum of psychological reac-
tions after face-lift surgery.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: August 19, 2015.
Published Online: October 29, 2015.
doi:10.1001/jamafacial.2015.1460.
Author Contributions: Dr Jacono had full access to
all the data in the study and takes responsibility for
the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis.
Study concept and design: Dibelius.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: All
authors.
Drafting of the manuscript: Dibelius.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Jacono, Chastant.
Statistical analysis: Chastant, Dibelius.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Jacono, Chastant.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Additional Contributions: Ben Talei, MD, Beverly
Hills Center for Plastic and Laser Surgery, and
Tommy Lavin, BA, made follow-up telephone calls
and emails to patients to have them complete and
return their 6-month follow-up data. They were not
compensated for their contributions.
REFERENCES
1. The American Society for Aesthetic Plastic
Surgery. Statistics. http://www.surgery.org/media
/statistics. Accessed March 11, 2015.
2. Friel MT, Shaw RE, Trovato MJ, Owsley JQ.
The measure of face-lift patient satisfaction: the
Owsley Facelift Satisfaction Survey with a long-term
follow-up study. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2010;126(1):
245-257.
3. Swanson E. Outcome analysis in 93 facial
rejuvenation patients treated with a deep-plane
face lift. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011;127(2):823-834.
4. Klassen AF, Cano SJ, Scott AM, Pusic AL.
Measuring outcomes that matter to face-lift
patients: development and validation of FACE-Q
appearance appraisal scales and adverse effects
checklist for the lower face and neck. Plast Reconstr
Surg. 2014;133(1):21-30.
5. Rosenberg M. Society and the Adolescent
Self-Image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press;
1965.
6. Alves MC, Abla LEF, Santos RdeA, Ferreira LM.
Quality of life and self-esteem outcomes following
rhytidoplasty. Ann Plast Surg. 2005;54(5):511-514.
7. Pusic AL, Lemaine V, Klassen AF, Scott AM,
Cano SJ. Patient-reported outcome measures in
plastic surgery: use and interpretation in
evidence-based medicine. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011;
127(3):1361-1367.
8. de Aquino MS, Haddad A, Ferreira LM.
Assessment of quality of life in patients who
underwent minimally invasive cosmetic
procedures. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2013;37(3):497-503.
9. World Medical Association. World Medical
Association Declaration of Helsinki: ethical
principles for medical research involving human
subjects. JAMA. 2013;310(20):2191-2194.
doi:10.1001/jama.2013.281053.
10. Jacono AA, Parikh SS. The minimal access deep
plane extended vertical facelift. Aesthet Surg J.
2011;31(8):874-890.
11. Sinclair SJ, Blais MA, Gansler DA, Sandberg E,
Bistis K, LoCicero A. Psychometric properties of the
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale: overall and across
demographic groups living within the United
States. Eval Health Prof. 2010;33(1):56-80.
12. Goin MK, Burgoyne RW, Goin JM, Staples FR.
A prospective psychological study of 50 female
face-lift patients. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1980;65(4):
436-442.
13. Viana GA, Osaki MH, Nishi M. Effect of lower
blepharoplasty on self-esteem. Dermatol Surg.
2010;36(8):1266-1272.
14. Castle DJ, Honigman RJ, Phillips KA. Does
cosmetic surgery improve psychosocial wellbeing?
Med J Aust. 2002;176(12):601-604.
15. Wright MR, Wright WK. A psychological study of
patients undergoing cosmetic surgery. Arch
Otolaryngol. 1975;101(3):145-151.
16. Litner JA, Rotenberg BW, Dennis M, Adamson
PA. Impact of cosmetic facial surgery on satisfaction
with appearance and quality of life. Arch Facial Plast
Surg. 2008;10(2):79-83.
17. Edgerton MT, Webb WL Jr, Slaughter R, Meyer
E. Surgical results and psychosocial changes
following rhytidectomy: an evaluation of
face-lifting. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1964;33:503-521.
18. Zimm AJ, Modabber M, Fernandes V, Karimi K,
Adamson PA. Objective assessment of perceived
age reversal and improvement in attractiveness
after aging face surgery. JAMA Facial Plast Surg.
2013;15(6):405-410.
19. Reilly MJ, Tomsic JA, Fernandez SJ, Davison SP.
Effect of facial rejuvenation surgery on perceived
attractiveness, femininity, and personality. JAMA
Facial Plast Surg. 2015;17(3):202-207.
Patient Self-esteem With Perceived Outcome After Face-lift Surgery
Original Investigation Research
jamafacialplasticsurgery.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Facial Plastic Surgery
Published online October 29, 2015
E5
Copyright 2015 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archfaci.jamanetwork.com/ by a AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY User  on 10/31/2015
