 Environmental and occupational disease
Maternal phthalate exposure promotes allergic
airway inflammation over 2 generations through
epigenetic modifications
Susanne Jahreis, PhD,a,b,o* Saskia Trump, PhD,a,m* Mario Bauer, MD,a Tobias Bauer, PhD,c Loreen Th€
urmann, MSc,a
Ralph Feltens, PhD,d Qi Wang, PhD,c Lei Gu, PhD,c,p Konrad Gr€
utzmann, PhD,a Stefan R€
oder, PhD,a
Marco Averbeck, MD,b Dieter Weichenhan, PhD,e Christoph Plass, PhD,e Ulrich Sack, MD,f Michael Borte, MD,g
Virginie Dubourg, MSc,h Gerrit Sch€
u€
urmann, PhD,i,j Jan C. Simon, MD,b Martin von Bergen, PhD,d,k,l
J€
org Hackerm€
uller, PhD,h Roland Eils, PhD,c,m,n* Irina Lehmann, PhD,a* and Tobias Polte, PhDa,b*
Leipzig, Heidelberg, Freiberg, and Jena, Germany, Aalborg, Denmark, and Boston, Mass
Background: Prenatal and early postnatal exposures to
environmental factors are considered responsible for the
increasing prevalence of allergic diseases. Although there is
some evidence for allergy-promoting effects in children because
of exposure to plasticizers, such as phthalates, findings of
previous studies are inconsistent and lack mechanistic
information.
Objective: We investigated the effect of maternal phthalate
exposure on asthma development in subsequent generations and
their underlying mechanisms, including epigenetic alterations.
Methods: Phthalate metabolites were measured within the
prospective mother-child cohort Lifestyle and Environmental
Factors and Their Influence on Newborns Allergy Risk (LINA)
and correlated with asthma development in the children.
A murine transgenerational asthma model was used to identify
involved pathways.
Results: In LINA maternal urinary concentrations of mono-n-
butyl phthalate, a metabolite of butyl benzyl phthalate (BBP),
were associated with an increased asthma risk in the children.
Using a murine transgenerational asthma model, we
demonstrate a direct effect of BBP on asthma severity in the
offspring with a persistently increased airway inflammation up
to the F2 generation. This disease-promoting effect was
mediated by BBP-induced global DNA hypermethylation in
CD41 T cells of the offspring because treatment with a
DNA-demethylating agent alleviated exacerbation of allergic
airway inflammation. Thirteen transcriptionally downregulated
genes linked to promoter or enhancer hypermethylation were
identified. Among these, the GATA-3 repressor zinc finger
protein 1 (Zfpm1) emerged as a potential mediator of the
enhanced susceptibility for TH2-driven allergic asthma.
Conclusion: These data provide strong evidence that maternal
BBP exposure increases the risk for allergic airway
inflammation in the offspring by modulating the expression of
genes involved in TH2 differentiation through epigenetic
alterations. (J Allergy Clin Immunol 2018;141:741-53.)
From athe Department of Environmental Immunology, dthe Department Molecular Sys-
tems Biology, hYoung Investigators Group Bioinformatics and Transcriptomics,
Department Molecular Systems Biology, ithe Department of Ecological Chemistry,
UFZ–Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research Leipzig-Halle, Leipzig; bthe
Department of Dermatology, Venerology and Allergology, Leipzig University Medical
Center; cthe Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, ethe Division of Epigenomics and
Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg; fthe Insti-
tute of Clinical Immunology, Medical Faculty, and kthe Institute of Biochemistry, Fac-
ulty of Bioscience, Pharmacy and Psychology, University of Leipzig; gMunicipal
Hospital ‘‘St Georg’’ Children’s Hospital, Leipzig; jthe Institute for Organic Chemis-
try, Technical University Bergakademie Freiberg; lthe Department of Chemistry and
Bioscience, University of Aalborg; mthe Institute of Pharmacy and Molecular Biotech-
nology, and Bioquant Center, and nthe Translational Lung Research Center Heidelberg
(TLRC), German Center for Lung Research (DZL), University of Heidelberg; oInfec-
tions in Hematology/Oncology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and
Infection Biology–Hans Kn€
oll Institute, Jena; and pthe Department of Cell Biology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Supported by the Helmholtz Association grant VG-NG-337, the LIFE–Leipzig Research
Center for Civilization Diseases (LIFE-007-D7), and the Helmholtz Initiative for
Personalized Medicine (iMed). M.v.B. was funded by the DFG SFB 1052.
Disclosure of potential conflict of interest: C. Plass and M. Borte have received
consultancy fees from BioMedX. T. Bauer was supported by the Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (BMBF)-funded eMED network PANC–STRAT. U. Sack has
personally received travel expenses from Phadia GmbH, Freiburg, Germany, for other
works. J. Hackerm€
uller’s institution received grant VH-NG738 from the Initiative and
Networking Fund of the Helmholtz Association for this work and has patents from
Fraunhofer Society for other works and his institution has received travel expenses
from the European Centre for Ecotoxicology and Toxicology of Chemicals for other
works. R. Eils’ institution received a grant from the BMBF for this work and other
works, received consultancy fees from Qiagen, and received fees for expert testimony
from Steinbeis GmbH & Co KG, and he has personally received consultancy fees from
Merck Darmstadt. S. Trump received e:Med funding from the BMBF and was
supported by iMed from the Helmholtz Association. T. Polte’s institute has received
grants VG-NG-337 from Helmholtz Association, LIFE-007-D7 from LIFE–Leipzig
Research Center for Civilization Diseases, and support from iMed from Helmholtz
Association for this work. The rest of the authors declare that they have no relevant
conflicts of interest.
Received for publication July 1, 2016; revised February 22, 2017; accepted for publica-
tion March 1, 2017.
Available online April 6, 2017.
Corresponding author: Tobias Polte, PhD, UFZ–Helmholtz Centre for Environmental
Research Leipzig-Halle, Helmholtz University Research Group Experimental Allergy
and Immunology, Permoserstr. 15, Leipzig, Germany. E-mail: tobias.polte@ufz.de.
The CrossMark symbol notifies online readers when updates have been made to the
article such as errata or minor corrections
0091-6749
� 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the American Academy of
Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-
ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2017.03.017
741
 Key words: Airway inflammation, asthma, phthalates, epigenetics,
T cells
Allergic asthma is caused by a TH2 cell–mediated immune
response to common environmental allergens and characterized
by airway inflammation with pulmonary eosinophilia, airway
hyperreactivity (AHR), and increased serum IgE levels.1
This
inflammatory
airway
disease
has
a
strong
genetic
background, but also, a multitude of environmental trigger
factors have been described.2,3 Epidemiologic and experimental
studies demonstrated that exposure to environmental pollutants,
such as diesel exhaust particles or environmental tobacco smoke,
or chemicals, such as volatile organic compounds, can lead to
exacerbation of respiratory symptoms and asthma.4-7 In partic-
ular, the prenatal and early postnatal periods appear critical to
environmental exposures, probably interfering with the develop-
mental programming of the immune system and thereby altering
the disease risk in later life.8 Epigenetic changes, such as modified
DNA methylation, have been described as mediators between
exposure and disease development.8,9 This has been shown for
allergy-preventing effects induced by upbringing in a farming
environment or exposure to microbial components, as well as
for asthma-promoting influences, such as maternal exposure to to-
bacco smoke during pregnancy.9-11 These findings emphasize that
the developing immune system is especially susceptible to
perturbations by external factors.
Here, we focused on phthalates, a group of chemicals
commonly used as plasticizers in large quantities worldwide.
These chemicals are present in a wide range of consumer
products, such as cosmetics, plastics, floor coverings, building
materials, toys, and cleaning products.12,13 Human subjects are
exposed to phthalates mainly through ingestion or inhalation
throughout life, starting in utero.14,15 Although there is some
evidence of allergy-promoting effects in children by maternal
phthalate exposure, findings of previous studies are conflicting
regarding
the
effect
direction,
the
investigated
exposure
conditions, and their assessment.16-18 Furthermore, little is known
about the mechanisms of maternal phthalate exposure, leading to
an altered disease risk in children’s later life.
In the present study we report a significant association between
maternal urinary concentrations of the phthalate metabolite
mono-n-butyl phthalate (MnBP) and an increased asthma risk
in children of our prospective mother-child cohort Lifestyle and
Environmental Factors and Their Influence on Newborns Allergy
Risk (LINA).7 Using a murine transgenerational asthma model,
we demonstrate that maternal exposure to butyl benzyl phthalate
(BBP), a parent compound of MnBP, has a direct effect on
severity of allergic airway inflammation in the offspring,
observing an enhanced airway inflammation, even in the F2
generation. This asthma-promoting effect was mediated by
BBP-induced DNA hypermethylation, as shown by diminished
BBP effects after treating mice with a hypomethylation-
inducing compound and a subsequently reduced expression of
genes involved in the differentiation of TH2 cells, such as the
GATA-3 repressor zinc finger protein 1 (Zfpm1), offering an
explanation for the increased allergic immune response.
METHODS
For more detailed information, please see the Methods section in this
article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.org.
LINA study design and sample collection
The LINA cohort study recruited 629 mother-child pairs between May
2006 and December 2008 in Leipzig, Germany, to investigate how
environmental factors in the prenatal and postnatal period influence immune
system development and the resulting disease risks.19-21
Urine samples and sample preparation
Phthalate metabolite quantification was carried out for 540 early morning
maternal urine samples, as described previously.22
Exposure to BBP and ovalbumin immunization
BALB/c mice were exposed to BBP (3 mg/mL) exclusively through
drinking water (custom-built glass bottles) for different time periods,
as described in detail in the Methods section in this article’s Online
Repository.
Measurement of airway responsiveness
Lung resistance was measured by using invasive plethysmography in
response to inhaled methacholine, as described previously23-25 and in more
detail in the Methods section in this article’s Online Repository.
Whole-genome bisulfite sequencing, differentially
methylated region calling, and annotation
Whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) library construction and
sequencing was performed, as previously described,26 by applying a
tagmentation-based, ultralow-input library preparation protocol with a
quantity of 20 ng of input DNA. Sequencing and alignment (mm10) were
carried out, as described previously.27 Differentially methylated region
(DMR) calling was performed, as described earlier.27
RNA sequencing
Total RNAwas isolated, and RNA sequencing was performed, as described
previously.28-30
Mapping of DMRs to target genes
DMRs were mapped on gene bodies, promoters, and putative enhancers of
the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), as described in detail in the
Methods section in this article’s Online Repository.
Abbreviations used
AHR: Airway hyperreactivity
Aza: 5-Aza-29-deoxycytidine
BBP: Butyl benzyl phthalate
DEG: Differentially expressed gene
DMR: Differentially methylated region
Fads1: Fatty acid desaturase 1
Fanca: Fanconi anemia complementation group A
Foxp3: Forkhead box p3
LINA: Lifestyle and Environmental Factors and Their Influence on
Newborns Allergy Risk
MBzP: Monobenzyl phthalate
MnBP: Mono-n-butyl phthalate
OVA: Ovalbumin
WGBS: Whole-genome bisulfite sequencing
Zfpm1: Zinc finger protein 1
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
FEBRUARY 2018
742 JAHREIS ET AL
 MassARRAY methylation analysis
MassARRAY analysis was performed, as described previously.27
Statistical analysis
Equal parameter distribution was tested by using x2 tests. Logistic
regression models were implemented, adjusting for known confounding
factors of lung disease or atopy in early childhood, to assess the contribution
of phthalate exposure on risk increase for asthma development or increased
IgE levels in the children.
Nonparametric tests were applied for all nonnormally distributed
parameters (eg, Mann-Whitney U test [MWU] and Spearman correlations).
All calculations were performed in STATISTICA software for Windows
(Version 10; Statsoft, Tulsa, Okla). Data were expressed as means 6 SEMs,
and P values of less than .05 were considered significant.
RESULTS
Association between maternal phthalate
metabolites and the development of allergic
asthma in children (LINA)
For the LINA mother-child study, 629 mother-child pairs were
recruited between 2006 and 2008. The 6-year follow-up investi-
gation included 420 (66.8%) of the families. Regarding asthma
development, only physician-diagnosed asthma was considered
for this study. For 24 of the LINA children, an asthma diagnosis
was reported until the age of 6 years. General characteristics of the
study participants are shown in Table E1 in this article’s Online
Repository at www.jacionline.org. Apart from a slightly lower
number of tobacco smoke–exposed children participating until
the age of 6 years, there were no differences between the analyzed
subcohort (n 5 371) and the total LINA cohort (n 5 629).
The concentration of 10 phthalate metabolites was determined
in a total of 540 maternal urine samples of the 34th week of
gestation. However, only measurements of the 371 children who
participated in the study until age 6 were considered for our
analysis (see Table E2 in this article’s Online Repository at www.
jacionline.org). Interestingly, an increased risk of asthma
symptoms until age 6 was observed only in children from mothers
with increased urinary MnBP levels (Fig 1, A and B), whereas all
other metabolites showed no significant association (see Table E3
and E5 in this article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.org).
In addition to the lung phenotype, high maternal MnBP
concentrations were also associated with a higher risk for
allergic sensitization against inhalant allergens in the children
FIG 1. Maternal phthalate exposure and children’s asthma and allergic sensitization. A and C, Maternal
urine MnBP concentrations (34th gestational week) for children with asthma until age 6 (Fig 1, A) and sensi-
tization against inhalant allergens (Fig 1, C) compared with control subjects (medians and interquartile
ranges). B and D, Frequency and risk (adjusted odds ratio per 100 ng/mg MnBP increase) for asthma (Fig
1, B) and sensitization against inhalant allergens (Fig 1, D) according to maternal MnBP concentrations
(high 5 greater than median).
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 141, NUMBER 2
JAHREIS ET AL 743
 (Fig 1, C and D, and see Table E4 and E5 in this article’s Online
Repository at www.jacionline.org).
Prenatal and perinatal exposure to BBP increased
allergic airway inflammation in a murine asthma
model
Next to monobenzyl phthalate (MBzP), MnBP is the major
metabolite of BBP.31 To further investigate whether the observed
increase in asthma risk in the human study cohort might be
directly caused by maternal exposure to BBP, we used a
well-established transgenerational ovalbumin (OVA)–induced
asthma mouse model.10,23,32,33 During the exposure period,
BALB/c mice received 3 mg/mL BBP through drinking water, a
concentration relevant for human exposure. MnBP levels
measured in the urine of BBP-exposed dams (see Table E6 in
this article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.org) were
comparable with those detected in highly exposed LINA mothers
FIG 2. Phthalate exposure and induction of an asthma-like phenotype. A, Dams were exposed to BBP during
pregnancy (prenatal) or until weaning when pups were 3 weeks old (perinatal exposure). B, Exposure of
adult mice to BBP started 1 week before the first allergen injection and was continued until the end of
the asthma induction protocol. C, Female F1 mice from exposed or control dams were mated with
unexposed male mice. i.n., Intranasal; i.p., intraperitoneal.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
FEBRUARY 2018
744 JAHREIS ET AL
 (12.47-6894.87 ng/mL in maternal urine). Dams were exposed to
BBP
during
pregnancy
(prenatal)
or
during
pregnancy
and breast-feeding (perinatal) to analyze the effect of maternal
BBP exposure on allergic airway inflammation. Grown-up
offspring were then subjected to antigen sensitization without
being
exposed
further
to
BBP
(Fig
2,
A).
In
another
treatment regimen, adult mice were exposed to BBP starting
1 week before OVA sensitization until the end of the asthma
protocol (Fig 2, B).
Although exposure of adult mice to BBP had no effect on the
asthma-like phenotype, prenatal and perinatal BBP exposure
significantly increased the number of eosinophils within the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid compared with the offspring from
unexposed dams (Fig 3, A). Maternal BBP exposure led to
substantially more inflammatory infiltrates in the airways, as
demonstrated by means of histologic examination of hematoxylin
and eosin–stained lung sections (Fig 3, B), as confirmed by means
of software-based image analysis (Fig 3, C). Accordingly, AHR
FIG 3. Prenatal and perinatal exposure to BBP increases allergic airway inflammation in a murine asthma
model. Total cell numbers in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid (A), airway inflammation examined by lung
histology (hematoxylin and eosin, magnification 3100; B) quantified by an investigator-independent com-
puter-based analysis (C), and lung resistance (D) were examined in offspring from BBP-exposed dams and
in BBP-exposed adult mice. Data are expressed as means 6 SEMs (n >
_ 9 animals per group in the offspring
[from >
_5 dams] and adult mice from 4 independent experiments). *P < .05.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 141, NUMBER 2
JAHREIS ET AL 745
 measured as lung resistance was enhanced in the offspring from
BBP-exposed dams (Fig 3, D).
Furthermore, OVA-specific IgE levels were increased in
prenatally and perinatally exposed offspring compared with
control mice (Fig 4, A). Moreover, OVA-restimulated spleen
and lymph node cells from offspring of BBP-exposed dams
produced significantly higher amounts of the TH2 cytokines
IL-5 and IL-13, whereas there was no significant effect on the
TH1 cytokine IFN-g (Fig 4, B and C).
To evaluate which BBP metabolite promotes the occurrence
of an asthma-like phenotype, we perinatally exposed mice to
MnBP or MBzP and subsequently characterized the asthma
phenotype
in
the
offspring.
Interestingly,
neither
MnBP
nor
MBzP
significantly
increased
the
allergic
airway
inflammation (see Fig E1 in this article’s Online Repository at
www.jacionline.org).
Maternal BBP exposure induces global
hypermethylation mediating the asthma-
promoting effect
Early environmental influences have been shown to perturb
epigenetic changes, such as DNA methylation, that might
contribute to programming of disease risks.8 To evaluate whether
maternal (perinatal) BBP exposure alters the global DNA
methylation
pattern
in
the
F1
generation,
we
subjected
splenic CD41 T cells isolated from dams and their 3-week-old
offspring to WGBS. DMRs were called with a difference in the
methylation level of greater than 5% and a P value of less than
.05 between the exposed group (F0 or F1) versus nonexposed con-
trolmiceofthesamegeneration(n53,medianfalsediscoveryrate:
F0, 0.056; F1, 0.036).
Our data show that maternal BBP exposure induced global
DNA hypermethylation in the F0 generation (63% hypermethy-
lated regions among identified DMRs) and to an even higher
extent in the offspring (83%; Fig 5, A, data set 1). Similar to the F0
generation, hypermethylation in the F1 generation was not
restricted to any particular genomic region but occurred genome
wide (Fig 5, B).
One-week-old pups from BBP-exposed dams were treated with
the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-29-deoxycytidine
(Aza) for 2 weeks until weaning to evaluate whether BBP-
induced hypermethylation is linked to the severe allergic airway
inflammation observed in the offspring.34 Treatment of the
offspring with Aza reversed enhanced airway inflammation
caused by maternal BBP exposure, as demonstrated by the
FIG 4. Prenatal and perinatal exposure to BBP enhances allergen-specific IgE levels and TH2 cytokine
production. OVA-specific IgE serum levels (A) and cytokine production of restimulated splenocytes
(B) and lymph node cells (C) were analyzed in OVA-immunized offspring from BBP-exposed dams and in
BBP-exposed adult mice. Data are expressed as means 6 SEMs (n >
_ 9 animals per group in the offspring
[from >
_5 dams] and adult groups from 4 independent experiments). *P < .05 and **P < .01.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
FEBRUARY 2018
746 JAHREIS ET AL
 FIG 5. Maternal BBP exposure induces global hypermethylation, which mediates the asthma-promoting
effect. A, DMRs were called from dams and their offspring between the exposed (F0 or F1) and nonexposed
groups. B, Numbers of DMRs in different DNA regions of the F1 generation. C-G, Total cell numbers in
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid (Fig 5, C), airway inflammation (Fig 5, D), lung resistance (Fig 5, E),
OVA-specific IgE levels (Fig 5, F), and cytokine production in spleen and lymph node cells (Fig 5, G) were
examined in offspring from BBP-exposed dams compared with F1 mice treated with the DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor Aza. Data are expressed as means 6 SEMs (n >
_ 9 animals per group in the
offspring [from >
_6 dams) from 6 independent experiments). *P < .05, OVA versus OVA 1 BBP. #P < .05,
OVA 1 BBP versus OVA 1 BBP 1 Aza.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 141, NUMBER 2
JAHREIS ET AL 747
 reduced number of eosinophilic granulocytes in bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid (Fig 5, C), diminished lung inflammation (Fig 5, D),
and attenuated OVA-specific lung resistance (Fig 5, E), reduced
IgE levels (Fig 5, F), and IL-5/IL-13 levels in splenocytes and
IL-4/IL-5 levels in lymph node cells (Fig 5, G). Aza treatment
of pups from unexposed dams had no effect on the asthma-like
phenotype in the offspring.
BBP-induced hypermethylation leads to
downregulation of certain target genes
To characterize the functional consequences of BBP-induced
hypermethylation on transcription, we assessed gene expression
using RNA sequencing in CD41 T cells from 3-week-old offspring
alongside with our WGBS analysis. At a false discovery rate of less
than 0.01, we detected 1138 differential expressed genes (DEGs) in
the offspring of BBP-exposed dams in comparison with those of
nonexposed mice. Treated versus nontreated mice clustered with
respect to their genome-wide RNA expression by means of
unsupervised clustering (Fig 6, A, data set 2). Two hundred
forty-two of the obtained DEGs could be linked to 346 DMRs
(Fig 6, B). Those target genes most likely mediating the
BBP-related asthma promotion should fulfill certain criteria (see
Fig E2 in this article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.org
and data set 3). As already mentioned, BBP-induced hypermethy-
lation was correlated with increased airway inflammation, which
was alleviated by treatment with the DNA-demethylating agent
Aza. Therefore, in a first step, we concentrated on those DEGs
related to hypermethylated DMRs (201 DEGs) located in function-
ally translating regulatory elements (promoter/enhancer; 33 DEGs
remaining). Because DNA hypermethylation is a key mechanism
to gene silencing, we focused only on those transcriptionally
repressed genes, leaving us with 13 potential candidates (data set
3). Among those, 3 genes were previously described to play a
role in TH2-driven allergic immunediseases and weresubsequently
evaluated in more detail.
Fatty acid desaturase 1 (Fads1) is an enzyme that regulates
desaturation of fatty acids and is involved in the synthesis of long-
chain polyunsaturated fatty acid. It has been shown that down-
regulation
of
the
Fads
gene
is
associated
with
lower
polyunsaturated fatty acid levels and atopic eczema.35 The second
gene, Fanconi anemia complementation group A (Fanca),
regulates the activity of regulatory T cells. Deletion of Fanca
leads to a decreased efficiency to suppress effector T-cell
function.36 Third, we focused on Zfpm1, also known as friend
of GATA protein 1 (Fog1), a gene that acts as a repressor of
GATA-3–mediated
TH2
cell
development.37-39
Therefore
downregulation of Zfpm1 could promote a TH2-driven immune
response. Validation of our RNA-sequencing results by using
real-time PCR confirmed a reduced expression of all 3 genes in
CD41 T cells from 3-week-old offspring of BBP-exposed dams
compared with control animals (Fig 6, C). In contrast, in
BBP-exposed F0 mice expression of Fads1, Fanca, and Zfpm1
was not altered (Fig 6, C). Furthermore, downregulation of Fanca
and Zfpm1 was also seen in full-grown offspring of BBP-exposed
dams (8 to 12 weeks old), whereas the effect of maternal BBP
exposure on Fads1 expression in adult mice was not significant
(Fig 6, C). Aza treatment of BBP-treated pups not only alleviated
the asthma-promoting effect, as described earlier, but also
abrogated downregulation of Fanca and Zfpm1 in the mature F1
generation (Fig 6, D).
To evaluate whether the potential mediators of phenotype
development identified in our mouse model might also play a
role in human subjects, we performed real-time PCR analysis in
whole-blood samples of 4-year-old children of the LINA cohort.
Interestingly,
high
urinary
maternal
MnBP
concentrations
(ie,
MnBP
concentrations
greater
than
the
median)
were
associated with a significant decrease in ZFPM1 expression in the
children (MWU: P 5.025; see Fig E3, A, in this article’s Online Re-
positoryatwww.jacionline.org)inaccordancewithourobservations
in the mouse model, no significant decrease of FADS1 or FANCA
expression in prenatally MnBP-exposed children was observed
(data not shown). Concomitant with a decrease in ZFPM1 expres-
sion,asthmaticchildrenshowedasignificantincreaseinmethylation
at a CpG site (chromosome 16: 88564360, R 5 20.87, P 5 .001)
located in an intronic human enhancer region corresponding to the
region observed in mice, which also in human subjects appears to
regulate its host gene ZFPM1 (see Fig E3, B and C).
Altered function of CD41 T cells in the offspring of
BBP-exposed mice
Both Fanca and Zfpm1 are described to play a crucial role in
T-cell differentiation and function.36,37 To investigate a possible ef-
fect of maternal BBP exposure on both of these end points in the
next generation, we isolated splenic CD41 effector T cells
from 8-week-old offspring
and
stimulated the
cells
with
anti-CD3/CD28 antibodies. Although proliferation of T cells was
not affected (data not shown), CD41 T cells from BBP-exposed
offspring appeared more activatable than T cells from nonexposed
control mice, as shown by expression of the activation marker
CD25 (Fig 7, A). Interestingly, we detected significantly more
IL-4–producing CD41 T cells in the F1 generation from exposed
mice,
whereas
the
increased
number
of
IL-13–producing
cells reached borderline significance and the number of IFN-
g–producing cells was unaffected (Fig 7, B). Furthermore, we
found a reduced number of forkhead box p3 (Foxp3)–positive
regulatory T cells in stimulated CD41CD251 T cells from
BBP-exposed offspring compared with cells derived from control
mice (Fig 7, C). However, the described differences did not
reach statistical significance. Furthermore, the frequency of
Foxp3-positive
regulatory
T
cells
in
the
blood
and
in
unstimulated
splenocytes
of
BBP-exposed
offspring
was
not affected (see Fig E4 in this article’s Online Repository at
www.jacionline.org). Accordingly, the efficiency of CD41CD251
regulatory T cells to suppress responder T cells was slightly but not
significantly impaired by using cells from BBP-exposed mice
compared with regulatory T cells from control animals (Fig 7, D).
Maternal BBP exposure affects airway inflammation
in the F2 generation
To investigate whether the asthma-promoting effect of peri-
natal BBP exposure persists up to the F2 generation, we mated
perinatally exposed female with nonexposed male mice and
induced an asthma-like phenotype in the F2 generation (Fig 2, C).
Surprisingly, exposure to BBP during pregnancy and breast-
feeding enhanced the eosinophilic airway inflammation (Fig 8,
A and B) and AHR (Fig 8, C) but did not alter OVA-specific
IgE levels in the F2 generation (Fig 8, D). Because treatment of
F2 pups with Aza reduced their increased airway inflammation
in relation to BBP exposure of their grandmother, an involvement
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
FEBRUARY 2018
748 JAHREIS ET AL
 of epigenetic mechanisms, including DNA hypermethylation, in
promoting this immune response is highly probable (Fig 8, A
and C). However, we did not observe changes in DNA
methylation related to BBP exposure in F2 pups in Fads1, Fanca
(both promoters), or Zfpm1 DMRs (enhancer) identified in F1
pups, and these genes were not significantly differentially ex-
pressed (see Fig E5 in this article’s Online Repository at www.
jacionline.org).
DISCUSSION
The role of phthalate exposure in the increasing prevalence of
atopic diseases has been a topic of great interest in recent years.
However, from current studies, no clear conclusion can be drawn
about the role of phthalates in asthma development or about the
potential mechanisms involved.18 In the present study we showed
that higher concentrations of MnBP in maternal urine during
pregnancy were associated with an increased risk of asthma in
children up to age 6, whereas none of the other phthalate
metabolites analyzed were associated with this disease outcome.
These results are in line with findings of a recent study by Whyatt
et al,40 who found a positive association between the maternal
urine phthalate metabolites MnBP and MBzP and asthma risk
in children between the ages of 5 and 11,40 whereas other studies
only found such a correlation for MBzP but not MnBP.41 These
discrepancies might in part be due to differences in study size
but might also be related to regional differences in exposure
pattern to the different members of the phthalate family.
Interestingly, beyond the increased risk of asthma development
by MnBP, we also observed a link between maternal MnBP
concentrations and the risk for sensitization against inhalant
allergens in the children, suggesting involvement of an atopic
mechanism.
FIG 6. BBP-induced hypermethylation leads to downregulation of selected target genes. A, Heat map displays
DEGs from pups of BBP-exposed dams versus control mice. B, Two hundred forty-two of 1338 DEGs in the
offspring from BBP-exposed dams can be linked to 346 DMRs. C, RNA expression of selected genes in
dams (n 5 5), pups, or adult mice (n >
_ 6 from >
_4 dams) was verified by using quantitative PCR. D, Mice
from BBP-exposed dams were treated with Aza, as described in the Methods section, and RNA expression
was measured in mature offspring (n >
_ 6 from >
_2 dams). Data are expressed as means 6 SEMs from at least
2 independent experiments. *P < .05, CON versus BBP. #P < .05, BBP versus BBP 1 Aza.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 141, NUMBER 2
JAHREIS ET AL 749
 MBzP and MnBP are both described as breakdown products of
BBP,40 with MnBP being the major metabolite of BBP and ap-
pearing in larger quantities in urine compared with MBzP.31,42
Thus we investigated the effect of maternal BBP exposure on
the asthma-like phenotype in our murine transgenerational
model.
Applied BBP exposure concentrations were based on the
tolerable daily intake of BBP in human subjects of 0.5 mg/kg
body weight per day,43 which corresponds to an estimated uptake
of 0.48 to 0.6 mg BBP/kg body weight per day in our mouse ex-
periments (assuming 4-5 mL/d drinking water intake containing
3 mg/mL BBP). The resulting urinary MnBP concentrations in
our murine model were similar to those observed in highly
exposed mothers of the LINA cohort, suggesting that BBP
concentrations investigated here are representative for the real
exposure situation in human subjects.
Although prenatal and perinatal exposure to BBP increased
asthma severity in the offspring, exposure of adult mice did not
affect the allergic immune response, further corroborating the
notion that the most vulnerable time period for phthalate exposure
is during pregnancy and shortly after birth.18
Another interesting finding was the inability of the BBP
metabolites
MnBP
or
MBzP
to
significantly
increase
allergic airway inflammation in the offspring when applied
perinatally to the dams. These data point to a direct effect of
the parent compound BBP, even without biotransformation.
However,
further
insight
into
the
BBP-mediated
initial
molecular events in the dams or the fetus has to be explored in
future studies.
There is growing evidence that prenatal and perinatal exposure
to diverse environmental chemicals might dysregulate the fetal or
neonatal epigenome, with potential consequences for diseases
manifesting in childhood.44 Because the asthma-promoting
effects by BBP in the present study were only detectable in the
offspring from exposed dams, we investigated the effects of
BBP on the epigenetic landscape. Previous studies already
showed an effect on DNA methylation by certain phthalates but
only based on targeted approaches restricted to preselected genes,
such as glucose transporter type 4 (Glut4) or proinflammatory cy-
tokines (TNF-a).45-47 In the current study we subjected samples
from our transgenerational mouse model to a genome-wide
evaluation of DNA methylation changes related to BBP. This
analysis was centered on the CD41 T-cell subset because these
cells have a central role in initiation and maintenance of the
allergic immune response.48 Maternal BBP exposure led to global
dysregulation in DNA methylation in the offspring dominated by
DNA hypermethylation. In contrast to our findings, Wang et al45
described a phthalate-induced DNA hypomethylation to be
responsible for their observed increased asthma risk. However,
the study was based on methylation analysis of 21 selected genes
measured in human blood samples compared with our genome-
wide approach in a T-cell subset. Nevertheless, we also observed
phthalate-induced hypomethylation, such as in the promoter of
IL-4 (chromosome 11: 53620267-53620300) similar to what
has been described by Wang et al45 in human subjects (data set
1). Counteracting the global DNA hypermethylation in our study
by treating pups with the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor Aza
prevented
BBP-related
exacerbation
of
allergic
airway
FIG 7. Altered function of CD41 T cells in offspring of BBP-exposed mice. A-C, Numbers of CD41CD251
T cells (Fig 7, A), percentages of cytokine-producing T cells (Fig 7, B), and Foxp31CD41CD251 T cells
(Fig 7, C) are shown. D, Efficiency of CD41CD251 regulatory T (Treg) cells to suppress proliferation of
responder T cells. Data are expressed as means 6 SEMs (n >
_ 5 from 3 independent experiments). *P < .05.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
FEBRUARY 2018
750 JAHREIS ET AL
 inflammation, suggesting a direct link between DNA hyperme-
thylation and phenotype development.
Although recent findings indicated a wide variety of relation-
ships between DNA methylation and gene expression, high
promotor/enhancer methylation is classically associated with
low levels of gene expression.49,50 Therefore we focused on
significantly repressed genes with a promoter or enhancer
hypermethylation to further elucidate the functional translation
of the BBP associated hypermethylation. In the offspring of
BBP-exposed dams, we identified 13 genes fulfilling these
criteria, including 3 interesting candidates involved in immune
processes contributing to TH2 differentiation and therefore
resulting in a higher susceptibility to experience allergic
diseases.35,36,38
Considering
the
longitudinal
stability
of
differential
RNA
expression
induced
by
maternal
BBP
exposure from 3-week-old pups to the adult offspring, Fanca
and
Zfpm1
appeared
to
be
the
most
promising
genes.
Characterizing
the
CD41
T-cell
function
from
offspring
of
BBP-exposed
dams
primarily
revealed
an
increased
susceptibility for a TH2-driven immune response, as expected
from downregulation of the GATA-3 repressor Zfpm1.37 In
contrast, we could not show significant perturbations in
regulatory
T-cell
function,
which
would
have
been
one
possible consequence of suppressed Fanca expression. Most
interestingly, we could corroborate a possible mediating role
of Zfpm1 in the phthalate effect by transferring the results of
the mouse model to our LINA cohort. ZFPM1 mRNA
expression was similarly decreased in children prenatally
exposed to high levels of MnBP. This decrease in gene
expression
was
correlated
with
an
increase
in
ZFPM1
methylation in the same region identified as a differentially
methylated enhancer in our mouse model. The importance of
reduced expression of the GATA-3 repressor Zfpm1 by maternal
BBP exposure is supported by various studies therapeutically
targeting GATA-3 to attenuate the TH2-regulated inflammatory
response.51,52
To investigate whether the BBP-induced asthma-promoting
effect functions also in the absence of direct environmental
exposures through germline transmission of an altered epige-
nome,53 we characterized asthma severity in the grandmotherly
BBP-exposed F2 generation. Although we observed increased
airway inflammation, the phenotype compared with the F1
generation was slightly different, showing no effect on IgE serum
levels.
Furthermore,
neither
DNA
methylation
nor
RNA
expression of Fads1, Fanca, and Zfpm1 were affected in the F2
generation, suggesting that the underlying mechanisms of an
exacerbated asthma-like phenotype in the F1 and F2 generations
are different.
In summary, data from our study strongly suggest that early
exposure to specific phthalates increases susceptibility to the
development of allergic asthma in the offspring and even
contributes to airway inflammation in the F2 generation. The
asthma-promoting effect was mediated by epigenetic changes,
leading to altered expression of genes that play a crucial role in
immune regulation. Therefore chemical exposure of the devel-
oping immune system leads to an altered epigenetic prenatal
FIG 8. Maternal BBP exposure affects airway inflammation in the F2 generation. Total cell numbers in
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid (A), airway inflammation (B), lung resistance (C), and OVA-specific IgE
levels (D) were examined in OVA-immunized F2 generation from prenatally BBP-exposed F1 dams
compared with control mice. Data are expressed as means 6 SEMs (n >
_ 9 animals per group in the F2
offspring [from >
_6 dams] from 6 independent experiments). *P < .05, OVA versus OVA 1 BBP. #P < .05,
OVA 1 BBP versus OVA 1 BBP 1 Aza.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 141, NUMBER 2
JAHREIS ET AL 751
 programming, contributing not only to asthma development in
later life but potentially also to other immune-regulated diseases.
We thank Marita Reiprich, Michaela Loschinski, Beate Fink, Stephan
Schreiber, Marion B€
ahr, Monika Helf, Oliver M€
ucke, and Melanie B€
ansch for
excellent technical assistance and all participants of the LINA study. We thank
the DKFZ Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility for the excellent technical
support and expertise.
Key messages
d Maternal MnBP levels associate with an increased asthma
risk in children.
d In mice maternal exposure to BBP enhances airway
inflammation in the F1 and F2 generations through epige-
netic alterations.
REFERENCES
1. Umetsu DT, McIntire JJ, Akbari O, Macaubas C, DeKruyff RH. Asthma: an
epidemic of dysregulated immunity. Nat Immunol 2002;3:715-20.
2. Pearce N, Douwes J. The global epidemiology of asthma in children. Int J Tuberc
Lung Dis 2006;10:125-32.
3. Tachdjian R, Mathias C, Al Khatib S, Bryce PJ, Kim HS, Blaeser F, et al. Path-
ogenicity of a disease-associated human IL-4 receptor allele in experimental
asthma. J Exp Med 2009;206:2191-204.
4. Dick S, Friend A, Dynes K, AlKandari F, Doust E, Cowie H, et al. A systematic
review of associations between environmental exposures and development of
asthma in children aged up to 9 years. BMJ Open 2014;4:e006554.
5. Alessandrini F, Schulz H, Takenaka S, Lentner B, Karg E, Behrendt H, et al. Ef-
fects of ultrafine carbon particle inhalation on allergic inflammation of the lung.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;117:824-30.
6. B€
onisch U, B€
ohme A, Kohajda T, M€
ogel I, Sch€
utze N, von Bergen M, et al. Vol-
atile organic compounds enhance allergic airway inflammation in an experi-
mental mouse model. PLoS One 2012;7:e39817.
7. Franck U, Weller A, Roder SW, Herberth G, Junge KM, Kohajda T, et al. Prenatal
VOC exposure and redecoration are related to wheezing in early infancy. Environ
Int 2014;73:393-401.
8. Martino D, Prescott S. Epigenetics and prenatal influences on asthma and allergic
airways disease. Chest 2011;139:640-7.
9. Kabesch M. Epigenetics in asthma and allergy. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol
2014;14:62-8.
10. Reiprich M, Rudzok S, Schutze N, Simon JC, Lehmann I, Trump S, et al.
Inhibition of endotoxin-induced perinatal asthma protection by pollutants in an
experimental mouse model. Allergy 2013;68:481-9.
11. Conrad ML, Ferstl R, Teich R, Brand S, Blumer N, Yildirim AO, et al. Maternal
TLR signaling is required for prenatal asthma protection by the nonpathogenic
microbe Acinetobacter lwoffii F78. J Exp Med 2009;206:2869-77.
12. Dodson RE, Nishioka M, Standley LJ, Perovich LJ, Brody JG, Rudel RA.
Endocrine disruptors and asthma-associated chemicals in consumer products.
Environ Health Perspect 2012;120:935-43.
13. Braun JM, Sathyanarayana S, Hauser R. Phthalate exposure and children’s health.
Curr Opin Pediatr 2013;25:247-54.
14. Adibi JJ, Whyatt RM, Williams PL, Calafat AM, Camann D, Herrick R, et al.
Characterization of phthalate exposure among pregnant women assessed by
repeat air and urine samples. Environ Health Perspect 2008;116:467-73.
15. Wormuth M, Scheringer M, Vollenweider M, Hungerbuhler K. What are the sour-
ces of exposure to eight frequently used phthalic acid esters in Europeans? Risk
Anal 2006;26:803-24.
16. Bornehag CG, Sundell J, Weschler CJ, Sigsgaard T, Lundgren B, Hasselgren M,
et al. The association between asthma and allergic symptoms in children and
phthalates in house dust: a nested case-control study. Environ Health Perspect
2004;112:1393-7.
17. Bertelsen RJ, Carlsen KC, Calafat AM, Hoppin JA, Haland G, Mowinckel P, et al.
Urinary biomarkers for phthalates associated with asthma in Norwegian children.
Environ Health Perspect 2013;121:251-6.
18. Robinson L, Miller R. The impact of bisphenol A and phthalates on allergy,
asthma, and immune function: a review of latest findings. Curr Environ Health
Rep 2015;2:379-87.
19. Hinz D, Simon JC, Maier-Simon C, Milkova L, Roder S, Sack U, et al. Reduced
maternal regulatory T cell numbers and increased T helper type 2 cytokine pro-
duction are associated with elevated levels of immunoglobulin E in cord blood.
Clin Exp Allergy 2010;40:419-26.
20. Weisse K, Winkler S, Hirche F, Herberth G, Hinz D, Bauer M, et al. Maternal and
newborn vitamin D status and its impact on food allergy development in the
German LINA cohort study. Allergy 2013;68:220-8.
21. Herberth G, Bauer M, Gasch M, Hinz D, Roder S, Olek S, et al. Maternal
and cord blood miR-223 expression associates with prenatal tobacco smoke
exposure and low regulatory T-cell numbers. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;
133:543-50.
22. Feltens R, Roeder S, Otto W, Borte M, Lehmann I, von Bergen M, et al. Evalu-
ation of population and individual variances of urinary phthalate metabolites in
terms of epidemiological studies. J Chromatogr Sep Tech 2015;6:290.
23. Polte T, Petzold S, Bertrand J, Schutze N, Hinz D, Simon JC, et al. Critical role
for syndecan-4 in dendritic cell migration during development of allergic airway
inflammation. Nat Commun 2015;6:7554.
24. Polte T, Foell J, Werner C, Hoymann HG, Braun A, Burdach S, et al. CD137-
mediated immunotherapy for allergic asthma. J Clin Invest 2006;116:1025-36.
25. Schutze N, Lehmann I, Bonisch U, Simon JC, Polte T. Exposure to mycotoxins
increases the allergic immune response in a murine asthma model. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2010;181:1188-99.
26. Wang Q, Gu L, Adey A, Radlwimmer B, Wang W, Hovestadt V, et al.
Tagmentation-based whole-genome bisulfite sequencing. Nat Protoc 2013;8:
2022-32.
27. Bauer T, Trump S, Ishaque N, Thurmann L, Gu L, Bauer M, et al. Environment-
induced epigenetic reprogramming in genomic regulatory elements in smoking
mothers and their children. Mol Syst Biol 2016;12:861.
28. Hackermuller J, Reiche K, Otto C, Hosler N, Blumert C, Brocke-Heidrich K,
et al. Cell cycle, oncogenic and tumor suppressor pathways regulate numerous
long and macro non-protein-coding RNAs. Genome Biol 2014;15:R48.
29. Martin M. Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-throughput sequencing
reads. EMBnet.journal 2011;17:10-2.
30. Hoffmann S, Otto C, Doose G, Tanzer A, Langenberger D, Christ S, et al. A
multi-split mapping algorithm for circular RNA, splicing, trans-splicing and
fusion detection. Genome Biol 2014;15:R34.
31. Eigenberg DA, Bozigian HP, Carter DE, Sipes IG. Distribution, excretion, and
metabolism of butylbenzyl phthalate in the rat. J Toxicol Environ Health 1986;
17:445-56.
32. Polte T, Hennig C, Hansen G. Allergy prevention starts before conception: mater-
nofetal transfer of tolerance protects against the development of asthma. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2008;122:1022-30.e5.
33. Petzold S, Averbeck M, Simon JC, Lehmann I, Polte T. Lifetime-dependent ef-
fects of bisphenol A on asthma development in an experimental mouse model.
PLoS One 2014;9:e100468.
34. Brand S, Kesper DA, Teich R, Kilic-Niebergall E, Pinkenburg O, Bothur E, et al.
DNA methylation of TH1/TH2 cytokine genes affects sensitization and progress
of experimental asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;129:1602-10.e6.
35. Chisaguano AM, Montes R, Perez-Berezo T, Castellote AI, Guerendiain M, Bus-
tamante M, et al. Gene expression of desaturase (FADS1 and FADS2) and
Elongase
(ELOVL5)
enzymes
in
peripheral
blood:
association
with
polyunsaturated fatty acid levels and atopic eczema in 4-year-old children.
PLoS One 2013;8:e78245.
36. Du W, Erden O, Wilson A, Sipple JM, Schick J, Mehta P, et al. Deletion of Fanca
or Fancd2 dysregulates Treg in mice. Blood 2014;123:1938-47.
37. Kurata H, Lee HJ, McClanahan T, Coffman RL, O’Garra A, Arai N. Friend of
GATA is expressed in naive Th cells and functions as a repressor of GATA-3-
mediated Th2 cell development. J Immunol 2002;168:4538-45.
38. Kitamura N, Mori A, Tatsumi H, Nemoto S, Hiroi T, Kaminuma O. Zinc finger
protein, multitype 1, suppresses human Th2 development via downregulation of
IL-4. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2011;155(suppl 1):53-6.
39. Zhou M, Ouyang W, Gong Q, Katz SG, White JM, Orkin SH, et al. Friend of
GATA-1 represses GATA-3-dependent activity in CD41 T cells. J Exp Med
2001;194:1461-71.
40. Whyatt RM, Perzanowski MS, Just AC, Rundle AG, Donohue KM, Calafat AM,
et al. Asthma in inner-city children at 5-11 years of age and prenatal exposure to
phthalates: the Columbia Center for Children’s Environmental Health Cohort.
Environ Health Perspect 2014;122:1141-6.
41. Gascon M, Casas M, Morales E, Valvi D, Ballesteros-Gomez A, Luque N, et al.
Prenatal exposure to bisphenol A and phthalates and childhood respiratory tract
infections and allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:370-8.
42. Nativelle C, Picard K, Valentin I, Lhuguenot JC, Chagnon MC. Metabolism of
n-butyl benzyl phthalate in the female Wistar rat. Identification of new
metabolites. Food Chem Toxicol 1999;37:905-17.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
FEBRUARY 2018
752 JAHREIS ET AL
 43. European Food Safety Initiative. Opinion of the Scientific Panel on food
additives, flavourings, processing aids and materials in contact with food
(AFC) related to Butylbenzylphthalate (BBP) for use in food contact materials.
Parma (Italy): European Food Safety Initiative Food Ingredients and Packaging;
2005.
44. Perera F, Herbstman J. Prenatal environmental exposures, epigenetics, and
disease. Reprod Toxicol 2011;31:363-73.
45. Wang IJ, Karmaus WJ, Chen SL, Holloway JW, Ewart S. Effects of phthalate
exposure on asthma may be mediated through alterations in DNA methylation.
Clin Epigenetics 2015;7:27.
46. Sekaran S, Jagadeesan A. In utero exposure to phthalate downregulates critical
genes in Leydig cells of F1 male progeny. J Cell Biochem 2015;116:1466-77.
47. Rajesh P, Balasubramanian K. Phthalate exposure in utero causes epigenetic
changes and impairs insulin signalling. J Endocrinol 2014;223:47-66.
48. Larche M, Robinson DS, Kay AB. The role of T lymphocytes in the pathogenesis
of asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;111:450-64.
49. Vinson C, Chatterjee R. CG methylation. Epigenomics 2012;4:655-63.
50. Wagner JR, Busche S, Ge B, Kwan T, Pastinen T, Blanchette M. The relationship
between DNA methylation, genetic and expression inter-individual variation in
untransformed human fibroblasts. Genome Biol 2014;15:R37.
51. Krug N, Hohlfeld JM, Kirsten AM, Kornmann O, Beeh KM, Kappeler D, et al.
Allergen-induced asthmatic responses modified by a GATA3-specific DNAzyme.
N Engl J Med 2015;372:1987-95.
52. Homburg U, Renz H, Timmer W, Hohlfeld JM, Seitz F, Luer K, et al. Safety and
tolerability of a novel inhaled GATA3 mRNA targeting DNAzyme in patients
with TH2-driven asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:797-800.
53. Rissman EF, Adli M. Minireview: transgenerational epigenetic inheritance: focus
on endocrine disrupting compounds. Endocrinology 2014;155:2770-80.
J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 141, NUMBER 2
JAHREIS ET AL 753
