 REVIEW ARTICLE
OPEN
Medically induced amenorrhea in female astronauts
Varsha Jain1,2,3,4 and Virginia E Wotring4,5
Medically induced amenorrhea can be achieved through alterations in the normal regulatory hormones via the adoption of
a therapeutic agent, which prevents menstrual flow. Spaceflight-related advantages for medically induced amenorrhea differ
according to the time point in the astronaut’s training schedule. Pregnancy is contraindicated for many pre-flight training activities
as well as spaceflight, therefore effective contraception is essential. In addition, the practicalities of menstruating during pre-flight
training or spaceflight can be challenging. During long-duration missions, female astronauts have often continuously taken the
combined oral contraceptive pill to induce amenorrhea. Long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs) are safe and reliable
methods used to medically induce amenorrhea terrestrially but as of yet, not extensively used by female astronauts. If LARCs were
used, daily compliance with an oral pill is not required and no upmass or trash would need disposal. Military studies have shown
that high proportions of female personnel desire amenorrhea during deployment; better education has been recommended at
recruitment to improve uptake and autonomous decision-making. Astronauts are exposed to similar austere conditions as military
personnel and parallels can be drawn with these results. Offering female astronauts up-to-date, evidence-based, comprehensive
education, in view of the environment in which they work, would empower them to make informed decisions regarding menstrual
suppression while respecting their autonomy.
npj Microgravity (2016) 2, 16008; doi:10.1038/npjmgrav.2016.8; published online 21 April 2016
INTRODUCTION
Physiological mechanisms during the natural menstrual cycle
involve a coordinated interplay among regulatory hormones.
Hypothalamic release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone stimu-
lates the pituitary gland to produce follicle-stimulating hormone
and luteinizing hormone, which peaks mid-cycle. This peak
invokes ovulation. The developing ovum produces estrogen and
its remaining ‘shell’, i.e., the corpus luteum produces progester-
one. Endometrial thickening commences in preparation for a
pregnancy; however, when fertilization does not occur, estrogen
and progesterone levels decrease causing endometrial shedding.
This is released cyclically as menstrual flow.
Medically induced amenorrhea is the adoption of a therapeutic
device (e.g., levonorgestrel intrauterine device (LNG-IUD)) or
treatment (typically hormonal preparations, e.g., the combined
oral contraceptive (COC) pill or depot medroxyprogesterone
acetate (DMPA)) that act on part or all of the above mechanisms
in order to prevent menstrual flow. Routinely, 21 COC pills are
taken daily; these contain active ingredients that suppress
ovulation and thin the endometrium. Then, for the next 7 days,
either a break is taken from the active ingredient pills or placebo
pills are taken, and during this time a withdrawal bleed occurs.
This
differs
from
a
menstrual
bleed.
Medically
induced
amenorrhea would also include the delay or suppression of this
withdrawal bleed.
Modern women living in an industrialized country have more
menstrual cycles compared with women of pre-historic times.
There are an estimated 450 ovulations per lifetime now, compared
with 160 ovulations potentially due to later menarche, earlier first
births, frequent closely spaced pregnancies, long periods of
breastfeeding and living shorter lives.1 The 21-day treatment/
7-day placebo COC cycle was developed in the 1960s to mimic a
natural cycle and increase adherence with a daily pill. Thoughts on
whether women need to menstruate every month vary widely and
have cultural determinants2,3 but menstrual suppression is gaining
favor and becoming more common. Physicians’ attitudes to
medically induced amenorrhea also vary and may affect long-term
acceptance.4 The side-effect profiles for menstrual suppression
regimes are grossly similar to when the same agents are used
for contraception (Table 1) and return to fertility occurs with
treatment cessation with most agents.5
ADVANTAGES OF MENSTRUAL SUPPRESSION
General
There are numerous reasons for menstrual cycle control. Arresting
cycles can alleviate or improve medical disorders, e.g., gyneco-
logical problems such as menorrhagia or endometriosis, hemato-
logic conditions including inherited bleeding disorders, and
neurologic disease such as menstrual headaches.6 Menstrual
cycles can also be suppressed on a short- or long-term basis for
convenience, e.g., during exams, for special holidays, or after tubal
ligation for sterilization. Women can control their cycles according
to personal circumstances and convenience.
Spaceflight related
Individuals in austere conditions (deployed military personnel or
astronauts) may welcome amenorrhea, with advantages beyond
those sought in the traditional clinic setting.
Pregnancy can delay aspects of astronaut selection and training.
It is contraindicated for pre-flight training activities, including
1National Institute for Health Research, London, UK; 2King's College London, London, UK; 3Queen Mary's University, London, UK; 4Center for Space Medicine, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA and 5Department of Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
Correspondence: VE Wotring (Virginia.Wotring@bcm.edu)
Received 18 September 2015; revised 10 January 2016; accepted 21 January 2016
www.nature.com/npjmgrav
All rights reserved 2373-8065/16
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited
 Table 1.
Therapeutic options for medically induced amenorrhea available for female astronauts
Medication
Dosing
Frequency
Contraceptive failure
rate
Amenorrhea rate
Mechanism of action for
amenorrhea
Advantages
Disadvantages
Continuous
COC
Multiple
preparations,
tend to be
30–35 μg
ethinyl estradiol
pill in continuous
use
Daily,
without
pill-free
week
Continuous and
cyclical
use have similar
contraceptive
efficacy34
with typical use they
have a 9% failure rate26
Up to 80% at the
end of 1 year of
continuous use26
Estrogen and progesterone
suppress hormone
production and follicle
development, endometrium
thinner than normal
• Long history and experience with
continuous use in spaceflight
• Protect BMD compared with
DMPA/non-hormonal contraceptives
• Can be stopped immediately if
required
• Decreased risk of ovarian,
endometrial, and colorectal
cancer, iron deficiency
anemia, benign breast disease,
functional ovarian cysts,
pre-menstrual symptoms,
and dysmenorrhea35
• No impact on breast cancer rate
• Daily compliance required—potential
issue with worldwide travel and
training schedule
• Variable duration of menstrual suppression
• BTB particularly in initial phase
• Hormonal side effects (estrogenic and
progestogenic): migraine, VTE, stroke, liver
problems, depression, glucose impairment,
altered lipid metabolism, and vaginal
infections
• Estrogen is contraindicated
in some women
• Medication stability problematic on
multi-year missions
Progestin-
containing
intrauterine
device
LNG release
20 μg per day,
e.g., Mirena
(LNG-IUD)
Every
5 years
1-year failure
rate is 0.2%8
Up to 80% at
1 year of use8
62% at 2 years in
peri-menopausal
women for
endometrial
protection
during
HRT use27
LNG downregulates
endometrial estrogen and
progesterone receptors
making endometrium
insensitive to circulating
estradiol, i.e., strong
anti-proliferative effect.
High local drug exposure
to the uterine cavity leads
to low LNG levels in serum
(gradient of endometrium
to serum 41,000-fold),
leading to minimal
systemic side effects36
• Long acting, i.e., no
need to remember
daily medication
• No effect on BMD in femur and
lumbar spine at 2 years37
• Top tier contraceptive efficacy
• Treatment of choice in medical
conditions including HMB, iron
deficiency anemia, endometrial
hyperplasia, endometriosis,
adenomyosis, fibroids, and
dysmenorrhea35
• Proliferative endometrium much
lower in LNG-IUD
versus oral progesterone, therefore
rate of amenorrhea increased with
time38
• Fertility regained after removal
• Can be used in succession for
continual benefits
• Discontinuation rates much lower
than COC use38
• No upmass or trash
to dispose
• Obviates long-duration medication
stability issue
• Perforation (rate 1:1,000 insertions up to
9:1,000 insertions.39–41 Occur mainly in first
year of use. May be related to skill of the
operator or undetected uterine abnormalities
• Expulsion rate between 2 and 10% in
the first year41
• Infection (0.51% in the first year)42
• Variable duration of initial menstrual
suppression due to BTB
• Initial expense
• Insertion-related pain/discomfort
• Hormonal side effects—progesterone
related (reduce with time)
Progestin-
containing
subdermal
implant
Etonorgestrel,
e.g., Nexplanon
Levonorgestrel,
e.g., Jadelle
3 years
(Nexplanon)
or 5 years
(Jadelle)
1-year failure
rate is 0.05%41
Varies between
11% in first
90 days up
to 41.25% at
3 years8,43–45
Inhibits ovulation by
suppressing hormone
production and follicle
development rendering the
endometrium thinner than
normal (such as COC)46
• Long acting with no need to
remember daily medication
• No effect on BMD at
2 years compared
with non-hormonal contraceptives46
• Fertility regained after removal
• Can be used in succession for
continual benefits
• No upmass or trash
to dispose
• Obviates long-duration medication
stability issue
• Subdermal implant may be palpable on arm
• Potential scarring at the site of insertion
• Insertion discomfort
• Variable length of time of menstrual
suppression with initial BTB (27–51.25%
irregular bleeding pattern)44,45
• Initial cost
• Hormonal side effects (progesterone related)
Abbreviations: BMD, bone mineral density; BTB, breakthrough bleeding; COC, combined oral contraceptive pill; DMPA, depot medroxyprogesterone acetate injections; HMB, heavy menstrual bleeding;
LNG, levonorgestrel; LNG-IUD, levonorgestrel intrauterine device; VTE, venous thromboembolism.
Menstrual suppression in astronauts
V Jain and VE Wotring
2
npj Microgravity (2016) 16008
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited
 vacuum chamber exercises or high-performance jet flying, and
spaceflight. With a rigorous pre-flight training phase, including
frequent international travel followed by time in quarantine before
missions, lasting at least 6 months, this further increases the time
over which reliable and effective contraception is important
(Figure 1). During the shuttle era, there were concerns about pre-
flight missed pills and therefore the risk of possible pregnancy.
There are, however, no cases where pregnancy prevented an
astronaut flying her designated mission.7 The ideal contraceptive
method would therefore help ensure effective amenorrhea as well
as higher adherence rates in order to reduce pregnancy risk.
As well as contraceptive effects, menstrual suppression is an
added benefit of some contraceptive methods. The waste disposal
systems onboard the US side of the International Space Station
that reclaim water from urine were not designed to handle
menstrual blood, thus idealizing the minimization of breakthrough
bleeding during menstrual suppression. The practicalities of
personal hygiene while menstruating during spaceflight could
be challenging, e.g., limited wash water supply or the task of
changing hygiene products in microgravity. Nonetheless, full
amenities are available should astronauts choose to menstruate. It
is more common for astronauts to continually suppress their
cycles for long-duration missions compared with short-duration
missions (Jennings, R.T., oral communication, 12 November 2014).
Short-duration missions allowed the flexibility for menstrual cycles
to be timed according to mission dates, thus avoiding menstrua-
tion in space as well as the need for menstrual suppression (Baker,
E.S., oral communication, 29 October 2014); female astronauts
could time shift their cycles with hormonal therapy in advance of a
mission. This cannot be done with long-duration missions and
therefore the question arises as to whether the female astronaut
wishes to suppress or not suppress.
MENSTRUAL SUPPRESSION METHODS FOR ASTRONAUTS
Options for female astronauts
Terrestrially, women may suppress menses via extended or
continuous use of the daily COC pill, daily progesterone-only pills
(POPs), the three monthly progestin-only injection DMPA, the
progestin-based subdermal implant that is viable for at least 3
years, or the LNG-IUD that is currently licensed for 5 years. As well
as a variance in their ability to induce amenorrhea, these methods
are also liable to individual variability within their end user. Several
studies have found a reduction in bone mineral density (BMD)
with DMPA.8 Terrestrially, these losses may be recovered once the
therapy is ceased, however, due to irreversible spaceflight-related
bone changes, a treatment option that may impact BMD would
not be acceptable for this subpopulation of women. Only 50%
of women using the POP become anovulatory and the rest
continue to menstruate regularly. Unless a woman is unable to
use estrogen-containing products, the POP would not provide
an astronaut with the desired rate of menstrual suppression
or minimized breakthrough bleeding that would be needed.
The progestin-based subdermal implant provides variable rates of
amenorrhea, ~ 11–42%. These rates are lower than continuous
COC use or the LNG-IUD; however, this device provides an
additional long-acting reversible option for those not able to use
estrogen or for those averse to having an intrauterine device.
Therefore, continuous use of the COC, the subdermal implant, and
the LNG-IUD appear to be the best options for menstrual
suppression in the female astronaut population.
Acceptability
For the astronaut population, their menstrual suppression regime
has often involved continuous use of the daily COC for numerous
years. Regimes used for COC can be tailored according to the
woman’s needs. A Brazilian survey showed that continuous use of
the COC was the more frequent prescribed method for inducing
amenorrhea (79.4%) with the LNG-IUD following closely at 72.7%.
It is important to note that patients requested and gynecologists
suggested these forms of contraception in 81% of cases, with
86.2% specifically prescribed to induce amenorrhea.9
Long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs) are now available
worldwide and provide a safe and reliable alternate method
to continuous COC use for inducing menstrual suppression.
LARCs encompass the progestin-containing subdermal implant
and the LNG-IUD. Neither contain estrogen and therefore are not
susceptible to estrogenic side effects or restrictions. They provide
long-acting contraceptive benefits and are used medically to treat
menorrhagia, fibroids, and endometriosis, whereas not impacting
BMD. LARCs offer long-term therapeutic advantages as well as a
reduction in mission upmass in comparison with daily COCs, no
packaging to dispose, and they dispel concerns regarding stability
during storage.
Despite the numerous advantages of using LARCs (outlined in
Table 1), a US study evaluating contraceptive use terrestrially up
until 2010 discovered that of the 62% of women using contra-
ception in the study, only 5.6% used LARCs compared with 28%
using COC and 27% who were sterilized.10 The percentage of
women using LARCs is fortunately increasing and another study
that evaluated the US National Survey of Family Growth data until
2013 highlighted a recent increase from 8.5% (2009) to 11.6%
(2012) in overall LARC usage. This was predominately driven by
intrauterine device (IUD) use, which rose from 7.7 to 10.3%
between 2009 and 2012, rather than implant usage, which
remained low.11 When no-cost contraception was offered to
women aged 14–45 years in the contraceptive CHOICE project,
LARCs were the preferred method of contraception. In addition to
this, satisfaction with LARCs is high, demonstrated by 76.7% of
LARC users still continuing with their contraceptive agent at
24 months, compared with 40.9% of non-LARC users. This trend
was present in both the adolescent (14–19 years) and adult (20–45
years) groups.12 An uptake rate of 11.6% in 2012 therefore
represents an underutilization of LARCs.
Better education for both physicians and patients could
improve acceptability of these therapies. Recent military studies
have shown continuous COC usage is only 15% in aviation
personnel, despite operationally relevant benefits associated with
its use.13 Military women desired to use menstrual suppression as
an alternative to experiencing menstruation during deployment.14
Many women desired suppression for deployment (66%) but only
21% continuously used COCs. Of note, desire for mandatory
education about continuous COC usage in this population was
high, with 86% reporting this type of education should be an entry
requirement for all female personnel.15 Knowledge gaps and
compliance difficulties limit use for continuous COCs and there-
fore menstrual suppression in the military.15 A small UK military
study highlighted the need for military healthcare providers to
counsel personnel about contraceptive options rather than
leaving this responsibility with national healthcare providers due
Figure 1.
Approximate time over which menstrual suppression ±
contraception may be required by female astronauts.
Menstrual suppression in astronauts
V Jain and VE Wotring
3
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited
npj Microgravity (2016) 16008
 to the higher levels of exposure to female soldiers. LARCs had not
been discussed with large numbers of personnel, whereas
contraceptive use was not even documented in over half of the
consultation records in the year leading up to the study.16 The
main barriers to uptake of LARCs include women’s knowledge of
and attitudes towards the methods, practice patterns among
providers, and high initial upfront costs. The contraceptive CHOICE
project removed these barriers, and in turn found over two-third
of participants chose a LARC (56% choosing an IUD and 11%
selecting a subdermal implant).17
Bone health with medically induced amenorrhea
The constant inhibition by oral synthetic estrogen and progester-
one
during
continuous
COC
use
leads
to
suppression
of
hypothalamic and pituitary release of follicle-stimulating hormone
and luteinizing hormone.18 This in turn impacts bioavailable levels
of estrogen and progesterone. Estrogen inhibits bone resorption
through its actions on osteoclastic activity and has anabolic effects
on osteoblasts.19 Continuous COC could therefore potentially
benefit astronauts by reducing spaceflight-related osteopenia. It is
however unknown how chronic low-dose COC therapy and its lack
of peaks in estrogen delivery alongside the impact of microgravity
together effect bone metabolism overall.
Elite athletes who are amenorrheic have been shown to have a
lower BMD than those with regular cycles.20 Exercise is a vital
countermeasure for astronauts and it is unknown if amenorrhea
affects astronauts at the same rates as elite athletes. Mechanisms
for osteopenic changes in relation to spaceflight are likely due to
gravitational unloading as opposed to changes in the hypotha-
lamic–pituitary–ovarian axis as is the case with elite athletes. It is
unknown if there is a synergistic mechanistic action in some
female astronauts who are extremely fit. Prescribing continuous
COC in these athletic female astronauts to understand any
potential advantages in relation to decreased BMD in space is
also unknown.
Terrestrially, COCs do not appear to negatively affect BMD.21
However, low-dose (20 μg) ethinyl estradiol COCs have been
shown to cause the loss of BMD compared with non-hormonal
contraceptives (e.g., the copper IUD) at 3 years of use.22 The
impact on overall BMD was particularly evident in adolescent
subjects; however, a decrease was noted specifically in the femoral
neck BMD in all pre-menopausal participants. The loss in BMD was
small, even smaller than the effect of menopause; however, any
BMD decrease within the astronaut population becomes relevant
due to the irreversible bone changes that occur as a result of
spaceflight. Little significance is given terrestrially to such small
decreases due to risk versus benefit ratios, but the connotation of
what may be ‘clinically relevant’, especially in terms of BMD, is
different in the spaceflight realm.
The balance between estrogen and progesterone provided by
hormonal contraception also needs consideration, as BMD was not
lost in 30–35 μg of ethinyl estradiol COC users compared with 2
years continuous use of DMPA, which led to 6% BMD loss.23
Subjects in this study were physically fit and healthy as eligibility
included being able to meet minimum criteria for entry into the
armed forces. Over the course of the study, there was no
requirement for regular physical exercise but the numbers that
engaged in weight-bearing activity did not differ between
experimental or control groups. Subjects were aged 18–33 years,
therefore their bones were still under estrogenic influence;
however, in the astronaut population, where bone preservation
is vital, the potential advantages of oral estrogen cannot be
ignored. Thus, COCs of 30–35 μg of ethinyl estradiol have been
prescribed for continuous use among the astronaut population.7
Decisions regarding the dosage of estrogen within the COC were
based on extrapolation from terrestrial studies, not from actual
spaceflight evidence. There are currently no studies comparing
the differences on bone loss in women who do or do not use the
COC in space, and therefore this has not been formally evaluated.
It is important to note that the progestin-only subdermal
implant and the LNG-IUD do not negatively impact BMD during
usage on Earth in pre-menopausal women.21 This further increases
their potential viability for female astronauts.
LIMITATIONS OF MENSTRUAL SUPPRESSION
A potential limitation with virtually all menstrual suppression
regimes is degree of suppression from initial dosing. Most studies
quote rates of unscheduled, unpredictable and irregular bleeding
in the initial months of LARC usage. It has been postulated that
this could be attributed to the timing of initiation and whether the
endometrium is in proliferative or secretory stages. There may also
be an element of whether the hypothalamic–pituitary–ovarian
axis is supporting ovulatory or anovulatory cycles.6
Weisberg et al.24 compared long-term bleeding patterns in
LNG-IUD versus progestin-containing subdermal implant users.
Irregular bleeding patterns are evident with all LARCs but
amenorrhea rates appear to be similar in both the groups after
2 years of use. Transexamic acid and mefanamic acid have both
been trialed to reduce the initial bleeding or spotting ‘nuisances’
with the LNG-IUD but neither led to a significant reduction
compared with placebo in a double-blind randomized control
trial.25 Evidence is limited around managing irregular bleeding
with LNG-IUDs but with subdermal implants, non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs, or low-dose COCs may be trialed on a short-
term basis in the United States.26 Trials in peri-menopausal
women, where the LNG-IUD was used alongside oral estrogen
therapy, have found high rates of amenorrhea, which are almost
comparable with continuous COC use.27 Similarly, in the United
Kingdom, up to 3 months of either continuous or cyclical 30–35 μg
of ethinyl estradiol COCs are recommended to combat irregular
bleeding for both LNG-IUDs and subdermal implants, although
this is unlicensed.28
LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF MENSTRUAL SUPPRESSION
Long-term side-effect profiles for menstrual suppression by afore-
mentioned methods are good. Data provide reassurance for the
long-term use of COC pills and LARCs. Adverse events associated
with extended regimes of COCs were similar to those seen with
28-day cyclical regimes.29 Return to a normal menstrual pattern and
fertility is promising with both continuous COC use and LARCs.
One-year pregnancy rate after the removal of the LNG-IUD is similar
to women of the same age not using any form of birth control.30
Women discontinuing extended use COC regimes without starting
any other hormonal contraception had a median time to withdrawal
bleeding of 32 days, a return to ovulatory capacity within 32 days
and 99% of women were having spontaneous menstruation or
pregnancy within 3 months of discontinuation.29 There is no
increased risk of breast cancer in users of the COC and it has been
found that ovarian, endometrial, and colorectal cancer risks decrease
as the length of COC use increases, i.e., making COC use protective
against ovarian, endometrial, and colorectal cancer.8,31 The LNG-IUD
is recommended for the treatment of endometrial hyperplasia and
can be used long term with surveillance.8
OPERATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
From an operational perspective, LARCs would not be expected to
interfere with the ability of the astronaut to perform her tasks.
There are no reports in the literature suggesting high G loading
experienced during launch or landing would impact subdermal
implant or LNG-IUD placement or bleeding patterns; similar
gravitational forces may be experienced by terrestrial women, e.g.,
military jet pilots but there are currently no data in the literature
Menstrual suppression in astronauts
V Jain and VE Wotring
4
npj Microgravity (2016) 16008
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited
 regarding this population. Perforation of the uterus or expulsion of
the LNG-IUD is a risk associated with operator skill and more
frequent in the first year of use. Should a LARC be desired
(LNG-IUD or the subdermal implant), it would be advisable to
insert it at least 1.5–2 years before flight, in order to judge the
side-effect profile but more importantly the bleeding pattern.
After the initial 6 months of use, bleeding patterns or probability
of amenorrhea can be better judged with the LNG-IUD; however,
bleeding patterns may differ with the subdermal implant. On the
rare chance the LNG-IUD is expulsed during flight, menstruation
would occur as normal during spaceflight and this would not
impede an astronaut’s ability to perform her job. Ultrasound
capabilities are already present onboard the International Space
Station and a transvaginal ultrasound probe as well as gyneco-
logical examination kit could be added to the hardware if desired.
Additional training as well as skill retention would need to be
addressed before the implementation of such equipment.
Immune dysfunction may occur during spaceflight; however,
this should not hinder an astronaut’s choice with regards to
menstrual suppression options. Hormonal contraception is safe to
use in immuno-compromised populations terrestrially, with COCs,
subdermal implants, and LNG-IUDs having all been trialed. A
pelvic inflammatory disease risk of 0.16 per 100 women years has
been demonstrated within an immuno-compromised study group
with IUDs, which is low.32 Earth-based analogs do not exist to
precisely replicate spaceflight immune dysfunction but extrapola-
tion from these data suggests continuous COCs and LARCs would
be safe for female astronauts.
The daily requirement of the continuous COC regime would
mean ~ 1,100 pills would be needed for a 3-year exploration class
mission. Drug stability has not been tested for hormonal
medications over such a long time in space or with the impact
of deep-space radiation. Opting for a LARC would remove the
cost, upmass, packaging, waste and stability issues as a device
could be inserted before a mission and replacement would not be
required in-flight. Consideration could be given as to whether a
small number of 30–35 μg of ethinyl estradiol COC pills or non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs could be added to the medical
kits in case breakthrough bleeding becomes problematic.
However, consideration may need to be given to the subdermal
implant and whether it could rub or catch on specialist equipment
or attire such as the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory diving suit or
the extra-vehicular activity suit. The implant does not usually
interfere with normal clothing worn by terrestrial users, and most
comment they are unaware of its positioning after the initial
insertion. We suspect subdermal implant positioning would be
non-problematic for female astronauts; however, this has not been
trialed.
DISCUSSION
There is a long history of continuous COC use during spaceflight
missions and training. It is safe and reliable for effective
contraception and menstrual suppression. Other methods could
be considered in the astronaut population, specifically LARCs,
which are dependable and effective long-acting contraceptives
with comparable rates of amenorrhea. The implant provides better
rates of amenorrhea compared with the LNG-IUD in the first
two years of use however thereafter rates of amenorrhea do not
differ significantly. With the LNG-IUD currently licensed for five
years versus three years for the implant, our recommendations
would lie with the LNG-IUD due to time scales over which
astronauts may require medically induced amenorrhea.
Treating bleeding irregularities in implant users has been
successful with concurrent COC use.33 Usage of COC has not
been investigated alongside the LNG-IUD and this could be a
viable option for female astronauts, potentially providing a top-
tier contraceptive, with the additional benefits of add-back
estrogen, which may reduce bone loss, an important issue for
astronauts. Further research would be needed to see whether this
strategy decreases initial irregular bleeding, breakthrough bleed-
ing, or has any impact on BMD.
Recommendations for spaceflight
The uniqueness of the spaceflight environment provides many
challenges in conducting research. The number of subjects
required by clinical studies cannot be matched by the number
of current active female astronauts. Combining pharmacological
data on the bioavailability of hormones during spaceflight with
analog ground-based studies investigating menstrual suppression
may provide the evidence required to trial LARCs during space-
flight. With longer-duration missions, the age at which female
astronauts are undertaking spaceflight is increasing and the
literature supports the LNG-IUD as the progestin component
for hormone
replacement therapy
in
peri-menopausal
and
menopausal women. Research is needed into the use of the
LNG-IUD alongside oral estrogen and whether this influences BMD
in this subpopulation of astronauts.
Resource limitations as well as the continuous number of days
worked by military personnel are similar to conditions experienced
by astronauts. Lessons learned from military studies dictate that
education for all female personnel at recruitment would be
extremely beneficial in these populations of women autonomously
making decisions about menstrual suppression. It is ultimately the
woman’s choice to suppress or not. Respecting this autonomy is
important; however, options should be available to her should she
decide to suppress in consideration of her working environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge Drs Michael Barratt, Serena Aunon, Richard Jennings, Ellen Baker,
and Michelle Blackwell for helpful discussions. We would also like to thank and
acknowledge Ms Elisca Hicks, Ms Sherrie Dill and Ms Janine Bolton for their
continued support. VJ was funded through the Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists/American Gynecological Club Travel Fellowship 2015, and the
National Institute for Health Research, UK. She received honorary academic support
from King’s College London and Baylor College of Medicine’s Center for Space
Medicine. The efforts of VEW were funded by NASA’s Human Research Program.
CONTRIBUTIONS
The project was conceived by V.E.W. after discussions with J.D. Polk, formerly of NASA
Johnson Space Center. V.J. performed the majority of the literature search and
personal interviewing. V.J. and V.E.W. collaborated on drafting and amending this
manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
REFERENCES
1. Thomas, S. L. & Ellertson, C. Nuisance or natural and healthy: should monthly
menstruation be optional for women? Lancet 355, 922–924 (2000).
2. Glasier A. F. et al. Amenorrhea associated with contraception—an international
study on acceptability. Contraception 67, 1–8 (2003).
3. Andrist L. C. et al. Women's and providers' attitudes toward menstrual suppres-
sion with extended use of oral contraceptives. Contraception 70: 359–363 (2004).
4. Frederick, C. E., Edelman, A., Carlson, N. E., Rosenberg, K. D. & Jensen, J. T. Extended-
use oral contraceptives and medically induced amenorrhea: attitudes, knowledge
and prescribing habits of physicians. Contraception 84, 384–389 (2011).
5. Lin, K. & Barnhart, K. The clinical rationale for menses-free contraception.
J. Womens Health (Larchmt) 16, 1171–1180 (2007).
6. Hillard, P. A. Menstrual suppression: current perspectives. Int. J. Womens Health 6,
631–637 (2014).
7. Jones, J. A., Jennings, R. T., Baker, E. S.Renal, In: Biomedical Results of the Space
Shuttle Program (eds Risin D. & Stepaniak P. C.) 141–155 (National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, USA, 2013).
Menstrual suppression in astronauts
V Jain and VE Wotring
5
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited
npj Microgravity (2016) 16008
 8. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 110: noncontraceptive uses of hormonal contra-
ceptives. Obstet. Gynecol. 115, 206–218 (2010).
9. Makuch, M. Y., D Osis, M. J., de Padua, K. S. & Bahamondes, L. Use of hormonal
contraceptives to control menstrual bleeding: attitudes and practice of Brazilian
gynecologists. Int. J. Womens Health 5, 795–801 (2013).
10. Jones, J., Mosher, W. & Daniels, K. Current contraceptive use in the United States,
2006-2010, and changes in patterns of use since 1995. Natl Health Stat. Rep. 60,
1–25 (2012).
11. Kavanaugh, M. L., Jerman, J. & Finer, L. B. Changes in use of long-acting reversible
contraceptive methods among U.S. women, 2009-2012. Obstet. Gynecol. 126,
917–927 (2015).
12. O'Neil-Callahan, M., Peipert, J. F., Zhao, Q., Madden, T. & Secura, G. Twenty-
four-month continuation of reversible contraception. Obstet. Gynecol. 122,
1083–1091 (2013).
13. Powell-Dunford, N., Cuda, A. S., Moore, J. L., Crago, M. S. & Deuster, P. A. Menstrual
suppression using oral contraceptives: survey of deployed female aviation
personnel. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 80, 971–975 (2009).
14. Trego, L. L. & Jordan, P. J. Military women's attitudes toward menstruation and
menstrual suppression in relation to the deployed environment: development
and testing of the MWATMS-9 (short form). Womens Health Issues 20,
287–293 (2010).
15. Powell-Dunford N. C. et al. Menstrual suppression for combat operations:
advantages of oral contraceptive pills. Womens Health Issues 2011; 21: 86–91.
16. Crabb, S. L. Contraception counselling of female soldiers in primary healthcare
facilities. J. R. Army Med. Corps 161, 109–111 (2015).
17. Secura, G. M., Allsworth, J. E., Madden, T., Mullersman, J. L. & Peipert, J. F. The
Contraceptive CHOICE Project: reducing barriers to long-acting reversible con-
traception. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 203, 115, e1-7 (2010).
18. Talukdar N. et al. Effect of long-term combined oral contraceptive pill use on
endometrial thickness. Obstet. Gynecol. 120, 348–354 (2012).
19. Krassas, G. E. & Papadopoulou, P. Oestrogen action on bone cells. J. Musculoskelet
Neuronal Interact. 2, 143–151 (2001).
20. Dimitriou L. et al. Bone mineral density, rib pain and other features of the female
athlete triad in elite lightweight rowers. BMJ Open 4, e004369 (2014).
21. Lopez, L. M., Grimes, D. A., Schulz, K. F. & Curtis, K. M. Steroidal contraceptives:
effect on bone fractures in women. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. CD006033
(2009).
22. Berenson, A. B., Rahman, M., Breitkopf, C. R. & Bi, L. X. Effects of depot medrox-
yprogesterone acetate and 20-microgram oral contraceptives on bone mineral
density. Obstet. Gynecol. 112, 788–799 (2008).
23. Berenson, A. B., Breitkopf, C. R., Grady, J. J., Rickert, V. I. & Thomas, A. Effects of
hormonal contraception on bone mineral density after 24 months of use. Obstet.
Gynecol. 103, 899–906 (2004).
24. Weisberg, E., Bateson, D., McGeechan, K. & Mohapatra, L. A three-year comparative
study of continuation rates, bleeding patterns and satisfaction in Australian women
using
a
subdermal
contraceptive
implant
or
progestogen
releasing-
intrauterine system. Eur. J. Contracept. Reprod. Health Care 19, 5–14 (2014).
25. Sordal, T., Inki, P., Draeby, J., O'Flynn, M. & Schmelter, T. Management of initial
bleeding or spotting after levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system place-
ment: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet. Gynecol. 121, 934–941 (2013).
26. Curtis, K. M., Bauer, U., Barfield, W. & Prevention, N. C. C. D. US Selected Practice
Recommendations for Contraceptive Use, 2013 Adapted from the World Health
Organization Selected Practice Recommendations for Contraceptive Use, 2nd
Edition. MMWR Recomm. Rep. 62, 1–59 (2013).
27. Boon, J., Scholten, P. C., Oldenhave, A. & Heintz, A. P. M. Continuous intrauterine
compared with cyclic oral progestin administration in perimenopausal HRT.
Maturitas 46, 69–77 (2003).
28. FSRH. CEU Guidance 2015 Problematic Bleeding with Hormonal Contraception.
1–28 (2015).
29. Nappi, R. E., Kaunitz, A. M. & Bitzer, J. Extended regimen combined oral contra-
ception: A review of evolving concepts and acceptance by women and clinicians.
Eur. J. Contracept. Reprod. Health Care 1–9 (2015); e-pub ahead of print.
30. Bednarek, P. H. & Jensen, J. T. Safety, efficacy and patient acceptability of the
contraceptive and non-contraceptive uses of the LNG-IUS. Int. J. Womens Health
1, 45–58 (2010).
31. Cibula D. et al. Hormonal contraception and risk of cancer. Hum. Reprod. Update
6, 631–650 (2010).
32. ACOG Committee on Practice Bulletins–Gynecology. ACOG Practice Bulletin No.
117: Gynecologic care for women with human immunodeficiency virus. Obstet.
Gynecol. 16, 1492–1509 (2010).
33. Abdel-Aleem, H., d'Arcangues, C., Vogelsong, K. M., Gaffield, M. L. & Gulmezoglu,
A. M. Treatment of vaginal bleeding irregularities induced by progestin only
contraceptives. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. CD003449 (2013).
34. Edelman A., Micks E., Gallo M. F., Jensen J. T., Grimes D. A. Continuous or
extended cycle vs cyclic use of combined hormonal contraceptives for contra-
ception. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. CS004895 (2014).
35. Fraser, I. S. Added health benefits of the levonorgestrel contraceptive intrauterine
system and other hormonal contraceptive delivery systems. Contraception 87,
273–279 (2013).
36. Bayer. Mirena Data Sheet. Product Insert 1–15 (2014); http://www.medsafe.govt.
nz/profs/datasheet/m/Mirenaius.pdf.
37. Yang, K. Y., Kim, Y. S., Ji, Y. I. & Jung, M. H. Changes in bone mineral density of
users of the levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine System. J. Nippon Med. Sch. 79,
190–194 (2012).
38. Somboonporn, W., Panna, S., Temtanakitpaisan, T., Kaewrudee, S. & Soontrapa, S.
Effects of the levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system plus estrogen therapy
in
perimenopausal
and
postmenopausal
women:
systematic
review
and
meta-analysis. Menopause 18, 1060–1066 (2011).
39. Van Houdenhoven, K., van Kaam, K. J., van Grootheest, A. C., Salemans, T. H. &
Dunselman, G. A. Uterine perforation in women using a levonorgestrel-releasing
intrauterine system. Contraception 73, 257–260 (2006).
40. Margarit, L. M., Griffiths, A. N. & Vine, S. J. Management of levonorgestrel-
releasing intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) uterine perforation. J. Obstet. Gynaecol.
24, 586–587 (2004).
41. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists ACOG Practice Bulletin No.
121: long-acting reversible contraception: implants and intrauterine devices.
Obstet. Gynecol. 18, 184–196 (2011).
42. Eisenberg D. L. et al. Three-year efficacy and safety of a new 52-mg levo-
norgestrel-releasing intrauterine system. Contraception 2015; 92, 10–16.
43. Hubacher, D., Lopez, L., Steiner, M. J. & Dorflinger, L. Menstrual pattern changes
from levonorgestrel subdermal implants and DMPA: systematic review and
evidence-based comparisons. Contraception 80, 113–118 (2009).
44. Bhatia, P., Nangia, S., Aggarwal, S. & Tewari, C. Implanon: subdermal single rod
contraceptive implant. J. Obstet. Gynaecol. India 61, 422–425 (2011).
45. Gezginc, K., Balci, O., Karatayli, R. & Colakoglu, M. C. Contraceptive efficacy
and side effects of Implanon. Eur. J. Contracept. Reprod. Health Care 12,
362–365 (2007).
46. Hohmann, H. Examining the efficacy, safety, and patient acceptability of the eto-
nogestrel implantable contraceptive. Patient Prefer. Adherence 3, 205–211 (2009).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/
Menstrual suppression in astronauts
V Jain and VE Wotring
6
npj Microgravity (2016) 16008
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited
