 July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 358
1
Original research
published: 24 July 2017
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2017.00358
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Peter John Shortland, 
 
Western Sydney 
University, Australia
Reviewed by: 
Karim A. Sarhane, 
University of Toledo, 
United States 
 
Leif A. Havton, 
University of California, 
 
Los Angeles, United States
*Correspondence:
Nicholas D. James 
 
nicholas.james@epfl.ch
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted 
 
to Neurotrauma, 
 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Neurology
Received: 13 March 2017
Accepted: 07 July 2017
Published: 24 July 2017
Citation: 
James ND, Angéria M, Bradbury EJ, 
Damberg P
, McMahon SB, Risling M 
and Carlstedt T (2017) Structural and 
Functional Substitution of Deleted 
Primary Sensory Neurons by 
 
New Growth from Intrinsic Spinal 
Cord Nerve Cells: An Alternative 
Concept in Reconstruction of 
 
Spinal Cord Circuits. 
Front. Neurol. 8:358. 
 
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2017.00358
structural and Functional 
substitution of Deleted Primary 
sensory neurons by new growth 
from intrinsic spinal cord nerve 
cells: an alternative concept in 
reconstruction of spinal cord 
circuits
Nicholas D. James1*, Maria Angéria2, Elizabeth J. Bradbury1, Peter Damberg3,  
Stephen B. McMahon1, Mårten Risling2 and Thomas Carlstedt1
1 
The Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, 2 
Department  
of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden, 3 
Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet,  
Solna, Sweden
In a recent clinical report, return of the tendon stretch reflex was demonstrated after 
spinal cord surgery in a case of total traumatic brachial plexus avulsion injury. Peripheral 
nerve grafts had been implanted into the spinal cord to reconnect to the peripheral 
nerves for motor and sensory function. The dorsal root ganglia (DRG) containing the 
primary sensory nerve cells had been surgically removed in order for secondary or 
spinal cord sensory neurons to extend into the periphery and replace the deleted DRG 
neurons. The present experimental study uses a rat injury model first to corroborate 
the clinical finding of a re-established spinal reflex arch, and second, to elucidate some 
of the potential mechanisms underlying these findings by means of morphological, 
immunohistochemical, and electrophysiological assessments. Our findings indicate 
that, after spinal cord surgery, the central nervous system sensory system could replace 
the traumatically detached original peripheral sensory connections through new neurite 
growth from dendrites.
Keywords: avulsion injury, sensory neurons, plasticity, proprioception, electrophysiology
inTrODUcTiOn
The first human case in which spinal cord surgery resulted in the return of sensorimotor func­
tion and the restoration of a reflex arch after spinal root avulsion, in conjunction with a brachial 
 
plexus lesion, was recently presented (1). The root avulsion injury is a spinal cord (or central ner 
vous 
system, CNS) lesion which was not previously considered amenable to treatment, as regeneration 
 
of new nerve fibers has to occur in CNS tissue of the spinal cord.
Reimplanting avulsed motor roots into the spinal cord can restore muscle function. Recovery 
is explained by the original findings that, as a first critical and crucial part of recuperation, spinal 
 FigUre 1 | Flowchart illustrating the breakdown of animals used for each outcome measure in the study.
2
James et al.
Alternative Concept in Reconstruction of Spinal Circuits
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 358
cord motorneurons can regrow within the CNS as proper CNS 
regeneration (2). This unique finding resulted in a surgical tech­
nique that is now an established clinical treatment and can restore 
useful motor (but not sensory) function in patients, even those 
with the most severe and complica 
ted brachial plexus avulsion 
injuries (3–5).
In contrast to the ability of motor neurons to regrow within, 
and extend beyond, the spinal cord after root avulsion or intra­
spinal injury, it is well documented that sensory nerve fibers 
cannot regenerate back into the spinal cord after injury (6, 7). 
Obviously, sensory function cannot be recovered by reimplant­
ing avulsed sensory roots in these injuries, which for the affected 
patients means agonizing chronic pain, loss of proprioceptive and 
exteroceptic sensation, as well as reduced muscle coordination 
and function (5).
Hypothetically, sensory nerve cells in the spinal cord could 
elongate new processes into a PNS graft implanted into the dorsal 
spinal cord to reconnect with the periphery. Indeed, medullary 
implantation of a nerve graft into the dorsal horn of the spinal 
cord has been documented to incite extension of processes from 
spinal cord dorsal horn neurons into the sensory part of a spinal 
nerve after the dorsal root ganglion has been removed, in effect 
bypassing the primary sensory neurons (8, 9). This original 
experimental observation led to application in a clinical case, the 
outcome of which was the return of a spinal cord reflex (1).
The objective of this study is to further elucidate the 
mechanisms underlying the clinical observation of surgically 
provo 
ked spinal cord recovery and plasticity of sensory systems. 
The nature of the de novo neurites from the dorsal horn, as 
well as the ability to electrically evoke local spinal segmental 
reflexes, is examined. In effect, this is an “inverted” translational 
 
study.
MaTerials anD MeThODs
animals and injury Model
All experimental procedures were performed according to 
 
United Kingdom Scientific Procedures Act (1986). Figure 1 illus­
trates the number of animals used for individual outcomes. 20 
adult female Wistar rats (220–250 g; Harlan Laboratories) were 
surgically anesthetized using a mixture of ketamine (60 mg/kg) 
and medetomidine (0.25 mg/kg; administered i.p.). A skin incision 
was made medial to the iliac crest and blunt dissection through 
the longissimus muscle to the left lateral L5 vertebral process 
was performed. This was removed and a hemi­laminectomy was 
performed in order to expose the terminal parts of L3–L6 dorsal 
roots and their associated dorsal root ganglia. The dorsal roots 
of L3–L6 were cut near the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and the 
L4 and L5 DRG were removed entirely (Figure 2A). A second, 
more rostral, hemi­laminectomy was performed and the L3–L6 
dorsal roots were cut flush with the spinal cord surface. The L5 
dorsal root was then reimplanted through a small opening in the 
pia mater just caudal to its original site of attachment with the 
spinal cord. The distal end of the L5 dorsal root was long enough 
to then be coapted to the sensory part of the L4 spinal nerve 
(Figure 2B). The end of the L5 dorsal root and the sensory part 
of the L4 spinal nerve were held together with Tisseal glue. The 
wound was then closed in layers. All animals were administered 
appropriate analgesia at the time of surgical induction, 24, and 
48 h post­surgery (carprofen, 5 mg/kg; s.c. delivery).
Tissue Processing
At 12–16 weeks post­injury terminally anesthetized animals 
underwent transcardial perfusion with heparinized 0.9% NaCl 
solution followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate 
 FigUre 2 | Schematic representation of surgical injury model indicating the rhizotomy of L3–L6 dorsal roots and ganglionectomy of L4 and L5 DRGs (a) as well  
as the subsequent reimplantation of the conjoined L4 spinal nerve and L5 dorsal root (B). Dashed red line indicates the site of surgical repair, where L5 dorsal root 
transitions into L4 spinal nerve. (c) Semi-thin transverse section of plastic-embedded reimplanted dorsal root indicating the presence of numerous small diameter 
myelinated axons, despite the surgical removal of the dorsal root ganglion [section taken from site marked with asterisk in panel (B)]. (D) Magnification of boxed  
area shown in panel (c). Scale bar in panel (c) = 50 µm and in panel (D) = 25 µm.
3
James et al.
Alternative Concept in Reconstruction of Spinal Circuits
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 358
buffer (PB). The L5 spinal cord segment and the replanted dorsal 
root were rapidly removed and post fixed with 4% paraformal­
dehyde in 0.1 M PB for 2 h at room temperature. For spinal cord 
sections, the spinal cord tissue was embedded in paraffin wax 
and cut in 25 µm transverse sections using a microtome. For 
semi­thin reimplanted dorsal root sections, tissue was osmicated 
and then dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol and then 
embedded in Durcopan (Fluka, Sigma­Aldrich GmbH). After 
polymerization, the specimens were cut in 0.5 µm semi­thin 
sections on a LKB Ultrotome V and stained with toluidine blue. 
Images were obtained with a NIKON E600 microscope with a 
 
60 × oil immersion plan­apo lens and a Nikon Digital Sight 
DS­U1 camera or a NIKON EZC1 confocal imaging system.
electrophysiology
Electrophysiological assessment of function in reimplanted, 
ganglionectomised dorsal root/spinal nerves was carried out 
12–16 weeks post­surgery on rats (n = 8) deeply anesthetized 
using urethane (1.25 g/kg i.p.). Depth of anesthesia was regularly 
assessed by monitoring withdrawal reflexes and respiratory 
rate. Core temperature was maintained at 37°C using a self­
regulating heating blanket. Soft tissue was dissected to re­expose 
the ganglionectomised dorsal root/spinal nerve from its spinal 
replantation site to the iliac crest. The ganglionectomised dorsal 
root was hooked onto bipolar silver wire stimulating electrodes 
just distal to the reimplantation site (~5 mm). The dorsal root 
was raised well above surrounding tissues on these silver wire 
hook electrodes and a thin sheet of plastic was placed over the 
surrounding tissue beneath the electrodes to ensure the stimulus 
could not spread to any other tissues. Similar bipolar silver wire 
recording electrodes were placed approximately 15 mm distal to 
the stimulation site (Figure 4A, “R1”). In n = 4 of these rats, 
the sciatic nerve in the left hindlimb was also exposed at mid­
thigh level and placed on bipolar silver wire recording electrodes 
(Figure 4B, “R2”). When recording activity in the sciatic nerve, 
the stimulating electrode pair was moved 10 mm distal to the 
original stimulation location described above (i.e., stimulation 
now 15 mm, rather than 5 mm, distal to the reimplantation 
site) in order to ensure there was no spread of stimulation to the 
spinal cord. All exposed tissues were immersed in mineral oil 
to prevent current spread and the drying out of nervous tissue. 
Stimulation intensity was supra­maximal (3 mA, 1 ms duration 
square wave pulses delivered at a frequency of 0.2 Hz) in order 
to ensure that even small diameter, non­myelinated fibers would 
be activated. Recordings were captured using LabChart software 
(AD Instruments).
Fluorogold (Fg) injections
One week prior to terminal electrophysiological experiments, 
n = 4 rats received injections of the retrograde tracer FG (Santa 
Cruz Biotechnology) into the left sciatic nerve. Under gaseous 
anesthesia (2% isoflurane), the left sciatic nerve was exposed, 
a small hole was cut in the epineurium using microdissection 
tools and a 5 µl Hamilton syringe was then inserted through this 
hole into the nerve tissue and used to slowly deliver 4 µl of 2% 
FG (in PBS) over the course of 90 s. The Hamilton syringe was 
left in position for 2 min following injection to minimize any 
backflow of tracer. Muscle and skin were then sutured separately 
 FigUre 3 | Retrograde tracing with FluoroGold (FG) indicates long distance 
extension of neuronal processes directly from spinal cord neurons to the 
sciatic nerve. Small populations of dorsal horn neurons [NeuN-positive;  
(a)] are colabeled with FG (B,D). FG-positive neurons in the dorsal horn  
were typically found in the vicinity of the reimplantation site [(c,D); arrow 
indicates implantation site]. Scale bar = 50 µm.
4
James et al.
Alternative Concept in Reconstruction of Spinal Circuits
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 358
and animals were administered analgesics (carprofen; 5 mg/kg) 
and allowed to recover for 2 h in a heated incubator before being 
returned to their home cage.
immunohistochemistry
Sections were incubated in primary antibody in 0.01 M PBS 
with 5% bovine serum albumin and 0.3% Triton at 4°C over­
night. Primary antibody was removed by washing three times 
for 5 min each in 0.01 M PBS. Sections were then incubated with 
appropriate secondary antibodies for 2 h at room temperature in 
0.01 M PBS with 0.3% triton and 5% normal donkey serum, and 
then washed in 0.01 M PBS three times for 5 min. Slides were then 
coverslipped using Mowiol mounting medium. Primary anti­
bodies used were rabbit anti­GFAP (1:2,000, Dako), mouse anti­
NeuN (1:500, Millipore), and mouse anti­MAP2 (1:500, Sigma). 
Secondary antibodies used were donkey anti­rabbit Alexa 488 
(Invitrogen), donkey anti­mouse Alexa 546 (Invitrogen), and 
donkey anti­mouse Cy3 (Jackson ImmunoResearch Inc.). All 
secondary antibodies were applied at a dilution of 1:1,000.
Tractography
Specimens for ex vivo MRI were fixed in paraformaldehyde 
and transferred to Fombin in a plastic syringe and mounted in 
a 16­mm coil (Rapid Biomedical, Würtsburg, Germany) in a 
 
9.4­T MRI system (Agilent technologies, Yarnton, UK). Diffu­
sion weighted data were recorded overnight using a spin echo 
sequence (TR = 4 s, TE = 18.17 ms, b = 1,250 s/mm2, 70 
contiguous slices of 0.15 mm thickness, matrix = 192 × 192, 
FOV = 19.2 mm × 19.2 mm, ucl42 scheme, zero­filled to 256 × 256 
before reconstruction). Tractography DSI studio DTI reconstruc­
tion was carried out using the following tracking parameters: 
termination index fa, Threshold, 90° Angular Threshold, step 
size 0.05, subvoxel seed position, trilinear direction interpolation, 
and the streamline (Euler) tracking Algorithm. The images were 
analyzed using DSI studio software (10). With this software, the 
diffusion information in each voxel is used for fiber tracing. Thus, 
the possibility for water molecules to move along axons and not 
across membranes during exposure to the magnetic field is to 
follow tracts from voxel to voxel. Several parameters have to be 
entered in the software before tracing. One critical parameter is 
the limit for angular reflection from the tract. In this study, this 
limit had to be gradually increased up to 90° to finally match 
the angle of the fibers in the dorsal root replant relative to the 
longitudinal axis of the spinal cord. Using automated software for 
tractography, it is important to change such parameters stepwise 
in order limit the risk for artifacts in the tracing.
The DSI software generates a 3D reconstruction from the stack 
of MRI images. In a virtual transverse section of the spinal cord, 
or dorsal root, a region of interest was used as the origin (seed) 
for the tracing of fiber tracts. The diffusion data from each voxel 
provide a description of the preferential movement of water mol­
ecules in the specimen. The diffusion is assumed to be restricted 
by axon membranes, but not restricted in the axoplasm along the 
fiber tracts. This generates a 3D image of the fiber tracts that stem 
from the so­called seed (the origin for the tracing). For the tracing 
of axons from the reimplanted dorsal root, we used a site within 
the root itself as seed (origin). We also performed tractography 
on the L3 region of the spinal cord where the dorsal root had 
been removed, but not reimplanted. As no root was available in 
the control specimen, the entire half of the spinal cord that was 
ipsilateral to the avulsed dorsal root was instead used as seed for 
the tractography.
resUlTs
Anatomical assessment of reimplanted, ganglionectomised dor­
sal root tissue taken at 16 weeks post­injury revealed the presence 
of numerous small diameter axons when examining semi­thin 
plastic­embedded transverse sections taken adjacent to the gan­
glionectomy site (Figures 2C,D). Additionally, it was apparent 
that while almost all axons in the root were of a relatively small 
diameter (<3 μm), many of these were myelinated. While the 
small diameter of these axons suggested that they are likely to be 
de novo growth, they could possibly have been remaining frag­
ments of degenerating axons following the avulsion and gangli­
onectomy. We therefore carried out retrograde tracing from the 
sciatic nerve using FG and examined transverse sections of the 
L5 spinal cord to verify the dorsal horn origin of some of these 
nerve fibers (Figure 3). Immunohistochemical analysis revealed 
that in each of the traced animals there were numerous examples 
of neuronal cell bodies (NeuN­positive) in the L5 dorsal horn 
which had incorporated the FG tracer (Figure 3), indicating 
that these cells must have a direct process which extended all 
the way to the sciatic nerve. Intriguingly, there were also many 
cases of FG­positive neurons being found in the lateral spinal 
nucleus (LSN). These FG­positive neurons occurred mainly in 
the vicinity of the tip of the reimplanted root in the spinal cord 
dorsal horn (Figures 3B,D).
 FigUre 4 | Electrophysiological assessment indicates functional viability of processes extending from spinal cord into dorsal root and distally to sciatic nerve.  
(a) Schematic drawing showing the experimental set-up for electrophysiological assessment of function in the ganglionectomised dorsal root/spinal nerve.  
(S), stimulation site; (R1), recording site on coapted spinal nerve (short distance conduction, 15 mm from S to R1); (R2), recording site on sciatic nerve (long  
distance conduction, 40 mm from S to R2). Dashed red line indicates the site of surgical repair, where L5 dorsal root transitions into the sensory part of L4  
spinal nerve. (B) Example trace showing recording from proximal recording site (on spinal nerve). (c) Example trace showing recording from distal recording site  
(on sciatic nerve). Note the differing scales for each trace, indicating the increased amplitude and decreased latency for the short distance response. For panels 
(B,c), # indicates onset of stimulus artifact and * indicates onset of evoked response.
5
James et al.
Alternative Concept in Reconstruction of Spinal Circuits
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 358
In order to determine if the neural processes extending 
into and growing along the ganglionectomised dorsal root and 
spinal nerve were functional and could transmit electrical nerve 
impulses, we carried out an electrophysiological assessment of 
conduction 12–16 weeks post­injury (Figure 4A). To do this, 
we first stimulated the affected L5 dorsal root as it entered the 
spinal cord while recording any subsequently evoked activity 
at a site approximately 15 mm distal to this in the spinal nerve 
(Figure 4B). In six out of eight animals assessed, we saw varying 
degrees of evoked activity when recording at this site, indicating 
that not only had axons extended from the spinal cord out into 
this denervated tissue but that these neurites were functionally 
viable. In four of these animals (those not injected with FG), 
we then carried out further electrophysiological assessment in 
which we moved our stimulation site 10 mm distal to the previ­
ous site (to ensure there was no spread of stimulus to directly 
activate the spinal cord) and recorded any evoked activity in 
the sciatic nerve. In two of four animals assessed, we recorded 
evoked activity at this site (representative trace in Figure 4C), 
indicating that the newly formed neurites extending from the 
spinal cord were capable of conduction over long distances. 
One of the animals lacking long distance conduction had also 
displayed a lack of activity in the short distance experiment. 
 
The other animal exhibiting no short distance conduction was 
not assessed using this technique due to having received a sciatic 
nerve injection of FG. In both experiment types, the conduction 
velocity was indicative of conduction by thinly myelinated fibers 
(3.84 ± 0.3 m/s for short distance and 3.48 ± 0.4 m/s for long 
distance, n = 6 and n = 2, respectively). Interestingly, during 
electrophysiological experiments, we had noted that stimulation 
of the ganglionectomised dorsal root often resulted in a detect­
able muscle twitch response in the hind limb, even if stimulation 
was distal to the implanted dorsal root entry zone. This twitch 
response suggests that the fibers extending from the spinal cord 
into dorsal root and beyond could potentially be connected, 
either directly or indirectly, to motor neurons in the spinal cord 
(e.g., part of spinal reflex circuitry).
To further test the nature of the processes now identified 
as functional and extending from the dorsal horn into the 
reimplanted root and beyond, additional immunohistochemical 
analyses were carried out. We found that numerous longitudi­
nal profiles crossing from the spinal cord into the implanted 
dorsal root could be identified as MAP2­positive (a dendritic 
marker) (Figure 5). The presence of a classical dendritic marker 
on these processes suggests that, following reimplantation of a 
ganglionectomised dorsal root, the dendrites of some neuronal 
cells in the adjacent dorsal horn are stimulated to extend toward 
and project along the denervated root, essentially becoming 
“dendraxons.”
Further support of new growth from the spinal cord into the 
implanted dorsal root was obtained using a 9.4­T MRI scanner. 
There were anatomical signs of neurite extensions through the 
white matter and the root when a region of interest within the 
reimplanted root was used as the seed (origin) for tractography 
(Figures 6A,B). Fibers entering the root could be traced not 
only from the adjacent gray matter and ipsilateral white matter 
 FigUre 5 | MAP2 immunopositivity indicates the dendritic origin of 
processes extending from the dorsal horn into the ganglionectomised dorsal 
root. Low magnification image shows the path of dendritic growth from 
dorsal horn into reimplanted dorsal root. High magnification inset highlights 
crossing of dendritic extensions from spinal cord to the reimplanted dorsal 
root. Scale bar = 70 µm for main panel and 50 µm for inset.
6
James et al.
Alternative Concept in Reconstruction of Spinal Circuits
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 358
FigUre 6 | MRI tractography of spinal cord specimen from a rat subjected to dorsal root avulsion and ganglionectomy followed by reimplantation into the 
dorsolateral quadrant. (a) After perfusion fixation with paraformaldehyde, the specimen was analyzed by ex vivo imaging with a 9.4-T MRI scanner, allowing 3D 
reconstruction of the reimplantation site. Posttreatment of the images was performed in DSI studio software for tractography. (B) The seed for tractography was 
placed in the reimplanted root. The color code for fibers running longitudinal to the SC is blue, whereas fibers running perpendicular into the replant appear in green 
and a sagittal direction is represented in red. In this specimen, fibers could be followed from the SC into the dorsal root. Fibers entering the reimplanted root could 
be traced not only from the gray matter and ipsilateral dorsal column but also into the contralateral dorsolateral white matter. (c) At the site of the L3 rhizotomy, 
fibers are observed running longitudinally in the white matter, but none are exiting the cord (seed placed in ipsilateral white matter).
but also from the contralateral white matter to a lesser extent. 
Whether these fibers are continuous extensions directly into 
the root or are supernumerary axons from cells within the 
adjacent gray matter cannot be determined using this technique. 
 
In contrast to the findings at the reimplantation site, the L3 
site (avulsion, but no reimplantation) showed no connection 
between the spinal cord and the avulsed dorsal root. Only, lon­
gitudinal fibers in the ventral, lateral, and dorsal funiculi were 
present (Figure 6C). The fiber content near the site of avulsion 
and the dorsal laminae of the dorsal horn seemed sparse. These 
results from the tractography, together with the histology and 
functional data, provide support of neurite extension and con­
nectivity not only from the local spinal cord segment but also 
from long fiber tracts (Figure 6).
DiscUssiOn
The present findings verify previous experimental (8) and human 
clinical surgical (1) results demonstrating that intrinsic spinal 
cord neurons can extend new (non­regenerative) processes into 
and beyond an implanted PNS conduit. Interestingly, although 
many of these spinal neurons were located in the dorsal horn, 
as previously described, retrogradely labeled neurons were 
also regularly observed in the white matter within the LSN. 
The role of the LSN is not entirely understood, but it has been 
implicated in both proprioception (11) and sensory processing, 
including nociceptive processing (12). It is difficult to predict 
the effect of activating such neurons due to the diverse range 
of nuclei to which they project (13), but their putative role in 
 7
James et al.
Alternative Concept in Reconstruction of Spinal Circuits
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 358
proprioception or sensory processing could provide a potential 
route for restoration of a spinal reflex arch. Importantly, not 
only can these intrinsic spinal cord neurons be transformed into 
projecting CNS/PNS neurons but such nerve cells are functional 
and can bypass or replace deleted or injured primary sensory 
neurons in the dorsal root ganglia. This depends on dendritic 
processes from spinal neurons extending into the periphery, not 
regenerating or regrowing previously injured axons.
A key addition to the previous and current anatomical find­
ings was the use of electrophysiological experiments to dem­
onstrate that the de novo extensions projecting from the spinal 
cord distally into the sensory spinal nerve and beyond were 
functionally viable. The activity recorded at both the sensory 
spinal nerve and the sciatic nerve was evoked antidromically, 
indicating a direct connection (i.e., no synapses involved) and 
allowing the mean conduction velocity of the potentials to be 
calculated. The rate of conduction was in accordance with that 
of small diameter, thinly myelinated axons. This adds to the 
previous findings where intrinsic neurons in the dorsal horn of 
the spinal cord were described to extend both myelinated and 
unmyelinated processes from CNS into PNS of the implanted 
nerve graft (8, 9). The electrophysiological demonstration of 
trans­synaptically evoked muscle contraction in the hindlimb 
while stimulating the de novo neurites in the reimplanted dorsal 
root suggests that there is an integration of these spinal cord 
neurons with segmental spinal cord circuits, and in particular 
with ventral horn motorneurons. This of course also supports 
the clinical finding of the returned muscle twitch reflex after a 
similar surgical procedure was performed in a human with root 
avulsion injuries (1). Whether the present findings represent 
newly established or spared contacts is not known. However, 
in previous studies, it was noted that some of the neurons that 
extended new processes to the implanted PNS conduit also 
retained normal or rostral projections (9). This suggests that 
 
the neurites grown into the periphery are aberrant processes.
A dorsal root injury is in effect a longitudinal spinal cord 
injury. The inability of DRG neurons to regrow after a dorsal 
root injury into the spinal cord is well documented (6). Although 
regrowth of injured dorsal root axons occurs in the root, it is 
impeded at the PNS–CNS interface (dorsal root entry zone) 
and regeneration is not possible. This is due to the inhibition 
of regeneration by CNS tissue but also to some degree the weak 
regenerating potential of the DRG neurons after a root injury 
(14). There are, however, situations where growth across the 
PNS–CNS interface is possible, such as from sensory neurons 
(DRG) in the immature animal (15). For example, regeneration 
occurred after root injury from the PNS into the spinal cord 
when the injury had been inflicted before there had been a 
development of a CNS–PNS transitional region at the root spi­
nal cord junction. Obviously, there is an impediment to axonal 
growth once this CNS glia compartment in the root has been 
established. It was also noted that dendrites from dorsal horn 
neurons in those experiments had extended out from the spinal 
cord and into the dorsal root. In serial section analysis, it could 
be demonstrated that the same extension, which phenotypically 
resembled a dendrite in the CNS, appeared to have changed its 
phenotype and become a small myelinated axon in the dorsal 
root (15). These were very much similar to the myelinated nerve 
fibers seen in the implanted root in this experiment.
Previous root replantation experiments indicated that to 
 
re­establish function in humans after plexus root avulsion injury 
the strategy should be to “bypass” the CNS–PNS transitional 
region. This has been successful for motor recovery but not for 
sensory restoration. However, sensory recovery occurs when 
new neurite growth is provoked from spinal cord neurons into 
the periphery. Both strategies are similar, as neurons within the 
spinal cord grow from CNS to PNS. When inciting spinal cord 
neurons to extend new processes into the PNS, it is likely that 
not axons but dendrites would be recruited by the PNS conduit 
implanted into the dorsal horn. Dendrites have the ability to 
respond to extrinsic sensory stimuli, as well as to intrinsically 
produced molecules, and change their morphology. Secreted 
proteins such as neurotrophins and brain­derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF) can participate in shaping dendritic morphology 
(16). BDNF has a role in many aspects of neuronal development 
and plasticity (17) and can act as a positive regulator of dendritic 
growth. The upregulated production of BDNF (among other 
neurotrophic factors) by Schwann cells in the root following 
injury and axonal degeneration (18, 19), together with dynamic 
changes in the neuronal expression of neurotrophin receptors 
induced by spinal cord trauma (20, 21), could be of importance 
in the presently observed neurite extension from dorsal horn 
neurons. In a recent study, it was demonstrated that the axons of 
mature CNS neurons lack various molecules, such as integrins, 
which are essential for regeneration and possibly an important 
contributing factor to the weak regenerative response of CNS 
axons. In contrast, dendrites were shown to contain such pro­
regenerative compounds (22).
Extension of supernumerary processes from spinal neurons 
into PNS conduits has previously been demonstrated only for 
motorneurons (23, 24). The present findings of MAP2 stained 
processes from the dorsal horn into the implanted root dem­
onstrates that dendrites have extended into the implanted PNS 
conduit. It is now well established that spinal cord neurons can 
produce aberrant or supernumerary axons after injury. Such 
processes have been shown to extend from dendrites into the 
PNS and are termed dendraxons (23) or unusual distal processes 
(25, 26). It has also been shown that such neuronal processes 
can transmit impulses and contain transmitter substances for 
synaptic communication (24).
This basic science study has demonstrated the potential for 
new growth and plasticity, rather than regeneration, of sensory 
spinal cord neurons to reconnect to the periphery. Muscle twitch 
activity during stimulation of the reimplanted root revealed some 
form of direct or indirect connection between dorsal horn neurons 
extending processes into the reimplanted root and ventral horn 
motorneurons, thereby indicating the potential to re­establish a 
spinal reflex arch that could replace the function of lost primary 
sensory neurons. This example of plasticity and new dendritic 
growth, rather than axonal regeneration, could be considered 
as a possible underlying mechanism in studies and treatments 
for more “classical” transverse spinal cord injury, particularly in 
instances of providing some form of growth­permissive graft as 
part of a therapeutic intervention.
 8
James et al.
Alternative Concept in Reconstruction of Spinal Circuits
Frontiers in Neurology | www.frontiersin.org
July 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 358
reFerences
1. Carlstedt T, Misra VP, Papadaki A, McRobbie D, Anand P. Return of 
 
spinal reflex after spinal cord surgery for brachial plexus avulsion injury. 
J Neurosurg (2012) 116:414–7. doi:10.3171/2011.7.JNS111106 
2. Cullheim S, Carlstedt T, Linda H, Risling M, Ulfhake B. Motoneurons 
reinnervate skeletal muscle after ventral root implantation into the spinal 
cord of the cat. Neuroscience (1989) 29:725–33. doi:10.1016/0306­4522(89) 
90144­9 
3. Carlstedt T, Anand P, Hallin R, Misra PV, Noren G, Seferlis T. Spinal nerve 
root repair and reimplantation of avulsed ventral roots into the spinal cord 
after brachial plexus injury. J Neurosurg (2000) 93:237–47. doi:10.3171/
spi2000.93.2.0237
4. Htut M, Misra VP, Anand P, Birch R, Carlstedt T. Motor recovery and the 
breathing arm after brachial plexus surgical repairs, including re­implantation 
of avulsed spinal roots into the spinal cord. J Hand Surg Eur (2007) 32:170–8. 
doi:10.1016/j.jhsb.2006.11.011 
5. Htut M, Misra P, Anand P, Birch R, Carlstedt T. Pain phenomena and sensory 
recovery following brachial plexus avulsion injury and surgical repairs. J Hand 
Surg Br (2006) 31:596–605. doi:10.1016/j.jhsb.2006.04.027 
6. Carlstedt T. Regenerating axons form nerve terminals at astrocytes. Brain Res 
(1985) 347:188–91. doi:10.1016/0006­8993(85)90911­4 
7. Ramer MS, McMahon SB, Priestley JV. Axon regeneration across the 
dorsal root entry zone. Prog Brain Res (2001) 132:621–39. doi:10.1016/
S0079­6123(01)32107­6 
8. Carlstedt T. Dorsal root innervation of spinal cord neurons after dorsal root 
implantation into the spinal cord of adult rats. Neurosci Lett (1985) 55:343–8. 
doi:10.1016/0304­3940(85)90459­8 
9. Carlstedt T, Aldskogius H, Rosario C. Extension of dorsal horn neurons into 
the severed and implanted dorsal root. Restor Neurol Neurosci (1991) 3:205–9. 
doi:10.3233/RNN­1991­3405 
10. Yeh FC, Verstynen TD, Wang Y, Fernandez­Miranda JC, Tseng WY. 
Deterministic diffusion fiber tracking improved by quantitative anisotropy. 
PLoS One (2013) 8:e80713. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0080713 
11. Flynn JR, Conn VL, Boyle KA, Hughes DI, Watanabe M, Velasquez T, 
 
et al. Anatomical and molecular properties of long descending proprio 
spi­
nal neurons in mice. Front Neuroanat (2017) 11:5. doi:10.3389/fnana.2017. 
00005 
12. Jiang MC, Liu L, Gebhart GF. Cellular properties of lateral spinal nucleus 
neurons in the rat L6­S1 spinal cord. J Neurophysiol (1999) 81:3078–86. 
13. Olave MJ, Maxwell DJ. Axon terminals possessing alpha2C­adrenergic recep­
tors densely innervate neurons in the rat lateral spinal nucleus which respond 
to noxious stimulation. Neuroscience (2004) 126:391–403. doi:10.1016/j.
neuroscience.2004.03.049 
14. Han SB, Kim H, Skuba A, Tessler A, Ferguson T, Son YJ. Sensory axon 
 
regeneration: a review from an in vivo imaging perspective. Exp Neurobiol 
(2012) 21:83–93. doi:10.5607/en.2012.21.3.83 
15. Carlstedt T. Reinnervation of the mammalian spinal cord after neonatal 
 
dorsal root crush. J Neurocytol (1988) 17:335–50. doi:10.1007/BF01187856 
16. McAllister AK. Neurotrophins and neuronal differentiation in the 
 
central nervous system. Cell Mol Life Sci (2001) 58:1054–60. doi:10.1007/
PL00000920 
17. Cohen­Cory S, Kidane AH, Shirkey NJ, Marshak S. Brain­derived neuro­
trophic factor and the development of structural neuronal connectivity. 
 
Dev Neurobiol (2010) 70:271–88. doi:10.1002/dneu.20774 
18. Gordon T. The role of neurotrophic factors in nerve regeneration. Neurosurg 
Focus (2009) 26:E3. doi:10.3171/FOC.2009.26.2.E3 
19. Hoke A, Redett R, Hameed H, Jari R, Zhou C, Li ZB, et al. Schwann cells 
express motor and sensory phenotypes that regulate axon regeneration. 
J Neurosci (2006) 26:9646–55. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1620­06.2006 
20. Frisén J, Verge VM, Cullheim S, Persson H, Fried K, Middlemas DS, et al. 
Increased levels of trkB mRNA and trkB protein­like immunoreactivity in the 
injured rat and cat spinal cord. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1992) 89:11282–6. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.89.23.11282 
21. Frisen J, Verge VM, Fried K, Risling M, Persson H, Trotter J, et al. 
Characterization of glial trkB receptors: differential response to injury in 
the central and peripheral nervous systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1993) 
90:4971–5. doi:10.1073/pnas.90.11.4971 
22. Franssen EH, Zhao RR, Koseki H, Kanamarlapudi V, Hoogenraad CC, 
 
Eva R, et al. Exclusion of integrins from CNS axons is regulated by 
Arf6 activation and the AIS. J Neurosci (2015) 35:8359–75. doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.2850­14.2015 
23. Linda H, Risling M, Cullheim S. “Dendraxons” in regenerating motoneurons 
in the cat: do dendrites generate new axons after central axotomy? Brain Res 
(1985) 358:329–33. doi:10.1016/0006­8993(85)90978­3 
24. Hoang TX, Nieto JH, Havton LA. Regenerating supernumerary axons are 
cholinergic and emerge from both autonomic and motor neurons in the rat 
spinal cord. Neuroscience (2005) 136:417–23. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2005. 
08.022 
25. Rose PK, Odlozinski M. Expansion of the dendritic tree of motoneurons 
innervating neck muscles of the adult cat after permanent axotomy. J Comp 
Neurol (1998) 390:392–411. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096­9861(19980119)390: 
3<392::AID­CNE7>3.0.CO;2­X 
26. Rose PK, MacDermid V, Joshi M, Neuber­Hess M. Emergence of axons from 
distal dendrites of adult mammalian neurons following a permanent axotomy. 
Eur J Neurosci (2001) 13:1166–76. doi:10.1046/j.0953­816x.2001.1490.x 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare they have no competing 
commercial or financial conflicts of interest.
Copyright © 2017 James, Angéria, Bradbury, Damberg, McMahon, Risling and 
Carlstedt. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in 
other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited 
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted 
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not 
comply with these terms.
eThics sTaTeMenT
This study was carried out in accordance with the United 
 
King 
dom Scientific Procedures Act (1986) and under the approved 
project license PPL 70/8032. Prior to Home Office approval the 
project license was also reviewed by an internal ethics panel at 
King’s College London.
aUThOr cOnTriBUTiOns
TC, SM, MR, PD, and EB designed experiments. NJ, MA, PD, 
SM, MR, and TC performed experiments and data analysis. 
 
NJ, TC, PD, and MR wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed 
and edited the manuscript.
acKnOWleDgMenTs
The work was supported by grants from the Medical Research 
Council UK (Senior Non­Clinical Fellowship Award G1002055), 
the Darwin Trust of Edinburgh, and Karolinska Institutet, 
Swedish Defence (FOT­AF.9221006). The MRI scanning was per­
formed at the Department of Comparative Medicine/Karolinska 
Experimental Research and Imaging Centre at Karolinska 
University Hospital, Solna, Sweden.
