  
1
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access 
AbstrAct
Objective To identify barriers and facilitators of 
medication adherence in patients with stroke along with 
their caregivers.
Design Qualitative thematic analysis of posts about 
secondary prevention medications, informed by 
Perceptions and Practicalities Approach.
Setting Posts written by the UK stroke survivors and their 
family members taking part in the online forum of the 
Stroke Association, between 2004 and 2011.
Participants 84 participants: 49 stroke survivors, 33 
caregivers, 2 not stated, identified using the keywords 
‘taking medication’, ‘pills’, ‘size’, ‘side-effects’, ‘routine’, 
‘blister’ as well as secondary prevention medication terms.
Results Perceptions reducing the motivation to adhere 
included dealing with medication side effects, questioning 
doctors’ prescribing practices and negative publicity about 
medications, especially in regard to statins. Caregivers 
faced difficulties with ensuring medications were taken 
while respecting the patient’s decisions not to take tablets. 
They struggled in their role as advocates of patient’s 
needs with healthcare professionals. Not experiencing side 
effects, attributing importance to medications, positive 
personal experiences of taking tablets and obtaining 
modification of treatment to manage side effects were 
facilitators of adherence. Key practical barriers included 
difficulties with swallowing tablets, dealing with the 
burden of treatment and drug cost. Using medication 
storage devices, following routines and getting help with 
medications from caregivers were important facilitators of 
adherence.
Conclusions An online stroke forum is a novel and 
valuable resource to investigate use of secondary 
prevention medications. Analysis of this forum highlighted 
significant barriers and facilitators of medication 
adherence faced by stroke survivors and their caregivers. 
Addressing perceptual and practical barriers highlighted 
here can inform the development of future interventions 
aimed at improving adherence to secondary prevention 
medication after stroke.
IntroductIon
Stroke recurrences are associated with higher 
disability and mortality than first time strokes,1 
and account for one-third of all stroke 
events.2 Secondary prevention medicines 
are considered important in reducing stroke 
recurrences in patients who have already 
experienced a stroke or transient ischaemic 
attack.3 4 However, medication non-adher-
ence is an issue known to be problematic, 
contributing to suboptimal health outcomes.5 
Reported practical barriers to medication 
adherence after stroke include forgetting 
medication, difficulty swallowing tablets and 
difficulties handling packaged medications.6 
A key factor decreasing stroke patients’ 
motivation for taking secondary prevention 
medications is having concerns about tablets, 
such as becoming dependent on them or 
worrying about their long-term effects.7 
Difficulties with taking medication, lack of 
information on stroke and medications and 
Barriers and facilitators to adherence to 
secondary stroke prevention 
medications after stroke: analysis of 
survivors and caregivers views from an 
online stroke forum
James Jamison,1 Stephen Sutton,1 Jonathan Mant,1 Anna De Simoni2 
to cite: Jamison J, Sutton S, 
Mant J, et al.  Barriers and 
facilitators to adherence to 
secondary stroke prevention 
medications after stroke: 
analysis of survivors and 
caregivers views from an 
online stroke forum. BMJ Open 
2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2017-016814
 
► Prepublication history for 
this paper is available online. 
To view these files, please visit 
the journal online (http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
bmjopen- 
2017- 
016814).
Received 13 March 2017
Revised 17 May 2017
Accepted 5 June 2017
1Primary Care Unit, Department 
of Public Health and Primary 
Care, Forvie Site, University of 
Cambridge School of Clinical 
Medicine, Cambridge, UK
2Centre for Primary Care and 
Public Health, Barts and the 
London School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Queen Mary University 
of London, London, UK
Correspondence to
James Jamison;  
jj285@ 
medschl. 
cam. 
ac. 
uk
Research
Strengths and limitations of this study
 
► The first study to explore and identify perceived 
barriers and facilitators to medication adherence 
among users of an online stroke forum using a 
theoretical framework.
 
► Inclusion of caregivers offers a unique perspective 
for understanding of medication taking behaviour in 
patients with severe disabilities.
 
► The online forum allowed patients and caregivers to 
communicate in a comfortable environment beyond 
the influence of the research team, shedding new 
light on factors affecting adherence to secondary 
prevention medications.
 
► Key themes identified may be limited by the search 
terms used and may not provide an exhaustive list of 
all barriers and facilitators to adherence discussed 
in the forum.
 
► Posts were scrutinised by a moderator prior to being 
published.
 
► The online forum was dated 2004–2011 and might 
not reflect current practice.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 2
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access 
patient’s fears of medicines are important barriers, while 
support from caregivers and worrying about further 
stroke are facilitators.8
Severe stroke-related impairments make it difficult 
for survivors to participate in research. Perhaps for this 
reason there is little evidence available on factors affecting 
adherence to medications in patients with more disabling 
strokes (at least a third of stroke survivors).9 10 Studying 
factors affecting adherence can be difficult because of 
self-presentational bias, that is, patients may perceive that 
a certain behaviour, for example, adherence to treatment, 
is one of the duties expected of the 'good patient’ and may 
be reluctant to admit a different behaviour, or reactivity 
bias, that is, if patients are aware that their adherence is 
being monitored, this might increase adherence simply 
by drawing attention to it.11 In a recent investigation, De 
Simoni et al used an online forum to explore adherence 
to inhaler treatment in asthma adolescents according to 
a framework, gaining fresh insights on factors affecting 
adherence in this patient group.12
Our analysis differs from previous adherence literature 
by assessing survivors and caregivers attitudes to medi-
cation adherence from a viewpoint that has not been 
previously explored. The online forum offers users the 
opportunity to discuss issues around medication that may 
be considered sensitive and which they may be less willing 
to address through traditional face-to-face approaches.
Caregivers of elderly patients experience difficulties 
with tablet administration.13 As patients’ dependency 
on caregivers for medicine taking increases, caregivers’ 
factors also become relevant in determining patients’ 
adherence.10 Indeed, a recent interview study by the 
authors14 highlighted the importance of caregivers in 
adherence to secondary prevention medications. Find-
ings from another study suggest that among patients 
with cardiovascular disease, those with a caregiver were 
more likely to be adherent to medications.15 There is a 
need to investigate adherence to secondary prevention 
medications after stroke avoiding self-presentational 
and reactivity biases, including patients with severe 
disabilities and caregivers factors.10 Online health 
forums are accessible 24/7 in the form of asynchronous 
communication that is convenient to the user. This 
medium offers anonymity and encourages honesty. 
Individuals with health-related difficulties can commu-
nicate in confidence about what matters to them.11 
TalkStroke is an online forum where survivors and their 
families discuss information and provide support to one 
another. Recent investigations using this forum showed 
that a wide variety of themes were discussed online, 
including secondary prevention medications.16 17 Care-
giver views were well represented and most of them 
(70%) looked after patients with severe disabilities. 
Among forum users who were stroke survivors, 30% 
were suffering from severe impairments.16 Therefore, 
data from the archives of this forum have the potential 
to shed light on adherence issues for these hard-to-
reach groups.1817
The aim of this investigation was to understand barriers 
and facilitators of medication adherence among survi-
vors of stroke and their caregivers through evaluating 
posts written in an online stroke forum, using a frame-
work-based approach.
Methods
design
We undertook a qualitative analysis of posts to the 
TalkStroke online forum using the Perceptions And 
Practicalities Approach (PAPA) theoretical framework.18 
According to the framework, non-adherence is viewed 
as a variable that can change over time and treatments. 
Non-adherence is known to be intentional or uninten-
tional. Unintentional adherence is linked to practical 
factors and resource limitation, for example, forgetting to 
take medications because of lack of prompting or expe-
riencing difficulties with swallowing tablets. Perceptual 
factors or beliefs affect intentional adherence, that is, how 
patients consciously make decisions that influence their 
medication taking behaviour.19 This occurs when patients 
deliberately choose not to follow recommendations and 
where beliefs about medications influence motivation to 
start and continue treatment. The PAPA framework was 
chosen as it is specifically designed to identify and classify 
factors affecting adherence to medications. Results have 
the potential to inform the development of behavioural 
interventions aimed at improving adherence and their 
subsequent evaluation according to causal pathways. 
The framework posits that patients make a choice to take 
medication based on judgement of their personal need 
for the medication, relative to their concerns about the 
possible consequences of taking it.18 The PAPA approach 
seeks to understand adherence through addressing both 
perceptual (beliefs and preferences) and practical (capa-
bility and resources) factors which have an influence 
on patients commencing and continuing treatment. We 
searched the forum archives using a set of predefined 
keywords, in order to identify barriers and facilitators of 
adherence to secondary prevention medications. Posts 
were written by stroke survivors or family members/care-
givers.
setting
The analysis was performed on the archives from Talk-
Stroke, a UK-based online forum hosted by the Stroke 
Association website, including 22 173 posts written 
between 2004 and 2011 by 2583 unique usernames.16 
TalkStroke is an online resource through which stroke 
survivors and caregivers could seek and/or offer informa-
tion and support. Forum users could discuss any topics, 
develop their own conversation threads and there was no 
restriction on the subject discussed. Participants could 
read the subject of the thread being discussed and decide 
whether they wished to contribute. Differentiating survi-
vors and caregivers was done by reading the text of the 
post: survivors talked in first person about themselves, 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
  
3
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access
Table 1 Key themes highlighting survivors’ and caregivers’ 
barriers and facilitators to adherence to secondary 
prevention medications classified according to perceptions 
and practicalities.
Sample characteristics
N
Median 
range
Total participants identified in posts
84
Number of posts in the forum/ participant
16 (1–4932)
Number of posts about secondary 
prevention medications/ participant
1 (1–37)
Age at stroke
  Survivor
50 (32–72)
  Patient by caregiver
66 (46–91)
Gender
  Male—survivor
20
  Female—survivor
26
  Not known—survivor
3
  Male—patient talked about by 
caregiver
20
  
 Female—patient talked about by 
caregiver
12
  Unknown gender and unknown identity 3
Identity person posting
  Stroke survivor
49
  Caregiver
33
  Not known
2
Years since stroke
  (0–12 months)
37
  (1–5 
years)
25
  (6–10 
years)
4
  (11–15 
years)
2
  (15+ years)
1
  Unknown
15
Caregiver identity
  Daughter/son
20
  Spouse
9
  Other (/in-law/ sister)
3
  Unknown
1
while caregivers were talking about a stroke survivor in 
the third person, for example, "my father had a stroke". 
Stroke survivors with severe disabilities were among the 
users of the forum. Caregivers could register as users 
independently from patients; 60% of users were in fact 
caregivers.16 We acknowledge that some caregivers could 
have assisted patients in writing their posts, although we 
do not have data to quantify these occurrences.
Procedure and participants
A word list of unique terms of the archive file of Talk-
Stroke was generated using AntConc3.2.4.20 Terms related 
to secondary prevention medications were selected (eg, 
amlodipine, statin, warfarin, ramipril), including misspell-
ings (eg, asprin, simvastin), brand names (eg, Lipitor, 
Plavix) and drug categories (eg, statin, diuretics, blood 
pressure medicines, etc). Posts including any secondary 
prevention medication term were identified. We addi-
tionally searched the TalkStroke archive for the keywords: 
‘taking medication’, ‘pills’, ‘size’, ‘statins’, ‘side effects’, 
‘capsule’, ‘box’, ‘routine’, ‘blister’ and ‘secondary preven-
tion’. These keywords were lay terms used by patients with 
stroke and their caregivers when talking about adher-
ence to secondary prevention medications as emerged 
from the transcripts of a previous interview study by the 
authors.14 The aim of the interviews was exploring stroke 
survivors’ and caregivers’ views around barriers and facili-
tators of adherence to secondary prevention medications 
in general practice. Search terms were discussed and 
agreed by two authors (JJ and ADS) (see online supple-
mentary file 1).
Participants of the online forum included stroke survi-
vors and patients talked about by caregivers, identified by 
usernames linked to each of the selected posts. Charac-
teristics were retrieved from usernames, taking advantage 
of data from a previous study.16 Demographics are shown 
in table 1. All posts that were relevant for the research 
questions were copied and pasted into Microsoft Excel 
and NVivo V.10 for later analysis.
ethics
The Stroke Association gave permission to ADS to use the 
data for research purposes. To protect the identity and 
intellectual property of forum participants,21 we chose 
not to use verbatim quotes, despite this being normal prac-
tice in qualitative research. Instead, we used descriptions 
of quotes throughout the text.16 22 Paraphrasing of the 
text reflected as closely as possible the original posts and 
was agreed among authors to minimise interpretation 
bias. The ethical aspects of conducting research on this 
forum have been discussed more extensively elsewhere.16
data analysis
A qualitative approach using thematic analysis was under-
taken to explore forum posts.23 All posts retrieved through 
the search terms were read by JJ to aid familiarisation. 
To strengthen the validity of findings and ensure rigour, 
50% of all posts were double-coded by ADS. Throughout 
the process, the authors checked the coding structure 
obtained to ensure a high level of agreement in coding 
was maintained. Once completed, coding was compared 
and the intercoder reliability was measured. The kappa 
score was 80%. Queries arising from the coding process 
were resolved through discussions involving a third 
author (SS) where necessary, until a final consensus 
was reached. NVivo V.10 was used to manage and orga-
nise the data. A set of codes representing key themes 
were initially developed from the forum posts by JJ to 
represent barriers and facilitators of medication adher-
ence. These themes were refined, and subthemes were 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 4
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access 
identified and grouped together with similar concepts. 
A coding framework was formed and refined further as 
additional themes emerged. Data saturation was reached 
with the recruitment of 84 individuals, beyond which no 
new themes emerged. Guided by the PAPA framework, 
we coded forum posts to identify practical and perceptual 
factors affecting adherence to medications. Identified 
themes were mapped onto the theory and subdivided 
into barriers or facilitators of adherence.
While we were unable to ask questions to clarify themes, 
users could participate in forum discussions they were 
interested in, offering insights on barriers and facilitators 
to adherence that may be beyond the reach of interviews. 
A previous investigation comparing an online forum with 
qualitative interviews concluded that the forum could 
provide useful data for qualitative health research.24
Although there is evidence that inappropriate medical 
information or health behaviours in this online stroke 
forum were identified and corrected by participants in 
subsequent postings,16 consistent with what is reported 
elsewhere in a cancer patients’ internet support group,25 
threads of discussions were not analysed here. There-
fore, self-correction received through the forum is not 
reported. For the purpose of this study, the term caregiver 
refers to family members such as spouses or children, and 
is not associated with paid caregivers. The online supple-
mentary file 1 shows the analysis pathway to reach the 
final number of themes.
results
Identification of posts
A search of the stroke forum resulted in 19 214 posts not 
associated with medication taking being excluded, leaving 
2959 posts (see online supplementary file 1). Additional 
analysis excluded 2527 posts not about secondary preven-
tion medications. Of the 473 remaining posts, a further 
251 were removed as being duplicate or not directly asso-
ciated with medication adherence. This yielded a total of 
222 posts describing barriers/facilitators of adherence to 
secondary prevention medication, including 162 posts by 
stroke survivors, 57 by caregivers and 3 by an individual 
whose status as a survivor or caregiver could not be iden-
tified.
characteristics of study participants
From 222 posts related to adherence to secondary 
prevention medications, we identified 84 individuals. 
Approximately 60% of participants were stroke survivors 
posting about their own experiences with the remainder 
being caregivers, predominantly sons or daughters. The 
age of participants ranged from 32 to 91 years, male and 
female were similarly represented (n=40 vs 38; table 1). 
The majority of participants experienced a stroke within 
12 months of posting on the forum. Around three-quar-
ters of participants (73%) reported a stroke occurring 
within the last 5 years, with 44% having had a stroke 
within the previous 12 months. The mean number of 
years since stroke was 2 years 2 months for survivors and 
10 months for patients talked about by caregivers. Several 
participants were prolific users on the forum and were 
instrumental in facilitating discussions and providing 
feedback on a considerable number of topics, offering a 
rich and in-depth assessment of issues raised. One forum 
participant wrote 37 posts about secondary prevention 
medications, while another 15 posts. The majority of 
participants (n=44) posted only once, 19 participants 
twice and 6 three times. Sample characteristics are 
reported in table 1.
themes
The range of themes comprising barriers and facilitators 
of medication adherence are reported in table 2. In line 
with the PAPA approach,18 these are discussed according 
to the following two categories.
Perceptions—necessity beliefs and concerns
In this section, perceptual barriers and facilitators of 
medication adherence in stroke survivors and care-
givers are explored, according to their classifications as 
necessity beliefs, that is, doubts about personal need for 
medication to maintain or improve current and future 
health, and their concerns about secondary prevention 
treatment.
Practicalities—capability and resources
In this section, we explore barriers and facilitators that 
stroke survivors and caregivers face around their capa-
bility of taking/giving medication and the resources 
available to undertake such behaviour.
Within each category, themes are grouped into barriers 
and facilitators. For each of the emerging themes, when 
relevant, caregivers’ views have been reported after 
patients’ ones.
PercePtIons of secondary PreventIon MedIcatIons
necessity beliefs and concerns
treatment necessity
lack of perceived benefits of medications
Doubts about high cholesterol as risk factor for stroke
A few users expressed doubts about the role of cholesterol 
in stroke, questioning the need for taking any preventa-
tive medications at all.
A male survivor acknowledged statins controlled cholesterol, 
but believed strokes occurred regardless of cholesterol levels. 
He talked about the 'Cholesterol Myth' having researched 
the topic online and described feeling confused about taking 
statins when in reality they weren’t needed. (Male, aged 
67, age at stroke 55, N.70)
Doubts about the added benefit of statins
Doubts were also expressed about the benefits statin 
added to long-term health outcomes.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
  
5
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access
Table 2 Characteristics of online TalkStroke participants as identified in the study posts
Perceptions
Barriers
Facilitators
Necessity beliefs
Lack of perceived benefits of medication
 
►Questioning the effectiveness of secondary prevention medications in preventing stroke 
recurrence.
 
►Considering statins detrimental to health and not effective.
 
 
►Valuing adherence but recognising that it is the choice of the patient to take tablets.
 
►Realising that stroke could still occur despite taking secondary prevention medications.
Necessity beliefs
Attributing importance to medications
 
►Recognising taking tablets as important to prevent stroke recurrence.
 
►Feeling reassured by taking secondary prevention medications.
 
►Experiencing consequences of non-adherence (a further stroke) as driver of 
necessity beliefs.
 
 
►Feeling secondary prevention medications are important and should only be stopped in consultation 
with the GP.
 
►Holding strong beliefs about the need for secondary prevention medications.
Concerns
Management of medication side effects*
 
►Experiencing statins side effects and considering they have potential to worsen quality 
of life.
 
►Changing diet/lifestyle as alternative to taking medication to reduce side effects.*
 
►Healthcare professionals recommending diet and exercise to reduce cholesterol instead 
of taking statins.*
 
 
►Struggling to raise issues about side effects of statins with healthcare professionals and obtaining changes in treatment 
when patients find it unsuitable.
Impact of bad press on statins
 
►Being extracautious about commencing statins for fear of side effects.
 
 
►Struggling to ensure patients’ adherence to statins in face of bad press.
Questioning prescribing practices
 
►Being disappointed as medications considered ineffective were not changed by GPs.
 
►Having concerns around incorrect medications being prescribed.
 
►Receiving conflicting information about medications.
 
 
►Worrying about medications being prescribed for financial reasons or guidelines over clinical judgement.
 
►Experiencing difficulties with asking GPs to prescribe alternative tablets as current ones considered unsuitable.
 
►Feeling the role of GPs is limited to advising about secondary prevention medications.
 
►Intentionally missing medications to manage side effects.
Concerns
Management of medication side effects*
 
►Awareness that not all patients are affected by side effects.
 
►Healthcare professionals changing medications to counteract side effects.
 
►Modifying medications to achieve optimal treatment.
 
 
►Obtaining changes in treatment from healthcare professionals until side effects are manageable.
Trusting healthcare professionals
 
►Perceiving medications to be beneficial as secondary healthcare 
professional also taking it.
Practicalities
Barriers
Practicalities
Continued
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 6
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access 
Problems associated with taking tablets
 
►Swallowing medication capsules, especially big size ones.
 
►Experiencing difficulties with handling medications due to size and stroke-related 
physical impairments.
 
 
►Experiencing frustration with burden of multiple medications and episodic patients’ refusal of medications.
 
►Experiencing frustration at patient refusal to take statins and attend routine medication appointment.
 
►Experiencing difficulties when helping patients with aphasia taking tablets in the context of changes in treatment.
 
►Experiencing frustration at patients failing to keep up with refilling prescriptions.
Cost of medications
 
►Struggling to meet the costs of secondary prevention medications.
Storage devices for managing medication
 
►Using pill box: helping seeing the correct medication was taken and when 
prescription needed to be renewed.
 
 
►Using pill boxes to provide written instruction to patients or keeping a note of tablets taken.
 
►Advice from pharmacist on taking medication correctly.
Good medication taking routines
 
►Linking tablet use to an everyday activity to facilitate medication taking 
behaviour.
 
 
►Assuming control of medication when patients have problems with short-term memory and reminding 
when tablets have to be taken.
*Because of missing details of the underlying clinical scenario, these themes could act both as barriers or facilitators to adherence to secondary prevention medications, therefore, have been 
reported under both headings.
Statements in italics refer to caregivers’ themes.
GP
, general practitioner.
Table 2 Continued 
A female survivor read about the hype around statins and 
stated she still didn’t have confidence in them. She had read 
a research paper on statins suggesting they only added an 
extra 9 months of life. (Female, aged 56, age at stroke 
56, N.66)
Caregivers’ related views
Respecting patients' medication choice
Caregivers struggled with their role of ensuring patients’ 
adherence. They felt survivors’ decisions about choosing 
or refusing medications needed to be evaluated according 
to patients’ preferences and not just in terms of what was 
clinically right.
A caregiver recognized it was hard to encourage her father to 
take medications. He suffered many side effects which made 
him feel less in control so he would choose to go without 
tablets. She said it was important to have a balance regarding 
what the survivor wanted, considering he stated he would 
be happier if he felt he was in control. See concluded that 
patient’s choice had to be respected, even if she didn’t agree. 
(Male, age unknown, age at stroke unknown, N.46)
Awareness of stroke recurrences despite medications
The fact that survivors could suffer a further stroke despite 
taking secondary prevention medications and following a 
healthy lifestyle also raised concerns around the benefits 
of adherence to medications.
A caregiver described how after having a first stroke, 
her father changed his lifestyle completely by eating well, 
exercising more and taking medication to control his blood 
pressure. However 1 day his BP surged suddenly and he 
experienced a second stroke. (Male, age unknown, time 
since stroke 0 years, N.55)
attributing importance to medications
Secondary prevention medications are essential to prevent stroke 
recurrences
The importance of secondary prevention medication in 
reducing the risk of a stroke event was acknowledged 
by forum users. Prioritising secondary prevention 
tablets over other types of medications highlighted the 
significance survivors attached to adherence to these 
medications. These posts were often written in reply to 
users complaining of medication side effects.
A female survivor commented that it was better to take a few 
extra tablets from the GP than to experience another stroke. 
Tablets were provided to prevent a further stroke, and she 
stressed that they shouldn’t be stopped except on professional 
advice. (Female, aged 51, age at stroke 51, N.17)
Secondary prevention medications offer reassurance
Another survivor reported feeling reassured by medica-
tions, particularly warfarin.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
  
7
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access
A female survivor mentioned that although she had suffered 
2 strokes in the previous year, none had occurred since 
commencing warfarin. She felt reassured about taking 
warfarin and she was now worried about coming off the 
medication as she had already experienced flashing in her 
left eye since she had started to be weaned off the drug. 
(Survivor, female, aged 42, age at stroke 42, N.35)
Experiencing the consequences of non-adherence improves 
adherence
Experiencing the consequences of medication non-ad-
herence after having another stroke reinforced necessity 
beliefs about secondary prevention medications.
A survivor who had already suffered 2 strokes acknowledged 
it was impossible to ever fully recover from the stroke 
experience. He said after his first stroke he was prescribed 
tablets he didn’t take and after suffering the second stroke 
he realised this was a big mistake. (Male, aged 67, age at 
stroke 55, N.82)
A survivor refused statins after her first stroke because of side 
effects. However, after suffering a second one she was now 
worried enough to take them. (Survivor, female, aged 68, 
age at stroke 67, N.14)
Cargivers’ related views
Not taking secondary prevention medications is risky
Caregivers generally held strong beliefs about the need 
for secondary prevention medications.
A caregiver (husband) advised that if patients don’t take 
medications they’re likely to become worse. He was amazed 
about how many people choose not to take their tablets, 
perhaps half of them, and few even did so when they knew 
they had a meeting with the consultant in the coming weeks. 
(Female, aged 46, age at stroke 46, N.12)
A caregiver (daughter) mentioned that her father wasn’t tak-
ing medication routinely. He had had a massive stroke just 
a few weeks earlier. She wanted to say to forum users that if 
stroke survivors follow a healthy lifestyle and are strict with 
medications, then there is no reason why a major stroke could 
not be prevented. (Male, aged 55, age at stroke 55, N.6)
concerns
Management of medication side effects
Suffering from side effects contributes to suboptimal adherence
The experience of side effects led some users to intention-
ally alter adherence to the medications. This was done by 
‘making a compromise’ with healthcare professionals.
A male survivor described being suspicious of the number 
and variety of pills he was dispensed. He said that he had 
come to a compromise with his doctor about taking blood 
pressure tablets. He was on 2 tablets for blood pressure, of 
which one was a diuretic. Having got fed up of frequently 
running to the toilet, he decided to check his blood pressure 
every day and would skip the diuretic if blood pressure was 
fine. (Male, age unknown, age at stroke unknown, 
N.63)
Lifestyle changes versus taking secondary prevention medications
To avoid side effects, some stroke survivors took the deci-
sion to reduce cholesterol through changing diet, rather 
than medications, without mentioning whether this 
decision was taken with or communicated to healthcare 
professionals. However, reducing cholesterol through 
diet rather than medication was recommended by the GP 
also.
A female survivor decided to reduce her cholesterol through 
diet because of unpleasant side effects of statins. Once 
symptoms disappeared, she wouldn’t take the statins, but 
instead olive oil and a healthy diet to keep her cholesterol 
balanced naturally. She said she would continue aspirin as 
it didn’t seem to cause side effects. (Female, aged 52, age 
at stroke 52, N.76)
A female survivor mentioned her cholesterol level was average. 
Her nurse suggested starting medication but her GP was 
against this, saying the level could be reduced through diet 
and exercise alone as these tablets were over prescribed. She 
added that statins were recommended when needed because 
of genetic makeup (meaning familial hypercholesterolemia). 
(Female, aged 49, age at stroke 48, N.21).
Depending on the exact clinical scenario, the decisions 
about statins in the last two posts could be medically 
appropriate or not, that is, act both as barrier or facili-
tator to adherence to secondary prevention medications. 
Due to lack of details, no definite classification could be 
made. To reflect this, themes were reported under both 
headings in table 2, but reported only here within the 
results, for simplicity.
Caregivers’ related views
Caregiver difficulties as advocates of stroke survivors with 
healthcare professionals
Caregivers assumed at times the role of advocates for 
their family members suffering from the side effects of 
medication and reported struggling in this role. Failure 
to be successful in obtaining a change in treatment led 
some survivors to stop taking medication completely.
A female caregiver described consistently trying to have her 
husband’s 40 mg statin dosage reduced by his GP. As a result 
of the high dosage he was chronically tired, so he stopped 
taking statins. (Male, aged 54, age at stroke 52, N.68)
Impact of bad press on statin
Influence of side effects on taking medicines
Side effects of secondary prevention medications raised 
important concern, and statins were frequently discussed 
by forum users. The bad press about statins was mentioned 
in relation to starting the medication and ongoing adher-
ence. Participants discussed these concerns together with 
healthcare professionals.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 8
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access 
A survivor wrote that despite her GP’s recommendation she 
couldn’t commence statins after reading in the press about 
side effects. She said she felt well and didn’t want to jeopardise 
that, as she wasn’t convinced she needed them. Although 
also her consultant disagreed with her decision and was keen 
for her to take them, he said she didn’t necessarily have to 
take them. (Female, aged 54, age at stroke 54, N.37)
Caregivers’ related views
Bad press making harder for caregivers to encourage adherence
Reading information about statins and their side effects 
highlighted caregivers’ struggle and made it more diffi-
cult for them to help stroke survivors be adherent.
A caregiver’s mother had suffered 2 mini strokes and was now 
prescribed both aspirin as well as pills to lower cholesterol but 
was refusing to take these as she had read in the press about 
the bad side effects they caused. (Female, age unknown, 
age at stroke unknown, N.74)
Questioning prescribing practices
Problems with obtaining appropriate secondary prevention 
medication treatment
Disappointment was expressed when practitioners failed 
to start/change secondary prevention medications when 
the survivor judged their current treatment to be inade-
quate.
A survivor described feeling let down as he requested 
changes in medications because he didn’t feel they (aspirin 
and clopidogrel) were beneficial. He’d lost confidence in the 
health care system after visiting several consultants and 
being sent home with unchanged medications. (Male, aged 
43, age at stroke 41, N.20)
Concerns around incorrect prescribing
This was also apparent when the prescribed medication 
was perceived as being incorrect.
A stroke survivor recalled being on 75 mg of aspirin as well 
as beta blockers, however, his nephew who was a consultant 
surgeon, suggested that had he been taking warfarin instead 
of the aspirin he may not have suffered a second stroke. 
(Male, aged 67, age at stroke 55, N.82)
Inconsistent advice about medications prescribed
Receiving conflicting advice on medication practices 
caused further uncertainty and confusion, which might 
have indirectly affected adherence to secondary preven-
tion medications.
A survivor suffered increased bleeding while on warfarin 
was taken off it. He suffered another stroke shortly after, and 
was put back on warfarin for the bleeding to begin again. 
He felt confused at being told to stay on warfarin to avoid a 
potentially serious stroke. (Male, aged 72, age at stroke 
72, N.10)
Caregivers’ related views
Questioning GP’s motivation to prescribe
Caregivers too raised concerns about GPs prescribing, 
principally statins, for financial rather than medical 
reasons, which could indirectly affect adherence, espe-
cially in patients suffering from statin side effects.
A caregiver (sister) suggested that GPs shouldn’t be paid for 
prescribing statins and that the decision should be based on 
clinical judgement alone. She suggested medication could be 
overprescribed as a result for financial reasons. (Gender 
and age unknown, age at stroke unknown, N.78)
Caregivers’ difficulties as advocates of patients’ medications
The caregivers’ role as advocates for their family 
members came up in questioning prescribing practices, 
highlighting caregivers’ awareness of guidelines and diffi-
culties at times with obtaining treatment modifications 
on the behalf of patients. (The cost of atorvastatin has 
dropped since, so this post does not reflect current prac-
tice.)
A caregiver recommended being firm with GPs about being 
put on atorvastatin if simvastatin was not tolerated, as 
atorvastatin was a bit more expensive but recommended 
by NICE guidelines as an alternative. (Gender and age 
unknown, age at stroke unknown, N.18)
GPs’ role advising about secondary prevention medications
Some survivors reflected on the role of GPs in their adher-
ence. They felt that the GP’s role was to provide advice. 
Getting support from family in medication related deci-
sions was considered important.
A male survivor agreed to stop taking a blood pressure tablet 
with his doctor because of intolerable side effects, and his wife 
being a nurse made it easier. He felt strongly that doctors are 
there to advise not instruct. (Male, age unknown, age at 
stroke unknown, N.63)
Caregivers’ related views
Caregivers also recognised the importance of medica-
tions and the need to continue taking tablets despite 
experiencing side effects. The importance of only stop-
ping medication on GP’s advice was highlighted.
A caregiver reported that because of side-effects her husband 
had voluntarily come off all the medication he was taking, 
except for aspirin which he continued to use. She said they 
had agreed to this together with the GP and stressed the 
importance of doing so before stopping tablets. (Male, aged 
54, age at stroke 52, N.68)
Management of medication side effects
Medications did not necessarily cause side effects
Survivors who did not experience medication side effects 
generally felt that taking medication was a positive 
preventative measure against stroke. Although threads 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
  
9
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access
of discussion were not analysed, these posts often were 
written in reply to users who complained about suffering 
from side effects.
A male survivor advised it was better taking tablets than 
risking another mini-stroke. He had a severe stroke himself 
and was prescribed aspirin and simvastatin. He never 
experienced side effects and also knew others on the same 
statin who didn’t experience any either. (Male aged 67, 
age at stroke 63, N.52)
Changing medications to avoid side effects
Forum users reported changes in secondary prevention 
medications being made by the health professionals to 
counteract negative side effects, which helped adherence.
A male survivor described that on a dosage of 8 mg of 
warfarin he started to suffer migraines and bleeding, 
leading him to refuse the drug. After further conclusive 
tests, the consultant decided to take him off warfarin as he 
was taking persantin, which never gave him a headache or 
nosebleed. He acknowledged warfarin was an important 
drug, but didn’t suit everyone. (Male, aged 49, age at 
stroke 49, N.47)
Perseverance with asking about modifications to achieve optimal 
treatment
Doctors’ and patients’ perseverance in modifying medica-
tions was important to achieve optimal treatment.
A male survivor reported taking up to 7 different blood 
pressure tablets and that it was unusual for a stroke patient 
to only need a few. He recommended going back to the GP as 
necessary to keep changing tablets until the right combination 
was found. (Male, aged 52, age at stroke 52, N.64)
Caregivers’ related views
Treatment adjustments to avoid side effects
Reduction of medication dosage by doctors and elimina-
tion of side effects was reported as a successful strategy to 
aid adherence.
A female caregiver described her husband suffering from 
considerable side effects from simvastatin 40 mg but when 
the GP changed to atorvastatin at a lower dose of 10 mg he 
was able to cope. (Male, aged 54, age at stroke 54, N.49)
trusting healthcare professionals
Healthcare professionals had an important role in 
patients’ trust in secondary prevention medications and 
consequently adherence.
A survivor described how he trusted his vascular surgeon 
who had changed his medication from warfarin to aspirin 
and statin. The survivor was happy to take aspirin and 
felt it would be good to continue as the surgeon also took 
it regularly, concluding it must be beneficial. (Survivor, 
male, aged 35, age at stroke 34, N.71)
PractIcalItIes of secondary PreventIon 
MedIcatIons
capability and resources
Problems associated with taking tablets
Swallowing and handling medicines
Swallowing difficulties were reported when taking tablets, 
especially in relation to the medication dipyridamole, 
due to its size.
A male survivor described ‘swallow panic’, that is, fear of 
choking when trying to take Dipyridamole capsules. The user 
reported it took around 3 months before he got over that. 
(Male, aged 67, age at stroke 55, N.70)
Size of tablets also caused handling difficulties due to 
stroke-related impairments.
A survivor agreed with another user about the 
problem with the size of dipyridamole tablets, which 
were getting stuck in the pill box organizer. (Female, 
aged 46, age at stroke 45, N.30)
Caregivers’ related views
Treatment burden
Taking multiple tablets also contributed to treatment 
burden experienced by caregivers. One caregiver 
described how this added to the survivor’s episodic refusal 
to take any medications.
A caregiver was asking advice on encouraging medication 
taking. He said his mother was on multiple tablets, up to 4 
times a day, but was now refusing to take any at all and this 
did upset him. Persuading her to continue taking the most 
important tablets had taken hours to do. (Male, aged 77, 
age at stroke 77, N.9)
Attending routine appointments
Another practical difficulty was dealing with routine 
appointments which were considered burdensome, 
resulting in the survivors being non-adherent to medica-
tions.
A caregiver (wife) described how her husband was adamant 
that he was not prepared to take statins because he didn’t 
have the time to keep going back to the GP for check-ups. The 
caregiver reported feeling helpless. (Male, aged 55, age at 
stroke 55, N.24)
Difficulties experienced by patients with disabilities
Caregivers of patients with severe disabilities such as 
aphasia and inability to communicate, made their job of 
ensuring patients’ adherence a difficult experience.
A caregiver said she couldn’t imagine what a stroke survivor 
was going through, with her mother unable to communicate 
following a stroke. She described her mother having 
difficulties with medications caused by previous changes in 
treatment. She felt her mother was giving up and wanted 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 10
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access 
advice on dealing with aphasia. (Caregiver-daughter, 
aged 52, age at stroke 47, N.54)
Problems with using storage devices
Using dosette boxes was sometimes a struggle for survi-
vors with severe disabilities, and a source of worry for 
caregivers.
A caregiver mentioned that despite using a nomad tray, 
tablets were still being taken from the wrong day with several 
days’ worth of tablets being taken in a single day. His father 
in law often didn’t take the time to work out the days or to 
look at the calendar. (Male, age unknown, age at stroke 
unknown, N.40)
Seeking advice from pharmacists on managing medications
Another caregiver described having to seek advice on the 
best way to manage the stroke survivor’s medications.
A caregiver said he went to the pharmacist and spent half 
an hour chatting about medications after which he bought a 
flip top multi-coloured medication box labeled with the days 
and doses. He also said it took him a while to establish the 
best way to fill the box without getting confused, eventually 
filling it a tablet at a time across the entire week, instead of a 
day at a time. (Male, aged 82, age at stroke 82, N. 57)
cost of medication
Survivors’ highlighted difficulties faced with meeting the 
cost of stroke medications.
A female survivor described being prescribed both aspirin 
and simvastatin that she had to pay for. She reported having 
to take out a credit card to pay for her medications as she 
was unable to work and did not have any money coming or 
any benefits. (Female, aged 59, age at stroke 59, N.72)
storage devices and strategies for medication management
Using medication aids
Stroke survivors also reported benefits from using medi-
cation aids including pill boxes and medication wallets 
to facilitate medication taking behaviour. These devices 
ensured the appropriate medication was being taken 
at the right time, while also allowing monitoring when 
boxes needed to be refilled.
A survivor agreed the storage box was useful to view 
medication and her husband didn’t have to keep asking 
her whether she had taken her tablets as he could also see. 
She said it was irritating to be constantly asked. The box 
helped her also with not running out of medications as she 
filled it weekly and could tell when it was time for a repeat 
prescription. (Female, aged 46, age at stroke 45, N.30)
Caregivers’ related views
Using medication instructions
Caregivers highlighted how instructions were considered 
helpful in facilitating day-to-day medicine taking. Keeping 
track of medicines that had been taken was suggested as a 
method of ensuring good adherence.
A caregiver (son) described making a note on the pill box 
asking the survivor to turn it over after taking the pills 
as this would mean the morning pills were now taken. A 
second instruction invited the survivor to do the same when 
taking the evening tablet. He suggested to forum users that a 
simple chart tracking when each medication was taken was 
also helpful. (Caregiver-son, aged 82, age at stroke 82, 
N.57)
Good medication taking routines
Creating good medication routines
Linking daily tablet use to an everyday activity or placing 
tablets in a specific location which then acted as a cue to 
take the medication was described as helpful by several 
users.
A survivor suggested using a white board and having method 
in place helped. She remembered taking her own medications 
through repetition or linking tablet use to another everyday 
activity. (Female, aged 54, age at stroke 46, N.19)
Caregivers’ related views
Reminding survivors about taking tablets
Caregivers also played a key role in medication routines 
when survivors could not remember to take tablets.
A caregiver (wife) described regularly giving her husband his 
medication because stroke had caused short term memory loss 
and he would forget them or sometimes take them over again. 
She said she was now in total control of his medications 
which was fine because she was a nurse with experience of 
this. (Female, aged 46, age at stroke 40, N.5)
dIscussIon
summary of main findings
Data from an online forum provided a rich source of 
information, illuminating on practical and perceptual 
barriers and facilitators to adherence to secondary preven-
tion medications in stroke survivors and their caregivers. 
These data highlight several points. Concerns around 
the bad press on statins could result in stroke survivors 
being cautious about commencing/keep taking the 
medication, and opting for a change in diet as an alter-
native (potentially not a  medically appropriate decision 
and without healthcare professionals’ support). Survivors 
expressed concerns about being prescribed medications 
they considered inappropriate, questioned GPs’ motiva-
tion to prescribe medications and at times realised when 
prescribing mistakes occurred. Caregivers themselves 
reported some doubts about the effectiveness of tablets 
and difficulties in ensuring good medication adherence, 
while recognising that it is ultimately a survivor’s decision 
whether or not to take medication, particularly when 
suffering from side effects. Indeed, not experiencing 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
  
11
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access
side effects from secondary prevention medications was 
an important facilitator of adherence. Health profes-
sionals successfully modifying treatment to manage side 
effects and awareness that not everyone suffers from 
side effects were reported as increasing the motivation 
to take secondary prevention treatment. Believing that 
medications reduced stroke risk, feeling reassured by 
taking secondary prevention treatment and experiencing 
another cerebrovascular event as consequence of non-ad-
herence were important drivers of necessity beliefs and 
supported adherence.
Practical barriers included difficulties swallowing 
capsules, burden of multiple medications, stroke-re-
lated communication impairments (eg, aphasia) causing 
patients’ confusion with any treatment changes, difficul-
ties meeting medication costs and with managing storage 
devices. Caregivers’ posts greatly contributed to these 
data. They reported that improved patients’ adherence 
was linked to using medications storage devices, getting 
help from pharmacists in organising medicines, assuming 
full control of their family members’ medication taking 
and having previous experience and knowledge about 
medications and their administration.
strengths and limitations
This study has a number of strengths. First, the method of 
data collection where descriptions by forum users capture 
unprompted thoughts is unlikely to be affected by 
self-presentational bias. Information comes from patients 
over a wide geographical area and includes people who 
might not take part in traditional research because of 
severe disabilities, communication impairments or in the 
case of caregivers, because of lack of time.11 The forum 
creates a natural environment facilitating exchange 
in opinions and in-depth discussions around several 
topics including secondary prevention medications. The 
important presence of caregivers in online discussions is a 
further strength, offering a unique viewpoint on medica-
tion taking behaviour of survivors with severe disabilities. 
Given that patients with significant disabilities may not 
traditionally participate in health research, the online 
forum may represent a potentially important method of 
data collection through which these patients’ views may 
be heard through their caregivers.
These findings however should be interpreted with 
caution. A key limitation of this research was that forum 
data were from the years 2004–2011 and therefore the 
findings reported here may not reflect current practice 
in primary care. Lack of details about the underlying 
clinical scenarios described in some of the posts made it 
difficult classifying emerging themes as barriers or facili-
tators to adherence. In addition, barriers and facilitators 
were limited to those identified from the predefined 
search criteria. Different keywords may have uncovered 
additional barriers to medication adherence we failed 
to identify, or revealed issues related to medications in 
general rather than specifically secondary prevention 
ones. All forum posts were examined by a moderator prior 
to being published online, which may have restricted the 
views of some users. Finally, with the majority of forum 
users under the age of 70 years, it is possible that this 
method of data collection overlooks a significant propor-
tion of the older stroke population.
comparisons with existing literature
Our investigation shed light on the significance stroke 
survivors and caregivers attributed to the bad press on 
statins, which impacted on their adherence. This is in 
agreement with a recent investigation concluding that 
negative statin-related news stories was associated with 
early discontinuation of statin and increased risk of death 
by cardiovascular disease.26 Furthermore, people already 
taking statin were found to be more likely to stop this 
medication following high media coverage,27 or when 
side effects were not tolerable despite GP’s attempts to 
modify treatment.17 Beliefs about secondary prevention 
medications differed at times between survivors and care-
givers. Some stroke survivors decided to stop medications 
because of intolerable side effects, despite their caregivers’ 
believing optimal adherence was important to prevent 
stroke recurrences. In the context of medication side 
effects, caregivers believed in their role as patients’ advo-
cates with healthcare professionals (including GPs and 
pharmacist) and often discussed and sought advice from 
other users in the forum on the matter. Findings from the 
present study also highlight the difficulties experienced 
by stroke survivors using blister packaged medication and 
dosette boxes, despite at the same time outlining their 
benefit in terms of adherence. Evidence from a systematic 
review has demonstrated a positive effect on adherence 
for those in the group using reminder packaging28 as 
well as using pill boxes and blister packs in packaging 
interventions in cardiovascular disease,29 while the use of 
reminder packaging may be a simple way of improving 
adherence to medication.30 With older people known 
to experience difficulties taking medication, developing 
interventions that seek to combine the use of medication 
management devices with caregiver cooperation may be 
one way of addressing the practical challenges they face.
This study highlights a couple of interesting findings. 
Survivors reported making decisions about taking or 
not secondary prevention medications sometimes inde-
pendently 
from 
their 
GPs, 
despite 
considering 
GPs’ 
support 
important. Collaborative decision making involving care-
givers, clinicians or pharmacists may however empower 
stroke survivors to make better informed decisions about 
secondary prevention medications. Understanding how 
patients make decision about medications is important31 
and GPs may benefit from enhancing caregivers’ role in 
the decision-making process about medications.
Barriers to caring for the stroke survivor posthospital 
discharge have included a lack of collaboration with 
the healthcare team and a lack of community support 
for the caregiving role32 as well as insufficient knowl-
edge and skills to care for the survivor in the home.33 
We described in this study the struggle caregivers face in 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 12
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access 
their role as advocate of patients, on one side engaging 
with healthcare professionals for ensuring that recom-
mended secondary prevention treatment is received, and 
on the other side wanting to support and respect patients’ 
decisions about taking or not taking medications. Care-
givers facing this dilemma could benefit from greater 
support by GPs and pharmacists. Caregivers could play 
an important role in bridging the gap between health-
care professional and stroke survivor in primary care and 
deserve more research and clinical attention. Developing 
interventions that seek to encourage active caregivers’ 
engagement in stroke survivors’ and healthcare profes-
sionals’ shared decision making, can help to address 
more comprehensively barriers to adherence as well as 
delivering a care programme tailored to the individual 
needs of patients.8
Barriers highlighted here are in line with those reported 
by another qualitative study, where negative or erroneous 
beliefs about tablets, doubts around the effectiveness of 
medication and concerns about the consequences of not 
taking tablets were associated with being low adherers.34 
Greater emphasis on informing stroke survivors and care-
givers about secondary prevention medications in primary 
care is needed. In a recent randomised trial evaluating an 
educational package for stroke survivors and caregivers, 
participants who received tailored information along with 
verbal reinforcement reported a greater satisfaction with 
medical and practical services.35
Survivors’ concerns around the need for secondary 
prevention medications may reflect a wider pattern of 
misunderstanding about the benefits of such drugs. In 
an assessment of attitudes towards taking cardiovascular 
medications, caution expressed around medications was 
linked with how great the risk to health was perceived to 
be, with most patients saying they would do what the GP 
recommended.36 A meta-analysis examining the necessi-
ty-concerns framework across a range of conditions found 
that experiencing the consequences of non-adherence 
reinforced the subsequent need to take tablets, acting as 
a driver of medication adherence,37 in agreement with 
what is reported in this study by both stroke survivors and 
caregivers.
Although statins are known to reduce the risk of stroke 
by as much as 25%,38 benefits are undermined by subop-
timal adherence. In a previous examination on patient 
perspectives around statin therapy, compliance with 
statins was associated with information provided during 
the practitioner consultation as well as the beliefs about 
cholesterol and current health status.39 This concurs 
with the findings in our study. In a recent investigation 
exploring non-adherence and patient’s perceptions 
towards statins, it was found that almost  three-quarters of 
all participants doubted the necessity of statins and lacked 
knowledge about this medication while  concerns around 
side effects were significantly associated with intentional 
non-adherence.40
In this online forum, we found evidence that stroke 
survivors establish routines and use cues to facilitate 
medication taking. This is in agreement with previous 
findings from a pilot trial in which a plan to establish 
a medication taking routine resulted in significantly 
greater adherence among survivors. 41 Providing support 
to establish medication taking routines particularly 
among older patients with stroke can be beneficial.42 
Challenges to adherence with warfarin therapy, including 
beliefs about the need for this treatment have been 
highlighted previously, suggesting the benefit of a more 
collaborative patient-practitioner approach, focusing on 
education around anticoagulant therapy.43
These findings add to current literature by providing an 
assessment of adherence from users of an online forum. 
There has been little research on this approach to data 
collection conducted to date. The study identifies adher-
ence concerns of a younger stroke population who may 
be less likely to be represented in research studies and 
whose attitudes to medication may be less well known. 
Findings add to the literature and shed lights on dynamic 
interactions between the survivor, caregiver and health-
care professionals and the extent to which this influences 
medication adherence in this patient group.
Implications for clinical practice
Results of this investigation demonstrate the need to 
address identified barriers to adherence to secondary 
prevention 
medications 
within 
clinical 
practice. 
Improving patient-practitioner and caregiver-practitioner 
communication through more effective clinical consulta-
tions has the potential to benefit patients and encourage 
a greater understanding of the importance of secondary 
prevention medications. This approach could contribute 
to shaping patients’ beliefs about medications and to 
improving confidence around taking them. Challenging 
negative medication beliefs, better information provision 
and addressing practical problems around the appro-
priate use of tablet storage devices, particularly for those 
patients with more severe disabilities as a result of stroke, 
has the potential to increase adherence and ultimately 
improve health outcomes.40
Both primary and secondary healthcare professionals 
should seek to engage the family of survivors and their 
support network to challenge concerns around taking 
tablets, offer reassurance on the benefits of medications, 
discuss the need for treatment in light of side effects and 
even support patients’ informed decision to refuse medi-
cations.
Interventions using ‘expert patients’ or ‘expert 
caregivers’ providing support to stroke survivors and care-
givers in the primary care setting hold potential.15
Internet fora for patients with stroke provide a poten-
tially important resource through which the attitudes of 
survivors and their caregivers towards medication use can 
be better understood.
These findings provide new insight to clinicians about 
younger stroke survivors’ concerns and the struggles 
caregivers might face in their role as patients’ advocates. 
Awareness of these factors will improve consultations 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
  
13
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access
about secondary prevention medication with both younger 
survivors and stroke survivors’ caregivers. Stroke survivors 
with severe disabilities and their caregivers experience 
significant practical barriers to adherence. Greater focus 
on such practicalities by healthcare professionals would 
be beneficial.
This study highlights caregivers’ unique position in 
overseeing patients’ medications. Exploring the stroke 
survivor-caregiver dynamic can shed light on potential 
barriers to adherence to secondary prevention medi-
cation and ways to address them, eventually improving 
patients’ outcomes.
future research
Our study suggests that caregivers play an important role 
in bridging the gap between patient and practitioner 
with regard to informing and facilitating the medica-
tion-taking process. Future research should therefore 
further explore their role in stroke survivors’ medication 
taking and systematically incorporate them into adher-
ence interventions.
Given the strong focus of forum users on statins, under-
standing why stroke survivors choose not to take statins 
as prescribed and suggesting to healthcare professionals 
effective ways of dealing with this issue should be a key 
focus for research in this area. With adverse events the 
most common reason for poor adherence to statin 
therapy, improved patient understanding of this medica-
tion through greater communication with the practitioner 
can help to address ongoing concerns.44
Future interventions should aim at further improving 
medication taking routines after stroke, using cues to 
prompt tablet taking. Advances in technology could facili-
tate delivery of such interventions. One novel approach to 
improving adherence particularly with regard to multiple 
medications is the use of fixed-dose combination therapy 
‘polypill approach’.45 Indeed, a recent systematic review 
of barriers and facilitators of adherence to secondary 
prevention medications within cardiovascular disease 
found fixed dose combination (FDC) therapy to be an 
important facilitator associated with high adherence.46
conclusIon
This study identified barriers and facilitators to medica-
tion adherence for stroke through analysing data from an 
online forum using a framework approach. Developing 
interventions which build on these results according to 
the framework has the potential to improve medication 
adherence and ultimately reduce the burden of stroke. 
Greater efforts are needed to meet the growing chal-
lenges faced by stroke survivors and their caregivers and 
to enable primary care clinicians to effectively address the 
burden of non-adherence to secondary prevention medi-
cations.
Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to the Stroke Association for 
permission to analyse the archives of the TalkStroke forum.
Contributors ADS conceived of the study, is the Chief Investigator, contributed 
to the data analysis and commented on the manuscript. JM is a co-investigator 
on the study, wrote and commented on the manuscript. SS is a co-investigator on 
the study, wrote and commented on the manuscript. JJ contributed to the study 
design, conducted the data analysis and prepared the manuscript for submission. 
All authors agreed on the final draft of the submitted manuscript.
Funding DS is funded by a National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Academic 
Clinical Lectureship. The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not 
necessarily those of the National Health Service, the NIHR or the Department of 
Health. JJ was supported by a research grant from The Stroke Association and the 
British Heart Foundation.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data sharing statement No additional data are available.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits 
others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for commercial use, 
provided the original work is properly cited. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
references
 1. Jørgensen HS, Nakayama H, Reith J, et al. Stroke recurrence: 
predictors, severity, and prognosis. The Copenhagen Stroke Study. 
Neurology 1997;48:891–5.
 2. Scarborough P
, Peto V, Bhatnagar P
, et al. Stroke statistics. British 
Heart Foundation and Stroke Association London, 2009.
 3. Wolf PA, Clagett GP
, Easton JD, et al. Preventing ischemic stroke in 
patients with prior stroke and transient ischemic attack : a statement 
for healthcare professionals from the Stroke Council of the American 
Heart Association. Stroke 1999;30:1991–4.
 4. Hankey GJ. Secondary stroke prevention. Lancet Neurol 
2014;13:178–94.
 5. Yusuf S. Two decades of progress in preventing vascular disease. 
Lancet 2002;360:2–3.
 6. Souter C, Kinnear A, Kinnear M, et al. Optimisation of secondary 
prevention of stroke: a qualitative study of stroke patients' beliefs, 
concerns and difficulties with their medicines. Int J Pharm Pract 
2014;22:424–32.
 7. Kronish IM, Diefenbach MA, Edmondson DE, et al. Key barriers to 
medication adherence in survivors of strokes and transient ischemic 
attacks. J Gen Intern Med 2013;28:675–82.
 8. Bauler S, Jacquin-Courtois S, Haesebaert J, et al. Barriers and 
facilitators for medication adherence in stroke patients: a qualitative 
study conducted in french neurological rehabilitation units. Eur 
Neurol 2014;72(5-6):262–70.
 9. Kelly-Hayes M, Beiser A, Kase CS, et al. The influence of gender and 
age on disability following ischemic stroke: the Framingham study. J 
Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 2003;12:119–26.
 
10. De Simoni A, Mant J, Sutton S. Adherence to medication in stroke 
survivors dependent on caregivers. Br J Gen Pract 2015;65:e789.
 
11. De Simoni A, Shanks A, Mant J, et al. Making sense of patients' 
internet forums: a systematic method using discourse analysis. Br J 
Gen Pract 2014;64:e178–e80.
 
12. De Simoni A, Horne R, Fleming L, et al. What do adolescents 
with asthma really think about adherence to inhalers? Insights 
from a qualitative analysis of a UK online forum. BMJ Open 
2017;7:e015245.
 
13. Travis SS, Bethea LS, Winn P
. Medication administration hassles 
reported by family caregivers of dependent elderly persons. J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2000;55:M412–M417.
 
14. Jamison J, Graffy J, Mullis R, et al. Barriers to medication adherence 
for the secondary prevention of stroke: a qualitative interview study 
in primary care. Br J Gen Pract 2016;66:e568–e576.
 
15. Aggarwal B, Liao M, Mosca L. Medication adherence is associated 
with having a caregiver among cardiac patients. Ann Behav Med 
2013;46:237–42.
 
16. De Simoni A, Shanks A, Balasooriya-Smeekens C, et al. Stroke 
survivors and their families receive information and support on 
an individual basis from an online forum: descriptive analysis of a 
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 14
Jamison J, et al. BMJ Open 2017;7:e016814. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814
Open Access 
population of 2348 patients and qualitative study of a sample of 
participants. BMJ Open 2016;6:e010501.
 
17. Izuka NJ, Alexander MA, Balasooriya-Smeekens C, et al. How 
do stroke survivors and their carers use practitioners' advice on 
secondary prevention medications? qualitative study of an online 
forum. Fam Pract 2017 April 10.
 
18. Horne R. Compliance adherence and Concordance. Harding KTG, 
ed. Pharmacy practice. London: Taylor & Franics, 2001.
 
19. Horne R Weinman J Barber N et al. Adherence and compliance in 
medicine – taking. Report for the National Co-ordinating Centre for NHS Service 
Delivery and Organisation R&D (NCCSDO) 2005.
 20 . Anthony L. AntConc (Version 3.2.4) [Computer Software]. Tokyo, 
Japan: Waseda University; 2016. Available from: http://www. 
laurenceanthony. 
net/
 
21. Eysenbach G, Till JE. Ethical issues in qualitative research on internet 
communities. BMJ 2001;323:1103–5.
 
22. Balasooriya-Smeekens C, Bateman A, Mant J, et al. Barriers and 
facilitators to staying in work after stroke: insight from an online 
forum. BMJ Open 2016;6:e009974.
 
23. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res 
Psychol 2006;3:77–101.
 
24. Seale C, Charteris-Black J, MacFarlane A, et al. Interviews and 
internet forums: a comparison of two sources of qualitative data. 
Qual Health Res 2010;20:595–606.
 
25. Esquivel A, Meric-Bernstam F
, Bernstam EV. Accuracy and self 
correction of information received from an internet breast cancer list: 
content analysis. BMJ 2006;332:939–42.
 
26. Nielsen SF
, Nordestgaard BG. Negative statin-related news stories 
decrease statin persistence and increase myocardial infarction and 
cardiovascular mortality: a nationwide prospective cohort study. Eur 
Heart J 2016;37:908–16.
 
27. Matthews A, Herrett E, Gasparrini A, et al. Impact of statin related 
media coverage on use of statins: interrupted time series analysis 
with UK primary care data. BMJ 2016;353:i3283.
 
28. Boeni F
, Spinatsch E, Suter K, et al. Effect of drug reminder 
packaging on medication adherence: a systematic review revealing 
research gaps. Syst Rev 2014;3:29.
 
29. Conn VS, Ruppar TM, Chan KC, et al. Packaging interventions 
to increase medication adherence: systematic review and meta-
analysis. Curr Med Res Opin 2015;31:145–60.
 
30. Mahtani KR, Heneghan CJ, Glasziou PP
, et al. Reminder packaging 
for improving adherence to self-administered long-term medications. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011:CD005025.
 
31. Benson J, Britten N. Patients' decisions about whether or 
not to take antihypertensive drugs: qualitative study. BMJ 
2002;325:873–73.
 
32. White CL, Korner-Bitensky N, Rodrigue N, et al. Barriers and 
facilitators to caring for individuals with stroke in the community: the 
family's experience. Can J Neurosci Nurs 2007;29:5–12.
 
33. Smith LN, Lawrence M, Kerr SM, et al. Informal carers' experience of 
caring for stroke survivors. J Adv Nurs 2004;46:235–44.
 
34. Chambers JA, O'Carroll RE, Hamilton B, et al. Adherence to 
medication in stroke survivors: a qualitative comparison of low and 
high adherers. Br J Health Psychol 2011;16:592–609.
 
35. Eames S, Hoffmann T, Worrall L, et al. Randomised controlled trial 
of an education and support package for stroke patients and their 
carers. BMJ Open 2013;3:e002538.
 
36. Gale NK, Greenfield S, Gill P
, et al. Patient and general practitioner 
attitudes to taking medication to prevent cardiovascular disease after 
receiving detailed information on risks and benefits of treatment: a 
qualitative study. BMC Fam Pract 2011;12:1–10.
 
37. Horne R, Chapman SC, Parham R, et al. Understanding patients' 
adherence-related beliefs about medicines prescribed for long-
term conditions: a meta-analytic review of the Necessity-Concerns 
Framework. PLoS One 2013;8:e80633.
 
38. Afilalo J, Duque G, Steele R, et al. Statins for secondary prevention 
in elderly patients: a hierarchical bayesian meta-analysis. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2008;51:37–45.
 
39. Tolmie EP
, Lindsay GM, Kerr SM, et al. Patients' perspectives on 
statin therapy for treatment of hypercholesterolaemia: a qualitative 
study. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs 2003;2:141–9.
 
40. Wouters H, Van Dijk L, Geers HC, et al. Understanding statin Non-
Adherence: knowing which perceptions and experiences matter to 
different patients. PLoS One 2016;11:e0146272.
 41 O'Carroll RE, Chambers JA, Dennis M, et al. Improving adherence 
to medication in stroke survivors: a pilot randomised controlled trial. 
Ann Behav Med 2013;46:358–68.
 42 Sanders MJ, Van Oss T. Using daily routines to promote medication 
adherence in older adults. Am J Occup Ther 2013;67:91–9.
 43 Kneeland PP
, Fang MC. Current issues in patient adherence 
and persistence: focus on anticoagulants for the treatment 
and prevention of thromboembolism. Patient Prefer Adherence 
2010;4:51–60.
 44 Maningat P
, Gordon BR, Breslow JL. How do we improve patient 
compliance and adherence to long-term statin therapy? Curr 
Atheroscler Rep 2013;15:291–91.
 45 Castellano JM, Sanz G, Peñalvo JL, et al. A polypill strategy to 
improve adherence: results from the FOCUS project. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2014;64:2071–82.
 46 Banerjee A, Khandelwal S, Nambiar L, et al. Health system 
barriers and facilitators to medication adherence for the secondary 
prevention of cardiovascular disease: a systematic review. Open 
Heart 2016;3:e000438.
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016814 on 16 July 2017. Downloaded from 
