 LSHTM Research Online
Jamison, DT; Alwan, A; Mock, CN; Nugent, R; Watkins, D; Adeyi, O; Anand, S; Atun, R; Bertozzi,
S; Bhutta, Z; +68 more... Binagwaho, A; Black, R; Blecher, M; Bloom, BR; Brouwer, E; Bundy, DAP;
Chisholm, D; Cieza, A; Cullen, M; Danforth, K; de Silva, N; Debas, HT; Donkor, P; Dua, T; Fleming,
KA; Gallivan, M; Garcia, PJ; Gawande, A; Gaziano, T; Gelband, H; Glass, R; Glassman, A; Gray,
G; Habte, D; Holmes, KK; Horton, S; Hutton, G; Jha, P; Knaul, FM; Kobusingye, O; Krakauer, EL;
Kruk, ME; Lachmann, P; Laxminarayan, R; Levin, C; Looi, LM; Madhav, N; Mahmoud, A; Mbanya,
JC; Measham, A; Medina-Mora, ME; Medlin, C; Mills, A; Mills, JA; Montoya, J; Norheim, O; Olson,
Z; Omokhodion, F; Oppenheim, B; Ord, T; Patel, V; Patton, GC; Peabody, J; Prabhakaran, D; Qi,
J; Reynolds, T; Ruacan, S; Sankaranarayanan, R; Sepúlveda, J; Skolnik, R; Smith, KR; Temmerman,
M; Tollman, S; Verguet, S; Walker, DG; Walker, N; Wu, Y; Zhao, K; (2017) Universal health coverage
and intersectoral action for health: key messages from Disease Control Priorities, 3rd edition. Lancet.
ISSN 0140-6736 DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9
Downloaded from: http://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk/4645826/
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9
Usage Guidlines:
Please refer to usage guidelines at http://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk/policies.html or alternatively
contact researchonline@lshtm.ac.uk.
Available under license: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.5/
https://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk
 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online November 24, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9 
1
Universal health coverage and intersectoral action for health: 
key messages from Disease Control Priorities, 3rd edition
Dean T Jamison, Ala Alwan*, Charles N Mock*, Rachel Nugent*, David Watkins*, Olusoji Adeyi, Shuchi Anand, Rifat Atun, Stefano Bertozzi, 
Zulfiqar Bhutta, Agnes Binagwaho, Robert Black, Mark Blecher, Barry R Bloom, Elizabeth Brouwer, Donald A P Bundy, Dan Chisholm, Alarcos Cieza, 
Mark Cullen, Kristen Danforth, Nilanthi de Silva, Haile T Debas, Peter Donkor, Tarun Dua, Kenneth A Fleming, Mark Gallivan, Patricia J Garcia, 
Atul Gawande, Thomas Gaziano, Hellen Gelband, Roger Glass, Amanda Glassman, Glenda Gray, Demissie Habte, King K Holmes, Susan Horton, 
Guy Hutton, Prabhat Jha, Felicia M Knaul, Olive Kobusingye, Eric L Krakauer, Margaret E Kruk, Peter Lachmann, Ramanan Laxminarayan, 
Carol Levin, Lai Meng Looi, Nita Madhav, Adel Mahmoud, Jean Claude Mbanya, Anthony Measham, María Elena Medina-Mora, Carol Medlin, 
Anne Mills, Jody-Anne Mills, Jaime Montoya, Ole Norheim, Zachary Olson, Folashade Omokhodion, Ben Oppenheim, Toby Ord, Vikram Patel, 
George C Patton, John Peabody, Dorairaj Prabhakaran, Jinyuan Qi, Teri Reynolds, Sevket Ruacan, Rengaswamy Sankaranarayanan, 
Jaime Sepúlveda, Richard Skolnik, Kirk R Smith, Marleen Temmerman, Stephen Tollman, Stéphane Verguet, Damian G Walker, Neff Walker, 
Yangfeng Wu, Kun Zhao
The World Bank is publishing nine volumes of Disease Control Priorities, 3rd edition (DCP3) between 2015 and 2018. 
Volume 9, Improving Health and Reducing Poverty, summarises the main messages from all the volumes and contains 
cross-cutting analyses. This Review draws on all nine volumes to convey conclusions. The analysis in DCP3 is built 
around 21 essential packages that were developed in the nine volumes. Each essential package addresses the concerns 
of a major professional community (eg, child health or surgery) and contains a mix of intersectoral policies and health-
sector interventions. 71 intersectoral prevention policies were identified in total, 29 of which are priorities for early 
introduction. Interventions within the health sector were grouped onto five platforms (population based, community 
level, health centre, first-level hospital, and referral hospital). DCP3 defines a model concept of essential universal 
health coverage (EUHC) with 218 interventions that provides a starting point for country-specific analysis of priorities. 
Assuming steady-state implementation by 2030, EUHC in lower-middle-income countries would reduce premature 
deaths by an estimated 4·2 million per year. Estimated total costs prove substantial: about 9·1% of (current) gross 
national income (GNI) in low-income countries and 5·2% of GNI in lower-middle-income countries. Financing 
provision of continuing intervention against chronic conditions accounts for about half of estimated incremental 
costs. For lower-middle-income countries, the mortality reduction from implementing the EUHC can only reach 
about half the mortality reduction in non-communicable diseases called for by the Sustainable Development Goals. 
Full achievement will require increased investment or sustained intersectoral action, and actions by finance ministries 
to tax smoking and polluting emissions and to reduce or eliminate (often large) subsidies on fossil fuels appear of 
central importance. DCP3 is intended to be a model starting point for analyses at the country level, but country-
specific cost structures, epidemiological needs, and national priorities will generally lead to definitions of EUHC that 
differ from country to country and from the model in this Review. DCP3 is particularly relevant as achievement of 
EUHC relies increasingly on greater domestic finance, with global developmental assistance in health focusing more 
on global public goods. In addition to assessing effects on mortality, DCP3 looked at outcomes of EUHC not 
encompassed by the disability-adjusted life-year metric and related cost-effectiveness analyses. The other objectives 
included financial protection (potentially better provided upstream by keeping people out of the hospital rather than 
downstream by paying their hospital bills for them), stillbirths averted, palliative care, contraception, and child physical 
and intellectual growth. The first 1000 days after conception are highly important for child development, but the next 
7000 days are likewise important and often neglected.
Introduction
In 1993, the World Bank published Disease Control 
Priorities in Developing Countries (DCP1), an attempt to 
systematically assess value for money (cost-effectiveness) 
of interventions that would address the major sources 
of disease burden in low-income and middle-income 
countries (LMICs).1 One motivation for DCP1 was to 
identify reasonable responses in highly resource-
constrained environments to the growing burden of non-
communicable disease and of HIV
/AIDS in LMICs. The 
World Bank had highlighted the already substantial 
problem of non-communicable diseases in country 
studies for Malaysia2 and China3 and in a Shattuck 
Lecture.4 Mexican scholars pointed to the rapid growth of 
non-communicable diseases in Mexico and introduced 
the concept of a protracted epidemiological transition 
involving a dual burden of non-communicable diseases 
combined with significant lingering problems of 
infectious disease.5,6 The dual burden paradigm remains 
valid to this day. The World Bank’s first (and only) World 
Development Report about health provided the first 
assessment of the global burden of disease, an assessment 
that underlined the importance of non-communicable 
diseases, which was consistent with subsequent assess-
ments of global disease burden. It then drew heavily 
on findings from DCP1 to conclude that a number 
of specific interventions against non-communicable 
diseases (including tobacco control and multidrug 
Published Online 
November 24, 2017 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0140-6736(17)32906-9
*Contributed equally
University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA, USA (Prof D T Jamison PhD, 
Prof H T Debas MD, 
Prof J Peabody MD, 
Prof J Sepúlveda MD); 
University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA 
(Prof A Alwan MD, 
Prof C N Mock MD, 
D Watkins MD, E Brouwer MPH, 
K Danforth MPH, 
Prof K K Holmes MD, 
C Levin PhD); RTI International, 
Seattle, WA, USA 
(R Nugent PhD); World Bank 
Group, Washington, DC, USA 
(O Adeyi DrPH, A Measham MD); 
Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA, USA (S Anand MD, 
Prof M Cullen MD); 
Harvard T. H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA 
(Prof R Atun FFPHM, 
Prof B R Bloom PhD, 
Prof A Gawande MD, 
M E Kruk MD, S Verguet PhD); 
University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA 
(Prof S Bertozzi MD, Z Olson MA, 
Prof K R Smith PhD); Aga Khan 
University, Karachi, Pakistan 
(Prof Z Bhutta PhD); Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA (A Binagwaho MD, 
Prof A Gawande, T Gaziano MD, 
E L Krakauer MD, 
Prof V Patel PhD); Johns Hopkins 
University Bloomberg School 
of Public Health, Baltimore, 
MD, USA (Prof R Black PhD, 
N Walker PhD); National 
Treasury of South Africa, 
Cape Town, South Africa 
(M Blecher MD); The Bill & 
Melinda Gates Foundation, 
London, UK (D A P Bundy PhD); 
 Review
2 
www.thelancet.com   Published online November 24, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9
The Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation, Seattle, WA, USA 
(D G Walker PhD); World Health 
Organization Regional Office 
for Europe, Copenhagen, 
Denmark (D Chisholm PhD); 
World Health Organization, 
Geneva, Switzerland 
(A Cieza PhD, T Dua MD, 
J-A Mills MIPH, T Reynolds MD); 
University of Kelaniya, 
Kelaniya, Sri Lanka 
(Prof N de Silva PhD); Kwame 
Nkrumah University of Science 
and Technology, Kumasi, 
Ghana (Prof P Donkor MD); 
Center for Global Health, 
National Cancer Institute, 
Bethesda, MD, USA 
(Prof K A Fleming DPhil); 
University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK (Prof K A Fleming, 
T Ord DPhil); Metabiota, 
San Francisco, CA, USA 
(M Gallivan MPH, 
N Madhav MSPH, 
B Oppenheim PhD); Universidad 
Peruana Cayetano Heredia, 
Lima, Peru (Prof P J Garcia MD); 
Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA 
(Prof A Gawande, T Gaziano); 
Fogarty International Center, 
US National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA 
(R Glass MD); Center for Global 
Development, Washington, DC, 
USA (A Glassman MSc); 
University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 
South Africa (G Gray MBBCh, 
Prof S Tollman PhD); 
International Clinical 
Epidemiology Network, 
New Delhi, India 
(Prof D Habte MD); University 
of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, 
Canada (Prof S Horton PhD); 
UNICEF, New York, NY, USA 
(G Hutton PhD); University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada 
(Prof P Jha DPhil, 
H Gelband MHS); University of 
Miami, Miami, FL, USA 
(Prof F M Knaul PhD); Makerere 
University Medical School, 
Kampala, Uganda 
(O Kobusingye MMed); 
University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK 
(Prof P Lachmann FMedSci); 
Center for Disease Dynamics, 
Economics, and Policy, 
Washington, DC, USA 
(R Laxminarayan PhD); 
University of Malaya, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia 
(Prof L M Looi MD); Princeton, 
University, Princeton, NJ, USA 
(Prof A Mahmoud MD, J Qi MS); 
University Yaoundé I, Yaoundé,
secondary prevention of vascular disease) were attractive 
even in environments where substantial burdens of 
infection and insufficient dietary intake remained.7,8 
The World Development Report also pointed to 
DCP1’s finding that opportunities remained to reduce 
enormously the burden of child mortality and other 
mortality from these infections.9
The second edition of Disease Control Priorities (DCP2), 
published in 2006, updated and extended DCP1 most 
notably by explicit consideration of the implications for 
health systems of expanded coverage of high-priority 
interventions.10 One important linkage to health systems 
was through examination of selected platforms for 
delivering logistically related interventions that might be 
addressing quite heterogeneous sets of problems. 
Platforms often provide a more natural unit for 
investment (and for estimating costs) than do individual 
interventions. Analysis of the costs of providing 
platforms (and of health improvements they can generate 
in a given epidemiological environment) can thus help 
guide health-system investments and development. One 
example of a platform (within the larger platform of 
first-level hospital) is the surgery service. A heterogeneous 
set of conditions is addressed by surgical equipment and 
surgically trained staff. Both Disease Control Priorities, 
3rd edition (DCP3), and WHO’s major investment case 
for health continue to use platforms and their associated 
costs as important organising concepts.11 The DCP3 
remit did not include assessment of the impact of DCP1 
and DCP2 (although the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
has commissioned such a review, emphasising DCP2 
and early output from DCP3).
The focus of DCP3 has been on the content of a benefits 
package. DCP3 does not address two important dimensions 
of finance—the role of private finance and whether public 
finance should focus on the poor or be universal. That said, 
our modelling of the costs and consequences of benefits 
packages assume universal coverage and low or zero 
payment at point of service. Our costing estimates include, 
implicitly, the costs of personnel training and system 
strengthening, but addressing how to develop personnel 
and system was beyond the remit of the DCP3.
In this Review, we convey the main findings of 
DCP3 and, in particular, the conclusions concerning 
Panel 1: Key messages from Disease Control Priorities, 3rd edition (DCP3)
1 DCP3 has found it useful to organise interventions into 
21 essential packages that group the interventions 
relevant to particular professional communities. Each 
package can contain both intersectoral interventions and 
health-system interventions. Specific findings from 
packages point to the attractiveness of widely available 
surgical capacity, the value of meeting unmet demand for 
contraception, the potential of a multipronged approach 
to air pollution, and the importance of maintaining 
investment in child health and development far beyond 
the first 1000 days of a child’s life.
2 Interventions were selected for packages by a systematic 
process using criteria of value for money, burden 
addressed, and implementation feasibility. Collectively, the 
218 selected health-system interventions are defined to 
constitute essential universal health coverage (EUHC). 
A subset of 108 of these interventions, selected using 
more stringent criteria, are suggested as a highest priority 
package (HPP), constituting an important first step on the 
path to EUHC. Five platforms (population based, 
community level, health centre, first-level hospital, and 
referral hospital) provide the delivery base for EUHC. The 
specific interventions selected for the HPP and for EUHC, 
and the definitions of platforms and packages, are 
necessarily quite generic. Every country’s definitions and 
selections will differ from these and from each other’s. 
Nonetheless, we view DCP3’s selections to be a potentially 
useful model list and a starting point for what are 
appropriately country-specific assessments. The package 
and EUHC concepts are new in DCP3 and are set up to be 
easily adapted to country-specific analyses.
3 The costs estimated for the HPP and EUHC are substantial. 
The HPP is, however, affordable by low-income countries 
prepared to commit to rapid improvement in population 
health, and the EUHC is affordable by lower-middle-income 
countries. Many upper-middle-income countries have yet to 
achieve EUHC, and they might also find that the EUHC 
interventions are a useful starting point for discussion.
4 To reduce premature deaths by 40% by 2030 (known as 
40 × 30) is a goal for mortality reduction closely mirroring 
the quantitative content of the Sustainable Development 
Goal 3. Our calculations suggest that low-income countries 
implementing HPP and lower-middle-income countries 
implementing EUHC by 2030 will make substantial progress 
toward this 40 × 30 target but are likely to fall short (unless 
there is an unexpectedly substantial intersectoral action to 
raise excise taxes on tobacco and adopt other fiscal 
interventions to reduce behavioural and environmental risk 
factors for non-communicable diseases).
5 DCP3 has shown that it is possible to identify the main 
sources of health-related financial risk and impoverishment, 
to estimate the value of risk reduction, and to use a new 
method developed for DCP3, the extended 
cost-effectiveness analysis, to help achieve efficiency in 
purchase of financial risk reduction. This concern for 
efficiency in (government) purchase of financial protection 
is new in DCP3, but DCP3 has made only a beginning in 
applying these methods. Much remains to be done.
6 In addition to the aggregate conclusions of DCP3, each 
volume provides rich detail on policy options and priorities. 
This granularity in the volumes makes them of use to the 
implementation level of ministries as well as the policy level.
 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online November 24, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9 
3
 Cameroon 
(Prof J C Mbanya MD); National 
Institute of Psychiatry de la 
Fuente Muniz, Mexico City, 
Mexico (M E Medina-Mora PhD); 
Praxis Social Impact 
Consulting, Washington, DC, 
USA (C Medlin PhD); London 
School of Hygiene & Tropical 
Medicine, London, UK 
(Prof A Mills PhD, 
Prof D Prabhakaran MD); 
University of the Philippines, 
inter 
sectoral policy priorities and essential universal 
health coverage. Beyond informing policy discourse, the 
granularity of analysis reported in DCP3’s nine volumes 
is intended to serve officials within ministries at the 
implementation level. Beginning with DCP3 volume 1, 
on essential surgery, the first eight volumes of DCP3 (and 
related overviews of six of them in The Lancet) were 
published between 2015 and 2017
. The final volume, with 
cross-cutting and synthesising chapters, will be published 
in early 2018. DCP3’s key messages are summarised in 
panel 1, and the DCP3’s nine volumes and their editors 
are listed in panel 2.
The division between intersectoral policies and health 
sector policies in DCP3’s analyses and examples of the 
risk factors and conditions that the policies address are 
shown in figure 1. Importantly the DCP3 structure views 
the role of intersectoral action to be reduction of 
behavioural and environmental risks, which themselves 
affect the level of physiological risks and health outcomes 
directly. The health sector’s role in reducing behavioural 
and environmental risk is viewed as modest—rather, the 
health sector’s main role is in reducing (some of) the 
physiological risk factors and reducing the duration and 
severity of health conditions and their sequelae. 
Appropriate health sector policies also offer the potential 
for reducing health-related financial risks in a population.
DCP3 has four major objectives that go beyond previous 
editions. First, DCP3 addresses explicitly the financial risk 
protection and poverty reduction objective of health 
systems as well as provision of contraception, reduction in 
stillbirths, palliative care, and enhancement of the physical 
and cognitive development of children. Standard health 
metrics such as quality-adjusted life-years and disability-
adjusted life-years usually do not address these other 
objectives of health systems, and DCP3 has endeavoured 
to be explicit about them and their importance. Second, 
DCP3 devotes systematic attention to disease prevention 
and the intersectoral determinants of health. Third, DCP3 
organises interventions into 21 essential packages that 
reflect professional communities (panel 3). DCP3 defines 
a concept of essential universal health coverage (EUHC) in 
terms of the health-systems components of the 21 essential 
packages and further identifies a subset of EUHC termed 
the highest priority package (HPP) that can potentially be 
afforded by low-income countries and offers the most 
potential achievement (given limited resources) of health, 
financial protection, and other objectives. Finally, for both 
EUHC and HPP, DCP3 provides estimates (for low-
income and for lower-middle-income countries) of the 
magnitude of their effect on mortality and of their 
incremental (ie, required expenditure above current levels) 
and total costs in 2030. In addition to these new elements, 
DCP3 updates the efforts of DCP1 and DCP2 to assemble 
and interpret the scientific literature on economic 
evaluation of health interventions.
Here we introduce the substantive topics addressed by 
DCP3 and relay our main conclusions. First, we briefly 
describe the context in which DCP3’s analyses have 
been undertaken.
Context
Five considerations set the context for DCP3. The first 
four were the 20th century revolution in human health, 
the scientific underpinnings of that revolution, the high 
estimated returns to (carefully chosen) health investments, 
and the increasing implementation of universal health 
coverage (UHC) as a practical goal for domestic finance of 
health systems. Skolnik12 provides further discussion of 
Panel 2: Nine volumes of Disease Control Priorities, 3rd edition (DCP3)
The World Bank is publishing DCP3 between 2015 and 2018. By contrast with the single 
(very large) volume formats of DCP1 and DCP2, DCP3 appears in nine small and topical 
volumes, each with its own editors. Coordination between volumes has been provided by 
seven series editors, Dean T Jamison, Rachel Nugent, Hellen Gelband, Susan Horton, 
Prabhat Jha, Ramanan Laxminarayan, and Charles N Mock. The topics and editors of the 
individual volumes are listed below:
2015
Volume 1: Essential surgery
(edited by Haile T Debas, Peter Donkor, Atul Gawande, Dean T Jamison, Margaret E Kruk, 
and Charles N Mock, with a foreword by Paul Farmer)
Volume 3: Cancer
(edited by Hellen Gelband, Prabhat Jha, Rengaswamy Sankaranarayanan, and Susan Horton, 
with a foreword by Amartya Sen)
Volume 4: Mental, neurological, and substance use disorders
(edited by Vikram Patel, Dan Chisholm, Tarun Dua, Ramanan Laxminarayan, and 
María Elena Medina-Mora, with a foreword by Agnes Binagwaho)
2016
Volume 2: Reproductive, maternal, newborn, and child health
(edited by Robert E Black, Ramanan Laxminarayan, Marleen Temmerman, and Neff Walker, 
with a foreword by Flavia Bustreo)
2017
Volume 5: Cardiovascular, respiratory, and related disorders
(edited by Dorairaj Prabhakaran, Shuchi Anand, Thomas Gaziano, Jean Claude Mbanya, 
Yangfeng Wu, and Rachel Nugent, with a foreword by K Srinath Reddy)
Volume 6: Major infectious diseases
(edited by King K Holmes, Stefano Bertozzi, Barry R Bloom, and Prabhat Jha, with a foreword 
by Peter Piot)
Volume 7: Injury prevention and environmental health
(edited by Charles N Mock, Rachel Nugent, Olive Kobusingye, and Kirk R Smith, with a 
foreword by Ala Alwan)
Volume 8: Child and adolescent health and development
(edited by Donald A P Bundy, Nilanthi de Silva, Susan Horton, Dean T Jamison, 
and George C Patton, with a foreword by Gordon Brown)
2018
Volume 9: Disease control priorities: improving health and reducing poverty
(edited by Dean T Jamison, Hellen Gelband, Susan Horton, Prabhat Jha, 
Ramanan Laxminarayan, Charles N Mock, and Rachel Nugent, with a foreword by 
Bill and Melinda Gates and an introduction by Lawrence H Summers)
 Review
4 
www.thelancet.com   Published online November 24, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9
Manila, Philippines 
(Prof J Montoya MD); University 
of Bergen, Bergen, Norway 
(Prof O Norheim PhD); 
University of Ibadan College of 
Medicine, Ibadan, Nigeria 
(Prof F Omokhodion MBBS); 
Murdoch Childrens Research 
Institute, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia (Prof G C Patton MD); 
University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
(Prof G C Patton); Public Health 
Foundation of India, 
New Delhi, India 
(Prof D Prabhakaran); 
Koc University Medical School, 
Istanbul, Turkey 
(Prof S Ruacan MD); 
International Agency for 
Research on Cancer, 
Lyon, France 
(R Sankaranarayanan MD); 
Yale University, New Haven, CT, 
USA (R Skolnik MPA); Aga Khan 
University East Africa, Nairobi, 
Kenya (Prof M Temmerman MD); 
The George Institute for Global 
Health at Peking University 
Health Science Center, Beijing, 
China (Prof Y Wu MD); and 
China National Health 
Development Research Center, 
Beijing, China (K Zhao MD)
Correspondence to: 
Prof Dean T Jamison, 
University of California, San 
Francisco Global Health Sciences, 
San Francisco, CA 94158, USA 
djamison@uw.edu
these four issues. A fifth consideration concerns evolution 
in thinking about the international dimension of health 
finance—development assistance for health broadly 
defined. This context points to the importance of funding 
health systems adequately (a record of remarkable success 
and high economic returns) and of getting high value for 
money from the resources spent.
Chile exemplifies the two key elements of the 
20th century revolution in human health. One is the 
sheer magnitude of improvement. As recently as in 
1910, life expectancy was less than 32 years. By 2010, 
life expectancy exceeded 78 years. Second, time has 
narrowed cross-country differences. In 1910, world 
leaders (eg, Australia and New Zealand) had life 
expectancies almost 30 years higher than in Chile, but 
that gap had narrowed by 2010 to about 4 years. The 
magnitude of Chile’s success has been unusual, but the 
broad story it conveys is not. That said, very substantial 
gaps remain in health between countries, and a major 
purpose of DCP3 is to point very specifically to 
approaches to closing these gaps.
Nurturing continuation of scientific investment remains 
a policy priority, as was extensively discussed in DCP2. 
DCP3 has devoted less attention to research and 
development than did DCP2, in part because of the 
coverage there.13–17 Although research and development 
are discussed in several places,18,19 a careful mining of 
DCP3 for its implications for basic research and for new 
product development remains to be done. Income growth 
in the past century and past decades has contributed to 
increased life expectancy as have, to a greater extent, 
improvements in education levels and improved tools. 
But the availability of new tools and their rate of uptake 
appear to be the dominant sources of mortality decline.20
Figure 1: Policies for heath
It is important to recognise that policies affecting health-sector finance, and hence the functioning and success of the health sector, often originate outside the health 
sector (eg, in social security agencies).
Health sector policies
(including financial protection 
policies) 
Intersectoral policies
• Access to and uptake of health 
interventions
• Quality of delivery of health 
interventions 
To reduce physiological factors. 
Examples include:
• Stunting
• Overweight
• Anaemia
• Hypertension
• Dyslipidaemia
• High blood glucose
To reduce behavioural and 
environmental risk factors
To provide financial protection 
from health-care costs
To improve health outcomes. 
Examples include:
• Child deaths
• Premature adult deaths
• Short-term and long-term 
disability
• Pain and distress
Panel 3: Clusters of essential packages*
Age-related cluster (packages 1–5)
1 Maternal and newborn health
2 Child health
3 School-age health and development
4 Adolescent health and development
5 Reproductive health and contraception
Infectious diseases cluster (packages 6–10)
6 HIV and sexually transmitted infections
7 Tuberculosis
8 Malaria and adult febrile illness
9 Neglected tropical diseases
10 Pandemic and emergency preparedness
Non-communicable disease and injury cluster 
(packages 11–17)
11 Cardiovascular, respiratory, and related disorders
12 Cancer
13 Mental, neurological, and substance use disorders
14 Musculoskeletal disorders
15 Congenital and genetic disorders
16 Injury prevention
17 Environmental improvements
Health services cluster (packages 18–21)
18 Surgery
19 Rehabilitation
20 Palliative care and pain control
21 Pathology
*Country applications will define packages in a way relevant to local policy. 
For example, the structure here distributes urgent interventions across 
packages, but in many contexts defining an emergency care package might 
prove more relevant.
 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online November 24, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9 
5
Valuation of mortality decline (or health change more 
generally) is excluded from the global system of national 
income and product accounts. Economists have 
nonetheless expended substantial effort on tracing the 
effect of health improvements on household and national 
income and on assessing the economic value of the small 
reductions in mortality risk that have occurred year by 
year. The Lancet Commission on Investing in Health21 
and the Copenhagen Consensus22 reviewed and extended 
the literature on the value of health improvements, 
pointing to high returns indeed.
As national incomes increase, countries typically 
increase the percentage of national income devoted to 
health. Equally significantly, they increase the proportion 
of health expenditures that are prepaid, usually through 
public or publicly mandated finance. Tedros Ghebreyesus, 
WHO’s new Director-General, has reaffirmed WHO’s 
commitment to UHC and to the use of evidence and data 
in support of achieving that goal.23 The Lancet 
Commission on Investing in Health21 advocated variants 
on a pathway toward UHC (progressive universalism) 
that emphasised two initial priorities for action: universal 
coverage of publicly financed interventions and 
reductions of user payments at the point of service (for 
those interventions) to very low levels. An increased 
emphasis on domestic financing for UHC has led to the 
need for greater initial selectivity in the range of 
interventions to be financed in UHC packages. It should 
be noted that in many countries public finance has been 
successfully combined with private sector provision. 
Many considerations will influence national choices of 
how benefits packages will evolve over time. DCP3 is 
intended to contribute to the deliberation of these 
choices. A recent report from the Center for Global 
Development24 provides valuable discussion of the 
considerations 
that 
might 
reasonably 
go 
into 
development of a benefits package.
With substantial income growth in (most) LMICs and 
an increasing number of countries committed to public 
finance of UHC, the role of development assistance is 
being reexamined.21,25 As the World Bank and others 
have long argued, finance ministers will often reduce 
domestic allocations to sectors receiving substantial 
foreign aid. The challenge to those concerned with aid 
effectiveness thus becomes one of identifying and 
supporting important activities that national finance 
ministries will plausibly under-finance (such as 
research and development, pandemic preparedness, 
and control of antimicrobial resistance). In a recent 
assessment, support for these global public goods was 
found to constitute more than 20% of development 
assistance for health broadly defined; the authors make 
the case that percentage should steadily increase 
over time.26 This view of development assistance 
has clear implications for construction of model 
benefits packages for domestic finance: other things 
equal, domestic finance should emphasise services 
having national importance and leave the finance of 
global (or regional) public goods to international 
finance. The DCP3 HPP does not include finance of 
pandemic preparedness for just this reason.
Packages, platforms, and policies
DCP3 defines packages of interventions as conceptually 
related interventions (eg, those dealing with cardio-
vascular disease or reproductive health or surgery). An 
objective of each DCP3 volume was to define one or more 
essential packages and the interventions in that package 
that might be acquired at an early stage on the pathway to 
UHC. The essential packages comprise interventions 
that provide value for money, are implementable, and 
address substantial needs. This matrix structure (with 
packages as the rows, intersectoral policies and health-
systems platforms as the columns, and interventions as 
the entries) is novel to DCP3. It remains to be seen 
whether this structure is helpful, but the DCP3 authors, 
at least, have found it so.
Platforms are defined as logistically related delivery 
channels. Panel 3 shows how DCP3 groups EUHC 
interventions with 
in packages that can be carried on 
different types of platforms. 
The temporal character of interventions is very 
important for health-system development. Patients 
requiring non-urgent but sub 
stantial intervention (eg, 
repair of cleft lips and palates) can be accumulated over 
space and time enabling the efficiencies of high volume 
in service delivery. In DCP3, urgent interventions are 
dispersed across packages. They could, as plausibly, be 
grouped into a package of emergency care. Urgent 
interventions, which include a large fraction of essential 
surgical interventions, are ideally available at all times 
and close to where patients live, with important 
implications for dispersal of relevant platforms and 
integration of different services.27 Non-urgent but 
continuing interventions to address chronic conditions 
(eg, secondary prevention of vascular disease or 
antiretroviral therapy for HIV-positive individuals) is a 
big and quite distinct challenge. One new product of 
DCP3 has been to explicitly categorise all essential 
interventions into one of these three temporal 
categories and to draw relevant lessons, including 
concerning cost, for health systems.
In total, 71 distinct intersectoral policies (fiscal, 
regulatory, infrastructural, and informational) for reducing 
behavioural and environmental risk were identified 
(appendix), and 29 of these were identified as candidates 
for early implementation. In addition to intersectoral 
policies, DCP3 selectively reviews policies that affect the 
uptake of health sector interventions (eg, conditional cash 
transfers) and the quality with which they are delivered.28
The DCP3 approach
We have thoroughly updated findings from DCP2 on 
costs, effectiveness, and cost-effectiveness. The literature 
See Online for appendix
 Review
6 
www.thelancet.com   Published online November 24, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9
provides much of specific interest, but formulation of 
policy, when informed by evidence at all, requires expert 
judgment to fill extensive gaps in the economic 
evaluation literature. The question to be addressed is 
one of how to construct a cost-constrained benefit 
package for UHC. Recent analyses have provided 
thoughtful discussion of considerations involved, 
including human rights.24,29 The DCP3 approach draws 
heavily on this prior work but with more emphasis on 
non-health outcomes of health systems. In this section 
we discuss the DCP3 approach that led both to a 
3P approach (packages, policies, and platforms) and to 
the specific content for intersectoral policy and for the 
packages and platforms. The methods are described 
more fully in the tables.
Using research (or other) evidence to guide policy is 
most simply done when randomised controlled trials of 
the relevant intervention (mix) have been undertaken on 
the population of interest in the appropriate ecological 
setting. Even in high-income countries such strong 
evidence is rarely available. In lower-income environments 
the evidence quality problem is compounded. As always, 
evidence must be used to help decision makers avoid 
adopting interventions that do not work in a given context 
and avoid rejecting those that do (panel 4).
The methods and findings of DCP3’s approaches to 
economic evaluation appear in three separate chapters of 
DCP3’s concluding volume: one chapter on cost-
effectiveness analysis,33 one on benefit-cost analysis,34 and 
one on extended cost-effectiveness analysis.35 A high-level 
overview of DCP3’s economic methods and findings 
appears in the appendix. In populations without access to 
health insurance or prepaid care, medical expenses that 
are high relative to income can be impoverishing. In most 
of the literature on medical impoverishment, the medical 
conditions responsible for this impoverishment are not 
identified. Essue and colleagues36 point to where specific 
causes of medical impoverishment are known, which is 
obviously a central point for construction of benefits 
packages.
Although multiple studies document the overall 
magnitude of medical impoverishment, most economic 
assessments of health interventions and their finance 
have not adequately addressed the important question of 
efficiency in the purchase of financial protection. In work 
undertaken for DCP3, extended cost-effectiveness analysis 
was developed to explicitly include financial protection 
(and equity) in economic assessment of health 
interventions.37
Editors of DCP3’s first eight volumes and authors 
of specific chapters in volume 9 (on rehabilitation,38 
on pathology,39 on palliative care,40 and pandemic 
preparedness41) constructed the 21 essential packages 
listed in panel 3. The authors of this Review then 
consolidated those policies and formats into a common 
level of aggregation and a common structure (eg, 
screening was not considered an intervention by itself but 
only in conjunction with the indicated response). This 
generated a set of harmonised essential packages (the 
originals appear as appendices to the first chapter of 
DCP3; the second and third chapter provide a full 
discussion of methods42–44). Several interventions appear in 
more than one package, but the final lists of 71 intersectoral 
Panel 4: Evidence for policy: from research findings to policy parameters
Analysis in Disease Control Priorities, 3rd edition (DCP3) proceeds by attempting to make 
the best use of the evidence available for informing important decisions rather than 
exclusively using what ideally generated evidence has to say.30 The distinction is 
important. An example is illustrative: quite good evidence is available on the effect of 
vector control on malaria mortality in specific environments; likewise there is strong 
evidence concerning treatment efficacy, but very little evidence exists on whether vector 
control and treatment are substitutes, complements, or additive in reducing mortality, 
yet this is the important question for policy.
Inevitably imperfectly, our task in the Disease Control Priorities series, beginning with the 
1st edition, has been to combine the (sometimes) good science about unidimensional 
intervention in very specific locales with informed judgment to reach reasonable conclusions 
about the effect of intervention mixes in diverse environments. To put this slightly differently, 
the parameters required for assessing policy differ, often substantially, from what has been 
addressed (so far) in the scientific literature. The transition from research findings to policy 
parameters requires judgment to complement the research and, often, a consideration of 
underlying mechanisms (eg, use of incentives) that might suggest generalisability.31
In particular, four types of judgments were often needed in the course of DCP3 to make 
the transition from research findings to evidence for policy.
1 Similar interventions
Assume we have evidence that intervention A is effective, and we believe intervention B is 
quite similar (eg, two lipid-lowering drugs). We use judgment to infer that intervention B 
is (or perhaps is not) also effective. 
2 Combined interventions
As in the malaria example above, assume that evidence shows interventions A and B are 
both effective. What about the combination of interventions A and B? Hard evidence on 
combinations is far more rare than evidence on individual interventions.
3 Changed settings
We have strong evidence that antimalarial bednets reduce all-cause child mortality when 
mosquitoes bite indoors at night, at moderate intensity. Although the available evidence 
concludes that bednets were effective where evaluated, other biological considerations 
suggest that evidence be rejected in an environment with very high biting intensity. 
Economists have discussed this point in the context of external validity. Ozler provides a 
clear overview.32
4 Trait-treatment interactions
Finally, patient characteristics might differ. Measles immunisation in healthy child 
populations might have been shown to have no effect on mortality. Generalising that 
finding to a population with different traits (eg, undernourished or sickly children) might 
(and in this case would) generate an unfortunate false negative.
Evidence can be weak. Or, as in the examples above, evidence can be strong but only 
partially relevant. Weak evidence for effectiveness, or partially relevant evidence for 
effectiveness, is often likewise weak evidence for lack of effectiveness. Interpreting weak 
evidence as grounds for rejecting an intervention could generate false negatives that cost 
lives. The attempt in DCP3 has been to unashamedly combine evidence with informed 
judgment to judiciously balance false positives and false negatives.
 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online November 24, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9 
7
policies and 218 EUHC interventions remove this 
duplication. A consequence is that the cost of EUHC is 
less than the sum of the costs of the packages within it.
Intersectoral policies for health
15 of DCP3’s 21 essential packages contained a total of 
71 intersectoral policies. These policies fall into four broad 
categories: (1) taxes and subsidies (15 of 71 intersectoral 
policies); regulations and related enforcement mech-
anisms (38 of 71 intersectoral policies); built environment 
(11 of 71 intersectoral policies); and informational 
(seven of 71 intersectoral policies). A complete listing of 
the 71 intersectoral policies is available in the appendix. 
These policies are designed to reduce the population level 
of behavioural and environmental risk factors (tobacco 
and alcohol use, air pollution, micronutrient deficiencies 
in the diet, unsafe sexual behaviour, excessive sugar 
consumption, and others; figure 1). Watkins and 
colleagues44 provide a thorough overview of DCP3’s 
findings on intersectoral policy. Here we exemplify our 
approach with several of DCP3’s findings
First, at initially low levels of income, the levels of many 
risk factors rise with income, thereby creating headwinds 
against which the health sector policy must proceed45 but 
are least potentially countered by sound policy. We 
identified 29 out of 71 intersectoral policies to be well 
worth considering for early adoption.
Second, for important categories of risk, such as 
pollution and transport risks, multiple sources for the 
risk exist, each of which is addressed through different 
modalities. Rather than a clear set of first priorities, there 
are multiple country or site-specific actions to be taken. 
Perhaps the single most important point to note is that 
the success of many high-income countries in reducing 
these risks to very low levels points to the great potential 
that these multiple policies can have for dealing, in 
particular, with air pollution and road traffic injuries.
Third, potentially important areas of dietary risk remain 
unaddressed by the policies identified in DCP3. These 
areas concern the macronutrients—carbohydrates, fats, 
and proteins. The most recent assessment of risk factors 
for the Global Burden of Disease (GBD) points to the 
reason for limited policy guidance.46 The GBD lists 11 risk 
factors in the category of child and maternal malnutrition, 
but only two of these risk factors are dietary (both concern 
breastfeeding). The other risk factors, such as child 
wasting, are what we label physiological (figure 1) and are 
consequences of diet and disease history. GBD lists 15 risk 
factors for non-communicable disease, all of them dietary 
(eg, diets low in fruits). These dietary risk factors do 
provide directions for intersectoral policy,47 and relevant 
policies are included in the DCP3 list of 71 intersectoral 
policies. Yet empirical studies to guide major macronutrient 
policy directions, for example toward reducing intake of 
carbo 
hydrates or fats, are only beginning to appear.48,49 
Much policy interest (eg, taxes) would rely on this missing 
information.
A fourth point is that existing analyses of genetic risk 
and of medical intervention risk remain to be included 
in disease burden studies.46 Although genetics cannot 
be ethically changed, genetic information can be an 
important guide to intervention. Medical risks can be 
quite substantial as Atul Gawande and Tom Weiser50 
document in the DCP3 chapter on quality of surgical 
care. Some medical risks are side-effects of inherent risks 
from intervention, some are medical error, and some 
result from inadequate resources available to the provider. 
We discuss genetic risk and intervention risk along with 
other risk factors although, clearly, the health system 
itself provides the compensatory interventions.
A fifth point is that fiscal policies (finance ministry 
policies) are important. Discussion of these policies has 
most prominently involved large increases in excise 
taxation of tobacco, with emerging evidence on taxation of 
alcohol and sugar-sweetened beverages. But the possi-
bilities for taxation extend to sugar production and imports, 
fossil fuels (or carbon), and industrial or vehicle emissions. 
Also of importance is reducing expensive subsidies that 
now exist on fossil fuels and, often, on unhealthy food 
production or unhealthy child dietary supplements. 
Although health improvement might be only one of several 
objectives for lowering subsidies, it is an important one. 
The scientific literature on the health potential for removing 
subsidies is limited. But the sheer magnitude of some of 
these subsidies, as the International Monetary Fund has 
stressed, points to the value of careful further analysis. In 
all likelihood, the finance ministry is the most important 
ministry (after health) for improving population health. 
And many (not all) of the measures a finance ministry can 
take would enhance public sector revenue.
Essential universal health coverage
At the heart of DCP3 was a review of available evidence 
on health-sector interventions’ costs, effectiveness, 
Figure 2: Essential universal health coverage and the highest priority package
The grand convergence agenda for reducing child and infectious disease 
mortality was advanced by the Lancet Commission on Investing in Health.21
Non-communicable 
diseases and injury
Infection and 
inadequate 
dietary intake
Grand convergence
Highest priority 
non-communicable 
diseases and injury 
interventions
Universal health coverage
Essential universal health coverage
Highest priority package (includes “grand convergence” and highest
priority non-communicable disease and injury interventions)
 Review
8 
www.thelancet.com   Published online November 24, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9
imple 
mentability, and capacity to deliver significant 
outcomes. DCP3’s nine volumes provide granular over-
views of this evidence, and these overviews are directed to 
the 
implementation 
community 
and 
the 
policy 
community. Chapter 3 of volume 9 provides an integrative 
overview.43 Each of the interventions on DCP3’s 
five platforms are described in the appendix.
A schema of how DCP3 defines EUHC is shown in 
figure 2. Beyond EUHC is the full range of available, 
efficacious health-sector interventions or UHC. We 
estimate the financial requirements of EUHC and the 
HPP, but would also stress that WHO’s notion of UHC 
emphasises quality of delivery. DCP3 dwells in some 
length on quality in surgery and in health care more 
generally.28,50 Although no country publicly finances all 
interventions, many high-income countries come close. 
Countries lie on a natural continuum of progress toward 
UHC. Short of EUHC is what DCP3 labels the HPP (the 
interventions included in the HPP are shown in the 
appendix). Individual countries’ highest priorities will 
differ from our model list for multiple reasons. That said, 
the HPP is intended to provide a useful starting point for 
national or subnational assessments. As with EUHC, 
DCP3’s models provide estimates for the cost and impact 
of HPP. In Global Health 2035,21 the Lancet Commission 
on Investing in Health pointed to the possibility of a 
grand convergence, across most countries and in our 
lifetime, in under-5 mortality and mortality from major 
infections. Grand convergence within the DCP3 structure 
is illustrated in figure 2. In the two following subsections, 
we provide the DCP3 models’ estimates of the mortality-
reducing consequences and costs of EUHC. Achieving 
these gains will require substantial investments in health 
systems. Although the DCP3’s costing model includes 
the cost of such investment, it was beyond the remit of 
DCP3 to address how to strengthen health systems. Mills 
and colleagues51 provide a valuable overview of the issues 
in the context of DCP.
Low-income countries
Lower-middle-income countries
Projected 
number of 
premature 
deaths, 2030 
(millions)*
40 × 30 
reduction 
target 
(millions)†
Expected 
reduction in 
premature 
deaths from 
HPP (millions)
Expected 
reduction in 
premature 
deaths from 
EUHC (millions)
Projected 
number of 
premature 
deaths, 2030 
(millions)
40 × 30 
reduction 
target 
(millions)†
Expected 
reduction in 
premature 
deaths from HPP 
(millions)
Expected 
reduction in 
premature 
deaths from 
EUHC (millions)
Age (years)
0–4
2·2
1·5
0·62
0·77
3·3
2·2
1·1
1·3
5–69
5·2
1·5
0·99
1·2
14
4·8
2·2
2·9
0–69
7·4
3·0
1·6
2·0
17
7·0
3·2
4·2
By cause (age ≥5 years)‡
Group 1
1·9
0·76
0·59
0·65
3·2
1·5
0·85
0·94
Tuberculosis
0·34
0·22
0·11
0·13
0·90
0·60
0·29
0·35
HIV/AIDS
0·44
0·29
0·18
0·20
0·48
0·32
0·23
0·26
Malaria
0·087
0·058
0·051
0·051
0·055
0·037
0·026
0· 026
Maternal 
conditions
0·17
0·11
0·075
0·086
0·20
0·13
0·079
0·092
Other diseases
0·90
0·074
0·18
0·18
1·6
0·40
0·22
0·22
Group 2
2·5
0·60
0·36
0·53
8·9
2·7
1·3
1·9
Neoplasms
0·65
0·22
0·010
0·039
1·8
0·60
0·10
0·16
Cardiovascular 
diseases
0·93
0·31
0·24
0·36
4·0
1·3
0·89
1·4
Other diseases
0·93
0·076
0·11
0·13
3·2
0·80
0·28
0·35
Group 3
0·77
0·13
0·043
0·060
2·0
0·54
0·070
0·10
Road injuries
0·25
0·085
0·032
0·046
0·57
0·19
0·048
0·069
Other injuries
0·52
0·042
0·010
0·014
1·4
0·36
0·022
0·032
The cost and diseases structures differ between and within income levels. We illustrate this by considering two income strata, but the analyses reported here can serve only as 
a starting point for national and subnational analyses. A premature death is death before age 70 years. We used the World Bank’s income classification of low-income and 
lower-middle-income countries.55 As a country’s income changes, its classification can also change; for example, both Bangladesh and Kenya moved from low-income status 
to lower-middle income status after 2014. HPP=highest priority package. EUHC=essential universal health coverage. *The UN Population Prospects median population 
projection for 203056 was used to provide the population totals for calculating deaths by age and sex. †A reduction target of 40 × 30 is defined as a 40% reduction in 
premature deaths by 2030, relative to the number that would have occurred had 2015 mortality persisted to 2030. The target specifies a 40% reduction in deaths in 
people aged 0–69 years overall, a two-thirds reduction in under-5 deaths and adult deaths from tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, malaria, and maternal conditions, and a one-third 
reduction in deaths from major non-communicable diseases. The quantitative targets above reflect these goals; however, targets for the residual categories (Other diseases 
and Other injuries) have been calculated in light of the targets for specific causes of death so that the total number of target deaths in people aged 5–69 years is sufficient to 
meet the 40 × 30 target. ‡WHO’s Global Health Estimates provided the 2015 cause distributions of deaths for these calculations.54 Sources: Watkins et al (2017)57 and 
Watkins et al (in press).43
Table 1: Implementation of essential packages: estimated reduction in premature deaths in 2030
 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online November 24, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9 
9
Importantly, EUHC has a platform dealing with 
population-wide intervention, including intervention 
directed toward improving doctor practices with antibiotic 
use or inappropriate polypharmacy. In many cases, 
whether we denote an intervention to be intersectoral or 
to be population-wide prevention within the health sector 
is somewhat arbitrary.
Motality reduction from essential UHC
Norheim and colleagues52 developed a structure, 
40 × 30, for thinking about mortality reduction objectives 
in the Sustainable Development Goal 3 (SDG-3). Their 
starting point was the UN’s Population Division (UNDP) 
projected age distribution of population in 2030, a 
distribution of deaths by age and cause generated from 
that age distribution of population, and mortality from 
2010. The overall 40 × 30 goal was to reduce the calculated 
number of premature deaths by 40%, where premature 
death is defined as death before age 70 years. Subgoals 
were to reduce under-5 mortality and death from major 
infectious diseases by two-thirds and deaths from non-
communicable disease and injury by a third. The DCP3 
mortality impact model53 follows the approach taken by 
Norheim and colleagues in broad terms but uses 
updated parameters. National applications of the DCP3 
model will result in country-specific calculation and 
modification of these goals. The model’s calculations 
start with a baseline age distribution of deaths by age 
and (broad) cause generated from the UNPD’s projected 
age distribution of population and age in 2030 combined 
with cause-specific mortality from 2015.54 It then 
estimates the effect of EUHC (and HPP) on mortality by 
assuming that the underlying intervention packages are 
implemented in the 15 years from 2015 to 2030 (the 
packages were designed to make this assumption 
reasonable). The age-specific and cause-specific mor-
tality from counterfactual 2015 are then applied to 
the UNPD 2030 age distributions to give the age 
distributions of death by cause estimated to result from 
implementation of EUHC.
The DCP3 model enables comparison of the EUHC 
mortality profile to an explicit counterfactual baseline 
(table 1). Implementation of the HPP in low-income 
countries could achieve about half of the 40 × 30 goal (the 
estimated reduction in deaths is 1·6 million of the 40 × 30 
target of 3·0 million). Full implementation of EUHC in 
lower-middle-income countries could achieve a little 
more than half of the 40 × 30 target of 2·2 million deaths 
averted in children younger than 5 years. The results for 
age group 5–69 years fall short of the 40 × 30 target of 
4·8 million. Estimated deaths averted by EUHC 
(4·2 million) is about three-fifths of the 40 × 30 target 
of 7·0 million. 
If we were to assume that both tools and 
implementation capacity improve between now and 
2030 (the Lancet Commission on Investing in Health21 
made an assumption of a 2% rate of technical progress 
in one of their scenarios), then the reduction in deaths 
from EUHC could be more substantial than shown in 
table 1. Likewise, the reduction in behavioural and 
environmental risk could be greater than anticipated. 
Such progress is certainly possible but might be 
Low-income countries
Lower-middle-income countries
HPP
EUHC
HPP
EUHC
Incremental annual cost*†
$23 billion
$48 billion
$82 billion
$160 billion
Incremental annual cost per person*
$26
$53
$31
$61
Total annual cost
$38 billion
$68 billion
$160 billion
$280 billion
Total annual cost per person†
$42
$76
$58
$110
Incremental annual cost as a percentage 
of current GNI per person*
3·1%
6·4%
1·5%
2·9%
Total annual cost (as percentage of 
GNI per person)‡
5·1%
9·1%
2·8%
5·2%
The cost and disease structures differ between and within income levels. We illustrate that by considering two income 
strata, but the analyses reported here can serve only as a starting point for national and subnational analyses. Lower 
and upper uncertainty ranges were derived from optimistic and pessimistic cost scenarios (respectively) that were 
based on variations in key parameters in the costing model. Uncertainty ranges are provided in the appendix. We use 
the World Bank’s 2014 income classification of low-income and lower-middle-income countries.55 As a country’s 
income changes its classification can also change; for example, both Bangladesh and Kenya moved from 
low-income to lower-middle income after 2014. GNI=gross national income. *The 2015 population of low-income 
countries was 0·90 billion people, whereas the 2015 population for lower-middle-income countries was 2·7 billion 
people. †Incremental annual cost is the estimated cost of going from current to full (80%) coverage of the EUHC and 
HPP interventions. The total annual cost is the incremental cost plus the estimated cost of the current level of coverage 
assuming the same cost structure for current as for incremental coverage. Estimated costs are inclusive of estimates 
for (large) health-system strengthening costs and are steady state (or long-term average) costs in that investments to 
achieve higher levels of coverage and to cover depreciation are included. ‡The 2015 GNI per capita of low-income 
countries was US$830. For lower-middle-income countries it was $2100. Note that GNI data were only available for 
countries covering 84% and 96% of the population of low-income and lower-middle-income countries, respectively. 
Data were less likely to be available for poorer countries and fragile states, hence these GNI figures are likely to be an 
overestimate of income, particularly in the low-income country group. Source: Watkins et al (2017).57
Table 2: Total and incremental annual costs of essential universal health coverage (EUHC) and the 
highest priority package (HPP), 2015 (in US$[2012])
Low-income 
countries
Lower-middle-
income countries
HPP
EUHC
HPP
EUHC
Incremental costs by platform (percentage of total)
Population-based
0·6%
2·3%
0·6%
2·0%
Community
18%
16%
12%
14%
Health centre
50%
52%
57%
52%
First-level hospital
25%
25%
22%
25%
Referral and specialty 
hospitals
6·4%
5·2%
9·1%
6·1%
Incremental costs by intervention urgency (percentage of total)
Urgent
35%
28%
27%
24%
Chronic
41%
48%
50%
52%
Time-bound (non-urgent)
24%
24%
23%
24%
The cost and disease structures differ between and within income levels. This is 
illustrated by considering two income strata, but the analyses reported here can 
serve only as a starting point for national and subnational analyses. 
Sources: Watkins et al (2017)57 and Watkins et al (in press).43
Table 3: Incremental costs of the highest priority package (HPP) and the 
essential universal health coverage (EUHC) by platform and by 
intervention urgency
 Review
10 
www.thelancet.com   Published online November 24, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9
unlikely. The DCP3 model estimates what is technically 
and economically feasible given tools that are available 
at present. The results are indeed substantial—and are 
viable options for decision makers. But substantial 
resources are required, and the goals are incompletely 
met. The actual decision to commit resources remains, 
of course, in the hands of national authorities.
Costs
The DCP3 costing model provides two estimates of 
costs for the health-system component of each of 
DCP3’s 21 essential packages.57 The first was an estimate 
of how much additional funding it would take (in the 
2015 cost and demographic environment) to implement 
each package to the extent judged feasible. The 
packages were designed so that for most cases full 
implemen 
tation (ie, 80% effective coverage) was judged 
feasible by 2030. The second estimate was of total cost 
for the package defined as incremental cost plus an 
estimate of the amount already (in 2015) being spent on 
the intervention. The model estimates these costs both 
for low-income countries and for lower-middle-income 
countries. Some interventions were included in several 
packages, which was a natural outcome of a package 
formulation process that delineated packages as areas of 
concern to specific professional communities, such as 
surgeons or reproductive health specialists. Eliminating 
this duplication resulted in 218 distinct EUHC 
interventions. This implies that the sum of the package 
costs will exceed the cost of providing all packages. The 
subset of UHC that was judged (by explicit criteria) to 
be highest priority (ie, HPP) was costed in the same way 
Lancet Commission on Investing in 
Health21
DCP350,54
WHO 201711
Countries included
34 low-income and three (large) 
lower-middle-income countries*
34 low-income and 49 lower-middle-income countries*
67 low-income, lower-middle, and upper-middle-income 
countries individually estimated and then aggregated†
Key definitions and 
intervention range 
covered
Grand convergence interventions lead 
to very substantial cross-country 
convergence in under-5, maternal, 
tuberculosis, malaria, and HIV/AIDS 
mortality and in the prevalence of 
neglected tropical diseases
21 packages (table 1) identified in terms that include 
intersectoral and health sector interventions (72 distinct 
intersectoral interventions and 244 distinct health sector 
interventions); EUHC are health sector interventions in the 
21 packages (covered in national health accounts and 
potentially included in benefits packages); a highest priority 
subset of EUHC (HPP) includes a limited range of 
interventions against non-communicable diseases, injuries, 
and cross-cutting areas such as rehabilitation and palliative 
care, in addition to the grand convergence interventions
Investments were modelled for 16 SDGs, including 187 health 
interventions and a range of health-system strengthening 
strategies (the latter of which included investments required to 
achieve target levels of health workforce, facilities, and other 
health-system building blocks); two scenarios were modelled, 
a progress scenario (in which coverage is limited by the absorptive 
capacity of current systems to incorporate new interventions), 
and an ambitious scenario (in which most countries achieve high 
levels of intervention coverage and hence SDG targets)
Intersectoral action 
for health
Extensive discussion of intersectoral 
actions for health but not included in 
modelling grand convergence
Intersectoral interventions defined as those typically 
managed and financed outside the health sector; each of 
the 21 packages contains the intersectoral interventions 
deemed relevant; the costs and effects of intersectoral 
action on mortality reduction are not explicitly modelled
WHO 2017 scenarios include some finance of intersectoral 
interventions from the health-sector perspective, as well as their 
effects on mortality
Intervention 
coverage
Full coverage defined at 85%; rates of 
scale-up defined using historical data 
on so-called best performers among 
similar groups of countries
Full coverage defined as 80%; the HPP differs from EUHC 
not in coverage level but in the scope of interventions 
included
Full coverage defined as 95% for most interventions in the 
ambitious scenario, with a range from 53% to 99% depending on 
intervention
Estimated additional costs (including requisite investment in health system capacity)
Low-income 
countries
US$(2011)30 billion annually between 
2016 and 2030
HPP: US$(2012)32 billion in 2030; EUHC: 
US$(2012)70 billion in 2030
US$(2012)64 billion in 2030
Lower-middle-
income countries
US$(2011)61 billion annually between 
2016 and 2030
HPP: US$(2012)97 billion in 2030; EUHC: 
US$(2012)190 billion in 2030
US$(2012)185 billion in 2030
Estimated deaths averted‡§¶
Low-income 
countries
4·5 million deaths averted per year 
between 2016 and 2030
2·0 million deaths averted in 2030
2·9 million deaths averted in 2030
Lower middle-
income countries
5·8 million deaths averted per year 
between 2016 and 2030
4·2 million deaths averted in 2030
6·1 million deaths averted in 2030
Benefit cost analysis 
undertaken
Yes
No
No
EUHC=essential universal health coverage. HPP=highest priority package. SDGs=Sustainable Development Goals. *Separate estimates for the low-income and lower-middle-income country groups are provided. 
†Reported results are for all included countries combined. ‡DCP3 reports the number of premature deaths averted (ie, deaths younger than 70 years). §Averted deaths included stillbirths averted in the reports by 
the Lancet Commission on Investing in Health21 and WHO11 but not in DCP3.53,57 ¶In the Lancet Commission report21 and DCP3, the reported deaths averted included only deaths averted in children actually born 
and women actually giving birth. Family planning averts unwanted pregnancies and hence potential deaths of women and children that would have occurred as a result of those averted pregnancies. 
The difference is large. For low-income countries, results of a sensitivity analysis in Global Health 203521 showed that the more comprehensive estimate was 7·5 million deaths averted rather than the 4·5 million 
deaths averted shown in this table. WHO’s 2017 estimates11 of deaths averted are based on the larger and more inclusive number. Ambitious scale-up of family planning services accounted for 50% of averted 
child and maternal deaths and more than 65% of averted stillbirths in the WHO analysis (Stenberg K, Department of Health Systems Governance and Financing, WHO, personal communication). Sources: Jamison 
et al (2013),21 Boyle et al (2015),58 Watkins et al (2017),57 Watkins et al (2017),53 and Stenberg et al (2017).11
Table 4: Costs and consequences of large-scale investment in health systems by the Lancet Commission on Investing in Health, Disease Control Priorities, 3rd edition (DCP3), and WHO
 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online November 24, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9 
11
as for EUHC. Costs should be interpreted as long-term 
steady state costs—costs that include training of staff to 
replace 
retirements 
and 
investment 
to 
counter 
depreciation of equipment and facilities. Naturally, 
country-specific applications will be built on country-
specific intervention lists and cost structures. The DCP3 
costing model provides a tool to assist national health 
technology assessment units in developing national 
specifications, including analyses of a particular 
platform or package. Decision makers often wish to 
assess whether a particular intervention should be in or 
out, and Susan Horton33 has summarised DCP3’s 
intervention-specific cost-effectiveness analyses.
The expenditure increases required above as a 
percentage of gross national income (GNI) are shown in 
table 2). Additional detail is available in the appendix, 
and costs by package are available in chapter 3 of DCP3 
volume 9.42 Just a small fraction of reasonably anticipated 
economic growth in most countries would cover the 
incremental costs of EUHC, although achieving the 
increased percentage of GNI required would require 
substantial reordering of public sector priorities.21 
Additional (incremental) costs needed are substantial 
relative to current levels of public expenditure on health. 
In principle, projections could be made of changes in 
both the tradeable and non-tradeable components of 
cost, of the responsiveness of costs to demography (and 
in particular to fertility decline), and on whether 
improved transport and other infrastructure might 
reduce our estimates of the cost of expanding coverage 
to parts of the population that are ever more difficult to 
reach. This will be worthwhile in a country-specific 
context, but for purposes of reasonable overall cost 
estimates, we judged that adding these layers of 
assumption would add little or nothing to the 
information content of table 2.
Table 3 presents the DCP3 costing model’s assessment 
of cost by platform and cost by degree of intervention 
urgency. More than half of our calculated costs occur at 
the health-centre level. For EUHC, another 15–25% each 
of incremental expenditures would go to the first-level 
hospital and to the community level. The health-systems 
implications for increasing intervention coverage 
plausibly differ markedly by urgency. Although DCP3 
has taken a step forward with its systematic classification 
and costing, much work remains before implications 
for health systems are well understood. Continuing 
interventions require appropriate community capacity 
for delivery. Examples include antiretroviral therapy or 
antihypertensive therapy. Half of estimated incremental 
costs are needed to finance continuing intervention. 
Urgent interventions (eg, for trauma or obstructed 
labour) require that first-level hospitals be accessible 
quickly.27 About a quarter to a third of incremental costs 
are required to provide this capacity. Time-bound but 
non-urgent interventions (eg, cataract extraction) allow 
patients to be accumulated over space and time with 
concomitant potential for efficiency and quality resulting 
from high volume. The numbers of interventions 
on each platform according to degree of urgency are 
available in the appendix. 
Reduction in mortality and the costs of major health-
system investments were also modelled by the 
Lancet Commission on Investing in Health21 and WHO.11 
The estimates and differences between these analyses 
and those of DCP3 are summarised in table 4.
Conclusion
The nine volumes of DCP3 provide a granular assessment 
of technical and policy alternatives facing decision 
makers and opinion leaders in LMICs. DCP3 is 
particularly relevant as achievement of EUHC relies 
increasingly on greater domestic finance, with global 
developmental assistance in health focusing more on 
global public goods. In this Review, we have summarised 
the content of a model concept of EUHC and point to 
specific priorities for intersectoral action for health 
(panel 1).
Contributors
DTJ generated the basic plan for this study with inputs from AA, CNM, 
RN, and DGW. DTJ prepared the first draft with input and revisions 
from all authors. All authors approved the final draft before submission. 
DTJ had responsibility for submitting for publication.
Declaration of interests
DTJ, AA, CNM, RN, DGW, KD, and CL report grants from the 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation during the conduct of the study. 
KAF reports personal fees from the Centre for Global Health, National 
Cancer Institute during the conduct of the study. TG reports personal 
fees from Teva Pharmaceuticals and grants from United HealthCare 
Services and Novartis, outside the submitted work. FMK reports grants 
from Pfizer, Mayday Fund, American Cancer Society, Roche, CRDF 
Global, JM Foundation, Grunenthal, and GDS, during the conduct of 
the study; and grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from 
Roche, Pfizer, Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck/EMD Serono, 
Asociacion Mexicana de Industrias de Investigacion Farmaceutica, 
Sanofi, Chinoin, and NADRO, outside the submitted work. MEK 
reports personal fees from Merck for Mothers, outside the submitted 
work. DP reports grants from the University of Washington, during the 
conduct of the study. DAPB and DGW are employees of the 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, and SB, CM, and JS have previously 
worked for the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which funds the DCP3 
series. DGW has managed the Disease Control Priorities Network grant 
since 2011. GH was previously affiliated with the Water and Sanitation 
Program, World Bank, Washington, DC, USA. DC, AC, TD, JM, and TR 
are staff members of the World Health Organization. The authors alone 
are responsible for the views expressed in this Review and they do not 
necessarily represent the decisions, policy, or views of the World Health 
Organization. All other authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation funded DCP3 as an element of its 
Disease Control Priorities Network grant to the University of Washington. 
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reflect the official policy or position of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. 
Many institutions have made available the time of their staff and they are 
specifically acknowledged in each volume. The views expressed in this 
paper are those of individual authors and not of the institutions with which 
they are affiliated. We acknowledge three institutions that have played key 
roles in DCP3. One is the World Bank, original home for the DCP series 
and accomplished publisher of its products. Within the World Bank, 
Carlos Rossel and Mary Fisk oversaw the editing and publication of the 
series, and served as important champions for DCP3. The second is the 
Inter-Academy Medical Panel (IAMP) and its US affiliate, the National 
 Review
12 
www.thelancet.com   Published online November 24, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9
Academy of Medicine (NAM). IAMP/NAM have organised a peer-review 
process to cover chapters in the nine volumes, and they established an 
Advisory Committee to the Editors, chaired by Anne Mills, of enormous 
value. The Department of Global Health, University of Washington, has 
provided a congenial home for DCP for the past 5 years. We 
acknowledge the intellectual and practical support of the department’s 
two chairs during this period, King Holmes and Judith Wasserheit. We 
thank Shamelle Richards, Tiffany Wilk, and Nazila Dabestani for their 
administrative and research support to the production of DCP3. 
Brianne Adderley has ably served DCP3 as Project Manager since the 
beginning, and we owe her a very particular thanks. We thank the 
referees for valuable and constructive comments.
References
1 
Jamison DT, Mosley WH, Measham AR, Bobadilla JL, eds. 
Disease control priorities in developing countries, 1st edn. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1993.
2 
Harlan WR, Harlan LC, Oii WL. Changing disease patterns in 
developing countries: the case of Malaysia. In: Leaverton P, Massi L, 
eds. Health information systems. New York: Praeger Scientific, 1984.
3 
Jamison DT, Evans JR, King T, Porter I, Prescott N. China: 
the health sector. Washington, DC: World Bank, 1984.
4 
Evans JR, Lashman Hall K, Warford J. Shattuck lecture. Health 
care in the developing world: problems of scarcity and choice. 
N Engl J Med 1981; 305: 1117–27
.
5 
Bobadilla JL, Frenk J, Lozano R, Frejka T, Claudio S. Chapter 3. 
The epidemiologic transition and health priorities. In: 
Jamison DT, Mosley WH, Measham AR, Bobadilla JL, eds. 
Disease control priorities in developing countries, 1st edn. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1993.
6 
Frenk J, Bobadilla JL, Sepulveda J, Lopez-Cervantes M. 
Health transition in middle-income countries: new challenges for 
health care. Health Policy Plan 1989; 4: 29–39.
7 
World Bank. World development report 1993. Investing in health. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1993.
8 
Summers LH. Introduction. In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, 
Horton S, et al, eds. Disease control priorities, 3rd edn.
Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
9 
Gates B, Gates M. Foreword. In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, 
Horton S, et al, eds. Disease control priorities, 3rd edn. 
Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
10 
Jamison DT, Breman JG, Measham AR, et al. Disease Control 
Priorities in developing countries, 2nd edn. New York, 
Washington, DC: Oxford University Press, World Bank, 2006.
11 
Stenberg K, Hanssen O, Edejer TT-T, et al. Financing 
transformative health systems towards achievement of the health 
Sustainable Development Goals: a model for projected resource 
needs in 67 low-income and middle-income countries. 
Lancet Glob Health 2017; 5: e875–87
.
12 
Skolnik R. Global Health 101, 3rd edition. Burlington, MA: 
Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2016.
13 
Jamison DT, Jha P, Laxminarayan R, Ord T. Chapter 7
. Infectious 
disease, injury, and reproductive health. In: Lomborg B, ed. 
Global problems, smart solutions: costs and benefits. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2013.
14 
Bloom BR, Michaud CM, La Montagne JR, Simonsen L. 
Chapter 4. Priorities for global research and development of 
interventions. In: Jamison DT, Breman JG, Measham AR, et al, eds. 
Disease control priorities in developing countries, 2nd edn. 
Washington, DC: World Bank, Oxford University Press, 2006.
15 
Weatherall D, Greenwood B, Chee HL, Wasi P. Chapter 5. Science 
and technology for disease control: past, present, and future. In: 
Jamison DT, Breman JG, Measham AR, et al, eds. Disease control 
priorities in developing countries, 2nd edn. Washington, DC: 
World Bank, Oxford University Press, 2006.
16 
Mahmoud A, Danzon PM, Barton JH, Mugerwa RD. Chapter 6. 
Product development priorities. In: Jamison DT, Breman JG, 
Measham AR, et al, eds. Disease control priorities in developing 
countries, 2nd edn. Washington, DC: World Bank, Oxford 
University Press, 2006.
17 
Meltzer D. Chapter 7
. Economic approaches to valuing global 
health research. In: Jamison DT, Breman JG, Measham AR, et al, 
eds. Disease control priorities in developing countries, 2nd edn. 
Washington, DC: World Bank, Oxford University Press, 2006.
18 
Bundy DAP, de Silva N, Horton S, Jamison DT, Patton GC. Disease 
control priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 8. Child and adolescent health 
and development. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2017
.
19 
Trimble EL, Rajaraman P, Chao A, et al. Chapter 15. The need for 
national commitments to cancer research to guide public health 
investment and practice. In: Gelband H, Jha P, Sankaranarayanan R, 
Horton S, eds. Disease control priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 3. Cancer. 
Washington, DC: World Bank, 2015.
20 Pradhan E, Suzuki EM, Martínez S, Schäferhoff M, Jamison D. 
Chapter 30. The effects of education quantity and quality on child 
and adult mortality: their magnitude and their value. In: Bundy DAP, 
de Silva N, Horton SE, Jamison DT, Patton GC, eds. Disease control 
priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 8. Child and adolescent health and 
development. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2017
.
21 
Jamison DT, Summers LH, Alleyne G, et al. Global health 2035: 
a world converging within a generation. Lancet 2013; 382: 1898–955.
22 Kydland FE, Mundell R, Schelling T, Smith V, Stokey N. Expert panel 
ranking. In: Lomborg B, ed. Global problems, smart solutions: costs 
and benefits. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013: 701–16.
23 Ghebreyesus TA. All roads lead to universal health coverage. 
Lancet Glob Health 2017; 5: e839–40.
24 
Glassman A, Giedion U, Smith PC. What’s in, what’s out: designing 
benefits for universal health coverage. Washington, DC: Center for 
Global Development, 2017
.
25 Bendavid E, Ottersen T, Liu P, et al. Chapter 16. Development 
assistance for health. In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, Horton S, et al, 
eds. Disease Control Priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 9. Disease control 
priorities: improving health and reducing poverty. Washington, DC: 
World Bank (in press).
26 Schäferhoff M, Fewer S, Kraus J, et al. How much donor financing 
for health is channelled to global versus country-specific aid 
functions? Lancet 2015; 386: 2436–41.
27 
Reynolds T, Sawe H, Rubiano AM, Shin SD, Wallis L, Mock CN. 
Chapter 13. Strengthening health systems to provide emergency care. 
In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, Horton S, et al, eds. Disease control 
priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 9. Disease control priorities: improving 
health and reducing poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
28 Peabody J, Shimkhada R, Adeyi O, Wang H, Broughton E, Kruk M. 
Chapter 10. Quality of care. In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, Horton S, 
et al, eds. Disease control priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 9. Disease 
control priorities: improving health and reducing poverty. 
Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
29 Rumbold B, Baker R, Ferraz O, et al. Universal health coverage, 
priority setting, and the human right to health. Lancet 2017; 
390: 712–14.
30 Jamison, DT. Disease control priorities: improving health and 
reducing poverty. Lancet 2015; published online Feb 4. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60097-6.
31 
Bates MA, Glennerster R. The generalizability puzzle. 
Stanford Social Innovation Review, 2017; summer. https://ssir.org/
articles/entry/the_generalizability_puzzle (accessed Sept 26, 2017).
32 Ozler B. Learn to live without external validity. Impact evaluations 
World Bank blog. Nov 4, 2013. https://blogs.worldbank.org/
impactevaluations/learn-live-without-external-validity (accessed 
Sept 26, 2017).
33 Horton S. Chapter 7
. Cost-effectiveness analysis. In: Jamison DT, 
Gelband H, Horton S, et al, eds. Disease control priorities, 3rd edn. 
Volume 9. Disease control priorities: improving health and reducing 
poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
34 
Chang AY, Horton S, Jamison DT. Chapter 9. Benefit–cost analysis. 
In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, Horton S, et al, eds. Disease control 
priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 9. Disease control priorities: improving 
health and reducing poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
35 Verguet S, Jamison DT. Chapter 8. Health policy analysis: 
applications of extended cost-effectiveness analysis methodology. 
In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, Horton S, et al, eds. Disease control 
priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 9. Disease control priorities: improving 
health and reducing poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
36 Essue B, Laba T, Knaul FM, et al. Chapter 6. Economic burden of 
chronic ill health and injuries for households in low- and middle-
income countries. In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, Horton S, et al, eds. 
Disease control priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 9. Disease control 
priorities: improving health and reducing poverty. Washington, DC: 
World Bank (in press).
 Review
www.thelancet.com   Published online November 24, 2017   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32906-9 
13
37 
Verguet S, Laxminarayan R, Jamison DT. Universal public finance 
of tuberculosis treatment in India: an extended cost-effectiveness 
analysis. Health Economics 2015; 24: 318–32.
38 Mills JA, Marks E, Reynolds T, Cieza A. Chapter 15. Rehabilitation: 
essential along the continuum of care. In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, 
Horton S, et al, eds. Disease control priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 9. 
Disease control priorities: improving health and reducing poverty. 
Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
39 Fleming K, Naidoo M, Wilson M, et al. Chapter 11. High quality 
diagnosis: an essential pathology package. In: Jamison DT, 
Gelband H, Horton S, et al, eds. Disease control priorities, 3rd edn. 
Volume 9. Disease control priorities: improving health and 
reducing poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
40 
Krakauer E, Ali Z, Arreola H, Bhadelia A, Connor S, de Lima L. 
Chapter 12. Palliative care. In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, Horton S, 
et al, eds. Disease control priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 9. Disease 
control priorities: improving health and reducing poverty. 
Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
41 
Madhav N, Oppenheim B, Gallivan M, Mulembakani P, Rubin E, 
Wolfe N. Chapter 17
. Pandemics: risks, impacts, and mitigation. 
In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, Horton S, et al, eds. Disease control 
priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 9. Disease control priorities: improving 
health and reducing poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
42 
Jamison DT, Alwan A, Mock CN, et al. Chapter 1. Universal health 
coverage and intersectoral action for health. In: Jamison DT, 
Gelband H, Horton S, et al, eds. Disease control priorities, 3rd edn. 
Volume 9. Disease control priorities: improving health and 
reducing poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
43 
Watkins DA, Jamison DT, Mills AJ, et al. Chapter 3. Universal health 
coverage and essential packages of care. In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, 
Horton S, et al, eds. Disease control priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 9. 
Disease control priorities: improving health and reducing poverty. 
Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
44 
Watkins DA, Nugent RA, Saxenian H, et al. Chapter 2. Intersectoral 
policy priorties for health. In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, Horton S, 
et al, eds. Disease control priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 9. Disease 
control priorities: improving health and reducing poverty. 
Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
45 
Landrigan PJ, Fuller R, Acosta NJR, et al. The Lancet Commission 
on pollution and health. Lancet 2017; published online Oct 19. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ S0140-6736(17)32345-0.
46 
GBD 2016 Risk Factors Collaborators. Global, regional, and national 
comparative risk assessment of 84 behavioural, environmental and 
occupational, and metabolic risks or clusters of risks, 1990–2016: 
a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. 
Lancet 2017; 390: 1345–422.
47 
Afshin A, Micha R, Webb M, et al. Chapter 6. Effectiveness of dietary 
policies to reduce noncommunicable diseases. In: Prabhakaran D, 
Anand S, Gaziano T, Mbanya JC, Wu Y, Nugent RA, eds. Disease 
control priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 5. Cardiovascular, respiratory, 
and related disorders. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2017
.
48 
Dehghan M, Mente A, Zhang X, et al. Associations of fats and 
carbohydrate intake with cardiovascular disease and mortality in 
18 countries from five continents (PURE): a prospective cohort study. 
Lancet 2017; published online Aug 29. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(17)32252-3.
49 
Bazzano LA, Hu T, Reynolds K, et al. Effects of low-carbohydrate 
and low-fat diets: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2014; 
161: 309–18.
50 Weiser TG, Gawande AA. Chapter 16. Excess surgical mortality: 
strategies for improving quality of care. In: Debas HT, Donkor P, 
Gawande AA, Jamison DT, Kruk ME, Mock CN, eds. Disease control 
priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 1. Essential surgery. Washington, DC: 
World Bank, 2015: 279–306.
51 
Mills A, Rasheed F, Tollman S. Chapter 3. Strengthening health 
systems. In: Jamison DT, Breman JG, Measham AR, et al, eds. 
Disease control priorities in developing countries, 2nd edn. 
Washington, DC: World Bank, 2006.
52 Norheim OF, Jha P, Admasu K, et al. Avoiding 40% of the 
premature deaths in each country, 2010–30: review of national 
mortality trends to help quantify the UN Sustainable Development 
Goal for health. Lancet 2015; 385: 239–52.
53 Watkins DA, Norheim OF, Jha P, Jamison DT. Reducing mortality 
within universal health coverage: the DCP3 model. DCP3 Working 
Paper No. 21. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2017
.
54 
Mathers C, Stevens G, Hogan D, Mahanani A, Ho J. Chapter 4. 
Global and Regional Causes of Death: Patterns and Trends, 2000–15. 
In: Jamison DT, Gelband H, Horton S, Jha P, Laxminarayan R, Mock 
C, Nugent R, eds. Disease control priorities, 3rd edn. Volume 9. 
Disease control priorities: improving health and reducing poverty. 
Washington, DC: World Bank (in press).
55 World Bank. World development indicators, 2014. Washington, DC: 
World Bank, 2014.
56 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. World 
population prospects: 2017 revision, key findings and advance 
tables. Report ESA/P/WP/248. New York, NY: UN DESA Population 
Division, 2017
.
57 
Watkins DA, Qi J, Horton SE, Jamison DT. Costing universal health 
coverage: the DCP3 model. DCP3 Working Paper No. 20. 
Washington, DC: World Bank, 2017
.
58 Boyle CF, Levin C, Hatefi A, Madriz S, Santos N. Achieving a 
“grand convergence” in global health: modeling the technical 
inputs, costs, and impacts from 2016 to 2030. PLoS One 2015; 
10: e0140092.
