 Victims, vectors and villains: are those who opt
out of vaccination morally responsible for the
deaths of others?
Euzebiusz Jamrozik,1 Toby Handfield,2 Michael J Selgelid1
1Centre for Human Bioethics,
SOPHIS, Monash University,
Clayton, Victoria, Australia
2Department of Philosophy,
SOPHIS, Monash University,
Clayton, Victoria, Australia
Correspondence to
Dr Euzebiusz Jamrozik, Centre
for Human Bioethics, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC, 3800,
Australia;
zeb.jamrozik@monash.edu
Received 17 December 2015
Revised 22 August 2016
Accepted 6 September 2016
Published Online First
3 October 2016
To cite: Jamrozik E,
Handfield T, Selgelid MJ. J
Med Ethics 2016;42:762–
768.
ABSTRACT
Mass vaccination has been a successful public health
strategy for many contagious diseases. The immunity of
the vaccinated also protects others who cannot be safely
or effectively vaccinated—including infants and the
immunosuppressed. When vaccination rates fall, diseases
like measles can rapidly resurge in a population. Those
who cannot be vaccinated for medical reasons are at the
highest risk of severe disease and death. They thus may
bear the burden of others’ freedom to opt out of
vaccination. It is often asked whether it is legitimate for
states to adopt and enforce mandatory universal
vaccination. Yet this neglects a related question: are
those who opt out, where it is permitted, morally
responsible when others are harmed or die as a result of
their decision? In this article, we argue that individuals
who opt out of vaccination are morally responsible for
resultant harms to others. Using measles as our main
example, we demonstrate the ways in which opting out
of vaccination can result in a significant risk of harm and
death to others, especially infants and the
immunosuppressed. We argue that imposing these risks
without good justification is blameworthy and examine
ways of reaching a coherent understanding of individual
moral responsibility for harms in the context of the
collective action required for disease transmission.
Finally, we consider several objections to this view,
provide counterarguments and suggest morally
permissible alternatives to mandatory universal
vaccination including controlled infection, self-imposed
social isolation and financial penalties for refusal to
vaccinate.
INTRODUCTION
Vaccine-preventable infectious diseases
Many vaccine-preventable infections are transmitted
between human beings and can cause serious harm
or death. Measles, for example, is one of the most
infectious known human viruses. It is transmitted
via the airborne route, and outbreaks can result
from minimal social contact between contagious
and susceptible individuals.1
2 In most people,
measles causes mild disease, but in some cases there
are serious sequelae including lung inflammation
(pneumonitis), brain inflammation (encephalitis),
permanent disability and death. US historical data
suggest a death rate of about 1 in every 350–1200
cases.1 3 Risks of both complications and death are
highest in infants, young children, the malnourished
and the immunosuppressed.3 Prior to widespread
measles
vaccination,
there
were,
on
average,
>500 000 cases of measles and 400 deaths per year
in the USA.1 Measles previously also accounted for
a significant proportion of deaths among young
people undergoing chemotherapy for leukaemiai.4
Currently, measles continues to cause >100 000
deaths per year worldwide—mostly in children
under 5 years of age in sub-Saharan Africa and
India,
in
communities
where
vaccination
rates
remain suboptimal.5
Modern inoculations for many common diseases
are extremely safe and effectively prevent illness in
the vast majority of those vaccinated. Vaccines have
played a major role in the eradication of smallpox
and near eradication of polio. High rates of vaccin-
ation against such diseases also protect those who
cannot be safely vaccinated, such as infants and the
immunosuppressed, through promotion of herd
protection (or ‘herd immunity’).6
The measles vaccine is especially safe and effective,
with significant side effects from vaccination being
exceedingly rare. A careful long-term follow-up
study of measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR)
vaccination found zero deaths due to the vaccine and
a less than one in a million chance of encephalitis.7
There are several groups that cannot be safely or
effectively
vaccinated
with
some
vaccines
(eg,
infants, the immunodeficient and the immunosup-
pressed).8 9 The only way these vulnerable indivi-
duals can be effectively protected against common
infections, apart from extremely onerous social iso-
lation (eg, ‘boy in a bubble’ scenarios), is through
herd
protection
(achieved
by
high
vaccination
rates).ii Herd protection models for measles suggest
that well over 90% of a population need to be vac-
cinated in order to reliably prevent sustained trans-
mission.10–12 Recent outbreaks have shown that
measles can spread quickly and cause significant
harm when vaccination rates fall.2 3 The presence
of such vulnerable individuals raises questions as to
whether these people should bear the burdens of
the decisions of others not to vaccinate and to what
degree the latter should be considered morally
responsible for resultant harms to the former.
In this article, we propose that those who opt
out of vaccination are morally responsible (and in
particular, blameworthy) for the harms suffered by
others as a result of infectious outbreaks. In other
words, non-vaccinators are morally blameworthy
for
the
morbidity
and
mortality
caused
by
iMeasles still poses significant risks in this context despite
prior vaccination of patients with cancer.
iiThat is, a sufficiently high proportion of those with
whom they come into contact must be vaccinated or
immune from past infection: to minimise risk, this
proportion must approach 100%.
762
Jamrozik E, et al. J Med Ethics 2016;42:762–768. doi:10.1136/medethics-2015-103327
Extended essay
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2015-103327 on 3 October 2016. Downloaded from 
 infectious diseases that can be prevented by vaccination. Exactly
how blame should in practice be apportioned among different
individuals is a question that is beyond the scope of this
article to resolve: but we show that there is at least one plausible
and morally defensible way that blame could be ascribed to
non-vaccinators. If our argument is sound, it joins other
significant grounds that support public health intervention in
this area.13–16
W
e focus on the example of measles because it is highly con-
tagious in social situations where people merely share the same
air.
Similar considerations apply to many other common
infections transmitted in similar ways, but we leave aside
diseases with other modes of transmission, noting that these
differences and their moral aspects have received some attention
elsewhere.16 17
One way to support our thesis would be to analyse the
concept of moral responsibility so as to identify sufficient
conditions, and then to show that these conditions apply to
non-vaccinators and the harms they cause. While we think this
route is defensible, it is difficult to frame in a way that is not
question-begging. Any account of sufficient conditions (for
moral responsibility) that supports our conclusion is likely to be
more contentious than the conclusion itself.
Instead, we adopt the following, two-pronged strategy. First,
we simply conjecture that non-vaccinators are responsible for
harms and present some relatively uncontentious necessary con-
ditions of moral responsibility. W
e consider some possible objec-
tions to our responsibility thesis, organised around these
conditions, and show that they all fail. Thus, we show that there
is no knockdown objection to our claim. Second, we argue that
there are a number of cases where we do in fact consider indivi-
duals blameworthy for harms that bear important similarities to
the harms caused by non-vaccinators. The legitimacy of consid-
ering individuals responsible in these other cases suggests that it
is
analogously
legitimate
to
consider
non-vaccinators
responsible.
MORAL RESPONSIBILITY, BLAME AND RISK
Those who are morally responsible for an outcome are proper
subjects of praise or blame for that outcome. So, for our pur-
poses, to say that someone is morally responsible for an
outcome O is equivalent to saying that they are worthy of (ie,
deserve) praise or blame for O. The project of analysing the
necessary and sufficient conditions for moral responsibility,
however, remains contentious. W
e do not hope to offer a com-
plete account here. Instead, we propose three necessary condi-
tions for moral responsibility. The conditions will be specified
only roughly, but with enough precision to ensure that they can
be uncontroversially applied to the vast majority of cases of
harm caused by refusal to vaccinate.
An agent A is morally responsible for outcome O only if
▸ (Cause) Agent A performs an action Φ that is a relevant part
of a causal explanation of O.
▸ (Salience) Outcome O is morally salient—it is a good or bad
outcome.
▸ (Foreseeability) Outcome O is a predictable or foreseeable
outcome of action Φ.
Evidently, refusal to vaccinate frequently satisfies the salience
condition: the harms caused by infectious diseases are highly
significant. Further, we see no difficulty meeting the foreseeabil-
ity condition. No doubt, when inoculation was a novel inven-
tion
and
mechanisms
of
transmission
were
less
widely
understood, refusal of a vaccination would not have always satis-
fied the foreseeability condition. But now, at least in those
countries where vaccination is widely available, it is practically
common knowledge that non-vaccination can have dangerous
consequences for oneself and for others. The most serious
source of potential resistance is the causal condition. Although
it is undeniable that some individuals’ refusal to vaccinate is part
of the causal explanation of some infections, it might be dis-
puted whether the ‘relevant’ sort of causal connection required
for moral responsibility is present. For the moment, we put this
objection to the side: it will be addressed in a section below.
These conditions provide a natural way to identify possible
sources of objection to our conjecture that non-vaccinators are
responsible for harms that result from their resultant lack of
immunity. In the following sections, we consider and address
the following purported objections:
1. Non-vaccinators lack the relevant sort of agency to be con-
sidered responsible for harms that result from a failure to
vaccinate. The harms do not arise from anything that non-
vaccinators do.
2. Harms due to a failure to vaccinate are due to collective
behaviours of many individuals, and consequently the causal
condition for responsibility is not satisfied.
3. Non-vaccinators may be morally responsible for the decision
whether or not to vaccinate, but there is no duty to vaccin-
ate. Vaccination is supererogatory, and so failure to vaccinate
is not blameworthy.
OBJECTION: NON-VACCINATION AND AGENCY
To legitimately consider someone morally responsible for an
outcome, it is necessary that the person had a relevant form of
agency, and that this agency was involved in the appropriate
way in the outcome for which they are attributed responsibility.
It is for this sort of reason that it does not make much sense to
consider someone responsible for the fact that 2 is a prime
number; nor for the actions of their ancestors of 20 generations
earlier. These states of affairs do not stand in the appropriate
causal relationship to the agency of an allegedly responsible
person. No one can causally influence what happened 20 gen-
erations earlier, nor can one influence a mathematical fact.
In non-vaccination cases, it might be objected that the harms
that result from non-vaccination are not harms that the non-
vaccinator has caused to occur; they are, rather, harms that the
non-vaccinator has merely failed to prevent. Or a somewhat dif-
ferent claim might be made: that the agent has not intended the
harm. For one or both of these reasons, it might be argued,
the agency of the non-vaccinator is not sufficiently involved in
the harm for us to hold the agent responsible.
Considered generally, this type of objection relies on two
claims. First: a conceptual claim is required, distinguishing two
types of harm, such that stereotypical wrongful harms fall in
one category, while harms suffered as a causal consequence of
non-vaccination fall in the other. As already suggested, all
manner of distinctions might be used in this way: we can distin-
guish between harms that are a result of doing versus allowing;
or harms that we commit rather than those that we omit to
prevent; or harms that we intend versus those that we do not
intend.18 Call this first part of the response the conceptual
claim.
Second, it must be argued that the distinction identified in the
conceptual claim separates states of affairs for which we may be
held responsible and those for which we cannot. “W
e can be
held responsible for the harms that we inflict on others, but not
for those that we merely fail to prevent”, or something to this
effect. Call this the moral significance claim.
Jamrozik E, et al. J Med Ethics 2016;42:762–768. doi:10.1136/medethics-2015-103327
763
Extended essay
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2015-103327 on 3 October 2016. Downloaded from 
 This response is implausible because there are numerous
examples—unrelated to vaccination—which illustrate the cred-
ibility of considering individuals responsible for harms that they
both (i) did not intend and (ii) did not cause directly by their
actions, but merely failed to prevent. Consider:
Intoxicated driver. A driver is driving while intoxicated at a safe
and reasonable speed. Due to her intoxication, however, she
blacks out briefly. During the blackout, she runs a red light, and
her vehicle collides with a pedestrian, killing him.
In such cases, the relevant agent does not intend the harm:
the harm comes about as a result of failures to act. Indeed, at
the crucial time of the red light signal, the driver is not capable
of acting in the required way because she is unconscious.
Perhaps in some cultures, and in some historical periods, this
driver would not be considered responsible for her careless
behaviour; but in many cultures and jurisdictions she would be,
and it is not credible to suppose that some conceptual error is
occurring in such cases. If it is coherent to consider individuals
responsible in cases like this, then there is no principled basis
for objection that non-vaccinators cannot be considered respon-
sible because they lack appropriate agency for the harms that
they transmit to others. That said, it remains very plausible that
intentionally caused harms warrant more blame than uninten-
tionally caused harms. W
e might think that the person who acci-
dentally forgets to get vaccinated deserves less blame than the
person who actively decides against vaccination. In addition, in
some countries vaccination is difficult to obtain, and where it is
not universally and freely available (or heavily subsidised), some
people may have difficulty paying the financial costs. Cases like
these would seem to be much less culpable, especially where
vaccines are not available, and blame may be attributable to
local or international public health agencies. But this is no
objection to our thesis that non-vaccinators (with easy access to
vaccines) can legitimately be considered responsible.
OBJECTION: COLLECTIVE ACTION AND INDIVIDUAL
RESPONSIBILITY
T
ypically, one person being unvaccinated is extremely unlikely
to cause harm to others because the probability of having direct
contact with both a contagious person (to become infected) and
a vulnerable person (infecting them) is low, at least in popula-
tions where vaccine uptake levels are high. Actual transmissions
to vulnerable individuals will typically involve a chain of trans-
mission involving dozens of unvaccinated individuals.
Is the collective nature of the harm-causing process compat-
ible with considering individuals responsible? W
e might have
concerns about overdetermination (where multiple chains of
transmission within an outbreak are sufficient to cause a given
harm) or because of more general concerns that our ordinary
assumptions about individual responsibility are not appropriate
to collective causation.
To address the concern about overdetermination first: this
will depend to a large extent on disease epidemiology. Take two
extreme cases:iii (i) endemic malaria: each sick person’s clinical
case of malaria is likely to be overdetermined since they will be
infected with parasites transmitted to them by many other
people, and each episode of transmission is itself potentially suf-
ficient to cause clinical malaria; and (ii) measles in a country
with a high vaccination rate: here each sick person’s clinical case
of measles is much more likely to have been transmitted to
them by just one other person, and each sick person is unlikely
to have had sufficient contact with more than one infectious
case.iv
In cases like the former (endemic malaria), our ordinary
ascriptions of responsibility might seem inappropriate. Blaming
someone for a bad outcome usually implies that, had the
blamed party behaved otherwise, the bad outcome would not
have occurred. This is precisely what fails to hold in overdeter-
mination cases.
Legal doctrine has evolved ingenious strategies to address this
sort of concern so that parties who participate in multiple, sim-
ultaneous wrongs (eg, Jones burns down the factory from the
outside, Smith blows it up from the inside; had one of them not
acted, the factory would have been destroyed anyway) cannot
benefit from the overdetermination of the damage they collect-
ively do. In dealing with overdetermination of risks, the mea-
sures become even more conceptually sophisticated.19 20 W
e
suggest something similar should happen here: we should adjust
our understanding of causation so as to ensure that overdeter-
mined harms are still caused in the relevant sense. Blind adher-
ence to a counterfactual test of causal responsibility will give an
absurd answer to questions of blameworthiness. That suggests
we should reject the counterfactual test rather than denying that
anyone should be blamed for overdetermined harms.v
Overdetermination aside, the question of how to apportion
individual responsibility in cases where one group (those who
opt out of vaccination) collectively causes harms to another
group (those who are vulnerable to vaccine-preventable disease)
remains. Even for cases like measles in high-income countries,
one individual alone opting out of vaccination is rarely sufficient
to cause infection in another. Such transmission will most com-
monly involve a causal chain leading back to many other suscep-
tible people, some of whom have chosen to remain susceptible
by opting out of vaccination.vi
Suppose a chain of transmitters (T1 → T2 → ··· → T100)
infect an immunosuppressed victim V
. Suppose all T1–T100
opted out of vaccination, knowing that this might cause harm to
others. Suppose further that they all engaged in similar risk-
creating behaviours: they had similar exposure to immunosup-
pressed individuals and took similar precautions with washing
hands and the like. Had T100 obtained a vaccination, V would
not have become unwell.vii But it is also the case that had T99
obtained a vaccination, V would not have become unwell. And
so on, for every member of the chain. So who is responsible?
At this point, it is helpful to stress the distinction between
moral responsibility for conduct versus moral responsibility for
consequences of our conduct. It is possible to think that
iiiNoting that a wide range of cases exist between these extremes.
ivAlthough for both malaria and measles there is some evidence of a
relationship between pathogen ‘dose’ and severity of disease.
vEven where overdetermination applies, other authors have provided a
coherent account of moral reasons not to contribute to collective harms
where those harms are likely to be overdetermined (eg, climate change).
Barry C & Overland G. Individual Responsibility for Carbon Emissions.
In: eremy Moss (ed), Climate Change and Justice, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, 2015:165–183. Similar reasoning may apply to
infection, and this may be a fruitful path for future enquiry.
viIt is not merely that these events are earlier in time to the ultimate
transmission event of interest (eg, to a vulnerable person) but that it is
the combined actions (ie, refusals to vaccinate) of the collective involved
in the chain that are together sufficient to cause harm.
viiW
e here assume, for illustrative purposes, that V’s infection is not
overdetermined—that is, V would not have been infected by another
chain of transmitters if the chain of infection from T1 to T100 to V had
not occurred.
764
Jamrozik E, et al. J Med Ethics 2016;42:762–768. doi:10.1136/medethics-2015-103327
Extended essay
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2015-103327 on 3 October 2016. Downloaded from 
 someone is blameworthy for their conduct without holding
them blameworthy for all the bad consequences of their
conduct. The distinction is philosophically important because
the outcomes of our actions are never entirely under our
control, whereas our conduct is—at least to a much greater
degree. If we consider individuals responsible to different
degrees because their conduct, though similar, led to different
outcomes, then we introduce an element of luck into our system
of moral judgement. This ‘moral luck’ is a pervasive feature of
normal moral practices involving praise and blame, but it is con-
troversial among theorists whether it can be justified.21
So, in the present case, with respect to their conduct, ex
hypothesi, each of the 100 individuals is equally blameworthy.
They all imposed similar risks and had similar foreknowledge
and control over those risks. Their moral responsibility for
harm to others will be affected by moral luck because not every-
one who behaves in a similarly blameworthy way will cause the
same harms. While all non-vaccinators are guilty of equally
blameworthy conduct (ie, they have all behaved equally badly),
only those who are actually involved in chains of transmission
to vulnerable individuals end up being morally responsible/
blameworthy for harm because causation is a necessary condi-
tion for blameworthiness; and the causal difference between
these groups is a matter of sheer luck. With regard to moral
responsibility for harm, therefore, moral luck is inescapable.
W
e claim that those non-vaccinators involved in a chain
causing harm are blameworthy for avoidable harms arising from
non-vaccination and, in practice, this means that they could
legitimately be blamed for these harms.viii W
e do not claim that
there is a uniquely appropriate way, in theory or practice, to
assign blame for the eventual harms, at least in part because of
the element of moral luck that influences the outcomes of risky
behaviours. With regard to theory, there may be multiple plaus-
ible views about the degree of blame that the 100 individuals in
question deserve for harm to V
. With regard to practice, indeter-
minacy could be resolved by adopting particular conventions or
laws. There are numerous examples of stable moral practices in
which we hold people blameworthy for the outcomes of their
collective risky behaviour and we see no reason to think that an
appropriate custom could not be devised for non-vaccination.
To illustrate, consider three ways (not exhaustive) in which we
might ascribe blame to those involved in chains of transmission:
i.
Nobody among T1–T100 is blamed for the harm to V
.
ii.
Only T100 is blamed for the harm to V (proximate cause).
iii. All individuals, T1 to T100, are blamed to an equal degree
for the harm to V
.
With regard to the first option: is it plausible to think that no
one is blameworthy for the harm? A crucial requirement for any
credible account of individual and collective responsibility is
that individuals are not left with perverse incentives to (collect-
ively) impose large risks on others for little or no benefit to
themselves. Allowing non-vaccinators to escape all responsibility
for subsequent deaths fails this basic test.22
The second of these policies (blaming the proximate cause
T100) might be appealing in practice because of its convenience:
it requires only one individual be found to receive the warranted
blame. Theoretically, however, it is implausible to consider the
proximate cause more blameworthy (for harm) than any other
member of the chain. Of 100 individuals who imposed similar
risks and had similar causal involvement in the death, it was
sheer luck that made T100 the ultimate transmitter of the harm
to a vulnerable person.23 There would thus be a very strong
element of moral luck, making it, on some views, unfair to
blame only T100, given that T1–T99 were all similarly blame-
worthy. Nevertheless, a moral community could have practical
or policy reasons (eg, deterrence) to blame only the proximate
transmitter—even if this blame were out of proportion to her
causal role in the harm.ix
The third policy would regard each individual in the chain
(who had reasonable opportunity to act otherwise) as blame-
worthy for the harms that arise. By considering each morally
responsible, we acknowledge that each is implicated in causing
avoidable harm.x
That said, there remain many unresolved questions about
how to apportion blame in collective action cases. In our con-
trived example, the causal roles of T1–T100 are all similar. But
in cases where the contributions are heterogeneous (eg, some
better foresee harms than others, some take more/better infec-
tion control measures than others, etc), we may need to discrim-
inate different degrees of blame deserved by the various agents.
For instance, one fundamental issue is whether it is possible to
meaningfully quantify the degree of causal contribution that an
agent (or chance) makes to an outcome. Intuitively, we can at
least make a partial ranking of contributions in multiagent
cases: some contribute more than others, though some contribu-
tions may be incomparable. While we may take some guidance
from this partial ranking information, it will leave some issues
indeterminate. For instance, if A makes a greater contribution
than B, this may constrain us to ascribe a greater quantum of
deserved blame to A. But suppose that a third agent C is
involved, and neither A’s contribution nor B’s contribution is
comparable to the contribution of C. (To illustrate with an
example: Transmitter A may have made a greater contribution
than transmitter B, because although both refused vaccinations,
transmitter A made more reckless visits to hospitals and other
environments in which immunosuppressed individuals reside.
Transmitter C took the most stringent hygiene precautions of
all, but C was also the blogger who spread ‘antivaccination’
ideas to A and B, such that they would have been much more
likely to get a vaccination had C not written the blog. W
e might
think that C’s contribution is so different from A’s and B’s that
it cannot obviously be rated as greater, less than or equivalent in
magnitude to either of them.) How much blame does C deserve
relative to these others? Any particular answer will involve some
arbitrariness.
At least one further question remains: does the blame
deserved by one agent change, depending on whether other
agents (or chancy processes) are involved in causing the harm?
viiiHere, and below, we distinguish being blameworthy (or being morally
responsible) in theory from being blamed (or being held morally
responsible) in practice. While the moral practice of blame might often
map onto theoretical accounts of blameworthiness, this need not always
be the case. For practical reasons, for example, we may sometimes
choose not to actually blame those who are blameworthy (for harm).
While the majority of this article focuses on the question of who is
morally blameworthy for what (in theory), in what follows we also
consider suggestions regarding who should be blamed for what (in
practice).
ixAnd following David Lewis, it could be argued that this practice does
treat all wrongdoers equally: they are all subjected to equivalent risks of
being blamed.24
xIt also anticipates a potential objection in that we need not trace the
causal chain back ad infinitum since only some members of the chain
had reasonable opportunity to act otherwise: for example, when an
outbreak in a high-income country begins with an imported case from a
low-income country or a community with poor access to vaccination.
Jamrozik E, et al. J Med Ethics 2016;42:762–768. doi:10.1136/medethics-2015-103327
765
Extended essay
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2015-103327 on 3 October 2016. Downloaded from 
 Suppose that an agent’s causal contribution to an outcome
(including the degree to which he foresaw and intended the
outcome) is the same in two scenarios S1 and S2, but that in S1
the outcome is facilitated (or hindered) by another agent,
whereas in S2 he achieves the outcome alone. Does the agent
deserve the same or a different degree of blame for the out-
comes in these alternative scenarios? One possibility is to treat
the total quantum of blame deserved for a given harm as con-
stant, regardless of the number of agents, and to distribute it
among the agents who causally contribute (eg, if three play
similar roles in collectively causing a death, they may each
deserve a reduced share of the blame that would ordinarily be
ascribed to one individual for that death). This is what typically
happens with liability to pay compensation. The amount of
compensation required is constant, and mechanisms like joint
and several liability allow that constant sum to be distributed in
a variety of ways over the liable parties. On this approach, the
presence of an additional agent will lead to a reduction in
degree of blame deserved. Another possibility is that the blame
deserved by the agent is identical in the two cases: despite the
fact that our agent had an accomplice in his blameworthy deed,
the degree of blame he deserves for the harm remains the
same.xi
Regardless of how we resolve these issues, it should be
stressed again that any such proposal that makes causation a
necessary condition of blame for harm will be affected by moral
luck ( just as in the case of blaming the proximate cause T100).
Given this, we may wish to consider whether it is preferable (in
practice) to adopt other policies—such as vaccine mandates—
which would arguably involve a fairer distribution of risk and
avoid the case where an unlucky subset of risk imposers would
be blamed for their chance involvement in harms.
While it may not be possible to prescribe one uniquely pre-
ferred approach to apportioning moral responsibility to indivi-
duals in cases of collective responsibility, we believe that at least
one of the above methods of attributing blame is defensible, and
that is all we require for the defence of our thesis. While the
incompleteness of our account may leave some degree of arbi-
trariness in the choice of rules to ascribe responsibility in theory
and practice, this is no worse than the degree of arbitrariness in
extant norms and laws: we punish attempted murderers less
harshly than successful ones; we blame reckless drivers who
cause injury much more harshly than those who luckily avoid
injuring anyone; and we are of course resigned to blaming
much less harshly those who simply evade detection.
OBJECTION: VACCINATION IS SUPEREROGATORY
The final objection we consider concedes that non-vaccinators
are responsible for imposing risks on others, but denies that
they are blameworthy. The idea is that while it might be praise-
worthy to obtain a vaccination, it is strictly supererogatory to
do so. Refusal to vaccinate is permissible either because vaccin-
ation comes at a significant cost to oneself or because the magni-
tude of risk imposed is not considered morally significant. This
latter argument might proceed either by asserting that the abso-
lute risk is small or by asserting that the overall risks and bene-
fits of some social practice are equitably shared across the
population.
Partiality to self
It is unreasonable to expect individuals to do everything they
can to minimise risks to others. In particular, it is hard to accept
that individuals have to bear significant risks of injury to them-
selves in order to achieve modest risk reductions for numerous
others. Even if the net effect of the action is to reduce levels of
expected harm to others, we might hold that—in some cases—
there is a reasonable degree of partiality to oneself, such that it
is merely supererogatory to undergo the risk in question.
Serving as an experimental subject in a new drug trial might be
an example where the risks are distributed in this fashion.
Having stated this objection, it is evidently implausible in the
case of vaccination. First and foremost, non-vaccinators usually
make themselves worse off by refusing a vaccine. So it is simply
not the case that they would have to undergo a significant cost
in order to reduce risk to others. But suppose we defer to a
sincere non-vaccinator’s claim that they believe it to be an
undue hardship to receive a vaccine. How then do the burdens
of vaccination compare to the potential risks to others? Taking
measles as an example again, the risk of death due to vaccin-
ation is zero and the risk of serious vaccine reaction requiring
hospitalisation is around 0.003% per dose,7 whereas the risk of
death due to measles in an immunocompetent person is up to 1
in 350–1200 per infection and the risk of significant disease
requiring hospitalisation is approximately 20%.3 Thus, in terms
of hospitalisation, it is around 6000 times more dangerous to
have measles than to have a dose of measles vaccine (and in
terms of risk of death, the comparison is even more stark).
Since the virus is so infectious, the risk of transmitting it while
infected is high, and so the risk of harming or killing others is
not negligible. For the risk of harming others to be so low as to
be commensurate with the risk of vaccination, the lifetime odds
of being part of a chain that reaches a non-immune person
would have to be significantly lower than 6000 to 1 against
(which could, admittedly, be the case if vaccination rates are suf-
ficiently high and stable).
Second, even if it could be shown that the requisite probabil-
ities are met in one place and at one point in time such cases
will be exceedingly rare and difficult to identify. The risks
change as a greater or lesser number of others opt out of vaccin-
ation, and as more people travel and cases are imported from
other populations (which frequently occurs for many vaccine-
preventable diseases).
Finally, non-vaccinators will tend to benefit from the herd
immunity that is achieved by others undertaking vaccination,
giving rise to a free-riding concern.26 Partiality to oneself is a
much less plausible reason for failing to do good if one is
already benefiting substantially from the equivalent sacrifices of
others.
Small risks
Once herd protection is established at some level, the individual
risk contributed by one non-vaccinator is admittedly small. It
could be argued that it is therefore inappropriate to regard these
risks as blameworthy. But this is, to use a term from Derek
Parfit, a mistake in moral mathematics.27 Even small contribu-
tions are morally significant, especially (i) when small risks are
run many times, as when the unvaccinated have social contact
with many others, and (ii) where, taken together, they cause
great harm. Herd protection is not binary—that is, it is not
‘present’ or ‘absent’, depending on whether some threshold rate
of vaccination has been achieved. Herd protection is a probabil-
istic phenomenon reflecting a higher or lower level of the
xiCf. Robert Nozick: “Responsibility is not a bucket in which less
remains when some is apportioned out; there is not a fixed amount of
punishment or responsibility which one uses up so that none is left over
for the other.”25
766
Jamrozik E, et al. J Med Ethics 2016;42:762–768. doi:10.1136/medethics-2015-103327
Extended essay
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2015-103327 on 3 October 2016. Downloaded from 
 ‘background’ risk of sustained transmission of infection. Unless
or until an infectious disease has been eradicated worldwide,
there is thus no level at which the risk of harming others by
remaining unvaccinated is zero. Further, if the number of non-
vaccinators is small, then although the total risk of harm to
others will be small, each individual will be responsible for a
sizeable proportion of that total risk.
Distribution of risks
In some cases, societies allow small risks to be imposed on others
because these risks are part of a social system of mutual risk
taking that, overall, produces significant benefits; driving per-
sonal automobiles may be one example. Yet, for such a system of
shared risk to be justifiable, the risks and benefits must be shared
equitably.28 Systems that allow non-medical exemptions for vac-
cination blatantly fail this requirement. Infants are vulnerable in
multiple ways and many immunosuppressed people are already
badly off in terms of health. The burden of risk will fall inequit-
ably on these groups. Both the probability of infection and the
probability of severe disease and death (upon infection) are
higher for the vulnerable. By contrast, a system of mandatory
vaccination (except for those excluded for medical reasons)
involves sharing the small risk of vaccination equitably across the
population, for significant health benefits, shared by all.
ALTERNATIVE DUTY ASSIGNMENTS
It might be wondered what concrete assignments of rights and
obligations would be morally acceptable ways to address the risk
of infectious diseases. In the absence of mandatory vaccination,
should non-vaccinators be required to take other steps to reduce
the risks they impose on others? Or should systems of liability
hold all non-vaccinators to account for their risk imposition,
whether or not specific harms arise?20
An argument that the present assignment of obligations is inad-
equate can be made from considerations of economic efficiency.
The risks imposed by non-vaccinators constitute a cost that is not
consented to. In the jargon of economics, this is an externality: a
cost that falls on people not participating in the relevant activity.
And where there are externalities, there will often be inefficiency:
people will choose a balance of activities that does not optimise
welfare.29 In this case, the cost to the immunosuppressed of
being exposed to a risk of infection is greater than the value to
the unvaccinated of remaining unvaccinated. To identify how to
remove the inefficiency, we can imagine various thought experi-
ments, regarding what would happen if it were possible to nego-
tiate a mutual agreement without excessive transaction costs,
assuming a determinate division of rights.
On one salient alternative, imagine that the unvaccinated have
a right to remain unvaccinated, but that the immunosuppressed
can band together to purchase the compliance of the unvaccin-
ated with a universal vaccination scheme. Given the very signifi-
cant gains that the immunosuppressed stand to achieve, it is
plausible that they would be willing to pay more than enough to
obtain the compliance of at least a very large proportion of the
unvaccinated community. The result would be to improve the
position of the immunosuppressed, who are now better pro-
tected from immunity, and to improve the position of the unvac-
cinated, who have been adequately compensated for frustrating
their preference for non-vaccination. This is a Pareto superior
outcome, and the inefficiency has been removed. A scheme like
this, on the other hand, could create perverse incentives for
people to cultivate or imitate a preference not to be vaccinated.
Another salient possibility is to allocate the immunosup-
pressed an enforceable right not to be exposed to (avoidable)
infection risks. In this case, the immunosuppressed could
demand that those who chose not to be vaccinated (i) remain
absent from public life, (ii) provide monetary compensation for
the risks they impose on the immunosuppressed, (iii) undertake
controlled infectionxii or (iv) become vaccinated. It is very plaus-
ible that
(iv) is the most preferred option for the non-
vaccinators, given the very high costs of the other options. So,
again, the inefficiency will have been removed: the immunosup-
pressed will enjoy the benefits of universal vaccination, and a
scheme like this would not obviously create perverse incentives.
Both of these scenarios give very clear support to the intuitive
claim that it is unreasonable for some to impose the risks of
non-vaccination upon the immunosuppressed. It is unreasonable
because it is possible to bring about other arrangements that
make some better off, and nobody worse off.
Both of the above scenarios are admittedly unrealistic because
it would be intolerably costly to engage in all the relevant trans-
actions involving everyone with whom we might need to inter-
act over the course of our lives. But a more realistic, centralised
proposal is that those who refuse vaccination might merely be
given the choice between (i) providing monetary compensation
for the risks they impose on the immunosuppressed or (ii)
becoming
vaccinated.
Monetary
compensation
could
be
achieved in practice via imposition of a new (non)vaccination
tax. Those who are vaccinated could receive a rebate for the tax
in question, so only those who remain unvaccinated end up
paying. The revenue raised could be paid out in individual com-
pensation settlements for infection-related harms or could
simply be paid directly to vulnerable individuals as compensa-
tion for exposure to risk itself.
CONCLUSIONS
A typical person transmitting infection may seem innocent
because they do not choose to contract or transmit the infec-
tion, just as the driver of a car rarely chooses the moment when
his brakes fail. Yet we are all at risk of being both the victims
and vectors of infectious disease, and by taking reasonable steps,
where possible, to ensure that we are immune from being a
victim, we also prevent ourselves from being a vector.23
Vaccination is a prime example of an action that, in this way,
prevents harm to oneself as well as harm to others. W
e have
argued that those who opt out of vaccination and transmit pre-
ventable disease to others can be considered morally responsible
for the harms and deaths that result. Our current practices of
attributing blame may not regard the avoidable transmission of
vaccine-preventable disease as villainous behaviour, but the
arguments of this article demonstrate that this attitude might
warrant change.
Contributors All authors contributed to the research and the writing of this article,
and approved the final manuscript.
Funding Green Templeton College, Ethox Centre and Green Templeton College,
Oxford University (Andrew Markus Visiting Scholarship), Monash University
(Australian Postgraduate Award).
Competing interests None declared.
xiiControlled infection would aim to make the person immune and thus
pose no risk of transmitting the disease. This would involve intentional
infection with medical oversight in an isolated environment where
transmission is prevented. Medical oversight decreases risks to the
infected
individual,
but
it
is
worth
noting
that
for
many
vaccine-preventable diseases there is no curative treatment for most
complications, should they arise, which would limit the application of
this approach (and demonstrates another advantage of vaccination).
Jamrozik E, et al. J Med Ethics 2016;42:762–768. doi:10.1136/medethics-2015-103327
767
Extended essay
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2015-103327 on 3 October 2016. Downloaded from 
 Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially,
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc/4.0/
REFERENCES
1
Roush SW, Murphy TV, Vaccine-Preventable Disease Table Working G. Historical
comparisons of morbidity and mortality for vaccine-preventable diseases in the
United States. JAMA 2007;298:2155–63.
2
Halsey NA, Salmon DA. Measles at Disneyland, a problem for all ages. Ann Intern
Med 2015;162:655–6.
3
Orenstein WA, Perry RT, Halsey NA. The clinical significance of measles: a review.
J Infect Dis 2004;189(Suppl 1):S4–16.
4
Baxi R, Mytton OT, Abid M, et al. Outbreak report: nosocomial transmission of
measles through an unvaccinated healthcare worker-implications for public health.
J Public Health (Oxf) 2014;36:375–81.
5
Simons E, Ferrari M, Fricks J, et al. Assessment of the 2010 global measles
mortality reduction goal: results from a model of surveillance data. Lancet
2012;379:2173–8.
6
Paul Y. Herd immunity and herd protection. Vaccine 2004;22:301–2.
7
Patja A, Davidkin I, Kurki T, et al. Serious adverse events after measles-mumps-
rubella vaccination during a fourteen-year prospective follow-up. Pediatr Infect Dis J
2000;19:1127–34.
8
Kunisaki KM, Janoff EN. Influenza in immunosuppressed populations: a review of
infection frequency, morbidity, mortality, and vaccine responses. Lancet Infect Dis
2009;9:493–504.
9
Glück T, Müller-Ladner U. Vaccination in patients with chronic rheumatic or
autoimmune diseases. Clin Infect Dis 2008;46:1459–65.
10
Fine P, Eames K, Heymann DL. “Herd immunity”: a rough guide. Clin Infect Dis
2011;52:911–16.
11
Fox JP, Elveback L, Scott W, et al. Herd immunity: basic concept and relevance to
public health immunization practices. Am J Epidemiol 1971;94:179–89.
12
Rashid H, Khandaker G, Booy R. Vaccination and herd immunity: what more do we
know? Curr Opin Infect Dis 2012;25:243–9.
13
Dawson A. Herd protection as a public good: vaccination and our obligations to
others. In: Dawson A, Verweij M, eds. Ethics, prevention and public health. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK 2009:160–78.
14
Dawson A. Vaccination ethics. Public Health Ethics 2011:143–53. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1017/CBO9780511862670.009
15
Verweij M, Dawson A. Ethical principles for collective immunisation programmes.
Vaccine 2004;22:3122–6.
16
Verweij M. Obligatory precautions against infection. Bioethics 2005;19:323–35.
17
Harris J, Holm S. Is there a moral obligation not to infect others? BMJ
1995;311:1215–17.
18
Rachels J. Killing and letting die. In: Becker LC, Becker M, Becker C, eds.
Encyclopedia of ethics. 2nd edn. Routledge, 2001;2:947–50.
19
Handfield T, Pisciotta T. Is the risk–liability theory compatible with negligence law?
Legal Theory 2005;11:387–404.
20
McCarthy D. Liability and risk. Philos Public Affairs 1996;25:238–62.
21
Williams BAO, Nagel T. Moral luck. Proc Aristotelian Soc Supplementary Volumes
1976;50:115–51.
22
Smiley M. Collective responsibility. In: Zalta EN, ed. The Stanford encyclopedia of
philosophy. Fall, 2011.
23
Battin M, Francis L, Jacobsen J, et al. The patient as victim and vector. New York,
NY: Oxford Press, 2007:90–2.
24
Lewis D. The punishment that leaves something to chance. Philos Public Affairs
1989:53–67.
25
Nozick R. Anarchy, state, and utopia. Basic Books, 1974.
26
Selgelid MJ. Ethics of infectious disease control. In: Heggenhougen HK,
ed. International encyclopedia of public health. Oxford: Academic Press,
2008:486–93.
27
Parfit D. Reasons and persons. Oxford University Press, 1984.
28
Hansson SO. Ethical criteria of risk acceptance. Erkenntnis 2003;59:291–309.
29
Coase RH. The problem of social cost. J Law Econ 1960;3:1–44.
768
Jamrozik E, et al. J Med Ethics 2016;42:762–768. doi:10.1136/medethics-2015-103327
Extended essay
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jme.bmj.com/
J Med Ethics: first published as 10.1136/medethics-2015-103327 on 3 October 2016. Downloaded from 
