 OPEN
REVIEW
Advanced paternal age effects in neurodevelopmental
disorders—review of potential underlying mechanisms
M Janecka1,2, J Mill1,3, MA Basson4, A Goriely5, H Spiers3, A Reichenberg2, L Schalkwyk6,7 and C Fernandes1,7
Multiple epidemiological studies suggest a relationship between advanced paternal age (APA) at conception and adverse
neurodevelopmental outcomes in offspring, particularly with regard to increased risk for autism and schizophrenia. Conclusive
evidence about how age-related changes in paternal gametes, or age-independent behavioral traits affect neural development is
still lacking. Recent evidence suggests that the origins of APA effects are likely to be multidimensional, involving both inherited
predisposition and de novo events. Here we provide a review of the epidemiological and molecular findings to date. Focusing on
the latter, we present the evidence for genetic and epigenetic mechanisms underpinning the association between late fatherhood
and disorder in offspring. We also discuss the limitations of the APA literature. We propose that different hypotheses relating to the
origins of the APA effects are not mutually exclusive. Instead, multiple mechanisms likely contribute, reflecting the etiological
complexity of neurodevelopmental disorders.
Translational Psychiatry (2017) 7, e1019; doi:10.1038/tp.2016.294; published online 31 January 2017
INTRODUCTION
Epidemiological studies have provided extensive evidence for an
association between advanced paternal age (APA) at conception
and a series of negative outcomes in offspring. These adverse
effects include Mendelian (single-gene) disorders (for example,
Apert syndrome, achondroplasia1–3), as well as those with a more
complex etiology (for example, autism, schizophrenia4,5), together
with birth complications6,7 and nonclinical phenotypes (for
example, IQ and academic achievement8,9). The current review
focuses on the relationship between APA and neurodevelop-
mental disorders, critically discussing evidence from both human
and rodent studies. Although young fatherhood has also been
linked with adverse outcomes in offspring, given that at least
some aspects of these effects are likely underlain by factors that
are different from those linked with APA,10 they are not discussed
here (but see for example, refs 11,12).
We begin this review by outlining key epidemiological findings,
and discussing the degree to which they might have been
affected by ascertainment bias and quality of phenotyping. Next,
we summarize the debate regarding de novo and inherited origins
of the APA effects, which reflects the lack of consensus about
whether effects on offspring behavior are caused by age-related
changes
in
paternal
spermatogonial
stem
cells,
or
age-
independent behavioral traits associated with a delay or extension
of fatherhood. We propose that the lack of unequivocal evidence
in this matter suggests that both mechanisms likely contribute, to
a varying degree in familial and sporadic cases. We suggest that
better stratification of the samples, as well as parsing out maternal
age effects, will be necessary to fully resolve this question.
The remaining part of this review focuses on the de novo
hypotheses,
including accumulation of genetic mutations—
exacerbated
by
spermatogonial
selection
mechanisms—and
epigenetic modifications. We present these hypotheses in detail,
and discuss how well they have been supported by studies in
humans and mouse models. Finally, we discuss the limitations of
the APA epidemiological and molecular research more broadly.
Throughout our work, we emphasize that resolving the
contribution of APA to complex, neurodevelopmental disorders
will require the integration of ‘competing’ hypotheses and
extensive dialog between epidemiology and molecular biology.
Molecular research should be guided by the patterns emerging
from population-based research, and likewise its findings need to
inform the design of the epidemiological studies.
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL FINDINGS
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia was the first neuropsychiatric disorder to be linked
with APA.5 Epidemiological data from multiple cohorts demon-
strated that the risk of the disorder increases with paternal age at
conception.13–16 Although the magnitude of this effect differed
between studies, there was a consensus about a relatively early
start of these effects. The risk for the disorder was shown to be
elevated already for offspring of fathers in their mid-to-late 30s,
and to continue to increase together with paternal age. Men who
were in their 40s at conception were found to be two to three
times more likely to father a child with schizophrenia than those
in their mid-to-late 20s, although these estimates vary consider-
ably between the cohorts. A possible explanation for such
1Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s College London, London, UK; 2Department of Psychiatry, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA; 3University of Exeter Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK; 4Department of Craniofacial and Stem Cell Biology,
MRC Centre for Neurodevelopmental Disorders, King’s College London, London, UK; 5Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK and 6School of
Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, UK. Correspondence: Dr M Janecka, Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10128,
USA.
E-mail: magdalena.janecka@mssm.edu
7These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received 13 September 2016; revised 23 November 2016; accepted 15 December 2016
Citation: Transl Psychiatry (2017) 7, e1019; doi:10.1038/tp.2016.294
www.nature.com/tp
 discrepancies is heterogeneity between the composition of
different cohorts, with samples enriched for sporadic cases likely
producing inflated estimates of the APA effects. The disorder odds
ratios associated with APA have been shown to be higher in
female than in male offspring,17 however, a meta-analysis by
Miller et al.18 did not confirm the presence of such effects.
Despite problems in obtaining precise estimates of the size of
the paternal age effects, the link between APA and schizophrenia
is robust across different cohorts and ethnic groups,19–21 and
remains significant after controlling for possible confounds,
including socio-economic status, paternal psychiatric morbidity
and maternal age. Furthermore, Frans et al.22 showed that these
effects are likely transgenerational—after controlling for parental
ages, the age of maternal, but not paternal grandfather, was
associated with a higher risk of schizophrenia in the Swedish
population.
Autism
The association between APA and increased risk of autism in
offspring was initially reported by Reichenberg et al.4 and was
subsequently replicated by other groups.6,9,11,12,20,23–30 As in
schizophrenia, the association between APA and increased risk
of autism is evident in the offspring of fathers in their mid-to-late
30s, with more advanced paternal ages associated with higher
odds ratios for the disorder. Similarly as for schizophrenia, higher
susceptibility of female offspring to the APA effects suggested by
some groups4,31 was not replicated in a multi-cohort study.11
Studies looking at transgenerational persistence of the APA–
autism association yielded conflicting results, reporting both that
the age of maternal grandmother (British Avon Longitudinal Study
of Parents and Children32,33) and maternal grandfather (Swedish
sample34), is associated with higher risk of autism. Possible reason
for inconsistency in the pattern of results was the different
diagnostic definitions adopted in these studies, with the British
Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children study relying on
a more heterogeneous cohort than the Swedish one.
The association between APA and both autism and schizo-
phrenia is interesting given the phenotypic and genetic overlap
between these disorders. They are both neurodevelopmental in
origin
and
characterized
by
social
impairment,35
delay
in
development
of
several
cognitive
and
perceptual
abilities,
prepubertal decline36 and behavioral rigidity.37 Evidence for
genetic correlation between these disorders was highlighted by
Sullivan et al.,38 who showed that family history of both
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder is a risk factor for autism
in two independent cohorts. Similarly, diagnosis of autism early in
life increases the odds of developing schizophrenia later in
life,39,40 and a study of genome-wide association data41 demon-
strated genetic correlation between these disorders more directly.
Taken together, this evidence suggests that autism and schizo-
phrenia may be underlain by partially overlapping etiological
factors, and therefore robustness of association between APA and
autism and schizophrenia may hold important cues for discover-
ing the biological pathways that are particularly vulnerable to the
APA effects and that contribute to the co-heritability of the
disorders.
DE NOVO VS INHERITED APA EFFECTS
Although the epidemiological association between APA and
autism/schizophrenia is now well established, the underlying
mechanisms remain equivocal. APA effects have been attributed
to both (i) inherited genetic factors in couples where an older
male becomes a father or (ii) de novo genetic changes in paternal
gametes
that
arise
as
a
consequence
of
ageing.
Studies
attempting to explore these hypotheses have used different
family designs to look at systematic differences between men who
delay or extend fatherhood and those who do not, compared the
APA effects among sporadic and familial cases, and used animal
models. As outlined below, the evidence from these studies
suggests involvement of both inherited and de novo factors, an
observation consistent with the complexity of the disorders in
question.
The notion that the effects of APA on offspring could be
mediated by inherited genetic factors is underpinned by a
possibility of a genetic correlation between characteristics of
couples with high paternal age and psychiatric disorders enriched
in children of older fathers. One possibility is that behavioral traits
of men who delay fatherhood, for example, social withdrawal or
aloofness, are also associated with a higher genetic risk for autism
or schizophrenia. Consequently, children born to men with gene
variants predisposing them to delay reproduction (for example,
due to social withdrawal) would be at a higher risk of developing
these disorders regardless of the age at which their father
conceives. It is also plausible that these inherited genetic risk
factors come from the maternal, rather than paternal side. This
entails that women who decide to have children with older men
are themselves enriched for certain characteristics that influence
the child’s genetic liability for psychiatric disorders. Although
paternal psychiatric diagnoses are usually controlled for in
epidemiological studies of APA, maternal diagnoses and sub-
clinical paternal and maternal traits often remain unaccounted for.
To date there has been little direct evidence of systematic
differences in psychiatric liability between men who are old vs
young at conception. Nilsen et al.42 showed that in a Norwegian
sample, men who fathered their first child at an advanced age
were characterized by more health problems and risky health
behaviors. Although deterioration in health is expected to
correlate with advancing age, whether these effects also influence
offspring mental health outcomes remains unknown. Other
studies have found no association between behavioral traits
(rigidity, aloofness, anxiousness and hypersensitivity) and age at
paternity, in either men or their female partners.43,44
Considering solely the maternal effects, a study in a Finnish
non-affective psychosis cohort found that females with schizo-
phrenia were more likely to have a child with an older man, but
this association was not replicated in a general birth cohort.45
Meta-analysis
of
multiple
genome-wide
association
studies,
however, suggested that higher age at maternity is associated
with elevated genetic risk for schizophrenia.46 In the context of a
very high correlation between parental ages (0.74; ref. 24), this
suggests that inherited effects associated with paternal age are
still likely conflated with those that arise due to maternal genetic
predisposition. Future studies attempting to parse out these
effects are therefore warranted (as discussed below, the same
applies to maternal and paternal de novo contributions).
Other groups have attempted to reconcile the de novo vs
inherited origins of the APA effects by exploring whether these
effects are more strongly associated with familial or sporadic
forms of the disorder. The assumption underlying such designs is
that if the inherited predisposition hypothesis was true, APA
should be a risk factor for familial, but not sporadic disorders; on
the other hand, the opposite would be observed if the APA effects
arise mainly due to age-related accumulation of de novo factors.
Studies relying on such design have yielded mixed evidence,
showing that APA was associated with both schizophrenia only in
sporadic cases47 and lack of such a pattern.48 Furthermore,
Malaspina et al.49 reported that paternal age was higher in
sporadic than familial cases, but Pulver et al.50 observed no such
differences. Although studies of this kind have a great potential in
shedding a light on the origins of the APA effects, they are still
limited by the quality of phenotyping in relatives of the cases, and
consequent confidence in classifying them as sporadic or familial.
It also needs to be emphasized that conclusive evidence for
higher paternal age in sporadic cases would not imply that APA
APA in neurodevelopmental disorders
M Janecka et al
2
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 effects are mediated solely by de novo mutations and are hence
irrelevant for familial forms of the disorder. Likewise, the
recognition of a significant proportion of sporadic cases in itself
does not undermine the potential role of a polygenic component
in the disorder etiology;51 therefore, dominant role of de novo
effects is not an automatic corollary of lack of family history of the
disorder. As illustrated in Figure 1, genetic liability likely interacts
with age at conception, producing different patterns of familial/
sporadic forms of the disorder in the population. Nevertheless, the
degree to which these groups may be heterogeneous in terms of
the genetic architecture underpinning their disorder remains to be
investigated and clearly a dominant role for de novo effects is not
synonymous of a lack of family history for the disorder.
A number of other family designs have been used to further the
debate on inherited vs de novo effects of APA. Considering the
effects of delaying fatherhood (age at first child) and advancing
paternal age per se, several groups have found that only the
former is associated with an increase in the risk of schizophrenia in
offspring.52–54 In contrast, Hultman et al.55 showed that within
families with siblings discordant for autism, the affected child is
usually born later in the father’s life, suggesting that age-
dependent factors, rather than men’s stable traits, explain the
epidemiological
association.
As
acknowledged
before,
such
discrepancies in findings may result from cohort heterogeneity
(Figure 1), or reflect a true difference in how APA mediates autism
and schizophrenia in offspring.
Finally, some APA studies attempted to explore the contribution
of de novo and inherited factors by using animal models. This was
motivated by a possibility of strict experimental control over the
timing of mating—thus ruling out paternal traits influencing the
age at reproduction—afforded by such approach. Furthermore,
control over the environmental variables (husbandry procedures,
maternal age) and availability of inbred strains—which permit
ruling out background genetic effects—can leave paternal age at
conception as the only independent variable in the experiment.
To our knowledge, all (published) APA animal studies have
reported that advanced paternal age at conception is associated
with changes in the behavioral domains relevant to autism and
schizophrenia (social interaction and exploration,56–59 motor
coordination60
and
pre-pulse
inhibition61).
Transgenerational
persistence of these effects via the paternal line has also been
shown by Sampino et al.,59 however, the design of their study did
not permit assessing the effects acting through the maternal line
(standardized age of the female breeders). Given the degree of
experimental control over the factors other than the age-related
genetic mutations in the paternal germline, these animal studies
suggest that de novo effects likely have a role in mediating the
APA effects. Nevertheless, there should be some caution in the
interpretation of these patterns, given the limitations inherent in
the use of these model organisms (see ‘Limitations of studies to
date’ section below). In short, eliminating the effects of familial
factors—which likely have a role in humans62—could distort the
relative importance of de novo factors. Second, the difference
between rodent and human lifespan affects the rate at which
these organisms age, limiting the translational potential of the
findings.
In summary, disentangling the contribution of de novo and
inherited factors to the APA effects is still challenging, and the
evidence for their relative importance remains equivocal. We
postulate that these effects likely interact. To fully resolve this
issue, future studies will have to overcome the difficulties in
reliable distinction between familial and sporadic cases, as well as
establish, and account for, the contribution of maternal effects.
Furthermore, to quantify the contribution of the de novo
mutations to disorder etiology, their frequency and consequences
in nonclinical samples will have to be better explored.63,64 This will
require an extensive cross-talk between epidemiological and
molecular research. In the following sections, we focus on the
literature exploring the role of the de novo effects, citing relevant
evidence for age-related changes in paternal spermatogonial
DNA, and corresponding effects in the offspring, in both
humans and animal models.56,57,59,60,61,65–70 Further discussion
regarding the inherited effects can be found in several recent
publications.52–54
MOLECULAR FINDINGS
De novo genetic mutations
The average number of de novo point mutations in a human
newborn has been estimated at approximately 60–80.71,72 Several
studies suggested enrichment of these mutations in individuals
with autism and schizophrenia,66,68,73,74 although with a caveat of
relying on samples with high proportion of cases from simplex
families, naturally characterized by higher de novo burden. Owing
to the primarily paternal origin of these de novo mutations and
their accumulation with advancing paternal age,66,67,69,72,73,75 they
are suggested as the main mechanism underpinning the APA
effects. Although the contribution of sporadic mutations to autism
and schizophrenia is likely modest overall,76–79 evidence suggests
their relevance in a subset of cases.66–68
The baseline mutation rate in humans is around 1.1 × 10-8 per
nucleotide per generation80–83 (estimates from exome rather than
whole-genome studies tend to be higher84). This entails the total
number of de novo changes doubling every 16.5 years,71,85,86
highlighting the possible consequences of delaying fatherhood
from the age of around 25 to 40. Although the rate of
accumulation of these mutations has been questioned in the
literature87 (and is likely variable between men72,84), the overall
age-related increase of mutagenic load in the gametes is now
widely accepted, and attributed to the constantly dividing nature
of the male germline. Owing to a risk of a DNA copy error
associated with each of these replicative events, point mutations
accumulate over time.84,85
This stands in contrast to the dynamics of the female germline,
where each oocyte is limited to 23 divisions, all of which occur
before birth.88 The contribution of age-related accumulation of de
novo mutations in female germline is only beginning to be
acknowledged,68,75,89 with a recent study of 816 trios by
Goldmann et al.75 suggesting increase of about 0.24 maternally
transmitted de novo mutations per year (compared with 0.91
paternally transmitted; see for example, Kong et al.,71 who
estimated the paternal increase to be 1.5–2 per year, without
Figure 1.
Different disorder etiologies among sporadic and familial
cases. (a–d) Genetic liability or delayed reproduction by themselves
increase the risk for, respectively, familial and sporadic forms of
disorder (a and d, respectively). Given putative correlation between
paternal genetic liability for psychiatric disorders and delayed
reproduction, a substantial proportion of cases will arise due to a
mixture of inherited and de novo factors (c).
APA in neurodevelopmental disorders
M Janecka et al
3
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 accounting for maternal effects and using ‘only’ 78 family
trios).75,90 The molecular events underlying the maternal and
paternal mutations associated with ageing are likely distinct,75
with a greater proportion of maternal mutations arising due to a
failure of DNA double-strand break repair, rather than replication
errors. The consensus still remains that the age-related increase in
de novo mutations is larger in male than in female germline by
over threefold,75 and that de novo point mutations in offspring are
mainly of paternal origin.66,67,69,72,73 Nevertheless, given the
parental age correlation discussed above, contribution of age-
related mutational events in female germline might have not been
sufficiently appreciated in the molecular APA research to date.
Regardless of parent-of-origin effects, the age-related accumu-
lation
of
sporadic
mutations
could
help
account
for
the
transgenerational persistence of the APA effects recorded in
epidemiological research. In line with the rules of Mendelian
inheritance, the mutagenic load in paternal spermatogonia would
progressively accumulate in the following generations, increasing
the risk of autism and schizophrenia in both children and
grandchildren of men who were old at conception.
Nevertheless, it has been suggested that given the high
polygenicity of both autism and schizophrenia,76,78,79,91 additive
effects of replication errors in the germline alone cannot explain
the epidemiological patterns. Although these complex neurode-
velopmental disorders remain a primary interest of the current
review, important insights to address this issue were gained from
the studies focusing on the APA-linked Mendelian disorders (for
example, achondroplasia, Apert and Costello syndromes) and their
causal mutations in the FGFR2, FGFR3, PTPN11, HRAS and RET
genes. The mutation frequency at these loci in the male germline
is much higher than that expected from the calculations above
(10−4–10 − 6 vs expected 10 − 9–10 − 7 per nucleotide),92,93 suggest-
ing either hypermutability of certain loci, or additional mechan-
isms acting to propagate the cells carrying the mutation (selection
model).
Although both the hotspot and selection models would result in
a relative enrichment of cells with highly localized mutations,
allelic distribution in the mutant cells,94 as well as replicated
observation that these mutant cells tend to cluster in certain
regions of the testes92,95,96 support the latter model (see also the
review by Arnheim and Calabrese93). Statistical predictions, as well
as lower probability of such clusters in young sperm donors95
further indicate it is unlikely that these clusters arose due to a
mutation early in testis development, rather than selective
expansion of cells with advantageous mutations. In the section
below, we explain the principles of the selection model, and
discuss its relevance to etiology of both Mendelian and complex
disorders.
Selection (‘selfish spermatogonial selection’)
The ‘selfish spermatogonial selection’ hypothesis postulates that
stem cells with mutations at certain loci can gain selective
advantage over non-mutated spermatogonial stem cells and
expand clonally, leading to their relative enrichment in the
germline.82,86,97 Although the mutational events giving rise to
these effects are themselves rare, activating mutations in the genes
involved in receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)/RAS/mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPK) pathway enhance the growth processes,
leading to abnormal proliferation of spermatogonial stem cells that
carry these mutations, via a process akin to oncogenesis (Maher
et al.96 shows these occurrences in human testis).
Nevertheless, the deleterious disease phenotypes associated
with these mutations render these mutations unlikely to be
propagated through multiple generations, posing challenges
in extrapolating the ‘selfish spermatogonial selection’ hypo-
thesis
to
complex,
polygenic
disorders
like
autism
and
schizophrenia.79,91,98,99 To account for this, Goriely et al.100
suggested that other mutations—conferring less pronounced
advantage in the testes—would be associated with milder variants
and/or less penetrant disease phenotypes, thus reducing selection
against them in subsequent generations and providing a source of
heritable material. Similarly, other ‘passenger’ (‘hitchhiker’) muta-
tions, could be co-inherited along with the selfish mutations
driving the increased proliferation of spermatogonial cells, leading
to
their
concurrent
enrichment
in
paternal
germline.
This
hypothesis is attractive because the genes that have so far been
shown to be driving the selfish behavior of spermatogonial stem
cells all belong to the RTK/RAS/MAPK pathway, which is one of the
molecular modules known to be enriched in deleterious variants
in neurodevelopmental disorders.101,102 However, it remains to
see whether experimental evidence support the idea that other
mutations, aside from those that have been already characterized
in the RTK/RAS/MAPK pathways display selfish properties. The
advent of new techniques96 for visualizing the clonal expansions
associated with such ‘selfish’ de novo mutations promises to allow
a better characterization of this process.
We suggest that further examination and refinement of the
selfish selection hypothesis is likely to have a prominent role in
elucidating the molecular de novo origins of APA effects. The
proposed mechanism is consistent with the original hypothesis of
increased burden of de novo mutations in male gametes, while
also accounting for the problems with this basic proposal, like
insufficiency of accumulation of these mutations to explain
polygenic disorders like autism and schizophrenia. Furthermore,
the disrupted regulation of specific growth factor pathways fits
with the reported association between APA and some cancers in
offspring,97,103,104 with close resemblance between clonal expan-
sion of mutated germ cells and cell division in oncogenic tissues.
Finally, the spermatogonial selection hypothesis would also
account for the transgenerational persistence of the APA effects,
reported in the epidemiological studies.22,59,105 Although more
experimental evidence is still needed, there exists a plausible
route through which the principles of the selection hypothesis
could be applied to explain effects of APA on complex disorders
like autism and schizophrenia.
De novo epigenetic changes
Other mechanisms proposed to explain the association between
APA and neuropsychiatric disorders in offspring include epige-
netic effects—modifiable alterations to the DNA that occur
independent of its sequence. These mechanisms may be of
phenotypic importance given their potential influence on gene
expression.106 Specific epigenetic alterations have been shown to
be associated with psychiatric disorders, including autism and
schizophrenia.107–110 Most recent evidence reveals the role of the
epigenetic marks in regulating offspring gene expression,111
suggesting that the paternally acquired factors affecting the
offspring
go
beyond
those
conferred
by
the
genome
sequence alone.
DNA methylation
In the context of health and disease, DNA methylation is the most
extensively studied epigenetic modification, having a key role in
gene regulation.106 Although traditionally regarded as a mechan-
ism of transcriptional repression, DNA methylation can be
associated
with
both
increases
and
decreases
in
gene
expression,112 and has recently been implicated in other genomic
functions, including alternative splicing and promoter usage.113
DNA methylation marks are mitotically stable,114,115 therefore
modifications acquired over time in the gametes can be reliably
maintained in the daughter cells, and thus accumulate over
paternal lifespan in a manner similar to the process described
above for de novo genetic mutations.61,116,117 However, persis-
tence of these marks through meiotic divisions is likely very
APA in neurodevelopmental disorders
M Janecka et al
4
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 limited due to the two rounds of robust epigenetic reprogram-
ming at fertilization.118 The first wave of global erasure of DNA
methylation marks occurs before birth in embryonic primordial
germ cells, and is followed by establishment of the new
methylation patterns, differentially in male and female embryos.
The second wave of erasure of these marks happens at
fertilization, however, imprinted regions—discussed in detail
below—escape
this
round
of
reprogramming,
that
is,
the
epigenetic marks in the imprinted regions present in the parental
germline persist in the developing embryo.
Ageing process is associated with changes in the epigenetic
landscape, and the levels of DNA methylation in multiple tissues
can be used to reliably predict chronological age in humans.119
The involvement of such age-related epigenetic modifications in
mediating APA effects was proposed by Malaspina in 2001,5 and
since then the topic has received the attention from multiple
research groups working on both animal61,120,121 and human
samples.122–124 The overarching hypothesis behind this line of
research is that age-related DNA methylation modifications in the
paternal germline are retained at the zygotic stage, where they
disrupt the normal developmental processes, resulting in an
increased risk of disorders like autism and schizophrenia. Another
possibility is that the changes in the DNA methylome affect
mutability of certain loci, therefore, they do not need to persist
transgenerationally to have an effect on offspring. Although such
correlation between DNA methylation status and mutation rate is
well established,72 this idea has received little attention in the
context of APA research, and so the discussion below focuses on
the former possibility, that is, effects of DNA methylation that do
not entail genetic mutations.
Although several studies have identified seemingly APA-related
modifications of the DNA methylome,61,120,124 these findings are
yet to be replicated. Studies still lack consensus about the focal
points of these changes (offspring tissue and/or DNA region-
specificity) and functional consequences on development and
behavior. The only study that analyzed age-related changes in the
germline methylome in humans reported hypermethylation in the
sperm of older males.116 However, these findings need to be taken
with caution, given conflicting results from the rodent studies.
Experiments
in
mice
showed
both
hypo-61
and
hypermethylation116,117 of spermatogonial DNA at the global
level, with similar changes in DNA methylation noted in brain
tissue of offspring (ref. 61 showed hypo-, ref. 120 hypermethyla-
tion). Interrogation of candidate regions in rodent offspring
revealed similarly inconsistent patterns.120,124 These apparent
discrepancies could be explained by (i) differences in methodol-
ogies used to quantify methylation in these studies; (ii) high
degree of inter- and/or intra-individual variability in germline DNA
methylation patterns;125 (iii) differences in the offspring type of
tissue used for these analyses and (iv) uncertainty whether the
changes occurred at paternally or maternally inherited alleles. It is,
however, unlikely that these discrepancies arose as a result of (v)
species-specific differences (only ref. 116 used human samples,
with refs 61,117,120 all analyzing rodent samples).
Given that
ageing is associated
with unique epigenetic
signatures,119 it is also possible that the findings described above
reflect events that are ultimately unrelated to disease processes.
Moreover, the age-related disruption of normal DNA methylation
patterns in the gametes still cannot account for the father-to-
offspring transmission of the APA effects. Paternal methylation
marks are erased through active mechanisms126 before the
blastocyst stage, with only the ones in the imprinted regions
(reviewed below) remaining in the embryo’s somatic cells.
Therefore, the time window when the paternally acquired non-
imprinted DNA methylation marks could affect offspring devel-
opment is very limited. Although the reported differences
between DNA methylome of offspring born to young and old
fathers
certainly
warrant
further
consideration,
we
must
emphasize that mechanistic understanding of putative father-to-
offspring persistence of such effects is still lacking.
Genomic imprinting
The DNA methylation hypothesis could be re-evaluated when
focusing solely on the imprinted regions that escape the second
round of epigenetic programming.127 Imprinting is a complex
phenomenon whereby differential DNA methylation in paternal
gametes is associated with monoallelic gene expression in
offspring128 (nota bene the direction of this effect remains
equivocal129). The imprints are established in the parental germline,
inherited through the mitotic divisions post fertilization, erased in
the fetal germline, and re-established later in an offspring sex-
specific manner. The imprinting control regions often regulate
monoallelic expression of a cluster of genes. Genes under such
monoallelic regulation are found on both sex and autosomal
chromosomes, and are characterized by age- and tissue-specific
expression patterns.130 They have been shown to have a critical role
in early development, including regulating placental formation and
functioning,131,132 and early brain development.133
Given that the parental imprints found in the germline can
persist in the somatic cells of the offspring, and the developmen-
tally important functions of imprinted genes, their involvement in
mediating the APA effects is plausible. This would entail that age-
related deficits in the maintenance of imprinted alleles in the
paternal germline could lead to bi-allelic expression of the
maternally expressed genes, resulting in abnormal development
of offspring. A number of neurodevelopmental disorders have
been previously attributed to errors in imprinting, including
Prader–Willi syndrome,134 Angelman syndrome135 and Beckwith–
Wiedemann syndrome.136
Although the possibility that APA effects may be mediated
through errors in imprinting mechanisms has been under
consideration for over a decade,5,123 the experimental evidence
for this hypothesis remains limited. One study in rodents showed
that offspring of older fathers displayed differences in brain-
expressed imprinted loci, with concurrent behavioral changes;120
however, it was not possible to unequivocally establish whether
the reported effects were of paternal or maternal origin. To the
best of our knowledge, there is still no research in humans in
support of the involvement of imprinting errors in the APA effects.
Furthermore, the classical imprinting theory alone still cannot
explain the transgenerational inheritance of the APA effect
(grandpaternal age effects) reported in the epidemiological
studies in humans22,34 and research in rodents.59 The imprints
escape the first wave of epigenetic reprogramming, and are
erased
and
re-established
in
the
offspring
germline,
thus
precluding any grandfather-to-offspring passage. This does not
rule out the contribution of imprinting errors to the APA effects,
however, necessitates that other mechanisms that can be
propagated through generations are also involved—a notion
consistent with the hypothesis of multifactorial nature of paternal
age effects. Although it has been suggested that transgenerational
epigenetic inheritance of the imprints could still occur in the
presence of a defect in the first wave of reprogramming,137 and
this
claim
has
been
substantiated
by
several
studies
in
rodents118,138 and zebrafish,139 evidence in support of this notion
is still lacking in humans. Generalizing these findings to the
outbred populations—and to humans—still needs to be done
with caution.
Limitations of the studies to date
Elucidating the age-related changes in the germline that are
causally involved in the APA effect on the risk of autism and
schizophrenia will likely prove challenging—an inevitable corol-
lary of complexity of the disorders in question. At present, we are
unable to distinguish functionally important effects of ageing on
APA in neurodevelopmental disorders
M Janecka et al
5
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 the male germline from those that are just correlative, as well as
the effects of age per se vs cumulative effects of other
environmental exposures.
Furthermore, the discovery of such causal mechanisms is
complicated by within-individual genetic heterogeneity of sper-
matogonial cells—resulting from chromosome recombination and
different mutagenic signatures across the germline. Although
studies of testicular tissue96 and sequencing of family trios68,71,75
can provide new insights into age-related dynamics of de novo
mutations, there still remains a challenge of analyzing mutations
in the particular cell that was used during fertilization of the
affected individual. As suggested by Ségurel et al.,84 de novo
mutations arising in parental germline or in the developing (post-
zygotic) offspring cells cannot be reliably distinguished without
looking at the subsequent (third) generation.
Moreover, studies to date tended to focus on a one chosen
mechanism, exploring its contribution to the APA effects in
isolation from other genomic and environmental events. Although
such approaches are understandable from the feasibility perspec-
tive, the APA effects are likely multifactorial. As discussed above,
autism and schizophrenia in the offspring of older fathers most
likely arise due to a combination of inherited and de novo factors,
with
the
latter
further
subdivided
into
genetic
mutations,
epigenetic alterations and other events related to lifetime
exposures in parents (Figure 2). Although accumulation of de
novo mutations has long been considered as the primary mediator
of the APA effects, their role in autism and schizophrenia is
relatively limited—recent exome sequencing study suggests that
even among sporadic cases, only about 10% of diagnoses could
be shown to arise partly due to de novo mutations.66
Additional evidence for these multifactorial origins of the APA
effects comes from a recent population genetics study.62 The
authors considered five possible genetic models underlying the
APA effects, four of which focused on the de novo, and one on
inherited factors. Among the de novo models, only the selfish
selection model could explain more than 20% of increased risk of
autism/schizophrenia in the offspring of older men, and only
when assuming large magnitude of the clonal expansion of the
mutated cells, with high proportion of the underlying mutations
causally involved in the disorders in offspring. In contrast, the
model assuming genetic correlation between age at paternity and
psychiatric outcomes could fully explain the epidemiological
patterns. Taking into account prior evidence for the role of the de
novo events, the authors proposed that 50% of the APA effects are
likely explained by inherited factors, 10–20% by de novo
mutations, and the remainder by nongenetic factors. Although a
degree of caution is warranted given that molecular validation of
these results is still pending, the study should emphasize the
multidimensional background of the APA effects.
Animal studies provide a strong support for the epidemiological
and molecular findings from humans, however, their limitations in
the context of APA research might not have been sufficiently
considered. Beyond the widely acknowledged constraint in
translation of behavioral phenotypes, differences in the mutation
rates due to shorter lifespan in rodents84 and non-overlapping
imprinted loci140 limit the construct validity of animal models of
APA. Also, given that the effects in mice have only been
investigated in models with a uniform genetic background
(inbred strains), rodent studies have had no scope to testing the
possibility that some men, because of their genetic make-up, will
be more vulnerable to the effects of age on their germline.
Evidence suggests more than twofold differences between men in
their age-related increase in de novo mutations in their germline,72
with possible explanations for this variation including efficiency of
the DNA repair system or germline methylation level.84 Even
available outbred strains of laboratory mouse originate from
random,
and
consequently
partly
inbred,
colonies
or
are
generated from a limited number of founders, which limits their
genetic heterogeneity.141 Therefore, for the time being, animal
models can provide only limited insights into the etiology of the
APA effects in a genetically heterogeneous population. Finally, the
role of environmental factors in the APA pathways is still
unknown, and cannot be modelled in rodents. Given possible
gene–environment correlation contributing to the APA effects,
results from rodent studies have to be interpreted with caution.
Last but not least, the issue of what constitutes ‘advanced
paternal age’ has not received enough attention, which is
particularly problematic in both human and animal studies
treating paternal age as a categorical, rather than continuous
variable. Owing to reduction in the sample size in the oldest
paternal age categories, such designs render the findings more
vulnerable to the effects of outliers, introducing considerable
noise to the APA literature. A related issue is lack of control over
the time of puberty—given higher rate of germ cells division (and
therefore new mutations) after vs before adolescence, and
variable age at the start of puberty,142 age at conception counted
since puberty, rather than birth, is more relevant for APA
research.84
CONCLUSIONS
This review focused on the mechanisms underlying the associa-
tion between APA and autism/schizophrenia in offspring. We
postulate that inherited and de novo factors present complemen-
tary influences contributing to the epidemiological observations.
Although these factors have been usually considered as compet-
ing hypotheses, the lack of unequivocal evidence to date suggests
that likely both of them have a role.
Although the de novo mutations shown to accumulate with age
in paternal sperm likely contribute to neurodevelopmental
disorders in offspring, given the highly polygenic nature of these
phenotypes, a substantial proportion of risk is still likely to arise
owing to variants inherited from parents (Figure 2). Other factors
that are also likely implicated include selection mechanisms,
epigenetic alterations and accumulation of other lifetime expo-
sures. Furthermore, maternal age effects will also have a role;
studies suggesting correlation between risk of schizophrenia and
age at conception46 and increase in de novo mutations in female
Figure 2.
Multifactorial origins of disorder risk in offspring, in
relation to paternal age at conception. The risk is underlain primarily
by familial factors, except for in the case of extremely old fathers.
The acquired factors likely involved DNMs ( ± selfish selection that is
anticipated to load the genome with functional variants in pathways
relevant to specific disease (RTK/RAS or other growth factors),
epigenetic modifications or other factors. DNM, de novo mutation;
RTK, receptor tyrosine kinase.
APA in neurodevelopmental disorders
M Janecka et al
6
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 germline75 suggest that maternal age effects likely contribute to
both inherited and de novo risk factors.
We suggest that in order to fully resolve the APA effects, future
research will need to use high sensitivity molecular techniques,
such as single-cell sequencing of individual germ cells, combined
with large human data sets with detailed epidemiological
background information. Continuous dialog between epidemio-
logical and molecular research will help refine the hypotheses
investigated, and provide further insights into why older men are
more likely to father a child with autism or schizophrenia, with
implications for reproductive policies and genetic counseling.
Considering solely the risk for neuropsychiatric disorders,
current
evidence
does
not
suggest
that
men
should
be
discouraged from having a child at an older age. Given the low
prevalence of these disorders at baseline, even a fivefold increase
in the odds ratio under an assumption of strong de novo effects,
would yield a low probability that the conceived child will have
autism or schizophrenia as a result of higher paternal age.
Nevertheless, more evidence is still needed to provide men and
their partners with informed, reliable and accurate advice
regarding the risks of delayed fatherhood.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Funding for this work was provided by the MRC PhD Studentship Award to MJ (MR/
J500380/1); MRC (MR/K022377/1) to MAB and CF; and the Simons Foundation Autism
Research Initiative (344763) to MAB. AG was funded by Wellcome Trust (102731).
REFERENCES
1 Moloney D, Slaney S, Oldridge M, Wall S, Sahlin P, Stenman G et al. Exclusive
paternal origin of new mutations in Apert syndrome. Nat Genet 1996; 13: 48–53.
2 Orioli I, Castilla E, Scarano G, Mastroiacovo P. Effect of paternal age in achon-
droplasia, thanatophoric dysplasia, and osteogenesis imperfecta. Am J Med
Genet 1995; 59: 209–217.
3 Wyrobek J, Eskenazi B, Young S, Arnheim N, Tiemann-Boege I, Jabs EW et al.
Advancing age has differential effects on DNA damage, chromatin integrity,
gene mutations, and aneuploidies in sperm. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103:
9601–9606.
4 Reichenberg A, Gross R, Weiser M, Bresnahan M, Silverman J, Harlap S et al.
Advancing paternal age and autism. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2006; 63: 1026–1032.
5 Malaspina D. Paternal factors and schizophrenia risk: de novo mutations and
imprinting. Schizophr Bull 2001; 27: 379–393.
6 Ben Itzchak E, Lahat E, Zachor DA. Advanced parental ages and low birth weight
in autism spectrum disorders--rates and effect on functioning. Res Dev Disabil
2011; 32: 1776–1781.
7 McIntosh GC, Olshan AF, Baird PA. Paternal age and the risk of birth defects in
offspring. Epidemiology 1995; 6: 282–288.
8 Saha S, Barnett AG, Foldi C, Burne TH, Eyles DW, Buka SL et al. Advanced paternal
age is associated with impaired neurocognitive outcomes during infancy and
childhood. PLoS Med 2009; 6: e40.
9 D’Onofrio BM, Rickert ME, Frans E, Kuja-Halkola R, Almqvist C, Sjölander A et al.
Paternal age at childbearing and offspring psychiatric and academic morbidity.
JAMA Psychiatry 2014; 71: 432–438.
10 Chen XK, Wen SW, Krewski D, Fleming N, Yang Q, Walker MC. Paternal age and
adverse birth outcomes: teenager or 40+, who is at risk? Hum Reprod 2008; 23:
1290–1296.
11 Sandin S, Schendel D, Magnusson P, Hultman C, Surén P, Susser E et al. Autism
risk associated with parental age and with increasing difference in age between
the parents. Mol Psychiatry 2016; 21: 693–700.
12 Lundström S, Haworth CM, Carlström E, Gillberg C, Mill J, Råstam M et al. Tra-
jectories leading to autism spectrum disorders are affected by paternal age:
findings from two nationally representative twin studies. J Child Psychol Psy-
chiatry 2010; 51: 850–856.
13 Brown AS, Schaefer C, Wyatt RJ, Begg MD, Goetz R, Bresnahan M et al. Paternal
age and risk of schizophrenia in adult offspring. Am J Psychiatry 2002; 159:
1528–1533.
14 Dallman C, Allebeck P. Paternal age and schizophrenia : further support for an
association. Am J Psychiatry 2002; 420: 1591–1592.
15 Malaspina D, Keller A, Antonius D, Perrin M, Opler M, Ahn H et al. Advanced
paternal age contributes to a specific subtype of schizophrenia. Schizophr Res
2012; 136: S3.
16 Lee H, Malaspina D, Ahn H, Perrin M, Opler MG, Kleinhaus K et al. Paternal age
related schizophrenia (PARS): latent subgroups detected by k -means clustering
analysis. Schizophr Res 2011; 128: 143–149.
17 Byrne M, Agerbo E, Ewald H, Eaton W, Mortensen PB. Parental age and risk of
schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2003; 60: 673–678.
18 Miller B, Messias E, Miettunen J, Alaräisänen A, Järvelin M-R, Koponen H et al.
Meta-analysis of paternal age and schizophrenia risk in male versus female
offspring. Schizophr Bull 2011; 37: 1039–1047.
19 Naserbakht M, Ahmadkhaniha H-R, Mokri B, Smith CL. Advanced paternal
age is a risk factor for schizophrenia in Iranians. Ann Gen Psychiatry 2011;
10: 15.
20 Lampi KM, Hinkka-Yli-Salomäki S, Lehti V, Helenius H, Gissler M, Brown AS et al.
Parental age and risk of autism spectrum disorders in a Finnish national
birth cohort. J Autism Dev Disord 2013; 43: 2526–2535.
21 Tsuchiya KJ, Takagai S, Kawai M, Matsumoto H, Nakamura K, Minabe Y et al.
Advanced paternal age associated with an elevated risk for schizophrenia in
offspring in a Japanese population. Schizophr Res 2005; 76: 337–342.
22 Frans EM, McGrath JJ, Sandin S, Lichtenstein P, Reichenberg A, Långström N et al.
Advanced paternal and grandpaternal age and schizophrenia: a three-
generation perspective. Schizophr Res 2011; 133: 120–124.
23 Cantor RM, Yoon JL, Furr J, Lajonchere CM. Paternal age and autism are asso-
ciated in a family-based sample. Mol Psychiatry 2007; 12: 419–421.
24 Croen L, Najjar DV, Fireman B, Grether JK. Maternal and paternal age
and risk of autism spectrum disorders. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2007; 161:
334–340.
25 Durkin MS, Maenner MJ, Newschaffer CJ, Lee L-C, Cunniff CM, Daniels JL et al.
Advanced parental age and the risk of autism spectrum disorder. Am J Epidemiol
2008; 168: 1268–1276.
26 Hultman CM. Advanced paternal and grandpaternal age as a risk factor for
psychiatric disorders. Schizophr Res 2012; 136: S3.
27 Idring S, Magnusson C, Lundberg M, Ek M, Rai D, Svensson A et al. Parental age
and the risk of autism spectrum disorders: findings from a Swedish population-
based cohort. Int J Epidemiol 2014; 43: 107–115.
28 Lee BK, McGrath JJ. Advancing parental age and autism : multifactorial path-
ways. Trends Mol Med 2015; 21: 118–125.
29 Parner ET, Baron-Cohen S, Lauritsen MB, Jørgensen M, Schieve LA, Yeargin-
Allsopp M et al. Parental age and autism spectrum disorders. Ann Epidemiol
2012; 22: 143–150.
30 Puleo C, Reichenberg A, Smith C, Kryzak L, Silverman JM. Do autism-related
personality traits explain higher paternal age in autism? Mol Psychiatry 2008; 13:
243–244.
31 Anello A, Reichenberg A, Luo X, Schmeidler J, Hollander E, Smith CJ et al. Brief
report: parental age and the sex ratio in autism. J Autism Dev Disord 2009; 39:
1487–1492.
32 Golding J, ALSPAC Study Team. The Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and
Children (ALSPAC) - study design and collaborative opportunities. Eur J Endo-
crinol 2004; 151: U119–U123.
33 Golding J, Steer C, Pembrey M. Parental and grandparental ages in the autistic
spectrum disorders: a birth cohort study. PLoS One 2010; 5: e9939.
34 Frans EM, Sandin S, Reichenberg A, Långström N, Lichtenstein P, McGrath JJ et al.
Autism risk across generations: a population-based study of advancing grand-
paternal and paternal age. JAMA Psychiatry 2013; 70: 516–521.
35 Lugnegård T, Unenge Hallerbäck M, Hjärthag F, Gillberg C. Social cognition
impairments in Asperger syndrome and schizophrenia. Schizophr Res 2013; 143:
277–284.
36 Waterhouse L, Fein D. Developmental trends in cognitive skills for children
diagnosed as autistic and schizophrenic. Child Dev 1984; 55: 236–248.
37 Hommer RE, Swedo SE. Schizophrenia and autism-related disorders. Schizophr
Bull 2015; 41: 313–314.
38 Sullivan PF, Magnusson C, Reichenberg A, Boman M, Dalman C, Davidson M et al.
Family history of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder as risk factors for autism.
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2012; 2: 1–5.
39 Petty LK, Ornitz EM, Michelman JD, Zimmerman EG. Autistic children who
become schizophrenic. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1984; 41: 129–135.
40 Selten J-P, Lundberg M, Rai D, Magnusson C. Risks for nonaffective psychotic
disorder and bipolar disorder in young people with autism spectrum disorder: a
population-based study. JAMA Psychiatry 2015; 72: 483–489.
41 Lee SH, Ripke S, Neale BM, Faraone SV, Purcell SM, Perlis RH et al. Genetic
relationship between five psychiatric disorders estimated from genome-
wide SNPs. Nat Genet 2013; 45: 984–994.
APA in neurodevelopmental disorders
M Janecka et al
7
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 42 Nilsen ABV, Waldenström U, Rasmussen S, Hjelmstedt A, Schytt E. Characteristics
of first-time fathers of advanced age: a Norwegian population-based study. BMC
Pregnancy Childbirth 2013; 13: 29.
43 Piven J, Palmer P, Jacobi D, Childress D, Arndt S. Broader autism phenotype:
evidence from a family history study of multiple-incidence autism families. Am J
Psychiatry 1997; 154: 185–190.
44 Puleo CM, Reichenberg A, Smith CJ, Kryzak L, Silverman JM. Do autism-related
personality traits explain higher paternal age in autism? Mol Psychiatry 2008; 13:
243–244.
45 Miller B, Suvisaari J, Miettunen J, Järvelin M-R, Haukka J, Tanskanen A et al.
Advanced paternal age and parental history of schizophrenia. Schizophr Res
2011; 133: 125–132.
46 Mehta D, Tropf FC, Gratten J, Bakshi A, Zhu Z, Bacanu S-A et al. Evidence for
genetic overlap between schizophrenia and age at first birth in women. JAMA
Psychiatry 2016; 73: 497–505.
47 Sipos A, Rasmussen F, Harrison G, Tynelius P, Lewis G, Leon DA et al. Paternal age
and schizophrenia: a population based cohort study. BMJ 2004; 329: 1070.
48 Zammit S, Allebeck P, Dalman C, Lundberg I, Hemmingson T, Owen MJ et al.
Paternal age and risk for schizophrenia. Br J Psychiatry 2003; 183: 405–408.
49 Malaspina D, Brown A, Goetz D, Alia-Klein N, Harkavy-Friedman J, Harlap S et al.
Schizophrenia risk and paternal age: a potential role for de novo mutations in
schizophrenia vulnerability genes. CNS Spectr 2002; 7: 26–29.
50 Pulver AE, McGrath J, Liang K-Y, Lasseter VK, Nestadt G, Wolyniec PS. An indirect
test of the new mutation hypothesis associating advanced paternal age with the
etiology of schizophrenia. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 2004; 124B:
6–9.
51 Yang J, Visscher PM, Wray NR. Sporadic cases are the norm for complex disease.
Eur J Hum Genet 2009; 18: 1039–1043.
52 Ek M, Wicks S, Svensson AC, Idring S, Dalman C. Advancing paternal age and
schizophrenia: the impact of delayed fatherhood. Schizophr Bull 2014; 41:
708–714.
53 Petersen L, Mortensen PB, Pedersen CB. Paternal age at birth of first child and
risk of schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry 2011; 168: 82–88.
54 Pedersen C, McGrath J, Mortensen P, Petersen L. The importance of father’s age
to schizophrenia risk. Mol Psychiatry 2014; 19: 530–535.
55 Hultman CM, Sandin S, Levine SZ, Lichtenstein P, Reichenberg A. Advancing
paternal age and risk of autism: new evidence from a population-based study
and a meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. Mol Psychiatry 2011; 16:
1203–1212.
56 Smith RG, Kember RL, Mill J, Fernandes C, Schalkwyk LC, Buxbaum JD et al.
Advancing paternal age is associated with deficits in social and exploratory
behaviors in the offspring: a mouse model. PLoS One 2009; 4: e8456.
57 Janecka M, Manduca A, Servadio M, Trezza V, Smith R, Mill J et al. Effects of
advanced paternal age on trajectories of social behavior in offspring. Genes Brain
Behavior 2015; 14: 443–453.
58 Foldi CJ, Eyles DW, McGrath JJ, Burne THJ. Advanced paternal age is associated
with alterations in discrete behavioural domains and cortical neuroanatomy of
C57BL/6 J mice. Eur J Neurosci 2010; 31: 556–564.
59 Sampino S, Juszczak GR, Zacchini F, Swiergiel AH, Modlinski J, Loi P et al. Grand-
paternal age and the development of autism-like symptoms in mice progeny.
Transl Psychiatry 2014; 4: e386.
60 García-Palomares S, Pertusa JF, Miñarro J, García-Pérez M, Hermenegildo C,
Rausell F et al. Long-term effects of delayed fatherhood in mice on postnatal
development and behavioral traits of offspring. Biol Reprod 2009; 80: 337–342.
61 Milekic MH, Xin Y, O’Donnell A, Kumar KK, Bradley-Moore M, Malaspina D et al.
Age-related sperm DNA methylation changes are transmitted to offspring and
associated with abnormal behavior and dysregulated gene expression. Mol
Psychiatry 2015; 20: 995–1001.
62 Gratten J, Wray NR, Peyrot WJ, McGrath JJ, Visscher PM, Goddard ME. Risk of
psychiatric illness from advanced paternal age is not predominantly from de
novo mutations. Nat Genet 2016; 48: 718–724.
63 Mannik K, Reedik M, Aurelien M, Cole B, Guyatt A, Shihab H et al. Copy number
variations and cognitive phenotypes in unselected populations. JAMA 2015; 313:
2044–2054.
64 Mefford H. Copy number variants in the population: unselected does not mean
unaffected. Epilepsy Curr 2016; 16: 91–93.
65 Dong S, Walker MF, Carriero NJ, DiCola M, Willsey AJ, Ye AY et al. De Novo
insertions and deletions of predominantly paternal origin are associated with
autism spectrum disorder. Cell Rep 2014; 9: 16–23.
66 Iossifov I, O’Roak BJ, Sanders SJ, Ronemus M, Krumm N, Levy D et al. The
contribution of de novo coding mutations to autism spectrum disorder. Nature
2014; 515: 216–221.
67 O’Roak BJ, Deriziotis P, Lee C, Vives L, Schwartz JJ, Girirajan S et al. Exome
sequencing in sporadic autism spectrum disorders identifies severe de novo
mutations. Nat Genet 2011; 43: 585–589.
68 Neale BM, Kou Y, Liu L, Ma’ayan A, Samocha KE, Sabo A et al. Patterns and rates
of exonic de novo mutations in autism spectrum disorders. Nature 2012; 485:
242–245.
69 Hehir-Kwa JY, Rodriguez-Santiago B, Vissers LE, de Leeuw N, Pfundt R,
Buitelaar
JK
et
al.
De
novo
copy
number
variants
associated
with
intellectual disability have a paternal origin and age bias. J Med Genet 2011; 48:
776–778.
70 Foldi CJ, Eyles DW, Flatscher-Bader T, McGrath JJ, Burne THJ. New perspectives
on rodent models of advanced paternal age: relevance to autism. Front Behav
Neurosci 2011; 5: 32.
71 Kong A, Frigge ML, Masson G, Besenbacher S, Sulem P, Magnusson G et al. Rate
of de novo mutations and the importance of father’s age to disease risk. Nature
2012; 488: 471–475.
72 Rahbari R, Wuster A, Lindsay SJ, Hardwick RJ, Alexandrov LB, Al Turki S et al.
Timing, rates and spectra of human germline mutation. Nat Genet 2016; 48:
126–133.
73 Xu B, Roos JL, Levy S, van Rensburg EJ, Gogos JA, Karayiorgou M. Strong asso-
ciation of de novo copy number mutations with sporadic schizophrenia. Nat
Genet 2008; 40: 880–885.
74 Sanders SJ, Ercan-Sencicek AG, Hus V, Luo R, Murtha MT, Moreno-De-Luca D
et al. Multiple recurrent de novo CNVs, including duplications of the 7q11.23
Williams syndrome region, are strongly associated with autism. Neuron 2011; 70:
863–885.
75 Goldmann JM, Wong WSW, Pinelli M, Farrah T, Bodian D, Stittrich AB et al.
Parent-of-origin-specific signatures of de novo mutations. Nat Genet 2016; 48:
935–939.
76 International Schizophrenia Consortium, Purcell SM, Wray NR, Stone JL, Visscher
PM, O'Donovan MC et al. Common polygenic variation contributes to risk of
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Nature 2009; 460: 748–752.
77 Stefansson H, Ophoff RA, Steinberg S, Andreassen OA, Cichon S, Rujescu D et al.
Common variants conferring risk of schizophrenia. Nature 2009; 460: 744–747.
78 Klei L, Sanders SJ, Murtha MT, Hus V, Lowe JK, Willsey AJ et al. Common genetic
variants, acting additively, are a major source of risk for autism. Mol Autism 2012;
3: 9.
79 Gaugler T, Klei L, Sanders SJ, Bodea CA, Goldberg AP, Lee AB et al. Most
genetic risk for autism resides with common variation. Nat Genet 2014; 46:
881–885.
80 Durbin RM, Altshuler DL, Durbin RM, Abecasis GR, Bentley DR, Chakravarti A et al.
A map of human genome variation from population-scale sequencing. Nature
2010; 467: 1061–1073.
81 Kondrashov AS. Direct estimates of human per nucleotide mutation rates at 20
loci causing mendelian diseases. Hum Mutat 2003; 21: 12–27.
82 Goriely A, Wilkie AOM. Paternal age effect mutations and selfish spermatogonial
selection: causes and consequences for human disease. Am J Hum Genet 2012;
90: 175–200.
83 Michaelson JJ, Shi Y, Gujral M, Zheng H, Malhotra D, Jin X et al. Whole-genome
sequencing in autism identifies hot spots for de novo germline mutation. Cell
2012; 151: 1431–1442.
84 Segurel L, Wyman MJ, Przeworski M. Determinants of mutation rate variation in
the human germline. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2014; 15: 47–70.
85 Crow JF. The origins, patterns and implications of human spontaneous mutation.
Nat Rev Genet 2000; 1: 40–47.
86 Crow JF. Age and sex effects on human mutation rates: an old problem with new
complexities. J Radiat Res 2006; 47: 75–82.
87 Forster P, Hohoff C, Dunkelmann B, Pfeiffer H, Neuhuber F, Brinkmann B et al.
Elevated germline mutation rate in teenage fathers. Proc Biol Sci 2015; 282:
20142898.
88 Vogel F, Motulsky A. Human Genetics: Problems and Approaches. Springer: Berlin,
1997; 404.
89 Wong WSW, Solomon BD, Bodian DL, Kothiyal P, Eley G, Huddleston KC et al.
New observations on maternal age effect on germline de novo mutations. Nat
Commun 2016; 7: 10486.
90 Goriely A. Decoding germline de novo point mutations. Nat Genet 2016; 48:
823–824.
91 Neale B, Sklar P. Genetic analysis of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder reveals
polygenicity but also suggests new directions for molecular interrogation. Curr
Opin Neurobiol 2015; 30: 131–138.
92 Choi S-K, Yoon S-R, Calabrese P, Arnheim N. A germ-line-selective advantage
rather than an increased mutation rate can explain some unexpectedly common
human disease mutations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008; 105: 10143–10148.
93 Arnheim N, Calabrese P. Understanding what determines the frequency and
pattern of human germline mutations. Nat Rev Genet 2009; 10: 478–488.
94 Goriely A, McVean GA, Rojmyr M, Ingemarsson B, Wilkie AO. Evidence for
selective advantage of pathogenic FGFR2 mutations in the male germ line.
Science 2003; 301: 643–646.
APA in neurodevelopmental disorders
M Janecka et al
8
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 95 Qin J, Calabrese P, Tiemann-Boege I, Shinde DN, Yoon SR, Gelfand D et al. The
molecular anatomy of spontaneous germline mutations in human testes. PLoS
Biol 2007; 5: 1912–1922.
96 Maher GJ, McGowan SJ, Giannoulatou E, Verrill C, Goriely A, Wilkie AOM.
Visualizing the origins of selfish de novo mutations in individual seminiferous
tubules of human testes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2016; 113: 2454–2459.
97 Goriely A, Wilkie AOM. Missing heritability: paternal age effect mutations and
selfish spermatogonia. Nat Rev Genet 2010; 11: 589.
98 Loh P-R, Bhatia G, Gusev A, Finucane HK, Bulik-Sullivan BK, Pollack SJ et al.
Contrasting regional architectures of schizophrenia and other complex diseases
using fast variance components analysis. Nat Genet 2015; 47: 1385–1392.
99 Sanders SJ, He X, Willsey AJ, Devlin B, Roeder K, State MW et al. Insights into
autism spectrum disorder genomic architecture and biology from 71 risk loci.
Neuron 2015; 87: 1215–1233.
100 Goriely A, McGrath JJ, Hultman CM, Wilkie AOM, Malaspina D. “Selfish sperma-
togonial selection”: a novel mechanism for the association between advanced
paternal age and neurodevelopmental disorders. Am J Psychiatry 2013; 170:
599–608.
101 Pinto D, Delaby E, Merico D, Barbosa M, Merikangas A, Klei L et al. Convergence
of genes and cellular pathways dysregulated in autism spectrum disorders. Am J
Hum Genet 2014; 94: 677–694.
102 Krishnan A, Zhang R, Yao V, Theesfeld CL, Wong AK, Tadych A et al. Genome-
wide prediction and functional characterization of the genetic basis of autism
spectrum disorder. Nat Neurosci 2016; 19: 1454–1462.
103 Choi J-Y, Lee K-M, Park SK, Noh D-Y, Ahn S-H, Yoo K-Y et al. Association of
paternal age at birth and the risk of breast cancer in offspring: a case
control study. BMC Cancer 2005; 5: 143.
104 Hemminki K, Kyyrönen P. Parental age and risk of sporadic and familial cancer in
offspring: implications for germ cell mutagenesis. Epidemiology 1999; 10:
747–751.
105 Frans EM, Sandin S, Reichenberg A, Langstrom N, Lichtenstein P, McGrath J et al.
Autism risk across generations. A population-based study of advancing grand-
paternal and paternal age. JAMA Psychiatry 2013; 70: 516–521.
106 Jaenisch R, Bird A. Epigenetic regulation of gene expression: how the genome
integrates intrinsic and environmental signals. Nat Genet 2003; 33(Suppl):
245–54.
107 Wong CCY, Meaburn EL, Ronald A, Price TS, Jeffries AR, Schalkwyk LC et al.
Methylomic analysis of monozygotic twins discordant for autism spectrum dis-
order and related behavioural traits. Mol Psychiatry 2014; 19: 495–503.
108 Wockner LF, Noble EP, Lawford BR, Young RM, Morris CP, Whitehall VLJ et al.
Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis of human brain tissue from schizo-
phrenia patients. Transl Psychiatry 2014; 4: e339.
109 Rutten BPF, Mill J. Epigenetic mediation of environmental influences in major
psychotic disorders. Schizophr Bull 2009; 35: 1045–1056.
110 Grafodatskaya D, Chung B, Szatmari P, Weksberg R. Autism spectrum disorders
and epigenetics. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2010; 49: 794–809.
111 Teperek M, Simeone A, Gaggioli V, Miyamoto K, Allen GE, Erkek S et al. Sperm is
epigenetically programmed to regulate gene transcription in embryos. Genome
Res 2016; 26: 1034–1046.
112 Wagner JR, Busche S, Ge B, Kwan T, Pastinen T, Blanchette M. The relationship
between DNA methylation, genetic and expression inter-individual variation in
untransformed human fibroblasts. Genome Biol 2014; 15: R37.
113 Maunakea AK, Nagarajan RP, Bilenky M, Ballinger TJ, D’Souza C, Fouse SD et al.
Conserved role of intragenic DNA methylation in regulating alternative pro-
moters. Nature 2010; 466: 253–257.
114 Leonhardt H, Page AW, Weier HU, Bestor TH. A targeting sequence directs DNA
methyltransferase to sites of DNA replication in mammalian nuclei. Cell 1992; 71:
865–873.
115 Bestor TH. Activation of mammalian DNA methyltransferase by cleavage of a Zn
binding regulatory domain. EMBO J 1992; 11: 2611–2617.
116 Jenkins T, Aston K, Cairns B, Carrell D. Paternal aging and associated intraindividual
alterations of global sperm 5-methylcytosine and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine levels.
Fertil Steril 2014; 100: 945–951.
117 Oakes CC, Smiraglia DJ, Plass C, Trasler JM, Robaire B. Aging results in hyper-
methylation of ribosomal DNA in sperm and liver of male rats. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2003; 100: 1775–1780.
118 Seisenberger S, Andrews S, Krueger F, Arand J, Walter J, Santos F et al. The
dynamics of genome-wide DNA methylation reprogramming in mouse pri-
mordial germ cells. Mol Cell 2012; 48: 849–862.
119 Horvath S. DNA methylation age of human tissues and cell types. Genome Biol
2013; 14: R115.
120 Smith RG, Reichenberg A, Kember RL, Buxbaum JD, Schalkwyk LC, Fernandes C
et al. Advanced paternal age is associated with altered DNA methylation at
brain-expressed imprinted loci in inbred mice: implications for neuropsychiatric
disease. Mol Psychiatry 2012; 18: 635–636.
121 Smith RG, Fernandes C, Kember R, Schalkwyk LC, Buxbaum J, Reichenberg A
et al. Transcriptomic changes in the frontal cortex associated with paternal age.
Mol Autism 2014; 5: 24.
122 De Jonge CJ. Paternal age and sperm methylation status. Fertil Steril 2013; 100:
940–941.
123 Perrin MC, Brown AS, Malaspina D. Aberrant epigenetic regulation could explain
the relationship of paternal age to schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull 2007; 33:
1270–1273.
124 Adkins RM, Thomas F, Tylavsky F, Krushkal J. Parental ages and levels of DNA
methylation in the newborn are correlated. BMC Med Genet 2011; 12: 47.
125 Flanagan J, Popendikyte V, Pozdniakovaite N, Sobolev M, Assadzadeh A, Schu-
macher A et al. Intra- and inter- individual epigenetic variation in human
germ cells. Am J Hum Genet 2006; 79: 67–84.
126 Hackett JA, Zylicz JJ, Surani MA. Parallel mechanisms of epigenetic reprogram-
ming in the germline. Trends Genet 2012; 28: 164–174.
127 Ferguson-Smith AC. Genomic imprinting: the emergence of an epigenetic
paradigm. Nat Rev Genet 2011; 12: 565–575.
128 Bartolomei MS, Ferguson-smith AC. Mammalian genomic imprinting. Cold Spring
Harb Perspect Biol 2011; 3: 1–17.
129 Bestor TH, Edwards JR, Boulard M. Notes on the role of dynamic DNA
methylation in mammalian development. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014; 112:
6796–6799.
130 Davies W, Isles AR, Wilkinson LS. Imprinted gene expression in the brain. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 2005; 29: 421–430.
131 Constância M, Hemberger M, Hughes J, Dean W, Ferguson-Smith A, Fundele R
et al. Placental-specific IGF-II is a major modulator of placental and fetal growth.
Nature 2002; 417: 945–948.
132 Fowden A, Sibley C, Reik W, Constancia M. Imprinted genes, placental devel-
opment and fetal growth. Horm Res 2006; 65: 50–58.
133 Wilkinson LS, Davies W, Isles AR. Genomic imprinting effects on brain devel-
opment and function. Nat Rev Neurosci 2007; 8: 832–843.
134 Nicholls RD, Knoll JH, Butler MG, Karam S, Lalande M. Genetic imprinting sug-
gested by maternal heterodisomy in nondeletion Prader-Willi syndrome. Nature
1989; 342: 281–285.
135 Driscoll DJ, Waters MF, Williams CA, Zori RT, Glenn CC, Avidano KM et al. A DNA
methylation imprint, determined by the sex of the parent, distinguishes the
Angelman and Prader-Willi syndromes. Genomics 1992; 13: 917–924.
136 Choufani S, Shuman C, Weksberg R. Molecular findings in Beckwith-Wiedemann
syndrome. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet 2013; 163: 131–140.
137 Grossniklaus U, Kelly WG, Kelly B, Ferguson-Smith AC, Pembrey M, Lindquist S.
Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance: how important is it? Nat Rev Genet
2013; 14: 228–235.
138 Lane N, Dean W, Erhardt S, Hajkova P, Surani A, Walter J et al. Resistance of IAPs
to methylation reprogramming may provide a mechanism for epigenetic
inheritance in the mouse. Genesis 2003; 35: 88–93.
139 Jiang L, Zhang J, Wang JJ, Wang L, Zhang L, Li G et al. Sperm, but not oocyte,
DNA methylome is inherited by zebrafish early embryos. Cell 2013; 153:
773–784.
140 Morison IM, Ramsay JP, Spencer HG. A census of mammalian imprinting. Trends
Genet 2005; 21: 457–465.
141 Svenson KL, Gatti DM, Valdar W, Welsh CE, Cheng R, Chesler EJ et al. High-
resolution genetic mapping using the Mouse Diversity outbred population.
Genetics 2012; 190: 437–447.
142 Palmert MR, Boepple PA. Variation in the timing of puberty : clinical spectrum
and genetic investigation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001; 86: 2364–2368.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017
APA in neurodevelopmental disorders
M Janecka et al
9
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
