 Body weight homeostat that regulates fat mass
independently of leptin in rats and mice
John-Olov Janssona,1, Vilborg Palsdottira, Daniel A. Häggb, Erik Schélea, Suzanne L. Dicksona, Fredrik Anestena,
Tina Bakea, Mikael Monteliusc, Jakob Bellmana, Maria E. Johanssona, Roger D. Coned,e, Daniel J. Druckerf, Jianyao Wub,
Biljana Aleksicb, Anna E. Törnqvistb, Klara Sjögrenb, Jan-Åke Gustafssong,1, Sara H. Windahlb, and Claes Ohlssonb,1
aDepartment of Physiology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SE 405 30, Gothenburg, Sweden;
bCentre for Bone and Arthritis Research, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SE 413 45, Gothenburg, Sweden;
cDepartment of Radiation Physics, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SE 413 45, Gothenburg, Sweden;
dLife Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2216; eDepartment of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2216; fDepartment of Medicine, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, ON M5G 1X5,
Toronto, Canada; and gDepartment of Biology and Biochemistry, Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell Signaling, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204
Contributed by Jan-Åke Gustafsson, November 8, 2017 (sent for review September 7, 2017; reviewed by Wolfgang Langhans and Subburaman Mohan)
Subjects spending much time sitting have increased risk of obesity but
the mechanism for the antiobesity effect of standing is unknown. We
hypothesized that there is a homeostatic regulation of body weight.
We demonstrate that increased loading of rodents, achieved using
capsules with different weights implanted in the abdomen or s.c. on
the back, reversibly decreases the biological body weight via reduced
food intake. Importantly, loading relieves diet-induced obesity and
improves glucose tolerance. The identified homeostat for body
weight regulates body fat mass independently of fat-derived leptin,
revealing two independent negative feedback systems for fat mass
regulation. It is known that osteocytes can sense changes in bone
strain. In this study, the body weight-reducing effect of increased
loading was lost in mice depleted of osteocytes. We propose that
increased body weight activates a sensor dependent on osteocytes of
the weight-bearing bones. This induces an afferent signal, which
reduces body weight. These findings demonstrate a leptin-independent
body weight homeostat (“gravitostat”) that regulates fat mass.
diet-induced obesity | weight loss | osteocytes | glucose metabolism
E
pidemiologic studies demonstrate that subjects spending
much time sitting have increased risk of obesity, diabetes, and
cardiovascular diseases. There is even epidemiologic evidence for
an association between sitting time and overall mortality (1, 2).
The mechanism for the antiobesity effect of standing is essentially
unknown. It is probable that part of the effect of high sitting time
on cardiometabolic phenotypes is caused by the associated low
degree of exercise. However, the results of some articles demon-
strate that the association of a sedentary behavior, as reflected by
much sitting time, with the metabolic syndrome, is independent of
physical activity (3, 4). We hypothesized that there is a homeostat
(5) in the lower extremities regulating body weight with an impact
on fat mass. Such a homeostat would (together with leptin) ensure
sufficient whole body energy depots but still protect land-living
animals from becoming too heavy. A prerequisite for such ho-
meostatic regulation of body weight is that the integration center,
which may be in the brain, receives afferent information from a
body weight sensor. Thereafter, the integration center may adjust
the body weight by acting on an effector (6).
Results
Body Weight Sensing for Fat Mass Homeostasis in Mice with Diet-
Induced Obesity. To investigate our hypothesis that there is a
homeostatic regulation of body weight and fat mass based on
loading, we implanted capsules that weighed 15% of the body
weight into the abdomen of adult Sprague-Dawley rats and
C57BL6 mice with diet-induced obesity (load). Control animals
were implanted with an empty capsule of equal size (3% of the
body weight). We found that increased loading suppressed the
biological body weight both in rats and mice (Fig. 1 A and B).
The difference in biological body weight between rodents with load
and control rodents was first seen on day 2 after implantation
and was larger on day 14 when the experiment was terminated (Fig.
1 A and B). At the end of the experiment the total body weight
(= biological body weight + capsule weight) was rather similar in the
load and control mice (Fig. S1A). Calculations of the efficiency of
the homeostatic regulation of total body weight at 2 wk after initi-
ation of the loading revealed that ∼80% of the increased loading was
counteracted by reduced biological weight (Fig. S1B). The increased
loading also reduced the amount of white adipose tissue (WAT), as
illustrated by representative MRI slices (Fig. 1C) and quantified by
WAT dissection (Fig. 1D) and serum leptin levels (Fig. 1E). These
findings demonstrate that there is an efficient body weight sensing
mechanism for the homeostatic regulation of body weight.
The possible mechanism behind the suppression of body weight
by increased loading was investigated on day 6 after implantation
of capsules, a time point when the difference in body weight was
still robustly increasing between load and control rodents (Fig. 1 A
and B). There was no significant difference between mice with
load and control mice in UCP1 mRNA levels in brown adipose
tissue (BAT) (Fig. S1C), in oxygen consumption as a measure of
energy expenditure (Fig. S1D), in respiratory quotient (RQ) (Fig.
S1E), or in motor activity (Fig. S1F). Importantly, load decreased
food intake, both calculated as percent of body weight (Fig. 1 F
Significance
The only known homeostatic regulator of fat mass is the leptin
system. We hypothesized that there is a second homeostat reg-
ulating body weight with an impact on fat mass. In this study we
have added and removed weight loads from experimental ani-
mals and measured the effects on the biological body weight. The
results demonstrate that there is a body weight homeostat that
regulates fat mass independently of leptin. As the body weight-
reducing effect of increased loading was dependent on osteo-
cytes, we propose that there is a sensor for body weight in the
long bones of the lower extremities acting as “body scales.” This
is part of a body weight homeostat, “gravitostat,” that keeps
body weight and body fat mass constant.
Author contributions: J.-O.J., V.P., S.L.D., M.E.J., J.-Å.G., S.H.W., and C.O. designed re-
search; V.P., D.A.H., E.S., F.A., T.B., M.M., J.B., J.W., B.A., A.E.T., K.S., and S.H.W. performed
research; R.D.C. and D.J.D. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; J.-O.J., V.P., D.A.H.,
E.S., T.B., J.B., J.-Å.G., S.H.W., and C.O. analyzed data; and J.-O.J., V.P., J.-Å.G., S.H.W., and
C.O. wrote the paper.
Reviewers: W.L., ETH Zurich; and S.M., Jerry L. Pettis Memorial VA Medical Center and
Loma Linda University.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND).
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: joj@neuro.gu.se or jgustafs@central.
uh.edu or Claes.Ohlsson@medic.gu.se.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1715687114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1715687114
PNAS
|
January 9, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 2
|
427–432
PHYSIOLOGY
 and G) and calculated as food intake per animal in both rats and
mice (Fig. S1 G and H).
Control mice pair fed with the same amount of food as the load
mice decreased their body weight to the same extent as the load
group (Fig. 1H). Therefore, the decreased biological body weight in
the animals with increased loading did not seem to be caused
primarily by increased energy expenditure, but rather by decreased
food intake. An alternative loading procedure using capsules
implanted s.c. on the back of the mice was also used. Increased
loading suppressed the biological body weight in adult mice with
diet-induced obesity also in this model (Fig. S1I). These experiments
revealed that increased loading reduces the biological body weight.
Fig. 1.
Body weight sensing for fat mass homeostasis in rats and mice with diet-induced obesity. (A) Effect of loading on change in biological body weight (=
total body weight − capsule weight) in rats (n = 8) and (B) mice (n = 10) implanted with capsules weighing 15% of the body weight (load) or empty capsules
(control; ∼1.5% and ∼3% of the body weight for rats and mice, respectively). (C) Coronal (Top) and corresponding transversal (Bottom) MR images of a control
(Left) and a load (Right) animal (day 14), acquired without fat suppression. Hyperintense regions represent body fat. Yellow dotted line and white bar indicate the
position of the corresponding transversal images Below and 10 mm, respectively. (D) The fat mass (day 14), (E) the serum leptin levels (day 14), and (F) the food
intake as percent of body weight (days 4–6) were measured in load and control rats (n = 8) and (G) mice (n = 10). (H) The effect of pair feeding on body weight
change in control mice compared with ad libitum fed control and load mice (n = 9). (I) Change in biological body weight, (J) the fat mass (day 17), and (K) the
skeletal muscle mass (day 17) after removal of load (heavy capsule followed by empty capsule) or sustained load (heavy capsule followed by heavy capsule) 14 d
after the first implantation (n = 10). (L) HOMA-IR in fasted control and load mice (n = 10). (M) Blood glucose, (N) blood glucose area under the curve (AUC), (O) serum
insulin, and (P) insulin AUC during an oral glucose tolerance test in load and control mice (n = 10). (Q) Effect of loading on long-term change in biological body
weight in load and control mice (n = 10) followed during 7 wk after capsule implantation. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
428
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1715687114
Jansson et al.
 We next evaluated whether reduced loading also influences the bi-
ological body weight by comparing mice with sustained loading
(heavy capsule followed by heavy capsule) and mice with removal of
loading (heavy capsule followed by empty capsule; Fig. 1I). Removal
of the loading increased the biological body weight and the fat mass
(Fig. 1J) but not the skeletal muscle mass (Fig. 1K), demonstrating
that the body weight sensor is functional in both directions.
Loading improved insulin sensitivity as indicated by substantially
reduced fasting homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance
(HOMA-IR) index (Fig. 1L) and reduced serum insulin before,
during, and after oral glucose administration compared with control
mice (Fig. 1 O and P). In addition, loading increased glucose tolerance
as indicated by decreased levels of circulating glucose after oral glucose
administration (Fig. 1 M and N and Fig. S1 K and L). Although
loading reduced the absolute serum insulin levels throughout the
glucose tolerance test (GTT) (Fig. 1 O and P), the induction of serum
insulin from baseline was normal during the test (Fig. S1 M and N).
We also performed a long-term study, demonstrating that the
effect of loading on biological body weight remained until the
experiment was terminated at day 49 (Fig. 1Q).
Leptin-Independent Body Weight Sensing for Fat Mass Homeostasis.
A prerequisite for homeostatic feedback regulation of energy depots
in body fat tissue (energy balance) is that energy regulating parts of
the brain receive information from fat tissue about its size. The fat-
derived hormone leptin, discovered by Friedman and coworkers over
20 y ago, is so far the only known such afferent homeostatic factor
(7–9). In the present study, we next investigated the interactions
between increased loading, a stimuli normally reflecting increased
body fat mass, and leptin. The loading-induced decrease in body
weight was seen in leptin-deficient obese (Ob/Ob) mice (Fig. 2A), in
the same way as in wild-type mice (Fig. 1B). In addition, the com-
bined effect of increased loading and leptin treatment was studied in
wild-type mice. Leptin was given to loaded and control mice on days
11–15 after implantation of capsules. It was found that leptin treat-
ment suppressed body weight (Fig. 2B) and body fat (Fig. 2C) to a
similar extent in loaded and control mice, while none of the treat-
ments affected muscle mass (Fig. 2D). Thus, the loading-induced
homeostatic regulation of body weight was independent of the
well-established fat mass reducing effect of leptin, revealing two
independent negative feedback systems for fat mass homeostasis.
Since the body weight reducing effect of increased loading was
caused by reduced food intake, we analyzed the expression of ap-
petite regulating genes in the hypothalamus. Increased loading
augmented the expression of the obesity promoting neuropeptides
AgRP and NPY (Fig. S1J). These two peptides are expressed by
essentially the same neurons in the arcuate nucleus of the hypo-
thalamus and their expression is suppressed by leptin. Therefore,
the increase in AgRP and NPY expression is likely to be a failed
compensatory mechanism induced by low fat mass and low serum
leptin in the mice exposed to increased loading (Fig. 1 D and E and
Fig. S1J), consistent with a leptin-independent mechanism for in-
creased loading to reduce body weight.
The Suppression of Body Weight and Fat Mass by Loading Is Dependent
on Osteocytes. It is known that osteocytes can sense dynamic short-
term high-impact bone loading for local bone adaptation (10–12).
We therefore postulated that chronic static moderately increased
bone loading, induced by increased body weight, also activates os-
teocytes, and thereby reduces fat mass via a systemic signal. To
determine the role of osteocytes for the suppression of body weight
by increased loading, we established an osteocyte depleted transgenic
mouse model using diphtheria toxin-driven cell depletion specifically
of DMP1 positive osteocytes (Fig. S2). The normal suppression of
body weight by increased loading observed in mice with intact oste-
ocytes (Fig. 3A) was lost in osteocyte-depleted mice (Fig. 3B). In-
creased loading decreased the weight of WAT (Fig. 3C) and serum
leptin levels (Fig. 3D) in mice with intact osteocytes but not in
osteocyte-depleted mice, while there was no significant differences in
the skeletal muscle weight between the groups (Fig. 3E). These
findings demonstrate that the suppression of body weight by loading
is dependent on osteocytes. We propose that increased body weight
activates a sensor dependent on the osteocytes of the weight-bearing
bones. This induces an afferent signal to reduce food intake (Fig. 3F).
A growing body of data indicates that the skeleton is an endocrine
organ that regulates energy and glucose metabolism through, at least
in part, the release of the bone-derived hormone osteocalcin (13,
14). We therefore hypothesized that the homeostatic regulation of
body weight and fat mass by osteocytes in response to changes in
Fig. 2.
Leptin-independent body weight sensing for fat mass homeostasis. (A) The effect of increased loading on the change in body weight in leptin
deficient Ob/Ob mice (control n = 7 and load n = 10). The effect of combined loading and leptin treatment (1.5 μg/g BW twice daily) on (B) changes in
biological body weight, (C) fat mass, and (D) muscle mass in mice (n = 10). Data are expressed as mean ± SEM *P < 0.05.
Jansson et al.
PNAS
|
January 9, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 2
|
429
PHYSIOLOGY
 body weight may be mediated by osteocalcin, or another known
bone-derived circulating factor. To investigate this hypothesis, we
determined the effect of increased loading for 6 d on the bone ex-
pression and circulating levels of four bone-derived candidate factors
(sclerostin, osteocalcin, FGF23, and lipocalin 2) that might mediate
this effect (Fig. S3). As previously shown for dynamic short-term
high-impact loading, static moderately increased loading for 6 d
reduced the bone expression of Sost (the gene coding for the bone
mass suppressing factor sclerostin) (Fig. S3A). However, serum
levels of sclerostin were not affected by increased loading (Fig. S3B).
Although osteocalcin is a crucial regulator of energy metabolism in
rodents, no effect of increased loading on the expression of osteo-
calcin in bone (Fig. S3C) or on circulating levels of total (Fig. S3D),
carboxylated (Fig. S3E), or undercarboxylated (Fig. S3F) osteocalcin
was observed. Furthermore, serum testosterone levels, known to be
regulated by bone-derived osteocalcin and to regulate fat mass, were
not affected by loading (15) (Fig. S3G). FGF23 is an osteocyte-
derived endocrine acting factor. Increased loading did not signifi-
cantly alter FGF23 expression in bone (Fig. S3H) or serum
FGF23 levels (Fig. S3I). It was recently demonstrated that bone-
derived lipocalin 2 suppresses appetite via a MC4R-dependent
pathway (16). Increased loading did not significantly alter lipocalin
2 mRNA levels in bone (Fig. S3J) or serum lipocalin 2 levels in mice
(Fig. S3K). These findings do not support that any of the four main
bone-derived circulating candidate factors mediate the effect of the
osteocyte-dependent body weight sensing mechanism.
Effect of Loading on Biological Body Weight in Relation to Other
Known Body Fat Regulators. As described above (Fig. 2 A–B), the
decrease in body weight by loading was independent of leptin. We
next investigated the suppression of body weight by increased load-
ing in relation to other known fat mass regulating signals (Fig. S4).
To regulate fat mass, the hypothalamus needs afferent signals from
the gastrointestinal tract, e.g., by the hunger and adiposity-inducing
hormone ghrelin (17). We found that loading suppressed body
weight in mice lacking the ghrelin receptor (Fig. S4A). Moreover,
body weight was decreased by loading in mice lacking the receptor
for glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) (Fig. S4B), an insulin-releasing
hormone, described to regulate body weight (18). Thus, we found no
evidence that loading is dependent on fat mass-regulating signals
from the gastrointestinal tract. A major regulator of body fat in the
hypothalamus is the circuit involving the neuropeptide α-MSH act-
ing on the melanocortin receptor-4 (MC4R) (19, 20). The body
weight decreasing effect of loading was also found in MC4R gene
knockout mice (Fig. S4C). Therefore, the suppression of body weight
by loading is independent of the α-MSH MC4R system, a major
mediator of effects by leptin and GLP-1. Estrogen receptor-α (ER-
α) signaling is involved in the regulation of both fat mass and bone
mass. It has been shown that local bone formation induced by short-
term high-impact loading is dependent on ER-α (10). However, our
results from ER-α knockout mice indicate that ER-α is dispensable for
the systemic regulation of body weight induced by chronical static
moderately increased loading (Fig. S4D). We next determined
whether neuronal signaling might mediate the loading-induced de-
crease in body weight. However, neither the sympathetic marker
Fig. 3.
The suppression of body weight and fat mass by loading is dependent on osteocytes. Effect of increased loading on change in biological body weight in (A)
control female mice with intact osteocytes (control n = 11 and load n = 12) and in (B) osteocyte-depleted (OCyD) female mice (n = 9). The effect of loading of control mice
with intact osteocytes and OCyD mice on (C) fat mass, (D) serum leptin levels, and (E) muscle mass, as measured 21 d after initiation of loading. Data are expressed as
mean ± SEM *P < 0.05. (F) Hypothesis for homeostatic regulation of body fat mass by two different signal systems. The first previously known pathway is fat-derived leptin
in circulation acting on the brain to decrease food intake and fat mass. The second mechanism is that increased fat mass is counteracted by the body weight homeostat
(gravitostat). Increased body weight activates a sensor dependent on the osteocytes of the weight-bearing bones. This induces an afferent signal to reduce food intake.
430
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1715687114
Jansson et al.
 noradrenaline in urine (Fig. S5A) nor the parasympathetic marker se-
rum choline levels (Fig. S5B) were regulated by loading. These findings
demonstrate that increased body weight activates a sensor dependent
on the osteocytes of the weight-bearing bones. This induces an af-
ferent food intake reducing signal that needs further study (Fig. 3F).
Discussion
The present findings reveal a body weight homeostat that regu-
lates fat mass independently of leptin in rodents with diet-induced
obesity. Increased body weight activates a sensor dependent on
the osteocytes of the weight-bearing bones. This induces an affer-
ent signal to reduce body weight.
We observed that increased loading decreased body weight,
while decreased loading increases body weight, demonstrating that
the body weight sensor is functional in both directions. Impor-
tantly, several authors have found that removal of fat by lipectomy
causes a compensatory increase in fat mass and body weight in
mice and rats lacking leptin activity (21–23). These data support
our conclusion that a leptin-independent regulation of fat mass
does exist, but they do not provide information about the possible
mechanism. The present data, indicating that loading can regulate
fat mass, raise the possibility that the increase in fat mass observed
after lipectomy in leptin-deficient mice is due to decreased load-
ing. Increased loading reduced the biological body weight via re-
duced food intake. The normal motor activity and the notion that
the mice appeared healthy indicate that the effects of increased
loading on food intake and body weight were specific.
It is well established that leptin signaling is necessary to pre-
vent severe obesity (7, 24). However, most patients with obesity
have high endogenous serum leptin levels and do not respond to
exogenous leptin treatment. This indicates that, during these
circumstances, leptin is not sufficient to suppress fat mass. This
has been referred to as leptin resistance (7, 25).
We propose that both leptin signaling and body weight sensing
are necessary for an optimal fat mass homeostasis. Pharmacologi-
cally, combined targeting of both the body weight sensing mecha-
nism and leptin signaling may be useful for obesity treatment (Fig.
3F). In line with this, weight loading and leptin treatment sup-
pressed body weight in an additive manner in the present study.
As described above, there is an established epidemiologic link
between numbers of hours per day spent in the sitting position and
several metabolic diseases, including obesity, diabetes, and cardio-
vascular diseases. However, the reason for this has been unknown
(1, 2). We propose that much sitting time results in decreased
loading of osteocytes in the weight-bearing long bones and, thereby,
the homeostatic regulation of body weight does not activate its af-
ferent signal to the brain, resulting in obesity (Fig. 3F). In addition,
it is possible that secular trends of increased sitting time, via reduced
activation of the body weight sensing mechanism, might have con-
tributed to the obesity epidemic. The fact that loading was effective
in decreasing fat mass in both Sprague-Dawley rats and C57BL
mice with diet-induced obesity, well established models of clinical
obesity (26, 27), suggests that increased standing time and, thereby,
increased loading will be effective in decreasing human obesity. In
addition, our findings demonstrate that loading increases insulin
sensitivity. Further studies are needed to investigate whether this
effect is completely or only partly due to decreased body fat mass.
The present findings reveal a body weight homeostat that regu-
lates fat mass independently of leptin. We suggest that this body
weight homeostat is called “gravitostat” (Latin gravis, meaning
heavy; Latin status, meaning stable). The gravitostat, like other
homeostats is based on communication between a sensor, an in-
tegration center, and an effector. Its sensor is most likely located in
the weight-bearing lower extremities. Our data indicate that at least
part of this sensor is in osteocytes. Increased fat mass is counter-
acted both by the gravitostat and by increased fat-derived leptin (7,
24) (Fig. 3F). The gravitostat activates an afferent signal for body
weight homoeostasis to reduce food intake (Fig. 3F). Leptin has the
capacity to decrease body weight, to some extent mediated by re-
duced food intake (7, 9). Therefore, both the gravitostat and leptin
are eventually acting on the brain and seem to have their integrative
centers there (Fig. 3F). Although both leptin and the gravitostat
have the capacity to regulate fat mass, it has been proposed that the
role of leptin primarily is in the lower end of fat mass homeostasis
(25, 28), while the present data demonstrate that the gravitostat is
efficient in diet-induced obesity. Future studies are warranted to
determine whether activation of the gravitostat explains the bene-
ficial effects of standing. Furthermore, when evaluated in a relevant
disease model, it was observed that loading relieved diet-induced
obesity and improved insulin sensitivity, suggesting the gravitostat is
an interesting drug target for metabolic diseases (Fig. 3F).
Materials and Methods
Animals. All animal procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee on
Animal Care and Use of Gothenburg University. C57BL/6 mice were purchased
from Taconic, leptin-deficient Ob/Ob mice were purchased from The Jackson
Laboratory and Ghrelin receptor knockout (GHSR KO) mice were obtained
from Deltagen. MC4R KO mice, GLP-1R KO mice, and ERα KO mice were
developed as previously described (19, 20, 29, 30). All knockout mice and
their controls were on a C57BL/6 background. Sprague-Dawley rats were
purchased from Charles River Laboratories.
To generate the osteocyte-depleted mice, DMP-1 promoter-Cre mice (31)
were crossed with ROSA26 promoter-Flox-STOP-Flox-DTR mice (32) (Fig. S2).
Diphtheria toxin receptor (DTR) mRNA was compared between cortical bone,
kidney, and liver with RT-PCR (Fig. S2C). Sost mRNA was measured in cortical
bone as a marker of osteocyte depletion (OCyD) in mice expressing DTR and
given diphtheria toxin (Fig. S2D).
Immunohistochemistry. The number of osteocytes and empty osteocyte lacunae
in femur was evaluated blinded using a bright field microscope. Briefly, femur
was fixed, paraffin embedded, sectioned, and stained with hematoxylin and
eosin. Three evenly spread out sections of femur were used for counting.
Osteocytes and empty lacunae were counted from cortical bone covering on
average 0.16 mm2 per section and located 5 mm from the tip of the epiphyseal
plate. The number of apoptotic osteocytes was measured as cells with TUNEL
positive staining. Briefly, three femur sections neighboring the sections used
for counting empty lacunae were stained using TUNEL assay (ApopTag Fluo-
rescein In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit, S7110; Millipore) in accordance with
instructions provided and counterstained with DAPI. Using a wide field fluo-
rescent microscope (Leica DMRB; Leica Microsystems), images were taken
covering on average 0.16 mm2 of cortical bone per section and located 5 mm
from the tip of the epiphyseal plate. Background autofluorescence was re-
duced by applying a digital channel subtraction method to the images. TUNEL
positive cells and DAPI positive cells were counted within the images.
In a separate experiment, blue β-gal staining of femoral bone sections was
used as a marker of cells with active DMP-1 promoter. DMP-1 promoter-Cre mice
or wild-type mice were crossed with ROSA26 promoter-Flox-STOP-Flox-β-gal
mice. The staining with β-gal in cortical bone was compared between ROSA26
promoter-Flox-STOP-Flox-β-gal mice with and without DMP-1 promoter-Cre.
Loading. Two- to 3-mo-old mice and rats were fed a high-fat diet (60% fat,
D12492; Research Diets) during 4 wk and then a capsule that weighed 15% of
the body weight (load) or 3% of the body weight (control) was implanted
intraperitoneally or s.c. into the adult animals under isoflurane anesthesia.
After the implantation, the body weight was measured daily or several times
per week until the end of each experiment.
Removal of load was done in one experiment in which the capsules were
exchanged 2 wk after the first surgery and half of the mice with load capsules
got control capsules (removal of load) and half of them got new load capsules
(sustained load) with a follow-up period of 3 wk after removal of load.
Indirect Calorimetry, Food Intake, and Activity Measurement. Oxygen con-
sumption and carbon dioxide production was measured by indirect calo-
rimetry in an INCA Metabolic System (Somedic) as previously described (33).
The RQ was calculated by the formula RQ = VCO2/VO2. The measurement was
done on days 4–6 after implantation of capsules in C57BL/6 mice and the food
intake was monitored during the same period for both mice and rats. We also
performed a pair feeding study, in which we fed control mice the same amount
of food as ad libitum fed load mice. The motor activity was measured in auto-
mated activity chambers, so-called Locoboxes, consisting of a plastic cage (55 ×
55 × 22 cm) inside a ventilated cabinet (Kungsbacka Mat-och Reglerteknik AB).
Glucose Tolerance Test. Oral GTT was performed on C57BL/6 mice 3 wk after
capsule implantation. The mice received oral glucose [2 g/kg body weight (BW);
Fresenius Kabi] by gavage after 5 h of fasting. Blood samples were collected from
Jansson et al.
PNAS
|
January 9, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 2
|
431
PHYSIOLOGY
 the tail vein at 0, 15, 30, 60, and 120 min after the glucose gavage. Blood glucose
concentrations were determined at the above-mentioned time points using an
Accu-Check Compact Plus glucometer (Roche Diagnostics). Serum insulin con-
centrations were measured attime points 0, 15, 60,and 120 min afterthe glucose
administration using the Ultrasensitive Mouse Insulin ELISA kit (90080; Chrystal
Chem, Inc.) according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer.
Leptin Treatment. Control and loaded C57BL/6 mice were given murine leptin
(1.5 μg/g BW; Pepro-Tech) or saline twice daily in s.c. injections on days 11–
15 after the capsule implantation.
Gene Expression. Cortical bone from femur and tibia, hypothalamus, and
interscapular BAT were dissected, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and kept
in −80 °C until analysis. The cortical bones were homogenized with TriZol
reagent (Invitrogen) before extraction. mRNA from all tissues was extracted
using RNeasy Lipid Tissue Mini Kit (Qiagen) and the mRNA concentration of
the samples was measured by NanoDrop spectrophotometry. cDNA was
synthesized from 1 μg mRNA with iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad).
Real-time PCR was performed using Step-One-Plus or the ABI Prism 7900
Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems). The hypothalamus samples
were analyzed with Universal Taqman Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) in a 48-
gene custom-made TaqMan low-density array card and normalized to glycer-
aldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH, Mm99999915_g1). The cortical
bone samples were analyzed by assays for osteocalcin (Mm01741771_g1),
sclerostin (Mm00470479_m1), FGF23 (Mm00445621_m1), and lipocalin 2 (Mm
01324470_m1) and normalized to 18S (4310893E). The BAT samples were an-
alyzed with an assay for Ucp1 (Mm0124486_m1) and normalized to 18S
(4310893E). The relative mRNA levels were obtained by using the comparative
threshold cycle (Ct) method and calculated with the ΔΔCt equation.
Serum and Urine Analyses. Blood samples were collected at the end of each
experiment and the serum was separated and kept in −80 °C until analysis. Serum
was analyzed in duplicates by ELISAs for leptin (Chrystal Chem, Inc), sclerostin
(ALPCO immunoassays), osteocalcin (Immutopics), Gla-osteocalcin and Glu-
osteocalcin (Takara Clontech), FGF23 (Kainos Laboratories, Inc), lipocalin 2
(R&D Systems), and choline (Abcam). Serum testosterone was analyzed by a
gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method as previously
described (34). Urine samples were analyzed by ELISA for noradrenaline
(Labor Diagnostika Nord) and the urine was also analyzed for creatinine
(Crystal Chem, Inc) to normalize the noradrenaline levels.
MRI. A 7T MR system (software: ParaVision 5.1; Bruker BioSpin MRI GmbH)
and a 50-mm quadrature transmit/receive volume coil (RAPID Biomedical
GmbH) were used to produce coronal images of each animal separately and
transversal images of pairs of animals from the load and control groups. The
pairing ensured identical MRI signal enhancement characteristics for both
groups, to facilitate subsequent comparison of body fat content.
The coronal images were acquired using a 2D multi slice multi echo (MSME)
sequence with repetition time (TR) = 1,000 ms, echo time (TE) = 12.3 ms,
number of signal averages (NSA) = 2, slice thickness = 1 mm, field of view
(FOV) (read × phase) = 64 × 28 mm2, in-plane resolution = 160 × 160 mm2,
and receiver bandwidth (BW) = 120 kHz. The transversal images were ac-
quired with slightly adjusted acquisition parameters (MSME sequence: TR =
1,000 ms, TE = 9.5 ms, NSA = 45, slice thickness = 0.7 mm, FOV = 46 × 35 mm2,
in-plane resolution = 177 × 177 mm2 and BW = 120 kHz). Both coronal and
transversal image series were acquired twice, with and without fat suppres-
sion, and coronal images were resampled to 177 × 177 mm2 for visualization
purposes. Regions of hyperintense MR signal (relative to muscle and organs) in
a nonfat suppressed image were assumed to represent fat if the correspond-
ing region in the fat-suppressed image was hypointense.
Statistics. Data were analyzed using two-tailed Student’s t test assuming
equal variance between control and load groups or between “sustained
load” and “removal of load” groups. When more than two groups were
compared, ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test was used. P < 0.05 was
considered statistically significant. All data are presented as mean ± SEM.
Data Availability Statement. The authors declare that all data supporting the
findings of this study are available within the paper and its Supporting
Information files.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Dr. Mikael Johansson (Department of
Languages and Literatures, Gothenburg University) for advice regard-
ing linguistics and senior research engineer Staffan Berg (Department
of Neuroscience and Physiology, Gothenburg University) for develop-
ment of loading capsules. This work was supported by the NovoNordisk
Foundation, the Swedish Research Council, the Swedish Government
[under the Avtal om Läkarutbildning och Medicinsk Forskning (Agree-
ment for Medical Education and Research)], the Knut and Alice Wal-
lenberg Foundation, EC Framework 7, and the Torsten Söderbergs
Foundation.
1. Katzmarzyk PT, Church TS, Craig CL, Bouchard C (2009) Sitting time and mortality
from all causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. Med Sci Sports Exerc 41:998–1005.
2. Levine JA, et al. (2005) Interindividual variation in posture allocation: Possible role in
human obesity. Science 307:584–586.
3. Chau JY, van der Ploeg HP, Merom D, Chey T, Bauman AE (2012) Cross-sectional as-
sociations between occupational and leisure-time sitting, physical activity and obesity
in working adults. Prev Med 54:195–200.
4. Ekblom Ö, et al. (2015) Cardiorespiratory fitness, sedentary behaviour and physical
activity are independently associated with the metabolic syndrome, results from the
SCAPIS pilot study. PLoS One 10:e0131586.
5. Bernard C (1865) Introduction à l’Etude de la Médecine Expérimentale (Flammarion, Paris).
6. Vander AJ (1990) Homeostatic mechanisms and cellular communication. Human
Physiology: The Mechanisms of Body Function, eds Nunes I, Schanck DT, Bradley JW
(McGraw-Hill, New York), 5th Ed, pp 141–166.
7. Friedman JM, Halaas JL (1998) Leptin and the regulation of body weight in mammals.
Nature 395:763–770.
8. Zeng W, Lu YH, Lee J, Friedman JM (2015) Reanalysis of parabiosis of obesity mutants
in the age of leptin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:E3874–E3882.
9. Zhang Y, et al. (1994) Positional cloning of the mouse obese gene and its human
homologue. Nature 372:425–432.
10. Lee K, Jessop H, Suswillo R, Zaman G, Lanyon L (2003) Endocrinology: Bone adapta-
tion requires oestrogen receptor-alpha. Nature 424:389.
11. Meakin LB, Price JS, Lanyon LE (2014) The contribution of experimental in vivo models
to understanding the mechanisms of adaptation to mechanical loading in bone. Front
Endocrinol (Lausanne) 5:154.
12. Vanderschueren D, et al. (2014) Sex steroid actions in male bone. Endocr Rev 35:906–960.
13. Ferron M, et al. (2010) Insulin signaling in osteoblasts integrates bone remodeling and
energy metabolism. Cell 142:296–308.
14. Lee NK, et al. (2007) Endocrine regulation of energy metabolism by the skeleton. Cell
130:456–469.
15. Oury F, et al. (2011) Endocrine regulation of male fertility by the skeleton. Cell 144:796–809.
16. Mosialou I, et al. (2017) MC4R-dependent suppression of appetite by bone-derived
lipocalin 2. Nature 543:385–390.
17. Tschöp M, Smiley DL, Heiman ML (2000) Ghrelin induces adiposity in rodents. Nature
407:908–913.
18. Holst JJ (2007) The physiology of glucagon-like peptide 1. Physiol Rev 87:1409–1439.
19. Butler AA, et al. (2001) Melanocortin-4 receptor is required for acute homeostatic
responses to increased dietary fat. Nat Neurosci 4:605–611.
20. Huszar D, et al. (1997) Targeted disruption of the melanocortin-4 receptor results in
obesity in mice. Cell 88:131–141.
21. Chlouverakis C, Hojnicki D (1974) Lipectomy in obese hyperglycemic mice (ob-ob).
Metabolism 23:133–137.
22. Harris RB, Hausman DB, Bartness TJ (2002) Compensation for partial lipectomy in mice
with genetic alterations of leptin and its receptor subtypes. Am J Physiol Regul Integr
Comp Physiol 283:R1094–R1103.
23. Liszka TG, Dellon AL, Im M, Angel MF, Plotnick L (1998) Effect of lipectomy on growth
and development of hyperinsulinemia and hyperlipidemia in the Zucker rat. Plast
Reconstr Surg 102:1122–1127.
24. Montague CT, et al. (1997) Congenital leptin deficiency is associated with severe
early-onset obesity in humans. Nature 387:903–908.
25. Frederich RC, et al. (1995) Leptin levels reflect body lipid content in mice: Evidence for
diet-induced resistance to leptin action. Nat Med 1:1311–1314.
26. Kanasaki K, Koya D (2011) Biology of obesity: Lessons from animal models of obesity.
J Biomed Biotechnol 2011:197636.
27. Wang CY, Liao JK (2012) A mouse model of diet-induced obesity and insulin re-
sistance. Methods Mol Biol 821:421–433.
28. Myers MG, Cowley MA, Münzberg H (2008) Mechanisms of leptin action and leptin
resistance. Annu Rev Physiol 70:537–556.
29. Dupont S, et al. (2000) Effect of single and compound knockouts of estrogen receptors
alpha (ERalpha) and beta (ERbeta) on mouse reproductive phenotypes. Development
127:4277–4291.
30. Scrocchi LA, et al. (1996) Glucose intolerance but normal satiety in mice with a
null mutation in the glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor gene. Nat Med 2:
1254–1258.
31. Lu Y, et al. (2007) DMP1-targeted Cre expression in odontoblasts and osteocytes.
J Dent Res 86:320–325.
32. Soriano P (1999) Generalized lacZ expression with the ROSA26 Cre reporter strain. Nat
Genet 21:70–71.
33. Wernstedt I, et al. (2006) Reduced stress- and cold-induced increase in energy ex-
penditure in interleukin-6-deficient mice. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 291:
R551–R557.
34. Nilsson ME, et al. (2015) Measurement of a comprehensive sex steroid profile in ro-
dent serum by high-sensitive gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.
Endocrinology 156:2492–2502.
432
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1715687114
Jansson et al.
