 REVIEW
Extended spider cognition
Hilton F. Japyassu
´1,2
• Kevin N. Laland2
Received: 22 April 2016 / Revised: 20 December 2016 / Accepted: 1 January 2017 / Published online: 7 February 2017
� TheAuthor(s) 2017. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract
There is a tension between the conception of
cognition as a central nervous system (CNS) process and a
view of cognition as extending towards the body or the
contiguous
environment.
The
centralised
conception
requires large or complex nervous systems to cope with
complex environments. Conversely, the extended concep-
tion involves the outsourcing of information processing to
the body or environment, thus making fewer demands on
the processing power of the CNS. The evolution of
extended cognition should be particularly favoured among
small, generalist predators such as spiders, and here, we
review the literature to evaluate the fit of empirical data
with these contrasting models of cognition. Spiders do not
seem to be cognitively limited, displaying a large diversity
of learning processes, from habituation to contextual
learning, including a sense of numerosity. To tease apart
the central from the extended cognition, we apply the
mutual manipulability criterion, testing the existence of
reciprocal causal links between the putative elements of the
system. We conclude that the web threads and configura-
tions are integral parts of the cognitive systems. The
extension of cognition to the web helps to explain some
puzzling features of spider behaviour and seems to promote
evolvability
within
the
group,
enhancing
innovation
through cognitive connectivity to variable habitat features.
Graded changes in relative brain size could also be
explained by outsourcing information processing to envi-
ronmental features. More generally, niche-constructed
structures emerge as prime candidates for extending animal
cognition, generating the selective pressures that help to
shape the evolving cognitive system.
Keywords Extended cognition � Modular cognition �
Web building � Evolvability � Niche construction
Boundaries of cognition
The field of animal cognition is subject to several contro-
versies, perhaps the most obvious of which is the tension
between a conception of cognition as operating like a
general purpose problem-solving device and the view that
cognition is more reliant on functionally dedicated, spe-
cialised neural modules. The former position remains
influential within experimental psychology, while the latter
is prevalent among evolutionary biologists, behavioural
ecologists and evolutionary psychologists (Laland and
Brown 2011; Sanderson 2014), although a range of inter-
mediate positions are tenable. What these stances have in
common, however, is the premise that, excluding some
aspects of perception, cognition primarily occurs within the
boundaries of the central nervous system (CNS). A further
controversy, potentially even more fundamental than the
aforementioned one, takes issue with this premise by
extending the seat of cognition into the external environ-
ment, either through an extended (Wilson 2008) or enacted
(Thompson 2010) cognition thesis, or through a dynamical
systems approach (Shanker and King 2002).
Resolution of these tensions requires accurate accounts
of
alternative
conceptions
of
cognition
and
their
& Hilton F. Japyassu
´
japyassu@ufba.br
1
Biology Institute, Federal University of Bahia,
Rua Bara
˜o de Jeremoabo s/n, Campus de Ondina, Salvador,
Bahia 40170-115, Brazil
2
Centre for Biodiversity, School of Biology, University
of St Andrews, Harold Mitchell Building, St Andrews,
Fife, UK KY16 9TH
123
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
DOI 10.1007/s10071-017-1069-7
 contrasting predictions, together with clear-cut criteria for
deciding between them (Kaplan 2012). It is not in the scope
of this paper to discuss a definition of cognition in itself,
although the findings we present clearly have implications
for such a definition. Instead, we embrace a broad and
prevalent definition of cognition as the acquisition, pro-
cessing, storage and use of information (Shettleworth
2010). In doing so, we focus on contrasting the conceptions
of cognition that confine cognition to the CNS (which we
refer to as the ‘central cognition’ hypothesis—Fodor 1983;
Barkow et al. 1995), and those that extend it to the body or
its contiguous environment (the ‘extended cognition’
hypothesis), using the cognition of spiders as a model
system.
The central cognition hypothesis is being challenged
from various perspectives (Noe
¨ 2004; Churchland 2007). It
is clear, for example, that humans extend their information
processing power through computers and a variety of so-
called intelligent gadgets, but many other animals use
tools, some of which may potentially function as infor-
mation processing devices (Biro et al. 2013). It remains
possible that some animal-constructed devices will also
help the constructor to perform cognitively challenging
tasks. We make no distinction here between the various
ways that animals could extend their cognition out of the
brain, nor are we defending one of these particular ways of
extending cognition. While we acknowledge that differ-
ences exist between the embodied (Varela et al. 1992), the
extended (Clark and Chalmers 1998), and the enactive
(Thompson 2010) views of cognition, here we concentrate
on the general similarity between them: that is, we focus on
the general idea that somehow cognition also operates
outside the bounds of the brain, and accordingly we refer to
all variants of these views as extending cognition.
The central and extended cognition hypotheses lead to
fairly general contrasting predictions. Ashby’s (1960) ‘Law
of Requisite Variety’ specifies that, if it is to be stable, the
number of states of the control mechanism of a system
(e.g., the variant states available to an organism) must be
greater than or equal to the number of states in the system
being controlled (e.g., the variant environmental states with
which the organism must cope). It follows that organisms
that experience more complex environments require more
complex behaviour. Hence, from a central cognition per-
spective, individuals inhabiting more challenging envi-
ronments, for instance with unpredictable fluctuations in
resources, should possess larger or more complex brains
than those in less complex environments (Shumway 2008).
This prediction follows from the assumption that neural
complexity or processing power underlies behavioural
complexity, and that the requirement to solve challenging
environmental problems in order to survive and reproduce
selects for a rich neural architecture in the CNS capable of
delivering behavioural flexibility. As an illustration of this
reasoning, the ‘social brain hypothesis’ states that living in
groups is cognitively demanding, because the complexities
of social interactions impose a burden on cognitive pro-
cessing (Dunbar 1998; Dunbar and Shultz 2007), for
instance, requiring individuals to remember and contextu-
alise diverse relationships, which is known to be critical for
effective social interaction.1 Accordingly, living in larger
groups is associated with increases in grey matter in mid-
superior temporal sulcus and rostral prefrontal cortex in
Macaques (Sallet et al. 2011). In general, the social brain
hypothesis has found wide acceptance, notwithstanding
criticisms concerning, for example, the difficulties it faces
in accommodating non-modular aspects of intelligence
(Reader et al. 2011) and in explaining graded changes in
relative brain size (van Schaik et al. 2012).
Conversely, the extended cognition perspective antici-
pates a less clear-cut relationship between environmental
complexity and brain size. That is because this position
does not conceptualise cognition as exclusively grounded
in the central nervous system, but instead regards cognition
as a more or less distributed process that extends from the
brain to the body and/or the surrounding environment.
Extended cognition hence replaces aspects of central pro-
cessing with more peripheral processing units.
Another important distinction between central and
extended cognition relates to their informational require-
ments. The central cognition conception specifies that
specific biological (internal) information is required to
process task-specific (environmental) information, and
hence that the centralised neural mechanisms, whether they
be general or modular, must be sufficiently informed with
task-relevant biological information to solve the tasks
faced by the organism. In other words, the neural mecha-
nisms must possess or draw on large quantities of biolog-
ical information2 in order to function effectively; they are
expected to be informationally greedy. Such biological
information concerns or relates to properties of the task,
and/or aspects of the world, and hence has a referential
property. The most clear-cut examples here would involve
communication
with
signs,
whereby
a
behaviour
(a
1 Since individual recognition is not necessary for social life, this line
of reasoning does not apply to all social species. Invertebrates, for
example, have not been fully investigated in this respect, presenting
mixed evidence for either class recognition, kin recognition or
familiar recognition, but never for the full set of properties defining
true individual recognition (Gherardi et al. 2012).
2 ‘‘Information’’ is a difficult concept with multiple meanings. At
least three broad conceptions of information can be distinguished: the
statistical, the semantic/conventional, and the physical (Harms 2006).
Throughout this paper we use information in the semantic/conven-
tional sense, to characterise ‘‘knowledge of’’ or ‘‘meaning’’ as, for
instance, witnessed in both the referential properties of symbols, and
instructional aspects of knowledge in natural biological systems.
376
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
123
 vocalisation, a vibratory pattern) explicitly conveys to
others information concerning an object or an event in the
external world. Thus, the central cognition hypothesis
endorses a representational stance to cognition, in which
the external world is, in some way, mimicked or captured
isomorphically within the nervous system (Gallistel 1989),
for instance, as symbolic representations. Effective beha-
viour is thought to arise through the individual manipu-
lating these representations, for example, planning future
behaviour, prior to performing motor actions. The central
cognition conception is informationally greedy because the
brain either already possesses (i.e., in a nativist account) or
through
experience constructs (i.e., in an empiricist
account) internal models of the external world. In contrast,
extended approaches to cognition are either not represen-
tational, or at least require fewer representations, in their
conception, and thus are less demanding in terms of the
informational requirements of the brain. On this view,
informational content is offloaded to the body, or to aspects
of the world (Shapiro 2010; Pfeifer et al. 2014; Cappuccio
2016).
Two further points are important here. First, at least in
natural systems, information is a fundamentally relational
property that pertains to particular organisms, and only
exists to the extent that a communication channel is
operating that allows the organism to read or extract it.
Information cannot exist solely in the external environ-
ment. Second, while the notion of extended cognition
inherently implies a trade-off between information stored
in the brain and information distributed beyond it, any such
trade-off operates within a species and not necessarily
between species. Although it is hard to quantify, we
envisage that different species of organisms will vary in the
gross quantity of acquired semantic information that they
possess, and hence that there is no reason to expect that
large-brained organisms will not exhibit extended cogni-
tion: to the contrary, humans would seem a prime example.
The idea that cognition extends towards the body,
artefacts or the nearby environment holds similarities with
the idea of ‘extended phenotypes’, adaptations expressed
outside of the organism that constructed them (Dawkins
1999). However, while both concepts deal with artefacts
and modified environments, any similarities are superficial.
Dawkins characterises all phenotypes, be they extended or
not, as the expression of information perceived to be
encoded in genes; in this respect, his position is consistent
with internalist models of cognition, since the ‘controlling’
information is thought to reside inside the organism.
Internalist models are at odds with a view of information as
a relational concept, a view that implies that the relevant
information emerges only within a system that includes the
interaction between the components that constitute the
system (among which some external devices could be
included). The relational or systemic view of information is
embraced by the extended cognition approaches in its
embodied, extended, and particularly in its enactivist ver-
sions. Extended cognition is more akin to the niche con-
struction perspective (Odling-Smee et al. 2003), because it
implies reciprocal causation between the organism and the
artefact, or modified environment (Laland 2004). In this
way, despite the superficial similarities between the
extended cognition and the extended phenotype approa-
ches, they are in opposition when it comes to some of their
core assumptions.
Brains are energetically costly organs and, from the
allometry between brain and body size (Haller’s rule,
Striedter 2005), it follows that the maintenance costs of a
large brain, demanded by the central cognition approach, is
a particular challenge for tiny animals. These costs mean
that smaller animals face more severe trade-offs between
energy demands and information processing in their ner-
vous systems (Niven and Farris 2012). Thus, allometry
implies that the cost of the brain is proportionally higher
for smaller animals, if their small body size is taken into
consideration. In other words, it should be harder for
smaller than larger animals to maintain energetically costly
large brains, but (from the central cognition perspective)
reducing brain size potentially leads to a reduced cognitive
capacity, and errors in information gathering and process-
ing. Consistent with this reasoning, smaller-brained fishes
suffer stronger predation pressure and exhibit reductions in
learning and gathering of information about predators (van
der Bijl et al. 2015; Kotrschal et al. 2013, 2015), and are
restricted to live in less complex habitats (Huber et al.
1997), compared to larger-brained fishes. This trade-off
should
be
particularly strong for
predators,
because
predators tend to be large and mobile so as to track diverse,
changeable and spatially distinct prey distributions, and
thus require the information processing capability to detect
and respond to changes in these distributions (Edmunds
et al. 2016a). Consistent with this, in mammals, carnivores
have larger brains relative to body size than ungulates
(Jerison 1973), and a higher trophic position is connected
to larger brains in teleost fishes (Edmunds et al. 2016b). A
generalist foraging strategy would also require enhanced
information processing capabilities,3 because (as Ashby’s
Law dictates) a wide niche requires a large number of skills
to cope with the diversity of resources, predators, parasites,
or competitors, while a narrow niche would impinge less
stress over the information processing system. Accord-
ingly, combinations of neural limitations are associated
3 For example, well known generalists like the kea parrot Nestor
notabilis (Young et al. 2012) are remarkable for presenting partic-
ularly high levels of technical intelligence (Huber and Gajdon 2006).
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
377
123
 with reduced diet breadth in many unrelated insect taxa
(Bernays 2001).
These considerations lead us to expect, other things
being equal, that predators, of a relatively small size, with
generalist habits, are prime candidates for extended cog-
nition, because they should be under particularly strong
selection to reduce their relative brain size but maintain
their behavioural richness, and one means by which this
could be achieved is through offloading brain processing to
the body or to the environment. Spiders, as small, gener-
alist predators (Peka
´r and Toft 2015), have all the above
reasons for living in an informationally overloaded world.
These considerations do not mean that other organisms do
not extend cognition, but nonetheless do potentially leave
this particular order of arthropods of central interest to
debates over extended cognition.
The above considerations lead us to expect that natural
selection will have favoured cognitive strategies in spiders
that allow them to deal with a relatively large amount of
information
processing
without
paying
the
costs
of
exceptionally large brains, including through extended
cognition. Spiders are also interesting because they show
taxonomically
widespread
niche-constructing
abilities,
using silk for many functions (Krafft and Cookson 2012;
Eberhard 2014), most notably in egg sacs and webs. Spi-
ders’ webs are diverse in form, encompassing orbs, cobs,
sheets, irregular, and even single-line webs, all of them
structures with a long evolutionary history (Hormiga and
Griswold 2014). These silk structures have been postulated
to act as an extension of the perceptual organs of the spi-
ders, enhancing sensitivity through amplification or atten-
uation of particular vibrations, and allowing them to detect
movements of the substrate some distance away (Naftilan
1999; Masters 1984). The hypothesis of the web as an
extended perceptual system, the expectation that web
characteristics will have coevolved with spider perceptual
systems, and the extensive means by which spiders control
and regulate their local environment, most obviously
through the use of silk, all combine to leave spiders prime
model organisms for extended cognition.
In this paper we first provide a brief overview of the
literature on spider cognition, concentrating on new find-
ings and domains relevant to the challenge of distinguish-
ing between the central and the extended conceptions of
cognition (see Herberstein 2011; Jackson and Cross 2011
or Hesselberg 2015 for more extensive reviews). Differ-
entiating between these alternative accounts of cognition
has historically proven rather difficult (Adams and Aizawa
2001; Shapiro 2010). For this reason, we go on to discuss
the ‘mutual manipulability criterion’ (which specifies that
two entities that can reciprocally alter the state of each
other pertain to one-and-the-same system), a straightfor-
ward criterion recently developed explicitly to evaluate
claims of extended cognition (Kaplan 2012). Finally, we
consider three cases where the mutual manipulability cri-
terion can be deployed alongside empirical evidence con-
cerning spider cognition, and in this manner discuss the
support that the experimental data provide to the central
and extended models of cognition.
Spider cognition: what is new?
Nowadays, spiders are far removed from their old depiction
as hardwired, instinct-driven animals with few learning
capabilities. As this brief section will show, spiders behave
as if planning routes in advance, show a sense of
numerosity, learn conditional tactics of aggressive mimi-
cry, reverse previous learned associations, and adjust their
behaviour to altered conditions in a variety of ways.
Indeed, the growing literature on spider cognition has even
prompted the creation of an immersive virtual reality sys-
tem for spiders (Peckmezian and Taylor 2015a), turning
them into model organisms for research on learning
(Peckmezian and Taylor 2015b).
Route planning
Araneophagic jumping spiders (Portia fimbriata), while
foraging on orb weavers, watch the motionless prey from a
distance, before engaging in a circuitous path, which often
involves losing sight of the spider’s prey, so as to appear
near the top of the orb-web. From this position, the
jumping spider hangs down from a line until she is able to
grab the prey in the centre of its web (Jackson and Cross
2011). This route-planning ability has been experimentally
demonstrated (Tarsitano and Jackson 1997; Tarsitano
2006) and involves the categorisation of prey types, com-
bined with the specialised use of working memory (Cross
and Jackson 2014).
Learning
Spiders’ capability for rapid learning is experimentally
demonstrated by their learning to avoid dangerous ants and
formation of a search image of their prey in just a single
encounter (Jackson and Li 2004; He
´naut et al. 2014).
Spider learning can be sufficiently strong as to override
inborn dietary preferences, as in the case of specialised
myrmecophagous (ant- or termite-eating) spiders that will
prefer less nutritious prey, such as Drosophila flies, when
raised on these alternative diets (Peka
´r and Ca
´rdenas 2015).
Web spiders have also been shown to memorise the char-
acteristics of a single captured prey, such as the prey type,
size and location (Ades 1988; Rodrı
´guez and Gamboa
2000; Rodrı
´guez and Gloudeman 2011; Rodrı
´guez et al.
378
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
123
 2013), and to change web properties as a function of pre-
vious prey catches (Nakata 2012; Heiling and Herberstein
1999).
If walking onto an orb-web, araneophagic jumping
spiders can learn to use alternative vibratory signals of
aggressive mimicry, conditional on the size of the prey.
Small, easy to catch, orb weavers are stimulated, through
the jumping spider’s vibratory signals, to perform a full
attack on a fictitious prey item ensnared in the web. Con-
versely, more dangerous, larger orb weavers are attracted
to the periphery of the orb through alternative vibratory
signals that do not stimulate a full attack by the resident
spider (Tarsitano et al. 2000). The jumping spiders have
been shown to learn to produce the deceptive vibratory
signal by trial and error (Jackson and Nelson 2011). That
jumping spiders can learn this is not surprising, considering
that they can learn associations between vibration and other
stimuli (Long et al. 2015) and can reverse previously
learned associations between stimuli (Liedtke and Schnei-
der 2014).
Jumping spiders are also able to generalise problem-
solving strategies and apply these to new cognitive
domains (Cross and Jackson 2015). This ability to perform
cross-context generalisations could provide the basis of
some findings reporting a sense of numerosity among
jumping spiders (Nelson and Jackson 2012). The abstrac-
tion needed to generalise between contexts and cognitive
domains could be at the base of the abstraction needed for
having a sense of numerosity, one that has also been found
among web-building spiders (Rodrı
´guez et al. 2015). While
jumping spiders do not build webs, they do use silk in a
variety of ways, including hunting and kleptoparasitism on
other spiders’ webs, as a tether to reach otherwise inac-
cessible prey, for navigation, and reproduction. Hence,
they remain candidates for extended cognition.
Cognition and performance in small animals
One way to reduce informational demands would be to
reduce the computational power of the nervous system, at
the cost of performance. Animals with reduced size would
show fewer and smaller neurons (Niven and Farris 2012),
reducing the resolution of sensory systems and the control
over motor systems (Chittka and Niven 2009). Neverthe-
less, the cognitive feats of spiders (reviewed in Herberstein
2011, and Jackson and Cross 2011) do not consistently
suggest any clear reduction in performance with reduced
body size. For example adult orb-weaving spiders vary in
body mass by 400,000 times (including those near the
lower size limit for spiders in general), yet there is no
evidence of inferior performance due to very small sizes
(Eberhard and Wcislo 2011, 2012). Even the tiniest spiders
have much smaller spiderlings that are seemingly as
proficient at orb weaving as their adult mothers, when it
comes
to
the
precision
of
performance
(Eberhard
2007, 2011). This lack of clear constraints in behavioural
performance due to miniaturisation raises the possibility of
the occurrence of qualitatively distinct ways to deal with
information processing in miniature animals.
The mutual manipulability criterion
The mutual manipulability criterion (MM—Craver 2007)
is the dominant means of assessing ‘constitutive rele-
vance’, that is, of determining whether and when an entity
is explanatorily relevant to the behaviour of a larger sys-
tem. The MM’s popularity may perhaps follow from its
intuitive plausibility (Baumgartner and Gebharter 2016).
As applied to the problem at hand, one would like to know,
for example, if a sensory field arising from the hairs (the
trichobothria) on the cuticle of the leg of a spider, or even
an external device (like the web), is constitutively relevant
to the cognitive system, which is usually considered to be
located within the confines of the brain. The MM helps us
to understand whether the perceptual field, or the web, is
part of a larger system that performs a particular cognitive
function. According to the MM, if experimental changes in
the external entity (the perceptual field or web) leads to
changes in the cognitive system (for example, changes in
the attention system) and, reciprocally, changes in the
cognitive state of the system, entail changes in the external
entity, then this entity can be regarded as a part of the
cognitive system, and accordingly one can say that cog-
nition extends to include the external entity (Kaplan 2012).
The
reciprocal
causation
emphasised
in
the
MM
account allows for robust experimental tests, both through
interventions in the putatively cognitive, external com-
ponent, and in the central (cognitive) system under
inspection. Formally, such interventions must comply
with some conditions, so as to demonstrate that a putative
component, for example, the spider web, is causally
connected to another, for example, the perceptual system
of the spider (see Appendix for the formal requirements).
It must be clear that the MM account of cognition
involves reciprocal causality and, as such, the planned
interventions must be performed in both directions (e.g.
from the web to the perceptual system and from the
perceptual system to the web). Also, the experimental set-
up must have standard controls for any alternative inter-
vening variable (see ‘‘Appendix’’), so as to test causality
between the putative system components appropriately. In
the following section, we review experiments on spider
cognition that comply with these requirements and thus
allow for a proper test of the hypothesis of extended
cognition.
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
379
123
 Other criteria have been proposed to demarcate the
boundaries of cognition, such as the ‘proprietary demar-
cation criteria’4 or the ‘bandwidth criterion’.5 Nevertheless,
the MM criterion outperforms these criteria, because it is
better able to distinguish causally relevant components of
cognition from background conditions, lower-level corre-
lates, and/or causally inert connections (see below), which
constitutes the sole criteria for empirical tests of hypothe-
ses concerning extended cognition (Kaplan 2012).
The proper use of MM circumvents two major criticisms
of extended cognition: the ‘coupling-constitution fallacy’
(Adams and Aizawa 2001, 2010), which is the argument
that the coupling of an element to a system does not imply
that this element is constitutively relevant to the system,
and the concern that cognition will be extended to objects
only indirectly and distantly connected to the cognitive
system through a long and networked causal pathway
(Rupert 2004), a possibility labelled ‘cognitive bloat’.6
With respect to the coupling-constitution fallacy, we
agree that coupling does not inherently entail constitution.
For instance, although cognitive activity is coupled to
regionally enhanced blood flow in the active brain area,
blood flow is not considered to constitute the cognitive
process. However, such examples fail the MM criteria:
they are coupled to cognition through a one-way, but not
through a reciprocal causal path (in this instance, experi-
mentally induced increases in blood flow in a brain area is
not expected to lead to increased neural activity in that
area). Thus, the reciprocal causality eliminates the possi-
bility of erroneously taking background conditions for
components of the cognitive system. As Adams and
Aizawa (2010) acknowledge, coupling does not entail
constitution, but MM is tailored to identify constitutive
relations correctly (Craver 2007; Kaplan 2012).
The correct application of MM also eliminates the
possibility of a cognitive bloat. For example, the cognition
of one person could be said to be causally connected to the
workings of a vast knowledge base like the internet,
because changes in the internet content perceived by that
person would change her brain’s cognitive states. However,
any suggestion that changes in the brain workings of one
person will immediately elicit change in the state of an
external knowledge database that receives simultaneously
the input of billions of people lacks credibility. The MM
requirement of reciprocal causality prevents cognitive bloat
and rules out many other obviously non-cognitive candi-
date entities. Likewise in spiders, manipulations of prey
type or prey size might well change spider predatory
behaviour, but prey should not be taken as a component of
the spider cognitive system because they do not satisfy the
MM criteria (if one changes the functioning of the neural
networks involved in the organisation of the attack beha-
viour this will not lead to instantaneous changes in either
the diversity or the abundance of prey in the environment).
In this way, the reciprocal causal pathways in the cognitive
bloat type of argument are not effective, and thus the MM
again emerges as a powerful criterion to exclude causally
inert connections.
Case 1: Attention extends to web threads
Attention mechanisms are important to filter out irrelevant
sensory information, helping spiders to focus on germane
areas of the sensory landscape, such as potential prey.
Web-building spiders can actively focus attention on a
particular web portion. They do that by pulling more
strongly the web threads on the more profitable areas of the
trap, a behaviour that has been shown to lead to enhanced
capture success in these web regions (Nakata 2010).
Enhanced attention to specific web areas can be
induced by manipulating thread tension. It is possible to
increase the tension of particular web sections experi-
mentally, for example, inducing spiders to build their
webs over movable supports; one can change the dis-
tances between the supports after the web has been built,
thus altering artificially the tension of the horizontal, or
alternatively of the vertical threads of the web. In
experiments in which researchers artificially tensed the
radial threads that led to one web area, the spider
increased attention to that area, responding more quickly
to stimuli coming from that particular region of the web
(Watanabe 2000; Nakata 2010).
4 A proprietary demarcation criterion specifies the condition to be
met for a process to count as cognitive. There are some candidate
criteria to mark a process as cognitive, but the most widely endorsed
is the ‘‘non-derived content’’. For example, Adams and Aizawa
(2001) propose that cognitive processes must involve the transfor-
mation and manipulation of representational states bearing non-
derived contents, i.e., bearing contents that do not derive from the
external world, that are thus intrinsic to the cognitive system. The
problem here is that derived content is an ill defined concept,
sometimes connected to intuitions about intentionality, without any
consensus as how to differentiate derived from non-derived content.
Also, a yet unavailable, consensual and complete theory of content
would be necessary to account for the origin of these intrinsic, non-
derived contents, within a naturalistic perspective (Shapiro 2009;
Kaplan 2012; Gallagher 2013).
5 The bandwidth criterion relies on the pattern of causal interactions
among the parts of a system. It states that causal connectivity should
be stronger and more complex within the system, and weaker and
simpler at the interfaces between distinct systems. Thus, the amount
of connectivity should be used to decide the boundaries of the system.
6 It is important to note that these criticisms apply specifically to the
approach put forward by Clark and Chalmers (1998) (see Clark 2006).
Here, we are using the term ‘extended cognition’ in a broad sense to
refer to any approach that proposes the extension of cognition to areas
outside the brain, which include other approaches, such as the
embodied and the enactivist ones.
380
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
123
 Naturally, it is also possible to alter the state of the
foraging system in spiders, by simply letting the spiders get
hungrier. Hungry spiders will increase web thread tension,
so as to respond promptly even to usually less noticeable,
and less profitable prey, such as small fruit flies (Watanabe
2000).
Spiders can also learn to focus attention on particular
areas of the web. Where researchers have experimentally
presented prey items exclusively on the horizontal threads
of the web, the spiders have learned to pull these threads
more strongly, and thus to respond more quickly to prey
offered in the horizontal dimension (Nakata 2013).
Applying the MM to the above experimental results
seems straightforward. Experimentally increasing the ten-
sion of web threads in a particular area of the web will alter
the spider foraging behaviour. The reverse is also true,
because one can experimentally induce changes in the
internal state of the foraging system (changing the level of
satiation of the spider), and this results in changes in the
tension of web threads. Thus, to the extent that the above
results are experimentally correct, there is reciprocal cau-
sation between the web and the foraging system, satisfying
the MM criterion. Those cognitive processes associated
with spider foraging, particularly the attention system,
would appear to extend to the web, mediated by beha-
vioural manipulations of the tension of the radial threads.
The radial threads modulate the resonance and the
attenuation of prey vibrations, as well as the velocity of
their propagation, and thereby promote signal transmission
through the web (Landolfa and Barth 1996). Changes in the
tension of threads will differentially affect the nature of
web vibrations: while longitudinal waves vary mainly with
the composition of the silk, the transmission of transversal
waves increases greatly with thread tension (Mortimer
et al. 2014). Tense threads increase the amplitude of some
and reduce the amplitude of other frequencies, an effect
that can also be obtained by increases in thread diameter
(Mortimer et al. 2015). This means that the spider can
effectively change the transmission properties of the silk,
and its processing of vibratory stimuli, by varying its ten-
sion. Smaller prey would be less able to produce strong
longitudinal waves, but the spider is able to modulate the
transmission properties in the web, by tensioning its trap,
so as to change her own sensorial input. In this manner,
spiders are able to tune the overall attentional system
extended through the web to become more sensitive to
distinct kinds of stimuli. In this sense, web threads cannot
be understood as passive transmitters, or even passive fil-
ters
of
vibratory
information.
Thread
properties
are
adjustable and thus can process the same information in
different and adaptive ways.
The spider regulates thread information processing so as
to decide whether to attack a prey in as adaptive a fashion
as she regulates the nervous system. For example, she may
activate a courtship neural network instead of a prey cap-
ture neural network (neural regulation), if the vibration
originates from a male walking over the web instead of a
prey ensnared in the adhesive threads. Now, the decision-
making process that evaluates whether to attack a prey item
is initiated before the vibratory information enters the CNS,
while it is still being processed outside the spider body in
the threads.7 Tensed threads will make the spider attentive
to small prey, but the same prey will be ignored under a
non-tensed threads context. If we accept that the decision
whether to attack or engage in courtship is an aspect of
cognition (because the spider regulates processing of
information within the respective neural networks), then
we must equally consider as cognitive the decision to
attack a prey. However, this last decision is based on the
regulation of web information processing. Moreover, such
web regulation is adaptive, because for hungrier spiders
small prey are more valuable than for satiated spiders; the
latter accordingly focus on larger prey items by relaxing
thread tension.
The extension of the foraging cognitive system to silken
threads is potentially ubiquitous in spiders. Web tensing is
not a rare behaviour in spiders. It is used for prey detection
among groups as diverse as Pholcidae (Japyassu
´ and
Macagnan 2004), Scytodidae (Japyassu and Machado
2010), Araneidae (Lubin 1980), Theridiidae (Japyassu
´ and
Jotta 2005; Garcia and Japyassu
´ 2005), Tetragnathidae
(Yoshida 1990), Nephilidae (Japyassu
´ and Viera 2002), or
Mygalomorphae (Coyle 1986) and occurs even among
web-less spiders that invade other spiders’ webs (White-
house 1986). One of the primary, and basal, functions of
spider silk is prey detection, a widespread function present
in all major spider groups, from Mesothelae, through
Mygalomorphae to Araneomorphae, including Haplogynae
and Entelegynae (Coddington and Levi 1991; Blackledge
et al. 2009). Silk use is a characteristic feature of spiders
(Craig 2003), and diversification in silk use (associated
with gene duplication and differentiation) is tied to the
diversification of spiders (Starrett et al. 2012). Hence, it
7 This is not to say that web threads alone could in any way decide
about the meaning of a vibration, as if the web was an extended
phenotype that gained autonomy from the spider. As we emphasised
above (note 1), the meaning of a piece of information is a systemic
property, and we are thus stating that the web is part of the system that
conveys meaning to the vibratory information. More than that, we are
stating that the web processes information in adaptive ways, so as to
impart meaning to it within the encompassing system. To make
clearer this point, even the information that is passing in our optic
lobes at any moment has no meaning in itself, without a connotative
operation (sensu Harms 2004, 2006), an interpretation that occurs
within the larger encompassing system, that relies on memory
retrieval, on operations over these memories, and on emotional or
activational states.
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
381
123
 would seem that the web tension mechanism is a pervasive,
and ancient component of the spider attentional system,
and is not restricted to web builders or any highly cognitive
sub-group of spiders.
Even outside of web-building spiders, among cursorial
spiders, the regulation of the transmission and filtering
properties of the substrate could also be affected indirectly,
through the spider actively choosing particular substrates.
For example, many cursorial spiders forage over leaves, or
flowers, and it has been shown that Cupiennius coccineus
select leaves with particularly high vibration transmission
properties, such as banana leaves (Barth 2002b). Spiders
could thus possibly actively regulate the transmission of
vibrations by choosing different substrates for different
purposes, such as prey detection, or courtship. Consistent
with this, male wolf spiders are found to prefer habitats that
transmit better the vibrations (such as leaves) in the
courtship context (Gordon and Uetz 2011).
Case 2: Extended web-building algorithms
We have seen above that radial thread tensing is a com-
ponent of the attentional system, modulating attention to
different web areas and/or prey. The tensing of threads is
certainly a small portion of the overall spider foraging
system, which comprises much more than attention to prey.
Foraging involves many distinct behaviours: the spider has
to search for a suitable place for web-building, she has to
build and repair the web, detect and capture the prey, and
monitor site quality for web relocation (Shear 1986).
Among these behaviours, web building is probably the best
studied, with a long tradition of natural history descriptions
(Tilquin 1942; Savory 1952; Witt et al. 1968), as well as
experimental data concerning a variety of influences on
web building. This work reveals the spider’s web to be a
structure exquisitely dependent on both major environ-
mental features (Scharf et al. 2011) and self-built cues,
based on precise interactions between the spider and actual
thread configuration (Peters 1970; Ades 1995).
From a functional perspective, web builders modify web
dimensions and mesh size in response to exposure to dif-
ferent prey types and sizes (Sandoval 1994; Schneider and
Vollrath 1998; Murakami 1983; Heiling and Herberstein
2000). Long-term learning seems important to some of
these adaptive structural changes (Heiling and Herberstein
1999, Venner et al. 2000).
Descriptive and experimental work has been performed
to understand web-building rules (Eberhard 1972, 1990;
Zschokke and Vollrath 1995; Zschokke 1996, 2000, 2011).
This research suggests that spiders use many distinct
external cues while building the web, such as prey-induced
vibratory stimuli and prey nutrients (Pasquet et al. 1994;
Blamires et al. 2011), wind intensity (Wu et al. 2013),
gravity (Witt et
al.
1976;
Eberhard
1987;
Vollrath
1988a, b), and humidity (Baba et al. 2014). Spiders also use
internal cues to guide web building, such as the amount of
silk supply, spider size, weight (Eberhard 1988a), and leg
length (Witt et al. 1968; Vollrath 1987).
A spider also relies on cues that she herself has pro-
duced, through building earlier stages of the web, using the
configuration of previous laid threads to organise the next
steps of web building (Peters 1970). These cues include the
spider position in the web (near or far from, and above or
below, the hub), or cues from sticky lines already present in
the web that are sensed anew on each radius (the site where
the preceding loop of sticky line was attached to the radius,
and the distance from the outer loop of temporary spiral to
this
inner
loop
of
sticky
spiral—Eberhard
1972, 1982, 2012a). Moreover, while walking on previ-
ously laid lines, spiders do not solely respond automatically
to present stimuli, but also rely on memory and attention.
Spiders also do not invariably respond instantaneously to
the immediate thread configuration because in many con-
texts spiders walk long journeys (relative to their body
sizes) from one point of the web to another, and must keep
track of the distances travelled in order to fix the new line
at a precise point: they need to memorise the distances
travelled at each step, while building the trap (Eberhard
1988b). Frequently the relevant cues are not immediately
available (Eberhard 2012a, b), so that the spider must
decide where to fix its current thread based on memories
about previous decisions in the web-building process.
Memory and attention are integral parts of web building,
and it is probable that these cognitive processes are even
more relevant in the initial, exploratory phase of web
building (Hesselberg 2015).
One example of the complexities involved in web-
building is the decision about the distance between suc-
cessive sticky spiral segments in one specific radius
(Fig. 1). This decision is repeated at each new attachment
point and involves the assessment of many distinct cues,
such as reference points (the position of the inner loop of
sticky spiral; the position of the outer loop of temporary
spiral), the distance from the hub, the angle of the radius
with gravity, the distance between radii, the measurement
of distances (such as the actual temporary spiral to inner-
loop distance) and the comparison of these distances with
either short-term memories of similar distances in the
previous sticky spiral segment attachment, or less recent
memories regarding the attachment of the previous sticky
spiral loop, in the same radius, among others (see review
at Eberhard and Wcislo 2011; Eberhard in prep). Due to
the complexity of the task, sometimes spiders ignore
some cues in favour of others. For example, while
building the sticky spiral spiders can be faced with
382
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
123
 conflict between distinct cues; removal of the temporary
spiral in one sector of the web (which can be done
experimentally, or by the spider herself) introduces con-
flict between the actual and the previous temporary spiral
to inner-loop distances, and in this case the spider fre-
quently ignores one set of cues (for example, inner-loop
sensing) in favour of others (previous temporary spiral to
inner loop, Eberhard and Hesselberg 2012). The reverse
effect also happens in natural or experimental webs, when
there is an over-sized distance between the preceding
sticky spiral loops: in this situation the spider sometimes
ignores the inner loop cue in the actual radius and over-
shoots the actual inner-loop segment attachment point,
thus producing a reduced distance between the actual and
the previous sticky spiral loop, so as to compensate for
the over-sized distance between the preceding loops
(Eberhard 2011, in prep). Thus, by manipulating the
actual configuration of threads during the web-building
process, the experimenter can actively change the spider’s
attention, leading the spider more prone to ignore some
cues in favour of others.
The spider’s use of memory can also be deduced from
more long-term and global changes in web structure that
result from learning. Spiders will increase the size of a
particularly profitable web area, leading to changes in web
symmetry, if offered prey preferentially in the region below
the hub (Nakata 2012; Heiling and Herberstein 1999).
Similarly, spiders detecting prey without capturing it
increased the total thread length and capture areas of their
webs compared to a control group (Nakata 2007). Evidence
of learning also stems from forcing spiders to build in
abnormal conditions. Argiope argentata usually builds
vertical orbs; if forced to build in horizontal cages, her first
web is very irregular, but subsequent ones become pro-
gressively similar to regular orbs (Nogueira and Ades
2012).
Manipulations of regions of the CNS involved in web
building have also been performed. Spiders with laser
walk in Rn
walk Tn
touch Rn+1
touch Tn 
(temporary spiral sensing)
walk out Rn+1
touch Sn 
(inner loop sensing)
walk in Rn+1
process slowly 
changing cues 
position in relation to hub 
radius angle with gravity
memory  
S, T and 
Radii position
 integrate cues   
to radius
A
B
web periphery  
(outer part)
web centre  
(inner part)
Fig. 1 Cycle of actions necessary to build the current segment of the
adhesive spiral. Steps and processes within the cycle (a), with the
illustration of some of the behaviours involved (b adapted from
Eberhard and Wcislo 2011). The cycle (blue arrows in a) begins and
ends with the fixation of the current adhesive spiral segment (blue
box). The spider fix (the current segment) over the current radius (Rn,
a; spider behaviour displayed at b, top figure), and then in the next
radius (Rn?1, a; spider behaviour displayed at b, bottom figure). The
spider performs successive actions (large blue arrows, a), while
assessing the position of some rapidly changing cues (coloured balls,
A and B). Slowly and rapidly changing cues are stored, compared to
each other (to obtain distances and rates of change) and then
integrated (continuous and thin blue lines, a) to determine the position
of the next adhesive segment fixation (in Rn?1). When confronted
with conflicting cues, the spider may ignore some cues (inner-loop
sensing), and proceed to a shortcut, an alternative routine (dotted blue
line, a). These cycles are repeated until the completion of the capture
area
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
383
123
 induced lesions in the C3 region of the supraoesophageal
ganglion build smaller and rounded webs, with reduced
regularity in the positioning of repetitive components (Witt
1969). Interventions in the CNS with neurotoxins also
resulted in significant changes in web properties. Chlor-
promazine, diazepam and psilocybin prevent onset of web
building and sodium pentobarbital causes end of radius
construction before completion. D-amphetamine causes
irregular radius and spiral spacing, while LSD-25 results in
unusually regular webs (review: Witt 1971). Amphetamine,
scopolamine and caffeine cause various alterations in web
geometry (Hesselberg and Vollrath 2004). Substances
present in potential prey (gonyleptidine), such as harvest-
man, cause the construction of more irregular webs (Albı
´n
et al. 2014), and some parasites even manipulate the web-
building behaviour of their host spiders, injecting sub-
stances that cause them to build altered web structures to be
exploited by the parasites themselves (Eberhard 2000a, b;
Matsumoto 2009). The effects of these substances on web
structure reveal the targeting by parasitoids of areas of the
CNS that regulate web-building rules (Eberhard 2010). It
seems abundantly clear that changes in the functioning of
the CNS, particularly in some specific areas of the
supraoesophageal ganglion, have substantial effects on the
webs built by the spider.
In spiders, hunger levels also have clear effects on for-
aging behaviour, particularly web building. Well-fed spi-
ders build orbs less frequently (Vollrath and Samu 1997),
with smaller capture webs (Mayntz et al. 2009; Baba and
Miyashita 2006, but see Vollrath and Samu 1997), and also
webs with an added structure, the barrier web (Baba and
Miyashita 2006). This result is not restricted to orb wea-
vers: well-fed cob weavers also decrease the amount of silk
used in the capture area (viscid silk, number of anchor
lines, and sheet of the web), while increasing the amount of
silk used for supporting or barrier structures (Blackledge
and Zevenbergen 2007). Hunger levels change foraging
behaviour not only in web builders, but also in other trap
builders (Scharf et al. 2011), and even in wandering spiders
(Okuyama 2011; Aguilar-Argu
¨ello and Garcı
´a-Cha
´vez
2015).
From the literature reviewed above, it becomes clear
that one can alter the attentional state of the spider to web-
building cues by changing thread configurations. This is an
intervention on the web threads promoting a change in
cognition. The reverse intervention also reveals connec-
tivity between web structure and its underlying cognitive
system: the manipulation of the functioning of parts of the
CNS resulting in web-induced changes is abundantly
documented and, more generally, the effects of specific
neural networks on foraging activity are also well docu-
mented, for hunger regulates the activation of motor
activities in invertebrates through 5-HT neurons embedded
in the feeding motor network, configuring a promoter of
appetitive state (Gillette 2006). The evidence is thus that
the MM can be applied to the foraging system, more
specifically to web building, implying that the web-build-
ing cognitive machinery extends from the spider brain to
the web itself.
The claim of the extended cognition approach would
be, in the case of web building, that the use of the
structural connections and organisation of the web as
integral components of the cognitive system itself would
reduce the necessity for cognitive processing within the
CNS. This could be achieved, for example, by a reduction
in the need for long-term spatial memory. It is well
known that some spatial tasks require long-term spatial
memory and that the performance of these tasks is asso-
ciated with increases in brain size. For example, many
birds cache food for later retrieval (Balda and Kamil
1989; Shettleworth 1990) and cannot rely on any clear-cut
environmental cue for retrieval, because otherwise con-
specifics would readily pilfer these easy caches (see
review by Keefner 2016). In this way, birds have to
memorise the location of literally thousands of caches
(Pravosudov and Roth 2013), and this enhanced reliance
on spatial memory is correlated with larger hippocampal
volumes and neural numbers, either across populations
(Roth and Pravosudov 2009; Croston et al. 2015) or
across time (within individual seasonal variation, Smul-
ders et al. 1995, 2000).
Birds cannot solve their food-retrieval problem without
long-term spatial memory, but spiders could reduce the
usage of long-term memory and still solve the spatially
challenging problem of building a web. To build each orb-
web, spiders make thousands of measurements, keeping
track of the distances travelled so as to make decisions
throughout the process. But while birds cannot rely on the
stability of the external environment for cueing food
retrieval, spiders can rely on previously laid threads as cues
for new navigation decisions. Since web threads are reli-
ably out there while the spider is building its trap, there is
no need to memorise all the details of the emerging
structure (each of the distances travelled between spiral
segments, radii distances, the relative position of the spider
at different moments), because at each new step of the
building process the spider can reset the memory used in
the previous step. For example, at each new fixation of one
spiral segment, the spider can forget the distance memo-
rised for the fixation of the previous spiral segment. Thus,
the spider is able to trade long-term for short-term spatial
memory, simply because the threads already fixed will
remain in place, cueing the next steps. Plausibly, natural
selection may have favoured extended cognition here
because it allows the use of operational memory, whereas
centralised cognition would require more intensively long-
384
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
123
 term memories, to solve the task. After operational mem-
ory is erased, the CNS circuitry responsible for this
memory can potentially be available for the memorisation
connected to the next behavioural routine (i.e., in a sense,
operational memory is renewable). A simple thought
experiment helps to make clear the substantial economy in
cognitive resources provided by the silken lines already in
place: imagine a spider that performs exactly the same
movements that a regular spider performs to build a web,
only that this imaginary spider does not lay down silk, but
rather ‘builds’ a web without leaving traces of her path. To
do this, the imaginary spider would have to memorise the
whole path, and all the decisions previously taken, so that
she would not pass two times on the same place, or fix
‘spiral segments’ twice in the same point of the same ‘ra-
dius’. This is the kind of memory that a real spider does not
need, because she uses previous threads as physical
memories of her path.
This is not to suggest that web building does not need
long-term memory: it does. Rather, the point here is that
the spider, by relying on the previous threads as external,
long-term memory devices, probably requires less CNS
long-term memory than other similarly complex animal
activities (that must instead rely mostly on centralised
cognition). Spiders are not alone in using external cues to
simplify complex navigation tasks (see review in Shettle-
worth 2010), but they are certainly an outstanding example
because, since they build their own externalised memory
traces, these built ‘environmental’ cues are extremely
reliable, allowing the cognitive system to evolve in the
direction of extending itself to encompass the previously
external, niche-constructed environment (the web itself).
The same logic applies to any niche-constructed device
(burrows, retreats) built by one single individual, and thus
extended cognition could also play a part in the evolution
of these structures.
The reliable permanence of threads already laid by the
spider, while web building proceeds, can also possibly
reduce the computations needed to finish the structure. For
example, instead of calculating in advance the number of
radii needed to complete the web, the spider can proceed
by filling in open spaces with new radii, until there is no
open space left. By the same reasoning spiders would not
need to calculate the number of viscid spiral loops before
actually laying these threads, because the emerging struc-
ture itself helps to simplify the task, reducing the need for
complex geometric calculations. In a way, we could say
that threads simplify the problems faced by this almost
blind animal by reducing the dimensionality of the navi-
gational problem. Instead of navigating on a fully three-
dimensional space, spiders basically navigate through one-
dimensional draglines (even cursorial spiders leave silken
lines while walking). Silken lines could shrink the effective
dimension of the space that spiders navigate through,
helping thus to reduce the complexity of the task. For
example, when an orb-weaver is disturbed she usually
jumps out of the web and hides among dead leaves in the
forest litter, but later returns to the web. Finding the way
back to the web could be a challenging navigational
problem for a blind animal, but the task is trivial for the
spider, because all she needs to do is to climb back through
the safety dragline she left fixed at the hub right before she
jumped away from the web. In these ways, extending
cognition to the web would not only outsource information
processing, but would also reduce the overall need for
information, simplifying the immense navigational prob-
lem that a tiny blind animal would face so as to end up with
an optimal geometrical solution to a fundamental foraging
problem.
Case 3: Matched filters do not extend cognition
From the previous examples, we have been able to con-
clude that some external components (web features) are
integral parts of the spider cognitive machinery. We now
move on to show briefly how the application of the MM
criteria can also rule out potential candidates for extended
cognition.
Matched filters are sensory systems that are tuned to
specific aspects of the sensory landscape, so as to resonate
with that particular aspect, filtering out irrelevant stimuli.
A classical example would be that of parasitoid wasps of
the genus Trichogramma (Ichneumonoidea), that match
the number of their own progeny to the volume of each
particular host egg (Schmidt and Smith 1986). The trick
can be easily solved at the sensory level. The wasp
determines the radius, and thus the volume, of her host
(egg)
not
by
performing
some
kind
of
spherical
trigonometry,
but
by
taking
a
single
measure—the
[wasp’s] head/scapus angle—monitored most probably by
the mechanosensory bristles located at the joint between
head and scapus, when the wasp is walking over the
host’s egg (Fig. 2). Thus, particular receptor distributions
could incorporate fundamental aspects of the ecological
problem, providing straightforward, high-level informa-
tion
to
simplify
otherwise
relatively
complex
tasks
(Wehner 1987).
Spiders have many different kinds of matched filters.
The organisation of the slit sensilla (Blickhan and Barth
1985) and lyriform organs (Barth 2002c) adequately map
the stress lines produced in the leg cuticle by normal
stimulation. Prey walking onto a surface produces a high-
frequency, broad-band spectrum of vibrations, which are
very distinct from the low-frequency, narrow-band spec-
trum noise produced by abiotic factors such as the wind.
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
385
123
 The slits of the metatarsal vibration detector are high-pass
filters, relatively insensitive to low frequencies (Barth
1982), and the primary sensory cells block the low fre-
quencies typical of background noise (Barth 1998), thus
filtering
out
unimportant
stimuli
from
the
sensory
landscape.
Trichobothria (hairs in the cuticle, deflected by air flow)
can have different lengths, and the longer they are, the
lower the frequencies at which they resonate (Barth et al.
1993; Humphrey et al. 2001). Groups of trichobothria with
slightly different sizes represent a set of bandpass filters
that enhance sensitivity. The air-flow fields generated by
abiotic factors, for example, in tropical forests, are char-
acterised by low-frequency and narrow-band spectrum,
with low velocities, while the air-flow fields produced by
prey items, such as flies, are characterised by high fre-
quencies and wind velocity. Since the proportion of high
frequencies in the spectrum increases quickly as the fly gets
closer to the cursorial spider, the set of bandpass tri-
chobothria hairs can process directly the information about
the distance of the prey, enabling a quick and precise lunge.
Spiders with ablated trichobothria do not jump towards
flying prey (Barth 2002a).
Although it is clear that matched filters process bio-
logically relevant information coming from the environ-
ment, as ablation experiments show, there is no indication
that changes in the central nervous system of spiders will
lead to changes in the functioning of the sensory organs
themselves, a requirement of the reciprocal causation
embedded in the MM. As the cognitive system of spiders
most certainly cannot actively alter the functioning of the
sensory organs, cognition does not extend to the matched
filters, according to MM.8 While matched filters do not
satisfy our criteria for extended cognition, they may,
nonetheless, be examples of embodied cognition, which is
a broader related concept.
Advantages of extended minds
Extended spider cognition may help explain some rather
unexpected experimental findings. For example, if web
building is conceived as a centralised cognitive process,
researchers might reasonably expect significant amounts of
brain tissue to be dedicated to the organisation of the
various behavioural units needed to obtain the final web.
On this view, the ability to build a complex structure such
as an orb-web should be correlated with those brain areas
devoted to the processing of the multitude of simultaneous
cues, of the different kinds of silks and spinnerets to use in
different situations, of the organisation of the various
components of the structure, such as frame lines, temporary
spiral lines, radii, viscid spiral lines, hub building and
rebuilding, while monitoring the spatial position of the
spider within the emerging structure, and the properties of
relevant environmental features, such as gravity, humidity,
8 Nevertheless, there is experimental evidence for the centralised
modulation of the most peripheral sensory neurons. Centrally released
Footnote 8 continued
octopamine (Seyfarth et al. 1993) causes a persistent increase in
excitability in spider mechanosensory neurons (Widmer et al. 2005),
promoting a rise in sensitivity to higher frequencies (Torkkeli et al.
2011), and thus helping the spider to filter out irrelevant, low-fre-
quency background noise. In this way, although the evidence avail-
able implies that the cognitive system does not extend to the matched
filters themselves, it also implies that it does extend from the CNS to
the periphery of the nervous system.
Fig. 2 Matched filters provide
high-level information to the
CNS, but do not extend
cognition. Parasitoid wasps use
the curvature (angle BCD) of
the host insect egg to determine
the number of progeny allocated
to it. The angle between head
and scapus (angle BCD) is
correlated with the radius of the
egg. Figure adapted from
Wehner (1987)
386
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
123
 wind, prey abundance and type, etc. From the centralised
cognition standpoint, these aspects of the web should be
represented internally, in the organisation of a potentially
relatively large and costly CNS tissue that would yield high
foraging payoffs.
Conversely, from the extended cognition perspective, if
the cognition for web building extends to the web itself, the
amount of CNS neural tissue dedicated to web building
would be expected to be significantly smaller than what the
centralised cognition stance anticipates. It follows that the
two approaches to cognition have contrasting predictions
about the relative size of spider CNS tissue dedicated to
solving specific tasks. Now, within the group of orb wea-
vers, web building has been lost or simplified indepen-
dently several times. For our purposes, the loss of web
building among the kleptoparasitic genus Argyrodes is
particularly relevant, because these spiders are particularly
small in size, and smaller sizes involve higher maintenance
costs for relatively larger brains (Haller rule, Striedter
2005).
Miniaturisation
should
be
accompanied
by
increased pressures
for
reducing
relative
brain
size,
because of a trade-off between energy demands and
information processing in their nervous systems (Niven and
Farris 2012). Indeed, from the centralised cognition
standpoint, the loss of web building in Argyrodes could be
thought of as an evolutionary response to these pressures,
allowing these spiders to dispose of relatively large brain
areas devoted to web building. Nevertheless, notwith-
standing the loss of web-building ability, these tiny spiders
did not change their relative brain size (Quesada et al.
2011). This result is unexpected from within the usual
central approach to cognition, but is precisely what an
extended approach to cognition would predict.
Extended cognition could also help to explain an
unsolved puzzle in comparative analyses of brain–body
allometry. It is well known that different taxa have dif-
ferent slopes and elevations of brain–body scaling (Fig. 3).
Larger animals such as mammals or birds cannot be as
small as ants, because they would have prohibitively large
brains (Eberhard and Wcislo 2011). This shows that small-
sized animal taxa have apparently solved scaling problems
seemingly insuperable for larger animals (Eberhard and
Wcislo 2012). One possible explanation for these brain-
scaling taxonomic differences would be that these tiny
brains harbour a simpler behavioural system, but this does
not seem to be generally the case, when one looks, for
example, at the cognitive feats of jumping spiders (re-
viewed above), or bees, that seem capable of complex
learning, including the formation of concepts (Giurfa et al.
2001; Leadbeater and Chittka 2007), or even tiny spiders
that do not have reduced ability to build functional orbs
(Eberhard and Wcislo 2011; Hesselberg 2010). Another
possible explanation would be at hand if these tiny brains
were inherently less precise in their performance, but that
also does not always seem to be the case (Eberhard 2011).
Alternatively, tiny brains could be more richly modu-
lated than larger brains. Neuromodulation could help the
nervous system to multitask, by multiplexing the network
(Wang 2010; Akam and Kullmann 2014). Although the
available information about neuromodulation in spiders
does not suggest that spiders have particularly sophisti-
cated neuromodulatory systems (Seyfarth et al. 1993;
Widmer et al. 2005; Jones et al. 2011; Torkkeli et al. 2011;
Barth 2013; Hebets et al. 2015), the dynamic properties of
spider nervous system networks have just begun to be
studied with new neurophysiological techniques (Menda
et al. 2014), so that this possibility can now be better
investigated in live animals.
One final solution to this brain–body scaling problem
would be the outsourcing of processing power from the
centre to the periphery of the nervous system/body, or to
organised and constructed areas of the external environ-
ment: that is, to extend cognition. If these smaller animals
find ways to regulate the properties of features of their
environment through their behaviour (as spiders alter the
Fig. 3 Graded changes in brain–body allometry (grey dots at the
basal plane, positive Central cognition-body size correlation) do not
follow from Haller’s rule. A possible explanation for the stepped
correlation across taxonomic groups (each of the three distinct clouds
of points) would be the relative amount of non-brain based
information processing (negative correlation between Extended
cognition and Body size, grey dots at the right plane). Relatively
higher degrees of extended cognition would help animals to maintain
performance at much smaller body sizes. The correlation between
cognition (both central and extended) and body size is represented by
the red dots
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
387
123
 properties of web threads by increasing tension), or if the
organisation of these environmental features help to
assemble together different behavioural domains (like in
the case of building silken sheets, see below), the stress
over centralised control is reduced, allowing a tiny brain to
perform better (Fig. 3).
Miniaturisation is a common phenomenon and is per-
haps becoming yet more common as the increasing tem-
peratures in the Anthropocene select for smaller body sizes
(Sheridan and Bickford 2011). Miniaturisation is consis-
tently correlated with morphological simplification and
novelty (Hanken and Wake 1993). For behavioural sys-
tems, simplification is often understood as connected to
reduced behavioural plasticity, because simpler systems
would have lower number of internal stable states, hence a
lower number of behavioural outputs (Arnellos and Mor-
eno 2015). Considering the web-building system, spiders
have repeatedly evolved from orb to sheet or cob weavers
(for example in Linyphiidae, Theridiidae, and Nesticidae:
Bond et al. 2014), and this change is connected to major
simplifications, with the loss of whole phases of the
ancestral
orb-web
building
algorithm
(Benjamin
and
Zschokke 2002, 2004). Nevertheless, instead of exhibiting
less plastic performance, these derived species of spiders
are even capable of larger adjustments in web design rel-
ative to ancestral forms. The derived forms have typically
lost the stereotypic construction behaviour (Benjamin and
Zschokke 2003, 2004) and gained ample intra-individual,
inter-individual, and species variability (Eberhard et al.
2008). This complexity of behavioural outputs (i.e., web
variability), which arises in spite of apparent simplicity in
underlying behavioural rules (e.g., a web algorithm),
requires explanation. Extensive web variability and inno-
vation appear connected to a higher behavioural impreci-
sion in these hyper-variable spider groups (Eberhard
2000a, b; Eberhard et al. 2008), which could be obtained, at
a mechanistic level, from the simultaneous loss of several
cues for setting various web parameters, particularly the
loss of an important organiser of orb-webs, the delimiting
frame threads (see Eberhard et al. 2008). The absence of
frame threads, of radial organisation, and of the whole
phase of temporary spiral building turned the cob and sheet
web algorithms much more dependent on the initial,
exploratory
phase
of
web
building
(Benjamin
and
Zschokke 2004), a phase that is much more variable,
mainly involving the fixation of threads over the substrate
(Hesselberg 2015). The dependence of the exploration
phase (and independence of the remaining phases) on the
substrate has been experimentally demonstrated for the
ancestral orb weavers: while the length of the exploratory
phase increases with the complexity of the substrate, the
length of the remaining phases does not match substrate
complexity (Zschokke 1996). Since these remaining phases
are either absent or much less organised in derived cob or
sheet weavers, the net result is a web much more dependent
on the exploratory phase, and thus much more connected to
the substrate. As a result, these webs seem to incorporate
substrate organisation into the organisation of the web
itself, and in this way substrate variability could help
explain the large intra-individual, inter-individual and
species variability in the group. What we see is a decrease
in the dependence of central organisers (simplification of
web building algorithm) with a simultaneous increase in
the dependence of external organisers (substrate form),
resulting not only in more plasticity, but also in the evo-
lution of a huge diversity of web patterns (Eberhard et al.
2008). Thus, the outsourcing of information from beha-
vioural algorithms to the environment could not only help
to explain the huge success of a diverse group of spiders,
but could also help to explain the taxonomic diversity of
this group.
Extended approaches to cognition could also shed light
on some other aspects of spider behaviour. Beside webs,
spiders build a variety of silken structures, such as barrier
webs, retreats and stabilimenta. These structures involve
the filling of a surface, either over a substrate, or suspended
in the air, which is obtained with the repetition of beha-
vioural routines of fixing threads over threads while
walking over the emerging structure. These silken surfaces
have evolved multiple times within distinct, independent
spider groups, and they have also appeared many times
independently among insects (Craig 1997), or pseu-
doscorpions (Tizo-Pedroso and Del-Claro 2005), whenever
silken lines evolve in the first place. The production of a
silken sheet thus seems straightforward, in the presence of
the ability to produce silken lines. One possible explanation
for the ease with which evolution finds behavioural algo-
rithms for building silken sheets is that it is also common
for animals to have territories, areas that are well known
and explored intensely, and that are frequently marked for
recognition, chemically or otherwise. If an animal is able to
produce silk, territory marking with silk is straightforward,
and if walking within a territory is common, nodal areas in
the territory (central resting places) will be filled with a
tissue of silk (Edgerly et al. 2002). The production of silken
sheets could be organised through positive feedback loops
between behaviour and silk lines: if the animal marks its
path with some volatile chemical compound in the silk, the
most walked through places will retain the most of the
marking, and the attraction to the denser regions of frozen
paths would feedback into the system, leading to the
emergence of silken tissues. Thus, the conjunction of ter-
ritoriality with the ability to produce threads could result in
the production of silken sheets, not because of some cog-
nitive faculty that organises behaviour from within the
CNS (central cognition), but instead because of the self-
388
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
123
 assembly between distinct aspects of the behaviour of the
species, promoted by enduring niche-constructed aspects of
the environment. In this way, a dynamic systems approach
to cognition could help explain the emergence of less CNS-
demanding, but still complex, behaviours. Given this easy
first start, the evolution of silken sheets for particular
purposes
(protection,
prey
capture,
courtship)
would
require only a few complementary organisational steps
(which could even be based on central cognition).
Although self-reinforcing loops of this kind are well
known to produce organised output in many distinct
dynamical,
including
social,
systems
(Couzin
2009;
Sumpter 2010), it is important to notice that extended
processes always work in conjunction with centralised
organisers, which allows the extended components to
evolve. Extended cognition cannot entirely replace cen-
tralised cognition; otherwise, the autonomy of the living
system would disappear in a constant flux of ecological
relations. Within social systems, extended cognition would
be a logical intermediary step facilitating major evolu-
tionary transitions (sensu Szathma
´ry and Maynard-Smith
1995), a step that nevertheless further requires means to
circumvent conflicts of interest within the newly emerging
social system.
Conclusions
The literature we have reviewed, allied to the mutual
manipulability criterion, leads us to conclude that spider
cognition does extend to web threads and its configura-
tions, but not to matched (sensorial) filters. Although
matched filters process information adaptively, the cogni-
tive system must simply take this information as input for
its workings, and cannot manipulate directly the state of
these sensory organs. The mutual manipulability criterion
is thus very discriminating and allows researchers to detect
the boundaries of the cognitive system effectively.
Despite allowing a straightforward distinction between
centralised and extended cognition, the MM is also
experimentally demanding, requiring interventions on the
CNS and at the periphery of the nervous system (or in the
niche-constructed environment). As a consequence, some
well-known examples of spider cognition, like route
planing and other impressive cognitive feats of jumping
spiders, still require further investigation to allow the
application of the MM criteria. Accordingly, we believe
there are good opportunities for further experimentation
leading to the recognition of other aspects of spider beha-
viour as extended cognition.
More generally, spiders and other small-sized inverte-
brates (and perhaps even many small vertebrates) are nat-
ural candidates for the discovery of further extended
cognitive mechanisms, because these extended mecha-
nisms would be especially relevant for small-brained ani-
mals. Small-sized animals may have solved the brain–body
scaling problems posed by miniaturisation by outsourcing
information processing, that is, by extending cognition to
the most peripheral parts of their bodies, or to the closest
elements of their environment. This ingenious solution may
be particularly successful when this closest environmental
feature is produced by the organism itself, as in the case of
nests, burrows, webs, retreats, and other artefacts produced
by animals, because coevolutionary loops could then fine
tune the properties and use of these artefacts more closely,
allowing cognition to extend in a more complete form. It
may be no coincidence that some of the most cognitively
sophisticated invertebrates (e.g., social bees, wasps, ants)
are renowned for their niche construction (e.g., nest
building). We thus have a double prediction: that minia-
turisation will select for extended cognition and that niche
construction will facilitate the process of outsourcing
information processing.
Moreover,
by
outsourcing
cognition
and
building
structures, organisms potentially make their world more
predictable, and a predictable feature of the environment
will frequently turn out to be a selective pressure (Odling-
Smee et al. 2003). As a consequence of having a web,
selection pressures appear for the web to be defended,
maintained, regulated, and improved upon in design, as
well as for others to hunt on it, destroy it, squat in it, or
steal food from it. Such adaptive responses potentially
evolved multiple times, perhaps producing parallel evolu-
tion in independent lineages, and/or long-term evolutionary
trends spanning multiple characters, in ways that are
potentially probabilistically predictable (Laland 2015;
Laland et al. 2015). Such parallel evolution or trends,
together with the aforementioned predictions concerning
miniaturisation and simplification, could be investigated
using comparative phylogenetic methods or through com-
parative experiments. Hence, increasing attention to the
possibility of extended cognition may open up exciting
new opportunities for novel research.
Acknowledgements HFJ received a visiting professor fellowship
from Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientı
´fico e Tec-
nolo
´gico (CNPq - Brazil) (PDE PDE232691/2014-2). Research sup-
ported in part by a Grant from the John Templeton Foundation to
KNL. William Eberhard, Kenneth Mavor and Stefan Pulver helped to
improve the original manuscript with ideas and criticisms. We also
thank Ken Cheng and three anonymous reviewers for the meticulous
reading and insightful suggestions.
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
389
123
 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://crea
tivecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were
made.
Appendix: Formal requirements to the mutual
manipulability criteria
Formally, the interventions realised to detect whether two
elements belong to one-and-the-same system must comply
with some conditions, so as to demonstrate that a putative
component X (for example, the spider web) is causally
connected to Y (for example, the perceptual system of the
spider):
A necessary and sufficient condition for X to be a
(type-level) contributing cause of Y with respect to
variable set V is that (i) there be a directed path from
X to Y such that each link in this path is a direct
causal relationship; that is, a set of variables Z1 … Zn
such that X is a direct cause of Z1, which is in turn a
direct cause of Z2, which is a direct cause of … Zn,
which is a direct cause of Y, and that (ii) there be
some intervention on X that will change Y when all
other variables in V that are not on this path are fixed
at some value (Woodward 2003, p.59).
Also, there are some necessary conditions for an interven-
tion (I) to appropriately test the causal relationship between
X and Y (Woodward 2003, p. 98):
1.
I causes X.
2.
I acts as a switch for all the other variables that cause
X. That is, certain values of I are such that when I
attains those values, X ceases to depend on the values
of other variables that cause X and instead depends
only on the value taken by I.
3.
Any directed path from I to Y goes through X. That is,
I does not directly cause Y and is not a cause of any
causes of Y that are distinct from X except, of course,
for those causes of Y, if any, that are built into the I-X-
Y connection itself.
4.
I is (statistically) independent of any variable Z that
causes Y and that is on a directed path that does not go
through X.
These are indeed general conditions to test causality in
any experimental setting. It must be clear that the MM
account of cognition involves reciprocal causality and, as
such, the planned interventions must be performed on both
directions, from X to Y and from Y to X.
Baumgartner and Gebharter (2016) suggest that MM
detects constitutive relevance, but that this does not
imply the existence of causal relationships within the
extended system, i.e., that constitutiveness does not entail
causality.9 Nevertheless, this is only true when you
consider the relationships between the overall system and
its constituent parts, because these are spatiotemporally
overlapping relations, that is, the system does not cau-
sally act over its own parts, because it is merely con-
stituted by these parts. Of course, this reasoning also
works the other way round: the parts do not causally act
over the system as a whole, because this would entail a
causal loop whereby the part acts over itself. So, this
reasoning is tailored to evaluate the relationship between
the whole and its parts. Nevertheless, this is not the
question we are trying to evaluate. We are not interested
in the relationship between the whole extended (cogni-
tive) system and one of its parts (threads, webs, sensorial
fields). Instead, we are interested in the relationship
between different parts of the system, and thus we do not
analyse the system simultaneously at two levels of
organisation (at the level of the whole, and at the level of
the parts). We stick to one level of analysis, and we
analyse only the parts and the interrelations between
them: we are dealing with the causal structure among the
parts (of the putative extended system), and this is suf-
ficient for our purposes.
Also, the argument just make sense if one considers the
macro- and micro-levels not as alternative descriptions of
one system, but instead as distinct entities that could be
causally independent from each other. This interpretation
comes from the correct and well established idea that the
whole is more than the sum of its parts, so that the
description of the macro-system is more than the descrip-
tion of its parts. But if we consider not only the parts, but
also their interactions (additive or non-additive), which are
not strictly predictable in complex systems, then the
description of the macro- and micro-levels do coincide, and
emergent properties will appear within these complex
interactions. If a property of an entity change as a function
of its interactions (as in multiplexing neural networks, that
are differentially activated for different functions—see
Wang 2010), then the interactions must necessarily be part
of the description of the system, at any (macro or micro)
level.
9 They state that ‘‘Craver and Bechtel (2007) offer two reasons to
support its non-causal nature: (i) constitutive relevance holds among
wholes and their parts, whereas causal relevance relates mereolog-
ically independent entities; and (ii) changes in the macro- and micro-
behaviours, of a mechanism temporally overlap, whereas causes
temporally precede their effects. The vast majority of mechanists join
Craver and Bechtel in taking (i) and (ii) to establish the non-causal
nature of constitutive relevance’’.
390
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
123
 It is not the place here to develop a functional analysis of
the cognitive system, but we would like to show briefly that
such an analysis would even solve the problem that
Baumgartner and Gebharter (2016) remark, namely, that
the macro-level is constituted by (and supervenes on) the
micro-level, and thus does not causally interact with it. To
perform such an analysis we will build on the theoretical
development of Moreno and Mossio (2015). These authors
show that the macro-description supervenes on the con-
figuration of the parts, while the configuration itself
remains as an emergent property of the parts. From this
position, there are two relevant points concerning the
extended cognition: the web (or any other biological
component external to the CNS) must be a constraint for
the internal workings of the CNS cognitive system, and it
must perform closure (see below) in this very system. As to
the first point, to be a constraint, is to channel the func-
tioning of a system (in a cognitive system, to channel
information processing in a specific, biologically relevant
way), without being changed in the timeframe of the
ongoing process, so as to accelerate or to make easier a
process. As to the second point, for a constraint to be part of
a closed configuration, causal relations between the con-
straints (internal and external) must take the form of a
closed network of interactions. Web threads clearly con-
strain information processing in the spider’s CNS, and the
web and threads as constraints are clearly entangled in
multiple reciprocal causal relations to the CNS cognitive
machinery (in a technical sense, they perform closure of
constraints), as shown in the empirical data we review in
this contribution. Thus, an analysis from within this sys-
temic perspective is entirely compatible with the analysis
we develop in the present contribution, and would render
philosophically sound the description of the system in
distinct (macro and micro) levels, that would correspond to
distinct causal regimes.
Anyway, for our purposes, we can bypass this discus-
sion, because it suffices to consider the relationship
between the macro-level description of the internal cog-
nitive system (the brain, or specific parts of it), and a
putatively external variable (the sensory field, or the spider
web), without reference to the internal workings of the
CNS. Our aim is to evaluate whether the putatively
external variable changes the functioning of the CNS and,
vice versa, whether changes in the state of the CNS lead to
changes in the putatively external variable. It does not
matter if the effect of the external variable on the macro-
system (and vice versa) occurs through some molar prop-
erty of the macro-system or through some internal com-
ponent within the (macro) CNS: in any way, if the mutual
manipulability criterion applies, because there is reciprocal
causality between the parts.
References
Adams F, Aizawa K (2001) The bounds of cognition. Philos Psychol
14:43–64
Adams F, Aizawa K (2010) Defending the bounds of cognition. In:
Menary R (ed) The extended mind. MIT Press, Cambridge
Ades C (1988) Memo
´ria e aprendizagem em aranhas. Biotemas
1(1):2–27
Ades C (1995) A construc
¸a
˜o da teia geome
´trica enquanto instinto:
primeira parte de um argumento. Psicol USP 6(1):145–172
Aguilar-Argu
¨ello SO, Garcı
´a-Cha
´vez JH (2015) Importance of hunger
and prey type on predatory behavior stages in Corythalia
albicincta (Araneae: Salticidae). J Arachnol 43(2):143–151.
doi:10.1636/0161-8202-43.2.143
Akam T, Kullmann DM (2014) Oscillatory multiplexing of popula-
tion codes for selective communication in the mammalian brain.
Nat Rev Neurosci 15(2):111–122
Albı
´n A, Lacava M, Viera C (2014) Effects of gonyleptidine on the
orb-web spider Araneus lathyrinus (Holmberg, 1875). Arach-
nology 16(5):154–156
Arnellos A, Moreno A (2015) Multicellular agency: an organizational
view. Biol Philos 30(3):333–357
Ashby W (1960) Design for a brain: the origin of adaptive behaviour.
Chapman & Hall, London
Baba Y, Miyashita T (2006) Does individual internal state affect the
presence of a barrier web in Argiope bruennichii (Araneae:
Araneidae)? J Ethol 24(1):75–78
Baba YG, Kusahara M, Maezono Y, Miyashita T (2014) Adjustment
of web-building initiation to high humidity: a constraint by
humidity-dependent thread stickiness in the spider Cyrtarachne.
Naturwissenschaften 101(7):587–593
Balda RP, Kamil AC (1989) A comparative study of cache recovery
by three corvid species. Anim Behav 38(3):486–495
Barkow JH, Cosmides L, Tooby J (eds) (1995) The adapted mind:
evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Barth FG (1982) Spider vibration receptors: threshold curves of
individual slits in the metatarsal lyriform organ. J Comp Physiol
148(2):175–185
Barth FG (1998) The vibrational sense of spiders. In: Hoy RR, Fay
RR (eds) Comparative hearing: insects. Springer, New York,
pp 228–278
Barth FG (2002a) Kinesthetic orientation. In: A spider’s world.
Springer, Berlin, pp 303–310
Barth FG (2002b) Signposts to the prey: substrate vibrations. In: A
spider’s world. Springer, Berlin, pp 223–246
Barth FG (2002c) The measurement of strain in the exoskeleton. In: A
spider’s world. Springer, Berlin, pp 39–72
Barth FG (2013) A spider’s world: senses and behavior. Springer,
Berlin
Barth FG, Wastl U, Humphrey JA, Devarakonda R (1993) Dynamics
of arthropod filiform hairs. II. Mechanical properties of spider
trichobothria (Cupiennius salei Keys.). Philos Trans R Soc Lond
B Biol Sci 340(1294):445–461
Baumgartner M, Gebharter A (2016) Constitutive relevance, mutual
manipulability,
and
fat-handedness.
Brit
J
Philos
Sci
67(3):731–756
Benjamin SP, Zschokke S (2002) Untangling the tangle-web: web
construction behavior of the comb-footed spider Steatoda
triangulosa and comments on phylogenetic implications (Ara-
neae: Theridiidae). J Insect Behav 15(6):791–809
Benjamin SP, Zschokke S (2003) Webs of theridiid spiders: construc-
tion, structure and evolution. Biol J Linn Soc 78(3):293–305
Benjamin SP, Zschokke S (2004) Homology, behaviour and spider
webs: web construction behaviour of Linyphia hortensis and L.
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
391
123
 triangularis (Araneae: Linyphiidae) and its evolutionary signif-
icance. J Evol Biol 17(1):120–130
Bernays EA (2001) Neural limitations in phytophagous insects:
implications for diet breadth and evolution of host affiliation.
Annu Rev Entomol 46(1):703–727
Biro D, Haslam M, Rutz C (2013) Tool use as adaptation. Philos
Trans R Soc B 368(1630):20120408
Blackledge TA, Zevenbergen JM (2007) Condition-dependent spider
web architecture in the western black widow, Latrodectus
hesperus. Anim Behav 73(5):855–864
Blackledge TA, Scharff N, Coddington JA, Szu
¨ts T, Wenzel JW,
Hayashi CY, Agnarsson I (2009) Reconstructing web evolution
and spider diversification in the molecular era. Proc Natl Acad
Sci 106(13):5229–5234
Blamires SJ, Chao YC, Liao CP, Tso IM (2011) Multiple prey cues
induce foraging flexibility in a trap-building predator. Anim
Behav 81(5):955–961
Blickhan R, Barth FG (1985) Strains in the exoskeleton of spiders.
J Comp Physiol A 157(1):115–147
Bond JE, Garrison NL, Hamilton CA, Godwin RL, Hedin M,
Agnarsson I (2014) Phylogenomics resolves a spider backbone
phylogeny and rejects a prevailing paradigm for orb-web
evolution. Curr Biol 24(15):1765–1771
Cappuccio ML (2016) Mind-upload. The ultimate challenge to the
embodied mind theory. Phenomenol Cogn Sci 1–24. doi:10.
1007/s11097-016-9464-0
Chittka L, Niven JE (2009) Are bigger brains better? Curr Biol
19:R995–R1008
Churchland P (2007) Neurophilosophy at work. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge
Clark A (2006) Coupling, constitution and the cognitive kind: a reply
to Adams and Aizawa
Clark A, Chalmers D (1998) The extended mind. Analysis 58:10–23
Coddington JA, Levi HW (1991) Systematics and evolution of spiders
(Araneae). Annu Rev Ecol Syst 22(1):565–592
Couzin ID (2009) Collective cognition in animal groups. Trends Cogn
Sci 13(1):36–43
Coyle FA (1986) The role of silk in prey capture by nonaraneomorph
spiders. In: Shear W (ed) Spiders: webs, behavior and evolution.
Stanford University Press, Stanford, pp 269–305
Craig CL (1997) Evolution of arthropod silks. Annu Rev Entomol
42(1):231–267
Craig CL (2003) Spiderwebs and silk: tracing evolution from
molecules to genes to phenotypes. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Craver CF (2007) Explaining the brain: mechanisms and the mosaic
unity of neuroscience. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Craver C, Bechtel W (2007) Top-down causation without top-down
causes. Biol Philos 22:547–563
Cross FR, Jackson RR (2014) Specialised use of working memory by
Portia
africana,
a
spider-eating
salticid.
Anim
Cogn
17(2):435–444
Cross FR, Jackson RR (2015) Solving a novel confinement problem
by spartaeine salticids that are predisposed to solve problems in
the context of predation. Anim Cogn 18(2):509–515
Croston R, Branch CL, Kozlovsky DY, Roth TC, LaDage LD, Freas
CA, Pravosudov VV (2015) Potential mechanisms driving
population variation in spatial memory and the hippocampus in
food-caching chickadees. Integr Comp Biol 55(3):354–371.
doi:10.1093/icb/icv029
Dawkins R (1999) The extended phenotype: the long reach of the
gene. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Dunbar RI (1998) The social brain hypothesis. Evol Anthropol
9(10):178–190
Dunbar RI, Shultz S (2007) Evolution in the social brain. Science
317(5843):1344–1347
Eberhard WG (1972) The web of Uloborus diversus (Araneae:
Uloboridae). J Zool 166(4):417–465
Eberhard WG (1982) Behavioral characters for the higher classifica-
tion of orb-weaving spiders. Evolution 36(5):1067–1095
Eberhard WG (1987) Effects of gravity on temporary spiral
construction
by
Leucauge
mariana
(Araneae:
Araneidae).
J Ethol 5(1):29–36
Eberhard WG (1988a) Behavioral flexibility in orb-web construction:
effects of supplies in different silk glands and spider size and
weight. J Arachnol 16(3):295–302
Eberhard WG (1988b) Memory of distances and directions moved as
cues during temporary spiral construction in the spider Leucauge
mariana (Araneae: Araneidae). J Insect Behav 1(1):51–66
Eberhard WG (1990) Early stages of orb construction by Philoponella
vicina, Leucauge mariana, and Nephila clavipes (Araneae,
Uloboridae and Tetragnathidae), and their phylogenetic impli-
cations. J Arachnol 18(2):205–234
Eberhard WG (2000a) Spider manipulation by a wasp larva. Nature
406(6793):255–256
Eberhard WG (2000b) Breaking the mold: behavioral imprecision and
evolutionary innovation in Wendilgarda spiders (Araneae,
Theridiosomatidae). Ecol Ethol Evol 12:223–235
Eberhard WG (2007) Miniaturized orb-weaving spiders: behavioural
precision is not limited by small size. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol
Sci 274(1622):2203–2209
Eberhard WG (2010) Recovery of spiders from the effects of parasitic
wasps: implications for fine-tuned mechanisms of manipulation.
Anim Behav 79(2):375–383
Eberhard WG (2011) Are smaller animals behaviorally limited? Lack
of
clear
constraints
in
miniature
spiders.
Anim
Behav
81:813–823
Eberhard WG (2012a) Cues guiding placement of the first loop of the
sticky spiralinorbs ofMicrathena duodecimspinosa (Araneidae)and
Leucauge mariana (Tetragnathidae). Arachnology 16(7):224–227
Eberhard WG (2012b) Correlations between leg positions and spaces
between sticky lines in the orbs of Micrathena duodecimspinosa
(Araneae: Araneidae). Arachnology 15(7):235–240
Eberhard WG (2014) A new view of orb webs: multiple trap designs
in a single structure. Biol J Linn Soc 111(2):437–449
Eberhard WG, Hesselberg T (2012) Cues that spiders (Araneae:
Araneidae, Tetragnathidae) use to build orbs: lapses in attention
to one set of cues because of dissonance with others? Ethology
118(7):610–620
Eberhard WG, Wcislo WT (2011) Grade changes in brain-body
allometry: morphological and behavioural correlates of brain
size in miniature spiders, insects and other invertebrates. Adv
Insect Physiol 40:155
Eberhard WG, Wcislo WT (2012) Plenty of room at the bottom. Am
Sci 100:226–233
Eberhard WG, Agnarsson I, Levi HW (2008) Web forms and the
phylogeny of theridiid spiders (Araneae: Theridiidae): chaos
from order. Syst Biodivers 6(4):415
Edgerly JS, Davilla JA, Schoenfeld N (2002) Silk spinning behavior
and domicile construction in webspinners. J Insect Behav
15(2):219–242
Edmunds NB, Laberge F, McCann KS (2016a) A role for brain size
and cognition in food webs. Ecol Lett 19:948–955
Edmunds NB, McCann KS, Laberge F (2016b) Food web structure
shapes the morphology of teleost fish brains. Brain Behav Evol
87(2):128–138
Fodor JA (1983) The modularity of mind: an essay on faculty
psychology. MIT Press, Cambridge
Gallagher S (2013) The socially extended mind. Cogn Syst Res
25:4–12
Gallistel CR (1989) Animal cognition: the representation of space,
time and number. Annu Rev Psychol 40(1):155–189
392
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
123
 Garcia CRM, Japyassu
´ HF (2005) Estereotipia e plasticidade na
sequ
¨e
ˆncia predato
´ria de Theridion evexum Keyserling 1884
(Araneae: Theridiidae). Biota Neotrop 5(1A):27–43
Gherardi F, Aquiloni L, Tricarico E (2012) Revisiting social
recognition systems in invertebrates. Anim Cogn 15(5):745–762
Gillette R (2006) Evolution and function in serotonergic systems.
Integr Comp Biol 46(6):838–846. Retrieved from http://www.
jstor.org/stable/3884873
Giurfa M, Zhang S, Jenett A, Menzel R, Srinivasan MV (2001) The
concepts of ‘sameness’ and ‘difference’ in an insect. Nature
410(6831):930–933
Gordon SD, Uetz GW (2011) Multimodal communication of wolf
spiders on different substrates: evidence for behavioural plastic-
ity. Anim Behav 81:367–375
Hanken J, Wake DB (1993) Miniaturization of body size: organismal
consequences and evolutionary significance. Annu Rev Ecol Syst
24(1):501–519
Harms WF (2004) Information and meaning in evolutionary pro-
cesses. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Harms WF (2006) What is information? Three concepts. Biol Theory
1(3):230–242
Hebets EA, Hansen M, Jones TC, Wilgers DJ (2015) Octopamine
levels relate to male mating tactic expression in the wolf spider
Rabidosa punctulata. Anim Behav 100:136–142
Heiling AM, Herberstein ME (1999) The role of experience in web-
building spiders (Araneidae). Anim Cogn 2(3):171–177
Heiling AM, Herberstein ME (2000) Interpretations of orb-web
variability: a review of past and current ideas. Ecol Bratisl
19:97–106
He
´naut Y, Machkour-M’Rabet S, Lachaud JP (2014) The role of
learning in risk-avoidance strategies during spider–ant interac-
tions. Anim Cogn 17(2):185–195
Herberstein ME (ed) (2011) Spider behaviour: flexibility and
versatility. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Hesselberg T (2010) Ontogenetic changes in web design in two orb-
web spiders. Ethology 116(6):535–545
Hesselberg T (2015) Exploration behaviour and behavioural flexibil-
ity in orb-web spiders: a review. Curr Zool 61(2):313–327
Hesselberg T, Vollrath F (2004) The effects of neurotoxins on web-
geometry and web-building behaviour in Araneus diadematus
Cl. Physiol Behav 82(2):519–529
Hormiga G, Griswold CE (2014) Systematics, phylogeny, and
evolution
of
orb-weaving
spiders.
Annu
Rev
Entomol
59:487–512
Huber L, Gajdon GK (2006) Technical intelligence in animals: the
kea model. Anim Cogn 9(4):295–305
Huber R, Van Staaden MJ, Kaufman LS, Liem KF (1997)
Microhabitat use, trophic patterns, and the evolution of brain
structure in African cichlids. Brain Behav Evol 50(3):167–182
Humphrey JAC, Barth FG, Voss K (2001) The motion-sensing hairs
of arthropods: using physics to understand sensory ecology and
adaptive evolution. In: Barth FG, Schmid A (eds) Ecology of
sensing. Springer, Berlin, pp 105–125
Jackson RR, Cross FR (2011) Spider cognition. Adv Insect Physiol
41:115–174
Jackson RR, Li D (2004) One-encounter search-image formation by
araneophagic spiders. Anim Cogn 7(4):247–254
Jackson RR, Nelson XJ (2011) Reliance on trial and error signal
derivation by Portia africana, an araneophagic jumping spider
from East Africa. J Ethol 29(2):301–307
Japyassu
´ HF, Jotta EG (2005) Forrageamento em Achaearanea
cinnabarina levi 1963 (Araneae, Theridiidae) e evoluc
¸a
˜o da cac
¸a
em aranhas de teia irregular. Biota Neotrop 5(1A):53–67
Japyassu
´ HF, Macagnan CR (2004) Fishing for prey: the evolution of
a new predatory tactic among spiders (Araneae, Pholcidae). Rev
Etol 6(2):79–94
Japyassu HF, Machado FDA (2010) Coding behavioural data for
cladistic analysis: using dynamic homology without parsimony.
Cladistics 26(6):625–642
Japyassu
´ HF, Viera C (2002) Predatory plasticity in Nephilengys
cruentata (Araneae: Tetragnathidae): relevance for phylogeny
reconstruction. Behaviour 139(4):529–544
Jerison H (1973) Evolution of the brain and intelligence. Academic
Press, New York, p 482
Jones TC, Akoury TS, Hauser CK, Neblett MF II, Linville BJ, Edge
AA, Weber NO (2011) Octopamine and serotonin have opposite
effects on antipredator behavior in the orb-weaving spider,
Larinioides cornutus. J Comp Physiol A 197(8):819–825
Kaplan DM (2012) How to demarcate the boundaries of cognition.
Biol Philos 27(4):545–570
Keefner A (2016) Corvids infer the mental states of conspecifics. Biol
Philos 31(2):267–281
Kotrschal A, Rogell B, Bundsen A, Svensson B, Zajitschek S,
Bra
¨nnstro
¨m I, Immler S, Maklavov AA, Kolm N (2013)
Artificial selection on relative brain size in the guppy reveals
costs and benefits of evolving a larger brain. Curr Biol
23(2):168–171
Kotrschal A, Buechel SD, Zala SM, Corral A, Penn DJ, Kolm N
(2015) Brain size affects female but not male survival under
predation threat. Ecol Lett 18:646–652
Krafft B, Cookson LJ (2012) The role of silk in the behaviour and
sociality of spiders. Psyche A J Entomol. doi:10.1155/2012/
529564
Laland KN (2004) Extending the extended phenotype. Biol Philos
19(3):313–325
Laland KN (2015) On evolutionary causes and evolutionary pro-
cesses. Behav Process 117:97–104
Laland KN, Brown GR (2011) Sense and nonsense: evolutionary
perspectives on human behaviour. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Laland KN, Uller T, Feldman MW, Sterelny K, Mu
¨ller GB, Moczek
A, Jablonka E, Odling-Smee J (2015) The extended evolutionary
synthesis: its structure, assumptions and predictions. Proc R Soc
B 282(1813):20151019
Landolfa MA, Barth FG (1996) Vibrations in the orb web of the
spider Nephila clavipes: cues for discrimination and orientation.
J Comp Physiol A 179(4):493–508
Leadbeater E, Chittka L (2007) Social learning in insects—from
miniature brains to consensus building. Curr Biol 17(16):R703–
R713
Liedtke J, Schneider JM (2014) Association and reversal learning
abilities in a jumping spider. Behav Process 103:192–198
Long SM, Leonard A, Carey A, Jakob EM (2015) Vibration as an
effective stimulus for aversive conditioning in jumping spiders.
J Arachnol 43(1):111–114
Lubin YD (1980) The predatory behavior of Cyrtophora (Araneae:
Araneidae). J Arachnol 8(2):159–185
Masters WM (1984) Vibrations in the orbwebs of Nuctenea
sclopetaria (Araneidae). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 15(3):207–215
Matsumoto R (2009) ‘‘Veils’’ against predators: modified web
structure of a host spider induced by an ichneumonid parasitoid,
Brachyzapus nikkoensis (Uchida)(Hymenoptera). J Insect Behav
22(1):39–48
Mayntz D, Toft S, Vollrath F (2009) Nutrient balance affects foraging
behaviour of a trap-building predator. Biol Lett 5:735–738
Menda G, Shamble PS, Nitzany EI, Golden JR, Hoy RR (2014)
Visual perception in the brain of a jumping spider. Curr Biol
24(21):2580–2585
Moreno A, Mossio M (2015) Biological autonomy: a philosophical
and theoretical enquiry, vol 12. Springer, Berlin
Mortimer B, Gordon SD, Holland C, Siviour CR, Vollrath F,
Windmill JF (2014) The speed of sound in silk: linking material
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
393
123
 performance
to
biological
function.
Adv
Mater
26(30):5179–5183
Mortimer B, Holland C, Windmill JF, Vollrath F (2015) Unpicking
the signal thread of the sector web spider Zygiella x-notata. J R
Soc Interface 12(113):20150633
Murakami Y (1983) Factors determining the prey size of the orb-web
spider, Argiope amoena (L. Koch)(Argiopidae). Oecologia
57(1–2):72–77
Naftilan SA (1999) Transmission of vibrations in funnel and sheet
spider webs. Int J Biol Macromol 24(2):289–293
Nakata K (2007) Prey detection without successful capture affects
spider’s
orb-web
building
behaviour.
Naturwissenschaften
94(10):853–857
Nakata K (2010) Attention focusing in a sit-and-wait forager: a spider
controls its prey-detection ability in different web sectors by
adjusting thread tension. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
277(1678):29–33
Nakata K (2012) Plasticity in an extended phenotype and reversed up-
down
asymmetry
of
spider
orb-webs.
Anim
Behav
83(3):821–826
Nakata K (2013) Spatial learning affects thread tension control in orb-
web spiders. Biol Lett 9(4):1–4
Nelson XJ, Jackson RR (2012) The role of numerical competence in a
specialized predatory strategy of an araneophagic spider. Anim
Cogn 15(4):699–710
Niven JE, Farris SM (2012) Miniaturization of nervous systems and
neurons. Curr Biol 22:R323–R329
Noe
¨ A (2004) Action in perception. MIT Press, Cambridge
Nogueira SDC, Ades C (2012) Evidence of learning in the web
construction of the spider Argiope argentata (Araneae: Aranei-
dae). Rev Etol 11(1):23–36
Odling-Smee FJ, Laland KN, Feldman MW (2003) Niche construc-
tion: the neglected process in evolution. Princeton University
Press, Princeton
Okuyama T (2011) Biphasic activity of a jumping spider. Naturwis-
senschaften 98(1):15–22
Pasquet A, Ridwan A, Leborgne R (1994) Presence of potential prey
affects web-building in an orb-weaving spider Zygiella x-notata.
Anim Behav 47(2):477–480
Peckmezian T, Taylor PW (2015a) A virtual reality paradigm for the
study of visually mediated behaviour and cognition in spiders.
Anim Behav 107:87–95
Peckmezian T, Taylor PW (2015b) Electric shock for aversion
training of jumping spiders: towards an arachnid model of
avoidance learning. Behav Process 113:99–104
Peka
´r S, Ca
´rdenas M (2015) Innate prey preference overridden by
familiarisation with detrimental prey in a specialised myrme-
cophagous predator. Sci Nat 102(1–2):1–6
Peka
´r S, Toft S (2015) Trophic specialisation in a predatory group:
the case of prey-specialised spiders (Araneae). Biol Rev
90:744–761
Peters PJ (1970) Orb-web construction: interaction of spider (Araneus
diadematus
Cl.)
and
thread
configuration.
Anim
Behav
18:478–484
Pfeifer R, Iida F, Lungarella M (2014) Cognition from the bottom up:
on biological inspiration, body morphology, and soft materials.
Trends Cogn Sci 18(8):404–413
Pravosudov VV, Roth TC (2013) Cognitive ecology of food
hoarding: The evolution of spatial memory and the hippocam-
pus. Annu Rev Ecol. doi:10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-110512-
135904
Quesada R, Triana E, Vargas G, Douglass JK, Seid MA, Niven JE,
Eberhard WG, Wcislo WT (2011) The allometry of CNS size
and consequences of miniaturization in orb-weaving and clep-
toparasitic spiders. Arthropod Struct Dev 40(6):521–529
Reader SM, Hager Y, Laland KN (2011) The evolution of primate
general and cultural intelligence. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci
366(1567):1017–1027
Rodrı
´guez RL, Gamboa E (2000) Memory of captured prey in three
web spiders (Araneae, Araneidae, Linyphiidae, Tetragnathidae).
Anim Cogn 3:91–97
Rodrı
´guez RL, Gloudeman MD (2011) Estimating the repeatability of
memories of captured prey formed by Frontinella communis
spiders (Araneae: Linyphiidae). Anim Cogn 14(5):675–682
Rodrı
´guez RL, Kolodziej RC, Ho
¨bel G (2013) Memory of prey
larders in golden orb-web spiders, Nephila clavipes (Araneae:
Nephilidae). Behaviour 150(12):1345–1356
Rodrı
´guez RL, Bricen
˜o RD, Bricen
˜o-Aguilar E, Ho
¨bel G (2015)
Nephila clavipes spiders (Araneae: Nephilidae) keep track of
captured prey counts: testing for a sense of numerosity in an orb-
weaver. Anim Cogn 18(1):307–314
Roth TC II, Pravosudov VV (2009) Hippocampal volumes and neuron
numbers increase along a gradient of environmental harshness: a
large-scale
comparison.
Proc
R
Soc
B
Biol
Sci
276(1656):401–405. doi:10.1098/rspb.2008.1184
Rupert RD (2004) Challenges to the hypothesis of extended
cognition. J Philos 101(8):389–428
Sallet J, Mars RB, Noonan MP, Andersson JL (2011) Social network
size affects neural circuits in macaques. Science 334:697–700
Sanderson SK (2014) Human nature and the evolution of society.
Westview Press, Boulder
Sandoval CP (1994) Plasticity in web design in the spider Parawixia
bistriata:
a
response
to
variable
prey
type.
Funct
Ecol
8(6):701–707
Savory TH (1952) The spider’s web. Warne, New York
Scharf I, Lubin Y, Ovadia O (2011) Foraging decisions and
behavioural flexibility in trap-building predators: a review. Biol
Rev 86(3):626–639. doi:10.1111/j.1469-185X.2010.00163.x
Schmidt JM, Smith JJB (1986) Correlations between body angles and
substrate curvature in the parasitoid wasp Trichogramma min-
uturn: a possible mechanism of host radius measurement. J Exp
Biol 125:271–285
Schneider JM, Vollrath F (1998) The effect of prey type on the
geometry of the capture web of Araneus diadematus. Naturwis-
senschaften 85(8):391–394
Seyfarth EA, Hammer K, Spo
¨rhase-Eichmann U, Ho
¨rner M, Vullings
HG (1993) Octopamine immunoreactive neurons in the fused
central nervous system of spiders. Brain Res 611(2):197–206
Shanker S, King B (2002) The emergence of a new paradigm in ape
language research. Behav Brain Sci 25(5):605–620
Shapiro LA (2009) A review of Frederick Adams and Kenneth
Aizawa, the bounds of cognition. Phenomenol Cogn Sci
8(2):267–273
Shapiro LA (2010) Embodied cognition. Routledge, London
Shear WA (ed) (1986) Spiders: webs, behavior, and evolution.
Stanford University Press, Stanford
Sheridan JA, Bickford D (2011) Shrinking body size as an ecological
response to climate change. Nat Clim Change 1(8):401–406
Shettleworth SJ (1990) Spatial memory in food-storing birds. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 329(1253):143–151
Shettleworth SJ (2010) Cognition, evolution, and behavior. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Shumway C (2008) Habitat complexity, brain, and behavior. Brain
Behav Evol 72:123–134
Smulders TV, Sasson AD, DeVoogd TJ (1995) Seasonal variation in
hippocampal volume in a food-storing bird, the black-capped
chickadee. J Neurobiol 27(1):15–25
Smulders TV, Shiflett MW, Sperling AJ, Devoogd TJ (2000) Seasonal
changes in neuron numbers in the hippocampal formation of a
food-hoarding bird: the black-capped chickadee. J Neurobiol
394
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
123
 44(4):414–422.
doi:10.1002/1097-4695(20000915)44:4
\
414:
AID-NEU4
[
3.0.CO;2-I
Starrett J, Garb JE, Kuelbs A, Azubuike UO, Hayashi CY (2012)
Early events in the evolution of spider silk genes. PLoS ONE
7(6):e38084
Striedter GF (2005) The principles of brain evolution. Sinaur Assoc.
Inc., Sunderland
Sumpter DJ (2010) Collective animal behavior. Princeton University
Press, Princeton
Szathma
´ry E, Maynard-Smith J (1995) The major evolutionary
transitions. Nature 374(6519):227–232
Tarsitano MS (2006) Route selection by a jumping spider (Portia
labiata) during the locomotory phase of a detour. Anim Behav
72:1437–1442
Tarsitano MS, Jackson RR (1997) Araneophagic jumping spiders
discriminate between detour routes that do and do not lead to
prey. Anim Behav 53:257–266
Tarsitano M, Jackson RR, Kirchner WH (2000) Signals and signal
choices made by the araneophagic jumping spider Portia
fimbriata while hunting the orb-weaving web spiders Zygiella
x-notata and Zosis geniculatus. Ethology 106(7):595–615
Thompson E (2010) Mind in life: biology, phenomenology, and the
sciences of mind. Belknap Press, Cambridge
Tilquin A (1942) La toile ge
´ome
´trique des araigne
´es. Presses
Universitaires, Paris
Tizo-Pedroso E, Del-Claro K (2005) Matriphagy in the neotropical
pseudoscorpion Paratemnoides nidificator (Balzan 1888)(Atem-
nidae). J Arachnol 33(3):873–877
Torkkeli PH, Panek I, Meisner S (2011) Ca2?/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase II mediates the octopamine-induced increase in
sensitivity in spider VS-3 mechanosensory neurons. Eur J
Neurosci 33(7):1186–1196
van der Bijl W, Thyselius M, Kotrschal A, Kolm N (2015) Brain size
affects the behavioural response to predators in female guppies
(Poecilia reticulata). Proc R Soc B 282(1812):20151132
van Schaik CP, Isler K, Burkart JM (2012) Explaining brain size
variation: from social to cultural brain. Trends Cogn Sci
16(5):277–284
Varela F, Thompson E, Rosch E (1992) The embodied mind:
cognitive science and human experience. MIT Press, Cambridge
Venner S, Pasquet A, Leborgne R (2000) Web-building behaviour in
the orb-weaving spider Zygiella x-notata: influence of experi-
ence. Anim Behav 59(3):603–611
Vollrath F (1987) Altered geometry of webs in spiders with
regenerated leg. Nature 328:247–248
Vollrath F (1988a) Untangling the spider’s web. Trends Ecol Evol
3(12):331–335
Vollrath F (1988b) Spiral orientation of Araneus diadematus orb-webs
built during vertical rotation. J Comp Physiol A 162(3):413–419
Vollrath F, Samu F (1997) The effect of starvation on web geometry
in an orb-weaving spider. Bull Br Arachnol Soc 10:295–297
Wang XJ (2010) Neurophysiological and computational principles of
cortical rhythms in cognition. Physiol Rev 90(3):1195–1268
Watanabe T (2000) Web tuning of an orb-web spider, Octonoba
sybotides, regulates prey-catching behaviour. Proc R Soc Lond B
Biol Sci 267(1443):565–569
Wehner R (1987) ‘Matched filters’—neural models of the external
world. J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural Behav Physiol
161(4):511–531
Whitehouse ME (1986) The foraging behaviours of Argyrodes
antipodiana (Theridiidae), a kleptoparasitic spider from New
Zealand. N Z J Zool 13(2):151–168
Widmer A, Ho
¨ger U, Meisner S, French AS, Torkkeli PH (2005)
Spider peripheral mechanosensory neurons are directly inner-
vated and modulated by octopaminergic efferents. J Neurosci
25(6):1588–1598
Wilson M (2008) How did we get from there to here? An evolutionary
perspective on embodied cognition. In: Calvo Paco, Gomila Toni
(eds) Handbook of cognitive science: an embodied approach.
Elsevier, San Diego
Witt PN (1969) Behavioral consequences of laser lesions in the
central nervous system of Araneus diadematus Cl. Am Zool
9(1):121–131
Witt PN (1971) Drugs alter web-building of spiders: a review and
evaluation. Behav Sci 16(1):98–113
Witt PN, Reed C, Peakall DB (1968) A spider’s web: problems in
regulatory biology. Springer, New York
Witt PN, Scarboro MB, Daniels R, Peakall DB, Gause RL (1976)
Spider web-building in outer space: evaluation of records from
the Skylab spider experiment. J Arachnol 4(2):115–124
Woodward J (2003) Making things happen. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Wu CC, Blamires SJ, Wu CL, Tso IM (2013) Wind induces variations
in spider web geometry and sticky spiral droplet volume. J Exp
Biol 216(17):3342–3349
Yoshida M (1990) Predatory behavior of Meta reticuloides Yaginuma
(Araneae: Tetragnathidae). Acta Arachnol 39(1):27–38
Young LM, Kelly D, Nelson XJ (2012) Alpine flora may depend on
declining frugivorous parrot for seed dispersal. Biol Conserv
147(1):133–142
Zschokke S (1996) Early stages of orb-web construction in Araneus
diadematus Clerck. Rev Suisse Zool 2:709–720
Zschokke S (2000) Radius construction and structure in the orb-web
of
Zilla
diodia
(Araneidae).
J
Comp
Physiol
A
186(10):999–1005
Zschokke S (2011) Spiral and web asymmetry in the orb-webs of
Araneus
diadematus
(Araneae:
Araneidae).
J
Arachnol
39(2):358–362
Zschokke S, Vollrath F (1995) Unfreezing the behaviour of two orb
spiders. Physiol Behav 58(6):1167–1173
Anim Cogn (2017) 20:375–395
395
123
