 Age and Ageing 2017; 46: 366–372
doi: 10.1093/ageing/afw231
Published electronically 9 December 2016
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British Geriatrics Society.
All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS
Can consultant geriatrician led comprehensive
geriatric assessment in the emergency
department reduce hospital admission rates?
A systematic review
SAMUEL JAY, PAULA WHITTAKER, JEROME MCINTOSH, NICHOLAS HADDEN
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Address correspondence to: Jay Samuel, Email: samuel.jay@student.manchester.ac.uk
Abstract
Objective: economic and demographic pressures are driving a need to reassess the way in which we care for older patients
presenting to emergency departments (EDs). This systematic review seeks to assess the extent to which performing compre-
hensive geriatric assessment (CGA) in the ED can reduce admission rates.
Design: systematic search of both published and unpublished literature to identify studies reporting admission rates follow-
ing the introduction of consultant geriatrician led teams performing CGA in the ED. Changes in inpatient length of stay
and subsequent readmission rates were identified as secondary outcome measures.
Results: five studies with a total of 28,434 participants were included. All of the studies reported statistically significant
reductions in admission rates (ranging between 2.6 and 19.7%). However, variation in the degree of changes leads to uncer-
tainty as to the financial viability of the intervention. No studies have yet examined the clinical effects of performing CGA
within the ED.
The results were far more varied with regards to inpatient length of stay and readmission rates, indicating that complex local
factors, such as the design of community support services, may play an important role.
Conclusion: consultant geriatrician led teams performing CGA within the ED can reduce admissions rates among older
patients. It is unclear as to what impact such interventions have upon readmission rates or inpatient length of stay. Future
research is needed to assess the clinical outcomes and financial viability of such admissions avoidance teams.
PROSPERO registration number: CRD42016038840.
Keywords: comprehensive geriatric assessment, CGA, emergency department, admissions avoidance, older people, systematic
review
Introduction
Recent shifts in the political, financial and demographic
environments have left English healthcare organisations
facing unprecedented pressure, with commissioners and pol-
icy makers struggling to respond to numerous complex chal-
lenges [1]. In the period since 2006 hospital admission rates
have risen 60% faster than population change, contributing
to the looming bed access crisis that is already causing sub-
stantial problems throughout our healthcare systems [2, 3].
Those over the age of 65 figure disproportionately in hospital
usage statistics, accounting for 41% of all non-elective admis-
sions despite representing just 18% of the population [4, 5].
Once admitted, older people are far more likely to stay in
hospital for more than two weeks [6] and are at much greater
risk of experiencing adverse effects such as deconditioning,
iatrogenic illness and loss of independence [7].
Older patients also experience poorer outcomes in
emergency departments (ED) where, historically, the com-
plexity of their care needs has been poorly met and acute
physicians have felt uncomfortable handling their treatment
[8, 9]. When considering the current quality of ED care
366
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/3/366/2661787 by guest on 03 June 2019
 that older patients receive and the rapid rate at which the
population is ageing, it becomes clear that a widespread
shift in the way we care for acutely presenting older people
is required. Such reconsiderations are underway globally,
across a spectrum of countries facing the pressure of rap-
idly ageing populations [10–13].
Multidimensional, interdisciplinary assessment of an old-
er individual’s health and social care needs, or comprehen-
sive geriatric assessment (CGA), in the inpatient setting has
been shown to increase the likelihood of an older person
being alive and in their own home 12 months following an
admission [14]. The process is time-consuming and not nat-
urally suited to the busy ED environment. In recent years,
however, several studies have examined the establishment
of specialised geriatrician led teams working within EDs to
perform CGA and prevent the inappropriate admission of
older patients who, with the right support, could return
immediately to their own homes [15–19].
A previous review has confirmed the feasibility of per-
forming CGA within the ED [20], but no paper has yet
examined the effectiveness of CGA interventions at pre-
venting admissions. A recent review found that ED-
community transition services for patients aged over 65 did
not reduce readmission, ED reattendance or mortality rates,
but did not examine whether CGA within the ED could
prevent unnecessary admissions [21]. The following system-
atic review seeks to assess whether consultant geriatrician
led CGA within the ED can reduce admission rates, and
how this subsequently impacts upon inpatient length of stay
and readmission rates.
Search strategy and selection criteria
The methods and search strategy were documented in
advance and published in the PROSPERO database (avail-
able at http://goo.gl/p6uXUg). The review was conducted
in compliance with PRISMA guidelines [22].
Information sources
The following databases were searched: Embase, MEDLINE,
CINAHL,
Google
Scholar
and
the
Cochrane
Library.
Unpublished literature and trial registry databases were searched
using OpenGrey, UKCRN Portfolio Database and the UK
National Research Register Archive to identify ongoing or
recently completed trials. All searches were from conception to
Week 3 of March 2016 without language limitation. The refer-
ence lists of related articles and all potentially eligible studies were
hand searched for additional papers and included studies were
‘forward-cited’.
Search strategy
The strategy used to search Embase and MEDLINE is dis-
played online (available at http://goo.gl/cBE1i1). Further
to the publication of the PROSPERO protocol it was
decided to search without outcome measures, meaning
steps 8–12 were removed. Identical, or highly similar, strat-
egies were used to search the other sources.
Eligibility criteria
The titles/abstracts of the retrieved studies were screened
by two authors (S.J. and P.W.) according to the eligibility cri-
teria detailed below. Full texts of trials deemed to be poten-
tially eligible for inclusion were then assessed independently
against the same criteria by two authors (S.J. and N.H.).
Any disagreements were adjudicated by a third author, P.W.
Inclusion criteria
– Studies of older persons over the age of 65 presenting
non-electively to EDs.
– Studies in which the intervention consisted of CGA per-
formed in the ED by a team that included, at the least, a
consultant geriatrician.
– Randomised controlled trials and observational studies.
– Studies reporting, at the least, inpatient admission rates.
Exclusion criteria
Studies in which CGA was performed after the final deci-
sion to admit as an inpatient or discharge had been made.
Data extraction
Data was extracted independently by two reviewers (S.J. and
J.M.) into predefined data extraction tables. Extracted data
was adjudicated by P.W.
Outcome measures
The primary outcome was a reduction in inpatient admis-
sion rates following presentation to the ED. Secondary out-
comes were inpatient length of stay and readmission rates
(at 7, 30 and 90 days).
Methodological quality
The methodological quality of each included paper was
assessed independently by two authors (S.J. and P.W.) using
the Risk of Bias Assessment tool for Non-randomised
Studies (RoBANS) [23]. Their conclusions were adjudicated
by J.M.
Data analysis
Study heterogeneity was reviewed using the data extraction
tables. This revealed substantial heterogeneity in terms of
study design, intervention team composition and population
characteristics. The studies were therefore reviewed using a
narrative analysis approach as it was felt that these design dif-
ferences would compromise the validity of a meta-analysis and
allow for potentially misleading results.
Can consultant geriatrician led comprehensive geriatric assessment in the emergency
367
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/3/366/2661787 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Results
The results of the search strategy are summarised in
Figure 1. The searches identified 631 papers, of which 25
were deemed to be potentially eligible for inclusion follow-
ing screening of titles. The full texts of these papers were
reviewed and five were found to meet the inclusion criteria.
The characteristics of the included papers [15–19] are sum-
marised in Table 1. Four of the included studies are before
and after observational studies whereas the fifth study, con-
ducted by Arendts et al., is a prospective non-randomised
control trial.
Table 2 contains a summary of the RoBANS quality
appraisal findings. The majority (3/5) of the studies were
found to be of good methodological quality, with two
studies being of moderate quality. A theme recurring
throughout the quality analysis was a failure to record
important covariates such as patient independence status
or comorbidity burden, which was undertaken in just one
study [16].
The interventions
All the interventions consisted of MDT assessment of
patients in the ED with the goal of overcoming medical
and social barriers to safe discharge. This included evalu-
ation of domains ranging from mood and cognition to falls
risk and activities of daily living. In practice, most of the
authors [15–17, 19] used standardised scoring systems and
proformas.
Such interventions represent an adapted form of the
CGA that takes place in the inpatient setting, truncated
and redirected by necessity to better suit the acute envi-
ronment. The term CGA is employed throughout this
review in order to reflect the body of published literature
and the close correlation of the intervention with inpatient
practices.
Though the intervention teams varied in their compos-
ition, all contained at least a consultant geriatrician and
older people’s nurse. Three of the studies employed a
physiotherapist and occupational therapist [16, 18, 19], and
Arendts et al. [16]. also had access to a dedicated social
worker. All strengthened links with community support ser-
vices. Two of the services (Ellis et al. and Sophia and
Bashir) operated between 9 am and 5 pm on weekdays [15,
18], whereas the other services operated 7 days a week with
similar hours [16, 17, 19].
Admission rates
The results of the included studies are displayed in Table 3.
All five reported statistically significant reductions in admis-
sion rates of older patients following the introduction of
geriatrician led CGA to the ED [15–19]. However, there
was a degree of variation in the magnitude of the results
(reductions ranged between 2.6 and 19.7%), leading to
Figure 1. PRISMA diagram illustrating the results of the search strategy.
S. Jay et al.
368
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/3/366/2661787 by guest on 03 June 2019
 some uncertainty as to the clinical and economic benefits of
the intervention. Conroy et al. conducted the largest
included trial and found that their results (a fall in ED con-
version rates from 70 to 61%) met the minimum reduction
in relative risk of admission deemed to be necessary for
clinical and economic significance (10%, from 70 to at least
63%) [17]. However, another of the large studies, con-
ducted by Arendts et al., reported a reduction of such small
magnitude (a drop in admission rates from 74 to 72%) as
to leave the real-world clinical and financial benefit of their
intervention uncertain [16].
It is also important to highlight the results reported by
Ellis et al. which, although positive and statistically signifi-
cant (a 15.7% reduction in the admissions rate, P < 0.0005),
were collected at a different point in the care pathway to the
other studies and so are not directly comparable. The results
correspond to patients transferred to a subunit within the
ED established for the care of older patients, to which the
CGA intervention was introduced, rather than to the ED as
a whole.
Significant reductions in admissions among non-intervention
populations were reported by both Conroy et al. (risk ratio
of 0.76 for those aged 16–64 years, 95% CI: 0.71–0.81)
[17] and Ellis et al. [15]. This stands in contrast to the find-
ings of Wright et al. who report a significant increase in the
admission rates of non-intervention patients (P < 0.001)
[19].
Length of stay and readmissions
Four of the papers examined whether the intervention
influenced length of stay (LoS) following inpatient admis-
sion. Ellis et al. report no significant difference (P = 0.78)
following the intervention [15]. Wright et al., on the other
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Table 1. The key characteristics of the included studies
Study
Study type
Location
n
Age
Sex
Intervention team
Patient recruitment
Intervention
Ellis et al.
[15]
Prospective
pre–post
cohort study
DGH in
Scotland,
UK
749
>65, Mean:
80.7
61.9%
female
Senior geriatrician
and older
persons’ nurse
Professional discretion,
excluding single organ
pathology
MDT geriatric
assessment
using tools to
assess functional
needs across
multiple
domains
Arendts et al.
[16]
Prospective
non-
randomised
study
Two tertiary
centres,
Australia
5,265
>65, Mean:
80.4
55.2%
female
Senior geriatrician,
geriatric nurse,
PT, OT and
social worker
Patients presenting with 1
of 10 medical index
conditions
Comprehensive
functional
assessment
across multiple
domains using
validated tools
Conroy et al.
[17]
Pre–post
cohort study
Teaching
hospital in
Leicester,
UK
15,930
>85, Mean:
not stated
Not stated
Consultant
geriatrician,
nursing staff
Professional discretion
MDT geriatric
assessement
following
standardised
proforma
Wright et al.
[19]
Pre–post
retrospective
cohort study
Teaching
hospital in
London,
UK
6,406
>70, Mean:
not stated
Not stated
Consultant
geriatrician, SpR,
nurse
practitioner, OT,
administrator
Professional discretion,
excluding malignancy or
mental illness
MDT assessment
of functional
and social
barriers to safe
discharge
Sophia and
Bashir [18]
Pre–post
retrospective
cohort study
DGH in
Somerset,
UK
84
>80, or
younger if
frail, mean:
not stated
Not stated
Consultant
geriatrician,
junior doctor,
OT, PT, staff
nurse
Professional discretion,
excluding ACS, stroke,
severe sepsis and
fractures
MDT geriatric
assessment of
social and
functional needs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Table 2. Summarised results of the RoBANS quality appraisal
Study
Selection of
participants
Confounding
variables
Measurement
of exposure
Blinding of
outcome measures
Incomplete
outcome data
Selective outcome
reporting
Ellis et al.
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Unclear
Arendts et al.
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Unclear
Conroy et al.
High
Low
Low
Low
Low
Unclear
Wright et al.
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Unclear
Sophia and Bashir
High
Low
Low
Low
Low
Unclear
Can consultant geriatrician led comprehensive geriatric assessment in the emergency
369
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/3/366/2661787 by guest on 03 June 2019
 hand, report a two day fall in the median LoS among the
intervention group (P < 0.001), and a 1 day fall in the overall
median LoS (P < 0.001) [19]. Sophia and Bashir also report
an absolute reduction in the mean length of stay [18], con-
trasted by Conroy et al. who report an absolute increase [17].
However, it should be noted that neither of these papers
state the statistical significance of these results. Furthermore,
the increase reported by Conroy et al. occurred in every age
group, not just in the intervention population.
Two of the papers examine the intervention’s effect
upon readmission rates. Both Ellis et al. and Conroy et al.
found there to be no significant difference in readmission
rates at 7 and 30 days [15, 17]. However, Conroy et al. do
report a fall in readmissions among the over 85 s at 90 days
(RR: 0.77 95% CI: 0.63–0.93) [17].
Discussion
This review has found evidence to suggest that consultant
geriatrician led CGA performed in the ED can reduce admis-
sion rates among the older patient population. However, the
degree of variation in the intervention methods renders it dif-
ficult to generalise the results and provide a clear roadmap
for the successful implementation of similar services.
A key example of this variation is the study by Ellis et al.,
which reported results for a care of the elderly subunit within
the ED, rather than for the ED as a whole. While more simi-
lar in service design, all of the other studies varied from one
another in multiple aspects, including staffing composition,
working hours and associated community support services.
Although this heterogeneity prevents meta-analysis and direct
comparison of numerical results, conclusions can be drawn
through the identification of trends and patterns.
The defining difference between the studies reporting
positive results and the Arendts et al.’s paper, which reported
results of borderline significance [16], is the method of patient
selection. While the other studies relied primarily upon the
professional discretion of the intervention teams for patient
recruitment (within the confines of broad inclusion criteria),
Arendts et al. only accepted patients presenting with one of
10 index conditions. Through subset analysis they concluded
that CGA in the ED only significantly reduces admissions in
highly episodic conditions, such as angina, or musculoskeletal
pain. None of the other studies performed similar subset ana-
lysis by presenting complaint to enable corroboration of these
conclusions. However, it may be that maintaining a degree of
professional discretion with regards to patient selection
improves the effectiveness of admissions prevention in the
older cohort. This would suggest that the primary value of
CGA in the ED is to identify and overcome social barriers to
discharge rather than to guide medical treatment. Research
into the clinical outcomes of such interventions is of course
required before confidence can be placed in any such conclu-
sion. If this is the case, well integrated community support
services and links with primary care will be essential for the
success of any admissions avoidance system employing CGA
within the ED. The availability and effectiveness of such ser-
vices will have a strong influence on the ability of ED teams
to facilitate safe discharge, especially for complex patients
who previously would have required admission. The import-
ance of such links is well recognised and emphasised by influ-
ential bodies, such as the King’s Fund [24].
In several of the included studies the intervention also
appeared to influence the admission rates of non-intervention
populations. Both significant increases and decreases in non-
intervention admissions were reported, suggesting that mul-
tiple local factors may be involved. Reductions in non-
intervention admissions were postulated to have been enabled
by the reduced work load of ED staff and wider cultural
changes resulting from the increased emphasis on early dis-
charge [15, 17]. It is possible that the actions of the CGA
teams changed the perception of admission among ED staff
from being the safest option in cases of uncertainty to an
action accompanied by its own set of risks [7]. The increase
in non-intervention admissions seen by Wright et al. [19] was
hypothesised to have resulted from increased capacity within
the hospital and saturation of community support services.
Introduction of admissions avoidance teams into EDs could
therefore produce unanticipated effects on ED, wider hospital
and
community
performance.
Comprehensive,
locally
focussed evaluation of the healthcare environment is there-
fore advisable before admissions avoidance teams are created.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Table 3. The results of the included studies
Study
n
Change in same-day admissions rate
(before intervention, during
intervention)
Readmissions rate
Length of stay
Ellis et al. [15]
749
15.7% (98.6%, 82.9%)a, P < 0.0005
No significant effect (P = 0.82)
No significant effect (P = 0.78)
Arendts et al. [16]
5,265
2.6% (74.4%, 72%), P = 0.046
Not reported
Not reported
Conroy et al. [17]
15,930
8.4% (69.6%, 61.2%), P < 0.001
(expressed as risk ratios) 7 days: 0.71
(0.42–1.1); 30 days: 0.74 (0.55–
1.00); 90 days: 0.77 (0.63–0.93)
(Expressed as mean days)
Before: 8.9
Intervention: 11.1
Wright et al. [19]
6406
19.7% (87.7%, 68%), P < 0.001
Not reported
Fall in median stay of 2 days
Reduction in mean stay of 18.2% (P < 0.001)
Sophia and Bashir [18]
84
9% (55%, 46%)
Not reported
Fall in mean stay from 12 to 3 days
aEllis et al. measured their results at a different point in the care pathway to the other studies, explaining the high ‘before intervention’ admission rate and rendering
direct comparison of their results inexact. The rate corresponds to patients transferred to a subunit within the ED rather than the overall ED population.
S. Jay et al.
370
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/3/366/2661787 by guest on 03 June 2019
 This theme continues when analysing the effect that per-
forming CGA in the ED has on inpatient LoS. The results are
varied, with a significant decrease in median LoS reported as
well as no significant change and absolute changes in both
directions. It should be noted that some studies reported
median figures and others mean values, rendering direct com-
parison impossible. The factors involved in influencing LoS are
no doubt numerous and complex. It is possible that perform-
ing CGA in the ED results in a higher proportion of admitted
patients with complex social needs and/or serious medical
requirements, contributing to a rise in LoS. Equally, early identi-
fication of these issues may help inpatient teams deliver indivi-
dualised care and smooth the eventual discharge process,
contributing to a decrease in LoS. Research in this area would
provide a useful insight into how admissions avoidance teams
can be best designed to improve hospital performance.
Too few of the included studies reported the effects of
the intervention on readmission rates for this review to per-
form meaningful assessment, which is disappointing as
readmission rates are often used as an indicator of service
performance [25]. This is an area for future research. It is
also important for future research to evaluate the clinical
and patient-centred outcomes of CGA interventions, in
order to ensure that discharged patients are not adversely
affected either medically or socially.
Some idea of what such research may find can be found
among the backdrop of evidence pertaining to other geriatric
ED services, such as the ED-community transition services
(ED-CTS) recently reviewed by Lowthian et al. [21]. ED-CTS
interventions consist of some form of geriatric assessment
before discharge from the ED, which is used to guide appro-
priate community follow-up and referral. Lowthian et al.
found no evidence to suggest that such services reduce
readmission, ED reattendance, or mortality rates among the
elderly cohort. None of the studies included in this review
were included by Lowthian et al. The CGA interventions
examined by this review were employed far earlier in the ED
care pathway than in ED-CTS services and, crucially, the pro-
cess guided ED care and the subsequent decision concerning
patient admission/discharge (studies that included patients
admitted to hospital were excluded from the Lowthian et al.’s
review). Although this review was unable to examine the
interventions’ effect upon readmission rates and did not seek
to examine other long-term outcomes, the results of the
Lowthian et al. review do cast some doubt upon their ability
to influence such domains. It is possible, however, that CGA
performed early in the care pathway allows for more balanced
identification of patient needs and therefore of the patients
who would most benefit from ED-CTS style input. Putting
this supposition to one side, it is important to remember that
in the current commissioning climate and wider policy envir-
onment [26], interventions that can successfully reduce hos-
pital admissions are welcome even if they do not carry longer
term effects. Future research into the financial viability of
CGA admission avoidance services is therefore required to
supply commissioners and other stake holders with compre-
hensive evidence of their value.
There are several important limitations to this review.
Firstly, although the majority of included studies were of
good methodological quality, none were randomised and
many of the studies were pre–post analyses in which broader
changes to the healthcare environment may have influenced
results. Furthermore, the majority of studies did not report
patient characteristics, meaning it is theoretically possible for
there to have been differences between comparison groups.
The nature of service evaluation makes it practically and eth-
ically difficult to conduct RCT research but, where possible,
more robust research methods should be employed in future
assessments of this issue. It is also important to state once
again that the included interventions represent a truncated
embodiment of CGA that has been adapted from inpatient
practice to better suit the acute environment. We have
employed the term CGA throughout in order to reflect the
literature and the close correlation with ‘traditional’ CGA.
Despite its limitations, the importance of this review’s
findings should not be understated. The value of providing
holistic and targeted care to older patients in the acute set-
ting is set forth in the British Geriatric Society’s ‘Silver
Book’ [27], and CGA has been proven to improve out-
comes and lower costs in a variety of settings [14, 28].
Multiple influential reports [2, 6, 24, 29] have highlighted
the growing need to reduce hospitalisation rates among older
patients if our health and social care systems are to cope
with the pressures of the ageing population. This review
demonstrates that consultant led geriatric teams performing
CGA in the ED may contribute towards that goal.
Key points
• Emergency attendance and hospital admission of older
patients continues to increase.
• Consultant geriatrician led CGA performed in the emer-
gency department reduces inpatient admission rates.
• Future research is needed to assess the clinical and eco-
nomic viability of such services.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr Lauren Wentworth of University
Hospitals of South Manchester for providing background
and initial assistance with this review.
Conflicts of interest
None declared.
References
1. Ham C, McKenna H, Dunn P. Tackling the Growing Crisis
in the NHS. The King’s Fund, 2016.
2. Smith P, McKeon A, Blunt I, Edwards E. NHS hospitals
under pressure: trends in acute activity up to 2022, 2014.
Can consultant geriatrician led comprehensive geriatric assessment in the emergency
371
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/3/366/2661787 by guest on 03 June 2019
 3. Barnes S. Monitor: high bed occupancy to blame for worst
A&E performance in a decade. Health Service J 2015. https://
www.hsj.co.uk/sectors/emergency-care/monitor-high-bed-
occupancy-to-blame-for-worst-ae-performance-in-a-decade/
5090060.article?sm=5090060 (23 November 2016, date last
accessed).
4. Office for National Statistics. Population Estimates for UK,
England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, Mid-
2014, 2015 [Online]. http://webarchive.nationalarchives.
gov.uk/20160105160709/http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/
pop-estimate/population-estimates-for-uk–england-and-wales–
scotland-and-northern-ireland/mid-2014/index.html (25 April
2016, date last accessed).
5. HSCIC. Hospital Episode Statistics Admitted Patient Care,
2014–2015. England: Health and Social Care Information
Centre, 2015.
6. Poteliakhoff E, Thompson J. Emergency bed usage: what the
numbers tell us. Data Briefing 2011.
7. Creditor MC. Hazards of hospitalization of the elderly. Ann
Intern Med 1993; 118(3): 219–23.
8. McNamara RM, Rousseau E, Sanders AB. Geriatric emer-
gency medicine: a survey of practicing emergency physicians.
Ann Emerg Med 1992; 21(7): 796–801.
9. Aminzadeh F, Dalziel WB. Older adults in the emergency
department: a systematic review of patterns of use, adverse
outcomes, and effectiveness of interventions. Ann Emerg
Med 2002; 39(3): 238–47.
10. Keyes DC, Singal B, Kropf CW, Fisk A. Impact of a new
senior emergency department on emergency department
recidivism, rate of hospital admission, and hospital length of
stay. Ann Emerg Med 2014; 63(5): 517–24.
11. Lee V, Ross B, Tracy B. Functional assessment of older
adults in an emergency department. Can J Occup Ther 2001;
68(2): 121–9.
12. Foo CL, Siu VWY, Tan TL, Ding YY, Seow E. Geriatric
assessment and intervention in an emergency department
observation unit reduced re-attendance and hospitalisation
rates. Australas J Ageing 2012; 31(1): 40–6.
13. Yuen TMY, Lee LLY, Or ILC et al. Geriatric consultation
service in emergency department: how does it work? Emerg
Med J 2013; 30(3): 180–5.
14. Ellis G, Ma W, Neill OD, Langhorne P, Robinson D.
Comprehensive geriatric assessment for older adults admitted
to hospital (Review). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; 7:
CD006211.
15. Ellis G, Jamieson C, Alcorn M, Devlin V. An Acute Care for
Elders (AC) unit in the emergency department. Eur Geriatr
Med 2012; 3(4): 261–3.
16. Arendts G, Fitzhardinge S, Pronk K, Donaldson M, Hutton
M, Nagree Y. The impact of early emergency department
allied health intervention on admission rates in older people :
a non-randomized clinical study. BMC Geriatr 2012; 12(8).
17. Conroy SP, Ansari K, Williams M et al. A controlled evalu-
ation of comprehensive geriatric assessment in the emergency
department : the ‘Emergency Frailty Unit,’. Age Ageing 2013;
0: 1–6.
18. Sophia R, Bashir WA. A geriatrician in the emergency department.
GM J 2014; 44: 32–4.
19. Wright PN, Tan G, Iliffe S, Lee D. The impact of a new
emergency admission avoidance system for older people on
length of stay and same-day discharges. Age (Omaha) 2013;
43: 116–21.
20. Graf CE, Zekry D, Giannelli S, Michel J, Chevalley T.
Efficiency and applicability of comprehensive geriatric assess-
ment in the Emergency Department: a systematic review.
Ageing Clin Exp Res 2010; 23(4): 244–54.
21. Lowthian JA, McGinnes
RA,
Brand
CA,
Barker AL,
Cameron PA. Discharging older patients from the emergency
department effectively : a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Age Ageing 2015; 44: 761–70.
22. Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J et al. The PRISMA state-
ment for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of
studies that evaluate health care interventions : explanation
and elaboration. PLoS Med 2009; 6(7).
23. Kim SY, Park JE, Lee YJ et al. Testing a tool for assessing the
risk of bias for nonrandomized studies showed moderate reliabil-
ity and promising validity. J Clin Epidemiol 2013; 66(4): 408–14.
24. Imison C, Poteliakhoff E, Thompson J. Older People and
Emergency Bed Use: Exploring Variation. London: The
King’s Fund, 2012.
25. Fischer C, Lingsma HF, Marang-van De Mheen PJ, Kringos
DS, Klazinga NS, Steyerberg EW. Is the readmission rate a
valid quality indicator? A review of the evidence. PLoS One
2014; 9(11): 1–9.
26. NHS England. What actions could be taken to reduce emer-
gency admissions? 2014.
27. British Geriatrics Society. Quality Care for Older People with
Urgent & Emergency Care needs. London: Silver Book, 2012.
28. Day P, Rasmussen P. What is the evidence for the effective-
ness of specialist geriatric services in acute, post-acute and
sub-acute settings? A critical appraisal of the literature.
Christchurch, 2004.
29. The King’s Fund. Making Our Health and Care Systems Fit
for an Ageing Population. London: The King’s Fund, 2014.
Received 15 July 2016; editorial decision 7 November 2016
S. Jay et al.
372
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/3/366/2661787 by guest on 03 June 2019
