 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Conflict of Interest in Seminal Hepatitis C Virus
and Cholesterol Management Guidelines
Akilah A. Jefferson, MD, MSc; Steven D. Pearson, MD, MSc
IMPORTANCE Little is known regarding whether Institute of Medicine (IOM) standards for
managing conflicts of interest (COI) have been met in the development of recent important
clinical guidelines.
OBJECTIVE To evaluate adherence to the IOM standards for limits on commercial COI,
guideline development, and evaluation of evidence by the 2013 American College of
Cardiology and American Heart Association cholesterol management guideline and the 2014
American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases and Infectious Diseases Society of
America hepatitis C virus management guideline.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS This study was a retrospective document review of the
June 2014 print version of the cholesterol guideline and the final September 2015 print
version of the hepatitis C virus guideline. Each guideline was assessed for adherence to the
IOM standards for commercial COI published in the 2011 special report Clinical Practice
Guidelines We Can Trust.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES The IOM standards call for no commercial COI among
guideline committee chairs and cochairs and for less than 50% of committee members to
have commercial COI. Guideline and contemporaneous article disclosure statements were
used to evaluate adherence to these standards. Each guideline was also reviewed for
adherence to other IOM standards for guideline development and evidence review.
RESULTS Among the 16 cholesterol guideline committee members, 7 (44%) disclosed
commercial COI, all 7 reported industry-sponsored research, and 6 (38%) also reported
consultancy. Of 3 guideline chairs and cochairs, 1 (33%) disclosed commercial COI. Review of
contemporaneous articles identified additional commercial COI. Among the 29 hepatitis C
virus guideline committee members, 21 (72%) reported commercial COI. Eighteen (62%)
disclosed industry-sponsored research, 10 (34%) served on advisory boards, 5 (17%) served
on data safety monitoring boards, 3 (10%) were consultants, and 3 (10%) reported other
honoraria. Of 6 guideline cochairs, 4 (67%) disclosed commercial COI. All 4 disclosed
additional COI in other publications that were not listed in their guideline disclosures.
Contemporaneous literature review revealed an additional cochair with commercial COI. Of
the 9 IOM guideline development and evidence standards, the cholesterol guideline met 5
(56%), and the hepatitis C virus guideline met them all.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Neither the cholesterol guideline nor the hepatitis C virus
guideline fully met the IOM standards for commercial COI management, and discordance
between committee leader guideline disclosures and those in contemporaneous articles was
common. Adherence to additional IOM standards for guideline development and evidence
review was mixed. Adoption of consistent COI frameworks across specialty societies may
help ensure that clinical guidelines are developed in a transparent and trustworthy manner.
JAMA Intern Med. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.8439
Published online January 17, 2017.
Related articles
Author Affiliations: Clinical Center,
Department of Bioethics, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland (Jefferson, Pearson);
Institute for Clinical and Economic
Review, Boston, Massachusetts
(Pearson).
Corresponding Author: Steven D.
Pearson, MD, MSc, Clinical Center,
Department of Bioethics, National
Institutes of Health, 10 Center Dr,
Room 1C118, Bethesda, MD 20892
(pearsonsd@cc.nih.gov).
Research
JAMA Internal Medicine | Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
E1
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/intemed/0/ by a Newcastle University User  on 01/24/2017
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
G
uidelines provide an authoritative synthesis of evi-
dence and clinical experience that often proves influ-
ential in clinical care and insurance coverage
decisions.1-3 In 2011, responding to concerns regarding pos-
sible bias among guideline committee members, the Insti-
tute of Medicine (IOM) published standards limiting the
types and magnitude of allowable conflicts of interest (COI)
as part of a broader set of guideline development
recommendations.4
Little is known about whether the IOM standards are being
met in the development of recent guidelines.5 Although COI
standards should be met by all guidelines, we selected for
evaluation 2 recent guidelines that may prove to be among the
most consequential for many years to come. The first was the
2013 cholesterol management guideline from the American
College of Cardiology and American Heart Association
(ACC/AHA),6 which moved away from the paradigm of treat-
ing to achieve specific target cholesterol levels. Second, start-
ing in 2014, the American Association for the Study of Liver
Diseases and Infectious Diseases Society of America (AASLD/
IDSA) jointly developed guidelines for the use of novel drug
treatments for chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection.7 Both
guidelines provide recommendations that help determine
the use of medications to treat conditions that affect millions
of Americans, with enormous clinical and economic
implications.8-12
Inthisretrospectivedocumentreview,wecomparetheCOI
of members of the 2 committees that developed these signifi-
cant guidelines. We use publicly available material to assess
whether each committee adhered to IOM COI standards. We
alsoexaminetheconcordanceofdisclosuresofcommitteelead-
ers with the contemporaneous disclosures they provided in
peer-reviewed literature. Last, we evaluate if each guideline
metotherIOMstandardsfordevelopmentandevidenceevalu-
ation. Our objective is to provide information with which to
evaluatewhetherthedevelopmentofthese2influentialguide-
lines met standards to support broad acceptance of their rigor
and objectivity.
Methods
Institutional review board approval was not sought for this ar-
ticlebecauseitwasadocumentreview.The2013ACC/AHAcho-
lesterol guideline (“cholesterol guideline”) was developed be-
tween 2008 and 2012 (months not specified). It was published
electronically in November 2013 and then in print in June
2014.6 We used the COI disclosure information provided in the
print version of the guideline for our analyses.
ThedevelopmentoftheAASLD/IDSAHCVtreatmentguide-
line(“HCVguideline”)beganinOctober2013.Theguidelinewas
initially disseminated on the web (http://hcvguidance.org7)
beginning in January 2014 before the first print version was
published in September 2015. The formatting of COI disclosure
statements for the committee members changed while the
guideline was available online. We used the final version of
disclosureinformationincludedinthe2015printversionofthe
guideline.
IOM COI Standards
The IOM categorizes COI as intellectual or financial.13 Finan-
cial COI are subdivided into commercial or noncommercial
types. Commercial COI include activities such as clinical ser-
vices for which income is paid, consulting, board member-
ship for which compensation is received, service as an expert
witness, industry-sponsored research, patents, royalties, stock
ownership, or other financial interests (Figure). Noncommer-
cialCOIincluderesearchgrantsandothertypesofsupportfrom
entities, such as government, foundations, or nonprofits.4,14
We focused solely on commercial COI, which have been con-
sidered to represent the greatest threat to external trustwor-
thiness of the resulting guidelines and, as a result, have re-
ceived the greatest emphasis in disclosure policies.13
We assessed each guideline for adherence to the IOM stan-
dards for commercial COI published in the 2011 special report
Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust.4 The IOM stan-
dards require that (1) less than 50% of the committee mem-
bers have any commercial COI and (2) all chairs and cochairs
havenocommercialCOI.4ThetimespanforCOIdisclosuredif-
fered between the 2 guideline committees. For the choles-
terol guideline, the disclosure period covered all of guideline
Figure. Institute of Medicine Conflict of Interest Classification
Institute of Medicine Conflict of Interest Classification
Financial
Intellectual
Authoring a 
publication or 
acting as an 
investigator on a 
peer-reviewed grant 
directly related to 
recommendations 
under consideration
Commercial
Noncommercial
Clinical services for which a 
significant proportion of income 
is paid
Consultant
Board member with compensation
Expert witness
Industry-sponsored research
Patents
Royalties
Stock
Other personal or family financial 
interests
Research grants 
or other support 
from government,
foundations, or 
other nonprofit
organizations
The Institute of Medicine categorizes conflicts of interest as intellectual or
financial.
Key Points
Question Are recent clinical guidelines adhering to Institute of
Medicine (IOM) standards for limits on conflicts of interest (COI)?
Findings In this document review of 2 guidelines, the IOM
standards for limits on COI among guideline committees were met
by the cholesterol guideline but not by the hepatitis C virus
guideline. Standards requiring no COI among committee chairs
and cochairs were not met by either guideline.
Meaning Levels of COI among guideline committees remain an
important problem, and adoption of consistent COI frameworks
may help ensure that guidelines are developed in a transparent
and trustworthy manner.
Research Original Investigation
Conflict of Interest in Seminal Hepatitis C Virus and Cholesterol Management
E2
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online January 17, 2017
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/intemed/0/ by a Newcastle University User  on 01/24/2017
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
development from 2013 to 12 months before committee ini-
tiation in 2008 (month not indicated). For the HCV guideline,
thedisclosureperiodcoveredthetimefrompublicationin2015
to the start of committee meetings in October 2013.
We also compared the commercial COI disclosures of each
committee chair and cochair with their contemporaneous COI
disclosures in relevant published articles in the peer-
reviewed literature. For this analysis of COI concordance, we
searched PubMed for each committee chair and cochair as au-
thors of other publications during the period of guideline de-
velopment (December 2008 to December 2012 for the choles-
terol guideline and October 2013 to May 2015 for the HCV
guideline). We included only publications directly related to
cholesterol or HCV management in which chairs and cochairs
were first or last author.
IOM Development and Evidence Standards
The IOM also provided guidance that addressed other ele-
ments, described in the foreward as “essential to developing
sound practice guidelines.”4 Our analysis included standards
relevant to guideline development and evidence review that
wereobjectiveandabletobemeasuredempirically.Eachguide-
line’
s text was evaluated for language indicating adherence to
the standards.
Results
ACC/AHA Cholesterol Guideline
Table 1 summarizes the findings across both guideline com-
mittees. The cholesterol guideline committee consisted of 16
members, with 1 chair and 2 cochairs. The disclosure stan-
dards were established by the ACC/AHA6 and required disclo-
sure of all COI starting 1 year before committee initiation in
2008 through the end of the guideline development process
in 2013. The cholesterol guideline development was initially
managed by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
(NHLBI) and then transferred to the ACC/AHA in 2013. The
NHLBI and ACC/AHA had similar COI disclosure require-
ments: both required chairs to be without COI.6 The ACC/
AHAalsospecifiedthataminorityofcommitteemembershave
COI.Thecholesterolguidelinedevelopmentwasfundedbythe
ACC and AHA. Industry funding was not directly accepted for
guideline development.15
Of the 16 committee members, 7 (44%) disclosed 1 or more
types of commercial COI. These 7 individuals had industry-
sponsored research grants, and 6 (38%) were also consul-
tants.
The committee chair disclosed no commercial COI from
12 months before the start of guideline development in 2008
through guideline publication in 2013 (months not speci-
fied). However, in contemporaneous published articles, the
chair disclosed service as a consultant and honoraria for edu-
cational activities from manufacturers of cholesterol treat-
ments. At the time he was interviewed in 2013 about his rela-
tionships with drugmakers, he said that when asked to chair
the committee, he disclosed to the NHLBI honoraria and con-
sultancies with 6 companies, all of which made drugs to treat
hyperlipidemia.16,17 He indicated he had been assured that, if
he had no such financial relationships for 1 year before serv-
ing on the committee, he would be eligible to be chair. There-
fore, he ended relationships in May 2008 with the 6 compa-
nies and, in March 2009 at the first meeting of the cholesterol
guideline committee, disclosed that he had no commercial
COI.16Wecannotascertainwhyhislaterpublishedarticle18still
contained a listing of these former commercial relationships.
Table 1. Adherence to Institute of Medicine Conflict of Interest (COI) Standards
Institute of Medicine Standard
No. (%)
HCV Guideline Committee
(n = 29)
Cholesterol Guideline Committee
(n = 16)
Are COI disclosures available within published guideline?
Yes
Yes
Committee members with any commercial COI
21 (72), Including 18 (62)
industry-sponsored research, 3
(10) consultancy, 10 (34)
advisory board, 5 (17) DSMB,
and 3 (10) unspecified
honorariaa
7 (44), Including 7 (44) industry-
sponsored research, 6 (38) consultancy,
0 advisory board,b 0 DSMB,b and
1 (6) unspecified honorariaa
Committee members with commercial COI, excluding
industry-sponsored research
15 (52), Including 3 (10)
consultancy, 10 (34) advisory
board, 5 (17) DSMB, and 3
(10) unspecified honorariaa
6 (38), Including 6 (38) consultancy,
0 advisory board,b 0 DSMB,b and
1 (6) unspecified honorariaa
Committee members with only industry-sponsored research COI
6 (21)
1 (6)
Members with commercial COI represent <50% of the panel?
No
Yes
Committee chairs and cochairs with any commercial COI
4 of 6 (67), Including 2 (50)
industry-sponsored research,
0 consultancy, 0
advisory board, 1 (25)
DSMB, and 1 (25) unspecified
honorariaa
1 of 3 (33), Including 1 (33) industry-
sponsored research, 0 consultancy,
0 advisory board,b 0 DSMB,b
and 0 unspecified honorariaa
All chairs and cochairs free of commercial COI?
No
No
Abbreviations: DSMB, data safety monitoring board; HCV, hepatitis C virus.
a Unspecified or other honoraria include ownership, partnership, principal,
stock, educational grants, and unspecified honoraria.
bAdvisory board and DSMB not disclosed specifically within the American
College of Cardiology and American Heart Association guidelines. The
American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association disclosure
categories included consultant, speakers bureau, ownership/partnership/
principal, personal research, and expert witness.
Conflict of Interest in Seminal Hepatitis C Virus and Cholesterol Management
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online January 17, 2017
E3
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/intemed/0/ by a Newcastle University User  on 01/24/2017
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
It may be that he submitted his disclosure for the article be-
foreendingtheserelationshipsorthatthedisclosuretimeframe
requested by the journal extended back to a time earlier than
May 2008.
One cholesterol committee cochair disclosed commer-
cial COI (only research grants from industry) as part of the
guideline disclosure process. In contemporaneous publica-
tions, this individual also disclosed service as a consultant, ad-
visory board membership, honoraria for educational activi-
ties, speaker honoraria, unspecified honoraria, and additional
industry-sponsoredresearchgrantsfromcompaniesthatmake
cholesterol treatments.
Of the 9 additional IOM guideline development and evi-
dence standards, the cholesterol guideline met 5 (56%). Most
failures to meet standards were related to the narrow scope of
the types of evidence eligible for consideration within the re-
view provided to the committee (Table 2).
AASLD/IDSA HCV Guideline
The HCV guideline committee consisted of 29 members, with
6 cochairs and no designated chair. The disclosure standards
were established by the AASLD/IDSA and required disclosure
of all COI during guideline development starting in October
2013. Conflict of interest statements for all committee mem-
berswereupdatedshortlybeforeguidelinepublication.7Hepa-
titis C virus guideline development was funded by the AASLD
and IDSA. The International Antiviral Society–USA provided
administrative support. Industry funding was not directly ac-
cepted for guideline development.7
Of the 29 committee members, 21 (72%) reported 1 or more
types of commercial COI. Eighteen (62%) received industry-
sponsoredresearchgrants,10(34%)servedonadvisoryboards,
5 (17%) served on data safety monitoring boards, 3 (10%) were
consultants, and 3 (10%) had other unspecified honoraria
(Table 1).
Of the 6 HCV guideline committee cochairs, 4 (67%) dis-
closed commercial COI. Two (50%) received industry-
sponsored research grants, 1 (25%) served on a data safety
monitoring board, and 1 (25%) had other unspecified hono-
raria. Disclosures in contemporaneous articles indicated that
1 additional cochair had commercial COI (industry-
sponsored research), and there were several other important
differences found for the other cochairs. For example, one co-
chair, who disclosed only industry-sponsored research in the
guideline, indicated in peer-reviewed articles service as a con-
sultant, payment for clinical trials, unspecified personal fees,
and additional industry-sponsored research grants that were
not included in the guideline disclosure statement. For all 4
cochairswhodisclosedcommercialCOIfortheguideline,there
were additional commercial COI disclosed in contemporane-
ous articles.
The HCV guideline met all additional IOM guideline de-
velopment and evidence standards. These results are summa-
rized in Table 2.
Discussion
Our analysis suggests that management of levels of commer-
cial COI among guideline committees remains an important
problem 5 years after the IOM standards were published. We
found that the ACC/AHA cholesterol guideline adhered to the
first IOM COI standard, but one of its committee leaders dis-
closed commercial COI, whereas the chair later acknowl-
edged ending commercial links to relevant drugmakers im-
mediately before assuming his chairperson role. The AASLD/
IDSA HCV guideline did not come close to meeting either IOM
COI standard, with almost three-fourths (21 of 29) of all com-
mittee members and two-thirds (4 of 6) of its cochairs disclos-
ing commercial COI. Concerns about COI are compounded by
our finding that contemporaneous COI disclosures in pub-
lished articles by guideline committee chairs and cochairs fre-
quently did not match, with additional and different relation-
ships listed than those in their guideline COI disclosures.
The recommendations of the cholesterol and HCV guide-
lines evaluated herein differ from contemporaneous guide-
lines in a way that adds to questions about the possible influ-
ence of commercial COI. In 2014, cholesterol management
guidelines were jointly developed by the Department of Vet-
erans Affairs (VA) and the US Department of Defense (DoD).19
No members of this guideline group declared commercial COI.
The VA/DoD guideline recommended a more conservative ap-
proach to cholesterol management through the use of higher
thresholds for initiating statin therapy and recommendation
of more moderate dosing levels.
Another VA expert committee without COI also produced
HCV management guidelines that differed in important ways
from that developed by the AASLD/IDSA. The 2014 VA HCV
guidelinehadseveralrecommendationsforlessexpensivefirst-
line treatment options and differed on the critical question of
whethertoconsiderpostponingtreatmentforsomepatients.20
The VA guideline gave cautious credence to this approach,
whereas the AASLD/IDSA guideline did not.
Limitations
There are several limitations to our study. First, we analyzed
only 2 guidelines, and our findings may not be representa-
tive. We thought it was useful to focus our analysis on guide-
Table 2. Adherence to Institute of Medicine Guideline Development
and Evidence Standards
Institute of Medicine Standard
Cholesterol
Guideline
HCV
Guideline
Committee selection process started
Yes
Yes
Information scientist
Yes
Yes
Patient or patient representative
No
Yes
Data collection and method given
Yes
Yes
Quality of evidence rated
Yes
Yes
Evidence supporting individual
recommendations given
Yes
Yes
Non-English literature included
No
Yes
Unpublished data included
No
Yes
Abstracts included
No
Yes
Total standards adhered, No. (%)
5 (56)
9 (100)
Abbreviation: HCV, hepatitis C virus.
Research Original Investigation
Conflict of Interest in Seminal Hepatitis C Virus and Cholesterol Management
E4
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online January 17, 2017
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/intemed/0/ by a Newcastle University User  on 01/24/2017
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
lines recommending major changes in the paradigm of appro-
priate care for large patient populations. Second, the results
of our concordance analysis must be interpreted cautiously.
We could not assess whether differing disclosure statements
between guidelines and published articles reflected the sev-
ering of active commercial ties with drugmakers “just in time”
in order to serve on guideline committees. Although not ex-
plicitly addressed in the IOM standards, it is unclear whether
this practice reduces the chance of bias due to COI of guide-
linecommitteemembers,especiallychairsandcochairs.Third,
we could not evaluate with great precision whether the time
spans for disclosure between the guidelines and contempo-
raneous articles may have differed. For example, journals may
haverequireddisclosureofconflictsdatingbackfarlongerthan
the guideline committees. However, this explanation seems
unlikely given that both committees asked for disclosure over
a broad multiyear time span.
Based on our findings, we propose 4 ways to improve the
development of COI standards and COI disclosure by guide-
line committees. First, all specialty societies should agree to
use the IOM framework and definition of the types of COI. In
particular, we believe that the IOM was correct in its judg-
ment that industry-sponsored research should be consis-
tently recognized as relevant commercial COI.
Second, for consistency across settings of COI disclosure,
we recommend that all guideline committees adopt the stan-
dard form for declaration of COI instituted in 2009 by leading
medical journal editors.21 Consistency in COI forms should en-
courage and facilitate concordance between COI disclosures.
Third, we propose that the IOM standards for the level
of acceptable commercial COI be adopted and implemented
by all guideline committees. We believe there is no a priori
reason why high-quality guidelines cannot be produced
while following IOM requirements that a few committee
members and none of the chairs and cochairs have commer-
cial COI. Specialty societies have options for how to meet
these standards. Some recruit a guideline writing commit-
tee entirely free of COI that meets with a second group com-
posed of clinical experts with a rate of COI exceeding the
50% standard.22,23 Before 2011, the ACC and AASLD had
already adopted COI standards consistent with the IOM
standards but, per our analysis, did not consistently adhere
to their own policies.24,25
Fourth, we propose that journal editors require that guide-
line committees meet the IOM standards in order for the re-
sulting guideline to merit peer review and publication. Simi-
larly, the National Guideline Clearinghouse could require
adherence to the IOM standards as a prerequisite for inclu-
sion. To improve consistency across disclosures, the National
Institutes of Health, or a similar entity, could house a central
COI disclosure database. Authors could be required to update
their data annually, and journals could extract disclosures di-
rectly, avoiding the problem of inconsistent disclosures across
journals.
Conclusions
We believe that our study highlights the need for broader and
more explicit adoption of the IOM’
s framework for COI man-
agement and a commitment from specialty societies to ad-
here to the IOM standards. Adoption of consistent COI frame-
works will help ensure that the clinical guidelines establishing
appropriate care in the United States are developed in a way
that can merit the trust of patients, clinicians, and the broader
public.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: November 8, 2016.
Published Online: January 17, 2017.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.8439
Author Contributions: Drs Jefferson and Pearson
had full access to all the data in the study and take
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Both authors.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Jefferson.
Drafting of the manuscript: Both authors.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Both authors.
Statistical analysis: Jefferson.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Both
authors.
Study supervision: Pearson.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Pearson
reported receiving research grants during the past 2
years from the Blue Shield of California Foundation,
the California Health Care Foundation, the Laura
and John Arnold Foundation, and the National
Pharmaceutical Council and reported membership
dues paid to the Institute for Clinical and Economic
Review during the past 2 years from Aetna,
America’
s Health Insurance Plans, Anthem, Blue
Shield of California, CVS Caremark, Express Scripts,
Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, OmedaRx, United
Healthcare, Kaiser Permanente, Premera Blue
Cross, Prime Therapeutics, Health Care Service
Corporation, AstraZeneca, Genentech,
GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson & Johnson, Merck, the
National Pharmaceutical Council, Takeda
Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer, Novartis, and Eli Lilly and
Company. No other disclosures were reported.
Funding/Support: This study was supported by an
intramural research grant from the National
Institutes of Health.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding source
had no role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
Disclaimer: The views expressed are the authors’
own and do not represent the views or policies of
the National Institutes of Health, the US
Department of Health and Human Services, or the
US government.
REFERENCES
1. American Medical Association. Ethical
considerations in the development of clinical
practice guidelines H-410.953. https://searchpf
.ama-assn.org/SearchML/searchDetails.action?uri
=%2FAMADoc%2FHOD.xml-0-3636.xml.
Published 2014. Accessed April 11, 2016.
2. Woolf SH, Grol R, Hutchinson A, Eccles M,
Grimshaw J. Clinical guidelines: potential benefits,
limitations, and harms of clinical guidelines. BMJ.
1999;318(7182):527-530.
3. Jacobs AK, Anderson JL, Halperin JL, et al;
ACC/AHA Task Force Members. The evolution and
future of ACC/AHA clinical practice guidelines:
a 30-year journey: a report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;130
(14):1208-1217.
4. Graham R, Mancher M, Miller Wolman D,
Greenfield S, Steinberg E, eds; Committee on
Standards for Developing Trustworthy Clinical
Practice Guidelines; Institute of Medicine. Clinical
Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. Washington, DC:
National Academy of Sciences; 2011.
5. Lenzer J, Hoffman JR, Furberg CD, Ioannidis JP;
Guideline Panel Review Working Group. Ensuring
the integrity of clinical practice guidelines: a tool for
protecting patients. BMJ. 2013;347:f5535.
6. Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, et al;
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. 2013
ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of blood
cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular
Conflict of Interest in Seminal Hepatitis C Virus and Cholesterol Management
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online January 17, 2017
E5
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/intemed/0/ by a Newcastle University User  on 01/24/2017
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
risk in adults: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines [published correction
appears in Circulation. 2014;129(25)(suppl
2):S46-S48]. Circulation. 2014;129(25)(suppl 2):S1-
S45.
7. AASLD/IDSA HCV Guidance Panel. Hepatitis C
guidance: AASLD-IDSA recommendations for
testing, managing, and treating adults infected with
hepatitis C virus. Hepatology. 2015;62(3):932-954.
8. Kodjak A. Hepatitis drug among the most costly
for Medicaid. National Public Radio. December 15,
2015.
9. Park A. Should I take a statin? what you need to
know about the new cholesterol guidelines. Time.
2013(November):20.
10. DeBoy AM. Assuring Medicaid Beneficiaries
Access to Hepatitis C (HCV) Drugs. Baltimore, MD:
Center for Medicaid & CHIP Services; November 5,
2015. Medicaid Drug Rebate Program Notice
Release 172.
11. Yee HF Jr. Treatment of hepatitis C virus
infection in real life. JAMA Intern Med. 2016;176(1):
73-74.
12. Martin SS, Blumenthal RS. Concepts and
controversies: the 2013 American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association risk
assessment and cholesterol treatment guidelines.
Ann Intern Med. 2014;160(5):356-358.
13. Lo B, Field MJ, eds; Institute of Medicine
Committee on Conflict of Interest in Medical
Research, Education, and Practice. Conflict of
Interest in Medical Research, Education, and Practice.
Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences;
2009.
14. Schünemann HJ, Al-Ansary LA, Forland F, et al;
Board of Trustees of the Guidelines International
Network. Guidelines International Network:
principles for disclosure of interests and
management of conflicts in guidelines. Ann Intern
Med. 2015;163(7):548-553.
15. American College of Cardiology Foundation and
American Heart Association, Inc. Methodology
Manual and Policies From the ACCF/AHA Task Force
on Practice Guidelines. http://professional.heart.org
/idc/groups/ahamah-public/@wcm/@sop
/documents/downloadable/ucm_319826.pdf.
Published June 2010. Accessed August 1, 2016.
16. Lenzer J. Majority of panelists on controversial
new cholesterol guideline have current or recent
ties to drug manufacturers. BMJ. 2013;347:f6989.
17. Park A. Conflicts of interest: cholesterol panel
head defends members’ties to industry. Time. 2013
(November):22.
18. Stone NJ. Nonpharmacologic management of
mixed dyslipidemia associated with diabetes
mellitus and the metabolic syndrome: a review of
the evidence. Am J Cardiol. 2008;102(12):14L-18L.
19. Downs JR, O’
Malley PG. Management of
dyslipidemia for cardiovascular disease risk
reduction: synopsis of the 2014 U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs and U.S. Department of Defense
clinical practice guideline. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163
(4):291-297.
20. Department of Veterans Affairs. Chronic
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection: treatment
considerations from the Department of Veterans
Affairs National Hepatitis C Resource Center
Program and the Office of Public Health. http:
//www.hepatitis.va.gov/pdf/2014hcv.pdf. Published
March 27, 2014. Accessed September 1, 2016.
21. Drazen JM, Van Der Weyden MB, Sahni P, et al.
Uniform format for disclosure of competing
interests in ICMJE journals. Lancet. 2009;374
(9699):1395-1396.
22. Guyatt G, Akl EA, Hirsh J, et al. The vexing
problem of guidelines and conflict of interest:
a potential solution. Ann Intern Med. 2010;152(11):
738-741.
23. Brawley O, Byers T, Chen A, et al. New
American Cancer Society process for creating
trustworthy cancer screening guidelines. JAMA.
2011;306(22):2495-2499.
24. American College of Cardiology. Relationships
with industry policy. http://www.acc.org/guidelines
/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents
/relationships-with-industry-policy. Published May
17, 2010. Accessed August 1, 2016.
25. American Association for the Study of Liver
Diseases. Code for the assessment and
management of conflict of interest. http://www
.aasld.org/governance-codes-site-data-policy
/code-assessment-and-management-conflict
-interest. Published October 2010. Accessed
August 1, 2016.
Research Original Investigation
Conflict of Interest in Seminal Hepatitis C Virus and Cholesterol Management
E6
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online January 17, 2017
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/pdfaccess.ashx?url=/data/journals/intemed/0/ by a Newcastle University User  on 01/24/2017
