 Delays in Emergency Care and Mortality during Major U.S. 
Marathons
Anupam B. Jena, M.D., Ph.D., N. Clay Mann, Ph.D., Leia N. Wedlund, and Andrew Olenski, 
B.S.
Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School (A.B.J., A.O.), and Massachusetts 
General Hospital (A.B.J.) — both in Boston, and the National Bureau of Economic Research 
(A.B.J.) and Harvard University (L.N.W.), Cambridge – all in Massachusetts; and the Department 
of Pediatrics, University of Utah School of Medicine, and the National EMS Information System 
Technical Assistance Center — both in Salt Lake City (N.C.M.)
Abstract
BACKGROUND—Large marathons frequently involve widespread road closures and 
infrastructure disruptions, which may create delays in emergency care for nonparticipants with 
acute medical conditions who live in proximity to marathon routes.
METHODS—We analyzed Medicare data on hospitalizations for acute myocardial infarction or 
cardiac arrest among Medicare beneficiaries (≥65 years of age) in 11 U.S. cities that were hosting 
major marathons during the period from 2002 through 2012 and compared 30-day mortality 
among the beneficiaries who were hospitalized on the date of a marathon, those who were 
hospitalized on the same day of the week as the day of the marathon in the 5 weeks before or the 5 
weeks after the marathon, and those who were hospitalized on the same day as the marathon but in 
surrounding ZIP Code areas unaffected by the marathon. We also analyzed data from a national 
registry of ambulance transports and investigated whether ambulance transports occurring before 
noon in marathon-affected areas (when road closures are likely) had longer scene-to-hospital 
transport times than on nonmarathon dates. We also compared transport times on marathon dates 
with those on nonmarathon dates in these same areas during evenings (when roads were reopened) 
and in areas unaffected by the marathon.
RESULTS—The daily frequency of hospitalizations was similar on marathon and nonmarathon 
dates (mean number of hospitalizations per city, 10.6 and 10.5, respectively; P=0.71); the 
characteristics of the beneficiaries hospitalized on marathon and nonmarathon dates were also 
similar. Unadjusted 30-day mortality in marathon-affected areas on marathon dates was 28.2% 
(323 deaths in 1145 hospitalizations) as compared with 24.9% (2757 deaths in 11,074 
hospitalizations) on nonmarathon dates (absolute risk difference, 3.3 percentage points; 95% 
confidence interval, 0.7 to 6.0; P=0.01; relative risk difference, 13.3%). This pattern persisted after 
adjustment for covariates and in an analysis that included beneficiaries who had five or more 
chronic medical conditions (a group that is unlikely to be hospitalized because of marathon 
Address reprint requests to Dr. Jena at the Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, 180 Longwood Ave., Boston, 
MA 02115, or at jena@hcp.med.harvard.edu. 
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Published in final edited form as:
N Engl J Med. 2017 April 13; 376(15): 1441–1450. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa1614073.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 participation). No significant differences were found with respect to where patients were 
hospitalized or the treatments they received in the hospital. Ambulance scene-to-hospital transport 
times for pickups before noon were 4.4 minutes longer on marathon dates than on nonmarathon 
dates (relative difference, 32.1%; P=0.005). No delays were found in evenings or in marathon-
unaffected areas.
CONCLUSIONS—Medicare beneficiaries who were admitted to marathon-affected hospitals 
with acute myocardial infarction or cardiac arrest on marathon dates had longer ambulance 
transport times before noon (4.4 minutes longer) and higher 30-day mortality than beneficiaries 
who were hospitalized on nonmarathon dates.
Preparation for large public events frequently involves road closures, an increase in 
emergency medical services, and interventions to ensure participant safety. In some 
instances, such as marathons, these changes may have unintended health consequences for 
nonparticipants. For example, widespread road closures and diversion of emergency medical 
services that occur during marathons may result in delays in care for persons with medical 
emergencies in areas affected by the marathon. Although studies have examined the effect of 
sporting events on emotional stress and acute cardiovascular events1–4 and on running-
related mortality among marathon participants,5,6 data are lacking on whether large 
infrastructure disruptions during marathons adversely affect non-marathon participants who 
require medical care. Many studies have documented the adverse effects that delays in care 
have on mortality across various settings and conditions7–13; these findings suggest that 
widespread road closures and infrastructure disruptions during marathons could adversely 
affect health outcomes in nonparticipants.
We compared 30-day mortality among Medicare beneficiaries with acute myocardial 
infarction or cardiac arrest who were hospitalized on the day of a major marathon, those 
who were hospitalized on the same day of the week as the day of the marathon in the 5 
weeks before or the 5 weeks after the marathon, and those who were hospitalized on the 
same day as the marathon but in surrounding ZIP Code areas unaffected by the marathon. 
We investigated whether marathons were associated with changes in hospital destination, 
hospital care, and admission volume and used data on ambulance arrival and transport times 
from a nationwide registry to examine whether marathons were associated with increased 
scene-to-hospital transport time and delays in patients seeking care.
METHODS
MARATHONS AND STUDY POPULATION
We identified the dates of the 11 largest U.S. urban marathons (according to the number of 
runners) during the period from 2002 through 2012; the 11 cities were Boston, Chicago, 
Honolulu, Houston, Los Angeles, Minneapolis, New York City, Orlando (Florida), 
Philadelphia, Seattle, and Washington, D.C.
We sought to determine whether marathons are associated with higher mortality because of 
infrastructure changes that result in delays in care rather than because of race participation. 
We therefore focused on persons who had a relatively low likelihood of marathon 
participation (i.e., Medicare beneficiaries ≥65 years of age who were hospitalized for acute 
Jena et al.
Page 2
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 myocardial infarction or cardiac arrest). Many Medicare beneficiaries who are hospitalized 
with these nonelective conditions are of advanced age and have multiple coexisting medical 
conditions (Table 1).
PRIMARY OUTCOME MEASURE AND DATA SOURCES
Our primary outcome was 30-day mortality after admission. We used several data sources. 
Medicare Provider Analysis and Review (MedPAR) 100% files, which contain information 
on all fee-for-service Medicare beneficiaries using hospital inpatient services, were used to 
identify hospitalizations for acute myocardial infarction (International Classification of 
Diseases, Ninth Revision [ICD-9] code 410.X1) or cardiac arrest (ICD-9 code 427.5) among 
Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries (≥65 years of age) between January 1, 2002, and 
November 30, 2012. Dates of death and demographic characteristics of the beneficiaries 
were obtained from Medicare Beneficiary Summary files. Information on chronic medical 
conditions of the beneficiaries was obtained from the Chronic Conditions Data Warehouse 
of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
In addition to these data, we matched the Medicare carrier file (20% sample) to the MedPAR 
file using the beneficiary identification number and claim date. Unlike MedPAR files, carrier 
files include claims for ambulance rides, which allowed us to identify whether a patient was 
brought to the hospital by ambulance and, if so, the miles driven. Ambulance rides were 
identified according to Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System code A0425. This 
20% matched sample was used only for the analysis of miles driven by the ambulance on 
marathon dates versus nonmarathon dates.
Finally, to estimate ambulance travel times on marathon dates, we used the National 
Emergency Medical Services Information System (NEMSIS),14 a national repository of 
emergency medical services activations. NEMSIS includes ambulance travel times, pickup 
times, incident and destination locations, and patient characteristics. We analyzed data 
submitted by participating agencies in the cities we studied during 2012. The outcome of 
interest was elapsed travel time from scene departure to hospital arrival on a marathon date 
versus the same day of the week as the day of the marathon in the 5 weeks before and the 5 
weeks after the marathon. We also analyzed the time of scene departure on marathon dates 
versus nonmarathon dates to assess delays in ambulance arrival at the scene or in patients 
seeking care. To ensure that we captured transports of nonrunners and to approximate 
characteristics of Medicare beneficiaries hospitalized for acute myocardial infarction or 
cardiac arrest, we restricted our NEMSIS analysis to transports involving patients 70 years 
of age or older (a sensitivity analysis is provided in the Supplementary Appendix, available 
with the full text of this article at NEJM.org). Because of confidentiality requirements, we 
were not provided with geographic data.
CLASSIFICATION OF HOSPITALS AND DATES OF HOSPITALIZATIONS
We identified areas within the marathon routes according to ZIP Code. For marathons that 
spanned areas outside city limits, we included as part of the marathon-affected area the 
towns that the marathon passed through. For instance, the Boston marathon passes through 
suburban towns such as Newton and Brookline, and so these additional ZIP Codes were 
Jena et al.
Page 3
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 included in the marathon-affected area. Hospitals located in ZIP Code areas through which 
the marathon route passed were defined as marathon-affected hospitals. We identified a 
control set of ZIP Codes that included all ZIP Code areas in the hospital referral regions that 
neighbored the hospital referral region in which the marathon took place.15 We defined 
control hospitals as all hospitals located in these surrounding hospital referral regions.
We compared 30-day mortality among patients admitted to marathon-affected hospitals on a 
marathon date with 30-day mortality among patients admitted to the same hospitals on the 
same day of week as the day of the marathon in the 5 weeks before and after the marathon. 
For instance, our control dates for Boston’s 2012 marathon, which occurred on Monday, 
April 16, included the five Mondays before and the five Mondays after that date. Dates of 
hospitalizations were classified as “marathon” or “nonmarathon” according to the admission 
date relative to the marathon date. Overall, 121 marathon dates (11 cities over 11 years) and 
1210 nonmarathon dates were analyzed.
MORTALITY ANALYSIS
We assessed whether patient characteristics (e.g., age, sex, race, and preexisting chronic 
medical conditions) were balanced among Medicare beneficiaries admitted to marathon-
affected hospitals on marathon dates versus nonmarathon dates. We then plotted unadjusted 
30-day mortality according to the week relative to the marathon date among the beneficiaries 
hospitalized in marathon-affected hospitals versus control hospitals (control hospitals were 
included to assess for regional trends in mortality that may be correlated with marathon 
dates). Because unmeasured patient characteristics that are correlated with mortality may 
vary between marathon dates and nonmarathon dates, we used a hospitalization-level 
multivariable logistic model to estimate the 30-day mortality among the beneficiaries 
hospitalized in marathon-affected hospitals as a function of hospital admission date 
(marathon date vs. nonmarathon date); the sex, age, or race of the patient; any one of 10 
preexisting chronic medical conditions; the median household income in the ZIP Code area; 
the interaction between city and marathon day (to allow marathon effects to vary across 
cities); and the fixed effects for hospital. The fixed effects for hospital accounted for 
differences in mortality among beneficiaries hospitalized on marathon dates versus 
nonmarathon dates that may be mediated by patients being admitted to different hospitals. 
Our estimates therefore compared mortality on marathon dates versus nonmarathon dates 
among beneficiaries admitted to the same hospital. We report adjusted 30-day mortality 
among beneficiaries admitted to marathon-affected hospitals on marathon dates versus 
nonmarathon dates using the marginal standardization form of predictive margins averaged 
over the distribution of covariates in our sample.16,17 Using an identical model, we estimated 
the 30-day mortality among beneficiaries admitted to control hospitals, hypothesizing that 
the higher 30-day mortality among beneficiaries admitted to marathon-affected hospitals on 
marathon dates should not be observed in these hospitals. Both models used robust variance 
estimators to account for clustering of admissions within hospitals. The 95% confidence 
interval around the reported estimates reflects an alpha level of 0.025 in each tail (or 
P≤0.05).
Jena et al.
Page 4
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SENSITIVITY ANALYSES
We conducted several sensitivity analyses. First, to ensure that we did not analyze 
hospitalizations that occurred as a result of participation in the marathon, we conducted a 
subgroup analysis that included only beneficiaries with five or more chronic medical 
conditions (the median number of conditions in our population); this group was unlikely to 
include marathon runners. We also performed an automated query of local newspapers to 
identify potential instances of deaths among marathon runners. Second, in a permutation 
test, we simulated how the observed difference in mortality among beneficiaries hospitalized 
on marathon dates versus nonmarathon dates compared with the difference that might be 
expected from chance alone, as calculated by assigning marathon-affected hospitals to 
“placebo” marathon dates chosen randomly throughout the year and then estimating the 
difference in unadjusted mortality among the beneficiaries hospitalized on the placebo 
marathon dates versus nonmarathon dates (1000 replications were performed). Additional 
analyses included alternative mortality end points, estimation of a hierarchical mortality 
model, inclusion of additional marathons, and an expanded definition of marathon-affected 
areas to address potential misclassification. (Further details on the automated query of local 
newspapers and additional analyses are provided in the Supplementary Appendix.)
ANALYSIS OF POTENTIAL CAUSES
We assessed several potential causes to explain differences in mortality among beneficiaries 
hospitalized on marathon dates versus nonmarathon dates. An influx of spectators into 
marathon-affected areas could lead to increases in the rate of acute myocardial infarction or 
cardiac arrest among visitors hospitalized on marathon dates, which could raise mortality if 
hospital resources are stretched. Alternatively, if patients delay seeking care during 
marathons, those hospitalized may have a higher unobserved risk of death. We assessed 
these possibilities by analyzing whether the number of hospitalizations for acute myocardial 
infarction or cardiac arrest varied across dates. Similarly, we used NEMSIS files to analyze 
whether the distribution of ambulance departure times varied between marathon and 
nonmarathon dates; delays in patients seeking care would be expected to shift the 
distribution of ambulance departure times to later in the day.
Second, we analyzed whether hospital care differed between marathon and nonmarathon 
dates, which may occur if hospitals are relatively short-staffed during marathons. We 
analyzed rates of percutaneous coronary intervention, mechanical circulatory support 
(defined as intraaortic balloon counterpulsation or insertion of a percutaneous ventricular 
assist device), and coronary-artery bypass grafting (procedure codes are provided in the 
Supplementary Appendix).
Third, we analyzed whether the distribution of hospitals providing care changed during 
marathons as a result of road closures that prompted diversions of ambulances or private 
vehicles. We computed each hospital’s share of total acute myocardial infarction or cardiac 
arrest hospitalizations on marathon dates and nonmarathon dates and used a Spearman 
correlation analysis to assess the correlation between these shares. A high correlation would 
imply that patients were not admitted to different hospitals on marathon dates than on 
nonmarathon dates.
Jena et al.
Page 5
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fourth, we analyzed whether the out-of-town composition of hospitalized patients changed 
during marathons, which could have led to higher mortality on marathon dates if unobserved 
risks of mortality were higher among patients residing outside marathon-affected ZIP Code 
areas. We compared distributions of ZIP Code of residence among the beneficiaries 
hospitalized in marathon-affected hospitals on marathon dates with those on nonmarathon 
dates. We also conducted a subgroup analysis of mortality that included only beneficiaries 
who lived in marathon-affected ZIP Code areas.
Fifth, we assessed whether scene-to-hospital ambulance travel was delayed on marathon 
dates. First, we used the 20% carrier files to compare the mean miles driven by ambulances 
on marathon dates versus nonmarathon dates. Next, because miles were reported in integers 
and road closures may lead to delays without increases in miles, we used NEMSIS files to 
compare scene-to-hospital transport time on marathon dates with that on nonmarathon dates, 
during mornings (defined as the period from 3 a.m. through noon), when roads should be 
closed, and evenings (defined as the period from 7 p.m. through 11:59 p.m.), when roads 
should be reopened. Finally, because delays in the care of acute myocardial infarction can 
lead to cardiac arrest, we used MedPAR files to estimate the probability of a diagnosis of 
concurrent cardiac arrest among patients with acute myocardial infarction on marathon and 
nonmarathon dates; we hypothesized that a greater proportion of admissions for acute 
myocardial infarction with concurrent cardiac arrest on marathon dates could indicate 
delayed care.
RESULTS
PATIENT CHARACTERISTICS
Our study included 1145 hospitalizations for acute myocardial infarction or cardiac arrest in 
marathon-affected hospitals on marathon dates and 11,074 hospitalizations on nonmarathon 
dates in the 5 weeks before and the 5 weeks after the marathon. The daily frequency of 
hospitalizations did not differ significantly between marathon dates and nonmarathon dates 
(mean number of hospitalizations per city, 10.6 and 10.5, respectively; P = 0.71) (Table S1 
in the Supplementary Appendix). Patient characteristics of age, sex, race, and preexisting 
medical conditions were clinically and statistically similar on pre-marathon, marathon, and 
postmarathon dates (Table 1).
30-DAY MORTALITY ON MARATHON AND NONMARATHON DATES
Unadjusted 30-day mortality was higher among beneficiaries admitted to marathon-affected 
hospitals on marathon dates than among beneficiaries admitted on nonmarathon dates, but 
this was not the case among beneficiaries admitted to control hospitals (Fig. 1). Among 
beneficiaries admitted to marathon-affected hospitals, unadjusted 30-day mortality was 
28.2% (323 deaths in 1145 hospitalizations) on marathon dates versus 24.9% (2757 deaths 
in 11,074 hospitalizations) on nonmarathon dates (absolute risk difference, 3.3 percentage 
points; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.7 to 6.0; P = 0.01; relative risk difference, 13.3%). 
After adjustment for covariates, adjusted 30-day mortality among beneficiaries admitted to 
marathon-affected hospitals on marathon dates was significantly higher than among 
beneficiaries admitted on nonmarathon dates (28.6% [95% CI, 26.1 to 31.1] vs. 24.9 [95% 
Jena et al.
Page 6
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CI, 24.1 to 25.6]; absolute adjusted risk difference, 3.7 percentage points [95% CI, 1.1 to 
6.4]) (Fig. 2, and Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix). Adjusted mortality among 
beneficiaries admitted to control hospitals on marathon dates was similar to that among 
beneficiaries admitted on nonmarathon dates (25.0 [95% CI, 23.6 to 26.4] and 24.7% [95% 
CI, 24.3 to 25.2], respectively; absolute adjusted risk difference, 0.3 percentage points [95% 
CI, −1.2 to 1.8]).
Our findings were similar in a subgroup analysis that included only beneficiaries who were 
unlikely to be marathon runners. In a review of local newspapers, we found no evidence that 
mortality was higher among runners in the week after the marathon than in the week before 
the marathon, which suggests that our main findings were not due to deaths occurring 
among marathon runners. The use of alternative mortality end points and different modeling 
assumptions and the inclusion of additional marathons in our analyses did not affect our 
findings. In a permutation test, the observed higher mortality among beneficiaries 
hospitalized on marathon dates than on nonmarathon dates was greater than the effect sizes 
observed in 99.4% of the 1000 replications in an analysis performed to compare whether the 
difference in mortality might be expected from chance alone. (See also Figs. S1 and S2, and 
Tables S2 through S4 in the Supplementary Appendix.)
POSSIBLE CAUSES
Hospital location was highly correlated between marathon dates and nonmarathon dates 
(Spearman correlation coefficient, 0.91: P<0.001), which suggests that patients were not 
admitted to different hospitals during marathons. Distributions of ZIP Code of residence of 
beneficiaries who were hospitalized on marathon dates were similar to those of beneficiaries 
who were hospitalized on nonmarathon dates. In analysis of only beneficiaries who resided 
within marathon-affected ZIP Code areas, the results of 30-day mortality were similar to 
those of the main analysis. We found no significant differences in rates of percutaneous 
coronary intervention, mechanical circulatory support, or coronary-artery bypass grafting 
performed at marathon-affected hospitals on marathon dates versus nonmarathon dates. (See 
also Figs. S3 and S4, and Tables S4 and S5 in the Supplementary Appendix.)
Among beneficiaries with acute myocardial infarction admitted to marathon-affected 
hospitals, the percentage with concurrent cardiac arrest was significantly higher on marathon 
dates than on nonmarathon dates (5.1% vs. 2.6%; absolute difference, 2.5 percentage points; 
95% CI, 1.4 to 3.5; P<0.001), but the corresponding percentages in the control hospitals did 
not differ significantly between marathon versus nonmarathon dates (Table S6 in the 
Supplementary Appendix).
We found no significant change in miles driven by ambulances on marathon dates. During 
mornings, we observed longer ambulance transport times in marathon-affected areas on 
marathon dates than on nonmarathon dates (i.e., same day of the week as the marathon date 
in the 5 weeks before and the 5 weeks after the marathon dates): an average of 18.1 minutes 
on marathon dates as compared with an average of 13.7 minutes on nonmarathon dates 
(absolute difference, 4.4 minutes; 95% CI, 1.3 to 7.5; P=0.005) (Fig. 3). No greater 
ambulance transport times were observed in marathon-affected areas during evenings or 
between marathon and nonmarathon dates in areas not affected by the marathon. We found 
Jena et al.
Page 7
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 no significant difference in the distribution of ambulance departure times in marathon-
affected areas on marathon dates, which suggests that patients did not delay seeking care 
during marathons. (See also Figs. S5 and S6, and Tables S7 and S8 in the Supplementary 
Appendix.)
DISCUSSION
We found higher 30-day mortality among Medicare beneficiaries admitted to marathon-
affected hospitals with acute myocardial infarction or cardiac arrest on dates of major 
marathons than among beneficiaries hospitalized on nonmarathon dates (i.e., that same day 
of the week as the day of the marathon in the 5 weeks before and the 5 weeks after the 
marathon). The characteristics of the beneficiaries hospitalized on marathon dates were 
similar to those of the beneficiaries hospitalized on nonmarathon dates, which argues against 
unmeasured patient factors leading to higher mortality during marathons. We observed no 
significant differences in mortality among beneficiaries who were admitted to hospitals that 
were unaffected by marathon routes. Marathon participation was unlikely to be a cause of 
death among the Medicare beneficiaries in our study, who had a mean age of 76.6 years and 
had notable chronic medical conditions.
The frequency of hospitalization was similar across marathon and nonmarathon dates, which 
suggests that patients did not forego care until after marathon dates. The distribution of 
hospitals in which patients were treated was also similar. In an analysis of ambulance 
transports that occurred during mornings, when road closures attributable to marathons 
would be more likely, scene-to-hospital transport times were 32.1% longer on marathon 
dates than on non-marathon dates (an average of 18.1 minutes vs. 13.7 minutes). No 
differences in transport times were found in areas unaffected by marathons or in evenings in 
marathon-affected areas, when roads were reopened. Ambulance departure times were 
similarly distributed on marathon and nonmarathon dates, which suggests that patients did 
not delay seeking care and that ambulances were not delayed in reaching patients. The 
geographic distribution of ZIP Code of residence was similar among beneficiaries 
hospitalized on marathon dates and those hospitalized on nonmarathon dates, and the main 
findings did not change when only beneficiaries who resided in marathon-affected ZIP Code 
areas were included in the analysis; therefore, our findings were unlikely to be attributable to 
out-of-town visitors. In a review of local newspapers to identify reported instances of deaths 
occurring among marathon runners, we found no evidence that mortality on marathon days 
was higher because of marathon participation itself. Finally, rates of acute myocardial 
infarction with concurrent cardiac arrest were twice as high among beneficiaries hospitalized 
on marathon dates as among similar beneficiaries hospitalized on nonmarathon dates, a 
finding that is consistent with delayed care. Taken together, our findings suggest that road 
closures, diversion of ambulance resources, and ensuing delays in hospital care may explain 
the higher mortality that we observed among patients with acute myocardial infarction or 
cardiac arrest who were hospitalized on dates of major marathons.
The differences in mortality that we observed were substantial. If one assumes that there is a 
causal link between the longer transport times and mortality, the higher 30-day mortality of 
28.2% vs. 24.9% (a relative difference of 13.3%) would imply that each year a total of 3.4 
Jena et al.
Page 8
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 additional 30-day mortality events occurred among Medicare beneficiaries with acute 
myocardial infarction or cardiac arrest who were hospitalized on marathon dates in the 11 
cities that we studied. The magnitude of these estimates raises the question of whether 
delays in ambulance transport of 4.4 minutes could reasonably affect mortality. 
Observational studies of cardiac arrest have shown higher mortality in association with even 
a few minutes of additional arrest duration.18–20 Findings from observational studies that 
showed lower mortality among patients transported by basic life support ambulances versus 
advanced life support ambulances are also consistent with our findings to the extent that 
receipt of hospital care may be faster with transport by basic life support ambulances.21,22 
More likely, however, is that large relative increases in ambulance transport time may be a 
proxy for large absolute increases in transport time among patients who are not brought to 
the hospital by ambulance and therefore would be more affected by road closures. 
Approximately 23% of patients in our study were not brought to the hospital by ambulance. 
Large transport delays for these patients may partly explain our findings.
Large public events may disrupt access to timely medical care for both participants and 
nonparticipants of these events. Our study suggests that a citywide strategy for emergency 
medical preparedness should consider the risks not only to event participants but also to 
others whose care may be delayed. We did not systematically assess how each city addressed 
the possible effect of road closures on ambulance or private vehicle transports. It is possible 
that formalized protocols may differ across cities and may sometimes be lacking; a pattern 
of higher mortality across multiple hospitals within a city on any given marathon date may 
not be recognized by any single hospital or public service entity. Preparedness strategies 
should account not only for delays in ambulance transports but also for possible delays in 
hospital transports by private vehicles.
Our study has limitations. First, we could not definitively identify the cause of higher 
mortality among beneficiaries hospitalized on marathon dates, although delays in care 
attributable to road closures are a possible explanation. Second, we focused on acute 
myocardial infarction and cardiac arrest because patients with these conditions would 
probably seek care promptly, and delays in care could result in measurable adverse 
outcomes. Third, our analysis was limited to Medicare beneficiaries, but this is an important 
population to consider given the high rates of coexisting medical conditions and older age, 
both of which make marathon participation an unlikely cause of death in this population. 
Fourth, residual confounding is possible. However, patient characteristics were balanced 
between beneficiaries hospitalized on marathon dates and beneficiaries hospitalized on 
nonmarathon dates. Moreover, we found no difference in mortality in counties that were 
unaffected by marathon routes. Fifth, we did not consider all U.S. marathons. Sixth, 
ambulance transport data were not available for the entire study period. Finally, our analysis 
was underpowered to assess whether differences in mortality among beneficiaries 
hospitalized on marathon dates versus nonmarathon dates were larger or smaller in particular 
cities and if so, what emergency-response protocols in those cities may be responsible.
In conclusion, we found higher 30-day mortality among Medicare beneficiaries admitted to 
marathon-affected hospitals with acute myocardial infarction or cardiac arrest on dates of 
major U.S. marathons than among beneficiaries hospitalized on nonmarathon dates. Our 
Jena et al.
Page 9
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 findings are consistent with the idea that delays in care attributable to infrastructure 
disruptions are a possible explanation.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH Early Independence Award, Grant 1DP5OD017897-01, to Dr. 
Jena).
Funded by the National Institutes of Health.
References
1. Wilbert-Lampen U, Leistner D, Greven S, et al. Cardiovascular events during World Cup soccer. N 
Engl J Med. 2008; 358:475–83. [PubMed: 18234752] 
2. Witte DR, Bots ML, Hoes AW, Grobbee DE. Cardiovascular mortality in Dutch men during 1996 
European football championship: longitudinal population study. BMJ. 2000; 321:1552–4.
3. Carroll D, Ebrahim S, Tilling K, Macleod J, Smith GD. Admissions for myocardial infarction and 
World Cup football: database survey. BMJ. 2002; 325:1439–42. [PubMed: 12493655] 
4. Berthier F, Boulay F. Lower myocardial infarction mortality in French men the day France won the 
1998 World Cup of football. Heart. 2003; 89:555–6. [PubMed: 12695467] 
5. Redelmeier DA, Greenwald JA. Competing risks of mortality with marathons: retrospective 
analysis. BMJ. 2007; 335:1275–7. [PubMed: 18156224] 
6. Mathews SC, Narotsky DL, Bernholt DL, et al. Mortality among marathon runners in the United 
States, 2000–2009. Am J Sports Med. 2012; 40:1495–500. [PubMed: 22562789] 
7. Chalfin DB, Trzeciak S, Likourezos A, Baumann BM, Dellinger RP. Impact of delayed transfer of 
critically ill patients from the emergency department to the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med. 2007; 
35:1477–83. [PubMed: 17440421] 
8. Chan PS, Krumholz HM, Nichol G, Nallamothu BK. American Heart Association National Registry 
of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Investigators. Delayed time to defibrillation after in-hospital 
cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med. 2008; 358:9–17. [PubMed: 18172170] 
9. De Luca G, Suryapranata H, Zijlstra F, et al. Symptom-onset-to-balloon time and mortality in 
patients with acute myocardial infarction treated by primary angioplasty. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003; 
42:991–7. [PubMed: 13678918] 
10. Cannon CP, Gibson CM, Lambrew CT, et al. Relationship of symptom-onset-to-balloon time and 
door-to-balloon time with mortality in patients undergoing angioplasty for acute myocardial 
infarction. JAMA. 2000; 283:2941–7. [PubMed: 10865271] 
11. De Luca G, Suryapranata H, Ottervanger JP, Antman EM. Time delay to treatment and mortality in 
primary angioplasty for acute myocardial infarction: every minute of delay counts. Circulation. 
2004; 109:1223–5. [PubMed: 15007008] 
12. Hasselqvist-Ax I, Riva G, Herlitz J, et al. Early cardiopulmonary resuscitation in out-of-hospital 
cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med. 2015; 372:2307–15. [PubMed: 26061835] 
13. Emberson J, Lees KR, Lyden P, et al. Effect of treatment delay, age, and stroke severity on the 
effects of intravenous thrombolysis with alteplase for acute ischaemic stroke: a meta-analysis of 
individual patient data from randomised trials. Lancet. 2014; 384:1929–35. [PubMed: 25106063] 
14. Mann NC, Kane L, Dai M, Jacobson K. Description of the 2012 NEMSIS public-release research 
dataset. Prehosp Emerg Care. 2015; 19:232–40. [PubMed: 25290075] 
15. Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care. Lebanon, NH: Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical 
Practice; 2017. (http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/data/region/)
Jena et al.
Page 10
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 16. Williams R. Using the margins command to estimate and interpret adjusted predictions and 
marginal effects. Stata J. 2012; 12:308.
17. Zhang Y, Baik SH, Fendrick AM, Baicker K. Comparing local and regional variation in health care 
spending. N Engl J Med. 2012; 367:1724–31. [PubMed: 23113483] 
18. Goldberger ZD, Chan PS, Berg RA, et al. Duration of resuscitation efforts and survival after in-
hospital cardiac arrest: an observational study. Lancet. 2012; 380:1473–81. [PubMed: 22958912] 
19. Goto Y, Funada A, Goto Y. Relationship between the duration of cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
and favorable neurological outcomes after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest: a prospective, nationwide, 
population-based cohort study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016; 5(3):e002819. [PubMed: 26994129] 
20. Reynolds JC, Frisch A, Rittenberger JC, Callaway CW. Duration of resuscitation efforts and 
functional outcome after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest: when should we change to novel therapies? 
Circulation. 2013; 128:2488–94. [PubMed: 24243885] 
21. Sanghavi P, Jena AB, Newhouse JP, Zaslavsky AM. Outcomes of basic versus advanced life 
support for out-of-hospital medical emergencies. Ann Intern Med. 2015; 163:681–90. [PubMed: 
26457627] 
22. Sanghavi P, Jena AB, Newhouse JP, Zaslavsky AM. Outcomes after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest 
treated by basic vs advanced life support. JAMA Intern Med. 2015; 175:196–204. [PubMed: 
25419698] 
Jena et al.
Page 11
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Unadjusted 30-Day Mortality among Medicare Beneficiaries Hospitalized for Acute 
Myocardial Infarction or Cardiac Arrest on Marathon Dates and Nonmarathon Dates in 
Marathon-Affected Hospitals and Control Hospitals
Panel A shows the unadjusted 30-day mortality according to hospitalizations on the 
marathon date (week 0) and in the weeks relative to the marathon date (i.e., the same day of 
the week as the day of the marathon in the 5 weeks before and the 5 weeks after the 
marathon). Hospitals located in ZIP Code areas through which the marathon route passed 
were defined as marathon-affected hospitals. Control hospitals were defined as all hospitals 
in the hospital referral regions that surrounded the hospital referral region in which a 
marathon-affected hospital was located. The dashed lines represent 95% confidence 
Jena et al.
Page 12
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 intervals, which account for clustering of admissions within hospitals. Panel B shows the 
unadjusted 30-day mortality among Medicare beneficiaries hospitalized on marathon dates 
and nonmarathon dates in marathon-affected hospitals and control hospitals. The I bars 
represent 95% confidence intervals.
Jena et al.
Page 13
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Adjusted 30-Day Mortality among Medicare Beneficiaries Hospitalized for Acute 
Myocardial Infarction or Cardiac Arrest on Marathon Dates and Nonmarathon Dates in 
Marathon-Affected Hospitals and Control Hospitals
The analysis was adjusted for beneficiary sex, age, race, any of 10 chronic medical 
conditions, the median household income in the ZIP Code area, the interaction between city 
and marathon day, and fixed effects for hospital. Separate models were estimated for 
marathon-affected and control hospitals. The I bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
Jena et al.
Page 14
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Ambulance Travel Times from Scene to Hospital on a Marathon Date and 
Nonmarathon Dates in Marathon-Affected Areas and Areas Not Affected by the Marathon
Morning was defined as the period from 3 a.m. through noon, when road closures 
attributable to marathons would be more likely. Evening was defined as the period from 7 
p.m. through 11:59 p.m., when roads should be reopened. Transport times were computed 
for persons 70 years of age or older, which was chosen to reflect the mean age of Medicare 
beneficiaries with acute myocardial infarction and cardiac arrest. During the morning, the 
mean unadjusted difference in transport time between a marathon day and combined 
nonmarathon days in marathon-affected areas was 4.4 minutes (95% CI, 1.3 to 7.5) (P = 
0.005 by a Student’s t-test). There was no significant difference in the evening (−1.1 
minutes; 95% CI, −6.0 to −3.8; P = 0.65). Owing to a lack of geographic information in 
National Emergency Medical Services Information System data, the analysis could not 
account for clustering of admissions within hospitals or cities. The dashed lines represent 
Jena et al.
Page 15
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 95% confidence intervals. Sensitivity analyses of morning and age cutoffs are provided in 
the Supplementary Appendix.
Jena et al.
Page 16
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Jena et al.
Page 17
Table 1
Characteristics of Patients Admitted to Marathon-Affected Hospitals with Acute Myocardial Infarction or 
Cardiac Arrest in Cities during Major Marathons.*
Characteristic
Premarathon Dates (N 
= 5607)
Marathon Dates (N 
= 1145)
Postmarathon Dates (N 
= 5467)
P Value†
Mean age — yr
76.7
76.3
76.7
0.54
Female sex — %
51.0
49.3
49.2
0.14
White race — %‡
67.9
66.0
69.0
0.11
Medicaid eligibility — %
40.0
38.6
37.3
0.06
Median household yearly income in ZIP Code 
area — $
60,091
59,532
60,776
0.20
Preexisting medical conditions — %§
 Alzheimer’s disease
23.2
20.2
23.0
0.08
 Atrial fibrillation
20.5
18.5
18.9
0.06
 Chronic kidney disease
37.5
38.3
35.7
0.07
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
32.7
31.9
33.7
0.34
 Diabetes
50.7
51.8
50.2
0.60
 Congestive heart failure
58.9
57.9
59.0
0.76
 Hyperlipidemia
66.0
67.1
65.8
0.70
 Hypertension
80.8
81.1
80.2
0.65
 Stroke or transient ischemic attack
24.3
23.4
23.9
0.73
 Cancer
14.6
15.6
15.2
0.56
*Hospitals located in ZIP Code areas through which the marathon route passed were defined as marathon-affected hospitals. Control hospitals were 
defined as all hospitals in the hospital referral regions that surrounded the hospital referral region in which a marathon-affected hospital was 
located.
†P values were estimated with the use of two-sample Student’s t-tests or chi-square tests for equality of proportions, as appropriate.
‡Race was determined according to the Medicare Beneficiary Summary file.
§Information on preexisting medical conditions in the beneficiaries was obtained from the Chronic Conditions Data Warehouse of the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services.
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 13.
