 BRIEF REPORT • OFID • 1
Open Forum Infectious Diseases
B R I E F  R E P O R T
Fatal Measles Virus Infection After 
Rituximab-Containing Chemotherapy 
in a Previously Vaccinated Patient
Philipp Jent,1,  Mafalda Trippel,2 Manuel Frey,3 Alexander Pöllinger,4 
Sabina Berezowska,2 Rupert Langer,2 Hansjakob Furrer,1 and Charles Béguelin1
1Department of Infectious Diseases, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, 
Bern, Switzerland; 2Institute of Pathology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; 3Department 
of Intensive Care Medicine, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland; 4Department of Radiology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland
We report the case of a young patient treated with rituxi-
mab-containing chemotherapy who was infected with mea-
sles despite previous vaccination. Treatment with vitamin A, 
ribavirin, and immunoglobulins was started; nevertheless he 
developed severe pneumonitis and deceased. Broad vaccination 
coverage is crucial in protecting vulnerable subjects.
Keywords. immunocompromised; 
measles; 
rituximab; 
vaccination.
 
CASE PRESENTATION
We present the case of a 26-year-old man who was hospital-
ized with fever and neutropenia. He was known to have chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL; small lymphocytic lymphoma, 
low risk, Binet stade B, Rai II; 11q deletion, no TP53 mutation), 
diagnosed 7 months before admission, and had been treated 
with 7 cycles of chemotherapy with fludarabine, cyclophospha-
mide, and rituximab until 1 month before admission. He had 
been receiving Pneumocystis pneumonia prophylaxis with tri-
methoprim/sulfamethoxazole and herpes simplex virus proph-
ylaxis with valaciclovir. There was no recent travel history, no 
known animal contact, no recent sexual risk exposure, and no 
known infectious disease in close contacts. Vaccinations had 
been completed according to Swiss national recommendations, 
including 2 documented measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) 
vaccine doses in 1993 and 1999.
At hospital entry, the patient reported sore throat, unproduc-
tive cough, and fever without chills since 1 day before admission. 
The clinical exam was only remarkable for pharyngitis and the 
previously known cervical lymphadenopathy. C-reactive pro-
tein was moderately elevated (53 mg/L). The patient was throm-
bocytopenic (73 G/L) and had a leukocytopenia (1.08 G/L; 0.67 
G/L neutrophile granulocytes). A chest x-ray showed no infil-
trates, and a rapid-antigen detection test for group A strepto-
cocci from a throat swab was negative.
Empirical treatment with cefepime was started. Blood cul-
tures and multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for 
respiratory viruses using a nasopharyngeal swab remained 
negative. Four days after symptom onset, the patient developed 
a confluent maculopapular rash of the face and upper trunk. 
Skin biopsy showed a perivascular lymphohistiocytic infil-
trate and necrotic keratinocytes—changes compatible with an 
exanthematous drug eruption. For this reason, trimethoprim/
sulfamethoxazole was stopped, and cefepime was switched to 
meropenem.
Besides a progressive craniocaudal evolution of the mac-
ulopapular rash (Figure 1B), the patient developed ulcerative 
stomatitis compatible with Koplik spots (Figure 1A) and bilat-
eral conjunctivitis on day 7 after symptom onset. These findings 
raised the suspicion of a measles virus infection, although the 
patient had been vaccinated as a child, as previously described. 
Positive measles real-time PCR from a throat swab confirmed 
the suspected diagnosis. In the month before, there had been 
no measles outbreaks in the patient’s region of residence, and he 
was not aware of any contact with a measles-infected individ-
ual. Measles IgG and IgM (Serion ELISA classic, Virion/Serion 
GmbH, Würzburg, Germany) and rubella virus IgG were neg-
ative on day 6 after symptom onset, and mumps virus IgG was 
borderline positive (93 U/mL; cutoff, 70 U/mL), despite doc-
umented prior vaccination with 2 doses. Total IgG was in the 
lower normal range (8.6 G/L; normal range, 7–16 G/L).
Treatment with intravenous ribavirin, intravenous immuno-
globulins, and vitamin A was started. On day 8 after symptom 
onset, the patient developed progressive dyspnea and hypoxia 
in addition to the unproductive cough, while the fever per-
sisted. A chest computed tomography scan showed bilateral, in 
part nodular pulmonary consolidations with adjacent ground 
glass infiltrations, compatible with pneumonitis (Figure 1C). 
Elevated transaminases up to 2 to 3 times the upper norm were 
observed as well. On day 15, he fulfilled the definition of acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and required invasive 
ventilation, and on the following day veno-venous extracorpor-
eal membrane oxygenation (VV-ECMO). On day 17 after the 
onset of symptoms, the patient developed venous bleeding at 
the puncture site of the VV-ECMO and succumbed to mixed 
shock and severe pneumonitis.
Open Forum Infectious Diseases®
© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Infectious Diseases 
Society of America. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial reproduction and distribution of the work, in any 
medium, provided the original work is not altered or transformed in any way, and that the work 
is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com
DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofy244
Received 19 July 2018; editorial decision 14 September 2018; accepted 20 September 2018.
Correspondence: P. Jent, MD, Department of Infectious Diseases, Inselspital, Bern University 
Hospital, Freiburgstrasse 16p, CH-3010 Bern, Switzerland (philipp.jent@insel.ch).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/11/ofy244/5150422 by guest on 01 June 2019
 2 • OFID • BRIEF REPORT
Postmortem examination showed macroscopically severe 
diffuse micronodular parenchymal consolidations of the lungs. 
Apart from the aspect of a diffuse alveolar damage, correlating 
with the clinical picture of ARDS, histology revealed numer-
ous syncytial multinuclear giant cells with intracytoplasmic and 
intranuclear inclusions lining the alveolar walls, consistent with 
measles pneumonitis (Figure 1D).
DISCUSSION
The presented case demonstrates the severity of measles infec-
tions in immunocompromised patients and highlights the 
importance of herd immunity, as rituximab can compromise 
previously acquired humoral immunity.
Measles in immunocompromised patients bears serious com-
plications in about 80% of cases. Pneumonitis is the principal 
complication, accounting for most measles-associated deaths 
[1]. Clinical presentation in immunocompromised patients fre-
quently is atypical, with 27%–40% of patients presenting with-
out a rash [1].
Humoral immunity plays the main role in preventing mea-
sles virus infection, with neutralizing antibody titers at the 
time of exposure correlating with protection from disease [2]. 
In our patient, a serum sample from before the start of rituxi-
mab was not available, but he had received 2 documented MMR 
vaccine doses before his infection, which induces long-lasting 
protection in 97% of vaccinated subjects [3]. However, at the 
time of diagnosis, he had no measurable antibodies to measles 
or rubella, and he had borderline mumps IgG. We assume this 
is due to his rituximab-containing chemotherapy. Additionally, 
the patient’s underlying disease may have played a role in his 
vulnerability, although pretreatment hypogammaglobulinemia 
in CLL is far less commonly seen than after treatment with 
rituximab [4]. Rituximab, a monoclonal CD-20 antibody, is 
known to induce transient hypogammaglobulinemia in 39% 
of patients [5]. After application of rituximab, the immune 
response to recall antigens is reduced [6]. Additionally, fludara-
bine, in addition to its effect on T-lymphocytes, also leads to 
prominent B-cell depletion [7]; the combination of fludarabine 
with rituximab has been independently associated with higher 
infection rates [8]. A primary vaccine failure cannot be ruled 
out as an explanation for the missing immunity against measles; 
however, it is a far less probable explanation given the vaccine’s 
high 2-dose effectiveness and the multiple reasons for humoral 
immunodeficiency depicted above.
Immune control of measles infection is primarily depend-
ent on T-lymphocyte cytolytic response, whereas humoral 
immunity seems to play only a minor role in disease control. 
B-lymphocyte-depleted rhesus monkeys have a clinical and 
A
B
C
D
20 μm
Figure 1. A, Enanthema, no scale available. B, Maculopapular rash (back of the patient), no scale available. C, Computed tomography lung scan with nodular peribronchial 
infiltrates. D, Histology of the lung section (hematoxylin and eosin stain, 80× magnification) of the patient. Giant cell pneumonitis: numerous syncytial multinuclear giant cells 
with intracytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusions lining the alveolar walls, with a background of diffuse alveolar damage.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/11/ofy244/5150422 by guest on 01 June 2019
 BRIEF REPORT • OFID • 3
virological course of measles infection that is indistinguish-
able from that of healthy monkeys [9]. Children with hypog-
ammaglobinemia have a normal disease course, in contrast to 
children with cellular immune defects [1, 10], in whom measles 
infection is associated with a high risk of complications. Mainly 
the T-lymphocyte cytolytic response is associated with clear-
ance of infection [11]. In our patient, the T-lymphocyte cyto-
lytic response was heavily compromised due to chemotherapy 
with fludarabine and cyclophosphamide.
Evidence on treatment options in severe measles infection is 
limited. Management consists primarily of supportive therapy 
and treatment of secondary bacterial infections.
Ribavirin, a ribosyl purine analogue, shows in vitro activity 
against measles virus [12]. One nonblinded randomized trial 
with ribavirin vs supportive therapy in 100 nonimmunocom-
promised patients found a reduced time to resolution of fever 
with ribavirin (mean, 7.3 vs 3.2 days). Furthermore, in the 
ribavirin group, there were no complications vs 11% with res-
piratory symptoms, 2% with encephalitis, and 2% with a fatal 
outcome in the control group [13]. The use of intravenous or 
aerosolized ribavirin in severe measles infection in immuno-
compromised patients has also been reported in a few case 
reports and series, but a significant survival benefit could not 
be proven in these series [1]. One case series [14] found sig-
nificantly higher mortality in pediatric oncologic patients with 
measles infection if ribavirin application was delayed, but the 
observation was based on only 2 patients with a fatal outcome.
Reduced mortality and major complications after oral appli-
cation of vitamin A in children with measles infection have been 
demonstrated in several randomized controlled trials in third 
world or developing countries [15]. It is unclear if this effect 
is transferable to immunocompromised patients in populations 
with a lower prevalence of vitamin A deficiency. Nevertheless, 
in most case series of severe measles infection, the patients have 
received oral vitamin A.
The use of intravenous immunoglobulins in severe measles 
infection in immunocompromised patients is common, but 
there is no evidence of its ability to improve the disease course. 
On the other side, its effect as postexposure prophylaxis is well 
established. Given the limited role of humoral immunity in dis-
ease control (see further up), a relevant benefit of intravenous 
immunoglobulin administration for a therapeutic indication in 
measles is improbable.
Given the fact that therapeutic options in severe measles 
infection are limited, as described above, the role of herd immu-
nity to protect vulnerable (eg, immunocompromised, children 
younger than age 1 year) subjects is crucial. A recent drop in 
vaccination coverage in Europe, with 2-vaccine-dose coverage 
below the World Health Organization (WHO) herd immunity 
threshold of 95% in 20 of 27 reporting countries, led to an epi-
demic of more than 14 000 cases, including 30 fatal ones in 
2017. MMR 1-dose coverage in the United States is still below 
the WHO herd immunity threshold, with local variation. In this 
epidemiologic situation of limited herd immunity, a cocooning 
vaccination strategy should be envisaged, namely to vaccinate 
people with close contact to patients whose immunosuppressive 
therapy is hampering their vaccination protection.
CONCLUSIONS
Measles virus infections in immunocompromised patients often 
have an atypical presentation and can even occur in previously 
vaccinated individuals (eg, after rituximab), as shown in this 
case presentation. Given the limited therapeutic options, herd 
immunity, namely high immunization coverage and a cocoon-
ing strategy, is crucial to the protection of vulnerable subjects. 
Ongoing efforts to raise confidence in vaccines and increase 
population immunity should be intensified.
Acknowledgments
We thank the family of the patient for giving us the opportunity to pub-
lish this case.
Potential conflicts of interest. All authors: no reported conflicts of 
interest. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of 
Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to 
the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. Kaplan LJ, Daum RS, Smaron M, McCarthy CA. Severe measles in immunocom-
promised patients. JAMA 1992; 267:1237–41.
2. Chen RT, Markowitz LE, Albrecht P, et al. Measles antibody: reevaluation of pro-
tective titers. J Infect Dis 1990; 162:1036–42.
3. Markowitz LE, Preblud SR, Fine PE, Orenstein WA. Duration of live measles vac-
cine-induced immunity. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1990; 9:101–10.
4. Baliakas P, Xochelli A, Minga E, et al. Revisiting hypogammaglobulinemia in 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a combined clinicobiological approach. Blood 
2014; 124:5633.
5. Casulo C, Maragulia J, Zelenetz AD. Incidence of hypogammaglobulinemia in 
patients receiving rituximab and the use of intravenous immunoglobulin for 
recurrent infections. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk 2013; 13:106–11.
6. van der Kolk LE, Baars JW, Prins MH, van Oers MH. Rituximab treatment 
results in impaired secondary humoral immune responsiveness. Blood 2002; 
100:2257–9.
7. Takada K, Danning CL, Kuroiwa T, et al. Lymphocyte depletion with fludara-
bine in patients with psoriatic arthritis: clinical and immunological effects. Ann 
Rheum Dis 2003; 62:1112–5.
8. Cabanillas F, Liboy I, Pavia O, Rivera E. High incidence of non-neutropenic 
infections induced by rituximab plus fludarabine and associated with hypogam-
maglobulinemia: a frequently unrecognized and easily treatable complication. 
Ann Oncol 2006; 17:1424–7.
9. Permar SR, Klumpp SA, Mansfield KG, et al. Limited contribution of humoral 
immunity to the clearance of measles viremia in rhesus monkeys. J Infect Dis 
2004; 190:998–1005.
10. Permar SR, Griffin DE, Letvin NL. Immune containment and consequences of 
measles virus infection in healthy and immunocompromised individuals. Clin 
Vaccine Immunol 2006; 13:437–43.
11. Permar SR, Klumpp SA, Mansfield KG, et al. Role of CD8(+) lymphocytes in con-
trol and clearance of measles virus infection of rhesus monkeys. J Virol 2003; 
77:4396–400.
12. Shigeta S, Mori S, Baba M, et al. Antiviral activities of ribavirin, 5-ethynyl-1-be-
ta-D-ribofuranosylimidazole-4-carboxamide, and 6’-®-6’-C-methylneplanocin 
A against several ortho- and paramyxoviruses. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
1992; 36:435–9.
13. Pal G. Effects of ribavirin on measles. J Indian Med Assoc 2011; 109:666–7.
14. Roy Moulik N, Kumar A, Jain A, Jain P. Measles outbreak in a pediatric oncology 
unit and the role of ribavirin in prevention of complications and containment of 
the outbreak. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2013; 60:E122–4.
15. Hussey GD, Klein M. A randomized, controlled trial of vitamin A in children with 
severe measles. N Engl J Med 1990; 323:160–4.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/11/ofy244/5150422 by guest on 01 June 2019
