 Alcohol marketing and youth alcohol consumption:
a systematic review of longitudinal studies published
since 2008
David Jernigan1, Jonathan Noel2, Jane Landon3, Nicole Thornton1 & Tim Lobstein4
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA,1 Department of Community Medicine and Health Care, University of Connecticut School of
Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA,2 UK Health Forum, London, UK3 and Public Health Advocacy Institute of Western Australia, Curtin University, Perth, WA, Australia4
ABSTRACT
Background and Aims
Youth alcohol consumption is a major global public health concern. Previous reviews have con-
cluded that exposure to alcohol marketing was associated with earlier drinking initiation and higher alcohol consumption
among youth. This review examined longitudinal studies published since those earlier reviews. Methods
Peer-reviewed
papers were identified in medical, scientific and social science databases, supplemented by examination of reference lists.
Non-peer-reviewed papers were included if they were published by organizations deemed to be authoritative, were fully ref-
erenced and contained primary data not available elsewhere. Papers were restricted to those that included measures of
marketing exposure and alcohol consumption for at least 500 underage people. Multiple authors reviewed studies for in-
clusion and assessed their quality using the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute’s Quality Assessment Tool for Obser-
vation Cohort and Cross-Sectional Studies. Results
Twelve studies (ranging in duration from 9 months to 8 years),
following nine unique cohorts not reported on previously involving 35 219 participants from Europe, Asia and North
America, met inclusion criteria. All 12 found evidence of a positive association between level of marketing exposure
and level of youth alcohol consumption. Some found significant associations between youth exposure to alcohol marketing
and initiation of alcohol use (odds ratios ranging from 1.00 to 1.69), and there were clear associations between exposure
and subsequent binge or hazardous drinking (odds ratios ranging from 1.38 to 2.15). Mediators included marketing recep-
tivity, brand recognition and alcohol expectancies. Levels of marketing exposure among younger adolescents were similar
to those found among older adolescents and young adults. Conclusions
Young people who have greater exposure to al-
cohol marketing appear to be more likely subsequently to initiate alcohol use and engage in binge and hazardous drinking.
Keywords
Adolescents, advertising, alcohol, marketing, self-regulation, youth.
Correspondence to: David Jernigan, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 624 North Broadway, Room 292, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
E-mail: djernigan@jhu.edu
Submitted 30 April 2016; initial review completed 2 June 2016; final version accepted 18 August 2016
INTRODUCTION
Globally, alcohol consumption caused 7% of death
and disability among young people aged 10–24 years
in 2004, the most recent year for which estimates
are
available
[1].
The
World
Health
Organization
(WHO) reported in 2010 that heavy episodic drinking
(defined as at least monthly consumption of 60 g or
more of alcohol on a single occasion) is more preva-
lent, on average, among 15–19-year-olds world-wide
(11.7%) than among the general adult population
(7.5%), although there are significant regional varia-
tions [2].
Given the high prevalence of risky drinking and
alcohol-related harm among young populations, delaying
alcohol initiation and preventing heavy use by young peo-
ple is a public health priority. Alcohol producers agree, and
the leading global producers have stated that: ‘we strongly
oppose marketing or sale of our products to underage
youth’ ([3], p. 36).
To accomplish this, alcohol marketers have detailed self-
regulatory codes regarding placement and content of their
advertising, including restrictions to prevent youth expo-
sure and to prevent content that appeals to or targets youth
[4], implying that alcohol marketing can affect youth deci-
sions about drinking. There is, however, substantial
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
REVIEW
doi:10.1111/add.13591
 evidence of youth exposure to alcohol marketing, in some
casesatrateshigher thanadults[5–7].However,globalpro-
ducers have argued that existing evidence demonstrating
associations between alcohol marketing exposure and alco-
holconsumptionis:‘veryweakanddoesnotmakeacompel-
ling case that advertising causes harmful drinking’ [8].
The last published reviews of the evidence regarding al-
cohol marketing’s effects on youth drinking were con-
ducted in 2008 and published in 2009. Smith & Foxcroft
examined seven cohort studies with more than 13000
participants, all of which demonstrated significant effects
of alcohol marketing on consumption across a range of
different exposure variables and outcome measures.
Anderson et al. [9] identified 13 longitudinal studies inves-
tigating the relationship between adolescent exposure to
alcohol advertising and promotion and drinking. Twelve
found evidence that such exposure predicts both onset of
drinking among non-drinkers and increased levels of con-
sumption among existing drinkers, while the 13th found
increased intentions to use alcohol, although the authors
concluded that participants were too young for drinking
initiation to show an effect [10]. An expert Science Group,
established in 2008 by the European Commission’s
European Alcohol and Health Forum and including indus-
try representatives, also reviewed the literature and agreed,
concluding: ‘Based on the consistency of findings across
the
studies,
the
confounders
controlled
for,
the
dose–response relationships, as well as the theoretical plau-
sibility and experimental findings regarding the impact of
media exposure and commercial communications,… alco-
hol marketing increases the likelihood that adolescents will
start to use alcohol, and to drink more if they are already
using alcohol’ ([11], p.2).
Since the publication of these reviews, there have been
numerous industry innovations in reaching and engaging
potential consumers through digital and traditional chan-
nels [12]. Subsequently, several additional studies have
been conducted on the effects of alcohol marketing. There-
fore, the purpose of this review was to review and summa-
rize longitudinal research published since 2008 to inform
current debates regarding regulation of commercial alco-
hol marketing activities. These studies have examined
youth exposure to alcohol marketing in a wide range of
venues and formats, including traditional print and broad-
cast channels as well as new (digital) media; outdoor ad-
vertisements;
product
placements
within
television
shows, films and song lyrics; in-store and price promotions;
branded merchandise; celebrity endorsements; and sport-
ing and musical event sponsorship.
METHODS
Searches were conducted through MEDLINE (PubMed),
Web of Science, CINAHL and PsycINFO in November
2014. The searches were repeated in January 2015 and
March 2016. English-language papers published from
2008 to early 2016 were searched using the following
terms: ‘youth alcohol use’ OR ‘youth alcohol consump-
tion’ OR ‘youth drinking’ OR ‘underage drinking’ OR ‘un-
derage alcohol consumption’ OR (youth* AND alcohol*)
OR (youth* and drinking*) AND media exposure OR me-
dia OR TV OR radio OR advertising OR marketing OR film
OR
movie*
OR
lyrics
OR
event
sponsorship
OR
sponsorship.
Papers returned for these search terms were assessed
for relevance. Studies were not included if their abstracts
or titles did not refer to the possibility of an association be-
tween alcohol advertising and youth alcohol consumption.
Final review was conducted on full texts of papers meeting
this criterion. The initial search was conducted by N.T.; ab-
stracts and full papers were reviewed by D.J. and T.L. The
second search and review were conducted by T.L., and
the third by D.J. Reference lists of included articles were ex-
amined for additional citations, including non-peer-
reviewed studies, not included in the search results.
Studies were included in the final review if they were
based on original data and included at baseline measures
of youth exposure to alcohol marketing. Exposure could
consist of self-reported exposure, such as watching televi-
sion content known to contain alcohol advertising, cued
and un-cued recall of advertisements, liking of advertise-
ments, recall of engagement with internet marketing and
branded websites and brand allegiance, or population-level
exposure as reported by designated market area by market
research firms. Studies also needed to use, at baseline and
follow-up, validated measures of self-reported drinking be-
haviour for at least 500 participants under the relevant
minimum legal purchase age for alcohol. Drinking behav-
iour included initiation of alcohol use and/or binge drink-
ing, past 30-day drinking, frequency and/or quantity of
drinks consumed in the past 30 days and/or alcohol-
related problems. Studies were included only if they used
self-reported and observed actual alcohol use or alcohol-
related behaviour such as binge drinking or drunkenness,
as opposed to measures of intentions to consume, which
are weak, indirect indicators of actual consumption behav-
iour [13], and may miss valuable information about pat-
terns of drinking (e.g. binge drinking).
Because the purpose of the present study was to sum-
marize and review evidence published since 2008, the pa-
pers cited in the systematic reviews by Smith & Foxcroft
[14], Anderson et al. [9] and the Science Group of the
European Alcohol and Health Forum [11] were excluded.
Studies that examined the influence of social networking
and digital media on drinking behaviour were also ex-
cluded unless they identified clearly that the social net-
working content originated from or was encouraged
specifically by alcohol marketers. Studies of the influence
8
David Jernigan et al.
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
 of alcohol use in media, such as actors drinking alcohol in
films or TV shows, were excluded unless they specifically
included advertising or commercial marketing practices.
Published versions of all studies were obtained and
reviewed by T.S., D.J. and J.N.; data were extracted from
these versions. From each study, we sought data on coun-
try and year of baseline data collection, number and age of
participants at baseline, study duration, attrition at follow-
up, marketing variables (principal independent variables)
and drinking outcomes, including initiation of drinking
or binge drinking, progression to binge or hazardous
drinking and/or drinking consequences, including odds
ratios of changes in drinking behaviour or consequences
at follow-up.
Study quality was assessed using the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute’s Quality Assessment Tool for
Observation Cohort and Cross-Sectional Studies [15]. Each
study was rated by two public health professionals. The
sum of positive responses (= 1) from each rater was calcu-
lated for each paper, with potential values ranging from 0
to 14. Inter-rater reliability, measured using De Vries
et al.’s [16] pooled kappa, was considered substantial
(κpooled = 0.845). A study was determined to meet a study
quality criterion if both raters agreed the criterion was
present, and a study quality criterion was not met if at least
one rater determined that the criterion was absent.
Because of the diversity of outcomes studied, data were
reported but not synthesized and a meta-analysis was not
attempted.
RESULTS
The numbers of papers returned by the search and those
that met the selection criteria are shown in the Preferred
Reporting
Items
for
Systematic
Reviews
and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flow diagram in Fig. 1. Twelve
longitudinal studies following nine cohorts not reported
on previously were identified. These cohorts not reported
on previously involved 35219 unique participants from
seven countries: Germany (four studies), Italy (three), the
Netherlands (two), Poland (three), Scotland, UK (four),
Taiwan (one) and the United States (four). One study
[17] was a follow-up of a cohort reported on previously
by Anderson et al. [9]. Two studies reported by De Bruijn
et al. [18] examined exposure to different marketing media
among the same cohort. Similarly, Gordon et al. [19] and
Harris et al. [20] reported separate analyses of the same co-
hort, as did Tanski et al. [21] and McClure et al. [22].
Table 1 lists the studies, with details of the country in
which the study took place, the year the baseline data were
collected, the age range of the youth studied, the advertis-
ing form being assessed, the main results and the authors’
summary conclusion.
Measures of marketing exposure differed across studies,
as research groups explored a variety of different hypothe-
ses for how alcohol marketing may influence youth
drinking
behaviour.
These
measures
ranged
from
population-level exposures, as imputed from the partici-
pants’ place of residence and market research studies
Figure 1 Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flow diagram of articles reviewed
Alcohol marketing and youth drinking
9
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
 Table 1 Summary of longitudinal studies published since 2009 investigating the relationship between alcohol marketing and youth alcohol consumption.
Source, reference, country
and year of baseline data
collection
Number and age of
participants at baseline
Study
duration
Marketing variables
Summary
Authors’ conclusion
Chang et al. [42],
Taiwan 2010
2315 youth aged
15–17 years
One year
Recall of exposure to
branded and unbranded
alcohol promotion in
four media
Students from 26 high schools in Taipei, Taiwan were
assessed in the 10th grade with follow-up conducted
in the 11th grade. Self-administered questionnaires
were collected in 2010 and 2011 to assess the patterns
of change in youth alcohol drinking behaviours, media
exposure to alcohol and risk and protective factors. Media
exposure included questions on advertising on TV
, print
media and outdoor media, plus questions on the use of
alcohol in TV shows and movies, and in internet social
media discussions. Results: of 1712 non-drinking students
in the 10th grade, 285 (16.6%) had initiated drinking by
the 11th grade. Of the 590 drinkers in the 10th grade,
396 (67.1%) were drinking persistently by the 11th grade.
When other potential confounders were accounted for,
greater media exposure to alcohol advertising in the 10th
grade was associated significantly with the initiation of
alcohol use, and when combined with an increase in media
exposure from 10th to 11th grades, this was significantly
associated with the persistence of alcohol use
Exposure to alcohol advertising in the
media was associated with both the
initiation and the persistence of alcohol
use by youth
De Bruijn et al. [18],
Germany, Italy,
the Netherlands,
Poland 2010–11
6651 adolescents,
with mean age
13.95 years
14–15
months
Recall of levels of
engagement with
on-line marketing
activities
Youngsters in four European countries reported to be exposed
frequently to on-line alcohol marketing. Results: adjusting
for relevant confounders, higher reported exposure to
on-line alcohol marketing was significantly associated with
expecting to drink alcohol and actual drinking in the previous
30 days. This effect was found to be consistent in all four
countries
The association between marketing
exposure and adolescents’ alcohol
expectancies and drinking was robust
and seems consistent in several
national contexts
De Bruijn et al. [18],
Germany, Italy,
the Netherlands,
Poland 2010–11
6652 adolescents,
with mean age
13.9 years
14–15
months
Viewing of sports events
(with known levels of
alcohol sponsorship)
Youngsters in four European countries reported their viewing
of TV sports events. Alcohol marketing in these events was
calculated from known sponsorship ties. Results: higher
exposure to alcohol-branded sports sponsorship was found to
be associated significantly with alcohol drinking intentions
and actual drinking in the previous 30 days. The association
Exposure to sports sponsorship can
predict future drinking. Policymakers
are recommended to take action on
alcohol marketing via sports events
(Continues)
10
David Jernigan et al.
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
 Table 1. (Continued)
Source, reference, country
and year of baseline data
collection
Number and age of
participants at baseline
Study
duration
Marketing variables
Summary
Authors’ conclusion
between this exposure and adolescents’ alcohol expectancies
and drinking was robust, even when controlling for national
differences and demographics
Gordon et al. [19],
Scotland, UK 2006–07
552 youth aged
12–14 years, with
mean age 13
Two years
Prompted recall of 15
marketing media formats
Data were gathered on exposure to multiple forms of
alcohol marketing (advertisements and promotions
from TV/cinema, posters/billboards, newspapers/
magazines, in-store price promotions; sports-related
sponsorship and clothing; e-mail, websites, mobile
phone/computer screensaver and social networking
sites; music sponsorship, TV/film sponsorship, celebrity
endorsements and product design) and measures of
drinking initiation, frequency and consumption. Results:
at follow-up, logistic regression demonstrated that, after
controlling for confounding variables, involvement with
alcohol marketing at baseline was predictive of both
uptake of drinking and increased frequency of drinking.
Awareness of marketing at baseline was associated with
increased frequency of drinking at follow-up
The authors are concerned whether the
current regulatory environment affords
youth sufficient protection from alcohol
marketing
Grenard et al. [17],
USA Date not given
3890 students,
beginning in 7th
grade (aged 11–12
years) and continuing
through 10th grade
(aged 14–15 years)
Four years
TV exposure and TV
advertisement prompted
recall
Data collected included several measures of exposure
to alcohol advertising, alcohol use, problems related to
alcohol use and a range of covariates, such as age,
drinking by peers, drinking by close adults, playing sports,
general TV viewing, acculturation, parents’ jobs and
parents’ education. Results: structural equation modelling of
alcohol consumption showed that exposure to alcohol
advertisements and/or liking of those advertisements in
7th grade were predictive of the latent growth factors for
alcohol use (previous 30 days and previous 6 months)
after controlling for covariates. In addition, there was a
significant total effect for boys and a significant mediated
effect for girls of exposure to alcohol advertisements and
liking of those advertisements in 7th grade through latent
Alcohol advertisement exposure and the
affective reaction to those advertisements
influence some youth to drink more and
experience drinking-related problems
later in adolescence
(Continues)
Alcohol marketing and youth drinking
11
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
 Table 1. (Continued)
Source, reference, country
and year of baseline data
collection
Number and age of
participants at baseline
Study
duration
Marketing variables
Summary
Authors’ conclusion
growth factors for alcohol use on alcohol-related problems
in 10th grade. Measures of exposure at time 1 were also
associated with the increasing use of alcohol over time
and the development of alcohol-related problems at time 4
Harris et al. [20],
2015, Scotland
2006–07
552 youth aged
12–14 at baseline
Two years
Unaided alcohol brand
recognition, aided brand
recognition, number of
alcohol brands able to list
unaided
In an extension of the findings of Gordon et al., measures
of consumer socialization to alcohol brands (in the form
of aided and unaided brand recognition and brand saliency)
were collected along with data on hazardous drinking,
defined as 6 or more units on the last occasion in the past
30 days (for boys) or 5 or more for girls. Results: at wave 1,
the more channels through which adolescents had seen
alcohol marketing, the higher their level of consumer
socialization. At wave 2, hazardous drinking at age 15 was
predicted by two measures of consumer socialization at 13:
unaided brand recognition and brand saliency
Marketing acts as a significant influencing
agent in the consumer socialization of
adolescents to alcohol. The current policy
and regulatory environment is not
protecting children adequately
McClure et al.
[22], 2016,
USA 2011–13
2012 youth aged
15–20 at baseline
Two years
Internet alcohol marketing
receptivity, including recall,
engagement, recognition of
alcohol home page images,
and being an on-line fan
Respondents were asked if they recalled web advertising for
alcohol, had ever been to an alcohol company website, could
recognize any of five alcohol brand home page images and
had become an on-line fan of any alcoholic beverages; these
were combined into an internet marketing receptivity score.
Outcome measures were ever drinking and ever binge
drinking (six or more drinks on one occasion).
Results: higher receptivity to internet alcohol marketing
was associated positively with transition to binge drinking
even after controlling for sensation-seeking, peer alcohol use
and age. Compared with non-receptive youth, those with
higher receptivity scores were 1.77–2.15 times more likely
to report binge drinking at follow-up; higher receptivity
scores were not associated with drinking initation among
baseline non-drinkers
Internet alcohol marketing receptivity was
associated with underage binge drinking
even after controlling for internet time.
Internet marketing may be important in
transitions to problematic outcomes in the
subset of drinkers who are more highly
engaged in and seek out on-line marketing
Morgenstern et al.
[43], Germany 2008
2130 6th to 8th
grade students,
Nine months Prompted recall of TV
commercials
Exposure to alcohol and non-alcohol advertising was
measured at baseline with masked images of 17
More favourable attitudes about alcohol
may be one path through which alcohol
(Continues)
12
David Jernigan et al.
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
 Table 1. (Continued)
Source, reference, country
and year of baseline data
collection
Number and age of
participants at baseline
Study
duration
Marketing variables
Summary
Authors’ conclusion
non-drinking at
baseline, aged
11–17 years, with
mean age 12.2 years
commercial advertisements with all brand information
digitally removed; students indicated contact frequency
and brand names. Outcome measures were positive attitudes
toward alcohol, current alcohol use and life-time binge
drinking. Results: a total of 581 of the students (28%)
started to drink alcohol during the observation period.
Alcohol use initiation was related positively to baseline
alcohol advertisement exposure. This effect of alcohol
advertisement exposure on alcohol use was mediated by
a change in alcohol-related attitudes, partially, which
explained about 35% of the total effect. The analysis
revealed similar results for binge drinking initiation
advertising exerts behavioural influence.
The study supports policy measures to
reduce exposure (e.g. through advertising
bans) as well as intervention techniques
that focus on the processing of advertising
contents
Morgenstern et al.
[25], Germany,
Italy, Poland,
Scotland 2009–10
7438 adolescents
non-binge drinking
at baseline, with
mean age 13.5 years
12 months
Allegiance to a favourite
brand
Pupils were asked the brand of their favourite alcohol
advertisement at baseline. Multi-level mixed-effects logistic
regressions assessed relationships between having a
favourite alcohol advertisement (‘alcohol marketing
receptivity’) and (a) binge drinking at baseline; and
(b) initiating binge drinking during follow-up among
never binge drinkers. Results: life-time binge drinking
prevalence at baseline was 29.9%, and 25.9% initiated
binge drinking during follow-up. Almost one-third of the
baseline sample (32.1%) and 22.6% of the follow-up
sample of never bingers named a branded favourite alcohol
advertisement, with high between-country variation in
brand named. Alcohol marketing receptivity was related
significantly to both binge drinking at baseline [adjusted
odds ratio (AOR) = 2.13] and binge drinking initiation
in longitudinal analysis (AOR = 1.45). There was no
evidence for effect heterogeneity across countries
Among European adolescents, naming a
favourite alcohol advertisement was
associated with increased likelihood of
initiating binge drinking during 1-year
follow-up, suggesting a relationship
between alcohol marketing receptivity
and adolescent binge drinking
Ross [23],
USA 2004–05
3576 youth aged
10–14 years
One year
Relationship of population-
level exposure to alcohol
advertising based on
National sample of youth collected through random
digit dialling was followed for 5 years. Study examined
data from waves 2 and 3, using as proxy for exposure
Relatively small amounts of alcohol
advertising are associated with increased
(Continues)
Alcohol marketing and youth drinking
13
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
 Table 1. (Continued)
Source, reference, country
and year of baseline data
collection
Number and age of
participants at baseline
Study
duration
Marketing variables
Summary
Authors’ conclusion
favourite TV channel and
drinking initiation
extrapolation from favourite TV station and amount of
time spent viewing television to develop, using Nielsen
ratings data, a measure of the adstock (current and prior
exposure to alcohol advertising, discounted retrospectively,
for the past year) of each participant. Outcomes were alcohol
expectancies (‘If one of your friends offered you alcohol would
you drink it?’; ‘I think I would enjoy drinking alcohol’; ‘Do you
think you will drink alcohol in the next year?’) and alcohol
initiation (‘Have you ever drunk alcohol that your parents did
not know about?’). Results: among non-drinking participants,
303 initiated alcohol use between waves 2 and 3.
Relationships between exposure and both expectancies and
initiation were curvilinear and significant for the sample
overall, and for boys but not girls
alcohol expectancies and with drinking
initiation among early adolescent boys
Saffer et al. [24],
2015, USA
2002–09
8984 youth aged
18–22 at baseline
Eight years
Average number of
advertisements per
designated market area
(DMA)
Annual, nationally representative sample of youth reports
alcohol consumption. Advertising exposure and price effects
were examined, with exposure derived from place of
residence and the hours of alcohol advertisments per month
on local and national TV shown in that media market as
reported by commercial sources. Results: population-level
elasticities increase as alcohol consumption increases,
supportive of the behavioural economic theory that heavy
drinkers are more responsive to alcohol advertising
Advertising-induced alcohol consumption
may not be optimal (from a behavioural
economics point of view), especially for
heavy drinkers. Continued high levels of
alcohol advertising on TV are not in the
interests of public health
Tanski et al. [21],
USA 2010–11
1596 youth aged
15–23 years
Two years
Prompted recall of TV
commercials
Respondents were questioned about 20 randomly selected
masked images from TV advertisements, and an alcohol
advertising receptivity score was derived (one point each for
having seen the advertisement and for liking it, and two points
for correct brand identification). Fast-food advertisements that
aired nationally in 2010–11 were queried similarly to evaluate
message specificity. Alcohol consumption measures were (a) the
onset of drinking among those who never drank; (b) the onset
of binge drinking among those who were never binge drinkers;
Receptivity to television alcohol advertising
predicted the transition to multiple
drinking outcomes. The findings are
consistent with the idea that marketing
self-regulation has failed to keep television
alcohol advertising from reaching large
numbers of underage persons and
affecting their drinking patterns
(Continues)
14
David Jernigan et al.
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
 Table 1. (Continued)
Source, reference, country
and year of baseline data
collection
Number and age of
participants at baseline
Study
duration
Marketing variables
Summary
Authors’ conclusion
and (c) the onset of hazardous drinking among those with an
Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test consumption subscore
of less than 4. Results: underage participants were only slightly
less likely than participants of legal drinking age to have seen
alcohol advertisements (the mean percentages of advertisements
seen were 23.4, 22.7 and 25.6%, respectively, for youth aged
15–17, 18–20 and 21–23 years). The transition to binge and
hazardous drinking occurred for 29 and 18% of youth aged
15–17 years, and for 29 and 19% of youth aged 18–20 years,
respectively. Among underage participants, the alcohol
advertising receptivity score independently predicted the
onset of drinking (AOR = 1.69), the onset of binge drinking
(AOR = 1.38) and the onset of hazardous drinking
(AOR = 1.49). Fast-food advertising receptivity was not
associated with any drinking outcome
Alcohol marketing and youth drinking
15
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
 documenting potential exposure from levels of advertising
available in those geographic markets [23,24] to self-
reported exposure imputed from television content viewed
[17,18]. The remaining studies used various measures of
receptivity to and/or engagement with alcohol marketing,
including prompted or unprompted recall of branded and
unbranded exposure, recognition of specific alcohol adver-
tising content and/or allegiance to a favourite brand.
Significant associations between exposure to, aware-
ness of, engagement with and/or receptivity to alcohol
marketing at baseline and initiation of alcohol use, initia-
tion of binge drinking, drinking in the previous 30 days
and/or alcohol problems at follow-up were found in all
studies. Periods of follow-up ranged from 9 months to 8
years. For example, Morgenstern et al.’s four-country study
followed more than 12000 children (average age below
13.5 years) for 1 year [25]. After controlling for differences
in a wide range of possible confounding factors (age, gen-
der, family affluence, school performance, TV screen time,
personalitycharacteristics and drinking behaviour of peers,
parents and siblings), children who were familiar with al-
cohol branding and had a favourite brand at baseline were
45% more likely to have their first binge drinking experi-
ence at follow-up compared to those who did not meet
these criteria. A 2-year study of more than 550 Scottish
children aged approximately 13 years found at follow-up
that awareness of advertising was not significantly predic-
tive of subsequent drinking, but engagement—defined as
taking free gifts, ownership of branded clothing or partici-
pation in alcohol websites or branded social networking
sites—was [19]. Those engaged at baseline were 31% more
likely to initiate drinking during the period and 43% more
likely to have become frequent drinkers (at least fortnightly
consumption), after controlling for a range of potential
confounders.
Figure 2 is a forest plot of the odds ratios with 95% con-
fidence intervals from the seven studies that reported them.
Some studies found associations between exposure to alco-
hol marketing of various kinds and initiation of alcohol use,
although several studies reported non-significant effects.
Ross [22] found a significant association between exposure
for boys but not for girls, using a curvilinear rather than a
linear approach to assess the association, based on earlier
literature suggesting that initiation effects are strongest at
lower levels of exposure [25]. Evidence was stronger for
the relationship between initiation of binge drinking or par-
ticipation in binge or hazardous drinking at follow-up than
for initiation of alcohol use. This is consistent with Saffer
et al.’s theoretical and empirical argument that exposure
to alcohol advertising will have the greatest effects on the
heaviest drinkers over time [23].
Figure 2 Forest plot of longitudinal cohort studies that supplied odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals
Table 2 Results of study quality assessment.
Study
Study quality score
Chang et al. [42]
12
de Bruijn et al. [18]
11
de Bruijn et al. [18]
12
Gordon et al. [19]
11
Grenard et al. [17]
8
Harris et al. [20]
11
McClure et al. [22]
10
Morgenstern et al. [43]
12
Morgenstern et al. [25]
11
Ross [23]
11
Saffer et al. [24]
10
Tanski et al. [21]
9
Mean quality score (standard deviation) = 10.7 (1.2).
16
David Jernigan et al.
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
 Results of the study quality assessment are included in
Table 2, and Table 3 shows the frequency of study quality
criteria. Strengths of the studies included specification
and definition of study populations; use of long enough
follow-up periods to reasonably expect to see an association
between exposure and outcome if it existed; clear definition
and measurement of independent and dependent variables;
and measurement and adjustment for key potential
confounding variables. Weaknesses included higher than
optimal attrition of participants at follow-up, failure to
assess the relevant exposures more than once over time
and measurement of the exposure(s) of interest after the
outcomes being measured may have already occurred.
DISCUSSION
This review has identified 12 longitudinal studies published
since 2008 containing original data from nine cohorts not
reported on previously regarding children and young
people’s exposure to alcohol marketing and their consump-
tion of alcohol. All found positive associations between
exposure to marketing and some measure of subsequent
drinking behaviour and/or negative consequences of
drinking.
Regulation of alcohol marketing is a highly contested
area in public health. As has been noted elsewhere [27],
little work has been conducted on the actual effects of
advertising restrictions or bans on alcohol consumption
in adolescents or adults. Bosque-Prous et al. found that
stricter marketing regulations were associated cross-
sectionally with a low prevalence of hazardous drinking
among 50–64-year-olds in 16 European countries [28].
Examining a range of alcohol control policies, including al-
cohol advertising restrictions, from the 1960s to the
2000s, Baccini & Carreras found a significant decrease in
consumption following advertisement restrictions only in
France and not in five other countries where restrictions
were implemented during the study period [29]. Smith &
Geller found 32.9% fewer youth traffic fatalities in US states
with laws prohibiting alcohol advertising targeting minors
compared with states lacking such laws. Based on this find-
ing, they estimated that imposing regulations on alcohol
marketing to youth in the 26 US states that currently do
not have such restrictions could save 400 lives per year
from youth drink-driving casualties alone [30].
The studies summarized in this review help to fill the
gap in evidence regarding alcohol marketing’s effects on
young people. World-wide, the most common approach
has been for government to rely on alcohol industry
self-regulation [2]. Reviews of the literature on the effec-
tiveness of self-regulation in reducing youth exposure or
limiting problematic content have concluded that existing
self-regulatory systems do not meet their intended goal of
protecting vulnerable populations from alcohol marketing
[31,32]. Given the ineffectiveness of current regulatory
approaches, the implications of the current review are
that more research is needed to understand and inter-
vene more effectively in the relationship between alcohol
marketing exposure and youth drinking behaviour. This
is particularly true in light of the apparent effects of
Table 3 Frequency of study quality criteria.
Question
Frequency (%)
Was the research question or objective in this paper clearly stated?
11 (91.7)
Was the study population clearly specified and defined?
12 (100)
Was the participation rate of eligible people at least 50%?
9 (75.0)
Were all the subjects selected or recruited from the same or similar populations (including the same time-period)?
Were inclusion and exclusion criteria for being in the study pre-specified and applied uniformly to all participants?
12 (100)
Was a sample size justification, power description or variance and effect estimates provided?
0 (0)
For the analyses in this paper, were the exposure(s) of interest measured prior to the outcome(s) being measured?
7 (58.3)
Was the time-frame sufficient so that one could reasonably expect to see an association between exposure and
outcome if it existed?
12 (100)
For exposures that can vary in amount or level, did the study examine different levels of the exposure as related to
the outcome (e.g. categories of exposure, or exposure measured as continuous variable)?
10 (83.3)
Were the exposure measures (independent variables) clearly defined, valid, reliable and implemented consistently
across all study participants?
12 (100)
Was the exposure(s) assessed more than once over time?
5 (41.7)
Were the outcome measures (dependent variables) clearly defined, valid, reliable and implemented consistently
across all study participants?
12 (100)
Were the outcome assessors blinded to the exposure status of participants?
12 (100)
Was loss to follow-up after baseline 20% or less?
2 (16.7)
Were key potential confounding variables measured and adjusted statistically for their impact on the relationship
between exposure(s) and outcome(s)?
12 (100)
Alcohol marketing and youth drinking
17
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
 exposure to alcohol marketing on youth binge drinking.
In the United States, adult binge drinking accounted for
more than 75% of economic costs associated with exces-
sive drinking [33]. Underage binge drinking has been as-
sociated with a range of negative outcomes, including
peer violence, dating violence, alcohol-related fighting,
poor school performance, attempting suicide and using il-
licit drugs [34].
Mediating factors
Effective intervention requires understanding how alcohol
marketing influences young people. The most obvious me-
diator between alcohol marketing and youth drinking be-
haviour
is
marketing
exposure
itself.
Beyond
this,
however, several studies used measures of marketing recep-
tivity, operationalized through such variables as liking an
advertisement, the ability to recall alcohol advertisements
correctly and participation in marketing. The latter may
be particularly important with increasing youth exposure
to alcohol marketing in social media, which seek to en-
courage user and viewer participation often and explicitly
in marketing [35]. Other studies hypothesized and demon-
strated that positive expectancies about alcohol use were
significant mediators. Further insight into mediating fac-
tors may come from cross-sectional studies not included
in this review. For instance, Jang & Frederick [36] found
that interpersonal discussions about alcohol use and ex-
pectations about using alcohol were mediating factors that
shaped the influence of advertising. This suggests that so-
cial media discourse may play a significant role in enhanc-
ing marketers’ advertising impact, a point echoed by
Hoffman et al. [37], who found that young people’s use of
social media related to alcohol marketing predicted alcohol
consumption and engaging in risky behaviours, whereas
the use of social media more generally did not.
Brand recognition, including identifying oneself as a
‘brand drinker’, was another significant mediator. Again,
cross-sectional research has shed light on the importance
of including brands of alcohol in both the independent (i.
e. exposure to marketing for specific brands) and the de-
pendent (i.e. consumption of specific brands) variables
when studying the effects of youth exposure to alcohol
marketing. Branded cross-sectional research has found
larger effect sizes than the studies in this review
[38,39], although they are limited in their ability to ad-
dress causality
. This suggests that future longitudinal re-
search
should
measure
branded
exposure
and
consumption. Moreover, Ross and colleagues [23,29]
have argued that the relationship between youth expo-
sure to alcohol marketing and youth drinking initiation
is non-linear, with saturation beginning to occur at
higher levels of exposure. This also has implications for
future research.
Strengths and limitations
The strengths of the studies included in this review include
the diversity of national and cultural settings in which they
have been conducted, as well as the diversityof measures of
marketing exposure and mediators they have employed.
This diversity is also a limitation, however, in that after
more than two decades of longitudinal research in this area
there is still no consensus on how marketing exposure
should be measured or what outcomes are most important.
While we selected 500 participants somewhat arbitrarily as
a minimum for studies included in this review, it is another
limitation of the research so far that none of the studies in-
cluded any justification for the sample size selected. Studies
also suffered from a high level of attrition at follow-up, and
a quarter of the studies had participation rates of eligible
people of less than 50%. Future research may need to ex-
plore greater use of incentives and more resources devoted
to follow-up to address these weaknesses.
This review is limited to the English-language litera-
ture, and there may be studies that have been published
in other languages that could have informed its findings.
The types of studies reviewed here varygreatly in measures
of marketing exposure, post-baseline follow-up periods in
the longitudinal studies and measures of drinking behav-
iour. The latter suffer from the usual problems with self-
reporting; however, these are somewhat mitigated by the
assumption that if under-reporting occurs in a longitudinal
design it may be expected to be consistent over time. The
age of the subjects also varied, from children as young as
10 to college/university students aged 17 or 18 years to
young adults (at follow-up) as old as 29 years. The failure
of most of the studies to use the same methodology across
different countries and cultures is particularly limiting in
the case of countries with a lower baseline of both exposure
and youth alcohol use (e.g. low-income countries), where
changes are more rapid and effects might be expected to
be stronger. The heterogeneity of the studies also means
that they cannot be combined easily into a meta-analysis
or other method for deriving an estimate of the true effect
size. Publication bias may also be a factor in the studies
we were able to identify for this review, in that it is possible
that studies finding no association may not have been sub-
mitted for publication or included in published results of
studies that examined advertising along with other possible
influences on youth drinking behaviour.
One of the strengths of the present review is that it has
found evidence of an association between marketing expo-
sure and youth drinking behaviour in multiple population
groups, cultures and nationalities among a range of youn-
ger age groups, and using an array of different measure-
ment methods. To the 13 longitudinal cohorts reviewed
by Anderson et al. [6] we add nine more, with a total of
more than 35000 participants, follow-up periods ranging
18
David Jernigan et al.
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
 from 9 months to 8 years and including children aged as
young as 10 years. All support the original review’s
findings of a significant association between exposure to
marketing and increased consumption of alcohol or wors-
ening of drinking patterns.
Gaps in the literature remain to be filled. Content of
marketing has been largely ignored, and there is reason
to believe that content such as associating drinking alcohol
with parties, humour, sexual attractiveness and other re-
warding outcomes may be more attractive to youth [40].
A longitudinal study published too late for inclusion in this
review found that adolescents and young adults in the
United States were more likely to initiate drinking and
binge drinking if they had greater exposure to alcohol ad-
vertisements containing a ‘party’ theme, independent of
their exposure to advertisements without such themes
[41]. If such content areas could be documented and quan-
tified more fully, they may add to the predictive power of
simple exposure measures. This is an important area for fu-
ture research.
The finding of several studies that levels of exposure ap-
pear to be as high or nearly as high among younger adoles-
cents as they are among older adolescents and young
adults represents a significant failure of current marketing
codes to protect minors from marketing messages [21,31].
This is particularly important with digital marketing tech-
niques that encourage interactive engagement with brand
marketing and are difficult for parents to monitor and
control.
CONCLUSIONS
This review has found further evidence of a close associa-
tion between marketing and youth alcohol consumption.
Recent longitudinal studies show additional evidence of a
relationship between early marketing exposure and later
alcohol consumption, and the results support the conclu-
sions of the earlier reviews. These effects have now been
found in a wider range of countries and among children
as young as 10 years. Many of the studies found their ef-
fects after adjusting for differences in family and peer drink-
ing behaviour and other cultural incentives to consume
alcohol. Although it is acknowledged that additional exter-
nal factors—including non-marketing pro-alcohol mes-
sages,
family
and
cultural
factors
and
individual
personality types—may explain some of the associations
shown, these studies add to the evidence suggesting that
alcohol marketing affects youth drinking behaviour and
that there is a need for public health-orientated policies
that can prevent, reduce or mitigate that effect.
Declaration of interests
None.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Public Health England for
commissioning an earlier review of the subject of this paper
in 2014. Parts of that review have been updated and in-
cluded in the present paper. This is one of a series of papers
published in a Supplement to Addiction entitled: ‘The Reg-
ulation of Alcohol Marketing: From Research to Public
Health Policy
.’ This supplement was published with finan-
cial support from Alcohol Research UK and the Institute
of Alcohol Studies. Preliminary versions of the majority of
these manuscripts were first presented at a meeting orga-
nized by the Pan American Health Organization.
References
1. Gore F. M., Bloem P
. J., Patton G. C., Ferguson J., Joseph V
.,
Coffey C. et al. Global burden of disease in young people aged
10–24 years: a systematic analysis. Lancet 2011; 377: 2093.
2. World Health Organization. Global Status Report on Alcohol
and Health—2014. Geneva; World Health Organization;
2014. Available at: http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/
publications/global_alcohol_report/msb_gsr_2014_1.pdf?
ua=1 (accessed 21 May 2014).
3. Global Alcohol Producers Group. Report from a Roundtable
Meeting with Economic Operators on Harmful Use of Alcohol.
Annex 5. Statement on Behalf of the Global Alcohol Pro-
ducers Group. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2009.
Available
at:
http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/activi-
ties/msbeoreport.pdf (accessed 2 April 2016).
4. Jernigan D. H. Framing a public health debate over alcohol
advertising: the Center on Alcohol Marketing and Youth
2002–2008. J Public Health Policy 2011; 32: 165–79.
5. Center on Alcohol Marketing and Youth. Youth Exposure to
Alcohol
Advertising in
National
Magazines,
2001–2008.
Baltimore, MD: Center on Alcohol Marketing and Youth;
2010.
6. Patil S., Winpenny E. M., Elliott M. N., Rohr C., Nolte E. Youth
exposure to alcohol advertising on television in the UK, the
Netherlands and Germany
. Eur J Public Health 2014; 24:
561–5.
7. Fielder L., Donovan R. J., Ouschan R. Exposure of children and
adolescents to alcohol advertising on Australian metropolitan
free-to-air television. Addiction 2009; 104: 1157–65.
8. International Alliance for Responsible Drinking. Submission on
behalf of the International Alliance for Responsible Drinking
(IARD) on WHO discussion paper ‘Framework for Country Action
Across Sectors for Health and Health Equity’. Geneva: World
Health Organization; 2014. Available at: http://www.who.
int/nmh/events/IARD.pdf (accessed 2 April 2016).
9. Anderson P
., De Bruijn A., Angus K., Gordon R., Hastings G.
Impact of alcohol advertising and media exposure on adoles-
cent alcohol use: a systematic review of longitudinal studies.
Alcohol Alcohol 2009; 44: 229–43.
10. Pasch K. E., Komro K. A., Perry C. L., Hearst M. O., Farbakhsh K.
Outdoor alcohol advertising near schools: what does it advertise
and how is it related to intentions and use of alcohol among
young adolescents? J Stud Alcohol Drugs 2007; 68: 587–96.
11. European Alcohol and Health Forum. Does Marketing
Communication Impact on the Volume and Patterns of
Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages, Especially by Young
People? A Review of Longitdunal Studies. Scientific Opinion
Alcohol marketing and youth drinking
19
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
 of the Science Group of the European Alcohol and Health
Forum. Brussels: DG SANCO; 2009. Available at: http://ec.eu-
ropa.eu/health/ph_determinants/life_style/alcohol/Forum/
docs/science_o01_en.pdf (accessed 2 April 2016).
12. Jernigan D. H., Rushman A. E. Measuring youth exposure to
alcohol marketing on social networking sites: challenges
and prospects. J Public Health Policy 2014; 35: 91–104.
13. Hagger M. S., Lonsdale A. J., Hein V
., Koka A., Lintunen T.,
Pasi H. et al. Predicting alcohol consumption and binge drink-
ing in company employees: an application of planned
behaviour and self-determination theories. Br J Health Psychol
2012; 17: 379–407.
14. Smith L. A., Foxcroft D. R. The effect of alcohol advertising,
marketing and portrayal on drinking behaviour in young
people: systematic review of prospective cohort studies. BMC
Public Health 2009; 9: 1–1.
15. National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. Quality Assessment
Tool for Observational Cohort and Cross-Sectional Studies.
Bethesda, MD: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute;
2014. Available at: http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-pro/
guidelines/in-develop/cardiovascular-risk-reduction/tools/co-
hort (accessed 1 July 2016).
16. De Vries H., Elliott M. N., Kanouse D. E., Steleki S. S. Using
pooled kappa to summarize interrater agreement across
many items. Field Methods 2008; 20: 272–82.
17. Grenard J. L., Dent C. W
., Stacy A. W
. Exposure to alcohol
advertisements
and
teenage
alcohol-related
problems.
Pediatrics 2013; 131: e369–79.
18. de Bruijn A., Tanghe J., Beccaria F., Bujalski M., Celata C.,
Gosselt J. et al. Report on the impact of European alcohol mar-
keting exposure on youth alcohol expectancies and youth
drinking. Alcohol Measures for Public Health Research
Alliance (AMPHORA0, Deliverable 2.3 and 3.7, Work Pack-
age 4). Nijmegen: European Centre for Monitoring Alcohol
Marketing; 2012. Available at: http://amphoraproject.net/
files/AMPHORA_WP4_longitudinal_advertising_survey.pdf
(accessed 3 April 2016).
19. Gordon R., MacKintosh A. M., Moodie C. The impact of
alcohol marketing on youth drinking behaviour: a two-stage
cohort study. Alcohol Alcohol 2010; 45: 470–80.
20. Harris F., Gordon R., MacKintosh A. M., Hastings G.
Consumer
socialization
and
the
role
of
branding
in
hazardous adolescent drinking. Psychol Market 2015; 32:
1175–90.
21. Tanski S. E., Dal Cin S., Stoolmiller M., Sargent J. D. Parental
R-rated movie restriction and early-onset alcohol use. J Stud
Alcohol Drugs 2010; 71: 452–9.
22. McClure A. C., Tanski S. E., Li Z., Jackson K., Morgenstern M.,
Li Z. et al. Internet alcohol marketing and underage alcohol
use. Pediatrics 2016; 137: e20152149.
23. Ross C. S. Social and Familial Risk Factors for Alcohol Initiation
and Affective Response to Marijuana Use [Dissertation]. Boston,
MA: Boston University School of Public Health, Department
of Epidemiology; 2014.
24. Saffer H., Dave D., Grossman M. A Behavioral Economic
Model of Alcohol Advertising and Price. Health Econ 2015;
25: 816–28.
25. Morgenstern M., Sargent J. D., Sweeting H., Faggiano F.,
Mathis F., Hanewinkel R. Favourite alcohol advertisements
and binge drinking among adolescents: a cross-cultural co-
hort study. Addiction 2014; 109: 2005–15.
26. Ackoff R. L., Emshoff J. R. Advertising research at Anheuser-
Busch Inc. Advert Res 1975; 16: 1–5.
27. Siegfried N., Pienaar D. C., Ataguba J. E., Volmink J., Kredo T.,
Jere M. et al. Restricting or banning alcohol advertising to re-
duce alcohol consumption in adults and adolescents. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2014; 11: CD010704.
28. Bosque-Prous M., Espelt A., Guitart A. M., Bartroli M., Villalbi
J. R., Brugal M. T. et al. Association between stricter alcohol
advertising regulations and lower hazardous drinking across
European countries. Addiction 2014; 109: 1634–43.
29. Baccini M., Carreras G. Analyzing and comparing the
association between control policy measures and alcohol con-
sumption in Europe. Subst Use Misuse 2014; 49: 1684–91.
30. Smith R. C., Geller E. S. Marketing and alcohol-related traffic
fatalities: impact of alcohol advertising targeting minors.
J Safety Res 2009; 40: 359–64.
31. Noel J. K., Babor T. F
., Robaina K. Industry self-regulation of
alcohol marketing: a systematic review of content and expo-
sure research. Addiction 2017; 112(Suppl. 1): 28–50 .
32. Noel J. K., Babor T. F. Does industry self-regulation protect
young persons from exposure to alcohol marketing? A review
of compliance and complaint studies. Addiction 2017; 112
(Suppl. 1): 51–6.
33. Sacks J. J., Gonzales K. R., Boucher E. E., Tomedi L. E.,
Brewer R. D. 2010 national and state costs of excessive
alcohol consumption. Am J Prev Med 2015; 49: e73–9.
34. Miller J. W
., Naimi T. S., Brewer R. D., Jones S. E. Binge drink-
ing and associated health risk behaviors among high school
students. Pediatrics 2007; 119: 76–85.
35. Lobstein T., Landon J., Thornton N., Jernigan D. The commer-
cial use of digital media to market alcohol products: a
narrative review. Addiction 2017; 112(Suppl. 1): 21–78.
36. Jang W
. Y., Frederick E. The influence of alcohol advertising?
Effects of interpersonal communication and alcohol expectan-
cies as partial mediators on drinking among college students.
Int J Health W
ellness Soc 2013; 2: 83–98.
37. Hoffman E. W
., Pinkleton B., Austin E. W
., Reyes-Velazquez W
.
Exploring college students’ use of general and alcohol-related
social media and their associations with alcohol-related
behaviors. J Am Coll Health 2014; 62: 328.
38. Siegel M. B., Ross C. S., Albers A. B., Dejong W
., King C. I.,
Naimi T. S. et al. The relationship between exposure to
brand-specific
alcohol
advertising
and
brand-specific
consumption among underage drinkers—United States,
2011–2012. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 2016; 42: 4–14.
39. Ross C. S., Maple E., Siegel M., Dejong W
., Naimi T. S.,
Padon A. A. et al. The relationship between population-level
exposure to alcohol advertising on television and brand-
specific consumption among underage youth in the U.S.
Alcohol Alcohol 2015; 50: 358.
40. Chen M. J., Grube J. W
., Gruenewald P
. J. Community alcohol
outlet density and underage drinking. Addiction 2010; 105:
270–80.
41. Morgenstern M., Li Z., Li Z., Sargent J. D. The party effect: pre-
diction of future alcohol use based on exposure to specific
alcohol advertising content. Addiction 2016; DOI:10.1111/
add.13509.
42. Chang F
. C., Lee C. M., Chen P
. H., Chiu C. H., Miao N. F.,
Pan Y. C. et al. Using media exposure to predict the initiation
and persistence of youth alcohol use in Taiwan. Int J Drug
Policy 2014; 25: 386.
43. Morgenstern M., Isensee B., Sargent J. D., Hanewinkel R.
Attitudes as mediators of the longitudinal association
between alcohol advertising and youth drinking. Arch Pediatr
Adolesc Med 2011; 165: 610–16.
This article was published online on 8 November 2016. References 31, 32 and 35 have now been updated to show the correct citation
details for Addiction Vol. 112, Suppl. 1.
20
David Jernigan et al.
© 2016 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction, 112 (Suppl. 1), 7–20
