 OPEN
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Evidence for newly generated interneurons in the basolateral
amygdala of adult mice
DJ Jhaveri1,2,5, A Tedoldi1,5, S Hunt1, R Sullivan1, NR Watts3, JM Power4, PF Bartlett1,6 and P Sah1,6
New neurons are continually generated from the resident populations of precursor cells in selective niches of the adult mammalian
brain such as the hippocampal dentate gyrus and the olfactory bulb. However, whether such cells are present in the adult
amygdala, and their neurogenic capacity, is not known. Using the neurosphere assay, we demonstrate that a small number of
precursor cells, the majority of which express Achaete-scute complex homolog 1 (Ascl1), are present in the basolateral amygdala
(BLA) of the adult mouse. Using neuron-specific Thy1-YFP transgenic mice, we show that YFP+ cells in BLA-derived neurospheres
have a neuronal morphology, co-express the neuronal marker βIII-tubulin, and generate action potentials, confirming their neuronal
phenotype. In vivo, we demonstrate the presence of newly generated BrdU-labeled cells in the adult BLA, and show that a
proportion of these cells co-express the immature neuronal marker doublecortin (DCX). Furthermore, we reveal that a significant
proportion of GFP+ neurons (~23%) in the BLA are newly generated (BrdU+) in DCX-GFP mice, and using whole-cell recordings in
acute slices we demonstrate that the GFP+ cells display electrophysiological properties that are characteristic of interneurons. Using
retrovirus-GFP labeling as well as the Ascl1CreERT2 mouse line, we further confirm that the precursor cells within the BLA give rise to
mature and functional interneurons that persist in the BLA for at least 8 weeks after their birth. Contextual fear conditioning has no
effect on the number of neurospheres or BrdU-labeled cells in the BLA, but produces an increase in hippocampal cell proliferation.
These results demonstrate that neurogenic precursor cells are present in the adult BLA, and generate functional interneurons, but
also show that their activity is not regulated by an amygdala-dependent learning paradigm.
Molecular Psychiatry (2018) 23, 521–532; doi:10.1038/mp.2017.134; published online 15 August 2017
INTRODUCTION
Overwhelming evidence has established that the addition of new
neurons continues in discrete areas of the adult mammalian brain,
particularly in the olfactory bulb and the dentate gyrus of the
hippocampus.1 The resident populations of neural stem and
precursor cells, which proliferate and differentiate into functional
neurons, drive neurogenesis in these regions.2–4 Numerous
studies have shown that this form of cellular plasticity plays a
critical
role
in
regulating
functions
associated
with
these
regions, such as olfactory discrimination, spatial learning and
emotion.2,5–10
Although the occurrence of neurogenesis has been proposed
for
other
‘non-canonical’
neurogenic
regions
of
the
adult
brain,11–13 the characteristics of any resident neural precursor
cells, the factors that regulate their differentiation potential,
maturation and integration into the local circuitry, and their
functional contribution remain unclear.14–16 Given the pivotal role
of the amygdala in the acquisition, consolidation and expression
of emotional memories,17,18 there has been considerable interest
in determining the presence and possible functional role of
neurogenesis in this region. Moreover, the amygdala is thought to
be a key player in a host of anxiety-related disorders including
generalized anxiety and post-traumatic stress,19 and monoamine
reuptake blockers are widely used for the treatment of many of
these disorders. Although the cellular mechanisms underlying
their therapeutic actions are not completely clear, it has been
suggested that these compounds alter neurogenesis in the adult
brain.20 Thus, it is of interest to understand whether, and what
subtypes of new neurons are generated in the amygdala, which
may provide insight into how this form of cellular plasticity alters
the existing microcircuitry and ultimately exerts an effect on
behavior.
Although one report in monkeys21 has suggested the presence
of newly generated neurons in the adult amygdala, whether these
newborn neurons are functional remains unclear. In fact, several
studies using rodents have reported that newly generated cells
could
only
be
detected
in
this
brain
region
following
stimulation,22–24 and notably they only generated non-neuronal
populations.23–25 However, the origin of these new cells, and
whether the amygdala, similar to the adult hippocampus and
subventricular zone (SVZ), contains a resident population of
precursor cells capable of generating functional neurons3,4,26 are
not known. Recent findings have highlighted the presence of
large populations of quiescent precursor cells in the hippocampus
that are activated by distinct neurogenic stimuli such as neuronal
depolarization and the neurotransmitter norepinephrine.4,27,28 We
therefore asked whether the adult amygdala also harbors such
quiescent
precursor
cell
populations.
As
growing
evidence
1The University of Queensland, Queensland Brain Institute, Brisbane, QLD, Australia; 2Mater Research Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia; 3Critical
Care and Trauma Division, The George Institute for Global Health, Sydney, NSW, Australia and 4School of Medical Science, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
Correspondence: Dr DJ Jhaveri or Professor PF Bartlett or Professor P Sah, The Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, Hawken Drive, St Lucia, 4072 QLD, Australia.
E-mail: dhanisha@uq.edu.au or p.bartlett@uq.edu.au or pankaj.sah@uq.edu.au
5These authors contributed equally to this work.
6These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received 15 February 2015; revised 2 May 2017; accepted 8 May 2017; published online 15 August 2017
Molecular Psychiatry (2018) 23, 521–532
www.nature.com/mp
 indicates that neural stem cells are heterogeneous and exhibit
differences in their proliferative, self-renewal and differentiation
capacities, we have used ‘precursor’ as a generic term to include
cells that have both stem- and progenitor-like properties.
In this study we tested for the presence of both active and
quiescent precursor cell populations within the adult amygdala,
and investigated their neurogenic potential. We characterized the
electrophysiological properties of newly generated neurons, and,
given the central role of the amygdala in fear learning,29,30
examined
whether
such
learning
regulates
the
activity
of
these cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Adult (7–12-week old) male C57BL/6J mice expressing yellow fluorescent
protein (YFP) under the control of the thymocyte antigen 1 (Thy1)
promoter,31 mice expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (GFP)
under the control of the doublecortin (DCX) promoter,32 mice expressing
GFP under the control of the chicken beta-actin promoter in all cells (AGFP
mice),33 mice expressing GFP under the control of glutamic acid
decarboxylase (GAD67) promoter34 and tamoxifen-inducible mice expres-
sing the tdTomato reporter under the control of Achaete-scute complex
homolog 1 (Ascl1)-CreERT2 (Ascl1CreERT2; CAGfloxStop-tdTomato mice obtained
from Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA, stock #012882)35 were used
for the experiments conducted in this study. To label proliferating cells
in vivo, DCX-GFP mice were administered 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU;
100 mg kg − 1; Sigma-Aldrich Castle Hill, NSW, Australia) intraperitoneally
twice daily for 14 days and were killed either 24 h or 4 weeks later. Seven
to 8-week-old male Ascl1CreERT2; CAGfloxStop-tdTomato mice were adminis-
tered tamoxifen intraperitoneally at 180 mg kg − 1 for three consecutive
days. Animals were killed 4 or 8 weeks after the last tamoxifen injection
and brain tissue was harvested for electrophysiological recordings and
immunohistochemistry.
All mice were housed in groups (3–5 mice per cage) and maintained on
a 12 h light/dark cycle with ad libitum access to food and water.
Treatments and procedures were carried out in accordance with the
Australian Code of Practice for the Care and Use of Animals for Scientific
Purposes and were approved by the University of Queensland Animal
Ethics Committee.
Amygdala dissection and neurosphere assay
Mice were killed by cervical dislocation and their brains removed in cold
artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) containing 118 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl,
25 mM NaHCO3, 10 mM D-glucose, 1.2 mM NaH2PO4, 1.3 mM MgCl2 and
2.5 mM CaCl2. Coronal brain slices (500 μm) were then prepared on a
vibratome (Leica, Mt Waverley, VIC, Australia). The basolateral amygdala
(BLA) and hippocampus were microdissected from these slices under a
binocular microscope to ensure that there was no contamination from the
surrounding tissue. The tissues were then individually minced using scalpel
blades, and neural precursor activity was examined using the neurosphere
assay as described previously.27 Briefly, the minced tissue was digested
using 0.1% papain or 0.1% trypsin-EDTA (Invitrogen, Zug, Switzerland) to
obtain a single-cell suspension. The cell suspension was centrifuged at
700 r.p.m. for 5 min and the pellet was washed before being plated in a 24-
or 96-well plate and cultured in complete neurosphere medium containing
epidermal growth factor (EG;F; 20 ng ml − 1) and basic fibroblast growth
factor (bFGF; 10 ng ml − 1), in the presence or absence of L-(− )-noradrena-
line (+)-bitartrate salt monohydrate (norepinephrine; 10 μM) or potassium
chloride (KCl, 15 mM). The number and the size of primary neurospheres
obtained were determined on day 10.
Neurosphere differentiation
Primary neurospheres derived from the BLA were collected and plated
onto coverslips coated with poly-D-lysine in 24-well plates and differ-
entiated in a serum-free medium containing DMEM/F12 with proliferation
supplements (Stem Cell Technologies, Tullamarine, VIC, Australia). On day
5, the neurospheres were fixed using ice-cold 4% paraformaldehyde and
washed several times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Following
blocking with 3% normal goat serum, they were then incubated in a
solution containing primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight. The primary
antibodies used were mouse anti-ßIII tubulin (1:2000, Promega, Sydney,
NSW, Australia), rabbit anti-GFAP (1:500, Dako), rat anti-myelin basic
protein (MBP; 1:500; Millipore, Schaffausen, Switzerland), rabbit anti-glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP;1:5000, DakoCytomation, Oyster Point Blvd,
South San Francisco, CA, USA), mouse anti-GAD-67 (Chemicon, Boronia,
VIC, Australia: 1:10000) and anti-pan sodium channel (Alomone, Jerusalem,
Israel: 1:500). Following PBS washes, Alexa Fluor 568 anti-mouse (1:1000,
Invitrogen), Alexa Fluor 488 or 568 anti-rabbit (1:1000, Invitrogen) or Alexa
Fluor 488 anti-rat (1:1000, Invitrogen) secondary antibodies were applied
together with DAPI (1:1000, Sigma-Aldrich). Finally, coverslips were applied
using fluorescence mounting medium (Dako, Mulgrave, VIC, Australia).
Secondary antibody-only controls were also run to control for non-specific
labeling.
Stereotaxic surgery for retrovirus-GFP delivery
Eight-week-old male C57BL/6J mice were anesthetized with ketamine/
xylazine (100/20 mg kg−1, i.p.), and fixed in a stereotaxic frame. The skull was
then exposed and a hole was drilled over each BLA, which was identified
based on stereotaxic coordinates from Bregma (mm): − 1.5 anteroposterior,
±3 mediolateral, −3.4 dorsoventral (Figure 5a). Retrovirus (2 μl) was infused
into this region bilaterally using a glass-pipette attached to a 2 μl Hamilton
syringe. The murine Moloney leukemia virus-based retroviral vector
expressing GFP (Clontech, Clayton, VIC, Australia) was prepared as described
in detail previously,36 at a titer of ~ 106 c.f.u. per ml. Once the infusion was
complete, the skull was closed and the skin sutured using Vetbond. Animals
were administered the analgesic Metacam (2 mg kg− 1) Boehringer Ingel-
heim, NSW, Australia and the antibiotic Baytril (5 mg kg− 1, Bayer, Gordon,
NSW, Australia) to facilitate recovery. Animals were used for electrophysio-
logical recordings 7–8 weeks after retrovirus injections.
Electrophysiology
For electrophysiological recordings, neurospheres were prepared from
Thy1-YFP animals as detailed above. After 10 days in culture, cells
expressing YFP were identified under a fluorescence microscope (Zeiss
710, Clayton, VIC, Australia). Whole-cell recordings were obtained from
YFP-positive (YFP+) cells using a K-methyl-sulfate based internal solution
containing 135 mM KMeSO4, 5 mM NaCl, 10 mM Hepes, 2 mM Mg2-ATP,
0.3 mM Na3-GTP, 0.3 mM EGTA, 0.1 mM spermine and 7 mM phosphocrea-
tine (pH = 7.3, ~ 290 mOsmol). Data were collected using Axograph X
software and a Multiclamp 700B amplifier (Molecular Devices). Signals
were filtered at 10 kHz and digitized at 50 kHz using an ITC-16A/D
converter (InstruTech, Longmont, CO, USA).
Whole-cell recordings were obtained from DCX-GFP-positive (DCX-GFP+)
cells in acute brain slices from DCX-GFP mice, GFP-positive (GFP+) cells from
retrovirus-injected
mice
and
tdTomato-positive
(tdTom+)
cells
from
Ascl1CreERT2; CAGfloxStop-tdTomato mice. Mice were anesthetized with isoflur-
ane, decapitated, and 300 μm thick coronal brain slices prepared in an ice-
cold sucrose solution (87 mM NaCl, 25 mM NaHCO3, 25 mM glucose, 50 mM
sucrose, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.2 mM NaH2PO4, 4 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM CaCl2), using a
vibratome (Leica). The slices were allowed to recover in oxygenated aCSF for
30 min at 32 °C and then at room temperature until required. Brain slices
were continuously perfused with oxygenated aCSF (32 °C) and whole-cell
patch-clamp
recordings
were
performed
using
a
Multiclamp
700B
(Molecular Devices), and analyzed using AxoGraph (AxoGraphX). Glass
recording electrodes (4–7 MΩ, Harvard Apparatus glass capillaries, Narishige
PC-10 electrode puller) were filled with a K-methyl-sulfate internal solution
containing 135 mM KMeSO4, 8 mM NaCl, 10 mM HEPES, 2 mM MgATP, 0.3 mM
GTP, 7 mM phosphocreatine, 0.2 mM EGTA and 0.2% biocytin (pH 7.2 with
KOH, 295 mOsmol). For DCX-GFP+ cell recordings, spiking was evoked using
current injections applied in increments of 20 pA from − 60 to 120 pA. In the
case of paired recordings, an action potential was evoked by a short current
injection (5 ms, 600 pA) delivered to the first cell in current clamp, while the
second cell was monitored for a response in voltage and current clamp. For
GFP+ and tdTom+ cell recordings, spikes were evoked by injecting current
from −60 to 120 pA (20 pA increments) and from −10 to 340 pA (50 pA
increments) to record spontaneous potential events and spiking, respec-
tively. In the case of spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic current (sEPSC)
recordings, GFP+and tdTom+ cells were voltage-clamped at − 60 mV and
recorded for 10 min. Input resistance, action potential threshold, amplitude,
delay, half-width, rise time and sEPSCs were analyzed offline.
Fear conditioning
Contextual fear conditioning was performed using a VideoFreeze system
from Med Associates. Conditioned animals received a single training
Newly generated neurons in the adult amygdala
DJ Jhaveri et al
522
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 521 – 532
 session daily for six consecutive days. For each session mice were placed in
a distinctive context (the shock chamber) and after an initial baseline
period of 2 min, received 5 footshocks (0.8 mA, 1 s) through the grid floor
over
a
20 min
period.
BrdU
(100 mg kg − 1)
was
administered
via
intraperitoneal injections, given twice daily, 6 h apart following training,
and mice were killed 24 h after the final injection. Immediately prior to
killing, contextual fear conditioning was assayed by measuring freezing
upon re-exposure to the conditioning context for 4 min in the absence of
footshock. Freezing was quantified using automatic freezing detection
software (Med Associates), and expressed as a percentage of time spent
freezing across the test session. Naive animals served as controls, receiving
injections in the animal housing facility. Animals used for the neurosphere
assay experiment did not receive any BrdU injections.
Immunohistochemistry
Mice
were
injected
with
an
overdose
of
sodium
pentobarbitone
(100 mg kg − 1) and were transcardially perfused with 1% sodium nitrate
in 0.1M phosphate buffer (PB, pH 7.2) followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in
0.1M PB (pH 7.2). Brains were removed from the skull and post-fixed via
immersion in the same fixative for 3 h at room temperature on an orbital
shaker. Brains were washed in 0.1M PBS and stored at 4 °C with 0.05%
sodium azide until sectioned. Coronal sections, 50 μm thick, were cut using
a vibratome (Lecia 1000 s) along the entire rostro-caudal axis containing
the amygdala and the hippocampus. Every fourth section was used for
immunohistochemical analysis. For BrdU immunolabeling, the sections
were briefly rinsed in 0.1M PBS, then incubated in 1M HCl at 45 °C for
20 min. Sections were rinsed in boric acid (pH 6) for 5 min, followed by a
wash in 0.1M PBS, and were then placed into a 3% bovine serum albumin
(BSA, Sigma-Aldrich) solution for 1 h. Following this, the sections were
incubated in a 1% BSA solution containing the primary antibodies,
including rat anti-BrdU (1:1000, Accurate Chemical, Westbury, NY, USA),
rabbit anti-DCX (1:2000, Abcam) or guinea pig anti-DCX (1:500, Millipore),
rabbit anti-GFAP (1:5000, DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark), chicken
anti-GFP, (1:4000, Aves Labs, Tigard, OR, USA), rabbit anti-Ki67 (1:500,
Novacastra, Mt Waverley, VIC, Australia), rabbit anti-Iba1 (1:1000, Wako,
Richmond, VA, USA), mouse anti-NeuN (1:1000, Millipore), rat anti-
tdTomato (1:2500, Kerafast, Boston, MA, USA), mouse anti-calbindin
(1:1000, Sigma), and rabbit calretinin (1:1000, Swant, Marley, Switzerland).
Following incubation with the primary antibodies, sections were washed in
PBS and incubated in the appropriate species-specific secondary antibody
in a 1% BSA solution for 5 h (1:1000, Invitrogen). To visualize cells filled
with biocytin, brain slices were incubated with streptavidin (1:2000) in a
1% BSA solution overnight. Sections were incubated in DAPI (1:1000) to
stain the nuclei of cells, and then mounted on microscope slides with
fluorescence mounting medium.
Quantification
Fluorescence immunolabeling was visualized and imaged on a confocal
laser-scanning microscope (LSM 710, Zeiss, Clayton, VIC, Australia) or a
spinning-disk confocal system (Marianas; Intelligent Imaging Innovations,
Denver, CO, USA) consisting of an Axio Observer Z1 (Carl Zeiss, North Ryde,
NSW, Australia) equipped with a CSU-W1 spinning-disk head (Yokogawa
Corporation of America), ORCA-Flash4.0 v2 sCMOS camera (Hamamatsu
Photonics, Shizuoka, Japan), and × 40 1.2 NA C-Apo objectives. Image
acquisition was performed using SlideBook 6.0 (Intelligent Imaging
Innovations). The resulting images were processed and visualized using
Imaris 7.7 software (Bitplane, Concorde, MA, USA). Cell counts were
performed on image stacks using Imaris or Fiji. Labeled cells were
quantified along the rostral-caudal extent of the amygdala by carefully
determining the boundaries of each nucleus using a standard neuroana-
tomical atlas. BrdU-labeled cells were represented as cells per mm2 of the
BLA and co-labeled cells were represented as the percentage of total BrdU-
positive (BrdU+) cells. In the hippocampus, BrdU-labeled cells were
quantified from the granule cell layer and represented as cells per mm
length of the dentate gyrus.
Statistical analysis
All data are expressed as mean ± s.e.m. Statistical analyses were performed
using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA). A Student’s
unpaired t-test was used for experiments with two groups and a one-way
analysis of variance with a Bonferroni post hoc test was used for
experiments involving more than two groups. Significance was determined
at Po0.05. A post hoc power analysis was conducted to ascertain that the
electrphysiology data were obtained from sufficient number of cells. For
example, power analysis for the difference in the input resistance observed
between the principal neurons (n = 5) and 4-week-old tdTom+ neurons
(n = 5) revealed that in order for an effect of this size (mean difference =
118) to be detected (80% chance) as significant at the 5% level (Figure 5h),
a sample of five cells is sufficient. Power analysis for the difference in the
action potential half-width (Figure 5i) between the principal neurons (n = 5)
and 7–8-week-old GFP+ neurons (n = 6) revealed that in order for an effect
of this size (mean difference = 0.26) to be detected (80% chance) as
significant at the 5% level (Figure 5h), a sample of 4 cells is sufficient.
RESULTS
The BLA harbors a resident population of precursor cells
To test for the presence of an endogenous pool of precursor cells
within the amygdala, we used the neurosphere assay37 to isolate
and characterize this population. The BLA was microdissected from
acutely prepared C57BL/6 brain slices (Figure 1a), dissociated, and a
single-cell suspension was plated in control neurosphere medium
containing EGF and bFGF at a low cell density of o5 cells per μl.
Following 10 days in culture, neurospheres could be seen
(Figure 1b). On average, 11.5 ± 1.9 BLA-derived neurospheres were
obtained per brain (Figure 1c; n = 9), suggesting the presence of a
small population of precursor cells. We have previously shown that
the addition of KCl to depolarize cells,4 or stimulation of β-
adrenergic receptors with norepinephrine27 can activate latent
neurogenic precursors in the hippocampus. We therefore tested if
similar treatments would also activate latent precursor cells and
increase the number of neurospheres generated from the adult
amygdala. Neither KCl (15 mM) nor norepinephrine (10 μM) altered
the total number of neurospheres obtained (KCl: 11.8 ± 2.1 neuro-
spheres; norepinephrine: 15.4 ± 2.6 neurospheres, n = 9, P40.05) as
compared to control conditions (Figure 1c). However, both
treatments led to a significant increase in the size of the
neurospheres, particularly those measuring 4200 μm in diameter
(Figure 1d). The clonal origin of the BLA-derived neurospheres was
confirmed using mixtures of differently labeled precursor cells from
wild-type and AGFP mice (Supplementary Figure S1).
To determine the identity of neurosphere-forming precursors
residing within the BLA, we used a genetically modified mouse
that expresses inducible Cre recombinase under the Ascl1promo-
ter. Recent studies have shown that Ascl1, a bHLH transcription
factor, is expressed by a subset of neural precursor cells residing in
the adult hippocampus and SVZ, and Ascl1CreERT2 mice can been
used to study the development and functional integration of
newborn neurons in these neurogenic niches.35,38,39 To investigate
whether neural precursors in the BLA also express Ascl1, we
crossed Ascl1CreERT2 mice to the CAGfloxStop-tdTomato (Ai14) condi-
tional reporter line to achieve indelible expression of tdTomato in
neural precursors and their progeny. Seven- to 8-week-old
Ascl1CreERT2; CAGfloxStop-tdTomato mice were administered tamoxifen
and the BLA was microdissected for the neurosphere assay.
Consistent with our data from the C57BL/6 mice, neurospheres
were obtained in the control condition as well as in the presence of
norepinephrine or KCl. Notably, the majority (470%) of these BLA-
derived neurospheres were tdTom+ (Figure 1e and f) demonstrat-
ing that precursors in the BLA express the proneural gene Ascl1.
Together, these results suggest that precursor cells, the majority
of which are Ascl1+, are present in the BLA but unlike in the adult
hippocampus, this region does not contain latent precursor cells
that can be activated in vitro. Rather, in the amygdala, both
depolarizing stimuli
(KCl) and norepinephrine
enhance the
proliferation of already active precursor cells.
Neural precursor cells in the amygdala have neurogenic capacity
and generate functional neurons in vitro
To determine whether the precursor cell population isolated from
the amygdala was neurogenic, we differentiated neurospheres
Newly generated neurons in the adult amygdala
DJ Jhaveri et al
523
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 521 – 532
 derived from the amygdala of Thy1-YFP mice. The regulatory
elements of the thy1.2 gene used to generate this strain of mice
have been shown to drive neuron-specific expression of the
fluorescent protein YFP in the adult brain.31 To increase precursor
cell proliferation, cells isolated from the BLA of Thy1-YFP mice
were treated with KCl or norepinephrine. Upon differentiation, YFP
+ cells were observed in these neurospheres (Figure 2a and b),
and 52% of the cells co-expressed the immature neuronal marker
βIII tubulin (n = 92 YFP+ cells) (Figure 2b). To confirm that the YFP+
cells generated within the amygdala-derived neurospheres were
neurons, we investigated their electrophysiological properties
(Figure 2d and e). Whole-cell recordings from YFP+ cells showed
that these cells had a resting membrane potential of − 55 ± 11 mV,
an input resistance of 293 ± 331 MΩ, and a membrane time
constant of 4.7 ± 3.3 ms (n = 5). Depolarizing current injections
evoked small amplitude action potentials (Figure 2e), similar to
those seen in early newborn neurons in the dentate gyrus,32
thereby confirming their neuronal phenotype. Interestingly, a
small proportion of neurospheres (3/10) also contained a few
GAD67+ cells (Figure 2c), suggesting that a proportion of
amygdala-derived precursor cells have the capacity to differenti-
ate into GABAergic neurons. The interneuron-generating capacity
of the precursor cells in the BLA was further confirmed using
neurospheres derived from GAD67-GFP mice which showed that
the majority (95 out of 128 neurosphres) of BLA-generated
neurospheres contained GFP+ cells.
We also examined whether the neurosphere-forming precursors
in the BLA were multipotent in vitro. All of the BLA-derived
neurospheres examined (n = 70 neurospheres) contained both βIII
tubulin+ neurons, and GFAP+ astrocytes. 65% (n = 20 neuro-
spheres) also contained MBP+ oligodendrocytes (Supplementary
Figure S2). Collectively, these results demonstrate that the adult
amygdala harbors populations of bipotent as well as multipotent
precursor cells.
Proliferating cells within the amygdala are neurogenic in vivo
Having shown that the adult BLA contains a precursor cell
population that can generate neurons in vitro, we next examined
whether and what proportion of the proliferating cells within the
adult amygdala differentiate into neurons in vivo, by injecting
mice intraperitoneally with BrdU. Following 14 days of injection,
BrdU+ cells were seen in the BLA (Figure 3a) at a density of
62.1 ± 4.7 cells per mm2 (n = 4 mice). Ki67, an endogenous marker
of
cell
proliferation,
also
labeled
cells
within
the
BLA
(51.9 ± 7.1 cells per mm2; n = 3 mice; Supplementary Figure S3),
Figure 1.
Presence of precursor cells in the basolateral amygdala (BLA). (a) The BLA was microdissected from 500 μm thick coronal brain slices.
(b) Photomicrograph of a neurosphere obtained in control medium versus medium containing 15 mM KCl. (c) Similar numbers of BLA-derived
neurospheres per brain were obtained in control, norepinephrine- (10 μM, NE) and KCl-treated wells (n = 9). (d) Distribution of neurospheres
based on their size in control, NE and KCl conditions. Note the significant increase in the number of neurospheres measuring 4200 μm in the
NE and KCl treatment conditions compared with the control (n = 9, *Po0.05, ****Po0.0001). (e) The majority of neurospheres generated from
the BLA are derived from Ascl1-expressing precursor cells (Ascl1::tdTom+) labeled using Ascl1CreERT2; CAGfloxStop-tdTomato mice. (f) Examples of
BLA-derived Ascl1::tdTom+ and tdTom − neurospheres. Scale bars, 100 μm.
Newly generated neurons in the adult amygdala
DJ Jhaveri et al
524
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 521 – 532
 thereby confirming that proliferating cells are present in this
region. To determine whether these BrdU+ cells differentiate into
neurons, we first quantified the number of BrdU+ cells expressing
the immature neuronal marker DCX, and found that 8.2 ± 1.8% of
BrdU-labeled cells co-expressed DCX in the BLA (Figure 3b; n = 4
mice). This was further confirmed using DCX-GFP mice, in which
GFP+ neurons in the adult dentate gyrus have the properties of
newly born neurons.32 In the BLA, 23.2 ± 1.9% of GFP+ (n = 4 mice)
cells were co-labeled for BrdU, consistent with them being
adult-born cells (Figure 3c). To test whether proliferating cells in
the BLA also adopt a glial fate, BrdU+ cells were co-labeled for the
glial markers GFAP (for astrocytes) or Iba1 (for microglia). We
found that 23.3 ± 7.8% of BrdU+ cells expressed GFAP whereas
27.5 ± 6.3% expressed Iba1 (n = 3 mice; Supplementary Figure S3),
demonstrating that a proportion of the newly generated cells in
the BLA have a glial fate.
We next determined the long-term fate of the newly generated
cells in the DCX-GFP mice by quantifying the proportion of
BrdU+ cells that expressed the mature neuronal marker NeuN at
4 weeks after the last BrdU injection. We found that 8.4 ± 0.7% of
the BrdU+ cells co-labeled for NeuN, but had no GFP expression
(Figure 3d, n = 3 mice), demonstrating that a small proportion of
newly generated cells in the BLA become mature neurons.
Interestingly, 13.9 ± 3.1% of BrdU+ cells retained expression of
DCX-GFP
while
expressing
NeuN
(Figure
3e,
n = 3
mice),
suggesting that these cells may represent an intermediate
population.
DCX-expressing cells in the BLA exhibit the electrophysiological
properties of interneurons
Having demonstrated the presence of newly generated DCX-GFP+
cells in the BLA, we next investigated their electrophysiological
properties. Whole-cell recordings from DCX-GFP+ cells in the BLA
(Figure 4a; n = 42 cells) revealed that these cells had a resting
membrane potential of − 56 ± 8 mV. Of the 42 cells recorded, 23
were successfully recovered for anatomical analysis, and displayed
a range of morphologies from mature cells with branching
dendrites (Figure 4c) to ‘underdeveloped’ and sparsely branching
cells (Figure 4f). Consistent with this morphological variety,
DCX-GFP+ cells showed a broad distribution of input resistance
(Figure 4b). Moreover, cells with developed dendritic trees had
lower input resistances, displayed a high frequency of sponta-
neous synaptic events, and discharged with high frequency
action potentials in response to depolarizing current injection
(Figure 4c–e). In contrast, cells with short dendrites had a higher
input resistance, showed little spontaneous synaptic activity and
typically only discharged a few action potentials (Figure 4f–h).
Overall, cells with an input resistance less than 400 MΩ had action
potentials with a half-width of 0.92 ± 0.08 ms (n = 13), whereas the
action potentials in cells with high input resistance (4 600 MΩ)
had a significantly wider half-width of 1.17 ± 0.06 ms (n = 16;
Po0.02). For comparison, mature pyramidal neurons had action
potentials with a half-width of 1.3 ± 0.1 ms (n = 6). Together, these
electrophysiological properties of DCX-GFP+ cells are similar to
those of interneurons in the BLA;40,41 the different input resistance
and distribution of action potential duration suggest that the
cells which are present in the BLA are at different developmental
stages.
To confirm that these neurons were indeed interneurons, paired
whole-cell recordings were made between DCX-GFP+ neurons
and principal neurons (Figure 4j). In these recordings, a single
action potential was evoked in the presynaptic DCX-GFP+ cell
while the postsynaptic neuron was voltage clamped at − 40 mV.
One out of six dual recordings between a DCX-GFP+ neuron and a
principal neuron showed that an action potential in a DCX-GFP+
neuron evoked an outward current that was significantly smaller
near the chloride reversal potential (Figure 4i). In current clamp, an
action potential in the presynaptic neuron evoked a hyperpolar-
ization (Figure 4k), showing that DCX-GFP+ neurons make
inhibitory synapses with principal neurons.
Retroviral birth-dating and lineage tracing using Ascl1CreERT2 mice
show that newborn neurons exhibit the electrophysiological
properties of interneurons in the BLA
Two approaches were used to confirm that functional newborn
neurons are indeed generated in the BLA. In the first of these, we
used a retrovirus-expressing GFP that labels dividing cells and has
been widely used to study functional neurogenesis in the adult
hippocampus.42–44 In the second approach, we used Ascl1CreERT2
mice to label newborn neurons in the BLA and characterize their
functional properties. Retrovirus expressing GFP was injected into
the BLA and electrophysiological recordings from GFP+ cells
were performed 7–8 weeks later (Figure 5a–c and Supplem-
entary Figure 4). Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings from GFP+
cells (n = 6 cells) revealed that these cells discharged action
potentials and received synaptic input, as seen by the presence of
spontaneous excitatory synaptic potentials and sEPSCs (Figure 5c
and Supplementary Figure S4c). More importantly, these cells
exibited passive and active membrane properties that were
different from those of principal neurons within the BLA (Figure 5i
Figure 2.
BLA-derived neurospheres contain functional neurons. (a)
Several Thy1- YFP+ cells are present in a basolateral amygdala
(BLA)-derived neurosphere. Nuclei are stained with DAPI (blue) Scale
bar, 50 μm. (b) Higher magnification of a fixed Thy1-YFP+ neuron
(green) co-labeled with βIII-tubulin (red). Scale bar, 10 μm (c) An
example of a GAD67+ neuron in a BLA-derived neurosphere. (d, e)
Whole-cell recordings from YFP+ cells (scale bar, 10 μm), showing
that depolarizing current injections evoke small amplitude action
potentials (e).
Newly generated neurons in the adult amygdala
DJ Jhaveri et al
525
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 521 – 532
 and
Supplementary
Figure
S4g–j).
The
resting
membrane
potential of GFP+ neurons was − 62.6 ± 0.8 mV, significantly more
depolarized than that of principal
neurons (−69.6 ± 1.4 mV,
Po0.05). Moreover, current-clamp recordings of trains of action
potentials showed that the GFP+ cells had faster action potentials
than principal neurons (action potential half-width of 1.0 ± 0.03 ms
versus 1.3 ± 0.1 ms, Po0.05), as well as a lower action potential
threshold (−40.3 ± 1.3 mV versus -29.9 ± 1.3 mV, Po0.01), lower
action potential rise time (0.29 ± 0.01 ms versus 0.52 ± 0.04 ms,
Po0.001) and a higher action potential peak (84.8 ± 2.4 mV
versus 65.6 ± 2.9 mV, Po0.001). These data demonstrate that
resident precursor cells in the BLA generate functional new
neurons.
Furthermore,
the
passive
and
active
membrane
properties of the GFP+ cells suggest that these newborn neurons
are interneurons.
To confirm these findings, we conducted lineage tracing using
Ascl1CreERT2; CAGfloxStop-tdTomato mice. As reported above, the
majority of the resident population of precursor cells in the BLA
express Ascl1 (Figure 1e and f). Therefore, whole-cell recordings
were made from tdTom+ cells in the BLA at 4 and 8 weeks post-
tamoxifen injection (Figure 5d-g and Supplementary Figure S5b).
We found that tdTom+ neurons could fire trains of action
potentials and receive excitatory inputs at both ages (4 weeks,
n = 5 cells; 8 weeks, n = 5 cells; Figure 5f and g and Supplementary
Figure S4d-f). Similar to GFP+ cells, tdTom+ cells had different
active and passive membrane properties from those of principal
neurons (Figure 5h and i and Supplementary Figure S4g–j)
indicating that these newborn cells are interneurons. In particular,
the action potentials of the tdTom+ cells at both 4 and 8 weeks
were significantly faster than those of principal neurons with a
half-width of 0.92 ± 0.05 ms (n = 5, Po0.01) and 0.87 ± 0.05 ms
(n = 5, Po0.001), respectively (Figure 5i). To further support our
electrophysiological
findings
and
to
immunohistochemically
characterize these newborn cells in Ascl1CreERT2; CAGfloxStop-
tdTomato mice at 4 weeks post tamoxifen treatment, we stained
for calcium binding protein calbindin and calretinin, which are
widely used as interneuron markers and label the majority
(470%) of interneurons in the BLA.41,45 We found that ~ 85%
(13 out of 15) of tdTom+ cells expressed calbindin (Supplementary
Figure 5), with one cell expressing both calbindin and calretinin
Figure 3.
New neurons are generated in the amygdala nuclei in vivo. (a) BrdU-labeled cells (red, arrows) are present in the basolateral
amygdala (BLA) in adult mice. CeA: central amygdala (b) An example of BrdU-labeled cells (red) co-expressing the immature neuronal marker
DCX (green) in the BLA. All nuclei are labeled with DAPI (blue). (c) An example of DCX-GFP+ cells (green) in the BLA that are co-labeled with
BrdU
(red).
The
merged
image
and
orthogonal
views
are
shown
on
the
far
right.
(d)
DCX-GFP − ,
BrdU+
cells
co-labeled with the mature neuronal marker NeuN in the BLA 4 weeks after the last BrdU injection. (e) A BrdU-labeled cell
co-expressing DCX-GFP and NeuN. Scale bars, 50 μm in (a) and 10 μm in (b–e).
Newly generated neurons in the adult amygdala
DJ Jhaveri et al
526
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 521 – 532
 (Supplementary Figure 5d). Taken together, electrophysiological
recordings and marker expression show that Ascl1-expressing
precursor cells within the adult BLA generate new functional
interneurons.
Notably, the input resistance of the tdTom+ cells at 4 weeks
(343.0 ± 35.1 MΩ,
n = 5)
was
significantly
higher
than
that
observed for these cells at 8 weeks (172.5 ± 32.4 MΩ, n = 5,
P = 0.001)
or
the
GFP+
cells
at
8
weeks
post-infection
(173.4 ± 19.3 MΩ, n = 6, P = 0.002; Figure 5h). This decrease in
input resistance over time is consistent with that observed during
the maturation of newborn granule cells in the dentate gyrus,39,46
suggesting that newborn neurons in the BLA display a similar
progression from an immature to mature state.
Contextual fear conditioning has no effect on precursor cell
numbers or proliferation in the amygdala
A growing body of data has demonstrated a strong causal link
between
adult
neurogenesis
and
learning
in
the
hippocampus.9,47,48 As the amygdala and hippocampus have
strong neural connections, and both play roles in contextual fear
conditioning,49 we tested the effects of this paradigm on cell
proliferation in these two brain regions (Figure 6a). As expected,
fear training resulted in significant freezing to the context in
conditioned mice (54 ± 6% freezing), compared to the control
mice that showed very little freezing (Figure 6b). Using the
neurosphere assay to quantify precursor activity, we found no
difference in the number of amygdala-derived neurospheres
generated following fear conditioning (Figure 6e), and the average
size of these neurospheres did not vary significantly between the
naive control and conditioned groups (Figure 6f; diameter of
neursopheres in control group: 78.5 ± 10.5 μm versus conditioned
group: 60.9 ± 5.6 μm). Moreover, no significant correlation was
found between the number or size of neurospheres obtained, or
the level of freezing (data not shown). Similarly, fear conditioning
did not significantly alter the number or size of the neurospheres
generated from hippocampi harvested from the same animals
(Figure 6c and d).
As there was no change in the number or proliferative potential
of resident precursor cells in the amygdala following fear
conditioning, we also examined the status of proliferating cells
within the amygdala in vivo. Overall, a similar number of BrdU+
cells were observed in the control and conditioned groups
(Figure 6c). Moreover, no significant relationship was found
between the level of freezing, and the number of BrdU+ cells
(r = − 0.37, P40.05). Interestingly, however, a significant increase
in the number of BrdU+ cells was observed in the dentate gyrus of
conditioned mice compared to the control (Figure 6d). Together,
these findings indicate that, although fear conditioning does not
alter the activity of resident precursor cells or cell proliferation
within the amygdala, it selectively enhances cell proliferation in
the hippocampal dentate gyrus.
DISCUSSION
In this study, we provide evidence that the amygdala is a bona fide
neurogenic
region
in
the
adult
brain.
We
show
that
an
endogenous population of precursor cells, a large proportion of
which express the proneural gene Ascl1, is present in the
adult
BLA.
In
vitro,
these
precursor
cells
proliferate
and
differentiate to exhibit immunohistochemical and electrophysio-
logical properties that are characteristic of neurons. Consistent
with our findings in vitro, we also demonstrate the presence of
proliferating cells in the BLA in vivo, a proportion of which
differentiate into mature neurons and display the electrophysio-
logical and immunohistochemical properties characteristic of
interneurons.
Figure 4.
DCX-GFP-expressing cells in the basolateral amygdala
(BLA) exhibit the electrophysiological properties of interneurons. (a)
Location of recovered cells in the BLA (n = 23 cells). (b) Histogram
showing the distribution of input resistance of DCX- GFP+ cells
(n = 42 cells), measured using whole-cell recordings. Recovered cells
displayed
morphologies
ranging
from
cells
with
branching
dendrites (c), that had interneuron-like fast-spiking firing properties
(d, e) and high spontaneous
activity (d: inset), to sparsely
branching, underdeveloped cells (f), which fired fewer action
potentials (g, h). Firing was evoked using increasing steps of current
injection (as shown below in g and h). (i) Dual whole-cell recording
shows that a DCX-GFP+ cell is capable of forming inhibitory
connections onto pyramidal cells (1 paired recording out of 6 dual
recordings); an evoked action potential in the presynaptic cell (‘Pre’;
recovered cell indicated by white arrowhead in j) evoked an
outward postsynaptic current in the postsynaptic cell (‘Post’;
recovered cell indicated by yellow arrowhead in j) when voltage-
clamped at − 40 mV (9.50 ± 0.54 pA; 4.27 ± 0.62 pA at − 60 mV, close
to the chloride reversal potential). Black traces show the average
response with example traces of single episodes in gray. (k) In
current clamp this response was an inhibitory postsynaptic potential
in the postsynaptic cell (−0.78 ± 0.09 mV). Scale bars, 50 μm in (c),
25 μm in (f) and 50 μm in (j).
Newly generated neurons in the adult amygdala
DJ Jhaveri et al
527
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 521 – 532
 Newly generated neurons in the adult amygdala
DJ Jhaveri et al
528
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 521 – 532
 Our analysis of the precursor cells within the amygdala suggests
that, although these cells do share some properties with those
present in the SVZ and hippocampal niches, precursors in the BLA
form a distinct population. First, using the neurosphere assay, we
find that this population is much smaller than that present in the
hippocampus26 or the SVZ.26,50 Second, unlike the hippocampus,
but similar to the SVZ, the amygdala does not contain any
populations of latent precursor cells that can be activated by
depolarizing levels of KCl4 or norepinephrine.27 However, as both
these treatments evoked a significant increase in the size of
amygdala-derived neurospheres, it appears that these stimuli play a
pro-proliferative role. This is in contrast to the effect of KCl on the
SVZ-derived neural precursor cell population, where a significant
reduction in precursor numbers has been noted.4 Although the
precise phenotypic identity of this small pool of precursor cells in
the BLA remains to be determined, our data show that a large
proportion of them express Ascl1, similar to results obtained in the
other known neurogenic niches.35
Several lines of evidence demonstrate that precursor cells
isolated from the BLA are neurogenic. First, differentiated neuro-
spheres derived from this region of Thy1-YFP mice contained
YFP+ cells. Second, these cells had the morphological features of
neurons and expressed the neuronal marker βIII tubulin. Finally,
whole-cell recordings from YFP-expressing cells showed that they
Figure 6.
Fear learning has no effect on precursor cell activity and cell proliferation in the basolateral amygdala (BLA) (a) Schematic of the
contextual fear conditioning protocol and BrdU administration. (b) All animals showed robust context fear conditioning (n = 8 in each group).
(c, d) There was a significant increase in the number of BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus (DG) of the hippocampus (f) following fear
conditioning, but no change in the number of BrdU-labeled cells in the BLA (e) of conditioned versus control animals (conditioned: n = 6,
control: n = 7; *Po0.05). (e, f) There was no change in the number (e) or size (f) of neurospheres in the BLA or hippocampus following
contextual fear conditioning (conditioned: n = 13, control: n = 12).
Figure 5.
Functional properties of new neurons in the basolateral amygdala (BLA) using retrovirus labeling and lineage tracing. (a) A schematic
illustrating bilateral injections of green fluorescent protein (GFP)-retrovirus in the BLA of 8-week-old C57BL/6 J mice. (b) Example GFP+
neurons (green) in the BLA recovered from whole-cell patch-clamp recordings and filled with biocytin (red). Note the presence of a doublet.
Nuclei are stained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar, 50 μm (c) Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings from one GFP+ cell of the doublet showing (i) a
train of action potentials induced by a +190 pA current injection, (ii) an example of spontaneous excitatory potential recording while injecting
current steps from − 60 to +80 pA, and (iii) an example trace of sEPSCs recorded while holding the cell at − 60 mV. (d) Schematic showing
tamoxifen injection in Ascl1CreERT2; CAGfloxStop-tdTomato mice. (e) An example of a tdTom+ cell (red) in the BLA, 4 weeks after the last tamoxifen
injection, which was recovered with biocytin (green) following whole-cell patch-clamp recordings. Scale bar, 50 μm (f) An example of whole-
cell patch-clamp recordings of a tdTom+ cell at 4 weeks post-tamoxifen showing (i) a train of action potentials induced by +190 pA current
injection, (ii) an example trace of sEPSCs recorded while holding the cell at − 60 mV, and (iii) an example of a spontaneous excitatory potential
recording while injecting current steps from − 60 to +20 pA. (g) An example of whole-cell patch-clamp recordings from a tdTom+ cell at
8 weeks post-tamoxifen showing (i) a train of action potentials induced by +240 pA current injection, (ii) an example trace of sEPSCs recorded
while holding the cell at − 60 mV, and (iii) an example of a spontaneous excitatory potential recording while injecting current steps from − 60
to +120 pA. (h) Graph showing the input resistances of recorded cells in the BLA. Note that the tdTom+ cells at 4 weeks have higher input
resistance than the input resistances of principal neurons (n = 5, *Po0.05), retrovirus-GFP+ cells at 7–8 weeks (n = 6, **Po0.01), and tdTom+
cells at 8 weeks (n = 6, **Po0.01). (i) Graph showing action potential half-widths from recorded cells within the BLA. Principal neurons have a
half-width (n = 5) that is slower than the half-widths of tdTom+ cells at 4 weeks (n = 5, **Po0.01), GFP+ cells at 7–8 weeks (n = 6, *Po0.05),
and tdTom+ cells at 8 weeks (n = 5, ***Po0.001).
Newly generated neurons in the adult amygdala
DJ Jhaveri et al
529
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 521 – 532
 had a resting membrane potential, and could discharge small
amplitude action potentials, demonstrating that amygdala pre-
cursor cells proliferate and differentiate into functional neurons
in vitro. Consistent with the presence of neurogenic precursor cells
in this nucleus, BrdU labeling revealed the presence of newly
generated cells in the BLA.22–24 Importantly, a proportion of these
newly generated cells expressed DCX, the expression of which has
been widely used as a surrogate marker of neurogenesis in the
adult brain. Moreover, using DCX-GFP mice, we demonstrate
that ~ 23% of the GFP+ cells in the BLA incorporated BrdU,
indicating that they represent newly generated cells. These GFP+
cells had sparsely spiny dendrites, and electrophysiological
recordings showed that they had relatively short duration action
potentials, and discharged at high frequency, suggesting that they
were interneurons.41,51 These cells also displayed spontaneous
excitatory synaptic potentials, demonstrating that they receive
synaptic input, and paired recording showed that DCX-GFP+ cells
can make inhibitory synaptic synapses onto local principal
neurons.
Importantly, GFP-retrovirus injection in the BLA revealed the
presence
of
newborn
neurons
7–8
weeks
after
infection.
Similar to DCX-GFP+ cells, these cells had short duration action
potentials, passive and active membrane properties different from
those of principal neurons, and received spontaneous excitatory
synaptic potentials, supporting the idea that the precursor cells in
the BLA mature into functional interneurons that integrate and
connect to other cells. Using Ascl1CreERT2; CAGfloxStop-tdTomato mice,
in which the lineage of newborn cells can be traced using
tamoxifen, we showed that 4 and 8-week-old new neurons
exhibited
passive
and
active
membrane
properties
similar
to
those
seen
in
DCX-GFP,
and
retrovial-injected
animals.
Moreover, all three methods demonstrated that the newly born
neurons
display
spontaneous
excitatory
synaptic
potentials,
indicating that these neurons are functional and integrate into
the amygdala circuitry, similar to what is seen in the dentate
gyrus.39,46
Previous reports have shown that no or very few BrdU-labeled
cells in the amygdala of rodents co-express the mature neuronal
marker NeuN,23–25 suggesting that the adult amygdala is non-
neurogenic. In one study that did report the neurogenic fate of
BrdU-labeled
proliferating
cells
in
the
amygdala,52
a
high
proportion of these cells displayed a neuronal phenotype within
24 h of BrdU injection, making it difficult to interpret whether
these were proliferating precursors or neurons undergoing DNA
repair. In another study, cell proliferation was observed in the
amygdala of PTZ-treated (epileptic) rats.53 However, as no
quantification was presented, the extent and proportion of
proliferating
cells
that
adopted
a
neuronal
fate
remained
unknown. Our results show that new neurons are generated in
the BLA, and express the neuronal markers DCX and NeuN. The
failure to detect newly generated neurons in the amygdala in
previous studies could be due to differences in the dosage or
length of BrdU administration.
Our electrophysiological recordings suggest that the DCX-GFP+
cells, retrovirus-GFP+ cells and tdTom+ cells derived from
Ascl1-expressing precursor cells in the BLA are interneurons.
Furthermore, we find that majority of 4 week-old tdTom+ cells
express
interneuron marker
calbindin.
Given that
newborn
neurons in the hippocampal dentate gyrus are glutamatergic,47
we suggest that the newborn cells in the BLA may in fact
represent a distinct population that differs in its electrophysiolo-
gical characteristics from that generated in the hippocampus.
Furthermore, our results reveal that this distinct population of new
neurons within the BLA survives for at least 8 weeks after their
birth. This supports the idea that precursor cells within the BLA
give rise to mature and functional interneurons, which are likely to
play a role in shaping the physiology of this nucleus. It will be
interesting
to
determine
whether
the
numbers
of
neural
precursors and new neurons in the amygdala decline with aging.
In this regard, it is worth noting that a population of cells that
co-express the polysialylated form of the neural cell adhesion
molecule and DCX has also been reported in the amygdala
of postmortem human brains.54 Given a recent report that
suggests
the
persistence
of
neurogenesis
in
the
hippoca-
mpus of adult humans throughout life,21,55 together with studies
showing
the
presence
of
adult-born
neurons
in
the
amygdala of both Old World and New World monkeys,21 and
the persistence of DCX+ cells in aged non-human primates,56 it is
possible that the generation of new neurons may also persist in
the amygdala
of adult
humans.
Future
studies using
the
elegant 14C retrospective birth-dating technique may shed more
light on this issue.
The
functional
significance
of
the
neurogenic
precursor
cells in the amygdala of rodents remains unclear. We did not
detect any effect of contextual fear conditioning on either
precursor cell numbers or cell proliferation. In contrast, the
application of norepinephrine or KCl clearly increased the size of
neurospheres in vitro. The extent of norepinephrine release
and/or the level of neuronal activity that is required to enhance
precursor proliferation following contextual fear conditioning
in vivo is currently not known, and may be influenced by the
amplitude, duration or temporal delay in the pairing of the shock
and
the
context.
Moreover,
it
is
possible
that
fear
conditioning leads to alterations in other factors in vivo that
negatively
influence
cell
proliferation
and
abrogate
any
proliferation-enhancing effects of norepinephrine or neuronal
activity. Nonetheless, the link between contextual fear learning,
which involves the activity of the amygdala and the hippo-
campus, is interesting, given our findings of an increase in the
number of BrdU-labeled cells in the hippocampus but not the
amygdala of fear-conditioned mice. A recent study has shown a
significant reduction in hippocampal cell proliferation following
either lesion- or viral-mediated attenuation of BLA activity in
mice.57 Interestingly, BLA lesions also significantly decreased the
expression
of
the
activity-regulated
gene
c-Fos
in
DCX+
newborn cells in the hippocampus. As BLA activity is known to
support long-term potentiation in the dentate gyrus,58 it seems
likely that the enhancement in proliferation observed in the
granule cell layer of the hippocampus in this study is congruent
with the increase in BLA activity during fear learning. Whether the
increase in proliferation in the dentate gyrus following fear
conditioning is a direct consequence of enhanced long-term
potentiation28,59 or mediated via the release of neurotransmitters
such as glutamate, norepinephrine or acetylcholine27,60,61 remains
unknown. It should be noted that, as our control mice were not
exposed to the context, we can not exclude the possibility that the
increase in the number of BrdU+ cells seen in the hippocampus in
the conditioned group compared to the control is partly due to
the novel context rather than contextual fear learning.
In summary, we have demonstrated the presence of neural
precursors and the generation of new interneurons in the BLA of
adult mice. Although we did not observe learning-induced
changes in precursor proliferation in this nucleus, the possibility
that new neurons in this region of the amygdala contribute
towards fear-related memory remains to be investigated.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by grants from the National Health and Medical Research
Council of Australia to PFB and PS (NHMRC Program Grants: 301204 and 569575;
Project Grant:10768227) and by Mater Foundation Fellowship to DJJ. We thank
Hongjun Song (Johns Hopkins Medical School) for the retroviral vectors, Imogen
Newly generated neurons in the adult amygdala
DJ Jhaveri et al
530
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 521 – 532
 O’Keeffe, Li Xu and Wendy Lee for technical assistance and Rowan Tweedale and
Ashley Cooper for editorial assistance.
REFERENCES
1 Ming GL, Song H. Adult neurogenesis in the mammalian central nervous system.
Annu Rev Neurosci 2005; 28: 223–250.
2 Imayoshi I, Sakamoto M, Ohtsuka T, Takao K, Miyakawa T, Yamaguchi M et al.
Roles of continuous neurogenesis in the structural and functional integrity of the
adult forebrain. Nat Neurosci 2008; 11: 1153–1161.
3 Rietze RL, Valcanis H, Brooker GF, Thomas T, Voss AK, Bartlett PF. Purification of a
pluripotent neural stem cell from the adult mouse brain. Nature 2001; 412:
736–739.
4 Walker TL, White A, Black DM, Wallace RH, Sah P, Bartlett PF. Latent stem and
progenitor cells in the hippocampus are activated by neural excitation. J Neurosci
2008; 28: 5240–5247.
5 Arruda-Carvalho M, Sakaguchi M, Akers KG, Josselyn SA, Frankland PW.
Posttraining ablation of adult-generated neurons degrades previously acquired
memories. J Neurosci 2011; 31: 15113–15127.
6 Enwere E, Shingo T, Gregg C, Fujikawa H, Ohta S, Weiss S. Aging results in
reduced epidermal growth factor receptor signaling, diminished olfactory
neurogenesis, and deficits in fine olfactory discrimination. J Neurosci 2004; 24:
8354–8365.
7 Shors TJ, Miesegaes G, Beylin A, Zhao M, Rydel T, Gould E. Neurogenesis
in the adult is involved in the formation of trace memories. Nature 2001; 410:
372–376.
8 Snyder JS, Hong NS, McDonald RJ, Wojtowicz JM. A role for adult neurogenesis in
spatial long-term memory. Neuroscience 2005; 130: 843–852.
9 Vukovic
J,
Borlikova
GG,
Ruitenberg
MJ,
Robinson
GJ,
Sullivan
RK,
Walker
TL
et
al.
Immature
doublecortin-positive
hippocampal
neurons
are important for learning but not for remembering. J Neurosci 2013; 33:
6603–6613.
10 Santarelli L, Saxe M, Gross C, Surget A, Battaglia F, Dulawa S et al. Requirement of
hippocampal neurogenesis for the behavioral effects of antidepressants. Science
2003; 301: 805–809.
11 Gould E, Beylin A, Tanapat P, Reeves A, Shors TJ. Learning enhances adult
neurogenesis in the hippocampal formation. Nat Neurosci 1999; 2: 260–265.
12 Kokoeva MV, Yin H, Flier JS. Neurogenesis in the hypothalamus of adult mice:
potential role in energy balance. Science 2005; 310: 679–683.
13 Zhao M, Momma S, Delfani K, Carlen M, Cassidy RM, Johansson CB et al. Evidence
for neurogenesis in the adult mammalian substantia nigra. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2003; 100: 7925–7930.
14 Gould E. How widespread is adult neurogenesis in mammals? Nat Rev Neurosci
2007; 8: 481–488.
15 Nowakowski RS, Hayes NL. New neurons: extraordinary evidence or extraordinary
conclusion? Science 2000; 288: 771.
16 Rakic P. Neurogenesis in adult primate neocortex: an evaluation of the evidence.
Nat Rev Neurosci 2002; 3: 65–71.
17 Davis M, Whalen PJ. The amygdala: vigilance and emotion. Mol Psychiatry 2001; 6:
13–34.
18 LeDoux JE. Emotion circuits in the brain. Ann Rev Neurosci 2000; 23: 155–184.
19 Likhtik E, Paz R. Amygdala-prefrontal interactions in (mal)adaptive learning. Trends
Neurosci 2015; 38: 158–166.
20 Miller BR, Hen R. The current state of the neurogenic theory of depression and
anxiety. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2015; 30C: 51–58.
21 Bernier PJ, Bedard A, Vinet J, Levesque M, Parent A. Newly generated neurons in
the amygdala and adjoining cortex of adult primates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;
99: 11464–11469.
22 Goncalves L, Silva R, Pinto-Ribeiro F, Pego JM, Bessa JM, Pertovaara A et al.
Neuropathic
pain
is
associated
with
depressive
behaviour
and
induces
neuroplasticity in the amygdala of the rat. Exp Neurol 2008; 213: 48–56.
23 Okuda H, Tatsumi K, Makinodan M, Yamauchi T, Kishimoto T, Wanaka A.
Environmental
enrichment
stimulates
progenitor
cell
proliferation
in
the
amygdala. J Neurosci Res 2009; 87: 3546–3553.
24 Wennstrom M, Hellsten J, Tingstrom A. Electroconvulsive seizures induce
proliferation of NG2-expressing glial cells in adult rat amygdala. Biol Psychiatry
2004; 55: 464–471.
25 Ehninger D, Wang LP, Klempin F, Romer B, Kettenmann H, Kempermann G.
Enriched environment and physical activity reduce microglia and influence
the fate of NG2 cells in the amygdala of adult mice. Cell Tissue Res 2011; 345:
69–86.
26 Bull ND, Bartlett PF. The adult mouse hippocampal progenitor is neurogenic but
not a stem cell. J Neurosci 2005; 25: 10815–10821.
27 Jhaveri DJ, Mackay EW, Hamlin AS, Marathe SV, Nandam LS, Vaidya VA et al.
Norepinephrine directly activates adult hippocampal precursors via beta3-
adrenergic receptors. J Neurosci 2010; 30: 2795–2806.
28 Kameda M, Taylor CJ, Walker TL, Black DM, Abraham WC, Bartlett PF. Activation of
latent precursors in the hippocampus is dependent on long-term potentiation.
Transl Psychiatry 2012; 2: e72.
29 Sah P, Faber ES, Lopez De Armentia M, Power J. The amygdaloid complex:
anatomy and physiology. Physiol Rev 2003; 83: 803–834.
30 Pape HC, Pare D. Plastic synaptic networks of the amygdala for the acquisition,
expression, and extinction of conditioned fear. Physiol Reviews 2010; 90: 419–463.
31 Feng G, Mellor RH, Bernstein M, Keller-Peck C, Nguyen QT, Wallace M et al.
Imaging neuronal subsets in transgenic mice expressing multiple spectral
variants of GFP. Neuron 2000; 28: 41–51.
32 Spampanato J, Sullivan RK, Turpin FR, Bartlett PF, Sah P. Properties of doublecortin
expressing neurons in the adult mouse dentate gyrus. PLoS ONE 2012; 7: e41029.
33 Okabe M, Ikawa M, Kominami K, Nakanishi T, Nishimune Y. 'Green mice' as a
source of ubiquitous green cells. FEBS Lett 1997; 407: 313–319.
34 Tamamaki N, Yanagawa Y, Tomioka R, Miyazaki J, Obata K, Kaneko T. Green
fluorescent protein expression and colocalization with calretinin, parvalbumin,
and somatostatin in the GAD67-GFP knock-in mouse. J Comp Neurol 2003; 467:
60–79.
35 Kim EJ, Ables JL, Dickel LK, Eisch AJ, Johnson JE. Ascl1 (Mash1) defines cells with
long-term neurogenic potential in subgranular and subventricular zones in adult
mouse brain. PLoS ONE 2011; 6: e18472.
36 Tashiro A, Makino H, Gage FH. Experience-specific functional modification of the
dentate
gyrus
through
adult
neurogenesis:
a
critical
period
during
an
immature stage. J Neurosci 2007; 27: 3252–3259.
37 Reynolds BA, Rietze RL. Neural stem cells and neurospheres--re-evaluating the
relationship. Nat Methods 2005; 2: 333–336.
38 Andersen J, Urban N, Achimastou A, Ito A, Simic M, Ullom K et al. A transcriptional
mechanism integrating inputs from extracellular signals to activate hippocampal
stem cells. Neuron 2014; 83: 1085–1097.
39 Yang SM, Alvarez DD, Schinder AF. Reliable genetic labeling of adult-born dentate
granule cells using Ascl1 CreERT2 and Glast CreERT2 murine lines. J Neurosci 2015;
35: 15379–15390.
40 Mahanty NK, Sah P. Calcium-permeable AMPA receptors mediate long-term
potentiation in interneurons in the amygdala. Nature 1998; 394: 683–687.
41 Spampanato J, Polepalli J, Sah P. Interneurons in the basolateral amygdala.
Neuropharmacology 2011; 60: 765–773.
42 Ma DK, Jang MH, Guo JU, Kitabatake Y, Chang ML, Pow-Anpongkul N et al.
Neuronal activity-induced Gadd45b promotes epigenetic DNA demethylation and
adult neurogenesis. Science 2009; 323: 1074–1077.
43 van Praag H,
Schinder
AF,
Christie BR,
Toni N, Palmer
TD, Gage FH.
Functional neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. Nature 2002; 415: 1030–1034.
44 Zhao C, Teng EM, Summers RG Jr, Ming GL, Gage FH. Distinct morphological
stages of dentate granule neuron maturation in the adult mouse hippocampus.
J Neurosci 2006; 26: 3–11.
45 Kemppainen S, Pitkanen A. Distribution of parvalbumin, calretinin, and calbindin-
D(28k) immunoreactivity in the rat amygdaloid complex and colocalization with
gamma-aminobutyric acid. J Comp Neurol 2000; 426: 441–467.
46 Gu Y, Arruda-Carvalho M, Wang J, Janoschka SR, Josselyn SA, Frankland PW et al.
Optical
controlling
reveals
time-dependent
roles
for
adult-born
dentate
granule cells. Nat Neurosci 2012; 15: 1700–1706.
47 Deng W, Aimone JB, Gage FH. New neurons and new memories: how does adult
hippocampal neurogenesis affect learning and memory? Nat Rev Neurosci 2010;
11: 339–350.
48 Saxe MD, Malleret G, Vronskaya S, Mendez I, Garcia AD, Sofroniew MV et al.
Paradoxical influence of hippocampal neurogenesis on working memory. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2007; 104: 4642–4646.
49 Maren S. Neurobiology of Pavlovian fear conditioning. Annu Rev Neurosci 2001;
24: 897–931.
50 Blackmore DG, Golmohammadi MG, Large B, Waters MJ, Rietze RL. Exercise increases
neural stem cell number in a growth hormone-dependent manner, augmenting the
regenerative response in aged mice. Stem Cells 2009; 27: 2044–2052.
51 McDonald AJ. Calbindin-D28k immunoreactivity in the rat amygdala. J Comp
Neurol 1997; 383: 231–244.
52 Fowler CD, Freeman ME, Wang Z. Newly proliferated cells in the adult male
amygdala are affected by gonadal steroid hormones. J Neurobiol 2003; 57:
257–269.
53 Park JH, Cho H, Kim H, Kim K. Repeated brief epileptic seizures by pentylenete-
trazole cause neurodegeneration and promote neurogenesis in discrete brain
regions of freely moving adult rats. Neuroscience 2006; 140: 673–684.
54 Marti-Mengual U, Varea E, Crespo C, Blasco-Ibanez JM, Nacher J. Cells expressing
markers of immature neurons in the amygdala of adult humans. Eur J Neurosci
2013; 37: 10–22.
Newly generated neurons in the adult amygdala
DJ Jhaveri et al
531
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 521 – 532
 55 Spalding KL, Bergmann O, Alkass K, Bernard S, Salehpour M, Huttner HB et al.
Dynamics of hippocampal neurogenesis in adult humans. Cell 2013; 153:
1219–1227.
56 Zhang XM, Cai Y, Chu Y, Chen EY, Feng JC, Luo XG et al. Doublecortin-expressing
cells persist in the associative cerebral cortex and amygdala in aged nonhuman
primates. Front Neuroanat 2009; 3: 17.
57 Kirby ED, Friedman AR, Covarrubias D, Ying C, Sun WG, Goosens KA et al.
Basolateral
amygdala
regulation
of
adult
hippocampal
neurogenesis
and fear-related activation of newborn neurons. Mol Psychiatry 2012; 17:
527–536.
58 Ikegaya Y, Saito H, Abe K. The basomedial and basolateral amygdaloid nuclei
contribute to the induction of long-term potentiation in the dentate gyrus in vivo.
Eur J Neurosci 1996; 8: 1833–1839.
59 Bruel-Jungerman E, Davis S, Rampon C, Laroche S. Long-term potentiation
enhances neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus. J Neurosci 2006; 26:
5888–5893.
60 Itou Y, Nochi R, Kuribayashi H, Saito Y, Hisatsune T. Cholinergic activation of
hippocampal neural stem cells in aged dentate gyrus. Hippocampus 2011; 21:
446–459.
61 Joo JY, Kim BW, Lee JS, Park JY, Kim S, Yun YJ et al. Activation of NMDA receptors
increases proliferation and differentiation of hippocampal neural progenitor cells.
J Cell Sci 2007; 120(Pt 8): 1358–1370.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International License. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons
license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under
the Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the license
holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2018
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Molecular Psychiatry website (http://www.nature.com/mp)
Newly generated neurons in the adult amygdala
DJ Jhaveri et al
532
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 521 – 532
