 Research Paper
Progranulin Recruits HSP70 to β-Glucocerebrosidase and Is Therapeutic
Against Gaucher Disease
Jinlong Jian a, Qing-Yun Tian a, Aubryanna Hettinghouse a, Shuai Zhao a, Helen Liu a, Jianlu Wei a,
Gabriele Grunig b, Wujuan Zhang c, Kenneth D.R. Setchell c, Ying Sun d, Herman S. Overkleeft e,
Gerald L. Chan f, Chuan-ju Liu a,g,⁎
a Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10003, United States
b Department of Environmental Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 57 Old Forge Road, Tuxedo, NY 10987, United States
c Division of Pathology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, United States
d Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, United States
e Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, Gorlaeus Laboratories, Einsteinweg 55, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands
f Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 665 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, United States
g Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, United States
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 22 August 2016
Received in revised form 3 October 2016
Accepted 7 October 2016
Available online 24 October 2016
Gaucher disease (GD), the most common lysosomal storage disease, is caused by mutations in GBA1 encoding of
β-glucocerebrosidase (GCase). Recently it was reported that progranulin (PGRN) insufficiency and deficiency as-
sociated with GD in human and mice, respectively. However the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. Here
we report that PGRN binds directly to GCase and its deficiency results in aggregation of GCase and its receptor
LIMP2. Mass spectrometry approaches identified HSP70 as a GCase/LIMP2 complex-associated protein upon
stress, with PGRN as an indispensable adaptor. Additionally, 98 amino acids of C-terminal PGRN, referred to as
Pcgin, are required and sufficient for the binding to GCase and HSP70. Pcgin effectively ameliorates the disease
phenotype in GD patient fibroblasts and animal models. These findings not only demonstrate that PGRN is a
co-chaperone of HSP70 and plays an important role in GCase lysosomal localization, but may also provide new
therapeutic interventions for lysosomal storage diseases, in particular GD.
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Keywords:
Progranulin
HSP70
β-glucocerebrosidase
Gaucher disease
Lysosomal storage diseases
Pcgin
1. Introduction
Gaucher disease (GD), a common lysosomal storage disease (LSD), is
caused
by
mutations
in
GBA1
with
resultant
defective
glucocerebrosidase (GCase) function and the consequent accumulation
of β-glucosylceramide (β-GlcCer) in macrophages and other cell types
(Brady et al., 1965; Platt, 2014). β-GlcCer storage transforms lysosomes
into tubular-like structures as viewed by electronic microscopy, with
the lipid-engorged macrophage (Gaucher cell) showing a characteristic
“wrinkled tissue paper” appearance under light microscopy. There are
three types of GD based on its neurological complications (Beutler,
1991). Type 1 GD, the most common, is a non-neuropathic form occur-
ring predominantly in patients of Ashkenazi Jewish descent; character-
istics
include
hepatosplenomegaly,
thrombocytopenia,
anemia,
osteonecrosis and sclerosis, diffuse osteopenia, and multiple osteologic
complications (Beutler, 1991). Type 2 (or acute infantile neuropathic
Gaucher's disease) begins within 6 months of birth and presents with
serious convulsions, hypertonia, mental retardation and apnea. Children
with Type 2 usually die before two years of age. Type 3 GD, a chronic
neuropathic form, can begin at any time in childhood or even in adult-
hood. It is characterized by slowly progressive, milder neurologic symp-
toms as compared to acute type 2 GD.
Progranulin (PGRN), also known as granulin, epithelin precursor
(GEP), PC-cell-derived growth factor (PCDGF), proepithelin, and
acrogranin, contains seven-and-a-half repeats of a cysteine-rich motif
(CX5–6CX5CCX8CCX6CCXDX2HCCPX4CX5–6C) and forms a unique
“beads-on-a-string” structure (Hrabal et al., 1996). PGRN is abundantly
expressed in epithelial cells, in chondrocytes, in cells of the immune sys-
tem, and in neurons (Bateman and Bennett, 2009). PGRN is known to
play a critical role in a variety of physiologic and disease processes, in-
cluding early embryogenesis, wound healing (He et al., 2003), and
host defense (Jian et al., 2013a). PGRN also functions as a neurotrophic
factor and mutations in the PGRN gene (GRN) resulting in partial or
complete loss of the PGRN protein were reported to associate with
EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 212–224
⁎ Corresponding author at: Rm 1608, HJD, New York University School of Medicine, 301
East 17th Street, New York, NY 10003, United States.
E-mail address: chuanju.liu@nyumc.org (C. Liu).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.10.010
2352-3964/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
EBioMedicine
journal homepage: www.ebiomedicine.com
 frontotemporal dementia (FTD) (Baker et al., 2006; Cruts et al., 2006)
and neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) (Ahmed et al., 2010; Gotzl et
al., 2014), respectively.
PGRN associates with particular members in the TNF receptor super-
family, including TNFR1, TNFR2 and DR3 (Tang et al., 2011; Jian et al.,
2013b; Liu et al., 2014; Li et al., 2014), and possesses the ability to sup-
press inflammation in various conditions (Zhu et al., 2002; Tang et al.,
2011). Auto-antibodies against PGRN have been found in several auto-
immune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis,
and inflammatory bowel disease, and such antibodies were shown to
promote a proinflammatory environment in a subgroup of patients
(Thurner et al., 2013; Thurner et al., 2014).
We recently reported that the four single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) sites in GRN, the gene encoding PGRN, lead to PGRN insufficiency
and have significantly higher frequency in GD patients; revealing an as-
sociation between PGRN insufficiency and GD (Jian et al., 2016). In addi-
tion, “aged” and challenged adult PGRN null mice develop GD-like
phenotypes (Jian et al., 2016). However, the mechanisms underlying
the association between PGRN and GD remain unclear. In this study,
we report that PGRN is a co-chaperone for the lysosomal localization
of GCase under pathological conditions through linking GCase to heat
shock protein 70 (HSP70), an evolutionarily highly conserved molecular
chaperone that mediates folding and unlocks disaggregation of numer-
ous proteins (Rothman and Schekman, 2011; Nillegoda et al., 2015;
Nillegoda and Bukau, 2015; Matsuda et al., 2003; Parenti et al., 2015).
More importantly, a 15-kDa PGRN-derived protein, referred to as
Pcgin, effectively ameliorates the cellular phenotypes of GD.
2. Methods
2.1. Materials
Fibroblasts from Types 1 and 2 GD patients were purchased from
Coriell Cell Repositories (Camden, NJ). Airway epithelial cells from WT
and HSP70 KO mice were kindly provided by Dr. Lee (Zhang et al.,
2016). Antibodies against GCase (sc-100544, sc-30844, and sc-32883),
PGRN (SC-28928), Sortilin (sc-376576), α-GLA (sc-25823), HSP70 (sc-
373867), Calregulin (sc-373863), TGN38 (sc-271624), EEA1 (sc-
365652) LIMP2 (sc-55571), LAMP2 (sc-18822), His-tag (sc-803), GFP
(sc-8334), and DsRed (sc-33353) were purchased from Santa Cruz Bio-
technology (Dallas, Texas). Fluorescence labeled secondary antibodies
were purchased from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc.
(West Grove, PA). Recombinant His-tag PGRN protein was purified
from 293T stable cell lines as described previously (Feng et al., 2010;
Tang et al., 2011). Recombinant GCase (Cat. No. 7410-GH-010), sortilin
(Cat. No. 3154-ST-050), and LIMP2 (Cat. No. 1966-LM-050) proteins
and sheep anti-mouse PGRN antibody (AF2557) were purchased from
R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN). ELISA kits to detect murine TNF-α,
IL-1β, and IL-6 were purchased from eBioscience, Inc. (San Diego, CA).
2.2. Construction of Expression Plasmids
cDNAs encoding either full-length human PGRN or its serial N-ter-
minal or C-terminal deletion mutants were cloned into pEGFP-N1 vec-
tors by using EcoRI and BamHI sites. The amino acid number encoded
by C-terminal Deletions (CD) constructs: full-length PGRN (aa 1-593),
CD1 (aa 1-521), CD2 (aa 1-444), CD3 (aa 1-376), CD4 (aa 1-284), CD5
(aa 1-209), CD6 (aa 1-127), and CD7 (aa 1-61). The amino acid number
encoded by N-terminal Deletions (ND) constructs: ND1 (aa 45-593),
ND2 (aa 113-593), ND3 (aa 179-593), ND4 (aa 261-593), ND5 (aa
336-593), ND6 (aa 416-593), and ND7 (aa 496-593). All constructs
were confirmed by DNA sequence. Full-length human GCase was pur-
chased from Addgene (Cambridge, MA) and subcloned to pDsRed-
monomer N1 vector (Clontech Mountain View, CA). All constructs
were confirmed by DNA sequencing.
2.3. Preparation of Lipid Extraction
Mouse brain tissue was used as a source of lipid mixture. Briefly, one
mouse brain was dissected under sterile conditions. The brain tissues
were homogenized in 50 ml DMEM medium containing 10% FBS.
Bicinchoninic acid assay was used to determine the protein level in
the brain lysate.
2.4. Expression and Purification of Pcgin
The sequence for Pcgin was inserted into pD444 expression vector
with a His-tag (from DNA2.0, Menlo Park, CA). Pcgin was expressed in
the BL21(DE3) E. coli strain after induction by 1 mM IPTG. After a 3 h cul-
ture, cells were pelleted and sonicated to release the fusion protein. His-
tagged Pcgin was purified by using ProBond™ Purification System (Life
Technology, Carlsbad, CA) as we have previously described (Tang et al.,
2011). Briefly, supernatant of cell lysis was incubated with affinity beads
overnight, and washed with washing buffer (50 mM NaH2PO4, 200 mM
NaCl, 50 mM Imidazole, pH 8.0) six times. Pcgin was eluted from beads
with elution buffer (50 mM NaH2PO4, 200 mM NaCl, 250 mM Imidaz-
ole, pH 8.0). After dialysis with PBS, endotoxin removal, and 0.2 μm filter
sterilization, recombinant Pcgin protein was used in our cell-based
model and in vivo animal model.
2.5. Site-directed Mutagenesis
pEGFP vector containing the Pcgin sequence was used as a template
to create serial deletion mutants using a site-directed mutagenesis kit
(Stratagene Ipswich, MA). Five deletion mutants were made to cover
the full-length Pcgin: Δ1 delete aa496-522, Δ2 delete aa523-534, Δ3 de-
lete aa535-539, Δ4 delete aa540-573 and Δ5 delete aa574-593. All mu-
tant constructs were confirmed by DNA sequencing and their
expressions were examined by western-blot.
2.6. Chronic Lung Inflammation Model
C57B/L6 WT and PGRN KO mice were housed in the animal facility of
New York University as previously described (Tang et al., 2011). All an-
imal experiments have been approved by Institutional Animal Care and
use Committee (IACUC) of New York University School of Medicine. 8
week-old mice were induced with chronic lung inflammation by intra-
peritoneal (I·P.) injection of OVA-Alum at Day 1 and Day 15, followed
by intranasal challenge with 1% OVA, beginning at Day 29 and adminis-
tered at a frequency of every three days for the duration of four weeks
(Daley et al., 2008).
To evaluate Pcgin's therapeutic function in vivo, a GD phenotype was
induced in 8-week-old PGRN KO mice (n = 10) by OVA as described by
above. One group of mice were injected with Pcgin (4 mg/kg/week)
starting from the first week of intranasal challenge until to the end of
this experiment and another group of mice were treated with Imigluce-
rase (60 u/kg/week) as a positive control. After 5 weeks of treatment
with Pcgin or Imiglucerase, mice were sacrificed and lung tissues were
fixed and processed by Mass Histology Service (Worcester, MA).
2.7. Right Ventricular Systolic Pressure (RVSP)
The right jugular veins of anesthetized WT and PGRN KO mice were
exposed under an anatomic microscope. The RVSP was measured as re-
ported previously (Park et al., 2015). Briefly, a catheter was inserted into
right ventricular chamber via the jugular vein and RVSP was measured.
Mice were analyzed without prior knowledge of group identity. The
data from three independent experiments were pooled.
213
J. Jian et al. / EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 212–224
 2.8. Histology and Analysis
After mice were sacrificed, lung tissues were embedded in paraffin,
cut into slides, and stained with H&E and PAS by Mass Histology Service
(Worcester, MA). Quantification of Gaucher cell count and measure-
ment of area occupied by Gaucher cells was analyzed by Image J
software.
2.9. Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM)
WT and PGRN KO mice after OVA treatment were anesthetized and
the lung was processed for TEM or immunogold EM staining at micro-
scope core facility at New York University School of Medicine (Jian et
al., 2016). Briefly, mice were euthanized and the lung was perfused
with fixative containing 2.5% Glutaraldehyde and 2% paraformaldehyde
in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.2) for 2 h. The samples were
post fixed in 1% OsO4 for 1 h, block stained with 1% uranyl acetate,
dehydrated and embedded in Embed 812 (Electron Microscopy Sci-
ences, Hatfield, PA). 60 nm sections were cut, and stained with uranyl
acetate and lead citrate by standard methods. Stained grids were exam-
ined under Philips CM-12 electron microscope (FEI; Eindhoven, The
Netherlands) and photographed with a Gatan (4 k × 2.7 k) digital cam-
era (Gatan, Inc., Pleasanton, CA).
For immunoelectron microscopy, lungs were fixed with 4% PFA in
0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). The tissues were embedded in
Lowicryl K4M (Polysciences, Inc.,Warrington, PA) and LR White (Elec-
tron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA). Polymerization was carried
out under UV light (360 nm) at −35 °C for LK4M and −10 °C for LR
White. After incubation with primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight,
gold conjugated secondary antibodies (15 nm Protein A Gold, Cell Mi-
croscopy Center, University Medical Center Utrecht, 35584 CX Utrecht,
The Netherlands; 18 nm Colloidal Gold-AffiniPure Goat Anti-Rabbit
IgG (H + L), Jackson ImmunoReasearch Laboratories, Inc., West Grove,
PA) were applied.
For double immunogold labeling, the tissue sections were incubated
with mouse antibodies against GBA, or HSP70, followed by incubation
with secondary antibody labeled with 5 nm gold particle. Then the sec-
tions were incubated with rabbit anti-PGRN antibody, followed by incu-
bation with secondary antibody labeled with 18 nm gold particle. The
grids were stained and examined as described above.
2.10. Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR)
Binding affinity between GCase and PGRN were measured by SPR
experiments by SensiQ Technologies Inc. (Oklahoma City, OK) as previ-
ously described (Tang et al., 2011; Jian et al., 2013b).
2.11. Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET)
293 EBNA cells in 96-well plates were transfected with pDsRed-GBA
and pEGFP-PGRN·Cells transfected with pDsRed empty vector were
employed as baseline control. The fluorescence intensity was read by
SpectraMax® i3x Platform from Molecular Devices (Sunnyvale, CA).
The cells were excited by GFP excitation wavelength (488 nm) and de-
tect the DsRed emission wavelength (588 nm).
2.12. Immunofluorescence Staining and Confocal Microscope
Frozen lung sections, or cover-slip cultured cells, were fixed with 4%
formaldehyde and permeabilized by 0.1% Triton-100 PBS. Primary anti-
bodies were probed at 4 °C degree overnight, followed by fluorescence-
labeled secondary antibodies. The tissues or cultured cells were
mounted on anti-fade medium containing DAPI. The images were
taken by Leica TCS SP5 con-focal system.
2.13. Immunoprecipitation
Lungs from WT and PGRN KO mice with or without OVA challenge,
or in another experiment from control PGRN KO mice, or OVA-chal-
lenged PGRN KO mice with or without rPGRN treatment, were lysed
with RIPA lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors. The same amount
of proteins from each group of mice was mixed together to represent
the protein profile of each group. 400 μg protein from mixed samples
were used for immunoprecipitation.
To determine the interaction between PGRN and GCase in cells, 293
EBNA cells were co-transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged
PGRN and RFP-fused GCase. Cells were collected by RIPA buffer, lysates
were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag antibody, and the protein
complexes were detected with anti-GCase antibody.
To dissect the domains of PGRN responsible for binding to GCase,
293 EBNA cells were transfected with the plasmids encoding GFP
fused full-length PGRN, or its serial deletion mutants, together with
an expression plasmid encoding RFP fused GCase. 48 h after transfec-
tion, the cells were lysed and samples were processed as described
above.
All the samples were incubated overnight with primary antibodies
and protein A/G agarose-beads, followed by thorough washing with
RIPA lysis buffer. The samples were run on SDS-PAGE. Targeted proteins
were probed with antibody and visualized by western-blot. In some ex-
periments, the samples were sent to NYU Core Facility for Mass Spec-
trometry after immunoprecipitation.
2.14. Mass Spectrum
1) Gel Separation and Digestion. Samples were reduced with
DTT at 57 °C for 1 h and were alkylated with Iodoacetamide for
45 min. Each sample was loaded onto a NuPAGE® 4–12% Bis-Tris
Gel 1.0 mm The gel was stained using GelCode Blue Stain Reagent
(Thermo Scientific) and Coomassie stained gel bands were excised
as indicated on the gel image. Excised gel pieces were destained
with a 50:50 v/v solution of methanol and 100 mM ammonium
bicarbonate. 300 ng of trypsin (Promega) were added to digest
the gel pieces. 2) Protein Extraction. A slurry of R2 20 μm Poros
beads (Life Technologies Corporation) in 5% formic acid and 0.2%
trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to each sample. The samples
were shaken at 4 °C for 2 h. The beads were loaded onto equilibrat-
ed C18 ziptips (Millipore) using a microcentrifuge for 30 s at
6000 rpm. Gel pieces were rinsed three times with 0.1% TFA. The
extracted porors beads were further washed with 0.5% acetic acid.
Peptides were eluted by the addition of 40% acetonitrile in 0.5%
acetic acid followed by the addition of 80% acetonitrile in 0.5%
acetic acid. The organic solvent was removed using a SpeedVac con-
centrator and the sample reconstituted in 0.5% acetic acid. 3) MS
Analysis. 1/5th of each sample was analyzed individually with the
mIgG analyzed first, then the KO GBA, and finally the WT GBA. Sam-
ples were injected for on-line LC-MS using the autosampler of a
EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were gradient eluted
from the column directly to Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo
Scientific) using a 1 h gradient Solvent A: 5% acetonitrile, 0.5%
acetic acid Solvent B: 95% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid. 4) MS Meth-
od. High resolution full MS spectra were acquired with a resolution
of 70,000, an AGC target of 1e6, with a maximum ion time of
120 ms, and scan range of 300 to 1500 m/z. Following each full MS
twenty data-dependent high resolution HCD MS/MS spectra were
acquired. All MS/MS spectra were collected using the following
instrument parameters: resolution of 17,000, AGC target of 2e5,
maximum ion time of 250 ms, one microscan, 2 m/z isolation window,
fixed first mass of 150 m/z, and NCE of 27. MS/MS spectra were searched
against a UniProt mouse database using Sequest within Proteome
Discoverer.
214
J. Jian et al. / EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 212–224
 2.15. Immunohistochemistry
Paraffin-embedded lung slides from WT and PGRN KO mice were de-
paraffined in a xylene and ethanol gradient. After antigen retrieval by
0.1% trypsin and inactivation of endogenous hydrogen peroxidase, the
slides were blocked with 3% BSA and 20% goat serum for 30 min. Primary
antibodies were diluted at 1:20–50 with 2% goat serum and primed on
the slides at 4 °C overnight. The next day, slides were washed with PBS
and secondary antibodies were added (1:200 biotin-labeled goat-anti
rabbit antibody or goat-anti mouse antibody) for 1 h. The staining was
visualized by Vector ABC peroxidase kit, followed by DAB substrates.
2.16. Fluorescence Labeling of Active Form of GCase
MDW933, a specific ultrasensitive fluorescent dye for active lyso-
somal GCase (Witte et al., 2010; Gaspar et al., 2014), was a kindly pro-
vided by Dr. Hermen E. Overkleeft at University of Leiden. Cells were
cultured on cover glass, and MDW933 (50 nM) was added in cell culture
medium for 2 h to label lysosomal GCase. Next, cells were fixed with 3%
(v/v) paraformaldehyde in PBS for 15 min, permeabilized by 0.1 mM
NH4Cl in PBS for 10 min, Cells were mounted with DAPI-medium, and
fluorescence was visualized under a confocal microscope.
2.17. Knockdown of PGRN and HSP70 by siRNA
siRNA against mouse PGRN and HSP70 were purchased from Life
Technology. 20 pmol of each siRNA were transiently transfected into
RAW264.7 cells by Lipofectamine 2000. The cells were treated with
lipid mixture (50 μg/ml) for 24 h and the level of the active form of
GCase was measured by MDW933 dye. The knockdown of PGRN or
HSP70 was confirmed by immunofluorescence staining using their spe-
cific antibodies.
2.18. Lysosome Staining in LSD Fibroblasts
Fibroblasts from GD patients were cultured on coverslips in 24-well
plates, and challenged with lipid lysis (50 μg/ml), with PGRN (0.4 μg/ml)
or Pcgin (5 μg/ml) for 24 h. The next day, fresh medium containing
100 nM LysoTracker® Red was added for 1 h. The cells were washed
with PBS and fixed in 2% PFA. The coverslips were mounted on slides
and the staining of lysosomes was imaged by confocal microscopy.
Ten images were randomly taken from each sample, and fluorescence
intensities were measured by ImageJ software.
2.19. Lysosome Staining by Live Imaging System
Full-length PGRN, as well as its serial deletion mutants, was cloned
into pEGFP vector, and transiently transfected into GD fibroblasts seed-
ed in Lab-Tek Chamber cover glass system. After 48 h in culture,
LysoTracker® Deep Red (50 nM) was added to the medium for 1 h.
The LysoTracker Deep Red signaling (excitation/emission of 647/
668 nm) was observed in live cells by Applied Precision Personal DV
live-cell imaging system at NYU core facility.
GFP+ positive cells indicated the expression of PGRN or its mutants,
and GFP− negative cells were un-transfected control cells. The thera-
peutic effect of PGRN, as well as its mutants, was evaluated by compar-
ing the LysoTracker signal between GFP+ and GFP− cells. Ten images
were taken for each sample, and fluorescence intensity of lysosome of
GFP+ and GFP− cells were selected and quantified by ImageJ.
2.20. GlcCer Quantitation
GlcCer contents in cell and spleen were quantitated by LC/MS fol-
lowing glycosphingolipids extraction as described (Sun et al., 2005). In-
ternal standard of D5-C18-GlcCer was added prior to extraction. LC/MS
was carried out on a Waters Quattro Premier XE triple quadruple mass
spectrometer interfaced with Aquity UPLC system (Milford, MA). GlcCer
were quantified using 3 GlcCer reference standards (C16, C18 and C24-1
GlcCer) based on multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) function on mass
spectrometer. Quantification of GlcCer with various chain lengths was
accomplished using the curve for the GlcCer of closest chain length.
Total GlcCer was the sum of individual GlcCer species detected. The
GlcCer levels were normalized by protein amount in the cells and by tis-
sue weight in spleen.
2.21. Statistical Analysis
For comparison of treatment groups, we performed unpaired t-tests,
paired t-tests, and one-way or two-way ANOVA (where appropriate).
All statistical analysis was performed using SPSS Software. Statistical
significance was two-sided and was achieved when at p b 0.05.
3. Results
3.1. PGRN is Required for GCase Lysosomal Appearance and Its Deficiency
Causes GCase/LIMP2 Aggregation
The findings that PGRN plays important anti-inflammatory and im-
munoregulatory roles in various conditions, including inflammatory ar-
thritis (Tang et al., 2011), prompted us to examine its involvement in
chronic lung inflammation. For this purpose, chronic lung inflammation
was induced in 8-week old WT and PGRN knockout (KO) mice by intra-
peritoneal (IP) injection of ovalbumin (OVA) at Day 1 and 15, followed
by intranasal challenge of 1% OVA three times a week for four weeks be-
ginning at Day 29. PGRN expression was induced in WT mice after OVA
challenge (Fig. S1a), and PGRN KO mice developed more severe lung in-
flammation, including increased levels of inflammatory cytokines, pul-
monary cell infiltration, and right ventricular systolic pressure (Fig.
S1b–f). Remarkably, large numbers of “giant cells” were found in the
lungs of PGRN KO mice, particularly after OVA treatment (Fig. 1a).
These cells were engorged with materials and had a “wrinkled tissue
paper” appearance, which is the typical morphology of Gaucher cells.
No such cells were found in WT mice, either with or without OVA chal-
lenge. The liver and spleen were larger in PGRN KO mice relative to
those in WT mice (Fig. 1b). In accordance with our previous report
that β-GlcCer is accumulated in the lung tissue of PGRN KO mice, lipid
composition analysis revealed that GlcCer (Jian et al., 2016), as well as
levels of GlcSph (glucosylsphingosine), were significantly higher in
both lung and plasma of PGRN KO mice as compared to WT mice (Fig.
S2). These macrophages from PGRN KO mice were much larger than
those in WT mice, and the PGRN KO lysosome displayed the classic
Gaucher-like cell tubular shape, instead of a regular round shape, as
viewed under transmission electronic microscope (TEM) (Fig. 1c). The
transformation of lysosome from the normal round shape to a tubu-
lar-like structure was observed along with material accumulation (Fig.
S3). Other organelles, such as mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum,
and other types of cells, such as type 1 and 2 pneumocyte, appeared nor-
mal (Figs. S4, S5), although defects in mitochondrial function have been
reported in GD (Gegg and Schapira, 2016; de la Mata et al., 2015). The
tubular-like structure was confirmed as lysosome through immunogold
EM staining with the lysosomal receptor Sortilin (Figs. S6).
Accumulation of β-GlcCer in GD is caused by reduced GCase enzymat-
ic activity or decreased GCase protein expression (Grabowski, 2012).
However the protein level and GCase enzymatic activity were not affect-
ed in PGRN KO mice (Jian et al., 2016). Immunohistochemistry staining of
GCase revealed that intracellular localization of GCase was dramatically
altered. Remarkably, GCase was aggregated in the cytoplasm in OVA-
challenged PGRN KO mice (Fig. 1d). Immunogold labeling TEM further
demonstrated that GCase was aggregated in PGRN null macrophages
(Fig. 1e). The specificity of GCase antibody was examined with
Gba1−/− tissues (Fig. S7). As a control for the immunogold labeling
TEM, Sortilin was found mainly to be clustered close to the cell plasma
215
J. Jian et al. / EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 212–224
 membrane, mediating endocytosis, and was also present in the tubular-
like lysosomes of Gaucher cells in PGRN KO mice (Fig. S6). TEM revealed
that the aggregation of GCase was environed, at least partially, in/on a
membrane structure (Fig. 1f). We also performed co-immunogold stain-
ing of GCase with various organelle markers, including ER, trans-Golgi
network, lysosome, and autophagy markers. Intriguingly, GCase was
found to be specifically co-localized with the autophagy marker LC3 in
aggregates (Fig. S8). Taken together, these results demonstrate that the
lysosomal localization of GCase depends on the presence of PGRN.
Lysosomal integral membrane protein 2 (LIMP2), known as a GCase-
binding receptor that mediates delivery of GCase to lysosomes, is present
in several subcellular organelles in the secretory pathway, including the
lysosome (Reczek et al., 2007). Interestingly, we found that lysosomal lo-
calization of LIMP2 was also defective in OVA-challenged PGRN-deficient
macrophages (Fig. 1g, h). However, intracellular localization of lysosom-
al associated membrane protein-2 (LAMP-2), a lysosomal marker, was
not affected in OVA-challenged PGRN null macrophages. Specifically,
both LIMP2 and LAMP2 were detected in the lysosomes of WT
macrophages; however LIMP2 was aggregated, while LAMP2 was dis-
tributed normally, in PGRN null macrophages (Fig. 1g). Confocal staining
with frozen sections of lung tissues also demonstrated the aggregation of
LIMP2, but not LAMP2, in OVA-challenged (Fig. 1h) and aged (Fig. S9)
PGRN deficient tissues. The cytoplasmic aggregation of LIMP2 was
further confirmed with immunogold TEM staining (Fig. 1i). In addition,
GCase and LIMP2 still bind together in both WT and PGRN KO tissues
mice, as assayed by co-immunoprecipitation (Fig. 1j) and con-focal
staining (Fig. S10), which is in accordance with the previous reports
that indicating that sorting of GCase and LIMP2 are tightly linked
(Reczek et al., 2007). Collectively, both GCase and its receptor LIMP2
were aggregated and absent from lysosomes in stressed (OVA-
challenged or lipid-stimulated) PGRN deficient macrophages and mice.
3.2. PGRN Directly Binds to GCase Through a Two-site Mechanism
The finding that PGRN was required for lysosomal localization of
GCase prompted us to determine whether PGRN directly associates
a
c
d
e
g
h
f
i
j
b
Fig. 1. PGRN is required for GCase lysosomal appearance and its deficiency causes GCase/LIMP2 aggregation. WT and PGRN KO mice received I.P. injection of OVA at Day 1 and 15, followed
by intranasal challenge of 1% OVA beginning at Day 29 and administered thereafter three times a week for four weeks. (a) H&E staining shows giant Gaucher-like cells in lung of both male
and female PGRN KO mice, especially after OVA treatment. (n = 10, 5 male and 5 female for each group). (b) Spleen and liver are larger in OVA-challenged PGRN KO mice than in WT mice
(n = 10, 5 male and 5 female for each group). (c) Macrophages from PGRN KO mice are much larger than those in WT mice, and lysosomes become a tubular-like shape instead of the
regular round shape, as assayed by transmission electronic microscope (TEM). (d) Distribution of GCase is altered in PGRN KO macrophages. Paraffin-embedded lung slides from OVA-
challenged mice were stained with GCase antibody by immunohistochemistry. The aggregation of GCase in PGRN KO macrophages is indicated with arrows. (e) GCase is aggregated in
the cytoplasm in of PGRN null macrophage, assayed by immunogold labeling of lung tissue. (f) The membrane of the aggregation structure in PGRN KO mice under EM. Lung tissues
from PGRN KO mice after OVA challenge were processed for EM scanning. The membrane structure around aggregates is indicated by the red arrow. (g) Expression of LIMP2 and
LAMP2 in macrophages from OVA-challenged WT and PGRN KO mice. Paraffin-embedded lung slides from WT and PGRN KO mice were stained with LIMP2 and LAMP2 by
immunohistochemistry. Aggregation of LIMP2 in PGRN KO macrophages was indicated with an arrow. (h) LIMP2, but not LAMP2, is aggregated in the cytoplasm of PGRN null
macrophage, assayed by immunofluorescence staining. Frozen sections of lung tissue from OVA-challenged PGRN KO mice were stained with LIMP2 or LAMP2 antibodies by
immunofluorescence. The aggregation of LIMP2 is indicated with an arrow. The numbers of LIMP2 aggregates and Gaucher-like cells were counted and indicated as aggregates/100
Gaucher-like cells (right panel). (i) LIMP2 is not detectable in the lysosome and is aggregated in the cytoplasm in the PGRN null macrophage, assayed by immunogold labeling of lung
tissue. LIMP2 is detectable in the lysosome, indicated with an arrow, of WT macrophage (left panel, 53,000×), whereas it is aggregated in the cytoplasm of PGRN-null macrophage and
not observed in the tubular-like lysosome (middle panel 31,000×). An aggregation region of denser immunogold labeling is circled with a dashed line. The numbers of aggregates of
LIMP2 and Gaucher-like cells were counted and indicated as aggregates/50 Gaucher-like cells (right panel). (j) GCase binds to LIMP2 in the absence of PGRN in vivo, assayed by co-
immunoprecipitation (Co-IP). Lung tissue from both WT and PGRN KO mice were lysed and protein complexes were immunoprecipitated with anti-GCase antibody and detected with
anti-LIMP2 antibody.
216
J. Jian et al. / EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 212–224
 with GCase. In vivo interaction between PGRN and GCase was dem-
onstrated by co-immunoprecipitation with both transfected cells
(Fig. 2a) and native tissues from WT mice (Fig. 2b). TNFR2 was
employed as a positive control for binding to PGRN (Tang et al.,
2011; Jian et al., 2013b). We also determined whether PGRN directly
binds to GCase using a solid-phase binding assay with recombinant
PGRN and GCase. PGRN demonstrated dose-dependent binding and
saturation to liquid-phase GCase (Fig. 2c), whereas no direct interac-
tion between PGRN and LIMP2 was detected (Fig. 2c). The binding af-
finity between PGRN and GCase was then measured using surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) with SensiQ Pioneer as described (Tang
et al., 2011; Jian et al., 2013b). The results demonstrated that PGRN
binds to GCase in a two-site model: The first binding site exhibited
a very high binding affinity (KD1 = 0.71 nM), whereas the second
one displayed a relatively weaker binding affinity (KD2 = 360 nM),
at pH 7.4 (Fig. 2d). Intriguingly, these two binding sites responded
differently to pH changes: The affinity for the high binding site
decreased, whereas affinity for the weaker binding site increased,
during pH reduction in the traffic process from endoplasmic reticu-
lum (ER), Golgi, and trans-Golgi network (TGN) of macrophages
(Fig. 2d, e), although GCase and PGRN co-localized in all of these in-
tracellular traffic compartments, as revealed by immunofluores-
cence staining (Fig. S11). Double labeling immunogold TEM also
showed that PGRN co-localized with GCase in the ER and lysosome
(Fig. 2f). Taken together, these results suggest that the probable
points of GCase and PGRN association are in the intracellular com-
partments, beginning in compartments as early as the ER.
To identify the domains of PGRN required for interacting with GCase,
serial N-terminal deletions of PGRN were subcloned into pEGFP vector
and the expressions of these GFP fused deletion mutants of PGRN
were visualized with anti-GFP antibody (Fig. 3a, b). Co-IP was per-
formed to examine the binding activities of these mutants to RFP-
fused GCase encoded by the pDsRed-GCase plasmid (Fig. 3c). Deletion
of Grn P and Grn G did not affect, whereas deletion of Grn F abolished,
the interaction of PGRN with GCase, indicating that Grn F of PGRN is in-
volved in the association between PGRN and GCase. Interestingly, fur-
ther removal of Grn B resulted in a weak recovery of interaction,
suggesting that Grn B might act as an inhibitory and regulatory domain
for binding to GCase. Further deletions demonstrated that Grn E
alone strongly bound to GCase (Fig. 3c). The binding pattern of these
N-terminal deletion mutants of PGRN with GCase was also confirmed
by fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) assay (Fig. 3d).
Indeed, the importance of the major and strong binding site Grn E in
mediating the binding of PGRN to GCase was further demonstrated
with serial C-terminal deletions of PGRN, since deletion of Grn E from
C-terminus abolished the interaction in both Co-IP and FRET assays
(Fig. 3e–h). Collectively, these sets of assays indicate that Grn E and F
are the strong and weak binding sites, respectively, which also supports
the aforementioned two-site binding mechanism of PGRN to GCase, first
observed in our surface plasmon resonance (SPR) assay (Fig. 2d, e).
a
b
e
d
c
f ER
Fig. 2. PGRN directly binds to GCase in a two-sites binding mechanism. (a) PGRN binds to GCase in 293 EBNA cells transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged PGRN and RFP-tagged
GCase, assayed by co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP). The cell lysates were immunoprecipitated by anti-Flag antibody and probed with RFP antibody. The result is representative of three
independent experiments. (b) PGRN binds to GCase assayed by Co-IP. Lung tissues from WT mice were lysed and protein complexes were immunoprecipitated with anti-GCase or
TNFR2 (serving as a positive control) antibody, and probed with anti-PGRN antibody. (c) PGRN directly binds to GCase in vitro, assayed by solid phase binding assay. Various amounts
of PGRN were coated, and biotin-labeled BSA, LIMP2 and GCase were added, followed by HRP-labeled Streptavidin and its substrates. (d) PGRN binds to GCase in a two-site
mechanism, and the binding affinity responds differently to decreasing pH in traffic, assayed by surface plasmon resonance (SPR) with COOH1 chips. (e) Effect of assay pH on kinetic
binding values of both high and low affinity binding sites. (f) PGRN co-localizes with GCase in ER and lysosome in the macrophage, assayed by double immunogold labeling of lung
tissue in WT mice. PGRN is labeled with 18 nm gold particle (large) and GCase is labeled with 5 nm gold particle (small), co-localizations are indicated by arrows.
217
J. Jian et al. / EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 212–224
 3.3. PGRN Recruits HSP70 to GCase/LIMP2 Upon Stress
We next sought to further determine the molecular mechanism by
which PGRN deficiency leads to the aggregation of GCase. To isolate
the molecules that are involved in PGRN's regulation of GCase, immuno-
precipitation was performed with anti-GCase antibody from OVA-chal-
lenged WT and PGRN KO tissues, followed by mass spectrometry (MS).
Immunoprecipitation with GCase antibody pulled-down both PGRN-
dependent and PGRN–independent GCase-associated proteins in WT
tissues. When the same immunoprecipitation experiment was per-
formed in PGRN KO tissues, only PGRN-independent GCase-associated
proteins were immunoprecipitated. Hits from WT mice were subtracted
by hits from PGRN KO, to yield PGRN-dependent GCase associated pro-
teins, with the rationale that the molecules involved in PGRN-mediated
GCase localization would be among the hits only present in WT mice but
not PGRN KO mice (Fig. 4a). 134 hits in WT mice and 114 hits in PGRN
KO mice were identified. 95 of them were common in both groups,
and 39 proteins were found to be specific for WT mice, suggesting
that these proteins would be PGRN-dependent GCase-associated
proteins (Fig. 4b). Perlecan and Leukocyte elastase inhibitor, two
known PGRN-binding proteins (Zhu et al., 2002; Gonzalez et al.,
2003), were identified among the 39 hits, validating the technique.
In addition, HSP70 and its co-chaperone protein T-complex protein
1 subunit alpha (TCP1), as well as cytoskeleton, vesicle-traffic relat-
ed proteins, and an energy producing enzyme, were among the 39
hits (Table S1). These data were followed up with the studies in
HEK293EBNA cells stably transfected with an expression plasmid
encoding His-tagged PGRN (Tang et al., 2011). Two proteins were
co-purified with His-tagged PGRN, and MS analysis revealed that
these were HSP70 and TCP1 (data not shown). To confirm the MS
data, we conducted immunoprecipitation using an anti-GCase anti-
body in WT and PGRN KO tissues, and probed with an antibody
against HSP70. HSP70 bound to GCase in WT mice after OVA
challenge, and this interaction was undetectable in PGRN KO mice
Fig. 3. PGRN binds to GCase through Grn E and Grn F. (a) Scheme of constructs encoding serial GFP-tagged N-terminal deletion mutants of PGRN. ND1 (aa 45-593), ND2 (aa 113-593), ND3
(aa 179-593), ND4 (aa 261-593), ND5 (aa 336-593), ND6 (aa 416-593), and ND7 (aa 496-593). (b) Expressions of GFP-tagged N-terminal deletion PGRN fragments, examined by
immunoblotting with anti-GFP antibody. (c) Co-IP assay. 293 EBNA cells were transfected with pDsRed-GCase encoding RFP-fused GCase and corresponding plasmids encoding
various GFP-fused N-terminal deletions of PGRN, as indicated, and the cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with GFP antibody. The complexes were probed with anti-RFP antibody.
Control IgG (Ctrl) used as a negative control. NS indicates nonspecific binding. (d) FRET assay. 293 EBNA cells were transfected as described in (c), and the culture plate was scanned
by SpectraMax® i3x Platform with GFP excitation wavelength (488 nm) and DsRed emission wavelength (588 nm). (e) Scheme of constructs encoding serial GFP-tagged C-terminal
deletion mutants of PGRN. PGRN full-length (aa 1-593), CD1 (aa 1-521), CD2 (aa 1-444), CD3 (aa 1-376), CD4 (aa 1-284), CD5 (aa 1-209), CD6 (aa 1-127), and CD7 (aa 1-61). (f)
Expressions of GFP-tagged C-terminal deletion PGRN fragments, examined by immunoblotting with anti-GFP antibody. (g) Co-IP assay. 293 EBNA cells were transfected with pDsRed-
GCase encoding RFP-fused GCase and corresponding plasmids encoding various GFP-fused C-terminal deletions of PGRN, as indicated, and the cell lysates were immunoprecipitated
with GCase BA antibody. The complexes were probed with anti-GFP antibody. The positive band is indicated with an arrow. HC indicates IgG heavy chain. (h) FRET assay. 293 EBNA
cells were transfected as described in (g), and the culture plate was scanned by SpectraMax® i3x Platform with GFP excitation wavelength (488 nm) and DsRed emission wavelength
(588 nm).
218
J. Jian et al. / EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 212–224
 (Fig. 4c). In addition, administration of rPGRN rescued the binding of
GCase to HSP70 in PGRN KO mice (Fig. 4d). HSP70 co-localized with
PGRN in macrophages (Fig. 4e, f). PGRN bound to HSP70, and dele-
tion of GrnE (i.e. CD1), known to be important for binding to GCase
(Fig. 3c, g), also abolished the binding to HSP70 (Fig. 4g). We also
examined whether HSP70 is required for the lysosomal localization
of GCase via suppression of HSP70 using a siRNA approach. Similar
to knockdown of PGRN (serving as a control), suppression of
HSP70 led to a reduction of lysosomal GCase detection, assayed
with the activity-based probe (ABP) MDW933, which can spontane-
ously cross membranes and allow sensitive and specific labeling of
active lysosomal GCase in living cells (Witte et al., 2010; Gaspar et
al., 2014; Aerts et al., 2011) (Fig. 4h). Further, immunofluorescence
staining with anti-GCase antibody demonstrated clear aggregation
of GCase in lipid-stimulated HSP70 knockout cells, but not in the
WT cells (Fig. 4i), and lysotracker and MDW933 co-staining revealed
elevated lysosomal storage and reduced active GCase in HSP70 KO
cells as compared to control cells (Fig. S12).
a
b
c
d
e
g
h
f
HSP70 pathway
HSP70
TCP-1
j
i
Fig. 4. Stress-induced PGRN-dependent interaction between GCase and HSP70. (a) The scheme of the method used to identify potential molecules involved in PGRN-mediated regulation
of GCase, i.e. PGRN-dependent GCase associated proteins. Immunoprecipitation was performed with GCase antibody from both OVA-challenged WT and PGRN KO mice, followed by high-
sensitivity mass spectrometry. (b) Summary of the hits isolated from both WT and PGRN KO mice and identification of HSP70 as a PGRN-dependent GCase-associated chaperone. (c)
Binding of GCase to HSP70 is PGRN-dependent. Immunoprecipitation was conducted with anti-GCase antibody in WT and PGRN KO mice, and probed with HSP70 antibody. The result
is representative of three independent experiments. (d) rPGRN restores the interaction between GCase and HSP70 in PGRN deficient mice in vivo. Lung tissue lysates prepared from
OVA-unchallenged (Ctrl) or OVA-challenged PGRN KO mice treated with or without rPGRN were immunoprecipitated with anti-GCase antibody, and the presence of HSP70 in the
immunoprecipitated complex was probed with HSP70 antibody. The result is representative of three independent experiments. (e) PGRN is co-localized with HSP70 in macrophages.
Distribution of PGRN and HSP70 in BMDM were stained by the specific antibodies followed by fluorescence secondary antibodies, the co-localization is quantified as PDM Value
(Product of the Differences from the Mean) shown in the lower right panel. (f) PGRN is co-localized with HSP70 in cytosol of macrophage, assayed by double immunogold labeling
TEM of lung tissue in WT mice. PGRN is labeled with 18 nm gold particle (large) and HSP70 is labeled with 5 nm gold particle (small), and the co-localizations are indicated by arrow.
(g) GrnE of PGRN is required for its binding to HSP70. A plasmid encoding GFP alone, GFP fused PGRN (FL) or C-terminal deletion of GrnE (CD1) mutation, was transfected into 293T
cells. The interaction between PGRN and HSP70 were measured by immunoprecipitation with anti-GFP antibody and detected with HSP70 antibody. The result is representative of
three independent experiments. (h) Suppression of PGRN and HSP70 via a siRNA approach markedly reduces the lysosomal GCase in living macrophage, assayed by MDW933 labeling.
RAW264.7 macrophages were transfected with siRNA specifically against PGRN or HSP70. Cells pre-treated with lipid stimulation were labeled with MDW933 probe for 2 h, and the
expression levels of PGRN and HSP70 were measured by immunofluorescence staining. The cell transfected with corresponding siRNA is indicated with an arrow. (i) GCase is
aggregated in HSP70 deficient cells, assayed by immunofluorescence staining. Murine lung endothelial cells from wild-type (WT) and HSP70 knockout (KO) mice were stimulated
with lipid for 24 h. The cells were immunofluorescence stained with anti-GCase antibody, and imaged under confocal microscope. The aggregation of GCase is indicated with an arrow.
The numbers of aggregates of GCase were counted and indicated as aggregates/100 cells (bottom panel). (j) Binding of LIMP2 to HSP70 is also stress-induced and PGRN-dependent.
Immunoprecipitation was conducted with anti-HSP70 antibody in OVA-challenged WT and PGRN KO mice, and probed with LIMP2 antibody. The result is representative of three
independent experiments.
219
J. Jian et al. / EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 212–224
 Previous reports that LIMP2 is the GCase transport receptor (Reczek
et al., 2007), together with the finding that both GCase and LIMP2 were
aggregated in PGRN deficient macrophages (Fig. 1), led us to determine
whether HSP70 also interacted with LIMP2. Similar to GCase, LIMP2 also
associated with HSP70 in WT, but not in PGRN KO tissues (Fig. 4j). In ad-
dition, the interaction between LIMP2 and HSP70 is highly dependent
on OVA challenge.
3.4. Development of Pcgin, a PGRN-derived Protein, Retains the Binding Ac-
tivity to GCase and HSP70
The finding that PGRN acts as a co-chaperone of HSP70 and is re-
quired for disaggregation of GCase, together with the facts that chaper-
one-based treatments aiming to enhance GCase lysosomal localization
have proven to be a promising alternative to enzyme replacement treat-
ment (ERT) and substrate reduction therapy (SRT) for GD (Zimran et al.,
2013; Sanchez-Fernandez et al., 2016; Jung et al., 2016; Mena-Barragan
et al., 2015), and recombinant HSP70 has been shown to effectively cor-
rect altered lysosomal stability seen in Niemann–Pick B disease (NPD)
(Kirkegaard et al., 2010), promoted us to examine whether PGRN
would have therapeutic effects in GD. Indeed, we have found that re-
combinant PGRN protein is therapeutic against Gaucher disease (Jian
et al., 2016). However, there is concern for the long-term usage of
PGRN as a drug due to potential oncogenic activity of this growth factor
and the established elevation of PGRN levels in various cancer tissues
relative to healthy counterparts (Bateman and Bennett, 2009; He and
Bateman, 1999; He et al., 2002; Zhou et al., 2015). To address this
issue, we devoted considerable effort toward developing a PGRN-de-
rived molecule that retains the GCase-binding and therapeutic activity
of PGRN but lacks its oncogenic action. For this purpose, numerous
PGRN mutants (i.e., C-terminal deletions, N-terminal deletions, internal
deletions, and various combinations) were generated, and their interac-
tions with GCase were tested. According to a series C-terminal and N-
terminal deletion mutants, a C-terminal 98 amino acid fragment (from
aa 496–593) of PGRN, containing Grn E domain, was found to be both
required and sufficient for binding to GCase (Fig. 3). We next examined
whether Grn E also is the functional domain that mediates PGRN's ther-
apeutic effect against GD. Type 2 GD fibroblasts (L444P) were
transfected with plasmids encoding GFP alone (negative control),
PGRN-GFP and CD1-GFP (deletion of Grn E domain, Fig. 3e), and the cor-
rection of lysosomal storage was analyzed with LysoTracker Deep Red.
By comparing the lysosomes in the transfected (GFP+) and non-
transfected (GFP−) cells, we found that lysosomal storage was signifi-
cantly reduced in cells expressing PGRN-GFP, compared to non-
transfected cells. Interestingly, the Grn E domain is also required for
PGRN-mediated therapeutic function, as the transfection of CD1-GFP,
similar to the transfection with GFP empty vector, did not show any
therapeutic effect (Fig. 5a, b).
To identify the “minimal fragment” that retains GCase-binding and
therapeutic activity of PGRN, we dissected C-terminal 98-aa fragment
with five fine-tune deletions (Fig. 5c, d). Deletion of the linker on the
left, i.e. Δ496–522, the region of aa540–573 and the linker on the right
of GrnE, i.e. Δ574–593, did not affect the binding to GCase and HSP70
(Fig. 5c, d), but abolished the molecule's therapeutic effects in type 2
GD fibroblasts (L444P) (Fig. 5e, f), suggesting that these regions may
be needed for maintaining the proper functional conformation. Howev-
er, deletion of 12 (aa523–534) and of 5 (aa535–539, RDNRQ) amino
acid fragments completely abolished the binding activity to GCase and
HSP70, respectively, indicating these 12 amino acids and the RDNRQ
motif are responsible for binding to GCase and HSP70, respectively. In-
triguingly, deletion of these critical motifs/fragments led to more severe
phenotypes as compared to controls (Fig. 5e, f), suggesting that these
mutants might act as the dominant negatives of endogenous PGRN.
Taken together, these results suggest that the C-terminal 98 amino
acid fragment appears to be the “minimal” molecule that retains
GCase-binding and functional activities. This molecule was referred to
as Pcgin (PGRN C-terminus for GCase Interaction). The structure and
amino acid sequence of Pcgin are shown in Fig. 5g.
3.5. Pcgin Effectively Ameliorates the Phenotypes of GD
Pcgin was expressed in bacteria and purified as a His-tagged protein.
The purity was examined by Coomassie Blue staining of SDS-PAGE
electrophoresis gels and confirmed by Western blotting with His
probe (Fig. 6a). Using a solid phase binding assay (Fig. 6b), we found
that recombinant Pcgin directly bound to GCase, HSP70 and sortilin
(known to bind to the last three amino acids QLL of PGRN and serving
as a positive control) (Zheng et al., 2011). Although Pcgin retained the
GCase and HSP70 binding activity of PGRN, it lacked PGRN's oncogenic
activity, including PGRN-activated oncogenic signaling and cell prolifer-
ation (data not shown).
Since overexpression of Pcgin significantly reduced lysosomal stor-
age in type 2 GD fibroblasts (L444P) (Fig. 5e, f), we next examined the
therapeutic effects of recombinant Pcgin in GD fibroblasts. Similar to
PGRN, recombinant Pcgin significantly reduced lysosomal storage con-
tent in the fibroblasts from type 2 GD L444P fibroblasts (measured by
LysoTracker intensity recorded via plate reader) (Fig. 6c) and D409H
fibroblasts(measured by fluorescence microscopy, followed by quantifi-
cation) (Fig. 6d, e). In addition, Pcgin also effectively increased the lyso-
somal localization of mutant GCase (N370S) in type 1 GD fibroblasts,
visualized by MDW933 labeling (Fig. 6f, g). Pcgin also reduced lysosome
storage and increased lysosomal localization of mutant GCase (L444P)
in type 2 GD fibroblasts (Fig. 6h). In addition, Pcgin treatment led to sig-
nificant reduction in β-GlcCer storage and increase of GCase activity in
type 2 GD fibroblasts (L444P) (Fig. 6i, j). We also examined Pcgin's ther-
apeutic effect in the animal model. GD phenotype was induced by OVA
challenge in 8-week-old PGRN deficient mice as described above (n = 6
per group). Pcgin (4 mg/kg/week) was I.P injected starting from the first
week of intranasal challenge and continuing for 5 weeks, at which point,
the mice were sacrificed. Another group was injected with imiglucerase
as a positive control. In the untreated group, mice developed severe GD–
like phenotype and large Gaucher cells occupied lung tissues. However,
histology of lung tissue revealed dramatic improvement in the Pcgin
treated group (Fig. 6k). Quantified data reveals that Pcgin significantly
reduced number and size of Gaucher cells (Fig. 6l, m). Lipid composition
analysis confirmed that Pcgin significantly reduced β-GlcCer storage as
well (Fig. 6n). These results suggest that Pcgin may be a promising drug
candidate in treating Gaucher disease.
4. Discussion
Recently we reported that PGRN is a previously unrecognized factor
that associates with GD (Jian et al., 2016). Serum level of PGRN is signif-
icantly lower in GD patients than in healthy controls, and we have iden-
tified 4 SNP sites which may contribute to the low levels of PGRN in GD
patients (Jian et al., 2016). In addition, aged PGRN null mice spontane-
ously develop Gaucher-like phenotypes (Jian et al., 2016). In the present
study, we demonstrate that PGRN directly bound to GCase and was es-
sential for the lysosomal appearance of GCase. In addition, HSP70,
known to be crucial in unlocking protein disaggregation (Nillegoda et
al., 2015; Nillegoda and Bukau, 2015), was isolated as one of numerous
GCase-associated proteins dependent on the presence of PGRN in our
unbiased proteomic screen. Interestingly, the interaction between
GCase and HSP70, as well as their involvement in GD, had been reported
previously (Lu et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2014; Ingemann and Kirkegaard,
2014), although the nature of this association was unclear. In addition,
the binding of PGRN to HSP70 was also independently reported
(Almeida et al., 2011). Our studies disclosed PGRN as an indispensable
co-chaperone that links GCase/LIMP2 complex to HSP70. Although
PGRN binds to and co-localizes with GCase in all traffic compartments,
as early as the ER and Golgi apparatus, the interactions of GCase/
LIMP2 with HSP70 highly depend on OVA challenge (Figs. 2, 4, Fig.
220
J. Jian et al. / EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 212–224
 S11). These results suggest that recruitment of HSP70 to the GCase/
LIMP2 complex through PGRN may be stress- or disease-dependent.
Under physiological conditions, GCase/LIMP2 associates with PGRN in
traffic compartments, including ER/Golgi apparatus, and basal level of
HSP70 may not interact or marginally interacts with this complex.
Whereas under stressed or pathological conditions, such as OVA chal-
lenge, lipid stimulation and/or GBA1 mutations, GCase/LIMP2 complex
aggregates in the cytoplasm (Fig. 1f), the HSP70 disaggregation system
will be recruited to GCase/LIMP2 complex through PGRN as an indis-
pensable co-chaperone, to unlock the disaggregation of GCase/LIMP2
complex. Thus, PGRN-dependent association with HSP70 is specifically
crucial for preventing the aggregation of the GCase/LIMP2 complex
under pathological conditions. It is also noted that the level of HSP70
is much higher than that of PGRN (Fig. 4f), indicating that the level of
PGRN may be the rate-limiting step for HSP70-mediated disaggregation
of GCase/LIMP2 aggregates. Thus, it is conceivable that supplementing
PGRN (Jian et al., 2016) or its derivative Pcgin may enrich or enhance
the utility of HSP70, leading to the effective amelioration of GD pheno-
types in various models tested (Figs. 6).
Although failing to recruit HSP70 disaggregation system to GCase/
LIMP2 complex may largely account for the OVA-induced GD-like phe-
notype in PGRN KO mice, some known functions of PGRN may also con-
tribute to understanding the unexpected observations in OVA-
challenged PGRN KO mice. For instance, PGRN associates with TNF re-
ceptors and possesses the ability to suppress inflammation in various
conditions (Zhu et al., 2002; Tang et al., 2011; Jian et al., 2013b; Liu et
al., 2014; Li et al., 2014), the lack of PGRN thus likely leads to an abnor-
mal macrophage response during OVA-induced inflammation (Fig. S1).
In addition, inflammation is known to be involved in multiple
sphingolipid LSDs and anti-inflammatory drugs have benefits in
treating LSDs when used alone or combined with other treatments
(Platt, 2014). Furthermore, PGRN has been implicated in ER-stress
a
b
e
d
c
f
g
Fig. 5. Development of Pcgin. (a) Overexpression of PGRN, but not its mutant lacking Grn E, significantly reduces lysosomal storage in type 2 GD fibroblasts (L444P). GD fibroblasts were
transiently transfected with plasmid encoding either GFP alone, GFP fused PGRN, or its mutant lacking GrnE (CD1-GFP), and LysoTracker® Deep Red were added after transfection, and live
images were taken. Red color represents level of lysosome signal, and the green color reflects cells expressing GFP (vector) or GFP-fused proteins. Lysosomal content was compared
between GFP+ and GFP− cells. (b) Quantification analysis of the therapeutic effects of PGRN and its mutant. Ten images were taken for each sample, and fluorescence (FL) intensity of
lysosomal signals from GFP+ and GFP− cells were selected and quantified by Image J. The therapeutic effects were determined by comparison of the red fluorescence intensity
between GFP+ and GFP− cells. (c) Scheme of Pcgin and its deletion mutants. (d) Co-IP assays for examining the binding of Pcgin and its mutants to GCase and HSP70. 293T cells were
transfected with plasmids encoding either GFP fused Pcgin, or its mutants, together with plasmids encoding RFP fused GCase and HSP70, and the protein complexes were
immunoprecipitated with GFP antibody and probed with RFP or HSP70 antibodies respectively. The bottom panel shows expression of Pcgin and its mutants in the transfected cells.
The result is representative of three independent experiments. (e) Evaluation of the therapeutic effects of Pcgin and its mutations in type 2 GD fibroblasts (L444P). Fibroblasts from
type 2 GD were transiently transfected with pEGFP control vector, or plasmid encoding Pcgin or its mutants. LysoTracker® Deep Red was added after transfection, and live images
were taken by DV live-cell imaging system. GFP+ cells with reduced lysosome staining exhibit a green color, while GFP+ cells with a high level of lysosome staining give rise to a
yellow color (GFP+ cells are indicated with white arrow). (f) Quantification analysis of the therapeutic effects of Pcgin and its mutants. Ten images were taken for each sample, and
fluorescence intensity of lysosomal staining from GFP+ and GFP− cells were quantified by Image J. The therapeutic effects were determined by comparison of the red fluorescence
intensity between GFP+ and GFP− cells. (g) Structure and sequence of Pcgin. Pcgin is derived from C-terminal human PGRN from aa496-593, containing Grn E and linker regions on
both sides (top panel). Sequence of Pcgin is shown in bottom panel. Linker regions and Grn E are highlighted in green and red, respectively. Binding sites of GCase, HSP70, and Sortilin
are indicated. One-way ANOVA was used to compare means among multiple groups (Data are represented as mean ± SEM, * p b 0.05; ** p b 0.01; two sided).
221
J. Jian et al. / EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 212–224
 related unfolded protein response (Li et al., 2014), which may play a key
role in cell death in GD (Wei et al., 2008). The loss of PGRN leads to the
abnormal ER stress responses and the aggregation of various proteins in
the cytoplasm, such as TDP-43 (Baker et al., 2006; Tanaka et al., 2014)
and GCase/LIMP2 (this paper). Recently, it was reported that RIPK3, a
component of the TNFR1 signaling complex that mediates necroptosis,
was also involved in the pathology of GD and inhibiting RIPK3 might
be a novel therapeutic approach for GD (Vitner et al., 2014). Thus,
PGRN's anti-TNF and anti-cell death activities may also contribute to
its therapeutic effects in GD and other LSDs.
Many GRN gene mutations have been reported, and most of these
mutations lead to reduced levels of PGRN (Kleinberger et al., 2013). In-
sufficiency of PGRN has been associated with many types of neurode-
generative
diseases
including
FTD,
Parkinson's
disease
(PD),
Alzheimer's disease, Multiple Sclerosis, and Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis (Petkau and Leavitt, 2014). Our finding that PGRN is an indis-
pensable co-chaperone of HSP70 disaggregation system required for ly-
sosomal localization of GCase/LIMP2 may also have relevance to the
pathology of neurodegenerative diseases. Mutation of the GRN gene
may directly affect the HSP70-based disaggregases (Nillegoda and
Bukau, 2015) and in turn lead to defects in the clearance of proteins as-
sociated with neurodegenerative diseases, such as TDP-43 and α-synu-
clein, or indirectly affect the function of lysosomes resulting from the
impairment of GCase lysosomal localization and consequent accumula-
tion of glucosylceramide (Platt et al., 2012). Thus, the identification of
PGRN as a co-chaperone of HSP70 for GCase lysosomal appearance
may also help us to better understand the putative molecular mecha-
nisms underlying GRN mutation-associated neurodegenerative disor-
ders. Further, heterozygosity for mutations in the GBA1 gene may be a
risk factor for PD (Eblan et al., 2005), this indicates that there may
Fig. 6. Pcgin is therapeutic against GD in vitro and in vivo. (a) Expression and characterization of recombinant Pcgin. The purified Pcgin was analyzed by Coomassie blue staining (left) and
Western blotting with anti-His antibody (right). (b) Recombinant Pcgin directly binds to GCase and HSP70 (Solid phase binding). Pcgin was coated on a 96-well plate and incubated with
biotin-labeled GCase, HSP70, and Sortilin (serving as a positive control) respectively. Direct binding was detected by an ELISA-based method. (c) Pcgin reduces lysosomal storage as
measured by lysotracker intensity. Type 2 GD fibroblasts (L444P) cultured in 96-well plates were stimulated with lipid lysis, and treated with Pcgin (5 μg/ml) or PGRN (0.4 μg/ml) for
24 h. The cells were stained with LysoTracker Red and the fluorescence intensity read using SpectraMax i3x plate reader. This data is representative of at least three independent
experiments. (d) Pcgin reduces lysosomal storage in type 2 GD fibroblasts (D409H). Fibroblasts from GD patients were stimulated with lipid, or lipid plus Pcgin (5 μg/ml) and PGRN
(0.4 μg/ml). Lysosomal storage was measured by LysoTracker staining. (e) Quantification of (d). Ten images per sample were taken by fluorescence microscope, and fluorescence (FL)
intensity was measured by Image J software, and therapeutic effects were determined by statistical analysis. (f) Pcgin enhances lysosomal localization of mutant GCase (N370S). Type
1 GD fibroblasts were treated with Pcgin (5 μg/ml) for 24 h, and the lysosomal GCase was detected with its specific fluorescence probe MDW933. (g) Quantification of (f). Ten images
per sample were taken by fluorescence microscope, and fluorescence (FL) intensity was measured by Image J software, and therapeutic effects were determined by statistical analysis.
(h) Pcgin enhances lysosomal GCase and reduces lysosomal storage as measured by live imaging system. Type 2 GD fibroblasts (L444P) were cultured in a live cell imaging chamber
and treated with Pcgin (5 μg/ml), or PGRN (0.4 μg/ml) for 24 h. MDW933 and LysoTracker were added and images were taken under live-cell imaging system. (i) Pcgin reduces β-
GlcCer storage in GD fibroblasts. Type 2 GD fibroblasts (L444P) were stimulated with lipid lysis, along with Pcgin (5 μg/ml), or PGRN (0.4 μg/ml) treatment for 24 h. The fibroblasts
were collected for β-GlcCer analysis. (j) Pcgin increases GCase activity in GD fibroblasts. Type 2 GD fibroblasts (L444P) were treated as in (i), The GCase enzymatic activity was
measured. (k) Pcgin is therapeutic against GD-like phenotype in OVA-challenged PGRN KO mice. A GD-like phenotype was induced in PGRN KO mice, and mice were treated with
either Pcgin or Imiglucerase (serving as a positive control) (n = 6 per group). Lung tissues were examined by H&E staining. Gaucher cell number (l) and Gaucher cell sizes (m) were
significantly reduced after Pcgin treatment. (n) Pcgin reduces β-GlcCer storage in OVA-challenged PGRN KO mice. Spleens of PGRN KO mice from (k) were used to measure the levels
of β-GlcCer. One-way ANOVA was used to compare means among multiple groups (Data are represented as mean ± SEM, * p b 0.05; ** p b 0.01; two sided).
222
J. Jian et al. / EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 212–224
 exist a functional and a genetic linkage between GRN and GBA1 genes,
and that their homozygous or heterozygous mutations cause or render
some carriers vulnerable to rare (i.e. GD) and/or common (i.e. PD)
diseases.
Although Pcgin is a 98 amino acid c-terminal PGRN fragment, it
demonstrates comparable therapeutic effects with PGRN in several
types of GD patient fibroblasts bearing common GBA1 mutations
and our GD mouse model. Future investigations with additional GD
models are warranted to further test the therapeutic effect and safe-
ty of Pcgin. Pcgin possesses features that suggest it may compare
favorably to currently marketed GD drugs. For example, currently
marketed drugs are enzyme replacement or substrate reduction
therapies. In contrast, Pcgin functions as a co-chaperone of HSP70
and enhances the disaggregation and lysosomal appearance of mu-
tant lysosomal enzymes. Due to this alternate mechanism of action,
Pcgin may be effective for other LSDs in addition to GD. Additionally,
Pcgin's safety (lacking PGRN's potential oncogenic activity) and ease
of production (as a small ~15 kD recombinant protein) suggest that
it may be a viable cost-effective agent for the clinical treatment of
LSDs, in particular GD.
In summary, this study identifies PGRN as a previously-unrecog-
nized molecule associated with GCase, thus providing a foundation for
future discoveries relating to this critical factor in GD and other lyso-
somal storage diseases. In addition, it also isolates PGRN as a co-chaper-
one of HSP70 disaggregation system, thus uncovering a unique strategy
to target this cardinal pathway of metabolic diseases. More importantly,
we have developed a PGRN derivative, Pcgin, which effectively amelio-
rates the phenotypes of GD in several preclinical models. With the con-
sideration that HSP70 is involved in a plethora of disease processes, the
identification and manipulation of this new co-chaperone of HSP70 may
lead to innovative therapeutics for LSDs, in particular GD, and other
metabolic pathologies and conditions.
Author Contributions
J. Jian designed and performed experiments, collected and analyzed
data, and wrote the paper. Q.Y. Tian, A. Hettinghouse, S. Zhao, H. Liu, and
J. Wei performed experiments, collected and analyzed data. G. Grunig
established the chronic lung inflammation model, collected and ana-
lyzed data. W. Zhang, K. Setchell, and Y. Sun. performed lipid analysis
and edited manuscript. H. S. Overkleeft contributed new reagents/ana-
lytic tools. G. L. Chan participated the experimental design and data
analysis. C. J. Liu designed and supervised this study, analyzed data,
and wrote and edited the manuscript. All authors contributed discus-
sions and interpretations of the data.
Acknowledgements
We thank Yi Zhang, Peiying Shan and Petty Lee at Yale University for
providing murine lung endothelial cells isolated from wild-type and
HSP70−/− mice, David Goad and Aaron Martin at SensiQ Technologies,
Inc. (Oklahoma City, OK 73104) for Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR)
assay with SensíQ Pioneer, and Fengxia Liang, Yan Deng, Chris Petzold
and Kristen Dancel at NYU Medical School OCS Microscopy Core for
their assistance with electronic microscope image, Venette Inskeep at
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center for technical support in
lipid analysis.
This
work
was
supported
partly
by
NIH
research
grants
R01AR062207, R01AR061484, and a research grant from Atreaon (to
C. J. Liu).
All authors disclose no conflict of interests.
Patents have been filed by NYU that claim PGRN and its derivatives
for diagnosis and treatment of Gaucher disease and other lysosomal
storage diseases (Docket No. 1049-1-224P).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.10.010.
References
Aerts, J.M., et al., 2011. Biomarkers in the diagnosis of lysosomal storage disorders: pro-
teins, lipids, and inhibodies. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 34, 605–619. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s10545-011-9308-6.
Ahmed, Z., et al., 2010. Accelerated lipofuscinosis and ubiquitination in granulin knockout
mice suggest a role for progranulin in successful aging. Am. J. Pathol. 177, 311–324.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2353/ajpath.2010.090915.
Almeida, S., Zhou, L., Gao, F.B., 2011. Progranulin, a glycoprotein deficient in
frontotemporal dementia, is a novel substrate of several protein disulfide isomerase
family proteins. PLoS One 6, e26454. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0026454.
Baker, M., et al., 2006. Mutations in progranulin cause tau-negative frontotemporal de-
mentia linked to chromosome 17. Nature 442, 916–919. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nature05016.
Bateman, A., Bennett, H.P., 2009. The granulin gene family: from cancer to dementia.
Bioessays 31, 1245–1254. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bies.200900086.
Beutler, E., 1991. Gaucher's disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 325, 1354–1360. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1056/NEJM199111073251906.
Brady, R.O., Kanfer, J.N., Shapiro, D., 1965. Metabolism of glucocerebrosides. II. Evidence of
an enzymatic deficiency in Gaucher's disease. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 18,
221–225.
Cruts, M., et al., 2006. Null mutations in progranulin cause ubiquitin-positive
frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 17q21. Nature 442, 920–924.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature05017.
Daley, E., et al., 2008. Pulmonary arterial remodeling induced by a Th2 immune response.
J. Exp. Med. 205, 361–372. http://dx.doi.org/10.1084/jem.20071008.
de la Mata, M., et al., 2015. Pharmacological chaperones and coenzyme Q10 treatment im-
proves mutant beta-glucocerebrosidase activity and mitochondrial function in
neuronopathic forms of Gaucher disease. Sci. Rep. 5, 10903. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1038/srep10903.
Eblan, M.J., Walker, J.M., Sidransky, E., 2005. The glucocerebrosidase gene and Parkinson's
disease in Ashkenazi Jews. N. Engl. J. Med. 352, 728–731. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/
NEJM200502173520719.
Feng, J.Q., Guo, F.J., Jiang, B.C., Zhang, Y., Frenkel, S., Wang, D.W., Tang, W., Xie, Y., Liu, C.J.,
2010. Granulin epithelin precursor: a bone morphogenic protein 2-inducible growth
factor that activates Erk1/2 signaling and JunB transcription factor in chondrogenesis.
FASEB J 24 (6), 1879–1892. http://dx.doi.org/10.1096/fj.09-144659.
Gaspar, P., et al., 2014. Action myoclonus-renal failure syndrome: diagnostic applications
of activity-based probes and lipid analysis. J. Lipid Res. 55, 138–145. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1194/jlr.M043802.
Gegg,
M.E.,
Schapira,
A.H.,
2016.
Mitochondrial
dysfunction
associated
with
glucocerebrosidase deficiency. Neurobiol. Dis. 90, 43–50. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.nbd.2015.09.006.
Gonzalez, E.M., Mongiat, M., Slater, S.J., Baffa, R., Iozzo, R.V., 2003. A novel interaction
between perlecan protein core and progranulin: potential effects on tumor
growth. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 38113–38116. http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.
C300310200.
Gotzl, J.K., et al., 2014. Common pathobiochemical hallmarks of progranulin-associated
frontotemporal lobar degeneration and neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Acta
Neuropathol. 127, 845–860. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00401-014-1262-6.
Grabowski, G.A., 2012. Gaucher disease and other storage disorders. Hematology/the Ed-
ucation Program of the American Society of Hematology 2012. American Society of
Hematology.
Education
Program,
pp.
13–18.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1182/
asheducation-2012.1.13.
He, Z., Bateman, A., 1999. Progranulin gene expression regulates epithelial cell growth
and promotes tumor growth in vivo. Cancer Res. 59, 3222–3229.
He, Z., Ismail, A., Kriazhev, L., Sadvakassova, G., Bateman, A., 2002. Progranulin (PC-cell-
derived growth factor/acrogranin) regulates invasion and cell survival. Cancer Res.
62, 5590–5596.
He, Z., Ong, C.H., Halper, J., Bateman, A., 2003. Progranulin is a mediator of the wound re-
sponse. Nat. Med. 9, 225–229. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nm816.
Hrabal, R., Chen, Z., James, S., Bennett, H.P., Ni, F., 1996. The hairpin stack fold, a novel pro-
tein architecture for a new family of protein growth factors. Nat. Struct. Biol. 3,
747–752.
Ingemann, L., Kirkegaard, T., 2014. Lysosomal storage diseases and the heat shock re-
sponse: convergences and therapeutic opportunities. J. Lipid Res. 55, 2198–2210.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1194/jlr.R048090.
Jian, J., Konopka, J., Liu, C., 2013a. Insights into the role of progranulin in immunity, infec-
tion, and inflammation. J. Leukoc. Biol. 93, 199–208. http://dx.doi.org/10.1189/jlb.
0812429.
Jian, J., et al., 2013b. Progranulin directly binds to the CRD2 and CRD3 of TNFR extracellu-
lar domains. FEBS Lett. 587, 3428–3436. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2013.09.
024.
Jian, J., et al., 2016. Association Between Progranulin and Gaucher's Disease. EBioMedicine
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.08.004.
Jung, O., Patnaik, S., Marugan, J., Sidransky, E., Westbroek, W., 2016. Progress and potential
of non-inhibitory small molecule chaperones for the treatment of Gaucher disease
223
J. Jian et al. / EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 212–224
 and its implications for Parkinson disease. Expert Rev. Proteomics 13, 471–479.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14789450.2016.1174583.
Kirkegaard, T., et al., 2010. Hsp70 stabilizes lysosomes and reverts Niemann-Pick disease-
associated lysosomal pathology. Nature 463, 549–553. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nature08710.
Kleinberger, G., Capell, A., Haass, C., Van Broeckhoven, C., 2013. Mechanisms of granulin
deficiency: lessons from cellular and animal models. Mol. Neurobiol. 47, 337–360.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12035-012-8380-8.
Li, M., et al., 2014. Progranulin is required for proper ER stress response and inhibits ER
stress-mediated apoptosis through TNFR2. Cell. Signal. 26, 1539–1548. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.03.026.
Liu, C., Li, X.X., Gao, W., Liu, W., Liu, D.S., 2014. Progranulin-derived Atsttrin directly binds
to TNFRSF25 (DR3) and inhibits TNF-like ligand 1A (TL1A) activity. PLoS One 9,
e92743. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0092743.
Lu, J., et al., 2011. Histone deacetylase inhibitors prevent the degradation and restore the
activity of glucocerebrosidase in Gaucher disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108,
21200–21205. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1119181109.
Matsuda, J., et al., 2003. Chemical chaperone therapy for brain pathology in G(M1)-
gangliosidosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100, 15912–15917. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.2536657100.
Mena-Barragan, T., et al., 2015. pH-responsive pharmacological chaperones for rescuing
mutant Glycosidases. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Eng. 54, 11696–11700. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/anie.201505147.
Nillegoda, N.B., Bukau, B., 2015. Metazoan Hsp70-based protein disaggregases: emer-
gence and mechanisms. Front. Mol. Biosci. 2, 57. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fmolb.
2015.00057.
Nillegoda, N.B., et al., 2015. Crucial HSP70 co-chaperone complex unlocks metazoan pro-
tein disaggregation. Nature 524, 247–251. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14884.
Parenti, G., Andria, G., Valenzano, K.J., 2015. Pharmacological chaperone therapy: preclin-
ical development, clinical translation, and prospects for the treatment of lysosomal
storage disorders. Mol. Ther. 23, 1138–1148. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/mt.2015.62.
Park, S.H., et al., 2015. The effects of antigen-specific IgG1 antibody for the pulmonary-hy-
pertension-phenotype and B cells for inflammation in mice exposed to antigen and
fine particles from air pollution. PLoS One 10, e0129910. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0129910.
Petkau, T.L., Leavitt, B.R., 2014. Progranulin in neurodegenerative disease. Trends
Neurosci. 37, 388–398. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2014.04.003.
Platt, F.M., 2014. Sphingolipid lysosomal storage disorders. Nature 510, 68–75. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1038/nature13476.
Platt, F.M., Boland, B., van der Spoel, A.C., 2012. The cell biology of disease: lysosomal stor-
age disorders: the cellular impact of lysosomal dysfunction. J. Cell Biol. 199, 723–734.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201208152.
Reczek, D., et al., 2007. LIMP-2 is a receptor for lysosomal mannose-6-phosphate-inde-
pendent targeting of beta-glucocerebrosidase. Cell 131, 770–783. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.cell.2007.10.018.
Rothman, J.E., Schekman, R., 2011. Molecular mechanism of protein folding in the cell. Cell
146, 851–854. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.08.041.
Sanchez-Fernandez, E.M., Garcia Fernandez, J.M., Mellet, C.O., 2016. Glycomimetic-based
pharmacological chaperones for lysosomal storage disorders: lessons from Gaucher,
GM1-gangliosidosis and Fabry diseases. Chem. Commun. (Camb.) 52, 5497–5515.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/c6cc01564f.
Sun, Y., Quinn, B., Witte, D.P., Grabowski, G.A., 2005. Gaucher disease mouse models:
point mutations at the acid beta-glucosidase locus combined with low-level
prosaposin expression lead to disease variants. J. Lipid Res. 46, 2102–2113. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1194/jlr.M500202-JLR200.
Tanaka, Y., Chambers, J.K., Matsuwaki, T., Yamanouchi, K., Nishihara, M., 2014. Possible in-
volvement of lysosomal dysfunction in pathological changes of the brain in aged
progranulin-deficient mice. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 2, 78. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1186/s40478-014-0078-x.
Tang, W., et al., 2011. The growth factor progranulin binds to TNF receptors and is thera-
peutic against inflammatory arthritis in mice. Science 332, 478–484. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1126/science.1199214.
Thurner, L., et al., 2013. Progranulin antibodies entertain a proinflammatory environment
in a subgroup of patients with psoriatic arthritis. Arthritis Res. Ther. 15, R211. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1186/ar4406.
Thurner, L., et al., 2014. Proinflammatory progranulin antibodies in inflammatory bowel
diseases. Dig. Dis. Sci. 59, 1733–1742. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10620-014-3089-3.
Vitner, E.B., et al., 2014. RIPK3 as a potential therapeutic target for Gaucher's disease. Nat.
Med. 20, 204–208. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nm.3449.
Wei, H., et al., 2008. ER and oxidative stresses are common mediators of apoptosis in both
neurodegenerative and non-neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorders and are
alleviated by chemical chaperones. Hum. Mol. Genet. 17, 469–477. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/hmg/ddm324.
Witte, M.D., et al., 2010. Ultrasensitive in situ visualization of active glucocerebrosidase
molecules. Nat. Chem. Biol. 6, 907–913. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.466.
Yang, C., et al., 2014. Celastrol increases glucocerebrosidase activity in Gaucher disease by
modulating molecular chaperones. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111, 249–254. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1321341111.
Zhang, Y.I., et al., 2016. An endothelial Hsp70-TLR4 axis limits Nox3 expression and pro-
tects against oxidant injury in lungs. Antioxid. Redox Signal. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1089/ars.2015.6505.
Zheng, Y., Brady, O.A., Meng, P.S., Mao, Y., Hu, F., 2011. C-terminus of progranulin interacts
with the beta-propeller region of sortilin to regulate progranulin trafficking. PLoS One
6, e21023. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0021023.
Zhou, B., et al., 2015. Progranulin induces adipose insulin resistance and autophagic im-
balance via TNFR1 in mice. J. Mol. Endocrinol. 55, 231–243. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1530/JME-15-0075.
Zhu, J., et al., 2002. Conversion of proepithelin to epithelins: roles of SLPI and elastase in
host defense and wound repair. Cell 111, 867–878.
Zimran, A., Altarescu, G., Elstein, D., 2013. Pilot study using ambroxol as a pharmacological
chaperone in type 1 Gaucher disease. Blood Cells Mol. Dis. 50, 134–137. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.bcmd.2012.09.006.
224
J. Jian et al. / EBioMedicine 13 (2016) 212–224
