 Targeting Focal Adhesion Kinase Renders Pancreatic Cancers 
Responsive to Checkpoint Immunotherapy
Hong Jiang1,4, Samarth Hegde1,4, Brett L. Knolhoff1,4, Yu Zhu1,4, John M. Herndon1,4, 
Melissa A. Meyer1,4, Timothy M. Nywening3, William G. Hawkins3,5, Irina M. Shapiro6, David 
T. Weaver6, Jonathan A. Pachter6, Andrea Wang-Gillam1,5, and David G. DeNardo1,2,4,5,7
1Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
2Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA
3Department of Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
4Integrating Communications within the Cancer Environment (ICCE) Institute, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
5Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
6Verastem Inc., Needham, MA, USA
Abstract
Single-agent immunotherapy has achieved limited clinical benefit to date in patients suffering 
from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). This may be due to the presence of a uniquely 
immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME). Critical obstacles to immunotherapy in 
PDAC tumors include a high number of tumor-associated immunosuppressive cells and a uniquely 
desmoplastic stroma that acts as a barrier to T-cell infiltration. We have identified hyperactivated 
focal adhesion kinase (FAK) activity in neoplastic PDAC cells as a significant regulator of the 
fibrotic and immunosuppressive TME. We found that FAK activity was elevated in human PDAC 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
7Corresponding author: David G. DeNardo (ddenardo@dom.wustl.edu). 
ACCESSION CODE
GSE75233 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE75233)
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
D.G.D. managed the project and coordinated activities from all authors. H.J. conducted transgenic and transplant mouse experiments 
and treatments. B.L.K. and J.M.H. aided with FAK inhibitor treatments. D.G.D., H.J. and B.L.K. designed experiments and provided 
KPC, KPPC and KPC-Y mice. D.G.D., S.H. and J.M.H. performed histology, immunofluorescence on human samples and related 
analyses. H.J. and S.H. conducted experiments with the PA hydrogels, H.J. performed MTT, 3D collagen assays, cytokine arrays, 
leukocyte trafficking, immunoblotting, and related analyses. S.H. and J.M.H. performed immunofluorescence and H.J. conducted 
analysis. H.J. and B.L.K. conducted subcutaneous and orthotropic PDAC mouse experiments. S.H. and H.J. conducted adoptive cell 
transfer and bioluminescence tracking. Y.Z. performed RT-PCR and flow analysis in bone marrow macrophage experiments. M.A.M. 
performed bone marrow flow analysis. D.G.D. and H.J. conducted PDAC tumor grading in transgenic mice. T.N.M., W.G.H. and 
A.W.-G. collected human samples and aided with pathological pancreatic cancer scoring of human samples. I.M.S., D.T.W. and J.A.P. 
provided FAK inhibitor VS-4718 and VS-116 as well as expert guidance and intellectual input on the project. D.G.D., H.J. and S.H. 
wrote the manuscript with input from all authors.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
Authors I.M.S., D.T.W. and J.A.P. are employees of Verastem Inc. The other authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2016 August ; 22(8): 851–860. doi:10.1038/nm.4123.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tissues and correlates with high levels of fibrosis and poor CD8+ cytotoxic T-cell infiltration. 
Single-agent FAK inhibition using the selective FAK inhibitor VS-4718 significantly limited 
tumor progression, resulting in a doubling of survival in the p48-Cre/LSL-KrasG12D/p53Flox/+ 
(KPC) mouse model of human PDAC. This delay in tumor progression was associated with 
dramatically reduced tumor fibrosis, and decreased numbers of tumor-infiltrating 
immunosuppressive cells. We also found that FAK inhibition rendered the previously unresponsive 
KPC mouse model responsive to T cell immunotherapy and PD-1 antagonists. These data suggest 
that FAK inhibition increases immune surveillance by overcoming the fibrotic and 
immunosuppressive PDAC TME and renders tumors responsive to immunotherapy.
Keywords
FAK; PDAC; pancreatic cancer; PD-1; fibrosis; CXCL12; immunotherapy; tumor 
microenvironment; VS-4718
The application of immunotherapy holds great promise to improve pancreatic cancer patient 
outcomes, as it has for melanoma and lung cancer patients. Unfortunately, to date, attempts 
at immunotherapy in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) have achieved limited 
clinical benefits when deployed as single agents1. This is likely due in part to the presence of 
a uniquely immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME) that is dominant in most 
human PDACs. This immunosuppressive TME is a significant regulator of disease 
progression and poor responses to conventional therapy. Major drivers of this pro-
tumorigenic microenvironment include a highly fibrotic stroma and extensive infiltration by 
immunosuppressive cell populations2-7. High stromal density can provide a barrier to the 
delivery of cytotoxic agents and has been postulated to limit T cell access to tumor cells and 
function once recruited within the tumor site8-11. Additionally, extensive myeloid cell 
infiltration, typical of PDAC, may further lead to the dysfunction of PDAC infiltrating T 
cells 6,12-15. Thus agents that can overcome excessive fibrosis to alter immune suppression 
would be particularly attractive therapeutics for PDAC.
Focal adhesion kinases (FAK) are non-receptor tyrosine kinases, which include FAK1 and 
PYK2/FAK2. Of these, FAK1 has been heavily studied in the context of cancer cell 
migration, proliferation, and survival (reviewed in 16,17). Several studies have demonstrated 
that elevated FAK1 expression enhances tumor malignancy and correlates with poor 
prognosis16. More recently, FAK1 has been implicated in regulating pro-inflammatory 
pathway activation and cytokine production18,19. Additionally, FAK signaling has been 
implicated in wound healing and/or pathologic fibrosis in several tissues 20-28. Because of 
the role of FAK in translating signals from extracellular matrix composition and/or stiffness 
into intracellular pro-inflammatory pathway regulation, it seemed plausible that FAK might 
be key in regulating the fibrotic PDAC TME28. The purpose of this study was to access the 
impact of FAK signaling in maintaining the fibrotic and immunosuppressive TME of PDAC. 
We find that FAK1 as a central driver of the fibrotic and immunosuppressive that protects 
tumors from immune surveillance and drives resistance to immunotherapy.
Jiang et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RESULTS
FAK is hyperactivated in human PDAC and correlates with immunosuppressive TMEs
To evaluate whether FAK activation might impact the TME, we analyzed human PDAC 
tumor tissues for the expression of total and phosphorylated FAK1 (Tyr-397, p-FAK1) and 
PYK2/FAK2 by immunohistochemistry (IHC). We found that both total FAK1 and p-FAK1 
were upregulated compared to normal pancreatic tissue in 80% (45/56) and 84% (47/56) of 
patients, respectively (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. 1a,b). IHC also revealed that while 
stromal cells had detectable expression of both total FAK1 and p-FAK1 relative to control 
stains, PDAC neoplastic cells expressed far higher levels of total FAK1 and p-FAK1.
To determine whether high levels of FAK1 activation in PDAC cells correlated with changes 
in the TME, we stratified human PDAC patients based on high or low epithelial (tumor cell) 
p-FAK1 levels using mean IHC intensity. We found that high p-FAK1 in tumor cells was 
associated with lower numbers of tumor-infiltrating CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), 
and higher prevalence of both neutrophil elastase+ (NE+) and CD15+ granulocytes (Fig. 1b 
and Supplementary Fig. 1c). Based on the inverse correlation between p-FAK levels and 
tumor infiltration by CD8+ CTLs, we analyzed the association of this with patient survival 
and found that high p-FAK1 and low CD8+ CTL levels were indicative of poor clinical 
outcomes (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Fig. 1c,d). To determine how FAK1 activation 
correlates specifically with tumor fibrosis, we analyzed both total collagen by Sirius Red 
staining and collagen I, III and IV deposition by IHC. While the majority of samples 
exhibited high levels of fibrosis, we found that tumors with high p-FAK1 expression also 
displayed higher levels of total stromal collagen and collagen I deposition (Fig. 1d,e, 
Supplementary Fig. 1e). We found that the extent of collagen I deposition, but not III or IV, 
correlated with the amount of p-FAK expression (r = 0.299 p = 0.028, n = 50) Taken 
together, these data suggest that high levels of tumor FAK1 activation are indicative of a 
fibrotic and immunosuppressive TME.
To determine the stage of tumor progression at which FAK1 becomes hyperactivated and 
how this correlates with changes in the TME, we analyzed p-FAK1 expression in pancreatic 
tissue from the p48-Cre/LSL-KrasG12D/p53Flox/+ (KPC) mouse model (Fig. 1f). We found 
that p-FAK1 was barely detectable in the normal pancreatic epithelium and early pancreatic 
intraepithelial neoplasia lesions (PanIN). However, p-FAK1 levels were modestly 
upregulated in late PanINs and significantly elevated in PDAC lesions. The absence of FAK 
hyperactivation in early stage PanIN lesions suggests that, in contrast to recent reports in 
lung cancer mouse models29, KrasG12D expression alone is not sufficient to induce FAK 
activation. Consistent with this, we found that neither the overexpression of KrasG12V in 
human pancreatic epithelial cells (PDEC) nor the knockdown of Kras in KPC-derived tumor 
cells (KP cells) led to alterations in total FAK1 or p-FAK1 expression (Supplementary Fig. 
2a,b). In contrast, we found that matrix stiffness or increased density of collagen-I, -IV or 
fibronectin, but not laminin results in elevated FAK activation (Fig. 1g and Supplementary 
Fig. 2c-f). We also observed that the induction of p-FAK1 by collagen density was Rho-
associated coiled-coil kinase (ROCK)-dependent (Fig. 1h). These data are also consistent 
with observations from several other research groups that collagen density or stiffness can 
Jiang et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 lead to FAK activation in other normal and malignant cell types30-33. Upon analysis of the 
TME present when FAK1 is hyperactivated in KPC mice, we found that p-FAK1 expression 
is high in PDAC lesions that have extensive collagen deposition and tumor-infiltration by 
inflammatory cells (F4/80+ and GR1+), but few CD8+ CTLs (Fig. 1f and Supplementary Fig. 
2g). Together, these findings suggest that FAK activation in tumor cells might play a key role 
in establishing the immunosuppressive TME.
FAK inhibition leads to temporary tumor stasis and extended survival in KPC mice
To assess the impact of inhibiting FAK on PDAC progression, we evaluated a clinically 
available dual FAK1/FAK and FAK2/PYK2 inhibitor, VS-4718, (FAKi, Supplementary Fig. 
3a) in the genetic p48-Cre/LSL-KrasG12D/p53Flox/+ (KPC) and /p53Flox/Flox (KPPC) mouse 
models. We evaluated both early and late therapeutic strategies by either treating KPC mice 
at 3.5 month of age, when over 90% of these mice have histological microscopic PDAC 
lesions (“early”), or when overt (palpable) and/or ultrasound detectable (>0.5 cm in 
diameter) tumors were identified (“late”). We found that single-agent FAK inhibition caused 
a significant and similar extension of survival in both early and late treatment groups (Fig. 
2a). These results are particularly striking in comparison to gemcitabine (GEM) treatment, a 
standard clinical treatment, which has no impact on survival in these models. A similar 
improvement of survival was observed in the extremely aggressive KPPC mouse model 
when mice bearing overt PDAC tumors were treated with FAKi (Fig. 2b). To assess if 
single-agent FAK inhibition led to tumor regression or tumor stasis, KPC animals were 
evaluated for gross tumor diameter by twice-weekly external caliper measurement. Using 
this approach, we observed that single-agent FAK inhibition increased survival by inducing 
prolonged tumor stasis rather than regression (Fig. 2C). Similar responses were seen in mice 
bearing orthotopic tumors derived from KI (Kras/INK4A) or KP (Kras/p53) cells treated 
with vehicle or FAKi (Fig. 2d and Supplementary Fig. 3b). Taken together, these data 
demonstrate that FAK signaling is a significant regulator of PDAC progression, consistent 
with its observed role in the pathogenesis of other types of cancer 28,29,34.
Inhibition of FAK decreases fibrosis
To determine whether FAK inhibition affects the formation of the otherwise-abundant 
fibrosis in these tumors, PDAC tissue from end-stage KPC and KPPC mice as well as KPC 
mice treated for 1.5 months was evaluated. We found that FAKi- treated KPC and KPPC 
mice had dramatically reduced levels of fibrosis, as seen by both decreased collagen 
deposition (Trichrome and Sirius Red staining) and reduced numbers of fibroblast activation 
protein alpha (FAP)+ and α-smooth muscle actin (α–SMA)+ fibroblasts compared to 
vehicle-treated mice (Fig. 2e, f and Supplementary Fig. 3c-e).
In order to better understand the mechanisms leading to decreased stromal density, we 
evaluated both tumor and stromal proliferation based on Ki67 staining. We found that even 
in end-stage KPC and KPPC tumors, PDAC tumor cell proliferation was decreased by 43% 
in FAKi treated mice. More intriguingly, PDAC stromal cell proliferation was dramatically 
decreased by up to 87% following FAK inhibition in both KPC and KPPC mice (Fig. 2g and 
Supplementary Fig. 3f). This stromal proliferation primarily localizes to FAP+ fibroblasts by 
IHC (Fig. 2h). Additionally, expression profiling of PDAC tissue from animals treated with 
Jiang et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FAKi showed down-regulation of multiple genes associated with fibrosis, collagen 
deposition, and remodeling (Fig. 2i and Supplemental Table 3). Taken together, these data 
suggest that FAK inhibition enhances survival by inducing PDAC tumor stasis while 
simultaneously inducing stromal depletion.
Inhibition of FAK decreases fibrosis without accelerating tumor progression
Recent studies have suggested that depletion of stromal fibrosis has the potential to lead to 
disease acceleration and more aggressive tumors9,35. To assess how stromal depletion by 
FAKi impacts the differentiation and aggressiveness of PDAC tumors, we analyzed 
pancreatic tumor tissue from end-stage KPC and KPPC animals for tumor stage and grade. 
We found that in concert with longer survival, tissue from FAKi- treated KPC mice had a 
decreased pathologic disease progression when compared to vehicle-treated mice (Fig. 3a 
and Supplementary Fig. 3g). KPPC mice also showed no evidence of disease acceleration 
(Supplementary Fig. 3h).
As discussed above, FAK signaling has been implicated in tumor invasion, which might 
explain the suppressed tumor progression observed in KPC mice. To assess this behavior we 
used KPC-YFP mice treated at 3.5 months of age with vehicle or FAKi for 1 month and 
quantified individual invading cells, a hallmark of tumor aggressiveness in this model36. We 
observed significantly reduced numbers of single YFP+ invasive tumor cells (Fig. 3b). In 
correlation with our results from KPC-YFP mice, a short 10-day treatment of mice bearing 
established orthotopically implanted PDAC tumors with FAKi decreased the frequency of 
ALDHBright and CD44HiCD24Hi tumor cells, indicating a potential reduction in tumor-
initiating cells (Fig. 3c) 37,38. Furthermore, we found less liver metastasis in KPC mice 
treated with FAKi (Fig. 3d). Taken together, these data suggest that FAK inhibition 
diminishes tumor-induced fibrosis, but unlike recent reports 9,35, reduces disease 
progression.
Inhibition of FAK decreases immunosuppressive cell populations in tumors
To explore how FAK inhibition might impact immunosuppressive cell populations in PDAC 
tissue, we analyzed tumor-infiltrating immune cells in KPC mice treated for 1.5 months with 
vehicle or FAKi. IHC analysis of PDAC tissue showed significantly fewer tumor-infiltrating 
F4/80+ and CD206+ macrophages and GR1+ granulocytes in FAKi- treated KPC mice (Fig. 
4a). Consistent with reduced infiltration of suppressive myeloid cell populations, we also 
observed decreased tumor cell p-STAT3 expression in PDAC tissue (Fig. 4b), suggesting a 
potential signaling mechanism for FAKi effects on immunosuppressive cell infiltration. To 
confirm these results and eliminate effects due to differing tumor stages, we analyzed mice 
bearing established orthotopic KI or KP tumors by flow cytometry. We found that following 
10 days of FAKi treatment, the numbers of tumor-infiltrating myeloid-derived suppressor 
cells (MDSCs), CD206+ tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), and CD4+FOXP3+ Tregs 
were decreased (Fig. 4c and Supplementary Fig. 4a,b).
To verify that these changes in tumor infiltrating immunosuppressive cells was not due to 
alterations in myelopoiesis, we analyzed bone marrow and blood from mice bearing 
established KP tumors that were treated for 10 days with FAKi (similar to Fig. 4c). During 
Jiang et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 this time period we observed no change in bone marrow or circulating monocytes, 
granulocytes, dendritic cells or their precursor populations (Supplementary Fig. 5a-c). 
Together, these data suggest that pharmacologic FAK inhibition dampens 
immunosuppressive inflammatory cell infiltration into PDAC tumors.
Neoplastic cell-intrinsic FAK promotes tumor protective fibrotic and immunosuppressive 
TME
FAK activity has been implicated in the biologic activity of both neoplastic cells as well as 
stromal cells, including endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and leukocytes39-41. These data 
suggest that FAK can play direct roles in both tumor and stromal compartments. The roles of 
each of these compartments likely contribute to the overall outcome of pharmacologic 
inhibitors studies. Based on our observation that high p-FAK1 levels in the neoplastic cells 
in human PDACs correlated with fibrosis and inflammatory cell infiltration, we 
hypothesized that FAK1 activity in tumor cells might be a critical driver of the 
immunosuppressive PDAC TME. To test this, we knocked down FAK1 in PDAC cells 
derived from either KPC mice (KP) or p48-Cre/LSL-KrasG12D mice (KC, Supplementary 
Fig. 6a). Perhaps surprisingly, knockdown or pharmacologic inhibition of FAK1 did not 
suffice to alter cell proliferation in vitro under 3D culture conditions (Fig. 5a). Notably, 
concomitant pharmacologic inhibition of both FAK1 and FAK2/PYK2 (“FAK1/2i”) did 
indeed succeed in suppressing cell proliferation, suggesting that FAK1 is either dispensable 
for cell proliferation or compensated for by FAK2/PYK2 expression (Fig. 5a and 
Supplementary Fig. 6a,b). In contrast to these in vitro results, loss of FAK1 alone 
significantly retarded growth of both KP and KC cells when implanted in syngeneic 
immune-competent hosts (Fig. 5b and Supplementary Fig. 6c). Because of these differences 
in in vitro and in vivo growth, we postulated that FAK1-deficient cells failed to create a 
tumor-supportive TME. To test this notion, we analyzed similarly size-matched 
subcutaneous tumors or short-term orthotopic grafts derived from either shLuc or shFAK1 
KP cells. In both settings we found that reduction of FAK1 expression in the carcinoma cells 
retarded tumor-induced collagen deposition, FAP+ fibroblast numbers, and the presence of 
Ki67+ fibroblasts (Fig. 5c and Supplementary Fig. 6d,e). Additionally, FAK1-deficient 
tumors had reduced infiltration by MDSCs and CD206+ TAMs (Fig. 5d). This reduction in 
immunosuppressive myeloid cells was accompanied by a dramatic increase in the numbers 
of infiltrating CD8+ CTLs (Fig. 5d).
These data suggest that FAK1 is required for PDAC cells to create the fibrotic and 
immunosuppressive TME that protects the tumor from immune surveillance by CTLs. To 
further explore this notion, we depleted both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells using neutralizing 
IgGs and found that while loss of T cells did not impact outgrowth of control shLuc-
expressing KP-derived tumors, it did restore shFAK1-expressing KP tumor growth to control 
levels (Fig. 5e). Together, these studies, in combination with our observations in human 
tissues, suggest that tumor-intrinsic FAK1 drives the fibrotic and immunosuppressive TME 
that blunts T cell mediated immune surveillance.
In order to understand more precisely how PDAC neoplastic cell-intrinsic FAK1 activity 
might drive inflammation and fibrosis, we profiled cytokine production from KP cells and 
Jiang et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 found that FAK inhibition dramatically reduced both pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic 
cytokine secretion (Fig. 5f and Supplementary Fig. 6f). We next sought to test if these 
alterations in cytokine production would reduce the capacity of PDAC tumor cells to induce 
myeloid cell recruitment and/or pro-tumor polarization. First we found that either genetic 
(shRNA) or pharmacologic inhibition of FAK1 signaling in KP cells impairs their ability to 
induce monocyte and granulocyte migration (Fig. 5g). Secondly, we found that while both 
murine and human PDAC cell lines can induce alternative activation of macrophages as 
measured by elevated CD206 or CD163 protein expression and/or elevated ARG1, YM1 and 
CCL2 gene expression, this induction is blocked when PDAC cells are pre-treated with 
FAKi (Supplementary Fig. 6g-j). These data suggest that hyper-activated FAK1 in PDAC 
neoplastic cells drives cytokine production, which in turn results in increased myeloid cell 
recruitment and pro-tumor polarization of macrophages.
We next sought to assess more directly whether loss of FAK1 might directly impact the 
ability of PDAC cells to promote expansion of tumor-associated fibroblasts. First, we noted 
that the loss of FAK activity in PDAC cells reduced their production of pro-fibrotic factors 
such as CCL6, CCL20, and CXCL12 (Fig. 5f and Supplementary Fig. 6f). We also found 
that direct co-culture or conditioned media (CM) from KP or KC cells induced high levels of 
proliferation in normal pancreatic fibroblasts; however CM from KP or KC cells deficient in 
FAK1 failed to increase fibroblast proliferation (Fig. 5h and Supplementary Fig. 6k,l). 
Notably, pharmacologic or genetic inhibition of FAK1 in cancer-associated fibroblasts sorted 
from KPPC mice did not inhibit cell proliferation in vitro (Supplementary Fig. 6m,n). 
Intriguingly, neutralization of CXCL12 in CM from KP cells was sufficient to restrict the 
level of PDAC-induced fibroblast proliferation to basal levels equal to those of fibroblasts 
treated with CM from FAK1-depleated cells (Fig. 5i). These data suggest that FAK1 activity 
in PDAC cells can drive stromal expansion in part by elevating CXCL12 production.
FAK inhibition renders previously unresponsive PDACs sensitive to chemo- and 
immunotherapy
Recent studies have shown that stromal depletion may facilitate responses to chemo- and 
immunotherapy in PDAC 9-11,35. Additionally, excessive tumor infiltration of myeloid cells 
may further blunt the efficacy of both chemotherapy 4,14,42-46 and immunotherapy 2,47,48. 
Given that FAK inhibition reduced both fibrosis and suppressive myeloid cells, we sought to 
test the ability of FAK inhibition to improve chemo- and immunotherapeutic efficacy.
We first treated KPPC mice bearing overt tumors with either vehicle or high-dose GEM (75 
mg/kg i.v., “GEM75”) in the presence or absence of FAKi. Consistent with reported 
results10,35,49, we found that GEM75 treatment alone conferred no survival benefits in KPPC 
mice. In contrast, the combination of FAKi plus GEM75 more than doubled animal median 
survival duration (Fig. 6a). Furthermore, increased PDAC cell apoptosis and tumor necrosis 
as well as reduced fibrosis were observed in end-stage animals (Fig. 6b and Supplementary 
Fig. 7a).
To assess the ability of FAK inhibition to improve immunotherapy by increasing T cell 
infiltration into tumors, we tested FAKi in combination with adoptive T cell transfer (ACT). 
To evaluate this, we established syngeneic tumors with KP cells expressing chicken 
Jiang et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ovalbumin (OVA), a potent T cell antigen. We next injected transgenic CD8+ T cells specific 
for OVA that also expressed CD45.1 and firefly luciferase (CD45.1/CAG-Luc/OT-I) into the 
tumor bearing mice. Analysis of response to adoptively transferred CD8+ OT-I T cells 
showed that while ACT alone modestly slowed tumor progression, treatment with FAKi and 
ACT abrogated tumor growth (Fig. 6c). To determine if the increased efficacy of ACT 
following FAKi treatment was due to the increased ability of T cells to infiltrate PDAC 
tumors, we assessed both circulating and tumor infiltrating OT-I T cell numbers using flow 
cytometry and bioluminescent imaging (BLI). We found that while the number of circulating 
CD45.1+ OT-I cells is unchanged by FAKi treatment (Supplementary Fig. 7b), FAKi 
treatment still results in 4.7 times more OT-I cells infiltrating into PDAC tumor tissue 
compared to vehicle treated mice (Fig. 6d). Together these data suggest that FAKi alters the 
TME to facilitate CTL cell infiltration and/or survival in the PDAC TME.
To further test the ability of FAKi to improve immunotherapy we evaluated several 
combinations of checkpoint immunotherapies with FAKi in syngeneic and genetic PDAC 
models. Using both syngeneic and orthotopic models, we found that FAK inhibition 
promotes the responsiveness to a PD-1 antagonist (αPD1) as seen by reduced tumor burden 
and improved overall survival; however, the maximum impact was seen when given in 
combination with low-dose GEM (25 mg/kg i.v., “GEM25”, Fig. 6e and Supplementary Fig. 
7c). We also found that mice bearing transplantable KP tumors that were treated with FAKi 
+ GEM25 + αPD1 had a significantly increased number of tumor-infiltrating CD8+ CTLs 
compared to vehicle + GEM25 + αPD1 treated mice (Fig. 6f). Interestingly, FAKi did not 
improve the responsiveness to αCTLA4 alone, but αCTLA4 did show added benefit when 
added to FAKi + GEM25 + αPD1 therapies (Supplementary Fig. 7d,e).
We next sought to test FAKi plus immunotherapy in the KPPC transgenic mice, as this 
mouse model recapitulates the poor immunogenicity and rapid progression typical of human 
pancreatic cancer. Treatment of KPPC mice with GEM25 + αPD1 + αCTLA4 (“Immuno”) 
did not alter survival compared to vehicle-treated mice, suggesting that KPPC mice have 
little de novo responsiveness to checkpoint immunotherapy. By contrast, KPPC mice treated 
with FAKi + GEM25 + αPD1/αCTLA4 showed a greater than 2.5-fold increase in median 
survival time with a subset of animals (2/15) still alive 6 months after the start of treatment 
(Fig. 6g). This observed improvement in immunotherapeutic efficacy was associated with 
increased numbers of CD8+ CTLs that penetrated the stroma and came into close proximity 
and/or contact with target CK19+ PDAC cells; at the same time, these tumors exhibited 
reduced numbers of CD4+ FOXP3+ Tregs, and better T-effector (Teff) to Treg ratios in the 
tumors (Fig. 6h and Supplementary Fig. 7f). Taken together, these data demonstrate that 
FAK inhibition, which diminished the fibrotic and immunosuppressive TME, can render 
previously unresponsive PDAC tumors responsive to chemo- and immunotherapy.
DISCUSSION
In this study, we show that FAK signaling is a key driver of fibrosis, immunosuppression and 
PDAC progression. Several FAK inhibitors are in clinical testing now; however to date, FAK 
inhibitors as single agents have struggled to deliver tumor regression in advanced cancer 
patients. Our own data in murine PDAC models agree with this, as we observed disease 
Jiang et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 stabilization rather than PDAC regression in KPC mice (Fig. 2c). These data are consistent 
with results from the completed phase I study of single agent FAK inhibition (VS-6063/
PF-00562271) in patients with advances solid tumors, NCT00787033. In this study 43% 
(16/37) of patients enrolled at doses >100mg experienced stable disease. One of these 
patients had PDAC and had stable disease on single-agent FAK inhibition for >6 months. 
These clinical data suggest that FAKi combination therapies may be key to achieving 
durable tumor regression in advanced cancer patients. In our hands, pharmacologic or 
genetic targeting of FAK augments tumor immunity and thus potentiates the efficacy of 
chemo- and immunotherapy, even in PDAC tumors that were previously unresponsive to 
these therapies. Our data strongly support the translation of FAK inhibitors in combination 
with checkpoint immunotherapy, an approach currently being pursued by our clinical team 
(NCT02546531)50.
As many “FAK” inhibitors, including the one employed in these studies have activity against 
both FAK1 and FAK2/PYK2, it is important to consider the role both these kinases play. 
Herein, we demonstrate that FAK1 in PDAC cells can be a driver of tumor-induced fibrosis 
and immune suppression (Fig. 5). However, this does not exclude a potentially critical role 
of FAK2/PYK2 in regulating fibrosis and/or immune suppression in response to dual FAK1-
PYK2 inhibitors, such as VS-4718 employed here or others presently in the clinic. Our own 
data show that both FAK2/PYK2 and phospho-PYK2 are elevated in human and murine 
PDACs (Supplementary Fig. 1f,g). Additionally, PYK2 has been shown to be important in 
wound healing, fibrosis, and myeloid cell migration and differentiation22-27. Thus a further 
dissection of the exact contribution of both FAK1 and PYK2 in driving fibrotic and 
immunosuppressive TMEs will be critical to exploiting FAK inhibition to benefit cancer 
patients.
In this report, we focused on the role of FAK1 signaling in malignant cells and its role as a 
driver of the fibrotic and inflammatory TME that thwarts immune surveillance and limits 
immunotherapy. However, clinical use of FAK inhibitors will target all cell types, including 
T cells themselves 51-54. Both FAK1 and PYK2 are activated downstream of both T cell 
receptor and co-stimulatory signaling, and have been shown to have roles in T cell 
proliferation, antigen sensitivity, cytokine production and migration in these contexts 
(reviewed in 51). Our data show no alterations in total circulating T cells or transferred 
antigen-specific T cell numbers following pharmacologic inhibition of FAK1 and PYK2, 
however the impact of such treatments on the functionality and/or T cell memory function is 
likely important to clinical translation of FAK inhibitor and immunotherapeutic 
combinations.
FAK signaling has been confirmed as a regulator of multiple signaling pathways during 
tumor progression, including cell-cell adhesion, migration, proliferation and chemokine 
transcription16. As such, FAK1 has been shown to be important in several carcinoma types 
including pancreatic tumors16,29,55-59. However, the role of FAK signaling in driving the 
suppressive tumor microenvironment is less well understood. A recent study in squamous 
carcinoma mouse models found that nuclear FAK1 in carcinoma cells drives exhaustion of 
CD8+ T cells and recruitment of Tregs to the TME by altering chemokine/cytokine 
networks18. Similarly, we found that FAK inhibition alters tumor cell production of pro-
Jiang et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 inflammatory and immunosuppressive cytokines and blunts their ability to avoid immune 
surveillance. Together these findings indicate that FAK1 signaling may be a key driver of 
immune escape in several tumor types and thus may be a target for combination with 
immunotherapy.
ONLINE METHODS
Pancreatic cancer tissue analysis
Tissue microarray (TMA) studies were conducted on surgically resected PDAC specimens 
from 56 patients diagnosed in the Department of Pathology at Washington University. 
Patients underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy followed by adjuvant chemotherapy (no 
neoadjuvant therapy). Clearly defined tumor areas were demarcated and two biopsies (1.0-
mm diameter) were taken from each donor block for 4.0-μm paraffin sections. The 
Washington University School of Medicine Ethics committee approved this study under 
protocol 2011103202. All tissue samples were collected for analysis under informed consent 
from the patients. Automated image acquisition was performed using an Aperio ScanScope 
XT Slide Scanner system with a 20 × objective (Aperio Technologies). In individual 
analyses, patients lacking survival data or whose tissue cores were unreadable/exhausted 
were excluded.
Genetic mouse models
KPC (p48-Cre/LSL-KrasG12D/p53Flox/+), KPPC (p48-Cre/LSL-KrasG12D/p53Flox/Flox), 
KPC-Y (p48-Cre/LSL-KrasG12D/p53Flox/+/LSL-YFP) were created by breeding C57/B6 
LSL-KrasG12D p53Flox or LSL-YFP mice (Jax mice) to p48-CRE mice that had been 
backcrossed n=6 to C57BL/6. Congenic marker analysis was used to verify the C57BL/6 
identity of KPC and KPPC colony founder mice. For all experiments, KPC/KPPC mice were 
either enrolled when age-matched and/or after first >0.5 cm tumor was detected by weekly 
palpation. Survival events were scored when mice lost >15% body weight, tumor burden 
reached > 1.8 cm in diameter or per absolute survival events. Transgenic OT-I mice and 
CAG-Luc-eGFP mice were obtained from Jackson laboratory and bred together to create 
CAG-Luc+/OT-I+ mice. Non-transgenic C57BL/6 or FVB/N mice were obtained from either 
Jackson laboratory or Charles-River. Mice were maintained within the Washington 
University Laboratory for Animal Care barrier facility. The Washington University School 
of Medicine Institutional Animal Studies Committee approved all studies involving animals.
Cell lines, plasmids, shRNAs and siRNAs
KP cells were derived from PDAC tumor tissue obtained from 6-month old p48-Cre/LSL-
KrasG12D/p53Flox/+ mice, which were screened for C57BL/6 identity. Cells were grown out 
on collagen-coated plastic for < 12 passages and were tested for CK19, SMA, Vimentin and 
CD45 to verify their identity and purity. Primary pancreatic fibroblasts were isolated from 
normal pancreas of 8-week old female mice. Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) were 
flow-sorted from KPC tumor tissue using marker CD45− Pan-Keratin− PDGFRα+ (clone 
APA5, eBioscience) and used within 4-6 passages for all experiments. All cell lines were 
tested negative for MAP and mycoplasma.
Jiang et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Short hairpin RNA (shRNA) constructs targeting mouse FAK1 (Ptk2) and Kras were 
purchased from Genome Center (Washington University). Targeting sequences are listed in 
Supplementary Table 4.
To generate cell lines stably expressing shFAK1/shKras, KP cells were transduced with 
lentivirus particles carrying shRNA for 48 h, following standard transduction protocols. 
Subsequently, cells were cultured in regular DMEM+F12 media (Gibco) containing 7 μg/mL 
puromycin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 weeks. Surviving cells were tested for knockdown 
efficiency by western blot. To generate KP-OVA cell line, KP cells were transduced with 
pLVX-IRES-Hyg-OVA (Clontech) following standard lentiviral protocol. Transduced cells 
were kept under 200 μg/mL Hygromycin selection during passages. Full-length OVA 
expression was verified by western blot.
Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting mouse FAK1 were purchased from Integrated 
DNA Technologies (IDT). Sequences are listed in Supplementary Table 4.
Orthotopic and transplantable models; preclinical animal cohorts
Age-matched 6-8 week old female C57BL/6 and FVB/N mice were used for orthotopic/
transplantable mouse models. Syngeneic orthotopic PDAC tumors were established by 
surgical implantation, as previously described60. Briefly, 200,000 cells in 50 μL Cultrex 
BME (Trevigen) were injected into each pancreas. Cohorts of mice were randomized into 
different treatment groups by gross tumor diameter using twice-weekly palpation and 
external caliper measurement. In establishing transplantable models, 200,000 cells in 50 μL 
Cultrex BME were injected into each mouse’s back. Cohorts of mice were randomized into 
different treatment groups by tumor volume (length*(width2)/2).
Gemcitabine (GEM; Hospira) was obtained from the Washington University School of 
Medicine pharmacy and diluted in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Mice were treated with 
GEM by intravenous (i.v.) injection into the right retro-orbital sinus every 4–5 days. 
Preclinical studies were conducted with 10–15 10-week old female mice per group. Tumor 
burden was measured by establishing gross wet weight of the pancreas and comparing it to 
that of five parallel mice sacrificed at the beginning of treatment.
Inhibitors, neutralizing antibodies, and checkpoint antagonists
FAK inhibitors (FAKi) were provided by Verastem Inc. VS-4718 is a selective bispecific 
inhibitor with activity against FAK1/FAK and FAK2/PYK2 kinases. Cell-based assays have 
determined it has biochemical half-maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC50) of 6.0 nM and 
20 nM for FAK1 and PYK2. For animal experiments, 50 mg/kg VS-4718 was formulated in 
vehicle (0.5% carboxymethyl cellulose and 0.1 % Tween-80 (Sigma-Aldrich) in sterile 
water) and administered by oral gavage twice a day. For in-vitro studies 0.5 or 1.0 μM of 
VS-4718 in DMSO was used. VS-116 is a FAK1-selective inhibitor provided by Verastem 
Inc. with IC50 of 78 nM and >10 uM for FAK1 and PYK2 respectively, and was employed at 
1.0 μM for in vitro studies. VS-116 was deemed to be poorly potent for use in vivo. For 
immunotherapy regimen, CTLA4 and PD1 antagonists (anti-mCTLA4 clone 
UC10-4F10-11; anti-mPD1 clone RMP1-14, BioXCell) were given by intraperitoneal (i.p.) 
injection every 4–5 days at 250 and 200 μg, respectively. For T cell depletion, CD4- and 
Jiang et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CD8- neutralizing IgG antibodies (anti-mCD4 clone GK1.5, anti-mCD8 clone 2.43, 
BioXCell) were administered via i.p. injection every 4–5 days, with the 1st injection 
containing 500 μg before tumor implantation and subsequent injections containing 250 μg. 
For CXCL12 neutralization, normal pancreatic fibroblasts were treated with conditioned 
medium (CM) from KP tumor cells and either 200 ng, 400 ng, 1.0 μg or 2.0 μg CXCL12 
neutralizing antibody (Monoclonal IgG1 Clone 79014, R&D) or mouse IgG control. For 
ROCK inhibition, KP cells were treated with 10 μM Y-27632 (Tocris Bioscience) for 24 
hours prior to fixation and p-FAK immunostaining.
Flow cytometry analysis & Flow sorting
Flow cytometry was carried out as described previously2. ALDEFLUOR analysis was done 
according to manufacturer’s recommendations (StemCell Tech.). Data acquisition was 
performed on the LSR-II system (BD Biosciences), and FlowJo v10.0.7r2 (Tree Star) was 
used for analysis with appropriate compensation. Flow sorting was performed using the 
FACS Aria-II cell sorter (BD Biosciences). For all sorting experiments, post-sort analyses 
were performed to ensure > 90% purity. All antibodies used for flow cytometry are listed in 
Supplementary Table 1.
Isolation and analyses of human CD14+ monocytes
Leukoreduction chambers from normal donor were obtained from the BJH Pheresis Center 
(Washington University). Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were 
isolated using Dr. Fehniger’s lab protocol (Washington University). Briefly, chamber eluate 
was mixed well with PBS containing 1 unit/mL heparin, centrifuged with brakes-off and 
‘buffy layer’ was isolated. Tube was centrifuged at 1,800 rpm for 10 min and pellets were 
incubated in 1X RBC lysis buffer. After subsequent centrifugation at 1,300 rpm for 4 min, 
PBMC pellets were resuspended in RPMI containing 10% human AB serum (Sigma-
Aldrich). Human CD14+ monocytes were sorted from PBMCs using EasySep Human CD14 
Selection Kit (Stemcell Technologies Inc.) per manufacturer’s instructions. CD14+ 
monocyte isolation purity > 90% was confirmed by flow cytometry. Flow cytometry was 
conducted as described elsewhere.
Isolation of murine bone marrow–derived macrophages (BM-MACs)
Bone marrow-derived macrophages were isolated following the protocol described 
previously61. Briefly, bone marrow cells were isolated by flushing femurs and tibias from 
C57BL/6 mice and cultured in RPMI-1640 medium (Gibco) containing 10% FBS and 20 
ng/mL macrophage colony–stimulating factor (M-CSF, PeproTech) on plastic petriplates. 
After 7 days in culture, adherent macrophages were harvested for co-culture experiments.
Adoptive cell transfer of Luc+ OT-I T cells
Total splenocytes were harvested from 10-week CAG-Luc/OT-I mice and plated in T-cell 
media i.e. 45% DMEM, 45% RPMI (Gibco), 10% FBS (Atlanta biologicals), 1X β-
mercaptoethanol and 1X Pen-Strep (Gibco) with 0.5 μg/mL SIINFEKL peptide (Sigma-
Aldrich) and 10 ng/mL IL-2 (PeproTech) for 3 days. Fresh T-cell media was replenished 
with 0.5 μg/mL SIINFEKL peptide and 10 ng/mL IL-2 on Day 2. Cultured splenocytes were 
Jiang et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 collected on Day 3, spun down and enriched for CD8α+ T cells using CD8α microbeads and 
MACS LS columns (Miltenyi biotec) per manufacturer’s instructions. CD8α+ T cell 
isolation purity > 90% was confirmed by flow cytometry. Isolated CD8α+ T cells were 
counted and resuspended to desired concentration (15 million cells/mL) in 1X ice-cold 
DPBS. 50 μL T cell suspension was injected into the right retro-orbital sinus of either FAKi- 
or vehicle-treated C57BL/6 mice bearing palpable (~ 0.5 cm) subcutaneous KP-OVA tumors 
on Day 0 and Day 1 of ACT regimen.
Bioluminescence imaging
FAKi- or vehicle-treated C57BL/6 mice bearing subcutaneous KP-OVA tumors and having 
undergone ACT were shaved and epilated prior to imaging on the Xenogen IVIS-50 
Bioluminescence Imaging System (Perkin Elmer). Mice were injected with D-Luciferin i.p. 
and tumors imaged at the peak of luciferase activity (10 min post-injection; 5 min exposure). 
Total flux read was analyzed restricted to tumor ROI on Living Image v2.60.1 (Imaging 
systems) and normalized to unresected tumor volume.
Preparation of polyacrylamide and collagen type I gels
Polyacrylamide gels of ~70 μm nominal thickness and differing stiffness were synthesized 
on 20-mm glass-bottom dishes (MatTek) as described previously62. PAA gels were 
functionalized by Sulfo-SANPAH crosslinking (Pierce) and subsequent incubation overnight 
in different ECM protein concentrations as per manufacturer’s instructions. ECM proteins 
used included Laminin (Sigma-Aldrich) and Fibronectin (Corning). ECM-coated gel dishes 
were used for culturing KP cells over 24 h prior to fixation and p-FAK immunostaining. 
Collagen type I gels were prepared according to manufacturers’ instructions. The polymer 
was placed in an 8-well chamber slide (Lab-Tek II; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated 
in a 37 °C incubator for 30 min. KP cells were grown on top of gel in complete media 
containing 5% FBS for 24 h prior to fixation and p-FAK immunostaining.
Cell proliferation assay
Cell proliferation assay was performed by using CellTiter96 Non-Radioactive Cell 
Proliferation Assay (Promega) according to manufacturers’ instructions. Briefly, 5,000 cells/
well were seeded into 96-well plates coated with 7.5 mg/mL Cultrex BME (Trevigen). At 
desired time points, Dye Solution was added to live cultures for 4 h at 37 °C. Absorbance 
was measured at 570 nm on Multiskan GO plate reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Leukocyte tracking assay
Peripheral blood was collected from left ventricles of anesthetized 8-week old healthy 
C57BL/6 mice into 1X PBS containing heparin (1 Unit/mL) on ice. Blood was centrifuged 
at 2,000 rpm for 5 min, and RBCs were lysed using 1X RBC Lysis Buffer (Biolegend). 
Subsequently, cells were centrifuged, resuspended in serum-free DMEM+F12 media and 
counted by Trypan Blue staining. For trans-well assay, 1 mL of tumor CM containing 5% 
FBS was added to bottom of 24-well plate. 5 × 105 leukocytes were added to upper chamber 
of 24-well trans-well inserts (3 μm, Corning). Cells were incubated at 37°C for 6 hours, 
following which inserts were removed, cells in lower well were resuspended in 1 mL 
Jiang et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DMEM and counted using hemocytometer to quantify total migrated cells. Flow cytometry 
was used to identify cellular subsets.
ELISA and Cytokine arrays
CXCL12 detection in CM was performed using Mouse CXCL12/SDF-1α DuoSet ELISA 
Kit (R&D) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Absorbance was determined at 450 nm 
on Multiskan GO plate reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cytokine assay was performed 
using Proteome Profiler™ Mouse XL Cytokine Array Kit (R&D) according to 
manufacturer’s instruction. The membranes were placed in an autoradiography film cassette 
and exposed to X-ray film for 2, 5 and 10 min. Data acquisition and quantification was 
performed using ImageQuant TL V2005 (Amersham Biosciences).
Histology
5 μm sections of paraffin-embedded pancreatic tissues were analyzed for hematoxylin and 
eosin (H&E, Thermo Fisher Scientific), Picro-Sirius Red (Sigma-Aldrich) and Masson’s 
Trichrome (Diagnostic Biosystems) according to manufacturer’s instructions.
10×, 20× and 40× Images were taken on the Nikon Eclipse 80i bright field microscope 
(Nikon). Whole-tissue slide scans at 10× magnification were performed on the Nikon 
Eclipse Ci Slide Scanner (Nikon, Objective Imaging). Image analysis was performed by 
thresholding for positive staining and normalizing to total tissue area, using ImageJ (NIH) 
and Metamorph v7.7.0.0 (Molecular Devices) software.
Immunofluorescence (IF)
5 μm-thick sections were air-dried and fixed in 4% PFA (Ted Pella, Inc.) for 15 min before 
being washed thrice with PBS. Tissues were permeabilized by incubating the slides in 0.5% 
Triton X-100 in PBS for 15 min at RT, and peroxidase-quenched by incubating in 1% 
hydrogen peroxide (Invitrogen) for 10 min at RT. After blocking for 1 hour at RT in 
blocking buffer (5% goat serum, 2.5% BSA in 1X PBS), slides were incubated overnight in 
a humidified chamber at 4 °C with anti-mouse antibodies listed in Supplementary Table 2. 
Following PBST (1X PBS with 0.05% Tween-20) washes, slides were incubated with Alexa 
Fluor 594- or Alexa Fluor 647–conjugated goat anti-mouse/rabbit secondary antibody 
(Molecular Probes). For immunofluorescence staining by Tyramide Signal Amplification 
(TSA), slides were additionally blocked using an Avidin/Biotin Blocking Kit (Vector Labs) 
after using blocking buffer. After primary incubation & washes, streptavidin-HRP conjugate 
(Perkin Elmer) was added and incubated for 30 min at RT. After three washes in PBST, 
slides were incubated with TSA-Biotin (Perkin Elmer) for 8 min at RT. After PBST washes, 
slides were incubated with Streptavidin-Alexa Fluor 594 (Life Technologies) for 30 min. 
Slides were subsequently washed and mounted using Vectashield w/DAPI (Vector Labs). 
For cell immunofluorescence staining, 5,000 normal pancreatic fibroblasts were seeded into 
an 8-well chamber slide (Lab-Tek II; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and cultured overnight. 
Slides were then processed as described previously for tissue IF staining.
10×, 20× and 40× Images were taken on the Nikon Eclipse 80i Epifluorescence microscope 
(Nikon). Whole-tissue slide scans at 10× magnification were performed on the Nikon 
Jiang et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Eclipse Ci Slide Scanner (Nikon, Objective Imaging). Image analysis was performed by 
thresholding for positive staining and normalizing to total tissue area, using ImageJ (NIH) 
and Metamorph v7.7.0.0 (Molecular Devices) software.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
Tissues were fixed in 10% formalin, embedded in paraffin, and incubated with antibodies as 
previously described (5). Briefly, 5 μm-thick sections were deparaffinized in xylene, 
rehydrated in graded ethanol, and subjected to antigen retrieval by steam heating in Citra™ 
antigen retrieval solution (BioGenex). After blocking for 1 h at RT in blocking buffer (5% 
goat serum, 2.5% BSA in 1X PBS), slides were incubated overnight in a humidified 
chamber at 4 °C with anti-mouse/human antibodies listed in Supplementary Table 2. 
Immunostaining was detected using either 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) and Ultravision LP 
detection system (Thermo) or using indirect immunofluorescence. Image acquisition and 
analysis was similar to that of Immunofluorescence imaging, described elsewhere.
Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
Total RNA was extracted from BM-MACs using an E.Z.N.A.® Total RNA Kit (OMEGA). 
cDNAs were synthesized using qScript cDNA SuperMix (QuantaBio). Quantitative real-
time PCR Taqman primer probe sets specific for ARG1, YM1 and CCL2 (Applied 
Biosystems) were used, and the relative gene expression was determined on an ABI 7900HT 
quantitative PCR machine (ABI Biosystems) using Taqman Gene Expression Master Mix 
(Applied Biosystems). The comparative threshold cycle method was used to calculate fold 
changes in gene expression, which were normalized to the expression of TBP and/or 
GAPDH as reference genes.
Immunoblotting
Briefly, equal amounts of cells were harvested in standard RIPA buffer supplemented with 
protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Protein lysates were resolved in Tris/glycine 
SDS PAGE gels and transferred onto PVDF membranes (Invitrogen). Membranes were 
blocked with 5% Milk powder in 1X TBS buffer containing 0.05% Triton X-100, and 
subsequently probed overnight at 4 °C with primary WB antibodies listed in Supplementary 
Table 2. Bands were probed with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (Cell Signaling 
Technology) and visualized using ECL Substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on ChemiDoc 
XRS+ system (Bio-Rad).
Microarray analysis
Microarray was performed by Genome Technology Access Center (GTAC) at Washington 
University and data generated has been deposited in NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus with 
accession number GSE75233 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?
acc=GSE75233). Total RNA from tumor tissues of KP tumor-bearing mice treated with 
vehicle and FAKi was isolated and subsequently processed for microarray hybridization 
using Agilent Mouse 8×60K Expression Microarrays according to the manufacturer's 
instruction (Agilent Technologies). Raw data were log2-transformed and quantile-
normalized across all samples. Detectable genes were defined as those with a detected call in 
Jiang et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 at least 10% of samples studied. R software package limma (Bioconductor) was used to 
detect differentially expressed genes in FAKi-treatment groups with respect to vehicle. 
Significant genes were determined at P < 0.05 and absolute fold-change >= 1.5. Top 
differentially regulated genes are listed in Supplementary Table 3.
Randomization of mouse models to treatment groups
Genetic KPC and KPPC mice were enrolled into treatment groups in an alternating 
enrolment using birth date and animal number to assign order. All animals were assigned a 
treatment group by an investigator blinded to their current tumor burden. For both orthotopic 
and subcutaneous PDAC tumor models, cohorts of mice were randomized into different 
treatment groups using either gross tumor diameter or tumor volume (length*(width2)/2). To 
accomplish randomization, animals were sorted by tumor size in ascending order and then 
groups were assigned in descending order. Each group was checked post-hoc to verify no 
statistical difference in average starting tumor size.
Statistics
All statistical analysis was run using the Graphpad Prism 6.0 software (Graphpad). Sample 
size for all in vivo experiments was determined using experimental data from other studies 
to approximate number of mice necessary to give >85% confidence for a 2-fold change in 
any given parameter at the P < 0.05 significance level. The number of animals and replicate 
in vitro experiments is specified in each figure legend. The majority of the data presented 
have normal distribution and similar variance. However, variance was first systematically 
examined using an F-test, and Mann-Whitney U-test or Student’s t-test employed 
accordingly. Kaplan-Meier survival curves were calculated using the survival time for each 
mouse from all treatment groups, and significance was determined by Log-rank test. For 
tumor burden analyses and image quantifications, statistical significance was assayed by 
Student’s t-test or one-way ANOVA. Significance of metastases’ frequency was determined 
by Fisher’s exact test.
* denotes P < 0.05; ** denotes P < 0.01; n.s. denotes not significant. All data are presented 
as mean ± s.e.m. or as boxplots.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by funding awarded to D.G.D. by Lustgarten Foundation, an AACR/PANCAN Award, 
NCI awards R01-CA177670, R01-CA203890, R21-CA182701, the BJCIH/Siteman Cancer Center Cancer Frontier 
Fund; and Washington University Clinical and Translational Grant KL2TR000450 awarded to A.W.G. KC 
(KrasG12D) cells were obtained from Dr. Mukherjee’s laboratories (University of North Carolina, Charlotte). 
HPNE, HPAC, Capan-1, Capan-2, Hs766T, MIA PaCa-2, and SW1990 cells were obtained from Dr. Lim’s lab 
(Washington University, St. Louis). pBABEpuro K-Ras G12V used to express KrasG12V was obtained from Dr. 
Weber’s laboratory (Washington University, St. Louis).
Jiang et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Abbreviations
FAK
focal adhesion kinase
FAKi
focal adhesion kinase inhibitor
CTL
cytotoxic T lymphocyte
DC
dendritic cells
GEM
gemcitabine
KI
KRas/INK4A
KP
KRas/p53
MDSC
myeloid-derived suppressor cell
IL
interleukin
PDAC
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
TAM
tumor-associated macrophage
TRegs
regulatory T cells
TME
tumor microenvironment
CM
conditioned media
REFERENCES
1. Royal RE, et al. Phase 2 trial of single agent Ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4) for locally advanced or 
metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Journal of immunotherapy. 2010; 33:828–833. [PubMed: 
20842054] 
2. Zhu Y, et al. CSF1/CSF1R Blockade Reprograms Tumor-Infiltrating Macrophages and Improves 
Response to T Cell Checkpoint Immunotherapy in Pancreatic Cancer Models. Cancer Res. 2014
3. Panni RZ, Linehan DC, DeNardo DG. Targeting Tumor-Infiltrating Macrophages to Combat Cancer. 
Immunotherapy. 2013 In-Press. 
4. Mitchem JB, et al. Targeting Tumor-Infiltrating Macrophages Decreases Tumor-Initiating Cells, 
Relieves Immunosuppression, and Improves Chemotherapeutic Responses. Cancer Res. 2013
5. Goedegebuure P, et al. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells: general characteristics and relevance to 
clinical management of pancreatic cancer. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2011; 11:734–751. [PubMed: 
21599634] 
6. Bayne LJ, et al. Tumor-derived granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor regulates 
myeloid inflammation and T cell immunity in pancreatic cancer. Cancer cell. 2012; 21:822–835. 
[PubMed: 22698406] 
7. Laklai H, et al. Genotype tunes pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma tissue tension to induce 
matricellular fibrosis and tumor progression. Nat Med. 2016
8. Feig C, et al. Targeting CXCL12 from FAP-expressing carcinoma-associated fibroblasts synergizes 
with anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy in pancreatic cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:20212–
20217. [PubMed: 24277834] 
9. Ozdemir BC, et al. Depletion of carcinoma-associated fibroblasts and fibrosis induces 
immunosuppression and accelerates pancreas cancer with reduced survival. Cancer Cell. 2014; 
25:719–734. [PubMed: 24856586] 
Jiang et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10. Olive KP, et al. Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling enhances delivery of chemotherapy in a mouse 
model of pancreatic cancer. Science. 2009; 324:1457–1461. [PubMed: 19460966] 
11. Provenzano PP, et al. Enzymatic targeting of the stroma ablates physical barriers to treatment of 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:418–429. [PubMed: 22439937] 
12. Beatty GL, et al. Exclusion of T Cells From Pancreatic Carcinomas in Mice Is Regulated by 
Ly6C(low) F4/80(+) Extratumoral Macrophages. Gastroenterology. 2015; 149:201–210. [PubMed: 
25888329] 
13. Zhu Y, et al. CSF1/CSF1R blockade reprograms tumor-infiltrating macrophages and improves 
response to T-cell checkpoint immunotherapy in pancreatic cancer models. Cancer Res. 2014; 
74:5057–5069. [PubMed: 25082815] 
14. Sanford DE, et al. Inflammatory Monocyte Mobilization Decreases Patient Survival in Pancreatic 
Cancer: a Role for Targeting the CCL2/CCR2 Axis. Clin Cancer Res. 2013
15. Mitchem JB, et al. Targeting tumor-infiltrating macrophages decreases tumor-initiating cells, 
relieves immunosuppression, and improves chemotherapeutic responses. Cancer Res. 2013; 
73:1128–1141. [PubMed: 23221383] 
16. Sulzmaier FJ, Jean C, Schlaepfer DD. FAK in cancer: mechanistic findings and clinical 
applications. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:598–610. [PubMed: 25098269] 
17. Frame MC, Patel H, Serrels B, Lietha D, Eck MJ. The FERM domain: organizing the structure and 
function of FAK. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010; 11:802–814. [PubMed: 20966971] 
18. Serrels A, et al. Nuclear FAK Controls Chemokine Transcription, Tregs, and Evasion of Anti-
tumor Immunity. Cell. 2015; 163:160–173. [PubMed: 26406376] 
19. Tavora B, et al. Endothelial-cell FAK targeting sensitizes tumours to DNA-damaging therapy. 
Nature. 2014; 514:112–116. [PubMed: 25079333] 
20. Zhao XK, et al. Focal Adhesion Kinase Regulates Fibroblast Migration via Integrin beta-1 and 
Plays a Central Role in Fibrosis. Sci Rep. 2016; 6:19276. [PubMed: 26763945] 
21. Balasubramanian S, et al. Dasatinib Attenuates Pressure Overload Induced Cardiac Fibrosis in a 
Murine Transverse Aortic Constriction Model. PLoS One. 2015; 10:e0140273. [PubMed: 
26458186] 
22. Rustad KC, Wong VW, Gurtner GC. The role of focal adhesion complexes in fibroblast 
mechanotransduction during scar formation. Differentiation. 2013; 86:87–91. [PubMed: 
23623400] 
23. Sonomura K, et al. The kinase Pyk2 is involved in renal fibrosis by means of mechanical stretch-
induced growth factor expression in renal tubules. Kidney Int. 2012; 81:449–457. [PubMed: 
22157654] 
24. You K, Huang Y, Zhang MC, Hao J. Control and prevention of myocardial fibrosis using Pyk2-
related non-kinase. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015; 8:18284–18292. [PubMed: 26770430] 
25. Koppel AC, et al. Delayed skin wound repair in proline-rich protein tyrosine kinase 2 knockout 
mice. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2014; 306:C899–909. [PubMed: 24598361] 
26. Graves DT, Wu Y, Badadani M. Pyk2 contributes to reepithelialization by promoting MMP 
expression. Focus on "Delayed skin wound repair in proline-rich protein tyrosine kinase 2 
knockout mice". Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2014; 306:C887–888. [PubMed: 24696142] 
27. Okigaki M, et al. Pyk2 regulates multiple signaling events crucial for macrophage morphology and 
migration. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100:10740–10745. [PubMed: 12960403] 
28. Stokes JB, et al. Inhibition of focal adhesion kinase by PF-562,271 inhibits the growth and 
metastasis of pancreatic cancer concomitant with altering the tumor microenvironment. Mol 
Cancer Ther. 2011; 10:2135–2145. [PubMed: 21903606] 
29. Konstantinidou G, et al. RHOA-FAK is a required signaling axis for the maintenance of KRAS-
driven lung adenocarcinomas. Cancer Discov. 2013; 3:444–457. [PubMed: 23358651] 
30. Bae YH, et al. A FAK-Cas-Rac-lamellipodin signaling module transduces extracellular matrix 
stiffness into mechanosensitive cell cycling. Sci Signal. 2014; 7:ra57. [PubMed: 24939893] 
31. Kumper S, Marshall CJ. ROCK-Driven Actomyosin Contractility Induces Tissue Stiffness and 
Tumor Growth. Cancer Cell. 2011; 19:695–697. [PubMed: 21665143] 
Jiang et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 32. Samuel MS, et al. Actomyosin-Mediated Cellular Tension Drives Increased Tissue Stiffness and 
beta-Catenin Activation to Induce Epidermal Hyperplasia and Tumor Growth. Cancer Cell. 2011; 
19:776–791. [PubMed: 21665151] 
33. Wozniak MA, Desai R, Solski PA, Der CJ, Keely PJ. ROCK-generated contractility regulates 
breast epithelial cell differentiation in response to the physical properties of a three-dimensional 
collagen matrix. J Cell Biol. 2003; 163:583–595. [PubMed: 14610060] 
34. Pylayeva Y, et al. Ras- and PI3K-dependent breast tumorigenesis in mice and humans requires 
focal adhesion kinase signaling. J Clin Invest. 2009; 119:252–266. [PubMed: 19147981] 
35. Rhim AD, et al. Stromal elements act to restrain, rather than support, pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma. Cancer Cell. 2014; 25:735–747. [PubMed: 24856585] 
36. Rhim AD, et al. EMT and dissemination precede pancreatic tumor formation. Cell. 2012; 148:349–
361. [PubMed: 22265420] 
37. Kim MP, et al. ALDH activity selectively defines an enhanced tumor-initiating cell population 
relative to CD133 expression in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e20636. 
[PubMed: 21695188] 
38. Hermann PC, et al. Distinct populations of cancer stem cells determine tumor growth and 
metastatic activity in human pancreatic cancer. Cell Stem Cell. 2007; 1:313–323. [PubMed: 
18371365] 
39. Crompton BD, et al. High-Throughput Tyrosine Kinase Activity Profiling Identifies FAK as a 
Candidate Therapeutic Target in Ewing Sarcoma. Cancer Research. 2013; 73:2873–2883. 
[PubMed: 23536552] 
40. Stokes JB, et al. Inhibition of Focal Adhesion Kinase by PF-562,271 Inhibits the Growth and 
Metastasis of Pancreatic Cancer Concomitant with Altering the Tumor Microenvironment. Mol 
Cancer Ther. 2011; 10:2135–2145. [PubMed: 21903606] 
41. Sulzmaier FJ, Jean C, Schlaepfer DD. FAK in cancer: mechanistic findings and clinical 
applications. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:598–610. [PubMed: 25098269] 
42. DeNardo DG, et al. Leukocyte complexity predicts breast cancer survival and functionally 
regulates response to chemotherapy. Cancer Discov. 2011; 1:54–67. [PubMed: 22039576] 
43. Ruffell B, et al. Macrophage IL10 Blocks CD8+ T Cell-Dependent Responces to Chemotherapy by 
Supressing IL12 Expression in Intratumoral Dendritic Cells. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:623–637. 
[PubMed: 25446896] 
44. Strachan DC, et al. CSF1R inhibition delays cervical and mammary tumor growth in murine 
models by attenuating the turnover of tumor-associated macrophages and enhancing infiltration by 
CD8 T cells. Oncoimmunology. 2013; 2:e26968. [PubMed: 24498562] 
45. Shree T, et al. Macrophages and cathepsin proteases blunt chemotherapeutic response in breast 
cancer. Genes & development. 2011; 25:2465–2479. [PubMed: 22156207] 
46. Beatty GL, et al. Mesothelin-specific chimeric antigen receptor mRNA-engineered T cells induce 
anti-tumor activity in solid malignancies. Cancer Immunol Res. 2014; 2:112–120. [PubMed: 
24579088] 
47. Highfill SL, et al. Disruption of CXCR2-mediated MDSC tumor trafficking enhances anti-PD1 
efficacy. Science translational medicine. 2014; 6:237ra267.
48. Mok S, et al. Inhibition of CSF-1 Receptor Improves the Antitumor Efficacy of Adoptive Cell 
Transfer Immunotherapy. Cancer Res. 2013
49. Beatty GL, et al. CD40 agonists alter tumor stroma and show efficacy against pancreatic carcinoma 
in mice and humans. Science. 2011; 331:1612–1616. [PubMed: 21436454] 
50. NIH. 2014. https://clinicaltrials.gov/
51. Chapman NM, Houtman JC. Functions of the FAK family kinases in T cells: beyond actin 
cytoskeletal rearrangement. Immunol Res. 2014; 59:23–34. [PubMed: 24816556] 
52. Chapman NM, Connolly SF, Reinl EL, Houtman JC. Focal adhesion kinase negatively regulates 
Lck function downstream of the T cell antigen receptor. J Immunol. 2013; 191:6208–6221. 
[PubMed: 24227778] 
53. Chapman NM, Yoder AN, Houtman JC. Non-catalytic functions of Pyk2 and Fyn regulate late 
stage adhesion in human T cells. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e53011. [PubMed: 23300847] 
Jiang et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 54. Collins M, Bartelt RR, Houtman JC. T cell receptor activation leads to two distinct phases of Pyk2 
activation and actin cytoskeletal rearrangement in human T cells. Mol Immunol. 2010; 47:1665–
1674. [PubMed: 20381867] 
55. Stewart JE, et al. Inhibition of FAK and VEGFR-3 binding decreases tumorigenicity in 
neuroblastoma. Mol Carcinog. 2015; 54:9–23. [PubMed: 23868727] 
56. Golubovskaya V, et al. Down-regulation of ALDH1A3, CD44 or MDR1 sensitizes resistant cancer 
cells to FAK autophosphorylation inhibitor Y15. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2015
57. Zheng D, et al. A novel strategy to inhibit FAK and IGF-1R decreases growth of pancreatic cancer 
xenografts. Mol Carcinog. 2010; 49:200–209. [PubMed: 19885860] 
58. Hochwald SN, et al. A novel small molecule inhibitor of FAK decreases growth of human 
pancreatic cancer. Cell Cycle. 2009; 8:2435–2443. [PubMed: 19571674] 
59. Francois RA, et al. Targeting Focal Adhesion Kinase and Resistance to mTOR Inhibition in 
Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015; 107
60. Kim MP, et al. Generation of orthotopic and heterotopic human pancreatic cancer xenografts in 
immunodeficient mice. Nature protocols. 2009; 4:1670–1680. [PubMed: 19876027] 
61. Weischenfeldt J, Porse B. Bone Marrow-Derived Macrophages (BMM): Isolation and 
Applications. CSH Protoc 2008, pdb prot5080. 2008
62. Pelham RJ, Wang YL. Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate flexibility 
(vol 94, pg 13661, 1997). P Natl Acad Sci USA. 1998; 95:12070–12070.
Jiang et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
FAK1 is hyperactivated in PDAC. (a) Representative Immunohistochemistry of total and 
phosphorylated FAK1/FAK (p-FAK1/FAK, Tyr397) in human normal pancreas and PDAC 
tissues; scale bar, 100 μm. (b) Immunohistochemistry analysis of CD8α+ CTLs, CD15+ and 
neutrophil elastase+ (NE+) granulocyte numbers in human PDAC patient tissues subdivided 
into p-FAK1High (n = 33) and p-FAK1Low (n = 23) by mean p-FAK1 expression. (c) Kaplan-
Meier survival analysis of PDAC patients stratified by mean p-FAK1 and CD8α+ CTL 
values (n = 50), with p-FAK1High CD8αLow group displayed vs. all other groups. (d) 
Quantification of Sirius Red staining (total collagen) or collagen I in human PDAC tumor 
tissues subdivided into p-FAK1High and p-FAK1Low by mean p-FAK1 expression. (e) 
Representative Immunohistochemistry for p-FAK1 and staining for Sirius Red in human 
PDAC and adjacent “normal” tissue; scale bar, 400 μm. (f) Representative 
immunohistochemistry for p-FAK1, Trichrome (total collagen), GR1+ granulocytes and 
F4/80+ TAMs in normal pancreatic tissue, early PANIN, late PANIN and PDAC tumor from 
KPC mice. Cytokeratin 19 (“CK19”) and Pan-Keratin (“PAN-K”) mark pancreatic epithelial 
cells. Scale bars: p-FAK1, 100 μm; Trichrome, GR-1 and F4/80, 200 μm. (g) 
Immunofluorescence analysis of p-FAK1 expression in KP cells cultured on collagen I gel, 
collagen IV-coated plates, fibronectin (FN1)-coated or laminin-coated polyacrylamide gels 
and FN1-coated compliant (800 Pa) / rigid (20 kPa) polyacrylamide gels. (h) 
Immunofluorescence analysis of p-FAK1 expression in KP cells cultured on collagen I gel 
Jiang et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and treated with vehicle or ROCKi (Y-27632). Error bars, mean ± s.e.m; * indicates P < 0.05 
by unpaired two-sided Student’s t-test (b,d and g), log-rank test (c) or one-way ANOVA 
with Tukey’s method for multiple comparisons (h).
Jiang et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Inhibition of FAK reduces tumor fibrosis and suppresses tumor progression. (a, b) Kaplan-
Meier survival analysis of (a) KPC and (b) KPPC mice treated with vehicle, FAK inhibitor 
(FAKi; VS-4718), or Gemcitabine (GEM). Treatment started at 3.5 months (“early”) or at 
overt disease (“late”) in a, and at 1.5 months in b. (c) Measurement of maximal tumor 
diameter in KPC mice since start of treatment as described in a. (d) Change in tumor burden 
in mice bearing established (> 0.5 cm) orthotopic KI tumors treated with vehicle or FAKi (n 
= 8–9 mice/group). (e) Representative Trichrome (Blue) and Sirius Red (Red) staining in 
PDAC tissue from KPC mice treated with either vehicle or FAKi; scale bars, 400 μm. Right 
panel depicts percentage of Sirius Red+ area for each treatment group and time point (n = 6–
9 mice/group). (f) Representative immunofluorescence staining for FAP in PDAC tissue 
from vehicle- and FAKi- treated KPC mice; scale bar, 400 μm. Right panel depicts 
percentage of FAP+ area for each treatment group (n = 11–13 mice/group). (g) 
Representative immunohistochemistry and quantification for stromal and tumor Ki67+ cells 
from vehicle- and FAKi-treated KPC mice; scale bars, 200 μm (inset, 50 μm) (n = 8–11 
mice/group). (h) Representative immunofluorescence staining for FAP and Ki67 in PDAC 
tissue from vehicle- and FAKi-treated KPC mice; scale bars, 400 μm (magnified field, 50 
Jiang et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 μm). (i) mRNA expression analysis from gene array of orthotopic KP tumors following 14-
days treatment with vehicle or FAKi. (n = 6–7 mice/group). Error bars, mean ± s.e.m.; * 
indicates P < 0.05, ** indicates P < 0.01 by log-rank test (a,b), or unpaired two-sided 
Student’s t-test (d,e,f,g).
Jiang et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
FAK inhibitor suppresses tumor progression and metastasis. (a) Tumor grading analysis on 
pancreas tissue from end-stage vehicle- and FAKi-treated KPC mice for each disease stage 
(left, n = 16–17 mice/group) and percentage of high-grade PDAC in total PDAC area (right, 
n = 5 mice/group). (b) Immunohistochemistry analysis and quantification of YFP+ invasive 
tumor cells in PDAC tissue from KPC-Y mice treated for 1 month with vehicle or FAKi; 
scale bars, 200 μm for left panel (magnified field, 100 μm) and 260 μm for right panel. 
Arrowheads indicate single invading tumor cells (n = 5 mice/group). (c) Flow cytometry 
analysis of % ALDHBright and % CD24Hi CD44Hi tumor cells in KI orthotopic tumors 
treated for 10 days with vehicle or FAKi (n = 6–7 mice/group). (d) Histology analysis for 
frequency of liver metastases from KPC mice treated with vehicle or FAKi; scale bar, 200 
μm. Error bars, mean ± s.e.m.; * indicates P < 0.05 by Student’s t-test (a-c), or Fisher’s 
exact test (d).
Jiang et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
FAK inhibition decreases immunosuppressive cell populations in tumors. (a) Representative 
immunofluorescence and quantification for F4/80+ or CD206+ macrophages and GR1+ 
granulocytes in PDAC tissue from KPC mice treated for 1.5 months with vehicle or FAKi; 
scale bars, 200 μm. Graphs depict percentage of marker+ area (for F4/80 and CD206) or 
cells/cm2 tissue (for GR1). CK19 and PAN-K mark epithelial-origin tumor cells. (n = 6–11 
mice/group). (b) Representative immunohistochemistry and quantification for p-STAT3 in 
PDAC tissue from KPC mice treated for 1.5 months with vehicle or FAKi. Graph depicts 
percentage of p-STAT3High/PDAC cell nuclei (n = 9 mice/group). (c) Flow cytometry 
analyses of monocytes, granulocytes, TAMs and Tregs in PDAC tissue from mice bearing 
orthotopic KI tumors treated for 10 days with vehicle or FAKi (n = 6–7 mice/group). Error 
bars, mean ± s.e.m.; * indicates P < 0.05 by Student’s t-test (a,b,c).
Jiang et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
FAK1 in PDAC cells drives fibrosis and immunosuppression. (a) In vitro growth analysis for 
KP or KC cells expressing shLuc or shFAK1 constructs, or treated with FAK1/2i (VS-4718) 
or FAK1i (VS-116). (b) Syngeneic tumor growth of KP or KC cells stably expressing shLuc 
or shFAK1. (c) Representative staining and quantification for Sirius Red (left) and FAP 
(right) in KP tumors expressing shLuc or shFAK1; scale bars, 400 μm. (d) Flow cytometry 
analysis of granulocytes, TAMs and CD8+ T cells in KP tumors expressing shLuc or 
shFAK1. (e) In vivo subcutaneous tumor burden 25 days after injection with KP cells 
expressing shLuc or shFAK1. A subset of mice was also treated with CD4- and CD8-
depleting IgG starting 1 day before tumor cell injection. (f) Cytokine profile of CM from KP 
cells treated with vehicle or FAKi for 24 hours (left) and ELISA for CXCL12 protein 
expression in CM from KP cells treated with DMSO, FAK1/2i or FAK1i for 24 hours 
(right). (g) Flow cytometry analysis of CD11b+ Ly6G+ and CD11b+ Ly6G− Ly6C+ 
leukocyte trafficking in trans-well system containing different CM. (h) Immunofluorescence 
staining for Ki67 in normal murine pancreas fibroblasts following 24-hour treatment with 
DMSO or FAKi, with CM from parental KP cells +/− DMSO or FAKi (left panel), or CM 
from KP or KC cells expressing shLuc or shFAK1 (right panel). (i) Immunofluorescence 
staining for Ki67 in normal murine pancreas fibroblasts following treatment with CM from 
KP cells cultured on BME +/− neutralizing antibodies against CXCL12. All in vitro assays 
are representative of 3 independent and agreeing replicate experiments. All animal 
Jiang et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experiments included 5–7 mice/group unless otherwise specified. Error bars, mean ± s.e.m.; 
* indicates P < 0.05 by one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s Multiple Comparison Test 
(a,b,c,d,f,g) or Student’s t-test (e,h,i).
Jiang et al.
Page 28
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
FAK inhibition renders PDAC tumors responsive to chemo- and immunotherapy. (a) 
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis of KPPC mice treated with vehicle or FAKi (VS-4718) +/
− 75 mg/kg Gemcitabine (“GEM75”). (b) Representative Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E), 
Sirius Red and immunofluorescence staining for cleaved caspase-3 (CC3) and Pan-Keratin 
(Pan-K) in end-stage tumor tissue from KPPC mice treated with GEM75 or FAKi+GEM75; 
scale bar, 400 μm for H&E and Sirius Red, 200 μm for CC3. (c) Tumor growth curve of KP-
OVA-bearing mice treated with vehicle or FAKi followed by adoptive cell transfer (ACT) of 
OT-I T cells. Right panel shows percentage change in tumor volume 11 days after ACT. (d) 
In vivo bioluminescence imaging (BLI) of luciferase+ OT-I CD8α+ T cells in KP-OVA-
bearing mice 11 days after ACT, with quantification of mean photon flux/tumor volume. (e) 
Tumor growth curve (left) and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis (right) of KP tumor-bearing 
mice treated as described. (f) Representative immunofluorescence staining and 
quantification for CD8α+ CTLs and cytokeratin 19 (CK19) in tumor tissues from selected 
treatment groups; scale bar, 100 μm. (g) Kaplan-Meier survival analysis of KPPC mice 
treated with vehicle, FAKi, “Immuno” (i.e. GEM25 + anti-PD1/anti-CTLA4), vehicle + 
Immuno or FAKi + Immuno. Black notches indicate animals alive without detectable disease 
Jiang et al.
Page 29
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 progression after 6 months. (h) Representative immunofluorescence staining for CD8α+ 
CTLs (left) or CD4+ FOXP3+ Tregs (right) in end-stage tumor tissue from KPPC mice; scale 
bars, 200 μm for CD8α and CD4 (magnified field, 100 μm). All values are depicted as mean 
± s.e.m.; * indicates P < 0.05, ** denotes P < 0.01 by log-rank test (a,e,g), unpaired two-
sided Student’s t-tests (b,d) or one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s method for multiple 
comparisons (c,e,f). All animal experiments include >7 mice/group unless otherwise 
specified.
Jiang et al.
Page 30
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
