 Review Article
Human factors in preventing complications in anaesthesia: a
systematic review
C. P. L. Jones,1,4 J. Fawker-Corbett,2 P. Groom,1 B. Morton,1,3 C. Lister2 and S. J. Mercer1,4,5
1 Consultant Anaesthetist, 2 Specialty Trainee, Aintree University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Longmoor Lane,
Aintree, Liverpool, UK
3 Honorary Research Fellow, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke Place, Liverpool, UK
4 Consultant Anaesthetist and Defence Lecturer, Defence Medical Services, Royal Centre for Defence Medicine, Queen
Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, Mindelsohn Way, Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK
5 Honorary Senior Lecturer, Postgraduate School of Medicine, University of Liverpool, Cedar House, Ashton Street,
Liverpool, UK
Summary
Human factors in anaesthesia were first highlighted by the publication of the Anaesthetists Non-Technical Skills
Framework, and since then an awareness of their importance has gradually resulted in changes in routine clinical
practice. This review examines recent literature around human factors in anaesthesia, and highlights recent national
reports and guidelines with a focus on team working, communication, situation awareness and human error. We
highlight the importance of human factors in modern anaesthetic practice, using the example of complex trauma.
.................................................................................................................................................................
Correspondence to: S. J Mercer
Email: simonjmercer@hotmail.com
Accepted: 1 September 2017
Keywords: communication; human error; human factors; non-technical skills; patient safety; team working
Introduction
There is widespread recognition that human factors
are key to the safe delivery of healthcare in the UK.
Human factors are defined as: “enhancing clinical per-
formance through an understanding of the effects of
teamwork, tasks, equipment, workspace, culture and
organisation on human behaviour and abilities and
application of that knowledge in clinical settings” [1];
or more simply, “the science of improving human per-
formance and well-being, by examining all the effectors
of human performance” [2].
There has been research into how human factors
for
anaesthetists
[3],
surgeons
[4]
and
scrub
practitioners [5] are translated into clinical practice.
Safe and efficient task performance requires both
technical and non-technical skills [6]. Deficiencies in
non-technical skills at the individual level increase
the chance of errors and adverse events [7]. There is
also evidence that teamwork glitches, communication
failures, and cultural and hierarchal barriers con-
tribute to safety failures [8–10]. Sir Liam Donaldson,
a previous Chief Medical Officer, stated that “to err
is human, to cover up is unforgivable, and to fail to
learn is inexcusable” [11]. It is hoped that the recent
concordat signed by 16 organisations including the
General
Medical
Council,
NHS
England
and
the
12
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 12–24
doi:10.1111/anae.14136
 Care
Quality
Commission
will
lead
to
further
embedding of human factors into everyday practice
[12].
This review article examines the literature around
human factors in anaesthesia, and highlights recent
national reports and guidelines, with a particular focus
on how their adoption can promote safer delivery of
care.
Methods
We
searched
Medline
and
CINAHL
for
papers
reporting on human factors and non-technical skills
in anaesthesia. We limited the search to articles pub-
lished from the year 2000 onwards, to represent con-
temporary
practice.
The
search
included
full-text
reports of articles from peer-reviewed journals pub-
lished in English with no restriction to study method-
ology. In addition, we manually searched anaesthesia-
specific journals by typing ‘human factors’ into the
search box for Anaesthesia, Anesthesiology, Anesthesia
and Analgesia, The British Journal of Anaesthesia, the
Canadian Journal of Anesthesia and European Journal
of Anesthesiology, accepting articles (not abstracts pre-
sented at conferences) from after 2000. In addition,
reference
lists
of
the
manuscripts
reviewed
were
scrutinised for additional relevant articles and book
chapters.
The titles and abstracts of the references obtained
were reviewed by two independent reviewers (SM and
CJ).
Inclusion
criteria
were:
papers
referring
to
human factors; non-technical skills; team resource or
crew resource management; and papers published on
or after 2000. Exclusion criteria were: animal studies;
and papers not referring to human factors, non-tech-
nical
skills
team
resource
management
or
crew
resource management in theatres, anaesthesia, trauma
or critical care. Articles were removed if both review-
ers agreed independently to exclude. In the event of
agreement to include, or a discordant opinion, articles
were reviewed in full by one out of five independent
reviewers (SM, CJ, JC, CL and PG). Our full protocol
and search strategy are registered with and published
by
PROSPERO
(http://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROS
PERO).
The results of the literature search are described in
Fig. 1.
Anaesthetists Non-Technical Skills
Work performed by the University of Aberdeen on
Anaesthetists
Non-Technical
Skills
(ANTS)
[3]
Figure 1 Systematic review literature search flow.
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
13
Jones et al. | Human factors in preventing complications in anaesthesia
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 12–24
 provides a practical framework for clinical practice
(Table 1). Initial analysis showed that the ANTS sys-
tem had a satisfactory level of validity, reliability and
usability in an experimental setting [3]. The increasing
importance of human factors has been recognised in
the recommendations of several recent national reports
and guidelines. In this review, we highlight some of
the individual components of human factors described
in the literature, and examine their importance in clin-
ical practice by considering complex trauma manage-
ment in the emergency department (ED) and in the
operating theatre, as this is our subspeciality interest.
National reports and guidelines
We highlight two recent reports and two national
guidelines that demonstrate the importance of human
factors in anaesthesia. They share common themes
that will be explored in more depth below.
The 4th National Audit Project (NAP4) [13] was
the first prospective study of all major airway events
occurring throughout the UK, and resulted in a review
of any complications resulting from airway manage-
ment that led to either death, brain damage, the need
for an emergency surgical airway, unanticipated ICU
admission or prolongation of ICU stay. After final
review, 184 reports met the inclusion criteria, and sub-
sequent in-depth analysis identified human factors as
having been a relevant influence in every case. Latent
Table 1 The
Anaesthetists
Non-Technical
Skills
Framework [3].
Categories
Elements
Task
management
•
Planning and preparing
•
Prioritising
•
Providing and maintaining standards
•
Identifying and utilising resources
Team
working
•
Coordinating activities with team
members
•
Exchanging information
•
Using authority and assertiveness
•
Assessing capabilities
•
Supporting others
Situation
awareness
•
Gathering Information
•
Recognising and understanding
•
Anticipating
Decision
making
•
Identifying options
•
Balancing risks and selecting options
•
Re-evaluating
Table 2 Human factors recognised by NAP4 taken
directly from the published report [15].
Individual
and team
non-technical
skills
•
Casual attitude to risk/overconfidence
•
Peer tolerance of poor standards
•
Lack of clarity in team structures
•
Incomplete or inadequate briefing and
handovers/poor or non-existent
debriefing
•
Poor or dysfunctional
communication – especially between
specialties
•
Failure to follow advice from a senior
colleague
•
Inadequate checking procedures
•
Failure to request previous patient
records
•
Failure to take and document a
comprehensive history
•
Failure to undertake appropriate
pre-operative investigations
•
Wrong interpretation of clinical
findings/test results
•
Failure to use available equipment
(e.g. capnography)
•
Attempts to use unfamiliar
equipment in an emergency situation
•
Failure to cope with stressful
environment/interruptive workplace
•
Failure to formulate back-up plans
and discuss with the team members
•
Fixation errors, resulting in a failure
to recognise and abort a plan which
is not working, and move to
another potential solution
•
Frequent/last minute changes of plan
System design
and
management
•
Equipment shortages
•
Inadequate maintenance of equipment
•
Incompatible goals (e.g. conflict
between financial and clinical need)
•
Reluctance to undertake a formal
analysis of adverse events/learn
from errors
•
Loss of documentation (e.g.
previous patient records not available)
•
Inadequate systems of communication
•
Highly mobile working arrangements
leading to difficulties in communication
•
Inexperienced personnel working
unsupervised
•
No scheduled training sessions for
updating staff in the use of new
techniques/equipment
•
Incomplete training/inadequate
knowledge or experience
•
Heavy personal work-loads/lack of time
to undertake thorough assessments
•
Organisational and professional
cultures which induce or tolerate
unsafe practices
•
No requirement at organisational
level to undertake formalised
checking procedures
14
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 12–24
Jones et al. | Human factors in preventing complications in anaesthesia
 threats (poor communication, poor training and team-
work, deficiencies in equipment, and inadequate sys-
tems and processes) predisposed to loss of situational
awareness and subsequent poor decision making [14].
We have divided human factors errors into individual
and team non-technical skills and system and design
management (Table 2).
The 5th National Audit Project (NAP5) [16] on
accidental
awareness
during
general
anaesthesia
(AAGA)
reported
that
two-thirds
of
awareness
occurred during induction and emergence. Contribut-
ing factors included: the use of thiopentone; rapid
sequence induction (RSI) of anaesthesia; obese patients;
difficult airway management; neuromuscular blockade;
and transfers to theatre [16]. Of those cases of AAGA
reported, 73% were deemed to be avoidable, with mis-
communication found to be the main contributory fac-
tor in greater than 80% cases of AAGA associated with
sedation. Human factors recognised by NAP5 are
described in Table 3.
The Difficult Airway Society (DAS) guidelines for
unanticipated difficult airway 2015 [17] included a
whole section on human factors, and incorporated rec-
ommendations made by the NAP4 report. The guideli-
nes highlight the importance of clinician awareness
that poor communication, poor training and team-
work,
deficiencies
in
equipment,
and
inadequate
systems and processes predispose to loss of situation
awareness and subsequent poor decision making. In
stressful situations such as cannot intubate, cannot
oxygenate (CICO), anaesthetists can become over-
loaded,
and
the
DAS
guidelines
provide
explicit
instructions for the team to ‘stop and think’. A ‘decla-
ration of the emergency’ ensures that all members of
the team start this critical situation on the ‘same page’
and can follow the same mental model (i.e. follow the
DAS Guidelines).
It is also important that teams rehearse together
and consider using simulation to develop non-techni-
cal skills, such as: leadership; team co-ordination; com-
munication; and shared understanding of roles [17]. A
team brief before the start of each anaesthetic, particu-
larly between anaesthetist and operating department
practitioner (ODP) is also considered to be good prac-
tice, and encourages thinking about specific challenges
and checking availability of appropriate equipment.
The DAS guidelines for the management of tra-
cheal extubation [18] recognised that human factors
compound problems related to tracheal extubation.
Problems arise when there is inadequate equipment,
inadequate skilled assistance, suboptimal patient posi-
tioning, limited access to airway (e.g. due to dressings/
gastric tubes/rigid fixators), interruption of oxygen
supply during patient transfer, communication difficul-
ties (e.g. language, mental capacity) and the removal of
oxygen by agitated or uncooperative patient.
Human factor components
Teamwork
The term ‘teamwork’ describes a number of beha-
vioural processes and emergent states [19] and is
defined as “a distinguishable set of two or more people
who interact dynamically, interdependently, and adap-
tively towards a common and valued goal, who have
each been assigned specific roles or functions to perform,
and who have a limited life-span membership” [20].
Although teams consist of individuals, it is important
to work towards maximising the mental and physical
problem-solving capabilities of the group, such that
the sum is greater than its parts [21]. In complex
teams, teamwork is more than just subordinates doing
what their leader tells them to do, and relies on good
followership; followership is ‘the active engagement of
Table 3 Human factors recognised by NAP5.
Induction of
anaesthesia
•
Drugs errors (mislabelling, syringe
swaps, failure to mix drugs,
underdosing due to lack of
knowledge)
•
Distraction (by colleagues or by
unexpected difficulty)
•
Timing (rushing, busy lists with
multiple changes)
•
Fatigue
•
Seniority (unsupervised juniors, lack
of knowledge)
Maintenance of
anaesthesia
•
Underdosing (due to cardiovascular
instability, risk to fetus, inattention/
judgement errors)
Emergence from
anaesthesia
•
Switching off anaesthetic agents
too early due to poor communication
or lack of knowledge
•
Failure to monitor neuromuscular
blockade
•
Rushing and mistiming
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
15
Jones et al. | Human factors in preventing complications in anaesthesia
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 12–24
 followers in helping the group achieve its goals’ [22].
Good teamwork is associated with improved produc-
tivity, innovation and job satisfaction [23]. Teams who
demonstrate
similar
mental
models
move
quicker
through the phases common to most crises. This is
important, particularly in complex trauma [24].
Communication
It is estimated that communication failures account for
43% of errors in the operating theatre in the USA
[25]. Communication failures can be categorised as fol-
lows: the provision of insufficient information; poor
timing of the communication (e.g. too late); unresolved
issues at the end of the communication; or the absence
of key personnel [26]. In time-critical situations, it is
important that there is a team leader who can impart
critical information without the potential for misinter-
pretation or misunderstanding, irrespective of the situ-
ation or the composition of the team.
Effective communication relies on clarity (‘keeping
it clear’), brevity (‘keeping it brief)’, empathy, (‘how will
it feel to receive this?’), with provision for a feedback
loop. Directed communication and closed-loop commu-
nication is particularly important when rapid response
is critical, and involves specification of who the order or
communication is directed towards, usually by using a
hand signal or saying the person’s name [27]. It is vital
that an atmosphere of open information exchange is
achieved by empowering all team members to speak out.
Barriers to challenging include poor communication
skills [28, 29] and poor intra-operative communication
between seniors and juniors [30], and should be taught
as part of the anaesthetic curriculum [31].
A shared mental model promotes an accurate
understanding of the facts, defends against error and
allows the cognitive resources of the entire team to be
fully leveraged for decision making and error detection
[32]. This model can be facilitated by a team brief,
which needs to include the following: the introduction
of all team members by name and role; a briefing as to
what is expected to happen; and allocation of tasks. An
example of this is the World Health Organization
(WHO) Safety Checklist [33]. To maintain effective
communication during a critical emergency, it is vital
that increased noise does not cause distraction. A ‘sterile
cockpit’ has been described in the airline industry
during key moments, and is also vital in emergency
patient care [34]. This is achieved by the noise level
being kept to an absolute minimum, and is reliant on
good ‘crowd control’ so that excessive noise levels are
kept low.
It is important to adopt a culture of good commu-
nication. There is evidence that nurses and trainee
doctors do not feel sufficiently empowered during
interactions with senior doctors. Factors responsible
for this include: hierarchy; sex; differing patient care
responsibilities; differing perceptions of requisite com-
munication standards; and differences in the training
methods [35].
Situational awareness
Situational awareness is the continuous monitoring of
the task, detection of events, and changes in the
environment. Almost all aspects of anaesthetists’ intra-
operative tasks rely heavily on their vigilance and
situational awareness skills [36]. Situational awareness
can be defined by three questions: ‘Where have we come
from?’; ‘Where are we now?’; and ‘Where are we going?’
[37]. Practically, factors such as clinical signs and physi-
ology seen on the monitors, the rest of the operating
theatre team and other technology are vital to inform
situational awareness [38]. The importance of a shared
situational awareness is key to effective teamwork, and
in the military this is improved by regular updates by
the team leader in the form of situational updates (‘sit-
reps’) [24]. The three levels of situational awareness and
an error taxonomy are described in Table 4.
Human error
It is reported that there is an average of one error in
every 133 anaesthetics, and 130 errors for every 1000
patient ICU days [39]. Anaesthetic drug errors are
commonly caused by slips and lapses, fixation errors
(failure to revise a situation assessment as new evi-
dence emerges) [40], mistakes, knowledge-based errors
and deliberate violations [41]. Recommendations to
avoid drug errors include the following:
•
Careful inspection of labels before a drug is drawn
up or injected.
•
Optimise label legibility and contents on syringes,
according to agreed standards.
16
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 12–24
Jones et al. | Human factors in preventing complications in anaesthesia
 •
Formal organisation of drug drawers and work-
space.
•
Second checker for labels before a drug is drawn
up or administered.
•
Thorough reporting and review of intravenous drug
administration errors.
•
Manage drug inventory to focus on minimising the
risk of drug error.
•
Avoid similar packaging and presentation of drugs
where possible.
Accidents
occur
due
to
the
interrelationship
between real-time ‘unsafe acts’ by front-line operators
and latent conditions [42]. In Reason’s classical ‘Swiss
cheese’ model, this is thought to be due to ‘holes’
appearing in the multiple levels of the system, and that
when these holes line up, as in multiple slices of Swiss
cheese, an accident can occur. ‘The Parmesan cheese
model’ [43] may be a better representation of the clini-
cian’s responsibility in routine patient care, and the
importance of minimising any deficiencies in routine
practice. In this analogy, small shavings from the
cheese occur every time our practice contributes to sub-
standard practice; ‘with each shave – no matter how
small – we remove from the whole’, thereby decreasing
the chances of optimal patient outcome [43].
Observable team errors may be classified into five
basic types.
1
Task execution – an unintentional physical act
that deviates from the intended course of action.
2
Procedural – an unintentional failure to follow
mandated procedures.
3
Communication – a failure to transmit informa-
tion, failure to understand information or failure
to share a mental model.
4
Decision – a choice of action unbounded by pro-
cedures that unnecessarily increase hazard and
5
Intentional non-compliance – violations of formal
procedures or regulations [44]. Latent errors in the
operating theatre are further classified as follows [45]:
•
Equipment, design and maintenance (availability,
functioning, standardisation of design and mainte-
nance of machines).
•
Staffing (adequate staffing and skills).
•
Communication
(work-directed
communication,
openness, interrelation and atmosphere).
•
Training (training for machines, procedures and
team training).
•
Teamwork and team training (team performance).
•
Procedures (presence of protocols and adherence to
protocols).
•
Situational awareness (awareness of present situa-
tion, own tasks and future developments).
•
Incompatible goals (balance between goals and
safety).
Table 4 Levels of situational awareness and error taxonomy – adapted from Endsley [37].
Level 1 situational awareness: failure
to correctly perceive the situation
‘Where have we come from?’
•
The data are not available
•
The data are difficult to detect or perceive
•
There is a failure to scan or observe data due to
o
Omission
o
Attentional narrowing or distraction
o
High taskload of individual
•
There is misperception of the data
•
Individual memory failure
Level 2 situational awareness: failure
to comprehend situation
‘Where are we now?’
•
Lack of or a poor mental model
•
Use of the incorrect mental model
•
Over-reliance on default values in the mental model
•
Individual memory failure
Level 3 situational awareness: failure
to project situation into the future
‘Where are we going?’
•
Lack of or a poor mental model
General
•
Failure to maintain multiple goals
•
Habitual schema
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
17
Jones et al. | Human factors in preventing complications in anaesthesia
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 12–24
 •
Planning and organisation (process of care).
•
Housekeeping (hygiene).
The importance of human factors in
clinical practice
The authors work in a busy major trauma centre in
the North-West of England. We have taken the results
of the literature review and applied this to our clinical
practice. Much of these findings are generalisable into
other areas of clinical anaesthesia.
Emergency department
Anaesthetists are frequently called to support critically
unwell, time-critical patients in the ED. At the time of
the call, patients may physically be in the department
or en route. This can result in overwhelming or inade-
quate clinical information, respectively. Both circum-
stances provide an immediate cognitive load and
increased risk of cognitive errors. These patients fre-
quently require high-risk anaesthetic interventions to
promote safety, but there is minimal time to consider
factors that may prevent poor critical decision-making
(Table 5).
There are increased distractions, mental workload
and cognitive pressures in ED that further increase the
risk of team errors. These include in particular deviation
from standardised operating procedures, not using cog-
nitive aids (checklists), violations of formal procedures
or regulations and intentional non-compliance [44].
Lack of familiarity and poor ergonomic design of ED
resuscitation bays can have a significant negative impact
on situational awareness. Fatigue, frequently encoun-
tered on call, can further exacerbate this situation. Fati-
gue has been reported to degrade or cause variability in
performance by reducing attention–vigilance, slowing
cognitive throughput, impairing memory and decision
making, prolonging reaction time and disrupting com-
munications. When managing high-acuity patients in
ED, it takes only a moment of reduced performance
during a critical task to have a negative outcome [48].
The reception and resuscitation of a critically
unwell patient in ED can be divided a number of
stages.
Initial handover
Pre-hospital teams should give a pre-alert notification
for admission of all critically unwell patients to the
ED. This allows time to assemble appropriately-skilled
resources and can trigger several defined protocols for
preparation of key interventions and additional logisti-
cal, specialist support (e.g. activation of trauma vs
medical cardiac arrest teams, major haemorrhage pro-
tocol, paediatric and obstetric teams, and ensuring an
emergency theatre is on stand-by to receive). On
Table 5 Emergency department contributory factors to
poor critical decision making, delayed diagnosis and
missed injury. To be considered before delivery of high
risk anaesthetic interventions.
Patient
factors
Evolving pathophysiology (medical and
surgical)
Altered level of consciousness – inability
to take a history
Haemodynamic and respiratory
compromise
Minimal clinical assessment completed
so far
Distracting injuries
Multiple injuries
Child vs. adult
Urgency of clinical problem
Provider
factors
Lack of knowledge, inexperience
Failure to adapt (low to high mental
work-load)
Lack of skilled assistance
Complacency
Fatigue
Emotive case
Practical difficulties and frustration
Failure to re-assess
Confirmation bias
Poor team dynamics
Ineffective communication
•
Hierarchical gradients [46]
•
Loss of situational awareness
•
Poor followership
Environmental
factors
Unfamiliar clinical environment
Increased auditory and physical distractions
•
Raised noise levels – crowd control
•
Multiple equipment alarms [47]
•
Increased staff observation &
movement
Ergonomic design – visibility of patient
monitor
Equipment familiarity and maintenance
Remote from specialist anaesthetic
equipment
Remote from immediate senior
anaesthetic support
Delayed access to specialist surgical
support and imaging
Standardised operational procedures
and cognitive aids
18
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 12–24
Jones et al. | Human factors in preventing complications in anaesthesia
 arrival, the handover must be delivered in a standard-
ised manner. Although there is variability among ser-
vices, many use the AT-MIST acronym (Table 6).
Early and robust decisions are required from the team
leader, often in conjunction with the anaesthetic team
and other specialties present. A formalised handover
process
ensures
that
the
team
is
prepared
and
‘switched on’ to receive crucial information in com-
plete silence, and ready to assimilate this information
into orders of priority. However, this process may fall
short when handovers are inadequate and the mental
model is no longer ‘shared’; this is referred to this as
‘the Bermuda Triangle of healthcare’ [49].
Primary systematic assessment
The role of the designated team leader is to allocate roles
(according to clinical competencies) and facilitate a pri-
mary systematic assessment and other subsequent tasks
in a ‘horizontal fashion’ [50]. Systematic re-assessments
are vital for the management of complex critically unwell
patients. This process permits shared understanding
(especially important in evolving pathophysiology), the
formulation of clear mental models and supports subse-
quent critical decisions. Failure to perform re-assessment
promotes cognitive bias and may impact on critical deci-
sion, for example, computed tomographic (CT) imaging
vs. immediate surgical intervention, or critical care sup-
port vs. recognition of futility and palliation.
Communication for critical decisions
Best practice management of critically unwell patients
in the ED requires a multidisciplinary team approach
with excellent communication. The key to delivering
damage control resuscitation and surgery has been
shown to be effective communication [51]. Although
this
requirement
is self-evident,
the
principles
to
achieving this can be forgotten or be suboptimal in
stressful situations. In response to this, the Trauma
WHO checklist has been proposed to improve and
streamline communication during the damage control
resuscitation [24]. This checklist has been tested and
modified in a military field hospital in Afghanistan
[52], and the main elements are described in Table 7.
The key features of the Command Huddle (described
below) could be applied within NHS practice to all ED
medical and surgical resuscitations. Following initial
assessment and resuscitation the team leader should
have formulated their own mental model and plan.
Before presenting it to the team, the team leader
should share and exchange critical information with
key members (anaesthetist, surgeon, medical physician,
intensivist, theatre lead etc.). Once agreed on a shared
mental model, the team leader presents their plan and
explores opinions from key members. The objective of
the command huddle is to formulate a plan of action
with clear order of priorities.
Emergency department rapid sequence induction
During the command huddle, the anaesthetist needs to
justify why an ED RSI of anaesthesia is required, and
complete their own risk vs. benefit analysis (Table 8).
The less situationally aware anaesthetist may immedi-
ately agree to delivering an RSI, especially for a patient
with a ‘solid’ indication(s). This is fraught with danger
unless there is clear understanding of the patient’s
pathology, consideration of specific anaesthetic cau-
tions and contingency planning to manage unantici-
pated difficulty with tracheal intubation. As outlined in
NAP4, the incidence of serious airway complications
causing death or brain damage is significantly greater
in the ED, with at least one in 50,000 anaesthetics
requiring a surgical airway [13]. The 2015 Difficult
Airway Society guidelines suggest waking a patient up
when both tracheal intubation and supraglottic airway
Table 6 Elements of the AT-MIST pre-alert and han-
dover.
Trauma
Medical
Age (include name
for handover)
Age (include name for handover)
Time of incident
Time of onset
Mechanism of injury
Medical complaint/history
Injuries top to toe
Investigations (brief examination
findings)
Vital signs (first set
and significant
changes)
Vital signs (first set and significant
changes)
Treatment
Treatment
Additional pre-alert
information:
Estimated time
of arrival
Mode of transport
Specialist resources
standing by
Additional pre-alert information:
Estimated time of arrival
Mode of transport
Specialist resources standing by
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
19
Jones et al. | Human factors in preventing complications in anaesthesia
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 12–24
 device insertion have failed [17], however, this may
not be possible for patients receiving an RSI for indi-
cations 1–3 (see below), and requires careful discussion
and planning.
Improving safety requires engagement. Emerging
evidence regarding safer practices offer substantial
gains in safety, but only if effectively implemented
[44]. Developing methods for a systematic approach to
the safety of ED RSI is supported by results in other
high-reliability organisations [45]. Without this, the
effectiveness of human factor training and awareness
would necessarily be limited. Safety culture, specifically
for the use of ED RSI checklists, has increased since
the implementation of the WHO surgical safety check-
list [53] and following recommendations from NAP4
[13] to use cognitive aids for emergency anaesthesia. A
systematic approach to safety around RSI in the ED is
described in Table 9.
It is not uncommon to perform complex proce-
dures in ED (e.g. emergency resuscitative thoracotomy),
or to undertake prolonged resuscitation before critical
care admission or performing a tertiary transfer to a
specialist hospital. When this occurs, there is often a
transfer of leadership to the anaesthetist.
The operating theatre
The operating theatre is recognised as a high-risk, acci-
dent-prone environment where the consequences of
failure can be catastrophic [53], and failures in non-
technical skills, particularly communication [25] and
teamwork have contributed to adverse events [54]. To
elucidate these, we have focused on four specific areas:
handover; hierarchy; checklists; and equipment. Again,
we have used complex trauma as an example, as this is
often a complex situation that is highly stressful,
involving a multidisciplinary team and where individu-
als are frequently placed out of their own comfort
zones.
Handover
The use of checklists and protocols has been shown
to improve the routine handover of patients [55]. In
an evolution of these, electronic handovers have been
tested and also found to be useful [56]. Failed com-
munication upon transfer of care may lead to adverse
events [56]. In the example of complex trauma, there
should be a formal handover from the trauma team
leader to the lead anaesthetist in the operating the-
atre. This process ensures that the whole trauma
team are aware of who the team leader is at all times
[57].
Hierarchy
In emergency situations, it is important that members
of the team are empowered to challenge their seniors.
‘Speaking-up’, or the ability to effectively challenge
erroneous decisions, is essential to preventing harm;
despite significant multifactorial barriers, systematic
training in effective ‘speaking up’ could improve the
confidence and ability of juniors to challenge erro-
neous decisions [31]. Perceived barriers to challenging
include the following: assumed hierarchy; fear of
embarrassment of self or others; concern over being
misjudged; fear of being wrong; fear of retribution;
jeopardising an ongoing relationship; natural avoidance
of conflict; and concern for reputation [58]. In the
Table 7 The
Trauma
World
Health
Organisation
checklist.
Command
Huddle
Following the primary and secondary survey
the team leader uses the information gleaned
from the handover from the pre-hospital
team, the physical examination, imaging
and blood test to arrive at a decision on
the next step in patient care. This is often
transfer to the CT scanner, but may involve
direct transfer to the operating theatre or
critical care.
Snap
Brief
Before commencing surgery there is a
reconfirmation of vital information to
ensure the right patient is in theatre
followed by a recap of the mechanism
of injury, the injuries sustained, any
additional radiology results and then the
surgical and anaesthetic plans.
Sit-Reps
Every 10–30 min there will be an update
or ‘sit-rep’, usually when additional
information is known. The acronym STACK
acronym can be used to facilitate this.
•
S = Systolic BP
•
T = Temperature
•
A = Acidosis
•
C = Coagulation
•
K = Kit (Including blood products used)
Debrief
At a convenient moment when the case has
finished there will be a debrief for all team
members.
20
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 12–24
Jones et al. | Human factors in preventing complications in anaesthesia
 airline industry, the acronym ‘CUS’-‘I’m concerned,’
‘I’m uncomfortable,’ and ‘this is unsafe or I’m scared’
is used to challenge in a crisis situation [59].
Further steps that we think are important in fur-
ther flattening the medical hierarchy include [60]:
•
Encouraging staff to address each another by their
first name.
•
Trying to create an inclusive atmosphere.
•
Consultants
specifically
inviting
juniors
to
ask
questions and vocalise uncertainties
•
Agreeing at departmental and national professional
level
to
a
‘two-challenge
rule’
triggering
the
involvement of a second consultant, without threat
of professional sanction.
•
Regular consultant assessment by juniors.
Checklists
The primary purpose of checklists is to avoid uninten-
tional harm by accounting for mental fallibility [61].
There are cultural hurdles to implementing checklists
[62], and acceptance of these cognitive aids requires a
certain amount of humility in a profession known for
independence and authority [61]. ‘Smart Checklists’
Table 8 Indications for emergency department anaesthesia – a risk vs. benefit analysis of ‘hard’ (1–3) and ‘soft (4–6)
indications.
Indication
Consider?
Actions, specialist equipment and
additional personnel
1
Actual or
impending
airway
compromise
Ensure mechanism fully understood (blunt, penetrating, burn
injuries, anaphylaxis, foreign body, malignancy, infectious etc.)
Videolaryngoscopy
Fibreoptic bronchoscope
Difficult airway trolley
ENT surgeon present
2
Ventilatory failure
Risk stratify patients at high risk of apnoeic desaturation [74].
Optimise patient position, consider
adding PEEP, provide apnoeic
oxygenation � positive pressure
ventilation pre-intubation.
3
Unconsciousness
Could this be secondary to an unsecured intracranial aneurysm?
Caution with RSI drugs used –
avoid hypertensive response to
laryngoscopy.
4
Unmanageable
and agitated
after head injury
Consider ‘delayed sequence induction’ to improve oxygenation
and i.v. access before completing RSI [75].
Use small boluses of ketamine to
achieve sedation, preserve airway
reflexes and maintain spontaneous
breathing.
5
Anticipated
clinical course
This rarely applies in a hospital setting.
Analyse clinical progression and risk of performing RSI later in
theatre.
Continue to improve physiology
and re-assess.
6
Humanitarian need
Dependent on patient cooperation.
Consider multi-modal analgesia
and sedation for anxiolysis vs.
delayed sequence induction to
get control.
PEEP, positive end-exporatory pressure; RSI, rapid sequence induction; ENT, ear, nose and throat; i.v., intravenous.
‘Code Red’ patients: ensure there is large bore i.v. access, that the major haemorrhage protocol activated and consider starting
blood pre-RSI using a rapid transfuser.
Blunt trauma: at the level of the larynx or below can be difficult to diagnose. The hallmark of airway management for such
patients is the maintenance of spontaneous ventilation, intubation under direct vision to avoid the creation of a false passage, and
avoidance of both intermittent positive pressure ventilation and cricoid pressure (the latter for laryngotracheal trauma only) dur-
ing a rapid sequence induction of anaesthesia [76].
Severe metabolic acidosis: often seen in patients with septic shock or metabolic crises (e.g. diabetic ketoacidosis). Consider ventilat-
ing these patients through the apnoeic phase, as a mixed respiratory and metabolic acidosis during this time can cause the pH to
fall sharply and precipitate cardiac arrest.
Table 9 A systematic approach to the safety of emer-
gency department rapid sequence induction (RSI).
•
‘Stop and Think’
•
Consider indication for emergency anaesthesia (risk
stratification for apnoeic hypoxia)
•
Consider RSI drug regime as per a standardised
approach
•
Use of Emergency Department RSI checklist
•
Strict clinical governance
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
21
Jones et al. | Human factors in preventing complications in anaesthesia
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 12–24
 are designed not to threaten provider autonomy, but
to mentally offload the many repetitive tasks in health-
care that must be completed in a largely predictable
sequence [63]. Displaying cognitive aids during emer-
gencies reduces omissions, time to perform tasks and
improves team skills, communication and performance
in most instances [64].
As described above, the WHO surgical safety check-
list [53] was introduced in 2009 with the primary aim of
eliminating
‘never
events’,
and
has
recently
been
reported to reduce hospital mortality [65]. This process
involves a team brief and then a series of questions to
review key aspects of the operation, any patient-specific
factors and any unusual steps in the process.
It has been suggested that during an emergency
there is potential unwillingness or inability to revert to
more systematic thinking [66]. During stress, there is an
increase in cortisol and other stress hormones, which
can lead to cognitive and behavioural changes. This may
account for deficiencies in recalling information, missed
treatment steps or mistakes in sequential procedures
[67]. The use of cognitive aids during simulation scenar-
ios has demonstrated improvements in the management
of anaesthetic emergencies such as malignant hyper-
pyrexia [68] and local anaesthetic toxicity [69]. Indivi-
dual anaesthetists’ decisions to follow or deviate from
guidelines are influenced by the beliefs held about the
consequence of their actions, the direct or indirect influ-
ence of others, and the presence of factors that encour-
age or facilitate particular courses of action [70].
Accepting a cognitive aid like a checklist requires a
certain amount of humility. Use of such aids is now seen
as a sign of strength, whereas failing to use them may be
regarded as a weakness, and of perhaps taking on
unwarranted risk. To avoid complacency, completion of
an RSI checklist is a two-person task, following a ‘chal-
lenge’ and ‘response’ process. Visual and tactile checks
are completed before the responder confirming a posi-
tive or negative response. A ‘pre-induction of anaesthe-
sia checklist’ has been shown to significantly improve
information exchange, knowledge of critical information
and perception of safety in anaesthetic teams [71].
Equipment
The design of equipment is crucial in the field of
human factors. One very topical equipment issue
currently is the universal Luer connector and its role
in intrathecal administration of drugs. In the UK, in
2001, Wayne Jowett, a teenager who was in remission
from leukaemia, died following the intrathecal admin-
istration of vincristine [72]. The Luer lock connection
had enabled the vincristine syringe to be attached to
the spinal needle, thereby removing the final safeguard
for the patient [72]. Similar tragedies have been
reported with chlorhexidine cleaning solution adminis-
tered epidurally [73]. Although this problem was
recognised over 40 years ago, there is still no satisfac-
tory solution. NHS trusts and independent healthcare
institutions in England and Wales were supposed to
have taken action to use spinal needles with non-Luer
connectors by 1 April 2011, but unfortunately this still
has not been achieved. Although there are other exam-
ples of unresolved equipment safety issues, this is per-
haps the most serious unresolved equipment risks that
anaesthetists regularly encounter.
Conclusion
Recognition of human factors is now firmly embedded
into clinical anaesthetic practice, and has been high-
lighted in several recent national reports and guide-
lines. We have reviewed the current literature and
described the human factor components of teamwork,
communication and situation awareness; we have also
commented
on
human
error.
The
importance
of
human factors in clinical practice has been highlighted
using the example of complex trauma in the ED and
the operating theatre.
Acknowledgements
No external funding or competing interests declared.
References
1. Catchpole K. Cited in department of health human factors ref-
erence group interim report, 1 March 2012, National Quality
Board. March 2012. http://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/pa
rt-rel/nqb/ag-min/ (accessed 26/05/2017).
2. Moneypenny MJ. When are ‘human factors’ not ‘human factors’
in can’t intubate can’t oxygenate scenarios? When they are ‘hu-
man’ factors. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2017; 118: 469–9.
3. Fletcher G, Flin R, McGeorge P
, et al. Anaesthetists’ Non-Tech-
nical Skills (ANTS): evaluation of a behavioural marker sys-
tem. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2003; 90: 580–8.
4. Yule S, Flin R, Paterson-Brown S, et al. Development of a rat-
ing system for surgeons’ non-technical skills. Medical Educa-
tion 2006; 40: 1098–104.
22
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 12–24
Jones et al. | Human factors in preventing complications in anaesthesia
 5. Mitchell L, Flin R. Non-technical skills of the operating theatre
scrub nurse: literature review. Journal of Advanced Nursing
2008; 63: 15–24.
6. Flin R, O’Connor P
, Crichton M. Safety at the sharp end: a
guide to non-technical skills. Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2008.
7. Flin R, Patey R, Glavin R, et al. Anaesthetists’ non-technical
skills. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2010; 105: 38–44.
8. Greenberg CC, Regenbogen SE, Studdert DM, et al. Patterns of
communication breakdowns resulting in injury to surgical
patients. Journal of the American College of Surgeons 2007;
204: 533–40.
9. Rosenstein AH, O’Daniel M. Impact and implications of disrup-
tive behavior in the perioperative arena. Journal of the Ameri-
can College of Surgeons 2006; 203: 96–105.
10. Lingard L, Reznick R, Espin S, et al. Team communications in
the operating room: talk patterns, sites of tension, and
implications for novices. Academic Medicine 2002; 77: 232–
7.
11. Feinmann J. Why sorry doesn’t need to be the hardest word.
British Medical Journal 2011; 342: d3258.
12. NHS England. Human factors in healthcare – a concordat from
the National Quality Board. http://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2013/11/nqb-hum-fact-concord.pdf(ac-
cessed 26/05/2017).
13. Cook TM, Woodall N, Frerk C, et al. Major complications of air-
way management in the UK: results of the Fourth National
Audit Project of the Royal College of Anaesthetists and the
Difficult Airway Society. Part 1: Anaesthesia. British Journal of
Anaesthesia 2011; 106: 617–31.
14. Flin R, Fioratou E, Frerk C, et al. Human factors in the devel-
opment of complications of airway management: preliminary
evaluation of an interview tool. Anaesthesia 2013; 68: 817–
25.
15. Cook T, Woodall N. NAP 4. Major complications of airway
management in the United Kingdom. Report and Findings
March 2011 Section 2. Clinical Reviews. http://www.rcoa.ac.
uk/node/1413 (accessed 27/05/2017).
16. Cook TM, Andrade J, Bogod DG, et al. 5th National Audit Pro-
ject (NAP5) on accidental awareness during general anaes-
thesia: patient experiences, human factors, sedation, consent,
and medicolegal issues. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2014;
113: 560–74.
17. Frerk C, Mitchell VS, McNarry AF, et al. Difficult Airway Society
2015 guidelines for management of unanticipated difficult
intubation in adults. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2015; 115:
827–48.
18. Mitchell V, Dravid R, Patel A, et al. Difficult Airway Society
Guidelines
for
the
management
of
tracheal
extubation.
Anaesthesia 2012; 67: 318–40.
19. Valentine MA, Nembhard IM, Edmondson AC. Measuring
teamwork in health care settings: a review of survey instru-
ments. Medical Care 2015; 53: e16–30.
20. Salas E, Burke CS, Stagl KC. Developing teams and team lead-
ers: strategies and principles. In: David VD, Stephen JZ, Stan-
ley
M,
eds.
Leader
development
for
transforming
organizations: growing leaders for tomorrow. Hove, UK: Psy-
chological Press, 2004: 325–55.
21. Pierre MS, Hofinger G, Buerschaper C, Simon R. Crisis man-
agement in acute care settings. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2011.
22. Hogg MA. Social identity processes and the empowerment of
followers. In: Riggio RE, Chaleff I, Lipman-Blumen J, eds. The
art of followership how great followers create great leaders
and organisations. San Francisco, CA: Wiley, 2008: 267.
23. Katzenbach JR, Smith DK. The wisdom of teams: creating the
high-performance organization. New York: Harper Business,
1993.
24. Arul GS, Pugh H, Mercer SJ, et al. Optimising communication
in the damage control resuscitation-damage control surgery
sequence in major trauma management. Journal of the Royal
Army Medical Corps 2012; 158: 82–4.
25. Gawande A, Zinner MJ, Studdert DM, et al. Analysis of errors
reported by surgeons at three teaching hospitals. Surgery
2003; 133: 614–21.
26. Lingard L. Communication failures in the operating room: an
observational classification of recurrent types and effects.
Quality and Safety in Health Care 2004; 13: 330–4.
27. Guise J-M, Segel S. Teamwork in obstetric critical care. Best
Practice & Research Clinical Obstetrics and Gynaecology
2008; 22: 937–51.
28. Okuyama A, Wagner C, Bijnen B. Speaking up for patient safety
by hospital-based health care professionals: a literature review.
BMC Health Services Research. BioMed Central 2014; 14: 61.
29. Kobayashi H, Pian-Smith M, Sato M, et al. A cross-cultural sur-
vey of residents’ perceived barriers in questioning/challeng-
ing authority. BMJ Quality and Safety 2006; 15: 277–83.
30. Belyansky I, Martin TR, Prabhu AS, et al. Poor resident-attend-
ing intraoperative communication may compromise patient
safety. Journal of Surgical Research 2011; 171: 386–94.
31. Beament T, Mercer SJ. Speak up! Barriers to challenging erro-
neous decisions of seniors in anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 2016;
71: 1332–40.
32. Weller JM, Merry AFI. Best practice and patient safety in
anaesthesia. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2013; 110: 671–3.
33. World Health Organisation. Surgical Safety Checklist. 2008.
http://www.who.int/patientsafety/safesurgery/checklist/
en/ (accessed 27/05/2017).
34. Broom MA, Capek AL, Carachi P
, et al. Critical phase distrac-
tions in anaesthesia and the sterile cockpit concept. Anaes-
thesia 2011; 66: 175–9.
35. Reader TW, Flin R, Mearns K, et al. Interdisciplinary communi-
cation in the intensive care unit. British Journal of Anaesthe-
sia 2007; 98: 347–52.
36. Flin R, Maran R. Basic concepts for crew resource manage-
ment and non-technical skills. Best Practice & Research Clini-
cal Anaesthesiology 2015; 29: 27–39.
37. Endsley MR. Measurement of situation awareness in dynamic
systems. Human Factors 1995; 37: 65–84.
38. Fioratou E, Flin R, Glavin R, et al. Beyond monitoring: dis-
tributed situation awareness in anaesthesia. British Journal of
Anaesthesia 2010; 105: 83–90.
39. Mahajan RP
. Medication errors: can we prevent them? British
Journal of Anaesthesia 2011; 107: 3–5.
40. De Keyser V, Woods DD. Fixation errors: failures to revise situ-
ation assessment in dynamic and risky systems. Netherlands:
Springer, 1990.
41. Glavin RJ. Drug errors: consequences, mechanisms, and avoid-
ance. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2010; 105: 76–82.
42. Reason J. Human error: models and management. British
Medical Journal 2000; 320: 768–70.
43. Moloney J. Error modelling in anaesthesia: slices of Swiss
cheese or shavings of Parmesan. British Journal of Anaesthe-
sia 2014; 113: 905–6.
44. Helmreich RL, Davies JM. Culture, threat, and error: lessons
from aviation. Canadian Journal of Anesthesia 2004; 51: R1–4.
45. van Beuzekom M, Boer F, Akerboom S, et al. Patient safety:
latent risk factors. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2010; 105:
52–9.
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
23
Jones et al. | Human factors in preventing complications in anaesthesia
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 12–24
 46. Bould MD, Sutherland S, Sydor DT, et al. Residents’ reluctance
to challenge negative hierarchy in the operating room: a
qualitative study. Canadian Journal of Anesthesia 2015; 62:
576–86.
47. Edworthy J, Hellier E. Alarms and human behaviour: implica-
tions for medical alarms. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2006;
97: 12–17.
48. Gaba DM, Howard SK. Fatigue among clinicians and the safety
of patients. New England Journal of Medicine 2002; 347:
1249–55.
49. Landro L. The informed patient: hospitals combat errors at
the ‘‘hand-off;’’ new procedures aim to reduce miscues as
nurses and doctors transfer patients to next shift. Wall Street
Journal
2006.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB115145533775992541 (accessed 27/05/2017).
50. Smith J, Russell R, Horne S. Critical decision-making and time-
lines in the emergency department. Journal of the Royal
Army Medical Corps 2011; 157: 273.
51. Mercer SJ, Arul GS, Pugh HEJ, et al. Performance improvement
through best practice team management – human factors in
complex trauma. Journal of the Royal Army Medical Corps
2014; 160: 105–8.
52. Arul GS, Pugh H, Mercer SJ, et al. Human factors in decision
making in major trauma in Camp Bastion, Afghanistan. Annals
of Surgery 2015; 97: 262–8.
53. Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, et al. A surgical safety
checklist to reduce morbidity and mortality in a global popu-
lation. New England Journal of Medicine 2009; 360: 491–9.
54. Catchpole K, Mishra A, Handa A, et al. Teamwork and error in
the operating room. Annals of Surgery 2008; 247: 699–706.
55. Segall N, Bonifacio AS, Schroeder RA, et al. Can we make
postoperative patient handovers safer? a systematic review
of the literature. Anesthesia & Analgesia 2012; 115: 102–15.
56. Weinger MB, Slagle JM, Kuntz AH, et al. A multimodal inter-
vention improves postanesthesia care unit handovers. Anes-
thesia & Analgesia 2015; 121: 957–71.
57. Mercer SJ, Tarmey NT, Woolley T, et al. Haemorrhage and
coagulopathy in the Defence Medical Services. Anaesthesia
2012; 68: 49–60.
58. Pian-Smith MCM, Simon R, Minehart RD, et al. Teaching resi-
dents the two challenge rule: a simulation based approach to
improve education and patient safety. Simulation in Health-
care: The Journal of the Society for Simulation in Healthcare
2009; 4: 84–91.
59. Leonard M. The human factor: the critical importance of effec-
tive teamwork and communication in providing safe care.
Quality and Safety in Health Care 2004; 13(S1): i85–90.
60. McMaster E, Phillips C, Broughton N. Righting the wrongs of
traditional medical hierarchy. Anaesthesia 2015; 71: 110–1.
61. Grigg E. Smarter clinical checklists. Anesthesia & Analgesia
2015; 121: 570–3.
62. Gawande A. The checklist manifesto: how to get things right.
London: Profile, 2009.
63. Hales BM, Pronovost PJ. The checklist – a tool for error man-
agement and performance improvement. Journal of Critical
Care 2006; 21: 231–5.
64. Marshall SD. Helping experts and expert teams perform under
duress: an agenda for cognitive aid research. Anaesthesia
2016; 72: 289–95.
65. van Klei WA, Hoff RG, van Aarnhem E, et al. Effects of the
introduction of the WHO ‘Surgical Safety Checklist’ on in-hos-
pital mortality: a cohort study. Annals of Surgery 2012; 255:
44–9.
66. Jenkins B. Cognitive aids: time for a change? Anaesthesia
2014; 69: 660–4.
67. Kuhlmann S, Piel M, Wolf OT. Impaired memory retrieval after
psychosocial stress in healthy young men. Journal of Neuro-
science 2005; 25: 2977–82.
68. Harrison TK, Manser T, Howard SK, et al. Use of cognitive aids
in a simulated anesthetic crisis. Anesthesia & Analgesia 2006;
103: 551–6.
69. Picard J, Ward SC, Zumpe R, et al. Guidelines and the adop-
tion of ‘lipid rescue’ therapy for local anaesthetic toxicity.
Anaesthesia 2009; 64: 122–5.
70. Phipps DL, Beatty PCW, Parker D, et al. Motivational influ-
ences on anaesthetists’ use of practice guidelines. British Jour-
nal of Anaesthesia 2009; 102: 768–74.
71. Tscholl DW, Weiss M, Kolbe M, et al. An anesthesia preinduc-
tion checklist to improve information exchange, knowledge of
critical information, perception of safety, and possibly percep-
tion of teamwork in anesthesia teams. Anesthesia & Analge-
sia 2015; 121: 948–56.
72. Toff B. External Inquiry into the adverse incident that occurred
at
Queen’s
Medical
Centre,
Nottingham,
2001.
http://
www.gatasm.org/sites/default/files/Brian%20Toft%20report.
pdf (accessed 27/05/2017).
73. Walker IA, Griffiths R, Wilson IH. Replacing Luer connectors:
still work in progress. Anaesthesia 2010; 65: 1059–63.
74. Weingart SD, Levitan RM. Preoxygenation and prevention of
desaturation during emergency airway management. Annals
of Emergency Medicine 2012; 59: 165–75.
75. Weingart SD, Trueger NS, Wong N, et al. Delayed sequence
intubation: a prospective observational study. Annals of Emer-
gency Medicine 2015; 65: 349–55.
76. Mercer SJ, Jones CP
, Bridge M, et al. A systematic review of
the anaesthetic management of non-iatrogenic acute adult
airway trauma. British Journal of Anaesthesia 2016; 117(S1):
i49–59.
24
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 12–24
Jones et al. | Human factors in preventing complications in anaesthesia
