 Jones L, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:978–986. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433
978 
 
AbstrAct
Background Health systems worldwide are increasingly 
holding boards of healthcare organisations accountable 
for the quality of care that they provide. Previous 
empirical research has found associations between 
certain board practices and higher quality patient care; 
however, little is known about how boards govern for 
quality improvement (QI).
Methods We conducted fieldwork over a 30-month 
period in 15 healthcare provider organisations in 
England as part of a wider evaluation of a board-level 
organisational development intervention. Our data 
comprised board member interviews (n=65), board 
meeting observations (60 hours) and documents (30 
sets of board meeting papers, 15 board minutes and 
15 Quality Accounts). We analysed the data using a 
framework developed from existing evidence of links 
between board practices and quality of care. We mapped 
the variation in how boards enacted governance of QI 
and constructed a measure of QI governance maturity. 
We then compared organisations to identify the 
characteristics of those with mature QI governance.
Results We found that boards with higher levels of 
maturity in relation to governing for QI had the following 
characteristics: explicitly prioritising QI; balancing 
short-term (external) priorities with long-term (internal) 
investment in QI; using data for QI, not just quality 
assurance; engaging staff and patients in QI; and 
encouraging a culture of continuous improvement. These 
characteristics appeared to be particularly enabled and 
facilitated by board-level clinical leaders.
Conclusions This study contributes to a deeper 
understanding of how boards govern for QI. The 
identified characteristics of organisations with mature 
QI governance seemed to be enabled by active 
clinical leadership. Future research should explore the 
biographies, identities and work practices of board-level 
clinical leaders and their role in organisation-wide QI.
IntroductIon
There is growing international attention 
on the role of boards in supporting high-
quality care.1–3 There are concerns that 
boards focus on finance and external 
performance standards at the expense 
of quality, and that board members lack 
the necessary experience, knowledge 
and skills for effective governance of 
quality.3–5 In the National Health Service 
(NHS) in England a number of high-pro-
file public inquiries have questioned the 
effectiveness of board governance of 
quality.6–8 For example, the report of the 
Francis inquiry into serious failings of 
care at Mid Staffordshire NHS Founda-
tion Trust found that the board did not 
listen to the concerns raised by patients 
and staff and ‘failed to tackle an insidious 
negative culture involving a tolerance of 
poor standards and disengagement from 
management and leadership responsi-
bilities.’8 As a consequence, national 
regulatory bodies are currently seeking 
to strengthen board-level governance 
of quality.9 10 However, little is known 
about how boards enact governance of 
quality, what ‘good’ governance in rela-
tion to quality, and quality improve-
ment (QI), looks like, and what organi-
sational processes accomplish and sustain 
it.3 11 In this study, we used findings from 
previous empirical research to construct a 
framework to explore how governance of 
QI is enacted by boards. We use ‘quality 
improvement’ to refer to the use of 
systematic methods and tools to improve 
outcomes for patients on a continuous 
basis.12 
Background
Boards of NHS providers in England have 
tended to follow the unitary board model 
of the private sector. They typically have 
between 10 and 15 members comprising 
executive and non-executive functions. 
Overall leadership of the board resides 
with the chair. The Chief Executive leads 
the executive team with each member 
usually responsible for a specific function 
Original research
 
► Additional material is 
published online only. To view 
these files please visit the 
journal online (http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
bmjqs- 
2016- 
006433).
1Department of Applied Health 
Research, University College 
London, London, UK
2The Florence Nightingale 
Faculty of Nursing& Midwifery, 
Kings College London, London
3Centre for Patient Safety and 
Service Quality, Imperial College 
London, London, UK
Correspondence to
Dr Lorelei Jones, Applied Health 
Research, University College 
London, Gower St, London 
WC1E 6BT, UK;  
 
lorelei. 
jones@ 
ucl. 
ac. 
uk
Received 21 December 2016
Revised 24 May 2017
Accepted 8 June 2017
Published Online First 
8 July 2017
To cite: Jones L, Pomeroy L, 
Robert G, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 
2017;26:978–986.
How do hospital boards govern 
for quality improvement? A mixed 
methods study of 15 organisations 
in England
lorelei Jones,1 linda Pomeroy,1 glenn robert,2 susan Burnett,3 
Janet e anderson,2 naomi J Fulop1
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433 on 8 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 979
Jones L, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:978–986. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433
Original research
such as ‘finance’ or ‘human resources.’ Non-executives 
are charged with holding the management team to 
account. Executives and non-executives are expected 
to work collaboratively to develop strategy.13
NHS hospital boards operate within a highly politi-
cised context with a ‘complex and unclear purpose 
and accountability structure.’14 Boards of NHS 
providers in England are ultimately accountable to 
the Secretary of State for Health. The majority of 
NHS provider organisations (142/242, 62%) are now 
‘foundation trusts.’ Unlike non-foundation trusts, this 
type of organisation also incorporates horizontal lines 
of accountability, to members, and to the board of 
governors which appoint the non-executive directors. 
However, this form of local accountability is perceived 
as generally weak,15 and it has been argued that finan-
cial deficits and an increase in central planning guid-
ance have narrowed the differences, in accountability 
processes, between foundation and non-foundation 
trusts.16
Previous research has found an association between 
certain board practices and the quality of care. A study 
of board chairs of US hospitals found that organi-
sations which considered ‘quality of care’ to be one 
of the top two board priorities performed better on 
clinical quality. Other characteristics found to be asso-
ciated with high-quality care were board chairs who 
were familiar with current performance, and board 
members with expertise in QI, and who had received 
formal training in QI.17 Other studies have found 
that higher quality care is associated with devoting a 
significant amount of time to quality issues at most 
board meetings, having a board quality committee, 
establishing strategic goals for QI, public dissemina-
tion of goals for QI, involvement in setting the quality 
agenda for the organisation, including a specific item 
on quality on board meeting agendas, and regularly 
reviewing quality performance to identify areas for 
improvement.18–22 Using a dashboard with national 
benchmarks for clinical quality, patient safety and 
patient satisfaction is associated with better quality 
care18–20; as is the approach of setting quality goals 
at a ‘theoretical ideal’ rather than average levels or 
national benchmarks.21
Since the report of the public inquiry into failings in 
care at Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust, the 
importance of involving staff and patients in formu-
lating strategy is increasingly recognised in guidance 
to hospital boards.23–25 Guidance also highlights the 
importance of board dynamics, such as open and 
constructive debate.13
We used findings from this previous empirical 
research and guidance to construct a framework to 
explore how governance in relation to QI is enacted 
by boards. We then used our findings to develop a 
measure of organisational ‘maturity’ in relation to 
governance of QI. We applied this measure to the 15 
organisations in our study to identify the processes 
adopted by boards with higher levels of maturity in 
their approach to governing for QI.
Our study differs from previous research on hospital 
boards that has employed board competency frame-
works.11 26 Board competency frameworks relate to the 
overall performance of the board and, in the absence of 
empirical evidence on how boards fulfil their responsi-
bilities, are largely normative.3 Moreover, their use to 
date has been based on self-assessment, which brings 
with it a risk of positive bias or limited insight.27 28 
Our study makes a significant contribution to under-
standing how boards enact governance in relation to 
QI by using a framework based on research evidence 
and focused specifically on the governance of QI, and 
on external observation and assessment of real-world 
board practices.
Methods
Sample
We conducted fieldwork in 15 organisations (12 
acute care providers, 2 mental health providers and 1 
community care provider) as part of an evaluation of 
a board-level organisational development intervention 
(iQUASER).29 In England healthcare provider organi-
sations may incorporate more than one hospital, but 
overseen by a single corporate board. For clarity we 
use the term ‘organisation’ to refer to the unit of anal-
ysis. Alongside the six organisations that received the 
intervention (‘participating organisations’), data were 
also collected from a comparator group (‘comparator 
organisations’) that included six organisations that 
matched each of those in the intervention group on 
the following dimensions: type of service provided 
(acute, community or mental health), foundation 
status, performance (as assessed by the English health-
care regulator) and number and location of sites. We 
also selected an additional three organisations (‘bench-
marking organisations’) to reflect different perfor-
mance levels (‘outstanding’, ‘good’ and ‘requires 
improvement’ as rated by a national regulator).
Developing the framework
We used previous research and guidance to construct a 
framework to explore how hospital boards in England 
enact governance of QI. The framework approach 
was designed for studies with a defined research ques-
tion of policy or practical relevance. It is well suited 
to multidisciplinary and mixed methods research and 
a homogenous data set.30 31 Our framework has eight 
dimensions, corresponding to the board characteris-
tics identified in the literature as being associated with 
higher quality patient care (table 1).
Data collection and analysis
Data were collected between March 2014 and 
November 2016. The public part of a board meeting 
was observed in all 15 organisations on two occa-
sions, once in 2014 and once in 2015/2016 (60 hours 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433 on 8 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 980
Jones L, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:978–986. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433
Original research
observation). We also collected publicly available 
board meeting papers from the meetings we observed 
(30 sets) minutes from an additional board meeting 
for each organisation (15) and Quality Accounts (a 
mandatory report on the quality of services provided 
by an organisation and published annually). Interviews 
were undertaken with board members (up to six per 
organisation) in the six organisations that had agreed 
to participate in the evaluation and in one compar-
ator and one benchmarking organisation which volun-
teered to take part in the interviews (interviews were 
not requested with the other organisations) (37 in 
2014 and 28 in 2015/2016). We asked organisations 
to nominate five members, both executive and non-ex-
ecutive, including the non-executive director respon-
sible for quality. Interviews were semistructured on the 
topic of governance of QI and covered the topics in 
our framework. Notes were handwritten at the time 
of board observations and then written up afterwards 
and stored electronically. Interviews were recorded 
and transcribed. All textual data, including board 
observations, interview transcripts and documents, 
were imported into NVIVO software for analysis.
Our analysis followed a number of stages. In the 
first stage we developed and tested a measure of an 
organisation’s ‘maturity’ in relation to governance of 
QI (QI maturity). This was an iterative process that 
involved successive rounds of analysis, team discus-
sion, testing the emerging measure against the data 
and refinement.32 We used the entire data set to map 
the full range of board activities related to each dimen-
sion of our framework. For each activity a grading 
scheme (high/medium/low) was constructed to reflect 
observed variation in the data (table 2). This was an 
interpretative activity that drew on both the research 
literature and the three ‘benchmarking’ organisations.
Once the measure was agreed it was used to clas-
sify all 15 organisations in our study. Organisa-
tions were rated against each item (by LP). Where 
organisations were considered ‘borderline’ they 
were given a combined rating (eg, medium/low). 
An overall rating for each dimension was calculated 
from the proportional frequencies of the compo-
nent items (eg, if the majority of items were rated 
‘high’ the overall rating for that dimension would 
be ‘high’). The same process was then used to calcu-
late, for each organisation, an overall classification of 
 
QI maturity.
The final stage was a thematic analysis33 of the 
entire data set to illuminate key differences between 
organisations with different levels of QI maturity. Our 
analysis thus involved a combination of deductive and 
inductive forms of inference.31 We used the framework 
that we developed from prior research and existing 
guidance deductively to guide analysis. We also used 
an inductive approach to identify additional themes in 
the data, returning to the literature to further explain 
our findings.
The study received exemption from NHS Research 
Ethics processes. Informed consent for interviews was 
obtained from all participants. Board meetings are held 
in public, although we informed organisations prior to 
our attendance of our presence (and our study).
results
We found a range of board-level activities related 
to governance of QI. Boards varied in the extent to 
which, and the way in which, specific activities were 
undertaken. Table 3 shows the QI maturity rating for 
each organisation.
Characteristics of boards with high levels of QI maturity
The following characteristics emerged as particu-
larly important in understanding variation between 
organisations: QI as a board priority; balancing 
a short-term (external) focus with a long-term 
(internal) focus on QI; using data for improvement; 
patient and staff engagement; and clinical leadership. 
Additional data relating to each theme are shown in 
online supplementary table S4.
Prioritising QI
Boards with higher levels of QI maturity prioritised 
QI in their discussions. The priority afforded to QI 
cannot, however, be inferred simply from the amount 
of time spent discussing QI as boards with high levels 
of QI maturity relied on their quality subcommittee 
to provide detailed scrutiny. These organisations 
exhibited apparent confidence in the functioning 
of the subcommittee through, for example, taking 
the subcommittee report ‘as read’ with only specific 
items escalated for attention and discussion. This 
was in contrast to an apparent lack of confidence 
in the board subcommittee structures within other 
organisations where the quality committee report 
was discussed in full at the board meeting. The 
following extract is from fieldnotes recorded during 
observation of a board meeting of an organisation 
rated ‘low’ in relation to QI maturity:
Table 1 Framework for data collection and analysis
Framework dimension
Evidence
1
QI as board priority
17–22
2
Using data for improvement
18–20
3
Familiarity with current performance
17 18
4
Degree of staff involvement
25
5
Degree of public/patient/carer involvement
25
6
Clear, systematic approach (clear and well-specified 
priorities, manageable number)
17 18 20
7
Balance between clinical effectiveness, patient 
experience and safety
18 20
8
Dynamics (how board members challenge/ask 
questions of each other)
13
QI, quality improvement.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433 on 8 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 981
Jones L, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:978–986. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433
Original research
Table 2 A measure of organisational maturity in relation to governing for QI (QI maturity)
Dimension
Rating
1. QI as a board priority
Where does QI come in the agenda of 
board discussions?
High: Top of the agenda, for example, first item/included throughout/a specific standing item led by an executive 
director.
Medium: In the middle of the meeting.
Low: At the end of the meeting.
How much time is spent talking about 
QI?
High: Majority of board meeting related to QI.
Medium: Some time given to QI.
Low: Limited time at the board meeting related to QI.
Is time spent on QI elsewhere other 
than at the board meeting (eg, 
subcommittees)?
High: QI is dealt with predominantly at the subcommittee level with only points of escalation brought to the 
board meeting.
Medium: QI is dealt with to some extent at the subcommittee level, for example, the subcommittee discussion 
appears to be fully reported to the board level.
Low: QI is dealt with extensively at the board level, for example, discussion of all aspects of the subcommittee 
discussions.
Do board members undergo any formal 
QI training?
High: Formal training systematically undertaken.
Medium: Training available and awareness of training but not necessarily taken up.
Low: Limited or no QI training.
How much time is spent on QI relative 
to QA*?
High: Balance between QI and QA. QA monitored and when necessary actions taken that feed into QI. QI 
alongside QA, as an ongoing strand of discussions and focus.
Medium: QA monitored and QI discussed but the balance is more towards assurance and there is not necessarily 
a well-managed link from QA to QI.
Low: Predominantly QA.
2. Using data for improvement
Does the Trust use QI-specific data?
High: QI data available and presented to board members.
Medium: Some QI data available and/or some QI discussion relating to the quality data that is presented.
Low: No QI data presented and no QI discussion relating to the quality data.
To what extent is the use of data 
proactive rather than reactive?
High: Regular and consistent use of data.
Medium: Some evidence of using data and/or some awareness of the need to move to a more proactive 
approach.
Low: Searching for data only when there is a perceived need.
Are data presented in a meaningful 
format?
High: Data are used, interpreted and discussed. Format is readable.
Medium: Data in a useable format but minimal interpretation.
Low: A lot of data presented but unreadable and limited interpretation or discussion.
Are data used to inform actions?
High: There are clear actions derived from data.
Medium: Some evidence of actions being informed by data.
Low: Limited evidence of actions being informed by data.
Are QI data linked to other data (eg, 
staffing levels, sickness absence, 
throughput)?
High: Data are clearly linked and discussions about QI take into account all the data available.
Medium: Data are linked to some extent.
Low: Each source of data considered in isolation.
Does the board consider a broad range 
of data (eg, quantitative alongside 
qualitative)?
High: Broad range of data considered, that is, both quantitative and qualitative data.
Medium: Predominantly focused on quantitative data (or one type of data) but aware and/or working towards a 
broader use of data.
Low: Focused solely or predominantly on quantitative data and no awareness of the need or usefulness of a 
broader range of data.
3. Familiarity with current performance
Are the board looking at current 
performance frequently?
High: Monthly review of data, awareness and understanding of the data, for example, questions about the data 
are knowledgeable.
Medium: Data reviewed less than once a month, lower awareness and understanding.
Low: Data reviewed less often or not available. Limited understanding and awareness.
Does the board benchmark and 
compare with other organisations?
High: Comparative assessment with other organisations discussed frequently.
Medium: Comparative assessments done but not frequent.
Low: Limited comparative assessment with other organisations.
Is there an awareness of the data 
available and where data needed to be 
improved?
High: Highly aware of the data relating to overall quality of services and an understanding of what development 
is needed.
Medium: Aware to less extent.
Low: Aware to some extent.
4. Degree of staff involvement
To what extent are staff involved and 
prioritised in the production of QI?
High: Staff are fully involved, priorities identified and discussed with staff.
Medium: Lower levels of staff involvement, some discussion takes place.
Low: Limited involvement.
Continued
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433 on 8 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 982
Jones L, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:978–986. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433
Original research
The report from the quality committee was 
given by the Nursing Director. The committee has 
been inquorate for 3 meetings. Not much reported 
at this point. Appeared there wasn’t a strong 
handle on the function of this committee and its 
function was being picked up in the CQC special 
measures Improvement Plan and other parts of 
the board meeting and therefore all quality discus-
sion was at the board level. (Board observation, 
 
Organisation 5)
Dimension
Rating
To what extent are staff involved 
directly or focused on by the board 
(eg, in board meeting discussions, 
agendas)?
High: Staff are involved in, or are the focus of, board discussion and agenda items. Actions and strategies are 
linked to staff, for example, considering the impact or highlighting the need to canvas opinion.
Medium: To some extent.
Low: Limited.
5. Degree of public/patient involvement
To what extent are patients and the 
public involved and prioritised in QA 
and QI?
High: Fully involved, priorities identified and discussed with patients/public.
Medium: Less involved.
Low: Limited involvement.
To what extent are patients involved 
directly or focused on by the board 
(eg, in board meeting discussions, 
agendas)?
High: Patients/public involved in, or are the focus of, board discussions and agenda items. There are actions and 
strategies in response to the concerns and experiences of patients/public.
Medium: To some extent.
Low: Limited.
6. Clear, systematic approach
Are there a manageable number 
of priorities that are clear and well 
specified?
High: Small number of priorities, readily apparent, clearly linked to actions.
Medium: A larger number of priorities, less clearly articulated in terms of what they are and what the actions are.
Low: A large volume of priorities, unclear descriptions and actions.
Are priorities predominantly driven 
externally?
High: Addressing external requirements while clearly prioritising internally led priorities.
Medium: Addressing both external requirements and some internally led priorities.
Low: Predominantly driven by external requirements.
7. Balance between clinical 
effectiveness, patient experience and 
safety
High: Attending to each aspect equally.
Medium: Attending to each aspect but some are more prominent than others.
Low: Not all aspects are being dealt with and they are very unbalanced.
8. Dynamics
How do board members challenge and 
ask questions of each other?
High: Probing questions alongside supportive comments and advice where relevant.
Medium: To a lesser extent.
Low: Repetitive questioning and discussion without timely resolution.
QA, quality assurance; QI, quality improvement.
*The aim of quality assurance (QA) is to ensure that minimum standards are being met and to deal with poor performance. It includes mechanisms such 
as quality monitoring and reporting, national standards, guidelines and targets.
Table 2 Continued 
Table 3 QI maturity
Organisation
Type
Overall rating
Framework dimensions
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
Benchmarking
High
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
2
Participating
High
M
M
H
H/M
H/M
H
H
H
3
Participating
Medium
M
L/M
M
L/M
M
M
M
L
4
Comparator
Low/Medium
M/H
L/M
L/M
L/M
L/M
L/M
L
M
5
Participating
Low
M
L
M
L
L
M
L
L
6
Benchmarking
Medium
M
M
L
M
M
M
M
M
7
Benchmarking
Low
L
L
M
M
H
L
L
L
8
Comparator
Medium
L
M
M
M/H
M/H
L
L
L
9
Participating
Medium
L
M
M
M/H
M/H
L
M
M
10
Participating
Medium/High
M/H
M
H
L/M
L
H
H
M
11
Comparator
High
H
M
H
H
H
M
H
H
12
Comparator
Low/Medium
L/M
L/M
L
M/L
M
L
L
M
13
Comparator
Medium
M
M
M
L
L
M
M
H
14
Comparator
High
H/M
M
H
M/H
H/M
M
H
H
15
Participating
High
M
M
H
M/L
L/M
H
H
H
QI, quality improvement.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433 on 8 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 983
Jones L, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:978–986. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433
Original research
Balancing a focus on short-term (external) priorities with a long-
term (internal) focus on QI
All boards faced multiple external accountability 
requirements. Boards with high QI maturity addressed 
these requirements but also had agreed plans to 
improve quality within the organisation in the long 
term. In these organisations the Quality Accounts 
contained clear priorities that were well defined 
and internally driven. In contrast, in organisations 
with low QI maturity, Quality Accounts had a large 
number of priorities that were driven more by external 
demands, such as national targets for infection control 
and waiting times for treatment.
One way in which boards with high QI maturity 
invested in long-term QI was through articulating and 
enacting values and expected behaviours, and in using 
these as a basis for staff recruitment. A focus on values 
was seen by participants to have benefits in terms of 
the quality of care provided to patients, as well as in 
encouraging staff to adopt QI processes. Importantly, 
it was also felt to lead to more effective functioning of 
the board by enabling trust between board members 
and managers:
You can only really rely on information that you get 
if you trust the people working for you, so that’s why 
it’s so important for the board. We’re very clear about 
it in recruitment process, appointment process, revali-
dation process, and so on. Because trust is an essential 
ingredient, when clearly the board cannot go through 
every little detail about whether this patient, or that 
patient has received the right treatment, the right care, 
the right behaviours from the staff. (Interview, chair, 
Organisation 2)
Using data for improvement
All boards in this study were confronted with large 
volumes of data (one board member described this as 
feeling as if they were ‘drowning in data’). Organisa-
tions with high QI maturity received reports where the 
data were clear, readable, and where different sources 
of data were discussed together (eg, data on staffing 
levels considered alongside data on staff well-being 
and patient experience). Importantly, organisations 
with a high QI maturity used data for QI, not just 
assurance. For example, data were linked to actions 
and these actions were monitored. In contrast, reports 
to boards with low QI maturity were characterised by 
a large volume of data, often not clearly presented, 
reviewed in silos and not linked to improvement 
actions.
Boards with high QI maturity used a range of types 
of data. In one example from our study the chair used 
unannounced visits to wards to detect potential prob-
lems. In this organisation the Chief Executive also 
personally read all complaint letters. This type of ‘soft 
intelligence’34 was seen to be important for detecting 
problems and identifying areas for improvement. It 
was also considered to be a valuable source of insight 
into the nature of problems that could then be used as 
a guide for action.
Reports to the boards with high QI maturity 
used ‘benchmarks’ and carefully identified relevant 
comparators. In contrast, organisations with a low 
QI maturity were less likely to compare themselves 
with others, and where benchmarking data were 
used these were considered in isolation (from other 
metrics) and used mainly for external reporting 
requirements.
Patient and staff engagement
Boards with a high QI maturity made systematic 
efforts to collect the views and experiences of staff and 
patients and involve staff and patients in the develop-
ment of strategy. In these organisations staff well-being 
was a noticeable inclusion in the board agenda and 
the experience and views of staff and patients were 
a ‘common thread’ through board agenda items. For 
example, in one organisation with high QI maturity, 
an away day was held with clinical staff to develop 
the organisation’s strategy. In this organisation board 
members also attended meetings with patient groups 
and, importantly, translated the issues that were raised 
in discussion into actions:
We have something called a patient experience stake-
holder forum which is a combination of staff, patients, 
governors, Health Watch, people who would have a 
whole view and then what we've been doing is feeding 
back to them. So they agreed our strategy, they have 
revised our plan of action because they didn’t agree 
with the focus and timing. (Interview, Director of 
Nursing, Organisation 2)
A culture of continuous improvement
Organisations with high QI maturity were character-
ised by constant questioning and self-examination. In 
these organisations ‘striving for excellence’ was seen, 
and promoted, as part of the corporate identity. For 
example, in one board meeting, following a discussion 
of current performance on staff engagement, the chair 
stated that ‘we don’t do average. We want to be the 
best out there’ (Board Observation, Organisation 1). 
A key feature of organisations with high QI maturity 
was a culture that supported learning and improve-
ment. These organisations used external networks 
for learning, proactively discussing particular issues 
with staff from regulatory agencies, researching how 
other hospitals had responded to similar problems and 
visiting high-performing organisations. For example, 
during a discussion at a board meeting on a particular 
performance metric (theatre utilisation) the chair 
asked ‘who is good at it, who could we talk to?’ Board 
members from this organisation also visited high-per-
forming organisations to see what they could learn and 
reported back to the board with initiatives that could 
potentially be implemented locally (Board Observa-
tion, Organisation 1).
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433 on 8 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 984
Jones L, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:978–986. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433
Original research
In contrast, organisations with low QI maturity 
appeared more complacent than those with higher 
levels of QI maturity. At times there was also insuffi-
cient challenge from non-executive directors. In these 
organisations executive directors were observed to 
bring overly optimistic trajectories of future perfor-
mance to the board or to put a ‘positive spin’ on poor 
performance. During one board observation this prac-
tice was picked up by a newly appointed chair, as can 
be seen in the following reprimand from the chair to 
an executive:
…the nursing trajectory is optimistic. I think what 
comes back to the board is our best realistic thinking 
not an element of wishful thinking. (Board Observa-
tion, Organisation 7)
Clinical leadership
It was notable that the boards of organisations with 
high QI maturity had a higher number of clinicians 
on the board (three or more) than other organisations. 
Moreover, in these organisations the medical director 
and the director of nursing had an extended role that 
included an additional corporate function, such as 
‘director of governance.’ In organisations with high 
QI maturity, such clinical leaders were observed to be 
visible and vocal, communicated assertively and were 
apparently well regarded by other board members (as 
suggested through verbal and non-verbal reactions). 
They were also observed to provide the board with 
helpful analysis of quality and safety concerns, for 
example, by explaining trends, both positive and nega-
tive, and why issues had arisen. They made connections 
between different sources of data (eg, between data on 
staffing levels, staff well-being and patient experience) 
and supplemented quantitative data with ‘softer’ intel-
ligence gleaned from time spent on the ward.
In contrast, the clinical leaders on the boards of 
organisations with low QI maturity made very little 
overall contribution to the meeting, speaking only to 
a small number of items related to their clinical remit. 
We also recorded instances of there being no medical 
director in post (and no interim provision) (Organi-
sation 6), of unhelpful responses from the medical 
director to questions from the chair (Organisation 10), 
and clinical leaders who spoke so quietly that the chair, 
or members of the public, had to request that they 
speak louder (Organisation 5, Organisation 7). We 
also observed an instance where clinical leadership was 
enacted in what we considered to be a largely rhetor-
ical, rather than a substantive, way. For example, one 
director of nursing spoke at length about her famil-
iarity with front-line patient care, and her concern for 
quality, but in such a way as to discourage further chal-
lenge from non-executive members, potentially inhib-
iting the effectiveness of the board (Organisation 10).
There is an indication—from interviews and board 
observations—that clinical leaders in organisations 
with high levels of quality governance maturity had 
also built relationships with external partners, such 
as commissioners and regional NHS managers, and 
brought to the board knowledge of the external policy 
environment. However, there was also the sugges-
tion that medical directors, in particular, attended 
numerous external planning meetings, potentially 
impacting on their role within the organisation, which 
requires further research. This is alluded to in the 
following admonishment from a chair to the board:
The top corridor is empty quite a lot of the time. I 
take it because you are all in these meetings in [name of 
locality], which I find annoying. (Chair, Organisation 
9)
dIscussIon
We used a framework developed from previous 
research and existing guidance to analyse the activities 
of hospital boards in England to develop a measure of a 
maturity in relation to governance of QI (QI maturity). 
We applied this measure to the organisations in our 
study and then explored the characteristics of boards 
with differing levels of QI maturity. We found that 
organisations with higher levels of QI maturity prior-
itised QI, balanced attention to short-term (external) 
priorities with a long-term (internal) investment 
in QI, used data for QI, not just QA, engaged staff 
and patients in QI and had a culture of continuous 
improvement. These characteristics often appeared 
to be enabled and facilitated by clinical leaders. We 
contribute to the literature on board governance of 
quality by describing how these characteristics were 
enacted.
Our study highlights the apparent importance 
of board-level clinical-manager ‘hybrids’ in QI.35 
Previous research has found an association between 
high levels of clinician involvement in hospital boards 
and higher quality of care.36 37 Findings from a longi-
tudinal analysis by Veronesi et al37 suggest that it is 
clinical involvement in boards that is contributing to 
performance and not the reverse (high-performing 
organisations recruiting more clinicians at senior 
levels). However, little is known about how clinicians 
on the board improve quality.
We found that in organisations with a high QI matu-
rity clinical leaders brought in-depth knowledge and 
understanding of quality issues and provided the board 
with meaningful analyses of data. Recent research has 
emphasised the importance of meaningful representa-
tion and interpretation of data by boards.38 Medical 
directors, in particular, appeared to contribute 
important translation work, using knowledge and 
skills drawn from their medical training, or from dedi-
cated training in QI. Clinical leaders also contributed 
knowledge of relevant developments in national policy 
and links to external networks. Previous research has 
highlighted the importance of good relationships 
with external partners, to access external resources; 
facilitate learning; and to negotiate, shape and align 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433 on 8 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 985
Jones L, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:978–986. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433
Original research
external regulatory and performance management 
demands with internal priorities for QI.39 40
In organisations with high QI maturity clinical 
leaders thus appear to play a critical role as ‘boundary 
spanners,’41 providing a link between ‘the board and 
the ward,’ making connections between data silos and 
aligning external demands with internal priorities. 
Although all organisations in our study had board 
members with clinical backgrounds, in those with high 
QI maturity clinical leadership was a state of doing 
rather than being. In these organisations clinical leaders 
were observed to be active in making connections and 
contributing to the decision making of the unitary 
board. While clinicians have always held leadership 
positions in the NHS, previous research suggested that 
they tended to adopt an advocacy position, promoting 
the interests of the profession or their own specialty.14 
In contrast, our research suggests that, in organisations 
with high QI maturity, clinical leaders are orientated to 
strategic decision making, and to a corporate goal of 
QI. Further research is needed to confirm and elabo-
rate these findings.
This research had some limitations. We only 
observed the public part of the board meeting. We 
did not observe board subcommittees. The use of an 
overall three-point classification system (L/M/H) could 
mask potential variation within organisations between 
the different dimensions of board governance of QI. 
It also only relates to board practices, rather than 
the organisation as a whole. Our development of a 
measure of quality governance maturity was explor-
atory and our assumptions may be open to debate; 
however, we undertook the task systematically, used 
the entire data set, and our methods are explicit and 
transparent. We grounded our analysis in both the data 
and the literature.
conclusIons
Boards of healthcare organisations with high QI matu-
rity prioritised QI; combined a focus on short-term 
(external) priorities with long-term (internal) invest-
ment in QI; used data for QI, not just assurance; 
engaged staff and patients; and had a culture of contin-
uous improvement. These characteristics appeared 
to be facilitated by clinical leaders. Future research 
should explore the biographies, identities and work 
practices of board-level clinical leaders and their role 
in organisation-wide QI.
We have developed a measure of QI maturity to help 
us understand how boards of healthcare organisations 
enact governance of QI, and to compare organisations 
within our study. There is potential for the measure 
to be further developed and applied formatively to 
assess, or self-assess, and improve an organisation’s 
governance of QI.
Twitter @CLAHRC_N_Thames
Acknowledgements We thank the participants for their 
generosity with their time, and two anonymous reviewers for 
helpful comments on this paper. 
Contributors LJ collected and analysed the data and drafted 
the paper. LP collected and analysed the data and revised the 
paper. GR, SB, JEA and NJF contributed to the conception and 
design of the research, data analysis and revision of the paper.
Funding The research was funded by the National Institute 
for Health Research (NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership in 
Applied Health Research and Care North Thames at Barts 
Health NHS Trust. The views expressed are those of the 
authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the 
Department of Health.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally 
peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed 
in accordance with the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits others to 
distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for 
commercial use, provided the original work is properly cited. 
See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise 
stated in the text of the article) 2017. All rights reserved. 
No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise expressly 
granted.
references
 1 National Quality Forum. Hospital governing boards and quality 
of care: a call to responsibility. Washington, DC: National 
Quality Forum, 2004.
 2 Bismark MM, Studdert DM. Governance of quality of care: a 
qualitative study of health service boards in Victoria, Australia. 
BMJ Qual Saf 2014;23:474–82.
 3 Baker G, Denis JL, Pomey M, et al. Effective Governance 
for Quality and Patient Safety in 27 Canadian Healthcare 
Organisations: A report to the Canadian Health Services 
Research 28 Foundation and the Canadian Patient Safety 
Institute. Ottawa: CHSRF/CPSI, 2010.
 4 Mannion R, Freeman T, Millar R, et al. Effective Board 
Governance of Safe Care: a (theoretically underpinned) 
cross-sectioned examination of the breadth and depth of 
relationships through local case studies and national surveys, 
NIHR Health Services and delivery research. 2016;4:1–200.
 5 Levey S, Vaughn T, Koepke M, et al. Hospital leadership and 
quality improvement: rhetoric versus reality. J Patient Saf 
2007;3:9–15.
 6 Kennedy I. Learning from Bristol: the report of the public 
inquiry into children's heart surgery at the Bristol Royal 
Infirmary 1984-1995. London: Stationery Office, 2001.
 7 House of Commons Health Committee. 2009. Patient Safety 
6th Report 2008-2009. London: Stationery Office.
 8 Francis R. The Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation T
rust Public 
Inquiry. London: The Stationery Office, 2013.
 9 NHS Improvement. Single Oversight Framework. (30 Sept 
2016).
 
10 Care Quality Commission and NHS Improvement. 
Consultation on use of resources and well-led assessments, 
2016.
 
11 Mannion R, Davies H, Freeman T, et al. Overseeing oversight: 
governance of quality and safety by hospital boards in the 
English NHS. J Health Serv Res Policy 2015;20(1 Suppl):9–16.
 
12 QUASER:The hospital guide. A research-based guide to reflect 
on and develop your quality improvement strategies. https://
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433 on 8 July 2017. Downloaded from 
 986
Jones L, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:978–986. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433
Original research
www. 
ucl. 
ac. 
uk/ 
dahr/ 
pdf/ 
study_ 
documents/ 
iQUASER_ 
Hospital_ 
Guide_ 
291014_ 
press- 
ready_ 
cs4. 
pdf (accessed Apr 2017).
 
13 Chambers N, Harvey G, Mannion R, et al. Towards a 
framework for enhancing the performance of NHS boards: 
a synthesis of the evidence about board governance, board 
effectiveness and board development. Health Services and 
Delivery Research 2013;1:1–138.
 
14 Addicott R. Models of governance and the changing role of the 
board in the "modernised" UK health sector. J Health Organ 
Manag 2008;22:147–63.
 
15 Ocloo J, O'Shea A, Fulop N, et al. Empowerment or 
rhetoric? Investigating the role of NHS Foundation Trust 
governors in the governance of patient safety. Health Policy 
2013;111:301–10.
 
16 Collins B. The Foundation Trust Model: death by a thousand 
cuts. The Kings Fund, 2016. https://www. 
kingsfund. 
org. 
uk/ 
blog/ 
2016/ 
02/ 
foundation- 
trust- 
model.
 
17 Jha A, Epstein A. Hospital Governance And The Quality Of 
Care. Health Aff 2010;29:182–7.
 
18 Kroch E, Vaughn T, Koepke M, et al. Hospital boards and 
quality dashboards. J Patient Saf 2006;2:10–19.
 
19 Jiang HJ, Lockee C, Bass K, et al. Board engagement in 
quality: findings of a survey of hospital and system leaders.  
J Healthc Manag 2008;53:121-34; discussion 135.
 
20 Jiang HJ, Lockee C, Bass K, et al. Board oversight of quality: 
any differences in process of care and mortality? J Healthc 
Manag 2009;54:15.
 
21 Jiang HJ, Lockee C, Fraser I, et al. Enhancing board oversight 
on quality of hospital care: an agency theory perspective. 
Health Care Manage Rev 2012;37:144–53.
 
22 Joshi MS, Hines SC. Getting the board on board: Engaging 
hospital boards in quality and patient safety. Jt Comm J Qual 
Patient Saf 2006;32:179–87.
 
23 National Leadership Council. The Healthy NHS Board. 
Principles For Good Governance, 2013.
 
24 Monitor. Quality Governance: how does a board know that its 
organization is working effectively to improve care? 2013.
 
25 Ramsay A, Fulop N, Fresko A, et al. The Healthy NHS Board. 
NHS Leadership Academy, 2013.
 
26 Mannion R, Davies HT, Jacobs R, et al. Do Hospital 
Boards matter for better, safer, patient care? Soc Sci Med 
2017;177:278–87.
 
27 Davis DA, Mazmanian PE, Fordis M, et al. Accuracy of 
physician self-assessment compared with observed measures of 
competence: a systematic review. JAMA 2006;296:1094–102.
 
28 Dunning D, Heath C, Suls JM, et al. Flawed Self-Assessment: 
Implications for Health, Education, and the Workplace. 
Psychol Sci Public Interest 2004;5:69–106.
 
29 http://www. 
clahrc- 
norththames. 
nihr. 
ac. 
uk/ 
iquaser/
 
30 In: Ritchie J, Lewis J, eds. Qualitative research practice: a 
Guide for Social scientists and researchers. London: SAGE, 
2003.
 
31 Gale NK, Heath G, Cameron E, et al. Using the framework 
method for the analysis of qualitative data in multi-
disciplinary health research. BMC Med Res Methodol 
2013;13:117.
 
32 Dixon-Woods M, Baker R, Charles K, et al. Culture and 
behaviour in the English National Health Service: overview 
of lessons from a large multimethod study. BMJ Qual Saf 
2014;23:106–15.
 
33 Pope C, Ziebland S, Mays N, et al. Analysing qualitative data. 
In: In Pope C, Mays N, eds. Qualitative research in Health 
Care. London: Blackwell Publishing, 2006.
 
34 Martin GP
, McKee L, Dixon-Woods M, et al. Beyond metrics? 
Utilizing 'soft intelligence' for healthcare quality and safety. Soc 
Sci Med 2015;142:19–26.
 
35 Waring J. Restratification, Hybridity and Professional Elites: 
Questions of Power, Identity and Relational Contingency at 
the Points of ?Professional-Organisational Intersection? Sociol 
Compass 2014;8:688–704.
 
36 Weiner BJ, Shortell SM, Alexander J, et al. Promoting clinical 
involvement in hospital quality improvement efforts: the 
effects of top management, board, and physician leadership. 
Health Serv Res 1997;32:491–510.
 
37 Veronesi G, Kirkpatrick I, Vallascas F, et al. Clinicians 
on the board: what difference does it make? Soc Sci Med 
2013;77:147–55.
 
38 Mountford J, Wakefield D. From stoplight reports to time 
series: equipping boards and leadership teams to drive better 
decisions. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:9–11.
 
39 Burnett S, Mendel P
, Nunes F, et al. Using institutional theory 
to analyse hospital responses to external demands for finance 
and quality in five european countries. J Health Serv Res Policy 
2016;21:109–17.
 
40 Bate P
, Mendel P
, Robert G, et al. Organizing For Quality. 
Abingdon: Radcliffe Publishing, 2008.
 
41 Tushman ML. Special Boundary Roles in the Innovation 
Process. Adm Sci Q 1977;22:587–605.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-006433 on 8 July 2017. Downloaded from 
