 THE
JOURNAL
•
RESEARCH
•
www.fasebj.org
Early PQQ supplementation has persistent long-term
protective effects on developmental programming of
hepatic lipotoxicity and inflammation in obese mice
Karen R. Jonscher,*,1 Michael S. Stewart,† Alba Alfonso-Garcia,‡ Brian C. DeFelice,§ Xiaoxin X. Wang,{
Yuhuan Luo,{ Moshe Levi,{ Margaret J. R. Heerwagen,† Rachel C. Janssen,† Becky A. de la Houssaye,†
Ellen Wiitala,† Garrett Florey,k Raleigh L. Jonscher,k Eric O. Potma,‡,# Oliver Fiehn,§,** and Jacob E. Friedman†
*Department of Anesthesiology, †Department of Pediatrics, and {Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, Department of Medicine,
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA; ‡Beckman Laser Institute, and #Department of Biomedical
Engineering, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California, USA; §West Coast Metabolomics Center, University of California, Davis, Davis,
CA USA; kDepartment of Integrative Biology, University of Colorado Denver, Denver, Colorado, USA; and **Biochemistry Department, King
Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
ABSTRACT: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is widespread in adults and children. Early exposure to ma-
ternal obesity or Western-style diet (WD) increases steatosis and oxidative stress in fetal liver and is associated with
lifetime disease risk in the offspring. Pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ) is a natural antioxidant found in soil,
enriched in human breast milk, and essential for development in mammals. We investigated whether a supple-
mental doseof PQQ, provided prenatally in a mousemodelof diet-induced obesity during pregnancy, could protect
obese offspring from progression ofNAFLD. PQQtreatment givenpre-and postnatallyin WD-fedoffspringhad no
effect on weight gain but increased metabolic flexibility while reducing body fat and liver lipids, compared with
untreated obese offspring. Indices of NAFLD, including hepatic ceramide levels, oxidative stress, and expression of
proinflammatory genes (Nos2, Nlrp3, Il6, and Ptgs2), were decreased in WD PQQ-fed mice, concomitant with
increasedexpression of fatty acid oxidation genes and decreasedPparg expression. Notably, thesechangespersisted
even after PQQ withdrawal at weaning. Our results suggest that supplementation with PQQ, particularly during
pregnancy and lactation, protects offspring from WD-induced developmental programming of hepatic lipotoxicity
and may help slow the advancing epidemic of NAFLD in the next generation.—Jonscher, K. R., Stewart, M. S.,
Alfonso-Garcia, A., DeFelice,B. C.,Wang,X.X., Luo, Y.,Levi, M.,Heerwagen,M.J. R., Janssen, R.C., dela Houssaye,
B. A., Wiitala, E., Florey, G., Jonscher, R. L., Potma, E. O., Fiehn, O. Friedman, J. E. Early PQQ supplementation has
persistent long-term protective effects on developmental programming of hepatic lipotoxicity and inflammation in
obese mice. FASEB J. 31, 1434–1448 (2017). www.fasebj.org
KEY WORDS: antioxidant
• PGC-1a
• ceramide
• lipidomics
• CARS
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) describes a
broad spectrum of chronic liver abnormalities, ranging
from simple steatosis to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
(NASH, the more severe form of the disease), character-
ized by different degrees of inflammation and fibrosis.
NAFLD is the most common liverdisease in the world and
affects 20–30% of all adults in the United States and well
over 60% of adults with obesity, increasing the risk of
cardiovascular events, type 2 diabetes and hepatocellular
carcinoma (1). There is compelling evidence from non-
human primate and rodent models linking a maternal
obesogenic environment and development of NAFLD in
offspring (2, 3). Indeed, exposure to a high-fat diet (HFD)
or Western-style diet (WD) in utero, compared with only
postnatal high-energy diet feeding, rapidly worsens the
liver phenotype to fibrosis in rodents (2, 4, 5).
ABBREVIATIONS: CARS, coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy; CH,
cholesterol-enriched standard chow; COX, cyclooxygenase; E18.5,
embryonic d 18.5; HFD, high-fat diet; HOMA-IR, homeostasis model as-
sessment of insulin resistance; LC, liquid chromatography; LFD, low-fat
diet; MnSOD, manganese-dependent SOD; MS, mass spectrometry;
NAFLD, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease; NASH, nonalcoholic steato-
hepatitis; PGC, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor g coactivator;
PND, postnatal day; PPAR, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor;
PQQ, pyrroloquinoline quinone; PWR, placental weight ratio; QTOF,
quadrupole time-of-flight; RQ, respiratory quotient; qMRI, quantitative
magnetic resonance imaging; qPCR, quantitative PCR; SM, sphingomye-
lin; SOD, superoxide dismutase; TEF, thermic energy from food; TG, tri-
glyceride; WD, Western-style diet
1 Correspondence: University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
12801 E. 17th Ave., M.S. 8016, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. E-mail: karen.
jonscher@ucdenver.edu
doi: 10.1096/fj.201600906R
This article includes supplemental data. Please visit http://www.fasebj.org to
obtain this information.
1434
0892-6638/17/0031-1434 © FASEB
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 Periconception obesity in both parents affects repro-
ductive health (reviewed in ref. 6), potentially by affecting
embryonic mitochondrial metabolism, which may un-
derlie the progression of liver damage observed in off-
spring born to obese mothers (7–9). How oxidative
metabolism, including that of offspring exposed to a ma-
ternal HFD, may be restored and whether restoration will
effectively blunt development of NAFLD, remain open
questions. Therapeutic approaches targeting mitochon-
drial oxidative function, delivered both during gestation
and lactation, may prevent metabolic complications in
offspring in later life. Sen and Simmons (10) demon-
strated that high doses of vitamins A, E, and C and
selenium provided during pregnancy and lactation to
WD-fed rats, effectively decreased adiposity and im-
proved glucose tolerance in offspring switched to a
lower fat control diet after birth; however, effects on
liver were not tested. Likewise, we recently established
that supplementing the diet of obese nonhuman pri-
mates fed an HFD with the antioxidant resveratrol
prevented development of fatty liver in the fetus (11);
however, it altered fetal pancreatic morphology, sug-
gesting the need for further studies.
Pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ) is a ubiquitous
natural bacterial cofactor found in soil, plants, and in-
terstellar dust and is essential for reproductive health
and normal development in mammals (12, 13). PQQ is a
powerful antioxidant. In the reduced form, its aroxyl
radical-scavenging activity is 7.4-fold higher than that
of vitamin C, the most active water-soluble antioxidant
(14). PQQ stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis in vitro
by activating peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR)-g coactivator (PGC)-1a (15), an important regu-
lator of metabolism and mitochondrial oxidative defense.
PQQ supplementation increased the concentration of ly-
sozyme in plasma (a component of the innate immune
system) in broiler chicks (16), mitigated streptozotocin-
induced oxidative damage and diabetes in mice (17), and
protected mice from thioacetamide-induced liver fibrosis
(18), whereas diets devoid of PQQ resulted in elevated
plasma lipids in rats (19), suggesting PQQ targets the
lesions of NAFLD. The major source of this important
antioxidant in mammals is dietary (20), and PQQ is highly
enriched in human breast milk (21), making it an in-
triguing dietary therapeutic for preventing excess ma-
ternal obesity-induced oxidative stress or ameliorating
mitochondrial dysfunction and inflammation caused
by exposure to an overabundance of toxic lipids during
development.
The goal of this study was to test the hypothesis that
PQQ supplementation, provided prenatally at con-
ception and through lactation in obese pregnancy,
improves offspring metabolic outcomes, enhances ox-
idative defense, and prevents NAFLD in the livers of
obese offspring exposed to HFD both prenatally and
after weaning. Furthermore, using coherent anti-Stokes
Raman spectroscopy (CARS) imaging and lipidomics
profiling, we sought to determine whether levels of bio-
active lipids, frequently linked to hepatic apoptosis and
metabolic dysfunction, are reduced in livers of obese mice
given supplemental PQQ.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals and diets
All experiments were reviewed, approved, and monitored by the
University of Colorado Institutional Animal Care and Use Com-
mittee in accordance with the Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals (National Research Council, Washington DC, USA).
C57BL/6J mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory
(Bar Harbor, ME, USA) and used for 2 different studies: a
maternal–fetalstudy(study1)andadevelopmentalprogramming
study in offspring (study 2), as outlined in Supplemental Fig. S1.
For study 1, 8-wk-old females were randomly assigned to either a
low-fat diet (LFD; 3.85 kcal/g, 10% kcal from fat) (D12450B; Re-
search Diets, New Brunswick, NJ, USA) or a high-fat diet (HFD;
4.73 kcal/g, 45% kcal from fat) (D12451; Research Diets) matched
for micronutrients. The diets were fed to the mice ad libitum for
8 wk before mating and throughout gestation. At ;16 wk of age,
females were mated with standard chow-fed males, and PQQ
supplementation was initiated. PQQ (obtained as a gift from
Dr. Robert Rucker, University of California, Davis) was dissolved
in water at a concentration of 1.25 mg/l (3.8 mM) providing
;7.5 mg/d based on standard C57BL/6J mouse water consump-
tion(22).Thisdailydosewasderivedfromhumanstudies(23)and
adjusted for increased caloric expenditure in mice vs. humans.
Successful pregnancy was confirmed by the presence of a vaginal
plug. Mothers were individually housed during gestation, and
mice and food were weighed weekly.
Bloodandtissues ofmothersandpupswereharvestedin very
late gestation [embryonic d (E)18.5] (24). The animals were unfed
for 4 h before glucose analysis and then were euthanized. Ma-
ternal blood and tissues were quickly collected with simulta-
neous dissection and isolation of fetal–placental units. Each fetus
and placenta was weighed separately, and each fetus was sub-
sequently euthanized by decapitation and exsanguination. Fetal
blood was pooled between littermates for subsequent analysis.
Fetal livers were dissected, snap frozen, and stored at 280°C for
later analysis; stabilized in RNALater (Qiagen, Valencia, CA,
USA); or embedded in optimal cutting temperature (OCT)
compound (Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA, USA) and used for
cryosections. Livers from 1 fetus per litter were selected for
analysis; therefore n represents the number of litters in study 1.
Maternal weight was determined as gross weight before harvest
minus aggregate weight of fetal–placental units. Placentas were
measuredwithamicrometer,lengthwiseandacrosstheplacental
diameter after dissection (24). The placental surface area was
calculated as length 3 width.
Forstudy2, siblingoffspringof breeders (fed a standardchow
diet) were randomly stratified into breeding groups and fed
standard chow [CH; 22% kcal from fat, 23% protein, 55% car-
bohydrate, 3.3 kcal/g; (CH) 2019, Teklad; Envigo, Indianapolis,
IN, USA] or WD [TD.88137, Envigo; 42% kcal from fat, 15%
protein, 43% carbohydrate (34% sucrose by weight), 0.2% cho-
lesterol, and 4.5 kcal/g], with or without PQQ supplementation.
In the maternal–fetal studies, dams were fed an HFD to focus on
the effects of a high lipid load on fetal hepatic metabolism. We
changed from HFD to WD for the postnatal studies, because WD
accelerates steatosisandmildfibrosis(25) and at 20 wk of age, the
WD replicates a phenotype similar to human NASH (26). In
previous studies, we found that long-term feeding of mice with
an LFD adversely affected their health and led to an increased
rate of early death from undetermined causes in the vivarium.
The standard chow diet represented a more physiologically rel-
evant diet that reflected a healthier level of fat consumption;
therefore, we decided to use that diet, even though it was not
matched for micronutrients with WD. Second-generation off-
springwereeithercontinuedonthematernaldietorwereswitched
after weaning to WD without PQQ (WD PQQ/WD). Last, we
tested whether a subset of WD-fed offspring supplemented with
PQQ AND DEVELOPMENTAL PROGRAMMING OF NAFLD
1435
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 PQQafterweaningatahigherconcentrationof12.1mM,providing
;24 mg/d per mouse, provided increased protection from weight
gain (WD PQQ 3X). Tissues from offspring were either har-
vested at the time of weaning [postnatal d (PND) 21] or at 20 wk
of age. Offspring were unfed for 4 h and then were euthanized
via isoflurane anesthetic followed by cervical dislocation and
cardiac exsanguination. Livers were dissected, weighed, snap
frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at 280°C until they were
used or were embedded in OCT compound and used for cry-
osections. The n in study 2 represents the number of animals
studied. The study mice were derived from repeated multiple
litters, representing 2 or more breeding pairs. The data pre-
sented herein include males (except for E18.5 mice), because
they have been shown to respond more robustly to diet-
induced obesity than females (24, 27).
Indirect calorimetry
Energy balance (energy intake, resting and nonresting energy
expenditure, and fuel utilization) was determined via indirect
calorimetry at PND 21 or 20 wk. The mice were individually
placed in an 8-chamber system (Oxymax Comprehensive Lab
Animal Monitoring System; Columbus Instruments, Columbus,
OH, USA), equipped with control of temperature, humidity, and
light/dark cycle. The mice were acclimated to the system for 2–
3 d before data acquisition and then monitored for 3–5 d, during
which time food and water intake were measured, as well as
oxygen consumption (VO2) and carbon dioxide production
(VCO2).Therespiratoryquotient(RQ)wascalculatedastheratioof
CO2 production to O2 consumption (VCO2/VO2) (28–30). Activity
was measured and thermic energy from food (TEF; kilocalories
aboverestingenergyexpenditurethatare necessarytometabolize
or store foods consumed) was inferred from total energy expen-
diture and activity (31). After monitoring, the mice were returned
to group housing for up to 48 h and then euthanized.
Body composition
Body composition was determined in adult male mice by quan-
titative magnetic resonance imaging (qMRI; Echo MRI Whole
Body Composition Analyzer; Echo Medical Systems, Houston,
TX, USA). Body composition was measured either before accli-
mation to the calorimeter or 24–48 h before death.
Analysis of metabolic markers
Maternal and fetal glucose concentrations were determined at
death with a OneTouch Ultra Meter (Lifescan, Milpitas, CA,
USA);unfedoffspringglucoselevelswerequantifiedusingblood
from the tail vein 1–2 wk before euthanasia. Blood was collected
via cardiac puncture for the mother/offspring or by decapitation
of the fetus after euthanasia. Fetal blood was pooled from each
litter and treated as a single sample for analysis. After incubation
at either room temperature for 15 min (fetuses) or on ice for
30 min (offspring), blood samples were centrifuged for 10 min at
4000 g. Insulin concentration was determined in serum using an
Ultrasensitive Insulin ELISA (Crystal Chem, Downers Grove, IL,
USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Maternal
homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR)
was calculated as fasting blood glucose (in mg/dl) 3 fasting
insulin(inmicroU/ml) dividedby405.Serumtriglycerides(TGs)
were determined with the Infinity Triglycerides Liquid Stable
Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with an
internal glycerol standard and quantified with a spectro-
photometer reading at 540 nm. Liver TGs were extracted from
;50 mg of frozen tissue (3) and quantified as for serum. Final
concentrations were normalized to starting tissue weight at
homogenization.
CARS imaging
CARS images of 12-mm-thick liver cryosections from selected
adult mice were obtained by combining 2 laser beams: a Stokes
beam fixed at 1064 nm and a pump beam tuned at 817 nm. The
CARS microscope has been described (32). We also analyzed
E18.5 and PND 21 liver sections using an Olympus FV1000 FCS/
RICS microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) in the Advanced
Light Microscopy Core at the University of Colorado Anschutz
Medical Campus.
Lipidomics
Sample
An additional WD-fed cohort of male mice was studied, with or
without constant exposure to PQQ (n = 6–7 mice/group, mean
age 5.7 6 0.2 wk). These mice were slightly older than PND 21
because they were subjected to glucose tolerance testing, qMRI,
andmetabolicchamberanalysisfor5–7dafterweaning.Allowing
for 2–3 d between tests for stress reduction and accounting for
availability in the metabolic chamber, which accommodates only
8 cages, led to a delay in tissue harvesting. Liver tissue samples
were harvested and kept at 280°C before analysis. Lipids were
extractedfrom5 mgof tissue (33),albeit slightlymodified.Inbrief,
tissues were homogenized in ice-cold methanol containing deu-
terated and odd-chain lipid standards. Subsequently, ice-cold
methyl tert-butyl ether was added to each sample, followed by
vortexing and addition of water. After centrifugation, the upper
organic phase was removed, dried, and resuspended in 9:1
methanol:toluene. A portion of each resuspended sample was
removed and diluted 20-fold for triacylglycerol analysis.
Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry
Chromatographic separation was performed with a 1290 Infinity
Binary LC (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) equip-
ped with a charged surface hybrid (CSH) C18 column (Acquity
CSH C18 column; 1.7 mm 2.1 3 100 mm; Waters, Milford, MA,
USA). Mobile phase A consisted of 60:40 v/v acetonitrile:water
and mobile phase B consisted of 90:10 v/v isopropanol:acetoni-
trile. Ammonium formate (10 mM) and formic acid (0.1% v/v)
were added equally to both mobile phases as positive-ion mode
modifiers, and ammonium acetate (10 mM) was used for
negative-ion mode analysis. Gradient program for both positive-
and negative-ionization mode was as follows: 15% B (initial),
gradientto30%Bat2.0min,gradientto48%Bat2.5min,gradient
to 82% B at 11.0 min, gradient to 99% B at 11.5 min, hold at 99% B
until 12.0 min, gradient to initial conditions at 12.1 min, and hold
until 15 min. Flow rate was 0.6 ml/min. Sample (1.67 ml) was
injected in positive mode 2 times: once at standard resuspension
concentrationandasecondtime20-folddilutedfortriacylglycerol
analysis. Five microliters of sample were injected in negative
mode. All mass spectrometry data were collected on a 6530 Ac-
curate Mass quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF; Agilent Technol-
ogies) system, using both positive and negative mode electrospray
ionization. Pools of each sample group (WD PQQ and WD) were
created and injected to collect tandem MS data for annotation
purposes.
Data processing
Sampleswereannotatedviain-houseaccurate-mass/retention-time
libraries previously generated from tandem mass spectrometry
1436
Vol. 31
April 2017
JONSCHER ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 (MS/MS) data collected by using the specific liquid chroma-
tography (LC)/MS method implemented and via MS/MS data
collected from treatment pools and analyzed using LipidBlast
and NIST MS Search 2.2 (34). MassHunter Workstation Soft-
ware Quantitative Analysis B.07.00 (Agilent Technologies) was
used for targeted peak picking and integration.
Total RNA extraction and real-time
quantitative PCR
RNA isolation from snap-frozen liver tissue from fetuses and
offspring was performed with the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Real-time quanti-
tative PCR (qPCR) was performed on an iQ5 Real-Time PCR
Detection System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) or an ABI Prism
Step One (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (24, 35). Gene expression of
each target sequence was normalized to expression of the refer-
ence genes Ppia and Sdha in fetal livers and 18S rRNA in 20 wk
livers. Forward and reverse sequences of primers are summa-
rized in Table 1. Equal efficiency of the reverse transcription of
RNA was confirmed through quantification of expression of the
reference genes, which did not differ between groups (for diet,
PQQ, and interaction, all P . 0.1).
SOD activity assay
Mitochondrial-enriched supernatants were isolated from 30 mg
frozen liver samples in buffer containing 210 mM mannitol,
70 mM sucrose, 5 mM HEPES, and 1 mM EGTA (pH 7.4) at
5% w/v. After homogenization, the samples were centrifuged
5 minat600g.Superoxidedismutase(SOD)activitywasmeasured
in a 10 mg sample (protein content measured by bicinchoninic acid
assay) with a kit from Cayman Chemical (Ann Arbor, MI, USA),
according to the manufacturer’s directions.
Western blot analysis
Frozen livers (;50 mg) were homogenized with tissue protein
extraction reagent buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing
protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and equivalent amounts of
total extracted proteins (determined by Bradford assay) were
separated on 4–20% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and then trans-
ferred onto a PVDF membrane. Anti-MnSOD antibody (Cell
SignalingTechnology,Danvers,MA,USA)wasusedtoprobethe
blot, and a UVP BioSpectrum Imaging System (Upland, CA,
USA) was used to acquire the chemiluminescent signal. b-Actin
(Cell Signaling Technology) was used as the control. Pixel den-
sitiesinbandswerequantifiedwithImageJ(NationalInstitutesof
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).
Histology
Samples from snap-frozen livers were fixed for 24 h in 4% para-
formaldehyde, embedded in paraffin, sectioned, and stained
with hematoxylin and eosin by the Pathology Core at the Uni-
versity of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus.
Statistics
Data are expressed as means 6 SEM. The significance of differ-
ences between groups was determined by 2-way ANOVA or
Mann-Whitney U test with Prism 6.0 Software (GraphPad, La
Jolla,CA,USA).AStudent’sttestwasperformedonLC/MS data,
to determine statistical significance of peak heights. Differences
TABLE 1. Forward and reverse sequences of primers used to probe expression of selected genes
Primer, 59–39
Gene
Forward
Reverse
18S
TCCGATAACGAACGAGAC
CTAAGGGCATCACAGACC
Acadm
GGCGATGAAGGTTGAACTC
TACTCTGTGTTGAATCCATAGC
Cpt1aa
AGAAGAAGTTCATCCGATTCAAG
CCACCACCACGATAAGCC
Cpt1ab
GTCCCTCCAGCTGGCTTATC
CATGCGGCCAGTGGTGTCTA
Il1b
AGTTGACGGACCCCAAAAGA
GGACAGCCCAGGTCAAAGG
Il6
TCCATCCAGTTGCCTTCTTG
TTTCTCATTTCCACGATTTCCC
Il10
GGTTGCCAAGCCTTATCG
TCTTCACCTGCTCCACTG
Nfkb1
TGTAGATAGGCAAGGTCAGAATG
AACACTGGAAGCACGGATG
Nlrp3
GCCTTGAAGAAGAGTGGATGG
GCGTGTAGCGACTGTTGAG
Nos2
AGAGAGATCCGATTTAGAGTCTTGGT
TGACCCGTGAAGCCATGAC
Pparaa
TCGCTATCCAGGCAGAAGG
AACAACAATAACCACAGA
Pparab
TGCCCTGAACATCGAGTGTCGAAT
TCGTACACCAGCTTCAGCCGAATA
Pparg1
TGTTGACCCAGAGCATGGTG
TGCGAGTGGTCTTCCATCAC
Pparg2
CTGACGGGGTCTCGGTTG
AACCATGGTAATTTCAGTAAAGGGT
Ppargc1aa
GTCAGAGTGGATTGGAGTTG
AAGTCATTCACATCAAGTTCAG
Ppargc1ab
ACCCACAGGATCAGAACAAACCCT
TTGGTGTGAGGAGGGTCATCGTTT
Ppia
GTCTCCTTCGAGCTGTTTGC
TAAAGTCACCACCCTGGCAC
Ptgs2
GGTCTGGTGCCTGGTCTG
CTCTCCTATGAGTATGAGTCTGC
Sdha
TGCAGGCCTGGAGATAAAGTTCCT
AACACTGCAGCATGGTTCTGCATC
Sod1
CTTCTCGTCTTGCTCTCTC
TCCTGACAACACAACTGG
Sod2
ATGTAGGTGTCTTCAGCCACA
AATTCCCAGCAAACACAGAGT
Tlr4
TTCAAGACCAAGCCTTTCAG
GTCACATCACATAGTCCTTCC
Tnf
GGTTCTGTCCCTTTCACTCAC
TGCCTCTTCTGCCAGTTCC
aPrimer used for analysis of mRNA from 20-wk-old mouse livers. bPrimer used for analysis of mRNA
from fetal livers.
PQQ AND DEVELOPMENTAL PROGRAMMING OF NAFLD
1437
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 weredeemedsignificantatP,0.05.Principlecomponentanalysis
was performed on LC/MS data by using MetaboAnalyst 3.0 (36).
RESULTS
Treating with PQQ during pregnancy does not
affect maternal weight gain but increases
placental growth
We tested the hypothesis that PQQ supplementation,
provided both prenatally (at the time of mating) and after
weaning, would improvemetabolic outcomes of offspring
of obese dams. Female mice were fed an LFD or HFD
before mating with LFD-fed males and continued to be fed
the same diet throughout gestation and lactation, adding
PQQsupplementationatmating.Bodyweight of HFD-fed
mice was higher before mating, and this difference was
maintained during pregnancy, with no effect of PQQ
supplementation in LFD- or HFD-fed mothers (Fig. 1A).
The increased energy density of the HFD (4.73 kcal/g) as
compared with the LFD (3.85 kcal/g) led to increased
energy intake for the obese group, although food con-
sumption (in grams per day) did not differ between groups
(Supplemental Fig. S2). Neither diet nor PQQ treatment
affected the number of pups per litter (Fig. 1B), and the
averagefetalweightwasnotdifferentbetweengroups(Fig.
1C). However, PQQ treatment led to a significant increase
in placental weight (Fig. 1D) and placental surface area
(Fig. 1E), regardless of maternal diet.
Metabolic phenotypes of male offspring of
obese dams are modulated by PQQ
throughout development
The effect of PQQ supplementation on diet-induced obe-
sityhadnotbeen studied,toourknowledge,promptingus
Figure 1. PQQ supplementation does not protect against maternal weight gain but increases placental size in pregnant obese
mice. A) Maternal weights for matched groups were recorded from the initiation of experimental diet to E18.5. PQQ
supplementation began at mating. Weights at 8 and 12 wk after diet initiation were compared. B) Number of pups per litter. C, D)
Fetal (C) and matched placental (D) weights were measured. E) Placenta length and width were measured with a micrometer,
and placental surface area was calculated. Data are means 6 SEM (n = 5–7/group). *P , 0.05, with 2-way ANOVA comparing diets
in A and PQQ treatment in D and E.
1438
Vol. 31
April 2017
JONSCHER ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 to measure levels of glucose, insulin, and TGs in both lean
and obese dams and offspring in our model. Results are
summarized in Table 2. Short-term supplementation with
PQQ during pregnancy increased maternal glucose levels
significantly, in both LFD- (control) and HFD-fed mothers,
without changing fasting insulin. We investigated cohorts
of offspring at E18.5 (fetuses), PND 21 (weanlings), and
20 wk (adults). In contrast to mothers, glucose levels of
E18.5 fetuses of HFD-fed dams exposed to PQQ were not
changed; nor was glucose affected by PQQ treatment at
PND 21. At 20 wk, glucose was markedly increased by the
WD in the group without PQQ. Although glucose and
insulin levels were lower in the WD PQQ-fed mice, as
compared to levels in the WD-fed cohort, the effect on
HOMA-IR reduction did not reach significance (assessed
by t test). Fetuses from HFD-fed dams and offspring fed
the WD had significantly increased hepatic TGs vs. control-
fed offspring, whereas PQQ supplementation significantly
reduced TG accumulation in both control and HFD- or
WD-fed mice, with the exception of PND 21 WD-fed mice.
Twenty-wk-oldoffspringofWD-feddamsgivenPQQonly
during gestation and lactation showed significant reduc-
tions in glucose and hepatic TGs compared to WD-fed
offspring without maternal PQQ.
Prolonged treatment with PQQ improves body
composition but does not protect male
offspring of obese dams from WD-induced
weight gain
We charted growth through adulthood for offspring con-
tinued with WD feeding and for a subset of WD-PQQ–fed
offspringwithPQQ withdrawn after weaning (WD PQQ/
WD). WD-fed mice supplemented with PQQ throughout
pregnancy and postnatally were not protected from
weight gain (PQQ supplementation similarly did not af-
fect weight gain of CH-fed mice; Supplemental Fig. S3 and
Fig. 2A). Mice with PQQ withdrawn postnatally gained
weight at the same rate as their WD-PQQ– and WD-fed
counterparts; however, they were smaller at weaning and
maintained the same weight difference throughout life
(Fig.2B).WD-fedlitterswerenotsignificantlysmallerthan
WD PQQ-fed litters (4.4 6 0.3 vs. 5.0 6 0.4 pups/litter);
thus, litter size was unlikely to contribute to this disparity.
Increasing the concentration of PQQ after weaning did
not alter growth trajectories (Supplemental Fig. S4). PQQ
did not affect energy or drink intake (Supplemental Fig.
S5). Body composition was measured by ECHO-MRI. The
ratio of fat mass to body mass of CH-fed mice (0.176 6 0.02)
was similar to that obtained with PQQ supplementation
(CH PQQ/CH PQQ 0.128 6 0.03; P = 0.3); however,
PQQ treatment reduced WD-induced increases in fat
mass (Fig. 2C) and liver hypertrophy (Fig. 2D) at 20 wk,
even when PQQ was provided only during gestation
and lactation.
“Metabolic flexibility” defines the ability to switch be-
tweenlipidandglucoseoxidation,dependingonsubstrate
availability, and is measured by a change in the RQ. Im-
paired metabolic flexibility may result in poor glycemic
control, reduced energy expenditure, and weight gain. To
elucidate whether PQQ reduces liver TGs and fat mass
through a change in energy metabolism or metabolic flex-
ibility, we measured CO2 production and O2 consumption
in a metabolic chamber at 20 wk and calculated the RQ.
RQs were affected by both diet and PQQ, with the WD
TABLE 2. Metabolic phenotype of mothers and offspring throughout development
Phenotype
CTL/CTLa
n = 5–11
HFD/HFD
n = 7–9
CTL PQQ/CTL PQQ
n = 5–7
HFD PQQ/HFD PQQ
n = 5–7
Maternal
Glucose (mg/dl)
77.5 6 5.5
90.3 6 6.3
119.8 6 10.4
106.2 6 13.0#
Insulin (ng/ml)
0.83 6 0.05
0.77 6 0.03
0.86 6 0.13
0.68 6 0.01
HOMA-IR
4.57 6 0.43
4.94 6 0.39
7.17 6 1.25
5.13 6 0.63
Serum TGs (mg/dl)
23.3 6 5.8
23.7 6 6.0
20.0 6 10.3
21.8 6 2.3
E18.5 (averaged per litter)
Glucose (mg/dl)
72.4 6 13.8
116.9 6 21.7
85.2 6 21.6
92.7 6 9.2
Insulin (ng/ml)
1.27 6 0.13
0.81 6 0.05*
1.02 6 0.08
0.78 6 0.07
HOMA-IR
6.54 6 1.41
6.73 6 1.32
6.05 6 1.61
5.14 6 0.69
Hepatic TGs (mg/dl)
10.9 6 0.8
22.4 6 2.9*
7.3 6 1.5
8.5 6 0.8#
PND 21b
Glucose (mg/dl)
193.3 6 10.7
200.6 6 9.3
179.2 6 18.5
197.0 6 18.5
Hepatic TGs (mg/dl)
14.9 6 1.5
17.3 6 1.5*
11.6 6 0.9
24.3 6 2.6
20 wk
Glucose (mg/dl)
154.8 6 8.7
172.9 6 10.6*
124.3 6 10.9
167.8 6 14.4
Insulin (ng/ml)b
0.87 6 0.11
1.34 6 0.31
–
0.84 6 0.19
HOMA-IRb
9.58 6 1.32
16.48 6 3.94
–
10.02 6 2.42
Hepatic TGs (mg/dl)
14.4 6 4.5
63.8 6 5.0*
9.3 6 0.7
37.0 6 4.0#
20 wk: WD PQQ/WD supplemented
during gestation and lactation only
Glucose (mg/dl)
172.9 6 10.6
125.2 6 8.8#
Hepatic TGs (mg/dl)
63.8 6 5.0
44.8 6 5.0#
Data are means 6 SEM. aControl diet: LFD for materna/fetal studies, CH for offspring studies; HFD: high-fat-diet for maternal/fetal studies,
WD for offspring studies. bInsulin concentrations were not measured for PND 21 or 20 wk CH-PQQ/CH-PQQ-fed mice. *P , 0.05 vs. CTL for diet
effect; #P , 0.05 vs. CTL PQQ for PQQ effect.
PQQ AND DEVELOPMENTAL PROGRAMMING OF NAFLD
1439
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 reducing RQ and PQQ increasing RQ in WD-fed animals
(Fig. 2E). The increase in RQ suggests that PQQ treatment
improves the ability of WD-fed mice to switch from lipid to
glucose oxidation during a meal, thus increasing their
metabolic flexibility (37), even when they received PQQ
supplementation only during gestation and lactation. En-
ergy expenditure for mice in the metabolic chamber was
calculated and, notably, the TEF was significantly in-
creased for WD-fed mice treated with PQQ (Fig. 2F). Taken
together, these results suggest that although PQQ does not
protect from overall weight gain, it may increase metabolic
flexibility in a high fat/high carbohydrate environment.
PQQ treatment increases expression of
regulators of lipid catabolism in WD-
fed offspring
Given the striking reduction of hepatic TGs and potential
changes in fuel metabolism associated with PQQ supple-
mentation, we next investigated the effect of PQQ on ex-
pression of genes that regulate lipid metabolism. PGC-1a
mediates regulation of both PPARa and -g (reviewed in
refs. 38, 39). We therefore determined the effects of WD
and PQQ on those gene sets in fetal and male adult off-
spring. At E18.5, maternal feeding of the HFD did not
significantly alter fetal gene expression; however, mater-
nal supplementation with PQQ modestly decreased ex-
pression of Ppargc1a, Pparg2, Ppara, and Cpt1a, regardless of
diet (Fig. 3A). In adults maintained on the maternal diet,
PQQ treatment significantly increased Ppargc1a expression
(Fig. 3B). Pparg1 mediates lipogenesis, whereas Pparg2 in
the liver is protective and prevents lipotoxicity (40). Ex-
pressionlevelsofbothisoformsweresignificantlyincreased
by both maternal and postnatal exposure to the WD, al-
though Pparg1 expression was more highly up-regulated
than Pparg2. PQQ supplementation significantly decreased
expression levels of both isoforms in the WD PQQ/WD
PQQ-fed group compared with levels in the WD/WD-fed
group (Fig. 3B). PQQ treatment did not affect Pparg1 ex-
pression in CH-fed mice. PQQ significantly altered Pparg2,
increasingexpressionintheCH-fedgroupanddecreasingit
in obese adult offspring (Fig. 3B). Unlike E18.5, Ppara and
Cpt1a mRNA expression in adult offspring were signifi-
cantly increased in WD PQQ/WD PQQ-fed animals (Fig.
3C). We also investigated expression of Acadm, another
Figure 2. Growth and energy metabolism characteristics of male offspring continued on the maternal diet or with PQQ removed
after weaning. Mice were weighed weekly after weaning. A) Growth curves for mice continued to 20 wk of age on the maternal
diet. B) Effect of removing PQQ after weaning. PQQ was removed from offspring of WD PQQ-fed dams after weaning, and they
were fed the WD for an additional 17 wk. C, D) At death, the percentage of fat mass (C) was measured, and the ratio of liver mass
to body mass (D) was determined. E, F) Before death, mice were placed in a metabolic chamber and the RQ (E) and TEF (F)
consumption and storage on total energy expenditure (TEF_TEE) were calculated. Data are means 6 SEM (n = 3–10/group).
*P , 0.05 vs. CH mice in A vs. drink-switched mice (WD PQQ/WD) in B and vs. WD-fed mice in C–F.
1440
Vol. 31
April 2017
JONSCHER ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 gene involved in fatty acid oxidation and found similar
significant up-regulation in WD PQQ/WD PQQ-fed off-
spring (Fig. 3C). We again investigated persistent effects in
our cohort with PQQ withdrawn at weaning (Fig. 3D) and
found that mRNA expression levels of the WD PQQ/WD-
fed group followed the same trends as WD-fed offspring
maintained with continuous PQQ treatment. Taken to-
gether, these data suggest that PQQ up-regulates catabolic
and oxidative genes in the livers of animals exposed to ex-
cess lipids during early life, and this altered response per-
sists into adulthood.
Hepatic lipid composition and lipid droplet
size is affected by PQQ treatment
The reduction of total hepatic TGs after PQQ treatment in
E18.5 and 20-wk-old obese offspring was consistent with
gene expression patterns; however, the slight increase in
TGs in PND 21 obese offspring on PQQ was unexpected;
therefore, we used CARS microscopy to further investi-
gate lipid droplet accumulation in liver cryosections from
all offspring groups. Few lipid droplets were observed in
livers from chow-fed mice (data not shown). Displayed in
Fig. 4A are representative CARS images of livers from
HFD-exposed fetuses and WD-fed offspring (2 mice/
group). At E18.5, lipid droplet accumulation was lower in
mice exposed to HFD PQQ compared with HFD-exposed
fetuses, in agreement with the total TG measurements in
Table 2 for these groups. By PND 21, offspring had accu-
mulated much more fat, likely through suckling from the
dams. Although variability was observed between mice,
liver sections from offspring treated with PQQ appeared
to have larger lipid droplets, on average, than offspring
without PQQ. Fat accretion continued into adulthood;
however, by 20 wk, droplets were much larger in the WD-
fed mice with no PQQ treatment as compared to those
with long-term consumption of WD with PQQ, and fewer
and smaller droplets were observed in the WD PQQ/WD
images as compared with those of the WD-fed mouse
livers, which again is consistent with the total TG mea-
surements above. Similar patterns were observed in
hematoxylin and eosin -stained images (Supplemental
Fig. S6).
Figure 3. Regulation of hepatic metabolism is shifted toward catabolic mechanisms by PQQ treatment. A–C) Real-time
quantitative PCR was used to measure mRNA expression of key metabolic transcription factors in fetal livers (A) and livers (B)
from male adult (20 wk) offspring, and expression of fatty acid oxidation genes was measured in adult males (C). Gene
expression was normalized to LFD-fed results and Ppia and Sdha expression levels (fetal) and CH-fed results and 18S rRNA
expression levels (adult). Data are means 6 SEM (n = 3–9/group). *P , 0.05, effect of diet, for WD-fed compared with CH-fed
animals; #P , 0.05, main effect of supplementation with PQQ. D) Persistent effects were assessed in offspring of WD-fed mothers
with either no PQQ (WD/WD), the WD-fed cohort with PQQ withdrawn at weaning (WD PQQ/WD), or those maintained on the
maternal diet (WD PQQ/WD PQQ) (n = 5–6/group). Gene expression was normalized to WD-fed results and 18S rRNA
expression levels. *P , 0.05 compared with WD PQQ/WD-fed mice by Mann-Whitney U test.
PQQ AND DEVELOPMENTAL PROGRAMMING OF NAFLD
1441
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 Figure 4. PQQ treatment alters hepatic lipid profiles around the time of weaning, increasing protective TGs and decreasing SM
and ceramide concentrations. A) CARS microscopy was used to visualize lipid droplets in 12-mm-thick cryosections from mouse
livers at E18.5, PND 21 (males), and 20 wk (males). Representative images from 2 mice are shown for offspring of dams treated
with or without PQQ. Mat PQQ, 20-wk-old WD PQQ/WD-fed mice that received PQQ via maternal supplementation only.
Magnification, 360; field of view, 350 mm. HFD*, E18.5 fetuses were from HFD-fed mothers, PND 21 and 20-wk-old offspring
were WD fed. B) Untargeted lipidomics analysis was performed on 6–7 mice/group (WD- and WD PQQ-fed) from 6-wk-old
males. When multiple instances of a compound were present, unique ions were selected based on highest mean abundance and
were used for subsequent analysis. Lipids were organized into general classes, with percentage of total identified shown for each
class. Student’s t test was performed to determine significance. The percentage of compounds with significant changes are shown
in parentheses for each class. P , 0.05. C, D) A subset of the most abundant significantly changed TGs (C) and the total PQQ-
induced change in TGs (D). E, F) A subset of the most abundant significantly changed SMs and ceramides (E) and the total
PQQ-induced change in SMs and ceramide concentrations from the lipidomics analysis (F) are plotted. Data are means 6 SEM.
*P , 0.05, by Mann-Whitney U test.
1442
Vol. 31
April 2017
JONSCHER ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 Giventhat TGsandlipiddropletsizes wereincreasedin
WDPQQ-fedPND 21mice,wewere curiousas towhether
PQQ treatment results in altered lipid composition in the
liver. We performed untargeted MS-based lipidomics in
liver tissue from the additional WD-fed cohort of ;6-wk-
old mice, with or without constant exposure to PQQ.
Differences in lipidomics data were examined by principle
component analysis (Supplemental Fig. S7), highlighting
the multivariate separation between treatment classes
(WD vs. WD PQQ). Summarized in Fig. 4B is the relative
distribution of classes of unique compounds identified in
both positive and negative ion mode. The percentage of
compounds within each class that were significantly dif-
ferent between groups is indicated within each section of
the chart in parentheses. Most of the identified ions were
phosphoglycerides(38%);however,abundanceofonly1%
of the .150 phosphoglycerides identified changed sig-
nificantly between groups. Lipid classes showing the most
significant changes were the TGs and the sphingomyelins
(SMs)/ceramides, representing 18 and 22% of the com-
pounds detected, respectively. Of the lipid classes, TGs
were the most affected by maternal PQQ treatment, with
29% of the unique TG moieties changing significantly. The
next most altered class of lipids was the combined SMs/
ceramides, with 14% of unique compounds changing
significantly. A subset of the significantly changed TGs is
plotted inFig.4C,and,consistentwiththetotalTGdatafor
WD-fed PND21 offspring, peakabundancewas increased
for age-matched offspring of WD PQQ-treated dams as
compared with untreated counterparts (summed TG in-
tensity; Fig. 4D). Notably, TG (54:3), identified astriolein, a
bioactive lipid associated with protection from oxidative
stress (41), was increased in WD PQQ-treated mice. In
contrast, concentrations of SMs and ceramides, associated
with lesions of NAFLD such as insulin resistance, oxida-
tivestress, and inflammation (42–45),weredecreased with
PQQ treatment in mice fed the WD (Fig. 4E; summed in-
tensity in Fig. 4F). Thus, PQQ supplementation of WD-fed
mothers during pregnancy and lactation appeared to shift
the liver lipid composition of offspring around the time of
weaning to increase lipid mediators of oxidative defense
and decrease proinflammatory mediators. Whether this
protective lipid profile persists in adults remains to be
determined.
Oxidative defense response of obese
offspring is differentially affected by PQQ
throughout development
The significant increase of triolein, a marker for protective
response to oxidative stress (41), in mice supplemented
with PQQ prompted us to investigate the activity and
expression of the oxidative defense enzyme SOD. The ac-
tivity of mitochondrial manganese-dependent (Mn)SOD
in fetal livers was significantly increased in HFD-exposed
E18.5 fetuses, whereas maternal supplementation with
PQQ significantly decreased SOD activity for HFD- but
not LFD-exposed fetuses (Fig. 5A). We examined mRNA
expression levels of Sod1 (cytoplasmic) and Sod2 (mito-
chondrial)inadultmouseliversandfoundthat,afterbirth,
expression of Sod1 was markedly increased in WD/WD-
fed mice, as compared with CH/CH-fed animals and was
reduced in PQQ-supplemented mice. Notably, Sod1 ex-
pression was significantly decreased in WD-fed animals
with PQQ withdrawn at weaning (WD PQQ/WD),
demonstrated a persistent effect of PQQ on Sod1 (Fig.
5B). Expression of Sod2 was unchanged by diet or PQQ
treatment (Fig. 5C). Wefurtherinvestigated mitochondrial
MnSOD protein expression by Western blot analysis. A
representative blot shown in Fig. 5D and quantified in Fig.
5E, shows that expression of the mitochondrial gene
product, MnSOD, was significantly decreased in adult
male offspring fed a WD diet and increased by PQQ
treatment in the WD-fed offspring, suggesting changes in
MnSOD protein abundance, which may not be reflected
by mRNA expression levels, are affected by both diet and
PQQ.
Inducible NOS-2 is up-regulated in the liver in response
to injury, oxidative stress, and inflammation (46, 47),
which are lesions of NAFLD in addition to TG accretion. In
20-wk-old offspring, we found that the WD resulted in
significant up-regulation of Nos2 expression as compared
to the CH diet, whereas PQQ treatment selectively di-
minished hepatic Nos2 expression in WD-fed offspring
(Fig. 5F). Furthermore, Nos2 expression in WD-fed mice
with PQQ withdrawn at weaning (WD PQQ/WD) was
even lower than that of the WD PQQ/WD PQQ-fed
group. Taken together, these data demonstrate that sub-
pharmacological supplementation with PQQ can robustly
reverse lipid-induced increases in expression of enzymes
associated with oxidative stress and inflammation, which
manifest even before birth. Supplementation with this
potent antioxidant is effective in adulthood, even when
provided only during gestation and lactation.
PQQ supplementation reduces expression
of proinflammatory genes in adult
WD-fed offspring
The marked reversal of Nos2 mRNA expression in PQQ-
treated WD-fed offspring suggested that the action of
PQQ is targeted to inflammatory pathways. Therefore, we
used qPCR to probe mRNA expression levels of proin-
flammatory genes in livers of adult male offspring main-
tained with the maternal diet. Results are summarized in
Table 3, where we observed a general pattern of increased
inflammatory gene expression associated with con-
sumption of WD. Supplementing with PQQ inhibited
WD-induced up-regulation of these proinflammatory
mediators. Expression of the p50 subunit of NFkB (Nfkb1)
and IL10 did not change significantly with diet or PQQ.
TLR4, TNF, and IL1b gene expression did not show sig-
nificant effects of PQQ, although significance was reached
in some cases when compared pair-wise by t test. A sig-
nificant effect of both diet (increase) and PQQ (decrease)
was observed for the inflammasome pathway genes
NLRP3 and IL6, and cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 (Ptgs2) gene
expression was markedly and specifically modulated by
PQQ. Figure 6 shows, again, that PQQ supplementation
given only during gestation and lactation persistently
PQQ AND DEVELOPMENTAL PROGRAMMING OF NAFLD
1443
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 protected WD-fed offspring from up-regulation of in-
flammatory programs into adulthood.
DISCUSSION
Collectively, multiple lines of evidence from human and
animal studies have converged to suggest that pregnancy
and the postnatal period are uniquely crucial windows of
opportunity for prevention of metabolic disease in this and
subsequent generations (2, 48–50). However, nontoxic,
nonsynthetic compounds that can be safely used in preg-
nancy to target specific pathways for disease risk are few
and far between. In the current study, supplementation
with PQQ, a naturally occurring antioxidant found in
foods and enriched in human breast milk, given at sub-
pharmacological levels throughout pregnancy and lactation,
protected obese mouse offspring from hepatic lipotoxicity,
increased metabolic flexibility, and suppressed liver in-
flammation without affecting growth or weight gain.
PQQ, given at the time of conception, had no effect on
maternal weight gain but increased maternal glucose.
PQQ at the molecular level enhances the production of
Figure 5. Response of obese offspring to oxidative stress in early life and in later life is altered by PQQ treatment. Offspring of
dams fed a LFD or HFD were assessed for response to oxidative stress by measuring activity or expression of SOD and Nos2. A)
MnSOD activity was measured in E18.5 fetuses (n = 5/group). B, C) Expression levels of cytoplasmic Sod1 (B) and mitochondrial
Sod2 (C) were measured by qPCR for male adult offspring continued on the maternal diet or drink switched after weaning (n =
3–9/group). *P , 0.05, compared with WD/WD determined by unpaired Student’s t test with Welch’s correction. D) Protein
expression was determined by Western blot, and a representative blot from n = 2/group is shown. E) Image analysis was
performed using ImageJ, and the densitometry was measured. After background subtraction, integrated pixel densities were
normalized to control values (CH/CH) (n = 4 mice/group). F) mRNA expression of Nos2 was measured for the same groups as
in B and C. *P , 0.05; #P , 0.1 compared with WD/WD feeding, determined by unpaired Student’s t test with Welch’s correction.
Data are means 6 SEM.
TABLE 3. mRNA expression of proinflammatory genes in 20-wk-old
male mice
Gene
CH
n = 4–6
WD
n = 4–6
CH PQQ
n = 4–5
WD PQQ
n = 5–7
Nlrp3
1.00 6 0.11
4.67 6 0.73* 1.52 6 0.14 2.12 6 0.25#
Tlr4
1.00 6 0.06
2.51 6 0.33* 1.38 6 0.27 1.66 6 0.26
Nfkb1 1.00 6 0.13
1.38 6 0.14
1.19 6 0.14 1.29 6 0.13
Tnf
1.00 6 0.17 10.51 6 3.8*
1.55 6 0.65 3.15 6 0.67
Il10
1.00 6 0.31
1.98 6 0.69
1.58 6 0.65 1.55 6 0.10
Il6
1.00 6 0.22
4.10 6 0.90* 0.54 6 0.15 1.21 6 0.18#
Il1b
1.00 6 0.22
3.65 6 1.05* 0.81 6 0.31 0.93 6 0.07
Ptgs2
1.00 6 0.09
1.09 6 0.04
0.71 6 0.09 0.76 6 0.06#
Data are means 6 SEM normalized to CH. *P , 0.05 vs. CH for diet
effect; #P , 0.05 vs. CH PQQ for PQQ effect.
1444
Vol. 31
April 2017
JONSCHER ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 pyruvate from lactate (51), possibly changing the cellular
redox state and favoring increased gluconeogenesis (52) in
the mothers. However, there was no effect of PQQ on fetal
glucose, litter size, or fetal weights, suggesting that al-
though statistically significant, maternal glucose had no
effect on fetal growth, despite increasing placental weight.
The lower fetal insulin levels in the HFD-fed group may
have been caused by impaired insulin secretion or by the
immaturity of the islets at E18.5 (53). With no significant
changes observed in insulin levels in adulthood, we sus-
pect that this is a transient effect; however, follow-up
studies are necessary to pursue this notion further. Nota-
bly, PQQ given to mothers fed both LFD and HFD led to
significantly reduced levels of fetal hepatic TGs compared
to unexposed mice at E18.5. More studies are needed to
identify whether the mechanisms underlying this change
reflect effects on the mother or the placenta or represent a
direct effect of PQQ on fetal development in utero.
PQQ reduced expression of both Ppara and Pparg2 in
the livers of E18.5 mice compared to HFD-fed controls, an
effect that persisted for Pparg2 but not Ppara in adult mice
fed WD and exposed to PQQ. PQQ activates PGC-1a, a
transcriptional coactivator implicated in regulation of re-
active oxygen species–detoxifying genes, such as SOD, as
wellasmanyothermetabolicmediators,includingPPARa
and -g (as reviewed in ref. 36). In adult but not fetal livers,
Ppara expression was significantly increased by PQQ
supplementation, but only for obese offspring; diet did not
have a significant effect. This result is consistent with
findings reported by Bauerly et al. (19), where PQQ sup-
plementation did not elevate PPARa expression in chow-
fed rat livers or in Hepa 1–6 cells. Wealso observed similar
up-regulation in expression of the fatty acid oxidation
genes Cpt1a and Acadm at 20 wk, suggesting that PQQ
increases fatty acid oxidation under conditions of over-
nutrition to reduce hepatic TGs. Notably, we observed a
significant increase in expression of Pparg isoforms with
WD feeding that was normalized by PQQ treatment in
adult obese offspring, consistent with Sen and Simmons
(10), who observed a similar trend for total Pparg expres-
sion in adipose tissue from offspring of obese dams treated
with antioxidants. PPAR-g2 is ectopically induced in liver
in response to overnutrition and may prevent lipotoxicity
by facilitating TG accumulation and increasing the lipid-
buffering capacity of the liver (40); PQQ may activate
similar pathways.
In adult mice, we measured significant decreases in WD-
induced hepatic TGs and expression of proinflammatory
cytokines associated with PQQ supplementation, particu-
larly for NLRP-3, a major component of the inflammasome;
NOS-2; and IL-6. We also observed PQQ-specific up-
regulation of COX-2 gene expression (Ptgs2). The sig-
nificant effect of PQQ on IL-6, as compared with that of
TNF and IL-1b, is similar to that observed in a thio-
acetamide model of induced fibrosis, where PQQ nor-
malized expression of IL6 more effectively than other
genes (18). These results also complement observations
by Tchaparian et al. (54) and suggest that PQQ activates
IL-6 to affect Jak-Stat signaling. IL-6 production was also
significantly diminished by PQQ treatment in synovio-
cytes, via attenuating phosphorylation of p38 and JNK
(55). In addition, an in vivo model of osteoarthritis has
demonstrated an effect of PQQ in decelerating inflam-
matory responses via inhibition of NO production by
suppressing IkBa degradation (56), suggesting PQQ acts
systemically to modulate IL-6 and NO levels through
different pathways. Notably, the ceramide content in
livers of WD-fed weanling mice was lowered by PQQ,
suggesting that the disease-causing effects of excess lip-
ids on inflammation and oxidative stress had already
been mitigated in early life. Taken together, these data
show that PQQ targets multiple proinflammatory path-
ways in the liver to protect against WD-induced liver
lipotoxicity, although there was no change in WD-
induced weight gain in the offspring of WD-fed mothers.
AsreviewedbyAkagawaetal.(14),innumerousinvitro
and in vivo models, PQQ acts as an antioxidant by scav-
enging O2
2 and protects mitochondria from oxidative
stress-induced damage. Whether PQQ acts preconception
to reduce oxidative stress in oocytes or sperm cells or im-
proves placental function by reducing oxidative stress,
indirectly protecting the fetus, is beyond the scope of the
present study but is important to determine. The pro-
gressive development of NAFLD involves excessive TG
accumulation in hepatocytes and results in cellular dys-
function caused by oxidative stress, lipotoxicity, or bacte-
rial endotoxin activation of liver resident macrophages
(Kupffer cells), inducing secretion of proinflammatory
cytokines that activate neighboring stellate cells (57). In-
flammatorycells,particularlytheKupffercells,arerecruited
to the liver in response to liver injury or after exposure to
danger signals. PQQ reduced macrophage infiltration in
thioacetamide-induced injury (18) and inhibited osteoclast
Figure 6. PQQ supplementation during gestation and lactation
only leads to mRNA expression profiles of proinflammatory
genes in adults similar to those of WD-fed offspring receiving
PQQ throughout their lifespan. mRNA expression of proin-
flammatory genes was measured in livers of adult male
offspring. Mothers were fed a WD, with or without PQQ, and
and either offspring continued on the maternal diet to 20 wk
(WD/WD- or WD PQQ/WD PQQ-fed), or PQQ was withdrawn
at weaning (WD PQQ/WD). Data are means 6 SEM (n = 5–6/
group). Mann-Whitney U test was used in pair-wise comparison
of groups. *P , 0.05 compared with WD/WD-fed mice; #P , 0.05
compared with WD PQQ/WD-fed mice.
PQQ AND DEVELOPMENTAL PROGRAMMING OF NAFLD
1445
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 formation (58), suggesting that PQQ targets macrophage
activity. Oxidative stress, associated with maternal obesity
(59, 60), may connect the liver to intrauterine programming
sequelae in the macrophage, particularly via epigenetic
mechanisms (61–64). Whether PQQ simply limits macro-
phage infiltration or actually blocks the impact of maternal
nutrition on developmental programming in the macro-
phage to reduce inflammation in the adult offspring is a
critical area for future study.
We tested the effect of early life PQQ supplementation
on metabolic flexibility in adult mice. We measured an
increase in RQ and TEF for PQQ-supplemented mice that
maybeinterpretedasimprovementinmetabolicflexibility
(37).Insulin resistance and altered glucose disposal rate, as
well as dysfunction in fatty acid oxidation in mitochon-
dria, impair metabolic flexibility in patients with type 2
diabetes (65). Decreased RQ has also been associated with
impaired insulin-mediated suppression of lipolysis in ad-
ipose tissue (66); however, the action of PQQ in adipose
tissue has not yet been established. The RQ for animals in
which PQQ was removed after weaning was increased
similarly to that for the continually supplemented mice,
suggesting that PQQ supplementation during gestation
and lactation permanently alters fuel utilization in the
offspring. The further increase in TEF for the WD-fed an-
imals with PQQ withdrawn at weaning may account for
their decreased weight, although the reason underlying
the increase remains unclear. Nevertheless, PQQ supple-
mentation during this early-life period conferred persis-
tent effects into adulthood, reducing the accumulation of
TGs, suppressing induction of proinflammatory path-
ways, andincreasingfattyacid oxidation. PQQ in early life
protected against diet-induced lipotoxicity and dimin-
ished NAFLD, suggesting that it might be useful in preg-
nancy and lactation for conferring future health benefits
foroffspring.Whethertheseeffectsarerelatedtopersistent
epigenetic changes in genes that regulate liver health or
adipose tissue remains to be determined.
CONCLUSIONS
We have demonstrated for the first time, to our knowl-
edge, that subpharmacological supplementation of PQQ,
when provided prenatally in obese pregnant mice, pro-
tects against disease pathways involved in NAFLD and
NASH, decreasing hepatic PPARg expression in early life.
Continued treatment after weaning showed similar trends
and results in reduced hepatic TG accumulation, inhibi-
tion of proinflammatory programs, and increased oxi-
dative defense. Protection against weight gain was not
achieved; however, PQQ altered fuel utilization and in-
creased metabolic flexibility in obese animals and signifi-
cantly reduced adiposity, resulting in an overall healthier
metabolic state in offspring exposed to the WD. Our novel
observation of a reduction in ceramides in the postnatal
livers of mice and normalization of PPARg by PQQ in
adults suggests that prolonged treatment with PQQ pro-
tects against hepatic lipotoxicity, as suggested in other
studies (18). In vivo tests in preclinical models of diabetes
and NASH and in vitro tests have reported no genotoxic
potentialofPQQ(67)andrecentshort-termhumanstudies
have shown PQQ-related improvements in cognitive
function (68), dry skin (69), and lipid metabolism (70).
Preclinical and human studies have also demonstrated
that supplemental PQQ improves oxidative stress (23, 71),
suggesting that dietary supplementation with PQQ is an
emerging therapeutic target worthy of further study in the
battle to reduce the risks of NAFLD in infants exposed to
maternal overnutrition.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The
authors
thank
Dr.
Robert
Rucker
(University
of
California, Davis) for invaluable mentorship of K.R.J. and helpful
discussions; Greg Glazner and Radu Moldovan [Advanced Light
Microscopy Core Facility, U.S. National Institutes of Health
(NIH)/National Center for Advancing Translational Science
Colorado County Technical Services, University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus; Grant UL1 TR001082] for help with
the CARS analysis; Matt Jackman and the Nutrition Obesity
Research Center Metabolic Phenotyping Core [NIH P30 Na-
tional Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
(NIDDK) Grant DK48520 and NIH P50 and National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development Grant HD073063,
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus] for aid with
processing data from the metabolic chamber. Funding was
received through NIH NIDDK Grant R01 DK104351 (to O.F.,
which provided funds for B.C.D.); NIH NIDDK Grant U24
DK097154, and the QTOF mass spectrometer was funded by
NIH National Institute of General Medical Sciences Grant S10-
RR031630 (to O.F.); NIH NIGMS Grant P41-RR01192 (Laser
Microbeam and Medical Program) (to A.A.G. and E.O.P.);
NIH NIDDK Grant 5R01DK098336 and Virtual, Augmented
and Mixed Reality Grant 1I01BX001954 (to X.X.W., Y.L., and
M.L.); and NIH NIDDK Grant K25DK098615 and an unre-
stricted grant from the Mitsubishi Gas and Chemical Company
(to K.R.J.) The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
K. R. Jonscher and J. E. Friedman designed the overall
research; O. Fiehn designed the lipidomics data acquisi-
tions; K. R. Jonscher, M. S. Stewart, B. C. DeFelice, M. J. R.
Heerwagen, R. C. Janssen, B. A. de la Houssaye, E. Wiitala,
G. Florey, and R. L. Jonscher performed research; X. X.
Wang, Y. Luo, and M. Levi contributed reagents and
analyticaltools;A.Alfonso-Garcia,andE.O.Potmaconducted
CARS experiments and image analysis; K. R. Jonscher, B. C.
DeFelice and R. C. Janssen analyzed data and O. Fiehn
advised on the lipidomics data analysis; K. R. Jonscher and
J. E. Friedman wrote the paper; and R. C. Janssen assisted
with editing the manuscript.
REFERENCES
1.
Armstrong, M. J., Adams, L. A., Canbay, A., and Syn, W. K. (2014)
Extrahepatic complications of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
Hepatology 59, 1174–1197
2.
Bruce, K. D., Cagampang, F. R., Argenton, M., Zhang, J., Ethirajan,
P.L.,Burdge,G.C.,Bateman,A.C.,Clough,G.F.,Poston,L.,Hanson,
M. A., McConnell, J. M., and Byrne, C. D. (2009) Maternal high-fat
feeding primes steatohepatitis in adult mice offspring, involving mi-
tochondrial dysfunction and altered lipogenesis gene expression.
Hepatology 50, 1796–1808
1446
Vol. 31
April 2017
JONSCHER ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 3.
McCurdy, C. E., Bishop, J. M., Williams, S. M., Grayson, B. E., Smith,
M. S., Friedman, J. E., and Grove, K. L. (2009) Maternal high-fat diet
triggers lipotoxicity in the fetal livers of nonhuman primates. J. Clin.
Invest. 119, 323–335
4.
Mouralidarane,A.,Soeda,J., Visconti-Pugmire,C.,Samuelsson,A.M.,
Pombo, J., Maragkoudaki,X., Butt, A., Saraswati, R., Novelli, M., Fusai,
G., Poston, L., Taylor, P. D., and Oben, J. A. (2013) Maternal obesity
programs offspring nonalcoholic fatty liver disease by innate immune
dysfunction in mice. Hepatology 58, 128–138
5.
Pruis, M. G., Lendvai, A., Bloks, V. W., Zwier, M. V., Baller, J. F.,
de Bruin, A., Groen, A. K., and Pl¨
osch, T. (2014) Maternal western
diet primes non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in adult mouse offspring.
Acta Physiol. (Oxf.) 210, 215–227
6.
Lane, M., Zander-Fox, D. L., Robker, R. L., and McPherson, N. O.
(2015) Peri-conception parental obesity, reproductive health, and
transgenerational impacts. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 26, 84–90
7.
Wu, L. L., Dunning, K. R., Yang, X., Russell, D. L., Lane, M., Norman,
R. J., and Robker, R. L. (2010) High-fat diet causes lipotoxicity re-
sponses in cumulus-oocyte complexes and decreased fertilization
rates. Endocrinology 151, 5438–5445
8.
Igosheva, N., Abramov, A. Y., Poston, L., Eckert, J. J., Fleming, T. P.,
Duchen, M. R., and McConnell, J. (2010) Maternal diet-induced
obesityaltersmitochondrialactivityandredoxstatusinmouseoocytes
and zygotes. PLoS One 5, e10074
9.
Wesolowski, S. R., Kasmi, K. C., Jonscher, K. R., and Friedman, J. E.
(2016) Developmental origins of NAFLD: a womb with a clue. [E-pub
ahead of print] Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol., doi: 10.1038/nrgastro.
2016.160
10.
Sen, S., and Simmons, R. A. (2010) Maternal antioxidant supple-
mentation prevents adiposity in the offspring of Western diet-fed rats.
Diabetes 59, 3058–3065
11.
Roberts, V. H., Pound, L. D., Thorn, S. R., Gillingham, M. B.,
Thornburg, K. L., Friedman, J. E., Frias, A. E., and Grove, K. L. (2014)
Beneficial and cautionary outcomes of resveratrol supplementation
in pregnant nonhuman primates. FASEB J. 28, 2466–2477
12.
Killgore, J., Smidt, C., Duich, L., Romero-Chapman, N., Tinker, D.,
Reiser, K., Melko, M., Hyde, D., and Rucker, R. B. (1989) Nutritional
importance of pyrroloquinoline quinone. Science 245, 850–852
13.
Steinberg, F., Stites, T. E., Anderson, P., Storms, D., Chan, I., Eghbali,
S., and Rucker, R. (2003) Pyrroloquinoline quinone improves growth
and reproductive performance in mice fed chemically defined diets.
Exp. Biol. Med. (Maywood) 228, 160–166
14.
Akagawa, M., Nakano, M., and Ikemoto, K. (2015) Recent progress in
studies on the health benefits of pyrroloquinoline quinone. Biosci.
Biotechnol. Biochem. 80, 13–22
15.
Chowanadisai,W.,Bauerly,K.A., Tchaparian, E.,Wong, A.,Cortopassi,
G. A., and Rucker, R. B. (2010) Pyrroloquinoline quinone stimulates
mitochondrial biogenesis through cAMP response element-binding
protein phosphorylation and increased PGC-1alpha expression. J. Biol.
Chem. 285, 142–152
16.
Samuel, K. G., Zhang, H. J., Wang, J., Wu, S. G., Yue, H. Y., Sun, L. L.,
and Qi, G. H. (2015) Effects of dietary pyrroloquinoline quinone
disodium on growth performance, carcass yield and antioxidant
status of broiler chicks. Animal 9, 409–416
17.
Kumar, N., and Kar, A. (2015) Pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ) has
potential to ameliorate streptozotocin-induced diabetes mellitus and
oxidative stress in mice: a histopathological and biochemical study.
Chem. Biol. Interact. 240, 278–290
18.
Jia, D., Duan, F., Peng, P., Sun, L., Ruan, Y., and Gu, J. (2015)
Pyrroloquinoline-quinone suppresses liver fibrogenesis in mice. PLoS
One 10, e0121939
19.
Bauerly, K., Harris, C., Chowanadisai, W., Graham, J., Havel, P. J.,
Tchaparian, E., Satre, M., Karliner, J. S., and Rucker, R. B. (2011)
Altering pyrroloquinoline quinone nutritional status modulates
mitochondrial,lipid,andenergymetabolisminrats.PLoSOne6,e21779
20.
Rucker, R., Chowanadisai, W., and Nakano, M. (2009) Potential
physiological importance of pyrroloquinoline quinone. Altern. Med.
Rev. 14, 268–277
21.
Mitchell, A. E., Jones, A. D., Mercer, R. S., and Rucker, R. B. (1999)
Characterization of pyrroloquinoline quinone amino acid derivatives
by electrospray ionization massspectrometry and detection in human
milk. Anal. Biochem. 269, 317–325
22.
Bachmanov, A. A., Reed, D. R., Beauchamp, G. K., and Tordoff, M. G.
(2002) Food intake, water intake, and drinking spout side preference
of 28 mouse strains. Behav. Genet. 32, 435–443
23.
Harris, C. B., Chowanadisai, W., Mishchuk, D. O., Satre, M. A.,
Slupsky, C. M., and Rucker, R. B. (2013) Dietary pyrroloquinoline
quinone(PQQ)altersindicatorsof inflammationandmitochondrial-
related metabolism in human subjects. J. Nutr. Biochem. 24, 2076–2084
24.
Heerwagen, M. J., Stewart, M. S., de la Houssaye, B. A., Janssen, R. C.,
and Friedman, J. E. (2013) Transgenic increase in N-3/n-6 fatty acid
ratio reduces maternal obesity-associated inflammation and limits
adverse developmental programming in mice. PLoS One 8, e67791
25.
Lytle, K. A., and Jump, D. B. (2016) Is Western diet-induced non-
alcoholic steatohepatitis in Ldlr2/2 mice reversible? PLoS One 11,
e0146942
26.
Verbeek, J., Jacobs, A., Spincemaille, P., and Cassiman, D. (2016)
Development of a representative mouse model with nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis. Curr. Protoc. Mouse Biol. 6, 201–210
27.
Samuelsson, A. M., Matthews, P. A., Argenton, M., Christie, M. R.,
McConnell, J. M., Jansen, E. H., Piersma, A. H., Ozanne, S. E., Twinn,
D. F., Remacle, C., Rowlerson, A., Poston, L., and Taylor, P. D. (2008)
Diet-induced obesity in female mice leads to offspring hyperphagia,
adiposity, hypertension, and insulin resistance: a novel murine model
of developmental programming. Hypertension 51, 383–392
28.
MacLean, P. S., Higgins, J. A., Johnson, G. C., Fleming-Elder, B. K.,
Peters, J. C., and Hill, J. O. (2004) Metabolic adjustments with the
development, treatment, and recurrence of obesity in obesity-prone
rats. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 287, R288–R297
29.
Jackman,M. R.,Steig,A.,Higgins,J.A.,Johnson,G. C.,Fleming-Elder,
B. K., Bessesen, D. H., and MacLean, P. S. (2008) Weight regain after
sustained weight reduction is accompanied by suppressed oxidation
of dietary fat and adipocyte hyperplasia. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr.
Comp. Physiol. 294, R1117–R1129
30.
Giles, E. D., Jackman, M. R., Johnson, G. C., Schedin, P. J., Houser,
J. L., andMacLean, P. S.(2010)Effectofthe estrous cycle and surgical
ovariectomy on energy balance, fuel utilization, and physical activity
in lean and obese female rats.Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol.
299, R1634–R1642
31.
Steig, A. J., Jackman, M. R., Giles, E. D., Higgins, J. A., Johnson, G. C.,
Mahan, C., Melanson, E. L., Wyatt, H. R., Eckel, R. H., Hill, J. O., and
MacLean, P. S. (2011) Exercise reduces appetite and traffics excess
nutrients away from energetically efficient pathways of lipid
deposition during the early stages of weight regain. Am. J. Physiol.
Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 301, R656–R667
32.
Lim, R. S., Kratzer, A., Barry, N. P., Miyazaki-Anzai, S., Miyazaki, M.,
Mantulin, W. W., Levi, M., Potma, E. O., and Tromberg, B. J. (2010)
Multimodal CARS microscopy determination of the impact of diet on
macrophage infiltration and lipid accumulationon plaque formation
in ApoE-deficient mice. J. Lipid Res. 51, 1729–1737
33.
Matyash, V., Liebisch, G., Kurzchalia, T. V., Shevchenko, A., and
Schwudke, D. (2008) Lipid extraction by methyl-tert-butyl ether for
high-throughput lipidomics. J. Lipid Res. 49, 1137–1146
34.
Kind, T., Liu, K. H., Lee, D. Y., DeFelice, B., Meissen, J. K., and Fiehn,
O. (2013) LipidBlast in silico tandem mass spectrometry database for
lipid identification. Nat. Methods 10, 755–758
35.
Jiang, T., Wang, Z., Proctor, G., Moskowitz, S., Liebman, S. E., Rogers,
T., Lucia, M. S., Li, J., and Levi, M. (2005) Diet-induced obesity in
C57BL/6J mice causes increased renal lipid accumulation and glo-
merulosclerosis via a sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1c-
dependent pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 32317–32325
36.
Xia, J., Sinelnikov, I. V., Han, B., and Wishart, D. S. (2015)
MetaboAnalyst 3.0: making metabolomics more meaningful. Nucleic
Acids Res. 43, W251–W257
37.
GDS group. (2016) Metabolic flexibility and oxidative capacity in-
dependently associate with insulin sensitivity in individuals with newly
diagnosed type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia 59, 2203–2207
38.
Puigserver,P.,andSpiegelman,B.M.(2003)Peroxisomeproliferator-
activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1 alpha (PGC-1 alpha): tran-
scriptional coactivator and metabolic regulator. Endocr.Rev. 24, 78–90
39.
Sugden, M. C., Caton, P. W., and Holness, M. J. (2010) PPAR control:
it’s SIRTainly as easy as PGC. J. Endocrinol. 204, 93–104
40.
Medina-Gomez, G., Gray, S. L., Yetukuri, L., Shimomura, K., Virtue, S.,
Campbell, M., Curtis, R. K., Jimenez-Linan, M., Blount, M., Yeo, G. S.,
Lopez, M., Sepp¨
anen-Laakso, T., Ashcroft, F. M., Oresic, M., and
Vidal-Puig,A.(2007)PPARgamma2preventslipotoxicitybycontrolling
adipose tissue expandability and peripheral lipid metabolism. PLoS
Genet. 3, e64
41.
Luo, T., Deng, Z. Y., Li, X. P., Rao, H., and Fan, Y. W. (2014) Triolein
and trilinolein ameliorate oxidized low-density lipoprotein-induced
oxidative stress in endothelial cells. Lipids 49, 495–504
42.
Pagadala,M.,Kasumov,T.,McCullough,A.J.,Zein,N.N.,andKirwan,
J. P. (2012) Role of ceramides in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 23, 365–371
PQQ AND DEVELOPMENTAL PROGRAMMING OF NAFLD
1447
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
 43.
Chavez,J.A.,Siddique,M.M.,Wang,S.T.,Ching,J.,Shayman,J.A.,and
Summers, S. A. (2014) Ceramides and glucosylceramides are
independentantagonistsofinsulinsignaling.J.Biol.Chem.289,723–734
44.
Bikman, B. T. (2012) A role for sphingolipids in the pathophysiology
of obesity-induced inflammation. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 69, 2135–2146
45.
Maceyka, M., and Spiegel, S. (2014) Sphingolipid metabolites in
inflammatory disease. Nature 510, 58–67
46.
Iwakiri, Y. (2015) Nitric oxide in liver fibrosis: the role of inducible
nitric oxide synthase. Clin. Mol. Hepatol. 21, 319–325
47.
Hassanin, A., Malek, H. A., and Saleh, D. (2014) Heparin modulation
on hepatic nitric oxide synthase in experimental steatohepatitis. Exp.
Ther. Med. 8, 1551–1558
48.
Brumbaugh, D. E., Tearse, P., Cree-Green, M., Fenton, L. Z., Brown,
M., Scherzinger, A., Reynolds, R., Alston, M., Hoffman, C., Pan, Z.,
Friedman,J.E.,andBarbour,L.A.(2013)Intrahepaticfatisincreased
in the neonatal offspring of obese women with gestational diabetes.
J. Pediatr. 162, 930–936, e931
49.
Oben, J. A., Mouralidarane, A., Samuelsson, A. M., Matthews, P. J.,
Morgan, M. L., McKee, C., Soeda, J., Fernandez-Twinn, D. S.,
Martin-Gronert, M. S., Ozanne, S. E., Sigala, B., Novelli, M., Poston,
L., and Taylor, P. D. (2010) Maternal obesity during pregnancy and
lactation programs the development of offspring non-alcoholic fatty
liver disease in mice. J. Hepatol. 52, 913–920
50.
Saben, J. L., Boudoures, A. L., Asghar, Z., Thompson, A., Drury, A.,
Zhang,W.,Chi,M.,Cusumano,A.,Scheaffer,S.,andMoley,K.H.(2016)
Maternal metabolic syndrome programs mitochondrial dysfunction via
germline changes across three generations. Cell Rep. 16, 1–8
51.
Akagawa, M., Minematsu, K., Shibata, T., Kondo, T., Ishii, T., and
Uchida, K. (2016) Identification of lactate dehydrogenase as a
mammalian pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ)-binding protein. Sci.
Rep. 6, 26723
52.
Hausler, N., Browning, J., Merritt, M., Storey, C., Milde, A., Jeffrey,
F. M., Sherry, A. D., Malloy, C. R., and Burgess, S. C. (2006) Effects of
insulin and cytosolic redox state on glucose production pathways in
the isolated perfusedmouseliver measured by integrated2Hand 13C
NMR. Biochem. J. 394, 465–473
53.
Herrera, P. L., Huarte, J., Sanvito, F., Meda, P., Orci, L., and Vassalli,
J. D. (1991) Embryogenesis of the murine endocrine pancreas; early
expressionofpancreaticpolypeptidegene.Development113,1257–1265
54.
Tchaparian,E., Marshal, L., Cutler,G., Bauerly, K., Chowanadisai, W.,
Satre, M., Harris, C., and Rucker, R. B. (2010) Identification of
transcriptional networks responding to pyrroloquinoline quinone
dietary supplementation and their influence on thioredoxin
expression, and the JAK/STAT and MAPK pathways. Biochem. J.
429, 515–526
55.
Liu, Z., Sun, C., Tao, R., Xu, X., Xu, L., Cheng, H., Wang, Y., and
Zhang, D. (2016) Pyrroloquinoline quinone decelerates rheumatoid
arthritis progression by inhibiting inflammatory responses and joint
destruction via modulating NF-kB and MAPK pathways. Inflammation
39, 248–256
56.
Tao,R.,Wang,S.,Xia,X.,Wang,Y.,Cao,Y.,Huang,Y.,Xu,X.,Liu,Z.,Liu,
P., Tang, X., Liu, C., Shen, G., and Zhang, D. (2015) Pyrroloquinoline
quinone slows down the progression of osteoarthritis by inhibiting nitric
oxide production and metalloproteinase synthesis. Inflammation 38,
1546–1555
57.
Liu, W., Baker, R.D., Bhatia, T., Zhu, L. and Baker, S.S. (2016)
Pathogenesis of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 73,
1969–1987.
58.
Odkhuu, E., Koide, N., Haque, A., Tsolmongyn, B., Naiki, Y.,
Hashimoto, S., Komatsu, T., Yoshida, T., and Yokochi, T. (2012)
Inhibition of receptor activator ofnuclear factor-kB ligand (RANKL)-
induced osteoclast formation by pyrroloquinoline quinine (PQQ).
Immunol. Lett. 142, 34–40
59.
Perrone, S., Santacroce, A., Picardi, A., and Buonocore, G. (2016)
Fetal programming and early identification of newborns at high risk
of free radical-mediated diseases. World J. Clin. Pediatr. 5, 172–181
60.
Thompson, L. P., and Al-Hasan, Y. (2012) Impact ofoxidative stressin
fetal programming. J. Pregnancy 2012, 582748
61.
Hitchler, M. J., and Domann, F. E. (2007) An epigenetic perspective
on the free radical theory of development. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 43,
1023–1036
62.
Cerda, S., and Weitzman, S. A. (1997) Influence of oxygen radical
injury on DNA methylation. Mutat. Res. 386, 141–152
63.
Rees, W. D., Hay, S. M., Brown, D. S., Antipatis, C., and Palmer, R. M.
(2000) Maternal protein deficiency causes hypermethylation of DNA
in the livers of rat fetuses. J. Nutr. 130, 1821–1826
64.
Lillycrop,K.A.,Phillips,E.S.,Torrens,C.,Hanson,M.A.,Jackson,A.A.,
and Burdge, G. C. (2008) Feeding pregnant rats a protein-restricted
diet persistently alters the methylation of specific cytosines in the he-
patic PPAR alpha promoter of the offspring. Br. J. Nutr. 100, 278–282
65.
Van de Weijer, T., Sparks, L. M., Phielix, E., Meex, R. C., van Herpen,
N. A., Hesselink, M. K., Schrauwen, P., and Schrauwen-Hinderling,
V. B. (2013) Relationships between mitochondrial function and
metabolic flexibility in type 2 diabetes mellitus. PLoS One 8, e51648
66.
Shulman, G. I. (2014) Ectopic fat in insulin resistance, dyslipidemia,
and cardiometabolic disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 371, 1131–1141
67.
Nakano, M., Suzuki, H., Imamura, T., Lau, A., and Lynch, B. (2013)
Genotoxicity of pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ) disodium salt
(BioPQQ™). Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 67, 189–197
68.
Itoh, Y., Hine, K., Miura, H., Uetake, T., Nakano, M., Takemura, N.,
and Sakatani, K. (2016) Effect of the antioxidant supplement
pyrroloquinoline quinone disodium salt (BioPQQ™) on cognitive
functions. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 876, 319–325
69.
Nakano, M., Kamimura, A., Watanabe, F., Kamiya, T., Watanabe, D.,
Yamamoto, E., Fukagawa, M., Hasumi, K., and Suzuki, E. (2015)
Effects of orally administered pyrroloquinoline quinone disodium
salt on dryskin conditions in mice and healthy female subjects.J. Nutr.
Sci. Vitaminol. (Tokyo) 61, 241–246
70.
Nakano, M., Kawasaki, Y., Suzuki, N., and Takara, T. (2015) Effects of
pyrroloquinoline quinone disodium salt intake on the serum
cholesterol levels of healthy Japanese adults. J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol.
(Tokyo) 61, 233–240
71.
Zhu,B.Q.,Simonis,U.,Cecchini,G.,Zhou,H.Z.,Li,L.,Teerlink,J.R.,
and Karliner, J. S. (2006) Comparison of pyrroloquinoline quinone
and/or metoprolol on myocardial infarct size and mitochondrial
damage in a rat model of ischemia/reperfusion injury. J. Cardiovasc.
Pharmacol. Ther. 11, 119–128
Received for publication August 23, 2016.
Accepted for publication December 12, 2016.
1448
Vol. 31
April 2017
JONSCHER ET AL.
The FASEB Journal x www.fasebj.org
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org by (77.173.35.219) on June 05, 2019. The FASEB Journal Vol. ${article.issue.getVolume()}, No. ${article.issue.getIssueNumber()}, pp. 1434-1448.
