 Correction
APPLIED PHYSICAL SCIENCES, NEUROSCIENCE
Correction for “Bioelectronic neural pixel: Chemical stimulation
and electrical sensing at the same site,” by Amanda Jonsson, Sahika
Inal, llke Uguz, Adam J. Williamson, Loïg Kergoat, Jonathan
Rivnay, Dion Khodagholy, Magnus Berggren, Christophe Bernard,
George G. Malliaras, and Daniel T. Simon, which appeared in issue
34, August 23, 2016, of Proc Natl Acad Sci USA (113:9440–9445;
first published August 9, 2016; 10.1073/pnas.1604231113).
The authors note that, due to a printer’s error, the first name of
the third author, Ilke Uguz, originally published with the first
letter as a lowercase letter l. This letter should instead appear as
an uppercase letter i. The online version has been corrected.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1615817113
www.pnas.org
PNAS
|
November 1, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 44
|
E6903
CORRECTION
 Bioelectronic neural pixel: Chemical stimulation and
electrical sensing at the same site
Amanda Jonssona,1, Sahika Inalb,1, Ilke Uguzb,1, Adam J. Williamsonc,1, Loïg Kergoata,c, Jonathan Rivnayb,2,
Dion Khodagholyb,3, Magnus Berggrena, Christophe Bernardc, George G. Malliarasb, and Daniel T. Simona,4
aLaboratory of Organic Electronics, Department of Science and Technology, Linköping University, 60174 Norrköping, Sweden; bDepartment of
Bioelectronics, École Nationale Supérieure des Mines de Saint-Etienne, Centre Microélectronique de Provence, Microelectronique et Objects Communicants,
13541 Gardanne, France; and cAix Marseille Université, Institut de Neurosciences des Systèmes, 13005 Marseille, France
Edited by Zhenan Bao, Stanford University, Stanford, California, and accepted by Editorial Board Member John A. Rogers June 27, 2016 (received for review
March 14, 2016)
Local control of neuronal activity is central to many therapeutic
strategies aiming to treat neurological disorders. Arguably, the best
solution would make use of endogenous highly localized and
specialized regulatory mechanisms of neuronal activity, and an
ideal therapeutic technology should sense activity and deliver
endogenous molecules at the same site for the most efficient
feedback regulation. Here, we address this challenge with an
organic electronic multifunctional device that is capable of chemical
stimulation and electrical sensing at the same site, at the single-cell
scale. Conducting polymer electrodes recorded epileptiform dis-
charges induced in mouse hippocampal preparation. The inhibitory
neurotransmitter, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), was then actively de-
livered through the recording electrodes via organic electronic ion
pump technology. GABA delivery stopped epileptiform activity,
recorded simultaneously and colocally. This multifunctional “neural
pixel” creates a range of opportunities, including implantable ther-
apeutic devices with automated feedback, where locally recorded
signals regulate local release of specific therapeutic agents.
organic electronics | controlled delivery | electrophysiology | epilepsy |
therapy
R
ecent estimates suggest neurological disorders affect up to 6%
of the global population (1). The vast majority of treatments
generally involve oral administration of pharmaceuticals. When
these fail, alternate therapies can include neurosurgery (e.g., in
epilepsy) and electrical stimulation via implanted electrodes [e.g.,
in Parkinson’s disease (1)]. Pharmaceutical and basic research have
identified promising targets and designed potentially efficient drugs
for multiple disorders, but such drugs haven’t reached patients
because of failure during (pre)clinical tests. There are multiple
reasons for such failures. Drugs may be toxic in the periphery (2, 3),
they may not cross the blood−brain barrier or they may be pumped
back to the blood stream by multidrug transporters (4, 5). However,
the critical factor is the fact that they may have deleterious side
effects when they penetrate “healthy” regions, affecting physiolog-
ical functions such as memory and learning (6, 7). In addition,
because oral administration will lead to a dilution of the drug in the
body, there is often a mismatch between the dose necessary to
obtain a therapeutic effect in the region to treat and the maximum
dose that nonaffected body regions can support without side effects.
Providing the drug past the blood−brain barrier, where and
when it is needed, constitutes the ideal solution. Such delivery
would solve all of the above-mentioned problems (blood−brain
barrier crossing, peripheral toxicity, undesirable side effects in
healthy regions, and effective dose). Devices have been success-
fully designed to deliver drugs locally (8). However, the “where”
and “when” issues remain to be addressed. Because clinicians may
have several spatially distributed regions to treat, or if the volume
of the intended treatment region is large, it is important to have
multiple drug delivery sites, which would solve the “where” issue.
The “when” issue is more difficult to address, as, ideally, a delivery
system should act on demand, when needed (e.g., just before an
impending seizure). Because electrophysiological signals can be
used to predict incoming pathological events (9), electrical activity
should be measured at each delivery site to trigger drug delivery at
that specific location. Such local, real-time measurement, and
precision delivery, would pave the way for closed-loop, fully au-
tomatic, therapeutic devices. Finally, because the size of the region
to treat may be small—down to the scale of a single cell—the
technology should allow spatial resolution of delivery on the order
of micrometers.
Interfacing malfunctioning neurological pathways with spatial
resolution and signal specificity approaching those of the cell could
provide significant advantages to future therapies. Microelectrode
recordings of the field potentials generated by neurons (or even
neuronal firing itself) have become routine in investigations of
brain function and dysfunction (10). Small size of recording sites
allows for recording of single neurons, and densely packed sites on
minimally invasive electrodes enhance the sampling capacity of the
probe (11). Such densely packed probes can be accomplished using
conducting polymers, such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
doped with poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), without de-
creasing the quality of the recordings. Conducting polymer elec-
trodes exhibit inherently low impedance characteristics (more than
Significance
Electronically and ionically conducting polymers provide a
unique means to translate electronic addressing signals into
chemically specific and spatiotemporally resolved delivery,
without fluid flow. These materials have also been shown to
provide high-fidelity electrophysiological recordings. Here, we
demonstrate the combination of these qualities of organic
electronics in multiple 20 × 20 μm delivery/sensing electrodes.
The system is used to measure epileptic activity in a brain slice
model, and to deliver inhibitory neurotransmitters to the same
sites as the recordings. These results show that a single-cell-scale
electrode has the ability to both record and chemically stimulate,
demonstrating the local effects of therapeutic treatment, and
opening a range of opportunities in basic neuroscience as well as
medical technology development.
Author contributions: A.J., S.I., I.U., A.J.W., L.K., J.R., D.K., M.B., C.B., G.G.M., and D.T.S.
designed research; A.J., S.I., I.U., A.J.W., and L.K. performed research; A.J., S.I., I.U., A.J.W.,
L.K., and C.B. analyzed data; and A.J., S.I., and D.T.S. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. Z.B. is a Guest Editor invited by the
Editorial Board.
1A.J., S.I., I.U., and A.J.W. contributed equally to this work.
2Present address: Electronic Materials and Devices Lab, Palo Alto Research Center, Palo
Alto, CA 94304.
3Present address: Neuroscience Institute, School of Medicine, New York University, New
York, NY 10016.
4To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: daniel.simon@liu.se.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1604231113/-/DCSupplemental.
9440–9445
|
PNAS
|
August 23, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 34
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1604231113
 one order of magnitude lower than bare Au, Pt, and Ir electrodes
of similar dimensions at 1 kHz), with the low impedance being
attributed partly to the high porosity, giving an increased electro-
chemical surface area (12–14). Additionally, with their mixed
electronic and ionic conductivity and the soft mechanical proper-
ties that match those of the neural tissue, conducting polymers are
ideally suited to obtain high signal-to-noise ratio recordings at the
neural interface (15, 16). Recently, we have demonstrated micro-
electrode arrays based on PEDOT:PSS electrodes for in vitro re-
cordings of electrophysiological signals from rat brain slices (17).
These microelectrodes, fabricated at small size and high density,
have enabled a good match with the dimensions of neural networks
while maintaining high-resolution neural recordings.
We have also demonstrated substance delivery mimicking exo-
cytotic release of neurotransmitters at the neuronal scale by means
of the organic electronic ion pump (OEIP) (18, 19). The OEIP
uses conducting polymer electrodes to electrophoretically “pump”
neurotransmitters through a permselective membrane, enabling
high spatiotemporal delivery resolution, without necessitating
liquid flow. OEIPs have been used in vitro to trigger cell signaling
(18, 20) and to control epileptiform activity in vitro (21), as well as
in vivo to effect sensory function (19) and as a therapy for pain in
awake animals (22). OEIPs have also been demonstrated in a
biosensor-regulated system—on a macroscopic scale—to mimic
the chemical-to-electrical-to-chemical signal transduction of neu-
rons (23). However, none of these devices meet the desired re-
quirement to record and deliver drugs at the same site.
In this work, we engineered a device able to perform electrical
sensing of local field potentials and neurotransmitter delivery at the
same site. To achieve this colocalized sensing and delivery, we de-
veloped a system consisting of an array of OEIP delivery points,
where each delivery point is integrated with a conducting polymer
electrode for recording neuronal activity. Each integrated delivery/
sensing pixel is at the single-cell scale and mimics the multi-
functionality of a biological neuron: Electrical information can be
sensed from the local cellular environment, and neuroactive com-
pounds can be delivered diffusively, without liquid flow, at the same
location. We report on the development and characterization of this
system of “neural pixels,” and we demonstrate its use by delivering
the endogenous inhibitory neurotransmitter γ-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) to locally affect cells while simultaneously monitoring how
the delivery modulates the cells’ firing patterns.
Results
Design and Working Principle. We designed our bioelectronic
neural pixel as depicted in Fig. 1. The charged compound to be
delivered is transported from an aqueous reservoir through a
cation-conducting channel and through part of the PEDOT:PSS
recording electrode before being released to the biological system.
In this way, the cells close to the OEIP outlets are affected by the
delivery, and the electrodes can record the subsequent modifica-
tions in cellular response. The OEIP transports cations by migra-
tion; when a potential is applied between an electrode in the
reservoir and an electrode in the medium containing the biological
system under study, an electric field is established across the cation-
conducting channel, and a current arises from cation migration
from the reservoir to the biological system. In this way, delivery is
only achieved when nonzero voltage is applied (see On−Off
Switching and Leakage in OEIPs for more details). The cation-
conducting channel has a high concentration of fixed negative
charges and is therefore permeable to cations but not to anions
(Donnan exclusion) (24), and is therefore a form of cation ex-
change membrane (CEM). Ideally, all of the current passed
through a CEM, and thus through the device, is due to cation
transport, and no anions are transported in the opposite direction;
this means that the delivery rate is directly proportional to the
current, with 1 μA corresponding to a delivery rate of 10 nmol/s.
Sustained delivery (constant current) requires nonpolarizable
high-capacity electrodes that can transfer charge between the elec-
trode and the electrolyte. We used PEDOT:PSS electrodes for this
purpose, on top of which were placed the source (reservoir) and
target electrolytes (Fig. 2A). Note that no potential was applied to
the recording electrodes at the delivery outlets to control the delivery
of ions.
Fabrication and Characterization. The materials and processing of
an OEIP and a conducting polymer microelectrode array (MEA)
are of similar nature, making it possible to manufacture the two
components of the merged device simultaneously on a single
glass substrate. To fabricate the bioelectronic neural pixel device,
we developed a manufacturing protocol based on standard
microfabrication techniques. Device fabrication is depicted Fig.
2B. First, gold electrodes were patterned on a glass substrate
using photolithography and lift-off. Then the main element of
the OEIP, the CEM, made from the polyanion poly(styrene
sulfonate-comaleic acid) (PSSA-co-MA) cross-linked with poly
(ethylene glycol) (PEG), was deposited. The CEM was photo-
lithographically patterned and dry-etched into a wide channel
leading to 32 thinner [and thus higher ionic resistance (22)]
parallel channels ending in 20-μm-wide delivery outlets (Fig. S1).
Alternatively, the PSS-co-MA/PEG was patterned by peel-off
using parylene (Methods). A 2-μm-thick parylene layer, providing
the insulating coating of the OEIP and the MEA contacts, was
deposited. A thin layer of dilute commercial cleaner was applied
as an antiadhesive coating, and a second 2-μm-thick parylene
layer was deposited. Openings to define the OEIP electrolytes,
the microelectrodes, and the contact pads were obtained by
further photolithography and plasma etching through the par-
ylene. PEDOT:PSS was then deposited by spin coating, and the
second parylene layer was peeled off to define the OEIP elec-
trolytes and the microelectrodes. The 32 resulting neural pixels
thus comprised 20 × 20 μm PEDOT:PSS recording electrodes at
the delivery end of each PSSA-co-MA-based OEIP channel. In
this way, substance delivery was achieved through the PEDOT:
PSS recording electrode, such that the delivery outlet and the
recording electrode were indeed at the same site (Fig. 1). Finally,
a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) gasket was cut with openings
over the source electrodes, defining the source solution well, and
over the 32 neural pixels and target electrode, defining the target
solution well (Fig. S2).
To characterize the multifunctional device, we first measured
the impedance of the recording electrodes separately, and then
while running a delivery current through the OEIP to investigate
whether running the delivery current through the recording
electrodes affected the electrical properties of the recording
neuron
reservoir
CEM
PEDOT:PSS
gold
parylene
Bioelectronic neural pixel
Fig. 1.
The bioelectronic neural pixel. The OEIP channel outlet (terminating
in the PEDOT:PSS) colocalized with the PEDOT:PSS recording electrode forms
one neural pixel. The reservoir (left) comprises an aqueous solution of the
positively charged compound to be delivered through the CEM and out
through the PEDOT:PSS recording electrode to the neural tissue above the
pixel. The biological response, in terms of ion fluxes, is measured locally by
the PEDOT:PSS recording electrode colocalized with the OEIP outlet.
Jonsson et al.
PNAS
|
August 23, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 34
|
9441
APPLIED PHYSICAL
SCIENCES
NEUROSCIENCE
 electrodes. The Bode plot of the mean impedance magnitude of
seven randomly picked PEDOT:PSS electrodes of the array is
presented in Fig. 3A. The SD of the impedance magnitude is low,
indicating that the fabrication process yielded homogeneous
electrode properties within the array. Between 10 kHz and
10 Hz, the impedance increased from 16 kΩ to 250 kΩ, and, at
1 kHz, the impedance was ca. 19 kΩ, which is similar to our
previously reported results (17).
To further investigate the influence of OEIP operation on the
signal-to-noise ratio, we compared electrode recordings in the
absence and presence of a delivery current (Fig. 3B). A 100-mM
GABA(aq) solution and artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF)
were placed on the source and the target side, respectively. The
amplitude of the baseline signal measured when the OEIP was
off was ca. 10 μV (Fig. 3B). After 60 s, a positive potential was
applied to the OEIP source electrode with respect to the target,
and a current of 1 μA was run through the device, yielding
GABA delivery at the 32 outlets. The electrical signal intensity
recorded remained stable. The OEIP was switched off after 60 s
without apparent change in signal amplitude. A too-high delivery
rate could affect the recording electrodes by perturbing the local
ion concentration, making cell recordings difficult or impossible.
However, as seen in this experiment, constant currents of 1 μA or
lower are compatible with electrophysiological recordings.
In Vitro Validation with Complete Hippocampus Preparations: Inhibiting
Epileptiform Activity. After confirming that cation delivery did not
interfere with electrode recordings, we evaluated sensing and
stimulation performance of the pixels in a biological system. As the
first application of the integrated device could be for epilepsy di-
agnosis and treatment, we used complete extracted hippocampus
preparations from mouse (P7-P12) and triggered epileptiform ac-
tivity by pharmacological manipulation, namely the addition of
4-aminopyridine (4-AP) to the perfusion; 4-AP is a selective blocker
of channels belonging to the Kv1 family of voltage-gated K+
channels. Blocking K+ channels with 4-AP in the perfusion pro-
duces epileptiform activity by increasing the time required for a
neuron to repolarize (fewer K+ channels are available). Thus,
neurons remain above the threshold to fire for a longer period, and
excitatory neurons consequently continue to deliver glutamate to
downstream neighbors.
To test the efficacy of the device, we chose to deliver GABA. As
an endogenous neurotransmitter, GABA activates GABAA re-
ceptors, leading to Cl− influx into the cell, which, in turn, hyper-
polarizes the cell membrane (Fig. 4A). In addition, the opening of
these channels decreases the membrane resistance, creating a
shunt effect, and limiting the effectiveness of excitatory inputs. The
net effect of GABA is therefore a decrease in the firing probability
of the cell (25).
With the complete extracted hippocampus preparation mounted
(and equilibrated) on the target area of the neural pixel system, we
induced epileptiform activity with the addition of 4-AP in the per-
fusion medium. PEDOT:PSS electrodes recorded the subsequent
broadband electrophysiological activity (Fig. 4B). The recordings,
which were simultaneously obtained via multiple channels, had
signal quality comparable to a conventional tungsten recording
1. gold patterning
2. Parylene deposition
3. Lithography and etching
4. CEM coating
7. Lithography and etching
8. PEDOT:PSS coating
9. Peel-off
10. Bioelectronic neural pixel 
substrate
gold
CEM
parylene
anti-adhesive
photoresist
PEDOT:PSS
5. Peel-off
6. 2x parylene deposition
Target
Source
CEM
gold
PEDOT:
PSS
A
B
Fig. 2.
Design and fabrication of the bioelectronic neural pixel. (A) Microscope image of the three adjacent colocalized OEIP outlets and sensing electrodes,
and photograph of a typical device. Two source electrodes are depicted, used at equipotential and thus forming effectively one electrode. The reservoir
chamber, cut from cured PDMS, is affixed to the source and target areas. The source contains the cation solution to be delivered, and the neural tissue is
placed on the target region. Fig. S1 shows the design in more detail. (B) Cross-section schematics showing the photolithographic fabrication process. Gold
lines were patterned with photolithography (step 1), followed by coating of parylene-C with a thin layer of anti-adhesive (step 2). Photoresist was then cast
and exposed, followed by reactive ion etching to define the areas to be filled with CEM (step 3). The CEM [PSSA-co-MA cross-linked with poly(ethylene glycol)]
was patterned into a wide channel that split into 32 separate outlets, each 20 μm wide and spaced by 200 μm (Fig. S1), by peeling off the sacrificial top layer of
parylene C (steps 4 and 5). Two layers of parylene C were then deposited, separated by a thin layer of antiadhesive (step 6). A thick layer of photoresist was
then cast, exposed, and etched to define the areas eventually to be filled with PEDOT:PSS (step 7). A thick layer of PEDOT:PSS (ca. 400 nm) was spin-cast (step 8),
and the source/target electrodes and the sensing electrodes at the pump outlets were patterned by peeling off the sacrificial top layer of parylene C (step 9). The
colocalization of an OEIP outlet with the PEDOT:PSS electrode form a neural pixel (step 10).
9442
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1604231113
Jonsson et al.
 electrode, which was located adjacent to the MEA (Fig. S3).
Moreover, due to multiple recording sites, it is possible to access
different forms of activity across the tissue. After ca. 1 min of
GABA delivery, epileptiform discharges were abolished. Assuming
that the delivery is equally distributed between the 32 outlets of the
device, 1 μA of supply current yields a delivery rate of 0.3 pmol·s−1
per outlet; this corresponds to a local concentration change of
25 μM at a distance of 400 μm from a single pump outlet (18, 21)
after 60 s, and is within the known range for GABA to suppress
hyperactivity (26) [injection of 250 μM of GABA in the ACSF-filled
bath directly on top of the tissue stopped the hyperactivity almost
instantaneously (Fig. S4)]. Previous experiments demonstrated local
delivery with OEIPs (ref. 22 and Fig. S5), and local control of
hippocampal networks with a similar device geometry (21). Taken
together, these results demonstrate that the neural pixel system can
effectively control the activity of a given network via OEIP delivery,
while simultaneously allowing monitoring via the integrated elec-
trodes of both hyperactivity and real-time biological response to
OEIP operation.
Because GABA is an acid and is transported by the OEIP in its
fully protonated form (charge +1), each GABA molecule will re-
lease a proton once delivered to the biological system. Therefore,
to verify that the observed abolishment of of epileptiform dis-
charges was solely due to GABA delivery, and not to proton de-
livery, or to the applied potentials and ionic currents, a control
experiment delivering protons was performed. The reservoir was
filled with aqueous HCl solution, and the target region contained
the hippocampus exhibiting hyperactivity. The same current was
sourced to the OEIP as for the GABA delivery experiments;
however, we did not observe any significant change in the electrode
pump on
pump off
A
B
Fig. 3.
Characterization of sensing electrodes incorporated into neural
pixels. (A) Bode plot of impedance versus frequency. The impedance mag-
nitude is an average of seven electrodes. Black squares and red dots are the
averaged impedance values while the OEIP is off and while K+ is delivered
(1-μA delivery current), respectively. (B) Time trace at a single recording site
during GABA delivery (60 s < t < 120 s) through the sensing electrode to the
ACSF target solution.
GABA
GABA
receptor
kv1 potassium
channel
4-AP
CEM
PEDOT:PSS
gold
parylene
200 µm
Neuron
mouse
hippocampal slice
bioelectronic
neural pixel
K+
K+K+
K+
K+
K+
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
4-AP
added
4-AP
added
pump on
pump on, GABA delivery
pump on
rinse
50 µV 
90 s
100 µV 
30 s
200 µV 
30 s
pump on, H+ delivery
A
B
C
Fig. 4.
Epileptiform activity simultaneously recorded and inhibited by a
single neural pixel. (A) Biochemical pathway for reducing 4-AP-induced ep-
ileptiform activity via GABA delivery. (Inset) A mouse hippocampal slice
positioned on an array of bioelectronic neural pixels. (B) Epileptiform activity
of a complete mouse hippocampal preparation was recorded from a single
pixel before and during GABA delivery to the same pixel. Large events are
seen at the beginning of the recording ∼100 s after introducing 4-AP to the
bath. Approximately 60 s after the OEIP is switched on, the epileptiform
activity stops. This cycle is repeated twice by rinsing the bath with ACSF and
treating the tissue with 4-AP. (C) Response of recording electrodes to de-
livery of H+. H+ delivery has no observable effect on epileptiform activity.
The recorded signal is from the epileptic mouse hippocampal neurons upon
delivery of H+ from the OEIP outlets. The activity does not stop when the
source reservoir contains HCl and ion pump is operated under the same
conditions as with GABA delivery experiment. Negative control denotes
delivery of H+ only. Epileptiform activity was not observed to change.
Jonsson et al.
PNAS
|
August 23, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 34
|
9443
APPLIED PHYSICAL
SCIENCES
NEUROSCIENCE
 recordings upon delivery of H+ (Fig. 4C). This result shows that
neither proton delivery nor ionic currents (which could cause
electrical stimulation) blocked the pathological activity, but that the
release of GABA was necessary to stop epileptiform activity.
Discussion
In the present work, we have demonstrated electrophysiological
sensing and chemical stimulation from a single multifunctional
“neural pixel.” This is a necessary advancement to achieve highly
localized feedback-regulated therapies with future devices. We
have previously shown that we could deliver GABA with an OEIP
to stop epileptiform activity in a tissue slice (21). In those exper-
iments, the recording electrode was a tungsten electrode posi-
tioned in the tissue slice in the vicinity of an OEIP outlet. In this
work, we suppress the need to align this external recording elec-
trode with the outlets of the OEIP. Instead, delivery occurs
through the sensing electrodes, ensuring colocalization of re-
cording and stimulation, and eliminating cumbersome experi-
mental setup. The integrated sensing and delivery device stopped
externally induced epileptiform activity of a hippocampus by de-
livering the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA at the exact sites
where epileptic activity was recorded. The low impedance of the
conducting polymer electrodes allowed for high signal-to-noise
ratio recordings of physiological activity at the site of GABA de-
livery. To efficiently treat an epileptic event, the delivery of GABA
should occur as soon as any signs of seizure appear.
Many studies have shown local release of compounds using
microfluidics, for example, refs. 27–29, to name a few. Micro-
fluidics have the ability to deliver any soluble compound, but such
delivery in a carrier fluid induces convection, which risks dis-
rupting fragile biochemical microenvironments. Microfluidic sys-
tems also typically require complex setups of valves and pumps.
Other groups have demonstrated electrically controlled convec-
tion-free delivery systems, for example, refs. 16 and 30, that rely on
redox switching of conducting polymers to release embedded
compounds. However, these systems are typically limited in the
amount of deliverable compound, a release rate that decreases
over time, and a poor on−off ratio. The OEIP-based delivery built
into the neural pixel system is electrically controlled, induces no
convection, includes a reservoir to increase the deliverable amount,
and exhibits a low diffusive off-leakage because of the relatively
large distance between the reservoir and the delivery points
(On−Off Switching and Leakage in OEIPs).
Although the electrical signals that turn on the OEIP can be
initiated nearly instantaneously, the time required to stop the
epileptiform activity after starting GABA delivery was about 60 s.
For some applications, this speed may need to be significantly
faster. OEIP dynamics are largely governed by the distance that
ions must traverse from the source electrolyte to the delivery
points. In the present geometry, this length is on the scale of
several millimeters. We are thus developing devices with signifi-
cantly faster turn-on by arranging delivery vertically through a thin
CEM film, thereby reducing the effective ion path length to
hundreds of nanometers. Likewise, the pixel dimensions in the
device described above were 20 × 20 μm, with the 32-electrode
array spanning several hundred microns; this is already on the
approximate scale of single neurons and local neuronal circuits,
respectively. Although miniaturization is feasible (but difficult),
increasing these dimensions to fit different therapeutic targets is
also possible.
Another limitation with the present neural pixel system is that
it delivers ions simultaneously at the 32 outlets, where each
outlet is colocalized with a sensing electrode. An addressable
pixel array, where each sensing/delivery site could be individually
controlled, would thus be a significant improvement. Such a
system would make it possible to record from an array of elec-
trodes, and then to selectively turn on the delivery at the sites
where, for example, epileptiform activity is recorded. A future
device, with individually addressable release sites and colocalized
recording electrodes, could also be used as an in vitro tool to
precisely quantify the kinetics of specific neurochemical signal-
ing. Furthermore, such individually addressed neural pixels could
enable multiple connections to a single neuron, similar to the
way biological neurons connect with each other. In this way, the
dynamics of multiple neural connections could be studied with
unprecedented detail.
The lifetime of our device depends on the electrochemical
capacity of the electrodes and the delivery rate required for the
application. For an in vitro study like the one above, lasting only
hours, electrode capacity is not an issue, especially because
consumed electrodes can easily be replaced by fresh, free-
standing electrodes dipped into the electrolytes. For an im-
plantable in vivo device, however, electrode capacity is crucial.
Larger or more three-dimensionally structured electrodes and
delivery in short pulses would increase the lifetime. Another
solution would be to incorporate an ion diode-based current
rectifier, so that the electrodes could be electrochemically
“recycled,” increasing the lifetime substantially (31). Likewise,
for in vivo applications, the device could be built on flexible
substrates, e.g., parylene C, and wrapped onto a tissue, but ad-
ditional fabrication issues such as long-term mechanical and
lamination stability must also be considered; this is something we
have not yet explored, however. For applications deeper inside
the tissue or organ of interest, neural pixel systems could be
constructed into implantable probes, a technique already dem-
onstrated for basic OEIPs (19, 22).
The ability to sense electrophysiological signals and deliver
neuroactive compounds at the same location represents a first step
in constructing a closed-loop feedback system, capable of moni-
toring neuronal activity and adjusting local release of neurotrans-
mitters accordingly. Indeed, the system presented above only
requires minor modification to the control software to explore this
functionality. Such a closed-loop system could be used, for exam-
ple, in epilepsy treatment, to predict or detect an epileptic seizure
at an early stage and intervene by delivering inhibitory neuro-
transmitters. The feedback system would make it possible to stop
seizures with a minimal amount of drugs, because the drug release
could be stopped as soon as the inhibitory effect is observed.
Methods
Device Fabrication. The 3 × 1 inch glass slides were cleaned by sonication in
soap/water mixture and acetone/IPA mixture. For patterning gold, a photore-
sist, S1813 (Shipley), was spin-cast on the glass slide, exposed to UV light using
an SUSS MJB4 photolithography UV-mask aligner, and developed using MF-26
developer. Titanium and gold (100 nm) were evaporated (Alliance Concept
EVA450) and patterned using lift-off in acetone. On top of a layer cast from
soap/water solution, 1.5 μm of parylene C was deposited using a Specialty
Coating Systems Labcoater 2; 4 μm of photoresist AZ9260 was then patterned
and etched (300 W, 50 cm3/min of O2, 5 min) using an Oxford 80 plus plasma
etcher. A solution of 3-glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane (GOPS, 5 wt%) in a
water:ethanol mixture (1:19) was spin-coated to improve the adhesion of the
PSSA-co-MA on glass. After 15 min, the substrates were rinsed in ethanol to
remove excess GOPS. Then the substrates were baked at 110 °C for 20 min.
PSSA-co-MA (5 wt% in a water:1-propanol mixture, 1:1) was mixed with
polyethylene glycol (3 wt%, molecular weight 400 g·mol−1) for cross-linking,
and then deposited by spin casting at 2,000 rpm to obtain a thickness of
300 nm. The film was baked at 110 °C for 1 h. The sacrificial parylene C layer
was peeled off to complete the patterning of PSSA-co-MA. Another layer of
parylene C was deposited, reaching a final thickness of 2 μm, with the use of
an adhesion promoting silane. A soap solution (1 wt% in water) was spun
and followed by a subsequent parylene C deposition (2 μm). Finally, the
source/target PEDOT:PSS was patterned with the insulating parylene C using
photolithography and a sacrificial peel-off step. A thick layer of AZ9260
(MicroChemicals) photoresist was cast, baked, and exposed using a SUSS
MJB4 contact aligner, followed by reactive ion etching in an O2 plasma
(160 W, 50 cm3/min of O2, 15 min) using an Oxford 80 plus plasma etcher.
For the preparation of the PEDOT:PSS films, 19 mL of aqueous dispersion
(PH 1000 from H.C. Starck) was mixed with 1 mL of ethylene glycol, 50 μL
9444
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1604231113
Jonsson et al.
 of dodecyl benzene sulfonic acid, and 1 wt% of GOPS, and the resulting
dispersion was spin-coated at 650 rpm, soft-baked at 100 °C for 60 s, and spun-
cast at 650 rpm to attain thicker PEDOT:PSS films. The film is patterned by peel-
off of the top parylene C film and subsequently baked at 140 °C for 1 h and
immersed in deionized water to remove any excess low molecular weight
compounds. The reservoir chambers, cut from cured polydimethylsiloxane,
were affixed to the source (reservoir) and target (bath) areas.
Device Characterization. Impedance spectra of the electrodes were measured
using an Autolab potentiostat equipped with a frequency response analyzer
(FRA) module. Commercially available Ag/AgCl and Pt electrodes were used
as the counter and reference electrodes. The applied voltage was 0.01 V, and
the electrolyte solution was aqueous 0.1 M NaCl(aq). The contacts of the
OEIP were connected to a Keithley 2400 source/measure unit, and constant
current (1 μA or lower) was sourced and voltage was measured using cus-
tomized LabVIEW software. Electrode recordings were obtained using a
commercially available voltage recording setup, RHD2000 Evaluation Sys-
tem. As the reference electrode, a grounded Ag/AgCl electrode was im-
mersed into the target electrolyte. The recordings were acquired at a 20-kHz
sampling rate and analyzed using MATLAB (Mathworks)-based software
with a low-pass filter of 1 kHz and were down-sampled by 500.
Electrical Recording Data Acquisition. Electrode recordings were obtained
using a commercially available voltage recording setup, RHD2000 Evaluation
System (Intan Technologies) (Fig. S2). A 3D printed sample holder was fab-
ricated, containing gold-coated pins in contact with the 32 gold electrode
pads of the device. As the reference electrode, a grounded Ag/AgCl elec-
trode was immersed into the target reservoir containing the brain slice.
Recordings were acquired at a 20-kHz sampling rate and analyzed using
MATLAB (Mathworks)-based software with a low-pass filter of 1 kHz and
were down-sampled by 500.
Hippocampus Preparation. All protocols have been approved by the In-
stitutional Animal Care and Use Committee of INSERM. All experiments were
repeated twice on different biological samples. After decapitation of
anesthetized mice, brains were rapidly extracted (postnatal day 14 through
18). In a chilled and perfused bath, the brain was cut into the left and right
hemisphere, and the complete hippocampus, including the septum, was
extracted from each hemisphere. This preparation maintains the whole 3D
hippocampal architecture, preserving cellular and axonal integrity (32, 33).
Freshly extracted preparations were placed in a chamber and perfused with
oxygenated (95% O2/5% CO2) ACSF (126 mM NaCl, 3.5 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2,
1.3 mM MgCl2, 1.2 mM NaH2PO4, 26.2 mM NaHCO3, and 10 mM glucose).
They were maintained in the chamber at room temperature and allowed to
recover for 1 h before experimental use. After this period of recovery,
preparations were transferred with a pipette to the surface of the in-
tegrated sensing/delivery device. The chamber containing the hippocampus
was continuously perfused with oxygenated ACSF warmed at 33 °C. Tung-
sten electrodes (with a tip resistance of 1 MΩ to 3 MΩ) were positioned on
top of the OEIP outlets/electrode openings. External electrode recordings
were made with a World Precision Instruments DAM80 AC amplifier, and
were acquired using an analog-to-digital converter (Digidata 1322B; Mo-
lecular Devices). Analysis was performed using using Clampfit (Molecular
Devices)- or MATLAB (Mathworks)-based software.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Gaelle Rondeau and the staff of the clean
room in Centre Microelectronique de Provence (CMP) for technical support
during fabrication. The research leading to these results has received
funding from the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) under Grant Agreement 602102 (EPITARGET) and Initiative
of Excellence Aix-Marseilles project MIDOE (A_M-AAP-ID-13-24-130531-
16.31-BERNARD-HLS). Funding was also provided by the Swedish Innovation
Office (2010-00507), the Swedish Research Council (621-2011-3517), and the
Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation (KAW Scholar, 2012.0302). The au-
thors also thank the National Science Foundation Grant DMR-1105253 for
partial support of this work, the French National Research Agency (ANR)
through the project PolyProbe (ANR-13-BSV5-0019-01), Fondation pour la
Recherche Médicale under Grant Agreements DBS20131128446 and
ARF20150934124, Fondation de l’Avenir, the Önnesjö Foundation, the Re-
gion Provence-Alpes-Côte d’Azur, and Microvitae Technologies. J.R. and
L.K. acknowledge support from Marie Curie Fellowships. The fabrication of
the device was performed, in part, at CMP.
1. Kringelbach ML, Jenkinson N, Owen SLF, Aziz TZ (2007) Translational principles of
deep brain stimulation. Nat Rev Neurosci 8(8):623–635.
2. Rogawski MA, Löscher W (2004) The neurobiology of antiepileptic drugs. Nat Rev
Neurosci 5(7):553–564.
3. Bialer M, White HS (2010) Key factors in the discovery and development of new an-
tiepileptic drugs. Nat Rev Drug Discov 9(1):68–82.
4. Löscher W, Potschka H (2005) Drug resistance in brain diseases and the role of drug
efflux transporters. Nat Rev Neurosci 6(8):591–602.
5. Higgins CF (2007) Multiple molecular mechanisms for multidrug resistance trans-
porters. Nature 446(7137):749–757.
6. Kwan P, Brodie MJ (2001) Neuropsychological effects of epilepsy and antiepileptic
drugs. Lancet 357(9251):216–222.
7. Perucca P, Gilliam FG (2012) Adverse effects of antiepileptic drugs. Lancet Neurol
11(9):792–802.
8. Wolinsky JB, Colson YL, Grinstaff MW (2012) Local drug delivery strategies for cancer
treatment: Gels, nanoparticles, polymeric films, rods, and wafers. J Control Release
159(1):14–26.
9. Cook MJ, et al. (2013) Prediction of seizure likelihood with a long-term, implanted
seizure advisory system in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy: A first-in-man study.
Lancet Neurol 12(6):563–571.
10. Cogan SF (2008) Neural stimulation and recording electrodes. Annu Rev Biomed Eng
10(1):275–309.
11. Buzsáki G, Anastassiou CA, Koch C (2012) The origin of extracellular fields and cur-
rents—EEG, ECoG, LFP and spikes. Nat Rev Neurosci 13(6):407–420.
12. Ludwig KA, Uram JD, Yang J, Martin DC, Kipke DR (2006) Chronic neural recordings
using silicon microelectrode arrays electrochemically deposited with a poly(3,4-eth-
ylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) film. J Neural Eng 3(1):59–70.
13. Ludwig KA, et al. (2011) Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) polymer coatings
facilitate smaller neural recording electrodes. J Neural Eng 8(1):014001.
14. Venkatraman S, et al. (2011) In vitro and in vivo evaluation of PEDOT microelectrodes for
neural stimulation and recording. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 19(3):307–316.
15. Green RA, Lovell NH, Wallace GG, Poole-Warren LA (2008) Conducting polymers for
neural interfaces: Challenges in developing an effective long-term implant. Biomaterials
29(24-25):3393–3399.
16. Abidian MR, Kim D-H, Martin DC (2006) Conducting-polymer nanotubes for con-
trolled drug release. Adv Mater 18(4):405–409.
17. Sessolo M, et al. (2013) Easy-to-fabricate conducting polymer microelectrode arrays.
Adv Mater 25(15):2135–2139.
18. Tybrandt K, et al. (2009) Translating electronic currents to precise acetylcholine-induced
neuronal signaling using an organic electrophoretic delivery device. Adv Mater 21(44):
4442–4446.
19. Simon DT, et al. (2009) Organic electronics for precise delivery of neurotransmitters to
modulate mammalian sensory function. Nat Mater 8(9):742–746.
20. Isaksson J, et al. (2007) Electronic control of Ca2+ signalling in neuronal cells using an
organic electronic ion pump. Nat Mater 6(9):673–679.
21. Williamson A, et al. (2015) Controlling epileptiform activity with organic electronic
ion pumps. Adv Mater 27(20):3138–3144.
22. Jonsson A, et al. (2015) Therapy using implanted organic bioelectronics. Sci Adv 1(4):
e1500039.
23. Simon DT, et al. (2015) An organic electronic biomimetic neuron enables auto-regulated
neuromodulation. Biosens Bioelectron 71(0):359–364.
24. Strathmann H (2004) Ion-Exchange Membrane Separation Processes (Elsevier, New
York).
25. Jones R (2012) Neurotransmission: GABA calls stop in the striatum. Nat Rev Neurosci
13(12):815.
26. Jones MV, Westbrook GL (1995) Desensitized states prolong GABAA channel responses
to brief agonist pulses. Neuron 15(1):181–191.
27. Hendricks JL, Chikar JA, Crumling MA, Raphael Y, Martin DC (2008) Localized cell and
drug delivery for auditory prostheses. Hear Res 242(1-2):117–131.
28. Jeong J-W, et al. (2015) Wireless optofluidic systems for programmable in vivo
pharmacology and optogenetics. Cell 162(3):662–674.
29. Minev IR, et al. (2015) Electronic dura mater for long-term multimodal neural inter-
faces. Science 347(6218):159–163.
30. Svirskis D, Travas-Sejdic J, Rodgers A, Garg S (2010) Electrochemically controlled drug
delivery based on intrinsically conducting polymers. J Control Release 146(1):6–15.
31. Gabrielsson EO, Janson P, Tybrandt K, Simon DT, Berggren M (2014) A four-diode full-
wave ionic current rectifier based on bipolar membranes: Overcoming the limit of
electrode capacity. Adv Mater 26(30):5143–5147.
32. Khalilov I, et al. (1997) A novel in vitro preparation: The intact hippocampal formation.
Neuron 19(4):743–749.
33. Davies ML, Kirov SA, Andrew RD (2007) Whole isolated neocortical and hippocampal
preparations and their use in imaging studies. J Neurosci Methods 166(2):203–216.
Jonsson et al.
PNAS
|
August 23, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 34
|
9445
APPLIED PHYSICAL
SCIENCES
NEUROSCIENCE
