 SPECIAL ARTICLE
European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO)
position paper on supportive and palliative care
K. Jordan1*, M. Aapro2, S. Kaasa3,4,5, C. I. Ripamonti6, F. Scotte
´7, F. Strasser8, A. Young9, E. Bruera10,
J. Herrstedt11,12, D. Keefe13, B. Laird14,15, D. Walsh16, J. Y. Douillard17 & A. Cervantes18
1Department of Medicine V, Hematology, Oncology and Rheumatology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; 2Cancer Center, Clinique de Genolier,
Genolier, Switzerland; 3Department of Oncology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo; 4University of Oslo, Oslo; 5European Palliative Care Research Centre (PRC) NTNU,
Oslo, Norway; 6Supportive Care in Cancer Unit, Department of Onco-Haematology Fondazione IRCCS, Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano, Italy; 7Medical
Oncology and Supportive Care Department, Foch Hospital, Suresnes, France; 8Oncological Palliative Medicine, Clinic for Medical Oncology and Hematology,
Departement Internal Medicine, Cantonal Hospital St.Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland; 9Warwick Clinical Trials Unit, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK; 10Department
of Palliative, Rehabilitation and Integrative Medicine, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, USA; 11Department of Oncology, Zealand
University Hospital, Roskilde; 12Department of Oncology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; 13Department of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia; 14Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh; 15St Columba’s Hospice, Edinburgh, UK;
16Academic Department of Palliative Medicine, Our Lady’s Hospice and Care Services, Dublin, Ireland; 17ESMO, Lugano, Switzerland; 18CIBERONC, Department of
Medical Oncology, Institute of Health Research INCLIVA, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain
*Correspondence to: Prof. Karin Jordan, Department of Medicine V, Hematology, Oncology and Rheumatology, Universita
¨tsklinikum Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 410,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Tel: þ49-6221-56-6435; E-mail: karin.jordan@med.uni-heidelberg.de
Oncology has come a long way in addressing patients’ quality of life, together with developing surgical, radio-oncological and
medical anticancer therapies. However, the multiple and varying needs of patients are still not being met adequately as part of
routine cancer care. Supportive and palliative care interventions should be integrated, dynamic, personalised and based on best
evidence. They should start at the time of diagnosis and continue through to end-of-life or survivorship. ESMO is committed to
excellence in all aspects of oncological care during the continuum of the cancer experience. Following the 2003 ESMO stand on
supportive and palliative care (Cherny N, Catane R, Kosmidis P. ESMO takes a stand on supportive and palliative care. Ann Oncol
2003; 14(9): 1335–1337), this position paper highlights the evolving and growing gap between the needs of cancer patients and
the actual provision of care. The concept of patient-centred cancer care is presented along with key requisites and areas for
further work.
Key words: position paper, ESMO, supportive care, palliative care, patient-centred care, multidisciplinarity
Introduction
Based on GLOBOCAN estimates, about 14.1 million new cancer
cases and 8.2 million cancer-related deaths occurred in 2012
worldwide [1]. Due to the accelerated pace of progress in diag-
nostics and treatments, more patients are now cured or live lon-
ger with metastatic disease.
Nevertheless, a cancer diagnosis, the disease itself and the
sequelae of anticancer treatment are major stress factors for
patients. Over the last decade clinicians have accepted that, while
survival and disease-free survival are both fundamental factors,
overall quality of life (QoL) is also crucial for patients. The latter
evidenced by the increasing use of QoL as high-level end points in
clinical trials of anticancer therapies [2–4].
Depending on diagnosis, cancer patients will receive different
types and intensities of tumour-directed treatment (i.e. antineo-
plastic therapy, radiotherapy and/or surgery). Along with antitu-
mour treatment, most patients need help to prevent and alleviate
side-effects and toxicities, and to cope with the disease itself.
Furthermore—at any stage of the cancer pathway—physical, psy-
chological, social, existential and spiritual support and rehabilita-
tion, are often needed. For optimal management, patients must
be fully involved in the decision-making process.
Building on previous ESMO policy statements and guidelines,
and considering the unfulfilled needs of cancer patients [5], this
position paper advocates for patient-centred care (including sup-
portive and palliative care) to be integrated by a multidisciplinary
team (MDT) to anticancer treatment, from the time of diagnosis
V
C The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology.
All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Annals of Oncology 29: 36–43, 2018
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdx757
Published online 14 December 2017
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/1/36/4739431 by guest on 01 June 2019
 and throughout the continuum of disease, including end-of-life
and survivorship care.
ESMO is committed to increasing awareness and education to
bring patient-centred care closer to all professionals, to improving
collaboration between healthcare providers for the good of patients
and to promoting research, so that patient-centred interventions
are not only integrated, but also based on the best evidence.
This paper was prepared by parts of the ESMO Faculty Group
on Supportive Care and Palliative Care. A meeting coordinated
by the ESMO Educational Committee was held in May 2017 to
discuss the content and structure of the paper. The draft went
through several rounds of review by the group and was approved
by both the group and the Educational Committee Chair.
Supportive and palliative care: all about the
patient
Clinicians have always intended to provide the best care for their
patients. However, health systems do not always enable this.
Consciously putting patients’ holistic needs at the centre of every-
thing is the cornerstone of supportive and palliative care. This
position paper goes beyond the debate about the standard defini-
tions of supportive, palliative and end-of-life care. Much work
has already been done in this area [6–8].
Two widely accepted definitions are provided below as
examples.
The Multinational Association of Supportive Care in Cancer
(MASCC) has proposed the following definition of supportive care:
‘Supportive care in cancer is the prevention and management of the
adverse effects of cancer and its treatment. This includes manage-
ment of physical and psychological symptoms and side-effects
across the continuum of the cancer experience from diagnosis
through anticancer treatment to post-treatment care. Enhancing
rehabilitation, secondary cancer prevention, survivorship and end-
of-life care are integral to supportive care’ [9].
The World Health Organisation (WHO) has proposed the fol-
lowing definition for palliative care: ‘Palliative care is an
approach that improves the QoL of patients (adults and children)
and their families who are facing problems associated with life-
threatening illness. It prevents and relieves suffering through the
early identification, correct assessment and treatment of pain and
other problems, whether physical, psychosocial or spiritual.
Addressing suffering involves taking care of issues beyond physi-
cal symptoms. Palliative care uses a team approach to support
patients and their caregivers. This includes addressing practical
needs and providing bereavement counselling. It offers a support
system to help patients live as actively as possible until death’ [7].
While definitions are important and studies have shown that
the word ‘palliative’ may have negative connotations for patients
and could even delay their referral or readiness to accept inter-
ventions (when there is a lack of education or awareness of what
supportive and palliative care entails) [10], efforts must be
focused on alleviating patients’ physical symptoms and psycho-
logical concerns, rather than on debating definitions.
The ESMO Supportive and Palliative Care Faculty proposes the
use of the term ‘patient-centred care’ [11, 12] to encompass both
supportive and palliative care. To offer optimal patient-centred
care, institutions should be organised (according to their structure
and goals) in a way to make this possible, with the necessary level
of professional competence, skills and a collaborative organisation
that facilitates care pathways, individualised according to the needs
of each patient.
The patient-centred care approach
Individual cancer patients will express different physical, psycho-
logical, social, existential and spiritual needs at different stages of
the disease that will often evolve over time. Therefore, patient-
centred care cannot be standardised, even though it is provided
through a standard framework. To ensure that patients can voice
their needs, oncologists should incorporate detailed and routine
physical and psychological assessments allowing for supportive
and palliative interventions to be personalised and integrated in
the continuum of care. Patient-reported outcomes (PROs)
should be highly encouraged as requesting them has shown to be
associated with better QoL, fewer hospitalisations and even
increased survival compared with usual care [13].
Patient-centred interventions should be routinely discussed
and evaluated by the MDT, together with tumour directed treat-
ment, respecting patient preferences and cultural specificities.
Key patient-centred care interventions
The MDT caring for patients should be able to address their mul-
tiple and varying needs. Table 1 shows some examples of key
patient-centred care interventions regarding assessment, moni-
toring and management strategies.
Timely patient-centred interventions
Patient-centred care should be offered during the continuum of
illness, from the time of cancer diagnosis through to survivorship
or end-of-life. Needs will evolve together with the disease and
anticancer treatment, so ongoing and careful holistic evaluation
of requirements should be part of every consultation (see section
on key interventions above).
For some patients diagnosed at an early stage, the treatment
period is relatively short and, after follow-up, they become long-
term survivors or are considered cured (Figure 1, the curative
phase and survivorship phase). For these patients, rehabilitation,
prevention and management of adverse side-effects are most
important. Some patients will have one or more comorbidities at
the time of their cancer diagnosis that may require intervention
before the start of treatment; others may need rehabilitation due
to treatment-induced long-term adverse effects. When cancer
patients have advanced disease at the time of diagnosis, cure is
usually not possible (Figure 1, palliative phase and end-of-life
phase) and palliative care should be considered from diagnosis
onwards [14].
Recent studies show variable effects of the integration of early
supportive/palliative care interventions. A few systematic reviews
concluded that early palliative care in patients with advanced can-
cer significantly [15] or slightly [16, 17] improved patients’ QoL
and could decrease symptom intensity, although overall survival
was not prolonged. The most recent studies were not included in
Annals of Oncology
Special article
Volume 29 | Issue 1 | 2018
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdx757 | 37
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/1/36/4739431 by guest on 01 June 2019
 these reviews. These results include negative studies [18]. The
overall impression is that early integration of palliative care
is beneficial to patients with advanced cancer at the time of
diagnosis [19].
Recently, dedicated outpatient supportive care teams focusing
on prevention and management of anticancer treatment toxicities
have been developed [20, 21]. Data from Italian [22] and French
[23]
dedicated
supportive
care
units
show
a
reduction
of unplanned hospitalisations of cancer patients undergoing treat-
ment [24] and for those requiring blood transfusion [25], allowing
for cost-effective management of symptoms and anticancer
treatment-related toxicity in an ambulatory setting [26]. However,
current literature is still scarce on supportive care units, so more
randomised clinical trial (RCTs) should be encouraged in this field.
Survivorship, pre- and rehabilitation
Although patient-centred care is needed throughout the disease,
some phases deserve specific attention and more research. For
example, due to the improvement of anticancer therapy efficacy,
millions of patients today survive and live with a history of can-
cer. For them, ESMO encourages oncologists, in partnership with
MDTs, to develop programmes of:
• Prehabilitation (at the time of diagnosis or relapse) to reduce
frailty and prepare patients to receive adequate treatment.
Prehabilitation may also reduce post-treatment disorders [27, 28].
Table 1. Key patient-centred care interventions (examples)
Assessment
Monitoring and intervention:
regular changes in patients’
health status preferably assessed
with PROMs or other validated
assessment tools
Management of cancer-related
symptoms and other needs
Management of anticancer
treatment-related toxicities and
complications, including
prevention
• Cancer and anticancer-treatment
related symptoms, toxicities,
complications
• Psychological disorders, distress
• Sleeping problems
• Spiritual and existential issues
• Comorbidities
• Nutritional status
• Sexuality concerns
• Prognosis and coping with
cancer disease
• Family and/or caregiver issues
• Socioeconomic issues
• Other unmet needs
• Adverse events of anticancer
treatment, specifically under
immunotherapy
• Compliance/adherence to onco-
logic treatments (e.g. oral antineo-
plastic agents)
• Frequency of unplanned visits
and/or unplanned hospitalisation
• Special survivors’ needs
• Coping mechanisms
• Understanding of illness, treatment
and care options
• Patient and caregiver information
(including help from cultural
mediators when needed)
• Treatment decision-making
• Advance care planning
• Preparation for end-of-life and
dying
• Family distress and care-giving
roles
• Professional support networks
• Loss of autonomy
• Distress
• Existential, spiritual and religious
needs
• Other monitoring and intervention
issues
• Pain
• Fatigue
• Nausea and vomiting
• Constipation, diarrhoea
• Anorexia, cachexia, early satiety
• Dyspnoea/breathlessness
• Hydro electrolytic disorders
• Prevention of skeletal related
events in patients with bone
metastases
• Anxiety
• Depression
• Sleeping disorders
• Evacuative paracentesis
• Endurance, resistance and balance
training
• Support in understanding the dis-
ease itself as well as the diagnosis,
treatment options and prognosis
• Supporting decisional processes of
patient and family
• Organising and coordinating
community support networks
• Coping with life limiting
expectancies
• Other management issues
• Nausea and vomiting
• Anaemia
• Febrile neutropenia
• Fatigue
• Pain
• Infections
• Dermatotoxicity
• Neurotoxicity
• Immune-related adverse events
• Diarrhoea/constipation
• Mucositis
• Renal impairment,
• Cardiotoxicity
• Problems with sexuality
• Endocrine disorders
• Arthralgia
• Prevention of CTIBL
• Prevention of infertility
• Maintenance of central access
devices
• Hydro electrolytic disorders
• Other symptom management
issues
PROMs, patient-reported outcome measures; CTIBL, cancer treatment-induced bone loss.
CANCER DIAGNOSIS
CURATIVE
PALLIATIVE
REHABILITATION*
SURVIVORSHIP
END OF LIFE
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the cancer pathway. *Rehabilitation
may also apply in the palliative setting.
Special article
Annals of Oncology
38 | Jordan et al.
Volume 29 | Issue 1 | 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/1/36/4739431 by guest on 01 June 2019
 • Rehabilitation to reduce acute and chronic disabilities due to anti-
neoplastic treatments. The objective is to help patients become
and remain independent and productive members of society, or
to cope better with remaining limitations [29]. Rehabilitation,
however, can also be applied in palliative situations.
• Survivor care plans, to support patients in recovering ‘well-
being’ in their personal, professional and social lives, may
reduce the risk of recurrence and help manage chronic dis-
ease, but further research is needed on how to apply them in
clinical practice [30–32].
End-of-life care
Special attention should be paid to patients and their caregivers
when life prolonging treatment comes to an end. In order to help
them cope with this transition, advanced care planning [33] as a
tool should be used early in the course of palliative chemo and
radiotherapy. Near the end-of-life [34], particularly during the last
days, these plans need to be adapted to patients and family mem-
bers’ individual needs, based on an open communication about
the natural course of the disease and the dying process [35].
‘Advanced directives’ should be discussed when appropriate, at
any time in the disease trajectory, allowing patients to spell out
their wishes about end-of-life care ahead of time. Discussing the
patient’s status and prognosis can be challenging for professio-
nals, therefore communication skills are essential.
Oncologists should be prepared to respond to emotions and to dis-
cuss the possible outcomes of cancer, including death. Professionals
should be able to understand what matters most to patients and their
families, to explain options simply and clearly, to help patients antici-
pate and plan in a way that is respectful of their wishes. This includes
respecting the patient’s right to refuse treatment.
The UK’s National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(NICE) offers useful guidelines for care, as well as for pharmaco-
logical and non-pharmacological interventions, in the last days of
life [34], although the UK health care system including hospices
may not be transferable to other countries.
Multidisciplinary teams
The list of professionals that compose an MDT caring for patients
includes several specialties. In summary, there should be medical
oncologists, palliative medicine specialists, nurses, tumour origin
specialists, radiation oncologists, surgeons, pharmacists, allied
healthcare professionals, clerics and volunteers involved. A more
extensive list of professions that may be included in the MDT is
provided in the online supplement (see supplementary Table S1,
available at Annals of Oncology online). Of course, not all patients
will need the involvement of all these professionals.
The composition of the MDT, as well as tasks and responsibil-
ities, will vary according to patient needs, resources and national
settings. Nevertheless, the team should encompass medical and
non-medical professionals that can take care of a wide variety of
physical, psychological, social and existential needs.
If, due to financial or organisational limitations, the cancer
centre does not have the necessary staff in-house to cater to all
patient needs, patients should be referred to other centres or to
individual, trained, professionals (such as physiotherapists or
psychologists) where they have access to necessary interventions.
It is important that the medical oncologist in charge of treatment
and care is also responsible for coordinating these interventions
and regularly evaluates the efficacy of patient-centred care [23].
Integrating healthcare resources
ESMO has a long-term commitment to advance the integration
of supportive and palliative care in oncology and to excellence in
all aspects of oncological care.
Integration is needed to coordinate care processes, including
establishing what health care resources are needed: ‘the correct
competence in the right place at the right time’. The concept of
integration of palliative care into oncology has received substantial
attention recently although there is still no consensus on a defini-
tion of ‘integration’. In a recent article, Hui and Bruera [36] sum-
marized 38 aspects of integration based on a systematic review,
which were classified under 5 categories (clinical structure, clinical
process, education, research and administration). Subsequently,
an international Delphi panel highlighted 13 criteria as major indi-
cators of integration which may be useful for benchmarking pallia-
tive care access across healthcare systems [37].
In order to improve the current situation, ESMO is committed
to expanding cooperation with other professional medical associ-
ations and organisations worldwide [such as the European
Association of Palliative Care (EAPC), the Multinational
Association of Supportive Care in Cancer (MASCC), etc.] and to
encourage and sustain supportive and palliative care develop-
ment through its ‘ESMO Designated Centre of Integrated
Oncology and Palliative Care’ programme [38, 39].
Adequate patient-centred care should be provided as part of
the global service of every hospital or clinic treating cancer
patients. Integrating patient-centred services is the best way to
ensure that they will be widely available and acceptable to profes-
sionals and patients alike. The Eligibility Criteria Checklist of the
ESMO Designated Centre of Integrated Oncology and Palliative
Care programme can be seen on the ESMO website [40].
Resources being limited, not all oncology centres will have an
extended MDT (and not all patients will need support) but, as a
minimum, regular routine patient assessment of physical and
psycho-social needs should be offered, as well as provision of
interventions, whether in-house or by referral to medical or non-
medical professionals.
Need for specific training in patient-centred
care
ESMO is committed to specialised education supporting oncolo-
gists in a fast-changing professional environment. The society
aims to help oncologists gain in-depth, disease-specific knowl-
edge as well as learning how to collaborate effectively with other
specialists in an integrated, multi-professional setting.
Medical oncologists should be trained in the supportive and
palliative care of patients, including basic knowledge about physi-
cal, psychological, social and spiritual aspects of cancer, as set out
in the ESMO/ASCO Recommendations for a Global Curriculum
Annals of Oncology
Special article
Volume 29 | Issue 1 | 2018
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdx757 | 39
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/1/36/4739431 by guest on 01 June 2019
 in Medical Oncology (see Table 2) [41]. As such a structured rota-
tion in supportive and palliative care for oncology trainees would
be a helpful approach. Furthermore, as stated in 2003, ESMO con-
siders oncologists ‘should be familiar with the roles of other profes-
sions in the care of patients with cancer and with community
resources to support the care of these patients’. If specialist patient-
centred care is required, oncologists should be able to identify
which appropriate professional the patient should be referred to.
National Societies should also promote continuing medical
education (CME) in the basics of patient-centred care, to ensure
professionals learn about new developments in the field.
Requirements of the ESMO/ASCO Curriculum are addressed
in the following sections:
• Complications/toxicities of anticancer treatment.
• Supportive care measures.
• Palliative care.
• End-of-life care.
The objectives encompassed are shown in Table 2.
ESMO resources for integrated patient-
centred care education
ESMO already offers a wide array of educational programmes
and tools to oncologists in the domain of patient-centred care
(see Table 3).
Research needs and resources in supportive
and palliative care
Despite growing awareness of the need to develop patient-cen-
tred care and recent progress in the field, more and better scien-
tific evidence, tailored to individual and fluctuating patient needs
is required so that effective interventions can be proposed to can-
cer patients at each stage of their illness.
Prospective, well-designed and preferably, intervention studies
are needed to evaluate the impact of palliative and supportive
interventions on outcomes and QoL. Even in pain management
the level of evidence in existing guidelines is low [42–44]. In this
area, the ESMO-led Global Opioid Policy Initiative (GOPI) [45]
seeks to drive necessary policy reform to improve severe cancer
pain management and unnecessary suffering. It calls for author-
ities to guarantee the availability and accessibility of effective and
safe pain killing treatments.
ESMO is willing to promote more research fellowships in sup-
portive and palliative care. Research in patient-centred care should
be the focus of original investigation. For anticancer treatment tri-
als, PROs should be used together with traditional tumour-ori-
ented outcomes. It is not enough to include QoL measures in
cancer clinical trials as secondary or tertiary outcomes.
Often, only research validated by RCTs is considered accept-
able. Nevertheless, there are methodological and ethical issues
[46] linked to RCTs in palliative and end-of-life care (i.e. con-
cerns about informed consent and the vulnerability of patients).
However, recent RCTs in this setting and embedded in qualitative
work showed that patients with advanced cancer benefit from
participation in symptom control trials [47, 48].
Other options include well-designed observational studies and
cross-sectional surveys [49]. More research is needed, for exam-
ple, on short- and long-term side-effects of new therapeutic inter-
ventions [50]; new supportive care agents; integrating new
technologies such as a web-based programmes and apps for self-
monitoring and reporting symptoms; congruent outcome assess-
ments on symptoms and side-effects (health care assessment ver-
sus PROs); nutrition, physical activity, QoL; social factors such as
family issues, social support, work, financial toxicity; care giver
attitudes and practices; rehabilitation and survivor care; identify-
ing organisational, economic and other incentives for the provi-
sion of integrated and affordable patient-centred care.
ESMO calls for more research to be carried out in this area in
order to create the evidence needed to improve patient-centred
care. Furthermore, a pragmatic approach to cancer research is
needed where patient-centred care trials are concurrent with can-
cer therapy trials.
Table 2. Requirements of the ESMO/ASCO Curriculum
• To be able to assess, diagnose and treat patients with complications/
toxicities of anticancer therapies
• To be able to understand, evaluate and provide supportive care
to patients with cancer, including management of symptoms from the
cancer and side-effects of therapy from the time of diagnosis until
death or until rehabilitation and survivorship issues have been
successfully managed
• To know the indications for the different supportive treatments and
their limitations and side-effects
• To be aware of the importance of a multidisciplinary approach
• To be able to screen for, assess, prevent and manage symptoms
of patients with cancer such as pain, fatigue, anorexia, anxiety,
depression, breathlessness and nausea
• To communicate effectively with patients and families about
illness understanding and coping with it, prognosis, difficult decisions,
end-of-life and its preparation
• To recognise the role of cancer rehabilitation, including physical
therapy and nutrition
• To recognise the importance of culturally competent,
multidisciplinary care including families
• To understand how to integrate palliative interventions in routine
multidisciplinary cancer care
• To recognise the difference between burnout, compassion fatigue
and depression
• To recognise the unique aspects of end-of-life care, such as
decision-making processes, symptom management, involvement of
family members and
spiritual aspects
• To understand how to recognise pseudo-refractory symptoms and
when to refer to specialist palliative care teams for management of
refractory symptoms
• To understand how to maintain patients’ cognition until close to
death with good symptom control
• To be able to assess, treat and counsel patients who are
approaching end-of-life
• To incorporate the family and beloved ones into goal planning
• The curriculum also defines the required skills in dealing with the
psychosocial aspects of cancer, geriatric oncology, communication,
patient education and survivorship.
Special article
Annals of Oncology
40 | Jordan et al.
Volume 29 | Issue 1 | 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/1/36/4739431 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Future/vision
ESMO is committed to ensuring that patient-centred care is
widely understood and integrated into health systems at all levels
throughout the disease; that oncologists have the necessary
knowledge and skills (competences) and that it is underpinned
by a high level of evidence. Therefore, ESMO will advocate for
• increased awareness;
• increased research;
• increases education; and
• increased resources to be dedicated to supportive and pallia-
tive care.
ESMO appeals to health authorities in Europe and beyond to
ensure that cancer patients have equal access to the best possible
patient-centred cancer care that resources allow. This is a medical
and ethical imperative.
Discussion
Conclusion
Recent studies show variable effects of the integration of early
supportive and palliative care interventions for cancer patients
and also emphasise their importance. The diverse outcomes may
be partly explained by methodological challenges, i.e. different
interventions, outcomes and patient populations applied in
published RCTs. Manifestly, more research is needed in patient-
centred care.
Together with anticancer therapies, medical oncology should
encompass patient-centred care by providing supportive and
palliative interventions at all stages of the disease, from the time
of diagnosis. The oncologist’s role is not only to deliver the best
quality anticancer treatment, but also to consider the impact of
the disease and treatment on each patient’s life. Oncologists
should be responsible for including and collaborating with
health care providers with other competences in outpatient and
inpatient clinics in order to alleviate patients’ distress. Since
only individual patient needs can determine what support is
required at each stage of the disease, it is challenging to define
models and standards for best patient-centred care, neverthe-
less, interventions should be based on the best available
evidence.
Further research is needed to ensure that palliative and suppor-
tive interventions are evidence based and PROs should be highly
encouraged. CME is also essential for oncologists to acquire and
update the necessary skills to evaluate patients’ specific needs and
provide the best care.
ESMO is committed to ensuring that supportive and palliative
care is widely understood, integrated into health systems at all
levels and underpinned by evidence.
Acknowledgement
The authors thank Jackie Partarrieu from the ESMO Press
Office for the editorial assistance during the preparation of the
manuscript.
Table 3. ESMO resources for integrated patient-centred care education
• E-learning modulesa on supportive and palliative care
• ESMO Palliative Care Fellowshipsb ESMO provides two palliative care fellowships allowing recipients observation or research at one of the ESMO
Designated Centres
• ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelinesc including guidelines on supportive care and palliative care.
• ESMO Patient Guidesd include, e.g. how to deal with side-effects
• ESMO Handbooks for physicianse
• ESMO Academyf includes an overview of standards of care and future perspective in supportive care
• ESMO Preceptorships in supportive care and palliative careg
• Oncology Pro Webcasts and Slides, Scientific Meeting Reports (using search function) http://oncologypro.esmo.org/Slide-Resources
• ESMO Congress track on supportive care and palliative care
• Core Curriculum slide sets: http://www.esmo.org/Career-Development/Global-Curriculum-in-Medical-Oncology
• ESMO collaboration with other entities with interest in supportive care and palliative care (e.g. MASCC, EAPC, ESO)
• Other resources on the ESMO website: http://www.esmo.org/Topics/Palliative-and-supportive-care
aESMO e-learning: http://oncologypro.esmo.org/Science-Education/ESMO-E-Learning-and-V-Learning.
bESMO Fellowships: http://www.esmo.org/Career-Development/Oncology-Fellowships/Awardees-and-Reports/Palliative-Care-Fellowship-Reports.
cESMO Guidelines on Supportive Care: http://www.esmo.org/Guidelines/Supportive-Care.
dESMO Patient Guides: http://www.esmo.org/Patients/Patient-Guides and ESMO Guide for Patients with Advanced Cancer http://www.esmo.org/content/
download/6932/132781/file/ESMO-A-Guide-for-Patients-with-Advanced-Cancer.pdf.
eESMO
Handbooks:
(i)
http://oncologypro.esmo.org/Publications/Handbooks/Nutrition-and-Cancer;
(ii)
http://oncologypro.esmo.org/Publications/
Handbooks/Advanced-Cancer-Care III. http://oncologypro.esmo.org/Publications/Handbooks/Rehabilitation-Issues-During-Cancer-Treatment-and-Follow-
Up.
fESMO Academy: http://www.esmo.org/Conferences/ESMO-Academy-2017/Programme.
gESMO Preceptorship. Slides from the 2017 preceptorship on supportive and palliative care http://oncologypro.esmo.org/Meeting-Resources/ESMO-
Preceptorship-on-Supportive-and-Palliative-Care-Zurich-February-2017.
Annals of Oncology
Special article
Volume 29 | Issue 1 | 2018
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdx757 | 41
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/1/36/4739431 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Funding
None declared.
Disclosure
KJ: Advisory board and or honoraria for presentations for
Merck, MSD, Helsinn, Tesaro, Amgen, Hexal, Pfizer.
MA: Grant/Reserch supports: Amgen, Eisai, Genomic Health,
Helsinn, Hospira, Novartis, Merck, Mundipharma, Pfizer,
Roche, Sandoz, Tesaro, Teva, Vifor. Consultant for Amgen,
BMS, Celgene, Clinigen, Eisai, Genomic Health, GSK, Helsinn,
Hospira, JnJ, Novartis, Merck, Merck Serono, Mundipharma,
Pfizer, Pierre Fabre, Roche, Sandoz, Tesaro, Teva, Vifor and has
received honoraria for lectures at symposia (equivalent speaker’s
bureau) of Amgen, Bayer Schering, Cephalon, Chugai, Eisai,
Genomic
Health,
GSK,
Helsinn,
Hospira,
Ipsen,
JnJ,
OrthoBiotech, Kyowa Hakko Kirin, Merck, Merck Serono,
Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre, Roche, Sandoz,
Sanofi, Tesaro, Taiho, Teva, Vifor.
SK: Holds stocks in EIR Solutions.
CIR: Honoraria from Amgen for educational programs on ONJ.
FS: Roche, Vifor, MSD, Teva, Norgine, Prostrakan, Leo pharma,
Janssen, Hospira, Boehringer, Sanofi, AMGEN, Pierre Fabre
Oncologie, Tesaro.
FS: Unrestricted Industry Grants for Clinical Research (last
10 years) Celgene (Lenalidomide Cachexia trial) Fresenius
(Survey parenteral nutrition malignant bowel obstruction)
Helsinn (Palliative Research Centre, MENAC Trial, KSSG
Cachexia) Participation in company-lead clinical cachexia trials
Novartis
(BYM338
cachexia
trial)
Punctual
Advisorship
(Boards, Expert Meetings) Acacia, ACRAF, Amgen, Baxter,
Celgene, Danone, Fresenius, GlaxoSmithKline, Gru
¨nenthal,
Helsinn,
ISIS
Global,
Millennium/Takeda,
Mundipharma,
Novartis,
Novelpharm,
Nycomed,
Obexia,
Otsuka,
Ono,
Pharm-Olam, Pfizer, Psioxus, PrIME, Santhera, Sunstone, Teva,
Vifor. Honoraria for Speaking Helsinn prIME.
AY: Honoraria from MSD, Helsinn, Bayer, Leo Pharma.
Educational grant from Bayer.
EB: Research grant from Helsinn Pharma.
JH: Advisory board activity Tesaro and remuneration SOBI.
DK: Advisory Board and stock options: Entrinsic Health
Solutions. Advisory Board: Second Genome.
BL: Advisory Board for Pfizer and Chugai Pharma.
DW: Non-executive Director of Nualtra.
J-YD has declared no conflicts of interest.
AC: Advisory board and or honoraria for Amgen, Lilly,
Novartis, Takeda, Roche, MerckSerono, Servier.
References
1. Torre L, Bray F, Siegel R et al. Globocan Global cancer statistics, 2012.
(2015) Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin 2015; 65(2): 87–108;
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.3322/caac.21262/full (29 November
2017, date last accessed).
2. Cherny N, Sullivan R, Dafni U et al. A standardised, generic, validated
approach to stratify the magnitude of clinical benefit that can be antici-
pated from anti-cancer therapies: the European Society for Medical
Oncology Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale (ESMO-MCBS). Ann
Oncol 2015; 26(8): 1547–1573.
3. Velikova G, Coens C, Efficace F et al. Health-related quality of life in
EORTC clinical trials: 30 years of progress from methodological develop-
ments to making a real impact on oncology practice. Eur J Cancer 2012;
10(1): 141–149.
4. Laird B, Fallon M, Hiermstad S et al. Quality of life in patients with
advanced cancer: differential association with performance status and
systemic inflammatory response. J Clin Oncol 2016; 34(23): 2769–2775.
5. Cherny N, Catane R, Kosmidis P. ESMO takes a stand on supportive and
palliative care. Ann Oncol 2003; 14(9): 1335–1337.
6. Hui D, Mori M, Parsons HA et al. The lack of standard definitions in the
supportive and palliative oncology literature, 2012. J Pain Symptom
Manage 2012; 43(3): 582–592.
7. WHO Definition of Palliative Care, World Health Organization.
Factsheet n.402, July 2015; http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/
fs402/en/ (29 November 2017, date last accessed).
8. Radbruch L, Payne S. White paper on standards and norms for hospice
and palliative care in Europe: Part 1. Eur J Palliative Care 2009; 16(6):
278–289.
9. Consensus on the Core Ideology of MASCC. Definition of Supportive
Care;
http://www.mascc.org/index.php?
option¼com_content&view¼
article&id¼493: mascc-strategic-plan&catid¼30: navigation (29 November
2017, date last accessed).
10. Zimmermann C, Swami N, Krzyzanowska M et al. Perceptions of pallia-
tive care among patients with advanced cancer and their caregivers.
CMAJ 2016; 188(10): E217–E227.
11. Frampton S, Guastello S, Brady C et al. Patient Centered Care
Improvement Guide. Planetree, Inc. and Picker Institute. 2008; http://
www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/Tools/PatientCenteredCareImprovement
Guide.aspx (29 November 2017, date last accessed).
12. WHO Framework on integrated people-centred health services; http://
apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA69/A69_39-en.pdf? ua¼1&ua¼1
(29 November 2017, date last accessed).
13. Basch E, Deal AM, Dueck AC et al. Overall survival results of a trial
assessing patient-reported outcomes for symptom monitoring during
routine cancer treatment. JAMA 2017; 318(2): 197–198.
14. World Health Organization. Strengthening of palliative care as a compo-
nent of integrated treatment throughout the life course. J Pain Palliative
Care Pharmacother 2014; 28(2): 130–134.
15. Kavalieratos D, Corbelli J, Zhang D et al. Association between palliative
care and patient and caregiver outcomes. A systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA 2016; 316(20): 2104–2114.
16. Haun MW, Estel S, Ru
¨cker G et al. Early palliative care for adults with
advanced cancer. Cochrane Lib 2017, Issue 6. Art. No.: CD011129. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD011129.pub2
17. Gaertner J, Siemens W, Meerpohl J et al. Effect of specialist palliative care
services on quality of life in adults with advanced incurable illness in
hospital, hospice, or community settings: systematic review and meta-
analysis. BMJ 2017; 357:j2925. doi: https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.j2925.
18. Groenvold M, Petersen MA, Damkier A et al. Randomised clinical trial
of early specialist palliative care plus standard care versus standard care
alone in patients with advanced cancer: the danish palliative care trial.
Palliat Med 2017; 31(9): 814.
19. Franciosi V, Caruso G, Maglietta G et al. Palliative care evaluation of
effects early palliative care on quality of life of advanced cancer patients:
a multicenter controlled trial. Ann Oncol 2016; 27(Suppl 6): LBA49.
20. Ripamonti C, Pessi MA, Boldini S et al. Supportive Care in Cancer Unit
(SCCU) at the NCI of Milan: a new integrated model of medicine in
oncology. Curr Opin Oncol 2012; 24: 391–396.
21. Scotte
´ F, Herve
´ C, Oudard S et al. Supportive care organisation in
France: an in depth study by the French speaking association for suppor-
tive care in cancer (AFSOS). Eur J Cancer 2013; 49(5): 1090–1096.
22. Vasile E, Lucchesi M, Ginocchi L et al. Dedicated supportive care team at
the oncology unit: a model of simultaneous care for cancer patients.
Support Care Cancer 2014; 22(4): 867–868.
23. Scotte
´ F, Herve
´ C, Leroy P et al. Supportive Care Organization in France:
a national in-depth survey among patients and oncologists. Support
Care Cancer 2017; 25(7): 2111–2118.
Special article
Annals of Oncology
42 | Jordan et al.
Volume 29 | Issue 1 | 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/1/36/4739431 by guest on 01 June 2019
 24. Antonuzzo A, Vasile E, Sbrana A et al. Impact of a supportive care service
for cancer outpatients: management and reduction of hospitalizations.
Preliminary results of an integrated model of care. Support Care Cancer
2017; 25(1): 209–212.
25. Ripamonti CI, Molani P, Desti C et al. A supportive care in cancer unit
reduces costs and hospitalizations for transfusions in a comprehensive
cancer center. Tumori 2017; 103(5): 449–456.
26. Morin S, Leroy P, Aubaret C et al. Cost effectiveness in a supportive
care unit. J Clin Oncol 2017; 35 (suppl; abstr e18326). https://meetingli
brary.asco.org/record/152502/abstract (29 November 2017, date last
accessed).
27. Skinner EH. Intensive preoperative rehabilitation improves functional
capacity and postoperative hospital length of stay in elderly patients with
lung cancer [synopsis]. J Physiother 2017; 63(3):184.
28. Driessen EJ, Peeters ME, Bongers BC et al. Effects of prehabilitation and
rehabilitation including a home-based component on physical fitness,
adherence, treatment tolerance and recovery in patients with non-small
cell lung cancer: a systematic review. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2017; 114:
63–76.
29. O’Mara A, Rowland JH, Greenwell TN et al. NIH Medical Rehabilitation
Coordinating Committee. National Institutes of Health Research Plan
on
Rehabilitation:
NIH
Medical
Rehabilitation
Coordinating
Committee. Phys Ther 2017; 97(4): 104–407.
30. Leensen MCJ, Groeneveld IF, Heide IV et al. Return to work of cancer
patients after a multidisciplinary intervention including occupational
counselling and physical exercise in cancer patients: a prospective study
in the Netherlands. BMJ Open 2017; 7(6): e014746.
31. Leensen MCJ, Groeneveld IF, Rejda T et al. Feasibility of a multidiscipli-
nary intervention to help cancer patients return to work. Eur J Cancer
Care (Engl) 2017; doi:10.1111/ecc.12690.
32. ESMO Patient Guide on Survivorship; http://www.esmo.org/content/
download/117593/2061518/file/ESMO-Patient-Guide-Survivorship.pdf
(29 November 2017, date last accessed).
33. Schrijvers D, Cherny N. ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines on
palliative care: advanced care planning. Ann Oncol 2014; 25(Suppl 3):
iii138–iii142.
34. End of life care. NHS; http://www.nhs.uk/Planners/end-of-life-care/
Pages/what-is-end-of-life-care.aspx
(29
November
2017,
date
last
accessed).
35. Care of adults in the last days of life. NICE guideline. December 2015;
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng31/resources/care-of-dying-adults-
in-the-last-days-of-life-pdf-1837387324357 (29 November 2017, date
last accessed).
36. Hui D, Bruera E. Integrating palliative care into the trajectory of cancer
care. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2016; 13: 159–171.
37. Hui D, Bansal S, Strasser F et al. Indicators of integration of oncology
and palliative care programs: an international consensus. Ann Oncol
2015; 26(9): 1953–1959.
38. The ESMO Designated Centres of Integrated Oncology and Palliative Care
accreditation
programme;
http://www.esmo.org/Patients/Designated-
Centres-of-Integrated-Oncology-and-Palliative-Care (29 November 2017,
date last accessed).
39. Hui D, Cherny N, Latino N, Strasser F. The 0critical mass0 survey of pal-
liative care programme at ESMO designated centres of integrated oncol-
ogy and palliative care. Ann Oncol 2017; 28(9): 2057–2066.
40. http://www.esmo.org/Patients/Apply-to-Become-an-ESMO-Designated-
Centre (29 November 2017, date last accessed).
41. Recommendations for a Global Curriculum in Medical Oncology; http://
www.esmo.org/Career-Development/Global-Curriculum-in-Medical-
Oncology (29 November 2017, date last accessed).
42. Caraceni A, Hanks G, Kaasa S et al. Use of opioid analgesics in the treat-
ment of cancer pain: evidence-based recommendations from the EAPC.
Lancet Oncol 2012; 13(2): e58–e68.
43. Ripamonti CI, Bossi P, Santini D, Fallon M. Pain related to cancer treat-
ments and diagnostic procedures: a no man’s land? Ann Oncol 2014;
25(6): 1097–1106 (review).
44. Bandieri E, Romero M, Ripamonti CI et al. Randomized trial of low-
dose morphine versus weak opioids in moderate cancer pain. J Clin
Oncol 2016; 34(5): 436–442.
45. ESMO-led Global Opioid Policy Initiative (GOPI); http://www.esmo.
org/Policy/Global-Opioid-Policy-Initiative (29 November 2017, date last
accessed).
46. Hanks G. Ethical issues in palliative care research. In The Oxford Textbook
of Palliative Medicine 2010; Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. DOI:
10.1093/med/9780199656097.001.0001. http://oxfordmedicine.com/view/
10.1093/med/9780199656097.001.0001/med-9780199656097-chapter-196
(29 November 2017, date last accessed).
47. Fallon M, Hoskin PJ, Colvin LA et al. Randomized double-blind trial of
pregabalin versus placebo in conjunction with palliative radiotherapy for
cancer-induced bone pain. JCO 2016; 34(6): 550–556.
48. Solheim TA, Laird BJA, Balstad TR et al. A randomised phase II trial of a
multimodal intervention for the management of cachexia in lung and
pancreatic cancer. J Cachexia Sarcopenia and Muscle 2017; 8: 778–788.
49. Middlemiss T, Lloyd-Williams M, Laird BJ et al. Symptom control trials
in patients with advanced cancer: a qualitative study. J Pain Symptom
Manage 2015; 50(5): 642–649.
50. A Beginners Guide to Successful Palliative Care. Scottish Partnership for
Palliative Care. Section 5: Identifying potentially useful ideas for research;
https://www.palliativecarescotland.org.uk/content/publications/134028
8254_A-Beginners-Guide-to-Successful-Palliative-Care-Research-.pdf
(29 November 2017, date last accessed).
Annals of Oncology
Special article
Volume 29 | Issue 1 | 2018
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdx757 | 43
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/1/36/4739431 by guest on 01 June 2019
