 The Spectrum of Clinical Utilities in Molecular Pathology Testing Procedures for Inherited 
Conditions and Cancer: A Report of the Association for Molecular Pathology  
Loren Joseph*,1, Milena Cankovic*,2, Samuel Caughron*,3, Pranil Chandra*,4, Rajyasree Emmadi*,5, Jill 
Hagenkord*,6, Stephanie Hallam*,7, Kay E. Jewell*,8, Roger Klein*,9, Victoria M. Pratt*,10, Paul G. 
Rothberg*,11, Robyn L. Temple‐Smolkin12, and Elaine Lyon.*,13 
Affiliations: 
* The Association for Molecular Pathology’s Framework for the Evidence Needed to Demonstrate
Clinical Utility Task Force, consisting of members from the Clinical Practice Committee, Economic 
Affairs Committee, and the Professional Relations Committee. 
1 Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 
2 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan 
3 MAWD Pathology Group, PA, North Kansas City, Missouri 
4 PathGroup, Brentwood, Tennessee 
5 Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 
6 23andMe, Mountain View California 
7 Good Start Genetics, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
8 Tara Center, LLC, Stevens Point, Wisconsin 
9 Department of Molecular Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 
10 Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis, Indiana  
11 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York 
_________________________________________________________________________________
 
This is the author's manuscript of the article published in final edited form as: 
Joseph, L., Cankovic, M., Caughron, S., Chandra, P., Emmadi, R., Hagenkord, J., … Lyon, E. (2016). The Spectrum of Clinical 
Utilities in Molecular Pathology Testing Procedures for Inherited Conditions and Cancer: A Report of the Association for 
Molecular Pathology. The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics, 18(5), 605–619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoldx.2016.05.007
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
2 
12 The Association for Molecular Pathology, Bethesda, Maryland 
13 Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine and ARUP Laboratories, Salt 
Lake City, Utah  
 
The 2014 and 2015 Clinical Practice Committee consisted of Matthew Bankowski, Milena Cankovic, 
Christopher Coldren, Linda Cook, Jennifer H. Crow, Jennifer Dunlap, Birgit H. Funke, Larissa V. Furtado, 
Lawrence Jennings, Loren Joseph (2014 Chair), Arivarasan Karunamurthy, Annette Kim, Bryan Krock, 
Marilyn M. Li, Melissa B. Miller, Marina N. Nikiforova (2015 Chair), Mary Lowery Nordberg, Carolyn Sue 
Richards, Paul Rothberg, and Somak Roy. The 2014 and 2015 Economic Affairs Committee consisted of 
Dara Aisner, Aaron D. Bossler (2014 Co‐Chair, 2015 Chair), Samuel Caughron (2015 Vice Chair), Pranil 
Chandra, Jill Hagenkord (2015 Vice Chair), Elaine Lyon, Jan Nowak (2014 Co‐Chair), Richard Press (2015 
Vice Chair), Linda Sabatini, Michele Schoonmaker, and Ester Stein. The 2014 and 2015 Professional 
Relations Committee consisted of Stephen P Day, Rajyasree Emmadi, Andrea Ferreira‐Gonzalez, Robert F. 
Klees, Roger D. Klein (Chair), Jordan Laser, Elaine Lyon, Roberta Madej, Shelby Melton, Timothy J. O'Leary, 
Vicky Pratt, and Daniel Sabath.  
 
Standard of practice is not defined by this article and there may be alternatives. See Disclaimer for further 
details.  
 
Corresponding Author: 
Elaine Lyon, PhD 
Department of Pathology 
University of Utah School of Medicine and ARUP Laboratories,  
15 North Medical Drive East, Salt Lake City, UT  84112 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
3 
Phone: (801) 583‐2787 
Fax: (801) 584‐5207 
Email: lyone@aruplab.com 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The roles of clinical validity and clinical utility in determining the medical usefulness of a molecular 
pathology testing procedure have been the subject of debate for a number of years, and discussions have 
increased since the advent of new molecular pathology Current Procedural Terminology (CPT®) codes.i 
Establishment of clinical validity is fundamental to clinical utility (Table 1); qualitative criteria for clinical 
validity have historically been the standard for insurance coverage determinations1. The rising cost of 
targeted therapies for patients whose molecular test results indicate a likelihood of response has payers 
reacting to potentially unsustainable payments and the ominous specter of concomitant premium 
increases. According to a recent study by the IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics, the average 
monthly price of cancer therapy in the U.S. increased 39% in the ten year period 2004‐2014, from $14,821 
to $20,700, when adjusted for inflation; and, targeted therapies accounted for almost 50% of total 
spending on all oncology medicines (Developments in Cancer Treatments, Market Dynamics, Patient 
Access and Value: Global Oncology Trend Report 2015, http://www.imshealth.com/, last accessed 
8/15/2015.. The variety of testing methodologies utilized to identify patients that might benefit from 
targeted therapies is becoming numerous and more complex. The increasing complexity of molecular 
diagnostic testing procedures, especially Gene Expression Signatures and Next Generation Sequencing 
(NGS) tests, is one of the factors payers cite for their interest in more comprehensive scrutiny. Title XVIII 
of the Social Security Act, Section 1862(a)(1)(A) prohibits Medicare payment " ...for items or services 
                                                            
i CPT® is a registered trademark of the American Medical Association. For more information about CPT coding, visit 
the AMA website, www.ama‐assn.org.  
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
4 
which are not reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis and treatment of illness or injury...." with certain 
exceptions. Recently, several Medicare Medical Administrative Contractors (MACs) have associated 
evaluations of both analytical and clinical validity with Medicare’s reasonable and necessary requirement 
and have demanded evidence for both in addition to evidence of clinical utility  (CMS Local Coverage 
Determination Palmetto L33599; CGS DL36021; Noridian L33541, www.cms.gov, accessed 8/11/2015). 
NGS gene panels and even NGS exome testing may be cost effective compared with testing several known 
relevant genes by Sanger sequencing. A potentially large but indirect cost of large gene panels, especially 
in cancer treatment, is that they increase the likelihood of finding a mutation for which there is an 
expensive therapy, possibly off‐label, or in a clinical trial. This impacts discussion of costs in complex ways; 
but it is evident that providers find the mutation analysis to have clinical utility, as they are taking action 
based on the test results. Alternately, gene panels or exome testing for inherited disease may identify 
variants that aren’t well characterized and may trigger a cascade of other medical procedures, which may 
or may not be necessary.   
Practical challenges in demonstrating clinical utility for molecular pathology testing procedures exist 
under any model. The general principles for evaluating clinical utility in molecular diagnostics are the same 
as for any test in medicine, from imaging to clinical chemistry, but the clinical questions addressed by 
molecular diagnostics often have features that limit the type and availability of evidence to assess clinical 
utility. For inherited disorders, constraints include low prevalence for specific disorders (although high in 
aggregate), lack of targeted therapies for most diseases, difficulty quantifying the impact of testing on 
psychological well‐being and long‐term care, and difficulty obtaining pertinent information about a 
patient’s relatives. For cancer therapy, limitations include a low frequency for many driver mutations in a 
given type of cancer, even lower frequency for combinations of driver mutations, prolonged cancer clinical 
trials due to low levels of patient recruitment, and the paucity of broad molecular profile data in most 
cancer trials to date. Despite the challenges, patient‐centered clinical molecular diagnostics, including 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
5 
interpretation, conducted by appropriately trained and certified molecular pathologists or clinical medical 
geneticists can demonstrate compelling clinical utility, as described in the following examples throughout 
this document. While the scope of this report is restricted to molecular pathology testing procedures for 
inherited conditions and cancer, we believe many recommendations can be extended to additional 
applications of molecular testing. 
CLINICAL UTILITY HAS MANY FACES  
Molecular diagnostic tests are used for multiple purposes, ranging from diagnosis of disease in 
patients, risk assessment of an inherited disease in family members, evaluation of patients whose family 
history indicates they are at high risk of a disease, prediction of future disease, prognosis, and therapy 
selection. Some tests can be used for multiple indications; thus, the clinical utility of molecular diagnostics 
is context dependent. The Medical Test Methods Guide presented by the Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality (AHRQ) in 2012 provides a foundation to evaluate all medical tests, including molecular 
diagnostic tests2.  The fundamental tenets include the assertion that the value of a medical test must 
always be linked to the context of use. While clinical utility has many aspects, the ultimate goal is to 
provide information necessary to care for the patient or a family member, who could be either future or 
as yet undiagnosed patients. Molecular testing can impact patients and their care in numerous ways and 
needs to be incorporated into the global patient assessment and management, especially in the context 
of patient‐centered care (Supplemental Figures 4 and 5). The decision to perform molecular diagnostic 
testing is made by the treating clinician based on the patient’s symptoms, history, and clinical findings, 
often after pre‐test consultation with a molecular pathology/medical genetics professional. Patient 
management occurs in the context of a medical team, where molecular diagnosis is integrated with 
additional clinical findings. The reasons for testing are most commonly classified as diagnosis, prognosis, 
and prediction. Of these, diagnosis is the foundation. 
DIAGNOSIS 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
6 
Importance of Molecular Diagnosis in Inherited Diseases 
Establishing a diagnosis by molecular genetic testing procedures for a patient with an inherited or 
de novo genetic germline disorder has inherent clinical utility even in the absence of guided therapy. 
Historically, inherited conditions were diagnosed based on clinical history and phenotype. This clinical 
paradigm – a treating physician forms an initial clinical impression, including a differential diagnosis and 
orders the appropriate clinical or confirmatory tests– is still applicable to molecular diagnostics.  
For many inherited diseases, the phenotype does not point to a definitive diagnosis. Even classic 
Mendelian single gene disorders can present challenges such as variable expressivity, locus heterogeneity, 
allelic heterogeneity, and incomplete (or reduced) penetrance. Basing a diagnosis on phenotype alone 
can result in incorrect diagnosis or delayed time to diagnosis. Making the correct diagnosis in a timely 
manner can have significant impact on patient, family, and physician decision‐making by clarifying level 
of risk and prognosis, treatment options, and associated comorbidities. The correct genetic diagnosis can 
provide recurrence risk for the family and thereby facilitate preconception intervention or prenatal 
diagnosis for at‐risk relatives.  
In patients with suspected genetic disorders, the standard of practice has been to follow 
phenotype‐driven iterative algorithms, single‐gene‐test‐at‐a‐time, including radiographic studies, 
biopsies, metabolite analysis, and cytogenomic analysis. Despite these efforts, the majority of patients 
remain without a diagnosis3. Consecutive negative results can delay a definitive diagnosis and allow 
development of adverse consequences (i.e. increased morbidity). Termed the diagnostic odyssey, this 
approach to diagnosis is expensive and causes frustration to the patient, their family, and the clinicians.  
When inherited genetic disorders have substantial genotypic and/or phenotypic overlap, testing 
several candidate genes simultaneously by a multi‐gene panel may be appropriate. Although this can and 
has been done with classical Sanger sequencing, a multi‐gene panel analyzed by massively parallel 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
7 
sequencing can result in a faster time to diagnosis and reduced cost. An example is the class of aortic 
dysfunction or dilation syndromes, which include Marfan syndrome, Loeys Dietz syndrome, Ehlers Danlos 
syndrome 
type 
IV, 
and 
arterial 
tortuosity 
syndrome 
(GeneReviews®, 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1335/#_marfan_Management, accessed 6/5/2015). Genomic 
sequencing panels for this overlapping group of genetic disorders include sequencing most causative 
genes (e.g. FBN1, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, COL3A1, MYH11, ACTA2, SLC2A10, SMAD3, and MYLK). Even though 
symptoms are overlapping, distinguish between these diseases is important because the clinical course of 
each syndrome differs.  
The utilization of multi‐gene panels has increased with the advent of massively parallel 
sequencing (MPS) technologies, notably with clinical introduction of whole exome sequencing (WES)4.  For 
well‐defined clinical phenotypes an MPS gene panel can show modestly superior performance relative to 
WES. For disorders such as developmental delay or neurological disorders that show extensive genotypic 
and/or phenotypic overlap, WES is appropriate. WES can also reveal incidental pathogenic variants not 
related to the patient’s phenotype but that are associated with treatable genetic diseases, such as 
hereditary breast cancer syndromes or familial hypercholesterolemia5. Detection of such variants 
provides a preventative medicine opportunity for both the proband and at‐risk family members.   
Several thousand clinical exomes have been completed and many results summarized in the 
medical literature. These show the feasibility of establishing diagnoses for rare, clinically unrecognizable, 
or puzzling disorders that are suspected to be genetic in origin, and in many cases, delineating new genetic 
disorders6–11. Currently the diagnostic yield for WES in this setting is approximately 25%4, but can be up 
to 50% depending upon clinical presentation and/or availability of family studies. This number is expected 
to rise as many more exomes are sequenced in national surveys (e.g. U.K. 100K study, U.S. Veteran’s 
Administration Million Veteran Study, Clinical Sequencing Exploratory Research Consortium). A recent 
review of molecular diagnostic testing menus in US laboratories revealed that over 100  inherited 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
8 
disorder‐specific multi‐gene testing panels are used clinically12.  Recognizing the increased clinical use of 
MPS, the American Medical Association has established genomic sequencing current procedural 
terminology (CPT) codes for several inherited genetic conditions, including gene panels such as aortic 
dysfunction, exomes, and genomes. Notably, the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association Technology 
Evaluation Center favorably assessed whole exome sequencing for suspected inherited disorders and 
defined clinical utility as the attainment of a diagnosis, not the direct effect on health status (Blue Cross 
and Blue Shield, http://www.bcbs.com/blueresources/tec/vols/28/28_03.pdf, accessed 6/5/15). At 
present whole genome sequencing (WGS) is considerably more expensive than WES, requires greater 
analysis, and generates more variants of uncertain significance. As technology advances, the balance of 
costs and reliability could tip in favor of WGS but at present WES is a plausible approach for inherited 
disease testing when the clinical picture does not strongly suggest a specific disorder suitable to a specific  
gene panel13. 
Importance of Molecular Diagnosis in Oncology 
The diagnosis of malignancy does not routinely rely on molecular diagnostics to the same degree 
as diagnosis of inherited disease; however, there are situations in which molecular diagnostic testing 
serves an important role in distinguishing benign from malignant proliferations. For example, molecular 
studies of the antigen receptor genes can help distinguish lymphoma from benign lymphoproliferations 
in cases which remain unclear after morphologic, immunohistochemical and flow cytometric analysis14,15.  
Similarly, molecular mutation analyses in cystic neoplasia of the pancreas and of thyroid lesions of 
indeterminate cytology can be used to help differentiate benign from malignant lesions16–25. In suspected 
myelodysplasia, National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines recommend testing a panel 
of genes to establish presence of “clonal hematopoiesis.” Molecular testing is often the testing modality 
of choice to provide a definitive diagnosis. Multiplex mutational analysis can establish a diagnosis 
especially when other traditional tests such as conventional cytogenetics, FISH testing, and flow 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
9 
cytometric analyses are not definitive (NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Myelodysplastic 
Syndromes, Version 2, 2015, www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/mds.pdf, accessed 
5/6/2015).  
Stratification of cancer has now become a part of the primary diagnosis. Accurate molecular 
diagnosis is fundamental to understanding the pathology of the disease process, which, in turn, will inform 
proper clinical management of the patient. The most extensive example is the World Health Organization 
(WHO) classification of lymphomas and leukemias which requires molecular diagnostic data for many of 
the tumor categories14,26.  In turn, correct molecularly‐assisted diagnosis is essential to evidence‐based 
management of patients27. For example, until only a few years ago, the diagnosis of lung cancer included 
histologic classification only (e.g. non‐small‐cell lung carcinoma, adenocarcinoma). Now, mutation status 
has become a part of the disease name of an increasing number of cancers because they predict 
recurrence or have implications for targeted therapy, sometimes for multiple mutations (e.g., BRAF, MEK, 
RAS‐mutant melanoma28–30). MPS can interrogate multiple gene regions that have been characterized as 
mutational hot spots, providing an efficient method for identifying a number of somatic mutations known 
to be important cancer drivers17,31–33. Just as important as diagnostic efficiency is the limitation presented 
by specimen type, which can impact the number of tumor cells and/or quantity of DNA available for 
analysis. Lung cancer patients benefit from the introduction of minimally invasive procedures such as 
bronchoscopy and mediastinoscopy that avoid surgical biopsy; however, the small specimen size may be 
an obstacle to successful testing.  
Importance of Molecular Diagnosis in the Absence of Treatment 
An accurate diagnosis is essential even when curative interventions are not available34.  In the 
absence of a definitive treatment, determination of the optimal supportive care is as important and may 
be determined by the molecular test result. The term supportive at times presupposes that the only 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
10 
purpose of medical care is to cure or significantly alter the natural progression of a condition through 
medical interventions such as drugs or surgery. If the interventions cannot cure or alter the progression 
of a disorder, the implication is that the interventions needed are not medically necessary, do not carry 
the same level of importance, and perhaps are not properly considered part of medical care. Positive 
patient outcomes in medicine have not historically been narrowly defined as only cure or prevention of 
disease. Many diseases are chronic conditions that can be effectively and appropriately managed when 
curative pharmacological therapies are not available. Healthcare resources are then focused on managing 
the disorder, the associated comorbidities, effects on other medical conditions, impact on life expectancy 
and quality of life.   
PROGNOSIS 
Beyond making a diagnosis, molecular diagnostic testing can provide individualized prognostic 
information, i.e., the expected clinical outcome in the absence of treatment or with the application of the 
standard treatment. For inherited disorders, a prognostic marker assesses the likelihood of development 
of a disease. For oncology, a prognostic marker assesses the prospect of disease progression or survival 
without disease specific intervention, in contrast to general supportive care. Two key questions to be 
addressed are (1) does a specific molecular finding have sufficient prognostic evidence to  effect a  change 
in management that will improve the clinical outcome, and (2) will the prognosis contribute to personal 
life management decisions for the patient and the patient’s family.   
Prognostic Molecular Diagnostics in Inherited Diseases 
Many inherited disorders with a similar primary phenotype can later develop distinct associated 
secondary conditions: for example, hearing loss may be isolated or may be associated with a syndrome. 
Definitive diagnosis using molecular diagnostic testing can assist with monitoring and/or preparation for 
these secondary conditions. Usher syndrome patients present with hearing loss but develop retinitis 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
11 
pigmentosa 
(night 
blindness 
and 
tunnel 
vision) 
as 
they 
age 
(GeneReviews®, 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1265/, 
accessed 
5/6/2015). 
The 
presentation 
of 
neurofibromatosis is variable and those with a questionable diagnosis based on clinical criteria should 
receive a definitive diagnosis by molecular diagnostic testing. Patients with neurofibromatosis may 
develop plexiform neurofibromas that can obstruct or become entangled around vital organs35. 
Surveillance is critical for these patients; early detection of these tumors will facilitate surgical removal 
before they become life threatening. 
Prognostic Molecular Diagnostics in Oncology 
Molecular genetic testing can inform prognosis at the time of diagnosis and guide surveillance 
and intervention. The presence or absence of a FLT3–ITD mutation in cytogenetically normal acute 
myeloid leukemia has prognostic impact and affects the selection of appropriate treatment even though 
at present it does not point to specific targeted therapy except in clinical trials36.  Molecular testing to 
quantify mRNA expression of the BCR‐ABL1 fusion gene in CML is an example of using molecular 
diagnostics to monitor response to therapy, monitor minimal residual disease (surveillance) and in some 
cases indicate specific changes in therapy37.   
Complex prognostic molecular diagnostic tests measuring gene expression have been shown to 
have clinical utility in treatment of early stage breast cancer. Within the hormone‐receptor‐positive 
(ESR1/PGR‐positive, or ER/PR‐positive) group, demonstrated by immunohistochemistry, chemotherapy is 
available for those considered at a high risk of recurrence while sparing others considered low‐risk the 
possible complication of chemotherapy‐related second malignancies (leukemia/lymphoma). This 
treatment stratification currently involves the use of genomic/transcriptomic data obtained from the 
Oncotype Dx™, MammaPrintTM , PAM50 and other molecular diagnostic assays. Here the meaning of 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
12 
prognosis and prediction overlap since the result of the molecular diagnostic can favor chemotherapy 
(predictive) or favor withholding therapy, a reflection of a good prognosis. 
For breast cancers which express neither estrogen and progesterone receptors [ESR1 (ER); PGR 
(PR)] nor ERBB2 (HER2) (so‐called triple negative tumors) the treating physician must consider molecular 
testing for inherited BRCA mutations, potentially facilitating complete care of the patient as well as the 
extended family. BRCA mutation‐positive patients may elect to have a prophylactic mastectomy of the 
uninvolved 
breast 
as 
well 
as 
bilateral 
oophorectomy 
(GeneReviews®, 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1247/, accessed 6/5/2015)38,39. Similarly, prognostic molecular 
diagnostics for colon cancer have demonstrated clinical utility in predicting the risk of relapse of stage II 
colorectal cancers, independent of conventional tumor stage and DNA mismatch repair status40,41.  
PRESYMPTOMATIC AND PREDICTIVE TESTING 
Molecular diagnostic testing has clinical utility in the context of predictive testing, including 
evaluation of individuals at high risk of developing a disease due to their family history, predisposition 
testing in asymptomatic individuals and groups (screening), and risk assessment for multifactorial 
disorders. Predisposition testing assesses the likelihood that an individual will develop the condition. 
Presymptomatic Molecular Testing for Inherited Disease 
The clinical utility of utilizing molecular diagnostic testing for inherited disease in asymptomatic 
individuals depends upon both the condition and whether the test is being performed on a person with a 
family history or testing within the general population. If the condition has high penetrance, such as 
Huntington disease, the molecular diagnostic test is used to predict future disease (presymptomatic 
testing) with high confidence (GeneReviews®, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1305/, accessed 
6/5/2015). Additional types of presymptomatic testing include fetal testing, prenatal screening, newborn 
screening, or preimplantation genetic diagnosis when a familial mutation is known. In addition to the 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
13 
assessment of individuals at risk of an inherited disorder is the use of molecular testing to predict drug 
response due to germline variants in drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters.  Pharmacogenomic 
testing is used to  predict drug efficacy, adjust dose, and identify the potential for drug‐related adverse 
events42 (PharmGKB®, https://www.pharmgkb.org/view/dosing‐guidelines.do?source=CPIC, accessed 
9/25/2015). 
Evaluating the clinical utility of molecular diagnostics used for risk assessment poses an additional 
challenge in showing that the information from the test result is used to reduce the patient’s risk, such as 
a behavioral/lifestyle change or increased compliance with medical interventions. Significant value, both 
in improved outcomes and in saving healthcare resources is achieved when molecular testing identifies 
patients for whom interventions are known to be effective. Key questions to be considered when 
evaluating the clinical utility of molecular diagnostics for disease risk are whether the test can identify 
persons not identified through clinical assessment and whether it can provide a more accurate assessment 
of risk. The value of the molecular diagnostics can be determined by a comparison of the sensitivity and 
specificity, PPV and NPV of the existing clinical assessment, and clinical risk assessment tools with and 
without the molecular diagnostic test results43.  
Predictive Molecular Testing in Oncology 
A predictive factor in oncology is associated with response or lack of response to a particular 
therapy. A well‐studied example is molecular diagnostic testing for mutations in the KRAS and EGFR genes 
to determine if EGFR‐targeted therapy is appropriate27,44. Particular mutations in either gene serve as 
predictive factors for the success of EGFR‐targeted therapy. Molecular testing can address clinically useful 
issues beyond drug response, e.g., whether dosing adjustments are needed, whether treatment should 
be by a different drug and the risk of adverse events. The clinical utility of molecular diagnostics to identify 
therapy‐resistant disease and to optimize dosing is illustrated with gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST): 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
14 
tumors harboring exon 9 mutations in the KIT gene have significantly longer progression‐free survival if 
treated with high dosages of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor (imatinib)45. The clinical utility of molecular 
diagnostics to identify therapy‐resistant disease is illustrated by the finding that imatinib resistant CML is 
often due to the development of resistance mutations in the BCR‐ABL1 fusion gene, especially the c. 
c.944C>T (p. T315I) mutation. Identifying the mutation is useful to predict the optimal alternative drug46, 
usually mandating a change to a 3rd generation inhibitor.  
IMPORTANCE OF MOLECULAR TESTING TO THE HEALTHCARE SYSTEM
IMPORTANCE OF MOLECULAR TESTING TO THE HEALTHCARE SYSTEM 
Despite the modest cost of a test, an accurate molecular diagnosis can lead to more efficient and 
appropriate use of health care resources. Most notably, it can stop the repeated office visits and testing 
associated with the search for a diagnosis in a patient with an unclear clinical situation, which can be very 
costly. For example, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia is characterized by recurring nosebleeds which 
have an average age of onset of 12 years. Cerebral and pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (AVM) 
are typically present but undetected at birth, eventually presenting catastrophically. Such AVM are 
detectable and treatable if a timely genetic diagnosis is made. Without a molecular assessment, a 
currently healthy individual with an affected relative is at risk and requires the same monitoring as an 
affected individual with a proven diagnosis47. Evaluation by a specialist is recommended every 5 years for 
affected or at‐risk individuals and includes brain MRI and echocardiogram, with about 20% needing 
follow‐up chest CTs. With an accurate molecular diagnosis unaffected family members will be spared 
costly procedures and radiation exposure.   
Evaluating the impact of molecular diagnosis on the healthcare system in the treatment of cancer 
is difficult by comparison to inherited disease in which a diagnosis is a discrete endpoint. Although the 
cost of molecular diagnostic testing is seemingly high, it is negligible compared to the cost of many 
components of cancer care. Significant expenses arise from molecular diagnostic test results which lead 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
15 
to the use of targeted or precision therapies. The cost of such therapy is typically two to three orders of 
magnitude greater than the cost of molecular diagnostic testing. The clinical validity of many mutation–
targeted drug associations is well established, especially with respect to dramatic short‐term responses 
in individual cases. It is important to show that precision therapy based on molecular diagnostics leads to 
improved outcomes. To date this has required large multi‐year studies typically assessing one target and 
one drug. Paradigmatic examples include the use of Gleevec for CML and EGFR inhibitors for lung and 
colon cancer. The application of MPS panels or exomes and the development of new clinical trial models 
promise to make this a more efficient process in which one test can assess suitability for many therapies. 
In patients who have failed traditional therapy, the finding of an actionable mutation on an NGS panel has 
been associated, in some cases, with dramatic responses48–54. The merit of such off‐label use is evaluated 
at present on a case‐by‐case basis. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
Alternatives to Randomized Controlled Trials 
The randomized controlled trial (RCT) remains the gold standard to evaluate interventions but at 
a practical level not every question of clinical utility can be answered by an RCT. This is especially true for 
rare inherited diseases and for malignancies, common or rare, driven by uncommon combinations of 
mutations. The difficulty of obtaining an adequate patient cohort drives up the cost of an adequately 
powered trial and the accrual of potential benefits to only a small number of patients discourages funding 
from private or public sources. 
Limiting medical care to what has been validated by RCTs is neither practical nor appropriate. 
Some situations do not require an RCT because observational data and historical controls may be 
sufficient to define safe practices where pathophysiological knowledge can support an intervention. This 
is the case with the use of prophylactic thyroidectomy for persons with pathogenic RET mutations because 
family studies have demonstrated previously a high penetrance for these mutations55. Additionally, a 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
16 
recent review indicates that requiring RCTs in conjunction with current evidence‐based medicine 
classification of data quality to assess diagnostic criteria is inadequate, proposing that alternative scales 
are needed to determine the value of pathology results outside of the limited scope of evaluating RCT 
drug trial outcomes for prognostic and predictive data56.  
The RCT is meaningful in some contexts; such as, determining if selecting cancer therapy based on 
molecular test results improves responses. However, a retrospective study is more suitable for 
determining if mutations in a particular gene are correlated with a specific clinical presentation. Given 
these limitations, alternate types of well‐designed prospective and retrospective clinical study designs 
(e.g., case control and other observational studies) and data analysis methods (e.g., comparative 
effectiveness and decision analysis) should be recognized by stakeholders as appropriate and sufficient 
for determining clinical utility for molecular diagnostics (Supplemental Figure 3). Recommendations are 
described in this report, when taken together, describe a new approach to identifying and assessing 
evidence necessary to demonstrate clinical utility (Supplemental Tables 2 & 3). 
 
Modification of ACCE Framework Application to Molecular Diagnostics 
Viewed in the general framework of Analytic validity, Clinical validity, Clinical utility, and Ethical, 
legal 
and 
social 
implications 
(ACCE; 
Centers 
for 
Disease 
Control, 
http://www.cdc.gov/genomics/gtesting/ACCE/index.htm, accessed 6/8/2015), the purpose of molecular 
diagnostics is to provide critical information to the physician, patient and patient’s family which can be 
used to reduce morbidity and mortality, or to assist the patient or family members with reproductive 
decision‐making.  Like the AHRQ guide, ACCE links the utility of the testing with the care provided, using 
as an example newborn screening tests. If the purpose of a test is to reduce the morbidity or mortality of 
rare inborn errors of metabolism, that purpose is not achieved unless the child who tests positive is 
provided with the appropriate intervention and follow‐up care. This model can include additional testing, 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
17 
pre‐ and post‐test counseling, facilities to carry out the testing, and interventions for those who are 
positive. Our position is that the value of molecular diagnostics are not fully captured by the existing ACCE 
framework. We therefore propose extensions of the ACCE model and make additional recommendations 
to incorporate better the value of molecular diagnostic testing into discussions regarding clinical utility 
(Tables 2 and 3).  
 
Recommendations for a New Approach 
The working definition of clinical utility is often narrowed to “actionability,” meaning that 
molecular diagnostics with established clinical validity must also mandate or inform therapy selection 
with an expected improvement in health outcome. This attempts to force all molecular diagnostics into 
a companion diagnostics model for evaluating their clinical utility57.  This restricted definition excludes a 
wide range of purposes for molecular diagnostics and ignores many aspects of the clinical utility of a test 
for the clinician, patient, family, or society (Supplemental Figures 1 & 2). Molecular diagnostic testing 
results are an intermediate outcome, relying on necessary changes in physician and/or patient behavior 
to directly link the test results to the typically analyzed health outcomes, such as overall and disease‐
free survival.  
A new approach to evaluate clinical utility in molecular pathology testing procedures is required; 
traditional models are too constrained or impractical. The existence of evidence for clinical utility that is 
outside of the norm of traditional models is very different from evidence against clinical utility. Emerging 
clinical utility evidence published in highly‐regarded journals, particularly in emerging technologies, 
should not be a barrier to insurance coverage and patient access to testing. In summary, we 
recommend: 
 
Promotion of patient‐centered definitions of clinical utility; 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
18 
 
Utilization of a modified ACCE model incorporating aspects of clinical utility beyond drug 
selection; 
 
Support for multiple modalities of clinical utility evidence generation; 
 
Development of professional organization‐driven practice guidelines; and 
 
Recognition of the critical role of the molecular professional in patient care. 
Our complete recommendations (Table 3) and the framework presented here, based on an expanded 
ACCE model that includes broader parameters for its assessment, recognize the many applications of 
molecular diagnostic testing and the varied impacts on patients, families and society. In doing so, the 
capabilities and benefits of molecular diagnostics can be realized while ensuring appropriate access and 
improved patient outcomes 
CONCLUSION  
The capabilities and applications of molecular diagnostic testing are rapidly evolving. While 
alone, individual inherited genetic diseases may be rare, combined they are common. An estimated 2‐
3% of births have a genetically determined abnormality. By age 25, 5.5% of the population has a medical 
condition with a significant genetic component. This increases to 60% later in life (Genetic Alliance UK, 
http://www.geneticalliance.org.uk/education3.htm, accessed 6/5/2105), which result in more than half 
a million deaths per year (Centers for Disease Control, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/leading‐causes‐
of‐death.htm, acceded 6/5/2015). Regardless of the disease, disorder, or condition – even in the 
absence of a curative therapy – an accurate diagnosis inherently has clinical utility. Molecular pathology 
testing procedures provides powerful tools for insight and analysis into various aspects of clinical 
practice, but to reach the goal of providing precision medicine to every patient, the value of elucidating 
their individual genetic/molecular diagnosis is fundamental to achieving positive downstream patient 
care outcomes. Without the foundation of an accurate molecular diagnosis, the treating clinician may 
have to make decisions based on incomplete or inaccurate information. While this practice was often 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
19 
unavoidable in the pre‐genomic medicine era, the post‐genomic era enables a higher level of diagnostic 
precision. 
The clinical utility of molecular diagnostics is not limited to diagnosis alone. It also applies to 
prognosis and prediction. As the clinical utility of an individual molecular diagnostic test is often context 
dependent, specifying the spectrum of clinical utility that can be addressed by the test is essential. The 
ability of molecular markers to prospectively identify individuals at risk of disease development, 
evaluate risk of disease recurrence, or assess the prospect of disease progression/survival provides 
clinically valuable information utilized by the medical team, patients and their families to provide 
proactive patient‐centered care. This in turn holds societal benefits by focusing medical resources 
appropriately. As the clinical genomic knowledge base further expands, molecular professionals and the 
test results they provide and interpret will increasingly be able to classify a patient’s disease or disorder 
and/or guide management. This is the promise of precision medicine.  
 
DISCLAIMER 
The AMP Clinical Practice Guidelines and Reports are developed to be of assistance to laboratory and 
other health care professionals by providing guidance and recommendations for particular areas of 
practice. The Guidelines or Report should not be considered inclusive of all proper approaches or 
methods, or exclusive of others. The Guidelines or Report cannot guarantee any specific outcome, nor do 
they establish a standard of care. The Guidelines or Report are not intended to dictate the treatment of a 
particular patient. Treatment decisions must be made based on the independent judgment of health care 
providers and each patient’s individual circumstances. AMP makes no warranty, express or implied, 
regarding the Guidelines or Report and specifically excludes any warranties of merchantability and fitness 
for a particular use or purpose. AMP shall not be liable for direct, indirect, special, incidental, or 
consequential damages related to the use of the information contained herein.
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
20 
REFERENCES 
1.  
National Academies Press (US): How Insurers Decide Whether to Pay for Testing. Roundtable Transl. 
Genomic‐Based Res. Heal. Board Heal. Sci. Policy; Inst. Med. Assess. Genomic Seq. Inf. Heal. Care Decis. Mak. 
Work. Summ. 2014 Aug 19, Washingt.  
2.  
Matchar DB: Chapter 1: Introduction to the methods guide for medical test reviews. J Gen Intern Med  2012, 
27.  
3.  
Gahl WA, Markello TC, Toro C, Fajardo KF, Sincan M, Gill F, Carlson‐Donohoe H, Gropman A, Pierson TM, 
Golas G, Wolfe L, Groden C, Godfrey R, Nehrebecky M, Wahl C, Landis DMD, Yang S, Madeo A, Mullikin JC, 
Boerkoel CF, Tifft CJ, Adams D: The National Institutes of Health Undiagnosed Diseases Program: insights 
into rare diseases. Genet. Med. 2012, pp. 51–59.  
4.  
Yang Y, Muzny DM, Reid JG, Bainbridge MN, Willis A, Ward P a, Braxton A, Beuten J, Xia F, Niu Z, Hardison 
M, Person R, Bekheirnia MR, Leduc MS, Kirby A, Pham P, Scull J, Wang M, Ding Y, Plon SE, Lupski JR, Beaudet 
AL, Gibbs R a, Eng CM: Clinical whole‐exome sequencing for the diagnosis of mendelian disorders. N Engl J 
Med 2013, 369:1502–1511.  
5.  
Green RC, Berg JS, Grody WW, Kalia SS, Korf BR, Martin CL, McGuire AL, Nussbaum RL, O’Daniel JM, Ormond 
KE, Rehm HL, Watson MS, Williams MS, Biesecker LG: ACMG recommendations for reporting of incidental 
findings in clinical exome and genome sequencing. Genet Med 2013, 15:565–574.  
6.  
Yang Y, DM M, Xia F, Al E: Molecular findings among patients referred for clinical whole‐exome sequencing. 
JAMA  2014, 312:1870–1879.  
7.  
Xia F, Bainbridge MN, Tan TY, Wangler MF, Scheuerle AE, Zackai EH, Harr MH, Sutton VR, Nalam RL, Zhu W, 
Nash M, Ryan MM, Yaplito‐Lee J, Hunter JV, Deardorff MA, Penney SJ, Beaudet AL, Plon SE, Boerwinkle EA, 
Lupski JR, Eng CM, Muzny DM, Yang Y, Gibbs RA: De Novo Truncating Mutations in AHDC1 in Individuals with 
Syndromic Expressive Language Delay, Hypotonia, and Sleep Apnea. Am J Hum Genet, Elsevier, 2015, 
94:784–789.  
8.  
Wang K, Kim C, Bradfield J, Guo Y, Toskala E, Otieno FG, Hou C, Thomas K, Cardinale C, Lyon GJ, Golhar R, 
Hakonarson H: Whole‐genome DNA/RNA sequencing identifies truncating mutations in RBCK1 in a novel 
Mendelian disease with neuromuscular and cardiac involvement. Genome Med 2013 [cited 2015 May 12], 
5:67. 
9.  
Rope AF, Wang K, Evjenth R, Xing J, Johnston JJ, Swensen JJ, Johnson WE, Moore B, Huff CD, Bird LM, Carey 
JC, Opitz JM, Stevens CA, Jiang T, Schank C, Fain HD, Robison R, Dalley B, Chin S, South ST, Pysher TJ, Jorde 
LB, Hakonarson H, Lillehaug JR, Biesecker LG, Yandell M, Arnesen T, Lyon GJ: Using VAAST to Identify an X‐
Linked Disorder Resulting in Lethality in Male Infants Due to N‐Terminal Acetyltransferase Deficiency. Am J 
Hum Genet, Elsevier, 2015, 89:28–43.  
10.  
Maxmen A: Exome Sequencing Deciphers Rare Diseases. Cell, Elsevier, 2015, 144:635–637.  
11.  
Ng SB, Buckingham KJ, Lee C, Bigham AW, Tabor HK, Dent KM, Huff CD, Shannon PT, Jabs EW, Nickerson DA, 
Shendure J, Bamshad MJ: Exome sequencing identifies the cause of a mendelian disorder. Nat Genet 2010, 
42:30–35.  
12.  
Pagon RA: GeneTests: an online genetic information resource for health care providers. J Med Libr Assoc 
2006 [cited 2014 Oct 1], 94:343–348.  
13.  
Teer JK, Mullikin JC: Exome sequencing: The sweet spot before whole genomes. Hum Mol Genet 2010, 19.  
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
21 
14.  
Raess, Philip W, Bagg A: The Role of Molecular Pathology in the Diagnosis of Cutaneous Lymphomas. 
Patholog Res Int 2012, 2012:10.  
15.  
Van Dongen JJM, Langerak AW, Bruggemann M, Evans PAS, Hummel M, Lavender FL, Delabesse E, Davi F, 
Schuuring E, Garcia‐Sanz R, van Krieken JHJM, Droese J, Gonzalez D, Bastard C, White HE, Spaargaren M, 
Gonzalez M, Parreira A, Smith JL, Morgan GJ, Kneba M, Macintyre EA: Design and standardization of PCR 
primers and protocols for detection of clonal immunoglobulin and T‐cell receptor gene recombinations in 
suspect lymphoproliferations: Report of the BIOMED‐2 Concerted Action BMH4‐CT98‐3936. Leukemia, 
Nature Publishing Group, 17:2257–2317.  
16.  
Singhi AD, Nikiforova MN, Fasanella KE, McGrath KM, Pai RK, Ohori NP, Bartholow TL, Brand RE, Chennat JS, 
Lu X, Papachristou GI, Slivka A, Zeh HJ, Zureikat AH, Lee KK, Tsung A, Mantha GS, Khalid A: Preoperative GNAS 
and KRAS Testing in the Diagnosis of Pancreatic Mucinous Cysts. Clin Cancer Res  2014, 20 :4381–4389.  
17.  
Nikiforov YE, Yip L, Nikiforova MN: New Strategies in Diagnosing Cancer in Thyroid Nodules: Impact of 
Molecular Markers. Clin Cancer Res  2013, 19 :2283–2288.  
18.  
Alexander EK, Kennedy GC, Baloch ZW, Cibas ES, Chudova D, Diggans J, Friedman L, Kloos RT, LiVolsi VA, 
Mandel SJ, Raab SS, Rosai J, Steward DL, Walsh PS, Wilde JI, Zeiger MA, Lanman RB, Haugen BR: Preoperative 
Diagnosis of Benign Thyroid Nodules with Indeterminate Cytology. N Engl J Med, Massachusetts Medical 
Society, 2012, 367:705–715.  
19.  
Nikiforov YE, Carty SE, Chiosea SI, Coyne C, Duvvuri U, Ferris RL, Gooding WE, Hodak SP, LeBeau SO, Ohori 
NP, Seethala RR, Tublin ME, Yip L, Nikiforova MN: Highly accurate diagnosis of cancer in thyroid nodules with 
follicular neoplasm/suspicious for a follicular neoplasm cytology by ThyroSeq v2 next‐generation sequencing 
assay. Cancer 2014, 120:3627–3634.  
20.  
Tefferi A, Vardiman JW: Classification and diagnosis of myeloproliferative neoplasms: the 2008 World Health 
Organization criteria and point‐of‐care diagnostic algorithms. Leuk  Off J Leuk Soc Am Leuk Res Fund, UK 
2008, 22:14–22.  
21.  
An JH, Song K‐H, Kim SK, Park KS, Yoo YB, Yang J‐H, Hwang TS, Kim D‐L: RAS mutations in indeterminate 
thyroid nodules are predictive of the follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 
2015, 82:760–766.  
22.  
Beaudenon‐Huibregtse, Sylvie, Alexander, Erik K., Guttler, Richard B., Hershman, Jerome M., Babu, Varsha, 
Blevins, Thomas C., Moore, Paul, Andruss, Bernard, Labourier E: Centralized Molecular Testing for Oncogenic 
Gene Mutations Complements the Local Cytopathologic Diagnosis of Thyroid Nodules. Thyroid 2014, 
24:1479–1487.  
23.  
Haddad, Robert I et al: NCCN Clinical Practice Guidleines in Oncology: Thyroid Carcinoma, Version 1. 2015.  
24.  
Kung, JS, Lopez, OA, McCoy, EE, Reicher, S, Eysselein V: Fluid genetic analyses predict the biological behavior 
of pancreatic cysts: three‐year experience. J Pancreas 2014, 15:427–432.  
25.  
Toll, AD, Kowalski, T, Loren, D, Bibbo M: The added value of molecular testing in small pancreatic cysts. J 
Pancreas 2010, 11:582–586.  
26.  
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Pileri SA, Stein H, Thiele J, Vardiman JW: WHO Classification of 
Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. World Heal. Organ. Calssification Tumours Haematop. 
Lymphoid Tissue. 2008, .  
27.  
Lindeman NI, Cagle PT, Beasley MB, Chitale DA, Dacic S, Giaccone G, Jenkins RB, Kwiatkowski DJ, Saldivar J‐
S, Squire J, Thunnissen E, Ladanyi M, College of American Pathologists International Association for the Study 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
22 
of Lung Cancer and Association for Molecular Pathology: Molecular testing guideline for selection of lung 
cancer patients for EGFR and ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors. J Mol Diagn  2013, 15:415–453.  
28.  
Xing M, Alzahrani AS, Carson KA, Shong YK, Kim TY, Viola D, Elisei R, Bendlová B, Yip L, Mian C: Association 
between BRAF V600E mutation and recurrence of papillary thyroid cancer. J Clin Oncol, American Society of 
Clinical Oncology, 2014, :JCO – 2014.  
29.  
Jang S, Atkins M: Which drug, and when, for patients with BRAF‐mutant melanoma? Lancet Oncol 2013, 
14:e60–e69.  
30.  
Sullivan R, Flaherty K: Resistance to BRAF‐targeted therapy in melanoma. Eur J Cancer 2013, 49:1297–1304.  
31.  
Cheng DT, Mitchell T, Zehir A, Shah RH, Benayed R, Syed A, Chandramohan R, Liu ZY, Won HH, Scott SN, 
Brannon AR, O’Reilly C, Sadowska J, Casanova J, Yannes A, Hechtman J, Yao J, Song W, Ross D, Oultache A, 
Dogan S, Borsu L, Hameed M, Nafa K, Arcila ME, Ladanyi M, Berger MF: MSK‐IMPACT: A Hybridization 
Capture‐Based Next‐Generation Sequencing Clinical Assay for Solid Tumor Molecular Oncology. J Mol Diagn, 
Elsevier, 2015, 17:251–264.  
32.  
Hadd AG, Houghton J, Choudhary A, Sah S, Chen L, Marko AC, Sanford T, Buddavarapu K, Krosting J, Garmire 
L, Wylie D, Shinde R, Beaudenon S, Alexander EK, Mambo E, Adai AT, Latham GJ: Targeted, high‐depth, next‐
generation sequencing of cancer genes in formalin‐fixed, paraffin‐embedded and fine‐needle aspiration 
tumor specimens. J Mol Diagn, Elsevier, 2013, 15:234–247.  
33.  
Frampton GM, Fichtenholtz A, Otto GA, Wang K, Downing SR, He J, Schnall‐Levin M, White J, Sanford EM, An 
P, Sun J, Juhn F, Brennan K, Iwanik K, Maillet A, Buell J, White E, Zhao M, Balasubramanian S, Terzic S, Richards 
T, Banning V, Garcia L, Mahoney K, Zwirko Z, Donahue A, Beltran H, Mosquera JM, Rubin MA, Dogan S, 
Hedvat C V, Berger MF, Pusztai L, Lechner M, Boshoff C, Jarosz M, Vietz C, Parker A, Miller VA, Ross JS, Curran 
J, Cronin MT, Stephens PJ, Lipson D, Yelensky R: Development and validation of a clinical cancer genomic 
profiling test based on massively parallel DNA sequencing. Nat Biotechnol, Nature Publishing Group, a 
division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. All Rights Reserved., 2013, 31:1023–1031.  
34.  
Scheuner MT, Rotter JI: Quantifying the health benefits of genetic tests: A clinical perspective. Genet Med, 
The American College of Medical Genetics, 2006, 8:141–142.  
35.  
McClatchey AI: Neurofibromatosis. Annu Rev Pathol 2007, 2:191–216.  
36.  
DeZern AE, Sung A, Kim S, Smith BD, Karp JE, Gore SD, Jones RJ, Fuchs E, Luznik L, McDevitt M, Levis M: Role 
of Allogeneic Transplantation for FLT3/ITD Acute Myeloid Leukemia: Outcomes from 133 Consecutive Newly 
Diagnosed Patients from a Single Institution. Biol Blood Marrow Transpl, Elsevier, 2015, 17:1404–1409.  
37.  
Branford, S, Yeung, DT, Parker, WT, Roberts, ND, Purins, L, Braley, JA, Altamura, HK, Yeoman, AL, Georgievski, 
J, Jamison, BA, Phillis, S, Donaldson, Z, Leong, M, Fletcher, L, Seymour, JF, Grigg, AP, Ross, DM, Hughes T: 
Prognosis for patients with CML and >10% BCR‐ABL1 after 3 months of imatinib depends on the rate of BCR‐
ABL1 decline. Blood 2014, 124:511–518.  
38.  
Mai PL, Loud JT, Greene MH: A major step forward for BRCA1/2‐related cancer risk management. J Clin Oncol 
2014, 32:1531–1533.  
39.  
Domchek SM, Friebel TM, Singer CF, Evans DG, Lynch HT, Isaacs C, Garber JE, Neuhausen SL, Matloff E, Eeles 
R, Pichert G, Van t’veer L, Tung N, Weitzel JN, Couch FJ, Rubinstein WS, Ganz PA, Daly MB, Olopade OI, 
Tomlinson G, Schildkraut J, Blum JL, Rebbeck TR: Association of risk‐reducing surgery in BRCA1 or BRCA2 
mutation carriers with cancer risk and mortality. JAMA 2010, 304:967–975.  
40.  
Wang Y, Jatkoe T, Zhang Y, Mutch MG, Talantov D, Jiang J, McLeod HL, Atkins D: Gene expression profiles 
and molecular markers to predict recurrence of Dukes’ B colon cancer. J Clin Oncol 2004, 22:1564–1571.  
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
23 
41.  
Eschrich S, Yang I, Bloom G, Kwong KY, Boulware D, Cantor A, Coppola D, Kruhøffer M, Aaltonen L, Orntoft 
TF, Quackenbush J, Yeatman TJ: Molecular staging for survival prediction of colorectal cancer patients. J Clin 
Oncol 2005, 23:3526–3535.  
42.  
Whirl‐Carrillo M, McDonagh EM, Hebert JM, Gong L, Sangkuhl K, Thorn CF, Altman RB, Klein TE: 
Pharmacogenomics knowledge for personalized medicine. Clin Pharmacol Ther  2012 [cited 2015 Oct 7], 
92:414–417.  
43.  
Jonas DE, Wilt TJ, Taylor BC, Wilkins TM, Matchar DB: Chapter 11: Challenges in and principles for conducting 
systematic reviews of genetic tests used as predictive indicators. J. Gen. Intern. Med. 2012, .  
44.  
Gangadhar T, Schilsky RL: Molecular markers to individualize adjuvant therapy for colon cancer. Nat Rev Clin 
Oncol 2010, 7:318–325.  
45.  
Debiec‐Rychter M, Sciot R, Le Cesne A, Schlemmer M, Hohenberger P, van Oosterom AT, Blay JY, Leyvraz S, 
Stul M, Casali PG, Zalcberg J, Verweij J, Van Glabbeke M, Hagemeijer A, Judson I: KIT mutations and dose 
selection for imatinib in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumours. Eur J Cancer 2006, 
42:1093–1103.  
46.  
Soverini, S, Hochhaus, A, Nicolini, FE, Gruber, F, Lange, T, Saglio, G, Pane, F, Müller, MC, Ernst, T, Rosti, G, 
Porkka, K, Baccarani, M, Cross, NC, Martinelli G: BCR‐ABL kinase domain mutation analysis in chronic myeloid 
leukemia patients treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors: recommendations from an expert panel on behalf 
of European LeukemiaNet. Blood 2011, 118:1208–1215.  
47.  
Faughnan ME, Palda VA, Garcia‐Tsao G, Geisthoff UW, McDonald J, Proctor DD, Spears J, Brown DH, Buscarini 
E, Chesnutt MS, Cottin V, Ganguly A, Gossage JR, Guttmacher AE, Hyland RH, Kennedy SJ, Korzenik J, Mager 
JJ, Ozanne AP, Piccirillo JF, Picus D, Plauchu H, Porteous MEM, Pyeritz RE, Ross DA, Sabba C, Swanson K, Terry 
P, Wallace MC, Westermann CJJ, White RI, Young LH, Zarrabeitia R: International guidelines for the diagnosis 
and management of hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia. J Med Genet 2011, 48:73–87.  
48.  
Welch JS, Westervelt P, Ding L, Larson DE, Klco JM, Kulkarni S, Wallis J, Chen K, Payton JE, Fulton RS, Veizer 
J, Schmidt H, Vickery TL, Heath S, Watson MA, Tomasson MH, Link DC, Graubert TA, DiPersio JF, Mardis ER, 
Ley TJ, Wilson RK: Use of whole genome sequencing to diagnose a cryptic fusion oncogene. JAMA 2011, 
305:1577–1584.  
49.  
Garralda E, Paz K, López‐Casas PP, Jones S, Katz A, Kann LM, López‐Ríos F, Sarno F, Al‐Shahrour F, Vasquez D, 
Bruckheimer E, Angiuoli S V, Calles A, Diaz LA, Velculescu VE, Valencia A, Sidransky D, Hidalgo M: Integrated 
Next Generation Sequencing and Avatar Mouse Models for Personalized Cancer Treatment. Clin Cancer Res 
2014, 20(9):2476‐84.  
50.  
Jones SJ, Laskin J, Li YY, Griffith OL, An J, Bilenky M, Butterfield YS, Cezard T, Chuah E, Corbett R, Fejes AP, 
Griffith M, Yee J, Martin M, Mayo M, Melnyk N, Morin RD, Pugh TJ, Severson T, Shah SP, Sutcliffe M, Tam A, 
Terry J, Thiessen N, Thomson T, Varhol R, Zeng T, Zhao Y, Moore RA, Huntsman DG, Birol I, Hirst M, Holt RA, 
Marra MA: Evolution of an adenocarcinoma in response to selection by targeted kinase inhibitors. Genome 
Biol  2010, 11:R82.  
51.  
Palma NA, Ali SM, O’Connor J, Dutta D, Wang K, Soman S, Palmer GA, Morosini D, Ross JS, Lipson D, Stephens 
PJ, Patel M, Miller VA, Koutrelakos N: Durable Response to Crizotinib in a MET‐Amplified, KRAS‐Mutated 
Carcinoma of Unknown Primary. Case Rep Oncol, Allschwilerstrasse 10, P.O. Box ∙ Postfach ∙ Case postale, 
CH–4009, Basel, Switzerland ∙ Schweiz ∙ Suisse, Phone: +41 61 306 11 11, Fax: +41 61 306 12 34, 
karger@karger.ch, S. Karger AG, 2014, 7:503–508. 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
24 
52.  
Ali SM, Alpaugh RK, Buell JK, Stephens PJ, Yu JQ (Michael), Wu H, Hiemstra CN, Miller VA, Lipson D, Palmer 
GA, Ross JS, Cristofanilli M: Antitumor Response of an ERBB2 Amplified Inflammatory Breast Carcinoma With 
EGFR Mutation to the EGFR‐TKI Erlotinib. Clin Breast Cancer, Elsevier, 2015, 14:e14–e16.  
53.  
Subbiah V, Westin SN, Wang K, Araujo D, Wang W‐L, Miller VA, Ross JS, Stephens PJ, Palmer GA, Ali SM: 
Targeted therapy by combined inhibition of the RAF and mTOR kinases in malignant spindle cell neoplasm 
harboring the KIAA1549‐BRAF fusion protein. J Hematol Oncol, BioMed Central, 2014, 7:8.  
54.  
Peled N, Palmer G, Hirsch FR, Wynes MW, Ilouze M, Varella‐Garcia M, Soussan‐Gutman L, Otto GA, Stephens 
PJ, Ross JS, Cronin MT, Lipson D, Miller VA: Next Generation Sequencing Identifies and 
Immunohistochemistry Confirms a Novel Crizotinib Sensitive ALK Rearrangement in a Patient with 
Metastatic Non‐small Cell Lung Cancer. J Thorac Oncol  2012, 7:e14–e16.  
55.  
Skinner MA, Moley JA, Dilley WG, Owzar K, Debenedetti MK, Wells SA: Prophylactic thyroidectomy in 
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. N. Engl. J. Med. 2005.  
56.  
Marchevsky AM, Wick MR: Evidence‐Based Pathology: Systematic Literature Reviews as the Basis for 
Guidelines and Best Practices. Arch Pathol Lab Med, College of American Pathologists, 2014, 139:394–399.  
57.  
Deverka P, Messner D, Dutta T: Evaluation of Clinical Validity and Clinical Utility of Actionable Molecular 
Diagnostic 
Tests 
in 
Adult 
Oncology. 
Center 
for 
Medical 
Technology 
Policy, 
2013, 
http://www.cmtpnet.org/docs/resources/MDX_EGD.pdf.  
58.  
Baskovich B, Hiraki S, Upadhyay K, Meyer P, Carmi S, Barzilai N, Darvasi A, Ozelius L, Peter I, Cho JH, Atzmon 
G, Clark L, Yu J, Lencz T, Pe’er I, Ostrer H, Oddoux C: Expanded genetic screening panel for the Ashkenazi 
Jewish population. Genet Med, American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, 2015.  
59.  
Shrager J, Tenenbaum JM: Rapid learning for precision oncology. Nat Rev Clin Oncol, Nature Publishing 
Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. All Rights Reserved., 2014, 11:109–118.  
60.  
Hamosh A, Scott AF, Amberger JS, Bocchini CA, McKusick VA: Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM), 
a knowledgebase of human genes and genetic disorders. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33.  
61.  
De La Chapelle A: The incidence of Lynch syndrome. Fam Cancer 2005, 4:233–237.  
62.  
Zhang L, Mmagu O, Liu L, Li D, Fan Y, Baranchuk A, Kowey PR: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: Can the 
noninvasive diagnostic testing identify high risk patients? World J Cardiol 2014, 6:764–770. dertype=abstract 
63.  
Schwartz PJ, Stramba‐Badiale M, Crotti L, Pedrazzini M, Besana A, Bosi G, Gabbarini F, Goulene K, Insolia R, 
Mannarino S, Mosca F, Nespoli L, Rimini A, Rosati E, Salice P, Spazzolini C: Prevalence of the congenital long‐
qt syndrome. Circulation 2009, 120:1761–1767.  
64.  
Amado RG, Wolf M, Peeters M, Van Cutsem E, Siena S, Freeman DJ, Juan T, Sikorski R, Suggs S, Radinsky R, 
Patterson SD, Chang DD: Wild‐type KRAS is required for panitumumab efficacy in patients with metastatic 
colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol  2008, 26:1626–1634.  
65.  
Chapman PB, Hauschild A, Robert C, Haanen JB, Ascierto P, Larkin J, Dummer R, Garbe C, Testori A, Maio M, 
Hogg D, Lorigan P, Lebbe C, Jouary T, Schadendorf D, Ribas A, O’Day SJ, Sosman J a, Kirkwood JM, Eggermont 
AMM, Dreno B, Nolop K, Li J, Nelson B, Hou J, Lee RJ, Flaherty KT, McArthur G a: Improved survival with 
vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation. N Engl J Med  2011, 364:2507–2516.  
66.  
Maevis V, Mey U, Schmidt‐Wolf G, Schmidt‐Wolf IGH: Hairy cell leukemia: short review, today/’s 
recommendations and outlook. Blood Cancer J, Macmillan Publishers Limited, 2014, 4:e184.  
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
25 
67.  
Srivastava A, Brewer AK, Mauser‐Bunschoten EP, Key NS, Kitchen S, Llinas A, Ludlam CA, Mahlangu JN, 
Mulder K, Poon MC, Street A, Hemophilia TGWGTWFO: Guidelines for the management of hemophilia. 
Haemophilia 2013, 19:e1–e47.  
68.  
Grody WW, Cutting GR, Klinger KW, Richards CS, Watson MS, Desnick RJ: Laboratory standards and 
guidelines for population‐based cystic fibrosis carrier screening. Genet Med, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 
Inc., 2001, 3:149–154.  
69.  
O’Reilly R, Elphick HE: Development, clinical utility, and place of ivacaftor in the treatment of cystic fibrosis. 
Drug Des. Devel. Ther. 2013, pp. 929–937.  
70.  
Deeks ED: Ivacaftor: a review of its use in patients with cystic fibrosis. Drugs  2013, 73:1595–1604.  
71.  
Castellani C, Picci L, Tamanini A, Girardi P, Rizzotti P, Assael BM: Association between carrier screening and 
incidence of cystic fibrosis. JAMA 2009, 302:2573–2579.  
72.  
Aspinall M, Au SM, Billings P, Dreyfuss R, Evans JP, Ferreira‐Gonzalez A, FitzGerald KT, Fomous C, Licinio J, 
Burns McGrath B, Miller PS, Telfair J, Teutsch S, Williams MS, Wise P: US system of oversight for genetic 
testing: a report from the Secretary’s Advisory Committee on Genetics, Health and Society. Per. Med. 2008, 
pp. 521–528.  
73.  
Carr S, Goodwin SM: Secretary’s advisory committee on genetic testing: its emerging role in public policy 
deliberation on genetic tests. Natl Forum 1999, 79:26–30.  
74.  
Segal JB: Chapter 3: Choosing the important outcomes for a systematic review of a medical test. J Gen Intern 
Med  2012, 27.  
 
 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
26 
Table 1: Definitions and Considerations 
Term 
Definition 
Considerations 
Molecular pathology 
testing 
procedures 
(molecular diagnostic) 
Any 
clinical 
laboratory 
testing 
performed to find alterations in 
nucleic 
acids 
in 
the 
germline 
(inherited disease) or in somatic 
tissues (cancer).  
Other applications of molecular diagnostics, such as to infectious disease or 
HLA typing, are beyond the scope of this document. 
Clinical Validity 
Ability of a test to correctly classify a 
patient with respect to a diagnostic, 
prognostic or predictive category. 
For example, demonstrating that the 
results of a test method for 
identifying microsatellite instability 
(MSI) in colon cancer correlates with 
Lynch 
syndrome, 
or 
that 
the 
presence of pathogenic mutations in 
a 
specific 
gene 
are 
strongly 
associated with the presence of 
developmental delay. 
 
The clinical validity for a test, even with respect to a particular application, 
is not a fixed value. The prevalence of the condition of interest in the 
population tested affects the positive predictive value (PPV) and negative 
predictive value (NPV). The significance of a positive result in a patient with 
a high‐risk history will be different from that for a positive result obtained 
from testing (screening) unselected populations. When a genetic variant 
affects more than one clinical outcome, the clinical end‐point studied needs 
to be specified. The clinical validity may be high for one endpoint and low 
for another. 
Clinical Utility  
Improved patient management is 
determined based on the results of 
the test in question compared to 
management based on results of a 
different test or no test at all. It 
includes a wide range of diagnostic, 
prognostic 
and 
predictive 
applications. The test result is 
necessary for the care of the patient 
or a family member, who could be 
either a future or as yet undiagnosed 
patient 
and 
thus 
is 
essential 
information for the health care 
professional, 
the 
patient, 
the 
patient’s family, and society. 
  
The clinical utility of molecular diagnostic testing is context dependent. A 
test can show excellent clinical validity but no clinical utility, depending on 
the context. Patient outcomes measurements are insufficient because they 
are greatly impacted by clinical decisions which occur downstream from the 
molecular diagnostic test result. For clinical utility to be accurately assessed, 
test results must be correctly interpreted and acted upon. For example, one 
way to demonstrate the clinical utility of microinstability (MSI) testing would 
be to show that a specific change in the standard treatment regimen led to 
better survival for patients with MSI positive tumors than for patients with 
MSI negative tumors. A different endpoint may show that testing of a 
proband with an inherited mutation in the MSI pathway led to identification 
of relatives who are carriers of the mutation and that the identified carriers 
fared better than did unscreened relatives. An accurate diagnosis has 
inherent clinical utility and is foundational to directing patient care to 
improve clinical outcomes.  
 
Cost effectiveness 
Impact of a medical test or 
treatment on the cost of care and/or 
on patient welfare. The latter is 
often measured in Quality Adjusted 
Life Years (QALY). 
 
Although numerous methods have been proposed for quantifying quality of 
life, or even the cost of treatment, this information is difficult to reliably 
estimate. Cost‐effectiveness analysis (CEA) is not a prerequisite for 
determining clinical utility, although it often supports evidence for clinical 
utility when such numbers are available. This type of analysis, although 
important, is beyond the scope of the present document. 
 
 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
27 
Table 2: Limitations, Concerns, and Suggested Modifications to the ACCE Model List of Targeted 
Questions Aimed at a Comprehensive Review of Genetic Testing Clinical Utility (Centers for Disease 
Control, http://www.cdc.gov/genomics/gtesting/ACCE/acce_proj.htm, accessed 6/4/2015)  
Component 
Targeted 
Questions 
Limitations / Concerns
Suggested Expansion of ACCE Model
Intervention 
 
What 
is 
the 
natural history of 
the disorder? 
Knowledge of underlying genetic 
variant(s) impact on the natural 
history of many disorders is still 
evolving.  
Recognize limitations of understanding underlying genetic 
component impacts on a disorder's natural history, which 
introduces challenges when defining the clinical utility of 
molecular diagnostic testing. Remove “Intervention” as 
the component. 
Intervention 
What is the impact 
of a positive (or 
negative) test on 
patient care? 
Molecular diagnostic test utilization 
within the oncology and inherited 
diseases 
categories 
can 
be 
diagnostic, 
prognostic, 
and/or 
predictive. Each of these can be 
useful to different stakeholders: 
clinician, patient, family, society, 
regulators, and payors. 
Define molecular diagnostic test setting and purpose 
broadly. 
 
Include clinical utility purpose to achieve a balance of 
outcomes where the expected health benefits exceed the 
expected negative consequences of testing for the person 
tested. 
 
Intervention 
If applicable, are 
diagnostic 
tests 
available?  
Interventions 
are 
currently 
narrowly defined as actionability. 
Many molecular diagnostics will be 
used for multiple purposes, e.g. to 
guide 
treatment 
and 
impact 
morbidity of the genetic condition 
and to provide information that will 
influence overall management.  
Recognize all therapeutic options are interventions, even 
when they are not curative.  
 
Recognize clinical utility evaluation for molecular 
diagnostics should be appropriate for the different 
purposes, in different populations and for the symptoms 
and presentation being assessed. 
 
Define monitoring and patient management as an 
appropriate intervention. 
Intervention 
Effectiveness 
Is 
there 
an 
effective remedy, 
acceptable action, 
or 
other 
measurable 
benefit? 
Definition of effectiveness often 
limited to selection of a therapeutic 
drug (e.g. companion diagnostics 
model) which is not appropriately 
applied to all types of molecular 
diagnostic tests. 
Define effectiveness as the ability of the molecular 
diagnostic test and any associated services to bring out 
the intended purpose (often, but not invariably, 
improvements in health) when used under the most 
favorable circumstances (efficacy) and under routine 
conditions (effectiveness). 
 
Recognize clinician utility: diagnostic, therapeutic, 
prognostic, and predictive management (even in absence 
of therapy). 
 
Recognize patient utility: disease management, decision‐
making, family planning, pregnancy management, long‐
term care decisions. 
 
Recognize family utility: impact of molecular diagnostic on 
family members (presymptomatic or predisposition 
testing), educational access to caregivers/supportive care. 
 
Recognize societal utility: cost of testing and missed 
diagnosis, economic measures, and healthcare resource 
management. 
Change 
component 
from 
“Intervention” 
to 
“Effectiveness” 
Quality Assurance 
What 
quality 
assurance 
measures are in 
place? 
Uncertain many potential reviewers 
have adequate knowledge base to 
evaluate the quality of complex 
molecular diagnostic testing. 
Recognize that molecular diagnostic testing is regulated 
by CLIA & subject to proficiency testing and other QA 
measures as are other clinical laboratory tests with 
established clinical utility. 
 
Support a modernization of CLIA to better incorporate 
molecular diagnostic testing. 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
28 
Pilot Trials 
Evidence 
What 
are 
the 
results 
of 
pilot 
trials? 
Pilot trials aren't viewed as being 
foundational 
or 
adequate 
for 
reimbursement; RCTs will not exist 
for many disorders. 
Recognize alternates to RCT as appropriate for 
establishing clinical utility evidence. Change component 
from “Pilot Trials” to “Evidence” 
 
What 
are 
the 
financial 
costs 
associated 
with 
testing? What are 
the 
economic 
benefits 
associated 
with 
actions 
resulting 
from testing? 
Inadequate 
data 
available 
comparing cost of appropriate 
molecular diagnostic tests to costs 
of diagnostic odyssey, unnecessary 
care, missed diagnosis, healthcare 
& education systems. 
Recognize molecular diagnostic tests can be affordable 
alternative to costs of diagnostic odyssey, inappropriate / 
unnecessary utilization of healthcare & educational 
systems. 
 
Identify gaps in appropriate economic outcomes data. 
Facilities 
What facilities / 
personnel 
are 
available or easily 
put in place? 
Molecular diagnostic testing is 
widely available but challenges in 
coverage 
and 
payment 
for 
professional services remain. 
Recognize gaps in coding, coverage and reimbursement 
for both molecular diagnostic testing and associated 
professional medical services. 
Education 
What educational 
materials have 
been developed 
and validated and 
which of these are 
available? 
Treating 
physicians 
often 
lack 
information necessary to choose 
the appropriate test, particularly 
those in specialties other than 
those who have utilized molecular 
testing for years. 
Encourage and facilitate collaborative education among 
relevant professional societies. 
 
Are 
there 
informed consent 
requirements? 
Informed 
consent 
does 
not 
determine 
clinical 
utility 
of 
molecular diagnostic test. 
Apply informed consent requirements in small number of 
inherited conditions where it is appropriately utilized. 
 
What 
guidelines 
have 
been 
developed 
for 
evaluating 
program 
performance? 
Guidelines 
for 
evaluating 
test 
analytical & clinical validity are 
available but guidelines for clinical 
utility have not reached consensus. 
Clinical practice guidelines are 
available for some conditions, but 
are 
not 
available 
for 
all 
disorders/test uses; no systematic 
reasoning 
for 
guideline 
topic 
selection; 
onerous 
and 
limits 
patient access to testing; guidelines 
don't keep pace with the evidence 
base. 
Do not limit evaluation of clinical utility (and subsequent 
lack of reimbursement) to rely on the existence of clinical 
practice guidelines, as this will result in decreased test 
availability for patients and negative impacts on patient 
care.  
 
Recognize that many disorders will not have clinical 
practice guidelines available.  
 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
29 
Table 3: Recommendations  
The following recommendations are made to clinicians, professional organizations and other stakeholders (to include but not limited to 
federal and state agencies, insurers, managed care organizations, patient advocacy groups, and others involved in health care policy 
development): 
PROMOTE PATIENT‐CENTERED DEFINITIONS OF CLINICAL UTILITY 
 
Ultimate arbiter of clinical utility is the patient. 
 
Insurer‐driven definitions of clinical utility do not necessarily incorporate patient‐centered outcome measures such as ethical, 
legal, and social implications, quality of life improvements, functional status, and patient satisfaction. 
 
Recognize the essential role of an accurate diagnosis in providing patient‐centered care. 
 
Recognize the patient’s right to be involved in all aspects of their health care and to make fully informed decisions. 
 
Current clinical utility determination models in genetic testing have limitations and harms: 
o 
A laboratory test result in isolation is only a portion of the entire professional medical service and needs to be viewed 
in that context. Meaningful use of a test (the indication for testing and interpretation of that test in the context of the 
individual patient’s management) will impact a test’s clinical utility. 
o 
Defining clinical outcomes depends upon a specific disease being diagnosed and/or managed using molecular methods. 
o 
There are identifiable patient harms to limiting access to genetic testing based upon an unrealistic evidentiary level for 
clinical utility. Insufficient evidence for lack of clinical utility evidence, particularly in emerging technologies, should not 
be a barrier to reimbursement and patient access to testing. A lack of evidence for clinical utility is not the same as 
evidence for a lack of clinical utility.
PROPOSE UTILIZING A MODIFIED ACCE MODEL THAT INCORPORATES THE ASPECTS OF CLINICAL UTILITY BEYOND DRUG 
SELECTION  
 
Recognize that an accurate molecular diagnosis has inherent clinical utility. 
 
Establish that predictive and prognostic molecular diagnostic testing can also demonstrate clinical utility when evaluated in 
context. 
 
Describe three purposes for tests: to reduce morbidity or mortality, to provide information salient to the care of the patient or 
family members, and/or to assist the patient or family members with reproductive decision‐making. 
 
Do not restrict the definition of clinical utility to selection of a pharmacological intervention. 
 
See Table 2 for suggested modifications to the list of targeted questions aimed at clinical utility.
SUPPORT MULTIPLE MODALITIES FOR ESTABLISHING EVIDENCE TO EVALUATE CLINICAL UTILITY 
 
Support the development of clinical grade high‐quality databases of outcomes together with the related and genetic information 
for oncology and inherited disease. 
 
Support retrospective data evaluation from n‐of‐one trials and compassionate use/off‐label use exception uses of approved 
therapies. 
 
Support alternative clinical trial modalities such as bucket and basket trial designs in oncology with molecular marker identification 
and/or molecular diagnosis driven selection of treatment arms. 
 
Development of a national database of anecdotal and small case series that involve n‐of‐one correlations of response to treatment 
information correlated with genetic information in oncology. This information can be used to develop better RCT to answer 
pressing questions in interpretation of molecular diagnostic testing, and help in decision making in the absence of sufficient RCT 
data. 
 
National database development for rare diseases correlated with genetic information in inherited diseases. As more patients with 
inherited disorders are correctly classified, we will learn a great deal about the knowledge of the disorders, and their natural 
histories and genotype phenotype correlations, which will then be useful in the interpretation of genetic data, will be greatly 
extended, and, in some cases, open avenues for new therapies, especially now that several new methods for editing the genome 
have been developed. 
SUPPORT THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATION‐DRIVEN PRACTICE GUIDELINES 
 
Professional organization‐driven guidelines should be used as part of the chain of evidence to develop clinical utility. 
 
Encourage efforts to develop collaborative interdisciplinary clinical practice guidelines.  
 
Support professional organization‐driven development of peer‐to‐peer clinical laboratory practice guidelines to guide best 
practices, particularly in areas of new/emerging technologies, and to assist clinicians in and stakeholder evaluation of molecular 
diagnostics and interpretation of results. 
 
Support professional organization‐driven development of interim clinical practice guidelines and expert opinion guidance 
documents that address aspects of clinical utility where RCT evidence is minimal and/or emergent technologies are utilized. 
 
Support development of appropriate evidence‐based medicine tools for evaluation of molecular diagnostics and pathology 
literature. 
 
Increase engagement between professional associations and other stakeholders, such as FDA, CMS, payers, community service 
providers, and patient groups. 
 
Encourage incorporation of comparative effectiveness research and health economics consideration into professional practice 
guidelines. 
 
Increase available AHRQ / CDC /IOM / PCORI grant funding to support these projects.
RECOGNIZE THE CRITICAL ROLE OF THE MOLECULAR PROFESSIONAL IN DISEASE MANAGEMENT 
 
Molecular pathologists and clinical molecular geneticists are key medical professionals with specialized knowledge needed to guide 
patient management decisions. 
 Joseph et al, 2015 – AMP Clinical Utility Report 
 
30 
 
Molecular diagnostics professionals have the education, training, and board certifications to appropriately guide test selection and 
utilization and should be relied upon by treating clinicians. 
 
Patient’s team of medical providers – molecular pathologists, medical geneticists, pathologists, oncologists, genetic counselors, 
surgeons, primary care providers, other providers – all have distinct scopes of practice that work in concert to support disease 
management and improve outcomes. 
 
Professional teams already have existing quality metrics and oversight mechanisms to guide proper test utilization (laboratory 
accreditation, practice guidelines, standards of care, tumor boards, medical staff reviews).
AHRQ – Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; CDC – Centers for Disease Control; IOM – Institute of Medicine; PCORI – Patient‐Centered 
Outcomes Research Institute; FDA – Food & Drug Administration; CMS – Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
 
