 ISSUE BRIEF
Medicare’s Bundled Payment Initiatives: 
Considerations for Providers
Introduction
Recently, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (CMS) has taken significant steps to expand 
the use of bundled payment programs. In October 
2015, it announced that more than 1,600 participants 
had entered its Bundled Payment for Care Improvement 
(BPCI) program, including 415 acute care hospitals, 
305 physician groups and 723 skilled-nursing facilities 
(SNFs). In November, CMS released its final rule for a new 
Comprehensive Care for Joint Replacement (CJR) initiative, 
a mandatory bundled payment program for total hip/knee 
replacement in 67 metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) 
with 789 hospital participants beginning April 1, 2016. 
Bundled payment sets a single spending target for all 
applicable health care services provided during a clinical 
episode of care over a specified time period. For example, 
a 90-day episode of care for total joint replacement could 
include the hospital stay, physician services, outpatient 
care, home health, post-acute facility services and 
readmissions. The goal is to create financial incentives that 
encourage providers to coordinate care across treatment 
settings, reduce unnecessary services and expand 
initiatives that can help patients recover quickly.
The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
is attracted to bundled payment because it can be 
implemented across a wider range of providers compared 
with initiatives like the Medicare Shared Savings Program 
(MSSP) in which organizations need a large base of primary 
care physicians to participate. Furthermore, the new bundled 
payment programs are designed to generate guaranteed 
cost savings. Given HHS’s goal of shifting half of Medicare 
payments into alternative payment models by 2018, it is likely 
that CMS will continue to introduce new bundling initiatives.
This issue brief describes the evolution of bundling within 
the Medicare program; the opportunities bundling creates 
for hospitals and post-acute care providers; the challenges 
providers have encountered in recent initiatives; the 
issues providers should consider when entering a bundled 
payment program; and policy considerations associated 
with a broader expansion of bundling initiatives in Medicare.
History of Medicare bundled payment
The movement toward Medicare bundled payment 
began with the creation of the inpatient prospective 
payment system in 1983. In a single year, Medicare 
shifted from paying hospitals on the basis of reported 
costs to paying a fixed amount per inpatient stay based 
on a patient’s diagnosis.i At the time, some policy officials 
proposed including physician services in the diagnosis-
related group (DRG) payment model, but this idea was 
ultimately dropped.ii Although the DRG system represented 
a radical change for hospitals, it did not affect the way 
other providers were reimbursed. 
In 1991, CMS began a bundled payment demonstration 
project for coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery that 
included all hospital and physician services during the initial 
hospitalization and any readmissions within 90 days. Seven 
hospitals were selected to participate for five years. The 
program evaluation found that the demonstration generated 
Medicare savings of about 10 percent and reduced death 
rates and major post-surgery complications.iii  However, the 
demonstration was never extended or expanded. 
In 2009, CMS began a three-year physician-hospital 
collaboration demonstration with 12 New Jersey hospitals 
that allowed them to share internal cost savings with 
physicians. The program evaluation did not find any 
Medicare cost savings (though none were required by 
the demonstration), evidence of cost-saving behavior by 
physicians or systematic changes in quality.iv
That same year the agency launched the three-year Acute 
Care Episode (ACE) demonstration to test prospective 
bundled payment for cardiac and orthopedic surgery that 
included inpatient hospital care and physician services 
during a hospital stay. CMS selected five hospitals 
to participate in the ACE demo and negotiated price 
 2
This section describes the 
principal elements of the 
current Medicare bundled 
payment initiatives focusing 
on BPCI and CJR, which are 
summarized in Exhibit 1.
Bundling program components
discounts with each of them. A 2013 evaluation found that 
Medicare saved about $585 per case in the demonstration. 
But about 45 percent of those savings were offset by 
increased post-acute care spending in the post-discharge 
period.v The evaluation found little evidence of changes 
in quality. Participants estimated that they saved between 
$600 and $2,600 per orthopedic case and $500 and 
$1,400 per cardiac case. Most of the savings came from 
negotiating better prices for implantable devices.
On Oct. 1, 2013, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid 
Innovation (CMMI) officially launched the Medicare Bundled 
Payment for Care Improvement (BPCI) initiative. Under this 
voluntary pilot program, hospitals, post-acute providers, 
physician group practices and other organizations assume 
risk for total spending relative to a target price for up to 
48 clinical episodes that begin with an acute-care hospital 
stay. Examples include spinal fusion, congestive heart 
failure (CHF), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) and stroke. The 48 episodes account for about 
70 percent of total Medicare spending. Providers can 
participate in four different models and can choose among 
different episode definitions and durations. 
On Feb. 12, 2015, CMMI announced a voluntary Oncology 
Care Model (OCM) that is slated to begin in spring 2016. 
OCM will establish bundled payments for six-month 
episodes of cancer treatment that begin at the start of 
chemotherapy. Participating oncology practices will receive 
a $160 monthly care management payment and will be 
eligible for performance payments based on the practice’s 
achievement and improvement on selected quality 
measures. 
 
CMS’s new CJR initiative builds on the components and 
lessons learned in BPCI. CJR hospitals will be accountable 
for the cost of episodes of total hip and total knee 
replacements – from the time of the surgery through 90 
days after discharge.
Both BPCI and CJR episodes of care are based on 
Medicare-severity-DRG (MS-DRG) “families.” BPCI 
includes 48 episode types, which include up to 15 MS-
DRGs each (see Appendix A). For example, renal failure 
episodes include three MS-DRGs (renal failure with major 
complication or comorbidity (MCC), renal failure with 
complication or comorbidity (CC) and renal failure without 
CC or MCC); CABG episodes have six. BPCI includes four 
distinct models:
■  
Model 1 is based on episodes that encompass Parts 
A and B spending during a hospitalization and it 
essentially continues the 2009 CMS physician-hospital 
collaboration demonstration program. Participation has 
included only roughly a dozen New Jersey hospitals. 
Model 1 will not be continued past its original sunset 
date of March 31, 2016.
■  
Model 2 combines spending for acute hospital care and 
post-acute care. Participants can select episodes lasting 
30, 60 or 90 days after patients are discharged from the 
hospital.  Model 2 has 631 participants in the risk-bearing 
phase. 
Exhibit 1: Summary of BPCI and CJR Provisions
 
BPCI 
CJR
Participation  
Voluntary  
Mandatory
Geography  
National  
67 metro areas
Duration  
3 years  
5 years
Clinical episodes  
48 episode types  
Total hip & knee replacement
Episode length  
30/60/90 days  
90 days
Responsible group  Physicians, hospitals, PAC  
Hospitals
Target price  
Provider-specific  
Blend of provider and region
CMS discount  
2 – 3%*  
1.5 - 3%*
Reconciliation  
Quarterly  
Annually
Risk adjustment  
MS-DRG only  
MS-DRG and hip fracture status
Maximum gain  
20%  
0%/5%/10%/20% Yrs 1, 2,3, 4-5
Maximum loss  
20%  
0%/5%/10%/20% Yrs 1, 2,3, 4-5
Quality  
Monitored  
Required for NPRA payments
* 
BPCI discount is 2% for 90-day bundles & 3% for others. CJR discount varies with quality score. 
NPRA = Net payment reconciliation amount.
Episode definition
 3
■  
Model 3 focuses on post-acute care episodes that begin 
with the start of post-acute services as long as care 
begins within 30 days of a hospital discharge. Model 3 
participants can select 30, 60 or 90-day episodes. Model 
3 has 871 participants in the risk-bearing phase.
■  
Model 4 is a prospective bundled payment for Parts A and 
B during hospitalizations plus the cost of readmissions. 
CMS makes a prospective payment to participating 
hospitals that then must pay the physicians. Similar to 
Model 1, less than a dozen hospitals participate in Model 4. 
CJR includes the two MS-DRGs associated with hip and 
knee replacements: MS-DRGs 469 and 470. CJR target 
prices will be based on a 90-day episode as well.vi
BPCI Model 2 and CJR include all related Parts A and 
B services provided during the duration of an episode 
including hospital care, physician care, readmissions, post- 
acute care and durable medical equipment.  BPCI and CJR 
episodes exclude certain readmissions and Part B services 
that CMS has determined are unrelated to the index 
admission including transplantation, trauma services, acute 
surgical procedures and cancer care. CMS does, however, 
include all medical MS-DRGs as related services if patients 
are readmitted within 90 days under both programs. 
Patient eligibility
Under, BPCI and CJR, Medicare beneficiaries must be 
enrolled in both Part A and Part B. Medicare Advantage 
beneficiaries and those with end-stage renal disease 
(ESRD) or with Medicare as a secondary payer during the 
episode are excluded. 
Target price
BPCI and CJR calculate target prices differently. CMS 
calculates BPCI Model 2 and Model 3 target prices using 
each participant’s historical claims data for a three-year 
period (Exhibit 2).  
CMS will calculate CJR target prices as a blend of each 
hospital’s historical spending per episode and the regional 
average spending in the hospital’s census division. Initially, 
target prices will be based on two-thirds hospital-specific 
spending and one-third regional spending. In year 3 the 
prices will be one-third hospital specific and two-thirds 
regional. In years 4 and 5, target prices will be set at 
regional average episode spending levels. 
In both programs, CMS adjusts the prices for geographic 
wage index differences to create standardized payment 
amounts and removes indirect medical education, 
disproportionate share and other special payments, which 
will continue to be paid outside of the bundle. Episode 
prices are set for each MS-DRG bundle, and in CJR CMS 
sets separate target prices for hip fracture patients. Neither 
initiative uses additional risk adjustment. 
CMS takes a mandatory discount off the baseline BPCI 
target price that varies by BPCI model and episode length 
as shown on page 4. The discount applies to the full bundle 
price. 
Exhibit 2: General Approach of BPCI Episode Pricing Rules
Hospital-specific 
Experience
2009 - 2012
Apply National
Risk Track 
Thresholds
Apply State Level 
Price Adjustments 
for Low-volume 
Episodes
Hospital-specific 
Experience
2009 - 2012
Group Claims into 
Episodes and Apply 
Adjustments:
• Update factors
• Area wage index
Apply National 
Case-mix Weights
Back Out 
Adjustments:
• Area wage index
• Case-mix
• Apply discount
 4
BPCI Target Price Discounts
 
Hospital Stay 30-Day 
60-Day 
90-Day
Model 1 
1% / 2%1 
 
 
Model 2 
 
3% 
3% 
2%
Model 3 
 
3% 
3% 
2%
Model 4 
3%2 
 
 
1  
Discount is 0.5% in year 1, 1% in year 2 and 2% thereafter for Part A 
services only.
2 Model 4 discount is 3.25% for DRGs included in the ACE demonstration.
Under CJR, the agency proposes a 3 percent discount 
factor for calculating reconciliation payments in all five 
years. However a substantial number of hospitals will 
have their discount reduced to 2 percent based on quality 
scores. Top performers will be eligible for a 1.5 percent 
discount. 
CJR hospitals are not required to make any repayments 
to CMS in the program’s first year. In years 2 and 3, CMS 
will calculate hospitals’ repayment responsibility based 
on target prices with a 2 percent discount. Hospitals can 
also reduce this discount based on their quality score. A 
majority of hospitals will likely achieve sufficient quality for 
a 1 percent discount and repayment discounts will drop to 
0.5 percent for top performers.
The repayment discount rises to 3 percent in years 4 and 5 
but it is reduced for hospitals that reach quality thresholds 
as shown below.
CJR Discount Factor by Performance Year
 
Repayment Discount
Quality Score 
Reconciliation Year 1 
Years 2&3 Years 4&5
Below Acceptable 
N/E 
N/A 
2.0% 
3.0%
Acceptable 
3.0% 
N/A 
2.0% 
3.0%
Good 
2.0% 
N/A 
1.0% 
2.0%
Excellent 
1.5% 
N/A 
0.5% 
1.5%
Notes:  
NA is not applicable because hospitals do not have repayment 
responsibility in year 1.  
NE is not eligible for reconciliation payment.
Payment updates
CMS updates BPCI episode prices quarterly based on 
the actual national average change in Medicare spending 
for each of the 48 bundles. Therefore, neither CMS nor 
the hospitals know what the update factors will be until 
six months after the end of each quarter. This method of 
updating BPCI prices has been a source of substantial 
uncertainty for participants. In contrast, the CJR will update 
target prices using the annual Medicare payment system 
updates thus hospitals will know their target prices before 
the start of each performance period. 
Risk mitigation
Under BPCI, participants must select one of three risk 
tracks, which are intended to reduce year-to-year variation 
in average episode spending caused by random variation 
in patient acuity.vii Participants can select to have their high 
cost claims truncated at the national 99th, 95th or 75th 
percentile. More detail about BPCI risk tracks is provided in 
Appendix B. 
CJR will truncate episode amounts that are more than two 
standard deviations (95th percentile) above the regional 
average. Amounts above the threshold are removed from 
target price calculations and from performance period 
spending. 
Neither program makes additional risk-adjustments, such 
as for patient-specific clinical indicators, Hierarchical 
Conditional Categories or socio-demographic factors. 
However, CJR will price episodes with hip fractures, which 
are roughly 70 percent more costly, separately from other 
total joint replacement procedures. 
Both programs have stop-loss limits, which give hospitals 
additional financial protection, as well as stop-gain 
thresholds. BPCI participant gains or losses are capped 
at 20 percent of the aggregate target amount across each 
participant’s bundles. CJR hospitals are limited to gains of 
five percent of the aggregate target amount in the first two 
program years, 10 percent in the 3rd program year, and 20 
percent in the last two years. CJR hospitals do not have 
downside risk in the first program year. In years 2 and 3, 
repayments for losses will be limited to 10 percent of the 
aggregate target amount respectively.  In years 4 and 5 
repayments will be capped at 20 percent. CMS proposes 
much lower limits on repayments from sole community 
hospitals, rural referral centers, rural hospitals and Medicare-
dependent hospitals.
 5
Precedence rules
Hospitals, physician group practices (PGPs) and post-
acute care providers all can participate in BPCI as 
Awardees or episode initiators so CMS established 
precedence rules to determine which organization is 
responsible for a BPCI episode when a patient receives 
care from more than one BPCI Awardee during an episode. 
Model 4 episodes always receive “precedence” over Model 
2 and Model 3 episodes, and Awardees that begin the 
risk-bearing phase of BPCI earlier have precedence over 
those that entered later. If multiple categories of Awardees 
are involved, precedence is given to PGPs, and if multiple 
PGPs are involved, the episode is assigned to the PGP 
with the attending physician. If a patient is simultaneously 
assigned to a Model 2 and Model 3 episode, the case is 
usually assigned to the Model 2 episode initiator. 
CJR was designed to minimize potential overlap with 
BPCI. CMS selected MSAs with low BPCI participation as 
CJR sites, and any hospitals that participate in BPCI are 
ineligible for CJR. However, if a beneficiary is admitted to 
a CJR hospital and treated by a PGP participating in BPCI 
Model 2, then precedence would be to the PGP and the 
CJR episode would be canceled. This also would occur for 
patients in a CJR episode who are served by a BPCI Model 
3 provider within 30 days of discharge. Therefore, BPCI 
episodes will always have precedence over CJR episodes. 
Quality requirements
BPCI monitors quality on an ongoing basis, but does not set 
a quality threshold that participants must meet to receive 
reconciliation payments. In contrast, CJR will calculate a 
composite quality score, and each hospital must achieve a 
minimum quality threshold to be eligible for reconciliation 
payments from CMS. According to CMS, 90 percent of 
hospitals are expected to meet the minimum threshold. 
The composite score is calculated based on two measures: 
risk-standardized complication rates (RSCR) for total knee 
and hip replacement and hospital consumer assessment 
of healthcare providers and systems (HCAHPS) survey 
scores. Hospitals can increase their quality score with 
voluntary submission of designated patient reported 
outcome (PRO) data. Each hospital’s score for the RSCR 
and HCAHPS measures are calculated based on the 
hospital’s performance relative to the distribution of 
performance nationally (Exhibit 3).   
Hospitals also can earn additional points with a 3 decile 
year-over-year improvement in RSCR and HCAPS 
performance (e.g., from 30th percentile to 60th percentile 
nationally). CMS estimates less than 100 hospitals would 
be eligible for improvement points.
Reconciliation
BPCI has quarterly financial reconciliations that occur 
six months after the end of each quarter (see Exhibit 4). 
Participants receive a worksheet with the reconciliation 
amounts for each MS-DRG episode along with the 
underlying calculations. The net payment reconciliation 
amount (NPRA) is the total target amount for the 
performance period minus the total adjusted fee-for-
service payments. As discussed above, gains and losses 
are capped at 20 percent of total episode spending. CMS 
also conducts “true-ups” to prior period reconciliation 
results to reflect claims that were not included in the initial 
reconciliation. CMS performs true-ups for three quarters 
beyond the initial reconciliation so that quarterly results are 
not finalized for an additional nine months. CJR will have 
annual reconciliations, but the process will be generally 
similar to BPCI.
If Medicare beneficiaries are cared for by a BPCI provider 
or CJR hospital and are also attributed to a MSSP or 
Pioneer Accountable Care Organization (ACO), the bundled 
payment provider will be credited with gains or losses for 
the bundled services and the amounts will be removed 
from the ACO settlements. If bundled payment providers 
are part of an MSSP or Pioneer ACO and the ACO earns 
positive shared savings payment, CMS will recapture any 
portion of the 2 percent bundled payment discount paid to 
the ACO as shared savings from the BPCI or CJR provider.
Exhibit 3: CJR Composite Quality Score Development
Percentile Complications HCAHPS
 
Points 
Points
≥ 90th 
10.00 
8.00
≥ 30th to 
5.50 - 9.25 
4.40 - 7.40 
< 90th
< 30th 
0.00 
0.00
Composite 
Quality
Quality 
Category
Score
< 4.0 
Below 
 
Acceptable
≥ 4.0 to < 6.0 Acceptable
≥ 6.0 to ≤ 13.2 Good
> 13.2 
Excellent
Data 
PRO
Submitted? 
Measure
 
Points
Yes 
2.00
No 
0.00
}
+
 6
Exhibit 4: Illustration of BPCI Reconciliation
Hospital-specific 
Target Price 2012
Target Price for 
Performance 
Period
Reconciliation  
Gain or Loss
Adjusted Actual 
Performance
Update Factor: Actual 
change in spending by DRG 
bundle from national data.
Wage Index: Apply year to 
year change.
Adjusted for:
-  
Risk tracks
-  
Geographic 
smoothing
- Stop loss
Reconcile Quarterly
or Annually
Post-episode monitoring
Under BPCI and CJR, CMS monitors post-episode 
spending for 30 days to identify any systematic increase 
in post-episode spending. The monitoring is intended to 
ensure bundling participants do not shift services out of the 
episode time period to reduce episode spending. If CMS 
determines that post-episode spending is systematically 
higher than it was during the baseline period, bundlers 
must return excess spending to Medicare.  
Program waivers
Certain waivers of Medicare requirements can help 
participants in bundling programs implement care redesign 
more effectively. Under BPCI, participants must provide 
information about how they plan to modify services or 
financial arrangements in an implementation protocol (IP) 
submitted to CMS. 
■  
Three-day hospital stay waiver for coverage of SNF 
services. Medicare does not cover care in a SNF unless 
it is preceded by a three-day acute care hospital stay. 
Model 2 BPCI participants may apply for a waiver of this 
provision so that SNF-qualifying hospital admissions may 
be shorter than three days. As a condition of the waiver, 
participants must prospectively identify partner SNFs, and 
the majority of these must be rated three stars or higher 
under the Nursing Home Compare five star rating system. 
CJR will waive the three-day hospital stay rule in years 2 
through 5 for partner SNFs that have at least a three-star 
rating.
■  
Post-discharge home visit waiver. BPCI participants 
may deliver up to three visits in the beneficiary’s home 
by licensed clinical staff paid under the physician fee 
schedule, and Medicare waives the current requirement 
that these staff must be under the “direct supervision” 
of a physician. CJR will allow up to nine post-discharge 
home visits to be billed and paid under the general 
supervision of a physician.
■  
Telehealth waiver. Geographic restrictions on 
coverage of telehealth service to Medicare beneficiaries 
may be waived in both BPCI and CJR as long as the 
service is consistent with other coverage and payment 
criteria.
■  
 
Gainsharing waiver. BPCI participants may share 
incentive payments they receive with partners, including 
physicians and post-acute providers. Physician 
gainsharing cannot exceed 50 percent of the regular 
Medicare fees that they receive in BPCI episodes. 
Participants must describe gainsharing methods in 
their IP
, and gainsharing partners must achieve the 
quality metrics that participants propose and CMS 
approves. For CJR, CMS allows hospitals to share 
reconciliation payments and internal cost savings 
with care partners as well as contract for shared risk. 
Again physician gainsharing cannot exceed 50 percent 
of the regular Medicare fees they receive for the 
episode. For both programs, CMS and the HHS Office 
of Inspector General have waived the physician self-
referral and anti-kickback laws with respect to financial 
arrangements that otherwise comply with the programs’ 
requirements.
 7
BPCI enrollment
More than 1,600 organizations were participating in BPCI 
as of October 2015 including 415 acute care hospitals, 
305 physician groups and 723 SNFs taking on risk for 
more than 14,000 clinical episodes. This reflects more than 
seven clinical episodes per participant on average in Model 
2 and 11 episodes per participant in Model 3 (Exhibit 5).
About 27 percent of Model 2 participants and 35 percent 
of Model 3 participants selected more than 10 episodes. 
Among participating physicians, hospitalist groups control 
about 70 percent of the bundles. The most common 
episodes are major joint replacement followed by COPD, 
CHF
, sepsis and pneumonia (Exhibit 6).
The vast majority of participants entered the program 
through third-party awardee-conveners that provide 
analytic and risk management services, and contract 
directly with CMS on behalf of the providers. Several 
conveners help manage the majority of episodes in BPCI 
with a single group, Remedy Partners, accounting for 
about half of the BPCI episodes (Exhibit 7).
Exhibit 5: Number of BPCI Participants, October 2015
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Source: CMS BPCI Analytic File as of Oct. 13, 2015. 
*Includes HHAs, LTCHs, IRF and SNFs.
Model 1 
Model 2 
Model 3* 
Model 4
Brandeis University
820
51
391
240
11
9
Mean Episodes
Model 2 = 7.3
Model 3 = 10.9
Exhibit 6: Percent of Participants Choosing Episode 
Type in BPCI Model 2 (N = 631)
Brandeis University
Source: CMS BPCI Analytic File as of 10-13-2015. 
Major joint replacement 
68.0%
Congestive heart failure 
34.9%
Simple pneumonia 
34.2%
COPD, bronchitis, asthma 
31.9%
Sepsis 
29.8%
Hip & femur procedures 
26.8%
Cellulitis 
24.2%
Uninary tract infection 
23.8%
Acute myocardial infarction 
22.8%
Medical non-infectious orthopedic 
22.2%
Other Respiratory 
20.3%
Brandeis University
Note: Remedy Partners and Liberty Partners episodes are combined.
Source: CMS BPCI Analytic File as of Oct. 13, 2015. 
Exhibit 7: Number of Bundles by Convener 
Model 2 Bundles by 
Convener (N=4,588)
Model 3 Bundles by 
Convener (N=9,515)
■  
Remedy  
Partners
■  
naviHealth
■  
All Other
■  
HCA
■  
Premier
■  
MedSolutions
■  
Remedy  
Partners
■  
Genesis
■  
Avamere
■  
Optum
■  
Access
■  
PAC Network
54.8%
16.1%
16.1%
5.6%
3.5% 3.1%
56.5%
12.8%
6.5%
6.3%3.6% 2.2%
■ Physician Group ■ Hospital/Facility
Bundling opportunities
Hospital care
Hospitals have many opportunities to improve quality and 
achieve positive financial results in bundling programs. In 
contrast to ACO initiatives that generally focus on primary 
care, bundled payment offers an opportunity to directly 
engage specialist physicians in care redesign.viii Participants in 
Medicare’s Acute Care Episode (ACE) demonstration worked 
successfully with surgeons to reduce spending, particularly 
through improved acquisition of implantable devices.
Hospitals need to undertake a range of activities to 
support performance management in bundling. First, they 
will need systems for identifying patients likely to qualify 
for bundled episodes early – particularly if they are at 
high risk for complications or are likely to need medical 
or social support after they are discharged. Second, 
hospitals will need to establish teams that will work with 
physicians to implement standard care processes to 
reduce treatment variation. Such efforts have been shown 
to reduce complications, readmissions and hospital 
 8
Exhibit 9: 2008 Medicare Post-acute Care Payments 
Per User by Site of Service: DRG 470 (Total Joint)
Within 30 Days of Hospital Discharge 
$25,000
$20,000
$15,000
$10,000
$5,000
$0
Source: RTI Inc, Post-acute Care Episodes: Expanded Analytic File, 
June 2011
 Admission Home Health 
SNF 
Rehab 
LTAC Readmission
 
100% 
60% 
40% 
7% 
0.2% 
9%
$11,079
$3,132
$8,562
$12,596
$23,017
$9,496
length of stay when they are implemented effectively.ix 
Hospitals also need to have a high-functioning discharge 
planning process. Hospitals in risk-based payment 
models increasingly rely on discharge planners to help 
patients gain access to high-quality post-acute services in 
appropriate settings and to coordinate effectively with the 
patients’ primary care providers upon discharge.
Post-acute care
The most significant opportunities for reducing spending 
and improving quality generally occur after patients are 
discharged from the hospital. Post-acute care is a major 
component of total per-episode spending. For example, 
post-acute care and readmissions account for nearly 40 
percent of Medicare spending for 30-day CHF episodes 
and 37 percent of spending for joint replacement episodes 
(Exhibit 8). These proportions increase for longer episodes. 
Post-acute care spending varies greatly from provider 
to provider and across geographic markets. A recent 
Institute of Medicine study found that post-acute care was 
the single largest factor driving geographic variation in 
Medicare per-beneficiary spending.x 
Bundling participants can adopt several strategies 
to manage post-acute care more effectively.xi One is 
reducing unnecessary use of more intensive facility-based 
settings and referring patients to lower cost settings 
when appropriate. The average cost of home health after 
a major joint replacement is a fraction of the cost of a 
SNF or rehabilitation hospital stay (Exhibit 9). Another 
is establishing preferred relationships with post-acute 
providers that have demonstrated good outcomes and 
are willing to collaborate on performance improvement. 
There is significant variation in average length of stay, 
readmission rates and quality across post-acute facilities. 
For example, risk-adjusted Medicare readmission rates are 
14.4 percent or less in the top 25 percent of U.S. SNFs and 
22 percent or more in the bottom 25 percent.xii Providers 
will have to balance the potential dollars saved in placing 
a patient in a lower cost setting against the possibility that 
the chosen care site will lead to more patient readmissions 
or complications, thereby driving overall episode costs up. 
While providers can establish preferred post-acute networks, 
Medicare beneficiaries are free to choose their own 
providers and many favor post-acute facilities that are close 
to their families. A third strategy for bundling participants 
is investing in systems and personnel to coordinate care 
transitions effectively. Finally, participants have reduced 
readmissions from nursing homes and average length of 
stay using teams of physicians and advanced practice 
clinicians that conduct regular rounds in nursing facilities.
Brandeis University
Percent of Episodes Using Site of Care
Exhibit 8: Components of Thirty-day Spending for 
Major Joint Replacement and Congestive Heart 
Failure, by Phase, 2011
$30
$25
$20
$15
$10
$5
$0
Source: Tsai TC et al. Health Affairs, March 2015.
 Phase 2 
Phase 1 
Non-BPCI 
Phase 2 
Phase 1 
Non-BPCI
Brandeis University
Major joint replacement           Congestive heart failure
Thousands of dollars
■ Outpatient
■ Readmission
■ Provider payment
■ Post-acute care
■ Index admission
 9
Challenges in bundling
Random variation in year-to-year episode spending
One of the most challenging aspects of any bundled 
payment program is random variation in the average cost of 
treating a cohort of patients in a particular clinical episode. 
This occurs because of the substantial variation in the 
severity of patients (and number of cost outliers) over a 
given period of time. The problem is exacerbated because 
most providers have a relatively low case volume in any 
particular bundle. For example, if a hospital has 50 cases 
with average episode spending of $15,000 in year 1 and 
the exact same cases in the year 2 except that one patient 
became a $100,000 outlier case, the average per-episode 
cost would rise by 11.3 percent. If the hospital has the 
exact same distribution of patients over two years but with 
no outliers in year 1 and two $100,000 outliers in year 2, 
the average per-episode cost would increase by nearly 23 
percent (Exhibit 10). If year 1 was used to establish a target 
price and year 2 was the performance period, the hospital 
would incur a large loss while if the outliers occurred in year 
1 and not in year 2 the hospital would incur a large gain.
Higher case volume substantially mitigates random variation. 
While a $100,000 outlier would add $1,700 to the average 
cost of the hypothetical hospital with 50 cases it would 
add only $170 per episode for a provider with 500 cases. 
In general, the average costs of surgical episodes vary less 
from period to period than the average episode costs of 
hospitalized patients with chronic medical conditions. 
Bundling participants need strategies to address the risk 
of random variation. One approach is to reduce variation 
by selecting a portfolio of bundles to increase volume. 
Another is to purchase reinsurance or, under BPCI, contract 
with facilitator-conveners that are willing to share risk. 
(Facilitator-conveners cannot contract with Medicare in 
CJR but can contract with providers to supply reinsurance 
services.) BPCI conducts quarterly payment reconciliation, 
and, since quarterly volume is low, quarterly performance 
varies substantially. Rather than focus too much on quarterly 
results, participants should be aware of random variation, 
develop methods to reduce it and maintain a longer-term 
perspective that focuses on performance improvement.
Developing operational capabilities
Bundled payment participants need to invest in new capacity 
and infrastructure to succeed. These include the capacity to:
■  
Identify patients eligible for bundles early and assess 
their risk for complications. BPCI episodes are triggered 
by MS-DRGs, but hospitals do not typically finalize MS-
DRG assignments until they bill Medicare. Participants 
will need to identify likely eligible patients early, as well 
as identify patients at risk for adverse events, such as 
readmissions, who are likely to need extra support after 
they are discharged. This not an issue for CJR because 
DRG selection for joint replacement surgeries is clear and 
most cases are scheduled in advance.
Exhibit 10: Illustration of Outliers Impact on Average Spending/Price for 50 Episodes
$100,000
$90,000
$80,000
$70,000
$60,000
$50,000
$40,000
$30,000
$20,000
$10,000
$0
Episode Price
0 Outliers = $14,522
1 Outlier  = $16,812
2 Outliers = $18,443
Average = $16,812
Outlier
 10
■  
Establish data analytic and information sharing 
capabilities. Bundlers have access to a vast array of 
new data that can help them evaluate the full spectrum 
of care that their patients receive and identify areas for 
performance improvement. Bundlers need to analyze 
the data quickly and transmit information to their 
physician and post-acute care partners. They need 
to develop systems that allow them to share patient 
data with care partners on a real-time basis. They also 
need to develop approaches to help determine the best 
post-acute care setting for individual patients upon 
discharge. 
■  
Track patients across the continuum of care. 
Hospitals and post-acute care providers historically did 
not routinely follow patients after they were discharged 
from the inpatient setting. With bundling, providers need 
personnel and systems that follow patients throughout 
the recovery process and respond rapidly if patients 
suffer complications or show signs of decompensation, 
such as failure of the heart to maintain adequate blood 
circulation. 
■  
Redesign care. Participants in bundling need to develop 
standard care protocols and longitudinal care plans, 
establish new staff roles such as nurse navigators, develop 
systems where physicians or advance-practice clinicians 
round regularly in post-acute facilities, and establish 
processes to ensure smooth transitions between care 
settings that include “warm-handoffs” between providers. 
■  
Engage physicians. Participants need to educate 
physicians about bundling initiatives, identify physician 
champions to lead clinical process improvement efforts, 
and provide appropriate data, resources and incentives to 
support progress.
■  
Coordinate care transitions and manage post-acute 
services. Efficient, high-quality post-acute care is essential 
for success under bundled payment. Providers under 
bundled payment must be able to evaluate post-acute 
care providers and develop relationships with those that 
deliver good quality, coordinate transitions between acute 
and post-acute settings, and create efficiencies and 
manage care across the continuum of post-acute care.
Participant experiences with BPCI
NYU Langone Medical Center is an academic medical 
center in New York City with four hospitals, 64,000 annual 
inpatient admissions and a clinically integrated physician 
network with more than 2,500 employed and independent 
physicians. NYU was one of the first hospitals to enter 
BPCI in October 2013 with Model 2 episodes for major 
joint replacement, cardiac valve surgery and posterior 
spinal fusion. It entered BPCI because it expected that 
the Affordable Care Act would catalyze payment reforms 
across multiple payers and it expected to develop new 
insights and capabilities from managing episodes that it 
could apply to other payment initiatives. 
NYU felt it was critical to have a dedicated BPCI team and 
hired a senior administrator to direct the initiative. It spent 
a year preparing for BPCI, guided by a steering committee 
of senior management and clinical leaders. Before starting 
the risk phase of the program, it created a new network 
integration department with five full-time equivalent (FTE) 
Nurse Care Coordinators (NCC) dedicated to managing BPCI 
patients. Data analytics was a critical component of NYU’s 
preparations. Because hospitals do not know most patients’ 
Medicare DRG assignment until after they are discharged, 
NYU created a clinical algorithm to identify likely BPCI 
patients during pre-admission screening and programmed 
the tool directly into its electronic medical record. It created 
a BPCI patient registry so NCCs could begin working with 
patients during the pre-admission period. It created a risk 
stratification tool to identify which patients were good 
candidates for home care and a process to ensure that staff 
created consistent expectations about where patients were 
likely to go for post-acute care. Finally, it developed clinical 
dashboards with key BPCI metrics like discharge disposition 
and readmissions that it shared weekly with physicians. 
NYU faced several challenges of particular importance to 
tertiary care hospitals. As new technologies and treatment 
techniques come into practice, BPCI’s approach for using 
historical data to set target prices for future periods can lead 
to pricing distortions. For posterior spinal fusion, for example, 
NYU began to see substantially more patients where surgeons 
were fusing six to eight vertebra rather than two or three. 
These are more complicated surgeries with higher hardware 
costs, and longer operating and recovery room times. These 
extra costs are not reflected in BPCI pricing since there is 
no change in DRG classification or risk adjustment. But they 
have resulted in higher-cost outlier payments relative to what 
NYU experienced in the baseline and led to financial losses. 
 11
Also, advancement in minimally invasive medical technology 
allowed anterior and posterior fusion of the spine to 
be performed via a single incision. This changed the 
classification of the procedures from an anterior posterior 
fusion DRG to a posterior fusion DRG, which lowered 
reimbursement by at least $20,000 and also increased the 
outlier payments related to the baseline. NYU dropped out 
of spine bundles in January 2015 because the baseline 
target prices were inconsistent with current clinical practice. 
NYU had similar concerns about transcatheter aortic valve 
replacements (TAVR), but these were allayed when CMS 
introduced new DRGs for TAVR in October 2014.
NYU had several additional concerns. One was the loss 
of indirect and direct medical education payments as it 
reduced readmissions for BPCI patients. Another was the 
loss of inpatient rehabilitation facility revenue as it worked to 
care for more patients in their homes. A third was the lack 
of predictability in the CMMI patient reconciliation including 
the method for trending target prices forward and the use of 
multiple “true-ups” for quarterly reconciliations. NYU added 
BPCI episodes for CABG in 2015 but decided not to take 
risk for medical bundles due to the heterogeneity of factors 
that drive the high cost medical cases. NYU is adapting the 
tools it has developed for BPCI to manage performance in 
shared savings contracts, which now cover about 200,000 
of its commercial and Medicare Advantage patients. 
Kindred Healthcare is a national health care company with 
more than 100,000 employees in 47 states. It operates the 
full continuum of post-acute services ranging from long-
term care hospitals (LTCH) to home care. In 2014 Kindred 
entered BPCI with two LTCHs and one SNF in Cleveland. 
Kindred refers to Cleveland as one of its “integrated care 
markets,” where it offers a full range of post-acute services 
(including primary care) and can transition complex patients 
effectively from more intensive to less intensive care settings 
with well-coordinated hand-offs from provider to provider. 
Kindred joined BPCI Model 3 expecting that value-based 
payment models would come rapidly and wanted to gain 
experience with bundling. Kindred initially selected seven 
episodes: CHF
, COPD, major joint replacement, hip and 
femur procedures, pneumonia, sepsis and other respiratory. 
Its primary objective was to manage high-cost critically 
chronically ill patients such as those on ventilators and those 
recovering from severe sepsis more effectively.  
Kindred officials believe that it achieved clinical improvements 
during the first year of BPCI such as reducing readmissions. 
But it has struggled with the program’s economics given its 
focus on critically complex patients. Despite participating 
in seven bundles, it only treated a small number of critically 
complex patients across its three Cleveland facilities (for 
example, only 18 ventilator patients in nine months), which 
created significant outlier risk. BPCI does not risk adjust 
episode spending (aside from pricing MS-DRGs separately) 
so that gains or losses on complex patients are essentially 
random. As a single organization with different types of post-
acute providers in the same MSA, Kindred’s target prices are 
based on a blended rate that underpays for LTCH patients and 
overpays for SNF patients. Kindred did not include its home 
health division in its BPCI application because of concern that 
it would lower the blended rate to an untenable level. 
Although it selected a 60-day episode period, Kindred 
believes a much longer time period is needed to realistically 
assess performance managing critically complex patients. 
For less complicated patients, it has had difficulty 
determining which patients are in BPCI since hospitals do not 
know the DRG assignment when the patient is discharged to 
a post-acute facility. Moreover, the use of DRGs in Model 3 
has very little relationship to functional status, which is how 
most post-acute providers think about patient care.  
Kindred officials suggested that CMS consider developing 
a different payment model for the type of critically complex 
patients treated in LTCHs. It believes there is substantial 
opportunity to improve care and reduce spending for these 
patients but would prefer full-risk prospective payments 
across a longer time frame (e.g., 12 months); it is currently 
discussing such an arrangement with private payers. 
Following its 2014 experience Kindred dropped all but one 
of its LTCH episodes from BPCI but added the episodes 
back so that it was participating in the original seven 
episodes as of October 2015. It plans to stay in BPCI for 
the time being so that it can continue learning. Ultimately, 
however, it would like to work with CMS to explore new 
payment methodologies for its most complex patients.
 12
 
Canton-Potsdam Hospital (CPH) is a 94-bed general 
medical and surgical hospital in Potsdam, N.Y., that 
provides about half of the community hospital care in 
a county of 110,000 residents located on the Canadian 
border. CPH participates in a small ACO with the University 
of Vermont Medical Center and a 168-member physician 
organization. It entered BPCI’s Model 2 in January 2014 
with episodes for major joint replacement and CHF
. CPH 
joined BPCI primarily to gain experience with managing 
care under alternative payment arrangements. It is part of 
a facilitator-convener group led by the Estes Park Institute, 
a group primarily focused on testing the BPCI model with 
small and rural community hospitals. The program would 
need to be designed in a way that these hospitals can 
perform successfully if BPCI were to become a national 
model.
Estes Park submitted a proposal for a CMMI innovation 
grant along with the BPCI application to help offset 
the significant BPCI infrastructure costs and to build a 
shared learning network for small community hospitals. 
The application was not successful and the number of 
interested hospitals dropped from more than 30 to about 
a dozen. Hospitals found the data component of the 
application process daunting even as Estes Park provided 
analytic support through Brandeis University. Most of 
the hospitals also were uncomfortable with the risks 
associated with price variation since they had relatively 
small numbers of episodes in their institutions. CPH was 
determined to the stay the course. It saw BPCI as a way to 
gain valuable experience developing new models of care 
with a payment model that supported its goals of better 
care, lower costs and improved community health status. 
CPH established a new Care Transitions Department with 
approximately 10 FTE staff including a Medical Director of 
Population Health at an annual cost exceeding $1 million. 
The department identifies patients likely to be included 
in a BPCI episode and assigns them to outpatient nurse 
care managers. The case managers stratify patients based 
on acuity to determine whom they need to follow. They 
educate CHF patients about what to expect after they are 
discharged from the hospital and continue to follow them in 
the community, supplemented by a health coach program 
that CPH developed with two local universities. CPH has 
a multi-provider patient-centered medical home (PCMH) 
where patients can go for care after their hospitalization. 
It also deploys clinicians into the community as needed. 
CPH has met with skilled nursing providers and some 
have agreed to develop patient-specific care plans with 
protocols that have led to reduced lengths of stay for major 
joint replacement patients. It views its relationships with 
local SNFs as collaborative and has not set up a preferred 
post-acute care network. 
CPH’s participation in BPCI is closely linked to its ACO 
and PCMH efforts and has led to many positive outcomes. 
It has engaged physicians in understanding the cost 
of episodes of care and factors driving variation. The 
programs have led to new practices that have decreased 
hospital utilization and improved care. Over the past 18 
months, CPH’s overall readmission rate has declined from 
13 percent to 8 percent. The proportion of inpatients that 
have a follow-up appointment with a physician prior to 
discharge increased from 60 percent to 91 percent. All 
outpatient practices now have a centralized RN triage 
after-hours call service with local physician back up, which 
has reduced avoidable emergency department visits. CPH 
has concluded that the most important factor for success 
in both the ACO and BPCI initiatives is the ability to 
effectively engage community physicians. 
CPH faced several challenges in BPCI. One was identifying 
BPCI patients correctly. It has encountered differences of 
20 percent or more in the number of CHF and total joint 
patients it identifies internally and the number identified in 
the CMS data. Also, as a smaller hospital, its volume and 
cost numbers vary substantially from quarter to quarter. 
The amounts reported as being owed to CMS or due to 
the hospital in a given quarter have changed significantly 
as CMS has updated the results. From a management 
and governance perspective in a small organization, 
knowing with certainty whether it has made $25,000 for a 
quarter or lost $50,000 is significant. The data, calculation 
methodologies and exclusions used by CMS to calculate 
its program’s performance have been opaque. This reduces 
the hospital’s confidence that gain or loss calculations are 
accurate and erodes confidence in BPCI generally. “We 
view BPCI as a tool to make our patients healthier” a senior 
CPH executive said. “It helps you look beyond day to day 
– one treatment at a time thinking to how to improve the 
health of your population and community. Our participation 
has been valuable, but unless CMS makes changes to the 
program, it will be difficult for small and rural hospitals to 
participate successfully.”
 13
IPC Hospitalist Physicians is the largest hospitalist 
company in the U.S. with about 2,000 clinicians, including 
a significant number that specialize in caring for patients in 
post-acute care settings. Because it believes that physicians 
need to have a seat at the table in new payment models, 
IPC began in July 2015 to transition 20 groups into Model 2 
with between 7 and 27 episodes each. The move will make 
IPC one of the largest BPCI participating provider groups.
IPC believes the major opportunity created by BPCI is in 
managing post-acute care, and that its expertise in both 
hospital and post-acute care medicine positions it well to 
place patients in the right post-acute settings; manage 
length of stay in post-acute care facilities; and treat acute 
exacerbations quickly so that patients do not bounce 
back to the hospital. IPC is partnering with naviHealth, 
which will provide analytic services, post-acute case 
management and share financial risk. IPC physicians are 
already organized into “pods” that meet regularly and work 
collaboratively. IPC expects to improve care primarily by 
providing physicians with much better information about 
the care that patients are receiving across the continuum 
and benchmarking data that help them identify areas for 
improvement. 
IPC has contracts with some of the hospitals where its 
physicians work while it operates as a private practice 
model in others. Hospitals have had varied reactions to 
IPC’s decision to join BPCI: some do not want physicians 
to “trump” them under the precedence rules; some have 
episodes that differ from what IPC selected; and some 
do not care. However, IPC believes tensions will arise, 
particularly if hospitals own post-acute facilities since IPC 
plans to reduce unnecessary post-acute utilization. IPC 
is designing gainsharing arrangements but expressed 
concerns about BPCI’s policy that limits physician 
gainsharing to 50 percent of Medicare fees. “Medicare 
might pay a hospitalist $450 for a 5-day inpatient stay,” 
said one executive. “How does it make sense that they 
can only earn $225 for saving thousands on a $25,000 
case?”
Dignity Health is one of the nation’s largest health systems 
with 39 hospitals in California, Arizona and Nevada, and 
nearly 400 care sites in 20 states. Two of its hospitals, St. 
Bernadine Medical Center and Community Hospital of San 
Bernardino entered BPCI in 2014 with 46 and 24 bundles 
respectively. The hospitals had recently established 
a clinically integrated network with 250 independent 
physicians and believed that a large commitment to BPCI 
would help them catalyze physician-hospital alignment. 
The two Dignity Health hospitals are partnered with 
naviHealth as their awardee-convener. NaviHealth provides 
software that analyzes clinical data and generates a risk 
score that helps the hospitals select the most appropriate 
post-acute care setting for each patient. Dignity Health 
shares BPCI performance risk with naviHealth, and some 
of its hospitals have established gainsharing arrangements 
with their physician partners.
Dignity Health has hired new staff and reorganized its 
inpatient care coordination program in preparation for 
BPCI. The Dignity Health care coordinators ensure that 
patients make a smooth transition from the hospital to 
the home or to an appropriate post-acute provider. They 
work closely with naviHealth staff to coordinate post-
acute services for the BPCI patients. The hospitals have 
a database of community-based services, such as meals 
on wheels, transportation, home care, education and other 
supports as a resource for care coordinators and their 
patients.  
The San Bernardino hospitals have identified several 
challenges. One is identifying BPCI patients quickly since 
DRG classifications are not finalized until after patients 
are discharged. Another has been the resource intensity 
of tracking BPCI patients across the full continuum of 
services. Also, the quarterly changes in BPCI target prices 
and the rolling reconciliation process make it very difficult 
to project financial results accurately. Nevertheless, 
Dignity Health supports BPCI as an initiative that seeks to 
foster care redesign and collaboration among hospitals, 
physicians and post-acute providers to improve patient 
care. It anticipates that both CMMI and private payers will 
continue to implement new payment innovations. Twenty-
three more Dignity Health hospitals joined BPCI in July 
2015 as it continues its clinical transformation efforts to 
improve patient care and prepare for the evolving payment 
landscape.
 14
Policy considerations
The introduction of Medicare’s mandatory CJR model is a 
clear signal that CMS is interested in expanding bundled 
payment as part of its effort to move 50 percent of Medicare 
payments into alternative payment models by 2018. This 
raises several policy issues.  
BPCI pricing is currently provider-specific like the MSSP
. This 
is a good initial approach because it encourages high-cost 
providers to enter the program and work on performance 
improvement. CJR begins with a blend of hospital-specific 
and regional average episode pricing and transitions to 
regional average pricing by year four. This will intensify the 
pressure on higher-cost providers and MSAs with costs 
above the regional norm to reduce spending while making 
CJR more attractive to lower-cost providers and MSAs. This 
rapid shift to a regional pricing model will be very challenging 
for some providers. 
CMS is likely to consider mandatory bundled payment 
models for other clinical episodes as well as new episode 
designs such as bundles that trigger at diagnosis. Total joint 
replacement is a high-volume procedure with relatively low 
spending variation, making it an ideal procedure for testing 
mandatory bundled payment. In contrast, other common 
medical conditions like CHF
, COPD, pneumonia and sepsis 
have more heterogeneous patients, less well-defined clinical 
protocols and greater spending variation. Several hundred 
BPCI providers have elected to take risk for these conditions 
and documenting their experience will be important. 
Bundling payments for chronic and medical conditions 
may require that CMS develop more advanced techniques 
for mitigating the risk of random variation in participants’ 
average year-to-year spending before providers will be 
comfortable with mandatory models. These could include 
better risk adjustment, exclusion of more low frequency 
high-cost services from bundle pricing, separate pricing of 
certain patients with higher cost conditions as CMS has 
done with hip fracture patients in CJR, or removal of certain 
high-risk patients from bundle pricing altogether. 
Conclusion
The BPCI initiative has experienced substantial voluntary 
enrollment with more than 1,600 participants as of October 
2015. CMS has signaled its interest in expanding bundled 
payment through mandated participation as evidenced by 
CJR. Much is still unknown about the impacts of bundled 
payment, and CMS has not completed a full evaluation. 
The vast majority of BPCI participants began in mid-2015 
so more time is needed to properly assess its impact. While 
nearly all of the 2014 BPCI participants were hospitals, the 
2015 entrants represent a wide range of providers, including 
relatively large enrollments of hospitalist physicians and 
SNFs. 
CJR has many features in common with BPCI. But it 
includes important refinements like a more transparent 
method for updating episode prices that makes it easier for 
participants to budget and monitor financial progress. But 
CJR has more controversial elements: namely mandatory 
participation, rapid transition to regional pricing and 
designating hospitals as the entity responsible for bundle 
performance with control over gains earned from managing 
expenditures. These elements could indicate a long-term 
direction for Medicare bundled payment. The potential 
value of bundled payment lies in encouraging hospitals, 
physicians, and post-acute providers to work together 
and coordinate patient care from hospitalization through 
recovery leading to lower spending, improved quality and 
better patient experience. Together, these programs will 
be important tests of how well Medicare bundled payment 
efforts can achieve these desired outcomes.
iAltman S. The Lessons of Medicare’s Prospective Payment System Show that the Bundled Payment Program Faces Challenges. Health Aff 2012; vol. 31 no. 9: 1923-1930.
iiMehrotra A and Hussey P. Including physicians in bundled hospital care payments: Time to revisit an old idea? JAMA 2015; 313(19):1907-08.
iiiCromwell J, Dayhoff DA, McCall NT et al. Medicare Participating Heart Bypass Center Demonstration Evaluation Report. Health Economics Research:Waltham MA. July 24, 1998.
ivRTI International. Evaluation of the Medicare Physician Hospital Collaboration Demonstration. September 2014.
vImpaq International. Evaluation of the Medicare Acute Care Episode Demonstration. Contract number: HHSM-500-2006-000071. May 31, 2013.
viNote:  Under CJR the 90 day period includes the date of discharge while in BPCI it does not.
viiCMMI conducts an additional adjustment to mitigate price variation in low volume episodes called “Empirical-Bayes” (EB).
viiiMechanic R. Opportunities and Challenges for Episode-Based Payment. N Engl J Med 2011; 365:777-779.
ixCasale AS. ProvenCare: A Provider-Driven Pay-for-Performance Program for Acute Episodic Cardiac Surgical Care. Ann Surg 2007;246: 613–623. 
xNewhouse J P and Garber A. Geographic Variation in Medicare Services. N Engl J Med 2013; 368:1465-1468. 
xiMechanic R. Post-Acute Care: The Next Frontier in Medicare Cost Control. N Engl J Med 2014; 370:692-694.
xiiMedicare Payment Advisory Commission. Report to Congress. March 2012.
 15
Appendix A
Episodes of Care and MS-DRG Groupings Under the Bundled
Payments for Care Improvement Initiative for Models 2, 3 and 4
Episodes of Care  
MS-DRGs
Acute myocardial infarction  
280, 281, 282
AICD generator or lead  
245, 265
Amputation  
239, 240, 241, 255, 256, 257, 474, 475, 476, 616, 617, 618
Atherosclerosis 
302, 303
Back and neck except spinal fusion  
518, 519, 520
Coronary artery bypass graft  
231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236
Cardiac arrhythmia  
308, 309, 310
Cardiac defibrillator  
222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227 
Cardiac valve  
216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 266, 267
Cellulitis  
602, 603
Cervical spinal fusion 
471, 472, 473
Chest pain  
313
Combined anterior posterior spinal fusion 
453, 454, 455
Complex noncervical spinal fusion  
456, 457, 458
Congestive heart failure  
291, 292, 293
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, bronchitis, asthma  
190, 191, 192, 202, 203
Diabetes 
637, 638, 639
Double joint replacement of the lower extremity  
461, 462
Esophagitis, gastroenteritis, and other digestive disorders  
391, 392
Fractures of the femur and hip or pelvis  
533, 534, 535, 536
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage 
377, 378, 379
Gastrointestinal obstruction  
388, 389, 390
Hip and femur procedures except major joint  
480, 481, 482
Lower extremity and humerus procedure except hip, foot, femur  
492, 493, 494
Major bowel procedures 
329, 330, 331
Major cardiovascular procedure  
237, 238
Major joint replacement of the lower extremity  
469, 470
Major joint replacement of the upper extremity  
483
Medical  noninfectious orthopedic  
537, 538, 551, 552, 553, 554, 555, 556, 557, 558, 559, 560, 561, 562, 563
Medical peripheral vascular disorders  
299, 300, 301
Nutritional and metabolic disorders 
640, 641
Other knee procedures  
485, 486, 487, 488, 489
Other respiratory  
189, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 186, 187, 188
Other vascular surgery 
252, 253, 254
Pacemaker 
242, 243, 244
Pacemaker device replacement or revision 
258, 259, 260, 261, 262
Percutaneous coronary intervention 
246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251
Red blood cell disorders 
811, 812
Removal of orthopedic devices  
495, 496, 497, 498, 499
Renal failure 
682, 683, 684
Revision of the hip or knee 
466, 467, 468
Sepsis  
870, 871, 872
Simple pneumonia and respiratory infections 
177, 178, 179, 193, 194, 195
Spinal fusion (noncervical) 
459, 460
Stroke 
61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66
Syncope and collapse 
312
Transient ischemia  
69
Urinary tract infection  
689, 690
 16
Appendix B
BPCI Risk Track Example
Exhibit A provides two examples of how Risk Track 
selection affects gains or losses in the payment 
reconciliation. The first scenario shows the impact of the 
Risk Tracks on a high-cost outlier case. Under Risk Track 
A, the target price is $16,799, actual spending is $90,000 
and the upper threshold is $85,000. The awardee is liable 
for the difference between the upper threshold and the 
target price ($68,201) plus 20 percent of the difference 
between the upper threshold and actual spending ($1,000). 
The awardee’s total liability would decline from $69,201 to 
$23,906 if it had selected Risk Track C.
However, in Scenario 2 when the awardee’s spending 
comes in below the target price, it would earn $2,799 
under Risk Track A but only $94 under Risk Track C. This 
is because the awardee’s target price is lower if it selects 
Risk Track C than it would be in Risk Track A. So although 
“winsorization” is supposed to reduce the random variation 
in episode pricing, its effects cannot be predicted with 
certainty for individual awardees. On occasion, awardees 
have lost more money in Risk Track C than they would 
have in Risk Track A because their target prices are 
reduced more than the benefit they get from a lower outlier 
limit.
Exhibit A
Impact of Risk Tracks: Two Scenarios
Scenario 1: High-cost Outlier 
Risk Track A (99/1) 
Risk Track C (75/5)
 
(Outlier limit = $85,000) 
(Outlier limit = $25,000)
Target price 
$16,799 
$14,094
Actual episode spending 
$90,000 
$90,000 
(Performance period)
Winsorized episode spending 
$85,000 
$25,000 
Performance period)
20% X (Winsorized – Target) 
($1,000) 
($13,000)
Episode Reconciliation 
($69,201) 
($23,906)
Scenario 2: Spending Below Target Price 
Risk Track A (99/1) 
Risk Track C (75/5)
 
(Outlier limit = $85,000) 
(Outlier limit = $25,000)
Target price 
$16,799 
$14,094
Actual episode spending 
$14,000 
$14,000 
(Performance period)
Winsorized episode spending 
$14,000 
$14,000 
Performance period)
20% X (Winsorized – Target) 
($0) 
($0)
Episode Reconciliation 
$2,799 
$94
800 10th Street, NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20001-4956
202.638.1100 • www.aha.org
©2016 American Hospital Association
Robert Mechanic, Senior Fellow
Heller School for Social Policy and Management, Brandeis University
1/19/16
