 An epigenetic mechanism mediates developmental nicotine 
effects on neuronal structure and behavior
Yonwoo Jung1,2, Lawrence S. Hsieh3, Angela M. Lee1,2, Zhifeng Zhou4, Daniel Coman5, 
Christopher J. Heath1,2,6, Fahmeed Hyder5,7, Yann S. Mineur1, Qiaoping Yuan3, David 
Goldman3, Angelique Bordey4, and Marina R. Picciotto1,2
1Division of Molecular Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06508
2Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
06508
3Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA; 
Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA
4Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National 
Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20849
5Department of Radiology & Biomedical Imaging and MRRC 300 Cedar St, TAC N144, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
6Department of Life, Health and Chemical Sciences, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton 
Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK
7Department of Biomedical Engineering, Yale University School of Applied Science & 
Engineering, New Haven, CT, USA
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Address for correspondence: Marina R. Picciotto, 34 Park Street, New Haven, CT 06508, Phone: 203-737-2041; Fax: 203-737-2043; 
marina.picciotto@yale.edu. 
Accession Codes: All microarray and DNA sequencing data have been submitted to the GEO database at NCBI. The accession 
number for all datasets in this study is GSE80789.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author Contributions: Y.J. designed the study, performed the experiments and data analyses, wrote and edited the manuscript. Z.Z 
and Q.Y. prepared samples and analyzed data for the ChIP-seq experiments. D.G provided critical resources, experimental design and 
advice on the ChIP-seq experiments. D.C. performed the imaging studies and data analyses for the diffusion tensor imaging 
experiments. F.H. provided valuable resources and critical advice on interpretation of the diffusion tensor imaging experiments. Y.S.M 
designed shRNA constructs, helped troubleshoot knockdown studies and provided critical advice on behavioral design. A.B. provided 
critical resources, experimental design and advice on the in utero electroporation studies. L.S.H performed in utero electroporation 
studies. A.M.L performed in utero electroporation surgeries and contributed to data collection. C.J.H. designed and prepared samples 
for the diffusion tensor imaging experiment and contributed to the microarray experiment. M.R.P. designed the project, assisted in 
interpretation of all studies, wrote and edited the manuscript. All authors contributed to editing of the manuscript.
Data Availability
H3K4me3 ChIP-seq and microarray datasets have been deposited in the GEO database at NCBI. All datasets for this study are 
available under a single accession number: GSE80789. Original Western blots are available in supplementary Figure 7. Gene Ontology 
data are available in supplementary Tables 1–4. Statistical analyses for all experiments are detailed in the Figure Legends and in the 
supplementary Data Checklist. All data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon 
request.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2016 July ; 19(7): 905–914. doi:10.1038/nn.4315.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Abstract
Developmental nicotine exposure causes persistent changes in cortical neuron morphology and in 
behavior. We used microarray screening to identify master transcriptional or epigenetic regulators 
mediating these effects of nicotine and discovered increases in Ash2l, a component of a histone 
methyltransferase complex. We therefore examined genome-wide changes in H3K4 tri-
methylation, a mark induced by the Ash2l complex associated with increased gene transcription. A 
significant number of regulated promoter sites were involved in synapse maintenance. We found 
that Mef2c interacts with Ash2l and mediates changes in H3K4 tri-methylation. Knockdown of 
Ash2l or Mef2c abolishes nicotine-mediated alterations of dendritic complexity in vitro and in 
vivo, and attenuates nicotine-dependent changes in passive avoidance behavior. In contrast, 
overexpression mimics nicotine-mediated alterations of neuronal structure and passive avoidance 
behavior. These studies identify Ash2l as a novel target induced by nicotinic stimulation that 
couples developmental nicotine exposure to changes in brain epigenetic marks, neuronal structure 
and behavior.
Keywords
Nicotine; histone modification; dendritic spines; Ash2l; Mef2c
High affinity nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are involved in early brain 
development, nicotine-mediated alterations of neuronal structure, and persistent changes in 
behavior 1,2. Developmental nicotine exposure induces structural and synaptic changes in the 
developing brain 3 and these changes persist into later life 4. Accordingly, developmental 
exposure to nicotine is associated with many deleterious effects, including deficits in 
learning and later development of psychiatric disorders 5–7; however, the molecular 
mechanisms underlying these effects of cholinergic signaling on early brain development are 
largely unknown.
We used microarray screening to detect long-term changes in gene expression with the goal 
of identifying pleiotropic master transcriptional regulators responsible for persistent 
morphological alterations of cortical neurons. Among identified genes that could alter a 
transcriptional program, a component of a histone methylase complex, Ash2l, was 
significantly up-regulated by nicotine exposure during development. We therefore used next 
generation sequencing to determine whether nicotine could alter histone methylation 
associated with promoter regions of ensembles of genes involved in neuronal structure. 
Developmental nicotine exposure induced significant enrichment of trimethylated histone 3, 
lysine 4 (H3K4me3) at promoter regions of multiple genes involved in development and 
maintenance of excitatory synapses, including the transcription factor Mef2c, which 
assembles with Ash2l in a histone methyltransferase complex. Taken together, this study 
identifies a novel role for Ash2l in the regulation of neuronal morphology during early brain 
development and a new molecular mechanism underlying the long-term consequences of 
developmental nicotine exposure.
Jung et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Results
 Developmental nicotine treatment alters neuronal morphology
Exposure to tobacco smoke during human development can alter cortical structure as 
measured by diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) 8. Since nicotine can alter dendritic spine 
number and neuronal morphology 1, we determined whether nicotine in tobacco smoke 
could underlie changes in cortical fractional anisotropy (FA) measured by DTI. Among 
regimens used to deliver nicotine during development 7, drinking water administration 
results in significant blood levels in the dam and the offspring and has minimal stressful 
effects 9. We therefore exposed mice to saccharin or nicotine (200 μg/ml) from the time of 
conception through weaning (P21) and measured FA at 3 months of age. This regimen 
results in persistent neurochemical and behavioral changes in exposed pups, with no effects 
on maternal behavior 10. Developmental nicotine exposure induced significant increases in 
FA in a number of cortical areas, largely in gray matter (Fig. 1a, b). To determine whether 
changes in gray matter such as spine density and dendritic arborization underlie increased 
FA, we labeled neurons diolistically with DiI and performed Sholl analysis and spine 
counting in mice exposed to nicotine throughout pre- and postnatal development as in the 
DTI study, as well as in an additional group that was treated only from birth to weaning 
(postnatal exposure), a critical period for cortical development dependent on acetylcholine 
signaling 11. Nicotine significantly increased spine density in both the pre- and postnatal 
nicotine treated group and in the postnatal-only nicotine treated group (Fig. 1c). There was a 
significant effect of nicotine treatment on dendritic complexity across rostral, medial and 
caudal regions of cortex (Fig. 1d–f), and across all cortical layers, as demonstrated by a 
significant nicotine treatment by dendritic complexity interaction in each cortical layer 
compared to the saccharin-treated group (Fig. 1g–i). These results are consistent with 
previous studies showing that nicotine can induce persistent changes in spine density 3,4. 
Postnatal-only nicotine treated mice also showed a significant increase in dendritic 
complexity across all cortical regions and layers (supplementary Fig. 1).
 Nicotine induces a histone methyltransferase protein
In order to identify persistent changes in transcriptional regulation that might be responsible 
for the effects of developmental nicotine treatment on cortical neuron morphology, we 
performed microarray analysis on mRNA prepared from dissected cortical tissue from mice 
administered saccharin or nicotine throughout the pre- and postnatal period until P21, that 
were then allowed to remain nicotine-free until 3 months of age (Fig. 2a; GEO accession 
#GSE80789). Our goal was to identify master transcriptional regulators that might maintain 
a program of gene expression responsible for persistent changes in neuronal morphology 
many weeks after developmental exposure to nicotine. We identified 18 probe sets that were 
significantly different between developmental nicotine-treated and control animals (Fig. 2b; 
supplementary Fig. 2a). To determine whether these changes in gene expression were an 
immediate or a later consequence of developmental nicotine exposure, we evaluated mRNA 
levels in independent cortical tissue samples by qRT-PCR immediately after nicotine 
exposure (21 days postnatal; Fig. 2c) or in adulthood following cessation of nicotine 
exposure (3 months postnatal; supplementary Fig 2b). At P21, 9 probes identified in the 
microarray study were significantly induced compared to the control group using qRT-PCR, 
Jung et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 including Ash2l, Chsy3, Ntrk2, Zfp91, Zcchc11, Cep192, Alkbh1, Ctnnal1, and Tmem107 
(Fig. 2c). Five out of 15 probes initially identified by microarray were significantly different 
as measured by qRT-PCR compared to the control group at 3 months of age. These included 
Ash2l, Chsy3, Zcchc11, Cep192, and Tmem107. Among these, Ash2l was the most highly 
regulated by two regimens of developmental nicotine treatment (Fig. 2d, e) and met our 
criterion as a master regulator of transcription as measured in muscle development 12. Ash2l 
belongs to the trithorax (trx) gene family, a positive regulator of gene transcription 
particularly critical for development and cell differentiation through trimethylation of 
H3K4me3 13.
Histone methylation provides a potential mechanism for long-term regulation of gene 
expression that could maintain the effects of early nicotine exposure into adulthood. We 
therefore evaluated H3K4me3 across the genome in cortical tissue following pre- and 
postnatal (Fig. 3a) and postnatal-only (Fig. 3b) nicotine exposure and identified 14,881 gene 
loci (Fig. 3a, b; GEO accession # GSE80789). Short read sequences from the ELAND 
pipeline were performed for quality control, and those that did not meet criteria for fidelity 
were discarded. Identified peaks were viewed in Genome browser and their alignment was 
verified (examples shown in Fig. 3c). 367 differentially-enriched peaks with adjusted p 
values < 0.05 were identified in cortical samples from pre- and postnatal nicotine exposed 
mice, and 426 differentially enriched peaks were identified from postnatal-only exposed 
mice (Fig. 3d; supplementary Tables 1 and 2).
Developmental nicotine exposure altered histone methylation at genomic sites responsible 
for the regulation of synapses, postsynaptic plasticity and cell junctions as identified by gene 
ontology (GO) analysis (using adjusted p values < 0.05; supplementary Tables 3 and 4). The 
genomic sites in these GO categories are highly overlapping (supplementary Fig. 3a). Most 
of the genomic sites identified in this screen are implicated in glutamatergic synaptic 
transmission (Grin1, Grin2c and Grin2d NMDA receptor subunits), and synapse formation 
(Dlg2, Camk2a, and Dlgap2).
Although there was substantial overlap in genomic sites associated with increased histone 
methylation in both nicotine-treated groups, developmental nicotine exposure resulted in 
different effects depending on time and duration of exposure. We identified common 
genomic sites from gene lists (adjusted p value < 0.05) of differentially enriched histone 
methylation following pre- and postnatal or postnatal-only nicotine exposure (example 
regulated locus; supplementary Fig. 3b). A total of 39 genes showed overlapping changes in 
both the pre- and postnatal and postnatal-only nicotine treated group (supplementary Tables 
1 and 2).
In order to validate these changes, all 36 overlapping genomic sites (excluding 3 Riken 
genes with unknown function) were tested using chromosome immunoprecipitation (ChIP) 
followed by qPCR in independent samples. 34 of 36 tested genomic sites showed significant 
changes in associated H3K4me3 levels in the pre- and postnatal or postnatal-only groups 
compared to the control group (Fig. 3e, supplementary Fig. 3c).
Jung et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Nicotine increases histone methylation at the Mef2c locus
Consistent with our search for master transcriptional regulators, we selected Mef2c for 
further functional characterization from among the 34 genomic sites that were verified by 
ChIP-PCR because the Mef2 family has been identified as part of the methylation complex 
along with Ash2l 12, and also participates in dendritic remodeling during neural 
differentiation 14,15. We first determined whether identified Ash2l and Mef2c binding sites 
in the genome 16 overlap with the sites of differentially enriched H3K4me3 sites we found 
following developmental nicotine exposure. A large proportion of Ash2l (mouse ES cell 
dataset) and Mef2c (early neuronal activity-induced cortical neuron datasets) binding sites 
overlapped with the H3K4me3 sites found here (supplementary Fig. 3d). GO analysis of 
these 6426 overlapping genomic sites (those sites differentially enriched as a result of 
nicotine exposure that overlapped with previously identified sites of Ash2l and Mef2c 
binding) identified synapse-related genes as a significant category (supplementary Fig. 3d). 
This suggested that Ash2l and Mef2c may normally interact at genomic sites related to 
synaptic function during neuronal development and induce histone tri-methylation and 
transcription of these loci, and that this complex is modulated as a result of developmental 
exposure to nicotine.
Mef2c expression is normally up-regulated during neuronal differentiation and 
maturation 14,15. Although it was not identified in our initial microarray screen, it is likely 
that the genome-wide evaluation missed some upregulated targets due to stringent statistical 
cut-offs. We therefore used targeted analyses to determine whether the mRNA encoding 
Mef2c is regulated following nicotine exposure during development. Using qPCR, we found 
that Mef2c mRNA levels were significantly elevated in the cortex of mice treated with 
nicotine throughout development (supplementary Fig. 4a). Mef2c genomic sites also showed 
significantly elevated H3 acetylation (supplementary Fig. 4b), an additional histone 
modification related to increased transcription.
At 3 months of age, H3K4me3 association with the Mef2c locus was elevated across all 
regions of cortex as measured by ChIP-PCR following developmental nicotine exposure, 
although changes were somewhat more modest in the caudal region (supplementary Fig. 4c). 
These data confirm that histone changes at the Mef2c locus are maintained for a long period 
following nicotine exposure, and that changes in histone methylation and gene expression 
occur broadly across cortical regions.
 Ash2l and Mef2c expression levels are regulated by nAChRs
In vivo genome-wide screening can identify loci that may be relevant for long-term 
consequences of developmental nicotine exposure, but cannot distinguish between direct 
effects of nicotine and indirect changes of downstream pathways. To determine whether 
alterations of Ash2l and Mef2c levels are due to direct effects of nicotine mediated through 
nAChRs, Ash2l and Mef2c protein levels were evaluated in cultured neural progenitor cells. 
After 8–9 days in culture, neural progenitor cells had differentiated into neurons. Cells were 
treated with nicotine (1 μM) for 48 h and protein levels were evaluated by Western blotting. 
Nicotine exposure significantly increased Mef2c and Ash2l protein levels as compared to 
saline treatment (Fig. 4a, b). The involvement of nAChR activity in the effects of nicotine on 
Jung et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mef2c and Ash2l expression was verified by exposure to the nicotinic antagonists 
mecamylamine, α-bungarotoxin, dihydro-β-erythroidine (DHβE) and methyllycaconitine 
(MLA; Fig. 4a, b). Mecamylamine and DHβE significantly attenuated nicotine-induced 
increases in Ash2l and Mef2c protein levels, whereas α-bungarotoxin and MLA had little 
effect, suggesting that heteromeric (likely α4/β2 subunit containing) nAChRs are more likely 
to contribute to these effects than homomeric nAChRs containing the α7 subunit.
Nicotine depolarizes neurons and increases levels of intracellular calcium, leading to 
induction of intracellular signaling cascades. To study the role of calcium signaling in 
nicotine-dependent alterations in Ash2l and Mef2c levels, we grew neural progenitor cells 
for 8–9 days, then treated with nifedipine (10 μg/ml) for 48 h with or without nicotine. Co-
treatment with nifedipine blocked the effects of nicotine and significantly reduced basal 
levels of Ash2l and Mef2c (Fig. 4a, b), suggesting that expression of these proteins is 
calcium-dependent and could be induced by depolarization.
Direct interaction of Mef2c and Ash2l was next assessed by co-immunoprecipitation using a 
Mef2c antibody to pull down Ash2l (Fig. 4c). Ash2l was recognized in samples 
immunoprecipitated with the specific Mef2c antibody, but much less Ash2l was observed in 
the control condition. Thus, Ash2l and Mef2c form a complex in neural progenitor cells, as 
has been documented in muscle cells 12. We next determined whether additional 
methyltransferase complex subunits (Wdr5, Mll, Rbbp5) that form a complex with Ash2l in 
muscle were also present in neural progenitor cells. Wdr5 and Rbbp5 were detected 
following formalin cross-linking and immunoprecipitation of Ash2l at baseline, and levels of 
Wdr5 were significantly elevated following treatment of cells with nicotine (Fig. 4d). Thus, 
the methyltransferase complex is expressed in neural progenitors and multiple components 
are regulated by nicotine signaling.
 Ash2l/Mef2c mediate nicotine effects on dendrite morphology
If the Ash2l/Mef2c complex is involved in transcriptional regulation of genes involved in 
synapse and spine formation, these proteins may be necessary for the ability of nicotine to 
induce changes in dendritic structure. To determine whether Ash2l and Mef2c are involved 
in dendritic spine formation, we generated shRNAs specific for mouse Ash2l or Mef2c and 
transfected these into neural progenitor cells. Down-regulation of Ash2l or Mef2c protein 
was confirmed by Western blotting (supplementary Fig. 5). Neural progenitor cells were 
transfected with Ash2l shRNA, Mef2c shRNA or scrambled control shRNA (Fig. 5a–f) and 
exposed for 4 days to saline or nicotine. Four days of nicotine exposure significantly 
increased the number of spines on dendritic shafts of cultured neurons (Fig. 5a, b). 
Conversely, knockdown of Ash2l or Mef2c (Fig. 5a, b) significantly reduced the number of 
dendritic spines on apical dendrites of cultured neural progenitor cells and abolished the 
increase in spines induced by 4 days of nicotine exposure.
To determine whether the Ash2l/Mef2c complex could also be critical for effects of nicotine 
on cortical neuron structure in vivo, in utero electroporation was used to introduce the 
shRNAs targeting Ash2l or Mef2c into a subset of neurons in the cortex of mice at 
embryonic day 14 (E14). Control (scrambled) shRNA was electroporated into the right 
hemisphere of a subset of the developing embryos and Ash2l or Mef2c shRNA was 
Jung et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 electroporated into the left hemisphere of remaining littermates (supplementary Fig. 6). 
Dams were administered nicotine or saccharin in the drinking water starting from the day of 
surgery and pups were euthanized on postnatal day 21 for analysis of cortical neuron 
dendritic structure. Exposure to nicotine increased dendritic complexity in neurons 
expressing the scrambled construct, whereas knockdown of Ash2l or Mef2c abolished the 
ability of nicotine exposure to alter dendritic branching (Fig. 5c–e). Consistent with the 
possibility that the Ash2l/Mef2c complex mediates the effects of nicotine on dendritic 
structure, overexpression of Ash2l or Mef2c mimicked the ability of nicotine to increase 
dendritic complexity in the absence of drug exposure (Fig. 5f).
Similarly, electroporation of the Ash2l shRNA abolished the ability of nicotine to increase 
density of dendritic spines (Fig. 5g). Unexpectedly, knockdown of Mef2c resulted in 
significantly increased basal spine density compared to control animals; however, there was 
no further increase in spine density by nicotine exposure following Mef2c knockdown (Fig. 
5g). These results suggest that Mef2c signaling likely has multiple roles in spine formation 
and stabilization 14,17–22, but among those roles, it contributes to the ability of nicotine to 
increase spine number. In contrast, overexpression of Ash2l or Mef2c increased spine 
density (Fig. 5h).
 Ash2l/Mef2c mediate nicotine effects on passive avoidance
Knockdown of Ash2l or Mef2c in vivo prevents developmental nicotine-induced remodeling 
of dendritic morphology and spine density. In previous studies, we showed that nicotine 
exposure during the first 3 postnatal weeks induces hypersensitive passive avoidance 
learning in response to a subthreshold foot shock that is normally ignored 23,24. 
Furthermore, this effect is mediated through β2 subunit-containing nAChRs on 
corticothalamic neurons. We hypothesized that this behavioral consequence of 
developmental nicotine exposure could result from morphological changes in sensory cortex 
as a result of Ash2l and Mef2c induction. We tested passive avoidance behavior in mice 
following shRNA-mediated knockdown or cDNA overexpression of Ash2l or Mef2c in 
sensory cortex via in utero electroporation. While we targeted sensory cortex based on the 
DTI findings and the role of sensory stimuli in passive avoidance behavior, all animals 
showed broad cortical expression of the shRNA constructs, and some expression was seen 
bilaterally. Mice were exposed to saccharin or nicotine from the time of surgery until 
weaning on postnatal day 21 (Fig. 6a). As predicted, nicotine-exposed mice demonstrated 
hypersensitive passive avoidance performance, as shown by increased latency to enter a dark 
chamber paired with a mild foot shock, compared to saccharin-exposed mice (Fig. 6a). 
Cortical delivery of Ash2l or Mef2c shRNA by in utero electroporation significantly 
attenuated the hypersensitive passive avoidance induced by nicotine (Fig. 6a). Despite this 
significant attenuation, Ash2l knockdown did not completely abolish the effects of nicotine, 
likely due to incomplete knockdown or variability in cortical targeting. Finally, Ash2l or 
Mef2c overexpression via electroporation mimicked the effect of nicotine exposure, 
resulting in hypersensitive passive avoidance behavior as compared to controls (Fig. 6b), 
demonstrating bidirectional modulation of passive avoidance by Ash2l and Mef2c.
Jung et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Discussion
The current results demonstrate that Ash2l and Mef2c are critical for the ability of nAChR 
activity to alter cortical neuron architecture and behavior during development. We propose 
that nicotine-dependent induction of the Ash2l/Mef2c complex during cortical development 
induces alterations of histone methylation associated with promoter regions of genes 
involved in structure and function of glutamatergic synapses, and increases spine number, 
dendritic branching and hypersensitive passive avoidance behavior, a task modulated by 
nAChRs expressed in cortical neurons. Together, these results identify a molecular 
mechanism underlying the ability of nAChRs to influence synaptic and dendritic structure 
and provide a potential cellular mechanism underlying a persistent behavioral consequence 
of developmental nicotine exposure.
Among the small number of genes that are persistently regulated in adulthood following 
early nicotine exposure, we focused on Ash2l because it fit the profile of a protein that could 
maintain a broad program of gene expression changes into adulthood. Ash2l is the 
mammalian homolog of ash2, a gene that belongs to the trithorax (trx) gene family and is a 
positive regulator of homeotic genes through DNA binding 25 and maintenance of chromatin 
in a transcriptionally active conformation 26. The Ash2l gene is highly conserved across 
evolution and functions as a transcription factor 27. It is a subunit of several Trx complexes 
that associate with the Set1 family of histone H3K4 methyltransferases 28. Decreased 
expression of Ash2l impairs histone H3K4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and expression of 
SET family target genes 29.
In mammals, Ash2l is expressed in fetal human and mouse brain and its expression 
decreases in adult tissue 30. A study of alcohol-induced changes in brain gene expression 
identified changes in trx-related genes, including Ash2l 31, suggesting that modulation of 
Ash2l may also be important for effects of alcohol and other drugs on brain development. 
Based on the human proteome atlas database, Ash2l protein in brain is detected only in 
neuronal and glial cells of the cerebral cortex and cerebellum 32. We cannot exclude the 
possibility that Ash2l signaling in glial cells is involved in nicotine effects on cortical 
morphology or behavior; however, the in utero electroporation studies may indicate that this 
is unlikely. Electroporation into the cortex at E14 largely targets pyramidal neurons because 
GABA interneurons have not yet migrated from the ganglionic eminence at E14, whereas 
astroglia develop later and electroporated DNA is diluted by the time glia start to 
differentiate 33. In addition, the genes most significantly regulated by nicotine exposure 
during development fall into neuronally-relevant GO groups, including those involved in 
glutamatergic synaptic formation and maintenance. Taken together, these observations 
support a primary role for Ash2l and Mef2c in neuronal signaling following nicotine 
exposure during development.
This study also identifies a novel mechanism of gene regulation during brain development 
that could be more generally involved in activity-dependent structural changes of cortical 
neurons. Ash2l-mediated changes in H3K4me3, specifically at promoters of genes involved 
in synapse maintenance, likely reflect transcriptional alterations at these loci during a critical 
period of development that become fixed in the genome 34. H3K4me3 has been identified as 
Jung et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 an active promoter mark 35 and may regulate formation of the pre-initiation complex and 
gene transcription by interacting with other transcription factors 36.
Of the 34 promoter regions associated with H3K4me3 changes following nicotine exposure, 
the Mef2c locus is of particular interest because interaction between Ash2l and Mef2d 
selectively induces trimethylation of H3K4, which subsequently induces gene expression 
changes required for muscle differentiation 12. While Mef2c mRNA levels increase in 
parallel with the increase in H3K4me3 associated with its promoter, it is not yet known 
whether these histone methylation changes alter Mef2c expression directly. In myoblasts 
undergoing terminal differentiation, p38α-dependent phosphorylation of Mef2d recruits the 
Ash2l complex to myogenic gene promoters, enhancing histone H3K4 methylation 12, 
promoting formation of the transcription initiation complex and recruiting associated 
transcription factors that maintain the expression of myogenic genes 37. Thus, the 
enrichment of H3K4me3 and persistence of elevated Ash2l expression many weeks after 
developmental nicotine exposure may maintain transcription of loci associated with 
H3K4me3 enrichment into adulthood.
Although differential H3K4me3 enrichment is positively correlated with transcription of 
specific subsets of genes, it is weakly correlated with genome wide transcription changes. 
The involvement of H3K4me3 in specific gene expression changes is therefore still 
somewhat controversial. The current study showing differential enrichment of histone 
methylation at genomic sites following developmental nicotine exposure may suggest that 
this subset of promoter regions is among those activated by the H3K4me3 mark. While the 
mechanisms that distinguish genomic loci transcribed as a result of this histone methylation 
event are not yet clear, the ability of nicotinic signaling to stimulate synaptically-related loci 
may help identify components of the complex that confer specific transcriptional activation. 
We note that although a small subset of loci were significantly enriched by both pre- and 
postnatal and postnatal-only nicotine exposure compared to saccharin treatment, 99% of loci 
identified with the H3K4me3 mark were identified in both nicotine treatment groups. The 
two regimens of nicotine exposure resulted in differential enrichment of H3K4me3 patterns 
across this set of gene loci, likely because histone methylation changes are highly dynamic 
across this period of neural precursor differentiation resulting in a cumulative representation 
of changes at each stage of development. Thus, the subset of gene loci showing differential 
H3K4me3 enrichment common to the two regimens of nicotine exposure are likely to be 
those loci most critical for the functional effects of nicotine on adult neuronal morphology 
and behavior.
Surprisingly, most of the genes implicated in developmental response or neuroadaptation to 
nicotine are implicated in glutamatergic neurotransmission, synaptic structure or spine 
formation. In addition to its role in the Ash2l complex, the Mef2 family is involved in 
synaptic maturation and dendritic structure 14,17–22. Members of the Mef2 family are 
expressed throughout the developing central nervous system 38 and can regulate activity-
dependent synaptic morphogenesis in hippocampal neurons 39,40. Mef2c regulates gene 
expression 18,19 and facilitates neuronal plasticity by regulating synaptic number and 
function in adult rodents 14. The identification of mutations in genes regulated by the Mef2 
family in human neurological diseases, including autism spectrum disorders, suggests that 
Jung et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mef2 activity is critical for normal brain development. Conditional knockout of the Mef2c 
gene in mouse brain results in changes in neuronal density, disorganized cortical structure 
and immature electrophysiological properties, along with abnormalities in anxiety-like 
behaviors and cognitive tasks 21. The current results support the idea that Mef2c plays 
multiple roles in neuronal development, some of which are dependent on Ash2l and others 
that are likely to be independent.
Although loci with synapse-related functions were most clearly identified by gene ontology 
analysis following developmental nicotine exposure, genomic sites in the channel binding 
protein and activity modulator groups were also identified, including a number of calcium 
and potassium channel subunits (see supplementary Tables 3 and 4). In addition, 
developmental nicotine administration induced changes in histone methylation of 
acetylcholine receptor loci, including the α3 subunit of the nAChR (Chrna3) and the 
muscarinic subunit M1 (Chrm1). Thus, developmental nicotine exposure has persistent 
effects on histone structure of loci associated with glutamatergic synaptic transmission, 
neuronal excitability and cholinergic signaling, and common molecular and cellular changes 
can be induced by different durations of nicotine exposure.
The early postnatal weeks appear to be a critical period for nicotine-induced molecular, 
cellular and behavioral alterations. The first 2–3 weeks of postnatal development in the 
mouse corresponds to the third trimester of human pregnancy with respect to cortical 
synaptic development 41,42. Previous studies suggest that stimulation of nAChRs and the 
resulting calcium influx contributes to maturation of glutamatergic synapses 11 and 
stimulation of β2* nAChRs induces spine formation in hippocampal and cortical neurons in 
a cell-autonomous manner 1. In previous studies we have shown that developmental nicotine 
exposure during the first three weeks of postnatal development induces persistent 
hypersensitive passive avoidance behavior that lasts into adulthood 23,24. Increased passive 
avoidance learning in response to a mild footshock that is normally ignored could represent 
an inability to screen out irrelevant sensory stimuli, consistent with the increased incidence 
of attentional disorders in children exposed in utero to maternal smoking 7. Maternal 
smoking is also associated with increased smoking in adult offspring, although this is not 
modeled with the passive avoidance paradigm. The hypersensitive passive avoidance 
phenotype requires expression of β2* nAChRs on layer 6 corticothalamic neurons, 
consistent with the finding that manipulation of Ash2l or Mef2c levels in cortex can 
modulate passive avoidance learning.
The correlation between the ability of the Ash2l/Mef2c complex to regulate nicotine-
dependent remodeling of dendritic morphology and changes in passive avoidance behavior 
suggest that the alterations in neuronal structure may mediate a persistent behavioral 
consequence of early nicotine exposure. The current study provides a novel molecular 
mechanism that underlies these cellular and behavioral consequences of nicotine 
administration. Moreover, the fact that DTI has the sensitivity to detect these morphological 
changes of dendritic spine density provides clinical opportunities to evaluate these changes 
in behaving human subjects. In addition to mediating the effects of developmental exposure 
to the nicotine in tobacco, these molecular mechanisms likely contribute to normal brain 
development, suggesting that dysregulation of cholinergic induction of Ash2l and Mef2c as 
Jung et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a result of genetic or environmental factors could increase the risk for neurodevelopmental 
disorders such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 5–7.
 Online Methods
 Animals
All procedures were approved by the Yale University Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee and conformed to the standards of the NIH Guide for Care and Use of 
Laboratory Animals. C57BL/6J mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) used in the 
developmental nicotine exposure studies acclimated for 1 week, had ad libitum food and 
water and a 12-h light–dark cycle (lights on at 7AM).
 Reagents
Nicotine hydrogen tartrate (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) was dissolved in phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) pH 7.4 and placed at 20°C until use. Inhibitors were incubated with 
the cultures for the following durations before nicotine stimulation: mecamylamine (20 min; 
Sigma), α-bungarotoxin (α-BTX; 20 min; Sigma and Calbiochem) and nifedipine (15 min; 
Sigma). Most inhibitors were used at a stock concentration of 1000X of the desired 
stimulating concentration. Anti-Ash2l antibody (abcam, ab176334) and anti-Mef2c antibody 
(Cell Signaling, 5030) were validated using cells overexpressing Ash2l and Mef2c. Anti-
Wdr5 antibody (Abcam, ab56919) and anti-Rbbp5 antibody (Abcam, ab52084) have been 
validated in published studies (supplementary methods checklist). Anti-β tubulin antibody 
(Abcam, ab6046) and anti-Gapdh antibody (Sigma, G8795-200UL) were used as loading 
controls for Western blots and have been validated in published studies (supplementary 
methods checklist).
 Developmental Nicotine Exposure
After vaginal plug identification, gestating mice were singly housed with ad libitum access 
to food and water containing 200 μg/ml nicotine hydrogen tartrate (calculated as free base) 
in 2% (w/v) saccharin or pH-matched 2% saccharin with 0.2% (v/v) tartaric acid (Sigma-
Aldrich, St Louis, MO). Solutions were prepared twice a week. At 21 days, offspring were 
weaned and left undisturbed until brain tissue harvesting except for routine husbandry. 
Female mice were used for genome wide screening, structural analyses and biochemical 
studies described below and animals were randomly assigned to treatment groups for all 
studies.
 Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and analysis
The DTI datasets were obtained using a custom-made 43 H radio frequency volume coil 
(40mm diameter) on a 9.4T horizontal bore magnet (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) The DTI 
experiments were performed using the Stejskal-Tanner spin-echo diffusion-weighted 
sequence with a diffusion gradient of 5 ms and a delay between the two diffusion gradients 
of 15 ms as previously described 44. Briefly, twenty contiguous coronal slices of 0.5 mm 
thickness were acquired with a repetition time of 2 s and an echo time of 25.1 ms. Two 1ms 
Shinnar–Le Roux (SLR) pulses were used for excitation and inversion, respectively. 
Eighteen averages were acquired and the 128 × 64 images were zero-filled to 256 × 256, 
Jung et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 resulting in an in-plane resolution of 100 μm × 100 μm. Sixteen different images were 
acquired for each slice, fifteen corresponding to noncollinear diffusion weighting directions 
(b=1000 s/mm2) and one with no diffusion weighting. In addition, a 256 x 256 fast spin-
echo anatomical image was acquired for each brain with the same slice geometry and 
position as the DTI images. The anatomical image was used for registration of each 
individual brain to a common reference image.
The diffusion tensor was calculated from the intensities of the 16 diffusion-weighted images 
and the tensor eigenvalues (λ1, λ2 and λ3) were obtained by matrix diagonalization. The 
fractional anisotropy (FA) was calculated using the following equation:
where λavg = (λ1 + λ2 + λ3)/3. The fast spin-echo anatomical images were non-rigidly 
registered to a reference isotropic anatomical image (100 μm) using a non-linear intensity-
based warping parameterized in terms of a tensor b-spline grid with uniform control point 
spacing of 1.5 mm. These transformations were used to warp the smoothed FA (Gausian 
smoothing sigma=0.2 mm) maps to the same isotropic reference anatomical image at 100μm 
resolution. The mean and the standard deviation FA maps for both nicotine and saccharin 
groups were then calculated. To measure the differences between the two groups, two tail t-
test maps were generated from the mean and standard deviation FA maps. The t-test maps 
were used to define brain regions (Fig. 1a), for which the mean FA difference becomes 
significant (p<0.05). An average FA value was calculated first for each individual brain in 
each of these regions. Then, an average FA value and the corresponding standard deviation 
in these regions were calculated for nicotine and saccharin groups separately.
 Diolistic labeling of cortical neurons in mouse brain slices
Tungsten particles (1.3 μm diameter, Bio-Rad, Berkeley, CA) were coated with the lipophilic 
carbocyanine dye DiI (Invitrogen, Calrsbad, CA). DiI-coated particles were delivered 
diolistically into tissue at 120 psi using a Helios Gene Gun system (Bio-Rad, Berkeley, CA) 
fitted with a polycarbonate filter (3.0 μm pore size; BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ). 
DiI was allowed to diffuse along neuronal dendrites and axons in PBS for 16 – 24 h at 4°C, 
and then labeled sections were fixed again in 4% paraformaldehyde for 1 h. After brief 
washing in PBS, sections were mounted with Fluoromount G mounting media (Electron 
Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) onto glass slides (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA).
 Confocal imaging and three-dimensional reconstructions
Cortical pyramidal neurons were imaged using an UltraVIEW VoX spinning disc confocal 
microscope with a 60x CFI Plan Apo objective and equipped with a Hamamatsu C9100-50 
camera, with excitation at 561 nm. Z-stacks were collapsed into projection images and 2- 3 
neurons/brain were manually analyzed per section.
Jung et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Neuronal tracing and data analysis
Cortical regions were identified using stereotactic coordinates according to the Paxinos 
mouse brain map 1: Frontal cortex: Bregma +1 mm; Parietal cortex: Bregma -2.06 mm; 
Occipital cortex: Bregma -2.46 mm (from rostral to caudal). Pyramidal neurons from layers 
1/2, layer 3/4, and layer 5/6 of entire cortex with complete cellular and dendritic staining 
were selected for analysis. For apical spine density quantitative analysis, collected data were 
processed for reconstruction with NeuronStudio software as described in the manufacturer’s 
manual (CNIC, Mt. Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY; http://research.mssm.edu/
cnic/help/ns/index.html). A 200 μM segment of the apical dendritic branch was analyzed. 
Maximum and minimum spine length was set at < 3.5 μm and > 0.5 μm respectively. After 
automatic detection of spines by the NeuronStudio software, spots that were not on the 
quantified dendrite were removed manually. For Sholl analysis of apical dendritic 
arborization, Simple Neurite Tracer (SNT) software was used. SNT is open source software, 
licensed under the GNU General Public License and based on the public domain image 
processing software ImageJ. To build a simple path, successive points were selected along 
the midline of a neural process, and the software would automatically find a path between 
them. Connected neural processes were confirmed by generating a 3D reconstruction image.
The morphological parameters measured for each apical dendrite and complexity of 
dendritic arborization were measured using Sholl analysis with NeuronStudio software 
(MicroBrightField) by calculating the number of crossings that intersected defined 
concentric circles spaced 10 μm-apart starting from the center of cell body as a function of 
distance from the soma and is based on a total of 214 neurons from 6 animals in the pre- & 
postnatal nicotine treated group and 181 neurons from 5 animals in the postnatal-only 
nicotine treated group. All data were collected by an investigator blinded to condition.
 Microarray analysis
Mouse tissue samples were cut into slices less than 1 mm in thickness, transferred to Trizol 
reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and disrupted with a Dounce tissue homogenizer 
(Wheaton, Millville, NJ). An equal volume of chloroform was added and samples were 
centrifuged for 5 min (4°C, 12,000g). The aqueous phase was transferred to a column from 
an RNeasy tissue kit (Qiagen, Redwood City, CA) and RNA was isolated according to the 
manufacturer's recommendations. Subsequently, RNAs from 4 animals were pooled to 
obtain 5 pools per experimental group (20 subjects total). Generation of double-stranded 
cDNA, preparation and labeling of cRNA, hybridization to GeneChip® Mouse Genome 430 
2.0 Arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) and washing was performed according to the 
standard Affymetrix protocol. Data analysis was performed using different R packages from 
the Bioconductor project (www.bioconductor.org). Microarray experiments were done on 
sample sizes based on successful experiments in the literature. All confirmation experiments 
were performed on multiple pools of brain samples to reduce biological variability and 
provide adequate statistical power.
 Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
Mouse tissue samples (50 mg) were cut into slices less than 1 mm in thickness, and fixed in 
3 ml of 1% formaldehyde/PBS solution for 10 min at room temperature to cross-link 
Jung et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 chromatin DNA and proteins. After being washed with PBS, the tissue samples were 
homogenized in a glass-Teflon homogenizer. Following homogenization, chromatin was 
isolated using the Magna ChIP G kit (Millipore, Temecula, CA) according to the Millipore 
protocol. Briefly, cells were lysed in Cell Lysis Buffer in the presence of protease inhibitor 
cocktail. Nuclei were isolated from the lysed cells by centrifugation, and resuspended in 
Nuclear Lysis Buffer. The chromatin DNA was then fragmented into 150 – 500 base-pair 
range by sonication using a Branson Sonifer (Danbury, Connecticut).
To immuno-precipitate specific genomic regions of chromatin DNA, the isolated chromatin 
fragments were incubated with antibodies against histone H3 trimethylated at Lysine 4 
(H3K4-me3, Abcam, Cambridge, MA) and magnetic protein G beads (Millipore) at 4° C for 
2.5 hr. Following incubation, the beads were washed with low salt, high salt, LiCl salt, and 
TE buffers, and chromatin fragments were reverse cross-linked by proteinase K digestion at 
62° C for 2 hr.
The eluted DNA was purified after reverse cross-linking by column purification. H3k4me3-
specific enrichment was validated by PCR amplification of select positive and negative 
genomic regions and amplification signals were normalized to the input DNA samples 
which were extracted from the same pools of chromatin fragments without enrichment by 
immunoprecipitation. To control for any differences in DNA across conditions, all ChIP-
PCR data were normalized to GAPDH.
 High-throughput, massively parallel sequencing
Sample preparation and sequencing on the Genome Analyzer (Illumina, San Diego, CA) 
were carried out according to the Illumina protocols with some modifications. Briefly, the 
double stranded cDNA and ChIP-enriched genomic DNA were treated with T4 DNA 
polymerase and the Klenow fragment for end repair. The 5’ ends of the DNA fragments 
were then phosphorylated by T4 polynucleotide kinase, and an adenosine base was added to 
the 3’ end of the fragments by Klenow (3’-5’ exo). A universal adaptor was then added to 
both ends of the DNA fragments by A-T ligation. Following 18 cycles of PCR with the 
Phusion DNA polymerase, the DNA library was then purified on a 2% agarose gel, and 
fragments of 170 – 300 base-pair in size were recovered. Around 15 ng of the DNA library 
was then used for cluster generation on a grafted GAII Flow Cell, and then sequenced on the 
Genome Analyzer for 36 cycles using the “Sequencing-by-synthesis” method.
 Sequence base-calling, mapping to genome, data normalization and statistical analysis
Sequences were called from image files with the Illumina Genome Analyzer Pipeline 
(GApipeline) and aligned to the reference genome (UCSC mm9) using Extended Eland in 
the GApipeline. Uniquely mapped H3K4-me3 reads for each sample were retrieved from 
export.txt files (output of Extended Eland). Based on their mapping locations, these selected 
reads were parsed with in-house Perl scripts to generate base coverage in WIG file format. 
After moving average smoothing, the chromosome locations of enrichment peaks were 
identified from pooled WIG files using in-house Perl scripts.
The uniquely aligned reads by ELAND pipeline were considered in calling peaks. To 
eliminate noise and account for unequal total numbers, we used a defined analysis model 
Jung et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Model-based Analysis of ChIP-Seq, MACS 45) with default parameters to find peaks, 
which were called “peaks” of H3K4me3. For comparison analysis, a customized genomic 
interval file was created for EdgeR 46 analysis.
Gene Ontology analysis was performed by using the Functional Annotation Tool of the 
DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.7, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 
(NIAID), NIH (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/). Statistical methods were not used to 
predetermine sample sizes, but ‘n’ sizes were based on other published studies. All 
confirmation experiments were performed on multiple pools of brain samples to reduce 
biological variability and provide adequate statistical power.
 Cell culture
Neural progenitor cell cultures were generated from C57BL/6J mice at embryonic day 15 as 
described in the Cold Spring Harbor protocol for neural progenitor cell culture 5. Each 
embryonic mouse brain was placed in a clean dish containing ice-cold 1X PBS. Brains were 
separated into two hemispheres, followed by separation of the dorsal telencephalon. Isolated 
brain regions were carefully transferred to a non-treated polystyrene dish containing cold 1X 
PBS and tissue was disrupted with a Pasteur pipette. Papaine Enzyme solution prepared as 
described in protocol 47 was added and incubated for 20 min at 37°C. Neural progenitor cell 
media (NEP) was added after adding enzyme inhibitor solution and centrifugation. Cells 
were counted using a hemacytometer and 4x106 cells were added to a non-treated culture 
dish containing NEP medium with EGF and bFGF (NEP complete medium). Once spheres 
formed, neural spheres were transferred to a PDL and laminin coated culture dish. The next 
day, after the neural spheres settled and attached to the culture dish, NEP complete medium 
was replaced with NEP medium containing 1% horse serum. For histological analysis, 
shRNA constructs were introduced into cells at DIV 8/9 when progenitor cells had already 
differentiated into neurons, and cultures then underwent a further 4 days of exposure to 
nicotine or saline. Histological analyses were performed at DIV 12/13.
 Western blotting
Approximately 40 μg of each sample was separated by 10% SDS–polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Blots were blocked with 5% 
milk in Tris-buffered saline with 0.05% (v/v) Tween-20 (TBS-T) for 60 min at 25°C, washed 
three times in TBS-T for 15 min, and then incubated at 4°C overnight in primary antibody 
diluted in TBS-T. Blots were washed three times in TBS-T and incubated for 60 min at 25°C 
in secondary antibody in TBS with 0.1% Tween. Blots were washed three times in TBS-T 
and two times in water before scanning with an Odyssey Infrared Scanner (Li-Cor 
Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA). The scans were performed with the following scan 
parameters: intensity = 5.0, for each wavelength (700 and 800 nm), resolution = 169, quality 
= medium, and focus offset = 0 mm. The scanned intensity of the two secondary antibodies’ 
fluorophores was then used by the Odyssey Software v1.2 (Li-Cor Biosciences) to produce 
individual images for each wavelength, and a pseudocolor overlay of the 700 (red) and 800 
nm (green) scans. The area of each band was selected for quantification and the integrated 
intensity of the 700 and 800 nm wavelengths was measured using Odyssey Software without 
investigator manipulation. Since Li-Cor uses the absolute intensities for quantitation, the 
Jung et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pseudocolor images are reflections of the absolute value measured by the program. The 
integrated intensity values were then exported to Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA) for 
further analysis. For Ash2l expression detection, Chemiluminescence (ECL detection kit 
from GE health care, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) was used.
 Immunoprecipitation assay
Approximately 4 x 106 neural progenitor cells (NPCs) were treated with nicotine or PBS. 
Following treatment, NPCs were lysed in Ripa buffer (0.7 % Na-Deoxycholate, 500 mM 
LiCl, 50mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.6, 1% NP-40, 1mM EDTA). Samples were sonicated and 
protein was measured using a D/C protein assay kit (Bio-rad). 500–1000 ug of protein was 
used for each immunoprecipitation assay. The anti-H3K4me3 antibody (Millipore) was 
coupled to Protein-A beads (Novex Lifetechnologies) and immunoprecipitation and elution 
were performed according to the manufacturer’s recommendation.
 Design and construction of shRNAs
shRNAs targeting Ash2l and Mef2c were constructed by selecting unique 24 base or 19 base 
sequences in the consensus coding region of the mRNA encoding the different isoforms of 
Ash2l and Mef2c (Ash2l; GenBank accession NM_011791.3, Mef2c; GenBank accession 
NM_025282.3) as previously described 48. A random sequence of 24 bases without 
similarities to any known mRNA was selected for the scrambled shRNA. Synthetic 
oligonucleotide duplexes were designed as previously described. Annealed oligonucleotides 
were ligated into a pAAV-EGFP-shRNA vector as described previously and positive clones 
were verified by sequencing 48–50. Sequences of shRNAs were as follows:
Ash2l shRNA (5’ to 3’: 1. GTGCCATCACAGTGGGAATACCTA; 2. 
GCCATCACAGTGGGAATACCTACT; 3. CCGGAAGCAAGCAAATTTA).
Mef2c shRNA (5’ to 3’: 1. GAATAGTATGTCTCCTGGT; 2. 
GGTAACCTGAACAAGAATA; 3. GGACAAACTCAGACATTGT)
 In utero electroporation
DNA plasmids encoding either scrambled or Ash2l-targeting shRNA were diluted to a final 
concentration of 3 μg/μl in PBS containing 0.1% fast green dye tracer. DNA solution (1–2 
μl) was unilaterally injected into a lateral ventricle of E14 embryos using a glass pipette and 
positive pneumatic pressure. PBS soaked Tweezertrodes with 5 mm electrode diameter 
(45-0489; BTX) were then positioned across the heads of the embryos followed by five 44 
volt square pulses lasting 50 ms each at 950 ms interval applied using a pulse generator 
(ECM830; BTX).
 Statistical analysis and computational analysis
All statistical analyses were accomplished using SPSS (IBM, Inc.). Shapiro-Wilks test of 
normality and the Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test were conducted to test for normal distribution. 
Levene’s test was conducted for homogeneity variance. Differences in fractional anisotrophy 
(FA) were analyzed by two-tailed t tests. One-way ANOVA with repeated mesures or two-
way ANOVA were conducted on the test sholl analysis of nicotine-mediated or IUE-induced 
Jung et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 morphological changes. One-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey or LSD test for multiple 
comparisons, was used to analyze experiments confirming changes in mRNA and protein 
levels in independent samples. Fold-change in ChIP (H3K4m3) experiments was analyzed 
by one-way ANOVA. A supplementary methods checklist is available with complete 
statistical details of all experiments.
 Passive avoidance behavior
Passive avoidance testing was conducted at 21 days of age in a step-through, two chamber 
apparatus (Ugo Basile, Comerio, Italy) using a 3-day paradigm 24. Day 1: mice were 
allowed to explore the apparatus for 5 min. Day 2: mice were placed in the light chamber 
and received a mild, inescapable footshock (0.2 mA, 2s) after entry into the dark chamber. 
Day 3: mice were placed in the light chamber and time to cross into the dark chamber was 
measured. Latency to cross was measured on days 2 (training day) and 3 (testing day), with 
5 min maximum. Passive avoidance studies were performed by an investigator blinded to 
condition. Both male and female mice were used for passive avoidance behavior and no sex 
differences were observed, as has been published previously. No animals were excluded 
from analysis in studies of passive avoidance behavior. No statistical methods were used to 
pre-determine sample sizes, but sample sizes are similar to those reported in previous 
publications 24.
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
 Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants DA14241 (MRP), DA10455 (MRP), NS052519 (FH) and NS086329 (FH) from 
the National Institutes of Health, the State of Connecticut, Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services 
and the Kavli Institute for Neuroscience at Yale.
Literature cited
1. Lozada AF, et al. Induction of dendritic spines by beta2-containing nicotinic receptors. The Journal 
of Neuroscience. 2012; 32:8391–8400. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6247-11.2012 [PubMed: 
22699919] 
2. Ballesteros-Yanez I, Benavides-Piccione R, Bourgeois JP, Changeux JP, DeFelipe J. Alterations of 
cortical pyramidal neurons in mice lacking high-affinity nicotinic receptors. PNAS. 2010; 
107:11567–11572. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1006269107 [PubMed: 20534523] 
3. Muhammad A, et al. Prenatal nicotine exposure alters neuroanatomical organization of the 
developing brain. Synapse. 2012; 66:950–954. DOI: 10.1002/syn.21589 [PubMed: 22837140] 
4. Mychasiuk R, Muhammad A, Gibb R, Kolb B. Long-term alterations to dendritic morphology and 
spine density associated with prenatal exposure to nicotine. Brain Research. 2013; 1499:53–60. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.12.021 [PubMed: 23328078] 
5. Sorenson CA, Raskin LA, Suh Y. The effects of prenatal nicotine on radial-arm maze performance 
in rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry & Behavior. 1991; 40:991–993.
6. Sobrian SK, Marr L, Ressman K. Prenatal cocaine and/or nicotine exposure produces depression 
and anxiety in aging rats. Progress in Neuro-psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry. 2003; 
27:501–518. DOI: 10.1016/S0278-5846(03)00042-3 [PubMed: 12691787] 
7. Heath CJ, Picciotto MR. Nicotine-induced plasticity during development: modulation of the 
cholinergic system and long-term consequences for circuits involved in attention and sensory 
Jung et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 processing. Neuropharmacology. 2009; 56(Suppl 1):254–262. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.
2008.07.020 [PubMed: 18692078] 
8. Jacobsen LK, Picciotto MR, Heath CJ, Mencl WE, Gelernter J. Allelic variation of calsyntenin 2 
(CLSTN2) modulates the impact of developmental tobacco smoke exposure on mnemonic 
processing in adolescents. Biological Psychiatry. 2009; 65:671–679. DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.
2008.10.024 [PubMed: 19058786] 
9. Pauly JR, Sparks JA, Hauser KF, Pauly TH. In utero nicotine exposure causes persistent, gender-
dependant changes in locomotor activity and sensitivity to nicotine in C57Bl/6 mice. Int J Dev 
Neurosci. 2004; 22:329–337. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2004.05.009 [PubMed: 15380832] 
10. Heath CJ, Horst NK, Picciotto MR. Oral nicotine consumption does not affect maternal care or 
early development in mice but results in modest hyperactivity in adolescence. Physiology & 
Behavior. 2010; 101:764–769. DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2010.08.021 [PubMed: 20826170] 
11. Dwyer JB, McQuown SC, Leslie FM. The dynamic effects of nicotine on the developing brain. 
Pharmacology & Therapeutics. 2009; 122:125–139. DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2009.02.003 
[PubMed: 19268688] 
12. Rampalli S, et al. p38 MAPK signaling regulates recruitment of Ash2l-containing 
methyltransferase complexes to specific genes during differentiation. Nature Structural & 
Molecular Biology. 2007; 14:1150–1156. DOI: 10.1038/nsmb1316
13. Wysocka J, Allis CD, Coonrod S. Histone arginine methylation and its dynamic regulation. 
Frontiers in Bioscience. 2006; 11:344–355. [PubMed: 16146736] 
14. Barbosa AC, et al. MEF2C, a transcription factor that facilitates learning and memory by negative 
regulation of synapse numbers and function. PNAS. 2008; 105:9391–9396. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
0802679105 [PubMed: 18599438] 
15. Cho EG, et al. MEF2C enhances dopaminergic neuron differentiation of human embryonic stem 
cells in a parkinsonian rat model. PloS One. 2011; 6:e24027. [PubMed: 21901155] 
16. Wan M, et al. The trithorax group protein Ash2l is essential for pluripotency and maintaining open 
chromatin in embryonic stem cells. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:5039–5048. DOI: 10.1074/
jbc.M112.424515 [PubMed: 23239880] 
17. Flavell SW, et al. Genome-wide analysis of MEF2 transcriptional program reveals synaptic target 
genes and neuronal activity-dependent polyadenylation site selection. Neuron. 2008; 60:1022–
1038. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.11.029 [PubMed: 19109909] 
18. Gossett LA, Kelvin DJ, Sternberg EA, Olson EN. A new myocyte-specific enhancer-binding factor 
that recognizes a conserved element associated with multiple muscle-specific genes. Molecular 
and Cellular Biology. 1989; 9:5022–5033. [PubMed: 2601707] 
19. Potthoff MJ, Olson EN. MEF2: a central regulator of diverse developmental programs. 
Development. 2007; 134:4131–4140. DOI: 10.1242/dev.008367 [PubMed: 17959722] 
20. Zweier M, et al. Mutations in MEF2C from the 5q14.3q15 microdeletion syndrome region are a 
frequent cause of severe mental retardation and diminish MECP2 and CDKL5 expression. Human 
Mutation. 2010; 31:722–733. DOI: 10.1002/humu.21253 [PubMed: 20513142] 
21. Li H, et al. Transcription factor MEF2C influences neural stem/progenitor cell differentiation and 
maturation in vivo. PNAS. 2008; 105:9397–9402. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0802876105 [PubMed: 
18599437] 
22. Sakai Y, et al. Neuroendocrine phenotypes in a boy with 5q14 deletion syndrome implicate the 
regulatory roles of myocyte-specific enhancer factor 2C in the postnatal hypothalamus. European 
Journal of Medical Genetics. 2013; 56:475–483. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.06.009 [PubMed: 
23832106] 
23. King SL, et al. Conditional expression in corticothalamic efferents reveals a developmental role for 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in modulation of passive avoidance behavior. The Journal of 
Neuroscience. 2003; 23:3837–3843. [PubMed: 12736354] 
24. Heath CJ, King SL, Gotti C, Marks MJ, Picciotto MR. Cortico-thalamic connectivity is vulnerable 
to nicotine exposure during early postnatal development through alpha4/beta2/alpha5 nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010; 35:2324–2338. DOI: 10.1038/npp.
2010.130 [PubMed: 20736992] 
Jung et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 25. Mazo AM, Huang DH, Mozer BA, Dawid IB. The trithorax gene, a trans-acting regulator of the 
bithorax complex in Drosophila, encodes a protein with zinc-binding domains. PNAS. 1990; 
87:2112–2116. [PubMed: 2107543] 
26. Paro R. Imprinting a determined state into the chromatin of Drosophila. Trends in Genetics. 1990; 
6:416–421. [PubMed: 1982376] 
27. Ikegawa S, Isomura M, Koshizuka Y, Nakamura Y. Cloning and characterization of ASH2L and 
Ash2l, human and mouse homologs of the Drosophila ash2 gene. Cytogenetics and Cell Genetics. 
1999; 84:167–172. 15248. [PubMed: 10393421] 
28. Dou Y, et al. Regulation of MLL1 H3K4 methyltransferase activity by its core components. Nature 
Structural & Molecular Biology. 2006; 13:713–719. DOI: 10.1038/nsmb1128
29. Steward MM, et al. Molecular regulation of H3K4 trimethylation by ASH2L, a shared subunit of 
MLL complexes. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology. 2006; 13:852–854. DOI: 10.1038/
nsmb1131
30. Adamson AL, Shearn A. Molecular genetic analysis of Drosophila ash2, a member of the trithorax 
group required for imaginal disc pattern formation. Genetics. 1996; 144:621–633. [PubMed: 
8889525] 
31. Cheng MK, Shearn A. The direct interaction between ASH2, a Drosophila trithorax group protein, 
and SKTL, a nuclear phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase, implies a role for 
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate in maintaining transcriptionally active chromatin. Genetics. 
2004; 167:1213–1223. DOI: 10.1534/genetics.103.018721 [PubMed: 15280236] 
32. Uhlen M, et al. Proteomics Tissue-based map of the human proteome. Science. 2015; 
347:1260419. [PubMed: 25613900] 
33. Nadarajah B, Parnavelas JG. Modes of neuronal migration in the developing cerebral cortex. Nat 
Rev Neurosci. 2002; 3:423–432. DOI: 10.1038/nrn845 [PubMed: 12042877] 
34. Goldberg AD, Allis CD, Bernstein E. Epigenetics: a landscape takes shape. Cell. 2007; 128:635–
638. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.02.006 [PubMed: 17320500] 
35. Barski A, et al. High-resolution profiling of histone methylations in the human genome. Cell. 2007; 
129:823–837. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.05.009 [PubMed: 17512414] 
36. Lauberth SM, et al. H3K4me3 interactions with TAF3 regulate preinitiation complex assembly and 
selective gene activation. Cell. 2013; 152:1021–1036. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.01.052 [PubMed: 
23452851] 
37. Tan CC, et al. Transcription factor Ap2delta associates with Ash2l and ALR, a trithorax family 
histone methyltransferase, to activate Hoxc8 transcription. PNAS. 2008; 105:7472–7477. DOI: 
10.1073/pnas.0711896105 [PubMed: 18495928] 
38. Lyons GE, Micales BK, Schwarz J, Martin JF, Olson EN. Expression of mef2 genes in the mouse 
central nervous system suggests a role in neuronal maturation. The Journal of Neuroscience. 1995; 
15:5727–5738. [PubMed: 7643214] 
39. Flavell SW, et al. Activity-dependent regulation of MEF2 transcription factors suppresses 
excitatory synapse number. Science. 2006; 311:1008–1012. DOI: 10.1126/science.1122511 
[PubMed: 16484497] 
40. Shalizi A, et al. A calcium-regulated MEF2 sumoylation switch controls postsynaptic 
differentiation. Science. 2006; 311:1012–1017. DOI: 10.1126/science.1122513 [PubMed: 
16484498] 
41. Krmpotic-Nemanic J, Kostovic I, Kelovic Z, Nemanic D. Development of acetylcholinesterase 
(AChE) staining in human fetal auditory cortex. Acta Oto-laryngologica. 1980; 89:388–392. 
[PubMed: 6156571] 
42. Krmpotic-Nemanic J, Kostovic I, Kelovic Z, Nemanic D, Mrzljak L. Development of the human 
fetal auditory cortex: growth of afferent fibres. Acta Anatomica. 1983; 116:69–73. [PubMed: 
6858605] 
43. Franklin KBJ, Paxinos G. The Mouse Brain in Stereotatic Coordinates. 1997
44. Duque A, et al. Neuroanatomical changes in a mouse model of early life neglect. Brain Structure & 
Function. 2012; 217:459–472. DOI: 10.1007/s00429-011-0350-9 [PubMed: 21984312] 
45. Zhang Y, et al. Model-based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biology. 2008; 9:R137. 
[PubMed: 18798982] 
Jung et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 46. Robinson MD, McCarthy DJ, Smyth GK. edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential 
expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:139–140. DOI: 
10.1093/bioinformatics/btp616 [PubMed: 19910308] 
47. Hutton SR, Pevny LH. Isolation, culture, and differentiation of progenitor cells from the central 
nervous system. CSH Protocols. 2008; 2008 pdb prot5077. 
48. Hommel JD, Sears RM, Georgescu D, Simmons DL, DiLeone RJ. Local gene knockdown in the 
brain using viral-mediated RNA interference. Nature Medicine. 2003; 9:1539–1544. DOI: 
10.1038/nm964
49. Mineur YS, et al. Nicotine decreases food intake through activation of POMC neurons. Science. 
2011; 332:1330–1332. DOI: 10.1126/science.1201889 [PubMed: 21659607] 
50. Mineur YS, et al. Cholinergic signaling in the hippocampus regulates social stress resilience and 
anxiety- and depression-like behavior. PNAS. 2013; 110:3573–3578. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
1219731110 [PubMed: 23401542] 
Jung et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Morphological changes in cortical neurons induced by developmental nicotine exposure
Voxel-based analysis of FA changes induced by nicotine treatment during development 
measured by DTI (diagram from the Paxinos atlas 43 identifies affected regions). Two-tail t-
tests of average FA values in nicotine and saccharin groups indicate a significant difference 
(n = 5 brains/condition; t(23) = 3.310, p = 0.00305573) in cortical regions investigated, 
including (a) somatosensory cortex and (b) sensory cortex. (c) Nicotine significantly 
increases spine density in nicotine treated groups compared to controls (pre- and postnatal: 
Sac (n = 26 slices from 6 mice), Nic (n = 25 slices from 5 mice), t49 = 5.151, p = 
0.00000460; postnatal-only: Sac (n = 19 slices from 6 mice), Nic (n = 29 slices from 6 
mice), t46 = 4.961, p = 0.00001002). (d–i) The number of intersections was assessed for the 
apical dendritic tree. Scale bar = 12 μm. (d) Frontal (F) cortical regions: (F(1,113) = 9.019, p 
= 0.00329026). The (e) parietal (P) and (f) occipital (O) regions of cortex showed a 
significantly higher number of intersections following nicotine exposure compared to the 
control group. (e) F(1,48) = 31.924; p = 0.00000085. (f) F(1,38) = 32.082, p = 0.00000165. 
(g–i) Layer-specific effects of developmental nicotine exposure on dendritic complexity. (g) 
Superficial layers of cortex showed the least change in complexity of dendritic arbors 
following early nicotine exposure (F(1,33) = 20.835, p = 0.0000661). Layers (h) 3/4 
(F(1,85) = 25.927, p = 0.00000210) and (i) 5/6 (F(1, 30)=17.452, p = 0.00020270) show 
significant nicotine-induced increases in dendritic arborization compared to the control 
group. *, p < 0.05. Frontal (Sac, n = 41; Nic, n = 73), Parietal (Sac, n = 29; Nic, n = 23), 
Occipital (Sac, n = 23; Nic, n = 25), L1/2 (Sac, n = 20; Nic, n = 15), L3/4 (Sac: Sac, n = 36 ; 
Jung et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Nic, n = 53), L5/6 (Sac, n = 14; Nic, n=18). “n” represents number of slices from 6 mice. 
Error bars represent s.e.m.
Jung et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Nicotine exposure during development alters expression of a gene involved in histone 
methylation
(a) Schematic of developmental nicotine exposure regimens. (b) List of the 18 probes that 
were significantly different between developmentally-treated and untreated animals. Primers 
(see supplementary Table 5) corresponding to 15 identified probes (excluding unannotated 
and predicted transcribed probe sets) were used to evaluate mRNA changes in cortical tissue 
from a separate set of animals using qRT-PCR. (c) 9 of 15 probe sets were significantly 
altered in independent samples immediately after the cessation of developmental nicotine 
treatment at 21 days of age (*p < 0.05; Ash2l: F(1,8) = 10.848, p = 0. 01096250; Chsy3: 
F(1,8) = 31.334, p = 0.00051163; Zfp91: F(1,8) = 14.28, p = 0.00539670; Cflar: F(1,8) = 
1.83, p = 0.21311592; Zcchc11: F(1,8) = 5.49, p = 0.04718863; Cep192: F(1,8) = 30.084, p 
= 0.00058407; Gmeb1: F(1,8) = 0.416, p = 0.53699305; Alkbh1: F(1,8) = 16.474, p = 
0.00363940; Unc13b: F(1,8) = 0.416, p = 0.53699305; Duox1: F(1,8) = 1.19, p = 
0.30709203; Scula2: F(1,8) = 1.58, p = 0.24421686; Zfp597: F(1,8) = 2.15, p = 0.181; 
Ctnnal1: F(1,8) = 13.878, p = 0.00582675; Ntrk2: F(1,8) = 13.364, p = 0.00644127; 
Tmem107A : F(1,8) = 28.897, p = 0.00066513). Ash2l mRNA levels were significantly 
Jung et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 elevated following exposure to nicotine during development (d) immediately following 
nicotine exposure (21 days of age; F(3,16) = 6.898, p = 0.003411) and (e) in adulthood (3 
months of age; F(3,16) = 10.736, p = 0.000413) in samples from mice treated throughout the 
pre- and postnatal period or during the postnatal period only. (*p <0.05; *** p <0.01 with 
multiple comparisons; # p <0.05). A total of 20 mice (Nic: n = 10; Sac, n = 10) were used 
for microarray studies. 5 animals were pooled for each experimental group and two replicate 
experiments were analyzed. 2 or 3 animals were pooled for each sample for qPCR analysis 
and 5 samples per each condition were analyzed (21 days: Nic: n = 13; Sac, n = 15. 3 
months: Nic: n = 11; Sac, n = 15). Whiskers represent minimum to maximum value of data 
distribution.
Jung et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Differential enrichment of H3K4me3 at promoter sites associated with synapse 
function following developmental nicotine exposure. (a,b)
Scatterplots of relative enrichment level, degree of (fold) change, and P values (nominal p 
value cutoffs) of all 14,881 identified genomic sites in the pre- and postnatal, and postnatal-
only, nicotine treated groups. Dots in red indicate genomic loci for which adjusted. p < 0.05 
(c) Genome browser tracks of H3K4me3 epigenetic marks at four selected genomic sites 
(Litaf, Rabgab1l, Sepsecs, and Ank1). Images were acquired using igvtools integrated 
genome browser and confirmed with UCSC genome browser. The peak distribution pattern 
of each replicate of a representative locus is shown in supplementary Fig. 3b. (d) ChIP-seq 
analysis identified 367 differentially enriched peaks in cortical samples from mice exposed 
Jung et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to nicotine during the pre- and postnatal periods, and 426 differentially enriched peaks in 
cortical samples from mice exposed to nicotine only in the postnatal period, with adjusted p 
values < 0.05. (e) Verification of identified gene loci that were enriched following both 
nicotine exposure regimens using ChIP-PCR showed that 36 of 39 genomic sites identified 
in the ChIP-seq analysis were differentially methylated in independent samples following 
pre- & postnatal nicotine exposure compared to the control group (*, p < 0.05; ***, p < 0.01 
with multiple comparisons; #, p < 0.05; Gapdh: F(1,8) = 0.00, p = 1.000; Eif4a: F(1,8) = 
31.364, p = 0.00051003; Izumo: F(1,6) = 0.900, p = 0.37940979; Gpr19: F(1,8) = 9.107, p = 
0.01661552; Litaf: F(1,8) = 5.554, p = 0.04619611; kcnq1: F(1,8) = 0.792, p = 0.39946656; 
Lage3: F(1,8) = 16.418, p = 0.00367444; Fbxw4: F(1,8) = 17.9, p = 0.00287307; Fgf12: 
F(1,7) = 13.804, p = 0.00750159; Sepsecs: F(1,8) = 7.568, p = 0.02502024; Rin2: F(1,8) = 
33.897, p = 0.00039509; Rabgap1l: F(1,8) = 11.344, p = 0.00981340; Ano2: F(1,8) = 
107.443, p = 0.00000649; Apool: F(1,8) = 120.782, p = 0.00000418; Lipc: F(1,8) = 893.328, 
p = 0.00000001; Cdk5rap: F(1,8) = 23.198, p = 0.00132739; Ing4: F(1,8) = 10.019, p = 
0.01328880; Ank3: F(1,8) = 11.424, p = 0.00964250; Ntm: F(1,7) = 330.474, p = 
0.00000038; Zfp658: F(1,7) = 141.861, p = 0.00000669; csda: F(1,8) = 8.411, p = 
0.01988645; Sorcs1: F(1,7) = 5.378, p = 0.05346909; Lars2: F(1,7) = 23.081, p = 
0.00195662; Ank1: F(1,7) = 47.436, p = 0.00023397; Acacb: F(1,7) = 128.527, p = 
0.00000930; Mgda2: F(1,7) = 10.811, p = 0.01333907; Chl1: F(1,7) = 18.662, p = 
0.00348039; Auts2: F(1,8) = 11.318, p = 0.00986976; : F(1,8) = 29.295 Mbnl1, p = 
0.00063647; : F(1,8) = 141.042 Cpeb1, p = 0.00000232; Zfp71-rs1: F(1,8) = 830.025, p = 
0.0000001; Chd9: F(1,8) = 396.42, p = 0.00000004; Syt4: F(1,8) = 87.029, p = 0.00001422; 
Sp110: F(1,8) = 7.628, p = 0.02460310; Sorbs2: F(1,8) = 77.526, p = 0.00002176; Slc35a2: 
F(1,8) = 37.6, p = 0.00027950; Mef2c: F(1,8) = 10.881, p = 0.01088096). Each replicate was 
a pool of 2–4 brain samples and 5 replicates were used for each condition (Sac: n = 5 pools 
from 17 animals; Nic: n = 5 pools from 15 animals). Whiskers represent minimum to 
maximum value of data distribution.
Jung et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. The Ash2l/Mef2c complex is regulated by nAChR activity
(a, b) Nicotine treatment of neural progenitor cells in culture significantly elevated Ash2l (a) 
and Mef2c (b) protein levels (F(13,42) = 12.540, p = 0.000001 (Saline vs Nic: p = 0.009350; 
α-BTX vs α-BTX+Nic: p = 0.003186; MLA vs MLA+Nic: p = 0.000001; Atropine vs 
Atropine+Nic: p = 0.000030) and F(13,42) = 3.749, p = 0.000551 (Saline vs Nic: p = 
0.023076; α-BTX vs α-BTX+Nic: p = 0.010348; MLA vs MLA+Nic: p = 0.05; Atropine vs 
Atropine+Nic: p = 0.023488), respectively, as measured by one-way ANOVA followed by 
LSD test for multiple comparisons). This was reversed by the broad spectrum nAChR 
antagonist mecamylamine (MEC) and the more selective heteromeric nAChR antagonist 
Jung et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dihydro-β-erythroidine (DHβE). The selective α7 nAChR antagonists α-bungarotoxin (btx) 
and methyllyccaconitine (MLA) had no effect on their own and did not alter the effects of 
nicotine (Nic). The voltage-gated calcium channel blocker nifedipine (Nif) decreased levels 
of Ash2l and Mef2c at baseline and abolished the ability of nicotine to increase their 
expression. (c) Ash2l and Mef2c can be co-immunoprecipitated in a complex from neural 
progenitor cells (replicated twice). (d) Wdr 5 protein levels are increased by nicotine 
treatment. n = 4 replicates per condition for all neural progenitor experiments. Original 
Western blots presented in supplementary Fig. 7. Whiskers represent minimum to maximum 
value of data distribution.
Jung et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. The Ash2l/Mef2c complex mediates dendritic remodeling by nicotine in neural 
progenitor cells and in vivo
(a, b) shRNAs targeting Ash2l or Mef2c were transfected into neural progenitor cells and 
spine density was measured on the apical dendrite in control cells (Saline) or following 4 
days of exposure to nicotine in the bath (Nicotine). Nicotine-induced increases in spine 
density are significantly attenuated by Ash2l shRNA and Mef2c shRNA delivery 
(F(5,108)=28.45, p=0.000001 with LSD correction for multiple comparisons). Scrambled 
Saline vs. Scrambled Nicotine: p = 0.000001; Scrambled shRNA: Saline, n = 20, Nicotine, 
n=13; Ash2l shRNA: Saline, n = 26, Nicotine = 11; Mef2c shRNA: Saline, n = 17, Nic = 11. 
“n” sizes for neural progenitor studies represent total cells counted across 3 independent 
cultures. Scale bar = 18 μm. (c – f) shRNAs or overexpression constructs for Ash2l and 
Mef2c were introduced into the developing cortex at E14 by electroporation, with or without 
nicotine treatment. (c) Representative images of cortical neurons following nicotine 
treatment or electroporation of shRNA constructs (supplementary Fig. 6 shows extent of 
construct spread). (d) Nicotine exposure during the first 21 days of postnatal development 
increased the complexity of cortical neuron dendrites as measured by Sholl analysis (F(1, 
174) = 14.570, p = 0.0002) and this was blocked by electroporation of shRNAs targeting 
Ash2l into the developing cortex at E14. Gene x treatment interaction: F(1, 174) = 16.633, p 
= 0.00006893 by two-way ANOVA with repeated measures followed by Tukey’s test for 
multiple comparisons (Scrambled Saccharin (n = 32) vs. Scrambled Nicotine (n = 57): p = 
0.000581, Ash2l Saccharin (n = 22) vs. Ash2l Nicotine (n = 67): p = 0.229149. “n” sizes for 
in vivo studies represent number of slices from 5 mice. (e) Nicotine-mediated changes in 
dendritic complexity are abolished by electroporation of Mef2c shRNA into developing 
cortex. Gene x treatment interaction: F(1,110) = 95.076, p = 0.0000001 by two-way repeated 
measures ANOVA with repeated measures followed by Tukey’s test for multiple 
comparisons (Scrambled Saccharin (n = 26) vs. Scrambled Nicotine (n = 31): p = 0.000581, 
Ash2l Saccharin (n = 27) vs. Ash2l Nicotine (n = 30): p = 0.229149). (f) Overexpression of 
Ash2l or Mef2c increases dendritic complexity (F(2,71) = 100.450, p = 0.0000001 by one-
way ANOVA with repeated measures). OE control (n = 28) vs. OE Ash2l (n = 22): p = 
0.0000001; OE control (n = 28) vs. OE Mef2c (n = 24): p = 0.0000001 with Tukey’s test for 
multiple comparisons. (g) Nicotine-induced increases in spine density are significantly 
attenuated by electroporation of Ash2l or Mef2c shRNAs into developing cortex (F(5,183) = 
10.748, p = 0.0000001 with LSD test for multiple comparisons). Scrambled Saccharin vs. 
Scrambled Nicotine: p = 0.0000001; Scrambled Saccharin vs. Mef2c Saccharin: p = 
0.042553; Scrambled Saccharin vs. Mef2c Nicotine: p = 0.023182; Scrambled Nicotine vs. 
Mef2c Saccharin: p = 0.000158; and Scrambled Nicotine vs. Mef2c Nicotine: p = 0.000295. 
Jung et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Scrambled shRNA: (Sac, n = 21; Nic, n = 36). Ash2l shRNA: (Sac, n = 34; Nic, n = 37). 
Mef2c shRNA: (Sac, n = 23; Nic, n = 38). (h) Overexpression of Ash2l or Mef2c 
significantly increases spine density increases (F(2,102) = 19.692, p = 0.00000006 with LSD 
test for multiple comparisons). OE control (n = 34) vs. OE Ash2l (n = 45): p = 0.000033; 
OE control (n = 34) vs. OE Mef2c (n = 26): p = 0.019220. Differences measured by one-
way ANOVA followed by LSD test for multiple comparisons. Whiskers represent minimum 
to maximum value of data distribution. Error bars represent s.e.m.
Jung et al.
Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Developmental nicotine-induced changes in passive avoidance behavior require 
expression of Ash2l and Mef2c
(a) Nicotine treatment from E14 through P21 induces hypersensitive passive avoidance 
behavior that is attenuated by knockdown of Ash2l or Mef2c (F(5,135) = 2.759; p = 
0.02090053, LSD correction for multiple comparisons). Scrambled Saccharin vs. Scrambled 
Nicotine: p = 0.015343; Ash2l Saline vs. Ash2l Nicotine: p = 0.009136 with LSD multiple 
comparison test. Scrambled shRNA: (Sac, n = 19; Nic, n = 24). Ash2l shRNA: (Sac, n = 10; 
Nic, n = 60). Mef2c shRNA: (Sac, n = 13; Nic, n = 15). F(5,130) = 2.713; p = 0.023 (b) 
Overexpression of Ash2l or Mef2c induces hypersensitive passive avoidance behavior 
(F(2,82) = 8.858; p = 0.00031264, LSD correction for multiple comparisons). OE-control vs. 
OE-Ash2l: p = 0.000076; OE-control vs. OE-Mef2c: p = 017160 with LSD multiple 
comparison test). OE, control: (n = 31), OE, Ash2l: (n = 22), OE, Mef2c: (n = 32). (c) 
Representative images of an in utero electroporated mouse brain. Efficiency of 
Jung et al.
Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 electroporation was variable but expression was consistently spread broadly across the 
parietal cortex. Error bars represent s.e.m. Competing financial interests
Jung et al.
Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
