 Research paper
Senolytics in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: Results from a
first-in-human, open-label, pilot study
Jamie N. Justice a,⁎,1, Anoop M. Nambiar b,1, Tamar Tchkonia c, Nathan K. LeBrasseur c, Rodolfo Pascual d,
Shahrukh K. Hashmi c, Larissa Prata c, Michal M. Masternak e, Stephen B. Kritchevsky a,
Nicolas Musi f,g, James L. Kirkland c
a Sticht Center for Healthy Aging and Alzheimer's Prevention, Internal Medicine – Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine (WFSM), 1 Medical Center Blvd, Winston-
Salem, NC 27157, United States
b Division of Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio (UTHSCSA) and South Texas Veterans
Health Care System, San Antonio, TX 78229, United States
c Robert and Arlene Kogod Center on Aging, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, United States
d Internal Medicine – Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy, Immunologic Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, 1 Medical Center Blvd, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, United States
e Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32827, United States
f Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging Studies, Center for Healthy Aging, University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio and South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio,
TX 78229, United States
g San Antonio Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center, South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX 78229, United States
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 3 December 2018
Received in revised form 14 December 2018
Accepted 21 December 2018
Available online 5 January 2019
Background: Cellular senescence is a key mechanism that drives age-related diseases, but has yet to be targeted
therapeutically in humans. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive, fatal cellular senescence-
associated disease. Selectively ablating senescent cells using dasatinib plus quercetin (DQ) alleviates
IPF-related dysfunction in bleomycin-administered mice.
Methods: A two-center, open-label study of intermittent DQ (D:100 mg/day, Q:1250 mg/day, three-days/week
over three-weeks) was conducted in participants with IPF (n = 14) to evaluate feasibility of implementing a
senolytic intervention. The primary endpoints were retention rates and completion rates for planned clinical as-
sessments. Secondary endpoints were safety and change in functional and reported health measures. Associa-
tions with the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) were explored.
Findings: Fourteen patients with stable IPF were recruited. The retention rate was 100% with no DQ discontinu-
ation; planned clinical assessments were complete in 13/14 participants. One serious adverse event was re-
ported. Non-serious events were primarily mild-moderate, with respiratory symptoms (n = 16 total events),
skin irritation/bruising (n = 14), and gastrointestinal discomfort (n = 12) being most frequent. Physical function
evaluated as 6-min walk distance, 4-m gait speed, and chair-stands time was significantly and clinically-
meaningfully improved (p b .05). Pulmonary function, clinical chemistries, frailty index (FI-LAB), and reported
health were unchanged. DQ effects on circulat.ing SASP factors were inconclusive, but correlations were observed
between change in function and change in SASP-related matrix-remodeling proteins, microRNAs, and pro-
inflammatory cytokines (23/48 markers r ≥ 0.50).
Interpretation: Our first-in-humans open-label pilot supports study feasibility and provides initial evidence that
senolytics may alleviate physical dysfunction in IPF, warranting evaluation of DQ in larger randomized controlled
trials for senescence-related diseases.
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02874989 (posted 2016–2018).
© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Keywords:
Cellular senescence
Senolytics
Translation
Clinical trial
Interstitial lung disease
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Aging
1. Introduction
Occurrence of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), a chronic, pro-
gressive fibrotic lung disease, rises dramatically with advancing age
[1–3]. It is a devastating disease with median survival of 3.8 years in
newly-diagnosed adults over 60 years of age [4]. Aging is implicated in
IPF pathogenesis, including accelerated aging of the alveolar epithelium,
denoted by oxidative stress, telomere attrition, DNA damage,
EBioMedicine 40 (2019) 554–563
⁎ Corresponding author at: 1 Medical Center Blvd, Wake Forest Baptist Hospital,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, United States.
E-mail addresses: jnjustic@wakehealth.edu (J.N. Justice), Nambiar@uthscsa.edu
(A.M. Nambiar), Tchkonia.Tamar@mayo.edu (T. Tchkonia), LeBrasseur.Nathan@mayo.edu
(N.K. LeBrasseur), rpascual@wakehealth.edu (R. Pascual), Hashmi.Shahrukh@mayo.edu
(S.K. Hashmi), prata.larissa@mayo.edu (L. Prata), michal.masternak@ucf.edu
(M.M. Masternak), skritche@wakehealth.edu (S.B. Kritchevsky), Musi@uthscsa.edu
(N. Musi), Kirkland.James@mayo.edu (J.L. Kirkland).
1 Drs. Justice and Nambiar contributed equally to this work.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.12.052
2352-3964/© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
EBioMedicine
journal homepage: www.ebiomedicine.com
 inflammation, and matrix remodeling [1,5]. Converging evidence sug-
gests that the aging hallmark, cellular senescence, may be a central
mechanism contributing to IPF [6,7]. Cellular senescence is a non-
proliferative cell state that can entail a senescence-associated secretory
phenotype (SASP) comprising cytokines, chemokines, pro-fibrotic fac-
tors, matrix metalloproteases (MMPs), factors causing stem/progenitor
cell dysfunction, and growth factors that impose detrimental effects on
the local and systemic environment [8,9]. Senescent cells and the SASP
may fuel an increasingly pro-inflammatory fibrotic response driving
lung deterioration and severe functional decline in IPF. Senescence bio-
markers accumulate in the lungs of IPF patients, and higher expression
of key senescence biomarkers, such as p16INK4A (CDKN2A), DNA dam-
age foci (γH2A.X), telomere dysfunction, and SASP factors are associ-
ated with increased disease severity [5,10].
Senolytic agents, drugs that selectively induce senescent cell apopto-
sis, were first developed using a hypothesis-driven approach [11,12].
The idea for developing agents to target senescent cells was based on
a key study showing that age-related senescent cell burden in mice
was reduced by both caloric restriction and a lifespan-extending
mutation [13]. These delays in senescent cell accumulation occurred in
tandem with increased healthspan, suggesting that pharmacologically
targeting senescent cells might delay onset of senescence-related dis-
eases such as IPF. Our hypothesis-driven drug discovery approach was
based on the observations that senescent cells release pro-apoptotic
factors as part of their SASP [14–16], yet resist apoptosis [17], leading
us to test if these cells rely on pro-survival senescent cell anti-
apoptotic pathways (SCAPs) to defend against their SASP and pro-
apoptotic intracellular milieu. Several such SCAPs were identified from
bioinformatics analyses of senescent vs. non-senescent human cells
[8,11,18,19]. Senescent cells originating from different cell types depend
for survival on different SCAPs. We identified which components of
these SCAPs are essential for survival of human senescent vs. non-
senescent cells in RNA interference studies. Next, we selected agents
know to target these SCAP components and found they selectively in-
duce apoptosis in human senescent but not non-senescent cultured
cells.
Using our hypothesis-driven drug discovery approach, the first
senolytics identified were Dasatinib (D) and Quercetin (Q), which are
effective in combination (DQ) when administered to mice [11]. D is a
tyrosine kinase inhibitor in clinical use for treating leukemias and Q is
a natural product that targets BCL-2, insulin/IGF-1, and HIF-1α SCAP
network components. The DQ combination is effective in eliminating
Research in context
Evidence before this study
Targeting fundamental mechanisms of aging has the potential to
reduce the severity of multiple age-related diseases. Cellular se-
nescence is a cell fate in which proliferating or differentiated
non-dividing cells undergo replicative arrest and develop a pro-
fibrotic, pro-inflammatory, and apoptosis-inducing senescence-
associated secretory phenotype (SASP). Senescent cells acquire
resistance to apoptosis and their own SASP. Senescence is a
mechanism that has been shown to drive multiple age-related dis-
eases, including idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). The occur-
rence of IPF, a chronic, fibrotic lung disease, rises dramatically
with advancing age. It is devastating, with a relentlessly progres-
sive course, a median survival of b4 years, and limited treatment
options. Aging processes have been implicated in IPF pathogene-
sis, with accumulation of senescent cells in the lung, fibrosis, ma-
trix remodeling, inflammation, DNA damage, telomere attrition,
and alveolar epithelial oxidative stress. Extent of expression of
markers of cellular senescence in lungs of patients with IPF is as-
sociated with disease severity. Senolytic agents are drugs devel-
oped using a hypothesis-driven approach that selectively induce
senescent cell apoptosis by transiently disabling the senescent
cell anti-apoptotic pathways (SCAPs) that defend senescent
cells against their own pro-apoptotic environment. The first
senolytics discovered were Dasatinib (D) and Quercetin (Q),
which, in combination (DQ), cause apoptosis of senescent vs.
non-senescent cells in human tissue. DQ alleviates a range of
age- and chronic disease-related conditions in mice, including
physical dysfunction in progeroid and naturally-aged mice, vascu-
lar stiffness in high fat-fed and aged mice, hepatic steatosis, age-
related osteoporosis, neurodegenerative disease modelling
Alzheimer disease, and premature development of age-related dis-
eases and early death caused by transplanting small numbers of
senescent cells into younger mice. Senolytics extend remaining
lifespan in old mice. Importantly with respect to human IPF, DQ re-
duces lung senescent cell burden and restores function in mice
with pulmonary fibrosis induced by bleomycin inhalation. Intermit-
tent treatment of IPF and other age-related conditions in mice with
DQ is effective despite the short elimination half-life of D and Q
(b6 h), likely because senescent cells do not divide and take
weeks to over a month to re-accumulate. Senolytics do not need
to be present continuously to occupy a receptor or affect an
enzyme.
Added value of the study
We report the first clinical trial using DQ or other senolytics in
humans. Clinical trial data using senolytics in the context of
senescence-associated diseases such as IPF do not exist. Apart
from lung transplantation, the extent of alleviation of dysfunction
by anti-fibrotics and other interventions for IPF has been disap-
pointing. Here, in a first-in-human, proof-of-concept open-label
clinical trial, we tested the feasibility and potential impact of inter-
mittently treating patients with stable mild to severe IPF with 9
oral doses of DQ over 3 weeks. Physical function and clinical pa-
rameters were measured before and 5 days after the last DQ
dose, well beyond these drugs' elimination half-lives. Fourteen
participants were enrolled, completed intermittent drug self-
administration, and 100% completed the study. Statistically sig-
nificant (within-subject) and clinically meaningful improvements
in physical function following DQ treatment were seen despite
the small number of participants and short study duration. Such
improved physical function has not been reported in subjects in
the placebo arms of other IPF trials. Although adverse events oc-
curred, they were acceptable and primarily consistent with the un-
derlying IPF diagnosis, study procedures, or known-off target
effects of the study drugs (e.g., gastrointestinal discomfort, head-
ache). No changes in laboratory tests suggestive of hepatic or
renal toxicity were found, and pulmonary function was un-
changed. While effects of DQ on circulating SASP factors were in-
conclusive in this initial study, correlations were seen between
change in function and change in SASP factors.
Implications of all the available evidence
In this first-in-human trial of senolytics, our data indicate that
short-term, intermittent administration of DQ may alleviate the
physical dysfunction that accompanies IPF, as is the case with
DQ treatment for pulmonary fibrosis induced by bleomycin in
mice. These findings suggest that evaluation of DQ and other
senolytics in larger randomized, controlled trials for IPF and other
cellular senescence-associated conditions is feasible.
555
J.N. Justice et al. / EBioMedicine 40 (2019) 554–563
 cultured senescent cells originating from several different types of
human and mouse cells [5,8,11,18,20–25].
DQ was recently demonstrated to decrease senescent cell burden
and the SASP in human tissues within 48 h by selectively causing apo-
ptosis in senescent vs. non-senescent cells in freshly isolated explants
[24]. DQ alleviates a range of age- and senescence-related disorders in
mice, including age-related osteoporosis, hepatic steatosis, neurodegen-
eration in Tau+ mouse models of Alzheimer disease, age- and high fat-
diet-induced vascular calcification and hyporeactivity, and radiation-
induced muscle dysfunction [5,8,11,18,20–25]. In older mice, senolytics
delay age-related diseases as a group and substantially increase late life
survival [24,26]. Moreover, senolytics prevent the physical dysfunction,
accelerated onset of age-related diseases, and early death caused by
transplanting small numbers of senescent cells into young mice
[24,26]. Importantly with respect to IPF, DQ alleviates bleomycin-
induced pulmonary fibrosis, causing improved pulmonary function,
body composition, and physical function [5]. DQ also decreases the im-
paired exercise endurance due to aging and progerias in mice [11,24].
Collectively, these data highlight the therapeutic potential of
senolytic therapies for multiple aging-related diseases and geriatric syn-
dromes, including IPF. Herein, we performed a first-in-human, small-
scale pilot clinical trial with the objective to assess the feasibility, ac-
ceptability, best methods, and measurement characteristics of potential
study outcomes for the senolytic drug combination DQ in older partici-
pants with stable IPF. The primary endpoints were retention rates and
completion rates for planned clinical assessments. Secondary endpoints
were: 1) initial safety estimates and adverse eventreports and 2) change
in functional and reported health measures. Functional endpoints were
the change from baseline in: 1) 6-min walk distance (6MWD), 4-m
usual gait speed, timed 5-repitition chair-stands, short physical perfor-
mance battery (SPPB), and grip strength; 2) pulmonary function: forced
vital capacity (FVC); forced expiratory volume in 1-s (FEV1); 3) clinical
lab-based frailty index (FI-LAB); and 4) patient reported quality of life,
respiratory health, and fatigue. Exploratory associations of change in
function with changes in circulating senescence-associated secretory
phenotype (SASP) factors were evaluated.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Overview of methods
Intermittent D (100 mg/day) plus Q (1250 mg/day) were orally ad-
ministered over three consecutive days in three consecutive weeks
(i.e., 9 total participant administered dosing days) at two outpatient
clinical research centers using a single-arm, open-label design. We mea-
sured clinical chemistries before and after DQ and performed rigorous
symptom questionnaires weekly for health-related quality of life and
off-target effects to obtain preliminary evidence of safety and tolerabil-
ity. We evaluated potential assessment tools probing function and bio-
logical activity of DQ: 1) physical function: 6MWD, 4-m gait speed,
timed chair-stands, SPPB, and grip strength; 2) pulmonary function:
FVC; FEV1; 3) FI-LAB. We explored associations of change in clinical
and functional assessments with biological assays of a set of circulating
SASP components assayed in plasma using multiplex discovery plat-
forms. SASP factors that had been associated with frailty (IL6, MCP-1,
activin A, apelin) [27–30] or had been reported to have prognostic or di-
agnostic potential in IPF (MMP1, MMP7, osteopontin) [31,32] were fur-
ther validated by single target enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays
(ELISA). In addition, non-coding micro (mi)-RNAs released locally and
systemically may be associated with inflammation and senescence
[33]. For example, miRNAs miR-146a-5p and miR-34a-5p have recently
has been acknowledged as part of SASP in a mouse model of lung fibro-
sis and long-lived dwarf mice [34,35]. Moreover, miRNA expression
suppresses cytokine secretion and may restrain excessive SASP activity
in primary human fibroblasts and HUVEC cultures [36,37], and could be
modulated by intervention in humans [38].
2.2. Sample size estimates
Traditional sample size determination is made to ensure specific
power to detect targeted treatment effects. However, the primary pur-
pose of this pilot study was to evaluate study feasibility rather than
drug efficacy [39,40]. Moreover, no clinical data exist on effects of
senolytics in humans or patients with IPF: prior data are not available
to derive efficacy-based sample size estimates. Therefore, pilot trial
sample size estimation (n = 14) was based on medium standardized ef-
fect sizes (0.5) for a main trial designed with 90% power and two-sided
5% significance [41].
2.2.1. Participants
The study was conducted at the Clinical Research Units (CRU) of
Wake Forest School of Medicine (WFSM, n = 2) and the University
of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio (UTHSCSA, n = 12), part
of the South Texas Veterans Health Care System. A total of 17 patients
aged ≥50 years with stable IPF were primarily recruited from a study
physician's clinical practice (n = 12) or from the community by direct
mailings, a hospital-supported website, or ClinicalTrials.gov (n = 3,
WFSM). After comprehensive in-clinic screening, 3 candidates were ex-
cluded from the study and the remaining 14 were enrolled. The
minority-ethnicity status of the participants was 12 non-Hispanic
white and 2 Hispanic white. All study procedures complied with the
Declaration of Helsinki and the informed consent and study documents
were approved by the Institutional Review Boards of WFSM and
UTHSCSA and were reviewed by Data and Safety Monitoring Boards
(DSMB) at both clinical sites. The nature, benefits, and risks of the
study were explained to the patient volunteers and their written in-
formed consent was obtained prior to participation.
The enrolled participants all had confirmed diagnoses of IPF according
to published consensus guidelines4 based on historical high-resolution
computed tomography (HRCT) and/or surgical lung biopsy showing
usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), on stable (3 months) therapy with
nintedanib (Ofev) or pirfenidone (Esbriet) or no therapy, had BMI within
the range 19–35 kg/m2, were cognitively intact as indicated by a Montreal
Cognitive Assessment score N 21, women were postmenopausal
(12 months), and were willing to maintain their current activity level
and remain geographically close to clinical site for the duration of the
study period. Enrolled participants did not experience more than two
moderate/severe IPF exacerbations resulting in new prescriptions for an-
tibiotics/oral steroids or events associated with hospitalization or emer-
gency room visits within the past year. Eligible participants were free of
lung transplant, pulmonary hypertension or cor pulmonale confirmed
by echocardiography or heart catheterization, myocardial infarction, an-
gina, hospitalization for cardiac etiology, stroke or transient ischemic at-
tack in the past 6 months, chronic heart failure, current or chronic
history of liver disease, neurologic condition, drug or alcohol abuse in pre-
vious 5 years, QTc prolongation, low CBC, Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR)
b30 (mL/min/1.73 m2), or ALT N2xULN and bilirubin N1.5xULN. Partici-
pants were not taking anti-arrhythmic medications known to cause QTc
prolongation or Coumadin or other anti-platelet or anti-coagulant medi-
cation. Participants had no current use of quinolone antibiotics or drugs
metabolized by the same liver enzymes as D or Q. Patients recruited
from the UTHSCSA site perform regular 6 min walk distance (6MWD)
tests as part of their clinical care and all patients had completed 6MWD
test within the previous 12 months, though differences in the research
and clinical protocols prevent direct comparison of distance walked.
2.2.2. Dosing
Following screening and baseline measures, all participants were ad-
ministered DQ orally (D: 100 mg/day, Sprycel, Bristol Myers Squibb and
Q: 250 mg capsules × 5/day quercetin phytosome Thorne Research
Sophora japonica concentrate [leaf]/phosphatidylcholine complex from
Sunflower). The dose of D selected is based on the FDA-approved dose
for chronic administration to patients as effective for inducing apoptosis
556
J.N. Justice et al. / EBioMedicine 40 (2019) 554–563
 in human cancer cells. Q is a natural product. DQ was administered in
conjunction with stable standard of care (nintedanib, pirfenidone, or
none). Nintedanib and dasatinib are both tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
though only dasatanib demonstrates senolytic action [11]. To avoid po-
tential drug-drug interaction, nintedanib was withheld on dosing days
with dasatinib, but was resumed on non-dosing days; pirfenidone was
maintained. Senolytics were anticipated to be effective when given in-
termittently. Our intermittent dosing regimen was based on our studies
in mice with pulmonary fibrosis [5], effects of DQ on different lung cell
types in culture,88,42 senescent cell clearance rate from freshly isolated
human tissue explants treated with DQ [24], peak concentrations and
elimination half-lives of DQ in humans [43,44], and dose escalation
studies in old Rhesus monkeys.
DQ was delivered on an intermittent schedule as 3 doses on 3 con-
secutive days followed by 4-day no-drug periods, repeated over
3 weeks, resulting in 9 total dosing days over the 3 week intervention
period (Fig. 2). The initial dose was administered onsite. Adherence
was checked and adverse event reports and symptom questionnaires
were administered weekly by telephone. Reminder calls were made be-
fore each weekly course of DQ began. Verbal checks for adherence,
symptoms, and event reports were conducted approximately 24 h fol-
lowing each weekly course of DQ self-administration (fourth day of
each intervention week). The symptom questionnaires combined com-
mon symptoms identified for chemotherapeutic drugs (Chemotherapy
Symptom Assessment Scale; C-SAS) and drugs targeting IPF. Nonserious
adverse events were collected from this weekly symptom question-
naire, reviewed by the study physician, and reported as mild, moderate,
or severe to according to the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activi-
ties (MedDRA) 16.1. Our event collection, classification, and reporting
are consistent with Phase III clinical trials in IPF [45,46]. Following
3 weeks of administration, baseline study procedures were repeated.
Follow-up testing was performed one and two weeks after drug course
completion, which is well beyond the D and Q elimination half-lives,
which are both b6 h [43,44]. All participants completed the study
(100% retention).
2.2.3. Assessments and biospecimen collection
All assessments and clinical chemistries were performed at WFSM or
UTHSCSA CRU. Blood draws for clinical laboratories and biological mea-
sures were obtained following 12-h overnight fasts. Measures of physi-
cal and pulmonary function and questionnaires were obtained after
ingesting a small snack. All pre-post biospecimen pairs collected at
WFSM and UTHSCSA were shipped to Mayo Clinic for batch
senescence-related assays.
2.3. Eligibility determination, safety labs, and biospecimen collection
Electrical activity of the heart and QTc prolongation were evaluated
by ECG. Body height and weight and blood pressure were measured at
each visit. Safety laboratory tests included complete blood count
(CBC), lipid panel, HbA1c, complete metabolic panel, and hsCRP. A clin-
ical laboratory-based frailty index (FI-LAB) was constructed as number
of laboratories outside of reference range per the total number of labo-
ratory measures [47]. SASP and inflammatory markers were not in-
cluded in the FI-LAB index. Fasted serum and EDTA plasma (10 mL
each) specimens were drawn and stored in 0.5–1 mL aliquots for
batched analysis of biological measures of senescence and SASP factors
(below).
2.4. Physical function assessments
Six Minute Walk Distance (6MWD): The 6MWD test is a well-
established outcome that is valid and reproducible in patients with a
wide range of physical function, predicts clinical events, and responds
to interventions [48,49]. The 6MWD was conducted in an unobstructed
hallway utilizing a standardized script. Total distance covered and
number and duration of rests and symptoms were recorded. 4 m Gait
Speed: Walking speed was assessed by asking the participants to walk
at their usual pace over a 4 m course, with the faster of two walks
used to compute walking speed. Chair-Stands: To evaluate time to com-
plete 5-repition chair-stands, participants were asked to stand up and
sit down on a straight-backed chair five times, as quickly as possible
without using their arms. Time to complete was recorded. Short Physi-
cal Performance Battery (SPPB) Score: performance on 4 m gait speed
and chair-stands tests (described above) and a balance test were scored
and combined to derive the summary SPPB Score (0–12 with 12 being
the best performance) [50]. For the test of standing balance, participants
were asked to maintain balance in three positions, characterized by a
progressive narrowing of base support. The SPPB score was based on
the percent of maximum achieved in each domain, with higher scores
indicative of better performance. Grip Strength: Handgrip strength
was measured twice in each hand to the nearest 2 kg using an isometric
Hydraulic Hand Dynamometer (Jamar, Bolingbrook, IL).
2.5. Pulmonary function assessment
Ventilatory capacity was assessed by spirometry recorded by an
EasyOne™ PLUS spirometer to record average FEV1 over three repro-
ducible trials. The essential elements of the test emphasized to the par-
ticipant included: filling lungs completely, sealing lips around the
spirette so there were no leaks, taking care not to block its opening
with teeth or tongue or bite down excessively, breathing out as force-
fully and rapidly as possible, and to continue blowing out until the
lungs are completely empty. FEV1 is reported as liters per second (L/s)
and as percent predicted value based on age, sex, race, and height. FVC
is reported as liters (L) and as percent predicted value based on age,
sex, race, and height. Ratio of percent predicted FEV1 to percent pre-
dicted FVC was calculated.
2.6. Patient-reported health measures
IPF-related symptoms were assessed by questionnaires, including
the Modified Medical Research Council (mMRC), the Saint George Re-
spiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ; respiratory health related quality of
life), Patient's Global Impressions of Change (PGIC), and University of
California San Diego Shortness of Breath Questionnaire (UCSD-SoBQ).
Fatigue was assessed by the Pittsburgh Fatigability Scale (PFS) and the
Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS).
2.7. Biological measures of senescence and SASP factors
All assays to determine cellular senescence burden and SASP factors
were performed under masked conditions using serum or EDTA-treated
plasma collected before and after 3 weeks of DQ at UTHSCSA and WFSM.
Post-DQ blood collections were conducted 5–7 days after the final DQ
dose, well after the ~1/2 day half-lives of D and Q [43,44], and under
fasted conditions. The proportion of senescent cells based on axillary
skin biopsy was envisioned as a measure during trial planning (see
clinicaltrials.govNCT02874989); however, technical complications re-
sulted in omission from the present study.
2.7.1. Plasma and serum analyses
Plasma cytokines were quantified using multiplex ELISA on a Bio-
Plex 200 analyzer by Eve Technologies (Calgary, Alberta, Canada)
using Human Cytokine 42-plex, MMP9 plex, and TIMP 4-plex discovery
assays. All samples were run in duplicates. Single targeted ELISA's (ven-
dors below) were run to measure plasma osteopontin, apelin12, PAI-1,
activin A, IL-6, and MCP-1, and serum MMP-1 and MMP-7 (Human
Activin A: DAC008, R&D systems; Human Total MMP-7 [serum]:
DMP700, R&D systems; Human IL-6: D6050, R&D systems; Human
Serpin E1/PAI-1: DSE100, R&D systems; Human CCL2/MCP-1: DCP00,
R&D systems; Human Osteopontin: BMS2066, eBioscience; Human
557
J.N. Justice et al. / EBioMedicine 40 (2019) 554–563
 Apelin-12: EK-057-23, Phoenix Pharmaceuticals; Human MMP-1
(serum): ELH-MMP-1, RayBiotech., Inc.).
2.7.2. MicroRNA analyses
Total miRNAs were isolated from serum using the miRNEasy Serum/
Plasma kit (Qiagen, Cat No. 217184) adjusting the manufacturer's in-
structions to allow for 400 μL of sample volume. All samples were
spiked-in with 3.5 μL of control Ce_miR39_1, provided by the manufac-
turer (Lot no. 237024736). cDNA was synthesized using the TaqMan™
Advanced miRNA cDNA Synthesis Kit (Applied Biosystems, Cat no.
A28007) following the manufacturer's instructions. PCR was carried
out using TaqMan micro RNA advanced assay Pre-Amp master mix
(Applied Biosystems, cat no.4391128 A) and TaqMan primers for -miR-
16-5p (Assay ID 477860_mir), mir-146-5p (Assay ID 478399_mir), and
hsa-miR-34c-5p (Assay ID 478052_mir). Expression of MiR-16-5p
(assay ID 477860_mir) was used as a reference to normalize qPCR data.
Relative expression of target miRNAs to the reference gene in each sam-
ple wascalculated using anequation (2A–B/2C–D [A= Ct value of thegene
of interest at baseline in the first sample; B = Ct value of the gene of in-
terest in each sample, C = Ct value of a reference gene in the first sample
at baseline; and D = Ct value of a reference gene in each sample]). This
gives the first control sample a relative expression of 1 and all other sam-
ples were calculated relative to this [51].
2.8. Statistics
Data are presented as mean ± SD (tables and text). Statistical analy-
sis was performed with SPSS software (v24, IBM). Prior to primary anal-
ysis, normality of each variable was assessed with the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test and by visual analysis of histograms and plots for skew/
kurtosis. Functional data are presented as individual data points at base-
line vs. follow-up without statistical procedures (Suppl. Figs. S1-S3).
Change following DQ in function, patient reported outcomes, and clini-
cal and safety labs were evaluated with paired-samples t-test and base-
line vs. follow-up bivariate Pearson correlation (single-arm design). The
α-level for significance was 0.05. However, as this was a pilot investiga-
tion to determine outcomes of interest for a larger randomized placebo-
controlled trial, trends are reported with an α-level of p ≤ .1.
Analyte data derived from microarray, multiplex, and ELISA were
subjected to additional quality control and data transformations to re-
duce positive skew. Microarray data (MMPs, TIMPs, miRNAs) were
log-transformed. For multiplexed cytokines and chemokines presented
in Suppl. Table S4, samples with a proportion of null values (concentra-
tion below detection limits) exceeding 20% were omitted (FLT3L, MCP3,
IL12p40, IL12p70, IL13, IL17a, IL7, TGFβ, VEGFα), and one statistical
outlier removed (N80% multiplexed markers N3 SD). Cytokines,
chemokines, and growth factors probed through exploratory multiplex
were analyzed as inverse hyperbolic sine (asinh) transformed median
fluorescence intensity luminex signals [52]. Plots of bivariate correla-
tions of MFI signal against calculated concentrations were examined
(raw and transformed). Change with DQ was evaluated by number of
samples ≥5% improved for consistency with physical function, pulmo-
nary function, and laboratory-based FI-LAB. Correlations are Pearson
correlations (r) using transformed SASP markers (log or asinh). All
correlations were confirmed visually by plots of baseline vs. follow-up.
Associations with physical function, pulmonary function, and FI-LAB r
≥ 0.50 are shown in Table S4, and correspond to p ≤ .10.
3. Results
3.1. Patient
recruitment,
adherence,
and
completion
of
planned
assessments
Fourteen participants (2 women) aged 70.8 ± 7.9 years with mild to
severe but stable IPF (7 on nintedanib, 5 on pirfenidone, 2 not on
antifibrotic therapy) were recruited (Table 1). The primary source of
patient recruitment was through a study physician clinic. UTHSCSA
was the primary recruitment site (n = 12). Of 17 participants screened
in-clinic at both sites, 14 were eligible, underwent baseline assessments,
and began the three-week long intermittent DQ drug course (Fig. 1).
The majority of participants had moderate IPF (8 of 14 with FVC be-
tween 50 and 80% of predicted); 4 participants had mild disease (FVC
N80% of predicted); and 2 participants had severe IPF (FVC b50% of pre-
dicted). The retention rate for completion was 100% (14 complete out of
14 enrolled), with no discontinuation of DQ. Adherence to the
self-administered intermittent dosing schedule was 127/126 doses: 13
participants achieved perfect adherence (9/9 dosing days), whereas 1
participant unintentionally self-administered an additional dose (10/9
dosing days). Planned assessments were completed in 14/14 partici-
pants, except for an omitted SPPB at follow-up in 1 participant due to
hospitalization for a likely respiratory infection.
3.2. Safety and tolerability
Extensive symptom questionnaires were administered weekly.
Symptom reports and diverse events that occurred during the study
period are summarized in Table 2. In general, the majority of these
events and symptoms were mild to moderate in severity, reversible,
and without clinically significant sequelae, according to MedDRA
v16.1. The most frequent events were respiratory symptoms (n = 14 re-
ports; cough, shortness of breath, rhinorrhea), skin irritation and bruis-
ing from study procedures (n = 14 reports; 11 related to biopsy or
adhesives), or gastrointestinal discomfort or heartburn (n = 12 re-
ports). Two headache events resulted in temporary discontinuation of
planned activities and were conservatively graded as “severe” according
Table 1
Patient characteristics.
N
14 (2 women)
Age, yrs. (mean, range)
70.8 (55–84)
MoCA, score (mean, range)
25.9 (22−30)
Number of patients
Racial/ethnic category
White
14
African American
0
Other
0
Latino or Hispanic
2
IPF severity by FVC
Preserved (N90%)
1
Low (80–90%)
3
Moderate (50–80%)
8
Severe (b50%)
2
Medications
IPF-indicated medications
Nintedanib
7
Pirfenidone
5
None
2
Non-IPF medications⁎
≤2
3
3-5
3
6–9
6
≥10
2
Comorbid conditions
Most frequent (≥5 patients)
Hypertension
8
Depression or Anxiety
7
Allergies
6
Hypothyroid
6
Insomnia or sleep disturbance
5
Diarrhea (Ofev-related)
6 (4)
Number of conditions
2–3
5
4–6
5
≥7
4
⁎ Multivitamin/supplement and as needed OTC excluded.
558
J.N. Justice et al. / EBioMedicine 40 (2019) 554–563
 to pre-specified criteria. One serious adverse event was reported follow-
ing completion of DQ intervention (possible bacterial multifocal pneu-
monia and pulmonary edema superimposed on IPF), which resulted in
temporary hospitalization with subsequent complete resolution.
Reported adverse events in the present trial were generally accept-
able and largely consistent with events previously reported by partici-
pants in the placebo arms of randomized controlled trials in IPF
[45,46]. Safety and tolerability with DQ are substantiated by acceptable
safety profile of 9 months of daily D use in participants with systemic
sclerosis with associated interstitial lung disease (SSc-ILD): mild-
moderate severity diarrhea and nausea were most common reported
adverse events [53]. However, similarly to the present pilot study, seri-
ous events involving edema, pleural effusion, and dyspnea were noted
and possibly related to D superimposed on underlying SSc-ILD, though
difficult to discern in a single-arm trial53. Future trials of DQ in IPF
should carefully monitor such conditions.
Following three weeks of intermittent DQ administration, no differ-
ences were observed in body weight, vitals, or clinical chemistries
(Suppl. Table S1).
3.3. Functional and biological measures
The most consistent improvements following DQ were observed in
physical function (Table 3, Suppl. Fig. S3). Specifically, 6MWD, 4-m
gait speed, chair-stands, and SPPB score were significantly improved
when assessed one week after the completion of the drug administra-
tion (p b .05 all). The majority of participants exhibited physical function
gains ≥5%. The 21.5-m increase in 6MWD is consistent with a clinically
important improvement in IPF [54,55]. Of note, the 12 participants en-
rolled at UTHSCSA completed 6MWD tests in the clinic as part of their
regular clinical assessments, which minimizes concerns that the im-
provement was attributable to a learning effect (Suppl. Methods).
Changes with DQ were not observed in grip strength or spirometric
measures (r N 0.90, Table 3, Suppl. Fig. S3). Eight of 14 participant's FI-
LAB scores improved by at least 5%, but mean difference did not reach
significance (p = .24, Table 3, Suppl. Fig. S1). When analyses were re-
stricted to include only disease severity categorized as low to moderate
(percent predicted FVC 5—90%, n = 11), results in this more homoge-
nous group were similar to those of all subjects in our study (Suppl
Table S2). Disease-specific health related quality of life and reported fa-
tigue were unchanged (Table 4; p N0 .05 all).
Circulating SASP factors were evaluated by multiplex, microarray,
and targeted ELISA. Substantially larger sample sizes will be needed to
definitively evaluate changes in biological markers of senescence and
circulating SASP factors in patients with IPF since their circulating
SASP factors assayed were not highly elevated initially (Suppl.
Tables S3, S4). Though not statistically significant, select SASP proteins,
including interluekin-6, matrix remodeling protein MMP7, and
metallopeptidase inhibitor TIMP2, showed potential for reduction,
with at least 8 participants having decreased circulating concentrations;
however serum ELISA failed to confirm findings in IL-6 and MMP7.
Moderate correlations were observed between change in physical func-
tion, pulmonary function, and FI-LAB and change in SASP factors (23 of
48 SASP factors, r ≥ 0.50; Suppl. Tables S3, S4). For example, gain in
6MWD was associated with lowered miR34c, improved 4 m-gait
speed with MMP8, MMP9, and lowered RANTES, and faster chair-
stands with decreased eotaxin, GRO-α, and interleukin-18. Though es-
sentially unchanged with DQ, FEV1 or FVC were associated with
lowered MCP-1 and with matrix remodeling proteins. Lowered FI-LAB
was primarily associated with decreased pro-inflammatory cytokines.
While provocative, these preliminary associations need to be confirmed
in a larger population.
These functional and biological effects are generally consistent with
preclinical findings in a murine bleomycin model of fibrotic lung dis-
ease, which supports our translational approach. Specifically, DQ initi-
ated at disease onset in mice significantly reduced the senescence
marker p16INK4a expression in the lung and collective SASP factors
(MCP1, IL6, TNFα, Col1a1, and TGFβ). Biological effects were matched
by dramatic improvements in functional outcomes in lung-injured
mice administered DQ, including a 54% relative improvement in median
treadmill running endurance [5], which supports the clinical evidence
reported here of meaningful change in physical function, even with
modest changes in biomarkers of senescent cell burden.
4. Discussion
We report study feasibility in this first-in-human, single-arm, open-
label pilot study of the senolytic drug combination, DQ, in participants
with mild to severe but stable IPF. The three weeks of intermittent DQ
administration was associated with clinically meaningful, statistically
significant improvements in physical function. This included improved
6-min walk distance, 4-m gait speed, and 5-repeated chair-stand
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Dosing 
Day 1-3
Dosing 
Day 8-10
Dosing 
Day 15-17
Baseline 
Measures
Follow-Up
Measures
Day 22
Day 30
Dosing Days:
Dasatinib:100 mg per day 
Quercetin:1250 mg per day
Adherence Check
Symptom Questionnaires
Adverse Event Reporting
Day 
4
Day 
11
Day 
18
Fig. 2. Three weeks of intermittent DQ dosing and assessment schedule. Dasatinib (100 mg per day) and Quercetin (1250 mg per day) were self-administered by participants for three
consecutive days per week on three consecutive weeks according to the dosing schedule shown (dosing days 1–3, 8–10, and 15–17). Study coordinators called participant to confirm
adherence and administer safety and symptom questionnaires approximately 24 h after the last dose of each week.
Enrollment
Allocation
Follow-Up & 
Analysis
Assessed for Eligibility (n=17)
WFSM (n=5), UTSHCSA (n=12)
Follow-Up (n=14)
Analyzed  (n=14)
Treated (n=14)
WFSM (n=2), UTSHCSA (n=12)
Screened out (n=3, WFSM), 
not meeting study criteria:
• Medication use (1)
• Pulmonary hypertension (1)
• Withdrew consent (1)
Discontinued use (n=0)
Lost to follow-up (n=0)
Fig. 1. CONSORT flow diagram. Patient allocation in single-arm open label pilot study
conducted at Wake Forest School of Medicine (WFSM) and University of Texas Health
Science Center San Antonio (UTHSCSA) shown in CONSORT flowchart.
559
J.N. Justice et al. / EBioMedicine 40 (2019) 554–563
 times. IPF appears to be relentlessly progressive: in large IPF drug trials,
no improvements in 6MWD have been observed in the placebo-control
arms [56]. These effects of DQ on physical function in IPF patients are
consistent with preclinical findings of marked improvements in tread-
mill endurance and frailty following the selective ablation of senescent
cells in progeroid, naturally aged, and lung-injured murine models
[5,11,24,26]. Follow-up visits were conducted at least 5 days after the
last dose of DQ, well beyond the elimination half-lives of D and Q,
which are b6 h [43,44]. Thus, potential improvements in physical func-
tion did not depend on a mechanism that requires continued presence
of the drugs (e.g., drug occupancy of a receptor or effects due to acting
on an enzyme). Thus, potential improvements in physical function did
not depend on a mechanism that requires continued presence of the
drugs (e.g., drug occupancy of a receptor or effects due to acting on an
enzyme). Rather, the improved physical function appears to depend
on a mechanism that causes effects that persist following drug clearance
(e.g., epigenetic effects or effects on tissue composition, such as a
change in slowly turning-over cell types). However, the primary pur-
pose of our study was not to evaluate drug efficacy: without a control
group, the functional improvements we observed must be interpreted
with caution and underscore the need for appropriately powered ran-
domized controlled trials.
DQ administration was acceptable and feasible in the older IPF par-
ticipants in this study. The single-arm open label study of three weeks
of intermittent administration of DQ in older adults with stable IPF
was successfully completed in all participants at two clinical sites.
Drug adherence was imperfect but acceptable; routine dosing re-
minders and adherence checks by study personnel were seen as essen-
tial to ensure drug self-administration according to the intermittent
dosing schedule. The senolytic agents were generally well tolerated
without notable adverse changes in clinical chemistries. Specifically,
there were no evident declines in renal or hepatic function or evidence
of cell lysis syndrome. One hospitalization was reported following suc-
cessful completion of DQ intervention, but the rest of the reported
events were generally mild to moderate in severity, reversible, and
without clinically significant sequelae. Though the single-arm open-
label design precludes comparison of events against a placebo or stan-
dard of care control group as would be necessary to definitively evaluate
safety and tolerability, we did compare event types and rate reporting to
the placebo control arms of published Phase III randomized controlled
trials in IPF (Suppl. Table S5). Overall, the majority of events are consis-
tent with reports in these large drug trials in IPF [45,46], except for po-
tentially higher reporting of cough, nausea, headache, and fatigue in this
pilot trial. However, these speculations should be considered with cau-
tion, as differences among symptom questionnaires or severity poten-
tially complicates direct comparison with these Phase III trials. We
Table 2
Incidence and severity of adverse events.
Adverse events
Overall
Severity grade
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Non-serious Adverse Events
67
37
31
0
Serious Adverse Event
1
–
–
1
Fatal Adverse Event
0
–
–
Adverse Event leading to discontinuation
0
–
–
Reported adverse events
IPF & respiratory (16 events)
Cough
6
0
5
1*
Shortness of breath
3
0
2
1*
Runny nose, sneezing
3
3
0
0
Respiratory infection
1
0
0
1*
Low O2
1
0
1
0
Other respiratory (e.g. allergies)
2
2
0
0
General health & well-being (14 events)
Feeling generally unwell
4
1
2
1*
Tired/weak
4
1
3
0
Nonspecific dizziness, light-headedness
3
3
0
0
Anxiety
2
0
2
0
Sleeplessness
1
1
0
0
Skin & bruising (14 events)
Skin irritation (steri-strip)
10
9
1
0
Skin irritation (unrelated to steri-strip)
2
1
1
0
Bruising (biopsy site)
1
1
0
0
Bruising (unrelated to study procedure)
1
0
1
0
Gastrointestinal & appetite (14 events)
Nausea
6
3
3
0
Change in appetite
2
2
0
0
Constipation
2
1
1
0
Diarrhea
2
1
1
0
Indigestion/heartburn
1
1
0
0
Vomiting
1
0
1
0
Pain or discomfort (7 events)
Headaches
5
2
1
2
Joint pain or body discomfort
2
2
1
0
Mouth, eyes (5 events)
Dry or watery eyes
3
2
1
0
Sore/sensitive mouth
2
1
2
0
Table 3
Changes in measures of physical and pulmonary function and frailty index derived from clinical chemistries before and after three-week intermittent DQ in 14 participants with stable IPF.
Functional measure
Baseline
Follow-up
Difference
Within-subjects
Correlation
Mean ± SD
Mean ± SD
Δ ± SD
p-Value
r
Pulmonary function
FEV1 (L/s)
2.1 ± 0.9
2.2 ± 0.7
+0.1 ± 0.3
0.38
0.95⁎
FEV1 (% predicted)
72.3 ± 26.3
73.4 ± 20.1
+1.14 ± 11
0.71
0.92⁎
FVC (L)
2.7 ± 1.0
2.6 ± 1.0
−0.2 ± 0.9
0.53
0.74⁎
FVC (% predicted)
67.3 ± 23.5
67 ± 17.9
−0.29 ± 9.1
0.91
0.94⁎
FEV1: FVC (%)
92.4 ± 8.3
91.6 ± 4.1
−0.7 ± 10
0.78
−0.27
Physical function
6-min walk distance (m)
447 ± 83
468 ± 81
+21.5 ± 28
0.012⁎
0.94⁎
4-m gait speed (m/s)
1.1 ± 0.2
1.2 ± 0.2
+0.12 ± 0.2
0.024⁎
0.54⁎
Timed chair-stands (s)
14.8 ± 3
12.6 ± 2
−2.2 ± 3
0.013⁎
0.51⁎
SPPB score
10 ± 1
11 ± 0.9
+0.9 ± 1
0.003⁎
0.38
Grip strength (kg)
12.7 ± 5
12.1 ± 4
−0.6 ± 2
0.314
0.94⁎
Frailty index
FI-LAB (score)⁎
0.103 ± 0.06
0.09 ± 0.07
0.02 ± 0.05
0.24
0.78⁎
⁎ p ≤ .05, n = 14 pulmonary function and 6-min walk test; n = 13 4-m gait speed, timed repeat chair-stands, SPPB score (1 subject did not complete due to coinciding health event),
FEV1: forced expiratory volume in one second (liters per sec, L/s); FVC: forced vital capacity (liters, L); Percent predicted values based on age, sex, race, and height. FI-LAB (lab-based frailty
index score derived from analytes in/out of reference range for 34 blood-based clinical chemistries). Within-subjects, paired t-test (p-value) and Pearson correlations for baseline vs. fol-
low-up.
560
J.N. Justice et al. / EBioMedicine 40 (2019) 554–563
 emphasize that physicians should not prescribe senolytics and IPF pa-
tients should not take these agents outside of clinical trials, unless and
until further studies clearly demonstrate safety and efficacy.
Pulmonary function in this IPF patient population did not change
during the course of this preliminary study. However, spirometry on a
given day is a reflection of factors affecting lung function over the
adult lifetime. For example, FEV1 and FVC can be improved acutely
(e.g. with the use of bronchodilators), but for the most part these lung
function parameters deteriorate with age and IPF disease course, and
it takes the passage of time to characterize changing FVC trajectories.
We did not hypothesize that the clearance of senescence cells would
have an acute effect on bronchial reactivity, fibrosis, or extracellular ma-
trix destruction. It is likely that in this pilot exploration, the follow-up
period is too short and the sample size too modest to assess effects on
long-term trajectories, especially in a complex chronic disease such as
IPF. IPF etiology and progression is multifactorial, and whether the at-
tendant pulmonary dysfunction is related to fibrosis vs. inflammation
vs. other effects of senescent cells remains an open question [54]. For ex-
ample, senescent cell-induced pulmonary dysfunction could be related
to small vessel hemostasis due to serpines such as plasminogen activa-
tor inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), tissue destruction due to proteases, delayed tis-
sue repair due to progenitor dysfunction caused by senescent cell
production of activin A and other factors that cause stem/progenitor
cell dysfunction, among other possibilities. Some of these potential
mechanisms, each of which has been observed in other contexts,
could take much longer to resolve following senescent cell reduction
than others. If resolution of pulmonary scarring and fibrosis does indeed
occur, it may take considerable time after clearance of senescent cells
from the lung. In sum, a longer follow-up period in an efficacy trial
that will enroll more participants and include a randomly-assigned con-
trol group will be needed to test if there is improvement in pulmonary
function.
4.1. Limitations of the study
As clearly articulated throughout this report, a limitation in the
single-arm open-label design is absence of a standard of care or placebo
control arm. However, as this is a pilot study, the purpose was not to es-
tablish efficacy of DQ on functional outcomes, but to suggest feasibility
and best methods to implement in a randomized, double-blind, con-
trolled efficacy trial of senolytics for IPF or other senescence-
associated age-related diseases. The improvements in physical function
we found, although statistically significant and clinically meaningful,
need to be verified in larger controlled trials. While efficacy and safety
estimates should not be over-interpreted, our findings in older adults
with stable IPF provide evidence supporting the conduct of such a trial
of DQ with changes in physical function as a primary outcome.
Another limitation is in regards to markers of in vivo senescent cell
burden for use in clinical trials. It is not feasible to test if senolytics di-
rectly cause senescent cell clearance from the lungs of IPF patients
given safety concerns about repeated bronchoscopies. Our previous
work demonstrated increased senescent cell abundance in lungs of sub-
jects with IPF, including upregulation of p16INK4A (CDKN2A), which cor-
related with disease severity [5]. Additionally, p16INK4A+ fibroblasts and
epithelial cells with telomere-associated DNA damage foci (TAFs), an-
other marker of cellular senescence, accumulated in fibrotic regions of
honeycomb lung in patients with IPF, together with increased expres-
sion of SASP components (including the matrix remodeling proteins
and pro-inflammatory factors that were tested in the blood of subjects
in the present study) [5]. Moreover, using DQ we did demonstrate se-
nescent cell clearance from lungs of mice with senescent cell accumula-
tion and pulmonary fibrosis caused by inhaled bleomycin [5]. In
exploratory analyses in the present pilot study, changes in circulating
SASP factors following administration of DQ were inconclusive, possibly
owing to the relatively low levels of these markers of cellular senes-
cence at baseline in the circulation. However, we did find that circulat-
ing pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic SASP factors following 3 weeks of
intermittent DQ administration were associated with change in physical
function, pulmonary function, and FI-LAB scores. These findings need to
be evaluated further in ongoing efforts to identify and validate reliable
circulating biomarkers of cellular senescence that reflect tissue senes-
cent cell abundance for use in multi-center clinical trials of senolytics,
especially for diseases such as IPF in which repeated tissue biopsies
are not feasible.
4.2. Drug and dosing considerations
Future trials should evaluate different senolytics and dosing regi-
mens. We used intermittent DQ here because: 1) D and Q have been
used extensively for other indications in humans and their safety pro-
files are understood, 2) DQ was effective in improving function in a
mouse model of IPF [5], 3) DQ has been shown to be senolytic in
human tissues [24], 4) DQ targets a broader range of senescent cells
than some other senolytic regimens [8,42], and 5) DQ alleviates physical
dysfunction, delays or treats multiple age-related disorders, and ex-
tends lifespan in old mice [5,8,11,18,20–25]. We recently demonstrated
that DQ causes selective apoptosis of senescent cells in freshly-isolated
human tissue explants [24]. Alternative senolytic agents are being ac-
tively explored, including BCL-2 inhibitors and fisetin. We and others
found that agents that target Bcl-xL, including navitoclax (ABT263),
Table 4
Changes in subjective respiratory health related quality of life and perceived fatigue before and after 3-week DQ.
Questionnaire
Baseline
Follow-up
Difference
Within-subjects
Corr
Mean ± SD
Mean ± SD
Δ ± SD
No. ≥5% Improve
p-Value
r
Respiratory health
MRC breathlessness
2.1 ± 0.8
2.3 ± 0.8
+0.2 ± 0.8
0
0.51
St. George's respiratory
26.9 ± 11
26.6 ± 12
−0.3 ± 5.4
5
0.89
UCSD shortness of breath
30.2 ± 17
28.6 ± 23
−3.6 ± 12
9
0.87
Perceived fatigue scales
Pittsburgh fatigability, physical
24.4 ± 9
23.5 ± 8
−0.9 ± 5
4
0.80
Pittsburgh fatigability, mental
15.1 ± 15
12.1 ± 10
−3.0 ± 11
6
0.69
Fatigue severity
33.5 ± 13
21.1 ± 16
−2.3 ± 7
5
0.66
Fatigue visual analogue scale
−0.3 ± 3
5
Global impression of change
Improve
Overall change (Likert)
–
3.4 ± 2
6
Global impression of change, VAS
–
4.4 ± 2
6
N = 14. For each scale, a higher score indicates poorer perceived health or fatigue. Pearson correlations for baseline vs. follow-up. The Global Impression of Change administered at trial end
to record change (if any) in activity limitations, symptoms, emotions, and overall quality of life related to IPF since study enrollment, queried by 2 inverse scales: a Likert scale (1 = no
change, 7 = a great deal better), and Visual Analogue Scale (0 = much better, 10 = much worse). 6 patients indicated mild to moderate improvement; 7 patients report little/no noticeable
change; 1 subject indicated “worsening” condition.
561
J.N. Justice et al. / EBioMedicine 40 (2019) 554–563
 A1331852, and A1155463, are senolytic, at least with some types of se-
nescent cells [18,57,58]. However, Bcl-xL inhibitors can interfere with
neutrophil and platelet viability, sometimes causing severe thrombocy-
topenia even after small doses [59]. Fisetin is another agent that we dis-
covered to be senolytic against some human cell types [18]. Like DQ,
fisetin alleviates physical dysfunction in progeroid and naturally-aged
mice, enhances healthspan, and increases remaining lifespan in older
mice [26]. If fisetin proves to be safe and effective in mouse IPF models,
it would be a strong candidate to advance into clinical trials, as may be
other next-generation senolytics [8,42].
We used an intermittent dosing strategy for several reasons (see
Methods). The development of the senescent phenotype is a relatively
long and dynamic process that can take weeks, at least in cell culture
[60]. However, senescent cell clearance by senolytics can occur within
18 h of a brief exposure, and senolytics do not need to be present contin-
uously to occupy a receptor or affect an enzyme [5,8,42]. Rather, they act
in a “hit-and-run” manner, which supports the rationale behind inter-
mittent treatment [42]. To be conservative, we administered three
courses of DQ separated by four days. Also, consistently with the
above, we found improved physical function 5 days after the last dose
of DQ, well after the day or so it takes for these agents to be completely
eliminated. A substantial improvement in exercise endurance was also
found in mice with pulmonary fibrosis intermittently treated with DQ
[5], reflecting emerging evidence that brief or intermittent senolytic
treatment results in profound effects that persist long after drug
elimination.
4.3. Conclusions
IPF is a disease related to senescent cell accumulation in the lungs
that is generally relentlessly progressive and fatal. While it remains to
be confirmed if senolytics directly clear lung senescent cells to improve
pulmonary function in humans with IPF as occurs in mice [5], our data in
this first-in-human trial of senolytics indicate potential for clinically
meaningful improvements in physical function. Consistent with the pri-
mary objective of this study, we established feasibility of recruitment,
adherence, assessments, and methods. These findings constitute pre-
liminary proof-of-concept evidence that interventions designed to tar-
get senescent cells may alleviate functional consequences of aging-
related diseases in humans, as is the case in mice.
Acknowledgments
We thank the volunteers in this study and the research staff who
conducted recruitment and assessments, and the CTSI. We especially
thank Dr. Yuji Ikeno at UTHSCSA and Samantha Rogers at WFSM for as-
sistance in biospecimen collection procedures. We also thank Heather
Gregory (WFSM) and Terry Romo (UTHSCSA) for technical assistance
in handling biologic samples and Kimberly Kennedy and Lindsay
Tysinger (WFSM) and Che Kelly and Darcy Bair-Kelps (UTHSCSA) for
their significant administrative, regulatory, and study coordinator con-
tributions. Aling Xu (Mayo Clinic) provided technical assistance for lab-
oratory procedures (e.g., ELISAs, microarray).
Funding
This work was supported by the Claude D. Pepper Older Americans
Independence Centers at WFSM (P30 AG021332, SBK, JNJ), and
UTHSCSA (P30 AG044271, AMN, NM); San Antonio Nathan Shock Cen-
ter (P30 AG013319, NM); NIH grants K01 AG059837 (JNJ); R37
AG13925 (JLK), R15 AG059190 and R03 AG059846 (MMM); the Connor
Group (JLK); Robert J. and Theresa W. Ryan (JLK); John and Virginia
Kunkel (NKL); and the Noaber, Ted Nash Long Life, and Glenn Founda-
tions (JLK, NKL). The CRU at UTHSCSA is supported by CTSA
(3UL1TR002645). This work was not supported in any way by pharma-
ceutical companies, private industry, or other for-profit agencies. The
corresponding authors had access to all data in the study. The authors
were responsible for concept, execution, analysis, interpretation, and fi-
nal responsibility for the decision to submit for publication, free of any
private interest, pharmaceutical company, or other agency.
Declarations of interests
JLK, TT, and NKL have a financial interest related to this research. Pat-
ents on senolytic drugs are held by Mayo Clinic. This research has been
reviewed by the Mayo Clinic Conflict of Interest Review Board and was
conducted in compliance with Mayo Clinic Conflict of Interest policies.
No conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the other
authors.
Author contributions
study concept and design: JNJ, SBK, NM, AMN, NKL, TT, SKH, JLK; pa-
tient recruitment, data collection, research, analysis: AMN, JNJ, RP; cel-
lular senescence assays and biomarker analyses: TT, LP, JLK; microRNA
analyses: MMM; statistical analysis: JNJ, SBK; interpretation: JNJ, SBK,
AMN, NM, TT, NKL, JLK; drafted manuscript: JNJ, AMN, JLK; critically re-
vised manuscript: SBK, JLK, TT, SKH, NKL, NM; equally responsible for
the final content of manuscript: JNJ, AMN; read and approved the final
manuscript: all authors.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.12.052.
References
[1] King Jr TE, Pardo A, Selman M. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Lancet 2011;378
(9807):1949–61.
[2] Ley B, Collard HR. Epidemiology of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Clin Epidemiol
2013;5:483–92.
[3] Ley B, Collard HR, King Jr TE. Clinical course and prediction of survival in idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011;183(4):431–40.
[4] Raghu G, Chen SY, Yeh WS, et al. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in US Medicare ben-
eficiaries aged 65 years and older: incidence, prevalence, and survival, 2001-11. Lan-
cet Respir Med 2014;2(7):566–72.
[5] Schafer MJ, White TA, Iijima K, et al. Cellular senescence mediates fibrotic pulmonary
disease. Nat Commun 2017;8:14532.
[6] Faner R, Rojas M, Macnee W, Agusti A. Abnormal lung aging in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2012;186(4):306–13.
[7] Hashimoto M, Asai A, Kawagishi H, et al. Elimination of p19(ARF)-expressing cells
enhances pulmonary function in mice. JCI Insight 2016;1(12):e87732.
[8] Kirkland JL, Tchkonia T. Cellular senescence: a translational perspective.
EBioMedicine 2017;21:21–8.
[9] Zhu Y, Armstrong JL, Tchkonia T, Kirkland JL. Cellular senescence and the senescent
secretory phenotype in age-related chronic diseases. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care
2014;17(4):324–8.
[10] Lomas NJ, Watts KL, Akram KM, Forsyth NR, Spiteri MA. Idiopathic pulmonary fibro-
sis: immunohistochemical analysis provides fresh insights into lung tissue remodel-
ling with implications for novel prognostic markers. Int J Clin Exp Pathol 2012;5(1):
58–71.
[11] Zhu Y, Tchkonia T, Pirtskhalava T, et al. The Achilles' heel of senescent cells: from
transcriptome to senolytic drugs. Aging Cell 2015;14(4):644–58.
[12] Kirkland JL, Tchkonia T. Clinical strategies and animal models for developing
senolytic agents. Exp Gerontol 2015;68:19–25.
[13] Krishnamurthy J, Torrice C, Ramsey MR, et al. Ink4a/Arf expression is a biomarker of
aging. J Clin Invest 2004;114(9):1299–307.
[14] Coppe JP, Desprez PY, Krtolica A, Campisi J. The senescence-associated secretory
phenotype: the dark side of tumor suppression. Annu Rev Pathol 2010;5:99–118.
[15] Coppe JP, Patil CK, Rodier F, et al. Senescence-associated secretory phenotypes reveal
cell-nonautonomous functions of oncogenic RAS and the p53 tumor suppressor.
PLoS Biol 2008;6(12):2853–68.
[16] Kuilman T, Michaloglou C, Vredeveld LC, et al. Oncogene-induced senescence re-
layed by an interleukin-dependent inflammatory network. Cell 2008;133(6):
1019–31.
[17] Wang E. Senescent human fibroblasts resist programmed cell death, and failure to
suppress bcl2 is involved. Cancer Res 1995;55(11):2284–92.
[18] Zhu Y, Doornebal EJ, Pirtskhalava T, et al. New agents that target senescent cells: the
flavone, fisetin, and the BCL-XL inhibitors, A1331852 and A1155463. Aging (Albany
NY) 2017;9(3):955–63.
562
J.N. Justice et al. / EBioMedicine 40 (2019) 554–563
 [19] Fuhrmann-Stroissnigg H, Ling YY, Zhao J, et al. Identification of HSP90 inhibitors as a
novel class of senolytics. Nat Commun 2017;8(1):422.
[20] Farr JN, Xu M, Weivoda MM, et al. Targeting cellular senescence prevents age-
related bone loss in mice. Nat Med 2017;23(9):1072–9.
[21] Ogrodnik M, Miwa S, Tchkonia T, et al. Cellular senescence drives age-dependent he-
patic steatosis. Nat Commun 2017;8:15691.
[22] Musi N, Valentine JM, Sickora KR, et al. Tau protein aggregation is associated with
cellular senescence in the brain. Aging Cell 2018;17(6):e12840.
[23] Tchkonia T, Kirkland JL. Aging, cell senescence, and chronic disease: emerging ther-
apeutic strategies. JAMA 2018;320(13):1319–20.
[24] Xu M, Pirtskhalava T, Farr JN, et al. Senolytics improve physical function and increase
lifespan in old age. Nat Med 2018;24(8):1246–56.
[25] Roos CM, Zhang B, Palmer AK, et al. Chronic senolytic treatment alleviates
established vasomotor dysfunction in aged or atherosclerotic mice. Aging Cell
2016;15(5):973–7.
[26] Yousefzadeh MJ, Zhu Y, McGowan SJ, et al. Fisetin is a senotherapeutic that extends
health and lifespan. EBioMedicine 2018;36:18–28.
[27] Marcos-Perez D, Sanchez-Flores M, Maseda A, et al. Frailty in older adults is associ-
ated with plasma concentrations of inflammatory mediators but not with lympho-
cyte subpopulations. Front Immunol 2018;9:1056.
[28] Yousefzadeh MJ, Schafer MJ, Noren Hooten N, et al. Circulating levels of monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 as a potential measure of biological age in mice and
frailty in humans. Aging Cell 2018;17(2).
[29] Loumaye A, de Barsy M, Nachit M, et al. Circulating activin A predicts survival in can-
cer patients. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle 2017;8(5):768–77.
[30] Vinel C, Lukjanenko L, Batut A, et al. The exerkine apelin reverses age-associated
sarcopenia. Nat Med 2018;24(9):1360–71.
[31] Rosas IO, Richards TJ, Konishi K, et al. MMP1 and MMP7 as potential peripheral
blood biomarkers in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. PLoS Med 2008;5(4):e93.
[32] White ES, Xia M, Murray S, et al. Plasma surfactant protein-D, matrix
metalloproteinase-7, and osteopontin index distinguishes idiopathic pulmonary fi-
brosis from other idiopathic interstitial pneumonias. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2016;194(10):1242–51.
[33] Olivieri F, Albertini MC, Orciani M, et al. DNA damage response (DDR) and senes-
cence: shuttled inflamma-miRNAs on the stage of inflamm-aging. Oncotarget
2015;6(34):35509–21.
[34] Cui H, Ge J, Xie N, et al. miR-34a inhibits lung fibrosis by inducing lung fibroblast se-
nescence. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2017;56(2):168–78.
[35] Schneider A, Matkovich SJ, Victoria B, et al. Changes of ovarian microRNA profile in
long-living ames dwarf mice during aging. PLoS One 2017;12(1):e0169213.
[36] Bhaumik D, Scott GK, Schokrpur S, et al. MicroRNAs miR-146a/b negatively modu-
late the senescence-associated inflammatory mediators IL-6 and IL-8. Aging (Albany
NY) 2009;1(4):402–11.
[37] Prattichizzo F, Giuliani A, Recchioni R, et al. Anti-TNF-alpha treatment modulates
SASP and SASP-related microRNAs in endothelial cells and in circulating angiogenic
cells. Oncotarget 2016;7(11):11945–58.
[38] Kangas R, Pollanen E, Rippo MR, et al. Circulating miR-21, miR-146a and Fas ligand
respond to postmenopausal estrogen-based hormone replacement therapy–a
study with monozygotic twin pairs. Mech Ageing Dev 2014;143-144:1–8.
[39] Kistin C, Silverstein M. Pilot studies: a critical but potentially misused component of
interventional research. JAMA 2015;314(15):1561–2.
[40] Leon AC, Davis LL, Kraemer HC. The role and interpretation of pilot studies in clinical
research. J Psychiatr Res 2011;45(5):626–9.
[41] Whitehead AL, Julious SA, Cooper CL, Campbell MJ. Estimating the sample size for a
pilot randomised trial to minimise the overall trial sample size for the external pilot
and main trial for a continuous outcome variable. Stat Methods Med Res 2016;25
(3):1057–73.
[42] Kirkland JL, Tchkonia T, Zhu Y, Niedernhofer LJ, Robbins PD. The Clinical potential of
Senolytic Drugs. J Am Geriatr Soc 2017;65(10):2297–301.
[43] Christopher LJ, Cui D, Wu C, et al. Metabolism and disposition of dasatinib after oral
administration to humans. Drug Metab Dispos 2008;36(7):1357–64.
[44] Moon YJ, Wang L, DiCenzo R, Morris ME. Quercetin pharmacokinetics in humans.
Biopharm Drug Dispos 2008;29(4):205–17.
[45] King Jr TE, Bradford WZ, Castro-Bernardini S, et al. A phase 3 trial of pirfenidone in
patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. N Engl J Med 2014;370(22):2083–92.
[46] Richeldi L, du Bois RM, Raghu G, et al. Efficacy and safety of nintedanib in idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis. N Engl J Med 2014;370(22):2071–82.
[47] Rockwood K, McMillan M, Mitnitski A, Howlett SE. A frailty index based on common
laboratory tests in comparison with a clinical frailty index for older adults in long-
term care facilities. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2015;16(10):842–7.
[48] Laboratories ATSCoPSfCPF. ATS statement: guidelines for the six-minute walk test.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;166(1):111–7.
[49] Erratum. ATS statement: guidelines for the six-minute walk test. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2016;193(10):1185.
[50] Guralnik JM, Simonsick EM, Ferrucci L, et al. A short physical performance battery
assessing lower extremity function: association with self-reported disability and
prediction of mortality and nursing home admission. J Gerontol 1994;49(2):
M85–94.
[51] Allen B, Schneider A, Victoria B, et al. Blood serum from head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma patients induces altered microrna and target gene expression profile
in treated cells. Front Oncol 2018;8:217.
[52] Rausch TK, Schillert A, Ziegler A, Luking A, Zucht HD, Schulz-Knappe P. Comparison
of pre-processing methods for multiplex bead-based immunoassays. BMC Genomics
2016;17(1):601.
[53] Martyanov V, Kim GJ, Hayes W, et al. Novel lung imaging biomarkers and skin gene
expression subsetting in dasatinib treatment of systemic sclerosis-associated inter-
stitial lung disease. PLoS One 2017;12(11):e0187580.
[54] Nathan SD, du Bois RM, Albera C, et al. Validation of test performance characteristics
and minimal clinically important difference of the 6-minute walk test in patients
with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Respir Med 2015;109(7):914–22.
[55] Robbie H, Daccord C, Chua F, Devaraj A. Evaluating disease severity in idiopathic pul-
monary fibrosis. Eur Respir Rev 2017;26(145).
[56] Brown AW, Nathan SD. The value and application of the 6-minute-walk test in idio-
pathic pulmonary fibrosis. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2018;15(1):3–10.
[57] Chang J, Wang Y, Shao L, et al. Clearance of senescent cells by ABT263 rejuvenates
aged hematopoietic stem cells in mice. Nat Med 2016;22(1):78–83.
[58] Zhu Y, Tchkonia T, Fuhrmann-Stroissnigg H, et al. Identification of a novel senolytic
agent, navitoclax, targeting the Bcl-2 family of anti-apoptotic factors. Aging Cell
2016;15(3):428–35.
[59] Wilson WH, Hernandez-Ilizaliturri FJ, Dunleavy K, Little RF, O'Connor OA. Novel dis-
ease targets and management approaches for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Leuk
Lymphoma 2010;51(Suppl. 1):1–10.
[60] Noren Hooten N, Evans MK. Techniques to induce and quantify cellular senescence. J
Vis Exp 2017(123).
563
J.N. Justice et al. / EBioMedicine 40 (2019) 554–563
