 ORIGINAL ARTICLE
A stimulus-responsive, in situ-forming, nanoparticle-laden hydrogel
for ocular drug delivery
Maryam Kabiri1,2 & Syed H. Kamal1 & Sandip V. Pawar1 & Protiva R. Roy1 & Maziar Derakhshandeh1,3 & Ujendra Kumar4 &
Savvas G. Hatzikiriakos1 & Sazzad Hossain5 & Vikramaditya G. Yadav1,6
Published online: 5 March 2018
# The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Abstract
Most medications targeting optic neuropathies are administered as eye drops. However, their corneal penetration efficiencies are
typically < 5%. There is a clear, unmet need for novel transcorneal drug delivery vehicles. To this end, we have developed a
stimulus-responsive, in situ-forming, nanoparticle-laden hydrogel for controlled release of poorly bioavailable drugs into the
aqueous humor of the eye. The hydrogel is formulated as a composite of hyaluronic acid (HA) and methylcellulose (MC). The
amphiphilic nanoparticles are composed of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and poly(lactic acid) (PLA). Experimental design aided
the identification of hydrogel composition and nanoparticle content in the formulation, and the formulation reliably switched
between thixotropy and temperature-dependent rheopexy when it was tested in a rheometer under conditions that simulate the
ocular surface, including blinking. These properties should ensure that the formulation coats the cornea through blinking of the
eyelid and facilitate application of the medication as an eye drop immediately prior to the patient’s bedtime. We subsequently
tested the efficacy of our formulation in whole-eye experiments by loading the nanoparticles with cannabigerolic acid (CBGA).
Our formulation exhibits over a 300% increase in transcorneal penetration over control formulations. This work paves the way for
the introduction of novel products targeting ocular diseases to the market.
Keywords Cannabinoids . Glaucoma . Hydrogel . Nanoparticles . Synthetic biology . Switchable rheology
Introduction
The space enclosed by the cornea and iris is referred to as the
anterior chamber of the eye. The base of the cornea extends
into a tissue called the ciliary body, and this interface is
aligned by a spongy tissue called the trabecular meshwork
[1]. Epithelial cells in the ciliary body secrete a thin, gelati-
nous fluid known as the aqueous humor that permeates
through the trabecular meshwork to fill the anterior chamber.
As freshly secreted aqueous humor makes its way into the
chamber, older fluid drains out, also through the meshwork.
The constant circulation of aqueous humor through the trabec-
ular meshwork is central to eye hygiene and health. Likewise,
the posterior chamber of the eye, which is enclosed by the lens
and the retina, is filled with a viscous, jelly-like fluid called the
vitreous humor. Inadequate or obstructed drainage of the
aqueous humor through the trabecular meshwork, which is
the pathophysiology of glaucoma, increases the fluid pressure
within the anterior chamber, which subsequently propagates
to the posterior chamber of the eye [2]. The increased intraoc-
ular pressure exacts a toll on the basal membrane of the retina,
thinning the mesh-like tissue in this region and damaging the
head of the optic nerve housed therein by inducing apoptotic
degeneration of the nerve’s ganglion cells.
Chronic optic neuropathies such as glaucoma are the leading
causes of blindness worldwide [3]. It is estimated that nearly 80
Maryam Kabiri and Syed H. Kamal contributed equally to this work.
* Vikramaditya G. Yadav
vikramaditya.yadav@ubc.ca
1
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
2
Evonik Transferra Nanosciences, Burnaby, BC, Canada
3
Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, University of
Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
4
Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
5
InMed Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Vancouver, BC, Canada
6
School of Biomedical Engineering, The University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Drug Delivery and Translational Research (2018) 8:484–495
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13346-018-0504-x
 million people will be affected by these conditions by 2020 [4].
Most neuroprotective medications for treating optic neuropa-
thies are administered as eye drops. However, since less than
5% of the drug in eye drops actually penetrates the cornea [5,
6], the dosage of drug in the formulation is typically much
higher than what is required, which implies that eye drops are
fairly expensive to manufacture. Additionally, once the neuro-
protective drug penetrates the cornea and lens, it must then
diffuse through the aqueous and vitreous humors before it can
interact with receptors on the surface of retinal ganglion cells.
These barriers to mass transport further lower the efficacy of
drugs administered as eye drops. There is considerable room for
improvement for drug formulations for ophthalmological appli-
cations, in particular, new and effective delivery vehicles for
neuroprotective drugs.
Our therapeutic strategy leverages the proven potential of
cannabinoids to confer neuroprotection to ganglion cells [7].
Although the role of cannabinoids in treating glaucoma is well
understood, no such products currently exist in the market.
Current glaucoma remedies work by lowering intraocular
pressure either by inhibiting carbonic anhydrase in the eye,
or reducing the production of aqueous humor by the ciliary
epithelial cells, or by increasing fluid drainage through the
trabecular meshwork [8]. Likewise, devices that provide a
conduit for the intraocular fluid to drain into the nasolacrimal
system have also been tested for the treatment of glaucoma
[9]. The nasolacrimal drainage system discharges tear fluid
from the external eye into the nasal cavity and plays key roles
in maintenance of eye hygiene and clearance of drugs.
Neuroprotection as a therapeutic strategy has not hitherto been
pursued owing to great difficulties associated with the targeted
delivery of cannabinoids to the base of retina and the poor
bioavailability of these molecules [10]. Previous attempts for
topical delivery of cannabinoids to human ocular tissues were
limited to using mineral oil [11] or cyclodextrins [12–15].
However, these formulations are either cytotoxic or irritate
the ocular tissue [16]. The development of a superior drug
delivery vehicle would surely pave the way to market for
non-invasive, cannabinoid-based neuropathic pain relievers
for treating glaucoma and other chronic optic neuropathies.
To this end, we have developed a stimulus-responsive, in
situ-forming, nanoparticle-laden hydrogel for spatiotemporal
and dosage-controlled release of poorly bioavailable cannabi-
noids into the aqueous humor of the eye. The hydrogel is for-
mulated as a composite of hyaluronic acid (HA) and methyl-
cellulose (MC). The former is an anionic polysaccharide, and
the latter is a water-soluble, hydrophobic derivative of cellulose.
Both materials are biocompatible and highly mucoadhesive and
have been recognized as safe by the FDA [17, 18]. In order to
enhance the flux of the drug through the cornea and sustain its
release for a prolonged duration, we also employed nanoparti-
cles as the drug carriers. The nanoparticles (NPs) are composed
of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and poly(lactic acid) (PLA) and
are loaded with cannabigerolic acid (CBGA), a molecule that is
a close mimic of the cannabinoids that have been approved for
use in glaucoma medication. Additionally, we synthesized the
CBGA by expressing the cannabinoid biosynthetic pathway in
Escherichia coli, and the drug-loaded NPs were synthesized
using nanoprecipitation. Since we desired rapid gelation of
the formulation upon contact with the ocular surface and for-
mation of a uniform, unintrusive coating over the cornea that
can be positioned by blinking of the eyelid, we implemented a
factorial design of experiments in order to identify the consti-
tution of the formulation that allows it to switch between
temperature-dependent rheopexy (thickening) and thixotropy
(thinning). Parameters that were investigated include the con-
centration of HA and MC, the size of the NPs, and the drug
loading, among others. The optimized formulation has a sol-gel
transition temperature of roughly 32 °C, which is comparable
with that of the ocular surface, and successfully transitioned
between shear thinning and temperature thickening when it
was tested in a rheometer under conditions that simulated the
ocular surface. Finally, we tested the efficacy of our formulation
in whole-eye experiments using porcine eyeballs. Our work
seamlessly combines product design, synthetic biology, poly-
mer rheology and analysis of mass transport within ocular tis-
sue, and the formulation that we have developed exhibits over a
300% increase in transcorneal penetration over control formu-
lations. Moreover, the nanoparticle-laden hydrogel can be pack-
aged as a liquid, which permits easy dosing and manufactur-
ability. The current study paves the way to the market for
cannabinoid-based drugs, as well as combination therapies with
existing intraocular pressure-lowering pharmaceuticals.
Experimental section
Chemicals
Sodium hyaluronate (MW 752 kDa) was purchased from
Lifecore Biomedical LLC (Chicago, IL). Methylcellulose
(MC A15 PREM LV) was obtained as a gift from Dow
Chemical (Midland, MI). PEO-b-PLA (5.0-b-23.0) was pur-
chased from Polymer Source Inc. (Montreal, QC). Carboxy-
functionalized poly(styrene) NPs bearing a range of sizes were
purchased from Phosphorex (Hopkinton, MA). Olivetolic ac-
id (OA) was synthesized as described previously [19], and all
reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich Canada
(Oakville, ON). Geranyl pyrophosphate (GPP) was also pur-
chased from Sigma Aldrich Canada. Water was distilled and
deionized using Millipore Milli-RO 10 Plus and Milli-Q UF
Plus (Bedford, MA) to a final resistivity of 18 MΩ. Simulated
tear fluid (STF) was prepared in accordance with previously
published protocols [20]. All organic solvents used in the cur-
rent study were of HPLC grade and were purchased from
Sigma Aldrich Canada.
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2018) 8:484–495
485
 Methods
Preparation of NP-laden hydrogels
MC was initially dissolved in half of the volume of deionized
(DI) water that is required for the sample under investigation.
For instance, if the final concentration of MC that was re-
quired in the sample was 10 g/L, 10 g of MC was first dis-
solved in 500 mL of DI water. The DI water was close to
boiling (~ 90 °C) when it was added to MC, and the mixture
was agitated until the solids were completely immersed. The
lower critical solution temperature (LCST) of MC in water
ranges between 40 and 50 °C, which implies that MC is not
soluble in water at temperatures above its LCST. The remain-
der of the water, which was at ambient temperature, was added
to the aforementioned MC solution as it was stirring. The
solution temperature was then rapidly lowered to 0 °C and
agitation continued for an additional 15 min. HA powder
was then added to the MC solution, and the mixture was
stirred for another 10 min. Finally, the NP suspension was
added to the hydrogel solution to yield a final concentration
of 10 wt.%. This mixture was then incubated overnight at 4 °C
prior to experimentation.
Rheological characterization
An Anton Paar MCR-501 rheometer equipped with a cone-
and-plate geometry having a cone angle and diameter of 4°
and 25 mm, respectively, was used to assess the rheology of
the formulations. The edges of loaded samples were also coat-
ed with low-viscosity silicon oil in order to minimize dehy-
dration. Strain and amplitude sweep tests were performed pri-
or to rheological testing in order to identify the ranges of strain
and frequency associated with the linear viscoelastic regime.
The temperature for sol-gel transition of the formulations was
identified by performing small amplitude oscillatory shear
(SAOS) experiments by monitoring the crossover of storage
(G′) and loss (G″) moduli at various temperatures [21]. The
temperature was increased by a rate of 1 °C/min, while the
frequency was set at 1 Hz. The shear-thinning behavior of the
formulations was investigated by measuring their viscosities
as a function of shear rate, which ranged between 0.01 and
100 s−1. Temperature sweeps were performed on three distinct
samples of the same composition in order to confirm repro-
ducibility of the results.
Factorial design of experiments for optimization
of hydrogel composition
A sol-gel transition temperature of 32 °C was desired for the
formulation. Previous studies on the gelation characteristics of
NP-laden hydrogels revealed that the composition of the hy-
drogel—in particular, the concentration of the precursors and
diameter of the NPs—yielded the greatest influence on gela-
tion [22, 23]. As a consequence, the effect of varying the
concentrations of HA and MC (XHA and XMC, respectively)
and the average diameter of the NPs (XNP) on the sol-gel
transition temperature were systematically investigated in a
three-factor, three-level factorial design. The NPs used in the
factorial design are composed of carboxy-functionalized
poly(styrene). The three levels of each factor were coded as
− 1, 0, and 1. The values for coded and actual variables are
presented in Table 1. The levels coded as − 1 and 1 correspond
to the lowest and highest feasible values at which a particular
factor can be set within the system. Since the intended time
window for application of this formulation is the patient’s
bedtime, the lowest and highest values for XHA and XMC were
determined by assessing of the hydrogel’s degradation rate in
STF, and all composites with these constitutions degraded in
STF in ~ 8 h. On the other hand, 0 corresponds to either the
average of the two extreme values or an intermediate value
that is constrained by material availability. The latter is espe-
cially relevant for XNP. The − 1 and 1 levels for NP diameters
were selected based on prior reports about the optimal size for
corneal penetration and lack of irritancy [24]. Since carboxy-
functionalized poly(styrene) bearing an average diameter of
125 nm are not readily available, the 0 level was set at 100 nm,
which is sold commercially.
The sol-gel transition temperature, which is the dependent
variable, was measured using a cone and plate rheometer as
described previously. The function fac.design() embedded in
the DoE.base package of R was used to generate a random
order of runs for the 27 experiments. Each experiment was
conducted three times, and the effects and interactions be-
tween the independent variables were also obtained using R.
The significance of the variable effects as well as their inter-
action effects was evaluated by analysis of variance (ANOVA)
for each parameter. Results with a P value less than 0.5 were
deemed to be statistically significant. Unlike conventional fac-
torial designs, which facilitate identification of an optimal
output, we sought to identify an output—not necessarily an
optimum point—with a specific characteristic, namely a sol-
gel transition temperature of ~ 32 °C. Since this output is not
an optimum point, there are many possible combinations that
can yield the desired characteristic. The impact of each
Table 1
Coded levels and actual values of the factors investigated in the
factorial experiment
Coded variable
Actual variable
Coded levels of factors
− 1
0
+ 1
Actual values of factors
XHA
HA concentration (wt.%)
0.5
1
1.5
XMC
MC concentration (wt.%)
0.5
1
1.5
XNP
NP size (nm)
50
100
200
486
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2018) 8:484–495
 variable on the output was also predicted using R in order to
identify a formulation that gels at 32 °C. Furthermore, some of
the 27 experiments were repeated (three replicates) using
poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) NPs. We observed that the com-
position of the NP did not exert a statistically significant in-
fluence on the sol-gel transition temperature. The results of the
factorial design informed the optimization of the methodology
for synthesis of the drug-loaded PEO-b-PLA NPs.
Biosynthesis of CBGA
We genetically engineered the bacterium E. coli to synthesize
CBGA. Genes encoding the rate-limiting enzymes of the na-
tive non-mevalonate pathway—dxs, ispD, ispF, and idi—
were overexpressed on a medium-copy pTrc plasmid under
the control of an isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG)-inducible trc promoter. A strong ribosomal-binding
site was employed to drive translation of the transcripts and
the plasmid also bears a chloramphenicol selection marker.
This plasmid is hereinafter referred to as pTrc-MEP.
Overexpression of the aforementioned enzymes enhances pro-
duction of isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl
pyrophosphate (DMAPP), which condense together to form
geranyl pyrophosphate (GPP). The enzyme GPP synthase
(GPPS) catalyzes the condensation of IPP with DMAPP.
In the marijuana plant Cannabis sativa, GPP then com-
bines with OA to form CBGA. This reaction is catalyzed by
an aromatic prenyltransferase called cannabigerolic acid syn-
thase (CBGAS) [25]. The gene expressing CBGAS [26] was
purchased from DNA 2.0, and its codons were optimized for
expression in E. coli. The synthetic construct was supplied on
a high-copy plasmid whereon an IPTG-inducible T5
promoter-controlled transcription. We refer to this plasmid as
pT5-CBGAS. We also separately cloned the gene for CBGAS
as well as an operon comprising the genes that express GPPS
and CBGAS onto a low-copy pBAD33 plasmid under the
control of an arabinose-inducible promoter. These plasmids
are referred to as pAra-CBGAS and pAra-GPPS-CBGAS,
respectively, and both bear the chloramphenicol selection
marker. Transformants bearing pT5-CBGAS were selected
using kanamycin. All the plasmids used in this study are com-
patible with one another in co-transformed cells and neither
IPTG nor arabinose were observed to affect the performance
of the cognate promoters of one another in the ranges of con-
centrations that were evaluated in this study.
We initially transformed E. coli BL21 with pT5-CBGAS
and confirmed the synthesis of the desired geometric isomer
in vitro using total extracted protein. Briefly, the transformed
cells were cultured in 3 mL of LB medium at 37 °C until they
reached an optical density (OD) of 0.6. Protein production
was subsequently induced using 1 mM of IPTG. The induced
cultures were maintained at 30 °C for 4 h. The cultures were
then harvested in order to prepare cell extracts for in vitro
evaluation of enzyme activity. Replicates of the protein ex-
tracts were prepared from three distinct culture tubes. Each
300 μL in vitro reaction comprised 0.2 mM OA, 0.4 or
1 mM GPP, 5 mM MgCl2 and 64 μg of unpurified protein
in a Tris-HCl buffer at pH 8.5. The reactions were allowed to
proceed for 1 h at 30 °C. Following completion of the reac-
tions, the metabolites were extracted in ethyl acetate and ana-
lyzed using reversed-phase HPLC on Perkin Elmer Flexar
instrument. The HPLC was equipped with a Waters Atlantis
C18 column (5 μm, 4.6 mm × 250 mm), and CBGA was de-
tected using UV light at 270 nm. An isocratic mobile phase of
water:acetonitrile 15:85 and 0.01% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)
at a constant flow rate of 1 mL/min and temperature of 40 °C
was used. The peak was measured at a wavelength of 270 nm.
For an injection volume of 10 μL, the retention time was ~
9 min.
The concentration of GPP was deliberately varied to con-
firm the hypothesis that a stoichiometric excess of GPP is
required for the synthesis of CBGA. Synthesis of the E-
isomer of CBGAwas confirmed by 1H-NMR. E. coli was then
co-transformed with pTrc-MEP, and either pT5-CBGAS or
pAra-CBGAS or pAra-GPPS-CBGAS and the production of
CBGAwere evaluated in vivo. This experiment was replicated
three times. In each instance, 5 mL cultures were propagated
until they reached an OD of 0.6. The cultures were then in-
duced with 10 mM arabinose and 0.05 mM IPTG and fed with
0.5 and 0.1 mM of GPP and OA, respectively. The cultures
were grown overnight for 30 °C, after which the fermentation
broth was separated from the cell mass by filtration. CBGA
production was then quantified through HPLC. Fifty-
milliliter-scale production of CBGA for use in the formula-
tions was subsequently undertaken for 3 days using the most
productive of the co-transformed E. coli strains, and CBGA
was purified from the fermentation broth using flash chroma-
tography. Briefly, the fermentation broth was sonicated to lyse
the cells and the liquid medium was filtered to eliminate cell
debris. The filtrate was vigorously contacted with ethyl acetate
and the organic extract was then dissolved in DMSO for pu-
rification using a Reveleris X2 flash chromatography unit. A
water-methanol gradient was used to separate CBGA using a
SRC C18 column.
Preparation and characterization of the drug-loaded
PEO-b-PLA nanoparticles
The CBGA-loaded PEO-b-PLA NPs were synthesized by
nanoprecipitation [27, 28]. Briefly, 10 mg of CBGA and
50 mg of PEO-b-PLA were dissolved in either 5 mL or
10 mL of ethyl acetate. The mixtures were then either sonicat-
ed and added dropwise to 100 mL of rapidly stirred water at
room temperature or added to water as is, and the solutions
were left uncovered for 3 h to facilitate evaporation of ethyl
acetate and NP formation. The NPs were then extracted by
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2018) 8:484–495
487
 ultrafiltration using Amicon Ultra-15 centrifuge filters. The
filters have a MW cut-off of 30 kDa and were centrifuged at
4000×g for 8 min. The concentrated NP suspension was then
washed with water and re-centrifuged.
The particle size and polydispersity index of the drug-
loaded NPs were measured with a Malvern Zetasizer Nano
ZS at 25 °C and at a scattering angle of 90°. Morphological
evaluation was performed using a Hitachi S-3000N Scanning
Electron Microscope. Briefly, a small volume of the nanopar-
ticle suspension was placed onto a bare aluminum stub and
allowed to air dry. The sample was then sputter-coated with
5 nm of gold-palladium alloy. A working distance of 5.0 mm
and an accelerating voltage of 5.00 kV were used to image the
sample. The NP size distribution and sphericity was also con-
firmed by estimating the size of 20 randomly selected particles
in micrographs of six different regions within the samples
using ImageJ. The encapsulation efficiency of the NPs was
determined through HPLC quantification of sonicated sam-
ples of 1 g of dried NPs in 1 mL of cold acetonitrile in tripli-
cate, as described previously [29].
Evaluation of the texture of the NP-hydrogel
composite
The texture of the NP-laden hydrogel was surveyed using
atomic force microscopy (AFM). Measurements were made
using a Vecco Multimode 8 Scanning Probe Microscope. Ten
microliters of the formulation was spotted on freshly cleaved
mica and spread over the surface to form a thin film. The film
was allowed to dry under air and then immediately analyzed.
Images of a 5-μm-×-5-μm section were captured in AC tap-
ping mode with a tip velocity of 9.8 μm/s, a loop gain of 8,
and a scanning speed of 0.977 Hz. The experiment was re-
peated three times using distinct samples.
Assessment of in solutio release
Forty microliters of the formulation was injected into a dialy-
sis cassette. The volumetric capacity of the unit is 100 μL, and
the cassette was subsequently incubated in 4 L of STF at 32 °C
under constant stirring. Ten microliters of the cassette’s con-
tents were withdrawn at intervals of 6 h, and the samples were
analyzed using HPLC. The dialysis was repeated three times.
Corneal penetration study
The delivery of CBGA through the cornea was assessed using
freshly excised porcine eyeballs provided by the Centre of
Comparative Medicine at the University of British
Columbia. The use of a complete Franz diffusion cell, which
is how penetration of drugs through tissue is typically evalu-
ated, was avoided owing to the impact on corneal swelling on
reproducibility of the data [30]. The eyeballs were obtained
with the eyelids intact, which maintains the integrity of the
cornea, prevents the hydrogel and ocular surface from drying,
and also ensures that the experiment faithfully approximates
in vivo conditions. Each eyeball was placed on a concave
construct made of plasticine clay, and the constructs were
lined with cling film in order to prevent the eyeballs from
rolling. The donor compartment of a Franz diffusion cell
was subsequently placed atop the cornea and secured using
cling film. Forty microliters of the formulation was injected
into the donor compartment, and the same concentration of
CBGA in mineral oil was used as a control. The entire setup
comprising the eyeball atop the plasticine clay holder was
immersed in a water bath at 32 °C. With the exception of the
donor compartment and a small area surrounding it, the eye-
ball was entirely submerged in water. Remnants of the formu-
lation were scrapped off the ocular surface after 4 h, and the
surface was washed with STF. The cornea and leans were
subsequently dissected and separately digested in 1 mL of
methylene chloride at 60 °C for 4 h. The tissue samples were
then centrifuged, and the CGBA content in the supernatant
was analyzed using HPLC. The entire experiment was repeat-
ed three times for the experimental and control formulations.
Results and discussion
Rheological optimization of the NP-laden hydrogel
Topical eye drops are the most common dosage form for de-
livering ophthalmic pharmaceuticals to their site of action
[31]. Being liquid, they are easy to manufacture and ship,
are relatively easy to apply, and do not negatively affect vision
in the manner ointments do. However, as is commonly expe-
rienced, very little of the liquid that is delivered to the ocular
surface remains there long enough to deliver a sizable dose.
Even in instances when the contact time is increased, only a
fraction of the drug load in the drop actually penetrates the
cornea. It is estimated that < 5% of the drug load in eye drops
penetrates the cornea [5, 6]. For anti-neuropathic drugs that
are intended to target retinal ganglion cells at the base of the
retina, it is safe to assume that only an infinitesimal amount, if
at all, of the drug load reaches its site of action. To this end, a
formulation that retains the beneficial traits of topical eye
drops but eliminates their drawbacks could achieve targeted
and deep delivery of ophthalmic drugs. In order to increase
contact times yet allow its application as an eye drop, we
sought to optimize the composition of the formulation in order
to switch its rheological behaviour between thixotropy, where-
in its viscosity decreases under shear strain, and temperature-
dependent rheopexy, wherein its viscosity increases with tem-
perature. Previous studies have demonstrated that manipulat-
ing the concentrations of the formulation’s constituent poly-
mers, HA and MC, and the size of the NPs can achieve
488
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2018) 8:484–495
 switchable behaviour between thixotropy and rheopexy [22,
23]. Since we desire a sol-gel transition temperature of 32 °C
and a degradation time in STF of 8 h, we first established a
working range for the concentrations of HA and MC by mon-
itoring the crossover of storage (G′) and loss (G″) moduli
during temperature sweeps for several HA-MC mixtures
(Fig. 1). The storage modulus is a measure of the elastic be-
havior of a material, whereas the loss modulus is a measure of
its viscous behavior. When a material is liquid, viscous forces
dominate its rheology (G″ >> G′). However, as the material
begins to transition to the solid state, the elastic contributions
begin to exceed those of viscosity (G′ >> G″). We observed
that although all the mixtures exhibited thixotropic behavior,
the MC majority mixtures transitioned from liquid to solid
closer to 32 °C, which can be defined as the gel point or sol-
gel transition point (G′ = G″). However, we also noticed that if
the concentration of HA fell to 0.1 wt.%, the mixture degraded
slowly in STF. Consequently, we established a lower and up-
per concentration limit of 0.5 and 1.5 wt.%, respectively, for
both polymers.
We then systematically assessed the influence of polymer
concentrations and NP size on the rheological behavior of NP-
laden hydrogels in a 33-factorial design. To permit assessment
of the independent variables at three levels, we used carboxy-
functionalized poly(styrene) NPs instead of amphiphilic NPs.
Although the latter are ideal for corneal penetration and trans-
port of lipophilic molecules within the eye, the former are
available in defined sizes. We hypothesized that the sol-gel
transition temperature of NP-hydrogel composites is more
sensitive to the size of the NPs as opposed to their composi-
tion. However, since composition and size of the NPs are
correlated, we opted to initially investigate the influence of
size of the NPs on the sol-gel transition temperature prior to
optimizing the composition of the NPs to meet the desired size
requirements. This approach ensures that the solution space
for optimization of the rheological characteristics and proper-
ties of the NP can be interrogated comprehensively in a feasi-
ble manner. The Pareto plot for the complete 33-factorial study
(Fig. 2) reveals that the concentration of MC and the size of
the NPs impact the rheology of the composite in contrasting
ways. Specifically, increasing the MC content of the compos-
ite reduces its transition temperature, whereas composites con-
taining larger particles undergo sol-gel transitions at higher
temperatures.
This observation is consistent with the expectation that
increasing the number of entanglements in the MC chains,
which occurs at higher concentrations of the material, de-
creases the amount of energy required for gel formation and
that larger particles hinder MC chain entanglements, which
necessitates application of a greater amount of energy for ge-
lation to occur. The Pareto plot also confirms that HA concen-
tration is positively correlated with sol-gel transition temper-
ature of the composite, which is in agreement with previous
studies that have reported the Bsalting out^ of MC in HA-MC
mixtures and the increase in transition temperatures thereafter
[22, 32]. All other effects, which included the interactions
between the three independent variables, were determined to
not be statistically significant to the sol-gel transition temper-
ature of the composite. Consequently, the polynomial that
relates the sol-gel transition temperature of the composite to
its influential factors (Eq. 1) was deduced and employed to
predict that a composite comprising HA and MC at 1.5 wt and
2.5 wt.%, respectively, and NPs of a diameter of 200 nm will
achieve a transition temperature that is approximately 32 °C.
Fig. 1 Storage and loss moduli as a function of temperature for hydrogels
with different weight percent of HA and MC. All experiments were
performed at 1 Hz using a rotational rheometer (MCR-501 of Anton
Paar) equipped with a cone-and-plate geometry. Each composition was
tested three times, and the standard deviation was estimated to be <
0.03 Pa or < 1.5%. There is no variation in the ordinate variable since
the temperature sweeps are electronically controlled
Fig. 2 Pareto plot for the evaluation of the effect of HAwt.%, MC wt.%,
and NP size and their interactions on the sol-gel transition temperature of
NP-laden HA-MC composites (statistical significance codes: ***P = 0;
**P = 0.001; *P = 0.01)
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2018) 8:484–495
489
 T ¼ 56:32 þ 3:09X HA−4:98X MC
þ 5:23XNP−2:25X HAX MC−2:86X MCX NP
ð1Þ
Microbial synthesis of CBGA
Glaucoma is characterized by high intraocular pressure, which
progressively damages the head of the optic nerve. Justifiably,
lowering the intraocular pressure has been an extensively
exploited therapeutic strategy against glaucoma.
Nevertheless, none of these medications remedy the damage
that has already been inflicted to retinal ganglion cells that
comprise the head of the optic nerve. Reversing this damage
through elicitation of neuroprotective mechanisms could
prove to be a valuable complementary strategy in addition to
lowering intraocular pressure [33]. In particular, activation of
the cannabinoid receptors is a promising approach to elicit
neuroprotection [7]. The cannabinoid receptors are a unique
class of G-protein-coupled transmembrane receptors that are
principally located on the surface of neurons and immune cells
[34]. These receptors are also found in the gastrointestinal
tract, liver, pancreas, adipocytes, eyes, vascular endothelia,
spleen, and the lymph nodes. Activation of the cannabinoid
receptors triggers downstream signaling and metabolic path-
ways that subsequently exert a major influence on synaptic
transmission, cellular fate, including neuroprotection, and the
body’s immune response. Secondary metabolites synthesized
by the marijuana plant C. sativa rank among the strongest
agonists of the cannabinoid receptors. These molecules are
aptly referred to as cannabinoids and are essentially
prenylated polyketides that are derived from fatty acid and
terpenoid precursors [35]. Presently, cannabinoids are pro-
duced commercially by directly extracting them from the mar-
ijuana plant. However, not only is the source material incon-
sistent in composition and quality, but its supply too is prone
to seasonal and environmental variations. Chemical synthesis
of these molecules is also quite challenging, partly due to
isomerism. These considerations have greatly limited the use
of cannabinoids as active pharmaceutical ingredients as well
as additional investigations into the pharmacology of these
compounds.
We have circumvented these obstacles by genetically engi-
neering the bacterium E. coli to synthesize a catalog of bioac-
tive cannabinoids. We also investigated cannabinoid biosyn-
thesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, but we observed that
E. coli is a much superior and more productive host for pro-
duction of cannabinoids. One of the molecules that we sought
to synthesize was CBGA, which is the product of the conden-
sation between OA and GPP. CBGA is a gateway molecule
that is subsequently functionalized to produce other cannabi-
noids such as tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA) and
cannabidiolic acid (CBDA). Although it is not pharmacoactive
itself, CBGA is pharmacokinetically similar to other bioactive
cannabinoids. In light of the focus of the current study, we have
solely reported the results of our study on the biosynthesis of
CBGA herein. We confirmed the suitability of E. coli as a
heterologous host for CBGA biosynthesis by confirming pro-
duction of the desired E-isomer in vitro (Fig. 3). In order to
identify a strain for production of CBGA at higher scales, we
subsequently co-transformed E. coli with pTrc-MEP and either
pT5-CBGAS or pAra-CBGAS or pAra-GPPS-CBGAS and
assessed CBGA production in 5 mL overnight cultures. The
pTrc-MEP plasmid expresses additional copies of the rate-
limiting enzymes of the non-mevalonate pathway that is essen-
tial for GPP production.
Our observations for the pTrc-MEP and pT5-CBGAS co-
transformants confirm that supply of GPP is the rate-
Fig. 3 HPLC and 1H–NMR analysis of CBGA synthesized in vitro. a
CBGA was detected at 270 nm. An isocratic mobile phase comprising
15–85% water-acetonitrile solution containing 0.01% TFA was used to
elute the metabolites from a C18 stationary phase. b Preparative HPLC
and 1H-NMR were employed to confirm the synthesis of CBGA in the
in vitro reactions
490
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2018) 8:484–495
 controlling metabolic flux in the biosynthetic pathway
(Fig. 4). In comparison, the pTrc-MEP and pAra-CBGAS
co-transformants only achieved a titer of 1.2 μg/mL under
the same experimental conditions. Interestingly, overexpres-
sion of GPPS did not yield any observable CBGA production.
We speculate that production of GPP over a yet-to-be de-
termined threshold has a detrimental effect on cell health since
GPP is toxic to cells at higher concentrations [36]. We subse-
quently cultivated the E. coli strain that co-expresses the pTrc-
MEP and pT5-CBGAS in 50 mL cultures for 3 days to pro-
duce CBGA for use in the formulations. The average final titer
of CBGA in these cultures is approximately 14 μg/mL and the
compound is separated via flash chromatography. Each 50 mL
batch produces enough material to synthesize in excess of 50
batches of NPs, and the cultures were re-cultivated to meet
CBGA requirements as they arose.
Synthesis and characterization of the CBGA-loaded
NPs
We subsequently optimized the nanoprecipitation method in
order to synthesize CBGA-loaded NPs having an average di-
ameter of 200 nm and polydispersity index of ~ 0.12. This size
meets the rheological requirements of the formulation, does
not irritate the cornea, and is ideal for transcorneal penetration
[24]. In the absence of pharmacological information regarding
optimal dosage for agonists of the cannabinoid receptor, we
arbitrarily opted to use 10 mg of CBGA to synthesize a single
batch of NPs. Combining an entire batch of NPs with the HA-
MC hydrogel should yield a formulation with a theoretical
CBGA concentration of 750 μg/mL. We observed that the
syntheses involving dissolution of CBGA and PEO-b-PLA
co-polymer into either 5 or 10 mL of ethyl acetate, followed
by sonication and dropwise addition to 100 mL of water pro-
duced particles of the desired size and polydispersity index
(Fig. 5).
Likewise, dissolving CBGA and the co-polymer in 10 mL
of ethyl acetate in the absence of sonication also yielded par-
ticles of the desired size and polydispersity index.
Consequently, we employed the method excluding sonication
to synthesize the drug-loaded NPs in light of the lower energy
demand, should the process mature to the industrial scale. The
average diameter and polydispersity index of the NPs pro-
duced using the selected method are 186 nm and 0.118, re-
spectively, and the size and spherical morphology of the NPs
was also confirmed using SEM (Fig. 6a). Moreover, we ob-
served that loading the NPs with CBGA generally diminished
their size, which points to improved packing within the core of
the particles, possibly due to co-solubilization. We then con-
centrated the NP solution using ultrafiltration and combined it
with HA and MC to synthesize the NP-hydrogel composite.
Images of the surface captured using AFM reveal a smooth
texture with uniform embedment of the spherical NPs (Fig.
6b, c). We verified the rheological behavior of the formulation
in a final temperature sweep experiment and determined the
sol-gel transition temperature to be 31.5 ± 0.2 °C (Fig. 7).
Fig. 4 Enhancing GPP flux to the synthesis of CBGA enhances
productivity of the strains. CBGA synthase is expressed on a high-copy
plasmid under the control of a T5 promoter, whereas the rate-limiting
enzymes of the non-mevalonate pathway, whose overexpression is
critical for enhancing GPP production, are expressed on a medium-copy
plasmid under the control of an IPTG-inducible Trc promoter. The
replication and expression of both plasmids is compatible with one
another. Error bars represent the standard deviation in the titer of CBGA
Fig. 5 Dropwise addition of a 10-mL solution of CBGA and the co-
polymer in ethyl acetate to water produces NPs of the desired size
(186 nm) and polydispersity index (0.118). This condition has been
highlighted in red in the figure. While sonication is also observed to
facilitate dense packing in the core of the NPs, avoiding its use is
preferable owing to higher energy demand, particularly at larger scales
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2018) 8:484–495
491
 Performance of the NP-laden hydrogel
We estimated the encapsulation efficiency and concentration
of CBGA in the formulation via two complementary ap-
proaches. In the first method, we dissolved 1 g of dried NPs
in 1 mL of cold acetonitrile and quantified the concentration of
CBGA in the solution using HPLC. We also estimated the
concentration of CBGA in the formulation by analyzing the
solution contained in the sample chamber of the dialysis cas-
sette. The concentration of CBGA in the formulation was
determined to be 231 ± 26 μg/mL, which translates to an en-
capsulation efficiency of 30.8 ± 3.5%. We subsequently eval-
uated the propensity of the formulation to dissolve and release
its drug load into aqueous media such as STF and intraocular
fluid by quantifying its release kinetics in a dialysis experi-
ment. We observed complete dissolution of the bulk formula-
tion within the first 3 h and sustained release of the drug into
the bulk phase over a 24-h period (Fig. 8). It must be noted
that we did not assess dissolution of the NPs. However, since
the low MW cut-off of the dialysis membrane precludes pen-
etration of the NPs through it, the efflux of CBGA from the
dialysis chamber can be solely attributed to sustained dissolu-
tion of the NPs and Fickian diffusion of CBGA thereafter.
This conclusion is corroborated by the rate of change in the
concentration of CBGA in the dialysis chamber. The steep
drop between the first two time points can be attributed to
dissolution of the formulation and subsequent dilution of
CBGA by the STF entering the dialysis chamber. It must be
emphasized that this experiment does not perfectly recapitu-
late the intraocular environment. Nevertheless, the results con-
firm that the formulation and the constituent NPs behave as
intended and our determination of the encapsulation efficiency
and release kinetics in the current study provides a frame of
reference for the loading and delivery of pharmacologically
relevant concentrations of bioactive cannabinoids for the treat-
ment of ganglion cell damage.
Finally, we also assessed the behavior of the formulation
under more physiologically relevant conditions in whole
eyeball experiments. Despite being a better experimental
system, excised eyeballs do not exhibit lachrymal drainage,
which could affect the performance of the formulation.
Fig. 6 SEM and AFM analysis of the NPs and composite. a SEM
analysis confirms the formation of spherical NPs with an average
diameter of 190 nm. The median and mean particle diameters were
determined to be 184 and 196 nm, respectively, and the standard
deviation is 6.03 nm. b, c The formulation exhibits a smooth texture
and is uniformly embedded with the NPs
Fig. 7 Temperature sweep for the optimized formulation provides a sol-
gel transition temperature that is very close to that of ocular surface. The
experiment was repeated three times, and the transition temperature was
determined to be 31.5 ± 0.2 °C
492
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2018) 8:484–495
 Nevertheless, we observed impressive uptake of CBGA in
dissected corneas and lenses after a 4-h treatment (Fig. 9).
In fact, our study is the first of its kind to report direct drug
uptake by the cornea and lens from a composite NP-
hydrogel vehicle. The concentration of CBGA delivered
to the cornea and lens by the NP-laden hydrogel is approx-
imately four- and twofold greater, respectively, than the
control. Whereas the transport of CBGA through the cornea
is purely diffusive in the case of the control, the delivery of
CBGA by the amphiphilic NPs is facilitated by diffusion of
the NPs themselves. Nevertheless, as was alluded earlier,
only ~ 0.015% of the original CBGA load was transported
through the cornea, largely due to the absence of lachrymal
drainage. In fact, very little of the formulation had dis-
solved after 4 h. These observations suggest that the formu-
lation could deliver a significantly higher drug load to the
intraocular environment under physiological conditions.
Conclusions
We have successfully developed a stimulus-responsive, in
situ-forming, nanoparticle-laden hydrogel for controlled re-
lease of poorly bioavailable drugs such as cannabinoids into
the aqueous humor of the eye. Using rheology, we systemat-
ically optimized the composition of the formulation to achieve
a sol-gel transition temperature of 31.5 °C, which is approxi-
mately the temperature of the ocular surface. The formulation
comprises 1.5 and 2.5 wt.% HA and MC, respectively, and
includes CBGA-loaded PEO-b-PLA NPs having an average
diameter and polydispersity index of 186 nm and 0.118, re-
spectively. The CBGA used in this study was synthesized
using genetically engineered E. coli, and we have also
established a reliable process to produce CBGA-loaded
PEO-b-PLA NPs via nanoprecipitation. HA and MC are bio-
compatible, highly mucoadhesive, and approved by the FDA
as GRAS. However, while HA exhibits concentration-
dependent gelation and shear-thinning characteristics [37],
gels that solely comprise HA lack structural integrity on ac-
count of the high hydrophilicity of biopolymer. On the other
hand, while MC is highly viscous and gels in a temperature-
dependent manner, it does not gel rapidly enough. When HA
and MC are co-formulated together, they interact with one
another at the molecular level and yield a material that gels
rapidly and can switch its rheology between thixotropy and
temperature-dependent rheopexy. Likewise, the
amphiphilicity of the PEO-b-PLA NPs is well suited for
transporting lipophilic molecules such as cannabinoids
through the cornea. Moreover, the size and uniform spherical
morphology of the NPs is optimal for transcorneal penetra-
tion, efficient dissolution, and reduced irritancy to the ocular
tissues. We also observed that incorporating NPs of a specific
size further increases the stability of the hydrogel, and this
observation is consistent with that of hydrogel formulations
that are used for intrathecal injections [22, 38].
When the performance of the formulation was assessed in
whole eyeball experiments, we confirmed the improvement in
delivery of CBGA by facilitated transport and also observed a
300% increase in transcorneal penetration over the control
formulation. In fact, our study is the first of its kind to report
direct drug uptake by the cornea and lens from a composite
NP-hydrogel vehicle. Nevertheless, there is considerable
room for improvement. Only ~ 0.015% of the original
CBGA load was transported through the cornea, largely due
to the absence of lachrymal drainage. In fact, although the
formulation was optimized to dissolve within 8 h under con-
stant lachrymal drainage—and in solutio release studies con-
firmed that the bulk formulation dissolves completely within
the first 3 h and sustains release of CBGA into the bulk phase
over a 24-h period—we observed that very little of the formu-
lation had dissolved after 4 h when it was applied onto excised
porcine eyeballs. The formulation needs to be assessed in vivo
Fig. 9 Drug uptake by the cornea and lens after exposing the corneal
surface to either the HA-MC hydrogel that is embedded with CBGA-
loaded PEO-b-PLA NPs or the control formulation comprising 230 μg/
mL CBGA in mineral oil. Error bars represent the standard deviation in
CBGA concentration in the tissue
Fig. 8 The formulations successfully release CBGA into the bulk
aqueous phase and the release kinetics mirrors unsteady state Fickian
diffusion, which suggests that the NPs and the formulation behave as
intended. Error bars represent the standard deviation in CBGA
concentration in the cassette
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2018) 8:484–495
493
 in order to conclusively determine its efficacy in delivering
molecules across the cornea and optimize its performance fur-
ther, including attributes such as optical clarity of the lens.
However, the formulation described herein is an excellent
starting point and it switches between shear thinning and tem-
perature thickening as intended when it is tested in a rheom-
eter under conditions that are representative of the ocular sur-
face. This result suggests that the formulation could coat the
corneal surface by blinking, which implies that the medication
could be applied as an eye drop immediately prior to the
patient’s bedtime. Liquids are also more desirable than
hydrogels since they are easier to manufacture at scale. Our
work paves the way for the introduction of novel products
targeting ocular diseases to the market.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Rishi Somvanshi,
John Jackson, Fahimeh Hosseini, and Tim Hollenberg for their assistance
with the experimentation.
Funding information The authors also acknowledge funding from the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of
Canada, Mitacs, and the Canada Foundation for Innovation.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest
Sazzad Hossain is the Chief Scientific Officer of
InMed Pharmaceuticals Inc., a biopharmaceutical company that is com-
mercializing an anti-glaucoma treatment that employs the formulation
described in this study.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appro-
priate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
1.
Riordan-Eva P. Anatomy & embryology of the eye. In: Riordan-
Eva P, Cunningham ET, editors. Gen Ophthalmol. 18th ed. New
York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 1999. p. 1–26.
2.
Weinreb RN, Aung T, Medeiros FA. The pathophysiology and
treatment of glaucoma: a review. JAMA. 2014;311:1901–11.
3.
Quigley HA, Broman AT. The number of people with glaucoma
worldwide in 2010 and 2020. Br J Ophthalmol. 2006;90:262–7.
4.
Optic neuropathy—pipeline review. London, UK; 2017.
5.
Keister JC, Cooper ER, Missel PJ, Lang JC, Hager DF. Limits on
optimizing ocular drug delivery. J Pharm Sci. 1991;80:50–3.
6.
Ding S. Recent developments in ophthalmic drug delivery. Pharm
Sci Technol Today. 1998;1:328–35.
7.
Tomida I, Pertwee RG, Azuara-Blanco A. Cannabinoids and glau-
coma. Br J Ophthalmol. 2004;88:708–13.
8.
van der Valk R, Webers C, Schouten J, Zeegers M, Hendrikse F,
Prins M. Intraocular pressure–lowering effects of all commonly
used glaucoma drugs. Ophthalmology. 2005;112:1177–85.
9.
Lim K, Allan B, Lloyd A, Muir A, Khaw P. Glaucoma drainage
devices; past, present, and future. Br J Ophthalmol. 1998;82(9):
1083–9.
10.
Durán-Lobato M, Martín-Banderas L, Lopes R, Gonçalves LMD,
Fernández-Arévalo M, Almeida AJ. Lipid nanoparticles as an
emerging platform for cannabinoid delivery: physicochemical op-
timization and biocompatibility. Drug Dev Ind Pharm. 2015;9045:
1–9.
11.
Jay WM, Green K. Multiple-drop study of topically applied 1%
delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in human eyes. Arch Ophthalmol.
1983;101:591–3.
12.
Hingorani T, Gul W, Elsohly M, Repka MA, Majumdar S. Effect of
ion pairing on in vitro transcorneal permeability of a Δ(9)-tetrahy-
drocannabinol prodrug: potential in glaucoma therapy. J Pharm Sci
Elsevier Masson SAS. 2012;101:616–26.
13.
Hippalgaonkar K, Gul W, ElSohly MA, Repka MA, Majumdar S.
Enhanced solubility, stability, and transcorneal permeability of δ-8-
tetrahydrocannabinol in the presence of cyclodextrins. AAPS
PharmSciTech. 2011;12:723–31.
14.
Porcella A, Maxia C, Gessa GL, Pani L. The synthetic cannabinoid
WIN55212-2 decreases the intraocular pressure in human glaucoma
resistant to conventional therapies. Eur J Neurosci. 2001;13:409–
12.
15.
Song Z-H, Slowey C-A. Involvement of cannabinoid receptors in
the intraocular pressure-lowering effects of WIN55212-2. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2000;292:136–9.
16.
Loftssona T, Järvinen T. Cyclodextrins in ophthalmic drug delivery.
Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 1999;36:59–79.
17.
Sandri G, Rossi S, Ferrari F, Bonferoni MC, Zerrouk N, Caramella
C. Mucoadhesive and penetration enhancement properties of three
grades of hyaluronic acid using porcine buccal and vaginal tissue,
Caco-2 cell lines, and rat jejunum. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2004;56:
1083–90.
18.
Boddupalli BM, Mohammed ZNK, Nath RA, Banji D.
Mucoadhesive drug delivery system: an overview. J Adv Pharm
Technol Res. 2010;1:381–7.
19.
Chittiboyina A, Khan I. Short synthesis of olivetolic acid via direct-
ed ortho-metalation. Planta Med. 2012;78:P42.
20.
Hägerström H, Paulsson M, Edsman K. Evaluation of
mucoadhesion for two polyelectrolyte gels in simulated physiolog-
ical conditions using a rheological method. Eur J Pharm Sci.
2000;9:301–9.
21.
Goodwin J, Hughes RW. Rheology for chemists: an introduction.
Royal Society of Chemistry. 2000;
22.
Gupta D, Tator CH, Shoichet MS. Fast-gelling injectable blend of
hyaluronan and methylcellulose for intrathecal, localized delivery
to the injured spinal cord. Biomaterials. 2006;27:2370–9.
23.
Appel EA, Tibbitt MW, Webber MJ, Mattix BA, Veiseh O, Langer
R. Self-assembled hydrogels utilizing polymer–nanoparticle inter-
actions. Nat Commun Nat Publ Group. 2015;6:6295.
24.
Zimmer A, Kreuter J. Microspheres and nanoparticles used in ocu-
lar delivery systems. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 1995;16:61–73.
25.
Page J, Boubakir Z. Aromatic prenyltransferase from cannabis.
2011.
26.
Page J, Boubakir Z. Aromatic prenyltransferase from cannabis.
2009.
27.
Govender T, Stolnik S, Garnett MC, Illum L, Davis SS. PLGA
nanoparticles prepared by nanoprecipitation: drug loading and re-
lease studies of a water soluble drug. J Control Release. 1999;57:
171–85.
28.
Cheng J, Teply BA, Sherifi I, Sung J, Luther G, Gu FX, et al.
Formulation of functionalized PLGA-PEG nanoparticles for
in vivo targeted drug delivery. Biomaterials. 2007;28:869–76.
29.
Hernan Perez dela Ossa D, Ligresti A, Gil-Alegre ME, Aberturas
MR, Molpeceres J, Di Marzo V, et al. Poly-ε-caprolactone micro-
spheres as a drug delivery system for cannabinoid administration:
494
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2018) 8:484–495
 development, characterization and in vitro evaluation of their anti-
tumoral efficacy. J Control Release Elsevier BV. 2012;161:927–32.
30.
Morrison PWJ, Connon CJ, Khutoryanskiy VV. Cyclodextrin-
mediated enhancement of riboflavin solubility and corneal perme-
ability. Mol Pharm. 2013;10:756–62.
31.
Patel A, Cholkar K, Agrahari V, Mitra A. Ocular drug delivery
systems: an overview. World J Pharmacol. 2013;2:47–64.
32.
Xu Y, Wang C, Tam KC, Li L. Salt-assisted and salt-suppressed sol-
gel transitions of methylcellulose in water. Langmuir. 2004;20:646–
52.
33.
Agarwal R, Gupta S, Agarwal P, Saxena R, Agrawal S. Current
concepts in the pathophysiology of glaucoma. Indian J
Ophthalmol. 2009;57:257–66.
34.
Guzmán M. Cannabinoids: potential anticancer agents. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2003;3:745–55.
35.
Fellermeier M, Eisenreich W, Bacher A, Zenk M. Biosynthesis of
cannabinoids. Eur J Biochem. 2001;268:1596–604.
36.
Sarria S, Wong B, García Martín H, Keasling J, Peralta-Yahya P.
Microbial synthesis of pinene. ACS Synth Biol. 2014;3:466–75.
37.
Cowman MK, Schmidt TA, Raghavan P, Stecco A. Viscoelastic
properties of Hyaluronan in physiological conditions.
F1000Research. 2015;4:622.
38.
Baumann MD, Kang CE, Stanwick JC, Wang Y, Kim H, Lapitsky
Y, et al. An injectable drug delivery platform for sustained combi-
nation therapy. J Control Release. 2009;138:205–13.
Drug Deliv. and Transl. Res. (2018) 8:484–495
495
