 Ultradian rhythmicity of plasma cortisol is necessary
for normal emotional and cognitive responses in man
K. Kalafatakisa,b,c,1, G. M. Russella,b,1, C. J. Harmerd, M. R. Munafoe, N. Marchanta,b, A. Wilsonc, J. C. Brooksc,e, C. Durantc,
J. Thakrara,b, P. Murphya,b, N. J. Thaic, and S. L. Lightmana,b,2
aHenry Wellcome Laboratories of Integrative Neuroscience and Endocrinology, School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, BS1 3NY Bristol, United
Kingdom; bJoint Clinical Research Unit, Bristol Royal Infirmary, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, BS2 8HW Bristol, United Kingdom;
cClinical Research and Imaging Centre, University of Bristol and University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, BS2 8DX Bristol, United Kingdom;
dDepartment of Psychiatry, Oxford University and Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust, OX3 7JX Oxford, United Kingdom; and eSchool of Experimental
Psychology, University of Bristol, BS8 1TU Bristol, United Kingdom
Edited by Donald W. Pfaff, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, and approved March 14, 2018 (received for review August 11, 2017)
Glucocorticoids (GCs) are secreted in an ultradian, pulsatile pattern
that emerges from delays in the feedforward-feedback interaction
between the anterior pituitary and adrenal glands. Dynamic
oscillations of GCs are critical for normal cognitive and metabolic
function in the rat and have been shown to modulate the pattern
of GC-sensitive gene expression, modify synaptic activity, and
maintain stress responsiveness. In man, current cortisol replace-
ment therapy does not reproduce physiological hormone pulses
and is associated with psychopathological symptoms, especially
apathy and attenuated motivation in engaging with daily activi-
ties. In this work, we tested the hypothesis that the pattern of GC
dynamics in the brain is of crucial importance for regulating
cognitive and behavioral processes. We provide evidence that
exactly the same dose of cortisol administered in different
patterns alters the neural processing underlying the response to
emotional stimulation, the accuracy in recognition and attentional
bias toward/away from emotional faces, the quality of sleep, and
the working memory performance of healthy male volunteers.
These data indicate that the pattern of the GC rhythm differen-
tially impacts human cognition and behavior under physiological,
nonstressful conditions and has major implications for the im-
provement of cortisol replacement therapy.
glucocorticoid rhythmicity | human brain | emotional processing |
fMRI study
G
lucocorticoids (GCs), predominantly cortisol in man, are
critical for life and are key regulators of cognitive, meta-
bolic, and immunologic homeostasis (1). The lipophilic nature of
these hormones allows them easy access to all tissues of the body,
including the central nervous system, where they can cross the
blood–brain barrier to act on GC receptors and mineralocorti-
coid receptors (MRs) found in both neuronal and glial pop-
ulations (2). In the rat, there is an extensive literature on the
importance of GCs for short- and long-term neurocognitive ad-
aptation to stressful conditions (3–6), and clinical studies in
healthy human subjects, using functional neuroimaging tech-
niques, have clearly demonstrate the importance of GCs in the
neural response to stress (7–16).
During the basal “unstressed” physiological state, plasma
cortisol levels vary across the 24-h cycle with a circadian rhythm
that reaches a peak soon after awakening and falls to low levels
late at night. This circadian rhythmicity is important for synaptic
function (17, 18) and is made up from an underlying ultradian
rhythm, which can be modified by internal or external stressors
(19). This ultradian rhythm of GC secretion has been observed in
all mammalian species studied, including rodents (20), sheep
(21), horse (22), deer (23), cow (24, 25), monkey (26, 27), and
man (28–37). Mathematical biomodeling also provides a very
strong rationale for the importance of this oscillating rhythm
(38–41).
Current regimens of cortisol replacement therapy for patients
lacking adrenal function do not replace ultradian rhythmicity and
result in considerable morbidity. Several centers have confirmed
that these treatment regimens result in impaired health-related
quality of life (42–47), adverse metabolic and cardiovascular risk
profiles (48), increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines (49),
and reduced activity, low motivation, and mental fatigue, with
associated high levels of unemployment and disability benefits
(43, 50–52). It was initially assumed that this was a direct con-
sequence of the inability of oral medication to provide the nor-
mal circadian variation of cortisol, and that this could be
improved by continuous s.c. infusions of the hormone. This has
proven to not be the case, however, and Gagliardi et al. (53) have
convincingly shown that “nonpulsatile” continuous s.c. infusion
does not improve subjective health status, while Oksnes et al.
(54), in an open-label study, showed only small changes in a
limited number of domains in a quality of life questionnaire and
suggested that this might be due to the lack of ultradian pulses in
their infusion protocol.
Pulsatility is a key feature of many hormone systems, and to
date biomedicine has failed to mimic this important facet of
physiological regulation (36). With respect to cortisol, there are
clear theoretical reasons why pulsatile replacement might be
important. We know that GC is pulsed not only in the blood, but
Significance
The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is a critical neurohor-
monal network regulating homeostasis and coordinating stress
responses. Here we demonstrate that an oscillating pattern of
plasma cortisol is important for maintenance of healthy brain
responses as measured by functional neuroimaging and be-
havioral testing. Our data highlight the crucial role of gluco-
corticoid rhythmicity in (i) modulating sleep behavior and
working memory performance, and (ii) regulating the human
brain’s responses under emotional stimulation. Current optimal
cortisol replacement therapies for patients with primary or
secondary adrenal insufficiently are associated with poor psy-
chological status, and these results suggest that closer atten-
tion to aspects of chronotherapy will benefit these patients
and may also have major implications for improved glucocor-
ticoid dynamics in stress and psychiatric disease.
Author contributions: G.M.R., C.J.H., M.R.M., and S.L.L. designed research; K.K., N.M.,
A.W., J.C.B., and N.J.T. performed research; K.K., G.M.R., C.J.H., M.R.M., N.J.T., and
S.L.L. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; K.K., G.M.R., J.C.B., C.D., J.T., P.M., and
S.L.L. analyzed data; and K.K., G.M.R., C.J.H., M.R.M., and S.L.L. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Published under the PNAS license.
1K.K. and G.M.R. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: Stafford.Lightman@bristol.ac.uk.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1714239115/-/DCSupplemental.
Published online April 9, 2018.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714239115
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 17
|
E4091–E4100
PHYSIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 also in peripheral tissues, such as the brain (55). Furthermore,
the brain responds dynamically to these oscillations (56) with
differing genomic (57) and rapid nongenomic responses, in-
cluding the accumulation of glutamatergic receptors into syn-
apses and induction of long-term potentiation (58). Even the
behavioral responses of rodents to a mild stressor are dependent
on endogenous pulses (59).
Motivated by the clinical need for improved GC-based ther-
apeutics and the preclinical evidence, we hypothesized that un-
der normal, nonstressful, nonpathological conditions, different
ultradian GC rhythms might be translated differently in relevant
GC-responsive human brain regions, and that this differential
processing should be detectable using well-designed experimen-
tal protocols. We have developed a “block and replace” protocol
(i.e., combined metyrapone administration with hydrocortisone
infusion) in which we can reliably impose definitive patterns of
plasma hydrocortisone (60). This has allowed us to provide three
predetermined patterns of cortisol replacement therapy: (i)
normal circadian rhythmicity lacking any physiological ultradian
rhythm [s.c.-continuous hydrocortisone infusion (SCC)], (ii)
normal circadian and ultradian rhythmicity [s.c.-pulsatile hy-
drocortisone infusion (SCP)], and (iii) current optimal oral re-
placement therapy (PO), characterized by suboptimal circadian
and ultradian rhythms. We have used these three treatment
regimens in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study
in healthy male volunteers to assess the importance of cortisol
rhythmicity for normal brain activity in man, using a combination
of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and psycho-
logical tasks (Fig. 1), based on stimulation with emotionally
valenced cues [implicit facial expression processing task (IFEPT)
and parts of the P1vital emotional test battery, respectively], that
recruit GC responsive brain regions previously shown to be
sensitive to changes in GC infusion patterns in our preclinical
studies (58, 59). We also gathered dynamic measurements of
affective state throughout these interventions.
Results
Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) data obtained
throughout the study showed no difference in either positive or
negative affect between the SCC and SCP groups [F(1.587,
22.221) = 0.196; P = 0.773 and F(1.321, 18.493) = 2.303; P =
0.141, respectively]. However, individuals in the PO group
showed higher negative mood ratings compared with the SCP
group (mean difference of 3.154; 95% CI, 0.754–5.554; P =
0.009) (Fig. 2A).
The Nonpulsatile GC Rhythm Is Associated with Poorer Quality of
Sleep. An interaction of cortisol dynamics was found in one of
the four domains of sleeping behavior assessed by the Leeds
sleep evaluation questionnaire (LSEQ) [F(1.914, 26.801) =
4.137; P = 0.029; ω2 = 0.12]. Based on the volunteers’ responses
on a visual analog scale (VAS), the quality of sleep is poorer (i.e.,
more and/or longer periods of restlessness and wakefulness)
when undergoing the s.c.-continuous hydrocortisone infusion
compared with the other two modes of hydrocortisone re-
placement (Fig. 2B and SI Appendix, Fig. S1). Post hoc analysis
with a Bonferroni adjustment did not reveal any pairwise dif-
ferences between any combinations of groups, however.
The N-Back Task Reveals an Effect of Optimal Pulsatile GC Replacement
in Retention of Working Memory Capacity Under Increased Cognitive
Demands. The n-back task is considered to reflect working memory
processes, when n equals 2 or more; in the latter cases, the
working memory buffer must be updated continuously to keep
track of what the current stimulus must be compared with, ne-
cessitating maintenance and manipulation of information in
working memory. Zero- and one-back tasks are used as control
Fig. 1.
Study design. Each healthy male volunteer took part in three 5-d, randomized-order, block and replace studies. In each arm of the study, endogenous
hydrocortisone was suppressed with metyrapone, and hydrocortisone was replaced at a dose of 20 mg/d via (i) s.c. with a normal circadian rhythm provided by
continuous s.c. infusion with an Animas Vibe pump (SCC), (ii) pulsatile s.c. infusion providing both circadian and ultradian rhythms with a Canè CRONO P
pump (SCP), or (iii) oral treatment (PO), using a three times daily regimen, resulting in just three pulses during the day and a prolonged low level at night.
During each pharmacologic intervention, participants were given hydrocortisone/placebo tablets and were connected to one of the pumps (infusing placebo/
hydrocortisone). Between pharmacologic interventions, there was a washout period of at least 2 wk. In the morning of the fifth day of each pharmacologic
intervention, participants were attending the clinical facility and undergoing time-controlled functional (fMRI) and perfusion (ASL) magnetic resonance
imaging experiments, completing an LSEQ and engaging with various computerized behavioral and cognitive tests. VS, visual stimulation task (flashing
checkerboard). The mean timing (and the corresponding SD) per outcome measure per group is displayed.
E4092
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714239115
Kalafatakis et al.
 sessions. Two subjects performed poorly (i.e., significantly low %
accuracy scores, with values of studentized residuals below −3) in
these control sessions in at least one of the study arms, which
indicates a systematic bias; therefore, these subjects were excluded
from further analysis for this task (n = 13 per study group).
ANOVA elicited a two-way interaction of [cognitive load] ×
[cortisol dynamics] on participants’ performance in the n-back
task [F(1.525, 18,304) = 4.437; P = 0.035]. Volunteers in the SCP
group retained the same performance across the two- and three-
back sessions, in contrast to the performance in the other two
treatment modes, where performance in three-back sessions was
poorer compared with that in the two-back sessions, especially in
the SCC group (mean drop in %accuracy score from two- to
three-back sessions, 7.9%; 95% CI, 2.7–13%; P = 0.006; ω2 =
0.28; mean difference in the %accuracy in three-back sessions
between the SCP and SCC groups, 6.6%; 95% CI, −0.3 to 13.5%;
P = 0.063; ω2 = 0.10) (Fig. 3).
ANOVA did not demonstrate any two-way interaction of
[cognitive load] × [cortisol dynamics] on participants’ reaction
times for correct responses [F(1.403, 16.835) = 0.663; P = 0.477],
or any significant interactions for the main effects of each factor.
Therefore, the differences in %accuracy reported above have not
been confounded by differences in reaction times.
The SCP Group Shows Reduced Accuracy in Recognizing Negatively
Valenced Emotional Input, as Assessed by P1vital Face Expression
Recognition Task. The Face Expression Recognition Task
(FERT) measures individuals’ accuracy and speed in interpreting
facial expressions. After each brief exposure to a human face,
subjects need to make one of seven choices, indicating that they
encountered a neutral expression, a positive expression (i.e.,
happy, surprise), or a negative expression (i.e., angry, fear, dis-
gust, sad). The %accuracy scores for recognizing neutral faces
did not differ across the treatment groups [F(1.780, 24.914) =
0.463; P = 0.612] and were higher than those for recognizing
faces with an emotional valence. ANOVA elicited a two-way
interaction of [valence] × [cortisol dynamics] on the %accuracy
[F(1.629, 22.809) = 3.747; P = 0.047]; across the treatment
groups, participants showed greater accuracy in recognizing
positive emotions compared with negative emotions, in agreement
with earlier research (61, 62). While the accuracy in recognizing
positive emotions did not change between treatments, this was not
the case with negative emotions [F(1.480, 20.714) = 6.492; P =
0.011; ω2 = 0.20]. The perception of negative facial expressions was
reduced in the SCP group compared with the SCC group (mean
difference of 4.9%; 95% CI, 0.2–9.6%; P = 0.039) and the PO
group (mean difference of 4%; 95% CI, −0.2 to 8.2%; P = 0.067)
p = 0.009 
POSITIVE 
NEGATIVE
POSITIVE
SCC
SCP
PO
GETTING 
TO  
SLEEP 
SLEEP 
QUALITY
AWAKING 
FROM  
SLEEP
BEHAVIOR 
POST 
WAKING
Better
Worse
A 
B
p = 0.029
Fig. 2.
(A) Mean positive and negative affect of individuals per treatment arm, as assessed by EMA techniques. The higher the value (0–100), the stronger the
corresponding (self-perceived) mood valence. Across treatments, subjects scored high for positive affect (65.7 ± 15.7 for the SCC group, 66.1 ± 15.2 for the SCP
group, and 67 ± 12.7 for the PO group) and low for the negative affect (19.1 ± 12.2 for the SCC group, 18.7 ± 12.2 for the SCP group, and 21.9 ± 11.7 for the
PO group). No major variations were observed in the positive affect scores across treatments. In contrast, there was a notable difference in the negative affect
scores between the SCP and PO groups (P < 0.01). (B) Self-perceived sleep behavior. Deviations from the self-perceived normality of night sleep, as assessed by
the LSEQ, across the three treatment groups. LSEQ evaluates four domains of sleep behavior: ease of falling asleep, quality of sleep, ease of awakening, and
behavior after awakening. The sleep that participants were asked to evaluate was the one they experienced during the night of the fourth day/early morning
of the fifth (last) day after starting each pharmacologic intervention. The values displayed in the scatterplot have been transformed [50 − (LSEQ score)] to
more clearly demonstrate any improvements (positive values) or deteriorations (negative values) in sleep behavior compared with what each participant
subjectively considered “normal” or “usual” (value 0). A notable interaction between cortisol dynamics and quality of sleep was observed (P < 0.05). The raw
values of the LSEQ are presented in the SI Appendix, Fig. S1.
Lower
(2-back) 
 Higher  
(3-back)
Lower
(2-back)
Lower
(2-back)
 Higher 
(3-back)
 Higher 
(3-back)
p = 0.006 
SCC
SCP
PO
)
p = 0.063
Fig. 3.
Cognitive performance. The marginal mean estimates of %accuracy
indicate the three treatment groups’ performance in the working memory
task (n-back), and how they change when going from the two-back test
(87.3 ± 11.4 for the SCC group, 84.6 ± 11.1 for the SCP group, and 85.8 ±
10.9 for the PO group) to the more challenging three-back test (79.4 ±
8.4 for the SCC group, 86 ± 9.5 for the SCP group, and 80.5 ± 7.7 for the PO
group). The working memory performance in the SCC group drops notably
when the cognitive demands increase (P < 0.01). In contrast to the other two
treatment modes, the SCP group retains its working memory capacity when
the cognitive demands increase (double-headed black arrow), especially
compared with the SCC group (P = 0.063).
Kalafatakis et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 17
|
E4093
PHYSIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 (Fig. 4A), consistent with a reduction in the processing of negative
information.
These treatment-related perceptual variations were confirmed
by ANOVA on the %origin of misclassifications [F(1.637,
22.916) = 4.120; P = 0.036; ω2 = 0.12], since subjects receiving
the optimal pulsatile hydrocortisone replacement are more likely
to misclassify negative emotional faces compared with those
receiving the other two modes of hydrocortisone replacement, as
well as by the main effect of treatment on the %destination of
misclassifications [F(1.665, 23.312) = 6.522; P = 0.008; ω2 =
0.20], since the SCP group misclassified toward emotional faces
with a significantly higher frequency compared with the other
two groups (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). Overall, the optimal pulsatile
treatment resulted in lower accuracy for recognizing negatively
valenced faces and, consequently, more misclassifications of
negatively valenced faces.
There was no two-way interaction of [valence] × [cortisol dy-
namics] by ANOVA on the reaction time of subjects’ responses
[F(1.927, 26.971) = 1.959; P = 0.162]. There was also no main
effect of treatment on reaction time [F(1.668, 23.351) = 1.026;
P = 0.361]. However, emotional valence showed a main effect
[F(1, 14) = 48.857; P < 0.001], similar to that found in earlier
studies (61, 62); independent of treatment group and on av-
erage, participants tended to respond faster to faces with a
positive emotional valence compared with faces with a negative
emotional valence (mean difference, 211 ms; 95% CI, 164–257 ms;
P < 0.001).
The P1vital Emotional Face-Related Attentional Bias Task Indicated
That the SCP Group Shows Facilitation of Attention Deployment
Toward Positive Stimuli. The Facial Dot-Probe Task (FDOT) as-
sesses attention to positive and negative stimuli using a reaction
time measure, the vigilance score. While subjects are asked to
maintain their attention to the middle of a screen, emotionally
valenced and neutral stimuli are presented above and below this
central point. After presentation, one of the stimuli is replaced
by two dots, vertically or horizontally oriented. The subjects are
instructed to guide their attention and correctly identify the
orientation of the two dots as quickly as possible. The facial
stimuli are presented for either 100 ms (unmasked) or 16 ms and
then replaced for the remaining 84 ms with a jumbled face
(masked) (63). In the three treatment groups, the mean %accuracy
scores for identifying the orientation of the two dots were very high
and very similar (97.5%, 97.1%, and 96.7%). ANOVA elicited a
three-way interaction of [masking] × [valence] × [cortisol dynamics]
on the vigilance score of the subjects’ responses [F(1.771, 24.778) =
4.039; P = 0.035], driven by the differential, treatment-dependent
deployment of attention toward or away from emotional faces when
moving from the subliminal level (masked faces; Fig. 4B) to the
brief presentation level (unmasked faces; Fig. 4C).
Across treatments and emotional valences (happy and fearful
faces), we can observe a pattern in which subjects showed a
negative vigilance score (i.e., attentional bias away from emo-
tional faces) at a subliminal level, transformed to a positive one
(i.e., attentional bias toward emotional faces) at a brief pre-
sentation level. This pattern not only was reversed for fearful
faces in subjects receiving oral hydrocortisone replacement, but
Towards 
emotional 
faces
Away from 
emotional 
faces
Away from 
emotional 
faces
Towards 
emotional 
faces
SCC
SCP
PO
POSITIVE  
POSITIVE 
POSITIVE 
NEGATIVE
NEGATIVE
NEGATIVE
FEAR
HAPPY
HAPPY
FEAR
p = 0.039
p = 0.067
A
B
C
p = 0.033
p = 0.002
p = 0.014
Fig. 4.
(A) Behavioral data on emotional face recognition. The scatterplot shows the %accuracy scores for recognizing positively valenced (happy, surprise)
and negatively valenced facial expressions (sad, angry, fearful, disgusted) per treatment group. Similar to what has been observed as an effect of established
antidepressant and anxiolytic agents on healthy male volunteers, the pulsatile GC rhythm approximating physiology (SCP) increases the within-group dif-
ference in the accuracy scores between correctly identifying positively valenced from negatively valenced human faces (double-headed black arrows). This
phenomenon occurs as the result of the comparatively reduced accuracy of subjects in the SCP group in correctly identifying faces expressing negative
emotions (on average by 4.9% vs. SCC; P = 0.029 and on average by 4% vs. PO; P = 0.067). More details are provided in SI Appendix, Fig. S2. (B) Behavioral data
on emotion-related attentional bias at the subliminal level (masked faces). The scatterplot presents each treatment group’s vigilance scores toward (positive
values) or away (negative values) from masked fearful and happy faces. (C) Scatterplot presenting each treatment group’s vigilance scores toward (positive
values) or away (negative values) from unmasked fearful and happy faces. In the SCP group, there is a significant difference (P = 0.014) in the vigilance score
between unmasked fearful and happy faces. Moreover, in the PO group, there is a strong trend for changing the direction of the attentional bias when going
from masked to unmasked fearful faces (light-blue ellipsoidal frame in B and C; P = 0.067 not shown in figure). Moreover, the PO group showed a statistically
significant absolute bias away from unmasked fearful faces (P = 0.033), and the SCP group showed a statistically significant absolute bias toward unmasked
happy faces (P = 0.002). Overall, fast-acting neural processing of fearful faces in the SCP group and of happy faces in the SCC group led to minimal attentional
bias. In all other cases, the transition from subliminal to more conscious attentional mechanisms led to changes in the direction of the attentional bias, either
from stimulus avoidance to vigilance or, only for the processing of fearful faces in the PO group, vice versa.
E4094
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714239115
Kalafatakis et al.
 the difference in the vigilance scores between the two perceptual
levels was notable [F(1.879, 26.301) = 3.456; P = 0.049; ω2 =
0.08; mean difference, 25.1; 95% CI, −2 to 52.3; P = 0.067],
especially due to the deployment of these subjects’ attention
away from unmasked fearful faces [absolute attentional bias:
t(14) = −2.363; P = 0.033; d = 0.31]. At a preconscious level,
subjects receiving the optimal pulsatile treatment tended to be
strongly attracted by happy faces, not only per se [absolute at-
tentional bias: t(14) = 3.872; P = 0.002; d = 1.00], but also in
comparison with fearful faces [F(1, 14) = 5.874; P = 0.030; ω2 =
0.14; mean difference in vigilance score, 23.1; 95% CI, 5.5–40.7;
P = 0.014]. Overall, GC rhythmicity seems to interact with the
fast-acting neural pathways that coordinate the deployment of
attention in the presence of emotional stimuli.
Different GC Rhythms Change the Neural Processing of Emotional
Input. Our fMRI protocol assessing the processing of emotional
faces (i.e., IFEPT) provoked significant activations from most of
the predefined regions of interest (ROIs; SI Appendix, Table S3)
and the combined evaluation of the fMRI experiments (on
emotional face processing and nonemotional visual stimulation)
with the ROI analysis on the regional perfusion data revealed the
presence of GC-susceptible brain areas in which the underlying
neural processing of emotional input is rhythm-sensitive. These
rhythm-dependent neural responses specifically relate to facial
expression processing rather than to nonspecific differences due
to neural reactivity or neural coupling or due to differences in
the resting perfusion of these brain areas between the groups.
Whole-brain analysis of the fMRI data acquired during the
IFEPT identified differential patterns of activation in brain re-
gion clusters (familywise error-corrected; Z-threshold = 2.3; P <
0.05) in which blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal
activity patterns corresponding to emotional face discrimination
showed notable variations as a function of emotional expression
and group. These included some of our predefined ROIs and
were observed in the differential processing of happy and sad
faces, and fearful and sad faces, between the SCC and SCP
groups (SI Appendix, Fig. S4) and in the differential processing of
happy and sad faces between the SCC and PO groups (SI Ap-
pendix, Fig. S5). The five ROIs specified were parts of the right
amygdala, right striatum, right orbitofrontal cortex, and right and
left insula; the corresponding data are presented in Figs. 5 and 6
and SI Appendix, Fig. S6.
During our control task, visual stimulation (i.e., flashing
checkerboard) whole-brain analysis did not reveal any notable
BOLD signal variations between the treatment groups in areas
responsible for visual processing (occipital and temporal lobes)
or any of the ROIs predefined for this study (SI Appendix, Fig.
S7). Thus, the variations detected in those five ROIs in the
IFEPT fMRI experiment should reflect differences in the pro-
cessing of facial traits and emotion rather than nonspecific dif-
ferences due to neural reactivity or neural coupling.
At another level, resting perfusion has been shown to have an
inverse relationship with the BOLD responses and thus is an
important confounding factor in fMRI studies (64). Our arterial
spin labeling (ASL) data showed comparable regional resting
perfusion (pairwise comparisons presented in SI Appendix, Fig.
S6 and Table S8) across the five GC-sensitive ROIs responding
differently to emotional faces in the IFEPT fMRI experiment,
further strengthening the concept that these variations reflect
RI RS
RA
SCC
SCP
0.17
0.42
0.11
*
***
**
**
***
Fig. 5.
Neural processing differences in emotional discrimination in GC-sensitive brain regions between the SCC and SCP groups. The coronal view of
MNI152 standard space (spatial resolution of 0.5 mm) shows these brain regions in yellow-red, in which BOLD signal changes in response to happy and sad
faces differ notably between the two treatment groups. Three ROIs are identified in this view (RA, RI, and RS). For each ROI, the mean value of the cor-
responding contrast of parameter estimate (COPE; happy vs. baseline and sad vs. baseline) and its mean across-subject effect estimate (%BOLD signal change
vs. baseline) are presented. A measure of the effect size of each mode of cortisol dynamics on the differential processing between happy and sad faces is also
shown (pie charts depicting the extent of the involvement of the corresponding brain region in the differential processing). In the SCP group, the right
amygdala (“R. Amygdala” graph) is activated significantly more strongly when subjects encounter sad faces compared with happy faces (P < 0.01), and this
activation intensity in response to viewing sad faces is notably higher compared with that in subjects in the SCC group (P < 0.001). Similarly, the right striatum
(“R. Striatum” graph) is also activated significantly more strongly in response to viewing sad faces in the SCP group compared with the SCC group (P < 0.001).
Moreover, in the SCC group, this brain structure is more responsive to happy faces compared with sad faces (P < 0.05). The same applies for the right insula
(“R. Insula” graph; P < 0.01). The results reported here are not confounded by nonspecific differences in neural reactivity, neural coupling, or resting per-
fusion in these brain regions. The black lines represent mean ± SD. More details on the cluster-corrected results of the whole-brain analysis are provided in SI
Appendix, Fig. S4. RA, right amygdala; RI, right insula; RS, right striatum. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
Kalafatakis et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 17
|
E4095
PHYSIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 existing differences in the underlying neural processing of facial
traits and emotion.
Different GC Rhythms Change the Functional Connectivity of GC-
Sensitive Brain Regions and Their Functional Roles in Processing of
Emotional Input. Pursuant to our fMRI data assessing the neural
processing of happy and sad faces, and our behavioral data from
FERT on the recognition of happy and sad faces, we investigated
whether there is a functional link between these GC rhythm-
sensitive neural and psychological processes, and how different
GC rhythms might alter that link. We conducted a multiple post
hoc correlation analysis between the absolute values of the effect
estimates (absolute %BOLD signal changes) of the brain re-
gions, which were differentially responsive to viewing happy and
sad faces across the treatment groups, an index of ambiguity in
recognizing emotion corresponding to happy and sad faces, de-
rived from the FERT data, and the EMA data illustrating the
positive and negative affective state of individuals presented
earlier (Fig. 7).
This post hoc analysis was decided in the light of the existing
strong evidence about the role of the amygdala in the detection
of ambiguous, emotion-relevant cues (65, 66) and the insular
cortex in the integration of internal cues, like affective state (67)
and empathic processing (68, 69), to the cognitive evaluation of
emotional input, as well as the involvement of the orbitofrontal
cortex and striatum in the neural systems mediating emotional
processing (70, 71).
To define the ambiguity in recognizing emotional faces, we
created an index derived from the data of the FERT. We divided
the number of misclassifications from or toward each valence
(sad and happy faces) by the number of emotional faces of that
valence correctly recognized for each mode of hydrocortisone
replacement such that the higher the index, the greater the de-
gree of ambiguity or difficulty in specifically recognizing each
emotion. This index was chosen because of its concurrent very
high correlation coefficient with both, the %accuracy scores (for
correctly identifying), and the number of misclassifications in-
volving the corresponding emotional valence (SI Appendix,
Fig. S9).
In the SCC and SCP groups, only in the latter were the %BOLD
signal changes of the right amygdala and right insula highly corre-
lated with the monitoring of ambiguity in recognizing happy and sad
faces [r(30) = 0.430; P = 0.018] and the affective state [r(30) =
0.521; P = 0.003], respectively. Moreover, in the SCP group, these
two brain structures showed an increased in-between functional
connectivity compared with the SCC group (Fig. 7A). Furthermore,
subjects on the oral replacement showed an increased functional
connectivity between the right orbitofrontal cortex with bilateral
insulae [rPO(30) = 0.501; P = 0.005 for the right insula and
rPO(30) = 0.428; P = 0.018, for the left insula] during the neural
processing of the happy and sad faces, not present in the SCC group
(Fig. 7B).
Relationship of Sleep Quality with Outcomes of the Study. Since
cortisol impacts sleep physiology, and the latter influences
emotional and memory processing in man (72–75), we plotted
our LSEQ-derived sleep evaluations against the rest of our data
(SI Appendix, Fig. S6 and Table S10). Quality of sleep had a
moderate positive correlation with the %BOLD signal changes
in the pulsatile and continuous infusion groups reported in the
right insula in the context of discriminating between fearful and
sad faces [r(30) = 0.344; P = 0.063, accounting for the 11.8% of
the statistical variance of these BOLD signal responses], and a
moderate negative correlation with the number of misclassifica-
tions originating from negatively valenced faces [r(45) = −0.366;
P = 0.014, accounting for the 13.4% of the statistical variance on
the number of misclassifications]. In all other cases, no significant
correlations were specified.
RI
RS
LI
SCC v
vs PO
SCC
PO
***
0.04
0.43
0.14
0.34
***
***
***
**
**
**
**
**
** ***
***
Fig. 6.
Neural processing differences on emotional discrimination in GC-sensitive brain regions between the SCC and PO groups. The coronal view of
MNI152 standard space (spatial resolution of 0.5 mm) shows these brain regions in yellow-red, in which BOLD signal changes in response to happy and sad
faces differ notably between the two treatment groups. Three ROIs are identified in this view (LI, RI, and RS). A forth ROI (right orbitofrontal cortex), not
shown in the previous coronal view, is illustrated independently in another, smaller coronal view of the standard space (in red) next to the corresponding
graph. For each ROI, the mean value of the corresponding COPE (happy vs. baseline and sad vs. baseline) and its mean across-subject effect estimate (%BOLD
signal change vs. baseline) are presented. A measure of the effect size of each mode of cortisol dynamics on the differential processing between happy and
sad faces is also shown (pie charts depicting the extent of the involvement of the corresponding brain region in the differential processing). All ROIs show an
almost opposite response to happy and sad faces between the two treatment groups. In the SCC group (similar to what is illustrated in Fig. 5), happy face
presentation provokes a much stronger activation compared with sad face presentation, which in some cases leaves the ROI irresponsive or even deactivates
it. In contrast, in the PO group, sad face presentation leads to higher activations compared with happy face presentation, which in some cases leaves the ROI
irresponsive or even deactivates it. The results reported here are not confounded by nonspecific differences in neural reactivity, neural coupling, or resting
perfusion in these brain regions. Graph bars represent mean ± SD. More details about the cluster-corrected results of the whole-brain analysis are provided in
SI Appendix, Fig. S5. L, left; LI, left insula; R, right; RI, right insula; RS, right striatum. **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
E4096
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714239115
Kalafatakis et al.
 Discussion
We have investigated the neural processing and behavioral re-
sponses related to emotional perception and cognitive perfor-
mance in healthy male volunteers on three patterns of the same
total dose hydrocortisone replacement therapy. The SCP group
was characterized by physiological circadian and ultradian GC
rhythms (SI Appendix, Fig. S11), the SCC group was character-
ized by a normal circadian but no ultradian GC variation, and the
PO group (in which we used current optimal GC replacement
recommendations) was characterized by a delayed circadian
peak of cortisol, two further pulses during the day, and very low
levels at awakening. It is the low quality of life, reduced activity,
low motivation, and mental fatigue reported in patients on oral
replacement therapy or continuous infusion therapy that moti-
vated the present study.
The pattern of GC replacement differentially modulates pro-
cesses related to working memory and sleep physiology. In par-
ticular, a lack of physiological cortisol pulsatility is associated
with poorer working memory performance at times of increased
cognitive demands. Moreover, the absence of ultradian rhyth-
micity correlates with a poorer self-perceived quality of sleep.
Our data demonstrate that different patterns of plasma cortisol
oscillations have a differential impact on the GC-sensitive brain
regions underlying emotional processing, with distinct conse-
quences for (i) the accuracy of recognizing emotional faces
(particularly the negatively valenced ones), (ii) the direction of
this perceptual bias, and (iii) the attentional bias toward or away
from emotional faces. These GC rhythm-dependent changes
could reflect functional modifications among corticolimbic brain
regions underlying the differential recognition of negatively
valenced faces as observed in the FERT, or the differential de-
ployment of attention across perceptual levels, in the presence of
emotional stimuli, as observed in the FDOT.
While the %BOLD signal change in the right amygdala of the
SCP group in response to emotional faces relates to the difficulty
of the individuals in correctly recognizing emotions, the same
brain region becomes dissociated from monitoring emotional
ambiguity in the SCC group. In this context, it is worth noting
that amygdala %BOLD signal changes in the SCP group were
significantly higher when subjects were viewing sad (negatively
valenced) faces compared with happy (positively valenced) faces.
This is in line with the FERT data, supporting the notion that the
decreased accuracy (i.e., increased uncertainty) of subjects on
the optimal pulsatile infusion in recognizing emotional faces is
negative valence-specific. Similarly, while in the SCP group the
right insula seems to integrate internal cues, like the affective
state, into the process of encoding facial expressions, it becomes
dissociated from that process in the SCC group. Finally, the
functional connectivity between the right orbitofrontal cortex
and insular cortices during emotional face presentation appears
to be very strong in the PO group, which is not the case in the
SCC group.
Previous studies using the FERT and FDOT for assessing
neuropsychological processes involved in depression and anxiety
(76) have shown similar responses of healthy subjects receiving
antidepressant and anxiolytic regimens to the responses that we
find in our patients on the pulsatile SCP regimen. This implies an
involvement of GC rhythmicity in the psychophysiological mecha-
nisms regulating mood and anxiety.
Previous neuroimaging experiments have provided evidence
that high levels of exogenous GCs, mimicking stress-associated
states, alter both the neural processing in response to emotional
Recg.Amb. 
POS.Aff.
NEG.Aff.
%BOLD.Ramy.
%BOLD.Rins.
%BOLD.RS.
SCC 
Recg.Amb.
POS.Aff.
NEG.Aff.
%BOLD.Ramy.
%BOLD.Rins.
%BOLD.RS.
SCP
***
**
**
***
***
* *
NEGATIVE MOOD
RECOGNITION AMBIGUITY
Emotional Face Processing
RI
RA
Emotional Face Processing
PO
0.312 
(p = 0.092) 
0.521
(p = 0.003)
0.430
(p = 0.018)
REC
0.160
(p = 0.398)
0.273
(p = 0.145)
0.052
(p = 0.784)
Recg.Amb.
POS.Aff.
NEG.Aff.
PO
%BOLD.ROFC.
%BOLD.Rins.
%BOLD.RS.
%BOLD.Lins.
***
***
***
***
* *
*
***
*
**
**
RI
LI
ROFC
0.501
(p = 0.005)
0.428
(p = 0.018)
0.110
(p = 0.563)
0.046
(p = 0.809)
A 
B
SCC
Recg.Amb.
POS.Aff.
NEG.Aff.
%BOLD.ROFC.
%BOLD.Rins.
%BOLD.RS.
%BOLD.Lins.
Fig. 7.
Correlation analysis between the absolute values of the effect estimates of the brain regions, which were differentially responsive to viewing happy
and sad faces across the treatment groups, an index of ambiguity in recognizing emotion corresponding to happy and sad faces, and the positive and
negative affective states of individuals. The values of each outcome measure are illustrated on a white to dark-blue scale (with white indicating the lowest
value and dark-blue indicating the highest value). Spearman’s rank-order correlation test was used; positive correlations (between the corresponding
datasets) are indicated with a green arrow, and negative correlations are indicated with a red arrow. The scales of the negative and positive effects are (as
expected) strongly anticorrelated with each other. A positive functional connectivity between the right insula and the right striatum (during emotional
processing) is observed. (A) The differences in the neural processing of emotional input observed in the right amygdala and the right insula of the SCP group
compared with the SCC group seem to (at least partially) reflect changes in their functional role (like monitoring ambiguity in recognizing facial expressions
or the affective state) during the processing of emotional input. (B) The differences in neural processing of emotional input observed in the bilateral insula
and the right orbitofrontal cortex of the PO group compared with the SCC group seem to (at least partially) reflect changes in their in-between functional
connectivity during the processing of emotional input. %BOLD, absolute %BOLD signal change (compared with baseline) during exposure to the corre-
sponding emotional face (happy and sad); LI/Lins, left insula; NEG.Aff., negative affect score; POS.Aff., positive affect score; RA/Ramy, right amygdala; Recg.
Amb., index of recognition ambiguity when engaging with the corresponding emotional faces (happy and sad); RI/Rins, right insula; ROFC, right orbitofrontal
cortex; RS, right striatum. *P < 0.1; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
Kalafatakis et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 17
|
E4097
PHYSIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 or cognitive stimulation and the resting state functional con-
nectivity (7–14). These studies suggest a specific role for MRs in
some of these stress-related changes in both neural processing
and functional connectivity (15, 16), while MR or GC receptor
antagonism impacts the amygdala-dependent processing of
emotional faces (77). Our study findings now provide evidence
that even in the absence of a stressful stimulus, the ultradian GC
rhythm is critical in regulating neural dynamics and, conse-
quently, behavioral and cognitive phenotypes. Future studies in
patients with adrenocortical insufficiency are now needed, not
only to help reduce the morbidity of current replacement regi-
mens, but also to provide evidence from longer-term modifica-
tion of replacement cortisol rhythmicity for improved brain
function and a more personalized approach to GC therapeutics.
Materials and Methods
Study Design. This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover
study of three different modes of hydrocortisone replacement in healthy
subjects was registered with the United Kingdom Clinical Research Network
(IRAS reference 106181, UKCRN-ID-15236; October 23, 2013). The study fol-
lowed the CONSORT guidelines for randomized controlled trials (SI Appendix,
Fig. S12).
Participants. Fifteen right-handed, healthy male volunteers age 20–33 y were
included in the study (SI Appendix, Table S13). The subjects had no history of
neuropsychiatric disease as confirmed by clinical assessment and were ex-
cluded if they had received a diagnosis or had a family history of a psychi-
atric disorder. The Ethics Committee of the University of Bristol approved the
study, and all participants provided informed written consent. Each volun-
teers passed a detailed screening session, part of which was the acquisition
of a high-resolution anatomic MRI scan.
Pharmacologic
Interventions.
The
cortisol
biosynthesis
blocking
agent
(metyrapone) was taken orally in all three arms of the study, together with
three different methods for replacing GCs with a fixed daily dose of 20 mg of
hydrocortisone: (i) s.c. via a pump, delivering normal circadian but no
ultradian rhythmicity (SCP group), (ii) normal circadian and ultradian
rhythmicity (SCC group), or (iii) per os, three times daily (after waking up,
during lunch and dinner) (PO group) (60).
Randomization and Blinding Procedures. Block randomization schedules were
generated by staff members not directly involved in data collection for this
study. Each subject was randomly assigned to one of the six possible orders of
treatment, with the limitation that that the difference in the final number of
subjects between any order of treatments should not exceed 1, when the
total number of participants reaches 15. Dispensing and processing of all
medication/placebo was managed by a third party (Bristol Royal Infirmary
University Hospital Pharmacy). In all treatment arms, subjects were required
to take the same daily regimen of tablets and remain connected to an s.c.
pump. Anonymized data from all outcome measures were stored in the
University of Bristol central servers, were cleaned at an individual level
without knowledge of which session corresponds to which subject, and,
consequently, further postprocessed and compared statistically at a group
level, without knowledge of which group corresponds to which mode of
hydrocortisone substitution.
EMA. Throughout each 5-d treatment period, subjects had to reply (via a
provided android phone) to a fixed set of nine questions about self-perceived
reactivity and feelings of well-being at multiple time points during each day
(SI Appendix, Fig. S14). A total of 1,018 assessments were collected. Principal
component analysis was used to reduce the nine items of the questionnaire
and identified two factors: positive and negative affect.
Neuroimaging Study. Prior to the fMRI experiments, shimming along the
longitudinal axis of the main magnetic field was performed to reduce the
impact of geometric distortions and improve signal acquisition from the areas
of the orbitofrontal cortices. Moreover, field maps were acquired and used
during the preprocessing stage of the functional image analysis, improving
the coregistration of the functional images to the corresponding high-
resolution anatomic images (SI Appendix, Table S15). This study follows
the guidelines for reporting fMRI data suggested by Poldrack et al. (78). The
ROIs for the fMRI studies have been defined a priori (60). Functional and
perfusion neuroimaging data analyses were carried out using FMRIB soft-
ware library 5.0 (79) and Statistical Parametric Mapping version 8, and in-
volved a number of preprocessing and postprocessing steps (SI Appendix,
Figs. S16 and S17) (80–83).
LSEQ. Ten self-rating questions examined four domains of sleeping behavior:
(i) getting to sleep, (ii) quality of sleep, (iii) awakening from sleep, and (iv)
behavior following waking. Rating was done on a 100-mm VAS, with a
higher score indicating poorer sleep. The score for each of the four domains
(per study arm and participant) was derived from the average of the scores
for the corresponding questions.
FERT. Two hundred and fifty images of artificially created human faces were
displayed (one at a time) on the computer screen for 500 ms and each time
replaced by a blank screen until the subject responded. The facial charac-
teristics of each image were developed based on the Pictures of Affect Series
(84) but morphed between each prototype emotion and neutral in such a
way as to produce images depicting the full emotion (100%) and images
presenting the emotion with gradually increasing degrees of ambiguity. For
each emotion, 40 images were displayed (equally weighted for other non-
emotional features, such as sex, skin color, eye color, etc.). In addition,
10 faces with a neutral expression were included. Images were presented in
a random order. More details on the dependent variables constructed are
provided in SI Appendix, Fig. S18.
FDOT. One hundred and ninety-two pairs of images depicting facial ex-
pressions were displayed on the screen (one pair at a time) for 100 ms. The
images used in this task were taken from the JACFEE/JACNeuF sets of facial
expressions (85). Each pair of faces comprised one emotional expression and
one neutral expression of the same individual (in 128 of the trials) or two
neutral expressions of the same individual (in 64 of the trials). One-half of
the emotional faces were fearful, and the other half were happy. In the
fearful–neutral and happy–neutral face trials, the emotional faces appeared
above and below the central fixation position with equal frequency. The
task design involved congruent trials (dots replace an emotional face) and
incongruent trials (dots replace a neutral face while an emotional face is
present). Incorrect trials were excluded from the data analysis. Attentional
vigilance scores were calculated for each participant by subtracting the
mean reaction time of congruent trials from incongruent trials.
N-Back. This test comprised 16 sessions of letter presentation (one letter at a
time during each session) and four levels of difficulty (types of n-back).
Subjects were asked to make a response to the letters seen based on the
type of n-back. In the zero-back type, the subjects were instructed to press
SAME every time the predefined target letter (X) appeared on the screen, and
DIFFERENT for all other letters. In the one-, two-, and three-back types,
subjects needed to pay attention to the letters as they changed and press
SAME if the letter on the screen was the same as the letter one trial, two trials,
or three trials back, respectively. If it was not the same, then they needed to
press DIFFERENT. The 16 n-back sessions were displayed in a pseudorandom
order (four of each kind), and each contained 10 letters, each of which was
presented for 500 ms. The interstimulus interval was 1,517 ms. Performance in
all types of n-back sessions was measured as %accuracy ([1 − [(no. of wrong +
no. of nonresponses)/total no. of trials]] × 100) and response time (across
correct trials) for each of the task conditions. The accuracy of responses in
the cognitively very-low-demanding zero-back and one-back sessions were
used to assess the presence of any systematic bias in subjects’ performance,
while the accuracy of responses and reaction times in the cognitively high-
demanding two-back and three-back sessions were used as indicators of the
working memory performance, according to latest psychometric theoretical
schemes and practices (86).
Statistical Analysis of the Behavioral Data. Statistical analysis was performed
using SPSS version 23, and corresponding graphs were created in GraphPad
Prism version 5.03. The influence of the different cortisol rhythms on subjects’
responses as assessed by the EMA, LSEQ, FERT, FDOT and n-back was eval-
uated with repeated-measures mixed-model ANOVA, either three-way
(FDOT), two-way (FERT, n-back), or one-way (EMA, LSEQ), depending on
the psychological test. In all cases, one of the within-subject factors was the
treatment group (three levels: SCC, SCP, and PO). In the case of FDOT, one-
sample t tests were also used to compare attentional bias scores to zero
within each group to clarify where an absolute bias was present. Tests for
detecting outliers, normality in the distribution of data (Shapiro–Wilk test),
and sphericity have been used and taken into consideration for the data
analysis. Two genuinely unusual values were detected in the FERT dataset
referring to reaction time; in this case, repeated-measures ANOVA was
E4098
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714239115
Kalafatakis et al.
 performed with and without the outliers, and in both cases no significant
differences were found between the treatment groups. The datasets derived
from the FERT and the negative affect scores were not normally distributed.
Although the assumption of sphericity (Mauchly’s test) was not violated in
any case, we used Greenhouse–Geisser correction regardless. Two-tailed
tests were performed for all analyses, and P was set to 0.05. All results
shown in the corresponding table are mean ± SD. CIs refer to ±2 SD. As a
measure of the effect size, ω2 was used for the ANOVA, and Cohen’s d was
used in the Student’s t test. Pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni adjust-
ment were performed to investigate any (simple) main effects of treatment
across the three study groups. Pearson’s product-moment and Spearman’s
rank-order correlation were used for correlation analyses (SI Appendix, Ta-
bles S10 and S19).
All study-related procedures not directly available in the main text are
provided in SI Appendix. Additional information is available in Kalafatakis
et al. (60).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank the clinicians from the Pharmacy of the
Bristol Royal Infirmary for their crucial contribution in the randomization
process of the study and for realizing its double-blind, placebo-controlled
nature. We also thank all the scientists at the Henry Wellcome Laboratories
for Integrative Neuroscience and Endocrinology and the Clinical Research
and Imaging Centre of the University of Bristol for their support and
assistance in completing this work. We especially appreciate the assistance of
Dr. Kristin Schmidt (University of Oxford) in optimizing the technicalities of
the neurobehavioral investigation. Funding for this work was provided by
the Medical Research Council (DCS Grant MR/J0125481/1) and the Wellcome
Trust (Grant 089647/Z/09/Z).
1. Kalafatakis K, Russell G-M, Zarros A, Lightman S-L (2016) Temporal control of glu-
cocorticoid neurodynamics and its relevance for brain homeostasis, neuropathology
and glucocorticoid-based therapeutics. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 61:12–25.
2. McEwen B-S, De Kloet E-R, Rostene W (1986) Adrenal steroid receptors and actions in
the nervous system. Physiol Rev 66:1121–1188.
3. Nadeau S, Rivest S (2003) Glucocorticoids play a fundamental role in protecting the
brain during innate immune response. J Neurosci 23:5536–5544.
4. Lee B, et al. (2013) Brain-specific homeobox factor as a target selector for glucocor-
ticoid receptor in energy balance. Mol Cell Biol 33:2650–2658.
5. Lussier A-L, Romay-Tallón R, Caruncho H-J, Kalynchuk L-E (2013) Altered GABAergic
and glutamatergic activity within the rat hippocampus and amygdala in rats
subjected to repeated corticosterone administration but not restraint stress.
Neuroscience 231:38–48.
6. Joëls M, Baram T-Z (2009) The neuro-symphony of stress. Nat Rev Neurosci 10:
459–466.
7. Symonds C-S, McKie S, Elliott R, William Deakin J-F, Anderson I-M (2012) Detection of
the acute effects of hydrocortisone in the hippocampus using pharmacological fMRI.
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 22:867–874.
8. Henckens M-J, van Wingen G-A, Joëls M, Fernández G (2011) Time-dependent corti-
costeroid modulation of prefrontal working memory processing. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 108:5801–5806.
9. Veer I-M, et al. (2012) Endogenous cortisol is associated with functional connectivity
between the amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex. Psychoneuroendocrinology 37:
1039–1047.
10. Vaisvaser S, et al. (2013) Neural traces of stress: Cortisol-related sustained enhance-
ment of amygdala-hippocampal functional connectivity. Front Hum Neurosci 7:313.
11. Henckens M-J, van Wingen G-A, Joëls M, Fernández G (2012) Corticosteroid-induced
decoupling of the amygdala in men. Cereb Cortex 22:2336–2345.
12. Henckens M-J, van Wingen G-A, Joëls M, Fernández G (2010) Time-dependent effects
of corticosteroids on human amygdala processing. J Neurosci 30:12725–12732.
13. Henckens M-J, et al. (2012) Dynamically changing effects of corticosteroids on human
hippocampal and prefrontal processing. Hum Brain Mapp 33:2885–2897.
14. Henckens M-J, van Wingen G-A, Joëls M, Fernández G (2012) Time-dependent effects
of cortisol on selective attention and emotional interference: A functional MRI study.
Front Integr Nuerosci 6:66.
15. Vogel S, et al. (2015) Blocking the mineralocorticoid receptor in humans prevents the
stress-induced enhancement of centromedial amygdala connectivity with the dorsal
striatum. Neuropsychopharmacology 40:947–956.
16. Vogel S, et al. (2015) A stress-induced shift from trace to delay conditioning depends
on the mineralocorticoid receptor. Biol Psychiatry 78:830–839.
17. Liston C, et al. (2013) Circadian glucocorticoid oscillations promote learning-
dependent synapse formation and maintenance. Nat Neurosci 16:698–705.
18. Liston C, Gan W-B (2011) Glucocorticoids are critical regulators of dendritic spine
development and plasticity in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:16074–16079.
19. Russell G-M, Kalafatakis K, Lightman S-L (2015) The importance of biological oscilla-
tors for hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal activity and tissue glucocorticoid response:
Coordinating
stress
and
neurobehavioural
adaptation. J
Neuroendocrinol
27:
378–388.
20. Spiga F, et al. (2011) ACTH-dependent ultradian rhythm of corticosterone secretion.
Endocrinology 152:1448–1457.
21. Fulkerson W-J, Tang B-Y (1979) Ultradian and circadian rhythms in the plasma con-
centration of cortisol in sheep. J Endocrinol 81:135–141.
22. Cudd T-A, et al. (1995) Ontogeny and ultradian rhythms of adrenocorticotropin and
cortisol in the late-gestation fetal horse. J Endocrinol 144:271–283.
23. Ingram J-R, Crockford J-N, Matthews L-R (1999) Ultradian, circadian and seasonal
rhythms in cortisol secretion and adrenal responsiveness to ACTH and yarding in
unrestrained red deer (Cervus elaphus) stags. J Endocrinol 162:289–300.
24. Fulkerson W-J, Sawyer G-J, Gow C-B (1980) Investigations of ultradian and circadian
rhythms in the concentration of cortisol and prolactin in the plasma of dairy cattle.
Aust J Biol Sci 33:557–561.
25. Lefcourt A-M, Bitman J, Kahl S, Wood D-L (1993) Circadian and ultradian rhythms of
peripheral cortisol concentrations in lactating dairy cows. J Dairy Sci 76:2607–2612.
26. Sarnyai Z, et al. (1995) The concordance of pulsatile ultradian release of adrenocor-
ticotropin and cortisol in male rhesus monkeys. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 80:54–59.
27. Holaday J-W, Martinez H-M, Natelson B-H (1977) Synchronized ultradian cortisol
rhythms in monkeys: Persistence during corticotropin infusion. Science 198:56–58.
28. Follenius M, Simon C, Brandenberger G, Lenzi P (1987) Ultradian plasma corticotropin
and cortisol rhythms: Time-series analyses. J Endocrinol Invest 10:261–266.
29. Hartmann A, Veldhuis J-D, Deuschle M, Standhardt H, Heuser I (1997) Twenty-four-
hour cortisol release profiles in patients with Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease
compared to normal controls: Ultradian secretory pulsatility and diurnal variation.
Neurobiol Aging 18:285–289.
30. Pasquali R, et al. (1998) Pulsatile secretion of ACTH and cortisol in premenopausal
women: Effect of obesity and body fat distribution. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 48:603–612.
31. Young E-A, Carlson N-E, Brown M-B (2001) Twenty-four-hour ACTH and cortisol
pulsatility in depressed women. Neuropsychopharmacology 25:267–276.
32. Gavrila A, et al. (2003) Diurnal and ultradian dynamics of serum adiponectin in
healthy men: Comparison with leptin, circulating soluble leptin receptor, and cortisol
patterns. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88:2838–2843.
33. Crofford L-J, et al. (2004) Basal circadian and pulsatile ACTH and cortisol secretion in
patients with fibromyalgia and/or chronic fatigue syndrome. Brain Behav Immun 18:
314–325.
34. Henley D-E, et al. (2009) Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activation in obstructive
sleep apnea: The effect of continuous positive airway pressure therapy. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 94:4234–4242.
35. Russell G-M, et al. (2010) Rapid glucocorticoid receptor-mediated inhibition of
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal ultradian activity in healthy males. J Neurosci 30:
6106–6115.
36. Lightman S, Terry J-R (2014) The importance of dynamic signalling for endocrine
regulation and drug development: Relevance for glucocorticoid hormones. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol 2:593–599.
37. Gibbison B, et al. (2015) Dynamic pituitary-adrenal interactions in response to cardiac
surgery. Crit Care Med 43:791–800.
38. Gupta S, Aslakson E, Gurbaxani B-M, Vernon S-D (2007) Inclusion of the glucocorticoid
receptor in a hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis model reveals bistability. Theor Biol
Med Model 4:8.
39. Walker J-J, Terry J-R, Lightman S-L (2010) Origin of ultradian pulsatility in the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Proc Biol Sci 277:1627–1633.
40. Rankin J, Walker J-J, Windle R, Lightman S-L, Terry J-R (2012) Characterizing dynamic
interactions between ultradian glucocorticoid rhythmicity and acute stress using the
phase-response curve. PLoS One 7:e30978.
41. Walker J-J, et al. (2012) The origin of glucocorticoid hormone oscillations. PLoS Biol
10:e1001341.
42. Bleicken B, et al. (2010) Influence of hydrocortisone dosage scheme on health-related
quality of life in patients with adrenal insufficiency. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 72:297–304.
43. Tiemensma J, et al. (2014) Psychological morbidity and impaired quality of life in
patients with stable treatment for primary adrenal insufficiency: Cross-sectional study
and review of the literature. Eur J Endocrinol 171:171–182.
44. Løvås K, Loge J-H, Husebye E-S (2002) Subjective health status in Norwegian patients
with Addison’s disease. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 56:581–588.
45. Hahner S, et al. (2007) Impaired subjective health status in 256 patients with adrenal
insufficiency on standard therapy based on cross-sectional analysis. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 92:3912–3922.
46. Erichsen M-M, et al. (2009) Clinical, immunological, and genetic features of autoim-
mune primary adrenal insufficiency: Observations from a Norwegian registry. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 94:4882–4890.
47. De Bucy C, Guignat L, Niati T, Bertherat J, Coste J (2017) Health-related quality of life
of patients with hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis dysregulations: A cohort study.
Eur J Endocrinol 177:1–8.
48. Filipsson H, Monson J-P, Koltowska-Häggström M, Mattsson A, Johannsson G (2006)
The impact of glucocorticoid replacement regimens on metabolic outcome and co-
morbidity in hypopituitary patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 91:3954–3961.
49. Bergthorsdottir R, et al. (2017) Visceral fat and novel biomarkers of cardiovascular
disease in patients with Addison’s disease: A case-control study. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 102:4264–4272.
50. Løvås K, et al. (2003) Replacement of dehydroepiandrosterone in adrenal failure: No
benefit for subjective health status and sexuality in a 9-month, randomized, parallel
group clinical trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88:1112–1118.
51. van der Valk E-S, et al. (2016) Decreased physical activity, reduced QoL and presence
of debilitating fatigue in patients with Addison’s disease. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 85:
354–360.
Kalafatakis et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 17
|
E4099
PHYSIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 52. Ricoux A, et al. (2013) [Oral glucocorticoid-induced psychiatric side effects: Focus on
clinical specificities, incidence, risk factors and treatment]. Rev Med Interne 34:
293–302. French.
53. Gagliardi L, et al. (2014) Continuous subcutaneous hydrocortisone infusion therapy in
Addison’s disease: A randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 99:4149–4157.
54. Oksnes M, et al. (2014) Continuous subcutaneous hydrocortisone infusion versus oral
hydrocortisone replacement for treatment of Addison’s disease: A randomized clin-
ical trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99:1665–1674.
55. Qian X, Droste S-K, Lightman S-L, Reul J-M, Linthorst A-C (2012) Circadian and ul-
tradian rhythms of free glucocorticoid hormone are highly synchronized between the
blood, the subcutaneous tissue, and the brain. Endocrinology 153:4346–4353.
56. Joëls M, Karst H, DeRijk R, de Kloet E-R (2008) The coming out of the brain miner-
alocorticoid receptor. Trends Neurosci 31:1–7.
57. Stavreva D-A, et al. (2009) Ultradian hormone stimulation induces glucocorticoid
receptor-mediated pulses of gene transcription. Nat Cell Biol 11:1093–1102.
58. Sarabdjitsingh R-A, et al. (2014) Ultradian corticosterone pulses balance gluta-
matergic transmission and synaptic plasticity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111:
14265–14270.
59. Sarabdjitsingh R-A, et al. (2010) Stress responsiveness varies over the ultradian glu-
cocorticoid cycle in a brain region-specific manner. Endocrinology 151:5369–5379.
60. Kalafatakis K, et al. (2016) Effects of the pattern of glucocorticoid replacement on
neural processing, emotional reactivity and well-being in healthy male individuals:
Study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. Trials 17:44.
61. Harmer C-J, et al. (2003) Acute SSRI administration affects the processing of social
cues in healthy volunteers. Neuropsychopharmacology 28:148–152.
62. Pringle A, Browning M, Cowen P-J, Harmer C-J (2011) A cognitive neuropsychological
model of antidepressant drug action. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 35:
1586–1592.
63. Dehaene S, Changeux J-P, Naccache L, Sackur J, Sergent C (2006) Conscious, pre-
conscious, and subliminal processing: A testable taxonomy. Trends Cogn Sci 10:
204–211.
64. Brown G-G, et al. (2003) BOLD and perfusion response to finger-thumb apposition
after acetazolamide administration: Differential relationship to global perfusion.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 23:829–837.
65. Spunt R-P, Adolphs R (2017) The neuroscience of understanding the emotions of
others. Neurosci Lett, 10.1016/j.neulet.2017.06.018.
66. Hsu M, Bhatt M, Adolphs R, Tranel D, Camerer C-F (2005) Neural systems responding
to degrees of uncertainty in human decision-making. Science 310:1680–1683.
67. Craig A-D (2009) How do you feel—now? The anterior insula and human awareness.
Nat Rev Neurosci 10:59–70.
68. Hennenlotter A, et al. (2005) A common neural basis for receptive and expressive
communication of pleasant facial affect. Neuroimage 26:581–591.
69. Jabbi M, Swart M, Keysers C (2007) Empathy for positive and negative emotions in the
gustatory cortex. Neuroimage 34:1744–1753.
70. Bechara A, Damasio H, Damasio A-R (2000) Emotion, decision making and the orbi-
tofrontal cortex. Cereb Cortex 10:295–307.
71. Hare T-A, Tottenham N, Davidson M-C, Glover G-H, Casey B-J (2005) Contributions of
amygdala and striatal activity in emotion regulation. Biol Psychiatry 57:624–632.
72. Born J, Späth-Schwalbe E, Schwakenhofer H, Kern W, Fehm H-L (1989) Influences of
corticotropin-releasing hormone, adrenocorticotropin, and cortisol on sleep in nor-
mal man. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 68:904–911.
73. Vandekerckhove M, Cluydts R (2010) The emotional brain and sleep: An intimate
relationship. Sleep Med Rev 14:219–226.
74. Deliens G, Gilson M, Peigneux P (2014) Sleep and the processing of emotions. Exp
Brain Res 232:1403–1414.
75. Payne J-D, Nadel L (2004) Sleep, dreams, and memory consolidation: The role of the
stress hormone cortisol. Learn Mem 11:671–678.
76. Harmer C-J, Duman R-S, Cowen P-J (2017) How do antidepressants work? New per-
spectives for refining future treatment approaches. Lancet Psychiatry 4:409–418.
77. Young K-D, et al. (2016) The effect of mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid receptor
antagonism on autobiographical memory recall and amygdala response to implicit
emotional stimuli. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 19:pyw036.
78. Poldrack R-A, et al. (2008) Guidelines for reporting an fMRI study. Neuroimage 40:
409–414.
79. Jenkinson M, Beckmann C-F, Behrens T-E, Woolrich M-W, Smith S-M (2012) FSL.
Neuroimage 62:782–790.
80. Chen G, Taylor P-A, Cox R-W (2017) Is the statistic value all we should care about in
neuroimaging? Neuroimage 147:952–959.
81. Okell T-W, Chappell M-A, Kelly M-E, Jezzard P (2013) Cerebral blood flow quantifi-
cation using vessel-encoded arterial spin labeling. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 33:
1716–1724.
82. Herscovitch P, Raichle M-E, Kilbourn M-R, Welch M-J (1987) Positron emission tomo-
graphic measurement of cerebral blood flow and permeability-surface area product
of water using [15O]water and [11C]butanol. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 7:527–542.
83. Parkes L-M, Tofts P-S (2002) Improved accuracy of human cerebral blood perfusion
measurements using arterial spin labeling: Accounting for capillary water perme-
ability. Magn Reson Med 48:27–41.
84. Ekman P, Friesen WV (1976) Pictures of Facial Affect (Consulting Psychologists Press,
Palo Alto, CA).
85. Matsumoto D, Ekman P (1988) Japanese and Caucasian Facial Expressions of Emotion
(JACFEE) (Intercultural and Emotion Research Laboratory, Department of Psychology,
San Francisco State University, San Francisco).
86. Jaeggi S-M, Buschkuehl M, Perrig W-J, Meier B (2010) The concurrent validity of the N-
back task as a working memory measure. Memory 18:394–412.
E4100
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1714239115
Kalafatakis et al.
