 Clinical Infectious Diseases
I D S A G U I D E L I N E
Management of Adults With Hospital-acquired and
Ventilator-associated Pneumonia: 2016 Clinical Practice
Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America
and the American Thoracic Society
Andre C. Kalil,1,a Mark L. Metersky,2,a Michael Klompas,3,4 John Muscedere,5 Daniel A. Sweeney,6 Lucy B. Palmer,7 Lena M. Napolitano,8 Naomi P. O’Grady,9
John G. Bartlett,10 Jordi Carratalà,11 Ali A. El Solh,12 Santiago Ewig,13 Paul D. Fey,14 Thomas M. File Jr,15 Marcos I. Restrepo,16 Jason A. Roberts,17,18
Grant W. Waterer,19 Peggy Cruse,20 Shandra L. Knight,20 and Jan L. Brozek21
1Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha; 2Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Connecticut
School of Medicine, Farmington; 3Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, and 4Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; 5Department of Medicine,
Critical Care Program, Queens University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada; 6Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of California, San Diego; 7Department of Medicine,
Division of Pulmonary Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, State University of New York at Stony Brook; 8Department of Surgery, Division of Trauma, Critical Care and Emergency Surgery,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor; 9Department of Critical Care Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, and 10Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland;
11Department of Infectious Diseases, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute, Spanish Network for Research in Infectious Diseases, University of Barcelona,
Spain; 12Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University at Buffalo, Veterans Affairs Western New York Healthcare System, New York;
13Thoraxzentrum Ruhrgebiet, Department of Respiratory and Infectious Diseases, EVK Herne and Augusta-Kranken-Anstalt Bochum, Germany; 14Department of Pathology and Microbiology,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha; 15Summa Health System, Akron, Ohio; 16Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, South Texas Veterans
Health Care System and University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio; 17Burns, Trauma and Critical Care Research Centre, The University of Queensland, 18Royal Brisbane and
Women’s Hospital, Queensland, and 19School of Medicine and Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia; 20Library and Knowledge Services, National Jewish Health,
Denver, Colorado; and 21Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics and Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
It is important to realize that guidelines cannot always account for individual variation among patients. They are not intended to
supplant physician judgment with respect to particular patients or special clinical situations. IDSA considers adherence to these
guidelines to be voluntary, with the ultimate determination regarding their application to be made by the physician in the light
of each patient’s individual circumstances.
These guidelines are intended for use by healthcare professionals who care for patients at risk for hospital-acquired pneumonia
(HAP) and ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), including specialists in infectious diseases, pulmonary diseases, critical care, and
surgeons, anesthesiologists, hospitalists, and any clinicians and healthcare providers caring for hospitalized patients with nosocomial
pneumonia. The panel’s recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of HAP and VAP are based upon evidence derived from
topic-specific systematic literature reviews.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
In this 2016 guideline, the term “hospital-acquired pneumo-
nia” (HAP) denotes an episode of pneumonia not associated
with mechanical ventilation. Thus, patients with HAP and
ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) belong to 2 distinct
groups. The major differences between this guideline and
the 2005 version [1] include the following: the use of the
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development
and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology for the evaluation of
all available evidence (Table 1) [2]; the removal of the concept
of healthcare-associated pneumonia (HCAP); and the recom-
mendation that each hospital generate antibiograms to guide
healthcare professionals with respect to the optimal choice of
antibiotics. In an effort to minimize patient harm and expo-
sure to unnecessary antibiotics and reduce the development of
antibiotic resistance, we recommend that the antibiogram
data be utilized to decrease the unnecessary use of dual
gram-negative and empiric methicillin-resistant Staphylococ-
cus aureus (MRSA) antibiotic treatment. We also recommend
short-course antibiotic therapy for most patients with HAP or
VAP independent of microbial etiology, as well as antibiotic
de-escalation.
Summarized below are the recommendations made in
the 2016 guideline. A detailed description of the methods,
background, and evidence summaries that support each of
the recommendations can be found in the full text of this
guideline.
Received 17 May 2016; accepted 18 May 2016; published online 14 July 2016.
aA. C. K. and M. L. M. contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence: A. C. Kalil, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseas-
es, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5400 (akalil@unmc.edu).
Clinical Infectious Diseases®
2016;63(5):e61–111
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society
of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciw353
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e61
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 MICROBIOLOGIC METHODS TO DIAGNOSE VAP AND
HAP
I. Should Patients With Suspected VAP Be Treated Based on the Results
of Invasive Sampling (ie, Bronchoscopy, Blind Bronchial Sampling)
With Quantitative Culture Results, Noninvasive Sampling (ie,
Endotracheal Aspiration) With Quantitative Culture Results, or
Noninvasive Sampling With Semiquantitative Culture Results?
Recommendation
1. We suggest noninvasive sampling with semiquantitative cultures
to diagnose V
AP, rather than invasive sampling with quantitative
cultures and rather than noninvasive sampling with quantitative
cultures (weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Remarks: Invasive respiratory sampling includes broncho-
scopic techniques (ie, bronchoalveolar lavage [BAL], protect-
ed specimen brush [PSB]) and blind bronchial sampling
(ie, mini-BAL). Noninvasive respiratory sampling refers to
endotracheal aspiration.
II. If Invasive Quantitative Cultures Are Performed, Should Patients With
Suspected VAP Whose Culture Results Are Below the Diagnostic Threshold
for VAP (PSB With <103 Colony-Forming Units [CFU]/mL, BAL With <104 CFU/
mL) Have Their Antibiotics Withheld Rather Than Continued?
Recommendation
1. Noninvasive sampling with semiquantitative cultures is the
preferred methodology to diagnose VAP (see section I); how-
ever, the panel recognizes that invasive quantitative cultures
will occasionally be performed by some clinicians. For pa-
tients with suspected VAP whose invasive quantitative cul-
ture results are below the diagnostic threshold for VAP, we
suggest that antibiotics be withheld rather than continued
(weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: This recommendation places a high
value on avoiding unnecessary harm and cost.
Remarks: Clinical factors should also be considered because
they may alter the decision of whether to withhold or contin-
ue antibiotics. These include the likelihood of an alternative
source of infection, prior antimicrobial therapy at the time of
culture, degree of clinical suspicion, signs of severe sepsis,
and evidence of clinical improvement.
III. In Patients With Suspected HAP (Non-VAP), Should Treatment Be
Guided by the Results of Microbiologic Studies Performed on
Respiratory Samples, or Should Treatment Be Empiric?
Recommendation
1. We suggest that patients with suspected HAP (non-VAP) be
treated according to the results of microbiologic studies per-
formed on respiratory samples obtained noninvasively, rath-
er than being treated empirically (weak recommendation,
very low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: The suggestion places a high value
on the potential to accurately target antibiotic therapy and
then deescalate antibiotic therapy based upon respiratory
and blood culture results. Minimizing resource use by not
obtaining respiratory cultures is given a lower value.
Remarks: Noninvasive methods to obtain respiratory sam-
ples include the following: spontaneous expectoration, spu-
tum induction, nasotracheal suctioning in a patient who is
unable to cooperate to produce a sputum sample, and endo-
tracheal aspiration in a patient with HAP who subsequently
requires mechanical ventilation. The panel recognizes that
for some patients in whom a respiratory sample cannot be
obtained noninvasively, there may be factors which could
prompt consideration of obtaining samples invasively.
THE USE OF BIOMARKERS AND THE CLINICAL
PULMONARY INFECTION SCORE TO DIAGNOSE
VAP AND HAP
IV. In Patients With Suspected HAP/VAP, Should Procalcitonin (PCT)
Plus Clinical Criteria or Clinical Criteria Alone Be Used to Decide
Whether or Not to Initiate Antibiotic Therapy?
Recommendation
1. For patients with suspected HAP/VAP, we recommend using
clinical criteria alone, rather than using serum PCT plus clinical
criteria, to decide whether or not to initiate antibiotic therapy
(strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
V. In Patients With Suspected HAP/VAP, Should Soluble Triggering
Receptor Expressed on Myeloid Cells (sTREM-1) Plus Clinical Criteria
or Clinical Criteria Alone Be Used to Decide Whether or Not to Initiate
Antibiotic Therapy?
Recommendation
1. For patients with suspected HAP/VAP, we recommend
using clinical criteria alone, rather than using bronchoalveo-
lar lavage fluid (BALF) sTREM-1 plus clinical criteria, to
Table 1.
Interpretation of Strong and Weak (Conditional) Recommendations
Strong Recommendation
Weak (Conditional)
Recommendation
Patients
Most individuals in this
situation would want the
recommended course of
action, and only a small
proportion would not.
The majority of individuals in
this situation would want
the suggested course of
action, but many would
not.
Clinicians
Most individuals should
receive the intervention.
Adherence to this
recommendation
according to the guideline
could be used as a quality
criterion or performance
indicator. Formal decision
aids are not likely to be
needed to help individuals
make decisions consistent
with their values and
preferences.
Recognize that different
choices will be appropriate
for individual patients and
that you must help each
patient arrive at a
management decision
consistent with his or her
values and preferences.
Decision aids may be
useful in helping
individuals to make
decisions consistent with
their values and
preferences.
Policy makers
The recommendation can be
adopted as policy in most
situations.
Policymaking will require
substantial debate and
involvement of various
stakeholders.
e62 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 decide whether or not to initiate antibiotic therapy (strong
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
VI. In Patients With Suspected HAP/VAP, Should C-Reactive Protein
(CRP) Plus Clinical Criteria, or Clinical Criteria Alone, Be Used to
Decide Whether or Not to Initiate Antibiotic Therapy?
Recommendation
1. For patients with suspected HAP/VAP, we recommend
using clinical criteria alone rather than using CRP
plus clinical criteria, to decide whether or not to initiate
antibiotic therapy (weak recommendation, low-quality
evidence).
VII. In Patients With Suspected HAP/VAP, Should the Modified Clinical
Pulmonary Infection Score (CPIS) Plus Clinical Criteria, or Clinical
Criteria Alone, Be Used to Decide Whether or Not to Initiate Antibiotic
Therapy?
Recommendation
1. For patients with suspected HAP/VAP, we suggest using
clinical criteria alone, rather than using CPIS plus clinical
criteria, to decide whether or not to initiate antibiotic therapy
(weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
TREATMENT OF VENTILATOR-ASSOCIATED
TRACHEOBRONCHITIS
VIII. Should Patients With Ventilator-Associated Tracheobronchitis
(VAT) Receive Antibiotic Therapy?
Recommendation
1. In patients with VAT, we suggest not providing antibiotic
therapy (weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
INITIAL TREATMENT OF VAP AND HAP
IX. Should Selection of an Empiric Antibiotic Regimen for VAP Be
Guided by Local Antibiotic-Resistance Data?
Recommendations
1. We recommend that all hospitals regularly generate and dis-
seminate a local antibiogram, ideally one that is specific to
their intensive care population(s) if possible.
2. We recommend that empiric treatment regimens be in-
formed by the local distribution of pathogens associated
with VAP and their antimicrobial susceptibilities.
Values and preferences: These recommendations place a high
value on targeting the specific pathogens associated with VAP
as narrowly as possible to assure adequate treatment while
minimizing overtreatment and its undesirable consequences.
Remarks: The frequency with which the distribution of path-
ogens and their antimicrobial susceptibilities are updated
should be determined by the institution. Considerations
should include their rate of change, resources, and the amount
of data available for analysis.
X. What Antibiotics Are Recommended for Empiric Treatment of
Clinically Suspected VAP?
Recommendations (See Table 3 for Specific Antibiotic
Recommendations)
1. In patients with suspected VAP, we recommend including
coverage for S. aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and other
gram-negative bacilli in all empiric regimens (strong recom-
mendation, low-quality evidence).
i. We suggest including an agent active against MRSA for the
empiric treatment of suspected VAP only in patients with
any of the following: a risk factor for antimicrobial resistance
(Table 2), patients being treated in units where >10%–20%
of S. aureus isolates are methicillin resistant, and patients in
units where the prevalence of MRSA is not known (weak
recommendation, very low-quality evidence).
ii. We suggest including an agent active against methicillin-
sensitive S. aureus (MSSA) (and not MRSA) for the empiric
treatment of suspected VAP in patients without risk factors
for antimicrobial resistance, who are being treated in ICUs
where <10%–20% of S. aureus isolates are methicillin resis-
tant (weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence).
2. If empiric coverage for MRSA is indicated, we recommend
either vancomycin or linezolid (strong recommendation,
moderate-quality evidence).
3. When empiric treatment that includes coverage for MSSA
(and not MRSA) is indicated, we suggest a regimen including
piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime, levofloxacin, imipenem,
or meropenem (weak recommendation, very low-quality evi-
dence). Oxacillin, nafcillin, or cefazolin are preferred agents
for treatment of proven MSSA, but are not necessary for
the empiric treatment of VAP if one of the above agents is
used.
4. We suggest prescribing 2 antipseudomonal antibiotics from
different classes for the empiric treatment of suspected VAP
only in patients with any of the following: a risk factor for
Table 2.
Risk Factors for Multidrug-Resistant Pathogens
Risk factors for MDR VAP
Prior intravenous antibiotic use within 90 d
Septic shock at time of VAP
ARDS preceding VAP
Five or more days of hospitalization prior to the occurrence of VAP
Acute renal replacement therapy prior to VAP onset
Risk factors for MDR HAP
Prior intravenous antibiotic use within 90 d
Risk factors for MRSA VAP/HAP
Prior intravenous antibiotic use within 90 d
Risk factors for MDR Pseudomonas VAP/HAP
Prior intravenous antibiotic use within 90 d
Abbreviations: ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; HAP, hospital-acquired
pneumonia; MDR, multidrug resistant; MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus;
VAP, ventilator-associated pneumonia.
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e63
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 antimicrobial resistance (Table 2), patients in units where
>10% of gram-negative isolates are resistant to an agent
being considered for monotherapy, and patients in an ICU
where local antimicrobial susceptibility rates are not available
(weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
5. We suggest prescribing one antibiotic active against P. aer-
uginosa for the empiric treatment of suspected VAP in pa-
tients without risk factors for antimicrobial resistance who
are being treated in ICUs where ≤10% of gram-negative iso-
lates are resistant to the agent being considered for mono-
therapy (weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
6. In patients with suspected VAP, we suggest avoiding amino-
glycosides if alternative agents with adequate gram-negative
activity are available (weak recommendation, low-quality
evidence).
7. In patients with suspected VAP, we suggest avoiding colistin
if alternative agents with adequate gram-negative activity are
available (weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: These recommendations are a com-
promise between the competing goals of providing early ap-
propriate antibiotic coverage and avoiding superfluous
treatment that may lead to adverse drug effects, Clostridium
difficile infections, antibiotic resistance, and increased cost.
Remarks: Risk factors for antimicrobial resistance are pro-
vided in Table 2. The 10%–20% threshold for deciding
whether or not to target MRSA and the 10% threshold for
deciding whether or not to prescribe 1 antipseudomonal
agent or 2 were chosen by the panel with a goal of trying
to assure that ≥95% of patient receive empiric therapy ac-
tive against their likely pathogens; when implementing
these recommendations, individual ICUs may elect to mod-
ify these thresholds. If patient has structural lung disease in-
creasing
the
risk
of
gram-negative
infection
(ie,
bronchiectasis or cystic fibrosis), 2 antipseudomonal agents
are recommended.
XI. Should Selection of an Empiric Antibiotic Regimen for HAP
(Non-VAP) Be Guided by Local Antibiotic Resistance Data?
Recommendations
1. We recommend that all hospitals regularly generate and dis-
seminate a local antibiogram, ideally one that is tailored to
their HAP population, if possible.
2. We recommend that empiric antibiotic regimens be based
upon the local distribution of pathogens associated with
HAP and their antimicrobial susceptibilities.
Remarks: The frequency with which the distribution of path-
ogens and their antimicrobial susceptibilities are updated
should be determined by the institution. Considerations
should include their rate of change, resources, and the
amount of data available for analysis.
Table 3.
Suggested Empiric Treatment Options for Clinically Suspected Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia in Units Where Empiric Methicillin-Resistant
Staphylococcus aureus Coverage and Double Antipseudomonal/Gram-Negative Coverage Are Appropriate
A. Gram-Positive Antibiotics With
MRSA Activity
B. Gram-Negative Antibiotics With
Antipseudomonal Activity: β-Lactam–Based Agents
C. Gram-Negative Antibiotics With Antipseudomonal
Activity: Non-β-Lactam–Based Agents
Glycopeptidesa
Vancomycin 15 mg/kg IV q8–12h
(consider a loading dose of 25–30
mg/kg × 1 for severe illness)
Antipseudomonal penicillinsb
Piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g IV q6hb
Fluoroquinolones
Ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV q8h
Levofloxacin 750 mg IV q24h
OR
OR
OR
Oxazolidinones
Linezolid 600 mg IV q12h
Cephalosporinsb
Cefepime 2 g IV q8h
Ceftazidime 2 g IV q8h
Aminoglycosidesa,c
Amikacin 15–20 mg/kg IV q24h
Gentamicin 5–7 mg/kg IV q24h
Tobramycin 5–7 mg/kg IV q24h
OR
OR
Carbapenemsb
Imipenem 500 mg IV q6hd
Meropenem 1 g IV q8h
Polymyxinsa,e
Colistin 5 mg/kg IV × 1 (loading dose) followed by 2.5
mg × (1.5 × CrCl + 30) IV q12h (maintenance dose) [135]
Polymyxin B 2.5–3.0 mg/kg/d divided in 2 daily IV doses
OR
Monobactamsf
Aztreonam 2 g IV q8h
Choose one gram-positive option from column A, one gram-negative option from column B, and one gram-negative option from column C. Note that the initial doses suggested in this table may
need to be modified for patients with hepatic or renal dysfunction.
Abbreviations: CrCl, creatinine clearance; IV, intravenous; MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
a Drug levels and adjustment of doses and/or intervals required.
b Extended infusions may be appropriate. Please see section XIII on pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic optimization of antibiotic therapy.
c On meta-analysis, aminoglycoside regimens were associated with lower clinical response rates with no differences in mortality.
d The dose may need to be lowered in patients weighing <70 kg to prevent seizures.
e Polymyxins should be reserved for settings where there is a high prevalence of multidrug resistance and local expertise in using this medication. Dosing is based on colistin-base activity (CBA);
for example, One million IU of colistin is equivalent to about 30 mg of CBA, which corresponds to about 80 mg of the prodrug colistimethate. Polymyxin B (1 mg = 10 000 units) [136].
f In the absence of other options, it is acceptable to use aztreonam as an adjunctive agent with another β-lactam–based agent because it has different targets within the bacterial cell wall [137].
e64 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 XII. What Antibiotics Are Recommended for Empiric Treatment of
Clinically Suspected HAP (Non-VAP)?
Recommendations (See Table 4 for Specific Antibiotic
Recommendations)
1. For patients being treated empirically for HAP, we recom-
mend prescribing an antibiotic with activity against S. aureus
(strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence). (See
below for recommendations regarding empiric coverage of
MRSA vs MSSA.)
i. For patients with HAP who are being treated empirically
and have either a risk factor for MRSA infection (ie,
prior intravenous antibiotic use within 90 days, hospitali-
zation in a unit where >20% of S. aureus isolates are meth-
icillin resistant, or the prevalence of MRSA is not known, or
who are at high risk for mortality, we suggest prescribing an
antibiotic with activity against MRSA (weak recommenda-
tion, very low-quality evidence). (Risk factors for mortality
include need for ventilatory support due to HAP and septic
shock).
ii. For patients with HAP who require empiric coverage for
MRSA, we recommend vancomycin or linezolid rather
than an alternative antibiotic (strong recommendation,
low-quality evidence).
iii. For patients with HAP who are being treated empirical-
ly and have no risk factors for MRSA infection and are
not at high risk of mortality, we suggest prescribing an
antibiotic with activity against MSSA. When empiric treat-
ment that includes coverage for MSSA (and not MRSA) is
indicated, we suggest a regimen including piperacillin-tazo-
bactam, cefepime, levofloxacin, imipenem, or meropenem.
Table 4.
Recommended Initial Empiric Antibiotic Therapy for Hospital-Acquired Pneumonia (Non-Ventilator-Associated Pneumonia)
Not at High Risk of Mortalitya and no
Factors Increasing the Likelihood of
MRSAb,c
Not at High Risk of Mortalitya but With Factors
Increasing the Likelihood of MRSAb,c
High Risk of Mortality or Receipt of Intravenous
Antibiotics During the Prior 90 da,c
One of the following:
One of the following:
Two of the following, avoid 2 β-lactams:
Piperacillin-tazobactamd 4.5 g IV q6h
Piperacillin-tazobactamd 4.5 g IV q6h
Piperacillin-tazobactamd 4.5 g IV q6h
OR
OR
OR
Cefepimed 2 g IV q8h
Cefepimed or ceftazidimed 2 g IV q8h
Cefepimed or ceftazidimed 2 g IV q8h
OR
OR
OR
Levofloxacin 750 mg IV daily
Levofloxacin 750 mg IV daily
Levofloxacin 750 mg IV daily
Ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV q8h
Ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV q8h
OR
OR
Imipenemd 500 mg IV q6h
Imipenemd 500 mg IV q6h
Imipenemd 500 mg IV q6h
Meropenemd 1 g IV q8h
Meropenemd 1 g IV q8h
Meropenemd 1 g IV q8h
OR
OR
Aztreonam 2 g IV q8h
Amikacin 15–20 mg/kg IV daily
Gentamicin 5–7 mg/kg IV daily
Tobramycin 5–7 mg/kg IV daily
OR
Aztreoname 2 g IV q8h
Plus:
Vancomycin 15 mg/kg IV q8–12h with goal to target
15–20 mg/mL trough level (consider a loading
dose of 25–30 mg/kg × 1 for severe illness)
Plus:
Vancomycin 15 mg/kg IV q8–12h with goal to target 15–20 mg/mL
trough level (consider a loading dose of 25–30 mg/kg IV × 1 for
severe illness)
OR
OR
Linezolid 600 mg IV q12h
Linezolid 600 mg IV q12h
If MRSA coverage is not going to be used, include coverage for MSSA.
Options include:
Piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime, levofloxacin, imipenem,
meropenem. Oxacillin, nafcillin, and cefazolin are preferred for the
treatment of proven MSSA, but would ordinarily not be used in an
empiric regimen for HAP.
If patient has severe penicillin allergy and aztreonam is going to be used
instead of any β-lactam–based antibiotic, include coverage for MSSA.
Abbreviations: HAP, hospital-acquired pneumonia; IV, intravenous; MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; MSSA, methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus.
a Risk factors for mortality include need for ventilatory support due to pneumonia and septic shock.
b Indications for MRSA coverage include intravenous antibiotic treatment during the prior 90 days, and treatment in a unit where the prevalence of MRSA among S. aureus isolates is not known
or is >20%. Prior detection of MRSA by culture or non-culture screening may also increase the risk of MRSA. The 20% threshold was chosen to balance the need for effective initial antibiotic
therapy against the risks of excessive antibiotic use; hence, individual units can elect to adjust the threshold in accordance with local values and preferences. If MRSA coverage is omitted, the
antibiotic regimen should include coverage for MSSA.
c If patient has factors increasing the likelihood of gram-negative infection, 2 antipseudomonal agents are recommended. If patient has structural lung disease increasing the risk of gram-
negative infection (ie, bronchiectasis or cystic fibrosis), 2 antipseudomonal agents are recommended. A high-quality Gram stain from a respiratory specimen with numerous and
predominant gram-negative bacilli provides further support for the diagnosis of a gram-negative pneumonia, including fermenting and non-glucose-fermenting microorganisms.
d Extended infusions may be appropriate.
e In the absence of other options, it is acceptable to use aztreonam as an adjunctive agent with another β-lactam–based agent because it has different targets within the bacterial cell wall [137].
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e65
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Oxacillin, nafcillin, or cefazolin are preferred for the treat-
ment of proven MSSA, but are not necessary for empiric
coverage of HAP if one of the above agents is used (weak
recommendation, very low-quality evidence).
2. For patients with HAP who are being treated empirically,
we recommend prescribing antibiotics with activity against
P. aeruginosa and other gram-negative bacilli (strong recom-
mendation, very low-quality evidence).
i. For patients with HAP who are being treated empirically
and have factors increasing the likelihood for Pseudomo-
nas or other gram-negative infection (ie, prior intravenous
antibiotic use within 90 days; also see Remarks) or a high
risk for mortality, we suggest prescribing antibiotics from
2 different classes with activity against P. aeruginosa (weak
recommendation, very low-quality evidence). (Risk factors
for mortality include need for ventilatory support due
to HAP and septic shock). All other patients with HAP
who are being treated empirically may be prescribed a single
antibiotic with activity against P. aeruginosa.
ii. For patients with HAP who are being treated empirically,
we recommend not using an aminoglycoside as the sole
antipseudomonal agent (strong recommendation, very
low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: These recommendations are a
compromise between the competing goals of providing
early appropriate antibiotic coverage and avoiding super-
fluous treatment that may lead to adverse drug effects,
C. difficile infections, antibiotic resistance, and increased cost.
Remarks: The 20% threshold for deciding whether or not
to target MRSA or MSSAwas chosen in an effort to balance
theneedforeffectiveinitialantibiotictherapyagainsttherisks
of excessive antibioticuse;when implementingthese recom-
mendations,individualunitsmayelecttomodifythisthresh-
old.Ifpatienthasstructurallungdiseaseincreasingtheriskof
gram-negativeinfection(ie,bronchiectasisorcystic fibrosis),
2antipseudomonalagentsarerecommended.Ahigh-quality
Gram stain from a respiratory specimen with numerous and
predominant gram-negative bacilli provides further support
for the diagnosis of a gram-negative pneumonia, including
fermenting and non-glucose-fermenting microorganisms.
PHARMACOKINETIC/PHARMACODYNAMIC
OPTIMIZATION OF ANTIBIOTIC THERAPY
XIII. Should Antibiotic Dosing Be Determined by Pharmacokinetic/
Pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) Data or the Manufacturer’s Prescribing
Information in Patients With HAP/VAP?
Recommendation
1. For patients with HAP/VAP, we suggest that antibiotic dos-
ing be determined using PK/PD data, rather than the manu-
facturer’s prescribing information (weak recommendation,
very low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: This recommendation places a high
value on improving clinical outcome by optimization of ther-
apy; it places a lower value on burden and cost.
Remarks: PK/PD-optimized dosing refers to the use of anti-
biotic blood concentrations, extended and continuous infu-
sions, and weight-based dosing for certain antibiotics.
ROLE OF INHALED ANTIBIOTIC THERAPY
XIV. Should Patients With VAP Due to Gram-Negative Bacilli Be Treated
With a Combination of Inhaled and Systemic Antibiotics, or Systemic
Antibiotics Alone?
Recommendation
1. For patients with VAP due to gram-negative bacilli that are
susceptible to only aminoglycosides or polymyxins (colistin
or polymyxin B), we suggest both inhaled and systemic anti-
biotics, rather than systemic antibiotics alone (weak recom-
mendation, very low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: This recommendation places a high
value on achieving clinical cure and survival; it places a lower
value on burden and cost.
Remarks: It is reasonable to consider adjunctive inhaled anti-
biotic therapy as a treatment of last resort for patients who are
not responding to intravenous antibiotics alone, whether the
infecting organism is or is not multidrug resistant (MDR).
PATHOGEN-SPECIFIC THERAPY
XV. What Antibiotics Should Be Used for the Treatment for MRSA
HAP/VAP?
Recommendation
1. We recommend that MRSA HAP/VAP be treated with
either vancomycin or linezolid rather than other antibiotics
or antibiotic combinations (strong recommendation, moder-
ate-quality evidence).
Remarks: The choice between vancomycin and linezolid may
be guided by patient-specific factors such as blood cell
counts, concurrent prescriptions for serotonin-reuptake in-
hibitors, renal function, and cost.
XVI. Which Antibiotic Should Be Used to Treat Patients With HAP/VAP
Due to P. aeruginosa?
Recommendations
1. For patients with HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa, we recom-
mendthatthechoiceofanantibioticfordefinitive(notempiric)
therapy be based upon the results of antimicrobial susceptibi-
lity testing (strong recommendation, low-quality evidence).
2. For patients with HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa, we recom-
mend against aminoglycoside monotherapy (strong recom-
mendation, very low-quality evidence).
Remarks: Routine antimicrobial susceptibility testing should
include assessment of the sensitivity of the P. aeruginosa
e66 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 isolate to polymyxins (colistin or polymyxin B) in settings that
have a high prevalence of extensively resistant organisms.
XVII. Should Monotherapy or Combination Therapy Be Used to Treat
Patients With HAP/VAP Due to P. aeruginosa?
Recommendations
1. For patients with HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa who are
not in septic shock or at a high risk for death, and for
whom the results of antibiotic susceptibility testing are
known, we recommend monotherapy using an antibiotic to
which the isolate is susceptible rather than combination ther-
apy (strong recommendation, low-quality evidence).
2. For patients with HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa who re-
main in septic shock or at a high risk for death when the re-
sults of antibiotic susceptibility testing are known, we suggest
combination therapy using 2 antibiotics to which the isolate
is susceptible rather than monotherapy (weak recommenda-
tion, very low-quality evidence).
3. For patients with HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa, we recom-
mend against aminoglycoside monotherapy (strong recom-
mendation, very low-quality evidence).
Remarks: High risk of death in the meta-regression analysis
was defined as mortality risk >25%; low risk of death is defined
as mortality risk <15%. For a patient whose septic shock
resolves when antimicrobial sensitivities are known, continued
combination therapy is not recommended.
XVIII. Which Antibiotic Should Be Used to Treat Patients With HAP/VAP
Due to Extended-Spectrum β-Lactamase (ESBL)–Producing Gram-
Negative Bacilli?
Recommendation
1. For patients with HAP/VAP due to ESBL-producing gram-
negative bacilli, we recommend that the choice of an antibiotic
for definitive (not empiric) therapy be based upon the results of
antimicrobial susceptibility testing and patient-specific factors
(strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence).
Remarks: Patient-specific factors that should be considered
when selecting an antimicrobial agent include allergies and co-
morbidities that may confer an increased risk of side effects.
XIX. Which Antibiotic Should Be Used to Treat Patients With HAP/VAP
Due to Acinetobacter Species?
Recommendations
1. In patients with HAP/VAP caused by Acinetobacter species,
we suggest treatment with either a carbapenem or ampicillin/
sulbactam if the isolate is susceptible to these agents (weak
recommendation, low-quality evidence).
2. In patients with HAP/VAP caused by Acinetobacter species
that is sensitive only to polymyxins, we recommend intrave-
nous polymyxin (colistin or polymyxin B) (strong recommenda-
tion, low-quality evidence), and we suggest adjunctive inhaled
colistin (weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
3. In patients with HAP/VAP caused by Acinetobacter species
that is sensitive only to colistin, we suggest not using adjunc-
tive rifampicin (weak recommendation, moderate-quality
evidence).
4. In patients with HAP/VAP caused by Acinetobacter species,
we recommend against the use of tigecycline (strong recom-
mendation, low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: These recommendations place a rela-
tively higher value on avoiding potential adverse effects due
to the use of combination therapy with rifampicin and colistin,
over achieving an increased microbial eradication rate, as erad-
ication rate was not associated with improved clinical outcome.
Remarks: Selection of an appropriate antibiotic for definitive
(nonempiric) therapy requires antimicrobial susceptibility
testing.
XX. Which Antibiotic Should Be Used to Treat Patients With HAP/VAP
Due to Carbapenem-Resistant Pathogens?
Recommendation
1. In patients with HAP/VAP caused by a carbapenem-resis-
tant pathogen that is sensitive only to polymyxins, we recom-
mend intravenous polymyxins (colistin or polymyxin B)
(strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence), and
we suggest adjunctive inhaled colistin (weak recommenda-
tion, low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: These recommendations place a
high value on achieving clinical cure and survival; they
place a lower value on burden and cost.
Remarks: Inhaled colistin may have potential pharmacoki-
netic advantages compared to inhaled polymyxin B, and
clinical evidence based on controlled studies has also
shown that inhaled colistin may be associated with improved
clinical outcomes. The clinical evidence for inhaled poly-
myxin B is mostly from anecdotal and uncontrolled studies;
we are therefore not suggesting use of inhaled polymyxin
B. Colistin for inhalation should be administered promptly
after being mixed with sterile water. This recommendation
was made by the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) after a report that a cystic fibrosis patient died after
being treated with a premixed colistin formulation [3]. Intra-
venous polymyxin B may have potential pharmacokinetic
advantages compared to intravenous colistin, but clinical
data are lacking in patients with HAP/VAP.
LENGTH OF THERAPY
XXI. Should Patients With VAP Receive 7 Days or 8–15 Days of Antibiotic
Therapy?
Recommendation
1. For patients with VAP, we recommend a 7-day course of an-
timicrobial therapy rather than a longer duration (strong rec-
ommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e67
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Remarks: There exist situations in which a shorter or longer
duration of antibiotics may be indicated, depending upon the
rate of improvement of clinical, radiologic, and laboratory
parameters.
XXII. What Is the Optimal Duration of Antibiotic Therapy for HAP
(Non-VAP)?
Recommendation
1. For patients with HAP, we recommend a 7-day course of
antimicrobial therapy (strong recommendation, very low-
quality evidence).
Remarks: There exist situations in which a shorter or longer
duration of antibiotics may be indicated, depending upon the
rate of improvement of clinical, radiologic, and laboratory
parameters.
XXIII. Should Antibiotic Therapy Be De-escalated or Fixed in Patients
With HAP/VAP?
Recommendation
1. For patients with HAP/VAP, we suggest that antibiotic ther-
apy be de-escalated rather than fixed (weak recommendation,
very low-quality evidence).
Remarks: De-escalation refers to changing an empiric
broad-spectrum antibiotic regimen to a narrower anti-
biotic regimen by changing the antimicrobial agent or
changing from combination therapy to monotherapy. In
contrast, fixed antibiotic therapy refers to maintaining
a broad-spectrum antibiotic regimen until therapy is
completed.
XXIV. Should Discontinuation of Antibiotic Therapy Be Based Upon PCT
Levels Plus Clinical Criteria or Clinical Criteria Alone in Patients With
HAP/VAP?
Recommendation
1. For patients with HAP/VAP, we suggest using PCT levels
plus clinical criteria to guide the discontinuation of antibiotic
therapy, rather than clinical criteria alone (weak recommen-
dation, low-quality evidence).
Remarks: It is not known if the benefits of using PCT levels
to determine whether or not to discontinue antibiotic thera-
py exist in settings where standard antimicrobial therapy for
VAP is already 7 days or less.
XXV. Should Discontinuation of Antibiotic Therapy Be Based Upon the
CPIS Plus Clinical Criteria or Clinical Criteria Alone in Patients With
Suspected HAP/VAP?
Recommendation
1. For patients with suspected HAP/VAP, we suggest not using
the CPIS to guide the discontinuation of antibiotic therapy
(weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
INTRODUCTION
Despite advances in the understanding of contributing causes
and prevention, HAP and VAP continue to be frequent compli-
cations of hospital care. Together, they are among the most
common hospital-acquired infections (HAIs), accounting for
22% of all HAIs in a multistate point-prevalence survey [4]. Al-
though hospital-reported data from the National Healthcare
Safety Network suggest that VAP rates have been declining [5,
6], recently published data from a randomly selected national
sample demonstrated that approximately 10% of patients who
required mechanical ventilation were diagnosed with VAP and
that this rate has not declined over the past decade [7].
These infections negatively impact important patient out-
comes. While all-cause mortality associated with VAP has
been reported to range from 20% to 50%, the mortality directly
related to VAP is debated; a recent meta-analysis derived from
randomized VAP prevention studies estimated the attributable
mortality at 13% [8]. There is little controversy, however, re-
garding the tremendous resource use and prolonged hospital
length of stay related to VAP. Two recent studies estimated
that VAP prolongs length of mechanical ventilation by 7.6 to
11.5 days and prolongs hospitalization by 11.5 to 13.1 days com-
pared to similar patients without VAP [9, 10]. The excess cost as-
sociated with VAP was estimated to be approximately $40 000 per
patient [10].
Even in HAP, generally considered to be less severe than
VAP, serious complications occur in approximately 50% of pa-
tients [11],including respiratory failure, pleural effusions, septic
shock, renal failure, and empyema. This is particularly seen
among patients who develop HAP in the intensive care unit
(ICU), where the mortality rate approaches that of patients
with VAP [11, 12].
The last American Thoracic Society (ATS)/Infectious Diseas-
es Society of America (IDSA) HAP/VAP guidelines, published
in 2005 [1], provided evidence-based recommendations for the
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of HCAP, HAP, and VAP.
Since 2005, new studies have provided additional insights into
diagnosis and treatment of these conditions. Furthermore, in
the 11 years since the publication of these guidelines, there
have been advances in evidence-based guideline methodology.
For these reasons, the ATS and the IDSA have collaborated to
create updated guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of
HAP and VAP.
Scope and Purpose
The purpose of this document is to provide evidence-based
guidance on the most effective diagnosis and management of
nonimmunocompromised patients with HAP/VAP. Patients
with immunosuppression who are at risk for opportunistic pul-
monary infection represent a special population that often re-
quires an alternative approach to diagnosis and treatment.
While many of the concepts addressed in these guidelines
e68 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 might be applicable to immunosuppressed patients, the recom-
mendations are not intended for such patients. The target audi-
ence for these guidelines includes healthcare professionals who
care for patients at risk for HAP and VAP, including specialists
in infectious diseases, pulmonary diseases, critical care, and sur-
geons, anesthesiologists, hospitalists, and any clinicians and
healthcare providers caring for hospitalized patients with noso-
comial pneumonia. This document may also serve as the basis
for development and implementation of locally adapted
guidelines.
To determine the scope of the current guidelines, the panel
considered whether or not there were new data that could
lead to a change in recommendations since the last ATS/
IDSA guidelines were published. We also considered the avail-
ability of more recent guidelines from other organizations to
avoid needless redundancy. Based on these considerations, the
panel agreed that the guidelines on the prevention of VAP ini-
tially published by the Society for Healthcare and Epidemiology
of America (SHEA) in 2008 [13], and updated in 2014 [14],
made it unnecessary to include prevention recommendations
in the present guidelines. The panel initially agreed that updated
recommendations regarding the diagnosis and treatment of
HCAP, HAP, and VAP were needed, given the existence of im-
portant new evidence since the publication of the prior guide-
lines in 2005.
Healthcare-Associated Pneumonia
The rationale for inclusion of the HCAP designation with the
HAP/VAP guidelines in 2005 was that patients with HCAP
were thought to be at high risk for MDR organisms by virtue
of their contact with the healthcare system. Therefore, due to
both the patients’ contact with the healthcare system and the
presumed high risk of MDR pathogens, guidelines for these pa-
tients were included with guidelines for HAP and VAP, the
HAPs. However, in subsequent years, these 2 rationales for in-
cluding HCAP with the HAP/VAP recommendations have
come into question. There is increasing evidence from a grow-
ing number of studies that many patients defined as having
HCAP are not at high risk for MDR pathogens [15–19]. Fur-
thermore, although interaction with the healthcare system is po-
tentially a risk for MDR pathogens, underlying patient
characteristics are also important independent determinants
of risk for MDR pathogens [15–17]. Even if HCAP would be
considered as a separate clinical entity, it was thought that
this could be included in the upcoming community-acquired
pneumonia (CAP) guidelines because patients with HCAP,
like those with CAP, frequently present from the community
and are initially cared for in emergency departments. Finally,
in light of the more recent data regarding the HCAP population,
the panel anticipated that recommendations regarding coverage
for MDR pathogens among community-dwelling patients who
develop pneumonia would likely be based on validated risk
factors for MDR pathogens, not solely on whether or not the
patient had previous contacts with the healthcare system. For
these reasons, the panel unanimously decided that HCAP
should not be included in the HAP/VAP guidelines.
Definitions
The panel agreed that the definitions of HAP and VAP, as de-
lineated in the 2005 guidelines [1], are clinically useful and
generally accepted; therefore, the panel did not consider
amending them. Pneumonia was defined in the 2005 document
as the presence of “new lung infiltrate plus clinical evidence
that the infiltrate is of an infectious origin, which include the
new onset of fever, purulent sputum, leukocytosis, and decline
in oxygenation.” Nonetheless, the panel recognizes that there is
no gold standard for the diagnosis of HAP or VAP. Further-
more, in the 2005 document and this update, HAP is defined
as a pneumonia not incubating at the time of hospital admis-
sion and occurring 48 hours or more after admission. VAP is
defined as a pneumonia occurring >48 hours after endotracheal
intubation.
Much of the literature on this subject is complicated by in-
consistent usage of the term HAP, with some using the term
to denote any pneumonia developing in the hospital, and others
excluding VAP from the HAP designation. In this document,
the term “HAP” will denote episodes of pneumonia not associ-
ated with mechanical ventilation. Thus, HAP and VAP patients
will belong to 2 mutually exclusive groups. In using this de-
finition, we can avoid the use of the cumbersome term “non-
ventilator-associated HAP,” with occasional exceptions in the
interest of clarity (eg, section headings or key tables).
We note the new entities of ventilator-associated events (in-
cluding ventilator-associated conditions and infection-related
ventilator-associated complications) introduced by the US Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention as potential metrics to
assess the quality of care provided to ventilated patients [20].
While the measurement of these events may be a useful concept
for trending and benchmarking quality, these definitions were
designed for the purposes of surveillance and quality improve-
ment at the population level and not to aid in diagnosis and
treatment decisions at the bedside. The panel therefore did not
consider these definitions for the purposes of these guidelines.
METHODOLOGY
Guideline Panel Composition
The IDSA and ATS each elected one co-chair to lead the guide-
line panel. Dr Andre Kalil was elected to represent the IDSA
and Dr Mark Metersky was elected to represent the ATS. A
total of 18 subject-matter experts comprised the full panel,
which included specialists in infectious diseases, pulmonary
medicine, critical care medicine, laboratory medicine, microbi-
ology, and pharmacology as well as a guideline methodologist.
Two other societies, the Society of Critical Care Medicine
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e69
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 (SCCM) and the SHEA, provided representatives with expertise
in HAP and/or VAP. An expert in guideline methodology,
Dr Jan Brozek, oversaw all methodological aspects of the guide-
lines. Ms Peggy Cruse, MLIS, and Ms Shandra L. Knight, MS,
worked as the librarians in charge of all issues related to the sys-
tematic identification of scientific evidence and literature for
all PICO (Patient/Population [P]; Intervention/Indicator[I];
Comparator/Control[C]; Outcome[O]) questions. Ms Jennifer
J. Padberg, MPH, Ms Judy Corn, and Mr John Harmon were
in charge of all administrative and logistic issues related to the
guideline panel. Mr Shane McDermott and Ms Jennifer
J. Padberg, MPH, were in charge of all conflicts of interest
(COI) issues.
Disclosure and Management of Potential Conflicts of Interest
All prospective panelists were required to disclose any actual,
potential, or perceived COI prior to being placed on the
panel. The disclosures were used to categorize the panelists as
cleared for full participation, allowed to participate with recusal
from certain aspects of guideline development, or disqualified
from participation. The co-chairs remained free of any financial
COI during the entire guideline development process. They
therefore avoided any relationships with pharmaceutical or de-
vice companies that had products in development or being mar-
keted for pneumonia. Furthermore, all panelists were precluded
from participating in any marketing-related activities (ie, lec-
tures or advisory boards directly funded by a pharmaceutical
or device company with interests related to the subject of
these guidelines) during the entire process. Panelists were re-
quired to disclose to the ATS and IDSA and the chairs any
new activities that had the potential to be viewed as a COI
prior to engaging in the activity. Staff and members of the so-
cieties determined if specific activities were allowed under the
societies’ COI rules. Assignments of panelists to specific PICO
questions were made as to minimize any COI concerns. At the
beginning of each meeting, whether face-to-face or by telecon-
ference, panelists were required to disclose any new potential
COI or prior relevant COI to the subject matter to be
discussed.
Clinical Questions and Evidence Review
An initial list of relevant clinical questions for these guidelines
was created by the co-chairs and then submitted to the whole
panel for review and discussion. After the committee prioritized
the proposed topics via an online poll, the final set of clinical
questions to be addressed was approved by the whole commit-
tee. All outcomes of interest were identified a priori and the
guideline committee explicitly rated their importance for deci-
sion making. Each clinical question was assigned to a pair of
panelists.
Two expert health sciences librarians (P. C. and S. L. K.) de-
signed literature searches to address all of the clinical questions
(see supplementary materials [21] for full search details).
Searches were limited to studies performed in adults and
those published in English or containing an English abstract.
No publication year limits were used. The initial literature
searches were performed in 2012 and 2013, and then updated
in July 2014. Studies published up to November 2015 were in-
cluded if pertinent to these guidelines. To supplement the elec-
tronic searches, as needed, panelists contacted experts and
hand-searched journals, conference proceedings, reference
lists, and regulatory agency websites for relevant articles. The ti-
tles and abstracts of all identified citations were screened and all
potentially relevant citations were subjected to a full-text review,
using predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria.
The results of the literature searches were thoroughly re-
viewed by the panelists followed by selection and evaluation
of the relevant articles. Once the articles were selected, the pan-
elists in conjunction with the co-chairs and the methodologist
decided if a qualitative and/or a quantitative analysis was appro-
priate. Panelists were not required to update their recently per-
formed meta-analyses with results of the last search unless there
was likelihood that doing so would result in a change to the
strength or direction of a recommendation.
Evidence summaries for each question were prepared by the
panel members using the GRADE approach for rating the con-
fidence in the evidence [2].The summaries of evidence were dis-
cussed and reviewed by all committee members and edited as
appropriate. The values and preferences for a specific outcome
could have a higher or lower value placed on it for different
PICO questions; this variation happened because the value
was always evaluated in the context of all other outcomes rele-
vant to each PICO question. Once the analyses were completed,
the panelists presented their data and findings to the whole
panel for deliberation and drafting of recommendations. Liter-
ature search strategies, evidence tables, evidence profiles, and
additional data, including meta-analysis results, can be found
in the supplementary materials [21].
Development of Clinical Recommendations
All recommendations were labeled as either “strong” or “weak”
(conditional) according to the GRADE approach. The words
“we recommend” indicate strong recommendations and “we
suggest” indicate weak recommendations. Table 1 provides
the suggested interpretation of strong and weak recommenda-
tions for patients, clinicians, and healthcare policy makers. Al-
though there is arguably ongoing need for research on virtually
all of the topics considered in this guideline, “Research Needs”
were noted for recommendations in which the need was be-
lieved by the panelists to be particularly acute. High-quality ev-
idence was lacking for many of the recommendations. Strong
recommendations were sometimes made in the setting of
lower-quality evidence when the panelists believed that most in-
dividuals would desire the recommended course of action, and
that most well-informed clinicians would agree, despite the low-
e70 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 quality evidence. All members of the panel participated in the
preparation of the guideline and approved the final recommen-
dations. Feedback was obtained from external peer reviewers.
The American College of Chest Physicians (CHEST), SCCM and
the SHEA reviewed and endorsed the guideline. The IDSA Standards
and Practice Guidelines Committee, the IDSA Board of Directors,
and the ATS Board of Directors reviewed and approved the guideline
prior to dissemination.
RISK FACTORS FOR ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE IN
VAP AND HAP
Because issues surrounding antibiotic resistance are fundamen-
tal to the consideration of many of the clinical questions ad-
dressed by this guideline, we undertook a series of systematic
reviews and meta-analyses to better understand risk factors
for MDR in both VAP and HAP. In these meta-analyses, we
studied risk factors for MDR in general, in addition to risk fac-
tors for specific classes of organisms. The findings do not lead to
any specific recommendations, rather they provided guidance
for the panelists for several of the treatment recommendations.
If more than one study was available for any risk factor, then
random-effects modeling was used for the pooled estimates
and their confidence intervals (CIs).
Risk Factors for VAP Caused by Any MDR Organism
Risk factors for MDR VAP have been addressed in several studies
(Table 2). Overall, 54 studies were identified in the literature search,
and 39 were excluded because of duplicate publication (n = 1), lack
of a comparator (n = 34), or nonclinical focus (n = 4). Fifteen
potential risk factors were included in the meta-analysis.
Factors associated with an increased risk of MDR VAP vs
non-MDR VAP were use of intravenous antibiotics in the past
90 days (odds ratio [OR], 12.3; 95% CI, 6.48–23.35) [22–24],≥5
days of hospitalization prior to the occurrence of VAP [23, 25–
29], septic shock at the time of VAP (OR, 2.01; 95% CI, 1.12–
3.61) [24, 30], acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
before VAP (OR, 3.1; 95% CI, 1.88–5.1) [22, 24], and acute
renal replacement therapy prior to VAP (OR, 2.5; 95% CI,
1.14–5.49) [22]. Coma present at the time of ICU admission
was associated with lower risk of MDR VAP (OR, 0.21; 95%
CI, .08–.52) [22]. Use of systemic corticosteroids was associated
with an increased risk of MDR VAP in only one study [23], but
due to the lack of reporting on specific dose and duration in ad-
dition to the lack of replication by other studies, corticosteroid
use was not accepted by the panel as a risk factor for MDR VAP.
Potential risk factors that were not found to be consistently
associated with resistant organisms in our analysis are listed
in the supplementary materials [21].
Prior exposure to intravenous antibiotics has been consistent-
ly identified as a predisposing factor to MDR pathogens in VAP.
While early antimicrobial therapy has been reported to lessen
the risk of VAP due to antibiotic-susceptible gram-positive
cocci and Haemophilus influenzae, it has been implicated in
the rise of MDR VAP due to MRSA, Pseudomonas, and other
non-glucose-fermenting organisms late in the course of hospi-
talization [24, 31–33]. This emphasizes the need for judicious
selection of patients for antibiotic therapy.
Other underlying clinical conditions may influence the mi-
crobiology of VAP. Sepsis may alter the response of cellular el-
ements that comprise the innate immune system [34]. The
protracted immunosuppressive phase following the hyperin-
flammatory response in sepsis diminishes the host ability to
clear MDR pathogens that are selected following early adminis-
tration of antibiotics. Studies of patients with ARDS have also
noted a higher incidence of MRSA and non-glucose-fermenting
gram-negative bacilli [35]. The onset of VAP appears to be de-
layed in ARDS patients, probably because of the near-universal
use of antibiotics early in the course of ARDS. When VAP does
occur, however, the microbial causes appear no different than
those among patients without ARDS who have required me-
chanical ventilation for similar periods of time and who have
experienced similar levels of exposure to antibiotic therapy
[36]. In contrast, coma upon ICU admission had a protective
effective against MDR VAP. This effect is related to the in-
creased propensity of neurotrauma patients to develop VAP
early in their ICU admission.
The concept of early- and late-onset pneumonia is based on
data from the late 1980s demonstrating that about 50% of me-
chanically ventilated patients developed VAP within the first 4
days after admission [37]. This concept has been subject to
validation in several subsequent studies. The study by Ewig
et al comprehensively illustrates the pathogenesis and the ra-
tionale behind it [38]. First, it could be demonstrated that
upper airway colonization was an independent predictor of
subsequent tracheobronchial colonization. Second, coloniza-
tion patterns in the upper and lower airways changed within
the first 3–4 days from a community-like to a typical nosoco-
mial pattern. Third, colonization with community-like pat-
terns was associated with early-onset pneumonia, whereas
nosocomial patterns were associated with a risk of late-onset
pneumonia. Finally, antimicrobial prophylaxis with 1 or 2
dosages of a cephalosporin decreased the risk of colonization
with community-like pathogens, and subsequently, early-
onset VAP was a risk factor for subsequent colonization
with typical nosocomial pathogens and increased the risk of
late-onset VAP. Others found that the threshold may also be
extended to 7 days [24].
Several subsequent studies have questioned the relationship
between the timing of VAP and the risk of MDR organisms.
No significant differences between pathogen patterns in early
and late VAP were found [23, 25–29]. These studies, however,
varied in their definitions of important concepts such as the
definition of “time zero” and risk factors for MDR. In fact,
the concept of early vs late VAP should be based on hospital
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e71
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 admission as the starting point, rather than intubation, as intu-
bation may have taken place after several days of hospitalization,
thus resulting in a patient already colonized in the upper and
lower airways with typically nosocomial pathogens. Moreover,
the presence of risk factors for MDR should take precedence
over the distinction between early- and late-onset pneumonia.
Hence, timing of developing VAP should be evaluated in the
context of other risk factors and recent antibiotic treatment.
Nonetheless, the reviewed evidence suggests that overall, pa-
tients who develop VAP after >5 days of hospitalization are at
higher risk of infection with MDR organisms than patients
who develop VAP earlier in their hospitalization.
Risk Factors for MDR HAP
Risk factors for MDR HAP have only rarely been studied
(Table 2). Fifteen potential risk factors were included in our
meta-analysis. Only one risk factor was significantly associated
with MDR HAP: prior intravenous antibiotic use (OR, 5.17;
95% CI, 2.11–12.67) [39, 40]. While other risk factors may be
relevant, evidence is lacking. With regard to the early vs late
pneumonia concept, no data are available for HAP.
Risk Factors for HAP/VAP Due to MRSA
A small number of studies have specifically addressed risk fac-
tors for nosocomial pneumonia due to MRSA (Table 2). Most
studies analyzed risk factors for MRSA colonization. Overall, 14
variables have resulted in potential predictive factors in 3 stud-
ies [41–43].
While nosocomial pneumonia due to MRSA may be asso-
ciated with several variables reflecting mainly patient charac-
teristics, severity of disease, as well as specific treatments and
interventions, the most consistent body of evidence regarding
risk factors for MRSA was related to the prior use of intrave-
nous antibiotics. Prior antibiotic treatment is a recognized
risk factor for MRSA infection; however, less attention has
been paid to the question of which specific antimicrobial clas-
ses are the most predictive. Furthermore, MRSA pneumonia
is more often seen in late-onset pneumonia than in early-onset
pneumonia [42].
Active case finding of colonized patients and implementation
of isolation and decolonization strategies may also have a com-
plementary role in the reduction of MRSA infections. Some
studies have shown that MRSA colonization is associated with
an increased likelihood of isolation of MRSA from respiratory
samples [44], including samples exclusively from patients diag-
nosed with pneumonia [45], while at least one other study did
not demonstrate this association [46]. However, to our knowl-
edge, there are no studies that have prospectively evaluated the
use of MRSA screening to inform empiric treatment choices.
While there are several potential risk factors for MRSA pneu-
monia, the published evidence for most of these is scarce and of
low quality. Based on the limited data, the panel agreed that the
prior use of intravenous antibiotics was the most predictive risk
factor for MRSA pneumonia. There is also some evidence sug-
gesting that a positive MRSA screen from nasal or respiratory
samples may increase the risk of MRSA being cultured from re-
spiratory samples, but not enough evidence to definitively list
this as a risk factor for MRSA pneumonia (see section X).
Risk Factors for HAP/VAP Due to MDR Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Seven variables were evaluated in 2 studies investigating the as-
sociation between P. aeruginosa and nosocomial pneumonia
(Table 2) [30, 47]. Direct comparison of available studies is dif-
ficult owing to the varied definitions used for multidrug resis-
tance. When focusing on case–control studies using more
stringent definitions of multidrug resistance (ie, resistance to
multiple classes of antipseudomonal antimicrobials), prior use
of antibiotics, mechanical ventilation, and history of chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease have been identified as potential
risk factors for MDR P. aeruginosa infection. Furthermore, al-
though there are limited data in HAP/VAP patients, patients
with cystic fibrosis and bronchiectasis are more likely than pa-
tients with other pulmonary diseases to be chronically colo-
nized with P. aeruginosa and are therefore also likely at
increased risk for MDR P. aeruginosa. When looking specifi-
cally at antibiotics associated with the isolation of MDR
P. aeruginosa, prior receipt of carbapenems, broad-spectrum
cephalosporins, and fluoroquinolones have been identified as
independent risk factors. While there are several potential risk
factors, the published evidence is scarce and of low quality.
Based on the limited analysis, the panel agreed that the prior
use of intravenous antibiotics was the most predictive risk factor
for MDR Pseudomonas pneumonia.
DETERMINING ETIOLOGY OF HAP AND VAP
Because of the growing frequency of MDR organisms as a
cause of VAP, as well as the risks of initial ineffective therapy,
experts believe that cultures of respiratory secretions should be
obtained from virtually all patients with suspected VAP [1].
The panelists were in agreement with this practice. Given
the widespread acceptance of this tenet at the bedside and
the likelihood that few data would be found to address this
question, panel members decided that this issue would not
be formally addressed in this document. Therefore, the follow-
ing sections related to VAP diagnosis presume that cultures of
respiratory secretions would be obtained from all patients with
suspected VAP.
The panelists recognized that the underlying evidence in
support of blood cultures for patients with VAP is limited.
However, approximately 15% of patients with VAP are bac-
teremic [48–50], and in these patients the definitive identifica-
tion of a pathogen, often MDR, may alter management. Some
studies have found that patients with bacteremic VAP are at
higher risk of morbidity and mortality than nonbacteremic pa-
tients [49–51]. It should be recognized that at least 25% of
e72 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 positive blood cultures in suspected VAP patients are from a non-
pulmonary source. Thus, blood cultures results might provide
evidence of a nonpulmonary source of infection and might re-
veal bacteria that are not effectively treated by empiric VAP
therapy, a potentially important finding given the nonprecise
nature of VAP diagnosis [49,50].For these reasons, the panelists
have not revised the 2005 ATS/IDSA guidelines recommenda-
tion and remain in favor of blood cultures for all patients with
suspected VAP. Data are even more limited for patients with
HAP, in whom sputum samples are less commonly available
than in patients with VAP. However, bacteremic HAP is not un-
usual [52]; therefore, blood culture results may provide further
guidance for both antibiotic treatment and treatment de-escala-
tion for HAP and VAP.
MICROBIOLOGIC METHODS TO DIAGNOSE VAP AND
HAP
I. Should Patients With Suspected VAP Be Treated Based on the Results
of Invasive Sampling (ie, Bronchoscopy, Blind Bronchial Sampling)
With Quantitative Culture Results, Noninvasive Sampling (ie,
Endotracheal Aspiration) With Quantitative Culture Results, or
Noninvasive Sampling with Semiquantitative Culture Results?
Recommendation
1. We suggest noninvasive sampling with semiquantitative cul-
tures to diagnose VAP, rather than invasive sampling with
quantitative cultures and rather than noninvasive sampling
with quantitative cultures (weak recommendation, low-
quality evidence).
Remarks: Invasive respiratory sampling includes broncho-
scopic techniques (ie, BAL, PSB) and blind bronchial sam-
pling (ie, mini-BAL). Noninvasive respiratory sampling
refers to endotracheal aspiration.
Summary of the Evidence
Our systematic review identified 5 relevant randomized trials
[53–57]. In 3 of the trials, invasive sampling (bronchoscopy
or blind bronchial sampling) with quantitative cultures was
compared to noninvasive sampling (endotracheal aspiration)
with semiquantitative cultures [53, 54, 57]; in the remaining
2 trials, invasive sampling with quantitative cultures was com-
pared to noninvasive sampling with quantitative cultures [55, 56].
No trials were identified that compared noninvasive sampling
with quantitative cultures to noninvasive sampling with semi-
quantitative cultures.
The trials did not identify any significant differences in 28-
day mortality, overall mortality, length of ICU stay, duration
of mechanical ventilation, or antibiotic changes [53, 54, 57].
The 2 trials that compared invasive sampling with quantitative
cultures to noninvasive sampling with quantitative cultures
evaluated antibiotic changes; one demonstrated that invasive
sampling led to more antibiotic changes than noninvasive sam-
pling (42% vs 15%; relative risk [RR], 2.81, 95% CI, 1.01–7.81)
[56], whereas the other found no difference [55]. Two of the tri-
als that compared invasive sampling with quantitative cultures
to noninvasive sampling with semiquantitative cultures mea-
sured antibiotic days: one demonstrated more antibiotic-free
days in the invasive sampling group (5.0 days vs 2.2 days;
P < .001) [54], whereas the other found no difference [53].
The trial that found no difference in antibiotic days excluded
patients who were infected or colonized with Pseudomonas spe-
cies or MRSA. Therefore, they were able to use monotherapy
and there was less opportunity to deescalate antibiotics, poten-
tially biasing the results toward no effect [53]. There was no dif-
ference in the emergence of antibiotic resistance in the only
study that looked at this outcome [54]; no other information re-
garding adverse events was reported in any of the trials.
When the 5 trials were pooled via meta-analysis, sampl-
ing technique did not affect any clinical outcome, including
mean duration of mechanical ventilation, ICU length of stay,
or mortality [58].
Taken together, the evidence suggests that outcomes are sim-
ilar regardless of whether specimens are obtained invasively or
noninvasively, and whether cultures are performed quantita-
tively or semiquantitatively. The evidence provides low confi-
dence in the effects estimated by the trials due to risk of bias
(lack of blinding in some trials, possible selection bias), indirect-
ness (differing protocols), and imprecision (3 of the trials in-
cluded small numbers of patients) [55–57].
We summarized the performance characteristics of several
sampling techniques—endotracheal aspirates (ETAs), BAL,
and PSB—for informational purposes only; the performance
characteristics were not used to inform our recommendation.
The performance characteristics were estimated by pooling
data from studies that used histopathology as the reference stan-
dard. Nine such studies were identified [59–67]. None of the
tests had ideal performance characteristics. Generally, semi-
quantitative ETAs were the most sensitive, but least specific
test [59–61, 64]. Quantitative ETAs and quantitative BAL had
near-equivalent intermediate-level performance. Sensitivity
ranged from 48% (95% CI, 38%–57%) for PSB with ≥103
CFU/mL to 57% (95% CI, 47%–66%) for quantitative BAL to
75% (95% CI, 58%–88%) for ETA with any amount of growth.
Specificity ranged from 47% (95% CI, 29%–65%) for ETA with
any amount of growth to 80% (95% CI, 71%–88%) for quanti-
tative BAL to 83% (95% CI, 70%–92%) for ETA with ≥105 CFU/
mL. Positive predictive values ranged from 60% (95% CI, 49%–
71%) for PSB with ≥103 CFU/mL and 61% (95% CI, 45%–76%)
for ETAs with any amount of growth to 77% (95% CI, 66%–
85%) for BAL with ≥104 CFU/mL and 81% (95% CI, 67%–
91%) for ETAs with ≥105 CFU/mL.
Rationale for the Recommendation
There is no evidence that invasive microbiological sampling
with quantitative cultures improves clinical outcomes
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e73
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 compared with noninvasive sampling with either quantitative
or semiquantitative cultures. Noninvasive sampling can be
done more rapidly than invasive sampling, with fewer com-
plications and resources. Semiquantitative cultures can be
done more rapidly than quantitative cultures, with fewer lab-
oratory resources and less expertise needed. For these rea-
sons, noninvasive sampling with semiquantitative cultures is
the microbiological sampling technique recommended by the
panel.
The guideline panel acknowledged that there is a potential
that invasive sampling with quantitative cultures could lead
to less antibiotic exposure if growth below defined thresh-
olds (eg, 103 CFU/mL for PSB, 104 CFU/mL for BAL) is
used as a trigger to stop antibiotics [68]. This outcome is
important due to the risks of acquiring antibiotic resistance,
the risk of side effects, and the costs of unnecessary or ex-
cessive antibiotic therapy; however, the estimated effects of
invasive sampling with quantitative culture on antibiotic ex-
posure are inconsistent and, therefore, insufficient to guide
therapy at this time [53–55]. Of note, lower respiratory
(eg, BAL, mini-BAL, brush, wash, ETA) and sputum
samples should be processed within 2 hours if kept at
room temperature and within 24 hours if kept at 4 degrees
Celsius [69].
Research Needs
The panel agreed that the question of whether or not invasive
sampling with quantitative cultures reduces antibiotic use, anti-
biotic resistance, direct costs, and indirect costs should be a pri-
ority area for future research. In addition, the panel agreed that
such trials should measure adverse outcomes, as most trials to
date have only evaluated beneficial outcomes.
II. If Invasive Quantitative Cultures Are Performed, Should Patients With
Suspected VAP Whose Culture Results Are Below the Diagnostic
Threshold for VAP (PSB With <103 CFU/mL, BAL With <104 CFU/mL) Have
Their Antibiotics Withheld Rather Than Continued?
Recommendation
1. Noninvasive sampling with semiquantitative cultures is
the preferred methodology to diagnose VAP (see section
I); however, the panel recognizes that invasive quantitative
cultures will occasionally be performed by some clini-
cians. For patients with suspected VAP whose invasive
quantitative culture results are below the diagnostic
threshold for VAP, we suggest that antibiotics be withheld
rather than continued (weak recommendation, very low-
quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: This recommendation places a
high value on avoiding unnecessary harm and cost.
Remarks: Clinical factors should also be considered be-
cause they may alter the decision of whether to withhold
or continue antibiotics. These include the likelihood of an
alternative source of infection, prior antimicrobial therapy
at the time of culture, degree of clinical suspicion, signs of
severe sepsis, and evidence of clinical improvement.
Summary of the Evidence
Although we do not recommend routine performance of in-
vasive quantitative cultures for patients with suspected VAP,
the panel recognizes that many clinicians feel that they are of
benefit in decreasing inappropriate antibiotic use and will
likely continue performing them, given the low quality of ev-
idence on which the recommendation against their perfor-
mance was based. We therefore decided to address the issue
of the safety of antibiotic discontinuation when quantitative
cultures are below the diagnostic threshold. We identified 6
studies that enrolled patients with VAP, measured the discon-
tinuation of antibiotics on the basis of quantitative culture re-
sults, and used the following thresholds to either diagnose or
exclude VAP: a PSB of <103 CFU/mL, a BAL of <104 CFU/mL,
and an ETA of <105 CFU/mL [54, 68, 70–73]. We excluded
20 studies that either did not withhold antibiotics on the
basis of the culture results or did not measure the utilization
of antibiotics once the culture results were known [53, 55–57,
74–88].
Only one of the selected studies was a randomized trial [54].
The trial randomly assigned patients with possible VAP to ei-
ther bronchoscopic sampling with quantitative cultures or the
use of clinical criteria alone to diagnose VAP. This trial found
that bronchoscopic sampling with quantitative cultures de-
creased 14-day mortality and antibiotic use. However, it did
not compare outcomes among those whose antibiotics were
withheld on the basis of the culture results to those whose an-
tibiotics were continued.
Because the randomized trial did not answer our question, we
next evaluated the 5 observational studies [68, 70–73]. Only 2 of
the studies compared outcomes among those whose antibiotics
were withheld on the basis of the invasively obtained quantita-
tive culture results to those whose antibiotics were continued
despite the culture results. The first study was a prospective co-
hort study of 68 patients with suspected VAP, in which the prev-
alence of VAP among those undergoing invasive sampling was
51%. Patients whose antibiotics were discontinued on the basis
of the quantitative cultures had a similar mortality and rate of
new respiratory infection as those whose antibiotics were con-
tinued [71]. The second study was a retrospective cohort study
of 89 patients with suspected VAP whose invasively obtained
quantitative cultures were below the diagnostic threshold for
VAP [68]. Similar to the other observational study, patients
whose antibiotics were discontinued did not have a higher mor-
tality or rate of new respiratory infection compared to patients
whose antibiotics were continued. However, those whose anti-
biotics were withheld received a shorter duration of antibiotics,
had a lower rate of total superinfection, and a lower rate of MDR
superinfection.
e74 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Taken together, the evidence indicates that patients whose
antibiotics are withheld on the basis of an invasive quantitative
culture below the diagnostic threshold for VAP have similar
clinical outcomes, less antibiotic use, and better microbiologic
outcomes compared to patients whose antibiotics are contin-
ued. The panel’s confidence in these estimated effects (ie, the
quality of evidence) was very low because they were derived
from observational studies with imprecision (ie, small studies
with few events) and high risk of bias (clinicians may have
been more likely to stop antibiotics early in less sick patients).
Rationale for the Recommendation
Antibiotic discontinuation in patients with suspected VAP
whose invasive quantitative culture results are below the diag-
nostic threshold for VAP may be beneficial. It decreases unnec-
essary antibiotic use, which should reduce antibiotic-related
adverse events (eg, Clostridium difficile colitis and promotion
of antibiotic resistance) and costs. Moreover, it improves micro-
biological outcomes (ie, fewer superinfections). While there is
no evidence that this approach worsens clinical outcomes, in
theory it could result in antibiotics being withdrawn from
some patients who would benefit from antibiotic therapy be-
cause the quantitative culture results were misleadingly low
due to sampling error or prior exposure to antibiotics.
III. In Patients With Suspected HAP (Non-VAP), Should Treatment Be
Guided by the Results of Microbiologic Studies Performed on
Respiratory Samples, or Should Treatment Be Empiric?
Recommendation
1. We suggest that patients with suspected HAP (non-VAP) be
treated according to the results of microbiologic studies per-
formed on respiratory samples obtained noninvasively, rath-
er than being treated empirically (weak recommendation,
very low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: The suggestion places a high value
on the potential to accurately target antibiotic therapy and
then deescalate antibiotic therapy based upon respiratory
and blood culture results. Minimizing resource use by not
obtaining respiratory cultures is given a lower value.
Remarks: Noninvasive methods to obtain respiratory sam-
ples include the following: spontaneous expectoration, spu-
tum induction, nasotracheal suctioning in a patient who is
unable to cooperate to produce a sputum sample, and endo-
tracheal aspiration in a patient with HAP who subsequently
requires mechanical ventilation. The panel recognizes that
for some patients in whom a respiratory sample cannot be
obtained noninvasively, there may be factors which could
prompt consideration of obtaining samples invasively.
Summary of the Evidence
We found only one randomized trial that compared empiric an-
tibiotic therapy with therapy based on the results of microbio-
logic studies in patients with suspected HAP [89]. Sixty-eight
patients with HAP were randomly assigned to undergo bron-
choscopy with protected specimen brushing vs noninvasive
management. In the latter group, expectorated sputum samples
were not obtained, so noninvasive management resulted in em-
piric therapy, which was supposed to adhere to the recommen-
dations from the 2005 ATS/IDSA guidelines [1]. There was no
difference among the 2 groups in either clinical cure at 28 days
or hospital length of stay. There was lower 28-day mortality in
the empirically treated group than the invasive group, but this
was not statistically significant (10% vs 21.9%; RR, 0.46; 95% CI,
.13–1.61). This evidence provided very low confidence in the es-
timated effects of microbiologic studies because there was very
serious risk of bias (fewer patients in the invasive group received
antibiotics than in the noninvasive group [76% vs 100%], lack of
blinding, lack of concealment) and imprecision.
Rationale for the Recommendation
Despite a lack of evidence showing that respiratory cultures in
patients with suspected HAP improve clinical outcomes, the
panel agreed that an attempt should be made to obtain respira-
tory samples for culture. The rationale for this suggestion is that
resistant pathogens lead to a significant risk of inadequate initial
empiric antibiotic therapy [90, 91], which is associated with an
increased risk of mortality in patients with HAP [92]. Having
culture results means that the antibiotic regimen can be adjust-
ed on the basis of those results if the patient does not respond to
initial therapy. Furthermore, performing cultures of respiratory
samples provides the opportunity to de-escalate antibiotic cov-
erage based on the results, minimizing unnecessary antibiotic
exposure. The panel acknowledges the potential for false-
positive results related to oral contamination when noninvasive
samples are obtained, but judged that the risks of inadequate
initial coverage and the potential benefit of allowing de-
escalation outweigh the negative impact of false-positive culture
results.
The panel further agreed that the respiratory specimens
should be obtained noninvasively rather than invasively. The
panel considered potential advantages of invasive sampling,
which might include less risk of inadequate initial antibiotic
coverage [90–92] and facilitation of antibiotic de-escalation.
However, there is no evidence in patients with HAP that either
of these goals would be frequently realized with regular use of
invasive sampling. Furthermore, routine use of invasive sam-
pling via bronchoscopy would be associated with increased
cost and increased risks to the patient. Although generally
safe, bronchoscopy may rarely cause life-threatening complica-
tions [93] and BAL results in temporary worsening of gas ex-
change both due to sedating medications and the lavage itself
[94], and this could result in the need for respiratory support.
The potential advantages of obtaining invasive cultures (less
risk of inadequate initial coverage, de-escalation of antibiotic
therapy) may not outweigh the disadvantages (negative impact
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e75
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 of false-positive culture) of noninvasive techniques once the
costs and risks of the invasive procedure are added as potential
disadvantages.
THE USE OF BIOMARKERS AND THE CLINICAL
PULMONARY INFECTION SCORE TO DIAGNOSE VAP
AND HAP
IV. In Patients With Suspected HAP/VAP, Should PCT Plus Clinical
Criteria or Clinical Criteria Alone Be Used to Decide Whether or Not to
Initiate Antibiotic Therapy?
Recommendation
1. For patients with suspected HAP/VAP, we recommend using
clinical criteria alone, rather than using serum PCT plus
clinical criteria, to decide whether or not to initiate antibiotic
therapy (strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
PCT is a precursor of calcitonin that is constitutively secreted
by C cells of the thyroid gland and K cells of the lung [95]. In
healthy individuals, PCT is normally undetectable (<0.01 ng/
mL). When stimulated by endotoxin, PCT is rapidly produced
by parenchymal tissue throughout the body [96]; this PCT pro-
duction has also been observed in diverse types of bacterial in-
fections [97, 98]. PCT may increase in response to sterile
inflammation or viral infection, but it is less common [99].
This characteristic makes PCT a potentially valuable diagnostic
test for the diagnosis of HAP/VAP.
We sought studies that enrolled patients with suspected
HAP/VAP and then compared outcomes among patients for
whom the initiation of antibiotic therapy was based upon
serum PCT levels plus clinical criteria with outcomes among
patients for whom therapy was based upon clinical criteria
alone. We found no such studies; therefore, we selected 6 studies
that reported the performance characteristics for serum PCT for
the diagnosis of HAP/VAP, generally diagnosed according to
the 2005 guideline definitions [1, 100–105]. Our underlying as-
sumption was that serum PCT results indicative of HAP/VAP
will prompt antibiotic therapy, which will improve clinical out-
comes. The immunoluminometric method was used to measure
serum PCT in 2 studies, and the Kryptor test using time-
resolved amplified cryptate emission technology was used to
measure serum PCT in 4 studies. The cutoffs used to distinguish
patients who had HAP/VAP from those who did not varied
among studies, ranging from 0.5 to 3.9 ng/mL. Some studies re-
ported results for varying thresholds. None of the cutoffs used
in the studies were subsequently validated.
We pooled the performance characteristics of serum PCT
for the diagnosis of HAP/VAP via a meta-analysis using a bi-
variate regression approach. The 6 studies included 665 partic-
ipants, among whom 335 (50.4%) were ultimately diagnosed
with HAP/VAP. The sensitivity, specificity, positive likelihood
ratio, negative likelihood ratio, and diagnostic OR were 67%
(95% CI, 53%–79%), 83% (95% CI, 43%–97%), 3.9 (95% CI,
.9–17.5), 0.4 (95% CI, .25–.62), and 10 (95% CI, 2–59), respec-
tively. The optimal PCT diagnostic thresholds differed accord-
ing to the severity of presentation, clinical setting, and type of
assay used. The summary receiver operating characteristic
(SROC) curve resulted in an area under the curve (AUC) of
0.76 (95% CI, .72–.79), which indicates moderate overall test
accuracy.
The panel’s confidence in the accuracy of these pooled per-
formance characteristics (ie, the quality of evidence) was mod-
erate because they were derived from accuracy studies with a
serious risk of bias. The risk of bias was multifactorial. Many
studies did not report enrolling consecutive patients, did not
report enrolling patients with a legitimate diagnostic uncer-
tainty (some studies required prior microbiological confirma-
tion of HAP/VAP), did not explain the reasons for
withdrawals, did not report blinding the outcome assessor,
and may have chosen diagnostic thresholds that gave more fa-
vorable results.
The meta-analysis revealed inconsistency of the evidence
(heterogeneity analysis I2 = 87.9; P < .001). However, the panel
did not downgrade the quality of evidence due to the inconsis-
tency because the performance characteristics were similar even
after the heterogeneity was reduced by excluding certain studies.
Causes of the heterogeneity included the methodological qual-
ity of the studies, the clinical setting (ie, whether the study was
conducted in a surgical or medical unit), and the type of PCT
assay. There was no evidence of potential publication bias ac-
cording to Egger test for funnel plot asymmetry.
Rationale for the Recommendation
The systematic review identified no studies that enrolled pa-
tients with suspected HAP/VAP and then compared outcomes
among patients for whom the initiation of antibiotic therapy
was based upon serum PCT levels plus clinical criteria vs out-
comes among patients for whom therapy was based upon clin-
ical criteria alone. Therefore, the guideline development panel
used accuracy studies to inform its recommendations.
The panel decided a priori that it would recommend that an-
tibiotics be initiated or withheld on the basis of serum PCT test-
ing plus clinical criteria, rather than clinical criteria alone, if
HAP/VAP can be confirmed or excluded by serum PCT with
a sensitivity and specificity of >90%. These thresholds were
set because, assuming a prevalence of HAP/VAP of 50%
among those who undergo testing, then for every 1000 patients
tested, only 50 patients (5%) would be incorrectly categorized as
having or not having HAP/VAP.
The evidence indicates that serum PCT plus clinical criteria
can diagnose HAP/VAP with a sensitivity and specificity of 67%
and 83%, respectively. These findings failed to meet the panel’s
prespecified thresholds for recommending that serum PCT plus
clinical criteria be used to decide whether or not to initiate
e76 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 antibiotics. The false-negative and false-positive rates of serum
PCT testing plus clinical criteria are 33% and 17%, respectively.
Thus, assuming a prevalence of HAP/VAP of 50%, then for
every 1000 patients with suspected HAP/VAP who are evaluat-
ed with serum PCT plus clinical criteria, 165 patients (16.5%)
would be incorrectly diagnosed as not having HAP/VAP and
85 patients (8.5%) will be incorrectly diagnosed as having
HAP/VAP.
A recent trial that randomized ICU patients to a PCT-guided
antibiotic escalation protocol vs standard of care, aiming to im-
prove survival by increasing early appropriate antibiotic thera-
py, showed that the PCT-guided protocol did not result in
survival improvement, but resulted in a higher number of ven-
tilator-days and prolonged ICU stay [106].
In the view of the guideline panelists, patients who are incor-
rectly diagnosed with HAP/VAP are likely to receive antibiotics
and, therefore, are at unnecessary risk for side effects and incur
unnecessary costs. Perhaps more important, efforts to find the
correct diagnosis may cease, increasing the time until correct di-
agnosis and therapy. Conversely, incorrectly excluding HAP/
VAP delays the initiation of antibiotic therapy, which may
lead to poorer clinical outcomes. The panel agreed that the fre-
quency of such undesirable consequences due to misleading
PCT results was unacceptable and, therefore, recommended
not using PCT to guide antibiotic initiation.
V. In Patients With Suspected HAP/VAP, Should sTREM-1 Plus Clinical
Criteria or Clinical Criteria Alone Be Used to Decide Whether or Not to
Initiate Antibiotic Therapy?
Recommendation
1. For patients with suspected HAP/VAP, we recommend using
clinical criteria alone, rather than using BALF sTREM-1 plus
clinical criteria, to decide whether or not to initiate antibiotic
therapy (strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells (TREM-1) has
been studied as a biological marker of microbial infection.
TREM-1 is a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily
that has been shown to be strongly expressed on the neutrophils
and monocytes infiltrating tissues invaded by bacteria or fungi
[107]. However, its use in diagnosing infections is uncertain be-
cause several recent studies suggest sTREM-1 may also be ele-
vated in noninfectious causes of inflammation [108, 109].
We sought studies that enrolled patients with suspected
HAP/VAP and then compared outcomes among patients for
whom the initiation of antibiotic therapy was based upon solu-
ble TREM-1 (sTREM-1) levels plus clinical criteria with out-
comes among patients for whom therapy was based upon
clinical criteria alone. We found no such studies; therefore, we
selected 6 studies that reported the performance characteristics
for sTREM-1 for the diagnosis of HAP/VAP [110–115]. Our
underlying assumption was that sTREM-1 results indicative of
HAP/VAP would prompt antibiotic therapy, which would im-
prove clinical outcomes. The measurement of sTREM-1 was per-
formed on BALF by immunoblot in one study [115], on BALF
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in 4 studies
[110–114], and on mini-BALF by ELISA in one study [114].
The cutoff values used to distinguish patients who had HAP/VAP
from those who did not varied widely among studies, ranging
from 5 to 900 pg/mL.
We pooled the performance characteristics of sTREM-1 for
the diagnosis of HAP/VAP via a meta-analysis using a bivariate
regression approach. Our meta-analysis included 208 patients
with clinically suspected pneumonia, of whom 108 (52%)
were ultimately diagnosed with pneumonia. The sensitivity,
specificity, positive likelihood ratio, negative likelihood ratio,
and diagnostic OR were 84% (95% CI, 63%–94%), 49% (95%
CI, 18%–81%), 1.6 (95% CI, .8%–3.3), 0.33 (95% CI, .12–
0.93), and 5 (95% CI, 1–24), respectively. The sensitivity and
specificity of sTREM-1 were lower in studies that used ELISA
[110–114] than in studies that used an immunoblot technique
[115]. The optimal sTREM-1 diagnostic thresholds differed ac-
cording to the severity of presentation, clinical setting, and type
of assay used. The SROC curve resulted in an AUC of 0.78 (95%
CI, .75–.82), which indicates moderate overall test accuracy.
The panel’s confidence in the accuracy of these pooled per-
formance characteristics (ie, the quality of evidence) was mod-
erate because they are derived from accuracy studies with
serious risk of bias. The risk of bias is due to the studies not en-
rolling consecutive patients with legitimate diagnostic uncer-
tainty (one study used clinical plus microbiological results as
inclusion criteria [115], whereas 5 studies used clinical, radio-
logical, and microbiological findings as inclusion criteria
[110–114]). Moreover, because the studies in the meta-analysis
used BALF quantitative culture as the reference standard, the
prior use of antibiotics may have resulted in more negative
cases and participants with anaerobic infections may have
been misclassified, which could have altered the performance
characteristics of sTREM-1.
Rationale for the Recommendation
Our systematic review identified no studies that enrolled pa-
tients with suspected HAP/VAP and then compared outcomes
among patients for whom the initiation of antibiotic therapy
was based upon soluble sTREM-1 levels plus clinical criteria
vs outcomes among patients for whom therapy was based
upon
clinical
criteria
alone.
Therefore,
the
guideline
development panel used accuracy studies to inform its
recommendations.
The panel decided a priori that it would recommend that an-
tibiotics be initiated or withheld on the basis of BALF sTREM-1
testing plus clinical criteria, rather than clinical criteria alone, if
HAP/VAP could be confirmed or excluded by BALF sTREM-1
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e77
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 with a sensitivity and specificity of >90%. These thresholds were
set because, assuming a prevalence of HAP/VAP of 50% among
those who undergo testing, then for every 1000 patients tested,
only 50 patients (5%) will be incorrectly categorized as having
or not having HAP/VAP.
The evidence indicates that BALF sTREM-1 can diagnose
HAP/VAP with a sensitivity and specificity of 84% and 49%, re-
spectively. These findings failed to meet the panel’s prespecified
thresholds for recommending that BALF sTREM-1 plus clinical
criteria be used to decide whether or not to initiate antibiotics.
The false-negative and false-positive rates of BALF sTREM-1
are 16% and 51%, respectively. Thus, again assuming a preva-
lence of HAP/VAP of 50%, then for every 1000 patients tested,
80 patients (8%) will be incorrectly diagnosed as not having
HAP/VAP and 255 patients (25.5%) will be incorrectly diag-
nosed as having HAP/VAP.
Patients who are incorrectly diagnosed with HAP/VAP are
likely to receive antibiotics and, therefore, are at unnecessary
risk for side effects and incur unnecessary costs. Perhaps
more important, efforts to find the correct diagnosis may
cease, increasing the duration until correct diagnosis and ther-
apy. Conversely, incorrectly excluding HAP/VAP delays the ini-
tiation of antibiotic therapy, which may lead to poorer clinical
outcomes. The panel agreed that the frequency of such undesir-
able consequences due to misleading BALF sTREM-1 results
was unacceptable and, therefore, recommended not using
BALF sTREM-1 to guide antibiotic therapy.
VI. In Patients With Suspected HAP/VAP, Should CRP Plus Clinical
Criteria, or Clinical Criteria Alone, Be Used to Decide Whether or Not to
Initiate Antibiotic Therapy?
Recommendation
1. For patients with suspected HAP/VAP, we recommend
using clinical criteria alone rather than using CRP plus clin-
ical criteria, to decide whether or not to initiate antibiotic
therapy (weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
We sought studies that enrolled patients with suspected HAP/
VAP and then compared outcomes among patients for whom
the initiation of antibiotic therapy was based upon CRP levels
plus clinical criteria with outcomes among patients for whom
therapy was based upon clinical criteria alone. We found no
such studies; therefore, we selected 3 studies that evaluated
the ability of CRP to identify patients with VAP [102, 115, 116].
One observational study enrolled 148 patients receiving me-
chanical ventilation and then found that the CRP levels in pa-
tients who had pneumonia were the same as in those who did
not [115].A similar study that enrolled 44 patients receiving me-
chanical ventilation found no differences in the CRP levels of pa-
tients who had VAP compared with those who did not [102].
Finally, in a study of 28 patients who had a return of spontaneous
circulation after an out-of-hospital arrest, the CRP levels were the
same among patients with and without VAP [116]. Taken togeth-
er, these studies suggest that CRP cannot reliably distinguish pa-
tients with VAP from patients without VAP.
The panel’s confidence in the findings that CRP levels are
similar among patients with and without VAP was low because
the findings are from observational studies with serious impre-
cision (ie, few patients and events).
Rationale for the Recommendation
For a diagnostic test to be helpful in deciding whether or not to
initiate or withhold antibiotics for VAP, it must be capable of
distinguishing patients with VAP from patients without VAP.
All 3 studies suggest that CRP levels do not make this distinc-
tion. Therefore, the panel judged that CRP testing was just as
likely to lead clinicians astray as it is to help clinicians and,
therefore, the benefits of using CRP levels to inform decision
making in patients with possible VAP does not outweigh the
costs and burdens of testing.
VII. In Patients With Suspected HAP/VAP, Should the Modified CPIS Plus
Clinical Criteria, or Clinical Criteria Alone, Be Used to Decide Whether or
Not to Initiate Antibiotic Therapy?
Recommendation
1. For patients with suspected HAP/VAP, we suggest using
clinical criteria alone, rather than using CPIS plus clinical
criteria, to decide whether or not to initiate antibiotic therapy
(weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
Clinical criteria have historically informed the need to start an-
tibiotics in patients with suspected HAP/VAP. However, semi-
objective measures such as the CPIS have emerged as a potential
tool to assist clinicians in deciding whether or not to initiate an-
timicrobial therapy for patients with suspected VAP. The CPIS
is a semiobjective assessment of several clinical factors predic-
tive of pneumonia; temperature, white blood cell count, pres-
ence and character of respiratory secretions, PaO2/FiO2
(arterial oxygen partial pressure/inspired oxygen fraction)
ratio, and chest radiograph findings.
We sought studies that enrolled patients with suspected
HAP/VAP and then compared outcomes among patients for
whom the initiation of antibiotic therapy was based upon the
CPIS plus clinical criteria with outcomes among patients for
whom therapy was based upon clinical criteria alone. We
found no such studies; however, we found a published system-
atic review with meta-analysis of 13 accuracy studies that re-
ported the performance characteristics of the CPIS for the
diagnosis of VAP [117–121]. The pooled prevalence of VAP
in the studies was 48%. The meta-analysis found that the
CPIS can confirm or exclude VAP with a sensitivity, specificity,
and diagnostic OR of 65% (95% CI, 61%–69%), 64% (95% CI,
60%–67%), and 4.84 (95% CI, 2.42–9.71), respectively. The
SROC curve resulted in an AUC of 0.748 (95% CI, .65–.85).
e78 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 The panel’s confidence in the accuracy of these pooled perfor-
mance characteristics (ie, the quality of evidence) was low because
they are derived from accuracy studies with serious risk of bias (ie,
many studies did not enroll consecutive patients with true diag-
nostic uncertainty, withdrawals were not explained) and inconsis-
tency (heterogeneity analysis I2 > 87% for all pooled analyses).
Rationale for the Recommendation
Our systematic review identified no studies that enrolled pa-
tients with suspected VAP and then compared outcomes
among patients for whom the initiation of antibiotic therapy
was based upon the CPIS plus clinical criteria vs outcomes
among patients for whom therapy was based upon clinical cri-
teria alone. Therefore, the guideline development panel used a
published systematic review and meta-analysis of accuracy stud-
ies to inform its recommendations.
The panel decided a priori that it would recommend that an-
tibiotics be initiated or withheld on the basis of the CPIS plus
clinical criteria, rather than clinical criteria alone, if VAP can be
confirmed or excluded by the CPIS with a sensitivity and spe-
cificity of >90%. These thresholds were set because, assuming a
prevalence of VAP of 48% among those who undergo testing,
then for every 1000 patients tested, only 48 patients (4.8%)
will be incorrectly categorized as having or not having VAP.
The evidence indicates that the CPIS can diagnose VAP with
a sensitivity and specificity of only 65% and 64%, respectively.
These findings failed to meet the panel’s prespecified thresholds
for recommending that the CPIS plus clinical criteria be used to
decide whether or not to initiate antibiotics. The false-negative
and false-positive rates of the CPIS are 35% and 36%, respec-
tively. Thus, again assuming a prevalence of VAP of 48%,
then for every 1000 patients tested, 168 patients (16.8%) will
be incorrectly diagnosed as not having HAP/VAP and 187 pa-
tients (18.7%) will be incorrectly diagnosed as having VAP.
Patients who are incorrectly diagnosed with HAP/VAP are like-
ly to receive antibiotics and, therefore, are at unnecessary risk for
side effects and incur unnecessary costs. Perhaps more important,
efforts to find the correct diagnosis may cease, increasing the du-
ration until correct diagnosis and therapy. Conversely, incorrectly
excluding HAP/VAP delays the initiation of antibiotic therapy,
which may lead to poorer clinical outcomes. The panel agreed
that the frequency of such undesirable consequences due to mis-
leading CPIS results was unacceptable and, therefore, recom-
mended not using CPIS to guide antibiotic therapy.
TREATMENT OF VENTILATOR-ASSOCIATED
TRACHEOBRONCHITIS
VIII. Should Patients With Ventilator-Associated Tracheobronchitis
(VAT) Receive Antibiotic Therapy?
Recommendation
1. In patients with VAT, we suggest not providing antibiotic
therapy (weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
To determine whether or not treatment for VAT is warranted,
we sought evidence that the treatment of VAT improves clinical
outcomes. VAT has been defined as fever with no other recog-
nizable cause, with new or increased sputum production, posi-
tive ETA culture (>106 CFU/mL) yielding a new bacteria, and
no radiographic evidence of nosocomial pneumonia [122].
Our systematic review identified 3 randomized trials that
compared the effects of antibiotics to either placebo or no anti-
biotics in patients with VAT [123–125]. However, the panel de-
cided to exclude 2 of the trials because they were too indirectly
related to the clinical question, as they defined VAT differently
than all other studies and evaluated aerosolized antibiotics rath-
er than intravenous antibiotics [124, 125]. The remaining ran-
domized trial randomly assigned 58 patients to receive either
intravenous antibiotics or no antibiotics for 8 days [123]. The
group that received antibiotic therapy had lower ICU mortality
(18% vs 47%; OR, 0.24, 95% CI, .07–.88), less subsequent VAP
(13% vs 47%; OR, 0.17, 95% CI, .04–.70), and more mechanical
ventilation–free days (median 12 vs 2 days; P < .001), but no dif-
ference in the duration of mechanical ventilation or length of
ICU stay [123].
The panel was concerned about the randomized trial’s risk of
bias because it was unblinded and stopped early due to benefit.
Therefore, the panel also evaluated 4 observational studies [122,
126–128]. When the observational studies were combined with
the randomized trial, P. aeruginosa comprised 34% of the iso-
lates; other common organisms included Acinetobacter (27%),
Klebsiella (5%), and MRSA (32%). MDR organisms comprised
61% of all isolates, and polymicrobial infections comprised 31%
of the episodes of VAT [122, 126–128].
The observational studies compared adult mechanically ven-
tilated patients with VAT who received intravenous antibiotics
to patients who did not receive antibiotics. Antibiotic therapy
was associated with a shorter duration of mechanical ventilation
(–3.5 days; 95% CI −6.88 to −.019 days); however, no signifi-
cant differences were found for mortality or the duration of
ICU stay [122, 126–128].
Taken together, the evidence suggests that antibiotic therapy
for VAT may shorten the duration of mechanical ventilation;
however, it is uncertain whether it improves other clinical out-
comes due to inconsistent findings. The panel’s confidence in
the estimated effects of antibiotic therapy in VAT (ie, the quality
of evidence) was low because it consisted of a randomized trial
limited by very serious risk of bias as described above, observa-
tional studies, and inconsistent findings. Two other observa-
tional studies on VAT were published more recently, but their
results did not change the panel’s recommendations [129, 130].
Rationale for the Recommendation
The potential desirable consequence of antibiotic therapy is a
decreased duration of mechanical ventilation; in contrast, the
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e79
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 potential undesirable consequences of antibiotic therapy in-
clude side effects such as rash, C. difficile colitis, antibiotic resis-
tance, and cost. The panel recognizes the potential desirable and
undesirable consequences, but judged that the latter outweigh
the former, given the uncertainty regarding the benefits. Fur-
thermore, the panel recognizes that in some patients, VAT
may occasionally result in mucus plugging, and resultant wean-
ing difficulty. In such patients, antibiotic treatment might be
considered, but no evidence for or against is available for this
situation. Last, the panel also recognizes that the diagnosis of
pneumonia is imperfect. The sensitivity and specificity of por-
table chest radiographs for pneumonia are lower than those of
computed tomography and autopsy. Thus, in the presence of
new respiratory signs of infection, such as an increased amount
of purulent sputum and a high-quality sample with positive
Gram stain, in conjunction with new systemic signs of infection
plus worsening oxygenation and/or increasing ventilator set-
tings, antibiotic treatment may be considered even in the ab-
sence of new or progressive persistent infiltrates on portable
chest radiographs; the rationale for that is because of the high
likelihood of a new VAP.
Research Needs
Randomized trials are needed to examine the effects of treating
VAT on clinical outcomes, since the existing randomized trials
have serious limitations. Such trials should use a concise defini-
tion that precludes overlap with VAP or, alternatively, combines
the diagnosis of VAT and VAP and adjusts for severity of respi-
ratory illness. Studies assessing the effect of inhaled and intra-
venous antibiotics on clinical outcomes are needed. In addition,
such trials should measure days of systemic antibiotics and
posttreatment antimicrobial resistance from both respiratory
and nonrespiratory sites, as the high frequency of MDR patho-
gens in the existing studies suggests that antimicrobial resistance
is increasing in the ICU.
INITIAL TREATMENT OF VAP AND HAP
Selecting an empiric antibiotic regimen for clinically suspected
VAP is difficult because clinicians must balance the potential
benefits of starting adequate antibiotics early (eg, decreased
mortality) with the harms of superfluous coverage (eg, adverse
drug effects, C. difficile infection, and increased antimicrobial
resistance).
IX. Should Selection of an Empiric Antibiotic Regimen for VAP Be
Guided by Local Antibiotic-Resistance data?
Recommendations
1. We recommend that all hospitals regularly generate and dis-
seminate a local antibiogram, ideally one that is specific to
their intensive care population(s) if possible.
2. We recommend that empiric treatment regimens be in-
formed by the local distribution of pathogens associated
with VAP and their antimicrobial susceptibilities.
Values and preferences: These recommendations place a
high value on targeting the specific pathogens associated
with VAP as narrowly as possible in order adequate treat-
ment while minimizing overtreatment and its undesirable
consequences.
Remarks: The frequency with which the distribution of path-
ogens and their antimicrobial susceptibilities are updated
should be determined by the institution. Considerations
should include their rate of change, resources, and the
amount of data available for analysis.
Summary of the Evidence
Antimicrobial flora and resistance patterns can vary consider-
ably between and within countries, regions, hospitals, ICUs in
a hospital, and specimen sources (ie, pulmonary vs other spec-
imens) [32, 74, 131, 132]. This was illustrated by an observation-
al study that compared quantitative culture results obtained by
bronchoscopy from 229 patients with VAP at 4 different insti-
tutions; there was wide variation in both the frequency of path-
ogens and patterns of antibiotic resistance among the
institutions [32]. Similarly, another observational study of pa-
tients with VAP found wide variation in both the frequency
of pathogens and patterns of antibiotic resistance in different
ICUs within a single institution [132]. However, another
study found that resistance rates measured in overall hospital
antibiograms are reflected in the resistance rates found in
ICU-acquired infections, although the frequency of MRSA
might be underestimated [133].
Rationale for the Recommendations
The panel recommends basing regimens for the empiric
treatment of suspected VAP on the local prevalence of path-
ogens and antimicrobial susceptibilities associated with VAP.
Because antimicrobial flora and resistance patterns can vary
considerably between ICUs, hospitals, regions, and countries,
the only way to know the local prevalence and resistance pat-
terns of pathogens associated with VAP is to develop a local
antibiogram. Ideally, the antibiogram should be specific for
VAP patients, or failing that, specific for ICU patients, since
there is wide variability between different settings and speci-
men sources. Nonetheless, the panel did recognize that devel-
oping a local antibiogram, especially one tailored to patients
with VAP, will not be feasible in many settings. This is par-
ticularly the case for hospitals that do not routinely conduct
surveillance for VAP, hospitals that have very few cases of
VAP, and/or hospitals with relatively few positive ICU cul-
tures regardless of specimen source. In the absence of local
microbial epidemiology, clinicians can refer to large national
and international surveys of organisms and resistance pat-
terns. The survey closest to the local level should be utilized.
An approved guideline for susceptibility testing is available
[134].
e80 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 X. What Antibiotics Are Recommended for Empiric Treatment of
Clinically Suspected VAP?
Recommendations (See Table 3 for specific antibiotic
recommendations)
1. In patients with suspected VAP, we recommend including
coverage for S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, and other gram-
negative bacilli in all empiric regimens (strong recommenda-
tion, low-quality evidence).
i. We suggest including an agent active against MRSA for the
empiric treatment of suspected VAP only in patients with
any of the following: a risk factor for antimicrobial resis-
tance (Table 2), patients being treated in units where
>10%–20% of S. aureus isolates are methicillin resistant,
and patients in units where the prevalence of MRSA
is not known (weak recommendation, very low-quality
evidence).
ii. We suggest including an agent active against MSSA (and
not MRSA) for the empiric treatment of suspected VAP in
patients without risk factors for antimicrobial resistance,
who are being treated in ICUs where <10%–20% of S. au-
reus isolates are methicillin resistant (weak recommenda-
tion, very low-quality evidence).
2. If empiric coverage for MRSA is indicated, we recommend
either vancomycin or linezolid (strong recommendation,
moderate-quality evidence).
3. When empiric coverage for MSSA (and not MRSA) is indica-
ted, we suggest a regimen including piperacillin-tazobactam,
cefepime, levofloxacin, imipenem, or meropenem (weak rec-
ommendation, very low-quality evidence). Oxacillin, nafcillin,
or cefazolin are preferred agents for treatment of proven
MSSA, but are not necessary for the empiric treatment of
VAP if one of the above agents is used.
4. We suggest prescribing 2 antipseudomonal antibiotics
from different classes for the empiric treatment of suspect-
ed VAP only in patients with any of the following: a risk
factor for antimicrobial resistance (Table 2), patients in
units where >10% of gram-negative isolates are resistant
to an agent being considered for monotherapy, and pa-
tients in an ICU where local antimicrobial susceptibility
rates are not available (weak recommendation, low-quality
evidence).
5. We suggest prescribing one antibiotic active against P.
aeruginosa for the empiric treatment of suspected VAP
in patients without risk factors for antimicrobial resistance
who are being treated in ICUs where <10% of gram-nega-
tive isolates are resistant to the agent being considered for
monotherapy
(weak
recommendation,
low-quality
evidence).
6. In patients with suspected VAP, we suggest avoiding amino-
glycosides if alternative agents with adequate gram-negative
activity are available (weak recommendation, low-quality
evidence).
7. In patients with suspected VAP, we suggest avoiding
colistin if alternative agents with adequate gram-negative ac-
tivity are available (weak recommendation, very low-quality
evidence).
Values and Preferences: These recommendations are
a
compromise
between
the
competing
goals
of
providing early appropriate antibiotic coverage and avoid-
ing superfluous treatment that may lead to adverse drug
effects, C. difficile infections, antibiotic resistance, and in-
creased cost.
Remarks: Risk factors for antimicrobial resistance are
provided in Table 2. The 10%–20% threshold for deciding
whether or not to target MRSA and the 10% threshold for
deciding whether or not to prescribe one antipseudomo-
nal agent or 2 were chosen by the panel with a goal of try-
ing to assure that ≥95% of patient receive empiric therapy
active against their likely pathogens; when implementing
these recommendations, individual ICUs may elect to
modify these thresholds. If patient has structural lung dis-
ease increasing the risk of gram-negative infection (ie,
bronchiectasis or cystic fibrosis), 2 antipseudomonal
agents are recommended.
Summary of the Evidence
Surveillance studies suggest that the organisms most com-
monly associated with VAP in the United States are S. aureus
(approximately 20%–30% of isolates), P. aeruginosa (approx-
imately 10%–20% of isolates), enteric gram-negative bacilli
(approximately 20%–40% of isolates), and Acinetobacter
baumannii (approximately 5%–10% of isolates) [138].
These organisms are also the most frequent isolates identified
in international surveillance programs, albeit with a higher
fraction of cases attributable to P. aeruginosa and A. bauman-
nii [139].
Many of these organisms, both in the United States
and abroad, are resistant to common antibiotics. These same
surveillance studies reported that almost 50% of S. aureus
isolates were resistant to methicillin (MRSA), 28%–35% of
P. aeruginosa isolates were resistant to cefepime, 19%–29% of
P. aeruginosa were resistant to piperacillin-tazobactam, and
56%–61% of A. baumannii isolates were resistant to carbape-
nems [138, 139].
A large number of observational studies suggest that inade-
quate and/or delayed treatment is associated with higher mortal-
ity rates in patients with VAP [118, 140–143]. In a meta-analysis
of 9 observational studies (813 patients), inadequate antibiotic
therapy for VAP was associated with a higher risk of death
(OR, 2.34; 95% CI, 1.51–3.62) [141].
Our systematic review did not identify randomized con-
trolled trials (RCTs) comparing regimens with and without
agents active against one or more of the potentially resistant
pathogens commonly associated with VAP. Nonetheless, the
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e81
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 breadth of studies associating inadequate and delayed therapy
with poor outcomes suggests that empiric treatment regimens
for VAP should include agents likely to be active against these
pathogens.
Gram-Positive Coverage
There are limited data to inform the choice between different
agents active against MRSA. Vancomycin and linezolid have
been best studied. Meta-analyses of RCTs comparing vancomy-
cin and linezolid suggest that they are associated with similar
clinical outcomes [144–147] (see section XV). Other theoretical
choices include teicoplanin, telavancin, ceftaroline, and tedizol-
id [148–150].Two randomized clinical trials evaluated teicopla-
nin vs vancomycin or linezolid for gram-positive infections
[151, 152]. However, multiple sites of infection were included
in both studies and small numbers of patients with pneumonia
were evaluated, and a small number of patients with docu-
mented MRSA pneumonia were evaluated. Thus, more evi-
dence is needed to define the clinical role of teicoplanin in
patients with HAP/VAP. Two RCTs comparing telavancin
and vancomycin found similar outcomes for both agents,
but <10% of patients in these trials had MRSA VAP, and pa-
tients with moderate to severe renal dysfunction (creatinine
clearance <50 mL/min) randomized to telavancin had higher
mortality rates [148, 153, 154]. There are no published RCTs
evaluating ceftaroline or tedizolid for the treatment of MRSA
VAP. Daptomycin is inactivated by surfactant and is therefore
not used for treatment of pneumonia. RCTs comparing tige-
cycline to imipenem and ceftobiprole to ceftazidime noted
significantly lower clinical cure rates among VAP patients
randomized to tigecycline and ceftobiprole, respectively
[155, 156].
Gram-Negative Coverage
Potential options to cover gram-negatives are more varied.
We identified 29 RCTs comparing different gram-negative
regimens for empiric treatment of VAP [155–183]. The
regimens tested varied considerably but included compari-
sons within and between carbapenems, cephalosporins, anti-
pseudomonal penicillins, aminoglycosides, quinolones,
aztreonam, and tigecycline either alone or in combination. In-
dividually, none of these trials reported significant differences
in clinical response or mortality rates between comparator
arms with the exceptions of tigecycline and doripenem,
which were both associated with worse outcomes [155, 158].
We did not identify any RCTs assessing colistin as empiric
therapy for VAP, but a systematic review and meta-regression
of observational studies comparing colistin to other antibiot-
ics found no differences in clinical response rates, mortality,
or nephrotoxicity [184].The US FDA recently approved 2 new
cephalosporin–β-lactamase
combinations,
ceftolozane-
tazobactam and ceftazidime-avibactam, for the treatment of
complicated urinary tract and intra-abdominal infections.
These agents are active against Pseudomonas and other gram-
negative bacteria, but their effectiveness against VAP has yet to
be determined [185].
We performed a series of meta-analyses comparing each class
of antibiotics against all other classes to evaluate whether any
particular class of antibiotics might be superior to another.
For each class, we identified all RCTs that included the antibi-
otic class of interest in one study arm vs agents from any other
class in the comparison arm. These trials were combined using
random-effects models. Summary risk ratios for mortality, clin-
ical response, acquired resistance, and adverse events are pre-
sented in the supplementary materials [21].
There were no significant differences in mortality, clinical re-
sponse, acquired resistance, or adverse events for patients ran-
domized to cephalosporin vs noncephalosporin regimens or
antipseudomonal penicillin vs non-antipseudomonal penicillin
regimens.
Our meta-analysis of 9 trials including 2174 patients on car-
bapenem-based regimens demonstrated a 22% relative decrease
in mortality with carbapenem-based regimens compared to reg-
imens without carbapenems (RR, 0.78; 95% CI, .65–.95;
I2 = 0%; P = .01) [155, 159, 161, 163, 167, 168, 173, 182, 183].
The pooled mortality rate in the carbapenem arm was 13.9%,
vs 17.8% in the noncarbapenem arm, for an absolute reduction
of 3.9% (95% CI, .8–7.0). However, there were no differences be-
tween carbapenems vs noncarbapenems in clinical response
rates or adverse event rates. In addition, the published studies
did not consistently report the rates of subsequent C. difficile in-
fection and acquired carbapenem resistance.
Patients randomized to aminoglycoside-containing regimens
had similar mortality rates but lower clinical response rates
compared to patients treated with aminoglycoside-free regi-
mens (56% vs 68%; RR, 0.82; 95% CI, .71–.95). Patients ran-
domized to quinolone-containing regimens had similar
mortality and clinical response rates but slightly fewer adverse
events compared to those randomized to quinolone-free regi-
mens (24% vs 27%; RR, 0.88; 95% CI, .78–.99).
Combination Versus Monotherapy for Empiric Gram-Negative
Coverage of Suspected VAP
We evaluated whether there was a difference in outcomes in pa-
tients randomized to one vs 2 antipseudomonal agents. We
identified 7 eligible trials [160–162, 170, 171, 176, 181]. There
were no differences in mortality, clinical response, adverse ef-
fects, or acquired resistance between the monotherapy and
combination arms. However, many of these studies excluded
patients with comorbid illnesses and patients known to be col-
onized with resistant pathogens. A number of the studies also
allowed adjunctive empiric coverage for Pseudomonas until pa-
tients’ actual pathogens were identified. These factors limit the
applicability of these studies to the selection of empiric regi-
mens in unselected patients with suspected VAP.
e82 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Gram Stains
The role of Gram stains in guiding empiric therapy for VAP is
unclear. Some studies suggest that the absence of gram-positive
organisms on Gram stain makes it less likely that S. aureus will
be cultured [186, 187]. A recent meta-analysis of observational
studies, however, found relatively poor concordance between
Gram stains and final cultures [188]. The pooled kappa was
0.40 (95% CI, .34–.46) for gram-positive organisms and 0.30
(95% CI, .25–.36) for gram-negative organisms [188]. We did
not identify RCTs evaluating the use of Gram stains to inform
empiric treatment choices.
S. aureus Surveillance Screening
Many hospitals perform surveillance screening for MRSA in
some or all inpatients. The sensitivities of MRSA screens vary
considerably by anatomical site and by method of isolation
(nares vs oropharynx, conventional culture vs polymerase
chain reaction) [189]. Observational data suggest that concur-
rent or recent positive MRSA screens increase the likelihood
that clinical infection is due to MRSA [45,190].This association
is strongest, however, for skin and soft tissue infections. Only
about 30% of respiratory infections are due to MRSA in patients
with positive MRSA surveillance studies [44, 46]. Likewise, neg-
ative MRSA surveillance studies need to be interpreted within
the context of the local prevalence of MRSA. In settings with
low prevalence of respiratory infections due to MRSA, a nega-
tive nasal screen further suggests that pneumonia is unlikely to
be due to MRSA and that anti-MRSA coverage can be withheld
[190]. In settings with higher prevalence rates of MRSA, a neg-
ative screen decreases the probability that infection is due to
MRSA but does not rule out the possibility [44,46].In these set-
tings, some studies have found that up to 75% of critically ill
patients with MRSA lower respiratory tract infections have neg-
ative nasal culture surveillance screens for MRSA [46]. We did
not identify any RCTs evaluating the use of MRSA screening to
inform empiric treatment choices for VAP.
Rationale for the Recommendations
Selecting empiric treatments for clinically suspected VAP is a
difficult balancing act between starting adequate antibiotics
early and limiting superfluous coverage. Delaying treatment
and failing to cover patients’ causative pathogens are both asso-
ciated with higher mortality rates Conversely, broader coverage
and longer treatment courses increase the risks of adverse drug
effects, C. difficile infections, and antimicrobial resistance [191,
192]. The generally recommended compromise is to pair early
and aggressive treatment with early and aggressive de-escalation
(see section XXIII) [68, 84, 120, 193–197].
National and international surveillance data suggest that a
considerable fraction of VAP is attributable to MRSA and resis-
tant gram-negatives. Unless local or regional data demons-
trating pathogen and/or antimicrobial resistance patterns
significantly different from the rates listed above are available,
empiric coverage should include an agent active against
MRSA and at least 2 agents active against gram-negative organ-
isms, including P. aeruginosa. The rationale for including 2
gram-negative agents in empiric regimens is to increase the
probability that at least one agent will be active against the pa-
tient’s pathogen. On the other hand, if local or regional data
suggest a low prevalence of MRSA and low antibiotic resistance
rates among gram-negatives, then a single agent active against
both P. aeruginosa and MSSA or one agent active against
MSSA combined with one agent active against Pseudomonas
and other gram-negatives is likely adequate [162].
Empiric therapies should be informed by patient-specific risk
factors for antimicrobial-resistant pathogens and the distribu-
tion of pathogens and antibiotic resistance in the local practice
environment [131, 133]. Not all patients require maximal em-
piric coverage (see Table 3 for specific antibiotic recommenda-
tions). Patient-specific factors to consider include prior culture
results and antimicrobial resistance patterns, recent antibiotic
exposures, time since hospital admission, and severity of illness.
The risk factors for antibiotic-resistant pathogens are listed in
Table 2. The positive predictive values of individual risk factors
for drug resistance are variable and imperfect; hence, clinicians
should also consider the local prevalence of drug-resistant path-
ogens when choosing empiric regimens. Coverage for MRSA
and resistant gram-negative bacilli may still be appropriate in
a patient without specific risk factors for resistant pathogens
if the local prevalence of antibiotic-resistant pathogens is
high. Conversely, narrow-spectrum coverage may be appropri-
ate for patients without specific risk factors for antibiotic-
resistant pathogens being treated in locations with a low
prevalence of antibiotic-resistant organisms.
There are no data to pinpoint what specific organism fre-
quencies or antibiotic resistance rates should be used when de-
signing empiric regimens to assure coverage. The panel suggests
that ICU-level S. aureus methicillin resistance rates of >10%–
20% merit selecting a gram-positive agent active against
MRSA, and that ICU-level gram-negative resistance rates of
>10% to an agent being considered for empiric gram-negative
monotherapy merit using 2 gram-negative agents for empiric
therapy of suspected VAP. The reason for the lower threshold
for gram-negatives compared with gram-positives is because
gram-negatives are more frequently implicated in VAP; hence,
there is increased risk for inadequate empiric gram-negative
coverage. The panel recognizes that calculating the total VAP
gram-negative resistance rate to a potential antibiotic choice
may be challenging because it requires knowing both the local
prevalence of organisms associated with VAP and their resis-
tance rates to all potential antibiotic choices. For hospitals
that are unable to calculate their gram-negative VAP resistance
rate for each antibiotic, the resistance rate for Pseudomonas is a
reasonable, albeit conservative, proxy as Pseudomonas is the
most common gram-negative organism associated with VAP
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e83
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 and tends to have higher resistance rates than other gram-negatives
commonly causing VAP.
The thresholds selected by the panel were chosen to try to
minimize the probability of inappropriate coverage while recog-
nizing that indiscriminate use of broad-spectrum coverage for
all patients in all settings is not necessary and is potentially
harmful. In arriving at these thresholds, the panel considered
the number of patients that would need to be treated to benefit
one individual. For example, if the average prevalence of S. au-
reus in VAP is approximately 25%, then a methicillin resistance
rate of 10%–20% implies that only 2.5%–5% of VAPs will be due
to MRSA and the vast majority of patients will not benefit from
MRSA coverage. Higher prevalence rates of MRSA, however, in-
crease the percentage of patients likely to benefit from MRSA
coverage. We acknowledge that, given the lack of data to inform
optimal thresholds for broadening coverage, individual units
can adjust these thresholds in accordance with local values
and preferences. We note that other infectious disease guide-
lines have suggested a similar threshold to inform empiric an-
tibiotic choices [198]. We believe that further research on
optimal thresholds for selecting broad vs narrow empiric regi-
mens is an important priority.
The panel recommended vancomycin or linezolid for empir-
ic MRSA coverage, vs other agents, based on the many trials
comparing these agents. Because the effects of vancomycin
and linezolid on clinical outcomes appear to be similar, the
final choice should rest upon other factors such as blood cell
counts, renal function, concurrent prescriptions for serotonin-
reuptake inhibitors, and cost.
The panel suggested that monotherapy with an agent active
against both MSSA and Pseudomonas may be adequate in pa-
tients without risk factors for antimicrobial-resistant pathogens
receiving treatment in units with low prevalence rates of MRSA
and resistant gram-negatives. Possible agents include piperacil-
lin-tazobactam, cefepime, levofloxacin, imipenem, or merope-
nem. The panel cautions clinicians that quinolone resistance
is slightly more common in MSSA vs resistance to the other op-
tions. If infection is confirmed to be due to MSSA, the panel
suggests selecting a narrower-spectrum agent with less likeli-
hood of inducing resistance such as cefazolin, oxacillin, or
nafcillin.
The panel suggested using 2 antipseudomonal agents from 2
different classes for empiric treatment of patients with risk fac-
tors for antibiotic-resistant pathogens as well as patients receiv-
ing care in units where >10% of VAPs are resistant to an agent
being considered for monotherapy. We made this suggestion
despite the panel’s meta-analysis suggesting no difference in
mortality, clinical response, adverse effects, or acquired resis-
tance rates between regimens with one antipseudomonal
agent vs 2. The panel was concerned that the trial data we re-
viewed do not apply to all patients with VAP because most of
the studies specifically excluded patients colonized with
resistant pathogens and patients at increased risk for resistant
pathogens. It was the panel’s belief that these data then are
most applicable to patients at low risk for resistant pathogens
or in whom resistant pathogens have been excluded. These
data do suggest, however, that once a pathogen has been iden-
tified and susceptibilities are known, there is no reason to con-
tinue combination therapy.
The panel did not specifically recommend carbapenems as
the empiric agent of choice for VAP despite our meta-analysis
suggesting that carbapenems may be associated with lower
mortality rates in VAP. The panel was concerned because all
of the carbapenem studies only evaluated patients for short-
term outcomes. Many studies now associate carbapenems
with selection of C. difficile and antibiotic-resistant organisms
at both the individual patient and hospital levels, includ-
ing organisms resistant to agents other than carbapenems
[199–209]. Furthermore, despite the lower number of studies
collecting and reporting the development of carbapenem resis-
tance (only 7 studies), our standard meta-analysis showed a
trend for an increased risk of developing resistance (RR,
1.40; 95% CI, .95–2.06; P = .08), and our Bayesian analyses
showed a 96% probability of developing carbapenem resis-
tance with the use of empiric carbapenem. It is therefore pos-
sible that short-term mortality benefits may be outweighed by
long-term harms. Of note, a significant increase in antibiotic re-
sistance and a lack of survival benefits with carbapenems com-
pared to other antibiotics was observed by our panel’s analysis
of the treatment of HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa (see section
XVI). Finally, carbapenem resistance rates have risen since the
publication of many of the studies included in our analysis
[210–212], and hence a blanket recommendation in favor of car-
bapenems may not be suitable for many contemporary ICUs. We
believe this is a critical area for future research.
The panel suggested avoiding aminoglycosides when alterna-
tive agents with adequate gram-negative activity are available
because of aminoglycosides’ poor lung penetration, increased
risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity, and our meta-analysis
suggesting that they are associated with poorer clinical response
rates compared with other classes.
Although there are no randomized trials assessing polymyx-
ins (colistin or polymyxin B) as empiric therapy for VAP, poly-
myxins may yet be a reasonable component of empiric
regimens in units with high rates of resistance to agents from
other classes [184]. In some ICUs, organisms sensitive to colis-
tin alone are responsible for >20% of gram-negative VAP [213].
In ICUs operating under these difficult conditions, including
colistin in empiric regimens may increase the frequency of ini-
tially appropriate empiric antibiotic treatment. However, there
are limited data on how this might affect nephrotoxicity rates,
colistin resistance, and mortality rates over the long term. Over-
use of polymyxins may jeopardize its current role as the gram-
negative antibiotic of last resort.
e84 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Finally, the panel strongly encourages clinicians to consider
all relevant, available data about both their individual patient
and their practice environment to tailor empiric choices for
each patient. Factors to consider include the clinician’s confi-
dence about whether or not the patient truly has pneumonia,
the patient’s risk factors for drug-resistant pathogens, the pa-
tient’s drug allergies and severity of illness, results from prior
clinical cultures, results of MRSA screening, the morphology
and quantity of organisms on Gram stains, and the local distri-
bution of organisms and resistance patterns associated with
VAP. Some of these factors could reasonably cause a clinician
to include coverage for MRSA even if the local prevalence of
methicillin resistance is <10%–20% (for example, if the patient
is severely ill and has a good-quality ETA Gram stain dense with
gram-positive cocci and a recent positive surveillance nasal
screen for MRSA). Conversely, some factors could also reason-
ably support a decision to omit MRSA coverage even within a
unit with relatively high rates of antibiotic resistance (eg, if the
clinical suspicion for pneumonia is relatively low, the patient is
not severely ill and has no risk factors for drug-resistant path-
ogens, and a good-quality Gram stain of pulmonary secretions
shows gram-negative bacilli alone).
Research Needs
There is a pressing need for more data to guide the selection of
broad- vs narrow-spectrum empiric regimens. More data are
also needed on the differential impact of different empiric reg-
imens on antimicrobial resistance rates and long-term out-
comes at the individual and population levels, such as
mortality and antibiotic resistance.
XI. Should Selection of an Empiric Antibiotic Regimen for HAP (Non-
VAP) Be Guided by Local Antibiotic Resistance Data?
Recommendations
1. We recommend that all hospitals regularly generate and dis-
seminate a local antibiogram, ideally one that is tailored to
their HAP population, if possible.
2. We recommend that empiric antibiotic regimens be based
upon the local distribution of pathogens associated with
HAP and their antimicrobial susceptibilities.
Remarks: The frequency with which the distribution of path-
ogens and their antimicrobial susceptibilities are updated
should be determined by the institution. Considerations
should include their rate of change, resources, and the
amount of data available for analysis.
Summary of the Evidence
We performed a systematic review of both randomized trials
and observational studies to determine the prevalence of infect-
ing organisms in HAP. Studies published prior to 2000 were ex-
cluded because of changes in resistance patterns and organism
prevalence over time. We selected 24 studies that provided rel-
evant data [11, 89, 92, 139, 155, 179, 214–231]. The studies
enrolled patients predominantly in North America, Europe,
and Asia, with a small percentage from South America. A
meta-analysis determined the following frequencies of potentially
drug-resistant pathogens: non-glucose-fermenting gram-negative
bacilli (19% [95% CI, 15%–24%] of isolates, with Pseudomonas
species accounting for 13% [95% CI, 10%–17%] and Acineto-
bacter species accounting for 4% [95% CI, 2%–6%]), enteric
gram-negative bacilli (16% [95% CI, 13%–20%] of isolates), S.
aureus (16% [95% CI, 12%–21%] of isolates), MRSA (10%
[95% CI 6%–14%] of isolates), and MSSA (6% of isolates).
There was considerable variation in the rates of isolation of spe-
cific pathogens across studies, but the study year and geographic
area did not account for the variation, with the possible exception
of Acinetobacter species. Acinetobacter species increased in prev-
alence from studies published between 1994 and 1999 to studies
published between 2006 and 2012, and are a more common
cause of HAP in Asia than in Europe and the United States.
One study was not included in the meta-analysis because the
number of observations could not be determined [139]; however,
exclusion of the study was inconsequential as the results of the
study and meta-analysis were concordant.
The systematic review had limitations that should be consid-
ered before applying the findings to clinical practice. There was
significant variation among studies regarding whether or not
patients who were immunosuppressed or did not have a con-
firmed pathogen were included; inclusion of only patients
with positive microbiologic results may bias the data to reflect
the sickest patients, as severely ill patients are more likely to
have positive microbiology and more likely to have infection
with drug-resistant organisms [27, 232, 233]. There was also
variation in the unit of analysis (ie, the patient or the isolate).
Because specific antibiotic sensitivities were not reported in
most studies, the results reflect potentially antibiotic-resistant
organisms, not actual antibiotic resistance rates.
Antimicrobial flora and resistance patterns can vary consid-
erably among countries, regions, hospitals, ICUs within a hos-
pital, and specimen sources (ie, pulmonary vs other specimens)
[32,131,132].This was illustrated by an observational study that
enrolled 405 patients who were consecutively admitted to the
medical, surgical, or trauma ICU of a large academic medical
center and then followed prospectively for 3 months. There
were significant differences in antibiotic susceptibility among
ICUs for S. aureus, Enterococcus species, Acinetobacter species,
Enterobacter species, Klebsiella species, and Pseudomonas spe-
cies [132]. However, another study found that resistance rates
measured in overall hospital antibiograms are reflected in the
resistance rates found in ICU-acquired infections, although
the frequency of MRSA might be underestimated [133].
Rationale for the Recommendations
To balance the competing goals of providing early appropri-
ate antibiotic coverage and avoiding superfluous treatment
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e85
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 that may lead to antibiotic resistance and other adverse
consequences, one approach involves preferentially providing
broad antimicrobial therapy to patients with the greatest
need for such therapy, such as those with risk factors for
antimicrobial-resistant pathogens and those in an environ-
ment where antibiotic-resistant pathogens are common
[131, 133].
Identifying patients who are in an environment where anti-
biotic-resistant pathogens are common requires that both local
prevalence and antibiotic resistance patterns be determined.
The distribution of pathogens and antibiotic-resistance patterns
associated with HAP should ideally be determined using local
data from each medical unit, if possible, because antimicrobial
flora and resistance patterns vary considerably among coun-
tries, regions, hospitals, ICUs, and specimen sources. The
guideline panel agreed that the use of local antibiograms to in-
form antibiotic selection is the preferred approach to initiating
early appropriate antibiotic coverage while avoiding superfluous
treatment.
XII. What Antibiotics Are Recommended for Empiric Treatment of
Clinically Suspected HAP (Non-VAP)?
Recommendations (See Table 4 for Specific Antibiotic
Recommendations)
1. For patients being treated empirically for HAP, we recom-
mend prescribing an antibiotic with activity against S. aureus
(strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence). (See
below for recommendations regarding empiric coverage of
MRSA vs MSSA.)
i. For patients with HAP who are being treated empirically
and have either a risk factor for MRSA infection (ie,
prior intravenous antibiotic use within 90 days, hospitali-
zation in a unit where >20% of S. aureus isolates are meth-
icillin resistant, or the prevalence of MRSA is not known,
or who are at high risk for mortality, we suggest prescrib-
ing an antibiotic with activity against MRSA (weak recom-
mendation, very low-quality evidence). (Risk factors for
mortality include need for ventilatory support due to
HAP and septic shock).
ii. For patients with HAP who require empiric coverage for
MRSA, we recommend vancomycin or linezolid rather
than an alternative antibiotic (strong recommendation,
low-quality evidence).
iii. For patients with HAP who are being treated empirically
and have no risk factors for MRSA infection and are not at
high risk of mortality, we suggest prescribing an antibiotic
with activity against MSSA. When empiric coverage for
MSSA (and not MRSA) is indicated, we suggest a regimen
including piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime, levofloxacin,
imipenem, or meropenem. Oxacillin, nafcillin, or cefazo-
lin are preferred for the treatment of proven MSSA, but
are not necessary for empiric coverage of HAP if one of
the above agents is used (weak recommendation, very
low-quality evidence).
2. For patients with HAP who are being treated empirically, we
recommend prescribing antibiotics with activity against
P. aeruginosa and other gram-negative bacilli (strong recom-
mendation, very low-quality evidence).
i. For patients with HAP who are being treated empirically
and have factors increasing the likelihood for Pseudomo-
nas or other gram-negative infection (ie, prior intrave-
nous antibiotic use within 90 days; also see Remarks) or
a high risk for mortality, we suggest prescribing antibiot-
ics from 2 different classes with activity against P. aerugi-
nosa (weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence).
(Risk factors for mortality include need for ventilatory
support due to HAP and septic shock). All other
patients with HAP who are being treated empirically
may be prescribed a single antibiotic with activity against
P. aeruginosa.
ii. For patients with HAP who are being treated empirically,
we recommend not using an aminoglycoside as the sole
antipseudomonal agent (strong recommendation, very
low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: These recommendations are a
compromise between the competing goals of providing
early appropriate antibiotic coverage and avoiding super-
fluous treatment that may lead to adverse drug effects,
C. difficile infections, antibiotic resistance, and increased
cost.
Remarks: The 20% threshold for deciding whether or not
to target MRSA or MSSA was chosen in an effort to bal-
ance the need for effective initial antibiotic therapy against
the risks of excessive antibiotic use; when implementing
these recommendations, individual units may elect to
modify this threshold. If patient has structural lung dis-
ease increasing the risk of gram-negative infection (ie,
bronchiectasis or cystic fibrosis), 2 antipseudomonal
agents are recommended. A high-quality Gram stain
from a respiratory specimen with numerous and pre-
dominant gram-negative bacilli provides further sup-
port for the diagnosis of a gram-negative pneumonia,
including fermenting and non-glucose-fermenting
microorganisms.
Summary of the Evidence
With respect to whether patients with HAP should be empiri-
cally treated for S. aureus, our meta-analysis of 23 studies de-
scribed above (see section XI) found that MRSA and MSSA
were associated with 10% and 6% of cases of HAP, respectively.
Inadequate initial treatment of S. aureus may be associated with
increased mortality according to an observational study of 165
patients with HAP. The study found that inadequate antibiotic
e86 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 therapy was associated with increased total mortality (75% vs
22%; RR, 10.41; 95% CI, 2.01–53.95) and increased mortality
due to pneumonia (50% vs 15.1%; RR, 4.92; 95% CI, 1.31–
18.49) [11]. This study is indirect evidence that failure to ade-
quately target S. aureus increases mortality because the study
identified the causative pathogen in only one-third of cases
and, among the cases in which the pathogen was identified,
<10% were due to S. aureus.
With respect to selection of an antibiotic once the decision is
made to target MRSA, the guideline panel found limited evi-
dence specific to patients with HAP that compared different
regimens. The panel, therefore, decided that the most appropri-
ate evidence to inform its judgments was the comparisons of
various regimens described above for VAP, which found no dif-
ferences in clinical outcomes when vancomycin was compared
to linezolid (see section XV).
With respect to whether patients with HAP should be empir-
ically treated for P. aeruginosa and other gram-negative bacilli,
the meta-analysis of 23 studies described above found that
P. aeruginosa was associated with 13% of cases of HAP, and
other gram-negative bacilli were associated with 22% of cases.
Inadequate initial treatment of P. aeruginosa and other gram-
negative bacilli may be associated with increased mortality
according to the observational study of 165 patients with
HAP described above. [11]. However, this study constitutes in-
direct evidence that failure to adequately target P. aeruginosa
and other gram-negative bacilli increases mortality because
the study identified the causative pathogen in only one-third
of cases; among the cases in which the pathogen was identified,
<50% were due to P. aeruginosa or other gram-negative bacilli.
With respect to whether to use a single antibiotic or 2 anti-
biotics to target P. aeruginosa and other gram-negative bacilli in
HAP, we found limited evidence that addressed this question in
patients with HAP.
With respect to the preferred antibiotic regimen, our system-
atic review identified 10 randomized trials that compared
empiric antibiotic regimens in adult populations in which at
least two-thirds of the patients had HAP rather than VAP
[153,155,177,179,183,214,229,234–236].Four trials compared
carbapenems to piperacillin-tazobactam [179, 183, 229, 235],
5 trials compared a cephalosporin to various alternative anti-
biotics [177, 214, 237–239], and 2 compared a new antimicro-
bial (televancin or tigecycline) to an alternative antibiotic
[153, 155]. Our meta-analysis of the 4 trials that compared
carbapenems to piperacillin-tazobactam revealed no differ-
ence in mortality (RR for carbapenems, 0.94; 95% CI, .66–
1.34). The remaining 6 trials could not be pooled; however,
all of the trials found that no specific antimicrobial regimens
demonstrated better outcomes than comparator regimens
with the exception of one trial, which had important limita-
tions and in which the difference may not have been clinically
significant [177].
Given the association of aminoglycoside therapy with adverse
effects in patients with VAP, the panel was concerned that sim-
ilar effects may occur in HAP. Several of the antimicrobial reg-
imens used in the trials included aminoglycosides. Although
side effects were not compared to other regimens, the incidence
of renal failure and vertigo/tinnitus in patients with HAP who
received an aminoglycoside-containing regimen was 3% and
2%, respectively [229, 235].
Although not available in the United States, ceftobiprole is a
new cephalosporin with in vitro activity against common HAP
pathogens, including MRSA, Enterobacter species, and P. aeru-
ginosa. In a study of 781 patients with nosocomial pneumonia,
including 571 with HAP, ceftobiprole had a similar clinical cure
rate and microbiological eradication rate to those of the combi-
nation of ceftazidime and linezolid for HAP (but not VAP). Ad-
junctive antipseudomonal therapy was provided to patients
with suspected or proven Pseudomonas infection [156].
The guideline panel had very low confidence in the following
bodies of evidence: (1) the estimated prevalence of various path-
ogens, because the estimates are based upon a meta-analysis
that included studies with risk of bias; (2) the estimated effects
of inadequate antibiotic therapy on non–mechanically ventilat-
ed patients with HAP due to P. aeruginosa and other gram-
negative bacilli, since the study was an observational study
that was limited by indirectness of the population (the popula-
tion of interest was patients with HAP due to P. aeruginosa and
other gram-negative bacilli, but the population studied was
patients with HAP due to a variety of pathogens) [11]; (3) the
estimated effects of various empiric regimens (including mono-
therapy vs combination therapy) because they were based upon
meta-analyses of randomized trials with risk of bias and very
serious indirectness (the indirectness reflects the fact that the
trials were performed in patients with HAP in different settings
using different protocols and different regimens); (4) the esti-
mated adverse effects of aminoglycosides because they were
not compared to a control group (ie, a case series within a ran-
domized trial [229,235]); (5) the study that evaluated the effects
of inadequate antibiotic therapy on patients with HAP due to
S. aureus, as the study was an observational study that was lim-
ited by indirectness of the population (the population of interest
was patients with HAP due to S. aureus, but the population
studied was patients with HAP due to a variety of pathogens
[11]); and (6) the estimates derived from comparisons of van-
comycin to linezolid because they were determined by a meta-
analyses of randomized trials, which were limited by a risk of
bias and indirectness (see section XV). The indirectness refers
to the meta-analyses including patients with VAP, whereas the
population of interest was patients with HAP.
Rationale for the Recommendations
The evidence indicated that 16% (95% CI, 12%–21%) of HAP
cases are caused by S. aureus. The guideline panel agreed that
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e87
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 this frequency was sufficient to recommend that all empiric reg-
imens include an antibiotic with activity against S. aureus, par-
ticularly in light of evidence that inadequate treatment of
S. aureus may increase mortality. In other words, the panel
judged that the benefit of potentially decreasing mortality out-
weighs the additional side effects, burdens, and cost of including
an antibiotic with activity against S. aureus. The recommenda-
tion is strong despite the very low quality of evidence because
the panel judged that the upsides of the recommendation are
more important to patients than the downsides and, therefore,
most well-informed patients would want to receive the addi-
tional antibiotic.
The guideline panel agreed that the finding that 10% (95% CI
6%–14%) of HAP cases are attributable to MRSA was insuffi-
cient justification to use an antibiotic that targets MRSA in all
patients with HAP. Factors that the panel considered included
the following: HAP patients tend to be less severely ill than VAP
patients and, therefore, the negative consequences of initial in-
appropriate antibiotic therapy are likely less severe than with
VAP patients [92, 219, 222]; culture data are often not obtained
in patients with HAP because adequate sputum samples can be
difficult to obtain and, therefore, clinicians are likely to continue
the initial broad-spectrum antibiotic regimen for the entire
course of therapy as there are no culture data to support de-
escalation; and lack of de-escalation increases the likelihood of
acquiring antibiotic resistance.
Instead, the panel agreed that empiric coverage of MRSA
should be reserved for patients with HAP who have either fac-
tors increasing the likelihood for MRSA infection or a high risk
for mortality. Our analyses revealed intravenous antibiotic treat-
ment during the prior 90 days as a risk factor for MRSA noso-
comial pneumonia. Other factors that probably increase
likelihood of MRSA pneumonia include prior known MRSA
colonization detected via nasal or respiratory cultures or non-
culture screening [45,190] and a high-quality Gram stain show-
ing numerous and predominant gram-positive cocci in clusters
with the morphology of Staphylococcus species [187, 240]. Hos-
pitalization in a unit where >20% of S. aureus isolates are meth-
icillin resistant or the prevalence of MRSA is not known
increases a priori the risk of MRSA compared with hospitals
where MRSA is known to be rare. The 20% threshold for decid-
ing whether or not to target MRSA or MSSA was arbitrarily
chosen by the panel in an attempt to balance the need for effec-
tive initial antibiotic therapy against the risks of excessive anti-
biotic use. A high risk for mortality was defined by the guideline
panel as requiring ventilatory support due to pneumonia and
having septic shock.
The guideline panel prefers vancomycin or linezolid for pa-
tients whose empiric antibiotic regimen will include an agent
that targets MRSA. This is based upon extensive clinical expe-
rience with these agents and the effects of these agents in pa-
tients with VAP. Because the effects of vancomycin and
linezolid on clinical outcomes are similar, the final choice
rests upon factors such as blood cell counts, concurrent pre-
scriptions for serotonin-reuptake inhibitors, renal function,
and cost.
Patients with HAP who have no risk factors for either MRSA
infection or a poor clinical outcome may receive an empiric reg-
imen that includes an antibiotic targeting MSSA. Of note, some
agents that may be included in empiric regimens for HAP due
to their activity against P. aeruginosa and gram-negative bacilli
are also suitable for empiric coverage against MSSA. These in-
clude piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime, levofloxacin, imipe-
nem, and meropenem. An empiric antimicrobial regimen that
includes one of these agents does not require an additional
agent to target MSSA. If infection with MSSA alone is con-
firmed, oxacillin, nafcillin, and cefazolin are narrow-spectrum
intravenous antibiotics that are optimal for treating MSSA.
The evidence indicated that approximately 35% of HAP cases
are caused by gram-negative bacilli. The panel agreed that this
high prevalence, combined with the possibility that inadequate
treatment increases mortality, dictates that all empiric regimens
target P. aeruginosa and other gram-negative bacilli. In other
words, the panel judged that the benefit of potentially decreas-
ing mortality outweighs the side effects, burdens, and cost of
targeting P. aeruginosa and other gram-negative bacilli. The rec-
ommendation is strong despite the very low quality of evidence,
because the panel judged that the upsides of the recommenda-
tion are more important to patients than the downsides and,
therefore, most well-informed patients would want antibiotics
with activity against P. aeruginosa and other gram-negative
bacilli.
With respect to whether the empiric regimen should include
one antibiotic or 2 antibiotics with activity against P. aerugino-
sa, the guideline panel considered indirect evidence from pa-
tients with VAP. Similar to its decision making with VAP, the
panel was concerned about applying this evidence to all patients
with HAP because most of the studies excluded patients at in-
creased risk for resistant pathogens. It was the panel’s impres-
sion that the data are most applicable to patients who are at low
risk for resistant pathogens or in whom resistant pathogens
have been excluded. The panel concluded that patients with
HAP with factors increasing the likelihood of gram-negative in-
fection, including Pseudomonas, or increased risk for mortality
should receive antibiotics from 2 different classes with activity
against P. aeruginosa, whereas patients without these factors
should receive only one such antibiotic. The panel agreed that
this approach was an appropriate balance between the compet-
ing goals of providing early appropriate antibiotic coverage to
improve clinical outcomes such as mortality while avoiding
superfluous treatment that may lead to antibiotic resistance,
side effects, and increased cost.
Factors likely increasing the probability of gram-negative in-
fection, including Pseudomonas, are a high-quality Gram stain
e88 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 from a respiratory specimen with numerous and predominant
gram-negative bacilli [240], and having structural lung disease
that is associated with Pseudomonas infection (ie, bronchiecta-
sis and cystic fibrosis). Risk factors for mortality include the re-
quirement for ventilatory support due to pneumonia and
having septic shock.
This approach will likely decrease the number of patients
with HAP for whom 2 antibiotics with activity against P. aeru-
ginosa would be recommended for initial empiric therapy, com-
pared with the recommendations from the 2005 ATS/IDSA
HAP/VAP guidelines [1]. The panel agreed that this change is
warranted, particularly in light of the growing prevalence of
C. difficile induced by antibiotics, the public health concerns re-
lated to increasing antibiotic resistance, and the dearth of new
antibiotics. The evidence suggests that non-glucose-fermenting
gram-negative bacilli (eg, Pseudomonas and Acinetobacter) and
enteric gram-negative bacilli account for 19% (95% CI, 15%–
24%) and 16% (95% CI, 13%–20%), respectively, of cases of
HAP. This means that even in a hospital with a high rate of
antibiotic resistance (eg, 20% for non-glucose-fermenting
gram-negative bacilli and 10% for enteric gram-negative
bacilli), the rate of HAP caused by antibiotic-resistant gram-
negative bacilli will be approximately 5%. Thus, gram-negative
monotherapy would be expected to be adequate for 95% of
patients with HAP. Of course, in hospitals with a high rate
of antibiotic resistance to the agent being considered for
monotherapy, the use of 2 antipseudomonal agents should
be considered.
The panel elected to not recommend a specific antibiotic
class to target P. aeruginosa and other gram-negative bacilli
due to the lack of evidence that any regimen is superior to an-
other. The only exceptions are the aminoglycosides. The panel
chose to recommend against aminoglycosides in most situa-
tions because of the poor lung penetration and risk of nephro-
toxicity and ototoxicity in the absence of improved outcomes in
patients with HAP, coupled with the indirect evidence from pa-
tients with VAP of inferior clinical outcomes and increased ad-
verse effects.
Patients with early-onset HAP (variably defined as pneu-
monia occurring within 4–7 days of hospital admission)
have a lower rate of MDR pneumonia than patients with
late-onset HAP [228]. Still, a number of patients with early-
onset HAP are infected with MDR pathogens [228, 241], prob-
ably because many have risks for resistant pathogens, such as
prior receipt of intravenous antibiotics. Thus, the panel did
not recommend different antibiotic regimens for early-onset
HAP, preferring to address the specific risk factors that confer
increased risk in patients independent of the timing of the
HAP.
Although not available in the United States, ceftobiprole may
be an option for HAP monotherapy where it is available, given
the results of the study described above [156].
PHARMACOKINETIC/PHARMACODYNAMIC
OPTIMIZATION OF ANTIBIOTIC THERAPY
XIII. Should Antibiotic Dosing Be Determined by PK/PD Data or the
Manufacturer’s Prescribing Information in Patients With HAP/VAP?
Recommendation
1. For patients with HAP/VAP, we suggest that antibiotic dos-
ing be determined using PK/PD data, rather than the manu-
facturer’s prescribing information (weak recommendation,
very low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: This recommendation places a high
value on improving clinical outcome by optimization of ther-
apy; it places a lower value on burden and cost.
Remarks: PK/PD -optimized dosing refers to the use of an-
tibiotic blood concentrations, extended and continuous infu-
sions, and weight-based dosing for certain antibiotics.
Summary of the Evidence
Our systematic review identified 3 randomized trials [242–
244] and 4 observational studies [245–248] that measured
the effects of PK/PD-optimized dosing (ie, dosing guided by
therapeutic drug monitoring or extended continuous intrave-
nous infusion) on clinical outcomes. A meta-analysis of 3
studies (one randomized trial [244] and 2 observational stud-
ies [246, 248]) determined that PK/PD-optimized dosing re-
duced both mortality (12% vs 24%; RR, 0.49; 95% CI,
.34–.72) and the ICU length of stay (mean difference, −2.48
days; 95% CI, −3.09 to −1.87 days). A meta-analysis of 5 stud-
ies (2 randomized trials [242, 243] and 3 observational studies
[246–248]) found that PK/PD-optimized dosing improved the
clinical cure rate (81% vs 64%; RR, 1.40; 95% CI, 1.16–1.69).
These benefits from PK/PD optimization have also been de-
tected during the treatment of infections other than HAP/
VAP [249].
PK/PD targets associated with improved clinical outcomes
have been reported in observational studies. Generally speaking,
the PK/PD targets reported for quinolones and aminoglyco-
sides are fairly consistent, whereas the PK/PD targets reported
for β-lactams are highly variable.
The guideline panel’s confidence in the estimated effects on
mortality, ICU length of stay, and clinical cure rate in patients
with HAP/VAP was very low, because most of the studies in-
cluded in the meta-analyses were observational studies with a
risk of bias due to the excess influence of one observational
study [248]. In the mortality and ICU length-of-stay meta-
analyses, the study contributed 638 of 741 patients (86%),
and in the clinical cure rate meta-analysis, the study contrib-
uted 638 of 908 patients (70%). In addition, the evidence is in-
direct for any specific class of antibiotics or any specific
approach to PK/PD optimization, as several antibiotic classes
and dosing strategies (eg, extended or continuous infusion
[242–244, 246, 247] and monitoring serum concentrations
[245, 248]) were included in the studies in the meta-analyses.
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e89
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Finally, the meta-analysis for clinical cure was also limited by
inconsistency.
Rationale for the Recommendation
The guideline panel carefully weighed the potential advantages
of PK/PD-optimized dosing (decreased mortality, decreased
ICU length of stay, and increased clinical cure rate) against
the potential downsides (more burdensome and costly, possibly
more toxicity among patients who require higher doses due to
augmented clearance). In addition, the panel considered the
possibility that the increased clinical cure rate might lead to
shorter courses of antibiotics and, subsequently, less antibiotic
toxicity and less antibiotic resistance. On the basis of this infor-
mation, the panel decided that patients with HAP/VAP should
have PK/PD-optimized dosing of their antimicrobial regimens,
rather than simply following the dosing described in the man-
ufacturer’s prescribing information. The panel agreed that the
potential benefits were far more important to patients than
the inconveniences and costs associated with the approach,
and agreed that their low confidence in the estimated effects
of PK/PD-optimized dosing was insufficient to justify an alter-
native approach.
The rationale for using PK/PD-optimized dosing rather than
following the manufacturer’s prescribing information is sound.
The distribution of many antibiotics can be severely altered by
pathophysiological changes that are common to critically ill pa-
tients, leading to altered pharmacokinetics [250]. Because the
ICU is also commonly associated with less susceptible patho-
gens, the likelihood of standard antibiotic dosing achieving de-
sired PK/PD targets is probably reduced in critically ill patients,
which may partially explain suboptimal clinical outcomes ob-
served in HAP/VAP [251, 252].
PK/PD-optimized dosing is probably more burdensome and
costly than conventional dosing. As an example, the most accu-
rate approach to dosing in patients with HAP/VAP requires
measurement of the blood concentration of the antibiotic and
then incorporation of the result into a dosing software package
[253]. Costs and burdens include education, blood sampling,
performing the drug assay, and acquiring and updating the soft-
ware. Alternative interventions, such as routine extended infu-
sions of β-lactams or weight-based dosing of aminoglycosides,
are probably less burdensome and costly than management
using the blood concentration of antibiotics, but still more bur-
densome than conventional dosing, because clinical staff must
be trained and educated.
No published studies describing the PK/PD of piperacillin-
tazobactam or polymyxins (colistin or polymyxin B) in patients
with HAP/VAP are available at this time and so these drugs
were not included in this recommendation. However, the
most optimal dosing of these drugs, based on limited evidence
and extrapolation from similar drug classes, is provided in
Table 3 (see section X).
More recently, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Qual-
ity (AHRQ) published a report on the use of PK/PD for HAPs,
which concluded that the evidence does not favor the routine
use of PK/PD [254]. This contrasts with our guideline recom-
mendation. We suggest that the reasons for the different conclu-
sions between the AHRQ report and ours are related to the
following: (1) We used a distinct research question where we
consolidated the studied issue into a singular PICO question,
rather than 3 questions that were considered separately in the
AHRQ report; (2) given this difference from the AHRQ meth-
ods, we were able to use the meta-analytic methodology to an-
alyze the combined effects of studies, which may have given
further confidence for interpreting the relative effects of identi-
fied studies; and (3) the ATS/IDSA guideline also evaluated
noninterventional studies that analyzed patient outcomes asso-
ciated with optimized drug exposure; these studies were not
evaluated by the AHRQ report.
ROLE OF INHALED ANTIBIOTIC THERAPY
XIV. Should Patients With VAP Due to Gram-Negative Bacilli Be Treated
With a Combination of Inhaled and Systemic Antibiotics, or Systemic
Antibiotics Alone?
Recommendation
1. For patients with VAP due to gram-negative bacilli that are
susceptible to only aminoglycosides or polymyxins (colistin
or polymyxin B), we suggest both inhaled and systemic anti-
biotics, rather than systemic antibiotics alone (weak recom-
mendation, very low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: This recommendation places a high
value on achieving clinical cure and survival; it places a lower
value on burden and cost.
Remarks: It is reasonable to consider adjunctive inhaled an-
tibiotic therapy as a treatment of last resort for patients who
are not responding to intravenous antibiotics alone, whether
the infecting organism is or is not MDR.
Summary of the Evidence
Our systematic review identified 9 studies of inhaled antibiotics
as adjunctive therapy for VAP due to gram-negative bacilli. Five
of the studies were randomized trials and 4 were observational
studies [125, 255–262]. Three different inhaled antibiotics were
administered in the 9 investigations—tobramycin, gentamicin,
and colistin. Most of the studies provided minimal information
about the device and method used to deliver the inhaled antibi-
otic. The predominant organisms isolated in the studies were
MDR Klebsiella pneumoniae, P. aeruginosa, and A. baumannii.
Our meta-analyses found that the addition of an inhaled an-
tibiotic to a systemic antibiotic regimen improved the clinical
cure rate (ie, resolution of signs and symptoms of respiratory
infection) (RR, 1.29; 95% CI, 1.13–1.47), but had no definitive
effects on mortality (RR, 0.84; 95% CI, .63–1.12) or nephrotox-
icity (RR, 1.11; 95% CI, .78–1.57). There were no other harmful
e90 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 effects attributed to the inhaled antibiotics. When only the trials
that evaluated colistin were pooled, the clinical cure rate similar-
ly improved (RR, 1.28; 95% CI, 1.11–1.47).
Several outcomes were reported by a few studies. One trial
found that inhaled antibiotics reduced the frequency of requir-
ing additional intravenous antibiotics [125]. Two studies looked
for, but did not find, increased antibiotic resistance among pa-
tients who received an adjunctive inhaled antibiotic [125, 256].
Two studies reported that inhaled colistin reduces the duration
of mechanical ventilation [260, 261]. The effects of adjunctive
inhaled antibiotics on the ICU length of stay and hospital length
of stay were not evaluated.
The panel’s confidence in the estimated effects of adjunctive
inhaled antibiotics was very low because a large proportion of
the evidence used to derive the estimates was observational
data limited by imprecision (ie, most of the studies were
small, with the largest study including 208 patients).
Rationale for the Recommendation
The guideline panel weighed the evidence for advantages of ad-
junctive inhaled antibiotic therapy in patients with VAP due to
gram-negative bacilli (increased clinical cure rate) against the
potential downsides (increased burden and cost) in the context
of no proven effects on mortality, side effects, or antibiotic re-
sistance. The panel agreed that the potential benefits were more
important to patients than inconvenience and cost. However,
the panel acknowledged having very low confidence in the esti-
mated effects of adjunctive inhaled antibiotic therapy and rec-
ognized that there are many important unknowns (eg, optimum
dosing, optimum delivery method, population most likely to
benefit). For these reasons, the panel elected to recommend ad-
junctive inhaled antibiotic therapy for patients who are most
likely to benefit: specifically, those who have VAP caused by bac-
teria that are only susceptible to the classes of antibiotics for
which evidence of efficacy by the intravenous alone route is
the most limited (ie, aminoglycosides or colistin). However,
the panel also believes that it is reasonable to consider adjunc-
tive inhaled antibiotic therapy as a treatment of last resort for
patients who are not responding to intravenous antibiotics
alone, whether the infecting organism is or is not MDR.
The rationale for adjunctive inhaled antibiotic therapy is
based in part upon the observation that antibiotic efficacy
against bacteria within purulent secretions may require anti-
biotic concentrations >10–25 times the minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC); these levels cannot be achieved with in-
travenous therapy alone and, therefore, the addition of inhaled
antibiotic therapy may be beneficial [263]. The finding of low
antibiotic concentrations in the secretions and epithelial lining
fluid of the lung during intravenous therapy with aminoglyco-
sides is well known [264–266]. However, it also occurs with
other antibiotics and its correlation with clinical outcomes re-
mains unknown. Studies of high-dose intravenous colistin
have shown that the concentration in the serum is approximately
the MIC of Acinetobacter and Pseudomonas [267,268]; concentra-
tions in the lung and airway are lower and, therefore, subtherapeu-
tic. The ongoing use of antibiotics at subtherapeutic levels may
lead to the selection of antibiotic-resistant organisms.
Research Needs
There is an urgent need for information about the optimal delivery
and dosing of inhaled antibiotic therapy. In addition, clinical trials
are needed that evaluate the concentrations of antibiotics that en-
sure efficacy in the context of viscous purulent secretions. The du-
ration of systemic antibiotic therapy and antibiotic resistance are
important endpoints for future studies. If future investigations
demonstrate that adjunctive inhaled therapy decreases the duration
of systemic antibiotics and lessens the emergence of resistance, this
could have a relevant impact on treatment decisions.
PATHOGEN-SPECIFIC THERAPY
XV. What Antibiotics Should Be Used for the Treatment for MRSA
HAP/VAP?
Recommendation
1. We recommend that MRSA HAP/VAP be treated with ei-
ther vancomycin or linezolid rather than other antibiotics
or antibiotic combinations (strong recommendation, moder-
ate-quality evidence).
Remarks: The choice between vancomycin and linezolid may
be guided by patient-specific factors such as blood cell
counts, concurrent prescriptions for serotonin-reuptake in-
hibitors, renal function, and cost.
Summary of the Evidence
Our systematic review identified 7 randomized trials that ad-
dressed the selection of antibiotics for HAP/VAP caused by
MRSA [153, 269–274]. Four trials compared linezolid to vanco-
mycin [271–274]. The remaining 3 trials compared telavancin
[153], quinupristin plus dalfopristin [269], or vancomycin
plus rifampin [270] to vancomycin alone.
Linezolid is the most extensively studied alternative to vanco-
mycin for MRSA pneumonia [271–274]. Our meta-analyses of
the 4 trials found no difference in mortality when analyzed
using an intention-to-treat strategy (RR, 0.91; 95% CI, .71–
1.16) or a modified intention-to-treat strategy (RR, 0.82; 95%
CI, .37–1.80). We also found no difference in the clinical cure
rate when analyzed using an intention-to-treat strategy; howev-
er, there was improvement of the clinical cure rate among pa-
tients who received linezolid when analyzed using a modified
intention-to-treat strategy (RR, 1.18; 95% CI, 1.00–1.40). Use
of a modified intention-to-treat analysis is controversial because
it involves excluding patients following randomization [275].
Linezolid and vancomycin appear to confer no clear difference
in nephrotoxicity, thrombocytopenia, serious adverse events, or
need for treatment discontinuation due to an adverse event.
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e91
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 None of the other trials demonstrated a clear superiority of
an alternative antibiotic or regimen over vancomycin alone.
The study that compared telavancin to vancomycin combined
2 smaller trials that were conducted in patients with gram-pos-
itive nosocomial pneumonia. In the combined population of
1503 patients, there were no differences in clinical cure rate,
mortality, or adverse effects, although there was a trend toward
increased all-cause mortality with telavancin in one of the com-
ponent studies (21.5% vs 16.6%; mean difference, 4.9%; 95% CI,
−.7% to 10.6%) [153]. This primarily occurred among patients
with creatinine clearance values <30 mL/minute, prompting an
FDA advisory panel to recommend limiting the use of telavan-
cin to patients with creatinine clearance levels above this thresh-
old [276]. Increases in serum creatinine were more common in
the telavancin group (16% vs 10%) [153].
A nonblinded trial that compared quinupristin plus dalfo-
pristin to vancomycin in 298 patients with gram-positive nos-
ocomial pneumonia found similar clinical response rates in
both treatment groups. This was also true for the subgroup
of 51 patients with MRSA pneumonia [269]. Another non-
blinded trial compared vancomycin plus rifampin to vancomy-
cin alone in 83 patients with MRSA nosocomial pneumonia
[270]. It found that vancomycin plus rifampin increased the
14-day clinical cure rate and decreased the 60-day mortality
rate, but had no effect on 28-day mortality. Of note, 34.1% of
the patients who were treated with rifampin developed resis-
tance to the antibiotic [270]. Although this trial did not report
significant adverse effects, other studies have reported an asso-
ciation of rifampin with hepatotoxicity, acute renal failure, and
hemolytic anemia [277].
Two randomized clinical trials evaluated teicoplanin vs van-
comycin or linezolid for gram-positive infections [151, 152].
However, multiple sites of infection were included in both stud-
ies and small numbers of patients with pneumonia were evalu-
ated, and a small number of patients with documented MRSA
pneumonia were evaluated. Thus, more evidence is needed to
define the clinical role of teicoplanin in patients with HAP/VAP.
Taken together, the evidence suggests that there are no im-
portant differences among the antibiotics available to treat
HAP/VAP due to MRSA with 2 exceptions: vancomycin plus
rifampin may improve the short-term clinical cure rate at the
expense of more rifampin resistance and possibly other side ef-
fects, and telavancin may be harmful in the setting of a creati-
nine clearance <30 mL/minute. Our confidence in the accuracy
of these estimated effects was diminished by risk of bias, which
included lack of blinding, ineffective randomization (ie, baseline
differences), missing data, failure to follow an intention-to-treat
analysis, and protocols that allowed outcomes to be overridden
“by the sponsor . . . all revisions were made before unblinding”
[274, 278]. It was also decreased by indirectness of the popula-
tion, as our population of interest was patients with HAP/VAP
due to MRSA but many of the trials enrolled patients with
HAP/VAP due to a variety of gram-positive organisms or pa-
tients with healthcare-associated non-HAP/VAP pneumonia.
The panel decided that its overall confidence in the evidence
was moderate, electing to downgrade due to the serious risk
of bias, but not the indirectness.
There has been concern related to the potential phenomenon
known as “MIC creep,” referring to reports of a trend of increas-
ing vancomycin MICs among MRSA isolates in some institutions
[279, 280]. This has not been a universal phenomenon, and sur-
veillance studies from different countries have not demonstrated
such an overall increase; in general, MRSA isolates with interme-
diate vancomycin MICs remain uncommon [281–285]. Further-
more, although there are theoretical reasons for concern when
treating MRSA pneumonia if the isolate has intermediate
MICs, there is evidence that outcomes are not worse in such pa-
tients [286–288].As with any other organism defined as interme-
diate to the selected antibiotic, a lack of clinical improvement
despite appropriate antibiotic dosing and duration should
prompt consideration of a change in antibiotic therapy.
Rationale for the Recommendation
The evidence indicates that vancomycin and linezolid are roughly
equivalent, and no alternative agent or regimen is clearly superior
to vancomycin or linezolid; additionally, alternative regimens may
be more harmful. Given these observations, the guideline panel
had a high level of confidence that the benefit-risk ratio of
using vancomycin or linezolid to treat patients with HAP/VAP
caused by MRSA is higher than the ratio for alternative regimens.
While a difference in nephrotoxicity risk between vancomy-
cin and linezolid was not identified using the measure of abso-
lute risk difference, there was an increased RR of nephrotoxicity
associated with vancomycin compared with linezolid. The lack
of double-blinding in about half of the randomized studies may
have led to ascertainment bias with respect to nephrotoxicity,
which could have favored linezolid. It should be noted that a va-
riety of definitions for nephrotoxicity were used across studies
and that there were no differences in terms of serious adverse
events, or need for treatment discontinuation between the 2 an-
tibiotics. Nonetheless, based on observational evidence, the se-
lection of vancomycin vs linezolid may depend upon factors
such as blood cell counts, concurrent prescriptions for seroto-
nin-reuptake inhibitors, renal function and cost. The panel
agrees with a prior consensus recommendation to achieve a
vancomycin trough level of 15–20 mg/L in patients being treat-
ed for pneumonia [289], although the panel did not review the
related evidence systematically.
XVI. Which Antibiotic Should Be Used to Treat Patients With HAP/VAP
Due to P. aeruginosa?
Recommendations
1. For patients with HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa, we recom-
mend that the choice of an antibiotic for definitive (not em-
piric) therapy be based upon the results of antimicrobial
e92 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 susceptibility testing (strong recommendation, low-quality
evidence).
2. For patients with HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa, we recom-
mend against aminoglycoside monotherapy (strong recom-
mendation, very low-quality evidence).
Remarks: Routine antimicrobial susceptibility testing should
include assessment of the sensitivity of the P. aeruginosa
isolate to polymyxins (colistin or polymyxin B) in set-
tings that have a high prevalence of extensively resistant
organisms.
Summary of the Evidence
Our systematic review identified no RCTs that compared anti-
biotic regimens in patients with HAP/VAP caused by P. aerugi-
nosa. The panel therefore considered 2 bodies of evidence:
evidence from randomized trials that compared antibiotic reg-
imens in patients with HAP/VAP due to any pathogen, and ev-
idence from subgroup analyses on patients with HAP/VAP
caused by P. aeruginosa.
With respect to studies that compared antibiotic regimens in
patients with HAP/VAP due to any pathogen, a systematic re-
view of 41 randomized trials found that no specific antimicro-
bial regimen decreased mortality and treatment failure more
than any other regimen [290], and 33 randomized trials
found that no specific antimicrobial regimen improved a variety
of clinical outcomes more than any other regimen [155–183,
229, 291–293]. The panel’s confidence in applying these esti-
mated effects to the clinical question was low because they are
derived from randomized trials limited by risk of bias (ie, many
trials were not blinded) and indirectness (ie, the question is spe-
cific to patients with HAP/VAP caused by P. aeruginosa, but the
studies were conducted with patients who had HAP/VAP due to
any pathogen).
The prevalence of antibiotic resistance among patients with
HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa is high. An observational
study of 314 patients with VAP caused by P. aeruginosa deter-
mined that susceptible, MDR, and extensively drug-resistant
P. aeruginosa represented 54%, 32%, and 14% of P. aeruginosa
isolates, respectively [294]. In another observational study of 91
episodes of VAP caused by P. aeruginosa, it was found that sus-
ceptible, MDR, and extensively drug-resistant P. aeruginosa
represented 34%, 20%, and 46% of P. aeruginosa isolates, re-
spectively [295]. Antibiotic resistance has been associated with
an increased ICU length of stay, but not mortality or recurrence
of HAP/VAP; however, the lack of statistical power is a common
issue with the published evidence [294]. Mortality due to HAP/
VAP is more closely associated with severity of illness than an-
tibiotic resistance [296].
With respect to studies that performed subgroup analyses on
patients with HAP/VAP caused by P. aeruginosa, the evidence is
probably best understood by considering each antibiotic class
separately. A review of 36 RCTs confirmed that it was only
possible to perform this analysis for the carbapenem antibiotic
class, due to lack of comparative studies within a specific anti-
biotic class or lack of specific data for the P. aeruginosa sub-
group for fluoroquinolones and β-lactams.
Doripenem: Three randomized trials were identified that com-
pared doripenem to other antibiotic regimens in a subgroup of
patients with P. aeruginosa [157, 158, 179]. The comparisons
were to either imipenem [157, 158] or piperacillin-tazobactam
[179]. We pooled the subgroup analyses and found no signifi-
cant differences between doripenem and the other regimens
in terms of mortality (28% vs 21%; RR, 1.07; 95% CI, .49–
2.35) and treatment failure rate (45% vs 63%; RR, 0.76; 95%
CI, .40–1.42). The panel’s confidence in these estimated effects
was very low because they are derived from randomized trials
limited by risk of bias (ie, many trials were unblinded), incon-
sistency (ie, I2 test for heterogeneity >25%), and imprecision (ie,
few events and wide CIs). In addition, the doripenem FDA label
was recently modified due to this drug’s association with in-
creased risk of death in patients with VAP due to P. aeruginosa
[297].
Imipenem: We identified a published systematic review of 20
randomized trials that compared imipenem to an alternative
antibiotic in patients with P. aeruginosa [298]. Patients who re-
ceived imipenem had a lower clinical cure rate (45% vs 75%; RR,
0.60; 95% CI, .48–.75) and microbiological cure rate (48% vs
53%; RR, 0.91; 95% CI, .73–1.13) than patients who received
an alternative antibiotic. Among patients who received imipe-
nem, antibiotic resistance increased from 15% to 39%; among
patients who received an alternative antibiotic, antibiotic resis-
tance increased from 2.5% to 22%. The panel’s confidence in
these estimated effects was low because they are derived from
randomized trials limited by risk of bias (ie, many trials were
unblinded) and imprecision (ie, few events).
Other carbapenems: We identified a published systematic re-
view of 12 randomized trials that compared a carbapenem
(alone or in combination with an aminoglycoside) to an alter-
native antibiotic in patients with P. aeruginosa [299]. Most of
the trials compared a carbapenem to either a fluoroquinolone
or a β-lactam. Our meta-analyses found that patients treated
with a carbapenem had a lower treatment success rate (6 ran-
domized trials: OR, 0.42; 95% CI, .22–.82) [159, 161, 169, 183,
300, 301], a lower eradication rate (7 randomized trials: OR,
0.50; 95% CI, .24–.89) [159, 161, 169, 173, 183, 299, 300], and
a higher incident antibiotic resistance rate (4 randomized trials:
OR, 5.17; 95% CI, 1.96–13.65) [173, 291, 293, 301]. Exceptions
to the lower eradication rate existed when the carbapenem was
meropenem (3 randomized trials: OR, 1.10; 95% CI, .39–3.14)
[159,161,300]. The panel’s confidence in these estimated effects
was very low because they are derived from randomized trials
limited by risk of bias (ie, many trials were unblinded), incon-
sistency (ie, low I2 test for heterogeneity), and imprecision
(ie, few events). Ertapenem has no or limited activity against
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e93
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 P. aeruginosa and is therefore not recommended for treatment
of pneumonia due to this organism.
Aminoglycosides: Our systematic review identified no recent
trials comparing aminoglycoside monotherapy to other antimi-
crobial regimens in HAP/VAP and, therefore, there were no data
related to the effects of such therapy in patients with HAP/VAP
due to P. aeruginosa.
Rationale for the Recommendations
The evidence synthesis failed to identify an antipseudomonal
agent that is clearly preferable to the others, due to either greater
benefit or less harm. Thus, the panel did not recommend a pre-
ferred antibiotic regimen for patients with confirmed HAP/VAP
caused by P. aeruginosa. Some of the outcomes described above
suggest that imipenem may have outcomes that are inferior to
other regimens (ie, a lower cure rate); however, the panel’s con-
fidence in these results was so low that it was unwilling to sug-
gest not using this agent.
The panel recognized that as many as two-thirds of patients
with HAP/VAP caused by P. aeruginosa have antibiotic resistance
and that the prevalence of antibiotic resistance is widely variable.
This variability was the primary reason that the panel agreed that
antibiotic choices should be based upon antimicrobial susceptibil-
ity testing. The benefits of this approach include assurance that
the patient is being treated with an antibiotic with activity against
the pathogen, while the downsides are the costs, burdens, and de-
lays associated with testing. The recommendation is strong despite
the low quality of evidence because the panel agreed that the im-
portance of avoiding ineffective therapy (ie, potential for harms
without benefits) far outweighs the costs, burdens, and time for
antibiotic susceptibility testing.
The aminoglycosides are the only exceptions with regard to the
panel not making a recommendation for or against a specific an-
tibiotic class in HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa. The panel chose
to recommend against aminoglycoside monotherapy for 2 rea-
sons. First, aminoglycosides penetrate the lung poorly; therefore,
high peak serum concentrations are necessary to obtain microbi-
ologically active concentrations in the alveoli, which increases the
risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity [266,302,303].Studies have
found no detectable antipseudomonal activity within bronchial
secretions despite therapeutic aminoglycoside levels in the
serum of patients with Pseudomonas pulmonary infection
[304]. Second, there is a lack of studies evaluating the effects of
aminoglycoside monotherapy in HAP/VAP.
Occasionally, routine antimicrobial susceptibility testing
identifies no antibiotics to which P. aeruginosa is susceptible.
Intravenous polymyxins (colistin or polymyxin B) [305–310]
may be an option for the treatment of such extensively resistant
P. aeruginosa [184]. For this reason, the panel agreed that poly-
myxin susceptibility should be routinely assessed for Pseudomo-
nas isolates in settings with a high prevalence of extensively
resistant organisms.
Research Needs
There is a lack of trials that enrolled patients with HAP/VAP
caused by P. aeruginosa and compared antibiotic regimens,
and subgroup analysis from trials that enrolled patients with
HAP/VAP caused by any pathogen are limited by the small
sizes of the subgroups. There is an urgent need for multicenter
trials that enroll patients with HAP/VAP caused by P. aerugino-
sa and then evaluate the benefits and harms of various antibi-
otic regimens. Such trials should measure mortality, treatment
failure, side effects, and antibiotic resistance as outcomes, and
should control for variables such as severity of illness, bactere-
mia, organ failure, and aminoglycoside use.
XVII. Should Monotherapy or Combination Therapy Be Used to Treat
Patients With HAP/VAP Due to P. aeruginosa?
Recommendations
1. For patients with HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa who are
not in septic shock or at a high risk for death, and for
whom the results of antibiotic susceptibility testing are
known, we recommend monotherapy using an antibiotic to
which the isolate is susceptible rather than combination ther-
apy (strong recommendation, low-quality evidence).
2. For patients with HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa who re-
main in septic shock or at a high risk for death when the re-
sults of antibiotic susceptibility testing are known, we suggest
combination therapy using 2 antibiotics to which the isolate
is susceptible rather than monotherapy (weak recommenda-
tion, very low-quality evidence).
3. For patients with HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa, we recom-
mend against aminoglycoside monotherapy (strong recom-
mendation, very low-quality evidence).
Remarks: High risk of death in the meta-regression analysis
was defined as mortality risk >25%; low risk of death is defined
as mortality risk <15%. For a patient whose septic shock
resolves when antimicrobial sensitivities were known, contin-
ued combination therapy is not recommended.
Summary of the Evidence
Our systematic review identified one published systematic re-
view [290] and 7 randomized trials [159, 161, 162, 170, 171,
181, 311] that compared monotherapy to combination therapy
in the treatment of HAP/VAP due to any pathogen. The pub-
lished systematic review included 41 randomized trials (7015
patients) [290]. HAP/VAP caused by P. aeruginosa represented
13.8% of cases. Our meta-analysis of trials that reported mortal-
ity determined that combination therapy offered no benefit be-
yond monotherapy (RR, 0.94; 95% CI, .76–1.16); similarly, a
meta-analysis of trials that reported the treatment failure rate
determined that combination therapy was not associated with
a lower rate of treatment failure than monotherapy. Among
the 7 randomized trials, 5 trials found that patients treated
with combination therapy and monotherapy had similar
e94 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 clinical outcomes which, depending upon the study, included
mortality, clinical treatment success, microbiological treatment
success, and ICU and hospital length of stay [159, 161, 162, 170,
171, 181, 311]. Two trials, however, demonstrated superior out-
comes among those who received carbapenem monotherapy
compared with those who received combination therapy [159,
161]. The different findings in these trials might be attributable
to the combination of the broad spectrum of carbapenems and
increased nephrotoxicity due to aminoglycoside-containing
combination therapy.
Taken together, the efficacy information provided by the sys-
tematic review and most randomized trials was remarkably sim-
ilar, finding no differences between monotherapy and
combination therapy for mortality, treatment failure, ICU and
hospital length of stay, duration of mechanical ventilation, and
acquisition of resistance. The panel’s confidence that these esti-
mates apply to the clinical question was low because there was a
risk of bias (many trials were unblinded) and because the trials
enrolled patients with HAP/VAP due to any pathogen. The lat-
ter introduces indirectness of the population, as the clinical
question was about patients with HAP/VAP due to P. aerugino-
sa, but only 6%–23% of the population in the trials had HAP/
VAP due to P. aeruginosa. Additional limitations that the panel
was aware of, but did not consider serious enough to warrant
further downgrading of the quality of evidence, were that
most of the studies were conducted more than a decade ago
and the antimicrobial agent was often not the only independent
variable, as the duration of therapy also varied.
More direct evidence (ie, studies that specifically evaluated
patients with HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa) was available
from the 2 observational studies [312, 313]. The first was a mul-
ticenter observational study that included 183 episodes of VAP
caused by P. aeruginosa [312]. Inappropriate empiric therapy
was associated with increased mortality (adjusted hazard ratio
[HR], 1.85; 95% CI, 1.07–3.10), and the initial use of combina-
tion therapy reduced the likelihood of inappropriate therapy.
Once patients who received inappropriate empiric treatment
were excluded, however, mortality was similar among those
who received definitive treatment using monotherapy and com-
bination therapy (23.1% vs 33.2%; adjusted HR, 0.90; 95% CI,
.50–1.63). The second was a single-center observational study
that enrolled 100 consecutive patients with bacteremic P. aeru-
ginosa pneumonia [313]. It found that a decreased all-cause 28-
day mortality was associated with the absence of septic shock at
the time of bacteremia (OR, 0.07; 95% CI, .01–.49) and adequate
combination therapy (OR, 0.05; 95% CI, .01–.34).
The observational studies suggest that combination therapy is
beneficial for initial empiric therapy; however, once the antibiotic
susceptibilities are known, there are no differences in outcome
among patients who receive definitive treatment using mono-
therapy or combination therapy. Nonetheless, there is a possi-
bility that a subset of patients with P. aeruginosa pneumonia
complicated by septic shock may benefit from combination ther-
apy [313, 314]. The panel’s confidence in these effects was also
low because they were based upon observational studies.
Septic shock: The panel sought additional evidence that pa-
tients with septic shock may benefit from combination therapy
by looking at evidence from patients who had septic shock from
sources other than just HAP/VAP caused by P. aeruginosa. The
studies identified had inconsistent results. A meta-analysis of 64
randomized and quasi-randomized trials (7586 patients with
culture-positive bacterial septic shock) that compared β-lactam
monotherapy to combination therapy with a β-lactam and ami-
noglycoside in hospitalized patients with sepsis determined that
there was no difference in mortality, regardless of whether the
trial arms included the same β-lactam (RR, 1.01; 95% CI, .75–
1.35) or different β-lactams (RR, 0.85; 95% CI, .71–1.01) [315].
In contrast, a propensity-matched analysis (2446 patients)
found that early combination therapy was associated with de-
creased mortality in septic shock [314].
A potential reason for the discordant results is that the stud-
ies did not require specific criteria to define the patients as hav-
ing septic shock. It is possible that the benefits of combination
therapy were diluted by including less severely ill patients in the
studies. This is supported by a meta-analysis of randomized tri-
als and observational studies that determined that combination
antimicrobial therapy decreased mortality only among patients
with severe sepsis or septic shock and a high risk of death (31%
vs 41%; HR, 0.71; 95% CI, .57–.89 among patients with sepsis
due to pneumonia, who comprised 36% of the study popula-
tion), with potentially harmful consequences in low-risk pa-
tients [316].
The guideline panel had very low confidence that the estimat-
ed effects of monotherapy and combination therapy from these
studies of sepsis and septic shock from any cause are accurate in
patients with sepsis or septic shock due to HAP/VAP caused by
P. aeruginosa, because much of the evidence base is observa-
tional and the results are both inconsistent and indirect (the
question is about patients with septic shock due to P. aeruginosa
pneumonia, but the evidence is from patients with septic shock
from any cause). To be consistent with the approach described
above, the panel did not further downgrade the quality of evi-
dence due to the age of the studies [317] or the variability of the
duration of antibiotic therapy.
Bacteremia: Approximately 20% of patients with P. aerugino-
sa bacteremia develop septic shock according to an observation-
al study of 709 episodes of P. aeruginosa bacteremia, and those
who develop septic shock are at increased risk for mortality
(OR, 6.6; 95% CI, 4.0–10.0) [318]. Given the strong relationship
between shock and bacteremia, the panel also sought additional
evidence that patients with bacteremia may benefit from com-
bination therapy by looking at evidence from patients who had
bacteremia from sources other than just HAP/VAP caused by
P. aeruginosa.
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e95
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 An initial meta-analysis from 2004 comparing combination
antimicrobial therapy with monotherapy for Pseudomonas bac-
teremia demonstrated a mortality benefit from combination an-
timicrobial therapy (OR, 0.50; 95% CI, .32–.79) [319].However,
more recent studies have not confirmed this finding. Three
meta-analyses that included more recent studies compared the
use of combination therapy to monotherapy for definitive ther-
apy in patients with P. aeruginosa bacteremia and found no dif-
ferences in all-cause mortality [320–322]. The largest individual
study was a post hoc analysis of an observational study that
compared monotherapy to combination therapy in 593 patients
with a single episode of P. aeruginosa bacteremia; it demonstrat-
ed that combination therapy was not associated with a reduc-
tion in the 30-day mortality risk compared with monotherapy
(adjusted HR, 1.34; 95% CI, .73–2.47) [323]. A potential expla-
nation for the different findings in the initial meta-analysis and
the subsequent studies is that many of the studies in the initial
meta-analysis included patients who received aminoglycoside
monotherapy.
The guideline panel had very low confidence that the estimat-
ed effects of monotherapy and combination therapy from these
studies apply to patients with P. aeruginosa bacteremia due to
HAP/VAP. The reasons for the very low confidence are that a
large proportion of the evidence base is observational with incon-
sistent results, and because of indirectness of the population (the
question is about patients who are severely ill with septic shock
and bacteremia due to P. aeruginosa pneumonia, but the evi-
dence is from patients whose severity of illness was unspecified
and who have P. aeruginosa bacteremia from any source).
Rationale for the Recommendations
The evidence synthesis found no differences in the effects of
monotherapy and combination therapy as definitive treatment
(ie, treatment once the antibiotic susceptibility results are
known) on mortality, treatment failure, ICU and hospital length
of stay, duration of mechanical ventilation, and acquisition of
resistance, regardless of whether the results derived from obser-
vational studies that enrolled patients with HAP/VAP caused by
P. aeruginosa or meta-analyses of randomized trials that en-
rolled patients with HAP/VAP due to any pathogen. The
panel felt strongly that, in the absence of any demonstrable ben-
efit, the costs and potential side effects of an additional antibi-
otic were not warranted. Therefore, the recommendation is
strong despite the low quality of evidence.
There was an important exception, however. The panel
judged that combination therapy is warranted as definitive ther-
apy for patients with HAP/VAP due to P. aeruginosa who have
septic shock or a high risk for death. The decision was based
upon the evidence that combination therapy was associated
with decreased mortality among patients with pneumonia com-
plicated by septic shock. The panel agreed that the potential for
decreased
mortality
outweighs
the
additional
costs,
inconveniences, and possible side effects attributable to an ad-
ditional antibiotic. The potential upsides of the recommenda-
tion seemed more important to patients than the potential
downsides.
The panel chose to recommend against aminoglycoside
monotherapy as definitive therapy for 2 reasons. First, amino-
glycosides penetrate the lung poorly; therefore, high peak serum
concentrations are necessary to obtain microbiologically active
concentrations in the alveoli, which increases the risk of neph-
rotoxicity and ototoxicity [266, 302, 303]. Studies have found no
detectable antipseudomonal activity within bronchial secretions
despite therapeutic aminoglycoside levels in the serum of pa-
tients with Pseudomonas pulmonary infection [304]. Second,
there is a lack of studies evaluating the effects of aminoglycoside
monotherapy in HAP/VAP. Given this lack of empirical evi-
dence, the recommendation is based upon the committee’s col-
lective clinical experience.
Research Needs
The potential benefit of combination therapy in patients with
septic shock is based upon studies in septic shock from any
cause. These findings need to be confirmed by randomized
trials in patients with septic shock due to P. aeruginosa
pneumonia. Outcomes for such trials should include mortality,
treatment failure, ICU and hospital length of stay, side effects,
and development of antibiotic resistance.
XVIII. Which Antibiotic Should Be Used to Treat Patients With HAP/VAP
Due to ESBL–Producing Gram-Negative Bacilli?
Recommendation
1. For patients with HAP/VAP due to ESBL-producing gram-
negative bacilli, we recommend that the choice of an antibi-
otic for definitive (not empiric) therapy be based upon the
results of antimicrobial susceptibility testing and patient-
specific factors (strong recommendation, very low-quality
evidence).
Remarks: Patient-specific factors that should be considered
when selecting an antimicrobial agent include allergies and
comorbidities that may confer an increased risk of side effects.
Summary of the Evidence
Comparative antibiotic data for HAP/VAP caused by ESBL-
producing gram-negative organisms is extremely limited.
There are no randomized trials or observational studies that
specifically enrolled patients with HAP/VAP due to ESBL-
producing gram-negative organisms; furthermore, trials that
enrolled patients with HAP/VAP due to any pathogen had an
insufficient number of cases due to ESBL-producing gram-
negative organisms to make subgroup analyses possible [291,
324–326].
The only evidence that exists is a few case series that describe
the failure of third-generation cephalosporins in treating ESBL-
producing pathogens [327,328]. In the absence of any randomized
e96 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 trials or observational studies, the guideline panel relied upon
the case series and its collective clinical experience to formulate
its judgments, which constitutes very low-quality evidence.
Rationale for the Recommendation
Our evidence synthesis failed to identify an agent that is clearly
preferable to others in the treatment of HAP/VAP due to ESBL-
producing gram-negative bacilli. Thus, the panel did not recom-
mend a preferred antibiotic regimen for patients with confirmed
HAP/VAP caused by ESBL-producing gram-negative bacilli.
The panel was aware that carbapenems are sometimes consid-
ered the agents of choice for treating such infections, in light of
the case series describing failure of third-generation cephalo-
sporin therapy. One recent study favored carbapenems but
also suggested that the use of β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitors
may be beneficial [329], and another suggested that either cefe-
pime or piperacillin-tazobactam may be used against ESBL infec-
tions if the MICs are within susceptible ranges [330]. However,
the panel’s confidence in those data was so low that it did not
want to use the series as the basis of a recommendation either for
carbapenems or against cephalosporins or β-lactam/β-lactamase
inhibitors.
The panel agreed that antimicrobial susceptibility testing
provides the best information to inform antibiotic choices.
However, the panel recognized that such testing often pro-
vides clinicians with several choices and, therefore, agreed
that patient-specific factors such as allergies and comorbidi-
ties should also be considered. The recommendation is strong
despite the very low quality of evidence because the panel
agreed that the importance of identifying an effective therapy
far outweighs the costs, burdens, and time for antibiotic sus-
ceptibility testing. Of note, the Clinical and Laboratory Stan-
dards Institute no longer recommends specific ESBL testing;
thus, this recommendation also applies when the ESBL phe-
notype is suspected.
Research Needs
There is an urgent need for studies comparing various antibiotic
regimens in the treatment of pneumonia due to ESBL-producing
gram-negative bacilli. Appropriate clinical outcomes include
mortality, treatment failure rate, ICU and hospital length of
stay, acquired antibiotic resistance, and side effects.
XIX. Which Antibiotic Should Be Used to Treat Patients With HAP/VAP
Due to Acinetobacter Species?
Recommendations
1. In patients with HAP/VAP caused by Acinetobacter species,
we suggest treatment with either a carbapenem or ampicillin/
sulbactam if the isolate is susceptible to these agents (weak
recommendation, low-quality evidence).
2. In patients with HAP/VAP caused by Acinetobacter species
that is sensitive only to polymyxins, we recommend in-
travenous polymyxin (colistin or polymyxin B) (strong
recommendation, low-quality evidence), and we suggest adjunc-
tive inhaled colistin (weak recommendation, low-quality
evidence).
3. In patients with HAP/VAP caused by Acinetobacter species
that is sensitive only to colistin, we suggest NOT using ad-
junctive rifampicin (weak recommendation, moderate-quali-
ty evidence).
4. In patients with HAP/VAP caused by Acinetobacter species,
we recommend against the use of tigecycline (strong recom-
mendation, low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: These recommendations place a rel-
atively higher value on avoiding potential adverse effects due
to the use of combination therapy with rifampicin and colis-
tin, over achieving an increased microbial eradication rate, as
eradication rate was not associated with improved clinical
outcome.
Remarks: Selection of an appropriate antibiotic for definitive
(nonempiric) therapy requires antimicrobial susceptibility
testing.
Summary of the Evidence
Our systematic review identified 6 randomized trials [155, 259,
331–334] and 6 observational studies [256, 257, 261, 335–337]
that evaluated the impact of specific antibiotics on clinical out-
comes in critically ill patients with VAP/HAP due to Acineto-
bacter species. The studies found no differences in mortality,
length of ICU stay, or clinical response when standard-dose am-
picillin-sulbactam was compared with imipenem [335], intrave-
nous colistin [332], or high-dose ampicillin-sulbactam [333], or
when imipenem was compared to intravenous colistin [337]. In
contrast, a trial found that tigecycline decreased clinical cure
rates compared with imipenem [155], and an observational
study demonstrated that tigecycline-based therapy was associat-
ed with higher mortality than was colistin-based therapy, al-
though the latter was associated with more nephrotoxicity
[336]. The panel had low confidence that the estimated effects
from these studies are an accurate reflection of the effects in pa-
tients with HAP/VAP due to Acinetobacter species because the
estimates were derived from observational studies, as well as
randomized trials with both a risk of bias (ie, some studies
were not blinded) and indirectness of the population (ie, the
question is about patients with HAP/VAP due to Acinetobacter
species, but the studies enrolled patients with HAP/VAP due to
a variety of gram-negative bacilli). Evidence on polymyxin B for
the treatment of HAP/VAP is growing, but also limited by low-
quality evidence [305–308, 338].
Adjunctive therapies have also been studied. Two observa-
tional studies [257,261]suggested that the combination of aero-
solized colistin plus intravenous colistin was associated with a
higher clinical response than intravenous colistin alone, al-
though no significant difference in mortality was observed. In
contrast, the addition of rifampicin to intravenous colistin did
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e97
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 not improve clinical outcomes such as mortality in 2 random-
ized trials (even though it improved microbiological eradica-
tion) [331, 334]. The addition of aerosolized colistin to an
intravenous antibiotic other than colistin resulted in no change
in mortality in a randomized trial [259]. The panel had low con-
fidence in most of these estimated effects for the same reasons
as described above; however, it had moderate confidence in the
estimated effects of the addition of rifampicin because the ef-
fects were derived from 2 randomized trials with a risk of bias.
Rationale for the Recommendations
The evidence suggests that the carbapenems (including imipe-
nem), ampicillin-sulbactam, and colistin are equally effective
at treating Acinetobacter species that are determined by antimi-
crobial sensitivity testing to be sensitive to those agents. The
guideline panel agreed that the carbapenems and ampicillin-
sulbactam are preferred due to fewer side effects, whereas
colistin should be reserved for Acinetobacter species that are
sensitive only to colistin due to the risk of nephrotoxicity
from colistin therapy. The recommendation to use colistin to
treat Acinetobacter species that are sensitive only to colistin
was strong despite the low quality of evidence because, for
such patients, there are no other therapeutic options, so colistin
therapy may be lifesaving.
The use of adjunctive therapies was discussed at length by the
guideline panel. Adjunctive aerosolized colistin improved clin-
ical outcomes without increasing harms; the panel agreed that
the additional benefits outweighed the additional burdens and
costs of such therapy and, therefore, opted to recommend ad-
junctive aerosolized colistin. In contrast, adjunctive rifampicin
did not improve outcomes and, therefore, was not recommend-
ed because its burdens, costs, and risks clearly exceed the
benefits.
Finally, the evidence synthesis indicated that the current label
dose of tigecycline worsened clinical outcomes compared with
several other therapies. The panel’s strong recommendation
against tigecycline despite low-quality evidence is intended to
emphasize the importance of avoiding potentially harmful ther-
apies, particularly when alternative choices exist.
Research Needs
There is an urgent need for studies comparing various antibiotic
regimens in the treatment of pneumonia due to Acinetobacter
species. Appropriate clinical outcomes include mortality, treat-
ment failure rate, ICU and hospital length of stay, acquired an-
tibiotic resistance, and side effects.
XX. Which Antibiotic Should Be Used to Treat Patients With HAP/VAP
Due to Carbapenem-Resistant Pathogens?
Recommendation
1. In patients with HAP/VAP caused by a carbapenem-resis-
tant pathogen that is sensitive only to polymyxins, we recom-
mend intravenous polymyxins (colistin or polymyxin B)
(strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence), and
we suggest adjunctive inhaled colistin (weak recommenda-
tion, low-quality evidence).
Values and Preferences: These recommendations place a
high value on achieving clinical cure and survival; they
place a lower value on burden and cost.
Remarks: Inhaled colistin may have potential pharmacoki-
netic advantages compared to inhaled polymyxin B, and
clinical evidence based on controlled studies has also
shown that inhaled colistin may be associated with improved
clinical outcomes. The clinical evidence for inhaled poly-
myxin B is mostly from anecdotal and uncontrolled studies;
we are therefore not suggesting use of inhaled polymyxin
B. Colistin for inhalation should be administered promptly
after being mixed with sterile water. This recommendation
was made by the FDA after a report that a cystic fibrosis pa-
tient died after being treated with a premixed colistin formu-
lation [3]. Intravenous polymyxin B may have potential
pharmacokinetic advantages compared to intravenous colis-
tin, but clinical data are lacking in patients with HAP/VAP.
Summary of the Evidence
Our systematic review identified 5 observational studies [256,
257, 261, 339, 340] and 4 randomized trials [259, 331, 332,
334] relevant to the clinical question. Acinetobacter baumannii
was the only organism or predominant organism in most stud-
ies, and intravenous colistin monotherapy was the comparator
in most studies.
Most of the studied antibiotics conferred similar effects when
given intravenously. A trial that randomly assigned patients to
ampicillin-sulbactam or intravenous colistin found no differ-
ence in mortality or clinical response [332]. An observational
study that similarly compared intravenous colistin and sulbac-
tam to intravenous colistin alone detected no difference in the
clinical response or microbiological response [340]. Two ran-
domized trials comparing rifampicin plus intravenous colistin
to intravenous colistin alone found no difference in mortality,
clinical response, or hospital length of stay [331, 334].
In contrast, the addition of inhaled colistin to intravenous co-
listin appeared beneficial. Three observational studies [256, 257,
261] and one randomized trial [259] evaluated the effects of
combination therapy with inhaled and intravenous colistin.
Our meta-analysis of these 4 studies showed an improved clin-
ical cure rate (RR, 1.29; 95% CI, 1.11–1.51) and trend toward
improved mortality (RR, 0.75; 95% CI, .52–1.09) when the com-
bination of adjunctive inhaled colistin plus intravenous colistin
was compared to intravenous colistin monotherapy. Of note,
the meta-analysis was repeated after removing one of the studies
deemed to have a high risk of bias because carbapenem-resis-
tant infections were not equally distributed between the 2
study arms and nearly 50% of patients may have had carbape-
nem-sensitive infections [257]. The repeat meta-analysis found
e98 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 that combination therapy with inhaled and intravenous colistin
was still superior to intravenous colistin monotherapy in terms
of clinical cure (RR, 1.28; 95% CI, 1.07–1.55). Inhaled colistin
was not associated with nephrotoxicity, bronchospasm, or neu-
rotoxicity, although this outcome was not systematically evalu-
ated across studies. The risk for the development of resistant
strains with inhaled colistin was addressed in one study, and
no such cases were identified [256].
Nephrotoxicity is the most common side effect of intrave-
nous colistin. In 3 studies, the frequency of colistin-associated
nephrotoxicity ranged from 19% to 33% [256, 261, 332]. This
degree of renal dysfunction may be unavoidable when treating
critically ill patients. In fact, a meta-regression analysis showed
no difference in the rate of nephrotoxicity in patients with VAP
who were treated with colistin compared with more traditional
agents [184]. The addition of inhaled colistin did not increase
the risk of renal injury or the emergence of colistin-resistant
infections. The development of Acinetobacter resistance to in-
haled colistin has only been described in spontaneously breath-
ing patients, probably because drug concentrations in the
airway are significantly lower in these patients compared with
patients on mechanical ventilation [341]. Recommendations re-
garding the frequency of administration and the total daily dose
of intravenous colistin or polymyxin B and whether a loading
dose should be administered are evolving and are beyond the
scope of these guidelines, but a suggestion is made in Table 3
(see section X). These issues should be addressed with the assis-
tance of a critical care pharmacist. Similar concerns surround
the use of inhaled colistin, as neither the dose nor method of
delivery is standardized. Evidence on polymyxin B for the treat-
ment of HAP/VAP is growing, but also limited by low-quality
evidence [305–308, 338].
The panel had moderate confidence in the finding of no dif-
ference among most antibiotic regimens because the finding
derived from randomized trials with indirectness of the inter-
vention (ie, colistin dosing was highly variable). In contrast,
the panel had low confidence in the estimated effects of in-
haled plus intravenous colistin compared with intravenous co-
listin alone because the effects derived from observational
studies with indirectness of the intervention, as well as from
randomized trials with a risk of bias (lack of blinding) and
imprecision (wide CIs for the outcome of mortality).
Rationale for the Recommendation
Intravenous colistin or polymyxin B is standard therapy for
HAP/VAP caused by a carbapenem-resistant pathogen because
such pathogens commonly demonstrate in vitro susceptibility
to only the polymyxin antibiotic class. Our systematic review
found no alternative antibiotic regimen with effects superior
to intravenous colistin; the panel judged that intravenous poly-
myxins should remain the preferred therapy until an alternative
antimicrobial regimen is definitively shown to be more
beneficial or less harmful, as clinical experience is becoming
more
extensive.
The panel agreed that the benefits of inhaled colistin plus in-
travenous colistin or polymyxin B combination therapy out-
weighed the downsides in most patients with HAP/VAP
caused by a carbapenem-resistant pathogen. The benefits con-
sidered by the panel were an improved clinical cure rate and
trend toward improved mortality, while the downsides included
potential harms (ie, nephrotoxicity, acquisition of colistin resis-
tance, and other less severe side effects), increased burdens, and
increased costs.
LENGTH OF THERAPY
XXI. Should Patients With VAP Receive 7 Days or 8–15 Days of Antibiotic
Therapy?
Recommendation
1. For patients with VAP, we recommend a 7-day course of an-
timicrobial therapy rather than a longer duration (strong rec-
ommendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Remarks: There exist situations in which a shorter or longer
duration of antibiotics may be indicated, depending upon the
rate of improvement of clinical, radiologic, and laboratory
parameters.
Summary of the Evidence
We identified 2 published systematic reviews of randomized trials
[342, 343] and an observational study [344] that compared short-
course antibiotic therapy to prolonged-course therapy for VAP.
One systematic review [342] included 6 randomized trials
[120, 158, 345–348] that enrolled 508 patients with HAP/VAP
and compared fixed durations of antibiotic therapy. Nearly all
of the patients had VAP, rather than HAP. Short courses of an-
tibiotics (ie, 7–8 days) increased 28-day antibiotic-free days
(mean difference, 4.02 days; 95% CI, 2.26–5.78 days) and re-
duced recurrent VAP due to MDR pathogens (42.1% vs
62.3%; OR, 0.44; 95% CI, .21–.95) compared with long courses
of antibiotics (ie, 10–15 days). There were no differences in
mortality, recurrent pneumonia, treatment failure, hospital
length of stay, or duration of mechanical ventilation. In the sub-
group of patients with VAP due to a non-glucose-fermenting
gram-negative bacillus including Pseudomonas and Acineto-
bacter (33% of patients), short courses of antibiotics were asso-
ciated with recurrent infection (OR, 2.18; 95% CI, 1.14–4.16),
but no other differences.
The other systematic review [343] similarly included 4 ran-
domized trials [345, 346, 348] that enrolled 883 patients with
VAP and compared short-course antibiotic regimens (ie, 7–8
days) to long-course regimens (ie, 10–15 days). Short-course
regimens increased antibiotic-free days, but there was no differ-
ence in mortality, recurrent pneumonia, ventilator-free days,
duration of mechanical ventilation, or length of ICU stay.
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e99
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 We conducted our own meta-analyses using the trials that
were included in the published systematic reviews, as well as
data provided by these trials’ authors. We also found no differ-
ences between short-course antibiotic regimens (ie, 7–8 days)
and long-course regimens (ie, 10–15 days) in terms of mortality,
clinical cure, and recurrent pneumonia. Of note, the specific
subpopulation with VAP due to non-glucose-fermenting
gram-negative bacilli was analyzed, and no differences were ob-
served for pneumonia recurrence (OR, 1.42; 95% CI, .66–3.04;
P = .37) or mortality (OR, 0.94; 95% CI, .56–1.59; P = .83).
The observational study enrolled patients with VAP due to
non-glucose-fermenting gram-negative bacilli, which included
27 patients who were treated with antibiotics for 3–8 days and
127 patients who were treated for ≥9 days. There were no dif-
ferences in mortality or recurrence rate among patients who re-
ceived a short course of antibiotics compared to those who
received a long course [344].
Taken together, the evidence indicates that short courses of
antibiotics reduce antibiotic exposure and recurrent pneumonia
due to MDR organisms. Other clinical outcomes such as mor-
tality do not appear to be affected by the duration of antibiotic
therapy, with the exception of short courses, which were asso-
ciated with recurrence of the initial VAP due to a non-glucose-
fermenting gram-negative bacillus in some previous studies, but
not in our updated meta-analysis. The panel’s confidence in
these results was moderate, reflecting that they derive from
meta-analyses of randomized trials that have a risk for bias.
The risk of bias is due to many of the trials not being blinded
and recurrence being measured at 30 days, which allows more
time for recurrence to occur in the short-course arms of the tri-
als, potentially biasing the studies in favor of long-course anti-
biotics. There was also indirectness; the question is for all
patients with VAP, but the largest trial excluded patients with
early VAP.
Rationale for the Recommendation
The desirable consequences of a short-course antibiotic regi-
men are that it decreases antibiotic exposure and antibiotic re-
sistance, without increasing recurrent disease or mortality. The
decreased antibiotic exposure almost certainly reduces costs and
side effects. The undesirable consequence of a short-course an-
tibiotic regimen is that occasionally antibiotics will be discon-
tinued in a patient who needs them, resulting in recurrent
VAP. The evidence suggests that this is very uncommon and,
therefore, the panel had a high level of confidence that the ben-
efits of a short-course antibiotic regimen outweighed the harms,
leading to their recommendation to use antibiotics for 7 days
rather than 8–15 days in patients with VAP.
The panel considered whether a separate recommendation
was indicated for patients with VAP due to non-glucose-
fermenting gram-negative bacilli, in light of the previous evi-
dence suggesting that recurrence may be increased in such
patients who receive a short course of antibiotics. The panel
agreed that a different recommendation was not indicated be-
cause, even if there is a small increased recurrence rate, mortality
and clinical cure do not appear to be affected; in addition, the ev-
idence for recurrence is from subgroup analyses with important
limitations. These include all of the following: There was potential
bias in favor of long-course therapy due to the differential time
period during which recurrence was assessed; there was the pos-
sibility that the second episode of VAP is incorrectly being consid-
ered a recurrence because of persistent colonizing organisms
being cultured; many studies reported superinfections from
both lung and other organ sites (eg, urinary tract infection) as re-
currence; pulmonary infiltrates are known to persist on imaging
studies and lag behind clinical resolution, leading to false identi-
fication of a new or recurrent pneumonia; and many subgroup
analyses were performed, raising the possibility of multiple hy-
pothesis testing.
XXII. What Is the Optimal Duration of Antibiotic Therapy for HAP
(Non-VAP)?
Recommendation
1. For patients with HAP, we recommend a 7-day course of
antimicrobial therapy (strong recommendation, very low-
quality evidence).
Remarks: There exist situations in which a shorter or longer
duration of antibiotics may be indicated, depending upon the
rate of improvement of clinical, radiologic, and laboratory
parameters.
Summary of the Evidence
The guideline panel found no studies that provided useful data
for comparing short-term to long-term antibiotic therapy in
HAP; however, the duration of therapy has been studied in
VAP. Short courses of antibiotics (ie, 7–8 days) increased
28-day antibiotic-free days (mean difference, 4.02 days; 95%
CI, 2.26–5.78 days) and reduced recurrent VAP due to MDR
pathogens (42.1% vs 62.3%; OR, 0.44; 95% CI, .21–.95) com-
pared with long courses of antibiotics (ie, 10–15 days). There
were no differences in mortality, recurrent pneumonia, treat-
ment failure, hospital length of stay, or duration of mechanical
ventilation. In the subgroup of patients with VAP due to a non-
glucose-fermenting gram-negative bacillus, including Pseudo-
monas and Acinetobacter (33% of patients), short courses of
antibiotics were associated with recurrence (41.8% vs 24.7%;
OR, 2.18; 95% CI, 1.14–4.16), but no mortality or other clinical
differences were found [342, 345–347]. The increased risk of re-
currence might have been in part due to bias created by how the
time to recurrence was defined. A more recent and larger body
of evidence comparing short-course vs long-course antibiotic
treatment found no differences in mortality, recurrent pneumo-
nia, treatment failure, hospital length of stay, or duration of me-
chanical ventilation (see section XXI).
e100 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Rationale for the Recommendation
Due to the absence of studies comparing short-term to long-
term antibiotic therapy in patients with HAP, the guideline
panel used evidence from patients with VAP to inform its judg-
ments. The evidence suggests that antibiotic therapy for ≤7 days
does not reduce the benefits of antibiotic therapy; however, the
shorter duration of therapy almost certainly reduces antibiotic-
related side effects, C. difficile colitis, the acquisition of anti-
biotic resistance, and costs. Given these potential benefits of a
shorter duration of therapy without known harms, the panel de-
cided that empiric antibiotic therapy should be prescribed for
≤7 days. The recommendation is strong, reflecting the panel’s
belief in the importance of avoiding therapies that are potential-
ly harmful and costly if there is no evidence of benefit.
The guideline panel agreed that it is reasonable to empirically
de-escalate the antimicrobial regimen to a single broad-spectrum
antibiotic in patients who have a negative sputum culture and are
clinically improving, provided that there is ongoing coverage ac-
cording to a local HAP antibiogram, or, if not available, for enteric
gram-negative bacilli and MSSA. Patients who have not had spu-
tum cultures performed, have factors that diminish the reliability
of the sputum culture (eg, antibiotic therapy prior to obtaining the
sample or a poor-quality sample), or are at high risk for MDR in-
fections may not be appropriate candidates for de-escalation.
XXIII. Should Antibiotic Therapy Be De-escalated or Fixed in Patients
With HAP/VAP?
Recommendation
1. For patients with HAP/VAP, we suggest that antibiotic ther-
apy be de-escalated rather than fixed (weak recommendation,
very low-quality evidence).
Remarks: De-escalation refers to changing an empiric broad-
spectrum antibiotic regimen to a narrower antibiotic regimen
by changing the antimicrobial agent or changing from com-
bination therapy to monotherapy. In contrast, fixed antibiot-
ic therapy refers to maintaining a broad-spectrum antibiotic
regimen until therapy is completed.
Summary of the Evidence
We identified 6 relevant studies that enrolled patients with nos-
ocomial pneumonia [194,196,229,349–351].One of the studies
was a randomized trial [229], and the remaining 5 were ob-
servational studies [196, 349–351]. One study found lower
mortality with de-escalation therapy [196], 3 studies found a
non–statistically significant reduction in mortality with de-
escalation therapy [349–351], and 2 studies found an increase
in mortality with de-escalation therapy [194, 229]. When the
studies were pooled, there was no difference in mortality for
the de-escalation group vs the fixed-regimen group (19.7% vs
22.6%; OR, 0.81; 95% CI, .64–1.1).
Other outcomes were similarly inconsistent or unaffected by
the antimicrobial strategy. For ICU length of stay, the randomized
trial found that de-escalation caused a non–statistically signifi-
cant decrease in the length of stay [229], whereas one of the ob-
servational studies found that de-escalation was associated with
a non–statistically significant increase in the length of stay
[349]. Recurrence of pneumonia was the same in both the de-es-
calation and fixed-regimen groups in 2 observational studies [194,
350]. One of the studies reported an increase in emergence of re-
sistant pathogens, particularly MRSA, in the de-escalation group
(37.9% vs 16.7%; P < .05) [229].
Following our systematic review, a randomized trial was re-
ported that specifically compared a de-escalation strategy of
antimicrobial management to a fixed strategy. It defined de-
escalation as narrowing the spectrum of initial antimicrobial
therapy and a fixed strategy as the continuation of appropriate
antimicrobial therapy until therapy was complete. The trial ran-
domly assigned 116 patients with sepsis in the ICU to receive
either a de-escalation strategy or fixed strategy. Pneumonia
was a more common cause of sepsis in the de-escalation
group (58% vs 40%). De-escalation increased the number of an-
timicrobial days (9 days vs 7.5 days; P = .03) and the risk of
superinfection (27% vs 11%; RR, 2.58; 95% CI, 1.09–6.12).
There was no difference in mortality or ICU length of stay
[352]. In a subgroup analysis of the 56 patients with pneumo-
nia, there were no differences in any of the outcomes measured.
Taken together, the evidence indicates the following: There
are no differences between de-escalation and a fixed antimicro-
bial regimen in terms of mortality or ICU length of stay; there is
conflicting evidence about the effect of de-escalation on the in-
cidence of recurrent pneumonia; and de-escalation may in-
crease antimicrobial days, superinfection, and the emergence
of MRSA. The panel’s confidence in these estimated effects is
very low. The panel’s systematic review consisted mostly of ob-
servational studies that were limited by risk of bias, indirectness
(different definitions of de-escalation, different antimicrobial
regimens and protocols), and inconsistent results. The subse-
quent randomized trial was limited by both serious risk of
bias (not blinded, failure of randomization [ie, baseline differ-
ences]) and probably also indirectness (the question is about
patients with HAP/VAP, but the trial may have included pa-
tients with healthcare-associated non-HAP/VAP pneumonia).
Rationale for the Recommendation
De-escalation is widely considered the preferable approach to
antimicrobial management and has become a principle of anti-
microbial stewardship. National guidelines and numerous pa-
pers contend that de-escalation is beneficial because it likely
reduces antimicrobial resistance, side effects, and costs [1, 195,
353–358]. However, there is very little evidence that substanti-
ates these presumed benefits, and there is some evidence (albeit
very poor-quality evidence) that de-escalation may have some
undesirable effects. These undesirable effects may, in part, be
the result of changing an appropriate antimicrobial regimen
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e101
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 to an inappropriate regimen due to misinterpretation of micro-
biological tests, misleading microbiological tests (eg, poor-
quality specimens reflecting contamination), or erroneous
decision making.
The panelists felt that the evidence was poor and that they
had essentially no confidence in the estimated effects of a de-es-
calation strategy compared with a fixed regimen. Therefore, the
panel elected to inform its recommendation with unsystematic
observations (ie, clinical experience) and clinical rationale. They
had a high level of confidence that de-escalation reduces costs,
burdens, and side effects, and that it is very likely that de-
escalation also reduces antimicrobial resistance. In contrast,
they thought it may be possible that recurrent pneumonia
could be increased by de-escalation, but had serious doubts
that de-escalation could increase superinfection or antimicrobi-
al days. When these factors were considered together, the panel
judged that the potential benefits of de-escalation outweigh the
possible harms and, therefore, recommended de-escalation.
Research Needs
Well-done randomized trials comparing the effects of de-
escalation and fixed antimicrobial regimens on clinical
outcomes are urgently needed. With antibiotic resistance con-
sidered one of the most significant threats of the current era
and de-escalation a potential way to combat resistance, such
research demands a high priority.
XXIV. Should Discontinuation of Antibiotic Therapy Be Based Upon PCT
Levels Plus Clinical Criteria or Clinical Criteria Alone in Patients With
HAP/VAP?
Recommendation
1. For patients with HAP/VAP, we suggest using PCT levels
plus clinical criteria to guide the discontinuation of antibiotic
therapy, rather than clinical criteria alone (weak recommen-
dation, low-quality evidence).
Remarks: It is not known if the benefits of using PCT levels
to determine whether or not to discontinue antibiotic thera-
py exist in settings where standard antimicrobial therapy for
VAP is already 7 days or less.
Summary of the Evidence
We identified a published systematic review that selected ran-
domized trials that enrolled patients with acute respiratory in-
fections and compared PCT-based antibiotic decision making
with conventional (ie, no PCT) decision making. The review se-
lected 14 trials with 4221 patients and found that PCT-based
decision making decreased antibiotic exposure (adjusted mean
difference, −3.47 days; 95% CI, −3.78 to −3.17 days) and was
not associated with increased mortality or treatment failure
[359, 360]. The generalizability of these findings is limited by
indirectness, as the question is about the discontinuation of an-
tibiotics in patients with VAP, but the trials included patients
with any type of acute respiratory infection and evaluated
both the initiation and discontinuation of antibiotics. The evi-
dence is predominantly from patients with VAP, so our recom-
mendations for HAP are mostly based on VAP studies.
In addition, we identified 2 published randomized trials [361,
362] and an abstract of a randomized trial [363], all of which
specifically evaluated the discontinuation of antibiotic therapy
for VAP on the basis of PCT levels plus clinical criteria vs clin-
ical criteria alone. When pooled, the trials included 308 patients
with VAP and found that those patients whose antibiotics were
either continued or discontinued on the basis of PCT levels plus
clinical criteria had a shorter duration of antibiotic therapy (9.1
days vs 12.1 days; P < .00001), but no difference in mortality.
Other outcomes were reported by only some of the trials, but
included no effects on the duration of mechanical ventilation,
length of ICU stay, length of hospital stay, incidence of recur-
rent pneumonia, or development of resistance.
Taken together, the evidence suggests that discontinuing an-
tibiotics on the basis of PCT levels plus clinical criteria decreas-
es antibiotic exposure compared with using clinical criteria
alone; all other outcomes remain unchanged. The panel had
low confidence in these results because they derive from a
meta-analysis of 14 randomized trials with both a serious risk
of bias (the trials were not blinded) and indirectness, as well
as from a meta-analysis of 3 randomized trials with a serious
risk of bias (the trials were not blinded) and some inconsistency
(I2= 21%). Moreover, the control groups in the trials had rou-
tinely received 9–15 days of antibiotics; it is uncertain if a ben-
efit would also be seen in hospitals that have a lower baseline
duration of antibiotic therapy [342, 345].
Rationale for the Recommendation
The desirable consequence associated with the use of PCT levels
to guide the discontinuation of empiric antibiotic therapy is that
it decreases antibiotic exposure without increasing treatment
failure or mortality. The decreased antibiotic exposure almost
certainly reduces costs and side effects. The undesirable conse-
quences of using PCT levels to guide the discontinuation of em-
piric antibiotic therapy are that PCT testing is more costly and
burdensome than clinical criteria alone. Moreover, falsely low
PCT levels may encourage inappropriate discontinuation of
necessary antibiotic therapy and falsely high PCT levels may
lead to the continuation of unnecessary antibiotic therapy.
When all these factors were considered, the panel felt that the
benefits of decreased antibiotic exposure outweighed the costs,
burdens, and uncertain results associated with PCT testing.
XXV. Should Discontinuation of Antibiotic Therapy Be Based Upon the
CPIS Plus Clinical Criteria or Clinical Criteria Alone in Patients With
Suspected HAP/VAP?
Recommendation
1. For patients with suspected HAP/VAP, we suggest not using
the CPIS to guide the discontinuation of antibiotic therapy
(weak recommendation, low-quality evidence).
e102 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Summary of the Evidence
Use of the CPIS as a diagnostic tool was discussed above. The
CPIS has also been studied as a management tool to aid in the
decision of whether or not to discontinue antibiotics. Our sys-
tematic review identified 3 such studies [120, 193, 364]. The ev-
idence is predominantly from patients with VAP, so our
recommendations for HAP are mostly based on VAP studies.
In the first study, 81 ICU patients with pulmonary infiltrates
and a CPIS ≤6 (low risk of pneumonia) were randomly assigned
to standard therapy (choice and duration of antibiotic therapy
at the discretion of the clinician) or ciprofloxacin monotherapy
with reevaluation at 3 days. If the CPIS remained ≤6 at 3 days,
ciprofloxacin was discontinued; otherwise, it was continued. Pa-
tients in the standard therapy group were more likely to receive
≥3 days of antibiotic therapy than patients in the CPIS group
(90% vs 28%; P = .0001). There was no difference in mortality
or ICU length of stay; however, patients in the CPIS group
had a shorter duration of antibiotic therapy (3.0 days vs 9.8
days; P = .0001), a less expensive treatment course ($259 vs
$640; P = .0001), and less antibiotic resistance and fewer super-
infections (14% vs 38%; RR, 0.36; 95% CI, .14–.89) [120].
In the second study, 290 patients with VAP were assigned to
have the duration of empiric antibiotic therapy for VAP deter-
mined using an antibiotic discontinuation policy (discontinuation
group) or according to the clinical judgment of the treating ICU
physicians (conventional group). The discontinuation policy re-
quired discontinuation of antibiotics if a noninfectious etiology
for the infiltrates was identified or the symptoms and signs of in-
fection resolved; the symptoms and signs overlapped with the
CPIS, but were slightly different. The duration of antibiotic ther-
apy was reduced in the discontinuation group compared with the
conventional therapy group (6 days vs 8 days; P = .001), but there
were no differences in mortality, ICU length of stay, development
of resistance, or incidence of superinfections [193, 364].
The third study was an observational study of 102 patients
with VAP that compared outcomes among patients managed
prior to the implementation of an antimicrobial guideline with
outcomes among patients managed after implementation of the
guideline. The guideline set standard antibiotic therapy to 7 days
and encouraged a longer duration of therapy only for patients
with evidence of ongoing active infection; this evidence closely
overlapped with the CPIS (ie, fever, leukocytosis, persistent infil-
trates, ongoing purulent sputum). Following implementation of
the guideline, the duration of antibiotic therapy was shorter
(8.6 days vs 14.8 days; P < .001), and recurrent VAP was less com-
mon (7.7% vs 24%; RR, 0.32; 95% CI, .11–.93) [193, 364].
Taken together, the evidence is inconsistent. One study suggests
that use of the CPIS to determine antibiotic duration decreases
cost, antibiotic resistance, and superinfection [120], but 2 other
studies suggest that use of the CPIS has no effect on most clinical
outcomes [193, 364]. The panel had low confidence in these esti-
mated effects because, although 2 of the studies were randomized
trials, the evidence was limited by inconsistency and indirectness
(the question is about the use of CPIS in patients with VAP, but
one trial enrolled patients with a low likelihood of VAP and the
other studies used criteria slightly different from the CPIS).
Rationale for the Recommendation
This recommendation illustrates the panel’s belief that an un-
proven intervention should not be recommended. Implementa-
tion of the CPIS is not costly and is minimally burdensome;
however, it may be harmful if it does not reliably discriminate
patients who can safely have their antibiotics discontinued from
patients who should have their antibiotics continued, since it
may lead to the discontinuation of antibiotics in patients who
need ongoing antimicrobial therapy.
Notes
Acknowledgments.
The panel expresses its gratitude to the thoughtful
reviewers of earlier drafts of the guideline. The panel also wishes to thank
Barb Griss from National Jewish Health for her assistance with the literature
searches, Lina Huang, PharmD, of Washington Hospital Health Care
System, Jennifer J. Padberg, MPH of Infectious Diseases Society of America
(IDSA) and Kevin Wilson, MD of American Thoracic Society (ATS) for
their assistance and support in the development of these guidelines.
Disclaimer.
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Institute, the National Institutes of Health, or the Department of
Veterans Affairs.
Financial support.
The IDSA and the ATS provided meeting facilities
for face-to-face meetings, financial support for conference calls, and admin-
istrative support. Industry funding to support guideline development was
not permitted.
Potential conflicts of interest.
T. M. F. reports grants from the US Food
and Drug Administration, during the conduct of the study; Served in an Ad-
visory/Consultancy role to Allergan, Melinta, Merck, MotifBio, Nabriva,
Tetraphase, Sensor Kenesis Group, and grants from Pfizer and Cempra, out-
side the submitted work. P. D. F. reports grants from Biofire Diagnostics and
Merck, outside the submitted work. M. L. M. reports that he has participated
as an investigator in clinical trials related to bronchiectasis sponsored by
Aradigm and Gilead; his employer has received remuneration for this
work; and prior to beginning work on this guideline, he served as a consul-
tant and speaker for Pfizer, and subsequent to the writing of these Guide-
lines, served as a consultant and clinical trial investigator for Bayer, both
related to bronchiectasis. J. C. reports personal fees from Astellas, Merck,
Roche, Angellini, Pfizer, and Novartis, outside the submitted work. J. M. re-
ports grants from Bayer Pharma, outside the submitted work. L. B. P. reports
a patent for targeted therapy of endobronchial infection in mechanically
ventilated patents with royalties paid to Nektar Therapeutics sublicensed
to Bayer, and the State University of New York at Stony Brook has licensed
patents to Nektar in the area of aerosolized antibiotics to the intubated pa-
tient. These patents are sublicensed to Bayer. L. B. P. is a consultant to Bayer.
M. I. R.’s time is partially protected by award number K23HL096054 from
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. J. A. R. reports serving on the
Advisory Board of Infectopharm, and receiving lecture fees from MSD, out-
side the submitted work. All other authors report no potential conflicts. All
authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Con-
flicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the content
of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. American Thoracic Society (ATS) and Infectious Diseases Society of America
(IDSA). Guidelines for the management of adults with hospital-acquired, venti-
lator-associated, and healthcare-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2005; 171:388–416.
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e103
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rat-
ing quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008; 336:924–6.
3. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Information for healthcare profes-
sionals: colistimethate (marketed as Coly-Mycin M and generic products). Avail-
able at: http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/PostmarketDrugSafetyInformation
forPatientsandProviders/ucm124896.htm. Accessed September 2014.
4. Magill SS, Edwards JR, Fridkin SK; Emerging Infections Program Healthcare-As-
sociated Infections Antimicrobial Use Prevalence Survey Team. Survey of health
care-associated infections. N Engl J Med 2014; 370:2542–3.
5. Dudeck MA, Weiner LM, Allen-Bridson K, et al. National Healthcare Safety Net-
work (NHSN) report, data summary for 2012, device-associated module. Am J
Infect Control 2013; 41:1148–66.
6. Dudeck MA, Horan TC, Peterson KD, et al. National Healthcare Safety Network
(NHSN) report, data summary for 2009, device-associated module. Am J Infect
Control 2011; 39:349–67.
7. Wang Y, Eldridge N, Metersky ML, et al. National trends in patient safety for four
common conditions, 2005–2011. N Engl J Med 2014; 370:341–51.
8. Melsen WG, Rovers MM, Groenwold RH, et al. Attributable mortality of venti-
lator-associated pneumonia: a meta-analysis of individual patient data from
randomised prevention studies. Lancet Infect Dis 2013; 13:665–71.
9. Muscedere JG, Day A, Heyland DK. Mortality, attributable mortality, and clinical
events as end points for clinical trials of ventilator-associated pneumonia and
hospital-acquired pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 51(suppl 1):S120–5.
10. Kollef MH, Hamilton CW, Ernst FR. Economic impact of ventilator-associated
pneumonia in a large matched cohort. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012;
33:250–6.
11. Sopena N, Sabria M; Neunos Study Group. Multicenter study of hospital-ac-
quired pneumonia in non-ICU patients. Chest 2005; 127:213–9.
12. Esperatti M, Ferrer M, Giunta V, et al. Validation of predictors of adverse outcomes
in hospital-acquired pneumonia in the ICU. Crit Care Med 2013; 41:2151–61.
13. Coffin SE, Klompas M, Classen D, et al. Strategies to prevent ventilator-associated
pneumonia in acute care hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2008; 29
(suppl 1):S31–40.
14. Klompas M, Branson R, Eichenwald EC, et al. Strategies to prevent ventilator-as-
sociated pneumonia in acute care hospitals: 2014 update. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 2014; 35(suppl 2):S133–54.
15. Chalmers JD, Rother C, Salih W, Ewig S. Healthcare-associated pneumonia does
not accurately identify potentially resistant pathogens: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 2014; 58:330–9.
16. Gross AE, Van Schooneveld TC, Olsen KM, et al. Epidemiology and predictors of
multidrug-resistant community-acquired and health care-associated pneumonia.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2014; 58:5262–8.
17. Yap V, Datta D, Metersky ML. Is the present definition of health care-associated
pneumonia the best way to define risk of infection with antibiotic-resistant path-
ogens? Infect Dis Clin North Am 2013; 27:1–18.
18. Jones BE, Jones MM, Huttner B, et al. Trends in antibiotic use and nosocomial
pathogens in hospitalized veterans with pneumonia at 128 medical centers,
2006–2010. Clin Infect Dis 2015; 61:1403–10.
19. Valles J, Martin-Loeches I, Torres A, et al. Epidemiology, antibiotic therapy and
clinical outcomes of healthcare-associated pneumonia in critically ill patients: a
Spanish cohort study. Intensive Care Med 2014; 40:572–81.
20. Hayashi Y, Morisawa K, Klompas M, et al. Toward improved surveillance: the
impact of ventilator-associated complications on length of stay and antibiotic
use in patients in intensive care units. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 56:471–7.
21. Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA)/American Thoracic Society
(ATS). Supplemental material for the management of adults with hospital-
acquired and ventilator-associated pneumonia: 2016 clinical practice guidelines
by the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the American Thoracic Soci-
ety. Available at: http://www.idsociety.org/Organ_System/#HospitalAcquired
VentilatorAssociatedPneumoniaHAPVAP. Accessed 9 June 2016.
22. Depuydt P, Benoit D, Vogelaers D, et al. Systematic surveillance cultures as a tool
to predict involvement of multidrug antibiotic resistant bacteria in ventilator-as-
sociated pneumonia. Intensive Care Med 2008; 34:675–82.
23. Giantsou E, Liratzopoulos N, Efraimidou E, et al. Both early-onset and late-onset
ventilator-associated pneumonia are caused mainly by potentially multiresistant
bacteria. Intensive Care Med 2005; 31:1488–94.
24. Trouillet JL, Chastre J, Vuagnat A, et al. Ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by
potentially drug-resistant bacteria. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998; 157:531–9.
25. Gastmeier P, Sohr D, Geffers C, Ruden H, Vonberg RP, Welte T. Early- and late-
onset pneumonia: is this still a useful classification? Antimicrob Agents Chemo-
ther 2009; 53:2714–8.
26. Ibrahim EH, Ward S, Sherman G, Kollef MH. A comparative analysis of patients
with early-onset vs late-onset nosocomial pneumonia in the ICU setting. Chest
2000; 117:1434–42.
27. Martin-Loeches I, Deja M, Koulenti D, et al. Potentially resistant microorganisms
in intubated patients with hospital-acquired pneumonia: the interaction of ecol-
ogy, shock and risk factors. Intensive Care Med 2013; 39:672–81.
28. Restrepo MI, Peterson J, Fernandez JF, Qin Z, Fisher AC, Nicholson SC. Comparison
of the bacterial etiology of early-onset and late-onset ventilator-associated pneumo-
nia in subjects enrolled in 2 large clinical studies. Respir Care 2013; 58:1220–5.
29. Verhamme KM, De Coster W, De Roo L, et al. Pathogens in early-onset and late-
onset intensive care unit-acquired pneumonia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2007; 28:389–97.
30. Parker CM, Kutsogiannis J, Muscedere J, et al. Ventilator-associated pneumonia
caused by multidrug-resistant organisms or Pseudomonas aeruginosa: preva-
lence, incidence, risk factors, and outcomes. J Crit Care 2008; 23:18–26.
31. George DL, Falk PS, Wunderink RG, et al. Epidemiology of ventilator-acquired
pneumonia based on protected bronchoscopic sampling. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1998; 158:1839–47.
32. Rello J, Sa-Borges M, Correa H, Leal SR, Baraibar J. Variations in etiology of
ventilator-associated pneumonia across four treatment sites: implications for
antimicrobial prescribing practices. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;
160:608–13.
33. Leroy O, Meybeck A, d’Escrivan T, Devos P, Kipnis E, Georges H. Impact of ad-
equacy of initial antimicrobial therapy on the prognosis of patients with ventila-
tor-associated pneumonia. Intensive Care Med 2003; 29:2170–3.
34. Hotchkiss RS, Monneret G, Payen D. Sepsis-induced immunosuppression: from
cellular dysfunctions to immunotherapy. Nat Rev Immunol 2013; 13:862–74.
35. Markowicz P, Wolff M, Djedaini K, et al. Multicenter prospective study of ven-
tilator-associated pneumonia during acute respiratory distress syndrome. Inci-
dence, prognosis, and risk factors. ARDS Study Group. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2000; 161:1942–8.
36. Chastre J, Trouillet JL, Vuagnat A, et al. Nosocomial pneumonia in patients
with acute respiratory distress syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;
157(4 pt 1):1165–72.
37. Langer M, Cigada M, Mandelli M, Mosconi P, Tognoni G. Early onset pneumonia:
a multicenter study in intensive care units. Intensive Care Med 1987; 13:342–6.
38. Ewig S, Torres A, El-Ebiary M, et al. Bacterial colonization patterns in mechan-
ically ventilated patients with traumatic and medical head injury. Incidence, risk
factors, and association with ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 1999; 159:188–98.
39. Leroy O, Giradie P, Yazdanpanah Y, et al. Hospital-acquired pneumonia: micro-
biological data and potential adequacy of antimicrobial regimens. Eur Respir J
2002; 20:432–9.
40. Leroy O, d’Escrivan T, Devos P, Dubreuil L, Kipnis E, Georges H. Hospital-
acquired pneumonia in critically ill patients: factors associated with episodes
due to imipenem-resistant organisms. Infection 2005; 33:129–35.
41. Bouza E, Giannella M, Bunsow E, et al. Ventilator-associated pneumonia due to
meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus: risk factors and outcome in a large ge-
neral hospital. J Hosp Infect 2012; 80:150–5.
42. Moreira MR, Cardoso RL, Almeida AB, Gontijo Filho PP. Risk factors and evo-
lution of ventilator-associated pneumonia by Staphylococcus aureus sensitive or
resistant to oxacillin in patients at the intensive care unit of a Brazilian university
hospital. Braz J Infect Dis 2008; 12:499–503.
43. Wooten DA, Winston LG. Risk factors for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus in patients with community-onset and hospital-onset pneumonia. Respir
Med 2013; 107:1266–70.
44. Robicsek A, Suseno M, Beaumont JL, Thomson RB Jr, Peterson LR. Prediction of
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus involvement in disease sites by con-
comitant nasal sampling. J Clin Microbiol 2008; 46:588–92.
45. Dangerfield B, Chung A, Webb B, Seville MT. Predictive value of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) nasal swab PCR assay for MRSA pneu-
monia. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2014; 58:859–64.
46. Sarikonda KV, Micek ST, Doherty JA, Reichley RM, Warren D, Kollef MH.
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus nasal colonization is a poor predictor
of intensive care unit-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infec-
tions requiring antibiotic treatment. Crit Care Med 2010; 38:1991–5.
47. Montero M, Sala M, Riu M, et al. Risk factors for multidrug-resistant Pseudomo-
nas aeruginosa acquisition. Impact of antibiotic use in a double case-control
study. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2010; 29:335–9.
48. Agbaht K, Diaz E, Munoz E, et al. Bacteremia in patients with ventilator-associated
pneumonia is associated with increased mortality: a study comparing bacteremic vs.
nonbacteremic ventilator-associated pneumonia. Crit Care Med 2007; 35:2064–70.
49. Kunac A, Sifri ZC, Mohr AM, Horng H, Lavery RF, Livingston DH. Bacteremia
and ventilator-associated pneumonia: a marker for contemporaneous extra-pul-
monic infection. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2014; 15:77–83.
50. Luna CM, Videla A, Mattera J, et al. Blood cultures have limited value in predict-
ing severity of illness and as a diagnostic tool in ventilator-associated pneumonia.
Chest 1999; 116:1075–84.
e104 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 51. O’Keefe GE, Caldwell E, Cuschieri J, Wurfel MM, Evans HL. Ventilator-associ-
ated pneumonia: bacteremia and death after traumatic injury. J Trauma Acute
Care Surg 2012; 72:713–9.
52. DeRyke CA, Lodise TP Jr, Rybak MJ, McKinnon PS. Epidemiology, treatment,
and outcomes of nosocomial bacteremic Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia.
Chest 2005; 128:1414–22.
53. Canadian Critical Care Trials Group. A randomized trial of diagnostic techniques
for ventilator-associated pneumonia. N Engl J Med 2006; 355:2619–30.
54. Fagon JY, Chastre J, Wolff M, et al. Invasive and noninvasive strategies for man-
agement of suspected ventilator-associated pneumonia. A randomized trial. Ann
Intern Med 2000; 132:621–30.
55. Ruiz M, Torres A, Ewig S, et al. Noninvasive versus invasive microbial investiga-
tion in ventilator-associated pneumonia: evaluation of outcome. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2000; 162:119–25.
56. Sanchez-Nieto JM, Torres A, Garcia-Cordoba F, et al. Impact of invasive and
noninvasive quantitative culture sampling on outcome of ventilator-associated
pneumonia: a pilot study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998; 157:371–6.
57. Sole Violan J, Fernandez JA, Benitez AB, Cardenosa Cendrero JA, Rodriguez de
Castro F. Impact of quantitative invasive diagnostic techniques in the manage-
ment and outcome of mechanically ventilated patients with suspected pneumo-
nia. Crit Care Med 2000; 28:2737–41.
58. Berton DC, Kalil AC, Teixeira PJ. Quantitative versus qualitative cultures of re-
spiratory secretions for clinical outcomes in patients with ventilator-associated
pneumonia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 10:Cd006482.
59. Papazian L, Thomas P, Garbe L, et al. Bronchoscopic or blind sampling tech-
niques for the diagnosis of ventilator-associated pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 1995; 152(6 pt 1):1982–91.
60. Marquette CH, Copin MC, Wallet F, et al. Diagnostic tests for pneumonia in ven-
tilated patients: prospective evaluation of diagnostic accuracy using histology as a
diagnostic gold standard. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995; 151:1878–88.
61. Torres A, el-Ebiary M, Padro L, et al. Validation of different techniques for the
diagnosis of ventilator-associated pneumonia. Comparison with immediate post-
mortem pulmonary biopsy. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994; 149(2 pt 1):324–31.
62. Balthazar AB, Von Nowakonski A, De Capitani EM, Bottini PV, Terzi RG, Arau-
jo S. Diagnostic investigation of ventilator-associated pneumonia using bron-
choalveolar lavage: comparative study with a postmortem lung biopsy. Braz J
Med Biol Res 2001; 34:993–1001.
63. Sole-Violan J, Rodriguez de Castro F, Rey A, et al. Comparison of bronchoscopic
diagnostic techniques with histological findings in brain dead organ donors with-
out suspected pneumonia. Thorax 1996; 51:929–31.
64. Fabregas N, Ewig S, Torres A, et al. Clinical diagnosis of ventilator associated
pneumonia revisited: comparative validation using immediate post-mortem
lung biopsies. Thorax 1999; 54:867–73.
65. Kirtland SH, Corley DE, Winterbauer RH, et al. The diagnosis of ventilator-
associated pneumonia: a comparison of histologic, microbiologic, and clinical
criteria. Chest 1997; 112:445–57.
66. Bregeon F, Papazian L, Thomas P, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of protected catheter
sampling in ventilator-associated bacterial pneumonia. Eur Respir J 2000; 16:969–75.
67. Chastre J, Viau F, Brun P, et al. Prospective evaluation of the protected specimen
brush for the diagnosis of pulmonary infections in ventilated patients. Am Rev
Respir Dis 1984; 130:924–9.
68. Raman K, Nailor MD, Nicolau DP, Aslanzadeh J, Nadeau M, Kuti JL. Early an-
tibiotic discontinuation in patients with clinically suspected ventilator-associated
pneumonia and negative quantitative bronchoscopy cultures. Crit Care Med
2013; 41:1656–63.
69. Jorgensen JH, Pfaller MA, Carroll KC, et al. Manual of clinical microbiology. 11th
edn. Washington: American Society of Microbiology, 2015.
70. Bonten MJ, Bergmans DC, Stobberingh EE, et al. Implementation of broncho-
scopic techniques in the diagnosis of ventilator-associated pneumonia to reduce
antibiotic use. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997; 156:1820–4.
71. Brun-Buisson C, Fartoukh M, Lechapt E, et al. Contribution of blinded, protected
quantitative specimens to the diagnostic and therapeutic management of venti-
lator-associated pneumonia. Chest 2005; 128:533–44.
72. Marik PE, Lynott J, Croxton M, Palmer E, Miller L, Zaloga GP. The effect of
blind-protected specimen brush sampling on antibiotic use in patients with sus-
pected ventilator-associated pneumonia. J Intensive Care Med 2001; 16:42–6.
73. Meduri GU, Wunderink RG, Leeper KV, Beals DH. Management of bacterial
pneumonia in ventilated patients. Protected bronchoalveolar lavage as a diagnos-
tic tool. Chest 1992; 101:500–8.
74. Babcock HM, Zack JE, Garrison T, Trovillion E, Kollef MH, Fraser VJ. Ventila-
tor-associated pneumonia in a multi-hospital system: differences in microbiology
by location. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003; 24:853–8.
75. Baker AM, Bowton DL, Haponik EF. Decision making in nosocomial pneumo-
nia. An analytic approach to the interpretation of quantitative bronchoscopic cul-
tures. Chest 1995; 107:85–95.
76. Chastre J, Luyt CE, Combes A, Trouillet JL. Use of quantitative cultures and re-
duced duration of antibiotic regimens for patients with ventilator-associated
pneumonia to decrease resistance in the intensive care unit. Clin Infect Dis
2006; 43(suppl 2):S75–81.
77. Combes A, Luyt CE, Trouillet JL, Chastre J. Controversies in ventilator-associated
pneumonia. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2010; 31:47–54.
78. Croce MA, Fabian TC, Waddle-Smith L, et al. Utility of Gram’s stain and efficacy
of quantitative cultures for posttraumatic pneumonia: a prospective study. Ann
Surg 1998; 227:743–51; discussion 51–5.
79. Dreyfuss D, Mier L, Le Bourdelles G, et al. Clinical significance of borderline
quantitative protected brush specimen culture results. Am Rev Respir Dis
1993; 147:946–51.
80. Fujitani S, Yu VL. Quantitative cultures for diagnosing ventilator-associated
pneumonia: a critique. Clin Infect Dis 2006; 43(suppl 2):S106–13.
81. Giantsou E, Liratzopoulos N, Efraimidou E, et al. De-escalation therapy rates are
significantly higher by bronchoalveolar lavage than by tracheal aspirate. Intensive
Care Med 2007; 33:1533–40.
82. Grgurich PE, Hudcova J, Lei Y, Sarwar A, Craven DE. Diagnosis of ventilator-as-
sociated pneumonia: controversies and working toward a gold standard. Curr
Opin Infect Dis 2013; 26:140–50.
83. Heyland DK, Cook DJ, Marshall J, et al. The clinical utility of invasive diagnostic
techniques in the setting of ventilator-associated pneumonia. Canadian Critical
Care Trials Group. Chest 1999; 115:1076–84.
84. Kollef MH, Kollef KE. Antibiotic utilization and outcomes for patients with clin-
ically suspected ventilator-associated pneumonia and negative quantitative BAL
culture results. Chest 2005; 128:2706–13.
85. Malhotra AK, Riaz OJ, Duane TM, et al. Subthreshold quantitative bronchoal-
veolar lavage: clinical and therapeutic implications. J Trauma 2008; 65:580–8.
86. Rello J, Vidaur L, Sandiumenge A, et al. De-escalation therapy in ventilator-as-
sociated pneumonia. Crit Care Med 2004; 32:2183–90.
87. Rodriguez de Castro F, Sole-Violan J, Aranda Leon A, et al. Do quantitative cul-
tures of protected brush specimens modify the initial empirical therapy in ven-
tilated patients with suspected pneumonia? Eur Respir J 1996; 9:37–41.
88. Sterling TR, Ho EJ, Brehm WT, Kirkpatrick MB. Diagnosis and treatment of ven-
tilator-associated pneumonia—impact on survival. A decision analysis. Chest
1996; 110:1025–34.
89. Herer B, Fuhrman C, Gazevic Z, Cabrit R, Chouaid C. Management of nosoco-
mial pneumonia on a medical ward: a comparative study of outcomes and costs
of invasive procedures. Clin Microbiol Infect 2009; 15:165–72.
90. Dorca J, Manresa F, Esteban L, et al. Efficacy, safety, and therapeutic relevance of
transthoracic aspiration with ultrathin needle in nonventilated nosocomial pneu-
monia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995; 151:1491–6.
91. Dalhoff K, Braun J, Hollandt H, Lipp R, Wiessmann KJ, Marre R. Diagnostic
value of bronchoalveolar lavage in patients with opportunistic and nonopportun-
istic bacterial pneumonia. Infection 1993; 21:291–6.
92. Chung DR, Song JH, Kim SH, et al. High prevalence of multidrug-resistant non-
fermenters in hospital-acquired pneumonia in Asia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2011; 184:1409–17.
93. Pereira W Jr, Kovnat DM, Snider GL. A prospective cooperative study of compli-
cations following flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Chest 1978; 73:813–6.
94. Gibson PG, Breit SN, Bryant DH. Hypoxia during bronchoalveolar lavage. Aust
N Z J Med 1990; 20:39–43.
95. Maruna P, Nedelnikova K, Gurlich R. Physiology and genetics of procalcitonin.
Physiol Res 2000; 49(suppl 1):S57–61.
96. Dandona P, Nix D, Wilson MF, et al. Procalcitonin increase after endotoxin in-
jection in normal subjects. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994; 79:1605–8.
97. Charles PE, Kus E, Aho S, et al. Serum procalcitonin for the early recognition of
nosocomial infection in the critically ill patients: a preliminary report. BMC In-
fect Dis 2009; 9:49.
98. Muller F, Christ-Crain M, Bregenzer T, et al. Procalcitonin levels predict bacter-
emia in patients with community-acquired pneumonia: a prospective cohort
trial. Chest 2010; 138:121–9.
99. Assicot M, Gendrel D, Carsin H, Raymond J, Guilbaud J, Bohuon C. High serum
procalcitonin concentrations in patients with sepsis and infection. Lancet 1993;
341:515–8.
100. Luyt CE, Combes A, Reynaud C, et al. Usefulness of procalcitonin for the diag-
nosis of ventilator-associated pneumonia. Intensive Care Med 2008; 34:1434–40.
101. Dallas J, Brown SM, Hock K, et al. Diagnostic utility of plasma procalcitonin for nos-
ocomial pneumonia in the intensive care unit setting. Respir Care 2011; 56:412–9.
102. Ramirez P, Garcia MA, Ferrer M, et al. Sequential measurements of procalcitonin
levels in diagnosing ventilator-associated pneumonia. Eur Respir J 2008;
31:356–62.
103. Duflo F, Debon R, Monneret G, Bienvenu J, Chassard D, Allaouchiche B. Alve-
olar and serum procalcitonin: diagnostic and prognostic value in ventilator-asso-
ciated pneumonia. Anesthesiology 2002; 96:74–9.
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e105
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 104. Liao X, Kang Y. Prognostic value of procalcitonin levels in predicting death for
patients with ventilator-associated pneumonia. Intensive Care Med 2010; 36:
S102.
105. Zhou CD, Lu ZY, Ren NZ, Zhang GC. Diagnostic value of procalcitonin in ven-
tilator associated pneumonia [in Chinese]. Chin Crit Care Med 2006; 18:370–2.
106. Jensen JU, Hein L, Lundgren B, et al. Procalcitonin-guided interventions against
infections to increase early appropriate antibiotics and improve survival in the
intensive care unit: a randomized trial. Crit Care Med 2011; 39:2048–58.
107. Bouchon A, Dietrich J, Colonna M. Cutting edge: inflammatory responses can be
triggered by TREM-1, a novel receptor expressed on neutrophils and monocytes.
J Immunol 2000; 164:4991–5.
108. Bopp C, Hofer S, Bouchon A, Zimmermann JB, Martin E, Weigand MA. Soluble
TREM-1 is not suitable for distinguishing between systemic inflammatory re-
sponse syndrome and sepsis survivors and nonsurvivors in the early stage of
acute inflammation. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2009; 26:504–7.
109. Ferat-Osorio E, Wong-Baeza I, Esquivel-Callejas N, et al. Triggering receptor ex-
pressed on myeloid cells-1 expression on monocytes is associated with inflamma-
tion but not with infection in acute pancreatitis. Crit Care 2009; 13:R69.
110. Palazzo SJ, Simpson TA, Simmons JM, Schnapp LM. Soluble triggering receptor
expressed on myeloid cells-1 (sTREM-1) as a diagnostic marker of ventilator-as-
sociated pneumonia. Respir Care 2012; 57:2052–8.
111. Anand NJ, Zuick S, Klesney-Tait J, Kollef MH. Diagnostic implications of soluble
triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-1 in BAL fluid of patients with pul-
monary infiltrates in the ICU. Chest 2009; 135:641–7.
112. Determann RM, Millo JL, Gibot S, et al. Serial changes in soluble triggering re-
ceptor expressed on myeloid cells in the lung during development of ventilator-
associated pneumonia. Intensive Care Med 2005; 31:1495–500.
113. Horonenko G, Hoyt JC, Robbins RA, et al. Soluble triggering receptor expressed
on myeloid cell-1 is increased in patients with ventilator-associated pneumonia: a
preliminary report. Chest 2007; 132:58–63.
114. Ramirez P, Kot P, Marti V, et al. Diagnostic implications of soluble triggering re-
ceptor expressed on myeloid cells-1 in patients with acute respiratory distress
syndrome and abdominal diseases: a preliminary observational study. Crit
Care 2011; 15:R50.
115. Gibot S, Cravoisy A, Levy B, Bene MC, Faure G, Bollaert PE. Soluble triggering
receptor expressed on myeloid cells and the diagnosis of pneumonia. N Engl J
Med 2004; 350:451–8.
116. Oppert M, Reinicke A, Muller C, Barckow D, Frei U, Eckardt KU. Elevations in
procalcitonin but not C-reactive protein are associated with pneumonia after car-
diopulmonary resuscitation. Resuscitation 2002; 53:167–70.
117. Fartoukh M, Maitre B, Honore S, Cerf C, Zahar JR, Brun-Buisson C. Diagnosing
pneumonia during mechanical ventilation: the clinical pulmonary infection score
revisited. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003; 168:173–9.
118. Luna CM, Aruj P, Niederman MS, et al. Appropriateness and delay to initiate
therapy in ventilator-associated pneumonia. Eur Respir J 2006; 27:158–64.
119. Shan J, Chen HL, Zhu JH. Diagnostic accuracy of clinical pulmonary infection
score for ventilator-associated pneumonia: a meta-analysis. Respir Care 2011;
56:1087–94.
120. Singh N, Rogers P, Atwood CW, Wagener MM, Yu VL. Short-course empiric an-
tibiotic therapy for patients with pulmonary infiltrates in the intensive care unit.
A proposed solution for indiscriminate antibiotic prescription. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2000; 162(2 pt 1):505–11.
121. Veinstein A, Brun-Buisson C, Derrode N, et al. Validation of an algorithm based
on direct examination of specimens in suspected ventilator-associated pneumo-
nia. Intensive Care Med 2006; 32:676–83.
122. Nseir S, Di Pompeo C, Soubrier S, et al. Effect of ventilator-associated tracheo-
bronchitis on outcome in patients without chronic respiratory failure: a case-con-
trol study. Crit Care 2005; 9:R238–45.
123. Nseir S, Favory R, Jozefowicz E, et al. Antimicrobial treatment for ventilator-as-
sociated tracheobronchitis: a randomized, controlled, multicenter study. Crit
Care 2008; 12:R62.
124. Palmer LB, Smaldone GC. Reduction of bacterial resistance with inhaled
antibiotics in the intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014;
189:1225–33.
125. Palmer LB, Smaldone GC, Chen JJ, et al. Aerosolized antibiotics and ventilator-
associated tracheobronchitis in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 2008;
36:2008–13.
126. Nseir S, Di Pompeo C, Pronnier P, et al. Nosocomial tracheobronchitis in me-
chanically ventilated patients: incidence, aetiology and outcome. Eur Respir J
2002; 20:1483–9.
127. Nseir S, Di Pompeo C, Soubrier S, et al. Outcomes of ventilated COPD patients with
nosocomial tracheobronchitis: a case-control study. Infection 2004; 32:210–6.
128. Dallas J, Skrupky L, Abebe N, Boyle WA 3rd, Kollef MH. Ventilator-associated
tracheobronchitis in a mixed surgical and medical ICU population. Chest 2011;
139:513–8.
129. Martin-Loeches I, Povoa P, Rodriguez A, et al. Incidence and prognosis of ven-
tilator-associated tracheobronchitis (TAVeM): a multicentre, prospective, obser-
vational study. Lancet Respir Med 2015; 3:859–68.
130. Nseir S, Martin-Loeches I, Makris D, et al. Impact of appropriate antimicrobial
treatment on transition from ventilator-associated tracheobronchitis to ventila-
tor-associated pneumonia. Crit Care 2014; 18:R129.
131. Beardsley JR, Williamson JC, Johnson JW, Ohl CA, Karchmer TB, Bowton DL.
Using local microbiologic data to develop institution-specific guidelines for the
treatment of hospital-acquired pneumonia. Chest 2006; 130:787–93.
132. Namias N, Samiian L, Nino D, et al. Incidence and susceptibility of pathogenic
bacteria vary between intensive care units within a single hospital: implications
for empiric antibiotic strategies. J Trauma 2000; 49:638–45; discussion 45–6.
133. Fridkin SK, Edwards JR, Tenover FC, Gaynes RP, McGowan JE Jr. Antimicrobial
resistance prevalence rates in hospital antibiograms reflect prevalence rates
among pathogens associated with hospital-acquired infections. Clin Infect Dis
2001; 33:324–30.
134. Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. Analysis and presentation of cumu-
lative antimicrobial suseptibility test data. Approved guideline. 4th ed. CLSI
document M39-A4. Wayne, PA: CLSI, 2014.
135. Garonzik SM, Li J, Thamlikitkul V, et al. Population pharmacokinetics of colistin
methanesulfonate and formed colistin in critically ill patients from a multicenter
study provide dosing suggestions for various categories of patients. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2011; 55:3284–94.
136. Nation RL, Li J, Cars O, et al. Framework for optimisation of the clinical use of
colistin and polymyxin B: the Prato polymyxin consensus. Lancet Infect Dis
2015; 15:225–34.
137. Sader HS, Rhomberg PR, Jones RN. In vitro activity of beta-lactam antimicrobial
agents in combination with aztreonam tested against metallo-beta-lactamase-
producing Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumannii. J Chemother
2005; 17:622–7.
138. Sievert DM, Ricks P, Edwards JR, et al. Antimicrobial-resistant pathogens asso-
ciated with healthcare-associated infections: summary of data reported to the Na-
tional Healthcare Safety Network at the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2009–2010. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2013; 34:1–14.
139. Jones RN. Microbial etiologies of hospital-acquired bacterial pneumonia and
ventilator-associated bacterial pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 51(suppl 1):
S81–7.
140. Kollef MH, Ward S. The influence of mini-BAL cultures on patient outcomes:
implications for the antibiotic management of ventilator-associated pneumonia.
Chest 1998; 113:412–20.
141. Kuti EL, Patel AA, Coleman CI. Impact of inappropriate antibiotic therapy on
mortality in patients with ventilator-associated pneumonia and blood stream in-
fection: a meta-analysis. J Crit Care 2008; 23:91–100.
142. Muscedere JG, Shorr AF, Jiang X, Day A, Heyland DK; Canadian Critical Care
Trials Group. The adequacy of timely empiric antibiotic therapy for ventilator-
associated pneumonia: an important determinant of outcome. J Crit Care 2012;
27:322.e7–14.
143. Rello J, Ulldemolins M, Lisboa T, et al. Determinants of prescription and choice
of empirical therapy for hospital-acquired and ventilator-associated pneumonia.
Eur Respir J 2011; 37:1332–9.
144. Vardakas KZ, Mavros MN, Roussos N, Falagas ME. Meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials of vancomycin for the treatment of patients with gram-positive
infections: focus on the study design. Mayo Clin Proc 2012; 87:349–63.
145. Walkey AJ, O’Donnell MR, Wiener RS. Linezolid vs glycopeptide antibiotics for
the treatment of suspected methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus nosocomi-
al pneumonia: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Chest 2011;
139:1148–55.
146. Kalil AC, Klompas M, Haynatzki G, Rupp ME. Treatment of hospital-acquired
pneumonia with linezolid or vancomycin: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
BMJ Open 2013; 3:e003912.
147. Kalil AC, Murthy MH, Hermsen ED, Neto FK, Sun J, Rupp ME. Linezolid versus
vancomycin or teicoplanin for nosocomial pneumonia: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2010; 38:1802–8.
148. Torres A, Rubinstein E, Corey GR, Stryjewski ME, Barriere SL. Analysis of phase
3 telavancin nosocomial pneumonia data excluding patients with severe renal im-
pairment and acute renal failure. J Antimicrob Chemother 2014; 69:1119–26.
149. Pasquale TR, Tan MJ, Trienski TL, File TM Jr. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococ-
cus aureus nosocomial pneumonia patients treated with ceftaroline: retrospective
case series of 10 patients. J Chemother 2015; 27:29–34.
150. Barber KE, Smith JR, Raut A, Rybak MJ. Evaluation of tedizolid against Staph-
ylococcus aureus and enterococci with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin, dap-
tomycin or linezolid. J Antimicrob Chemother 2016; 71:152–5.
151. Cepeda JA, Whitehouse T, Cooper B, et al. Linezolid versus teicoplanin in the
treatment of gram-positive infections in the critically ill: a randomized, dou-
ble-blind, multicentre study. J Antimicrob Chemother 2004; 53:345–55.
e106 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 152. Wilcox M, Nathwani D, Dryden M. Linezolid compared with teicoplanin for the
treatment of suspected or proven gram-positive infections. J Antimicrob Chemo-
ther 2004; 53:335–44.
153. Rubinstein E, Lalani T, Corey GR, et al. Telavancin versus vancomycin for
hospital-acquired pneumonia due to gram-positive pathogens. Clin Infect Dis
2011; 52:31–40.
154. Corey GR, Kollef MH, Shorr AF, et al. Telavancin for hospital-acquired pneumo-
nia: clinical response and 28-day survival. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2014;
58:2030–7.
155. Freire AT, Melnyk V, Kim MJ, et al. Comparison of tigecycline with imipenem/
cilastatin for the treatment of hospital-acquired pneumonia. Diagn Microbiol In-
fect Dis 2010; 68:140–51.
156. Awad SS, Rodriguez AH, Chuang YC, et al. A phase 3 randomized double-blind
comparison of ceftobiprole medocaril versus ceftazidime plus linezolid for the
treatment of hospital-acquired pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis 2014; 59:51–61.
157. Chastre J, Wunderink R, Prokocimer P, Lee M, Kaniga K, Friedland I. Efficacy
and safety of intravenous infusion of doripenem versus imipenem in ventila-
tor-associated pneumonia: a multicenter, randomized study. Crit Care Med
2008; 36:1089–96.
158. Kollef MH, Chastre J, Clavel M, et al. A randomized trial of 7-day doripenem
versus 10-day imipenem-cilastatin for ventilator-associated pneumonia. Crit
Care 2012; 16:R218.
159. Alvarez Lerma F; Serious Infection Study Group. Efficacy of meropenem as
monotherapy in the treatment of ventilator-associated pneumonia. J Chemother
2001; 13:70–81.
160. Alvarez-Lerma F, Insausti-Ordenana J, Jorda-Marcos R, et al. Efficacy and toler-
ability of piperacillin/tazobactam versus ceftazidime in association with amikacin
for treating nosocomial pneumonia in intensive care patients: a prospective ran-
domized multicenter trial. Intensive Care Med 2001; 27:493–502.
161. Sieger B, Berman SJ, Geckler RW, Farkas SA. Empiric treatment of hospital-ac-
quired lower respiratory tract infections with meropenem or ceftazidime with to-
bramycin: a randomized study. Meropenem Lower Respiratory Infection Group.
Crit Care Med 1997; 25:1663–70.
162. Heyland DK, Dodek P, Muscedere J, Day A, Cook D; Canadian Critical Care Tri-
als Group. Randomized trial of combination versus monotherapy for the empiric
treatment of suspected ventilator-associated pneumonia. Crit Care Med 2008;
36:737–44.
163. Polk HC Jr, Livingston DH, Fry DE, et al. Treatment of pneumonia in mechan-
ically ventilated trauma patients. Results of a prospective trial. Arch Surg 1997;
132:1086–92.
164. Croce MA, Fabian TC, Stewart RM, et al. Empiric monotherapy versus combina-
tion therapy of nosocomial pneumonia in trauma patients. J Trauma 1993;
35:303–9; discussion 309–11.
165. Reeves JH, Russell GM, Cade JF, McDonald M. Comparison of ceftriaxone with
cefotaxime in serious chest infections. Chest 1989; 96:1292–7.
166. Thomas PD, Daly S, Misan G, Steele T. Comparison of the efficacy and adverse
effect profile of cefotaxime, 3 g/day, and ceftriaxone, 2 g/day, in the treatment of
nosocomial lower respiratory tract infections in ICU patients. Eur Respir Rev
1994; 4:321–8.
167. Fink MP, Snydman DR, Niederman MS, et al. Treatment of severe pneumonia in
hospitalized patients: results of a multicenter, randomized, double-blind trial
comparing intravenous ciprofloxacin with imipenem-cilastatin. The Severe Pneu-
monia Study Group. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1994; 38:547–57.
168. Shorr AF, Zadeikis N, Jackson WL, et al. Levofloxacin for treatment of ventilator-
associated pneumonia: a subgroup analysis from a randomized trial. Clin Infect
Dis 2005; 40(suppl 2):S123–9.
169. West M, Boulanger BR, Fogarty C, et al. Levofloxacin compared with imipenem/
cilastatin followed by ciprofloxacin in adult patients with nosocomial pneumonia:
a multicenter, prospective, randomized, open-label study. Clin Ther 2003;
25:485–506.
170. Kljucar S, Heimesaat M, von Pritzbuer E, Olms K. Ceftazidime with and without
tobramycin versus azlocillin plus tobramycin in the therapy of bronchopulmonary
infections in intensive care patients [in German]. Infection 1987; 15(suppl 4):
S185–91.
171. Damas P, Garweg C, Monchi M, et al. Combination therapy versus monotherapy:
a randomised pilot study on the evolution of inflammatory parameters after ven-
tilator associated pneumonia [ISRCTN31976779]. Crit Care 2006; 10:R52.
172. Hartenauer U, Weilemann LS, Bodmann KF, Ritzerfeld WW, Asmus S, Koch
EM. Comparative clinical trial of ceftazidime and imipenem/cilastatin in patients
with severe nosocomial pneumonias and septicaemias. J Hosp Infect 1990; 15
(suppl A):61–4.
173. Torres A, Bauer TT, Leon-Gil C, et al. Treatment of severe nosocomial pneumo-
nia: a prospective randomised comparison of intravenous ciprofloxacin with imi-
penem/cilastatin. Thorax 2000; 55:1033–9.
174. Beaucaire G. Evaluation of the efficacy and safety of isepamicin compared with
amikacin in the treatment of nosocomial pneumonia and septicaemia. J Chemo-
ther 1995; 7(suppl 2):165–73.
175. Beaucaire G, Nicolas MH, Martin C, et al. Phare study. Comparative study of
combined cefepime-amikacin versus ceftazidime combined with amikacin in
the treatment of nosocomial pneumonias in ventilated patients. Multicenter
group study [in French]. Ann Fr Anesth Reanim 1999; 18:186–95.
176. Manhold C, von Rolbicki U, Brase R, et al. Outbreaks of Staphylococcus aureus
infections during treatment of late onset pneumonia with ciprofloxacin in a pro-
spective, randomized study. Intensive Care Med 1998; 24:1327–30.
177. Saginur R, Garber G, Darling G, et al. Prospective, randomized comparison of
intravenous and oral ciprofloxacin with intravenous ceftazidime in the treatment
of nosocomial pneumonia. Can J Infect Dis 1997; 8:89–94.
178. Ahmed SM, Choudhary J, Ahmed M, Arora V, Parul , Ali S. Treatment of ven-
tilator-associated pneumonia with piperacillin-tazobactum and amikacin vs cefe-
pime and levofloxacin: a randomized prospective study. Indian J Crit Care Med
2007; 11:117–21.
179. Rea-Neto A, Niederman M, Lobo SM, et al. Efficacy and safety of doripenem ver-
sus piperacillin/tazobactam in nosocomial pneumonia: a randomized, open-
label, multicenter study. Curr Med Res Opin 2008; 24:2113–26.
180. Brun-Buisson C, Sollet JP, Schweich H, Briere S, Petit C. Treatment of ventilator-
associated pneumonia with piperacillin-tazobactam/amikacin versus ceftazi-
dime/amikacin: a multicenter, randomized controlled trial. VAP Study Group.
Clin Infect Dis 1998; 26:346–54.
181. Brown RB, Lemeshow S, Teres D. Moxalactam vs carbenicillin plus tobramycin:
treatment of nosocomial gram-negative bacillary pneumonias in non-neutrope-
nic patients. Curr Ther Res 1984; 36:557–64.
182. Maskin B, Fontan PA, Spinedi EG, Gammella D, Badolati A. Evaluation of endo-
toxin release and cytokine production induced by antibiotics in patients with
gram-negative nosocomial pneumonia. Crit Care Med 2002; 30:349–54.
183. Joshi M, Metzler M, McCarthy M, Olvey S, Kassira W, Cooper A. Comparison of
piperacillin/tazobactam and imipenem/cilastatin, both in combination with to-
bramycin, administered every 6 h for treatment of nosocomial pneumonia. Re-
spir Med 2006; 100:1554–65.
184. Florescu DF, Qiu F, McCartan MA, Mindru C, Fey PD, Kalil AC. What is the
efficacy and safety of colistin for the treatment of ventilator-associated pneu-
monia? A systematic review and meta-regression. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 54:
670–80.
185. Liscio JL, Mahoney MV, Hirsch EB. Ceftolozane/tazobactam and ceftazidime/
avibactam: two novel beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitor combination agents
for the treatment of resistant gram-negative bacterial infections. Int J Antimicrob
Agents 2015; 46:266–71.
186. Gottesman T, Yossepowitch O, Lerner E, et al. The accuracy of Gram stain of re-
spiratory specimens in excluding Staphylococcus aureus in ventilator-associated
pneumonia. J Crit Care 2014; 29:739–42.
187. Tetenta S, Metersky ML. Tracheal aspirate Gram stain has limited sensitivity and
specificity for detecting Staphylococcus aureus. Respirology 2011; 16:86–9.
188. O’Horo JC, Thompson D, Safdar N. Is the Gram stain useful in the microbiologic
diagnosis of VAP? A meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55:551–61.
189. McKinnell JA, Huang SS, Eells SJ, Cui E, Miller LG. Quantifying the impact of
extranasal testing of body sites for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
colonization at the time of hospital or intensive care unit admission. Infect Con-
trol Hosp Epidemiol 2013; 34:161–70.
190. Davis KA, Stewart JJ, Crouch HK, Florez CE, Hospenthal DR. Methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) nares colonization at hospital admis-
sion and its effect on subsequent MRSA infection. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 39:
776–82.
191. Paul M, Shani V, Muchtar E, Kariv G, Robenshtok E, Leibovici L. Systematic re-
view and meta-analysis of the efficacy of appropriate empiric antibiotic therapy
for sepsis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010; 54:4851–63.
192. Swanson JM, Wells DL. Empirical antibiotic therapy for ventilator-associated
pneumonia. Antibiotics 2013; 2:339–51.
193. Micek ST, Ward S, Fraser VJ, Kollef MH. A randomized controlled trial of an
antibiotic discontinuation policy for clinically suspected ventilator-associated
pneumonia. Chest 2004; 125:1791–9.
194. Joffe AR, Muscedere J, Marshall JC, Su Y, Heyland DK; Canadian Critical Care
Trials Group. The safety of targeted antibiotic therapy for ventilator-associated
pneumonia: a multicenter observational study. J Crit Care 2008; 23:82–90.
195. Hibbard ML, Kopelman TR, O’Neill PJ, et al. Empiric, broad-spectrum antibiotic
therapy with an aggressive de-escalation strategy does not induce gram-negative
pathogen resistance in ventilator-associated pneumonia. Surg Infect (Larchmt)
2010; 11:427–32.
196. Joung MK, Lee JA, Moon SY, et al. Impact of de-escalation therapy on clinical
outcomes for intensive care unit-acquired pneumonia. Crit Care 2011; 15:R79.
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e107
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 197. Weiss CH, Dibardino D, Rho J, Sung N, Collander B, Wunderink RG. A clinical
trial comparing physician prompting with an unprompted automated electronic
checklist to reduce empirical antibiotic utilization. Crit Care Med 2013; 41:2563–9.
198. Stevens DL, Bisno AL, Chambers HF, et al. Practice guidelines for the diagnosis
and management of skin and soft tissue infections: 2014 update by the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2014; 59:e10–52.
199. Mentzelopoulos SD, Pratikaki M, Platsouka E, et al. Prolonged use of carbape-
nems and colistin predisposes to ventilator-associated pneumonia by pandrug-
resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Intensive Care Med 2007; 33:1524–32.
200. Pakyz AL, Oinonen M, Polk RE. Relationship of carbapenem restriction in 22
university teaching hospitals to carbapenem use and carbapenem-resistant Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2009; 53:1983–6.
201. Marchaim D, Chopra T, Bhargava A, et al. Recent exposure to antimicrobials and
carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae: the role of antimicrobial stewardship.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:817–30.
202. Miyawaki K, Miwa Y, Seki M, Asari S, Tomono K, Kurokawa N. Correlation be-
tween the consumption of meropenem or doripenem and meropenem suscept-
ibility of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in a university hospital in Japan. Biol Pharm
Bull 2012; 35:946–9.
203. McDougall DA, Morton AP, Playford EG. Association of ertapenem and anti-
pseudomonal carbapenem usage and carbapenem resistance in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa among 12 hospitals in Queensland, Australia. J Antimicrob Chemo-
ther 2013; 68:457–60.
204. Routsi C, Pratikaki M, Platsouka E, et al. Risk factors for carbapenem-resistant
gram-negative bacteremia in intensive care unit patients. Intensive Care Med
2013; 39:1253–61.
205. Pena C, Guzman A, Suarez C, et al. Effects of carbapenem exposure on the risk
for digestive tract carriage of intensive care unit-endemic carbapenem-resistant
Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains in critically ill patients. Antimicrob Agents Che-
mother 2007; 51:1967–71.
206. Ogutlu A, Guclu E, Karabay O, Utku AC, Tuna N, Yahyaoglu M. Effects of car-
bapenem consumption on the prevalence of Acinetobacter infection in intensive
care unit patients. Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob 2014; 13:7.
207. Armand-Lefevre L, Angebault C, Barbier F, et al. Emergence of imipenem-resis-
tant gram-negative bacilli in intestinal flora of intensive care patients. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2013; 57:1488–95.
208. Moreira MR, Guimaraes MP, Rodrigues AA, Gontijo Filho PP. Antimicrobial use,
incidence, etiology and resistance patterns in bacteria causing ventilator-associ-
ated pneumonia in a clinical-surgical intensive care unit. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop
2013; 46:39–44.
209. Swaminathan M, Sharma S, Poliansky Blash S, et al. Prevalence and risk factors
for acquisition of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae in the setting of ende-
micity. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2013; 34:809–17.
210. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Annual epidemi-
ological report: antimicrobial resistance and healthcare-associated infections
2014. Stockholm: ECDC, 2015.
211. Jacob J, Klein E, Laxminarayan R, et al. Carbapenem resistant enterobactereciae.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2013; 62:165–70.
212. Thaden JT, Lewis SS, Hazen KC, et al. Rising rates of carbapenem-resistant enter-
obacteriaceae in community hospitals: a mixed-methods review of epidemiology
and microbiology practices in a network of community hospitals in the south-
eastern United States. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2014; 35:978–83.
213. Luna CM, Sarquis S, Niederman MS, et al. Is a strategy based on routine endo-
tracheal cultures the best way to prescribe antibiotics in ventilator-associated
pneumonia? Chest 2013; 144:63–71.
214. Yakovlev SV, Stratchounski LS, Woods GL, et al. Ertapenem versus cefepime for
initial empirical treatment of pneumonia acquired in skilled-care facilities or in
hospitals outside the intensive care unit. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2006;
25:633–41.
215. Alsuraikh M, Hamdy G. Incidence, risk factors, and causative agents of hospital
acquired pneumonia (nosocomial pneumonia) in adult hospitalized patients in
medical wards of a general hospital in Kuwait. Kuwait Med J 2008; 40:297–300.
216. Avci M, Ozgenc O, Coskuner A, Bozca B, Kidak L, Mermut G. Hospital-acquired
pneumonia in nonintensive care unit wards. Turk J Med Sci 2010; 40:357–63.
217. Cakir Edis E, Hatipoglu ON, Yilmam I, Eker A, Tansel O, Sut N. Hospital-ac-
quired pneumonia developed in non-intensive care units. Respiration 2009;
78:416–22.
218. Espejo E, Andres M, Torviso J, et al. Hospital-acquired bacteraemic pneumonia
in non-ventilated patients. In: 21st European Congress of Clinical Microbiology
and Infectious Diseases (ECCMID)/27th International Congress of Chemother-
apy (ICC) Posters 2011: S478.
219. Kollef MH, Shorr A, Tabak YP, Gupta V, Liu LZ, Johannes RS. Epidemiology and
outcomes of health-care-associated pneumonia: results from a large US database
of culture-positive pneumonia. Chest 2005; 128:3854–62.
220. Giannella M, Pinilla B, Capdevila JA, et al. Pneumonia treated in the internal
medicine department: focus on healthcare-associated pneumonia. Clin Microbiol
Infect 2012; 18:786–94.
221. Piskin N, Aydemir H, Oztoprak N, et al. Inadequate treatment of ventilator-as-
sociated and hospital-acquired pneumonia: risk factors and impact on outcomes.
BMC Infect Dis 2012; 12:268.
222. Esperatti M, Ferrer M, Theessen A, et al. Nosocomial pneumonia in the intensive
care unit acquired by mechanically ventilated versus nonventilated patients. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2010; 182:1533–9.
223. Maruyama T, Niederman MS, Kobayashi T, et al. A prospective comparison of
nursing home-acquired pneumonia with hospital-acquired pneumonia in non-
intubated elderly. Respir Med 2008; 102:1287–95.
224. Barreiro-Lopez B, Tricas JM, Mauri E, Quintana S, Garau J. Risk factors and
prognostic factors in nosocomial pneumonia outside the intensive care units set-
ting [in Spanish]. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin 2005; 23:519–24.
225. Takano Y, Sakamoto O, Suga M, Muranaka H, Ando M. Prognostic factors of
nosocomial pneumonia in general wards: a prospective multivariate analysis in
Japan. Respir Med 2002; 96:18–23.
226. Schussler O, Alifano M, Dermine H, et al. Postoperative pneumonia after major
lung resection. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006; 173:1161–9.
227. Watanabe A, Yanagihara K, Kohno S, Matsushima T; HAP Study Group. Multi-
center survey on hospital-acquired pneumonia and the clinical efficacy of first-
line antibiotics in Japan. Intern Med 2008; 47:245–54.
228. Weber DJ, Rutala WA, Sickbert-Bennett EE, Samsa GP, Brown V, Niederman
MS. Microbiology of ventilator-associated pneumonia compared with that of
hospital-acquired pneumonia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2007; 28:825–31.
229. Kim J, Chung J, Choi S-H, et al. Early use of imipenem/cilastatin and vancomycin
followed by de-escalation versus conventional antimicrobials without de-escala-
tion for patients with hospital-acquired pneumonia in a medical ICU: a random-
ized clinical trial. Crit Care 2012; 16:1–9.
230. Kohlenberg A, Schwab F, Behnke M, Geffers C, Gastmeier P. Pneumonia associ-
ated with invasive and noninvasive ventilation: an analysis of the German noso-
comial infection surveillance system database. Intensive Care Med 2010;
36:971–8.
231. Herer B, Fuhrman C, Demontrond D, Gazevic Z, Housset B, Chouaid C. Diag-
nosis of nosocomial pneumonia in medical ward: repeatability of the protected
specimen brush. Eur Respir J 2001; 18:157–63.
232. Edis EC, Hatipoglu ON, Yilmam I, Eker A, Tansel O, Sut N. The importance of
pathogen identification in the success of treatment of hospital acquired pneumo-
nias. Turk Toraks Dergisi 2010; 11:155–9.
233. Giunta V, Ferrer M, Esperatti M, et al. ICU-acquired pneumonia with or without
etiologic diagnosis: a comparison of outcomes. Crit Care Med 2013; 41:2133–43.
234. Fernandez-Guerrero M, Gudiol F, Rodriguez-Torres A, Arnau C, Valdes L, Vallve
C. Nosocomial pneumonia: comparative multicentre trial between monotherapy
with cefotaxime and treatment with antibiotic combinations. Infection 1991; 19
(suppl 6):S320–5.
235. Schmitt DV, Leitner E, Welte T, Lode H. Piperacillin/tazobactam vs imipenem/
cilastatin in the treatment of nosocomial pneumonia—a double blind prospective
multicentre study. Infection 2006; 34:127–34.
236. Hoffken G, Barth J, Rubinstein E, Beckmann H; HAP Study Group. A random-
ized study of sequential intravenous/oral moxifloxacin in comparison to sequen-
tial intravenous ceftriaxone/oral cefuroxime axetil in patients with hospital-
acquired pneumonia. Infection 2007; 35:414–20.
237. Bhavnani SM, Rubino CM, Hammel JP, et al. Pharmacological and patient-spe-
cific response determinants in patients with hospital-acquired pneumonia treated
with tigecycline. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2012; 56:1065–72.
238. Pea F, Di Qual E, Cusenza A, Brollo L, Baldassarre M, Furlanut M. Pharmacoki-
netics and pharmacodynamics of intravenous levofloxacin in patients with early-
onset ventilator-associated pneumonia. Clin Pharmacokinet 2003; 42:589–98.
239. Roberts JA, Taccone FS, Udy AA, Vincent JL, Jacobs F, Lipman J. Vancomycin
dosing in critically ill patients: robust methods for improved continuous-infusion
regimens. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2011; 55:2704–9.
240. Anevlavis S, Petroglou N, Tzavaras A, et al. A prospective study of the diagnostic
utility of sputum Gram stain in pneumonia. J Infect 2009; 59:83–9.
241. Montravers P, Veber B, Auboyer C, et al. Diagnostic and therapeutic manage-
ment of nosocomial pneumonia in surgical patients: results of the Eole study.
Crit Care Med 2002; 30:368–75.
242. Hanes SD, Wood GC, Herring V, et al. Intermittent and continuous ceftazidime
infusion for critically ill trauma patients. Am J Surg 2000; 179:436–40.
243. Nicolau DP, McNabb J, Lacy MK, Quintiliani R, Nightingale CH. Continuous
versus intermittent administration of ceftazidime in intensive care unit patients
with nosocomial pneumonia. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2001; 17:497–504.
244. Sakka SG, Glauner AK, Bulitta JB, et al. Population pharmacokinetics and phar-
macodynamics of continuous versus short-term infusion of imipenem-cilastatin
e108 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 in critically ill patients in a randomized, controlled trial. Antimicrob Agents Che-
mother 2007; 51:3304–10.
245. Jeffres MN, Isakow W, Doherty JA, Micek ST, Kollef MH. A retrospective analysis
of possible renal toxicity associated with vancomycin in patients with health care-
associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia. Clin Ther
2007; 29:1107–15.
246. LorenteL,JimenezA,MartinMM,IribarrenJL,JimenezJJ,MoraML.Clinicalcureof
ventilator-associated pneumonia treated with piperacillin/tazobactam administered
by continuous or intermittent infusion. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2009; 33:464–8.
247. Lorente L, Jimenez A, Palmero S, et al. Comparison of clinical cure rates in adults
with ventilator-associated pneumonia treated with intravenous ceftazidime ad-
ministered by continuous or intermittent infusion: a retrospective, nonrandom-
ized, open-label, historical chart review. Clin Ther 2007; 29:2433–9.
248. Scaglione F, Esposito S, Leone S, et al. Feedback dose alteration significantly af-
fects probability of pathogen eradication in nosocomial pneumonia. Eur Respir J
2009; 34:394–400.
249. Roberts JA, Paul SK, Akova M, et al. DALI: defining antibiotic levels in intensive
care unit patients: are current beta-lactam antibiotic doses sufficient for critically
ill patients? Clin Infect Dis 2014; 58:1072–83.
250. Roberts JA, Lipman J. Pharmacokinetic issues for antibiotics in the critically ill
patient. Crit Care Med 2009; 37:840–51; quiz 59.
251. Roberts JA, Lipman J. Optimal doripenem dosing simulations in critically ill nos-
ocomial pneumonia patients with obesity, augmented renal clearance, and de-
creased bacterial susceptibility. Crit Care Med 2013; 41:489–95.
252. Sinnollareddy MG, Roberts MS, Lipman J, Roberts JA. Beta-lactam pharmacoki-
netics and pharmacodynamics in critically ill patients and strategies for dose op-
timization: a structured review. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 2012; 39:489–96.
253. Roberts JA, Abdul-Aziz MH, Lipman J, et al. Individualised antibiotic dosing for
patients who are critically ill: challenges and potential solutions. Lancet Infect Dis
2014; 14:498–509.
254. Lux LJ, Posey RE, Daniels LS, et al. Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic measures
for guiding antibiotic treatment for hospital-acquired pneumonia. Rockville, MD:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2014. Comparative Effectiveness ?Re-
views, No 136. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK266264/. Ac-
cessed 5 January 2015.
255. Hallal A, Cohn SM, Namias N, et al. Aerosolized tobramycin in the treatment of
ventilator-associated pneumonia: a pilot study. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2007;
8:73–82.
256. Kofteridis DP, Alexopoulou C, Valachis A, et al. Aerosolized plus intravenous co-
listin versus intravenous colistin alone for the treatment of ventilator-associated
pneumonia: a matched case-control study. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 51:1238–44.
257. Korbila IP, Michalopoulos A, Rafailidis PI, Nikita D, Samonis G, Falagas ME. In-
haled colistin as adjunctive therapy to intravenous colistin for the treatment of
microbiologically documented ventilator-associated pneumonia: a comparative
cohort study. Clin Microbiol Infect 2010; 16:1230–6.
258. Le Conte P, Potel G, Clementi E, et al. Administration of tobramycin aerosols in
patients with nosocomial pneumonia: a preliminary study [in French]. Presse
Med 2000; 29:76–8.
259. Rattanaumpawan P, Lorsutthitham J, Ungprasert P, Angkasekwinai N, Thamli-
kitkul V. Randomized controlled trial of nebulized colistimethate sodium as ad-
junctive therapy of ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by gram-negative
bacteria. J Antimicrob Chemother 2010; 65:2645–9.
260. Doshi NM, Cook CH, Mount KL, et al. Adjunctive aerosolized colistin for multi-
drug resistant gram-negative pneumonia in the critically ill: a retrospective study.
BMC Anesthesiol 2013; 13:45.
261. Tumbarello M, De Pascale G, Trecarichi EM, et al. Effect of aerosolized colistin as
adjunctive treatment on the outcomes of microbiologically documented ventila-
tor-associated pneumonia caused by colistin-only susceptible gram-negative bac-
teria. Chest 2013; 144:1768–75.
262. Brown RB, Kruse JA, Counts GW, Russell JA, Christou NV, Sands ML. Double-
blind study of endotracheal tobramycin in the treatment of gram-negative bacte-
rial pneumonia. The Endotracheal Tobramycin Study Group. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1990; 34:269–72.
263. Mendelman PM, Smith AL, Levy J, Weber A, Ramsey B, Davis RL. Aminoglyco-
side penetration, inactivation, and efficacy in cystic fibrosis sputum. Am Rev Re-
spir Dis 1985; 132:761–5.
264. Panidis D, Markantonis SL, Boutzouka E, Karatzas S, Baltopoulos G. Penetration
of gentamicin into the alveolar lining fluid of critically ill patients with ventilator-
associated pneumonia. Chest 2005; 128:545–52.
265. Valcke YJ, Vogelaers DP, Colardyn FA, Pauwels RA. Penetration of netilmicin in
the lower respiratory tract after once-daily dosing. Chest 1992; 101:1028–32.
266. Boselli E, Breilh D, Djabarouti S, et al. Reliability of mini-bronchoalveolar lavage
for the measurement of epithelial lining fluid concentrations of tobramycin in
critically ill patients. Intensive Care Med 2007; 33:1519–23.
267. Plachouras D, Karvanen M, Friberg LE, et al. Population pharmacokinetic anal-
ysis of colistin methanesulfonate and colistin after intravenous administration in
critically ill patients with infections caused by gram-negative bacteria. Antimi-
crob Agents Chemother 2009; 53:3430–6.
268. Markou N, Markantonis SL, Dimitrakis E, et al. Colistin serum concentrations
after intravenous administration in critically ill patients with serious multi-
drug-resistant, gram-negative bacilli infections: a prospective, open-label, uncon-
trolled study. Clin Ther 2008; 30:143–51.
269. Fagon J, Patrick H, Haas DW, et al. Treatment of gram-positive nosocomial
pneumonia. Prospective randomized comparison of quinupristin/dalfopristin
versus vancomycin. Nosocomial Pneumonia Group. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2000; 161(3 pt 1):753–62.
270. Jung YJ, Koh Y, Hong SB, et al. Effect of vancomycin plus rifampicin in the treat-
ment of nosocomial methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia. Crit
Care Med 2010; 38:175–80.
271. Kohno S, Yamaguchi K, Aikawa N, et al. Linezolid versus vancomycin for the
treatment of infections caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in
Japan. J Antimicrob Chemother 2007; 60:1361–9.
272. Stevens DL, Herr D, Lampiris H, Hunt JL, Batts DH, Hafkin B. Linezolid versus
vancomycin for the treatment of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in-
fections. Clin Infect Dis 2002; 34:1481–90.
273. Wunderink RG, Mendelson MH, Somero MS, et al. Early microbiological re-
sponse to linezolid vs vancomycin in ventilator-associated pneumonia due to
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Chest 2008; 134:1200–7.
274. Wunderink RG, Niederman MS, Kollef MH, et al. Linezolid in methicillin-resis-
tant Staphylococcus aureus nosocomial pneumonia: a randomized, controlled
study. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 54:621–9.
275. Montedori A, Bonacini MI, Casazza G, et al. Modified versus standard intention-
to-treat reporting: are there differences in methodological quality, sponsorship,
and findings in randomized trials? A cross-sectional study. Trials 2011; 12:58.
276. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Anti-Infective Drugs Advisory Commit-
tee. FDA advisory committee briefing document: telavancin for nosocomial pneu-
monia, 2012. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/
CommitteesMeetingMaterials/Drugs/Anti-InfectiveDrugsAdvisoryCommittee/
UCM329482.pdf. Accessed January 2013.
277. Ramsey KM, Mazer MA. Addition of rifampin to vancomycin for the treatment
of pneumonias due to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus: caveat emptor.
Crit Care Med 2010; 38:326–7.
278. Lahey T. Questionable superiority of linezolid for methicillin-resistant Staphy-
lococcus aureus nosocomial pneumonia: watch where you step. Clin Infect Dis
2012; 55:159–60.
279. Holmes NE, Turnidge JD, Munckhof WJ, et al. Antibiotic choice may not explain
poorer outcomes in patients with Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia and
high vancomycin minimum inhibitory concentrations. J Infect Dis 2011;
204:340–7.
280. Steinkraus G, White R, Friedrich L. Vancomycin MIC creep in non-vancomycin-
intermediate Staphylococcus aureus (VISA), vancomycin-susceptible clinical
methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) blood isolates from 2001–05. J Antimi-
crob Chemother 2007; 60:788–94.
281. Adam HJ, Louie L, Watt C, et al. Detection and characterization of heterogeneous
vancomycin-intermediate Staphylococcus aureus isolates in Canada: results from
the Canadian Nosocomial Infection Surveillance Program, 1995–2006. Antimi-
crob Agents Chemother 2010; 54:945–9.
282. Holmes RL, Jorgensen JH. Inhibitory activities of 11 antimicrobial agents and
bactericidal activities of vancomycin and daptomycin against invasive methicil-
lin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus isolates obtained from 1999 through 2006.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2008; 52:757–60.
283. Pitz AM, Yu F, Hermsen ED, Rupp ME, Fey PD, Olsen KM. Vancomycin sus-
ceptibility trends and prevalence of heterogeneous vancomycin-intermediate
Staphylococcus aureus in clinical methicillin-resistant S. aureus isolates. J Clin
Microbiol 2011; 49:269–74.
284. Sader HS, Fey PD, Limaye AP, et al. Evaluation of vancomycin and daptomycin
potency trends (MIC creep) against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
isolates collected in nine U.S. medical centers from 2002 to 2006. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2009; 53:4127–32.
285. van Hal SJ, Barbagiannakos T, Jones M, et al. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus vancomycin susceptibility testing: methodology correlations, temporal
trends and clonal patterns. J Antimicrob Chemother 2011; 66:2284–7.
286. Honda H, Doern CD, Michael-Dunne W Jr, Warren DK. The impact of
vancomycin susceptibility on treatment outcomes among patients with
methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. BMC Infect Dis 2011;
11:335.
287. Kalil AC, Van Schooneveld TC, Fey PD, Rupp ME. Association between vanco-
mycin minimum inhibitory concentration and mortality among patients with
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e109
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Staphylococcus aureus bloodstream infections: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA 2014; 312:1552–64.
288. Walraven CJ, North MS, Marr-Lyon L, Deming P, Sakoulas G, Mercier RC. Site of
infection rather than vancomycin MIC predicts vancomycin treatment failure in
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteraemia. J Antimicrob Chemo-
ther 2011; 66:2386–92.
289. Rybak MJ, Lomaestro BM, Rotschafer JC, et al. Vancomycin therapeutic
guidelines: a summary of consensus recommendations from the infectious
diseases Society of America, the American Society of Health-System Pharma-
cists, and the Society of Infectious Diseases Pharmacists. Clin Infect Dis 2009;
49:325–7.
290. Aarts MA, Hancock JN, Heyland D, McLeod RS, Marshall JC. Empiric anti-
biotic therapy for suspected ventilator-associated pneumonia: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. Crit Care Med 2008; 36:
108–17.
291. Zanetti G, Bally F, Greub G, et al. Cefepime versus imipenem-cilastatin for treat-
ment of nosocomial pneumonia in intensive care unit patients: a multicenter,
evaluator-blind, prospective, randomized study. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
2003; 47:3442–7.
292. Giamarellou H, Mandragos K, Bechrakis P, Pigas K, Bilalis D, Sfikakis P. Peflox-
acin versus imipenem in the therapy of nosocomial lung infections of intensive
care unit patients. J Antimicrob Chemother 1990; 26(suppl B):117–27.
293. Jaccard C, Troillet N, Harbarth S, et al. Prospective randomized comparison of
imipenem-cilastatin and piperacillin-tazobactam in nosocomial pneumonia or
peritonitis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998; 42:2966–72.
294. Planquette B, Timsit JF, Misset BY, et al. Pseudomonas aeruginosa ventilator-as-
sociated pneumonia. Predictive factors of treatment failure. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2013; 188:69–76.
295. Pena C, Gomez-Zorrilla S, Oriol I, et al. Impact of multidrug resistance
on Pseudomonas aeruginosa ventilator-associated pneumonia outcome: predic-
tors of early and crude mortality. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2013;
32:413–20.
296. Luyt CE, Aubry A, Lu Q, et al. Imipenem, meropenem, or doripenem to treat
patients with Pseudomonas aeruginosa ventilator-associated pneumonia. Antimi-
crob Agents Chemother 2014; 58:1372–80.
297. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). FDA Drug Safety Communication:
FDA approves label changes for antibacterial Doribax (doripenem) describing in-
creased risk of death for ventilator patients with pneumonia. Available at: http://
www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm387971.htm. Accessed 5 January 2015.
298. Zilberberg MD, Chen J, Mody SH, Ramsey AM, Shorr AF. Imipenem resistance
of Pseudomonas in pneumonia: a systematic literature review. BMC Pulm Med
2010; 10:45.
299. Siempos II, Vardakas KZ, Manta KG, Falagas ME. Carbapenems for the treat-
ment of immunocompetent adult patients with nosocomial pneumonia. Eur Re-
spir J 2007; 29:548–60.
300. Mouton YJ, Beuscart C. Empirical monotherapy with meropenem in serious bac-
terial infections. Meropenem Study Group. J Antimicrob Chemother 1995; 36
(suppl A):145–56.
301. Norrby SR, Finch RG, Glauser M. Monotherapy in serious hospital-acquired in-
fections: a clinical trial of ceftazidime versus imipenem/cilastatin. European
Study Group. J Antimicrob Chemother 1993; 31:927–37.
302. Carcas AJ, Garcia-Satue JL, Zapater P, Frias-Iniesta J. Tobramycin penetration
into epithelial lining fluid of patients with pneumonia. Clin Pharmacol Ther
1999; 65:245–50.
303. Levy J, Baran D, Klastersky J. Comparative study of the antibacterial activity of
amikacin and tobramycin during Pseudomonas pulmonary infection in patients
with cystic fibrosis. J Antimicrob Chemother 1982; 10:227–34.
304. Mombelli G, Coppens L, Thys JP, Klastersky J. Anti-Pseudomonas activity in
bronchial secretions of patients receiving amikacin or tobramycin as a continu-
ous infusion. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1981; 19:72–5.
305. Furtado GH, d’Azevedo PA, Santos AF, Gales AC, Pignatari AC, Medeiros EA.
Intravenous polymyxin B for the treatment of nosocomial pneumonia caused
by multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Int J Antimicrob Agents
2007; 30:315–9.
306. Ouderkirk JP, Nord JA, Turett GS, Kislak JW. Polymyxin B nephrotoxicity and
efficacy against nosocomial infections caused by multiresistant gram-negative
bacteria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003; 47:2659–62.
307. Rigatto MH, Ribeiro VB, Konzen D, Zavascki AP. Comparison of polymyxin B
with other antimicrobials in the treatment of ventilator-associated pneumonia
and tracheobronchitis caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Acinetobacter bau-
mannii. Infection 2013; 41:321–8.
308. Sobieszczyk ME, Furuya EY, Hay CM, et al. Combination therapy with polymyx-
in B for the treatment of multidrug-resistant gram-negative respiratory tract in-
fections. J Antimicrob Chemother 2004; 54:566–9.
309. Gales AC, Jones RN, Sader HS. Contemporary activity of colistin and polymyxin
B against a worldwide collection of gram-negative pathogens: results from the
SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program (2006–09). J Antimicrob Chemo-
ther 2011; 66:2070–4.
310. Sader HS, Rhomberg PR, Farrell DJ, Jones RN. Differences in potency and cate-
gorical agreement between colistin and polymyxin B when testing 15,377 clinical
strains collected worldwide. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2015; 83:379–81.
311. Cometta A, Baumgartner JD, Lew D, et al. Prospective randomized comparison of
imipenem monotherapy with imipenem plus netilmicin for treatment of severe infec-
tions in nonneutropenic patients. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1994; 38:1309–13.
312. Garnacho-Montero J, Sa-Borges M, Sole-Violan J, et al. Optimal management
therapy for Pseudomonas aeruginosa ventilator-associated pneumonia: an obser-
vational, multicenter study comparing monotherapy with combination antibiotic
therapy. Crit Care Med 2007; 35:1888–95.
313. Park SY, Park HJ, Moon SM, et al. Impact of adequate empirical combination
therapy on mortality from bacteremic Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia.
BMC Infect Dis 2012; 12:308.
314. Kumar A, Zarychanski R, Light B, et al. Early combination antibiotic therapy
yields improved survival compared with monotherapy in septic shock: a propen-
sity-matched analysis. Crit Care Med 2010; 38:1773–85.
315. Paul M, Silbiger I, Grozinsky S, Soares-Weiser K, Leibovici L. Beta lactam anti-
biotic monotherapy versus beta lactam-aminoglycoside antibiotic combination
therapy for sepsis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; CD003344.
316. Kumar A, Safdar N, Kethireddy S, Chateau D. A survival benefit of combination
antibiotic therapy for serious infections associated with sepsis and septic shock is
contingent only on the risk of death: a meta-analytic/meta-regression study. Crit
Care Med 2010; 38:1651–64.
317. Tamma PD, Cosgrove SE, Maragakis LL. Combination therapy for treatment of
infections with gram-negative bacteria. Clin Microbiol Rev 2012; 25:450–70.
318. Morata L, Cobos-Trigueros N, Martinez JA, et al. Influence of multidrug resis-
tance and appropriate empirical therapy on the 30-day mortality rate of Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa bacteremia. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2012; 56:4833–7.
319. Safdar N, Handelsman J, Maki DG. Does combination antimicrobial therapy re-
duce mortality in gram-negative bacteraemia? A meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis
2004; 4:519–27.
320. Hu Y, Li L, Li W, et al. Combination antibiotic therapy versus monotherapy for
Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteraemia: a meta-analysis of retrospective and pro-
spective studies. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2013; 42:492–6.
321. Paul M, Leibovici L. Editorial commentary: combination therapy for Pseudomo-
nas aeruginosa bacteremia: where do we stand? Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:217–20.
322. Vardakas KZ, Tansarli GS, Bliziotis IA, Falagas ME. Beta-lactam plus aminogly-
coside or fluoroquinolone combination versus beta-lactam monotherapy for
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections: a meta-analysis. Int J Antimicrob Agents
2013; 41:301–10.
323. Pena C, Suarez C, Ocampo-Sosa A, et al. Effect of adequate single-drug vs com-
bination antimicrobial therapy on mortality in Pseudomonas aeruginosa blood-
stream infections: a post hoc analysis of a prospective cohort. Clin Infect Dis
2013; 57:208–16.
324. Balakrishnan I, Awad-El-Kariem FM, Aali A, et al. Temocillin use in England:
clinical and microbiological efficacies in infections caused by extended-spectrum
and/or derepressed AmpC beta-lactamase-producing Enterobacteriaceae. J Anti-
microb Chemother 2011; 66:2628–31.
325. Bassetti M, Righi E, Fasce R, et al. Efficacy of ertapenem in the treatment of early
ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-
producing organisms in an intensive care unit. J Antimicrob Chemother 2007;
60:433–5.
326. Kaniga K, Flamm R, Tong SY, Lee M, Friedland I, Redman R. Worldwide expe-
rience with the use of doripenem against extended-spectrum-beta-lactamase-
producing and ciprofloxacin-resistant Enterobacteriaceae: analysis of six phase
3 clinical studies. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010; 54:2119–24.
327. Cheng WL, Hsueh PR, Lee CC, et al. Bacteremic pneumonia caused by extended-
spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae:
appropriateness of empirical treatment matters. J Microbiol Immunol Infect
2014; 49:208–15.
328. Paterson DL, Ko WC, Von Gottberg A, et al. Antibiotic therapy for Klebsiella
pneumoniae bacteremia: implications of production of extended-spectrum
beta-lactamases. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 39:31–7.
329. Tsai HY, Chen YH, Tang HJ, et al. Carbapenems and piperacillin/tazobactam for
the treatment of bacteremia caused by extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-pro-
ducing Proteus mirabilis. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2014; 80:222–6.
330. Nguyen HM, Shier KL, Graber CJ. Determining a clinical framework for use of
cefepime and beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitors in the treatment of infec-
tions caused by extended-spectrum-beta-lactamase-producing Enterobacteria-
ceae. J Antimicrob Chemother 2014; 69:871–80.
e110 • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • Kalil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
 331. Aydemir H, Akduman D, Piskin N, et al. Colistin vs. the combination of
colistin and rifampicin for the treatment of carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter
baumannii ventilator-associated pneumonia. Epidemiol Infect 2013; 141:
1214–22.
332. Betrosian AP, Frantzeskaki F, Xanthaki A, Douzinas EE. Efficacy and safety of
high-dose ampicillin/sulbactam vs. colistin as monotherapy for the treatment
of multidrug resistant Acinetobacter baumannii ventilator-associated pneumo-
nia. J Infect 2008; 56:432–6.
333. Betrosian AP, Frantzeskaki F, Xanthaki A, Georgiadis G. High-dose ampicillin-
sulbactam as an alternative treatment of late-onset VAP from multidrug-resistant
Acinetobacter baumannii. Scand J Infect Dis 2007; 39:38–43.
334. Durante-Mangoni E, Signoriello G, Andini R, et al. Colistin and rifampicin com-
pared with colistin alone for the treatment of serious infections due to extensively
drug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii: a multicenter, randomized clinical trial.
Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:349–58.
335. Wood GC, Hanes SD, Croce MA, Fabian TC, Boucher BA. Comparison of am-
picillin-sulbactam and imipenem-cilastatin for the treatment of acinetobacter
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis 2002; 34:1425–30.
336. Chuang YC, Cheng CY, Sheng WH, et al. Effectiveness of tigecycline-based ver-
sus colistin- based therapy for treatment of pneumonia caused by multidrug-
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii in a critical setting: a matched cohort analysis.
BMC Infect Dis 2014; 14:102.
337. Garnacho-Montero J, Ortiz-Leyba C, Jimenez-Jimenez FJ, et al. Treatment of
multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii ventilator-associated pneumonia
(VAP) with intravenous colistin: a comparison with imipenem-susceptible
VAP. Clin Infect Dis 2003; 36:1111–8.
338. Ramasubban S, Majumdar A, Das PS. Safety and efficacy of polymyxin B in mul-
tidrug resistant gram-negative severe sepsis and septic shock. Indian J Crit Care
Med 2008; 12:153–7.
339. Simsek F, Gedik H, Yildirmak MT, et al. Colistin against colistin-only-susceptible
Acinetobacter baumannii-related infections: monotherapy or combination ther-
apy? Indian J Med Microbiol 2012; 30:448–52.
340. Kalin G, Alp E, Akin A, Coskun R, Doganay M. Comparison of colistin and co-
listin/sulbactam for the treatment of multidrug resistant Acinetobacter bauman-
nii ventilator-associated pneumonia. Infection 2014; 42:37–42.
341. Choi HK, Kim YK, Kim HY, Uh Y. Inhaled colistin for treatment of pneumonia
due to colistin-only-susceptible Acinetobacter baumannii. Yonsei Med J 2014;
55:118–25.
342. Pugh R, Grant C, Cooke RP, Dempsey G. Short-course versus prolonged-course
antibiotic therapy for hospital-acquired pneumonia in critically ill adults. Co-
chrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 8:Cd007577.
343. Dimopoulos G, Poulakou G, Pneumatikos IA, Armaganidis A, Kollef MH, ?Mat-
thaiou DK. Short- vs long-duration antibiotic regimens for ventilator-associated
pneumonia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Chest 2013; 144:1759–67.
344. Hedrick TL, McElearney ST, Smith RL, Evans HL, Pruett TL, Sawyer RG. Dura-
tion of antibiotic therapy for ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by non-
fermentative gram-negative bacilli. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2007; 8:589–97.
345. Chastre J, Wolff M, Fagon JY, et al. Comparison of 8 vs 15 days of antibiotic ther-
apy for ventilator-associated pneumonia in adults: a randomized trial. JAMA
2003; 290:2588–98.
346. Fekih Hassen M, Ayed S, Ben Sik Ali H, Gharbi R, Marghli S, Elatrous S. Dura-
tion of antibiotic therapy for ventilator-associated pneumonia: comparison of 7
and 10 days. A pilot study [in French]. Ann Fr Anesth Reanim 2009; 28:16–23.
347. Medina J, Perez Protto S, Paciel D, Pontet J, Saldun P, Berro M. Antibiotic treat-
ment for the ventilator-associated pneumonia: 8 vs. 12 days randomized trial pre-
liminary data. In: Proceedings of the 47th Interscience Conference on
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 2007:361.
348. Capellier G, Mockly H, Charpentier C, et al. Early-onset ventilator-associated
pneumonia in adults randomized clinical trial: comparison of 8 versus 15 days
of antibiotic treatment. PLoS One 2012; 7:e41290.
349. Alvarez-Lerma F, Alvarez B, Luque P, et al. Empiric broad-spectrum antibiotic
therapy of nosocomial pneumonia in the intensive care unit: a prospective obser-
vational study. Crit Care 2006; 10:R78.
350. Eachempati SR, Hydo LJ, Shou J, Barie PS. Does de-escalation of antibiotic ther-
apy for ventilator-associated pneumonia affect the likelihood of recurrent pneu-
monia or mortality in critically ill surgical patients? J Trauma 2009; 66:1343–8.
351. Kollef MH. Providing appropriate antimicrobial therapy in the intensive care
unit: surveillance vs. de-escalation. Crit Care Med 2006; 34:903–5.
352. Leone M, Bechis C, Baumstarck K, et al. De-escalation versus continuation of em-
pirical antimicrobial treatment in severe sepsis: a multicenter non-blinded ran-
domized noninferiority trial. Intensive Care Med 2014; 40:1399–408.
353. Camargo LF. The “de-escalation concept” and antibiotic de-escalation: a missed
opportunity? Shock 2013; 39(suppl 1):29–31.
354. Dellit TH, Chan JD, Skerrett SJ, Nathens AB. Development of a guideline for the
management of ventilator-associated pneumonia based on local microbiologic
findings and impact of the guideline on antimicrobial use practices. Infect Con-
trol Hosp Epidemiol 2008; 29:525–33.
355. Hoffken G, Niederman MS. Nosocomial pneumonia: the importance of a de-
escalating strategy for antibiotic treatment of pneumonia in the ICU. Chest
2002; 122:2183–96.
356. Kollef MH, Morrow LE, Niederman MS, et al. Clinical characteristics and treat-
ment patterns among patients with ventilator-associated pneumonia. Chest
2006; 129:1210–8.
357. Lisboa T, Rello J. De-escalation in lower respiratory tract infections. Curr Opin
Pulm Med 2006; 12:364–8.
358. Niederman MS, Soulountsi V. De-escalation therapy: is it valuable for the man-
agement of ventilator-associated pneumonia? Clin Chest Med 2011; 32:517–34.
359. Schuetz P, Briel M, Christ-Crain M, et al. Procalcitonin to guide initiation and
duration of antibiotic treatment in acute respiratory infections: an individual pa-
tient data meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55:651–62.
360. Schuetz P, Muller B, Christ-Crain M, et al. Procalcitonin to initiate or discontinue
antibiotics in acute respiratory tract infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;
9:CD007498.
361. Stolz D, Smyrnios N, Eggimann P, et al. Procalcitonin for reduced antibiotic ex-
posure in ventilator-associated pneumonia: a randomised study. Eur Respir J
2009; 34:1364–75.
362. Bouadma L, Luyt CE, Tubach F, et al. Use of procalcitonin to reduce patients’
exposure to antibiotics in intensive care units (PRORATA trial): a multicentre
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2010; 375:463–74.
363. Pontet J, Paciel D, Olivera W, Bentancourt S, Cancela M, Gervas J. Procalcitonin
(PCT) guided antibiotic treatment in ventilator associated pneumonia (VAP).
Multi-centre, clinical prospective, randomized-controlled study. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 2007; 175:A212.
364. Ibrahim EH, Ward S, Sherman G, Schaiff R, Fraser VJ, Kollef MH. Experience
with a clinical guideline for the treatment of ventilator-associated pneumonia.
Crit Care Med 2001; 29:1109–15.
Management of Adults With HAP/VAP • CID 2016:63 (1 September) • e111
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/63/5/e61/2237650 by guest on 02 June 2019
