 Persistently active neurons in human medial frontal and medial 
temporal lobe support working memory
J Kamiński1,4, S Sullivan1, JM Chung2, IB Ross3, AN Mamelak1, and U Rutishauser1,2,4
1Department of Neurosurgery, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA
2Department of Neurology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA
3Department of Neurosurgery, Huntington Memorial Hospital, Pasadena, California, USA
4Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
Abstract
Persistent neural activity is a putative mechanism for the maintenance of working memories. 
Persistent activity relies on the activity of a distributed network of areas, but the differential 
contribution of each area remains unclear. We recorded single neurons in the human medial frontal 
cortex and the medial temporal lobe while subjects held up to three items in memory. We found 
persistently active neurons in both areas. Persistent activity of hippocampal and amygdala neurons 
was stimulus-specific, formed stable attractors, and was predictive of memory content. Medial 
frontal cortex persistent activity, on the other hand, was modulated by memory load and task set 
but was not stimulus-specific. Trial-by-trial variability in persistent activity in both areas was 
related to memory strength, because it predicted the speed and accuracy by which stimuli were 
remembered. This work reveals, in humans, direct evidence for a distributed network of 
persistently active neurons supporting working memory maintenance.
Introduction
The ability to store information in an active and readily available state for short periods of 
time is fundamental for cognition. Working memory (WM) is essential for many high level 
cognitive skills, including inference, decision making, mental calculations, and awareness 1. 
The prevailing models of WM posit that in the absence of external stimuli, memoranda are 
maintained by persistent neuronal activity 2,3. Signatures of sustained activity have been 
observed in a variety of brain areas in macaques including dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
(dlPFC) 4–6, parietal cortex 7, inferior temporal (IT) cortex 8,9, Entorhinal Cortex 10, and 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Corresponding author: ueli.rutishauser@cshs.org. 
Contributions
J.K. and U.R. designed the experiments. J.K. and U.R. performed experiments. J.K., S.S. and U.R. performed analysis. A.N.M. and 
I.B.R. performed surgery. J.M.C. provided patient care. J.K. and U.R. wrote the paper. All of the authors discussed the results at all 
stages of the project.
Competing financial interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2017 April ; 20(4): 590–601. doi:10.1038/nn.4509.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 medial frontal cortex (MFC) 11. It is thus thought that WM relies on different types of 
persistent activity provided by a distributed set of brain areas. Indeed, some brain areas in 
non-human primates exhibit stimulus-selective 4,5,7–9 persistent activity, whereas others do 
not 12. However, the relationship and importance of these different kinds of persistent 
activity for human WM remain unclear.
In humans, a number of brain areas are thought to be essential for forming, maintaining and 
retrieving short-term memories 13. Here, our focus is on two of these areas: the MTL and the 
MFC. In neuroimaging studies MFC activity is consistently related to WM 14 and it has been 
suggested that the MFC supports executive functions through persistent neuronal activity 15. 
However, there is at present no direct neuronal evidence of such activity in the human MFC. 
The MTL, on the other hand, is traditionally thought to be required for the formation of new 
long-term memories but not for WM 16. However, it has become clear that the MTL also 
plays an important role for WM 17 whenever subjects are distracted or are maintaining an 
amount of information close to their WM capacity. Indeed, studies of patients with damage 
to the MTL reveal deficits in retaining information for more than a few seconds in WM tasks 
under some circumstances 17. Also, studies utilizing intracranial recordings have begun to 
reveal field potential signatures of persistent activity during maintenance of WM in the 
MTL 18 and recordings from human lateral temporal cortex have revealed elevated activity 
of neurons during encoding and retrieval of short term memories 19. However, there is 
presently no direct single-neuron evidence of persistently active MTL or MFC neuronsy 
during WM maintenance in humans.
Attractors are dynamically stable patterns of neuronal activity that have been an influential 
framework for conceptualizing how memories are maintained by persistent activity 20,21. In 
this framework, the brain has large numbers of different attractors, each of which 
corresponds to a different specific memory. During maintenance, at most, a small subset of 
these attractors can be active simultaneously. Consequently, the extent to which the pattern 
of persistent activity during a given trial remains close to the attractor(s) should predict the 
quality of the memory trace as assessed by later behavior. Indeed, in macaques, the extent of 
drift of neural activity away from attractors formed by persisted activity is predictive of error 
magnitude in recalled spatial location 22. While a major concept in theoretical work 20,21,23, 
there is little direct evidence for the existence and importance of attractors for WM 
maintenance in humans.
Here, we used human single-neuron recordings performed in neurosurgical patients to 
investigate the properties of persistent neuronal activity and its relationship to behavior. We 
recorded simultaneously from two areas each in the Medial Temporal Lobe (MTL, 
hippocampus and amygdala) and the Medial Frontal Cortex (MFC; we recorded from Dorsal 
Anterior Cingulate Cortex, dACC and pre-Supplementary Motor Area, pre-SMA). As a 
starting point, we screened for highly selective and sparsely responsive “concept cells”. Such 
cells are characterized by a highly selective and invariant response for abstract concepts, 
such as a particular person or building 24,25. Here, we test whether concept cells exhibit 
persistent activity and whether such activity is related to WM. As in previous work 24, we 
used a screening task to select the images with the best response before our actual 
Kamiński et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experiment. We then used only the images for which selective neurons were present in the 
subsequent WM task.
Results
Task and behavior
Subjects (14 sessions from 13 patients) performed a working memory (WM) task 
(“Sternberg task”). In each trial, subjects were asked to memorize (“encode”) 1–3 images 
that were presented sequentially for 1s each. After a waiting (maintenance) period of at least 
2.5 s and at most 2.8s, subjects were asked to judge whether a probe stimulus was identical 
to one of the 1–3 images held in memory (Fig. 1a). We refer to the number of images held in 
memory as “load” throughout. Subjects pressed either the “Yes” or “No” button to provide 
their answers (button identity was reversed in the middle of the experiment). Patients 
performed well: average accuracy was 89.55 % ± 5.66% (Fig. 1c), and median reaction time 
(for correct trials only) was 1.09 ± 0.28 s (±sd). For all subsequent analysis, we used only 
correct trials unless indicated otherwise. Reaction time (RT) increased as a function of load 
(Fig. 1d, F[2,26]=4.11; P=0.025, permuted repeated-measures ANOVA). Also, RT was 
significantly faster in response to probes that were held in memory (IN=1.03 ± 0.29 sec) 
compared to probes not held in memory (OUT=1.2 ± 0.3 sec; permuted paired t-test: 
t[13]=3.35; p=0.005). Moreover, correct in/out decisions were made more quickly than 
incorrect decisions (1.09 ± 0.28 s vs. 1.52 ± 0.74 s, permuted paired t-
test:t[13]=3.81;p=0.0005). Together, this shows that our patients performed the task 
accurately and exhibited the expected patterns of RT differences 26.
Screening task
We customized the set of images to be memorized for each patient. Each patient performed a 
screening task 2–3 hours prior to the experiment. During this task, 54–64 images were 
presented in random order 6 times for 1s each. We then processed the data to identify the 5 
images with the best image-selective responses (see methods; see Supplementary Fig. 2 for 
examples) which were then used for the WM experiment. We will refer to these images as 
Image A-E throughout the manuscript (A,B,C,D, or E was set arbitrarily but fixed for each 
patient).
Electrophysiology
Across all patients, we isolated 651 (47±22.1 per session) putative single units from the 
dorsal Anterior Cingulate Cortex (dACC; N=120), pre-Supplementary Motor Area (pre-
SMA; N=184), amygdala (Amg; N=195) and hippocampus (Hipp; N=152, Fig. 1b shows the 
locations of recording sites in MNI space). Spike sorting quality was assessed quantitatively 
(Supplementary Fig. 1). Throughout the manuscript, we use the terms neuron and cell 
interchangeably to refer to a putative single unit.
Classes of neuronal responses
We selected for and quantified the properties of three groups of neurons: i) visually selective 
concept cells, ii) maintenance neurons that exhibit elevated activity in the absence of visual 
stimuli, and iii) probe neurons, which responded only during retrieval. Together, these three 
Kamiński et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 groups of cells provide a comprehensive inventory of cellular activity during WM encoding, 
maintenance, and retrieval.
Identification of concepts cells
We identified concept cells 24 by testing whether their firing rate significantly co-varied as a 
function of picture identity (using a permuted one-way ANOVA with x groups, where x is 
the number of unique images followed by a permutated t-test for the image with the 
maximal response against all other images). In the initial screening sessions, 99 cells (out of 
670, 14.77%) qualified as concept cells. In the Sternberg task, 93 cells (out of 465, 14.2 %) 
qualified as concept cells (Fig. 2a shows an example). Most concept cells were located either 
in the amygdala (Fig. 2b, 25.4% of all amygdala cells, Permutation test, P=0.002 vs. chance) 
or the hippocampus (12.1 %, Permutation test, P=0.002 vs. chance). The number of concept 
cells was not larger than expected by chance in the dACC (4.35 %, Permutation test, P=0.21) 
and pre-SMA (2.55 %, Permutation test, P=0.806). We will use the term preferred image for 
the picture for which a given cell is selective and the term non-preferred images for all other 
pictures. The response of concept cells was highly selective: the average depth of selectivity 
(S) index was 0.68 (see Supplementary Fig. 2b and methods). During the screening task, 
only 9.61% ± 9.2 % (±s.d.) of the presented pictures evoked a selective response in at least 
one cell. In contrast, during the Sternberg task, on average 56.92% ± 36.37% (±s.d., 
permuted paired t-test, t[12]=5.48, P=0.001) of all presented pictures elicited a response in 
at least one concept cell (Fig. 2c). 86% of the units which were identified as significantly 
selective in the screening task remained selective for the same visual stimulus during the 
Sternberg task. This indicates that the screening procedure was effective, that recordings 
were stable, and that most neurons maintained their tuning between sessions.
Activity of concept cells during working memory maintenance
We found that concept cells located in the MTL (hippocampus and amygdala) remained 
active during memory maintenance if the preferred image of a cell was presently held in 
memory (Fig. 3a–d, Fig. 4a, Supplementary Fig.3a–b). Note that the preferred and non-
preferred images for each cell were defined based only on the activity observed during 
encoding, making this analysis unbiased. We used the picture selectivity index (PSI) to 
quantify the activity of each concept cell during maintenance (see methods). During 
maintenance, the PSI for concept cells recorded in the amygdala (n=57) was 49.2 ± 65.88 
(permuted paired t-test, t(56)=4.79, P=0.0005 vs. zero, Fig. 4b). Similarly, the PSI for 
concept cells recorded in the hippocampus (n=21) was 28.8 ± 51.85 (permuted paired t-test, 
t(20)=2.54, P=0.0025 vs. zero). Tested individually for each neuron, 44.9% (N=35) of the 
concept cells in the MTL exhibited persistent activity during WM maintenance (p<0.05, 
one-tailed test). This suggests that persistent activity of concept cells in the MTL supports 
WM. If so, we expected that the PSI systematically co-varied with memory load and 
success/failure in maintaining a memory. We next investigated this hypothesis.
We found that the higher the load, the lower the PSI (permuted repeated-measures 1×3 
ANOVA, F(2,112)=7.31, P=0.0005 for amygdala and F(2,40)=8.48, P=0.0005 for 
hippocampus, Fig. 4c). Amygdala neurons had significant PSI values for all loads, whereas 
hippocampal neurons maintained above chance values only for loads 1–2. We next tested 
Kamiński et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 whether the drop in PSI as a function of load could be explained by lingering visually-
evoked activity. If so, persistent activity should only be present for the picture encoded last 9. 
However, we found no significant relationship between the position during encoding (using 
loads 2–3 only) and the PSI in load 2 (permuted paired t-test, t(77)=0.38, P=0.702) nor in 
load 3 (permuted repeated-measures 1×3 ANOVA, F[2,231]=0.135, P=0.873; Fig. 4d, Fig.3c 
and Fig.3d). Thus, the persistent activity during maintenance could not be explained by 
lingering visually-evoked activity.
We next tested whether the activity of concept cells during the maintenance period 
correlated with the correctness of the later response. For the subset of trials during which the 
preferred stimulus of a concept cell was held in memory, persistent activity of concept cells 
was significantly larger in correct compared to incorrect trials (permuted paired t-test, 
t(77)=4.92, P=0.005; see Fig. 4e, left side). In contrast, when the preferred stimulus of a cell 
was not held in memory, there was no significant difference between correct and incorrect 
trials (Fig. 4e, permuted paired t-test, t(77)=0.76, P=0.48).
Lastly, if cells show persistent activity, it should be possible to select for concept cells using 
only maintenance-activity (load 1 only). Indeed, we found that in both the Amygdala 
(14.9%, N=29, Permutation test, P=0.002) and the Hippocampus (11.8% N=18, Permutation 
test, P=0.002), a significant proportion of neurons qualified as concept cells using this 
approach.
Together, this shows that concept cells exhibit selective persistent activity during 
maintenance of items in WM and that the amplitude of this activity was correlated with the 
quality of the memory trace.
Maintenance neurons
The second group of neurons we characterized were maintenance neurons. These neurons 
increased their firing rate relative to baseline during the maintenance period regardless of the 
stimulus that was held in memory. While we observed maintenance neurons in all recorded 
areas (Fig. 5c), they were most prominent in the two areas of the MFC (chi2[1]=25.08; 
P=5.473e-6): pre-SMA and dACC, in which 31.3% and 21.2% of all recorded neurons were 
maintenance neurons, respectively. Was the activity of maintenance neurons predictive of 
which image(s) were held in memory? Using the same approach as in the case of concept 
cells (see methods) we found that the activity of maintenance neurons was not indicative of 
the images held in memory; only 5 (3.97%) neurons out of 126 showed significant 
differences (P=0.829 against scrambled data).
We next tested whether the firing rate of maintenance neurons was associated with load and 
retrieval performance (RT and accuracy). Indeed, during maintenance, the firing rates of 
subsets of maintenance neurons in dACC (10.7%) and pre-SMA (46.3%) co-varied 
systematically with load (Fig. 5d, Supplementary Fig. 3c). Also, in pre-SMA, the majority of 
such neurons decreased their firing rate as a function of load (9.2% vs 37%, Fig. 5d and Fig. 
5a). In addition, the activity of 18.5% of maintenance neurons recorded in the pre-SMA and 
10.3% (3 cells) of amygdala maintenance neurons differentiated between slow and fast later 
memory retrieval (median split computed independently for each load and in and out 
Kamiński et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 conditions, median was computed individually for every subject to account for individual 
differences in RT; Fig. 5e, Supplementary Fig. 3d). Lastly, the mean firing rate of 
maintenance neurons in both dACC and amygdala, but not pre-SMA and hippocampus, was 
significantly higher in trials that were later correctly remembered (Fig. 5f). Together, this 
shows that the MFC contains neurons with persistent activity during maintenance. This 
persistent activity was not indicative of memory content but correlated with memory load 
and later performance.
Probe neurons
The third group of cells we characterized were probe neurons. These neurons increased their 
firing rate only during the presentation of the probe stimulus, relative to encoding and 
maintenance (Fig. 6a,b shows an example; see methods). The response of probe neurons was 
not visually selective: only 5 (6.49%) neurons out of 77 showed image selectivity (P=0.385 
against scrambled data). Also, probe neurons did not respond to the identical stimuli when 
presented during encoding (P=0.0005, permutation test, Fig. 6d). We identified probe 
neurons in all areas, but most prominently in pre-SMA (chi2[1]=44.21; P=2e-11; Fig. 6c), 
where 26.2% of neurons were probe neurons. Next, we tested whether the response of these 
neurons is related to visual input or movement initiation by computing the maximal firing 
rate after aligning to stimulus onset and to button press (RT). Aligning the response with 
stimulus onset resulted in significantly higher peak firing rates (mean for all probe neurons: 
8.82 Hz ± 8.74) compared to the peak firing rate when aligned to button press (5.85 Hz 
± 7.5, permutation t-test: t(76)=8.71; P=0.0005, see Fig. 6a, b for an example). This suggests 
that these neurons responded to the probe itself rather than to movement initiation.
What was the relationship between the activity of probe neurons and behavior? A minority 
of the probe neurons recorded in pre-SMA (15.6% of probe neurons) showed a differential 
response as a function of the WM-based decision (in vs. out, Fig. 6e, counting spikes in a 
window of −800ms to 0ms relative to button press). Similarly, a small number of neurons 
differentiated the button (left or right) used to communicate the decision (Fig. 6f). However, 
the large majority of probe neurons (84%) signaled neither. Instead, these neurons showed a 
strong but indiscriminate increase in firing rate to all pictures shown as probes. We 
hypothesize that probe neurons signal a change of task phase, i.e. a switch from maintenance 
to retrieval of information held in WM (see discussion).
Separability and effects of epilepsy
Were the three neuronal classes we identified separate or were there neurons which qualified 
as multiple types? Note that concept and maintenance cells are observed preferentially in 
separate anatomical areas (MTL vs. MFC), supporting the argument that they are separate. 
Nevertheless, there was some overlap in the same areas (Supplementary Fig. 4a). However, 
further analysis of the correlations between effect sizes attributable to different factors shows 
that the three types we identified constitute three largely separate categories of neurons 
(Supplementary Fig. 4b–c). Lastly, we confirmed that the effects observed did not differ 
between neurons recorded within vs. outside of later resected tissue (Supplementary Fig. 
4d).
Kamiński et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Decoding of information held in WM
We next assessed how well neuronal activity during maintenance predicted the identity of 
remembered images and/or performance in a given trial. For this, we trained a decoder on a 
pseudo-population of all neurons recorded of a given kind (for example, only MFC neurons 
or only concept cells) on a subset of trials and tested its performance on an independent set 
of test trials (see methods). We used this decoding approach to assess whether activity 
during maintenance was sufficiently strong to be read out at the single-trial level. We found 
that neurons in the MTL, but not MFC, carried information about picture identity during 
load 1 trials (Fig. 7a, green bars). Because there were multiple correct answers for loads 2 
and 3, we used a separate binary decoder (trained in load 1 trials) for each image to predict 
whether it is currently in memory or not in load 2/3 trials, and averaged performance across 
all 5 images. This allowed us to compare performance between all load conditions. The 
average decoding accuracy for amygdala and hippocampal neurons during load 1 was 
83.5 % and 63.4%, respectively (Fig. 7a, P=0.002 and P=0.007, respectively, estimated using 
scrambled data, see methods, chance was 50%). We observed a sharp drop in decoding 
accuracy as a function of increasing load (Fig. 7a) in both amygdala and hippocampus. 
Nevertheless, decoding performance was above chance for loads 2 and 3 in the amygdala 
(load 2: 60.7 %, P=0.008; load 3: 56 %, P=0.039) but not in the hippocampus (load 2: 
54.2 %, P=0.25; load 3: 47.7 %, P=0.73). We also performed the same analysis using 
concept cells only (for load 1 trials). We found little difference in decoding accuracy 
between using only concept cells and the whole population of all recorded neurons (Fig. 7a, 
P for amygdala comparison = 0.88 and hippocampus = 0.32). Thus, the information 
decodable about picture identity from the population was carried principally by concept 
cells.
We next tested if information present in the neuronal firing rate of concept cells is carried by 
a static or dynamic code 27,28. We tested this by evaluating whether a decoder trained at one 
point of time could decode information obtained from a different point of time. We found 
that regardless of the time the decoder was trained, decoding performance was significantly 
above chance (Fig. 7b). For example, the average decoding accuracy during the maintenance 
period of a decoder trained based on the activity during the encoding period time (300 ms 
after image exposition) was 0.58 (chance level 0.2, P=0.002 vs. chance as estimated using a 
permutation test). Together, this shows that concept cells coded for the identity of the items 
held in memory using a static code. We next tested whether activity during maintenance was 
indicative of the number of items (load) held in memory. We found that decoding memory 
load was possible in both pre-SMA (decoding accuracy: 67.96 %, P=0.002, chance 33%, 
Fig. 7c) and dACC (42.88 %, P=0.027), but not Amygdala and hippocampus (Fig. 7c). 
When we restricted the decoder to only use information provided by the previously 
identified maintenance neurons, we found that load decoding performance in pre-SMA did 
not change significantly (59.8 % vs 67.96 %, P=0.061). In contrast, in dACC, allowing 
access only to maintenance neurons reduced decoding performance to chance levels 
(performance 38.04%, P=0.164). Thus, activity of MFC cells did not carry information 
about the content of the memory itself but rather about other aspects of the memory: the 
current load. Additionally, we observed that in pre-SMA maintenance neurons carried most 
of the information about memory load. Note that the activity of concept cells in the MTL 
Kamiński et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 also varied as a function of load (Fig. 4c), but only for the preferred stimulus of a cell. In 
contrast, the activity of MFC cells varied as a function of load regardless of the stimulus 
held in memory (as the above decoding results demonstrate).
Finally, we tested if it was possible to predict the amount of time (referred to as RT) taken to 
make the in/out decision at the end of the trial based on the activity of neurons during the 
maintenance period (Fig. 7d). Stronger memories generally lead to faster and more accurate 
and confident decisions 29. We found evidence for this behavior in our task also, because 
incorrect decisions took longer (see behavioral results). Based on this rationale, we split 
correct trials into two groups based on the median RT of each patient (slow/fast groups). We 
did this separately for each load and in/out group (6 groups total) to account for the 
systematic RT differences that result from different loads and in/out decisions. We found that 
that RT could be predicted from neurons located in pre-SMA (65.28 %, P=0.002, chance 
50%, Fig. 7d) and amygdala (60.86 % P=0.0027, Fig. 7d) but not in dACC and 
hippocampus. Repeating the same analysis using only maintenance neurons revealed similar 
performance in pre-SMA (59.8%, P=0.0157 vs. chance). In amygdala, decoding based on 
maintenance neurons only reduced performance to chance levels (52.65 %, P=0.2).
Together, this shows that information about the content of working memory is provided by 
the firing rate of concept cells in the MTL (Fig. 7a) and that information about the quality of 
memories (load, later RT) is encoded predominantly by neurons in the MFC (Fig. 7c,d).
Working memory as attractors in state space
We next quantified the dynamics of neuronal activity during memory maintenance. An 
attractor is a location in state space, which in our case is formed by the activity of all 
recorded neurons. Here, an attractor is thus a pattern of firing rates. Theoretical work 
suggests that during WM maintenance the neural trajectories reside close to a point in this 
state space (the attractor) to maintain information in WM. This space could potentially 
assume a variety of patterns, including a static code 22 , dynamic patterns 28 or combination 
of both30. Our goal was to determine whether the neuronal trajectories during the 
maintenance period were compatible with an attractor formed by a static code. We used 
demixed PCA (dPCA) as a dimensionality reduction technique 31 to derive basis functions 
into which all neural activity was projected. The projection matrix of dPCA was computed 
only based on activity during encoding period 1 (first image) on all neurons. Afterwards, we 
projected the activity during the other encoding and the maintenance periods into this same 
space without recomputing the basis functions, making this analysis unbiased. We used 
dPCA with picture identity as the marginalized variable 31. We found that a four dimensional 
space formed by four dPCs (id 1,2,3,5) separated the neural trajectories well (30.7% 
explained variance) between the five different image identities and had the highest 
percentage of variance attributed to picture identity (Fig. 8a–b, Supplementary Fig. 5, 
Supplementary Fig. 6d, see also supplementary video 1).
We first analyzed the rate of change (velocity) in this four dimensional neural state. As 
expected, velocity was highest during encoding due to the strong visual-onset transients of 
concept cells (Fig. 8c). In contrast, velocity was substantially reduced at baseline (fixation 
cross). Surprisingly, the amount of change in the activity during maintenance was reduced: 
Kamiński et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the velocity during maintenance was not significantly different from that during baseline 
(Fig. 8c, P=0.233). We next quantified the pairwise distance between the neural trajectories 
associated with different images held in memory (Fig. 8d; only for load 1 because pairwise 
distance is ill defined if several items are held in memory. See analysis using DA below for 
other loads). Distances were maximal during encoding but were maintained significantly 
above baseline levels during maintenance (Fig. 8d, P=0.0005). Thus, the neural trajectories 
during the maintenance period were drawn to particular locations in state space, which is the 
definition of an attractor 21,32. Therefore, our data suggests that neural activity during 
maintenance clusters around attractors (Fig. 8d).
We next tested whether the distance of the neural trajectories from a given attractor was 
correlated with behavior (accuracy and RT). We defined the attractor location based on the 
activity during maintenance of one item and quantified the distance of the neural activity to 
this activity in each trial using a distance metric (DA, “distance to attractor”, see methods). 
DA was defined as the Euclidian distance across trials between the attractor center for a 
particular image divided by the average distance of this attractor from all other attractors 
representing all the other pictures (Fig. 8e shows an illustration of this concept in 2d space). 
We found that the DA was smaller for trials in which the item in memory was correctly 
remembered compared to trials where the item was forgotten (Fig. 8f, permutation test: 
P=0.002, computed for loads 1–3 separately and averaged; see Supplementary Fig. 6c for 
each load). This difference was abolished when we excluded concept cells from the 
population, but excluding maintenance neurons did not alter this effect (Fig. 8f). Similarly, 
excluding neurons recorded in MFC did not affect this result whereas excluding MTL 
neurons eliminated the observed differences (Fig. 8f, permutation test, P=0.002 and 
P=0.664, respectively). We also tested whether the distance from the attractor predicted later 
decision time. We tested this for the subset of trials in which the probe was held in memory 
(“IN trials”). Faster decisions were associated with smaller DA values, indicating that neural 
trajectories (during maintenance) were closer to the given attractor (Fig. 8g). Similar to 
before, that was true only when concept cells and MTL were present in the population.
We next repeated the same analysis only using simultaneously recorded neurons (n=5 
subjects who had at least four simultaneously recorded concept cells). Similar to the pseudo-
population results, trial-by-trial, the distance to the closest attractor was predictive of 
whether the answer given by the subject in a trial would be correct or incorrect (Fig. 8h, 
permutated t-test, t[624]=3.33, P=0.003). This shows that attractors can be seen in individual 
subjects and that the distance to the attractor is informative in individual trials.
In conclusion, this shows that persistent activity during maintenance created attractors and 
that the distance of the neural trajectory in a given trial predicted the quality of the memory 
trace as measured by reaction time and accuracy.
Discussion
We found neurons with two different types of persistent activity in MTL and MFC during 
WM maintenance. In the MTL, concept cells were persistently active, and this activity was 
characterized by a high degree of selectivity. In the MFC, on the other hand, we observed a 
Kamiński et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 group of neurons (Fig. 5c) which tonically increased their activity during maintenance, but 
this activity was indifferent to the identity of the memoranda currently held in the memory.
Preceding the WM task, we used a screening task to identify visually selective ‘concept 
cells’ similar to those first identified by Quiroga et al 24,33–35. Such concept cells responded 
strongly and selectively only to the preferred, but not to the non-preferred images (see 
Supplementary Fig. 2a). Interestingly, we identified more concept cells in the amygdala 
(25.4%) compared to the hippocampus (12.1%), a trend compatible with that observed 
previously 34. It remains an open question whether concept cells also exhibit persistent 
activity for stimuli other than images, such as text or audio 34. In addition to transient 
activation by visual input, concept cells can also be activated by free recall of episodic 
memories 36 and visual imagery 37. While this has so far been interpreted as representing 
recall from long-term memory, we here now show a direct relationship between persistent 
concept cell activity and WM. Of note, we found that the response strength (firing rate) of 
concept cells for images held in memory decreased as a function of memory load, an 
observation that fits models of persistent activity 38.
We found that the dynamics of self-sustained persistent activity were well described as an 
attractor state. Attractor-like behavior has been observed in animal experiments as well as 
theoretical work 20–22,39. Modeling work shows that attractor networks can hold multiple 
pieces of information encoded by separate attractors 40 in a robust and noise-resistant 
manner 39. Theoretical work further indicates that the activity of attractor networks can drift 
during the maintenance period due to other attractors located close-by in state space 20,39. 
This prediction has been confirmed experimentally in macaque recordings with a single item 
held in memory, where the extent of drift away from an attractor was predictive of errors 22. 
Here, we present evidence that the activity of human neurons during WM maintenance is 
compatible with that expected if attractors were present. We show that this prediction of the 
model holds for discrete attractors and for multiple items held in memory, because we find 
that the quality of a memory trace can be predicted by the drift (distance) away from the 
attractor representing a given image (Fig. 8). In addition, we found that it is principally 
concept cells in the MTL that support attractors (Fig. 8 f , g). Here, we defined each attractor 
based on the pattern of activity observed when only a single item was held in memory. 
However, when multiple items were held in memory (loads 2–3), multiple concept cells are 
persistently active. Consequently, the population activity is different from that defined by the 
single-item attractors as demonstrated by increased DA values (Supplementary Fig. 6c). 
Despite this, the distance to the attractors defined in this manner was predictive of memory 
content and quality even in loads 2 and 3 (Supplementary Fig. 6c). This is possible because 
of the high dimensionality of the state space, which make it possible to be closest to several 
attractors while being far away from all the others 40. Overall, our findings reveal a direct 
neuronal correlate for discrete attractors in humans. This shows that persistent activity can 
be viewed as forming attractors and that persistent activity is a mechanism capable of 
supporting information maintenance during WM.
A lack of evidence for stimulus-specific persistent activity in some studies28,41 has led to 
alternative proposals on how WM is maintained. A key new proposal is that information in 
WM can be carried by salient states encoded through synaptic weight changes 42,43 or by 
Kamiński et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 oscillatory bursts 41. Our analysis now shows that persistent activity compatible with the 
original model exists in the human MTL. This argues that the original WM model is a valid 
way to conceptualize persistent activity during Sternberg-like WM tasks. However, this does 
not rule out the possibility that mechanisms other than persistent activity also contribute to 
WM.
Our data shows that the activity of MTL neurons during WM maintenance carried 
information about the items held in memory. This raises the question of the role of the MTL 
for WM. While it has been observed before that intracranial field potentials recorded from 
the MTL are modulated by load 18,44, these differences are not stimulus selective. Subjects 
with bilateral MTL damage do not exhibit WM deficits in some circumstances 17, but 
sufficiently difficult WM tasks or the presence of distractors 17 reveal WM deficits in the 
same subjects. Based on this, it has been suggested that the MTL is critical in conditions 
when WM alone is insufficient17. A possible role for the persistent MTL activity we 
observed is therefore to maintain memory engrams so that they can be used to recover 
information in WM that has been lost due to shifts in attention triggered by distractors or 
when the capacity of WM is saturated.
We found amygdala neurons with prominent persistent activity. Interestingly, amygdala 
persistent activity was more easily decodable than activity in the hippocampus. This is in 
contrast to episodic memory-related activity during free recall 36, which is prominent in the 
hippocampus but not the amygdala. This raises the novel possibility that the amygdala could 
have a role in supporting WM. While encoding new long-term memories does not require 
the amygdala, the amygdala prominently modulates this process by enhancing or 
suppressing the encoding of new memories 45. Interestingly, patients with amygdala lesions 
frequently have working memory deficits46 . Also, rats with amygdala lesions have a 
specific impairment in visual WM tasks 47. While it is recognized that the amygdala can 
boost general vigilance and thereby facilitates execution of demanding tasks 45, our data 
indicates that the amygdala might directly contribute to WM maintenance by storing specific 
memoranda with the help of persistently active neurons.
The persistent activity of MFC neurons did not carry information about the content of the 
memory. Nevertheless, this activity was relevant for WM, because it was predictive of later 
behavior (accuracy and RT) and memory load. This is similar to some recordings in 
macaques, which also revealed non-selective persistent activity in the MFC 12. However, 
other macaque studies have revealed MFC single-units who are stimulus selective 11,48. It 
remains an open question whether stimulus-specific persistent activity in the human MFC 
exists in other tasks or for other stimuli such as tactile vibration stimuli 11, sounds 11 or task 
contexts 48. Note that we did not record from dlPFC in this study, which is frequently 
associated with stimulus selective persistent activity4,5,7. It therefore remains an open 
question whether human dlPFC neurons have stimulus-specific persistent activity. 
Nevertheless our finding that the activity of maintenance neurons in the MFC during delay 
was predictive of RT and accuracy is consistent with the hypothesized role of the MFC in 
attentional control 49.
Kamiński et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dACC and pre-SMA are both part of the cingulo-opercular (CO) system. It is thought that 
the activity of this network supports implementation of different task sets 15. Indeed, in 
lesion studies, subjects with MFC lesions are impaired in switching between different 
response and instruction sets 50. Our task consisted of three task sets (encoding, 
maintenance, retrieval). A role of the MFC in controlling switches between these three task 
sets is compatible with our finding that differences in activity due to load and RT appear 
prominently only in the initial part of the maintenance period (Fig. 5a, b). This is because in 
each trial, the set size is unknown to the subject. Therefore, starting the maintenance period 
after encoding only one picture was more unpredictable compared to starting it after 
encoding three pictures. Thus, switching to maintenance after encoding one picture would 
be more attentionally demanding. Indeed, we found that pre-SMA cells were most active for 
load 1, and less so for loads 2 and 3 (Fig. 5). Similarly, the firing rate of MFC maintenance 
neurons was most predictive of RT early during the maintenance period (Fig. 5b), which 
might also be related to switching from the encoding to the maintenance mode. Here, we 
suggest that these neurons support attentional control and, together with probe neurons (see 
below), the implementation of task sets. Future work is needed to determine whether 
maintenance-and and concept neurons interact during task.
Finally, we also observed a group of “probe neurons” in pre-SMA that only became active 
during the retrieval phase of the task. The activity of these neurons was better explained by 
the time of visual stimulus onset rather than the timing or nature of the motor response. 
Probe neurons did not respond to the same stimuli during encoding, demonstrating that they 
are not simply visually tuned or responsive. In the context of task sets 15, “probe neurons” 
signaled the transition to the retrieval phase of the task, i.e. a switch from maintenance to 
retrieval of information held in WM. Together, this reveals a direct correlate of neurons 
implementing transitions between different tasks sets in human MFC.
Online Methods
Task
We used a modified Sternberg task with images (instead of the usual digits) as material for 
memorization (Fig. 1a). Each trial started with a fixation cross shown for 900 – 1000 ms. 
Next, we sequentially presented the images to be memorized (“encoding”) in a given trial. 
Each picture was presented for 1 second, followed by a blank screen for 1–200ms 
(randomized). Subjects were asked to memorize the 1–3 images shown in each trial. We use 
the terms “encoding 1”, “encoding 2” and “encoding 3” to refer to the 1–3 images shown in 
a trial. After encoding, there was a maintenance (delay) period lasting at least 2.5s and at 
most 2.8s. During this time, the word “hold” was shown on the screen. Lastly, after the end 
of the maintenance period, a probe stimulus was displayed. Subjects were asked to decide if 
the probe stimulus was shown as one of the preceding 1–3 images or not. Participants 
responded by pressing the “green” or “red” buttons on a response pad. Which color was 
“yes” and which “no” was shown at the top of the screen during each probe trial. We used 
this approach to switch the location of the yes/no buttons in the middle of the experiment as 
a control. We asked subjects to respond as fast as possible. The probe picture was presented 
Kamiński et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 until subjects made a response. In each session, subjects preformed 108 or 135 trials 
depending on the task variant. Pictures were shown in pseudo-random order.
The pictures used for each participant were different and were determined by the results of a 
screening task conducted 2–3 hours earlier (except from one patient who did not undergo a 
screening procedure and had images used with a previous subject). For the screening task, 
images were chosen based on a patient’s interests.
During screening, we showed 54–64 images. Each image was shown 6 times in randomized 
order for 1s. As a control, every few trials (randomized) we asked a control question related 
to the image shown immediately before (i.e. “Did the last image present person/ landscape/
animal?”). After the screening task, we immediately analyzed the data to choose the 5 
images with the best responses as judged by the mean response in a 200–1000ms window 
relative to stimulus onset (based on an F statistic computed by a one-way ANOVA with 
image as a factor). In sessions in which less than 5 neurons showed significantly selective 
responses (6/13 sessions), we picked the remaining images according to the strongest non-
selective responses. In these instances, we used a combination of the F-statistic (with image 
as a factor) and neuronal isolation quality (amplitude of waveform) to choose the next best 
non-selective response. These 5 images were subsequently used for the Sternberg task. Both 
tasks were implemented in MATLAB using the Psychophysics Toolbox 51. Note that the 
statistical tests run during the screening and Sternberg task were statistically independent, 
because they were run at distinct periods of time.
Data collection and analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of the experiments.
Patients
13 subjects participated in the study (Supplementary Table 1). All of them were implanted 
with depth electrodes for possible surgical treatment of epilepsy. They volunteered for the 
study and gave informed consent. This study was approved by the Institutional Review 
Boards of the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Huntington Memorial Hospital, and the 
California Institute of Technology. Electrodes were localized based on pre-and post-
operative T1 structural MRIs. We used the following processing pipeline to transform the 
post-operative MRI into the same space as a template brain. We extracted the brains from the 
pre-and post-operative T1 scans 52 and aligned the post-operative to the pre-operative scan 
with Freesurfer’s mri_robust_register 53. We then computed a forward mapping of the pre-
operative scan to the CIT168 template brain 54 using a concatenation of an affine 
transformation followed by a symmetric image normalization (SyN) diffeomorphic 
transform computed by the ANTs software package55. This resulted in a post-operative scan 
overlayed on the MNI152-registered version of the CIT168 template brain 54. We then used 
Freesurfer’s Freeview program to mark the electrodes as point sets to determine where the 
tips of the microwires were located. For visualization only, electrode locations were 
projected onto the 2D sagittal plane (Fig. 1b).
Kamiński et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Spike sorting and quality metrics of single units
Each macroelectrode contained eight 40 µm diameter microwires 56. We recorded broadband 
(0.1–9000Hz filter) from a total of 64 channels sampled at 32 kHz using a Neuralynx Atlas 
system. Signals were locally referenced to one of the eight microwires in each brain area.
The raw signal was filtered with a zero-phase lag filter in the 300–3000Hz band and spikes 
were detected and sorted using a semi-automated template-matching algorithm 23. We 
computed several spike sorting quality metrics for all identified putative single units to 
assess the quality of identified units (Supplementary Fig. 1): 1) the percentage of interspike 
intervals (ISIs) below 3 ms was 0.42% ± 0.68%, 2) the ratio between the standard deviation 
of the noise and the peak amplitude of the mean waveform of each cluster was 6.18 ± 4.09 
(peak SNR), 3) the pairwise projection distance in clustering space between all neurons 
isolated on the same wire was 14.39 ± 6.2 (projection test; in units of s.d. 57 of the signal), 4) 
the modified coefficient of variation of variability in the ISI (CV2) was 0.94 ± 0.14, 5) the 
median isolation distance 58 was 30.9. We calculated the isolation distance in a ten-
dimensional feature space (energy, peak amplitude, total area under the waveform and first 
five principal components of the energy normalizes waveforms 58).
Statistics
Statistical comparisons were conducted using permutation tests based on a null distribution 
estimated from B=2000 runs on data with scrambled labels using the EEGLAB toolbox 59. 
For comparisons with two groups we used the permuted t-test statistic and for comparisons 
with more than two groups the estimated distribution was that of the F statistics. Note that 
we used permutation tests throughout to avoid the assumption of normality. We used 
ANOVAs instead of linear regressions to test for effects of load because linear regressions 
introduce the additional assumption of a monotonic relationship between load and behavior. 
Note that the reported p-values can be different from those expected from the t and F 
distributions because p-values were based on the empirically estimated null distribution. No 
statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes but our sample sizes are similar 
to those reported in previous publications in the field56.
Selection of neurons
For each recorded neuron, we ran the following three statistical tests to determine whether a 
cell qualified as a concept, maintenance, or probe neuron. Tests were independent and some 
cells qualified as multiple types. To identify concept cells we counted spikes in a window 
200–1000ms following stimulus onset of the first encoding period. Concept cells were 
selected (p<0.05) using a permuted one-way ANOVA with 5 groups (the number of unique 
images). In addition, we also required that the activity for the image with the maximal 
response was significantly larger compared to that of all other images (p<0.05, permutation 
t-test). The value of this latter test was also used as the effect size metric to compare the 
neuronal groups (see “Separability of neuronal categories”). For the analysis of persistent 
activity of concept cells, we used all concept cells found during the Sternberg task regardless 
of whether they were also significant in the screening task.
Kamiński et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To identify maintenance cells, we tested if the mean firing rate during the maintenance 
period (0–2500ms) was significantly larger (permutation t-test, p<0.05) than the firing rate 
during the 500ms long fixation cross period before trial start. If a maintenance cell was also 
a concept cell, we in addition required that its maintenance activity for the non-preferred 
stimuli was significantly higher than baseline. This second criteria is to assure that strong 
concept cells, which only increase their firing rate to a single stimulus, don’t automatically 
qualify as maintenance cells.
Probe neurons were identified by comparing the firing rate during presentation of the probe 
stimulus (spikes counted during 200–1000 ms after probe onset) to that during both the 
encoding (p<0.05, 200 – 1000 ms) and maintenance periods (p<0.05, 0–2500 ms, 
permutation t-test).
Single-cell metrics
We used a Picture Selectivity Index (PSI) to quantify the response of concept cells:
Where the FR is the mean firing rate in a 200–1000 ms window relative to stimulus onset for 
encoding and probe, 0–2500 ms for maintenance and −500-0 ms for baseline. When 
comparing correct and incorrect trials, we computed firing rates and PSI values 
independently for the three load conditions (1,2,3) and then averaged the results in order to 
eliminate bias due to different number of incorrect trials for each load. We also used the 
depth of selectivity index 6 to quantify the sparsity of concept cells (Supplementary Fig. 2):
Where n is the number of images presented, Ri is the firing rate of the neuron during the 
presentation of the ith picture, and Rmax is the largest firing rate across all presented 
images. A neuron with a S value of 0 would respond identically to all images, whereas a 
neuron with S=1 would respond only to a single image and not at all to others.
In order to compare time courses of neuronal activity, we counted spikes in 200 ms bins 
moved by a step-size of 2ms. We corrected for multiple comparisons using a cluster based 
approach 60. In this method, a cluster is defined as a group of adjacent significant tests. We 
tested, for all identified clusters, if the summed value of the test statistic in a given cluster 
was larger than the 95th percentile of the same value estimated from scrambled labels. For 
comparing firing rates across cells, we standardized the firing rate of each neuron using the 
mean and standard deviation of the firing rate of each cell during the baseline (fixation cross, 
−500ms – 0 ms window before encoding 1). To evaluate if the proportion of significant 
neurons in an area was larger than that expected by chance we computed a null distribution 
based on randomly scrambled labels (B=500) and then estimated an empirical P value as 
described.
Kamiński et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Population decoding
We used a pseudo-population of neurons pooled across all recording sessions and subjects to 
determine decoding performance. To pool images from different subjects we arbitrarily 
labeled the individual images of each subjects as image A-E. We then pooled the images 
with the same label across all subjects. Note that each subject saw a different set of pictures. 
Nevertheless, neurons can be considered a pseudo-population for decoding purposes, a 
procedure that is frequently used to pool single-neuron recordings across sessions and 
animals 61. This is because for the learning algorithm, all that matters is that each patient 
saw five distinct images regardless of their identity. The decoder assigns a weight to each 
neuron independently, i.e. the decoder will identify all neurons which signaled the presence 
of “image A” in all patients, regardless of the identity of “image A”. This pooling procedure 
provides, at every point of time, a NxT matrix where N is the total number of neurons 
recorded from all subjects in given brain area, and T is a smallest number of trials of a given 
type observed in all patients. This matrix thus represented, as a function of time, the neural 
state in an N dimensional space. We then trained a decoder to separate patterns in this high 
dimensional space. Spikes were counted in 1500 ms bins moved with a stepsize of 250 ms. 
For decoding, we used a support vector machine (SVM) as implemented in the ndt 
toolbox 61 and the LIBSVM library 62. We used leave-one-out cross-validation to estimate 
performance: one trial was randomly assigned for each neuron from each class as the test 
trial and the remaining trials were used for training. All possible train/test combinations 
were computed, and we used 500 randomly chosen train/test combinations to estimate the 
cross-validated testing error. For decoding image identity, we trained a classifier on the load 
1 condition and then applied it to loads 2 and 3 to determine the accuracy by which the 
algorithm could determine whether a given image was in held in memory. To test if given 
decoding performance was significantly better than chance, we created null distributions by 
decoding using the same approach as described above but with scrambled labels. We 
repeated this computation 500 times. Note that the minimal possible P value is thus 0.002 
and we used this p-value if no value in the null distribution exceeded the observed value. 
Similarly, for comparisons between decoding accuracy of different decoders - for example, 
all neurons compared to maintenance only neurons - we created a null distribution of 
differences in a given comparison by subtracting the null distribution created for the whole 
population (in this example) from the null distribution created for maintenance neurons only. 
We then estimated the p value for this comparison by counting the number of times the null 
distribution exceeded the observed difference of performance between the two decoders.
Analysis of neuronal activity dynamics
To analyze the dynamics of activity of the entire neuronal population we reduced 
dimensionally using demixed principal component analysis (dPCA) 29. We used dPCA 
instead of PCA because PCA stretches components “blindly” based on the percentage of 
explained variance as a criterion. Due to this, the dimensions chosen often don’t have a 
meaningful interpretation and thus don’t help in a particular analysis. In contrast, dPCA has 
the advantage that it stretches components along dimensions not only to explain overall 
signal variance but also to explain variance attributable to variables of interest (such as 
image identity in our case). For dPCA analysis, we used a pseudo-population of all recorded 
neurons (as defined above). We used dPCA with picture identity and time as the 
Kamiński et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 marginalized variable. We binned neuronal firing in 2ms non-overlapping bins and smoothed 
the resulting time course by convolution with a Gaussian kernel (200 ms width). In addition, 
we z-scored all time-courses based on the mean and standard deviation estimated from the 
baseline (−500-0ms relative to onset of first image). We computed the basis functions of 
dPCA (demixing weights) based only on the data recorded during 200–1000ms following 
onset of the first image (“encoding 1”). We rank-ordered the demixed principal components 
(dPCs) by their explained variance and used the first 15 dPCs. These together accounted for 
51.58 % of the total signal variance. To prevent overfitting, we used a regularization 
procedure to find the optimal lambda parameter (Supplementary Fig. 6f). In addition, we 
also tested if the percentage of explained variance for picture identity was higher than that 
observed for data with scrambled image identity labels. Indeed, the portion of variance that 
was attributed to image identity by the 15 largest dPCs of the real data was 45.13%, whereas 
for the scrambled data it was only 13.64% (permutation test, P=0.002, Supplementary Fig. 
6e). We projected the data from the maintenance period onto the basis functions computed 
from the encoding 1 period.
We used the multidimensional Euclidean distance d(p,q) to quantify how different the 
population activity was between the neural activity vector p(t) and q(t) (which here are the 
neuronal states during two different conditions at time t):
In addition, we quantified the speed by which the population activity changed at a given 
point of time t as V(t):
Where n is the number of dimensions in dPCA space (n=4), Δt is 50 ms and p is the neural 
activity vector. We used the first four dPCs (id 1,2,3,5) that had the highest percentage of 
variance attributed to picture identity during load 1 trials (Fig. 8a–b, Supplementary Fig. 5, 
Supplementary Fig. 6d, see also supplementary video 1). dPC 4, in contrast, had variance 
that was only attributable to time but not image identity (Supplementary Fig. 5). Also, the 
next biggest dPCs (id 6) accounted for only 2.55% of the variance attributed to picture 
identity. We also recomputed our analysis using the 8 or 12 dPCs with the highest 
percentage attributed to image identity and found that results were very similar to the 
analysis based on 4 dPCs (Supplementary Fig. 6ab). Both V and d are population-level 
metrics not computable for single neurons. To estimate the variance of V and d, we 
bootstrapped the confidence intervals of V and d by randomly picking a subset 10% of trials 
and computed V and d for each such subset (repeated 50 times).
For each possible remembered stimulus k, we defined the location of its corresponding 
attractor Ak as the center (mean across time) of the neuronal trajectory observed during 
Kamiński et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 maintenance of that image during the load 1 condition. There were 5 attractors (a–e) — one 
for each image used. To quantify the distance of a neuronal trajectory from an attractor in a 
given condition, we used a “distance to attractor” (DA) metric:
Where dj(t)=d(Aj,p(t)) is the Euclidean distance of the neuronal trajectory p(t) from the 
attractor Aj. C is the total number of attractors (C=5). We computed DA(t) separately for 
loads 1–3 and each time point t during maintenance (0–2500 ms) and then averaged DA(t) 
over all points of time and loads to get a single value DA for every trial. Note that DA=1 
implies that the neural trajectory was equidistant between the tested (di) and all other 
attractors, which indicates no memory. On the other hand, DA<1 indicates that the neuronal 
state was closer to one attractor compared to all the other attractors.
Similarly to d and V, DA is a population-level metric not computable for single neurons. We 
thus assessed the significance of differences in DA between correct and incorrect trials and 
fast and slow RT conditions by estimating a null distribution of DA based on data with 
scrambled labels. For visualization of distances between attractors in 2D space (Fig. 8e), we 
used non-metric multidimensional scaling (MDS). We used Euclidean distance as the 
pairwise distance measure. MDS was used for visualization only.
For the single subject analysis (Fig. 8h), we used the same approach as described for the 
pseudo-population but used only neurons recorded simultaneously from a given subject. For 
each session, we used the first four dPCs that explained the highest proportion of variance 
and computed DA accordingly.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available on reasonable request from the 
corresponding author. The data are not publicly available because they contain information 
that could compromise research participant privacy/consent.
Code availability
Analysis was performed in Matlab using the publicly available software packages Osort, ndt, 
and EEGLAB together with custom-developed analysis routines.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank J. Minxa, R. Adolphs and J. Dubois for discussion, and the staff and physicians of the Epilepsy 
Monitoring Unit at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and the Huntington Memorial Hospital for invaluable assistance. 
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (1554105 to U.R.), the National Institute of Mental 
Health (R01MH110831 to U.R.), the McKnight Endowment Fund for Neuroscience (to U.R.), a NARSAD Young 
Investigator grant from the Brain & Behavior Research Foundation (23502 to U.R.), and the Pfeiffer Foundation (to 
U.R.).
Kamiński et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
1. Baddeley A. Working memory: theories, models, and controversies. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2012; 
63:1–29. [PubMed: 21961947] 
2. Eriksson J, Vogel EK, Lansner A, Bergström F, Nyberg L. Neurocognitive Architecture of Working 
Memory. Neuron. 2015; 88:33–46. [PubMed: 26447571] 
3. Goldman-Rakic PS. Cellular basis of working memory. Neuron. 1995; 14:477–485. [PubMed: 
7695894] 
4. Constantinidis C, Franowicz MN, Goldman-Rakic PS. The sensory nature of mnemonic 
representation in the primate prefrontal cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 2001; 4:311–316. [PubMed: 
11224549] 
5. Funahashi S, Bruce CJ, Goldman-Rakic PS. Mnemonic coding of visual space in the monkey’s 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 1989; 61:331–349. [PubMed: 2918358] 
6. Rainer G, Asaad WF, Miller EK. Selective representation of relevant information by neurons in the 
primate prefrontal cortex. Nature. 1998; 393:577–579. [PubMed: 9634233] 
7. Chafee MV, Goldman-Rakic PS. Matching patterns of activity in primate prefrontal area 8a and 
parietal area 7ip neurons during a spatial working memory task. J. Neurophysiol. 1998; 79:2919–
2940. [PubMed: 9636098] 
8. Fuster JM, Jervey JP. Inferotemporal neurons distinguish and retain behaviorally relevant features of 
visual stimuli. Science. 1981; 212:952–955. [PubMed: 7233192] 
9. Miller EK, Li L, Desimone R. Activity of neurons in anterior inferior temporal cortex during a 
short-term memory task. J. Neurosci. 1993; 13:1460–1478. [PubMed: 8463829] 
10. Suzuki WA, Miller EK, Desimone R. Object and place memory in the macaque entorhinal cortex. 
J. Neurophysiol. 1997; 78:1062–1081. [PubMed: 9307135] 
11. Vergara J, Rivera N, Rossi-Pool R, Romo R. A Neural Parametric Code for Storing Information of 
More than One Sensory Modality in Working Memory. Neuron. 2016; 89:54–62. [PubMed: 
26711117] 
12. Constantinidis C, Procyk E. The primate working memory networks. Cogn. Affect. Behav. 
Neurosci. 2004; 4:444–465. [PubMed: 15849890] 
13. Fuster JM. Cortex and memory: emergence of a new paradigm. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 2009; 21:2047–
2072. [PubMed: 19485699] 
14. Yarkoni T, Poldrack RA, Nichols TE, Van Essen DC, Wager TD. Large-scale automated synthesis 
of human functional neuroimaging data. Nat. Methods. 2011; 8:665–670. [PubMed: 21706013] 
15. Dosenbach NUF, et al. A Core System for the Implementation of Task Sets. Neuron. 2006; 50:799–
812. [PubMed: 16731517] 
16. Squire LR, Stark CEL, Clark RE. The medial temporal lobe. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2004; 27:279–
306. [PubMed: 15217334] 
17. Jeneson A, Squire LR. Working memory, long-term memory, and medial temporal lobe function. 
Learn. Mem. 2012; 19:15–25. [PubMed: 22180053] 
18. Axmacher N, et al. Sustained neural activity patterns during working memory in the human medial 
temporal lobe. J. Neurosci. 2007; 27:7807–7816. [PubMed: 17634374] 
19. Ojemann GA, Creutzfeldt O, Lettich E, Haglund MM. Neuronal activity in human lateral temporal 
cortex related to short-term verbal memory, naming and reading. Brain. 1988; 111:1383–1403. 
[PubMed: 3208062] 
20. Wang XJ. Synaptic reverberation underlying mnemonic persistent activity. Trends in 
Neurosciences. 2001; 24:455–463. [PubMed: 11476885] 
21. Hopfield JJ. Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational 
abilities. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1982; 79:2554–2558. [PubMed: 6953413] 
22. Wimmer K, Nykamp DQ, Constantinidis C, Compte A. Bump attractor dynamics in prefrontal 
cortex explains behavioral precision in spatial working memory. Nat. Neurosci. 2014; 17:431–439. 
[PubMed: 24487232] 
23. Rutishauser U, Douglas R. State-dependent computation using coupled recurrent networks. Neural 
Comput. 2009; 509:478–509.
Kamiński et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 24. Quian Quiroga R, Reddy L, Kreiman G, Koch C, Fried I. Invariant visual representation by single 
neurons in the human brain. Nature. 2005; 435:1102–1107. [PubMed: 15973409] 
25. Mormann F, et al. A category-specific response to animals in the right human amygdala. Nat. 
Neurosci. 2011; 14:1247–1249. [PubMed: 21874014] 
26. Sternberg S. In defence of high-speed memory scanning. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 2016; 69:2020–2075.
27. Meyers EM, Freedman DJ, Kreiman G, Miller EK, Poggio T. Dynamic population coding of 
category information in inferior temporal and prefrontal cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 2008; 100:1407–
1419. [PubMed: 18562555] 
28. Stokes MG, et al. Dynamic coding for cognitive control in prefrontal cortex. Neuron. 2013; 
78:364–375. [PubMed: 23562541] 
29. Rutishauser U, et al. Representation of retrieval confidence by single neurons in the human medial 
temporal lobe. Nat. Neurosci. 2015; 18:1–12. [PubMed: 25547471] 
30. Murray J, et al. Stable population coding for working memorycoexists with heterogeneous 
neuraldynamics in prefrontal cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2016
31. Kobak D, et al. Demixed principal component analysis of neural population data. Elife. 2016; 5:1–
37.
32. Milnor J. On the concept of attractor. Commun. Math. Phys. 1985; 99:177–195.
33. Mormann F, et al. Latency and selectivity of single neurons indicate hierarchical processing in the 
human medial temporal lobe. J. Neurosci. 2008; 28:8865–8872. [PubMed: 18768680] 
34. Quian Quiroga R, Kraskov A, Koch C, Fried I. Explicit encoding of multimodal percepts by single 
neurons in the human brain. Curr. Biol. 2009; 19:1308–1313. [PubMed: 19631538] 
35. Waydo S, Kraskov A, Quian Quiroga R, Fried I, Koch C. Sparse representation in the human 
medial temporal lobe. J. Neurosci. 2006; 26:10232–10234. [PubMed: 17021178] 
36. Gelbard-Sagiv H, Mukamel R, Harel M, Malach R, Fried I. Internally generated reactivation of 
single neurons in human hippocampus during free recall. Science. 2008; 322:96–101. [PubMed: 
18772395] 
37. Kreiman G, Koch C, Fried I. Imagery neurons in the human brain. Nature. 2000; 408:357–361. 
[PubMed: 11099042] 
38. Macoveanu J, Klingberg T, Tegnér J. A biophysical model of multiple-item working memory: A 
computational and neuroimaging study. Neuro Science. 2006; 141:1611–1618.
39. Camperi M, Wang XJ. A model of visuospatial working memory in prefrontal cortex: Recurrent 
network and cellular bistability. J. Comput. Neurosci. 1998; 5:383–405. [PubMed: 9877021] 
40. Laing CR, Troy WC, Gutkin B, Ermentrout GB. Multiple bumps in a neuronal model of working 
memory. Siam J. Appl. Math. 2002; 63:62–97.
41. Lundqvist M, et al. Gamma and Beta Bursts Underlie Working Memory. Neuron. 2015
42. Stokes MG. ‘Activity-silent’ working memory in prefrontal cortex: a dynamic coding framework. 
Trends Cogn. Sci. 2015; 19:394–405. [PubMed: 26051384] 
43. Mongillo G, Barak O, Tsodyks M. Synaptic theory of working memory. Science. 2008; 319:1543–
1546. [PubMed: 18339943] 
44. van Vugt MK, Schulze-Bonhage A, Litt B, Brandt A, Kahana MJ. Hippocampal gamma 
oscillations increase with memory load. J. Neurosci. 2010; 30:2694–2699. [PubMed: 20164353] 
45. Davis M, Whalen PJ. The amygdala: vigilance and emotion. Mol. Psychiatry. 2001; 6:13–34. 
[PubMed: 11244481] 
46. Buchanan, TW., Tranel, D., Adolphs, R. The Human Amygdala. Whalen, PJ., Phelps, EA., editors. 
2009. p. 289-317.
47. Peinado-Manzano MA. The role of the amygdala and the hippocampus in working memory for 
spatial and non-spatial information. Behav. Brain Res. 1990; 38:117–134. [PubMed: 2363833] 
48. Saez A, Rigotti M, Ostojic S, Fusi S, Salzman CD. Abstract Context Representations in Primate 
Amygdala and Prefrontal Cortex. Neuron. 2015; 87:869–881. [PubMed: 26291167] 
49. Bush G, Luu P, Posner MI. Cognitive and emotional influences in anterior cingulate cortex. Trends 
Cogn Sci. 2000; 4:215–222. [PubMed: 10827444] 
50. Gläscher J, et al. Lesion mapping of cognitive control and value-based decision making in the 
prefrontal cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2012; 109:14681–14686. [PubMed: 22908286] 
Kamiński et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Methods-only References
51. Brainard DH. The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spat. Vis. 1997; 10:433–436. [PubMed: 9176952] 
52. Ségonne F, et al. A hybrid approach to the skull stripping problem in MRI. Neuro image. 2004; 
22:1060–1075. [PubMed: 15219578] 
53. Reuter M, Rosas HD, Fischl B. Highly accurate inverse consistent registration: A robust approach. 
Neuro image. 2010; 53:1181–1196. [PubMed: 20637289] 
54. Tyszka JM, Pauli WM. A high resolution in vivo MRI atlas of the adult human amygdaloid 
complex. Hum. Brain Mapp. 2016; 37:3979–3998. [PubMed: 27354150] 
55. Avants B, et al. Multivariate Analysis of Structural and Diffusion Imaging in Traumatic Brain 
Injury. Acad. Radiol. 2008; 15:1360–1375. [PubMed: 18995188] 
56. Rutishauser U, Ross IB, Mamelak AN, Schuman EM. Human memory strength is predicted by 
theta-frequency phase-locking of single neurons. Nature. 2010; 464:903–907. [PubMed: 
20336071] 
57. Pouzat C, Mazor O, Laurent G. Using noise signature to optimize spike-sorting and to assess 
neuronal classification quality. J. Neurosci. Methods. 2002; 122:43–57. [PubMed: 12535763] 
58. Harris KD, Henze DA, Csicsvari J, Hirase H, Buzsáki G. Accuracy of tetrode spike separation as 
determined by simultaneous intracellular and extracellular measurements. J. Neurophysiol. 2000; 
84:401–414. [PubMed: 10899214] 
59. Delorme A, Makeig S. EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG 
dynamics including independent component analysis. J Neurosci Methods. 2004; 134:9–21. 
[PubMed: 15102499] 
60. Maris E, Oostenveld R. Nonparametric statistical testing of EEG- and MEG-data. J Neurosci 
Methods. 2007; 164:177–190. [PubMed: 17517438] 
61. Meyers EM. The Neural Decoding Toolbox. Front. Neuroinform. 2013; 7:8. [PubMed: 23734125] 
62. Fan R-E, Chen P-H, Lin C-J. Working Set Selection Using Second Order Information for Training 
Support Vector Machines. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2005; 6:1889–1918.
Kamiński et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Task, recording locations, and behavioral results
(a) The task. Upper row represents examples of the screens presented to the subjects during 
an example trial (with load 2). The lower row represents the lengths of time for which each 
screen was shown. Each trial consisted of 1–3 sequentially presented pictures (encoding), 
followed by a variable delay (holding or maintenance period). After the delay, a probe image 
was shown and patients indicated whether the probe was or was not shown during the 
immediately preceding encoding period. (b) Location of recording sites in MNI152 space 
(see methods). Recording locations are indicated by different colors (red is pre-SMA, blue is 
dACC, yellow is hippocampus, and cyan is amygdala). (c–d) Behavioral results. (c) 
Accuracy of all sessions, rank-ordered. (d) Median reaction time (relative to onset of the 
probe image) as a function of load. Each dashed line connects an individual session. (b–c) 
Thick and light blue lines represent the mean and s.e.m across all sessions, respectively.
Kamiński et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Stimulus-selective concept cells
(a) Example concept cell recorded from the amygdala. Upper panel shows the Post-stimulus 
time histogram (PSTH; binsize 200ms, stepsize 2ms). Colors denote the different images 
(shown on the right). Shaded areas represent ±s.e.m across trials. Middle panel marks 
periods of significance (1×5 ANOVA; corrected for multiple comparisons using a cluster-
size correction, see methods). Bottom panel shows raster with trials re-ordered according to 
image identity for plotting purposes only. Image onset is at t=0 (gray bar). The right inset 
shows the mean extracellular waveform ±s.e.m of all spikes associated with this cell. (b) 
Percent of all recorded cells who qualified as concept cells in each area during the screening 
and WM (“Sternberg”) tasks. The numbers below each area label denotes the number of 
neurons associated with each bar. We test if the observed percentage is higher than that 
expected by chance by comparing with a null distribution estimated after scrambling the 
condition labels randomly (repeated 500 times; * denotes p<0.05, ** p<0.01, and *** 
denotes p<=0.002). (c) Percentage of images shown for which we observed at least one 
concept cell in both tasks (p=0.0014). Each dashed line connects an individual session. This 
shows that the screening task successfully identified responsive neurons. Thick and thin blue 
lines represent the mean and ±s.e.m, respectively.
Kamiński et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Concept cells are persistently active during WM maintenance
(a,b) Two example concept cells recorded from the amygdala (a) and hippocampus (b). For 
each, the upper panel shows the PSTH (binsize 200ms, stepsize 2ms). Shaded areas 
represent ±s.e.m across trials. Middle panel marks periods of significance between preferred 
vs. not preferred stimuli (corrected for multiple comparisons using a cluster-size correction, 
see methods). Bottom panel shows raster with trials re-ordered according to condition for 
plotting purposes only. Both neurons show both visually evoked selective activity (red) and 
sustained activity (blue) during maintenance. Note how during maintenance, concept cells 
have elevated activity only when their preferred stimulus was held in memory (blue vs. 
gray). Also, note how the sustained activity (blue) was suppressed during encoding of the 
non-preferred image (i.e. encoding 3) when the preferred stimulus was already held in 
memory. (c,d) Maintenance activity of the same neurons shown in (a,b), but only for the 
subset of trials with load 2 (two items held in memory). There was no significant difference 
in activity between trials where the preferred image was shown first vs. second (encoding 1 
or 2; middle panel marks periods of significance). See Fig. 4d for a similar analysis at the 
population level. See Fig. S3 for further single-cell examples.
Kamiński et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Population analysis of MTL concept cells
(a) Average firing rate of all concept cells identified in the amygdala (n=57) in the different 
phases of the task. Shaded areas represent ±s.e.m across neurons. Gray vertical bars mark 
periods of time during which an image was on the screen. Bottom panel marks points of 
time during which the activity of the cells was significantly different between trials when a 
preferred image was in memory vs. when it was not (corrected for multiple comparisons 
based on cluster size, see methods). Colors mark different trials as indicated. For subplots a-
d, only correct trials were used. (b) Picture selectivity index (PSI) during encoding, 
maintenance, and retrieval for all identified concept cells (each data point is one neuron; data 
points are sorted according to the encoding phase of the task). Neurons in both amygdala 
and hippocampus, but not dACC, maintained their selectivity throughout the task and 
showed persistent activity. Significance was computed against chance (PSI=0). (c) PSI for 
different load conditions indicates that neurons maintained persistent activity for loads 1–3 
in amygdala and 1–2 in hippocampus, but not for dACC. (d) PSI for loads 2 and 3 as a 
function of whether the preferred image was shown first, second, or third during encoding. 
This shows that images which were shown directly before the maintenance period did not 
have greater selectivity (load 2 P=0.702; load 3 P=0.873). (e) Relationship between firing 
rate of concept cells in the MTL and behavior. The firing rate was significantly higher for 
correct compared to incorrect trials only when the preferred stimulus was held in memory. 
For (c–e), PSI and firing rate was calculated for the entire maintenance period. Throughout, 
* denotes p<0.05, ** p<0.01 and *** p<0.001 as estimated with permutation tests. Pre-SMA 
is not shown in this figure because we did not identify any concept cells in this area.
Kamiński et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Persistent activity of maintenance cells in MFC
(a) Average firing rate of all maintenance neurons (n=54) in pre-SMA for different load 
conditions and (b) for trials that ended with a fast or slow response (median split of RT). 
Shaded areas represent ±s.e.m across neurons. Gray vertical bars mark image presentation. 
Black bars indicate significance at P<0.05 of a 1×3 (top, permutation ANOVA) and 1×2 
(bottom, permutation t-test) with load as dependent variable for (a) and response time for 
(b). Multiple comparisons were corrected for using a cluster-size approach (see methods). 
(c) Percentage of all recorded cells identified as maintenance neurons in each area. Numbers 
Kamiński et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 below the area label denotes number of cells. The medial frontal areas (dACC, pre-SMA) 
contained significantly higher proportions of maintenance neurons (chi2[1]=21.1; 
P=4.353e-6) compared to areas in the MTL. (d) Percentage of maintenance neurons whose 
firing rate during maintenance differed as a function of load. Notably, in pre-SMA, 37% of 
cells decreased their firing rate as a function of load. (e) Percentage of maintenance neurons 
whose activity during maintenance differed as a function of response time. (f) The firing rate 
of maintenance neurons in dACC and amygdala differed as a function of whether stimuli 
were later remembered or forgotten. (c–e) Significance was assessed by comparing with a 
null distribution estimated using a bootstrap (see methods). For (f) we used permutation test. 
(f) Boxplot represents quartiles (25%, 75%), line is median, whiskers show range up to 1.5 
times the interquartile range, and dots above whiskers show outliers. Throughout, * denotes 
p< 0.05, ** p< 0.01 and *** p<= 0.002.
Kamiński et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Probe neurons reflect WM-retrieval related evoked activity in MFC
(a) Firing rate of an example probe neuron recorded from the pre-SMA, shown separately 
for trials where the probe was held in (IN,cyan) or not (OUT,magenta) in memory. Upper 
panel shows the PSTH (binsize 200 bins, stepsize 2 ms, shaded areas represent ±s.e.m). 
Middle panel marks points of time with a significant difference between IN and OUT trials, 
corrected for multiple comparisons using a cluster-size approach. Bottom panel shows raster 
with re-ordered trials. Gray vertical bars mark image presentation. (b) Same neuron as in (a), 
but aligned the response (button press was at 1.2 sec after image presentation) to button 
press. Note the much reduced peak response (1.44 Hz vs 0.45 Hz, permuted t-test: P=0.005). 
(c) Percentage of probe neurons in each area. Probe neurons were most prominent in pre-
SMA, followed by dACC. (d) Probe neurons elevated their firing rate only during retrieval, 
but not encoding (P=0.0002, permuted t-test). (e–f) Percentage of probe neurons in each area 
whose firing rate during probe (−800-0 ms relative to button press) differed as a function of 
IN vs. OUT (e) or as a function of button press (f). Most cells showed no difference, i.e. they 
responded equally strongly (but selectively) to the probe stimulus. (c,e,f) Significance was 
assessed based on a null distribution estimated based on permuted labels. * denotes p< 0.05, 
** p< 0.01 and *** p< 0.001.
Kamiński et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Population decoding from all recorded neurons during the maintenance period
(a) During maintenance, picture identity could be decoded from the activity of amygdala and 
hippocampus, but not dACC and pre-SMA, neurons. Decoding performance was maintained 
when only cells identified as concept cells were considered (magenta). One vs. all denotes 
average accuracy of decoders trained to distinguish between a given image and all the others 
(50% chance level). (b) Picture identity decoding using different time windows for training 
and testing. Shown is the test – retest decoding performance for load 1 trials (chance level is 
20%). (c) The activity of neurons in the pre-SMA during maintenance was predictive of how 
many items were held in memory (load, 1–3). Decoding only from maintenance neurons 
(magenta) was sufficient. (d) The activity of neurons in the pre-SMA and amygdala during 
maintenance was predictive of later response speed. * denotes significance at p< 0.05, ** p< 
0.01 and *** p<= 0.002. Markers below bars indicate significance vs. chance performance, 
estimated by randomly scrambled labels. Significance of pairwise tests was estimated by 
comparisons with a null distribution of the same differences estimated from decoders trained 
on data with randomly scrambled labels. (a,c,d) Boxplots represent quartiles (25%, 75%), 
line indicates the median, whiskers show range up to 1.5 times the interquartile range, and 
dots above whiskers show outliers.
Kamiński et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 8. Persistent activity during maintenance forms attractors
(a) Illustration of the mean trajectories in neuronal state space formed by the three demixed 
principal components (dPCs) associated with picture identity during encoding (thin line) and 
maintenance (thick line). The dot indicates the point of time 200 ms after image onset and 
the arrow indicates the direction of change. Colors mark different images (only 4 of the total 
5 are shown for clarity). (b) Different view of (a). (c) Multidimensional velocity of the 
population in the different phases of the task (shown for all load 1 trials). The velocity 
during maintenance was significantly slower compared to encoding and was not 
significantly different from that during baseline. (d) Multidimensional pairwise distance 
between all possible pairs of attractors during maintenance (load 1). The distance during 
maintenance was significantly larger compared to that during baseline (P=0.0005). Together 
(c,d) are indicative of attractors. The significance of the population-metrics shown in (c–d) 
was computed by randomly subsampling a subset of trials and neurons (see methods). (e) 
Schematic representation of the distances between the attractors (attractors are defined based 
on correct load 1 trials) for each image (small filled dots) and the average position in state 
space for image D for two behaviors: remembered (correct) and forgotten (incorrect) 
computed for all loads separately and averaged. This representation was determined based 
on multidimensional scaling of the state space (see methods). Isolines depict areas of equal 
distance from the attractor for image D. (f) The distance to the attractor (DA) was 
significantly smaller for correct compared to incorrect trials only when concept cells were 
part of the population. Note that DA <1 indicates that the trajectory is closer to the correct 
attractor than all the other attractors. (g) The distance to the attractor (DA) corresponding to 
Kamiński et al.
Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the remembered image was indicative of the speed of the response. This relationship was 
observed only for concept cells. (h) Distance from attractor predicts performance on 
individual trials. Each dot is one trial. (c,d) Boxplots represent quartiles (25%, 75%), line 
indicates the median, whiskers show range up to 1.5 times the interquartile range, and dots 
above whiskers show outliers. * denotes p< 0.05, ** p< 0.01 and *** denotes p<=0.002.
Kamiński et al.
Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
