 An automated smartphone-based diagnostic assay for point-of-
care semen analysis
Manoj Kumar Kanakasabapathy1, Magesh Sadasivam1,*, Anupriya Singh1,*, Collin Preston1, 
Prudhvi Thirumalaraju1, Maanasa Venkataraman1, Charles L. Bormann2, Mohamed 
Shehata Draz1, John C. Petrozza2, and Hadi Shafiee1,3,†
1Division of Engineering in Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02139, USA
2Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA
3Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
†Corresponding author.: hshafiee@bwh.harvard.edu.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/382/eaai7863/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Image of a micrometer scale taken with the smartphone-based semen analyzer.
Fig. S2. Images of microbeads and sperm taken with a laboratory-based microscope and the smartphone-based semen analyzer.
Fig. S3. Process flow of microchip fabrication.
Fig. S4. Smartphone application flow.
Fig. S5. Device performance for samples with concentrations below 100 million sperm/ml.
Fig. S6. Bland-Altman analysis for the measurement of sperm curvilinear (VCL) and linear velocities (VSL).
Fig. S7. Weight scale schematic and design.
Fig. S8. Weight scale performance in estimating the total count and total motile count.
Fig. S9. Bland-Altman analysis of the three phones.
Fig. S10. Overall agreement and diagnostic performance of the smartphone-based semen analyzer.
Fig. S11. Steps of operation for semen testing using the smartphone-based semen analyzer.
Table S1. Table of costs.
Table S2. Processing times for the 350 samples tested by trained and untrained users.
Table S3. Raw data of cryopreserved samples collected for measuring sperm concentration.
Table S4. Raw data collected from clinical specimens at MGH fertility clinic tested by trained users.
Table S5. Repeatability measures for the concentration parameter.
Table S6. Repeatability measures for the motility parameter.
Table S7. Diagnostic results for samples tested by trained users.
Table S8. Comparison of the performance of three different phones with the smartphone-based semen analyzer.
Table S9. Raw data collected from clinical specimens at MGH fertility clinic tested by untrained users.
Table S10. Diagnostic results for samples tested by untrained users.
Table S11. CASA triplicate measurements at MGH fertility clinic for 112 samples.
Table S12. Measurement of CASA accuracy against manual analysis.
Movie S1. Video of a semen sample recorded with the smartphone-based semen analyzer.
Competing interests: H.S. is the inventor of patent application PCT/US2016/038739 submitted by the Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital that covers home evaluation of the quality of semen samples.
Author contributions: H.S. designed the study. M.K.K., A.S., M.S., and H.S. designed the smartphone optical attachment. M.K.K., 
A.S., and H.S. designed the microfluidic device for semen sample handling. M.K.K. developed the smartphone code for sperm 
detection and monitoring. M.K.K. and C.P. developed the graphical user interface of the smartphone application. A.S., M.V., and P.T. 
performed the experiments. P.T. designed and developed the miniaturized weight scale. C.L.B. assisted in clinical validation field 
testing using patient semen samples and performed all the CASA tests. J.C.P. provided clinical advice and support in developing and 
validating the smartphone-based assay. M.K.K., A.S., and M.S.D. analyzed the data. M.K.K. and H.S. wrote the manuscript. All 
coauthors edited the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Published in final edited form as:
Sci Transl Med. 2017 March 22; 9(382): . doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aai7863.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Abstract
Male infertility affects up to 12% of the world’s male population and is linked to various 
environmental and medical conditions. Manual microscope-based testing and computer-assisted 
semen analysis (CASA) are the current standard methods to diagnose male infertility; however, 
these methods are labor-intensive, expensive, and laboratory-based. Cultural and socially 
dominated stigma against male infertility testing hinders a large number of men from getting 
tested for infertility, especially in resource-limited African countries. We describe the development 
and clinical testing of an automated smartphone-based semen analyzer designed for quantitative 
measurement of sperm concentration and motility for point-of-care male infertility screening. 
Using a total of 350 clinical semen specimens at a fertility clinic, we have shown that our assay 
can analyze an unwashed, unprocessed liquefied semen sample with <5-s mean processing time 
and provide the user a semen quality evaluation based on the World Health Organization (WHO) 
guidelines with ~98% accuracy. The work suggests that the integration of microfluidics, optical 
sensing accessories, and advances in consumer electronics, particularly smartphone capabilities, 
can make remote semen quality testing accessible to people in both developed and developing 
countries who have access to smartphones.
INTRODUCTION
More than 45 million couples worldwide are affected by infertility, and more than 40% of 
these cases include some component of male infertility. It is estimated that, on a global 
scale, up to 12% of men (>30 million) will have fertility issues during their lifetime (1). 
Sperm abnormalities are definitive markers for male infertility and have been linked to 
varicocele, hormonal imbalances, and genetic reasons such as Y-deletions (2–4), but other 
medical conditions can also influence semen quality (5). Sperm abnormalities may be 
correlated with lifestyle and environmental effects as well (6). Semen analysis is considered 
the cornerstone in male infertility evaluation, but men often feel embarrassed to go to 
urologists, and women carry the weight with regard to infertility most of the time (7, 8). 
Furthermore, health care disparities related to economic, cultural, societal, geographical, and 
religious factors are major impediments to accessing infertility care worldwide, especially in 
developing countries, making it one of the most underestimated and neglected health care 
issues (9). Here, we present a true point-of-care smartphone-based semen analyzer that is 
easy to use, rapid, automated, and inexpensive. It provides sperm concentration, motility, 
and linear and curvilinear velocities by performing an on-phone image analysis using a 
semen sample loaded into a low-cost disposable microfluidic device. Along with a modular 
wireless weight scale, it also provides semen volume, total sperm count, and total motile 
sperm count.
The critical components for determining seminal quality are sperm concentration, motility, 
and morphology. Manual microscope-based testing and computer-assisted semen analysis 
(CASA) systems are the current clinical standard methods; however, these methods are 
labor-intensive, expensive, and laboratory-based. CASA-based techniques require highly 
trained technicians for producing reliable and repeatable results. CASA techniques also 
require bulky microscope-based image analysis systems that greatly limit their point-of-care 
applications. Many fertility clinics and small hospitals are believed to not have CASA-based 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 2
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 platforms and so use a time-consuming manual method for semen analysis (10). Manual test 
results are subjective, therefore making it difficult to compare results from different clinics 
(11).
Turbidimetry (12), photon correlation spectroscopy (13), laser Doppler velocimetry (14), 
impedance-based analysis (15), lensless imaging (16), paper-based colorimetric detection 
(17), and ball lens–based imaging (18) are some of the other methods developed for semen 
analysis. However, these methods have not completely addressed all of the requirements for 
a true point-of-care, inexpensive, rapid, easy-to-use, automated diagnostic assay for semen 
analysis that can be used by an inexperienced user. Some of these methods cannot provide 
direct estimates of sperm concentration and motility, and almost all of the methods require 
expensive, bulky components for data collection and separate computational units for 
analysis of the collected data. Paper-based quantification assays may offer low-cost 
alternatives for routine semen analysis. One study made use of the color change resulting 
from the reactivity of yellow tetrazolium dye in the presence of the diaphorase flavoprotein 
enzyme present in human sperm to form purple formazan for the quantification of live and 
motile sperm concentrations (17). Although the paper-based colorimetric analysis does not 
require expensive and bulky components, it requires a desktop scanner connected to a 
computer for measuring live and motile sperm concentrations with a limit of detection of 
8.46 million live sperm/ml. Similarly, although lensless imaging techniques benefit from 
large field-of-view (FOV) imaging, they are limited by the requirement of a separate 
computational unit for relatively time-consuming and computationally intensive hologram-
based image reconstruction. The evaluation results demonstrated by the lensless imaging for 
semen analysis showed that accurate quantification of sperm concentration using this 
method is limited to 8.3 million immotile sperm/ml and 6.5 million motile sperm/ml, 
suggesting its technical limitation in evaluating undiluted, unwashed human semen samples 
with clinically relevant sperm concentrations (16). More recent work on point-of-care semen 
analysis using a ball lens–cellphone setup only magnifies the image of a semen sample 
pipetted onto polyethylene sheets that needs to be transferred to a separate monitor for 
manual analysis (18). An expert technician can then manually count the number of sperm 
per FOV and evaluate the motility of the sample. The reported sperm motility results using 
this ball lens–cellphone setup suggest that this system may be susceptible to a high 
frequency of false negatives. Therefore, this ball lens–cellphone setup is not appropriate for 
home-based semen analysis.
Current home-based male infertility assays on the market are FertilMARQ and SpermCheck, 
which use a chemical staining approach for detecting sperm-specific proteins on the sperm 
head. Trak, another U.S. Food and Drug Administration–approved product, uses centrifugal 
force to estimate sperm concentration on a microfluidic device (19). The assay requires a 
small centrifuge for analysis and classifies semen samples based on sperm concentration 
criterion of 15 million sperm/ml with >94% accuracy. However, all of these assays can only 
measure sperm concentration and not motility.
Microfluidics as an enabling biotechnology has shown great promise in the development of 
biomedical devices with broad applications in medicine and biology, such as low-cost 
biosensing assays, single-cell analysis, gene expression profiling, and DNA sequencing (20). 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 3
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The application of microfluidics for sperm analysis has garnered considerable attention over 
the past decade, and several advanced platforms have been developed, such as high-
throughput sperm genomics (21). On the other hand, advances in consumer electronics and 
particularly in mobile processing power, memory size, power consumption, and 
functionality have paved the way for their applications in health care (22). Numerous health 
care applications have stemmed from supplementing external attachments to smartphones 
(23–25), with multiple point-of-care diagnostic devices using the on-board smartphone 
camera (25–27). Integrating microfluidics, optical sensing modality, and smartphones can 
provide a powerful platform to develop affordable and easily accessible point-of-care 
fertility diagnostic assays.
Here, we present an automated smartphone-based diagnostic assay, which uses a small 
volume of semen sample (<35 μl) loaded into a disposable microfluidic device for 
measuring sperm concentration and motility (Fig. 1). We have evaluated the assay using 
fresh, unwashed, unprocessed patient semen samples by comparing the results obtained by 
the smartphone-based assay performed by trained and untrained users with the results 
obtained by a CASA-based platform. We showed that the smartphone-based platform could 
detect abnormal semen samples with regard to sperm concentration (<15 million sperm/ml) 
and motility (<40%) among samples with sperm concentrations between 0 and 408 million 
sperm/ml with 97.71% accuracy. The quantitative results on patient semen samples showed 
an excellent agreement between the smartphone-based platform and CASA using Passing-
Bablok regression analysis and Bland-Altman analysis.
RESULTS
Optical modality design for low-power testing
The hardware component of the smartphone-based platform consists of an optical 
attachment for image magnification and device positioning and a disposable microfluidic 
device for semen sample handling. The optical attachment is a lightweight (~75 g), compact 
(15.2 × 8.2 × 3.4 cm), three-dimensionally (3D) printed housing that contains an inexpensive 
white light-emitting diode (LED) used for transillumination, two aspheric lenses, a small 
and low-cost battery, an electronic switch, and wiring components to connect the electronics. 
The optical attachment was custom-designed to align its optical axis to the smartphone 
camera through a simple slide-on mechanism. The optical attachment was designed to have 
an opening to pass the microchip through for chip positioning on the attachment. The need 
for manual focusing was eliminated by positioning the microchip slot at a specific distance 
from the lens arrangement such that the sample contained in the microchip is in optimal 
focus. The device was calibrated using a micrometer scale (fig. S1), and the resolving power 
of the attachment was tested using micropolystyrene beads (3 to 10 μm), such that it was 
observed to be capable of visualizing and detecting sperm heads (fig. S2 and movie S1).
The disposable microfluidic device for semen sample handling was designed on the basis of 
a power-free mechanical pumping mechanism using a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) bulb 
for easy-to-use, on-chip semen sample loading through creating a negative pressure chamber 
at the end of the device (fig. S3 and Fig. 1). The total material cost to fabricate the 
smartphone accessory and the disposable microfluidic device was $4.45, including $3.59 for 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 4
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the optical attachment and $0.86 for the microfluidic device, in comparison to tens of 
thousands of dollars for a typical CASA-based platform (table S1).
The software (smartphone application) of the technology was designed with a user-friendly 
interface to guide the user through each step of testing (fig. S4). The test results are stored 
locally on the phone for semen quality monitoring over time. The developed assay was able 
to record sample videos at a rate of 30 frames per second (fps) with a maximum effective 
FOV of 886 × 886 pixels for the smartphone used in this study (Motorola Moto X). The 
smartphone application was able to image, automatically analyze, and report the results at an 
average time of 4.48 s (table S2).
Preclinical testing: Detecting samples with low sperm count
To evaluate the performance of the smartphone-based semen analyzer in classifying samples 
based on their concentrations at the lower range, in a double-blinded approach, we measured 
sperm concentrations for 56 cryopreserved semen samples with sperm concentrations below 
and above 100,000 sperm/ml (table S3). A separate technician performed a parallel 
microscope-based manual sperm count using a standard hemocytometer. This evaluation 
showed the ability of the assay to be used for monitoring patients who undergo vasectomy. 
Men who undergo vasectomy are required to monitor their semen quality for 3 to 6 months 
after the procedure to verify whether the procedure was successful (sperm concentration, 
≤100,000 sperm/ml) (28).
In Fig. 2A, good agreement between the two methods can be observed for the tested sperm 
concentration range. Passing-Bablok regression analysis (29) (n = 56) showed an A intercept 
value of −0.02078 with a confidence interval (CI) of −0.06186 to −0.001318 and a B slope 
value of 0.9530 with a CI of 0.7913 to 1.0032. The cusum test for linearity showed no 
significant deviation from linearity with P = 0.52. The Bland-Altman analysis (30) (n = 56) 
comparing the smartphone-based sperm count and manual microscope-based sperm count 
showed a mean bias of −0.07612 million sperm/ml with an SD of 4.270 million sperm/ml 
(Fig. 2B). The limits of agreement (LOAs) ranged from −8.446 to 8.293 million sperm/ml. 
These statistical analyses showed that the difference between manual and smartphone-based 
semen analyses increased as sperm concentration increased in the semen samples. However, 
we did not observe a fixed difference in measuring sperm concentration between the two 
methods. To establish a threshold for optimum sensitivity and specificity, we performed 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. ROC analysis plot along with a vertical 
scatterplot illustrated the sensitivity and specificity of the device (Fig. 2, C and D). The ROC 
analysis (n = 56) showed that the sperm concentration threshold value of 0.103 × 106 
sperm/ml yields an optimum sensitivity of 92.86% with a CI of 66.1 to 99.8% and a 
specificity of 100% with a CI of 91.6 to 100.0% for the smartphone-based device to identify 
semen samples with actual sperm concentrations below and above the threshold of 100,000 
sperm/ml measured by the microscope-based method. The accuracy was 98.21%, and the 
area under the curve (AUC) was 0.9930 with a binomial exact CI ranging from 0.9230 to 
1.0000.
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 5
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Clinical semen specimen testing performed by trained users
To evaluate the performance, sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of the smartphone-based 
semen analyzer, we tested 164 semen samples from patients at the Massachusetts General 
Hospital (MGH) fertility clinic and compared the results with the results obtained by a 
CASA-based platform for semen analysis (table S4). The overall repeatability of CASA for 
measuring sperm concentration and motility was above 90% (tables S5 and S6).
Passing-Bablok analysis (n = 164) was performed to evaluate the performance of the 
smartphone-based platform in calculating sperm concentration in the patient semen samples 
as compared to CASA (Fig. 3A). The A and B values were 1.5762 (CI, 0.4678 to 2.8996) 
and 0.8801 (CI, 0.8106 to 0.9588), respectively. The cusum test for linearity showed no 
significant deviation from linearity with P = 0.69. These results may suggest that there was a 
saturation point for sperm concentration measurement in the current version of the 
smartphone-based system for samples with high sperm concentrations (>100 million sperm/
ml). However, the device saturation point did not have any significant effect on the 
diagnostic performance of the smartphone-based platform to accurately detect abnormal 
semen samples with sperm concentrations below the World Health Organization (WHO) 
threshold (15 million sperm/ml) for male semen quality classification (31). Here, we also 
report the Passing-Bablok analysis for patient semen samples with sperm concentrations 
below 100 million sperm/ml (n = 156) to evaluate the performance of the smartphone-based 
semen analyzer within the clinically relevant range (fig. S5A). The A and B values were 
1.3173 (CI, 0.0990 to 2.0584) and 0.9348 (CI, 0.8604 to 1.006), respectively. The cusum test 
results showed no significant deviation from linearity with P = 0.80. A relatively better 
agreement between CASA and the smartphone-based semen analyzer was observed for 
samples with sperm concentrations below 100 million sperm/ml. We also performed 
Passing-Bablok analysis on sperm motility measurements for 164 patient semen samples 
obtained using the smartphone-based semen analyzer and CASA (Fig. 3B). The A and B 
values were 1.5157 (CI, 0 to 2.8432) and 0.9463 (CI, 0.8428 to 1.0504), respectively. The 
cusum test results showed no significant deviation from linearity with P = 0.69.
We performed Bland-Altman analysis (n = 164) to evaluate sperm concentration results 
obtained by the smartphone-based semen analyzer as compared to CASA (Fig. 3C). The 
mean bias was 5.068 million sperm/ml with an SD of 31.00 million sperm/ml (LOA, −55.68 
to 65.82 million sperm/ml). We also performed Bland-Altman analysis for samples with 
sperm concentrations below 100 million sperm/ml (fig. S5B; n = 156). The mean bias was 
0.4309 million sperm/ml with an SD of 10.90 million sperm/ml (LOA, −20.93 to 21.79 
million sperm/ml). Figure 3D shows the Bland-Altman analysis for sperm motility 
measurements (n = 164) using the smartphone-based semen analyzer and CASA. The mean 
bias was −0.3232% with an SD of 10.98% (LOA, −21.84% to 21.20%). Collectively, 
Passing-Bablok and Bland-Altman analyses showed that the difference between CASA and 
the smartphone-based device in measuring sperm concentration and motility increased as 
sperm concentration and motility increased in the samples. These differences, however, did 
not have a significant effect on the ability of the smartphone-based semen analyzer to 
identify abnormal semen samples.
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 6
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We evaluated the performance of the smartphone-based device to detect semen samples with 
sperm concentrations below and above the WHO threshold of 15 million sperm/ml (Fig. 3E; 
n = 164) (31). The sensitivity and specificity of the smartphone-based device to detect 
abnormal semen samples based on sperm concentration criterion were 91.30% (CI, 79.21 to 
97.58%) and 97.46% (CI, 92.75 to 99.47%), respectively, and the accuracy was 95.73%. The 
observed AUC was 0.94 (binomial exact CI, 0.90 to 0.97). The performance of the 
smartphone-based device to detect abnormal semen samples with sperm motility below the 
WHO threshold of 40% (31) was also evaluated (Fig. 3F; n = 164). The sensitivity and 
specificity of the device based on sperm motility criterion were 99.29% (CI, 96.11 to 
99.98%) and 86.96% (CI, 66.41 to 97.22%), respectively, and the accuracy was 97.56%. The 
observed AUC was 0.93 (binomial exact CI, 0.88 to 0.96). We also evaluated the sensitivity, 
specificity, and accuracy of the smartphone-based semen analyzer as a qualitative test to 
detect abnormal semen samples when both sperm concentration (<15 million sperm/ml) and 
sperm motility (<40%) criteria were used together for semen analysis (n = 164) (table S7). 
These results showed that the sensitivity and specificity of the smartphone-based semen 
analyzer to detect abnormal semen samples using both sperm concentration and motility 
parameters were 99.31% (CI, 96.22 to 99.98%) and 89.47% (CI, 66.86 to 98.70%), 
respectively, with an accuracy of 98.17%. The observed AUC was 0.94 (binomial exact CI, 
0.90 to 0.97).
The smartphone-based semen analyzer was able to rapidly and accurately calculate the 
average linear and curvilinear velocities of sperm in an undiluted, unwashed semen sample. 
Bland-Altman analyses (n = 24) were performed to evaluate the smartphone-based device 
compared to CASA and manual microscope-based methods for calculating the sperm linear 
and curvilinear velocities (fig. S6 and table S4). These results suggest high comparability of 
the smartphone-based device with CASA for sperm velocity measurement. The smartphone-
based semen analyzer also has the potential to measure total sperm count and total motile 
sperm count based on the WHO guidelines (31). We developed a separate compact custom-
designed modular wireless weight scale for semen sample volume estimation (fig. S7). The 
performance of the weight scale module was first evaluated by comparing its results with the 
results obtained by a conventional weighing scale (Ohaus, EP64 Explorer Pro). An excellent 
agreement with a Pearson’s correlation coefficient of r = 1 (n = 27) was observed between 
the two scales (fig. S8A). Our preliminary experimental results showed a strong correlation 
between the smartphone-based semen analyzer and CASA in measuring the total sperm 
count (r = 0.9089) and total motile sperm count (r = 0.9294) (fig. S8, B and C; n = 14).
The current version of the smartphone-based semen analyzer uses the smartphone camera 
for sample imaging and can be used with different cellphones with minor modifications in 
the hardware optical attachment depending on the physical dimensions of the cellphone. To 
evaluate the performance of our system, we used three different smart-phones (Moto X, 
Moto G4, and LG G4) for semen analysis (fig. S9 and table S8). No changes were made to 
manually tune the optical focus. Fine optical focus was achieved and controlled by the 
smartphone’s autofocusing ability. The Bland-Altman analysis for sperm concentration 
measurements using (i) Moto X and Moto G4 smartphones (fig. S9A) and (ii) Moto X and 
LG G4 smartphones (fig. S9B) was performed for 13 unprocessed semen samples. The mean 
bias between Moto X and Moto G4 smartphones was 0.7692 million sperm/ml with an SD 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 7
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of 3.166 million sperm/ml, and the LOA ranged from −5.437 million to 6.975 million 
sperm/ml. The mean bias between Moto X and LG G4 smartphones was 4.462 million 
sperm/ml with an SD of 6.851 million sperm/ml, and the LOA ranged from −8.966 million 
to 17.89 million sperm/ml. We also performed Bland-Altman analysis for sperm motility 
measurements for the 13 semen samples using (i) Moto X and Moto G4 smartphones (fig. 
S9C) and (ii) Moto X and LG G4 smartphones (fig. S9D). The mean bias between Moto X 
and Moto G4 smartphones was 0.2308% with an SD of 2.833%, and the LOA ranged from 
−5.322 to 5.783%. The mean bias between Moto X and LG G4 smartphones was 0.7692% 
with an SD of 6.954%, and the LOA ranged from −12.86 to 14.40%. These results showed 
that there was no difference between the three smartphones in identifying undiluted, 
unwashed abnormal semen samples based on the WHO criteria on sperm concentration and 
motility. Minor differences were observed in terms of quantitative measurements. The 
sample processing time was also dependent on the smartphone’s processing power (table 
S8).
Clinical semen specimen testing performed by untrained users
To evaluate the usability and simplicity of the smartphone-based male infertility screening 
device, we recruited untrained users and performed a double-blinded evaluation of semen 
analysis using the smartphone-based platform and CASA (Fig. 4 and table S9). None of the 
developers of the smartphone-based semen analyzer were present during the double-blinded 
usability experiments.
A Passing-Bablok analysis (n = 186) was performed to evaluate the performance of the 
smartphone-based semen analyzer in calculating sperm concentrations in semen samples 
tested by the untrained users as compared to CASA (Fig. 4A). The A and B values were 0 
(CI, −2.2148 to 1.1984) and 0.8555 (CI, 0.7870 to 0.9235), respectively. The cusum test 
results showed no significant deviation from linearity with P = 0.27. These results showed 
that the difference between CASA and smartphone-based device in measuring sperm 
concentration increased with an increase in sperm concentration of the semen samples. 
Figure 4B shows a Passing-Bablok analysis of sperm motility measurements for 186 patient 
semen samples obtained using the smartphone-based device and CASA. The A and B values 
were 0.05 (CI, 0 to 1.2745) and 0.9 (CI, 0.8410 to 0.9737), respectively. The cusum test 
results showed no significant deviation from linearity with P = 0.31. There was an increase 
in the difference between CASA and the smartphone-based system in measuring sperm 
motility with an increase in the motility of the semen samples. We did not observe a fixed 
difference between CASA and the smartphone-based system in measuring sperm 
concentration and motility of the semen samples.
Through a Bland-Altman analysis, we observed that the mean bias in measuring the sperm 
concentration of the samples using the smartphone-based device and CASA was 6.657 
million sperm/ml with an SD of 16.65 million sperm/ml (LOA, −25.98 to 39.29 million 
sperm/ml) (Fig. 4C; n = 186). We also performed Bland-Altman analysis for sperm motility 
measurements of the 186 patient samples measured using the smartphone-based device and 
CASA (Fig. 4D). The mean bias was −0.2450% with an SD of 10.28% (LOA, −20.40 to 
19.91%). Collectively, Passing-Bablok and Bland-Altman analyses results showed that there 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 8
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were no fixed differences between CASA and the smartphone-based semen analyzer in 
measuring sperm concentration and motility. However, the difference between the two 
systems in measuring sperm concentration and motility increased as sperm concentration 
and motility of the semen samples increased.
The performance of the smartphone-based device as a qualitative assay to detect semen 
samples with sperm concentrations below and above the WHO threshold of 15 million 
sperm/ml was evaluated (Fig. 4E; n = 186). The sensitivity and specificity of the 
smartphone-based device to identify abnormal semen samples based on sperm concentration 
criterion were 95.83% (CI, 85.75 to 99.49%) and 97.10% (CI, 92.74 to 99.20%), 
respectively, and the accuracy was 96.77%. The observed AUC was 0.96 (binomial exact CI, 
0.93 to 0.99). The sensitivity and specificity of the smartphone-based device identifying 
abnormal semen samples based on sperm motility criterion were 98.04% (CI, 94.38 to 
99.59%) and 93.94% (CI, 79.77 to 99.26%), respectively, and the accuracy was 97.31% (Fig. 
4F; n = 186). The observed AUC was 0.96 (binomial exact CI, 0.92 to 0.98). We also 
evaluated the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of the smartphone-based semen analyzer 
as a qualitative test to detect abnormal semen samples when both sperm concentration (<15 
million sperm/ml) and sperm motility (<40%) were used together for semen analysis (table 
S10; n = 186). These results showed that the sensitivity and specificity of the smartphone-
based semen analyzer to detect abnormal semen samples using both sperm concentration 
and motility parameters were 98.15% (CI, 94.68 to 99.62%) and 91.67% (CI, 73.00 to 
98.97%), respectively, with an accuracy of 97.31% (table S10; n = 186). The observed AUC 
was 0.95 (binomial exact CI, 0.91 to 0.98).
Comparison of the results obtained by the trained and untrained users
To evaluate the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of the smartphone-based semen 
analyzer, we combined all the results obtained by untrained and trained study participants 
using 350 patient semen samples. The results obtained by the smartphone-based semen 
analyzer were compared with the results obtained by CASA. We performed Passing-Bablok 
analysis (n = 350) to evaluate the performance of the smartphone-based semen analyzer in 
calculating sperm concentration in patient semen samples as compared to CASA (fig. 
S10A). The A intercept value was 0.8146 with a CI of 0.0041 to 1.9313, and the B slope 
value was 0.8495 with CI ranging from 0.8039 to 0.8975. The cusum test results showed no 
significant deviation from linearity with P = 0.80. Figure S10B shows a Passing-Bablok 
analysis of sperm motility measurements for 350 patient semen samples obtained using the 
smartphone-based semen analyzer and CASA. The A intercept value was 0.4171 with a CI 
of 0 to 1.5431, and the B slope value was 0.9095 with CI ranging from 0.8596 to 0.9700. 
The cusum test results showed no significant deviation from linearity with P = 0.16.
We also performed Bland-Altman analysis (n = 350) to evaluate sperm concentration results 
obtained by the smartphone-based semen analyzer as compared to CASA (fig. S10C). The 
mean bias was 5.912 million sperm/ml with an SD of 24.42 million sperm/ml, and the LOA 
ranged from −41.95 to 53.77 million sperm/ml. Figure S10D shows the Bland-Altman 
analysis for sperm motility measurements of the 350 patient semen samples measured using 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 9
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the smartphone-based semen analyzer and CASA. The mean bias was 0.5% with an SD of 
10.27%, and the LOA ranged from −19.63% to 20.64%.
Overall, the smartphone-based semen analyzer performed well when operated by trained and 
untrained users in measuring sperm concentration and motility (Table 1 and fig. S10, E and 
F; n = 350). The sensitivity and specificity of the smartphone-based semen analyzer in 
detecting abnormal semen samples based on the WHO criterion for sperm concentration 
were 93.62% (CI, 86.62 to 97.62%) and 97.27% (CI, 94.45 to 98.89%), respectively, and the 
accuracy was 96.29%. The observed AUC was 0.95 (binomial exact CI, 0.93 to 0.97). We 
also evaluated the performance of the smartphone-based semen analyzer in identifying 
abnormal semen samples based on sperm motility criterion (motility, <40%) (fig. S10F; n = 
350). The sensitivity and specificity of the smartphone-based semen analyzer based on the 
sperm motility criterion were 98.64% (CI, 96.55 to 99.63%) and 91.07% (CI, 80.38 to 
97.04%), respectively, and the accuracy was 97.43%. The observed AUC was 0.95 (binomial 
exact CI, 0.92 to 0.97). The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of the smartphone-based 
semen analyzer as a qualitative test to detect abnormal semen samples with sperm 
concentrations of less than 15 million sperm/ml or sperm motilities of less than 40% were 
98.70% (CI, 96.70 to 99.64%), 90.70% (CI, 77.86 to 97.41%), and 97.71%, respectively. 
The observed AUC was 0.95 (binomial exact CI, 0.92 to 0.97). Collectively, Passing-Bablok 
and Bland-Altman analyses on the results obtained from both trained and untrained users 
showed that there were no fixed differences between CASA and the smartphone-based 
semen analyzer in measuring sperm concentration and motility. However, the difference 
between the two systems in measuring sperm concentration and motility increased with an 
increase in sperm concentration and motility of the semen samples. These combined results 
showed that the smartphone-based semen analyzer performed well in qualitatively 
identifying abnormal semen samples based on the WHO thresholds on sperm concentration 
(<15 million sperm/ml) and sperm motility (<40%).
To further evaluate the performance of the smartphone-based device, we compared the 
results obtained by trained and untrained users using the Holm-Sidak statistical analysis 
(Fig. 5). Figure 5A compares the frequency of correctly classifying patient semen samples 
based on the WHO guidelines on sperm concentration (below and above 15 million 
sperm/ml) when trained and untrained users performed the semen analysis. No statistical 
significance was observed for identifying semen samples with sperm concentration below 
the WHO criterion (15 million sperm/ml) (P = 0.43) and samples with sperm concentrations 
above the WHO threshold (P = 0.88) (Fig. 5A). Similarly, there was no statistically 
significant difference between the sample classification results obtained by trained and 
untrained users for correctly classifying semen samples with sperm motility below (P = 
0.45) and above (P = 0.41) the WHO threshold (40% motility) (Fig. 5B). We measured the 
frequency of correctness in semen sample classification by trained and untrained users when 
both sperm concentration and motility were considered for the detection of abnormal semen 
samples (Fig. 5C). No statistical significance was observed for identifying abnormal (sperm 
concentration of <15 million/ml or motility of <40%) (P = 0.47) and normal (sperm 
concentration of >15 million/ml and motility of >40%) (P = 0.83) semen samples when 
trained and untrained users performed the tests.
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 10
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The mean error score of both user groups were also tested (Fig. 5D). There was not a 
statistically significant difference between the error scores estimated for the trained and 
untrained users. The two groups were tested for statistically significant difference with the 
Holm-Sidak method of analysis. No statistically significant difference was observed in the 
error scores of motility (P = 0.63), concentration (P = 0.44), and combined sperm 
concentration and motility results (P = 0.46) between the two groups. The smartphone-based 
semen analyzer did not show any statistically significant difference when used by trained or 
untrained users.
Here, we have tested 350 unprocessed semen samples, 95 of which had sperm 
concentrations of less than 15 million sperm/ml based on CASA results and 88 of which 
were correctly identified by our system. Furthermore, of the 295 samples that had sperm 
motilities of less than 40% based on CASA, 290 were correctly classified as abnormal 
semen samples using the smartphone-based system. Considering both sperm concentration 
and motility criteria, 307 semen samples were categorized as abnormal (sperm concentration 
of <15 million sperm/ml or motility of <40%) using CASA, and 303 of these samples were 
identified correctly by the smartphone-based semen analyzer.
DISCUSSION
We have demonstrated that the smartphone-based semen analyzer can accurately measure 
sperm concentration, motility, total sperm count, total motile sperm count, and linear and 
curvilinear velocities using a small volume (<35 μl) of an unwashed, unprocessed semen 
sample loaded into a disposable microchip. We developed an automated smartphone-based 
diagnostic assay with the potential to make male fertility testing as accessible, easy, fast, and 
private as pregnancy tests.
Our technology evaluation results using preclinical cryopreserved and fresh, undiluted, 
unprocessed clinical patient semen samples showed that the smartphone-based semen 
analyzer performed well compared to the conventional method of semen analysis, which is 
the manual microscope-based analysis method. Device variability, coefficient of variation 
(CV), in preclinical samples was 4.47%. The optical attachment and the smartphone 
application were designed such that minimal input from an untrained user was required. The 
optical focus and lighting intensity were optimized and fixed in the smartphone accessory to 
eliminate the need for manual adjustment by the user and to reduce the errors in image 
processing. Professional training and routine quality control exercises are critical to 
minimize errors in CASA-based and manual microscope-based semen analysis methods. 
Our easy-to-use platform eliminates the need for such exercises and may aid in the 
standardization of semen tests because variability in semen analysis is still relatively high 
(11). Furthermore, infertility in resource-limited settings is also a global issue, and the 
ability to provide routine, point-of-care, low-cost, reliable semen analysis testing is needed 
(9). CASA systems are relatively expensive, and even in the United States, many clinics and 
fertility centers use manual semen analysis methods, resulting in poor standardization (10, 
32). Our system, with its low manufacturing costs (<$5 material cost), can potentially 
introduce a better standardization of care in regions of the world that require it the most.
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 11
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The smartphone-based semen analyzer may also be used for home-based monitoring of men 
who undergo vasectomy. It is estimated that worldwide more than 33 million couples prefer 
to perform vasectomy as a safer, less expensive, and simpler method compared to female 
sterilization for contraception (33). There are more than 20 million men who underwent 
vasectomy in China and India alone (34). The number of vasectomy procedures per year in 
the United States has been estimated to be between 175,000 and 550,000 procedures per 
year (35, 36). Although vasectomy failure is lower than 1%, it is highly recommended that 
men perform a follow-up semen analysis to confirm the success of the procedure. As per 
guidelines, sperm concentration in semen of patients should be less than 100,000 sperm/ml 
between 8 and 16 weeks after the vasectomy procedure (28). It has been reported that patient 
compliance for postvasectomy follow-up semen analysis has been extremely poor (37). The 
smartphone-based semen analyzer has the potential to improve patient compliance for 
postvasectomy semen analysis by providing a rapid, easy-to-use, affordable, and private 
method for accurate sperm concentration and motility measurement. Our results 
demonstrated the ability of the smartphone-based semen analyzer to accurately classify 
semen samples with sperm counts below and above the 100,000 sperm/ml threshold set for 
postvasectomy monitoring.
One of the limitations of automated optical-based semen analyzers is measuring sperm 
concentration with high accuracy in samples with higher-than-average numbers of nonsperm 
cells such as white blood cells. We have designed our sperm detection and tracking 
algorithm to perform size-based differentiation of sperm heads from other larger cells such 
as white blood cells. However, although our single parameter–based detection algorithm is 
effective at reducing processing time, it is prone to misidentifications when nonsperm cells 
or debris of similar size to the sperm head are present in the FOV of the smartphone-based 
semen analyzer. This limitation may be overcome with a more computationally intensive set 
of image processing algorithms at the expense of processing time or with relatively more 
expensive optical sensing–based hardware. Similarly, our current version of the smartphone-
based semen analyzer cannot evaluate sperm morphology; however, its ability to accurately 
identify abnormal semen samples based on sperm concentration and motility can potentially 
shift the paradigm in male infertility management in both developed and developing 
countries.
A rapid, point-of-care diagnostic assay for semen analysis can also have an important 
application in animal breeding. Currently, animal breeders immediately transfer collected 
semen samples to an equipped laboratory for semen analysis through a sample transfer 
process with a controlled exposure to environmental effects such as cold, excessive heat, 
light, shock, and physical trauma. The sample container must be prewarmed at 37° or 38°C 
and kept at this temperature during the transfer. Additionally, sperm maturation and 
development can take a few weeks (~65 days for stallions, depending on the species) (38). If 
any unintended event/disease occurs for the male animal during the sperm maturation 
process, the previously produced and stored mature sperm may not be negatively affected, 
and only sperm being produced would be harmed. Therefore, a regular point-of-care semen 
analysis could have an important role in the efficient and cost-effective management of 
animal breeding. Considering the differences between human semen and animal semen in 
terms of sperm concentration, motility, and sample volume, the current version of the 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 12
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 smartphone-based semen analyzer would need to be augmented for applications in animal 
breeding. We envision that animal semen sample dilution would be required before semen 
analysis testing using the current version of the smartphone-based platform.
The advances in microtechnologies and the surge in consumer electronics have paved a solid 
foundation for developing mobile health (mhealth) technologies with the potential to 
transform the current paradigm in global health. The work reported here is an example of 
how smartphones can be seamlessly integrated with hardware, software, and microfluidics to 
develop a point-of-care diagnostic device to address clinical gaps in male infertility 
management.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The goal of this study was to develop and evaluate a smartphone-based diagnostic assay for 
point-of-care semen analysis through accurate sperm concentration and motility 
measurement using a small undiluted, unprocessed semen sample loaded into a disposable 
microchip. We had initially set a target of ~50 samples based on a power analysis for AUC 
with a null hypothesis value of 50%, an estimated AUC value of 80%, an α value of 0.05, 
and a power of 95. The disease prevalence was set at 50% because those visiting the clinic 
have ~50% chance of showing signs of infertility. We further increased the number of 
samples to more than 150 to achieve greater clinical relevance with more statistical power. 
We had originally set a target of ~120 samples to be tested by untrained users. This sample 
size was increased to 186 to collect data from patient samples with a broad range of sperm 
concentrations and motilities below and above the WHO criteria. Initially, we wanted to 
evaluate the ability of the smartphone-based semen analyzer to accurately detect semen 
samples with sperm concentrations below and above 100,000 sperm/ml, a threshold criterion 
for postvasectomy failure. In an attempt to prepare semen samples with sperm 
concentrations as low as <100,000 sperm/ml, we prepared 61 serially diluted cryopreserved 
semen samples. Three repeated measurements were made for each sample to measure the 
coefficient of variability. Five cryopreserved semen samples were excluded from this study 
because of microfluidic device contamination by debris in the channels, which caused false 
detection. Precautionary methods were in place when chips were fabricated for the clinical 
assessment by taking steps to fabricate these devices in a sterile environment.
For the assessment of infertility diagnosis based on sperm concentration and motility, we 
carried out our evaluation using 164 undiluted, unprocessed, fresh semen samples received 
from patients at the MGH fertility clinic, and the smartphone-based results were compared 
with the results calculated by a CASA-based platform (Hamilton Thorne, HTM-CEROS II). 
Ten untrained users who were completely unfamiliar with the smartphone-based semen 
analyzer were recruited to perform semen analysis tests with 186 unwashed, undiluted 
semen samples. The untrained users ranged from administrative staff with no background in 
science to clinical nurses. The users were between 25 and 45 years old. The results obtained 
by the untrained users were compared with the results obtained by CASA. An instruction 
sheet was provided to the users, and the entire set of experiments was carried out in a 
double-blinded manner. The original developers of the device were not present during the 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 13
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 device usability testing with the untrained users. No patient selection criteria were in place 
for the trained user study. For the untrained user study, we collected data from patient 
samples with a broad range of sperm concentrations and motilities below and above the 
WHO criterion of 15 million sperm/ml. No samples were excluded from this clinical 
evaluation study. During this study, we have also evaluated the performance of a modular 
weight scale attachment in estimating the total sperm count and total motile sperm count.
Optical attachment
The optical attachment, which housed a pair of lenses obtained from pick-up heads of a 
DVD and CD drive, a small battery, and an LED, was 3D printed using Ultimaker 2 
Extended with Ultimaker PLA (poly-lactic acid) as the printing material. The lenses were 
positioned inside the optical attachment aligned to the optical axis of the smartphone’s rear 
camera. The 3D model of the attachment was designed in SolidWorks for a Moto X 
smartphone (Motorola, XT1575). Sample fine focus was achieved through the smartphone’s 
autofocus capability. A broadband white LED (Microtivity, IL041) was used for 
transillumination of the sample powered by a 3-V battery (Panasonic, CR1620).
Microchip design
The microfluidic devices were fabricated using plain glass slides (VWR, 48300-025), 
double-sided adhesives (DSAs) (30 μm; 3M, 82603), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) 
(3.175 mm; McMaster-Carr, 8560K239), and PDMS (Dow Corning, Sylgard 184). PMMA 
and DSA sheets were cut using a laser cutter (Universal Laser Systems, VLS 2.30). The 
rubber bulb used in the microfluidic devices for electric-free on-chip sample loading was 
made out of PDMS on a 3D printed master mold composed of acrylonitrile butadiene 
styrene (Ultimaker). The bulb was attached to PMMA with PDMS. The PMMA was 
attached to the microchip using DSA. Before use, the inlet was covered with a latex fabric 
for hermetic sealing and was bonded to the microchip using super glue (3M, 
B004OKKWGE), and a small incision was made on the PDMS bulb. An extender cap, 
holding a plastic microhematocrit capillary tube (Fisherbrand, 22-315791) as an extender 
capillary tip, was 3D printed with PLA. The extender cap was placed at the inlet of the 
microfluidic device.
Smartphone application
Once the microchip containing the sample is loaded into the attachment, the smartphone 
application records 1-s duration videos (30 fps) and processes each frame to obtain the 
various semen parameters. The image processing, sperm detection and tracking, and data 
analysis were all performed on-phone, which was running on Android 6.0. A custom 
Android application was developed using Android Studio. We used the sdk and ndk libraries 
provided with the Android development tools as well as other libraries including OpenCV 
(version 2.4.8) and JavaCV (version 1.1) for the image processing calculations in the 
smartphone application. The application was designed to process data obtained by the 
smartphone camera using the optical attachment. The analysis was performed in two steps: 
(i) processing individual frames of the recorded video and extracting coordinates of the 
sperm observed in the FOV and (ii) tracking the observed positions of sperm across frames 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 14
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 by mapping their paths. We used an adaptive thresholding algorithm as part of the sperm 
detection method for sperm concentration and motility analysis.
Sample preparation and preclinical testing
Cryopreserved semen samples were obtained from California Cryobank and New England 
Cryobank and were stored in liquid nitrogen. The samples were thawed before use by 
placing them in an incubator at 37°C for 14 min. The samples were serially diluted with 
phosphate-buffered saline at multiple ratios. The samples were loaded into the microchips 
and were tested using the smartphone-based semen analyzer. In parallel, 10 μl of each 
sample was loaded into a Neubauer hemocytometer (Sigma, Z359629) and was counted 
under a phase-contrast optical microscope (Zeiss, Observer D1). At least four different 
FOVs were analyzed for each sample, and three repeated measurements were made using 
the smartphone application.
Assessment with patients’ semen samples (trained and untrained users)
Specimens analyzed were from patients seeking treatment from the Vincent Andrology 
laboratory at the MGH. The use of the discarded specimens was approved by the Human 
Studies Institutional Review Boards of the MGH. Semen samples were obtained on-site by 
masturbation and collected into a sterile plastic container. This study was performed with 
compliance to previously published guidelines (31, 39). Men were instructed to abstain from 
ejaculation for at least 48 hours before the sample was produced. Although the sample 
liquefaction can be done at room temperature according to the WHO fifth edition guidelines 
(31), we liquefied the samples used for device evaluation by trained users at 37°C for 20 min 
before analysis. Semen sample volume was calculated by measuring the sample weight 
using a standard laboratory-based weight scale. To measure both sperm concentration and 
motility, 6 μl of semen from each sample was placed into a prewarmed (37°C) Leja counting 
chamber (Hamilton Thorne) and analyzed using a CASA system (HTM-CEROS II). A 
minimum of 200 sperm cells from at least four different FOVs were analyzed from each 
specimen. If the sperm concentrations exceeded 100 million sperm/ml, standard dilutions 
(1:10 or 1:20) were performed, and the samples were reanalyzed using CASA to obtain 
accurate measurements. Similarly, samples with sperm concentrations less than 5 million 
sperm/ml were verified with a manual assessment before the final CASA output was 
recorded. Patient specimens were loaded into the microchip and tested using the 
smartphone-based semen analyzer in parallel to the CASA system. Single measurements 
were made for each sample tested with the smartphone-based setup regardless of the 
concentration.
To further evaluate the performance and ease of use of the smartphone-based semen 
analyzer, untrained users (n = 10) who were completely unfamiliar with the platform were 
recruited at the MGH fertility clinic to perform 186 semen analysis tests. The participants 
were only given the device, disposables, and a simple instruction (fig. S11) to perform the 
tests. The developers of the smartphone-based semen analyzer were not present at the site 
during the double-blinded semen analysis tests by untrained users. Triplicate CASA 
measurement results on 112 semen samples were used for CASA repeatability calculations 
(tables S5, S6, and S11). To evaluate the reliability of our CASA system for measuring 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 15
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sperm concentration, we tested and analyzed 1067 semen samples using both CASA and 
manual analysis before the initiation of the study. Similarly, we tested 1243 samples to 
evaluate the accuracy of the CASA system for motility measurement in comparison to 
manual analysis. The mean % variations between the two methods are reported in table S12.
Statistical analysis
Passing-Bablok regression analysis (29), coefficient of variation, and ROC analysis were 
performed using MedCalc 14.8.1. Bland-Altman analysis (30) was performed using 
GraphPad Prism version 6. Sample size estimation was performed using MedCalc. Stata 13 
was also used to calculate the classification accuracy reported for sensitivity and specificity 
of the device.
Mean error was calculated by assigning weights for each of the classifications as obtained by 
both trained and untrained user groups. If the device classified the tested samples correctly 
relative to the CASA-based method, a score of 0 was assigned. Scores of 1 and 2 were 
assigned for false positives and false negatives, respectively. Arithmetic mean scores were 
obtained for sperm concentration, sperm motility, and overall results for both trained users 
and untrained users. Statistical significance was determined using t tests for multiple 
comparisons with Holm-Sidak corrections and 5% α.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank J. E. Chavarro, M. N. Kathrins, R. Singh, A. Vasan, and S. Kallakuri for fruitful discussions 
and their help in microchip fabrications. Funding: This work is supported by the Brigham Research Institute Pilot 
Grant, the Bright Futures Prize, the Innovation Evergreen Fund, and the Fund to Sustain Research Excellence 
(Brigham Research Institute, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School), NIH grants 
(1R01AI118502 and P30ES000002), a Harvard National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences Grant (Harvard 
T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Harvard Center for Environmental Health), and an American Society of 
Reproductive Medicine Award (American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology, American College of Obstetricians 
and Gynecologists, American Society for Reproductive Medicine, and Society for Reproductive Endocrinology and 
Infertility).
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. Agarwal A, Mulgund A, Hamada A, Chyatte MR. A unique view on male infertility around the 
globe. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2015; 13:37. [PubMed: 25928197] 
2. Diamond DA, Zurakowski D, Bauer SB, Borer JG, Peters CA, Cilento BG Jr, Paltiel HJ, Rosoklija I, 
Retik AB. Relationship of varicocele grade and testicular hypotrophy to semen parameters in 
adolescents. J Urol. 2007; 178:1584–1588. [PubMed: 17707046] 
3. de Kretser DM. Endocrinology of male infertility. Br Med Bull. 1979; 35:187–192. [PubMed: 
387166] 
4. Reijo R, Lee TY, Salo P, Alagappan R, Brown LGJ, Rosenberg M, Rozen S, Jaffe T, Straus D, 
Hovatta O, de la Chapelle A, Silber S, Page DC. Diverse spermatogenic defects in humans caused 
by Y chromosome deletions encompassing a novel RNA-binding protein gene. Nat Genet. 1995; 
10:383–393. [PubMed: 7670487] 
5. Eisenberg ML, Li S, Behr B, Pera RR, Cullen MR. Relationship between semen production and 
medical comorbidity. Fertil Steril. 2015; 103:66–71. [PubMed: 25497466] 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 16
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 6. Skakkebaek NE, Rajpert-De Meyts E, Buck Louis GM, Toppari J, Andersson A-M, Eisenberg ML, 
Jensen TK, Jørgensen N, Swan SH, Sapra KJ, Ziebe S, Priskorn L, Juul A. Male reproductive 
disorders and fertility trends: Influences of environment and genetic susceptibility. Physiol Rev. 
2016; 96:55–97. [PubMed: 26582516] 
7. Carmeli YS, Birenbaum-Carmeli D. The predicament of masculinity: Towards understanding the 
male’s experience of infertility treatments. Sex Roles. 1994; 30:663–677.
8. Inhorn MC. Masturbation semen collection and men’s IVF experiences: Anxieties in the Muslim 
world. Body Soc. 2007; 13:37–53.
9. Ombelet W. Global access to infertility care in developing countries: A case of human rights equity 
and social justice. Facts Views Vis Obgyn. 2011; 3:257–266. [PubMed: 24753875] 
10. Amann RP, Katz DF. Reflections on CASA after 25 years. J Androl. 2004; 25:317–325. [PubMed: 
15064305] 
11. Punjabi U, Wyns C, Mahmoud A, Vernelen K, China B, Verheyen G. Fifteen years of Belgian 
experience with external quality assessment of semen analysis. Andrology. 2016; 4:1084–1093. 
[PubMed: 27410398] 
12. Halangk W, Bohnensack R. Quantification of sperm motility by a turbidimetric assay. Correlation 
to cellular respiration. Biomed Biochim Acta. 1986; 45:331–341. [PubMed: 2939829] 
13. Frost J, Cummins HZ. Motility assay of human sperm by photon correlation spectroscopy. Science. 
1981; 212:1520–1522. [PubMed: 7233239] 
14. Earnshaw JC, Munroe G, Thompson W, Traub AI. Automated laser light scattering system for 
assessment of sperm motility. Med Biol Eng Comput. 1985; 23:263–268. [PubMed: 4021572] 
15. Segerink LI, Sprenkels AJ, ter Braak PM, Vermes I, van den Berg A. On-chip determination of 
spermatozoa concentration using electrical impedance measurements. Lab Chip. 2010; 10:1018–
1024. [PubMed: 20358109] 
16. Su TW, Erlinger A, Tseng D, Ozcan A. Compact and light-weight automated semen analysis 
platform using lensfree on-chip microscopy. Anal Chem. 2010; 82:8307–8312. [PubMed: 
20836503] 
17. Nosrati R, Gong MM, San Gabriel MC, Pedraza CE, Zini A, Sinton D. Paper-based quantification 
of male fertility potential. Clin Chem. 2016; 62:458–465. [PubMed: 26747445] 
18. Kobori Y, Pfanner P, Prins GS, Niederberger C. Novel device for male infertility screening with 
single-ball lens microscope and smartphone. Fertil Steril. 2016; 106:574–578. [PubMed: 
27336208] 
19. Schaff UY, Fredriksen LL, Epperson JG, Quebral TR, Naab S, Sarno MJ, Eisenberg ML, Sommer 
GJ. Novel centrifugal technology for measuring sperm concentration in the home. Fertil Steril. 
2016; 107:358–364.e4. [PubMed: 27887718] 
20. Weibel DB, Whitesides GM. Applications of microfluidics in chemical biology. Curr Opin Chem 
Biol. 2006; 10:584–591. [PubMed: 17056296] 
21. Wang J, Fan HC, Behr B, Quake SR. Genome-wide single-cell analysis of recombination activity 
and de novo mutation rates in human sperm. Cell. 2012; 150:402–412. [PubMed: 22817899] 
22. Steinhubl SR, Muse ED, Topol EJ. The emerging field of mobile health. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 
7:283rv283.
23. Laksanasopin T, Guo TW, Nayak S, Sridhara AA, Xie S, Olowookere OO, Cadinu P, Meng F, Chee 
NH, Kim J, Chin CD, Munyazesa E, Mugwaneza P, Rai AJ, Mugisha V, Castro AR, Steinmiller D, 
Linder V, Justman JE, Nsanzimana S, Sia SK. A smartphone dongle for diagnosis of infectious 
diseases at the point of care. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 7:273re271.
24. Wojtczak J, Bonadonna P. Pocket mobile smartphone system for the point-of-care submandibular 
ultrasonography. Am J Emerg Med. 2013; 31:573–577. [PubMed: 23159431] 
25. D’Ambrosio MV, Bakalar M, Bennuru S, Reber C, Skandarajah A, Nilsson L, Switz N, Kamgno J, 
Pion S, Boussinesq M, Nutman TB, Fletcher DA. Point-of-care quantification of blood-borne 
filarial parasites with a mobile phone microscope. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 7:286re284.
26. Berg B, Cortazar B, Tseng D, Ozkan H, Feng S, Wei Q, Chan RYL, Burbano J, Farooqui Q, 
Lewinski M, Di Carlo D, Garner OB, Ozcan A. Cellphone-based hand-held microplate reader for 
point-of-care testing of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. ACS Nano. 2015; 9:7857–7866. 
[PubMed: 26159546] 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 17
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 27. Ming K, Kim J, Biondi MJ, Syed A, Chen K, Lam A, Ostrowski M, Rebbapragada A, Feld JJ, 
Chan WCW. Integrated quantum dot barcode smartphone optical device for wireless multiplexed 
diagnosis of infected patients. ACS Nano. 2015; 9:3060–3074. [PubMed: 25661584] 
28. Sharlip ID, Belker AM, Honig S, Labrecque M, Marmar JL, Ross LS, Sandlow JI, Sokal DC. 
Vasectomy: AUA guideline. J Urol. 2012; 188:2482–2491. [PubMed: 23098786] 
29. Passing H, Bablok. A new biometrical procedure for testing the equality of measurements from two 
different analytical methods. Application of linear regression procedures for method comparison 
studies in clinical chemistry, Part I. J Clin Chem Clin Biochem. 1983; 21:709–720. [PubMed: 
6655447] 
30. Bland JM, Altman DG. Statistical methods for assessing agreement between two methods of 
clinical measurement. Lancet. 1986; 1:307–310. [PubMed: 2868172] 
31. World Health Organization. World Health Organization. WHO Laboratory Manual for the 
Examination and Processing of Human Semen. 2010. p. 5
32. Walczak-Jedrzejowska R, Marchlewska K, Oszukowska E, Filipiak E, Bergier L, Slowikowska-
Hilczer J. Semen analysis standardization: Is there any problem in Polish laboratories? Asian J 
Androl. 2013; 15:616–621. [PubMed: 23817502] 
33. Department of Economic and Social Affairs. World Contraceptive Use 2009. United Nations: 2009. 
34. Pile JM, Barone MA. Demographics of vasectomy–USA and international. Urol Clin North Am. 
2009; 36:295–305. [PubMed: 19643232] 
35. Eisenberg ML, Lipshultz LI. Estimating the number of vasectomies performed annually in the 
United States: Data from the National Survey of Family Growth. J Urol. 2010; 184:2068–2072. 
[PubMed: 20850832] 
36. Kogan P, Wald M. Male contraception: History and development. Urol Clin North Am. 2014; 
41:145–161. [PubMed: 24286773] 
37. Duplisea J, Whelan T. Compliance with semen analysis. J Urol. 2013; 189:2248–2251. [PubMed: 
23357212] 
38. Morel, MCGD. CABI. Equine Reproductive Physiology, Breeding and Stud Management. 2015. p. 
4
39. Björndahl L, Barratt CLR, Mortimer D, Jouannet P. How to count sperm properly: Checklist for 
acceptability of studies based on human semen analysis. Hum Reprod. 2016; 31:227–232. 
[PubMed: 26682580] 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 18
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. The process flow for semen analysis using the smartphone-based device and conventional 
methods
(A) (i) Process of operation: A small volume of an unwashed, unprocessed semen sample is 
loaded into a microfluidic device that has a capillary-based disposable tip at the inlet and a 
rubber bulb at the outlet to create negative pressure in the microchannel for manual, power-
free sample loading. The user manually detaches the capillary disposable tip from the 
microfluidic device through a simple snap-off mechanism and inserts the clean microfluidic 
device into the smartphone optical attachment. The user then initializes the smartphone 
application, which analyzes the sample with <5-s mean video processing time. (ii) 
Conventional method of semen analysis performed in a laboratory setting. The sample is 
drawn using a pipette and is loaded onto a semen glass slide counting chamber. The glass 
slide is placed under a desktop microscope, and a technician performs the analysis either 
manually or using a CASA system. (B) Actual image of the smartphone accessory and the 
microchip (C) along with its side view.
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 19
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. Device evaluation using cryopreserved semen samples based on sperm concentration 
criterion of 100,000 sperm/ml
(A) Direct comparison of sperm concentrations calculated by the smartphone-based device 
and manual microscope-based method. The solid blue line represents the regression line, the 
solid black line represents the identity line, and two dashed red lines represent the 
confidence band (n = 56). (B) Bland-Altman analysis to compare the results obtained by the 
smartphone-based semen analyzer and manual microscope-based method. The red dashed 
line is the mean difference of the methods, and the blue dotted lines represent the 95% 
LOAs. ROC curves (C) along with a vertical scatterplot (D) show the sensitivity and 
specificity of the smartphone-based device in detecting samples with sperm concentrations 
at ~100,000 sperm/ml. In (D), “Negative” and “Positive” represent sperm concentrations 
below and above 100,000 cells/ml, respectively, indicated by the blue line. Manual analysis 
was used as the reference method.
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 20
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3. On-site device evaluation performed by trained users using unwashed, unprocessed semen 
samples
Passing-Bablok analysis to compare (A) sperm concentration and (B) sperm motility as 
measured by the smartphone-based semen analyzer and CASA for all patient semen 
samples. The solid blue line represents the regression line, the solid black line represents the 
identity line, and two dashed red lines represent the confidence band in the Passing-Bablok 
figures. Bland-Altman analysis to compare (C) sperm concentration and (D) sperm motility 
as measured by the smartphone-based semen analyzer and CASA for all patient semen 
samples. The red dashed line in the Bland-Altman figures is the mean difference of the 
methods, and the blue dotted lines represent the 95% LOAs. Scatterplots (E and F) represent 
the qualitative performance of the device in measuring sperm concentration and motility, 
respectively. The solid red lines represent the threshold values for each criterion. “Positive” 
and “Negative” in (E) represent sperm concentration below and above 15 million sperm/ml 
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 21
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 measured by CASA, respectively. “Positive” and “Negative” in (F) represent sperm motility 
below and above 40% measured by CASA, respectively.
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 22
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 4. On-site device evaluation performed by 10 untrained users using unwashed, unprocessed 
semen samples
Passing-Bablok analysis to compare (A) sperm concentration and (B) sperm motility as 
measured by the smartphone-based semen analyzer and CASA for all patient semen 
samples. The solid blue line represents the regression line, the solid black line represents the 
identity line, and two dashed red lines represent the confidence band in the Passing-Bablok 
figures. Bland-Altman analysis to compare (C) sperm concentration and (D) sperm motility 
as measured by the smartphone-based semen analyzer and CASA for all patient semen 
samples. The red dashed line in the Bland-Altman figures is the mean difference of the 
methods, and the blue dotted lines represent the 95% LOAs. Scatterplots (E and F) represent 
the qualitative performance of the device in measuring concentration and motility. The solid 
red lines represent the threshold values for each criterion. “Positive” and “Negative” in (E) 
represent sperm concentration below and above 15 million sperm/ml measured by CASA, 
respectively. “Positive” and “Negative” in (F) represent sperm motility below and above 
40% measured by CASA, respectively.
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 23
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 5. Usability of the smartphone-based semen analyzer by trained and untrained users
The accuracy of correctly classifying the patient semen samples using the smartphone-based 
semen analyzer based on the WHO criteria for (A) sperm concentration, (B) sperm motility, 
and (C) sperm concentration and motility using 164 samples tested by trained users and 186 
samples tested by 10 untrained users. Relative frequency represents the rate of correctness of 
the trained and untrained user groups. (D) A comparison of the mean error score as obtained 
for the groups of trained and untrained users. The mean error scale ranges from 0 to 2. All 
error bars represent the 95% CIs.
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 24
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Kanakasabapathy et al.
Page 25
Table 1
Contingency table comparing CASA and smartphone-based testing
“Negative” indicates semen samples with sperm concentration and motility above the WHO threshold (sperm 
concentration of >15 million sperm/ml and sperm motility of >40%). “Positive” indicates semen samples with 
sperm concentration or motility below the WHO threshold (sperm concentration of <15 million sperm/ml or 
sperm motility of <40%).
Smartphone
Negative
Positive
CASA
Negative
39
4
Specificity, 90.70%
Positive
4
303
Sensitivity, 98.70%
Accuracy, 97.71%
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 24.
