 Surveillance Summaries / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
June 15, 2018 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance — 
United States, 2017
 Surveillance Summaries
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Title]. MMWR Surveill Summ 2018;67(No. SS-#):[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Robert R. Redfield, MD, Director
Anne Schuchat, MD, Principal Deputy Director
Leslie Dauphin, PhD, Acting Associate Director for Science  
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Serials)
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Acting Editor in Chief, Executive Editor 
Christine G. Casey, MD, Editor
Mary Dott, MD, MPH, Online Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor
David C. Johnson, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Catherine B. Lansdowne, MS, Project Editor
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, 
Terraye M. Starr, Moua Yang,
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William L. Roper, MD, MPH 
William Schaffner, MD
CONTENTS
Introduction ............................................................................................................2
Methods 
....................................................................................................................3
Sampling ..................................................................................................................3
Results .......................................................................................................................8
Discussion ...........................................................................................................102
Limitations ..........................................................................................................112
Conclusion ..........................................................................................................112
References 
...........................................................................................................113
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
1
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance — United States, 2017
Laura Kann, PhD1; Tim McManus, MS1; William A. Harris, MM1; Shari L. Shanklin, MPH1; Katherine H. Flint, MA2; Barbara Queen, MS3; 
Richard Lowry, MD1; David Chyen, MS1; Lisa Whittle, MPH1; Jemekia Thornton, MPA1; Connie Lim, MPA1; Denise Bradford, MS1; 
Yoshimi Yamakawa, MPH1; Michelle Leon, MPH1; Nancy Brener, PhD1; Kathleen A. Ethier, PhD1
1Division of Adolescent and School Health, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC, Atlanta, GA; 
2ICF International, Rockville, Maryland; 3Westat, Rockville, Maryland
Abstract
Problem: Health-risk behaviors contribute to the leading causes of morbidity and mortality among youth and adults in the United 
States. In addition, significant health disparities exist among demographic subgroups of youth defined by sex, race/ethnicity, and 
grade in school and between sexual minority and nonsexual minority youth. Population-based data on the most important health-
related behaviors at the national, state, and local levels can be used to help monitor the effectiveness of public health interventions 
designed to protect and promote the health of youth at the national, state, and local levels.
Reporting Period Covered: September 2016–December 2017.
Description of the System: The Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS) monitors six categories of priority health-
related behaviors among youth and young adults: 1) behaviors that contribute to unintentional injuries and violence; 2) tobacco 
use; 3) alcohol and other drug use; 4) sexual behaviors related to unintended pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections 
(STIs), including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection; 5) unhealthy dietary behaviors; and 6) physical inactivity. 
In addition, YRBSS monitors the prevalence of other health-related behaviors, obesity, and asthma. YRBSS includes a national 
school-based Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS) conducted by CDC and state and large urban school district school-based YRBSs 
conducted by state and local education and health agencies. Starting with the 2015 YRBSS cycle, a question to ascertain sexual 
identity and a question to ascertain sex of sexual contacts were added to the national YRBS questionnaire and to the standard 
YRBS questionnaire used by the states and large urban school districts as a starting point for their questionnaires. This report 
summarizes results from the 2017 national YRBS for 121 health-related behaviors and for obesity, overweight, and asthma by 
demographic subgroups defined by sex, race/ethnicity, and grade in school and by sexual minority status; updates the numbers 
of sexual minority students nationwide; and describes overall trends in health-related behaviors during 1991–2017. This reports 
also summarizes results from 39 state and 21 large urban school district surveys with weighted data for the 2017 YRBSS cycle by 
sex and sexual minority status (where available).
Results: Results from the 2017 national YRBS indicated that many high school students are engaged in health-risk behaviors 
associated with the leading causes of death among persons aged 10–24 years in the United States. During the 30 days before the 
survey, 39.2% of high school students nationwide (among the 62.8% who drove a car or other vehicle during the 30 days before 
the survey) had texted or e-mailed while driving, 29.8% reported current alcohol use, and 19.8% reported current marijuana use. 
In addition, 14.0% of students had taken prescription pain medicine without a doctor’s prescription or differently than how a 
doctor told them to use it one or more times during their life. During the 12 months before the survey, 19.0% had been bullied 
on school property and 7.4% had attempted suicide. Many high school students are engaged in sexual risk behaviors that relate 
to unintended pregnancies and STIs, including HIV infection. Nationwide, 39.5% of students had ever had sexual intercourse 
and 9.7% had had sexual intercourse with four or more persons during their life. Among currently sexually active students, 53.8% 
reported that either they or their partner had used a condom during their last sexual intercourse. Results from the 2017 national 
YRBS also indicated many high school students are engaged in behaviors associated with chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular 
disease, cancer, and diabetes. Nationwide, 8.8% of high school students had smoked cigarettes and 13.2% had used an electronic 
vapor product on at least 1 day during the 30 days before the survey. Forty-three percent played video or computer games or used 
a computer for 3 or more hours per day on an average school day for something that was not school work and 15.4% had not been 
physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes on at least 1 day during the 7 days before the survey. Further, 14.8% had obesity 
and 15.6% were overweight. The prevalence of most health-related behaviors varies by sex, race/ethnicity, and, particularly, sexual 
identity and sex of sexual contacts. Specifically, the prevalence 
of many health-risk behaviors is significantly higher among 
sexual minority students compared with nonsexual minority 
Corresponding author: Laura Kann, PhD, Division of Adolescent and 
School Health, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, 
and TB Prevention. Telephone: 678-315-2406; E-mail: lkk1@cdc.gov.
 Surveillance Summaries
2 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
students. Nonetheless, analysis of long-term temporal trends indicates that the overall prevalence of most health-risk behaviors 
has moved in the desired direction.
Interpretation: Most high school students cope with the transition from childhood through adolescence to adulthood successfully 
and become healthy and productive adults. However, this report documents that some subgroups of students defined by sex, 
race/ethnicity, grade in school, and especially sexual minority status have a higher prevalence of many health-risk behaviors that 
might place them at risk for unnecessary or premature mortality, morbidity, and social problems (e.g., academic failure, poverty, 
and crime).
Public Health Action: YRBSS data are used widely to compare the prevalence of health-related behaviors among subpopulations 
of students; assess trends in health-related behaviors over time; monitor progress toward achieving 21 national health objectives; 
provide comparable state and large urban school district data; and take public health actions to decrease health-risk behaviors and 
improve health outcomes among youth. Using this and other reports based on scientifically sound data is important for raising 
awareness about the prevalence of health-related behaviors among students in grades 9–12, especially sexual minority students, 
among decision makers, the public, and a wide variety of agencies and organizations that work with youth. These agencies and 
organizations, including schools and youth-friendly health care providers, can help facilitate access to critically important education, 
health care, and high-impact, evidence-based interventions.
Introduction
In 2016 in the United States, 74% of all deaths among 
persons aged 10–24 years resulted from four causes: motor 
vehicle crashes (22%), other unintentional injuries (20%), 
suicide (17%), and homicide (15%) (1). Among persons aged 
15–19 years, 209,809 births (2); 488,700 cases of chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, and syphilis (3); and 1,652 diagnoses of human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (4) were reported. Among 
persons aged ≥25 years, 54% of all deaths in the United States 
resulted from cardiovascular disease (31%) and cancer (23%) 
(1). These leading causes of mortality, morbidity, and social 
problems (e.g., academic failure, poverty, and crime) among 
youth and adults in the United States are associated with six 
categories of priority health-related behaviors: 1) behaviors that 
contribute to unintentional injuries and violence; 2) tobacco 
use; 3) alcohol and other drug use; 4) sexual behaviors that 
related to unintended pregnancy and sexually transmitted 
infections (STIs), including HIV infection; 5) unhealthy 
dietary behaviors; and 6) physical inactivity. These behaviors, as 
well as obesity, overweight, and asthma, frequently are related, 
are established during childhood and adolescence, and extend 
into adulthood.
Significant health disparities exist among demographic 
subgroups of youth defined by sex, race/ethnicity, and 
grade in school, and especially between sexual minority and 
nonsexual minority youth (5–7). More specifically, violence, 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, STIs, and 
pregnancy occur more frequently among sexual minority youth 
than nonsexual minority youth. In addition, some sexual 
minority youth struggle with stigma, discrimination, family 
disapproval, and social rejection. However, although differences 
based on sex, race/ethnicity, and grade in school have been 
well documented, not enough is known about health-related 
behaviors that contribute to negative health outcomes among 
sexual minority youth (5,7).
Sexual identity and sex of sexual contacts can both be used 
to identify sexual minority youth. Sexual minority youth 
include those who identify as gay, lesbian, and bisexual and 
those who are not sure about their sexual identity as well as 
those who have sexual contact with only the same sex or with 
both sexes. Dissonance between sexual identity and sex of 
sexual contact occurs, particularly among youth (6–12). Some 
youth who identify as heterosexual, gay, lesbian, or bisexual 
and some youth who are not sure of their sexual identity 
might not have had any sexual contact. Some youth who have 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
might identify as heterosexual and some youth who have had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex might identify as 
gay, lesbian, or bisexual or might not be sure of their sexual 
identity. Sexual identity and sex of sexual contacts can change 
throughout the life span.
To monitor health-related behaviors and the prevalence of 
obesity, overweight, and asthma among youth, CDC developed 
the Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS) (13). 
The YRBSS includes a school-based national Youth Risk 
Behavior Survey (YRBS) and state and large urban school 
district YRBSs conducted among representative samples of 
students in grades 9–12. National, state, and large urban 
school district surveys have been conducted biennially since 
1991 (Supplementary Table 1). Since 1995, the need for 
more and higher quality data on the health-related behaviors 
of sexual minority high school students has been recognized 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
by an increasing number of states and large urban school 
districts (Supplementary Table 2). With CDC support, these 
states and large urban school districts began adding at least 
one of two questions to their YRBS questionnaire to ascertain 
sexual identity, sex of sexual contacts, or both and to generate 
estimates of health-related behaviors by sexual identity and sex 
of sexual contacts. For the 1997 YRBSS cycle, a question on 
sexual identity and a question on sex of sexual contacts were 
placed on the YRBS Optional Question List indicating CDC’s 
support for the use of these questions. Results from seven states 
and six large urban school districts that used these questions 
during 2001–2009 were then summarized in a previous report 
in June 2011 (14). For the 2015 YRBSS cycle, on the basis 
of substantial support from the state and large urban school 
district YRBS coordinators, the two questions ascertaining 
sexual minority status were added to the standard YRBS 
questionnaire used by the states and large urban school districts 
as a starting point for their YRBS questionnaires. The two 
questions also were added to the national YRBS questionnaire. 
A report summarizing these national, state, and large urban 
school district results and providing the first national estimates 
of the numbers of sexual minority high school students was 
published in August 2016 (15).
This report summarizes results from the 2017 national YRBS, 
including 121 health-related behaviors and obesity, overweight, 
and asthma. Specifically, this report provides the latest update 
on the prevalence of health-related behaviors among United 
States high school students by demographic subgroups (i.e., 
sex, race/ethnicity, and grade) and by sexual minority status, 
updates the numbers of sexual minority students nationwide, 
and describes overall trends in health-related behaviors during 
1991–2017. Results by sex and sexual minority status (where 
available) from the 39 state and 21 large urban school district 
surveys with weighted data for the 2017 YRBSS cycle (Figure) 
also are included in this report. Data from seven state surveys 
with unweighted data are not included. Among those sites 
with weighted data for 2017, three state and two large urban 
school district surveys were conducted during fall 2016; the 
national survey, 33 state, and 18 large urban school district 
surveys were conducted during spring 2017; and three state 
and one large urban school district surveys were conducted 
during fall 2017. Results from 30 state and all 21 large urban 
school district surveys that asked at least one of the questions 
to ascertain sexual minority status and had weighted data 
for the 2017 YRBSS cycle also are included in this report. 
Additional information about YRBSS is available at https://
www.cdc.gov/yrbs.
Methods
Detailed information about the methodology of the 
national, state, and large urban school district YRBSs has 
been described elsewhere (13). Information also is available 
at https://www.cdc.gov/yrbs.
Sampling
National Youth Risk Behavior Survey
The sampling frame for the 2017 national YRBS consisted 
of all regular public (including charter schools), Catholic, and 
other non-public schools with students in at least one of grades 
9–12 in the 50 states and the District of Columbia. Alternative 
schools, special education schools, schools operated by the 
Department of Defense, Bureau of Indian Education schools, 
and vocational schools serving only pull-out populations were 
excluded. The sampling frame combined data sets obtained 
from Market Data Retrieval, Inc. (MDR) (16) and the 
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) (17). The 
NCES data sets were based on the Common Core of Data for 
public schools and the Private School Survey for nonpublic 
schools. Very small schools with an enrollment of ≤40 across 
grades 9–12 were excluded.
A three-stage cluster sample design was used to produce a 
nationally representative sample of students in grades 9–12 
who attend public and private schools. The first-stage sampling 
frame consisted of 1,257 primary sampling units (PSUs), 
consisting of counties; groups of smaller, adjacent counties; 
or parts of larger counties. The 1,257 PSUs were categorized 
into 16 strata according to their metropolitan statistical area 
(MSA) status (e.g., urban city) and the percentages of black 
and Hispanic students in the PSUs. From the 1,257 PSUs, 54 
were sampled with probability proportional to overall school 
enrollment size for the PSU.
For the second stage of sampling, secondary sampling units 
(SSUs) were defined as a physical school with grades 9–12 or 
a school created by combining nearby schools to provide all 
four grades. From the 54 PSUs, 162 SSUs were sampled with 
probability proportional to school enrollment size. These 162 
SSUs corresponded to 192 physical schools.
The third stage of sampling consisted of random sampling 
in each of grades 9–12, one or two classrooms from either a 
required subject (e.g., English or social studies) or a required 
period (e.g., homeroom or second period). All students in 
sampled classes were eligible to participate. Schools, classes, 
and students that refused to participate were not replaced.
In order to enable a separate analysis of data for black and 
Hispanic students, two classes per grade, rather than one, were 
 Surveillance Summaries
4 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
sampled in schools with a high minority enrollment. Before the 
2013 national YRBS, three strategies were used to oversample 
black and Hispanic students: 1) larger sampling rates were 
used to select PSUs that were in high-black and high-Hispanic 
strata; 2) a modified measure of size was used to increase the 
probability of sampling schools with a disproportionately high 
minority enrollment; and 3) two classes per grade, rather than 
one, were sampled in schools with a high minority enrollment. 
Because of increases in the proportions of black and Hispanic 
students in the population, only selection of two classes per 
grade was needed in the 2013, 2015, and 2017 national YRBS 
to balance the precision needed for subgroup estimates with 
minimum variance for overall estimates.
State and Large Urban School District 
Youth Risk Behavior Surveys
States and large urban school districts used a two-stage 
cluster sample design to produce representative samples of 
students in grades 9–12 in their jurisdiction. In 2017, the 
samples were representative of regular public school and in 
some jurisdictions, charter school students, in grades 9–12 in 
26 states and 13 large urban school districts and regular public 
school students plus students in grades 9–12 in other types of 
public schools (e.g., public alternative, special education, or 
vocational schools or schools overseen by the Bureau of Indian 
Education) in 13 states and eight large urban school districts.
In the first sampling stage, schools with any of grades 9–12 
were sampled with probability proportional to school enrollment 
size in 36 states and four large urban school districts; all 
schools with any of grades 9–12 were invited to participate 
in three states and 17 large urban school districts. In the 
second sampling stage, intact classes from either a required 
subject (e.g., English or social studies) or a required period 
(e.g., homeroom or second period) were sampled randomly in 
38 states and 20 large urban school districts, and all students 
in the sampled classes were eligible to participate. In one state 
and one large urban school district, all students in sampled 
schools were eligible to participate.
Data Collection Procedures and 
Questionnaires
Survey procedures for the national, state, and large urban 
school district surveys were designed to protect students’ privacy 
by allowing for anonymous and voluntary participation. Before 
survey administration, local parental permission procedures 
were followed. Students completed the self-administered 
questionnaire during one class period and recorded their 
responses directly on a computer-scannable booklet or answer 
sheet. CDC’s Institutional Review Board approved the protocol 
for the national YRBS.
The 2017 YRBS standard questionnaire contained 89 
questions. This questionnaire was used as the starting point for 
the state and large urban school district questionnaires. States 
and large urban school districts could add and delete questions 
from the standard questionnaire. Only two states and two large 
urban school districts included in this report used the 2017 
YRBS standard questionnaire without modifications.
The 2017 national YRBS questionnaire contained 99 
questions, including all 89 questions on the standard 
questionnaire. This report presents national results and state 
and large urban school district results for questions on the 2017 
standard questionnaire and national (only) results from eight 
additional questions measuring having driven when they had 
been using marijuana, having ever used hallucinogenic drugs, 
sports drink consumption, plain water consumption, having 
done muscle-strengthening exercises on 3 or more days during 
the 7 days before the survey, indoor tanning device use, having 
had a sunburn, and having to avoid some foods because eating 
the food could cause an allergic reaction.
Two questions on the standard questionnaire and national 
questionnaire measured sexual minority status. Sexual identity 
was ascertained with the following question: “Which of 
the following best describes you?” Response options were 
“heterosexual (straight),” “gay or lesbian,” “bisexual,” and “not 
sure.” Sex of sexual contacts was ascertained with, “During 
your life, with whom have you had sexual contact?” Response 
options were “I have never had sexual contact,” “females,” 
“males,” and “females and males.” No definition was provided 
for sexual contact. Across all the states and large urban school 
districts included in this report, 30 states and 21 large urban 
school districts included the question on sexual identity and 26 
states and 21 large urban school districts included the question 
on sex of sexual contacts.
Introductions on the standard questionnaire and national 
questionnaire before some questions provided additional 
information about the behaviors being measured. For 
example, bullying was defined as “when 1 or more students 
tease, threaten, spread rumors about, hit, shove, or hurt 
another student over and over again. It is not bullying when 
two students of about the same strength or power argue or 
fight or tease each other in a friendly way.” The questions on 
attempted suicide were preceded by, “Sometimes people feel so 
depressed about the future that they may consider attempting 
suicide, that is, taking some action to end their own life.” The 
introduction to the questions on electronic vapor products 
included brand names (blu, NJOY, Vuse, MarkTen, Logic, 
Vapin Plus, eGo, and Halo) and examples of types of electronic 
vapor products (e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, vape pipes, 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
FIGURE. State and large urban school district Youth Risk Behavior Surveys — United States, 2017
Chicago
Cleveland
Detroit
Boston
New York City
Philadelphia
Baltimore
District of Columbia
Shelby County
DeKalb County
Duval County
Orange County
Palm Beach County
Broward County
Miami-Dade County
State, weighted results
State, unweighted results
Large urban school district, weighted results
State, did not participate
Fort Worth
Houston
Oakland
San Francisco
Los Angeles
San Diego
vaping pens, e-hookahs, and hookah pens). The introduction 
to the questions on alcohol use clarified that drinking alcohol 
“includes drinking beer, wine, wine coolers, and liquor such 
as rum, gin, vodka, or whiskey. For these questions, drinking 
alcohol does not include drinking a few sips of wine for religious 
purposes.” The questions on dietary behaviors were preceded 
by, “Think about all the meals and snacks you had from the 
time you got up until you went to bed. Be sure to include food 
you ate at home, at school, at restaurants, or anywhere else.” 
Concussions were defined as, “when a blow or jolt to the head 
causes problems such as headaches, dizziness, being dazed or 
confused, difficulty remembering or concentrating, vomiting, 
blurred vision, or being knocked out.”
Except for six demographic questions (sex, grade in school, 
age, Hispanic ethnicity, race, and sexual identity) and three 
questions assessing height, weight, and asthma, all the 
remaining questions on the standard questionnaire and the 
national questionnaire in this report measured behaviors 
practiced or experienced by the student (referred to as 
“behaviors”). Skip patterns, which occur when a particular 
response to one question indicates to the respondents that they 
should not answer one or more subsequent questions, were 
not included in any YRBS questionnaire to protect students’ 
privacy by ensuring all students took about the same amount 
of time to complete the questionnaire. All questions (except 
for two questions assessing height and weight and the race 
question) were multiple choice with a maximum of eight 
mutually exclusive response options and only one possible 
answer per respondent. Information about the reliability of 
the standard questionnaire has been published elsewhere 
(18,19). The wording of each question, including recall 
periods and response options, and operational definitions for 
each variable can be found by reviewing the 2017 standard 
and national YRBS questionnaires and Data User’s Guide at 
https://www.cdc.gov/yrbs.
Data Processing Procedures and 
Response Rates
For the 2017 national YRBS, 14,956 questionnaires 
were completed in 144 schools. The national data set was 
cleaned and edited for inconsistencies. Missing data were 
 Surveillance Summaries
6 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
not statistically imputed. Among the 14,956 completed 
questionnaires, 191 failed quality control* and were excluded 
from analysis, resulting in 14,765 usable questionnaires 
(Supplementary Table 3). The school response rate was 75%, 
the student response rate was 81%, and the overall response 
rate was 60%† (Supplementary Table 3).
Data from each state and large urban school district survey 
were cleaned and edited for inconsistencies with the same 
procedures used for the national data set. The percentage of 
completed questionnaires that failed quality control checks 
and were excluded from analysis ranged from 0.1% to 8.8% 
(median: 0.9%) across the states and from 0.3% to 10.7% 
(median: 1.7%) across the large urban school districts. The 
student sample sizes ranged from 1,273 to 51,087 (median: 
2,139) across the states and from 805 to 10,191 (median: 
1,971) across the large urban school districts (Supplementary 
Table 3). Among the states, the school response rates ranged 
from 68% to 100%, student response rates ranged from 66% 
to 90%, and overall response rates ranged from 60% to 82%. 
Among the large urban school districts, the school response 
rates ranged from 84% to 100%, student response rates ranged 
from 63% to 89%, and overall response rates ranged from 61% 
to 89% (Supplementary Table 3).
To obtain a sufficient sample size for analyses of health-
related behaviors by sexual identity subgroups, students who 
selected “gay or lesbian” or “bisexual” were combined into a 
single subgroup and are referred to as “gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
students.” Students who selected “heterosexual (straight)” 
are referred to as “heterosexual students,” and students who 
selected “not sure” are referred to as “not sure students.” Sex of 
sexual contacts was ascertained from the questions, “During 
your life, with whom have you had sexual contact?” and “What 
is your sex?” Response options were “female” and “male.” To 
obtain a sufficient sample size for analyses of health-related 
behaviors by sex of sexual contact subgroups, students who had 
sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes were 
combined into a single subgroup and are referred to as “students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes.” Students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex are referred to as “students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex.” Students who selected “I have never had 
sexual contact” are referred to as “students who had no sexual 
contact.” Students who had no sexual contact were excluded 
from analyses on sexual behaviors, female students who had 
sexual contact with only females were excluded from analyses 
on condom use and birth control use, and male students who 
had sexual contact with only males were excluded from analyses 
on birth control use.
Race/ethnicity was ascertained from two questions: 1) “Are 
you Hispanic or Latino?” (response options were “yes” or “no”), 
and 2) “What is your race?” Response options were “American 
Indian or Alaska Native,” “Asian,” “black or African American,” 
“Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander,” or “white.” For the 
second question, students could select more than one response 
option. For this report, students were classified as “Hispanic/
Latino” and are referred to as “Hispanic” if they answered “yes” 
to the first question, regardless of how they answered the second 
question. Students who answered “no” to the first question 
and selected only “black or African American” to the second 
question were classified as “black or African American” and 
are referred to as “black.” Students who answered “no” to the 
first question and selected only “white” to the second question 
were classified and are referred to as “white.” Race/ethnicity 
was classified as missing for students who did not answer the 
first question and for students who answered “no” to the first 
question but did not answer the second question.
Students were classified as having obesity or being overweight 
based on their body mass index (kg/m2) (BMI), which was 
calculated from self-reported height and weight. BMI values 
were compared with sex- and age-specific reference data from 
the 2000 CDC growth charts (20). Obesity was defined as 
a BMI of ≥95th percentile for age and sex. Overweight was 
defined as a BMI of ≥85th percentile and <95th percentile for 
age and sex. These classifications are not intended to diagnose 
obesity or overweight in individual students but to provide 
population-level estimates of obesity and overweight.
Weighting
For the national YRBS, a weight based on student sex, race/
ethnicity, and grade was applied to each record to adjust for 
school and student nonresponse and oversampling of black and 
Hispanic students. The overall weights were scaled so that the 
weighted count of students equals the total sample size, and 
the weighted proportions of students in each grade match the 
national population proportions. Therefore, weighted estimates 
are representative of all students in grades 9–12 attending 
public and private schools in the United States.
Data from states and large urban school districts that had a 
representative sample of students, appropriate documentation, 
and an overall response rate of ≥60% were weighted. A weight 
based on student sex, race/ethnicity, and grade was applied to 
each record to adjust for school and student nonresponse in 
* A questionnaire that fails quality control has <20 remaining responses after 
editing or has the same answer to ≥15 consecutive questions.
† Overall response rate = (number of participating schools/number of eligible 
sampled schools) x (number of usable questionnaires/number of eligible 
students sampled).
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
7
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
each jurisdiction. The weighted count of students equals the 
student population in each jurisdiction. Data from 39 states 
and 21 large urban school districts were weighted. In 26 states 
and 13 large urban school districts weighted estimates are 
representative of all students in grades 9–12 attending regular 
public schools and in 13 states and eight large urban school 
districts weighted estimates are representative of regular public 
school students plus students in grades 9–12 in other types 
of public schools (e.g., public alternative, special education, 
or vocational schools or schools overseen by the Bureau of 
Indian Education).
Analytic Methods
Statistical analyses were conducted on weighted data using 
SAS (21) and SUDAAN (22) software to account for the 
complex sampling designs. Prevalence estimates and confidence 
intervals were computed for all variables and all data sets. In 
the supplementary tables, prevalence estimates, confidence 
intervals, or both are not provided in the following instances: 
1) the question was not asked; 2) the number of students in 
the relevant subgroup is <100 for sites with an overall sample 
size ≥1,000 students, <50 for sites with an overall sample size 
of 200–999 students, and <30 for any analyses including either 
of the variables ascertaining sexual minority status; or 3) the 
prevalence estimate was 0%. In addition, ranges and medians 
for the overall prevalence estimates were computed across states 
and across large urban school districts for all variables unless 
fewer than five sites had data available. 
In addition, for the national YRBS data, t tests were used to 
determine pairwise differences between subpopulations (23). 
Differences between prevalence estimates were considered 
statistically significant if the t test p value was <0.05 for main 
effects (sex, race/ethnicity, grade, sexual identity, and sex of 
sexual contacts) and for interactions (sex by race/ethnicity, 
sex by grade, race/ethnicity by sex, grade by sex, sex by sexual 
identity, sexual identity by sex, sex by sex of sexual contacts, 
and sex of sexual contacts by sex). In the results section, only 
statistically significant differences in national YRBS prevalence 
estimates are reported in the following order: sex, sex by race/
ethnicity, sex by grade, race/ethnicity, race/ethnicity by sex, 
grade, grade by sex, sexual identity, sex by sexual identity, 
sexual identity by sex, sex of sexual contacts, sex by sex of sexual 
contacts, and sex of sexual contacts by sex.
To identify overall long-term temporal trends in health-
related behaviors nationwide, prevalence estimates from the 
earliest year of data collection to 2017 for each variable assessed 
with identically worded questions were examined. Logistic 
regression analyses were used to account for all available 
estimates; control for sex, grade, and racial/ethnic changes 
over time; and assess long-term linear and quadratic trends 
(23). A p value associated with the regression coefficient that 
was <0.05 was considered statistically significant. Linear and 
quadratic time variables were treated as continuous and were 
coded using orthogonal coefficients calculated with PROC 
IML in SAS. A minimum of 3 survey years was required to 
calculate linear trends, and a minimum of 6 survey years was 
required to calculate quadratic trends. Separate regression 
models were used to assess linear and quadratic trends for every 
variable. When a significant quadratic trend was identified, 
Joinpoint software (24) was used to automate identification 
of the year, or joinpoint, where the nonlinear (i.e., quadratic) 
trend changed, then regression models were used to identify 
linear trends occurring in each segment. Cubic and higher 
order trends were not assessed. A quadratic trend indicates 
a significant but nonlinear trend in prevalence over time. A 
long-term temporal change that includes a significant linear 
and quadratic trend demonstrates nonlinear variation (e.g., 
leveling off or change in direction) in addition to an overall 
increase or decrease over time.
To identify 2-year changes in health-related behaviors 
nationwide, prevalence estimates from 2015 and 2017 were 
compared using t tests for each variable assessed with identically 
worded questions in both survey years. Prevalence estimates were 
considered statistically different if the t test p value was <0.05.
In the results section, long-term linear and quadratic trends 
are described first, followed by results from the t tests used 
to assess 2-year changes. Prevalence estimates not provided 
in the results section can be found at Youth Online (https://
nccd.cdc.gov/youthonline/App/Default.aspx). Information 
about long-term temporal trends and 2-year changes are not 
available because of changes in question or response option 
wording or because the question was asked for the first time 
during 2017 for the following variables: having driven when 
they had been using marijuana; having carried a gun; having 
experienced sexual violence by anyone; having first tried 
cigarette smoking before age 13 years; having usually gotten 
their own electronic vapor products by buying them in a store; 
current, current frequent, and current daily smokeless tobacco 
use; current cigarette, cigar, or smokeless tobacco use; current 
cigarette, cigar, smokeless tobacco, or electronic vapor product 
use; having tried to quit using all tobacco products; current 
binge drinking; having ever taken prescription pain medicine 
without a doctor’s prescription or differently than how a doctor 
told them to use it; and having had a concussion one or more 
times from playing a sport or being physically active.
 Surveillance Summaries
8 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Results
Demographic Characteristics
Sex, Grade, and Race/Ethnicity
Data from the national YRBS were weighted to match 
national population proportions. Thus, 50.7% of the students 
were female, 27.3% were in 9th grade, 25.6% were in 10th 
grade, 23.9% were in 11th grade, and 23.0% were in 12th 
grade (Supplementary Table 3). A total of 53.5% were white, 
13.4% were black, 22.8% were Hispanic, and 10.3% were 
American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Native Hawaiian or 
other Pacific Islander, or multiple race (non-Hispanic). The 
demographic characteristics of the state and local samples varied 
by jurisdiction but were weighted to match the demographic 
characteristics of each student population.
Sexual Identity
Nationwide, 85.4% of students identified as heterosexual, 
2.4% identified as gay or lesbian, 8.0% identified as bisexual, 
and 4.2% were not sure of their sexual identity (Supplementary 
Table 4). Across 30 states, 79.9%–88.0% (median: 85.1%) of 
students identified as heterosexual, 1.7%–6.4% (median: 2.9%) 
identified as gay or lesbian, 6.4%–10.3% (median 7.8%) 
identified as bisexual, and 2.6%–8.4% (median: 4.2%) 
were not sure of their sexual identity. Across 21 large urban 
school districts, 74.7%–88.4% (median: 82.8%) of students 
identified as heterosexual, 1.7%–5.5% (median: 3.5%) 
identified as gay or lesbian, 5.5%–11.9% (median: 7.9%) 
identified as bisexual, and 3.3%–14.9% (median: 4.7%) were 
not sure of their sexual identity.
Sex of Sexual Contacts
Nationwide, 45.3% of students had had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex, 1.6% had had sexual contact with 
only the same sex, 5.3% had had sexual contact with both 
sexes, and 47.8% had had no sexual contact (Supplementary 
Table 5). Across 26 states, 33.6%–51.4% (median: 45.3%) of 
students had had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 
from 1.5% to 6.9% (median: 2.8%) had had sexual contact 
with only the same sex, 3.1%–6.2% (median: 5.0%) had had 
sexual contact with both sexes, and 40.0%–58.9% (median: 
47.0%) had had no sexual contact. Across 21 large urban 
school districts, 28.6%–50.5% (median: 44.6%) of students 
had had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 2.7%–6.6% 
(median: 4.0%) had had sexual contact with only the same 
sex, 3.3%–9.8% (median: 5.5%) had had sexual contact with 
both sexes, and 36.3%–64.3% (median: 45.8%) had had no 
sexual contact.
Dissonance Between Sexual Identity and Sex of 
Sexual Contact
Nationwide, among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex, 94.1% identified as heterosexual; 4.0% 
identified as gay, lesbian, or bisexual; and 1.9% were not sure 
of their sexual identity (Supplementary Table 6). Across 26 
states, among students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex, 88.1%–96.2% (median: 93.3%) identified as 
heterosexual; 2.9%–7.9% (median: 4.6%) identified as gay, 
lesbian, or bisexual; and 0.9%–5.2% (median: 2.2%) were 
not sure of their sexual identity. Across 21 large urban school 
districts, among students who had sexual contact with only 
the opposite sex, 83.5%–94.3%% (median: 92.4%) identified 
as heterosexual; 3.1%–6.7% (median: 5.2%) identified as gay, 
lesbian, or bisexual; and 1.3%–10.0% (median: 2.5%) were 
not sure of their sexual identity.
Nationwide, among students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes, 20.1% identified as 
heterosexual; 68.4% identified as gay, lesbian, or bisexual; and 
11.4% were not sure of their sexual identity (Supplementary 
Table 6). Across 26 states, among students who had 
sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, 
18.7%–43.0% (median: 29.4%) identified as heterosexual; 
48.8%–71.1% (median: 60.2%) identified as gay, lesbian, or 
bisexual; and 4.1%–18.7% (median: 9.0%) were not sure of 
their sexual identity. Across 21 large urban school districts, 
among students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes, 20.8%–47.4% (median: 30.6%) identified 
as heterosexual; 43.2%–66.9% (median: 59.1%) identified as 
gay, lesbian, or bisexual; and 1.3%–20.2% (median: 10.3%) 
were not sure of their sexual identity.
Nationwide, among students who had no sexual contact, 
87.6% identified as heterosexual; 7.7% identified as gay, 
lesbian, or bisexual; and 4.7% were not sure of their sexual 
identity (Supplementary Table 6). Across 26 states, among 
students who had no sexual contact, 84.2%–91.7% (median: 
88.0%) identified as heterosexual; 5.0%–10.1% (median: 
7.3%) identified as gay, lesbian, or bisexual; and 3.0%–8.0% 
(median: 4.6%) were not sure of their sexual identity. Across 
21 large urban school districts, among students who had no 
sexual contact, 78.3%–90.2% (median: 87.8%) identified as 
heterosexual; 5.2%–13.6% (median: 7.4%) identified as gay, 
lesbian, or bisexual; and 3.0%–14.6% (median: 5.0%) were 
not sure of their sexual identity.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
9
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Behaviors that Contribute to 
Unintentional Injuries
Rarely or Never Wear a Seat Belt
Nationwide, 5.9% of students rarely or never wore a seat belt 
when riding in a car driven by someone else (Supplementary 
Table 7). The prevalence of rarely or never wearing a seat belt 
was higher among male (6.6%) than female (5.1%) students, 
higher among white male (5.3%) than white female (3.4%) 
students, and higher among 11th-grade male (6.9%) and 
12th-grade male (7.9%) than 11th-grade female (4.6%) 
and 12th-grade female (4.0%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of rarely or never wearing a seat belt was higher 
among black (9.8%) and Hispanic (7.3%) than white (4.3%) 
students, higher among black (9.8%) than Hispanic (7.3%) 
students, higher among black female (8.1%) and Hispanic 
female (7.6%) than white female (3.4%) students, and higher 
among black male (11.3%) than white male (5.3%) and 
Hispanic male (7.0%) students. The prevalence of rarely or 
never wearing a seat belt was higher among 9th-grade female 
(6.5%) than 12th-grade female (4.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 5.8% of heterosexual students; 
6.1% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 7.9% of not 
sure students rarely or never wore a seat belt when riding in a 
car driven by someone else (Supplementary Table 7). Among 
male students, the prevalence of rarely or never wearing a seat 
belt was higher among not sure (11.6%) than heterosexual 
(6.4%) students. The prevalence also was higher among not 
sure male (11.6%) than not sure female (4.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 8.3% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 8.1% of students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, 
and 2.9% of students who had no sexual contact rarely or never 
wore a seat belt (Supplementary Table 7). The prevalence of 
rarely or never wearing a seat belt was higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (8.3%) 
and students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes (8.1%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (2.9%). Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only males 
(6.5%) and those who had sexual contact with only females or 
with both sexes (7.8%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(3.3%). Among male students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only females (9.7%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only males or with both 
sexes (8.7%) than those who had no sexual contact (2.5%). 
The prevalence also was higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only females (9.7%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only males (6.5%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (25.9%–5.9%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of rarely or never wearing a seat belt. A 
significant quadratic trend was not identified. The prevalence 
of rarely or never wearing a seat belt did not change significantly 
from 2015 (6.1%) to 2017 (5.9%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of rarely 
or never wearing a seat belt ranged from 5.0% to 17.5% across 
state surveys (median: 7.3%) (Supplementary Table 8). Across 
16 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
5.3% to 22.1% (median: 9.6%).
Rode with a Driver Who Had Been 
Drinking Alcohol
Nationwide, 16.5% of students had ridden one or more 
times during the 30 days before the survey in a car or other 
vehicle driven by someone who had been drinking alcohol 
(Supplementary Table 9). The prevalence of having ridden 
with a driver who had been drinking alcohol was higher among 
black female (19.1%) than black male (14.8%) students. 
The prevalence of having ridden with a driver who had been 
drinking alcohol was higher among Hispanic (20.7%) than 
white (15.0%) and black (17.0%) students, higher among 
Hispanic female (21.9%) than white female (15.7%) students, 
and higher among Hispanic male (19.5%) than white male 
(14.2%) and black male (14.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 16.1% of heterosexual students; 
20.1% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 20.9% of 
not sure students had ridden with a driver who had been 
drinking alcohol (Supplementary Table 9). The prevalence of 
having ridden with a driver who had been drinking alcohol 
was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (20.1%) than 
heterosexual (16.1%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual female (17.1%) than heterosexual male 
(15.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 21.1% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 26.7% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 10.6% of students who had no sexual contact 
(Supplementary Table 9) had ridden with a driver who had 
been drinking alcohol. The prevalence of having ridden with 
a driver who had been drinking alcohol was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(21.1%) and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (26.7%) than students who had 
 Surveillance Summaries
10 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
no sexual contact (10.6%) and higher among students who 
had sexual contacts with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(26.7%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (21.1%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (21.1%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (28.0%) than those who had no 
sexual contact (12.0%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (28.0%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (21.1%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (21.2%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(23.1%) than those who had no sexual contact (9.2%). The 
prevalence also was higher among female students who had 
no sexual contact (12.0%) than male students who had no 
sexual contact (9.2%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (39.9%–16.5%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having ridden with a driver who had 
been drinking alcohol. A significant quadratic trend also was 
identified. The prevalence of having ridden with a driver 
who had been drinking alcohol decreased during 1991–2009 
(39.9%–28.3%) and then decreased more rapidly during 
2009–2017 (28.3%–16.5%). The prevalence of having 
ridden with a driver who had been drinking alcohol decreased 
significantly from 2015 (20.0%) to 2017 (16.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 34 states, the overall prevalence of 
having ridden with a driver who had been drinking alcohol 
ranged from 12.8% to 28.2% across state surveys (median: 
16.5%) (Supplementary Table 10). Across 19 large urban 
school districts, the prevalence ranged from 14.0% to 27.0% 
(median: 19.5%).
Drove When They Had Been Drinking Alcohol
Among the 62.6% of students nationwide who drove a car 
or other vehicle during the 30 days before the survey,§ 5.5% 
had driven a car or other vehicle one or more times when 
they had been drinking alcohol during the 30 days before the 
survey (Supplementary Table 11). The prevalence of having 
driven a car or other vehicle when they had been drinking 
alcohol was higher among male (6.8%) than female (4.1%) 
students; higher among white male (6.3%) and Hispanic male 
(8.5%) than white female (3.8%) and Hispanic female (5.4%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 11th-grade male 
(6.9%) and 12th-grade male (10.4%) than 11th-grade female 
(4.1%) and 12th-grade female (5.9%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having driven a car or other vehicle when 
they had been drinking alcohol was higher among Hispanic 
(7.0%) than white (5.0%) and black (4.1%) students, higher 
among Hispanic female (5.4%) than white female (3.8%) 
students, and higher among white male (6.3%) and Hispanic 
male (8.5%) than black male (4.1%) students. The prevalence 
of having driven a car or other vehicle when they had been 
drinking alcohol was higher among 11th-grade (5.5%) and 
12th-grade (8.1%) than 9th-grade (3.2%) and 10th-grade 
(3.2%) students, respectively; higher among 12th-grade (8.1%) 
than 11th-grade (5.5%) students; higher among 12th-grade 
female (5.9%) than 9th-grade female (2.4%), 10th-grade 
female (2.4%), and 11th-grade female (4.1%) students; 
higher among 11th-grade male (6.9%) than 10th grade male 
(4.0%) students; and higher among 12th-grade male (10.4%) 
than 9th-grade male (4.0%), 10th-grade male (4.0%), and 
11th-grade male (6.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among the students who drove 
a car or other vehicle during the 30 days before the survey, 
5.2% of heterosexual students; 6.9% of gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual students; and 9.5% of not sure students had driven 
a car or other vehicle when they had been drinking alcohol 
(Supplementary Table 11). Among female students, the 
prevalence of having driven a car or other vehicle when they 
had been drinking alcohol was higher among gay and bisexual 
(7.1%) than heterosexual (3.5%) students. The prevalence also 
was higher among heterosexual male (6.8%) than heterosexual 
female (3.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among the students who 
drove a car or other vehicle during the 30 days before the 
survey, 8.4% of students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex, 10.3% of students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes, and 1.0% of students who 
had no sexual contact had driven a car or other vehicle when 
they had been drinking alcohol (Supplementary Table 11). 
The prevalence of having driven a car or other vehicle when 
they had been drinking alcohol was higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (8.4%) 
and students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes (10.3%) than students who had no sexual 
contact. Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only males (5.4%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (10.3%) than those who had no sexual contact 
§ The prevalence of driving a car or other vehicle during the 30 days before the 
survey varies slightly for the three variables (having driven when they had been 
drinking alcohol, having driven when they had been using marijuana, and 
having texted or e-mailed while driving) because of differences in the number 
of students who selected the response option “I did not drive a car or other 
vehicle during the past 30 days” for each question.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
11
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(1.2%) and among those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (10.3%) than those who had sexual 
contact only with males (5.4%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (10.8%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (10.5%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (0.9%). The prevalence also was higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only females 
(10.8%) than female students who had sexual contact with 
only males (5.4%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2013–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (10.0%–5.5%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having driven a car or other vehicle when 
they had been drinking alcohol, among the students who drove 
a car or other vehicle during the 30 days before the survey. 
Not enough data points were available to identify a quadratic 
trend. The prevalence of having driven a car or other vehicle 
when they had been drinking alcohol decreased significantly 
from 2015 (7.8%) to 2017 (5.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 34 states, the overall prevalence of having 
driven a car or other vehicle when they had been drinking 
alcohol, among the students who drove a car or other vehicle 
during the 30 days before the survey, ranged from 2.8% to 
10.7% across state surveys (median: 5.7%) (Supplementary 
Table 12). Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 2.2% to 8.0% (median: 5.5%).
Drove When They Had Been Using Marijuana
Among the 64.5% of students nationwide who drove a car or 
other vehicle during the 30 days before the survey,§ 13.0% had 
driven a car or other vehicle one or more times when they had 
been using marijuana (also called grass, pot, or weed) during 
the 30 days before the survey (Supplementary Table 13). The 
prevalence of having driven a car or other vehicle when they 
had been using marijuana was higher among male (14.6%) 
than female (11.3%) students; higher among white male 
(13.7%) than white female (10.2%) students; and higher 
among 9th-grade male (10.2%) and 10th-grade male (13.5%) 
than 9th-grade female (4.5%) and 10th-grade female (8.9%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of having driven a car 
or other vehicle when they had been using marijuana was 
higher among 10th-grade (11.3%), 11th-grade (12.3%), 
and 12th-grade (18.3%) than 9th-grade (7.3%) students; 
higher among 12th-grade (18.3%) than 10th-grade (11.3%) 
and 11th-grade (12.3%) students, higher among 10th-grade 
female (8.9%), 11th-grade female (11.7%), and 12th-grade 
female (16.5%) than 9th-grade female (4.5%) students; 
higher among 12th-grade female (16.5%) than 10th-grade 
female (8.9%) and 11th-grade female (11.7%) students; and 
higher among 12th-grade male (20.1%) than 9th-grade male 
(10.2%), 10th-grade male (13.5%), and 11th-grade male 
(12.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among the students who drove 
a car or other vehicle during the 30 days before the survey, 
12.2% of heterosexual students; 20.5% of gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual students; and 21.7% of not sure students had driven 
a car or other vehicle one or more times when they had been 
using marijuana (Supplementary Table 13). The prevalence of 
having driven a car or other vehicle when they had been using 
marijuana was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (20.5%) 
than heterosexual (12.2%) students. Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (20.2%) 
than heterosexual (10.0%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual male (14.1%) than heterosexual 
female (10.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among the students who 
drove a car or other vehicle during the 30 days before the 
survey, 19.1% of students who had sexual contact with only 
the opposite sex, 30.0% of students who had sexual contact 
with only the same sex or with both sexes, and 2.6% of 
students who had no sexual contact had driven a car or other 
vehicle one or more times when they had been using marijuana 
(Supplementary Table 13). The prevalence of having driven a 
car or other vehicle when they had been using marijuana was 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (19.1%) and students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes (30.0%) than students 
who had no sexual contact (2.6%) and higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (30.0%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (19.1%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (16.0%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (30.5%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (2.0%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (30.5%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (16.0%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (21.4%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(28.7%) than those who had no sexual contact (3.2%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (21.4%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (16.0%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having driven a 
car or other vehicle when using marijuana was used for the 
first time in the 2017 national YRBS. As a result, long-term 
 Surveillance Summaries
12 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
temporal trends and 2-year temporal changes are not available 
for this variable.
The question also was not included in the standard 
questionnaire used in the state and large urban school district 
surveys in 2017. As a result, the range and median prevalence 
estimates across states and large urban school districts for the 
prevalence of having driven a car or other vehicle when using 
marijuana are not available.
Texted or E-Mailed While Driving
Among the 62.8% of students nationwide who drove a 
car or other vehicle during the 30 days before the survey,§ 
39.2% had texted or e-mailed while driving a car or other 
vehicle on at least 1 day during the 30 days before the survey 
(Supplementary Table 14). The prevalence of having texted 
or e-mailed while driving was higher among white (43.9%) 
and Hispanic (36.6%) than black (26.9%) students, higher 
among white (43.9%) than Hispanic (36.6%) students, higher 
among white female (46.0%) and Hispanic female (36.8%) 
than black female (27.4%) students, higher among white 
female (46.0%) than Hispanic female (36.8%) students, higher 
among white male (41.7%) and Hispanic male (36.5%) than 
black male (26.3%) students, and higher among white male 
(41.7%) than Hispanic male (36.5%) students. The prevalence 
of having texted or e-mailed while driving was higher among 
10th-grade (24.5%), 11th-grade (45.5%), and 12th-grade 
(59.3%) than 9th-grade (12.9%) students; higher among 
11th-grade (45.5%) and 12th-grade (59.3%) than 10th-grade 
(24.5%) students; higher among 12th-grade (59.3%) than 
11th-grade (45.5%) students; higher among 10th-grade female 
(25.1%), 11th-grade female (47.9%), and 12th-grade female 
(60.3%) than 9th-grade female (11.3%) students; higher 
among 11th-grade female (47.9%) and 12th-grade female 
(60.3%) than 10th-grade female (25.1%) students; higher 
among 12th-grade female (60.3%) than 11th-grade female 
(47.9%) students; higher among 10th-grade male (24.0%), 
11th-grade male (43.2%), and 12th-grade male (58.5%) than 
9th-grade male (14.4%) students; higher among 11th-grade 
male (43.2%) and 12th-grade male (58.5%) than 10th-grade 
male (24.0%) students; and higher among 12th-grade male 
(58.5%) than 11th-grade male (43.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among the students who drove a car 
or other vehicle during the 30 days before the survey, 39.5% 
of heterosexual students; 38.1% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
students; and 35.9% of not sure students texted or e-mailed 
while driving a car or other vehicle (Supplementary Table 14). 
The prevalence of having texted or e-mailed while driving was 
higher among heterosexual female (41.5%) than heterosexual 
male (38.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among the students who 
drove a car or other vehicle during the 30 days before the 
survey, 52.9% of students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex, 44.0% of students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes, and 23.0% of students 
who had no sexual contact had texted or e-mailed while 
driving (Supplementary Table 14). The prevalence of having 
texted or e-mailed while driving was higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (52.9%) 
and students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes (44.0%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (23.0%) and higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (52.9%) than students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(44.0%). Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only males (55.6%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (45.3%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(25.1%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only males (55.6%) than those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (45.3%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (50.7%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (40.2%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (20.9%). The prevalence also was higher 
among female students who had sexual contact with only males 
(55.6%) than male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (50.7%) and higher among female students who had 
no sexual contact (25.1%) than male students who had no 
sexual contact (20.9%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having texted or e-mailed while driving 
among the students who drove a car or other vehicle during the 
30 days before the survey during 2013–2017 (41.4%–39.2%). 
Not enough data points were available to identify a quadratic 
trend. The prevalence of texting or e-mailing while driving did 
not change significantly from 2015 (41.5%) to 2017 (39.2%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 36 states, the overall prevalence of 
having texted or e-mailed while driving, among the students 
who drove a car or other vehicle during the 30 days before 
the survey, ranged from 27.4% to 55.2% across state surveys 
(median: 39.3%) (Supplementary Table 15). Across 19 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 18.0% to 
36.6% (median: 31.4%).
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
13
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Behaviors That Contribute to Violence
Carried a Weapon
Nationwide, 15.7% of students had carried a weapon (e.g., 
gun, knife, or club) on at least 1 day during the 30 days before 
the survey (Supplementary Table 16). The prevalence of 
having carried a weapon was higher among male (24.2%) than 
female (7.4%) students; higher among white male (29.0%), 
black male (15.3%), and Hispanic male (18.4%) than white 
female (8.0%), black female (6.1%), and Hispanic female 
(6.9%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
male (23.2%), 10th-grade male (24.5%), 11th-grade male 
(25.3%), and 12th-grade male (23.2%) than 9th-grade 
female (7.6%), 10th-grade female (6.3%), 11th-grade female 
(8.6%), and 12th-grade female (6.6%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having carried a weapon was higher among 
white (18.1%) than black (10.8%) and Hispanic (12.7%) 
students and higher among white male (29.0%) than black 
male (15.3%) and Hispanic male (18.4%) students. The 
prevalence of having carried a weapon was higher among 
11th-grade (16.8%) than 12th-grade (14.6%) students and 
higher among 11th-grade female (8.6%) than 10th-grade 
female (6.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 15.6% of heterosexual students; 
16.2% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 17.4% of 
not sure students had carried a weapon (Supplementary Table 
16). Among female students, the prevalence of having carried 
a weapon was higher among lesbian and bisexual (14.1%) 
than heterosexual (6.1%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual male (23.7%) than heterosexual 
female (6.1%) students, higher among gay and bisexual male 
(22.9%) than lesbian and bisexual female (14.1%) students, 
and higher among not sure male (27.6%) than not sure female 
(9.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 20.1% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 21.4% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 10.5% of students who had no sexual contact had 
carried a weapon (Supplementary Table 16). The prevalence 
of having carried a weapon was higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (20.1%) and 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes (21.4%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (10.5%). Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only males 
(7.9%) and those who had sexual contact with only females or 
with both sexes (17.2%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(5.1%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (17.2%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only males (7.9%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (30.2%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (33.4%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (16.2%). The prevalence also was higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only females 
(30.2%) than female students who had sexual contact with 
only males (7.9%), higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (33.4%) 
than female students who had sexual contact with only females 
or with both sexes (17.2%), and higher among male students 
who had no sexual contact (16.2%) than female students who 
had no sexual contact (5.1%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (26.1%–15.7%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having carried a weapon. A significant 
quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence of 
having carried a weapon decreased during 1991–1997 
(26.1%–18.3%) and then did not change significantly during 
1997–2017 (18.3%–15.7%). The prevalence of having carried 
a weapon did not change significantly from 2015 (16.2%) to 
2017 (15.7%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 26 states, the overall prevalence of having 
carried a weapon ranged from 11.1% to 29.6% across state 
surveys (median: 18.2%) (Supplementary Table 17). Across 20 
large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 7.8% 
to 19.0% (median: 11.7%).
Carried a Weapon on School Property
Nationwide, 3.8% of students had carried a weapon (e.g., a 
gun, knife, or club) on school property on at least 1 day during 
the 30 days before the survey (Supplementary Table 18). The 
prevalence of having carried a weapon on school property 
was higher among male (5.6%) than female (1.9%) students; 
higher among white male (5.9%), black male (5.4%), and 
Hispanic male (4.5%) than white female (1.7%), black female 
(1.7%), and Hispanic female (2.5%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade male (3.6%), 10th-grade male 
(4.8%), 11th-grade male (7.1%), and 12th-grade male (7.0%) 
than 9th-grade female (1.3%), 10th-grade female (1.4%), 
11th-grade female (3.0%), and 12th-grade female (1.5%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of having carried a 
weapon on school property was higher among 11th-grade 
(5.0%) and 12th-grade (4.2%) than 9th-grade (2.5%) 
students; higher among 11th-grade (5.0%) than 10th-grade 
(3.2%) students; higher among 11th-grade female (3.0%) 
than 9th-grade female (1.3%), 10th-grade female (1.4%), 
and 12th-grade female (1.5%) students; and higher among 
 Surveillance Summaries
14 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
11th-grade male (7.1%) and 12th-grade male (7.0%) than 
9th-grade male (3.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 3.4% of heterosexual students; 
5.9% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 4.9% of 
not sure students had carried a weapon on school property 
(Supplementary Table 18). The prevalence of having carried 
a weapon on school property was higher among gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual (5.9%) than heterosexual (3.4%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian 
and bisexual (4.9%) than heterosexual (1.4%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (5.0%) 
than heterosexual female (1.4%) students and higher among 
not sure male (6.8%) than not sure female (2.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 4.5% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 6.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 1.6% of students who had no sexual contact had 
carried a weapon on school property (Supplementary Table 18). 
The prevalence of having carried a weapon on school property 
was higher among students who had sexual contact with only 
the opposite sex (4.5%) and students who had sexual contact 
with only the same sex or with both sexes (6.8%) than students 
who had no sexual contact (1.6%). Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (6.0%) than those who 
had sexual contact with only males (1.5%) and those who had 
no sexual contact (1.1%). Among male students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
females (7.0%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
males or with both sexes (9.1%) than those who had no sexual 
contact (2.2%). The prevalence also was higher among male 
students who had sexual contact with only females (7.0%) than 
female students who had sexual contact with only males (1.5%) 
and higher among male students who had no sexual contact 
(2.2%) than female students who had no sexual contact (1.1%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1993–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (11.8%–3.8%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having carried a weapon on school 
property. A significant quadratic trend also was identified. 
The prevalence of having carried a weapon on school property 
decreased during 1993–1997 (11.8%–8.5%) and then 
decreased more slowly during 1997–2017 (8.5%–3.8%). The 
prevalence of having carried a weapon on school property did 
not change significantly from 2015 (4.1%) to 2017 (3.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 35 states, the overall prevalence of having 
carried a weapon on school property ranged from 2.2% to 
10.2% across state surveys (median: 4.9%) (Supplementary 
Table 19). Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 1.6% to 7.8% (median: 3.3%).
Carried a Gun
Nationwide, 4.8% of students had carried a gun on at least 
1 day (not counting the days when they carried a gun only 
for hunting or for a sport, such as target shooting) during the 
12 months before the survey (Supplementary Table 20). The 
prevalence of having carried a gun was higher among male 
(7.7%) than female (1.9%) students; higher among white 
male (7.0%), black male (9.8%), and Hispanic male (9.0%) 
than white female (1.3%), black female (3.0%), and Hispanic 
female (2.5%) students, respectively; and higher among 
9th-grade male (6.4%), 10th-grade male (6.9%), 11th-grade 
male (8.2%), and 12th-grade male (9.4%) than 9th-grade 
female (2.4%), 10th-grade female (1.4%), 11th-grade female 
(1.7%), and 12th-grade female (1.8%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having carried a gun was higher among 
12th-grade (5.5%) than 10th-grade (4.1%) students and 
higher among 12th-grade male (9.4%) than 9th-grade male 
(6.4%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 4.8% of heterosexual students; 
3.7% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 7.9% of not 
sure students had carried a gun (Supplementary Table 20). 
The prevalence of having carried a gun was higher among not 
sure (7.9%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (3.7%) students. 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among not 
sure (12.0%) than gay and bisexual (4.7%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (7.6%) 
than heterosexual female (1.6%) students and higher among 
not sure male (12.0%) than not sure female (3.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 7.2% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 6.6% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 2.0% of students who had no sexual contact had 
carried a gun (Supplementary Table 20). The prevalence of 
having carried a gun was higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (7.2%) and students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (6.6%) than students who had no sexual contact (2.0%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females or with both sexes 
(4.9%) than those who had sexual contact with only males 
(2.1%) or those who had no sexual contact (1.1%). Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only females (11.4%) and those who 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
15
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (11.7%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (2.9%). The prevalence 
also was higher among male students who had sexual contact 
with only females (11.4%) than female students who had sexual 
contact with only males (2.1%), higher among male students 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(11.7%) than female students who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (4.9%), and higher among 
male students who had no sexual contact (2.9%) than female 
students who had no sexual contact (1.1%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having carried 
a gun (not counting the days when they carried a gun only 
for hunting or for a sport, such as target shooting) during the 
12 months before the survey was used for the first time in the 
2017 national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal trends 
and 2-year temporal changes are not available for this variable.
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 22 states, the overall prevalence of having 
carried a gun ranged from 2.7% to 12.2% across state surveys 
(median: 6.0%) (Supplementary Table 21). Across 15 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 3.4% to 
10.8% (median: 5.9%).
Were Threatened or Injured with a Weapon on 
School Property
Nationwide, 6.0% of students had been threatened or 
injured with a weapon (e.g., a gun, knife, or club) on school 
property one or more times during the 12 months before the 
survey (Supplementary Table 22). The prevalence of having 
been threatened or injured with a weapon on school property 
was higher among male (7.8%) than female (4.1%) students; 
higher among white male (6.5%), black male (10.0%), and 
Hispanic male (8.3%) than white female (3.6%), black female 
(5.5%), and Hispanic female (3.8%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade male (8.8%), 10th-grade male 
(8.5%), 11th-grade male (6.7%), and 12th-grade male 
(6.6%) than 9th-grade female (4.9%), 10th-grade female 
(5.0%), 11th-grade female (3.2%), and 12th-grade female 
(2.7%) students, respectively. The prevalence of having been 
threatened or injured with a weapon on school property was 
higher among black (7.8%) than white (5.0%) and Hispanic 
(6.1%) students and higher among black male (10.0%) and 
Hispanic male (8.3%) than white male (6.5%) students. The 
prevalence of having been threatened or injured with a weapon 
on school property was higher among 9th-grade (6.8%) and 
10th-grade (6.8%) than 12th-grade (4.6%) students, higher 
among 9th-grade (6.8%) than 11th-grade (5.1%) students, 
higher among 9th-grade female (4.9%) and 10th-grade female 
(5.0%) than 12th-grade female (2.7%) students, and higher 
among 9th-grade female (4.9%) than 11th-grade female 
(3.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 5.4% of heterosexual students; 
9.4% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 11.1% of not 
sure students had been threatened or injured with a weapon 
on school property (Supplementary Table 22). The prevalence 
of having been threatened or injured with a weapon on school 
property was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (9.4%) 
and not sure (11.1%) than heterosexual (5.4%) students. 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
lesbian and bisexual (7.4%) than heterosexual (3.6%) students. 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among gay 
and bisexual (14.6%) and not sure (17.2%) than heterosexual 
(6.9%) students. The prevalence also was higher among 
heterosexual male (6.9%) than heterosexual female (3.6%) 
students, higher among gay and bisexual male (14.6%) than 
lesbian and bisexual female (7.4%) students, and higher among 
not sure male (17.2%) than not sure female (5.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 7.6% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 12.1% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 3.1% of students who had no sexual contact had 
been threatened or injured with a weapon on school property 
(Supplementary Table 22). The prevalence of having been 
threatened or injured with a weapon on school property was 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (12.1%) and students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (7.6%) than students 
who had no sexual contact (3.1%) and higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (12.1%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (7.6%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (4.9%) and those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (8.8%) than those who had 
no sexual contact (2.7%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (8.8%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (4.9%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only females (9.9%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only males or with both 
sexes (21.5%) than those who had no sexual contact (3.6%) 
and higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males or with both sexes (21.5%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only females (9.9%). The prevalence also was 
higher among male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (9.9%) than female students who had sexual contact 
with only males (4.9%) and higher among male students who 
 Surveillance Summaries
16 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (21.5%) 
than female students who had sexual contact with only females 
or with both sexes (8.8%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1993–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (7.3%–6.0%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having been threatened or injured with a 
weapon on school property. A significant quadratic trend was 
identified. The prevalence of having been threatened or injured 
with a weapon on school property did not change significantly 
during 1993–2003 (7.3%–9.2%) and then decreased during 
2003–2017 (9.2%–6.0%). The prevalence of having been 
threatened or injured with a weapon on school property did 
not change significantly from 2015 (6.0%) to 2017 (6.0%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having 
been threatened or injured with a weapon on school property 
ranged from 4.8% to 12.8% across state surveys (median: 
6.9%) (Supplementary Table 23). Across 21 large urban 
school districts, the prevalence ranged from 4.9% to 12.3% 
(median: 7.1%).
Were in a Physical Fight
Nationwide, 23.6% of students had been in a physical fight 
one or more times during the 12 months before the survey 
(Supplementary Table 24). The prevalence of having been in 
a physical fight was higher among male (30.0%) than female 
(17.2%) students; higher among white male (28.7%), black 
male (37.2%), and Hispanic male (29.9%) than white female 
(13.5%), black female (29.1%), and Hispanic female (21.1%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade male 
(33.9%), 10th-grade male (34.7%), 11th-grade male (25.8%), 
and 12th-grade male (24.1%) than 9th-grade female (22.7%), 
10th-grade female (18.0%), 11th-grade female (15.2%), 
and 12th-grade female (11.8%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of having been in a physical fight was higher among 
black (33.2%) and Hispanic (25.7%) than white (20.8%) 
students, higher among black (33.2%) than Hispanic (25.7%) 
students, higher among black female (29.1%) and Hispanic 
female (21.1%) than white female (13.5%) students, higher 
among black female (29.1%) than Hispanic female (21.1%) 
students, and higher among black male (37.2%) than white 
male (28.7%) students. The prevalence of having been in 
a physical fight was higher among 9th-grade (28.3%) and 
10th-grade (26.2%) than 11th-grade (20.4%) and 12th-grade 
(17.8%) students; higher among 9th-grade female (22.7%) 
than 10th-grade female (18.0%), 11th-grade female (15.2%), 
and 12th-grade female (11.8%) students; higher among 
10th-grade female (18.0%) than 12th-grade female (11.8%) 
students; and higher among 9th-grade male (33.9%) and 
10th-grade male (34.7%) than 11th-grade male (25.8%) and 
12th-grade male (24.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 23.2% of heterosexual students; 
27.9% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 19.8% of 
not sure students had been in a physical fight (Supplementary 
Table 24). The prevalence of having been in a physical fight 
was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (27.9%) than 
heterosexual (23.2%) and not sure (19.8%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian 
and bisexual (27.6%) than heterosexual (15.5%) and not 
sure (14.8%) students. The prevalence also was higher among 
heterosexual male (29.9%) than heterosexual female (15.5%) 
students and higher among not sure male (24.5%) than not 
sure female (14.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 32.2% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 36.6% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 13.4% of students who had no sexual contact 
had been in a physical fight (Supplementary Table 24). The 
prevalence of having been in a physical fight was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with 
both sexes (36.6%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (32.2%) and students who had no sexual 
contact (13.4%) and higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (32.2%) than students who 
had no sexual contact (13.4%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (35.9%) than students 
who had sexual contact with only males (20.9%) or students 
who had no sexual contact (10.2%) and higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only males (20.9%) than students 
who had no sexual contact (10.2%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (41.6%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (38.5%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (16.8%). The prevalence also was higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only females 
(41.6%) than female students who had sexual contact with 
only males (20.9%) and higher among male students who had 
no sexual contact (16.8%) than female students who had no 
sexual contact (10.2%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (42.5%–23.6%) occurred in 
the overall prevalence of having been in a physical fight. A 
significant quadratic trend was identified. The prevalence of 
having been in a physical fight decreased during 1991–2011 
(42.5%–32.8%) and then decreased more rapidly during 
2011–2017 (32.8%–23.6%). The prevalence of having been 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
17
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
in a physical fight did not change significantly from 2015 
(22.6%) to 2017 (23.6%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 36 states, the overall prevalence of having 
been in a physical fight ranged from 15.3% to 30.6% across 
state surveys (median: 20.1%) (Supplementary Table 25). 
Across 20 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 15.4% to 39.1% (median: 24.5%).
Were in a Physical Fight on School Property
Nationwide, 8.5% of students had been in a physical fight 
on school property one or more times during the 12 months 
before the survey (Supplementary Table 26). The prevalence 
of having been in a physical fight on school property was 
higher among male (11.6%) than female (5.6%) students; 
higher among white male (10.1%) and Hispanic male 
(11.6%) than white female (3.1%) and Hispanic female 
(7.0%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
male (16.9%), 10th-grade male (13.5%), 11th-grade male 
(7.5%), and 12th-grade male (6.5%) than 9th-grade female 
(7.7%), 10th-grade female (5.8%), 11th-grade female (4.5%), 
and 12th-grade female (3.6%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of having been in a physical fight on school property 
was higher among black (15.3%) and Hispanic (9.4%) 
than white (6.5%) students, higher among black (15.3%) 
than Hispanic (9.4%) students, higher among black female 
(13.7%) and Hispanic female (7.0%) than white female (3.1%) 
students, higher among black female (13.7%) than Hispanic 
female (7.0%) students, and higher among black male (16.9%) 
than white male (10.1%) and Hispanic male (11.6%) students. 
The prevalence of having been in a physical fight on school 
property was higher among 9th-grade (12.3%) than 10th-grade 
(9.6%), 11th-grade (6.0%), and 12th-grade (5.0%) students; 
higher among 10th-grade (9.6%) than 11th-grade (6.0%) and 
12th-grade (5.0%) students; higher among 9th-grade female 
(7.7%) and 10th-grade female (5.8%) than 12th-grade female 
(3.6%) students; and higher among 9th-grade male (16.9%) 
and 10th-grade male (13.5%) than 11th-grade male (7.5%) 
and 12th-grade male (6.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 8.3% of heterosexual students; 
9.6% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 11.8% of 
not sure students had been in a physical fight on school 
property (Supplementary Table 26). Among female students, 
the prevalence of having been in a physical fight on school 
property was higher among lesbian and bisexual (8.9%) than 
heterosexual (4.9%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual male (11.3%) than heterosexual female 
(4.9%) students and higher among not sure male (16.4%) 
than not sure female (7.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 12.2% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 12.7% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 4.0% of students who had no sexual contact had 
been in a physical fight on school property (Supplementary 
Table 26). The prevalence of having been in a physical fight 
on school property was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (12.2%) and students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(12.7%) than students who had no sexual contact (4.0%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only males (7.3%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only females or with both 
sexes (10.3%) than students who had no sexual contact (2.7%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (16.2%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(19.6%) than those who had no sexual contact (5.5%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (16.2%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (7.3%) and higher among 
male students who had no sexual contact (5.5%) than female 
students who had no sexual contact (2.7%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1993–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (16.2%–8.5%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having been in a physical fight on school 
property. A significant quadratic trend was not identified. The 
prevalence of having been in a physical fight on school property 
did not change significantly from 2015 (7.8%) to 2017 (8.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 32 states, the overall prevalence of having 
been in a physical fight on school property ranged from 4.6% 
to 12.3% across state surveys (median: 7.3%) (Supplementary 
Table 27). Across 17 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 6.2% to 17.9% (median: 9.5%).
Were Electronically Bullied
Nationwide, 14.9% of students had been electronically 
bullied (counting being bullied through texting, Instagram, 
Facebook, or other social media) during the 12 months 
before the survey (Supplementary Table 28). The prevalence 
of having been electronically bullied was higher among 
female (19.7%) than male (9.9%) students; higher among 
white female (23.0%), black female (13.3%), and Hispanic 
female (17.2%) than white male (11.2%), black male 
(8.4%), and Hispanic male (7.6%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade female (22.3%), 10th-grade 
female (19.7%), 11th-grade female (19.9%), and 12th-grade 
female (16.4%) than 9th-grade male (10.9%), 10th-grade 
 Surveillance Summaries
18 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
male (9.7%), 11th-grade male (8.2%), and 12th-grade male 
(10.4%) students, respectively. The prevalence of having been 
electronically bullied was higher among white (17.3%) than 
black (10.9%) and Hispanic (12.3%) students, higher among 
white female (23.0%) and Hispanic female (17.2%) than black 
female (13.3%) students, higher among white female (23.0%) 
than Hispanic female (17.2%) students, and higher among 
white male (11.2%) than black male (8.4%) and Hispanic male 
(7.6%) students. The prevalence of having been electronically 
bullied was higher among 9th-grade (16.7%) than 10th-grade 
(14.8%) and 12th-grade (13.5%) students, higher among 
9th-grade female (22.3%) and 10th-grade female (19.7%) 
than 12th-grade female (16.4%) students, and higher among 
9th-grade male (10.9%) than 11th-grade male (8.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 13.3% of heterosexual students; 
27.1% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 22.0% of not 
sure students had been electronically bullied (Supplementary 
Table 28). The prevalence of having been electronically 
bullied was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (27.1%) 
and not sure (22.0%) than heterosexual (13.3%) students. 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
lesbian and bisexual (28.5%) than heterosexual (18.6%) 
students. Among male students, the prevalence was higher 
among gay and bisexual (22.3%) and not sure (18.2%) than 
heterosexual (8.8%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual female (18.6%) than heterosexual male 
(8.8%) students and higher among lesbian and bisexual female 
(28.5%) than gay and bisexual male (22.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 17.7% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 31.4% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 10.5% of students who had no sexual contact had 
been electronically bullied (Supplementary Table 28). The 
prevalence of having been electronically bullied was higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (17.7%) and students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes (31.4%) than students who 
had no sexual contact (10.5%) and higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (31.4%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (17.7%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (26.6%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (32.0%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (13.3%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (10.5%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (29.7%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (7.4%) and higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (29.7%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only females (10.5%). 
The prevalence also was higher among female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (26.6%) than male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (10.5%) and higher 
among female students who had no sexual contact (13.3%) 
than male students who had no sexual contact (7.4%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having been electronically bullied 
during 2011–2017 (16.2%–14.9%). Not enough data points 
were available to identify a quadratic trend. The prevalence of 
having been electronically bullied did not change significantly 
from 2015 (15.5%) to 2017 (14.9%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 39 states, the overall prevalence of having 
been electronically bullied ranged from 10.1% to 21.2% across 
state surveys (median: 16.1%) (Supplementary Table 29). 
Across 21 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 8.8% to 16.0% (median: 11.7%).
Were Bullied on School Property
Nationwide, 19.0% of students had been bullied on 
school property during the 12 months before the survey 
(Supplementary Table 30). The prevalence of having been 
bullied on school property was higher among female (22.3%) 
than male (15.6%) students; higher among white female 
(24.6%) and Hispanic female (21.0%) than white male 
(18.1%) and Hispanic male (11.8%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade female (25.2%), 10th-grade 
female (23.6%), 11th-grade female (23.5%), and 12th-grade 
female (16.3%) than 9th-grade male (20.0%), 10th-grade 
male (16.8%), 11th-grade male (12.8%), and 12th-grade male 
(11.6%) students, respectively. The prevalence of having been 
bullied on school property was higher among white (21.5%) 
and Hispanic (16.3%) than black (13.2%) students, higher 
among white (21.5%) than Hispanic (16.3%) students, higher 
among white female (24.6%) and Hispanic female (21.0%) 
than black female (14.5%) students and higher among white 
male (18.1%) than black male (11.8%) and Hispanic male 
(11.8%) students. The prevalence of having been bullied 
on school property was higher among 9th-grade (22.7%), 
10th-grade (20.3%), and 11th-grade (18.3%) than 12th-grade 
(14.0%) students; higher among 9th-grade (22.7%) than 
11th-grade (18.3%) students; higher among 9th-grade female 
(25.2%), 10th-grade female (23.6%), and 11th-grade female 
(23.5%) than 12th-grade female (16.3%) students; and higher 
among 9th-grade male (20.0%) and 10th-grade male (16.8%) 
than 11th-grade male (12.8%) and 12th-grade male (11.6%) 
students.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
19
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 17.1% of heterosexual students; 
33.0% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 24.3% 
of not sure students had been bullied on school property 
(Supplementary Table 30). The prevalence of having been bullied 
on school property was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(33.0%) than heterosexual (17.1%) and not sure (24.3%) 
students and higher among not sure (24.3%) than heterosexual 
(17.1%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among lesbian and bisexual (32.2%) than heterosexual 
(20.5%) and not sure (25.2%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (35.0%) 
and not sure (21.5%) than heterosexual (14.2%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual female (20.5%) 
than heterosexual male (14.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 19.3% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 35.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 16.8% of students who had no sexual contact had 
been bullied on school property (Supplementary Table 30). 
The prevalence of having been bullied on school property was 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (19.3%) and students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes (35.8%) than students who 
had no sexual contact (16.8%) and higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(35.8%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (19.3%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (25.4%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (35.9%) than those who had no 
sexual contact (18.1%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (35.9%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (25.4%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(35.5%) than those who had sexual contact with only females 
(14.4%) and those who had no sexual contact (15.4%). The 
prevalence also was higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only males (25.4%) than male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (14.4%) and higher 
among female students who had no sexual contact (18.1%) 
than male students who had no sexual contact (15.4%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having been bullied on school property 
during 2009–2017 (19.9%–19.0%). Not enough data points 
were available to identify a quadratic trend. The prevalence 
of having been bullied on school property did not change 
significantly from 2015 (20.2%) to 2017 (19.0%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 38 states, the overall prevalence of having been 
bullied on school property ranged from 14.1% to 26.7% across 
state surveys (median: 21.2%) (Supplementary Table 31). 
Across 21 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 10.6% to 19.7% (median: 13.9%).
Did Not Go to School Because of Safety Concerns
Nationwide, 6.7% of students had not gone to school on at 
least 1 day during the 30 days before the survey because they 
felt they would be unsafe at school or on their way to or from 
school (i.e., did not go to school because of safety concerns) 
(Supplementary Table 32). The prevalence of having not 
gone to school because of safety concerns was higher among 
white female (5.7%) than white male (3.9%) students. The 
prevalence of having not gone to school because of safety 
concerns was higher among black (9.0%) and Hispanic (9.4%) 
than white (4.9%) students, higher among black female 
(9.5%) and Hispanic female (9.3%) than white female (5.7%) 
students, and higher among black male (8.2%) and Hispanic 
male (9.4%) than white male (3.9%) students. The prevalence 
of having not gone to school because of safety concerns was 
higher among 9th-grade (7.6%) and 10th-grade (7.9%) than 
11th-grade (5.4%) and 12th-grade (5.2%) students, higher 
among 9th-grade female (8.7%) and 10th-grade female (8.6%) 
than 11th-grade female (5.7%) and 12th-grade female (4.7%) 
students, and higher among 10th-grade male (7.2%) than 
11th-grade male (4.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 6.1% of heterosexual students; 
10.0% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 10.7% of not 
sure students did not go to school because of safety concerns 
(Supplementary Table 32). The prevalence of having not 
gone to school because of safety concerns was higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual (10.0%) and not sure (10.7%) than 
heterosexual (6.1%) students. Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (12.3%) and 
not sure (12.6%) than heterosexual (5.5%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual female (6.7%) 
than heterosexual male (5.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, 7.9% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 11.5% 
of students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes, and 4.5% of students who had no sexual 
contact did not go to school because of safety concerns 
(Supplementary Table 32). The prevalence of having not gone 
 Surveillance Summaries
20 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
to school because of safety concerns was higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (7.9%) 
and students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes (11.5%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (4.5%) and higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (11.5%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (7.9%). Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only males (8.0%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (11.4%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(5.5). Among male students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only females (7.8%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only males or with both 
sexes (11.8%) than those who had no sexual contact (3.5%). 
The prevalence also was higher among female students who 
had no sexual contact (5.5%) than male students who had no 
sexual contact (3.5%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1993–2017, a 
significant linear increase (4.4%–6.7%) occurred in the overall 
prevalence of having not gone to school because of safety 
concerns. A significant quadratic trend was not identified. 
The prevalence of having not gone to school because of safety 
concerns did not change significantly from 2015 (5.6%) to 
2017 (6.7%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 36 states, the overall prevalence of having not gone 
to school because of safety concerns ranged from 4.5% to 
11.8% across state surveys (median: 7.3%) (Supplementary 
Table 33). Across 20 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 5.8% to 13.3% (median: 9.6%).
Were Physically Forced to Have Sexual Intercourse
Nationwide, 7.4% of students had ever been physically 
forced to have sexual intercourse when they did not want to 
(Supplementary Table 34). The prevalence of having been 
forced to have sexual intercourse was higher among female 
(11.3%) than male (3.5%) students; higher among white female 
(11.2%), black female (11.7%), and Hispanic female (11.2%) 
than white male (3.3%), black male (3.4%), and Hispanic male 
(3.6%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
female (8.1%), 10th-grade female (11.2%), 11th-grade female 
(12.1%), and 12th-grade female (13.9%) than 9th-grade male 
(2.7%), 10th-grade male (3.5%), 11th-grade male (2.8%), 
and 12th-grade male (4.8%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of having been forced to have sexual intercourse 
was higher among 10th-grade (7.4%), 11th-grade (7.5%), and 
12th-grade (9.4%) than 9th-grade (5.4%) students; higher 
among 12th-grade (9.4%) than 10th-grade (7.4%) students; 
higher among 10th-grade female (11.2%), 11th-grade female 
(12.1%), and 12th-grade female (13.9%) than 9th-grade female 
(8.1%) students; and higher among 12th-grade male (4.8%) 
than 9th-grade male (2.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 5.4% of heterosexual students; 
21.9% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 13.1% of 
not sure students had ever been physically forced to have 
sexual intercourse when they did not want to (Supplementary 
Table 34). The prevalence of having been forced to have 
sexual intercourse was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(21.9%) than heterosexual (5.4%) and not sure (13.1%) 
students and higher among not sure (13.1%) than heterosexual 
(5.4%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among lesbian and bisexual (23.7%) than heterosexual 
(8.8%) and not sure (12.7%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (15.6%) 
and not sure (11.8%) than heterosexual (2.5%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual female (8.8%) 
than heterosexual male (2.5%) students and higher among 
lesbian and bisexual female (23.7%) than gay and bisexual 
male (15.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 9.9% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 30.3% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 1.5% of students who had no sexual contact had 
ever been physically forced to have sexual intercourse when 
they did not want to (Supplementary Table 34). The prevalence 
of having been forced to have sexual intercourse was higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (9.9%) and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (30.3%) than students who had 
no sexual contact (1.5%) and higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(30.3%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (9.9%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (17.5%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (31.7%) than those who had no 
sexual contact (2.1%) and higher among those who had sexual 
contact with only females or with both sexes (31.7%) than 
those who had sexual contact with only males (17.5%). Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females (3.6%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (26.4%) than 
those who had no sexual contact (0.8%) and higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only males or with both 
sexes (26.4%) than those who had sexual contact with only 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
21
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
females (3.6%). The prevalence also was higher among female 
students who had sexual contact with only males (17.5%) than 
male students who had sexual contact with only females (3.6%) 
and higher among female students who had no sexual contact 
(2.1%) than male students who had no sexual contact (0.8%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2001–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (7.7%–7.4%) occurred in the overall 
prevalence of having been forced to have sexual intercourse. A 
significant quadratic trend was not identified. The prevalence 
of having been forced to have sexual intercourse did not change 
significantly from 2015 (6.7%) to 2017 (7.4%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 34 states, the overall prevalence of having 
been forced to have sexual intercourse ranged from 5.7% to 
19.2% across state surveys (median: 8.3%) (Supplementary 
Table 35). Across 20 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 6.8% to 11.9% (median: 9.2%).
Experienced Sexual Violence by Anyone
Nationwide, 9.7% of students had been forced to do 
“sexual things” (e.g., kissing, touching, or being physically 
forced to have sexual intercourse) they did not want to do 
one or more times during the 12 months before the survey by 
anyone (i.e., sexual violence) (Supplementary Table 36). The 
prevalence of having experienced sexual violence by anyone 
was higher among female (15.2%) than male (4.3%) students; 
higher among white female (16.6%), black female (11.0%), 
and Hispanic female (15.1%) than white male (3.5%), black 
male (5.8%), and Hispanic male (4.2%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade female (14.7%), 10th-grade 
female (15.3%), 11th-grade female (16.1%), and 12th-grade 
female (14.4%) than 9th-grade male (3.8%), 10th-grade male 
(4.4%), 11th-grade male (4.1%), and 12th-grade male (4.7%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of having experienced 
sexual violence was higher among white female (16.6%) and 
Hispanic female (15.1%) than black female (11.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 7.9% of heterosexual students; 
22.2% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 16.7% 
of not sure students had experienced sexual violence by 
anyone (Supplementary Table 36). The prevalence of having 
experienced sexual violence by anyone was higher among gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual (22.2%) and not sure (16.7%) than 
heterosexual (7.9%) students and higher among gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual (22.2%) than not sure (16.7%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian and 
bisexual (22.8%) and not sure (18.9%) than heterosexual 
(13.4%) students. Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among gay and bisexual (19.6%) and not sure (11.3%) 
than heterosexual (3.1%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual female (13.4%) than heterosexual 
male (3.1%) students and higher among not sure female 
(18.9%) than not sure male (11.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex 
of sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, 12.0% of 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex, 31.4% of students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes, and 4.3% of students who 
had no sexual contact had experienced sexual violence by 
anyone (Supplementary Table 36). The prevalence of having 
experienced sexual violence by anyone was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(12.0%) and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (31.4%) than students who had 
no sexual contact (4.3%) and higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(31.4%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (12.0%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (21.2%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (33.1%) than those who had no 
sexual contact (7.0%) and higher among those who had sexual 
contact with only females or with both sexes (33.1%) than 
those who had sexual contact with only males (21.2%). Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females (4.7%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (26.4%) than 
those who had no sexual contact (1.4%) and higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only males or with both 
sexes (26.4%) than those who had sexual contact with only 
females (4.7%). The prevalence also was higher among female 
students who had sexual contact with only males (21.2%) than 
male students who had sexual contact with only females (4.7%) 
and higher among female students who had no sexual contact 
(7.0%) than male students who had no sexual contact (1.4%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having experienced 
sexual violence by anyone was used for the first time in the 
2017 national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal trends 
and 2-year temporal changes are not available for this variable.
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 26 states, the overall prevalence of having 
experienced sexual violence by anyone ranged from 7.7% to 
18.5% across state surveys (median: 10.5%) (Supplementary 
Table 37). Across 15 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 8.4% to 14.1% (median: 11.0%).
 Surveillance Summaries
22 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Experienced Sexual Dating Violence
Among the 68.3% of students nationwide who dated or 
went out with someone during the 12 months before the 
survey,¶ 6.9% had been forced to do “sexual things” (e.g., 
kissing, touching, or being physically forced to have sexual 
intercourse) they did not want to do one or more times during 
the 12 months before the survey by someone they were dating 
or going out with (i.e., sexual dating violence) (Supplementary 
Table 38). The prevalence of having experienced sexual 
dating violence was higher among female (10.7%) than male 
(2.8%) students; higher among white female (11.1%), black 
female (6.8%), and Hispanic female (11.4%) than white 
male (2.6%), black male (2.7%), and Hispanic male (2.5%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade female 
(11.0%), 10th-grade female (10.6%), 11th-grade female 
(11.5%), and 12th-grade female (9.4%) than 9th-grade male 
(2.2%), 10th-grade male (2.9%), 11th-grade male (1.8%), and 
12th-grade male (4.0%) students, respectively. The prevalence 
of having experienced sexual dating violence was higher among 
white (6.9%) and Hispanic (6.9%) than black (4.8%) students 
and higher among white female (11.1%) and Hispanic female 
(11.4%) than black female (6.8%) students. The prevalence of 
having experienced sexual dating violence was higher among 
12th-grade male (4.0%) than 11th-grade male (1.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among the students who dated 
or went out with someone during the 12 months before the 
survey, 5.5% of heterosexual students; 15.8% of gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual students; and 14.1% of not sure students had 
experienced sexual dating violence (Supplementary Table 38). 
The prevalence of having experienced sexual dating violence 
was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (15.8%) and 
not sure (14.1%) than heterosexual (5.5%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian 
and bisexual (16.3%) than heterosexual (9.3%) students. 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among gay 
and bisexual (13.5%) than heterosexual (2.1%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual female (9.3%) 
than heterosexual male (2.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among the students who 
dated or went out with someone during the 12 months before 
the survey, 7.2% of students who had sexual contact with only 
the opposite sex, 19.5% of students who had sexual contact 
with only the same sex or with both sexes, and 3.5% of students 
who had no sexual contact had experienced sexual dating 
violence (Supplementary Table 38). The prevalence of having 
experienced sexual dating violence was higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (7.2%) 
and students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes (19.5%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (3.5%) and higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (19.5%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (7.2%). Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only males (12.4%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (19.2%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(6.0%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (19.2%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only males (12.4%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (2.8%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (20.2%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (0.6%) and higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (20.2%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only females (2.8%). 
The prevalence also was higher among female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (12.4%) than male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (2.8%) and higher 
among female students who had no sexual contact (6.0%) than 
male students who had no sexual contact (0.6%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2013–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (10.4%–6.9%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having experienced sexual dating violence, 
among the students who dated or went out with someone 
during the 12 months before the survey. Not enough data 
points were available to identify a quadratic trend. The 
prevalence of having experienced sexual dating violence 
decreased significantly from 2015 (10.6%) to 2017 (6.9%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 27 states, the overall prevalence of having 
experienced sexual dating violence, among the students who 
dated or went out with someone during the 12 months before 
the survey, ranged from 5.2% to 12.0% across state surveys 
(median: 7.3%) (Supplementary Table 39). Across 19 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 3.5% to 
15.4% (median: 5.8%).
Experienced Physical Dating Violence
Among the 69.0% of students nationwide who dated or went 
out with someone during the 12 months before the survey,¶ 
8.0% had been physically hurt on purpose (e.g., being hit, 
slammed into something, or injured with an object or weapon) 
¶ The prevalence of dating or going out with someone during the 12 months 
before the survey varies slightly for the two variables (having experienced sexual 
dating violence and having experienced physical dating violence) because of 
differences in the number of students who selected the response option “I did 
not date or go out with anyone during the past 12 months” for each question.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
23
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
one or more times during the 12 months before the survey 
by someone they were dating or going out with (i.e., physical 
dating violence) (Supplementary Table 40). The prevalence of 
having experienced physical dating violence was higher among 
female (9.1%) than male (6.5%) students; higher among black 
female (13.1%) and Hispanic female (9.2%) than black male 
(7.1%) and Hispanic male (5.9%) students, respectively; and 
higher among 9th-grade female (8.1%), 10th-grade female 
(10.1%), and 11th-grade female (8.4%) than 9th-grade male 
(5.6%), 10th-grade male (6.5%), and 11th-grade male (4.8%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of having experienced 
physical dating violence was higher among black (10.2%) than 
white (7.0%) and Hispanic (7.6%) students and higher among 
black female (13.1%) than white female (8.0%) students. The 
prevalence of having experienced physical dating violence was 
higher among 12th-grade (9.2%) than 9th-grade (7.0%) and 
11th-grade (6.8%) students and higher among 12th-grade 
male (8.9%) than 9th-grade male (5.6%) and 11th-grade male 
(4.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among the students who dated 
or went out with someone during the 12 months before the 
survey, 6.4% of heterosexual students; 17.2% of gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual students; and 14.1% of not sure students had 
experienced physical dating violence (Supplementary Table 40). 
The prevalence of having experienced physical dating violence 
was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (17.2%) and 
not sure (14.1%) than heterosexual (6.4%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian 
and bisexual (16.9%) than heterosexual (7.1%) students. 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among gay 
and bisexual (16.8%) and not sure (14.1%) than heterosexual 
(5.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, among the students 
who dated or went out with someone during the 12 months 
before the survey, 9.1% of students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex, 20.2% of students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, and 2.4% of 
students who had no sexual contact had experienced physical 
dating violence (Supplementary Table 40). The prevalence of 
having experienced physical dating violence was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(9.1%) and students who had sexual contact with only the same 
sex or with both sexes (20.2%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (2.4%) and higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (20.2%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (9.1%). Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only males (10.5%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (19.8%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(2.9%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (19.8%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only males (10.5%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (7.9%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (21.4%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (1.8%) and higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (21.4%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only females (7.9%). 
The prevalence also was higher among female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (10.5%) than male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (7.9%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2013–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (10.3%–8.0%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having experienced physical dating 
violence, among the students who dated or went out with 
someone during the 12 months before the survey. Not enough 
data points were available to identify a quadratic trend. The 
prevalence of having experienced physical dating violence 
decreased significantly from 2015 (9.6%) to 2017 (8.0%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 36 states, the overall prevalence of having 
experienced physical dating violence, among the students who 
dated or went out with someone during the 12 months before 
the survey, ranged from 5.5% to 12.1% across state surveys 
(median: 8.4%) (Supplementary Table 41). Across 21 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 5.2% to 
14.1% (median: 8.7%).
Felt Sad or Hopeless
During the 12 months before the survey, 31.5% of students 
nationwide had felt so sad or hopeless almost every day for 2 
or more weeks in a row that they stopped doing some usual 
activities (Supplementary Table 42). The prevalence of having 
felt sad or hopeless was higher among female (41.1%) than 
male (21.4%) students; higher among white female (38.2%), 
black female (40.7%), and Hispanic female (46.8%) than 
white male (21.4%), black male (17.3%), and Hispanic male 
(21.2%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
female (40.0%), 10th-grade female (43.1%), 11th-grade female 
(43.6%), and 12th-grade female (37.5%) than 9th-grade male 
(19.5%), 10th-grade male (21.5%), 11th-grade male (20.9%), 
and 12th-grade male (24.1%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of having felt sad or hopeless was higher among 
Hispanic (33.7%) than white (30.2%) and black (29.2%) 
students and higher among Hispanic female (46.8%) than 
white female (38.2%) students. The prevalence of having felt 
sad or hopeless was higher among 10th-grade female (43.1%) 
 Surveillance Summaries
24 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and 11th-grade female (43.6%) than 12th-grade female 
(37.5%) students and higher among 12th-grade male (24.1%) 
than 9th-grade male (19.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 27.5% of heterosexual students; 
63.0% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 46.4% of 
not sure students had felt sad or hopeless (Supplementary 
Table 42). The prevalence of having felt sad or hopeless was 
higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (63.0%) and not sure 
(46.4%) than heterosexual (27.5%) students and higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual (63.0%) than not sure (46.4%) 
students. Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among lesbian and bisexual (68.8%) and not sure (51.9%) than 
heterosexual (36.8%) students and higher among lesbian and 
bisexual (68.8%) than not sure (51.9%) students. Among male 
students, the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual 
(45.5%) and not sure (36.4%) than heterosexual (19.5%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
female (36.8%) than heterosexual male (19.5%) students, 
higher among lesbian and bisexual female (68.8%) than gay 
and bisexual male (45.5%) students, and higher among not 
sure female (51.9%) than not sure male (36.4%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 34.8% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 63.9% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 25.4% of students who had no sexual contact had 
felt sad or hopeless (Supplementary Table 42). The prevalence 
of having felt sad or hopeless was higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (34.8%) and 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes (63.9%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (25.4%) and higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (63.9%) than 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(34.8%). Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only males (48.4%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (68.9%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(33.2%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (68.9%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only males (48.4%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (23.6%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (49.8%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (17.0%) and higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (49.8%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only females (23.6%). 
The prevalence also was higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only males (48.4%) than male students who 
had sexual contact with only females (23.6%), higher among 
female students who had sexual contact with only females or 
with both sexes (68.9%) than male students who had sexual 
contact with only males or with both sexes (49.8%), and higher 
among female students who had no sexual contact (33.2%) 
than male students who had no sexual contact (17.0%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a 
significant linear increase (28.3%–31.5%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having felt sad or hopeless. A significant 
quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence of having 
felt sad or hopeless decreased during 1999–2009 (28.3%–
26.1%) and then increased during 2009–2017 (26.1%–
31.5%). The prevalence of having felt sad or hopeless did not 
change significantly from 2015 (29.9%) to 2017 (31.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 39 states, the overall prevalence of having 
felt sad or hopeless ranged from 24.8% to 40.2% across state 
surveys (median: 30.4%) (Supplementary Table 43). Across 
21 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
26.1% to 35.5% (median: 31.4%).
Seriously Considered Attempting Suicide
Nationwide, 17.2% of students had seriously considered 
attempting suicide during the 12 months before the survey 
(Supplementary Table 44). The prevalence of having seriously 
considered attempting suicide was higher among female 
(22.1%) than male (11.9%) students; higher among white 
female (21.2%), black female (22.4%), and Hispanic female 
(22.2%) than white male (13.0%), black male (6.6%), and 
Hispanic male (10.8%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 9th-grade female (22.1%), 10th-grade female (23.4%), 
11th-grade female (23.1%), and 12th-grade female (19.5%) 
than 9th-grade male (10.3%), 10th-grade male (10.9%), 
11th-grade male (11.7%), and 12th-grade male (15.1%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of having seriously 
considered attempting suicide was higher among white 
(17.3%) than black (14.7%) students and higher among 
white male (13.0%) and Hispanic male (10.8%) than black 
male (6.6%) students. The prevalence of having seriously 
considered attempting suicide was higher among 10th-grade 
female (23.4%) than 12th-grade female (19.5%) students 
and higher among 12th-grade male (15.1%) than 9th-grade 
male (10.3%), 10th-grade male (10.9%), and 11th-grade male 
(11.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 13.3% of heterosexual students; 
47.7% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 31.8% of 
not sure students had seriously considered attempting suicide 
(Supplementary Table 44). The prevalence of having seriously 
considered attempting suicide was higher among gay, lesbian, 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
25
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and bisexual (47.7%) and not sure (31.8%) than heterosexual 
(13.3%) students and higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(47.7%) than not sure (31.8%) students. Among female 
students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual 
(51.0%) and not sure (35.9%) than heterosexual (16.9%) 
students and higher among lesbian and bisexual (51.0%) 
than not sure (35.9%) students. Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (37.0%) and 
not sure (23.9%) than heterosexual (10.2%) students and 
higher among gay and bisexual (37.0%) than not sure (23.9%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
female (16.9%) than heterosexual male (10.2%) students, 
higher among lesbian and bisexual female (51.0%) than gay 
and bisexual male (37.0%) students, and higher among not 
sure female (35.9%) than not sure male (23.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 19.0% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 45.1% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 12.3% of students who had no sexual contact had 
seriously considered attempting suicide (Supplementary Table 
44). The prevalence of having seriously considered attempting 
suicide was higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (19.0%) and students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (45.1%) 
than students who had no sexual contact (12.3%) and higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the same 
sex or with both sexes (45.1%) than students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (19.0%). Among female 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only males (25.8%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (48.7%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (15.9%) and higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (48.7%) than those who had sexual contact with 
only males (25.8%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(13.5%) and those who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (34.6%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(8.5%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only males or with both sexes (34.6%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only females (13.5%). The prevalence also 
was higher among female students who had sexual contact 
with only males (25.8%) than male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (13.5%), higher among female 
students who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (48.7%) than male students who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (34.6%), and higher among 
female students who had no sexual contact (15.9%) than male 
students who had no sexual contact (8.5%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (29.0%–17.2%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having seriously considered attempting 
suicide. A significant quadratic trend also was identified. The 
prevalence of having seriously considered attempting suicide 
decreased during 1991–2007 (29.0%–14.5%) and then 
increased during 2007–2017 (14.5%–17.2%). The prevalence 
of having seriously considered attempting suicide did not 
change significantly from 2015 (17.7%) to 2017 (17.2%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 38 states, the overall prevalence of having 
seriously considered attempting suicide ranged from 12.4% to 
23.2% across state surveys (median: 17.0%) (Supplementary 
Table 45). Across 21 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 11.9% to 20.5% (median: 15.7%).
Made a Suicide Plan
During the 12 months before the survey, 13.6% of students 
nationwide had made a plan about how they would attempt 
suicide (Supplementary Table 46). The prevalence of having 
made a suicide plan was higher among female (17.1%) than 
male (9.7%) students; higher among white female (15.3%), 
black female (18.9%), and Hispanic female (17.2%) than 
white male (9.6%), black male (6.5%), and Hispanic male 
(9.9%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
female (16.3%), 10th-grade female (19.0%), and 11th-grade 
female (18.5%) than 9th-grade male (8.8%), 10th-grade male 
(9.0%), and 11th-grade male (9.7%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of having made a suicide plan was higher among 
white male (9.6%) and Hispanic male (9.9%) than black male 
(6.5%) students. The prevalence of having made a suicide plan 
was higher among 10th-grade female (19.0%) and 11th-grade 
female (18.5%) than 12th-grade female (14.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 10.4% of heterosexual students; 
38.0% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 25.6% of not 
sure students had made a plan about how they would attempt 
suicide (Supplementary Table 46). The prevalence of having 
made a suicide plan was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(38.0%) and not sure (25.6%) than heterosexual (10.4%) 
students and higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (38.0%) 
than not sure (25.6%) students. Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (40.8%) 
and not sure (26.8%) than heterosexual (12.8%) students 
and higher among lesbian and bisexual (40.8%) than not sure 
(26.8%) students. Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among gay and bisexual (28.7%) and not sure (21.9%) 
than heterosexual (8.2%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual female (12.8%) than heterosexual 
 Surveillance Summaries
26 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
male (8.2%) students and higher among lesbian and bisexual 
female (40.8%) than gay and bisexual male (28.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, 14.4% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 41.2% 
of students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes, and 9.1% of students who had no sexual 
contact had made a plan about how they would attempt suicide 
(Supplementary Table 46). The prevalence of having made 
a suicide plan was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (14.4%) and students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(41.2%) than students who had no sexual contact (9.1%) and 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (41.2%) than students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (14.4%). Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males (19.4%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (42.3%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (11.3%) and higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (42.3%) than those who had sexual contact with 
only males (19.4%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(10.2%) and those who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (38.0%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(6.7%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only males or with both sexes (38.0%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only females (10.2%). The prevalence also 
was higher among female students who had sexual contact with 
only males (19.4%) than male students who had sexual contact 
with only females (10.2%) and higher among female students 
who had no sexual contact (11.3%) than male students who 
had no sexual contact (6.7%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (18.6%–13.6%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having made a suicide plan. A significant 
quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence of having 
made a suicide plan decreased during 1991–2009 (18.6%–
10.9%) and then increased during 2009–2017 (10.9%–
13.6%). The prevalence of having made a suicide plan did 
not change significantly from 2015 (14.6%) to 2017 (13.6%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 36 states, the overall prevalence of having 
made a suicide plan ranged from 10.7% to 26.1% across state 
surveys (median: 14.2%) (Supplementary Table 47). Across 18 
large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 10.1% 
to 18.4% (median: 13.2%).
Attempted Suicide
Nationwide, 7.4% of students had actually attempted 
suicide one or more times during the 12 months before the 
survey (Supplementary Table 48). The prevalence of having 
attempted suicide was higher among female (9.3%) than male 
(5.1%) students; higher among white female (7.3%), black 
female (12.5%), and Hispanic female (10.5%) than white male 
(4.6%), black male (6.7%), and Hispanic male (5.8%) students, 
respectively; and higher among 9th-grade female (11.3%) and 
10th-grade female (11.7%) than 9th-grade male (5.0%) and 
10th-grade male (5.2%) students, respectively. The prevalence 
of having attempted suicide was higher among black (9.8%) 
than white (6.1%) students and higher among black female 
(12.5%) than white female (7.3%) students. The prevalence of 
having attempted suicide was higher among 9th-grade (8.3%) 
and 10th-grade (8.6%) than 11th-grade (6.1%) and 12th-grade 
(5.8%) students and higher among 9th-grade female (11.3%) 
and 10th-grade female (11.7%) than 11th-grade female (7.3%) 
and 12th-grade female (6.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 5.4% of heterosexual students; 
23.0% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 14.3% 
of not sure students had attempted suicide (Supplementary 
Table 48). The prevalence of having attempted suicide was 
higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (23.0%) and not sure 
(14.3%) than heterosexual (5.4%) students and higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual (23.0%) than not sure (14.3%) 
students. Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among lesbian and bisexual (23.7%) and not sure (12.9%) than 
heterosexual (7.0%) students and higher among lesbian and 
bisexual (23.7%) than not sure (12.9%) students. Among male 
students, the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual 
(18.3%) and not sure (13.8%) than heterosexual (4.1%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
female (7.0%) than heterosexual male (4.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 8.1% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 23.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 4.2% of students who had no sexual contact had 
attempted suicide (Supplementary Table 48). The prevalence of 
having attempted suicide was higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (8.1%) and students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (23.8%) than students who had no sexual contact (4.2%) 
and higher among students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes (23.8%) than students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (8.1%). Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among those who 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
27
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
had sexual contact with only males (10.9%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (24.1%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (5.8%) and higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (24.1%) than those who had sexual contact with 
only males (10.9%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(5.8%) and those who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (22.6%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(2.5%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only males or with both sexes (22.6%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only females (5.8%). The prevalence also 
was higher among female students who had sexual contact 
with only males (10.9%) than male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (5.8%) and higher among female 
students who had no sexual contact (5.8%) than male students 
who had no sexual contact (2.5%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (7.3%–7.4%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having attempted suicide.** A significant 
quadratic trend was not identified. The prevalence of having 
attempted suicide did not change significantly from 2015 
(8.6%) to 2017 (7.4%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 38 states, the overall prevalence of having 
attempted suicide ranged from 5.4% to 16.8% across state 
surveys (median: 9.3%) (Supplementary Table 49). Across 21 
large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 5.6% 
to 19.5% (median: 11.0%).
Made a Suicide Attempt Resulting in an Injury, 
Poisoning, or Overdose that Had to be Treated by 
a Doctor or Nurse
During the 12 months before the survey, 2.4% of students 
nationwide had made a suicide attempt resulting in an injury, 
poisoning, or overdose that had to be treated by a doctor or 
nurse (Supplementary Table 50). The prevalence of having 
made a suicide attempt resulting in an injury, poisoning, 
or overdose that had to be treated by a doctor or nurse was 
higher among female (3.1%) than male (1.5%) students; 
higher among white female (2.3%) and Hispanic female 
(3.8%) than white male (1.3%) and Hispanic male (1.7%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade female 
(3.8%) and 12th-grade female (2.7%) than 9th-grade male 
(1.2%) and 12th-grade male (1.1%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having made a suicide attempt resulting in 
an injury, poisoning, or overdose that had to be treated by a 
doctor or nurse was higher among black (3.4%) than white 
(1.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 1.7% of heterosexual students; 
7.5% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 5.6% of not 
sure students had made a suicide attempt resulting in an injury, 
poisoning, or overdose that had to be treated by a doctor or 
nurse (Supplementary Table 50). The prevalence of having 
made a suicide attempt resulting in an injury, poisoning, or 
overdose that had to be treated by a doctor or nurse was higher 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (7.5%) and not sure (5.6%) 
than heterosexual (1.7%) students. Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (8.2%) 
than heterosexual (2.2%) and not sure (4.4%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual female (2.2%) 
than heterosexual male (1.3%) students and higher among 
lesbian and bisexual female (8.2%) than gay and bisexual male 
(3.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 2.7% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 7.8% of students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, 
and 1.2% of students who had no sexual contact had made a 
suicide attempt resulting in an injury, poisoning, or overdose 
that had to be treated by a doctor or nurse (Supplementary 
Table 50). The prevalence of having made a suicide attempt 
resulting in an injury, poisoning, or overdose that had to be 
treated by a doctor or nurse was higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (2.7%) and 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with 
both sexes (7.8%) than students who had no sexual contact 
(1.2%) and higher among students who had sexual contact 
with only the same sex or with both sexes (7.8%) than students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (2.7%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only males (3.9%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only females or with both 
sexes (8.2%) than those who had no sexual contact (1.7%) and 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
or with both sexes (8.2%) than those who had sexual contact 
with only males (3.9%). Among male students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
females (1.6%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
males or with both sexes (6.5%) than those who had no sexual 
contact (0.6%). The prevalence also was higher among female 
students who had sexual contact with only males (3.9%) than 
male students who had sexual contact with only females (1.6%) 
and higher among female students who had no sexual contact 
(1.7%) than male students who had no sexual contact (0.6%).
 
** Review of only the oldest and most recent data points are not necessarily 
indicative of long-term temporal trends because the logistic regression analyses 
take into account all data points and adjust for changes in sex, grade, and 
race/ethnicity over time.
 Surveillance Summaries
28 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend 
in the overall prevalence of having made a suicide attempt 
resulting in an injury, poisoning, or overdose that had to be 
treated by a doctor or nurse during 1991–2017 (1.7%–2.4%). 
A significant quadratic trend also was not identified. The 
prevalence of having made a suicide attempt resulting in an 
injury, poisoning, or overdose that had to be treated by a doctor 
or nurse did not change significantly from 2015 (2.8%) to 
2017 (2.4%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having made a 
suicide attempt resulting in an injury, poisoning, or overdose 
that had to be treated by a doctor or nurse ranged from 1.9% 
to 7.6% across state surveys (median: 3.1%) (Supplementary 
Table 51). Across 19 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 1.5% to 7.5% (median: 3.6%).
Tobacco Use
Ever Tried Cigarette Smoking
Nationwide, 28.9% of students had ever tried cigarette 
smoking (even one or two puffs) (Supplementary Table 52). 
The prevalence of having ever tried cigarette smoking was 
higher among male (30.7%) than female (27.3%) students. 
The prevalence of having ever tried cigarette smoking was 
higher among white (31.0%) and Hispanic (29.7%) than black 
(21.1%) students, higher among white female (29.1%) and 
Hispanic female (27.5%) than black female (21.2%) students, 
and higher among white male (33.0%) and Hispanic male 
(31.8%) than black male (20.8%) students. The prevalence 
of having ever tried cigarette smoking was higher among 
10th-grade (26.1%), 11th-grade (33.1%), and 12th-grade 
(37.1%) than 9th-grade (20.9%) students; higher among 
11th-grade (33.1%) and 12th-grade (37.1%) than 10th-grade 
(26.1%) students; higher among 12th-grade (37.1%) than 
11th-grade (33.1%) students, higher among 10th-grade female 
(24.6%), 11th-grade female (30.5%), and 12th-grade female 
(34.8%) than 9th-grade female (20.3%) students; higher among 
11th-grade female (30.5%) and 12th-grade female (34.8%) than 
10th-grade female (24.6%) students; higher among 10th-grade 
male (27.8%), 11th-grade male (35.8%), and 12th-grade male 
(39.5%) than 9th-grade male (21.4%) students; and higher 
among 11th-grade male (35.8%) and 12th-grade male (39.5%) 
than 10th-grade male (27.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 28.2% of heterosexual students; 
41.8% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 27.5% of not 
sure students had ever tried cigarette smoking (Supplementary 
Table 52). The prevalence of having ever tried cigarette 
smoking was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (41.8%) 
than heterosexual (28.2%) and not sure (27.5%) students. 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
lesbian and bisexual (42.1%) than heterosexual (25.7%) 
and not sure (25.4%) students. Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (40.2%) than 
heterosexual (30.5%) and not sure (28.6%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (30.5%) 
than heterosexual female (25.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 43.3% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 57.2% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 13.0% of students who had no sexual contact had 
ever tried cigarette smoking (Supplementary Table 52). The 
prevalence of having ever tried cigarette smoking was higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (43.3%) and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (57.2%) than students who had 
no sexual contact (13.0%) and higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(57.2%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (43.3%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (40.0%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (57.4%) than those who had no 
sexual contact (12.9%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (57.4%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (40.0%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only females (46.1%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only males or with both 
sexes (56.8%) than those who had no sexual contact (13.2%) 
and higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males or with both sexes (56.8%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only females (46.1%). The prevalence also was 
higher among male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (46.1%) than female students who had sexual contact 
with only males (40.0%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (70.1%–28.9%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having ever tried cigarette smoking. A 
significant quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence of 
having ever tried cigarette smoking did not change significantly 
during 1991–1999 (70.1%–70.4%) and then decreased during 
1999–2017 (70.4%–28.9%). The prevalence of having ever 
tried cigarette smoking did not change significantly from 2015 
(32.3%) to 2017 (28.9%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 30 states, the overall prevalence of having ever tried 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
29
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
cigarette smoking ranged from 16.4% to 40.5% across state 
surveys (median: 28.3%) (Supplementary Table 53). Across 
16 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
15.0% to 27.3% (median: 18.6%).
Tried Cigarette Smoking Before Age 13 Years
Nationwide, 9.5% of students had first tried cigarette 
smoking (even one or two puffs) before age 13 years 
(Supplementary Table 54). The prevalence of having first tried 
cigarette smoking before age 13 years was higher among male 
(10.9%) than female (8.0%) students; higher among white 
male (10.0%) and Hispanic male (13.0%) than white female 
(7.7%) and Hispanic female (7.1%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 11th-grade male (10.7%) and 12th-grade 
male (11.6%) than 11th-grade female (8.3%) and 12th-grade 
female (7.5%) students, respectively. The prevalence of having 
smoked a whole cigarette before age 13 years was higher among 
black female (10.9%) than Hispanic female (7.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 8.8% of heterosexual students; 
14.2% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 14.8% of not 
sure students had first tried cigarette smoking before age 13 
years (Supplementary Table 54). The prevalence of having first 
tried cigarette smoking before age 13 years was higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual (14.2%) and not sure (14.8%) than 
heterosexual (8.8%) students. Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (13.2%) 
than heterosexual (7.0%) students. Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (15.9%) and 
not sure (16.7%) than heterosexual (10.4%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (10.4%) 
than heterosexual female (7.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 13.5% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 23.9% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 3.9% of students who had no sexual contact had 
first tried cigarette smoking (even one or two puffs) before 
age 13 years (Supplementary Table 54). The prevalence of was 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (13.5%) and students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes (23.9%) than students 
who had no sexual contact (3.9%) and higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (23.9%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (13.5%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (10.3%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (23.1%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (3.5%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (23.1%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (10.3%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only females (16.1%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only males or with both 
sexes (26.2%) than those who had no sexual contact (4.3%) 
and higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males or with both sexes (26.2%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only females (16.1%). The prevalence also was 
higher among male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (16.1%) than female students who had sexual contact 
with only males (10.3%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having first tried 
cigarette smoking (even one or two puffs) before age 13 years 
was used for the first time in the 2017 national YRBS. As a 
result, long-term temporal trends and 2-year temporal changes 
are not available for this variable.
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 32 states, the overall prevalence of having first tried 
cigarette smoking before age 13 years ranged from 5.7% to 
16.7% across state surveys (median: 9.9%) (Supplementary 
Table 55). Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 5.9% to 12.6% (median: 9.1%).
Current Cigarette Use
Nationwide, 8.8% of students had smoked cigarettes on at 
least 1 day during the 30 days before the survey (i.e., current 
cigarette use) (Supplementary Table 56). The prevalence of 
current cigarette use was higher among male (9.8%) than 
female (7.8%) students; higher among white male (12.3%) 
and black male (5.7%) than white female (9.9%) and black 
female (2.8%) students, respectively; and higher among 
12th-grade male (15.7%) than 12th-grade female (11.1%) 
students. The prevalence of current cigarette use was higher 
among white (11.1%) and Hispanic (7.0%) than black (4.4%) 
students, higher among white (11.1%) than Hispanic (7.0%) 
students, higher among white female (9.9%) and Hispanic 
female (6.6%) than black female (2.8%) students, higher 
among white female (9.9%) than Hispanic female (6.6%) 
students, higher among white male (12.3%) than black male 
(5.7%) and Hispanic male (7.4%) students. The prevalence 
of current cigarette use was higher among 10th-grade (7.6%), 
11th-grade (9.5%), and 12th-grade (13.4%) than 9th-grade 
(5.2%) students; higher among 11th-grade (9.5%) and 
12th-grade (13.4%) than 10th-grade (7.6%) students; higher 
among 12th-grade (13.4%) than 11th-grade (9.5%) students; 
higher among 11th-grade female (8.6%) and 12th-grade female 
(11.1%) than 9th-grade female (4.9%) students; higher among 
12th-grade female (11.1%) than 10th-grade female (6.8%) 
students; higher among 10th-grade male (8.4%), 11th-grade 
 Surveillance Summaries
30 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
male (10.2%), and 12th-grade male (15.7%) than 9th-grade 
male (5.6%) students; and higher among 12th-grade male 
(15.7%) than 10th-grade male (8.4%) and 11th-grade male 
(10.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current cigarette 
use was 8.1% among heterosexual students; 16.2% among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 10.1% among not 
sure students (Supplementary Table 56). The prevalence 
of current cigarette use was higher among gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual (16.2%) than heterosexual (8.1%) and not sure 
(10.1%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among lesbian and bisexual (15.4%) than heterosexual 
(6.6%) and not sure (8.6%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (17.1%) 
than heterosexual (9.4%) and not sure (9.7%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (9.4%) 
than heterosexual female (6.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current 
cigarette use was 14.2% among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex, 24.5% among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 1.9% among students who had no sexual contact 
(Supplementary Table 56). The prevalence of current cigarette 
use was higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (14.2%) and students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (24.5%) than 
students who had no sexual contact (1.9%) and higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with 
both sexes (24.5%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (14.2%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (12.1%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (24.9%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (1.5%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (24.9%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (12.1%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (15.9%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(23.4%) than those who had no sexual contact (2.3%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (15.9%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (12.1%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (27.5%–8.8%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of current cigarette use. A significant 
quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence of current 
cigarette use increased during 1991–1997 (27.5%–36.4%) 
and then decreased during 1997–2017 (36.4%–8.8%). The 
prevalence of current cigarette use did not change significantly 
from 2015 (10.8%) to 2017 (8.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 39 states, the overall prevalence of current 
cigarette use ranged from 3.8% to 14.4% across state surveys 
(median: 8.2%) (Supplementary Table 57). Across 19 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 2.7% to 
6.7% (median: 4.2%).
Current Frequent Cigarette Use
Nationwide, 2.6% of students had smoked cigarettes on 
20 or more days during the 30 days before the survey (i.e., 
current frequent cigarette use) (Supplementary Table 58). 
The prevalence of current frequent cigarette use was higher 
among Hispanic male (2.2%) than Hispanic female (1.1%) 
students. The prevalence of current frequent cigarette use was 
higher among white (3.6%) than black (1.1%) and Hispanic 
(1.7%) students, higher among white female (3.7%) than 
black female (0.9%) and Hispanic female (1.1%) students, 
and higher among white male (3.4%) than black male (1.2%) 
and Hispanic male (2.2%) students. The prevalence of current 
frequent cigarette use was higher among 12th-grade (4.7%) 
than 9th-grade (1.3%), 10th-grade (1.8%), and 11th-grade 
(2.8%) students; higher among 11th-grade (2.8%) than 
9th-grade (1.3%) students; higher among 12th-grade female 
(4.8%) than 9th-grade female (1.1%), 10th-grade female 
(1.5%), and 11th-grade female (2.9%) students; higher 
among 11th-grade female (2.9%) than 9th-grade female 
(1.1%) students; and higher among 12th-grade male (4.5%) 
than 9th-grade male (1.5%), 10th-grade male (2.1%), and 
11th-grade male (2.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current frequent 
cigarette use was 2.3% among heterosexual students; 5.4% 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 4.0% among 
not sure students (Supplementary Table 58). The prevalence of 
current frequent cigarette use was higher among gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual (5.4%) than heterosexual (2.3%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian and 
bisexual (5.3%) than heterosexual (2.1%) students. Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among gay and 
bisexual (5.9%) than heterosexual (2.4%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence 
of current frequent cigarette use was 4.2% among students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 10.3% 
among students who had sexual contact with only the same 
sex or with both sexes, and 0.2% among students who had 
no sexual contact (Supplementary Table 58). The prevalence 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
31
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
of current frequent cigarette use was higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (4.2%) 
and students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes (10.3%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (0.2%) and higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (10.3%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (4.2%). Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only males (3.7%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (11.0%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(0.3%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (11.0%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only males (3.7%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (4.7%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (8.0%) than those who had 
no sexual contact (0.1%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a significant 
linear decrease (12.7%–2.6%) occurred in the overall prevalence 
of current frequent cigarette use. A significant quadratic trend 
also was identified. The prevalence of current frequent cigarette 
use increased during 1991–1999 (12.7%–16.8%) and then 
decreased during 1999–2017 (16.8%–2.6%). The prevalence 
of current frequent cigarette use did not change significantly 
from 2015 (3.4%) to 2017 (2.6%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 39 states, the overall prevalence of current 
frequent cigarette use ranged from 0.4% to 5.5% across state 
surveys (median: 2.2%) (Supplementary Table 59). Across 19 
large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 0.1% 
to 1.4% (median: 0.8%).
Current Daily Cigarette Use
Nationwide, 2.0% of students had smoked cigarettes on all 
30 days during the 30 days before the survey (i.e., current daily 
cigarette use) (Supplementary Table 60). The prevalence of 
current daily cigarette use was higher among white (2.6%) than 
black (1.1%) and Hispanic (1.3%) students and higher among 
white female (2.9%) than black female (0.9%) and Hispanic 
female (0.8%) students. The prevalence of having currently 
smoked cigarettes daily was higher among 11th-grade (2.2%) 
and 12th-grade (3.5%) than 9th-grade (0.9%) students, higher 
among 12th-grade (3.5%) than 10th-grade (1.4%) students, 
higher among 11th-grade female (2.4%) and 12th-grade female 
(3.7%) than 9th-grade female (0.9%) students, higher among 
12th-grade female (3.7%) than 10th-grade female (1.1%) 
students, and higher among 11th-grade male (2.1%) and 
12th-grade male (3.1%) than 9th-grade male (1.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current daily 
cigarette use was 1.7% among heterosexual students; 3.9% 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 3.4% among 
not sure students (Supplementary Table 60). The prevalence of 
current daily cigarette use was higher among gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual (3.9%) than heterosexual (1.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current 
daily cigarette use was 3.2% among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex, 8.3% among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 0.2% among students who had no sexual contact 
(Supplementary Table 60). The prevalence of current daily 
cigarette use was higher among students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex (3.2%) and students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (8.3%) than 
students who had no sexual contact (0.2%) and higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes (8.3%) than students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex (3.2%). Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (2.8%) and those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (9.0%) than those who had 
no sexual contact (0.3%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (9.0%) than 
those who had sexual contact with only males (2.8%). Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only females (3.4%) and those who 
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (6.3%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (0.1%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a significant 
linear decrease (9.8%–2.0%) occurred in the overall prevalence 
of current daily cigarette use. A significant quadratic trend 
also was identified. The prevalence of current daily cigarette 
use increased during 1991–1999 (9.8%–12.8%) and then 
decreased during 1999–2017 (12.8%–2.0%). The prevalence 
of current daily cigarette use did not change significantly from 
2015 (2.3%) to 2017 (2.0%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 39 states, the overall prevalence of current 
daily cigarette use ranged from 0.3% to 4.5% across state 
surveys (median: 1.6%) (Supplementary Table 61). Across 19 
large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 0.1% 
to 0.8% (median: 0.6%).
Smoked More than 10 Cigarettes per Day
Among the 8.8% of students nationwide who currently 
smoked cigarettes, 9.7% of students had smoked more than 10 
cigarettes per day on the days they smoked during the 30 days 
 Surveillance Summaries
32 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
before the survey (Supplementary Table 62). The prevalence 
of having smoked more than 10 cigarettes per day was higher 
among male (11.7%) than female (6.5%) students and higher 
among white male (10.4%) than white female (5.6%) students. 
The prevalence of having smoked more than 10 cigarettes per 
day was higher among 12th-grade (11.6%) than 11th-grade 
(5.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among the students who currently 
smoked cigarettes, 8.1% of heterosexual students; 5.7% 
of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 39.6% of not 
sure students had smoked more than 10 cigarettes per day 
(Supplementary Table 62). The prevalence of having smoked 
more than 10 cigarettes per day was higher among not sure 
(39.6%) than heterosexual (8.1%) and gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual (5.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among the students who 
currently smoked cigarettes, 8.5% of students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex, 14.8% of students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, 
and 1.5% of students who had no sexual contact had smoked 
more than 10 cigarettes per day (Supplementary Table 62). 
The prevalence of having smoked more than 10 cigarettes per 
day was higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (8.5%) and students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (14.8%) 
than students who had no sexual contact (1.5%). Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only females (10.5%) and those who 
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (32.3%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (1.2%). The prevalence 
also was higher among male students who had sexual contact 
with only females (10.5%) than female students who had 
sexual contact with only males (5.2%) and higher among male 
students who had sexual contact with only males or with both 
sexes (32.3%) than female students who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (9.4%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (18.0%–9.7%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having smoked more than 10 cigarettes 
per day, among the students who currently smoked cigarettes. 
A significant quadratic trend was not identified. The prevalence 
of having smoked more than 10 cigarettes per day did not 
change significantly from 2015 (7.9%) to 2017 (9.7%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 28 states, the overall prevalence of having 
smoked more than 10 cigarettes per day, among the students 
who currently smoked cigarettes, ranged from 2.3% to 18.1% 
across state surveys (median: 8.0%) (Supplementary Table 63). 
Across seven large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 3.6% to 12.9% (median: 7.9%).
Ever Used an Electronic Vapor Product
Nationwide, 42.2% of students had ever used an electronic 
vapor product (including e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, 
vape pipes, vaping pens, e-hookahs, and hookah pens) 
(Supplementary Table 64). The prevalence of having ever used 
an electronic vapor product was higher among male (44.9%) 
than female (39.7%) students, higher among Hispanic male 
(50.5%) than Hispanic female (46.8%) students, and higher 
among 12th-grade male (52.4%) than 12th-grade female 
(45.0%) students. The prevalence of having ever used an 
electronic vapor product was higher among white (41.8%) 
and Hispanic (48.7%) than black (36.2%) students, higher 
among Hispanic (48.7%) than white (41.8%) students, higher 
among Hispanic female (46.8%) than white female (39.1%) 
and black female (35.5%) students, higher among white male 
(44.9%) and Hispanic male (50.5%) than black male (36.7%) 
students, and higher among Hispanic male (50.5%) than white 
male (44.9%) students. The prevalence of having ever used 
an electronic vapor product was higher among 10th-grade 
(41.0%), 11th-grade (48.0%), and 12th-grade (48.6%) than 
9th-grade (32.7%) students; higher among 11th-grade (48.0%) 
and 12th-grade (48.6%) than 10th-grade (41.0%) students; 
higher among 10th-grade female (38.7%), 11th-grade female 
(45.6%), and 12th-grade female (45.0%) than 9th-grade 
female (30.8%) students; higher among 11th-grade female 
(45.6%) and 12th-grade female (45.0%) than 10th-grade 
female (38.7%) students; and higher among 10th-grade male 
(43.6%), 11th-grade male (50.5%), and 12th-grade male 
(52.4%) than 9th-grade male (34.6%) students, and higher 
among 11th-grade male (50.5%) and 12th-grade male (52.4%) 
than 10th-grade male (43.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 42.8% of heterosexual students; 
50.5% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 37.3% of 
not sure students had ever used an electronic vapor product 
(Supplementary Table 64). The prevalence of having ever used 
an electronic vapor product was higher among heterosexual 
(42.8%) and gay, lesbian, and bisexual (50.5%) than not 
sure (37.3%) students and higher among gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual (50.5%) than heterosexual (42.8%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian and 
bisexual (53.2%) than heterosexual (39.6%) and not sure 
(36.5%) students. Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among heterosexual (45.6%) than not sure (36.7%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
male (45.6%) than heterosexual female (39.6%) students and 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
33
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
higher among lesbian and bisexual female (53.2%) than gay 
and bisexual male (42.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 61.5% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 66.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 22.9% of students who had no sexual contact had 
ever used an electronic vapor product (Supplementary Table 
64). The prevalence of having ever used an electronic vapor 
product was higher among students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex (61.5%) and students who had 
sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(66.8%) than students who had no sexual contact (22.9%) 
and higher among students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes (66.8%) than students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (61.5%). Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males (57.6%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (69.7%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (22.4%) and higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (69.7%) than those who had sexual contact with 
only males (57.6%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(64.8%) and those who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (57.8%) than those who had no sexual 
contact (23.4%). The prevalence also was higher among male 
students who had sexual contact with only females (64.8%) 
than female students who had sexual contact with only males 
(57.6%) and higher among female students who had sexual 
contact with only females or with both sexes (69.7%) than 
male students who had sexual contact with only males or with 
both sexes (57.8%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having ever used 
an electronic vapor product was used for the first time in the 
2015 national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal trends 
are not available for this variable. The prevalence of having ever 
used an electronic vapor product did not change significantly 
from 2015 (44.9%) to 2017 (42.2%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having 
ever used an electronic vapor product ranged from 33.2% to 
51.0% across state surveys (median: 41.1%) (Supplementary 
Table 65). Across 19 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 25.0% to 42.0% (median: 36.6%).
Current Electronic Vapor Product Use
Nationwide, 13.2% of students had used an electronic vapor 
product (including e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, vape pipes, 
vaping pens, e-hookahs, and hookah pens) on at least 1 day 
during the 30 days before the survey (i.e., current electronic 
vapor product use) (Supplementary Table 66). The prevalence 
of current electronic vapor product use was higher among 
male (15.9%) than female (10.5%) students; higher among 
white male (19.6%) than white female (11.8%) students; 
and higher among 9th-grade male (11.3%), 10th-grade male 
(13.4%), 11th-grade male (17.0%), and 12th-grade male 
(22.7%) than 9th-grade female (7.8%), 10th-grade female 
(9.5%), 11th-grade female (11.1%), and 12th-grade female 
(14.1%) students, respectively. The prevalence of current 
electronic vapor product use was higher among white (15.6%) 
and Hispanic (11.4%) than black (8.5%) students, higher 
among white (15.6%) than Hispanic (11.4%) students, and 
higher among white male (19.6%) than black male (9.2%) and 
Hispanic male (12.3%) students. The prevalence of current 
electronic vapor product use was higher among 10th-grade 
(11.4%), 11th-grade (14.1%), and 12th-grade (18.3%) than 
9th-grade (9.5%) students; higher among 12th-grade (18.3%) 
than 10th-grade (11.4%) and 11th-grade (14.1%) students; 
higher among 12th-grade female (14.1%) than 9th-grade 
female (7.8%) and 10th-grade female (9.5%) students; higher 
among 12th-grade male (22.7%) than 9th-grade male (11.3%), 
10th-grade male (13.4%), and 11th-grade male (17.0%) 
students; and higher among 11th-grade male (17.0%) than 
9th-grade male (11.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current electronic 
vapor product use was 13.2% among heterosexual students; 
17.5% among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 10.8% 
among not sure students (Supplementary Table 66). The 
prevalence of current electronic vapor product use was higher 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (17.5%) than heterosexual 
(13.2%) and not sure (10.8%) students. Among female 
students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual 
(17.8%) than heterosexual (9.6%) and not sure (10.3%) 
students. Among male students, the prevalence was higher 
among heterosexual (16.3%) than not sure (8.5%) students. 
The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male 
(16.3%) than heterosexual female (9.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current 
electronic vapor product use was 22.6% among students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 27.0% among 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes, and 3.5% among students who had no sexual 
contact (Supplementary Table 66). The prevalence of current 
electronic vapor product use was higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (22.6%) and 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes (27.0%) than students who had no sexual 
 Surveillance Summaries
34 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
contact (3.5%) and higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (27.0%) than 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(22.6%). Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only males (16.4%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (28.6%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(3.0%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (28.6%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only males (16.4%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (27.7%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (22.2%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (4.0%). The prevalence also was higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only females 
(27.7%) than female students who had sexual contact with 
only males (16.4%).
The question measuring the prevalence of current electronic 
vapor product use was used for the first time in the 2015 
national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal trends are not 
available for this variable. The prevalence of current electronic 
vapor product use decreased significantly from 2015 (24.1%) 
to 2017 (13.2%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 37 states, the overall prevalence of current 
electronic vapor product use ranged from 7.6% to 26.2% across 
state surveys (median: 14.3%) (Supplementary Table 67). 
Across 21 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 4.7% to 17.3% (median: 7.4%).
Current Frequent Electronic Vapor Product Use
Nationwide, 3.3% of students had used an electronic vapor 
product (including e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, vape pipes, 
vaping pens, e-hookahs, and hookah pens) on 20 or more days 
during the 30 days before the survey (i.e., current frequent 
electronic vapor product use) (Supplementary Table 68). The 
prevalence of current frequent electronic vapor product use 
was higher among male (5.0%) than female (1.6%) students; 
higher among white male (6.6%), black male (2.2%), and 
Hispanic male (3.1%) than white female (2.2%), black female 
(0.5%), and Hispanic female (1.1%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade male (2.6%), 10th-grade male 
(3.8%), 11th-grade male (6.1%), and 12th-grade male (7.9%) 
than 9th-grade female (1.0%), 10th-grade female (1.5%), 
11th-grade female (1.4%), and 12th-grade female (2.2%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of current frequent 
electronic vapor product use was higher among white (4.3%) 
than black (1.4%) and Hispanic (2.1%) students, higher 
among white female (2.2%) than black female (0.5%) students, 
and higher among white male (6.6%) than black male (2.2%) 
and Hispanic male (3.1%) students. The prevalence of current 
frequent electronic vapor product use was higher among 
10th-grade (2.7%), 11th-grade (3.7%), and 12th-grade (5.0%) 
than 9th-grade (1.8%) students; higher among 12th-grade 
(5.0%) than 10th-grade (2.7%) students; higher among 
11th-grade male (6.1%) and 12th-grade male (7.9%) than 
9th-grade male (2.6%) students; and higher among 12th-grade 
male (7.9%) than 10th-grade male (3.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current frequent 
electronic vapor product use was 3.3% among heterosexual 
students; 4.0% among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; 
and 3.4% among not sure students (Supplementary Table 68). 
Among female students, the prevalence of current frequent 
electronic vapor product use was higher among lesbian and 
bisexual (3.5%) than heterosexual (1.1%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (5.2%) 
than heterosexual female (1.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of 
current frequent electronic vapor product use was 6.2% among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 
6.4% among students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes, and 0.6% among students who had 
no sexual contact (Supplementary Table 68). The prevalence 
of current frequent electronic vapor product use was higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (6.2%) and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (6.4%) than students who had no 
sexual contact (0.6%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (2.1%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (6.2%) than those who had no sexual 
contact (0.3%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(9.4%) and those who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (7.1%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(1.0%). The prevalence also was higher among male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (9.4%) than female 
students who had sexual contact with only males (2.1%) and 
higher among male students who had no sexual contact (1.0%) 
than female students who had no sexual contact (0.3%).
The question measuring the prevalence of current frequent 
electronic vapor product use was used for the first time in 
the 2015 national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal 
trends are not available for this variable. The prevalence of 
current frequent electronic vapor product use did not change 
significantly from 2015 (3.0%) to 2017 (3.3%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 37 states, the overall prevalence of current 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
35
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
frequent electronic vapor product use ranged from 1.5% to 
5.7% across state surveys (median: 2.8%) (Supplementary 
Table 69). Across 21 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 0.4% to 2.5% (median: 0.9%).
Current Daily Electronic Vapor Product Use
Nationwide, 2.4% of students had used electronic vapor 
products (including e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes, vape 
pipes, vaping pens, e-hookahs, and hookah pens) on all 30 
days during the 30 days before the survey (i.e., current daily 
electronic vapor product use) (Supplementary Table 70). The 
prevalence of current daily electronic vapor product use was 
higher among male (3.8%) than female (1.1%) students; 
higher among white male (4.7%), black male (1.6%), and 
Hispanic male (2.5%) than white female (1.5%), black female 
(0.2%), and Hispanic female (0.9%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade male (1.9%), 10th-grade male 
(2.6%), 11th-grade male (4.5%), and 12th-grade male (6.1%) 
than 9th-grade female (0.5%), 10th-grade female (0.7%), 
11th-grade female (1.0%), and 12th-grade female (2.0%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of current daily electronic 
vapor product use was higher among white (3.1%) than black 
(1.0%) and Hispanic (1.7%) students, higher among white 
female (1.5%) and Hispanic female (0.9%) than black female 
(0.2%) students, and higher among white male (4.7%) than 
black male (1.6%) and Hispanic male (2.5%) students. The 
prevalence of current daily electronic vapor product use was 
higher among 11th-grade (2.7%) and 12th-grade (4.0%) than 
9th-grade (1.2%) and 10th-grade (1.7%) students, higher 
among 12th-grade female (2.0%) than 9th-grade female 
(0.5%) students, and higher among 11th-grade male (4.5%) 
and 12th-grade male (6.1%) than 9th-grade male (1.9%) and 
10th-grade male (2.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current daily 
electronic vapor product use was 2.4% among heterosexual 
students; 2.8% among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; 
and 3.1% among not sure students (Supplementary Table 70). 
Among female students, the prevalence of current daily 
electronic vapor product use was higher among lesbian and 
bisexual (2.7%) than heterosexual (0.7%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (3.8%) 
than heterosexual female (0.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current 
daily electronic vapor product use was 4.5% among students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 4.9% 
among students who had sexual contact with only the same 
sex or with both sexes, and 0.5% among students who had no 
sexual contact (Supplementary Table 70). The prevalence of 
current daily electronic vapor product use was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(4.5%) and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (4.9%) than students who had no 
sexual contact (0.5%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (1.4%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (5.1%) than those who had no 
sexual contact (0.2%). Among male students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
females (7.0%) than those who had no sexual contact (0.9%). 
The prevalence also was higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only females (7.0%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only males (1.4%) and higher 
among male students who had no sexual contact (0.9%) than 
female students who had no sexual contact (0.2%).
The question measuring the prevalence of current daily 
electronic vapor product use was used for the first time in the 
2015 national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal trends 
are not available for this variable. The prevalence of current 
daily electronic vapor product use did not change significantly 
from 2015 (2.0%) to 2017 (2.4%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 37 states, the overall prevalence of current 
daily electronic vapor product use ranged from 0.9% to 4.0% 
across state surveys (median: 1.9%) (Supplementary Table 71). 
Across 21 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 0.1% to 1.9% (median: 0.7%).
Usually Got Electronic Vapor Products by Buying 
Them in a Store
Among the 8.7% of students nationwide who currently 
used electronic vapor products (including e-cigarettes, e-cigars, 
e-pipes, vape pipes, vaping pens, e-hookahs, and hookah pens) 
and who were aged <18 years, 13.6% had usually gotten their 
own electronic vapor products by buying them in a store 
(e.g., convenience store, supermarket, discount store, gas 
station, or vape store) during the 30 days before the survey 
(Supplementary Table 72). The prevalence of having usually 
gotten their own electronic vapor products by buying them in 
a store was higher among 12th-grade (22.9%) than 9th-grade 
(8.7%), 10th-grade (11.6%), and 11th-grade (14.3%) students 
and higher among 12th-grade male (25.3%) than 9th-grade 
male (10.0%) and 10th-grade male (12.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among the students who currently 
used electronic vapor products and who were aged <18 years, 
14.1% of heterosexual students; 10.5% of gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual students; and 21.3% of not sure students had usually 
gotten their own electronic vapor products by buying them 
 Surveillance Summaries
36 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
in a store (Supplementary Table 72). Among male students, 
the prevalence of having usually gotten their own electronic 
vapor products by buying them in a store was higher among 
heterosexual (16.5%) than gay and bisexual (5.4%) students. 
The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male 
(16.5%) than heterosexual female (9.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, among the students 
who currently used electronic vapor products and who were 
aged <18 years, 15.5% of students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex, 7.5% of students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, and 10.7% 
of students who had no sexual contact had usually gotten 
their own electronic vapor products by buying them in a store 
(Supplementary Table 72). The prevalence of having usually 
gotten their own electronic vapor products by buying them in 
a store was higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (15.5%) than students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (7.5%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having usually 
gotten their own electronic vapor products by buying them in 
a store was used for the first time in the 2017 national YRBS. 
As a result, long-term temporal trends and 2-year temporal 
changes are not available for this variable.
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 26 states, the overall prevalence of 
having usually gotten their own electronic vapor products by 
buying them in a store, among the students who currently 
used electronic vapor products and who were aged <18 years, 
ranged from 6.0% to 26.7% across state surveys (median: 
10.6%) (Supplementary Table 73). Across seven large urban 
school districts, the prevalence ranged from 10.5% to 23.6% 
(median: 18.4%).
Current Smokeless Tobacco Use
Nationwide, 5.5% of students had used chewing tobacco, 
snuff, dip, snus, or dissolvable tobacco products (e.g., Redman, 
Levi Garrett, Beechnut, Skoal, Skoal Bandits, Copenhagen, 
Camel Snus, Marlboro Snus, General Snus, Ariva, Stonewall, 
or Camel Orbs) (not counting any electronic vapor products) 
on at least 1 day during the 30 days before the survey (i.e., 
current smokeless tobacco use) (Supplementary Table 74). The 
prevalence of current smokeless tobacco use was higher among 
male (8.9%) than female (1.9%) students; higher among white 
male (11.9%), black male (5.0%), and Hispanic male (5.6%) 
than white female (2.1%), black female (1.8%), and Hispanic 
female (1.8%) students, respectively; and higher among 
9th-grade male (6.8%), 10th-grade male (7.5%), 11th-grade 
male (9.7%), and 12th-grade male (12.0%) than 9th-grade 
female (1.5%), 10th-grade female (1.8%), 11th-grade female 
(1.5%), and 12th-grade female (2.7%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of current smokeless tobacco use was higher 
among white (6.8%) than black (3.5%) and Hispanic (3.7%) 
students and higher among white male (11.9%) than black 
male (5.0%) and Hispanic male (5.6%) students. The 
prevalence of current smokeless tobacco use was higher among 
11th-grade (5.7%) and 12th-grade (7.2%) than 9th-grade 
(4.1%) students, higher among 12th-grade (7.2%) than 
10th-grade (4.6%) students, higher among 12th-grade female 
(2.7%) than 9th-grade female (1.5%) students, higher among 
11th-grade male (9.7%) and 12th-grade male (12.0%) than 
9th-grade male (6.8%) students, and higher among 12th-grade 
male (12.0%) than 10th-grade male (7.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current smokeless 
tobacco use was 5.5% among heterosexual students; 5.9% 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 6.3% among 
not sure students (Supplementary Table 74). Among female 
students, the prevalence of current smokeless tobacco use was 
higher among lesbian and bisexual (4.0%) than heterosexual 
(1.4%) students. The prevalence also was higher among 
heterosexual male (9.0%) than heterosexual female (1.4%) 
students and higher among gay and bisexual male (11.1%) 
than lesbian and bisexual female (4.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of 
current smokeless tobacco use was 9.2% among students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 8.2% among 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes, and 1.6% among students who had no sexual 
contact (Supplementary Table 74). The prevalence of current 
smokeless tobacco use was higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (9.2%) and students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (8.2%) than students who had no sexual contact (1.6%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only males (2.6%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only females or with both 
sexes (6.1%) than those who had no sexual contact (0.4%) 
and higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (6.1%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only males (2.6%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (14.6%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (14.5%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (2.9%). The prevalence also was higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only females 
(14.6%) than female students who had sexual contact with 
only males (2.6%), higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (14.5%) than 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
37
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
female students who had sexual contact with only females or 
with both sexes (6.1%), and higher among male students who 
had no sexual contact (2.9%) than female students who had 
no sexual contact (0.4%).
The question measuring the prevalence of current smokeless 
tobacco (e.g., chewing tobacco, snuff, dip, snus, or dissolvable 
tobacco products, not counting any electronic vapor products) 
use was used for the first time in the 2017 national YRBS. As a 
result, long-term temporal trends and 2-year temporal changes 
are not available for this variable.
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of current 
smokeless tobacco use ranged from 2.8% to 12.7% across state 
surveys (median: 5.9%) (Supplementary Table 75). Across 18 
large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 1.9% 
to 5.9% (median: 3.7%).
Current Frequent Smokeless Tobacco Use
Nationwide, 2.1% of students had used chewing tobacco, 
snuff, dip, snus, or dissolvable tobacco products (e.g., 
Redman, Levi Garrett, Beechnut, Skoal, Skoal Bandits, 
Copenhagen, Camel Snus, Marlboro Snus, General Snus, 
Ariva, Stonewall, or Camel Orbs) (not counting any electronic 
vapor products) on 20 or more days during the 30 days before 
the survey (i.e., current frequent smokeless tobacco use) 
(Supplementary Table 76). The prevalence of current frequent 
smokeless tobacco use was higher among male (3.7%) than 
female (0.4%) students; higher among white male (5.5%), 
black male (1.5%), and Hispanic male (1.6%) than white 
female (0.5%), black female (0.2%), and Hispanic female 
(0.3%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
male (1.6%), 10th-grade male (3.2%), 11th-grade male (4.0%), 
and 12th-grade male (6.1%) than 9th-grade female (0.2%), 
10th-grade female (0.3%), 11th-grade female (0.0%), and 
12th-grade female (0.8%) students, respectively. The prevalence 
of current frequent smokeless tobacco use was higher among 
white (2.9%) than black (0.9%) and Hispanic (1.0%) students 
and higher among white male (5.5%) than black male (1.5%) 
and Hispanic male (1.6%) students. The prevalence of current 
frequent smokeless tobacco use was higher among 10th-grade 
(1.7%), 11th-grade (2.0%), and 12th-grade (3.4%) than 
9th-grade (0.9%) students; higher among 12th-grade (3.4%) 
than 10th-grade (1.7%) students; higher among 12th-grade 
female (0.8%) than 11th-grade female (0.0%) students; higher 
among 10th-grade male (3.2%), 11th-grade male (4.0%), and 
12th-grade male (6.1%) than 9th-grade male (1.6%) students; 
and higher among 12th-grade male (6.1%) than 10th-grade 
male (3.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current frequent 
smokeless tobacco use was 2.1% among heterosexual students; 
1.0% among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 4.1% 
among not sure students (Supplementary Table 76). The 
prevalence of current frequent smokeless tobacco use was 
higher among heterosexual (2.1%) than gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual (1.0%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual male (3.7%) than heterosexual female 
(0.3%) students and higher among gay and bisexual male 
(2.7%) than lesbian and bisexual female (0.4%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current 
frequent smokeless tobacco use was 3.8% among students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 3.6% among 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes, and 0.3% among students who had no sexual 
contact (Supplementary Table 76). The prevalence of current 
frequent smokeless tobacco use was higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (3.8%) 
and students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes (3.6%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (0.3%). Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
or with both sexes (1.8%) than those who had no sexual 
contact (0.1%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(6.5%) and those who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (9.0%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(0.6%). The prevalence also was higher among male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (6.5%) than female 
students who had sexual contact with only males (0.4%) and 
higher among male students who had sexual contact with only 
males or with both sexes (9.0%) than female students who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (1.8%).
The question measuring the prevalence of current frequent 
smokeless tobacco (e.g., chewing tobacco, snuff, dip, snus, 
or dissolvable tobacco products, not counting any electronic 
vapor products) use was used for the first time in the 2017 
national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal trends and 
2-year temporal changes are not available for this variable.
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of current 
frequent smokeless tobacco use ranged from 0.6% to 5.8% 
across state surveys (median: 1.6%) (Supplementary Table 77). 
Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 0.3% to 1.4% (median: 0.6%).
Current Daily Smokeless Tobacco Use
Nationwide, 1.6% of students had used chewing tobacco, 
snuff, dip, snus, or dissolvable tobacco products, (e.g., Redman, 
Levi Garrett, Beechnut, Skoal, Skoal Bandits, Copenhagen, 
 Surveillance Summaries
38 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Camel Snus, Marlboro Snus, General Snus, Ariva, Stonewall, 
or Camel Orbs) (not counting any electronic vapor products) 
on all 30 days during the 30 days before the survey (i.e., 
current daily smokeless tobacco use) (Supplementary Table 78). 
The prevalence of current daily smokeless tobacco use was 
higher among male (2.8%) than female (0.3%) students; 
higher among white male (4.2%), black male (1.0%), and 
Hispanic male (1.2%) than white female (0.3%), black female 
(0.2%), and Hispanic female (0.3%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade male (1.0%), 10th-grade male 
(2.8%), 11th-grade male (3.0%), and 12th-grade male (4.7%) 
than 9th-grade female (0.2%), 10th-grade female (0.3%), 
11th-grade female (0.0%), and 12th-grade female (0.6%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of current daily smokeless 
tobacco use was higher among white (2.2%) than black (0.6%) 
and Hispanic (0.8%) students and higher among white male 
(4.2%) than black male (1.0%) and Hispanic male (1.2%) 
students. The prevalence of current daily smokeless tobacco 
use was higher among 10th-grade (1.5%), 11th-grade (1.5%), 
and 12th-grade (2.6%) than 9th-grade (0.6%) students; higher 
among 12th-grade (2.6%) than 10th-grade (1.5%) students; 
and higher among 10th-grade male (2.8%), 11th-grade male 
(3.0%), and 12th-grade male (4.7%) than 9th-grade male 
(1.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current daily 
smokeless tobacco use was 1.6% among heterosexual students; 
0.7% among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 3.5% 
among not sure students (Supplementary Table 78). The 
prevalence of current daily smokeless tobacco use was higher 
among heterosexual (1.6%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(0.7%) students. The prevalence also was higher among 
heterosexual male (2.8%) than heterosexual female (0.2%) 
students and higher among gay and bisexual male (2.3%) than 
lesbian and bisexual female (0.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current 
daily smokeless tobacco use was 2.9% among students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 2.8% among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 0.3% among students who had no sexual contact 
(Supplementary Table 78). The prevalence of current daily 
smokeless tobacco use was higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (2.9%) and students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (2.8%) than students who had no sexual contact (0.3%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (5.0%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(7.0%) than those who had no sexual contact (0.5%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only females (5.0%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only males (0.3%).
The question measuring the prevalence of current daily 
smokeless tobacco (e.g., chewing tobacco, snuff, dip, snus, 
or dissolvable tobacco products, not counting any electronic 
vapor products) use was used for the first time in the 2017 
national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal trends and 
2-year temporal changes are not available for this variable.
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of current 
daily smokeless tobacco use ranged from 0.4% to 5.1% across 
state surveys (median: 1.4%) (Supplementary Table 79). Across 
18 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
0.1% to 1.2% (median: 0.4%).
Current Cigar Use
Nationwide, 8.0% of students had smoked cigars, cigarillos, 
or little cigars on at least 1 day during the 30 days before the 
survey (i.e., current cigar use) (Supplementary Table 80). 
The prevalence of current cigar use was higher among male 
(10.5%) than female (5.4%) students; higher among white 
male (12.7%) and Hispanic male (7.6%) than white female 
(5.5%) and Hispanic female (5.0%) students, respectively; and 
higher among 9th-grade male (6.1%), 10th-grade male (7.4%), 
11th-grade male (11.3%), and 12th-grade male (18.0%) 
than 9th-grade female (3.9%), 10th-grade female (3.6%), 
11th-grade female (7.0%), and 12th-grade female (7.4%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of current cigar use was 
higher among white (9.0%) than Hispanic (6.3%) students 
and higher among white male (12.7%) than black male 
(8.7%) and Hispanic male (7.6%) students. The prevalence 
of current cigar use was higher among 11th-grade (9.2%) and 
12th-grade (12.5%) than 9th-grade (5.0%) and 10th-grade 
(5.5%) students, higher among 12th-grade (12.5%) than 
11th-grade (9.2%) students, higher among 11th-grade female 
(7.0%) and 12th-grade female (7.4%) than 9th-grade female 
(3.9%) and 10th-grade female (3.6%) students, higher among 
11th-grade male (11.3%) and 12th-grade male (18.0%) than 
9th-grade male (6.1%) and 10th-grade male (7.4%) students, 
and higher among 12th-grade male (18.0%) than 11th-grade 
male (11.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current cigar use 
was 7.7% among heterosexual students; 10.8% among gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual students; and 10.9% among not sure 
students (Supplementary Table 80). The prevalence of current 
cigar use was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (10.8%) 
than heterosexual (7.7%) students. Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (10.1%) 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
39
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
than heterosexual (4.5%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual male (10.4%) than heterosexual 
female (4.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of 
current cigar use was 13.2% among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex, 18.7% among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 1.9% among students who had no sexual contact 
(Supplementary Table 80). The prevalence of current cigar 
use was higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (13.2%) and students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (18.7%) than 
students who had no sexual contact (1.9%) and higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with 
both sexes (18.7%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (13.2%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (7.6%) and those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (18.3%) than those who had 
no sexual contact (1.2%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (18.3%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (7.6%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (17.7%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(20.1%) than those who had no sexual contact (2.6%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (17.7%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (7.6%) and higher among 
male students who had no sexual contact (2.6%) than female 
students who had no sexual contact (1.2%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1997–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (22.0%–8.0%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of current cigar use. A significant quadratic 
trend was not identified. The prevalence of current cigar use 
decreased from 2015 (10.3%) to 2017 (8.0%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of current 
cigar use ranged from 3.2% to 14.1% across state surveys 
(median: 7.7%) (Supplementary Table 81). Across 19 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 2.7% to 
10.5% (median: 6.3%).
Current Frequent Cigar Use
Nationwide, 1.3% of students had smoked cigars, cigarillos, 
or little cigars on 20 or more days during the 30 days before 
the survey (i.e., current frequent cigar use) (Supplementary 
Table 82). The prevalence of current frequent cigar use was 
higher among male (1.7%) than female (0.7%) students; higher 
among white male (1.7%) and Hispanic male (1.5%) than 
white female (0.7%) and Hispanic female (0.6%) students, 
respectively; and higher among 10th-grade male (1.2%) than 
10th-grade female (0.2%) students. The prevalence of current 
frequent cigar use was higher among 11th-grade (1.4%) and 
12th-grade (2.2%) than 9th-grade (0.6%) students, higher 
among 12th-grade (2.2%) than 10th-grade (0.7%) students, 
higher among 11th-grade female (0.8%) and 12th-grade 
female (1.5%) than 9th-grade female (0.3%) and 10th-grade 
female (0.2%) students, and higher among 12th-grade male 
(2.8%) than 9th-grade male (1.0%) and 10th-grade male 
(1.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current frequent 
cigar use was 1.1% among heterosexual students; 1.5% among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 4.3% among not sure 
students (Supplementary Table 82). The prevalence of current 
frequent cigar use was higher among heterosexual male (1.4%) 
than heterosexual female (0.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current 
frequent cigar use was 1.9% among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex, 4.1% among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 0.2% among students who had no sexual contact 
(Supplementary Table 82). The prevalence of current frequent 
cigar use was higher among students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex (1.9%) and students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (4.1%) than 
students who had no sexual contact (0.2%). Among female 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only males (0.9%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (2.7%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (0.2%). Among male 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females (2.7%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (8.1%) than 
those who had no sexual contact (0.1%). The prevalence also 
was higher among male students who had sexual contact with 
only females (2.7%) than female students who had sexual 
contact with only males (0.9%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend 
in the overall prevalence of current frequent cigar use during 
1997–2017 (1.3%–1.3%). A significant quadratic trend 
was identified. The prevalence of current frequent cigar use 
increased during 1997–2013 (1.3%–1.8%) and then decreased 
during 2013–2017 (1.8%–1.3%). The prevalence of current 
frequent cigar use did not change significantly from 2015 
(1.3%) to 2017 (1.3%).
 Surveillance Summaries
40 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of current 
frequent cigar use ranged from 0.4% to 2.9% across state 
surveys (median: 1.1%) (Supplementary Table 83). Across 19 
large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 0.5% 
to 1.6% (median: 1.0%).
Current Daily Cigar Use
Nationwide, 1.0% of students had smoked cigars, cigarillos, 
or little cigars on all 30 days during the 30 days before the 
survey (i.e., current daily cigar use) (Supplementary Table 84). 
The prevalence of current daily cigar use was higher among 
male (1.2%) than female (0.6%) students and higher among 
10th-grade male (1.2%) than 10th-grade female (0.2%) 
students. The prevalence of current daily cigar use was higher 
among 12th-grade (1.7%) than 9th-grade (0.4%), 10th-grade 
(0.7%), and 11th-grade (0.8%) students; higher among 
11th-grade (0.8%) than 9th-grade (0.4%) students; higher 
among 12th-grade female (1.4%) than 9th-grade female (0.2%) 
and 10th-grade female (0.2%) students; and higher among 
12th-grade male (2.0%) than 9th-grade male (0.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current daily 
cigar use was 0.8% among heterosexual students; 1.1% among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 3.9% among not sure 
students (Supplementary Table 84). The prevalence of current 
daily cigar use was higher among heterosexual male (1.0%) 
than heterosexual female (0.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current 
daily cigar use was 1.4% among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex, 3.4% among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 0.1% among students who had no sexual contact 
(Supplementary Table 84). The prevalence of current daily 
cigar use was higher among students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex (1.4%) and students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (3.4%) than 
students who had no sexual contact (0.1%) and higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes (3.4%) than students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex (1.4%). Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (0.8%) and those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (2.0%) than those who had no 
sexual contact (0.1%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(1.8%) and those who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (7.7%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(0.1%). The prevalence also was higher among male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (1.8%) than female 
students who had sexual contact with only males (0.8%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend 
in the overall prevalence of current daily cigar use during 
1997–2017 (0.9%–1.0%). A significant quadratic trend was 
identified. The prevalence of current daily cigar use increased 
during 1997–2011 (0.9%–1.4%) and then decreased during 
2011–2017 (1.4%–1.0%). The prevalence of current daily 
cigar use did not change significantly from 2015 (1.0%) to 
2017 (1.0%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of current 
daily cigar use ranged from 0.3% to 2.4% across state surveys 
(median: 0.8%) (Supplementary Table 85). Across 19 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 0.3% to 
1.1% (median: 0.7%).
Current Cigarette or Cigar Use
Nationwide, 12.3% of students had smoked cigarettes or 
cigars on at least 1 day during the 30 days before the survey (i.e., 
current cigarette or cigar use) (Supplementary Table 86). The 
prevalence of current cigarette or cigar use was higher among 
male (14.3%) than female (10.3%) students, higher among 
white male (17.5%) than white female (11.8%) students, and 
higher among 10th-grade male (11.3%) and 12th-grade male 
(23.6%) than 10th-grade female (8.4%) and 12th-grade female 
(14.6%) students, respectively. The prevalence of current 
cigarette or cigar use was higher among white (14.5%) than 
black (9.5%) and Hispanic (9.9%) students and higher among 
white male (17.5%) than black male (10.7%) and Hispanic 
male (10.6%) students. The prevalence of current cigarette or 
cigar use was higher among 10th-grade (9.8%), 11th-grade 
(13.4%), and 12th-grade (18.9%) than 9th-grade (7.6%) 
students; higher among 11th-grade (13.4%) and 12th-grade 
(18.9%) than 10th-grade (9.8%) students; higher among 
12th-grade (18.9%) than 11th-grade (13.4%) students; higher 
among 11th-grade female (11.9%) and 12th-grade female 
(14.6%) than 9th-grade female (6.6%) and 10th-grade female 
(8.4%) students; higher among 10th-grade male (11.3%), 
11th-grade male (14.8%), and 12th-grade male (23.6%) than 
9th-grade male (8.6%) students; and higher among 12th-grade 
male (23.6%) than 10th-grade male (11.3%) and 11th-grade 
male (14.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current cigarette 
or cigar use was 11.6% among heterosexual students; 19.8% 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 14.7% among 
not sure students (Supplementary Table 86). The prevalence 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
41
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
of current cigarette or cigar use was higher among gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual (19.8%) than heterosexual (11.6%) and not sure 
(14.7%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among lesbian and bisexual (19.0%) than heterosexual 
(8.9%) and not sure (12.0%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (21.3%) 
than heterosexual (14.0%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual male (14.0%) than heterosexual 
female (8.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of 
current cigarette or cigar use was 19.9% among students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 30.9% among 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes, and 3.0% among students who had no sexual 
contact (Supplementary Table 86). The prevalence of current 
cigarette or cigar use was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (19.9%) and students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(30.9%) than students who had no sexual contact (3.0%) and 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (30.9%) than students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (19.9%). Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males (15.7%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (30.9%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (2.4%) and higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (30.9%) than those who had sexual contact with 
only males (15.7%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(23.3%) and those who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (31.0%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(3.7%). The prevalence also was higher among male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (23.3%) than female 
students who had sexual contact with only males (15.7%) and 
higher among male students who had no sexual contact (3.7%) 
than female students who had no sexual contact (2.4%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1997–2017, a significant 
linear decrease (42.6%–12.3%) occurred in the overall prevalence 
of current cigarette or cigar use. A significant quadratic trend 
was not identified. The prevalence of current cigarette or cigar 
use decreased from 2015 (16.0%) to 2017 (12.3%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of current 
cigarette or cigar use ranged from 5.0% to 19.7% across state 
surveys (median: 12.7%) (Supplementary Table 87). Across 17 
large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 3.6% 
to 11.2% (median: 8.3%).
Current Cigarette, Cigar, or Smokeless 
Tobacco Use
Nationwide, 14.0% of students had smoked cigarettes or 
cigars or used smokeless tobacco on at least 1 day during 
the 30 days before the survey (i.e., current cigarette, cigar, 
or smokeless tobacco use) (Supplementary Table 88). The 
prevalence of current cigarette, cigar, or smokeless tobacco 
use was higher among male (17.3%) than female (10.7%) 
students; higher among white male (21.7%) than white 
female (12.3%) students; and higher among 9th-grade male 
(11.4%), 10th-grade male (14.1%), 11th-grade male (17.6%), 
and 12th-grade male (26.9%) than 9th-grade female (6.9%), 
10th-grade female (8.7%), 11th-grade female (12.5%), 
and 12th-grade female (14.9%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of current cigarette, cigar, or smokeless tobacco 
use was higher among white (16.8%) than black (10.2%) 
and Hispanic (10.5%) students and higher among white 
male (21.7%) than black male (11.9%) and Hispanic male 
(11.9%) students. The prevalence of current cigarette, cigar, 
or smokeless tobacco use was higher among 10th-grade 
(11.4%), 11th-grade (15.1%), and 12th-grade (20.7%) than 
9th-grade (9.1%) students; higher among 11th-grade (15.1%) 
and 12th-grade (20.7%) than 10th-grade (11.4%) students; 
higher among 12th-grade (20.7%) than 11th-grade (15.1%) 
students; higher among 11th-grade female (12.5%) and 
12th-grade female (14.9%) than 9th-grade female (6.9%) and 
10th-grade female (8.7%) students; higher among 11th-grade 
male (17.6%) and 12th-grade male (26.9%) than 9th-grade 
male (11.4%) and 10th-grade male (14.1%) students; and 
higher among 12th-grade male (26.9%) than 11th-grade male 
(17.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current cigarette, 
cigar, or smokeless tobacco use was 13.5% among heterosexual 
students; 20.5% among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 
15.6% among not sure students (Supplementary Table 88). 
The prevalence of current cigarette, cigar, or smokeless tobacco 
use was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (20.5%) than 
heterosexual (13.5%) students. Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (19.6%) 
than heterosexual (9.2%) and not sure (13.1%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (17.2%) 
than heterosexual female (9.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current 
cigarette, cigar, or smokeless tobacco use was 22.7% among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 
31.6% among students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes, and 3.9% among students 
 Surveillance Summaries
42 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
who had no sexual contact (Supplementary Table 88). The 
prevalence of current cigarette, cigar, or smokeless tobacco 
use was higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (22.7%) and students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (31.6%) than 
students who had no sexual contact (3.9%) and higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with 
both sexes (31.6%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (22.7%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (16.3%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (31.5%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (2.6%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (31.5%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (16.3%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (28.0%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(32.2%) than those who had no sexual contact (5.2%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (28.0%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (16.3%) and higher among 
male students who had no sexual contact (5.2%) than female 
students who had no sexual contact (2.6%).
The question measuring the prevalence of current smokeless 
tobacco use that is used to calculate current cigarette, cigar, or 
smokeless tobacco use was used for the first time in the 2017 
national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal trends and 
2-year temporal changes are not available for this variable.
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 32 states, the overall prevalence of current 
cigarette, cigar, or smokeless tobacco use ranged from 5.8% to 
23.1% across state surveys (median: 14.4%) (Supplementary 
Table 89). Across 17 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 4.3% to 13.6% (median: 9.5%).
Current Cigarette, Cigar, Smokeless Tobacco, or 
Electronic Vapor Product Use
Nationwide, 19.5% of students had smoked cigarettes 
or cigars or used smokeless tobacco or an electronic vapor 
product on at least 1 day during the 30 days before the survey 
(i.e., current cigarette, cigar, smokeless tobacco, or electronic 
vapor product use) (Supplementary Table 90). The prevalence 
of current cigarette, cigar, smokeless tobacco, or electronic 
vapor product use was higher among male (23.4%) than 
female (15.6%) students; higher among white male (28.1%) 
and Hispanic male (18.5%) than white female (17.2%) and 
Hispanic female (14.6%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 9th-grade male (16.3%), 10th-grade male (19.6%), 
11th-grade male (24.3%), and 12th-grade male (34.5%) 
than 9th-grade female (10.9%), 10th-grade female (13.3%), 
11th-grade female (17.8%), and 12th-grade female (20.8%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of current cigarette, 
cigar, smokeless tobacco, or electronic vapor product use was 
higher among white (22.4%) than black (14.9%) and Hispanic 
(16.6%) students and higher among white male (28.1%) than 
black male (16.2%) and Hispanic male (18.5%) students. The 
prevalence of current cigarette, cigar, smokeless tobacco, or 
electronic vapor product use was higher among 10th-grade 
(16.4%), 11th-grade (21.1%), and 12th-grade (27.5%) than 
9th-grade (13.6%) students; higher among 11th-grade (21.1%) 
and 12th-grade (27.5%) than 10th-grade (16.4%) students; 
higher among 12th-grade (27.5%) than 11th-grade (21.1%) 
students; higher among 11th-grade female (17.8%) and 
12th-grade female (20.8%) than 9th-grade female (10.9%) and 
10th-grade female (13.3%) students; higher among 10th-grade 
male (19.6%), 11th-grade male (24.3%), and 12th-grade male 
(34.5%) than 9th-grade male (16.3%) students; higher among 
11th-grade male (24.3%) and 12th-grade male (34.5%) than 
10th-grade male (19.6%) students; and higher among 12th-grade 
male (34.5%) than 11th-grade male (24.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current cigarette, 
cigar, smokeless tobacco, or electronic vapor product use 
was 19.2% among heterosexual students; 27.2% among gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual students; and 18.7% among not sure 
students (Supplementary Table 90). The prevalence of current 
cigarette, cigar, smokeless tobacco, or electronic vapor product 
use was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (27.2%) 
than heterosexual (19.2%) and not sure (18.7%) students. 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
lesbian and bisexual (27.5%) than heterosexual (14.1%) and 
not sure (16.5%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual male (23.6%) than heterosexual female 
(14.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current 
cigarette, cigar, smokeless tobacco, or electronic vapor product 
use was 32.5% among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex, 41.5% among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, and 5.7% 
among students who had no sexual contact (Supplementary 
Table 90). The prevalence of current cigarette, cigar, smokeless 
tobacco, or electronic vapor product use was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(32.5%) and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (41.5%) than students who had 
no sexual contact (5.7%) and higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(41.5%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
43
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
opposite sex (32.5%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (24.4%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (42.2%) than those who had no 
sexual contact (4.5%) and higher among those who had sexual 
contact with only females or with both sexes (42.2%) than 
those who had sexual contact with only males (24.4%). Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only females (39.0%) and those who 
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (39.1%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (7.0%). The prevalence 
also was higher among male students who had sexual contact 
with only females (39.0%) than female students who had 
sexual contact with only males (24.4%) and higher among 
male students who had no sexual contact (7.0%) than female 
students who had no sexual contact (4.5%).
The question measuring the prevalence of current smokeless 
tobacco use that is used to calculate current cigarette, cigar, 
smokeless tobacco, or electronic vapor product use was used 
for the first time in the 2017 national YRBS. As a result, long-
term temporal trends and 2-year temporal changes are not 
available for this variable.
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 32 states, the overall prevalence of current 
cigarette, cigar, smokeless tobacco, or electronic vapor product 
use ranged from 9.7% to 32.7% across state surveys (median: 
21.5%) (Supplementary Table 91). Across 17 large urban 
school districts, the prevalence ranged from 7.1% to 21.4% 
(median: 13.6%).
Tried to Quit Using All Tobacco Products
Among the 24.2% of students nationwide who used any 
tobacco products during the past 12 months, 41.4% had ever 
tried to quit using all tobacco products (including cigarettes, 
cigars, smokeless tobacco, shisha or hookah tobacco, and 
electronic vapor products) during the 12 months before the 
survey (Supplementary Table 92). The prevalence of having 
tried to quit using all tobacco products was higher among 
female (47.7%) than male (36.8%) students; higher among 
white female (51.8%) than white male (36.6%) students; and 
higher among 10th-grade female (49.2%), 11th-grade female 
(52.2%), and 12th-grade female (47.4%) than 10th-grade 
male (38.7%), 11th-grade male (35.3%), and 12th-grade male 
(32.3%) students, respectively. The prevalence of having tried 
to quit using all tobacco products was higher among white 
(42.8%) and Hispanic (42.8%) than black (32.2%) students 
and higher among white female (51.8%) and Hispanic female 
(47.9%) than black female (33.0%) students. The prevalence 
of having tried to quit using all tobacco products was higher 
among 9th-grade male (43.9%) than 11th-grade male (35.3%) 
and 12th-grade male (32.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among the 19.5% of students who 
used any tobacco products during the past 12 months, 39.4% 
of heterosexual students; 53.0% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
students; and 47.6% of not sure students had tried to quit using 
all tobacco products (Supplementary Table 92). The prevalence 
of having tried to quit using all tobacco products was higher 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (53.0%) than heterosexual 
(39.4%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among not sure (69.2%) than heterosexual (45.2%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
female (45.2%) than heterosexual male (36.2%) students and 
higher among not sure female (69.2%) than not sure male 
(23.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, among the 19.5% 
of students who used any tobacco products during the past 
12 months, 41.0% of students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex, 49.6% of students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, and 41.9% 
of students who had no sexual contact had tried to quit using 
all tobacco products (Supplementary Table 92). The prevalence 
of having tried to quit using all tobacco products was higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the same 
sex or with both sexes (49.6%) than students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (41.0%). The prevalence 
also was higher among female students who had sexual contact 
with only males (49.8%) than male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (36.3%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having tried to 
quit using all tobacco products was used for the first time in 
the 2017 national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal trends 
and 2-year temporal changes are not available for this variable.
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 21 states, the overall prevalence of having 
tried to quit using all tobacco products, among the 19.5% of 
students who used any tobacco products during the past 12 
months, ranged from 33.0% to 50.7% across state surveys 
(median: 45.1%) (Supplementary Table 93). Across 17 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 34.8% to 
46.0% (median: 39.1%).
Alcohol and Other Drug Use
Ever Drank Alcohol
Nationwide, 60.4% of students had had at least one drink 
of alcohol on at least 1 day during their life (i.e., ever drank 
 Surveillance Summaries
44 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
alcohol) (Supplementary Table 94). The prevalence of having 
ever drunk alcohol was higher among female (62.6%) than 
male (58.1%) students and higher among black female (57.3%) 
than black male (44.8%) students. The prevalence of having 
ever drunk alcohol was higher among white (61.7%) and 
Hispanic (64.7%) than black (51.3%) students, higher among 
Hispanic female (67.1%) than black female (57.3%) students, 
and higher among white male (60.5%) and Hispanic male 
(62.3%) than black male (44.8%) students. The prevalence 
of having ever drunk alcohol was higher among 10th-grade 
(58.0%), 11th-grade (66.4%), and 12th-grade (71.7%) 
than 9th-grade (47.7%) students; higher among 11th-grade 
(66.4%) and 12th-grade (71.7%) than 10th-grade (58.0%) 
students; higher among 12th-grade (71.7%) than 11th-grade 
(66.4%) students; higher among 10th-grade female (59.9%), 
11th-grade female (68.9%), and 12th-grade female (74.0%) 
than 9th-grade female (49.6%) students; higher among 
11th-grade female (68.9%) and 12th-grade female (74.0%) 
than 10th-grade female (59.9%) students; higher among 
12th-grade female (74.0%) than 11th-grade female (68.9%) 
students; higher among 10th-grade male (56.0%), 11th-grade 
male (63.7%), and 12th-grade male (69.4%) than 9th-grade 
male (45.7%) students; higher among 11th-grade male 
(63.7%) and 12th-grade male (69.4%) than 10th-grade male 
(56.0%) students; and higher among 12th-grade male (69.4%) 
than 11th-grade male (63.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 60.9% of heterosexual students; 
72.2% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 50.0% of 
not sure students had ever drunk alcohol (Supplementary Table 
94). The prevalence of having ever drunk alcohol was higher 
among heterosexual (60.9%) and gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(72.2%) than not sure (50.0%) students and higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual (72.2%) than heterosexual (60.9%) 
students. Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among heterosexual (63.8%) and lesbian and bisexual (74.3%) 
than not sure (50.6%) students and higher among lesbian and 
bisexual (74.3%) than heterosexual (63.8%) students. Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among heterosexual 
(58.5%) and gay and bisexual (66.3%) than not sure (47.3%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
female (63.8%) than heterosexual male (58.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 81.5% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 86.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 41.6% of students who had no sexual contact had 
ever drunk alcohol (Supplementary Table 94). The prevalence 
of having ever drunk alcohol was higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (81.5%) and 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes (86.8%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (41.6%) and higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (86.8%) than 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(81.5%). Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only males (85.3%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (89.3%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(44.4%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (89.3%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only males (85.3%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (78.4%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (79.6%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (38.6%). The prevalence also was higher 
among female students who had sexual contact with only males 
(85.3%) than male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (78.4%), higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (89.3%) 
than male students who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (79.6%), and higher among female students 
who had no sexual contact (44.4%) than male students who 
had no sexual contact (38.6%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a significant 
linear decrease (81.6%–60.4%) occurred in the overall 
prevalence of having ever drunk alcohol. A significant quadratic 
trend also was identified. The prevalence of having ever drunk 
alcohol decreased during 1991–2007 (81.6%–75.0%) and then 
decreased more rapidly during 2007–2017 (75.0%–60.4%). 
The prevalence of having ever drunk alcohol did not change 
significantly from 2015 (63.2%) to 2017 (60.4%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 29 states, the overall prevalence of having 
ever drunk alcohol ranged from 30.4% to 68.0% across state 
surveys (median: 58.7%) (Supplementary Table 95). Across 
19 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
38.2% to 64.8% (median: 55.4%).
Drank Alcohol Before Age 13 Years
Nationwide, 15.5% of students had their first drink of alcohol 
(other than a few sips) before age 13 years (Supplementary 
Table 96). The prevalence of having drunk alcohol for the first 
time before age 13 years was higher among male (18.2%) than 
female (12.8%) students; higher among white male (17.1%) 
and Hispanic male (22.5%) than white female (10.9%) and 
Hispanic female (15.9%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 9th-grade male (20.3%), 10th-grade male (18.1%), 
11th-grade male (17.4%), and 12th-grade male (16.2%) 
than 9th-grade female (16.0%), 10th-grade female (12.8%), 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
45
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
11th-grade female (12.3%), and 12th-grade female (9.3%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of having drunk alcohol 
for the first time before age 13 years was higher among Hispanic 
(19.3%) than white (14.0%) and black (14.9%) students, 
higher among Hispanic female (15.9%) than white female 
(10.9%) students, and higher among Hispanic male (22.5%) 
than white male (17.1%) and black male (14.9%) students. 
The prevalence of having drunk alcohol for the first time before 
age 13 years was higher among 9th-grade (18.2%), 10th-grade 
(15.4%), and 11th-grade (14.9%) than 12th-grade (12.7%) 
students; higher among 9th-grade (18.2%) than 11th-grade 
(14.9%) students; higher among 9th-grade female (16.0%), 
10th-grade female (12.8%), and 11th-grade female (12.3%) 
than 12th-grade female (9.3%) students; higher among 
9th-grade female (16.0%) than 11th-grade female (12.3%) 
students; and higher among 9th-grade male (20.3%) than 
12th-grade male (16.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 14.9% of heterosexual students; 
21.6% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 20.0% of 
not sure students had drunk alcohol for the first time before 
age 13 years (Supplementary Table 96). The prevalence of 
having drunk alcohol for the first time before age 13 years 
was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (21.6%) than 
heterosexual (14.9%) students. Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (20.2%) 
than heterosexual (11.5%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual male (17.7%) than heterosexual 
female (11.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, 20.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 28.2% 
of students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes, and 9.1% of students who had no sexual 
contact had drunk alcohol for the first time before age 13 years 
(Supplementary Table 96). The prevalence of having drunk 
alcohol for the first time before age 13 years was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(20.8%) and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (28.2%) than students who had 
no sexual contact (9.1%) and higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(28.2%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (20.8%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (15.9%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (26.9%) than those who had no 
sexual contact (7.9%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (26.9%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (15.9%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (25.0%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(32.3%) than those who had no sexual contact (10.4%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (25.0%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (15.9%), and higher among 
male students who had no sexual contact (10.4%) than female 
students who had no sexual contact (7.9%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (32.7%–15.5%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having drunk alcohol for the first time 
before age 13 years. A significant quadratic trend also was 
identified. The prevalence of having drunk alcohol for the 
first time before age 13 years did not change significantly 
during 1991–1999 (32.7%–32.2%) and then decreased during 
1999–2017 (32.2%–15.5%). The prevalence of having drunk 
alcohol for the first time before age 13 years did not change 
significantly from 2015 (17.2%) to 2017 (15.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 38 states, the overall prevalence of having drunk 
alcohol for the first time before age 13 years ranged from 7.8% 
to 22.5% across state surveys (median: 15.8%) (Supplementary 
Table 97). Across 20 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 13.8% to 21.2% (median: 16.9%).
Current Alcohol Use
Nationwide, 29.8% of students had had at least one drink of 
alcohol on at least 1 day during the 30 days before the survey 
(i.e., current alcohol use) (Supplementary Table 98). The 
prevalence of current alcohol use was higher among female 
(31.8%) than male (27.6%) students; higher among black 
female (24.3%) and Hispanic female (35.9%) than black male 
(16.9%) and Hispanic male (26.8%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade female (22.0%) and 11th-grade 
female (36.8%) than 9th-grade male (15.3%) and 11th-grade 
male (31.6%) students, respectively. The prevalence of current 
alcohol use was higher among white (32.4%) and Hispanic 
(31.3%) than black (20.8%) students, higher among white 
female (33.2%) and Hispanic female (35.9%) than black 
female (24.3%) students, higher among white male (31.6%) 
and Hispanic male (26.8%) than black male (16.9%) students, 
and higher among white male (31.6%) than Hispanic male 
(26.8%) students. The prevalence of current alcohol use was 
higher among 10th-grade (27.0%), 11th-grade (34.4%), 
and 12th-grade (40.8%) than 9th-grade (18.8%) students; 
higher among 11th-grade (34.4%) and 12th-grade (40.8%) 
than 10th-grade (27.0%) students; higher among 12th-grade 
(40.8%) than 11th-grade (34.4%) students; higher among 
10th-grade female (28.7%), 11th-grade female (36.8%), and 
 Surveillance Summaries
46 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
12th-grade female (41.2%) than 9th-grade female (22.0%) 
students; higher among 11th-grade female (36.8%) and 
12th-grade female (41.2%) than 10th-grade female (28.7%) 
students; higher among 12th-grade female (41.2%) than 
11th-grade female (36.8%) students; higher among 10th-grade 
male (25.3%), 11th-grade male (31.6%), and 12th-grade male 
(40.5%) than 9th-grade male (15.3%) students; higher among 
11th-grade male (31.6%) and 12th-grade male (40.5%) than 
10th-grade male (25.3%) students; and higher among 12th-grade 
male (40.5%) than 11th-grade male (31.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current alcohol 
use was 29.7% among heterosexual students; 37.4% among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 21.5% among not 
sure students (Supplementary Table 98). The prevalence of 
current alcohol use was higher among heterosexual (29.7%) 
and gay, lesbian, and bisexual (37.4%) than not sure (21.5%) 
students and higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (37.4%) 
than heterosexual (29.7%) students. Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among heterosexual (32.2%) 
and lesbian and bisexual (39.9%) than not sure (20.6%) 
students and higher among lesbian and bisexual (39.9%) 
than heterosexual (32.2%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual female (32.2%) than heterosexual 
male (27.7%) students and higher among lesbian and bisexual 
female (39.9%) than gay and bisexual male (29.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of 
current alcohol use was 47.5% among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex, 52.5% among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 13.1% among students who had no sexual contact 
(Supplementary Table 98). The prevalence of current alcohol 
use was higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (47.5%) and students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (52.5%) 
than students who had no sexual contact (13.1%). Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males (50.2%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (55.5%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (15.9%). Among male 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females (45.2%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (43.9%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (10.2%). The prevalence 
also was higher among female students who had sexual contact 
with only males (50.2%) than male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (45.2%), higher among female 
students who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (55.5%) than male students who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (43.9%), and higher among 
female students who had no sexual contact (15.9%) than male 
students who had no sexual contact (10.2%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (50.8%–29.8%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of current alcohol use. A significant quadratic 
trend also was identified. The prevalence of current alcohol 
use decreased during 1991–2007 (50.8%–44.7%) and then 
decreased more rapidly during 2007–2017 (44.7%–29.8%). 
The prevalence of current alcohol use did not change 
significantly from 2015 (32.8%) to 2017 (29.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 39 states, the overall prevalence of current 
alcohol use ranged from 10.6% to 34.0% across state surveys 
(median: 27.1%) (Supplementary Table 99). Across 21 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 16.8% to 
32.5% (median: 22.9%).
Usually Got Alcohol by Someone Giving It 
to Them
Among the 29.8% of students nationwide who currently 
drank alcohol, 43.5% had usually gotten the alcohol they drank 
by someone giving it to them during the 30 days before the 
survey (Supplementary Table 100). The prevalence of having 
usually gotten the alcohol they drank by someone giving it to 
them was higher among female (48.4%) than male (37.8%) 
students; higher among white female (49.4%) and Hispanic 
female (47.9%) than white male (38.6%) and Hispanic 
male (36.1%) students, respectively; and higher among 
9th-grade female (52.4%) and 12th-grade female (48.4%) 
than 9th-grade male (38.0%) and 12th-grade male (35.3%) 
students, respectively.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among the students who currently 
drank alcohol, 44.2% of heterosexual students; 42.6% of gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual students; and 29.5% of not sure students 
had usually gotten the alcohol they drank by someone giving it 
to them (Supplementary Table 100). The prevalence of having 
usually gotten the alcohol they drank by someone giving it to 
them was higher among heterosexual (44.2%) than not sure 
(29.5%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among heterosexual (50.8%) than not sure (28.2%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
female (50.8%) than heterosexual male (37.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among the students who 
currently drank alcohol, 43.0% of students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex, 36.6% of students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, 
and 51.4% of students who had no sexual contact had usually 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
47
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
gotten the alcohol they drank by someone giving it to them 
(Supplementary Table 100). The prevalence of having usually 
gotten the alcohol they drank by someone giving it to them 
was higher among students who had no sexual contact (51.4%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (43.0%) and students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes (36.6%). Among female 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only males (50.4%) and those who had 
no sexual contact (51.8%) than those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (37.3%). Among male 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had no 
sexual contact (50.9%) than those who had sexual contact 
with only females (36.1%). The prevalence also was higher 
among female students who had sexual contact with only males 
(50.4%) than male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (36.1%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having usually gotten the alcohol they 
drank by someone giving it to them, among the students who 
currently drank alcohol, during 2007–2017 (41.7%–43.5%). 
A significant quadratic trend also was not identified. The 
prevalence of having usually gotten the alcohol they drank by 
someone giving it to them did not change significantly from 
2015 (44.1%) to 2017 (43.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 31 states, the overall prevalence of having 
usually gotten the alcohol they drank by someone giving it 
to them, among the students who currently drank alcohol, 
ranged from 31.7% to 46.6% across state surveys (median: 
40.1%) (Supplementary Table 101). Across 15 large urban 
school districts, the prevalence ranged from 26.9% to 45.7% 
(median: 40.0%).
Current Binge Drinking
Nationwide, 13.5% of students had had four or more drinks 
of alcohol in a row (if they were female) or five or more drinks 
of alcohol in a row (if they were male) within a couple of 
hours on at least 1 day during the 30 days before the survey 
(i.e., current binge drinking) (Supplementary Table 102). The 
prevalence of current binge drinking was higher among black 
female (6.8%) and Hispanic female (16.0%) than black male 
(4.1%) and Hispanic male (12.0%) students, respectively 
and higher among 9th-grade female (9.2%) and 10th-grade 
female (12.6%) than 9th-grade male (5.3%) and 10th-grade 
male (10.1%) students, respectively. The prevalence of current 
binge drinking was higher among white (15.7%) and Hispanic 
(14.0%) than black (5.6%) students, higher among white 
female (15.9%) and Hispanic female (16.0%) than black 
female (6.8%) students, higher among white male (15.5%) 
and Hispanic male (12.0%) than black male (4.1%) students, 
and higher among white male (15.5%) than Hispanic male 
(12.0%) students. The prevalence of current binge drinking 
was higher among 10th-grade (11.4%), 11th-grade (15.4%), 
and 12th-grade (20.9%) than 9th-grade (7.3%) students; 
higher among 11th-grade (15.4%) and 12th-grade (20.9%) 
than 10th-grade (11.4%) students; higher among 12th-grade 
(20.9%) than 11th-grade (15.4%) students; higher among 
10th-grade female (12.6%), 11th-grade female (15.4%), and 
12th-grade female (20.1%) than 9th-grade female (9.2%) 
students; higher among 12th-grade female (20.1%) than 
10th-grade female (12.6%) and 11th-grade female (15.4%) 
students; higher among 10th-grade male (10.1%), 11th-grade 
male (15.4%), and 12th-grade male (21.9%) than 9th-grade 
male (5.3%) students; higher among 11th-grade male (15.4%) 
and 12th-grade male (21.9%) than 10th-grade male (10.1%) 
students; and higher among 12th-grade male (21.9%) than 
11th-grade male (15.4%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current binge 
drinking was 13.2% among heterosexual students; 17.2% 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 10.8% among 
not sure students (Supplementary Table 102). The prevalence 
of current binge drinking was higher among gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual (17.2%) than heterosexual (13.2%) and not sure 
(10.8%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among lesbian and bisexual (18.3%) than heterosexual 
(13.9) and not sure (10.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current 
binge drinking was 23.1% among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex, 25.2% among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 4.0% among students who had no sexual contact 
(Supplementary Table 102). The prevalence of current binge 
drinking was higher among students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex (23.1%) and students who had 
sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(25.2%) than students who had no sexual contact (4.0%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only males (23.8%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only females or with both 
sexes (26.7%) than those who had no sexual contact (5.1%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (22.5%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(21.1%) than those who had no sexual contact (2.8%). The 
prevalence also was higher among female students who had no 
sexual contact (5.1%) than male students who had no sexual 
contact (2.8%).
 Surveillance Summaries
48 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The question measuring the prevalence of current binge 
drinking using different criteria for male and female students 
was used for the first time in the 2017 national YRBS. As a 
result, long-term temporal trends and 2-year temporal changes 
are not available for this variable.
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 36 states, the overall prevalence of current 
binge drinking ranged from 4.8% to 17.9% across state surveys 
(median: 13.1%) (Supplementary Table 103). Across 20 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 4.1% to 
13.1% (median: 8.3%).
Largest Number of Alcoholic Drinks in a Row Was 
10 or More
Nationwide, 4.4% of students had reported 10 or more 
as the largest number of alcoholic drinks they had had in 
a row, within a couple of hours, during the 30 days before 
the survey (Supplementary Table 104). The prevalence of 
having reported 10 or more as the largest number of drinks 
in a row was higher among male (5.8%) than female (2.9%) 
students; higher among white male (7.0%) and Hispanic 
male (5.7%) than white female (2.9%) and Hispanic female 
(3.7%) students, respectively; and higher among 10th-grade 
male (5.1%), 11th-grade male (6.6%), and 12th-grade male 
(10.1%) than 10th-grade female (2.1%), 11th-grade female 
(3.5%), and 12th-grade female (4.6%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having reported 10 or more as the largest 
number of drinks in a row was higher among white (4.9%) 
and Hispanic (4.7%) than black (1.4%) students, higher 
among white female (2.9%) and Hispanic female (3.7%) than 
black female (1.0%) students, and higher among white male 
(7.0%) and Hispanic male (5.7%) than black male (1.5%) 
students. The prevalence of having reported 10 or more as 
the largest number of drinks in a row was higher among 
10th-grade (3.6%), 11th-grade (5.0%), and 12th-grade (7.3%) 
than 9th-grade (1.9%) students; higher among 12th-grade 
(7.3%) than 10th-grade (3.6%) students and 11th-grade 
(5.0%) students; higher among 11th-grade female (3.5%) 
and 12th-grade female (4.6%) than 9th-grade female (1.8%) 
students; higher among 12th-grade female (4.6%) than 
10th-grade female (2.1%) students; higher among 10th-grade 
male (5.1%), 11th-grade male (6.6%), and 12th-grade male 
(10.1%) than 9th-grade male (2.1%) students; and higher 
among 12th-grade male (10.1%) than 10th-grade male (5.1%) 
and 11th-grade male (6.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 4.3% of heterosexual students; 
4.8% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 6.1% of not 
sure students had reported 10 or more as the largest number 
of drinks in a row (Supplementary Table 104). The prevalence 
of having reported 10 or more as the largest number of drinks 
in a row was higher among heterosexual male (5.7%) than 
heterosexual female (2.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 7.9% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 10.1% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 0.8% of students who had no sexual contact had 
reported 10 or more as the largest number of drinks in a row 
(Supplementary Table 104). The prevalence of having reported 
10 or more as the largest number of drinks in a row was higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (7.9%) and students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes (10.1%) than students who 
had no sexual contact (0.8%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (4.8%) and those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (9.0%) than those who had 
no sexual contact (0.8%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (9.0%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (4.8%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (10.5%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(13.5%) than those who had no sexual contact (0.8%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (10.5%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (4.8%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2013–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (6.1%–4.4%) occurred in the overall 
prevalence of having reported 10 or more as the largest number 
of drinks in a row. Not enough data points were available to 
identify a quadratic trend. The prevalence of having reported 
10 or more as the largest number of drinks in a row did not 
change significantly from 2015 (4.3%) to 2017 (4.4%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 21 states, the overall prevalence of having 
reported 10 or more as the largest number of drinks in a row 
ranged from 1.9% to 6.9% across state surveys (median: 
4.1%) (Supplementary Table 105). Across 15 large urban 
school districts, the prevalence ranged from 1.1% to 3.2% 
(median: 2.1%).
Ever Used Marijuana
Nationwide, 35.6% of students had used marijuana (also 
called grass, pot, or weed) one or more times during their 
life (Supplementary Table 106). The prevalence of having 
ever used marijuana was higher among black (42.8%) and 
Hispanic (42.4%) than white (32.0%) students, higher among 
black female (44.9%) and Hispanic female (42.7%) than 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
49
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
white female (32.1%) students, and higher among black male 
(40.5%) and Hispanic male (42.1%) than white male (31.7%) 
students. The prevalence of having ever used marijuana was 
higher among 10th-grade (33.3%), 11th-grade (41.4%), 
and 12th-grade (45.8%) than 9th-grade (23.8%) students; 
higher among 11th-grade (41.4%) and 12th-grade (45.8%) 
than 10th-grade (33.3%) students; higher among 12th-grade 
(45.8%) than 11th-grade (41.4%) students; higher among 
10th-grade female (33.6%), 11th-grade female (42.3%), and 
12th-grade female (45.3%) than 9th-grade female (24.1%) 
students; higher among 11th-grade female (42.3%) and 
12th-grade female (45.3%) than 10th-grade female (33.6%) 
students; higher among 10th-grade male (33.1%), 11th-grade 
male (40.3%), and 12th-grade male (46.2%) than 9th-grade 
male (23.4%) students; higher among 11th-grade male 
(40.3%) and 12th-grade male (46.2%) than 10th-grade male 
(33.1%) students; and higher among 12th-grade male (46.2%) 
than 11th-grade male (40.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 35.2% of heterosexual students; 
50.4% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 28.8% of 
not sure students had ever used marijuana (Supplementary 
Table 106). The prevalence of having ever used marijuana 
was higher among heterosexual (35.2%) and gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual (50.4%) than not sure (28.8%) students and higher 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (50.4%) than heterosexual 
(35.2%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among lesbian and bisexual (54.3%) than heterosexual 
(34.7%) and not sure (29.9%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among heterosexual (35.7%) and 
gay and bisexual (38.5%) than not sure (24.9%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among lesbian and bisexual female 
(54.3%) than gay and bisexual male (38.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 55.5% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 67.5% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 15.0% of students who had no sexual contact 
had ever used marijuana (Supplementary Table 106). The 
prevalence of having ever used marijuana was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(55.5%) and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (67.5%) than students who had 
no sexual contact (15.0%) and higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(67.5%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (55.5%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (54.6%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (71.6%) than those who had no 
sexual contact (16.6%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (71.6%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (54.6%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (56.3%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(55.5%) than those who had no sexual contact (13.3%). The 
prevalence also was higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (71.6%) 
than male students who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (55.5%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having ever used marijuana during 
1991–2017 (31.3%–35.6%). A significant quadratic trend 
was identified. The prevalence of having ever used marijuana 
increased during 1991–1997 (31.3%–47.1%) and then 
decreased during 1997–2017 (47.1%–35.6%). The prevalence 
of having ever used marijuana did not change significantly 
from 2015 (38.6%) to 2017 (35.6%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 30 states, the overall prevalence of having 
ever used marijuana ranged from 16.6% to 44.1% across state 
surveys (median: 34.4%) (Supplementary Table 107). Across 
16 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
25.6% to 46.9% (median: 36.4%).
Tried Marijuana Before Age 13 Years
Nationwide, 6.8% of students had tried marijuana (also 
called grass, pot, or weed) for the first time before age 13 years 
(Supplementary Table 108). The prevalence of having tried 
marijuana for the first time before age 13 years was higher 
among male (8.3%) than female (5.3%) students; higher 
among black male (12.8%) and Hispanic male (12.1%) 
than black female (6.8%) and Hispanic female (7.5%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade male 
(8.0%), 10th-grade male (8.6%), 11th-grade male (8.2%), 
and 12th-grade male (8.4%) than 9th-grade female (6.0%), 
10th-grade female (5.0%), 11th-grade female (5.1%), 
and 12th-grade female (4.8%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of having tried marijuana for the first time before 
age 13 years was higher among black (9.8%) and Hispanic 
(9.8%) than white (4.7%) students, higher among Hispanic 
female (7.5%) than white female (4.0%) students, and higher 
among black male (12.8%) and Hispanic male (12.1%) than 
white male (5.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 6.3% of heterosexual students; 
11.1% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 8.7% of 
not sure students had tried marijuana for the first time before 
age 13 years (Supplementary Table 108). The prevalence of 
 Surveillance Summaries
50 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
having tried marijuana for the first time before age 13 years 
was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (11.1%) than 
heterosexual (6.3%) students. Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (10.7%) 
than heterosexual (4.3%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual male (8.2%) than heterosexual 
female (4.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, 10.6% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 18.0% 
of students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes, and 1.7% of students who had no sexual 
contact had tried marijuana for the first time before age 13 
years (Supplementary Table 108). The prevalence of having 
tried marijuana for the first time before age 13 years was higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (10.6%) and students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes (18.0%) than students who 
had no sexual contact (1.7%) and higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (18.0%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (10.6%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (6.9%) and those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (17.7%) than those who had 
no sexual contact (1.4%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (17.7%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (6.9%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (13.6%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(18.8%) than those who had no sexual contact (2.0%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (13.6%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (6.9%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (7.4%–6.8%) occurred in the overall 
prevalence of having tried marijuana for the first time before 
age 13 years. A significant quadratic trend was identified. The 
prevalence of having tried marijuana for the first time before 
age 13 years increased during 1991–1999 (7.4%–11.3%) 
and then decreased during 1999–2017 (11.3%–6.8%). The 
prevalence of having tried marijuana before age 13 years did 
not change significantly from 2015 (7.5%) to 2017 (6.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 38 states, the overall prevalence of having tried 
marijuana for the first time before age 13 years ranged from 4.1% 
to 15.7% across state surveys (median: 6.7%) (Supplementary 
Table 109). Across 19 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 5.7% to 15.9% (median: 8.1%).
Current Marijuana Use
Nationwide, 19.8% of students had used marijuana (also 
called grass, pot, or weed) one or more times during the 30 days 
before the survey (i.e., current marijuana use) (Supplementary 
Table 110). The prevalence of current marijuana use was 
higher among black (25.3%) and Hispanic (23.4%) than white 
(17.7%) students, higher among black female (25.0%) and 
Hispanic female (23.8%) than white female (17.2%) students, 
and higher among black male (25.4%) and Hispanic male 
(23.1%) than white male (18.1%) students. The prevalence of 
current marijuana use was higher among 10th-grade (18.7%), 
11th-grade (22.6%), and 12th-grade (25.7%) than 9th-grade 
(13.1%) students; higher among 11th-grade (22.6%) and 
12th-grade (25.7%) than 10th-grade (18.7%) students; higher 
among 12th-grade (25.7%) than 11th-grade (22.6%) students; 
higher among 10th-grade female (18.7%), 11th-grade female 
(23.3%), and 12th-grade female (23.8%) than 9th-grade 
female (13.3%) students; higher among 11th-grade female 
(23.3%) and 12th-grade female (23.8%) than 10th-grade 
female (18.7%) students; higher among 10th-grade male 
(18.7%), 11th-grade male (21.7%), and 12th-grade male 
(27.8%) than 9th-grade male (13.0%) students, and higher 
among 12th-grade male (27.8%) than 10th-grade male 
(18.7%) and 11th-grade male (21.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current marijuana 
use was 19.1% among heterosexual students; 30.6% among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 18.9% among not 
sure students (Supplementary Table 110). The prevalence of 
current marijuana use was higher among gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual (30.6%) than heterosexual (19.1%) and not sure 
(18.9%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among lesbian and bisexual (32.8%) than heterosexual 
(18.1%) and not sure (19.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of current 
marijuana use was 31.9% among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex, 43.3% among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 6.4% among students who had no sexual contact 
(Supplementary Table 110). The prevalence of current 
marijuana use was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (31.9%) and students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(43.3%) than students who had no sexual contact (6.4%) and 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (43.3%) than students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (31.9%). Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among those who 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
51
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
had sexual contact with only males (30.0%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (45.4%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (7.6%) and higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (45.4%) than those who had sexual contact with 
only males (30.0%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(33.4%) and those who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (37.3%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(5.1%). The prevalence also was higher among female students 
who had no sexual contact (7.6%) than male students who 
had no sexual contact (5.1%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend 
in the overall prevalence of current marijuana use during 
1991–2017 (14.7%–19.8%). A significant quadratic trend was 
identified. The prevalence of current marijuana use increased 
during 1991–1995 (14.7%–25.3%) and then decreased 
during 1995–2017 (25.3%–19.8%). The prevalence of current 
marijuana use did not change significantly from 2015 (21.7%) 
to 2017 (19.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 39 states, the overall prevalence of current 
marijuana use ranged from 8.1% to 27.3% across state surveys 
(median: 18.6%) (Supplementary Table 111). Across 21 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 15.5% to 
33.0% (median: 20.9%).
Ever Used Synthetic Marijuana
Nationwide, 6.9% of students had used synthetic marijuana 
(also called “K2,” “Spice,” “fake weed,” “King Kong,” “Yucatan 
Fire,” “Skunk,” or “Moon Rocks”) one or more times during 
their life (Supplementary Table 112). The prevalence of having 
ever used synthetic marijuana was higher among black male 
(8.4%) than black female (4.2%) students. The prevalence 
of having ever used synthetic marijuana was higher among 
Hispanic (9.1%) than white (5.9%) and black (6.3%) students, 
higher among Hispanic female (8.9%) than black female 
(4.2%) students, and higher among Hispanic male (9.3%) 
than white male (5.9%) students. The prevalence of having 
ever used synthetic marijuana was higher among 12th-grade 
(7.6%) than 9th-grade (5.5%) students and higher among 
12th-grade male (8.6%) than 9th-grade male (5.4%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 6.0% of heterosexual students; 
12.7% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 11.1% 
of not sure students had ever used synthetic marijuana 
(Supplementary Table 112). The prevalence of having ever 
used synthetic marijuana was higher among gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual (12.7%) and not sure (11.1%) than heterosexual 
(6.0%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among lesbian and bisexual (11.8%) than heterosexual 
(5.4%) and not sure (7.2%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (14.4%) 
and not sure (15.4%) than heterosexual (6.6%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (6.6%) 
than heterosexual female (5.4%) students and higher among 
not sure male (15.4%) than not sure female (7.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 10.2% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 19.1% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 1.7% of students who had no sexual contact had 
ever used synthetic marijuana (Supplementary Table 112). 
The prevalence of having ever used synthetic marijuana was 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (10.2%) and students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes (19.1%) than students 
who had no sexual contact (1.7%) and higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (19.1%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (10.2%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (8.5%) and those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (19.6%) than those who had 
no sexual contact (1.9%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (19.6%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (8.5%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (11.5%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(17.5%) than those who had no sexual contact (1.5%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (11.5%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (8.5%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having ever used 
synthetic marijuana was used for the first time in the 2015 
national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal trends are 
not available for this variable. The prevalence of having ever 
used synthetic marijuana decreased from 2015 (9.2%) to 
2017 (6.9%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 28 states, the overall prevalence of having ever used 
synthetic marijuana ranged from 4.8% to 17.3% across state 
surveys (median: 6.6%) (Supplementary Table 113). Across 17 
large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 4.9% 
to 10.4% (median: 6.8%).
 Surveillance Summaries
52 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Ever Used Cocaine
Nationwide, 4.8% of students had used any form of cocaine 
(e.g., powder, crack,†† or freebase§§) one or more times 
during their life (Supplementary Table 114). The prevalence 
of having ever used cocaine was higher among male (6.1%) 
than female (3.5%) students; higher among white male 
(5.5%), black male (4.2%), and Hispanic male (8.1%) than 
white female (3.4%), black female (1.2%), and Hispanic 
female (4.6%) students, respectively; and higher among 
9th-grade male (3.6%), 10th-grade male (5.5%), 11th-grade 
male (6.6%), and 12th-grade male (8.7%) than 9th-grade 
female (2.3%), 10th-grade female (2.3%), 11th-grade female 
(4.1%), and 12th-grade female (5.3%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having ever used cocaine was higher among 
white (4.4%) and Hispanic (6.3%) than black (2.8%) students, 
higher among Hispanic (6.3%) than white (4.4%) students, 
higher among white female (3.4%) and Hispanic female 
(4.6%) than black female (1.2%) students, and higher among 
Hispanic male (8.1%) than white male (5.5%) and black male 
(4.2%) students. The prevalence of having ever used cocaine 
was higher among 12th-grade (7.0%) than 9th-grade (2.9%), 
10th-grade (3.9%), and 11th-grade (5.4%) students; higher 
among 11th-grade (5.4%) than 9th-grade (2.9%) students; 
higher among 11th-grade female (4.1%) and 12th-grade female 
(5.3%) than 9th-grade female (2.3%) and 10th-grade female 
(2.3%) students; higher among 11th-grade male (6.6%) and 
12th-grade male (8.7%) than 9th-grade male (3.6%) students; 
and higher among 12th-grade male (8.7%) than 10th-grade 
male (5.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 4.2% of heterosexual students; 
8.0% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 10.4% of 
not sure students had ever used cocaine (Supplementary Table 
114). The prevalence of having ever used cocaine was higher 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (8.0%) and not sure (10.4%) 
than heterosexual (4.2%) students. Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (5.6%) 
than heterosexual (3.0%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (14.6%) 
and not sure (15.1%) than heterosexual (5.2%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (5.2%) 
than heterosexual female (3.0%) students, higher among gay 
and bisexual male (14.6%) than lesbian and bisexual female 
(5.6%) students, and higher among not sure male (15.1%) 
than not sure female (6.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 7.1% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 14.4% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 0.8% of students who had no sexual contact had ever 
used cocaine (Supplementary Table 114). The prevalence of 
having ever used cocaine was higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (7.1%) and students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (14.4%) than students who had no sexual contact (0.8%) 
and higher among students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes (14.4%) than students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (7.1%).
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only males (4.6%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only females or with both 
sexes (11.9%) than those who had no sexual contact (0.8%) 
and higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (11.9%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only males (4.6%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (9.2%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (21.3%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (0.8%) and higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (21.3%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only females (9.2%). 
The prevalence also was higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only females (9.2%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only males (4.6%) and higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (21.3%) than female students who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (11.9%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (5.9%–4.8%) occurred in the overall 
prevalence of having ever used cocaine. A significant quadratic 
trend also was identified. The prevalence of having ever used 
cocaine increased during 1991–2001 (5.9%–9.4%) and then 
decreased during 2001–2017 (9.4%–4.8%). The prevalence 
of having ever used cocaine did not change significantly from 
2015 (5.2%) to 2017 (4.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 32 states, the overall prevalence of having 
ever used cocaine ranged from 2.9% to 9.9% across state 
surveys (median: 4.6%) (Supplementary Table 115). Across 
20 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
2.3% to 7.8% (median: 5.8%).
Ever Used Inhalants
Nationwide, 6.2% of students had sniffed glue, breathed the 
contents of aerosol spray cans, or inhaled any paints or sprays 
 
†† Pellet-sized pieces of highly purified cocaine.
 
§§ A process in which cocaine is dissolved in ether or sodium hydroxide and the 
precipitate is filtered off.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
53
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
to get high one or more times during their life (Supplementary 
Table 116). The prevalence of having ever used inhalants was 
higher among 9th-grade female (9.0%) than 9th-grade male 
(5.6%) students and higher among 12th-grade male (5.8%) 
than 12th-grade female (4.1%) students. The prevalence of 
having ever used inhalants was higher among Hispanic (7.1%) 
than white (5.7%) students. The prevalence of having ever used 
inhalants was higher among 9th-grade (7.2%) than 10th-grade 
(5.7%) and 12th-grade (4.9%) students and higher among 
9th-grade female (9.0%) than 10th-grade female (5.6%) and 
12th-grade female (4.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 5.1% of heterosexual students; 
10.7% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 18.3% of 
not sure students had ever used inhalants (Supplementary 
Table 116). The prevalence of having ever used inhalants was 
higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (10.7%) and not sure 
(18.3%) than heterosexual (5.1%) students and higher among 
not sure (18.3%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (10.7%) 
students. Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among lesbian and bisexual (9.9%) and not sure (15.8%) 
than heterosexual (5.2%) students. Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (13.2%) and 
not sure (20.4%) than heterosexual (5.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 7.4% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 18.6% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 2.9% of students who had no sexual contact had ever 
used inhalants (Supplementary Table 116). The prevalence of 
having ever used inhalants was higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (7.4%) and students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (18.6%) than students who had no sexual contact (2.9%) 
and higher among students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes (18.6%) than students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (7.4%). Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males (7.6%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (17.1%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (3.4%) and higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (17.1%) than those who had sexual contact with 
only males (7.6%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(7.3%) and those who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (23.0%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(2.4%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only males or with both sexes (23.0%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only females (7.3%). The prevalence also 
was higher among female students who had no sexual contact 
(3.4%) than male students who had no sexual contact (2.4%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1995–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (20.3%–6.2%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having ever used inhalants. A significant 
quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence of having 
ever used inhalants decreased during 1995–2011 (20.3%–
11.4%) and then decreased more slowly during 2011–2017 
(11.4%–6.2%). The prevalence of having ever used inhalants 
did not change significantly from 2015 (7.0%) to 2017 (6.2%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 27 states, the overall prevalence of having 
ever used inhalants ranged from 5.5% to 12.6% across state 
surveys (median: 6.7%) (Supplementary Table 117). Across 17 
large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 4.6% 
to 12.4% (median: 7.4%).
Ever Used Heroin
Nationwide, 1.7% of students had used heroin (also called 
“smack,” “junk,” or “China White”) one or more times during 
their life (Supplementary Table 118). The prevalence of having 
ever used heroin was higher among male (2.4%) than female 
(0.9%) students; higher among white male (1.8%), black 
male (2.9%), and Hispanic male (2.7%) than white female 
(0.4%), black female (1.3%), and Hispanic female (1.0%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade male 
(2.2%), 11th-grade male (2.1%), and 12th-grade male (3.1%) 
than 9th-grade female (0.5%), 11th-grade female (0.8%), 
and 12th-grade female (1.4%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of having ever used heroin was higher among black 
(2.2%) than white (1.1%) students, higher among Hispanic 
female (1.0%) than white female (0.4%) students, and higher 
among black male (2.9%) than white male (1.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 1.1% of heterosexual students; 
3.5% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 7.7% of not 
sure students had ever used heroin (Supplementary Table 118). 
The prevalence of having ever used heroin was higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual (3.5%) and not sure (7.7%) than 
heterosexual (1.1%) students. Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (2.2%) 
than heterosexual (0.6%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (7.4%) 
and not sure (13.2%) than heterosexual (1.6%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (1.6%) 
than heterosexual female (0.6%) students, higher among gay 
and bisexual male (7.4%) than lesbian and bisexual female 
(2.2%) students, and higher among not sure male (13.2%) 
than not sure female (2.8%) students.
 Surveillance Summaries
54 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 1.7% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 6.6% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 0.3% of students who had no sexual contact had 
ever used heroin (Supplementary Table 118). The prevalence 
of having ever used heroin was higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (1.7%) and students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (6.6%) than students who had no sexual contact (0.3%) 
and higher among students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes (6.6%) than students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (1.7%). Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (3.6%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (0.4%) and 
those who had no sexual contact (0.4%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (2.8%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (15.4%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (0.2%) and higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (15.4%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only females (2.8%). 
The prevalence also was higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only females (2.8%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only males (0.4%) and higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (15.4%) than female students who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (3.6%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (2.4%–1.7%) occurred in the overall 
prevalence of having ever used heroin. A significant quadratic 
trend also was identified. The prevalence of having ever used 
heroin did not change significantly during 1999–2011 (2.4%–
2.9%) and then decreased during 2011–2017 (2.9%–1.7%). 
The prevalence of having ever used heroin did not change 
significantly from 2015 (2.1%) to 2017 (1.7%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having 
ever used heroin ranged from 1.2% to 9.6% across state surveys 
(median: 2.3%) (Supplementary Table 119). Across 20 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 1.3% to 
7.6% (median: 3.8%).
Ever Used Methamphetamines
Nationwide, 2.5% of students had used methamphetamines 
(also called “speed,” “crystal,” “crank,” or “ice”) one or more 
times during their life (Supplementary Table 120). The 
prevalence of having ever used methamphetamines was 
higher among male (3.4%) than female (1.4%) students; 
higher among white male (2.9%), black male (3.5%), and 
Hispanic male (4.0%) than white female (1.0%), black female 
(1.5%), and Hispanic female (1.7%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade male (2.5%), 10th-grade male 
(3.5%), 11th-grade male (3.2%), and 12th-grade male (4.3%) 
than 9th-grade female (1.2%), 10th-grade female (1.0%), 
11th-grade female (1.3%), and 12th-grade female (2.0%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of having ever used 
methamphetamines was higher among 12th-grade (3.2%) than 
9th-grade (1.9%) students and higher among 12th-grade male 
(4.3%) than 9th-grade male (2.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 1.8% of heterosexual students; 
6.1% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 7.6% 
of not sure students had ever used methamphetamines 
(Supplementary Table 120). The prevalence of having ever used 
methamphetamines was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(6.1%) and not sure (7.6%) than heterosexual (1.8%) students. 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
lesbian and bisexual (3.9%) than heterosexual (0.9%) students. 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among gay and 
bisexual (12.4%) and not sure (12.6%) than heterosexual (2.5%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
male (2.5%) than heterosexual female (0.9%) students, higher 
among gay and bisexual male (12.4%) than lesbian and bisexual 
female (3.9%) students, and higher among not sure male 
(12.6%) than not sure female (2.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 2.8% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 8.7% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 0.6% of students who had no sexual contact had 
ever used methamphetamines (Supplementary Table 120). The 
prevalence of having ever used methamphetamines was higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (2.8%) and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (8.7%) than students who had no 
sexual contact (0.6%) and higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (8.7%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (2.8%). Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only males (1.1%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (6.8%) than those who had no sexual contact (0.5%) 
and higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (6.8%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only males (1.1%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (4.2%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (14.3%) than those who 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
55
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
had no sexual contact (0.8%) and higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (14.3%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only females (4.2%). 
The prevalence also was higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only females (4.2%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only males (1.1%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a significant 
linear decrease (9.1%–2.5%) occurred in the overall prevalence 
of having ever used methamphetamines. A significant quadratic 
trend was not identified. The prevalence of having ever used 
methamphetamines did not change significantly from 2015 
(3.0%) to 2017 (2.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 30 states, the overall prevalence of having ever used 
methamphetamines ranged from 1.7% to 10.5% across state 
surveys (median: 2.6%) (Supplementary Table 121). Across 17 
large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 2.0% 
to 7.1% (median: 4.2%).
Ever Used Ecstasy
Nationwide, 4.0% of students had used ecstasy (also called 
“MDMA” [3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine]) one 
or more times during their life (Supplementary Table 122). 
The prevalence of having ever used ecstasy was higher among 
male (5.0%) than female (2.9%) students; higher among 
white male (4.1%), black male (4.1%), and Hispanic male 
(6.6%) than white female (2.8%), black female (1.7%), and 
Hispanic female (3.5%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 9th-grade male (3.5%), 10th-grade male (4.2%), 
and 11th-grade male (5.2%) than 9th-grade female (1.6%), 
10th-grade female (1.7%), and 11th-grade female (3.4%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of having ever used 
ecstasy was higher among Hispanic (5.1%) than white (3.4%) 
and black (3.0%) students, higher among Hispanic female 
(3.5%) than black female (1.7%) students, and higher among 
Hispanic male (6.6%) than white male (4.1%) and black male 
(4.1%) students. The prevalence of having ever used ecstasy 
was higher among 11th-grade (4.4%) and 12th-grade (6.0%) 
than 9th-grade (2.5%) and 10th-grade (2.9%) students, higher 
among 11th-grade female (3.4%) and 12th-grade female 
(5.1%) than 9th-grade female (1.6%) and 10th-grade female 
(1.7%) students, and higher among 12th-grade male (6.9%) 
than 9th-grade male (3.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 3.3% of heterosexual students; 
8.8% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 8.1% of not 
sure students had ever used ecstasy (Supplementary Table 
122). The prevalence of having ever used ecstasy was higher 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (8.8%) and not sure (8.1%) 
than heterosexual (3.3%) students. Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (6.4%) 
than heterosexual (2.3%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (15.0%) 
and not sure (11.2%) than heterosexual (4.2%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (4.2%) 
than heterosexual female (2.3%) students and higher among 
gay and bisexual male (15.0%) than lesbian and bisexual female 
(6.4%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 5.7% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 14.3% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 0.6% of students who had no sexual contact had 
ever used ecstasy (Supplementary Table 122). The prevalence 
of having ever used ecstasy was higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (5.7%) and 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes (14.3%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (0.6%) and higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (14.3%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (5.7%). Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only males (3.7%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (12.7%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(0.4%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (12.7%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only males (3.7%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (7.4%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (19.0%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (0.8%) and higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (19.0%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only females (7.4%). 
The prevalence also was higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only females (7.4%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only males (3.7%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2001–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (11.1%–4.0%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having ever used ecstasy. A significant 
quadratic trend was not identified. The prevalence of having 
ever used ecstasy decreased from 2015 (5.0%) to 2017 (4.0%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 28 states, the overall prevalence of having 
ever used ecstasy ranged from 2.8% to 13.0% across state 
surveys (median: 4.1%) (Supplementary Table 123). Across 
17 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
1.9% to 7.9% (median: 5.1%).
 Surveillance Summaries
56 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Ever Used Hallucinogenic Drugs
Nationwide, 6.6% of students had used hallucinogenic drugs 
(e.g., LSD, acid, PCP
, angel dust, mescaline, or mushrooms) 
one or more times during their life (Supplementary Table 124). 
The prevalence of having ever used hallucinogenic drugs was 
higher among male (7.6%) than female (5.5%) students; higher 
among black male (4.8%) and Hispanic male (8.2%) than 
black female (1.4%) and Hispanic female (5.8%) students, 
respectively; and higher among 10th-grade male (7.0%) than 
10th-grade female (4.0%) students. The prevalence of having 
ever used hallucinogenic drugs was higher among white (7.2%) 
and Hispanic (7.1%) than black (3.3%) students, higher 
among white female (6.4%) and Hispanic female (5.8%) than 
black female (1.4%) students, and higher among white male 
(7.9%) and Hispanic male (8.2%) than black male (4.8%) 
students. The prevalence of having ever used hallucinogenic 
drugs was higher among 11th-grade (8.0%) and 12th-grade 
(9.2%) than 9th-grade (4.0%) and 10th-grade (5.4%) students; 
higher among 11th-grade female (7.0%) and 12th-grade female 
(7.6%) than 9th-grade female (3.7%) and 10th-grade female 
(4.0%) students; higher among 10th-grade male (7.0%), 
11th-grade male (8.8%), and 12th-grade male (10.7%) than 
9th-grade male (4.4%) students; and higher among 12th-grade 
male (10.7%) than 10th-grade male (7.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 5.7% of heterosexual students; 11.9% 
of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 12.0% of not sure 
students had ever used hallucinogenic drugs (Supplementary 
Table 124). The prevalence of having ever used hallucinogenic 
drugs was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (11.9%) and 
not sure (12.0%) than heterosexual (5.7%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian and 
bisexual (10.9%) than heterosexual (4.3%) students. Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual 
(15.3%) than heterosexual (7.0%) students. The prevalence also 
was higher among heterosexual male (7.0%) than heterosexual 
female (4.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 9.9% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 20.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 1.3% of students who had no sexual contact had 
ever used hallucinogenic drugs (Supplementary Table 124). 
The prevalence of having ever used hallucinogenic drugs was 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (9.9%) and students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes (20.8%) than students 
who had no sexual contact (1.3%) and higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (20.8%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (9.9%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (7.3%) and those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (20.3%) than those who had 
no sexual contact (1.1%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (20.3%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (7.3%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only females (22.3%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only males or with both 
sexes (12.1%) than those who had no sexual contact (1.5%) 
and higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males or with both sexes (22.3%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only females (12.1%). The prevalence also was 
higher among male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (12.1%) than female students who had sexual contact 
with only males (7.3%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2001–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (13.3%–6.6%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having ever used hallucinogenic drugs. A 
significant quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence 
of having ever used hallucinogenic drugs decreased during 
2001–2005 (13.3%–8.5%) and then decreased more slowly 
during 2005–2017 (8.5%–6.6%). The prevalence of having 
ever used hallucinogenic drugs did not change significantly 
from 2015 (6.4%) to 2017 (6.6%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having ever 
used hallucinogenic drugs was not included in the standard 
questionnaire used in the state and large urban school district 
surveys in 2017. As a result, the range and median prevalence 
estimates across states and large urban school districts for 
the prevalence of having ever used hallucinogenic drugs are 
not available.
Ever Took Steroids Without a Doctor’s Prescription
Nationwide, 2.9% of students had taken steroid pills or shots 
without a doctor’s prescription one or more times during their 
life (Supplementary Table 125). The prevalence of having ever 
taken steroids without a doctor’s prescription was higher among 
male (3.3%) than female (2.4%) students. The prevalence of 
having ever taken steroids without a doctor’s prescription was 
higher among Hispanic (3.5%) than white (2.2%) students. 
The prevalence of having ever taken steroids without a doctor’s 
prescription was higher among 12th-grade male (3.8%) than 
9th-grade male (2.4%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 2.3% of heterosexual students; 
6.1% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 6.5% of 
not sure students had ever taken steroids without a doctor’s 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
57
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
prescription (Supplementary Table 125). The prevalence of 
having ever taken steroids without a doctor’s prescription was 
higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (6.1%) and not sure 
(6.5%) than heterosexual (2.3%) students. Among female 
students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual 
(4.8%) than heterosexual (1.8%) students. Among male 
students, the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual 
(9.8%) and not sure (7.7%) than heterosexual (2.8%) students. 
The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male 
(2.8%) than heterosexual female (1.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, 3.9% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 8.0% of 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes, and 0.7% of students who had no sexual 
contact had ever taken steroids without a doctor’s prescription 
(Supplementary Table 125). The prevalence of having ever 
taken steroids without a doctor’s prescription was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(3.9%) and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (8.0%) than students who had 
no sexual contact (0.7%) and higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (8.0%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (3.9%). Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only males (2.6%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (7.2%) than those who had no sexual contact (1.0%) 
and higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (7.2%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only males (2.6%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (4.9%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (10.1%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (0.5%). The prevalence also was higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only females 
(4.9%) than female students who had sexual contact with only 
males (2.6%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having ever taken steroids without 
a doctor’s prescription during 1991–2017 (2.7%–2.9%). A 
significant quadratic trend was identified. The prevalence 
of having ever taken steroids without a doctor’s prescription 
increased during 1991–2001 (2.7%–5.0%) and then decreased 
during 2001–2017 (5.0%–2.9%). The prevalence of having 
ever taken steroids without a doctor’s prescription did not 
change significantly from 2015 (3.5%) to 2017 (2.9%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 22 states, the overall prevalence of having ever taken 
steroids without a doctor’s prescription ranged from 2.1% to 9.2% 
across state surveys (median: 3.5%) (Supplementary Table 126). 
Across 14 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 2.6% to 7.5% (median: 4.5%).
Ever Took Prescription Pain Medicine Without a 
Doctor’s Prescription or Differently than How a 
Doctor Told Them to Use It
Nationwide, 14.0% of students had taken prescription 
pain medicine (counting drugs such as codeine, Vicodin, 
OxyContin, Hydrocodone, and Percocet) without a do 
ctor’s 
prescription or differently than how a doctor told them to 
use it one or more times during their life (Supplementary 
Table 127)). The prevalence of having ever taken prescription 
pain medicine without a doctor’s prescription or differently 
than how a doctor told them to use it was higher among 
Hispanic (15.1%) than black (12.3%) students and higher 
among Hispanic female (16.1%) than black female (12.5%) 
students. The prevalence of having ever taken prescription 
pain medicine without a doctor’s prescription or differently 
than how a doctor told them to use it was higher among 
11th-grade (15.4%) and 12th-grade (17.0%) than 9th-grade 
(10.9%) students, higher among 12th-grade (17.0%) than 
10th-grade (12.8%) students, higher among 11th-grade female 
(16.4%) and 12th-grade female (16.2%) than 9th-grade female 
(12.1%) students, higher among 11th-grade male (14.3%) 
and 12th-grade male (17.7%) than 9th-grade male (9.7%) 
students, and higher among 12th-grade male (17.7%) than 
10th-grade male (12.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 12.9% of heterosexual students; 
24.3% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 17.7% of 
not sure students had ever taken prescription pain medicine 
without a doctor’s prescription or differently than how a doctor 
told them to use it (Supplementary Table 127). The prevalence 
of having ever taken prescription pain medicine without a 
doctor’s prescription or differently than how a doctor told them 
to use it was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (24.3%) 
and not sure (17.7%) than heterosexual (12.9%) students and 
higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (24.3%) than not sure 
(17.7%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among lesbian and bisexual (23.8%) than heterosexual 
(12.9%) students. Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among gay and bisexual (25.4%) than heterosexual 
(12.8%) and not sure (13.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, 19.9% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 35.3% 
of students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes, and 5.7% of students who had no sexual 
contact had ever taken prescription pain medicine without 
 Surveillance Summaries
58 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
a doctor’s prescription or differently than how a doctor told 
them to use it (Supplementary Table 127). The prevalence of 
having ever taken prescription pain medicine without a doctor’s 
prescription or differently than how a doctor told them to use 
it was higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (19.9%) and students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (35.3%) 
than students who had no sexual contact (5.7%) and higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the same 
sex or with both sexes (35.3%) than students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (19.9%). Among female 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only males (18.9%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (37.2%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (6.9%) and higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (37.2%) than those who had sexual contact with 
only males (18.9%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(20.8%) and those who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (29.8%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(4.4%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only males or with both sexes (29.8%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only females (20.8%). The prevalence also 
was higher among female students who had no sexual contact 
(6.9%) than male students who had no sexual contact (4.4%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having ever taken 
prescription pain medicine without a doctor’s prescription or 
differently than how a doctor told them to use it was used for 
the first time in the 2017 national YRBS. As a result, long-term 
temporal trends and 2-year temporal changes are not available 
for this variable.
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 36 states, the overall prevalence of having 
ever taken prescription pain medicine without a doctor’s 
prescription or differently than how a doctor told them to use 
it ranged from 7.8% to 19.3% across state surveys (median: 
13.7%) (Supplementary Table 128). Across 20 large urban 
school districts, the prevalence ranged from 8.9% to 18.1% 
(median: 12.8%).
Ever Injected Any Illegal Drug
Nationwide, 1.5% of students had used a needle to inject 
any illegal drug into their body one or more times during their 
life (Supplementary Table 129). The prevalence of having ever 
injected any illegal drug was higher among male (2.0%) than 
female (0.8%) students; higher among white male (1.4%), 
black male (2.6%), and Hispanic male (2.1%) than white 
female (0.5%), black female (1.1%), and Hispanic female 
(0.9%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
male (2.1%) and 10th-grade male (1.9%) than 9th-grade 
female (0.6%) and 10th-grade female (0.6%) students, 
respectively. The prevalence of having ever injected any illegal 
drug was higher among 12th-grade (1.9%) than 11th-grade 
(1.1%) students and higher among 12th-grade female (1.3%) 
than 11th-grade female (0.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 1.0% of heterosexual students; 
3.4% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 6.1% of not 
sure students had ever injected any illegal drug (Supplementary 
Table 129). The prevalence of having ever injected any illegal 
drug was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (3.4%) and 
not sure (6.1%) than heterosexual (1.0%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian and 
bisexual (2.3%) than heterosexual (0.4%) students. Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among gay and 
bisexual (5.7%) and not sure (8.0%) than heterosexual (1.5%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
male (1.5%) than heterosexual female (0.4%) students and 
higher among gay and bisexual male (5.7%) than lesbian and 
bisexual female (2.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 1.4% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 6.0% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 0.2% of students who had no sexual contact had 
ever injected any illegal drug (Supplementary Table 129). The 
prevalence of having ever injected any illegal drug was higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (1.4%) and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (6.0%) than students who had 
no sexual contact (0.2%) and higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(6.0%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (1.4%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (4.3%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only males (0.3%) and those who had no sexual 
contact (0.3%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(2.4%) and those who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (11.2%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(0.1%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only males or with both sexes (11.2%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only females (2.4%). The prevalence also 
was higher among male students who had sexual contact with 
only females (2.4%) than female students who had sexual 
contact with only males (0.3%).
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
59
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Trend analyses indicated that during 1995–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (2.1%–1.5%) occurred in the overall 
prevalence of having ever injected any illegal drug. A significant 
quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence of having 
ever injected any illegal drug did not change significantly 
during 1995–2011 (2.1%–2.3%) and then decreased during 
2011–2017 (2.3%–1.5%). The prevalence of having ever 
injected any illegal drug did not change significantly from 
2015 (1.8%) to 2017 (1.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 24 states, the overall prevalence of having 
ever injected any illegal drug ranged from 1.4% to 8.0% across 
state surveys (median: 2.4%) (Supplementary Table 130). 
Across 16 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 1.4% to 6.1% (median: 3.3%).
Were Offered, Sold, or Given an Illegal Drug on 
School Property
Nationwide, 19.8% of students had been offered, sold, or 
given an illegal drug on school property during the 12 months 
before the survey (Supplementary Table 131). The prevalence 
of having been offered, sold, or given an illegal drug on 
school property was higher among male (20.9%) than female 
(18.7%) students; higher among white male (19.6%) than 
white female (15.9%) students; and higher among 10th-grade 
male (22.1%) and 12th-grade male (21.5%) than 10th-grade 
female (18.5%) and 12th-grade female (17.8%) students, 
respectively. The prevalence of having been offered, sold, or 
given an illegal drug on school property was higher among 
Hispanic (25.4%) than white (17.7%) and black (18.9%) 
students, higher among Hispanic female (25.0%) than white 
female (15.9%) and black female (18.2%) students, and higher 
among Hispanic male (25.8%) than white male (19.6%) and 
black male (19.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 18.9% of heterosexual students; 
28.2% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 19.6% of 
not sure students had been offered, sold, or given an illegal 
drug on school property (Supplementary Table 131). The 
prevalence of having been offered, sold, or given an illegal 
drug on school property was higher among gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual (28.2%) than heterosexual (18.9%) and not sure 
(19.6%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among lesbian and bisexual (28.1%) than heterosexual 
(17.2%) and not sure (18.7%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (28.8%) 
than heterosexual (20.4%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual male (20.4%) than heterosexual 
female (17.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 24.3% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 31.9% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 13.3% of students who had no sexual contact had 
been offered, sold, or given an illegal drug on school property 
(Supplementary Table 131). The prevalence of having been 
offered, sold, or given an illegal drug on school property was 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (24.3%) and students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes (31.9%) than students who 
had no sexual contact (13.3%) and higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(31.9%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (24.3%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (22.2%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (33.1%) than those who had no 
sexual contact (13.0%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (33.1%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (22.2%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (26.0%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(28.5%) than those who had no sexual contact (13.6%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (26.0%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (22.2%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1993–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (24.0%–19.8%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having been offered, sold, or given an 
illegal drug on school property. A significant quadratic trend 
also was identified. The prevalence of having been offered, 
sold, or given an illegal drug on school property increased 
during 1993–1997 (24.0%–31.7%) and then decreased during 
1997–2017 (31.7%–19.8%). The prevalence of having been 
offered, sold, or given an illegal drug on school property did 
not change significantly from 2015 (21.7%) to 2017 (19.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 34 states, the overall prevalence of having 
been offered, sold, or given an illegal drug on school property 
ranged from 12.1% to 30.7% across state surveys (median: 
22.3%) (Supplementary Table 132). Across 19 large urban 
school districts, the prevalence ranged from 19.7% to 32.2% 
(median: 27.6%).
 Surveillance Summaries
60 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Sexual Behaviors Related to Unintended 
Pregnancy and Sexually Transmitted 
Infections, Including HIV Infection
Ever Had Sexual Intercourse
Nationwide, 39.5% of students had ever had sexual 
intercourse (Supplementary Table 133). The prevalence of 
having ever had sexual intercourse was higher among male 
(41.4%) than female (37.7%) students; higher among black 
male (52.7%) and Hispanic male (44.1%) than black female 
(39.4%) and Hispanic female (37.9%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade male (23.3%) than 9th-grade 
female (17.2%) students. The prevalence of having ever had 
sexual intercourse was higher among black (45.8%) than 
white (38.6%) students, higher among black male (52.7%) 
and Hispanic male (44.1%) than white male (38.5%) 
students, and higher among black male (52.7%) than 
Hispanic male (44.1%) students. The prevalence of having 
ever had sexual intercourse was higher among 10th-grade 
(36.2%), 11th-grade (47.3%), and 12th-grade (57.3%) 
than 9th-grade (20.4%) students; higher among 11th-grade 
(47.3%) and 12th-grade (57.3%) than 10th-grade (36.2%) 
students; higher among 12th-grade (57.3%) than 11th-grade 
(47.3%) students; higher among 10th-grade female (34.4%), 
11th-grade female (45.8%), and 12th-grade female (55.8%) 
than 9th-grade female (17.2%) students; higher among 
11th-grade female (45.8%) and 12th-grade female (55.8%) 
than 10th-grade female (34.4%) students; higher among 
12th-grade female (55.8%) than 11th-grade female (45.8%) 
students; higher among 10th-grade male (38.0%), 11th-grade 
male (48.8%), and 12th-grade male (58.9%) than 9th-grade 
male (23.3%) students; higher among 11th-grade male 
(48.8%) and 12th-grade male (58.9%) than 10th-grade 
male (38.0%) students; and higher among 12th-grade male 
(58.9%) than 11th-grade male (48.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 39.1% of heterosexual students; 
48.4% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 28.4% of not 
sure students had ever had sexual intercourse (Supplementary 
Table 133). The prevalence of having ever had sexual 
intercourse was higher among heterosexual (39.1%) and gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual (48.4%) than not sure (28.4%) students 
and higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (48.4%) than 
heterosexual (39.1%) students. Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among heterosexual (36.3%) and lesbian 
and bisexual (50.1%) than not sure (25.7%) students and 
higher among lesbian and bisexual (50.1%) than heterosexual 
(36.3%) students. Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among heterosexual (41.6%) than not sure (30.8%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
male (41.6%) than heterosexual female (36.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 78.2% of students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex and 74.5% 
of students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes had ever had sexual intercourse (students 
who had no sexual contact are excluded from these analyses) 
(Supplementary Table 133).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (54.1%–39.5%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having ever had sexual intercourse. A 
significant quadratic trend was not identified. The prevalence 
of having ever had sexual intercourse did not change 
significantly from 2015 (41.2%) to 2017 (39.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having 
ever had sexual intercourse ranged from 29.1% to 45.9% across 
state surveys (median: 37.7%) (Supplementary Table 134). 
Across 20 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 21.7% to 49.2% (median: 37.2%).
Had Sexual Intercourse Before Age 13 Years
Nationwide, 3.4% of students had had sexual intercourse for 
the first time before age 13 years (Supplementary Table 135). 
The prevalence of having had sexual intercourse before age 
13 years was higher among male (4.8%) than female (2.0%) 
students; higher among black male (12.8%) and Hispanic male 
(6.0%) than black female (2.5%) and Hispanic female (1.9%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade male 
(5.7%), 10th-grade male (4.6%), 11th-grade male (3.5%), 
and 12th-grade male (5.1%) than 9th-grade female (2.2%), 
10th-grade female (2.2%), 11th-grade female (1.2%), and 
12th-grade female (1.9%) students, respectively. The prevalence 
of having had sexual intercourse before age 13 years was higher 
among black (7.5%) and Hispanic (4.0%) than white (2.1%) 
students, higher among black (7.5%) than Hispanic (4.0%) 
students, higher among black male (12.8%) and Hispanic male 
(6.0%) than white male (2.3%) students, and higher among 
black male (12.8%) than Hispanic male (6.0%) students. The 
prevalence of having had sexual intercourse before age 13 years 
was higher among 9th-grade (4.1%), 10th-grade (3.4%), and 
12th-grade (3.5%) than 11th-grade (2.3%) students and higher 
among 9th-grade male (5.7%) and 12th-grade male (5.1%) 
than 11th-grade male (3.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 3.0% of heterosexual students; 
6.1% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 4.1% of 
not sure students had had sexual intercourse before age 13 
years (Supplementary Table 135). The prevalence of having 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
61
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
had sexual intercourse before age 13 years was higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual (6.1%) than heterosexual (3.0%) 
students. Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among lesbian and bisexual (5.2%) than heterosexual (1.3%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
male (4.6%) than heterosexual female (1.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 5.8% of students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex and 10.5% of 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes had had sexual intercourse before age 13 years 
(students who had no sexual contact are excluded from these 
analyses) (Supplementary Table 135). The prevalence of having 
had sexual intercourse before age 13 years was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes (10.5%) than students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex (5.8%). Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (8.2%) than those who 
had sexual contact with only males (2.8%). Among male 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (17.5%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only females (8.4%). 
The prevalence also was higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only females (8.4%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only males (2.8%) and higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (17.5%) than female students who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (8.2%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (10.2%–3.4%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having had sexual intercourse before age 
13 years. A significant quadratic trend was not identified. The 
prevalence of having had sexual intercourse before age 13 years 
did not change significantly from 2015 (3.9%) to 2017 (3.4%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 35 states, the overall prevalence of having had sexual 
intercourse before age 13 years ranged from 2.1% to 6.0% across 
state surveys (median: 3.3%) (Supplementary Table 136). Across 
20 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 2.7% 
to 9.0% (median: 4.7%).
Had Sexual Intercourse with Four or More Persons
Nationwide, 9.7% of students had had sexual intercourse 
with four or more persons during their life (Supplementary 
Table 137). The prevalence of having had sexual intercourse 
with four or more persons was higher among male (11.6%) 
than female (7.9%) students; higher among black male 
(23.2%) and Hispanic male (12.0%) than black female (7.0%) 
and Hispanic female (6.8%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 9th-grade male (6.0%), 10th-grade male (9.7%), and 
11th-grade male (12.2%) than 9th-grade female (1.8%), 
10th-grade female (5.1%), and 11th-grade female (9.1%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of having had sexual 
intercourse with four or more persons was higher among black 
(14.8%) than white (8.6%) and Hispanic (9.4%) students, 
higher among black male (23.2%) and Hispanic male (12.0%) 
than white male (8.6%) students, and higher among black male 
(23.2%) than Hispanic male (12.0%) students. The prevalence 
of having had sexual intercourse with four or more persons was 
higher among 10th-grade (7.3%), 11th-grade (10.6%), and 
12th-grade (18.0%) than 9th-grade (4.0%) students; higher 
among 11th-grade (10.6%) and 12th-grade (18.0%) than 
10th-grade (7.3%) students; higher among 12th-grade (18.0%) 
than 11th-grade (10.6%) students; higher among 10th-grade 
female (5.1%), 11th-grade female (9.1%), and 12th-grade 
female (16.5%) than 9th-grade female (1.8%) students; higher 
among 11th-grade female (9.1%) and 12th-grade female 
(16.5%) than 10th-grade female (5.1%) students; higher 
among 12th-grade female (16.5%) than 11th-grade female 
(9.1%) students; higher among 10th-grade male (9.7%), 
11th-grade male (12.2%), and 12th-grade male (19.5%) than 
9th-grade male (6.0%) students; higher among 11th-grade 
male (12.2%) and 12th-grade male (19.5%) than 10th-grade 
male (9.7%) students; and higher among 12th-grade male 
(19.5%) than 11th-grade male (12.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 9.1% of heterosexual students; 
14.7% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 9.9% of not 
sure students had had sexual intercourse with four or more 
persons (Supplementary Table 137). The prevalence of having 
had sexual intercourse with four or more persons was higher 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (14.7%) than heterosexual 
(9.1%) and not sure (9.9%) students. Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (15.0%) 
than heterosexual (6.5%) and not sure (8.0%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (11.5%) 
than heterosexual female (6.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 17.7% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex and 28.6% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (students who had no sexual contact are excluded from 
these analyses) had had sexual intercourse with four or more 
persons (Supplementary Table 137). The prevalence of having 
had sexual intercourse with four or more persons was higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the same 
sex or with both sexes (28.6%) than students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (17.7%). Among female 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
 Surveillance Summaries
62 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (30.1%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (12.5%). 
The prevalence also was higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only females (22.1%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only males (12.5%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (18.7%–9.7%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having had sexual intercourse with four or 
more persons. A significant quadratic trend was not identified. 
The prevalence of having had sexual intercourse with four or 
more persons did not change significantly from 2015 (11.5%) 
to 2017 (9.7%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 32 states, the overall prevalence of having had sexual 
intercourse with four or more persons ranged from 5.4% to 
12.7% across state surveys (median: 8.8%) (Supplementary 
Table 138). Across 19 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 5.9% to 14.8% (median: 9.5%).
Currently Sexually Active
Nationwide, 28.7% of students had had sexual intercourse 
with at least one person during the 3 months before the survey 
(i.e., currently sexually active) (Supplementary Table 139). The 
prevalence of being currently sexually active was higher among 
black male (34.6%) than black female (28.4%) students. The 
prevalence of being currently sexually active was higher among 
black male (34.6%) than white male (27.6%) students. The 
prevalence of being currently sexually active was higher among 
10th-grade (24.9%), 11th-grade (35.3%), and 12th-grade 
(44.3%) than 9th-grade (12.9%) students; higher among 
11th-grade (35.3%) and 12th-grade (44.3%) than 10th-grade 
(24.9%) students; higher among 12th-grade (44.3%) than 
11th-grade (35.3%) students; higher among 10th-grade female 
(24.6%), 11th-grade female (35.8%), and 12th-grade female 
(45.1%) than 9th-grade female (11.7%) students; higher 
among 11th-grade female (35.8%) and 12th-grade female 
(45.1%) than 10th-grade female (24.6%) students; higher 
among 12th-grade female (45.1%) than 11th-grade female 
(35.8%) students; higher among 10th-grade male (25.3%), 
11th-grade male (34.7%), and 12th-grade male (43.5%) than 
9th-grade male (14.1%) students; higher among 11th-grade 
male (34.7%) and 12th-grade male (43.5%) than 10th-grade 
male (25.3%) students; and higher among 12th-grade male 
(43.5%) than 11th-grade male (34.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 28.5% of heterosexual students; 
33.7% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 19.8% of not 
sure students were currently sexually active (Supplementary Table 
139). The prevalence of being currently sexually active was higher 
among heterosexual (28.5%) and gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(33.7%) than not sure (19.8%) students and higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual (33.7%) than heterosexual (28.5%) 
students. Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among heterosexual (28.0%) and lesbian and bisexual (36.5%) 
than not sure (18.6%) students and higher among lesbian and 
bisexual (36.5%) than heterosexual (28.0%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among lesbian and bisexual female 
(36.5%) than gay and bisexual male (26.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 56.7% of students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex and 55.6% 
of students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes were currently sexually active (students 
who had no sexual contact are excluded from these analyses) 
(Supplementary Table 139). The prevalence of being currently 
sexually active was higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (58.0%) 
than male students who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (48.0%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (37.5%–28.7%) occurred in 
the overall prevalence of being currently sexually active. A 
significant quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence 
of being currently sexually active decreased during 1991–2013 
(37.5%–34.0%) and then decreased more rapidly during 
2013–2017 (34.0%–28.7%). The prevalence of being 
currently sexually active did not change significantly from 
2015 (30.1%) to 2017 (28.7%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 35 states, the overall prevalence of being 
currently sexually active ranged from 19.2% to 33.5% across 
state surveys (median: 26.3%) (Supplementary Table 140). 
Across 19 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 15.4% to 35.6% (median: 25.0%).
Used a Condom During Last Sexual Intercourse
Among the 28.7% of currently sexually active students 
nationwide, 53.8% reported that either they or their partner had 
used a condom during last sexual intercourse (Supplementary 
Table 141). The prevalence of having used a condom during last 
sexual intercourse was higher among male (61.3%) than female 
(46.9%) students; higher among white male (61.9%), black 
male (57.9%), and Hispanic male (62.4%) than white female 
(47.0%), black female (45.8%), and Hispanic female (47.1%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade male 
(61.1%), 10th-grade male (63.2%), 11th-grade male (63.1%), 
and 12th-grade male (59.1%) than 9th-grade female (46.8%), 
10th-grade female (52.4%), 11th-grade female (50.0%), and 
12th-grade female (41.3%) students, respectively. The prevalence 
of having used a condom during last sexual intercourse was 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
63
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
higher among 10th-grade (57.8%) and 11th-grade (56.3%) 
than 12th-grade (49.9%) students and higher among 10th-grade 
female (52.4%) and 11th-grade female (50.0%) than 12th-grade 
female (41.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually active 
students, 56.1% of heterosexual students; 39.9% of gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual students; and 44.1% of not sure 
students had used a condom during last sexual intercourse 
(Supplementary Table 141). The prevalence of having used 
a condom during last sexual intercourse was higher among 
heterosexual (56.1%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (39.9%) 
students. Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among heterosexual (49.6%) than lesbian and bisexual (37.3%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
male (61.8%) than heterosexual female (49.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually 
active students, 56.3% of students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex and 39.7% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes had 
used a condom during last sexual intercourse (male and female 
students who had no sexual contact and female students 
who had sexual contact with only females are excluded from 
these analyses) (Supplementary Table 141). The prevalence 
of having used a condom during last sexual intercourse was 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (56.3%) than students who had sexual contact 
with only the same sex or with both sexes (39.7%). Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among those who 
had sexual contact with only males (50.3%) than those who 
had sexual contact with both sexes (36.1%). The prevalence 
also was higher among male students who had sexual contact 
with only females (61.6%) than female students who had sexual 
contact with only males (50.3%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear increase (46.2%–53.8%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having used a condom during last sexual 
intercourse, among currently sexually active students. A 
significant quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence 
of having used a condom during last sexual intercourse 
increased during 1991–2005 (46.2%–62.8%) and then 
decreased during 2005–2017 (62.8%–53.8%). The prevalence 
of having used a condom during last sexual intercourse did not 
change significantly from 2015 (56.9%) to 2017 (53.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 35 states, the overall prevalence of having 
used a condom during last sexual intercourse, among currently 
sexually active students, ranged from 42.7% to 65.6% across 
state surveys (median: 54.4%) (Supplementary Table 142). 
Across 19 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 45.0% to 64.5% (median: 56.3%).
Used Birth Control Pills Before Last 
Sexual Intercourse
Among the 28.7% of currently sexually active students 
nationwide, 20.7% reported that either they or their partner 
had used birth control pills to prevent pregnancy before last 
sexual intercourse (Supplementary Table 143). The prevalence 
of having used birth control pills before last sexual intercourse 
was higher among 12th-grade female (31.4%) than 12th-grade 
male (22.8%) students. The prevalence of having used birth 
control pills before last sexual intercourse was higher among 
white (27.1%) than black (13.2%) and Hispanic (12.1%) 
students, higher among white female (29.6%) than black 
female (11.2%) and Hispanic female (12.0%) students, and 
higher among white male (24.5%) than black male (15.1%) 
and Hispanic male (12.1%) students. The prevalence of 
having used birth control pills before last sexual intercourse 
was higher among 10th-grade (17.0%), 11th-grade (20.6%), 
and 12th-grade (27.2%) than 9th-grade (8.6%) students; 
higher among 12th-grade (27.2%) than 10th-grade (17.0%) 
and 11th-grade (20.6%) students; higher among 10th-grade 
female (17.4%), 11th-grade female (19.9%), and 12th-grade 
female (31.4%) than 9th-grade female (10.0%) students; 
higher among 12th-grade female (31.4%) than 10th-grade 
female (17.4%) and 11th-grade female (19.9%) students; 
and higher among 10th-grade male (16.7%), 11th-grade male 
(21.5%), and 12th-grade male (22.8%) than 9th-grade male 
(7.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually active 
students, 21.7% of heterosexual students; 15.4% of gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual students; and 10.2% of not sure students had used 
birth control pills before last sexual intercourse (Supplementary 
Table 143). The prevalence of having used birth control pills before 
last sexual intercourse was higher among heterosexual (21.7%) 
than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (15.4%) and not sure (10.2%) 
students. Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among heterosexual (24.2%) than lesbian and bisexual (16.2%) 
students. Among male students, the prevalence was higher among 
heterosexual (19.5%) than gay and bisexual (10.5%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual female (24.2%) 
than heterosexual male (19.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually 
active students, 21.8% of students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex and 17.0% of students who had sexual 
contact with both sexes had used birth control pills before 
last sexual intercourse (students who had no sexual contact 
 Surveillance Summaries
64 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
are excluded from these analyses) (Supplementary Table 143).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear increase (20.8%–20.7%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having used birth control pills before last 
sexual intercourse, among currently sexually active students.** 
A significant quadratic trend also was identified. The 
prevalence of having used birth control pills before last sexual 
intercourse decreased during 1991–1995 (20.8%–17.4%) 
and then increased during 1995–2017 (17.4%–20.7%). The 
prevalence of having used birth control pills before last sexual 
intercourse did not change significantly from 2015 (18.2%) 
to 2017 (20.7%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having used birth 
control pills before last sexual intercourse, among currently 
sexually active students, ranged from 14.1% to 34.8% across 
state surveys (median: 21.2%) (Supplementary Table 144). 
Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 8.6% to 23.1% (median: 13.5%).
Used an IUD or Implant Before Last 
Sexual Intercourse
Among the 28.7% of currently sexually active students 
nationwide, 4.1% reported that either they or their partner had 
used an intrauterine device (IUD) (e.g., Mirena or ParaGard) or 
implant (e.g., Implanon or Nexplanon) to prevent pregnancy 
before last sexual intercourse (Supplementary Table 145). The 
prevalence of having used an IUD or implant before last sexual 
intercourse was higher among female (5.3%) than male (2.7%) 
students; higher among white female (6.2%) and Hispanic 
female (4.4%) than white male (3.4%) and Hispanic male 
(0.1%) students, respectively; and higher among 12th-grade 
female (6.0%) than 12th-grade male (3.2%) students. The 
prevalence of having used an IUD or implant before last sexual 
intercourse was higher among white (4.9%) than Hispanic 
(2.2%) students and higher among white male (3.4%) than 
Hispanic male (0.1%) students. The prevalence of having used an 
IUD or implant before last sexual intercourse was higher among 
12th-grade male (3.2%) than 9th-grade male (1.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually active 
students, 4.0% of heterosexual students; 4.1% of gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual students; and 6.2% of not sure students 
had used an IUD or implant before last sexual intercourse 
(Supplementary Table 145). Among male students, the 
prevalence of having used an IUD or implant before last 
sexual intercourse was higher among heterosexual (2.6%) and 
not sure (13.0%) than gay and bisexual (0.0%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual female (5.5%) 
than heterosexual male (2.6%) students and higher among 
lesbian and bisexual female (4.9%) than gay and bisexual male 
(0.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually 
active students, 4.0% of students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex and 5.9% of students who had sexual 
contact with both sexes had used an IUD or implant before 
last sexual intercourse (students who had no sexual contact 
and students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
are excluded from these analyses) (Supplementary Table 145). 
The prevalence of having used an IUD or implant before last 
sexual intercourse was higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only males (5.4%) than male students who 
had sexual contact with only females (2.7%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2013–2017, a 
significant linear increase (1.6%–4.1%) occurred in the overall 
prevalence of having used an IUD or implant before last 
sexual intercourse, among currently sexually active students. 
Not enough data points were available to identify a quadratic 
trend. The prevalence of having used an IUD or implant before 
last sexual intercourse did not change significantly from 2015 
(3.3%) to 2017 (4.1%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having used an 
IUD or implant before last sexual intercourse, among currently 
sexually active students, ranged from 1.9% to 13.3% across 
state surveys (median: 5.0%) (Supplementary Table 146). 
Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 0.7% to 10.4% (median: 3.4%).
Used a Shot, Patch, or Birth Control Ring Before 
Last Sexual Intercourse
Among the 28.7% of currently sexually active students 
nationwide, 4.7% reported that either they or their partner 
had used a shot (e.g., Depo-Provera), patch (e.g., OrthoEvra), 
or birth control ring (e.g., NuvaRing) to prevent pregnancy 
before last sexual intercourse (Supplementary Table 147). 
The prevalence of having used a shot, patch, or birth control 
ring before last sexual intercourse was higher among female 
(6.9%) than male (2.2%) students; higher among white female 
(8.1%), black female (8.6%), and Hispanic female (3.9%) than 
white male (2.4%), black male (3.4%), and Hispanic male 
(1.1%) students, respectively; and higher among 10th-grade 
female (6.0%), 11th-grade female (7.5%), and 12th-grade 
female (7.3%) than 10th-grade male (0.9%), 11th-grade male 
(3.0%), and 12th-grade male (2.6%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having used a shot, patch, or birth control 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
65
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
ring before last sexual intercourse was higher among white 
(5.4%) and black (6.0%) than Hispanic (2.5%) students and 
higher among white female (8.1%) and black female (8.6%) 
than Hispanic female (3.9%) students. The prevalence of 
having used a shot, patch, or birth control ring before last 
sexual intercourse was higher among 11th-grade (5.4%) than 
10th-grade (3.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually active 
students, 4.7% of heterosexual students; 5.0% of gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual students; and 2.4% of not sure students had used 
a shot, patch, or birth control ring before last sexual intercourse 
(Supplementary Table 147). Among male students, the 
prevalence of having used a shot, patch, or birth control ring 
before last sexual intercourse was higher among heterosexual 
(2.3%) than gay and bisexual (0.0%) and not sure (0.0%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
female (7.3%) than heterosexual male (2.3%) students and 
higher among lesbian and bisexual female (6.0%) than gay 
and bisexual male (0.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually 
active students, 4.6% of students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex and 5.2% of students who had sexual 
contact with both sexes had used a shot, patch, or birth control 
ring before last sexual intercourse (students who had no sexual 
contact and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex are excluded from these analyses) (Supplementary 
Table 147). The prevalence of having used a shot, patch, or 
birth control ring before last sexual intercourse was higher 
among female students who had sexual contact with only males 
(7.3%) than male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (2.2%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having used a shot, patch, or birth 
control ring before last sexual intercourse, among currently 
sexually active students, during 2013–2017 (4.7%–4.7%). Not 
enough data points were available to identify a quadratic trend. 
The prevalence of having used a shot, patch, or birth control 
ring before last sexual intercourse did not change significantly 
from 2015 (5.3%) to 2017 (4.7%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having used a shot, 
patch, or birth control ring before last sexual intercourse, among 
currently sexually active students, ranged from 2.1% to 7.9% 
across state surveys (median: 4.7%) (Supplementary Table 148). 
Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 0.0% to 9.3% (median: 3.3%).
Used Birth Control Pills; an IUD or Implant; or a 
Shot, Patch, or Birth Control Ring Before Last 
Sexual Intercourse
Among the 28.7% of currently sexually active students 
nationwide, 29.4% reported that either they or their partner 
had used birth control pills; an IUD (e.g., Mirena or ParaGard) 
or implant (e.g., Implanon or Nexplanon); or a shot (e.g., 
Depo-Provera), patch (e.g., OrthoEvra), or birth control 
ring (e.g., NuvaRing) to prevent pregnancy before last sexual 
intercourse (Supplementary Table 149). The prevalence of 
having used birth control pills; an IUD or implant; or a shot, 
patch, or birth control ring before last sexual intercourse was 
higher among female (34.6%) than male (23.9%) students; 
higher among white female (43.9%) and Hispanic female 
(20.4%) than white male (30.3%) and Hispanic male (13.4%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade female 
(19.2%) and 12th-grade female (44.7%) than 9th-grade male 
(10.1%) and 12th-grade male (28.5%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having used birth control pills; an IUD 
or implant; or a shot, patch, or birth control ring before last 
sexual intercourse was higher among white (37.4%) and black 
(22.5%) than Hispanic (16.8%) students, higher among white 
(37.4%) than black (22.5%) students, higher among white 
female (43.9%) than black female (23.7%) and Hispanic 
female (20.4%) students, higher among white male (30.3%) 
and black male (21.1%) than Hispanic male (13.4%) students, 
and higher among white male (30.3%) than black male 
(21.1%) students. The prevalence of having used birth control 
pills; an IUD or implant; or a shot, patch, or birth control ring 
before last sexual intercourse was higher among 10th-grade 
(24.1%), 11th-grade (30.4%), and 12th-grade (36.9%) 
than 9th-grade (14.3%) students; higher among 11th-grade 
(30.4%) and 12th-grade (36.9%) than 10th-grade (24.1%) 
students; higher among 12th-grade (36.9%) than 11th-grade 
(30.4%) students; higher among 12th-grade female (44.7%) 
than 9th-grade female (19.2%), 10th-grade female (28.5%), 
and 11th-grade female (32.8%) students; higher among 
11th-grade female (32.8%) than 9th-grade female (19.2%) 
students; higher among 10th-grade male (19.6%), 11th-grade 
male (27.8%), and 12th-grade male (28.5%) than 9th-grade 
male (10.1%) students; and higher among 11th-grade male 
(27.8%) and 12th-grade male (28.5%) than 10th-grade male 
(19.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually active 
students, 30.3% of heterosexual students; 24.4% of gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual students; and 18.8% of not sure students 
had used birth control pills; an IUD or implant; or a shot, 
patch, or birth control ring before last sexual intercourse 
 Surveillance Summaries
66 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(Supplementary Table 149). The prevalence of having used 
birth control pills; an IUD or implant; or a shot, patch, or 
birth control ring before last sexual intercourse was higher 
among heterosexual (30.3%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(24.4%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among heterosexual (37.0%) than lesbian and bisexual 
(27.2%) and not sure (19.6%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among heterosexual (24.5%) than 
gay and bisexual (10.5%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual female (37.0%) than heterosexual 
male (24.5%) students and higher among lesbian and bisexual 
female (27.2%) than gay and bisexual male (10.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually 
active students, 30.4% of students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex and 28.1% of students who had 
sexual contact with both sexes had used birth control pills; an 
IUD or implant; or a shot, patch, or birth control ring before 
last sexual intercourse (students who had no sexual contact 
and students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
are excluded from these analyses) (Supplementary Table 149). 
The prevalence of having used birth control pills; an IUD or 
implant; or a shot, patch, or birth control ring before last sexual 
intercourse was higher among female students who had sexual 
contact with only males (36.8%) than male students who had 
sexual contact with only females (24.6%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2013–2017, a 
significant linear increase (25.3%–29.4%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having used birth control pills; an IUD 
or implant; or a shot, patch, or birth control ring before last 
sexual intercourse, among currently sexually active students. 
Not enough data points were available to identify a quadratic 
trend. The prevalence of having used birth control pills; an 
IUD or implant; or a shot, patch, or birth control ring before 
last sexual intercourse did not change significantly from 2015 
(26.8%) to 2017 (29.4%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having used birth 
control pills; an IUD or implant; or a shot, patch, or birth 
control ring before last sexual intercourse, among currently 
sexually active students, ranged from 20.9% to 50.2% across 
state surveys (median: 33.1%) (Supplementary Table 150). 
Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 14.0% to 36.3% (median: 21.5%).
Used Both a Condom During Last Sexual 
Intercourse and Birth Control Pills; an IUD or 
Implant; or a Shot, Patch, or Birth Control Ring 
Before Last Sexual Intercourse
Among the 28.7% of currently sexually active students 
nationwide, 8.8% reported that either they or their partner 
had used both a condom during last sexual intercourse and 
birth control pills; an IUD (e.g., Mirena or ParaGard) or 
implant (e.g., Implanon or Nexplanon); or a shot (e.g., Depo-
Provera), patch (e.g., OrthoEvra), or birth control ring (e.g., 
NuvaRing) before last sexual intercourse to prevent pregnancy 
(Supplementary Table 151). The prevalence of having used 
both a condom during last sexual intercourse and birth control 
pills; an IUD or implant; or a shot, patch, or birth control 
ring before last sexual intercourse was higher among white 
(11.6%) than black (6.4%) and Hispanic (4.2%) students, 
higher among white female (12.2%) than black female (6.0%) 
and Hispanic female (3.8%) students, and higher among 
white male (10.9%) than Hispanic male (4.5%) students. The 
prevalence of having used both a condom during last sexual 
intercourse and birth control pills; an IUD or implant; or a 
shot, patch, or birth control ring before last sexual intercourse 
was higher among 11th-grade male (10.2%) than 9th-grade 
male (4.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually active 
students, 9.6% of heterosexual students; 4.4% of gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual students; and 3.7% of not sure students had 
used both a condom during last sexual intercourse and birth 
control pills; an IUD or implant; or a shot, patch, or birth 
control ring before last sexual intercourse (Supplementary 
Table 151). The prevalence of having used both a condom 
during last sexual intercourse and birth control pills; an IUD 
or implant; or a shot, patch, or birth control ring before last 
sexual intercourse was higher among heterosexual (9.6%) 
than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (4.4%) and not sure (3.7%) 
students. Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among heterosexual (10.2%) than lesbian and bisexual (4.3%) 
and not sure (2.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually 
active students, 9.5% of students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex and 5.1% of students who had sexual 
contact with both sexes had used both a condom during last 
sexual intercourse and birth control pills; an IUD or implant; or 
a shot, patch, or birth control ring before last sexual intercourse 
(students who had no sexual contact and students who had 
sexual contact with only the same sex are excluded from these 
analyses) (Supplementary Table 151). The prevalence of having 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
67
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
used both a condom during last sexual intercourse and birth 
control pills; an IUD or implant; or a shot, patch, or birth 
control ring before last sexual intercourse was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(9.5%) than students who had sexual contact with both sexes 
(5.1%). Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only males (10.1%) 
than those who had sexual contact with both sexes (4.6%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having used both a condom during 
last sexual intercourse and birth control pills; an IUD or 
implant; or a shot, patch, or birth control ring before last 
sexual intercourse, among currently sexually active students, 
during 2013–2017 (8.8%–8.8%). Not enough data points 
were available to identify a quadratic trend. The prevalence 
of having used both a condom during last sexual intercourse 
and birth control pills; an IUD or implant; or a shot, patch, or 
birth control ring before last sexual intercourse did not change 
significantly from 2015 (8.8%) to 2017 (8.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having 
used both a condom during last sexual intercourse and birth 
control pills; an IUD or implant; or a shot, patch, or birth 
control ring before last sexual intercourse, among currently 
sexually active students, ranged from 5.5% to 18.9% across 
state surveys (median: 11.2%) (Supplementary Table 152). 
Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 4.5% to 10.7% (median: 6.6%).
Did Not Use Any Method to Prevent Pregnancy
Among the 28.7% of currently sexually active students 
nationwide, 13.8% reported that neither they nor their 
partner had used any method to prevent pregnancy during last 
sexual intercourse (Supplementary Table 153). The prevalence 
of not having used any method to prevent pregnancy was 
higher among female (16.7%) than male (10.5%) students; 
higher among black female (25.5%) than black male (10.8%) 
students; and higher among 9th-grade female (27.6%) and 
11th-grade female (15.4%) than 9th-grade male (13.8%) and 
11th-grade male (7.0%) students, respectively. The prevalence 
of not having used any method to prevent pregnancy was 
higher among black (17.8%) and Hispanic (19.0%) than 
white (10.0%) students, higher among black female (25.5%) 
and Hispanic female (22.0%) than white female (11.8%) 
students, and higher among Hispanic male (16.1%) than white 
male (7.7%) students. The prevalence of not having used any 
method to prevent pregnancy was higher among 9th-grade 
(20.1%) than 11th-grade (11.5%) and 12th-grade (12.3%) 
students, higher among 9th-grade female (27.6%) than 
11th-grade female (15.4%) and 12th-grade female (13.7%) 
students, and higher among 9th-grade male (13.8%) than 
11th-grade male (7.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually active 
students, 11.5% of heterosexual students; 27.4% of gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual students; and 25.0% of not sure 
students had not used any method to prevent pregnancy 
(Supplementary Table 153). The prevalence of not having 
used any method to prevent pregnancy was higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual (27.4%) and not sure (25.0%) than 
heterosexual (11.5%) students. Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (27.8%) 
than heterosexual (13.7%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (25.9%) 
than heterosexual (9.5%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual female (13.7%) than heterosexual 
male (9.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually 
active students, 11.5% of students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex and 20.8% of students who had 
sexual contact with both sexes had not used any method to 
prevent pregnancy (students who had no sexual contact and 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex are 
excluded from these analyses) (Supplementary Table 153). 
The prevalence of not having used any method to prevent 
pregnancy was higher among students who had sexual contact 
with both sexes (20.8%) than students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex (11.5%). Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with both sexes (22.6%) than those who had sexual contact 
with only males (13.8%). The prevalence also was higher 
among female students who had sexual contact with only males 
(13.8%) than male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (9.5%) and higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with both sexes (22.6%) than male students 
who had sexual contact with both sexes (10.2%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (16.5%–13.8%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of not having used any method to prevent 
pregnancy, among currently sexually active students. A 
significant quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence 
of not having used any method to prevent pregnancy 
decreased during 1991–2007 (16.5%–12.2%) and then did 
not change significantly during 2007–2017 (12.2%–13.8%). 
The prevalence of not having used any method to prevent 
pregnancy did not change significantly from 2015 (13.8%) 
to 2017 (13.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of not 
 Surveillance Summaries
68 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
having used any method to prevent pregnancy, among currently 
sexually active students, ranged from 6.6% to 23.1% across 
state surveys (median: 13.3%) (Supplementary Table 154). 
Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 12.6% to 27.1% (median: 18.7%).
Drank Alcohol or Used Drugs Before Last Sexual 
Intercourse
Among the 28.7% of currently sexually active students 
nationwide, 18.8% had drunk alcohol or used drugs before 
last sexual intercourse (Supplementary Table 155). The 
prevalence of having drunk alcohol or used drugs before last 
sexual intercourse was higher among male (21.6%) than female 
(15.9%) students; higher among Hispanic male (22.6%) 
than Hispanic female (12.6%) students; and higher among 
10th-grade male (25.6%) and 12th-grade male (23.3%) than 
10th-grade female (14.1%) and 12th-grade female (17.5%), 
respectively. The prevalence of having drunk alcohol or used 
drugs before last sexual intercourse was higher among white 
female (16.6%) than Hispanic female (12.6%) students. The 
prevalence of having drunk alcohol or used drugs before last 
sexual intercourse was higher among 10th-grade (19.7%) and 
12th-grade (20.3%) than 11th-grade (14.2%) students; higher 
among 12th-grade female (17.5%) than 11th-grade female 
(13.8%) students; and higher among 9th-grade male (24.2%), 
10th-grade male (25.6%), and 12th-grade male (23.3%) than 
11th-grade male (14.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually active 
students, 18.0% of heterosexual students; 20.3% of gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual students; and 34.6% of not sure students 
had drunk alcohol or used drugs before last sexual intercourse 
(Supplementary Table 155). The prevalence of having drunk 
alcohol or used drugs before last sexual intercourse was higher 
among not sure (34.6%) than heterosexual (18.0%) students. 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
lesbian and bisexual (20.2%) and not sure (30.7%) than 
heterosexual (14.1%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual male (21.3%) than heterosexual female 
(14.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, among currently sexually 
active students, 17.7% of students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex and 24.8% of students who had sexual 
contact with both sexes had drunk alcohol or used drugs before 
last sexual intercourse (students who had no sexual contact 
are excluded from these analyses) (Supplementary Table 155). 
Among female students, the prevalence of having drunk alcohol 
or used drugs before last sexual intercourse was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only females or with both 
sexes (26.1%) than those who had sexual contact with only 
males (13.2%). The prevalence also was higher among male 
students who had sexual contact with only females (21.7%) 
than female students who had sexual contact with only males 
(13.2%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (21.6%–18.8%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having drunk alcohol or used drugs 
before last sexual intercourse, among currently sexually active 
students. A significant quadratic trend also was identified. 
The prevalence of having drunk alcohol or used drugs 
before last sexual intercourse increased during 1991–1999 
(21.6%–24.8%) and then decreased during 1999–2017 
(24.8%–18.8%). The prevalence of having drunk alcohol 
or used drugs before last sexual intercourse did not change 
significantly from 2015 (20.6%) to 2017 (18.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 35 states, the overall prevalence of 
having drunk alcohol or used drugs before last sexual 
intercourse, among currently sexually active students, ranged 
from 13.7% to 22.8% across state surveys (median: 18.2%) 
(Supplementary Table 156). Across 18 large urban school 
districts, the prevalence ranged from 11.6% to 24.1% (median: 
19.1%).
Ever Been Tested for HIV
Nationwide, 9.3% of students had ever been tested for HIV, 
not counting tests done if they donated blood (Supplementary 
Table 157). The prevalence of having ever been tested for HIV 
was higher among female (10.5%) than male (8.1%) students, 
higher among Hispanic female (10.1%) than Hispanic male 
(7.7%) students, and higher among 12th-grade female (15.8%) 
than 12th-grade male (10.2%) students. The prevalence of 
having ever been tested for HIV was higher among black 
(15.2%) than white (7.9%) and Hispanic (8.9%) students, 
higher among black female (16.6%) than white female (8.8%) 
and Hispanic female (10.1%) students, and higher among 
black male (13.7%) than white male (6.9%) and Hispanic male 
(7.7%) students. The prevalence of having ever been tested 
for HIV was higher among 10th-grade (8.2%), 11th-grade 
(10.3%), and 12th-grade (13.2%) than 9th-grade (6.2%) 
students; higher among 11th-grade (10.3%) and 12th-grade 
(13.2%) than 10th-grade (8.2%) students; higher among 
12th-grade (13.2%) than 11th-grade (10.3%) students; higher 
among 11th-grade female (11.6%) and 12th-grade female 
(15.8%) than 9th-grade female (6.6%) and 10th-grade female 
(8.5%) students; higher among 12th-grade female (15.8%) 
than 11th-grade female (11.6%) students; and higher among 
11th-grade male (9.0%) and 12th-grade male (10.2%) than 
9th-grade male (5.7%) students.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
69
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 9.1% of heterosexual students; 
14.0% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 7.4% of not 
sure students had ever been tested for HIV (Supplementary 
Table 157). The prevalence of having ever been tested for HIV 
was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (14.0%) than 
heterosexual (9.1%) and not sure (7.4%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian and 
bisexual (14.7%) than heterosexual (10.5%) and not sure (6.5%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
female (10.5%) than heterosexual male (7.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, 13.2% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 20.2% 
of students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes, and 3.6% of students who had no sexual 
contact had ever been tested for HIV (Supplementary Table 
157). The prevalence of having ever been tested for HIV was 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (13.2%) and students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes (20.2%) than students 
who had no sexual contact (3.6%) and higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (20.2%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (13.2%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (15.6%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (22.0%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (4.4%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (22.0%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (15.6%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (11.3%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(15.1%) than those who had no sexual contact (2.7%). The 
prevalence also was higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only males (15.6%) than male students who 
had sexual contact with only females (11.3%), higher among 
female students who had sexual contact with only females or 
with both sexes (22.0%) than male students who had sexual 
contact with only males or with both sexes (15.1%), and higher 
among female students who had no sexual contact (4.4%) than 
male students who had no sexual contact (2.7%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2005–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (11.9%–9.3%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having ever been tested for HIV. A 
significant quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence 
of having been tested for HIV did not change significantly 
during 2005–2013 (11.9%–12.9%) and then decreased 
during 2013–2017 (12.9%–9.3%). The prevalence of having 
been tested for HIV did not change significantly from 2015 
(10.2%) to 2017 (9.3%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 29 states, the overall prevalence of having 
ever been tested for HIV ranged from 8.2% to 23.8% across 
state surveys (median: 12.0%) (Supplementary Table 158). 
Across 21 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 10.2% to 37.2% (median: 18.0%).
Dietary Behaviors
Did Not Eat Fruit or Drink 100% Fruit Juices
Nationwide, 5.6% of students had not eaten fruit or drunk 
100% fruit juices (e.g., orange juice, apple juice, or grape 
juice, not counting punch, Kool-Aid, sports drinks, or other 
fruit-flavored drinks) during the 7 days before the survey 
(Supplementary Table 159). The prevalence of not having 
eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices was higher among male 
(7.2%) than female (4.0%) students; higher among white 
male (7.1%), black male (9.5%), and Hispanic male (6.3%) 
than white female (4.1%), black female (4.4%), and Hispanic 
female (3.7%) students, respectively; and higher among 
9th-grade male (8.5%), 10th-grade male (6.4%), 11th-grade 
male (6.2%), and 12th-grade male (7.2%) than 9th-grade 
female (3.8%), 10th-grade female (4.4%), 11th-grade female 
(3.7%), and 12th-grade female (3.9%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of not having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit 
juices was higher among black (7.0%) than white (5.5%) 
and Hispanic (5.0%) students and higher among black male 
(9.5%) than Hispanic male (6.3%) students. The prevalence of 
not having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices was higher 
among 9th-grade (6.1%) than 11th-grade (4.9%) students 
and higher among 9th-grade male (8.5%) than 11th-grade 
male (6.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 5.6% of heterosexual students; 
4.4% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 8.9% of not 
sure students had not eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices 
(Supplementary Table 159). The prevalence of not having eaten 
fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices was higher among not sure 
(8.9%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (4.4%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (7.0%) 
than heterosexual female (4.1%) students, higher among gay 
and bisexual male (7.5%) than lesbian and bisexual female 
(3.2%) students, and higher among not sure male (12.8%) 
than not sure female (5.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 4.4% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 4.6% of students who 
 Surveillance Summaries
70 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, 
and 5.8% of students who had no sexual contact had not eaten 
fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices (Supplementary Table 159). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had no sexual contact (7.5%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only females (5.5%). The prevalence also was 
higher among male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (5.5%) than female students who had sexual contact 
with only males (3.1%), higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (8.9%) than 
female students who had sexual contact with only females or 
with both sexes (3.1%), and higher among male students who 
had no sexual contact (7.5%) than female students who had 
no sexual contact (4.2%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of not having eaten fruit or drunk 100% 
fruit juices during 1999–2017 (5.4%–5.6%). A significant 
quadratic trend also was not identified. The prevalence of not 
having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices did not change 
significantly from 2015 (5.2%) to 2017 (5.6%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 37 states, the overall prevalence of not having eaten 
fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices ranged from 4.9% to 13.0% 
across state surveys (median: 7.5%) (Supplementary Table 160). 
Across 21 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 3.8% to 12.1% (median: 8.1%).
Ate Fruit or Drank 100% Fruit Juices One or More 
Times per Day
Nationwide, 60.8% of students had eaten fruit or drunk 
100% fruit juices (e.g., orange juice, apple juice, or grape 
juice, not counting punch, Kool-Aid, sports drinks, or other 
fruit-flavored drinks) one or more times per day during the 
7 days before the survey (Supplementary Table 161). The 
prevalence of having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices one 
or more times per day was higher among male (63.3%) than 
female (58.2%) students; higher among white male (62.6%) 
and Hispanic male (65.3%) than white female (56.7%) and 
Hispanic female (59.5%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 10th-grade male (63.7%) and 12th-grade male (63.6%) 
than 10th-grade female (56.7%) and 12th-grade female 
(56.6%) students, respectively.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 61.6% of heterosexual students; 
56.5% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 56.2% of 
not sure students had eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices 
one or more times per day (Supplementary Table 161). The 
prevalence of having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices 
one or more times per day was higher among heterosexual 
(61.6%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (56.5%) and not sure 
(56.2%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among heterosexual (59.4%) than not sure (53.0%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
male (63.5%) than heterosexual female (59.4%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 63.0% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 59.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 60.6% of students who had no sexual contact had 
eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices one or more times per 
day (Supplementary Table 161). The prevalence of having 
eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices one or more times per 
day was higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (63.0%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (60.6%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(67.4%) than those who had no sexual contact (60.8%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (67.4%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (57.5%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having eaten fruit or drunk 100% 
fruit juices one or more times per day during 1999–2017 
(62.6%–60.8%). A significant quadratic trend also was not 
identified. The prevalence of having eaten fruit or drunk 
100% fruit juices one or more times per day did not change 
significantly from 2015 (63.3%) to 2017 (60.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 37 states, the overall prevalence of having 
eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices one or more times per 
day ranged from 48.1% to 64.9% across state surveys (median: 
57.4%) (Supplementary Table 162). Across 21 large urban 
school districts, the prevalence ranged from 48.3% to 61.2% 
(median: 53.8%).
Ate Fruit or Drank 100% Fruit Juices Two or More 
Times per Day
Nationwide, 31.3% of students had eaten fruit or drunk 
100% fruit juices (e.g., orange juice, apple juice, or grape juice, 
not counting punch, Kool-Aid, sports drinks, or other fruit-
flavored drinks) two or more times per day during the 7 days 
before the survey (Supplementary Table 163). The prevalence 
of having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices two or more 
times per day was higher among male (33.8%) than female 
(28.8%) students; higher among white male (31.5%), black 
male (40.1%), and Hispanic male (36.2%) than white female 
(27.4%), black female (33.6%), and Hispanic female (29.7%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 10th-grade male 
(37.6%) and 12th-grade male (33.6%) than 10th-grade female 
(26.4%) and 12th-grade female (28.4%) students, respectively. 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
71
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The prevalence of having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices 
two or more times per day was higher among black (36.8%) 
and Hispanic (33.0%) than white (29.4%) students, higher 
among black female (33.6%) than white female (27.4%) 
students, and higher among black male (40.1%) than white 
male (31.5%) students. The prevalence of having eaten fruit 
or drunk 100% fruit juices two or more times per day was 
higher among 9th-grade female (30.3%) than 10th-grade 
female (26.4%) students and higher among 10th-grade male 
(37.6%) than 11th-grade male (30.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 32.3% of heterosexual students; 
26.2% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 29.1% of 
not sure students had eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices 
two or more times per day (Supplementary Table 163). The 
prevalence of having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices 
two or more times per day was higher among heterosexual 
(32.3%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (26.2%) students. 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
heterosexual (30.2%) than lesbian and bisexual (25.4%) 
students. Among male students, the prevalence was higher 
among heterosexual (34.0%) than gay and bisexual (27.4%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
male (34.0%) than heterosexual female (30.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 33.5% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 32.0% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 30.3% of students who had no sexual contact had 
eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices two or more times per 
day (Supplementary Table 163). The prevalence of having 
eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices two or more times per 
day was higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (33.5%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (30.3%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(37.9%) than those who had no sexual contact (30.5%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (37.9%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (28.2%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having eaten fruit or drunk 100% 
fruit juices two or more times per day during 1999–2017 
(34.8%–31.3%). A significant quadratic trend also was not 
identified. The prevalence of having eaten fruit or drunk 
100% fruit juices two or more times per day did not change 
significantly from 2015 (31.5%) to 2017 (31.3%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 37 states, the overall prevalence of having 
eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices two or more times per 
day ranged from 20.3% to 33.3% across state surveys (median: 
27.5%) (Supplementary Table 164). Across 21 large urban 
school districts, the prevalence ranged from 23.3% to 34.0% 
(median: 27.8%).
Ate Fruit or Drank 100% Fruit Juices Three or 
More Times per Day
Nationwide, 18.8% of students had eaten fruit or drunk 
100% fruit juices (e.g., orange juice, apple juice, or grape juice, 
not counting punch, Kool-Aid, sports drinks, or other fruit-
flavored drinks) three or more times per day during the 7 days 
before the survey (Supplementary Table 165). The prevalence 
of having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices three or more 
times per day was higher among male (21.8%) than female 
(15.9%) students; higher among white male (19.2%), black 
male (29.2%), and Hispanic male (24.6%) than white female 
(13.3%), black female (22.3%), and Hispanic female (18.6%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade male 
(20.9%), 10th-grade male (24.9%), 11th-grade male (20.1%), 
and 12th-grade male (20.9%) than 9th-grade female (17.0%), 
10th-grade female (15.6%), 11th-grade female (16.1%), 
and 12th-grade female (14.6%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices 
three or more times per day was higher among black (25.7%) 
and Hispanic (21.7%) than white (16.1%) students, higher 
among black (25.7%) than Hispanic (21.7%) students, higher 
among black female (22.3%) and Hispanic female (18.6%) 
than white female (13.3%) students, higher among black 
female (22.3%) than Hispanic female (18.6%) students, higher 
among black male (29.2%) and Hispanic male (24.6%) than 
white male (19.2%) students, and higher among black male 
(29.2%) than Hispanic male (24.6%) students. The prevalence 
of having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices three or more 
times per day was higher among 10th-grade (20.2%) than 
11th-grade (18.1%) and 12th-grade (17.6%) students and 
higher among 10th-grade male (24.9%) than 9th-grade male 
(20.9%) and 11th-grade male (20.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 19.6% of heterosexual students; 
15.2% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 17.9% of 
not sure students had eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices 
three or more times per day (Supplementary Table 165). The 
prevalence of having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices 
three or more times per day was higher among heterosexual 
(19.6%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (15.2%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (22.1%) 
than heterosexual female (16.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 21.5% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 19.9% of students 
 Surveillance Summaries
72 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 16.9% of students who had no sexual contact had 
eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices three or more times per 
day (Supplementary Table 165). The prevalence of having eaten 
fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices three or more times per day 
was higher among students who had sexual contact with only 
the opposite sex (21.5%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (16.9%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(25.9%) and those who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (25.2%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(17.8%). The prevalence also was higher among male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (25.9%) than female 
students who had sexual contact with only males (16.2%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (24.9%–18.8%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit 
juices three or more times per day. A significant quadratic 
trend was not identified. The prevalence of having eaten fruit 
or drunk 100% fruit juices three or more times per day did 
not change significantly from 2015 (20.0%) to 2017 (18.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 37 states, the overall prevalence of having 
eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices three or more times per 
day ranged from 12.0% to 20.2% across state surveys (median: 
15.8%) (Supplementary Table 166). Across 21 large urban 
school districts, the prevalence ranged from 14.8% to 22.8% 
(median: 17.7%).
Did Not Eat Vegetables
Nationwide, 7.2% of students had not eaten vegetables 
(green salad, potatoes [not counting French fries, fried potatoes, 
or potato chips], carrots, or other vegetables) during the 7 days 
before the survey (Supplementary Table 167). The prevalence 
of not having eaten vegetables was higher among male (8.9%) 
than female (5.5%) students; higher among white male (6.9%), 
black male (14.9%), and Hispanic male (11.1%) than white 
female (3.8%), black female (10.6%), and Hispanic female 
(7.2%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
male (10.5%), 10th-grade male (8.3%), 11th-grade male 
(7.8%), and 12th-grade male (8.8%) than 9th-grade female 
(6.2%), 10th-grade female (5.5%), 11th-grade female (5.6%), 
and 12th-grade female (4.5%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of not having eaten vegetables was higher among 
black (12.7%) and Hispanic (9.2%) than white (5.3%) 
students, higher among black (12.7%) than Hispanic (9.2%) 
students, higher among black female (10.6%) and Hispanic 
female (7.2%) than white female (3.8%) students, higher 
among black female (10.6%) than Hispanic female (7.2%) 
students, higher among black male (14.9%) and Hispanic male 
(11.1%) than white male (6.9%) students, and higher among 
black male (14.9%) than Hispanic male (11.1%) students. 
The prevalence of not having eaten vegetables was higher 
among 9th-grade (8.3%) than 11th-grade (6.7%) students, 
higher among 9th-grade female (6.2%) than 12th-grade female 
(4.5%) students, and higher among 9th-grade male (10.5%) 
than 11th-grade male (7.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 7.5% of heterosexual students; 6.6% 
of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 7.7% of not sure 
students had not eaten vegetables (Supplementary Table 167). 
The prevalence of not having eaten vegetables was higher 
among heterosexual male (9.1%) than heterosexual female 
(5.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 6.9% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 5.3% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 7.4% of students who had no sexual contact had not 
eaten vegetables (Supplementary Table 167). The prevalence of 
not having eaten vegetables was higher among male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (8.2%) than female 
students who had sexual contact with only males (5.4%) and 
higher among male students who had no sexual contact (9.1%) 
than female students who had no sexual contact (5.8%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a 
significant linear increase (4.2%–7.2%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of not having eaten vegetables. A significant 
quadratic trend was not identified. The prevalence of not 
having eaten vegetables did not change significantly from 2015 
(6.7%) to 2017 (7.2%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of not 
having eaten vegetables ranged from 4.5% to 16.5% across 
state surveys (median: 7.7%) (Supplementary Table 168). 
Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 7.1% to 15.8% (median: 11.8%).
Ate Vegetables One or More Times per Day
Nationwide, 59.4% of students had eaten vegetables (green 
salad, potatoes [not counting French fries, fried potatoes, or 
potato chips], carrots, or other vegetables) one or more times 
per day during the 7 days before the survey (Supplementary 
Table 169). The prevalence of having eaten vegetables one 
or more times per day was higher among white (62.8%) and 
Hispanic (56.1%) than black (49.4%) students, higher among 
white (62.8%) than Hispanic (56.1%) students, higher among 
white female (64.0%) and Hispanic female (55.2%) than 
black female (47.4%) students, higher among white female 
(64.0%) than Hispanic female (55.2%) students, higher 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
73
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
among white male (61.5%) and Hispanic male (56.9%) than 
black male (51.5%) students, and higher among white male 
(61.5%) than Hispanic male (56.9%) students. The prevalence 
of having eaten vegetables one or more times per day was 
higher among 10th-grade (60.8%), 11th-grade (60.4%), 
and 12th-grade (60.8%) than 9th-grade (56.1%) students; 
higher among 12th-grade female (62.0%) than 9th-grade 
female (56.0%) students; and higher among 10th-grade male 
(61.1%) and 11th-grade male (61.7%) than 9th-grade male 
(55.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 58.9% of heterosexual students; 
58.6% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 66.0% of 
not sure students had eaten vegetables one or more times per 
day (Supplementary Table 169). The prevalence of having 
eaten vegetables one or more times per day was higher among 
not sure (66.0%) than heterosexual (58.9%) and gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual (58.6%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among not sure (69.9%) than 
heterosexual (58.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 59.9% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 64.7% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 58.6% of students who had no sexual contact had 
eaten vegetables one or more times per day (Supplementary 
Table 169). The prevalence of having eaten vegetables one or 
more times per day was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (64.7%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (59.9%) and students who had no sexual contact (58.6%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (61.0%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(70.7%) than those who had no sexual contact (57.1%) and 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (70.7%) than those who had sexual contact 
with only females (61.0%). The prevalence also was higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (70.7%) than female students who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (62.7%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a significant 
linear decrease (64.5%–59.4%) occurred in the overall 
prevalence of having eaten vegetables one or more times per day. 
A significant quadratic trend was not identified. The prevalence 
of having eaten vegetables one or more times per day did not 
change significantly from 2015 (61.0%) to 2017 (59.4%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having 
eaten vegetables one or more times per day ranged from 46.7% 
to 71.2% across state surveys (median: 57.6%) (Supplementary 
Table 170). Across 18 large urban school districts, the 
prevalence ranged from 45.6% to 58.2% (median: 50.1%).
Ate Vegetables Two or More Times per Day
Nationwide, 26.6% of students had eaten vegetables (green 
salad, potatoes [not counting French fries, fried potatoes, or 
potato chips], carrots, or other vegetables) two or more times 
per day during the 7 days before the survey (Supplementary 
Table 171). The prevalence of having eaten vegetables two 
or more times per day was higher among male (28.7%) than 
female (24.5%) students; higher among black male (27.4%) 
and Hispanic male (28.6%) than black female (20.8%) and 
Hispanic female (23.6%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 10th-grade male (30.5%) than 10th-grade female 
(24.3%) students. The prevalence of having eaten vegetables 
two or more times per day was higher among white female 
(25.8%) than black female (20.8%) students. The prevalence 
of having eaten vegetables two or more times per day was 
higher among 10th-grade (27.3%), 11th-grade (27.5%), and 
12th-grade (27.7%) than 9th-grade (24.2%) students; higher 
among 11th-grade female (25.8%) than 9th-grade female 
(22.3%) students; and higher among 10th-grade male (30.5%) 
than 9th-grade male (25.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 26.5% of heterosexual students; 
26.3% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 29.2% of 
not sure students had eaten vegetables two or more times per 
day (Supplementary Table 171). The prevalence of having 
eaten vegetables two or more times per day was higher among 
heterosexual male (27.8%) than heterosexual female (24.9%) 
students, higher among gay and bisexual male (33.1%) than 
lesbian and bisexual female (23.9%) students, and higher among 
not sure male (38.0%) than not sure female (23.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 27.6% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 32.9% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 24.9% of students who had no sexual contact had 
eaten vegetables two or more times per day (Supplementary 
Table 171). The prevalence of having eaten vegetables two or 
more times per day was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (27.6%) and students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(32.9%) than students who had no sexual contact (24.9%) 
and higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes (32.9%) than students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (27.6%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females or with both sexes 
 Surveillance Summaries
74 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(28.9%) than those who had sexual contact with only males 
(24.2%). Among male students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only females (30.5%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only males or with both 
sexes (44.8%) than those who had no sexual contact (25.1%) 
and higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males or with both sexes (44.8%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only females (30.5%). The prevalence also was 
higher among male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (30.5%) than female students who had sexual contact 
with only males (24.2%) and higher among male students who 
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (44.8%) 
than female students who had sexual contact with only females 
or with both sexes (28.9%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having eaten vegetables two or more 
times per day during 1999–2017 (28.5%–26.6%). A significant 
quadratic trend also was not identified. The prevalence of having 
eaten vegetables two or more times per day did not change 
significantly from 2015 (28.0%) to 2017 (26.6%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having 
eaten vegetables two or more times per day ranged from 18.3% 
to 35.1% across state surveys (median: 24.7%) (Supplementary 
Table 172). Across 18 large urban school districts, the 
prevalence ranged from 18.6% to 25.9% (median: 21.2%).
Ate Vegetables Three or More Times per Day
Nationwide, 13.9% of students had eaten vegetables (green 
salad, potatoes [not counting French fries, fried potatoes, or 
potato chips], carrots, or other vegetables) three or more times 
per day during the 7 days before the survey (Supplementary 
Table 173). The prevalence of having eaten vegetables three 
or more times per day was higher among male (15.9%) than 
female (12.1%) students; higher among white male (14.4%), 
black male (19.3%), and Hispanic male (16.2%) than white 
female (11.4%), black female (12.0%), and Hispanic female 
(12.5%) students, respectively; and higher among 10th-grade 
male (17.6%) and 12th-grade male (16.4%) than 10th-grade 
female (11.0%) and 12th-grade female (13.1%) students, 
respectively. The prevalence of having eaten vegetables three 
or more times per day was higher among black (15.6%) than 
white (12.8%) students and higher among black male (19.3%) 
than white male (14.4%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 13.8% of heterosexual students; 
14.5% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 17.4% of 
not sure students had eaten vegetables three or more times 
per day (Supplementary Table 173). Among male students, 
the prevalence of having eaten vegetables three or more times 
per day was higher among gay and bisexual (22.4%) and 
not sure (25.2%) than heterosexual (15.1%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (15.1%) 
than heterosexual female (12.4%) students, higher among gay 
and bisexual male (22.4%) than lesbian and bisexual female 
(12.1%) students, and higher among not sure male (25.2%) 
than not sure female (12.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 15.2% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 19.7% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 12.1% of students who had no sexual contact had 
eaten vegetables three or more times per day (Supplementary 
Table 173). The prevalence of having eaten vegetables three or 
more times per day was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (15.2%) and students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(19.7%) than students who had no sexual contact (12.1%) 
and higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes (19.7%) than students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (15.2%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only females or with both 
sexes (16.8%) than those who had sexual contact with only 
males (12.4%) and those who had no sexual contact (11.6%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (17.5%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(28.1%) than those who had no sexual contact (12.6%) and 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (28.1%) than those who had sexual contact 
with only females (17.5%). The prevalence also was higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only females 
(17.5%) than female students who had sexual contact with 
only males (12.4%) and higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (28.1%) than 
female students who had sexual contact with only females or 
with both sexes (16.8%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having eaten vegetables three or more 
times per day during 1999–2017 (14.0%–13.9%). A significant 
quadratic trend also was not identified. The prevalence of having 
eaten vegetables three or more times per day did not change 
significantly from 2015 (14.8%) to 2017 (13.9%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having 
eaten vegetables three or more times per day ranged from 9.0% 
to 18.1% across state surveys (median: 12.3%) (Supplementary 
Table 174). Across 18 large urban school districts, the 
prevalence ranged from 9.4% to 14.8% (median: 11.8%).
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
75
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Did Not Drink Milk
Nationwide, 26.7% of students had not drunk milk during 
the 7 days before the survey (Supplementary Table 175). The 
prevalence of not having drunk milk was higher among female 
(33.7%) than male (19.4%) students; higher among white 
female (31.9%), black female (50.3%), and Hispanic female 
(27.4%) than white male (18.1%), black male (31.2%), and 
Hispanic male (15.7%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 9th-grade female (30.2%), 10th-grade female (33.7%), 
11th-grade female (34.0%), and 12th-grade female (37.1%) 
than 9th-grade male (21.1%), 10th-grade male (15.9%), 
11th-grade male (20.0%), and 12th-grade male (20.6%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of not having drunk 
milk was higher among white (25.3%) and black (40.9%) 
than Hispanic (21.4%) students, higher among black (40.9%) 
than white (25.3%) students, higher among white female 
(31.9%) and black female (50.3%) than Hispanic female 
(27.4%) students, higher among black female (50.3%) than 
white female (31.9%) students, and higher among black 
male (31.2%) than white male (18.1%) and Hispanic male 
(15.7%) students. The prevalence of not having drunk milk 
was higher among 12th-grade (29.1%) than 9th-grade (25.7%) 
and 10th-grade (25.0%) students; higher among 12th-grade 
female (37.1%) than 9th-grade female (30.2%) students; 
and higher among 9th-grade male (21.1%), 11th-grade male 
(20.0%), and 12th-grade male (20.6%) than 10th-grade male 
(15.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 25.9% of heterosexual students; 
32.4% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 31.8% of not 
sure students had not drunk milk (Supplementary Table 175). 
The prevalence of not having drunk milk was higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual (32.4%) and not sure (31.8%) than 
heterosexual (25.9%) students. Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (29.0%) than 
heterosexual (18.9%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual female (34.1%) than heterosexual male 
(18.9%) students and higher among not sure female (36.8%) 
than not sure male (21.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 27.1% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 31.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 25.8% of students who had no sexual contact had 
not drunk milk (Supplementary Table 175). The prevalence 
of not having drunk milk was higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(31.8%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (27.1%) and students who had no sexual contact 
(25.8%). The prevalence also was higher among female 
students who had sexual contact with only males (35.7%) 
than male students who had sexual contact with only females 
(19.9%), higher among female students who had sexual 
contact with only females or with both sexes (36.2%) than 
male students who had sexual contact with only males or with 
both sexes (19.3%), and higher among female students who 
had no sexual contact (32.8%) than male students who had 
no sexual contact (18.2%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a 
significant linear increase (17.0%–26.7%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of not having drunk milk. A significant 
quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence of not 
having drunk milk increased during 1999–2013 (17.0%–
19.4%) and then increased more rapidly during 2013–2017 
(19.4%–26.7%). The prevalence of not having drunk milk 
also increased from 2015 (21.5%) to 2017 (26.7%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 27 states, the overall prevalence of not 
having drunk milk ranged from 14.9% to 37.3% across state 
surveys (median: 25.1%) (Supplementary Table 176). Across 
18 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
25.3% to 43.5% (median: 30.9%).
Drank One or More Glasses of Milk per Day
Nationwide, 31.3% of students had drunk one or more 
glasses of milk per day (counting milk in a glass or cup, from a 
carton, or with cereal and counting the half pint of milk served 
at school as equal to one glass) during the 7 days before the 
survey (Supplementary Table 177). The prevalence of having 
drunk one or more glasses of milk per day was higher among 
male (40.4%) than female (22.5%) students; higher among 
white male (44.5%), black male (28.7%), and Hispanic male 
(38.8%) than white female (24.4%), black female (16.9%), 
and Hispanic female (23.1%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 9th-grade male (42.5%), 10th-grade male (42.3%), 
11th-grade male (39.2%), and 12th-grade male (37.3%) 
than 9th-grade female (24.2%), 10th-grade female (24.5%), 
11th-grade female (21.5%), and 12th-grade female (19.2%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of having drunk one or 
more glasses of milk per day was higher among white (34.0%) 
and Hispanic (31.1%) than black (22.7%) students, higher 
among white female (24.4%) and Hispanic female (23.1%) 
than black female (16.9%) students, higher among white 
male (44.5%) and Hispanic male (38.8%) than black male 
(28.7%) students, and higher among white male (44.5%) than 
Hispanic male (38.8%) students. The prevalence of having 
drunk one or more glasses of milk per day was higher among 
9th-grade (33.2%) and 10th-grade (33.2%) than 12th-grade 
(28.0%) students, higher among 10th-grade (33.2%) than 
 Surveillance Summaries
76 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
11th-grade (30.2%) students, higher among 9th-grade female 
(24.2%) and 10th-grade female (24.5%) than 12th-grade 
female (19.2%) students, higher among 10th-grade female 
(24.5%) than 11th-grade female (21.5%) students, and 
higher among 10th-grade male (42.3%) than 12th-grade male 
(37.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 32.1% of heterosexual students; 
23.5% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 28.3% of 
not sure students had drunk one or more glasses of milk per 
day (Supplementary Table 177). The prevalence of having 
drunk one or more glasses of milk per day was higher among 
heterosexual (32.1%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (23.5%) 
students. Among male students, the prevalence was higher 
among heterosexual (40.8%) than gay and bisexual (28.0%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
male (40.8%) than heterosexual female (22.0%) students and 
higher among not sure male (40.1%) than not sure female 
(21.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 30.7% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 25.0% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 32.6% of students who had no sexual contact had 
drunk one or more glasses of milk per day (Supplementary 
Table 177). The prevalence of having drunk one or more glasses 
of milk per day was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (30.7%) and students who 
had no sexual contact (32.6%) than students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (25.0%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had no sexual contact (24.1%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only males (20.1%). The prevalence also 
was higher among male students who had sexual contact with 
only females (39.5%) than female students who had sexual 
contact with only males (20.1%), higher among male students 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(37.0%) than female students who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (20.8%), and higher among 
male students who had no sexual contact (41.9%) than female 
students who had no sexual contact (24.1%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (47.1%–31.3%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having drunk one or more glasses of milk 
per day. A significant quadratic trend also was identified. The 
prevalence of having drunk one or more glasses of milk per 
day decreased during 1999–2013 (47.1%–40.3%) and then 
decreased more rapidly during 2013–2017 (40.3%–31.3%). 
The prevalence of having drunk one or more glasses of milk 
per day decreased from 2015 (37.5%) to 2017 (31.3%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 27 states, the overall prevalence of having drunk one 
or more glasses of milk per day ranged from 19.8% to 48.3% 
across state surveys (median: 28.9%) (Supplementary Table 178). 
Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
15.5% to 32.8% (median: 22.8%).
Drank Two or More Glasses of Milk per Day
Nationwide, 17.5% of students had drunk two or more 
glasses of milk per day (counting milk in a glass or cup, from a 
carton, or with cereal and counting the half pint of milk served 
at school as equal to one glass) during the 7 days before the 
survey (Supplementary Table 179). The prevalence of having 
drunk two or more glasses of milk per day was higher among 
male (24.7%) than female (10.6%) students; higher among 
white male (28.2%), black male (17.1%), and Hispanic male 
(21.9%) than white female (11.4%), black female (9.2%), and 
Hispanic female (11.0%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 9th-grade male (26.5%), 10th-grade male (25.5%), 
11th-grade male (24.2%), and 12th-grade male (22.0%) 
than 9th-grade female (12.5%), 10th-grade female (11.1%), 
11th-grade female (10.1%), and 12th-grade female (8.4%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of having drunk two or 
more glasses of milk per day was higher among white (19.4%) 
and Hispanic (16.6%) than black (13.1%) students, higher 
among white male (28.2%) and Hispanic male (21.9%) than 
black male (17.1%) students, and higher among white male 
(28.2%) than Hispanic male (21.9%) students. The prevalence 
of having drunk two or more glasses of milk per day was 
higher among 9th-grade (19.4%) and 10th-grade (18.2%) 
than 12th-grade (15.0%) students, higher among 9th-grade 
female (12.5%) than 12th-grade female (8.4%) students, and 
higher among 9th-grade male (26.5%) than 12th-grade male 
(22.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 17.8% of heterosexual students; 
14.6% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 17.9% of 
not sure students had drunk two or more glasses of milk per 
day (Supplementary Table 179). The prevalence of having 
drunk two or more glasses of milk per day was higher among 
heterosexual (17.8%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (14.6%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
male (24.5%) than heterosexual female (10.0%) students, 
higher among gay and bisexual male (21.3%) than lesbian and 
bisexual female (12.3%) students, and higher among not sure 
male (27.3%) than not sure female (12.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 17.9% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 14.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
77
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
sexes, and 17.6% of students who had no sexual contact had 
drunk two or more glasses of milk per day (Supplementary 
Table 179). The prevalence of having drunk two or more 
glasses of milk per day was higher among male students who 
had sexual contact with only females (24.9%) than female 
students who had sexual contact with only males (9.6%), 
higher among male students who had sexual contact with 
only males or with both sexes (26.1%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only females or with both sexes 
(10.8%), and higher among male students who had no sexual 
contact (24.3%) than female students who had no sexual 
contact (11.5%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (33.6%–17.5%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having drunk two or more glasses of milk 
per day. A significant quadratic trend also was identified. The 
prevalence of having drunk two or more glasses of milk per 
day decreased during 1999–2013 (33.6%–25.9%) and then 
decreased more rapidly during 2013–2017 (25.9%–17.5%). 
The prevalence of having drunk two or more glasses of milk 
per day decreased from 2015 (22.4%) to 2017 (17.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 27 states, the overall prevalence of having drunk two 
or more glasses of milk per day ranged from 10.9% to 33.9% 
across state surveys (median: 16.7%) (Supplementary Table 180). 
Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
7.8% to 17.3% (median: 12.0%).
Drank Three or More Glasses of Milk per Day
Nationwide, 7.9% of students had drunk three or more 
glasses of milk per day (counting milk in a glass or cup, 
from a carton, or with cereal and counting the half pint of 
milk served at school as equal to one glass) during the 7 days 
before the survey (Supplementary Table 181). The prevalence 
of having drunk three or more glasses of milk per day was 
higher among male (11.8%) than female (4.1%) students; 
higher among white male (13.8%), black male (8.8%), and 
Hispanic male (9.6%) than white female (4.4%), black female 
(3.5%), and Hispanic female (4.3%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade male (13.1%), 10th-grade male 
(12.4%), 11th-grade male (12.2%), and 12th-grade male 
(9.2%) than 9th-grade female (4.4%), 10th-grade female 
(4.7%), 11th-grade female (3.6%), and 12th-grade female 
(3.5%) students, respectively. The prevalence of having drunk 
three or more glasses of milk per day was higher among white 
(8.9%) than black (6.2%) students and higher among white 
male (13.8%) than black male (8.8%) and Hispanic male 
(9.6%) students. The prevalence of having drunk three or more 
glasses of milk per day was higher among 9th-grade (8.7%) 
and 10th-grade (8.5%) than 12th-grade (6.3%) students and 
higher among 9th-grade male (13.1%) than 12th-grade male 
(9.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 7.9% of heterosexual students; 6.6% of 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 8.9% of not sure students 
had drunk three or more glasses of milk per day (Supplementary 
Table 181). The prevalence of having drunk three or more glasses 
of milk per day was higher among heterosexual male (11.8%) than 
heterosexual female (3.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 8.3% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 9.1% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 7.3% of students who had no sexual contact had 
drunk three or more glasses of milk per day (Supplementary 
Table 181). Among female students, the prevalence of having 
drunk three or more glasses of milk per day was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only females or with both 
sexes (7.1%) than those who had sexual contact with only 
males (3.6%) and those who had no sexual contact (3.7%). 
The prevalence also was higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only females (12.1%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only males (3.6%) and higher 
among male students who had no sexual contact (11.2%) than 
female students who had no sexual contact (3.7%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (18.0%–7.9%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having drunk three or more glasses of milk 
per day. A significant quadratic trend also was identified. The 
prevalence of having drunk three or more glasses of milk per 
day decreased during 1999–2013 (18.0%–12.5%) and then 
decreased more rapidly during 2013–2017 (12.5%–7.9%). 
The prevalence of having drunk three or more glasses of milk 
per day decreased from 2015 (10.2%) to 2017 (7.9%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 27 states, the overall prevalence of having 
drunk three or more glasses of milk per day ranged from 4.8% 
to 16.1% across state surveys (median: 8.5%) (Supplementary 
Table 182). Across 18 large urban school districts, the 
prevalence ranged from 3.2% to 7.6% (median: 5.5%).
Did Not Drink Soda or Pop
Nationwide, 27.8% of students had not drunk soda or pop 
(e.g., Coke, Pepsi, or Sprite, not counting diet soda or diet pop) 
during the 7 days before the survey (Supplementary Table 183). 
The prevalence of not having drunk soda or pop was higher 
among female (31.4%) than male (24.0%) students; higher 
among white female (32.9%) than white male (22.7%) 
students; and higher among 9th-grade female (30.9%), 
10th-grade female (30.3%), 11th-grade female (31.7%), and 
 Surveillance Summaries
78 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
12th-grade female (32.9%) than 9th-grade male (23.2%), 
10th-grade male (22.9%), 11th-grade male (25.1%), and 
12th-grade male (25.3%) students, respectively. The prevalence 
of not having drunk soda or pop was higher among white 
female (32.9%) than black female (25.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 27.0% of heterosexual students; 
26.5% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 30.3% of not 
sure students had not drunk soda or pop (Supplementary Table 
183). Among female students, the prevalence of not having 
drunk soda or pop was higher among heterosexual (30.7%) 
and not sure (35.3%) than lesbian and bisexual (26.3%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
female (30.7%) than heterosexual male (23.7%) students and 
higher among not sure female (35.3%) than not sure male 
(23.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 24.0% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 24.0% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 30.0% of students who had no sexual contact 
had not drunk soda or pop (Supplementary Table 183). The 
prevalence of not having drunk soda or pop was higher among 
students who had no sexual contact (30.0%) than students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (24.0%) and 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with 
both sexes (24.0%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had no sexual contact (33.6%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (27.6%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (25.0%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had no sexual contact (26.1%) than 
those who had sexual contact with only females (21.0%). The 
prevalence also was higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only males (27.6%) than male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (21.0%) and higher 
among female students who had no sexual contact (33.6%) 
than male students who had no sexual contact (26.1%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2007–2017, a 
significant linear increase (18.6%–27.8%) occurred in 
the overall prevalence of not having drunk soda or pop. A 
significant quadratic trend was not identified. The prevalence 
of not having drunk soda or pop did not change significantly 
from 2015 (26.2%) to 2017 (27.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 36 states, the overall prevalence of not 
having drunk soda or pop ranged from 21.4% to 38.2% across 
state surveys (median: 29.1%) (Supplementary Table 184). 
Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 21.4% to 36.1% (median: 29.9%).
Drank Soda or Pop One or More Times per Day
Nationwide, 18.7% of students had drunk a can, bottle, or 
glass of soda or pop (e.g., Coke, Pepsi, or Sprite, not counting 
diet soda or diet pop) one or more times per day during the 
7 days before the survey (Supplementary Table 185). The 
prevalence of having drunk soda or pop one or more times 
per day was higher among male (22.3%) than female (15.4%) 
students; higher among white male (24.0%) and Hispanic 
male (19.9%) than white female (15.5%) and Hispanic female 
(14.0%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
male (21.5%), 10th-grade male (23.5%), 11th-grade male 
(21.0%), and 12th-grade male (22.9%) than 9th-grade female 
(14.3%), 10th-grade female (15.6%), 11th-grade female 
(15.0%), and 12th-grade female (16.5%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having drunk soda or pop one or more 
times per day was higher among black (21.5%) than Hispanic 
(17.0%) students, higher among black female (19.8%) than 
Hispanic female (14.0%) students, and higher among white 
male (24.0%) than Hispanic male (19.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 19.1% of heterosexual students; 
21.1% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 20.0% of 
not sure students had drunk soda or pop one or more times 
per day (Supplementary Table 185). Among female students, 
the prevalence of having drunk soda or pop one or more times 
per day was higher among lesbian and bisexual (19.9%) than 
heterosexual (15.3%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual male (22.4%) than heterosexual female 
(15.3%) students and higher among not sure male (28.0%) 
than not sure female (13.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 23.9% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 25.5% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 14.6% of students who had no sexual contact had 
drunk soda or pop one or more times per day (Supplementary 
Table 185). The prevalence of having drunk soda or pop one or 
more times per day was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (23.9%) and students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(25.5%) than students who had no sexual contact (14.6%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only males (19.1%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only females or with both 
sexes (22.9%) than those who had no sexual contact (12.4%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (27.8%) and those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(32.9%) than those who had no sexual contact (17.0%). The 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
79
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (27.8%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (19.1%) and higher among 
male students who had no sexual contact (17.0%) than female 
students who had no sexual contact (12.4%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2007–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (33.8%–18.7%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having drunk soda or pop one or more 
times per day. A significant quadratic trend was not identified. 
The prevalence of having drunk soda or pop one or more times 
per day did not change significantly from 2015 (20.4%) to 
2017 (18.7%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 36 states, the overall prevalence of having drunk 
soda or pop one or more times per day ranged from 10.2% to 
32.0% across state surveys (median: 16.4%) (Supplementary 
Table 186). Across 18 large urban school districts, the prevalence 
ranged from 9.4% to 23.4% (median: 15.1%).
Drank Soda or Pop Two or More Times per Day
Nationwide, 12.5% of students had drunk a can, bottle, or 
glass of soda or pop (e.g., Coke, Pepsi, or Sprite, not counting 
diet soda or diet pop) two or more times per day during the 
7 days before the survey (Supplementary Table 187). The 
prevalence of having drunk soda or pop two or more times 
per day was higher among male (15.0%) than female (10.0%) 
students; higher among white male (16.1%) and Hispanic 
male (12.8%) than white female (9.4%) and Hispanic female 
(8.8%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
male (14.2%), 10th-grade male (16.5%), 11th-grade male 
(13.5%), and 12th-grade male (15.9%) than 9th-grade female 
(9.6%), 10th-grade female (10.1%), 11th-grade female (9.2%), 
and 12th-grade female (10.8%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of having drunk soda or pop two or more times 
per day was higher among black (16.6%) than white (12.7%) 
and Hispanic (10.8%) students, higher among black female 
(16.2%) than white female (9.4%) and Hispanic female 
(8.8%) students, and higher among white male (16.1%) and 
black male (17.0%) than Hispanic male (12.8%) students. 
The prevalence of having drunk soda or pop two or more 
times per day was higher among 10th-grade (13.2%) and 
12th-grade (13.3%) than 11th-grade (11.3%) students and 
higher among 10th-grade male (16.5%) than 11th-grade male 
(13.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 12.5% of heterosexual students; 
15.8% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 14.2% of 
not sure students had drunk soda or pop two or more times 
per day (Supplementary Table 187). The prevalence of having 
drunk soda or pop two or more times per day was higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual (15.8%) than heterosexual (12.5%) 
students. Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among lesbian and bisexual (15.3%) than heterosexual (9.6%) 
and not sure (7.3%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual male (15.0%) than heterosexual female 
(9.6%) students and higher among not sure male (23.3%) 
than not sure female (7.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 15.8% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 19.5% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 9.2% of students who had no sexual contact had 
drunk soda or pop two or more times per day (Supplementary 
Table 187). The prevalence of having drunk soda or pop two 
or more times per day was higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (15.8%) and students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (19.5%) than students who had no sexual contact (9.2%) 
and higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes (19.5%) than students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (15.8%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only males (11.5%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only females or with both 
sexes (18.4%) than those who had no sexual contact (7.9%) 
and higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (18.4%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only males (11.5%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (19.4%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (22.4%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (10.5%). The prevalence also was higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only females 
(19.4%) than female students who had sexual contact with 
only males (11.5%) and higher among male students who had 
no sexual contact (10.5%) than female students who had no 
sexual contact (7.9%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2007–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (24.4%–12.5%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having drunk soda or pop two or more 
times per day. A significant quadratic trend was not identified. 
The prevalence of having drunk soda or pop two or more times 
per day did not change significantly from 2015 (13.0%) to 
2017 (12.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 36 states, the overall prevalence of having drunk 
soda or pop two or more times per day ranged from 5.9% to 
21.1% across state surveys (median: 9.7%) (Supplementary 
Table 188). Across 18 large urban school districts, the 
prevalence ranged from 4.8% to 16.6% (median: 9.7%).
 Surveillance Summaries
80 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Drank Soda or Pop Three or More Times per Day
Nationwide, 7.1% of students had drunk a can, bottle, or 
glass of soda or pop (e.g., Coke, Pepsi, or Sprite, not counting 
diet soda or diet pop) three or more times per day during the 
7 days before the survey (Supplementary Table 189). The 
prevalence of having drunk soda or pop three or more times 
per day was higher among male (8.7%) than female (5.5%) 
students; higher among white male (9.3%) and Hispanic 
male (7.3%) than white female (5.4%) and Hispanic female 
(4.2%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
male (8.2%), 10th-grade male (9.6%), and 11th-grade male 
(7.5%) than 9th-grade female (5.3%), 10th-grade female 
(5.2%), and 11th-grade female (5.4%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having drunk soda or pop three or more 
times per day was higher among black (9.9%) than white 
(7.3%) and Hispanic (5.8%) students, higher among black 
female (8.8%) than white female (5.4%) and Hispanic female 
(4.2%) students, and higher among black male (11.1%) than 
Hispanic male (7.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 7.1% of heterosexual students; 
8.3% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 9.7% of not 
sure students had drunk soda or pop three or more times per 
day (Supplementary Table 189). Among female students, the 
prevalence of having drunk soda or pop three or more times 
per day was higher among lesbian and bisexual (8.2%) than 
heterosexual (5.3%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual male (8.7%) than heterosexual female 
(5.3%) students and higher among not sure male (15.1%) 
than not sure female (5.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 9.3% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 11.9% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 5.0% of students who had no sexual contact had 
drunk soda or pop three or more times per day (Supplementary 
Table 189). The prevalence of having drunk soda or pop three 
or more times per day was higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (9.3%) and students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (11.9%) than students who had no sexual contact (5.0%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only males (6.3%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only females or with both 
sexes (10.9%) than those who had no sexual contact (4.2%) 
and higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (10.9%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only males (6.3%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (11.8%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (14.6%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (5.8%). The prevalence also was higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only females 
(11.8%) than female students who had sexual contact with 
only males (6.3%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2007–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (14.4%–7.1%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having drunk soda or pop three or more 
times per day. A significant quadratic trend was not identified. 
The prevalence of having drunk soda or pop three or more 
times per day did not change significantly from 2015 (7.1%) 
to 2017 (7.1%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 36 states, the overall prevalence of having drunk 
soda or pop three or more times per day ranged from 2.5% to 
12.0% across state surveys (median: 5.1%) (Supplementary 
Table 190). Across 18 large urban school districts, the 
prevalence ranged from 2.2% to 10.5% (median: 6.0%).
Did Not Drink a Sports Drink
Nationwide, 47.7% of students had not drunk a sports 
drink (e.g., Gatorade or Powerade, not counting low-calorie 
sports drinks such as Propel or G2) during the 7 days before 
the survey (Supplementary Table 191). The prevalence of 
not having drunk a sports drink was higher among female 
(57.7%) than male (37.3%) students; higher among white 
female (62.2%), black female (49.5%), and Hispanic female 
(47.5%) than white male (39.4%), black male (28.9%), and 
Hispanic male (33.7%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 9th-grade female (53.9%), 10th-grade female (57.2%), 
11th-grade female (58.7%), and 12th-grade female (61.6%) 
than 9th-grade male (36.0%), 10th-grade male (37.9%), 
11th-grade male (36.3%), and 12th-grade male (39.1%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of not having drunk 
a sports drink was higher among white (51.3%) than black 
(39.4%) and Hispanic (40.4%) students, higher among white 
female (62.2%) than black female (49.5%) and Hispanic 
female (47.5%) students, higher among white male (39.4%) 
and Hispanic male (33.7%) than black male (28.9%) students, 
and higher among white male (39.4%) than Hispanic male 
(33.7%) students. The prevalence of not having drunk a sports 
drink was higher among 12th-grade (50.7%) than 9th-grade 
(45.0%) students, higher among 11th-grade female (58.7%) 
and 12th-grade female (61.6%) than 9th-grade female (53.9%) 
students, and higher among 12th-grade female (61.6%) than 
10th-grade female (57.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 44.7% of heterosexual students; 
59.4% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 57.5% of 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
81
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
not sure students had not drunk a sports drink (Supplementary 
Table 191). The prevalence of not having drunk a sports drink 
was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (59.4%) and not 
sure (57.5%) than heterosexual (44.7%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among not sure 
(67.6%) than heterosexual (55.2%) students. Among male 
students, the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual 
(62.6%) than heterosexual (35.6%) and not sure (42.3%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
female (55.2%) than heterosexual male (35.6%) students and 
higher among not sure female (67.6%) than not sure male 
(42.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 38.6% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 50.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 54.2% of students who had no sexual contact had 
not drunk a sports drink (Supplementary Table 191). The 
prevalence of not having drunk a sports drink was higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the same 
sex or with both sexes (50.8%) and students who had no 
sexual contact (54.2%) than students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex (38.6%). Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had no sexual 
contact (61.7%) than those who had sexual contact with only 
males (51.6%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (52.1%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (47.0%) and those who 
had no sexual contact (46.2%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only females (27.9%). The prevalence also was 
higher among female students who had sexual contact with 
only males (51.6%) than male students who had sexual contact 
with only females (27.9%) and higher among female students 
who had no sexual contact (61.7%) than male students who 
had no sexual contact (46.2%).
The question measuring the prevalence of not having drunk 
a sports drink was used for the first time in the 2015 national 
YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal trends are not available 
for this variable. The prevalence of not having drunk a sports 
drink increased from 2015 (42.4%) to 2017 (47.7%).
The question also was not included in the standard 
questionnaire used in the state and large urban school district 
surveys in 2017. As a result, the range and median prevalence 
estimates across states and large urban school districts for the 
prevalence of not having drunk a sports drink are not available.
Drank a Sports Drink One or More Times per Day
Nationwide, 12.4% of students had drunk a can, bottle, 
or glass of a sports drink (e.g., Gatorade or Powerade, not 
counting low-calorie sports drinks such as Propel or G2) one 
or more times per day during the 7 days before the survey 
(Supplementary Table 192). The prevalence of having drunk 
a sports drink one or more times per day was higher among 
male (16.9%) than female (8.2%) students; higher among 
white male (15.4%), black male (27.6%), and Hispanic male 
(17.3%) than white female (6.3%), black female (14.8%), 
and Hispanic female (9.4%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 9th-grade male (16.7%), 10th-grade male (18.7%), 
11th-grade male (14.8%), and 12th-grade male (17.1%) 
than 9th-grade female (9.5%), 10th-grade female (7.9%), 
11th-grade female (7.7%), and 12th-grade female (7.1%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of having drunk a sports 
drink one or more times per day was higher among black 
(21.1%) and Hispanic (13.5%) than white (10.7%) students, 
higher among black (21.1%) than Hispanic (13.5%) students, 
higher among black female (14.8%) and Hispanic female 
(9.4%) than white female (6.3%) students, higher among black 
female (14.8%) than Hispanic female (9.4%) students, and 
higher among black male (27.6%) than white male (15.4%) 
and Hispanic male (17.3%) students. The prevalence of 
having drunk a sports drink one or more times per day was 
higher among 10th-grade male (18.7%) than 11th-grade male 
(14.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 13.2% of heterosexual students; 
9.3% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 11.1% of 
not sure students had drunk a sports drink one or more times 
per day (Supplementary Table 192). The prevalence of having 
drunk a sports drink one or more times per day was higher 
among heterosexual (13.2%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(9.3%) students. Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among heterosexual (17.2%) than gay and bisexual 
(12.0%) students. The prevalence also was higher among 
heterosexual male (17.2%) than heterosexual female (8.6%) 
students and higher among not sure male (18.3%) than not 
sure female (5.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 16.9% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 12.5% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 8.9% of students who had no sexual contact had 
drunk a sports drink one or more times per day (Supplementary 
Table 192). The prevalence of having drunk a sports drink one 
or more times per day was higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (16.9%) than students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (12.5%) and students who had no sexual contact (8.9%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only males (10.3%) than those 
 Surveillance Summaries
82 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
who had no sexual contact (6.6%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (22.3%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (20.9%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (11.3%). The prevalence also was higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only females 
(22.3%) than female students who had sexual contact with 
only males (10.3%), higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (20.9%) than 
female students who had sexual contact with only females or 
with both sexes (9.6%), and higher among male students who 
had no sexual contact (11.3%) than female students who had 
no sexual contact (6.6%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having drunk 
a sports drink one or more times per day was used for the 
first time in the 2015 national YRBS. As a result, long-
term temporal trends are not available for this variable. The 
prevalence of having drunk a sports drink one or more times 
per day did not change significantly from 2015 (13.8%) to 
2017 (12.4%).
The question also was not included in the standard 
questionnaire used in the state and large urban school district 
surveys in 2017. As a result, the range and median prevalence 
estimates across states and large urban school districts for the 
prevalence of having drunk a sports drink one or more times 
per day are not available.
Drank a Sports Drink Two or More Times per Day
Nationwide, 7.6% of students had drunk a can, bottle, 
or glass of a sports drink (e.g., Gatorade or Powerade, not 
counting low-calorie sports drinks such as Propel or G2) two 
or more times per day during the 7 days before the survey 
(Supplementary Table 193). The prevalence of having drunk a 
sports drink two or more times per day was higher among male 
(10.7%) than female (4.5%) students; higher among white 
male (9.7%), black male (18.9%), and Hispanic male (11.2%) 
than white female (3.6%), black female (8.5%), and Hispanic 
female (4.9%) students, respectively; and higher among 
9th-grade male (11.0%), 10th-grade male (10.9%), 11th-grade 
male (9.5%), and 12th-grade male (11.3%) than 9th-grade 
female (4.9%), 10th-grade female (4.6%), 11th-grade female 
(4.4%), and 12th-grade female (4.0%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having drunk a sports drink two or more 
times per day was higher among black (13.6%) and Hispanic 
(8.2%) than white (6.5%) students, higher among black 
(13.6%) than Hispanic (8.2%) students, higher among black 
female (8.5%) than white female (3.6%) and Hispanic female 
(4.9%) students, and higher among black male (18.9%) than 
white male (9.7%) and Hispanic male (11.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 8.0% of heterosexual students; 6.0% 
of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 8.0% of not sure 
students had drunk a sports drink two or more times per day 
(Supplementary Table 193). The prevalence of having drunk 
a sports drink two or more times per day was higher among 
heterosexual (8.0%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (6.0%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
male (10.9%) than heterosexual female (4.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 10.6% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 9.2% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 4.9% of students who had no sexual contact had 
drunk a sports drink two or more times per day (Supplementary 
Table 193). The prevalence of having drunk a sports drink two 
or more times per day was higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (10.6%) and students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (9.2%) than students who had no sexual contact (4.9%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only males (6.1%) and those who 
had sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (7.0%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (3.1%). Among male 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females (14.4%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (15.6%) than 
those who had no sexual contact (6.8%). The prevalence also 
was higher among male students who had sexual contact with 
only females (14.4%) than female students who had sexual 
contact with only males (6.1%), higher among male students 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(15.6%) than female students who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (7.0%), and higher among 
male students who had no sexual contact (6.8%) than female 
students who had no sexual contact (3.1%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having drunk 
a sports drink two or more times per day was used for the 
first time in the 2015 national YRBS. As a result, long-
term temporal trends are not available for this variable. The 
prevalence of having drunk a sports drink two or more times 
per day did not change significantly from 2015 (8.3%) to 
2017 (7.6%).
The question also was not included in the standard 
questionnaire used in the state and large urban school district 
surveys in 2017. As a result, the range and median prevalence 
estimates across states and large urban school districts for the 
prevalence of having drunk a sports drink two or more times 
per day are not available.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
83
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Drank a Sports Drink Three or More Times per Day
Nationwide, 4.2% of students had drunk a can, bottle, 
or glass of a sports drink (e.g., Gatorade or Powerade, not 
counting low-calorie sports drinks such as Propel or G2) three 
or more times per day during the 7 days before the survey 
(Supplementary Table 194). The prevalence of having drunk 
a sports drink three or more times per day was higher among 
male (5.9%) than female (2.5%) students; higher among white 
male (5.0%), black male (13.4%), and Hispanic male (5.9%) 
than white female (2.0%), black female (4.6%), and Hispanic 
female (2.4%) students, respectively; and higher among 
9th-grade male (6.3%), 10th-grade male (5.5%), 11th-grade 
male (4.9%), and 12th-grade male (6.9%) than 9th-grade 
female (2.5%), 10th-grade female (2.3%), 11th-grade female 
(2.4%), and 12th-grade female (2.4%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having drunk a sports drink three or more 
times per day was higher among black (8.9%) than white 
(3.4%) and Hispanic (4.2%) students, higher among black 
female (4.6%) than white female (2.0%) and Hispanic female 
(2.4%) students, and higher among black male (13.4%) than 
white male (5.0%) and Hispanic male (5.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 4.3% of heterosexual students; 
3.0% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 6.4% of not 
sure students had drunk a sports drink three or more times 
per day (Supplementary Table 194). Among male students, 
the prevalence of having drunk a sports drink three or more 
times per day was higher among not sure (12.2%) than gay 
and bisexual (4.5%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual male (5.9%) than heterosexual female 
(2.5%) students and higher among not sure male (12.2%) 
than not sure female (2.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, 6.1% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 6.2% of 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes, and 2.3% of students who had no sexual 
contact had drunk a sports drink three or more times per day 
(Supplementary Table 194). The prevalence of having drunk 
a sports drink three or more times per day was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(6.1%) and students who had sexual contact with only the same 
sex or with both sexes (6.2%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (2.3%). Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only males 
(3.1%) and those who had sexual contact with only females or 
with both sexes (4.6%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(1.5%). Among male students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only females (8.5%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only males or with both 
sexes (11.2%) than those who had no sexual contact (3.0%). 
The prevalence also was higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only females (8.5%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only males (3.1%) and higher 
among male students who had no sexual contact (3.0%) than 
female students who had no sexual contact (1.5%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having drunk 
a sports drink three or more times per day was used for 
the first time in the 2015 national YRBS. As a result, long-
term temporal trends are not available for this variable. The 
prevalence of having drunk a sports drink three or more times 
per day did not change significantly from 2015 (4.8%) to 
2017 (4.2%).
The question also was not included in the standard 
questionnaire used in the state and large urban school district 
surveys in 2017. As a result, the range and median prevalence 
estimates across states and large urban school districts for the 
prevalence of having drunk a sports drink three or more times 
per day are not available.
Did Not Drink Plain Water
Nationwide, 3.8% of students had not drunk plain water 
(counting tap, bottled, and unflavored sparkling water) during 
the 7 days before the survey (Supplementary Table 195). The 
prevalence of not having drunk plain water was higher among 
male (5.0%) than female (2.7%) students; higher among white 
male (4.3%) and Hispanic male (5.5%) than white female 
(1.9%) and Hispanic female (2.3%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade male (5.8%), 11th-grade male 
(4.2%), and 12th-grade male (5.5%) than 9th-grade female 
(2.5%), 11th-grade female (2.1%), and 12th-grade female 
(2.6%) students, respectively. The prevalence of not having 
drunk plain water was higher among black (6.7%) than white 
(3.1%) and Hispanic (4.0%) students, higher among black 
female (5.5%) than white female (1.9%) and Hispanic female 
(2.3%) students, and higher among black male (8.0%) than 
white male (4.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 3.8% of heterosexual students; 
3.5% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 6.5% of not 
sure students had not drunk plain water (Supplementary 
Table 195). The prevalence of not having drunk plain water 
was higher among not sure (6.5%) than gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual (3.5%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual male (4.9%) than heterosexual female 
(2.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 3.7% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 3.4% of students who 
 Surveillance Summaries
84 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, 
and 3.4% of students who had no sexual contact had not drunk 
plain water (Supplementary Table 195). The prevalence of not 
having drunk plain water was higher among male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (4.7%) than female 
students who had sexual contact with only males (2.5%) and 
higher among male students who had no sexual contact (4.4%) 
than female students who had no sexual contact (2.4%).
The question measuring the prevalence of not having drunk 
plain water was used for the first time in the 2015 national 
YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal trends are not available 
for this variable. The prevalence of not having drunk water did 
not change significantly from 2015 (3.5%) to 2017 (3.8%).
The question also was not included in the standard 
questionnaire used in the state and large urban school district 
surveys in 2017. As a result, the range and median prevalence 
estimates across states and large urban school districts for the 
prevalence of not having drunk plain water are not available.
Drank Plain Water One or More Times per Day
Nationwide, 75.4% of students had drunk a bottle or 
glass of plain water (counting tap, bottled, and unflavored 
sparkling water) one or more times per day during the 7 days 
before the survey (Supplementary Table 196). The prevalence 
of having drunk plain water one or more times per day was 
higher among white (77.8%) and Hispanic (73.4%) than black 
(67.6%) students, higher among white (77.8%) than Hispanic 
(73.4%) students, higher among white female (78.5%) than 
black female (67.6%) and Hispanic female (72.4%) students, 
and higher among white male (77.3%) and Hispanic male 
(74.4%) than black male (67.5%) students. The prevalence 
of having drunk plain water one or more times per day was 
higher among 11th-grade (76.8%) and 12th-grade (76.8%) 
than 9th-grade (73.2%) students and higher among 10th-grade 
male (76.1%), 11th-grade male (77.7%), and 12th-grade male 
(76.3%) than 9th-grade male (71.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 75.3% of heterosexual students; 
73.3% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 70.2% of 
not sure students had drunk plain water one or more times 
per day (Supplementary Table 196). The prevalence of having 
drunk plain water one or more times per day was higher among 
heterosexual (75.3%) than not sure (70.2%) students. Analyses 
based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual contacts 
indicated that nationwide, 75.1% of students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex, 74.0% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, and 
76.0% of students who had no sexual contact had drunk plain 
water one or more times per day (Supplementary Table 196).
The question measuring the prevalence of having drunk plain 
water one or more times per day was used for the first time 
in the 2015 national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal 
trends are not available for this variable. The prevalence of 
having drunk plain water one or more times per day did not 
change significantly from 2015 (73.6%) to 2017 (75.4%).
The question also was not included in the standard 
questionnaire used in the state and large urban school district 
surveys in 2017. As a result, the range and median prevalence 
estimates across states and large urban school districts for the 
prevalence of having drunk plain water one or more times per 
day are not available.
Drank Plain Water Two or More Times per Day
Nationwide, 66.8% of students had drunk a bottle or glass 
of plain water (counting tap, bottled, and unflavored sparkling 
water) two or more times per day during the 7 days before the 
survey (Supplementary Table 197). The prevalence of having 
drunk plain water two or more times per day was higher 
among Hispanic male (67.7%) than Hispanic female (64.1%) 
students. The prevalence of having drunk plain water two or 
more times per day was higher among white (68.0%) and 
Hispanic (66.0%) than black (61.1%) students, higher among 
white female (68.0%) than black female (61.6%) students, and 
higher among white male (68.1%) and Hispanic male (67.7%) 
than black male (60.6%) students. The prevalence of having 
drunk plain water two or more times per day was higher among 
11th-grade (68.3%) and 12th-grade (68.9%) than 9th-grade 
(63.9%) students and higher among 10th-grade male (68.6%), 
11th-grade male (69.2%), and 12th-grade male (69.7%) than 
9th-grade male (62.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 66.8% of heterosexual students; 
64.4% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 63.0% of 
not sure students had drunk plain water two or more times 
per day (Supplementary Table 197). Analyses based on the 
question ascertaining the sex of sexual contacts indicated that 
nationwide, 66.9% of students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex, 65.7% of students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, and 67.0% 
of students who had no sexual contact had drunk plain water 
two or more times per day (Supplementary Table 197).
The question measuring the prevalence of having drunk plain 
water two or more times per day was used for the first time 
in the 2015 national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal 
trends are not available for this variable. The prevalence of 
having drunk plain water two or more times per day did not 
change significantly from 2015 (64.3%) to 2017 (66.8%).
The question also was not included in the standard 
questionnaire used in the state and large urban school district 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
85
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
surveys in 2017. As a result, the range and median prevalence 
estimates across states and large urban school districts for the 
prevalence of having drunk plain water two or more times per 
day are not available.
Drank Plain Water Three or More Times per Day
Nationwide, 51.3% of students had drunk a bottle or glass 
of plain water (counting tap, bottled, and unflavored sparkling 
water) three or more times per day during the 7 days before the 
survey (Supplementary Table 198). The prevalence of having 
drunk plain water three or more times per day was higher 
among Hispanic (52.5%) than black (47.3%) students and 
higher among Hispanic male (54.6%) than black male (47.1%) 
students. The prevalence of having drunk plain water three 
or more times per day was higher among 12th-grade male 
(54.1%) than 9th-grade male (48.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 51.5% of heterosexual students; 
47.3% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 49.2% of 
not sure students had drunk plain water three or more times 
per day (Supplementary Table 198). The prevalence of having 
drunk plain water three or more times per day was higher 
among heterosexual (51.5%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(47.3%) students. Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among heterosexual (52.0%) than gay and bisexual 
(42.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 51.8% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 48.9% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 51.2% of students who had no sexual contact had 
drunk plain water three or more times per day (Supplementary 
Table 198). Among male students, the prevalence of having 
drunk plain water three or more times per day was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only females (52.9%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males or with 
both sexes (42.0%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having drunk plain 
water three or more times per day was used for the first time 
in the 2015 national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal 
trends are not available for this variable. The prevalence of 
having drunk plain water three or more times per day did not 
change significantly from 2015 (49.5%) to 2017 (51.3%).
The question also was not included in the standard 
questionnaire used in the state and large urban school district 
surveys in 2017. As a result, the range and median prevalence 
estimates across states and large urban school districts for the 
prevalence of having drunk plain water three or more times 
per day are not available.
Did Not Eat Breakfast
Nationwide, 14.1% of students had not eaten breakfast 
during the 7 days before the survey (Supplementary Table 199). 
The prevalence of having not eaten breakfast was higher among 
10th-grade female (15.4%) than 10th-grade male (12.0%) 
students. The prevalence of having not eaten breakfast was 
higher among Hispanic (16.0%) than white (12.8%) students 
and higher among Hispanic male (16.4%) than white male 
(12.4%) students. The prevalence of having not eaten breakfast 
was higher among 12th-grade male (16.4%) than 9th-grade 
male (12.9%), 10th-grade male (12.0%), and 11th-grade male 
(12.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual 
identity indicated that nationwide, 13.9% of heterosexual 
students; 18.1% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; 
and 16.0% of not sure students had not eaten breakfast 
(Supplementary Table 199). The prevalence of having not 
eaten breakfast was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(18.1%) than heterosexual (13.9%) students. Among female 
students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual 
(18.9%) than heterosexual (14.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, 15.0% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 19.5% of 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes, and 12.4% of students who had no sexual 
contact had not eaten breakfast (Supplementary Table 199). 
The prevalence of having not eaten breakfast was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(15.0%) and students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (19.5%) than students who had 
no sexual contact (12.4%) and higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(19.5%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (15.0%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (16.0%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (19.5%) than those who had no 
sexual contact (12.6%). Among male students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males or with both sexes (19.7%) than those who had sexual 
contact with only females (14.1%) and those who had no 
sexual contact (12.2%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having not eaten breakfast during 
2011–2017 (13.1%–14.1%). Not enough data points were 
available to identify a quadratic trend. The prevalence of having 
not eaten breakfast did not change significantly from 2015 
(13.8%) to 2017 (14.1%).
 Surveillance Summaries
86 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having 
not eaten breakfast ranged from 10.5% to 24.5% across state 
surveys (median: 14.6%) (Supplementary Table 200). Across 
20 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
12.2% to 22.0% (median: 17.7%).
Ate Breakfast on All 7 Days
Nationwide, 35.3% of students had eaten breakfast on all 
7 days during the 7 days before the survey (Supplementary 
Table 201). The prevalence of having eaten breakfast on all 7 
days was higher among male (39.9%) than female (31.0%) 
students; higher among white male (43.4%) and black 
male (35.1%) than white female (33.2%) and black female 
(22.7%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
male (43.8%), 10th-grade male (44.1%), 11th-grade male 
(36.4%), and 12th-grade male (34.3%) than 9th-grade 
female (32.8%), 10th-grade female (31.2%), 11th-grade 
female (29.5%), and 12th-grade female (30.2%) students, 
respectively. The prevalence of having eaten breakfast on all 
7 days was higher among white (38.1%) than black (28.7%) 
and Hispanic (31.7%) students, higher among white female 
(33.2%) and Hispanic female (29.8%) than black female 
(22.7%) students, and higher among white male (43.4%) than 
black male (35.1%) and Hispanic male (33.6%) students. The 
prevalence of having eaten breakfast on all 7 days was higher 
among 9th-grade (38.1%) and 10th-grade (37.5%) than 
11th-grade (32.8%) and 12th-grade (32.1%) students and 
higher among 9th-grade male (43.8%) and 10th-grade male 
(44.1%) than 11th-grade male (36.4%) and 12th-grade male 
(34.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 36.6% of heterosexual students; 
24.6% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 33.8% of not 
sure students had eaten breakfast on all 7 days (Supplementary 
Table 201). The prevalence of having eaten breakfast on all 
7 days was higher among heterosexual (36.6%) and not sure 
(33.8%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (24.6%) students. 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
heterosexual (32.1%) and not sure (33.1%) than lesbian 
and bisexual (23.4%) students. Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among heterosexual (40.7%) than gay 
and bisexual (28.9%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual male (40.7%) than heterosexual female 
(32.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 31.5% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 22.1% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 41.3% of students who had no sexual contact had 
eaten breakfast on all 7 days (Supplementary Table 201). 
The prevalence of having eaten breakfast on all 7 days was 
higher among students who had no sexual contact (41.3%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (31.5%) and students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes (22.1%) and higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(31.5%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (22.1%). Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had no sexual 
contact (36.5%) than those who had sexual contact with only 
males (26.3%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (21.3%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had no sexual contact 
(46.5%) than those who had sexual contact with only females 
(35.7%) and those who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (24.6%) and higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females (35.7%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (24.6%). 
The prevalence also was higher among male students who had 
sexual contact with only females (35.7%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only males (26.3%) and higher 
among male students who had no sexual contact (46.5%) than 
female students who had no sexual contact (36.5%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having eaten breakfast on all 7 days 
during 2011–2017 (37.7%–35.3%). Not enough data points 
were available to identify a quadratic trend. The prevalence of 
having eaten breakfast on all 7 days did not change significantly 
from 2015 (36.3%) to 2017 (35.3%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 33 states, the overall prevalence of having eaten 
breakfast on all 7 days ranged from 20.9% to 39.7% across 
state surveys (median: 34.6%) (Supplementary Table 202). 
Across 20 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 16.3% to 40.3% (median: 27.8%).
Physical Activity
Were Not Physically Active for a Total of at Least 
60 Minutes on at Least 1 Day
Nationwide, 15.4% of students had not been physically active 
for a total of at least 60 minutes on at least 1 day during the 
7 days before the survey (adding up time spent in any kind of 
physical activity that increased their heart rate and made them 
breathe hard some of the time) (Supplementary Table 203). 
The prevalence of not having been physically active for a total 
of at least 60 minutes on at least 1 day was higher among 
female (19.5%) than male (11.0%) students; higher among 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
87
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
white female (16.7%), black female (26.6%), and Hispanic 
female (20.0%) than white male (10.2%), black male (12.7%), 
and Hispanic male (12.3%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 9th-grade female (12.9%), 10th-grade female (19.1%), 
11th-grade female (23.0%), and 12th-grade female (23.7%) 
than 9th-grade male (8.1%), 10th-grade male (10.7%), 
11th-grade male (12.3%), and 12th-grade male (13.5%) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of not having been 
physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes on at least 
1 day was higher among black (19.8%) than white (13.6%) 
students and higher among black female (26.6%) than white 
female (16.7%) students. The prevalence of not having been 
physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes on at least 
1 day was higher among 10th-grade (14.9%), 11th-grade 
(17.7%), and 12th-grade (18.7%) than 9th-grade (10.5%) 
students; higher among 12th-grade (18.7%) than 10th-grade 
(14.9%) students; higher among 10th-grade female (19.1%), 
11th-grade female (23.0%), and 12th-grade female (23.7%) 
than 9th-grade female (12.9%) students; higher among 
10th-grade male (10.7%), 11th-grade male (12.3%), and 
12th-grade male (13.5%) than 9th-grade male (8.1%) students; 
and higher among 12th-grade male (13.5%) than 10th-grade 
male (10.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 13.9% of heterosexual students; 
20.8% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 23.1% of 
not sure students had not been physically active for a total of at 
least 60 minutes on at least 1 day (Supplementary Table 203). 
The prevalence of not having been physically active for a total 
of at least 60 minutes on at least 1 day was higher among gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual (20.8%) and not sure (23.1%) than 
heterosexual (13.9%) students. Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (21.5%) 
than heterosexual (18.1%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (19.4%) 
and not sure (25.6%) than heterosexual (10.1%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual female (18.1%) 
than heterosexual male (10.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 13.1% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 20.9% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 14.4% of students who had no sexual contact had 
not been physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes on 
at least 1 day (Supplementary Table 203). The prevalence of not 
having been physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes 
on at least 1 day was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (20.9%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (13.1%) and students who had no sexual contact (14.4%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only females or with both 
sexes (22.3%) than those who had no sexual contact (16.8%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(16.7%) and those who had no sexual contact (11.8%) than 
those who had sexual contact with only females (8.8%). The 
prevalence also was higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only males (18.4%) than male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (8.8%) and higher 
among female students who had no sexual contact (16.8%) 
than male students who had no sexual contact (11.8%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of not having been physically active for a 
total of at least 60 minutes on at least 1 day during 2011–2017 
(13.8%–15.4%). Not enough data points were available to 
identify a quadratic trend. The prevalence of not having been 
physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes on at least 1 
day did not change significantly from 2015 (14.3%) to 2017 
(15.4%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 39 states, the overall prevalence of not 
having been physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes 
on at least 1 day ranged from 11.1% to 28.2% across state 
surveys (median: 15.9%) (Supplementary Table 204). Across 
21 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
14.2% to 29.8% (median: 22.8%).
Were Physically Active for a Total of at Least 60 
Minutes per Day on 5 or More Days
Nationwide, 46.5% of students had been physically active 
for a total of at least 60 minutes per day on 5 or more days 
during the 7 days before the survey (adding up time spent in 
any kind of physical activity that increased their heart rate and 
made them breathe hard some of the time) (Supplementary 
Table 205). The prevalence of having been physically active 
for a total of at least 60 minutes per day on 5 or more days was 
higher among male (56.9%) than female (36.8%) students; 
higher among white male (59.4%), black male (54.5%), and 
Hispanic male (52.6%) than white female (38.8%), black 
female (29.9%), and Hispanic female (36.9%) students, 
respectively; and higher among 9th-grade male (63.1%), 
10th-grade male (56.4%), 11th-grade male (56.3%), and 
12th-grade male (51.2%) than 9th-grade female (45.3%), 
10th-grade female (34.2%), 11th-grade female (34.6%), 
and 12th-grade female (32.2%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of having been physically active for a total of at 
least 60 minutes per day on 5 or more days was higher among 
white (48.7%) than black (42.0%) students, higher among 
white female (38.8%) and Hispanic female (36.9%) than 
 Surveillance Summaries
88 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
black female (29.9%) students, and higher among white male 
(59.4%) than Hispanic male (52.6%) students. The prevalence 
of having been physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes 
per day on 5 or more days was higher among 9th-grade (54.1%) 
than 10th-grade (45.0%), 11th-grade (45.1%), and 12th-grade 
(41.4%) students; higher among 10th-grade (45.0%) and 
11th-grade (45.1%) than 12th-grade (41.4%) students; higher 
among 9th-grade female (45.3%) than 10th-grade female 
(34.2%), 11th-grade female (34.6%), and 12th-grade female 
(32.2%) students; higher among 9th-grade male (63.1%) 
than 10th-grade male (56.4%), 11th-grade male (56.3%), 
and 12th-grade male (51.2%) students; and higher among 
10th-grade male (56.4%) and 11th-grade male (56.3%) than 
12th-grade male (51.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 49.6% of heterosexual students; 
32.2% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 34.2% of 
not sure students had been physically active for a total of at 
least 60 minutes per day on 5 or more days (Supplementary 
Table 205). The prevalence of having been physically active 
for a total of at least 60 minutes per day on 5 or more days 
was higher among heterosexual (49.6%) than gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual (32.2%) and not sure (34.2%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among heterosexual 
(39.4%) than lesbian and bisexual (31.5%) students. Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among heterosexual 
(58.7%) than gay and bisexual (33.6%) and not sure (35.5%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
male (58.7%) than heterosexual female (39.4%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 52.7% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 34.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 46.2% of students who had no sexual contact had 
been physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes per day 
on 5 or more days (Supplementary Table 205). The prevalence 
of having been physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes 
per day on 5 or more days was higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (52.7%) and 
students who had no sexual contact (46.2%) than students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(34.8%) and higher among students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex (52.7%) than students who had no 
sexual contact (46.2%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (39.3%) and those who had no sexual contact (39.7%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (32.5%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(63.8%) and those who had no sexual contact (53.2%) than 
those who had sexual contact with only males or with both 
sexes (41.5%) and higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (63.8%) than those who had no sexual 
contact (53.2%). The prevalence also was higher among male 
students who had sexual contact with only females (63.8%) 
than female students who had sexual contact with only males 
(39.3%) and higher among male students who had no sexual 
contact (53.2%) than female students who had no sexual 
contact (39.7%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having been physically active for a 
total of at least 60 minutes per day on 5 or more days during 
2011–2017 (49.5%–46.5%). Not enough data points were 
available to identify a quadratic trend. The prevalence of 
having been physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes 
per day on 5 or more days did not change significantly from 
2015 (48.6%) to 2017 (46.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 39 states, the overall prevalence of having 
been physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes per day 
on 5 or more days ranged from 35.1% to 53.4% across state 
surveys (median: 45.6%) (Supplementary Table 206). Across 
21 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
25.5% to 48.5% (median: 33.6%).
Were Physically Active for a Total of at Least 60 
Minutes per Day on All 7 Days
Nationwide, 26.1% of students had been physically active for 
a total of at least 60 minutes per day on all 7 days during the 
7 days before the survey (calculated by adding up time spent 
in any kind of physical activity that increased their heart rate 
and made them breathe hard some of the time) (Supplementary 
Table 207). The prevalence of having been physically active for 
a total of at least 60 minutes per day on all 7 days was higher 
among male (35.3%) than female (17.5%) students; higher 
among white male (36.7%), black male (33.7%), and Hispanic 
male (33.3%) than white female (18.4%), black female 
(15.5%), and Hispanic female (18.1%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade male (39.7%), 10th-grade male 
(36.7%), 11th-grade male (34.5%), and 12th-grade male 
(29.8%) than 9th-grade female (22.0%), 10th-grade female 
(15.2%), 11th-grade female (15.9%), and 12th-grade female 
(16.4%) students, respectively. The prevalence of having been 
physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes per day on all 
7 days was higher among 9th-grade (30.6%) than 10th-grade 
(25.6%), 11th-grade (24.9%), and 12th-grade (22.9%) 
students; higher among 10th-grade (25.6%) than 12th-grade 
(22.9%) students; higher among 9th-grade female (22.0%) than 
10th-grade female (15.2%), 11th-grade female (15.9%), and 
12th-grade female (16.4%) students; higher among 9th-grade 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
89
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
male (39.7%) and 10th-grade male (36.7%) than 12th-grade 
male (29.8%) students; and higher among 9th-grade male 
(39.7%) than 11th-grade male (34.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 28.5% of heterosexual students; 
14.7% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 19.0% of not 
sure students had been physically active for a total of at least 
60 minutes per day on all 7 days (Supplementary Table 207). 
The prevalence of having been physically active for a total of 
at least 60 minutes per day on all 7 days was higher among 
heterosexual (28.5%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (14.7%) 
and not sure (19.0%) students. Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among heterosexual (19.0%) than 
lesbian and bisexual (14.3%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among heterosexual (37.0%) than 
gay and bisexual (15.0%) and not sure (24.1%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (37.0%) 
than heterosexual female (19.0%) students and higher among 
not sure male (24.1%) than not sure female (16.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 31.6% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 16.2% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 24.9% of students who had no sexual contact had 
been physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes per day 
on all 7 days (Supplementary Table 207). The prevalence of 
having been physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes 
per day on all 7 days was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (31.6%) than students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(16.2%) and students who had no sexual contact (24.9%) and 
higher among students who had no sexual contact (24.9%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the same 
sex or with both sexes (16.2%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (41.9%) than those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (19.5%) and those who had 
no sexual contact (31.6%) and higher among those who had 
no sexual contact (31.6%) than those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (19.5%). The prevalence 
also was higher among male students who had sexual contact 
with only females (41.9%) than female students who had 
sexual contact with only males (19.2%) and higher among 
male students who had no sexual contact (31.6%) than female 
students who had no sexual contact (18.7%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having been physically active for a total 
of at least 60 minutes per day on all 7 days during 2011–2017 
(28.7%–26.1%). Not enough data points were available to 
identify a quadratic trend. The prevalence of having been 
physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes per day on 
all 7 days did not change significantly from 2015 (27.1%) to 
2017 (26.1%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 39 states, the overall prevalence of having 
been physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes per day 
on all 7 days ranged from 17.9% to 30.8% across state surveys 
(median: 23.4%) (Supplementary Table 208). Across 21 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 13.4% to 
24.0% (median: 18.0%).
Did Exercises to Strengthen or Tone Muscles on 3 
or More Days
Nationwide, 51.1% of students had done exercises to 
strengthen or tone their muscles (e.g., push-ups, sit-ups, or 
weightlifting) on 3 or more days during the 7 days before 
the survey (Supplementary Table 209). The prevalence of 
having done exercises to strengthen or tone their muscles on 
3 or more days was higher among male (62.1%) than female 
(40.8%) students; higher among white male (61.2%), black 
male (65.9%), and Hispanic male (60.9%) than white female 
(41.2%), black female (36.2%), and Hispanic female (43.1%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade male 
(66.4%), 10th-grade male (63.8%), 11th-grade male (60.2%), 
and 12th-grade male (56.6%) than 9th-grade female (49.3%), 
10th-grade female (39.8%), 11th-grade female (36.8%), 
and 12th-grade female (36.1%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of having done exercises to strengthen or tone their 
muscles on 3 or more days was higher among Hispanic female 
(43.1%) than black female (36.2%) students and higher among 
black male (65.9%) than white male (61.2%) students. The 
prevalence of having done exercises to strengthen or tone their 
muscles on 3 or more days was higher among 9th-grade (57.6%) 
than 10th-grade (51.5%), 11th-grade (48.2%), and 12th-grade 
(46.0%) students; higher among 9th-grade female (49.3%) than 
10th-grade female (39.8%), 11th-grade female (36.8%), and 
12th-grade female (36.1%) students; higher among 9th-grade 
male (66.4%) and 10th-grade male (63.8%) than 12th-grade 
male (56.6%) students; and higher among 9th-grade male 
(66.4%) than 11th-grade male (60.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 54.1% of heterosexual students; 
36.4% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 39.4% of 
not sure students had done exercises to strengthen or tone 
their muscles on 3 or more days (Supplementary Table 209). 
The prevalence of having done exercises to strengthen or tone 
their muscles on 3 or more days was higher among heterosexual 
(54.1%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (36.4%) and not sure 
(39.4%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among heterosexual (43.7%) than lesbian and bisexual 
 Surveillance Summaries
90 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(34.5%) and not sure (35.7%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among heterosexual (63.2%) than 
gay and bisexual (42.4%) and not sure (46.3%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (63.2%) 
than heterosexual female (43.7%) students and higher among 
not sure male (46.3%) than not sure female (35.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 56.9% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 38.7% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 49.2% of students who had no sexual contact had 
done exercises to strengthen or tone their muscles on 3 or more 
days (Supplementary Table 209). The prevalence of having 
done exercises to strengthen or tone their muscles on 3 or more 
days was higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (56.9%) than students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (38.7%) 
and students who had no sexual contact (49.2%) and higher 
among students who had no sexual contact (49.2%) than 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with 
both sexes (38.7%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had sexual contact with only 
males (42.4%) and those who had no sexual contact (43.6%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (33.7%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
(69.0%) than those who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (54.8%) and those who had no sexual contact 
(55.1%). The prevalence also was higher among male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (69.0%) than female 
students who had sexual contact with only males (42.4%), 
higher among male students who had sexual contact with 
only males or with both sexes (54.8%) than female students 
who had sexual contact with only females or with both sexes 
(33.7%), and higher among male students who had no sexual 
contact (55.1%) than female students who had no sexual 
contact (43.6%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear increase occurred in the overall prevalence 
of having done exercises to strengthen or tone their muscles 
on 3 or more days (47.8%–51.1%). A significant quadratic 
trend also was identified. The prevalence of having done 
exercises to strengthen or tone their muscles on 3 or more days 
increased during 1991–2011 (47.8%–55.6%) and then did 
not change significantly during 2011–2017 (55.6%–51.1%). 
The prevalence of having done exercises to strengthen or tone 
their muscles on 3 or more days did not change significantly 
from 2015 (53.4%) to 2017 (51.1%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having done 
exercises to strengthen or tone their muscles on 3 or more 
days was not included in the standard questionnaire used in 
the state and large urban school district surveys in 2017. As a 
result, the range and median prevalence estimates across states 
and large urban school districts for the prevalence of having 
done exercises to strengthen or tone their muscles on 3 or more 
days are not available.
Played Video or Computer Games or Used a 
Computer 3 or More Hours per Day
Nationwide, 43.0% of students played video or computer 
games or used a computer 3 or more hours per day on an 
average school day for something that was not school work 
(counting “time spent on things such as Xbox, PlayStation, 
an iPad or other tablet, a smartphone, texting, YouTube, 
Instagram, Facebook, or other social media”) (Supplementary 
Table 210). The prevalence of playing video or computer 
games or using a computer 3 or more hours per day was 
higher among black (47.2%) and Hispanic (45.4%) than 
white (40.7%) students, higher among black female (46.7%) 
and Hispanic female (46.8%) than white female (39.6%) 
students, and higher among black male (47.7%) than white 
male (41.7%) students. The prevalence of playing video or 
computer games or using a computer 3 or more hours per day 
was higher among 9th-grade (45.0%) and 10th-grade (45.1%) 
than 12th-grade (39.2%) students; higher among 9th-grade 
female (44.0%), 10th-grade female (46.5%), and 11th-grade 
female (43.4%) than 12th-grade female (37.5%) students; and 
higher among 9th-grade male (45.7%) than 12th-grade male 
(40.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 42.6% of heterosexual students; 
52.9% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 47.4% of not 
sure students had played video or computer games or using a 
computer 3 or more hours per day (Supplementary Table 210). 
The prevalence of playing video or computer games or using 
a computer 3 or more hours per day was higher among gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual (52.9%) than heterosexual (42.6%) 
students. Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among lesbian and bisexual (51.5%) than heterosexual (42.8%) 
students. Among male students, the prevalence was higher 
among gay and bisexual (57.4%) than heterosexual (42.6%) 
students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 43.1% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 51.9% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 44.3% of students who had no sexual contact 
played video or computer games or used a computer 3 or more 
hours per day (Supplementary Table 210). The prevalence of 
playing video or computer games or using a computer 3 or 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
91
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
more hours per day was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (51.9%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (43.1%) and students who had no sexual contact (44.3%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only males (46.0%) and 
those who had sexual contact with only females or with both 
sexes (51.6%) than those who had no sexual contact (42.4%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(52.8%) and those who had no sexual contact (46.3%) than 
those who had sexual contact with only females (40.7%). The 
prevalence also was higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only males (46.0%) than male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (40.7%) and higher 
among male students who had no sexual contact (46.3%) than 
female students who had no sexual contact (42.4%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2003–2017, a significant 
linear increase (22.1%–43.0%) occurred in the overall prevalence 
of playing video or computer games or using a computer 3 
or more hours per day. A significant quadratic trend was not 
identified. The prevalence of playing video or computer games 
or using a computer 3 or more hours per day did not change 
significantly from 2015 (41.7%) to 2017 (43.0%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 37 states, the overall prevalence of playing 
video or computer games or using a computer 3 or more hours 
per day ranged from 33.7% to 47.9% across state surveys 
(median: 41.2%) (Supplementary Table 211). Across 20 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 38.0% to 
49.7% (median: 40.6%).
Watched Television 3 or More Hours per Day
Nationwide, 20.7% of students watched television 3 or 
more hours per day on an average school day (Supplementary 
Table 212). The prevalence of watching television 3 or more 
hours per day was higher among black (35.2%) and Hispanic 
(20.7%) than white (17.7%) students, higher among black 
(35.2%) than Hispanic (20.7%) students, higher among black 
female (32.8%) than white female (18.4%) and Hispanic 
female (19.5%) students, higher among black male (37.8%) 
and Hispanic male (21.9%) than white male (16.9%) students, 
and higher among black male (37.8%) than Hispanic male 
(21.9%) students. The prevalence of watching television 3 
or more hours per day was higher among 10th-grade female 
(22.7%) than 12th-grade female (18.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 20.5% of heterosexual students; 
25.6% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 24.4% of 
not sure students watched television 3 or more hours per 
day (Supplementary Table 212). The prevalence of watching 
television 3 or more hours per day was higher among gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual (25.6%) than heterosexual (20.5%) 
students. Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among lesbian and bisexual (27.2%) than heterosexual 
(20.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 21.9% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 23.6% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 19.9% of students who had no sexual contact 
watched television 3 or more hours per day (Supplementary 
Table 212). The prevalence of watching television 3 or more 
hours per day was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (21.9%) than students who 
had no sexual contact (19.9%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (22.5%) than those who had no sexual 
contact (19.3%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (42.8%–20.7%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of watching television 3 or more hours 
per day. A significant quadratic trend also was identified. 
The prevalence of watching television 3 or more hours per 
day decreased during 1999–2013 (42.8%–32.5%) and then 
decreased more rapidly during 2013–2017 (32.5%–20.7%). 
The prevalence of watching television 3 or more hours per day 
decreased from 2015 (24.7%) to 2017 (20.7%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 35 states, the overall prevalence of 
watching television 3 or more hours per day ranged from 
14.5% to 28.7% across state surveys (median: 20.8%) 
(Supplementary Table 213). Across 20 large urban school 
districts, the prevalence ranged from 19.1% to 32.7% (median: 
23.6%).
Went to Physical Education Classes on 1 or 
More Days
Nationwide, 51.7% of students went to physical education 
(PE) classes on 1 or more days in an average week when they 
were in school (Supplementary Table 214). The prevalence 
of going to PE classes on 1 or more days was higher among 
male (55.9%) than female (47.6%) students; higher among 
white male (52.7%), black male (62.4%), and Hispanic male 
(58.8%) than white female (45.1%), black female (47.8%), 
and Hispanic female (53.1%) students, respectively; and 
higher among 10th-grade male (60.0), 11th-grade male (44.9), 
and 12th-grade male (42.0) than 10th-grade female (51.0), 
11th-grade female (33.4), and 12th-grade female (32.2) 
students, respectively. The prevalence of going to PE classes on 
 Surveillance Summaries
92 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
1 or more days was higher among Hispanic (56.0%) than white 
(48.7%) students and higher among black male (62.4%) than 
white male (52.7%) students. The prevalence of going to PE 
classes on 1 or more days was higher among 9th-grade (72.1%) 
than 10th-grade (55.4%), 11th-grade (39.0%), and 12th-grade 
(39.0%) students; higher among 10th-grade (55.4%) than 
11th-grade (39.0%) and 12th-grade (36.9%) students; higher 
among 9th-grade female (70.8%) than 10th-grade female 
(51.0%), 11th-grade female (33.4%), and 12th-grade female 
(32.2%) students; higher among 10th-grade female (51.0%) 
than 11th-grade female (33.4%) and 12th-grade female 
(32.2%) students; higher among 9th-grade male (73.5%) 
than 10th-grade male (60.0%), 11th-grade male (44.9%), 
and 12th-grade male (42.0%) students; and higher among 
10th-grade male (60.0%) than 11th-grade male (44.9%) and 
12th-grade male (42.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 52.0% of heterosexual students; 
43.5% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 51.0% 
of not sure students went to PE classes on 1 or more days 
(Supplementary Table 214). The prevalence of going to PE 
classes on 1 or more days was higher among heterosexual 
(52.0%) and not sure (51.0%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(43.5%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among heterosexual (46.7%) and not sure (51.6%) than 
lesbian and bisexual (42.0%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among heterosexual (56.7%) than 
gay and bisexual s (47.6%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual male (56.7%) than heterosexual 
female (46.7%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 50.1% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 39.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 55.1% of students who had no sexual contact went 
to PE classes on 1 or more days (Supplementary Table 214). 
The prevalence of going to PE classes on 1 or more days was 
higher among students who had no sexual contact (55.1%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (50.1%) and students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes (39.8%) and higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(50.1%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (39.8%). Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had no sexual 
contact (52.9%) than those who had sexual contact with only 
males (42.3%) and those who had sexual contact with only 
females or with both sexes (36.8%). The prevalence also was 
higher among male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (56.5%) than female students who had sexual contact 
with only males (42.3%), higher among male students who 
had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (48.5%) 
than female students who had sexual contact with only females 
or with both sexes (36.8%), and higher among male students 
who had no sexual contact (57.4%) than female students who 
had no sexual contact (52.9%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of going to PE classes on 1 or more days 
during 1991–2017 (48.9%–51.7%). A significant quadratic 
trend also was not identified. The prevalence of going to PE 
classes on 1 or more days did not change significantly from 
2015 (51.6%) to 2017 (51.7%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 35 states, the overall prevalence of going to PE 
classes on 1 or more days ranged from 27.9% to 91.5% across 
state surveys (median: 46.4%) (Supplementary Table 215). 
Across 17 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 28.0% to 86.1% (median: 44.6%).
Went to Physical Education Classes on All 5 Days
Nationwide, 29.9% of students went to PE classes on 
all 5 days in an average week when they were in school 
(Supplementary Table 216). The prevalence of going to PE 
classes on all 5 days was higher among male (34.7%) than 
female (25.3%) students; higher among white male (32.2%), 
black male (35.8%), and Hispanic male (40.5%) than white 
female (22.6%), black female (21.6%), and Hispanic female 
(34.1%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
male (45.5%), 10th-grade male (36.7%), 11th-grade male 
(28.3%), and 12th-grade male (26.5%) than 9th-grade female 
(39.2%), 10th-grade female (24.2%), 11th-grade female 
(20.3%), and 12th-grade female (15.9%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of going to PE classes on all 5 days was higher 
among Hispanic (37.4%) than white (27.2%) students and 
higher among Hispanic female (34.1%) than white female 
(22.6%) and black female (21.6%) students. The prevalence of 
going to PE classes on all 5 days was higher among 9th-grade 
(42.3%) than 10th-grade (30.2%), 11th-grade (24.3%), 
and 12th-grade (21.0%) students; higher among 10th-grade 
(30.2%) than 11th-grade (24.3%) and 12th-grade (21.0%) 
students; higher among 11th-grade (24.3%) than 12th-grade 
(21.0%) students; higher among 9th-grade female (39.2%) than 
10th-grade female (24.2%), 11th-grade female (20.3%), and 
12th-grade female (15.9%) students; higher among 10th-grade 
female (24.2%) and 11th-grade female (20.3%) than 12th-grade 
female (15.9%) students; higher among 9th-grade male (45.5%) 
than 10th-grade male (36.7%), 11th-grade male (28.3%), 
and 12th-grade male (26.5%) students; and higher among 
10th-grade male (36.7%) than 11th-grade male (28.3%) and 
12th-grade male (26.5%) students.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
93
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 32.3% of heterosexual students; 
21.7% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 24.3% of not 
sure students went to PE classes on all 5 days (Supplementary 
Table 216). The prevalence of going to PE classes on all 5 days 
was higher among heterosexual (32.3%) than gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual (21.7%) and not sure (24.3%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among heterosexual 
(28.2%) than lesbian and bisexual (20.4%) students. Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among heterosexual 
(35.9%) than gay and bisexual (25.5%) and not sure (26.9%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
male (35.9%) than heterosexual female (28.2%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 31.3% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 19.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 33.8% of students who had no sexual contact went 
to PE classes on all 5 days (Supplementary Table 216). The 
prevalence of going to PE classes on all 5 days was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(31.3%) and students who had no sexual contact (33.8%) than 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with 
both sexes (19.8%). Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among those who had no sexual contact (30.9%) 
than those who had sexual contact with only males (25.4%) 
and those who had sexual contact with only females or with 
both sexes (18.8%) and higher among those who had sexual 
contact with only males (25.4%) those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (18.8%). Among male 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females (36.3%) and those who had 
no sexual contact (36.9%) than those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (22.8%). The prevalence 
also was higher among male students who had sexual contact 
with only females (36.3%) than female students who had 
sexual contact with only males (25.4%) and higher among 
male students who had no sexual contact (36.9%) than female 
students who had no sexual contact (30.9%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend 
in the overall prevalence of going to PE classes on all 5 days 
during 1991–2017 (41.6%–29.9%). A significant quadratic 
trend also was not identified. The prevalence of going to PE 
classes on all 5 days did not change significantly from 2015 
(29.8%) to 2017 (29.9%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 35 states, the overall prevalence of going 
to PE classes on all 5 days ranged from 5.8% to 68.4% across 
state surveys (median: 22.0%) (Supplementary Table 217). 
Across 17 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 7.1% to 43.5% (median: 22.1%).
Played on at Least One Sports Team
Nationwide, 54.3% of students had played on at least 
one sports team (counting any teams run by their school or 
community groups) during the 12 months before the survey 
(Supplementary Table 218). The prevalence of having played 
on at least one sports team was higher among male (59.7%) 
than female (49.3%) students; higher among white male 
(59.6%), black male (67.5%), and Hispanic male (56.7%) than 
white female (49.8%), black female (51.1%), and Hispanic 
female (47.5%) students, respectively; and higher among 
9th-grade male (63.9%), 10th-grade male (59.2%), 11th-grade 
male (59.5%), and 12th-grade male (55.9%) than 9th-grade 
female (56.4%), 10th-grade female (49.2%), 11th-grade 
female (47.0%), and 12th-grade female (43.8%) students, 
respectively. The prevalence of having played on at least one 
sports team was higher among black (59.1%) than Hispanic 
(52.2%) students and higher among black male (67.5%) than 
white male (59.6%) and Hispanic male (56.7%) students. The 
prevalence of having played on at least one sports team was 
higher among 9th-grade (60.0%) than 10th-grade (54.0%), 
11th-grade (53.1%), and 12th-grade (49.6%) students; 
higher among 10th-grade (54.0%) and 11th-grade (53.1%) 
than 12th-grade (49.6%) students; higher among 9th-grade 
female (56.4%) than 10th-grade female (49.2%), 11th-grade 
female (47.0%), and 12th-grade female (43.8%) students; 
higher among 10th-grade female (49.2%) than 12th-grade 
female (43.8%) students; and higher among 9th-grade male 
(63.9%) than 10th-grade male (59.2%) and 12th-grade male 
(55.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 57.9% of heterosexual students; 
38.5% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 43.7% 
of not sure students had played on at least one sports team 
(Supplementary Table 218). The prevalence of having played 
on at least one sports team was higher among heterosexual 
(57.9%) than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (38.5%) and not sure 
(43.7%) students. Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among heterosexual (54.1%) than lesbian and bisexual 
(38.1%) and not sure (44.9%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among heterosexual (61.2%) than 
gay and bisexual (40.0%) and not sure (42.6%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (61.2%) 
than heterosexual female (54.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 60.0% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 41.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
 Surveillance Summaries
94 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
sexes, and 53.4% of students who had no sexual contact had 
played on at least one sports team (Supplementary Table 218). 
The prevalence of having played on at least one sports team 
was higher among students who had sexual contact with only 
the opposite sex (60.0%) and students who had no sexual 
contact (53.4%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes (41.3%) and higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
(60.0%) than students who had no sexual contact (53.4%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only males (52.9%) and 
those who had no sexual contact (52.2%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (41.3%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females (66.0%) than those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(43.4%) and those who had no sexual contact (54.8%). The 
prevalence also was higher among male students who had sexual 
contact with only females (66.0%) than female students who 
had sexual contact with only males (52.9%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of having played on at least one sports 
team during 1999–2017 (55.1%–54.3%). A significant 
quadratic trend also was not identified. The prevalence of 
having played on at least one sports team did not change 
significantly from 2015 (57.6%) to 2017 (54.3%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 26 states, the overall prevalence of having played on 
at least one sports team ranged from 46.8% to 62.8% across 
state surveys (median: 54.6%) (Supplementary Table 219). 
Across 15 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 40.4% to 54.7% (median: 47.7%).
Had a Concussion One or More Times from 
Playing a Sport or Being Physically Active
Nationwide, 15.1% of students had a concussion one or 
more times during the 12 months before the survey from 
playing a sport or being physically active (Supplementary 
Table 220). The prevalence of having had a concussion one 
or more times was higher among male (17.1%) than female 
(13.0%) students; higher among white male (16.7%), black 
male (20.0%), and Hispanic male (16.5%) than white female 
(12.6%), black female (13.9%), and Hispanic female (13.5%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 10th-grade male 
(18.6%) and 12th-grade male (13.9%) than 10th-grade female 
(11.9%) and 12th-grade female (10.5%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having had a concussion one or more times 
was higher among black male (20.0%) than Hispanic male 
(16.5%) students. The prevalence of having had a concussion 
one or more times was higher among 9th-grade (17.0%), 
10th-grade (15.2%), and 11th-grade (15.3%) than 12th-grade 
(12.2%) students; higher among 9th-grade female (15.5%) 
than 10th-grade female (11.9%) and 12th-grade female 
(10.5%) students; and higher among 9th-grade male (18.6%), 
10th-grade male (18.6%), and 11th-grade male (17.1%) than 
12th-grade male (13.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 15.0% of heterosexual students; 
15.7% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 17.2% 
of not sure students had had a concussion one or more 
times (Supplementary Table 220). Among female students, 
the prevalence of having had a concussion one or more 
times was higher among lesbian and bisexual (15.7%) than 
heterosexual (12.8%) students. The prevalence also was higher 
among heterosexual male (16.9%) than heterosexual female 
(12.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, 18.3% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 18.9% 
of students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes, and 11.2% of students who had no 
sexual contact had had a concussion one or more times 
(Supplementary Table 220). The prevalence of having had 
a concussion one or more times was higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex (18.3%) 
and students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes (18.9%) than students who had no sexual 
contact (11.2%). Among female students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only males 
(14.5%) and those who had sexual contact with only females or 
with both sexes (18.2%) than those who had no sexual contact 
(11.1%) and higher among those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (18.2%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only males (14.5%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (21.5%) and those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (20.8%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (11.3%). The prevalence also was higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only females 
(21.5%) than female students who had sexual contact with 
only males (14.5%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having had a 
concussion one or more times was used for the first time in the 
2017 national YRBS. As a result, long-term temporal trends 
and 2-year temporal changes are not available for this variable.
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 28 states, the overall prevalence of having had a 
concussion one or more times ranged from 12.7% to 21.5% 
across state surveys (median: 15.8%) (Supplementary Table 221). 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
95
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Across 15 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 
10.7% to 20.9% (median: 16.2%).
Obesity, Overweight, and Weight Control
Obesity
Nationwide, 14.8% of students had obesity (were ≥95th 
percentile for body mass index, based on sex- and age-
specific reference data from the 2000 CDC growth charts) 
(Supplementary Table 222). The prevalence of obesity was 
higher among male (17.5%) than female (12.1%) students; 
higher among white male (14.8%) and Hispanic male 
(22.2%) than white female (10.3%) and Hispanic female 
(14.0%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
male (15.9%), 10th-grade male (18.9%), 11th-grade male 
(18.6%), and 12th-grade male (16.2%) than 9th-grade female 
(10.3%), 10th-grade female (11.0%), 11th-grade female 
(15.2%), and 12th-grade female (12.4%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of obesity was higher among black (18.2%) 
and Hispanic (18.2%) than white (12.5%) students, higher 
among black female (16.7%) and Hispanic female (14.0%) 
than white female (10.3%) students, and higher among black 
male (19.7%) and Hispanic male (22.2%) than white male 
(14.8%) students. The prevalence of obesity was higher among 
11th-grade (16.9%) than 9th-grade (13.1%) and 12th-grade 
(14.2%) students and higher among 11th-grade female 
(15.2%) than 9th-grade female (10.3%) and 10th-grade female 
(11.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of obesity was 
14.4% among heterosexual students; 20.5% among gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual students; and 16.5% among not sure 
students (Supplementary Table 222). The prevalence of obesity 
was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (20.5%) than 
heterosexual (14.4%) students. Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual (20.0%) 
and not sure (17.6%) than heterosexual (10.8%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual male (17.5%) 
than heterosexual female (10.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of obesity 
was 13.5% among students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex, 21.2% among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes, and 15.6% 
among students who had no sexual contact (Supplementary 
Table 222). The prevalence of obesity was higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes (21.2%) and students who had no sexual 
contact (15.6%) than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex (13.5%) and higher among students who 
had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes 
(21.2%) than students who had no sexual contact (15.6%). 
Among female students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only females or with both sexes 
(20.7%) and those who had no sexual contact (12.8%) than 
those who had sexual contact with only males (10.0%) and 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only females 
or with both sexes (20.7%) than those who had no sexual 
contact (12.8%). The prevalence also was higher among male 
students who had sexual contact with only females (16.5%) 
than female students who had sexual contact with only males 
(10.0%) and higher among male students who had no sexual 
contact (18.6%) than female students who had no sexual 
contact (12.8%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a 
significant linear increase (10.6%–14.8%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of obesity. A significant quadratic trend 
was not identified. The prevalence of obesity did not change 
significantly from 2015 (13.9%) to 2017 (14.8%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 39 states, the overall prevalence of obesity 
ranged from 9.5% to 21.7% across state surveys (median: 
14.2%) (Supplementary Table 223). Across 21 large urban 
school districts, the prevalence ranged from 10.1% to 20.4% 
(median: 16.1%).
Overweight
Nationwide, 15.6% of students were overweight (≥85th 
percentile but <95th percentile for body mass index, based 
on sex- and age-specific reference data from the 2000 CDC 
growth charts) (Supplementary Table 224). The prevalence 
of overweight was higher among female (16.8%) than male 
(14.4%) students, higher among black female (20.8%) than 
black male (14.8%) students, and higher among 11th-grade 
female (18.8%) than 11th-grade male (14.1%) students. The 
prevalence of overweight was higher among black (17.8%) and 
Hispanic (19.5%) than white (14.0%) students, higher among 
black female (20.8%) and Hispanic female (21.9%) than white 
female (14.3%) students, and higher among Hispanic male 
(17.1%) than white male (13.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of overweight 
was 15.5% among heterosexual students; 19.2% among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 15.7% among not 
sure students (Supplementary Table 224). The prevalence 
of overweight was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
(19.2%) than heterosexual (15.5%) students. Among female 
students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian and bisexual 
(20.5%) than heterosexual (16.6%) students. The prevalence 
 Surveillance Summaries
96 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
also was higher among heterosexual female (16.6%) than 
heterosexual male (14.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of overweight 
was 16.2% among students who had sexual contact with only 
the opposite sex, 18.3% among students who had sexual contact 
with only the same sex or with both sexes, and 15.2% among 
students who had no sexual contact (Supplementary Table 224). 
The prevalence of overweight was higher among female students 
who had no sexual contact (16.8%) than male students who had 
no sexual contact (13.6%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a 
significant linear increase occurred in the overall prevalence of 
overweight (14.1%–15.6%). A significant quadratic trend was 
not identified. The prevalence of overweight did not change 
significantly from 2015 (16.0%) to 2017 (15.6%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 39 states, the overall prevalence of 
overweight ranged from 12.3% to 18.3% across state surveys 
(median: 15.9%) (Supplementary Table 225). Across 21 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 12.2% to 
20.4% (median: 16.6%).
Described Themselves as Overweight
Nationwide, 31.5% of students described themselves as 
slightly or very overweight (Supplementary Table 226). The 
prevalence of describing themselves as overweight was higher 
among female (37.5%) than male (25.3%) students; higher 
among white female (35.4%), black female (36.8%), and 
Hispanic female (42.5%) than white male (23.9%), black male 
(19.1%), and Hispanic male (31.9%) students, respectively; 
and higher among 9th-grade female (35.2%), 10th-grade 
female (34.6%), 11th-grade female (41.8%), and 12th-grade 
female (38.6%) than 9th-grade male (25.6%), 10th-grade 
male (24.6%), 11th-grade male (25.3%), and 12th-grade male 
(25.5%) students, respectively. The prevalence of describing 
themselves as overweight was higher among Hispanic (37.1%) 
than white (29.9%) and black (28.1%) students, higher among 
Hispanic female (42.5%) than white female (35.4%) and black 
female (36.8%) students, higher among white male (23.9%) 
and Hispanic male (31.9%) than black male (19.1%) students, 
and higher among Hispanic male (31.9%) than white male 
(23.9%) students. The prevalence of describing themselves 
as overweight was higher among 11th-grade (33.8%) than 
9th-grade (30.5%) and 10th-grade (29.7%) students and 
higher among 11th-grade female (41.8%) than 9th-grade 
female (35.2%) and 10th-grade female (34.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 29.9% of heterosexual students; 
45.6% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 43.0% 
of not sure students described themselves as overweight 
(Supplementary Table 226). The prevalence of describing 
themselves as overweight was higher among gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual (45.6%) and not sure (43.0%) than heterosexual 
(29.9%) students. Among female students, the prevalence 
was higher among lesbian and bisexual (48.4%) and not sure 
(48.7%) than heterosexual (36.0%) students. Among male 
students, the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual 
(37.3%) than heterosexual (24.6%) students. The prevalence 
also was higher among heterosexual female (36.0%) than 
heterosexual male (24.6%) students, higher among lesbian and 
bisexual female (48.4%) than gay and bisexual male (37.3%) 
students, and higher among not sure female (48.7%) than not 
sure male (33.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 28.6% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 46.4% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 34.3% of students who had no sexual contact 
described themselves as overweight (Supplementary Table 
226). The prevalence of describing themselves as overweight 
was higher among students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes (46.4%) and students who 
had no sexual contact (34.3%) than students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (28.6%) and higher among 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with 
both sexes (46.4%) than students who had no sexual contact 
(34.3%). Among female students, the prevalence was higher 
among those who had sexual contact with only females or 
with both sexes (49.8%) and those who had no sexual contact 
(39.9%) than those who had sexual contact with only males 
(35.6%) and higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (49.8%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (39.9%). Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males or with both sexes (36.5%) and those who had 
no sexual contact (28.4%) than those who had sexual contact 
with only females (22.8%). The prevalence also was higher 
among female students who had sexual contact with only 
males (35.6%) than male students who had sexual contact with 
only females (22.8%), higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (49.8%) 
than male students who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (36.5%), and higher among female students 
who had no sexual contact (39.9%) than male students who 
had no sexual contact (28.4%).
Trend analyses did not identify a significant linear trend in 
the overall prevalence of describing themselves as overweight 
during 1991–2017 (31.8%–31.5%). A significant quadratic 
trend was identified. The prevalence of describing themselves 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
97
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
as overweight decreased during 1991–1995 (31.8%–27.6%) 
and then increased during 1995–2017 (27.6%–31.5%). The 
prevalence of describing themselves as overweight did not 
change significantly from 2015 (31.5%) to 2017 (31.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 30 states, the overall prevalence of describing 
themselves as overweight ranged from 25.5% to 35.9% across 
state surveys (median: 30.7%) (Supplementary Table 227). 
Across 19 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 22.4% to 37.3% (median: 29.2%).
Trying to Lose Weight
Nationwide, 47.1% of students were trying to lose weight 
(Supplementary Table 228). The prevalence of trying to lose 
weight was higher among female (59.9%) than male (34.0%) 
students; higher among white female (58.6%), black female 
(55.3%), and Hispanic female (65.6%) than white male 
(30.6%), black male (28.9%), and Hispanic male (45.7%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade female 
(56.9%), 10th-grade female (57.9%), 11th-grade female 
(63.4%), and 12th-grade female (62.0%) than 9th-grade male 
(35.4%), 10th-grade male (34.3%), 11th-grade male (33.0%), 
and 12th-grade male (32.9%) students, respectively. The 
prevalence of trying to lose weight was higher among Hispanic 
(55.4%) than white (45.1%) and black (42.3%) students, 
higher among Hispanic female (65.6%) than white female 
(58.6%) and black female (55.3%) students, and higher among 
Hispanic male (45.7%) than white male (30.6%) and black 
male (28.9%) students. The prevalence of trying to lose weight 
was higher among 11th-grade female (63.4%) than 9th-grade 
female (56.9%) and 10th-grade female (57.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 45.8% of heterosexual students; 
59.5% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 49.3% of 
not sure students were trying to lose weight (Supplementary 
Table 228). The prevalence of trying to lose weight was higher 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual (59.5%) than heterosexual 
(45.8%) and not sure (49.3%) students. Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (48.5%) 
than heterosexual (33.7%) students. The prevalence also was 
higher among heterosexual female (60.0%) than heterosexual 
male (33.7%) students, higher among lesbian and bisexual 
female (63.1%) than gay and bisexual male (48.5%) students, 
and higher among not sure female (61.5%) than not sure male 
(32.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 46.0% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 58.5% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 47.2% of students who had no sexual contact 
were trying to lose weight (Supplementary Table 228). The 
prevalence of trying to lose weight was higher among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes (58.5%) than students who had sexual contact with only 
the opposite sex (46.0%) and students who had no sexual 
contact (47.2%). Among male students, the prevalence was 
higher among those who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (44.0%) than those who had sexual contact 
with only females (32.6%). The prevalence also was higher 
among female students who had sexual contact with only 
males (62.2%) than male students who had sexual contact with 
only females (32.6%), higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (63.5%) 
than male students who had sexual contact with only males or 
with both sexes (44.0%), and higher among female students 
who had no sexual contact (58.7%) than male students who 
had no sexual contact (35.0%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1991–2017, a 
significant linear increase (41.8%–47.1%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of trying to lose weight. A significant 
quadratic trend was not identified. The prevalence of trying 
to lose weight did not change significantly from 2015 (45.6%) 
to 2017 (47.1%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 29 states, the overall prevalence of trying 
to lose weight ranged from 41.1% to 52.3% across state surveys 
(median: 44.8%) (Supplementary Table 229). Across 18 large 
urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 41.0% to 
50.6% (median: 44.5%).
Other Health-Related Topics
Asthma
Nationwide, 22.5% of students had ever been told by a doctor 
or nurse that they have asthma (Supplementary Table 230). 
The prevalence of having ever been told they have asthma was 
higher among black (29.8%) than white (20.9%) and Hispanic 
(21.1%) students, higher among black female (29.1%) than 
white female (21.2%) and Hispanic female (20.7%) students, 
and higher among black male (30.5%) than white male 
(20.6%) and Hispanic male (21.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 22.1% of heterosexual students; 
29.1% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 23.3% 
of not sure students had ever been told they have asthma 
(Supplementary Table 230). The prevalence of having ever 
been told they have asthma was higher among gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual (29.1%) than heterosexual (22.1%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among lesbian 
 Surveillance Summaries
98 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and bisexual (27.6%) than heterosexual (22.4%) students. 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among gay 
and bisexual (32.3%) than heterosexual (22.0%) and not sure 
(19.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 23.2% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 27.6% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 21.1% of students who had no sexual contact had 
ever been told they have asthma (Supplementary Table 230). 
The prevalence of having ever been told they have asthma 
was higher among students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes (27.6%) than students who 
had no sexual contact (21.1%). Among female students, the 
prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (28.1%) than those who 
had no sexual contact (21.8%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2003–2017, a 
significant linear increase (18.9%–22.5%) occurred in 
the overall prevalence of having ever been told they have 
asthma. A significant quadratic trend also was identified. 
The prevalence of having ever been told they have asthma 
increased during 2003–2009 (18.9%–22.0%) and then did 
not change significantly during 2009–2017 (22.0%–22.5%). 
The prevalence of having ever been told they have asthma did 
not change significantly from 2015 (22.8%) to 2017 (22.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data indicated 
that across 29 states, the overall prevalence of having ever been 
told they have asthma ranged from 19.3% to 33.4% across 
state surveys (median: 24.3%) (Supplementary Table 231). 
Across 20 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 17.4% to 33.4% (median: 23.9%).
Never Saw a Dentist
Nationwide, 1.5% of students had never seen a dentist 
for a check-up, exam, teeth cleaning, or other dental work 
(Supplementary Table 232). The prevalence of having never 
seen a dentist was higher among male (1.7%) than female 
(1.2%) students, higher among Hispanic male (2.5%) 
than Hispanic female (1.2%) students, and higher among 
12th-grade male (2.2%) than 12th-grade female (0.7%) 
students. The prevalence of having never seen a dentist was 
higher among black (2.3%) and Hispanic (1.9%) than white 
(1.0%) students and higher among black male (2.7%) and 
Hispanic male (2.5%) than white male (1.2%) students. The 
prevalence of having never seen a dentist was higher among 
9th-grade male (2.0%) and 12th-grade male (2.2%) than 
10th-grade male (1.1%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 1.4% of heterosexual students; 
1.5% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 2.6% of not 
sure students had never seen a dentist (Supplementary Table 
232). Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, 1.2% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 2.8% of 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes, and 1.2% of students who had no sexual 
contact had never seen a dentist (Supplementary Table 232). 
The prevalence of having never seen a dentist was higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the same 
sex or with both sexes (2.8%) than students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (1.2%) and students who 
had no sexual contact (1.2%). The prevalence also was higher 
among male students who had sexual contact with only females 
(1.6%) than female students who had sexual contact with only 
males (0.7%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (3.0%–1.5%) occurred in the overall 
prevalence of having never seen a dentist. Not enough data 
points were available to identify a quadratic trend, because 
the question measuring the prevalence of having never seen a 
dentist was only used in 1999, 2001, 2003, 2015, and 2017. 
The prevalence of having never seen a dentist did not change 
significantly from 2015 (1.9%) to 2017 (1.5%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 31 states, the overall prevalence of having 
never seen a dentist ranged from 0.9% to 4.7% across state 
surveys (median: 1.9%) (Supplementary Table 233). Across 19 
large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged from 1.6% 
to 4.3% (median: 2.7%).
Saw a Dentist
Nationwide, 75.7% of students had seen a dentist for a 
check-up, exam, teeth cleaning, or other dental work during 
the 12 months before the survey (Supplementary Table 234). 
The prevalence of having seen a dentist during the 12 months 
before the survey was higher among female (77.3%) than 
male (74.2%) students; higher among white female (82.7%) 
and Hispanic female (74.1%) than white male (79.0%) and 
Hispanic male (69.3%) students, respectively; and higher 
among 10th-grade female (79.1%) than 10th-grade male 
(75.3%) students. The prevalence of having seen a dentist 
during the 12 months before the survey was higher among 
white (80.8%) and Hispanic (71.6%) than black (64.5%) 
students, higher among white (80.8%) than Hispanic (71.6%) 
students, higher among white female (82.7%) and Hispanic 
female (74.1%) than black female (66.1%) students, higher 
among white female (82.7%) than Hispanic female (74.1%) 
students, higher among white male (79.0%) and Hispanic male 
(69.3%) than black male (62.9%) students, and higher among 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
99
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
white male (79.0%) than Hispanic male (69.3%) students. 
The prevalence of having seen a dentist during the 12 months 
before the survey was higher among 10th-grade (77.1%) than 
12th-grade (73.8%) students and higher among 10th-grade 
male (75.3%) than 12th-grade male (71.8%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 76.2% of heterosexual students; 
70.0% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 67.6% of 
not sure students had seen a dentist during the 12 months 
before the survey (Supplementary Table 234). The prevalence 
of having seen a dentist during the 12 months before the survey 
was higher among heterosexual (76.2%) than gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual (70.0%) and not sure (67.6%) students. Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among heterosexual 
(75.8%) than gay and bisexual (60.3%) and not sure (51.6%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among lesbian and 
bisexual female (73.6%) than gay and bisexual male (60.3%) 
students and higher among not sure female (79.3%) than not 
sure male (51.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of 
sexual contacts indicated that nationwide, 75.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 68.8% of 
students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes, and 76.5% of students who had no sexual 
contact had seen a dentist during the 12 months before the 
survey (Supplementary Table 234). The prevalence of having 
seen a dentist during the 12 months before the survey was 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
opposite sex (75.8%) and students who had no sexual contact 
(76.5%) than students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes (68.8%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (74.1%) and those who had no sexual contact 
(76.3%) than those who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (57.3%). The prevalence also was higher 
among female students who had sexual contact with only males 
(77.8%) than male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (74.1%) and higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (72.8%) 
than male students who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (57.3%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 1999–2017, a 
significant linear increase (66.8%–75.7%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of having seen a dentist during the 12 
months before the survey. Not enough data points were 
available to identify a quadratic trend, because the question 
measuring the prevalence of having seen a dentist during the 12 
months before the survey was only used in 1999, 2001, 2003, 
2015, and 2017. The prevalence of having seen a dentist during 
the 12 months before the survey did not change significantly 
from 2015 (74.4%) to 2017 (75.7%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 31 states, the overall prevalence of 
having seen a dentist during the 12 months before the survey 
ranged from 65.0% to 82.8% across state surveys (median: 
76.1%) (Supplementary Table 235). Across 19 large urban 
school districts, the prevalence ranged from 60.9% to 74.2% 
(median: 68.1%).
Got 8 or More Hours of Sleep
Nationwide, 25.4% of students got 8 or more hours of 
sleep on an average school night (Supplementary Table 236). 
The prevalence of getting 8 or more hours of sleep was 
higher among 9th-grade male (37.5%) than 9th-grade female 
(32.3%) students. The prevalence of getting 8 or more hours 
of sleep was higher among 9th-grade (34.8%) than 10th-grade 
(26.6%), 11th-grade (21.4%), and 12th-grade (17.6%) 
students; higher among 10th-grade (26.6%) than 11th-grade 
(21.4%) and 12th-grade (17.6%) students; higher among 
11th-grade (21.4%) than 12th-grade (17.6%) students; higher 
among 9th-grade female (32.3%) than 10th-grade female 
(26.0%), 11th-grade female (21.1%), and 12th-grade female 
(17.9%) students; higher among 10th-grade female (26.0%) 
than 11th-grade female (21.1%) and 12th-grade female 
(17.9%) students; higher among 9th-grade male (37.5%) 
than 10th-grade male (27.0%), 11th-grade male (21.6%), 
and 12th-grade male (17.3%) students; and higher among 
10th-grade male (27.0%) than 11th-grade male (21.6%) and 
12th-grade male (17.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 25.9% of heterosexual students; 
17.8% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 24.7% of not 
sure students had gotten 8 or more hours of sleep (Supplementary 
Table 236). The prevalence of getting 8 or more hours of sleep 
was higher among heterosexual (25.9%) and not sure (24.7%) 
than gay, lesbian, and bisexual (17.8%) students. Among 
female students, the prevalence was higher among heterosexual 
(25.6%) than lesbian and bisexual (18.1%) students. Among 
male students, the prevalence was higher among heterosexual 
(26.4%) and not sure (32.1%) than gay and bisexual (18.0%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among not sure male 
(32.1%) than not sure female (20.5%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 21.9% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 15.8% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 29.8% of students who had no sexual contact had 
gotten 8 or more hours of sleep (Supplementary Table 236). 
The prevalence of getting 8 or more hours of sleep was higher 
 Surveillance Summaries
100 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
among students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (21.9%) and students who had no sexual contact (29.8%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes (15.8%) and higher among students who 
had no sexual contact (29.8%) than students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex (21.9%). Among female 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only males (21.2%) and those who had no 
sexual contact (28.4%) than those who had sexual contact with 
only females or with both sexes (16.6%) and higher among 
those who had no sexual contact (28.4%) than those who had 
sexual contact with only males (21.2%). Among male students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only females (22.5%) and those who had no sexual contact 
(31.3%) than those who had sexual contact with only males 
or with both sexes (13.5%) and higher among those who had 
no sexual contact (31.3%) than those who had sexual contact 
with only females (22.5%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2007–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (31.1%–25.4%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of getting 8 or more hours of sleep. A 
significant quadratic trend also was identified. The prevalence 
of getting 8 or more hours of sleep did not change significantly 
during 2007–2013 (31.1%–31.7%) and then decreased during 
2013–2017 (31.7%–25.4%). The prevalence of getting 8 or 
more hours of sleep did not change significantly from 2015 
(27.3%) to 2017 (25.4%).
Analyses of state and large urban school district data 
indicated that across 34 states, the overall prevalence of getting 
8 or more hours of sleep ranged from 19.4% to 32.8% across 
state surveys (median: 23.7%) (Supplementary Table 237). 
Across 21 large urban school districts, the prevalence ranged 
from 12.1% to 30.5% (median: 20.2%).
Indoor Tanning Device Use
Nationwide, 5.6% of students had used an indoor tanning 
device (e.g., a sunlamp, sunbed, or tanning booth, not counting 
getting a spray-on tan) one or more times during the 12 
months before the survey (i.e., indoor tanning device use) 
(Supplementary Table 238). The prevalence of indoor tanning 
device use was higher among female (7.5%) than male (3.5%) 
students; higher among white female (10.1%) than white 
male (2.8%) students; higher among black male (7.0%) than 
black female (3.8%) students; and higher among 9th-grade 
female (5.0%), 11th-grade female (8.1%), and 12th-grade 
female (12.9%) than 9th-grade male (2.3%), 11th-grade male 
(2.9%), and 12th-grade male (4.5%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of indoor tanning device use was higher among 
white (6.6%) and black (5.5%) than Hispanic (3.2%) students, 
higher among white female (10.1%) than black female (3.8%) 
and Hispanic female (3.0%) students, and higher among 
black male (7.0%) than white male (2.8%) and Hispanic male 
(3.4%) students. The prevalence of indoor tanning device use 
was higher among 12th-grade (8.9%) than 9th-grade (3.7%), 
10th-grade (4.3%), and 11th-grade (5.5%) students; higher 
among 11th-grade (5.5%) than 9th-grade (3.7%) students; 
higher among 11th-grade female (8.1%) and 12th-grade female 
(12.9%) than 9th-grade female (5.0%) and 10th-grade female 
(4.2%) students; higher among 12th-grade female (12.9%) 
than 11th-grade female (8.1%) students; higher among 
10th-grade male (4.3%) and 12th-grade male (4.5%) than 
9th-grade male (2.3%) students; and higher among 12th-grade 
male (4.5%) than 11th-grade male (2.9%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of indoor tanning 
device use was 5.4% among heterosexual students; 6.0% 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 9.9% among 
not sure students (Supplementary Table 238). The prevalence 
of indoor tanning device use was higher among not sure (9.9%) 
than heterosexual (5.4%) students. Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among heterosexual (8.4%) than 
lesbian and bisexual (4.9%) and not sure (5.0%) students. 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among gay 
and bisexual (9.4%) and not sure (15.6%) than heterosexual 
(2.8%) students. The prevalence also was higher among 
heterosexual female (8.4%) than heterosexual male (2.8%) 
students and higher among not sure male (15.6%) than not 
sure female (5.0%).
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, the prevalence of indoor 
tanning device use was 7.7% among students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex, 10.8% among students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 2.3% among students who had no sexual contact 
(Supplementary Table 238). The prevalence of indoor tanning 
device use was higher among students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex (7.7%) and students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (10.8%) than 
students who had no sexual contact (2.3%). Among female 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only males (12.1%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only females or with both sexes (9.2%) 
than those who had no sexual contact (3.4%). Among male 
students, the prevalence was higher among those who had 
sexual contact with only females (4.1%) and those who had 
sexual contact with only males or with both sexes (15.6%) than 
those who had no sexual contact (1.1%) and higher among 
those who had sexual contact with only males or with both 
sexes (15.6%) than those who had sexual contact with only 
females (4.1%). The prevalence also was higher among female 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
101
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
students who had sexual contact with only males (12.1%) than 
male students who had sexual contact with only females (4.1%) 
and higher among female students who had no sexual contact 
(3.4%) than male students who had no sexual contact (1.1%).
Trend analyses indicated that during 2009–2017, a 
significant linear decrease (15.6%–5.6%) occurred in the 
overall prevalence of indoor tanning device use. Not enough 
data points were available to identify a quadratic trend. The 
prevalence of indoor tanning device use decreased from 2015 
(7.3%) to 2017 (5.6%).
The question measuring the prevalence of indoor tanning 
device use was not included in the standard questionnaire used 
in the state and large urban school district surveys in 2017. 
As a result, the range and median prevalence estimates across 
states and large urban school districts for the prevalence of 
indoor tanning device use are not available.
Had a Sunburn
Nationwide, 57.2% of students had had a sunburn one or 
more times (counting the number of times even a small part 
of their skin turned red or hurt for 12 or more hours after 
being outside in the sun or after using a sunlamp or other 
indoor tanning device) during the 12 months before the 
survey (Supplementary Table 239). The prevalence of having 
had a sunburn was higher among female (61.6%) than male 
(52.8%) students; higher among white female (78.8%), black 
female (15.5%), and Hispanic female (50.1%) than white male 
(70.5%), black male (10.4%), and Hispanic male (40.3%) 
students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade female 
(61.5%), 10th-grade female (61.2%), 11th-grade female 
(59.9%), and 12th-grade female (63.9%) than 9th-grade 
male (53.6%), 10th-grade male (52.9%), 11th-grade male 
(51.2%), and 12th-grade male (53.2%) students, respectively. 
The prevalence of having had a sunburn was higher among 
white (74.8%) and Hispanic (45.0%) than black (13.0%) 
students, higher among white (74.8%) than Hispanic (45.0%) 
students, higher among white female (78.8%) and Hispanic 
female (50.1%) than black female (15.5%) students, higher 
among white female (78.8%) than Hispanic female (50.1%) 
students, higher among white male (70.5%) and Hispanic male 
(40.3%) than black male (10.4%) students, and higher among 
white male (70.5%) than Hispanic male (40.3%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 57.0% of heterosexual students; 
56.2% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 52.4% of not 
sure students had had a sunburn (Supplementary Table 239). 
Among female students, the prevalence of having had a 
sunburn was higher among heterosexual (62.7%) than lesbian 
and bisexual (54.6%) students. Among male students, the 
prevalence was higher among gay and bisexual (62.3%) than 
heterosexual (52.2%) and not sure (45.7%) students. The 
prevalence also was higher among heterosexual female (62.7%) 
than heterosexual male (52.2%) students and higher among 
gay and bisexual male (62.3%) than lesbian and bisexual female 
(54.6%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 58.9% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 57.7% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 55.7% of students who had no sexual contact had 
had a sunburn (Supplementary Table 239). The prevalence of 
having had a sunburn was higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex (58.9%) than students 
who had no sexual contact (55.7%). Among female students, 
the prevalence was higher among those who had sexual contact 
with only males (65.6%) than those who had sexual contact 
with only females or with both sexes (57.0%) and those who 
had no sexual contact (58.9%). The prevalence also was higher 
among female students who had sexual contact with only males 
(65.6%) than male students who had sexual contact with only 
females (53.4%) and higher among female students who had 
no sexual contact (58.9%) than male students who had no 
sexual contact (52.4%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having had a 
sunburn was used for the first time in the 2015 national YRBS. 
As a result, long-term temporal trends are not available for 
this variable. The prevalence of having had a sunburn did not 
change significantly from 2015 (55.8%) to 2017 (57.2%).
The question also was not included in the standard 
questionnaire used in the state and large urban school district 
surveys in 2017. As a result, the range and median prevalence 
estimates across states and large urban school districts for the 
prevalence of having had a sunburn are not available.
Have to Avoid Some Foods Because Eating the 
Food Could Cause an Allergic Reaction
Nationwide, 15.2% of students have to avoid some foods 
because eating the food could cause an allergic reaction (e.g., 
skin rashes, swelling, itching, vomiting, coughing, or trouble 
breathing) (Supplementary Table 240). The prevalence of 
having to avoid some foods because eating the food could cause 
an allergic reaction was higher among female (18.4%) than 
male (11.9%) students; higher among white female (17.6%), 
black female (24.1%), and Hispanic female (17.2%) than 
white male (10.5%), black male (16.6%), and Hispanic male 
(11.1%) students, respectively; and higher among 9th-grade 
female (17.3%), 10th-grade female (19.7%), 11th-grade female 
(18.1%), and 12th-grade female (18.5%) than 9th-grade male 
(11.5%), 10th-grade male (13.0%), 11th-grade male (10.0%), 
and 12th-grade male (12.9%) students, respectively. The 
 Surveillance Summaries
102 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
prevalence of having to avoid some foods because eating the 
food could cause an allergic reaction was higher among black 
(20.4%) than white (14.3%) and Hispanic (14.1%) students, 
higher among black female (24.1%) than white female (17.6%) 
and Hispanic female (17.2%) students, and higher among 
black male (16.6%) than white male (10.5%) and Hispanic 
male (11.1%) students. The prevalence of having to avoid 
some foods because eating the food could cause an allergic 
reaction was higher among 10th-grade (16.5%) than 9th-grade 
(14.5%) and 11th-grade (14.1%) students and higher among 
10th-grade male (13.0%) and 12th-grade male (12.9%) than 
11th-grade male (10.0%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining sexual identity 
indicated that nationwide, 14.5% of heterosexual students; 
19.6% of gay, lesbian, and bisexual students; and 18.3% of 
not sure students have to avoid food because eating the food 
could cause an allergic reaction (Supplementary Table 240). 
The prevalence of having to avoid some foods because eating 
the food could cause an allergic reaction was higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual (19.6%) than heterosexual (14.5%) 
students. The prevalence also was higher among heterosexual 
female (17.9%) than heterosexual male (11.6%) students and 
higher among not sure female (23.0%) than not sure male 
(11.4%) students.
Analyses based on the question ascertaining the sex of sexual 
contacts indicated that nationwide, 15.5% of students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex, 20.2% of students 
who had sexual contact with only the same sex or with both 
sexes, and 14.0% of students who had no sexual contact have 
to avoid some foods because eating the food could cause an 
allergic reaction (Supplementary Table 240). The prevalence of 
having to avoid some foods because eating the food could cause 
an allergic reaction was higher among students who had sexual 
contact with only the same sex or with both sexes (20.2%) 
than students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex (15.5%) and students who had no sexual contact (14.0%). 
Among male students, the prevalence was higher among those 
who had sexual contact with only males or with both sexes 
(18.1%) than those who had no sexual contact (10.9%). The 
prevalence also was higher among female students who had 
sexual contact with only males (19.2%) than male students 
who had sexual contact with only females (12.3%) and higher 
among female students who had no sexual contact (16.9%) 
than male students who had no sexual contact (10.9%).
The question measuring the prevalence of having to avoid 
some foods because eating the food could cause an allergic 
reaction was used for the first time in the 2015 national YRBS. 
As a result, long-term temporal trends are not available for this 
variable. The prevalence of having to avoid some foods because 
eating the food could cause an allergic reaction did not change 
significantly from 2015 (16.0%) to 2017 (15.2%).
The question also was not included in the standard 
questionnaire used in the state and large urban school district 
surveys in 2017. As a result, the range and median prevalence 
estimates across states and large urban school districts for the 
prevalence of having to avoid some foods because eating the 
food could cause an allergic reaction are not available.
Discussion
YRBSS is the largest public health surveillance system in 
the United States monitoring a broad range of health-related 
behaviors among high school students. In addition, YRBSS 
has been measuring sexual identity and sex of sexual contacts 
at the state and local levels longer than any other public health 
surveillance system in the United States. YRBSS data are used 
widely to compare the prevalence of health-related behaviors 
among subpopulations of students, assess trends in health-
related behaviors over time, monitor progress toward achieving 
national health objectives, provide comparable state and large 
urban school district data, and take public health actions to 
decrease health-risk behaviors and improve health outcomes 
among youth. This report provides an update on the prevalence 
of health-related behaviors among students in grades 9–12 
nationwide and across 39 states and 21 large urban school 
districts. More specifically, it describes nationwide disparities 
in health-related behaviors by demographic subgroups (defined 
by sex, race/ethnicity, and grade in school) and sexual minority 
status (as defined by sexual identity and sex of sexual contacts), 
describes trends in the overall prevalence of health-related 
behaviors at the national level, and provides an update on the 
size of sexual minority subgroups nationwide.
Although the majority of the 16,311,000 students projected 
to have attended public and private schools in grades 9–12 
nationwide in 2017 (25) are heterosexual, this report indicates 
that approximately 391,000 are gay or lesbian, 1,305,000 are 
bisexual, and 685,000 are not sure of their sexual identity. 
In addition, approximately 261,000 of all students in grades 
9–12 have had sexual contact with only the same sex and 
864,000 have had sexual contact with both sexes. These 
counts are somewhat higher than previously reported (15) 
reflecting both an increase in the size of the overall estimated 
number of students in grade 9–12 nationwide and social and 
demographic changes in the sexual minority community (26). 
Sexual minority students are part of every community and are 
as racially, ethnically, socially, economically, and geographically 
diverse as their nonsexual minority peers.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
103
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Comparison of the Prevalence of Health-
Related Behaviors Among Subpopulations 
of Students
YRBSS is designed to identify how health-related behaviors 
vary by subpopulations of high school students. Understanding 
these variations (or lack of variation) in health-related behaviors 
might help design, target, and identify the impact of school and 
community policies, programs, and practices. However, isolating 
the effects of demographic subgroups ascertained by the YRBSS 
from the effects of socioeconomic status (SES) or culture on 
the prevalence of health-related behaviors is not possible. For 
example, in a national study, the likelihood of cardiovascular 
disease risks such as obesity, sedentary behaviors, and tobacco 
exposure increased among adolescents aged 12–17 years as their 
SES based on a poverty-income ratio decreased (27).
Variations by Sex
The prevalence of most health-related behaviors varies by 
sex. For example, the prevalence of three of the five injury-
related behaviors (rarely or never wearing a seatbelt, having 
driven when they had been drinking alcohol, and having 
driven when they had been using marijuana) was higher 
among male than female students. The prevalence of six of 
the 13 violence-related behaviors (having carried a weapon, 
having carried a weapon on school property, having carried 
a gun, having been threatened or injured with a weapon on 
school property, having been in a physical fight, and having 
been in a physical fight on school property) also was higher 
among male than female students. However, the prevalence of 
six other violence-related behaviors (having been electronically 
bullied, having been bullied on school property, having been 
forced to have sexual intercourse, having experienced sexual 
violence by anyone, having experienced sexual dating violence, 
and having experienced physical dating violence) was higher 
among female than male students. The prevalence of all five 
suicide-related behaviors (having felt sad or hopeless, having 
seriously considered attempting suicide, having made a suicide 
plan, having attempted suicide, and having made a suicide 
attempt resulting in an injury, poisoning, or overdose that 
had to be treated by a doctor or nurse) also was higher among 
female than male students. The prevalence of having ridden 
with a driver who had been drinking alcohol, having texted or 
e-mailed while driving, and having not gone to school because 
of safety concerns did not vary by sex.
The prevalence of 17 of the 20 tobacco use risk behaviors 
(having ever tried cigarette smoking; having first tried cigarette 
smoking before age 13 years; current cigarette use; having 
smoked more than 10 cigarettes per day; having ever used an 
electronic vapor product; current, current frequent, and current 
daily electronic vapor product use; current, current frequent, 
and current daily smokeless tobacco use; current, current 
frequent, and current daily cigar use; current cigarette or cigar 
use; current cigarette, cigar, or smokeless tobacco use; and 
current cigarette, cigar, smokeless tobacco, or current electronic 
vapor product use) was higher among male than female 
students. However, among all the tobacco-use behaviors, the 
only behavior that was health promoting (having tried to quit 
using all tobacco products) had a higher prevalence among 
female than male students. The prevalence of three tobacco 
use behaviors (current frequent and current daily cigarette use 
and having usually gotten their own electronic vapor products 
by buying them in a store) did not vary by sex.
The prevalence of 11 of the 20 alcohol and other drug use 
behaviors (having drunk alcohol for the first time before age 
13 years; having reported 10 or more as the largest number of 
alcoholic drinks in a row; having tried marijuana for the first 
time before age 13 years; having ever used cocaine, heroin, 
methamphetamines, ecstasy, and hallucinogenic drugs; having 
ever taken steroids without a doctor’s prescription; having ever 
injected any illegal drug; and having been offered, sold, or 
given an illegal drug on school property) was higher among 
male than female students. However, the prevalence of having 
ever drunk alcohol, current alcohol use, and having usually 
gotten the alcohol they drank by someone giving it to them was 
higher among female than male students. Six alcohol and other 
drug use behaviors (current binge drinking, having ever used 
marijuana, current marijuana use, having ever used synthetic 
marijuana, having ever used inhalants, and having ever taken 
prescription pain medicine without a doctor’s prescription 
or differently than how a doctor told them to use it) did not 
vary by sex.
The prevalence of four of the six sexual risk behaviors (having 
ever had sexual intercourse, having had sexual intercourse 
before age 13 years, having had sexual intercourse with four 
or more persons, and having drunk alcohol or used drugs 
before last sexual intercourse) and one of the six protective 
sexual behaviors (having used a condom during last sexual 
intercourse) was higher among male than female students. The 
prevalence of three protective sexual behaviors (having used an 
IUD or implant before last sexual intercourse; having used a 
shot, patch, or birth control ring before last sexual intercourse; 
and having used birth control pills; an IUD or implant; or a 
shot, patch, or birth control ring before last sexual intercourse) 
was higher among female than male students, while one 
sexual risk behavior (not having used any method to prevent 
pregnancy) also was higher among female than male students. 
Similarly, the prevalence of having ever been tested for HIV was 
higher among female than male students. The prevalence of 
being currently sexually active; having used birth control pills 
 Surveillance Summaries
104 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
before last sexual intercourse; and having used both a condom 
during last sexual intercourse and birth control pills; an IUD 
or implant; or a shot, patch, or birth control ring before last 
sexual intercourse did not vary by sex.
The prevalence of 18 of the 26 dietary behaviors (not having 
eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices; having eaten fruit or 
drunk 100% fruit juices one or more times, two or more times, 
and three or more times per day; not having eaten vegetables; 
having eaten vegetables two or more times and three or more 
times per day; having drunk one or more glasses, two or more 
glasses, and three or more glasses of milk per day; having drunk 
soda or pop one or more times, two or more times, and three 
or more times per day; having drunk a sports drink one or 
more times, two or more times, and three or more times per 
day; not having drunk plain water; and having eaten breakfast 
on all 7 days) was higher among male than female students. In 
contrast, the prevalence of only three dietary behaviors (not 
having drunk milk, not having drunk soda or pop, and not 
having drunk a sports drink) was higher among female than 
male students. The prevalence of having eaten vegetables one 
or more times per day; having drunk plain water one or more 
times, two or more times, and three or more times per day; 
and having not eaten breakfast did not vary by sex.
The prevalence of all six protective physical activity behaviors 
(having been physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes 
per day on 5 or more days, having been physically active for a 
total of at least 60 minutes per day on all 7 days, having done 
exercises to strengthen or tone their muscles on 3 or more days, 
going to PE classes on 1 or more days, going to PE classes on 
all 5 days, and having played on at least one sports team), and 
one of the four physical activity risk behaviors (having had a 
concussion one or more times from playing a sport or being 
physically active) was higher among male than female students. 
Only one physical activity risk behavior (were not physically 
active for a total of at least 60 minutes on at least 1 day) had a 
higher prevalence estimate among female than male students. 
The prevalence of playing video or computer games or using 
a computer 3 or more hours per day and watching television 
3 or more hours per day did not vary by sex.
The prevalence of obesity was higher among male than 
female students, whereas the prevalence of being overweight, 
describing themselves as overweight, and trying to lose weight 
was higher among female than male students. The prevalence 
of having never seen a dentist was higher among male than 
female students, whereas the prevalence of having seen a dentist 
during the 12 months before the survey, indoor tanning device 
use, having had a sunburn, and having to avoid some foods 
because eating the food could cause an allergic reaction was 
higher among female than male students. The prevalence of 
having ever been told they have asthma and getting 8 or more 
hours of sleep did not vary by sex.
Variations by Race/Ethnicity
The prevalence of most health-related behaviors varies by 
race/ethnicity. The prevalence of 25 behaviors (17 risk and 
eight protective) was higher among white than black and 
Hispanic students, the prevalence of 21 behaviors (19 risk 
and two protective) was higher among black than white and 
Hispanic students, and the prevalence of 11 risk behaviors 
was higher among Hispanic than white and black students. 
Twenty-four behaviors (17 risk and seven protective) did not 
vary by race/ethnicity.
White students had a higher prevalence than black and 
Hispanic students of one injury-related risk behavior (having 
texted or e-mailed while driving), three violence-related risk 
behaviors (having carried a weapon, having been electronically 
bullied, and having been bullied on school property), 
12 tobacco-use related risk behaviors (current, current frequent, 
and current daily cigarette use; current, current frequent, and 
current daily electronic vapor product use; current, current 
frequent, and current daily smokeless tobacco use; current 
cigarette or cigar use; current cigarette, cigar, or smokeless 
tobacco use; and current cigarette, cigar, smokeless tobacco, or 
electronic vapor product use), three protective sexual behaviors 
(having used birth control pills before last sexual intercourse; 
having used birth control pills, an IUD or implant, or a shot, 
patch, or birth control ring before last sexual intercourse; and 
having used both a condom during last sexual intercourse and 
birth control pills, an IUD or implant, or a shot, patch, or 
birth control ring before last sexual intercourse), four protective 
dietary behaviors (having eaten vegetables one or more times 
per day, not having drunk a sports drink, having drunk plain 
water one or more times per day, and having eaten breakfast 
on all 7 days), one additional protective behavior (having seen 
a dentist during the 12 months before the survey) and one 
additional risk behavior (having had a sunburn).
Black students had a higher prevalence than white and 
Hispanic students of one injury-related risk behavior (rarely or 
never wearing a seatbelt), four violence-related risk behaviors 
(having been threatened or injured with a weapon on school 
property, having been in a physical fight, having been in a 
physical fight on school property, and having experienced 
physical dating violence), two sexual risk behaviors (having had 
sexual intercourse before age 13 years and having had sexual 
intercourse with four or more persons), having ever been tested 
for HIV, nine dietary risk behaviors (not having eaten fruit 
or drunk 100% fruit juices; not having eaten vegetables; not 
having drunk milk; having drunk soda or pop two or more 
times and three or more times per day; having drunk a sports 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
105
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
drink one or more times, two or more times, and three or 
more times per day; and not having drunk plain water), one 
protective dietary behavior (having eaten fruit or drunk 100% 
fruit juices three or more times per day), one physical activity 
risk behavior (watching television 3 or more hours per day), 
and two additional risk behaviors (having ever been told they 
have asthma and having to avoid some foods because eating 
the food could cause an allergic reaction).
Hispanic students had a higher prevalence than white and 
black students of two injury-related risk behaviors (having 
ridden with a driver who had been drinking alcohol and having 
driven when they had been drinking alcohol), one suicide-
related risk behavior (having felt sad or hopeless), one tobacco 
use-related risk behavior (having ever used an electronic vapor 
product), five risk behaviors related to alcohol and other drug 
use (having drunk alcohol before age 13 years; having ever used 
synthetic marijuana; having ever used cocaine; having ever used 
ecstasy; and having been offered, sold or given an illegal drug 
on school property), and two weight control-related behaviors 
(describing themselves as overweight and trying to lose weight).
The prevalence of some health-related behaviors did not 
vary by race/ethnicity: one injury-related risk behavior (having 
driven when using marijuana), four violence-related risk 
behaviors (having carried a weapon on school property, having 
carried a gun, having been forced to have sexual intercourse, 
and having experienced sexual violence by anyone), one 
suicide-related risk behavior (having made a suicide plan), 
five tobacco-related risk behaviors (having first tried cigarette 
smoking before age 13 years, having smoked more than 10 
cigarettes per day, having usually gotten their own electronic 
vapor products by buying them in a store, and current frequent 
and current daily cigar use), three risk behaviors related to 
alcohol and other drug use (having usually gotten the alcohol 
they drank by someone giving it to them, having ever used 
methamphetamines, and having ever injected any illegal drug), 
two sexual risk behaviors (being currently sexually active 
and having drunk alcohol or used drugs before last sexual 
intercourse), one protective sexual behavior (having used a 
condom during last sexual intercourse), three protective dietary 
behaviors (having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices one or 
more times per day, having eaten vegetables two or more times 
per day, and not having drunk soda or pop), two protective 
physical activity-related behaviors (having been physically 
active for a total of at least 60 minutes per day on all 7 days 
and having done exercises to strengthen or tone their muscles 
on 3 or more days), one physical activity risk behavior (having 
had a concussion one or more times from playing a sport or 
being physically active), and one additional protective behavior 
(getting 8 or more hours of sleep).
Variations by Sexual Identity and Sex of 
Sexual Contacts
The prevalence of most health-related behaviors varies by 
sexual identity and sex of sexual contacts. However, unlike the 
variations by sex and race/ethnicity, this report documents that 
the differences are almost always in the same direction with 
sexual minority students having a higher prevalence of health-
risk behaviors compared with nonsexual minority students. 
For example, across the 13 violence-related risk behaviors, the 
prevalence of 10 was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
students than heterosexual students and the prevalence of nine 
was higher among students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes than students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex. The prevalence for five of 
these behaviors (having been electronically bullied, having 
been forced to have sexual intercourse, having experienced 
sexual violence by anyone, having experienced sexual dating 
violence, and having experienced physical dating violence) 
was twofold or greater for gay, lesbian, and bisexual students 
compared with heterosexual students and the prevalence for 
four of these same behaviors (having been forced to have 
sexual intercourse, having experienced sexual violence by 
anyone, having experienced sexual dating violence, and having 
experienced physical dating violence) was twofold or greater 
for students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes than students who had sexual contact with 
only the opposite sex. Similarly, across the five suicide-related 
risk behaviors, the prevalence of all five was higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual students than heterosexual students 
and higher among students who had sexual contact with only 
the same sex or with both sexes than students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex. The prevalence of all five 
of these behaviors (having felt sad or hopeless; having seriously 
considered attempting suicide; having made a suicide plan; 
having attempted suicide; and having made a suicide attempt 
resulting in an injury, poisoning, or overdose that had to be 
treated by a doctor or nurse) was twofold or greater for gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual students compared with heterosexual 
students and the prevalence for four of these same behaviors 
(having seriously considered attempting suicide; having made 
a suicide plan; having attempted suicide; and having made a 
suicide attempt resulting in an injury, poisoning, or overdose 
that had to be treated by a doctor or nurse) was twofold or 
greater for students who had sexual contact with only the same 
sex or with both sexes than students who had sexual contact 
with only the opposite sex.
Across the 19 tobacco use-related risk behaviors, the 
prevalence of 11 was higher among gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
students than heterosexual students and the prevalence of 
 Surveillance Summaries
106 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
12 was higher among students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes than students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex. The prevalence for 
three of these behaviors (current, current frequent, and current 
daily cigarette use) was twofold or greater for gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual students compared with heterosexual students and the 
prevalence for four of these behaviors (current frequent and 
current daily cigarette use and current frequent and current 
daily cigar use) was twofold or greater for students who had 
sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes than 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex.
Similarly, across the 19 risk behaviors related to alcohol 
and other drug use, the prevalence of 18 was higher among 
gay, lesbian, and bisexual students than heterosexual students 
and the prevalence of 16 was higher among students who had 
sexual contact with only the same sex or with both sexes than 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex. 
The prevalence for eight of these behaviors (having ever used 
synthetic marijuana, inhalants, heroin, methamphetamines, 
ecstasy, and hallucinogenic drugs; having ever taken steroids 
without a doctor’s prescription, and having ever injected 
any illegal drug) was twofold or greater for gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual students compared with heterosexual students and 
the prevalence for eight of these behaviors (having ever used 
cocaine, inhalants, heroin, methamphetamines, ecstasy, and 
hallucinogenic drugs; having ever taken steroids without a 
doctor’s prescription, and having ever injected any illegal drug) 
was twofold or greater for students who had sexual contact 
with only the same sex or with both sexes than students who 
had sexual contact with only the opposite sex.
The same pattern also was evident across the six sexual risk 
behaviors. The prevalence of five of these behaviors was higher 
among gay, lesbian, and bisexual students than heterosexual 
students and the prevalence of three of these behaviors was 
higher among students who had sexual contact with only the 
same sex or with both sexes than students who had sexual 
contact with only the opposite sex. The prevalence for two of 
these behaviors (having had sexual intercourse before age 13 
years and not having used any method to prevent pregnancy) 
was twofold or greater for gay, lesbian, and bisexual students 
compared with heterosexual students.
In contrast, no clear pattern of differences by sexual identity 
or sex of sexual contact subgroups was detected for dietary 
behaviors, physical activity, and other health-related behaviors. 
However, the prevalence of having never seen a dentist was 
twofold or greater for students who had sexual contact with 
only the same sex or with both sexes than students who had 
sexual contact with only the opposite sex.
This report also demonstrates that some students are not 
yet sure of their sexual identity. Not sure students and gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual students often have a similar prevalence 
of many health-risk behaviors. For example, not sure students 
and gay, lesbian, and bisexual students had a similar prevalence 
for all five of the injury-related risk behaviors, eight of the 13 
violence-related risk behaviors, 12 of the 19 tobacco use-related 
risk behaviors, 11 of the 19 risk behaviors related to alcohol 
and other drug use, three of the six sexual risk behaviors, 
nine of the 11 dietary risk behaviors, all four physical activity 
risk behaviors, and four of the five other health-related risk 
behaviors and obesity and overweight. In addition, not sure 
students often have a higher prevalence of many health-risk 
behaviors than heterosexual students. For example, not sure 
students had a higher prevalence for eight of the 13 violence-
related risk behaviors, all five suicide-related risk behaviors, 
and 10 of the 19 risk behaviors related to alcohol and other 
drug use.
Students who had no sexual contact have a much lower 
prevalence of most health-risk behaviors compared with 
students who had sexual contact with only the opposite sex 
and students who had sexual contact with only the same sex or 
with both sexes. For example, the prevalence of all five injury-
related risk behaviors, all 13 violence-related risk behaviors, all 
five suicide-related risk behaviors, all 19 tobacco use-related 
risk behaviors, all 19 risk behaviors related to alcohol and other 
drug use, and six of the 11 dietary risk behaviors was higher 
among students who had sexual contact with only the opposite 
sex and students who had sexual contact with only the same sex 
or with both sexes than students who had no sexual contact.
Assessment of Trends in Health-Related 
Behaviors Over Time
Because YRBSS has been implemented since 1991, YRBSS 
data can be used to assess both long-term temporal trends 
(i.e., as long as 26 years) and more recent 2-year changes 
in most of the health-related behaviors included in this 
report. Although this report describes many overall long-
term temporal trends and 2-year changes in prevalence, a 
more in-depth trend analysis by demographic subgroups 
would increase understanding of how to implement effective 
interventions among the students who need them most. 
Nonetheless, almost all of the overall trends reflect actual 
reductions in risk behaviors and potential improvements in 
health outcomes among high school students nationwide.
For behaviors for which long-term trend data are available, 
long-term linear decreases occurred in the prevalence of 
three of the four injury-related risk behaviors (rarely or never 
wearing a seatbelt, having ridden with a driver who had been 
drinking alcohol, and having driven when they had been 
drinking alcohol). Long-term linear decreases also occurred 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
107
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
in the prevalence of eight of the 11 violence-related risk 
behaviors (having carried a weapon, having carried a weapon 
on school property, having been threatened or injured with a 
weapon on school property, having been in a physical fight, 
having been in a physical fight on school property, having 
been forced to have sexual intercourse, having experienced 
sexual dating violence, and having experienced physical dating 
violence), whereas a long-term linear increase was identified 
in the prevalence of having not gone to school because of 
safety concerns. A linear decrease occurred in the prevalence 
of having carried a weapon from 1991–2017; however, based 
on significant quadratic trends, no change has occurred since 
1997. In addition, long-term linear decreases occurred in the 
prevalence of three of the five suicide-related risk behaviors 
(having seriously considered attempting suicide, having made 
a suicide plan, and having attempted suicide), whereas a long-
term linear increase occurred in the prevalence of having felt 
sad or hopeless. Despite the linear decreases in the prevalence 
of having seriously considered suicide and having made a 
suicide plan, based on significant quadratic trends, having 
seriously considered attempting suicide increased since 2007 
and having made a suicide plan increased since 2009. No long-
term trends occurred in the prevalence of one injury-related 
risk behavior (having texted or e-mailed while driving), two 
violence-related risk behaviors (having been electronically 
bullied and having been bullied on school property), and one 
suicide-related risk behavior (having made a suicide attempt 
resulting in an injury, poisoning, or overdose that had to be 
treated by a doctor or nurse).
Long-term linear decreases occurred in the prevalence of 
seven of the nine tobacco use-related risk behaviors (having ever 
tried cigarette smoking; current, current frequent, and current 
daily cigarette use; having smoked more than 10 cigarettes 
per day; current cigar use; and current cigarette or cigar use). 
No long-term linear trends occurred in the prevalence of 
current frequent and current daily cigar use. However, based 
on significant quadratic trends, current frequent cigar use 
increased from 1997–2013 and then decreased from 2013–
2017 and current daily cigar use increased from 1997–2011 
and then decreased from 2011–2017.
Long-term linear decreases occurred in the prevalence of 13 
of the 17 risk behaviors related to alcohol and other drug use 
(having ever drunk alcohol; having drunk alcohol for the first 
time before age 13 years; current alcohol use; having reported 
10 or more as the largest number of drinks in a row; having 
tried marijuana for the first time before age 13 years; having 
ever used cocaine, inhalants, heroin, methamphetamines, 
ecstasy, and hallucinogenic drugs; having ever injected an 
illegal drug; and having been offered, sold, or given an illegal 
drug on school property). Although no long-term linear trends 
occurred for three additional behaviors related to alcohol 
and other drug use, based on significant quadratic trends, 
the prevalence of having ever used marijuana increased from 
1991–1997 and then decreased from 1997–2017, current 
marijuana use increased from 1991–1995 and then decreased 
from 1995–2017, and having ever taken steroids without a 
doctor’s prescription increased from 1991–2001 and then 
decreased from 2001–2017. No long-term trends (linear or 
quadratic) occurred in the prevalence of having usually gotten 
the alcohol they drank by someone giving it to them.
Long-term linear decreases occurred in the prevalence of all 
six sexual risk behaviors (having ever had sexual intercourse, 
having had sexual intercourse before age 13 years, having 
had sexual intercourse with four or more persons, being 
currently sexually active, not having used any method to 
prevent pregnancy, and having drunk alcohol before last sexual 
intercourse), whereas long-term linear increases occurred in the 
prevalence of four of the six protective sexual behaviors (having 
used a condom during last sexual intercourse; having used birth 
control pills before last sexual intercourse; having used an IUD 
or implant before last sexual intercourse; and having used birth 
control pills, an IUD or implant, or a shot, patch, or birth 
control ring before last sexual intercourse). However, based on 
significant quadratic trends, the prevalence of having used a 
condom during last sexual intercourse has decreased since 2005 
and not having used any method to prevent pregnancy has not 
changed since 2007. In addition, a significant linear decrease 
occurred in the prevalence of having ever been tested for HIV.
Although a long-term linear increase occurred in the 
prevalence of not having drunk soda or pop and long-term 
linear decreases occurred in the prevalence of having drunk 
soda or pop one or more times, two or more times, and three 
or more times per day (improvements in dietary behaviors), 
long-term linear increases occurred in the prevalence of not 
having eaten vegetables and not having drunk milk and long-
term linear decreases occurred in the prevalence of having eaten 
fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices three or more times per day, 
having eaten vegetables one or more times per day, and having 
drunk one or more glasses, two or more glasses, and three or 
more glasses of milk per day (worsening dietary behaviors). No 
long-term linear or quadratic trends occurred in the prevalence 
of not having eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices, having 
eaten fruit or drunk 100% fruit juices one or more times and 
two or more times per day, having eaten vegetables two or 
more times and three or more times per day, having not eaten 
breakfast, and having eaten breakfast on all 7 days.
A long-term linear increase occurred in the prevalence of 
having done exercises to strengthen or tone their muscles on 3 
or more days; however, based on significant quadratic trends, 
the prevalence of having done exercises to strengthen or tone 
 Surveillance Summaries
108 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
their muscles on 3 or more days has not changed since 2011. 
Although a long-term linear decrease occurred in the prevalence 
of watching television 3 or more hours per day, this decrease in 
sedentary behavior might have been offset by a long-term linear 
increase in the prevalence of playing video or computer games 
or using a computer 3 or more hours per day. No long-term 
trends occurred in the prevalence of six of the nine behaviors 
related to physical activity (not having been physically active 
for a total of at least 60 minutes on at least 1 day, having been 
physically active for a total of at least 60 minutes per day on 
5 or more days, having been physically active for a total of at 
least 60 minutes per day on all 7 days, going to PE classes on 
1 or more days, going to PE classes on all 5 days, and having 
played on at least one sports team).
Long-term linear increases occurred in the prevalence of 
obesity, overweight, trying to lose weight, and having ever 
been told they have asthma; however, based on significant 
quadratic trends, no change has occurred in the prevalence 
of having ever been told they have asthma since 2009. Long-
term linear decreases occurred in the prevalence of getting 8 
or more hours of sleep and indoor tanning device use. No 
long-term linear trend occurred in the prevalence of describing 
themselves as overweight, though a significant quadratic trend 
indicated that describing themselves as overweight decreased 
from 1991–1995 and then increased from 1995–2017.
Monitor Progress Toward Achieving 
National Health Objectives
The national YRBS is the primary source of data to measure 
21 Healthy People 2020 objectives, including one leading health 
indicator (28). The Healthy People 2020 objectives provide a 
comprehensive agenda for improving the health of all persons 
in the United States during 2011–2020. This report provides 
the Healthy People 2020 targets and data from the 2017 
national YRBS for 16 of the 21 objectives (Supplementary 
Table 241). Because of changes in the questions included in 
the 2017 national YRBS or changes in question wording, 2017 
data are not available for five objectives. The data indicate that 
as of 2017, eight of the 16 objectives have been achieved, which 
is one more than the number met when the 2015 national 
YRBS data were reported in 2016 (15) and twice the number 
met when the 2013 national YRBS data were reported in 2014 
(29). Healthy People 2020 objective AH-7 is to reduce the 
proportion of adolescents who have been offered, sold, or given 
an illegal drug on school property to ≤20.4%. During 2017, 
19.8% of high school students nationwide had been offered, 
sold, or given an illegal drug on school property during the 12 
months before the survey. This is the first time this objective 
has been met. Healthy People 2020 objective C-20.3 is to reduce 
the proportion of adolescents in grades 9–12 who report using 
artificial sources of ultraviolet light for tanning to ≤14.0%. 
During 2017, 5.6% of high school students nationwide had 
used an indoor tanning device (e.g., sunlamp, sunbed, or 
tanning booth) one or more times during the 12 months 
before the survey. Healthy People 2020 objective IVP-34 is to 
reduce physical fighting among adolescents to ≤28.4%. During 
2017, 23.6% of high school students nationwide had been in a 
physical fight one or more times during the 12 months before 
the survey. Healthy People 2020 objective IVP-36 is to reduce 
weapon carrying by adolescents on school property to ≤4.6%. 
During 2017, 3.8% of high school students nationwide had 
carried a weapon on school property on at least 1 day during 
the 30 days before the survey. Healthy People 2020 objective 
PA-8.2.3 is to increase the proportion of adolescents in grades 
9–12 who view television, watch videos, or play video games 
for no more than 2 hours per day. During 2017, 79.3% of high 
school students nationwide watched television for no more 
than 2 hours per day on an average school day. Healthy People 
2020 objective SA-1 is to reduce the proportion of adolescents 
who report that they rode, during the previous 30 days, with 
a driver who had been drinking alcohol to ≤25.5%. During 
2017, 16.5% of high school students nationwide had ridden 
one or more times during the 30 days before the survey in a 
car or other vehicle driven by someone who had been drinking 
alcohol. Healthy People 2020 objective TU-2.2 is to reduce 
the proportion of adolescents who use cigarettes during the 
past 30 days to ≤16.0%. During 2017, 8.8% of high school 
students smoked cigarettes on at least 1 day during the 30 days 
before the survey. Healthy People 2020 objective TU-2.4 is to 
reduce the proportion of adolescents who use cigars during 
the past 30 days to ≤8.0%. During 2017, 8.0% of high school 
students smoked cigars, cigarillos, or little cigars on at least 1 
day during the 30 days before the survey. This is the first time 
this objective has been met.
To meet additional Healthy People 2020 objectives, changes 
in school and community policies, programs, and practices 
might be needed. For example, Healthy People 2020 objective 
IVP-35 is to reduce bullying among adolescents to ≤17.9%. 
During 2017, 19.0% of high school students nationwide were 
bullied on school property during the 12 months before the 
survey. Similarly, Healthy People 2020 objective SH-3 is to 
increase the proportion of students in grades 9–12 who get 
sufficient sleep to ≥33.2%. During 2017, 25.4% of high school 
students nationwide got 8 or more hours of sleep on an average 
school night. The 2015 and 2017 prevalence estimates for both 
of these objectives were not significantly different suggesting 
that more work might be needed to address these issues.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
109
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Provide Comparable State and Large 
Urban School District Data
One of the strengths of YRBSS is that it provides not just 
national but state and large urban school district data. These 
data are more likely to be used to develop, improve, and evaluate 
state and local policies, programs, and practices because they 
reflect a more relevant population for local stakeholders and 
decision makers than national data. Because participating states 
and large urban school districts use similar sampling designs, 
questionnaires, data collection strategies, and data processing 
procedures, their YRBS data can be compared which provides 
even more information to guide decision making about public 
health interventions that can help reduce health-risk behaviors 
among youth.
Across states, a range of 25 or more percentage points or a 
fivefold variation or greater was identified for the following 
19 behaviors:
• having texted or e-mailed while driving (minimum: 
27.4%; maximum: 55.2%);
• current frequent cigarette use (minimum: 0.4%; 
maximum: 5.5%);
• current daily cigarette use (minimum: 0.3%; maximum: 
4.5%);
• having smoked more than 10 cigarettes per day (minimum: 
2.3%; maximum: 18.1%);
• current frequent smokeless tobacco use (minimum: 0.6%; 
maximum: 5.8%);
• current daily smokeless tobacco use (minimum: 0.4%; 
maximum: 5.1%);
• current frequent cigar use (minimum: 0.4%; maximum: 
2.9%);
• current daily cigar use (minimum: 0.3%; maximum: 2.4%);
• having ever drunk alcohol (minimum: 30.4%; maximum: 
68.0%);
• having ever used marijuana (minimum: 16.6%; maximum: 
44.1%);
• having ever used heroin (minimum: 1.2%; maximum: 
9.6%);
• having ever used methamphetamines (minimum: 1.7%; 
maximum: 10.5%);
• having ever injected any illegal drug (minimum: 1.4%; 
maximum: 8.0%);
• having used an IUD or implant before last sexual 
intercourse (minimum: 1.9%; maximum: 13.3%);
• having used birth control pills; an IUD or implant; or a 
shot, patch, or birth control ring before last sexual 
intercourse (minimum: 20.9%; maximum: 50.2%);
• having drunk one or more glasses of milk per day 
(minimum: 19.8%; maximum: 48.3%);
• going to PE classes on 1 or more days (minimum: 27.9%; 
maximum: 91.5%);
• going to PE classes on all 5 days (minimum: 5.8%; 
maximum: 68.4%); and
• having never seen a dentist (minimum: 0.9%; maximum: 
4.7%).
Across large urban school districts, a range of 25 or more 
percentage points or a fivefold variation or greater was 
identified for the following 13 behaviors:
• current frequent cigarette use (minimum: 0.1%; 
maximum: 1.4%);
• current daily cigarette use (minimum: 0.1%; maximum: 
0.8%);
• current frequent electronic vapor product use (minimum: 
0.4%; maximum: 2.5%);
• current daily electronic vapor product use (minimum: 
0.1%; maximum: 1.9%);
• current daily smokeless tobacco use (minimum: 0.1%; 
maximum: 1.2%);
• having ever drunk alcohol (minimum: 38.2%; maximum: 
64.8%);
• having ever used heroin (minimum: 1.3%; maximum: 
7.6%);
• having ever had sexual intercourse (minimum: 21.7%; 
maximum: 49.2%);
• having used an IUD or implant before last sexual 
intercourse (minimum: 0.7%; maximum: 10.4%);
• having used a shot, patch, or birth control ring before last 
sexual intercourse (minimum: 0.0%; maximum: 9.3%);
• having ever been tested for HIV (minimum: 10.2%; 
maximum: 37.2%);
• going to PE classes on 1 or more days (minimum: 28.0%; 
maximum: 86.1%); and
• going to PE classes on all 5 days (minimum: 7.1%; 
maximum: 43.5%).
All these substantial differences across states and large urban 
school districts might reflect differences in state and local laws 
and policies, enforcement practices, access to drugs, availability 
of effective school and community interventions, prevailing 
behavioral and social norms (including attitudes toward 
sexual minorities), the amount of stigma and discrimination, 
demographic characteristics of the population, and adult 
practices and health-related behaviors. Positive changes in 
one or more of these factors might contribute to important 
reductions in health-risk behaviors within and across states and 
large urban school districts among students in grades 9–12.
 Surveillance Summaries
110 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Take Public Health Action
Most high school students cope with the transition from 
childhood through adolescence to adulthood successfully 
and become healthy and productive adults. However, this 
report documents that some subgroups of students defined 
by sex, race/ethnicity, grade in school, and sexual minority 
status have a higher prevalence of many health-risk behaviors 
that might place them at risk for unnecessary or premature 
mortality, morbidity, and social problems. Sexual minority 
students in particular struggle because of the disparities in 
health-related behaviors documented in this report, including 
violence-related behaviors and alcohol and other drug use, 
that can be compounded by stigma, discrimination, and 
homophobia. Because many health-risk behaviors initiated 
during adolescence often extend into adulthood, they might 
have life-long negative effects on health outcomes, educational 
attainment, employment, housing, and overall quality of life.
Schools have a unique and an important role to play 
in addressing the health-related behaviors of all students, 
including sexual minority students. In the United States, 
schools have direct contact with more than 56 million 
students (25) for at least 6 hours a day during 13 key years 
of their social, physical, and intellectual development. After 
the family home, schools are the primary places responsible 
for the development of young persons. This gives schools an 
opportunity to dramatically improve the health and well-being 
of their students each day. Research shows that well-designed, 
well-implemented, school-based prevention programs can 
significantly reduce health-risk behaviors among all students 
(30) as well as sexual minority students (31–33).
During 2013–2018, CDC supported schools in 
implementing prevention programs through two major 
cooperative agreements. The first, Promoting Adolescent 
Health Through School-Based HIV/STD Prevention and 
School-Based Surveillance (http://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/
fundedpartners/1308/pdf/rfa-1308.pdf), provided funding 
and technical assistance to the education agency in 18 states and 
the District of Columbia and to 17 large urban school districts 
to help schools implement effective policies and practices to 
reduce sexual risk behaviors among youth. These programs 
focused partly on adolescents most at risk as part of their HIV, 
STI, and pregnancy prevention activities. Examples of program 
activities included the implementation of quality health 
education, connecting youth to school-linked and school-
based health services, and supporting schools in establishing 
safe and supportive environments. This cooperative agreement 
also provided funding to 46 states and 21 large urban school 
districts to conduct the YRBS and School Health Profiles 
(https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/data/profiles/index.htm).
The second major cooperative agreement, State Public 
Health Actions to Prevent and Control Diabetes, Heart 
Disease, Obesity and Associated Risk Factors and Promote 
School Health (http://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/about/
state-public-health-actions.htm), provided funding to the 
health agency in all 50 states and the District of Columbia to 
reduce the risk factors associated with childhood obesity and to 
promote the well-being and healthy development of all children 
and youth. As part of this program, CDC supported use of 
the following proven strategies in schools: healthier nutrition 
environments, comprehensive physical activity programs 
and physical education policies, and improved processes and 
better training to help students manage chronic conditions. 
In addition, CDC gives schools well-researched and effective 
guidance and support to help them improve school health 
services, policies, and practices. This support helps schools and 
students manage challenges associated with chronic conditions 
such as diabetes, asthma, and food allergies. Providing health 
services in schools helps reduce absences among children with 
chronic conditions.
In addition, CDC provides resources to help states and 
communities take advantage of the best available evidence 
to prevent violence. Specifically, CDC has developed several 
technical packages containing strategies to prevent or reduce 
youth violence, sexual violence, dating violence, and suicide 
(available at https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pub/
technical-packages.html).
YRBS data are a primary data source for monitoring the 
impact of both of the cooperative agreements described 
previously at the state and local levels. In addition, health 
and education agencies and nongovernmental organizations 
in these jurisdictions use their YRBS data in myriad ways 
to improve health-related policies, programs, and practices. 
For example, state and local agencies use YRBS results to 
inform key stakeholders, help develop local health promotion 
programs, identify the highest risk behaviors around which 
programmatic funds should be focused, combine with results 
from other surveys on health topics, review and set goals for 
children’s health and wellness, measure long-term outcomes 
related to certain projects or goals, and demonstrate need for 
public health funding and grant programs. More specifically, 
state and local health and education agencies used YRBS results 
in the following ways:
• The Rhode Island Department of Health and the Rhode 
Island Department of Education collaboratively developed 
a Rhode Island Adolescent Sexual Health Profile. The data 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
111
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
source for many of the indicators in the profile is the Rhode 
Island YRBS. The profile was presented to Rhode Island 
decision-makers and is also being shared with other 
stakeholders to help guide discussions about policy and 
program recommendations.
• In Vermont, YRBS results have been instrumental in 
helping the Vermont Agency of Education and Department 
of Health to document the need for and support schools 
in instituting condom availability programs in high schools 
throughout the state. The two agencies released a joint 
memo on comprehensive sex education citing YRBS results 
and encouraging schools to provide access to condoms, 
which has led to supportive newspaper coverage and 
discussions within schools and at school board meetings.
• The New York City Department of Education’s Office of 
School Wellness Programs routinely uses YRBS results 
during its professional development workshops and 
trainings for health and physical education teachers. 
During these trainings, YRBS results are used to inform 
educators about students’ health-related behaviors. The 
New York City Teens Connection, a program of the 
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene’s Center for 
Health Equity, relies heavily on YRBS results to support 
its teen pregnancy and STI prevention work. The New 
York City Teens Connection works through local and 
citywide partnerships to provide evidence-based sexual 
health education programs and access to health care for 
youth. To recruit implementation partners (e.g., 
community-based organizations, schools, clinics, and 
citywide agencies), the New York City Teens Connection 
routinely presents YRBS results on adolescent sexual 
behaviors to demonstrate the need for sexual health 
education programs and access to health care.
• San Diego Unified School District used their YRBS results 
to help determine which sexual health curriculum would 
best meet the needs of students; revise curriculum to 
include up-to-date information on sexual orientation, 
sexual behaviors, and harassment; educate parents, 
caregivers, and community members about the importance 
of the new curriculum via community forum presentations 
and panel discussions; and revise their sexual health 
instruction training for district teachers.
• The State of Alaska Obesity Prevention and Control 
Program makes extensive use of YRBS results to support 
their Play Every Day public education campaign, describe 
the burden of childhood obesity, and document the need 
to increase physical activity in Alaska schools. YRBS results 
were helpful in passing the Physical Activity in Schools Law 
that requires every student in grades K–8 be provided with 
opportunities for 54 minutes (90% of the recommended 
60 minutes) of physical activity every school day.
• The Montana Office of Public Instruction’s tobacco use 
prevention trainings for school administrators and faculty 
feature their YRBS results on electronic vapor product use 
along with examples of the products themselves, how easily 
they can be concealed in school, and the health risks 
produced by electronic vapor product use. The Montana 
Department of Public Health and Human Services ran a 
public education campaign that included television 
commercials featuring Montana YRBS results on electronic 
vapor product use.
•  North Dakota YRBS results are used by the North Dakota 
Center for Tobacco Prevention and Control Policy, also 
known as BreatheND, to support a public education 
campaign designed to prevent tobacco use among youth 
and exposure to second hand smoke. North Dakota’s YRBS 
results documented a statewide decrease in cigarette use 
among high school students that they attribute in part to 
this public education campaign.
• New Hampshire YRBS results revealed a real need for a 
program on distracted driving and informed regional 
efforts on suicide prevention and dating violence 
prevention efforts in high schools for both students and 
parents. In addition, a prevention program called Life of 
an Athlete was brought into a region’s high schools because 
of their YRBS results on substance use. Student teams 
reviewed YRBS results to help inform the type of outreach 
and other activities they will conduct throughout the 
school year to specifically address the attitudes around 
substance misuse and student misperceptions about the 
prevalence of use.
CDC and other federal agencies use YRBS data in various 
reports and publications including State Health Profiles (34); 
Indicators for Chronic Disease Surveillance (35); America’s 
Children: Key National Indicators of Well-Being (36); 
Prevention Status Reports (37); Indicators of School Crime 
and Safety (38); and Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity: 
Data, Trends and Maps (39). Each of these reports and other 
similar reports using YRBS data are intended to stimulate 
support for and improvements in public health interventions.
 Surveillance Summaries
112 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Limitations
The findings in this report are subject to at least eight 
limitations. First, these data apply only to youth who attend 
school and therefore are not representative of all persons 
in this age group. Nationwide, in 2013, of persons aged 
16–17 years, approximately 5% were not enrolled in high 
school and lacked a high school credential (40). However, 
sexual minority youth might represent a disproportionate 
percentage of high school dropouts and other youths who 
are absent from or do not attend school (41). Second, the 
extent of underreporting or overreporting of health-related 
behaviors cannot be determined, although the survey questions 
demonstrate good test-retest reliability (18,19). Third, some 
students might not have known their sexual identity; might 
have been unwilling to disclose it on the YRBS questionnaire; 
might have been unwilling to label themselves as heterosexual, 
gay, lesbian, or bisexual; or might not have understood the 
sexual identity question. Although the “not sure” response 
option for the sexual identity question is a credible choice for 
youth who might truly be unsure of their sexual identity at 
this point in their lives, this response option might have been 
selected by students who did not know what the question or 
the other response options meant. Nonetheless, evidence that 
the words used to describe various types of sexual identity are 
unclear to youth is not available. Fourth, because no definition 
was provided for sexual contact, students likely considered a 
range of sexual activities when responding to this question, 
possibly including involuntary activities. Fifth, the questions 
used to ascertain sexual minority status focused only on sexual 
identity and sex of sexual contacts. Questions focused on sexual 
attraction or gender identity might have identified a different 
subgroup of sexual minority students and different estimates 
of the prevalence of health-related behaviors. Sixth, BMI is 
calculated on the basis of self-reported height and weight, 
and therefore tends to underestimate the prevalence of obesity 
and overweight (19). Seventh, not all states and large urban 
school districts included all of the standard questions on their 
YRBS questionnaire; therefore, data for certain variables are 
not available for some sites. Finally, these analyses are based 
on cross-sectional surveys and can only provide an indication 
of association, not causality.
Conclusion
YRBSS is an ongoing source of high-quality data at the 
national, state, and large urban school district levels for 
monitoring health-related behaviors that contribute to the 
leading causes of mortality and morbidity among youth and 
adults in the United States. In 2017, in addition to the national 
data, 39 states and 21 large urban school districts obtained data 
representative of their high school students. Questionnaires for 
the national survey, 30 of the 39 state surveys, and all 21 large 
urban school district surveys included a question to ascertain 
sexual identity, sex of sexual contacts, or both.
YRBSS data are an important tool for planning, implementing, 
and evaluating public health policies, programs, and practices. 
Although beyond the scope of this report, a particular strength 
of YRBSS (as compared with more narrowly focused surveys) 
is that it allows analysis of the interrelationships among 
health-related behaviors (e.g., how alcohol and other drug use 
is associated with sexual behaviors). Similarly, because of its 
long history and consistent methodology, YRBSS can identify 
not only national long-term temporal trends in health-related 
behaviors overall as described in this report but also long-term 
trends among demographic subgroups of students (e.g., by sex 
or race/ethnicity) and long-term temporal trends at the state 
and large urban school district levels. These trend analyses are 
particularly valuable for understanding the impact of broad 
public health and school health policies and practices designed 
to improve the health outcomes of students over time.
This report documents important disparities in health-
related behaviors among subgroups of students defined by 
sex, race/ethnicity, and grade in school and experienced by 
sexual minority students. Using this and other reports based on 
scientifically sound data is important to raise awareness about 
the prevalence of health-related behaviors among students 
in grades 9–12, especially sexual minority students, among 
decision-makers, the public, and a wide variety of agencies 
and organizations that work with youth. These agencies and 
organizations, including schools and youth-friendly health 
care providers, can help facilitate access to critically important 
education, health care, and evidence-based interventions.
To maintain the quality of YRBSS data, enhanced training 
and technical assistance for participating state and local health 
and education agencies, an increase in the number of states 
with representative data, more substate surveys at the county- 
or school district-level, and more universal use of all standard 
YRBSS questions are needed. Because sexual minority students 
represent a relatively small proportion of all students, use of 
large, population-based samples of students is key to obtaining 
the most generalizable and highest quality data on which to 
base policy and programmatic decisions that can help eliminate 
the health-related behavior disparities and improve health 
status, educational outcomes, and overall quality of life for 
this population as well as all other youth.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8 
113
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
References
 1. CDC WONDER Online Database. Underlying cause of death, 1999–
2016. Multiple cause of death files, 1999–2016. Hyattsville, MD: 
National Center for Health Statistics, CDC, US Department of Health 
and Human Services; 2017. https://wonder.cdc.gov/ucd-icd10.html
 2. Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJK, Driscoll AK, Drake P
. Births: 
final data for 2016. Natl Vital Stat Rep 2018;67:1–54. https://www.cdc.
gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr67/nvsr67_01.pdf
 3. CDC. Sexually transmitted disease surveillance 2016. Atlanta, 
GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2017. 
https://www.cdc.gov/std/stats16/CDC_2016_STDS_Report-
for508WebSep21_2017_1644.pdf
 4. CDC. HIV surveillance report, 2016 (vol 28). Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2017. https://www.
cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/library/reports/surveillance/cdc-hiv-surveillance-report-
2016-vol-28.pdf
 5. Institute of Medicine. The health of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
transgender people: building a foundation for better understanding. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2011. https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK64806
 6. Coker TR, Austin SB, Schuster MA. The health and health care of lesbian, 
gay, and bisexual adolescents. Annu Rev Public Health 2010;31:457–77. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.publhealth.012809.103636
 7. Mayer KH, Bradford JB, Makadon HJ, Stall R, Goldhammer H, Landers 
S. Sexual and gender minority health: what we know and what needs to 
be done. Am J Public Health 2008;98:989–95. https://doi.org/10.2105/
AJPH.2007.127811
 8. Robin L, Brener ND, Donahue SF, Hack T, Hale K, Goodenow C. 
Associations between health risk behaviors and opposite-, same-, and 
both-sex sexual partners in representative samples of Vermont and 
Massachusetts high school students. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 
2002;156:349–55. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpedi.156.4.349
 9. Pathela P, Schillinger JA. Sexual behaviors and sexual violence: 
adolescents with opposite-, same-, or both-sex partners. Pediatrics 
2010;126:879–86. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2010-0396
 
10. Saewyc EM, Bauer GR, Skay CL, et al. Measuring sexual orientation in 
adolescent health surveys: evaluation of eight school-based surveys. 
J Adolesc Health 2004;35:345.e1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jadohealth.2004.06.002
 
11. Savin-Williams RC. A critique of research on sexual-minority youths. 
J Adolesc 2001;24:5–13. https://doi.org/10.1006/jado.2000.0369
 
12. Kann L, Olsen EO, McManus T, et al. Sexual identity, sex of sexual 
contacts, and health-related behaviors among students in grades 9–12—
United States and selected sites, 2015. MMWR Surveill Summ 
2016;65(No. SS-9). https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.ss6509a1
 
13. Brener ND, Kann L, Shanklin S, et al. Methodology of the youth risk 
behavior surveillance system—2013. MMWR Recomm Rep 
2013;62(No. RR-1).
 
14. Kann L, Olsen EO, McManus T, et al. Sexual identity, sex of sexual 
contacts, and health-risk behaviors among students in grades 9-12—
youth risk behavior surveillance, selected sites, United States, 2001–
2009. MMWR Surveill Summ 2011;60(No. SS-7).
 
15. Kann L, McManus T, Harris WA, et al. Youth risk behavior surveillance—
United States, 2015. MMWR Surveill Summ 2016;65(No. SS-6).
 
16. Market Data Retrieval. National education database master extract. 
Shelton, CT: Market Data Retrieval; 2016. http://www.mdrorders.com/
scripts/cgiip.exe/WService=mdr/startlist.r 
 
17. US Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. 
Common core of data public elementary/secondary school universe survey: 
school year 2013–14. Washington, DC: US Department of Education, 
National Center for Education Statistics. https://nces.ed.gov/ccd
 
18. Brener ND, Kann L, McManus T, Kinchen SA, Sundberg EC, Ross JG. 
Reliability of the 1999 youth risk behavior survey questionnaire. J 
Adolesc Health 2002;31:336–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1054-139X(02)00339-7
 
19. Brener ND, Mcmanus T, Galuska DA, Lowry R, Wechsler H. Reliability 
and validity of self-reported height and weight among high school 
students. J Adolesc Health 2003;32:281–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1054-139X(02)00708-5
 
20. Kuczmarski RJ, Ogden CL, Grummer-Strawn LM, et al. CDC growth 
charts: United States. Advance Data. Vital Health Stat, No. 314. 
Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics, CDC; 2000. 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ad/ad314.pdf
 
21. SAS Institute, Inc. SAS, version 9.3 [software and documentation]. Cary, 
NC: SAS Institute; 2010.
 
22. Research Triangle Institute. SUDAAN, version 11.0.1 [software and 
documentation]. Research 
T
riangle Park, NC: Research 
T
riangle Institute; 2013. 
https://www.rti.org/impact/sudaan-statistical-software-analyzing-correlated-data
 
23. Hinkle DE, Wiersma W, Jurs SG. Applied statistics for the behavioral 
sciences. 5th ed. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Co; 2003.
 
24. National Cancer Institute. Joinpoint trend analysis software, version 3.5 
[software and documentation]. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer 
Institute; 2013. http://surveillance.cancer.gov/joinpoint
 
25. Snyder TD, de Brey C, Dillow SA. Digest of education statistics, 2015. 
Pub No. 2016–014. National Center for Education Statistics, Institute 
of Education Sciences, US Department of Education: Washington, DC; 
2016. https://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2016014
 
26. Gates GJ. LGBT data collection amid social and demographic shifts of 
the U.S. LGBT community. Am J Public Health 2017;107:1220–2. 
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2017.303927
 
27. Ali MK, Bullard KM, Beckles GL, et al. Household income and 
cardiovascular disease risks in U.S. children and young adults: analyses 
from NHANES 1999–2008. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1998–2004. 
https://doi.org/10.2337/dc11-0792
 
28. US Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy people 2020. 
Washington, DC. US Department of Health and Human Services. 
https://www.healthypeople.gov
 
29. Kann L, Kinchen S, Shanklin SL, et al. Youth risk behavior surveillance—
United States, 2013. MMWR Surveill Summ 2014;63(No. SS-4).
 
30. CDC. Registries of programs effective in reducing youth risk behaviors. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC. 
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/adolescenthealth/registries.htm
 
31. Espelage DL, Aragon SR, Birkett M, Koenig BW Homophobic teasing, 
psychological outcomes, and sexual orientation among high school 
students: What influence do parents and schools have? School Psych 
Rev 2008;37:202–16.
 
32. Goodenow C, Szalacha L, Westheimer K. School support groups, other 
school factors, and the safety of sexual minority adolescents. Psychol Sch 
2006;43:573–89. https://doi.org/10.1002/pits.20173
 
33. Saewyc EM, Konishi C, Rose HA, Homma Y. School-based strategies 
to reduce suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, and discrimination among 
sexual minority and heterosexual adolescents in Western Canada. Int J 
Child Youth Fam Stud 2014;5:89–112. https://doi.org/10.18357/ijcyfs.
saewyce.512014
 
34. CDC. State health profiles. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, CDC. https://www.cdc.gov/nchhstp/stateprofiles/
default.htm
 
35. Holt JB, Huston SL, Heidari K, et al. Indicators for chronic disease 
surveillance—United States, 2013. MMWR Recomm Rep 2015;64(No. RR-1).
 
36. Federal Interagency Forum on Child and Family Statistics. America’s 
children: key national indicators of well-being. Washington, DC: US 
Government Printing Office; 2017. https://www.childstats.gov/pdf/
ac2017/ac_17.pdf
 Surveillance Summaries
114 
MMWR / June 15, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 8
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
37. CDC. Prevention status reports. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health 
and Human Services, CDC. https://www.cdc.gov/psr/index.html
 
38. Musu-Gillette L, Zhang A, Wang K, Zhang J, Oudekerk BA. Indicators 
of school crime and safety: 2016. Pub Nos. NCES 2017–064 and NCJ 
250650. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics, US 
Department of Education, and Bureau of Justice Statistics, Office of 
Justice Programs, US Department of Justice; 2017. https://nces.ed.gov/
pubs2017/2017064.pdf
State and Large Urban School District Youth Risk Behavior Survey Coordinators
States: Alaska: Tazlina Mannix, MPH, Department of Health and Social Services; Arizona: Miranda Graves, Department of Education; Arkansas: Kathleen 
Courtney, MS, Department of Education; California: Daniela E. Torres, MPH, Department of Education; Colorado: Mariana del Hierro, MA, Department 
of Public Health and Environment; Connecticut: Celeste Jorge, MPH, Department of Public Health; Delaware: Fred Breukelman, Division of Public Health; 
Florida: Tera Anderson, Department of Health; Hawaii: Monica Mann, MA, Department of Education; Idaho: Lisa Kramer, Department of Education; Illinois: 
Jessica Gerdes, MS, State Board of Education; Iowa: Shea Cook, MPP
, Department of Education; Kansas: Mark Thompson, PhD, Department of Education; 
Kentucky: Stephanie Bunge, MEd, Department of Education; Louisiana: Michael Comeaux, MS, Department of Education; Maine: Jean Zimmerman, 
MS, Department of Education; Maryland: Nikardi Jallah, MPH, Department of Health, Prevention and Health Promotion Administration; Massachusetts: 
Chiniqua N. Milligan, MPH, Department of Elementary and Secondary Education; Michigan: Nicole Kramer, Department of Education; Missouri: Craig 
Rector, Department of Elementary and Secondary Education; Montana: Susan Court, Office of Public Instruction; Nebraska: Chris Junker, Department of 
Education; Nevada: Brian Parrish, MPH, Division of Public and Behavioral Health; New Hampshire: Joseph Pipinias, Department of Education; New Mexico: 
Dean Hopper, MAEd, Public Education Department; New York: Martha R. Morrissey, MA, State Education Department; North Carolina: Les Spell, MAEd, 
Department of Public Instruction; North Dakota: Robin Lang, MS, Department of Public Instruction; Oklahoma: Thad Burk, MPH, Department of Health; 
Pennsylvania: Nicholas T. Slotterback, MS, Department of Education; Rhode Island: Tara Cooper, MPH, Department of Health; South Carolina: Sabrina B. 
Moore, PhD, Department of Education; Tennessee: Mark Bloodworth, Department of Education; Texas: Jennifer Haussler Garing, MS, Department of State 
Health Services; Utah: Michael Friedrichs, MS, Department of Health; Vermont: Kristen Murray, PhD, Department of Health; Virginia: Sarah Conklin, PhD, 
Department of Health; West Virginia: Rebecca King, MSN, Department of Education; Wisconsin: Molly M. Herrmann, MS, Department of Public Instruction.
Large Urban School Districts: Baltimore, Maryland: Alexia Lotts-McCain, MEd, Baltimore City Public Schools; Boston, Massachusetts: Katia Miller, MPH, 
Boston Public Schools; Broward County, Florida: Sebrina James, EdS, Broward County Public Schools; Chicago, Illinois: E Marshall, MPH, Chicago Public 
Schools; Cleveland, Ohio: Deborah Aloshen, MEd, Cleveland Municipal School District; DeKalb County, Georgia: Sedessie Spivey, MS, DeKalb County Board 
of Health; Detroit, Michigan: Arlene Richardson, EdD, Detroit Public Schools Community District; District of Columbia: Aimee McLaughlin, MPA, Office 
of the State Superintendent of Education; Duval County, Florida: Jamie Y. Wells, MSH, Duval County Public Schools; Fort Worth, Texas: Edward Patterson, 
MS, Ft. Worth Independent School District; Houston, Texas: Felicia Ceaser-White, MS, Houston Independent School District; Los Angeles, California: 
Timothy Kordic, MA, Los Angeles Unified School District; Miami, Florida: Steven M. Urdegar, PhD, Miami-Dade County Public Schools; New York City, 
New York: Madeline Travers, MPH, New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; Oakland, California: Ilsa Bertolini, MA, Oakland Unified 
School District; Orange County, Florida: Brenda Christopher-Muench, Orange County Public Schools; Palm Beach, Florida: William P
. Stewart, Jr., MPH, 
School District of Palm Beach County; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Judith Peters, MBA, School District of Philadelphia; San Diego, California: Rachel Miller, 
MEd, San Diego Unified School District; San Francisco, California: Kim Levine, MHA, San Francisco Unified School District; Shelby County, Tennessee: 
Carla Shirley, PhD, Shelby County Schools.
 
39. CDC. Nutrition, physical activity, and obesity: data, trends, and maps. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC. 
https://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/data-trends-maps/index.html
 
40. McFarland J, Stark P
, Cui J. Trends in high school dropout and completion 
rates in the United States: 2013. Pub. No. NCES 2016–117). Washington, 
DC: US Department of Education, National Center for Education 
Statistics; 2016. https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2016/2016117rev.pdf
 
41. Burton CM, Marshal MP
, Chisolm DJ. School absenteeism and mental 
health among sexual minority youth and heterosexual youth. J Sch 
Psychol 2014;52:37–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsp.2013.12.001
    ISSN: 1546-0738 (Print)
The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free 
of charge in electronic format. To receive an electronic copy each week, visit MMWR at https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/index.html.
Readers who have difficulty accessing this PDF file may access the HTML file at https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/ss/ss6708a1.htm?s_
cid=ss6708a1_w. Address all inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for publication, to Executive Editor, MMWR Series, 
Mailstop E-90, CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30329-4027 or to mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations 
or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses 
listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication.
