 AMH/MIS as a contraceptive that protects the ovarian
reserve during chemotherapy
Motohiro Kanoa,b, Amanda E. Sosulskia,b, LiHua Zhanga,b, Hatice D. Saatcioglua,b, Dan Wangc, Nicholas Nagykerya,b,
Mary E. Sabatinid, Guangping Gaoc, Patricia K. Donahoea,b,1, and David Pépina,b,1
aPediatric Surgical Research Laboratories, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114; bDepartment of Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115; cHorae Gene Therapy Center, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655; and dDepartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114
Contributed by Patricia K. Donahoe, December 29, 2016 (sent for review December 16, 2016; reviewed by Richard N. Freiman, Bruce D. Murphy,
and Teresa K. Woodruff)
The ovarian reserve represents the stock of quiescent primordial
follicles in the ovary which is gradually depleted during a woman’s
reproductive lifespan, resulting in menopause. Müllerian inhibiting
substance (MIS) (or anti-Müllerian hormone/AMH), which is pro-
duced by granulosa cells of growing follicles, has been proposed as
a negative regulator of primordial follicle activation. Here we show
that long-term parenteral administration of superphysiological doses
of MIS, using either an adeno-associated virus serotype 9 (AAV9)
gene therapy vector or recombinant protein, resulted in a complete
arrest of folliculogenesis in mice. The ovaries of MIS-treated mice
were smaller than those in controls and did not contain growing
follicles but retained a normal ovarian reserve. When mice treated
with AAV9/MIS were paired with male breeders, they exhibited com-
plete and permanent contraception for their entire reproductive
lifespan, disrupted vaginal cycling, and hypergonadotropic hypogonad-
ism. However, when ovaries from AAV9-MIS–treated mice were trans-
planted orthotopically into normal recipient mice, or when treatment
with the protein was discontinued, folliculogenesis resumed, suggest-
ing reversibility. One of the important causes of primary ovarian in-
sufficiency is chemotherapy-induced primordial follicle depletion, which
has been proposed to be mediated in part by increased activation. To
test the hypothesis that MIS could prevent chemotherapy-induced
overactivation, mice were given carboplatin, doxorubicin, or cyclophos-
phamide and were cotreated with AAV9-MIS, recombinant MIS protein,
or vehicle controls. We found significantly more primordial follicles in
MIS-treated animals than in controls. Thus treatment with MIS may
provide a method of contraception with the unique characteristic of
blocking primordial follicle activation that could be exploited to prevent
the primary ovarian insufficiency often associated with chemotherapy.
MIS | AMH | oncofertility | AAV9 | contraceptive
M
üllerian inhibiting substance (MIS), also known as anti-
Müllerian hormone (AMH), has long been appreciated for
its role in sex differentiation and reproduction, and sensitive ELISAs
measuring blood levels are used in fertility clinics around the world as
a measure of ovarian reserve (1–6). MIS plays important roles in the
development of the gonad and the differentiation of the urogenital
ridge. In the male fetus, MIS produced by the developing testes causes
regression of the Müllerian duct (7). In the female fetus, MIS may
play a role in early follicle assembly in the gonad by primordial germ
cells (not to be confused with primordial follicles), since mice over-
expressing MIS are devoid of germ cells shortly after birth (8), and,
similarly, ex vivo incubation of fetal ovaries with MIS results in the
inhibition of follicle assembly (9). These data highlight a role of MIS
during fetal development that is distinct from its regulatory role of
folliculogenesis postnatally.
In the adult, MIS is produced predominantly by the cumulus
(less so by the mural) granulosa cells of secondary and early antral
follicles (10). The receptor, Misr2, is expressed both in granulosa
cells of follicles and in the ovarian surface epithelium (11–15).
It remains unclear how some primordial follicles can stay
dormant from birth well into adulthood and by what mechanism
they are selected for activation. However, some studies suggest
MIS may be an important gatekeeper of their recruitment. The
default state of primordial follicles is skewed toward activation,
as evidenced by both transgenic mouse models and in vitro ovarian
culture experiments. Although MIS-knockout females were initially
fertile (8), young mice were found to contain more preantral and
small antral follicles, and the window of fertility was shortened.
Mice over 1 y old were nearly completely depleted of primordial
follicles, suggesting unregulated recruitment of primordial follicles
into the growing pool (16). Similarly, ex vivo cultures of ovarian
cortical section, which contain only primordial and primary follicles,
undergo recruitment of all primordial follicles in the absence of
endogenous inhibitory signals. When ovarian cortical sections are
implanted in chicken embryos, which contain high levels of MIS,
primordial follicle recruitment is reduced (17). In contrast, when
ovaries from Misr2-knockout mice are implanted in the chicken
embryos, the primordial follicles are recruited at a high rate,
equivalent to wild-type ovaries implanted in gonadectomized chicks
with no MIS (17). Similarly, in ovarian cultures from postnatal day
4 rats, a stage at which only primordial follicles are present, 50 ng/mL
MIS was sufficient to inhibit, albeit modestly, the transition of pri-
mordial to primary follicles compared with controls (18).
Until recently production of recombinant human MIS (rhMIS)
protein was complicated by the low rates of activating cleavage,
Significance
All current reversible hormonal contraceptives rely on modulating
gonadotropins or sex steroids by acting on the hypothalamic–
pituitary–gonadal axis. Primordial follicle activation, the first step
of folliculogenesis, is independent of gonadotropins or steroids. In
this study we show that Müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS) can
completely block primordial follicle activation, representing a
unique mechanism of contraception that spares the pool of qui-
escent primordial follicles (ovarian reserve). Chemotherapy is
thought to cause the over-recruitment of primordial follicles. Here
we show that treatment with MIS during cycles of carboplatin,
doxorubicin, or cyclophosphamide can significantly protect the
ovarian reserve in mice. Thus, MIS may provide a paradigm of a
reversible contraceptive that could mitigate damage to the ovar-
ian reserve associated with gonadotoxic chemotherapeutics.
Author contributions: M.K., G.G., P.K.D., and D.P. designed research; M.K., A.E.S., L.Z., H.D.S.,
N.N., and D.P. performed research; D.W. and G.G. contributed new reagents/analytic tools;
M.K., M.E.S., P.K.D., and D.P. analyzed data; and M.K., M.E.S., P.K.D., and D.P. wrote the paper.
Reviewers: R.N.F., Brown University; B.D.M., Université de Montréal; and T.K.W.,
Northwestern University.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
See Commentary on page 2101.
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: DPEPIN@mgh.harvard.edu or pdonahoe@
partners.org.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1620729114/-/DCSupplemental.
E1688–E1697
|
PNAS
|
Published online January 30, 2017
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620729114
 low expression, and high rates of unwanted secondary cleavage
contributing to a heterogeneous product (19, 20). To address
these concerns, we created a cDNA construct (21) in which we
replaced the Leader sequence with that of albumin and in-
troduced a Q425R substitution in the C-terminal cleavage site
to produce an MIS protein analog (LR-MIS, which we will refer
to simply as “rhMIS”), with increased activating cleavage and
secretion. The LR-MIS transgene also was used to produce an
optimized adeno-associated virus serotype 9 (AAV9) gene
therapy vector compatible with in vivo use, which we will refer to
as “AAV9-MIS” (22).
Unlike other female contraceptive agents, which target more
mature follicles by interfering with the hypothalamic–pituitary–
gonadal axis [through modulation of 17β-estradiol (E2), pro-
gesterone (P4), luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH), and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
feedbacks] to inhibit ovulation, MIS acts directly on the first step
of folliculogenesis, primordial follicle recruitment, which occurs
acyclically from birth (23–25). Controlling this rate-limiting step
has important implications for primary ovarian insufficiency
(POI), a condition characterized by an early onset of menopause
and a catastrophic loss of ovarian reserve (26). One of the sig-
nificant causes of POI is chemotherapy. Chemotherapy, partic-
ularly for childhood cancers (27, 28) and for cancers that affect
women of reproductive age such as breast cancer (29), can have
lasting effects on female fertility. In the breast cancer population
alone in the United States the NIH estimates 246,660 women
were diagnosed with breast cancer in 2016, of which 10.7% were
under age 45, and a majority of which received potentially fer-
tility-impairing treatments consisting of regimens of chemo-
therapy that include alkylating agents, doxorubicin (DOX), and
taxanes (29). From this growing medical need was born the new
field of oncofertility, which is devoted to the preservation of
fertility in cancer patients (30, 31).
There are two ways by which chemotherapy is thought to dam-
age the ovary: direct toxicity to follicles and indirect depletion of
primordial follicles by over-recruitment (26). The latter is thought
to occur as a consequence of the loss of negative feedback normally
provided by growing follicles, which are highly susceptible to che-
motherapeutic agents targeting proliferative cells (26).
Ovarian suppression has been proposed as a therapeutic modality
for the preservation of the ovarian reserve (32). However, strategies
to date have focused on GnRH inhibition, which has had limited
success (33–35), likely because gonadotropins regulate only the late,
irreversible stages of follicular maturation rather than the recruit-
ment of primordial follicles (36). By directly inhibiting primordial
follicle activation, we hypothesize that MIS could provide a unique
method of contraception and a therapeutic option for oncofertility.
MIS is an ideal biologic for this purpose; its safety profile is benign,
given that its function in adults is predominantly restricted to the
gonads, and MIS concentrations in baby boys (50–500 ng/mL) (37)
and in patients with sex cord stromal tumors (3 μg/mL) (38)
exceed those expected to affect folliculogenesis.
Results
MIS Administered as Gene Therapy or Purified Recombinant Protein
Can Induce Superphysiological Blood Concentrations Sufficient to Act
on Primordial Follicles of the Ovary. The availability of a bi-
ologically active rhMIS protein that can be produced and puri-
fied to high yields using chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells (21)
allowed us to explore higher and longer dosing in vivo, which
previously had been impractical with the lower-cleavage wild-
type protein (39) or impossible using commercial C-terminal
recombinant MIS protein (R&D Systems, Inc.), which we found
to be devoid of activity. For example, incubation of fetal [em-
bryonic day (E)14.5] female rat urogenital ridges with 5 μg/mL of
rhMIS for 72 h in ex vivo cultures causes nearly complete re-
gression of the Müllerian duct (Fig. 1A, Top Row, Right),
whereas the R&D Systems C-terminal MIS has no observable
activity on the Müllerian duct bioassay (Fig. 1A, Bottom Right), the
gold standard to test potency and specificity of the hormone (40).
The rhMIS protein can be administered s.c. (Fig. 1B), i.v. (Fig. 1C),
or i.p. (Fig. 1D), each resulting in a half-life of ∼4 h and reaching
peak concentrations at 4 h, 30 min, and 2 h, respectively (n = 3 per
group). The preferred route of delivery for rhMIS protein, when
injected, was s.c., because its absorption kinetics were the most fa-
vorable. However, when osmotic pumps were used, i.p. implanta-
tion was found to be optimal and less prone to clogging, producing
steady delivery for up to 1 wk (Fig. 1E) (n = 3). rhMIS activity was
remarkably stable, with the material recovered from pumps that had
been implanted in mice for 1 wk conserving full biological ac-
tivity in the rat urogenital ridge bioassay (Fig. 1A, Middle Row,
Right) (representative of n = 3).
Alternatively, a single i.p. administration of an AAV9 gene ther-
apy vector (at 3e11 particles per mouse), which we have previously
shown to induce persistent expression of the transgene for more than
1 y (22), efficiently delivers the rhMIS transgene to the liver, muscles,
and pancreas of adult C57BL/6N mice (Fig. 1G) but not to the ovary
(Fig. S1A). The resulting secreted rhMIS protein can be found at
high concentrations (>0.25 μg/mL) in the blood as early as 2 d after
injection when using an ELISA specific to the human protein (Fig.
1F) (n = 3).
With delivery of MIS optimized, we could evaluate the in-
hibitory activity of MIS on the recruitment of ovarian primordial
follicles in vivo. We confirmed that Misr2 was expressed by
granulosa cells at all early stages of folliculogenesis, including
primordial follicles (Fig. S2A), with their germ cells identifiable
by immunofluorescence (IF) based on their P63+ nucleus and
mouse vasa homolog (Mvh)+ cytoplasm (a representative ex-
ample is shown in the inset of Fig. S2A).
AAV9-MIS Treatment Results in Reversible Ovarian Quiescence. A
single i.p. administration of AAV9-MIS vector in adult (6- to 7-wk-
old) female Nu/Nu mice induces a viral titer-dependent increase in
circulating MIS (Fig. S2 B and C), which can be detected by an
ELISA specific to the human protein (2, 21). The circulating level
of rhMIS was remarkably stable over the 60 d of the experiment
(Fig. S2C); 1e12 particles generated serum concentrations from 1.5 to
2.7 μg/mL; 3e11 particles generated concentrations of 0.8–2 μg/mL;
1e11 particles generated concentrations of 0.2–0.7 μg/mL; 1e10
particles generated concentrations of 1–17 ng/mL; and the AAV9-
GFP control had no detectable human MIS protein. Mice treated
with doses of 1e11 or more AAV9-MIS viral particles had a
marked reduction in growing follicles (Fig. S2B). We chose the
middle dose of 3e11 for subsequent experiments. Ovaries from
mice treated with 3e11 particles of AAV9-MIS and euthanized 39
d later were visibly smaller than ovaries from control mice treated
with AAV9-GFP (Fig. 2A) as a consequence of the profound re-
duction in growing follicles evidenced in the representative (of n =
3) middle sections of the ovaries (Fig. 2B). The reduced ovarian
size was observed in mice treated for 1–2 mo, but not earlier,
suggesting gradual depletion of developing follicles. Ovaries har-
vested 39 d after treatment from three control females treated with
AAV9-GFP and three females treated with AAV9-MIS were
sectioned in their entirety, and total follicle counts were performed
(Fig. 2C). The AAV9-MIS ovaries were almost completely devoid
of growing follicles, with marked reductions of primary follicles
(−65%; P < 0.001), secondary follicles (−96%; P < 0.001), and
antral follicles (−97%; P < 0.001) (Fig. 2C). Interestingly, this re-
duction is unlikely to be caused by germ cell toxicity or enhanced
large follicle atresia, because primordial follicle counts were un-
changed, and atretic follicles actually were significantly reduced
compared with control ovaries (−88%; P < 0.001) (Fig. 2C), as is
consistent with a blockade of primordial follicle activation.
To test if the primordial follicle inhibition is reversible, C57BL6/N
mice were treated with AAV9-MIS and were allowed to deplete their
Kano et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 30, 2017
|
E1689
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
 pool of growing follicles for 60 d, after which their ovaries were
transplanted orthotopically into the unilaterally gonadectomized
bursa of either AAV9-GFP– or AAV9-MIS–treated recipient female
mice (Fig. 2D). Folliculogenesis was “reawakened,” with visible sec-
ondary and antral follicles as early as 12 d after quiescent ovaries
were transplanted into AAV9-GFP recipients that did not have
superphysiological levels of MIS, whereas the ovaries remain dor-
mant when reintroduced into another AAV9-MIS–treated recipient
as a transplantation control (Fig. 2E).
Treatment with rhMIS Protein Results in Reversible Ovarian
Quiescence. To confirm that the inhibition of primordial follicle
activation is not a unique property of gene therapy delivery and
to elucidate the kinetics of ovarian reawakening, we tested the
effect of parenteral treatment with rhMIS protein in Nu/Nu
mice. The protein was administered s.c. twice daily (every 12 h),
at a dosage of 1.5 mg/kg (Fig. 3A, Upper), which in silico phar-
macokinetic modeling predicted would maintain circulating
levels of rhMIS above our target level of 0.25 μg/mL (Fig. 3D)
(the lower range achieved using 1e11 AAV9-MIS) (Fig. S2C).
Actual circulating levels of rhMIS measured by ELISA 12 h after
injection, representing the trough, were maintained above the
target threshold of 0.25 μg/mL (Fig. 3C), as predicted by in silico
simulations of pharmacokinetics (Fig. 3D). Ovaries from rhMIS-
treated mice were markedly reduced in size, as evidenced by a
representative (of n = 3) middle section following 40 d of
treatment, thus phenocopying the treatment with AAV9-MIS
(Fig. 3 A and B). As expected, ovaries from rhMIS-treated mice
contained fewer primary, secondary, and antral follicles than
ovaries from saline-treated controls (Fig. 3B). As ovaries were
released from quiescence following cessation of treatment with
rhMIS protein, folliculogenesis resumed (Fig. S3). We observed
a trend for a rapid increase in primary follicles from day 0 to day
5 posttreatment, followed by a plateau at a level comparable to
the counts seen in normally cycling saline-treated control mice
(Fig. 3B). There was a significant increase (P = 0.0002) in sec-
ondary follicles from day 5 to day 10 and a trend for a continued
increase from day 10 to day 15 to levels equivalent those into
saline-treated controls. However, the number of antral follicles
did not rise significantly to levels comparable to those in saline-
treated controls within the short time frame of this experiment
(Fig. 3B). There also was a trend for a reduction in primordial
follicles following reawakening, suggesting some overactivation
(Fig. 3B). The timing of reactivation was consistent with the
appearance of growing follicles at day 12 in the AAV9 trans-
plantation experiment (Fig. 2E).
Gene Therapy with AAV9-MIS as a Vectored Contraceptive. To eval-
uate the effectiveness of MIS as a contraceptive, we tested the effects
of AAV9-MIS treatment on C57BL/6N mice and examined various
fertility end points. The estrus cycle of mice treated with AAV9-MIS
(n = 3) and mice treated with AAV9 empty control (n = 3) were
monitored by daily vaginal swabs. After an initial period of regular
cycling in the 35 d following injection of the virus, the cycle of
AAV9-MIS–treated mice became irregular at week 5 (Fig. 4A), with
significantly (P = 0.0004) more time spent in apparent estrus from
day 36–70 (Fig. 4B). The vaginal swabs of acyclic mice (Fig. S2 E and
F) resembled the estrus-like cytology typical of ovarian insufficiency
(41), which presents as cornified epithelium and should not be
confused with the true estrus of cycling mice (42). Female C57BL/
6N mice treated with AAV9-MIS (n = 10) or AAV9 empty control
(n = 10) were paired with proven male breeders 3 d after AAV9
injection and were mated continuously for 6 mo. Consistent with the
gradual depletion of growing follicles, the two groups of females had
litters of similar size for their initial litters produced within the first
6-wk interval immediately following injection (Fig. 4C). Interestingly,
litters born during this time to mothers with high levels of MIS had
normal sex ratios, normal Müllerian duct development, and no de-
tectable MIS in their blood, suggesting that the protein does not
cross the placental barrier or affect the mother’s pregnancy. For the
analysis of fertility, we grouped mice that experienced any period of
circulating levels of MIS below our target threshold of 0.25 μg/mL as
“AAV9-MIS low” (n = 4) and those that maintained MIS levels
above the 0.25μg/mL threshold as “AAV9-MIS high” (n = 6) (Fig.
4D). AAV9-MIS high mice became completely infertile after 6 wk,
whereas AAV9-MIS low mice experienced reduced fertility,
0
8
16
24
0.063
0.250
1.000
4.000
16.000
time 
(h)
MIS 
concentration 
(µg/mL)
s.c.
0
8
16
24
0.063
0.250
1.000
4.000
16.000
time 
(h)
MIS 
concentration 
(µg/mL)
i.p.
0
8
16
24
0.063
0.250
1.000
4.000
16.000
64.000
time 
(h)
MIS 
concentration 
(µg/mL)
i.v.
0.25
1
4
16
64
256
0.063
0.250
1.000
4.000
16.000
time 
(h)
MIS 
concentration 
(µg/mL)
pump
0.5
1
2
4
8
16
32
64
0.063
0.125
0.250
0.500
1.000
2.000
4.000
Days 
after 
injection
MIS 
concentration 
(µg/mL)
AAV9 
MIS
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
A 
Fig. 1.
Comparative analysis of multiple modes of MIS administration. (A) Rat fetal (E14.5) urogenital ridges were incubated ex vivo with recombinant
protein (Right), and the contralateral ridge was mock-treated (Left) for 72 h. Shown are representative sections from ridges treated with fresh rhMIS (LR-MIS)
protein at 5 μg/mL (Top), rhMIS recovered from a pump implanted for 1 wk in a mouse at 5 μg/mL (Middle), or commercially obtained (R&D Systems)
C-terminal MIS protein produced in Escherichia coli at 5 μg/mL (Bottom). Regressed (Top and Middle) or intact (Bottom) Müllerian ducts are indicated by
arrows. (B–F) Pharmacokinetics of MIS administered by different delivery routes with serum levels of MIS measured serially with a human-specific ELISA.
(B) Bolus injection, 3 mg/kg s.c. (n = 3). (C) Bolus injection, 3 mg/kg i.v. (n = 3). (D) Bolus injection, 1.5 mg/kg i.p. (n = 3). (E) Implanted i.p. osmotic pump delivering
rhMIS at a rate of 0.6 μg/h. (F) AAV9-MIS 3e11 particles per mouse (n = 5). (G) A representative Western blot of MIS protein showing the prohormone (70 kDa)
and cleaved C-terminal (12.5 kDa) peptide from tissue protein lysates of a mouse injected with 3e11 particles of AAV9-MIS. Controls include CHO-K1–LR-MIS–
conditioned medium as a positive control and lysate from uninjected (WT) muscle protein as a negative control.
E1690
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620729114
Kano et al.
 producing a few small litters during the course of the mating experi-
ment (Fig. 4C). Cumulative numbers of litters per female were reduced
significantly in both the high (P < 0.0001) and low (P < 0.0001)
groups (Fig. 4C). When the same females were mated for 1 mo at 1 y
of age, control females still had some residual fertility, producing an
average of one pup per female, whereas all the treated females
remained infertile (P = 0.0065) (Fig. S2D). Following the 6-mo
mating study (between days 232 and 309), blood samples were taken
at estrus, as determined by vaginal cytology, from both treated and
control female mice to assess reproductive hormone levels. As pre-
dicted by the depletion of early-growing follicles, there was a sig-
nificant reduction in inhibinB (InhB) (P = 0.0024), E2 (P = 0.0026),
and its precursor testosterone (P = 0.0093) in mice treated with
AAV9-MIS compared with controls; however, P4 levels were un-
affected (Fig. 4E). As expected from pituitary feedback, gonado-
tropins were elevated, with trends for greater FSH and LH levels in
females treated with AAV9-MIS than in controls (Fig. 4E) (43).
MIS Treatment Reduces Primordial Follicle Depletion Induced by
Chemotherapy. To evaluate ovarian suppression by MIS as a
protective therapy against chemotherapy-induced ovarian re-
serve depletion, we tested both the AAV9-MIS gene therapy and
the rhMIS protein in mouse models treated with chemotherapy.
For this purpose we administered AAV9-MIS or AAV9-GFP to
adult (6- to 7-wk-old) tumor-bearing Nu/Nu mice and 1 d later
began weekly doses of carboplatin (CBP) (n = 10) at 80 mg/kg i.p.
or DOX (n = 9) at 3 mg/kg i.v. until the mice were euthanized for
tumor-related end points (volume >1 cm3) at days 10 and 12,
respectively (Fig. 5A). Tumor growth in this short timespan was
not affected by MIS. Ovaries were retrieved and serially sectioned,
and total follicle counts were performed. We observed significantly
higher ovarian reserves in mice cotreated with AAV9-MIS than
in control mice treated with AAV9-GFP, with primordial follicle
counts 2.2-fold higher (P < 0.001) in CBP-treated mice and
1.8-fold higher (P < 0.01) in the DOX-treated mice (Fig. 5 B and C).
No differences were observed in growing follicle counts; however,
using immunohistochemistry (IHC), we noticed an abundance
of growing follicles with extensive granulosa cell apoptosis, as
evidenced by pycnotic hematoxylin staining and cleaved caspase-3
staining in all groups (Fig. S2 G and H). We did not find cleaved
caspase-3+ primordial follicles.
To test the efficacy of rhMIS protein for the preservation of
ovarian reserve, we elected to use osmotic pumps implanted i.p. in
C57BL/6N female mice to allow very precise delivery of MIS (Fig.
1E). In this model we implanted osmotic pumps loaded with 100 μL
of a 1,200-μg/mL solution of rhMIS diluted in saline or saline-loaded
control pumps, which were replaced every 7 or 5 d (Fig. 5D). The day
after pump implantation, mice began a weekly treatment of i.p.
chemotherapy or saline control, using doses of 60 mg/kg for CBP,
7.5 mg/kg for DOX, and 60 mg/kg for cyclophosphamide (CPA) (Fig.
5 E–G). After 2 wk of chemotherapy, mice were euthanized, ovaries
were retrieved and serially sectioned, and total follicle counts were
performed. We observed significantly higher ovarian reserves in mice
that had been implanted with rhMIS-eluting pumps before receiving
chemotherapy than in controls that had been implanted with saline
pumps and that received the same chemotherapy. Primordial follicle
counts were 1.4-fold higher (P < 0.0001) in CBP-treated mice,
2.9-fold higher (P < 0.001) in DOX-treated mice, and 1.2-fold higher
(P < 0.05) in CPA-treated mice (Fig. 5 E–G). Treatment with rhMIS
alone did not significantly affect either primordial or growing follicles
within this short timespan; however, there was a trend toward lower
numbers of growing follicles compared with saline-only controls (Fig.
5 E–G). Using an ELISA capable of detecting the murine protein
(Fig. S1B), we found that treatment with chemotherapy alone pro-
duced a trend for decreased endogenous mouse MIS when the blood
from the same mice was compared pre- and postchemotherapy (at
the 14-d time point), and the decrease achieved statistical significance
with CPA treatment (P = 0.015) (Fig. S1A).
A
B
C
E
D
Fig. 2.
AAV9-MIS treatment results in reversible
ovarian quiescence. Mice were treated with a sin-
gle dose of AAV9-MIS at 3e11 particles per mouse, and
ovaries were examined after 39 d. (A) Representative
gross morphology (ovary circled with dashed line). (B)
A representative middle section compared with an
AAV9-GFP control ovary. (C) Total follicle counts in
AAV9-MIS and AAV9-GFP mice 39 d after treatment
with a single dose of 3e11 viral particles (n = 5 mice per
group). ***P < 0.001 by Student’s t test. (D) Schematic
for the transplantation of ovaries from mice treated
with AAV9-MIS for 60 d into AAV9-GFP or AAV9-MIS
recipients. (E) Representative intact contralateral ova-
ries (Top) or middle sections from transplanted ovaries
(n = 5) (Middle) from two donor mice pretreated with
AAV9-MIS, transplanted 60 d later into AAV9-GFP or
AAV9-MIS recipients, and recovered 12 d after trans-
plantation. (Bottom, Left) Higher-magnification image
of growing follicles indicated by arrows. (Bottom,
Right) Quiescent primordial follicles indicated by ar-
rowhead. (Inset magnification: 400×.)
Kano et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 30, 2017
|
E1691
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
 Discussion
The MIS receptor Misr2 has long been known to be expressed by
ovarian surface epithelium and granulosa cells of the ovary (11),
and its promoter is often used in the generation of conditional
transgenic mice for these cell types (44) and in mouse models of
gynecological cancers (15). Our results confirm that Misr2 ex-
pression during folliculogenesis may begin as early as the pri-
mordial stage and may persist from birth until the depletion of
those follicles (Fig. S2A). Reports of the effect of MIS on folli-
cles have been mixed, with some studies suggesting an activating
effect (45, 46) and others implying a direct inhibitory effect (18,
47), indirect inhibition via gonadotropins (48, 49), or even reg-
ulation of meiosis (50). In past studies, the magnitude of in-
hibition of primordial follicle recruitment in vivo and in vitro has
been perceived as relatively modest because of difficulties in
achieving high concentrations of the protein. With tools such as
the rhMIS analog LR-MIS (21) and the use of gene therapy
vectors such as AAV9 (22), we have been able to test the effects
of high (perhaps superphysiological) levels of MIS on the ovaries
of adult mice. The local concentration of MIS in the mouse
ovarian cortex, where primordial follicles reside, is unknown.
However, in humans the concentration of MIS in the follicular
fluid of small antral follicles is greater than 1 μg/mL, i.e., three
orders of magnitude higher than the serum levels (51), suggest-
ing that primordial follicles may be exposed to levels of MIS in
excess of serum concentration. In contrast to previous studies, we
find MIS is capable of inducing a complete shutdown of folli-
culogenesis when maintained at levels over 0.25 μg/mL in the
blood in two different strains of mice: C57BL/6N and Nu/Nu
(the latter ruling out any major effect of immunogenicity of the
human protein). Follicle counts suggest a specific inhibition of
primordial follicle activation without inhibition or activation of
other stages or increases in the rate of atresia (see the two col-
umns at the far right in Fig. 2C, Right). Consistent with this
hypothesis, the MIS-induced ovarian quiescence takes ∼5 wk to
manifest, as seen by cycling and mating studies (Fig. 4 A and C),
suggesting the already growing follicles complete their irrevers-
ible development and are gradually depleted from the ovary (Fig.
S3). Furthermore, that both the estrus cycle and the fertility of
MIS-treated mice during the first 5 wk of treatment are not
different from controls suggests that any positive or negative
effect of MIS on other stages of folliculogenesis or gonadotropin/
steroid levels is biologically insignificant for fertility. Further-
more, the results of many studies using commercial C-terminal
MIS protein in the context of fertility should be interpreted with
caution, given that peptide’s lack of specific biological activity in
the rat fetal urogenital ridge bioassay (Fig. 1A).
A
C
B
D
Fig. 3.
Treatment with rhMIS protein results in reversible ovarian quiescence. (A) Mice were treated twice daily (every 12 h) with an s.c. injection of 750 μg/kg
of rhMIS for 40 consecutive days and were euthanized at days 0, 5, 10, and 15 posttreatment. Shown are representative middle sections from ovaries of mice
at days 0, 5, 10, and 15 posttreatment (Upper Row, Left to Right) and higher-magnification examples of quiescent primordial (Lower Row, Left Image) or
growing (Lower Row, Three Right Images) follicles. (B) Total follicle counts from ovaries of mice treated for 40 d with rhMIS protein and released for 0, 5, 10,
or 15 d and controls consisting of AAV9-MIS as a positive control of complete quiescence (Left), or saline as a negative control with normal folliculogenesis
(Right, control). Different letters (a–f) above the bars indicate significance (P < 0.05) within each category of follicle by one-way ANOVA. (C) Serum MIS levels
as measured by ELISA during the 40 d of s.c. treatment with 1.5 mg/kg of rhMIS protein, taken at the trough (12 h after injection). (D) Simulation of the
pharmacokinetics of s.c. administration of 1.5 mg/kg of rhMIS protein every 12 h over a 24-h interval.
E1692
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620729114
Kano et al.
 Remarkably, the inhibition of primordial follicle activation by
MIS was found to be reversible with ovarian transplantation from
AAV9-treated animals and in short-term protein treatment ex-
periments (Figs. 2E and 3). The reawakening of folliculogenesis
was rapid (Fig. S3, model), with the number of secondary follicles
gradually recovering to within the normal range 15 d after the
cessation of treatment with the rhMIS protein (Fig. 3B). This
dramatic activation of primordial follicles and quick maturation to
the secondary stage may be accelerated by the absence of feedback
from growing follicles and the resulting reduced endogenous MIS
and elevated gonadotropins (Fig. 4E). Therefore, careful weaning
from exogenous MIS may be necessary to avoid overactivation of
primordial follicles following treatment. Prolonged treatment with
MIS and the corresponding depletion of growing follicles also
decreased E2, testosterone, and InhB levels and increased go-
nadotropin levels (Fig. 4E). The induced hypergonadotropic
hypogonadism was associated with disrupted estrus cycling and
persistent vaginal cornification (Fig. 4A and Fig. S2 E and F) (42).
Given the nearly complete blocking of folliculogenesis and the
resulting infertility of treated mice (Fig. 4C), MIS or agonists
targeting its pathway may represent a unique hormonal contra-
ceptive approach. Unlike current hormonal contraceptives that
disrupt the hypothalamus–pituitary–gonadal axis and act on al-
ready committed secondary and antral follicles, MIS inhibits the
first step of activation of the dormant primordial follicle, po-
tentially sparing the germ cell. It has not escaped our notice that
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 4.
Treatment with AAV9-MIS results in a progressive loss of cycling and fertility and the induction of a hypergonadotropic hypogonadic hormonal
profile. (A) Mice were treated with a single injection of 3e11 particles of AAV9-MIS or AAV9-empty vector control, and cycling was monitored by daily vaginal
swabs over 70 d. (B) The relative amount of time spent in estrus was compared for the first half (day 1–day 35) and the second half (day 36–day 70) of the
observation period in both groups. (C) Mating trios (n = 10 trios) consisting of a proven male breeder with an AAV9-MIS and an AAV9-empty vector control
female were housed together continuously for a 6-mo interval, and the average cumulative number of pups per female was compared by ANOVA with a
Holm–Sidak post hoc test (P values are indicated). (D) Females treated with AAV9-MIS were split into two groups, AAV9-MIS high and low, based whether
their serum levels of MIS, as measured by ELISA, were above or below the 0.25 μg/mL threshold for the duration of the experiment. (E) Following the
6-mo breeding experiment, serum samples were collected, and the levels of LH, FSH, testosterone (T), P4, InhB, and E2 were measured by ELISA. **P < 0.01 and
***P < 0.001 by Student’s t test.
Kano et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 30, 2017
|
E1693
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
 the chronic use of a contraceptive method sparing germ cells
suggests the possibility of extending the reproductive lifespan of
the user; however, matters of oocyte quality associated with aging
remain to be resolved. More practically, vectored contraceptives
using MIS may be very useful in the veterinary setting where a
single injection could be used as a permanent contraceptive for
female cats and dogs in temporary shelter, because AAVs are
not replication competent and have a history of safe use for that
purpose (52).
The unique specificity and mechanism of action of MIS pre-
sent some therapeutic opportunities not afforded by current
hormonal contraceptives. Limiting primordial follicle activation
could lessen the premature depletion of the ovarian reserve
observed in cases of POI induced by environmental, iatrogenic,
or genetic causes. This is particularly true in cases where POI
may be exacerbated by primordial follicle over-recruitment, i.e.,
in which specific toxicities to growing follicles increase the acti-
vation rate of primordial follicles (26). We hypothesize that
secondary primordial follicle depletion may result from the re-
duction in endogenous MIS, which normally is secreted by
granulosa cells of growing follicles and provides negative feed-
back to the primordial follicle (Fig. 6, model); MIS levels are
also known to decline during chemotherapy (53). We further
hypothesize that this deficit could be addressed directly by sup-
plementing exogenous MIS, as a form of hormone replacement
therapy, to restore this negative feedback (Fig.6, model). To test
these hypotheses, we used gene therapy with MIS, or rhMIS
parenteral protein administration, to create a complete arrest in
primordial follicle activation concurrently with chemotherapy
cycles. As a proof of concept we chose three commonly used
chemotherapeutic classes with well-described gonadotoxicities:
platinums (54), anthracyclins (55), and alkylating agents (56).
Both platinums (such as CBP) and anthracyclins (DOX) in-
terfere with DNA replication and as such are particularly toxic to
dividing granulosa cells of secondary and antral follicles, albeit
with distinct toxicity profiles (55), and thus represent ideal tar-
gets for an MIS oncofertility intervention. CPA is an alkylating
agent, a class that is particularly damaging to germ cells, and is
the most problematic gonadotoxic chemotherapeutic in the
clinic, particularly because it is often used in young girls with
hematological cancers (57). We found that MIS had a particu-
larly dramatic protective effect in the case of DNA-damaging
agents (Fig. 5 B, C, E, and F) but was only weakly protective for
CPA (Fig. 5G). We speculate that the degree of protection likely
A 
D 
B 
E 
C 
F 
G 
Fig. 5.
Treatment with MIS protects the ovarian reserve from the primordial follicle depletion induced by chemotherapy. (A) Mice were treated with a single
injection of 3e11 particles of AAV9-MIS or AAV9-GFP control, and weekly chemotherapy started 1 d later. Mice were euthanized either 3 d (DOX) or 5 d (CBP) after
the second chemotherapeutic injection. (B and C) Total follicle counts were performed for AAV9-MIS (n = 5) and AAV9-GFP (n = 5) mice treated with 80 mg/kg CBP
i.p. (B) or 3 mg/kg DOX i.v. (C) and were analyzed by Student’s t test. (D) Mice were implanted i.p. with pumps delivering either rhMIS protein at 0.6 μg/h or saline as
a negative control. Pumps were replaced every 5 or 7 d. Weekly rounds of chemotherapy were started 1 d after implantation of the pump. Mice were euthanized
1 wk after the last dose of chemotherapy. (E–G) Total follicle counts were performed for saline pump + saline i.p. controls, rhMIS protein pump + saline i.p. controls,
saline pump + chemotherapy i.p., and rhMIS protein pump + chemotherapy i.p. (n = 5 per group) for (E) DOX 7.5 mg/kg i.p., (F) CBP 60 mg/kg i.p., and (G) CPA
60 mg/kg i.p. Average follicle counts were analyzed by two-way ANOVA with a Holm–Sidak post hoc test; *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001.
E1694
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620729114
Kano et al.
 reflects the relative amounts of direct damage to the germ cells
versus the indirect damage caused by the loss of negative feedback
and over-recruitment of primordial follicles. A recent investigation
on the relative contribution of the direct versus indirect damage
caused by various chemotherapeutics demonstrated that, although
some agents, such as CPA have greater toxicity to germ cells of
quiescent primordial follicles, others, such as gemcitabine, leave
them relatively unscathed, instead causing cell death in the dividing
granulosa cells of growing follicles. We predict MIS treatment
would be most suitable in the latter case (58).
Treatment with MIS is particularly compatible with short-term
oncofertility use such as during chemotherapy, because complete
blockade of folliculogenesis induces a menopausal-like state of
acyclicity and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (Fig. 4E). In
some cases, such as breast cancer, reduced estradiol is consid-
ered beneficial to the treatment of the tumor (29); thus ovarian
suppression might offer an additional advantage in these instances.
Additionally, for conditions such as polycystic ovarian syndrome
(59), the reduction of both folliculogenesis and androgens ob-
served with MIS may alleviate some of the most important
symptoms. However, in other contexts, chronic long-term use of
MIS as a contraceptive likely would have to be associated with
steroid hormone replacement therapy. Alternatively, one could
envision the use of a lower dosage of MIS with which primordial
follicle activation could be partially reduced but not completely
inhibited, thus slowing the depletion of the ovarian reserve in
patients with diminished ovarian reserve such as carriers of the
fragile X mental retardation 1 premutation (60). Finally, another
application in which MIS may be useful is in the treatment of
primordial follicle depletion associated with ovarian tissue grafting
(61), an experimental fertility-preservation technique in which
cortical ovarian grafts are frozen and reimplanted after chemo-
therapy (62). The relatively modest lifespan of such grafts could be
expanded if the initial primordial follicle loss upon reimplantation
could be moderated.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that MIS is a potent
inhibitor of primordial follicle activation and is an effective
contraceptive in mice. Its unique mechanism of action makes it
particularly suited for the protection of ovarian reserve during
chemotherapy and opens up many clinical possibilities in other
conditions in which the recruitment of follicles is dysregulated.
Future studies should address the quality of the eggs being
preserved and evaluate ways to mitigate the long-term effects of
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism.
Materials and Methods
Animals. This study was performed in accordance with experimental protocols
2009N000033 and 2014N000275 approved by the Massachusetts General Hospital
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Under those protocols, euthanasia
was performed by CO2 asphyxiation or by barbiturate overdose using a
commercial preparation (sodium pentobarbital 390 mg + sodium phenytoin
50 mg/mL) (Euthasol) 0.22 mL/kg i.p. (86 mg/kg pentobarbital) respectively, in
compliance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals
guideline (63).
For pharmacokinetic analysis, rhMIS protein was delivered to 6- to 7-wk-
old C57BL/6N female mice (Charles River Laboratories) s.c. (3 mg/kg; n = 3), i.v.
(3 mg/kg; n = 3), i.p. (1.5 mg/kg; n = 3), or by an i.p. implanted osmotic pump
(ALZET 1007D, DURECT Corporation) with a flow rate of 0.5 μL/h, filled with
1,200 μg/mL of LR-MIS (n = 3). After the delivery of LR-MIS, blood samples
were collected serially and analyzed.
To investigate the effect of AAV9-MIS on the ovaries, 6- to 7-wk-old Nu/Nu
female mice (Massachusetts General Hospital) were injected i.p with 1e10, 1e11,
3e11, or 1e12 particles of AAV9-MIS (n = 1), and blood samples were collected
serially. After 7 wk of treatment, the animals were euthanized, ovaries were
dissected, and ovarian follicles were counted as described below.
To observe the effect of releasing ovaries from exogenous MIS ovarian
suppression, 3e11 viral particles of AAV9-MIS were given i.p. to 6- to 7-wk-old
C57BL/6N female mice; 60 d later one ovary per mouse was surgically
transplanted orthotopically into the emptied bursa of either an AAV9-MIS–
treated or an AAV9-GFP–treated female mouse. Mice were euthanized 12 d -
after the transplantation, and ovaries were dissected.
To seetheeffect of short-termrhMIS protein ovarian suppression, 6- to 7-wk-old
Nu/Nu female mice were injected s.c. with 750 μg/kg of rhMIS every 12 h for 40 d.
The mice were euthanized 0 (n = 3), 5 (n = 3), 10 (n = 3), or 15 (n = 3) d after the
injections were stopped, and the ovaries were examined to assess the recovery
of folliculogenesis.
Histology. Dissected ovaries were fixed in 4% (wt/vol) paraformaldehyde
overnight at 4 °C and were embedded in paraffin blocks in an automated
tissue processor (Leica TP1020). For H&E staining, the whole ovary was cut
into 8-μm sections, and serial sections were mounted on slides and depar-
affinized. After the graded series of rehydration, sections were stained with
hematoxylin (Dako) and eosin (Sigma Aldrich), coverslipped with Cytoseal 60
(Thermo Fisher Scientific), and examined under the light microscope for
follicle counts.
For IHC and IF, the ovaries were cut into 5-μm thicknesses and were
mounted on slides. Slides were deparaffinized and rehydrated, and heat-
induced antigen retrieval was performed.
For IHC, after endogenous peroxidase was inactivated by 3% (vol/vol) hy-
drogen peroxide (Thermo Fisher Scientific), sections were blocked in Tris-buff-
ered saline and Tween20 (TBST) solution containing 2% (vol/vol) donkey serum
(Jackson ImmunoResearch) and were incubated in primary antibody overnight at
4 °C. Then the sections were incubated in an HRP-conjugated secondary anti-
body for 1.5 h, and 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) (DAKO) was used to visualize
the signal.
For IF, sections were blocked in 2% (vol/vol) donkey serum blocking buffer
and were incubated in primary antibody overnight at 4 °C. Then the sections
were incubated in secondary antibodies for 1.5 h and were coverslipped with
VECTASHIELD mounting medium with DAPI (Vector Laboratories). The slides
were examined 15 min after coverslipping under a Nikon Eclipse i80 micro-
scope. Primary antibodies included sheep anti-hMISR2 polyclonal antibody (R&D
Systems), rabbit anti-cleaved caspase-3 polyclonal antibody (Cell Signaling
Technology), rabbit anti-MVH polyclonal antibody (Abcam), and mouse anti-
p63 monoclonal antibody (Biocare Medical). Secondary antibodies included
donkey anti-sheep IgG antibody conjugated to HRP (R&D Systems), donkey
anti-rabbit IgG antibody conjugated to HRP (Jackson ImmunoResearch), Alexa
Fluor 488-conjugated donkey anti-sheep IgG antibody, Alexa Fluor 555-conju-
gated donkey anti-rabbit IgG antibody, and Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated donkey
anti-mouse IgG antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Follicle Counts. Follicle counts were performed blinded as previously described
(64). Briefly, the total number of follicles in each ovary was estimated by
counting the numbers of follicles in every fifth section of H&E-stained whole
ovaries and applying a fivefold correction factor. Follicles were classified into
five stages: primordial, primary, secondary, antral, and atretic follicles. Only
follicles that had an oocyte nucleus were scored. Follicles whose oocyte was
surrounded by a layer of squamous granulosa cells were classified as pri-
mordial follicles. If a single layer of cuboidal granulosa cells was observed,
follicles were classified as primary follicles. Secondary follicles had multiple
layers of cuboidal granulosa cells. If an antrum was observed in the gran-
ulosa cell layers, the follicle was classified as an antral follicle. Atretic follicles
were counted only when an aberrant oocyte and multiple layers of pycnotic
granulosa cells were observed. Follicle counts were performed in both
ovaries of n = 5 mice per group for the experiment shown in Fig. 2C, n = 3
Fig. 6.
Model of hormone-replacement treatment with exogenous MIS
to protect the ovarian reserve from primordial follicle depletion induced
by chemotherapy. Chemotherapeutic agents (CBP, DOX, CPA), which are
toxic to the dividing cells of growing follicles, disrupt the negative
feedback that such follicles normally provide to inhibit primordial follicle
recruitment, leading to a self-amplifying depletion of the ovarian re-
serve. By restoring negative feedback with exogenous MIS, primordial
follicle activation was inhibited, thus lessening the depletion of the
ovarian reserve.
Kano et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 30, 2017
|
E1695
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
 mice per group for the experiment shown in Fig. 3B, and n = 5 mice per
group for each experiment of Fig. 5.
Blood Sampling. Mouse blood taken by pricking facial veins or by cardiac
puncture at end point, was collected in an Edta 2Na tube, and centrifuged at
900 × g for 10 min. Serum was taken from the supernatant and stored at
−20 °C until analysis. For frequently repeated, small-volume blood sampling,
lateral tail blood was collected; 10 μL was collected and diluted immediately
in 90 μL of 1% BSA/PBS, centrifuged, and stored as described above. Blood
samples for the murine P4/E2/LH/FSH/InhB ELISAs were taken following the
6-mo mating study, between days 232 and 309. Samples for each test were
taken from individual mice (n = 5) within 3 d of each other, when their
vaginal smears consisted only of cornified epithelium, a cytology normally
typical of estrus. Blood samples for the murine MIS ELISA were taken from
n = 3 mice at the beginning of the study and after chemotherapy (day 14) in
mice treated with saline, DOX, CBP, and CPA.
Vaginal Cycling. Female mice were cohoused in groups of four with male bed-
ding, and vaginal smears were taken once a day, at least 5 d/wk, between 10 AM
and 11 AM. Dried smears were stained with Giemsa (Sigma Aldrich) for 15 min,
rinsed with distilled water, dried at room temperature, and coverslipped with
Cytoseal 60 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The slides were examined by two ob-
servers under a light microscope, and the stage of the cycle was determined
according to the Allen criteria (65). To compare the time spent in estrus versus
other stages, the cycling period was divided in two intervals: from 1 d after the
injection (day 1) to day 35 and from day 36 to day 70, and the ratios of days
spent in estrus were compared.
ELISA. The ELISA to measure human MIS was performed as previously
reported (21). Briefly, a 96-well plate was coated with mouse monoclonal
anti-human recombinant MIS antibody (clone 6E11) overnight at 4 °C and
was blocked with 1% BSA/PBS and Tween 20 (PBST) (Jackson Immuno-
Research) for 2 h at room temperature. The MIS standard and samples were
added to the wells and incubated overnight at 4 °C. The rabbit polyclonal
anti-MIS antibody MGH6 was then added and incubated for 1 h at room
temperature, and then donkey anti-rabbit IgG antibody conjugated to
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) (Jackson ImmunoResearch) was added and
incubated for 1 h at 4 °C. The plate was developed using 3,3′,5,5′-Tetra-
methylbenzidine (TMB) (Sigma Aldrich), and the light absorbance was read
at 595 nm in a microplate reader (Vector2 1420; Perkin-Elmer).
Murine P4/E2/LH/FSH/INHB serum levels were measured with ELISA at the
Ligand Assay and Analysis Core of the Center for Research in Reproduction at
University of Virginia School of Medicine under a cooperative agreement.
Mouse E2 was measured with an ELISA kit from Calbiotech, testosterone was
measured with an ELISA kit from IBL-America, LH and FSH were measured
with the Endocrine Multiplex Assay from EMD Millipore, and InhB was
measured with an ELISA kit from Beckman Coulter. Endogenous murine MIS
was measured using an ELISA kit (Cusabio Biotech) according to the manu-
facturer’s instructions in samples from n = 3 animals before (day 0) and after
(day 15) chemotherapy as described in Fig. 5D.
Mating Experiments. The C57BL/6N mice were paired 7 d after the AAV9 virus
injection. Each pair comprising one female treated with AAV9 empty vector
and one female treated with AAV9-MIS was caged with one experienced
breeder male. When a pregnant mouse was identified, it was separated until
parturition, the size of the litter was recorded, the pups were removed, and
the female was reintroduced to the male. After 5 mo of mating, the female
mice were separated for 2 mo and then were mated again to different ex-
perienced breeder males for 1 mo at age 12 mo. While the mice were sep-
arated, blood samples were taken for endocrine studies.
Chemotherapy Models.
AAV9. Peripubertal 6- to 7-wk-old Nu/Nu mice (n = 20) were xenografted s.c. in the
right flank with 1 M cells of the ovcar5 ovarian cancer cell line as previously de-
scribed (22). Once the tumor reached a size of 500 mm3, 26 d after grafting, mice
were injected with AAV9-MIS (n = 10) or AAV9-GFP (n = 10) at dose of 3e11
particles per mouse. The mice were treated with chemotherapeutics [3 mg/kg of
DOX i.v. (n = 10) or 80 mg/kg of CBP i.p. (n = 10)] or saline 24 h after the AAV
injection. A second dose of chemotherapeutic agents was given 7 d after the first
dose. The animals were euthanized 3 d (for DOX) or 5 d (for CBP) after the second
dose of chemotherapeutics, and the ovaries were recovered and fixed for analysis.
Osmotic pump. Peripubertal 6- to 7-wk-old C57BL/6N mice were surgically
implanted in the peritoneal cavity with an osmotic pump (ALZET 1007D; DURECT
Corporation) filled with 100 μL of rhMIS (1,200 μg/mL) or saline and then were
treated with chemotherapeutics or saline i.p. 1 d after the implantation.
A second dose of chemotherapeutic agents was given 7 d after the first dose.
The implanted pump was replaced every 7 d except in the doxorubicin exper-
iment, in which the pump was replaced every 5 d. Chemotherapeutic regimens
used for this experiment are as follows: DOX: 7.5 mg/kg i.p. followed by
6.0 mg/kg i.p. for the second round; CBP: 60 mg/kg i.p. for both rounds: CPA
60 mg/kg for both rounds. The animals were euthanized 7 d after the second
dose of chemotherapeutic agent, and the ovaries were dissected for analysis.
Statistical Analysis. All analyses were performed using Prism 7 (GraphPad).
When two groups of data with a known direction were compared, an un-
paired one-tailed Student’s t test was used. When the distribution of data
was not normal, a Mann–Whitney test was used for analysis. For four groups
of chemotherapy analysis, follicle counts in each were compared by two-way
ANOVA for multiple comparisons followed by a Holm–Sidak post hoc test.
The breeding experiment was assessed by one-way ANOVA for multiple
comparisons followed by a Holm–Sidak post hoc test.
Production of rhMIS Protein. RhMIS protein was purified as previously de-
scribed (21). Briefly, a CHO-K1 clone stably transfected with the LR-MIS
vector was grown in HYPERflasks (Corning), and serum-free conditioned
medium collected after 72 h of incubation was concentrated 10–20× using a
tangential flow over a size-exclusion membrane. The concentrated medium
was incubated with Sepharose beads previously conjugated with an anti-
human MIS monoclonal antibody (clone 6E11). Bound rhMIS was serially
eluted with a glycine-buffered solution (pH 2.9). The eluates containing high
levels of rhMIS protein were dialyzed for 4 h against a 10× volume of PBS. All
purified protein was tested for activity in the rat urogenital ridge bioassay
and was stored at −80 °C until use.
Production of AAV9 Virus. Recombinant AAV9 (rAAV) viral particles were
produced, purified, and titrated as previously described (22). Briefly, HEK293
cells were transfected with an AAV plasmid (pAAV) containing the LR-MIS
construct flanked with inverted terminal repeats, and the virus was rescued
with plasmids expressing AAV9 capsid proteins and adenoviral helper pro-
teins. Particles of rAAV were sedimented by cesium chloride gradient and
purified by dialysis. The rAAV vector titer was quantified by silver staining of
capsid proteins and quantitative PCR of the genome copy.
Fetal Rat Urogenital Ridge Bioassay. The rat urogenital organ culture bioassay
for MIS was performed as previously described (21, 40). In brief, female embryonic
urogenital ridges containing ovary, Wolffian, and Müllerian ducts with in-
tervening mesonephros from timed (E14.5) pregnant Sprague–Dawley rats
(Envigo) were dissected and incubated on 2% (wt/vol) agarose gel over CMRL
1066 medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% (vol/vol) female
fetal bovine serum, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 1% L-glutamine, 1% Fungizone
(Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 5 nM testosterone (Sigma-Aldrich). After in-
cubation for 72 h in presence of the sample, the specimens were fixed, em-
bedded in paraffin, sectioned, and stained with H&E. The sections then were
scored under a light microscope by experienced blinded observers. Cultures were
carried out with the purified rhMIS at 5 μg/mL, rhMIS solution recovered from
the pumps implanted for 7 d in mice at 5 μg/mL, and commercially available C
terminal rhMIS (R&D Systems) at a final concentration of 5 μg/mL.
Surgical Procedures.
Ovarian transplants. Ovarian transplants were performed as previously de-
scribed (66). Briefly, both the recipient and donor mice were anesthetized,
and small incisions were made on the back wall at the level of the kidney.
The ovary, oviduct, and the distal part of the uterus were exteriorized,
taking care to avoid damage; a small incision was made in the ovarian bursa
just large enough to pull the ovary through. The ovary of the donor was
carefully resected and introduced into the emptied bursa of the recipient.
The ovary and reproductive tract were replaced in the peritoneal cavity, the
wound was closed with metal clips, and the mice received postoperative care
as described above. Transplantations were performed in this manner from
AAV9-MIS–treated mice (60 d after injection) into either AAV9-GFP or AAV9-
MIS recipients. The animals were euthanized, and ovaries were examined 12
d after surgery.
Pump implantation. Osmotic pumps were primed before implantation by filling
them with either 100 μL of rhMIS (1,200 μg/mL) or saline and were incubated
in saline at 37 °C for 3 h. The mice were anesthetized with isoflurane, and
the procedure was performed on a heated pad. To implant the pump, a
small incision was made on the flank, the osmotic pump was installed in the
peritoneal cavity, and the wound was closed with metal clips. Mice were
given daily dosing of carprofen analgesic (2.5 mg/mL) by oral gavage
(100 μL) before the surgery and daily for 2 d postoperatively.
E1696
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1620729114
Kano et al.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Rana Suliman, Rahgav Mohan, and Miho
Suzuki for their help in performing histological stains and Alessandro Alessandrini
for his critical input into the manuscript. This study was funded in part by Grant
MG14-S06R from the Michelson Found Animal Foundation (to D.P., P.K.D., and
G.G.); a Sudna Gar Fellowship (D.P.); an Innovation Development Award from
Massachusetts General Hospital (to D.P. and P.K.D.); the Massachusetts General
Hospital Executive Committee on Research (ECOR) (D.P. and P.K.D.); a Mas-
sachusetts General Hospital Department of Surgery Award (to P.D.K.); funding
from the Austen Fund, the McBride family, and Commons Development (P.K.D.);
and royalties from the use of the MIS ELISA in infertility clinics around the world.
1. Baker ML, Metcalfe SA, Hutson JM (1990) Serum levels of Müllerian inhibiting sub-
stance in boys from birth to 18 years, as determined by enzyme immunoassay. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 70(1):11–15.
2. Hudson PL, et al. (1990) An immunoassay to detect human müllerian inhibiting substance
in males and females during normal development. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 70(1):16–22.
3. Josso N, Legeai L, Forest MG, Chaussain J-L, Brauner R (1990) An enzyme linked im-
munoassay for anti-müllerian hormone: A new tool for the evaluation of testicular
function in infants and children. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 70(1):23–27.
4. Seifer DB, et al. (1993) Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist-induced differences in
granulosa cell cycle kinetics are associated with alterations in follicular fluid müllerian-
inhibiting substance and androgen content. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 76(3):711–714.
5. Josso N, Picard JY, Rey R, di Clemente N (2006) Testicular anti-Müllerian hormone: His-
tory, genetics, regulation and clinical applications. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev 3(4):347–358.
6. Dewailly D, et al. (2014) The physiology and clinical utility of anti-Mullerian hormone
in women. Hum Reprod Update 20(3):370–385.
7. Jost A (1947) Sur les dérivés mülleriens d’embryons de lapin des deux sexes castrés a
21 jours. C R Seances Soc Biol Fil 141(3-4):135.
8. Behringer RR, Finegold MJ, Cate RL (1994) Müllerian-inhibiting substance function
during mammalian sexual development. Cell 79(3):415–425.
9. Nilsson EE, Schindler R, Savenkova MI, Skinner MK (2011) Inhibitory actions of Anti-
Müllerian Hormone (AMH) on ovarian primordial follicle assembly. PLoS One 6(5):e20087.
10. Hirobe S, He WW, Lee MM, Donahoe PK (1992) Mullerian inhibiting substance mes-
senger ribonucleic acid expression in granulosa and Sertoli cells coincides with their
mitotic activity. Endocrinology 131(2):854–862.
11. Teixeira J, et al. (1996) Developmental expression of a candidate Müllerian inhibiting
substance type II receptor. Endocrinology 137(1):160–165.
12. Baarends WM, et al. (1994) A novel member of the transmembrane serine/threonine
kinase receptor family is specifically expressed in the gonads and in mesenchymal cells
adjacent to the Müllerian duct. Development 120(1):189–197.
13. Baarends WM, et al. (1995) Anti-Müllerian hormone and anti-Müllerian hormone
type II receptor messenger ribonucleic acid expression in rat ovaries during postnatal
development,
the
estrous
cycle,
and
gonadotropin-induced
follicle
growth.
Endocrinology 136(11):4951–4962.
14. di Clemente N, et al. (1994) Cloning, expression, and alternative splicing of the re-
ceptor for anti-Müllerian hormone. Mol Endocrinol 8(8):1006–1020.
15. Connolly DC, et al. (2003) Female mice chimeric for expression of the simian virus 40
TAg under control of the MISIIR promoter develop epithelial ovarian cancer. Cancer
Res 63(6):1389–1397.
16. Durlinger AL, et al. (1999) Control of primordial follicle recruitment by anti-Müllerian
hormone in the mouse ovary. Endocrinology 140(12):5789–5796.
17. Gigli I, Cushman RA, Wahl CM, Fortune JE (2005) Evidence for a role for anti-Mullerian
hormone in the suppression of follicle activation in mouse ovaries and bovine ovarian cortex
grafted beneath the chick chorioallantoic membrane. Mol Reprod Dev 71(4):480–488.
18. Nilsson E, Rogers N, Skinner MK (2007) Actions of anti-Mullerian hormone on the ovarian
transcriptome to inhibit primordial to primary follicle transition. Reproduction 134(2):209–221.
19. Ragin RC, Donahoe PK, Kenneally MK, Ahmad MF, MacLaughlin DT (1992) Human
Müllerian inhibiting substance: Enhanced purification imparts biochemical stability
and restores antiproliferative effects. Protein Expr Purif 3(3):236–245.
20. Lorenzo HK, et al. (2002) New approaches for high-yield purification of Müllerian
inhibiting substance improve its bioactivity. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed
Life Sci 766(1):89–98.
21. Pépin D, et al. (2013) An albumin leader sequence coupled with a cleavage site
modification enhances the yield of recombinant C-terminal Mullerian Inhibiting
Substance. Technology 1(1):63–71.
22. Pépin D, et al. (2015) AAV9 delivering a modified human Mullerian inhibiting sub-
stance as a gene therapy in patient-derived xenografts of ovarian cancer. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 112(32):E4418–E4427.
23. Gupta SK, Malik A, Arukha AP (2015) Ovarian and oocyte targets for development of
female contraceptives. Expert Opin Ther Targets 19(11):1433–1446.
24. Pelosi E, Forabosco A, Schlessinger D (2015) Genetics of the ovarian reserve. Front
Genet 6:308.
25. Knight PG, Glister C (2006) TGF-β superfamily members and ovarian follicle devel-
opment. Reproduction 132(2):191–206.
26. Morgan S, Anderson RA, Gourley C, Wallace WH, Spears N (2012) How do chemo-
therapeutic agents damage the ovary? Hum Reprod Update 18(5):525–535.
27. Hudson MM (2010) Reproductive outcomes for survivors of childhood cancer. Obstet
Gynecol 116(5):1171–1183.
28. Green DM, et al. (2009) Ovarian failure and reproductive outcomes after childhood cancer
treatment: Results from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. J Clin Oncol 27(14):2374–2381.
29. El Hachem H, Atallah D, Grynberg M (2014) Fertility preservation in breast cancer
patients. Future Oncol 10(10):1767–1777.
30. Woodruff TK (2007) The emergence of a new interdiscipline: Oncofertility. Cancer
Treat Res 138:3–11.
31. Jeruss JS, Woodruff TK (2009) Preservation of fertility in patients with cancer. N Engl J
Med 360(9):902–911.
32. Lobo RA (2005) Potential options for preservation of fertility in women. N Engl J Med
353(1):64–73.
33. Moore HCF, et al.; POEMS/S0230 Investigators (2015) Goserelin for ovarian protection
during breast-cancer adjuvant chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 372(10):923–932.
34. Elgindy E, Sibai H, Abdelghani A, Mostafa M (2015) protecting ovaries during che-
motherapy through gonad suppression: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Obstet Gynecol 126(1):187–195.
35. Lambertini M, et al. (2015) Ovarian suppression using luteinizing hormone-releasing hor-
mone agonists during chemotherapy to preserve ovarian function and fertility of breast
cancer patients: A meta-analysis of randomized studies. Ann Oncol 26(12):2408–2419.
36. Oktay K, Briggs D, Gosden RG (1997) Ontogeny of follicle-stimulating hormone receptor gene
expression in isolated human ovarian follicles. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 82(11):3748–3751.
37. Lee MM, et al. (1997) Measurements of serum müllerian inhibiting substance in the
evaluation of children with nonpalpable gonads. N Engl J Med 336(21):1480–1486.
38. Gustafson ML, et al. (1992) Müllerian inhibiting substance as a marker for ovarian sex-
cord tumor. N Engl J Med 326(7):466–471.
39. Cate RL, et al. (1986) Isolation of the bovine and human genes for Müllerian inhibiting
substance and expression of the human gene in animal cells. Cell 45(5):685–698.
40. Price JM, Donahoe PK, Ito Y (1979) Involution of the female Mullerian duct of the
fetal rat in the organ-culture assay for the detection of Mullerian Inhibiting Sub-
stance. Am J Anat 156(2):265–284.
41. Grive KJ, et al. (2016) TAF4b regulates oocyte-specific genes essential for meiosis. PLoS
Genet 12(6):e1006128.
42. Nelson JF, Felicio LS, Osterburg HH, Finch CE (1981) Altered profiles of estradiol and
progesterone associated with prolonged estrous cycles and persistent vaginal corni-
fication in aging C57BL/6J mice. Biol Reprod 24(4):784–794.
43. Franks LM, Payne J (1970) The influence of age on reproductive capacity in C57BL
mice. J Reprod Fertil 21(3):563–565.
44. Jamin SP, Arango NA, Mishina Y, Hanks MC, Behringer RR (2002) Requirement of Bmpr1a
for Müllerian duct regression during male sexual development. Nat Genet 32(3):408–410.
45. Xu J, Bishop CV, Lawson MS, Park BS, Xu F (2016) Anti-Müllerian hormone promotes
pre-antral follicle growth, but inhibits antral follicle maturation and dominant follicle
selection in primates. Hum Reprod 31(7):1522–1530.
46. Schmidt KLT, Kryger-Baggesen N, Byskov AG, Andersen CY (2005) Anti-Müllerian hormone
initiates growth of human primordial follicles in vitro. Mol Cell Endocrinol 234(1-2):87–93.
47. Durlinger ALL, et al. (2002) Anti-Müllerian hormone inhibits initiation of primordial
follicle growth in the mouse ovary. Endocrinology 143(3):1076–1084.
48. Cimino I, et al. (2016) Novel role for anti-Müllerian hormone in the regulation of
GnRH neuron excitability and hormone secretion. Nat Commun 7:10055.
49. Garrel G, et al. (2016) Anti-Müllerian hormone: A new actor of sexual dimorphism in
pituitary gonadotrope activity before puberty. Sci Rep 6:23790.
50. Takahashi M, Koide SS, Donahoe PK (1986) Müllerian inhibiting substance as oocyte
meiosis inhibitor. Mol Cell Endocrinol 47(3):225–234.
51. Andersen CY, et al. (2010) Concentrations of AMH and inhibin-B in relation to fol-
licular diameter in normal human small antral follicles. Hum Reprod 25(5):1282–1287.
52. Li J, et al. (2015) Vectored antibody gene delivery mediates long-term contraception.
Curr Biol 25(19):R820–R822.
53. Hamy A-S, et al. (2014) Ovarian reserve in breast cancer: Assessment with anti-Mül-
lerian hormone. Reprod Biomed Online 29(5):573–580.
54. Li X, Kang X, Deng Q, Cai J, Wang Z (2013) Combination of a GnRH agonist with an antagonist
prevents flare-up effects and protects primordial ovarian follicles in the rat ovary from cis-
platin-induced toxicity: A controlled experimental animal study. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 11:16.
55. Morgan S, Lopes F, Gourley C, Anderson RA, Spears N (2013) Cisplatin and doxorubicin
induce distinct mechanisms of ovarian follicle loss; imatinib provides selective pro-
tection only against cisplatin. PLoS One 8(7):e70117.
56. Kalich-Philosoph L, et al. (2013) Cyclophosphamide triggers follicle activation and “burn-
out”; AS101 prevents follicle loss and preserves fertility. Sci Transl Med 5(185):185ra62.
57. van der Kaaij MAE, van Echten-Arends J, Simons AHM, Kluin-Nelemans HC (2010) Fertility
preservation after chemotherapy for Hodgkin lymphoma. Hematol Oncol 28(4):168–179.
58. Yuksel A, et al. (2015) The magnitude of gonadotoxicity of chemotherapy drugs on
ovarian follicles and granulosa cells varies depending upon the category of the drugs
and the type of granulosa cells. Hum Reprod 30(12):2926–2935.
59. McAllister JM, Legro RS, Modi BP, Strauss JF, 3rd (2015) Functional genomics of PCOS:
From GWAS to molecular mechanisms. Trends Endocrinol Metab 26(3):118–124.
60. Sullivan SD, Welt C, Sherman S (2011) FMR1 and the continuum of primary ovarian
insufficiency. Semin Reprod Med 29(4):299–307.
61. Gavish Z, Peer G, Roness H, Cohen Y, Meirow D (2014) Follicle activation and ‘burn-
out’ contribute to post-transplantation follicle loss in ovarian tissue grafts: The effect
of graft thickness. Hum Reprod 29(5):989–996.
62. Jensen AK, et al. (2017) Cryopreservation of ovarian tissue for fertility preservation in a
large cohort of young girls: Focus on pubertal development. Hum Reprod 32(1):154–164.
63. Committee on Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (2011) Guide for the Care and Use
of Laboratory Animals (National Academies Press, Washington, DC), 8th Ed.
64. Pépin D, Paradis F, Perez-Iratxeta C, Picketts DJ, Vanderhyden BC (2013) The imitation
switch ATPase Snf2l is required for superovulation and regulates Fgl2 in differenti-
ating mouse granulosa cells. Biol Reprod 88(6):142.
65. Allen E (1922) The oestrous cycle in the mouse. Am J Anat 30(3):297–371.
66. Nagy A (2002) Manipulating the Mouse Embryo: A Laboratory Manual (Cold Spring
Harbor Lab Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY), 3rd Ed.
Kano et al.
PNAS
|
Published online January 30, 2017
|
E1697
MEDICAL SCIENCES
PNAS PLUS
SEE COMMENTARY
