 High-Quality Carbohydrates and
Physical Performance
Expert Panel Report
Mitch Kanter, PhD
While all experts agreed that protein needs for perfor-
mance are likely greater than believed in past genera-
tions, particularly for strength training athletes, and that
dietary fat could sustain an active person through lower-
intensity training bouts, current research still points to
carbohydrate as an indispensable energy source for high-
intensity performance. Nutr Today. 2018;53(1):35Y39
N
umerous studies conducted over the past 40 to
50 years have consistently pointed to carbohydrate
as the primary macronutrient for sustaining and
improving physical performance. In recent years, however,
with the advent of techniques that better allow scientists to
measure the metabolism of key nutrients such as proteins/
amino acids, and studies on alternative feeding regimens
such as ketogenic diets and periodized nutrition, our
knowledge of sports nutrition principles has expanded
at the same time that a consensus on what constitutes the
most appropriate diet for an active person has been clouded.
The Alliance for Potato Research and Education (APRE)
convened a panel of experts to discuss the latest science
on the macronutrient needs for physical activity.
Athletes and other physically active people are always
searching for an edgeY a new technique, a training reg-
imen, or an article of clothing that might help them shave
minutes or seconds off their personal best time, lead to
strength gains necessary to compete at a higher level, or
hasten recovery after a difficult training bout. Among the
most often-cited and frequently misunderstood ergo-
genic aids that athletes use to enhance performance is
their diet. Over the past few decades, athletes and the
people who train them have become more aware than
ever of the link between physical performance and nu-
trition. Now, most trained athletes can recite their macro-
nutrient and micronutrient intakes almost as adeptly as
they discuss their training techniques, with eating regi-
mens such as the ketogenic diet, periodized nutrition (or
nutritional training), and training low a regular part of
locker room discussion.
Among the most often-cited and fre-
quently misunderstood ergogenic aids
that athletes use to enhance perfor-
mance is their diet.
But how much has our understanding of the dietary needs
for physical performance truly evolved over the past
quarter century? Is the age-old admonition for physically
active people to ‘‘eat their carbs and drink their fluids’’
obsolete, or do the same rules that applied to athletes of
yesteryear still hold true today? Many sports nutrition
researchers have lamented that basic feeding principles
are often forgotten in the quest to find the next ‘‘big
thing’’Vthe diet regimen that trumps all other regimens
and leads to enhanced performance. Because the gen-
eral misunderstanding about limiting carbohydrate in-
take for health reasons in the physically inactive population
has become more prevalent, some have lost sight of the
fact that athletes have an unequivocal need to consume
high-carbohydrate foods to enhance muscle glycogen
storage and deliver carbohydrate to muscle during stren-
uous exercise.1Y3
In an environment filled with athletes willing to experi-
ment with their nutrient intake to enhance performance
and health advocates admonishing people to include fewer
Nutrition and Physical Activity
Volume 53, Number 1, January/February 2018
Nutrition Today\
35
Mitch Kanter, PhD, is the chief science officer with FoodMinds, a
division of Padilla, in Chicago IL. He leads nutrition research and sci-
entific projects and programming for FoodMinds clients. He also leads the
FoodMinds Global Expert BenchTM, a group of nutrition scientists and
technical communications experts from around the world who provide
strategic counsel to FoodMinds clients on various international projects.
During his 25-plus years in the food industry, he has served in various
technical leadership roles for a number of multinational companies.
The author serves as a paid consultant to the Alliance for Potato Research &
Education (APRE) through his work at FoodMinds.
Correspondence: Mitch Kanter, PhD, FoodMinds, a division of Padilla,
1101 West River Pkwy Suite 400, Minneapolis, MN 55415 (mkanter@
foodminds.com).
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives License 4.0
(CCBY-NC-ND), where it is permissible to download and share the
work provided it is properly cited. The work cannot be changed in any
way or used commercially without permission from the journal.
Copyright * 2018 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.
DOI: 10.1097/NT.0000000000000238
Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.
 carbohydrate foods in their diets, a desire to more fully
understand the tenets of high-performance eating prompted
APRE, the nonprofit research overseer for one of the lead-
ing natural carbohydrate sources, to seek answers from
experts. APRE convened a panel of sports nutrition re-
searchers and practitioners to discuss recent science
on nutritional needs for optimal physical performance
and provide their collective perspectives on how die-
tary recommendations for athletes have changed over
the years.
The panel consisted of Dr Lawrence Spriet from the Uni-
versity of Guelph, one of the more prolific basic and
applied researchers on the role of diet in exercise per-
formance over the past quarter century; Dr Janet Rankin
from Virginia Tech, a leader in the application of sports
nutrition research and principles; Dr Katherine Beals, an
endurance athlete and certified specialist in sports die-
tetics (CSSD) from the University of Utah who has advised
the potato industry in recent years on the role of potatoes
in physical performance; and Dr Bob Murray, former
Gatorade Sports Science Institute director and a respected
researcher and lecturer in the sports nutrition arena for
over 30 years.
The panel met for one day and reviewed the latest nu-
trition research regarding the dietary needs of serious
athletes, trained-but-not-elite performers, and weekend
warriors alike. They discussed issues such as the po-
tential impact of high-quality, nutrient-dense carbohy-
drates versus low-quality, calorie-dense simple sugars on
performance and the evolving role ofprotein in an athlete’s
diet. The wisdom of low-carbohydrate eating regimens for
athletes was broached, as was the balance between nat-
ural, whole food sources and nutritional supplements on
physical performance. The overall conclusion of the day’s
discussion was that, although athletes in general are more
aware of their diets than ever and that expertise in the form
of sports registered dietitians and other sports nutrition
professionals is more available to athletes than ever be-
fore, many physically active people (particularly those
who restrict energy intake or eliminate certain food
groups from their diets) still fall short in meeting their
nutrition requirements and may benefit from macronutri-
ent and micronutrient supplementation. The panel ac-
knowledged that different types of athletes, from the
competitive long-distance cyclist to the hockey player
who performs at a high intensity for repeated short periods
of time to the recreational 10-K runner, have distinct and
often unique nutritional needs for performance and re-
covery.2,4 However, a few constants exist, particularly the
need for carbohydrates, protein, and fluids in varying
combinations (depending on the sport and the intensity
of the training regimen), ideally from natural, whole-food
sources, to fuel the training, recovery, and adaptation re-
quirements of the physically active individual.
FOR HIGH-INTENSITY PERFORMANCE,
CARBOHYDRATES ARE STILL KING
Despite reams of new data that have been generated over
the years and an ever-evolving understanding about how
athletes metabolize foodstuffs, the panelists generally agreed
that the primary tenets of sport nutrition have not changed
much over the past 25 years. Although they acknowledged
that recent research suggests an athlete’s need for protein
and some fats may be a little higher than believed by
previous generations,5 one factor that remains as true
today as it did decades ago is the athlete’s indispensable
need for carbohydrate as a key component of the diet.
Although dietary protein and fat can provide necessary
energy to perform physical activity, carbohydrate is the
substrate most efficiently metabolized by the body and the
only macronutrient that can be broken down rapidly
enough to provide energy during periods of high-intensity
exercise when fast-twitch muscle fibers are primarily re-
lied upon.1,3,4,6
Furthermore, the experts pointed to data indicating that
many athletes fail to consume enough carbohydrate to
fully replenish muscle glycogen stores,7 a factor that can
lead to performance decrements, particularly when stren-
uous exercise is performed on a regular basis.8 As an ex-
ample, one of the panelists cited the daily carbohydrate
needs of the serious competitor, someone who may train for
four hours a day or more, as potentially exceeding 12 g/kg
body weight, which translates to a whopping 3,800 car-
bohydrate calories for a 175-lb athlete.4 According to ex-
perts, without consuming a diet rich in carbohydrate
sources such as potatoes, rice, and pasta (5Y7 g/kg per
day for a moderate exerciser, up to 8Y12 g/kg per day for
a very heavy exerciser), the athlete stands little chance of
satisfying such high carbohydrate demands.
SLOWLY ABSORBED VERSUS RAPIDLY
ABSORBED CARBOHYDRATES
Panelists pointed out that, before and during exercise, the
rapidity with which a carbohydrate source enters the
bloodstream could impact exercise intensity and duration.
High-carbohydrate foods and beverages that tend to be
rapidly absorbed are best for providing the muscles with
the energy that they need during exercise to maintain
performance. Over the years, some sports nutritionists
have theorized that lower glycemic index (GI) carbohy-
drates, those that appear in the bloodstream more slowly
after ingestion and promote a blunted rise in the blood
glucose response, may be preferable before exercise be-
cause they tend to ‘‘meter’’ the appearance of glucose in
the blood. However, this construct is not supported by
robust data; the experts pointed to recent research indi-
cating no difference between pre-event consumption of a
low GI meal (lentils, GI = 26) or a moderate GI meal
36
Nutrition Today\
Volume 53, Number 1, January/February 2018
Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.
 (mashed potatoes, bread, egg whites) on the ability to
maintain or improve high-intensity running performance9
(as a side note, the utility of GI as a predictor of foods
appropriate for exercise performance and recovery, or
general healthfor that matter,has been questioned bymany
sports nutritionists in light of recent data citing poor
intrasubject and intersubject variability of the measure).10
In the hours immediately post-exercise, research indicates
that nutritious, carbohydrate-rich foods that can be quickly
digested, absorbed, and transported in the blood can most
readily alter the hormonal milieu to speed glycogen
resynthesis, a key factor when performing strenuous exer-
ciseonconsecutivedaysor,sometimes,duringthesameday.3
When rapid glycogen resynthesis is required, the experts
indicated that consuming approximately 0.5 to 0.6 g/kg of
rapidly absorbed carbohydrate (approximately 150 kcal for
a 160-lb athlete; roughly the equivalent of one medium po-
tato, one cup of pasta or white rice) every 30 minutes for two
to four hours (or until the next full meal) can sustain a high
rate of glycogen synthesis.4 For long-term glycogen re-
covery (e.g., 24 hours or more), panelists pointed to a
recent review by Burke et al11 that suggested, among other
things, that long-term resynthesis is not affected so much
by carbohydrate type but more so by the total amount of
carbohydrate ingested.
LOW-CARBOHYDRATE DIETS AMONG
ATHLETES: TREND OR FAD?
With ample available data supporting the need for carbo-
hydrate in the athlete’s diet, the experts expressed concern
about the increasing popularity of low-carbohydrate diets
among active individuals.12 Diet and exercise regimens
such as the ‘‘training-low’’ concept (a type of periodized
nutrition, as well as a strategic meal/exercise approach
designed to promote training adaptations), which has
existed for more than a decade, represent examples of
low-carbohydrate eating for performance that the panel
viewed as potentially more faddish than practical. The
training-low concept generally requires an athlete to
conduct heavy exercise training bouts after skipping a
meal or meals to reduce carbohydrate availability and train
the muscles to more readily use fat as substrate, thereby
conserving limited glycogen stores and promoting greater
responses in the molecular signals that lead to adapta-
tion.4,13,14 Proponents of the ‘‘train-low’’ concept em-
phasize that athletes must compete with high glycogen
stores, and many recognize that ‘‘train-low’’ may impair
the ability to use carbohydrate during competition, in-
crease the risk of illness, reduce training intensity, and
increase protein oxidation during exercise.13,14 The ex-
perts agreed that more quality research is needed to clarify
the utility of ‘‘train-low’’ regimens for optimal health, per-
formance, and recovery from heavy exercise. Furthermore,
all the experts indicated that ‘‘train-low’’ regimens will
inevitably reduce training intensity and potentially com-
promise performance improvements.
Based on available data, panelists also questioned the
value of low-carbohydrate, ketone-promoting diets as a
means of improving performance. Although previous
research has suggested that physically active people can
adapt to the use of ketone bodies as fuel when subsisting
on a low to moderate carbohydrate diet and may become
more adept at burning fat and conserving carbohydrate at
low exercise intensities,15 the experts viewed the long-
term use of such eating regimens as potentially harmful to
the performance of the athlete. Some of the experts cited
impaired cognitive performance and mood, perceptions
of fatigue,16 and an inability to focus on the task at hand
as rationale for avoiding low-carbohydrate diet regimens.
Others mentioned data suggesting a greater suscepti-
bility to skeletal muscle damage while training or com-
peting with low-carbohydrate stores.17 One panelist
cited a recent study of world-class race walkers who con-
sumed a low-carbohydrate, high-fat diet for three weeks
and experienced a loss of exercise economy, resulting in
a decrement in performance gains.12 The researchers
also cited data indicating that, as athletes become de-
hydrated during exercise, their reliance on carbohydrate
for energy actually increases, suggesting an additional
benefit of adequate carbohydrate stores.18,19 All the
panelists were adamant that low-carbohydrate stores make
it difficult to sustain the intensity levels at which most
competitive and serious recreational athletes train and
compete.
The Skinny on Protein
The experts acknowledged that our understanding of
dietary protein for physical activity has evolved consid-
erably over the past decade and that science consistently
demonstrates that protein is needed in greater-than-
recommended daily allowance (0.8 g/kg per day) levels
to enhance performance, recovery, and skeletal muscle
accretion.5 There was much discussion on the recent ad-
vent of techniques that have allowed researchers to
identify and assess the effects of individual amino acids
on muscle protein synthesis as having a great impact on
our understanding of the protein needs of athletes. For
example, leucine, an amino acid particularly high in
whey and eggs, was cited as a key nutrient in skeletal
muscle-signaling reactions that promote muscle growth, a
fact that was largely unknown to exercise scientists not
long ago.20
Nevertheless, despite the acknowledgement that ath-
letes and resistance-trained athletes, in particular, can
benefit by increasing protein intake, the experts agreed that
some athletes are already consuming enough protein,
roughly 1.2 to 2 g/kg per day.2 Furthermore, the recent
Volume 53, Number 1, January/February 2018
Nutrition Today\
37
Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.
 emphasis on protein for physical performance may have
clouded issues regarding the athlete’s diet and, in some
instances, inadvertently promoted less-than-optimal die-
tary practices. Athletes who overconsume protein at levels
far above those recommended in the literature may cut
carbohydrate intake drastically and (depending on protein
sources) may consume more fat than they need. These
practices can lead to suboptimal skeletal muscle glycogen
levels, which, as pointed out earlier, can limit the amount
of high-intensity exercise an athlete can engage in before
he/she fatigues or affect how well he/she can perform
during subsequent exercise bouts.
Some discussion centered on the purported satiety-
promoting potential of various proteins,21,22 a factor
that may not be beneficial for serious competitors for
whom food is fuel. For athletes with very high caloric
needs, overconsumption of highly satiating foods could
possibly lead to underconsumption of calories, resulting
in possible weight loss or impaired performance. For
the casually active individual, the notion of satiety lead-
ing to a decrease in calorie consumption may be appeal-
ing; for the seriously active individual, it may well be
counterproductive.
Why Potatoes?
At the conclusion of the meeting, the experts discussed
the merits of a balanced diet and the avoidance of fo-
cusing on one or two food groups as keys to enhancing
physical performance and health. Although none of the
experts argued with the convenience and portability
afforded by many of the bars and gels on the market and
their practicality during competition, they all believed that
diets high in natural, whole foods are the best choice for
athletes. Citing potatoes as an example of a high-
carbohydrate food with other nutritional benefits, panel-
ists discussed its high levels of potassium, various B vita-
mins, and vitamin C. Some mentioned the fiber content in a
potato and indicated that the protein quality of a potato is
very high, carrying a biological value between 90 and 100,
greater than most other nonanimal, and some animal, pro-
tein sources.23 Lastly, one panelist cited various phyto-
nutrients and antioxidants that have been identified in
potatoes24Y26 and indicated that there may be other yet-to-
be-discovered phytonutrients in potatoes and in other fruit,
vegetable, and grain sources, for that matter, further driving
the point that whole, natural foods should comprise the
bulk of the athlete’s diet.
Future Research Directions
Although studies dating back more than 50 years have
demonstrated the benefits of carbohydrate intake for
improving physical performance, the experts closed
the session by discussing future research needs regard-
ing the impact of high-quality carbohydrate sources on
performance and recovery from strenuous exercise, as
well as on general health (e.g., the interaction of chronic
high-quality carbohydrate diets and exercise on indices of
diabetes, cardiovascular disease, obesity, etc).
The panelists cited the following as possible research
questions worth considering:
& Impact of potato (which may contain as much as 7 g of pro-
tein) versus a lower-protein carbohydrate source on recov-
ery from strenuous exercise in elite athletes, particularly on the
time course of glycogen replenishment between heavy exercise
bouts
& Impact of rapidly absorbed carbohydrates such as potatoes
post-exercise on performance of a subsequent exercise bout after
a modest recovery period
& Impact of potatoes as a good source of carbohydrate and an-
tioxidants such as vitamin C on exercise-induced skeletal muscle
damage and repair
& Impact of potato carbohydrate consumption on performance
parameters in various athletic populations across various age
ranges
& Comparison of the muscle protein synthetic capacity of potato
proteinversusotherproteinsourcesusedprevalentlypost-exercise,
such as soy or dairy protein
& Chronic consumption of high nutrient-dense carbohydrate
sources such as potatoes versus low-nutrient dense sources such
as sugar on physical performance parameters, as well as on hy-
perlipidemias, inflammation, and other disease-related biomarkers
in physically active people
& Impact of potatoes and other high-potassium food sources on
blood pressure in mildly hypertensive athletes
IN CONCLUSION
Although our understanding of the nutritional needs of
athletes has increased dramatically in recent years and
the research tools used to measure the ways we assim-
ilate and metabolize foodstuffs have become more so-
phisticated, the primary tenets of sports nutrition have
not changed much over the past 25 years. Although it is
generally acknowledged that an athlete’s need for protein
may be a bit higher than previously believed and that
issues regarding the timing and make-up of meals before,
during, and after exercise can affect performance and re-
covery, one factor that remains as true today as it did decades
ago is the athlete’s indispensable need for carbohydrate
as a key component of the diet.1Y4 Although protein and
dietary fat can provide necessary energy to perform physical
activity, carbohydrate is the only macronutrient that can be
broken down rapidly enough to provide energy during
periods of high-intensity exercise. Although additional
research aimed at fine-tuning the dietary needs of the
physically active individual still needs to be conducted, all
the experts who participated in the panel discussion en-
dorsed the concept of consuming a majority of daily cal-
ories in the form of high-quality, high-carbohydrate whole
food sources, such as potatoes, as a means of improving
physical performance and recovery from exercise.
38
Nutrition Today\
Volume 53, Number 1, January/February 2018
Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.
 Although additional research aimed
at fine-tuning the dietary needs of the
physically active individual still needs
to be conducted, all the experts who
participated in the panel discussion
endorsed the concept of consuming a
majority of daily calories in the form
of high-quality, high-carbohydrate
whole-food sources such as potatoes as
a means of improving physical perfor-
mance and recovery from exercise.
After spending a day discussing the nutritional needs of
the physically active person with a group of sports nutri-
tion experts, one is left with the feeling that the more
things change, the more they truly remain the same. The
advice doled out by the experts in 2017 would not likely
have been much different had they gotten together in
1987. To enhance physical performance, high-quality,
nutrient-dense carbohydrate sources are still critical.
REFERENCES
1. Helge JW. A high carbohydrate diet remains the evidence based
choice for elite athletes to optimise performance. J Physiol. 2017;
595(9):2775.
2. International Olympic Committee Consensus statement on sports
nutrition 2010. J Sports Sci. 2010;29(suppl 1):S3YS4.
3. HawleyJA,LeckeyJJ.Carbohydrate dependence during prolonged,
intense endurance exercise. Sports Med. 2015;45(suppl 1):
S5YS12.
4. Thomas DT, Erdman KA, Burke LM. American College of
Sports Nutrition joint position statement. Nutrition and athletic
performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2016;48(3):543Y568.
5. Journal style uses abbreviations if mentioned 3 or more times
within the article. RDA was mentioned only once and has been
changed to recommended daily allowance. Please confirm if
correct.Phillips SM, Van Loon LJ. Dietary protein for athletes:
from requirements to optimum adaptation. J Sports Sci. 2011;
29(suppl 1):S29YS38.
6. Jeukendrup AE. Periodized nutrition for athletes. Sports Med.
2017;47(suppl 1):51Y63.
7. Cox RC, Snow RJ, Burke LM. Race-day carbohydrate intakes of
elite triathletes contesting Olympic-distance triathlon events.
Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 2010;20:299Y306.
8. Havemann L, West SJ, Goedecke JH, et al. Fat adaptation
followed by carbohydrate loading compromises high-intensity
sprint performance. J Appl Physiol. 2006;100:194Y202.
9. Little JP, Chilibeck PD, Ciona D, et al. Effect of low- and high-
glycemic-index meals on metabolism and performance during
high-intensity, intermittent exercise. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc
Metab. 2010;20(6):447Y456.
10. Matthan NR, Ausman LM, Meng H, Tighiouart H, Lichtenstein
AH. Estimating the reliability of glycemic index values and
potential sources of methodological and biological variability.
Am J Clin Nutr. 2016;104(4):1004Y1013.
11. Burke LM, Van Loon LJC, Hawley JA. Post-exercise muscle
glycogen resynthesis in humans. J Appl Physiol. 2016.
12. Burke LM, Ross ML, Garvican-Lewis LA, et al. Low carbohy-
drate, high fat diet impairs exercise economy and negates the
performance benefit from intensified training in elite race
walkers. J Physiol. 2017;595(9):2785Y2807.
13. Stellingwerff T, Spriet LL, Watt MJ, et al. Decreased PDH
activation and glycogenolysis during exercise following fat
adaptation with carbohydrate restoration. Am J Physiol. 2006;
290:E380YE388.
14. Bartlett JD, Hawley JA, Morton JP. Carbohydrate availability
and exercise training adaptations: too much of a good thing? Eur J
Sport Sci. 2014:1Y10.
15. Volek JS, Noakes T, Piney SD. Rethinking fat as a fuel for
endurance exercise. Eur J Sports Sci. 2015;15(1):13Y20.
16. Achten J, Halson SL, Moseley L, et al. Higher dietary car-
bohydrate content during intensified running training results in
better maintenance of performance and mood state. J Appl
Physiol. 2004;96(4):1331Y1340.
17. Gavin JP, Myers SD, Willems ME. Neuromuscular responses to
mild-muscle damaging eccentric exercise in a low glycogen
state. J Electromyogr Kinesiol. 2015;25(1):53Y60.
18. Logan-Sprenger HM, Heigenhauser GJ, Killian KJ, et al. Effects
of dehydration during cycling on skeletal muscle metabolism
in females. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012;44:1949Y1957.
19. Logan-Sprenger HM, Heigenhauser GJ, Jones G, Spriet LL. The
effect of dehydration on muscle metabolism and time trial
performance during prolonged cycling in males. Physiol Rep.
2015;3(8):e12483.
20. Rowlands DS, Nelson AR, Raymond F, et al. Protein-leucine
ingestion activates a regenerative inflammo-myogenic
transcriptome in skeletal muscle following intense endurance
exercise. Physiol Genomics. 2016;48(1):21Y32.
21. Ortinau LC, Hoertel HA, Douglas SM, Leidy HJ. Effects of high-
protein vs high-fat snacks on appetite control, satiety, and eating
initiation in healthy women. Nutr J. 2014;13:97.
22. Leidy HJ, Hoertel HA, Douglas SM, Higgins KA, Shafer RS. A
high-protein breakfast prevents body fat gain, though reduction
in daily intake and hunger, in ‘‘breakfast skipping’’ adolescents.
Obesity. 2015;23(9):1761Y1764.
23. McGill CR, Kurilich AC, Davignon J. The role of potatoes and
potato components in cardiometabolic health: a review. Ann
Med. 2013;45(7):467Y473.
24. Liu RH. Health-promoting components of fruits and vegetables
in the diet. Adv Nutr. 2013;4(3):384SY392S.
25. Brown CR, Culley D, Yang C-P, Durst R, Wrolstad R. Variation
of anthocyanin and carotenoid contents and associated antiox-
idant values in potato breeding lines. J Amer Soc Hort Sci. 2005;
130:174Y180.
26. Kawabata K, Mukai R, Ishisaka A. Quercetin and related
polyphenols: new insights and implications for their bioactivity
and bioavailability. Food Funct. 2015;6(5):1399Y1417.
Volume 53, Number 1, January/February 2018
Nutrition Today\
39
Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.
