 Progressions
Author reflections on developments since the publication of “The Fusiform Face Area: A Module in Human Extrastriate
Cortex Specialized for Face Perception,” by Nancy Kanwisher, Josh McDermott and Marvin M. Chun. (1997) J Neurosci
11:4302–4311.
The Quest for the FFA and Where It Led
XNancy Kanwisher
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
This article tells the story behind our first paper on the fusiform face area (FFA): how we chose the question, developed the methods, and
followedthedatatofindtheFFAandsubsequentlymanyotherfunctionallyspecializedcorticalregions.Thepaper’simpacthadlesstodo
with the particular findings in the paper itself and more to do with the method that it promoted and the picture of the human mind and
brain that it led to. The use of a functional localizer to define a candidate region in each subject individually enabled us not just to make
picturesofbrainactivation,butalsotoaskprincipled,hypothesis-drivenquestionsaboutathinginnature.Thismethodenabledstronger
and more extensive tests of the function of each cortical region than had been possible before in humans and, as a result, has produced a
largebodyofevidencethatthehumancortexcontainsnumerousregionsthatarespecificallyengagedinparticularmentalprocesses.The
growing inventory of cortical regions with distinctive and often very specific functions can be seen as an initial sketch of the basic
components of the human mind. This sketch also serves as a roadmap into the vast and exciting new landscape of questions about the
computations, structural connections, time course, development, plasticity, and evolution of each of these regions, as well as the hardest
question of all: how do these regions work together to produce human intelligence?
Introduction
In November of 1991, some of the first fMRI images of neural
activity in human visual cortex were published on the cover of
Science (Belliveau et al., 1991). For me, a psychologist studying
visual perception, these images changed everything. Compared
with the previous brain-imaging method of positron emission
tomography (PET), fMRI images were sharp and crisp, they re-
quired no ionizing radiation to the participant, and they could be
made every few seconds. Now, scientists could actually watch
activity in the normal human brain change over time as it sees,
thinks, and remembers. I moved to Boston to try to finagle my
way onto (and into) the fMRI scanners at Massachusetts General
Hospital (MGH) in Charlestown, then the epicenter of the bud-
ding new field.
In the spring of 1995, I finally got my wish: a regular slot on the
fMRI scanner at MGH. It was, quite literally, the opportunity of a
lifetime. I recruited the two smartest and most committed people
I knew to join my team: then-undergraduate Josh McDermott
and then-postdoc Marvin Chun. We started off looking for brain
regions engaged in visual shape perception. But, after a few
months without much success, I became worried. Scan time was
expensive, I did not have a grant, and I was at risk of losing my
scanner access if my team did not score a big result fast. I figured
there was one response that almost had to be lurking somewhere
in visual cortex. Extensive evidence from behavior, neurophysi-
ology, and studies of patients with brain damage had already
suggested that special brain machinery existed for the perception
of faces somewhere in the back of the right hemisphere (Kan-
wisher and Yovel, 2009). Further, brain-imaging work from both
PET and fMRI had already found strong activations when people
looked at faces (Sergent et al., 1992; Haxby et al., 1994; Puce et al.,
1996). However, this condition had been compared only to very
different control conditions such as viewing letter strings or re-
porting the locations of visual blobs. The question of whether that
region was specifically involved in the perception of faces, rather
than more generally engaged in visual shape perception, re-
mained unanswered. I had never worked on face perception be-
cause I considered it to be a special case, less important than the
general case of object perception. But I needed to stop messing
around and discover something, so I cultivated an interest in
faces. To paraphrase Stephen Stills, if you can’t answer the ques-
tion you love, love the question you can.
An initial scan with me as the subject found a promising blob
on the bottom of my right hemisphere. Most thrillingly, you
could see in the raw time course of the fMRI response of individ-
ual voxels that the signal was higher during the periods when I
was looking at faces than the periods when I was looking at ob-
jects. Still, a single result like that could have been a fluke. So
Received Oct. 21, 2016; revised Dec. 26, 2016; accepted Dec. 27, 2016.
This work was supported by NIH (Grant DP1HD091947) and the National Science Foundation Science and Tech-
nology Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines (Grant CCF-1231216 to N.K.). This work has benefited greatly by
comments from Caroline Robertson, Michael Cohen, Danny Dilks, Evelina Fedoreko, Jay Keyser, Ken Nakayama,
Molly Potter, and John Rubin.
The author declares no competing financial interests.
Correspondence should be addressed to Nancy Kanwisher, Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
46-4113, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139. E-mail: ngk@mit.edu.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1706-16.2016
Copyright © 2017 the authors
0270-6474/17/371056-06$15.00/0
1056 • The Journal of Neuroscience, February 1, 2017 • 37(5):1056–1061
 Marvin and Josh scanned me again. And again. And again. To our
delight, the trusty little blob showed up in exactly the same place
every time.
Today, our field faces a replication crisis, with widespread
concerns that a substantial proportion of our published findings
might be spurious (Szucs and Ioannidis, 2016). I think this prob-
lem will be solved not with fancier math, but simply by develop-
ing a stronger tradition of replicating our own results before
publishing them (especially when those results are surprising).
Replicating results is not glamorous, and falls far short of
understanding. But replicating your results is its own special kind
of rush. The ability to replicate your phenomenon empowers you
to embark on the grander quest of trying to understand it. Rep-
lication reveals your own control over the little speck of the uni-
verse that you are trying to understand. You are making it come
and go at will. You are playing peek-a-boo with nature.
Of course, it is important not just to replicate a phenomenon
in the very narrow condition in which you originally found it, but
also to generalize it—across people, stimuli, tasks, and methods.
When we scanned other people, we found a rather complex pat-
tern, with most subjects showing several different blobs that re-
sponded more to faces than objects. What, if anything, was shared
across subjects? We did not know about the standard method for
answering this question, which was a group analysis. That was
lucky: if we had performed a group analysis on those data, we
probably would not have found the fusiform face area (FFA)
because its location varies too much from one individual to the
next.
Instead, we invented our own low-tech version of a group
analysis: we taped a paper printout of each subject’s activation
map on the wall along the long hall outside my laboratory and we
walked back and forth staring at the activation maps, trying to
glean the common pattern shared across subjects. It became clear
that a few blobs appeared in similar vicinities across subjects, but
the most consistent blob was the one on the bottom of the right
hemisphere, just above the cerebellum, about an inch in from the
skull. We decided to focus on that one first.
Our next problem was that it was not obvious what statistics to
run. The activation maps showed that some voxels responded
significantly more to faces than objects with impressive p levels,
but these numbers were not corrected for the tens of thousands of
statistical tests conducted (one per voxel). On the other hand, a
strict Bonferroni correction was clearly too conservative because
the voxels were not independent of each other. Software existed
that would supposedly do a more appropriate correction, but I
didn’t understand it so I didn’t want to use it.
Instead, I decided to do something very simple that I did un-
derstand: I split the data in half, using the even runs to find the
apparently face-selective blob in each subject and then extracting
from the odd runs the average response across the voxels in that
blob from the face and object conditions. Now I could run simple
t tests or ANOVAs across subjects on the resulting response mag-
nitudes for faces and objects. No correction for multiple statisti-
cal comparisons was necessary because I was running a single
statistical test on a single “functional region of interest” or
“fROI.” We could also apply the same method to answer new
questions: We could use one set of data (from a “localizer” scan
with faces and objects) to find the region in each subject and
another set of data to measure the response of this region in new
conditions of interest. We could do cognitive psychology on a
little patch of the brain.
We were not the first to use the fROI method; Roger Tootell
and others had been doing something similar, mapping V1
(Sereno et al., 1995) and the visual motion area MT (Tootell et al.,
1995) and then separately measuring fMRI responses in those
regions in independent data. And, in some sense, neurophysiolo-
gists had been using this method for decades: you would obvi-
ously first figure out which area your electrode was in before
characterizing the single-unit responses measured in that loca-
tion. It was just common sense.
I still do not understand the resistance to the use of fROIs
(Friston et al., 2006), which offer myriad advantages. fROIs en-
able you to not just make pictures of brain activation, but also to
ask principled, hypothesis-driven questions about a thing in na-
ture. In this way, fROIs make possible a cumulative research
enterprise in which findings across laboratories can build upon
each other because they are studying the same thing (Fedorenko
and Kanwisher, 2009) and that thing has systematic, replicable
properties, much as one expects for anatomical ROIs such as the
amygdala and hippocampus. Standardized brain coordinate sys-
tems (e.g., MNI or Talairach coordinates) do not accomplish this
goal effectively because functional regions such as the FFA are not
well aligned across subjects in standard coordinates. However, a
functional localizer allows you to pick out the FFA in each person
individually and turn this region into an object of study (includ-
ing the study of its representations, connectivity, and develop-
ment). Further, fROIs demonstrate with every use that at least
some findings in fMRI are highly replicable across subjects and
laboratories. Finally, fROIs enable researchers to avoid three of
the most common errors in fMRI data analysis: double dipping
(Kriegeskorte et al., 2009), hidden degrees of freedom (Simmons
et al., 2011), and invalid methods for correcting p levels for mul-
tiple spatial hypotheses (Eklund et al., 2016).
We could now proceed with the standard scientific method,
trying to refute our hypothesis that this region was involved se-
lectively in the perception of faces. Might the region respond, not
just to faces, but to any human body part? Or to anything that
subjects attend to? Or to any stimulus with the same luminance or
contour length or curvature? In subsequent experiments, we lo-
calized the candidate face region in each subject individually,
measured the magnitude of response in that region to new
stimuli testing each of these alternative hypotheses, and ruled
out each one.
We quickly wrote a short paper on the work, which was just as
quickly rejected from both Science and Nature. We then pub-
lished the work in the Journal of Neuroscience, which probably
increased its impact because we had the room to explain the
method in more detail. We weren’t the only ones doing brain-
imaging experiments on faces; the same year, Greg McCarthy and
colleagues published a study similar to ours (McCarthy et al.,
1997), also finding a selective response to faces in the fusiform
gyrus. Perhaps the biggest contribution of our paper was its dem-
onstration of a set of methods that enabled you to identify a
candidate region, formulate a hypothesis about it, and then test
that hypothesis rigorously with multiple repeated tests applied to
that same region of the brain.
What was most exciting to me about our work was that it
seemed to address directly a major and long-standing theoretical
question in cognitive psychology: the degree to which mental
architecture is “domain specific,” that is, specialized for particu-
lar kinds of information such as faces or places or language. This
question had been debated heatedly in our field for nearly 200
years (Finger, 2001) and now here was a little piece of the brain
that seemed to do just one thing: perceive faces. This finding fit
the broader idea that the mind is not a general purpose device,
but is instead composed of a set of distinct components, some
Kanwisher • The Quest for the FFA
J. Neurosci., February 1, 2017 • 37(5):1056–1061 • 1057
 of them highly specialized for solving a very specific problem
(Fodor, 1983).
Because the FFA work stepped straight into the middle of this
centuries-old debate about domain specificity in the brain, it
quickly drew fire from many directions. One argument was that
the FFA was not specialized for faces per se, but for the processing
of any visual stimulus for which an individual had gained sub-
stantial expertise (Gauthier et al., 2000). Although some studies
reported higher FFA responses to objects of expertise than con-
trol objects (Gauthier et al., 2000; Xu, 2005), consistent with this
hypothesis, these effects were small and many other studies failed
to replicate them (Grill-Spector et al., 2004; Op de Beeck et al.,
2006; Yue et al., 2006). Further, in all studies that have looked,
expertise effects are not restricted to the FFA, but extend to mul-
tiple other brain regions (Gauthier et al., 2000; Harel et al., 2010;
McGugin et al., 2012; Harel et al., 2014), as expected if these
effects simply reflect greater attentional engagement by objects of
expertise (Harel et al., 2010). Thus, there is no replicable evidence
for a special linkage between the FFA (or face selectivity in gen-
eral) and expertise.
A more serious challenge to the specificity of the FFA came
from Jim Haxby, who made the important point that we should
care not just about which kinds of stimuli most strongly drive a
region, but what information is represented in each region
(Haxby et al., 2001). These two things need not be the same, he
pointed out, because the pattern of response across voxels within
the FFA might be systematically different during viewing of, say,
cars versus chairs even if the mean response to the two categories
is the same. Indeed, Haxby and others have shown that, by this
measure (known as multiple voxel pattern analysis, or MVPA),
the FFA does in fact hold information about nonface objects. I
consider this the most important current challenge to the speci-
ficity of the FFA for faces (and of the other regions discussed
below for their preferred categories or functions).
However, what we really want to understand is neither the
mean response of the region nor the information content of the
neural response, but the causal role of that neural response in
behavior. After all, even if this patch of brain were crafted by
evolution all and only for representing the difference between
one face and another, and even if this is all it was ever used for, it
might still produce a different pattern of response to cars versus
chairs. This ambiguity is a central problem with MVPA, which
shows only the information that we scientists can fish out of the
response of a given patch of brain, not the information that the
rest of the brain is reading out of that patch of brain (Williams et
al., 2007). The only way to determine the causal role of that brain
region in behavior is to intervene on it. So far, results from inter-
vention studies (including brain damage, transcranial magnetic
stimulation, and electrical stimulation) indicate that category-
selective regions of the brain are primarily or exclusively causally
engaged in representing their preferred stimulus categories
(Pitcher et al., 2009). However, new and more precise methods
for causal intervention on neural representations (Afraz et al.,
2015) are being developed that should provide stronger tests of
these ideas in the next few years.
The localize-and-test fROI method that we developed in the
FFA paper proved useful for identifying and characterizing a
number of other functionally specific regions of cortex. Follow-
ing up on the mysterious “negative activation” from the FFA
paper, a higher response to objects than faces, Russell Epstein and
I found the parahippocampal place area (PPA), which responds
selectively to images of places (Epstein and Kanwisher, 1998). A
few years later, Paul Downing and I found the extrastriate body
area (EBA), which responds selectively to bodies (Downing et al.,
2001). However, in a systematic test that Paul ran on 20 different
kinds of object categories, including tools, flowers, spiders, and
snakes, we did not find other highly specialized regions.
Evidently, we do not have specialized brain regions for every
category of object that we can perceive. Why do some categories
get their own private patch of real estate in the brain while others
do not? Is it just visual categories that have longstanding evolu-
tionary significance that get their own region? Evidently not. A
tiny region near the face area, but in the left hemisphere, responds
selectively to visually presented letter strings, but only if you
know how to read (Saygin et al., 2016) and only for an orthogra-
phy you know (Baker et al., 2007). The existence of this “visual
word form area” shows that at least one region of the cortex has a
strong selectivity that cannot be innate (Polk and Farah, 1998),
but is instead based on the experience of that individual. Whether
all cortical selectivities develop through experience in this way
or whether some are innate remains a fundamental and unan-
swered question.
Surprisingly basic questions remain unanswered about the
information represented in each region, the computations it con-
ducts, and the connectivity between that region and the rest of the
brain. Methods exist that are capable of at least approaching some
of these questions in humans, but each has substantial limita-
tions. fMRI adaptation has taught us much about what is repre-
sented in each region of the brain, but the mechanisms behind
adaptation, and thus the interpretation of results of adaptation
studies, are open to multiple interpretations. Although widely
used and undeniably elegant, MVPA often produces very low
decoding accuracies (e.g., 55% correct where chance is 50%).
Efforts in my laboratory have shown zero ability to decode iden-
tity, race, or gender from the FFA, even with very high-resolution
scans (see also Jeong and Xu, 2016), although some other studies
have managed such decoding, albeit with relatively low accuracy
(Anzellotti, Fairhall, and Caramazza, 2014; Axelrod and Yovel,
2015; Guntupalli et al., 2016). We know that the information is in
there but, perhaps not surprisingly, we often can’t see it with a
method that averages responses across hundreds of thousands of
neurons in each voxel (Dubois et al., 2015). Given the weaknesses
in the methods available for investigations in humans, I began to
despair that fundamental questions about face-selective patches
in the brain might just never be answered.
But help was on the way. In 2003, Doris Tsao and Winrich
Freiwald discovered face-selective patches of cortex in macaque
monkeys using fMRI methods much like those we had used in
humans. Now, precise questions about the computations of face-
selective patches could finally be answered. Indeed, a few years
later, they published an even more exciting result: by directing
electrodes into the face patches in monkeys (identified with
fMRI), they found that the vast majority of individual neurons in
the macaque face patches responded extremely selectively to
faces. This result lent powerful support to the earlier work in
humans, showing that the selectivity was even stronger than sug-
gested by fMRI, but even more importantly, it enabled Tsao and
Freiwald to look directly at the actual neural code for faces, which
we can only “see” in drastically blurred form with fMRI. Over the
next few years, Tsao and Freiwald and their colleagues swiftly
answered many of the fundamental questions that the work on
humans had been unable to answer. They showed the progression
in face representations across hierarchically organized face
patches (Freiwald and Tsao, 2010), the time course of response in
each patch, and the precise connectivity of the face system, re-
vealed by tracer injection studies (Grimaldi et al., 2016) and by
1058 • J. Neurosci., February 1, 2017 • 37(5):1056–1061
Kanwisher • The Quest for the FFA
 scanning monkeys with fMRI while electrically stimulating one
region at a time (Moeller et al., 2008). This work has produced
one of the best-understood cortical systems in mammals.
Thrilling as these discoveries about the macaque face system
have been, some important questions just cannot be answered
in animals. It is a good bet that face processing works similarly in
macaques and humans, but what about quintessentially human
cognitive functions like music, language, and understanding
other people’s thoughts? Do we have specialized brain regions
even for these? The localize-and-test method developed in the
original FFA paper has proven powerful here too. A region in the
rTPJ has been shown to respond selectively when you think about
another person’s thoughts (Saxe and Kanwisher, 2003). The clas-
sic brain regions for language, which are strongly activated when
you understand the meaning of a sentence, turn out to be inactive
when you perform arithmetic, hold information in working
memory, exert “cognitive control” or listen to music, showing
that, as far as the brain is concerned, language and thought are
not the same thing (Fedorenko and Varley, 2016). The discovery
that distinct populations of neurons respond selectively to speech
and music (Norman-Haignere et al., 2015) shows that music is
not simply a byproduct of speech, but rather its own separate
thing in the brain. These brain regions, specialized for core com-
ponents of human cognition, afford a new window into human
nature.
Lest it seem that every mental function has its own special
brain region or vice versa, that is decidedly not the case. Indeed,
just as remarkable as the extreme specificity of the regions de-
scribed above is the almost disreputable indiscriminateness of
another set of brain regions often referred
to as “multiple demand” regions, which
respond to almost any kind of task de-
mand (i.e., difficulty; Duncan and Owen,
2000; Fedorenko et al., 2013). Conversely,
many of the mental functions that we and
others have studied engage brain regions
that are not specialized for that function
alone. For example, our ability to infer in-
tuitively the basis of physical events ap-
pears to engage brain regions also known
for their role in planning actions (Fischer
et al., 2016). Ultimately, these cases in
which two apparently different mental
functions cohabit the same brain region
may prove most informative about the
representations and computations that
underlie these mental abilities.
Human neuroscience has come far in
the last quarter century. Figure 1 (top)
shows the approximate state of knowledge
of the functional architecture of the hu-
man brain in 1990, just before the inven-
tion of fMRI. It was not at all obvious then
that more functional structure existed,
waiting to be discovered. The picture on
the top could have remained the whole
story, with no other brain regions selec-
tively engaged in specific mental functions
at all. Instead, the glorious picture that has
emerged from fMRI research (bottom of
Fig. 1) shows a large number of function-
ally specific regions of the cortex, each of
which has been widely replicated in many
different laboratories. Functional imaging of the brain has begun
to reveal, in a very concrete way, the functional organization of
the human mind.
This general picture is not universally accepted in the field.
Some of the disagreement results, I think, from a simple misun-
derstanding of the concept of functional specificity, which is of-
ten conflated with other ideas. Brain specialization is often
assumed to imply innateness, yet, as the case of the visual word
form area shows, these concepts are independent. It is an open
(and fascinating) question which of the functionally specific re-
sponses in Figure 1 are determined genetically and which are
strictly derived from experience. Second, some have assumed
that the claim of functional specificity entails the concept that a
given brain region acts alone, but of course this is never the case.
Every brain region needs inputs (to provide information to pro-
cess) and outputs (to inform other brain regions of what it has
learned). Third, much confusion has been sowed by referring to a
set of similarly selective regions spaced far apart as a “distributed
cortical system.” But the multiplicity and spatial separation of
such regions in no way argues against the functional specificity of
each. Fourth, it has become fashionable to suggest that the selec-
tivity of these regions depends on the context or task. Alhough
the overall magnitude of responses of all of these regions can be
modulated by attention and task (O’Craven et al., 1997; Harel et
al., 2014), no published result that I know of suggests that any
context exists that can alter qualitatively the function of any of the
regions described here.
Perhaps the most fundamental critique of the view put forth
here would be to argue that functionally defined cortical regions
Figure1.
Schematicdepictionofthemarkedprogressthathasbeenmadeinourunderstandingofthefunctionalorganization
ofthehumanbrainsince1990.Blackcirclesindicatetheapproximatelocationsoflong-knownprimarysensoryandmotorregions.
Top,BeforetheinventionoffMRI,onlyafewregionsofthecortexwereclearlyimplicatedinspecificmentalfunctions(fromstudies
ofpatientswithfocalbraindamage)andthepreciseanatomicallocationoftheseregionswasnotknown.Bottom,Researchover
the last quarter century has identified dozens of cortical regions for which extensive and widely replicated results from fMRI
implicate that region in a specific mental function.
Kanwisher • The Quest for the FFA
J. Neurosci., February 1, 2017 • 37(5):1056–1061 • 1059
 are not distinct things (or “natural kinds”; Quine, 1969), but
rather arbitrary subdivisions of underlying continua (Op de
Beeck et al., 2008; Huth et al., 2012). Of course, a complex system
such as the brain can be subdivided along multiple dimensions
and levels of analysis (Marr, 1982) and there is no single privi-
leged organizing scheme. Instead, the nature and grain of the
most useful units in one’s theories depend on the phenomena
that one is attempting to explain. I would argue that, for an un-
derstanding of the human mind, functionally specific brain re-
gions do in fact carve nature at its joints, capturing structure
inherent in both cognitive and neural data. Many functionally
specific cortical regions represent not just peaks of broad func-
tional selectivities spanning centimeters of cortex, but relatively
sharp spatial discontinuities in functional responses along the
cortical surface. For example, the signature selectivity of the FFA
and PPA drops to zero within 4 mm outside of the standardly
defined border of these regions (Spiridon et al., 2006). Further,
growing evidence indicates that each functionally defined cortical
region has a distinctive pattern of connectivity to the rest of the
brain (Saygin et al., 2011; Osher et al., 2016) and some of these
regions may even correspond to cytoarchitectonic divisions of
the cortex (Weiner et al., 2014). Therefore, current evidence sup-
ports the idea that these regions are distinct in their spatial bor-
ders, functional responses, connectivity, causal role in behavior,
and perhaps also cytoarchitecture, thus already meeting many of
the classical criteria for cortical areas (Felleman and Van Essen,
1991). But the real test of a natural kind is whether it can explain
future data. It is an open and exciting empirical question whether
the functionally distinct regions of the cortex argued for here will
turn out to correspond to discontinuities in other kinds of
data such as trajectories of development, patterns of gene ex-
pression, and the computational architecture of cognition.
fMRI has opened up a vast landscape of fundamental new
questions. What is the time course of processing in each function-
ally specific cortical region and how do these regions interact with
each other online during processing? What is the causal role of
each region in cognition and behavior? How fixed are these re-
gions in adulthood and when and how can they reorganize after
brain damage? When (Deen et al., 2016) and how (Saygin et al.,
2016) does each region arise over development? Perhaps most
fundamentally, what is the evolutionary origin of the brain re-
gions that implement distinctively human functions such as lan-
guage, music, and understanding other minds?
For many of these questions, currently available methods in
humans are likely insufficient, although intracranial recording
(Allison et al., 1994; Fedorenko et al., 2016) and stimulation
(Parvizi et al., 2012) in neurosurgery patients are particularly
informative when available. We will have to keep scouting the
horizon, looking for opportunities to chip away at these big ques-
tions. For whatever measurements we make, it will behoove us to
first identify functionally where we are in the brain so that our
objects of study are actual things in nature. Indeed, the most
important legacy of the FFA may be the establishment of a cumu-
lative research program on the human mind and brain in which
the analyses that we conduct are principled and the questions that
we ask–and the answers that we receive–are meaningful.
References
Afraz A, Boyden ES, DiCarlo JJ (2015) Optogenetic and pharmacological
suppression of spatial clusters of face neurons reveal their causal role in
face gender discrimination. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112:6730–6735.
CrossRef Medline
Allison T, McCarthy G, Nobre A, Puce A, Belger A (1994) Human extrastri-
ate visual cortex and the perception of faces, words, numbers, and colors.
Cereb Cortex 4:544–554. CrossRef Medline
Anzellotti S, Fairhall SL, Caramazza A (2014) Decoding representations of
face identity that are tolerant to rotation. Cereb Cortex 24:1988–1995.
CrossRef Medline
Axelrod V, Yovel G (2015) Successful decoding of famous faces in the fusi-
form face area. PLoS One 10:e0117126. CrossRef Medline
Baker CI, Liu J, Wald LL, Kwong KK, Benner T, Kanwisher N (2007) Visual
word processing and experiential origins of functional selectivity in hu-
man extrastriate cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:9087–9092.
CrossRef Medline
Belliveau JW, Kennedy DN Jr, McKinstry RC, Buchbinder BR, Weisskoff RM,
Cohen MS, Vevea JM, Brady TJ, Rosen BR (1991) Functional mapping
of the human visual cortex by magnetic resonance imaging. Science 254:
716–719. CrossRef Medline
Deen B, Richardson H, Dilks DD, Takahashi A, Keil B, Wald LL, Kanwisher
N, Saxe R (2017) Organization of high-level visual cortex in human in-
fants. Nat Commun 8:13995. CrossRef Medline
Downing PE, Jiang Y, Shuman M, Kanwisher N (2001) A cortical area selec-
tive for visual processing of the human body. Science 293:2470–2473.
CrossRef Medline
Dubois J, de Berker AO, Tsao DY (2015) Single-unit recordings in the ma-
caque face patch system reveal limitations of fMRI. J Neurosci 35:2791–
2802. CrossRef Medline
Duncan J, Owen AM (2000) Common regions of the human frontal lobe
recruited by diverse cognitive demands. Trends Neurosci 23:475–483.
CrossRef Medline
Eklund A, Nichols TE, Knutsson H (2016) Cluster failure: why fMRI infer-
ences for spatial extent have inflated false-positive rates. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 113:7900–7905. CrossRef Medline
Epstein R, Kanwisher N (1998) A cortical representation of the local visual
environment. Nature 392:598–601. CrossRef Medline
Fedorenko E, Kanwisher N (2009) Neuroimaging of language: why hasn’t a
clearer picture emerged? Language and Linguistics Compass 3:839–865.
CrossRef
Fedorenko E, Varley R (2016) Language and thought are not the same thing:
evidence from neuroimaging and neurological patients. Ann N Y Acad
Sci 1369:132–153. CrossRef Medline
Fedorenko E, Duncan J, Kanwisher N (2013) Broad domain generality in
focal regions of frontal and parietal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
110:16616–16621. CrossRef Medline
Fedorenko E, Scott TL, Brunner P, Coon WG, Pritchett B, Schalk G, Kan-
wisher N (2016) Neural correlate of the construction of sentence mean-
ing. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113:E6256–E6262. CrossRef Medline
Felleman DJ, Van Essen DC (1991) Distributed hierarchical processing in
the primate cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex 1:1–47. Medline
Finger, S (2001) Origins of neuroscience: a history of explorations into
brain function. New York: OUP.
Fischer J, Mikhael JG, Tenenbaum JB, Kanwisher N (2016) Functional neu-
roanatomy of intuitive physical inference. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113:
E5072–E5081. CrossRef Medline
Fodor JA (1983) The modularity of mind: an essay on faculty psychology.
Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Freiwald WA, Tsao DY (2010) Functional compartmentalization and view-
point generalization within the macaque face-processing system. Science
330:845–851. CrossRef Medline
Friston KJ, Rotshtein P, Geng JJ, Sterzer P, Henson RN (2006) A critique of
functional localisers. Neuroimage 30:1077–1087. CrossRef Medline
Gauthier I, Skudlarski P, Gore JC, Anderson AW (2000) Expertise for cars
and birds recruits brain areas involved in face recognition. Nat Neurosci
3:191–197. CrossRef Medline
Grill-Spector K, Knouf N, Kanwisher N (2004) The fusiform face area sub-
serves face perception, not generic within-category identification. Nat
Neurosci 7:555–562. CrossRef Medline
Grimaldi P, Saleem KS, Tsao D (2016) Anatomical connections of the func-
tionally defined “face patches” in the macaque monkey. Neuron 90:1325–
1342. CrossRef Medline
Guntupalli JS, Wheeler KG, Gobbini MI (2016) Disentangling the represen-
tation of identity from head view along the human face processing path-
way. bioRxiv:045823.
Harel A, Gilaie-Dotan S, Malach R, Bentin S (2010) Top-down engagement
1060 • J. Neurosci., February 1, 2017 • 37(5):1056–1061
Kanwisher • The Quest for the FFA
 modulates the neural expressions of visual expertise. Cereb Cortex 20:
2304–2318. CrossRef Medline
Harel A, Kravitz DJ, Baker CI (2014) Task context impacts visual object
processing differentially across the cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:
E962–E971. CrossRef Medline
Haxby JV, Horwitz B, Ungerleider LG, Maisog JM, Pietrini P, Grady CL
(1994) The functional organization of human extrastriate cortex: a
PET-rCBF study of selective attention to faces and locations. J Neuro-
sci 14:6336–6353. Medline
Haxby JV, Gobbini MI, Furey ML, Ishai A, Schouten JL, Pietrini P (2001)
Distributed and overlapping representations of faces and objects in ven-
tral temporal cortex. Science 293:2425–2430. CrossRef Medline
Huth AG, Nishimoto S, Vu AT, Gallant JL (2012) A continuous semantic
space describes the representation of thousands of object and action
categories across the human brain. Neuron 76:1210–1224. CrossRef
Medline
Jeong SK, Xu Y (2016) Behaviorally relevant abstract object identity
representation in the human parietal cortex. J Neurosci 36:1607–1619.
CrossRef Medline
Kanwisher N, Yovel G (2009) Cortical specialization for face perception
in humans. In: Handbook of neuroscience for the behavioral sciences
(Cacioppo JT, Bernston GG, eds). New York: Wiley.
Kriegeskorte N, Simmons WK, Bellgowan PS, Baker CI (2009) Circular
analysis in systems neuroscience: the dangers of double dipping. Nat Neu-
rosci 12:535–540. CrossRef Medline
Marr D (1982) Vision: a computational investigation into the human rep-
resentation and processing of visual information. San Francisco: Henry
Holt.
McCarthy G, Puce A, Gore JC, Allison T (1997) Face-specific processing in
the human fusiform gyrus. J Cogn Neurosci 9:605–610. CrossRef Medline
McGugin RW, Gatenby JC, Gore JC, Gauthier I (2012) High-resolution im-
aging of expertise reveals reliable object selectivity in the fusiform face
area related to perceptual performance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109:
17063–17068. CrossRef Medline
Moeller S, Freiwald WA, Tsao DY (2008) Patches with links: a unified sys-
tem for processing faces in the macaque temporal lobe. Science 320:1355–
1359. CrossRef Medline
Norman-Haignere S, Kanwisher NG, McDermott JH (2015) Distinct corti-
cal pathways for music and speech revealed by hypothesis-free voxel de-
composition. Neuron 88:1281–1296. CrossRef Medline
O’Craven KM, Rosen BR, Kwong KK, Treisman A, Savoy RL (1997) Volun-
tary attention modulates fMRI activity in human MT-MST. Neuron 18:
591–598. CrossRef Medline
Op de Beeck HP, Baker CI, DiCarlo JJ, Kanwisher NG (2006) Discrimina-
tion training alters object representations in human extrastriate cortex.
J Neurosci 26:13025–13036. CrossRef Medline
Op de Beeck HP, Haushofer J, Kanwisher NG (2008) Interpreting fMRI
data: maps, modules and dimensions. Nat Rev Neurosci 9:123–135.
CrossRef Medline
Osher DE, Saxe RR, Koldewyn K, Gabrieli JD, Kanwisher N, Saygin ZM
(2016) Structural connectivity fingerprints predict cortical selectivity for
multiple visual categories across cortex. Cereb Cortex 26:1668–1683.
CrossRef Medline
Parvizi J, Jacques C, Foster BL, Withoft N, Rangarajan V, Weiner KS,
Grill-Spector K (2012) Electrical stimulation of human fusiform face-
selective regions distorts face perception. J Neurosci 32:14915–14920.
CrossRef Medline
Pitcher D, Charles L, Devlin JT, Walsh V, Duchaine B (2009) Triple disso-
ciation of faces, bodies, and objects in extrastriate cortex. Curr Biol 19:
319–324. CrossRef Medline
Polk TA, Farah MJ (1998) The neural development and organization of
letter recognition: Evidence from functional neuroimaging, computa-
tional modeling, and behavioral studies. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95:847–
852. CrossRef Medline
Puce A, Allison T, Asgari M, Gore JC, McCarthy G (1996) Differential
sensitivity of human visual cortex to faces, letterstrings, and textures:
a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. J Neurosci 16:5205–
5215. Medline
Quine WV (1969) Natural kinds. In: Essays in honor of Carl G. Hempel, pp
5–23. New York: Springer.
Saxe R, Kanwisher N (2003) People thinking about thinking people: the role
of the temporo-parietal junction in “theory of mind”. Neuroimage 19:
1835–1842. CrossRef Medline
Saygin ZM, Osher DE, Koldewyn K, Reynolds G, Gabrieli JD, Saxe RR (2011)
Anatomical connectivity patterns predict face selectivity in the fusiform
gyrus. Nat Neurosci 15:321–327. CrossRef Medline
Saygin ZM, Osher DE, Norton ES, Youssoufian DA, Beach SD, Feather J,
Gaab N, Gabrieli JD, Kanwisher N (2016) Connectivity precedes func-
tion in the development of the visual word form area. Nat Neurosci 19:
1250–1255. CrossRef Medline
Sereno MI, Dale AM, Reppas JB, Kwong KK, Belliveau JW, Brady TJ, Rosen
BR, Tootell RB (1995) Borders of multiple visual areas in humans re-
vealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging. Science 268:889–893.
CrossRef Medline
Sergent J, Ohta S, MacDonald B (1992) Functional neuroanatomy of face
and object processing. Brain 115:15–36. CrossRef Medline
Simmons JP, Nelson LD, Simonsohn U (2011) False-positive psychology:
undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting
anything as significant. Psychol Sci 22:1359–1366. CrossRef Medline
Spiridon M, Fischl B, Kanwisher N (2006) Location and spatial profile of
category-specific regions in human extrastriate cortex. Hum Brain Mapp
27:77–89. CrossRef Medline
Szucs D, Ioannidis JP (2016) Empirical assessment of published effect sizes
and power in the recent cognitive neuroscience and psychology literature.
bioRxiv:071530.
Tootell RB, Reppas JB, Dale AM, Look RB, Sereno MI, Malach R, Brady TJ,
Rosen BR (1995) Visual motion aftereffect in human cortical area MT
revealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nature 375:139–141.
CrossRef Medline
Weiner KS, Golarai G, Caspers J, Chuapoco MR, Mohlberg H, Zilles K,
Amunts K, Grill-Spector K (2014) The mid-fusiform sulcus: a landmark
identifying both cytoarchitectonic and functional divisions of human
ventral temporal cortex. Neuroimage 84:453–465. CrossRef Medline
Williams MA, Dang S, Kanwisher NG (2007) Only some spatial patterns of
fMRI response are read out in task performance. Nat Neurosci 10:685–
686. Medline
Xu Y (2005) Revisiting the role of the fusiform face area in visual expertise.
Cereb Cortex 15:1234–1242. Medline
Yue X, Tjan BS, Biederman I (2006) What makes faces special? Vision Res
46:3802–3811. CrossRef Medline
Kanwisher • The Quest for the FFA
J. Neurosci., February 1, 2017 • 37(5):1056–1061 • 1061
