 4 Hz oscillations synchronize prefrontal-amygdala circuits 
during fear behaviour
Nikolaos Karalis1,2,3,6,8, Cyril Dejean1,2,6, Fabrice Chaudun1,2,6, Suzana Khoder1,2, Robert 
R. Rozeske1,2, Hélène Wurtz1,2, Sophie Bagur4, Karim Benchenane4, Anton Sirota3, Julien 
Courtin1,2,5,7, and Cyril Herry1,2,7,8
1INSERM, Neurocentre Magendie, U862, 146 Rue Léo-Saignat, 33077 Bordeaux, France. 2Univ. 
Bordeaux, Neurocentre Magendie, U862, 146 Rue Léo-Saignat, 33077 Bordeaux, France. 
3Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Munich, Munich Cluster of Systems 
Neurology (SyNergy), Faculty of Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München, 82152 
Planegg-Martinsried, Germany. 4Team Memory, Oscillations and Brain states (MOBs), Brain 
Plasticity Unit, CNRS UMR 8249, ESPCI ParisTech. Ecole Supérieure de Physique et de Chimie 
Industrielles de la Ville de Paris, 10 rue Vauquelin, 75005 Paris, France. 5Friedrich Miescher 
Institute for Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.
Abstract
Fear expression relies on the coordinated activity of prefrontal and amygdala circuits, yet the 
mechanisms allowing long-range network synchronization during fear remain unknown. Using a 
combination of extracellular recordings, pharmacological, and optogenetic manipulations we 
report that freezing, a behavioural expression of fear, temporally coincides with the development 
of sustained, internally generated 4 Hz oscillations within prefrontal-amygdala circuits. 4 Hz 
oscillations predict freezing onset and offset and synchronize prefrontal-amygdala circuits. 
Optogenetic induction of prefrontal 4 Hz oscillations coordinates prefrontal-amygdala activity and 
elicits fear behaviour. These results unravel a novel sustained oscillatory mechanism mediating 
prefrontal-amygdala coupling during fear behaviour.
Introduction
Long-range neuronal synchronization among groups of neurons is an effective mechanism 
that promotes the transmission of information between neuronal structures1-4. This form of 
neuronal communication has been largely described in sensory and motor systems5-8 and 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
8To whom correspondence should be addressed. cyril.herry@inserm.fr (CH); karalis@bio.lmu.de (NK) .
Author Contributions
S. Bagur, K. Benchenane, F. Chaudun, J. Courtin, C. Dejean, N. Karalis, S. Khoder, R.R. Rozeske, A. Sirota, and H. Wurtz performed 
the experiments and analyzed the data. J. Courtin, C. Dejean, N. Karalis and C. Herry designed the experiments. C. Herry wrote the 
paper.
6These authors contributed equally to this work
7These authors contributed equally to this work
The authors declare they have no competing financial interests.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2016 April ; 19(4): 605–612. doi:10.1038/nn.4251.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 more recently between neuronal structures involved in the processing of emotions such as 
fear-related information9-12. Fear behaviour is known to depend on the interaction between 
the dorsal medial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC), and the basolateral amygdala (BLA) and 
recent data indicate that local or distant synchronization of neuronal activity within this 
dmPFC-BLA network strongly correlates with fear behaviour9-12. In particular, 
synchronization of spiking activity between dmPFC and BLA has been associated with 
resistance to extinction learning, whereas fear discrimination has been associated with 
transient, sensory-driven mPFC-BLA synchronization10, 11. However to date, the precise 
neuronal mechanisms mediating long-range network synchronization during fear behaviour 
remain unknown. Furthermore, a causal role of neuronal synchrony among dmPFC and BLA 
circuits in driving fear behaviour has not yet been demonstrated.
Results
Internally generated freezing behaviour
To address these questions, we performed single unit and local field potential (LFPs) 
recordings in the dmPFC and BLA of freely behaving mice submitted to auditory fear 
conditioning (Fig. 1a). Twenty-four hours following conditioning, re-exposure to the 
conditioned auditory stimulus (CS+) but not to the control auditory stimulus (CS−) induced 
conditioned freezing behaviour, which we used as readout of fear memory acquired upon 
associative learning (Fig. 1b). Interestingly, quantification of freezing episodes occurring 
inside or between CS+ presentations indicated that mice froze more often between CS+ 
presentations (Fig. 1c). Moreover, evaluation of freezing period onset distribution inside or 
between CS+ presentations indicated that a large fraction of freezing periods (41.8 ± 0.03 %) 
was initiated outside of CS+ presentations (Fig. 1d). Finally, cross-correlation analysis 
performed between freezing and CS+ onset revealed that the latency of freezing period onset 
inside CS+ presentations was delayed by approximately 1.5 second compared to CS+ onset 
(Fig. 1e). These observations indicate, that in addition to freezing episodes driven by 
auditory inputs, internally generated mechanisms can maintain or initiate freezing episodes 
following CS+ presentations.
dmPFC and BLA 4 Hz oscillations predict freezing behaviour
Analysis of dmPFC LFPs recorded throughout the behavioural sessions revealed a 
prominent and sustained 2-6 Hz oscillation with a peak frequency at 4 Hz (hereafter referred 
to as 4 Hz oscillations), which strongly correlated with episodes of freezing behaviour 
following conditioning (Fig. 2a-d and Supplementary Fig. 1a-b). Importantly, 4 Hz 
oscillations were not present when animals were passively immobile during the habituation 
session (Fig. 2a and Fig. 3a-c). Moreover, the duration and power of 4 Hz oscillations in the 
dmPFC was strongly correlated with the length of freezing episodes (Fig. 3d). To evaluate if 
4 Hz oscillations could predict freezing behaviour, we first computed freezing-triggered 
spectrograms centered on the onset and offset of freezing episodes (Fig. 3e). Statistical 
analyses for the temporal progression of significant changes of 4 Hz power indicated that 4 
Hz oscillations in the dmPFC emerge and terminate significantly earlier than freezing 
behaviour. These results strongly suggest that 4 Hz oscillations are an accurate predictor of 
freezing onset and offset, rather than a consequence of freezing behaviour. This observation 
Karalis et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 was further supported by additional analyses using supervised learning models, that allowed 
us to successfully predict freezing behaviour on a trial-by-trial basis using the 4 Hz dmPFC 
signal to noise ratio (SNR) (Fig. 3f-g). Importantly, 4 Hz oscillations developed during 
auditory fear conditioning (Supplementary Fig. 2), and dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations were also 
observed during freezing episodes in mice submitted to contextual fear conditioning 
indicating that 4 Hz oscillations might correspond to a general physiological signature of 
freezing behaviour (Supplementary Fig. 3). A similar but less prominent phenomenon was 
observed in the BLA, although the coupling between 4 Hz oscillations and freezing 
behaviour was stronger in the dmPFC, likely due to the different laminar anatomical 
organization of the two structures and putative localization of the source of the 4Hz 
oscillation in the prefrontal circuits. (Fig. 4 and Supplementary Fig. 1c-d and 4a-e). To 
evaluate if 4 Hz oscillations were the mere consequence of freezing-, motor-, or respiratory-
related behaviour, we performed additional recordings in the ventrolateral periaqueductal 
grey (vlPAG), a neuronal structure involved in the genesis of freezing behavior and the 
control of breathing during emotional load13-16. Power spectrum analyses performed on 
vlPAG recordings failed to reveal significant 4 Hz oscillations during freezing episodes, 
which strongly suggests that 4 Hz oscillations do not reflect motor-, respiratory- or freezing-
related activity (Supplementary Fig. 4f-g).
4 Hz oscillations are distinct from theta oscillations
To evaluate if dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations could correspond to hippocampal-dependent low 
theta oscillations observed previously during conditioned stimulus presentations10, 12, 17, 18, 
we inactivated the medial septum (MS), a neuronal structure known to be involved in the 
genesis of theta oscillations19. Targeted, reversible, inactivation of the MS with muscimol, 
which is known to reduce theta power in the dorsal hippocampus19, impaired dmPFC theta 
but had no effect on dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations (Supplementary Fig. 5a-e). In addition, this 
manipulation had no effects on the percentage of dmPFC neurons phase-locked to 4 Hz 
oscillations, but significantly reduced the number of dmPFC neurons phase-locked to theta 
oscillations (Supplementary Fig. 5f). Furthermore, in contrast to transient dmPFC local theta 
oscillations, which displayed CS+-evoked phase resetting and were short-lasting (~300 
ms)9, 10, sustained dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations described in the present manuscript were not 
modulated by CS+ presentations, did not display CS+-evoked phase resetting 
(Supplementary Fig. 6), and could be maintained over long periods of freezing behaviour 
even between CS+ presentations (Fig. 2a-b, Fig. 3d and Fig. 4a-b) suggesting that the two 
phenomena are generated independently. Together these data indicate that the development 
of hippocampus-independent, internally generated 4 Hz oscillations within dmPFC-BLA 
circuits temporally predict freezing behaviour.
dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations drive BLA during freezing
Interestingly, analyses of moment-to-moment covariations in oscillatory power and phase 
between structures revealed that during freezing episodes, 4 Hz oscillations in the dmPFC 
and BLA were strongly synchronized (Fig. 5a-b and Supplementary Fig. 7). Consequently, 
coherence between dmPFC and BLA LFPs was significantly enhanced during freezing 
behaviour (Fig. 5c and Supplementary Fig. 7). Moreover, a series of statistical directionality 
measures, in both the phase and the amplitude domain, revealed that dmPFC 4 Hz 
Karalis et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 oscillations lead BLA LFPs during freezing episodes but not during locomotor activity (Fig. 
5b-d and Supplementary Fig. 7). Together, these data demonstrate that conditioned freezing 
behaviour is associated with a preferential dmPFC to BLA phase coupling of 4 Hz LFP 
oscillations.
4 Hz oscillations organize dmPFC and BLA firing activity
To evaluate the consequence of synchronized 4 Hz oscillatory activity on individual dmPFC 
and BLA putative excitatory principal neurons (PNs) (n = 92 and n = 72, respectively) and 
putative inhibitory interneurons (INs) (n = 35 and n = 15, respectively) (Supplementary Fig. 
8), we measured the phase locking to dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations and changes in firing 
frequency of dmPFC and BLA neurons during fear behaviour. These analyses revealed that a 
large proportion of PNs and INs in both structures were significantly phase-locked to 
dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations during freezing episodes, among which the vast majority exhibited 
4 Hz-related oscillatory activity (Fig. 6). Moreover, freezing episodes were associated with a 
global increase in the firing rate of PNs compared to no freezing periods in both the dmPFC 
and the BLA (Supplementary Fig. 8). Interestingly, correlation and co-firing analyses of 
pairwise spiking activity performed between neurons recorded in the dmPFC and neurons 
recorded in the BLA indicated that phase-locked pairs of PNs were significantly more co-
activated during freezing episodes compared to both no freezing periods and non phase-
locked neurons (Fig. 6c,h). Together, these data indicate that dmPFC and BLA PNs 
synchronize their firing activity to 4 Hz oscillations during freezing behaviour.
Optogenetic induction of dmPFC 4 Hz drives fear behaviour
To further evaluate the causal role of 4 Hz oscillations in synchronizing dmPFC-BLA PNs 
firing activity during fear behaviour, we artificially induced 4 Hz oscillations in the dmPFC 
of naïve animals by analog optogenetic modulation of dmPFC interneurons (INs), which 
contribute to the emergence of dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations (Supplementary Fig. 9). In 
particular, we manipulated parvalbumin-expressing INs, which is an efficient approach for 
inducing rhythmic inhibition of cortical PNs at low frequencies 20-22. These genetically 
identified cells were predominantly phase-locked to 4 Hz oscillations and displayed 4 Hz 
oscillatory activity (Supplementary Fig. 9d-j). Rhythmically driving parvalbumin-expressing 
INs at 4 Hz, resulted in prominent 2-6 Hz oscillations in the dmPFC and induced persistent 
fear behaviour (Fig. 7a-c and Supplementary Fig. 10a-b). Importantly, freezing behaviour 
was frequency and structure specific as dmPFC rhythmic stimulation using a number of 
different control frequencies and BLA or motor cortex stimulation at 4 Hz were inefficient to 
induce fear responses (Fig. 7d-e and Supplementary Fig. 10c-d). Furthermore, we observed 
that the artificial induction of dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations synchronized dmPFC and BLA 
spiking activity during freezing episodes (Fig. 7f and Supplementary Fig. 10g-i). Given the 
emergence of 4Hz oscillations during fear conditioning and retrieval of contextual fear 
memory (Supplementary Fig. 2 and 3), we re-tested the mice 24 hours later in the context in 
which they received artificial induction of 4 Hz oscillations. Interestingly, in these 
conditions, mice exhibited contextual fear behaviour compared to GFP control animals (Fig. 
7c and Supplementary Fig. 10a-b). Furthermore, mice exhibited low freezing levels when 
tested in a neutral context 24 hours later, indicating that fear behaviour was specific to the 
context where the optogenetic stimulation occurred (Supplementary Fig. 10b). Together, 
Karalis et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 these results indicate that freezing behaviour upon artificial induction of dmPFC 4 Hz 
oscillations cannot be explained by motor impairments and further suggest that 4 Hz 
oscillations are causally involved in the synchronization of dmPFC-BLA spiking activity 
and the expression of aversive fear memories. Finally, the post-training optogenetic silencing 
of BLA neurons during CS presentations significantly reduced fear behaviour indicating that 
the BLA is necessary for the full expression of conditioned fear behaviour (Supplementary 
Fig. 10e-f).
Discussion
In this study, we demonstrated that expression of conditioned fear memories is associated 
with prominent synchronous 4 Hz oscillations within dmPFC-BLA circuits, which organize 
the spiking activity of local neuronal populations. Furthermore, both dmPFC and BLA 4Hz 
oscillations develop specifically during fear conditioning and predict the onset and offset of 
freezing episodes. Moreover, the length of freezing episodes was also strongly correlated 
with the duration and power of dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations, a phenomenon not observed in the 
BLA. This is possibly due to the different laminar anatomical organization of the two 
structures. Indeed, aligned pyramidal cells in the cortex form spatially coherent dipoles. The 
resulting summation of field potentials allows the detection of high signal-to-noise ratio 
oscillations in the extracellular space23. The BLA on the other hand is a nuclear structure 
with no clear anatomical organization (dipoles are distributed uniformly and not aligned). 
Consequently, the SNR of extracellularly recorded LFP oscillations is expected to be lower 
than in the mPFC. Nonetheless, spike trains of a number of BLA neurons present both 
intrinsic 4Hz oscillations and phase locking to dmPFC 4Hz, whether it is in physiological 
conditions or during light stimulation. Moreover, the presence of 4 Hz oscillations in LFP is 
indicative of the underlying synaptic activity, however differences in the absolute 
power/SNR between the two structures cannot be interpreted as a stronger involvement of 
the dmPFC. Again, due to the radically different neuronal organization between the two 
structures, synaptic inputs are differentially filtered by the biophysical and topological 
properties of the BLA neural tissue24, 25. Importantly, our data indicate that internally 
generated freezing-related dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations constitute a specific oscillatory 
mechanism, distinct from CS+-evoked dmPFC theta resetting observed previously9, 10, 12. 
These previously published studies9, 10 evaluated transient sensory-evoked theta oscillations 
in the dmPFC, which lasted around 300 ms and have been linked to sensory-driven 
processes during fear behaviour, or fear discrimination9, 10. In striking contrast, the present 4 
Hz oscillatory phenomenon correlated not only with long periods of freezing behaviour 
observed during CS+ presentations, but also during spontaneously occurring freezing 
episodes. Functionally this implies that spontaneously occurring freezing periods are 
internally maintained or generated and not directly driven by sensory stimulations. To our 
knowledge, this is the first report of a sustained brain state (4 Hz oscillations) that predicts 
and temporally coincides with freezing episodes. The freezing responses observed between 
CS presentations are unlikely triggered by the context for several reasons. Firstly, it should 
be noted that mice are tested in a context distinct from the one used for the conditioning 
session. Secondly, freezing levels during CS− presentations during retrieval were very low, 
indicating that the retrieval context was not aversive per se (Figure 1b, 13.19% freezing on 
Karalis et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 CS− presentations). Our interpretation that freezing episodes occur between CS 
presentations relies on the induction of a fearful state after the initial CS-induced retrieval of 
the fear memory and thus the emergence of non-CS related spontaneous freezing episodes. 
Rather, our data and analyses suggest that the 4 Hz oscillations represent a mechanism for 
the initiation and maintenance of freezing episodes, inside and outside of CS presentations. 
Our present data also confirm published observations that CS+ onset is associated with a 
transient resetting of the phase of theta oscillations9, 10, which is however specific for 
oscillations in the 8-12 Hz range and are associated with transient increases in theta power, 
but are not observed for the 4 Hz oscillations (Supplementary Fig. 6). Hence, these 
observations indicate that sustained 4 Hz oscillations described in the present manuscript do 
not correspond to sensory-driven transient theta oscillations previously observed9, 10. 
Altogether these results have important functional consequences as they indicate the 
existence of distinct and independent dmPFC neuronal oscillations involved in the regulation 
of different aspects of fear behaviour, such as stimulus-evoked attention processes related to 
the presentation of salient CS, fear discrimination, or to the expression of freezing 
behaviour. Importantly, all of these findings were observed in mice, additional studies are 
required to evaluate if these oscillations also occurs in different species.
Our data also indicate that stationary dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations do not correspond to 
hippocampus-mediated dmPFC theta oscillations observed previously17 as muscimol 
inactivation of the medial septum, blocks hippocampal theta recorded in the dmFFC without 
affecting prefrontal 4 Hz oscillations, nor the percentage of dmPFC neurons phase-locked to 
4 Hz oscillations. Our observation of BLA 4 Hz oscillatory activity during freezing 
behaviour is consistent with previous recordings of slow theta oscillations in the lateral 
amygdala during fear behaviour, which correlated with dorsal hippocampal theta 
oscillations17, 18, although in these studies the temporal relation between CS+ onset, 4 Hz 
oscillatory activity, and freezing onset and offset was not clearly established. A recent 
observation of power increase for 4-7.5 Hz oscillations in the cingulate cortex in a 
hippocampus-dependent trace fear-conditioning paradigm is also partly consistent with our 
observation26. Indeed, the authors observed that in some conditioning trials, 4-7.5 Hz power 
increased during the interval separating the conditioned stimulus from the footshock. 
Although in this study, the neuronal interaction between the cingulate cortex and the BLA, 
the precise temporal relation between slow oscillation and freezing behaviour, and the causal 
role of prefrontal 4 Hz oscillations were not established. These data nevertheless suggest that 
prefrontal 4 Hz oscillations might be a general mechanism of fear expression encompassing 
classical auditory and contextual fear conditioning.
A key novel aspect of our study comes from the demonstration that during freezing 
behaviour, dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations entrain BLA oscillatory activity and synchronize 
spiking activity between dmPFC and BLA neurons. Recent publications have highlighted 
neuronal co-firing between prefrontal cortex and amygdala during resistance to extinction 
behaviour11, LFP coherence between mPFC and BLA after CS+ onset during fear 
discrimination, and amygdala neurons phase-locked to dmPFC theta oscillations during fear 
discrimination10. To our knowledge, our data provide the first mechanistic demonstration of 
a 4 Hz-mediated long-range synchronization of spiking activity between dmPFC and BLA 
during freezing behaviour. Moreover, our findings also indicate that mPFC activity leads the 
Karalis et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 BLA one during freezing behaviour. Accordingly, we found that the optogenetic-mediated 
artificial induction of 4 Hz oscillations in dmPFC, synchronizes dmPFC and BLA neuronal 
activity and increases freezing behaviour in a persistent manner which is an unprecedented 
causal demonstration of the role of internally generated oscillations in driving behaviour. 
Indeed, neuronal synchronization between dmPFC and BLA has been classically evaluated 
using powerful correlational analyses10, 11, 18, but never causally demonstrated. Our present 
data indicate that the genesis of 4 Hz oscillations in the dmPFC is sufficient to synchronize 
neuronal activity between mPFC and BLA and further drive the expression of freezing 
responses. Moreover, this effect was frequency and structure specific as dmPFC 
manipulation at other frequencies or 4 Hz induction in the motor cortex and BLA did not 
induce any behavioural effects. However, our data indicate that when freezing behaviour has 
been induced following auditory fear conditioning, the BLA was necessary for its full 
expression. Together these data strongly suggest that dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations are 
instrumental for dmPFC/BLA synchronization of neuronal activities during fear behaviour 
and that the synchronized firing activity of BLA neurons triggers fear responses 
(Supplementary Figure 11). It is important to note that the dmPFC 4 Hz analog optogenetic 
stimulation induced freezing behaviour during the stimulation but also 24 hours later in the 
context in which the mice were stimulated. This observation suggests that the artificial 
induction of dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations might be involved in the formation of associative fear 
memories. Another possibility could be that this artificial induction might lead to unspecific 
anxiety behavior. However, it is unlikely that a sudden inactivation or rhythmic inhibition of 
prefrontal areas could lead to unspecific anxiety behavior for at least two reasons. Published 
reports of optogenetic inactivation of the cingulate cortex during remote contextual memory 
retrieval, results in a reduction of contextual fear behaviour, an observation not consistent 
with a general increase in anxiety levels27. Furthermore, in our optogenetic experiments 
(Fig. 7), dmPFC 4 Hz induction induces freezing in a context specific manner, which is also 
an observation not consistent with a general increase in anxiety levels. Additionally, while it 
is possible that induction of 4 Hz oscillations lead to the formation of associative fear 
memories, an alternative interpretation is that contextual fear memory observed 24 hours 
following optogenetic stimulation is the direct consequence of the association between 
contextual elements and the aversive state induced by 4 Hz oscillations. This interpretation is 
consistent with the notion that dmPFC-BLA 4 Hz oscillations are causally involved in the 
expression of freezing behaviour.
Although, our data indicate that dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations are causally involved in the 
neuronal synchronization of spiking activity between dmPFC and BLA during freezing 
behavior, it is conceivable that this mechanism could be involved in other emotional 
processes such as avoidance, flight responses, sensory processes, or cognitive tasks. For 
instance recent data have observed 4 Hz oscillations in the whisker barrel cortex during 
respiration 28 and in the rat mPFC under working memory load during locomotor 
behaviour29. Another important aspect in the future will be also to identify the source of 4 
Hz oscillations. Although our data indicate that these oscillations do not originate from the 
hippocampus and are localized in dmPFC circuits, additional work will be required in the 
future to address this question and unequivocally identify the source of 4 Hz oscillations. 
Ultimately, our data unravel a novel, specific 4 Hz oscillatory mechanism allowing the 
Karalis et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 expression of fear memories by long-range synchronization of neuronal activity between 
dmPFC and BLA neuronal circuits.
Methods
Animals
Naïve male C57BL6/J mice (3 months old, Janvier) and PV-IRES-Cre mice (3 months old, 
Jackson Laboratory, B6;129P2-Pvalbtm1(cre)Arbr/J) were individually housed for at least 7 
days before all experiments, under a 12-h light–dark cycle, and provided with food and 
water ad libitum. Experiments were performed during the light phase. All procedures were 
performed in accordance with standard ethical guidelines (European Communities Directive 
86/60-EEC) and were approved by the committee on Animal Health and Care of Institut 
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale and French Ministry of Agriculture and 
Forestry (authorization A3312001).
Behaviour
Auditory fear conditioning and testing took place in two different contexts (context A and 
B). The conditioning and testing boxes were cleaned with 70% ethanol and 1% acetic acid 
before and after each session, respectively. To score freezing behaviour independently of the 
experimenter, an automated infrared beam detection system located on the bottom of the 
experimental chambers was used (Coulbourn Instruments). Because the detection of our 
dependent variable (freezing) was independent of the experimenter, we did not use a 
blinding process for group allocation or behaviour scoring. The animals were considered to 
be freezing if no movement was detected for 2 s. On day 1, C57BL6/J mice were submitted 
to a habituation session in context A, in which they received four presentations of the CS+ 
and of the CS− (total CS duration, 30 s; consisting of 50-ms pips at 0.9 Hz repeated 27 
times, 2 ms rise and fall, pip frequency, 7.5 kHz or white-noise, 80 dB sound pressure level).
Discriminative fear conditioning was performed on the same day by pairing the CS+ with a 
US (1 s foot-shock, 0.6 mA, 5 CS+–US pairings, inter-trial intervals, 20–180 s). The onset of 
the US coincided with the offset of the CS+. The CS− was presented after each CS+–US 
association but was never reinforced (five CS− presentations; inter-trial intervals, 20–180 s). 
The frequencies used for CS+ and CS− were counterbalanced across animals and 
randomization of CS− and CS+ allocation was performed using an online randomization 
algorithm (http://www.randomization.com).
On day 2, conditioned mice were submitted to a testing session (Retrieval session) in context 
B during which they received 4 and 12 presentations of the CS− and CS+, respectively. 13 
naïve C57BL6/J mice recorded simultaneously in the dmPFC and BLA were included in this 
experiment and the data collected in two distinct replicates. Five additional naïve C57BL6/J 
mice recorded in the vlPAG were fear conditioned using the same protocol. Contextual fear 
conditioning took place in contexts A and B as describe above. On day 1, C57BL6/J mice 
were submitted for 5 min to a habituation session in context A. Contextual fear conditioning 
was performed 24 hours later by pairing context B with a US. The next day, mice were 
submitted for 12 min testing session (Retrieval) in context B. 6 naïve C57BL6/J mice were 
Karalis et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 included in this experiment and the data collected in two distinct replicates. For neck muscle 
EMG recordings, C57BL6/J mice were exposed to 20 CS+ presentations in context B as 
describe above and auditory fear conditioning was performed on the same day by pairing the 
CS+ with a US. 7 naïve C57BL6/J mice were included in this experiment and the data 
collected in two distinct replicates.
For optogenetic experiments using channelrhodopsin, PV-IRES-Cre mice (and GPF 
controls) were exposed on day 1 to context A as described above. During the session, four 
blue-light 4 Hz rhythmic analog (2 or 10 mW, 30 sec) stimulations were delivered in the 
dmPFC in order to activate parvalbumin-expressing interneurons. On day 2 and 3, mice were 
exposed to the same context as day 1, or to the neutral context B as described above without 
any stimulation, respectively. To test for the frequency and structure specificity of the 
stimulation, additional groups of naïve PV-IRES-Cre mice were submitted to four blue-light 
rhythmic analog dmPFC stimulations at different frequencies (1, 8, 10, and 12 Hz, stochastic 
4 Hz composed of 2-12 Hz frequency with an average at 4 Hz, 10 mW, 30 sec, n = 6 mice) 
or to four blue-light rhythmic analog stimulations at 4 Hz of the motor cortex (n = 4 mice) or 
the BLA (n = 5 mice). These 5 mice infected in the BLA were also submitted to auditory 
fear conditioning as described above and tested 24 and 48 hrs later to evaluate the effect of 
BLA silencing during fear behaviour. Randomization of group allocation (ChR2 versus GFP 
controls) was performed using an online randomization algorithm (http://
www.randomization.com).
For pharmacological experiments, C57BL6/J mice were submitted to a fear conditioning 
paradigm consisting of CS+ and US pairings in context A as described above. On days 2, 3, 
and 4, conditioned mice were tested in context B, during which they received four 
presentations of the CS+ before muscimol injections (Day 2, Test 1), 5 min after muscimol 
injections (Day 3, Inac.), and 24 hours following muscimol injections (Day 4, Test 2). 6 
naïve C57BL6/J mice were included in this experiment and the data collected in two distinct 
replicates.
Surgery and recordings
Mice were anaesthetized with isoflurane (induction 3%, maintenance 1.5%) in O2. Body 
temperature was maintained at 37 °C with a temperature controller system (FHC). Mice 
were secured in a stereotaxic frame and unilaterally implanted in the left dorsomedial 
prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) with a multi-wire electrode array aimed at the following 
coordinates: 2.0 mm anterior to the bregma; 0.3 mm lateral to the midline; and 0.8 to 1.4 
mm ventral to the cortical surface and in the left basolateral amygdala (BLA) with a multi-
wire electrode array aimed at the following coordinates: 1.7 mm posterior to the bregma; 3 
mm lateral to the midline; and 4 mm ventral to the cortical surface.
An additional group of mice was only implanted in the ventrolateral periaqueductal gray at 
the following coordinates: −4.30 mm anterior to the bregma, 0.55 mm lateral to the midline; 
and 2.20 mm ventral to the cortical surface. For contextual fear conditioning experiments, 
mice were only implanted in the dmPFC. For electromyographic (EMG) recording 
experiments, Teflon-coated stainless steel electrodes (AM systems) were sutured in the right 
Karalis et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 and left nuchal muscles. Wires were connected to a multi-wire electrode array connector 
attached to the skull.
For pharmacological experiments, animals were implanted in the dmPFC as the same 
coordinate as above and in dorsal hippocampus (dHip) at the following coordinates: 2 mm 
posterior to bregma; 1.2 mm lateral to midline; and 1.2 to 1.4 mm ventral to the cortical 
surface. The electrodes consisted of 16 individually insulated nichrome wires (13 μm inner 
diameter, impedance 30–100 KΩ; Kanthal) contained in a 26-gauge stainless-steel guide 
cannula. The wires were attached to an 18-pin connector (Omnetics) and two connectors 
were used for each mouse. All implants were secured using Super-Bond cement (Sun 
Medical). After surgery mice were allowed to recover for 7 days and were habituated to 
handling. Analgesia was applied before, and 1 day after surgery (Metacam, Boehringer). 
Electrodes were connected to a headstage (Plexon) containing sixteen unity-gain operational 
amplifiers. The headstage was connected to a 16-channel preamplifier (gain 100× bandpass 
filter from 150 Hz to 9 kHz for unit activity, Plexon). Spiking activity was digitized at 40 
kHz and bandpass filtered from 250 Hz to 8 kHz, and isolated by time-amplitude window 
discrimination and template matching using a Multichannel Acquisition Processor system 
(Plexon). At the conclusion of the experiment, recording sites were marked with electrolytic 
lesions before perfusion, and electrode tip locations were reconstructed with standard 
histological techniques.
Single-unit analyses
Single-unit spike sorting was performed using Off-Line Spike Sorter (OFSS, Plexon) for all 
behavioural sessions. Principal-component scores were calculated for unsorted waveforms 
and plotted in a three-dimensional principal-component space; clusters containing similar 
valid waveforms were manually defined. A group of waveforms were considered to be 
generated from a single neuron if the waveforms formed a discrete, isolated, cluster in the 
principal-component space and did not contain a refractory period less than 1 ms, as 
assessed using auto-correlogram analyses. To avoid analysis of the same neuron recorded on 
different channels, we computed cross-correlation histograms. If a target neuron presented a 
peak of activity at a time that the reference neuron fired, only one of the two neurons was 
considered for further analysis.
To separate putative inhibitory interneurons (INs) from putative excitatory principal neurons 
(PNs) we used an unsupervised clustering algorithm based on Ward’s method. In brief, the 
Euclidian distance was calculated between all neuron pairs based on the three-dimensional 
space defined by each neuron’s average half-spike width (measured from trough to peak), 
the firing rate, and the area under the hyperpolarization phase of the spike. An iterative 
agglomerative procedure was then used to combine neurons into groups based on the matrix 
of distances such that the total number of groups was reduced to give the smallest possible 
increase within-group sum of square deviation.
For the detection of interactions between units recorded in the dmPFC and BLA, the spike 
trains of each simultaneously recorded pair were binned (10 ms bin size), the cross-
correlation of the binned histograms was calculated over multiple lags (maximum lag: ± 500 
ms) and the peak cross-correlation coefficient for each pair was determined. For the 
Karalis et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 detection of co-firing property for unit pairs, spike trains were binned as before and the co-
firing index was calculated as the ratio of co-occurring (common) spikes to the total number 
of spikes for the two units. This provides a simple, yet direct, measure of the co-occurrence 
of unit spikes on multiple levels of temporal resolution. For the determination of the bin-size 
and the robustness of the method, different bin sizes were tested and they all gave 
qualitatively similar results. Among those tested, 10 ms was selected since it allows the 
identification of potentially monosynaptic interactions. To evaluate if neurons were 
oscillating at 4 Hz we used Gabor functions which are commonly used to fit autocorrelation 
(AC) histograms of non-stationary rhythmic biological time series such as neuronal spiking 
activity30-32. Gabor functions are damped sine waves with two components, first the sine 
wave frequency (fo), the amplitude of which is modulated by the second term, here the 
damping frequency (fd). The Gabor functions served as predicted AC (pAC), used to fit the 
actual AC of the frequencies of interest. We constructed a set of Gabor functions as 
follows32:
,with fo and fd both ranging from 1 to 25 Hz, hence creating 100 × 100 predicted AC. The 
quality of the fit of each predicted AC was then assessed by its correlation (Spearman's ρ) 
with the actual AC of specific frequency bands (calculated for lags t of 0–500 ms), and this 
correlation score was plotted for each f0, fd pair. Points showing the highest correlation thus 
represent candidate f0, fd pairs capable of predicting oscillations.
Local field potential and EMG analyses
Local field potentials were analysed using custom-written Matlab programs. Raw LFP traces 
were filtered between 0.7 Hz and 400 Hz and downsampled to 1 kHz. All signals were 
filtered using zero-phase distortion 6th order Butterworth filters. For phase analyses, the 
signal was filtered in the desired frequency band (2 - 6 Hz for the 4Hz oscillation) and the 
complex valued analytic signal was calculated using the Hilbert transform as below.
The vector length and the arctangent of the vector angle provide the estimation of the 
instantaneous amplitude and instantaneous phase of the signal respectively at every time 
point. All analyses were performed during freezing episodes and, where indicated, during 
subsampled non-freezing epochs. A phase of 0° corresponds to the peak of prefrontal - 
amygdala oscillations. LFP power spectrum and LFP-LFP coherence estimations were, 
unless otherwise noted, performed using the multitaper method33. Briefly, data was 
multiplied by a set of 2-5 orthogonal taper functions (discrete prolate spheroidal sequences), 
Fourier transformed using window size of two seconds and averaged to obtain a direct 
multitaper spectral estimate.
Signal to noise ratio (SNR) for 4 Hz power was calculated as the ratio of the mean power in 
the 2-6 Hz band to the mean power outside of this band. Because, one mouse didn’t show 
Karalis et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 immobility behaviour during habituation, it was excluded from SNR analyses. For coherence 
analyses, a method based on imaginary coherence was employed34. Imaginary coherence 
was calculated as 
,
where Sxy is the cross-spectrum, Sxx and Syy the auto-spectra and summation takes place 
over the spectrogram bins corresponding to the quantified state. By keeping the imaginary 
part of the normalized cross-spectrum, coherence value is weighted inversely proportional to 
the time lag between the two signals. Consequently, it is sensitive only to time-lagged 
signals, whereas the effect of absolutely synchronous signals is eliminated. Given the very 
synchronous nature of the oscillation examined here and the small phase lag, it is expected 
that imaginary coherence is under-estimating the strength of the interaction. However, we 
opted for this conservative flavor of coherence analysis, in order to avoid any influence of 
volume conducted currents or artifacts that can artificially boost coherence values.
To investigate any potential causal interaction between the oscillations recorded in the two 
structures, spectrally resolved Granger causality was calculated for the unfiltered LFP 
signals. Granger causality is a statistical measure of the predictive power of one variable 
over another. Linear trends were removed from the LFP signals and signals were normalized 
before the analysis. For these analyses, the MVGC multivariate Granger causality toolbox 35 
was used to fit a higher order vector autoregressive model to the processes. Data was tested 
for stability in time and model order was determined using the Akaike Information Criterion 
(AIC). To identify directionality and quantify the lag between the two signals in terms of 
phase and amplitude, a point-process was defined consisting of the peaks of the bandpass 
filtered LFP signal for each of the two structures. The lag of the peak of the cross-correlation 
of these point-processes identifies the time lag of the oscillation in the two structures and the 
directionality of their potential interaction. To avoid any potential bias due to phase 
asymmetry, the same procedure was tested for the troughs giving identical results. To 
investigate this relationship throughout the oscillation cycle, the phase of each analytical 
signal was extracted using the Hilbert transform and the distribution of the phase differences 
between the two structures was characterized for deviation from uniformity using circular 
statistics and Monte Carlo simulations. To evaluate the specific role of phase, amplitude and 
their interplay on the directionality and causality measures for the LFP data, a procedure was 
devised for the selective perturbation of phase and amplitude of the signals. Signals were 
converted in the spectral domain using a discrete Fourier transform and the phase (or 
amplitude) component of the signal was permuted, leaving the amplitude (or phase) intact. 
The modified signal was converted back to the time domain using the inverse Fourier 
transform. For the power comodulation analysis, the power profile for each frequency bin in 
each structure was calculated and the correlation coefficient of every pair was calculated36.
To compare the impact of CS+ during freezing on local theta and 4 Hz phase resetting we 
used a multitaper analysis of LFP signals for frequencies ranging from 2 to 12 Hz and 
computed a stimulus-triggered spectrogram. For the CS+-triggered theta and 4Hz phase 
overlays, signals were filtered in the corresponding range (theta: 8-12 Hz; 4Hz: 2-6Hz) and 
phases were extracted from the analytic signal as described above. To quantify phase 
Karalis et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 stability across all CS+ pip during freezing episodes we calculated the mean resultant length 
(MRL) for all time-frequency pairs. To evaluate the predictive value of 4 Hz power on 
freezing behaviour, we used wavelet analysis, that in some instances allows a higher 
temporal resolution, to quantify the spectral content of the signal for frequencies between 2 
to 12 Hz and computed freezing-triggered spectrograms. To evaluate the latency to freeze in 
response to the CS+, individual tone onsets and freezing period onsets for individual mice 
were binned (100 ms bin size), smoothed and averaged and cross-correlation analysis was 
performed on these data taking freezing onset epochs as the reference event (Fig.1e). In 
these conditions negative lags indicate the precedence of freezing events by conditioned 
stimuli. Statistical significance was evaluated using two different approaches and then 
combined. We first simulated 1000 instances of a uniform distribution of freezing episodes 
and recomputed the cross-correlation analysis. We next shuffled 1000 times the freezing ISIs 
of the actual freezing episodes to preserve the first order statistics of freezing behavior but 
perturb its relation to CS+ and recomputed the cross-correlation analysis. The results of both 
analyses were averaged to produce a more robust significance threshold. However, each 
individual result was not qualitatively and quantitatively different from the final average. 
One interesting characteristic of the cross-correlation is its oscillatory nature, which is due to 
the rhythmic repetition of CS+ (27 pips delivered at 1.1 Hz) and the tendency of elicited 
freezing to occur in response to these events (Fig. 1e).
For correlation analyses between freezing behaviour and 4 Hz oscillations (Fig. 3d and 
Supplementary Fig. 2), we first evaluated the percentage of time individual animals were 
freezing during the entire recording session. For 4 Hz quantification, 4 Hz oscillation 
periods were evaluated as periods of significant 4 Hz SNR, as compared to baseline (a 2 min 
period before the first CS presentation). 4 Hz expressed as the percentage of total time 
corresponds to the ratio of the total duration of 4 Hz episodes to the recording session 
duration. For electromyographic recordings, unilateral EMG signals were band pass filtered 
(100-1000 Hz), rectified and integrated (convolution with 100ms Gaussian kernel). Delta 
EMG signal was calculated as the differential EMG recorded in the left and right nuchal 
muscle 37. The absolute value of Delta EMG was then Z-scored transformed and averaged 
around freezing onsets (−500ms to 500ms) occurring during CS+ presentation, both during 
Habituation and fear conditioning.
Phase locking analyses
For phase modulation analysis, the variance-stabilized ln(Z) (Z = R2/n, R being the resultant 
length and n the sample size) statistics for the Rayleigh test for uniformity against the von 
Mises distribution were calculated 38, 39. To partially account for the sample size bias of the 
resultant length, only units with at least 100 spikes during freezing behaviour were taken 
into consideration. All results were corroborated using the pairwise phase consistency 
method, a bias-free estimate of neuronal synchronization based on the average pairwise 
circular distance
Karalis et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 with θi and θj being the phases from two different spikes. This method is analytically 
equivalent to the squared phase locking value40. To calculate the statistics for each unit, 
bootstrap analyses and Monte Carlo simulations were performed. In the Monte Carlo 
simulations, the Ysim value, indicating the expected value for a uniform prior distribution, 
was calculated for each sample size. Units for which the Yunit was exceeding the 95% 
percentile of the simulated Ysim estimate, were considered phase locked. For the bootstrap 
statistics, in order to take into account the higher-order statistics of the spike trains, for each 
unit, the inter-spike intervals were shuffled randomly and the potentially not uniform prior 
distribution was calculated.
Phases for both mPFC and BLA spikes were extracted using the mPFC 4Hz oscillation 
phase that exhibits the highest SNR and allows for direct comparison of the phase locking 
statistics. For the statistical evaluations, before the phase extraction, the prior distribution of 
phases of the 4 Hz oscillation was examined, and as is the case for other neuronal slow 
oscillations, this prior distribution deviates from the uniform distribution. This bias can alter 
the phase locking statistics and produce false positives38, 39. To account for this potential 
bias, the phases of the LFPs were transformed using the inverse of the empirical cumulative 
density function to return a signal with uniform prior distribution. Following this 
transformation, the spike phases are drawn from a uniform distribution allowing the 
application of the circular statistics for detecting deviations from uniformity. For normalized 
averaged phase density analyses, the circular histogram for each neuron was normalized to 
the maximum and the averaged circular histogram was computed.
Supervised learning algorithms
To establish the predictive value of dmPFC and BLA 4 Hz oscillations on the animal’s 
behavioural state (“freezing” or “not freezing”), we used two distinct machine learning 
approaches. Specifically, we used the 4 Hz signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the two structures 
as features to train a naïve Bayes classifier and a Support Vector Machine (SVM). Based on 
the time-resolved spectral decomposition of the signals (spectrograms), we calculated the 
mean 4 Hz SNR across three consecutive time bins (with a bin size of 150 ms) and we 
assigned a binary value based on the behavioral state of the animal during the corresponding 
time (450 ms: freezing= 1; mobility = 0). Each formed SNR-binary value pair constitutes a 
single data point used as an input to the classifier.
For this analysis we considered the total duration of the recordings, that is, all time bins 
were used in this analysis. SVM projects data into a higher-dimensional space and estimates 
a hyperplane that best separates the data points belonging to distinct classes41. Naïve Bayes 
classifiers assume independence of the probability distributions of the features and classify 
the test data based on the maximal posterior probability of class assignment42. The dataset 
was randomly split into a training dataset containing 70% of the data points, which was used 
to train the classifiers, and a test dataset containing the remaining 30% of data points that 
were used to test the accuracy of the algorithms. In order to estimate the stability of the 
algorithms and confidence intervals of the accuracy and receiver operating characteristic 
(ROC) curves of the classifiers, we implemented a Monte-Carlo procedure, whereby the 
Karalis et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 dataset was randomly split 1000 times in mutually exclusive training and test datasets and 
the algorithms were trained and tested on the respective datasets. The accuracy, defined as:
and the area under the curve (AUC) of the ROC curve were used to characterize the 
performance of the classifiers and were compared with the same algorithms trained on 
shuffled data using the exact same Monte-Carlo procedure.
Statistical analyses
For each statistical analysis provided in the manuscript, the Kolmogorov–Smirnov normality 
test was first performed on the data to determine whether parametric or non-parametric tests 
were required. When multiple statistical tests were performed, Bonferroni corrections were 
applied. Two different approaches were used to calculate the sample size. For studies in 
which we had sufficient information on response variables, power analyses were carried out 
to determine the number of mice needed. For studies in which the behavioural effect of the 
manipulation could not be pre-specified, such as optogenetic experiments, we used a 
sequential stopping rule (SSR). In essence this method enables null-hypothesis tests to be 
used in sequential stages, by analysing the data at several experimental points using t-tests. 
Usually the experiment started by testing only a few animals and if the P value was below 
0.05, the investigator declared the effect significant and stopped testing. If the P value was 
greater than 0.36, the investigator stopped the experiment and retained the null hypothesis.
For sample-size estimation using power analyses, we used an on-line power analysis 
calculator (G*Power3). For each analysis, sample size was determined using a power > 0.9 
and alpha error = 0.05. All tests were two-sided. Power analyses were computed for matched 
pairs (cued and contextual fear conditioning protocol (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 4) and 
pharmacological experiments (Supplementary Fig. 5)). In our behavioural experiments, a 
critical parameter is freezing level, and the numerical endpoint typically ranges between 50 
and 70% freezing for CS+ presentations immediately following auditory fear conditioning 
and between 10 and 30% freezing for CS− presentations. A minimum biologically 
significant difference in the mean values between CS− and CS+ conditions for cued fear 
conditioning (Fig. 1) or between habituation and test sessions for contextual fear 
conditioning (Supplementary Fig. 4), is 1.5-fold. If we assume a standard deviation of 1.5 
for a mean value of 60% freezing for CS+ test session and 20% freezing for CS− habituation 
(which are realistic numbers), then a minimum n = 6 is needed to reject the null hypothesis 
with 90% probability. Sample size determination using SSRs analyses was used for 
optogenetic experiments in which it was not possible to determine a priori the effect of the 
optical manipulation. We used P values of 0.05 and 0.36 for lower and upper criterion.
Muscimol inactivation
Mice were unilaterally implanted with stainless steel guide cannula (26 gauge; Plastics One) 
aimed at the MS using an angle of 10° and recording electrodes were implanted in the 
dmPFC and the dHip as described in the “Surgery and recordings” methodological section. 
Karalis et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 To target the MS, we used the following coordinates: 1 mm anterior to bregma; 0.7 mm 
lateral to midline and 3.0 to 3.3 mm ventral to the cortical surface with an angle of 10° in the 
coronal plane. The cannula was secured using Super-Bond cement (Sun Medical). On the 
injection day, muscimol (Muscimol-Bodipy-TMR-X conjugate, Invitrogen; 0.8 mM in PBS 
0.1 M) was infused at a rate of 0.2 μL/min during 2 min (total volume of 0.4 μL). On the 
injection day, muscimol was infused 15 min before the behavioural test. After the end of the 
experiment, muscimol was again infused with the same parameters to control for the drug 
diffusion within the MS and mice were perfused. Brains were collected for histological 
analyses as described below.
Anatomical analysis
Mice were euthanized with isoflurane and perfused through the left ventricle with 4% w/v 
paraformaldehyde (PFA) in 0.1 M PBS. Brains were dissected out and postfixed for 24 h at 
4 °C in the same solution. 60μm-thick sections were cut, mounted on gelatin-coated 
microscope slides, and dried. Sections were stained with toluidine blue, dehydrated and 
mounted. Electrolytic lesions were identified with conventional transmission light 
microscopy. Only recordings with confirmed lesions in cingulate/ prelimbic areas of dmPFC 
and basolateral amygdala (BLA) were included in our analyses. For verification of muscimol 
(MUS) injections in the medial septum (MS) and viral injections in dmPFC, BLA or motor 
cortex, serial 80 μm-thick slices were imaged using an epifluorescence system (Leica DM 
5000) fitted with a 10× dry objective. The location and the extent of the injections/infections 
were visually controlled. All included MUS injections were targeted and limited to the MS. 
Similarly, only infections accurately targeting the region of interest were considered for 
behavioural and electrophysiological analyses.
Virus injections and optogenetics
For optical identification of parvalbumin-expressing interneurons, conditional AAV 
encoding ChR2 (AAV-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-EYFP, serotype 5, Vector Core, 
University of North Carolina) or ArchT (AAV-FLEX-ArchT-GFP, serotype 5, Vector Core, 
University of North Carolina) were bilaterally injected into the dmPFC of PV-IRES-Cre 
mice (n = 12 mice) from glass pipettes (tip diameter 10-20 μm) connected to a Picospritzer 
(Parker Hannifin Corporation; approximately 0.4 μL per hemisphere) at the following 
coordinates : dmPFC: 2.0 mm anterior to bregma; 0.4 mm lateral to midline and 0.9 to 1.2 
mm ventral to the cortical surface. 1-2 weeks after the injection mice were implanted 
bilaterally with optic fibers (diameter: 200 μm; numerical aperture: 0.37; flat tip; Doric 
Lenses) at the same coordinates. All implants were secured using Super-Bond cement (Sun 
Medical). For experiments using optogenetic stimulation coupled to single unit and LFP 
recordings, one of the two optic fibers was combined to the array of 16 or 32 individually 
insulated nichrome wires. Single unit recordings during the manipulation of PV INs were 
performed as described in the “Surgery and recordings” section.
Behavioural and recording experiments were performed 3-5 weeks post-injection. The light 
(approximately 2 or 10 mW per implanted fiber) was bilaterally conducted from the laser 
(OptoDuet 473/593 nm, Ikecool) to the mice via two fiber-optic patch cords (diameter: 200 
μm, Doric Lenses), connected to a rotary joint (1×2 fiber-optic rotary joint, Doric Lenses) 
Karalis et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 that allowed mice to freely move in the behavioural apparatus. For optical control of 
parvalbumin-expressing interneurons, conditional AAV encoding ChR2 (AAV-EF1a-DIO-
hChR2(H134R)-EYFP, serotype 5, Vector Core, University of North Carolina) were 
bilaterally injected into the dmPFC or the BLA at the same coordinates as above or into the 
motor cortex of PV-IRES-Cre mice at the following coordinates : motor cortex: 2.0 mm 
anterior to bregma; 1.5 mm lateral to midline and 1.3 mm ventral to the cortical surface. 
Control experiments were performed using an AAV containing the DNA construct for only 
GFP (AAV-FLEX-GFP, Vector Core, University of North Carolina).
For optogenetic manipulation of PV INs during behaviour, we used a 30 sec analog dmPFC 
stimulation delivered at 1, 4, 8, 10, or 12 Hz. As a control we also used a stochastic 4 Hz 
analog dmPFC stimulation generated by an oscillator with a randomly time-modulated 
frequency drawn from a Gaussian distribution centered on 4Hz. The power spectrum of the 
signal displayed a broad peak around 4Hz but the duration of each cycle varied randomly 
from 0.15 to 0.6 sec, therefore destroying the regularity of the population activity. For motor 
cortex experiments, we used a 4 Hz analog stimulation. For BLA silencing experiments, a 
continuous pulse of blue light was applied during CS+ presentations 24 hrs following fear 
conditioning. After behavioural and recording experiments, mice were perfused and 
histological analysis was performed. A Supplementary Methods checklist is available.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Aknowledgements
We thank the members of the Herry laboratory for helpful discussions and comments on the manuscript and K. 
Deisseroth and E. Boyden for generously sharing material. This work was supported by grants from the French 
National Research Agency (ANR-2010-BLAN-1442-01; ANR-10-EQPX-08 OPTOPATH; LABEX BRAIN ANR 
10-LABX-43, LABEX TRAIL ANR 10-LABX-57), the European Research Council (ERC) under the European 
Union’s Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013)/ERC grant agreement no. 281168, the Conseil Regional 
d’Aquitaine (C.H.), the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale (FRM) (F.C.), the CNRS ATIP program (2014) and 
the city of Paris (Grant Emergence 2014), the French National Research Agency (ANR—10—LABX—54 MEMO 
LIFE ANR—11—IDEX—0001—02 PSL) (K.B.), Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy, EXC 1010), 
DFG Priority Program 1665 and 1392 and BMBF via Grant no. 01GQ0440 (BCCN Munich) (A.S.) and scholarship 
from the Erasmus Mundus program Neurasmus (N.K.).
References
1. Bosman CA, et al. Attentional stimulus selection through selective synchronization between monkey 
visual areas. Neuron. 2012; 75:875–888. [PubMed: 22958827] 
2. Siegel M, Donner TH, Oostenveld R, Fries P, Engel AK. Neuronal synchronization along the dorsal 
visual pathway reflects the focus of spatial attention. Neuron. 2008; 60:709–719. [PubMed: 
19038226] 
3. Rodriguez E, et al. Perception’s shadow: long-distance synchronization of human brain activity. 
Nature. 1999; 397:430–433. [PubMed: 9989408] 
4. Hipp JF, Engel AK, Siegel M. Oscillatory synchronization in large-scale cortical networks predicts 
perception. Neuron. 2011; 69:387–396. [PubMed: 21262474] 
5. Friedrich RW, Habermann CJ, Laurent G. Multiplexing using synchrony in the zebrafish olfactory 
bulb. Nature neuroscience. 2004; 7:862–871. [PubMed: 15273692] 
6. Riehle A, Grun S, Diesmann M, Aertsen A. Spike synchronization and rate modulation differentially 
involved in motor cortical function. Science. 1997; 278:1950–1953. [PubMed: 9395398] 
Karalis et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 7. Benchenane K, et al. Coherent theta oscillations and reorganization of spike timing in the 
hippocampal- prefrontal network upon learning. Neuron. 2010; 66:921–936. [PubMed: 20620877] 
8. Gregoriou GG, Gotts SJ, Zhou H, Desimone R. High-frequency, long-range coupling between 
prefrontal and visual cortex during attention. Science. 2009; 324:1207–1210. [PubMed: 19478185] 
9. Courtin J, et al. Prefrontal parvalbumin interneurons shape neuronal activity to drive fear expression. 
Nature. 2014; 505:92–96. [PubMed: 24256726] 
10. Likhtik E, Stujenske JM, Topiwala MA, Harris AZ, Gordon JA. Prefrontal entrainment of 
amygdala activity signals safety in learned fear and innate anxiety. Nature neuroscience. 2014; 
17:106–113. [PubMed: 24241397] 
11. Livneh U, Paz R. Amygdala-prefrontal synchronization underlies resistance to extinction of 
aversive memories. Neuron. 2012; 75:133–142. [PubMed: 22794267] 
12. Stujenske JM, Likhtik E, Topiwala MA, Gordon JA. Fear and safety engage competing patterns of 
theta-gamma coupling in the basolateral amygdala. Neuron. 2014; 83:919–933. [PubMed: 
25144877] 
13. Gabbott PL, Warner TA, Jays PR, Salway P, Busby SJ. Prefrontal cortex in the rat: projections to 
subcortical autonomic, motor, and limbic centers. J Comp Neurol. 2005; 492:145–177. [PubMed: 
16196030] 
14. Holstege G. The periaqueductal gray controls brainstem emotional motor systems including 
respiration. Progress in brain research. 2014; 209:379–405. [PubMed: 24746059] 
15. Subramanian HH, Balnave RJ, Holstege G. The midbrain periaqueductal gray control of 
respiration. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 
2008; 28:12274–12283. [PubMed: 19020021] 
16. Vianna DM, Landeira-Fernandez J, Brandao ML. Dorsolateral and ventral regions of the 
periaqueductal gray matter are involved in distinct types of fear. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2001; 
25:711–719. [PubMed: 11801296] 
17. Lesting J, et al. Patterns of coupled theta activity in amygdala-hippocampal-prefrontal cortical 
circuits during fear extinction. PloS one. 2011; 6:e21714. [PubMed: 21738775] 
18. Seidenbecher T, Laxmi TR, Stork O, Pape HC. Amygdalar and hippocampal theta rhythm 
synchronization during fear memory retrieval. Science. 2003; 301:846–850. [PubMed: 12907806] 
19. Yoder RM, Pang KC. Involvement of GABAergic and cholinergic medial septal neurons in 
hippocampal theta rhythm. Hippocampus. 2005; 15:381–392. [PubMed: 15630696] 
20. Stark E, et al. Inhibition-induced theta resonance in cortical circuits. Neuron. 2013; 80:1263–1276. 
[PubMed: 24314731] 
21. Siegle JH, Wilson MA. Enhancement of encoding and retrieval functions through theta phase-
specific manipulation of hippocampus. Elife. 2014; 3:e03061. [PubMed: 25073927] 
22. Atallah BV, Bruns W, Carandini M, Scanziani M. Parvalbumin-expressing interneurons linearly 
transform cortical responses to visual stimuli. Neuron. 2012; 73:159–170. [PubMed: 22243754] 
23. Nunez, PL.; Srinivasan, R. Electric fields of the brain: the neurophysics of EEG. Oxford University 
Press; 2006. second edition
24. Magee JC. Dendritic integration of excitatory synaptic input. Nature reviews. Neuroscience. 2000; 
1:181–190. [PubMed: 11257906] 
25. Vaidya SP, Johnston D. Temporal synchrony and gamma-to-theta power conversion in the dendrites 
of CA1 pyramidal neurons. Nature neuroscience. 2013; 16:1812–1820. [PubMed: 24185428] 
26. Steenland HW, Li XY, Zhuo M. Predicting aversive events and terminating fear in the mouse 
anterior cingulate cortex during trace fear conditioning. The Journal of neuroscience : the official 
journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2012; 32:1082–1095. [PubMed: 22262906] 
27. Goshen I, et al. Dynamics of retrieval strategies for remote memories. Cell. 2011; 147:678–689. 
[PubMed: 22019004] 
28. Ito J, et al. Whisker barrel cortex delta oscillations and gamma power in the awake mouse are 
linked to respiration. Nature communications. 2014; 5:3572.
29. Fujisawa S, Buzsaki G. A 4 Hz oscillation adaptively synchronizes prefrontal, VTA, and 
hippocampal activities. Neuron. 2011; 72:153–165. [PubMed: 21982376] 
Karalis et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Methods References
30. Engel AK, Konig P, Gray CM, Singer W. Stimulus-Dependent Neuronal Oscillations in Cat Visual 
Cortex: Inter-Columnar Interaction as Determined by Cross-Correlation Analysis. The European 
journal of neuroscience. 1990; 2:588–606. [PubMed: 12106294] 
31. Gray CM, Konig P, Engel AK, Singer W. Oscillatory responses in cat visual cortex exhibit inter-
columnar synchronization which reflects global stimulus properties. Nature. 1989; 338:334–337. 
[PubMed: 2922061] 
32. Young MP, Tanaka K, Yamane S. On oscillating neuronal responses in the visual cortex of the 
monkey. Journal of neurophysiology. 1992; 67:1464–1474. [PubMed: 1629758] 
33. Mitra PP, Pesaran B. Analysis of dynamic brain imaging data. Biophys J. 1999; 76:691–708. 
[PubMed: 9929474] 
34. Nolte G, et al. Identifying true brain interaction from EEG data using the imaginary part of 
coherency. Clinical neurophysiology : official journal of the International Federation of Clinical 
Neurophysiology. 2004; 115:2292–2307. [PubMed: 15351371] 
35. Barnett L, Seth AK. The MVGC multivariate Granger causality toolbox: a new approach to 
Granger-causal inference. Journal of neuroscience methods. 2014; 223:50–68. [PubMed: 
24200508] 
36. Buzsaki G, et al. Hippocampal network patterns of activity in the mouse. Neuroscience. 2003; 
116:201–211. [PubMed: 12535953] 
37. Steenland HW, Zhuo M. Neck electromyography is an effective measure of fear behavior. Journal 
of neuroscience methods. 2009; 177:355–360. [PubMed: 19010352] 
38. Siapas AG, Lubenov EV, Wilson MA. Prefrontal phase locking to hippocampal theta oscillations. 
Neuron. 2005; 46:141–151. [PubMed: 15820700] 
39. Sirota A, et al. Entrainment of neocortical neurons and gamma oscillations by the hippocampal 
theta rhythm. Neuron. 2008; 60:683–697. [PubMed: 19038224] 
40. Vinck M, van Wingerden M, Womelsdorf T, Fries P, Pennartz CM. The pairwise phase 
consistency: a bias-free measure of rhythmic neuronal synchronization. Neuroimage. 2010; 
51:112–122. [PubMed: 20114076] 
41. Cortes C, V V. Support-vector networks. Mach. Learn. 1995; 20:273–297.
42. Bishop, CM. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning Information Science and Statistics. 
Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.; Secaucus, NJ, USA: 2006. 
Karalis et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Freezing behaviour is triggered by internally generated mechanisms
(a) Experimental protocol. (b) Behavioural results. During habituation (Hab.), mice (n = 13) 
exhibited low freezing during CS− and CS+. Following conditioning (Day 2: Retrieval), CS+ 
(CS+ 1-12 grouped in blocks of 4) induced high freezing in comparison to CS− (Paired t-
tests, CS− versus each CS+ block: t(12) = −11.929; t(12) = −11.929; t(12) = −8.442, *** all 
Ps < 0.001). (c) Percentage of freezing exhibited during and between CS+ presentations 
(Paired t-test, freezing inside versus between CS+: t(12) = −2.480, * P = 0.029). (d) 
Distribution probability for freezing episode duration as a function of whether freezing was 
initiated inside or between CS+ presentations. Inset: Percentage of freezing episodes 
initiated inside or between CS+ presentations (n = 13 mice, Paired t-test, t(12) = 2.762, * P = 
0.016). (e) Cross-correlation analysis performed between freezing and CS+ onset (n = 13 
mice, 100 ms bins). Red vertical dotted line represents freezing onset. Black horizontal 
dotted line represents significance level. Black arrow indicates the highest probability for 
CS+ onset at 1.5 s prior freezing onset. Error bars: mean ± s.e.m. For box plots, the middle, 
bottom and top lines correspond to the median, lower quartile and upper quartile and 
whiskers to lower and upper extremes minus lower quartile and upper quartile, respectively..
Karalis et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Emergence of dmPFC 4 Hz oscillations during freezing behaviour
(a) Top, Representative dmPFC raw LFP traces recorded during Retrieval. 4 Hz oscillatory 
activity is prominent during freezing behaviour. Bottom, Representative spectrograms of 
dmPFC LFPs during Habituation and Retrieval sessions during CS− and CS+ presentations 
(blue lines: CS− onset; red lines: CS+ onset; Hab. and Retrieval: CS− 3 and 4 and CS+ 1 and 
2). White lines on the spectrogram indicate immobility/freezing episodes. (b) Representative 
spectrogram of dmPFC LFPs at a finer time resolution before, during, and after presentation 
of a CS+ during Retrieval (each red tick represents a single CS+ pip). White lines on the 
spectrogram indicate freezing episodes. (c) Averaged power spectrum of dmPFC LFPs 
recorded during Retrieval for freezing and no freezing periods (n = 13 mice, shaded areas: 
mean ± s.e.m.). Inset: Averaged dmPFC 2-6 Hz power during Retrieval for freezing and no 
freezing periods (Paired t-test, Freezing versus No Freezing: t(12) = −14.884, *** P < 
0.001). (d) Averaged signal to noise ratio (SNR) of 4 Hz oscillation (2-6 Hz) during 
Habituation and Retrieval (n = 12 mice, paired t-tests, Hab. versus Retrieval: dmPFC: t(11) = 
−6.805, *** P < 0.001). Shaded areas and error bars: mean ± s.e.m. For box plots, the 
middle, bottom and top lines correspond to the median, lower quartile and upper quartile and 
Karalis et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 whiskers to lower and upper extremes minus lower quartile and upper quartile, respectively. 
For representative examples (a, b), similar traces were observed for the 13 animals used in 
these experiments.
Karalis et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. dmPFC 4 Hz predict freezing
(a) Spectrograms of dmPFC LFP during Habituation (Hab.). White lines indicate 
immobility. (b) Correlation between dmPFC 4 Hz power and freezing during Hab. and 
Retrieval (n = 13 mice, paired t-tests: t(12) = 6.134, *** P < 0.001) (c) Left, Mean Z-score 
for neck electromyography (Δ EMG) during immobility/freezing (n = 7 mice) for CS+ 
presentations. Right, Averaged Δ EMG (0-500 ms post-CS+, Mann-Whitney U test, Hab. 
versus FC: U = 0, *** P < 0.001). (d) Correlation between freezing and dmPFC 4 Hz (n = 
13 mice; Pearson’s r = 0.88, P < 0.001). (e) Averaged freezing onset (left) and offset (right) 
Karalis et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 -triggered z-scored spectrograms of dmPFC LFPs (n = 13 mice; black lines: averaged z-
scored power envelope; white lines: first significant bin of 4 Hz power changes (increase: 
−0.53 ± 0.31 sec; decrease: −0.39 ± 0.10 sec; one sample t-test: first significant bin versus 
hypothetical mean = 0, increase: t(12) = 19.207, P < 0.001; decrease: t(12) = 16.615, P < 
0.001)). (f) Left, Receiver operating characteristics (ROC) analysis performed on Naïve 
Bayes (NBC) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifiers trained on dmPFC 4 Hz signal 
to noise ratio (SNR) during freezing. Right, averaged area under the curve for both 
classifiers versus shuffled data. (g) Accuracy of both classifiers to predict freezing. a.u.: 
arbitrary units. Power in log scale. Shaded areas and error bars: mean ± s.e.m. For box plots, 
the middle, bottom and top lines correspond to the median, lower and upper quartile and 
whiskers to lower and upper extremes minus lower quartile and upper quartile, respectively. 
For the representative example in (a), similar traces were observed for the 13 animals used 
in these experiments.
Karalis et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. BLA 4 Hz emerge during freezing
(a) Top, Representative BLA LFP traces recorded during Retrieval. Bottom, Spectrograms 
of BLA LFPs during Hab. and Retrieval during CS− and CS+ (black lines: CS− onset; red 
lines: CS+ onset). White lines indicate immobility/freezing. (b) Spectrogram of BLA LFPs 
before, during, and after presentation of a CS+ during Retrieval (red ticks represent single 
CS+ pip). White lines indicate freezing. (c) Averaged power spectrum of BLA LFPs 
recorded during Retrieval for freezing and no freezing (n = 13 mice). Inset: Averaged BLA 
2-6 Hz power during Retrieval for freezing and no freezing (Paired t-test, Freezing versus 
Karalis et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 No Freezing: t(12) = 6.077, *** P < 0.001). (d) Averaged 4 Hz signal to noise ratio (SNR) 
during Habituation and Retrieval (n = 12 mice, paired t-tests, Hab. versus Retrieval: BLA: 
t(11) = 3.334, ** P = 0.003). (e) Averaged freezing onset (left) and offset (right) -triggered 
z-scored spectrograms of BLA LFPs (n = 13 mice, black lines: averaged z-scored power 
envelope; white lines: first significant bin of 4 Hz power changes (increase: −0.27 ± 0.20 
sec; decrease: −0.46 ± 0.22 sec; one sample t-test: first significant bin versus hypothetical 
mean = 0, increase: t(12) = 10.976, P < 0.001; decrease: t(12) = 34.372, P < 0.001)). a.u.: 
arbitrary units. Spectral power in log scale. Shaded areas and error bars: mean ± s.e.m. For 
box plots, the middle, bottom and top lines correspond to the median, lower and upper 
quartile and whiskers to lower and upper extremes minus lower quartile and upper quartile, 
respectively. For representative examples (a, b), similar traces were observed for the 13 
animals used in these experiments.
Karalis et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 5. Synchronization of dmPFC and BLA 4 Hz during freezing
(a) Overlaid filtered (2-6 Hz) dmPFC and BLA LFP traces illustrating synchronized 4 Hz 
during freezing. (b) Circular distribution of the phase differences between dmPFC and BLA 
LFPs recorded for freezing during Retrieval compared to a control bootstrap simulated phase 
distribution (n = 13 mice). (c) Left, Representative coherogram for dmPFC and BLA LFPs 
recorded during Retrieval during CS+ (red ticks represent individual CS+ pip). White lines 
indicate freezing. Right, Averaged dmPFC and BLA LFPs imaginary coherence (Im. 
coherence,) for Freezing and No freezing during Retrieval (n = 13 mice). Inset: Averaged 
peak of Im. coherence for Freezing and No freezing during Retrieval (Paired t-test, Freezing 
versus No Freezing: t(12) = 3.933, * P = 0.002). (d) Top, Granger Causality (GC) analysis 
performed between dmPFC and BLA LFPs during freezing (n = 13 mice). Inset: Averaged 
Granger Causality (2-6 Hz) performed between dmPFC and BLA LFPs during freezing 
(Retrieval, Paired t-test, dmPFC → BLA versus BLA → dmPFC: t(12) = −5.940, *** P < 
0.001). Bottom, Averaged cross-correlogram performed between dmPFC and BLA LFPs 
(2-6 Hz). The peak (red bar) and negative skewness of the distribution indicate that dmPFC 
4 Hz oscillations lead the BLA oscillatory activity by 15 ms (n = 13 mice). Shaded area and 
error bars: mean ± s.e.m. For box plots, the middle, bottom and top lines correspond to the 
median, lower and upper quartile and whiskers to lower and upper extremes minus lower 
quartile and upper quartile, respectively. For representative examples (a, c), similar traces 
were observed for the 13 animals used in these experiments.
Karalis et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 6. 4 Hz oscillations synchronize dmPFC-BLA spiking activity
(a, d, f, i) Phase distribution relative to 4 Hz oscillations for dmPFC (a, d) and BLA (f, i) 
putative excitatory neurons (PN) (a, f) or putative inhibitory interneurons (IN) (d, i). (b, g, e, 
j) Circular distribution of the 4 Hz preferred phase for populations of dmPFC (b, e, top) and 
BLA (g, j, top) phase-locked PNs (b, g) and INs (e, j) during freezing (dmPFC: 44 PNs and 
26 INs; BLA: 25 PNS and 10 INs) and cumulative distribution of log-transformed 
Rayleigh’s test Z of dmPFC (b, e, bottom) and BLA (g, j, bottom) PNs (b, g) and INs (e, j). 
Inset, percentage of dmPFC and BLA neurons significantly phase-locked to 4 Hz 
oscillations. Dashed line, significant 4 Hz phase locking threshold (ln(Z)= 1.097, * P < 0.05, 
dmPFC: 44/92 PNs and 26/35 INs; BLA: 25/72 PNs and 10/15 PNs). (c, h) Cumulative 
distribution of peak correlation coefficient (c) and co-firing index (h) for pairs of dmPFC 
and BLA phase-locked and not phase-locked neurons during freezing and mobility. Insets: 
Maximum correlation coefficient (c) and co-firing index (h) for all pairs of recorded dmPFC 
and BLA neurons (Phase-locked pairs: n = 180; Non Phase-locked pairs: n = 911, Mann-
Whitney U test, top and bottom, phase-locked pairs during freezing versus mobility or non 
phase-locked pairs: U = 50313, 7893, 16200, 9413, ** P < 0.001, *** P < 0.001). Error bars: 
mean ± s.e.m.
Karalis et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 7. Optogenetic induction of dmPFC 4 Hz drives freezing
(a) Top left, Strategy used to activate PV INs. Top right, dmPFC micrograph from a PV-
IRES-Cre mouse expressing ChR2. Scale bar = 0.5 mm. Bottom, Spectrogram during 4 Hz 
analog stimulation. (b) Averaged normalized LFP power spectra of dmPFC LFPs during 
(Stim.) and outside (No stim.) stimulation (n = 8). (c) Percentage of freezing for ChR2 (n = 
8) or GFP (n = 8) mice before, during and after 4 Hz induction (two way ANOVA repeated 
measures; group: F(1,14) = 0.868, P = 0.367, time F(1,2) = 8.926, P = 0.001, group × time 
F(1,28) = 6.925, P = 0.0036); Unpaired t-tests: Day 1: Stim. t(14) = 3.712, ** P = 0.002; Day 
2: No stim., t(14) = 2.758, * P = 0.013). (d) Percentage of freezing for ChR2 mice (n = 6) 
during analog stimulation at 1, 4, 8, 10, 12 Hz (Stationary) or using a 4 Hz stochastic 
waveform (Stationary: One way repeated measures ANOVA: F(5,4) = 8.618, *** P < 0.001; 
Bonferroni corrected Paired t-tests: 4 versus 1 Hz: t(5) = 5.927, ** P = 0.0019; 4 versus 8 
Hz: t(5) = 4.712, ** P = 0.0053; 4 versus 10 Hz: t(5) = 7.632, *** P < 0.001; 4 versus 12 
Hz: t(5) = 4.009, ** P = 0.01; Paired t-test: 4 Hz stationary versus stochastic: t(5) = 3.533, # 
P < 0.016). (e) Percentage of freezing for ChR2 (n = 6) mice during dmPFC 4 Hz analog 
stimulation at 2 or 10 mW (Paired t-test: t(5) = 0.951, P = 0.385). (f) Maximum correlation 
and co-firing index for pairs of dmPFC and BLA neurons during and outside stimulation (n 
= 31 pairs, Mann-Whitney, U = 326 and 278, *P = 0.03; **P = 0.004). a.u.: arbitrary units. 
Power in log scale. Shaded area and error bars: mean ± s.e.m. For box plots, the middle, 
bottom and top lines correspond to the median, lower and upper quartile and whiskers to 
lower and upper extremes minus lower quartile and upper quartile, respectively. For 
Karalis et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 representative examples (a), similar images and traces were observed for the 16 (top, 8 
ChR2 and 8 GFP mice) and 8 (bottom, 8 ChR2 mice) animals used in these experiments.
Karalis et al.
Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
