 C A N C E R
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy induces breast cancer
metastasis through a TMEM-mediated mechanism
George S. Karagiannis,1,2* Jessica M. Pastoriza,1,3 Yarong Wang,1,2,4 Allison S. Harney,1,2,4,5
David Entenberg,1,2,4 Jeanine Pignatelli,1 Ved P. Sharma,1,4 Emily A. Xue,1 Esther Cheng,6
Timothy M. D’Alfonso,6 Joan G. Jones,1,2,7,8 Jesus Anampa,9 Thomas E. Rohan,8
Joseph A. Sparano,9 John S. Condeelis,1,2,4* Maja H. Oktay1,4,7*
Breast cancer cells disseminate through TIE2/MENACalc/MENAINV-dependent cancer cell intravasation sites, called
tumor microenvironment of metastasis (TMEM), which are clinically validated as prognostic markers of metastasis
in breast cancer patients. Using fixed tissue and intravital imaging of a PyMT murine model and patient-derived
xenografts, we show that chemotherapy increases the density and activity of TMEM sites and Mena expression
and promotes distant metastasis. Moreover, in the residual breast cancers of patients treated with neoadjuvant
paclitaxel after doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide, TMEM score and its mechanistically connected MENAINV isoform
expression pattern were both increased, suggesting that chemotherapy, despite decreasing tumor size, increases
the risk of metastatic dissemination. Chemotherapy-induced TMEM activity and cancer cell dissemination were
reversed by either administration of the TIE2 inhibitor rebastinib or knockdown of the MENA gene. Our results indicate
that TMEM score increases and MENA isoform expression pattern changes with chemotherapy and can be used in
predicting prometastatic changes in response to chemotherapy. Furthermore, inhibitors of TMEM function may
improve clinical benefits of chemotherapy in the neoadjuvant setting or in metastatic disease.
INTRODUCTION
Breast cancer cell intravasation and dissemination occur at micro-
anatomical structures called tumor microenvironment of metastasis
(TMEM). Each TMEM is composed of three different cell types in
direct physical contact: a tumor cell expressing the actin-regulatory
protein Mammalian-enabled (MENA), a perivascular macrophage,
and an endothelial cell (1, 2). TMEM sites have been identified in mouse
and human mammary carcinomas, and their density correlates with
metastatic outcome in breast cancer patients (3–5). High-resolution
intravital imaging (IVI) of murine primary breast tumors revealed
that TMEM sites induce local and transient dissociation of endothelial
cell junctions, through which migratory cancer cells may intravasate
and disseminate to secondary sites (1). TMEM-dependent vascular per-
meability is localized and is mediated by vascular endothelial growth
factor–A (VEGF-A) release from the TMEM-bound macrophages,
which express the angiopoietin receptor TIE2 (1).
Randomized prospective studies indicate that addition of paclitaxel
into the preoperative neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) regimen in-
creases the rate of pathologic complete response (pCR) but paradox-
ically does not improve the overall survival (6, 7). It has also been shown
that taxane-based chemotherapies promote tumor regrowth by inducing
angiogenesis. In particular, they mobilize bone marrow–derived mesen-
chymal and endothelial progenitors and CD11b+ myeloid cells, includ-
ing TIE2+ monocytes, into the primary tumor microenvironment (8–13).
TIE2+ monocyte progenitors transform into TIE2hi macrophages, which
associatewithnewlyconstructedtumorbloodvesselsandpromotetumor
regrowth (14, 15). As stated before, TIE2hi macrophages are also critical
constituents of the functional TMEM sites, where they mediate VEGF-
A–induced blood vessel permeability and tumor cell intravasation.
TMEM-dependent vascular permeability is necessary but not suffi-
cient for tumor cell intravasation, because intravasation also requires
the presence of discohesive, migratory cancer cells (1, 16–18). These
migratory cells express relatively large amounts of invasive, chemotactic
prometastatic MENA isoforms (19), such as the MENAINV isoform,
and relatively smaller amounts of the antimetastatic MENA isoform,
MENA11a (18–26). MENAINV expression is switched on in invasive
tumor cells by NOTCH-mediated macrophage contact and signaling
(27). Because paclitaxel induces an influx of macrophages into the
primary tumor, and these are required for TMEM assembly and
function (1, 2, 20, 21, 28, 29), we hypothesized that preoperative chemo-
therapy may increase the density and the activity of TMEM sites, as well
as expression of invasion-promoting MENA isoforms within the
primary tumor, and consequently induce cancer cell dissemination
and distant metastasis while at the same time reducing cancer burden.
Such a side effect would diminish the clinical benefit of NAC and would
need to be blocked by inhibitors of TMEM function. Here, we tested this
hypothesis by using fixed tissue and IVI of mouse mammary tumor
virus–polyoma middle T antigen (MMTV-PyMT) murine models
and patient-derived xenografts (PDXs), as well as pre- and post-NAC
(paclitaxel followed by doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide) breast
cancer tissue samples from human patients.
RESULTS
Paclitaxel delays tumor growth but increases TMEM
assembly in breast cancer
Because chemotherapy induces recruitment of endothelial progenitors
and TIE2+ monocyte progenitors into the tumor (10, 11, 30), and we
1Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, NY 10461, USA. 2Integrated Imaging Program, Albert Einstein College of Med-
icine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. 3Department of Surgery, Montefiore Medical Center,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10467, USA. 4Gruss-Lipper Biophotonics
Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. 5Department of
Radiology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. 6Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065,
USA. 7Department of Pathology, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY 10467, USA.
8Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of Med-
icine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. 9Department of Oncology, Montefiore Medical Center,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10467, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: georgios.karagiannis@einstein.yu.edu (G.S.K.);
john.condeelis@einstein.yu.edu (J.S.C.); maja.oktay@einstein.yu.edu (M.H.O.)
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
1 of 15
CO RRECTED  
1
9 
J U LY 
201
7;
 
S EE 
ERRATU M
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 have previously demonstrated that TIE2hi macrophages are required
for TMEM-mediated cancer cell intravasation (1), we examined the
possibility that neoadjuvant paclitaxel promotes TMEM assembly
and cancer cell dissemination and metastasis. We addressed this hy-
pothesis in the following breast carcinoma models: (i) transgenic
MMTV-PyMT mice bearing spontaneous breast tumors, (ii) friend
virus B (FVB) mice transplanted orthotopically with tumors from
MMTV-PyMT donors, and (iii) two PDX models, the HT17 and
HT33, developed previously in our laboratory (31). Animals were
treated with paclitaxel (10 mg/kg) every 5 days, three times in total
(Fig. 1A). The number of animals per group is shown in Fig. 1B. After
sacrificing the animals, we evaluated tumor growth, TIE2hi macrophage
recruitment, and TMEM assembly. Treatment of all groups began at
the early carcinoma stage (tumor size of ~0.3 cm diameter), when there
was minimal or absent necrosis (fig. S1). We chose to work with early-
stage PyMT mouse mammary carcinoma model, because it more accu-
rately reflects clinically relevant scenarios, where most women present
with small-sized tumors of <2 cm (32). At the end of treatment, all
tumors were histologically classified as invasive carcinomas (fig. S1).
Although paclitaxel-treated tumors showed delayed tumor growth
(Fig. 1C), they revealed a two- to threefold higher TMEM score (P <
0.001) compared to nontreated controls in all the experimental models
(Fig. 1, D and E).
Paclitaxel increases the infiltration of perivascular
TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages in the primary breast
cancer microenvironment
To explain the mechanism of increased TMEM assembly upon admin-
istering chemotherapy in breast tumors, we investigated whether
paclitaxel affects intratumoral macrophage density, as previously sug-
gested (33). We found a significant increase (P < 0.01) in the percentage
of macrophage-specific IBA1+ area in paclitaxel-treated mice in all
transplantation models, but not in the PyMT spontaneous model
(fig. S2A). Consistently, the absolute number of IBA1+ cells was sig-
nificantly increased (P < 0.001) in the paclitaxel-treated HT17 xeno-
graft but not in the PyMT spontaneous model, when quantified either
over the entire tissue (fig. S2B) or only in the perivascular niche (Fig.
1F), where TMEM structures are located.
The functional TMEM sites contain TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages
and invasive tumor cells in perivascular regions (1), and chemotherapy
may promote mobilization of such TIE2hi monocyte progenitors in
primary tumors (8, 10). Thus, we focused on and quantified the
TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophage subpopulation using multichannel immu-
nofluorescence (IF) imaging (Fig. 1, G to I, and fig. S2C) (10, 14, 34).
Paclitaxel-treated mice had significantly higher (P < 0.001) density of
TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages compared to the vehicle-treated controls,
regardless of whether these were assessed in the entire tissue (fig. S2D)
or only in the perivascular niches (Fig. 1G). The proportion of TIE2hi/
VEGFhi macrophages among all IBA1+ cells was also increased by
paclitaxel treatment (fig. S2, E and F). The significant increase of the
perivascular TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophage subpopulation (P < 0.0001)
was also demonstrated in the PyMT spontaneous model (Fig. 1G and
fig. S2F). Figure 1H illustrates a representative IF image of a TIE2hi/
VEGFhi macrophage quantified using CD31, IBA1, VEGF, and TIE2
staining. Figure 1I provides a representative example of VEGFhi and
VEGFlo macrophages as seen comparatively in the same field of view,
by combining CD31, IBA1, and VEGF staining.
In the PyMT spontaneous model, the total IBA1+ macrophage
counts did not correlate with TMEM score (Fig. 1J, left panel), but
we did find a correlation (P < 0.001) of TMEM with perivascular
TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages (R2 = 0.5) (Fig. 1J, right panel). In the
HT17 xenograft, both total IBA1+ macrophages (Fig. 1K, left panel)
and perivascular TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages (Fig. 1K, right panel)
correlated (R2 = 0.65 and R2 = 0.55, respectively) with TMEM score
(P < 0.001 in both cases). Both TMEM scores and perivascular TIE2hi/
VEGFhi macrophages remained increased upon chemotherapy treat-
ment, even after their values were normalized to microvascular den-
sity (fig. S3, A to C). In aggregate, neoadjuvant paclitaxel specifically
promotes the assembly of TMEM sites containing TIE2hi/VEGFhi
macrophages that are required for TMEM activity in primary breast
cancer.
Paclitaxel induces TMEM-dependent vascular permeability
in breast tumors
Because chemotherapy treatment may affect blood vessel dynamics by
inducing angiogenesis (9, 11–13, 35–37), we used IVI (Fig. 2, A and B,
and fig. S4A) to investigate whether neoadjuvant paclitaxel induces
TMEM-dependent (localized) or TMEM-independent (more universal)
blood vessel leakage. Tumors in mice treated with paclitaxel did not
demonstrate generalized blood vessel leakage of tetramethylrhodamine
(TMR)–conjugated 155-kDa dextran in the extravascular portion of
tumors. Instead, they showed localized areas of transient vascular
permeability called “bursting” (Fig. 2C and videos S1 and S2), similar
to those observed previously in untreated tumors (1). In particular,
Fig. 2C illustrates a characteristic example of peak bursting activity
(still image on the left of Fig. 2C; time lapse in video S1) on a TMEM
site, though not all TMEM sites presented with bursting activity (still
image on the right of Fig. 2C; time lapse in video S3). All the bursting
incidents occurred only at TMEM sites, in close proximity to at least
one Dendra2+ tumor cell and one CFP+ macrophage (Fig. 2C, left
image). As also reported previously (1), we never observed any bursting
incidents without juxtaposition to a clearly defined TMEM site. Bursting
was documented by the accumulation of dextran-TMR signal over time
around an active TMEM site, and no such accumulation was observed
away from TMEM (Fig. 2D). The intensity values from all TMEM-
mediated bursting incidents observed in paclitaxel-treated mice were
averaged and plotted over the entire time of bursting activity (fig. S4B),
which confirmed the transient nature of paclitaxel-induced, TMEM-
dependent vascular permeability.
To explicitly demonstrate that tumor cell intravasation after pa-
clitaxel treatment is dependent on TMEM-dependent bursting, we
measured the tumor cell–specific Dendra2 signal intensity in blood
vessel ROIs that were directly juxtaposed to or away from bursting
sites (Fig. 2D). The entire time-lapse imaging session of this field
can be seen in video S2. Signal intensity of dextran-TMR was also
quantified in the corresponding extravascular ROIs to confirm the
presence of bursting. We found that cancer cell intravasation in
paclitaxel-treated animals occurs during or shortly after the bursting
event, specifically at TMEM sites associated with bursting, but never
before the bursting event or at TMEM sites without bursting activity
(Fig. 2D).
In an independent validation experiment, a group of vehicle- or
paclitaxel-treated mice received an intravenous injection of dextran-
TMR for 1 hour and was then sacrificed and evaluated for vascular
permeability in fixed tumor sections. Multichannel IF staining included
endomucin as a blood vessel exclusion mask and an anti-TMR antibody
for assessing dextran leakage (fig. S5). A corresponding TMEM IHC
staining section was co-aligned to evaluate the presence/absence of
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
2 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 1. Paclitaxel delays tumor growth and promotes infiltration of TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages and TMEM assembly. (A) Experimental design and chemotherapy
scheme. i.v., intravenously. (B) Mouse models of breast carcinoma, estrogen receptor (ER) status in each model, and cohort sizes. (C) Tumor volume quantification on day 15
of the chemotherapy scheme shown in (A). Mann-Whitney U test. (D) TMEM score, assessed in 10 high-power fields (HPFs) by two pathologists, in mice treated as shown in
(A). Mann-Whitney U test. (E) TMEM identification by triple-stain immunohistochemistry (IHC) and representative images for each mouse model. Scale bar, 50 mm.
(F) Perivascular IBA1+ macrophages (Mϕ) in 10 HPFs (absolute counts) in PyMT spontaneous and HT17 xenograft tumors, treated with paclitaxel or vehicle control. Mann-Whitney
U test. (G) Perivascular TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages in 10 HPFs (absolute counts) quantified in PyMT spontaneous and HT17 xenograft tumors, treated with paclitaxel or vehicle
control. Mann-Whitney U test. (H) Multichannel IF of IBA1, CD31, TIE2, VEGF, and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) in two sequential sections of an MMTV-PyMT breast tumor
not treated with paclitaxel. Representative VEGFhi/TIE2hi macrophage (also coexpressing IBA1) is encircled with yellow dotted line. Scale bar, 10 mm. (I) Multichannel IF of IBA1,
CD31, VEGF, and DAPIin an HT17 xenograft tumor, treatedwithpaclitaxel, demonstrating one VEGFhi andone VEGFlo macrophage in afield. Scale bar, 15 mm. (J and K)Correlations
of macrophage infiltration (IBA1+ macrophages or VEGFhi/TIE2hi macrophages) with TMEM score in the PyMT spontaneous (J) and HT17 xenograft (K) models. R2 = Pearson’s
coefficient of determination; filled circles, control; open circles, paclitaxel.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
3 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 TMEM in each vascular profile that presented with vascular leakage.
Two examples of vascular profiles selected from a paclitaxel-treated
mouse are demonstrated in Fig. 2E; the upper row shows a vascular
profile with abundant extravascular dextran, which colocalized with
two TMEM sites, whereas the lower row shows a vascular profile
with absent or minimal extravascular dextran, which colocalized
with a blood vessel lacking TMEM (Fig. 2E). For quantification
purposes, ~20 to 30 vascular profiles were selected for each mouse,
based on tissue size, degree of vascularization, and quality of endomucin
staining. In both vehicle-treated and paclitaxel-treated groups, about
96 to 98% of the vascular profiles with extravascular dextran colocal-
ized with at least one TMEM (Fig. 2F).
Paclitaxel increases metastatic dissemination of
breast tumors
To assess whether paclitaxel treatment promotes tumor cell dissemina-
tion and metastatic incidence, we first used IVI to quantify and compare
incidence and frequency of bursting in mice treated with vehicle or
paclitaxel (Fig. 3, A to C, and videos S1 and S3). The incidence (at least
one bursting event in a ~4.5-hour imaging session) and frequency of
bursting were increased in mice treated with paclitaxel, when compared
to those treated with vehicle control (Fig. 3, B and C). The same con-
clusions were reached when frequency of bursting was normalized to
the number of TMEM sites, as measured in each field (fig. S6, A and
B). Unlike in late-stage tumors, in which TMEM shows spontaneous
Fig. 2. Paclitaxel induces vascular permeability exclusively at TMEM sites. (A) Experimental design and chemotherapy scheme. (B) Mouse models of breast car-
cinoma and cohort sizes. (C) Two examples of images taken from IVI of cfms-CFP mice grafted with MMTV-PyMT/Dendra2+ tumors. Left image: Bursting at TMEM (TMEM
activity) identified by the presence of TMR-conjugated 155-kDa dextran in the extravascular space. Outline of the burst indicated by dotted yellow line. Right image:
Absence of bursting at TMEM, as a control. Mf, macrophage; TC, tumor cell; EC, endothelial cell. Scale bar, 25 mm. (D) Left image: Region of interest (ROI) selection for
calculation of Dendra2/TMR signal intensity over time. Right graph: The quantification of extravascular dextran (red lines) and Dendra2-labeled intravasating cancer cell
(green lines) signal intensity in the selected TMEM-associated (solid lines) or non-TMEM (dotted lines) ROIs from the image shown on the left side. (E) Multichannel IF of
endomucin (first column), dextran-TMR (second column), their merged image along with DAPI (third column), the corresponding thresholded blood vessel and ex-
travascular dextran masks (fourth column), and the corresponding sequential section of TMEM IHC (fifth column) in MMTV-PyMT mice treated with paclitaxel. Top row:
TMEM-associated vascular profile. Bottom row: Vascular profile away from TMEM. Scale bar, 20 mm. (F) Percentage of vascular profiles with extravascular dextran that
have at least one TMEM site or no TMEM sites associated with them for vehicle-treated (top graph) or paclitaxel-treated (bottom graph) cases.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
4 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 3. Paclitaxel pro-
motes TMEM-dependent
vascular permeability,
cancer cell dissemina-
tion, and metastasis in
breast cancer. (A) Time-
lapse images from videos
S1(toprow)andS3(bottom
row). Time shown in mi-
nutes (t = 0 to 20 min). Top
row: Arrowhead follows
site of bursting from an
active TMEM in a paclitaxel-
treated mouse. Bottom row:
Arrowhead marks the lack
of bursting from an inactive
TMEMinapaclitaxel-treated
mouse. Scale bar, 50 mm.
(B) Incidence of bursting (at
leastonecompleteeventdur-
ing ~4.5 hours of imaging
per mouse) in paclitaxel-
and vehicle-treated MMTV-
PyMT/Dendra2 cfms-CFP
mice.(C)Frequencyofburst-
ing in paclitaxel and con-
trol MMTV-PyMT/Dendra2
cfms-CFPmice.Mann-Whitney
U test. (D) Representative
blood vessel (endomucin)
and extravascular dextran
masks, as obtained by IF
in mice treated with either
vehicle or paclitaxel, show-
ing TMEM-associated vas-
cular permeability (yellow
area). Scale bar, 100 mm.
(E) Quantification of extra-
vascular dextran area nor-
malized to blood vessel
area in mice treated with
either vehicle or paclitaxel
shown in (D). Mann-Whitney
Utest. (F) CTCs per milliliter
of blood collected before
sacrifice (day 15). Values
normalized to the control
group in each case to ac-
count for intercohort varia-
bility. Mann-Whitney U test.
(G) Correlation between
CTCsandTMEM.R2=Pearson’
s
coefficient of determination;
filled circles, control; open
circles, paclitaxel. (H) Detec-
tion of micrometastatic foci
in the lungs of paclitaxel-
treated mice. Two cases of
histologically detectable
metastases in lungs of PyMT transplants and HT17 xenografts, respectively, are shown. Scale bar, 100 mm. (I) Incidence of lung metastasis in mice treated with paclitaxel
or vehicle control, c2 test. (J) Quantification of histologically detectable lung metastases in mice treated with paclitaxel or vehicle control. Mann-Whitney U test. (K) Stereo-
microscopy in extracted mouse lung. Blood vessels visualized via tail vein injection of rhodamine-labeled lectin 1 hour before sacrifice, and cancer cells identified through
Dendra2 expression (arrow). Mann-Whitney U test. Scale bar, 20 mm. (L) Quantification of single cancer cell dissemination in lungs of PyMT transplants using fluorescence
stereomicroscopy. Mann-Whitney U test.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
5 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 activity as we have already reported (1), TMEM-associated bursting is a
very rare phenomenon in early carcinoma (Fig. 3C). In addition to IVI,
we quantified and compared extravascular dextran area as a percentage
normalized to the blood vessel area in fixed tumors of mice treated with
either vehicle or paclitaxel, using multichannel IF (Fig. 3, D and E, and
fig. S5). Extravascular dextran was about threefold (P < 0.05) more
abundant in paclitaxel-treated compared to vehicle-treated mice (Fig.
3, D and E).
Having shown that TMEM function is associated with tumor cell
intravasation in chemotherapy-treated tumors (Fig. 2D), we then asked
whether paclitaxel treatment induces increased metastatic dissemi-
nation of breast cancer cells. We found about a twofold increase in
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) (P < 0.05) after paclitaxel treatment in
all experimental models examined (Fig. 3F). TMEM score and CTCs
correlated positively in the PyMT spontaneous (R2 = 0.57, P < 0.001),
PyMT transplantation (R2 = 0.63, P < 0.001), as well as the HT17 (R2 =
0.28, P < 0.05) and the HT33 (R2 = 0.28, P < 0.05) PDX models, though
correlations were weaker in the HT17 and HT33 xenografts (Fig. 3G).
Because severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice used in the
PDX models are engineered to lose adaptive immunity but retain innate
immunity, it is possible that the weaker correlations were due to a dif-
ferential degree of immune-mediated rejection of CTCs.
To further determine the effect of paclitaxel on cancer cell dissemi-
nation to distant sites, we harvested lungs and evaluated metastatic
foci histologically (Fig. 3H and fig. S5). We found an increase in both
the metastatic incidence (at least one micrometastatic focus of more
than five tumor cells) (Fig. 3I) and the number of cancer cell micro-
metastases in the lungs of paclitaxel-treated mice (Fig. 3J). In addi-
tion, we quantified single-cell dissemination of breast cancer cells in
the lungs of FVB recipient mice after syngeneic transplantation of
MMTV-PyMT/Dendra2+ tumors using ex vivo microscopy (Fig. 3K
and fig. S5) and found about a twofold increase (P < 0.01) of single
Dendra2+ breast cancer cells in the lungs of paclitaxel-treated mice (Fig.
3L). Overall, these data indicate that, in early-stage breast cancers,
chemotherapy increases vascular permeability at TMEM sites, which
is accompanied by increased cancer cell dissemination.
Paclitaxel promotes the expression of invasive isoforms of
Mena in breast tumors
Because our data showed that paclitaxel treatment increases TMEM
assembly, as well as TMEM-dependent vascular permeability and meta-
static dissemination, we hypothesized that it also increases the propor-
tion of highly migratory cancer cells, which express invasive isoforms of
the actin-regulatoryproteinMENA(21, 23) andare capable of assembling
and using TMEM sites to intravasate, a major prerequisite for successful
metastatic seeding. To test this hypothesis, we first performed quan-
titative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
analysisfortotalMENA(PanMena), Mena11a, andMenaINV on formalin-
fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumors from the PyMT spontaneous
and HT17 xenograft models (fig. S7A). Paclitaxel treatment significantly
increased(P<0.01)theexpressionofPanMena,MenaINV,andMenaCalc,
a marker that takes into account the full repertoire of invasive Mena iso-
forms including MENAINV (38, 39), but not that of the antimetastatic
Mena11a (Fig. 4, A to D), and correlates with distant recurrence in breast
cancerpatients(38,39).In addition, both MenaCalc and MenaINV corre-
lated positively with increased TMEM score (MenaINV, P < 0.001;
MenaCalc,P <0.01)in bothmodelstested(Fig.4, EandF),with MenaINV
demonstrating higher correlation coefficientsthan MENACalc. Paclitaxel-
mediated MenaINV-increased expression (P < 0.0001) and correlation
with TMEM score (P < 0.001) were also confirmed at the protein level
in both the PyMT spontaneous and the HT17 xenograft models (Fig. 4,
G to I, and fig. S7, B and C). As shown in the specific MENAINV IF, the
pattern of MENAINV expression in PyMT mice was heterogeneous (Fig.
4G and fig. S7C), consistent with previous observations (40). We
found a positive correlation between TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophage in-
filtration and MenaINV expression (P < 0.001, R2 = 0.68) (fig. S8A), as
well as MenaCalc (P < 0.05, R2 = 0.24) (fig. S8B), supporting the ev-
idence that direct contact of tumor cells with macrophages induces
MenaINV expression (27). In addition, there was an inverse correla-
tion for the antimetastatic Mena11a (P < 0.01, R2 = 0.3) (fig. S8C).
Paclitaxel promotes breast cancer cell dissemination in a
MENA-dependent manner
Animals grafted with MMTV-PyMT MENA-null tumors do not develop
CTCs and lung metastases (28), indicating that MENA is necessary for
tumor cell dissemination. Having shown that paclitaxel increases TMEM
assembly (Fig. 1D) and invasive MENA isoform expression (Fig. 4, C, D,
G, and H), we next investigated whether paclitaxel-mediated tumor cell
dissemination in invasive breast cancer was also MENA-dependent.
To test this hypothesis, we orthotopically transplanted MENA−/− or
MENA+/+ CFP-fluorescent PyMT tumors into wild-type syngeneic hosts
to assess tumor cell intravasation and dissemination in the lungs of mice
after paclitaxel treatment (Fig. 5, A and B). MENA−/− mice did not ex-
press MENAINV protein (fig. S7B). Quantitative assessment of macro-
phages in the perivascular niches of MENA−/− mice revealed both
increased IBA1+ and TIE2hi/VEGFhi IBA1+ macrophage infiltration after
paclitaxel treatment (Fig. 5, C to F, and fig. S9, A to C), similar to changes
observed in PyMT and HT17 MENA+/+ mice after receiving chemotherapy
(Fig.1,FandG).Theseresultsindicate thatMENAdoesnot interfere with
paclitaxel-mediated TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophage recruitment in the pri-
mary breast tumor microenvironment.
Because a MENA-expressing tumor cell constitutes one of the
elements of the tripartite TMEM structure, MENA−/− tumors do not
assemble TMEM. However, because the perivascular TIE2hi/VEGFhi
macrophages could be recruited by paclitaxel treatment even in the
MENA−/− tumors (Fig. 5, E and F), we next investigated whether these
TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages were by themselves sufficient to increase
cancer cell dissemination, without the presence of a complete TMEM
structure. The absence of the Mena gene completely eliminated CTCs
(P < 0.0001) and the number of single cancer cells disseminating in the
lungs (P < 0.0001) (Fig. 5, G and H), consistent with previous findings
(28). This suppression was consistent regardless of vehicle or paclitaxel
treatment (Fig. 5, G and H), indicating that the elimination of the
Mena gene in breast cancers affects cancer cell intravasation and dis-
semination, although it still permits the paclitaxel-mediated increase of
perivascular TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages. Thus, paclitaxel treatment in
MENA−/− PyMT-CFP transplants failed to boost the number of CTCs
in the blood or disseminated cells in the lungs, as seen in the case of
MENA+/+ mice (Fig. 5, G and H). In summary, these data show that
paclitaxel-induced tumor cell dissemination is also dependent on
MENA expression, further supporting the essential role of TMEM in
paclitaxel-stimulated tumor cell dissemination.
Doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide treatment elicits
prometastatic changes similar to paclitaxel in the breast
cancer microenvironment
Having shown that paclitaxel induces TMEM- and MENA-mediated
prometastatic changes in the primary breast tumor microenvironment
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
6 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 in a wide variety of mouse models, we then examined whether similar
effects could be elicited by other chemotherapeutics. We selected the
doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide combinatorial chemotherapy because it
is a main component of NAC in human breast cancer patients (41, 42).
Transgenic MMTV-PyMT mice bearing spontaneous breast tumors
received a total of three doses of doxorubicin (5 mg/kg, intravenously)
every 5 days and one single dose of cyclophosphamide (120 mg/kg,
intraperitoneally) (Fig. 6, A and B). Upon histological examination
of the resulting tumors, necrosis and cell death were more evident in the
doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide-treated tumors than in vehicle-treated
Fig. 4. Paclitaxel promotes the expression of invasive isoforms of MENA in the primary breast cancer microenvironment. (A to D) Gene expression of MENA or
MENA isoforms (real-time RT-PCR) after RNA extraction from FFPE tumors. Gene expression of Pan-Mena (A), Mena11a (B), MenaCalc (C), and MenaINV (D) indicated.
Mann-Whitney U test. NS, not significant. (E and F) Correlations of MenaCalc with TMEM and MenaINV gene expression with TMEM in the PyMT spontaneous (E) and
HT17 xenograft (F) tumors. R2 = Pearson’s coefficient of determination; filled circles, control; open circles, paclitaxel. (G) MENAINV protein expression visualized by
MENAINV IF and DAPI in PyMT spontaneous and HT17 xenograft tumors, treated with paclitaxel or vehicle control. Scale bar, 100 mm. (H) Quantification of the MENAINV-positive
area (%) in tumors shown in (G). Mann-Whitney U test. (I) Correlation of MENAINV-positive area (%) with TMEM score in the PyMT spontaneous (top plot) and HT17 xenograft
(bottom plot) models. R2 = Pearson’s coefficient of determination; filled circles, control; open circles, paclitaxel.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
7 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 mice (Fig. 6C). TMEM score was significantly (P < 0.05) increased after
doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide treatment (Fig. 6, C and D) and was
accompanied by a significant ~1.3-fold (P = 0.027) increase in the num-
ber of CTCs (Fig. 6E), as well as increased numbers of perivascular
TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages compared to vehicle-treated controls
(Fig. 6F). Therefore, the combination of doxorubicin and cyclophos-
phamide affects TMEM density, TMEM activity, and CTCs in a similar
fashion to paclitaxel, further indicating that similar prometastatic effects
may be elicited by a variety of NAC regimes.
NAC with paclitaxel induces prometastatic changes in the
tumor microenvironment of human breast cancer patients
On the basis of findings shown collectively in Figs. 1 to 6, we then
expanded our investigations to human breast cancer patients receiving
NAC, containing paclitaxel, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide. The
change in TMEM density in post-NAC specimens was evaluated in
20 patients with ER+/HER2− disease, who were treated with weekly
paclitaxel for up to 12 weeks followed by four cycles of doxorubicin
plus cyclophosphamide and had residual disease after NAC [residual
cancer burden (RCB) score 2 to 3]. None of the patients received pre-
operative tamoxifen. When TMEM scores were graphed for each pa-
tient individually (Fig. 7A), the following observations were made: (i)
Most patients had an increase in TMEM scores after NAC, with a few
increasing more than fivefold (patients #3, #11, #15, #19, and #20);
(ii) TMEM scores of 50% of patients moved from low/intermediate-
into high-risk group (score ≥ 23; red line on the graph) after NAC
[TMEM score of 23 was established as the cutoff that separates patients
into low/intermediate- and high-risk groups for developing distant
metastasis (5)]; (iii) TMEM score remained unaltered or even worsened
by the end of the treatment in 15% of patients who had high TMEM
scores before the NAC (patients #4, #9, and #17); and (iv) there was
not a single patient that demonstrated a decrease in TMEM score
after NAC. Representative images of TMEM before and after NAC
are shown for patients #3 and #7 (Fig. 7B). When analyzed as a cohort,
the mean TMEM score was significantly increased (Wilcoxon test; P <
0.0001) in post-NAC samples compared to pre-NAC core biopsies (Fig.
7C). These data suggest that NAC may have unwanted long-term
consequences in some breast cancer patients.
To further substantiate the translational importance of our pre-
clinical data from PyMT and PDX mice receiving neoadjuvant paclitaxel,
we compared MENAINV expression in pre- and post-NAC samples. We
observed a significant increase (P < 0.01) in MENAINV-positive area be-
tween pre-NAC biopsies and post-NAC tumors (Fig. 7, D and E). In
addition, we analyzed MENAINV expression by qRT-PCR in fine needle
aspiration (FNA) biopsies taken before and 1 week after the second dose
of weekly paclitaxel in an independent small cohort of patients (n = 5).
Fig. 5. Paclitaxel promotes breast cancer cell dissemination and metastasis in a MENA-dependent manner. (A) Experimental design and chemotherapy scheme.
(B) Mouse models of breast carcinoma and cohort sizes. (C) Multichannel IF of IBA1, CD31, VEGF, and DAPI in MENA−/− MMTV-PyMT-CFP transplanted tumors, treated with either
vehicle control (top panel) or paclitaxel (bottom panel). Arrowheads: VEGFhi/IBA1+ macrophages. Scale bar, 25 mm. (D) Perivascular IBA1+ macrophages (Mϕ) counted in 10 HPFs
(absolute counts) in MENA−/− MMTV-PyMT-CFP transplanted tumors treated with paclitaxel or vehicle control. Mann-Whitney U test. (E and F) Perivascular TIE2hi/VEGFhi
macrophages (Mϕ) quantified in MENA−/− MMTV-PyMT-CFP transplanted tumors, treated with paclitaxel or vehicle control. Absolute counts (E) or percentages (F) among
all perivascular IBA1+ macrophages (Mϕ). Mann-Whitney U test. (G) CTCs per milliliter of blood collected from MENA+/+ and MENA−/− PyMT-CFP mice. Values normalized to
the control group in each case to account for intercohort variability. Mann-Whitney U test. (H) Quantification of single cancer cell dissemination in the lungs of MENA+/+ and
MENA−/− PyMT-CFP transplants, using fluorescence stereomicroscopy. Mann-Whitney U test.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
8 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Even at such an early phase of paclitaxel treatment, we were able to ob-
serve an increase of MENAINV gene expression in four of five breast
cancer patients (patients #1 and #3 to #5) (Fig. 7F), suggesting that
the TMEM- and MENA-dependent prometastatic changes may have
already been initiated in these patients.
Inhibition of the TIE2 receptor reverses the
paclitaxel-mediated prometastatic changes
We postulated that selective TIE2 inhibitors could not only be success-
fully used to counteract the angiogenic potential of NAC-induced
endothelialprogenitorcellinfiltration (9,12,13,35,36)butalso TMEM-
and MENA-dependent prometastatic changes, given that TIE2 inhibi-
tors could target TMEM-associated TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages.
To address this question, we first investigated the effects of rebastinib,
a TIE2 inhibitor, on TMEM assembly, vascular permeability, and CTCs
in the PyMT transplantation and HT17 PDX mammary tumor models
used in our studies. Animals received NAC with or without rebastinib
(Fig. 8, A and B). Treatment with rebastinib alone did not significantly
affect the overall TMEM score (Fig. 8, C and D) or the density of peri-
vascular TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages (Fig. 8, E and F). However, it sig-
nificantly (P < 0.01) reduced the number of CTCs in both animal models
(Fig. 8, G and H), thus impairing hematogenous dissemination, without
affecting the assembly of TMEM intravasation sites, indicating inhibition
of TMEM activity.
Treatment with paclitaxel alone increased perivascular TIE2hi/
VEGFhi macrophages, TMEM assembly, and activity (Fig. 8, C to H), in
consistency with Figs. 1 and 3. However, administration of rebastinib
in paclitaxel-treated animals decreased the number of perivascular
TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages (Fig. 8E) and decreased CTCs to the level
observed in the control animals (Fig. 8, G and H) without affecting
TMEM assembly (Fig. 8, C and D). These data indicate that TIE2
inhibition successfully blocks the function but not the assembly of
TMEM sites, which is sufficient to suppress cancer cell dissemination.
We next investigated whether rebastinib-mediated suppression
of tumor cell dissemination observed in the paclitaxel-treated mice
was due to inhibition of TMEM-associated macrophage function. To
address this issue, we used IVI (Fig. 8, A and B) and again found that
baseline incidence and frequency of bursting, a TMEM-associated
activity, matched to the previously acquired data in the “paclitaxel-only”
group (compare Fig. 8, I and J, with Fig. 3, B and C). However, the
coadministration of rebastinib in paclitaxel-treated mice completely
abolished the incidence and frequency of bursting (Fig. 8, I and J), fur-
ther suggesting that TIE2 inhibition blocks chemotherapy-driven,
TMEM-mediated vascular permeability and cancer cell dissemination.
DISCUSSION
Accumulating evidence indicates that chemotherapy evokes a host re-
pair response, during which bone marrow–derived cells (BMDCs)
infiltrate the primary tumor microenvironment and facilitate neoan-
giogenesis and tumor regrowth (10, 11). Here, we have shown that
through such BMDC recruitment, NAC may increase cancer cell dis-
semination and induce a more aggressive tumor phenotype with
increased metastasis. The mechanism involves both the assembly of
TMEM sites and the increased MENAINV expression in residual cancer
after NAC. These results are consistent with our previous findings that
MENA expression is required for TMEM assembly and for cancer
cell dissemination through a TMEM MENAINV and TIE2hi/VEGFhi
macrophage-dependent mechanism (1, 20, 21, 29). Although the effects
of taxanes and other chemotherapeutics on neovascularization have
been adequately described (8, 10, 12, 13, 35, 43), our study provides in-
sight into the mechanisms by which paclitaxel and other chemotherapies
Fig. 6. Nontaxane chemotherapies induce TMEM-dependent prometastatic
changes in the breast cancer microenvironment. (A) Experimental design
and chemotherapy scheme. (B) Mouse models of breast carcinoma and cohort
sizes. (C) Representative histological [hematoxylin and eosin (H&E); left column]
and TMEM IHC sections (right column) from MMTV-PyMT mice receiving doxorubicin/
cyclophosphamide treatment or vehicle control, as shown in (A). Scale bar, 50 mm.
(D) TMEM score in MMTV-PyMT mice treated with either vehicle control or doxorubicin/
cyclophosphamide. Mann-Whitney U test. (E) CTCs per milliliter of blood collected
before sacrifice (day 15). Values normalized to the control group in each case, to
account for intercohort variability. Mann-Whitney U test. (F) Proportion of peri-
vascular TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages among all IBA1+ macrophages, quantified in
MMTV-PyMT mice treated with either doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide or vehicle con-
trol. Mann-Whitney U test.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
9 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 modulate the cancer microenvironment to promote breast cancer cell
intravasation and dissemination to distant sites, as well as a TIE2-
directed therapeutic approach to counteract paclitaxel-mediated induc-
tion of cancer cell dissemination (Fig. 8K). Thus, this work is primarily
focused on the chemotherapy effect on cancer cell dissemination via
TMEM/MENA-mediated mechanism.
We demonstrated that chemotherapy increases macrophage density
in a PDX model but not in spontaneous PyMT. Our findings in the
PyMT model are in discrepancy with the Coussens group (44). This
may be because we worked with 8- to 9-week-old mice bearing early-
stage spontaneous carcinomas, whereas the Coussens group worked
with 12-week-old mice, which typically have advanced-stage tumors.
However, our findings demonstrated that chemotherapy promotes
an increase in perivascular TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages (Fig. 8K),
which is consistent with studies showing that this population associates
with sites of (patho)physiological angiogenesis, especially as a host
repair mechanism after cytotoxic damage through chemotherapy
(14, 15, 45–47). Although it is not clear whether TIE2hi/VEGFhi
macrophages belong to the “classically activated” (M1) or “alternatively
activated” (M2) group, they are crucial for modulating the tumor
microenvironment in response to cytotoxic therapies (10, 48). Our
observation that other chemotherapeutics, such as doxorubicin/
cyclophosphamide, are capable of perivascular TIE2hi/VEGFhi macro-
phage recruitment, TMEM assembly, and TMEM-dependent tumor
cell intravasation further supports the idea that the mechanism by
which chemotherapy induces these prometastatic effects is a generic
host repair mechanism in response to extensive tissue damage and not a
paclitaxel-specific phenomenon. For instance, TIE2+ macrophages
also express the chemokine receptor CXCR4, and chemotherapy may
increase the expression of the CXCR4 ligand CXCL12 in the primary
tumor microenvironment (10). Therefore, it is very likely that the pro-
metastatic TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages are recruited through a distinct
chemotactic axis in chemotherapy-treated individuals.
In addition, increased macrophage infiltration into tumors upon
paclitaxel treatment increases the contact between tumor cells and
macrophages, which is known to stimulate the expression of MENAINV
via NOTCH pathway activation, resulting in increased MENAINV and
TMEM-dependent intravasation (27). These observations suggest that
paclitaxel treatment may have induced MENAINV and MENACalc
expression due to chemotherapy-driven macrophage infiltration, re-
sulting in increased TMEM assembly and function as described here
(Fig. 8K). This may be an active process and not simply the result of
selective survival of MENA-expressing tumor cells during paclitaxel
treatment (49). Otherwise, our data are in agreement with findings
from Oudin et al. (49), who showed increased MENA and MENAINV
expression in paclitaxel-treated compared to control MDA-MB-231
xenografts.
The observed increase in disseminating tumor cells upon chemo-
therapy treatment as a direct consequence of macrophage contact–
induced MENAINV overexpression is supported by two key findings
reported here. First, MENAINV and MENACalc expression correlated
especially well with TIE2hi macrophages, consistent with earlier studies
in humans and in mice (18, 20, 29). Second, the absence of all MENA
isoforms completely abolished cancer cell dissemination and distant
metastasis in vivo, regardless of whether those mice received paclitaxel
or not and without affecting TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophage recruit-
ment, indicating that MENA expression is an essential prerequisite for
paclitaxel-induced breast cancer cell transendothelial migration in vivo.
Our study indicates that the TMEM score and MENAINV increase
in breast cancer samples from patients treated with NAC including
doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and paclitaxel, suggesting that TMEM
score and MENAINV might be used in predicting development of
prometastatic changes in primary tumor microenvironment in response
to NAC.Thisisimportantbecausemanybreastcancerpatientsaretreated
with NAC, which typically lasts about 6 months, and currently, there
Fig. 7. NAC in breast cancer patients promotes TMEM assembly and
increased MENAINV expression. (A) Individual TMEM scores of 20 patients before
and after receiving NAC, which included weekly paclitaxel (80 mg/m2 × 12 con-
secutive weeks) followed sequentially by dose-dense AC chemotherapy [doxoru-
bicin (60 mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide (600 mg/m2) every 2 weeks × four
cycles, plus pegfilgrastim (6 mg, subcutaneously) on day 2 of each cycle]. The
patients did not receive tamoxifen. Red line: TMEM high-risk cutoff point
according to (5). (B) Representative images of TMEM triple-stain IHC in patients
#3 and #7 in the pre-NAC core biopsies (upper panels) and post-NAC resected tumors
(lower panels). Scale bar, 50 mm. (C) Mean TMEM scores in the 20 human breast
cancers shown in (A), before and after receiving NAC, Wilcoxon test. (D) Representa-
tive images of MENAINV protein expression, as visualized by MENAINV IF and DAPI in
a patient receiving NAC. Scale bar, 100 mm. (E) Quantification of the MENAINV-positive
area in pre- and post-NAC patient samples. Assay performed in only seven of the
patients shown in (A) because of limited availability of pre-NAC biopsy material for
the remaining 13 patients. Mann-Whitney U test. (F) MENAINV gene expression, as
assessed by real-time RT-PCR, in FNA biopsies taken from five breast cancer patients
before and after 2 weeks of receiving NAC with paclitaxel.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
10 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 8. TIE2 inhibitor rebastinib eliminates the prometastatic effects of paclitaxel. (A) Experimental design and chemotherapy scheme. (B) Mouse models of breast
carcinoma and cohort sizes. (C and D) TMEM scores in the PyMT transplantation model (C) and the HT17 xenograft model (D), treated with vehicle control, rebastinib,
paclitaxel, or a combination of rebastinib with paclitaxel. Mann-Whitney U test. (E and F) Perivascular TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages quantified in 10 HPFs in the PyMT
transplantation model (E) or in the HT17 xenograft model (F), treated with vehicle control rebastinib, paclitaxel, or a combination of rebastinib with paclitaxel. Mann-
Whitney U test. (G and H) CTCs per milliliter of blood collected before sacrifice (day 15) of mice [PyMT transplantation (G); HT17 xenograft (H)]. Values normalized to the
control group in each case to account for intercohort variability. Mann-Whitney U test. (I) Incidence of bursting (at least one complete event during 4.5 hours of imaging
per mouse) in paclitaxel-treated MMTV-PyMT/Dendra2 cfms-CFP mice that either received or did not receive rebastinib. (J) Frequency of bursting in paclitaxel-treated
MMTV-PyMT/Dendra2 cfms-CFP mice that either received or did not receive rebastinib. Mann-Whitney U test. (K) Proposed model of chemotherapy-induced prometa-
static changes and cancer cell dissemination. Chemotherapy treatment increases the density of TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages within the primary tumor. In addition to
inducing angiogenesis, these macrophages assemble active TMEM structures. Chemotherapy treatment also increases expression of the actin-regulatory protein
MENAINV isoform in tumor cells due to their contact with infiltrating macrophages, which makes these cancer cells highly migratory and invasive. Upon arriving at
the blood vessels, some of the MENAINV-expressing cancer cells assemble active TMEM sites, which other MENAINV-expressing cells then use to intravasate. Together,
chemotherapy-mediated MENAINV overexpression and TMEM assembly in breast cancer contribute to TMEM-dependent cancer cell dissemination and distant me-
tastasis. Targeting the function of TMEM-associated macrophage subpopulation by a TIE2 inhibitor counteracts TMEM-mediated cancer cell dissemination induced
by chemotherapy treatment.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
11 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 are no markers that predict response to NAC (43). Our data indicate
that in patients who have RCB post-NAC, such as those with ER+
disease, NAC could induce metastases via TMEM, despite inducing
partial tumor regression. In particular, only 16.5% of patients with
ER+/HER2− disease achieve pathologic complete response (pCR)
with NAC, indicating that our findings may apply to the majority
of patients, that is, those who do not achieve pCR (50). Although
addition of paclitaxel to NAC increases the percentage of patients with
pCR, it does not improve the overall survival (6, 7), suggesting that
some patients do not draw long-term benefit from NAC. Because we
showed that after only two doses of chemotherapy, MENAINV in-
creases in some patients, we speculate that MENA isoform expression
status in FNA biopsy after the first 2 weeks of chemotherapy could pre-
dict which patients would receive full benefit from NAC and in which
continuation of NAC would be harmful. For example, an approach
could be developed to routinely assess the expression of MENAINV
in FNA samples after the second chemotherapeutic dose. If the invasive
isoforms of MENA do not increase, then the chemotherapy could be
continued to its completion. Conversely, if there is an increase in the
invasive MENA isoform, then the chemotherapy could be discontinued
andthesepatientscouldbetreatedwithsurgeryfirst, followedby chemo-
therapy. However, the effectiveness of such an approach would need to
be investigated in future studies.
Our cohort of 20 patients with ER+ disease had only 5 years of
follow-up time, which is not sufficient to reliably analyze distant recur-
rence in this breast cancer subtype because ER+ disease often recurs 10
or more years after the initial diagnosis (51). However, two retrospective-
prospective analyses of human breast cancer samples indicate that
increased TMEM score is associated with metastatic outcome in pa-
tients (3, 5). These studies imply that with the proper follow-up time,
the increase in TMEM score upon chemotherapy should translate
into distant recurrence in some of the patients. A follow-up study is
needed to determine whether patients with an increase in TMEM score
upon NAC develop distant recurrence more often than those without
an increase in TMEM score. In addition, as discussed above, it is nec-
essary to determine whether we can predict which patients are likely to
respond to NAC by assessing MENAINV so that the treatment can be
adjusted accordingly.
To accurately reflect clinically relevant scenarios, we primarily used
early-stage PyMT tumors in our study. As reported by American
Cancer Society in Breast Cancer Facts & Figures 2015-2016,the inci-
dence rate is the highest for tumors <2 cm (70 per 100,000), followed
by tumors 2 to 4.9 cm (35 per 100,000) (32). Tumors >5 cm had an
incidence rate of only 10 per 100,000. Likewise, the incidence rate for
localized (40 to 90 per 100,000) and regional (25 to 40 per 100,000)
disease far exceeds the incidence rate for distant (5 to 11 per 100,000)
disease (32). In addition, by selecting early-stage PyMT tumors, we
have avoided measuring potentially TMEM-independent mechanisms
of cancer cell dissemination that could result from an open circulation
effect, such as upon destruction of the vasculature in advanced-stage
necrotic lesions.
Our finding that paclitaxel induces an increase in CTCs is consistent
with recently reported data from patient studies focused on the effect
of chemotherapy on CTCs. Although CTC count measured by U.S.
Food and Drug Administration–approved CellSearch System is a
strong prognostic factor in both primary and metastatic breast
cancer, there is no conclusive evidence in the literature that chemo-
therapy significantly reduces CTCs (52). On the contrary, several re-
ports indicate that CTC counts in post-chemotherapy blood samples
increase in some patients and decrease in others, do not correlate
with pCR, and correlate with distant metastasis–free survival (53, 54).
Moreover, when CTC search included cells with epithelial-mesenchymal
transition marker expression, 21% of patients showed increased CTC
counts after NAC, whereas 15% showed a decrease in CTCs counts after
NAC (54). Thus, our data indicating that NAC may be increasing CTCs
in some patients are consistent with current literature.
One limitation of this study is that it does not fully address the de-
velopment of clinically detectable metastases, which involves other pro-
cesses such as release from dormancy and tumor growth in addition
to cancer cell dissemination. Another limitation is that, due to a long
time between the diagnosis and the relapse in ER+ disease, this study
could not provide evidence that increased TMEM and MENAINV in
post-NAC patient samples correlate with metastatic outcome.
Because metastatic disease is the major cause of cancer-related mor-
tality and is currently incurable, it is critical that we develop strate-
gies to prevent progression of cancer to the metastatic stage and to
prevent further spread from already existing metastatic foci. Therefore,
our finding that chemotherapy, when given in the setting of clinically
active disease, may promote cancer cell dissemination is of major
concern. However, our data indicate that strategies can be developed
to prevent chemotherapy-induced TMEM/MENA-mediated cancer
cell dissemination and subsequent metastasis. This can be done either
by discontinuing NAC in patients whose tumors show NAC-induced
prometastatic changes or by combining NAC with agents that block
TMEM/MENA-mediated cancer cell dissemination, such as selective
TIE2 inhibitors, which would be useful not only in NAC treatment of
localized breast cancer but also in treatment of metastatic breast cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The primary objective of this study was to examine the prometastatic
effects of NAC in mouse models of breast cancer, breast cancer PDXs,
and human patients. Mice were randomly allocated to two treatment
groups: vehicle-treated and chemotherapy-treated. Two chemotherapy
schemes were performed: paclitaxel or doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide.
After the termination of treatment, mice were either subjected to IVI
to assess the effect of chemotherapy on vascular permeability (bursting)
or sacrificed and assessed for TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages, TMEM
assembly, TMEM-dependent vascular permeability, CTCs, metastatic
dissemination in the lungs, and gene and protein expression of the
invasive MENA isoform MENAINV. The secondary objective was to
examine whether the TIE2 inhibitor, rebastinib, is capable of suppres-
sing the chemotherapy-mediated prometastatic effects described in the
first part of the study in the same mouse models of breast cancer. All
mice received NAC with paclitaxel and were randomly allocated to two
groups: vehicle- or rebastinib-treated. After the termination of treat-
ment, mice were either subjected to IVI or sacrificed to assess TIE2hi/
VEGFhi macrophages, TMEM assembly, and CTCs.
Statistical analysis
GraphPad Prism 6 software was used for graph/plot generation and
statistical hypothesis testing. Continuous variables (tumor volume,
TMEM score, CTCs per milliliter of blood, macrophage count, and gene
and protein expression values) are presented as dot plots with means
and SD. Comparisons between two independent samples were per-
formed using two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test, and matched-sample
comparisons were performed using the Wilcoxon test. Correlations
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
12 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 were analyzed using Pearson’s correlation and coefficient of determina-
tion (R2), and the data are presented as scatterplots with fit lines and
corresponding P values. To investigate for differences in binary out-
comes (incidence of metastasis) between two groups, cross-tabulation
and c2 tests were performed. In all graphs, P values of <0.1 are reported;
however, only P values of <0.05 are described as statistically significant.
Sample size calculations were performed using the following param-
eters: significance level (adjusted for sidedness) of 0.025, probability of
type II error of 0.2 (statistical power of 0.8), and expected difference in
means equal to 1.2 SD units, based on the assumption that the SD of the
response variable was 1 unit. A total of 22 animals (11 animals per
group) was calculated to enter all two-treatment parallel studies.
The following animals were removed from the study: mice whose
tumors were necrotic or cystic; mice with inadequate tumor tissue to
perform TMEM counting, IHC/IF, or RNA extraction; mice with less
than 0.5 ml of blood collected through heart puncture for the CTC
assay; and mice that were either obese (>33 g) or emaciated (<17 g).
Accordingly, in each individual figure panel, the number of mice may
have been reduced up to 25% from the original cohort sizes depicted in
the corresponding figures (Figs. 1B, 2B, 5B, 6B, and 8B).
Transgenic MMTV-PyMT animals, as well as animals transplanted
with syngeneic or patient-derived tumors, were housed in cages of five
animals, as per the regulations of the Albert Einstein College of Medi-
cine Animal Care and Use Committee. Once they reached the criteria
for inclusion into the experimental pipeline (tumor diameter of ~2 to
3 mm), animals were randomly assigned to the chemotherapy-treated,
rebastinib-treated, or vehicle-treated groups.
All pathologists involved in TMEM scoring were blinded to the
group allocation (fig. S10), as were the scientists performing IVI,
CTC scoring, IF/IHC, and qRT-PCR analyses in mouse and human
samples. However, pre-NAC biopsies in human patients are microscop-
ically easy to differentiate from resected whole tumor tissues, and as
such, blinding was not possible for TMEM assessment in human breast
cancer patients receiving NAC.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/397/eaan0026/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Histological sections of control and paclitaxel-treated mice.
Fig. S2. Macrophage population dynamics in control and paclitaxel-treated mice.
Fig. S3. Microvascular density in control and paclitaxel-treated mice.
Fig. S4. IVI and extravascular dextran intensity analysis.
Fig. S5. Experimental design of in vivo metastasis dissemination assays.
Fig. S6. Frequency of bursting normalized to TMEM sites.
Fig. S7. MENAINV expression at the gene and protein levels.
Fig. S8. The association of Mena isoform expression with TIE2hi/VEGFhi macrophages.
Fig. S9. Macrophage population dynamics after paclitaxel treatment in MENA−/− mice.
Fig. S10. Correlation of TMEM scoring between pathologists.
Table S1. Forward and reverse primer sequences used to identify transmission of the disrupted
Mena allele in MENA−/− mice.
Video S1. Bursting close to a TMEM site of a paclitaxel-treated mouse.
Video S2. Bursting close to a TMEM site of a second paclitaxel-treated mouse.
Video S3. Absence of bursting in the vasculature of a paclitaxel-treated mouse.
References (55–65)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. A. S. Harney, E. N. Arwert, D. Entenberg, Y. Wang, P. Guo, B.-Z. Qian, M. H. Oktay,
J. W. Pollard, J. G. Jones, J. S. Condeelis, Real-time imaging reveals local, transient vascular
permeability, and tumor cell intravasation stimulated by TIE2hi macrophage–derived
VEGFA. Cancer Discov. 5, 932–943 (2015).
2. G. S. Karagiannis, S. Goswami, J. G. Jones, M. H. Oktay, J. S. Condeelis, Signatures of breast
cancer metastasis at a glance. J. Cell Sci. 129, 1751–1758 (2016).
3. B. D. Robinson, G. L. Sica, Y.-F. Liu, T. E. Rohan, F. B. Gertler, J. S. Condeelis, J. G. Jones,
Tumor microenvironment of metastasis in human breast carcinoma: A potential
prognostic marker linked to hematogenous dissemination. Clin. Cancer Res. 15,
2433–2441 (2009).
4. M. H. Oktay, F. B. Gertler, Y.-F. Liu, T. E. Rohan, J. S. Condeelis, J. G. Jones, Correlated
immunohistochemical and cytological assays for the prediction of hematogenous
dissemination of breast cancer. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 60, 168–173 (2012).
5. T. E. Rohan, X. Xue, H.-M. Lin, T. M. D’Alfonso, P. S. Ginter, M. H. Oktay, B. D. Robinson,
M. Ginsberg, F. B. Gertler, A. G. Glass, J. A. Sparano, J. S. Condeelis, J. G. Jones, Tumor
microenvironment of metastasis and risk of distant metastasis of breast cancer. J. Natl.
Cancer Inst. 106, dju136 (2014).
6. P. Rastogi, S. J. Anderson, H. D. Bear, C. E. Geyer, M. S. Kahlenberg, A. Robidoux,
R. G. Margolese, J. L. Hoehn, V. G. Vogel, S. R. Dakhil, D. Tamkus, K. M. King, E. R. Pajon,
M. J. Wright, J. Robert, S. Paik, E. P. Mamounas, N. Wolmark, Preoperative chemotherapy:
Updates of National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project Protocols B-18 and B-27.
J. Clin. Oncol. 26, 778–785 (2008).
7. L. Gianni, J. Baselga, W. Eiermann, V. G. Porta, V. Semiglazov, A. Lluch, M. Zambetti,
D. Sabadell, G. Raab, A. L. Cussac, A. Bozhok, A. Martinez-Agulló, M. Greco, M. Byakhov,
J. J. L. Lopez, M. Mansutti, P. Valagussa, G. Bonadonna, Phase III trial evaluating the
addition of paclitaxel to doxorubicin followed by cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and
fluorouracil, as adjuvant or primary systemic therapy: European Cooperative Trial in
Operable Breast Cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 27, 2474–2481 (2009).
8. L. G. M. Daenen, J. M. Houthuijzen, G. A. Cirkel, J. M. L. Roodhart, Y. Shaked, E. E. Voest,
Treatment-induced host-mediated mechanisms reducing the efficacy of antitumor
therapies. Oncogene 33, 1341–1347 (2014).
9. M. De Palma, C. E. Lewis, Macrophage regulation of tumor responses to anticancer
therapies. Cancer Cell 23, 277–286 (2013).
10. R. Hughes, B.-Z. Qian, C. Rowan, M. Muthana, I. Keklikoglou, O. C. Olson, S. Tazzyman,
S. Danson, C. Addison, M. Clemons, A. M. Gonzalez-Angulo, J. A. Joyce, M. De Palma,
J. W. Pollard, C. E. Lewis, Perivascular M2 macrophages stimulate tumor relapse after
chemotherapy. Cancer Res. 75, 3479–3491 (2015).
11. J. M. L. Roodhart, H. He, L. G. M. Daenen, A. Monvoisin, C. L. Barber, M. van Amersfoort,
J. J. Hofmann, F. Radtke, T. F. Lane, E. E. Voest, M. L. Iruela-Arispe, Notch1 regulates
angio-supportive bone marrow–derived cells in mice: Relevance to chemoresistance.
Blood 122, 143–153 (2013).
12. Y. Shaked, A. Ciarrocchi, M. Franco, C. R. Lee, S. Man, A. M. Cheung, D. J. Hicklin, D. Chaplin,
F. S. Foster, R. Benezra, R. S. Kerbel, Therapy-induced acute recruitment of circulating
endothelial progenitor cells to tumors. Science 313, 1785–1787 (2006).
13. Y. Shaked, E. Henke, J. M. L. Roodhart, P. Mancuso, M. H. G. Langenberg, M. Colleoni,
L. G. Daenen, S. Man, P. Xu, U. Emmenegger, T. Tang, Z. Zhu, L. Witte, R. M. Strieter,
F. Bertolini, E. E. Voest, R. Benezra, R. S. Kerbel, Rapid chemotherapy-induced acute
endothelial progenitor cell mobilization: Implications for antiangiogenic drugs as
chemosensitizing agents. Cancer Cell 14, 263–273 (2008).
14. M. De Palma, M. A. Venneri, R. Galli, L. Sergi Sergi, L. S. Politi, M. Sampaolesi, L. Naldini,
Tie2 identifies a hematopoietic lineage of proangiogenic monocytes required for tumor
vessel formation and a mesenchymal population of pericyte progenitors. Cancer Cell 8,
211–226 (2005).
15. M. De Palma, M. A. Venneri, C. Roca, L. Naldini, Targeting exogenous genes to tumor
angiogenesis by transplantation of genetically modified hematopoietic stem cells.
Nat. Med. 9, 789–795 (2003).
16. A. Dovas, A. Patsialou, A. S. Harney, J. Condeelis, D. Cox, Imaging interactions between
macrophages and tumour cells that are involved in metastasis in vivo and in vitro.
J. Microsc. 251, 261–269 (2013).
17. A. Patsialou, J. J. Bravo-Cordero, Y. Wang, D. Entenberg, H. Liu, M. Clarke,
J. S. Condeelis, Intravital multiphoton imaging reveals multicellular streaming as a
crucial component of in vivo cell migration in human breast tumors. Intravital 2,
e25294 (2013).
18. E. T. Roussos, J. S. Condeelis, A. Patsialou, Chemotaxis in cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 11,
573–587 (2011).
19. S. Goswami, U. Philippar, D. Sun, A. Patsialou, J. Avraham, W. Wang, F. Di Modugno,
P. Nistico, F. B. Gertler, J. S. Condeelis, Identification of invasion specific splice variants of
the cytoskeletal protein Mena present in mammary tumor cells during invasion in vivo.
Clin. Exp. Metastasis 26, 153–159 (2009).
20. E. T. Roussos, S. Goswami, M. Balsamo, Y. Wang, R. Stobezki, E. Adler, B. D. Robinson,
J. G. Jones, F. B. Gertler, J. S. Condeelis, M. H. Oktay, Mena invasive (MenaINV) and
Mena11a isoforms play distinct roles in breast cancer cell cohesion and association with
TMEM. Clin. Exp. Metastasis 28, 515–527 (2011).
21. E. T. Roussos, M. Balsamo, S. K. Alford, J. B. Wyckoff, B. Gligorijevic, Y. Wang, M. Pozzuto,
R. Stobezki, S. Goswami, J. E. Segall, D. A. Lauffenburger, A. R. Bresnick, F. B. Gertler,
J. S. Condeelis, Mena invasive (MenaINV) promotes multicellular streaming motility and
transendothelial migration in a mouse model of breast cancer. J. Cell Sci. 124, 2120–2131
(2011).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
13 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 22. J. Wyckoff, W. Wang, E. Y. Lin, Y. Wang, F. Pixley, E. R. Stanley, T. Graf, J. W. Pollard, J. Segall,
J. Condeelis, A paracrine loop between tumor cells and macrophages is required for
tumor cell migration in mammary tumors. Cancer Res. 64, 7022–7029 (2004).
23. U. Philippar, E. T. Roussos, M. Oser, H. Yamaguchi, H.-D. Kim, S. Giampieri, Y. Wang,
S. Goswami, J. B. Wyckoff, D. A. Lauffenburger, E. Sahai, J. S. Condeelis, F. B. Gertler, A Mena
invasion isoform potentiates EGF-induced carcinoma cell invasion and metastasis.
Dev. Cell 15, 813–828 (2008).
24. A. Patsialou, J. Wyckoff, Y. Wang, S. Goswami, E. R. Stanley, J. S. Condeelis, Invasion of
human breast cancer cells in vivo requires both paracrine and autocrine loops involving
the colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor. Cancer Res. 69, 9498–9506 (2009).
25. S. Goswami, E. Sahai, J. B. Wyckoff, M. Cammer, D. Cox, F. J. Pixley, E. R. Stanley, J. E. Segall,
J. S. Condeelis, Macrophages promote the invasion of breast carcinoma cells via a
colony-stimulating factor-1/epidermal growth factor paracrine loop. Cancer Res. 65,
5278–5283 (2005).
26. E. Leung, A. Xue, Y. Wang, P. Rougerie, V. P. Sharma, R. Eddy, D. Cox, J. Condeelis,
Blood vessel endothelium-directed tumor cell streaming in breast tumors requires the
HGF/C-Met signaling pathway. Oncogene 36, 2680–2692 (2017).
27. J. Pignatelli, J. J. Bravo-Cordero, M. Roh-Johnson, S. J. Gandhi, Y. Wang, X. Chen, R. J. Eddy,
A. Xue, R. H. Singer, L. Hodgson, M. H. Oktay, J. S. Condeelis, Macrophage-dependent
tumor cell transendothelial migration is mediated by Notch1/MenaINV-initiated
invadopodium formation. Sci. Rep. 6, 37874 (2016).
28. E. T. Roussos, Y. Wang, J. B. Wyckoff, R. S. Sellers, W. Wang, J. Li, J. W. Pollard, F. B. Gertler,
J. S. Condeelis, Mena deficiency delays tumor progression and decreases metastasis
in polyoma middle-T transgenic mouse mammary tumors. Breast Cancer Res. 12, R101
(2010).
29. J. Pignatelli, S. Goswami, J. G. Jones, T. E. Rohan, E. Pieri, X. Chen, E. Adler, D. Cox, S. Maleki,
A. Bresnick, F. B. Gertler, J. S. Condeelis, M. H. Oktay, Invasive breast carcinoma cells from
patients exhibit MenaINV- and macrophage-dependent transendothelial migration.
Sci. Signal. 7, ra112 (2014).
30. L. Chen, J. Li, F. Wang, C. Dai, F. Wu, X. Liu, T. Li, R. Glauben, Y. Zhang, G. Nie, Y. He, Z. Qin,
Tie2 expression on macrophages is required for blood vessel reconstruction and
tumor relapse after chemotherapy. Cancer Res. 76, 6828–6838 (2016).
31. A. Patsialou, Y. Wang, J. Lin, K. Whitney, S. Goswami, P. A. Kenny, J. S. Condeelis, Selective
gene-expression profiling of migratory tumor cells in vivo predicts clinical outcome in
breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res. 14, R139 (2012).
32. A. C. Society, Breast Cancer Facts & Figures 2015-2016 (American Cancer Society Inc.,
2015).
33. T. Shree, O. C. Olson, B. T. Elie, J. C. Kester, A. L. Garfall, K. Simpson, K. M. Bell-McGuinn,
E. C. Zabor, E. Brogi, J. A. Joyce, Macrophages and cathepsin proteases blunt
chemotherapeutic response in breast cancer. Genes Dev. 25, 2465–2479 (2011).
34. F. Pucci, M. A. Venneri, D. Biziato, A. Nonis, D. Moi, A. Sica, C. Di Serio, L. Naldini,
M. De Palmax, A distinguishing gene signature shared by tumor-infiltrating
Tie2-expressing monocytes, blood “resident” monocytes, and embryonic macrophages
suggests common functions and developmental relationships. Blood 114, 901–914
(2009).
35. C. Murdoch, M. Muthana, S. B. Coffelt, C. E. Lewis, The role of myeloid cells in the
promotion of tumour angiogenesis. Nat. Rev. Cancer 8, 618–631 (2008).
36. C. E. Lewis, A. S. Harney, J. W. Pollard, The multifaceted role of perivascular macrophages
in tumors. Cancer Cell 30, 18–25 (2016).
37. E. Fremder, M. Munster, A. Aharon, V. Miller, S. Gingis-Velitski, T. Voloshin, D. Alishekevitz,
R. Bril, S. J. Scherer, D. Loven, B. Brenner, Y. Shaked, Tumor-derived microparticles
induce bone marrow-derived cell mobilization and tumor homing: A process regulated
by osteopontin. Int. J. Cancer 135, 270–281 (2014).
38. C. L. Forse, S. Agarwal, D. Pinnaduwage, F. Gertler, J. S. Condeelis, J. Lin, X. Xue, K. Johung,
A. M. Mulligan, T. E. Rohan, S. B. Bull, I. L. Andrulis, Menacalc, a quantitative method of
metastasis assessment, as a prognostic marker for axillary node-negative breast cancer.
BMC Cancer 15, 483 (2015).
39. S. Agarwal, F. B. Gertler, M. Balsamo, J. S. Condeelis, R. L. Camp, X. Xue, J. Lin, T. E. Rohan,
D. L. Rimm, Quantitative assessment of invasive mena isoforms (Menacalc) as an
independent prognostic marker in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res. 14, R124 (2012).
40. M. J. Oudin, S. K. Hughes, N. Rohani, M. N. Moufarrej, J. G. Jones, J. S. Condeelis,
D. A. Lauffenburger, F. B. Gertler, Characterization of the expression of the pro-metastatic
MenaINV isoform during breast tumor progression. Clin. Exp. Metastasis 33, 249–261
(2016).
41. G. Bonadonna, A. Moliterni, M. Zambetti, M. G. Daidone, S. Pilotti, L. Gianni, P. Valagussa,
30 years’ follow up of randomised studies of adjuvant CMF in operable breast cancer:
Cohort study. BMJ 330, 217 (2005).
42. G. Bonadonna, E. Brusamolino, P. Valagussa, A. Rossi, L. Brugnatelli, C. Brambilla,
M. De Lena, G. Tancini, E. Bajetta, R. Musumeci, U. Veronesi, Combination chemotherapy
as an adjuvant treatment in operable breast cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 294, 405–410 (1976).
43. J. M. Roodhart, M. H. Langenberg, J. S. Vermaat, M. P. Lolkema, A. Baars, R. H. Giles,
E. O. Witteveen, E. E. Voest, Late release of circulating endothelial cells and endothelial
progenitor cells after chemotherapy predicts response and survival in cancer patients.
Neoplasia 12, 87–94 (2010).
44. D. G. DeNardo, D. J. Brennan, E. Rexhepaj, B. Ruffell, S. L. Shiao, S. F. Madden,
W. M. Gallagher, N. Wadhwani, S. D. Keil, S. A. Junaid, H. S. Rugo, E. S. Hwang, K. Jirström,
B. L. West, L. M. Coussens, Leukocyte complexity predicts breast cancer survival and
functionally regulates response to chemotherapy. Cancer Discov. 1, 54–67 (2011).
45. C. Murdoch, S. Tazzyman, S. Webster, C. E. Lewis, Expression of Tie-2 by human
monocytes and their responses to angiopoietin-2. J. Immunol. 178, 7405–7411 (2007).
46. M. A. Venneri, M. De Palma, M. Ponzoni, F. Pucci, C. Scielzo, E. Zonari, R. Mazzieri,
C. Doglioni, L. Naldini, Identification of proangiogenic TIE2-expressing monocytes (TEMs)
in human peripheral blood and cancer. Blood 109, 5276–5285 (2007).
47. M. De Palma, L. Naldini, Angiopoietin-2 TIEs up macrophages in tumor angiogenesis.
Clin. Cancer Res. 17, 5226–5232 (2011).
48. C. E. Lewis, A. S. Harney, J. W. Pollard, The multifaceted role of perivascular macrophages
in tumors. Cancer Cell 30, 365 (2016).
49. M. J. Oudin, L. Barbier, C. Schäfer, T. Kosciuk, M. A. Miller, S. Han, O. Jonas,
D. A. Lauffenburger, F. B. Gertler, MENA confers resistance to paclitaxel in triple-negative
breast cancer. Mol. Cancer Ther. 16, 143–155 (2017).
50. S. K. Swisher, J. Vila, S. L. Tucker, I. Bedrosian, S. F. Shaitelman, J. K. Litton, B. D. Smith,
A. S. Caudle, H. M. Kuerer, E. A. Mittendorf, Locoregional control according to breast
cancer subtype and response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer patients
undergoing breast-conserving therapy. Ann. Surg. Oncol. 23, 749–756 (2016).
51. F. M. Blows, K. E. Driver, M. K. Schmidt, A. Broeks, F. E. van Leeuwen, J. Wesseling,
M. C. Cheang, K. Gelmon, T. O. Nielsen, C. Blomqvist, P. Heikkilä, T. Heikkinen,
H. Nevanlinna, L. A. Akslen, L. R. Bégin, W. D. Foulkes, F. J. Couch, X. Wang, V. Cafourek,
J. E. Olson, L. Baglietto, G. G. Giles, G. Severi, C. A. McLean, M. C. Southey, E. Rakha,
A. R. Green, I. O. Ellis, M. E. Sherman, J. Lissowska, W. F. Anderson, A. Cox, S. S. Cross,
M. W. R. Reed, E. Provenzano, S.-J. Dawson, A. M. Dunning, M. Humphreys, D. F. Easton,
M. García-Closas, C. Caldas, P. D. Pharoah, D. Huntsman, Subtyping of breast cancer
by immunohistochemistry to investigate a relationship between subtype and short
and long term survival: A collaborative analysis of data for 10,159 cases from 12 studies.
PLOS Med. 7, e1000279 (2010).
52. L. Zhang, S. Riethdorf, G. Wu, T. Wang, K. Yang, G. Peng, J. Liu, K. Pantel, Meta-analysis of
the prognostic value of circulating tumor cells in breast cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 18,
5701–5710 (2012).
53. J.-Y. Pierga, F.-C. Bidard, C. Mathiot, E. Brain, S. Delaloge, S. Giachetti, P. de Cremoux,
R. Salmon, A. Vincent-Salomon, M. Marty, Circulating tumor cell detection predicts early
metastatic relapse after neoadjuvant chemotherapy in large operable and locally
advanced breast cancer in a phase II randomized trial. Clin. Cancer Res. 14, 7004–7010
(2008).
54. W. Onstenk, J. Kraan, B. Mostert, M. M. Timmermans, A. Charehbili, V. T. H. B. M. Smit,
J. R. Kroep, J. W. R. Nortier, S. van de Ven, J. B. Heijns, L. W. Kessels, H. W. M. van Laarhoven,
M. M. E. M. Bos, C. J. H. van de Velde, J. W. Gratama, A. M. Sieuwerts, J. W. M. Martens,
J. A. Foekens, S. Sleijfer, Improved circulating tumor cell detection by a combined EpCAM
and MCAM CellSearch enrichment approach in patients with breast cancer undergoing
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Mol. Cancer Ther. 14, 821–827 (2015).
55. C. T. Guy, R. D. Cardiff, W. J. Muller, Induction of mammary tumors by expression of
polyomavirus middle T oncogene: A transgenic mouse model for metastatic disease.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 12, 954–961 (1992).
56. F. Ahmed, J. Wyckoff, E. Y. Lin, W. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Hennighausen, J.-i. Miyazaki, J. Jones,
J. W. Pollard, J. S. Condeelis, J. E. Segall, GFP expression in the mammary gland for
imaging of mammary tumor cells in transgenic mice. Cancer Res. 62, 7166–7169 (2002).
57. D. Entenberg, J. Wyckoff, B. Gligorijevic, E. T. Roussos, V. V. Verkhusha, J. W. Pollard,
J. Condeelis, Setup and use of a two-laser multiphoton microscope for multichannel
intravital fluorescence imaging. Nat. Protoc. 6, 1500–1520 (2011).
58. D. Entenberg, D. Kedrin, J. Wyckoff, E. Sahai, J. Condeelis, J. E. Segall, Imaging tumor cell
movement in vivo. Curr. Protoc. Cell Biol. Chapter 19, Unit 19.7 (2013).
59. C. A. Schneider, W. S. Rasband, K. W. Eliceiri, NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image
analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 671–675 (2012).
60. J. B. Wyckoff, J. G. Jones, J. S. Condeelis, J. E. Segall, A critical step in metastasis: In vivo
analysis of intravasation at the primary tumor. Cancer Res. 60, 2504–2511 (2000).
61. P. Thevenaz, U. E. Ruttimann, M. Unser, A pyramid approach to subpixel registration
based on intensity. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 7, 27–41 (1998).
62. P. J. Boimel, T. Smirnova, Z. N. Zhou, J. Wyckoff, H. Park, S. J. Coniglio, B.-Z. Qian,
E. R. Stanley, D. Cox, J. W. Pollard, W. J. Muller, J. Condeelis, J. E. Segall, Contribution
of CXCL12 secretion to invasion of breast cancer cells. Breast Cancer Res. 14, R23
(2012).
63. H. Gil-Henn, A. Patsialou, Y. Wang, M. S. Warren, J. S. Condeelis, A. J. Koleske, Arg/Abl2
promotes invasion and attenuates proliferation of breast cancer in vivo. Oncogene 32,
2622–2630 (2013).
64. T. D. Schmittgen, K. J. Livak, Analyzing real-time PCR data by the comparative CT method.
Nat. Protoc. 3, 1101–1108 (2008).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
14 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 65. M. D. Weidmann, C. R. Surve, R. J. Eddy, X. Chen, F. B. Gertler, V. P. Sharma, J. S. Condeelis,
MenaINV dysregulates cortactin phosphorylation to promote invadopodium maturation.
Sci. Rep. 6, 36142 (2016).
Acknowledgments: We thank the Histopathology Core Facility in the Albert Einstein College
of Medicine for assistance in IHC and the Analytical Imaging Facility for assistance in
imaging and microscopy. We also thank R. Eddy and M. Chen for the development and
validation of the MENAINV antibody, J. Lin for help with selected data analysis, and Y. Lin for
technical assistance. We finally thank Deciphera Pharmaceuticals for providing rebastinib
for the experiments described in Fig. 8. Funding: Our work is supported by grants from the
NIH (CA100324, CA150344, and 1T32CA200561-01), the T32 Research Training Grant of
Surgeons, the SIG 1S10OD019961-01, the Gruss Lipper Biophotonics Center, and the
Integrated Imaging Program at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Author contributions:
G.S.K. designed and performed the experiments, analyzed and interpreted the data,
coordinated the project, and co-wrote the manuscript. J.M.P. performed IVI experiments.
Y.W. performed animal handling. A.S.H. and E.A.X. performed IF imaging. D.E. developed image
analysis software and performed IVI. V.P.S. contributed HyperStackReg plug-in for image
alignment in intravital movies and helped define methodology for generating vascular
permeability exclusion masks in ImageJ. J.P. performed qRT-PCR for MENAINV in patient
FNA biopsies. J.G.J. analyzed TMEM triple staining. J.A., E.C., T.M.D., and J.A.S. provided
human samples for histopathology. T.E.R. contributed to data interpretation. J.S.C. guided
multiphoton imaging and IF data interpretation. M.H.O. guided histology and IHC experiments
(TMEM triple staining). J.S.C. and M.H.O. conceived the hypothesis, led the project,
interpreted the data, and wrote the manuscript. Competing interests: J.S.C. and M.H.O. are
inventors on a patent application (#96700/2505) submitted by Albert Einstein College of
Medicine that covers methods of detecting and reducing chemotherapy-induced
prometastatic changes in breast tumors. All other authors declare that they have no
competing interests.
Submitted 20 February 2017
Accepted 13 June 2017
Published 5 July 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aan0026
Citation: G. S. Karagiannis, J. M. Pastoriza, Y. Wang, A. S. Harney, D. Entenberg, J. Pignatelli,
V. P. Sharma, E. A. Xue, E. Cheng, T. M. D’Alfonso, J. G. Jones, J. Anampa, T. E. Rohan,
J. A. Sparano, J. S. Condeelis, M. H. Oktay, Neoadjuvant chemotherapy induces breast
cancer metastasis through a TMEM-mediated mechanism. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Karagiannis et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan0026 (2017)
5 July 2017
15 of 15
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 mechanism
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy induces breast cancer metastasis through a TMEM-mediated
Joseph A. Sparano, John S. Condeelis and Maja H. Oktay
Ved P. Sharma, Emily A. Xue, Esther Cheng, Timothy M. D'Alfonso, Joan G. Jones, Jesus Anampa, Thomas E. Rohan, 
George S. Karagiannis, Jessica M. Pastoriza, Yarong Wang, Allison S. Harney, David Entenberg, Jeanine Pignatelli,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aan0026
, eaan0026.
9
Sci Transl Med 
dissemination.
that a drug called rebastinib can interfere with TMEM activity and help overcome the increased risk of cancer cell 
amounts of TMEM complexes and circulating tumor cells in the bloodstream. The researchers also determined
cells entering the vasculature, and the authors discovered that several types of chemotherapy can increase the 
of cells collectively known as tumor microenvironment of metastasis (TMEM) can serve as gateways for tumor
discovered that, in addition to killing tumor cells, chemotherapy treatment can also increase intravasation. Groups 
.
et al
from this disease. By studying the process of intravasation or entry of cells into the vasculature, Karagiannis 
Breast cancer is one of the most common tumor types, and metastasis greatly increases the risk of death
Closing the door to cancer cells
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/397/eaan0026
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/06/29/9.397.eaan0026.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/436/eaan3464.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/357/6346/55.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/399/eaao3817.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/400/eaao0959.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/357/6346/35.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/384/eaai8504.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/385/eaak9679.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/385/eaak9670.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/392/eaal0225.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/397/eaan0026#BIBL
This article cites 64 articles, 28 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 1, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
