 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
Introduction
With few exceptions, curative treatment protocols in clinical 
oncology remain reliant upon a combination of surgical resec-
tion, ionizing radiation, and cytotoxic chemotherapy. However, 
in many cases, the full potential of these modalities is limited by 
off-target effects and dose-limiting toxicities. Even when side 
effects can be effectively managed, durable responses are difficult 
to achieve, particularly in cases characterized by refractory, met-
astatic disease. To address these shortcomings, there has been a 
trend in drug discovery to develop targeted therapies capable of 
modulating signaling axes dysregulated in cancers. There are now 
many FDA-approved Abs (1) and small molecules (2) that allow for 
therapeutic manipulation of a myriad of clinically relevant targets. 
Collectively, these drugs have proven beneficial but not trans-
formative (3); metrics of efficacy are often measured in progres-
sion-free survival rather than improved overall survival. To date, 
the complex biology that drives tumorigenesis has been, for the 
most part, unyielding to single-agent, targeted treatments.
While limited as monotherapies, the value of these drugs lies 
in their ability to be used with the classic aforementioned treat-
ment modalities. By augmenting standard treatment protocols 
with inhibitors targeting signaling pathways known to be import-
ant within a particular patient, meaningful improvements in 
efficacy have been obtained within a small subset of individuals. 
However, most patients remain refractory even to these combina-
tion treatments, emphasizing the need for new molecular entities 
that have direct antitumor activity, but more importantly, act syn-
ergistically with surgery, radiation, and/or chemotherapy.
One target that has shown promise in many cancers is AXL, a 
member of the TAM family of receptor tyrosine kinases that also 
includes TYRO3 and MER (4, 5). Upregulated in many forms of 
cancer (6), AXL overexpression has been linked to metastasis (7, 
8), poor survival (9–11), and drug resistance (12, 13). Critically, 
AXL-deficient mice have mild phenotypes (14), suggesting com-
plete abrogation of signaling through the AXL receptor would 
confer minimal on-target toxicity. Furthermore, AXL has a single 
ligand, growth arrest–specific 6 (GAS6) (15, 16), and constitutive 
activation is rarely observed in tumors, leaving GAS6-mediated 
signaling as the primary driver of pathogenesis. Nevertheless, 
an unusually strong binding affinity between GAS6 and AXL of 
approximately 30 pM (17) has made the development of competi-
tive antagonists challenging.
We showed that administration of a soluble AXL decoy recep-
tor (18–21) is an effective therapeutic strategy that circumvents the 
native affinity barrier (Figure 1A). The AXL receptor contains 2 dis-
tinct GAS6-binding epitopes: a high affinity site on its N-terminal 
Ig-like domain and a low affinity site on the second Ig domain (22). 
Previously, we engineered the major site on AXL Ig1 using a com-
bination of rational and combinatorial protein-engineering meth-
ods (17). The result of these efforts was MYD1, a high-affinity AXL 
variant containing 4 mutations that conferred improved binding 
The AXL receptor and its activating ligand, growth arrest–specific 6 (GAS6), are important drivers of metastasis and 
therapeutic resistance in human cancers. Given the critical roles that GAS6 and AXL play in refractory disease, this signaling 
axis represents an attractive target for therapeutic intervention. However, the strong picomolar binding affinity between 
GAS6 and AXL and the promiscuity of small molecule inhibitors represent important challenges faced by current anti-AXL 
therapeutics. Here, we have addressed these obstacles by engineering a second-generation, high-affinity AXL decoy receptor 
with an apparent affinity of 93 femtomolar to GAS6. Our decoy receptor, MYD1-72, profoundly inhibited disease progression 
in aggressive preclinical models of human cancers and induced cell killing in leukemia cells. When directly compared with 
the most advanced anti-AXL small molecules in the clinic, MYD1-72 achieved superior antitumor efficacy while displaying no 
toxicity. Moreover, we uncovered a relationship between AXL and the cellular response to DNA damage whereby abrogation 
of AXL signaling leads to accumulation of the DNA-damage markers γH2AX, 53BP1, and RAD51. MYD1-72 exploited this 
relationship, leading to improvements upon the therapeutic index of current standard-of-care chemotherapies in preclinical 
models of advanced pancreatic and ovarian cancer.
Inhibition of the GAS6/AXL pathway augments  
the efficacy of chemotherapies
Mihalis S. Kariolis,1 Yu Rebecca Miao,1 Anh Diep,1 Shannon E. Nash,1 Monica M. Olcina,1 Dadi Jiang,1 Douglas S. Jones II,2  
Shiven Kapur,2 Irimpan I. Mathews,3 Albert C. Koong,1 Erinn B. Rankin,1 Jennifer R. Cochran,2 and Amato J. Giaccia1
1Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University School of Medicine, and 2Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA. 3Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, 
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, California, USA.
Authorship note: M.S. Kariolis and Y
.R. Miao contributed equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: Stanford University holds a patent “Biologic inhibitors for thera-
peutic targeting the receptor tyrosine kinase AXL
” (US8618254 B2), which is related to 
the work described in this paper, with M.S. Kariolis, Y
.R. Miao, D.S. Jones, E.B. Rankin, J.R. 
Cochran, and A.J. Giaccia named as inventors. A.J. Giaccia and A.C. Koong are cofounders 
of Ruga Corp., a company that has licensed this patent.
Submitted: November 16, 2015; Accepted: October 18, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(1):183–198. doi:10.1172/JCI85610.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
both engineered proteins, we fur-
ther define the correlation between 
the affinity of the decoy to GAS6 
and antitumor efficacy achieved 
in vivo. The second-generation 
decoy receptor was well tolerat-
ed and outperformed the current 
lead clinical AXL small molecule 
inhibitor when directly compared. 
Finally, we uncovered a relation-
ship between AXL and the DNA- 
damage response and leveraged this 
to improve the therapeutic index of 
standard-of-care cytotoxic chemo-
therapies in preclinical models of 
pancreatic and ovarian cancers.
Results
Engineering a second-generation 
decoy receptor. In our original work, 
an error-prone library was creat-
ed using the WT AXL Ig1 domain 
as a template and placed into the 
yeast display system (23). After 6 
rounds of flow cytometric sorting, 
the library was enriched for 3 AXL 
variants with improved binding to 
GAS6 (17). While only 3 variants 
were present after the sixth and 
final round of sorting, substantial 
 
diversity was retained in earlier 
sort products.
To evaluate whether further increased GAS6-binding affin-
ity could improve antitumor efficacy, we performed sequence 
analysis on the sort 5 products to identify additional gain-of- 
function mutations. A total of 141 clones were sequenced, yielding 
25 unique variants. Three mutations were found to occur in at least 
20% of these unique variants: A72V, D87G, and V92A, the latter 2 
to GAS6. The characterization of MYD1 revealed a strong correla-
tion between GAS6-binding affinity and therapeutic efficacy of the 
AXL decoy receptor in preclinical models of cancer metastasis (17).
Here, we report the engineering and characterization of a 
second-generation AXL decoy receptor that binds both mouse 
and human GAS6 more tightly than our original molecule. Using 
Figure 1. Engineering and characteriza-
tion of a second-generation AXL decoy 
receptor. (A) The first immunoglobulin 
domain of the AXL receptor was engi-
neered for improved affinity to GAS6. 
When administered, the engineered 
soluble AXL sequesters GAS6, prevent-
ing it from binding to and activating 
endogenous cell surface–expressed AXL. 
(B) GAS6/MYD1-72 1:1 cocomplex. GAS6 
is shown in gray and MYD1-72 in blue. 
V72 is highlighted in red, and its location 
on the structure is indicated (arrows). 
(C) Cutaway showing A72 on the MYD1 
and V72 on the MYD1-72. The sidechains 
of both are shown as dotted spheres, 
illustrating the space occupied by the 
larger valine mutation. The new interac-
tion gained in the MYD1-72 structure is 
shown in the middle.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
350-fold increase over WT AXL, and also bound more strongly to 
mouse GAS6 with an apparent affinity of 140 fM ().
Structural basis of high-affinity binding. To elucidate the struc-
tural origins underlying the affinity increase, the GAS6/MYD1-72 
cocomplex was crystallized. This structure, along with the WT 
(PDB: 2C5D) (22) and MYD1 (PDB: 4RA0) (17) cocomplexes, use 
the AXL Ig1-Ig2 and GAS6 LG1-LG2 fragments to produce a 2:2 
cocomplex. Despite significant effort and successful growth of 
crystals under several different conditions, only a low-resolution 
structure (3.5 Å) was obtained (Supplemental Figure 3 and Supple-
mental Table 3). While the low resolution precluded detailed anal-
ysis of interresidue contacts, no significant backbone changes were 
observed relative to the MYD1 structure (Cα root mean square 
deviation [RMSD] 0.2 Å), particularly within the regions around 
residue 72 and within helix A on GAS6 (Supplemental Figure 3).
In an effort to improve crystal quality, we simplified the struc-
ture by truncating AXL, complexing only MYD1-72’s high-affinity 
Ig1 domain with GAS6, and were able to generate a high-resolution 
structure at 2.3 Å (Figure 1B and Supplemental Table 3). When com-
pared with the GAS6/MYD1 structure (PDB: 4RA0, at 3.4Å), the 
intermolecular contacts across the interface were similar. Impor-
tantly, analysis of the binding interface at high resolution supports 
previous conclusions using the GAS6/MYD1 structure. Specifical-
of which are contained in MYD1 (Supplemental Table 1; supple-
mental material available online with this article; doi:10.1172/
JCI85610DS1). When mapped onto the GAS6/MYD1 structure 
(PDB: 4RA0), residue 72 was distant from the 4 mutations already 
contained in MYD1. Furthermore, the structural rearrangements 
observed on the GAS6/MYD1 structure (17) did not occur near 
position 72 (Supplemental Figure 1). The high frequency of A72V 
in the enriched pool indicated that it likely improved binding to 
GAS6, and its isolation in 3D space on the structure suggested it 
would improve the affinity of MYD1 to GAS6. To test this empiri-
cally, we recombinantly expressed an AXL Ig1 variant containing 
the A72V point mutation. The A72V mutation did not disrupt the 
overall folding of the protein (Supplemental Figure 1), and the 
mutant was determined to bind GAS6 with an affinity of 5.8 pM, 
5 times stronger than WT AXL Ig1 (Table 1, Supplemental Figure 
2, and Supplemental Table 2). Encouraged by these results, we 
then combined A72V with MYD1, yielding an AXL variant (MYD1-
72) with an affinity for GAS6 of 720 fM (Table 1). Using thermo-
dynamic cycle analysis (Supplemental Figure 2), contributions 
from A72V were determined to be nearly completely additive with 
the preexisting mutations in MYD1, illustrating the independent 
nature of this mutation. When reformatted as an Fc fusion, MYD1-
72 Fc had an apparent binding affinity to human GAS6 of 93 fM, a 
Figure 2. Superior efficacy of the second-generation AXL decoy receptor. (A) Western blots showing the reduction of AXL and FLT3 phosphorylation in 
AML cells when treated with the AXL decoy receptors. (B) Inhibition of cell growth and induced cytotoxicity in both OCI-AML3 and MV4:11 cells after treat-
ment with AXL Fcs. Effects are dependent upon dosage and the affinity of the decoy receptor, but not influenced by FLT3 status. Untreated data are the 
same in the 100 ng/ml and 10 ng/ml graphs. (C) In vivo sequestration of GAS6 following a single 0.5 mg/kg dose of MYD1 Fc (gray) or MYD1-72 Fc (blue). 
The PK profile of MYD1-72 Fc following a single 1 mg/kg dose is overlaid in red. (D) Amount of lung metastases in the 4T1 breast cancer model as quanti-
fied by ex vivo bioluminescent imaging. Error bars represent mean ± SD. n = 11 for in vivo experiments. *P < 0.05. Repeated measure ANOVA was used for 
measurement over time, and Student’s t test was used for comparing single treatment to the control.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
Figure 3. AXL inhibition reduces primary tumor 
growth. (A) Volume over time of orthotopically 
implanted primary 4T1 tumors in mice treated with 
vehicle, foretinib, BGB324, or MYD1-72 Fc.  
(B) Mass of the primary tumor at the conclusion of 
the study. (C) Kaplan-Meier curve for the MYD1-72 
Fc– and foretinib-treated groups only. Toxicity from 
foretinib treatment required half of the mice to be 
prematurely removed from the study. (D–G) Rep-
resentative images and matched quantification of 
Ki67, TUNEL, γH2AX, and vWF staining of primary 
tumor tissue. Error bars represent mean ± SD.  
n = 6–12. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001;  
****P < 0.0001. Scale bars: 50 μm. Repeated mea-
sure ANOVA was used for measurement over time, 
and ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer test was used for 
comparing multiple treatment to each other.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
nificantly less metastatic disease than those treated with MYD1 
Fc (Figure 2D). Collectively, these studies demonstrate the 
superior efficacy of our second-generation molecule, further 
emphasizing the important correlation of the decoy receptor’s 
affinity to therapeutic efficacy.
Comparison of MYD1-72 Fc with clinical AXL tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors. There are currently no FDA-approved drugs targeting 
AXL, though several small molecule kinase inhibitors are undergo-
ing clinical trials. BerGenBio’s BGB324 (previously Rigel’s R428) 
is the most advanced of these compounds and the first to be devel-
oped prospectively as an AXL inhibitor (26). Given the positive 
clinical results seen thus far with BGB324, we hypothesized that it 
would serve as a good benchmark of comparison for MYD1-72 Fc. 
Furthermore, since tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and biolog-
ics are fundamentally very different, as are their mechanisms of 
action, a direct comparison would provide valuable insights into 
the potential of distinct therapeutic intervention strategies.
We therefore compared the antitumor effects of MYD1-72 Fc 
to BGB324 and another TKI with significant activity against AXL, 
foretinib (27), in the 4T1-luciferase model. Cells were implanted 
orthotopically in the mammary fat pad, and primary tumors were 
allowed to establish prior to treatment. Mice were then random-
ized into 1 of 4 treatment groups: saline, MYD1-72 Fc daily at 1 mg/
kg, BGB324 twice daily at 12.5 mg/kg, or foretinib twice daily at 
12.5 mg/kg. This dose for the TKIs was chosen as significant activ-
ity has been previously reported at equivalent concentrations (26, 
28). Mice were treated for 3 weeks or until they showed signs of 
morbidity, at which point they were removed from the study.
Both MYD1-72 Fc and foretinib significantly reduced the size 
of primary tumors compared with control mice, while BGB324 
showed little effects (Figure 3, A and B). This was notable because, 
with the exception of AML, AXL has historically been a driving 
force of metastatic disease, showing little effect on cellular growth 
in vitro or primary tumor growth in vivo (8). Though antitumor effi-
cacy was seen in the foretinib-treated group, substantial toxicity 
was also present, requiring half of the mice to be sacrificed prior to 
the study endpoint (Figure 3C). Immunohistochemistry was per-
formed on sections of primary tumor from each treatment group 
to study the mechanism underlying the reduction in growth. Stain-
ing for the proliferation marker Ki67 revealed all treatment groups 
had significantly less proliferation within the primary tumor com-
pared with control animals (Figure 3D). Complimenting this, there 
ly, the N-terminal capping of helix A on GAS6 that we reported in 
the MYD1 cocomplex was conserved in the MYD1-72 cocomplex. 
These observations serve as structural confirmation that A72V and 
the preexisting mutations in MYD1 act independently.
While the intermolecular contacts at the binding interface 
were similar between the 2 structures, substantial differences in 
the region around position 72 were observed. First, in the MYD1-
72 structure, a single additional electrostatic interaction was 
observed on the backside of the complex within the loop contain-
ing position 72 (Figure 1C). Second, local packing within the core 
of AXL is markedly different (Figure 1C), as the increased volume 
of the valine side chain permits more efficient side-chain packing 
and thus a lower void volume. As a result, several van der Waals 
contacts are gained, further strengthening the core structure of 
MYD1-72 (Supplemental Table 4). Together, these 2 features likely 
serve as the structural basis for the improvements in affinity seen 
in the A72V mutant.
MYD1-72 Fc has improved anti-tumor efficacy. AXL is a known 
survival factor in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) (24), as cytotox-
icity is seen when signaling through the receptor is antagonized. 
To test whether the enhanced affinity of MYD1-72 Fc would 
equate to increased activity, we initially characterized the effects 
of the decoy receptors on the in vitro growth of 2 human AML cell 
lines: OCI-AML3 and MV4:11. While OCI-AML3 cells are WT for 
FLT3, MV4:11 cells contain an internal tandem duplication (ITD) 
of the FLT3 receptor, resulting in constitutive activation. FLT3 ITD 
remains a significant clinical challenge and is associated with poor 
prognosis (25). Treatment with WT AXL Fc, MYD1 Fc, or MYD1-72 
Fc inhibited AXL and FLT3 phosphorylation (Figure 2A), and cyto-
toxicity was observed in a dose-dependent manner, independent 
of FLT3 status (Figure 2B). Importantly, the improved affinity of 
MYD1-72 Fc compared with MYD1 Fc correlated with enhanced 
activity (Figure 2B).
To determine whether the increase in activity would translate 
in vivo, we evaluated how well MYD1 Fc and MYD1-72 Fc could 
systemically sequester endogenous GAS6. To ensure that poten-
tial improvements could be quantified, a dose of 0.5 mg/kg was 
used, which is the in vivo IC50 of MYD1 Fc, as previously deter-
mined using the same assay (17). Mice were administered MYD1 
Fc or MYD1-72 Fc, and serum samples were obtained at time 
points up to 36 hours after injection. The amount of free, circu-
lating GAS6 (i.e., not neutralized by the decoy receptor) was then 
quantified. Both molecules rapidly eliminated free GAS6 upon 
administration, though MYD1-72 Fc suppressed GAS6 levels lon-
ger than MYD1 Fc (Figure 2C), highlighting its improved pharma-
codynamic (PD) profile. These improvements were not due to dif-
ferences in the clearance rates of the molecules, as the PK profile 
of MYD1-72 Fc was similar to what was previously reported for 
MYD1 Fc (Figure 2C).
To directly study the consequences of MYD1-72 Fc’s 
improved PD, we used both decoy receptors as treatments in 
the 4T1-luciferase breast cancer model of metastasis. In this 
model, cells orthotopically implanted in the mammary fat pad 
generate primary masses that metastasize to the lungs. Four 
days after tumor implantation, mice were treated with either 
MYD1 Fc or MYD1-72 Fc at the suboptimal dose of 0.5 mg/kg. 
After 3 weeks of treatment, mice receiving MYD1-72 Fc had sig-
Table 1. GAS6-binding parameters
KD (fM)
hGAS6
Kon
(107 M-1s-1)
Koff
(10-5 s-1)
KD (fM)
mGAS6
WT AXL Ig1B
33,000
2.1
70
ND
MYD1 Ig1B
2,700
1.6
4.0
ND
A72V Ig1
5,800
1.9
11.0
ND
MYD1-72 Ig1
720
1.7
1.2
ND
MYD1 FcB
420A
2.3
1.0
1,100
MYD1-72 Fc
93A
2.7
0.25
140
A Values that are apparent affinities, not affinities. B Previously reported 
values in ref. 17. ND, not detectable.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
was also more intratumoral apoptosis in the treatment groups 
(Figure 3E). To further understand the increased apoptosis rate, 
we stained for γH2AX, a marker of DNA double-strand breaks. 
All treatment groups showed elevated levels of γH2AX compared 
with controls; however, tissue samples from MYD1-72 Fc–treated 
animals had significantly more γH2AX-positive cells compared 
with all other treatment groups (Figure 3F). While AXL has been 
linked to VEGF signaling and endothelial cells (29, 30), no chang-
es in vessel density were observed across the groups (Figure 3G).
MYD1-72 Fc and foretinib also demonstrated activity against 
metastatic disease, as seen by a 71% and 55% reduction in lung 
metastases, respectively, compared with vehicle-treated mice 
(Figure 4, A and B). In contrast, BGB324 had a modest, 10%, 
decrease that was not significantly different than that in control 
animals. Throughout the study, both MYD1-72 Fc and BGB324 
were well tolerated with no visible signs of toxicity, as animal 
weight remained consistent across treatment groups (Figure 4C).
To further understand these differences among MYD1-72 Fc, 
foretinib, and BGB324, we examined changes in the phosphory-
lation of AXL, MER, TYRO3, and downstream Akt signaling in 
vitro upon treatment with each. MYD1-72 Fc significantly reduced 
pAXL and pAkt levels, while pMER and pTYRO3 remained rela-
tively unchanged (Figure 4D). These data indicate that MYD1-72 
Fc is specific at attenuating the AXL-signaling cascade, achiev-
ing significant efficacy without noticeable off-target effects. In 
contrast, BGB324 treatment resulted in short-term inhibition of 
pAXL, but increased pAXL levels at later time points (Figure 4D 
and Supplemental Figure 4). While efficacious, the promiscuity of 
foretinib, which indiscriminately inhibited all TAM receptors (Fig-
ure 4D and Supplemental Figure 4), was likely responsible for the 
significant toxicity observed.
Collectively, these data demonstrate that MYD1-72 Fc com-
pares favorably to anti-AXL TKIs currently being evaluated in the 
clinic, both in terms of safety and efficacy. Specifically, MYD1-72 Fc 
recapitulates the efficacy of foretinib without the aforementioned 
toxicity, while achieving greater antitumor effects than BGB324.
AXL signaling augments the DNA-damage response. AXL signal-
ing is known to be a critical driver of tumor progression and drug 
Figure 4. Inhibition of AXL 
decreases metastatic tumor 
burden. (A) Lung metastases 
in the 4T1 model, quantified ex 
vivo by bioluminescent imaging. 
(B) Representative biolumines-
cent images of whole lungs from 
mice in each treatment group. 
(C) Average animal weight in 
each treatment group over the 
course of the study. Foretinib was 
omitted as animals were removed 
throughout the study. (D) Western 
blot analysis of OVCAR8 cells after 
4-hour treatment with BGB324, 
foretinib, or MYD1-72 Fc. Acti-
vation of all 3 TAM receptors as 
well as downstream Akt signaling 
was assayed. Error bars represent 
mean ± SEM. n = 6–12. **P < 0.01. 
Repeated measure ANOVA were 
used for measurement over time, 
and ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer 
test was used for comparing mul-
tiple treatments to each other.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 8 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
resistance (12, 31), leading to interest in combining AXL inhibi-
tors with other targeted therapies. Our data suggest that inhibit-
ing AXL induces a DNA-damage response, as demonstrated by 
elevated γH2AX levels in the primary tumors of the 4T1 study 
(Figure 3F). To further interrogate the link between AXL and the 
DNA-damage response, we first performed immunofluorescence 
staining to detect γH2AX foci in ovarian cancer cells treated with 
0.1 μg or 10 μg of MYD1-72 Fc. While cells treated with MYD1-72 
Fc in complete media showed no changes across treatments (Fig-
ure 5A), treatment done under serum-limited conditions resulted 
in a significant increase in the number of γH2AX foci compared 
with untreated controls (Figure 5A), suggesting that a DNA- 
damage response is activated upon inhibition of AXL signaling.
To further understand this relationship, we performed a 
reverse phase protein array (RPPA) on shAXL cell lines and WT 
cell lines treated with MYD1-72 Fc (Supplemental Figure 6). We 
found Akt, mTor, and P70SK6 to be differentially expressed in 
all data sets (Supplemental Figure 6–8), demonstrating the fidel-
ity of both assay and samples, as these downstream effectors are 
known to be controlled in part by AXL signaling (32). Interest-
ingly, key components of the DNA-damage response (XRCC1/
CHK2) as well as some proapoptotic members of the BCL-2 path-
way (BAX/BID) were highly upregulated in the shAXL cell lines 
(Supplemental Figure 7) and when WT cells were treated with 
MYD1-72 Fc continuously for 7 days in low serum (1% FBS) (Sup-
plemental Figure 7 and 9). In addition, we performed Western blot 
analysis to examine expression levels of classical DNA-damage 
response components, including total and phosphorylated ATM, 
ATR, CHK1, CHK2, and RPA32 (Figure 5B), at 4 time points after 
MYD1-72 treatment. We saw induction of pATM and pATR at early 
time points, followed by increased phosphorylation of both CHK1 
and CHK2. Elevated pRPA32 levels were also observed (as shown 
by the doublet band on the total RPA32 blot), suggesting replica-
tion stress. These data suggest that the loss of AXL signaling can 
modulate DNA-damage response signaling in tumor cells under 
stress conditions such as nutrient deprivation.
To interrogate the nature of the DNA-damage response, we 
immunofluorescently stained cells treated with MYD1-72 Fc for 
53BP1 and RAD51 foci. Under serum-limited conditions, treat-
ment with MYD1-72 Fc increased the numbers of both 53BP1 
and RAD51 foci (Supplemental Figure 5), further supporting our 
hypothesis that loss of AXL signaling promotes a DNA-damage 
response. Intrigued by the RPA phosphorylation observed follow-
ing AXL inhibition (Figure 5B), we performed EdU labeling and 
costaining of cells for γH2AX (Figure 5C). These experiments 
allow a better understanding of whether the γH2AX signaling 
previously observed following AXL inhibition was occurring in 
EdU-positive/S phase cells, suggesting a link between AXL inhi-
bition and replication stress. Figure 5D shows the percentage of 
γH2AX-positive cells upon treatment with MYD1-72 Fc. This result 
supports the previous observation that treatment with MYD1-72 
Fc induces γH2AX signal in cancer cells. There was a minor differ-
ence in the number of S phase cells between control and MYD-72 
Fc–treated groups that is unlikely to alone account for the differ-
ence in distribution of the γH2AX signal (Figure 5E). Interestingly, 
we observed that in the MYD-72 Fc–treated group, 85% of cells 
that were γH2AX positive were also in S phase/EdU positive (Fig-
ure 5F), while only 7% of non–S phase cells (EdU negative) were 
positive for γH2AX (Supplemental Figure 5).
Furthermore, cells treated with hydroxyurea (Hu) in the 
presence and absence of MYD1-72 Fc showed comparable num-
bers of γH2AX-positive cells, and no additive effect was observed 
when the 2 compounds were used in combination (Supplemen-
tal Figure 5). Together, these results suggest that AXL inhibi-
tion may contribute to replication stress, resulting in increasing 
DNA-damage signaling.
That these effects were observed only under serum-limited 
conditions is further indication that GAS6/AXL signaling provides 
a cytoprotective effect for tumor cells placed under stress, such as 
growth factor deprivation. These results provide the rationale for 
combining AXL inhibitors and DNA-damaging agents, such as 
radiation and chemotherapy, to enhance their therapeutic index.
Inhibiting AXL improves the standard of care. Clinical man-
agement of ovarian cancer remains a challenge, as patients often 
present with advanced metastatic disease at the time of diagno-
sis. Treatment for these patients is limited and entails surgical 
debulking followed by combination chemotherapy; however, 
tumor response rates remain poor (33). Coincidently, ovarian 
cancer represents an ideal setting to test the combination of AXL 
inhibitors and DNA-damaging agents, as patients are in critical 
need of new treatment options that can enhance the effects of 
standard-of-care chemotherapy.
We therefore treated ovarian cancer cells with MYD1-72 
Fc either alone or in combination with doxorubicin in vitro and 
assessed levels of DNA damage by staining the cells for γH2AX 
foci. Cells treated with MYD1-72 Fc alone showed a significant 
increase in the number of γH2AX foci compared with untreated 
controls; however, γH2AX levels were further elevated when doxo-
rubicin was also present (Figure 5A). These data further support 
the link between inhibition of AXL signaling and the DNA-damage 
response and suggest that a synergistic effect can be achieved when 
anti-AXL therapies are combined with cytotoxic chemotherapy.
To see whether these results would translate in vivo, we eval-
uated the efficacy of MYD1-72 Fc alone and in combination with 
doxorubicin in 2 models of human ovarian cancer, the OVCAR8 
and skov3.ip models. For both models, cells were injected i.p. 
where they were allowed to establish for 1 week prior to treat-
ment. At this time, several mice were sacrificed at random to 
ensure engraftment of diffuse metastatic disease, a hallmark 
of the human condition. Mice were then randomized into 1 of 4 
treatment groups: saline, MYD1-72 Fc at 1 mg/kg daily, doxorubi-
cin at 2 mg/kg twice weekly, or a combination of MYD1-72 Fc and 
doxorubicin. After 3 weeks of treatment, mice were sacrificed and 
tumor burden was quantified by counting the number of visible 
lesions as well as excising and weighing all diseased tissue.
In the OVCAR8 model, MYD1-72 Fc had significant antitumor 
effects, reducing tumor burden by 95% as a single agent (Figure 
6A). While similar effects were obtained using doxorubicin alone, 
combination treatment resulted in nearly undetectable levels of 
disease. Each mouse receiving both therapies had on average 2 
and at most 3 macroscopic metastases, while the mean number in 
the control group was in excess of 750 (Figure 6A, inlaid graph). 
A similar degree of diminishment was observed when comparing 
cumulative metastatic mass (Figure 6A).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
bination with gemcitabine in an orthotopic model of murine pan-
creatic cancer. LMP cells derived from the KRAS/p53 metastatic 
mouse model (38) were implanted s.c. into the flanks of mice and 
allowed to grow until they reached approximately 500 mm3 in size. 
To establish orthotopic tumors, mice harboring s.c. tumors were 
sacrificed and tumors were isolated and cut into small fragments. 
Laparotomies were then performed, and a tumor fragment was 
secured to the tail of the pancreas. Four days after engraftment, 
mice were randomized into 1 of 4 treatment groups: saline, MYD1-
72 Fc at 1 mg/kg daily, gemcitabine at 100 mg/kg twice weekly, or 
a combination of MYD1-72 Fc and gemcitabine. Dosing continued 
until a mouse showed significant signs of morbidity, at which time 
it was removed from the study.
Direct engraftment of tumor tissue to the pancreas yielded a 
rapidly progressing primary tumor, with a median survival in the 
control group of 17 days (Figure 7 and Table 2). As single agents, 
MYD1-72 Fc showed no activity with a median survival of seven-
teen days, while gemcitabine doubled median survival to 35 days. 
As in the ovarian models, combining MYD1-72 Fc and chemo-
therapy showed significantly greater efficacy over either therapy 
alone, as median survival was tripled to 57 days (Figure 7 and Table 
2). Across treatment groups, animals succumbed to large primary 
tumor masses rather than diffuse metastatic disease. To deter-
mine whether increased sensitivity to DNA damage was the mech-
anism driving the effects seen in the combination group, immuno-
histochemistry was performed on primary tumor tissue samples. 
Ki67 staining showed a small, albeit significant decrease in pro-
liferation within the gemcitabine-treated group (Figure 8A), while 
vessel density remained unchanged (Figure 8B). Intratumoral 
apoptosis was significantly increased in all treatment groups com-
pared with controls, particularly in those animals administered 
MYD1-72 Fc despite the fact that the decoy receptor alone demon-
strated negligible effects on overall survival (Figure 8C). Most 
notably, although MYD1-72 Fc treatment had a small effect on 
DNA damage, the combination of MYD1-72 Fc and gemcitabine 
significantly increased the amount of γH2AX staining compared 
with all other groups (Figure 8D). These results strengthen the link 
between AXL inhibition and the DNA-damage response and, in 
combination with the data from the 4T1 and ovarian cancer mod-
els, highlight it as an important mechanism across cancer types. 
Furthermore, along with the ovarian cancer studies, these data 
convincingly demonstrate that this relationship can be exploited 
to achieve meaningful improvements in overall response rates 
over what can be realized by current clinical standards of care.
Discussion
As our understanding of the molecular basis of cancer has 
improved, a number of dysregulated signaling pathways respon-
Comparatively, the skov3.ip model was more aggressive, 
with mice in the control group having nearly 3 times as much 
tumor tissue, by weight, at the conclusion of the study as in the 
OVCAR8 study (Figure 6B). Under these conditions, using the 
number of nodules as a measure of tumor burden became mis-
leading, as lesions grew into one another, resulting in a smaller 
number of larger metastases. Even in this more advanced set-
ting, MYD1-72 Fc and doxorubicin had significant antitumor 
activity, decreasing tumor burden by 51% and 91%, respectively 
(Figure 6B). The combination of these 2 agents was once again 
effective, as animals in the combination group had, on average, 
99% less tumor by weight than controls. Furthermore, with-
in this group, 3 out of 10 animals were completely cured with 
no evidence of disease (Figure 6B, inlaid graphs). Together, 
these 2 studies support the in vitro findings that AXL inhibition 
modulates the DNA-damage response and demonstrate that 
antagonizing the GAS6/AXL signaling axis can be leveraged to 
improve the therapeutic index of chemotherapy.
Successful inhibition of AXL carries with it little risk of on-target 
toxicity, as seen in the AXL-knockout mouse (14). However, broad 
inhibition of the TAM family can lead to severe toxicities. For exam-
ple, autoimmune diseases are common in the TAM triple-knockout 
mouse (14) and disruption of the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) 
can lead to blindness when signaling through MER is abrogated 
(34). Furthermore, concurrent inhibition of AXL and MER has been 
shown to enhance tumor growth in certain types of cancer (35). To 
ensure the decoy receptors were specifically targeting AXL in vivo, 
we performed histology to assess the integrity of the RPE in mice 
from the skov3.ip experiment. Across all treatment groups, the RPE 
was healthy and normal, indicating that requisite signaling through 
other TAM family members, specifically MER, is preserved (Figure 
6C). Additionally, histological analysis on the liver, lung, and kidney 
from these animals showed no histological abnormalities across 
treatment groups, indicating a lack of gross toxicity (Figure 6C).
Combination treatment improves overall survival of pancreatic 
cancer. Similar to recurrent ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer rep-
resents a largely intractable clinical challenge. The primary tumor 
location makes early detection improbable, and patients often 
present with advanced disease, as illustrated by 5-year survival 
rates of around 6% (36). Even when surgery is feasible, adjuvant 
chemotherapies are nearly ubiquitously administered in the form 
of the pyrimidine antagonists gemcitabine or fluorouracil (5-FU) 
(37). Pancreatic cancer thus represents an additional clinical set-
ting in which improved therapies are desperately needed and stan-
dard treatment includes DNA-damaging agents.
To examine whether the synergistic effects seen in the ovarian 
models were indicative of a general phenomenon broadly applica-
ble to clinical oncology, MYD1-72 Fc was tested alone and in com-
Figure 5. Treatment with MYD1-72 induces DNA-damage response during cell S phase. (A) Immunofluorescence staining of γH2AX foci formation in ovarian 
cancer cells treated with MYD1-72 Fc alone or in combination with doxorubicin. n = 7-9. (B) Western blot analysis was carried out to examine changes in the 
phosphorylation of ATM, ATR, CHK1, CHK2, and RPA32 in ovarian cancer cells cultured in low serum (0.1% FBS) after treatment with MYD1-72 Fc. (C) Rep-
resentative images of EdU- and γH2AX-positive cells and (D) quantification of γH2AX-positive cells in MYD1-72 Fc vs. control treated cells. The differences 
in the number of S phase cells (EdU positive) between control and MYD1-72 Fc–treated groups are shown. No click refers to the negative control for EdU 
staining (E). The percentage of γH2AX-positive cells that are in S phase (EdU positive) between control and MYD1-72 Fc–treated group is shown in F. n = 3.  
*P < 0.05; ****P < 0.0001. Scale bars: 15 μm. ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer test was used for comparing multiple treatments to each other, and Student’s t 
test was used for comparing single treatments to the control.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
Figure 6. MYD1-72 Fc enhances the 
effects of chemotherapy in ovarian 
cancer. Inhibition of metastasis in 
the OVCAR8 (A) and SKOV3.ip (B) 
ovarian cancer models as measured 
by number of metastases and 
overall tumor weight. Blue data 
points represent mice estimated to 
have over 1,000 metastases, and 
red outlined data points represent 
mice with no evidence of disease. 
Inlaid graphs are expanded views of 
a subset of the complete data set 
to highlight differences between 
treatment groups. The eyes, liver, 
lungs, and kidneys of mice in the 
OVCAR8 study (C) were analyzed for 
histological signs of toxicity. Treat-
ment with MYD1-72 Fc did not result 
in ocular toxicity; as the integrity of 
the RPE (arrows) was maintained, 
no histological abnormalities were 
present across treatment groups. 
Representative images are shown 
from each treatment group.  
n = 7–10. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01;  
***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001. Scale 
bars: 50 μm. Dox, doxorubicin. 
ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer test 
was used for comparing multiple 
treatments to each other.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
Therefore, to more appropriately determine its clinical potential, 
we placed MYD1-72 head to head with leading anti-AXL TKIs. We 
demonstrate that, in vitro, MYD1-72 Fc specifically inhibits AXL 
signaling without affecting MER or TYRO3 activities, whereas 
the TKIs were more promiscuous. Foretinib and BGB324 are both 
known as AXL inhibitors, though their ability to attenuate AXL 
signaling differs dramatically. At the same dosage, foretinib was 
indiscriminate, inhibiting all 3 TAM receptor family members, 
whereas BGB324 treatment resulted only in modest inhibition of 
AXL signaling. In all cases, downstream pAkt expression was sup-
pressed, suggesting that BGB324 can elicit its therapeutic effica-
cy by influencing alternative signaling cascades. These different 
activity profiles are likely due to two critical factors: MYD1-72 Fc 
only binds to GAS6, leaving proteins and other ligands present in 
the serum free to bind to MER and TYRO3, and the polypharma-
cology of the anti-AXL TKIs results in broader kinase inhibition.
One critical detail of this study was the dosages that were cho-
sen. Initial studies outlining the development of BGB324 achieved 
efficacy at 7 mg/kg twice daily, but other studies more consistent-
ly used dosages in excess of 100 mg/kg twice daily (26). This high 
dose is in line with what is often used when evaluating TKIs pre-
clinically, most likely because a negative result at these elevated 
doses would be definitive. However, clinically, the total daily dose 
of approved TKIs in oncology is, with few exceptions, less than 12 
mg/kg (Supplemental Table 5). Though differences in how a drug 
behaves in mice and human subjects invariably exist, doses that 
exceed what is realistically achievable in the clinic by over an order 
of magnitude can skew preclinical results. As a result, we chose 
to dose both foretinib and BGB324 at 12.5 mg/kg twice daily. For 
MYD1-72 Fc, we dosed mice at 1 mg/kg daily. We have previously 
shown that this dosing regimen is equivalent to 10 mg/kg admin-
istered biweekly and thus chose daily dosing, as it reduced the 
total protein administered by nearly two-thirds.
When directly compared, the efficacy of MYD1-72 Fc was 
equivalent to that of the best TKI tested, foretinib. However, 
severe toxicity undermined foretinib’s results, as half of the treat-
ment group was removed from the study prior to the predeter-
mined endpoint due to excessive morbidity. This highlights one of 
the confounding issues of using elevated doses of TKIs; the high 
homology of kinases results in off-target activity of even the most 
specific inhibitors. This promiscuity was observed in the clinic as 
well. In a recent phase II trial, foretinib failed to demonstrate effi-
cacy despite the observation of treatment-related adverse events 
in 91% of patients (42). Furthermore, within our study, BGB324 
was largely ineffective when dosed at 12.5 mg/kg twice a day, 
having only a marginal effect on metastatic disease. It should be 
sible for driving disease progression have been identified. Efforts 
have been made to exploit these pathways as targets for therapeu-
tic intervention, with the expectation that drugs capable of mod-
ulating them would deliver previously unachievable efficacy. In 
practice, however, the genetic instability and hypermutation rates 
of cancer, coupled with the redundancy often built in to biological 
systems, have undermined the importance of singular targets. In 
the presence of this confluence of factors, resistant mutations arise 
and compensatory signaling pathways become upregulated, limit-
ing the utility of specific inhibitors. As an illustration, clinical trials 
for some new molecular entities prospectively set progression-free 
survival as the primary endpoint (39), highlighting the difficulty 
in achieving meaningful advancements in overall survival. These 
observations suggest that, while the development of new targets is 
critical, priority should be given to those that have the potential to 
act in synergy with, and increase the therapeutic index of, estab-
lished treatment modalities. The AXL receptor fits this description. 
AXL initially attracted attention because of the fundamental roles 
it plays in driving tumor progression and metastatic dissemination, 
but more recently, relationships between the receptor and other 
disease pathways have emerged. The intersection of these two fea-
tures has thus made AXL an ideal oncology target.
There is a critical need for the development and character-
ization of anti-AXL therapeutics. To this end, a pipeline of AXL 
antagonists has been generated that largely comprises small mole-
cule kinase inhibitors (40). The paucity of biologics under clinical 
development can be attributed to the comparatively poor binding 
affinity of the mAbs described to date, as the strength of the native 
GAS6/AXL interaction is orders of magnitude stronger than each 
mAb. As an example, several generations of anti-AXL Abs were 
developed with affinities to the receptor in the nanomolar range (7, 
41). When tested in preclinical models, modest antitumor effects 
were seen, hinting at the value of the target while highlighting the 
difficulties inherent to inhibiting AXL.
We have previously demonstrated that the use of an engi-
neered AXL decoy receptor is an effective way to exploit the native 
interaction itself in order to overcome this affinity barrier. Here, 
by developing a second-generation decoy receptor, we further 
validate this approach and more clearly define the relationship 
between the affinity of our AXL antagonists and antitumor effects 
achieved in vivo. This reengineered molecule, MYD1-72, combines 
an additional beneficial mutation, allowing it to attain a subpi-
comolar affinity to GAS6. Comparisons of the first- and second- 
generation receptors demonstrated that this improved binding 
affinity was critical for achieving optimal efficacy. Importantly, at 
93 fM, the apparent affinity of the final MYD1-72 Fc construct rep-
resents one of the strongest protein-protein interactions reported. 
An additional feature of MYD1-72 is that it binds strongly to both 
mouse and human GAS6. The original MYD1 showed no increase 
in binding to mouse GAS6, preventing it from effectively neutral-
izing endogenous mGAS6 in preclinical models. By binding both 
orthologs with exceptionally high affinity, MYD1-72 overcomes 
this challenge, and thus the efficacy obtained in our mouse models 
is more representative of what could be achieved clinically.
One major challenge when interpreting the results of preclini-
cal models is that their multivariable nature precludes an accurate 
assessment of efficacy in the absence of a known, internal control. 
Table 2. Treatment survival
Treatment
Median survival (days)
Vehicle
17
MYD1-72 Fc
17
Gemcitabine
35
Combination
57
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
DNA-damaging agents have long been used to exploit cancer’s 
hyperproliferative state, and modulation of the damage response 
through the abrogation of AXL signaling was shown to increase 
the therapeutic effects of these drugs both in vitro and in vivo. In 
fact, this effect was so pronounced that the reduction of tumor 
burden in models of human ovarian cancer exceeded 99% and in 
some cases resulted in complete cures. A confounding aspect of 
our studies is that substantial differences exist between the in vivo 
models used, making direct comparisons less straightforward. 
However, that these effects were observed in multiple tumor 
models suggests that the relationship between AXL and the DNA- 
damage response is one that transcends cancer subtypes. These 
results offer the possibility of improving the therapeutic index of 
many standard-of-care chemotherapies, potentially providing a 
meaningful advancement in the care of many patients with refrac-
tory disease. Moving forward, additional studies exploring wheth-
er other DNA-damaging modalities, such as radiation, would ben-
efit from concurrent AXL inhibition are justified. Furthermore, 
clinical studies combining candidate AXL inhibitors with cytotoxic 
agents would provide a clear advantage when evaluating efficacy.
Collectively, this study expands the role that AXL plays in 
tumor progression and the development of therapeutic resis-
tance. By implicating the receptor as an important regulator of 
the DNA-damage response, there is the exciting possibility that 
anti-AXL therapies can be broadly used to chemosensitize in 
a myriad of malignancies. Our second-generation AXL decoy 
receptor is poised to capitalize upon this potential by providing 
a molecule capable of effectively antagonizing the GAS6/AXL 
system, with little to no toxicity. Clinical evaluation of MYD1-72 
Fc is therefore justified, particularly when used as an adjuvant to 
standard-of-care chemotherapy.
Methods
Recombinant protein production. AXL Ig1 variants were produced in 
the methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris, as previously described (17). 
Briefly, Ig1 variants were cloned into the pPIC9K plasmid (no. V175-
20, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with flanking N- and C-terminal FLAG 
and 6xHIS tags, respectively, and yeast were transformed according 
to the manufacturer’s protocol. Recombinant proteins were purified 
from conditioned culture supernatant by nickel affinity chromatog-
raphy followed by removal of N-linked glycans using endoglycosi-
dase H (EndoHf, P0703S, New England Biolabs). Final purification 
was performed using size-exclusion chromatography. Human GAS6 
LG1-2 and both AXL constructs used for crystallography studies were 
expressed and purified as previously described. All AXL Fc fusion con-
structs were expressed transiently using the FreeStyle Max (Invitro-
gen) HEK293 system as previously described. Dimeric Fc fusions were 
isolated from conditioned culture supernatant using protein A affinity 
chromatography followed by size exclusion chromatography.
The Kinetic Exclusion Assay. Equilibrium binding and association 
rate constants for all GAS6-AXL interactions were measured on a 
Kinetic Exclusion Assay instrument (KinExA, Sapidyne Instruments 
Inc.) as previously described (17).
For equilibrium binding studies, 3 independent titrations were 
completed for each AXL Ig1 or AXL Fc fusion unless otherwise noted. 
Depending on the affinity of interaction, 3 of the following 4 titrations 
were performed: (a) 1 ml reactions of 5 nM GAS6, AXL serially dilut-
reiterated that this dose of BGB324 is on the low end of what has 
been reported to be effective. The studies on clinical dose escala-
tion have not been published, and it is possible that higher doses 
of BGB324 would be effective, should they prove to be tolerable. 
Collectively, these data demonstrate that the specificity of our bio-
logic allows marked antitumor activity to be achieved with little 
toxicity. These effects are equivalent to what can be attained by 
TKIs at their maximally tolerated dose, but carry few, if any, of the 
off-target risks of those compounds.
An unexpected result from the 4T1 study was that treat-
ment with MYD1-72 Fc substantially reduced primary tumor 
growth. Immunohistochemical analysis of primary tumor sam-
ples showed elevated levels of γH2AX, leading us to investigate 
the link between AXL and the DNA-damage response. Using an 
RPPA, we uncovered a new relationship between AXL signal-
ing and the DNA-damage response, wherein inhibition of AXL 
resulted in increased levels of DNA-damage markers such as 
CHK2, XRCC1, BAX, and BID. Furthermore, we demonstrat-
ed that the loss of AXL signaling upon treatment with MYD1-
72 Fc leads to phosphorylation of the classical DNA-damage 
response components ATM, ATR, and RPA32. By performing 
an EdU incorporation assay with Hu and MYD1-72 Fc, we are 
proposing a new role for AXL signaling in protecting cancer 
cells from disruptive replication and fork collapse during the 
S phase. Based on these data, we concluded that the GAS6/
AXL signaling cascade provides cytoprotection for tumor 
cells and loss of AXL removes this protection, leading to repli-
cation stress and subsequent activation of the DNA-damage 
response. We showed that these effects were more pronounced 
when AXL was inhibited on cells cultured under serum-limited 
 
conditions, as cells grown in complete growth media showed a 
negligible increase in γH2AX expression upon treatment with 
MYD1-72 Fc. This observation is insightful, as it indicates that 
AXL’s protective role is only activated under stress. This provides 
context to the fact that upregulation of AXL is generally associ-
ated with later stage metastatic disease, situations where tumor 
cells are under severe nutrient and oxygen deprivation.
Figure 7. Inhibition of AXL in pancreatic cancer prolongs survival when 
used in combination with gemcitabine. Kaplan-Meier of the LM-P ortho-
topic pancreatic cancer study. Animals were treated with either vehicle, 
MYD1-72 Fc, gemcitabine, or MYD1-72 Fc plus gemcitabine. §P < 0.0001 
for combination vs. vehicle; †P < 0.0001 for combination vs. gemcitabine. 
A log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test was performed to compare mean survival 
among groups.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
ed 1:2 twelve times starting at 30 nM, 3 hours 
RT incubation; (b) 2 ml reactions of 500 pM 
GAS6, AXL serially diluted 1:2.5 twelve times 
starting at 10 nM, 18 hours RT incubation; (c) 
12 ml reactions of 50 pM GAS6, AXL serially 
diluted 1:3 twelve times starting at 9 nM, 1 day 
RT incubation; (d) 12 ml reactions of 15 pM 
GAS6, AXL serially diluted 1:3 twelve times 
starting at 1 nM, 4 day RT incubation. After 
the appropriate incubation time, reactions 
were flowed over MYD1 Fc–coated beads 
and captured free GAS6 was probed using an 
anti-6xHIS Dylight 649 Ab (no. 200-343-382, 
Rockland Immunochemicals Inc.). Each sam-
ple was measured twice, and data from the 3 
independent equilibrium binding experiments 
were globally analyzed using n-curve analysis 
in the KinExA Pro 3.6.2 software (Sapidyne 
Instruments Inc.) to obtain the KD value.
To analyze the association rate of the inter-
actions, the direct inject method was used. 
For these experiments, 1 μM AXL was serially 
diluted 1:2.5, and equal volumes of each AXL 
sample and 500 nM GAS6 were briefly mixed 
and flowed over the capture beads. Free GAS6 
was detected as described, and the data were 
fit using the KinExA Pro 3.6.2 software to 
obtain the association rate (Kon) of the interac-
tion. The dissociation rate (Koff) was calculated 
as the product of the KD and the Kon.
Circular dichroism spectroscopy. The circu-
lar dichroism spectra of AXL Ig1 variants were 
measured on a Jasco J-815 circular dichroism 
spectropolarimeter. 
Recombinant 
proteins 
were diluted to 10 μM in PBS, and elliptic-
ity was measured in the far UV range from 
190–260 nm at 20°C in a quartz cuvette with a 
1-mm path length. Raw data were transformed 
to mean residue ellipticity using the following 
equation: [θ]mrw = (mrw × θobs)/(10 × l × c), where 
mrw is the mean molecular weight per residue, 
θobs is observed ellipticity in degrees, l is the path 
length in centimeters, and c is the concentra-
tion of protein in grams/ml. Three independent 
data sets were collected and averaged to obtain 
the spectrum for each protein, with each data 
set representing the average of triplicate scans.
Figure 8. Inhibition of AXL in pancreatic cancer 
improves the efficacy of gemcitabine. Represen-
tative images and matched quantification of (A) 
Ki67, (B) vWF, (C) TUNEL, and (D) γH2AX staining 
of primary tumor tissue. Error bars represent 
mean ± SD. n = 10–14. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01;  
****P < 0.0001. Scale bars: 50 μm. ANOVA with 
Tukey-Kramer test was used for comparing multi-
ple treatments to each other.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
to 550 in both chain A and chain B for the GAS6/MYD1-72 Ig1 cocom-
plex; the WT GAS6/AXL Ig1-2 crystal (PDB ID: 2C5D) structure also 
did not show electron density for this region. Several cycles of manual 
model building using COOT and refinement using REFMAC resulted 
in final Rworking and Rfree values of 19.8% and 24.7%, respectively. The 
Ramachandran statistics are as follows: 96.6% (favored) and 0.64% 
(outlier). The refinement statistics are provided in Supplemental Table 
3. All crystal structure figures were created using PyMOL (45).
Analysis of intermolecular contacts. The intermolecular contacts 
between GAS6 and MYD1 A72V in the cocomplex were examined 
as described. Briefly, the binding interface was analyzed using the 
PDBePISA (46) server v1.47 (http:/
/www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbe/prot_int/
pistart.html) utilizing a cutoff of 3.5 Å and 4.0 Å for hydrogen bonds 
and electrostatic interactions, respectively. Analysis was performed in 
a manner identical to that used with the prior GAS6/MYD1 structure 
to enable direct comparison.
Analysis of van der Waals contacts. The van der Waals contacts 
between the side chain of the residue at position 72 and surrounding 
residues were determined using the WHAT IF server. A contact is 
defined as 2 atoms for which the distance between the van der Waals 
surfaces is less than 1.0 Å. The WHAT IF algorithm uses the following 
van der Waals radii: C: 1.8 Å; O:1.4 Å; N:1.7 Å; S: 2.0 Å.
In vivo tumor models. For all in vivo studies, 6-week-old, female nude 
(nu/nu) mice (Jackson Laboratory) were used. In all studies, animals dis-
playing signs of morbidity were removed from the study immediately.
To establish orthotopic mammary tumors, 5 × 104 4T1 luciferase 
cells (47) (a gift from Marta Vilalta, Stanford University) were inject-
ed in a volume of 50 μl of DMEM into the mammary fat pad. Tumor 
engraftment was confirmed 4 days after tumor inoculation by biolu-
minescence imaging using an IVIS 200 (PerkinElmer). Treatment was 
initiated 4 days after inoculation for both studies. In the initial study 
comparing MYD1 Fc and MYD1-72 Fc, proteins were administered i.v. 
twice a week via tail vein injection in a volume of 200 μl at 0.5 mg/
kg. In the second study comparing MYD1-72 Fc and the small mole-
cule TKIs, proteins were administered daily via i.p. injections at 1 mg/
kg. BGB324 (Selleckchem LLC) and foretinib (MedChem) were given 
twice daily via oral gavage at 12.5 mg/kg.
Small molecules were administered twice daily via oral gavage. 
On day 24, mice were sacrificed 10 minutes after receiving a single i.p. 
injection of d-luciferin. Ex vivo bioluminescent imaging of the lungs 
and spleen was performed using an IVIS 200, and images were ana-
lyzed using Living Image software v4.3.1 to quantify lung metastases.
In both the skov3.ip (a gift from Gordon Mills at MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA) and OVCAR8 ovarian cancer 
models (NCI-Frederick Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis 
[DCTD] tumor cell line repository), diffuse metastatic disease was 
established by injecting 1 × 106 cells i.p. Tumors were allowed to estab-
lish for 1 week prior to treatment, and on day 5, a subset of animals 
were sacrificed to confirm the presence of visible macroscopic disease. 
In both studies, MYD1-72 Fc was administered at 1 mg/kg i.p. daily, 
doxorubicin (APP Pharmaceuticals) at 2 mg/kg was administered i.p. 
twice a week, or both were administered as described for a total of 3 
weeks. Animals were sacrificed on day 28, and metastatic burden was 
assessed by counting the number of visible metastatic lesions in the 
peritoneal cavity as well as excising and weighing all tumor tissue.
The orthotropic LM-P pancreatic adenocarcinoma model (a gift 
from Edgar Engleman at Stanford University ) was established as previ-
Crystallization and data collection of GAS6/AXL cocomplexes. 
Crystallization for the 2:2 GAS6/MYD1-72 Ig1-2 cocomplex was per-
formed as previously described (22). Briefly, purified WT GAS6 and 
MYD1-72 Ig1-2 were mixed in a 1:1 molar ratio and allowed to complex 
at room temperature for 24 hours. The cocomplexes were purified 
using size exclusion chromatography to remove any unreacted com-
ponents and were buffer exchanged into 25 mM Na-HEPES, 150 mM 
NaCl, and 1 mM calcium acetate to a final concentration of 10 mg/
ml. Crystals for the GAS6/MYD1-72 cocomplex were grown at room 
temperature by the hanging-drop vapor-diffusion method with a 1:1 
mixture (1.2 μl each) of the complex solution (5.6 mg/ml) and the well 
solution containing 0.15 M Li2SO4, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 5% glyc-
erol, and 2 mM Ni2SO4. For cryocooling, the crystals were dipped in a 
solution containing 38 parts of 1 M Li2SO4, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 0.1 
M NaCl, and 12 parts of 100% glycerol. Diffraction data sets for the 
GAS6/MYD1-72 cocomplex (3.5Å) were collected at 100 K using the 
Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL) beamline 12-2 at 
a wavelength of 0.98Å. Data were indexed and integrated using the 
XDS package. The crystals belong to space group P3221 and contain 2 
monomers per symmetric unit. The crystallographic data are summa-
rized in Supplemental Table 3. Several attempts to improve the res-
olution by using various additives, crystal dehydration experiments, 
and changes in the cryocooling procedure were unsuccessful.
Nearly identical conditions were used to crystalize the 1:1 GAS6/
MYD1-72 Ig1 cocomplex. Briefly, purified WT GAS6 and MYD1-72 
Ig1 were mixed in a 1:1 molar ratio and allowed to complex at room 
temperature for 24 hours. The cocomplexes were purified using size 
exclusion chromatography to remove any uncomplexed components 
and buffer exchanged into 25 mM Na-HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, and 1 
mM calcium acetate to a final concentration of 10 mg/ml. Crystals for 
the GAS6/MYD1-72 Ig1 cocomplex were grown at room temperature 
by the hanging-drop vapor-diffusion method with a 1:1 mixture (1.2 μl 
each) of the complex solution (9.8 mg/ml) and the well solution con-
taining 0.7 M Li2SO4 and 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.4). For cryocooling, the 
crystals were dipped in a solution containing 38 parts of 1.1 M Li2SO4, 
0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.4), 0.1 M NaCl, and 12 parts of 100% glycerol. 
Before cryocooling, crystals were slightly dehydrated by placing the 
cover slip over 1 M Li2SO4, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.4) well solution for 
8 hours. The diffraction data set for the GAS6/MYD1-72 Ig1 cocom-
plex (2.3 Å) was collected at 100 K using the SSRL beamline 12-2 at 
a wavelength of 0.98 Å. Data were indexed and integrated using the 
XDS package. The crystals belong to space group P212121 and contain 2 
monomers per symmetric unit. The crystallographic data are summa-
rized in Supplemental Table 3. Crystals were also grown from 3 other 
crystallization conditions, but they showed weaker diffraction.
Structure determination and refinement. For the GAS6/MYD1-72 
Ig1-2 cocomplex, initial phases were obtained by molecular replace-
ment by using the program MOLREP and the coordinates of the WT 
GAS6/AXL crystal structure (PDB ID: 2C5D) as the search model. Sev-
eral cycles of manual model building using COOT (43) and refinement 
using REFMAC (44) resulted in final Rworking and Rfree values of 20.3% 
and 24.5%, respectively. The Ramachandran statistics are as follows: 
93.28 (favored) and 1.15 (outlier). The refinement statistics are pro-
vided in Supplemental Table 3. The structure of the GAS6/MYD1-72 
Ig1 cocomplex was similarly solved by molecular replacement, again 
using the coordinates of the WT structure as the search model. No 
electron density was observed for the loop of GAS6 from residues 542 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
Scientific) or anti-mouse FITC (no. 62-6511, Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
for 1 hour at 37°C and counterstained with Prolong Mounting Medi-
um with DAPI. Positive foci intensities were calculated using Imagine 
Software Metamorph. EdU (5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine) labeling and 
costaining were carried out according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions (no. C10637, Thermo Fisher Scientific). γH2AX staining was 
performed as described above. Cells were visualized using a Leica 
DM6000 B microscope with Leica Application Suite X software. EdU 
was used at a concentration of 10 μM. EdU labeling was carried out 
for 1 hour in all cases; for conditions including drug treatments, EdU 
was added during the last hour of treatment. Experiments were carried 
out in triplicate. Quantification of staining: positive γH2AX staining 
refers to cells with over 8 foci and pan-nuclear staining. For Hu-treated 
groups, γH2AX-positive cells refers to cells where a pannuclear staining 
pattern (typically associated with replication stress) was observed.
Statistics. ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer test was used for compar-
ing multiple treatment groups with each other. P < 0.05 was consid-
ered significant. Repeated measure ANOVA was used for comparing 
multiple treatment groups measured over time. Statistical analysis of 
survival curves was conducted in the pancreatic cancer survival study. 
A log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test was performed to compare mean surviv-
al among groups; P ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Study approval. All procedures involving animals and their care 
and use were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Usage 
Committee of Stanford University.
Author contributions
All authors contributed to the design of the research. MSK per-
formed the protein engineering and characterization; MSK, SK, 
and IIM did the crystallography; MSK, YRM, SEN, and AD con-
ducted the in vivo experiments; all authors analyzed the data; MSK 
and AJG prepared the manuscript with input from all coauthors.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the Stanford FACS Core Facility for 
assistance with the flow cytometric sorting. Rie von Eyben helped 
with statistical analysis. All ex vivo imaging was conducted in the 
Stanford Small Animal Imaging Facility. Portions of this research 
were performed at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory, 
a national user facility operated by Stanford University on behalf 
of the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Basic Energy Scienc-
es. This work was supported by the Silicon Valley Foundation, the 
Kimmelman Fund, the Skippy Frank Foundation,  the Wallace H. 
Coulter Translational Research Grant Program (to JRC and AJG), 
the Stanford Chemistry, Engineering & Medicine for Human 
Health (ChEM-H) Institute (to JRC and IIM), Stanford Bio-X and 
ARCS graduate fellowships (to MSK), NCI grant 88480 (to AJG 
and YRM), NIH training grant T32 GM008412-15S1, and a Siebel 
graduate fellowship (to DSJ). MMO is a Cancer Research Institute 
Irvington Fellow supported by the Cancer Research Institute.
Address correspondence to: Amato J. Giaccia, CCSR-South, Room 
1255, 269 Campus Drive, Stanford, California 94305-5152, USA. 
Phone: 650.723.7311; E-mail: giaccia@stanford.edu. Or to: Jennifer 
R. Cochran, Shriram Center for Bioengineering and Chemical Engi-
neering, 443 Via Ortega, Room 356, Stanford, California 94305-
4125, USA. Phone: 650.724.5034; E-mail: cochran@stanford.edu.
ously described (38). Briefly, 1 × 106 cells were injected s.c. into the flanks 
of nude mice and grown for 2 to 3 weeks until they reached 500 mm3. To 
establish orthotropic tumors, mice harboring the s.c. tumors were sacri-
ficed and tumors were isolated and cut into small 3- to 4-mm fragments. 
Laparotomies were performed, and a tumor fragment was secured to 
the tail of the pancreas using sutures. After implantation, the pancreas 
was returned to the peritoneal cavity and the incision was closed. Mice 
received daily injections of antibiotics on the day of implantation and on 
each of the 3 days after the operation for pain management. Treatment 
was initiated 4 days after surgery. MYD1-72 Fc was administered at 1 
mg/kg i.p. daily, gemcitabine (Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Inc.) at 2 
mg/kg was administered i.p. twice a week, or both were administered 
as described. Treatment was continued until a mouse displayed signs of 
morbidity, at which time it was removed from the study.
In vivo GAS6 serum ELISA. For the time course studies, mice were 
administered a single dose of MYD1 Fc or MYD1-72 Fc at 0.5 mg/kg 
via tail vein injection. All doses were formulated in a 200 μl volume. 
Two mice were analyzed per condition, and untreated mice were used 
to determine baseline GAS6 levels. At 2, 12, 24, and 36 hours after 
administration, retroorbital bleeds were performed to obtain blood 
samples from which serum was isolated and free GAS6 was measured 
as previously described. The amount of free GAS6 in each sample was 
determined using a sandwich ELISA. In this assay, MYD1 Fc was used 
as a capture reagent in order to ensure the detection of free, unbound 
GAS6 and not GAS6/AXL Fc complexes. Detection of GAS6 was car-
ried out using a biotinylated polyclonal antimouse GAS6 Ab (BAF986, 
R&D Systems) and streptavidin HRP (no. 4800-30-06, Trevigen Inc.).
RPPA. The RPPA was performed by MD Anderson as described.
Immunoblotting. Cell lysates were subjected to sodium dodecyl sul-
fate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, followed by transfer to nitro-
cellulose membrane. The membranes were then probed with primary 
Abs against total AXL (AF154, R&D Systems), pAXL (T702; no. 5724, 
CST), total Akt (no. 4691 CST), pAkt (no. 4060, CST), anti-MER (no. 
ab52968, Abcam), pMER (no. ab14921 Abcam), anti-TYRO3 (no. 5585, 
CST), pTyro3 (no. orb186274, Biorbyt LLC), BCL-2 Family Antibody 
Sampler Kit (no. 9934, CST), anti-CHK2 (no. sc-5278, Santa Cruz Bio-
technology Inc.), anti-XRCC1 (no. 2735, CST), anti-γH2AX (no. 05636, 
Merck Millipore), anti-pATM (no. ab81292, Abcam), anti-ATM (no. 
ab78, Abcam), anti-pATR (no. 2853, CST), anti-ATR (no. 2790, CST), 
anti-phospho CHK1 (no. 12302, CST), anti-pHK2 (no. 2197, CST) and 
anti-RPA32 (no. 2208, CST) at 4°C overnight. The blots were then 
washed and probed with HRP-conjugated anti-goat (no. sc-2020, Santa 
Cruz Biotechnology Inc.), or HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit (no. A16110, 
Thermo Fisher Scientific) as appropriate. The blots were developed 
with Bio-Rad Western C Developing Reagent (no. 170-5060 Bio-Rad) 
and visualized with Chemidoc digital imager (no. 1708280, Bio-Rad).
 
Immunofluorescence analysis. 10,000 cells were plated in each well 
of glass chamber slide and allowed to attach overnight. Cells were 
serum starved and treated with 0.1 μg or 10 μg of MYD1-72 Fc with or 
without (2.5 mg) doxorubicin. Cells were then washed with PBS and 
fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, lysed for 10 minutes, and blocked 
with a 2% BSA and 0.1% PBS–Triton-X solution for 1 hour. After wash-
es in PBS–Triton-X 100, cells were incubated with mouse anti-γH2AX 
(no. 05-636, Merck Millipore), rabbit anti-RAD51 (no. PC130-100UL 
Merck Millipore), or rabbit anti-53BP1 (no. ab36823, Abcam) overnight 
in a humidified chamber at 4°C. Cells were washed with PBS and incu-
bated in secondary Ab anti-rabbit FITC (no. 65-6111, Thermo Fisher 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 1   January 2017
 1. Scott AM, Wolchok JD, Old LJ. Antibody therapy 
of cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012;12(4):278–287.
 2. Fabian MA, et al. A small molecule-kinase inter-
action map for clinical kinase inhibitors. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2005;23(3):329–336.
 3. Wan L, Pantel K, Kang Y. Tumor metastasis: 
moving new biological insights into the clinic. 
Nat Med. 2013;19(11):1450–1464.
 4. Lemke G, Rothlin CV. Immunobiology 
of the TAM receptors. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2008;8(5):327–336.
 5. O’Bryan JP, et al. axl, a transforming gene isolat-
ed from primary human myeloid leukemia cells, 
encodes a novel receptor tyrosine kinase. Mol Cell 
Biol. 1991;11(10):5016–5031.
 6. Linger RM, Keating AK, Earp HS, Graham DK. 
TAM receptor tyrosine kinases: biologic functions, 
signaling, and potential therapeutic targeting in 
human cancer. Adv Cancer Res. 2008;100:35–83.
 
7. Li Y, et al. Axl as a potential therapeutic target in 
cancer: role of Axl in tumor growth, metastasis and 
angiogenesis. Oncogene. 2009;28(39):3442–3455.
 8. Rankin EB, et al. AXL is an essential factor and 
therapeutic target for metastatic ovarian cancer. 
Cancer Res. 2010;70(19):7570–7579.
 9. Vajkoczy P, et al. Dominant-negative inhibition 
of the Axl receptor tyrosine kinase suppress-
es brain tumor cell growth and invasion and 
prolongs survival. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2006;103(15):5799–5804.
 10. Chen PX, Li QY, Yang Z. Axl and prostasin are 
biomarkers for prognosis of ovarian adenocarci-
noma. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2013;17(5):425–429.
 11. Gjerdrum C, et al. Axl is an essential epithelial- 
to-mesenchymal transition-induced regulator 
of breast cancer metastasis and patient survival. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107(3):1124–1129.
 12. Zhang Z, et al. Activation of the AXL kinase caus-
es resistance to EGFR-targeted therapy in lung 
cancer. Nat Genet. 2012;44(8):852–860.
 13. Hong J, Peng D, Chen Z, Sehdev V, Belkhiri 
A. ABL regulation by AXL promotes cisplatin 
resistance in esophageal cancer. Cancer Res. 
2013;73(1):331–340.
 14. Lu Q, et al. Tyro-3 family receptors are essential 
regulators of mammalian spermatogenesis. 
Nature. 1999;398(6729):723–728.
 15. Nagata K, et al. Identification of the product of 
growth arrest-specific gene 6 as a common ligand 
for Axl, Sky, and Mer receptor tyrosine kinases.  
J Biol Chem. 1996;271(47):30022–30027.
 16. Varnum BC, et al. Axl receptor tyrosine kinase 
stimulated by the vitamin K-dependent pro-
tein encoded by growth-arrest-specific gene 6. 
Nature. 1995;373(6515):623–626.
 17. Kariolis MS, et al. An engineered Axl ‘decoy 
receptor’ effectively silences the Gas6-Axl sig-
naling axis. Nat Chem Biol. 2014;10(11):977–983.
 18. Economides AN, et al. Cytokine traps: 
multi-component, high-affinity blockers of cyto-
kine action. Nat Med. 2003;9(1):47–52.
 19. Kariolis MS, Kapur S, Cochran JR. Beyond anti-
bodies: using biological principles to guide the 
development of next-generation protein therapeu-
tics. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2013;24(6):1072–1077.
 20. Peppel K, Crawford D, Beutler B. A tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-IgG heavy chain 
chimeric protein as a bivalent antagonist of TNF 
activity. J Exp Med. 1991;174(6):1483–1489.
 21. Holash J, et al. VEGF-Trap: a VEGF blocker with 
potent antitumor effects. Proc Natl Acad Sci  
U S A. 2002;99(17):11393–11398.
 22. Sasaki T, et al. Structural basis for Gas6-Axl sig-
nalling. EMBO J. 2006;25(1):80–87.
 23. Chao G, Lau WL, Hackel BJ, Sazinsky SL, Lip-
pow SM, Wittrup KD. Isolating and engineering 
human antibodies using yeast surface display. 
Nat Protoc. 2006;1(2):755–768.
 24. Park IK, Mishra A, Chandler J, Whitman SP, 
Marcucci G, Caligiuri MA. Inhibition of the 
receptor tyrosine kinase Axl impedes activation 
of the FLT3 internal tandem duplication in 
human acute myeloid leukemia: implications 
for Axl as a potential therapeutic target. Blood. 
2013;121(11):2064–2073.
 25. Thiede C, et al. Analysis of FLT3-activating muta-
tions in 979 patients with acute myelogenous 
leukemia: association with FAB subtypes and 
identification of subgroups with poor prognosis. 
Blood. 2002;99(12):4326–4335.
 26. Holland SJ, et al. R428, a selective small molecule 
inhibitor of Axl kinase, blocks tumor spread and 
prolongs survival in models of metastatic breast 
cancer. Cancer Res. 2010;70(4):1544–1554.
 27. Kataoka Y, et al. Foretinib (GSK1363089), a 
multi-kinase inhibitor of MET and VEGFRs, 
inhibits growth of gastric cancer cell lines by 
blocking inter-receptor tyrosine kinase networks. 
Invest New Drugs. 2012;30(4):1352–1360.
 28. Zillhardt M, et al. Foretinib (GSK1363089), an 
orally available multikinase inhibitor of c-Met 
and VEGFR-2, blocks proliferation, induces anoi-
kis, and impairs ovarian cancer metastasis. Clin 
Cancer Res. 2011;17(12):4042–4051.
 29. Ruan GX, Kazlauskas A. Axl is essential for 
VEGF-A-dependent activation of PI3K/Akt. 
EMBO J. 2012;31(7):1692–1703.
 30. D’Arcangelo D, Ambrosino V, Giannuzzo M, Gae-
tano C, Capogrossi MC. Axl receptor activation 
mediates laminar shear stress anti-apoptotic 
effects in human endothelial cells. Cardiovasc 
Res. 2006;71(4):754–763.
 31. Rankin EB, et al. Direct regulation of GAS6/
AXL signaling by HIF promotes renal metastasis 
through SRC and MET. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2014;111(37):13373–13378.
 32. Elkabets M, et al. AXL mediates resistance 
to PI3Kα inhibition by activating the EGFR/
PKC/mTOR axis in head and neck and esoph-
ageal squamous cell carcinomas. Cancer Cell. 
2015;27(4):533–546.
 33. Bowtell DD, et al. Rethinking ovarian cancer II: 
reducing mortality from high-grade serous ovari-
an cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015;15(11):668–679.
 34. Burstyn-Cohen T, Lew ED, Través PG, Burrola 
PG, Hash JC, Lemke G. Genetic dissection 
of TAM receptor-ligand interaction in retinal 
pigment epithelial cell phagocytosis. Neuron. 
2012;76(6):1123–1132.
 35. Bosurgi L, et al. Paradoxical role of the proto- 
oncogene Axl and Mer receptor tyrosine kinas-
es in colon cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2013;110(32):13091–13096.
 36. Cancer Facts and Figures 2014. American Can-
cer Society. http:/
/www.cancer.org/acs/groups/
content/@research/documents/webcontent/
acspc-042151.pdf. Accessed October 19, 2016.
 37. Li D, Xie K, Wolff R, Abbruzzese JL. Pancreatic 
cancer. Lancet. 2004;363(9414):1049–1057.
 38. Tseng WW, et al. Development of an orthot-
opic model of invasive pancreatic cancer in an 
immunocompetent murine host. Clin Cancer Res. 
2010;16(14):3684–3695.
 39. Takeda Announces Phase 3 MONET-A Study 
Evaluating Motesanib (AMG 706) in Patients 
with Advanced Non-Squamous Non-Small 
Cell Lung Cancer Does Not Meet Primary End-
point [press release]. Cambridge, MA; Osaka, 
Japan; Takeda; February 17, 2015. https:/
/www.
takeda.com/news/2015/20150217_6909.html. 
Accessed October 19, 2016.
 40. Wu X, Liu X, Koul S, Lee CY, Zhang Z, Halmos B. 
AXL kinase as a novel target for cancer therapy. 
Oncotarget. 2014;5(20):9546–9563.
 41. Ye X, et al. An anti-Axl monoclonal antibody 
attenuates xenograft tumor growth and enhances 
the effect of multiple anticancer therapies. Onco-
gene. 2010;29(38):5254–5264.
 42. Shah MA, et al. Phase II study evaluating 2 dosing 
schedules of oral foretinib (GSK1363089), cMET/
VEGFR2 inhibitor, in patients with metastatic 
gastric cancer. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e54014.
 43. Emsley P, Cowtan K. Coot: model-building tools 
for molecular graphics. Acta Crystallogr D Biol 
Crystallogr. 2004;60(Pt 12 Pt 1):2126–2132.
 44. Murshudov GN, Vagin AA, Dodson EJ. Refine-
ment of macromolecular structures by the maxi-
mum-likelihood method. Acta Crystallogr D Biol 
Crystallogr. 1997;53(Pt 3):240–255.
 45. Schrodinger, LLC. The PyMOL Molecular Graph-
ics System, Version 1.3r1. PyMol. https:/
/www.
pymol.org/. Accessed October 19. 2016.
 46. Krissinel E, Henrick K. Inference of macromolec-
ular assemblies from crystalline state. J Mol Biol. 
2007;372(3):774–797.
 47. Aslakson CJ, Miller FR. Selective events in the 
metastatic process defined by analysis of the 
sequential dissemination of subpopulations 
of a mouse mammary tumor. Cancer Res. 
1992;52(6):1399–1405.
