 ARTICLE
The architecture of functional lateralisation and its
relationship to callosal connectivity in the human
brain
Vyacheslav R. Karolis
1,2, Maurizio Corbetta3,4,5,6,7,8 & Michel Thiebaut de Schotten
1,2,9
Functional lateralisation is a fundamental principle of the human brain. However, a com-
prehensive taxonomy of functional lateralisation and its organisation in the brain is missing.
Here, we report the first complete map of functional hemispheric asymmetries in the human
brain, reveal its low dimensional structure, and its relationship with structural inter-
hemispheric connectivity. Our results suggest that the lateralisation of brain functions is
distributed along four functional axes: symbolic communication, perception/action, emotion,
and decision-making. The similarity between this finding and recent work on neurological
symptoms give rise to new hypotheses on the mechanisms that support brain recovery after
a brain lesion. We also report that cortical regions showing asymmetries in task-evoked
activity have reduced connections with the opposite hemisphere. This latter result suggests
that during evolution, brain size expansion led to functional lateralisation to avoid excessive
conduction delays between the hemispheres.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1
OPEN
1 Brain Connectivity and Behaviour Laboratory, Sorbonne Universities, Paris, France. 2 Frontlab, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM), Sorbonne
Universities, Inserm U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Paris, France. 3 Department of Neuroscience, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. 4 Padova Neuroscience
Center (PNC), University of Padova, Padova, Italy. 5 Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine, Fondazione Biomedica, Padova, Italy. 6 Department of
Neurology, Washington University, Saint Louis, MO, USA. 7 Department of Radiology, Washington University, Saint Louis, MO, USA. 8 Department of
Neuroscience, Washington University, Saint Louis, MO, USA. 9 Groupe d’Imagerie Neurofonctionnelle, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives-UMR 5293,
CNRS, CEA University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to V.R.K. (email: vyacheslav.
karolis@ndcn.ox.ac.uk) or to M.T.d S. (email: michel.thiebaut@gmail.com)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2019) 10:1417 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;
 “A
re you left- or right-brain?”. The widespread belief
that hemispheric dominance influences the human
character comes from a misinterpretation of several
decades of neuropsychological findings1 that show that functional
lateralisation is a fundamental principle of the brain’s organisa-
tion2–4. Today, after nearly 30 years of functional neuroimaging,
theories on functional lateralisation suggest a less radical division
and assume that the two hemispheres balance one another5.
However, despite the implications of functional lateralisation
theories for neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders6,7, as
well as for stroke recovery8–11, a comprehensive mapping of
functional lateralisation in the brain is, to our knowledge, still
missing in the literature. It is also not known whether putatively
lateralised cognitive functions share similar or different spatial
patterns of functional activation and whether these functional
activations can be categorised to a limited number of spatial
patterns—have a low-dimensional structure.
Furthermore, the mechanisms that sustain functional later-
alisation, and related inter-hemispheric communication, remain
debated12,13. Two competing hypotheses have been proposed on
the emergence of functional lateralisation based on the structure
of the corpus callosum, the most considerable inter-hemispheric
connection. The inter-hemispheric independence hypothesis
suggests that, during evolution, brain size expansion led to
functional lateralisation in order to avoid excessive conduction
delays between the hemispheres14. Accordingly, functionally
lateralised regions will be connected less strongly via the corpus
callosum than non-lateralised regions to make processing of
lateralised functions more efficient15. The inter-hemispheric
competition hypothesis proposes that functional lateralisation
arises from the competition between the hemispheres that inhibit
each other via the corpus callosum. As functionally lateralised
regions would need to inhibit the opposite hemisphere more than
non-lateralised regions, they could be more connected by the
corpus callosum. Preliminary anatomical16 and functional mag-
netic resonance imaging (fMRI)17 studies provide support for
both theories. However, the small range of functions investigated
and shortcomings in the methods often limit the interpretability
of the findings13. Overall, the generalisation of these theories and
findings to the whole brain’s functional organisation remains
unknown.
Here, we took advantage of combining the largest fMRI meta-
analytic dataset18 with the highest quality structural connectivity
data19 to produce, for the first time, a comprehensive map of the
functional brain architecture of lateralised cognitive functions,
characterise its low-dimensional structure, and examine its rela-
tionship to corpus callosum connectivity.
Results
Functional lateralisation maps and their low-dimensional
structure. We selected 590 terms related to specific cognitive
processes out of the whole Neurosynth database (see Supple-
mentary Table 1). A functional lateralisation map was computed
for each term by calculating the difference between hemispheres
for each pair of homologous voxels. Homologous functional
regions may be displaced in the two hemispheres because of
anatomical factors, e.g. the Yakovlevian torque4,20, the size of the
planum temporale21 and motor cortex22,23. Here we adjusted for
main anatomical asymmetries in the two hemispheres by regis-
tering the maps to a symmetric atlas24.
We first sought to determine which regions show a significant
functional lateralisation. Given that selected terms could be either
correlated or related in a trivial way (e.g., singular and plural
forms of the same word; “visual form” and “visual forms”), a
varimax-rotated principal component analysis was run in order to
eliminate redundancy in the data. One hundred and seventy-one
principal components with eigenvalues higher than the grand
average were retained, explaining 72.6% of the variance of the
lateralisation maps. General linear modelling was subsequently
employed with component loads as a set of predictors to fit
lateralisation maps data and identify voxels with a significant
lateralisation associated with each component. After 5000
permutations, 25 principal components showed voxels with a
significant lateralisation (>20 voxels; P < 0.05 family-wise error
corrected; see Supplementary Table 2). Essentially, these repre-
sent
the
significant
groups
of
voxels
showing
significant
functional lateralisation in Neurosynth.
Next, a multivariate spectral embedding, based on the
similarity between lateralisation maps, enabled us to examine a
generic structure of the brain’s functional lateralisation profiles,
i.e. its “morphospace”25,26. The preliminary step that included the
embedding in the first two dimensions (Fig. 1a and Supplemen-
tary
Figure
1)
revealed
a
triangular
organisation
of
the
lateralisation maps with three vertices: symbolic communication,
perception/action and emotion. A t-ratio test, i.e. a test of i.e.
pareto optimality,27, between the organisation of real data and
2000 samples of simulated data, which were obtained via
permutations of the voxel order before computing right–left
differences, confirmed the statistical veracity of such triangular
organisation. The same analysis was used to explore other
dimensions and revealed three additional triangles and a fourth
vertex given by decision-making. (Fig. 1b and Supplementary
Figure 2).
Furthermore, by regressing lateralisation profiles onto terms’
coordinates in the embedded space, we constructed predictions
for the maps located at the coordinates of the vertices, which we
will refer to as archetype maps.
The archetype maps corresponding to the symbolic commu-
nication axis was characterised by a left dominant activation of
the dorsal and ventral posterior part of the frontal lobe, including
Broca area and the presupplementary motor area, the posterior
part of the temporal lobe, including Wernicke area and the Visual
Word Form Area (i.e. VWFA). Right dominant activations were
located in the posterior lobe of the cerebellum, including area
Crus II (Fig. 2a).
The archetype perception/action map involved left sensorimo-
tor cortex, left SMA and left thalamus. Right dominant
activations included frontal eye field, intraparietal region, and
ventral frontal regions, frontal eye field, presupplementary motor
area, basal forebrain and anterior cerebellum (i.e. Areas V/VI and
VIII) as well as part of the vermis (Fig. 2b).
The archetype emotion map involved the left anterior cingulate
cortex, the basolateral complex of the right amygdala, the
posterior part of the right inferior frontal gyrus, the right
intraparietal sulcus and the posterior part of the right temporal
lobe (Fig. 2c).
Finally, the decision-making archetype map involved mostly
the right prefrontal cortex (i.e. medial orbital gyrus), the right
frontal eye field, the left intraparietal sulcus together with the
striatum (right putamen and left caudate) and the left basal
forebrain (Fig. 2d).
Corpus callosum and functional lateralisation. Given that the
microscopic diffusion of water molecules in the brain is easier
along rather than across axons, tractography derived from
diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging allows for peer-
ing into the structural organisation of brain connectivity (Fig. 3a).
In the following, we analysed the relationship between
functional
lateralisation
and
corpus
callosum
connectivity
measures by contrasting the connectivity profiles of lateralised
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:1417 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 and non-lateralised regions (see Methods for the definition of
non-lateralised regions). Two measures of connectivity were
employed, both computed by averaging across participants in the
HCP sample. The first measure, axonal water fraction28, is
microscopic and is estimated in the midsection of the corpus
callosum crossed by streamlines originating from voxels of a
selected cortical region. The second measure is macroscopic and
estimates the replicability of connections29,30 calculated as the
proportion of participants in which a voxel is connected to the
corpus callosum, which we will refer to as probability of
connection for shortness.
By sampling voxels from lateralised and non-lateralised
regions, in each hemisphere separately, we first constructed the
distribution of the differences in the axonal water fraction
between
lateralised
and
non-lateralised
regions.
Figure
3b
indicates that the axonal water fraction was consistently lower
for corpus callosum voxels projecting onto lateralised regions
when compared to non-lateralised voxels. Additionally, the plots
suggested a slightly lower axonal water fraction for left hemi-
sphere regions as compared to the right hemisphere.
Next, we constructed an analogous distribution for the
probability of connection. Figure 3c demonstrates that lateralised
regions when compared to non-lateralised voxels did not differ in
this macrostructural measure of connectivity.
The previous analysis failed to reveal a categorical difference
between lateralised and non-lateralised regions in macroscopic
measure of connectivity. However, the degree of functional
hemispheric dominance (see Methods for the definition of this
measure) can vary —from a unilateral to a relatively asymmetric
pattern of activity. In the latter case, both hemispheres are
involved in a function, but one is more active than the other.
Therefore, we explored whether a proportional relationship
existed between the degree of functional lateralisation and the
probability of corpus callosum connectivity.
Figure 3d indicates a negative relationship between the
probability of connection and the degree of functional lateralisa-
tion, for both the left and the right hemispheres (Pearson
correlation r = –0.81 and r = –0.69, respectively, p < 0.001). As
the overall level of activation of two homotopic areas in the left
and the right hemispheres may have an influence on its corpus
callosum connections, we duplicated the same analysis after
regressing out the left and right hemispheres average level of
activity for every functionally lateralised voxel. The relationship
between the level of functional dominance and the probability of
connection to corpus callosum remained unchanged for the left
hemisphere (Pearson correlation r = –0.79) and increased for the
right hemisphere (Pearson correlation r = –0.85).
Additional supplementary analyses indicated that there was no
relationship between the difference in corpus callosum con-
nectivity of lateralised and non-lateralised voxels and their
distance from the midsection of the corpus callosum (Supple-
mentary Figure 3).
Discussion
In the present study, we provide for the first time a compre-
hensive mapping of the functional brain architecture of lateralised
cognitive functions. The lateralisation of brain functions had a
low-dimensional structure distributed along four functional
axes: symbolic communication, perception/action, emotion and
Visual word
Auditory
Reward
Expression
Fearful
Autobiographical memory
Language
Working memory
Phonetic
Action
Tapping
Unpleasant
Pain
Movement
Motor performance
Eye movement
Violations
Decision (making)
Social interaction
Touch
Signal task
Musical
Imagery
Calculation
Navigation
Language
Visual word
Movement
Tapping
Motor performance
Eye movement
Auditory
Autobiographical
memory
Expression
Pain
Decision (making)
Reward
Unpleasant
Fearful
Signal task
Social interaction
Working memory
Calculation
Touch
Imagery
Action
Navigation
Phonetic
Musical
Musical
Left dominant activations (p < 0.05)
Right dominant activations (p < 0.05)
Lateralisation
Symbolic communication
Emotion
Perception/action
Decision
Axes
b
a
Fig. 1 Low-dimensional structure of functional lateralisation. Embedded in two-dimensional (a) and three-dimensional (b) space according to similarity in
their lateralisation profile (MATLAB interactive 3D file available as Supplementary Data 1). See Supplementary Figures 1 and 2 for the spatial embedding of
all Neurosynth terms. Here, to provide a graphical summary of all results reported in the section, we plotted the significantly lateralised components maps,
named by the highest-loading terms (Supplementary Table 3), in place of the actual Neurosynth terms (Supplementary Table 1)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2019) 10:1417 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3
 decision-making. Additionally, lateralised regions, as compared to
non-lateralised regions, were connected to regions of the corpus
callosum with reduced microstructural connectivity. Finally,
within the pool of lateralised regions, corpus callosum macro-
structural connectivity was proportionally associated with the
degree of hemispheric functional dominance.
The meta-analysis of task-related activation maps in relation to
cognitive terms replicated several known functional lateralisation
profiles (Figs. 1 and 2). For instance, the term /language/ was
associated with dominant responses in prefrontal, superior tem-
poral regions and inferior parietal regions of the left hemi-
sphere32. In association with terms such as /eye movements/stop
signal/ we found several regions of right dorsal fronto-parietal
and ventral frontal cortex that matched core regions of the dorsal
and ventral attention network24,33,34 involved in visuospatial and
response inhibition processes. Surprisingly, the term /attention/,
possibly not specific enough, was not associated with a specific
lateralised component. However, it did show a strong negative
weighting on the language component, corroborating previous
reports of a balance between language and attention in similar
brain regions35. Lateralised maps in the left and right cortex had
counterparts in the contralateral cerebellum in agreement with a
role of the cerebellum in supporting cognition36,37, and the
known anatomical organisation of cortico-pontine-cerebellar-
thalamic pathways38. Even the phylogenetical organisation of
functional regions in cerebellar networks was respected39. For
instance, area Crus II, part of the neo-cerebellum, connected with
frontal regions involved in language, showed a significant right
lateralisation for the language component. Similarly, Areas V/VI
and VIIIb, an anterior superior part of the paleocerebellum
connected with sensorimotor cortical regions, showed significant
right lateralisation for movement and finger components. These
findings support the validity and the anatomical precision of the
functional lateralisation maps based on fMRI meta-analyses (also
see for comparison our meta-analytic results with a task-based
fMRI results on finger tapping in Supplementary Figure 4).
The overall functional lateralisation of the brain could be
summarised with a low-dimensional architecture defined by
spatial patterns of activity and groups of cognitive terms. This
architecture defined four axes corresponding to symbolic com-
munication, perception/action, emotion and decision-making
(Fig. 1). The association of different terms along the different
TPJ
(IPL/STg)
IPs
M
SS
IFg
IPs
VFC
(IFg/MFg)
PFC
FEF
IPs
VFC
(IFg/MFg)
FEF
preSMA
SMA
BF
Perception/action
V
VI
VIII
Anterior
lobe
Vermis
PTL
preSMA
Emotion
Crus I
Posterior
lobe
ACC
Left lateralised
Right lateralised
–4
4
WA
preSMA
SMA
BF
SFg
Symbolic 
communication
Decision
Crus II
Posterior
lobe
VI
VIIb
VWFA
a
b
c
d
Fig. 2 Archetypes of functional lateralisation. The maps correspond to the symbolic communication (a), perception/action (b), emotion (c) and decision
(d) axes. Upper panel corresponds to the lateral view, middle panel to the medial view and lower panel to the cerebellum view (lateral and posterior views)
of the reconstructed pattern of activations. VWFA visual word form area, WA Wernicke area, VFC ventral frontal cortex, IFg inferior frontal gyrus, MFg
middle frontal gyrus, TPJ temporo-parietal junction, IPL inferior parietal lobule, STg superior temporal gyrus, IPs intraparietal sulcus, SS somatosensory
cortex, M motor cortex, FEF frontal eye field, PTL posterior temporal lobe, PFC prefrontal cortex, SMA supplementary motor area, preSMA
presupplementary motor area, ACC anterior cingulate cortex, BF basal forebrain (maps are available as Supplementary Data 2–5)
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:1417 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 axis defined domains of function that are not trivially associated.
For instance, the axis “symbolic communication” includes not
only left lateralised maps related to the term /language/ but also
left and right lateralised parietal maps related to /calculation/ in
agreement with recent neuropsychology40. The axis perception/
action includes left hemisphere component related to motor
planning, consistent with the effects of left lesions on motor
planning (apraxia)41,42, but also right hemisphere maps related to
visuospatial attention and response inhibition. As recently shown,
attention and motor deficits co-vary after focal lesions43. The
emotion axis include right hemisphere biased maps for terms
such as /expression/fearful/social interactions/, but left hemi-
sphere foci for /autobiographical memory/.
The triangular organisation of this morphospace may be sig-
nificant in relation to the theory of Pareto optimality. In evolu-
tionary biology27, the theory posits that in complex systems (e.g.
animal morphology27 or behaviour44) evolution forces trade-offs
among traits: strength in one trait of high evolutionary sig-
nificance, e.g. solving well one set of problems is associated with
relative weakness on other problems. The trait at the vertices of
the triangle represent “archetypes”, that is most specialised traits.
Pareto
optimality
distributions
in
human
cognition
and
behaviour have been recently reported in association with the
ability to inhibit immediate reward for larger delayed rewards, a
trait associated with numerous other cognitive, behaviour, health
and socioeconomic variables45.
The low-dimensional structure of lateralised functions is con-
sistent with previous findings that reported a low-dimensional
structure of functional networks46 and of cognitive performance
in both healthy controls47 and patients48. Accordingly, individual
performances or deficits are not task-specific but instead shared
across a range of cognitive tasks. For example, in stroke patients,
two axes of behavioural deficits, one related to language and the
other to attention-motor functions, occur43. Our result suggests
that, at least in stroke, two supplementary axes of deficits might
exist along the emotional and decision-making dimensions and
that these dimensions tend to be under-represented by the
standard behavioural and cognitive examinations. Additionally,
the similarity between the grand-scale organisation of functional
lateralisation in healthy controls and behavioural deficits in stroke
points to the importance of inter-hemispheric connection for
recovery from stroke as shown recently by several studies9,10
The distribution of the probability of connection of the corpus
callosum onto the brain surface matched the previous atlases that
Hemisphere
Left
Right
Corpus callosum axon water fraction
(lateralised – non-lateralised)
Corpus callosum probability of connection
(lateralised – non-lateralised)
Normalised frequency
Hemisphere
Left
Right
Functional lateralisation (radians) 
Corpus callosum probability of connection (log scale) 
b
d
a
c
V1
AT
STG
LOF
0.045
0.035
0.025
0.015
0.005
0.07
0.05
0.03
0.01
–0.1
–0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.3
0
0.07
0.18 0.36 0.64
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
–0.04
–0.02
0
SS
AT
STG
LOF
SS
60
1
Log 
%
Hemisphere
Left
Right
LOF
SS
STG
V1
V1
AT
PC
PH
M
MC
AC
Axon water fraction
V1
Fig. 3 Lateralisation and inter-hemispheric connectivity. a Tractography of the corpus callosum in a representative subject of our study (top left); cortical
projection of the corpus callosum derived from axonal tracing in monkeys31 (top right); cortical projections of the corpus callosum derived from
tractography in the participants of our study (bottom). b Histogram of the difference between lateralised and non-lateralised regions in the corpus callosum
axonal water fraction, averaged across participants. c Histogram of the difference between lateralised and non-lateralised regions in the corpus callosum
probability of connection. The measure was calculated as the proportion of participants in which a connection exists between brain’s voxels and corpus
callosum to the overall HCP sample size. d Dimensional relationship between the degree of functional lateralisation and the corpus callosum probability of
connectivity. LOF lateral orbitofrontal cortex, SS somatosensory cortex, STG superior temporal gyrus, AT anterior temporal, V1 primary visual area, M
primary motor area, PC posterior cingulate gyrus, MC middle cingulate gyrus, AC anterior cingulate gyrus, PH parahippocampal gyrus
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2019) 10:1417 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5
 were derived from inter-hemispheric homotopic functional con-
nectivity analyses49. Extra conduction time and energy con-
sumption
are
required
to
integrate
information
across
hemispheres. Therefore, the role of inter-hemispheric con-
nectivity for functional lateralisation has long been debated in the
literature50.
The
current
study
presents
a
comprehensive
demonstration that functional lateralisation is linked to a decrease
of callosal function51 (i.e. an inter-hemispheric independence),
possibly through the mechanisms of callosal myelination and
pruning52. The alternative hypothesis that functional lateralisa-
tion depends on a competition between the hemispheres that
inhibits each other via the corpus callosum, hence predicting
stronger connectivity in lateralised regions, is not supported.
Notably,
reduced
inter-hemispheric
communication
may
improve processing time of lateralised functions, but it may lead
to a decreased capacity to recover after a brain injury. This is an
issue that deserves further studies as recent studies indicate a
proportional recovery similar for different functions (motor,
vision, visuospatial attention, language, memory)53.
It is important to stress that several factors limited the inter-
pretation of the findings. For instance, while the meta-analytic
approach has the power to summarise thousands of task-related
fMRI findings, it is limited by publication biases which prevent a
generalisation of the current findings to all brain functions54.
Additionally, the experimental paradigms probing brain function
may systematically use the same or similar material which may
have biased some of the asymmetries reported. For example,
processes such as emotion are frequently assessed using emo-
tional faces that typically involve the right hemisphere more than
the left hemisphere55,56. Out of the 300 most relevant studies for
the term “emotion” in the Neurosynth database, 36% used face
stimuli, 28% visual scenes, 16% language-related material, 4%
movies, 4% memories, 2% odour and 10% used other materials
such as music, conditioned stimuli or inkblots. This appeared to
have had a limited effect on our results, because the maps driving
the emotion axis did not involve the face fusiform area that is
specialised in face perception57. However, we cannot rule out the
possibility that biases in label selection by the experimenters that
ran the studies housed in Neurosynth may in part affect our
findings. Another issue concerns whether the left lateralisation of
some functions, such as finger tapping, movement and touch,
could be related to the laterality of stimulus presentation or
response. While we cannot rule out this possibility, lesion studies
indicate that apraxia, a deficit of motor planning and control,
occurs more frequently and severely after left hemisphere
damage41,42. Moreover, the effect of the laterality of stimulus
presentation or response is often counterbalanced by the use of
both hands or mask out using control tasks. For instance, a large
proportion (41%) of studies associated with /finger tapping/
required responses with both hands. In addition, we found an
agreement between the foci of lateralised response in left SMA
and left thalamus identified in our meta-analysis, and the results
of a finger tapping task in a functional MRI study of 142 right-
handed participants that controlled for the laterality of the
manual response (Supplementary Figure 4). A third limitation,
which is not specific to the current study, is that fMRI signal on
the medial wall can be blurred at the acquisition stage, due to
voxel size and spatial smoothing applied to the fMRI data as a
standard (and typically compulsory) preprocessing step. This
problem can limit the ability to detect lateralised regions along
the medial wall of the brain or in regions close to the midline.
Even though we observed several lateralised regions on the medial
walls of the brain, it is not possible to estimate how many
putatively lateralised regions were lost due to limited spatial
resolution. Finally, the limitation of the connectivity analyses
derived from diffusion-weighted imaging58 also prevented us
from investigating with confidence the distinct contribution of
homotopic and heterotopic areas to the functional lateralisation
as well as smaller inter-hemispheric connections such as the
anterior commissure, hippocampal commissure, massa inter-
media (i.e. thalamus), tectal commissure of Forel (i.e. tegmen-
tum), habenular commissure and reticular commissure (i.e.
brainstem)59. The advent of new diffusion imaging methods60, as
well as post-mortem investigations61, might circumvent this bias
in the future.
In conclusion, the present analysis provides us with a com-
prehensive view of functional lateralisation in humans, which
appears to be organised in four domains: symbolic communica-
tion, perception/action, emotion-related and decision-making
functions. It also reveals some of its mechanisms, such as the
relationship between functional lateralisation and the strength of
communication between the hemispheres. The similarity between
the current findings and recent work on neurological symptoms
give rise to new hypotheses on the mechanisms that support brain
recovery after a brain lesion.
Methods
Datasets. In this study we used a meta-analytic approach to the functional MRI
studies described by Yarkoni et al.18 (http://Neurosynth.org). We downloaded the
Neurosynth database that contained 3107 reversed unthresholded functional maps
and the details of 11,406 literature sources as of the 25th of September 2017.
Structural connectome data were derived from the diffusion-weighted imaging
dataset of 163 participants acquired at 7 Tesla by the Human Connectome Project
Team62 (http://www.humanconnectome.org/study/hcp-young-adult/) (WU-Minn
Consortium; Principal investigators: David Van Essen and Kamil Ugurbil;
1U54MH091657). This was funded by the 16 NIH Institutes and Centers that
support the NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience Research, and by the McDonnell
Center for Systems Neuroscience at Washington University.
Preprocessing of Neurosynth data. Two researchers (V.R.K. and M.T.S.) acted as
judges, selecting terms that, in their view, were related to specific cognitive pro-
cesses. The selection procedure consisted of two stages. During the first stage, the
judges made their selection independently. Brain anatomical (e.g., “salience net-
work”), psychiatric (e.g., “schizophrenia”) and pathological (e.g., “alzheimer”)
terms were systematically excluded. The two judges agreed on 422 terms as related
to cognitive processes as well as 2309 unrelated terms that were to be discarded
(88% reproducibility). For the remaining terms, the judges made their decision
together. In the end, 590 cognitive terms were selected for the study.
In the present analysis, we corrected for the anatomical differences between the
left and the right hemispheres to focus on the functional asymmetries. Given that
the Neurosynth functional maps are provided in the standard 2 mm MNI template
space, which is not symmetric, we co-registered non-linearly the MNI template to
an MNI symmetrical template, available at http://www.bic.mni.mcgill.ca/
ServicesAtlases/ICBM152NLin2009, using the Greedy symmetric diffeomorphic
normalisation (GreedySyN) pipeline distributed with the Advanced Normalisation
Tools (ANTs, http://stnava.github.io/ANTs/)63. The symmetrical template was
downsampled to a 2 mm voxel size to match the voxel dimensions of the standard
template. The estimated transformation between non-symmetrical and
symmetrical MNI spaces were then applied to all functional maps.
The following steps were performed to obtain lateralisation indices for each
functional map following their co-registration with the symmetrical template.
Firstly, we split the functional maps into the left- and right hemisphere parts and
smoothed the resulting maps using a 6 mm FWHM Gaussian filter. We then
flipped the left hemisphere maps and subtracted them from unflipped right
hemisphere maps in order to obtain laterality indices (LI) maps (see24 for a similar
approach). Positive and negative values in these maps would signify a higher meta-
analytic evidence for, respectively, right and left lateralisation of the function
associated with a term.
Preprocessing of structural connectome data. The scanning parameters have
previously been described in Vu et al.62. In brief, each diffusion-weighted imaging
consisted of a total of 132 near-axial slices acquired with an acceleration factor of 3
(ref. 64), isotropic (1.05 mm3) resolution and coverage of the whole head with a TE
of 71.2 ms and with a TR of 7000 ms. At each slice location, diffusion-weighted
images were acquired with 65 uniformly distributed gradients in multiple Q-space
shells65 and 6 images with no diffusion gradient applied. This acquisition was
repeated four times with a b-value of 1000 and 2000 s mm−2 in pairs with left-to-
right and right-to-left phase-encoding directions. The default HCP preprocessing
pipeline (v3.19.0) was applied to the data66,67. In short, the susceptibility-induced
off-resonance field was estimated from pairs of images with diffusion gradient
applied with distortions going in opposite directions68 and corrected for the whole
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:1417 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 diffusion-weighted dataset using TOPUP69. Subsequently, motion and geometrical
distortion were corrected using the EDDY tool as implemented in FSL.
ExploreDTI toolbox for Matlab (http://www.exploredti.com70,71) has been used
to extract estimates of axonal water fraction28. Next, we discarded the volumes with
a b-value of 1000 s mm−2 and whole-brain deterministic tractography was
subsequently performed in the native DWI space using StarTrack software (https://
www.mr-startrack.com). A damped Richardson-Lucy algorithm was applied for
spherical deconvolutions72. A fixed fibre response corresponding to a shape factor
of α = 1.5 × 10–3 mm2 s−1 was adopted, coupled with the geometric damping
parameter of 8. Two hundred algorithm iterations were run. The absolute threshold
was defined as three times the spherical fibre orientation distribution (FOD) of a
grey matter isotropic voxel and the relative threshold as 8% of the maximum
amplitude of the FOD73. A modified Euler algorithm74 was used to perform the
whole-brain streamline tractography, with an angle threshold of 35°, a step size of
0.5 mm and a minimum streamline length of 15 mm.
We co-registered the structural connectome data to the standard MNI 2 mm
space using the following steps: first, whole-brain streamline tractography was
converted into streamline density volumes where the intensities corresponded to
the number of streamlines crossing each voxel. Second, a study-specific template of
streamline density volumes was generated using the Greedy symmetric
diffeomorphic normalisation (GreedySyN) pipeline distributed with ANTs. This
provided an average template of the streamline density volumes for all subjects.
The template was then co-registered with a standard 2 mm MNI152 template using
flirt tool implemented in FSL. This step produced a streamline density template in
the MNI152 space. Third, individual streamline density volumes were registered to
the streamline density template in the MNI152 space template and the same
transformation was applied to the individual whole-brain streamline tractography
using the trackmath tool distributed with the software package Tract Querier75,
and to the axonal water fraction maps, using ANTs GreedySyn. This step produced
a whole-brain streamline tractography and axonal water fraction maps in the
standard MNI152 space.
Determination of functionally lateralised regions. In these analyses, completed
in two steps, we thought to identify the regions with significant functional later-
alisation. See Supplementary Figure 5. In the first step, we addressed the redun-
dancy while preserving the richness of the Neurosynth data. For instance, many
selected terms were related as singular and plural forms of the same word (e.g,
“visual form” and “visual forms”) and therefore their maps are likely to be very
similar. To this end, we reduced the dimensionality of the data using a data-driven
varimax-rotated principal component (PC) analysis implemented in SPSS (SPSS,
Chicago, IL) with the LI maps as inputs76–78. Following a standard principal
component analysis, involving the eigendecomposition of the covariance matrix,
171 extracted orthogonal components with eigenvalues more than the grand
average were submitted to the varimax-rotation procedure using Kaiser normal-
isation criterion79, with a maximum of 1000 iterations for convergence. This
accounted for 72.6% of variance in the data. The distribution of loadings along
varimax-rotated principal components is typically skewed and only a few items
receive large loadings. Subsequently, for the purpose of discussing the results,
components were labelled according to the term(s) with the largest loadings
(Supplementary Table 3).
In the second step, general linear modelling was employed to identify voxels
with a significant lateralisation associated with a particular component. In this
analysis, the principal components were used as a set of predictors to fit the LI
maps and obtain beta maps, i.e., component spatial maps. The permutation test
was performed to identify significantly lateralised regions. Given that varimax
rotation may impose some correlations between the columns of the principal
component matrix, we performed permutations on the rows of the unrotated
matrix, subsequently applying component rotation and calculating a random map
on each permutation in the same way as it was done for the real principal
components. This procedure allowed us to mimic the correlational structure of the
unpermuted data and provide a more robust test of significance. In order to
account for multiple comparisons, the maximal statistics approach was used
whereby the spatial map values for the real principal components were compared
to the maximal (either positively or negatively) value across a whole random map
on each permutation. Five thousand permutations were run. The voxels were
considered as showing a significant lateralisation if they simultaneously satisfied
two criteria: (1) their spatial map values were in 97.5% cases higher or lower than,
respectively, maximal positive and negative the values obtained via permutations
(i.e., p < 0.05, two-tailed and FWE-corrected); (2) they formed a cluster of at least
20 voxels. The second criterion was used to exclude small and possibly spurious
effects observed in a small number of voxels.
Multivariate embedding of lateralisation maps. In order to characterise a low-
dimensional structure of functional brain lateralisation, a spectral embedding of the
LI maps was performed using eigendecomposition of graph normalised Laplacian
of similarity matrix80. The method sought to uncover geometric features in the
similarities between the lateralisation maps by converting these similarities into
distances between lateralisation maps in the embedded space (the higher similarity
between lateralisation profiles, the smaller the distance). Here we concentrated only
on the variances which were accounted for by the 171 components analysed in the
present study. To this end, the LI maps were “de-noised,” in a sense that they were
reconstructed as the matrix product of 171 components and their spatial maps.
Every element of the similarity matrix was calculated as a dot product taken for a
pair of “denoised” LI maps across all voxels (i.e., an element of the similarity matrix
was a sum of products of voxelwise values for a pair of maps). Negative values were
zeroed to permit estimability. The embedding dimensions were ordered according
to their eigenvalues, from small to large. The first non-informative dimension
associated with a zero eigenvalue was dropped. In the analysis we sought to
determine whether there exists a structure in a low-dimensional representation of
the data, specifically data structural triangularity, and if it does, in how many
dimensions this structure is preserved (for eigenvalue plot—see Supplementary
Figure 6). The triangular structure was quantified as a t-ratio, i.e., a ratio between
the area of the convex hull encompassing all points in embedded space and an
encompassing triangle of a minimal area27. These values were compared to the t-
ratios of random LI maps. These random maps were obtained by generating
2000 sets of 590 random maps via the permutation of the voxel order. For each set,
random LI maps were calculated for each pair and then submitted to varimax
analysis with the number of principal components = 171. The embedding proce-
dure was identical to the procedure applied to non-random LI maps. The
dimensional span of triangular organisation was evaluated by testing if t-ratio for
non-random LI maps was greater than t-ratios of random LI maps in each two-
dimensional subspace of embedding (p < 0.05, Bonferroni-corrected). The label for
the axes was defined ad-hoc according to one or a few terms situated at the vertices
of the triangle. Archetype maps were approximated using multiple regression
approach. We first regressed the values in each voxel across the “denoised” LI maps
onto corresponding maps’ coordinates in the first 171 dimensions of the embedded
space (i.e., matching the number of components used for “denoising”). This pro-
vided an estimated contribution of each embedded dimension to the lateralisation
index. We then obtained the archetype maps by evaluating regression coefficients
for the dimensions where the triangular structure was observed at the estimated
locations of the archetypes (i.e., at the vertices of “simplex” - multidimensional
triangular).
Determination of non-lateralised regions. In the following analyses we con-
trasted the connectivity profiles of lateralised regions with regions that do not show
a significant lateralisation but nevertheless show a significant involvement at least
in one function. The latter was identified by repeating the analyses outlined in the
section “Determination of functionally lateralised regions” with the original Neu-
rosynth functional maps as inputs. See Supplementary Figure 7. This rendered 69
components, accounting for 70.6% of variance. For closer comparability, the
analysis was run in the symmetrical space and for the left and right hemispheres
separately. The voxels were considered to have no significant lateralisation if they
met the following criteria: (1) passed the significance threshold for at least one
component and one hemisphere; (2) were non-overlapping with lateralised voxels;
and (3) were homologues of the voxels meeting criteria (1) and (2) in the opposite
hemisphere. A shortcut term “non-lateralised” regions was used to denominate
voxels without significant lateralisation in the remaining text. This provides a
conservative contrast for the lateralised regions because, by virtue of the frequentist
statistical approach, the non-lateralised regions would also include voxels
demonstrating a considerable lateralisation but failing to meet the statistical criteria
of significance used in the study. The number of non-lateralised voxels was 3.6
times greater than the number of lateralised voxels.
Measures of the connectivity strength for structure–function relationships.
The following steps were used for structure–function relationships. First, we
combined the spatial maps of significantly lateralised voxels, irrespective of the left
and right polarity of lateralisation. Second, we transformed the combined map back
into the regular MNI space for a joint analysis with diffusion information using an
inverse of the MNI non-symmetrical to MNI symmetrical template deformations
estimated above. Finally, we projected the combined map onto the white matter
boundary of the non-symmetrical MNI template in each hemisphere and subse-
quently selected tractography from these voxels to the corpus callosum. The same
procedures were applied to the maps of non-lateralised regions.
Two measures for the strength of structural inter-hemispheric connectivity were
analysed. The first, microstructural, measure referred to the axonal water fraction,
averaged across participants in the HCP sample, in the voxels of corpus callosum
which were hit by streamlines from selected lateralised (or non-lateralised) regions.
The second, macrostructural, measure of connectivity, was defined in terms of
connection replicability30 between brain’s voxels and corpus callosum, i.e., as a
proportion of participants in which a connection exists between brain’s voxels and
corpus callosum to the overall HCP sample size. We will refer to this measure as a
“probability of connection” for shortness.
Comparison of the connectivity between lateralised and non-lateralised
regions. The comparison of connectivity between lateralised and non-lateralised
regions was performed by sampling subsets of voxels (without replacement) from
the pools of lateralised and non-lateralised cortical voxels. A sample from each pool
was equal to 5% of the entire number of voxels in that pool (i.e., ensuring that the
within-pool spatial frequency of drawn samples was equal between pools). For each
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2019) 10:1417 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7
 subset we calculated an average value for probability of connection and a weighted
average for callosal axonal water fraction, where a weight for a voxel was given as a
connection replicability between this voxel and any voxel in a sampled subset. A
negative value would indicate a weaker connectivity of the lateralised voxels. The
distributions of the difference in the connectivity measures between lateralised and
non-lateralised cortical regions were obtained by repeating the procedure 1000
times and for each hemisphere separately.
Analysis of hemispheric dominance. The degree of functional hemispheric
dominance was evaluated in radians as an arctangent of the ratio between the
strengths of activation in two hemispheres. Pi/4 was subtracted from this value to
ensure that the absolute magnitude of this value increases if the task activation is
unilateral and decreases if both hemispheres demonstrate comparable levels of task
activity. Given that a partial spatial overlap between lateralised regions associated
with different components is possible, in the analyses we picked the dominance
values associated with components that rendered the largest z-score in a particular
voxel. In order to obtain robust estimate for the relationship between hemispheric
dominance and the strength of inter-hemispheric connectivity, the voxels were
binned by the probabilities of connection such that the smallest bin width was of
the size equal to 1/163 and increased with the probability of connection (given by
logspace function in Matlab). This procedure was used to partially compensate for
the fact that only a very limited number of voxels had a high probability of
connection to the corpus callosum, whereas the majority were characterised by
small values. We also estimated the voxel’s average activity between left and right
hemispheres (i.e., (left + right hemisphere activity)/2) and used it as a covariate of
non-interest in the analyses looking at the relationship between hemispheric
dominance and other measures.
Data availability
The dataset analysed during the current study are available at https://www.
humanconnectome.org and http://www.neurosynth.org.
In addition, processed data are available on request to the corresponding authors michel.
thiebaut@gmail.com and http://vyacheslav.karolis@ndcn.ox.ac.uk.
Code availability
The code used in the following analyses is available on request from http://vyacheslav.
karolis@ndcn.ox.ac.uk
Received: 23 July 2018 Accepted: 5 March 2019
References
1.
Geschwind, N. & Galaburda, A. M. Cerebral lateralization. Biological
mechanisms, associations, and pathology: I. A hypothesis and a program for
research. Arch. Neurol. 42, 428–459 (1985).
2.
Sperry, R. W. Lateral Specialization in the Surgically Separated Hemispheres
(Rockefeller University Press, New York, NY, 1974).
3.
Kong, X. Z. et al. Mapping cortical brain asymmetry in 17,141 healthy
individuals worldwide via the ENIGMA Consortium. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA 115, E5154–E5163 (2018).
4.
Toga, A. W. & Thompson, P. M. Mapping brain asymmetry. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 4, 37–48 (2003).
5.
Herve, P. Y., Zago, L., Petit, L., Mazoyer, B. & Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. Revisiting
human hemispheric specialization with neuroimaging. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17,
69–80 (2013).
6.
Wexler, B. E. Cerebral laterality and psychiatry: a review of the literature. Am.
J. Psychiatry 137, 279–291 (1980).
7.
Bishop, D. V. Cerebral asymmetry and language development: cause, correlate,
or consequence? Science 340, 1230531 (2013).
8.
Bartolomeo, P. & Thiebaut de Schotten, M. Let thy left brain know what thy
right brain doeth: inter-hemispheric compensation of functional deficits after
brain damage. Neuropsychologia 93, 407–412 (2016).
9.
Forkel, S. J. et al. Anatomical predictors of aphasia recovery: a tractography
study of bilateral perisylvian language networks. Brain 137, 2027–2039 (2014).
10. Lunven, M. et al. White matter lesional predictors of chronic visual neglect: a
longitudinal study. Brain 138, 746–760 (2015).
11. Siegel, J. S. et al. Disruptions of network connectivity predict impairment in
multiple behavioral domains after stroke. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113,
E4367–E4376 (2016).
12. Hopkins, W. D. & Cantalupo, C. Theoretical speculations on the evolutionary
origins of hemispheric specialization. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 17, 233–237
(2008).
13. Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. Intra- and Inter-Hemispheric Connectivity Supporting
Hemispheric Specialization (Springer, Berlin, 2016).
14. Ringo, J. L., Doty, R. W., Demeter, S. & Simard, P. Y. Time is of the essence: a
conjecture that hemispheric specialization arises from interhemispheric
conduction delay. Cereb. Cortex 4, 331–343 (1994).
15. Markov, N. T. et al. Cortical high-density counterstream architectures. Science
342, 1238406 (2013).
16. Jäncke, L. & Steinmetz, H. in Brain Size: A Possible Source of Interindividual
Variability in Corpus Callosum Morphology (eds Zaidel, E. I. M. & Pascual-
Leone, A.) (Plenum Press, New York, 1998).
17. Josse, G., Seghier, M. L., Kherif, F. & Price, C. J. Explaining function with
anatomy: language lateralization and corpus callosum size. J. Neurosci. 28,
14132–14139 (2008).
18. Yarkoni, T., Poldrack, R. A., Nichols, T. E., Van Essen, D. C. & Wager, T. D.
Large-scale automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data. Nat.
Methods 8, 665–670 (2011).
19. Van Essen, D. C. et al. The WU-Minn Human Connectome Project: an
overview. Neuroimage 80, 62–79 (2013).
20. Yakovlev, P. J. & Rakic, P. Pattern of decussation of bulbar pyramids and
distribution of pyramidal tracts on two sides of the spinal cord. Trans. Am.
Neurol. Assoc. 91, 366–367 (1966).
21. Geschwind, N. & Levitsky, W. Human brain: left-right asymmetries in
temporal speech region. Science 161, 186–187 (1968).
22. Amunts, K. et al. Asymmetry in the human motor cortex and handedness.
Neuroimage 4, 216–222 (1996).
23. Yousry, T. A. et al. Localization of the motor hand area to a knob on
the precentral gyrus. A new landmark. Brain 120, 141–157 (1997). (Pt 1).
24. Shulman, G. L. et al. Right hemisphere dominance during spatial selective
attention and target detection occurs outside the dorsal frontoparietal
network. J. Neurosci. 30, 3640–3651 (2010).
25. Luo, B., Wilson, R. C. & Hancock, E. R. Spectral embedding of graphs. Pattern
Recognit. 36, 2213–2230 (2003).
26. Barthélemy, M. Spatial networks. Phys. Rep. 499, 1–101 (2011).
27. Shoval, O. et al. Evolutionary trade-offs, Pareto optimality, and the geometry
of phenotype space. Science 336, 1157–1160 (2012).
28. Fieremans, E., Jensen, J. H. & Helpern, J. A. White matter characterization
with diffusional kurtosis imaging. Neuroimage 58, 177–188 (2011).
29. Thiebaut de Schotten, M. et al. Atlasing location, asymmetry and inter-subject
variability of white matter tracts in the human brain with MR diffusion
tractography. Neuroimage 54, 49–59 (2011).
30. Karolis, V. R. et al. Reinforcement of the brain’s rich-club architecture
following early neurodevelopmental disruption caused by very preterm birth.
Cereb. Cortex 26, 1322–1335 (2016).
31. Myers, R. E. in Functions of the Corpus Callosum (ed. Ettlinger, E. G.) 20
(CIBA Foundation Study Group, 1965).
32. Mazoyer, B. et al. Gaussian mixture modeling of hemispheric lateralization for
language in a large sample of healthy individuals balanced for handedness.
PLoS ONE 9, e101165 (2014).
33. Corbetta, M. & Shulman, G. L. Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven
attention in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 201–215 (2002).
34. Thiebaut de Schotten, M. et al. A lateralized brain network for visuospatial
attention. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1245–1246 (2011).
35. Zago, L. et al. The association between hemispheric specialization for language
production and for spatial attention depends on left-hand preference strength.
Neuropsychologia 93, 394–406 (2016).
36. Schmahmann, J. D. An emerging concept. The cerebellar contribution to
higher function. Arch. Neurol. 48, 1178–1187 (1991).
37. Schmahmann, J. D. & Caplan, D. Cognition, emotion and the cerebellum.
Brain 129, 290–292 (2006).
38. Schmahmann, J. D. in Essentials of Cerebellum and Cerebellar Disorders: A
Primer For Graduate Students (Springer International Publishing, New York,
2016).
39. Buckner, R. L. & Krienen, F. M. The evolution of distributed association
networks in the human brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, 648–665 (2013).
40. Semenza, C. & Benavides-Varela, S. Reassessing lateralization in calculation.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 373, https://doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2017.0044 (2017).
41. Della Sala, S., Faglioni, P., Motto, C. & Spinnler, H. Hemisphere asymmetry
for imitation of hand and finger movements, Goldenberg’s hypothesis
reworked. Neuropsychologia 44, 1496–1500 (2006).
42. Goldenberg, G. Apraxia and beyond: life and work of Hugo Liepmann. Cortex
39, 509–524 (2003).
43. Corbetta, M. et al. Common behavioral clusters and subcortical anatomy in
stroke. Neuron 85, 927–941 (2015).
44. Gallagher, T., Bjorness, T., Greene, R., You, Y. J. & Avery, L. The
geometry of locomotive behavioral states in C. elegans. PLoS ONE 8, e59865
(2013).
45. Cona, G. et al. Archetypes of human cognition defined by time preference for
reward and their brain correlates: an evolutionary trade-off approach.
Neuroimage 185, 322–334 (2018).
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:1417 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 46. Liu, H., Stufflebeam, S. M., Sepulcre, J., Hedden, T. & Buckner, R. L. Evidence
from intrinsic activity that asymmetry of the human brain is controlled by
multiple factors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 20499–20503 (2009).
47. Cona, G. F. et al. Archetypes in human behavior and their brain correlates: an
evolutionary trade-off approach. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/
325803 (2018).
48. Corbetta, M., Siegel, J. S. & Shulman, G. L. On the low dimensionality of
behavioral deficits and alterations of brain network connectivity after focal
injury. Cortex, 107, 229–237 (2018).
49. Joliot, M. et al. AICHA: an atlas of intrinsic connectivity of homotopic areas. J.
Neurosci. Methods 254, 46–59 (2015).
50. Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. & Seghier, M. L. The neural bases of hemispheric
specialization. Neuropsychologia 93, 319–324 (2016).
51. Gazzaniga, M. S. Cerebral specialization and interhemispheric
communication: does the corpus callosum enable the human condition? Brain
123 (Pt 7), 1293–1326 (2000).
52. Luders, E., Thompson, P. M. & Toga, A. W. The development of the corpus
callosum in the healthy human brain. J. Neurosci. 30, 10985–10990 (2010).
53. Ramsey, L. E. et al. Behavioural clusters and predictors of performance during
recovery from stroke. Nat. Hum. Behav. 1, 0038 (2017).
54. Jennings, R. G. & Van Horn, J. D. Publication bias in neuroimaging research:
implications for meta-analyses. Neuroinformatics 10, 67–80 (2012).
55. Gazzaniga, M. S. & Smylie, C. S. Facial recognition and brain asymmetries:
clues to underlying mechanisms. Ann. Neurol. 13, 536–540 (1983).
56. Davidson, R. J., Shackman, A. J. & Maxwell, J. S. Asymmetries in face and
brain related to emotion. Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 389–391 (2004).
57. Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J. & Chun, M. M. The fusiform face area: a
module in human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception. J.
Neurosci. 17, 4302–4311 (1997).
58. Maier-Hein, K. H. et al. The challenge of mapping the human connectome
based on diffusion tractography. Nat. Commun. 8, 1349 (2017).
59. Catani, M., Thiebaut de Schotten, M. Atlas of Human Brain Connections
(Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012).
60. Girard, G. et al. AxTract: Toward microstructure informed tractography.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 38, 5485–5500 (2017).
61. De Benedictis, A. et al. New insights in the homotopic and heterotopic
connectivity of the frontal portion of the human corpus callosum revealed by
microdissection and diffusion tractography. Hum. Brain Mapp. 37, 4718–4735
(2016).
62. Vu, A. T. et al. High resolution whole brain diffusion imaging at 7T for the
Human Connectome Project. Neuroimage 122, 318–331 (2015).
63. Avants, B. B. et al. A reproducible evaluation of ANTs similarity metric
performance in brain image registration. Neuroimage 54, 2033–2044
(2011).
64. Moeller, S. et al. Multiband multislice GE-EPI at 7 tesla, with 16-fold
acceleration using partial parallel imaging with application to high spatial and
temporal whole-brain fMRI. Magn. Reson. Med. 63, 1144–1153 (2010).
65. Caruyer, E., Lenglet, C., Sapiro, G. & Deriche, R. Design of multishell
sampling schemes with uniform coverage in diffusion MRI. Magn. Reson.
Med. 69, 1534–1540 (2013).
66. Andersson, J. L. et al. A comprehensive Gaussian process framework for
correcting distortions and movements in diffusion images. In Proc. 20th
Annual Meeting of ISMRM, Melbourne 2426 (2012).
67. Sotiropoulos, S. N. et al. Advances in diffusion MRI acquisition and
processing in the Human Connectome Project. Neuroimage 80, 125–143
(2013).
68. Andersson, J. L., Skare, S. & Ashburner, J. How to correct susceptibility
distortions in spin-echo echo-planar images: application to diffusion tensor
imaging. Neuroimage 20, 870–888 (2003).
69. Smith, S. M. et al. Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis
and implementation as FSL. Neuroimage 23, 208–219 (2004).
70. Leemans, A. & Jones, D. K. The B-matrix must be rotated when correcting for
subject motion in DTI data. Magn. Reson. Med. 61, 1336–1349 (2009).
71. Vos, S. B. et al. The importance of correcting for signal drift in diffusion MRI.
Magn. Reson. Med. 77, 285–299 (2017).
72. Dell’acqua, F. et al. A modified damped Richardson-Lucy algorithm to reduce
isotropic background effects in spherical deconvolution. Neuroimage 49,
1446–1458 (2010).
73. Thiebaut de Schotten, M. et al. Damage to white matter pathways in subacute
and chronic spatial neglect: a group study and 2 single-case studies with
complete virtual “in vivo” tractography dissection. Cereb. Cortex 24, 691–706
(2014).
74. Dell’Acqua, F., Simmons, A., Williams, S. C. & Catani, M. Can spherical
deconvolution provide more information than fiber orientations? Hindrance
modulated orientational anisotropy, a true-tract specific index to characterize
white matter diffusion. Hum. Brain Mapp. 34, 2464–2483 (2013).
75. Wassermann, D. et al. The white matter query language: a novel approach for
describing human white matter anatomy. Brain Struct. Funct. 221, 4705–4721
(2016).
76. Abdi, H. & Williams, L. J. Principal component analysis. WIREs Comp. Stat. 2,
433–459 (2010).
77. Thiebaut de Schotten, M. et al. Rostro-caudal architecture of the frontal lobes
in humans. Cereb. Cortex 27, 4033–4047 (2017).
78. Parlatini, V. et al. Functional segregation and integration within fronto-
parietal networks. Neuroimage 146, 367–375 (2017).
79. Kaiser, H. F. The varimax criterion for analytic rotation in factor analysis.
Psychometrika 23, 187–200 (1958).
80. Chung, F. Spectral Graph Theory (American Mathematical Society,
Providence, RI, 1997).
Acknowledgements
We particularly thank Nathalie Tzourio-Mazoyer and her team (GIN) for useful dis-
cussion and for providing us with fMRI maps of left and right hands finger tapping. This
project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement
No. 818521). We also thank Lauren Sakuma for useful discussion and edits to the
manuscript. The research leading to these results received funding from the “Agence
Nationale de la Recherche” [grant number ANR-13-JSV4-0001-01]. Additional financial
support comes from the program “Investissements d’avenir” ANR-10-IAIHU-06 and the
Fondation pour la Recherche Medicale [grant number DEQ20150331725]. M.C. was
supported by NIH R01NS095741, and a strategic grant from the University of Padua. M.
C. was a visiting professor at the Institut du Cerveau and Moelle Epiniere (ICM) in Paris
where the research was conducted.
Author contributions
V.R.K. implemented the methods, performed the analyses and wrote the manuscript. M.
C. conceived and coordinated the study, and wrote the manuscript. M.T.S. conceived and
coordinated the study, reviewed the neuroimaging data, wrote the manuscript and
provided funding.
Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
019-09344-1.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
Journal peer review information: Nature Communications thanks the anonymous
reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are
available.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2019
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2019) 10:1417 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09344-1 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9
