 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20529 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20529
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Novel Method for Neuronal 
Nanosurgical Connection
Nir Katchinskiy1, Helly R. Goez2, Indrani Dutta3, Roseline Godbout3 & 
Abdulhakem Y. Elezzabi1
Neuronal injury may cause an irreversible damage to cellular, organ and organism function. While 
preventing neural injury is ideal, it is not always possible. There are multiple etiologies for neuronal 
injury including trauma, infection, inflammation, immune mediated disorders, toxins and hereditary 
conditions. We describe a novel laser application, utilizing femtosecond laser pulses, in order to connect 
neuronal axon to neuronal soma. We were able to maintain cellular viability, and demonstrate that this 
technique is universal as it is applicable to multiple cell types and media.
Neurons are cells within the nervous system that process and transfer information through electrical impulses 
and chemical signals1,2. This type of communication between neurons occurs in a specific interphase called a syn-
apse2. The Central Nervous System (CNS) which includes the brain and the spinal cord, as well as the Peripheral 
Nervous System (PNS) operate in a similar pattern utilizing a neuronal synaptic network as a means of inter-
cellular communication. It is imperative to have intact neuronal circuits in order to maintain normal organ and 
organism function. The typical neuronal structure includes cell body (soma), dendrites, and an axon. Dendrites 
are structures arising from the cell body branching multiple times. An axon is a cellular extension arising from 
the cell body which can traverse a long distance in human beings and in other species. The axon may branch 
multiple times and connect to multiple cells prior to termination. There is an average of 300 trillion synapses in 
the adult brain3.
Neural communication is usually transferred through one neuron’s axon to a dendrite or cell body of another 
neuron. However, there are other connection options based on different neuronal cell structures: for example, 
axon to axon, dendrite to dendrite, etc4. The cell membrane of the soma and the axon is electrically conducting 
through activation of voltage-gated ion channels4. These calcium, sodium, potassium, and chloride ion channels 
generate the electrical signals propagated in the axons.
Neurons are highly specialized cells that can no longer divide. Neurogenesis is very limited in adulthood; 
hence, nerve injury has a major impact on the ability to maintain normal function. There are a few recognized 
patterns to peripheral nerve damage post injury: Wallerian degeneration, segmental demyelination and axonal 
degeneration5–10. Wallerian degeneration develops after transection of the nerve and injury to the axon and its 
myelin sheath, where distal to the transection both the axon and the myelin will degenerate. A conduction block 
is observed one week after the injury. Regrowth is possible depending upon preservation of the basement mem-
brane of the cells that are producing myelin (Schwann cells) and approximation of the nerve ends5,6. This type 
of damage may cause atrophy of the muscle innervated by the damaged neuron. Segmental demyelination is the 
result of damage restricted to the myelin sheath. As the axon is preserved, no end point muscle degeneration is 
expected or observed6,7. Axonal degeneration is caused by damage to the neural cell body resulting in distal death 
of the axon. Muscle atrophy will develop unless re-innervation occurs from adjacent nerves, however recov-
ery may be only partial8–10. Experimental work on nerve injury repair has been carried out in the last decade 
and a few approaches have been investigated. These techniques included: bridging a gap by utilizing growth 
permissive matrix placed across the site of injury to allow axonal growth11, creating new network via stem cell 
therapy11, providing neurotropic support in order to stimulate sprouting of spared axons or enable regeneration 
of injured axons11,12. Alternative techniques attempted to overcome myelin associated growth inhibitors11,12, and 
scar-associated growth inhibitors11,12. Molecular protection of cells was used to avoid from the cascade of bio-
chemical events that lead to cell death post injury12. These investigational treatments were encouraging but had 
partial success in animal models.
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. 2Division of 
Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
AB, Canada. 3Department of Oncology, University of Alberta, Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, AB, Canada. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to N.K. (email: katchins@ualberta.ca)
received: 08 September 2014
Accepted: 06 January 2016
Published: 05 February 2016
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20529 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20529
It is of paramount importance to develop a precise means of selectively connecting specific axons to neuron 
cell body. Such a leap in scientific method will open up doors to unparalleled research frontiers in neurology, 
cell biology, biochemistry, and electrophysiology. Connecting neurons, before or right after injury, enables the 
preservation of the viability of the neural network, thereby allowing complex pathophysiological processes, such 
as neurogenesis, Wallerian degeneration, segmental demyelination, and axonal degeneration to be further under-
stood. Understanding the complex pathophysiological processes and the time frame available in order to prevent 
conductivity block and axonal death makes it necessary to develop techniques that enable the connection of nerve 
ends as soon as possible post injury, and maintain the viability of a healthy neural network. We describe a novel 
laser application to physically reattach severed neurons right after injury. This method may potentially allow 
further prevention of a conductivity block. Moreover, it may trigger studies questioning the hypothesis whether 
physical attachment and approximation of the nerve ends will stimulate recovery.
To date, a method to connect neuron ends does not exist. Assessment of axonal growth and regeneration is 
currently performed via either immunolabeling, where specific proteins that are involved in known regeneration 
pathways are labeled and monitored or via anterograde and retrograde tracing to visually trace neural connec-
tions from their termination/source to their source/termination. These imaging methods are utilized to trace the 
neuronal projections from one location to various targets in the nervous system, and it allows researchers to study 
the natural process of axonal regeneration. However, the above mentioned techniques are limited to studying only 
the natural healing processes of neurons. Thus, control on selection and isolation of neurons, in order to study 
regeneration of specific neurons, is not available. Knowledge gained from such studies will allow researchers to 
develop new therapies for, currently, irreversible neuronal injuries and diseases.
A prime candidate method for connecting specific neurons that fulfills such key applications is femtosecond 
laser pulse technology. This versatile technology has been utilized for very precise cell manipulation, such as 
optoporation, cell nanosurgery, cell isolation, and embryo transfection13,14. Removal or ionization of material is 
confined to less than a diffraction limited spot size, with no damage to surrounding material. Femtosecond laser 
pulses have also been used as a tool to study neuron regeneration by severing neurons and axons15. This method 
allows creating of precise injury that enables the studies on axonal injury and regeneration at the single cell level15. 
More recently, it was demonstrated for the first time that this technology can be used to “reverse” cell cutting or 
isolation, by performing cell-cell attachment16. However, physical connection of single neurons has not been 
performed thus far.
In this communication we present a method for neuron connection, using femtosecond laser pulses. By phys-
ically connecting single axons and neurons right after injury, it will allow researchers to develop new methods 
of studying the effects of neuron connection on neuronal regeneration, progression of Wallerian degeneration, 
and the existence of cellular communication, to further our understandings of these phenomena. This effective 
neuronal connection method should allow the user to select single cells for isolation, connection, and cutting. The 
technique is shown to be universal and applicable to multiple cell types and their media.
We developed a novel neuron connection method using ultrashort femtosecond laser pulses (illustrated in 
Fig. 1a). Precise tuning of the laser parameters allowed us to induce a process called hemifusion at the contact 
point of two phospholipid membranes (illustration of the contact point is seen in Fig. 1b). To achieve neuron 
connection, the laser intensity and aiming accuracy required are 1.7(± 
0.08)× 
1012 W/cm2, and ± 
0.5 μ 
m, respec-
tively, within the membranes hemifusion location. Exposure to near infrared femtosecond laser pulses induces 
molecular rearrangement of the phospholipid bilayers via multiphoton and avalanche ionization processes. The 
high electron and ion density at the laser beam focal point leads to an ultrafast reversible destabilization of the 
phospholipid molecules. Since the membrane’s exterior surface is permeable to both photo-induced ions and 
electrons, these can cross over to the central nonpolar region of the phospholipid bilayer and break the bonds 
of the fatty acid tails, as illustrated in Fig. 1c. At the end of this destabilization process, the ionized phospholipid 
molecules seek equilibrium state, and form new bonds with nearby ions, as seen in Fig. 1d. Only the phospholipid 
molecules that are located at the cell membrane contact point cross-link with phospholipid molecules of the adja-
cent cell membrane. The cross-linking process leads to the formation of a single, shared, phospholipid bilayer (i.e. 
hemifused membrane), which is the underlying mechanism that takes place in this neuron connection method 
and provides a strong attachment.
To demonstrate our neuron connection method, we show that this technique can be used on any number 
and types of neurons by its implementation on two neuron types: P19, and Neuro2A. Neurons were grown in 
culture, and suspended in DMEM solution right before connection (see online methods). Selected neurons for 
connection were identified, isolated and brought into contact using an optical tweezer such that the protruding 
axon of one neuron touched another neuron’s soma. In order to ensure that the neurons do not naturally stick 
to each other, the cells were left touching for a period of time, and then pulled apart by the optical tweezer. The 
neurons did not show any signs of natural connectivity. The neurons were brought into contact once more, and 
then femtosecond laser pulses were delivered to the axon and cell soma connection point (see methods) in order 
to induce an attachment. To validate that a connection was achieved, one of the neurons was moved inside the 
suspension dish using optical tweezer (see methods), and it was found that all neurons followed a corresponding 
path, twisted, and rotated as a single entity, without showing any sign of detachment. Figure 2a depicts the attach-
ment of two Neuro2A cells (see methods), where the axon of cell (i) is attached to the soma of (ii).
Connection of single neuron to multiple neurons is a fundamental requirement for assembling a chain of 
neurons, and to maintain neuronal connectivity and continuity. As shown in Fig. 2b, two axons from Neuro2A (i) 
were attached to Neuro2A (ii) and (iii). The cells are shown, in Fig. 2c, after being moved and oriented approxi-
mately 30° relative to their original orientation.
Figure 2d–f depict a femtosecond laser induced connection of P19 axon to P19 soma (see methods). Here, 
connection of groups of targeted neurons is demonstrated. Two groups of four P19 cells were identified, as shown 
in Fig. 2d. The axon of neuron (i) came in contact and was connected with (ii), using femtosecond laser pulses. In 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20529 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20529
Figure 1. (a) An illustration of how a femtosecond laser pulse is delivered to the target point between an axon 
and a neuronal soma. (b) An illustration of the phospholipid bilayers of the neuron soma and axon. Note that 
the attachment region, where the phospholipid layers are attaching, is designated with a circular spot. This does 
not represent the laser focal spot. (c) The laser pulse high intensity causes a reversible destabilization of both 
phospholipid layers. A depiction of the femtosecond laser pulse induced axon-soma attachment. Here, the 
generated free ions (shown in red) and free electrons (shown in orange) cross the center nonpolar region and 
break bonds between the fatty acid hydrophobic tails. (d) The relaxation process results in the formation of new 
stable bonds and formation of singular, hemifused, cell membrane only at the targeted connection point.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20529 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20529
Fig. 2e the cells are shown right after attachment, and in Fig. 2f the cells are shown after being pulled and rotated 
using the optical tweezer.
Several groups of neurons were attached in order to demonstrate the proposed neuron connection method. 
One to two 15 ms pulse trains (i.e. 1.2 × 
 106 pulses) were necessary to achieve attachment, with 90% success rate. 
Figure 2. The arrows point to the location of neuron connection using femtosecond laser pulses. (a) A 
single Neuro2A’s (i) axon is connected to the soma of Neuro2A (ii). (b) Two axons of Neuro2A (i) are connected 
using to the soma of Neuro2A cells (ii) and (iii). (c) Overlap image of the original Neuro2A cells (i,ii), and (iii) 
compared to Neuro2A cells (i), (ii*), and (iii*) after being rotated and moved by an optical tweezers to examine 
the integrity of the axons’ connectivity. (d) Two groups of four P19 neurons are identified. (e) The axon of P19 
(i) is brought into contact with the soma of P19 (ii), and are connected as shown by the arrow tip. Note that 
there is another unconnected axon nearby which was left detached (f) The two groups of P19 cells are rotated 
and moved by optical tweezers to examine the integrity of the axons’ connectivity.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20529 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20529
Throughout our observations and rigorous manipulations, the cells remained viable and firmly attached without 
showing signs of deterioration in attachment strength, validating long term viability and attachment prospects. 
Moreover, previously reported cell-cell attachment method16, and long term viability experiments17,18 also con-
firm that the laser parameters used for this method fall within a safe range for preserving cell viability and attach-
ment. We envisage that femtosecond laser-induced neuronal nanosurgical connection method can potentially 
provide a scientific leap that will open up new frontiers in the studies of the effects of connecting neurons, right 
before or after injury. The preservation of the viability of the neural network will allow researchers to study new 
complex pathophysiological processes, such as neurogenesis, Wallerian degeneration, segmental demyelination, 
and axonal degeneration. This will allow further development of new therapies for neuronal injuries and disease.
Materials and Methods
Cell Cultures. 
P19 mouse teratocarcinoma cells19 were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium 
(DMEM) supplemented with 7.5% bovine serum and 2.5% fetal calf serum. For neuronal differentiation, P19 
cells were cultured in petri dishes (to allow formation of embryoid bodies) at a density of 105 cells/ml in the 
presence of 1 μ 
M all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) (Sigma R2625) (Day 0)20. On Day 2, the medium was replaced with 
fresh DMEM supplemented with serum and 1 μ 
M RA. On Day 4, the embryoid bodies were trypsinizsed and 
broken down into single cells. These single cells were plated on coverslips and cultured in DMEM plus 10% fetal 
calf serum. On Day 6, the cells were treated with 5 μ 
g/ml Ara-C (Sigma C1768) in order to remove any remaining 
proliferating cells. The cells completed neuronal differentiation by Day 8, at which stage long neurite projections 
could be observed. Neuro2A (mouse neuroblastoma cells) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal 
calf serum, penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 μ 
g/ml). At confluence, cells were trypsinized and plated 
on coverslips.
Setup Characteristics. 
The neuron connection was achieved by using sub-10 femtosecond laser pulses, with 
800 nm central wavelength that was delivered from a Ti:Sapphire laser oscillator at a repetition rate of 80 MHz. 
The near infrared pulses were coupled to an upright Nikon Eclipse 80i optical microscope and directed towards 
the cells. A 60× 
 (numerical aperture (NA) = 
 1) water immersion microscope objective was used, in order to focus 
the laser pulses and to image the cells. A high NA microscope objective is required to achieve high-resolution 
imaging and to focus the beam to an effective spot size of ~600 nm. At the focal spot, the optimum laser pulse 
train average power, energy, and intensity are: 200 mW, 2.5 nJ/pulse, and 1.71 × 
 1012 W/cm2, respectively. Ideal 
irradiation time is 15 ms pulse train (i.e. 1.2 × 
 106 pulses). The neuron connection experiments were imaged and 
recorded in real-time using a color charge-coupled device (CCD) camera. The images used in this communica-
tion were taken from the video recordings after the completion of the experiment.
Experimental Procedure. 
P19 and Neuro2A cells were placed inside a glass dish with DMEM solution and 
mounted on a motorized x-y-z nano-translation stage for precise movement control of the cell culture. Trypsin 
solution was added to each dish in order to release the neurons from the bottom of the plate. After 10 minutes, 
the dish was shaken by hand in order to suspend the neurons in the solution. Neurons with identifiable axons 
and that are not attached to large groups have been identified and selected for connection. The selected neurons 
were brought into contact using an optical tweezer, such that an axon of one neuron touches the soma of the 
other neuron. The optical tweezer was made collinear with the femtosecond laser pulse train. Once the desired 
contact region between the axon and cell soma was identified, it was precisely targeted by the femtosecond laser 
pulse train for a duration of 15 ms. The mechanical integrity of the connected neurons was then assessed using 
an optical tweezer. This was performed by trapping one of the neurons to the optical tweezer’s focal spot, and 
moving the trapped cell(s) in various paths. In order to verify that proper attachment was obtained, three criteria 
were assessed: (1) no detachment due to twisting, and drag forces (2) movement of all cells due to trapping of any 
cell in the group, and (3) movement of all cells as a single unit. We confirmed the physical cellular attachment 
by following the translation of the trapped cell as an integral unit together with the other cells without detaching 
from each other. In order to verify that the connected neurons did not move only due to their proximity to the 
optical trap, groups of four neurons were attached. Using this technique we were able to ensure that the neurons 
are located far enough from the optical trapping spot, where the attraction forces to the laser tweezers are too 
weak to pull an individual cell.
References
1. Bennett, M. V. & Zukin, R. S. Electrical coupling and neuronal synchronization in the Mammalian brain. Neuron. 41(4), 495–511 
(2004).
2. Hormuzdi, S. G., Filippov, M. A., Mitropoulou, G., Monyer, H. & Bruzzone, R. Electrical synapses: a dynamic signaling system that 
shapes the activity of neuronal networks. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1662, 113–37 (2004).
3. Nowakowski, R. S. Stable neuron numbers from cradle to grave. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 103, 12219 (2006).
4. Sanes, J. R. & Yamagata, M. Many paths to synaptic specificity. Annu. Rev. Cell. Dev. Biol. 25, 161–195 (2009).
5. Coleman, M. P. & Freeman, M. R. Wallerian Degeneration, Wld(s), and Nmnat. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 33, 245–267 (2010).
6. Robinson, L. R. Traumatic injury to peripheral nerves. Suppl. Clin. Neurophysiol. 57, 173–186 (2004).
7. Donofrio, P. D. & Albers, J. W. AAEM minimonograph #34: polyneuropathy: classification by nerve conduction studies and 
electromyography. Muscle Nerve. 13, 889–903 (1990).
8. England, J. D. & Asbury, A. K. Peripheral neuropathy. Lancet. 363, 2151–2161 (2004).
9. Wang, J. T. Medress, Z. A. & Barres, B. A. Axon degeneration: molecular mechanisms of a selfdestruction pathway. J. Cell Biol. 196, 
7–18 (2012).
10. Wang, J. T. & Barres, B. A. Axon degeneration: where the Wld(s) things are. Curr. Biol. 22, 221–223 (2012).
11. Rosenzweig, E. S. & McDonald, J. W. Rodent models for treatment of spinal cord injury: research trends and progress toward useful 
repair. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 17(2), 121–31 (2004).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:20529 | DOI: 10.1038/srep20529
12. Dobkin, B. H. & Havton L. A. Basic advances and new avenues in therapy of spinal cord injury. Annu. Rev.Med. 55, 255–82 (2004).
13. Kohli, V. Elezzabi, A. Y. & Acker, J. P. Cell nanosurgery using ultrashort (femtosecond) laser pulses: Applications to membrane 
surgery and cell isolation. Laser Surg. Med. 37, 227–230 (2005).
14. Kohli, V. & Elezzabi, A. Y. Prospects and developments in cell and embryo laser nanosurgery. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Nanomed. 
Nanobiotechnol. 1, 11–25 (2009).
15. Kim, Y., Karthikeyan, K., Chirvi, S. & Dave, D. P. Neuro-optical microfluidic platform to study injury and regeneration of single 
axons. Lab on a Chip. 9, 2576–2581 (2009).
16. Katchinskiy, N., Godbout, R., Goez, R. H. & Elezzabi, A. Y. Femtosecond laser-induced cell-cell surgical attachment. Laser Surg. 
Med. 46, 335–341 (2014).
17. Kohli, V. et al. An alternative method for delivering exogenous material into developing zebrafish embryos. biotechnol. Bioeng. 92, 
889–899 (2007).
18. Kohli, V. & Elezzabi, A. Y. Laser surgery of zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos using femtosecond laser pulses: Optimal parameters for 
exogenous material delivery, and the laser’s effect on short and long-term development. BMC Biotechnol. 8, 1–20 (2008).
19. McBurney, M. W. & Rogers, B. J. Isolation of male embryonal carcinoma cells and their chromosome replication patterns. Dev. Biol. 
89, 503–508 (1982).
20. Jones-Villeneuve, E. M. et al. Retinoic acid-induced neural differentiation of embryonal carcinoma cells. Mol. Cell Biol. 3, 2271–9 
(1983).
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the assistance provided by Elizabeth Monckton. This work is supported by the Natural 
Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada, The Canadian Institute of Health Research 
(CIHR), and Alberta Innovates Technology Futures (AITF).
Author Contributions
N.K., I.D., R.G. and A.Y.E. designed the research project. N.K. and I.D. carried out experiments. N.K., H.R.G., 
I.D., R.G. and A.Y.E. wrote the main manuscript. N.K. and H.R.G. performed literature review. H.R.G. provided 
scientific neurological background. N.K. and A.Y.E. prepared figures. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Additional Information
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Katchinskiy, N. et al. Novel Method for Neuronal Nanosurgical Connection. Sci. Rep. 6, 
20529; doi: 10.1038/srep20529 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
