 RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY
◥
MELANOMA INITIATION
A zebrafish melanoma model reveals
emergence of neural crest identity
during melanoma initiation
Charles K. Kaufman, Christian Mosimann, Zi Peng Fan, Song Yang, Andrew J. Thomas,
Julien Ablain, Justin L. Tan, Rachel D. Fogley, Ellen van Rooijen, Elliott J. Hagedorn,
Christie Ciarlo, Richard M. White, Dominick A. Matos, Ann-Christin Puller,
Cristina Santoriello, Eric C. Liao, Richard A. Young, Leonard I. Zon*
INTRODUCTION: The “cancerized field” con-
cept posits that cells in a given tissue sharing
an oncogenic mutation are cancer-prone, yet
only discreet clones within the field initiate tu-
mors. Studying the process of cancer initiation
has remained challenging because of (i) the rar-
ity of these events, (ii) the difficulty of visiualiz-
ing initiating clones in living organisms, and
(iii) the transient nature of a newly transformed
clone emerging before it expands to form an ear-
ly tumor. A more complete understanding of the
molecular processes that regulate cancer initia-
tioncouldprovideimportantprognosticinforma-
tion about which precancerous lesions are most
prone to becoming cancer and also implicate
druggablemolecularpathwaysthat,wheninhib-
ited, may prevent the cancer from ever starting.
RATIONALE: The majority of benign nevi
carry oncogenic BRAFV600E mutations and can
be considered a cancerized field of melano-
cytes, but they only rarely convert to mela-
noma. In an effort to define events that initiate
cancer, we used a melanoma model in the
zebrafish in which the human BRAFV600E
oncogene is driven by the melanocyte-specific
mitfa promoter. When bred into a p53 mutant
background, these fish develop melanoma
tumors over the course of many months. The
zebrafish crestin gene is expressed embryoni-
cally in neural crest progenitors (NCPs) and is
specifically reexpressed only in melanoma
tumors, making it an ideal candidate for
tracking melanoma from initiation onward.
RESULTS: We developed a crestin:EGFP
reporter that recapitulates the embryonic
neural crest expression pattern of crestin
and its expression in melanoma tumors. We
show through live imaging of transgenic
zebrafish crestin reporters that within a
cancerized field (BRAFV600E-mutant; p53-
deficient), a single melanocyte reactivates the
NCP state, and this establishes that a fate
change occurs at mela-
noma initiation in this
model.
Early
crestin+
patches of cells expand
and are transplantable in
a manner consistent with
their possessing tumori-
genic activity, and they exhibit a gene expres-
sion pattern consistent with the NCP identity
readout by the crestin reporter. The crestin
element is regulated by NCP transcription
factors, including sox10. Forced sox10 over-
expression in melanocytes accelerated mel-
anoma formation, whereas CRISPR/Cas9
targeting of sox10 delayed melanoma onset.
We show activation of super-enhancers at
NCP genes in both zebrafish and human
melanomas, identifying an epigenetic mech-
anism for control of this NCP signature lead-
ing to melanoma.
CONCLUSION: This work using our zebra-
fish melanoma model and in vivo reporter of
NCP identity allows us to see cancer from its
birth as a single cell and shows the impor-
tance of NCP-state reemergence as a key event
in melanoma initiation from a field of cancer-
prone melanocytes. Thus, in addition to the
typical fixed genetic alterations in oncogenes
and tumor supressors that are required for
cancer development, the reemergence of pro-
genitor identity may be an additional rate-
limiting step in the formation of melanoma.
Preventing NCP reemergence in a field of
cancer-prone melanocytes may thus prove ther-
apeutically useful, and the association of NCP
genes with super-enhancer regulatory elements
implicates the associated druggable epigenetic
machinery in this process.▪
RESEARCH
464
29 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6272
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
The list of author affiliations is available in the full article online.
*Corresponding author. E-mail: zon@enders.tch.harvard.edu
Cite this article as C. K. Kaufman et al., Science 351, aad2197
(2016). DOI: 10.1126/science.aad2197
Neural crest reporter expression in melanoma. The crestin:EGFP transgene is specifically
expressed in melanoma in BRAFV600E/p53 mutant melanoma-prone zebrafish. (Top) A single
cell expressing crestin:EGFP expands into a small patch of cells over the course of 2 weeks,
capturing the initiation of melanoma formation (bracket). (Bottom) A fully formed melanoma
specifically expresses crestin:EGFP, whereas the rest of the fish remains EGFP-negative.
ON OUR WEB SITE
◥
Read the full article
at http:/
/dx.doi.
org/10.1126/
science.aad2197
..................................................
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH ARTICLE
◥
MELANOMA INITIATION
A zebrafish melanoma model reveals
emergence of neural crest identity
during melanoma initiation
Charles K. Kaufman,1,2,3,4 Christian Mosimann,5 Zi Peng Fan,6,7 Song Yang,1,2
Andrew J. Thomas,1 Julien Ablain,1,2,4 Justin L. Tan,1 Rachel D. Fogley,1
Ellen van Rooijen,1,2,4 Elliott J. Hagedorn,1,2,4 Christie Ciarlo,1,4 Richard M. White,8
Dominick A. Matos,9 Ann-Christin Puller,10 Cristina Santoriello,1,11 Eric C. Liao,2,4,12
Richard A. Young,6,13 Leonard I. Zon1,2,3,4,11*
The “cancerized field” concept posits that cancer-prone cells in a given tissue share an oncogenic
mutation, but only discreet clones within the field initiate tumors. Most benign nevi carry
oncogenic BRAFV600E mutations but rarely become melanoma.The zebrafish crestin gene is
expressed embryonically in neural crest progenitors (NCPs) and specifically reexpressed in
melanoma. Live imaging of transgenic zebrafish crestin reporters shows that within a cancerized
field (BRAFV600E-mutant; p53-deficient), a single melanocyte reactivates the NCP state, revealing
a fate change at melanoma initiation in this model. NCP transcription factors, including sox10,
regulate crestin expression. Forced sox10 overexpression in melanocytes accelerated melanoma
formation, which is consistent with activation of NCP genes and super-enhancers leading to
melanoma. Our work highlights NCP state reemergence as a key event in melanoma initiation.
U
nderstanding the earliest events in cancer
formation remains an incompletely ful-
filled goal in biology, with important im-
plications for human health. In cancer
initiation, an activated oncogene or inac-
tivated tumor suppressor can trigger tumor for-
mation. However, it is unclear as to why only
sporadic cells with these genetic alterations com-
plete the conversion to a malignant state when
they are present in a large group of cancer-prone
cells, sometimes described as a “cancerized field”
(1). Better characterizing initiating events would
help identify targets for early therapeutic inter-
ventions and also provide prognostic information
about which precancerous lesions are most likely
to progress to cancer.
Melanoma is a cancer of transformed melano-
cytes, which are pigment-producing cells derived
from the embryonic neural crest lineage. It is
frequently driven by BRAF orRASmutations (~80%
of cases) (2, 3). Melanoma is treatable and curable
when it is localized and resected completely but
remains largely incurable once it has spread, even
when treated with new kinase- and immune
checkpoint–targeted therapies (4). Our labora-
tory previously developed an animal model of
a BRAFV600E-driven cancer by placing the hu-
man BRAFV600E gene under the control of the
melanocyte-specific mitfa-promoter in trans-
genic zebrafish (5). When crossed into a p53
mutant loss-of-function background, these zebra-
fish (referred to here as p53/BRAF) invariably
develop nevi and, after several months, invasive
melanoma (5). Despite creating this extensive
“cancerized field” in which all melanocytes harbor
both oncogenic BRAFV600E and p53 loss through-
out their life span, these p53/BRAF melanoma–
prone zebrafish all develop one to three melanoma
tumors after several months of age, indicating
that other molecular alterations are important
for tumor initiation.
crestin transgenics mark neural crest
To investigate the dynamics and mechanism of
sporadic melanoma formation, we visualized and
characterized melanoma lesion initiation. The
functionally uncharacterized zebrafish crestin gene
marks the neural crest during embryonic devel-
opment, becomes undetectable by ~72 hours after
fertilization (6, 7), and is specifically reexpressed
in melanoma tumors in adult zebrafish (8). We rea-
soned that a crestin-based reporter transgene
would allow us to track embryonic neural crest cells
as well as melanoma tumors in vivo, potentially
from their earliest onset. We amplified by means
of polyermase chain reaction (PCR) a 4.5-kb up-
stream region common to multiple crestin inser-
tions in the zebrafish genome and cloned this
element upstream of an enhanced green fluorescent
protein (EGFP) reporter (Fig. 1A, crestin:EGFP).
In stable transgenic zebrafish embryos, this con-
struct reproduced crestin mRNA expression through
EGFP fluorescence (Fig. 1, B and C, and fig. S1A),
and time-lapse videos demonstrated the dorsal
emergence and wide migration of these crestin-
expressing putative neural crest progenitor cells
(movies S1 and S2). Neural crest expression was
reproducible in multiple independent lines and
with additional reporter genes (creERT2 and
mCherry) (Fig. 1, D to G, and fig. S5, A to C). As
with endogenous crestin expression, transgenic
crestin:EGFP expression was not detectable after
3 days after fertilization and did not come back
on in wild-type juvenile or adult zebrafish.
To confirm that the crestin transgenes target
neural crest progenitors, we also generated trans-
genics for crestin:creERT2 to genetically mark
crestin-expressing embryonic cells using a Cre/
lox–dependent EGFP-to-mCherry switching line
(“ubi:switch”) (9) and genetically labeled neu-
ral crest-derived cells, including melanocytes/
pigment cells (Fig. 1, D and E, red cells), jaw
cartilage (Fig. 1F), and lateral line glia (Fig.
1G). Because the crestin gene is specific to zeb-
rafish, we wanted to ensure that crestin reporter
embryonic expression is consistent with another
conserved early neural crest marker, the tran-
scription factor sox10. Confocal analysis of double-
transgenic Tg(crestin_1kb:EGFP) and Tg(sox10:mCh)
(10) zebrafish embryos showed a high degree of
overlap in reporter gene expression (Fig. 1H),
with any differences matching published in situ
hybridization (ISH) data (11). Thus, our crestin
transgenic lines recapitulate crestin expression
and specifically mark the embryonic neural crest
stem/progenitor cell population.
crestin transgenics visualize
melanoma initiation
We next determined whether crestin:EGFP is re-
expressed in melanoma tumors, as noted previ-
ously by ISH (8). We found crestin:EGFP is
expressed in tumors arising on triple transgenic
p53/BRAF/crestin:EGFP adult zebrafish but is
absent in the remainder of the animal, high-
lighting its specificity to the tumor (Fig. 2A). We
next followed developing zebrafish in order to
observe the onset of crestin:EGFP+ expression.
Before EGFP-expressing patches of cells formed
raised melanoma lesions on a given fish (Fig. 2B),
we were able to detect single isolated EGFP+
cells in p53/BRAF/crestin:EGFP zebrafish (Fig. 2C).
We could track their persistence and enlargement
(fig. S2, A and B). Small patches of EGFP+ cells,
containing <50 cells, are readily tractable as they
enlarge (fig. S2C). Analysis of single scales with
RESEARCH
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
29 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6272
aad2197-1
1Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Children’s Hospital Boston, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. 2Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. 3Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
4Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 5Institute
of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zürich, 8057 Zürich,
Switzerland. 6Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research,
9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
7Computational and Systems Biology Program,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA. 8Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10075, USA.
9Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. 10Research
Institute Children’s Cancer Center Hamburg and Department
of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.
11Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 12Center for
Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA 02114, USA. 13Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA.
*Corresponding author. E-mail: zon@enders.tch.harvard.edu
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 discrete crestin:EGFP+ patches demonstrated that
transgene expression detectable with fluorescence
microscopy overlaps with crestin mRNA detected
with ISH (Fig. 2D). Together, these observations
reveal that after pan-neural crest expression con-
fined to the embryo, our crestin reporter ex-
presses specifically and reproducibly in melanoma
tumors, thus providing an in vivo genetic label for
melanoma cells that is earlier than with previous
detection methods (5, 12).
We next addressed the dynamics of reemerging
crestin expression in cohorts of p53/BRAF/crestin:
EGFP zebrafish. At the population level, crestin:
EGFP+ patches of cells (fig. S1, B and C) were
visible before the appearance of grossly raised
melanoma lesions (Fig. 2E, fig. S1D, and movie
S3). The crestin:EGFP expression is undetectable
in the p53/BRAF fish from 3 to >21 days after
fertilization, which is again consistent with pre-
vious in situ analyses for endogenous crestin.
We tracked individual small patches of crestin:
EGFP+ cells over time as they progressed into
fully formed raised melanoma lesions (Fig. 2E)
and found that all melanomas tracked in this
manner initiated from crestin:EGFP+ patches of
cells (30 out of 30). Thus, if a patch is seen in the
p53/BRAF background, it will become an overt
melanoma. These data demonstrate that reemer-
gence of crestin:EGFP expression, and a neural
crest progenitor state, correlates with melanoma
initiation in an in vivo model of de novo mela-
noma formation.
To establish that pretumor patches of crestin:
EGFP+ cells are tumorigenic and can autono-
mously expand locally after transplant, we per-
formed scale auto-transplants on p53/BRAF/
crestin:EGFP zebrafish (13). After transplant,
patches of crestin:EGFP+ cells survive and expand
at the new site. The EGFP+ cells persist and
further expand when later removing the tran-
splanted scale, suggesting that the cells have
invaded the hypodermis (Fig. 2G, representa-
tive example). We achieved similar results with
isolated scales placed in tissue culture but on a
shorter time scale (figs. S3A, and S4, A and B)
and with allotransplants to sublethally irradiated
recipient zebrafish (fig. S3B) (8). Thus, early
patches of crestin:EGFP–expressing cells are trans-
plantable in a manner suggesting that they are
already tumorigenic.
Transcriptional regulators
of crestin expression
As the crestin element proved to be a highly
specific and distinct tool for monitoring neural
crest and melanoma development, we aimed to
identify (i) a minimal element within the 4.5-kb
crestin promoter/enhancer that could drive this
expression pattern and (ii) key transcriptional
regulators within the element. Sequence analysis
of the crestin locus, which is replicated through-
out the zebrafish genome >40 times, is similar
to another retroelement called bhikari that is ex-
pressed in early mesendoderm (fig. S6A) (6, 7, 14).
Both a 1-kb segment from the putative retroele-
ment promoter region and a smaller 296–base
pair (bp) subregion fully reproduced the neural
crest- and melanoma-specfic expression pattern
of the full 4.5-kb crestin element (Fig. 1H and fig.
S5, A to G), with slightly weaker expression for
the 296-bp element. Hence, key neural crest reg-
ulatory elements are contained in this 296-bp of
DNA, although additional contributory binding
sites may also be functional in the context of the
larger crestin element.
Database searches identified multiple predicted
transcription factor binding sites for important
neural crest developmental regulators within the
296-bp segment, including two sox10, one pax3,
aad2197-2
29 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6272
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
1
4500
crestin ORF
LTR-like
U3
EGFP
crestin:EGFP
24 hpf, crestin ISH
Tg(crestin_1kb:EGFP)
Tg(sox10:mCh)
Merge
Tg(crestin:creERt2;crystallin:YFP) 
X Tg(–3.5ubi:loxP-GFP- loxP-mCherry)
24 hpf, Tg(crestin:EGFP)
EGFP
1
1000
crestin_1kb:EGFP
Fig. 1. The crestin promoter/enhancer drives neural crest-specific gene expression. (A) Prototypical
crestin retrotransposon locus with predicted ORF, LTR-like, and U3-like promoter regions. Shown are
locations of 4.5- and 1-kb segments used for crestin:EGFP constructs (white box/promoter arrow in-
dicate b-globin gene minimal promoter). (B) Endogenous expression pattern of crestin transcript by means
of ISH (purple staining) at 24 hours after fertilization marks developing and migrating neural crest cells.
(C) This expression pattern (green) is recapitulated by a stable Tg(crestin:EGFP) embryo at 24 hours after
fertilization. (D to G) Genetic lineage tracing of cells that express crestin [Tg(crestin:creERt2;crystallin:
YFP) X Tg(–3.5ubi:loxP-GFP-loxP-mCherry)] marks multiple neural crest lineages (red cells), including
melanocytes (bracket) on (D) the dorsum and (E) the eye (72 hours after fertilization), (F) jaw cartilage
(ventral view, 5 days after fertilization), and (G) glial cells of the lateral line (arrows, dorsal view posterior
to the yolk, 72 hours after fertilization). (H) Tg(crestin:EGFP) expression overlaps substantially with a
sox10:mCh transgene (confocal image, dorsal view over yolk, 24 hours after fertilization).
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 SCIENCE sciencemag.org
29 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6272
aad2197-3
n=43 
p=0.021 
p53/BRAF/
crestin:EGFP
p53/BRAF/
crestin:EGFP
6 wks
9 wks
11.5 wks
17 wks
p53/BRAF/Na/
MCR/crestin:EGFP
Day 0
Day 0
Day 6
Day 12
Day 19
Day 26
Day 33 - overlying scales 
removed after photo
Day 40
p53/BRAF/Na/
MCR/crestin:EGFP
Pre-scale transplant
Post-scale transplant
Day 0
Day 0
Remove scale from 
recipient site
Replace with 
scale with 
crestin:EGFP (+) cells
p53/BRAF/crestin:EGFP
p53/BRAF/crestin:EGFP
crestin ISH 
(-) control
p53/BRAF/Na/MCR/crestin:EGFP
p53/BRAF/Na/MCR/crestin:EGFP
p53/BRAF/Na/MCR/crestin:EGFP
Fig. 2. Tg(crestin:EGFP) specifically marks melanoma tumors and pre-
cursor lesions. (A) Spontaneously arising tumors (outlined) in p53/BRAF/
crestin:EGFP zebrafish express EGFP (brackets), whereas the remainder of
the animal is negative. (B) crestin:EGFP expression is also visible in precursor,
nonraised lesions. (C) Example of a single crestin:EGFP+ cell in p53/BRAF
background. (D) Scales expressing crestin:EGFP from precursor, nonraised
regions [(B), bottom, arrow] were plucked, photographed [(D), left and
middle], and subjected to ISH for crestin transcript [(D), right]. There is a
concordance of EGFP (green) and crestin transcript (purple, dotted outlines,
scales curl during ISH procedure, indicated by the curved arrow, observed in
5 of 5 scales). (Bottom right) crestin:EGFP– scales are negative for crestin
ISH staining (observed in 7 of 7 tested scales). (E) Cohorts of p53/BRAF/
crestin:EGFP zebrafish were tracked over time for the appearance of crestin:
EGFP+ patches and tumors, with crestin:EGFP+ cells/patches (green line)
identifiable before raised melanoma tumors (black line). (F) Example of an
EGFP+ preclinical patch tracked over time (6, 9, 11.5, and 17 weeks) as it
expands into a clinically apparent melanoma tumor. (G) Scale autotransplant
and expansion of crestin:EGFP+ patch of cells. At day 0, the recipient site is
free of crestin:EGFP+ cells (pre–scale transplant), but immediately after trans-
plant of a single scale (post–scale transplant), the patch of EGFP+ cells is
apparent (white circle). This patch expands outward, and even upon removal
of the original transplanted scale after the day 33 photograph, EGFP+ cells
remain in place and continue to expand. The magnification and size of white
circle is the same in each image.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 one E-box (myc or mitf-binding site), and one
tfap2 site (Fig. 3A and table S1) (15). To de-
termine which sites are functionally required for
crestin transgene expression, we individually mu-
tated the core consensus for each site (Fig. 3A
and fig. S6B) and tested expression at 24 hours
after fertilization in F0 embryos injected with the
different crestin_296bp:EGFP constructs at the
one-cell stage, examining >80 successfully injec-
ted F0 embryos per construct. Whereas muta-
tion of the predicted pax3 site left the expression
pattern largely unchanged from that of the
wild type (~55% of embryos with neural crest
predominant expression in both), mutation of
either sox10 site drastically reduced neural crest
expression (≤20%), as did mutation of the tfap2
site or the E-box site (<10% and none, respec-
tively) (Fig. 3A and fig. S6, C and D). These
functional transcription factor binding sites pro-
vide an explanation for the neural crest specifi-
city of crestin transgene expression, which
integrates regulatory signals of multiple neural
crest transcription factors, including sox10.
Neural crest signature in
melanoma initiation
To test whether early precursor melanoma le-
sions express other melanoma and neural crest
progenitor markers in addition to crestin, we
isolated individual scales from p53/BRAF/Na/
MiniCoopR/crestin:EGFP zebrafish with early
crestin:EGFP+ patches and compared them with
adjacent individual scales without crestin:EGFP
expression (Fig. 3, B and C) and performed
Affymetrix microarrays (12). Such scales appear
well-matched in their cell make-up, particularly
in regards to melanocytes, as shown through mitf:
mCh co-expression (marking melanocytes), and
crestin:EGFP (fig. S7). Crestin:EGFP+ scale-enriched
genes include neural crest– (such as crestin, mitf,
and dlx2a) and melanoma-expressed [such as
mia and mt (metallothionein)] genes (table S2)
(16–18). We confirmed enrichment by means of
quantitative reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR)
on independent crestin:EGFP+ and crestin:EGFP–
scales (including crestin, dlx2a, and mia) (Fig. 3D).
We also found sox10 expression enriched in the
crestin:EGFP+ samples (Fig. 3D). Sox10 is a known
marker and key regulator of neural crest identity
(Fig. 1H) (19) and, from our data, of crestin ex-
pression (Fig. 3A); it is also sufficient to direct
reprogramming of human fibroblasts to induced
neural crest cells (20) and can be highly express
in melanoma, where it is involved in growth con-
trol (21–23). We used gene set enrichment analy-
sis (GSEA) to query a rank-ordered list of the
crestin:EGFP+ scale enriched genes for an asso-
ciation with all neural crest–expressed genes in
the Zebrafish Information Network (ZFIN) data-
base, and we found a significant correlation [false
discovery rate (FDR) Q = 0.019, and familywise
error rate (FWER) P = 0.019] (Fig. 3E, left, and
table S6). Similarly, we used GSEA to compare
a rank-ordered list of genes enriched in embry-
onic stem (ES)–derived human neural crest cells
(24) with genes enriched ≥2-fold in crestin:
EGFP+ scales, and we found a positive correla-
tion, detectable even across species (FDR Q =
0.089, FWER P = 0.089) (Fig. 3E, right, and table
S6). These data collectively support the concept
that key aspects of NCP state reemerge at the
time of melanoma initiation, as read out by the
crestin:EGFP reporter.
Neural crest progenitor identity
and melanomagenesis
On the basis of our analysis of crestin expression,
which provides an in vivo readout of NCP identity
at the time of melanoma initiation, we reasoned
that favoring entry into or inappropriately main-
taining the NCP state in a cancerized field of
melanocytes would accelerate the onset of mela-
noma formation (Fig. 3F). The neural crest master
transcription factor sox10 has been shown to
increase crestin mRNA in embryos when over-
expressed (25), and we found similar results for
our crestin:EGFP reporter (fig. S8). Misexpression
of SOX10 in postnatal fibroblasts also generates
multipotent neural crest cells in culture (20). We
therefore overexpressed sox10 in melanocytes
using the transgenic MiniCoopR system (12) and
found that sox10 overexpression in melanocytes
accelerated melanoma onset significantly versus
controls (Fig. 3G). To examine the consequence
of sox10 inactivation, we used a melanocyte-
specific CRISPR/Cas9 system to target sox10 in
the p53/BRAF/Na background (fig. S9A). As com-
pared with controls in which p53 is redundantly
targeted (already mutated in our system) using
an analogous vector, we found a significant
slowing of median tumor onset in the sox10
CRISPR/Cas9 setting [133 days (p53) versus
180 days (sox10), P < 0.0001] (fig. S9B). When
melanomas developed in the sox10-targeted
background, the sox10 target genomic locus ex-
hibited a propensity for mutations that preserve
predicted sox10 function (for example, point mu-
tations or in-frame deletions, ~60% of sequenced
genomes) as opposed to inactivating mutations
(for example, frame-shifts, ~40% of sequenced
genomes), suggesting a selective pressure for re-
tention of sox10 function (fig. S9, C and D).
These gain- and loss-of-function results together
strongly support our hypothesis that reemer-
gence of NCP state is an important event in
melanoma tumor initiation.
Neural crest super-enhancers
and melanoma
In order to understand how the expression of
neural crest genes such as sox10 may be regulated
in zebrafish and human melanoma, we used a
combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation
sequencing (ChIP-seq) and assay for transposase-
accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-
seq). Chromatin regions with high levels of
H3K27Ac histone marks have been referred to
as super-enhancers (SEs), or stretch-enhancers
(26, 27), and have been identified as key tran-
scriptional regulatory elements that modulate
cell type–specific and cancer-related gene ex-
pression (26–29). We used ChIP-seq to identify
H3K27Ac-enriched regions in a zebrafish crestin:
EGFP+ melanoma cell line (zcrest1) that we
derived from p53/BRAF/Na/MiniCoopR/crestin:
EGFP zebrafish and noted substantial regions
of H3K27Ac enrichment at crestin loci, identi-
fied as SEs (representative locus shown in Fig.
4A, red bar indicates SE). We also identified
Sox10 binding by means of ChIP-seq across the
crestin locus (Fig. 4A, bottom track), which is
consistent with our promoter analysis linking
sox10 to crestin transcriptional regulation (Fig.
3A). We examined the sox10 locus in the zcrest
1 zebrafish melanoma cell line and also identified
H3K27Ac SE marks (Fig. 4B). These SEs were
similarly found at sox10 and crestin via H3K27Ac
ChIP-seq performed on a freshly isolated pri-
mary zebrafish melanoma tumor (fig. S10, A and
B, red bars), supporting our findings on the cell
lines as being representative of the in vivo land-
scape. ATAC-seq identified open and accessible
chromatin corresponding to the SEs at crestin and
sox10 (Fig. 4, A and B) and other SE-associated
loci in two zebrafish melanoma cell lines (fig.
S10, E and F) (30). These data suggest a molec-
ular basis for the epigenetic state readout by
crestin of NCP identity in initiating melanoma
cells.
To compare our fish studies with human
melanoma, for which SE analysis is limited,
we examined the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
(CCLE) database (31) and found that most hu-
man melanoma lines (51 of 60) express SOX10
according to Affymetrix microarray data (fig.
S11A). As with zebrafish melanomas, ChIP-seq
showed enriched H3K27Ac marks near the SOX10
locus in six SOX10-expressing human melanoma
lines tested but not in a rare SOX10-negative
human melanoma cell line (LOXIMVI) (Fig. 4,
C and E, and fig. S11A). The SOX10 SE’s were
ranked 3 and 6 out of 842 SEs from ~15,000
total enhancers in the A375 line (fig. S11B and
table S3). Clustering based on the SE landscape
yielded two distinct groups of SOX10-expressing
lines that correlated with the presence or ab-
sence of expression of melanocyte differentia-
tion markers, TYR and DCT (fig. S11, C and D).
H3K4me1, a histone modification typically at
active enhancers, was also enriched at SOX10
in the representative A375 melanoma line (Fig.
4C). Remarkably, these SOX10 SE peaks were
also found in published H3K27Ac data from hu-
man ES-derived neural crest cells (hNCCs) (Fig.
4, C and E) (32). Examining multiple normal
and cancer cell types (66 and 18 types, respec-
tively), the enrichment of H3K27Ac signal at
SOX10 was evident and specific to melanoma
cells, hNCCs, and brain tissue, which contains
SOX10-expressing oligodendrocytes (Fig. 4E)
(26). Beyond SOX10, a similar SE epigenetic
signature was shared for the neural crest tran-
scription factor DLX2 among melanomas across
species and was enriched in melanomas and
hNCCs (Fig. 4, D and E, and fig. S10, C and E).
DLX2 expression is enriched in sorted crestin+
embryonic neural crest cells (table S4), in crestin+
precursor melanoma patches (Fig. 3D), and in
the less differentiated, TYR/DCT– melanomas
relative to cultured normal human melanocytes
(fig. S11, C, D, and F; and table S5). SEs were
aad2197-4
29 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6272
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 SCIENCE sciencemag.org
29 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6272
aad2197-5
crestin:EGFP (-) scale
crestin:EGFP (+) scale
crestin dlx2a
mia
sox10
crestin:EGFP (-) scale
crestin:EGFP (+) scale
Normalized Fold Expression
0.0 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 
5.0 
6.0 
7.0 
BRAFV600E 
p53 -/- 
Neural crest  
progenitor state 
Oncogene activation 
Tumor suppressor loss 
Reprogramming 
Super-enhancer
activation 
Normal Tissue 
Field Cancerization 
Melanoma 
Initiation 
Tumor
Expansion
FDR q-value  
0.0889
FWER p-Value 
0.088
Enrichment Score (ES)  
0.694  
 
Normalized ES  
1.45
FDR q-value  
0.019
FWER p-Value 
0.019
Enrichment Score (ES) 
0.413
Normalized ES 
1.39
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
n  80 embryos per construct 
coninject ubi:mCh 
MITF/ 
myc 
Sox10 
AP2 
Pax3 
Sox10 
MITF/ 
myc 
Sox10 
AP2 
Pax3 
Sox10 
MITF/ 
myc 
Sox10 
AP2 
Pax3 
Sox10 
MITF/ 
myc 
Sox10 
AP2 
Pax3 
Sox10 
MITF/ 
myc 
Sox10 
AP2 
Pax3 
Sox10 
MITF/ 
myc 
Sox10 
AP2 
Pax3 
Sox10 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Neural Crest 
No  
GFP 
NC 
+ ect 
Ectopic  
Percent of injected embryos with 
indicated expression pattern
EGFP
crestin_296bp:EGFP
ZFIN COMPLETE
HUMAN NC CELLS
Fig. 3. Reemergence of neural crest progenitor identity in melanoma
initiation. (A) Mutation of key neural crest transcription factor binding sites
in the 296-bp crestin element, including sox10, tfap2, and an E-box for myc or
mitf, substantially reduces neural crest EGFP expression at 24 hours after fer-
tilization, whereas mutation of the predicted pax3 site does not alter expres-
sion. Coinjection of a ubiquitous ubi:mCh transgene confirmed successful
injection for the >80 independently injected F0 embryos analyzed for each
construct. Scales from p53/BRAF/Na/MiniCoopR/crestin:EGFP adult zebra-
fish (B) with and (C) without EGFP+ cells were collected, and total RNA was
isolated for microarray analysis. (D) Quantitative RT-PCR of crestin:EGFP+ versus
crestin:EGFP– scales reveals enrichment of neural crest (crestin, dlx2a, sox10)
and melanoma marker expression (crestin, mia, sox10). (E) GSEA analysis shows
a positive association between crestin:EGFP+ patch-enriched genes and neural
crest–expressed genes in zebrafish (left) and in human ES–derived neural
crest cells (right). (F) Model for the importance of reemergence of NCP state
through SE activation as an essential step in melanoma initiation. The
acquisition of genetic lesions in normal tissue leads to oncogene activation
(BRAFV600E) and tumor suppressor loss (p53−/−) and represents an initial
barrier that generates a cancerized field from which rare clones (green)
overcome the additional barrier of achieving a NCP state to initiate melanoma
formation and then tumor expansion. Favoring reemergence of the neural
crest progenitor state would then increase melanoma formation, and
strengthening this barrier to inhibit adoption of the crestin+ NCP state would
block melanoma initiation. (G) Misexpression of the NCP transcription factor
sox10 accelerates melanoma onset as compared with controls in p53/BRAF/
Na zebrafish rescued with the MiniCoopR construct.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 also found at TFAP2 family members, whose
functional binding site was identified in the
296-bp crestin element (Fig. 3A), in A375 hu-
man melanoma (TFAP2C) (fig. S12A), and in
the zebrafish melanoma cell line and primary
melanoma (tfap2a) (fig. S10, D and F). Such
SEs are also found near other crestin+ cell-
enriched genes MIA and MT2A (metallothionein
genes) in A375 melanoma cells (fig. S12, B and C).
Discussion
This work shows that melanoma precursor cells
reinitiate an embryonic neural crest signature and
activate a melanoma gene program. Although the
expression of stem cell factors or embryonic genes
has been noted previously in advanced malignan-
cies including melanoma (8, 23), it remained un-
certain whether this was simply due to aberrant
misexpression of these genes or whether these
genes were present from tumor outset (Fig. 3F). Our
data support a model in which the stem/progenitor
aad2197-6
29 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6272
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 4. A SE signature in zebrafish and human melanoma. (A) ChIP-
seq for the H3K27Ac histone mark (top row) in a crestin:EGFP+ zebrafish
melanoma cell line (zcrest 1) reveals enriched peaks, identified as a SE
(red bar), at a representative crestin locus. Sequences of crestin_4.5kb,
crestin_1kb, and crestin_296bp shown with blue horizontal bars. ATAC-seq
on two zebrafish melanoma lines (zcrest 1 and zcrest 2) identifies open
chromatin coincident with the H3K27Ac marks at crestin loci. ChIP-seq for
Sox10 shows enrichment across the crestin locus (bottom row) in zcrest
1 cells. (B) ChIP-seq for the H3K27Ac histone mark (top row) on the zcrest
1 line identifies robust enrichment and a SE at sox10 (red bar). ATAC-seq
identifies corresponding regions of open chromatin (rows 2 and 3). (C) ChIP-
seq for the H3K27Ac mark on multiple SOX10-expressing melanoma lines
(A375, CJM, COLO679, SKMEL2, SKMEL30, and UACC257) and a rare
SOX10-negative melanoma line (LOXIMVI). Robust peaks corresponding
to SEs (red bars) are identified in all lines, except the SOX10-negative
LOXIMVI line. Published H3K27Ac ChIP-seq data from hNCCs reveal a
similar SE pattern. ChIP-seq for H3K4Me1, an enhancer mark, on a rep-
resentative melanoma line, A375 (row 2), identifies regions corresponding
to the H3K27Ac marks. (D) H3K27Ac signal is robust at the DLX2 locus
in melanoma cell lines not expressing the melanocyte differentiation
genes TYR and DCT (blue box), in hNCCs, and in the SOX10-negative
LOXIMVI melanoma line. Human genomic track images were generated at
http:/
/genome.ucsc.edu. (E) High relative H3K27Ac signal at SOX10 (top)
and DLX2 (bottom) identifies SEs (presence = red/orange bar, absence =
blue bars) and is largely enriched in melanomas and hNCCs compared with
66 normal and 18 cancer cell types.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 cell gene programs are an integral part of can-
cer initiation and not reacquired later (Fig. 3F).
Analogously, this theme was also recently des-
cribed in basal cell carcinoma (BCC), a cancer
arising from a different cell lineage, in which
careful analysis of gene expression from tissue
collected during early BCC formation in a mouse
model of the disease exhibited an embryonic hair
follicle progenitor signature, indicating that this
may be a general feature of cancer initiation
(33). There also is a conceptual similarity be-
tween the reprogramming-induced pluripotent
stem process and the tumorigenic reemergence
of NCP state seen in our system as melanocytes
with the required, but insufficient, p53/BRAF
genetic mutations stochastically reenter a NCP
state (as read out by crestin expression) early at
the initiation of melanoma. As the initiating stages
of more cancers are analyzed, stem cell/progenitor
phenotype reacquisition may be a generally ob-
served phenomenon in most cancers (33).
Our work establishes a method to live-image
cancer development when a tumor starts, poten-
tially as a single cell, providing a singular view of
the initiating events. NCP identity arises, and is
likely a necessary step, early in tumor develop-
ment. In our p53/BRAF/crestin:EGFP model, all
EGFP+ patches of crestin:EGFP cells that we track
go on to enlarge and form tumors; given the
rarity of capturing single cells in this background,
we cannot rule out that clones may rarely fail to
progress to patches. The crestin gene has the dis-
tinct characteristic of being expressed in neural
crest cells in embryos, but not being expressed in
adult tissues except when melanoma arises. Super-
enhancers shared between melanoma and neural
crest are specifically activated. The neural crest
signature encompasses a combinatorial code in-
cluding SOX10, DLX2, and the TFAP2 family. It
is unlikely that any one of these genes is suf-
ficient for the reprogramming event, but it is
the combination of multiple transcription factors
that participate. In contrast to SOX10, DLX2 ex-
pression is characteristic of genes that are ex-
pressed by neural crest and melanoma, but not
expressed in melanocytes. As such, this gene set
may have diagnostic importance in the initiat-
ing cancer cell. A reevaluation of published ex-
pression data for nevi, primary melanoma, and
metastatic melanoma does reveal increased
SOX10 expression in malignant melanomas (34).
Nevi show a wide range and consistently lower
amount of SOX10 expression than that of mel-
anoma, raising the possibility that the histolo-
gically defined category of nevus is capturing
a range of melanoma-initiating capacity (those
nevi expressing higher SOX10 levels may have
initiated or may be more prone to initiating
melanoma).
Several major questions remain about an ini-
tiating cancer cell that may now be more ac-
cessible with our live visualization tool. The niche
environment must participate in the process of
initiation, perhaps through the activation of neural
crest signaling pathways akin to the development
of the normal neural crest or by stress pathways
related to irradiation or oxidative damage. Further
genetic mutations, as opposed to isolated epi-
genetic changes, may be required for tumor ini-
tiation from the cancerized field; however, the
absence of identifiable functionally relevant exo-
mic mutations in a study of 53 zebrafish mel-
anoma tumors to which we contributed would
tend to favor that the key genetic drivers
(BRAFV600E and mutant p53) are already present
in our model (35). Work on this question will
provide information on how cancer initiates. The
reprogramming event appears to occur in one
melanocyte or progenitor in a cancerized field,
and defining why the process initiates in that
single cell rather than an adjacent cell will provide
an understanding of protective mechanisms in
cancer formation.
Materials and methods
Cloning of crestin promoter/enhancer
The transcript for crestin, originally described as
AF195881, was used with Basic Local Alignment
Search Tool (BLAST) on the zebrafish genome
and, as has been previously noted, identified many
partial or complete highly similar (>90% identical)
sequences spread throughout the genome (6, 7).
Multiple insertions are present on chromosome
4, and a ~4.5-kb sequence located upstream of the
predicted crestin open reading frame (ORF)
was noted to be present in multiple instances.
Reasoning that this segment may contain the
relevant regulatory elements of crestin, primers
were designed to amplify via PCR upstream se-
quences of the crestin locus (LOC796814) on chro-
mosome 4 in the TU background (primers 299
and 302; primers supplemental table). The 1-kb
fragment and 296-bp fragment were isolated by
using PCR primers 302/340 and 517/516, re-
spectively. Fragments were cloned into pENTR5′
(Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) per man-
ufacturers instructions. Expression vectors were
derived by using Multisite Gateway technology
per manufacturer’s specifications and the Tol2
Kit (36) [EGFP, vector 383; mCh, vector 386; SV40
poly A, vector 302; EGFP with mouse minimal
ß-globin promoter (37); destination vectors, vector
394 alone and modified with addition of crystallin:
YFP marker; zmitfa middle entry vector, gift of
Craig Ceol; MiniCoopR from (15)].
Production of transgenic zebrafish and
lineage tracing
One-cell-stage embryos from the AB strain grown
under standard, Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee (IACUC)–approved conditions
were injected with the given DNA construct at
25 ng/ml with Tol2 mRNA at 20 ng/ml (36).
Embryos were screened at 24 hours after fer-
tilization for neural crest expression of EGFP
or mCh, or in the case of Tg(crestin:CreERt2;
crystallin:YFP), screened for yellow fluorescent
protein (YFP)–positive lenses at 4 days after
fertilization. These were grown to adulthood and
outcrossed so as to identify founders that gave
germline transmission. For each DNA construct,
≥2 independent lines were generated to confirm
the expression pattern. For lineage tracing of
crestin-expressing cells, a stable transgenic line
of Tg(crestin:creERt2;crystalline:YFP) was crossed
to the Tg(-3.5ubi:loxP-GFP-loxP-mCherry) line
(ubi:Switch) (9); embryos were collected and
treated with 10 mM 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT)
at 50% epiboly and 24 hours after fertilization
while grown at 28°C in E3 medium, as per
standard protocol.
Embryo and adult imaging
Transmitted light and fluorescence images of
adult and nonconfocal images of embryos were
collected on a Zeiss Discovery V.8 Stereoscope
with an Axiocam HRc. Static confocal images
were collected on a Nikon C2si Laser Scanning
Confocal using 25× objective on embryos mounted
in 1% low melt agarose. Maximum intensity
projections of Z stacks or three-dimensional re-
constructions are presented here. Movies of
developing embryos were collected on a Nikon
Eclipse Ti Spinning Disk Confocal with a 10×
objective, with tiled images collected every 6 to
7 min. Images were processed by using Photo-
shop, ImageJ, or Imaris. Multiple tiled images
of adult zebrafish were stitched together by using
the automated Photomerge function in Photo-
shop or manually aligned.
Melanoma model and MiniCoopR system
Experiments were performed as outlined in (15).
Briefly, p53/BRAF/Na embryos were injected with
equal amounts of MiniCoopR alone or MiniCoopR;
mitf:sox10 and selected for melanocyte rescue at
48 hours. Equal numbers of melanocyte-rescued
embryos were grown to adulthood (n = 14 for
control and n = 13 for mitf:sox10) and scored
for the emergence of raised melanoma lesions
as per (15). Survival curves and statistics were
generated in Prism.
Quantitative PCR, microarray, and
in situ hybridization
Adult p53/BRAF/Na/MiniCoopR/crestin:EGFP
fish were anesthetized with Tricaine, viewed
under the fluorescent dissecting scope, and pre-
cursor patches of crestin:EGFP+ cells were iden-
tified and associated single scales removed. These
fish contained stable (germ-line transmitted)
alleles of crestin:EGFP and control MiniCoopR
(no test gene). Neighboring crestin:EGFP–negative
scales from the same zebrafish were selected for
controls. Scales were immediately placed in Trizol,
and total RNA was purified following the man-
ufacturer’s instructions, with the additional use
of Sigma GenElute LPA carrier. RNA was anal-
yzed on a BioAnalyzer, and high-quality samples
were chosen for microarray libraries generated
by using the Ovation Pico WTA System V2 and
Encore Biotin labeling system for hybridization
on the Zebrafish Gene 1.0 ST Affymetrix Array
or used for cDNA preparation using SuperScript
III. RMA-normalized Affymetrix Array results were
sorted for maximum fold (log2) increase in gene
expression in GFP-positive samples versus neg-
ative samples. Quantitative PCR reactions were
run on triplicate biological samples with triplicate
technical replicates and normalized to b-actin
expression, with representative results presented.
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
29 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6272
aad2197-7
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 For in situ hybridizations, we used the methods
of (38) and the crestin probe from (7).
ChIP-seq and SE analysis
Human melanoma cells were grown to confluence
in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle medium (DMEM) +
10% fetal calf serum (FCS), and ~ 1 × 108 cells
were formaldehyde cross-linked and collected.
ChIP was performed by using the methods of
(30, 39) with antibodies against H3K27Ac (ab4729)
(Abcam), H3K4Me1 (ab8895) (Abcam), and SOX10
[Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas, TX), sc-17342x].
Libraries were prepared by using the NEBNext
Multiplex Oligos for Illumina kit (NEB) and run
on an Illumina HiSeq 2000. Data analysis, in-
cluding enhancer and SE calling, was performed
as described in (26). Genomic track images were
generated by using the IGV package (40) and the
University of California, Santa Cruz Browser (41).
All human ChIP-seq data sets were aligned to
build version NCBI37/HG19 of the human genome
using Bowtie (version 0.12.9) (42) with the fol-
lowing parameters: –n2, –e70, –m2, –k2, –best.
We used the MACS version 1.4.1 (Model based
analysis of ChIP-seq) (43) peak finding algorithm
to identify regions of ChIP-seq enrichment over
background. A P value threshold of enrichment
of 1 × 10–9 was used for all data sets. Wiggle files
for gene tracks were created by using MACS with
options –w –S –space = 50 to count reads in 50-bp
bins. They were normalized to the total number
(in millions) of mapped reads producing the final
tracks in units of reads per million mapped reads
per base pair (rpm/bp).
Identifying SEs
The identification of SEs has previously been
described in detail (26). Briefly, H3K27Ac peaks
were used to identify constituent enhancers.
These were stitched if within 12.5 kb, and peaks
fully contained within ±2kb from a TSS were ex-
cluded from stitching. H3K27Ac signal (less input
control) was used to rank enhancers by their en-
richment. Super-enhancers were assigned to ac-
tive genes by using the ROSE software package
(younglab.wi.mit.edu/super_enhancer_code.html).
ATAC-seq
Zebrafish melanoma cell lines were grown to
80% confluence, trypsinized, and counted, and
50,000 cells were lysed and subjected to “tag-
mentation” reaction and library construction as
described in (30). Libraries were run on an Illu-
mina HiSeq 2000. All zebrafish ATAC-seq data
sets were aligned to build version Zv9 of the
zebrafish genome by using Bowtie2 (version 2.2.1)
(42) with the following parameters: –end-to-end,
–N0, –L20. We used the MACS2 version 2.1.0 (43)
peak-finding algorithm to identify regions of
ATAC-seq peaks, with the following parameter–
nomodel–shift –100–extsize 200. A Q value
threshold of enrichment of 0.05 was used for all
data sets.
Scale transplants
Adult p53/BRAF/Na/MiniCoopR/crestin:EGFP
were anesthetized, viewed under the fluorescent
dissecting scope; precursor patches of crestin:
EGFP+ cells were identified (not from raised
melanoma lesions); and single associated scales
were removed and placed in 50-ml drops of E3
buffer on a petri dish lid. Anesthetized recip-
ient zebrafish (in the case of allotransplants) or
the same zebrafish (in the case of autotrans-
plants) were gently placed on a wet sponge and
a recipient site selected (free of crestin:EGFP–
expressing cells). One scale was removed at the
donor site, and the previously selected donor
scale from the drop of E3 was placed on the
zebrafish and slid posterior to anterior into
place by using surrounding scales to hold it in
place. Recipients were quickly placed in fresh
zebrafish water and monitored for recovery from
anesthesia. Transplants were monitored fre-
quently with some loss of transplanted scales
(~20%) occurring quickly within 1 day because
of simple dislodgement. Once in place for ~4 days,
scales were firmly incorporated and could be
monitored over time and photographed at the
same magnification under the dissecting scope
after mild Tricaine anesthesia of the recipient
zebrafish. In single-scale autotransplants in a
representative cohort of 10 fish, three scales were
lost in the first week (we consider a technical
failure with the scales falling out), five showed
expansion of the crestin:EGFP cells, and three
showed no change or loss of crestin:EGFP cells.
In single-scale allotransplants onto sublethally
irradiated casper recipient fish, eight EGFP+
scales were transplanted onto different recip-
ients with one scale lost in the first week, five
scales showing expansion of the crestin:EGFP
cells for ≥2.5 weeks, and two showing stable
appearance for ≥ 2 weeks. Six of six EGFP– scales
showed loss of pigmented cells in this time
frame.
Promoter analysis
Transcription factor binding sites were predicted
by using JASPAR (14). We used the Q5 Site-
Directed Mutagenesis Kit from NEB to introduce
mutations to destroy the chosen transcription
factor binding site (primers supplemental table).
To analyze expression in vivo, equal volumes of
a mixture of the crestin_296bp:EGFP construct
variant at 20 ng/ml mixed with 5 ng/ml of ubi:mCh
(9, 36) (for an injection control) were injected
with 20 ng/ml of Tol2 mRNA into single-cell AB
embryos. At 24 hours after fertilization, embryos
were fixed in paraformaldehyde (PFA), washed
and stored in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS),
and scored for mCh expression to identify suc-
cessfully injected embryos and for EGFP to bin
based on the predominant expression pattern.
More than 80 transgenic F0 embryos for each
construct were scored.
Investigating SOX10 and DLX2 SEs in
healthy normal cells and
melanoma cells
To investigate whether the two SOX10-asscociated
SEs identified in A375 cells are also present in
other cell types, they were compared with the SEs
identified in other melanoma cell types, neural
crest cells, and 84 additional cell types from
normal or cancer cells described in (26).
First, the SOX10-asscociated SEs were opera-
tionally called “present” in a cell type if the SEs
identified in the cell-type overlap with the SOX10
SEs in A375 cells by at least 1 bp. Second, the
H3K27Ac signal density of the SOX10-asscociated
SEs identified in A375 cells was compared with
the mean H3K27Ac signal density of all enhancer
clusters in each cell type. For each cell type, the
average H3K27Ac ChIP-seq read density was
calculated in rpm/bp for the two SOX10 SEs
identified in A375 cells as well as all enhancers
clusters identified by using the ROSE software
package in the cell type (younglab.wi.mit.edu/
super_enhancer_code.html). The fold difference
of H3K27Ac ChIP-seq signal at SOX10 SEs over
the mean H3K27Ac ChIP-seq signal at all en-
hancers in each cell type was plotted in Fig. 4E.
The same process was undertaken for the SEs at
the DLX2 locus.
Pairwise comparison of SEs between
different melanoma cell lines and neural
crest cells
The set of SE regions in each cell type (SKMEL2,
SKMEL30, UACC257, LOXIMVI, A375, CJM,
COLO679, and neural crest cells) were merged
together if overlapping by 1 bp, resulting in a
total of 3407 merged SE regions. The neural
crest cell data were previously published in (32).
The average H3K27Ac ChIP-seq read density was
calculated in rpm/bp for each of the merged re-
gions. The pair-wise comparisons by Pearson cor-
relation were performed on all data sets by using
the average read density at the merged regions.
The average linkage hierarchical clustering of the
Pearson correlation was shown in the heatmap
(fig. S11C).
Zebrafish melanoma cell lines and
in vitro scale imaging
A single EGFP+ melanoma tumor arising in a
p53/BRAF/Na fish injected with MiniCoopR
plasmid and crestin:EGFP plasmid (zcrest 1 line)
or a p53/BRAF/Na/crestin:EGFP fish injected
with MiniCoopR plasmid (zcrest 2 line) was re-
moved after killing the adult fish. Briefly, tumors
were dissociated with a razor blade and trypsin,
filtered, and plated on a fibronectin-coated well
and grown in rich media supplemented with
FBS and zebrafish embryo extract as described
(44). After several passages, the zcrest 1 line
was sorted for EGFP+ cells, which were con-
tinued as the line. For the zcrest 2 line, after
several passages, most if not all cells remaining
were EGFP+. Both lines continue to be EGFP+
and have been grown for >50 passages on plastic
in standard DMEM + 10% FBS with 1X Gluta-
MAX supplement and penicillin/streptomycin
antibiotics.
Scales from p53/BRAF/Na/crestin:EGFP/Mini-
CoopR and p53/BRAF/crestin:EGFP fish with and
without EGFP+ patches of cells were placed in
zebrafish melanoma growth medium in fibro-
nectin coated wells in 384-well format, flat-
bottomed plates and imaged daily on a Yokogawa
aad2197-8
29 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6272
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 CV7000 confocal imager with brightfield and
z-stack image projections collected.
GSEA analysis
Using our microarrays comparing crestin:EGFP+
versus crestin:EGFP– scale gene expression, zebra-
fish genes were rank-ordered (10,705 genes) from
high to low for enrichment (crestin scales rank.
rnk). We generated a gene list of all neural-crest–
expressed genes in the ZFIN database (317 genes,
zfincomp.gmt) (45) and used the preranked GSEA
analysis tool. Using a list of genes with ≥2-fold
enrichment in crestin:EGFP+ scales by means of
microarray (Crestin Scales.gmt), we queried a list
of 17,575 genes rank-ordered for their enrich-
ment in human neural crest cells versus parental
ES cells from (32) (Rada Ranked.rnk), also using
the preranked GSEA analysis tool (46).
RNA-seq analysis
Multiple human melanoma cell lines and adult
human epidermal melanocytes (purchased from
Life Technologies) were grown to near conflu-
ence, and total RNA was isolated by using the
standard Trizol protocol. Illumina libraries were
prepared by using Ribo-Zero Magnetic Gold Kit
(epicenter) and NEBNext Ultra RNA Library
Prep Kit (NEB) and run on a HiSeq 2500, reads
aligned by using Tophat 2.0, and fragments per
kilobase of exon per million fragments mapped
values determined by using Cufflinks. For sorted
crestin+ cells, transgenic crestin_1kb:EGFP adults
were mated, and embryos collected and grown to
the 15-somite stage. These were homogenized,
filtered, and sorted by using fluorescence-
activated cell sorting into PBS, collecting ~5500
EGFP+ cells and 100K EGFP– cells. Total RNA was
again collected by using Trizol and GenElute LPA
carrier per manufacturer instructions. Libraries
were prepared by using Ribogone kit (Clontech)
and the SMARTer Universal Low RNA Kit
(Clontech) and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq
2500, with post-analysis performed as above
with the zebrafish genome.
CRISPR/Cas9 experiment
Cas9 mRNA was produced by means of in vitro
transcription from a pCS2 Cas9 vector (47) by
using mMESSAGE mMACHINE SP6 kit (Invi-
trogen). Guide RNAs (gRNAs) were generated by
following established methods (48). The Sox10 tar-
get sequence was GGCCGCGCGCAGGAAACTGG.
Six hundred picograms of Cas9 mRNA and 25 pg
of gRNA were injected into embryos of the AB
strain. After microinjection, embryos were raised
in E3 medium at 28.5°C. The T7E1 assay was per-
formed as reported (49). Briefly, genomic DNA
was extracted from 2-day-old embryos by using
the hotSHOT method (50). A fragment of 434 bp
was amplified from genomic DNA by using the
following primers: GAAGTCCGACGAGGAAGAT
and CTTGACTGAGTAAATAGTGCGT. The PCR
amplicons were then purified on a 1% agarose
gel. Two hundred nanograms of purified DNA
were denatured at 95°C for 5 min and slowly
reannealed before digestion with 10 units of
T7E1 enzyme (NEB) for 1 hour at 37°C. The
digestion product was finally run on a 2.5%
agarose gel.
CRISPR/Cas9 tumor-free survival curves
In order to inactivate sox10 specifically in the
melanocytes of our zebrafish melanoma model,
the MiniCoopR vector was engineered to express
Cas9 under the control of the melanocyte-specific
mitfa promoter and a gRNA efficiently mutating
sox10, described above, off a U6 promoter. A gRNA
against p53 was used as a negative control (51). The
two vectors were injected into one-cell stage, Tg
(mitfa:BRAFV600E), p53−/−, mitfa−/− embryos, and
tumor formation was monitored.
To sequence genomic DNA from tumors, tu-
mor tissue was dissected carefully, digested in
buffer with proteinase K (52), and after inacti-
vation of proteinase K, PCR was performed by
using the primers described above as for the
T7E1 reaction. PCR fragments were cloned by
using TopoTA cloning per manufacturer instruc-
tions, and colony PCR was performed on result-
ing individual clones and submitted for Sanger
sequencing for fig. S9C. For next-generation seq-
uencing in fig. S9D, nested PCR (primer sequences
TGAACGGGTACGACTGGACGCT and TGTTGTA-
GCAGTGCGTTTA, yielding a 238-bp amplicon)
was performed on the initially amplified genomic
locus so as to bring the amplicon ends closer to the
CRISPR target sequence in order to allow for cov-
erage by using a MiSeq-based 150-bp paired-end
Illumina run with pooled and barcoded samples at
the MGH DNA Core. Both Sanger and compiled
next-generation sequences were aligned to the
wild-type locus by using Lasergene Seqman in
order to identify changes at the CRISPR target
sequence. Wild-type sox10 reads, although poten-
tially from nontargeted sox10 loci in melanocytes
and not necessarily from other tissue types in the
sample, were excluded from the calculations of
fractions of allele types. If included, these would
only increase the fraction of active sox10 alleles
and would further favor our interpretation of the
results. When determining the fractions of alleles
in fig. S9D, each tumor was weighted equally so as
to avoid skewing from more reads from a given
tumor.
Injection of sox10 mRNA
The sox10 cDNA from zebrafish was cloned into
pENTR/D-TOPO and transferred into pCSDest
(53) by using Gateway cloning, all per manufac-
turer instructions. mRNA was generated by using
SP6 mMessage mMachine Kit (Ambion) per man-
ufacturer, and 1 nl mRNA mix was injected into
single-cell p53/BRAF/crestin:EGFP embryos at mul-
tiple concentrations, with 20 pg being the highest
tolerateddosewithout substantialtoxicity. Embryos
were imaged on a Zeiss Discovery V.8 Stereo-
scope and scored for EGFP expression.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1.
D. P. Slaughter, H. W. Southwick, W. Smejkal, Field
cancerization in oral stratified squamous epithelium; clinical
implications of multicentric origin. Cancer 6, 963–968 (1953).
doi: 10.1002/1097-0142(195309)6:5<963::AID-
CNCR2820060515>3.0.CO;2-Q; pmid: 13094644
2.
R. L. Mort, I. J. Jackson, E. E. Patton, The melanocyte lineage
in development and disease. Development 142, 620–632
(2015). doi: 10.1242/dev.106567; pmid: 25670789
3.
The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, Comprehensive
molecular profiling of lung adenocarcinoma. Nature 511,
543–550 (2014). pmid: 25079552
4.
J. A. Lo, D. E. Fisher, The melanoma revolution: From UV
carcinogenesis to a new era in therapeutics. Science 346,
945–949 (2014). doi: 10.1126/science.1253735;
pmid: 25414302
5.
E. E. Patton et al., BRAF mutations are sufficient to promote
nevi formation and cooperate with p53 in the genesis of
melanoma. Curr. Biol. 15, 249–254 (2005). doi: 10.1016/
j.cub.2005.01.031; pmid: 15694309
6.
R. Luo, M. An, B. L. Arduini, P. D. Henion, Specific pan-neural
crest expression of zebrafish Crestin throughout embryonic
development. Dev. Dyn. 220, 169–174 (2001). pmid: 11169850
7.
A. L. Rubinstein, D. Lee, R. Luo, P. D. Henion, M. E. Halpern,
Genes dependent on zebrafish cyclops function identified by
AFLP differential gene expression screen. Genesis 26, 86–97
(2000). doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1526-968X(200001)26:1<86::
AID-GENE11>3.0.CO;2-Q; pmid: 10660676
8.
R. M. White et al., DHODH modulates transcriptional elongation
in the neural crest and melanoma. Nature 471, 518–522 (2011).
doi: 10.1038/nature09882; pmid: 21430780
9.
C. Mosimann et al., Ubiquitous transgene expression and
Cre-based recombination driven by the ubiquitin promoter in
zebrafish. Development 138, 169–177 (2011). doi: 10.1242/
dev.059345; pmid: 21138979
10. Y. Kong et al., Neural crest development and craniofacial
morphogenesis is coordinated by nitric oxide and histone
acetylation. Chem. Biol. 21, 488–501 (2014). pmid: 24684905
11. M. Grzmil et al., The INT6 cancer gene and MEK signaling
pathways converge during zebrafish development. PLOS ONE
2, e959 (2007). doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000959;
pmid: 17895999
12. C. J. Ceol et al., The histone methyltransferase SETDB1 is
recurrently amplified in melanoma and accelerates its onset.
Nature 471, 513–517 (2011). pmid: 21430779
13. W. H. Hildemann, Tissue transplantation immunity in goldfish.
Immunology 1, 46–54 (1958). pmid: 13513141
14. A. M. Vogel, T. Gerster, Promoter activity of the zebrafish
bhikhari retroelement requires an intact activin signaling
pathway. Mech. Dev. 85, 133–146 (1999). doi: 10.1016/
S0925-4773(99)00104-5; pmid: 10415354
15. A. Sandelin, W. Alkema, P. Engström, W. W. Wasserman,
B. Lenhard, JASPAR: An open-access database for eukaryotic
transcription factor binding profiles. Nucleic Acids Res. 32,
D91–D94 (2004). doi: 10.1093/nar/gkh012; pmid: 14681366
16. M. Uhlén et al., A human protein atlas for normal and cancer
tissues based on antibody proteomics. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 4,
1920–1932 (2005). doi: 10.1074/mcp.M500279-MCP200;
pmid: 16127175
17. A. K. Bosserhoff, Melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA): An important
molecule in melanoma development and progression. Pigment
Cell Res. 18, 411–416 (2005). pmid: 16280006
18. G. Weinlich et al., Metallothionein—Overexpression as a highly
significant prognostic factor in melanoma: A prospective study
on 1270 patients. Br. J. Cancer 94, 835–841 (2006).
doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6603028; pmid: 16508630
19. R. N. Kelsh, Sorting out Sox10 functions in neural crest
development. BioEssays 28, 788–798 (2006). doi: 10.1002/
bies.20445; pmid: 16927299
20. Y. J. Kim et al., Generation of multipotent induced neural crest
by direct reprogramming of human postnatal fibroblasts with a
single transcription factor. Cell Stem Cell 15, 497–506 (2014).
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.07.013; pmid: 25158936
21. J. C. Cronin et al., SOX10 ablation arrests cell cycle, induces
senescence, and suppresses melanomagenesis. Cancer Res.
73, 5709–5718 (2013). pmid: 23913827
22. S. A. Graf, C. Busch, A. K. Bosserhoff, R. Besch, C. Berking,
SOX10 promotes melanoma cell invasion by regulating
melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA). J. Investig. Dermatol. 134,
2212–2220 (2014). doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.128
23. O. Shakhova et al., Sox10 promotes the formation and
maintenance of giant congenital naevi and melanoma. Nat. Cell
Biol. 14, 882–890 (2012). pmid: 22772081
24. A. Rada-Iglesias et al., Epigenomic annotation of enhancers
predicts transcriptional regulators of human neural crest. Cell
Stem Cell 11, 633–648 (2012). doi: 10.1016/
j.stem.2012.07.006; pmid: 22981823
25. E. Olesnicky, L. Hernandez-Lagunas, K. B. Artinger, prdm1a
Regulates sox10 and islet1 in the development of neural crest
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
29 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6272
aad2197-9
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and Rohon-Beard sensory neurons. Genesis 48, 656–666
(2010). doi: 10.1002/dvg.20673; pmid: 20836130
26. D. Hnisz et al., Super-enhancers in the control of cell identity
and disease. Cell 155, 934–947 (2013). doi: 10.1016/
j.cell.2013.09.053; pmid: 24119843
27. S. C. J. Parker et al., NISC Comparative Sequencing Program,
National Institutes of Health Intramural Sequencing Center
Comparative Sequencing Program Authors, NISC Comparative
Sequencing Program Authors, Chromatin stretch enhancer
states drive cell-specific gene regulation and harbor human
disease risk variants. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110,
17921–17926 (2013). pmid: 24127591
28. W. A. Whyte et al., Master transcription factors and mediator
establish super-enhancers at key cell identity genes. Cell 153,
307–319 (2013). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.035;
pmid: 23582322
29. J. Lovén et al., Selective inhibition of tumor oncogenes by
disruption of super-enhancers. Cell 153, 320–334 (2013).
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.036; pmid: 23582323
30. J. D. Buenrostro, P. G. Giresi, L. C. Zaba, H. Y. Chang,
W. J. Greenleaf, Transposition of native chromatin for fast and
sensitive epigenomic profiling of open chromatin, DNA-binding
proteins and nucleosome position. Nat. Methods 10, 1213–1218
(2013). doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2688; pmid: 24097267
31. J. Barretina et al., The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables
predictive modelling of anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature 483,
603–607 (2012). doi: 10.1038/nature11003; pmid: 22460905
32. A. Rada-Iglesias et al., A unique chromatin signature uncovers
early developmental enhancers in humans. Nature 470,
279–283 (2011). doi: 10.1038/nature09692; pmid: 21160473
33. K. K. Youssef et al., Adult interfollicular tumour-initiating cells
are reprogrammed into an embryonic hair follicle progenitor-
like fate during basal cell carcinoma initiation. Nat. Cell Biol. 14,
1282–1294 (2012). doi: 10.1038/ncb2628; pmid: 23178882
34. L. Rönnstrand, B. Phung, Enhanced SOX10 and KIT expression
in cutaneous melanoma. Med. Oncol. 30, 648 (2013).
doi: 10.1007/s12032-013-0648-y; pmid: 23801280
35. J. Yen et al., The genetic heterogeneity and mutational burden
of engineered melanomas in zebrafish models. Genome Biol.
14, R113 (2013). doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-10-r113;
pmid: 24148783
36. K. M. Kwan et al., The Tol2kit: A multisite gateway-based
construction kit for Tol2 transposon transgenesis constructs.
Dev. Dyn. 236, 3088–3099 (2007). doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21343;
pmid: 17937395
37. O. J. Tamplin, B. J. Cox, J. Rossant, Integrated microarray and
ChIP analysis identifies multiple Foxa2 dependent target genes
in the notochord. Dev. Biol. 360, 415–425 (2011). doi: 10.1016/
j.ydbio.2011.10.002; pmid: 22008794
38. C. Thisse, B. Thisse, High-resolution in situ hybridization to
whole-mount zebrafish embryos. Nat. Protoc. 3, 59–69 (2008).
doi: 10.1038/nprot.2007.514; pmid: 18193022
39. T. I. Lee, S. E. Johnstone, R. A. Young, Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and microarray-based analysis of protein
location. Nat. Protoc. 1, 729–748 (2006). doi: 10.1038/
nprot.2006.98; pmid: 17406303
40. J. T. Robinson et al., Integrative genomics viewer. Nat.
Biotechnol. 29, 24–26 (2011). doi: 10.1038/nbt.1754;
pmid: 21221095
41. W. J. Kent et al., The human genome browser at UCSC.
Genome Res. 12, 996–1006 (2002). doi: 10.1101/gr.229102;
pmid: 12045153
42. B. Langmead, S. L. Salzberg, Fast gapped-read alignment with
Bowtie 2. Nat. Methods 9, 357–359 (2012). doi: 10.1038/
nmeth.1923; pmid: 22388286
43. Y. Zhang et al., Model-based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS).
Genome Biol. 9, R137 (2008). doi: 10.1186/gb-2008-9-9-r137;
pmid: 18798982
44. S. Heilmann et al., A quantitative system for studying
metastasis using transparent zebrafish. Cancer Res. 75,
4272–4282 (2015). doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3319;
pmid: 26282170
45. D. G. Howe et al., ZFIN, the Zebrafish Model Organism Database:
Increased support for mutants and transgenics. Nucleic Acids
Res. 41 (D1), D854–D860 (2013). doi: 10.1093/nar/gks938;
pmid: 23074187
46. A. Subramanian et al., Gene set enrichment analysis: A
knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide
expression profiles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102,
15545–15550 (2005). doi: 10.1073/pnas.0506580102;
pmid: 16199517
47. L.-E. Jao, S. R. Wente, W. Chen, Efficient multiplex biallelic
zebrafish genome editing using a CRISPR nuclease system.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 13904–13909 (2013).
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1308335110; pmid: 23918387
48. J. A. Gagnon et al., Efficient mutagenesis by Cas9 protein-
mediated oligonucleotide insertion and large-scale assessment
of single-guide RNAs. PLOS ONE 9, e98186 (2014).
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098186; pmid: 24873830
49. H. J. Kim, H. J. Lee, H. Kim, S. W. Cho, J.-S. Kim, Targeted
genome editing in human cells with zinc finger nucleases
constructed via modular assembly. Genome Res. 19,
1279–1288 (2009). doi: 10.1101/gr.089417.108;
pmid: 19470664
50. G. E. Truett et al., Preparation of PCR-quality mouse genomic
DNA with hot sodium hydroxide and tris (HotSHOT).
BioTechniques 29, 52–54 (2000).
51. J. Ablain, E. M. Durand, S. Yang, Y. Zhou, L. I. Zon, A CRISPR/
Cas9 vector system for tissue-specific gene disruption in
zebrafish. Dev. Cell 32, 756–764 (2015). doi: 10.1016/
j.devcel.2015.01.032; pmid: 25752963
52. E. Wienholds et al., Efficient target-selected mutagenesis in
zebrafish. Genome Res. 13, 2700–2707 (2003). doi: 10.1101/
gr.1725103; pmid: 14613981
53. J. A. Villefranc, J. Amigo, N. D. Lawson, Gateway compatible vectors
for analysis of gene function in the zebrafish. Dev. Dyn. 236,
3077–3087 (2007). doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21354; pmid: 17948311
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
C.K.K. and research reported here is supported by the National
Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases
of the National Institutes of Health under award K08 AR061071.
C.M. received support from a European Molecular Biology
Organization long-term fellowship, a Human Frontier Science
Program long-term fellowship, and a Swiss National Science
Foundation advanced postdoctoral fellowship. L.I.Z. is supported
by R01 CA103846, the Ellison Foundation, the V Foundation,
and the Melanoma Research Alliance and is a Howard Hughes
Medical Institute Investigator. R.A.Y. is supported by NIH HG002668.
Z.P.F. was supported by NIH HG002668. E.J.H. is a Howard
Hughes Medical Institute Fellow of the Helen Hay Whitney
Foundation. L.I.Z. is a founder and stock holder of Fate, Inc.
and Scholar Rock. R.A.Y. is a founder of Syros Pharmaceuticals.
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views of the National
Institutes of Health. We thank the Massachusetts General
Hospital DNA Core for providing technical assistance with deep
sequencing. We thank J. Ablain for critical review of the
manuscript, C. Ceol for the gift of the zebrafish mitfa middle
entry clone, and G. Musso for helpful discussions on microarray
data and GSEA. All microarray, Chip-seq, and RNA-seq are
deposited at Gene Expression Omnibus, ID GSE75356.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencemag.org/content/351/6272/aad2197/suppl/DC1
Figs. S1 to S12
Tables S1 to S6
Movies S1 to S3
11 August 2015; accepted 22 December 2015
10.1126/science.aad2197
aad2197-10
29 JANUARY 2016 • VOL 351 ISSUE 6272
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 initiation
A zebrafish melanoma model reveals emergence of neural crest identity during melanoma
Cristina Santoriello, Eric C. Liao, Richard A. Young and Leonard I. Zon
Fogley, Ellen van Rooijen, Elliott J. Hagedorn, Christie Ciarlo, Richard M. White, Dominick A. Matos, Ann-Christin Puller, 
Charles K. Kaufman, Christian Mosimann, Zi Peng Fan, Song Yang, Andrew J. Thomas, Julien Ablain, Justin L. Tan, Rachel D.
DOI: 10.1126/science.aad2197
 (6272), aad2197.
351
Science 
, this issue p. 10.1126/science.aad2197; see also p. 453
Science
detecting and preventing melanoma initiation.
set of gene regulatory elements, called super-enhancers, whose identification and manipulation may prove beneficial in 
present during embryogenesis or during adult melanoma tumor formation. The appearance of this tumor correlated with a
Boumahdi and Blanpain). They used a fluorescent reporter that specifically lit up neural crest progenitors that are only 
 used a zebrafish melanoma model to visualize cancer initiation (see the Perspective by
et al.
mutations. Kaufman 
In cancer biology, a tumor begins from a single cell within a group of precancerous cells that share genetic
Visualizing the beginnings of melanoma
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/351/6272/aad2197
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/01/28/351.6272.aad2197.DC2
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/01/27/351.6272.aad2197.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/8/401/pe3.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/8/385/re8.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/8/392/ra87.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/8/394/ec261.abstract
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/351/6272/453.full
REFERENCES
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/351/6272/aad2197#BIBL
This article cites 53 articles, 12 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science 
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
