 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
788 
MMWR / August 5, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 30
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Notes from the Field
Fatal Infection Associated with Equine Exposure — 
 
King County, Washington, 2016
Vance Kawakami, DVM1,2; Krista Rietberg, MPH1; 
Beth Lipton, DVM1; Kaye Eckmann3; Maryann Watkins3; 
Hanna Oltean, MPH4; Meagan Kay, DVM1; Chantal Rothschild, DVM5; 
Miwako Kobayashi, MD2,6; Chris Van Beneden, MD6; 
Jeff Duchin, MD1,7
On March 17, 2016, Public Health—Seattle & King County 
in Washington was notified of two persons who received 
a diagnosis of Streptococcus equi subspecies zooepidemicus 
(S. zooepidemicus) infections. S. zooepidemicus is a zoonotic 
pathogen that rarely causes human illness and is usually 
associated with consuming unpasteurized dairy products or 
with direct horse contact (1). In horses, S. zooepidemicus is a 
commensal bacterium that can cause respiratory, wound, and 
uterine infections (2). The health department investigated to 
determine the magnitude of the outbreak, identify risk factors, 
and offer recommendations.
Patient A, a previously healthy woman aged 37 years, oper-
ated a horse boarding and riding facility in King County, 
Washington. Patient A fed, groomed, and exercised the facil-
ity’s six horses and cleaned the stalls daily. During the week of 
February 21, 2016, patient A developed mild pharyngitis and 
cough. During the week of February 21, horse A developed 
mucopurulent ocular and nasal discharge and lethargy. On 
February 29, patient A began administering 10 days of sulfa-
based antibiotics to horse A, which recovered without incident.
Patient B, a previously healthy woman aged 71 years and 
the mother of patient A, developed symptoms consistent with 
an upper respiratory infection during the week of February 21 
while visiting patient A and living in the same household. On 
March 2, she developed vomiting and diarrhea. On March 3, 
she was found unconscious and transported to a hospital, where 
she died that day. Patient B had close contact (i.e., riding, 
petting, and walking) with horse A on at least February 25 
and February 29.
Culture results of nasal swabs collected on March 10 from 
horse A and two other horses that appeared well were positive 
for S. zooepidemicus. Patient A did not report consumption of 
unpasteurized dairy products or exposure to other animals, apart 
from one healthy cat, during the preceding 2 months. A throat 
culture from patient A obtained March 10 and blood cultures 
from patient B grew S. zooepidemicus isolates indistinguishable 
by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis from isolates cultured from 
horse A and a second horse at the facility. S. zooepidemicus cul-
tured from a third horse did not match other isolates.
The epidemiologic and laboratory evidence from this investi-
gation linked a fatal S. zooepidemicus infection to close contact 
with an ill horse. Patient B might have been at increased risk 
for invasive disease by S. zooepidemicus because of her age and 
her possible antecedent upper respiratory infection. Because 
patient A specifically sought health care and a throat culture 
as a result of patient B’s death, determining whether the 
S. zooepidemicus infection preceded or followed her mild illness 
approximately 2 weeks earlier was not possible.
Although S. zooepidemicus is a rare zoonotic pathogen in 
humans, older persons might be at increased risk for a fatal 
outcome from this infection; in 32 reported cases, the median 
age was 61 years (range = <1 to 83 years) with 7 deaths (case-
fatality rate = 22%) (1). Consistently practicing thorough 
hand washing with soap and water after contact with horses 
and other animals or areas where animals are housed is rec-
ommended (3). This outbreak highlights the need for more 
research regarding risk factors for zoonotic transmission and 
spectrum of human illness associated with S. zooepidemicus.
Acknowledgments
Supervisors and staff members of the Reference and PulseNet 
laboratories, Washington State Department of Health; Shelly 
McKeirnan, MPH, Public Health–Seattle & King County, 
Washington; Washington State Department of Health; Washington 
Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory; Northwest Equine Veterinary 
Associates, Washington; Bernard Beall, PhD, Division of Bacterial 
Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory 
Diseases, CDC.
 1Public Health–Seattle & King County, Seattle, Washington; 2Epidemic 
Intelligence Service, CDC; 3Washington State Department of Health Public 
Health Laboratories, Shoreline, Washington; 4Washington State Department 
of Health; 5Northwest Equine Veterinary Associates, Washington; 6Division 
of Bacterial Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory 
Diseases, CDC; 7University of Washington, Seattle.
Corresponding author: Vance Kawakami, vance.kawakami@kingcounty.gov, 
206-423-8160.
References
1. van Samkar A, Brouwer MC, van der Ende A, van de Beek D. Streptococcus 
equi meningitis. Clin Microbiol Infect 2016;22:e3–4. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.cmi.2015.09.003
2. Clark C, Greenwood S, Boison JO, Chirino-Trejo M, Dowling PM. 
Bacterial isolates from equine infections in western Canada (1998–2003). 
Can Vet J 2008;49:153–60.
3. CDC. Wash your hands. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, CDC; 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/features/handwashing
