 A hippocampal network for spatial coding during immobility and 
sleep
K. Kay, M. Sosa, J.E. Chung, M.P. Karlsson, M.C. Larkin, and L.M. Frank
UCSF Center for Integrative Neuroscience and Department of Physiology, University of California 
San Francisco
Abstract
How does an animal know where it is when it stops moving? Hippocampal place cells fire at 
discrete locations as subjects traverse space, thereby providing an explicit neural code for current 
location during locomotion. In contrast, during awake immobility, the hippocampus is thought to 
be dominated by neural firing representing past and possible future experience. The question of 
whether and how the hippocampus constructs a representation of current location in the absence of 
locomotion has stood unresolved. Here we report that a distinct population of hippocampal 
neurons, located in the CA2 subregion, signals current location during immobility, and 
furthermore does so in association with a previously unidentified hippocampus-wide network 
pattern. In addition, signaling of location persists into brief periods of desynchronization prevalent 
in slow-wave sleep. The hippocampus thus generates a distinct representation of current location 
during immobility, pointing to mnemonic processing specific to experience occurring in the 
absence of locomotion.
The hippocampus is essential for memory and spatial navigation, but we still do not know 
how these cognitive functions are made possible by the hippocampal neural circuit. 
Examination of hippocampal neural activity during naturalistic behaviors yields a landmark 
clue: during locomotion, hippocampal principal neurons, known as “place” cells, fire when 
subjects traverse discrete locations in space1,2. Place cell firing thus provides an internal 
representation of space understood to be required for both spatial navigation and episodic 
memory1,3,4. Yet despite extensive study of place cells, it remains an open question whether 
place firing reliably persists in the absence of movement, and, if so, whether distinct 
hippocampal neurons and network mechanisms are engaged. This matter is of fundamental 
importance since immobility punctuates spatial exploration5,6 and features in a range of 
behaviors dependent on the hippocampus1,7,8, including contextual fear conditioning9 and 
trace conditioning10.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to K.K. (kenneth.kay@ucsf.edu) or L.M.F. (loren@phy.ucsf.edu). 
Author Contributions K.K. and L.M.F. conceived the study. K.K., M.S., J.E.C., M.P.K., and M.C.L., conducted the experiments. 
K.K. analyzed the data. K.K. and L.M.F. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 March 10; 531(7593): 185–190. doi:10.1038/nature17144.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Previous work focusing on hippocampal neural activity during immobility has identified 
firing related to past and even upcoming experience11-15. Most striking is the observation 
that place cells during immobility often re-activate in brief bouts at locations outside of their 
spatial receptive fields. These brief re-activations occur in conjunction with hippocampal 
sharp wave-ripples (SWRs)16,17, massively synchronous network events lasting ∼100 ms 
and reflecting high firing rates and strong excitatory drive in hippocampal subregions 
CA11,16-19, CA317-20, and DG20. Recent work indicates that place cell firing during SWRs 
frequently represents spatial sequences remote from the animal's current position14,17,21-23, 
further raising the question of whether and how the hippocampus sustains a representation of 
current position during immobility.
A distinct neuron population at CA2
We recorded neural activity in hippocampal subregions CA1, CA2, CA3, and DG (Fig. 1a) 
in rats engaged in a hippocampus-dependent spatial memory task21,25, with interleaved rest 
sessions in an enclosed box. In the task, subjects were trained to alternate between each of 
three locations (reward wells) in a W-shaped maze (Extended Data Fig. 1a). In examining 
single neuron (unit) activity, we observed principal units (Fig. 1b) that fired at continuously 
high rates during immobility (Extended Data Fig. 2a). This basic observation led us to 
investigate hippocampal activity in this behavioral state.
We first found that, although SWRs were prominent during immobility, SWR periods 
comprised only a small proportion of time spent immobile (<10%, Extended Data Fig. 2b), 
suggesting that SWRs could not account for the observed continuous firing. Next, in 
examining unit firing at the time of SWRs, we were struck by putative principal units 
recorded in CA2 that consistently decreased firing during both task and rest SWRs, in 
contrast to CA1 and CA3 principal units, which increased firing (Fig. 1c, d). Indeed virtually 
all CA1 and CA3 principal units fired more during SWRs (permutation tests at p < 0.05, 
CA1: 478 out of 489 units, CA3: 271 out of 276 units), while a substantial proportion of 
putative principal units recorded at CA2 sites were either inhibited or showed no change in 
firing rate during SWRs, despite otherwise firing hundreds to thousands of spikes during 
single task epochs (84 out of 226 CA2 site units, with 56 of 84 significantly inhibited during 
SWRs; Fig. 1e, Extended Data Fig. 3). We termed these atypical units at CA2 sites “N” units 
(non-positively modulated by SWRs) to distinguish them from conventionally responding 
“P” units (positively modulated).
N units fire more during immobility
We next examined the relationship of N unit firing to ongoing behavior. We found that N 
units fired mainly at low movement speeds and during immobility (Fig. 2a). To characterize 
this relationship, we first evaluated the correlation between unit firing rate and speed (Fig. 
2b). The CA1 and CA3 unit populations both showed overall positive correlation, consistent 
with previous reports26-28 (Pearson r, firing rate vs. log speed; mean ± s.d.; CA1: 0.11 
± 0.10, CA1 vs. 0, p < 10-58, signed-rank; CA3: 0.06 ± 0.11, CA3 vs. 0, p < 10-14, signed-
rank). Remarkably, the CA2 N and CA2 P unit populations showed dramatically different 
distributions: P units were positively correlated while N units were almost exclusively 
Kay et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 negatively correlated (mean ± s.d.; CA2 P: 0.10 ± 0.13, CA2 P vs. 0, p < 10-11, signed-rank; 
CA2 N: -0.10 ± 0.09, CA2 N vs. 0, p < 10-10, signed-rank; CA2 N vs. CA2 P, p < 10-19, 
rank-sum). N units also fired at higher rates than all other unit populations during 
immobility (Fig. 2c). These findings indicated a fundamental distinction between N units 
and classic hippocampal place cells.
N units signal location during immobility
We next assessed whether N units showed spatial firing. We found that N units showed less 
spatial coverage than the other unit populations (Fig. 3a, b, Extended Data Fig. 4). In 
contrast, CA2 P units typically showed large spatial fields, consistent with recent 
reports29-31.
In conjunction with low spatial coverage, N unit firing maps showed concentrated firing at 
locations where subjects were immobile (Fig. 3a, Extended Data Fig. 4c). To quantify 
possible spatial specificity in firing during immobility, we focused on firing at the maze 
reward wells since immobility at these locations was common across all subjects. Our 
analysis revealed that individual N units characteristically fired at specific single reward 
wells while remaining silent at the others (Fig. 3c, d, Extended Data Fig. 5a). Importantly, 
the location of N unit firing did not require direct association with reward since spatially 
specific firing was also observed at other maze locations (Extended Data Fig. 5b-d; seen 
previously in Fig. 2a, Fig. 3a, Extended Data Fig. 4c). These findings indicate that N unit 
firing constitutes a precise neural code for location during immobility.
A signature of spatial coding during immobility
We were struck by the fact that the firing pattern of N units was not only unorthodox (Fig. 1) 
but also had unambiguous behavioral (Fig. 2) and representational (Fig. 3) correlates. We 
hypothesized that this distinctive firing was the result of an unidentified input pattern in the 
hippocampus. To evaluate this possibility, we calculated CA2 site (N and P) unit spike-
triggered averages (STAs) of hippocampal local field potential (LFP)18, analyzing locomotor 
and immobility periods separately (Fig. 4a).
In contrast to STAs from locomotor periods (characterized by the expected ∼8 Hz theta 
frequency modulation18,32, Extended Data Fig. 6), STAs from non-SWR immobility periods 
(Fig. 4b, c, Extended Data Fig. 7a) showed that N units fired at the time of a positive 
transient LFP pattern lasting ∼200 ms. The pattern was smallest on the parent electrode in 
CA2, larger in CA3, and largest at DG, suggesting broad engagement of the hippocampal 
circuit. Furthermore, unlike N units, P units showed a mean STA characterized by a negative 
transient similar to the canonical sharp wave transient of SWRs33 (Fig. 4b, c).
Power spectral analysis (Fig. 4d) further specified the contrasting LFP patterns. The power 
spectral density (PSD) of CA2 N and P unit immobility STAs and of SWR sharp waves 
showed fundamental frequencies <5 Hz, a bandwidth distinct to that of theta18,32 (5-11 Hz). 
In agreement, STAs of LFP filtered at 1-4 Hz showed the same pattern of transients as in the 
wide-band STAs (Extended Data Fig. 7a), indicating that filtering at 1-4 Hz effectively 
isolates the large-amplitude transients associated with CA2 N units, CA2 P units, and 
Kay et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SWRs. Importantly, the N unit STA pattern exceeded 0 mV (Extended Data Fig. 7b, c), in 
fundamental contrast to SWR sharp waves33, which manifested as negative transients. Thus 
N units fired in association with an LFP pattern distinct from canonical hippocampal LFP 
patterns1,17,18 (theta and SWRs). We termed this pattern “N wave” (N unit-identified wave), 
a ∼200 ms LFP transient with positive polarity at hippocampal recording sites (specifically 
CA2, CA3, and DG principal cell layers) at which SWR sharp waves are negative.
We then asked whether neurons outside of CA2 were also N wave-coupled. We identified N 
wave-coupled units in CA1, CA3, and DG (Fig. 4e-i, Extended Data Figs. 7d-g, 8, 9), 
indicating that the N wave reflects a hippocampus-wide network pattern. Critically, a distinct 
subset of principal units was N wave-coupled (CA1: 50 units, CA3: 34 units, Fig. 4g-i, 
Extended Data Figs. 8, 9). As with CA2 N units, these units fired more during immobility 
than during movement (Extended Data Fig. 8b) and showed unequivocal location-specific 
firing during immobility (Fig. 4g, i and Extended Data Figs. 8d, e, 9), thereby linking the N 
wave network pattern to spatial coding during immobility across the hippocampus.
Hippocampal spatial coding in sleep
Does spatial coding during immobility also occur under quiescent behavioral conditions? 
Intriguingly, past work has shown that, during slow-wave sleep, ∼5% of CA1 place cells 
continuously fire during episodes in which hippocampal neural activity becomes highly 
desynchronized, reflected by low-amplitude LFP34. In this sleep state, termed small-
irregular activity (SIA)1,34,35, CA1 place cells were found to signal the location where the 
subject fell asleep (nesting position)34. Recent findings show that CA2 neurons send strong 
excitatory input to CA136-38, raising the possibility that coding of nesting position is staged 
upstream in CA2.
To test this possibility, we evaluated hippocampal neural activity during rest sessions. First, 
during sleep, we observed periods of high-amplitude LFP, corresponding to a hippocampal 
sleep state dominated by SWRs (termed LIA1,18,34,35), frequently interrupted by periods of 
low-amplitude LFP in which the subject did not rouse, which we identified as periods of SIA 
(Fig. 5a). Next, in examining unit firing during sleep, we observed striking instances in 
which N units fired preferentially during SIA periods, falling silent during LIA (Fig. 5b). 
Analogously to awake immobility in the task (Fig. 2c), the N unit population fired at higher 
rates than all other unit populations during SIA (green, Fig. 5c) and also during awake 
immobility in the rest environment (dark grey, Fig. 5c). However, unlike the task condition, 
there was no significant overall correlation between firing rate and speed for N units during 
awake periods in the rest environment (Extended Data Fig. 10a), indicating that properties of 
the task maze or the cognitive demands of the task have essential roles in regulating N unit 
firing.
We then asked whether N units represented locations in the rest environment. We found that 
N units showed spatially specific firing during awake periods (Fig. 5d, Extended Data Fig. 
10b) that persisted in awake immobility periods (Extended Data Fig. 10c-i) and furthermore 
into SIA: specifically, the CA1 and N unit populations met dual criteria for nesting position 
coding during SIA, while the CA3 population unexpectedly failed both criteria (criteria in 
Kay et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Supplemental Methods; Fig. 5e, f, Extended Data Fig. 10j-l). In addition, during awake 
immobility in the rest environment, the N unit population showed a dominant coupling to the 
N wave network pattern, suggesting similar or equivalent circuit mechanisms underlying 
spatial firing during immobility in quiescent conditions as spatial firing during immobility in 
the task (Extended Data Fig. 10m).
Discussion
These findings identify a distinct hippocampal network at the anatomical (Fig. 1), behavioral 
(Fig. 2), representational (Fig. 3), and neural circuit (Figs. 1, 4) levels, and also indicate its 
activation in sleep (Fig. 5). In the awake animal, neural firing in this network is marked by a 
distinct hippocampal network pattern (N wave), occurs during immobility in subsets of 
neurons in CA1, CA2, CA3, and DG, and is location-specific, constituting an explicit neural 
code for current position. Thus the classic locomotor hippocampal place code switches, 
during immobility, to an alternative hippocampal neural code that nonetheless maintains 
spatial specificity.
Past observations of a lack of place cell firing in restrained animals have led to the 
suggestion that place firing is driven by input correspondent with an animal's preparedness 
to make limb movements that would displace the animal from its current position, a 
condition termed “motor set”39,40. Moreover, in rodents, hippocampal theta has been 
proposed to be a marker of motor set1,35,41, and thus by inference a marker of hippocampal 
place firing. Here we observe spatial firing dependent on neither theta nor motor set, 
indicating that distinct mechanisms can generate spatial firing and in fact do so 
complementarily.
A neural code for location during awake immobility enables the brain to provide a spatial 
context to events occurring during immobility such as consumption of food, sensory stimuli, 
and deliberation, allowing for the formation of location-specific memories when the animal 
is still. Moreover, we suggest that the various hippocampus-dependent behaviors 
characterized by immobility1,5-10 engage this network, and that activity in this network may 
correspond to activity seen in human42, monkey43, and bat44 hippocampus, where the theta 
network pattern occurs less frequently. Importantly, analysis of firing during immobility has 
not been prominent in traditional approaches to hippocampal spatial coding, in which 
behavioral paradigms eliciting continuous locomotion or post hoc exclusion of immobility 
periods is the norm.
Remarkably, a distinct population of hippocampal neurons located at CA2 (N units) signaled 
location during not only awake immobility but also sleep. An internal representation of 
current location active during sleep could adaptively influence representations reactivated in 
sleep in support of memory consolidation45-47, and, concurrently, could serve to maintain a 
sleeping animal's bearings despite diminished receptivity to sensory stimuli.
Finally, the localization of N units at CA2 suggests that N units correspond to CA2 neurons, 
while CA2 P units correspond to intermingling CA1 and CA3 neurons at the CA2 
anatomical locus. In parallel with the unique firing pattern of N units, CA2 neurons exhibit a 
Kay et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 variety of properties unique among hippocampal neurons, including a unique synaptic 
configuration36-38,48,49. Moreover, a recent study reports suppressed firing in three identified 
CA2 neurons during SWRs50, indicating that N units and CA2 neurons are overlapping 
populations or in fact identical. Recent work also links CA2 neurons to the generation of 
time-dependent spatial representations29, spatial pattern completion30,31, and social 
memory38. These cognitive functions and possibly others may rely on the alternative forms 
of hippocampal neural activity identified here.
Methods
Subjects, neural recordings, and behavioral task
Eight male Long-Evans rats that were 4 to 9 months old (500–600 g) were food deprived to 
85% of their baseline weight and pre-trained to run on a 1-m linear track for liquid reward 
(sweetened evaporated milk). After subjects alternated reliably, they were implanted with 
microdrives containing 14 (two subjects), 21 (three subjects), or 30 (three subjects) 
independently movable four-wire electrodes (tetrodes2,51) targeting dorsal hippocampus (all 
rats) and medial entorhinal cortex (one rat), in accordance with University of California San 
Francisco Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and US National Institutes of 
Health guidelines. The minimum number of subjects was established beforehand as four or 
more, as this is considered to be the minimum necessary to yield data with sufficient 
statistical power to evaluate the type of effects investigated in this study.
In two subjects, right and left dorsal hippocampus were targeted at AP: -3.7 mm, ML: ±3.7 
mm. In one subject, dorsal hippocampus was targeted at AP: -3.6 mm, ML: +2.2 mm, in 
addition to medial entorhinal cortex at AP: -9.1, ML: 5.6, at a 10 degree angle in the sagittal 
plane. Data from these several subjects have been reported in earlier studies5,31-33. In five 
subjects, right dorsal hippocampus was targeted at AP: -3.3 to -4.0 mm, ML: +3.5 to +3.9 
mm, moreover, in two of these subjects, the septal pole of right hippocampus was targeted 
with an additional six tetrodes targeted to AP: -2.3 mm, ML: +1.1 mm. Targeting locations 
were used to position stainless steel cannulae containing 6, 14, 15, or 21 independently 
driveable tetrodes. The cannulae were circular except in four cases targeting dorsal 
hippocampus in which they were elongated into ovals (major axis ∼2.5 mm, minor axis ∼1.5 
mm; two subjects with major axis 45° relative to midline, along the transverse axis of dorsal 
hippocampus; two subjects with major axis 135° relative to midline, along the longitudinal 
axis of dorsal hippocampus). Data exclusively from tetrodes targeting right dorsal 
hippocampus were analyzed in this study.
In five subjects, viral vectors with optogenetic transgenes were targeted to either right dorsal 
CA2 (three subjects, AAV2/5-CaMKII-hChR2(H134R)-EYFP, UNC Vector Core, 135 nl at 
AP: -3.6 mm, ML: +4.2 mm, DV: -4.5 mm), dorsal DG (one subject, AAV2/5-I12B34-ChR2-
GFP, 225 nl at AP: -3.75 mm, ML: +2.2 mm, DV: 3.9 mm and AP: -3.75 mm, ML: +1.8 
mm, DV: -4.5 mm), or right supramammilary nucleus (one subject, AAV2/5-hSyn-ChETA-
EYFP, Penn Vector Core, 135 nl at AP: -4.3 mm, ML: +1.8 mm, and -8.9 mm along a 
trajectory angled at 6° in the coronal plane). Viruses were delivered during the implant 
surgery using a glass micropipette (tip manually cut to ∼25 um diameter) attached to an 
injector (Nanoject, Drummond Scientific). In addition, a driveable optical fiber (62.5/125 
Kay et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 μm core/cladding) was integrated in the tetrode microdrive assembly to enable light delivery 
to hippocampus. This fiber was advanced to its final depth (2.5-3 mm) within 7 days of 
implantation. Data reported in this study were collected prior to light stimulation. No overt 
differences in neural activity were observed in subjects that received virus. In particular, 
CA2 recording sites reporting heterogeneous unit populations (Extended Data Fig. 3c) were 
found in subjects either receiving or free of viral vectors.
Over the course of two weeks following implantation, the tetrodes were advanced to the 
principal cell layers of CA1 (all subjects), CA2 (5 subjects), CA3 (all subjects), and DG (3 
subjects). For DG, tetrodes were advanced to the cell layer using a previously described 
protocol in which the tetrodes were slowly advanced within DG (∼10 μm increments) and 
unit activity monitored over long periods of rest52. DG cell layer was identified by the 
presence of highly sparsely firing putative principal units. In several subjects, tetrodes were 
also left in cortex overlying dorsal hippocampus. Neural signals were recorded relative to a 
reference (REF) tetrode positioned in corpus callosum above right dorsal hippocampus. The 
REF tetrode reported voltage relative to a ground screw installed in skull overlying 
cerebellum, and local field potential (LFP) from this tetrode was also recorded. All tetrode 
final locations were histologically verified (see below).
After 5-7 days of recovery after surgery, subjects were once again food deprived to 85% of 
their baseline weight, and again pre-trained to run on a linear track for liquid reward. At ∼14 
days after surgery, six subjects were then introduced to one task W-maze (Extended Data 
Fig. 1a) and recorded for 3 to 6 days before being introduced to a second task W-maze, 
located in a separate part of the recording room and rotated 90°° relative to the first. On 
recording days in which the second task W-maze was used, recordings were also conducted 
in the first task W-maze. In two subjects, recordings were conducted in both task W-mazes 
on every recording day. The W-mazes were 76 × 76 cm with 7-cm-wide track sections. The 
two task W-mazes were separated by an opaque barrier.
In each W-maze, subjects were rewarded for performing a hippocampus-dependent 
continuous alternation task5,13,36 (Extended Data Fig. 1a). Liquid reward (sweetened 
evaporated milk) was dispensed via plastic tubing connected to a hole at the bottom of each 
of the three reward wells (wells A, B, and C), miniature bowls 3 cm in diameter. In three 
subjects, reward was dispensed via syringes operated manually by an experimenter who was 
located in a separate part of the recording room. In five subjects, entry of subjects' head into 
reward well was sensed by an infrared beam break circuit attached to the well, and reward 
was automatically delivered by syringe pumps (OEM syringe pumps, Braintree Scientific) 
either immediately or after an imposed delay lasting from 0.5 to 2 s. In these subjects, digital 
time stamps corresponding to well entry and reward delivery were recorded and used for 
illustration in Fig. 3c, but were otherwise not used in determining entry times or occupancy 
of the subjects at the wells for consistency among all subjects. Task epochs lasting 15 
minutes were preceded and followed by rest epochs lasting ∼20 minutes in a high-walled 
black box (floor edges 25-35 cm and height 50 cm), during which rats often groomed, 
quietly waited, and slept. Two subjects also ran in an open field environment for scattered 
food (grated cheese) after W-maze recordings, with additional interleaved rest epochs. 
Tetrode positions were adjusted after each day's recordings.
Kay et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Data were collected using the NSpike data acquisition system (L.M.F. and J. MacArthur, 
Harvard Instrumentation Design Laboratory). During recording, an infrared diode array with 
a large and a small cluster of diodes was affixed to headstage preamps to enable tracking of 
head position and head direction. Following recording, position and direction were 
reconstructed using a semi-automated analysis of digital video (30 Hz) of the experiment. 
Spike data were recorded relative to the REF tetrode, sampled at 30 kHz, digitally filtered 
between 600 Hz and 6 kHz (2-pole Bessel for high- and low-pass), and threshold crossing 
events were saved to disk. Local field potentials (LFPs) were sampled at 1.5 kHz and 
digitally filtered between 0.5 Hz and 400 Hz. LFPs analyzed were relative to the REF 
tetrode except where otherwise indicated.
Individual units (putative single neurons) were identified by clustering spikes using peak 
amplitude, principal components, and spike width as variables (MatClust, M.P.K.). Only 
well-isolated neurons with stable spike waveform amplitudes were clustered. A single set of 
cluster bounds defined in amplitude and width space could often isolate units across an 
entire recording session. In cases where there was a shift in amplitudes across time, units 
were clustered only when that shift was coherent across multiple clusters and when plots of 
amplitude versus time showed a smooth shift. No units were clustered in which part of the 
cluster was cut off at spike threshold.
Histology and recording site assignment
After recordings, subjects were anesthetized with isoflurane, electrolytically lesioned at each 
tetrode (30 μA of positive current for 3 s applied to two channels of each tetrode), and 
allowed to recover overnight. In one subject, no electrolytic lesions were made, and tetrode 
tracks rather than lesions were used to identify recording sites. Subjects were euthanized 
with pentobarbital and were perfused intracardially with PBS followed by 4% 
paraformaldehyde in PBS. The brain was post-fixed in situ overnight, after which the 
tetrodes were retracted and the brain removed, cryo-protected (30% sucrose in PBS), and 
embedded in OCT compound. Coronal (7 subjects) and sagittal (1 subject) sections (50 μm) 
were taken with a cryostat. Sections were either Nissl-stained with cresyl violet or stained 
with the fluorescent Nissl reagent NeuroTrace Blue (1:200) (Life Technologies, N-21479). 
In four subjects, the sections were blocked (5% donkey serum in 0.3% Triton-X in TBS, 
used for all incubations) for 1 hr, incubated with RGS1424,37 antibody (1:400) (Antibodies 
Inc., 75-140) overnight, washed, and subsequently incubated with fluorescent secondary 
antibody (1:400) (Alexa 568, Life Technologies). CA2 recording sites were designated as 
those in which the electrolytic lesion or end of tetrode track overlapped with the dispersed 
cytoarchitectural zone characteristic of CA224,29-31,53-56. This strategy was deliberately 
inclusive to maximize detection of putative CA2 neurons with novel physiological responses 
(N units, Fig. 1, Extended Data Fig. 3). It is important to note that CA2 sites defined in this 
way include recording locations that have been designated in previous studies as “CA3a.”
Data Analysis
All analyses were carried out using custom software written in Matlab (Mathworks).
Kay et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SWR detection
Detection of SWRs was prerequisite for all data analyzed in this study, and was performed 
only when at least three CA1 cell layer recordings were available. Offline, a multisite 
average approach was used to detect SWRs57. Specifically, LFPs from all available CA1 cell 
layer tetrodes were filtered between 150–250 Hz, then squared and summed across tetrodes. 
This sum was smoothed with a Gaussian kernel (σ = 4 ms) and the square root of the 
smoothed sum was analyzed. SWRs were detected when the signal exceeded 2 s.d. of the 
recording epoch mean for at least 15 ms. SWR periods were then defined as the periods, 
containing the times of threshold crossing, in which the power trace exceeded the mean. 
SWR onset was defined as the start of a SWR period. Detection of SWRs was performed 
only when subjects' head speed was <4 cm/s. For SWR-triggered spike raster plots and 
PSTH plots, a 0.5 s exclusion period was imposed to isolate SWRs occurring only after non-
SWR periods; otherwise, analyses of SWRs included all detected SWRs.
Unit inclusion
Two unit sets were analyzed in this study. In the first (task unit set), units included fired at 
least 100 spikes outside of SWRs in at least one task epoch. In the second set (rest unit set), 
units included fired at least 100 spikes outside of SWRs in at least one rest epoch, moreover 
specifically in awake periods (see below). The rest unit set was established to evaluate 
spatial representations and network patterns in the rest environment. For both unit sets, all 
included units were required to have available data for least 300 (typically >1000) 
concurrently detected SWRs in either task or rest epochs. Since relatively less is understood 
about hippocampal neurons in CA2, units recorded at CA2 in the rest unit set were included 
in the study only if they met the task unit set criterion to ensure that neurons engaged during 
active behavior were evaluated. All unit population findings in this study refer to the task 
unit set, with the exception of those presented in Fig. 5f and Extended Data Fig. 10, which 
refer to the rest unit set.
Principal vs. interneuronal unit classification
For each unit set, scatter plots of firing rate, spike width, and autocorrelation function mean 
(calculated from 0 to 40 ms; low values indicating burst firing) showed two distinct 
clusters18,32,58-61 (example plot of task unit set in Fig. 1c). Putative principal units 
corresponded with the low firing rate (<4 Hz), large spike width, low autocorrelation mean 
cluster, while putative interneuronal units corresponded to the cluster characterized by high 
firing rate, small spike width, and high autocorrelation mean. Twenty-one units with 
ambiguous features were left unclassified. All units in the study were isolated (clustered) 
and classified prior to STA analysis.
N vs. P unit classification
Periods when head speed was <4 cm/s were segregated into SWR vs. non-SWR periods, and 
the change in firing rate during SWRs calculated. The period types were then permuted (N = 
1000) to obtain a distribution of firing rate differences given the null hypothesis of no 
association of firing rate with period type. P units were those units showing a difference in 
firing rate that was >95% of values from the null distribution, either for SWRs of any single 
Kay et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 task epoch or for rest epoch SWRs. N units were those that showed a failure of significance 
for SWRs in every task epoch and also for rest epoch SWRs. This approach minimized false 
positives in the detection of N units. Negatively modulated (inhibited) units were formally 
identified as a subset of N units (examples in Fig. 1c, d and additional observations in 
Extended Data Fig. 3b) showing a firing rate difference during SWRs that was <95% of the 
values from the null hypothesis distribution for rest epoch SWRs and also for SWRs of at 
least one task epoch.
A small number of CA1 principal units (11 out of 504) and CA3 principal units (7 out of 
289) were classified as N units (N vs. P proportions for the task unit set shown in Fig. 1e); 
these units were excluded from all analyses. After exclusion of N units for CA1 and CA3, 
total putative principal unit counts in the task unit set were CA1: 478, CA3: 271, CA2 P: 
142, CA2 N: 84; in the rest unit set, CA1: 163, CA3: 76, CA2 P: 76, CA2 N: 68. “N units” 
and “P units” solely refer to the distinct unit populations recorded at CA2 sites, and are 
equivalent to “CA2 N” and “CA2 P.”
Behavioral state
Periods of locomotion were defined as times when head speed was >4 cm/s. Periods of non-
SWR immobility were times when head speed was <4 cm/s separated from locomotor 
periods by 2 s buffer intervals (preceding and following) and excluding SWR periods. Thus 
brief interruptions in locomotion did not qualify as formally detected periods of immobility.
Firing rate estimation
For each unit, instantaneous firing rate (IFR) was estimated by convolving the unit's spike 
train (1-ms bins) with a Gaussian kernel (σ = 250 ms). Mean firing rates in the task (Fig. 2c, 
Extended Data Fig. 8b) were calculated from the task epoch in which the unit had the 
highest mean firing rate combined with additional task epochs of the same environment 
(specific W-maze) when available. Mean firing rates in the rest environment (Fig. 5c) were 
calculated from all available rest epochs, and were only calculated for units for which LIA 
and SIA sleep data were available. Firing rates during SWRs were calculated for SWR 
periods in either task epochs (Fig. 2c, Extended Data Fig. 8b) or rest epochs (Fig. 5c).
Firing vs. speed correlation
For each unit, the Pearson correlation coefficient (r) was calculated between IFR and the 
logarithm of head speed28,62,63 for non-SWR periods. The correlation was calculated from 
the task epoch in which the unit had the highest mean firing rate combined with additional 
task epochs of the same W-maze when available. Only units with significant correlations (p 
< 0.05) were analyzed (CA1: 475/477 units, CA2 P: 141/142 units, CA2 N: 83/84 units, 
CA3: 270/271 units). It is worth noting that the findings relating CA2 N unit firing to speed 
in the task condition (Fig. 2) are not a direct consequence of the N unit classification criteria, 
which refer strictly to a lack of increased firing during SWRs.
Spatial firing
To quantify spatial coverage, 2D position data (corresponding to subjects' head location) for 
all subjects was first converted to linear position. Linear position was measured as the 
Kay et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 distance from the center reward well along the linear arms of the W-shaped task maze. In 
addition, all linear positions were classified as belonging to one of four possible trajectories 
of the behavioral task, namely, outbound and inbound trajectories between the center well 
and each of the two outer wells (diagrammed in Extended Data Fig. 1a). The end of each 
continuous trajectory assignment period corresponded to the separation of the subject's 
linear position from that of the target well of the given trajectory (>2 cm from well).
No trajectory assignment was performed for periods of data corresponding to three cases: (1) 
excursions in which in the subject departed and returned to the same well, (2) excursions in 
which the subject occupied a maze segment that was not part of the three linear segments 
defining the animal's current trajectory, and (3) times during which the subject's linearized 
head direction (either forward or backward along the current maze segment) did not match 
the defined direction of the animal's current trajectory. These unassigned periods represented 
a minority proportion of the data (33% across all task sessions) and were not included either 
in spatial plots referencing trajectory (occupancy-normalized firing maps in Extended Data 
Fig. 4b) or in subsequent spatial coverage analysis, which relied on unambiguous trajectory 
assignment in accordance with known direction- and trajectory-dependence of hippocampal 
spatial firing26,64-66. Less stringent restriction of positional data produced qualitatively 
equivalent results.
For each unit, an occupancy-normalized firing map was calculated for each of the four task 
trajectories. First, total spike counts and occupancy durations were calculated for 2-cm 
spatial bins on each trajectory. Both the occupancy and spike counts per bin were smoothed 
with a Gaussian (σ = 4 cm), then spike counts were divided by occupancy to produce the 
unit's smoothed occupancy-normalized firing map. The peak spatial firing rate was the 
maximum value in the occupancy-normalized map. A bin counted toward spatial coverage 
(Fig. 3b) if its occupancy-normalized rate was >2 Hz. Spatial coverage was quantified in 
each unit's highest mean firing rate task epoch. Seven units (CA1: 2 units, CA2 N: 5 units) 
were not included in spatial coverage quantification because of a failure of subjects to visit 
one of the maze arms in the units' highest firing rate task epochs. Quantification using 
additional velocity cutoffs and spatial firing thresholds are shown in Extended Data Fig. 4a.
Two-dimensional occupancy-normalized firing maps were constructed with 1-cm (W-maze) 
or 0.5-cm (rest environment) square bins. For example plots, these maps were smoothed 
with a symmetric 2D Gaussian (σ = 3 cm for maze; σ = 1.5 cm for rest environment); for 
nesting position analyses in the rest environment, no smoothing was performed. Data during 
SWR periods were excluded from all spatial firing plots and analyses.
Well firing
Well periods were defined as times when the subject's linear position matched that of the 
reward well (<2 cm separation). Well visits were defined as well periods that lasted at least 2 
s and were preceded earlier in the recording epoch by a well period at a different well. In 
instances in which subjects re-visited the well they departed from before visiting another 
well, a well visit was only registered after an exclusion period of 5 s. Well entry times 
(designated t = 0 in well raster plots) were defined as the beginning of well visits.
Kay et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To calculate the well specificity index (WSI) of a unit, the well firing rate at each of the 
three wells of the task was first determined. Well firing rate was specifically calculated from 
the intersection of well periods with non-SWR immobility periods (well intersectional time). 
Next, each of the three well firing rates was divided by the numerical sum of the three well 
firing rates (normalization) to create a three-category (well A vs. B vs. C) probability 
distribution of firing activity. This probability distribution was subsequently treated as a 
circular distribution with a vector whose length corresponded to the probability mass for 
well A placed at 0°, a vector for well B at 120°, and a vector for well C at 240°. The 
magnitude of the vector sum (resultant), defined as the WSI, was used as a measure of well-
specific firing. The WSI directly reflects specificity of firing: a WSI = 0 corresponds to 
equal firing at all three wells (completely non-specific), WSI = 0.5 corresponds to firing at 
two wells, and WSI = 1 corresponds to firing at one well.
The WSI was calculated in a unit's highest mean firing task epoch, and was only calculated 
when (i) at least 100 spikes were observed during well intersectional time, (ii) at least 5 s of 
well intersectional time was available for each of the three wells, (iii) the firing rate (during 
well intersectional time) for at least one well exceeded 0.5 Hz. These minimum activity 
criteria ensured that the WSI was calculated only for units that were unequivocally active at 
wells and for which adequate data at each well were available.
Theta analysis
To estimate theta phase, LFP from the REF tetrode (located in corpus callosum overlying 
right dorsal hippocampus67) was filtered at 5-11 Hz. The phase of the Hilbert transform of 
the filtered REF LFP was then designated as the theta phase32,67. For a given unit, theta 
phase locking analysis was performed for locomotor periods (>4 cm/s) in task epochs, and 
moreover only when at least 50 spikes where present in these periods.
Spike- and SWR-triggered averaging of LFP (STA and RTA)
Spike-triggered averages of LFP (STAs) were calculated for spiking in task epochs, 
moreover specifically for distinct two period types: locomotion and non-SWR immobility. 
For a given unit, STAs were calculated only when at least 100 spikes in the period type were 
observed. In each subject, the recording electrodes for each of four LFP reference regions 
(REF and CA2, CA3, and DG when available) were kept constant over all recording days. 
Each LFP recording site either reported principal units for its correspondent region (if CA2, 
CA3, DG) or was within 60 μm of the depth range at which principal units were detected, as 
determined from records of tetrode adjustment depths. In cases where the LFP reference 
region was the same as the region in which the unit was located, the parent electrode of the 
unit was chosen as the LFP reference.
For each unit for which an STA was calculated, a matched SWR-triggered average of LFP 
(RTA) was calculated, using the same LFP reference site and averaging across all SWRs 
detected in the same task recording epochs as the unit. RTAs were calculated by averaging 
LFP aligned to the time of peak power (designated t = 0) in the multisite ripple band power 
(power at 150-250 Hz across CA1 sites, see above) for each SWR.
Kay et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To evaluate the spectral components of the STAs and RTAs, the power spectral density 
(PSD) of individual unit STAs and RTAs (2-sec LFP traces) was calculated using Welch's 
method (pwelch, Matlab Signal Processing Toolbox). Spectral analysis is shown for STAs/
RTAs of LFP recorded in DG (Fig. 4d), as DG LFP showed the largest amplitude low-
frequency signals.
N wave firing
To detect unit firing in association with the N wave, unit STAs were analyzed. Specifically, 
unit STAs were classified into distinct groups using the following procedure. First, non-
SWR immobility STAs and RTAs were calculated from LFP filtered at 1-4 Hz. Since the N 
wave as originally identified (Fig. 4c) was largest at DG, then CA3, and then CA2, the STAs 
were calculated for LFP at DG sites when available, then at CA3 when available, then at 
CA2. Furthermore, for an LFP recording site to be used to calculate classifiable STAs, the 
RTA at that site had to be significantly negative at t = 0 (p < 0.001 level, signed-rank). In a 
small number of cases in which this condition was not satisfied, LFP from the next available 
region, if available, was used. Thus SWR sharp waves were verified to manifest as negative 
deflections at recording sites used to calculate STAs.
A unit STA was classified in two specific cases: (1) when the STA at the time of spiking (t = 
0) was positive and the nearest local extremum was a maximum (peak), and (2) when the 
STA at the time of spiking was negative and nearest local extremum was a minimum 
(trough). A small number of units showing positive troughs or negative peaks were left 
unclassified (CA1: 10 out of 146 units, CA2 N units: 1 out of 58 units, CA3: 3 out of 137 
units, interneurons: 10 out of 63 units, plotted at bottom in Extended Data Figs. 7b, 7d, 8a). 
Units satisfying (1) and (2) are referred to as “positive STA” and “negative STA” unit 
populations, respectively. Units satisfying (1) were identified as firing in association with the 
N wave (N wave-coupled).
Sleep state identification
In rest epochs, awake periods were identified as times in which head speed was >4 cm/s in 
addition to times <4 cm/s within 7 s of a previous movement >4 cm/s. Thus, given the 
behavioral state criteria (see above), for each distinct period in which a subject stopped 
moving, no more than 5 seconds were included as awake immobility.
Candidate sleep periods were identified as times <4 cm/s preceded by 60 s with no 
movement >4 cm/s. REM periods within candidate sleep times were identified following an 
established procedure68. Specifically, the ratio of Hilbert amplitudes (smoothed with a 
Gaussian kernel, σ = 1 s) of theta (5-11 Hz) to delta (1-4 Hz) filtered LFP was calculated for 
all available CA1 tetrodes (referenced to cerebellar ground), and the mean taken over 
tetrodes. For each rest epoch, a threshold (range: 1.2-1.8) was manually set to capture 
sustained periods (10 s minimum duration) in which the theta:delta ratio was elevated. LFP 
and position data from each detected REM period were visually inspected.
For a given day's set of candidate sleep times outside of REM periods, LFP from each 
available CA1, CA3, and DG recording site was squared then smoothed with a Gaussian 
kernel (σ = 300 ms). The square root of the smoothed signal was then z-scored and summed 
Kay et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 across sites. The sum trace was in turn z-scored to obtain an aggregate hippocampal LFP 
amplitude. For each rest epoch, the distribution of aggregate LFP amplitudes was plotted 
(example trace and distribution in Fig. 5a). From a rest epoch in which bimodality was 
observed, the value at the local minimum separating the two modes was chosen as the SIA z-
score threshold for the day. SIA periods were defined as non-REM times in which the 
aggregate LFP amplitude was below the threshold, and LIA otherwise. In a minority of 
cases, a threshold was chosen to isolate a heavy left tail of the distribution, later verified in 
the LFP to correspond to SIA periods. SIA thresholds across all recording days (n = 73 days) 
were -0.67 ± 0.24 (z-score, mean ± s.d.), and median period durations were SIA: 1.20 s; 
LIA: 2.48 s; REM: 27 s. Visual inspection of LFPs confirmed that SIA periods could often 
be ∼1 s in duration34, indicating rapid switching between distinct sleep states (Fig. 5a, b). 
Also, as previously reported34, slight movements without overt awaking could at times 
observed during SIA (Fig. 5b). Lastly, though SWRs in sleep typically occurred during LIA, 
SWRs at times occurred within identified SIA periods34. Thus, to isolate SIA periods 
optimally, SWR periods were not included in calculations referencing SIA periods.
Sleep periods were candidate sleep periods at least 90 s in duration and containing extended 
(>5 s) continuous LIA periods. Across all recording days, 465 sleep periods (median 
duration: 218 s) were identified.
Nesting position coding
Unit firing rates during SIA were calculated for individual sleep periods. Sleep periods in 
which a unit's SIA firing rate was >2 Hz were categorized as SIA ON for the unit, and SIA 
OFF otherwise. Next, the 2D spatial firing map (non-smoothed, see above) for the unit from 
awake periods in the same ∼20-minute rest epoch was referenced. During awake periods, the 
total number of spikes and total time spent at positions >5 cm from the subject's head 
position at the beginning of the sleep period (nesting position) were categorized as Nest 
OUT, and likewise Nest IN for positions <5 cm. If there were additional sleep periods of a 
given type (SIA ON or SIA OFF) available for a unit, then the spike counts and durations 
spent were summed within the Nest OUT/IN categories for the respective nesting positions 
of the additional sleep periods. Firing rate for a given category (e.g. SIA ON, Nest OUT) 
was calculated as the total number of spikes divided by the total time.
A unit coding for nesting position is expected to show two firing patterns (dual criteria): if 
classified as SIA ON in a given sleep period, the unit is expected to show higher firing rates, 
during awake periods, at positions nearer to the nesting position (Nest IN, <5 cm) 
corresponding to the sleep period; conversely, if classified as SIA OFF in a given sleep 
period, the unit is expected to show higher firing rates, during awake periods, at positions 
farther from the nesting position (Nest OUT, >5 cm) corresponding to the sleep period.
Unit populations were tested for nesting position coding with two approaches. In the first, 
absolute firing rates were compared between Nest IN vs. OUT periods for both SIA ON and 
SIA OFF groups34 (Extended Data Fig. 10j). In the second (Fig. 5f), firing rates in the Nest 
IN vs. Nest OUT conditions were compared for each unit by calculating a measure termed 
the nesting position specificity index, calculated as 2 * frIN / (frIN + frOUT) – 1. Using this 
Kay et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 measure, a firing rate in Nest IN that is twice as high as in Nest OUT yields a value of 1/3; 
three times as high yields a value of 1/2.
For either the absolute firing rate or the specificity index approach, the dual criteria for 
nesting position coding in a unit population were (1) higher firing during Nest IN vs. Nest 
OUT for the SIA ON group and (2) higher firing during Nest OUT vs. Nest IN for the SIA 
OFF group.
Statistics
All statistical tests were two-sided. No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample 
size.
Code availability
All custom-written code is available upon request.
Kay et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Behavioral task and hippocampal recording sites
a, Continuous spatial alternation task21,25,64,69. The task environment is a W-shaped maze 
with a center arm and two outer arms. Reward (∼0.3 mL of sweetened evaporated milk) is 
dispensed through 3-cm diameter wells (designated “A,” “B,” and “C” for reference in data 
plots), located at the end of each arm. Rats are rewarded for performing the trajectory 
sequence shown, in which the correct destination after visiting the center well is the less 
Kay et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recently visited outer well. All subjects stopped locomoting upon reaching the reward wells 
to check for (by licking) and consume reward. Subjects also stopped intermittently 
elsewhere on the track (most frequently at maze junctions), particularly in earlier exposures 
to the task. b, c, Example hippocampal histological sections showing tetrode tracks and 
electrolytic lesions in CA1, CA2, CA3, and DG. Nissl-stained sections show neuronal cell 
bodies in dark blue, while sections stained with Neurotrace show neuronal cell bodies in 
light grey. Panel b shows example sections with sites overlapping with the CA2 
cytoarchitectural locus24,29-31,37,53-56 (enclosed by dotted lines; characterized by dispersion 
of the hippocampal cell layer in the region between CA1 and CA3). Filled arrowheads 
indicate sites overlapping with CA2, while empty arrowheads indicate non-CA2 recording 
sites. The CA2 site assignment was deliberately inclusive to maximize detection of units at 
CA2 with novel physiological responses (N units, Fig. 1, Extended Data Fig. 3). Scale bars: 
500 μm. d, Coronal hippocampal section stained with a neuronal cell body marker (light 
grey; NeuroTrace) and CA2 marker (yellow; RGS1437,48,70). Bottom, magnified view of a 
track left by a CA2 site tetrode. Scale bars: 500 μm. e, Survey of recording sites included in 
the study data set. Left, diagram of recording site locations in a representative hippocampal 
section. Shown are recording sites (circles) of seven subjects from which coronal 
hippocampal sections were taken (CA1: 41 sites, CA2: 9 sites, CA3: 30 sites, DG: 7 sites; 
two additional CA2 sites near the septal pole of hippocampus not shown). Dotted lines 
enclose the CA2 anatomical locus, with overlapping recording sites shown as filled circles. 
The majority of CA1 recordings were in CA1c, while the majority of CA3 recordings were 
in CA3b.
Kay et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 2. Observation of firing during immobility
a, Non-SWR immobility firing in three example principal units recorded in CA1, CA2, and 
CA3. Each firing raster is shown as vertical lines overlaid on a plot of the subject's head 
speed (grey trace). Top traces: wide-band LFP (0.5-400 Hz, scale bar: 800 μV) and ripple-
band LFP (150-250 Hz, scale bar: 100 μV) traces from a simultaneous recording in CA1, to 
show hippocampal network state. SWR periods are plotted as pink zones. Note that 
substantial firing occurs in the absence of (i) locomotion, (ii) detectable SWRs, and (iii) 
detectable theta (regular ∼8 Hz rhythm visible in the LFP during moving periods). b, 
Proportions of time spent in different period types over all task recording epochs (n = 222 
task recording epochs, 8 subjects) in the data set. During the performance of the task, a 
substantial proportion of time was spent at low speeds and immobility, moreover when 
SWRs were not detected. Transitional low speed periods were times when the subject's 
speed was <4 cm/s and within 2 s (earlier or later) of periods of movement >4 cm/s, while 
immobility periods were times when the speed was <4 cm/s but separated more than 2 s 
(earlier or later) from periods of movement >4 cm/s. Note that SWR periods comprised only 
a minority of time spent at low speeds, consistent with past observations17,71,72.
Kay et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. Firing properties of CA1, CA2, and CA3 units
a, Peri-SWR time histograms (PSTHs; SWR onset at t = 0) of firing for all principal units in 
the task unit set. SWRs from both task and rest epochs were used to calculate PSTHs (1-ms 
bins), which were smoothed with a Gaussian kernel (σ = 10 ms). Each unit's mean PSTH 
was then z-scored (color bar) and plotted in a row. Units are sorted by the time of the 
maximum z-scored rate from 0 to +100 ms. b, PSTHs for the four hippocampal unit 
populations (mean ± s.e.m.; # of units: CA1: 478 units; CA3: 271; CA2 P: 142; CA2 N: 84) 
analyzed in this study. Using formal criteria (described in Supplementary Methods), units 
Kay et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that were inhibited during SWRs constituted a majority subset (56 of 84) of N units, and 
were observed in every subject with CA2 site recordings (5 subjects, inhibition apparent in 
examples in Fig. 1d and N unit PSTHs in a). Here, the reduction of firing in these neurons 
manifests in the N unit population response as a dip in firing rate at the time of SWRs (N 
unit population in blue), in contrast to the CA1, CA3, and CA2 P unit populations, all of 
which showed sharp increases in firing during SWRs19. Time bins: 5 ms. c, Proportion of N 
units in CA2 site recordings. Upper plots: spike amplitudes measured on two channels of a 
tetrode for two example CA2 site recordings (left and right). Colors indicate spikes of N 
(blue-based tones) and P (red-based tones) units. The number of well-isolated principal units 
of each type is reported at upper right. Scale bars (x and y): 100 μV. Lower plot: proportion 
of N units across CA2 site recordings with at least four clustered putative principal units. 
CA2 recording sites typically reported N and P units concurrently, indicating that the spiking 
of two distinct hippocampal principal cell types was detectable at a single CA2 recording 
site. d, Unit spike counts in 15-minute task epochs for each principal unit population. The 
counts were taken from each unit's highest mean rate task epoch. Spikes that occurred during 
SWR periods were not included in these counts. e, Mean firing rate for each principal unit 
population (mean ± s.e.m). The mean rates were calculated from the highest rate epoch for 
each unit, either among task (top, TASK) or rest (bottom, REST) epochs. TASK # units (task 
unit set): CA1: 478 units; CA2 P: 142; CA2 N: 84; CA3: 271. REST # units (subset of task 
unit set with available rest epoch data): CA1: 454 units; CA2 P: 142; CA2 N: 84; CA3: 252. 
All spikes and epoch times were included. f, Peak firing rate for each principal unit 
population (mean ± s.e.m). The peak rates were estimated from the highest rate epochs for 
each unit, either among task (top, TASK) or rest (bottom, REST) epochs. The peak rate was 
the maximum instantaneous firing rate (IFR) exhibited by the unit. Here, the IFR was 
estimated by convolving each unit's spike train (1-ms bins) with Gaussian kernels of 
different sizes (x-axis, times refer to s.d. of the kernel). TASK # units (task unit set): CA1: 
478 units; CA2 P: 142; CA2 N: 84; CA3: 271. REST # units (subset of task unit set with 
available rest epoch data and at least 100 spikes in a rest epoch): CA1: 421, CA2 P: 138, 
CA2 N: 82, CA3: 197 units. All spikes and epoch times were included. g, Burst firing in 
each principal unit population. The burst index of a unit was defined as the proportion of 
inter-spike intervals (ISI) less than 6 ms73,74. Burst indices were calculated separately for 
three conditions: locomotion (left panels) and immobility (center) in task epochs, and also 
for rest epochs (right). In a given condition, a minimum of 100 spikes was required for a unit 
to be analyzed. Moreover, for locomotor and immobility periods from task epochs, only ISIs 
of spikes that were successive within single uninterrupted periods of a given type were 
included. Lastly, in this analysis, SWR periods were not excluded. Notably, CA2 N units 
showed high levels of bursting, suggesting that these units correspond to hippocampal 
principal (pyramidal) neurons58,59,61,75-78.
Kay et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. Spatial firing of CA1, CA2, and CA3 units
For the analyses in a and b, unit sample sizes are the same as in Fig. 3b. a, Spatial coverage 
at different speed cutoffs (mean ± s.e.m.), in which only data from periods satisfying the 
speed condition were analyzed. For each speed cutoff, a firing rate threshold of 2 Hz was 
used. The all speeds condition is the same as in Fig. 3b. CA2 P > each other unit population, 
Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA, Tukey's post hoc tests, p = 0.0015 for all speeds, p = 0.0021 for >4 
cm/s, and p < 10-5 for >20 cm/s. CA2 N < each other unit population, Kruskal-Wallis 
ANOVA, Tukey's post hoc tests, p < 10-6 for all speeds, p < 10-7 for >4 cm/s, and p < 10-8 
Kay et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 for >20 cm/s. Asterisks: **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001 or p ≪ 0.001. b, Spatial coverage at 
different firing rate thresholds (mean ± s.e.m.). For each threshold level, spikes at all speeds 
were analyzed. CA2 P > each other unit population, Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA, Tukey's post 
hoc tests, p < 10-5 for >0.5 Hz, p = 0.0015 for >2 Hz, and p = 0.11 for >5 Hz. CA2 N < each 
other unit population, Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA, Tukey's post hoc tests, p < 10-4 for >0.5 Hz, 
p < 10-6 for >2 Hz, and p < 10-7 for >5 Hz. Asterisks: **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001 or p ≪ 
0.001, n.s., not significant at p < 0.05. c, Example spatial firing maps for CA1, CA3, CA2 P, 
and CA2 N units. Each column corresponds to data from an individual unit from a single 15-
minute task epoch. Upper row: raw maps showing positions visited by the subject (grey) and 
positions where the unit fired (colored opaque points, plotted chronologically and with 
darker color values at lower speeds). The total number of spikes (outside of SWRs) in the 
epoch is reported at upper right. Lower two rows: occupancy-normalized firing maps, with 
the first row showing maps generated from data from outbound trajectories (center to left or 
right arms) and the second row inbound trajectories (left or right to center arm; Extended 
Data Fig. 1a). The spatial peak firing rate (highest rate for a occupancy-normalized bin) is 
shown at upper right. Shown are data from each unit's highest mean firing rate task epoch. 
Data from SWR periods were excluded from all plots. Notably, N units could show 
substantial firing at locations distinct from the reward wells (N unit examples with spike 
counts of 534, 497, 957, 1819, 668, 1016, 372).
Kay et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 5. N unit spatial coding
a, Reward well firing rasters of 20 example N units. For each unit, data from the final ten (if 
available) entries of the subject's head into each of the three task reward wells (A, B, C) 
from a single task epoch are shown. The time of well entry (t = 0) is plotted as a grey line. 
SWR periods are plotted in the background as pink zones. Note that firing for a given N unit 
was typically specific to one of the three reward wells. b, Non-reward well firing in three 
example N units. The rightmost example is the same as the third example in Fig. 2a. Upper 
row: spatial firing maps. Locations visited by the subject are plotted in grey, while locations 
Kay et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 at which the unit fired are plotted as colored opaque points (in blue) plotted chronologically 
and with darker color values at lower speeds. Total spike counts are indicated at upper right. 
In the task (Supplementary Methods and Extended Data Fig. 1a), reward was delivered to 
the subjects only at the ends of the maze arms, thus locations elsewhere in the maze were not 
directly associated with reward. Lower row: firing rate vs. speed of distinct visits to specific 
maze junctions (indicated with a square on spatial firing maps). Junction visits were 
identified as periods during which the subject's linear position (Supplementary Methods) 
was within 10 cm of a maze junction. Firing rate was the total number of spikes divided by 
the visit duration. Mean speed was the average instantaneous head speed during the visit. To 
limit analysis to discrete traversals through a junction, visits that were both less than 1 s in 
duration and also had mean speeds <10 cm/s were disregarded. Note that N units tended to 
fire at lower speed junction visits, and that some junction visits at higher speeds elicited no 
firing. c, Firing rate dependence on speed at non-reward task locations. Distribution of 
correlations (Pearson's r) between firing rate and log speed for each unit population. This 
analysis is the same as in Fig. 2b except restricted to periods when the subject was located 
>30 cm from reward wells, moreover including only units that fired at least 50 spikes outside 
of SWRs at these locations. As in the location-inclusive case (Fig. 2b), the N unit population 
uniquely showed an anti-correlation (r < 0) of firing rate with speed. Pearson's r, mean ± 
s.d.; CA1: 0.12 ± 0.20, CA1 vs. 0, p < 10-23, signed-rank; CA3: 0.11 ± 0.18, CA3 vs. 0, p < 
10-13, signed-rank; CA2 P: 0.12 ± 0.16, CA2 P vs. 0, p < 10-10, signed-rank; CA2 N: -0.09 
± 0.20, CA2 N vs. 0, p = 0.0056, signed-rank; CA2 N vs. CA2 P, p < 10-8, rank-sum. Only 
units with significant correlations (p < 0.05) were included (CA1: 386/393 units, CA3: 
195/196 units, CA2 P: 121/121 units, CA2 N: 42/42 units). Asterisks: **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 
0.001. d, Same analysis as c, except with an additional restriction to periods when the 
subject was located in positions where a unit had occupancy-normalized spatial coverage >2 
Hz. Pearson's r, mean ± s.d.; CA1: 0.14 ± 0.30, CA1 vs. 0, p < 10-16, signed-rank; CA3: 0.17 
± 0.30, CA3 vs. 0, p < 10-10, signed-rank; CA2 P: 0.22 ± 0.23, CA2 P vs. 0, p < 10-12, 
signed-rank; CA2 N: -0.17 ± 0.33, CA2 N vs. 0, p = 0.031, signed-rank; CA2 N vs. CA2 P, p 
< 10-6, rank-sum. Only units with significant correlations (p < 0.05) were included (CA1: 
358/364 units, CA3: 168/168 units, CA2 P: 111/111 units, CA2 N: 23/24 units). Asterisks: 
*, p < 0.05; ***, p < 0.001.
Kay et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. Locomotor STAs and theta analysis
Unit spiking at speeds >4 cm/s was analyzed. a, Locomotor STAs. Plotted are mean STAs of 
hippocampal LFP for each principal unit population. LFP from four distinct recording sites 
(REF, CA2, CA3, DG) are plotted in rows. Vertical lines correspond to the time of spiking. 
The width of the trace indicates ± s.e.m. across individual unit STAs. The total trace length 
is 2 s. REF: reference electrode located in corpus callosum overlying dorsal hippocampus, 
reporting signals relative to a cerebellar ground screw. Scale bars: x: 250 ms, y: 50 μV. b, 
Theta phase locking analysis of each principal unit population. For comparison of theta 
Kay et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 phase preferences between unit populations in simultaneously recorded data, analysis was 
restricted to subjects in which all four unit types (CA1, CA3, CA2 N and CA2 P) were 
recorded. First row: mean circular distribution of spikes for each unit population. Error bars: 
± s.e.m. across individual units. Second row: the distribution of mean circular phases for 
significantly modulated units (p < 0.05, Rayleigh tests, total number of significant units 
reported at upper right). Bottom row: the distribution of modulation depths (resultant length) 
for all units. In plots with theta phase (bin size: 15°; troughs at 180°, indicated in dotted 
lines), two cycles are shown to aid visual comparison. Surprisingly, we did not observe a 
∼90° phase lead of CA3 relative to CA1 as reported in a previous study32, perhaps due to 
differences in CA3 recording locations.
Kay et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. N wave: a novel hippocampal network pattern at 1-4 Hz
a, Non-SWR immobility STAs of wide-band (0.5-400 Hz, upper section) and low frequency-
band (1-4 Hz, lower section) filtered LFP. Plotted are mean STAs of hippocampal LFP for 
each principal unit population (first four columns). LFP from four distinct recording sites 
(REF, CA2, CA3, DG) are plotted in rows. The mean RTA (fifth column) was calculated 
from individual RTAs that were matched (same recording epochs) to each CA2 N unit, and 
thus have the same sample sizes as N units. Vertical lines correspond to the time of spiking 
(STAs) or SWRs (RTA). The width of the trace indicates ± s.e.m. over individual unit STAs 
Kay et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 or RTAs. The total trace length is 2 s. REF: reference electrode located in corpus callosum 
overlying dorsal hippocampus, reporting signals relative to a cerebellar ground screw. Scale 
bars: x: 250 ms, y: 50 μV. b, All CA2 N unit STAs for spiking during non-SWR immobility. 
Unit STAs are grouped by polarity at the time of spiking (t = 0) and sorted by the time of the 
extremum (peak for positive; trough for negative) nearest the time of spiking. For each unit, 
LFP (1-4 Hz) from CA2, CA3, or DG (in increasing order of preference when available) was 
used. Colors indicate voltage (color bar). STAs are plotted on the left, while RTAs are 
plotted on the right. The center bar indicates the voltage polarity of the STA (orange: 
positive, black: negative) at the time of spiking (STAs) or SWRs (RTAs), with a dot 
indicating significance vs. 0 μV (p < 0.05, rank-sum). The STA of an unclassified unit (see 
Supplementary Methods) is indicated with an empty box. c, STA vs. matched RTA voltage 
amplitudes (1-4 Hz LFP measured at t = 0; STA: time of spike, RTA: time of peak ripple 
power) for individual CA2 N units (n = 58). CA2 N unit STA amplitudes (black circles) 
were larger than that of their matched RTAs (pink circles) (mean ± s.e.m., STA: 47 ± 6 μV, 
RTA: -168 ± 10 μV; p < 10-10, signed-rank) and also 0 μV (p < 10-7, signed-rank). Asterisks: 
***, p ≪ 0.001. d, All interneuronal unit STAs for spiking during non-SWR immobility 
periods. Interneuronal units were analyzed for coupling to LFP since hippocampal 
interneurons show temporally precise firing relationships with all canonical hippocampal 
network patterns79. Seventy-eight putative interneuronal units were recorded in or near the 
cell layers of CA1, CA2, CA3, and DG; of these units, 63 were recorded when valid CA2, 
CA3, or DG LFP recordings were simultaneously available and reporting SWR sharp waves 
as negative transients. Of the 63 units, 27 fired in association with the N wave (criteria in 
Supplementary Methods; CA1: 10, CA2: 4, CA3: 7, and DG: 6). In the plot, unit STAs are 
grouped by polarity at the time of spiking (t = 0) and sorted by the time of the extremum 
(peak for positive; trough for negative) nearest the time of spiking. For each unit, LFP (1-4 
Hz) from CA2, CA3, or DG (in increasing order of preference when available) was used. 
Colors indicate voltage (color bar). STAs are plotted on the left, while RTAs are plotted on 
the right. The center bar indicates the voltage polarity of the STA (orange: positive, black: 
negative) at the time of spiking (t = 0), with a dot indicating significance vs. 0 μV (p < 0.05, 
signed-rank). Unit STAs left unclassified (see Supplementary Methods) are indicated with 
an empty box. e, Mean firing rate of interneuronal units (mean ± s.e.m.) with negative 
(black; n = 36) vs. positive (orange; n = 27) STAs. f, Firing rate vs. speed correlation 
(Pearson's r) of interneuronal units with negative (black) vs. positive (orange) STAs. Task 
epochs were analyzed. g, Peri-SWR time histograms (PSTHs) of firing for interneuronal 
units with negative (left) and positive (right) STAs. Negative STA units uniformly exhibited 
a sharp peak in firing at the time of SWRs while positive STA units showed instances in 
which unit firing decreased from baseline levels (unit # 1-4, 6, 8) or showed an increase in 
firing that was less sharp (unit # 23-25)79-81.
Kay et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 8. CA1 and CA3 principal neurons fire in association with the N wave
Units showing positive STAs for spiking during non-SWR immobility periods were 
identified as firing in association with the N wave. a, All CA1 and CA3 principal unit STAs 
for spiking during non-SWR immobility periods. Only units with >100 spikes during these 
periods were analyzed. Unit STAs are grouped by polarity at the time of spiking (t = 0) and 
sorted by the time of the extremum (peak for positive; trough for negative) nearest the time 
of spiking. For each unit, LFP (1-4 Hz) from CA2, CA3, or DG (in increasing order of 
preference when available) was used. Colors indicate voltage (color bar at upper right). 
Kay et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 STAs are plotted on the left, while RTAs are plotted on the right. The center bar indicates the 
voltage polarity of the STA (orange: positive, black: negative) at the time of spiking (t = 0), 
with a dot indicating significance vs. 0 μV (p < 0.05, signed-rank). Unit STAs left 
unclassified (see Supplementary Methods) are plotted at bottom and indicated with an empty 
box. b, Firing rates for STA-classified unit populations during task epochs (mean ± s.e.m.; # 
of units: CA1 negative: 86, CA1 positive: 50, CA3 negative: 100, CA3 positive: 34). In both 
CA1 and CA3, units with positive STAs showed higher firing rates during non-SWR 
immobility (CA1 positive vs. CA1 negative, p < 10-9, rank-sum; CA3 positive vs. CA3 
negative, p < 10-5, rank-sum), similar to CA2 N units (Fig. 2c). c, Spatial coverage in CA1 
and CA3 units with negative vs. positive STAs (mean ± s.e.m.; # of units: CA1 negative: 86, 
CA1 positive: 50, CA3 negative: 100, CA3 positive: 34). CA1 units with positive STAs 
showed somewhat lower spatial coverage than units with negative STAs (CA1 negative vs. 
CA1 positive, p = 0.046, rank-sum), while an analogous difference in CA3 was not 
statistically significant (CA3 negative vs. CA3 positive, p = 0.12, rank-sum). d, Well 
specificity distributions in CA1 and CA3 units that had STA amplitudes (at time of spiking) 
significantly different from 0 μV (the units marked as significant in a and with available well 
data). For both CA1 and CA3, units with positive STAs showed higher well specificity 
(mean ± s.e.m., CA1 negative: 0.66 ± 0.04, CA1 positive: 0.86 ± 0.03; CA1 negative vs. 
CA1 positive, p < 10-4, rank-sum; CA3 negative: 0.49 ± 0.04, CA3 positive: 0.79 ± 0.04, 
CA3 negative vs. CA3 positive, p < 10-4, rank-sum). e, Well specificity distributions in CA1 
and CA3 units with theta power cutoff. For each task epoch, the distribution of power in the 
theta band (5-11 Hz), averaged over CA1 recording sites, was calculated for immobility non-
SWR periods. Spikes occurring during times in which the theta band power was in the upper 
quartile of this distribution were then excluded from well specificity calculations. For both 
CA1 and CA3, units with positive STAs showed higher well specificity (mean ± s.e.m., CA1 
negative: 0.73 ± 0.05, CA1 positive: 0.87 ± 0.04; CA1 positive vs. CA1 negative, p < 0.002, 
rank-sum; CA3 negative: 0.58 ± 0.04, CA3 positive: 0.80 ± 0.04; CA3 negative vs. CA3 
positive, p < 0.004, rank-sum).
Kay et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 9. N wave-coupled CA1 and CA3 principal neurons
Examples of CA1 and CA3 principal units with negative vs. positive STAs during non-SWR 
immobility. Each column corresponds to data from an individual unit. Upper sections: Non-
SWR immobility STA (black trace, ± s.e.m. over individual LFP traces) and RTA (pink 
trace, ± 2 * s.e.m. over individual LFP traces). Vertical lines correspond to the time of 
spiking (for STAs) or time of SWRs (for RTAs). The total number of spikes (for STAs) and 
SWRs (for RTAs) averaged is reported at upper left. The region in which the LFP (at 1-4 Hz) 
was recorded is indicated at lower right. STAs with amplitudes (measured at the time of 
spiking) significantly different from 0 μV (p < 0.05, rank-sum) are marked by an asterisk at 
Kay et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 upper right. The total trace length is 1 s. A horizontal bar centered at the time of spiking 
indicates 0 μV and corresponds to 200 ms. Scale bars: x: 200 ms, y: 50 μV for STA (black 
trace); 100 μV for RTA (pink trace). Middle sections: Spatial firing maps. Positions visited 
by the subject are plotted in grey while positions at which the unit fired are shown as colored 
opaque points (in green) plotted chronologically and with darker color values at lower 
speeds. The total number of spikes in the epoch is reported at upper right. Shown is the 15-
minute task epoch in which the unit had the highest mean firing rate. Spikes during SWRs 
are omitted from all plots. Lower sections: Well firing rasters. The time of well entry (t = 0) 
is plotted as a grey line. SWR periods are plotted in the background as pink zones.
Kay et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 10. Hippocampal spatial coding in the rest environment
a, Distribution of correlations (Pearson's r) between firing rate and log speed for each unit 
population in awake periods in the rest environment. Mean ± s.d.; CA1 (n = 162 units): 0.06 
± 0.07, CA1 vs. 0, p < 10-17, signed-rank; CA3 (n = 75): 0.05 ± 0.08, CA3 vs. 0, p < 10-6, 
signed-rank; CA2 P (n = 74): 0.01 ± 0.07, CA2 P vs. 0, p = 0.55, signed-rank; CA2 N (n = 
64): 0.00 ± 0.07, CA2 N vs. 0, p = 0.77, signed-rank, CA2 N vs. CA2 P, p = 0.47. Only units 
with significant correlations (p < 0.05) were included (CA1: 162/163 units, CA3: 75/76, 
CA2 P: 74/76 units, CA2 N: 64/68 units). The N unit population did not show a significant 
Kay et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 relationship between firing rate and speed, unlike in the task environment (Fig. 2b). The 
positive correlation between firing rates and speed was also absent in the CA2 P population, 
suggesting a broader weakening of speed-dependent changes in hippocampal firing in the 
rest environment. This could be due to the restricted range of speeds in the rest environment 
enclosure and/or a fundamental influence of task conditions (Extended Data Fig. 1) on 
hippocampal neural activity. b, Three additional example N unit spatial firing maps in the 
rest environment. Plotted are data from awake periods. Each column corresponds to data 
from an individual unit. Upper row: raw maps showing positions visited by the subject 
(grey) and positions where the unit fired (colored opaque points, plotted chronologically and 
with darker color values at lower speeds). Total number of spikes (outside of SWRs) in the 
epoch is reported at upper right. Lower row: occupancy-normalized firing maps. Peak spatial 
firing rate is reported at upper right. Scale bar: 20 cm. c-g, Awake immobility spatial firing 
in five example co-recorded pairs of N units from single rest recording epochs. The example 
pair in c is the same as shown at bottom in Fig. 5d. For each example pair, a unit 
corresponds to a row. The leftmost two columns (raw and occupancy-normalized firing 
maps) correspond to data from awake periods, while the rightmost two columns (raw and 
occupancy-normalized firing maps) correspond to data from awake immobility periods. 
Reported at upper right are total spike counts (raw maps) or peak spatial rates (occupancy-
normalized maps). Bin size: 2.5 cm. Scale bar: 20 cm. Here, the occupancy-normalized 
maps shown were generated from unsmoothed occupancy-normalized maps by taking the 
mean firing rate of bins of a 3×3 grid centered on the bin, disregarding bins that were not 
occupied by the subject. Quantification in h and i was performed on unsmoothed occupancy-
normalized maps. h, Spatial information82 of N units in awake periods outside of immobility 
periods (upper plot, 1.12 ± 0.59 bits/spike, n = 67 units, with one unit excluded due to lack 
of firing outside of immobility) and awake immobility periods (lower plot, 1.17 ± 0.58 bits/
spike, n = 68 units). In both conditions, data during SWR periods were excluded. Spatial 
information was calculated in the rest epoch in which the unit had the highest mean firing 
rate during awake periods. As in the task environment, N units exhibited spatially specific 
firing during immobility. Notably, the rest environment is an additional condition in which N 
units signaled location, moreover in the absence of material reward (analysis of non-reward 
locations in the task maze in Extended Data Fig. 5b-d). i, Correlation (Pearson's r) of N unit 
spatial maps between awake immobility periods and awake non-immobility periods in the 
rest environment. The correlation was calculated from unsmoothed occupancy-normalized 
firing maps, specifically for spatial bins in which the subject was immobile. Out of 67 units, 
35 showed significant correlation (p < 0.05; 0.53 ± 0.03, mean ± s.e.m.), with no negative 
correlations observed. Correlations were calculated in the rest epoch in which the unit had 
the highest mean firing rate during awake periods. These positive correlations indicate that N 
units retained their spatial specificity into immobility periods. j, Comparison of firing rates 
across SIA-nesting conditions. Statistical tests (signed-rank, comparison of Nest OUT vs. 
IN): CA1, SIA ON (n = 18 units), p = 0.014; CA1, SIA OFF (n = 92), p < 10-5; CA3, SIA 
ON (n = 19), p = 0.60; CA3, SIA OFF (n = 58), p = 0.26; CA2 P, SIA ON (n = 15), p = 0.11; 
CA2 P, SIA OFF (n = 65), p = 0.0027; CA2 N, SIA ON (n = 18), p = 0.022; CA2 N, SIA 
OFF (n = 57), p = 0.027. As in the evaluation of the nesting position specificity index (Fig. 
5f), these comparisons show that the CA1 and CA2 N unit populations met dual criteria 
(description in Supplementary Methods) for nesting position coding, while the CA3 unit 
Kay et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 population did not. Asterisks: *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001; n.s., not significant 
at p < 0.05. k, SIA firing rate vs. nesting position specificity index for all detected unit-sleep 
period samples. Here, if data was available for a unit (in the rest unit set) during a detected 
sleep period, then the unit's SIA firing rate during the sleep period was measured and its 
nesting position specificity index was calculated with respect to that sleep period's nesting 
position; this sample is then represented by a scatter point. In this approach, an individual 
unit can contribute more than one sample. CA1 (n = 312 samples from 94 units): Spearman's 
ρ: 0.55, p < 10-25. CA3 (n = 223 samples from 62 units): Spearman's ρ: 0.12, p = 0.065. 
CA2 P (n = 263 samples from 65 units): Spearman's ρ: 0.37, p < 10-9. CA2 N (n = 256 
samples from 60 units): Spearman's ρ: 0.33, p < 10-7. l, CA2 P unit distribution of nesting 
position specificity indices. Mean ± s.e.m.: SIA ON (n = 15): 0.22 ± 0.09, p = 0.048, signed-
rank; SIA OFF (n = 65): -0.16 ± 0.04, p < 0.001, signed-rank. Asterisks: *, p < 0.05; ***, p 
< 0.001. m, STA class proportions across conditions. In addition to STAs calculated from 
non-SWR immobility in task epochs (TASK, presented in Fig. 4 and Extended Data Figs. 7, 
8, 9), STAs were also calculated from non-SWR immobility during awake periods in rest 
epochs (REST). For REST STAs, as in TASK STAs, a minimum of 100 spikes outside of 
SWRs during awake immobility and valid LFP reference sites were required, and units with 
STAs with mixed features were left unclassified (LFP reference site and unclassified STA 
criteria in Supplementary Methods; unclassified unit counts: CA1: 8 out of 83, CA3: 4 out 
of 51, CA2 N: 10 out of 58). As in TASK, N wave-coupled units in REST were detected in 
substantial proportions. In diagrams, STA positive (N wave-coupled) is in light orange, with 
a darker orange corresponding to significance in the STA voltage at t = 0 (p < 0.05, signed-
rank). STA negative is in grey, with black corresponding to significance. Left (pie charts): 
proportions (%) of units in each of STA classes. Total unit counts (number of units with 
classified STAs) are reported at bottom right. Percentages are rounded to nearest whole 
number. Upper right: unit counts in each (non-overlapping) category (* denotes units with 
STAs with significance at p < 0.05). Lower right: contingency table for CA1 and CA3 units 
found active in both task and rest epochs (fired >100 spikes outside of SWRs during 
immobility in at least one task recording epoch and during awake immobility in at least one 
rest recording epoch) and with classifiable STAs (positive vs. negative). Notably, no units 
were observed that were STA positive in both conditions, suggesting that N wave-coupling 
for a given CA1/CA3 neuron is not a static property. In contrast, the majority of classifiable 
CA2 N units in both TASK (53/57, or 93%) and REST (38/48, or 79%) were N wave-
coupled.
Acknowledgments
We thank G. Rothschild, D. Liu, J. Yu, S. Jadhav, E. Anderson, P. Sabes, C. Schreiner, M. Stryker, R. Knight, J. 
O'Doherty, E. Phillips, K. Kay, and B. Mensh for discussion and suggestions, and I. Grossrubatscher, C. Lykken, 
and S. Harris for technical assistance. This work was supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, an NIH 
grant (R01 MH090188), a McKnight Foundation Cognitive and Memory Disorders Award (L.M.F.). K.K. is 
supported by Ruth L. Kirchstein National Research Service Award Fellowship (NIH/NIMH) and the UCSF Medical 
Scientist Training Program.
References
1. O'Keefe, J.; Nadel, L. The hippocampus as a cognitive map. Oxford University Press; 1978. 
Kay et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2. Wilson MA, McNaughton BL. Dynamics of the hippocampal ensemble code for space. Science. 
1993; 261:1055–1058. [PubMed: 8351520] 
3. Buzsaki G, Moser EI. Memory, navigation and theta rhythm in the hippocampal-entorhinal system. 
Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16:130–138. [PubMed: 23354386] 
4. Eichenbaum H, Cohen NJ. Can we reconcile the declarative memory and spatial navigation views 
on hippocampal function? Neuron. 2014; 83:764–770. [PubMed: 25144874] 
5. Eilam D, Golani I. Home base behavior of rats (Rattus norvegicus) exploring a novel environment. 
Behav Brain Res. 1989; 34:199–211. [PubMed: 2789700] 
6. Wallace DG, Hamilton DA, Whishaw IQ. Movement characteristics support a role for dead 
reckoning in organizing exploratory behavior. Anim Cogn. 2006; 9:219–228. [PubMed: 16767471] 
7. Bannerman DM, et al. Regional dissociations within the hippocampus--memory and anxiety. 
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2004; 28:273–283. [PubMed: 15225971] 
8. Pentkowski NS, Blanchard DC, Lever C, Litvin Y, Blanchard RJ. Effects of lesions to the dorsal and 
ventral hippocampus on defensive behaviors in rats. Eur J Neurosci. 2006; 23:2185–2196. 
[PubMed: 16630065] 
9. Maren S, Phan KL, Liberzon I. The contextual brain: implications for fear conditioning, extinction 
and psychopathology. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013; 14:417–428. [PubMed: 23635870] 
10. Christian KM, Thompson RF. Neural substrates of eyeblink conditioning: acquisition and 
retention. Learn Mem. 2003; 10:427–455. [PubMed: 14657256] 
11. Takahashi M, Lauwereyns J, Sakurai Y, Tsukada M. A code for spatial alternation during fixation 
in rat hippocampal CA1 neurons. J Neurophysiol. 2009; 102:556–567. [PubMed: 19420119] 
12. MacDonald CJ, Carrow S, Place R, Eichenbaum H. Distinct hippocampal time cell sequences 
represent odor memories in immobilized rats. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:14607–14616. [PubMed: 
24005311] 
13. Hattori S, Chen L, Weiss C, Disterhoft JF. Robust hippocampal responsivity during retrieval of 
consolidated associative memory. Hippocampus. 2015; 25:655–669. [PubMed: 25515308] 
14. Carr MF, Jadhav SP, Frank LM. Hippocampal replay in the awake state: a potential substrate for 
memory consolidation and retrieval. Nat Neurosci. 2011; 14:147–153. [PubMed: 21270783] 
15. Pfeiffer BE, Foster DJ. Hippocampal place-cell sequences depict future paths to remembered goals. 
Nature. 2013; 497:74–79. [PubMed: 23594744] 
16. Buzsaki G, Horvath Z, Urioste R, Hetke J, Wise K. High-frequency network oscillation in the 
hippocampus. Science. 1992; 256:1025–1027. [PubMed: 1589772] 
17. Buzsaki G. Hippocampal sharp wave-ripple: A cognitive biomarker for episodic memory and 
planning. Hippocampus. 2015
18. Buzsaki G, Leung LW, Vanderwolf CH. Cellular bases of hippocampal EEG in the behaving rat. 
Brain Res. 1983; 287:139–171. [PubMed: 6357356] 
19. Csicsvari J, Hirase H, Mamiya A, Buzsaki G. Ensemble patterns of hippocampal CA3-CA1 
neurons during sharp wave-associated population events. Neuron. 2000; 28:585–594. [PubMed: 
11144366] 
20. Penttonen M, Kamondi A, Sik A, Acsady L, Buzsaki G. Feed-forward and feed-back activation of 
the dentate gyrus in vivo during dentate spikes and sharp wave bursts. Hippocampus. 1997; 7:437–
450. [PubMed: 9287083] 
21. Karlsson MP, Frank LM. Awake replay of remote experiences in the hippocampus. Nat Neurosci. 
2009; 12:913–918. [PubMed: 19525943] 
22. Davidson TJ, Kloosterman F, Wilson MA. Hippocampal replay of extended experience. Neuron. 
2009; 63:497–507. [PubMed: 19709631] 
23. Gupta AS, van der Meer MA, Touretzky DS, Redish AD. Hippocampal replay is not a simple 
function of experience. Neuron. 2010; 65:695–705. [PubMed: 20223204] 
24. Lorente de Nó R. Studies on the structure of the cerebral cortex. II. Continuation of the study of the 
ammonic system. J Psychol Neurol. 1934; 46:113–177.
25. Kim SM, Frank LM. Hippocampal lesions impair rapid learning of a continuous spatial alternation 
task. PLoS ONE. 2009; 4:e5494. [PubMed: 19424438] 
Kay et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 26. McNaughton BL, Barnes CA, O'Keefe J. The contributions of position, direction, and velocity to 
single unit activity in the hippocampus of freely-moving rats. Exp Brain Res. 1983; 52:41–49. 
[PubMed: 6628596] 
27. Huxter J, Burgess N, O'Keefe J. Independent rate and temporal coding in hippocampal pyramidal 
cells. Nature. 2003; 425:828–832. [PubMed: 14574410] 
28. Zheng C, Bieri KW, Trettel SG, Colgin LL. The relationship between gamma frequency and 
running speed differs for slow and fast gamma rhythms in freely behaving rats. Hippocampus. 
2015
29. Mankin EA, Diehl GW, Sparks FT, Leutgeb S, Leutgeb JK. Hippocampal CA2 activity patterns 
change over time to a larger extent than between spatial contexts. Neuron. 2015; 85:190–201. 
[PubMed: 25569350] 
30. Lu L, Igarashi KM, Witter MP, Moser EI, Moser MB. Topography of Place Maps along the CA3-
to-CA2 Axis of the Hippocampus. Neuron. 2015; 87:1078–1092. [PubMed: 26298277] 
31. Lee H, Wang C, Deshmukh SS, Knierim JJ. Neural Population Evidence of Functional 
Heterogeneity along the CA3 Transverse Axis: Pattern Completion versus Pattern Separation. 
Neuron. 2015; 87:1093–1105. [PubMed: 26298276] 
32. Mizuseki K, Sirota A, Pastalkova E, Buzsaki G. Theta oscillations provide temporal windows for 
local circuit computation in the entorhinal-hippocampal loop. Neuron. 2009; 64:267–280. 
[PubMed: 19874793] 
33. Buzsaki G. Hippocampal sharp waves: their origin and significance. Brain Res. 1986; 398:242–
252. [PubMed: 3026567] 
34. Jarosiewicz B, McNaughton BL, Skaggs WE. Hippocampal population activity during the small-
amplitude irregular activity state in the rat. J Neurosci. 2002; 22:1373–1384. [PubMed: 11850464] 
35. Vanderwolf CH. Hippocampal electrical activity and voluntary movement in the rat. 
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1969; 26:407–418. [PubMed: 4183562] 
36. Chevaleyre V, Siegelbaum SA. Strong CA2 pyramidal neuron synapses define a powerful 
disynaptic cortico-hippocampal loop. Neuron. 2010; 66:560–572. [PubMed: 20510860] 
37. Kohara K, et al. Cell type-specific genetic and optogenetic tools reveal hippocampal CA2 circuits. 
Nat Neurosci. 2014; 17:269–279. [PubMed: 24336151] 
38. Hitti FL, Siegelbaum SA. The hippocampal CA2 region is essential for social memory. Nature. 
2014; 508:88–92. [PubMed: 24572357] 
39. Foster TC, Castro CA, McNaughton BL. Spatial selectivity of rat hippocampal neurons: 
dependence on preparedness for movement. Science. 1989; 244:1580–1582. [PubMed: 2740902] 
40. McNaughton BL, Battaglia FP, Jensen O, Moser EI, Moser MB. Path integration and the neural 
basis of the ‘cognitive map’. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006; 7:663–678. [PubMed: 16858394] 
41. Buzsaki G. Theta rhythm of navigation: link between path integration and landmark navigation, 
episodic and semantic memory. Hippocampus. 2005; 15:827–840. [PubMed: 16149082] 
42. Watrous AJ, et al. A comparative study of human and rat hippocampal low-frequency oscillations 
during spatial navigation. Hippocampus. 2013; 23:656–661. [PubMed: 23520039] 
43. Jutras MJ, Fries P, Buffalo EA. Gamma-band synchronization in the macaque hippocampus and 
memory formation. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:12521–12531. [PubMed: 19812327] 
44. Ulanovsky N, Moss CF. Hippocampal cellular and network activity in freely moving echolocating 
bats. Nat Neurosci. 2007; 10:224–233. [PubMed: 17220886] 
45. Lee AK, Wilson MA. Memory of sequential experience in the hippocampus during slow wave 
sleep. Neuron. 2002; 36:1183–1194. [PubMed: 12495631] 
46. Girardeau G, Benchenane K, Wiener SI, Buzsaki G, Zugaro MB. Selective suppression of 
hippocampal ripples impairs spatial memory. Nat Neurosci. 2009; 12:1222–1223. [PubMed: 
19749750] 
47. Ego-Stengel V, Wilson MA. Disruption of ripple-associated hippocampal activity during rest 
impairs spatial learning in the rat. Hippocampus. 2010; 20:1–10. [PubMed: 19816984] 
48. Caruana DA, Alexander GM, Dudek SM. New insights into the regulation of synaptic plasticity 
from an unexpected place: hippocampal area CA2. Learn Mem. 2012; 19:391–400. [PubMed: 
22904370] 
Kay et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 49. Rowland DC, et al. Transgenically targeted rabies virus demonstrates a major monosynaptic 
projection from hippocampal area CA2 to medial entorhinal layer II neurons. J Neurosci. 2013; 
33:14889–14898. [PubMed: 24027288] 
50. Valero M, et al. Determinants of different deep and superficial CA1 pyramidal cell dynamics 
during sharp-wave ripples. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:1281–1290. [PubMed: 26214372] 
51. Gray CM, Maldonado PE, Wilson M, McNaughton B. Tetrodes markedly improve the reliability 
and yield of multiple single- unit isolation from multi-unit recordings in cat striate cortex. J 
Neurosci Methods. 1995; 63:43–54. [PubMed: 8788047] 
52. Neunuebel JP, Knierim JJ. Spatial firing correlates of physiologically distinct cell types of the rat 
dentate gyrus. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:3848–3858. [PubMed: 22423105] 
53. Ishizuka N, Cowan WM, Amaral DG. A quantitative analysis of the dendritic organization of 
pyramidal cells in the rat hippocampus. J Comp Neurol. 1995; 362:17–45. [PubMed: 8576427] 
54. Woodhams PL, Celio MR, Ulfig N, Witter MP. Morphological and functional correlates of borders 
in the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus. Hippocampus. 1993; 3:303–311. [PubMed: 8287109] 
55. Amaral, DG.; Lavenex, P. The Hippocampus Book. Andersen, P., et al., editors. Oxford Univ. 
Press; 2007. p. 37-114.
56. Cui Z, Gerfen CR, Young WS 3rd. Hypothalamic and other connections with dorsal CA2 area of 
the mouse hippocampus. J Comp Neurol. 2013; 521:1844–1866. [PubMed: 23172108] 
57. Csicsvari J, Hirase H, Czurko A, Mamiya A, Buzsaki G. Fast Network Oscillations in the 
Hippocampal CA1 Region of the Behaving Rat. J Neurosci. 1999; 19:RC20. [PubMed: 10436076] 
58. Ranck JB Jr. Studies on single neurons in dorsal hippocampal formation and septum in 
unrestrained rats. I. Behavioral correlates and firing repertoires. Exp Neurol. 1973; 41:461–531. 
[PubMed: 4355646] 
59. Fox SE, Ranck JB Jr. Electrophysiological characteristics of hippocampal complex-spike cells and 
theta cells. Exp Brain Res. 1981; 41:399–410. [PubMed: 7215500] 
60. Skaggs WE, McNaughton BL. Replay of neuronal firing sequences in rat hippocampus during 
sleep following spatial experience. Science. 1996; 271:1870–1873. [PubMed: 8596957] 
61. Csicsvari J, Hirase H, Czurko A, Mamiya A, Buzsaki G. Oscillatory coupling of hippocampal 
pyramidal cells and interneurons in the behaving rat. J Neurosci. 1999; 19:274–287. [PubMed: 
9870957] 
62. Kemere C, Carr MF, Karlsson MP, Frank LM. Rapid and Continuous Modulation of Hippocampal 
Network State during Exploration of New Places. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e73114. [PubMed: 
24023818] 
63. Chen Z, Resnik E, McFarland JM, Sakmann B, Mehta MR. Speed controls the amplitude and 
timing of the hippocampal gamma rhythm. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e21408. [PubMed: 21731735] 
64. Frank LM, Brown EN, Wilson M. Trajectory encoding in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex. 
Neuron. 2000; 27:169–178. [PubMed: 10939340] 
65. Wood ER, Dudchenko PA, Robitsek RJ, Eichenbaum H. Hippocampal neurons encode information 
about different types of memory episodes occurring in the same location. Neuron. 2000; 27:623–
633. [PubMed: 11055443] 
66. Ito HT, Zhang SJ, Witter MP, Moser EI, Moser MB. A prefrontal-thalamo-hippocampal circuit for 
goal-directed spatial navigation. Nature. 2015; 522:50–55. [PubMed: 26017312] 
67. Lubenov EV, Siapas AG. Hippocampal theta oscillations are travelling waves. Nature. 2009; 
459:534–539. [PubMed: 19489117] 
68. Mizuseki K, Diba K, Pastalkova E, Buzsaki G. Hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells form 
functionally distinct sublayers. Nat Neurosci. 2011; 14:1174–1181. [PubMed: 21822270] 
69. Jadhav SP, Kemere C, German PW, Frank LM. Awake hippocampal sharp-wave ripples support 
spatial memory. Science. 2012; 336:1454–1458. [PubMed: 22555434] 
70. Lee SE, et al. RGS14 is a natural suppressor of both synaptic plasticity in CA2 neurons and 
hippocampal-based learning and memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:16994–16998. 
[PubMed: 20837545] 
Kay et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 71. Suzuki SS, Smith GK. Spontaneous EEG spikes in the normal hippocampus. I. Behavioral 
correlates, laminar profiles and bilateral synchrony. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1987; 
67:348–359. [PubMed: 2441970] 
72. Buzsaki G. Two-stage model of memory trace formation: a role for “noisy” brain states. 
Neuroscience. 1989; 31:551–570. [PubMed: 2687720] 
73. Harris KD, Hirase H, Leinekugel X, Henze DA, Buzsaki G. Temporal interaction between single 
spikes and complex spike bursts in hippocampal pyramidal cells. Neuron. 2001; 32:141–149. 
[PubMed: 11604145] 
74. Mizuseki K, Royer S, Diba K, Buzsaki G. Activity dynamics and behavioral correlates of CA3 and 
CA1 hippocampal pyramidal neurons. Hippocampus. 2012; 22:1659–1680. [PubMed: 22367959] 
75. Harvey CD, Collman F, Dombeck DA, Tank DW. Intracellular dynamics of hippocampal place 
cells during virtual navigation. Nature. 2009; 461:941–946. [PubMed: 19829374] 
76. Epsztein J, Brecht M, Lee AK. Intracellular determinants of hippocampal CA1 place and silent cell 
activity in a novel environment. Neuron. 2011; 70:109–120. [PubMed: 21482360] 
77. Grienberger C, Chen X, Konnerth A. NMDA receptor-dependent multidendrite Ca(2+) spikes 
required for hippocampal burst firing in vivo. Neuron. 2014; 81:1274–1281. [PubMed: 24560703] 
78. Bittner KC, et al. Conjunctive input processing drives feature selectivity in hippocampal CA1 
neurons. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:1133–1142. [PubMed: 26167906] 
79. Klausberger T, Somogyi P. Neuronal diversity and temporal dynamics: the unity of hippocampal 
circuit operations. Science. 2008; 321:53–57. [PubMed: 18599766] 
80. Diba K, Amarasingham A, Mizuseki K, Buzsaki G. Millisecond timescale synchrony among 
hippocampal neurons. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:14984–14994. [PubMed: 25378164] 
81. Royer S, et al. Control of timing, rate and bursts of hippocampal place cells by dendritic and 
somatic inhibition. Nat Neurosci. 2012; 15:769–775. [PubMed: 22446878] 
82. Skaggs, WE.; McNaughton, BL.; Gothard, K.; Markus, E. Advanced in Neural Information 
Processing Systems. Hanson, S.; Cowan, JD.; Giles, CL., editors. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers; 
1993. p. 1030-1037.
Kay et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Distinct hippocampal neuron population at CA2
Diagram of hippocampal recording sites. Recording locations were designated as CA2 sites 
if found to overlap with the CA2 cytoarchitectural locus24 (dotted lines). CA2 molecular 
markers are schematized as a yellow band. Additional description is provided in Extended 
Data Fig. 1. b, Classification of putative principal vs. interneuronal units. Shown is a scatter 
plot of all hippocampal neural units in the task data set for the three features used to classify 
units in this study. AC mean: autocorrelation function mean. Open circles: interneuronal (n = 
78); plus symbols: principal (n = 991); open diamonds: unclassified (n = 21). c, Firing 
aligned to SWRs (t = 0: time of SWR onset) in four simultaneously recorded hippocampal 
putative principal units. Upper sections: SWR-triggered spike rasters (black dots). Grey 
zones demarcate rest epochs; white zones demarcate task epochs. Lower sections: peri-SWR 
time histogram (PSTH; 1-ms bins) smoothed with a Gaussian kernel (σ = 10 ms). Red 
background indicates increased firing during SWRs; blue background indicates lack of 
increase. The CA2 site units were recorded on the same tetrode. d, Firing aligned to SWRs 
in four example CA2 N units. Each unit was recorded from a different subject. e, 
Percentages of P (red) vs. N (blue) units at CA1, CA2, and CA3 recording sites. Numbers 
correspond to unit counts.
Kay et al.
Page 40
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. N units fire more at low speeds and during immobility
Firing of four example CA2 N units during task behavior. Each row corresponds to an N 
unit, with spike rasters plotted above the traces. Left y-axis and grey fill trace: head speed 
(cm/s) of the subject. Right y-axis and blue fill trace: instantaneous firing rate (Hz). Right 
panels: spatial firing maps from corresponding task epochs. Grey: positions visited; colored 
points (darker color values at lower speeds): positions at which firing occurred, with each 
point opaque and plotted chronologically. b, Distribution of correlations (Pearson's r) 
between firing rate and log speed for each hippocampal unit population. Asterisks: ***, p ≪ 
0.001 (vs. r = 0). c, Mean firing rates during task epochs (mean ± s.e.m.; # of units: CA1: 
478, CA3: 271, CA2 P: 142, CA2 N: 84). Across unit populations, N units showed the 
highest firing rates during non-SWR immobility (Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA, Tukey's post hoc 
tests for CA2 N > each other population, p < 0.001). Moreover, N unit firing was higher 
during non-SWR immobility than during locomotion (p < 10-10, signed-rank) and also 
SWRs (p < 10-12, signed-rank). Asterisks: ***, p < 0.001 or p ≪ 0.001.
Kay et al.
Page 41
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. N units signal current location during immobility
Spatial firing maps of five example CA2 site units. Each column corresponds to a unit. 
Upper row: positions visited (grey) and positions where the unit fired (colored points: P 
units in red, N units in blue). Total number of spikes is reported at upper right. Lower row: 
occupancy-normalized firing maps. Peak spatial firing rate is reported at upper right. 
Subjects stopped locomoting at the ends of the maze arms to receive reward and also 
stopped intermittently elsewhere in the maze (Extended Data Fig. 1a). b, Spatial coverage in 
the hippocampal unit populations (mean ± s.e.m.; # of units: CA1: 476, CA2 P: 142, CA2 N: 
79, CA3: 271). The CA2 N and P unit populations showed the lowest and highest spatial 
coverages, respectively (Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA, Tukey's post hoc tests, CA2 P > each other 
population, p = 0.0015; CA2 N < each other population, p < 10-6). Asterisks: **, p < 0.01; 
***, p ≪ 0.001. c, Reward well firing of four example CA2 N units. Each column 
corresponds to a unit. For each well, the last ten visits (in a task recording epoch) are shown. 
Grey line: time of well entry (t = 0); yellow line: time of reward delivery (omitted in error 
trials). SWR periods are shown as pink zones. The two leftmost units were recorded 
simultaneously and on the same tetrode. d, Well specificity distribution in the N unit 
population. Mean ± s.e.m.: 0.78 ± 0.03 (n = 53 units).
Kay et al.
Page 42
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. A novel hippocampal network pattern marks spatial coding during immobility
Schematic of recording configuration. SWRs (pink symbol) were detected with CA1 site 
electrodes, while wide-band LFP was taken from CA2, CA3, and DG site electrodes. Blue 
and red symbols refer to CA2 N and CA2 P units, respectively, analyzed in b-d. b, Example 
CA2 N (blue symbol, first column) and CA2 P (red symbol, second column) unit spike-
triggered average (STA) and SWR-triggered average (RTA; pink symbol, third column) of 
hippocampal CA2, CA3, and DG LFP from non-SWR immobility periods. Vertical lines 
indicate the time of spiking (STA) or time of SWR (RTA). The two units were recorded 
Kay et al.
Page 43
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 simultaneously and on the same tetrode. SWRs averaged in the RTA were detected in the 
same recording epochs as the units. The total number of events averaged is reported at upper 
right. Trace width indicates ± s.e.m. over single LFP traces. Trace length: 2 s. Scale bars: x: 
250 ms, y: 100 μV. c, Mean STAs for CA2 N and CA2 P unit populations for non-SWR 
immobility periods. The mean RTA was calculated from single RTAs matching the recording 
epochs of N unit STAs, and thus have the same sample size. Trace width indicates ± s.e.m. 
over unit STAs/RTAs. Trace length: 2 s. Scale bars: x: 250 ms, y: 100 μV. d, Power spectral 
density (PSD) of STAs and RTAs of DG LFP. The mean PSD is plotted as a black line, with 
± s.e.m. over single averages plotted in grey (locomotor periods: CA2 N, n = 39 units; CA2 
P, n = 85; non-SWR immobility periods: CA2 N, n = 47; CA2 P, n = 72; RTAs matched to 
CA2 N units: n = 47). e, Schematic of additional hippocampal neurons analyzed with STAs. 
Interneuronal units (left, grey circles) recorded in the principal cell layers of CA1, CA2, 
CA3 and DG analyzed in f and Extended Data Fig. 7d-g. Principal units (right, grey 
triangles) recorded in CA1 and CA3 analyzed in g-i and Extended Data Figs. 8 and 9. STAs 
in f-i were taken for 1-4 Hz LFP, analyzing spikes from non-SWR immobility periods. f, N 
wave firing in four example interneuronal units. Plotted are unit STAs and RTAs. Trace 
width indicates ± s.e.m. (STA) or ± 2 s.e.m. (RTA) over single LFP traces. Vertical line: time 
of spiking (STAs) or SWRs (RTAs). The hippocampal region in which the unit was recorded 
is reported at upper right. The number of spikes or SWRs averaged is indicated at upper and 
lower left, respectively. Trace length: 1 s. Horizontal line (200 ms in length): 0 μV. DG LFP 
was used in each example except for the CA3 unit, which used CA3 LFP. Scale bars: x: 200 
ms, y: 50 μV for STA (black), 100 μV for RTA (pink). g, N wave firing and well specificity 
in four example CA1/CA3 principal units. Top: unit STAs and RTAs, following the plotting 
conventions in f. DG LFP was used in each example. Bottom: well firing rasters 
correspondent with each unit. Grey line: time of well entry (t = 0). SWR periods plotted as 
pink zones. h, CA1 and CA3 unit STAs. Color indicates voltage. For each unit, LFP (1-4 
Hz) from DG, CA3, or CA2 (in decreasing order of preference) was used. Unit STAs were 
grouped by polarity at the time of spiking (t = 0) and sorted by the time of the local 
extremum (peak for positive; trough for negative) nearest the time of spiking. Units with 
positive voltage peaks at the time of spiking were classified as N wave-coupled. i, Well 
specificity distributions for CA1 and CA3 principal unit populations classified by STA. For 
both CA1 and CA3 populations, units with positive STAs (N wave-coupled) showed higher 
well specificity than units with negative STAs (mean ± s.e.m.; CA1 pos.: 0.85 ± 0.03; CA1 
neg.: 0.65 ± 0.04, CA1 pos. vs. CA1 neg., p < 10-5, rank-sum; CA3 pos.: 0.77 ± 0.04; CA3 
neg.: 0.53 ± 0.04, CA3 pos. vs. CA3 neg., p < 0.001, rank-sum).
Kay et al.
Page 44
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Hippocampal spatial coding in desynchronized sleep
Detection of sleep states using hippocampal LFP. Left, 10-minute trace of aggregate 
hippocampal LFP amplitude during sleep, with times classified as LIA (yellow), SIA 
(green), or REM (R) periods. SWR rate was estimated by counting SWRs in 1-s bins and 
smoothing with a Gaussian (σ = 2 s). Right, kernel density estimate (Gaussian kernel, σ = 
0.1) of aggregate hippocampal LFP amplitude during non-REM sleep for the recording 
epoch from which the plotted trace was taken. Grey line: amplitude threshold used to 
distinguish SIA (below threshold) and LIA (above threshold) periods. b, Sleep firing in two 
Kay et al.
Page 45
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 example CA2 N units. Top traces: wide-band LFP (Wide, 0.5-400 Hz, scale bar: 2 mV) and 
ripple-band LFP (Ripple, 150-250 Hz, scale bar: 300 μV) traces from a simultaneous 
recording in CA1. SWR, LIA, and SIA periods are plotted as pink, yellow, and green zones, 
respectively. Grey-filled trace (y-axis: 0 to 10 cm/s): head speed. Subsequent analysis in d-f 
indicated that SIA firing was dependent on whether the location at which the animal slept 
was near the spatial firing field of the CA2 N unit. c, Mean firing rates during rest epochs 
(mean ± s.e.m.; # of units: CA1: 400, CA3: 220, CA2 P: 126 units, CA2 N: 76 units). CA2 
N units fired more during SIA than LIA (p = 0.011, signed-rank) and at higher rates than 
other unit populations during SIA periods (green) and during awake immobility periods 
(grey) (Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA, Tukey's post hoc tests; p < 0.001 for SIA; p = 0.0051 for 
awake immobility). As in Fig. 2c, these comparisons indicate population-level engagement 
in sleep states, encompassing both higher and lower rate firing as a result of spatially 
specific firing in single units. Asterisks: *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001. d, 
Example spatial firing maps of two pairs of simultaneously recorded CA2 N units in the rest 
environment. Data from waking periods plotted. Upper plots: positions visited (grey) and 
positions where the unit fired (black points). Total number of spikes is reported at upper 
right. Lower plots: occupancy-normalized firing maps. Peak spatial firing rate is reported at 
upper right. Scale bar: 20 cm. e, Three example CA2 N units coding for nesting position. 
Shown are occupancy-normalized firing maps from awake periods in a rest recording epoch. 
Indicated on each map is the nesting position (circle, 5 cm radius) of the subject for a sleep 
period detected in the same recording epoch. For a given sleep period, the unit was classified 
either as SIA ON (>2 Hz firing rate during SIA; black circle) or SIA OFF (<2 Hz; white 
circle). Reported at left are the mean awake firing rates within (Nest IN) and outside (Nest 
OUT) the encircled nesting region. In the third example, two distinct nesting positions 
corresponding to two distinct sleep periods were observed. f, Nesting position specificity 
index distribution in CA1, CA3, and CA2 N unit populations. The CA1 and CA2 N 
populations met dual criteria (see Supplementary Methods) for nesting position coding, 
while the CA3 unit population did not. Mean ± s.e.m.: CA1, SIA ON (n = 18 units): 0.18 
± 0.09, p = 0.043; CA1, SIA OFF (n = 92): -0.26 ± 0.04, p < 10-6; CA3, SIA ON (n = 19): 
0.09 ± 0.09, p = 0.47; CA3, SIA OFF (n = 58): -0.04 ± 0.04, p = 0.50, signed-rank; CA2 N, 
SIA ON (n = 18): 0.18 ± 0.06, p = 0.020; CA2 N, SIA OFF (n = 57): -0.12 ± 0.04, p = 
0.0087. All statistical tests were signed-rank. Asterisks: *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 
0.001 or p ≪ 0.001; n.s., not significant at p < 0.05.
Kay et al.
Page 46
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
