 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
NeuroImage: Clinical
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ynicl
Comparing fMRI activation during smooth pursuit eye movements among
contact sport athletes, non-contact sport athletes, and non-athletes
Derek Kellar, Sharlene Newman, Franco Pestilli, Hu Cheng, Nicholas L. Port⁎
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 1101 E 10th St., Bloomington, IN, United States
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Smooth pursuit
fMRI
Collegiate athletics
A B S T R A C T
Objectives: Though sub-concussive impacts are common during contact sports, there is little consensus whether
repeat blows affect brain function. Using a “lifetime exposure” rather than acute exposure approach, we ex-
amined oculomotor performance and brain activation among collegiate football players and two control groups.
Our analysis examined whether there are group differences in eye movement behavioral performance and in
brain activation during smooth pursuit.
Methods: Data from 21 off-season Division I football “starters” were compared with a) 19 collegiate cross-
country runners, and b) 11 non-athlete college students who were SES matched to the football player group
(total N = 51). Visual smooth pursuit was performed while undergoing fMRI imaging via a 3 Tesla scanner.
Smooth pursuit eye movements to three stimulus difficulty levels were measured with regard to RMS error, gain,
and lag.
Results: No meaningful differences were found for any of the standard analyses used to assess smooth pursuit eye
movements. For fMRI, greater activation was seen in the oculomotor region of the cerebellar vermis and areas of
the FEF for football players as compared to either control group, who did not differ on any measure.
Conclusion: Greater cerebellar activity among football players while performing an oculomotor task could in-
dicate that they are working harder to compensate for some subtle, long-term subconcussive deficits.
Alternatively, top athletes in a sport requiring high visual motor skill could have more of their cerebellum and
FEF devoted to oculomotor task performance regardless of subconcussive history. Overall, these results provide
little firm support for an effect of accumulated subconcussion exposure on brain function.
1. Introduction
The public and research emphasis on concussions can sometimes
obscure the fact that athletes in a variety of sports experience hundreds
of sub-concussive impacts each year (McAllister et al., 2012a). Esti-
mates for sub-concussive impact exposure in football players at the high
school and collegiate level range from 244 to 1444 per season (Broglio
et al., 2010; Crisco et al., 2010; Greenwald et al., 2008). In contrast, the
per season concussion risk is 7.25% for high school and 5.52% for
collegiate football athletes (Dompier et al., 2015). Beginning with the
documentation of “punch-drunk” dementia in the 1920's (Carroll, 1936;
Martland, 1928; Parker, 1934) and the coining of the term Dementia
Pugilistica in the 1930's (Millspaugh, 1937), scientists and clinicians
have been concerned about the cumulative dose effects of impacts to
the skull, including those that do not produce acute concussion but
nevertheless result in clinical signs and symptoms. The animal model
literature began documenting the cumulative effects of repeated “sub-
concussive” impacts to the skull in the 1940's (Tedeschi, 1944).
Research on this topic burgeoned further with heightened public
awareness of the issue and with the development of key research tools
such as cognitive testing, brain imaging and wearable accelerometers.
Despite the availability of these tools, however, there remains a striking
lack of agreement within the literature as to whether repeat sub-
concussive blows has a measurable effect on the brain and in what
areas.
Studies on cognition examine a variety of neurocognitive functions,
including: verbal learning, verbal recognition, spatial recognition, vi-
sual working memory, visual-motor speed, impulse inhibition, visual
attention, and concentration. Using athletes from a variety of sports but
primarily soccer, some studies find an effect on cognition (Downs and
Abwender, 2002; Ellemberg et al., 2007; Killam et al., 2005; Matser
et al., 1999, 2001, 1998; McAllister et al., 2012a; Miyashita et al., 2017;
Straume-Naesheim et al., 2009; Talavage et al., 2014; Tsushima et al.,
2016; Tysvaer and Løchen, 1991; Witol and Webbe, 2003; Zhang et al.,
2013), while others find no effect (Abreau et al., 1990; Guskiewicz
et al., 2002; Janda et al., 2002; Kaminski et al., 2008; Kemp et al., 2016;
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2018.01.025
Received 11 August 2017; Received in revised form 29 December 2017; Accepted 18 January 2018
⁎ Corresponding author at: Indiana University, School of Optometry, Indiana University, 800 E Atwater Ave, Bloomington, IN 47405, United States.
E-mail address: nport@indiana.edu (N.L. Port).
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 413–424
Available online 31 January 2018
2213-1582/ © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).
T
 Miller et al., 2007; Putukian et al., 2000; Rutherford et al., 2009;
Salinas et al., 2009; Stephens et al., 2010; Straume-Naesheim, 2005;
Vann Jones et al., 2014). The subconcussive effect of hits on balance is
also inconclusive with some reporting a positive effect (Haran et al.,
2013; Miyashita et al., 2017), and others reporting no effect (Broglio
et al., 2004; Gysland et al., 2012; Mangus et al., 2004; Schmitt et al.,
2004). A meta-analysis of 30 studies on the subconcussive effects on
cognition of soccer players concluded that there are too many short-
comings of the current research to draw conclusions. Common short-
comings include small sample sizes, inappropriate selection of control
groups, low quality assessment of head impact frequency, and in-
appropriate control for type 1 errors (Tarnutzer et al., 2016). Examining
the potential effects on cognition of subconcussive hits is important
from a symptom and quality of life standpoint, but from a scientific
standpoint, it is also challenging. Learning and memory skills are easily
affected by a large number of relatively difficult to control factors, such
as motivation, sleep, age, drug use, blood sugar levels, hydration, etc.
Combining neurocognitive testing with neuroimaging may be more
promising (Tarnutzer et al., 2016).
Though imaging is not a viable method for diagnosing concussion,
the sheer number of subconcussive hits to the skull during contact
sports could conceivably result in visible damage to brain matter. Both
EEG (Tysvaer and Storli, 1989), and CT (Sortland and Tysvaer, 1989)
have been utilized in this effort. More recently, numerous MRI studies
have been conducted on subconcussion, including using diffusion
imaging and the diffusion tensor model (DTI), which looks for damage
in the white matter (Bahrami et al., 2016; Bazarian et al., 2014;
Chappell et al., 2008, 2006; Davenport et al., 2016, 2014; Helmer et al.,
2014; Koerte et al., 2017, 2012; Lipton et al., 2013; Mayinger et al.,
2017; McAllister et al., 2014; Shin et al., 2014). A smaller number of
studies have addressed anatomical defects (grey matter changes)
(Adams et al., 2007; Davenport et al., 2014; Koerte et al., 2016). Once
again, however, these studies do not yield a clear consensus (for review
see (Bailes et al., 2013; Belanger et al., 2016; Koerte et al., 2015; Maher
et al., 2014)).
To more accurately identify athletes who experience the largest
and/or greatest number of subconcussive blows during a season, a small
number of researchers have begun using head-mounted accelerometers.
So far, the use of this technique has resulted in positive findings. Both
McAllister et al. (2014) and Bazarian et al. (2014) reported significant
correlations between total accelerometer-based hit exposure and white
matter measures of the brain using the DTI model of diffusion imaging.
One study used helmet accelerometers and neurocognitive measures
among football and hockey players and found a weak effect (McAllister
et al., 2012b). Talavage et al. (2014) found a significant correlation
with functional MRI (fMRI) activation while athletes performed the
short-term memory n-back task. The use of accelerometers in research
is limited by cost (of equipment, installation and maintenance), hassle
(some players find them cumbersome), and concerns over accuracy.
When tested against biomechanical sensors in a laboratory setting, the
accuracy of helmet-based accelerometers must be interpreted cau-
tiously (O'Connor et al., 2017; Siegmund et al., 2016).
The study by Talavage and colleagues highlights yet another pro-
mising but thus far minimally explored approach: the use of fMRI in
combination
with
behaviorally
relevant
neurocognitive
testing.
Research involving resting-state fMRI conducted while subjects relax in
an MRI scanner has not shown consistent results (Abbas et al., 2015;
Johnson et al., 2014; Slobounov et al., 2017), but the study by Talavage
et al. evaluated memory, a neurocognitive function known to be af-
fected by head trauma generally and concussion specifically. Another
known sequelae of concussion is sensory motor deficits (Howell et al.,
2017; Kontos et al., 2017). Sensory motor testing holds promise for the
detection of subconcussive damage in part because it is multimodal. To
the best of our knowledge, there is one study series examining fMRI
activation during a oculomotor sensorimotor task (Johnson et al.,
2015a, 2015b). We chose to examine eye movement behavior due to
the solid body of literature showing ocular motor performance to be
one of the most robust indicators of concussion (Balaban et al., 2016;
Brahm et al., 2009; Capó-Aponte et al., 2012a, 2012b; Cifu et al., 2015;
DeHaan et al., 2007; Drew et al., 2007; Heitger et al., 2009, 2007a,
2007b, 2006, 2004; Hoffer et al., 2017; Kraus et al., 2007; Liston et al.,
2017; Maruta et al., 2017; Master et al., 2016; Mucha et al., 2014;
Pearce et al., 2015; Samadani et al., 2015; Storey et al., 2017;
Thiagarajan et al., 2011). Oculomotor control has been strongly linked
to neural integrity (John Leigh and Zee, 2015; Pierrot-Deseilligny et al.,
2004) and tasks that assess oculomotor function are linked to a number
of cognitive functions including attention, visuospatial processing,
working memory, processing speed and predictive behavior (Barnes,
2008; Hutton, 2008; John Leigh and Zee, 2015; Pierrot-Deseilligny
et al., 2004; Schütz et al., 2011). In addition, unlike other sensory
motor behaviors (e.g., balance and gait), eye movements lend them-
selves well to fMRI neuroimaging.
The aim of this study is to measure differences in the oculomotor
control network in athletes playing in concussion-prone sports as
compared to two control groups (non-concussion-prone sport, cross
country runners, and socioeconomically matched, SES, non-athletes
college students). To do so we used a smooth pursuit task, which has
been demonstrated to show reduced performance in concussion pa-
tients. The smooth pursuit task in particular has been thoroughly stu-
died in both primates and humans and is known to engage many re-
gions of the brain, both cortical and subcortical (Fukushima et al.,
2013). FMRI studies have revealed a network of brain regions linked to
the task, including the frontal eye fields (FEF) and supplementary eye
fields (SEF) in the frontal lobe, the intraparietal cortex, the occipital
cortex, and the cerebellum (Lencer and Trillenberg, 2008; Petit and
Haxby, 1999). Smooth pursuit has the additional advantages of being
an almost autonomic process and being shown in concussion and post-
concussion studies to be impaired in concussed patients (Cifu et al.,
2015; Heitger et al., 2009, 2006; Hoffer et al., 2017).
We compared athletes from an NCAA Football Bowl Subdivision
team to both athlete and non-athlete control groups. A pattern in the
research design of much of the existing literature is the use of either a
single athlete control group from non-contact sports or a single control
group drawn from the general student body. Using a non-athlete control
group only does not take into account any effects on the brain of years
of athletic training and competition. Another pattern within the lit-
erature is the lack of matching of either athlete or non-athlete control
groups on socioeconomic (SES) status, despite the fact that SES status is
known to be related to cognitive abilities (Ursache et al., 2015) and
health (Meyer et al., 2014). Depending on the study setting, the so-
cioeconomic backgrounds of even athlete control group participants
may be significantly different from that of the concussion prone sport
athletes. We therefore included both a non-contact sport control group
(drawn from the cross country team) and a non-athlete group matched
to the football players on age, gender and SES.
If repetitive sub-concussive impacts have a deleterious effect on
neural processing, collegiate football players should show performance
decrements on the smooth pursuit task and differences in brain acti-
vation when compared to both control groups. At the present time there
is insufficient literature to attempt to predict which regions of the
network implicated in oculomotor processing (i.e., cerebellum, parietal
cortex, or frontal regions) might be affected, but greater activation
within the smooth pursuit network, along with possible recruitment of
additional regions to handle the increased processing load, would be
suggestive of an effect of subconcussion.
2. Methods
2.1. Participants
A total of 51 male subjects participated in the study. Of these 21
were 4th and 5th year undergraduates (many were red-shirts) who were
D. Kellar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 413–424
414
 considered ‘starters’ on the Indiana University (IU) varsity football team
(age 21.1 ± 1.5), 19 were on the IU cross country team (age:
20.2 ± 2.5), and 11 were non-collegiate athletes from IU that were
socioeconomically matched to the football players (age 19.9 ± 3). One
football player did not complete the study and his fMRI data was dis-
carded. One cross country runner's fMRI data was unusable and was
discarded. None of the athletes had been diagnosed with a concussion
in the preceding year. The only exclusion criterion was for MRI safety at
3 Tesla (e.g. no implanted metal). In terms of concussion history, two
football players had been diagnosed with a concussion approximately
3 years before the study and one player had been diagnosed with a
concussion approximately 2 years before the study. No cross-country
runners were diagnosed with a concussion while at IU. In general sport
related head impacts in cross-country are extremely rare and the lowest
of all the NCAA sanctioned sports (Zuckerman et al., 2015). It should
also be noted some football players may have received a diagnosed
concussion in high school, and others may have successfully hidden
prior concussions from the medical staff of either high school, college,
or both. This information was unfortunately not available to us but we
can estimate 7.25% players to have received concussion previous to
college given published data (Dompier et al., 2015). Football players
were given a socioeconomic status questionnaire after completing the
scanning session. The socioeconomic match group filled out the same
questionnaire and were selectively chosen to match the football players
based on sex, age, estimated family income, and the area in which they
were raised (urban, small town, suburbs, or urban). Participants gave
informed written consent that was approved by the Indiana University
Institutional Review Board. All participants were recruited through
flyers handed out by the athletic trainers of each team or posted around
the campus. Beyond repeated hit exposure, there are differences in the
work out schedules/team practices of IU football players and cross-
country runners. IU football players have a morning practice 6 days a
week lasting approximately 1.5 h, with 2 days of contact practice and
4 days of non-contact practice per week. Six days a week, in the after-
noon, football players participate in 30 min of ‘muscle-building’
strength and condition workouts. IU cross-country runners have
morning runs lasting approximately 30 min and afternoon runs lasting
approximately 1.0–1.5 h, 6 days a week. Twice a week the runners
participate in ‘toning’ strength and conditioning workouts. We have no
data on the exercise habits of the control subjects.
2.2. Procedures and stimuli
Participants performed a visual smooth pursuit task while under-
going imaging. The movements of participants' right eyes were tracked
using an MRI compatible SR Research EyeLink 1000 running monocular
at 1000 Hz with an accuracy of roughly 0.2°. Data were recorded and
analyzed to ensure that participants were performing the task correctly
and to assess performance based on mean gain, lag, and root-mean-
square (RMS) error. The stimuli were projected onto a screen located
behind the subject and viewed through a mirror attached to the head
coil. The task consisted of 20 blocks, each of which started with a 12 s
rest followed by three smooth pursuit conditions presented in rando-
mized order (sinusoidal frequency = 0.25 [slow], 0.5 [medium], and
1.0 Hz [fast]), each of which was 11 s in duration. The total time for
each block was 45 s and total task time was 15 min. The sinusoidal
stimuli traveled ± 5° of amplitude (10° total) from the center of the
screen. They traveled along the horizontal meridian and the peak ve-
locity of the stimuli were 8, 15, and 30°/s for the slow, medium, and
fast stimuli, respectively. Many of the classes of eye movements have
been used in concussion research and shown to have impairment (e.g.
saccade, anti-saccades, and binocular eye movements) (Johnson et al.,
2015a). Each class of eye movement involves different brain networks
(John Leigh and Zee, 2015)and probably reveals a different aspect of
the concussion and subconcussion sequelae (Collins et al., 2014). We
only had time for one eye movement class in this study and chose
smooth pursuit due to documented dysfunction after a concussion (Cifu
et al., 2015; Heitger et al., 2009, 2006; Hoffer et al., 2017).
2.3. Data acquisition
All participants were scanned using a 3 Tesla TIM Trio scanner lo-
cated in the Imaging Research Facility at Indiana University using a 12-
channel head coil. The 32 channel head coil did not fit our larger
subjects, so all subjects were scanned with the 12-channel. Functional
scans were obtained with the following sequence: TR/TE = 2240/
30 ms,
TI = 900 ms,
flip
angle = 70°,
FoV = 240,
measure-
ments = 480, bandwidth = 1860 Hz/pixel, iPAT factor = 2, 36 axial
slices,
matrix = 96 × 256,
slice
thickness = 3.5 mm,
0
gap,
2.5 mm × 2.5 mm × 3.5 mm voxels, total acquisition time = 18:03.
Additionally, high resolution anatomical scans were acquired using the
following
sequence:
TR/TE = 1800/2.67 ms,
TI = 900 ms,
flip
angle = 9°,
bandwidth = 150 Hz/pixel,
160
sagittal
slices,
FOV = 256 mm,
matrix = 256 × 256,
slice
thickness = 1 mm,
re-
sulting in 1 mm × 1 mm × 1 mm voxels, total acquisition time = 7:42.
In order for the eye tracker to have a good view of the right of our large
subjects, the subject's head was often tilted.
2.4. Behavioral analysis
Eye tracking data were analyzed using custom written software in
Matlab. Blinks were removed from the records and a spline interpola-
tion was performed to recreate the eye movement missing during the
blink. The eye records were filtered with a 50 coefficient FIR low pass
filtered with a pass-band at 20 Hz and a stop-band at 90 Hz. Since we
are interested in comparing total oculomotor tracking performance
between the three subject groups, and not necessarily only strictly
smooth pursuit eye movements, we did not “de-saccade” the data. RMS
error is the euclidean distance between the stimulus and the eye every
1 ms sample. Gain and lag were calculated by fitting a sinusoid to the
10 s eye movement trial (the first second was skipped because of
movement initiation) with free parameters for amplitude, lag, and
frequency. Gain is defined as the ratio of the eye movement amplitude
divided by the stimulus amplitude. Lag is defined as the difference in
time between the fitted sinusoid and the stimulus sinusoid as measured
with cross-correlation. One and two-way analysis of variance statistics
were performed in Matlab with the ANOVAN function. Effect size was
quantified using Cohen's d metric.
2.5. fMRI analysis
The functional data were analyzed using statistical parametric
mapping, SPM 8. There were three subject groups: football players
(experimental), cross country runners (control 1), and SES matches
(control 2). fMRI data were preprocessed in several steps, including
slice timing correction, motion correction by realignment, co-registra-
tion between functional and anatomical scans, spatial normalization,
and smoothing. All functional data were resampled to 2mm3 iso-
morphic voxels normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute
(MNI) template. For spatial smoothing, an 8 mm FWHM Gaussian
kernel was applied. On the preprocessed fMRI data of individual sub-
jects, a canonical statistical analysis based on the general linear model
(GLM) and Gaussian random field theory was performed (Friston et al.,
1995). The hemodynamic response for the stimuli blocks were modeled
with a canonical HRF built on the onsets of the blocks with the block
duration included in the analysis. For each individual data analysis,
regressors were built for the three levels of task difficulty, fixation
blocks and 6 regressors from the realignment step were included in the
model to remove unexpected effects from noise from head movement.
In order to examine the activation related to each level of difficulty
of the pursuit task, each was compared to fixation for each group se-
parately using a one-sample t-test. This was performed to allow for
D. Kellar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 413–424
415
 inspection of the results prior to group comparisons to ensure data
quality. Two-sample t-tests were then performed to compare activation
across groups (e.g., football vs. cross country; football vs. SES-matched
non-athlete). For the contrasts examined, we applied a Monte Carlo
simulation of the brain volume to establish an appropriate voxel con-
tiguity threshold. The threshold obtained from the simulation has the
advantage of higher sensitivity to smaller effect sizes (Slotnick and
Schacter, 2004). The result of the Monte Carlo simulation indicated that
a cluster size of 20 contiguous resampled voxels using an uncorrected
threshold of p < 0.005 would be appropriate to control type I error
(p < 0.05) corrected for the multiple comparisons in the whole brain
volume analysis.
An ROI analysis was also performed. The mean bold signal for each
contrast was also obtained using the SPM toolbox Marsbar and was
analyzed in SPSS 24 and Matlab. Eight spherical regions of interest
(ROIs) with a radius of 10 mm were defined around regions previously
shown to be implicated in smooth pursuit tasks (talairach coordinance):
bilateral FEF (−42, −12, 50; 42, −12, 50), SEF (−6, −4, 62; 6, −4,
62), cerebellar vermis (−12, −72 −22; 12, −72, −22), and the
anterior lobe of the cerebellum (−11, −36, −14).
3. Results
3.1. Behavioral data
Fig. 1 shows the raw eye movement records for the first subject in
the experiment (a football student athlete). The three stimulus fre-
quencies (0.25, 0.5, and 1.0 Hz) are all in the range where human
smooth pursuit performance is usually fairly good. We calculated the
mean RMS (root mean squared) error, gain, and lag for every eye
movement sample for every trial (20 trial per stimulus condition) as our
metric of the subject's performance for each stimulus condition (slow,
medium, and fast).
Fig. 2 summarizes the oculomotor findings for three groups of
subjects. For no stimulus condition (slow, medium, or fast) or smooth
pursuit performance metric (RMS, gain, and lag) was there a qualitative
(shift in a histogram) or quantitative difference between the three
subject groups (one-way ANOVA, Fig. 2). This study is a two-way de-
sign (subject group by task difficulty) and Fig. 2J–L summarizes the
result for each smooth pursuit metric. A two-way ANOVA indicates a
significant effect of subject group for smooth pursuit RMS, as well as
significant effects for both subject group and task difficulty for smooth
pursuit gain. Given the well documented shortcomings of interpreting
results through the p-value of null-hypothesis significance testing
(Hentschke and Stüttgen, 2011; Nakagawa and Cuthill, 2007), the effect
size between the subject group was calculated for each smooth pursuit
metric (Fig. 2J–L). Combining the data across task difficulty, the effect
sizes of subject group differences ranges between 0.27 and 0.61
(Fig. 2J–L), which in general are in the small range (Hentschke and
Stüttgen, 2011; Nakagawa and Cuthill, 2007). Thus, between the his-
tograms of the raw data, the one-way ANOVAs, and the effect size,
there appears to be no meaningful difference between our three subject
groups in oculomotor performance during our smooth pursuit task. The
degrees of freedom for subject group and task difficulty is 2.
3.2. Functional data
Fig. 3 illustrates the oculomotor function activation for each subject
group and stimulus condition. For the three stimulus conditions (easy,
Fig. 1. Example subject ocular-motor performance for the slow (A), medium (B), and fast
stimulus conditions (C). The red trace underneath is the horizontal position of the sti-
mulus and the blue traces are all 20° horizontal eye movement records. The mean RMS
error for all 20 trials and for each stimulus condition is listed in the figure. (For inter-
pretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)
D. Kellar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 413–424
416
 Fig. 2. Histogram comparing ocular motor performance for the 3 subject groups. The first row is for the easy stimulus, the second row is for the medium stimulus, and the third row is for
the hard stimulus. The ANOVAs in the first three rows is a one-way ANOVA examining the effect of subject group. The mean and standard deviation of each distribution are listed in the
panel. The fourth row shows a summary for each subject group for three task difficulties. The two-way ANOVAS in the fourth row test for the effects of subject group and task difficulty,
and an interaction of the two variables. There are two degrees of freedom for both subject group and task difficulty. Effect size is calculated using Cohen's d metric. The first column
analyzes smooth pursuit root mean squared metric (RMS), the middle column analyzes pursuit gain, and the third column analyzes pursuit lag. In each panel, cyan represents values from
the football subjects, orange represents cross country subjects, and green represents SES matched nonathletes. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader
is referred to the web version of this article.)
D. Kellar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 413–424
417
 medium, and hard), there is stronger activation (increase in p value)
and recruitment of more brain regions (more voxels) for each group
(p < 0.005, k = 10), reflecting task difficulty (Fig. 3). Qualitatively,
football players consistently showed greater activation during the easy
and medium conditions than either the cross country runners or SES
non-athlete controls. When examining the hard stimulus condition
alone, the football players show greater activation in the cerebellar
regions, whereas the cross-country runners and SES control non-ath-
letes show greater activation in frontal regions such as the FEFs (Fig. 3).
The last row of Fig. 3 combines the stimulus conditions together to
highlight the differences between the three subjects groups by in-
creasing the signal to noise ratio of functional activation.
In Fig. 4, for each stimulus condition, the differences between
groups are shown. The top row contrasts football players minus cross-
country runners, illustrating some activation difference in the cere-
bellum. The middle row contrasts football players minus SES non-ath-
letes, also illustrating activation differences in the cerebellum. The
bottom row contrasts cross-country runners minus SES non-athletes,
illustrating no consistent difference.
Fig. 5 summarizes the activation differences of the hard stimulus
minus the easy stimulus conditions, contrasted between subject groups.
In the left panel, football players have more activation in the FEF, oc-
cipital lobe, and cerebellum than cross-country runners. In the middle
and right panels, we see no systematic differences when football players
are contrasted with SES non-athletes, or when cross-country runners are
contrasted with SES non-athletes, respectively.
Fig. 6 summarizes activation differences between our subject groups
with the stimulus conditions combined. The left panel contrasts football
Fig. 3. A within group comparison of all conditions separately and collapsed. All contrasts are condition greater than fixation. The first column shows the activation of football players
during each of the three conditions of the task as well as the activation when all conditions are collapsed and compared to fixation. The second column shows the activation of cross
country runners for all three conditions separately as well as collapsed. The third column shows the activation of SES matched non-athletes for all three conditions separately as well as
collapsed.
D. Kellar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 413–424
418
 players minus cross-country runners, illustrating greater activation in
occipital cortex and the cerebellum. The middle panel contrasts football
players minus SES non-athletes, illustrating greater activation in the
cerebellum. The right panel illustrates no systematic differences in ac-
tivation between cross-country runners and SES non-athletes.
Fig. 7A quantifies the differences in FEF activation for each hemi-
sphere between our three groups for each stimulus condition by ex-
amining the GLM beta weights from Fig. 6. Football players have a
significantly greater activation pattern in comparison to the runners
and non-athletes. There is a significant effect of subject group and side
on activation. There is greater left hemisphere FEF activation for all
three subjects groups in comparison to the right hemisphere FEF. In
addition, there is a possible qualitative effect of stimulus condition
(p = 0.034). There are no significant interactions.
Finally, Fig. 7B quantifies the differences in cerebellar vermis acti-
vation for each side between our three groups for each stimulus
Fig. 4. Comparison between groups during each condition of the task (x = 14, y = −36, z = −10). The top row shows the activation of football players during each condition subtracted
by the activation of the cross country runners during the same condition. The middle row shows the activation of football players during each condition subtracted by the activation of the
SES matched non-athletes during the same condition. The bottom row shows the activation of cross country runners during each condition subtracted by the activation of the SES matched
non-athletes during the same condition.
Fig. 5. Comparison within groups between hard and easy conditions (x = −6, y = −66, z = 10). This contrast compared the activation during the hard condition minus the easy
conditions in order to demonstrate increased activation accompanying the increase in cognitive demand. The first column shows the activation of football players subtracted by the cross
country players for this contrast. The second column shows the activation of the football players subtracted by the SES matched non-athletes for this contrast. The third column shows the
activation of cross country runners subtracted by the SES matched non-athletes for this contrast.
D. Kellar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 413–424
419
 condition. Football players have a significantly greater activation pat-
tern in comparison to the runners and non-athletes. There is greater left
vermis activation in comparison to the right vermis. In addition, there is
a possible qualitative but not quantitative effect of stimulus condition
on vermis activation. There are no significant interactions.
4. Discussion
The aim of the current study was to determine whether oculomotor
differences are observed in athletes who play a concussion-prone sport
in comparison to other groups. The smooth pursuit task was chosen
because it has been demonstrated to show reduced performance in
concussion patients. Functional MRI was also used in order to explore
for any differences in functional brain activation while subjects per-
formed the visual motor task. Both athletes in a non-concussion-prone
sport (cross country runners) and SES-matched non-athletes were used
as two separate control groups.
No meaningful differences were found among the groups for any of
the three standard analyses used to assess smooth pursuit: root mean
squared error, gain, and lag. Only one research group has published
studies examining eye movements in relation to subconcussion. Kawata
et al. (2016b) studied the acute effects of repetitive head impacts
(heading a soccer ball) on near point convergence among twenty soccer
players. They found a decrease in performance both immediately after
and at 24-h post-exposure. Interpretations of this study are limited by
the lack a control “placebo” activity group (e.g., a sport-based but non-
heading activity) and the lack of blinding of researchers and subjects,
especially for what is a subjective visual motor test. However, in a
second study, Kawata et al. (2016a) used mouthguard-based accel-
erometers to divide twenty-nine football players into high versus low
head impact (22 high; 7 low) during training camp. The acute effect on
near point convergence was measured at baseline (pre-season) and
before and after non-contact practice and contact practices, and again
at postseason. For the high impact players but not for the low impact
players, they found a significant performance impairment, though their
performance had returned to baseline by the postseason follow-up.
Unfortunately, the authors provide no histogram demonstrating how
and why the two groups were chosen, nor do they provide reassurance
regarding the degree of blinding by the experimenter collecting the eye
movement data. In general, eye movement measures that can be ob-
jectively quantified are preferable to those that rely on subjective re-
port, in part because they minimize experimenter and subject bias.
It is important to note that our study focused on the accumulated
effects of subconcussion compared to athletes and non-athletes without
this exposure. The football players we recruited had not experienced a
concussion in the previous season, and data was collected just prior to
the upcoming season in order to allow the maximum amount of
whatever healing would take place to occur. In other words, the players
were tested at the moment in time during which they should have
shown the least amount of acute effects possible, e.g., a ‘lifetime ex-
posure’ approach rather than an immediate post-season or even post-
acute approach (as per Kawata).
A possible limitation of our study is the maximum pursuit speed,
which may not have been sufficiently high, resulting in a low ceiling
effect. This likely occurred due to the small size of the computer screen
within the scanner. Future studies should perform a full psychophysical
pilot to insure adequate increased error rates for faster stimuli. On the
other hand, all groups showed a consistent increase in the intensity and
volume of activation with increased difficulty, implying that the task
did become more demanding as the speed increased (Fig. 3), just maybe
not sufficiently so to reveal meaningful between group differences.
Another limitation in our study is the assumption of repeated head
impact exposure. We did not have the ability or resources to do a full
size instrumented accelerometer study, therefore can only assume the
starting junior and senior football players experienced repeated head
impacts. Future work would be enhanced by recording accelerometer
data in both groups and correlating changes in activation with differ-
ences in exposure.
For the fMRI results, we found an increase in the amount of tissue
area activated during the oculomotor task among football players as
compared to athlete and non-athlete controls. Areas of greater activa-
tion included the oculomotor region of the cerebellum (vermis) and
areas in the FEF. No differences were found between the two control
groups. All groups displayed the expected bilateral activation in the
occipital lobe, both in the cuneus and lateral regions, as well the FEF
and SEF in the frontal lobes; however, only the football players showed
significant activation in the cerebellum, specifically the vermis. Vermal
activation was expected in all groups and both control groups revealed
activation when the significance threshold was lowered, suggesting that
the vermis was recruited in all participants but to a higher degree by the
football players.
Only one prior study has examined functional activation maps in
relationship to a behaviorally relevant task among subjects who have
accumulated subconcussive hits. Talavage et al. (2014) instrumented
twenty-one high school football players' helmets with accelerometers
for one season of play. The study included pre-season and in-season
neurocognitive testing with ImPACT and fMRI during one season of
high school football. Of the eleven subjects, three were diagnosed with
concussion by the team physician. Of the remaining eight non-con-
cussed subjects, four had a normal in-season ImPACT and four had an
abnormal in-season ImPACT. The functional fMRI task was the 1 or 2-
Back working memory test. Of the eight non-concussed subjects, those
who demonstrated abnormalities on the ImPACT showed a decrease in
fMRI
activation
in
the
dorsolateral
pre-frontal
cortex
and
the
Fig. 6. Between group comparison during the task (x = 14, y = −36, z = −10). All three conditions were collapsed representing the task as a whole. The task activation was then
subtracted by the fixation and this resulting activation was then compared between groups. The first column shows the task-based activation of the football players subtracted by the cross
country runners. The second column shows the task based activation of the football players subtracted by the SES matched non-athlete controls. The third column shows the task-based
activation of the cross country runners subtracted by the SES matched non-athlete controls.
D. Kellar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 413–424
420
 cerebellum compared to those who did not have an impaired ImPACT
score. Issues arise with regard to the use the ImPACT test as a means of
categorizing subjects, however, due to a published false positive rate of
40% (Nelson et al., 2016). The size of the sample also contributes to
concerns about the validity and reliability of the results. As per the
previously discussed work of Kawata and colleagues, this study focuses
on the acute rather than long-term effects of subconcussive hits to the
brain. Finally, it differs from our study in that the task used, while
certainly relevant in terms of known post-concussive effects, is not
sensorimotor in nature.
Johnson and colleagues, in a series of two papers, examined the
oculomotor deficits and functional brain activation (fMRI) of 9 con-
cussed athletes both acutely (within 7 days of the injury) and sub-
acutely (~30 days post-injury) (Johnson et al., 2015a, 2015b). At the
acute time course, they report longer saccadic latencies during anti-
saccades, worse positional errors during pro-saccades, anti-saccades,
and memory guided saccades, and fewer saccades during the self-paced
saccade task. Examining the effect size, they found a strong effect
(> 2.0) for directional errors in the anti-saccade task, directional errors
in the memory guided task, and the number of saccades in the self-
paced saccade task. Interestingly, they did not find any deficits in two
smooth pursuit tasks (sinusoidal and circular pursuit), which is in
Fig. 7. GLM beta weight from Fig. 6 for each group and condition in the bilateral frontal eye fields (FEF) and vermis. The football players are plotted in ceyan, the cross-country runners
are plotted in orange, and the SES matched non-athletes are plotted in green. The easy task condition is plotted with circles, the medium condition is plotted with plus signs, and the hard
condition is plotted with stars. The left and right sides of the central nervous system are plotted separately. Each symbol is an individual subject. The mean and standard deviation are
plotted in black. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
D. Kellar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 413–424
421
 contrast to other studies of smooth pursuit and concussions (Cifu et al.,
2015; Heitger et al., 2009, 2006; Hoffer et al., 2017). In their fMRI
results, Johnson and colleague's concussed group demonstrated a larger
activation and recruitment of new sites in the brain, in comparison to
the normal volunteers.
In Johnson and colleagues follow-up manuscript, they examined the
eye movements and brain activation of the same concussed athletes at
30 days post injury (Johnson et al., 2015a, 2015b). The concussed
athletes (7 participated in the follow-up study) were clinically asymp-
tomatic and showed oculomotor improvements compared to their
acutely concussed measured eye movement. Nevertheless, oculomotor
differences remained between the subacute group and normal volun-
teers. The concussed group demonstrated increased and larger areas of
brain activation in fMRI, similar to when the athletes were acutely
concussed.
In regards to the eye movement analysis, both papers are limited by
the small number of subjects. The lack of raw data (no histograms or
scatter graphs) in the papers also leaves open the possibility the results
are driven by a single subject. Finally, the normal volunteer group does
not
appears
to
be
matched
for
sport
with
student
athletes.
Notwithstanding these limitations, their results are in agreement with
ours in terms of an increase in and larger area of brain activation, in-
cluding in the cerebellum.
To the best of our knowledge, then, our study is the first to examine
groups of athletes in the off-season using a sensorimotor task and fMRI.
Off-season data collection was used in order to minimize the acute ef-
fects of recent hit exposure and better isolate the effects of long-term
exposure. Our sample of twenty athletes per athlete group compares
well to fMRI studies in general, which tend to have limited N's primarily
due to the costs involved. The lower number of SES matched subjects
(11) resulted from the difficulty of recruiting students who's SES mat-
ched that of the football players. As expected, the football team had a
higher percentage of students from lower SES strata than the student
population at large. The difficulty we experienced even in recruiting
sufficient numbers of matched non-athlete controls highlights the re-
levance of including SES matching in future studies.
The finding of greater cerebellar activity among football players has
at least two possible interpretations. First, the football players may be
working harder to compensate for some subtle, long-term sub-
concussive deficits (e.g., a “compensation” theory). Animal studies
demonstrate that, after a concussion, a metabolic slowdown is produced
that parallels the symptom trajectory. As one of the most metabolically
active areas of the brain, the cerebellum would be expected to be
particularly affected by such a slow down. The cerebellar areas of
football players experiencing subconcussive symptoms might therefore
show added activation as their brains attempt to compensate for these
losses. This interpretation would not explain the greater activation
found for the FEF, however, because those areas have only average
metabolic demand. A finding that supports the compensation theory is
the fact that differences in activation between the football players and
the control groups increased with task difficulty. This implies that not
only were football players required to recruit different brain regions
such as the cerebellum to perform the task, but also as the task in-
creased in difficulty, they were required to make more than expected
recruitment in already active areas in response to this increase of de-
mand.
An equally valid interpretation of our fMRI findings, however, is
that our sample was comprised of top athletes in a sport requiring high
visual motor skill. As such, more of their cerebellum and FEF may be
devoted to oculomotor task performance regardless of their history of
hits to the brain. This has been demonstrated for other high-skill ac-
tivities, such as musicians and the proportion of the brain dedicated to
finger control in musicians (Landau and D'esposito, 2006; Münte et al.,
2002), and taxi drivers and the proportion of the brain dedicated to
mental maps (Woollett et al., 2009). One possible method for sur-
mounting this difficulty would be to repeat this study with a within-
sport design, using accelerometer data to differentiate those who ex-
perienced greater and lesser hits to the brain during the season. This
approach would, however, relate again to acute rather than life-time
cumulative effects of subconcussion hits. To examine life-time effects,
one might examine groups of retired football players with greater and
lesser previous seasons of play, although again one would need to in-
sure that the reason for participating in fewer seasons was not due to
lesser athletic ability.
In summary, with the caveat that our smooth pursuit task might not
have achieved sufficient difficulty to reveal group differences, our re-
sults do not provide support for the idea that cumulative subconcussive
hits accrued during participation in a concussion-prone sport affect the
behaviorally relevant, sensory motor task of smooth pursuit compared
to cross country runner and non-athletes. And while differences were
found with regard to fMRI imaging, the results are difficult to interpret.
The combination of fMRI and a behaviorally relevant task is a powerful
one. Future studies are needed for smooth pursuit and other behavio-
rally relevant cognitive and sensorimotor tasks, and controls should be
SES matched when possible. Within the literature, it is important to
differentiate studies examining acute versus life-time cumulative effects
of subconcussion.
Acknowledgements
Indiana
Spinal
Cord
and
Brain
Injury
Research
Fund,
NIH
R21DC013974. This research was partially supported by NSF IIS-
1636893, BCS-1734853 and NIH NIMH ULTTR001108 to FP. The
Indiana University Imaging Research Facility partially supported data
acquisition and preprocessing.
References
Abbas, K., Shenk, T.E., Poole, V.N., Breedlove, E.L., Leverenz, L.J., Nauman, E.A.,
Talavage, T.M., Robinson, M.E., 2015. Alteration of default mode network in high
school football athletes due to repetitive subconcussive mild traumatic brain injury: a
resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Brain Connect. 5, 91–101.
Abreau, F., Templer, D.I., Schuyler, B.A., Terry Hutchison, H., 1990. Neuropsychological
assessment of soccer players. Neuropsychology 4, 175–181.
Adams, J., Adler, C.M., Jarvis, K., DelBello, M.P., Strakowski, S.M., 2007. Evidence of
anterior temporal atrophy in college-level soccer players. Clin. J. Sport Med. 17,
304–306.
Bahrami, N., Sharma, D., Rosenthal, S., Davenport, E.M., Urban, J.E., Wagner, B., Jung,
Y., Vaughan, C.G., Gioia, G.A., Stitzel, J.D., Whitlow, C.T., Maldjian, J.A., 2016.
Subconcussive head impact exposure and white matter tract changes over a single
season of youth football. Radiology 281, 919–926.
Bailes, J.E., Petraglia, A.L., Omalu, B.I., Nauman, E., Talavage, T., 2013. Role of sub-
concussion in repetitive mild traumatic brain injury. J. Neurosurg. 119, 1235–1245.
Balaban, C., Hoffer, M.E., Szczupak, M., Snapp, H., Crawford, J., Murphy, S., Marshall, K.,
Pelusso, C., Knowles, S., Kiderman, A., 2016. Oculomotor, vestibular, and reaction
time tests in mild traumatic brain injury. PLoS One 11, e0162168.
Barnes, G.R., 2008. Cognitive processes involved in smooth pursuit eye movements. Brain
Cogn. 68, 309–326.
Bazarian, J.J., Zhu, T., Zhong, J., Janigro, D., Rozen, E., Roberts, A., Javien, H., Merchant-
Borna, K., Abar, B., Blackman, E.G., 2014. Persistent, long-term cerebral white matter
changes after sports-related repetitive head impacts. PLoS One 9, e94734.
Belanger, H.G., Vanderploeg, R.D., McAllister, T., 2016. Subconcussive blows to the head:
a formative review of short-term clinical outcomes. J. Head Trauma Rehabil. 31,
159–166.
Brahm, K.D., Wilgenburg, H.M., Kirby, J., Ingalla, S., Chang, C.-Y., Goodrich, G.L., 2009.
Visual impairment and dysfunction in combat-injured servicemembers with trau-
matic brain injury. Optom. Vis. Sci. 86, 817–825.
Broglio, S.P., Guskiewicz, K.M., Sell, T.C., Lephart, S.M., 2004. No acute changes in
postural control after soccer heading. Br. J. Sports Med. 38, 561–567.
Broglio, S.P., Schnebel, B., Sosnoff, J.J., Shin, S., Fend, X., He, X., Zimmerman, J., 2010.
Biomechanical properties of concussions in high school football. Med. Sci. Sports
Exerc. 42, 2064–2071.
Capó-Aponte, J.E., Tarbett, A.K., Urosevich, T.G., Temme, L.A., Sanghera, N.K., Kalich,
M.E., 2012a. Effectiveness of computerized oculomotor vision screening in a military
population: pilot study. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 49, 1377–1398.
Capó-Aponte, J.E., Urosevich, T.G., Temme, L.A., Tarbett, A.K., Sanghera, N.K., 2012b.
Visual dysfunctions and symptoms during the subacute stage of blast-induced mild
traumatic brain injury. Mil. Med. 177, 804–813.
Carroll, E.J., 1936. PUNCH-DRUNK. Am J Med Sci 191, 706–712.
Chappell, M.H., Uluğ, A.M., Zhang, L., Heitger, M.H., Jordan, B.D., Zimmerman, R.D.,
Watts, R., 2006. Distribution of microstructural damage in the brains of professional
boxers: a diffusion MRI study. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 24, 537–542.
D. Kellar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 413–424
422
 Chappell, M.H., Brown, J.A., Dalrymple-Alford, J.C., Uluğ, A.M., Watts, R., 2008.
Multivariate analysis of diffusion tensor imaging data improves the detection of
microstructural damage in young professional boxers. Magn. Reson. Imaging 26,
1398–1405.
Cifu, D.X., Wares, J.R., Hoke, K.W., Wetzel, P.A., Gitchel, G., Carne, W., 2015. Differential
eye movements in mild traumatic brain injury versus normal controls. J. Head
Trauma Rehabil. 30, 21–28.
Collins, M.W., Kontos, A.P., Reynolds, E., Murawski, C.D., Fu, F.H., 2014. A compre-
hensive, targeted approach to the clinical care of athletes following sport-related
concussion. Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc. 22, 235–246.
Crisco, J.J., Fiore, R., Beckwith, J.G., Chu, J.J., Brolinson, P.G., Duma, S., McAllister,
T.W., Duhaime, A.-C., Greenwald, R.M., 2010. Frequency and location of head impact
exposures in individual collegiate football players. J. Athl. Train. 45, 549–559.
Davenport, E.M., Whitlow, C.T., Urban, J.E., Espeland, M.A., Jung, Y., Rosenbaum, D.A.,
Gioia, G.A., Powers, A.K., Stitzel, J.D., Maldjian, J.A., 2014. Abnormal white matter
integrity related to head impact exposure in a season of high school varsity football.
J. Neurotrauma 31, 1617–1624.
Davenport, E.M., Apkarian, K., Whitlow, C.T., Urban, J.E., Jensen, J.H., Szuch, E.,
Espeland, M.A., Jung, Y., Rosenbaum, D.A., Gioia, G.A., Powers, A.K., Stitzel, J.D.,
Maldjian, J.A., 2016. Abnormalities in diffusional kurtosis metrics related to head
impact exposure in a season of high school varsity football. J. Neurotrauma 33,
2133–2146.
DeHaan, A., Halterman, C., Langan, J., Drew, A.S., Osternig, L.R., Chou, L.-S., van
Donkelaar, P., 2007. Cancelling planned actions following mild traumatic brain in-
jury. Neuropsychologia 45, 406–411.
Dompier, T.P., Kerr, Z.Y., Marshall, S.W., Hainline, B., Snook, E.M., Hayden, R., Simon,
J.E., 2015. Incidence of concussion during practice and games in youth, high school,
and collegiate American football players. JAMA Pediatr. 169, 659–665.
Downs, D.S., Abwender, D., 2002. Neuropsychological impairment in soccer athletes. J.
Sports Med. Phys. Fitness 42, 103–107.
Drew, A.S., Langan, J., Halterman, C., Osternig, L.R., Chou, L.-S., van Donkelaar, P., 2007.
Attentional disengagement dysfunction following mTBI assessed with the gap saccade
task. Neurosci. Lett. 417, 61–65.
Ellemberg, D., Leclerc, S., Couture, S., Daigle, C., 2007. Prolonged neuropsychological
impairments following a first concussion in female university soccer athletes. Clin. J.
Sport Med. 17, 369–374.
Friston, K.J., Frith, C.D., Turner, R., Frackowiak, R.S., 1995. Characterizing evoked he-
modynamics with fMRI. Neuroimage 2 (2), 157–165.
Fukushima, K., Fukushima, J., Warabi, T., Barnes, G.R., 2013. Cognitive processes in-
volved in smooth pursuit eye movements: behavioral evidence, neural substrate and
clinical correlation. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 7, 4.
Greenwald, R.M., Gwin, J.T., Chu, J.J., Crisco, J.J., 2008. Head impact severity measures
for evaluating mild traumatic brain injury risk exposure. Neurosurgery 62, 789–798
(discussion 798).
Guskiewicz, K.M., Marshall, S.W., Broglio, S.P., Cantu, R.C., Kirkendall, D.T., 2002. No
evidence of impaired neurocognitive performance in collegiate soccer players. Am. J.
Sports Med. 30, 157–162.
Gysland, S.M., Mihalik, J.P., Register-Mihalik, J.K., Trulock, S.C., Shields, E.W.,
Guskiewicz, K.M., 2012. The relationship between subconcussive impacts and con-
cussion history on clinical measures of neurologic function in collegiate football
players. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 40, 14–22.
Haran, F.J., Tierney, R., Wright, W.G., Keshner, E., Silter, M., 2013. Acute changes in
postural control after soccer heading. Int. J. Sports Med. 34, 350–354.
Heitger, M.H., Anderson, T.J., Jones, R.D., Dalrymple-Alford, J.C., Frampton, C.M.,
Ardagh, M.W., 2004. Eye movement and visuomotor arm movement deficits fol-
lowing mild closed head injury. Brain 127, 575–590.
Heitger, M.H., Jones, R.D., Dalrymple-Alford, J.C., Frampton, C.M., Ardagh, M.W.,
Anderson, T.J., 2006. Motor deficits and recovery during the first year following mild
closed head injury. Brain Inj. 20, 807–824.
Heitger, M.H., Jones, R.D., Dalrymple-Alford, J.C., Frampton, C.M., Ardagh, M.W.,
Anderson, T.J., 2007a. Mild head injury—a close relationship between motor func-
tion at 1 week post-injury and overall recovery at 3 and 6 months. J. Neurol. Sci. 253,
34–47.
Heitger, M.H., Jones, R.D., Frampton, C.M., Ardagh, M.W., Anderson, T.J., 2007b.
Recovery in the first year after mild head injury: divergence of symptom status and
self-perceived quality of life. J. Rehabil. Med. 39, 612–621.
Heitger, M.H., Jones, R.D., Macleod, A.D., Snell, D.L., Frampton, C.M., Anderson, T.J.,
2009. Impaired eye movements in post-concussion syndrome indicate suboptimal
brain function beyond the influence of depression, malingering or intellectual ability.
Brain 132, 2850–2870.
Helmer, K.G., Pasternak, O., Fredman, E., Preciado, R.I., Koerte, I.K., Sasaki, T., Mayinger,
M., Johnson, A.M., Holmes, J.D., Forwell, L.A., Skopelja, E.N., Shenton, M.E., Echlin,
P.S., 2014. Hockey concussion education project, part 1. Susceptibility-weighted
imaging study in male and female ice hockey players over a single season. J.
Neurosurg. 120, 864–872.
Hentschke, H., Stüttgen, M.C., 2011. Computation of measures of effect size for neu-
roscience data sets. Eur. J. Neurosci. 34, 1887–1894.
Hoffer, M.E., Balaban, C., Szczupak, M., Buskirk, J., Snapp, H., Crawford, J., Wise, S.,
Murphy, S., Marshall, K., Pelusso, C., Knowles, S., Kiderman, A., 2017. The use of
oculomotor, vestibular, and reaction time tests to assess mild traumatic brain injury
(mTBI) over time. In: Laryngoscope Investigative Otolaryngology, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/lio2.74.
Howell, D.R., Osternig, L.R., Chou, L.-S., 2017. Single-task and dual-task tandem gait test
performance after concussion. J. Sci. Med. Sport 20, 622–626.
Hutton, S.B., 2008. Cognitive control of saccadic eye movements. Brain Cogn. 68,
327–340.
Janda, D.H., Bir, C.A., Cheney, A.L., 2002. An evaluation of the cumulative concussive
effect of soccer heading in the youth population. Inj. Control. Saf. Promot. 9, 25–31.
John Leigh, R., Zee, D.S., 2015. The Neurology of Eye Movements. Oxford University
Press, USA.
Johnson, B., Neuberger, T., Gay, M., Hallett, M., Slobounov, S., 2014. Effects of sub-
concussive head trauma on the default mode network of the brain. J. Neurotrauma
31, 1907–1913.
Johnson, B., Hallett, M., Slobounov, S., 2015a. Follow-up evaluation of oculomotor
performance with fMRI in the subacute phase of concussion. Neurology 85,
1163–1166.
Johnson, B., Zhang, K., Hallett, M., Slobounov, S., 2015b. Functional neuroimaging of
acute oculomotor deficits in concussed athletes. Brain Imaging Behav. 9, 564–573.
Kaminski, T.W., Cousino, E.S., Glutting, J.J., 2008. Examining the relationship between
purposeful heading in soccer and computerized neuropsychological test performance.
Res. Q. Exerc. Sport 79, 235–244.
Kawata, K., Rubin, L.H., Lee, J.H., Sim, T., Takahagi, M., Szwanki, V., Bellamy, A.,
Darvish, K., Assari, S., Henderer, J.D., Tierney, R., Langford, D., 2016a. Association of
football subconcussive head impacts with ocular near point of convergence. JAMA
Ophthalmol. 134, 763–769.
Kawata, K., Tierney, R., Phillips, J., Jeka, J.J., 2016b. Effect of repetitive sub-concussive
head impacts on ocular near point of convergence. Int. J. Sports Med. 37, 405–410.
Kemp, S., Duff, A., Hampson, N., 2016. The neurological, neuroimaging and neu-
ropsychological effects of playing professional football: results of the UK five-year
follow-up study. Brain Inj. 30, 1068–1074.
Killam, C., Cautin, R.L., Santucci, A.C., 2005. Assessing the enduring residual neu-
ropsychological effects of head trauma in college athletes who participate in contact
sports. Arch. Clin. Neuropsychol. 20, 599–611.
Koerte, I.K., Ertl-Wagner, B., Reiser, M., Zafonte, R., Shenton, M.E., 2012. White matter
integrity in the brains of professional soccer players without a symptomatic con-
cussion. JAMA 308, 1859–1861.
Koerte, I.K., Lin, A.P., Willems, A., Muehlmann, M., Hufschmidt, J., Coleman, M.J.,
Green, I., Liao, H., Tate, D.F., Wilde, E.A., Pasternak, O., Bouix, S., Rathi, Y., Bigler,
E.D., Stern, R.A., Shenton, M.E., 2015. A review of neuroimaging findings in re-
petitive brain trauma. Brain Pathol. 25, 318–349.
Koerte, I.K., Hufschmidt, J., Muehlmann, M., Tripodis, Y., Stamm, J.M., Pasternak, O.,
Giwerc, M.Y., Coleman, M.J., Baugh, C.M., Fritts, N.G., Heinen, F., Lin, A., Stern,
R.A., Shenton, M.E., 2016. Cavum Septi pellucidi in symptomatic former professional
football players. J. Neurotrauma 33, 346–353.
Koerte, I.K., Nichols, E., Tripodis, Y., Schultz, V., Lehner, S., Igbinoba, R., Chuang, A.Z.,
Mayinger, M., Klier, E., Muehlmann, M., Kaufmann, D., Lepage, C., Heinen, F.,
Schulte-Koerne, G., Zafonte, R.D., Shenton, M.E., Sereno, A.B., 2017. Impaired cog-
nitive performance in youth athletes exposed to repetitive head impacts. J.
Neurotrauma. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/neu.2016.4960.
Kontos, A.P., Deitrick, J.M., Collins, M.W., Mucha, A., 2017. Review of vestibular and
oculomotor screening and concussion rehabilitation. J. Athl. Train. 52, 256–261.
Kraus, M.F., Little, D.M., Donnell, A.J., Reilly, J.L., Simonian, N., Sweeney, J.A., 2007.
Oculomotor function in chronic traumatic brain injury. Cogn. Behav. Neurol. 20,
170–178.
Landau, S.M., D'esposito, M., 2006. Sequence learning in pianists and nonpianists: an
fMRI study of motor expertise. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 6, 246–259.
Lencer, R., Trillenberg, P., 2008. Neurophysiology and neuroanatomy of smooth pursuit
in humans. Brain Cogn. 68, 219–228.
Lipton, M.L., Kim, N., Zimmerman, M.E., Kim, M., Stewart, W.F., Branch, C.A., Lipton,
R.B., 2013. Soccer heading is associated with white matter microstructural and
cognitive abnormalities. Radiology 268, 850–857.
Liston, D.B., Wong, L.R., Stone, L.S., 2017. Oculometric assessment of sensorimotor im-
pairment associated with TBI. Optom. Vis. Sci. 94, 51–59.
Maher, M.E., Hutchison, M., Cusimano, M., Comper, P., Schweizer, T.A., 2014.
Concussions and heading in soccer: a review of the evidence of incidence, mechan-
isms, biomarkers and neurocognitive outcomes. Brain Inj. 28, 271–285.
Mangus, B.C., Wallmann, H.W., Ledford, M., 2004. Analysis of postural stability in col-
legiate soccer players before and after an acute bout of heading multiple soccer balls.
Sports Biomech. 3, 209–220.
Martland, H.S., 1928. PUNCH DRUNK. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 91, 1103.
Maruta, J., Jaw, E., Modera, P., Rajashekar, U., Spielman, L.A., Ghajar, J., 2017.
Frequency responses to visual tracking stimuli may be affected by concussion. Mil.
Med. 182, 120–123.
Master, C.L., Scheiman, M., Gallaway, M., Goodman, A., Robinson, R.L., Master, S.R.,
Grady, M.F., 2016. Vision diagnoses are common after concussion in adolescents.
Clin. Pediatr. 55, 260–267.
Matser, J.T., Kessels, A.G., Jordan, B.D., Lezak, M.D., Troost, J., 1998. Chronic traumatic
brain injury in professional soccer players. Neurology 51, 791–796.
Matser, E.J., Kessels, A.G., Lezak, M.D., Jordan, B.D., Troost, J., 1999.
Neuropsychological impairment in amateur soccer players. JAMA 282, 971–973.
Matser, J.T., Kessels, A.G., Lezak, M.D., Troost, J., 2001. A dose-response relation of
headers and concussions with cognitive impairment in professional soccer players. J.
Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 23, 770–774.
Mayinger, M.C., Merchant-Borna, K., Hufschmidt, J., Muehlmann, M., Weir, I.R.,
Rauchmann, B.-S., Shenton, M.E., Koerte, I.K., Bazarian, J.J., 2017. White matter
alterations in college football players: a longitudinal diffusion tensor imaging study.
Brain Imaging Behav. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11682-017-9672-4.
McAllister, T.W., Flashman, L.A., Maerlender, A., Greenwald, R.M., Beckwith, J.G.,
Tosteson, T.D., Crisco, J.J., Brolinson, P.G., Duma, S.M., Duhaime, A.-C., Grove, M.R.,
Turco, J.H., 2012a. Cognitive effects of one season of head impacts in a cohort of
collegiate contact sport athletes. Neurology 78, 1777–1784.
McAllister, T.W., Flashman, L.A., Maerlender, A., Greenwald, R.M., Beckwith, J.G.,
D. Kellar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 413–424
423
 Tosteson, T.D., Crisco, J.J., Brolinson, P.G., Duma, S.M., Duhaime, A.-C., Grove, M.R.,
Turco, J.H., 2012b. Cognitive effects of one season of head impacts in a cohort of
collegiate contact sport athletes. Neurology 78, 1777–1784.
McAllister, T.W., Ford, J.C., Flashman, L.A., Maerlender, A., Greenwald, R.M., Beckwith,
J.G., Bolander, R.P., Tosteson, T.D., Turco, J.H., Raman, R., Jain, S., 2014. Effect of
head impacts on diffusivity measures in a cohort of collegiate contact sport athletes.
Neurology 82, 63–69.
Meyer, O.L., Castro-Schilo, L., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., 2014. Determinants of mental health
and self-rated health: a model of socioeconomic status, neighborhood safety, and
physical activity. Am. J. Public Health 104, 1734–1741.
Miller, J.R., Adamson, G.J., Pink, M.M., Sweet, J.C., 2007. Comparison of preseason,
midseason, and postseason neurocognitive scores in uninjured collegiate football
players. Am. J. Sports Med. 35, 1284–1288.
Millspaugh, J.A., 1937. Dementia Pugilistica. US Naval Med. Bull. 35, e303.
Miyashita, T.L., Diakogeorgiou, E., Marrie, K., 2017. Correlation of head impacts to
change in balance error scoring system scores in division I men's lacrosse players.
Sports Health 1941738116685306.
Mucha, A., Collins, M.W., Elbin, R.J., Furman, J.M., Troutman-Enseki, C., DeWolf, R.M.,
Marchetti, G., Kontos, A.P., 2014. A brief vestibular/ocular motor screening (VOMS)
assessment to evaluate concussions: preliminary findings. Am. J. Sports Med. 42,
2479–2486.
Münte, T.F., Altenmüller, E., Jäncke, L., 2002. The musician's brain as a model of neu-
roplasticity. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 473–478.
Nakagawa, S., Cuthill, I.C., 2007. Effect size, confidence interval and statistical sig-
nificance: a practical guide for biologists. Biol. Rev. Camb. Philos. Soc. 82, 591–605.
Nelson, L.D., LaRoche, A.A., Pfaller, A.Y., Lerner, E.B., Hammeke, T.A., Randolph, C.,
Barr, W.B., Guskiewicz, K., McCrea, M.A., 2016. Prospective, head-to-head study of
three computerized neurocognitive assessment tools (CNTs): reliability and validity
for the assessment of sport-related concussion. J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc. 22, 24–37.
O'Connor, K.L., Rowson, S., Duma, S.M., Broglio, S.P., 2017. Head-impact-measurement
devices: a systematic review. J. Athl. Train. 52, 206–227.
Parker, H.L., 1934. Traumatic encephalopathy (‘punch drunk’) of professional pugilists. J.
Neurol. Psychopathol. 15, 20–28.
Pearce, K.L., Sufrinko, A., Lau, B.C., Henry, L., Collins, M.W., Kontos, A.P., 2015. Near
point of convergence after a sport-related concussion: measurement reliability and
relationship to neurocognitive impairment and symptoms. Am. J. Sports Med. 43,
3055–3061.
Petit, L., Haxby, J.V., 1999. Functional anatomy of pursuit eye movements in humans as
revealed by fMRI. J. Neurophysiol. 82, 463–471.
Pierrot-Deseilligny, C., Milea, D., Müri, R.M., 2004. Eye movement control by the cerebral
cortex. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 17, 17–25.
Putukian, M., Echemendia, R.J., Mackin, S., 2000. The acute neuropsychological effects of
heading in soccer: a pilot study. Clin. J. Sport Med. 10, 104–109.
Rutherford, A., Stephens, R., Fernie, G., Potter, D., 2009. Do UK university football club
players suffer neuropsychological impairment as a consequence of their football
(soccer) play? J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 31, 664–681.
Salinas, C.M., Webbe, F.M., Devore, T.T., 2009. The epidemiology of soccer heading in
competitive youth players. J. Clin. Sport Psychol. 3, 15–33.
Samadani, U., Ritlop, R., Reyes, M., Nehrbass, E., Li, M., Lamm, E., Schneider, J.,
Shimunov, D., Sava, M., Kolecki, R., Burris, P., Altomare, L., Mehmood, T., Smith, T.,
Huang, J.H., McStay, C., Todd, S.R., Qian, M., Kondziolka, D., Wall, S., Huang, P.,
2015. Eye tracking detects disconjugate eye movements associated with structural
traumatic brain injury and concussion. J. Neurotrauma 32, 548–556.
Schmitt, D.M., Hertel, J., Evans, T.A., Olmsted, L.C., Putukian, M., 2004. Effect of an
acute bout of soccer heading on postural control and self-reported concussion
symptoms. Int. J. Sports Med. 25, 326–331.
Schütz, A.C., Braun, D.I., Gegenfurtner, K.R., 2011. Eye movements and perception: a
selective review. J. Vis. 11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1167/11.5.9.
Shin, W., Mahmoud, S.Y., Sakaie, K., Banks, S.J., Lowe, M.J., Phillips, M., Modic, M.T.,
Bernick, C., 2014. Diffusion measures indicate fight exposure-related damage to
cerebral white matter in boxers and mixed martial arts fighters. AJNR Am. J.
Neuroradiol. 35, 285–290.
Siegmund, G.P., Guskiewicz, K.M., Marshall, S.W., DeMarco, A.L., Bonin, S.J., 2016.
Laboratory validation of two wearable sensor systems for measuring head impact
severity in football players. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 44, 1257–1274.
Slobounov, S.M., Walter, A., Breiter, H.C., Zhu, D.C., Bai, X., Bream, T., Seidenberg, P.,
Mao, X., Johnson, B., Talavage, T.M., 2017. The effect of repetitive subconcussive
collisions on brain integrity in collegiate football players over a single football season:
a multi-modal neuroimaging study. NeuroImage: Clin. 14, 708–718.
Slotnick, S.D., Schacter, D.L., 2004. A sensory signature that distinguishes true from false
memories. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 664–672.
Sortland, O., Tysvaer, A.T., 1989. Brain damage in former association football players. An
evaluation by cerebral computed tomography. Neuroradiology 31, 44–48.
Stephens, R., Rutherford, A., Potter, D., Fernie, G., 2010. Neuropsychological con-
sequence of soccer play in adolescent U.K. school team soccer players. J.
Neuropsychiatr. Clin. Neurosci. 22, 295–303.
Storey, E.P., Master, S.R., Lockyer, J.E., Podolak, O.E., Grady, M.F., Master, C.L., 2017.
Near point of convergence after concussion in children. Optom. Vis. Sci. 94, 96–100.
Straume-Naesheim, T.M., 2005. Effects of heading exposure and previous concussions on
neuropsychological performance among Norwegian elite footballers. Br. J. Sports
Med. 39, i70–i77.
Straume-Naesheim, T.M., Andersen, T.E.,.K., Holme, I.M., McIntosh, A.S., Dvorak, J.,
Bahr, R., 2009. Do minor head impacts in soccer cause concussive injury? A pro-
spective case-control study. Neurosurgery 64, 719–725 (discussion 725).
Talavage, T.M., Nauman, E.A., Breedlove, E.L., Yoruk, U., Dye, A.E., Morigaki, K.E.,
Feuer, H., Leverenz, L.J., 2014. Functionally-detected cognitive impairment in high
school football players without clinically-diagnosed concussion. J. Neurotrauma 31,
327–338.
Tarnutzer, A.A., Straumann, D., Brugger, P., Feddermann-Demont, N., 2016. Persistent
effects of playing football and associated (subconcussive) head trauma on brain
structure and function: a systematic review of the literature. Br. J. Sports Med. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096593.
Tedeschi, C.G., 1944. Cumulative effects of repeated head trauma of minimal intensity.*
Observations on experimental animals. Exp. Biol. Med. 57, 264–266.
Thiagarajan, P., Ciuffreda, K.J., Ludlam, D.P., 2011. Vergence dysfunction in mild trau-
matic brain injury (mTBI): a review. Ophthalmic Physiol. Opt. 31, 456–468.
Tsushima, W.T., Geling, O., Arnold, M., Oshiro, R., 2016. Are there subconcussive neu-
ropsychological effects in youth sports? An exploratory study of high- and low-con-
tact sports. Appl. Neuropsychol. Child 5, 149–155.
Tysvaer, A.T., Løchen, E.A., 1991. Soccer injuries to the brain. A neuropsychologic study
of former soccer players. Am. J. Sports Med. 19, 56–60.
Tysvaer, A.T., Storli, O.-V., 1989. Soccer injuries to the brain. Am. J. Sports Med. 17,
573–578.
Ursache, A., Noble, K.G., Blair, C., 2015. Socioeconomic status, subjective social status,
and perceived stress: associations with stress physiology and executive functioning.
Behav. Med. 41, 145–154.
Vann Jones, S.A., Breakey, R.W., Evans, P.J., 2014. Heading in football, long-term cog-
nitive decline and dementia: evidence from screening retired professional footballers.
Br. J. Sports Med. 48, 159–161.
Witol, A.D., Webbe, F.M., 2003. Soccer heading frequency predicts neuropsychological
deficits. Arch. Clin. Neuropsychol. 18, 397–417.
Woollett, K., Spiers, H.J., Maguire, E.A., 2009. Talent in the taxi: a model system for
exploring expertise. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 364, 1407–1416.
Zhang, M.R., Red, S.D., Lin, A.H., Patel, S.S., Sereno, A.B., 2013. Evidence of cognitive
dysfunction after soccer playing with ball heading using a novel tablet-based ap-
proach. PLoS One 8, e57364.
Zuckerman, S.L., Lee, Y.M., Odom, M.J., Forbes, J.A., Solomon, G.S., Sills, A.K., 2015.
Sports-related concussion in helmeted vs. Unhelmeted athletes: who fares worse? Int.
J. Sports Med. 36, 419–425.
D. Kellar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 413–424
424
