 Why is changing health-related behaviour so difficult?
M.P. Kelly, PhD1 and M. Barker, PhD2
1Institute of Public Health, Forvie Site, University of Cambridge, CB2 0SR
2MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, 
Southampton, SO16 6YD
Abstract
Objective—to demonstrate that six common errors made in attempts to change behaviour have 
prevented the implementation of the scientific evidence base derived from psychology and 
sociology; to suggest a new approach which incorporates recent developments in the behavioural 
sciences.
Study design—the role of health behaviours in the origin of the current epidemic of non-
communicable disease is observed to have driven attempts to change behaviour. It is noted that 
most efforts to change health behaviours have had limited success. This paper suggests that in 
medicine and policy making, discussions about behaviour change are subject to six common errors 
and that these errors have made the business of health-related behaviour change much more 
difficult than it needs to be.
Methods—overview of policy and practice attempts to change health related behaviour.
Results—the reasons why knowledge and learning about behaviour have made so little progress 
in non-communicable disease prevention are considered, and an alternative way of thinking about 
the behaviours involved is suggested. This model harnesses recent developments in the 
behavioural sciences.
Conclusion—it is important to understand the conditions preceding behaviour psychologically 
and sociologically and to combine psychological ideas about the automatic and reflective systems 
with sociological ideas about social practice.
Keywords
behaviour change; public health; psychological theory; social practice; non-communicable disease
Introduction
The short answer to the question posed in our title is that it is difficult because policy makers 
consistently and habitually commit a number of errors when they set about changing health 
related behaviour. We draw attention to these six errors and suggest a different way of 
(Corresponding author) +44 1223 330 300 mk744@medschl.cam.ac.uk. 
The authors have no competing or conflicting interests.
Ethical approval was not required for this work as no new empirical data were collected.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Public Health. 2016 July ; 136: 109–116. doi:10.1016/j.puhe.2016.03.030.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 thinking about behaviour change using recent understandings derived from the social and 
psychological sciences.
That behaviour is critical to the health of the public is undeniable. The number of people in 
the world with type 2 diabetes is expected to rise from 366 million at the present time to 552 
million in 2030(1); and whereas about 17 million people died from cardiovascular disease in 
2008, some 23 million are expected to do so in 2030.(2) The response to and understanding 
of these epidemics must involve human behaviour. However it is not just individual 
behaviour of course which drives these epidemics. Behaviour takes place in social 
environments and efforts to change it must therefore take account of the social context and 
the political and economic forces which act directly on people’s health regardless of any 
individual choices that they may make about their own conduct.(3,4)
The importance of social, political and economic circumstances notwithstanding, the policy 
default has traditionally been behaviour change extracted from the contexts within which 
behaviour occurs. In some ways this is not surprising because the drivers of the epidemics of 
non-communicable disease smoking, diet, alcohol consumption and physical inactivity – are 
self-evidently behaviours. Foregrounding behaviour not only appeals to the apparently 
obvious but also achieves two other things. It avoids having to confront the complexity of 
the social, political and economic factors which influence people’s health and therefore the 
powerful vested interests who may not want people to change their behaviour to more 
healthy ways of living.
Changing health behaviours is therefore an attractive policy approach. What we focus on 
here is not that the broader social and economic issues should be considered, but rather that 
even in their own terms, efforts at behaviour change are not done very well. This is in spite 
of the fact that a great deal is known about the science of how to change health-related 
behaviour. The scientific literature is extensive and evidence based guidelines from NICE for 
example carefully describe how health behaviour change interventions can be made part of 
standard health and social care practice.(5) Yet over the years most efforts at getting people 
to change behaviour have had only limited success.(6) Our thesis is that although much is 
known, there has been a dispiriting failure by policy makers and politicians to put into 
practice what the science shows to be effective, preferring instead a range of approaches 
based on nothing much more than anecdote, gut feeling and common sense.
This paper outlines some of the typically poor reasoning that frequently gets applied to 
health related behaviour change in non-communicable disease prevention by politicians and 
policy makers and suggests an alternative way of thinking about the behaviours involved. We 
argue that in policy making (and often in medicine too!), discussions about behaviour 
change are subject to six errors and that the repetition of these errors has made the business 
of health-related behaviour change much more difficult than it needs to be.
Kelly and Barker
Page 2
Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Six common errors
1 It’s just common sense
The overarching problem is what amounts to an appeal to common sense, and this appeal to 
common sense is not only an error in itself but also leads, we argue, to the other errors we 
draw attention to below. By common sense we mean the idea that understanding human 
behaviour is so obvious that it needs little or no serious thought. It is, we suggest, 
deliberately anti-intellectual and anti-scientific. It sees itself as grounded in the real world 
and as therefore different from the woolly ideas produced by ivory tower academics, who are 
by definition divorced from reality. Schematically the argument goes that it is obvious what 
needs to be done, so let’s just get on and do it.
Quite apart from the philistinism embedded in such arguments, they are patently false. If 
changing behaviour was simply common sense, we would all be able to make whatever 
changes we wanted to whenever we wanted, and we don’t. So there is clearly more to it than 
that - ask anyone who has tried to give up smoking or lose weight. Change is difficult and 
requires sustained motivation and support. Just getting on and doing it is not the answer. 
Human behaviour is the result of the interplay between habit, automatic responses to the 
immediate and wider environments, conscious choice and calculation, and is located in 
complex social environments and cultures.(7) Moreover the behaviours which need to be 
changed are sustained and nurtured by highly profitable industries selling goods which make 
people ill – sugar rich, energy dense fatty foods and , alcoholic beverages as well of course 
tobacco.
The discourse of common sense needs to be confronted by the observation true of all 
science, which is that just because something appears to be obvious does not mean that we 
should not bother to study it.Nor does it mean that we can know little or nothing about it 
scientifically and we certainly shouldn’t default to simplistic ideas to answer what are 
actually complex and difficult questions.(8) With respect to human behaviour we must be 
clear that there is a science and more than two centuries of psychological, sociological and 
anthropological evidence which may be pressed into service. To ignore what we already 
know leads to much wasted effort and money. The assumption that we somehow intuitively 
know how to change behaviour and do not need to waste resources proving the obvious is 
wrong. Common sense has led repeatedly to ineffective interventions delivered at great cost 
in terms of money, resources and lost opportunities. It has also meant that the accumulated 
learning from the behavioural and social sciences has been ignored.
2 It’s about getting the message across
In a slightly more sophisticated vein, some argue that changing health behaviour is simply a 
matter of getting the packaging of messages right. The idea here is very simple. If we could 
only get the message out there in some form which people could understand and identify 
with, then they would change in response. However, the psychological sciences demonstrate 
that simple stimulus-response models explain only a small fraction of human behaviour. So 
the notion that response to messages says all there is to say about behaviour change is wide 
of the mark. The analogy which is often drawn here is with commercial advertising. 
Kelly and Barker
Page 3
Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Commercial organisations spend a great deal of money promoting their products but we 
have to be very careful about taking the analogy too far. Commercial advertising campaigns 
have a variety of aims and changing immediate purchasing behaviour is only one of them. 
They are also designed to raise awareness, to keep the company in the consumers’ eye, to 
highlight new products, and the changes in the amount of market share which follows these 
campaigns tend to be modest – certainly not of the order of magnitude required to reverse 
the epidemics of type 2 diabetes, obesity and alcohol misuse. Moreover, the highly 
sophisticated ways in which products as different as car insurance and chocolate are 
advertised belies the notion that it is simply a response to a simple message. The investment 
in social marketing campaigns which borrow heavily from the commercial analogy - 
‘Change for Life’ being one example - and their lack of tangible success suggests that the 
commercial analogy is flawed if applied simplistically to public health matters.(9)(10) We 
still have rising levels of obesity and NCDs and no scientific evidence that ‘Change for Life’ 
works. People are fatter than ever before.
Having said this, there have been some notably memorable health campaigns down the years 
involving advertising: “Don’t die of ignorance” in the face of the HIV epidemic in the 1980s 
being a very good case in point.(11) But what we need to remember is that this was a multi- 
level strategy and the advertising or messaging was but one part of a broad many pronged 
policy and was not the only component of the campaign. There was also a specialist agency 
–the Health Education Authority - which was central in organising the campaigns and 
working with leading advertising agencies on the copy. It employed very sophisticated 
advertising and promotional approaches which were indeed modelled on commercial 
practice including for example long-run, multi-media campaigns to build up trust among 
different audiences. Regrettably the Health Education Authority was closed down in 1999 
and the expertise it had developed was dissipated. A great national asset was squandered.
The key point is that purchasing a car or a tube of toothpaste is not the same kind of 
behaviour as making a decision to stop smoking or not to have unprotected sex. There is a 
great deal more to it than just getting the message across. Campaigns can have an important 
role and can be effective, but they are but one part of a total strategy and behaviour change is 
not just about simple messaging
3 Knowledge and information drive behaviour
There is another related common mistake of which the behavioural science literature warns 
the unwary. This is to privilege the role of information from expert sources as a driver of 
behaviour change. It borrows from traditional medical models of the doctor-patient 
relationship, the basis of which is that patients have an information deficit and come to see 
medical practitioners to consult them for their expertise to remedy their deficiency in 
knowledge and understanding.(12) In return they get information in the form of a diagnosis 
from which treatment proceeds. This is a model that works very well for patients with acute 
conditions. It tends to work less well for the chronic conditions that are the great 
contemporary medical challenge and where patients often have very high degrees of 
information and expertise,(13) and is even less effective in the realm of the prevention by 
way of changing behaviour.(6) Since for many practitioners, passing on expertise means 
Kelly and Barker
Page 4
Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 passing on information, what this model assumes is that if we tell people the negative 
consequences of eating too much or exercising too little, they will then change their 
behaviour accordingly. This is clearly not true and every front line clinician and practitioner 
knows it is not true. This fundamental belief about the role of information and knowledge in 
determining behaviour is wrong and unscientific. Giving people information does not make 
them change. In the course of our research, we have conducted a number of sets of focus 
group discussions with young women and with those who provide services for them for 
example. They tell us consistently that it is not that they don’t know that they and their 
families should be eating a healthy diet with more fruit and vegetables. What they say is that 
a host of other things in life get in the way of them doing this.(14, 15)
4 People act rationally
A linked misapprehension is that people act rationally, and that they do what they know to 
be sensible and logical after critical and rational appraisal of the evidence. Our job as health 
educators or public health advocates is to provide the evidence. Again this assumes that if 
you tell people what is good for them and what they need to do to protect their health, they 
will do it. Well they clearly don’t. There has been a long standing effort based on the idea of 
rational calculating humans designed to change behaviour which is premised on economic 
utility theory. The idea of economic utility theory is that the driving force of human 
behaviour is that people seek to maximise their pleasure or their gains and profits and to 
minimise their pains, losses and costs. The formal theory was called the subjective expected 
utility model.(16) The standard way of implementing such models in the case of health 
related behaviour change was to emphasise health threats (losses or pains) and ways of 
protecting oneself from those threats by changing some habit or other. Since the first models 
appeared there have been many others built on the same basic utility maximisation principle 
including the Theory of Planned Behaviour(17), Protection Motivation Theory(18), the 
Health Action Process Approach(19) and Stages of Change(20). Because these theories 
chime so well with the individualistic conceptions of human behaviour embedded in 
Western culture in which self-interested actors “obviously” maximise gains and minimises 
costs,(21) they have enjoyed great popularity in spite of having achieved very limited 
success.(6) Even where people are in possession of the information behaviour change can be 
very difficult. So we know that most smokers want to quit and that many people are 
permanently dieting in order to lose weight. But most smokers don’t quit and successful 
quitting takes multiple attempts. Most diets fail, not because people don’t know what is 
supposedly good for them, but because knowledge and its rational assessment alone do not 
drive behaviour.
Changes in smoking, eating as well as alcohol consumption and physical activity are 
processes and practices embedded in social life , not one off events triggered by information 
or prevented by information deficits. Neither are the processes the consequence of people 
applying a rational calculus to their own actions. Smoking, eating, drinking and the amount 
of physical activity people do are ingrained in people’s everyday lives and their routines and 
habits. These things to a very important extent help people define who and what they are: 
their sense of self is in part derived from these activities. Likewise the identities which 
others bestow upon then are partly the consequence of these behaviours.(22) The idea that 
Kelly and Barker
Page 5
Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 simply providing people with information to make them see sense and that once they have 
the facts they will change their sense of who and what they are – i.e. seek to be a different 
person to the one they are now - is specious in the extreme.
These utility theories also ignore of course the fact that that people sometimes act 
altruistically, selflessly, out of love, jealousy, fear, compassion, venality or fun. It isn’t all 
about a profit and loss calculus. The problem with this rational calculus approach is that it 
only deals with one part of the way the human mind functions. Humans are indeed 
calculating, thinking creatures and use a what psychologists call the reflective system to 
appraise external stimuli and act accordingly, having cognitively processed the data.(23) But 
only some of our behaviour works like this.(8) There is also an automatic system which 
responds to environmental and social cues in a way that requires very little conscious 
engagement.
The concept of ‘nudge’ in shaping human behaviour has been significant in popularising the 
importance of the automatic system. In a series of articles, Theresa Marteau and colleagues 
have made it very clear that health behaviour is much less rational and driven far less by 
conscious and cognitive processes than is acknowledged in the notion of the human using 
only a rational calculus.(24, 25) The proposition of nudge is that much of our behaviour is 
driven by automatic responses requiring little cognitive engagement, controlled by our state 
of mind and triggered by features of the environment. The ‘nudge’ refers to small changes in 
the physical or social environment that make specific behaviours more likely – placing fresh 
fruit and vegetables at the front of a food display is an obvious example of a nudge making 
healthier food choices more likely. Research into unconscious food choices and mindless 
eating has exposed how many of our decisions about what and how much to eat involve little 
rational thought.(26) This holds true for other health behaviours and undermines the basic 
assumption about the value of appealing to people’s logic if we wish them to change their 
behaviour.
5 People act irrationally
However, neither is the converse true. If people don’t act rationally all the time, neither are 
they always irrational. When someone with asthma refuses to stop smoking, we tend to 
dismiss them as very foolish or addicted or both. But what we tend not to see is that this may 
not be so irrational a decision after all given their lives and experiences. People have their 
own reasons for doing things. Behaviours that persist tend to be functional for people. In her 
seminal work, Hilary Graham found that women who live in very difficult circumstances 
with tightly constrained resources still find money for cigarettes and when asked why, say 
that sitting down for a smoke is the one opportunity in the day that they get a chance to do 
something completely indulgent for themselves.(27) In their context, smoking is therefore 
not an irrational thing to do. There is a considerable literature which has examined health 
behaviours from the point of view of the actors involved.(28–31) Whether this is about 
choice of food, decisions about breast feeding or walking and cycling it shows that one 
person’s rationality is another’s irrationality. It is extremely arrogant to assume that people 
consume alcohol, chocolate, or cream cakes, because that are irrational or are simply 
behaving thoughtlessly or stupidly. Human actors are profoundly knowledgeable about their 
Kelly and Barker
Page 6
Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 own behaviour, they can account for it in meaningful ways which not only make sense to 
them, but if we take the trouble to hear those accounts, the rationality within them is clear. 
(32, 33) So it is important not to dismiss the explanations people give of what they do just 
because the epidemiological evidence demonstrates that what they do carries a risk. This is 
well illustrated by the public response to the recent publication by the UK Chief Medical 
Officers draft guidelines on alcohol consumptions. The current scientific evidence shows 
that there is no absolutely safe level of alcohol consumption. This is something important for 
everyone to know. But the level of risk is the critical thing; so what is the risk compared to 
say smoking or driving a car, sitting in the sun or listening to loud music? The screams from 
the press and the leader of UKIP that this was yet another encroachment by the nanny state 
on the rights of individuals to choose how to live their lives, missed the much more 
fundamental and important point that many people find alcohol intoxication very enjoyable 
and like it. It gives many of them something very positive in their lives. They derive what 
they consider to be benefits from alcohol which will include socialising and having fun as 
well as intoxication. If we wish to bring down alcohol consumption that truism has to be the 
starting point, not worries about individual choice and fears of the nanny state.
6 It is possible to predict accurately
And lastly, though we have made great strides in identifying key factors which shape 
behaviour and in what works in changing behaviour, it is still very difficult to say with any 
certainty how individual people will behave in any given situation. In even the most careful 
of our models, a great deal of variance in individual behavioural outcomes remains.(34) 
Prediction of an individual’s behaviour and predicting accurately what changes will flow 
from a specific stimulus is limited to a small number of highly automatic responses and to 
relatively short time frames. At a population level, patterns of common behaviours may be 
observed and the outcome of those behaviours can be seen vividly in for example patterns of 
health inequalities, tobacco and alcohol consumption and trends in these over time and 
place.(6, 35) While we can describe these patterns in great detail, however, none of this has 
provided sharp edged tools with which to tackle health inequalities, the obesity epidemic or 
the rising tide of alcohol consumption. Knowledge about the relationship, the mechanisms 
operating between individual actions and societal patterns is thin and therefore offers little 
on which to base interventions. Important research is presently underway to elucidate 
mechanisms very much more precisely. (36) But it remains to be seen whether when this 
becomes available if it will stop policy makers falling back on platitudes about ‘getting 
people to change their behaviour’.
A way forward
So how might we better understand behaviour and behaviour change? We begin to answer 
this by way of an analogy - the inferences made by the famous fictional Oxford police 
detective, Inspector Morse. In the books and television series based on them, Morse 
discovers the perpetrators of murder amidst the colleges and quadrangles of that beautiful 
city. The genre is familiar and helps to illustrate the central argument of our paper. The 
fictional stories take us on a journey in the company of Morse and his assistant Lewis, 
during which we witness the forensic unpicking of the conditions preceding the murder. On 
Kelly and Barker
Page 7
Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 the discovery of the corpse Morse works backwards in time to understand the reasons for 
and the conditions which preceded the death and then to identify the murderer. Morse works 
by constructing a series of narratives about possible suspects and follows in reverse time, 
several potential causal pathways till he is able to construct a definitive explanatory pathway. 
What he doesn’t do once the corpse is discovered is predict how many more corpses will 
turn up (although with the apparent propensity for foul play in the fictional version of the 
city of dreaming spires, perhaps he ought to!).
Let’s think for a moment like Inspector Morse and look backwards in time to understand 
human conduct. Although the behavioural and medical sciences are dominated by predictive 
causal models, ordinary human reasoning doesn’t work like this. Ordinarily humans when 
seeking to explain why things are the way they are, think like Inspector Morse – they work 
to understand the immediate preceding conditions and then the conditions which preceded 
those and so on. So if they are running late for work for example, they might ask themselves 
why, and the answer might be they missed their train. Then they may ask why did they miss 
their train and the answer might be that they got up late. They might then ask why did they 
oversleep and get up late and the answer might be that they were out late the night before 
and so on and so on. They do not think about prediction other than perhaps to wonder if they 
are going to get reprimanded by their boss for being late. This forensic or regressive form of 
inference works in the opposite direction to a predictive model, although is premised on the 
same underlying idea of events in time.
Scientifically this approach can be illuminating where social and psychological factors are 
implicated. So it starts with an event (B) – a behaviour - and seeks to understand and 
articulate the preceding conditions which led to that behaviour, rather than starting with the 
preceding event and predicting the behaviour. It looks at B, (or C. or D or E) and tries to 
articulate what happened prior to B, C, D, or E. It then seeks to see what happened before 
that and so on. This regressive inference approach is premised on the notion that things do 
not happen in a random or chance way; social relations and social practices are patterned.
(37) They happen because of preceding events. However there is always some uncertainty 
about the constellation or figurations of those preceding events and how far one might 
regress backwards in time. However in the case of much human behaviour and especially the 
health related behaviours of interest in this paper, through careful observation preceding 
causal events can be inferred; although only ever imperfectly. In pure form this is entirely 
inductive, empirical and a posterori. This is the type of model which ought to be dominant in 
the public health where behaviour is involved. It acknowledges complexity and the fact that 
in the social, political and economic worlds the ability to predict very accurately other than 
in the most short-term of circumstances is very limited, but that understanding preceding 
conditions in the form of patterns and practices is usually useful way of thinking about what 
might be done to change things. This is the corollary of understanding the reasons why 
people do what they do from their perspective, rather than that of the scientific observer.
To demonstrate the usefulness of this approach in the worlds of medicine and public health, 
let’s consider the question of alcohol consumption. Habitually policy makers and politicians 
refer to the misuse of alcohol as if the consumption of alcohol was a single behaviour and as 
if it was possible to find a single solution to the problem of alcohol misuse. With alcohol 
Kelly and Barker
Page 8
Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 there are at least three different public health issues. First the overall levels of alcohol 
consumption in the population which have been increasing over decades and carry elevated 
risk for the population of all drinkers because there is no absolutely safe level of alcohol 
consumption. Second, very high levels of alcohol consumption in a sub set of the population 
where organ damage is the consequence and where the physical and psychological sequelae 
of heavy drinking over many years are palpable and will be fatal. Third, the relationship 
between so called binge drinking especially among young people and the public order and 
health outcomes. It is the two latter forms of behaviour which are alighted on by apologists 
for the drinks industry in the form of calls for more education, and to drink responsibly! 
Leaving aside the question of whether the industry itself might just behave more responsibly, 
these three different public health issues immediately suggeststhat the origins, the preceding 
conditions, of the patterns of behaviour, may be different.
To further disassemble this we need (just like Inspector Morse) to describe the preceding 
conditions of consumption among different groups, communities, age groups, occupations, 
even families from their perspectives. Alcohol consumption and patterns of behaviour 
associated with consumption are highly variegated across different social groups. So what 
happens at a wedding, in a student union bar, in an English country pub on a quiet Tuesday 
lunchtime, at an Oxford College High Table, at a club for young people on a Saturday 
evening, on a cruise ship providing holidays for gay and lesbian people, at a middle class 
dinner party, in a pub where a group of manual workers in middle age are drinking after 
work, will all be different. What is drunk, how much is drunk, what behaviour goes on 
around the drinking, the degree to which intoxication is encouraged, tolerated, ignored or 
discouraged are all highly nuanced features of the micro-social structures of each of these 
settings. All have immediate preceding conditions and all have more distant preceding 
conditions and of course individual people may inhabit several of these situations on 
different occasions.
The different patterning of behaviour manifested in these different groups or within their 
different cultural milieu act as an important point of reference for both the automatic and 
reflective psychological processes which operate. There will be both automatic and 
reflective actions within each of these contexts which will explain individual level 
consumption which will determine alcohol related disease and overall patterns of population 
consumption. Most humans inhabit multiple social structures and are highly adept at 
adapting their reflective responses accordingly. They tend to be less adept at controlling their 
automatic responses and in the case of intoxication less able to do so the more intoxicated 
they become. It is clearly pointless to try to design interventions to prevent excessive 
consumption on the basis of some a priori social category like social class or age or some 
overarching universal theory or model. Starting with the behaviour, identifying who is 
behaving and where, and working backwards using regressive inference is a much more 
profitable avenue for developing interventions. Interventions to deal with alcohol use must 
reflect the specifics and understand the preceding conditions of the specifics, like Inspector 
Morse, rather than try to develop interventions on a single unilinear model of causation 
based on long range predictions about behaviour change.
Kelly and Barker
Page 9
Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Conclusion
All this is to say that predicting behaviour and supporting behaviour change is neither 
obvious nor common sense. It requires careful, thoughtful work that leads to a deep 
understanding of the nature of what motivates people and the pressures that act upon them. 
If we understand these, we are better able to support them to change. In this respect, there 
have been major advances in recent years. Health psychology has made huge progress in 
identifying what it takes to change health behaviour.(7) Interventions to alter ‘choice 
architecture’ arising from the concept of nudge are an effective solution to altering some 
population-level behaviours in ways that improve public health. The scrupulous analysis of 
behaviour change techniques that has produced a behaviour change taxonomy that has 
advanced our understanding of mechanisms and of supporting change in the behaviour of 
individuals.(7, 38, 39)
There have also been important developments in sociology and in particular the conception 
of social practice. This conceptualises behaviour not as something that can be reduced down 
to things that individuals do and think as if they were isolated from others. It sees the 
relations between individuals and groups and institutions as the starting point and 
conceptualises things like smoking as a practice consisting of relationships between 
interacting people but which importantly exists above and beyond the individuals who do it. 
Smoking (like eating and drinking alcohol consumption) exist across time. New individuals 
are regularly recruited to the practice which is sustained and supported as new recruits learn 
how to use the materials, how to relate to the body of other people doing the smoking and 
what it all means. The practice transits across time and space and only fundamentally 
changes when the links between parts of the activity get broken and changed – as for 
example when smoking ceased being primarily defined as glamourous and tough and 
defined as a health problem and as socially undesirable. All of which happened many 
decades after the information was available about the lethal consequences of the practice. 
When the practice changed people changed with it.
The integration of the insights from contemporary psychological theory especially the 
distinction between the automatic and reflective responses and social practice theory offers 
perhaps the most exciting new territory for public health interventions. In schematic terms it 
means disaggregating broad behaviours like eating and drinking, breaking them down in 
time and place where different expressions of these behaviours occur. It then involves 
constructing accounts of the typical preceding conditions for those behaviours. The next step 
is to consider the extent to which automatic and reflective processes are at work. Finally it 
involves identifying the elements in the practices, the infrastructures, the meanings and the 
competencies exhibited by the people doing the behaviour and determining where the links 
between these things might be disconnected – and indeed whether they ought to be 
disconnected at all!. Thinking then of the mechanisms which might be linked to the 
disconnection provides guidance on the type of interventions which might be applied. This 
analytic and self-consciously academic approach turns on its head the idea that it is enough 
to give people information and tell them what they need to do to produce change in health 
behaviour. As a consequence, we need to change the way we as health professionals work 
with the public. In Southampton, we have developed and tested a method of individual 
Kelly and Barker
Page 10
Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 support for patients and clients of health and social care services that steers away from 
information giving and towards empowering and motivating individuals to generate their 
own solutions to their problems. This approach is looking promising in its ability to produce 
sustained changes in the way health and social care staff support behaviour change, and its 
impact on the lifestyles of different population groups is being tested.(40, 41)
Current public health policy stresses the potential of cumulative, small changes in individual 
behaviour to produce significant advancements in population health. The Behavioural 
Insights Team or ‘Nudge Unit’ advocates for changes in health behaviour through 
manipulations of small environmental cues. The movement in the NHS to ‘make every 
contact count’ recognises the opportunity that practitioners have to improve public health 
through supporting behaviour change in the millions of people with whom they come into 
contact.(42) It seems an appropriate moment to harness recent advances in behavioural 
science in the battle against the rising tide of NCDs threatening to engulf us.
Acknowledgements
MK had the original idea for this paper and MB helped to develop the argument and the ideas. Both MK and MB 
were involved in drafting and redrafting the paper and contributed equally to the final manuscript. The final 
manuscript has been approved by both authors,
No funding was received to support the writing of this paper.
References
1. Chen L, Magliano DJ, Zimmet PZ. The worldwide epidemiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus - 
present and future perspectives. Nature Reviews Endocrinology. 2012; 8:228–36.
2. Laslett LJ, Alagona P, Clark BA, Drozda JP, Wilson SR, Poe C, et al. The worldwide environment of 
cardiovascular disease: prevalance, diagnosis, therapy, and policy issues. Journal of American 
College of Cardiology. 2012; 60(Suppl 25):S1–S49.
3. Glasgow S, Schrecker T. The double burden of neoliberalism? Noncommunicable disease policies 
and the global political economy of risk. Health & Place. 2015; 34:279–86. [PubMed: 26117651] 
4. Kelly, MP.; Doohan, E. The Social Determinants of Health. Global Health: Diseases, Programs, 
Systems and Policies. 3rd ed. Merson, MH.; Black, RE.; Mills, AJ., editors. Burlington, MA: Jones 
& Bartlett; 2012. p. 75-113.
5. NICE. Behaviour change: individual approaches. 2014 Report No.: PH49. 
6. Marteau, TM.; Hollands, GJ.; Kelly, MP. Changing population behavior and reducing health 
disparities: Exploring the potential of “choice architecture” interventions. Emerging Behavioral and 
Social Science Perspectives on Population Health. Kaplan, RM.; Spittel, M.; David, DH., editors. 
Bethesda, M.D: National Institutes of Health/Agency For Healthcare Research and Quality; 2015. 
7. Michie, S.; West, R.; Campbell, R.; Brown, J.; Gainforth, H. ABC of Behaviour Change Theories: 
an essential resource for researchers, policy makers and practitioners. London: Silverback; 2014. 
8. Kahneman, D. Thinking, Fast and Slow. London: Penguin; 2012. 
9. Puhl R, Peterson JL, Luedicke J. Fighting obesity or obese persons[quest] Public perceptions of 
obesity-related health messages. Int J Obes. 2013; 37(6):774–82.
10. Behaviour change follow-up: Hearing before the House of Lords Science & Technology 
Committee. House of Lords. May 13.2014 Committee Room 3 Sess. 
11. Fowler, N. AIDS: Don't Die of Prejudice. London: Birkbeck; 2014. 
12. Parsons, T. The Social System. Glencoe, IL: Free Press; 1951. 
13. Kelly MP. Diagnostic Categories in Autobiographical Accounts of Illness. Perpectives in Biology 
and Medicine. 2015; 58(1):89–104.
Kelly and Barker
Page 11
Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 14. Barker M, Lawrence W, Skinner TC, Haslam C, Robinson SM, Barker DJP, et al. Constraints on 
the food choices of women with lower educational attainment. Pub Health Nutr. 2008; 11(12):
1229–37. [PubMed: 18298884] 
15. Lawrence W, Keyte J, Tinati T, Haslam C, Baird J, Margetts B, et al. A mixed-methods 
investigation to explore how women living in disadvantaged areas might be supported to improve 
their diets. Journal of health psychology. 2012; 17(6):785–98. [PubMed: 22044913] 
16. Savage, LJ. The Foundations of Statistics. New York: John Wiley; 1954. 
17. Ajzen, I. Attitudes, Personality and Behaviour. Chicago: 1988. 
18. Rogers, RW.; Prentice-Dunn, S. Protection motivation theory. Handbook of health behavior 
research: Personal and social determinants. Gochman, DSE., editor. New York, NY: Plenum Press; 
1997. p. 113-32.
19. Schwarzer, R. Self-efficacy in the adoption and maintainance of health behaviours: theoretical 
approaches and a new model. Self-efficacy: thought control of action. Schwarzer, R., editor. 
London: Hemisphere; 1992. p. 217-43.
20. Prochaska JO, Velicer WF, Rossi JS, Goldstein MG, Marcus BH, Rakowski W, et al. Stages of 
change and decisional balance for 12 problem behaviors. Health Psychology. 1994; 13(1):39–46. 
[PubMed: 8168470] 
21. Kelly MP, Heath I, Howick J, Greenhalgh T. The importance of values in evidence-based medicine. 
BMC Medical Ethics. 2015; 16(1):1–8. [PubMed: 25576996] 
22. Kelly, MP.; Millward, JM. Identity and Illness. Identity and Health. Kelleher, D.; Leavey, G., 
editors. London: Routledge; 2004. p. 1-18.
23. Strack F, Deutsch R. Reflective and Impulsive Determinants of Social Behavior. Personality and 
Social Psychology Review. 2004; 8(3):220–47. [PubMed: 15454347] 
24. Marteau TM, Hollands GJ, Fletcher PC. Changing human behaviour to prevent disease: the 
importance of targeting automatic processes. Science. 2012; 337:1492. [PubMed: 22997327] 
25. Marteau TM, Oliver A, Ashcroft RE. Changing behaviour through state intervention. Br Med J. 
2009; 338(a2543):121–2.
26. Wansink B, Sobal J. Mindless eating: the 200 daily food descisions we overlook. Environment and 
Behaviour. 2007; 39(1):106–23.
27. Graham, H. When Life's a Drag: women, smoking and disadvantage. 1 ed. London: HMSO; 1993. 
28. Hunt SM, Macleod M. Health and behavioural change: some lay perspectives. Community 
medicine. 1987; 9(1):68–76. [PubMed: 3581767] 
29. Ockene JK, Sorensen G, Kabat-Zinn J, Ockene IS, Donnelly G. Benefits and costs of lifestyle 
change to reduce risk of chronic disease. Preventive medicine. 1988; 17(2):224–34. [PubMed: 
3047727] 
30. Williams, SJ.; Calnan, S. Modern Medicine: Lay Perspectives and Experiences. London: UCL 
Press; 1996. 
31. Popay J, Bennett S, Thomas C, Williams G, Gatrell A, Bostock L. Beyond 'beer, fags, egg and 
chips'? Exploring lay understandings of social inequalities in health. Sociology of health & illness. 
2003; 25(1):1–23. [PubMed: 14498942] 
32. Giddens, A. Central problems in social theory: action, structure and contradiction in social 
analysis. Basingstoke: Macmillan; 1979. 
33. Giddens, A. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration. Berkeley: 
University of California Press; 1984. 
34. Barker M, Swift JA. The application of psychological theory to nutrition behaviour change. The 
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society. 2009; 68:205–9. [PubMed: 19243667] 
35. Kelly MP. The axes of social differentiation and the evidence base on health equity. Journal of the 
Royal Society of Medicine. 2010; 103(7):266–72. [PubMed: 20558547] 
36. Michie S, Carey R, Johnston M, Rothman A, de Bruin M, Kelly MP, et al. From theory-inspired to 
theory-based interventions: Developing and testing a methodology for linking behaviour change 
techniques to theoretical mechanisms of action. ann behav med. under review. 
37. Blue S, Shove E, Carmona C, Kelly MP. Theories of practice and public health: understanding 
(un)healthy practices. Critical Public Health. 2014:1–15.
Kelly and Barker
Page 12
Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 38. Michie S, West R. Behaviour change theory and evidence: a presentation to Government. Health 
Psychology Review. 2013; 7(1):1–22.
39. Olander EK, Fletcher H, Williams S, Atkinson L, Turner A, French DP, et al. What are the most 
effective techniques in changing obese individuals' physical activity self-efficacy and behaviour?a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2013; 10:29. [PubMed: 
23452345] 
40. Lawrence W, Black C, Tinati T, Cradock S, Begum R, Jarman M, et al. 'Making every contact 
count': longitudinal evaluation of the impact of training in behaviour change on the work of health 
and social care practitioners. Journal of health psychology. 2014; epub 8 April. doi: 
10.1177/1359105314523304
41. Baird J, Jarman M, Lawrence W, Black C, Davies J, Tinati T, et al. The effect of a behaviour 
change intervention on the diets and physical activity levels of women attending Sure Start 
Children's Centres: results from a complex public health intervention BMJ Open. 2014; 
4:e005290.
42. NHS Future Forum. NHS Future Forum - Summary Report second phase. London: 2012. Report 
No
Kelly and Barker
Page 13
Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
