 RESEARCH ARTICLE
Diacylglycerol kinase (DGKA) regulates the effect of the
epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatment valproic acid in
Dictyostelium discoideum
Elizabeth Kelly, Devdutt Sharma, Christopher J. Wilkinson and Robin S. B. Williams*
ABSTRACT
Valproic acid (VPA) provides a common treatment for both epilepsy
and bipolar disorder; however, common cellular mechanisms relating
to both disorders have yet to be proposed. Here, we explore the
possibility of a diacylglycerol kinase (DGK) playing a role in regulating
the effect of VPA relating to the treatment of both disorders, using the
biomedical model Dictyostelium discoideum. DGK enzymes provide
the first step in the phosphoinositide recycling pathway, implicated in
seizure activity. They also regulate levels of diacylglycerol (DAG),
thereby regulating the protein kinase C (PKC) activity that is linked to
bipolar disorder-related signalling. Here, we show that ablation of the
single Dictyostelium dgkA gene results in reduced sensitivity to the
acute effects of VPA on cell behaviour. Loss of dgkA also provides
reduced sensitivity to VPA in extended exposure during development.
To differentiate a potential role for this DGKA-dependent mechanism
in epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatment, we further show that the
dgkA null mutant is resistant to the developmental effects of a range of
structurally distinct branched medium-chain fatty acids with seizure
control activity and to the bipolar disorder treatment lithium. Finally, we
show that VPA, lithium and novel epilepsy treatments function
through DAG regulation, and the presence of DGKA is necessary for
compound-specific increases in DAG levels following treatment.
Thus, these experiments suggest that, in Dictyostelium, loss of
DGKA attenuates a common cellular effect of VPA relating to both
epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatments, and that a range of new
compounds with this effect should be investigated as alternative
therapeutic agents.
This article has an associated First Person interview with the first
author of the paper.
KEY WORDS: Diacyclglycerol, Diacylglycerol kinase,
Dictyostelium discoideum, Epilepsy, Lithium, Valproic acid
INTRODUCTION
Diacylglycerol kinases (DGKs) provide the first step in the
phosphoinositide
salvage
pathway,
functioning
in
the
phosphorylation of diacylglycerol (DAG) to produce phosphatidic
acid (PA) (Whatmore et al., 1999). Through this activity, cells
regulate levels of lipid (Milne et al., 2008) and glucose metabolism
(Banfic et al., 1993; Inoguchi et al., 1994), cell growth (Banfic et al.,
1993) and cell signalling (Cerbón et al., 2005). In addition, DGKs
regulate both inositol phosphate and phosphatidylinositol signalling
through the recycling of DAG, and activation of protein kinase C
(PKC; also known as PRKC) enzymes, which require DAG binding.
Owing to the numerous roles of DAG, and the ten DGK isoforms in
humans, few studies have considered a role for DGK-dependent
signalling in disease states. The exceptions to this are several
knockout studies that have linked various DGK isoforms with
epilepsy [DGKβ (Ishisaka et al., 2103), DGKδ (Leach et al., 2007)
and DGKε (Rodriguez de Turco et al., 2001)] and bipolar disorder
[DGKβ (Kakefuda et al., 2010; Squassina et al., 2009) and DGKη
(Baum et al., 2007; Moya et al., 2010)]. In bipolar disorder, PKC
levels are also elevated during manic episodes (Friedman et al.,
1993; Wang and Friedman, 1996), and lithium, a common bipolar
disorder treatment, is known to increase DAG levels (Brami et al.,
1993; Drummond and Raeburn, 1984). Surprisingly, no studies, to
our knowledge, have investigated DGK-dependent signalling as
an overlapping process relating to both epilepsy and bipolar
disorder treatment.
One widely used treatment for both epilepsy and bipolar disorder
is the eight-carbon, branched-chain fatty acid, valproic acid (VPA).
It was discovered accidentally in 1963 as a treatment for epilepsy
(Meunier et al., 1963), and is also used in the treatment of migraine
(Pryse-Phillips et al., 1997), with potential for the treatment of
cancer (Arce et al., 2006) and HIV (Lehrman et al., 2005). In a
clinical context, it is used at a plasma concentration of 0.3-0.6 mM
(DSMIV, 2000), but it is teratogenic, leading to enhanced likelihood
of birth defects if taken during pregnancy, thus limiting its clinical
use (Jentink et al., 2010). To develop novel compounds lacking the
side effects of VPA, but with a common therapeutic mechanism,
many studies have sought to identify its cellular effects and potential
targets. This research has been complicated by a broad range of
effects caused by VPA, linked to varying therapeutic (or adverse)
mechanisms (Terbach and Williams, 2009). One approach to
simplify this research is to use a tractable model system, such as the
simple biomedical model Dictyostelium discoideum.
Dictyostelium has been used to investigate complex cellular
mechanisms of both bioactive natural products and drugs,
including VPA. This pharmacogenetics research has employed
Dictyostelium, because its haploid genome enables the rapid
identification and ablation of genes encoding proteins that control
sensitivity to a drug in growth or acute cell behaviour responses,
thus implicating either the identified protein or the pathway that
it regulates in the action of a drug. In such an approach, the mutant
cell line might also show reduced sensitivity to the effects of the
compound on multicellular development, thus conferring resistance to
Received 10 May 2018; Accepted 3 July 2018
Centre for Biomedical Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway
University of London, Egham TW20 0EX, UK.
*Author for correspondence (robin.williams@rhul.ac.uk).
R.S.B.W., 0000-0002-9826-6020
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium provided that the original work is properly attributed.
1
© 2018. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Disease Models & Mechanisms (2018) 11, dmm035600. doi:10.1242/dmm.035600
Disease Models & Mechanisms
 the drug-dependent block in fruiting body formation. Dictyostelium
provides an excellent system to investigate the developmental
effects of VPA, because its well-defined process of cell migration,
coalescence and differentiation to form multicellular fruiting bodies
is sensitive to VPA (Boeckeler et al., 2006; Williams et al., 2002).
It is important to note that Dictyostelium provides the ability to
assess these behaviours as mutually exclusive cell functions,
controlled by groups of both independent and common proteins,
yielding a considerable advantage over other model systems.
Dictyostelium was the first model to show VPA-dependent effects
on phospholipid signalling (Chang et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2007)
relating to seizure control (Chang et al., 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016),
and on inositol phosphate signalling (Eickholt et al., 2005; Frej
et al., 2016; Shimshoni et al., 2007; Williams et al., 2002) relating
to bipolar disorder treatment. These studies have shown that VPA
reduces phosphoinositide levels in a time- and dose-dependent
manner (Chang et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2007), independent of
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase activity, inositol recycling and
de novo inositol biosynthesis. In Dictyostelium, VPA has also been
found to increase the levels of phospholipids, phosphatidylcholine
(PC) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) (Elphick et al., 2012),
implicating the phosphoinositide salvage pathway as a target pathway
of the drug. In both epilepsy and bipolar disorder, Dictyostelium has
been used to identify mechanisms underlying the therapeutic role of
VPA and also novel compounds for seizure control that have been
validated by confirmatory experiments in both in vitro and in vivo
mammalian models (Chang et al., 2012, 2014, 2015; Williams et al.,
2002). These various studies suggest that Dictyostelium could provide
valuable insights into the mechanism of VPA in therapeutic function,
relating to both epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatment.
Here, we investigate a role for DGKA in attenuating the effect of
VPA in Dictyostelium. The use of Dictyostelium as a model provides
the opportunity to ablate the single dgkA gene, creating a stable
isogenic cell line lacking all DGK activity, and enabling the
subsequent quantification of acute effects of VPA and congeners
on cell behaviour and development in the absence of this enzyme
(Chang et al., 2012; Cocorocchio et al., 2016, 2018; Xu et al.,
2007). Previous studies show that ablation of the dgkA gene gives
rise to altered development, where cells were able to form small,
but relatively normal, fruiting bodies (Egelhoff et al., 1993), but this
study was complicated by the proposal that the enzyme functioned as
a myosin II kinase, whereas it was later shown to provide DGK
activity (De La Roche et al., 2002; Ostroski et al., 2005). We show
that loss of DGKA, a proposed DGKθ orthologue, results in a
significant decrease in the potency of VPA in triggering acute cell
behaviour responses and in development. We further show that loss
of DGKA reduces sensitivity to the inhibitory effects of a range of
other potential epilepsy treatments and a structurally dissimilar
bipolar disorder treatment, lithium. These results suggest that DGKA
might regulate the cellular effects of VPA, relating to treatments for
both epilepsy and bipolar disorder, and newly identified alternatives
to VPA could function through the same molecular mechanism.
RESULTS
Dictyostelium DGKA represents the origins of the family of
mammalian DGK enzymes
Because DGKs catalyse the first step in the DAG salvage pathway
(Fig. 1A), we initially investigated homology between the single
Dictyostelium DGKA protein and the ten members of the mammalian
DGK family of enzymes (Fig. 1B-F). The Dictyostelium DGKA
protein shows a conserved domain structure generally found in the
ten human isoforms (Fig. S1), with three putative N-terminal
phorbol-ester/DAG-type 1 zinc finger domains and a DAG-kinase
catalytic domain (Fig. 1B). The catalytic site is highly conserved
between the human and Dictyostelium proteins and broadly
conserved throughout other kingdoms (Fig. 1C). In addition, the
Dictyostelium enzyme retains a conserved glycine (G262) that,
when mutated, abolishes enzymatic activity in COS-7 cells without
effect on translocation to membrane (Los et al., 2004; van Baal et al.,
2005) and two prolines (P245 and P246) necessary for full enzymatic
activity (Los et al., 2004). The Dictyostelium protein also contains
three cysteine residues necessary for membrane association of
the mammalian protein (van Baal et al., 2005). Although the
Dictyostelium protein shows slightly stronger homology to the
human DGKθ (De La Roche et al., 2002), the enzyme is likely
to function as a single, generic DGK owing to high sequence
conservation between Dictyostelium DGKA and all ten human
isoforms (Fig. S2). The cladistics tree supports evolutionary
conservation of the DGKs with tight clusters of DGK types 1-5 in
organisms with multiple isoforms (Fig. S3).
To analyse the role of the Dictyostelium DGKA enzyme, we
ablated the enzyme in an isogenic cell line. The dgkA− mutant
was produced by homologous recombination with a knockout
cassette, leading to the loss of 1072 bp from the central region of
the encoding gene including the catalytic site (Fig. 1F; Fig. S4).
Loss of dgkA gene expression was confirmed by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) (Fig. 1E).
The dgkA− mutant was then used to investigate sensitivity or
resistance to VPA exposure in both acute cell behaviour assays
and in development.
Investigating a role for DGKA in regulating the acute effect of
VPA on Dictyostelium cell behaviour
Because we have previously shown that VPA acutely blocks
Dictyostelium cell behaviour (Boeckeler et al., 2006; Williams
et al., 2002), we then assessed whether this effect was attenuated
following ablation of DGKA. This was carried out by monitoring
cell behaviour in wild-type and dgkA− cells prior to treatment, to
identify potential behavioural differences owing to loss of DGKA,
and following exposure to VPA, to identify altered sensitivity to the
behavioural changes caused by VPA. The logic to this approach is
that loss of VPA sensitivity in the mutant would implicate a role for
DGKA-related signalling or protein function in the effect of VPA on
acute cell behaviour in this model. In these experiments, cells were
treated with pulsatile cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) to
mimic the natural signalling pathways Dictyostelium uses to initiate
the process of changing from a unicellular lifestyle to a multicellular
phase, beginning with aggregation. These cells, in early development
with rapid cell movement, were then exposed to VPA for 10 min to
monitor changes in cell behaviour (Fig. 2A). As an initial approach,
we treated cells with VPA at 0.5 mM to show that wild-type cells
had halted in movement and formed a circular shape (Fig. 2B),
whereas dgkA− cells continued to move and remained amoeboid in
shape (Fig. 2C), after VPA treatment. We continued this analysis
by employing a recently developed assay for monitoring acute
changes in cell behaviour following drug or compound exposure,
enabling quantification of cell responses (Cocorocchio et al.,
2016, 2018). Here, cell behaviour was recorded using time-lapse
microscopy prior to and following the addition of VPA, and
computer-generated cell outlines were analysed to describe
changes in cell shape (circularity) (Fig. 2D-F), membrane
protrusion (Fig. 2G) and motility (Fig. 2H). In the absence of
VPA treatment, wild-type and dgkA– cells showed similar
circularity (0.71±0.02 and 0.65±0.04, respectively), protrusions
2
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2018) 11, dmm035600. doi:10.1242/dmm.035600
Disease Models & Mechanisms
 Fig. 1. See next page for legend.
3
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2018) 11, dmm035600. doi:10.1242/dmm.035600
Disease Models & Mechanisms
 (8.4±0.1 and 9.2±0.1, respectively) and motility (0.012±0.001
and
0.017±0.001 µm/s,
respectively,
suggesting
that
these
characteristics and behaviours are not grossly affected by loss of
DGKA. Following treatment, in all cell behaviour characteristics
monitored, dgkA− cells showed reduced sensitivity to the acute
effects of VPA, with around a twofold reduction in IC50 values
relating to membrane protrusions and motility compared with those
of wild-type cells (Fig. 2G,H). This was also seen when comparing
the average protrusion number in the absence and presence of VPA
(0.5 mM), with wild-type cells showing a 5.6-fold reduction, and
dgkA− cells showing a 1.5-fold reduction, following treatment.
These results suggest that, following the deletion of dgkA, the
effect of VPA on acute cell behaviour is reduced, implicating
either a role for DGKA-dependent signalling or the DGKA protein
in regulating the action of VPA in this model.
Rescuing the DGKA-dependent VPA sensitivity in acute
cell behaviour
We next investigated whether the reduced VPA sensitivity in acute
cell behaviour shown for dgkA− cells was through loss of DGKA, by
expression of a tagged DGKA-GFP in dgkA− cells (to produce
dgkA−/+). In these experiments, the expressed DGKA-GFP protein
was of the expected size (130 kDa, Fig. 3A), and was localised
within the cytosol (Fig. 3B), consistent with the localisation of the
mammalian protein (van Baal et al., 2005). Acute cell behaviour
analysis of the resulting dgkA−/+ cells showed reinstated VPA
sensitivity in relation to circularity, protrusion formation and
motility (Fig. 3C-E; Fig. S5). These results further support a role
for DGKA-dependent signalling or the DGKA protein in regulating
the sensitivity of cells to the effects of VPA.
Investigating a role for DGKA in regulating the effect of VPA
on Dictyostelium development
In Dictyostelium, VPA has been shown to block development,
where starving cells aggregate to form a mound and then develop
into a mature fruiting body over a 24 h period (Boeckeler et al.,
2006; Williams et al., 2002) (Fig. 4A). Because the development of
dgkA− cells produces morphologically normal fruiting bodies, with
distinct stalk and spore heads (Egelhoff et al., 1993), albeit of
reduced size, we can therefore analyse the sensitivity of this mutant
to the VPA-dependent block in fruiting body formation. Loss of
VPA sensitivity in the mutant would suggest that VPA functions to
block development in Dictyostelium through a mechanism dependent
upon DGKA-related signalling or protein function. We therefore
compared fruiting body morphology, in wild-type, dgkA− and dgkA−/+
cells, starved on nitrocellulose filters (Fig. 4B-E), in the absence and
presence of a range of VPA concentrations (0.3 mM, 0.5 mM and
1 mM) (Fig. 4C-E). The therapeutic (plasma) concentrations of
VPA in patients is ∼0.4 mM (DSMIV, 2000). In the absence of
VPA, wild-type, dgkA− and dgkA−/+ cells formed mature fruiting
bodies, containing a stalk and a spore head, although the overall
size of the dgkA− fruiting body was reduced compared with that of
wild-type cells, consistent with previous reports (Abu-Elneel et al.,
1996; De La Roche et al., 2002) (Fig. 4B). Fruiting body size was
restored in the dgkA−/+ rescue cell line compared with that of
wild-type cells, consistent with complementing the loss of dgkA
(Fig. 4B). In the presence of VPA at 0.3 mM (Fig. 4C) and 0.5 mM
(Fig. 4D), wild-type fruiting body morphology was severely
affected, reducing the aggregate size and stopping development at
the mound stage at 1 mM (Fig. 4E), consistent with earlier studies
(Boeckeler et al., 2006; Williams et al., 2002). In contrast, dgkA−
cells were able to develop into mature fruiting bodies at 0.3 mM
(Fig. 4C) and 0.5 mM (Fig. 4D) that were indistinguishable from
those formed in the absence of VPA, although development was
also arrested at the mound stage in the presence of 1 mM VPA
(Fig. 4E). VPA sensitivity was restored in the dgkA−/+ cell line;
fruiting body development was halted with a similar effect to that
shown for wild-type cells (Fig. 4C,D). These results suggest that the
developmental effect of VPA on Dictyostelium is at least partially
dependent upon the presence of the DGKA protein.
Investigating a role for DGKA in regulating the effect of
other epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatments on
Dictyostelium development
Research into the molecular mechanisms of VPA has yet to identify
a common mechanism for both epilepsy and bipolar disorder
treatments. We therefore investigated the role of the Dictyostelium
DGKA protein in regulating the effect of VPA relating to the
treatment of both epilepsy and bipolar disorders, using a range of
epilepsy treatments shown to be active in Dictyostelium and in
mammalian epilepsy models (Chang et al., 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015,
2016) and the commonly used bipolar disorder treatment, lithium
(Williams et al., 1999, 2002). The logic to this approach was that if
these compounds modulate the same signalling pathway or have the
same protein target, cells in which this pathway is blocked or has a
missing target will show reduced responsiveness to each compound.
This analysis was limited to assessing the developmental effects
of these compounds, because lithium does not show acute effects
on cell behaviour in Dictyostelium (King et al., 2009). In these
experiments, cells were again starved on nitrocellulose filter for 24 h
to initiate development, in the presence of a range of compounds
at concentrations that inhibited development and fruiting body
formation in wild-type cells, and the effects were compared
between wild-type and dgkA− cells (Fig. 5A). We first investigated
decanoic acid, a compound that attenuated phosphoinositide
signalling in Dictyostelium and provides a key component of
medium-chain ketogenic diet for the treatment of drug-resistant
epilepsy, with efficacy against seizure activity in an ex vivo
hippocampal slice model (Augustin et al., 2018; Chang et al., 2016).
This compound arrested wild-type Dictyostelium development at the
mound stage (at 1.65 mM), whereas dgkA− cells were resistant to the
compounds and developed into mature fruiting bodies (Fig. 5B). In a
similar manner, the branched chain fatty acid 4-ethyloctanoic acid
shows activity in both Dictyostelium phosphoinositide inhibition, in
ex vivo hippocampal seizure models and in neuroprotection (Chang
et al., 2012, 2013, 2015). This compound also blocked Dictyostelium
development at the mound stage in wild-type cells (at 0.5 mM), but
Fig. 1. Diacylglycerol kinase (DGK), within the phosphoinositide salvage
pathway, is highly conserved across kingdoms and ablated in
Dictyostelium. (A) Schematic of the phosphoinositide salvage pathway,
showing the recycling of diacylglycerol (DAG) to phosphatidic acid (PA) from
the extracellular membrane to the endoplasmic reticulum, via cytidine
diphosphate (CDP)-DAG to phosphoinositide (PI), and then back to the
extracellular membrane and phosphorylation to various phosphoinositides
(PIP, PIP2). Phospholipase C (PLC) regenerates DAG and inositol
trisphosphate. (B) Schematic representation of Dictyostelium DGKA and
human DGKθ, highlighting DAG binding domains and the catalytic domain.
(C) Conservation amino acids within regions of the DGK catalytic domain
(pink), with ‘.’ representing an intervening region. (D) Schematic of
homologous recombination used to produce the dgkA knockout fragment,
with arrows representing the primers used to create the two fragments which
were inserted into the knockout vector, and the area in yellow indicating the
region deleted. (E,F) A DGKA null mutant was created, with the deletion of the
core catalytic domain of the protein (E). Arrows represent primers used to
demonstrate loss of expression (RT-PCR) in the mutant (F).
4
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2018) 11, dmm035600. doi:10.1242/dmm.035600
Disease Models & Mechanisms
 did not block the development of dgkA− cells (Fig. 5C). As a related
control, a chemical with similar structure to these medium-chain fatty
acids, 2-methylhexanoic acid, that showed no effect on Dictyostelium
phosphoinositide regulation (Chang et al., 2012), and no effect in
seizure control (Chang et al., 2013), was used. For this compound,
both wild-type and dgkA− cells showed similar sensitivity during
development (shown for 0.5 mM), with both cell types showing
development arrest at the mound stage (Fig. 5D). These results
suggest that a range of compounds, identified in Dictyostelium
through the inhibition of phosphoinositide regulation and providing
strong seizure control in mammalian models, have reduced potency in
dgkA− cells, suggesting that the effect of these compounds is
dependent upon the presence of DGKA.
We continued the analysis of dgkA− cells in response to the bipolar
disorder treatment lithium. In Dictyostelium, lithium provides a
well-described effect through inhibiting development related to a
block in inositol phosphate signalling (Williams et al., 1999,
2002). To test for resistance to the developmental effect of lithium
following loss of dgkA, development assays were repeated using
lithium chloride (at 8 mM). In wild-type cells, development was
blocked after aggregation, in early development, at first finger
stage (Fig. 5E), as previously reported (Williams et al., 1999, 2002).
Fig. 2. Loss of DGKA confers reduced
sensitivity to the acute effects of VPA.
(A) Schematic of the acute cell behaviour
experimental procedure. Cells were
induced to early development by pulsatile
cAMP before being visualised under a
microscope, and cell movement was
recorded in the absence and presence of
VPA for 250 s and 750 s, respectively.
(B,C) Brightfield images before and after
addition of 0.5 mM VPA to WT (B) and
dgkA− cells (C). Scale bars: 4 µm.
(D,E) Quantification of cell circularity in
the absence and presence of a range of
VPA concentrations (0.01 mM to 0.7 mM) in
WT (D) and dgkA− (E) cells, with data
presented as mean±s.e.m. (n=30 cells).
(F-I) Schematic of the quantitative
measurements taken during the assay (F).
Black dashed line arrows represent the
measurement being taken and the resulting
secondary plots for data normalised to
control conditions of each cell type (100%)
for circularity (G), membrane protrusions
(H) and motility (I) for WT (black circles) and
dgkA− (blue squares) cells. A Kruskal–
Wallis with Dunn’s post hoc test was used to
compare WT and dgkA− cell lines. There
were significant differences in WT and
dgkA− cell displacement, circularity,
protrusions and motility, as indicated. IC50,
half maximal inhibitory concentration; CI,
95% confidence interval. **P≤0.01.
5
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2018) 11, dmm035600. doi:10.1242/dmm.035600
Disease Models & Mechanisms
 In contrast, dgkA− cells were able to develop into mature fruiting
bodies, showing distinct stalks and spore heads, following
lithium treatment. These results suggest that the developmental
effect of lithium chloride occurs through a mechanism dependent
upon the presence of DGKA.
Investigating a role for DGKA as a regulator of the effect of
epilepsy and bipolar treatments on DAG levels
We
then
went
on
to
quantify
the
molecular
changes
in
Dictyostelium DAG levels in the presence and absence of
DGKA, and following treatment with VPA, lithium and other
compounds, using DAG-specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA). In these experiments, cells were prepared in the
same way as for acute cell behaviour experiments, with pulsatile
cAMP to induce early development. Results from this approach
surprisingly showed that, in the absence of treatment, dgkA− cells
showed lower levels of DAG compared with wild-type cells, which
were only partially restored on reintroduction of the enzyme within
dgkA−/+ cells (Fig. 6A). We then treated cells with VPA at
concentrations in which dgkA− cells were resistant to treatment. In
the presence of VPA (0.3 mM and 0.5 mM), DAG levels
significantly increased in wild-type and dgkA−/+ cells compared
with dgkA− cells (Fig. 6A). In a similar fashion, cells treated with
lithium chloride (8 mM) also showed significantly increased DAG
levels. We also analysed the two unrelated structures with
demonstrated seizure control activity, again at concentrations
shown to block development in wild-type cells [decanoic acid
(1.65 mM) and 4-ethyloctanoic acid (0.5 mM) (Chang et al., 2012,
2013, 2015)], and found that these compounds elevated DAG
levels significantly above those in control (untreated wild-type)
cells (Fig. 6B). These results suggest that, in Dictyostelium, loss of
DGKA reduces DAG levels, and treatment of wild-type cells with
VPA, lithium and new compounds, gives rise to a common effect of
increasing DAG levels.
DISCUSSION
Mechanistic insights into the biochemical basis of therapeutic
treatments provides opportunities to increase our understanding
of signalling pathways underlying these disorders and for
the development of new treatments. In this study, we employed the
simple biomedical model system Dictyostelium to investigate the
cellular mechanisms of the epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatment,
VPA, through the key enzyme, DGKA, which is responsible
for the phosphorylation of DAG to PA. In mammalian models,
DAG is a second messenger derived from phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) through excitatory neurotransmitter
activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors to activate PLC
(Rodriguez de Turco et al., 2001). DAG has numerous roles
including in the activation of PKCs (Newton, 1997), transient
receptors channels (Lucas et al., 2003) and the endocannabinoid
system (Williams et al., 2003). The roles of DGK thus include
turning off DAG-dependent signalling, in addition to acting at
the start of the phosphoinositide salvage pathway for the recycling
of phosphoinositide signalling. By using Dictyostelium as a model,
we were able to ablate all enzyme activity through loss of one
protein, likely to represent the evolutionary origins of the family of
mammalian DGK enzymes, with conserved structure and key
amino acids. Consistent with the viability of yeast mutants, the
Dictyostelium enzyme is not vital (Han et al., 2008a,b), although
the encoded protein more closely resembles that found in higher
eukaryotes rather than that in other single-cell models, such as
yeast and bacteria (Cai et al., 2009). We show that loss of the
Dictyostelium dgkA gene significantly reduced sensitivity to the
acute effects of VPA on changes in cell behaviour and in
multicellular development, suggesting that the effect of VPA on
cellular function is at least partially dependent upon DGKA in
Dictyostelium. It is therefore likely that VPA acts to change a
cellular function in this model to cause acute and developmental
effects, where these changes are dependent on the presence of
DGKA, thus implicating either perturbed DGKA-related signalling or
DGKA activity as a cellular mechanism for VPA action. We further
used Dictyostelium development to analyse a range of compounds
associated with both epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatments, to
show that loss of DGKA decreases sensitivity to both treatments. At a
biochemical level, loss of DGKA appears to reduce DAG levels, and
exposure to both epilepsy and bipolar disorder treatments increases
DAG levels. Removal of DGKA therefore counteracts the effect of
these treatments in increasing DAG levels. These studies thus suggest
that, in Dictyostelium, DGKA might regulate a cellular mechanism
common for drugs used to treat both epilepsy and bipolar disorder.
In this study, we used the dgkA− cell line to assess a role for
DGKA in the biochemical activity of VPA. This approach is
unusual, as we have removed all DGK activity in these cells. Our
earlier studies have shown that VPA acutely blocks cell behaviour,
with a concomitant reduction in phosphoinositide levels (Chang
et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2007), and reduces inositol phosphate levels
(Williams et al., 1999). Here, we extend these studies, using
identical conditions, to show that loss of DGKA reduces the acute
effect of VPA on cell behaviour, and blocks the VPA-dependent
increase in DAG levels in wild-type cells. The most likely rationale
for this resistant phenotype is that of molecular changes in the
dgkA− mutant, either through loss of the enzyme as a direct target
for VPA or by alterations in cell signalling regulated by DGKA to
overcome the cellular effect of VPA in this model. Further studies
are necessary to investigate a direct role for VPA in inhibiting
DGKA, and to examine the VPA-dependent regulation of the
phosphoinositide salvage pathway (Fakas et al., 2011; Rodriguez
Fig. 3. VPA sensitivity is restored by expression of GFP-DGKA in the
dgkA null mutant. (A) Western blot showing GFP-DGKA expression
with loading control (streptavidin) for WT, dgkA− and dgkA−/+ cell lines.
(B) Fluorescence image of GFP-DGKA localisation in dgkA−/+ cells.
Scale bar: 10 µm. (C-E) In behavioural assays, cells were induced to early
development by pulsatile cAMP, before cell behaviour was recorded in the
absence and presence of VPA for WT (black circles), dgkA− (blue squares)
and dgkA−/+ (pink triangles) cell response to 0.01-0.7 mM VPA for circularity
(C), protrusions (D) and motility (E). Data are from n=30 cells, with secondary
plots using data normalised to control conditions of each cell type (100%).
A Kruskal–Wallis with Dunn’s post hoc test was used to compare the three cell
lines, for which there were significant differences between WT and dgkA−
(black asterisks), and dgkA− and dgkA−/+ (blue asterisks), cells as indicated.
*P≤0.05, **P≤0.01, ***P<0.001 and ****P≤0.0001.
6
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2018) 11, dmm035600. doi:10.1242/dmm.035600
Disease Models & Mechanisms
 de Turco et al., 2001; Walsh et al., 1995), phosphoinositide levels
(Chang et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2007) and inositol phosphates
(Williams et al., 1999, 2002).
This study provides the first analysis of Dictyostelium DAG
levels. We show that nanomolar levels of DAG in unstimulated
Dictyostelium cells (at ∼0.4 ng/107 cells) are similar to those
reported for human tissue (110 nmol/g), pigs (using porcine aortic
endothelia cells) (13.7 nmol/107 cells) and mice fibroblast Swiss
3T3 cells (1.4 nmol/107 cells) (Pettitt et al., 1997; Szendroedi et al.,
2014). Although Dictyostelium DAG levels were shown to be
variable, consistent with those shown in in vivo mouse model
studies (Rodriguez de Turco et al., 2001), the dgkA− mutant showed
a significant and large reduction in DAG levels. This result was
unexpected, because elevated levels of DAG would be expected
following removal of DGKA. Two potential mechanisms can be
suggested for this result. First, the cellular response VPA treatment
(or dgkA deletion) might be to upregulate the activity of the
Kennedy pathway, through which DAG is recycled to PA through
PE and PC to form CDP-DAG (Gibellini and Smith, 2010). This
theory appears likely, because VPA treatment in Dictyostelium leads
to the accumulation of nonpolar lipids in lipid droplets typically
consisting of DAG and triacylglycerol (TAG) species (Kalantari
et al., 2010), and includes PE and PC (Elphick et al., 2012). Thus,
enhanced activation of the Kennedy pathway might be induced by
acute exposure to VPA or to a chronic block in DGKA activity
(through gene ablation). A second potential mechanism could simply
involve the stabilisation or protection of DAG levels through binding
to DGKA, thus loss of the protein (as distinct to inhibition of the
enzyme) leads to the reduction in DAG levels. It must also be
acknowledged that VPA-dependent changes in DAG, although
providing a useful marker, could indeed arise through effects on a
variety of other metabolites to give rise to this effect. However,
through either direct or indirect processes, treated Dictyostelium cells
showed a significantly altered DAG level, suggesting that DAG-
dependent signalling might provide an important target pathway for
VPA, lithium and other compounds.
DGK-related activity might play an important role in epilepsy.
A range of studies have demonstrated a role for phosphoinositide
signalling in both seizure susceptibility and progression (Backman
et al., 2001; Chang et al., 2014; Shinoda et al., 2004; Vanhaesebroeck
et al., 2012), and this signalling is dependent upon DAG recycling
through DGK activity. In addition, mutations in several DGK
isoforms have been linked with increased seizure activity (Ishisaka
et al., 2103; Leach et al., 2007; Rodriguez de Turco et al., 2001).
The data provided here suggest that, in Dictyostelium, one action of
VPA is related to the cellular function of DGK, because ablation of
DGKA attenuates the effect of VPA. Further studies will be necessary
to investigate a VPA-dependent effect on seizure control through
regulation of DGK-related signalling. It is also interesting to note that
previous studies have shown a reduction in dendritic spines in
epilepsy patients (Muller et al., 1993; Scheibel et al., 1974), that
DGKβ controls dendritic spine outgrowth and maturation (Hozumi
Fig. 4. Loss of DGKA confers reduced sensitivity to
the chronic effects of VPA on development.
(A) Schematic of the development assay experimental
procedure. Cells were shaken and placed on a
nitrocellulose filter in the presence and absence of VPA
for 24 h to enable development before being visualised
under a dissection microscope. (B-E) Overhead and side
shots of developmental morphologies (B) under control
conditions, and in the presence of VPA at (C) 0.3 mM,
(D) 0.5 mM and (E) 1 mM, in WT (left column), dgkA−
(middle column) and dgkA−/+ (right column) cells.
Data are representative of triplicate independent
experiments. Scale bars: 0.5 mm (overhead view) and
0.1 mm (side view).
7
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2018) 11, dmm035600. doi:10.1242/dmm.035600
Disease Models & Mechanisms
 et al., 2009), and that VPA treatment increases dendritic spine
formation in mouse models (Yang et al., 2016). Together, these data
provide a view consistent with a role for VPA in regulating cell
function through alterations in DGK-dependent signalling pathways
related to seizure activity and neurological effects.
We also sought to investigate a role for Dictyostelium DGKA in
attenuating the effects of other potential epilepsy treatments. Here, we
employed a range of novel compounds, identified in Dictyostelium to
provide a similar cellular function to VPA, that show seizure control
effects in mammalian models (Chang et al., 2016, 2012, 2013, 2014,
2015). Importantly, these compounds lack the potential adverse
effect of histone deacetylase inhibition at therapeutically relevant
concentrations, and this effect has been linked to teratogenicity
of VPA and resulting birth defects (Jentink et al., 2010). Using
the Dictyostelium development assay to screen compounds, we
showed that loss of DGKA also provided reduced sensitivity
to decanoic acid [the therapeutically active constituent of the
medium-chain-triglyceride ketogenic diet (Augustin et al., 2018)]
and to 4-ethyloctanoic acid. In contrast, 2-methyhexanoic acid, a
related compound with low activity in Dictyostelium without
seizure control activity (Chang et al., 2012, 2013), did not show
differential effects between the two cell lines. Furthermore,
decanoic acid and 4-ethyloctanoic acid treatment also elevated
DAG levels at concentrations shown to block development in
wild-type cells, although the large increase in DAG levels shown
here
should
be
investigated
further
to
exclude
potential
nonspecific effects on the assay. These studies therefore propose
a role for DGKA in regulating the cellular effects of other potential
epilepsy treatments, beyond that of VPA.
DGK-regulated signalling also provides an attractive therapeutic
target for bipolar disorder. Data provided here demonstrate that the
previously reported effect of the bipolar disorder treatment lithium
on Dictyostelium development is overcome by loss of DGKA
(Boeckeler et al., 2006; Williams et al., 2002). Earlier studies in
Dictyostelium have shown that both VPA and lithium attenuate
inositol phosphate signalling as a mechanism for bipolar disorder
treatments (Eickholt et al., 2005; Shimshoni et al., 2007; Williams
et al., 2002, 1999). The reduction in phosphoinositide signalling
caused by VPA, through attenuation of DGKA, might therefore
underlie this change in inositol phosphate levels as a potential
mechanism for bipolar disorder treatment. This association is further
supported by the role of DAG in bipolar disorder-associated
signalling. In mammalian models, DGK competes with PKC for
binding to DAG, thereby regulating PKC activity, and dysregulation
of the PKC signalling pathway has been widely demonstrated in
bipolar disorder patient populations and following therapeutic
treatment (Sakai and Sakane, 2012; Saxena et al., 2017). Numerous
studies have identified upregulated PKC activity in bipolar disorder
Fig. 5. Loss of DGKA confers reduced sensitivity
to the chronic developmental effects of a
range of novel antiepileptic treatments and the
bipolar disorder treatment, lithium chloride.
Overhead and side view images of development in
WT (left column), dgkA− (middle column) and
dgkA−/+ (right column) cells (A) under control
conditions and in the presence of (B) decanoic acid
(1.65 mM), (C) 4-ethyloctanoic acid (0.5 mM),
(D) 2-methylhexanoic acid (0.5 mM) and (E) lithium
chloride (8 mM). Data are representative of triplicate
independent experiments. Scale bars: 0.5 mm
(overhead view) and 0.1 mm (side view).
8
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2018) 11, dmm035600. doi:10.1242/dmm.035600
Disease Models & Mechanisms
 patients (Friedman et al., 1993; Wang and Friedman, 1996), with
this activity being reduced by both lithium (Friedman et al., 1993;
Wang and Friedman, 1989) and VPA (Ramadan et al., 2011;
Watson et al., 1998) in animal models and patient studies (Katsel
et al., 2008; Soares and Mallinger, 1997; Wang et al., 2001).
Associations with bipolar disorder have been made with DGKβ
and DGKη (Baum et al., 2007; Kakefuda et al., 2010; Moya et al.,
2010; Squassina et al., 2009), with lithium treatment resulting in
accumulation of DAG in a range of models (Brami et al., 1993;
Drummond and Raeburn, 1984), independent of phospholipase D
(Nilssen et al., 2005). DGK also interacts with NR5A1, which in turn
binds to phosphatidylinositol headgroups, in particular PI(3,4)P2 and
PI(3,4,5)P3, providing a mechanism of DGK-dependent regulation
of phosphoinositides beyond that of DAG recycling (Blind et al.,
2014). Thus a VPA- and lithium-dependent effect on signalling
components controlled by, or involving, DGK activity could provide
a biochemical mechanism underlying the treatment of patients with
bipolar disorder.
Developing new treatments for bipolar disorder has remained a
difficult prospect owing to a lack of clarity regarding a therapeutic
mechanism of current drugs. One approach to overcome this is
based upon the observation that a range of antiepileptic drugs are
also effective in the treatment of bipolar disorder (Rogawski and
Loscher, 2004). In earlier studies, we have successfully translated a
common molecular mechanism relating to both epilepsy and bipolar
disorder treatments from Dictyostelium to mammalian neurons,
demonstrating that it is possible to model bipolar disorder drug
mechanisms in Dictyostelium (Williams et al., 2002, 1999). In our
current study, we show that novel compounds (decanoic acid and
4-ethyloctanoic acid) function through modulating a DGKA-related
pathway commonly affected by lithium and VPA, suggesting that
these compounds should be investigated as new treatments for
bipolar disorder as well as epilepsy.
In summary, VPA is a widely used treatment for both epilepsy
and bipolar disorder, without a clear mechanism of action and with
significant side effects. Here, we propose that signalling regulated
by DGK could provide a key role in the mechanisms of action
for VPA (Fig. 7), in addition to other proposed therapeutic
compounds that could provide treatments for both epilepsy and
bipolar disorder.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents
All compounds were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Dorset, UK) unless
otherwise stated. Axenic medium, SM agar, phosphate buffer (KK2) and
blasticidin were obtained from ForMedium (Norfolk, UK). Penicillin-
streptomycin was purchased from Gibco (Paisley, UK), decanoic acid was
from Alfa Aesar (Massachusetts, USA) and all enzymes were purchased
from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Hemel Hempstead, UK).
Cell culture, strains and plasmids
Dictyostelium cell lines were grown at 22°C in Axenic medium which
contained 100 µg/ml penicillin-streptomycin. dgkA− cell lines were
generated from wild-type (Ax2) cells. Creation of the dgkA knockout
Fig. 6. Dictyostelium DGKA-dependent DAG regulation following treatment with VPA, lithium and novel antiepileptic compounds. WT, dgkA−
and dgkA−/+ cells were induced into early development by pulsatile cAMP and exposed to VPA, lithium or novel antiepileptic treatments, as indicated,
for 10 min prior to ELISA quantification. (A) DAG levels in WT (black), dgkA− (blue) and dgkA−/+ (pink) cells under control conditions and in the presence
of 0.3 mM and 0.5 mM VPA and 8 mM LiCl. (B) DAG levels in WT cells in the absence (control) and presence of decanoic acid (1.65 mM) and 4-ethyloctanoic
acid (0.5 mM). Data are mean±s.e.m. A Mann–Whitney test was used to compare the different cell lines and conditions, with a significant difference shown
between WT and dgkA− cells (**P<0.01) and between dgkA− and dgkA−/+ cells (+P<0.05). Data are representative of quadruplicate independent experiments
with duplicate technical repeats.
Fig. 7. Proposing a mechanism for VPA, linking epilepsy and bipolar
disorder with the phosphoinositide salvage pathway. Phosphoinositide
signalling (pink oval) has been widely shown to be deregulated in seizures
and epilepsy, is regulated by VPA, and is dependent upon the salvage
pathway involving DAG and DGKs. In addition, protein kinase C (PKC)
activity is regulated by DAG, and numerous studies have described changes
in PKC pathway activation in bipolar disorder studies (blue oval), in which
patients are treated with VPA or lithium. Our data, based on the model system
Dictyostelium, suggest that loss of the DGK enzyme reduces the effect of
both VPA and lithium, and reduces DAG levels, and that both compounds
(and other potential new epilepsy treatments) function to commonly elevate
DAG levels. Further pre-clinical and clinical studies are therefore needed to
investigate DAG and related signalling as a target pathway in the treatment of
both disorders.
9
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2018) 11, dmm035600. doi:10.1242/dmm.035600
Disease Models & Mechanisms
 construct was as previously described (Pakes et al., 2012). DNA was
amplified from the 5′ and 3′ regions of the dgkA gene (DDB_G0277223)
(Fey et al., 2013) and cloned into the pLPBLP vector on either side of a
blasticidin resistance cassette using the restriction enzymes BamHI, PstI,
NcoI and HindIII. The knockout cassettewas excised from the vector through
restriction digestion and electroporated into wild-type cells. Transformants
were selected in medium containing 10 µg/ml blasticidin, and surviving
colonies were screened by PCR for homologous integration using a genomic
and vector control bands and a diagnostic band. RT-PCR (First Strand
cDNA Synthesis Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was performed to confirm
loss of gene transcription. The dgkA−/+ rescue cell line was produced using
the pTX-FLAG-DGK-GFP plasmid vector, which was kindly provided by
T. Egelhoff (De La Roche et al., 2002).
Dictyostelium random cell movement assay
As previously described (Cocorocchio et al., 2016, 2018), wild-type and
transformant cells (1×107) were harvested from mid-log-phase-growing
shaking cultures and washed in phosphate buffer, resuspended at 1×107
cells in 6 ml phosphate buffer, and pulsed with 30 nM cAMP at 6 min
intervals for 5 h at 120 rpm. Cells were further washed in phosphate
buffer, resuspended in 4 ml phosphate buffer and diluted 1:10. Cells
(250 µl) were placed in a Nunc Lab-Tek coverglass chamber (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) and incubated for 15 min in order for the cells to adhere prior to
time-lapse microscopy for 900 s. After a control period of 225 s, 250 µl of
double concentrate compound was added, and change in cell behaviour
was monitored at 30 cells per condition from at least three independent
experiments. To analyse random cell movement, the ImageJ Quimp 11b
software package and accompanying scripts for MATLAB analysis were
used. Individual cells were segmented and cell behaviour before and after
drug addition were quantified using measures of circularity (where the
ratio of perpendicular axes through each cell provides a ratio, with ‘1’
indicating a perfect circle), protrusion formation (defined within motility
maps as regional peaks exceeding an average speed of 0.1 µm/s, and
counted automatically over a running window of 10 frames) to represent
protrusive activity within short time periods, centred around discrete time
points) and motility between each frame (local membrane velocities
between frame motility maps), counted automatically over a ten-frame
running window.
Dictyostelium development assay
Dictyostelium wild-type and mutant cells (1×107 cells) were washed in
phosphate buffer and developed on a nitrocellulose membrane filter above a
hydrophobic membrane filter (both from Millipore, Watford, UK) in the
absence or presence of compounds. Filters were incubated for 24 h at 22°C
prior to imaging. Experiments were repeated over at least three independent
experiments.
DAG analysis
Levels of DAG were determined using ELISA (General ELISA Kit for
Diacylglycerol, E2038Ge, Amsbio, Abingdon, UK). Cells were prepared by
pulsing with cAMP (as described for cell behaviour assays). DAG levels
were then measured from 5×106 cells, treated with VPA (0.3 mM–0.5 mM)
or lithium chloride (8 mM) for 10 min in shaking suspension. Cells were
washed in phosphate buffer and resuspended in 100 µl phosphate buffer.
The cell wall fraction was obtained from six rounds of freeze-thaw (3 min
each), centrifuged (10,000 g, 10 min, 4°C) and the pellet was resuspended
in 100 µl sample diluent from the kit. ELISA was conducted following the
supplier’s instructions. Data are derived from at least triplicate independent
experiments.
Data analysis and statistics
In the analysis of cell behaviour, a Kruskal–Wallis analysis with Dunn’s
post hoc test was employed to test for statistically significant changes
between three independent groups (wild type, dgkA− and dgkA−/+) that were
not
normally
distributed.
Differences
were
considered
statistically
significant if the P-value was less than 0.05. In the analysis of DAG
levels, a Mann–Whitney analysis was employed to test for statistically
significant changes between groups, again with data that were not
normally distributed but enabling direct paired groups.
Acknowledgements
We thank M. Walker for comments on the manuscript, T. Egelhoff for provision of the
GFP-DGK-expressing plasmid, and Dictybase.org and the Dictybase Stock Centre
for provision of Dictyostelium strains and materials.
Competing interests
R.S.B.W. has a range of patents submitted regarding new treatments for epilepsy
and bipolar disorder, including compounds cited in this study.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: C.J.W., R.S.B.W.; Methodology: E.K., D.S., R.S.B.W.;
Validation: D.S.; Formal analysis: E.K., D.S., R.S.B.W.; Investigation: E.K., D.S.,
R.S.B.W.; Data curation: E.K., R.S.B.W.; Writing - original draft: E.K., R.S.B.W.;
Writing - review & editing: E.K., D.S., C.J.W., R.S.B.W.; Visualization: E.K.,
R.S.B.W.; Supervision: C.J.W., R.S.B.W.; Project administration: C.J.W., R.S.B.W.;
Funding acquisition: R.S.B.W.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Centre for the Replacement, Refinement
and Reduction of Animals in Research (NC/L001500/1).
Supplementary information
Supplementary information available online at
http://dmm.biologists.org/lookup/doi/10.1242/dmm.035600.supplemental
References
Abu-Elneel, K., Karchi, M. and Ravid, S. (1996). Dictyostelium myosin II is
regulated during chemotaxis by a novel protein kinase C. J. Biol. Chem.
271, 977-984.
Arce, C., Pérez-Plasencia, C., González-Fierro, A., de la Cruz-Hernández, E.,
Revilla-Vázquez, A., Chávez-Blanco, A., Trejo-Becerril, C., Pérez-Cárdenas, E.,
Taja-Chayeb, L., Bargallo, E. et al. (2006). A proof-of-principle study of
epigenetic therapy added to neoadjuvant doxorubicin cyclophosphamide for
locally advanced breast cancer. PLoS ONE 1, e98.
Augustin, K., Khabbush, A., Williams, S., Eaton, S., Orford, M., Cross, J. H.,
Heales, S. J. R., Walker, M. C. and Williams, R. S. B. (2018). Mechanisms of
action for the medium-chain triglyceride ketogenic diet in neurological and
metabolic disorders. Lancet Neurol. 17, 84-93.
Backman, S. A., Stambolic, V., Suzuki, A., Haight, J., Elia, A., Pretorius, J.,
Tsao, M.-S., Shannon, P., Bolon, B., Ivy, G. O. et al. (2001). Deletion of Pten in
mouse brain causes seizures, ataxia and defects in soma size resembling
Lhermitte-Duclos disease. Nat. Genet. 29, 396-403.
Banfić, H., Žiz
̌ ak, M., Divecha, N. and Irvine, R. F. (1993). Nuclear
diacylglycerol is increased during cell proliferation in vivo. Biochem. J.
290, 633-636.
Baum, A. E., Akula, N., Cabanero, M., Cardona, I., Corona, W., Klemens, B.,
Schulze, T. G., Cichon, S., Rietschel, M., No
̈ then, M. M. et al. (2007).
A genome-wide association study implicates diacylglycerol kinase eta (DGKH)
and several other genes in the etiology of bipolar disorder. Mol. Psychiatry
13, 197-207.
Blind, R. D., Sablin, E. P., Kuchenbecker, K. M., Chiu, H.-J., Deacon, A. M.,
Das, D., Fletterick, R. J. and Ingraham, H. A. (2014). The signaling phospholipid
PIP3 creates a new interaction surface on the nuclear receptor SF-1. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 111, 15054-15059.
Boeckeler, K., Adley, K., Xu, X., Jenkins, A., Jin, T. and Williams, R. S. B. (2006).
The neuroprotective agent, valproic acid, regulates the mitogen-activated protein
kinase pathway through modulation of protein kinase A signalling in Dictyostelium
discoideum. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 85, 1047-1057.
Brami, B. A., Leli, U. and Hauser, G. (1993). Elevated phosphatidyl-CMP is not the
source of diacylglycerol accumulation induced by lithium in NG108-15 cells.
J. Neurochem. 60, 1137-1142.
Cai,
J.,
Abramovici,
H.,
Gee,
S.
H.
and
Topham,
M.
K.
(2009).
Diacylglycerol kinases as sources of phosphatidic acid. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1791, 942-948.
Cerbón, J., Falcon, A., Hernández-Luna, C. and Segura-Cobos, D. (2005).
Inositol phosphoceramide synthase is a regulator of intracellular levels of
diacylglycerol and ceramide during the G1 to S transition in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Biochem. J. 388, 169-176.
Chang, P., Orabi, B., Deranieh, R. M., Dham, M., Hoeller, O., Shimshoni, J. A.,
Yagen, B., Bialer, M., Greenberg, M. L., Walker, M. C. et al. (2012).
The antiepileptic drug valproic acid and other medium-chain fatty acids acutely
reduce phosphoinositide levels independently of inositol in Dictyostelium. Dis.
Model. Mech. 5, 115-124.
10
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2018) 11, dmm035600. doi:10.1242/dmm.035600
Disease Models & Mechanisms
 Chang,
P.,
Terbach,
N.,
Plant,
N.,
Chen,
P.
E.,
Walker,
M.
C.
and
Williams, R. S. B. (2013). Seizure control by ketogenic diet-associated medium
chain fatty acids. Neuropharmacology 69, 105-114.
Chang, P., Walker, M. C. and Williams, R. S. B. (2014). Seizure-induced reduction
in PIP3 levels contributes to seizure-activity and is rescued by valproic acid.
Neurobiol. Dis. 62, 296-306.
Chang, P., Zuckermann, A. M. E., Williams, S., Close, A. J., Cano-Jaimez, M.,
McEvoy, J. P., Spencer, J., Walker, M. C. and Williams, R. S. B. (2015). Seizure
control by derivatives of medium chain fatty acids associated with the ketogenic
diet show novel branching-point structure for enhanced potency. J. Pharmacol.
Exp. Ther. 352, 43-52.
Chang, P., Augustin, K., Boddum, K., Williams, S., Sun, M., Terschak, J. A.,
Hardege, J. D., Chen, P. E., Walker, M. C. and Williams, R. S. B. (2016).
Seizure control by decanoic acid through direct AMPA receptor inhibition. Brain
139, 431-443.
Cocorocchio, M., Ives, R., Clapham, D., Andrews, P. L. and Williams, R. S.
(2016). Bitter tastant responses in the amoeba Dictyostelium correlate with rat and
human taste assays. ALTEX 33, 225-236.
Cocorocchio, M., Baldwin, A. J., Stewart, B., Kim, L., Harwood, A. J.,
Thompson, C. R. L., Andrews, P. L. R. and Williams, R. S. B. (2018).
Curcumin and derivatives function through protein phosphatase 2A and presenilin
orthologues in Dictyostelium discoideum. Dis. Model. Mech. 11.
De La Roche, M. A., Smith, J. L., Rico, M., Carrasco, S., Merida, I., Licate, L.,
Co
̂ té, G. P. and Egelhoff, T. T. (2002). Dictyostelium discoideum has a single
diacylglycerol kinase gene with similarity to mammalian theta isoforms. Biochem.
J. 368, 809-815.
Drummond, A. H. and Raeburn, C. A. (1984). The interaction of lithium with
thyrotropin-releasing hormone-stimulated lipid metabolism in GH3 pituitary tumour
cells. Enhancement of stimulated 1,2-diacylglycerol formation. Biochem. J.
224, 129-136.
DSMIV (2000). American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders. Washington: American Psychiatric Association.
Egelhoff, T. T., Lee, R. J. and Spudich, J. A. (1993). Dictyostelium myosin heavy
chain phosphorylation sites regulate myosin filament assembly and localization in
vivo. Cell 75, 363-371.
Eickholt, B. J., Towers, G., Ryves, W. J., Eikel, D., Adley, K., Ylinen, L.,
Chadborn, N., Harwood, A., Nau, H. and Williams, R. S. (2005). Effects of
valproic acid derivatives on inositol trisphosphate depletion, teratogenicity, GSK-
3β inhibition and viral replication: a screening approach for new bipolar disorder
drugs based on the valproic acid core structure. Mol. Pharmacol. 67, 1426–1433.
Elphick, L. M., Pawolleck, N., Guschina, I. A., Chaieb, L., Eikel, D., Nau, H.,
Harwood, J. L., Plant, N. J. and Williams, R. S. B. (2012). Conserved valproic-
acid-induced lipid droplet formation in Dictyostelium and human hepatocytes
identifies structurally active compounds. Dis. Model. Mech. 5, 231-240.
Fakas, S., Konstantinou, C. and Carman, G. M. (2011). DGK1-encoded
diacylglycerol kinase activity is required for phospholipid synthesis during
growth resumption from stationary phase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Biol.
Chem. 286, 1464-1474.
Fey, P., Dodson, R. J., Basu, S. and Chisholm, R. L. (2013). One stop shop for
everything Dictyostelium: dictyBase and the Dicty Stock Center in 2012. Methods
Mol. Biol. 983, 59-92.
Frej, A. D., Clark, J., Le Roy, C. I., Lilla, S., Thomason, P., Otto, G. P.,
Churchill, G., Insall, R., Claus, S. P., Hawkins, P. et al. (2016). The inositol-3-
phosphate synthase biosynthetic enzyme has distinct catalytic and metabolic
roles. Mol. Cell Biol. 36, 1464-1479.
Friedman, E., Hoau-Yan-Wang, Levinson, D., Connell, T. A. and Singh, H.
(1993). Altered platelet protein kinase C activity in bipolar affective disorder, manic
episode. Biol. Psychiatry 33, 520-525.
Gibellini, F. and Smith, T. K. (2010). The Kennedy pathway–de novo synthesis
of phosphatidylethanolamine
and
phosphatidylcholine.
IUBMB Life 62,
414-428.
Han, G.-S., O’Hara, L., Carman, G. M. and Siniossoglou, S. (2008a). An
unconventional diacylglycerol kinase that regulates phospholipid synthesis and
nuclear membrane growth. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 20433-20442.
Han, G.-S., O’Hara, L., Siniossoglou, S. and Carman, G. M. (2008b).
Characterization of the yeast DGK1-encoded CTP-dependent diacylglycerol
kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 20443-20453.
Hozumi, Y., Watanabe, M., Otani, K. and Goto, K. (2009). Diacylglycerol kinase
beta
promotes
dendritic
outgrowth
and
spine
maturation
in
developing
hippocampal neurons. BMC Neurosci. 10, 99.
Inoguchi, T., Xia, P., Kunisaki, M., Higashi, S., Feener, E. P. and King, G. L.
(1994). Insulin’s effect on protein kinase C and diacylglycerol induced by diabetes
and glucose in vascular tissues. Am. J. Physiol. 267, E369-E379.
Ishisaka, M., Tsuruma, K., Shimazawa, M., Shirai, Y., Saito, N. and Hara, H.
(2013). Increased seizure susceptibility in a mouse with diacylglycerol kinase β
deficiency. Neurosci. Med. 4, 177-122.
Jentink, J., Loane, M. A., Dolk, H., Barisic, I., Garne, E., Morris, J. K. and
de Jong-van den Berg, L. T.; EUROCAT Antiepileptic Study Working Group.
(2010).
Valproic
acid
monotherapy
in
pregnancy
and
major
congenital
malformations. N. Engl. J. Med. 362, 2185-2193.
Kakefuda, K., Oyagi, A., Ishisaka, M., Tsuruma, K., Shimazawa, M., Yokota, K.,
Shirai, Y., Horie, K., Saito, N., Takeda, J. et al. (2010). Diacylglycerol kinase
beta knockout mice exhibit lithium-sensitive behavioral abnormalities. PLoS ONE
5, e13447.
Kalantari, F., Bergeron, J. J. M. and Nilsson, T. (2010). Biogenesis of lipid droplets
– how cells get fatter. Mol. Membr. Biol. 27, 462-468.
Katsel, P., Davis, K. L., Li, C., Tan, W., Greenstein, E., Kleiner Hoffman, L. B. and
Haroutunian, V. (2008). Abnormal indices of cell cycle activity in schizophrenia
and their potential association with oligodendrocytes. Neuropsychopharmacology
33, 2993-3009.
King, J. S., Teo, R., Ryves, J., Reddy, J. V., Peters, O., Orabi, B., Hoeller, O.,
Williams, R. S. B. and Harwood, A. J. (2009). The mood stabiliser lithium
suppresses PIP3 signalling in Dictyostelium and human cells. Dis. Model Mech.
2, 306-312.
Leach, N. T., Sun, Y., Michaud, S., Zheng, Y., Ligon, K. L., Ligon, A. H.,
Sander, T., Korf, B. R., Lu, W., Harris, D. J. et al. (2007). Disruption of
diacylglycerol kinase delta (DGKD) associated with seizures in humans and mice.
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 80, 792-799.
Lehrman, G., Hogue, I. B., Palmer, S., Jennings, C., Spina, C. A., Wiegand, A.,
Landay, A. L., Coombs, R. W., Richman, D. D., Mellors, J. W. et al. (2005).
Depletion of latent HIV-1 infection in vivo: a proof-of-concept study. Lancet
366, 549-555.
Los, A. P., van Baal, J., de Widt, J., Divecha, N. and van Blitterswijk, W. J.
(2004). Structure-activity relationship of diacylglycerol kinase theta. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1636, 169-174.
Lucas, P., Ukhanov, K., Leinders-Zufall, T. and Zufall, F. (2003). A
diacylglycerol-gated cation channel in vomeronasal neuron dendrites is
impaired in TRPC2 mutant mice: mechanism of pheromone transduction.
Neuron 40, 551-561.
Meunier, H., Carraz, G., Neunier, Y., Eymard, P. and Aimard, M. (1963).
Pharmacodynamic properties of N-dipropylacetic acid. Therapie 18, 435-438.
Milne, S. B., Ivanova, P. T., Armstrong, M. D., Myers, D. S., Lubarda, J.,
Shulga, Y. V., Topham, M. K., Brown, H. A. and Epand, R. M. (2008). Dramatic
differences in the roles in lipid metabolism of two isoforms of diacylglycerol kinase.
Biochemistry 47, 9372-9379.
Moya, P. R., Murphy, D. L., McMahon, F. J. and Wendland, J. R. (2010).
Increased gene expression of diacylglycerol kinase eta in bipolar disorder.
Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. 13, 1127-1128.
Muller, M., Gahwiler, B. H., Rietschin, L. and Thompson, S. M. (1993).
Reversible loss of dendritic spines and altered excitability after chronic epilepsy
in hippocampal slice cultures. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 257-261.
Newton, A. C. (1997). Regulation of protein kinase C. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.
9, 161-167.
Nilssen, L. S., Dajani, O., Christoffersen, T. and Sandnes, D. (2005).
Sustained diacylglycerol accumulation resulting from prolonged G protein-
coupled receptor agonist-induced phosphoinositide breakdown in hepatocytes.
J. Cell. Biochem. 94, 389-402.
Ostroski, M., Tu-Sekine, B. and Raben, D. M. (2005). Analysis of a novel
diacylglycerol kinase from Dictyostelium discoideum: DGKA. Biochemistry
44, 10199-10207.
Pakes, N. K., Veltman, D. M., Rivero, F., Nasir, J., Insall, R. and Williams, R. S. B.
(2012). The Rac GEF ZizB regulates development, cell motility and cytokinesis in
Dictyostelium. J. Cell Sci. 125, 2457-2465.
Pettitt, T. R., Martin, A., Horton, T., Liossis, C., Lord, J. M. and Wakelam, M. J. O.
(1997). Diacylglrcol and phosphatidate generated by phospholipase C and D,
respetively, have distinct fatty acid compositions and functions; phospholipase
D-derived diacylglyceol does not activate protein kinase C in porcine aortic
endothelial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 28, 17354-17359.
Pryse-Phillips, W. E., Dodick, D. W., Edmeads, J. G., Gawel, M. J., Nelson, R. F.,
Purdy, R. A., Robinson, G., Stirling, D. and Worthington, I. (1997). Guidelines
for the diagnosis and management of migraine in clinical practice. Canadian
Headache Society. CMAJ 156, 1273-1287.
Ramadan, E., Basselin, M., Taha, A. Y., Cheon, Y., Chang, L., Chen, M. and
Rapoport, S. I. (2011). Chronic valproate treatment blocks D2-like receptor-
mediated brain signaling via arachidonic acid in rats. Neuropharmacology
61, 1256-1264.
Rodriguez
de
Turco,
E.
B.,
Tang,
W.,
Topham,
M.
K.,
Sakane,
F.,
Marcheselli, V. L., Chen, C., Taketomi, A., Prescott, S. M. and Bazan, N. G.
(2001). Diacylglycerol kinase epsilon regulates seizure susceptibility and
long-term potentiation through arachidonoyl- inositol lipid signaling. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 98, 4740-4745.
Rogawski, M. A. and Lo
̈ scher, W. (2004). The neurobiology of antiepileptic drugs
for the treatment of nonepileptic conditions. Nat. Med. 10, 685-692.
Sakai, H. and Sakane, F. (2012). Recent progress on type II diacylglycerol kinases:
the physiological functions of diacylglycerol kinase delta, eta and kappa and their
involvement in disease. J. Biochem. 152, 397-406.
Saxena, A., Scaini, G., Bavaresco, D. V., Leite, C., Valvassoria, S. S.,
Carvalho, A. F. and Quevedo, J. (2017). Role of protein kinase C in bipolar
disorder: a review of the current literature. Mol. Neuropsychiatry 3, 108-124.
11
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2018) 11, dmm035600. doi:10.1242/dmm.035600
Disease Models & Mechanisms
 Scheibel, M. E., Crandall, P. H. and Scheibel, A. B. (1974). The hippocampal-
dentate complex in temporal lobe epilepsy. A Golgi study. Epilepsia 15, 55-80.
Shimshoni,
J.
A.,
Dalton,
E.
C.,
Jenkins,
A.,
Eyal,
S.,
Kwan,
K.,
Williams, R. S. B., Pessah, N., Yagen, B., Harwood, A. J. and Bialer, M.
(2007). The effects of CNS-active valproic acid constitutional isomers, cyclopropyl
analogues and amide derivatives on neuronal growth cone behaviour. Mol.
Pharmacol. 71, 884-892.
Shinoda, S., Schindler, C. K., Meller, R., So, N. K., Araki, T., Yamamoto, A.,
Lan, J.-Q., Taki, W., Simon, R. P. and Henshall, D. C. (2004). Bim regulation
may determine hippocampal vulnerability after injurious seizures and in temporal
lobe epilepsy. J. Clin. Invest. 113, 1059-1068.
Soares, J. C. and Mallinger, A. G. (1997). Intracellular phosphatidylinositol
pathway abnormalities in bipolar disorder patients. Psychopharmacol. Bull.
33, 685-691.
Squassina, A., Manchia, M., Congiu, D., Severino, G., Chillotti, C., Ardau, R.,
Piccardi, M. and Zompo, M. D. (2009). The diacylglycerol kinase eta gene and
bipolar disorder: a replication study in a Sardinian sample. Mol. Psychiatry
14, 350-351.
Szendroedi, J., Yoshimura, T., Phielix, E., Koliaki, C., Marcucci, M., Zhang, D.,
Jelenik, T., Mu
̈ ller, J., Herder, C., Nowotny, P., Shulmsn, G. I. and Roden, M.
(2014) Role of diacylglycerol activation of PKCθ in lipid-induced muscle insulin
resistance in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 26, 9597-9602.
Terbach, N. and Williams, R. S. B. (2009). Structure-function studies for the
panacea, valproic acid. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 37, 1126-1132.
van Baal, J., de Widt, J., Divecha, N. and van Blitterswijk, W. J. (2005).
Translocation of diacylglycerol kinase theta from cytosol to plasma membrane in
response to activation of G protein-coupled receptors and protein kinase C. J. Biol.
Chem. 280, 9870-9878.
Vanhaesebroeck,
B.,
Stephens,
L.
and
Hawkins,
P.
(2012).
PI3K
signalling: the path to discovery and understanding. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
13, 195-203.
Walsh, J. P., Suen, R. and Glomset, J. A. (1995). Arachidonoyl-diacylglycerol
kinase.
Specific
in
vitro
inhibition
by
polyphosphoinositides
suggests
a
mechanism for regulation of phosphatidylinositol biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem.
270, 28647-28653.
Wang, H.-Y. and Friedman, E. (1989). Lithium inhibition of protein kinase C
activation-induced serotonin release. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 99, 213-218.
Wang, H.-Y. and Friedman, E. (1996). Enhanced protein kinase C activity and
translocation in bipolar affective disorder brains. Biol. Psychiatry 40, 568-575.
Wang, H.-Y., Johnson, G. P. and Friedman, E. (2001). Lithium treatment inhibits
protein kinase C translocation in rat brain cortex. Psychopharmacology (Berl)
158, 80-86.
Watson, D. G., Watterson, J. M. and Lenox, R. H. (1998). Sodium valproate down-
regulates the myristoylated alanine-rich C kinase substrate (MARCKS) in
immortalized hippocampal cells: a property of protein kinase C-mediated mood
stabilizers. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 285, 307-316.
Whatmore, J., Wiedemann, C., Somerharju, P., Swigart, P. and Cockcroft, S.
(1999). Resynthesis of phosphatidylinositol in permeabilized neutrophils following
phospholipase Cbeta activation: transport of the intermediate, phosphatidic acid,
from the plasma membrane to the endoplasmic reticulum for phosphatidylinositol
resynthesis is not dependent on soluble lipid carriers or vesicular transport.
Biochem. J. 341, 435-444.
Williams, R. S. B., Eames, M., Ryves, W. J., Viggars, J. and Harwood, A. J.
(1999). Loss of a prolyl oligopeptidase confers resistance to lithium by elevation of
inositol (1,4,5) trisphosphate. EMBO J. 18, 2734-2745.
Williams, R. S. B., Cheng, L., Mudge, A. W. and Harwood, A. J. (2002). A common
mechanism of action for three mood-stabilizing drugs. Nature 417, 292-295.
Williams, E.-J., Walsh, F. S. and Doherty, P. (2003). The FGF receptor uses the
endocannabinoid signaling system to couple to an axonal growth response. J. Cell
Biol. 160, 481-486.
Xu, X., Muller-Taubenberger, A., Adley, K. E., Pawolleck, N., Lee, V. W. Y.,
Wiedemann, C., Sihra, T. S., Maniak, M., Jin, T. and Williams, R. S. B. (2007).
Attenuation of phospholipid signaling provides a novel mechanism for the action of
valproic acid. Eukaryot. Cell 6, 899-906.
Yang, E. J., Ahn, S., Lee, K., Mahmood, U. and Kim, H. S. (2016). Early behavioral
abnormalities and perinatal alterations of PTEN/AKT pathway in valproic acid
autism model mice. PLoS ONE 11, e0153298.
12
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Disease Models & Mechanisms (2018) 11, dmm035600. doi:10.1242/dmm.035600
Disease Models & Mechanisms
