 Oncotarget
71817
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/ 
Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 44
Chronic low-dose-rate ionising radiation affects the hippocampal 
phosphoproteome in the ApoE−/− Alzheimer's mouse model
Stefan J. Kempf1,2, Dirk Janik3, Zarko Barjaktarovic1, Ignacia Braga-Tanaka III4, 
Satoshi Tanaka4, Frauke Neff3, Anna Saran5, Martin R. Larsen2, Soile Tapio1
1Institute of Radiation Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, 
Neuherberg, Germany
2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
3Institute of Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health GmbH, Neuherberg, 
Germany
4Institute for Environmental Sciences, Rokkasho, Japan
5Laboratory of Biomedical Technologies, Agenzia Nazionale per le Nuove Tecnologie, l´Energia e lo Sviluppo Economico 
Sostenibile (ENEA), Rome, Italy
Correspondence to: Stefan J. Kempf, email: stefank@bmb.sdu.dk 
Soile Tapio, email: soile.tapio@helmholtz-muenchen.de
Keywords: synaptic plasticity, hippocampus, dendritic spine, synapse, phosphoproteomics
Received: August 12, 2016    Accepted: September 20, 2016    Published: September 30, 2016
ABSTRACT
Accruing data indicate that radiation-induced consequences resemble 
pathologies of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer´s. The aim of this 
study was to elucidate the effect on hippocampus of chronic low-dose-rate radiation 
exposure (1 mGy/day or 20 mGy/day) given over 300 days with cumulative doses 
of 0.3 Gy and 6.0 Gy, respectively. ApoE deficient mutant C57Bl/6 mouse was used 
as an Alzheimer´s model. Using mass spectrometry, a marked alteration in the 
phosphoproteome was found at both dose rates. The radiation-induced changes in 
the phosphoproteome were associated with the control of synaptic plasticity, calcium-
dependent signalling and brain metabolism. An inhibition of CREB signalling was found 
at both dose rates whereas Rac1-Cofilin signalling was found activated only at the 
lower dose rate. Similarly, the reduction in the number of activated microglia in the 
molecular layer of hippocampus that paralleled with reduced levels of TNFα expression 
and lipid peroxidation was significant only at the lower dose rate. Adult neurogenesis, 
investigated by Ki67, GFAP and NeuN staining, and cell death (activated caspase-3) 
were not influenced at any dose or dose rate. This study shows that several molecular 
targets induced by chronic low-dose-rate radiation overlap with those of Alzheimer´s 
pathology. It may suggest that ionising radiation functions as a contributing risk 
factor to this neurodegenerative disease.
INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic neuro- 
degenerative disease with a progressive pattern of cognitive 
impairment. Characteristic features of AD include the 
formation of amyloid plaques originating from amyloid 
precursor protein (APP) and neurofibrillary tangles 
containing hyperphosphorylated tau protein in the brain. 
Already now it is the leading cause for dementia in the 
elderly. As the global prevalence of AD is supposed to 
increase dramatically in the following decades up to 80 
million patients by 2040 [1], it is crucial to elucidate potential 
contributing factors and their role in the molecular aetiology 
of AD. Ionising radiation could be one such a factor [2].
Large number of people of all age groups 
are increasingly exposed to ionising radiation from 
various sources [2]. Many individuals receive chronic 
occupational exposure related to nuclear technologies 
or airline travel. The use of medical diagnostics 
and therapeutic radiology has increased rapidly [3]. 
For example more than 62 million CT scans per 
year are currently carried out in the United States 
[4]. Approximately one third of all diagnostic CT 
examinations are scans of the head region [4]. The 
absorbed tissue doses range from 10–100 mGy for a 
single CT examination [5] but as CT scans are frequently 
repeated the cumulative doses will inevitably increase for 
many patient groups.
                  Research Paper
 Oncotarget
71818
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Recent data suggest that even relatively low 
radiation doses, similar to those received from a few CT 
scans, could trigger molecular changes associated with 
cognitive dysfunction, resembling that seen in normal 
aging and AD [6]. A total body dose of 0.5 Gy administered 
to neonatal NMRI mice has been shown to result in long-
term cognitive dysfunction and enhanced level of total tau 
protein (Mapt), a marker of AD pathology, in the adult 
mouse brain [7]. Total body irradiation of 8-week-old 
C57Bl6/J mice (0.1 Gy) induced early transcriptional 
response of several AD-related genes in hippocampus but 
no late AD-like pathogenesis or memory impairment [8]. 
In contrast, APP/PS1 mice, a model of AD, had permanent 
decreased cognitive abilities measured by contextual fear 
conditioning and novel object recognition tests 6 months 
after exposure to 0.1 or 1.0 Gy (56)Fe radiation [9]. 
Furthermore, an acceleration of amyloid β (Aβ) plaque 
pathology was observed in male mice [9].
Studies in human and animals indicate that synapses 
are affected at an early stage in AD neurodegeneration 
[10]. The hippocampus, the brain area critical for learning 
and memory, is especially vulnerable to damage at early 
stages of AD [11]. Adult neurogenesis occurs almost 
exclusively in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus 
[12]. Several studies have shown that adult neurogenesis 
is inhibited by high radiation doses in radiotherapy 
patients [13] and in mice [14, 15], resembling the 
neurodegeneration seen in the AD pathophysiology 
[16, 17]. Neurogenesis in the hippocampus relies on the 
ApoE function [18].
The aim of this study was to elucidate molecular 
alterations in the murine hippocampus induced by 
chronic low-dose-rate ionising radiation. ApoE deficient 
C57BL/6 mice were used as an AD model; the APOE 
genotype is known as the major genetic risk factor for AD 
in human supressing synaptic plasticity, lipid transport 
and metabolism [19]. The mice were total body exposed 
to cumulative doses of 0.3 Gy or 6.0 Gy given at low 
dose rates of 1 mGy/day or 20 mGy/day, respectively, 
during 300 days. As both phosphorylation and N-linked 
glycosylation of proteins can influence neural cell 
adhesion, axonal targeting and neuronal transmission and 
thereby modulate synaptic plasticity we aimed to study 
especially these protein modifications in this study. We 
show here that both dose rates are capable of inducing 
molecular features, particularly on the phosphoproteome 
level, that are reminiscent of those found in the AD 
neuropathology. 
RESULTS
Chronic low-dose radiation targets protein 
phosphorylation
8-week old female C57BL/6 ApoE−/− mice were 
chronically irradiated with dose rates of 1 mGy/day or 20 
mGy/day over 300 days with cumulative doses of 0.3 Gy 
or 6.0 Gy, respectively. A quantitative proteome analysis 
of unmodified proteins, phosphoproteins and N-linked 
sialylated glycoproteins was performed from the complete 
hippocampus.
A nearly equal distribution of proteins within the 
proteome and post-translational modifications (PTMs) 
within the quartiles Q was observed (Figure 1). The 
quantified unmodified and modified proteins were found 
localised in neurons, cell projections, axons, mitochondria 
and synaptic membranes in an unbiased manner from high 
abundant (Q1) to low abundant proteins (Q4) (Figure 1).
Importantly, only one unmodified protein was 
altered in expression at 6.0 Gy (Hsd17b8 - Estradiol 
17-beta-dehydrogenase 8) (Figure 2A); no expression 
changes in unmodified proteins were noted at 0.3 Gy 
(Supplementary Table S1). However, this was not due 
to an increased total variance as the average standard 
deviation of all unmodified proteins used for statistical 
analysis was 9% (Supplementary Table S1). Moreover, the 
biological log2-changes of these proteins were around 0 
(fold-change 1) (Figure 2A), indicating that the proteome 
was confidently quantified within the six biological 
replicates.
In contrast, we noted a dose-dependent increase in 
the number of significantly deregulated phosphoproteins 
without additional glycosylation motif (0.3 Gy/6.0 
Gy: 9/60) (Figures 2B and 2C, red marking). Some 
significantly 
altered 
phosphoproteins 
overlapped 
between the two conditions (0.3 Gy and 6.0 Gy) 
(Figure 2E). Upregulations in the phosphorylation profile 
of neurofilament (Nefm-S769 and Nefm-S723) and 
eukaryotic translation initiation factor (Eif4b-S504), and 
downregulation in phosphorylation of G-protein coupled 
receptor (Gpr158-S881) were observed at both doses 
(Supplementary Table S2). Ermin had different direction 
of deregulation and distinct phophosites at the two doses. 
Only three glycoproteins were significantly 
changed at 6.0 Gy, two of which had additionally 
significant changes in the phosphorylation: paralemmin-1 
(Palm-T145/N149) and plasma membrane calcium-
transporting ATPase 2 (Atp2b2-N1154/S1155). Only one 
protein, neurofascin (Nfasc-N1050), was found changed 
on glycosylation level at 6.0 Gy (Supplementary Table S2) 
whereas no significant changes on this modification were 
found at 0.3 Gy (Supplementary Table S2).
In spite of the large change in the PTMome at 6 
Gy, no significant radiation-induced alteration in body 
weights, brain weights or brain-to-body weight ratios were 
noticed (Supplementary Figure S1). 
Chronic low-dose ionising radiation targets 
synaptic plasticity and cellular metabolism
Pathway 
analysis 
of 
significantly 
changed 
phosphoproteins showed that most pathways affected at 
6.0 Gy were involved in synaptic plasticity (glutamate 
receptor signalling, calcium transport, calcium signalling) 
 Oncotarget
71819
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
as well as brain metabolism (Acetyl-CoA biosynthesis, 
glutamate degradation, sucrose degradation, glycolysis 
and gluconeogenesis) (Figure 2F). In contrast, only 
three significantly altered signalling pathways related to 
synaptic plasticity were observed at 0.3 Gy (glutamate 
receptor signalling, Wnt/β-catenin signalling, and 
tight junction signalling) (Figure 2F). The pathways 
are shown in Supplementary Table S5. Moreover, a 
significant inhibition of cytoskeleton-associated synaptic 
neurodegenerative processes (neurodegeneration of axons, 
degeneration of nervous system and length of plasma 
membrane projections) was predicted in hippocampus at 
6.0 Gy but not at 0.3 Gy (Figure 2G). GO term analysis 
of molecular functions showed that several PTM-
proteins changed in their phosphorylation status were 
associated with cytoskeleton and adhesion (~ 22% at 
0.3 Gy and 33% at 6.0 Gy) (Figure 2D, Supplementary 
Table S2; PANTHER protein classes highlighted in 
yellow). Key cytoskeletal proteins that are also typically 
altered in AD such as stathmin 1 (Stmn1), microtubule-
associated protein tau (Mapt), and microtubule-associated 
proteins 1b and 2 (Map1b, Map2) were decreased in their 
phosphorylation status, particularly at the higher dose. 
Three proteins were changed in their N-linked sialylated 
glycosylation pattern (Atp2b2, Nfasc, Palm). These 
proteins are important in synaptic plasticity regulation: 
Atp2b2 in ATP hydrolysis and calcium transport, Nfasc in 
cell adhesion, and neurite extension and synaptogenesis, 
and Palm in axonal and dendritic filopodia induction, and 
synapse formation.
Irradiation targets synaptic plasticity by 
stimulating Rac1-Cofilin and inhibiting cAMP/
PKA/MAPK/CREB pathways, particularly on 
the phosphorylation level
To further validate synaptic signalling pathways, 
84 different gene transcripts important for synaptic 
plasticity were quantified. Only sham-irradiated and 
6.0 Gy-irradiated samples were measured as most 
changes in the phosphoproteome were seen at this dose 
(Figure 2F and 2G). 
Figure 1: Gene Ontology “cellular compartment” of unmodified proteins and PTM peptides belonging to different 
quartiles. The numbers of proteins and PTM-peptides grouped into quartile Q1 (up to 25 %), Q2 (25–50 %), Q3 (50–75 %) and Q4 
(75–100 %) based on their cumulative log2-signal intensities ranging from the highest to the lowest abundant are shown. This was done 
following Sharma et al. [57]. The hits per quartile were exported into ClueGO gene ontology software to identify enriched “Cellular 
Compartment” with a q-value ≤ 0.05 (p-value ≤ 0.05, corrected with Benjamini & Hochberg).
 Oncotarget
71820
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
The transcriptome analysis showed similar results 
as the proteomics-based quantification of the unmodified 
proteins as only four genes (Grm2, Klf1, Ngf and Nptx2) 
out of 84 were changed in their expression status 
(Supplementary Table S4). However, the decreased gene 
expression of metabotropic glutamate receptor 2 (Grm2), 
and the nerve growth factor (Ngf), correlated well with 
the bioinformatics analysis of the phosphoproteome 
at 6.0 Gy (Figure 2F and 2G). Neuronal pentraxin 
2 (Nptx2) that was also found decreased on the gene 
expression level is involved in the modification of 
calcium-mediated long-term plasticity of synapses 
(Figure 2F).
Our previous data using acute low-dose irradiation 
show immediate and long-term alteration of the Rac1-
Cofilin pathway [20–22]. This pathway modulates the 
synaptic cytoskeleton, a target predicted to be affected also 
in this study (Figure 2D). Indeed, increased expression of 
Rac1, cofilin and phospho-cofilin were found in this study 
but only at 0.3 Gy (Figure 3A and 3B). 
CREB 
(cAMP 
response 
element-binding 
protein) is an essential transcription factor inhibited 
by ionising radiation [20, 23] and in AD [24]. Calcium 
signalling, one of the most significantly altered 
pathways related to synaptic plasticity in our study 
(Figure 2F), includes CREB signalling (Supplementary 
Table S5). Quantification of CREB and p-CREB on 
Ser133, the main phosphorylation site for protein 
activation, showed reduced levels of total CREB 
(6 Gy) and phospho-CREB (0.3 Gy and 6.0 Gy) 
 
(Figure 3A and 3B). Also the level of ARC (activity-
regulated cytoskeleton-associated protein), a CREB 
target, was downregulated at both doses (Figure 
3A and 3B). The gene expression of ARC was not 
significantly changed (Supplementary Table S4), nor it 
was identified in the proteomics analysis, presumably due 
its very low abundance.
The expression of upstream regulators of CREB, 
namely ERK1/2, phospho-ERK1/2, and cAMP was 
measured by immunoblotting. A reduction of phospho-
ERK1/2 but not that of total ERK1/2 level was observed 
at both radiation doses (Figure 3A and 3B). As the 
MAPK signalling pathway can be activated by PKA and 
PKC signalling, all proteins with a PKA- and PKC-motif 
were quantified using phospho-motif immunoblotting. 
PKC signalling was not affected by chronic radiation 
whereas PKA signalling was significantly inhibited 
at 6.0 Gy but not at 0.3 Gy (Figure 4A–4B). As PKA 
signalling is activated by cAMP levels, these were 
quantified. A reduced cAMP level was observed only at 
6.0 Gy (Figure 4C and 4D) which is in good agreement 
with the reduced expression of the phosphorylated form 
of A-kinase anchoring protein Akap5. This protein 
anchors PKA kinase to cytoskeletal proteins and 
transfers the signal carried by cAMP to intracellular 
effectors [25]. 
Chronic irradiation does not induce cell death or 
inhibit adult neurogenesis in hippocampus
The evaluation of adult neurogenesis by counting 
Ki67+-cells (highly proliferating progenitor cells), GFAP+-
cells (neural stem cells) in the subgranular zone, and 
NeuN+-cells (mature neurons) in the granular zone of the 
hippocampus revealed no alteration at either dose (dose 
rate) (Figure 5A–5D, Supplementary Figure S2). The stable 
number of mature neurons was consistent with unchanged 
level of apoptosis-inducing caspase-3 as evaluated by ELISA 
(Figure 4C and 4D) and in situ immunohistochemistry 
(Supplementary Figure S2). This suggests that the observed 
molecular changes in memory-related signalling pathways 
did not arise from a changed cellular process of adult 
neurogenesis or cell death in the hippocampus. 
Chronic irradiation increases synaptic proteins 
in the dentate gyrus
As the analysis of biological functions and diseases 
revealed a number of degenerative mechanism related 
to axons and membrane projections (Figure 2G), an 
immunofluorescence quantification of the post-synaptic 
density protein 95 (PSD95) and the microtubule-associated 
protein 2 (MAP2) was performed. Increased expression of 
both proteins in the dentate gyrus but not in the complete 
hippocampus was noted (Figures 5E and 5F). This 
correlated well with the mass spectrometry data showing 
that MAP2 and PSD95 were not significantly changed in the 
whole hippocampus at either radiation dose (fold-changes 
at 0.3 Gy/6.0 Gy: Map2 – 1.21/0.90; PSD95 (Dlg4) – 
0.88/0.94) (Supplementary Table S1). Only phospho-MAP2 
(Ser1791) expression was significantly downregulated at 
6.0 Gy (fold-change: 0.5) (Supplementary Table S2).
Chronic irradiation diminishes 
neuroinflammation and lipid peroxidation 
The quantification of activated Iba1+-microglia, 
markers of neuroinflammation, demonstrated a reduction 
only in the molecular layer of the hippocampus at 0.3 Gy 
but not in the granular layer or hilus (Figure 6A and 6B). 
This was accompanied with a significantly reduced level 
of TNFα at this dose (Figure 6E). Moreover, a reduction 
in lipid peroxidation, evaluated by quantification of the 
total protein content modified with malondialdehyde 
(MDA) was observed (Figure 6C and 6D). At 6.0 Gy, no 
significant changes in these inflammation or oxidative 
stress markers were noted (Figure 6).
DISCUSSION
ApoE knockout mice have been used as a model of 
AD as they exhibit mild neurodegenerative changes and 
behavioural abnormalities relevant to the early stages of 
 Oncotarget
71821
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
this disorder, including synaptic and dendrite loss, lipid 
peroxidation, cellular stress, behavioural alterations 
in Morris water maze test and deficits in long-term 
potentiation (LTP) [26–30]. We used this mouse model 
to study whether chronic low-dose-rate radiation could 
be a potential risk factor in AD aetiology. This study 
shows a significant effect of the dose rate of 20 mGy/day 
 
with a cumulative dose of 6.0 Gy in 300 days on the 
phosphorylation status of the hippocampal proteome. 
Several proteins that showed a radiation-induced change 
in their phosphorylation status were associated with 
synaptic plasticity. 
The data indicated a reduction in phosphorylation 
of the tau protein at site Ser554 at 6.0 Gy. This 
phosphorylation site has not been found before in the 
context of radiation biology and AD research, and its 
function remains unknown. It has been shown that a single 
dose of 0.5 Gy administered to neonatal NMRI mice 
leads to long-term cognitive dysfunction and increased 
level of total tau in the adult mouse brain [7]. Similarly, a 
 
Figure 2: Analysis of mass spectrometry-based proteomics and signalling pathways of deregulated phosphoproteins. 
Panels A, B and C show the volcano blots (log2-changes versus –log2 (q-values)) of statistically quantifiable proteins (A) and PTMs 
(B and C); n.s., not significant; sign., significant. Panel D shows the percentage of PTM-proteins that belong to cytoskeleton or adhesion 
proteins at 0.3 Gy and 6.0 Gy. The calculation is based on the protein affiliations into sub-protein classes obtained from the PANTHER 
software (PANTHER protein class) and information from UniProt (Supplementary Table S2; PANTHER protein classes are highlighted in 
yellow) involving cytoskeleton-associated processes and cell adhesion-associated processes. Panel E shows the total number of deregulated 
phosphoproteins at 0.3 Gy (9) versus 6.0 Gy (60) with 5 overlapping hits. Panel F shows the affected signaling pathway analysis using 
IPA software. High colour intensity represents high significance (p-value). All coloured boxes have a p-value of ≤ 0.05; white boxes have 
a p-value of ≥ 0.05 and are not significantly altered. Panel G shows the biological functions and diseases associated to PTMome changes. 
High colour intensity represents high significance (z-score). All coloured boxes have a z-score of < 2.0 indicating significant inhibition of 
the hit; white boxes have a z-score > 2.0 and are not significantly altered. Data for panel F and G involve only deregulated phosphoproteins. 
All data were independently uploaded using identified phosphoproteins and fold-changes and taking into account only the down-regulated 
phosphopeptides (down), up-regulated phosphopeptides (up) or all deregulated peptides (average). The fold-change per phosphoprotein 
was then calculated accordingly for each upload.
 Oncotarget
71822
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Figure 4: Expression of proteins with PKC and PKA motifs in the control and irradiated hippocampus. Panel (A) shows 
the data from immunoblotting of proteins with PKC and PKA motifs. The columns represent the fold-changes with standard errors of the 
mean (SEM) from 6 biological replicates (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 - unpaired Student´s t-test). Panel (B) shows representative 
images of the immunoblots. Panel (C) shows the levels of cAMP and activated caspase3 measured by ELISA. The columns represent the fold-
changes with standard errors of the mean (SEM) from 6 biological replicates (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 - unpaired Student´s t-test) 
 
that were normalised against GAPDH ELISA data (Panel D).
Figure 3: Analysis of CREB and Rac1-Cofilin signalling in the irradiated hippocampus. Panel (A) shows the protein levels 
of Rac1, cofilin, p-cofilin, ERK1/2, p-ERK1/2, CREB, p-CREB and ARC using immunoblotting. The columns represent the fold-changes 
with standard errors of the mean (SEM) from 6 biological replicates (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 - unpaired Student´s t-test). Panel 
(B) shows the representative images of the immunoblots. H, hippocampus.
 Oncotarget
71823
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
heavy-ion dose of 0.1 Gy induced the formation of insoluble 
Aβ 6 months post-irradiation in AD mouse model [9]. 
These studies together with the data presented here suggest 
that ionising radiation may accelerate AD symptoms.
Even the dose rate of 1 mGy/day used in this 
study resulted in significant changes in the hippocampus 
that were distinct of those found at the dose rate of 
20 mGy/day. An activation of Rac1 signalling was 
observed only at this very low dose rate. Activation of 
this pathway promotes actin depolymerisation and thus 
induces impairment in axonal outgrowth and elongation 
[31], especially if the level of inactive phospho-cofilin 
compared to total cofilin is low [20]. This, in combination 
with the observed changes in the phosphorylation status of 
neurofilament and actin- and microtubule-related proteins 
noted in the phospho-proteomics study,  may inhibit 
synaptic plasticity as well as memory and learning.
CREB is an essential regulator of synaptic 
plasticity, neuroprotection and memory formation 
[32]. It is reduced in cognitive and neurodegenerative 
disorders such as AD [33] and is connected with the 
Rac1-Cofilin pathway [20]. We found an inhibition 
of CREB signalling in the chronically irradiated 
hippocampus. These changes correlated with the reduced 
cAMP levels, inhibition of PKA activity and reduced 
phosphorylation of MAPK upstream of CREB. It is known 
that molecular changes in Akap5 levels disrupt cAMP 
organisation and PKA signalling in the hippocampus 
Figure 5: Analysis of adult neurogenesis and in situ quantification of MAP2 and PSD95 levels. Panels A and C show the 
fold-changes with standard errors of the mean (SEM) from NeuN and GFAP expression, respectively. The immunohistochemistry analysis 
was performed in a double-blinded fashion. Differences were considered to be significant when p-values were ≤ 0.05 using unpaired 
Student’s t-test; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. Panels B and D show representative images from NeuN and GFAP stainings, 
respectively. Immunohistochemical staining for NeuN was performed to assess the neuronal density in the granular cell layer (GC) of the 
dentate gyrus (DG). Counting was carried out in a rectangular field of 4,000 µm2 in the suprapyramidal and infrapyramidal blade and in 
the crest area of the DG (yellow boxes). The number of positive cells in each of the areas was recorded separately, followed by statistical 
analysis of the mean from 4–6 biological replicates (n = 6: sham-irradiated; n = 4: irradiated). GFAP-expression in the subgranular zone 
(SGZ) was evaluated by counting immune-positive cells located at the border of the GC and hilus (HL, n = 6). The length of the borderline 
was measured and was used as normalisation for the number of positive cells for GFAP. Panels E and F show the data from sequential 
immunofluorescence from hippocampus (H) and dentate gyrus (DG) at the two radiation dose rates (doses). The columns represent the 
fold-changes with standard errors of the mean (SEM) from 6 biological replicates regarding MAP2 (red – microtubule-associated protein2), 
PSD95 (green – disks large homolog 4 [DLG4]), Hoechst and merged intensities within the hippocampal and DG region. The MAP2 / PSD95 
 
intensity 
was 
normalised 
against 
nuclear 
Hoechst 
intensity 
in 
the 
region 
of 
interest. 
*p 
< 
0.05; 
**p 
< 
0.01; 
***p 
< 
0.001 
(unpaired 
Student´s 
t-test); 
 
magnification: 4×.
 Oncotarget
71824
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
and induce neurological disorders including AD [34]. 
Our global phosphoproteomics data indicated reduced 
phosphorylation of Akap5 at 6.0 Gy.
ARC is a CREB target protein, the expression of 
which has been shown to persistently decrease in the 
hippocampus of NMRI mice 7 months after a dose of 
1.0 Gy [20]. Reduced levels of ARC have been shown 
to impair the maintenance of LTP and spatial memory 
consolidation [35]. Acute inhibition of ARC synthesis 
induced a loss of nascent F-actin at synaptic sites associated 
with dephosphorylation of cofilin [36]. Thus, ARC seems 
to be involved in the dephosphorylation of cofilin and, at 
least in part, may explain the imbalance between total and 
phospho-cofilin at 0.3 Gy found in this study. 
This study shows that chronic low-dose-rate 
radiation resulted in anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative 
effects in hippocampus, especially at 0.3 Gy. This was 
seen as a decreased number of Iba1-positive microglia, 
downregulation of TNFα expression and reduced lipid 
peroxidation. Increasing data suggest that this may be due 
to disturbances in MAPK signalling [37, 38], a pathway 
noted to be inhibited in our study.
The negative effect of chronic low-dose-rate 
radiation on lipid peroxidation observed here is not 
caused by changed levels of antioxidant proteins such as 
glutathione S-transferases (Gstm1, Gstp1), superoxide 
dismutases (Sod2, Sod1) or thioredoxins (Txn, Prdx3) 
as they were not found altered in the global proteomics 
analysis. The reduction in lipid peroxidation seen here 
is similar to that observed in long-term after moderate 
doses of high-dose-rate radiation [20, 39]. These previous 
studies suggested a possible association with inactivated 
mitochondria producing less reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) [23, 39]. Low-dose radiation may activate the 
Figure 6: Analysis of neuroinflammation and lipid peroxidation in  hippocampus after chronic irradiation. Panel 
A, C and E show the fold-changes with standard errors of the mean (SEM) from Iba1, MDA protein content and TNFα analysis. The 
immunohistochemistry analysis was performed in a double-blinded fashion. Differences were considered to be significant when p-values 
were ≤ 0.05 using unpaired Student’s t-test; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. Six biological replicates per group were used. Panel 
B shows a representative image from the Iba1 staining. The number of Iba1-positive cells was established by counting three rectangular 
fields of 4,000 µm2 in each biological replicate (n = 6) within the molecular layer (ML), granule cell layer (GC) and hilus (HL). The means 
were calculated from each cell region separately. Panel D shows the visualisation of proteins with MDA modification from a representative 
immunoblot. MDA; malondialdehyde.
 Oncotarget
71825
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
oxidative stress defense system and reduce ROS-related 
injuries such as lipid peroxidation [40]. 
In contrast to this study, we and others have shown 
previously that high-dose-rate ionising radiation may 
stimulate the transformation of resting microglia to a 
reactive state that is associated with upregulation of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNFα [20, 41, 42]. 
Suppression of micgroglia-induced neuroinflammation 
is capable of attenuating AD symptoms and improving 
behavioral performance in a mouse model [43]. 
Due to the high importance of hippocampal 
neurogenesis for functional plasticity in the adult brain 
[13], the number of mature neurons, highly proliferating 
progenitors and neural stem cells was quantified. No 
significant difference in these numbers was found 
suggesting that adult neurogenesis is not affected by 
chronic low-dose-rate radiation. In agreement with this, 
no radiation-induced neuronal cell death (activated 
caspase-3) was observed. Recently, we demonstrated that 
a single low-dose high-dose-rate exposure to gamma-rays 
 
(0.1 Gy) at postnatal day 10 leads to a significant reduction 
in adult neurogenesis [20]. These data correlated well with 
the adverse consequences of single high radiation doses 
(> 5 Gy) for adult neurogenesis as reviewed recently [13]. 
We suggest that the distinct outcomes of these studies 
on neurogenesis may be related to the dose rate or age at 
exposure. 
Importantly, we show here that chronic irradiation 
induces the expression of the synaptic proteins MAP2 and 
PSD95 only in the dentate gyrus but not in the complete 
hippocampus (6.0 Gy). This is in agreement with previous 
studies using high-dose-rate radiation [20, 44]. An increase 
in hippocampal MAP2 levels may be a compensatory 
response to the age-related functional decline of brain 
function in C57BL/6J mice [45]. This may indicate that 
chronic low-dose-rate radiation targets the integration 
process of newborn neurons in existing synaptic wires and 
inhibits in that way synaptic plasticity.
CONCLUSIONS
This study is the first of its kind to elucidate the 
protein modification alterations in hippocampus when 
exposed to chronic low-dose-rate ionising radiation. 
Although it cannot distinguish between the effects of 
dose and dose rate, the comparison with previous high-
dose-rate studies indicate that both play a role in the 
observed alterations. Furthermore, chronic irradiation 
seems to result in a unique molecular fingerprint, 
highlighting an overwhelming role of phosphorylation 
events of hippocampal proteins. These data are especially 
important considering that an increasing number of people 
are exposed to chronic radiation either in occupational 
or medical situations but more research in the area of 
molecular epidemiology is needed to validate these first 
observations.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics statement, irradiation of animals and 
tissue collection
Experiments were carried out in accordance to 
Japanese ethics committee (processing numbers: 24–20, 
24–21 and 25–16). All experiments were conducted 
according to the legal regulations in Japan.
Female C57Bl/6 mice (8 weeks old) with Apoe−/− 
deletion (specific-pathogen-free B6.129P2-ApoEtm1Unc/J, 
Charles River) were chronically irradiated with 1 mGy/
day or 20 mGy/day (137Cs, gamma-rays) over 300 days 
(cumulative dose: 0.3 Gy and 6.0 Gy, respectively) at the 
Department of Radiobiology, Institute for Environmental 
Sciences, Aomori, Japan. Dosimetry was carried out 
with two ionisation chambers and TLDs [46]. The mice 
were maintained throughout the experiment in a specific-
pathogen-free (SPF) facility. Radiation exposure was 
continuous for 22 h per day. The remaining 2 h were used 
to maintain the rooms and cages with animals. Animals 
were sacrificed via CO2 asphyxiation after 300 days of 
chronic low-dose-rate irradiation. Brains were excised and 
transferred to ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS), 
rinsed, and dissected under stereomicroscopic inspection 
in cold. Hippocampi from each hemisphere were 
separately sampled, gently rinsed in ice-cold PBS and 
snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for protein and RNA studies. 
For immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence 
studies, one hemisphere of the brain was immediately 
fixed by 4% buffered formalin and kept for 2–3 days light 
protected at room temperature (RT).
Isolation of total protein and RNA
The frozen hippocampi were homogenised in 6 M 
urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM DTT, 20 mM TEAB, pH 7.5, 
containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (cOmplete 
Protease Inhibitor and PhosSTOP, Roche Diagnostics) 
manually using a mortar on ice. Homogenates were briefly 
vortexed and sonicated. The samples were stored at −20°C 
before further use.
Total RNA from frozen hippocampi was isolated and 
purified by mirVana™ Isolation Kit (Ambion) according to 
the manufacturer´s instructions. Total RNA was eluted 
with nuclease-free water. The optical density (OD) ratio of 
260/280 was measured using Nanodrop spectrophotometer 
(PeqLab Biotechnology); it ranged between 1.9 and 2.1. 
Eluates were stored at −20°C until further analysis.
In total, 18 mice per condition were used for analysis 
consisting of 6 biological replicates for immunoblotting or 
ELISA, 6 for mass spectrometry-based proteome analysis, 
3 for RNA experiments and 6 for immunohistochemistry 
and immunofluorescence. Samples for RNA and 
immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence originated 
from same mice.
 Oncotarget
71826
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Mass spectrometry-based proteome analysis
Sample processing
The workflow and the number of identifications and 
quantifications of the proteomics experiments are shown in 
Figure 7. The mass spectrometry-based proteome analysis 
was performed as described previously [24]. Briefly, 100 
µg tryptic peptides per brain region and condition were 
labelled by a TMT-9plex approach (AB Sciex) that was 
performed as follows: TMT-126/-127N/127C was used for 
sham-irradiated samples, TMT-128N/-128C/-129N for 0.3 
Gy-irradiated samples and TMT-129C/-130N/-130C for 6 
Gy-irradiated samples. Six biological replicates were used 
per condition. The labelling was performed according to 
manufacturer´s instructions.
Multi- and monophosphorylated peptides and 
sialylated N-linked glycopeptides were separated from 
unmodified peptides using a TiO2-SIMAC-TiO2 (TiSH) 
workflow [47–50]. Following SIMAC (sequential 
elution from IMAC beads) [51], multiphosphorylated 
peptides were enriched and eluted separately from the 
monophosphorylated and deglycopeptides that were, 
in turn, separated in a second TiO2 step (Figure 7A). 
The eluted modified peptides from the first TiO2 step 
were deglycosylated to remove N-linked glycans [48]. 
Hydrophilic 
interaction 
chromatography 
(HILIC) 
was used as sample fractionation prior to nano liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).
High pH fractionation was used to increase protein 
identification of the unmodified peptides. Combined 
labelled samples (100 µg) containing unmodified peptides 
were dissolved in 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5, and loaded on 
a R3 micro-column that was equilibrated with 50 mM 
TEAB, pH 8.5. The column was washed with 50 µl 
 
50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5, followed by a wash with 50 µl 
water. The peptides were sequentially eluted by 30 µl 7%, 
10%, 12%, 15%, 17.5%, 22% and 60% acetonitrile (ACN). 
The eluates were dried and analysed by mass spectrometry.
Reversed-phase nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS
The peptides resuspended in 0.1% formic acid 
(FA) were automatically injected and loaded on a 
ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-
Entringen, Germany) in-house packed trap column (2 
cm × 100 µm; 5 µm). The peptides were separated at 
250 nl/min on an analytical ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ (Dr. 
Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) packed in-
house column (17 cm × 75 µm; 3 µm) by reversed phase 
chromatography which was operated on an EASY-nanoLC 
system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark). 
Mobile phase was set to 95% ACN/ 0.1% FA (B) and 
water/0.1% FA (A). The gradient was from 1% to 34% 
solvent B in 80 min (unmodified peptides), 40 min (mono-
phosphoralyated- and deglycosylated-peptides) or 110 min 
(multiphosphorylated peptides), 34–50% B in 7 min, 
50–100% B in 5 min and 8 min at 100% B. The nano-
LC was online connected to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific; only high-pH fractionated unmodified 
peptide samples) or Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-
Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific; 
all other samples) operating in positive ion mode and 
using data-dependent acquisition. The Orbitrap acquired 
the full MS scan with an automatic gain control of a 
target value of 1 × 106 ions and a maximum fill time of 
120 ms. Each MS scan was acquired at high-resolution 
(60,000 full-width half maximum (FWHM)) at m/z 200 in 
the Orbitrap with a mass range of 400–1400 Da. The 12 
most abundant peptide ions were selected from the MS for 
HCD fragmentation (collision energy: 34 V) if they were 
at least doubly charged. Fragmentation was performed at 
high resolution (60,000 FWHM) for a target of 1 × 105 
and a maximum injection time of 60 ms using an isolation 
window of 1.2 m/z and a dynamic exclusion of 20 s. 
Data analysis
Raw data were searched against the SwissProt 
database and UniProt mouse reference database via 
Mascot (v2.3.02, Matrix Science) and Sequest HT 
search engines, respectively, using Proteome Discoverer 
(v1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A precursor mass 
tolerance of 10 ppm and a product ion mass tolerance 
of 0.02 Da were applied allowing not more than one 
missed cleavage for trypsin. Fixed modifications included 
carbamidomethylation of Cys and TMT9-plex labeling 
for Lys and N-terminal. Variable modifications contained 
phosphorylation on Ser/Thr/Tyr and deamidation of Asn. 
The TMT datasets were quantified using the centroid 
peak intensity with the “reporter ions quantifier” node. 
To ensure a high-confident identification of peptides, we 
used the Mascot percolator algorithm (q value filter set 
to 0.01), Mascot and Sequest HT peptide rank 1 and a 
cut-off value of Mascot score ≥ 22 as well as Sequest HT 
ΔCn of 0.1. Moreover, a cut-off value of Xcorr score for 
charge states of +1, +2, +3 and +4 higher than 1.5, 2, 2.25 
and 2.5, respectively, were considered for further analysis. 
Subsequently, these peptides were filtered against a Decoy 
database resulting into a false discovery rate (FDR) of 
lower than 0.01 (FDR < 0.01). PhosphoRS was used to 
localise phosphorylation sites with a confidence filter of 
99%. Six biological replicates without missing values 
were considered for the statistical analysis. Quantification 
was performed on the log2-values of the measured 
peptide intensities and the data were normalised based 
on the median. Modified peptides were merged with the 
R Rollup function (http://omics.pnl.gov/software/danter) 
allowing for one-hit-wonders and using the mean of the 
normalised intensities for each peptide. Quantification of 
proteins was obtained by merging the unmodified peptides 
with the R Rollup function considering at least 2 unique 
peptides not allowing for one-hit-wonders and using the 
mean of the intensities. Subsequently, the mean over the 
 Oncotarget
71827
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
experimental conditions for each peptide in each replicate 
was subtracted in order to merge the data from different 
replicates. Proteins, phosphopeptides and formerly 
sialylated N-linked glycopeptides with a consensus motif 
for N-linked glycosylation (NXS/T/C; where X # P) were 
considered to be significantly deregulated if they were 
identified by at least two unique peptides (proteins) or at 
least one unique peptide (post-translationally modified 
peptides) in 6 biological replicates without missing 
values. Phosphorylated and deglycosylated peptides were 
normalised based on the protein expression in each of the 
replicates including the proteins with two unique peptides 
to ensure that deregulation occurred on PTM level and not 
on protein level. Significant up/down-regulations between 
experimental conditions were calculated allowing a FDR 
of 0.05 without missing values. We applied combined 
limma and rank product tests [52], subsequently corrected 
for multiple testing according to Storey.
Figure 7: Proteomics workflow used in this study. Panel A shows the workflow to analyse phosphorylated, N-linked sialylated 
glycoproteins and unmodified proteins using mass spectrometry. Panel B shows the number of PTM and protein identifications as well as 
the numbers used for final quantification. The criteria for protein and PTM quantification including statistics are described in the Material 
and Methods section. PTM; post-translational modification.
 Oncotarget
71828
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
The mass spectrometry proteomics data was 
deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium [53] via 
the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier 
PXD003969 
(Username: 
reviewer76492@ebi.ac.uk; 
Password: 2XqkmUme). 
Bioinformatics analysis
Deregulated proteins were assigned to molecular 
functional classes using PANTHER classification system 
software (http://www.pantherdb.org) and the general 
annotation from UniProt (www.uniprot.org). To identify 
radiation-affected signalling pathways, a signalling 
pathway analysis was performed with all altered proteins 
for each dose group using INGENUITY Pathway Analysis 
(IPA) (http://www.ingenuity.com) applying databases 
of experimental and predictive origin. Furthermore, IPA 
was also used to visualise significantly (z-score ≥ 2: 
activation or z-score ≤ −2: inhibition; p-value ≤ 0.05) 
changed biological functions / diseases by the z-scores 
and p-values derived from the Fisher´s exact test across 
all observations. 
The ClueGO plug-in of Cytoscape (http://apps.
cytoscape.org/apps/cluego) was used for cellular 
compartment gene ontology (GO) term annotation. Only 
significantly enriched terms with a p-value ≤ 0.05 were 
reported, subsequently corrected for multiple testing 
according to Benjamini & Hochberg. 
Quantification of proteins and phosphorylation-
motifs by immunoblotting
Hippocampal protein extracts (15 µg) were 
separated on 12% SDS polyacrylamide gels and 
transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare) 
via BIO-RAD CriterionTM Blotter system. The membranes 
were blocked with RotiR-Block solution (Roth), washed 
and incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibody 
dilutions as recommended by the manufacturer: 
GAPDH – sc-47724, Santa Cruz; Rac1 – ab33186, Abcam; 
cofilin – 3312, Cell Signalling; p-Cofilin (Ser3) – 3311, 
Cell Signalling; CREB – 4820, Cell Signaling; phospho-
CREB (Ser133) – 9198, clone 87G3, Cell Signaling; 
ARC – A8344, Sigma Aldrich; p44/42 MAPK (ERK 1/2) 
– 9102, Cell signalling; phospho-p44/42 MAPK (ERK 
1/2) (Thr202/Tyr204) – 9101, Cell Signaling; phospho-
PKC Substrate Motif (R/KXpSX(R/K) MultiMab Rabbit 
Monoclonal Antibody – 6967, Cell Signalling; phospho-
PKA Substrate (RRXS*/T*) (100G7E) Rabbit Monoclonal 
Antibody – 9624, Cell Signalling; and goat polyclonal 
antibody against malondialdehyde (MDA)-tagged proteins 
(HRP-linked) - ab20703, Abcam. Following secondary 
antibodies were used: rabbit anti-mouse IgG (HRP-
linked, ab6728, Abcam) and goat anti-rabbit IgG (HRP-
linked, ab6721, Abcam). The blots were incubated with 
appropriate horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary 
antibody in 8% milk for 1 h at RT and developed using 
ECL system (GE Healthcare) using standard protocol 
from the manufacturer. GAPDH was not significantly 
changed based on the global proteomics results in any 
sample and was therefore used as the loading control. 
Immunoblots were quantified with TotalLab TL100 
software (www.totallab.com) using software-suggested 
background correction. Six biological replicates were used 
for statistical analysis (unpaired Student´s t-test) with a 
significance threshold of 0.05.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
A total of 5 µg of protein lysates were used to 
quantify Caspase3 (SEA626Mu, Cloud-Clone Corp.), 
TNFα (BMS607HS, eBioscience) and cAMP (KGE012B, 
R&D Systems) using manufacturer´s instructions. The 
plates were measured on a FLUOstar Omega (BMG 
Labtech) at the recommended wavelength of the 
manufacturer. All assays were normalised against an 
ELISA against GAPDH (ab176642, Abcam). GAPDH 
was not changed in the proteomics and transcriptomics 
data and was therefore used for data normalisation. 
Six biological replicates were analysed in duplicates. 
The mean of each technical triplicate was normalised 
against the mean of the representative GAPDH technical 
replicates. Statistical analysis was performed via unpaired 
Student´s t-test and the data are presented as fold-changes 
with the standard error of the mean (SEM).
Pathway-focussed gene expression analysis 
related to synaptic plasticity
Sham- and 6.0 Gy-irradiated hippocampal RNA 
isolates (100 ng) were used to quantify the gene expression 
of 84 mRNA transcripts related to synaptic plasticity (RT2 
Profiler Mouse Synaptic Plasticity – PAMM-126Z, Qiagen). 
The relative expression of each mRNA was normalised 
against the median of all 84 target genes using the equation 
2−ΔΔCt, where ΔΔCt = ΔCtirradiated – ΔCtsham and ΔCt = Cttarget-
mRNA – Ctmedian-of-84-target-genes. Three biological replicates were 
used within each group. Gene expression changes were 
considered significant if they reached a p-value of ≤ 0.05 
and if they had a fold-change of ≥ 1.2 or ≤ −1.2. The 
threshold of ± 1.2 was based on the average experimental 
technical variance (8.4%) and biological variance (6.9%) of 
a set of 14 overlapping target genes as reported elsewhere 
[54]. Three biological replicates were used.
Immunohistochemistry/Immunofluorescence
Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues were 
prepared and processed using standard techniques [55]. 
One μm thick single sagittal brain sections were dewaxed, 
rehydrated and heated in citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 30 min 
for evaluation of GFAP, Ki67, activated caspase-3, Iba1 
 Oncotarget
71829
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
and NeuN. Four µm thick sections were cut and stained 
with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) followed by visual 
inspection for morphological aberrations. Quenching of 
endogenous peroxidase was performed with 3% H2O2 in 
methanol (v/v) for 20 min. Brain sections were incubated 
with primary antibody dilutions as recommended by 
the manufacturer. Following antibodies were used for 
immunohistochemistry: mouse monoclonal antibody 
against Ki67 (clone B56, 556003, BD PharMingen, 
Heidelberg, Germany, 1:100), mouse monoclonal antibody 
against NeuN (clone A60, MAB377, Merck Millipore, 
Schwalbach, Germany, 1:20), rabbit polyclonal antibody 
against Iba1 , rabbit monoclonal antibody against cleaved 
caspase 3 (Asp175, #9661, Cell Signaling, Massachusetts, 
USA, 1:200) and rabbit polyclonal antibody against GFAP 
(Z0334, DakoCytomation, Hamburg, Germany, 1:350).
After 
application 
of 
the 
specific 
primary 
antibody, the slides were processed with the automated 
staining system i6000 (Biogenex, USA) according to 
manufacturer’s instructions, including the incubation 
with the appropriate secondary antibody (MoMap 
Kit 760-137, Ventana, Tucson, AZ, USA) according 
to manufacturer’s instructions or biotinylated using 
goat anti-rabbit IgG BA-1000, Vector Laboratories, 
Burlingame, CA, USA, 1:750). Haematoxylin was used 
as a counterstain and diaminobenzidine (DAB) was used 
for the immunohistochemical stain. Visualisation was 
performed using a streptavidin–horseradish peroxidase 
system (HK330-9K; Biogenex, San Ramon, CA, USA). 
After dehydration, the slides were air-dried and mounted 
with Eukitt® (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and cover-
slipped. Each immunohistochemical staining was 
performed simultaneously with identical incubation times 
and concentrations for the primary and secondary antibody 
and DAB solution.
Light microscopic evaluation of the staining was 
performed on the stained sagittal sections encompassing 
all relevant brain structures. Images were taken with 
the Olympus BX43F microscope equipped with DP25 
digital camera (Olympus Deutschland GmbH, Hamburg) 
(GFAP stainings) and Hamamatsu NanoZoomer 2.HT® 
Slide scanning system (Hamamatsu Photonics K.K., 
Japan) (other stainings). All images were analysed using 
identical software settings by two qualified pathologists 
experienced in mouse histopathology (FN, DJ).
The area of granule cell layer (GC) and subgranular 
zone (SGZ) of the hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) was 
measured using imaging software NDP.view (Hamamatsu 
Photonics K.K., Japan). Subsequently, the number of 
Ki67-positive cells in the GC and SGZ were counted 
(n = 6). The number of Iba1-positive cells was established 
by counting three rectangular fields of 4,000 µm2 in each 
biological replicate (n = 6) within the molecular layer [52], 
GC and hilus (HL). The means were calculated from each 
cell region separately. Immunohistochemical staining for 
NeuN was performed to assess the neuronal density in the 
GC of the DG. Counting was carried out in a rectangular 
field of 4,000 µm2 in the suprapyramidal, infrapyramidal 
blade and in the crest area of the DG. The number of 
positive cells in each of the areas was recorded separately, 
followed by statistical analysis of the mean from 4–6 
biological replicates (n = 6 for sham-irradiated; n = 4 for 
irradiated). To detect cleaved caspase 3 immunoreactivity, 
the whole hippocampal formation was examined via 
light microscopy (n = 6). GFAP-expression in the SGZ 
was evaluated by counting immunopositive cells located 
at the border of the GC and HL (n = 6). The length of 
the borderline was measured with the labSens imaging 
software (Olympus Deutschland GmbH, Hamburg) and 
the number of positive cells for GFAP was normalised 
against the length. The complete immunohistochemistry 
analysis was performed in a double-blinded fashion. 
Differences were considered to be significant when 
p-values were ≤ 0.05 using unpaired Student’s t-test.
For immunofluorescence, auto-fluorescence was 
blocked by 0.1% Sudan black in 70% ethanol after 
epitope retrieval in citrate buffer. After a goat serum 
block, slides were incubated overnight with rabbit anti-
mouse primary antibody against MAP-2 (ab32454–
Abcam, Germany) followed by goat anti-rabbit Cy3-
Fab-fragment IgG secondary antibody (111-167-003 
- Jackson ImmunoResearch, UK) using manufacturer’s 
instructions. Subsequently, the slides were washed in PBS 
and incubated overnight with rabbit anti-mouse primary 
antibody against PSD-95 (ab18258–Abcam, Germany), 
followed by goat anti-rabbit Alexa-fluor IgG secondary 
antibody (111-545-144 - Jackson ImmunoResearch, UK) 
using manufacturer’s indications. The slides were 
nuclear stained with Hoechst and mounted with antifade 
fluorescence mounting media. Sample processing was 
done under identical conditions on the same day. All 
steps were performed in a humid chamber in the dark. 
All images were analysed using identical software 
settings. The MAP-2 / PSD-95 intensity in the region 
of interest was normalised against the Hoechst intensity 
within this region. Six biological replicates were used 
in all cases. Statistical significance was calculated with 
unpaired Student’s t-test using n = 6. Respective controls 
of specificity of this sequential immunofluorescence 
approach are reported elsewhere [20].
Abbreviations
ACN, acetonitrile; AD; Alzheimer´s disease, CT; 
computer tomography, DG; dentate gyrus, ELISA; 
enzyme-linked immusorbent assay, FWHM; full-
width half maximum, FDR; false discovery rate, GO; 
gene ontology, GC; granule cell layer, HL; hilus, 
HILIC; hydrophilic interaction chromatography, H; 
hippocampus, IAA; iodacetamide, IPA; Ingenuity 
pathway analysis, LTP; long-term potentiation, LC-MS/
MS; liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, 
 Oncotarget
71830
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
MDA; malondialdehyde, ML; molecular layer, OD; 
optical density, PBS; phosphate buffered saline, PTM; 
post-translational modification, Q; quartile, RT; room 
temperature, ROS; reactive oxygen species, SIMAC; 
sequential elution from IMAC beads, SEM; standard 
error of the mean, SPF; specific-pathogen-free, SGZ; 
subgranular zone, TiSH; TiO2-SIMAC-TiO2
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Stefanie Winkler and Jacqueline Mueller 
for excellent technical assistance. 
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
GRANT SUPPORT
The research leading to these results was supported 
by a grant from the European Community’s Seventh 
Framework Programme (EURATOM) contracts no. 
29552 (CEREBRAD) and no. 29583 (PROCARDIO). 
This work was also partly supported by a generous 
grant from the VILLUM Foundation to the VILLUM 
Center for Bioanalytical Sciences at the University of 
Southern Denmark and a grant from SDU2020 (COPING 
AD – Collaborative Project on the Interaction between 
Neurons and Glia in Alzheimer´s Disease). The funders 
had no role in study design, data collection, analysis and 
interpretation, decision to publish, or preparation of the 
manuscript.
REFERENCES
 1. Hampel H, Prvulovic D, Teipel S, Jessen F, Luckhaus C, 
Frolich L, Riepe MW, Dodel R, Leyhe T, Bertram L, 
Hoffmann W, Faltraco F. The future of Alzheimer’s disease: 
the next 10 years. Prog Neurobiol. 2011; 95:718–728.
 2. Kempf SJ, Azimzadeh O, Atkinson MJ, Tapio S. Long-term 
effects of ionising radiation on the brain: cause for concern? 
Radiat Environ Biophys. 2013; 52:5–16.
 3. Renner M, Lacor PN, Velasco PT, Xu J, Contractor A, 
Klein WL, Triller A. Deleterious effects of amyloid beta 
oligomers acting as an extracellular scaffold for mGluR5. 
Neuron. 2010; 66:739–754.
 4. Brenner DJ, Hall EJ. Computed tomography—an increasing 
source of radiation exposure. N Engl J Med. 2007; 
357:2277–2284.
 5. Wiest PW, Locken JA, Heintz PH, Mettler FA, Jr. CT 
scanning: a major source of radiation exposure. Semin 
Ultrasound CT MR. 2002; 23:402–410.
 6. Lowe XR, Bhattacharya S, Marchetti F, Wyrobek AJ. Early 
brain response to low-dose radiation exposure involves 
molecular networks and pathways associated with cognitive 
functions, advanced aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Radiat 
Res. 2009; 171:53–65.
 7. Buratovic S, Stenerlow B, Fredriksson A, Sundell-
Bergman S, Viberg H, Eriksson P. Neonatal exposure to 
a moderate dose of ionizing radiation causes behavioural 
defects and altered levels of tau protein in mice. 
Neurotoxicology. 2014; 45:48–55.
 8. Wang B, Tanaka K, Ji B, Ono M, Fang Y, Ninomiya Y, 
Maruyama K, Izumi-Nakajima N, Begum N, Higuchi M, 
Fujimori A, Uehara Y, Nakajima T, et al. Total body 100-
mGy X-irradiation does not induce Alzheimer’s disease-like 
pathogenesis or memory impairment in mice. J Radiat Res. 
2014; 55:84–96.
 9. Cherry JD, Liu B, Frost JL, Lemere CA, Williams JP, 
Olschowka JA, O’Banion MK. Galactic cosmic radiation 
leads to cognitive impairment and increased abeta plaque 
accumulation in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. 
PLoS One. 2012; 7:e53275.
10. Overk CR, Masliah E. Pathogenesis of synaptic 
degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and Lewy body 
disease. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014; 88:508–516.
11. Mu Y, Gage FH. Adult hippocampal neurogenesis and its 
role in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol Neurodegener. 2011; 6:85.
12. Dayer AG, Ford AA, Cleaver KM, Yassaee M, 
Cameron HA. Short-term and long-term survival of new 
neurons in the rat dentate gyrus. J Comp Neurol. 2003; 
460:563–572.
13. Son Y, Yang M, Wang H, Moon C. Hippocampal dysfunctions 
caused by cranial irradiation: a review of the experimental 
evidence. Brain Behav Immun. 2015; 45:287–296.
14. Rola R, Raber J, Rizk A, Otsuka S, VandenBerg SR, 
Morhardt DR, Fike JR. Radiation-induced impairment of 
hippocampal neurogenesis is associated with cognitive 
deficits in young mice. Exp Neurol. 2004; 188:316–330.
15. Mizumatsu S, Monje ML, Morhardt DR, Rola R, 
Palmer TD, Fike JR. Extreme sensitivity of adult 
neurogenesis to low doses of X-irradiation. Cancer Res. 
2003; 63:4021–4027.
16. Perry EK, Johnson M, Ekonomou A, Perry RH, Ballard C, 
Attems J. Neurogenic abnormalities in Alzheimer’s disease 
differ between stages of neurogenesis and are partly related 
to cholinergic pathology. Neurobiol Dis. 2012; 47:155–162.
17. Demars M, Hu YS, Gadadhar A, Lazarov O. Impaired 
neurogenesis is an early event in the etiology of familial 
Alzheimer’s disease in transgenic mice. J Neurosci Res. 
2010; 88:2103–2117.
18. Yang CP, Gilley JA, Zhang G, Kernie SG. ApoE is required 
for maintenance of the dentate gyrus neural progenitor pool. 
Development. 2011; 138:4351–4362.
19. Holtzman DM, Herz J, Bu G. Apolipoprotein E and 
apolipoprotein E receptors: normal biology and roles in 
Alzheimer disease. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012; 
2:a006312.
 Oncotarget
71831
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
20. Kempf SJ, Casciati A, Buratovic S, Janik D, von Toerne C, 
Ueffing M, Neff F, Moertl S, Stenerlow B, Saran A, 
Atkinson MJ, Eriksson P, Pazzaglia S, et al. The cognitive 
defects of neonatally irradiated mice are accompanied 
by changed synaptic plasticity, adult neurogenesis and 
neuroinflammation. Mol Neurodegener. 2014; 9:57.
21. Kempf SJ, Buratovic S, von Toerne C, Moertl S, 
Stenerlow B, Hauck SM, Atkinson MJ, Eriksson P, Tapio S. 
Ionising radiation immediately impairs synaptic plasticity-
associated cytoskeletal signalling pathways in HT22 cells 
and in mouse brain: an in vitro/in vivo comparison study. 
PLoS One. 2014; 9:e110464.
22. Kempf SJ, Sepe S, von Toerne C, Janik D, Neff F, 
Hauck SM, Atkinson MJ, Mastroberardino PG, Tapio S. 
Neonatal Irradiation Leads to Persistent Proteome 
Alterations Involved in Synaptic Plasticity in the Mouse 
Hippocampus and Cortex. J Proteome Res. 2015.
23. Kempf SJ, Sepe S, von Toerne C, Janik D, Neff F, 
Hauck SM, Atkinson MJ, Mastroberardino PG, Tapio S. 
Neonatal Irradiation Leads to Persistent Proteome Alterations 
Involved in Synaptic Plasticity in the Mouse Hippocampus 
and Cortex. J Proteome Res. 2015; 14:4674–4686.
24. Kempf SJ, Metaxas A, Ibanez-Vea M, Darvesh S, Finsen B, 
Larsen MR. An integrated proteomics approach shows 
synaptic plasticity changes in an APP/PS1 Alzheimer’s 
mouse model. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:33627–48. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.9092.
25. Diering GH, Gustina AS, Huganir RL. PKA-GluA1 coupling 
via AKAP5 controls AMPA receptor phosphorylation and 
cell-surface targeting during bidirectional homeostatic 
plasticity. Neuron. 2014; 84:790–805.
26. Suski M, Olszanecki R, Chmura L, Stachowicz A, Madej J, 
Okon K, Adamek D, Korbut R. Influence of metformin on 
mitochondrial subproteome in the brain of apoE knockout 
mice. Eur J Pharmacol. 2016; 772:99–107.
27. Kuhla A, Ludwig SC, Kuhla B, Munch G, Vollmar B. 
Advanced glycation end products are mitogenic signals and 
trigger cell cycle reentry of neurons in Alzheimer’s disease 
brain. Neurobiol Aging. 2015; 36:753–761.
28. Masliah E, Mallory M, Ge N, Alford M, Veinbergs I, 
Roses AD. Neurodegeneration in the central nervous system 
of apoE-deficient mice. Exp Neurol. 1995; 136:107–122.
29. Shea TB, Rogers E, Ashline D, Ortiz D, Sheu MS. 
Apolipoprotein E deficiency promotes increased oxidative 
stress and compensatory increases in antioxidants in brain 
tissue. Free Radic Biol Med. 2002; 33:1115–1120.
30. Siegel JA, Benice TS, Van Meer P, Park BS, Raber J. 
Acetylcholine receptor and behavioral deficits in mice 
lacking apolipoprotein E. Neurobiol Aging. 2011; 32:75–84.
31. Lisman J. Actin’s actions in LTP-induced synapse growth. 
Neuron. 2003; 38:361–362.
32. Sakamoto K, Karelina K, Obrietan K. CREB: a 
multifaceted regulator of neuronal plasticity and protection. 
J Neurochem. 2011; 116:1–9.
33. Saura CA, Valero J. The role of CREB signaling in 
Alzheimer’s disease and other cognitive disorders. Rev 
Neurosci. 2011; 22:153–169.
34. Poppinga WJ, Munoz-Llancao P, Gonzalez-Billault C, 
Schmidt M. A-kinase anchoring proteins: cAMP 
compartmentalization in neurodegenerative and obstructive 
pulmonary diseases. Br J Pharmacol. 2014; 171:5603–5623.
35. Guzowski JF, Lyford GL, Stevenson GD, Houston FP, 
McGaugh JL, Worley PF, Barnes CA. Inhibition of activity-
dependent arc protein expression in the rat hippocampus 
impairs the maintenance of long-term potentiation and 
the consolidation of long-term memory. J Neurosci. 2000; 
20:3993–4001.
36. Messaoudi E, Kanhema T, Soule J, Tiron A, Dagyte G, da 
Silva B, Bramham CR. Sustained Arc/Arg3.1 synthesis 
controls long-term potentiation consolidation through 
regulation of local actin polymerization in the dentate gyrus 
in vivo. J Neurosci. 2007; 27:10445–10455.
37. Kim EK, Choi EJ. Compromised MAPK signaling in human 
diseases: an update. Arch Toxicol. 2015; 89:867–882.
38. Ho GJ, Drego R, Hakimian E, Masliah E. Mechanisms of 
cell signaling and inflammation in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy. 2005; 4:247–256.
39. Casciati A, Dobos K, Antonelli F, Benedek A, Kempf SJ, 
Belles M, Balogh A, Tanori M, Heredia L, Atkinson MJ, von 
Toerne C, Azimzadeh O, Saran A, et al. Age-related effects 
of X-ray irradiation on mouse hippocampus. Oncotarget. 
2016; 7:28040–58. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8575. 
40. Kataoka T. Study of antioxidative effects and anti-
inflammatory effects in mice due to low-dose X-irradiation 
or radon inhalation. J Radiat Res. 2013; 54:587–596.
41. Monje ML, Toda H, Palmer TD. Inflammatory blockade 
restores adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Science. 2003; 
302:1760–1765.
42. Kyrkanides S, Olschowka JA, Williams JP, Hansen JT, 
O’Banion MK. TNF alpha and IL-1beta mediate 
intercellular 
adhesion 
molecule-1 
induction 
via 
microglia-astrocyte interaction in CNS radiation injury. 
J Neuroimmunol. 1999; 95:95–106.
43. Fan R, Xu F, Previti ML, Davis J, Grande AM, 
Robinson JK, Van Nostrand WE. Minocycline reduces 
microglial activation and improves behavioral deficits in 
a transgenic model of cerebral microvascular amyloid. 
 
J Neurosci. 2007; 27:3057–3063.
44. Parihar VK, Limoli CL. Cranial irradiation compromises 
neuronal architecture in the hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA. 2013; 110:12822–12827.
45. Benice TS, Rizk A, Kohama S, Pfankuch T, Raber J. Sex-
differences in age-related cognitive decline in C57BL/6J 
mice associated with increased brain microtubule-
associated protein 2 and synaptophysin immunoreactivity. 
Neuroscience. 2006; 137:413–423.
 Oncotarget
71832
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
46. Tanaka S, Tanaka IB, 3rd, Sasagawa S, Ichinohe K, 
Takabatake T, Matsushita S, Matsumoto T, Otsu H, Sato F. 
No lengthening of life span in mice continuously exposed 
to gamma rays at very low dose rates. Radiat Res. 2003; 
160:376–379.
47. Engholm-Keller K, Hansen TA, Palmisano G, Larsen MR. 
Multidimensional strategy for sensitive phosphoproteomics 
incorporating protein prefractionation combined with SIMAC, 
HILIC, and TiO chromatography applied to proximal EGF 
signaling. J Proteome Res. 2011; 10:5383–5397.
48. Larsen MR, Jensen SS, Jakobsen LA, Heegaard NH. 
Exploring 
the 
sialiome 
using 
titanium 
dioxide 
chromatography and mass spectrometry. Mol Cell 
Proteomics. 2007; 6:1778–1787.
49. Larsen MR, Thingholm TE, Jensen ON, Roepstorff P, 
Jorgensen 
TJ. 
Highly 
selective 
enrichment 
of 
phosphorylated peptides from peptide mixtures using 
titanium dioxide microcolumns. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2005; 
4:873–886.
50. Melo-Braga MN, Ibanez-Vea M, Larsen MR, Kulej K. 
Comprehensive protocol to simultaneously study protein 
phosphorylation, acetylation, and N-linked sialylated 
glycosylation. Methods Mol Biol. 2015; 1295:275–292.
51. Thingholm TE, Jensen ON, Robinson PJ, Larsen MR. 
SIMAC 
(sequential 
elution 
from 
IMAC), 
a 
phosphoproteomics strategy for the rapid separation 
of monophosphorylated from multiply phosphorylated 
peptides. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2008; 7:661–671.
52. Schwammle V, Leon IR, Jensen ON. Assessment and 
improvement of statistical tools for comparative proteomics 
analysis of sparse data sets with few experimental 
replicates. J Proteome Res. 2013; 12:3874–3883.
53. Vizcaino JA, Deutsch EW, Wang R, Csordas A, Reisinger F, 
Rios D, Dianes JA, Sun Z, Farrah T, Bandeira N, Binz PA, 
Xenarios I, Eisenacher M, et al. ProteomeXchange provides 
globally coordinated proteomics data submission and 
dissemination. Nat Biotechnol. 2014; 32:223–226.
54. Kempf SJ, Casciati A, Buratovic S, Janik D, Toerne C, 
Ueffing M, Neff F, Moertl S, Stenerlow B, Saran A, 
Atkinson MJ, Eriksson P, Pazzaglia S, et al. The cognitive 
defects of neonatally irradiated mice are accompanied 
by changed synaptic plasticity, adult neurogenesis and 
neuroinflammation. Mol Neurodegener. 2014; 9:57.
55. Tanori M, Pasquali E, Leonardi S, Casciati A, Giardullo P, 
De Stefano I, Mancuso M, Saran A, Pazzaglia S. 
Developmental and oncogenic radiation effects on neural 
stem cells and their differentiating progeny in mouse 
cerebellum. Stem Cells. 2013; 31:2506–2516.
56. Shinohara M, Fujioka S, Murray ME, Wojtas A, Baker M, 
Rovelet-Lecrux A, Rademakers R, Das P, Parisi JE, Graff-
Radford NR, Petersen RC, Dickson DW, Bu G. Regional 
distribution of synaptic markers and APP correlate with 
distinct clinicopathological features in sporadic and familial 
Alzheimer’s disease. Brain. 2014; 137:1533–1549.
57. Sharma K, Schmitt S, Bergner CG, Tyanova S, 
Kannaiyan N, Manrique-Hoyos N, Kongi K, Cantuti L, 
Hanisch UK, Philips MA, Rossner MJ, Mann M, Simons M. 
Cell type- and brain region-resolved mouse brain proteome. 
Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:1819–1831.
