 History of Psychiatry
The Phenomenology of Major Depression and the
Representativeness and Nature of DSM Criteria
Kenneth S. Kendler, M.D.
How should DSM criteria relate to the disorders they are
designed to assess? To address this question empirically, the
author examines how well DSM-5 symptomatic criteria for
major depression capture the descriptions of clinical de-
pression in the post-Kraepelin Western psychiatric tradition
as described in textbooks published between 1900 and
1960. Eighteen symptoms and signs of depression were
described, 10 of which are covered by the DSM criteria
for major depression or melancholia. For two symptoms
(mood and cognitive content), DSM criteria are considerably
narrowerthanthosedescribedinthetextbooks.Fivesymptoms
and signs (changes in volition/motivation, slowing of speech,
anxiety, other physical symptoms, and depersonalization/
derealization) are not present in the DSM criteria. Compared
with the DSM criteria, these authors gave greater emphasis to
cognitive, physical, and psychomotor changes, and less to
neurovegetative symptoms. These results suggest that im-
portant features of major depression are not captured by DSM
criteria. This is unproblematic as long as DSM criteria are un-
derstood to index rather than constitute psychiatric disorders.
However, since DSM-III, our field has moved toward a re-
ification of DSM that implicitly assumes that psychiatric dis-
orders are actually just the DSM criteria. That is, we have taken
an index of something for the thing itself. For example, good
diagnostic criteria should be succinct and require minimal
inference, but some critical clinical phenomena are subtle,
difficult to assess, and experienced in widely varying ways.
This conceptual error has contributed to the impoverish-
ment of psychopathology and has affected our research,
clinical work, and teaching in some undesirable ways.
Am J Psychiatry 2016; 173:771–780; doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.15121509
The tower of Babel never yielded such confusion of tongues,
as the chaos of melancholy doth variety of symptoms.
—Robert Burton, Anatomy of Melancholia, 6th edition,
1651 (1, p. 456)
The introduction of operationalized diagnostic criteria in
DSM-III has had many benefits for psychiatric practice
and research. However, its wide use has produced an un-
anticipatedsideeffect—thereificationoftheDSMcriteria(2).
In our training, clinical work, and research, we typically
evaluate only DSM criteria, as if they constituted all anyone
would want to know about the disorder in question (3).
Focusing solely on the symptoms and signs in DSM risks
producing an impoverished view of psychopathology (4) and
has encouraged the rise of diagnostic literalism (5).
In this article, I first evaluate these claims empirically for
one of the most common and important of psychiatric dis-
orders:majordepression.Inthishistoricalinquiry,Iask:How
well do the A criteria for major depression used in DSM-III
through DSM-5 capture the descriptive approach taken to
clinicaldepressioninthepost-KraepelinWesternpsychiatric
tradition circa 1900–1960? (I chose this period because the
clinical features associated with what we now call depres-
sion were considerably more diverse in earlier epochs [6]).
I focus initially on textbooks as the best place to obtain ex-
pert opinion about the important symptoms and signs of
depression. I next review the phenomenology of depression
describedbyAubreyLewisinwhatisthemostdetailedsurveyof
the phenomenology of depression written in the 20th century
(7). I then evaluate how well our clinical descriptive tradition
for depressive illness is represented in the DSM criteria.
Then, in light of this historical analysis, I review the
question: How should DSM criteria relate to the disorders
they are designed to assess? I suggest that U.S. psychiatry, as a
field, has tended to reify DSM criteria. This approach reflects
aconceptualerror—acategorymistake.Thatmistakeistaking
an index of a thing for the thing itself. The criteria proposed in
DSM-IIIandsubsequentDSMeditionsarepracticalmeansto
identify disorders with what are hoped to be good reliability,
sensitivity, and specificity. They do not constitute the disorders
they seek to identify. This conceptual error is central to the
problemofpsychopathologicimpoverishment.Itscorrectionhas
important implications for the ways in which the DSM criteria
are used in research, clinical care, and especially teaching.
METHOD
I identified textbooks of psychiatry or psychological med-
icine published from ∼1900 to 1960, and written or trans-
lated into English, from three major sources: Amazon.com,
the National Library of Medicine, and Forgotten Books
(forgottenbooks.com). Textbooks were rejected if they did
See related feature: Clinical Guidance (Table of Contents)
Am J Psychiatry 173:8, August 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
771
REVIEWS AND OVERVIEWS
 not adopt the Kraepelinian diagnostic perspective on affec-
tive illness or if the information they contained on the
symptoms and signs of major depression was too sparse to be
useful. When multiple editions were available, I reviewed the
earliest edition. In total, 19 textbooks, published from 1899 to
1956 from five countries (nine from the United States, seven
from the United Kingdom, and one each from Germany,
France, and Switzerland), met inclusion criteria.
I reviewed the relevant sections of text in historical order
starting with the 6th edition of Kraepelin’s Psychiatry text-
book (8), creating categories for signs and symptoms as
needed as I progressed through the textbooks. After going
through all the texts, developing and testing the categories,
I went back over them a second time to ensure consistent
application of the categories. In the key table, I included
short quotations or paraphrases to give a sense of the authors’
“turn of phrase” in their descriptions.
Nine issues arose during this process. First, I focused on
the general descriptions of what the author termed either
“depression” or (for many of the earlier authors who did
not use this category) “melancholia” (terms included de-
pression, melancholia, depressive states, state(s) of depres-
sion, depressed type, types of depression, depressive phase,
depressive psychosis, and depressed reaction). For the pur-
poses of this essay, I refer to this syndrome as major de-
pression. Second, I never accepted symptoms or signs only
described in case reports. Third, if the author described
depressive subtypes, I generally took representative symp-
tomsfromthoseofmildtomoderateseverity.Ididnotinclude
symptoms or signs only noted for severe or stuporous de-
pression. Fourth, I did not accept symptoms or signs that
were described only for “involutional melancholy,” as most
authors considered it distinct from “depression” or more
typical “melancholia.” Fifth, I did not include signs or
symptoms that were present in “mixed states.”
Sixth, I did not describe the delusions or hallucinations
associated with major depression, as these are not part of the
DSM A criteria. Seventh, none of these authors separately
described the symptoms and signs of depression occurring in
the course of unipolar versus bipolar illness, so I could not
make that distinction. Eighth, many authors described a brief
set of symptoms or signs that they judged to be central or
primary to the depressive syndrome: I noted these by an
asterisk in the table. Ninth, several authors provided rather
long lists of associated somatic symptoms. In these situations,
I summarized those that seemed most prominent.
RESULTS
Textbooks’ Descriptions of Symptoms and Signs
Mood disturbances in the course of major depression were
described by all 19 textbook authors (Table 1). However, a
number of them were broader than the “feels sad, empty,
hopeless” described in DSM-5 criterion A1. Common addi-
tional terms included “gloomy,” “painful,” “misery,” “wor-
ried,” “wretched,” “blue”, and “lonesome.” Twelve of the
authorscommentedonlossofinterestusinglanguagebroadly
similar to DSM-5 criterion A2, often using terms indicating
apathy or indifference.
All authors described specific cognitive content as char-
acteristic of depressed patients. While guilt and worthless-
ness were frequently noted, other common descriptors
included hopelessness, pessimism, self-accusation, self-
derogation, feelings of inadequacy and of being a failure,
and a specific focus on prior moral shortcomings, often of
a sexual nature. The depressive cognitive content was
therefore considerably broader than that incorporated in
the relevant DSM criterion A7: “Feelings of worthlessness
or excessive or inappropriate guilt.”
All but one author described changes in cognitive func-
tioning, most typically of slowness of thought and difficulty
with concentration, consistent with major depression cri-
terion A8, “diminished ability to think or concentrate.”
Depression-related changes in volition and motivation
were described by 15 authors and were typically distin-
guished both from the more physical feelings of fatigue and
the difficulty in decision making. Most commonly, this was
described as lack of initiative, loss of will, or inability to work.
This symptomatic domain is not included in the DSM-5 A
criteria for major depression.
Difficulties with decision making were noted by seven
authors and are well captured by part of criterion A8, “in-
decisiveness.” Anhedonia was described by seven authors,
most commonly as a loss of feeling of affection for loved ones
and natural enjoyment. This symptom is relatively well
represented by the relevant part of criterion A2: “markedly
diminished pleasure.”
Psychomotor changes were reported by all but one author,
12 of whom described only aspects of psychomotor re-
tardation and six of whom also commented on agitation.
These signs are well presented in DSM-5 criterion A5.
Fatigue,exhaustion,andfeelingsofbeingtiredout,symptoms
well captured by DSM criterion A6, were described by only
eight authors. Speech that was slow, hesitant, indistinct, and/
or monosyllabic was described by all but two authors. This
symptom is not included in DSM-5.
Disturbed sleep was noted by 14 authors, most typically
described as insomnia or disturbed or unrefreshing sleep.
Early morning awakening was described by three authors.
This symptom is well covered by “insomnia” in criterion A4.
However, “hypersomnia,” also noted in this criterion, was not
described as a symptom of depression by any of the authors.
Various aspects of anxiety, including panic attacks and
obsessive fears, were noted by 14 authors, but anxiety is not
included in the DSM criteria for major depression. Poor
appetite and weight loss were described by, respectively, 10
and nine textbook authors,consistent with DSM criterion A3.
However, none of the authors noted increased appetite and
weight gain, which are also described in this DSM criterion.
Other physical symptoms and signs, noted by 17 authors,
was the most difficult symptom category to summarize. Most
commonly described were gastrointestinal complaints, but
772
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:8, August 2016
PHENOMENOLOGY OF MAJOR DEPRESSION
 diminished libido, amenorrhea, and headaches were also
often noted. Also frequently described were changes in facial
expression and posture. These phenomena are not captured
by any part of the A criterion in DSM-5 major depression.
Suicidal thoughts and ruminations were described by 13 of
the authors, and this symptom area is well covered by DSM
criterion A9, which includes “recurrent thoughts of death,”
“recurrent suicidal ideation,” or suicide attempt or plan.
Seven authors described circadian shifts in depressive
symptoms, all noting that the symptoms were more severe
in the morning. This is not in the DSM A criteria for major
depression but is reflected in specifier criterion B2 for
“melancholic features.”
Depression-associated depersonalization and dereal-
ization were noted in 12 of the textbooks. A number of
descriptions were provided, including everything feeling
changed or unreal, seeing the world through a mist, and
perplexity. No DSM-5 criteria for major depression describe
this kind of depressive symptomatology.
Prominent Symptoms and Signs
Fifteen authors noted a subset of symptoms and signs of
major depression they regarded as of particular importance
orcentralitytothesyndrome.AsseeninTable1(bottomrow),
this analysis indicated that these authors, in aggregate,
strongly endorsed three symptoms/signs of depression as
being of special diagnostic importance: lowered mood, im-
pairment in cognitive function, and psychomotor changes.
All three of these are well reflected in the DSM criteria for
major depression. The next most common central symptom,
volitional changes, was noted by only 20% of these authors
and is not described in DSM-5 criteria. Of note, only one
authordescribedneurovegetativechangesinsleep,appetite,or
weight as a central symptom of depression.
Criteria for Depression Proposed by Muncie
One of the authors—Muncie (22), in a 1939 textbook—
proposed a relatively complete set of diagnostic criteria for
depression, which for historical interest is presented in
Table2.ComparedwiththeDSM-5criteria,Muncie’scriteria
included symptoms of depersonalization and derealization
and gave greater emphasis to physiological symptoms and
changes in facial expression and posture.
Lewis’s Monograph
In 1934 Aubrey Lewis (7) described the “clinical features” of
61 cases of “depressive state,” all examined and treated by
Lewis in 1928–1929 in the Maudsley Hospital, London. This
102-page monograph provides considerably greater details
of depressive symptoms and signs than any of the textbooks
consulted. I can only hope to capture some relevant main
themes of this rich paper. First, Lewis comments on all but
two of the symptoms and signs that I developed from the
textbook review, so there is a high degree of consilience
between these two sources of information (Table 3). Second,
as with the texts, his descriptions of the mood changes are
much richer than those provided by DSM-5. Third, he
strongly emphasizes the importance and diversity of changes
in cognitive content, demonstrating even more clearly than
the textbooks the relative narrowness of the “worthlessness
and guilt” description provided in DSM criterion A7. Fourth,
he comments on but does not emphasize the depression-
related changes in volition. Fifth, he highlights the close rela-
tionship between depressive and anxious symptoms, and he
specifically notes the relatively high frequency of episode-
related obsessions and compulsions. Sixth, he comments
prominently on the depression-related signs of change in
posture and facial expression. Finally, in accord with the
textbook writers, he notes in considerable detail the relatively
frequent symptoms of depersonalization and derealization.
Quantitative Analysis
Finally, I tookeach of the 18 symptoms and signs developed in
the textbook review and divided them into three categories:
wellcoveredbyDSMcriteria,partlycoveredbyDSMcriteria,
and not at all covered by DSM criteria. As seen in Table 4, ten
of the18symptomsandsigns werewelldescribedbytheDSM
A criteria for major depression and one by a criterion for
melancholia. Two symptoms and signs (mood changes and
changes in cognitive content) were partly covered by DSM
criteria. Five symptoms and signs were not reflected in the
DSM criteria for major depression.
DISCUSSION
Empirical Conclusions
The goal of the historical portion of this essay was to de-
termine how well the phenomenology of depressive illness
described in the post-Kraepelinian Western psychiatric
tradition is captured by the current DSM symptomatic cri-
teria for major depression. I begin by reviewing the nine
major conclusions of this investigation.
First, the description of the core mood symptom for major
depression in DSM-5, “depressed … sad, empty, hopeless,”
was narrower than that provided by the textbook authors and
by Lewis. Terms like “painful,” “miserable,” “wretched,”
“dull,” “broken-hearted,” and “in agony” were used by var-
ious authors to reflect the diverse subjective manifestations
of the dysphoric mood that is widely agreed to be central to
the depressive syndrome.
Second, the descriptive literature placed greater relative
emphasis on the cognitive and attitudinal changes associ-
ated with depression than do the DSM criteria, where these
features constitute only one criterion, characterized solely
by worthlessness and guilt. In agreement with Beck (27),
theclassical authorsconsistently emphasizedtheimportance
and diversity of cognitive changes in depression. In addition
to worthlessness and guilt, other cognitive content was
emphasized, including hopelessness, gloom, and a range of
diverse self-accusatory and self-derogatory themes.
Third, second to mood changes, the most frequently noted
key symptom of major depression was changes in cognitive
Am J Psychiatry 173:8, August 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
773
KENDLER
 TABLE 1. Symptoms and Signs of Depression as Described by Authors of 19 Textbooks of Psychiatry Published Circa 1900–1960a
Author, Year
(Reference)
Mood
Interest
Cognitive Content
Cognitive Function
Volition/
Motivation
Decision
Making
Anhedonia
Psychomotor
Changes
Kraepelin,
1899 (8)
Gloomy, utterly
miserable
Nothing can
arouse interest,
indifferent
Hopeless, future
gloomy, without
purpose
Thinking difficult,
psychic inhibition*
Lack of initiative,*
work very difficult
Very
difficult
Nothing gives
pleasure
Psychomotor
inhibition
De Fursac,
1905 (9)
Painful,* sad,
gloomy
Indifferent to
everything*
Pessimistic
Psychic inhibition*
Abulia*
Constant
indecision
Experiencing no
affection
Slow
Paton, 1905 (10)
Emotional
depression
Self-insufficiency
and unworthiness
Retardation in
thought, difficulty
thinking
Inability to think
or act
Slow, with difficulty
Dana, 1907 (11)
Mental
depression*
Apathy, loss of
interest
Hopeless
Slowness, difficulty
in thinking* and
attention
Weakness of will,
attempts at work
are futile
Hopeless
indecision
Psychomotor
retardation,* but
agitation also seen
Craig, 1912 (12)
Feeling of
depression*
Loss of interest
Self-accusation
Slowing of thought
and action*
Inability to work
White, 1913 (13)
Emotional
depression*
Self-accusatory,
hypochondriacal
Difficulty thinking*
Incapable of effort
Psychomotor
retardation*
Cole, 1913 (14)
Mental pain,
abject misery,
wretchedness
Lack of interest in
family or others,
apathetic
Future impossible,
feeling of impending
evil, pervaded by
painful emotions
Difficulty in
association
Gait is slow but can
pace, be restless
Buckley,
1920 (15)
Depression of
emotional
tone,* sadness
No interest in
anything
Hopelessness,
personal
inadequacy
Retardation of
thought,* slug-
gishness, poor
attention
Reduced; efforts
made with difficulty
Lost all feeling
of affection
Retardation,* all
action slowed
Jelliffe,
1923 (16)
Emotional
depression*
Self-accusatory,
inadequacy,
hypochondriacal
Difficulty thinking*
Incapable of effort,
interference when
trying to exert will
Psychomotor
retardation*
Bleuler,
1924 (17)
Depressive
mood,* painful
All experiences
colored painfully;
focus on imagined
misfortune
Retardation of
mental stream*
Reduced resolution
of acting*
Retardation of
motility,* move-
ments slow and
weak, but can be
restless, wailing
Yellowlees, 1932
(18)
Unhappiness,
emotional
dullness
No interest in
anything, general
indifference
Focus on their moral
failings, ideas of
unworthiness
From lack of initia-
tive to grave impair-
ment in volition
Complete
emotional
unresponsive-
ness*
Lowering of activity,*
general slowness, but
sometimes pacing
restlessly
Sadler,
1936 (19)
Emotional
depression,*
painful, gloomy
Lost all interest
Unworthiness, guilt,
hopeless, self-
accusatory,
discouraged
Difficulty thinking,*
slowed down
Devoid of ability to
initiate action
Psychomotor
retardation,* all acting
slowed down
Noyes,
1936 (20)
Despondency,
“blue”
Hopelessness,
unworthiness,
gloomy
Difficulty thinking
Unable to carry out
activities
Indecision
Movements slow,
inhibited
Gordon,
1936 (21)
Depression*
Lose all usual
interests
Hopelessness,*
unworthiness*
Difficulty
concentrating
Everything a burden
Lacks the
natural
enjoyment
of life
Slowness of thought
and action, but some-
times agitation, weep-
ing, hand wringing
Muncie,
1939 (22)
Depressed, blue,
sad, lonesome,
worried,
homesick*
Ideas of self-
derogation,
unworthiness,
guilt, sin*
Thinking difficulty
Inhibition, lack of
initiative
General slowing of
motility*
Henderson,
1944 (23)
Depression*
Unable to take
interest
A failure, hopeless,
a disgrace
Difficulty in
thinking* and
concentrating
Loss of feeling
Psychomotor
retardation* but
can be agitated
Curran,
1945 (24)
Sadness,*
listlessness
Apathetic
Guilt, self-reproach
Retarded thinking*
Indecision
Motor retardation*
Mayer-Gross,
1954 (25)
Depression,
indifference,
misery
Loss of interest
Feeling of insuffi-
ciency, future dark
and gloomy,
hopeless
Diminished
quickness of
thought
Loss of willpower,
incapable of
initiating actions
Inability to
reach
decisions
Loss of enjoyment
Retardation
Ulett, 1956 (26)
Emotional
depression,*
melancholy
Guilt, self-
accusation, self-
deprecation
Slowness and
difficulty in
thinking*
Painful
uncertainty
Psychomotor
retardation*
Number of
times noted
19
12
19
18
15
7
7
18
Number of times
prominent (of 15)
13
0
2
12
3
0
1
11
a An asterisk (*) indicates that the symptom or sign was judged by the author to be prominent. “Depression” is described variously by these authors as depressive states, state(s) of
depression, types of depression, depressed type, melancholia, depressive phase, depressive psychosis, and depressed reaction.
774
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:8, August 2016
PHENOMENOLOGY OF MAJOR DEPRESSION
 Energy
Speech
Sleep
Anxiety
Appetite Weight
Other Physical
Symptoms
Suicidal
Behavior
Circadian
Effects
Depersonalization/
Derealization
Tired, worn
out
Quiet and
hesitant
Greatly impaired
Obsessional
ideas common
Much
reduced
Usually
drops
significantly
Palpitations, heaviness;
limp facial expression
and posture
Does not want
to live
Deeply perplexed
Indistinct, few
words
Diminished,
unrefreshing, disturbed
Spells
Anorexia Loss of
weight
Headache, vague pains,
constipation
Everything appears
strange
Slow or
unable
to speak
Apprehension
to marked
anxiety
Insomnia
Often anxiety
Loss of
appetite
Emaciation
Dyspeptic troubles; pre-
cordial distress, consti-
pation; menstrual
irregularities; loss of libido
Suicidal ideas
and impulses
Stupefied by gloom
Slow
Vague fears
“Potential suicides”
Depression more
acute in morning
Speaks slowly,
monosyllabic
Limp posture and
facial expression
Disaggregation of
the personality
Only snatches of
sleep, nights are
wretched and sleepless
Morbid
apprehensions
Loses all
appetite
Loses
weight
Dyspepsia, constipation,
lost sexual drive, scanty
menstruation, dry skin,
specific facial expressions
Suicidal intention
frequently
expressed
Fatigue,
exhaustion
Commonly
absent
Not infrequent
state of fear
Weakness
Unlike themselves/
surroundings
have changed
Unable to make
any effort, lack
of energy
Monosyllabic,
sometimes
inaudible
Disturbed
Anxiety attacks,
apprehension,
nameless dread
Poor
Loss of
weight
Constipation, cold
extremities, flexion
of body
Quiet, slow
Often, compul-
sive fears
Specific facial expression,
weakness, headache
Suicidal impulses
Loss of emotion,
everything
strange, colorless;
depersonalization
Slow, low-
pitched, dull
Often insomnia
Refusal
of food
Gastrointestinal
disturbance
Suicidal tendency
Fatigue,
exhaustion
Low tone,
monosyllabic
Disturbed,
un-refreshing
Irritability
Headaches, indiges-
tion, constipation;
careworn expression
Danger of
suicide
At worst in
morning
Complain of
unreality of the
environment
Fatigue
Slow and in
low tone
Insomnia
Headache, hypochon-
driacal complaints; typical
posture, stooped
Delay in
responses
Insomnia
Worry over trifles
Intestinal upset,
constipation, face
is very aged
Common
Often worst in
early morning
In a fog
Fatigue
Slowed
Principally early
morning awakening*
Poor*
Weight
loss*
Menstrual irregularity,
reduction in erections,
reduced libido; stooped
posture, constipation*
Suicidal
preoccupations*
Early morning
worst*
Depersonalization,
puzzle, perplexity*
Fatigue,
exhaustion
Typically, re-
duced speech,
but can be
increased
Frequently
disturbed, always
unrefreshing
Not infrequently
present
Reduced
Headache, dyspepsia,
constipation, careworn
expression
Danger of
suicide
Worst in
morning
Environment seems
unreal
Insomnia, especially
early awakening
Frequent
Loss
Loss of sexual desire,*
constipation, amenorrhea,
sallow complexion*
Suicidal ideas*
Worse in
morning
Depersonalization,
feels changed,
lifeless,
derealization
Fatigue,
heaviness
of limbs
Retardation
Sleeplessness,
unrefreshing
sleep
Exaggerated
fears and
anxieties,
anxiety attacks
Loss of
appetite
Loss of
weight
Constipation, reduced
sexual desire, amenorrhea;
distinct posture,
facial expression
Common
Worse in
morning
Depersonalization;
world through
a mist
Slowly and in
low tone
Insomnia,
early rising
Failure
to eat
Weight loss Libido is lost, constipation,
menstrual disorder,
depressed countenance
Suicidal
ruminations
8
17
14
14
10
9
17
13
7
12
0
0
1
0
1
1
2
2
1
1
Am J Psychiatry 173:8, August 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
775
KENDLER
 functioning, typically characterized by difficulties in think-
ing and concentrating. These symptoms, while noted in the
clinical and neuropsychological literature (28), have rarely,
in the post-DSM-III world, been regarded as central to the
clinical presentation of major depression.
Fourth, these authors describe a range of somatic symp-
toms and signs in depressed patients that receive little
attention in DSM. Gastrointestinal changes, especially
constipation, was commonly observed, as were menstrual
and libidinal changes. Observations of dried skin and char-
acteristic changes in facial expressions and posture were also
frequently noted. Somatic symptoms of major depression
may be more common in non-Western cultures, especially
China, and it has been claimed that this is due to a “men-
talization” of depression in Western culture (29). The
widespread use of DSM criteria for major depression, which
exclude consideration of somatic symptoms, may have
contributed to this trend.
Fifth, the textbook authors gave less importance to the
neurovegetative features of depression—changes in sleep,
appetite, and weight—than the DSM criteria do. No author
noted them as key depressive symptoms.
Sixth,consistentwithrecentwork(30),theseauthorsgave
greater prominence to changes in psychomotor functioning,
especially psychomotor retardation, than is our current
practice. This was noted as a key depressive sign by over two-
thirds of authors who listed such symptoms. However, only
five of the 19 textbook authors described psychomotor agi-
tationasacommonsymptomofdepressionormelancholia.In
addition, severalothers referredto sections on“mixed” states
where they described such cases.
Seventh, nearly two-thirds of the textbook authors de-
scribed a domain of symptomatology in depression rarely
noted in the post-DSM-III world: derealization and de-
personalization. These are poignantly described by Curran:
The typical affect is that of sadness, but has been described as
being qualitatively … different to that normally experi-
enced … the typical depressed mood thus shades into de-
personalization in which the patient feels changes—strange,
lifeless, detached, automatic. Sometimes, instead of feeling
that they themselves have changed, the patients lay emphasis
on a change in the outer world which seems dead or macabre
(24, p. 157).
This point is well captured by a recent first-person report:
It was as if the whatness of each thing … the essence of each
thing in the sense of the tableness of the table or the chairness
of the chair … was gone. There was a mute and indifferent
object in that place. Its availability to human living … in the
worldwasdrainedoutofit.Itsidentityasafamiliarobjectthat
we live with each day was gone … the world had lost its
welcoming quality (31, pp. 212–213).
Some pathological experiences in depression may not be
best understood as “symptoms that a person has” (e.g., sore
throat,insomnia)butratherafundamentalchangeinaperson’s
“being in the world” (32). That is, hopelessness or guilt can
become an “existential state” rather than a “symptom.”
Eighth, nearly all authors commented on changes in the
speech of depressed patients, most typically describing it
as slow, low in volume, with long pauses. This sign is not in
DSM-5.
Finally, the symptomatology of atypical depression—
particularly the “reverse” vegetative features of increased
eating/weight and hypersomnia—was not described in the
classical literature. One of these symptoms (hypersomnia)
wasintroduced intotheFeighner criteria(although itwasnot
TABLE 2. Criteria for Depression Proposed by Muncie in 1939a
Criterion
Name
Description
1
Mood
Depressed, melancholy, blue, sad, lonesome, worried, homesick, and noted
in the facial expression
1.a
Mood equivalent
Depersonalization, feelings of unrealityb
1.b
Mood equivalent
Puzzle and perplexity
2
Cognitive content: appropriate to mood
Self-derogatory, self-depreciatory ideas, ideas of unworthiness, guilt, sin, the
source of trouble for others
3
Suicidal preoccupations
Natural consequence of mood and content
4
General slowing of motility
Of musculature, speech, thinking, including feelings of inhibition, lack of
initiative, fatigue
5
Diurnal variation
Early morning after waking worst, the evening better
6
Physiological alterations
6.a
Insomnia
Principally early morning awakening
6.b
Poor appetite
6.c
Weight loss
6.d
Reduction in sexual functions
In women, menstrual irregularity. In men, reduction in frequency of erections.
In both sexes, reduction or loss of sexual desire.
6.e
Reduction in muscular tone
Stooped posture
6.f
Slowed motility
Constipation, lowered blood pressure, pulse
6.g
Reduction in basal metabolism
a From Muncie’s Psychobiology and Psychiatry (22).
b “In some cases at least, the expression of depersonalization … [may result from] … the fact that the misery is of such a degree as to beggar description in positive
terms.”
776
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:8, August 2016
PHENOMENOLOGY OF MAJOR DEPRESSION
 in the two earlier sets of diagnostic criteria for depression
that influenced the Feighner criteria [33, 34]). Increased
eating and weight gain were introduced into the Research
Diagnostic Criteria (35) for major depression and carried
over into all subsequent editions of DSM.
Conceptual Issues With Our Current Approach to
DSM Criteria
This historical inquiry provides a useful framework in which
to reflect on the way to answer the following question: How
should DSM criteria relate to the disorders they are designed
to assess? I wish to argue that many in our field have made a
serious category mistake in the ways in which we have un-
derstood and used the DSM criteria. Put succinctly, we have
confused an index of a thing with the thing itself.
Let me explain. As in all diagnostic systems, DSM
criteria were designed to index (i.e., measure or assess)
syndromes—to describe signs and symptoms that permit the
clinician to classify individuals as being affected or un-
affected, with good efficiency, reliability, sensitivity, and
specificity. To use major depression as an example, if the
criteria work well, then individuals who meet the criteria for
major depression have a high likelihood of really having
depression and being neither psychiatrically well nor having
another syndrome, such as panic disorder. But meeting the
DSM criteria for major depression is not the same thing as
having major depression. The DSM criteria do not con-
stitute clinically significant depression.
To illustrate this critical but abstract concept, let me give
three examples. First, early World Health Organization
(WHO) criteria for myocardial infarction (MI) were simple
(36). Definite MI required these three criteria:
1. Clinical history of ischemic type chest pain lasting for
more than 20 minutes
2. Changes in serial ECG tracings
3. Rise and fall of serum cardiac biomarkers such as creatine
kinase-MB fraction and troponin
These criteria were well validated, and they predicted de-
finitive diagnostic tests for MI, especiallyangiography, which
directly identifies arterial stenosis or blockage. Thus, we
would use these criteria because they index having an
MI—they provided a pragmatic and well-validated way to
identify this syndrome. However, few would argue that these
criteria constitute “having an MI”—that is, that having an MI
is simply meeting those three criteria. Rather, an MI occurs
when heart muscle dies from ischemia. This is often but not
always accurately indexed by these criteria.
Second, the Apgar score (37, 38) was proposed in 1953 by
VirginiaApgarasarapidwaytoassessimmediatepostpartum
neonatal health. It contains five items (heart rate, respiratory
effort, reflex irritability, muscle tone, and color) that can be
TABLE 3. Symptoms and Signs of Depression as Described by Lewis in 1934a
Symptom Area
Description
Mood
Depressed, miserable, dreadful, brokenhearted, worried, frightened, low, unhappy, despondent, awful, in
agony, desperate, and reflects “the complex quality of experienced totality”
Interest
Little or no interest in their surroundings
Cognitive content
Hopeless, nothing to live for, useless, inadequate, degradation, attribution to self of evil motives, self-
reproach and self-accusation. These are “among the most striking of melancholic symptoms”
Cognitive function
Difficulties with concentration and focus. Muddled. But in some patients, due to a constant press of
thoughts. “Difficulty in thinking, not slowness of thought, is the essential feature.” Feelings of inadequacy
more important than performance.
Volition/motivation
No will power
Decision making
Anhedonia
Rarely noted compared with loss of interest. One patient stated, “I can’t enjoy anything.”
Psychomotor changes
General slowing of action. But agitation seen in one-quarter of patients. Wringing of hands, picking. Also
descriptions of “inner restlessness”
Energy
Tired, worn out, exhausted
Speech
Around a third of patients “talked a great deal” and another third said “little”
Sleep
Anxiety
“The relation of anxiety to depression is intimate.” Apprehension very common, fear of something
unpleasant happening. Seen both “in attacks or as a lasting state.” Thirteen patients demonstrated
compulsive symptoms. Obscene thoughts, repeating picking (“I feel I must do that; I know it’s wrong”),
washing, “I can’t keep my thoughts off my private parts. It’s dreadful.”
Appetite
“Refusal of food is one of the prominent features of any depressive state.”
Weight
Loss is common
Other physical symptoms
Headaches, other “aches and pains” common. Drooping slack posture, facial expression “more easily
recognized than described”
Suicidal behavior
26 patients attempted suicide; 12 others often spoke of suicide
Circadian effects
Infrequently seen in this sample
Depersonalization/derealization
Feel dazed, queer, different, no feeling at all, don’t feel myself; 19 cases with depersonalization—“I have no
feeling at all in me,” “I feel all dead”; 21 cases with derealization—“everything changed and unreal,” “a veil
or mist interposed between them” and reality
a From Lewis’s monograph “Melancholia: A Clinical Survey of Depressive States” (7).
Am J Psychiatry 173:8, August 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
777
KENDLER
 evaluated quickly in the delivery room (38). The Apgar score
is practical, reliable, and valid in that it robustly predicts
neonatal survival and risk of future cognitive impairment
(38). But would anyone wish to argue that a healthy baby is
just having a baby with a high Apgar score, or, to phrase it
differently, that the construct of infant health can be reduced
to an Apgar score?
Third, the intelligence quotient (IQ) originated with
Alfred Binet in 1905. Its major function was to predict school
performance, and it is still widely used (for example, as
the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale) as a broad measure of
intellectualfunctioning.Despiteitswidepopularityandentry
into the general vocabulary, it would be a confusion to assert
that being intelligent is just having a high IQ measured by
constructs such as fluid reasoning, knowledge, quantitative
reasoning, visual-spatial processing, and working memory.
There is, of course, a common core to these three ex-
amples. We have a latent concept or process that we cannot
easily directly assess: MI, general health of a newborn, and
intelligence. We develop a method to assess that construct
which is practical to apply and is a good predictor of that
latent concept. But then weare at riskof a misstep. As pointed
out by John Locke, the great English philosopher (and
physician), “Another great abuse of words is taking them
for things.… How much names taken for things are apt to
mislead the understanding” (39, pp. 442–443). Once we
have a name—MI, Apgar, IQ, or DSM major depression—we
areatriskof confusingourindexwiththethingitself,thatis,
what it was developed to measure.
Following from Locke’s observation, we can reframe our
concept of a category mistake into a more concrete and se-
mantic form: the meaning of the sentence “Mary suffers from
depression”isreducedto“MarymeetstheDSM-Vcriteriafor
major depression.” This would be the same error as claiming
that “Roger has had a heart attack” is reducible to “Roger
meets the WHO criteria for MI” and claiming that “April is a
healthy baby” is just the same as saying “April
had a high Apgar score.”
Illustrations of the Problems Associated
With Our Category Mistake
Why is it a bad idea to conflate our DSM
criteria with the disorders themselves? Our
historical review of symptoms of major de-
pression presents three illustrative problems.
First, for most diagnostic criteria, rapidity and
reliability of assessment is critical. The de-
velopers of DSM-III explicitly preferred cri-
teria that required low levels of inference,
because these are typically more reliable (40).
Many of the symptomatic criteria for major
depression—suchaschangesinappetite,weight,
psychomotor performance, and sleep—can be
quickly and reliably assessed.
But some important features of psychiatric
disorders may not be like that. They may be
subtle, and time-consuming to evaluate. Does this mean that
such symptoms should be disregarded? If DSM criteria for
major depression constitute depression, that would be a
logical conclusion.
But many of our classical textbook authors believed that
derealization was an important clinical feature of major
depression. We can understand why this did not make it into
DSM: It is a subtle concept, time-consuming to evaluate, and
perhaps of limited reliability. Yet, senior clinicians of earlier
generations thought it was a critical feature of the depressive
syndrome that reflected their patients’ lived experiences.
Should we not evaluate it or teach it to our students because it
is not in DSM?
Second, developers of diagnostic criteria are also appro-
priately concerned about specificity. A symptom could be
quite clinically important, but if it is shared by many other
syndromes, it would likely not make a good diagnostic cri-
terion. Most of our textbook writers considered anxiety to be
a prominent and clinically important part of the presentation
of major depression. If we conflate our criteria with our
disorders, we are then in the awkward position of suggesting
that anxiety is not important in major depression because it is
not in our criteria.
Third, to be practical, diagnostic criteria need to be suc-
cinct. For thekeymajor depressioncriteria A1 andA7, DSM-5
lists three and two descriptors, respectively. As illustrated by
our textbook writers, these lists are too short to capture
adequately the range of human experience of the mood state
of depression and the range of self-derogatory/pessimistic
depressive cognitions.
Consequences of Our Category Mistake
Reification has many meanings, but in this context it reflects
the process whereby we have taken DSM criteria as too
sacrosanct. Hyman trenchantly writes, “Unfortunately, the
disorders within these classifications [DSM and ICD] are not
TABLE 4. The Degree of Coverage by DSM-5 Criteria for Major Depression of the
18 Symptoms and Signs of Depression Assessed by Textbook Authors
Symptom Area
Degree of Coverage by DSM Criteria
Mood
Partly covered, criterion A1
Interest
Well covered, criterion A2
Cognitive content
Partly covered, criterion A7
Cognitive function
Well covered, criterion A8
Volition/motivation
Not covered
Decision making
Well covered, criterion A8
Anhedonia
Well covered, criterion A2
Psychomotor changes
Well covered, criterion A5
Energy
Well covered, criterion A6
Speech
Not covered
Sleep
Well covered, criterion A4
Anxiety
Not covered
Appetite
Well covered, criterion A3
Weight
Well covered, criterion A3
Other physical symptoms
Not covered
Suicidal behavior
Well covered, criterion A9
Circadian effects
Well covered, criterion B2 for melancholia
Depersonalization/derealization
Not covered
778
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:8, August 2016
PHENOMENOLOGY OF MAJOR DEPRESSION
 generally treated as heuristic, but to a great degree have
become reified” (2, p. 156). Many of us have become di-
agnostic literalists with respect to DSM, stymied by an ex-
cessive respect for own creation. DSM criteria are imperfect
approximations created by a very human process that, al-
though scientifically informed, could not be claimed by any
knowledgeable individual to be infallible. These criteria have
been enshrined in our diagnostic algorithms and structured
interviews, and are so often required by journal and grant
reviewers that they approach the tokens of an orthodox faith.
By losing sight of the indexical function of our diagnostic
criteria and confounding the criteria with the disorders
themselves, we open the door to reification.
Furthermore, if meeting DSM criteria constitutes a psy-
chiatric disorder, why should we evaluate anything but the
DSM criteria? This view is deeply problematic. Psychiatry is
the inheritor of the richest tradition of description in all of
medicine because the features of the disordered mind/brain
system that is the subject of our discipline are so diverse, so
innately fascinating and profound in the degree to which they
illuminate the human condition. Part of the process of good
clinical care is to explore the experiences of our patients. This
helps us better understand their experiences, and this sense of
shared understanding can be directly therapeutic. This cannot
be done without knowledge of the world of psychopathology
outside of DSM. DSM might provide a guide to but can hardly
be a replacement for our rich psychopathological tradition.
From a historical perspective, psychiatry has been ap-
propriately proud of the “DSM revolution.” However, we still
lack gold-standard validators like coronary angiography. The
presence of such validators helps illustrate the difference
between indexing and constituting a disorder. Given our
pride in our diagnosis and our lack of definitive validators, it
is understandable that our field has had undergone a “con-
ceptual creep” in which our criteria have mistakenly become
our disorder.
Potential Limitations
My historical review of symptoms and signs of major de-
pression should be interpreted in the context of three po-
tentially important methodological limitations. First, the
natureofpsychiatricpracticechangedduringthe20thcentury,
with outpatient care constituting a larger proportion of our
work, especially after 1960. Many of the classical textbook
writers were seeing severely depressed patients in hospitals.
By the time DSM-III was published in 1980, the majority of
depressedpatients were being seen in ambulatory settings and
were often more mildly ill. Second, none of these authors
distinguishedbetween depressionsoccurring inbipolar illness
and those occurring in unipolar illness. It is possible, although
unlikely given modest symptomatic differences seen for de-
pression in major depression as compared with bipolar illness
(37), that some of the differences between the symptoms
described and those listed in the DSM-5 criteria result from
admixture of patients with bipolar illness. Third, as noted
above, the goals of those who develop diagnostic criteria are
not the same as those of the textbook writers, with the former
being much more concerned with brevity, reliability (and
hence low inferential content), and specificity.
There are two potentially important concerns about my
critique of this common approach to DSM criteria. First,
readers might conclude that I am critical of the basic concept
of operationalized criteria and the ensuing DSM-III revo-
lution. Nothing could be further from the truth. The benefits
of these changes to the clinical and research agendas of
psychiatry have been immense. It is only against this back-
ground that I have attempted to address concerns for the
negative consequences of the DSM-III revolution, which in
my view arise in part from our misconstruing their true
purpose as indices of disorders. Second, the most deflating
critique of my view on the category mistake common in our
field might be phrased as follows:
All you have done is pointed out the difference between di-
agnostic criteria and clinical evaluation. Since DSM-III, DSM
has contained an “associated features” section that describes
common symptoms and signs of the disorder not included as
diagnostic criteria. We use diagnostic criteria for referral or
treatment decisions but then put them aside and do our
complete clinical evaluation.
While this argument has force, it falls short in three major
ways. First, it fails to recognize the degree to which many
mental health clinicians have conflated clinical evaluation
andassessmentofDSMcriteriainourclinicalwork,research,
and teaching. We often see a clinical evaluation as simply the
evaluation of DSM diagnostic criteria. Second, it does not
explain the diminution in psychopathological expertise and
interest since the advent of DSM-III (4). Third and most
importantly, the critique does not address the underlying
conceptual problems of diagnostic literalism and reification
that arise directly from our category mistake of confusing
our fallible diagnostic criteria with the categories they are
designed to assess.
CONCLUSIONS
The DSM symptomatic criteria for major depression do a
reasonable but incomplete job of assessing the prominent
clinical symptoms and signs of depressive illness as described
in the Western post-Kraepelinian psychiatric tradition. In
their use as diagnostic criteria, this is unproblematic because,
across all of medicine, diagnostic criteria are designed to index
rather than exhaustively describe a clinical syndrome. That is,
criteria need only to identify true cases with sufficient sen-
sitivity and specificity, and not to reflect complete catalogs of
important symptoms and signs. But it is problematic when we
focus our teaching, our clinical work, and our research solely
around DSM criteria. In our teaching, our trainees need to
understand that the DSM criteria for depression, while a good
place to start a diagnostic evaluation, do not represent all the
relevant symptoms and signs that merit evaluation. In our
clinicalwork,weshouldmakean efforttoexplorethediversity
of the depressive experiences of our patients, some of which
Am J Psychiatry 173:8, August 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
779
KENDLER
 clearly lie beyond the bounds of the DSM criteria. For our
research, if we focus only on DSM criteria for major de-
pression, how can we further improve on our current criteria?
I suggest that, to many intents and purposes, we have
been misusing the DSM diagnostic criteria because we have
confused them with the diagnostic entities they are designed
to assess. To be explicit, our DSM criteria for major de-
pression are a good index of the clinical syndrome of de-
pression.But,asmyhistoricalsurveysuggests,thisdepressive
syndrome is not entirely constituted by the DSM criteria.
Recognizing and correcting this approach to DSM should
help us enjoy the many benefits our increasingly research-
based criteria can afford to our field while diminishing its
negative effects of reduced interest in our rich descriptive
heritage andof excessivediagnostic literalismandreification.
AUTHOR AND ARTICLE INFORMATION
From the Virginia Institute of Psychiatric and Behavioral Genetics and the
Departments of Psychiatry and Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond.
Address correspondence to Dr. Kendler (kenneth.kendler@vcuhealth.
org).
Denny Borsboom, Ph.D., and Paul Appelbaum, M.D., provided helpful
comments on earlier versions of the manuscript.
The author reports no financial relationships with commercial interests.
Received Dec. 1, 2015; revisions received Feb. 18 and Feb. 29, 2016;
accepted March 7, 2016; published online May 3, 2016.
REFERENCES
1. Burton R: The Anatomy of Melancholia. London, Bell and Sons, 1893
2. Hyman SE: The diagnosis of mental disorders: the problem of
reification. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2010; 6:155–179
3. Kendler KS: DSM issues: incorporation of biological tests, avoidance
of reification, and an approach to the “box canyon problem”. Am J
Psychiatry 2014; 171:1248–1250
4. Andreasen NC: DSM and the death of phenomenology in America: an
exampleofunintended consequences. SchizophrBull2007;33:108–112
5. Zachar P: A Metaphysics of Psychopathology. Cambridge, Mass,
MIT Press, 2014
6. Berrios GE: The History of Mental Symptoms: Descriptive Psy-
chopathology Since the Nineteenth Century. New York, Cambridge
University Press, 1996
7. Lewis AJ: Melancholia: a clinical survey of depressive states. J Ment
Sci 1934; 80:277–378
8. Kraepelin E: Psychiatry: A Textbook for Students and Physicians,
vol 2, Clinical Psychiatry. Translated by Sabine Ayed, edited by
Jacques Quen. Canton, Mass, Science History Publications, 1990
(originally published 1899)
9. De Fursac R: Manual of Psychiatry. London, Forgotten Books, 2013
(originally published 1905)
10. Paton S: Psychiatry: A Text-Book for Students and Physicians.
London, Forgotten Books, 2014 (originally published 1905)
11. Dana CL: Text-Book of Nervous Diseases and Psychiatry: For the Use
of Students and Practitioners of Medicine, 6th rev and enlarged ed.
New York, William Wood, 1904
12. Craig M: Psychological Medicine: A Manual on Mental Diseases
for Practitioners and Students. London, Forgotten Books, 2013
(originally published 1912)
13. White WA: Outlines of Psychiatry: Nervous and Mental Disease
Monograph Series No 1, 4th ed. New York, Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease Publishing Company, 1913
14. Cole RH: Mental Diseases: A Text-Book of Psychiatry for Medical
Students and Practitioners. London, University of London Press, 1913
15. Buckley AC: The Basis of Psychiatry (Psychological Medicine): A
Guide to the Study of Mental Disorders, for Students and Practi-
tioners. London, Forgotten Books, 1920 (originally published 1920)
16. Jelliffe SE, White WA: Diseases of the Nervous System: A Text-Book
of Neurologyand Psychiatry, 4th ed,revised, rewritten,and enlarged
ed. Philadelphia and New York, Lea & Febiger, 1923.
17. Bleuler E: Textbook of Psychiatry. New York, Arno Press, 1976
18. Yellowlees H: Clinical Lectures on Psychological Medicine.
Baltimore, J & A Churchill, 1932
19. Sadler WS: Theory and Practice of Psychiatry. St Louis, Mosby, 1936
20. Noyes AP: A Textbook of Psychiatry, 2nd ed. New York, Macmillan,
1936
21. Gordon RG, Harris NG, Rees JR: An Introduction to Psychological
Medicine. London, Oxford University Press, Oxford Medical Pub-
lications, 1936
22. Muncie W: Psychobiology and Psychiatry: A Textbook of Normal
and Abnormal Human Behavior. St Louis, Mosby, 1939
23. Henderson DK, Gillespie RD: A Text-Book of Psychiatry for
Students and Practitioners, 6th ed. London, Oxford University
Press, Oxford Medical Publications, 1944
24. Curran D, Guttmann E: Psychological Medicine: A Short In-
troduction to Psychiatry, 2nd ed. Edinburgh, UK, Livingstone, 1945
25. Mayer-Gross W, Slater E, Roth M: Clinical Psychiatry. London,
Cassell, 1954
26. Ulett GA, Goodrich DW: A Synopsis of Contemporary Psychiatry.
St Louis, Mosby, 1956
27. Beck AT, Alford BA: Depression: Causes and Treatment, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 2008
28. Trivedi MH, Greer TL: Cognitive dysfunction in unipolar depression:
implications for treatment. J Affect Disord 2014; 152–154:19–27
29. Kleinman A, Kleinman J: Somatization: the interconnections in
Chinese society among culture, depressive experiences, and the
meanings of pain, in Culture and Depression: Studies in the An-
thropology and Cross-Cultural Psychiatry of Affect and Disorder.
Edited by Kleinman A, Good B. Berkeley, University of California
Press, 1985, pp 429–490
30. Parker G, Hadzi-PavlovicD, AustinMP, etal: Sub-typingdepression,
I: is psychomotor disturbance necessary and sufficient to the defi-
nition of melancholia? Psychol Med 1995; 25:815–823
31. Hornstein G: Agnes’s Jacket: A Psychologist’s Search for the
Meanings of Madness. New York, Rodale Books, 2009
32. Ratcliffe M: Experiences of Depression: A Study in Phenomenology.
Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press, 2015
33. Cassidy WL, Flanagan NB, Spellman M, et al: Clinical observations
in manic-depressive disease: a quantitative study of one hundred
manic-depressive patients and fifty medically sick controls. J Am
Med Assoc 1957; 164:1535–1546
34. StoneTT, BurrisBC: Melancholia;clinical study of 50 selected cases.
JAMA 1950; 142:165–168
35. Spitzer RL, Endicott J, Robins E: Research Diagnostic Criteria for a
Selected Group of Functional Disorders, 2nd ed. New York, New
York Psychiatric Institute, 1975
36. Anonymous : Nomenclature and criteria for diagnosis of ischemic
heartdisease:ReportoftheJointInternationalSocietyandFederation
of Cardiology/World Health Organization task force on standardi-
zation of clinical nomenclature. Circulation 1979; 59:607–609
37. Apgar V: A proposal for a new method of evaluation of the newborn
infant. Curr Res Anesth Analg 1953; 32:260–267
38. Finster M, Wood M: The Apgar score has survived the test of time.
Anesthesiology 2005; 102:855–857
39. Locke J: An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Oxford, UK,
Oxford University Press, 1979
40. Decker HS: The Making of DSM-III: A Diagnostic Manual’s Conquest
of American Psychiatry. New York, Oxford University Press, 2013
780
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:8, August 2016
PHENOMENOLOGY OF MAJOR DEPRESSION
