 E238 
CMAJ  |  MARCH 5, 2018  |  VOLUME 190  |  ISSUE 9 
© 2018 Joule Inc. or its licensors
S
troke is the second leading global cause of death, 
accounting for 11% of deaths worldwide.1,2 Five-year sur-
vival is similar to all cancers combined and heart failure.3 
Prognosis is particularly poor for patients with total anterior cir-
culation syndrome strokes; i.e., the “full house” of unilateral 
motor or sensory loss with cortical symptoms (e.g., aphasia or 
inattention) and homonymous hemianopia.4 A physical trajec-
tory for patients with severe stroke has been proposed of sudden 
decline in functional status at stroke onset, and ending in death 
or survival with long-term disability.5
Palliative care seeks to support people to live well with deteri-
orating health until they die and improves outcomes when intro-
duced early alongside disease-modifying treatment.6,7 The World 
Health Organization (WHO) recommends that holistic care for 
people with any life-threatening illness should include the key 
principles of palliative care.8 Patients with severe stroke and 
their informal caregivers (the term “informal caregiver” is used 
to include family or unpaid caregivers) stand to benefit when 
their physical, psychological, emotional, spiritual and practical 
needs are anticipated and addressed.9–11 Cohort studies and 
qualitative research in patients with major stroke have identi-
fied difficulties with symptom management, communication, 
family support and proxy decision-making among patients dying 
with acute stroke.12–15 However, there is insufficient detail about 
the immediate and long-term psychological, emotional and spir-
itual needs of stroke survivors and their informal caregivers to 
understand whether, and how, palliative care should be inte-
grated into stroke care. A mixed-methods approach was consid-
ered the most appropriate method to explore these dynamic 
complex issues.16
RESEARCH
Outcomes, experiences and palliative care 
in major stroke: a multicentre, mixed-method, 
longitudinal study
Marilyn Kendall MA PhD, Eileen Cowey MN PhD, Gillian Mead MD, Mark Barber MD, Christine McAlpine MBChB, 
David J. Stott MD, Kirsty Boyd PhD, Scott A. Murray MD
n Cite as: CMAJ 2018 March 5;190:E238-46. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.170604
See related article at www.cmaj.ca/lookup/doi/10.1503/cmaj.170956
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND: Case fatality after total 
anterior circulation stroke is high. Our 
objective was to describe the experiences 
and needs of patients and caregivers, and 
to explore whether, and how, palliative 
care should be integrated into stroke care.
METHODS: From 3 stroke services in Scot-
land, we recruited a purposive sample of 
people with total anterior circulation 
stroke, and conducted serial, qualitative 
interviews with them and their informal 
and professional caregivers at 6 weeks, 
6 months and 1 year. Interviews were 
transcribed for thematic and narrative 
analysis. The Palliative Care Outcome 
Scale, EuroQol-5D-5L and Caregiver Strain 
Index questionnaires were completed 
after interviews. We also conducted a data 
linkage study of all patients with anterior 
circulation stroke admitted to the 3 ser-
vices over 6 months, which included case 
fatality, place of death and readmissions.
RESULTS: Data linkage (n = 219) showed 
that 57% of patients with total anterior 
circulation stroke died within 6 months. 
The questionnaires recorded that the 
patients experienced immediate and per-
sistent emotional distress and poor qual-
ity of life. We conducted 99 interviews 
with 34 patients and their informal and 
professional careers. We identified sev-
eral major themes. Patients and caregiv-
ers faced death or a life not worth living. 
Those who survived felt grief for a former 
life. Professionals focused on physical 
rehabilitation rather than preparation for 
death or limited recovery. Future plan-
ning was challenging. “Palliative care” 
had connotations of treatment with-
drawal and imminent death.
INTERPRETATION: Major stroke brings 
likelihood of death but little preparation. 
Realistic planning with patients and infor-
mal caregivers should be offered, raising 
the possibility of death or survival with 
disability. Practising the principles of pal-
liative care is needed, but the term “pallia-
tive care” should be avoided or reframed.
 RESEARCH
 
CMAJ  |  MARCH 5, 2018  |  VOLUME 190  |  ISSUE 9 
E239
Our objective was to understand patients and informal and 
professional caregivers’ experiences, concerns and priorities in 
the 12 months after total anterior circulation syndrome stroke, 
and to identify the potential role of palliative care within stroke 
care, both in hospital and the community.
Methods
Design
To explore patterns of death, we employed a mixed-methods 
approach using individual in-depth interviews with patients, 
informal caregivers and health or social care professionals, or 
joint interviews with patient and caregiver; questionnaires, if 
patients and caregivers were able to complete them; and a data 
linkage study of all patients with total anterior circulation syn-
drome admitted to the 3 participating stroke units in central 
Scotland (2 of which were in academic centres). We specifically 
used serial qualitative multiperspective interviews, as this is a 
robust method for understanding evolving and complex pro-
cesses.17 We used questionnaires to allow a numeric comparison 
using standardized measures across the interviewees, and to 
observe how the questionnaires might perform serially in a 
future trial.
Data generation
Qualitative component
The qualitative study included patients with total anterior circu-
lation syndrome with a modified Rankin score of 4 or 5. To cap-
ture a range of experiences, we aimed to recruit a minimum of 
10 patients in each of the dichotomous groups of age (70 yr or 
older, or younger than 70); sex; artificial or oral feeding; right and 
left hemisphere stroke; substantial comorbidity or not; and at 
least 5 people who were expected to go home. In total, we aimed 
to recruit about 30 patients because this was expected to achieve 
saturation, based on our previous experience of serial qualitative 
interviews in other end-of-life patient groups.17
Patients admitted to the 3 stroke units, or their legally recog-
nized representative or next of kin, were identified and 
approached by a clinician or a Scottish Stroke Research Network 
nurse working in a stroke unit in 3 Scottish Health Boards 
between June 2014 and January 2015. We used a recruitment 
grid to ensure we recruited the required diversity of participants. 
We obtained consent from those patients with capacity (using 
aphasia-friendly materials if needed). Proxy consent was 
obtained for patients with incapacity. A researcher then con-
tacted participants. See Box 1 for special considerations we 
adopted for people deemed not to have capacity.
Two experienced female qualitative researchers (nurse 
researcher and senior social scientist) undertook the interviews 
with stroke survivors or their informal caregiver or relative at 
6 weeks, 6 months and 1 year.18 At each time point, participants 
nominated a key health or social care professional for interview. 
Patient and relative interviews took place in the hospital ward or 
in their homes or residential care. Professionals were interviewed 
at their workplace or by telephone. The interviews took a narra-
tive approach using topic guides that included, for instance, ask-
ing professionals how they perceived “palliative care.” The 
researchers did not directly ask patients and caregivers about 
end-of-life care, death or dying, but if the participants raised the 
topic, this was explored using their terms; the researchers asked 
whether the participants had heard of palliative care, and what 
they understood it to mean. Interviews lasted 20 to 90 minutes, 
were digitally recorded and fully transcribed with field notes.19
Two lay advisory groups — one from a support group for 
patients with stroke and their informal caregivers, and another 
from a group specifically for people with speech loss — regularly 
discussed emerging findings. Four end-of-study focus groups (n = 
36) of informal caregivers, stroke clinicians, general practitio-
ners, geriatricians, palliative care specialists, allied health profes-
sionals, care home managers and policy-makers considered 
emerging recommendations.
Questionnaires
After each interview, we mailed the EuroQol-5D-5L (quality of 
life) and the Patient Outcome Score (multidimensional needs) to 
patients and the Carer Strain Index (caregiver well-being) to 
caregivers.20–22
Data linkage
We obtained Scottish Stroke Care Audit data for all patients with 
total anterior circulation syndrome admitted to the 3 stroke 
units during the 6 months of recruitment to the qualitative study. 
We linked these data with hospital and National Register for 
Scotland data for the year after the index stroke, to describe tem-
poral patterns of death.
Data analysis
The qualitative analysis was iterative and ongoing alongside fur-
ther data generation. It was guided by the research questions, key 
theoretical concepts in the literature and assimilated themes 
 
arising from the data. We performed thematic and narrative analy-
sis and used a constructivist and interpretivist framework.19,23 
Box 1: Special considerations in dealing with people 
with incapacity
• Where there was not an Adults with Incapacity Order, patients’ 
capacity to consent was established by the clinical team (i.e., 
not the interviewers).
• For patients with incapacity, relatives gave proxy consent and 
acted as proxy information-givers.
• We developed aphasia-friendly information sheets about the study.
• The interviewers received training in communicating with 
people who have aphasia.
• We used tailored information sheets for different participant 
groups (e.g., patients with or without aphasia, relatives).
• Written informed consent was obtained or reaffirmed before 
interviews.
• Patients deemed by the clinical team during the follow-up year 
as having lost the capacity to consent were not interviewed 
again, but their relatives continued in the study.
 RESEARCH
E240 
CMAJ  |  MARCH 5, 2018  |  VOLUME 190  |  ISSUE 9 
Principles of grounded theory were used in the sense that data 
analysis was iterative and guided by emerging themes as well as 
by the research questions.24 We were thus open to new ideas or 
themes and were also able to situate our findings within the 
existing theoretical landscape. The interviews with individual 
patients, caregivers and professionals were initially coded sepa-
rately. Then, each set of individual patient’s and caregiver’s tran-
scripts was analyzed over time to identify dynamic changes, gen-
erating 29 individual case studies. Next, we analyzed patient 
transcripts together to gather patients’ perceptions; informal 
caregiver transcripts to examine the caregivers’ perspectives; 
and health care professional transcripts to gain their views. 
Finally, we analyzed all the transcripts (patients’, caregivers’ and 
professionals’) from each of the 3 time points together to look at 
issues specific to each point. The insights were integrated with 
the assistance of NVivo 10 (QSR International Pty Ltd.) to show 
common themes and divergent perspectives. We then traced 
themes across the 3 data sets to give an in-depth multiperspec-
tive picture of experiences and outcomes.25
We triangulated between methods and between the views of 
the various participant groups to enrich our understanding of the 
data, employing mainly the mixed-methods matrix approach, 
which integrates both qualitative and quantitative data for each 
participant at the analysis stage of the study.25 We scrutinized devi-
ant cases, or accounts of experiences that differed from those com-
monly reported, to refine our comprehension of emerging narra-
tives.26 Early in the study, the interviewers (MK, EC) reviewed each 
other’s initial interview transcripts to ensure similarity of interview-
ing approach. MK coded all the transcripts and met frequently with 
a principal investigator (SAM) to discuss the emerging findings. The 
evolving analysis was reviewed by the investigator group at quar-
terly meetings. We established an audit trail using field notes, 
recruitment logs, records of meetings and analytical discussions. 
We used multiple data collection sites to enhance the transferabil-
ity of our findings and undertook data linkage to enable a descrip-
tion of the wider study context, in terms of outcomes for a cohort of 
patients with total anterior circulation syndrome.
Ethics approval
The study was approved by Scotland A Research Ethics Commit-
tee (reference 14/SS/0060) and the Caldicott Guardian for the 
data linkage study. The local NHS Research & Development ser-
vices conferred governance approval.
Results
Two hundred and nineteen patients with total anterior circula-
tion syndrome (185 ischemic stroke [85%]; 33 hemorrhagic 
stroke [15%]) were admitted to the 3 participating stroke units 
during the study recruitment period. Six-month case fatality was 
57% (125 deaths). One-year case fatality was 60% (132 deaths); of 
these deaths, 88 (67%) occurred during the first 4 weeks.
We recruited 34 patients to the qualitative study (Table 1) and 
performed 99 qualitative interviews (Table 2) over the first year 
Table 1: Profile of participants in the qualitative study at recruitment
Patient characteristics
No. of participants* 
n = 34
Mean age, yr (range)
75 (20–98)
Sex, female
20
Stroke in dominant hemisphere
20
First stroke
29
Recurrent stroke
5
Modified Rankin score (0–6)27†
score 5: 22; score 4: 12
Tube fed (nasogastric or gastrostomy)
18
Has Do Not Attempt Cardio-Pulmonary Resuscitation Order 
14
Has incapacity certificate
19
Substantial speech loss (aphasia)
24
Permanent indwelling urinary catheter (urinary incontinence) 
20
Has informal caregiver at home
18
Residential area
urban: 25; rural: 4; semi-urban:5
Has hypertension
18
Has major comorbidities, including chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, heart failure, renal failure, dementia 
15 patients: no comorbidities; 12: 1; 5: 3; 1: 3
Median number of medicines prescribed at the time of recruitment 
5 (range 0–9)
*Except where indicated otherwise. 
†Modified Rankin scores: 4 = moderately severe disability; unable to walk without assistance and unable to attend to own bodily needs without 
assistance; 5 = severe disability; bedridden, incontinent and requiring constant nursing care and attention.
 RESEARCH
 
CMAJ  |  MARCH 5, 2018  |  VOLUME 190  |  ISSUE 9 
E241
after stroke. Between half and two-thirds of questionnaires were 
returned; these showed anxiety of family or friends, low self-
worth, lack of information, difficulty sharing feelings and emo-
tional distress (Table 3). See Box 2 for specific details according 
to specific data sources, including data linkage. We present the 
integrated findings from the 3 methods.
Experiences and key concerns of patients, informal 
caregivers and professionals
A typical trajectory of physical decline with people with total 
anterior circulation syndrome is illustrated in Figure 1 based on 
the findings generated from our mixed methods. This extends 
and enriches Creutzfeldt’s proposal for a “fourth trajectory.”5 It 
visualizes how the typical physical functioning of patients who 
survived the stroke tended to progress during the following 
12 months. The percentages of patients surviving at 1, 2, 6 and 
12 months are also shown. Key quotations are in Box 3.
Phase 1: Sudden illness and acute hospital admission
The sudden unexpected event of major stroke came as a major 
life crisis. Its life-threatening but unpredictable course posed 
huge challenges for patients, informal caregivers and profession-
als. Although the possibility of dying was clear to all involved, it 
was rarely voiced. Family members were unsure whether they 
were “doing the right thing” for patients (Q1). Participants faced 
complex care-planning decisions about resuscitation and feed-
ing interventions (Q2).
Communication with informal caregivers and among staff 
was often challenging, as circumstances could change rapidly 
and many patients had lost capacity. Patients and caregivers 
expressed “dual narratives”; i.e., the narrative of a good recov-
ery competing with a more realistic account of disability or 
death. Everyone had thoughts about death, but most patients 
felt unable to raise these with professionals. When the stroke 
first occurred, professionals aimed at life-saving treatment 
unless the patient was clearly dying, so professionals and 
patients expressed hope for a good recovery, even if death had 
been mentioned as a possible outcome. This sometimes con-
fused caregivers (Q3). Staff confessed to being overoptimistic in 
order to motivate people and encourage participation in phys-
ical rehabilitation (Q4).
Many patients and informal caregivers would have welcomed 
more support in making decisions and in planning for the future 
from day 1. The focus was on active rehabilitation, recovery, 
motivation and hope, with much less discussion and preparation 
for limited recovery. Many professionals gave time and listened 
and communicated well, but future planning was less evident 
(Q5 and Q6).
Phase 2: Rehabilitation and transition to the community
Emotional needs and ability to adapt to a radically altered life 
varied. Some said it was difficult to see life as “a life worth liv-
ing” (Q7).
Table 3: Quantitative data collected at 6 weeks, 6 months 
and 12 months
Questionnaires
6 wk
6 mo
1 yr
POS*
Questionnaires sent
21
10
6
Questionnaires returned
13
5
4
Return rate, %
62
50
67
POS score (median)
15
8
10
POS score (range)
4–25
5–21
5–26
EQ-5D†
Questionnaires sent
18
9
6
Questionnaires returned
12
5
4
Return rate, %
67
56
67
EQ-5D score (median)
19
11
18
EQ-5D score (range)
5–23
5–18
13–22
EQ-5D VAS score (median)‡
50
72
45
EQ-5D VAS score (range)
15–90
60–90
30–75
CSI§
Questionnaires sent
27
8
5
Questionnaires returned
14
4
3
Return rate, %
52
50
60
CSI score (median)
8
7
7
CSI score (range)
3–11
4–8
3–8
Note: CSI = Carer Strain Index, POS = Palliative Care Outcome scale.
*POS ranges from 0 to 4 in 10 dimensions of need. Each of these dimensions is 
monitored individually over time and not usually summated.
†EQ5D range 5–25 where 5 represents no problems.
‡EQ5D VAS range 0–100 where 0 is worst health.
§CSI score range 0–12 where 0 represents no caregiver strain. A CSI score of 7 or more 
indicates a high level of stress.
Table 2: Completed interviews at 6 weeks, 6 months and 
12 months
Participants*
No. of interviews
6 wk
6 mo
12 mo
Total
Patient alone
6
5
5
16
Patient and caregiver
5
4
2
11
Informal caregiver alone
21
5
4
30
Bereavement interviews 
with informal caregiver
2
7
0
9
Health and social care 
professionals†
16
12
5
33
Total
50
33
16
99
*Thirty-four index patients were recruited. Five died before 6-wk interview. Between 
the first interview at 6 wk and the second at 6 mo, 11 people died, 1 person moved 
away, 1 person withdrew for personal reasons, and 7 were lost to follow-up because 
they were very unwell and had several readmissions. This gave us 9 participants for 
round 2 interviews at 6 mo. One more person died between interview 2 and the final  
interview at 12 mo, leaving 8 participants for the final interviews.
†Twelve hospital doctors and nurses, 9 physiotherapists, 2 speech and language 
therapists, 2 community nurses, 3 home care workers, 2 care home managers and 
3 general practitioners.
 RESEARCH
E242 
CMAJ  |  MARCH 5, 2018  |  VOLUME 190  |  ISSUE 9 
As in the earlier phase, maintaining a sense of dignity and 
personhood was central. In rehabilitation wards, people felt 
trapped, as they could not be discharged home until their 
physical abilities improved. Some caregivers and patients 
began to suggest that it would have been better if the patient 
had died, rather than living with severe disability. The sort of 
life deemed “unacceptable” was subjective: some accepted 
their disability; others with a better physical recovery felt dis-
contented and grieved for their former life (Q8 and Q9). These 
caregivers felt that there was less forward planning than in 
other illnesses (Q10).
Most patients wished to return home initially, but later real-
ized this was complex, being compounded by pressure on hospi-
tal and care home beds (Q11).
Phase 3: Living with major stroke in the community
Many people, especially those with aphasia and cognitive impair-
ments, found difficulties in accessing services and equipment. 
Some felt abandoned and experienced loss of hope and mean-
ing. This was exacerbated once professionals assessed patients 
as having reached their “plateau,” when many services were 
withdrawn (Q12). Those who returned to living at home had to 
adjust to a very different way of life and a home disrupted by 
hoists, commodes and boxes of medication (Q13).
Most patients and their informal caregivers came to appreci-
ate the advantages a good care home offered when they could 
not manage at home. However, one family member still wanted 
to take their parent home (Q14). For informal caregivers, a 
nearby care home with friendly staff who inspired trust was 
important. Many care homes provided equipment and care that 
was difficult to achieve at home (Q15). Many informal caregivers 
felt that future care planning for both recovery and deterioration 
would have been helpful (Q16).
A few people died in care homes, where care home staff 
generally managed discussions and decisions sensitively. 
However, one participant was shocked when the general prac-
titioner in the care home approached her as she visited her 
relative and began an end-of-life conversation without any 
warning (Q17).
Use of the term “palliative care”
Some staff viewed the term “palliative care” as something negative, 
applicable only to someone who was clearly dying (Q18 and Q19).
Professionals actively sought to offer holistic care to 
patients and caregivers, but also struggled with the words “pal-
liative care.” Barriers to its use included prognostic uncertainty, 
although one physician understood that this may remain, even 
after introducing a palliative approach (Q20). Professionals 
spoke about the need for everyone involved in patient care to 
have the time and ability to communicate effectively, with 
referrals being made to specialist palliative care only when 
required (Q21).
One bereaved relative suggested following a routine 
approach to document preferences (Q22); using the word insen-
sitively with patients could upset them (Q23). One hospital doc-
tor suggested that the word may best be avoided (Q24).
Discussion
In this longitudinal study of 219 persons with total anterior circu-
lation stroke, we found that that 57% died within 6 months. Over 
this time, the professionals focused on active physical rehabilita-
tion, recovery, motivation and hope, and took less account of 
psychological, social and existential needs. However, care plan-
ning was difficult because of uncertain prognosis, variable and 
changing understandings, expectations and coping strategies.28 
Patients and their informal caregivers faced sudden complex 
decisions, anxiety, distressing symptoms and the likelihood of 
death. Transition to home or to a care home brought feelings of 
abandonment. Some experienced a lack of hope and meaning, 
and grief for a former life. The term “palliative care” was equated 
Box 2: Summary of the findings relating to the 
qualitative interviews, the questionnaire results and 
the data linkage findings
• Qualitative interviews: We approached 39 eligible people and 
recruited 34 participants. Five died or withdrew before the first 
interview at 6 weeks, leaving 29 participants, who represented a 
range of age, gender, social situations, dominant or 
nondominant stroke, and social circumstances. They ranged 
from a previously healthy 19-year-old to many older people with 
substantial comorbidities (Table 1). We conducted 99 interviews 
in total. Many informal caregivers were interviewed alone 
because many patients lacked capacity to participate or had 
difficulty in communicating well as a result of speech loss. 
Eleven patients died between the first and second interview. By 
12 months, n = 19 (59%) had died (Table 2).
• Questionnaires: A total of 110 questionnaires were given or 
posted out to patients and caregivers across the 3 time points. 
In total, 64 were returned, a response rate varying from 50% to 
67% (Table 3). The Palliative Care Outcome Scale at 6 weeks 
identified anxiety of family or friends, low self-worth, lack of 
information and difficulty sharing feelings. Anxiety remained 
prominent for both patients and informal caregivers at 6 and 
12 months. The EuroQol-5D-5L identified problems with 
mobility, self-care and doing usual activities. The Carer Strain 
Index had average scores of 7, indicating high levels of distress 
among caregivers throughout the 12 months.
• Data linkage: One-year follow-up (for hospital admissions and 
death) analyzed service use and outcomes for all 219 patients 
with total anterior circulation stroke. This type of stroke 
affected mainly older people (29% aged 70–79 yr [n = 64]; 49% 
older than 80 yr [n = 107]), and 61% (n = 134) were women. One-
year mortality was 60% (132 deaths). Although 61% died of 
cerebrovascular disease, a further 25% died from heart disease. 
Most had an ischemic stroke (85%, n = 185), but patients with 
hemorrhagic stroke (15%, n = 33) had a poor outcome with a 
median time to death of just 6 days. Early mortality was high 
overall, with 67% (n = 88) of deaths occurring in the first 4 weeks 
and only a 14% discharge (n = 18) rate at that point. By 
6 months, 57% (n = 126) of the original cohort had died. The 
remaining stroke survivors had a better prognosis, with 5% (n = 
5) dying by 12 months. There were 27 hospital readmissions, 
with all but 2 occurring in the first 6 months. People who 
survived to 6 months were living in the community with long-
term disability and not using hospital services. However, the 
high early death rate meant that 92% (n = 121) of deaths 
occurred in hospital.
 RESEARCH
 
CMAJ  |  MARCH 5, 2018  |  VOLUME 190  |  ISSUE 9 
E243
with “last-days-of-life” care by health care professionals, 
patients and family. 
Previous studies have identified high case fatality after severe 
stroke, multiple long-term physical problems, substantial emo-
tional distress, prognostic uncertainty and a sense of abandon-
ment after discharge from hospital.10,29,30 Our study confirms and 
adds richness to these findings, and contributes several new 
insights. First, staff focused on active physical rehabilitation, 
recovery, motivation and hope, while patients and caregivers felt 
that they needed more preparation for, and discussion of, the 
possibility of death and living with severe disability. The ques-
tionnaires documented poor quality of life and multidimensional 
needs, and highlighted anxiety and caregiver distress through-
out. Patients described a degree of suffering consistent with con-
siderable unmet palliative care needs. Second, for those patients 
who survived, there was grief among both patients and family for 
the loss of their previous life, identity and roles; this could be 
considered as an evolving bereavement process, with some 
patients and family wondering if death would have been prefera-
ble to survival with disability. This evolving process has also been 
reported in severe head injury and dementia.31,32
Third, patients and professionals found the term “palliative 
care” difficult to use, as it was equated with “end-of-life” care 
and withdrawal of treatment. This is still true even in people 
with cancer.33 This contrasts with the WHO’s definition and 
recent affirmation of the term as active treatment to prevent 
distress, starting from diagnosis of a life-threatening illness (Box 
4).
A realistic model of care would be to prepare for survival, 
decline or death, balancing “hoping for the best” with “preparing 
for the worst.”5 This palliative approach more often occurs for 
patients with progressive cancer and increasingly for people with 
nonmalignant conditions such as heart, lung and renal failure 
and frailty.34 Shared decision-making and individualized care is 
crucial.30,35–37 Staff must be supported and trained in talking 
openly and honestly about the possibility of death or survival 
with severe disability, particularly in the acute setting, where the 
majority of deaths occur. Models of bereavement support might 
help professionals to facilitate both the more traditional 
restoration- 
oriented approaches to rehabilitation and loss- 
oriented rehabilitation that allows people to express and work 
through devastating life changes.38 The principles of palliative 
care should be embedded within stroke services, but the term 
“palliative care” should currently be avoided or reframed 
because of the implications of abandonment rather than a posi-
tive approach to care.33,39 Some specific recommendations are 
offered in Box 5.
Strengths and limitations
Strengths included the mixed-methods design, with serial multi-
perspective interviews dynamically integrating data from 
patients, informal and professional caregivers, and rigorous 
analysis with service user involvement through the 2 lay advisory 
groups and the 4 end-of-study focus groups to aid interpretation. 
For instance, the service user involvement explained the chal-
lenges of accessing support when people have aphasia, and the 
survey data  n = 219
Phase 1:
Sudden illness 
and hospital 
admission
Phase 2:
Rehabilitation and 
transition
Phase 3:
Living with major stroke 
in the community
*
High
Low
Physical functioning
1
2
6
12
60
53
43
40
Months afer stroke
% survival
Figure 1: Archetypal physical trajectory of decline for people with total anterior circulation stroke. *At some time in the first 
12 months, most people have 1 or more episodes of acute functional decline owing to a comorbidity such as a chest infection.
 RESEARCH
E244 
CMAJ  |  MARCH 5, 2018  |  VOLUME 190  |  ISSUE 9 
Box 3: Quotations
Phase 1
• Q1: “I felt helplessness; I felt as if my mother was dead but yet she wasn’t dead. I felt guilty because I had phoned the ambulance and I thought perhaps 
I shouldn’t have phoned the ambulance and then she would have died, and perhaps that would have been better” (daughter — first interview).
• Q2: “It just struck one night. Unusual for me, I fell out of bed. I don’t think I’ve ever done that before. I remember lying there and thinking, ‘Now if I don’t 
get up on that bed, I could die here’” (patient — first interview).
• Q3: “We kept getting conflicting stories, so sometimes one would say one thing and then the other one would say another and that was the only thing we 
were a bit confused about” (daughter — first interview).
• Q4: “We need her to really try hard so we need to keep her thinking it’s going to get better, otherwise she won’t commit and then you won’t get the same 
outcome. You’re very positive even though you think long term it might not happen” (physiotherapist — first interview).
• Q5: “We had a meeting with them when they said that they’d taken Dad as far as he could go and they’d be transferring him to the rehab unit … When we 
got there, we started to discover things we felt should have been told at the very, very start of the whole process, and it would have created a completely 
different atmosphere in the way we handled the whole situation and progressed through it” (daughter and son-in-law — bereavement interview).
• Q6: “I look back over the course of [X’s] admission; I will have sat down with that family for hours and hours in total, and that’s all time that I’m, you 
know, it’s very important and I would do that plus more if I could, but all of these things take time, and to be able to have the time, you need that 
resource, but you also need the skill” (hospital doctor — first interview).
Phase 2
• Q7: “I remember when we came home from that visit, [my husband] said to me, ‘I wish my mum had just passed away when she took her stroke at first.’ 
I said, ‘I didn’t want to say that to you, but I’ve been thinking that all the time.’ It’s so sad when someone has to suffer like that” (daughter-in-law — 
bereavement interview).
• Q8: “And my point is, yes, you can bring people back from these severe strokes, but I don’t feel that the infrastructure is there to give them a reasonable quality 
of life. It’s like bringing someone back from a major stroke and then putting them in solitary confinement …” (daughter — bereavement interview).
• Q9: “I remember saying to my daughter, ‘I feel so disabled, and that upsets me, because what does the future hold at this moment — nothing worthwhile 
looking forward to.’ So then I got told off and she said, ‘What about the man who comes in the afternoon and is in a wheelchair?’ I said, ‘I know. I mustn’t 
be like that, but it is how I feel’” (patient — second interview).
• Q10: “I think if you had, like, say, a heart attack or cancer, there would be something there to try and, you know, this is our plan, this is what we’re going to 
do. But you can’t plan ahead because everything’s up in the air; and it’s like we had a meeting last week with all the doctors and everybody and the team, 
and they’re great, I mean, they sit and explain everything to you, but you’re still coming away with nothing. It’s just all talk and there’s nothing because 
there’s basically nothing they can say because it’s the brain, so we are just now, is limbo” (daughters — first interview).
• Q11: “It’s all to do with funding and care availability … we just have to wait. Then there’s the possibility of boarding, which is always a shame but it can’t 
be avoided, unfortunately, when we need the bed for someone else” (hospital-based physiotherapist — first interview).
Phase 3
• Q12: “You get to a level with some people and it’s when do we stop? Because we’ve kind of plateaued, and then it’s their expectations of the services which are 
available, but also it’s having that difficult conversation of saying you’re not going to manage the stairs again or you’re not going to be able to get out on your 
own, you’re always going to have to have somebody with you. And then I think people hate us for saying it” (community physiotherapist — third interview).
• Q13: “Well, I can see things here that are familiar, but I knew whenever I was in it, I wasn’t home … My husband keeps saying I’ve got to accept it. ‘This is 
your home and you’re in it.’ But I can’t” (patient — second interview).
• Q14: “I’m hoping that I can … make enough money to hopefully get him out of here and get him cared for like in a house that I own, but …  But I don’t 
know if I’ll be able to do it as fast as I know I need to …” (son — third interview).
• Q15: “I have nothing but praise for the care home. They let us put up his pictures and make it as much like his home as we could … in fact, the 
manageress went to assess Dad and her expression to me was that she was heartbroken to see him in that situation [in hospital], and she says, ‘whatever 
happens, we have to get him out of there’” (daughter — bereavement interview).
• Q16: “If we’d had honesty from the start, rather than the end of the process, we would have done things differently … rather than pushing him, pushing 
him for something that was never going to happen” (daughter — bereavement interview).
• Q17: “Doctor X, she was a very nice person, but she really took me unawares when she said, ‘What do you think of your mother-in-law’s quality of life?’ 
And she said, ‘We could stop feeding her,’ and I thought no, I couldn’t cope with that. It’s not for us to decide how long she’s going to live. I was really, 
really upset. I said, ‘You can’t do that,’ and she left it at that” (daughter-in-law — bereavement interview).
Use of the term “palliative care”
• Q18: “I wouldn’t say she was a palliative patient just yet, in terms of helping her to die peacefully or pain free or anything like that. So she’s going on to 
the nursing home, so I wouldn’t consider her a palliative patient just now” (stroke unit nurse — first interview).
• Q19: “I suppose it depends what we mean by ‘palliative care,’ but it’s, you know, no more needles and no more drips and no more antibiotics …” 
(hospital doctor — first interview).
• Q20: “I try to emphasize that just because we’re shifting the approach to palliation, it’s still really hard to predict what happens from here, and I usually 
try and say that, you know, some people deteriorate very quickly, some people deteriorate very slowly, some people stabilize and don’t deteriorate 
particularly” (hospital doctor — first interview).
• Q21: “Much as I’d love to say if only we had access to a communication team from palliative care, that would solve all our problems, it clearly wouldn’t. 
It’s about upskilling everybody and allowing us all to have the skills and time for communicating well” (hospital doctor — first interview).
• Q22: “Maybe ask a question in the event of you becoming … would you choose to let nature take its course, have you spoken to your next of kin about 
what you would like? Something like that, so it was in your medical records. Like organ donation. I think you need to write it down” (bereaved carer — 
bereavement interview).
• Q23: “One of the staff said, ‘He’s not going to need a wheelchair because he’s obviously now palliative care,’ which I found very upsetting, that you go 
from being a priority to being an inconvenience” (daughter — bereavement interview).
• Q24: “I sometimes tell the team to scrap the word ‘palliative’ … It does give the wrong focus … if they’re not dying” (hospital doctor — first interview).
 RESEARCH
 
CMAJ  |  MARCH 5, 2018  |  VOLUME 190  |  ISSUE 9 
E245
experience of discharge back to the community after a long admis-
sion. To promote credibility and generalizability and transferability of 
the data, we sought to find exceptions, then used triangulation 
 
(multiple methods of data collection, data sources, researchers or 
 
theories), to obtain a high level of concordance in category develop-
ment. We adopted a relatively large longitudinal multisite interview 
study to enable prolonged engagement in the field and used a varied 
sample to ensure that a range of perspectives were explored.
Limitations included the following: we recruited patients from 
Scotland only; some patients participated in only 1 interview because 
of loss to follow-up or death (although we performed several bereave-
ment interviews with informal caregivers), and the sample comprised 
all white British people. No formal training in palliative care had 
occurred in any of the stroke units, although some online learning was 
available; this is likely to be the case in most facilities internationally.
Conclusion 
In this study of patients experiencing major stroke, death occurred in 
more than half in the first 6 months. Care of those who survived the 
acute event focused on physical rehabilitation and did not address 
persistent disability, loss and death. Realistic planning with patients 
and informal caregivers should include these factors. 
References
 1. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al.; American Heart Association Statistics 
Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart disease and stroke sta-
tistics — 2015 update: a report from the American Heart Association [published 
erratums in Circulation 2015;131:e535; Circulation 2016;133:e417]. Circulation 
2015;131:e29-322.
 2. Deaths from cardiovascular diseases: implications for end of life care in England. 
Bristol (UK): National End of Life Care Intelligence Network; 2013. Available: 
www.endoflifecare-intelligence.org.uk/resources/publications/deaths_from_
cardiovascular_diseases (accessed 2017 Feb. 6).
 3. Askoxylakis V, Thieke C, Pleger ST, et al. Long-term survival of cancer patients com-
pared to heart failure and stroke: a systematic review. BMC Cancer 2010;10:105.
 4. Bamford J, Sandercock P, Dennis M, et al. Classification and natural history of 
clinically identifiable subtypes of cerebral infarction. Lancet 1991;337:1521-6.
 5. Creutzfeldt CJ, Longstreth WT, Holloway RG. Predicting decline and survival in 
severe acute brain injury: the fourth trajectory. BMJ 2015;351:h3904.
 6. Tassinari D, Drudi F, Monterubbianesi MC, et al. Early palliative care in advanced 
oncologic and non-oncologic chronic diseases: a systematic review of literature. 
Rev Recent Clin Trials 2016;11:63-71.
 7. Detering KM, Hancock AD, Reade MC, et al. The impact of advance care planning on 
end of life care in elderly patients: randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2010;340:c1345.
 8. Definition of palliative care. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. Available: 
www.who.int/cancer/palliative/definition/en/ (accessed 2017 Sept. 6). 
 9. Addington-Hall J, Lay M, Altmann D, et al. Symptom control, communication 
with health professionals, and hospital care of stroke patients in the last year of 
life as reported by surviving family, friends, and officials. Stroke 1995;26:2242-8.
10. Burton CR, Payne S, Addington-Hall J, et al. The palliative care needs of acute 
stroke patients: a prospective study of hospital admissions. Age Ageing 
2010;39:554-9.
11. Eriksson H, Milberg A, Hjelm K, et al. End of life care for patients dying of stroke: a 
comparative registry study of stroke and cancer. PLoS One 2016;11:e0147694.
12. Alonso A, Ebert AD, Dörr D, et al. End-of-life decisions in acute stroke patients: an 
observational cohort study. BMC Palliat Care 2016;15:38.
13. Payne S, Burton C, Addington-Hall J, et al. End-of-life issues in acute stroke care: a 
qualitative study of the experiences and preferences of patients and families. Palliat 
Med 2010;24:146-53.
14. de Boer ME, Depla M, Wojtkowiak J, et al. Life-and-death decision-making in the 
acute phase after a severe stroke: Interviews with relatives. Palliat Med 
2015;29:451-7.
15. Cowey E, Smith LN, Stott DJ, et al. Impact of a clinical pathway on end-of-life 
care following stroke: a mixed methods study. Palliat Med 2015;29:249-59.
16. Rowan M, Huston P. Qualitative research articles: information for authors and 
peer reviewers. CMAJ 1997;157:1442-6.
17. Murray SA, Kendall M, Carduff E, et al. Use of serial qualitative interviews to 
understand patients’ evolving experiences and needs. BMJ 2009;339:b3702.
18. Kendall M, Murray SA, Carduff E, et al. Use of multiperspective qualitative interviews 
to understand patients’ and carers’ beliefs, experiences, and needs. BMJ 
2009;339:b4122.
Box 4: Definition and historical development 
of palliative care
Palliative care is an approach that improves the quality of life of 
patients who are facing life-threatening illness, as well as that of 
their informal caregivers, through the prevention and relief of 
suffering by means of early identification and assessment and 
treatment of physical, psychosocial and spiritual problems.8
Forty years ago, the World Health Organization (WHO) defined 
palliative care as an approach to care. It quickly developed into a 
specialty, and most patients and clinicians now consider it to be a 
specialty concerned with people who are imminently dying, as we 
found in this study. However, in 2014, palliative care was reaffirmed 
as an approach, when the WHO resolved that it should be routinely 
integrated with disease-modifying care to improve patient and 
informal caregiver experience and outcomes. It should be integrated 
when a disease is “life-threatening,” rather than when the patient is 
imminently dying. It encompasses support to live as well as possible 
with deteriorating health as well as bereavement care.
Box 5: Suggestions to improve stroke care
Acute hospital
• Stroke care should encompass the principles of palliative care 
from admission through rehabilitation, encompassing physical, 
social, psychological and existential aspects.
• There should be person-centred, shared decision-making 
supported by effective patient-oriented information about 
treatment options and outcomes.
• Staff should be given support and training in key principles of 
palliative care, as well as support to talk openly with patients 
and caregivers about the possibility of dying.
Rehabilitation ward
• All dimensions of need and what matters to the patient and 
caregiver should be reviewed frequently.
• Anxieties and loss of meaning, purpose and value in life, and 
grief for former life should be addressed, with openness about 
discussing such issues.
• There should be liaison with the primary care team to plan 
ongoing care.
Primary care
• A care plan should be started or updated and communicated, in 
liaison with social work.
• Informal caregivers should be supported, and use of local 
resources facilitated, including for grief in bereavement.
 RESEARCH
E246 
CMAJ  |  MARCH 5, 2018  |  VOLUME 190  |  ISSUE 9 
19. Charon R. Narrative medicine: honoring the stories of illness. Oxford University 
Press; 2008.
20. Herdman M, Gudex C, Lloyd A, et al. Development and preliminary testing of the 
new five-level version of EQ-5D (EQ-5D-5L). Qual Life Res 2011;20:1727-36.
21. Palliative Care Outcome Scale (POS) [main page]. London (UK): Cicely Saunders 
Institute; 2012. Available: http://pos-pal.org/ (accessed 2017 May 24).
22. Robinson BC. Validation of a caregiver strain index. J Gerontol 1983;38:344-8.
23. Riessman CK. Narrative Methods for the human sciences. London (UK): Sage 
Publications; 2008.
24. Bryant A, Charmaz K. The SAGE handbook of grounded theory. London (UK), 
Thousand Oaks (CA), New Delhi (India), Singapore: SAGE Publications Ltd.; 2007.
25. O’Cathain A, Murphy E, Nicholl J. Three techniques for integrating data in mixed 
methods studies. BMJ 2010;341:c4587.
26. Ziebland S, McPherson A. Making sense of qualitative data analysis: an introduction 
with illustrations from DIPEx (personal experiences of health and illness). Med Educ 
2006;40:405-14.
27. Bruno A, Shah N, Lin C, et al. Improving modified Rankin Scale assessment with a 
simplified questionnaire. Stroke 2010;41:1048-50.
28. Murray SA, Boyd K, Sheikh A. Palliative care in chronic illnesses: we need to 
move from prognostic paralysis to active total care. BMJ 2005;330:611-2.
29. Holloway RG, Benesch CG, Burgin WS, et al. Prognosis and decision making in 
severe stroke. JAMA 2005;294:725-33.
30. Braun LT, Grady KL, Kutner JS, et al.; American Heart Association Advocacy Coordi-
nating Committee. Palliative care and cardiovascular disease and stroke: a policy 
statement from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. 
 
Circulation 2016;134:e198-225.
31. Coping with grief after brain surgery. Nottingham (UK): Headway — the brain 
injury association; 2017. Available: www.headway.org.uk/news/national-news/
coping-with-grief-after-brain-injury/ (accessed 2017 July 17).
32. Loss and bereavement in people with dementia. Edinburgh (Scotland): 
Alzheimer Scotland; 2011. Available: www.alzscot.org/information_and_
resources/information_sheet/1788_loss_and_bereavement_in_people_with_
dementia (accessed 2017 July 17).
33. Zimmermann C, Swami N, Krzyzanowska M, et al. Perceptions of palliative care 
among patients with advanced cancer and their caregivers. CMAJ 2016;188:E217-27.
34. Kimbell B, Boyd K, Kendall M, et al. Managing uncertainty in advanced liver disease: 
a qualitative, multiperspective, serial interview study. BMJ Open 2015;5:e009241.
35. Murray SA, Kendall M, Mitchell G, et al. Palliative care from diagnosis to death. 
BMJ 2017;356:j878.
36. Oliver D, Borasio GD, Caraceni A, et al. Palliative care in chronic and progressive neu-
rological disease: summary of a consensus review. Eur J Palliat Care 2016;23:232-5.
37. National clinical guideline for stroke. 5th ed. London (UK): Royal College of 
 
Physicians; 2016. Available: www.strokeaudit.org/SupportFiles/Documents/
Guidelines/2016-National-Clinical-Guideline-for-Stroke-5t-%281%29.aspx 
(accessed 2017 Sept. 6). 
38. Stroebe M, Schut H. The dual process model of coping with bereavement: ratio-
nale and description. Death Stud 1999;23:197-224.
39. About palliative care. New York: Center to advance palliative care (CAPC). Avail-
able: www.capc.org/about/palliative-care/ (accessed 2017 July 18).
Competing interests: None declared.
This article has been peer reviewed.
Affiliations: Primary Palliative Care Research 
Group (Kendall, Boyd, Murray), University of 
Edinburgh, Usher Institute of Population 
Health Sciences & Informatics, Medical 
School, Edinburgh, Scotland; School of Medi-
cine, Dentistry & Nursing (Nursing & Health 
Care) (Cowey), University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, Scotland; Royal Infirmary of Edin-
burgh (Mead), Edinburgh, Scotland; Depart-
ment of Medicine for the Elderly (Barber), 
Monklands Hospital, Airdrie, UK; Glasgow 
Royal Infirmary (McAlpine), Glasgow, Scot-
land; Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical 
Sciences (Stott), University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, Scotland
Contributors: Gillian Mead, Marilyn Kendall, 
Eileen Cowey, Mark Barber, Christine McAlpine, 
David Stott and Scott Murray conceived the 
study and contributed to its design. Gillian 
Mead and Marilyn Kendall prepared the appli-
cation for ethics approval and the patient 
information leaflets. Marilyn Kendall led the 
study and undertook data collection and ini-
tial analysis with Eileen Cowey. All authors 
were involved in the interpretation of the data 
and reviewing the early and final drafts. All of 
the authors gave final approval of the version 
to be published and agree to be accountable 
for all aspects of the work.
Funding: This study was funded by the Chief 
Scientist Office, grant number CZH/4/1033. 
The funder played no part in undertaking the 
research apart from funding it. 
Data sharing: Further data are available from 
Gillian Mead.
Acknowledgements: The authors are grate-
ful to all patients, informal and professional 
caregivers, and clinical colleagues who identi-
fied participants, and to members of the lay 
advisory groups for their involvement 
throughout the study. They thank the Scot-
tish Stroke Research Network for support 
with patient recruitment, and Sian Nowell, 
National Service Scotland, for conducting the 
data linkage. Heather Goodare, who cares for 
her husband with a stroke, commented on an 
earlier draft of this article.
Accepted: Sept. 5, 2017 
Correspondence to: Gillian Mead, 
gillian.mead@ed.ac.uk
