 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / February 2, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 4 
131
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Outbreak of Seoul Virus Among Rats and Rat Owners — 
United States and Canada, 2017
Janna L. Kerins, VMD1,2; Sarah E. Koske, DVM3; James Kazmierczak, DVM3; Connie Austin, DVM4; Karen Gowdy, DVM5; Antonia Dibernardo6; 
Seoul Virus Working Group; Canadian Seoul Virus Investigation Group (Federal); Canadian Seoul Virus Investigation Group (Provincial)
In December 2016, the Wisconsin Department of Health 
Services (WDHS) notified CDC of a patient hospitalized with 
fever, leukopenia, elevated transaminases, and proteinuria. The 
patient owned and operated an in-home rattery, or rat-breeding 
facility, with approximately 100 Norway rats, primarily bred as 
pets. A family member developed similar symptoms 4 weeks 
later, but was not hospitalized. Because both patients were known 
to have rodent contact, they were tested for hantavirus infections. 
In January 2017, CDC confirmed recent, acute Seoul virus 
infection in both patients. An investigation was conducted to 
identify additional human and rat infections and prevent further 
transmission. Ultimately, the investigation identified 31 facilities 
in 11 states with human and/or rat Seoul virus infections; six 
facilities also reported exchanging rats with Canadian ratteries. 
Testing of serum samples from 183 persons in the United States 
and Canada identified 24 (13.1%) with Seoul virus antibodies; 
three (12.5%) were hospitalized and no deaths occurred. This 
investigation, including cases described in a previously published 
report from Tennessee (1), identified the first known transmis-
sion of Seoul virus from pet rats to humans in the United States 
and Canada. Pet rat owners should practice safe rodent handling 
to prevent Seoul virus infection (2).
Seoul virus is an Old World hantavirus in the Bunyaviridae 
family. Its natural reservoir is the Norway rat (Rattus norvegicus). 
Rats infected with Seoul virus are asymptomatic, but can transmit 
the virus to humans through infectious saliva, urine, droppings, 
or aerosolization from contaminated bedding. Human signs and 
symptoms range from mild influenza-like illness to hemorrhagic 
fever with renal syndrome (HFRS). HFRS causes acute renal 
failure and can result in death; however, asymptomatic Seoul 
virus infections also occur. Wild Norway rats in the United 
States have been known to harbor Seoul virus infection (3), but 
transmission to humans is rare (4). Seoul virus is not known to 
spread from person to person. In the United Kingdom, Seoul 
virus transmission has occurred from pet rats to humans (5), 
but before this outbreak, infections had not been reported in 
pet rats in the United States or Canada.
Investigation and Results
After confirming Seoul virus infection in the Wisconsin 
patients, CDC and WDHS initiated investigations into rat 
shipments to (trace-back) and from (trace-forward) the rat-
tery to identify suspected and confirmed facilities. Trace-back 
investigations initially extended back 2 months prior to onset 
of clinical disease, based on the known maximum incubation 
period for Seoul virus in humans. As additional confirmed 
facilities were identified, tracing focused instead on interac-
tions with known infected facilities, sometimes as much as 
1 year prior. Suspected facilities included ratteries, homes, or 
pet stores that sold rats to a confirmed facility (a facility where 
at least one human or rat tested positive for Seoul virus infec-
tion) or housed rats that lived at or comingled with rats from 
a confirmed facility. Once a suspected facility was identified, 
local or state health officials interviewed persons with a history 
of rodent contact associated with the facility about their rat 
exposure and health history. Additionally, the primary rodent 
caretaker was interviewed using a standardized questionnaire to 
identify movement of rats into and out of the facility, includ-
ing dates and locations where the rats were obtained. Local or 
state health officials offered laboratory testing for Seoul virus 
infection to all persons with rodent contact. Officials recom-
mended testing for persons with a history of febrile illness and 
exposure to rats from a confirmed facility and for rats at sus-
pected and confirmed facilities. Trace-forward and trace-back 
investigations of rat shipments at confirmed facilities identified 
additional suspected facilities, which were similarly assessed.
A suspected human case of Seoul virus infection was defined 
as a febrile illness (recorded temperature >101°F [38.3°C] or 
subjective history of fever) or an illness clinically compatible 
with Seoul virus infection (myalgia, headache, renal failure, 
conjunctival redness, thrombocytopenia, or proteinuria) 
without laboratory confirmation in a person reporting con-
tact with rats from a confirmed or suspected facility. Human 
Seoul virus infections were laboratory-confirmed by detec-
tion of Seoul virus-specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) and/or 
immunoglobulin G (IgG) (6) antibodies by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). In the United States, Seoul 
virus infections in rats were confirmed through detection of 
viral RNA by reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR) and/or IgG ELISA at CDC, or by CDC-validated 
commercial IgG testing. In Canada, public health officials 
investigated rat breeding facilities that exported rats to and 
imported rats from affected U.S. facilities. Seoul virus infection 
was detected in Canadian rats from breeding facilities using 
the same serologic and molecular-based protocols described 
for United States facilities.
Please note: An erratum has been published for this issue. To view the erratum, please click here.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
132 
MMWR / February 2, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 4
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
By March 16, 2017, trace-forward and trace-back investiga-
tions identified approximately 100 suspected facilities in 21 states. 
Among these, 31 facilities in 11 states* had laboratory-confirmed 
human or rat infections, including a previously reported house-
hold in Tennessee with two confirmed human infections (1). 
Six confirmed facilities in six states (Georgia, Illinois, Missouri, 
South Carolina, Tennessee, and Utah) reported exchanging rats 
with Canadian ratteries during their trace-forward and trace-
back investigations. A total of 163 persons in the United States 
and 20 in Canada consented to serologic testing; 17 (10.4%) 
U.S. residents and one (5.0%) Canadian resident had detectable 
IgM and IgG antibodies, indicating recent infection, and four 
(2.5%) U.S. residents and two (10.0%) Canadian residents had 
only IgG antibodies, indicating past or convalescent infection. 
Among the 17 U.S. patients with recent Seoul virus infection, 
eight reported recent febrile illness. Three were hospitalized, but 
did not develop HFRS, and all recovered. Serious illness was 
not reported in any Canadian patients. All strains detected in 
Canada and the United States were indistinguishable from one 
another based on nucleotide sequencing (7), indicating that a 
single strain was responsible for the outbreak. No single facility 
was identified as the origin of the outbreak.
Public Health Response
On January 24, CDC issued a Health Alert Notice to notify 
health departments and health care providers of the Seoul virus 
investigations.† On February 20, the World Health Organization 
was notified of the U.S. and Canadian infections and investi-
gations as required by International Health Regulations.§ On 
January 31 and May 9, 2017, CDC and the Pet Industry Joint 
Advisory Council hosted calls to provide updates on the Seoul 
virus outbreak and to answer questions for the pet industry and 
fancy rat community. CDC created a website with Seoul virus 
facts and frequently asked questions for the public.
Health departments notified suspected and confirmed 
facilities and placed those facilities under quarantine, allow-
ing no rats to enter or leave. Rat contact was limited to as 
few persons as possible to reduce transmission. In suspected 
facilities, CDC recommended rat testing be performed under 
the supervision of a public health official or licensed veteri-
narian. The quarantine was lifted when at least 4 weeks had 
elapsed since the newest animal was introduced, and all rats 
subsequently tested negative. Rats belonging to owners who 
refused to test their animals could remain quarantined for life 
or be euthanized. CDC recommended euthanasia of all rats 
in confirmed facilities as the most effective method to prevent 
* Colorado, Georgia, Iowa, Illinois, Minnesota, Missouri, Pennsylvania, South 
Carolina, Tennessee, Utah, and Wisconsin.
† https://emergency.cdc.gov/han/han00400.asp.
§ http://www.who.int/csr/don/20-february-2017-seoulvirus-usa-and-canada/en/.
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Seoul virus, a type of hantavirus, is carried by Norway rats. 
Humans become infected through contact with virus shed in rat 
urine or droppings, or inhalation of virus particles in dust from 
contaminated bedding. Infected rats do not develop disease, 
but humans can experience symptoms ranging from mild 
influenza-like illness to severe disease with kidney failure and 
death.  Although infections have been previously reported in 
humans after contact with wild rats, Seoul virus infections had 
not been reported in pet rats in the United States or Canada.
What is added by this report?
This report describes the first known outbreak of Seoul virus 
infections in humans from contact with pet rats in the United 
States and Canada. This investigation identified 31 U.S. facilities 
with human and/or rat Seoul virus infections in 11 states, 
including six that exchanged rats with Canadian ratteries. 
Seventeen persons had recent infection with Seoul virus, eight 
became ill, and three were hospitalized and recovered.
What are the implications for public health practice?
Human hantavirus infections are reportable to state or local 
health departments in the United States. Clinicians should 
consider Seoul virus infection in patients with a history of rat 
contact and compatible symptoms. Pet rat owners and breeders 
should also be aware of Seoul virus and should practice good 
hand hygiene and safe rodent handling to prevent infection. 
transmission, although control recommendations differed by 
state and country according to local policies and response 
capacities. If euthanasia was not possible, then owners could 
either quarantine all rats for life or pursue quarantine with 
testing and culling. The testing and culling strategy entailed 
testing all rats and euthanizing only infected rats. Testing and 
euthanasia were repeated at 4 week intervals until all rats tested 
negative and the quarantine was lifted. In Canada, public 
health officials opted for education and a voluntary testing and 
culling approach to control Seoul virus transmission.
Discussion
This outbreak report, in parallel to the previously described 
investigation in Tennessee (1), describes the first known cases 
of Seoul virus infection in humans attributable to contact with 
pet rats in the United States and Canada. Human hantavirus 
infections are nationally notifiable in the United States and 
suspected cases should be reported to state or local health 
departments. Health care providers should consider Seoul virus 
infection in patients with febrile illness who report rat exposure; 
CDC recommends testing for any person with compatible 
illness and rodent contact. Testing is available at CDC¶ and 
¶ https://www.cdc.gov/hantavirus/health-care-workers/specimen-submission/
index.html.  
Please note: An erratum has been published for this issue. To view the erratum, please click here.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / February 2, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 4 
133
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
through some state and commercial laboratories. In Canada, 
testing is available for symptomatic persons with rat exposure, 
rattery owners associated with this investigation, and their rats 
through public health laboratories; for individually owned pet 
rats and ratteries not associated with the investigation, testing 
is available through a commercial laboratory.
Pet rat owners should be aware of the potential for Seoul virus 
infection. To keep themselves and their pets healthy, all persons 
with rodent contact should avoid bites or scratches and prac-
tice good hand hygiene, especially children and persons with 
compromised immune systems (2). CDC recommends hand 
washing after caring for rodents and before eating, drinking, 
or preparing food (2). If a pet rat is suspected of having Seoul 
virus, the person cleaning the rodent environment should wear 
a respirator, gloves, and cover any scratches or open wounds 
(8). An adult should routinely disinfect rat cages and acces-
sories, including used bedding, with a 10% bleach solution or 
a commercial disinfectant (8). More information about rodent 
contact and disease prevention is available from CDC (8,9).
Rattery owners are encouraged to quarantine any newly 
acquired rats for 4 weeks and to test these rats for Seoul virus 
antibodies before allowing them to comingle with other rats. 
Commercial laboratories can perform Seoul virus testing 
of rodent blood samples, and comparisons of results from 
shared samples have been concordant with CDC’s ELISA and 
RT-PCR assays. To prevent transmission to humans, CDC 
recommends euthanasia of all rats in facilities with human or 
rat Seoul virus infections. Further guidance on methods to 
eradicate Seoul virus from infected ratteries should be obtained 
from local or state health departments.
Contributors
Seoul Virus Working Group
Jan Achenbach, Chester County Department of Health; Jill 
Baber, North Dakota Department of Health; Gary Balsamo, 
Louisiana Department of Health; Casey Barton Behravesh, CDC; 
David Blythe, Maryland Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene; Iwona Boraks-Pielechaty, Pennsylvania Department of 
Health; Shelley M. Brown, CDC; Jennifer Brown, Indiana State 
Department of Health; Robert Brucker, Montgomery County 
Health Department; Barbara A. Bruen, Pennsylvania Department 
of Health; Colin Campbell, New Jersey Department of Health; 
Deborah Cannon, CDC; Beth Carlson, North Dakota Department 
of Agriculture; Kris Carter, CDC, Idaho Department of Health and 
Welfare; Cynthia Cary, CDC; Caroline Castillo, CDC, Michigan 
Department of Health and Human Services; Cheng-Feng Chiang, 
CDC; Mary Choi, CDC; Ellen Christel, Manitowoc County 
Health Department; April Clayton, CDC; Leah Colton, Colorado 
Department of Public Health and Environment; Laura Cronquist, 
North Dakota Department of Health; David Damsker, Bucks 
County Health Department; William G. Davis, CDC; Annabelle 
de St Maurice, CDC; Jordan Dieckman, Wisconsin Department 
of Health Services; John Dunn, Tennessee Department of Health; 
Drew D. Dycus, Bucks County Health Department; Elizabeth Ervin, 
CDC; Michelle Feist, North Dakota Department of Health; Amanda 
Feldpausch, Georgia Department of Public Health; Mary Margaret 
Fill, CDC, Tennessee Department of Health; Julie Gabel, Georgia 
Department of Public Health; Ann Garvey, Iowa Department of 
Public Health; Sarah Genzer, CDC; Suzanne Gibbons-Burgener, 
Wisconsin Department of Health Services; James Graziano, CDC; 
Victoria Hall, CDC, Minnesota Department of Health; Russel 
Heisey, Pennsylvania Department of Health; Heather Henderson, 
Tennessee Department of Health; Janemarie Hennebelle, Georgia 
Department of Agriculture; Leslie Hiber, Minnesota Department 
of Health; Stacy Holzbauer, CDC, Minnesota Department of 
Health; Jennifer House, Colorado Department of Public Health 
and Environment; Eddie Jackson, CDC; Mary H. Jenks, CDC Dee 
Jones, Alabama Department of Public Health; Susan Keller, North 
Dakota Department of Agriculture; John D. Klena, CDC; Rachel F. 
Klos, Wisconsin Department of Health Services; Barbara Knust, 
CDC; Anna Kocharian, Wisconsin Department of Health Services; 
Katrin Kohl, CDC; Gregory Langham, CDC; George Lathrop, 
CDC; Jennifer Layden, Illinois Department of Public Health; 
Kathryn Lehatto, Pennsylvania Department of Health; Jodi Lovejoy, 
Indiana State Board of Animal Health; Kenneth Lowery, Georgia 
Department of Public Health; Nicole Lukovsky-Akhsanov, CDC; 
Nhiem Luong, Delaware Health and Social Services; Michael Maglio, 
Chester County Department of Health; Craig Manning, CDC; 
Chandra Marriott, Pennsylvania Department of Health; Natalie 
Marzec, Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment; 
Michel Masters, Montgomery County Health Department; 
Susan McClanahan, Minnesota Board of Animal Health; Lisa 
McCloskey, Bucks County Health Department; Shannon McKnight, 
Pennsylvania Department of Health; Jennifer McQuiston, CDC; 
Sara McReynolds, North Dakota Department of Agriculture; Gianna 
Megaro, Chester County Department of Health; Maria Morales-
Betoulle, CDC; Allyn K. Nakashima, Utah Department of Health; 
Stuart Nichol, CDC; Julie Paoline, Montgomery County Health 
Department; Nishi Patel, CDC; Ketan Patel, CDC; Dallin Peterson, 
Utah Department of Health; Leah Posivak-Khouly, Montgomery 
County Health Department; Nathaniel Powell Jr., CDC; Howard 
Pue, Missouri Department of Health & Senior Services; Lawrence 
Purpura, CDC; Rachel Radcliffe, South Carolina Department of 
Health & Environmental Control; Nicole Reynolds, Minneapolis 
Medical Research Foundation; Linda Roesch, CDC; Pierre Rollin, 
CDC; Andrea L. Sandberg, Brown County Health and Human 
Services; Joni Scheftel, Minnesota Department of Health; Betsy 
Schroeder, CDC, Indiana State Department of Health; Irshad A. 
Shaikh, Montgomery County Department; Trevor Shoemaker, 
CDC; Jennifer Sidge, Michigan Department of Health and Human 
Services; Tom Sidwa, Texas Department of State Health Services; Kim 
Signs, Michigan Department of Health and Human Services; Amber 
Singh, Ohio Department of Health; Aaron Smee, Pennsylvania 
Department of Health; Danielle Stanek, Florida Department of 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
134 
MMWR / February 2, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 4
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Health; Mary Grace Stobierski, Michigan Department of Health and 
Human Services; Anne Straily, CDC; Ute Ströher, CDC; Cassandra 
Tansey, CDC; Leslie Tengelsen, Idaho Department of Health and 
Welfare; Beth Thompson, Minnesota Board of Animal Health; 
Susan L. Ward, Bucks County Department of Health; Kimberly 
Warren, Pennsylvania Department of Health; Susan Weinstein, 
Arkansas Department of Health; Deborah Weiss, CDC, Wisconsin 
Department of Health Services; Andre Weltman, Pennsylvania 
Department of Health; Tigist Yirko, Pennsylvania Department of 
Health; Joyce Zuzack, Bucks County Department of Health.
Canadian Seoul Virus Investigation Group (Federal)
Peter A. Buck, Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC); Allen Grolla, 
PHAC; Chris Huynh, PHAC; L. Robbin Lindsay, PHAC; Courtney 
Loomer, PHAC; David Safronetz, PHAC; Angela Sloan, PHAC; Jim E. 
Strong, PHAC; Joanne R. Tataryn, PHAC; Linda Vrbova, PHAC.
Canadian Seoul Virus Investigation Group (Provincial)
Office of the Chief Medical Officer of Health; Ontario Ministry 
of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs; Population and Public Health 
Division, Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care; Public Health 
Ontario; Ontario Public Health Units.
Conflict of Interest
No conflicts of interest were reported.
 1Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC; 2Chicago Department of Public Health, 
Illinois; 3Wisconsin Department of Health Services; 4Illinois Department of 
Public Health; 5Population and Public Health Division, Ontario Ministry of 
Health and Long-Term Care; 6Public Health Agency of Canada.
Corresponding author: Janna Kerins, jkerins@cdc.gov, 312-746-6219.
References
1. Fill MA, Mullins H, May AS, et al. Notes from the field: multiple cases 
of Seoul virus infection in a household with infected pet rats—Tennessee, 
December 2016–April 2017. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2017;66:1081–2. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6640a4
2. CDC. Key messages about pet rodents. Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, CDC; 2017. https://www.cdc.gov/
healthypets/pets/small-mammals/petrodents.html
3. Childs JE, Korch GW, Smith GA, Terry AD, Leduc JW. Geographical 
distribution and age related prevalence of antibody to Hantaan-like virus 
in rat populations of Baltimore, Maryland, USA. Am J Trop Med Hyg 
1985;34:385–7. https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.1985.34.385
4. Knust B, Rollin PE. Twenty-year summary of surveillance for human 
hantavirus infections, United States. Emerg Infect Dis 2013;19:1934–7 
10.3201/eid1912.131217. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1912.131217
5. Jameson LJ, Taori SK, Atkinson B, et al. Pet rats as a source of hantavirus 
in England and Wales, 2013. Euro Surveill 2013;18:20415.
6. Ksiazek TG, West CP
, Rollin PE, Jahrling PB, Peters CJ. ELISA for the 
detection of antibodies to Ebola viruses. J Infect Dis 1999;179(Suppl 1):S192–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/514313
7. Woods C, Palekar R, Kim P
, et al. Domestically acquired Seoul virus 
causing hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome—Maryland, 2008. Clin 
Infect Dis 2009;49:e109–12. https://doi.org/10.1086/644742
8. CDC. Cleaning up after pet rodents to reduce the risk of Seoul virus 
infection. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC; 2017. https://www.cdc.gov/hantavirus/outbreaks/seoul-virus/
cleaning-up-pet-rodents.html
9. CDC. Healthy pets healthy people. Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, CDC; 2017. https://www.cdc.gov/
healthypets/  
