 Kerkman et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat0497     27 June 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
1 of 10
NEUROSCIENCE
Network structure of the human musculoskeletal 
system shapes neural interactions on multiple  
time scales
Jennifer N. Kerkman1, Andreas Daffertshofer1, Leonardo L. Gollo2,3,4,5,  
Michael Breakspear2,6, Tjeerd W. Boonstra2,7*
Human motor control requires the coordination of muscle activity under the anatomical constraints imposed by 
the musculoskeletal system. Interactions within the central nervous system are fundamental to motor coordination, 
but the principles governing functional integration remain poorly understood. We used network analysis to inves-
tigate the relationship between anatomical and functional connectivity among 36 muscles. Anatomical networks 
were defined by the physical connections between muscles, and functional networks were based on intermuscular 
coherence assessed during postural tasks. We found a modular structure of functional networks that was strongly 
shaped by the anatomical constraints of the musculoskeletal system. Changes in postural tasks were associated 
with a frequency-dependent reconfiguration of the coupling between functional modules. These findings reveal 
distinct patterns of functional interactions between muscles involved in flexibly organizing muscle activity during 
postural control. Our network approach to the motor system offers a unique window into the neural circuitry driving 
the musculoskeletal system.
INTRODUCTION
The human body is a complex system consisting of many subsystems 
and regulatory pathways. The musculoskeletal system gives the body 
structure and creates the ability to move. It is made up of more than 
200 skeletal bones, connective tissue, and over 300 skeletal muscles. 
Muscles are attached to bones through tendinous tissue and can 
generate movement around a joint when they contract. The central 
nervous system controls these movements through the spinal motor 
neurons, which serve as the final common pathway to the muscles 
(1). While the anatomical and physiological components of the muscu-
loskeletal system are well characterized (2, 3), the organizational 
principles of neural control remain poorly understood. Here, we 
elucidate the interplay between the anatomical structure of the 
musculoskeletal system and the functional organization of distributed 
neural circuitry from which motor behaviors emerge.
The traditional idea that the cortex controls muscles in a one-to-one 
fashion has been challenged by several lines of evidence (4). For ex-
ample, it is widely recognized that the many degrees of freedom (DOFs) 
of the musculoskeletal system prohibit a simple one-to-one correspon-
dence between a motor task and a particular motor solution; rather, 
muscles are coupled and controlled in conjunction (5). A coupling be-
tween muscles—whether mechanical or neural—reduces the number 
of effective DOFs and hence the number of potential movement pat-
terns. This coupling thereby reduces the complexity of motor control (6).
There is continuing debate about the nature of the coupling be-
tween muscles. The mechanical coupling in the musculoskeletal sys-
tem constrains the movement patterns that can be generated (7, 8). 
For example, the biomechanics of the limb constrain relative changes 
in musculotendon length to a low dimensional subspace, resulting 
in correlated afferent inputs to spinal motor neurons (9). The coupling 
between muscles could also result from redundancies in the neural 
circuitry that drives spinal motor neurons (10). Electrophysiological 
studies reveal that a combination of only a few coherent muscle acti-
vation patterns—or muscle synergies—can generate a wide variety 
of natural movements (11). Some of these patterns are already present 
from birth and do not change during development, whereas other 
patterns are learned (12). This arrangement supports the notion that 
the neuromuscular system has a modular organization that simpli-
fies the control problem (13). Spinal circuitry consists of a network of 
premotor interneurons and motor neurons that may generate basic 
movement patterns by mediating the synergistic drive to multiple 
muscles (14). These spinal networks may encode coordinated motor out-
put programs (15), which can be used to translate descending com-
mands for multijoint movements into the appropriate coordinated 
muscle synergies that underpin those movements (3).
Network theory can provide an alternative perspective on the modu-
lar organization of the musculoskeletal system. Community or modu-
lar structures, which refer to densely connected groups of nodes with 
only sparse connections between these groups, are one of the most 
relevant features of complex networks (16). The investigation of com-
munity structures has been widely used in different domains such as 
brain networks (17). This approach has recently been applied to in-
vestigation of the structure and function of the musculoskeletal sys-
tem: The anatomical network can be constructed by mapping the 
origin and insertion of muscles (18, 19). We have previously shown 
how functional muscle networks can be constructed by assessing inter-
muscular coherence from surface electromyography (EMG) recorded 
from different muscles (20). These functional networks reveal func-
tional connectivity between groups of muscles at multiple frequency 
bands. Coherence between EMGs indicates correlated or common in-
puts to spinal motor neurons that are generated by shared structural 
connections or synchronization within the motor system (10, 21, 22). 
1Department of Human Movement Sciences, Faculty of Behavioural and Movement 
Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam Movement Sciences and Institute 
for Brain and Behavior, Amsterdam, Netherlands. 2QIMR Berghofer Medical Research 
Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. 3The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, 
Queensland 4072, Australia. 4Queensland University of Technology, 2 George Street, 
Brisbane, Queensland 4000, Australia. 5National Institute for Dementia Research, QIMR 
Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 300 Herston Road, Brisbane, Queensland 
4006, Australia. 6Metro North Mental Health Service, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. 
7Black Dog Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
*Corresponding author. Email: t.boonstra@unsw.edu.au
Copyright © 2018 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Kerkman et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat0497     27 June 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
2 of 10
Functional connectivity patterns hence allow the assessment of struc-
tural pathways in the motor system using noninvasive recordings (23).
Here, we investigate the organizational principles governing human 
motor control by comparing the community structure of anatomical 
and functional networks. We use multiplex modularity analysis (24) 
to assess the community structure of functional muscle networks 
across frequencies and postural tasks. As biomechanical properties 
of the musculoskeletal system constrain the movement patterns that 
can be generated, we expect a similar community structure for ana-
tomical and functional muscle networks. Deviations in community 
structure indicate additional constraints imposed by the central nervous 
system. We also compare functional connectivity between modules 
during different tasks to investigate changes in functional organization 
during behavior. While the average functional connectivity is con-
strained by anatomical constraints, we expect that functional muscle 
networks reconfigure to enable task-dependent coordination patterns 
between muscles. These task modulations would indicate that func-
tional interactions between muscles are not hard-wired but are instead 
governed by dynamic connectivity in the central nervous system that 
is shaped by the anatomical topology of the musculoskeletal system.
RESULTS
We assessed the relationship between anatomical and functional con-
nectivity of key muscles involved in postural control tasks (36 muscles 
distributed throughout the body). We investigated a muscle-centric 
network in which the nodes represent the muscles and the edges of 
the network are anatomical connections or functional relations be-
tween muscles.
Anatomical muscle network
Anatomical muscle networks were defined by mapping the physical 
connections between muscles (19, 25), based on gross human anatomy 
(2). The anatomical network constituted a densely connected, sym-
metrical network (network density, 0.27; Fig. 1). Modularity analysis 
revealed five modules that divided the anatomical muscle network 
into the main body parts (right arm, left arm, torso, right leg, and 
left leg) with a modularity of 0.39.
Functional muscle network
Functional muscle networks were defined by mapping correlated inputs 
to different muscles. To map functional networks, we measured surface 
EMG from the same 36 muscles while healthy participants performed 
different postural tasks. A full-factorial design was used in which we 
varied postural control (normal standing and instability in the anterior- 
posterior or medial-lateral direction) and pointing behavior (no pointing 
and pointing with the dominant hand or with both hands; see Materials 
and Methods for details). We used these tasks to experimentally ma-
nipulate the required coordination between muscles and to induce 
changes in the functional muscle network. We assessed functional 
connectivity by means of intermuscular coherence between all muscle 
combinations and used nonnegative matrix factorization (NNMF) 
to decompose these coherence spectra into frequency components 
and corresponding edge weights. This yielded a set of weighted networks 
with their corresponding spectral fingerprints (frequency components).
We observed four separate frequency components (component 
1, 0 to 3 Hz; component 2, 3 to 11 Hz; component 3, 11 to 21 Hz; 
component 4, 21 to 60 Hz; Fig. 2A), which serve as separate layers 
of a multiplex network and explained most of the variance of the 
coherence spectra (R2 = 0.90). Weights were thresholded to obtain a 
minimally connected binary network across layers and to keep the 
number of edges constant across layers (relative threshold, 0.035). 
Using multiplex modularity analysis, we obtained a fixed community 
structure across all four frequencies and nine conditions, which re-
vealed six modules: right upper arm, bilateral forearms, torso, right 
upper leg, left upper leg, and bilateral lower legs (Fig. 2B). Figure 2C 
depicts how these modules are distributed across the body. Distinct 
network topologies were observed across layers with a more widely 
connected network at lower frequencies and more partitioned network 
at higher frequencies: Network density was 0.10, 0.09, 0.08, and 0.06, 
and modularity was 0.46, 0.60, 0.64, and 0.75 for components 1, 2, 
3, and 4, respectively (Fig. 2D).
Comparison between anatomical and functional networks
The community structures of the anatomical and functional muscle 
networks were very similar (Rand index, 0.80; adjusted Rand index, 
0.36; P < 0.001). The connections between bilateral forearm and bi-
lateral lower leg muscles in the functional networks, which were absent 
in the anatomical network, are a marked difference between anatomical 
and functional networks. This is reflected in the community structure 
of the functional networks, where bilateral lower leg muscles and 
bilateral forearm muscles were grouped in separate modules (Fig. 2C).
Comparison of anatomical distance (path length) and functional 
connectivity revealed that anatomically nearby nodes are more likely 
to receive common input (Fig. 3). We first examined the percentage 
of all possible edges, that is, the number of edges above threshold, 
which decreased as a function of anatomical distance: 11.3, 0.9, 0.6, 
and 0.0% for anatomical distances 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively. This 
decline with distance was even more pronounced for the higher fre-
quency components (Fig. 3B). Next, we examined the distribution of 
functional weights as a function of anatomical distance. The highest 
weights were observed for edges connecting muscles within the same 
module. The edges within most modules had an anatomical distance 
of 1. Only a few edges had an anatomical distance of 2 or 3, and all these 
edges were contained in the forearm and lower leg modules. In par-
ticular, edges connecting bilateral lower leg muscles showed relatively 
large weights at an anatomical distance of 3 (Fig. 3C).
Task-dependent modulations
We next sought to study the influence of task on this structure-function 
relationship. This was achieved by using clustered graphs to com-
pare functional muscle networks across task conditions. The func-
tional modules identified using the preceding multiplex modularity 
analysis form the nodes of these clustered graphs. Figure 4A shows 
the clustered graphs in the nine experimental conditions and for the 
four frequency components. The clustered graphs were very sparse, 
as modules have dense within-module connections but sparse con-
nections between nodes in other modules. Most edges were observed 
between leg muscles modules (lower leg, right upper leg, and left 
upper leg) at the lowest frequency components (0 to 3 and 3 to 11 Hz), 
consistent with the lower modularity scores, in particular when pos-
tural stability was challenged by instability in the anterior-posterior 
or medial-lateral direction. Edges between the arm muscle modules 
(right upper arm and forearm) and the torso were mainly observed 
at the higher frequency components (11 to 21 and 21 to 60 Hz) during 
pointing (unimanual and bimanual).
The effects of the stability tasks were largely confined to the leg mod-
ules (Fig. 4C). Increased connectivity was observed during postural 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Kerkman et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat0497     27 June 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
3 of 10
Fig. 1. Community structure of the anatomical muscle network. (A) Topological representation of the anatomical network. The nodes of the network represent the 
muscles, and the edges represent the anatomical connections between muscles that are attached to the same bone or connective tissue. The five modules are color-coded. 
(B) Spatial representation of anatomical muscle network displayed on the human body (53). The size of each node represents the number of other nodes it is connected to.
Fig. 2. Community structure of multiplex functional muscle networks. (A) Frequency spectra of the four components obtained using NNMF. (B) Multiplex community 
structure of functional muscle network across frequencies and conditions. The dominant hand of all participants is displayed on the right side of the human body. 
(C) Spatial representation of the average muscle network displayed on the human body (53). The size of the nodes represents the number of other nodes it is connected 
to and the width of the edges the number of edges across layers. (D) Binary muscle networks for each layer.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Kerkman et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat0497     27 June 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
4 of 10
instability (anterior-posterior and medial-lateral) compared to normal 
standing within most frequency components. At the lowest frequency 
component (0 to 3 Hz), connectivity increased within and between 
most leg modules (Pcorrected < 0.01). Only small differences were observed 
at 3 to 11 Hz: increased connectivity between the torso and lower leg 
modules during anterior-posterior instability [+25% (range, −9 to 46%), 
Pcorrected = 0.01] and decreased connectivity within the torso module 
during medial-lateral instability [−21% (range, −50 to 0.3%), Pcorrected = 0.01]. 
Connectivity increased again at the highest frequency components 
(11 to 21 and 21 to 60 Hz) within and between the torso and leg modules 
(right upper leg, left upper leg, and lower leg; Pcorrected < 0.02).
The pointing tasks showed a different pattern compared to the 
postural tasks, but the effects of unimanual and bimanual pointing 
were very similar (Fig. 4D). During pointing, connectivity decreased within 
the torso module at the lowest frequency components [0 to 3 Hz, −61% 
(range, −90 to −1%), Pcorrected < 0.005; 3 to 11 Hz, −59% (range, −86 
to 2%), Pcorrected < 0.02] and between the torso and the right upper 
arm module only at the lowest frequency component [0 to 3 Hz, −67% 
(range, −93 to −9%), Pcorrected < 0.005]. In contrast, a significant increase 
in connectivity within the right upper arm module was observed during 
unimanual pointing compared to no pointing at the highest frequency 
components [11 to 21 Hz, +64% (range, −4 to 95%), Pcorrected = 0.005; 
21 to 60 Hz, +66% (range, −12 to 93%), Pcorrected = 0.015]. In addition, 
there was increased connectivity between the torso and the forearm 
modules [+41% (range, −8 to 82%), Pcorrected < 0.01] and between the 
right upper arm and the forearm modules [+44% (range, 0 to 82%), 
Pcorrected < 0.005] during pointing (unimanual and bimanual) com-
pared to no pointing at frequency component 3 (11 to 21 Hz).
DISCUSSION
We used a network approach to study the structure-function relation-
ship of the human musculoskeletal system. Several principles gov-
erning the functional relationship between muscles were revealed: 
(i) Functional connectivity patterns between muscles are strongly 
shaped by the anatomical constraints of the musculoskeletal system, 
with functional connectivity strongest within anatomical modules and 
decreased as a function of anatomical distance; (ii) bilateral connectivity 
between the homologous upper and between the homologous lower 
extremities is a key characteristic of the functional muscle networks; 
(iii) the functional relationships are task-dependent, with postural tasks 
differentially affecting functional connectivity at different frequency 
ranges. The use of a multiplex approach allows the integration of func-
tional muscle networks across frequencies and provides a unifying 
window into the distributed circuitry of the human central nervous sys-
tem that controls movements by innervating the spinal motor neurons.
Identifying relationships between anatomical and functional mus-
cle networks is crucial for understanding how movement is coor-
dinated. Previous studies investigated either how biomechanical 
properties of the musculoskeletal system constrain the movement 
patterns that can be generated (8, 9) or how muscle activation pat-
terns can be explained by a combination of only a few coherent mus-
cle activation patterns (11). Our combined analyses of anatomical 
and functional muscle networks reveal a strong relationship between 
anatomical connections in the musculoskeletal systems and cor-
related inputs to spinal motor neurons. This finding builds on previ-
ous research showing that common input is strongest to spinal motor 
neurons that innervate muscle pairs that are anatomically and 
Fig. 3. Relationship between functional connectivity and anatomical distance. (A) Adjacency and distance matrix of the anatomical muscle network. The maximum 
anatomical distance (path length) is 4. (B) Percentage of functional edges of thresholded networks across experimental conditions as a function of anatomical distance. 
(C) Distribution of edge weights of functional networks as a function of anatomical distance for each layer. Weights were averaged across experimental conditions. Edges 
connecting muscles within the same module are color-coded (rUA, right upper arm; FA, bilateral forearms; T, torso; rUL, right upper leg; lUL, left upper leg; and LL, bilateral 
lower legs), and gray dots represent edges between modules.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Kerkman et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat0497     27 June 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
5 of 10
functionally closely related (10, 21). The similarity between structural 
and functional networks has been a signature of the study of brain 
networks (26), and the topology of brain networks depends on the 
brain’s spatial embedding (27). The present findings suggest that the 
principles governing embodied structural and functional networks 
also apply to the neural circuitry that controls movements and may 
hence reflect a general principle of the central nervous system.
The similarities between anatomical and functional connectivity 
may indicate that the anatomical structure constrains the functional 
interactions between muscles. The anatomical connections between 
muscles remain largely unchanged over the life span (28), and it is 
more likely that the fast-changing functional networks are constrained 
by the much slower changing anatomical networks than vice versa. 
These constraints may be imposed through afferent activity. The muscu-
loskeletal properties of the human body restrict the postural dynamics 
(9), and these mechanical couplings result in correlated proprioceptive 
feedback to spinal motor neurons. The influence of biomechanics 
on functional muscle networks is expected to be most pronounced 
Fig. 4. Clustered graphs of functional muscle networks across conditions. (A) Clustered graphs in the nine experimental conditions (columns) and the four frequency 
components (rows). The nodes are the modules identified using multiplex modularity analysis. Node size represents the network density within, and the width of the 
edges represents the connection density between modules. (B) Spatial representation of the functional modules on the human body: right upper arm (rUA), bilateral 
forearms (FA), torso (T), right upper leg (rUL), left upper leg (lUL), and bilateral lower legs (LL). We used toolboxes for geometry processing to generate the colored meshes 
(54) and display them on the human body (53). (C) Significant differences in the connectivity of the clustered graphs between the stability conditions. Two contrasts were 
assessed: normal stability–anterior-posterior instability and normal stability–medial-lateral instability. A permutation test was used, and family-wise error control was main-
tained using Bonferroni correction (84 comparisons). Significant differences (Pcorrected < 0.05) are color-coded: Red depicts an increase and blue depicts a decrease in the 
average weights. Colored edges and nodes depict significant changes in connectivity between and within modules, respectively. (D) Significant differences in the con-
nectivity of the clustered graphs between the pointing conditions. Two contrasts were assessed: no pointing–unimanual pointing and no pointing–bimanual pointing.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Kerkman et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat0497     27 June 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
6 of 10
at the lower frequency components, as muscles act as a low-pass filter 
of neuronal inputs and kinematics of the musculoskeletal system un-
fold on a slow time scale. This generates correlated activity at low 
frequencies that are fed back to spinal motor neurons via sensory 
afferents. The spatial distribution of common input would arguably 
mirror the topology of the musculoskeletal system.
Anatomical constraints may also be imposed during neural devel-
opment. During early development, changes in the topographical 
distribution of axon terminals of descending projects are dependent 
on patterns of motor activity and anatomical connectivity between 
muscles (29). Likewise, large changes in functional coupling are ob-
served in infants between 9 and 25 weeks, which reflects a sensitive 
period where functional connections between corticospinal tract fibers 
and spinal motor neurons undergo activity-dependent reorganization 
(30). The anatomy of the musculoskeletal system will limit the motor 
activity patterns that can be performed.
Anatomical and functional connectivity between muscles may also 
be influenced by external factors. For example, connectivity pat-
terns of descending pathways are, in part, genetically determined (31). 
A somatotopic organization is observed across the neural motor sys-
tem, and the community structure of the anatomical muscle network 
mirrors the organization of primary motor cortex control modules 
(19). Likewise, the spatial organization of motor neurons of the spinal 
cord is also related to the anatomical organization of muscles (32), 
and muscles that are anatomically closely located to each other are 
also innervated by the same spinal nerves (fig. S2) (2). The topo-
graphic organization of spinal motor neurons is similar across species 
(33) and may hence be a result of evolutionary conservation (34). Muscu-
loskeletal anatomy and neuronal pathways are hence both subject 
to some sort of genetic control.
Functional connectivity was not entirely determined by anatomy; 
we observed several key differences between anatomical and func-
tional muscle networks. Bilateral modules consisting of muscles in 
the upper or lower extremities were a key characteristic of the 
functional muscle network that were absent in the anatomical network. 
The two bilateral forearm muscles (flexor digitorum superficialis and 
extensor digitorum) showed coherent activity at 3 to 11 Hz, consistent 
with previous studies showing bimanual coupling at ~10 Hz between 
homologous hand and forearm muscles (35, 36). The observed bimanual 
coupling at 3 to 11 Hz may be generated by the olivocerebellar system, 
which is known to produce oscillations in this frequency range and 
for its involvement in the formation of functional muscle collectives 
(35). The bilateral forearm muscles were only weakly coupled to other 
muscles (Fig. 2), which may reflect the relatively high proportion of 
direct corticospinal projections—and thus a relative low proportion 
of diverging projections—to motor neurons innervating hand and 
forearm muscles (37).
In contrast, the bilateral module of lower leg muscles revealed 
strong coupling at multiple frequency bands, consistent with previous 
analyses on functional muscle networks (20), and showed the stron-
gest long-range connections observed in the present study (Fig. 3C). 
Bilateral connectivity between arm and leg muscles during balancing 
could be generated by the vestibulospinal tract, which is known to 
be involved in postural stability and to innervate the spinal gray matter 
bilaterally (21). Bilateral connectivity has been observed at all levels 
of the corticospinal axis (38) and is paramount for functional brain 
networks, particularly between homologous left-right cortical regions 
(39). The present findings suggest that bilateral coupling is also a 
defining feature of functional muscle networks. The differences in 
functional connectivity between bilateral arm and bilateral leg mus-
cles indicate that the functional muscle network, like the anatomical 
muscle network (25), does not show serial homology.
Functional connectivity displayed distinct task-dependent modu-
lations that were linked to the task the subjects performed: Functional 
connectivity was increased within and between the leg modules during 
postural instability and increased within and between arm and upper 
body modules in the pointing conditions. Functional connectivity 
between muscles is thus task-dependent (21, 36), which may suggest 
the presence of multifunctional circuits in which a given anatomical 
connectivity pattern can generate different functional activity patterns 
under various conditions (40). Such a distributed circuitry creates the 
substrate to support many behaviors that are driven by the concerted 
actions of a large distributed network as opposed to simple, dedicated 
pathways. The underlying network connectivity hence constrains the 
possible patterns of population activity to a low-dimensional manifold 
spanned by a few independent patterns—neural modes— 
that provide 
the basic building blocks of neural dynamics and motor control (41). 
Again, this finds similarities with recent investigations of the func-
tional principles of cognitive networks in the brain (42).
Task-dependent changes occurred at different frequencies, which 
indicate the functioning of a multiplex network organization, whereby 
the four frequency components reflect different types of interactions 
between muscles. Four distinct frequency components (0 to 3, 3 to 11, 
11 to 21, and 21 to 60 Hz) were extracted using NNMF. These frequency 
bands closely match those found previously (20), demonstrating the 
robustness of this finding. An interesting possibility is that these fre-
quency components reflect the spectral fingerprints of different path-
ways that project onto the spinal motor neurons. It has been suggested 
that these different frequencies may have specific roles in coding motor 
signals (43). Functional connectivity at the lowest frequency compo-
nents may result from afferent pathways, while functional connectivity 
Table 1. List of muscles. 
Muscle
Abbreviation
Tibialis anterior
TA
Gastrocnemius caput mediale
GM
Soleus
SOL
Rectus femoris
RF
Biceps femoris
BF
Vastus lateralis
VL
Adductor longus
AL
Obliquus externus abdominis
EO
Pectoralis major
PMA
Sternocleidomastoideus
SMA
Longissimus
LO
Latissimus dorsi
LD
Trapezius
TZ
Deltoideus
D
Biceps brachii
BB
Triceps brachii
TRB
Extensor digitorum
ED
Flexor digitorum superficialis
FDS
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Kerkman et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat0497     27 June 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
7 of 10
at higher frequencies may reflect correlated input from descending 
pathways. For example, functional connectivity in the β-band (15 to 
30 Hz) most likely reflects corticospinal projections (10, 36). The 
highest frequency components observed in this study (21 to 60 Hz) 
showed the most local connectivity patterns. These local connectivity 
patterns may reflect propriospinal pathways (3, 15). These functional 
connectivity patterns may be used to uncover the contribution of 
structural pathways in the formation of coordinated activity patterns 
in the motor system (23). These findings mirror observations in cortical 
networks where frequency-specific networks reveal different topologies 
and are differentially expressed across brain states (44). The differences 
in the frequency content of functional connectivity observed between 
the upper limb and lower limb muscles suggest distinct neural cir-
cuitry controlling these body parts.
In summary, our network analysis revealed widespread functional 
connectivity between muscles, indicative of correlated inputs to spinal 
motor neurons at multiple frequencies. Correlated inputs indicate 
divergent projections or lateral connections in the neural pathways 
that innervate spinal motor neurons and can hence be used to assess 
spinal networks (23). These findings are consistent with a many-to- 
many rather than a one-to-one mapping between brain and muscle 
(4), in which complex movements arise through relatively subtle 
changes in the coactivation of different distributed functional modes. 
We present a novel approach that aligns movement neuroscience with 
current research on brain networks by showing how the central nervous 
system interacts with the musculoskeletal system of the human body. 
This approach fits within the broader framework of network physiology, 
investigating brain-body interactions (45). Similar to the current results, 
research on network physiology has shown that dynamic interactions 
among organ systems are mediated through specific frequency bands (46). 
We extended this approach by investigating the network topology of 
functional interactions between muscles, which are mediated through 
neural pathways within the spinal cord. Future studies may extend the 
number of muscles that are investigated, include electroencephalography 
to map brain-body networks and investigate the cortical control of mus-
cle networks, and consider individual differences in anatomy.
From a systems biology perspective, the brain and spinal cord are 
interwoven with the body—they are “embodied” (7)—and brain net-
work analysis can thus be extended to investigate the intrinsic organi-
zation of functional networks in the human spinal cord (47). Functional 
interactions between supraspinal, spinal, and peripheral regions can 
be integrated using network analysis as a common framework. Such 
an integrated framework is well placed to provide new insights and 
interventions for neurological disorders (48).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Data acquisition
Fourteen healthy participants (7 males and 7 females; mean age, 25 ± 
8 years; 10 right-handed and 4 left-handed) without any neurological 
or motor disorder or diabetes mellitus and with a body mass index 
below 25 were included in this study. The experiments were approved 
Table 2. Origin and insertion of muscles. Origin and insertion are based on gross human anatomy as described by Martini et al. (2), hence ignoring potential 
individual differences between participants. 
Muscle
Origin 1
Origin 2
Origin 3
Insertion 1
Insertion 2
TA
Tibia
Os cuneiforme mediale
Ossa metatarsi
GM
Femur
Calcaneus
SOL
Fibula
Tibia
Calcaneus
RF
Os coxae*†
Os ilium*†
Tibia
BF
Femur
Os ischii*†
Fibula
Tibia
VL
Femur
Tibia
AL
Os pubis*†
Femur
EO
Costae†‡
Linea alba†
Os ilium*†
PMA
Clavicula
Costae†‡
Sternum†‡
Humerus
SMA
Clavicula
Sternum†‡
Os temporale†§
LO
Ligamentum 
sacrospinale*†
Vertebra†
Costae†‡
Vertebra†
LD
Costae†‡
Fascia thoracolumbalis†
Vertebra†
Humerus
TZ
Ligamentum nuchae†
Os occipitale†§
Vertebra†
Clavicula
Scapula
D
Clavicula
Scapula
Humerus
BB
Scapula
Radius
TRB
Humerus
Scapula
Ulna
ED
Humerus
Ossa digitorum
FDS
Humerus
Radius
Ulna
Ossa digitorum
*Part of the pelvis.   †Connective structure on the midline of the body connecting bilateral muscles.   ‡Part of the skeleton thoracis.   §Part of the ossa cranii.
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Kerkman et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat0497     27 June 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
8 of 10
by the Ethics Committee Human Movement Sciences of the Vrije 
Universiteit Amsterdam (reference ECB 2014-78) and performed in 
full compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All participants were 
written and verbally informed about the procedure and signed an in-
formed consent before participation.
Participants were instructed to perform nine different postural 
tasks. A full-factorial design was used in which postural stability (normal 
standing, instability in anterior-posterior direction, and instability in 
medial-lateral direction) and pointing behavior (no pointing, pointing 
with dominant hand, and pointing with both hands) were varied. 
Postural stability was manipulated using a balance board with one 
DOF, which allowed movement in either the anterior-posterior or 
medial-lateral direction. In the pointing task, participants held a laser 
pointer with their dominant hand (unimanual) or with both hands 
(bimanual) and pointed it on a white target (25 cm2) located at a 
distance of 2.25 m, parallel to the transversal axis of the body at the 
height of the acromion of the participant. The experiment hence con-
sisted of nine (3 × 3) experimental conditions. The duration of a trial 
was 30 s, and each condition was repeated six times.
Bipolar surface EMG was recorded from 36 muscles distributed 
across the body (18 bilateral muscles; Table 1). We selected a repre-
sentative group of antagonistic muscle pairs involved in postural control 
that can be properly measured with surface EMG due to their location 
and size. EMG was acquired using three 16-channel Porti systems 
(TMSi), online high-pass–filtered at 5 Hz, and sampled at 2 kHz.
Anatomical muscle network
The anatomical muscle network was defined by mapping the physical 
connections between muscles. The nodes represent the 36 muscles 
(18 left and 18 right), and the edges of the network represent the 
tendinous attachments of muscles onto bones and connective tissue. 
The structural connections were defined based on the origin and 
insertion of the muscles (2). Bones that show no or almost no motion 
in the joint between them were considered as one rigid bony structure, 
that is, the pelvis, skeleton thoracis, or ossa cranii (25). The connections 
between muscles and bones listed in Table 2 denote a bipartite net-
work C, with muscles as one group and bones as the second group. 
We then created a muscle-centric network as the one-mode projec-
tions of C:B = CCT (19). This gave a weighted adjacency matrix, where 
the weights reflect the number of attachments by which two mus-
cles are connected. We converted this to a binary network by setting 
all non-zero weights to 1.
Functional muscle network
We mirrored the data of the left-handers to create a dominant and 
nondominant side. EMG data were preprocessed to remove move-
ment and electrocardiography (ECG) artifacts. EMG was band-pass– 
filtered (1 to 400 Hz), and independent component analysis was used 
to remove ECG contamination (49). One or two independent com-
ponents were removed for each participant. EMG data were then 
high-pass–filtered (20 Hz) to remove low-frequency movement artifacts. 
After preprocessing, EMG envelopes were extracted by means of the 
Hilbert amplitude (22).
We followed the procedure described by Boonstra et al. (20) to 
extract functional muscle networks from surface EMG. First, complex- 
valued coherency was estimated and averaged over trials within each 
condition for each participant. The absolute value of coherency was 
squared to obtain magnitude-squared coherence. Intermuscular co-
herence was assessed between all 630 muscle pairs. Next, NNMF was 
used to decompose these coherence spectra across all muscle com-
binations, conditions, and participants into four distinct frequency 
components and the corresponding weights. This yielded a set of 
weights for each frequency component, which defined an undirected 
weighted network for each condition and participant.
These functional networks were converted to binary networks to 
facilitate comparison with the anatomical network. Weights were 
thresholded to obtain a minimally connected network across condi-
tions and frequency components. This thresholding procedure yields 
a single, unique threshold value, which corresponds to the percolation 
threshold (50). This resulted in sparse networks in which each node 
was connected to at least one other node by an edge at one of the layers 
of the multiplex network.
Community structure
The Louvain algorithm was used to extract the modules from the ana-
tomical networks. As the Louvain algorithm is stochastic, we used con-
sensus clustering to obtain a stable partition across 1000 iterations (51). 
Multiplex modularity analysis (24) was used to identify the modules of 
functional muscle network across the conditions and frequency com-
ponents. We used MolTi, a stand-alone graphical software, to detect 
communities from multiplex networks by optimizing the multiplex 
modularity with the adapted Louvain algorithm (https://github.
com/ 
gilles-didier/MolTi). Modules were extracted across the 36 (9 × 4) 
binary networks. We used the Rand index and the adjusted Rand 
index to compare the modules of the anatomical and functional mus-
cle networks (16).
Comparison of functional networks across conditions
To facilitate the comparison of functional networks across task con-
ditions, we coarse-grained the networks (52). We used the set of func-
tional modules estimated across conditions and frequency components 
as a frame of reference to coarse-grain the 36 binary networks and 
then compared the strength of the inter- and intramodule connections 
across networks using these module boundaries. In the clustered 
networks, the nodes represent the modules (groups of muscles, 
identified above) and the edges represent the connections between 
modules. The nondiagonal elements of the resulting weighted adja-
cency matrix represent the average edge weights between two mod-
ules, and the diagonal elements represent the average edge weights 
within a module.
To compare the clustered networks across conditions, we used 
simple contrasts between task conditions and quantified differences in 
the numbers of connections between and within modules. We tested 
four contrasts: (i) unimanual and (ii) bimanual pointing compared to 
no pointing and (iii) anterior-posterior and (iv) medial-lateral in-
stability compared to normal standing. To test the statistical signifi-
cance of these contrasts, we performed paired permutation tests 
separately on each of the matrix elements (52). The clustered net-
works had a much reduced dimensionality compared to the original 
functional muscle networks (21 instead of 630 edges). Family-wise 
error control was maintained using Bonferroni correction to correct 
for multiple comparisons (4 × 21 = 84 comparisons).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/4/6/eaat0497/DC1
section S1. Alternative anatomical muscle network
section S2. Spinal nerve network
section S3. Weighted functional networks
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Kerkman et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat0497     27 June 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
9 of 10
fig. S1. The adjacency matrix of anatomical muscle networks.
fig. S2. Community structure of the spinal nerve network.
fig. S3. Community structure of weighted functional network.
table S1. Spinal nerve innervation.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. C. Sherrington, The Integrative Action of the Nervous System (CUP Archive, 1910).
 2. F. H. Martini, M. J. Timmons, M. P. McKinley, Human Anatomy (3rd Edition)  
(Prentice Hall, 2000).
 3. E. Pierrot-Deseilligny, D. Burke, The Circuitry of the Human Spinal Cord: Its Role in Motor 
Control and Movement Disorders (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005).
 4. M. Graziano, The organization of behavioral repertoire in motor cortex. Annu. Rev. 
Neurosci. 29, 105–134 (2006).
 5. N. Bernstein, The Coordination and Regulation of Movements (Pergamon, 1967).
 6. M. T. Turvey, Coordination. Am. Psychol. 45, 938–953 (1990).
 7. H. J. Chiel, R. D. Beer, The brain has a body: Adaptive behavior emerges from interactions 
of nervous system, body and environment. Trends Neurosci. 20, 553–557 (1997).
 8. A. D. Kuo, F. E. Zajac, Human standing posture: Multi-joint movement strategies based 
on biomechanical constraints. Prog. Brain Res. 97, 349–358 (1993).
 9. J. J. Kutch, F. J. Valero-Cuevas, Challenges and new approaches to proving the existence 
of muscle synergies of neural origin. PLOS Comput. Biol. 8, e1002434 (2012).
 10. S. F. Farmer, F. D. Bremner, D. M. Halliday, J. R. Rosenberg, J. A. Stephens, The frequency 
content of common synaptic inputs to motoneurones studied during voluntary 
isometric contraction in man. J. Physiol. 470, 127–155 (1993).
 11. A. d’Avella, P. Saltiel, E. Bizzi, Combinations of muscle synergies in the construction of a 
natural motor behavior. Nat. Neurosci. 6, 300–308 (2003).
 12. N. Dominici, Y. P. Ivanenko, G. Cappellini, A. d’Avella, V. Mondì, M. Cicchese, A. Fabiano, 
T. Silei, A. Di Paolo, C. Giannini, R. E. Poppele, F. Lacquaniti, Locomotor primitives in 
newborn babies and their development. Science 334, 997–999 (2011).
 13. F. A. Mussa-Ivaldi, Modular features of motor control and learning. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 
9, 713–717 (1999).
 14. T. Takei, J. Confais, S. Tomatsu, T. Oya, K. Seki, Neural basis for hand muscle synergies in 
the primate spinal cord. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, 8643–8648 (2017).
 15. A. J. Levine, C. A. Hinckley, K. L. Hilde, S. P. Driscoll, T. H. Poon, J. M. Montgomery, 
S. L. Pfaff, Identification of a cellular node for motor control pathways. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 
586–593 (2014).
 16. S. Fortunato, Community detection in graphs. Phys. Rep. 486, 75–174 (2010).
 17. E. Bullmore, O. Sporns, Complex brain networks: Graph theoretical analysis of structural 
and functional systems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 186–198 (2009).
 18. B. Esteve-Altava, R. Diogo, C. Smith, J. C. Boughner, D. Rasskin-Gutman, Anatomical 
networks reveal the musculoskeletal modularity of the human head. Sci. Rep. 5, 8298 
(2015).
 19. A. C. Murphy, S. F. Muldoon, D. Baker, A. Lastowka, B. Bennett, M. Yang, D. S. Bassett, 
Structure, function, and control of the human musculoskeletal network. PLOS Biol. 16, 
e2002811 (2018).
 20. T. W. Boonstra, A. Danna-Dos-Santos, H. B. Xie, M. Roerdink, J. F. Stins, M. Breakspear, 
Muscle networks: Connectivity analysis of EMG activity during postural control. Sci. Rep. 
5, 17830 (2015).
 21. J. Gibbs, L. M. Harrison, J. A. Stephens, Organization of inputs to motoneurone  
pools in man. J. Physiol. 485, 245–256 (1995).
 22. T. W. Boonstra, M. Breakspear, Neural mechanisms of intermuscular coherence: 
Implications for the rectification of surface electromyography. J. Neurophysiol. 107, 
796–807 (2012).
 23. T. W. Boonstra, S. F. Farmer, M. Breakspear, Using computational neuroscience to define 
common input to spinal motor neurons. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10, 313 (2016).
 24. G. Didier, C. Brun, A. Baudot, Identifying communities from multiplex biological 
networks. PeerJ 3, e1525 (2015).
 25. R. Diogo, B. Esteve-Altava, C. Smith, J. C. Boughner, D. Rasskin-Gutman, Anatomical 
network comparison of human upper and lower, newborn and adult, and normal and 
abnormal limbs, with notes on development, pathology and limb serial homology vs. 
homoplasy. PLOS ONE 10, e0140030 (2015).
 26. C. J. Honey, R. Kötter, M. Breakspear, O. Sporns, Network structure of cerebral cortex 
shapes functional connectivity on multiple time scales. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 
10240–10245 (2007).
 27. J. A. Roberts, A. Perry, A. R. Lord, G. Roberts, P. B. Mitchell, R. E. Smith, F. Calamante, 
M. Breakspear, The contribution of geometry to the human connectome. Neuroimage 
124, 379–393 (2016).
 28. M. Tieland, I. Trouwborst, B. C. Clark, Skeletal muscle performance and ageing. J. Cachexia 
Sarcopenia Muscle 9, 3–19 (2018).
 29. J. H. Martin, The corticospinal system: From development to motor control. Neuroscientist 
11, 161–173 (2005).
 30. A. Ritterband-Rosenbaum, A. Herskind, X. Li, M. Willerslev-Olsen, M. D. Olsen, S. F. Farmer, 
J. B. Nielsen, A critical period of corticomuscular and EMG-EMG coherence detection in 
healthy infants aged 9-25 weeks. J. Physiol. 595, 2699–2713 (2017).
 31. C. S. Goodman, C. J. Shatz, Developmental mechanisms that generate precise patterns of 
neuronal connectivity. Cell 72, 77–98 (1993).
 32. T. Bácskai, Y. Fu, G. Sengul, Z. Rusznák, G. Paxinos, C. Watson, Musculotopic organization 
of the motor neurons supplying forelimb and shoulder girdle muscles in the mouse. 
Brain Struct. Funct. 218, 221–238 (2013).
 33. S. McHanwell, T. J. Biscoe, The localization of motoneurons supplying the hindlimb 
muscles of the mouse. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 293, 477–508 (1981).
 34. F. Lacquaniti, Y. P. Ivanenko, A. d’avella, K. Zelik, M. Zago, Evolutionary and 
developmental modules. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 7, 61 (2013).
 35. J. H. McAuley, S. F. Farmer, J. C. Rothwell, C. D. Marsden, Common 3 and 10 Hz oscillations 
modulate human eye and finger movements while they simultaneously track a visual 
target. J. Physiol. 515, 905–917 (1999).
 36. I. E. J. de Vries, A. Daffertshofer, D. F. Stegeman, T. W. Boonstra, Functional connectivity in 
the neuromuscular system underlying bimanual coordination. J. Neurophysiol. 116, 
2576–2585 (2016).
 37. R. N. Lemon, Descending pathways in motor control. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 31, 195–218 
(2008).
 38. R. G. Carson, Neural pathways mediating bilateral interactions between the upper limbs. 
Brain Res. Rev. 49, 641–662 (2005).
 39. K. Shen, B. Mišić, B. N. Cipollini, G. Bezgin, M. Buschkuehl, R. M. Hutchison, S. M. Jaeggi, 
E. Kross, S. J. Peltier, S. Everling, J. Jonides, A. R. McIntosh, M. G. Berman, Stable 
long-range interhemispheric coordination is supported by direct anatomical projections. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 6473–6478 (2015).
 40. K. Briggman, W. B. Kristan Jr., Multifunctional pattern-generating circuits. Annu. Rev. 
Neurosci. 31, 271–294 (2008).
 41. J. A. Gallego, M. G. Perich, L. E. Miller, S. A. Solla, Neural manifolds for the control of 
movement. Neuron 94, 978–984 (2017).
 42. M. W. Cole, D. S. Bassett, J. D. Power, T. S. Braver, S. E. Petersen, Intrinsic and task-evoked 
network architectures of the human brain. Neuron 83, 238–251 (2014).
 43. J. H. McAuley, C. D. Marsden, Physiological and pathological tremors and rhythmic 
central motor control. Brain 123, 1545–1567 (2000).
 44. K. K. Liu, R. P. Bartsch, A. Lin, R. N. Mantegna, P. C. Ivanov, Plasticity of brain wave 
network interactions and evolution across physiologic states. Front. Neural Circuits 9, 62 
(2015).
 45. A. Bashan, R. P. Bartsch, J. W. Kantelhardt, S. Havlin, P. C. Ivanov, Network physiology 
reveals relations between network topology and physiological function. Nat. Commun. 3, 
702 (2012).
 46. R. P. Bartsch, K. K. Liu, A. Bashan, P. Ivanov, Network physiology: How organ systems 
dynamically interact. PLOS ONE 10, e0142143 (2015).
 47. Y. Kong, F. Eippert, C. F. Beckmann, J. Andersson, J. Finsterbusch, C. Büchel, I. Tracey, 
J. C. Brooks, Intrinsically organized resting state networks in the human spinal cord.  
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 18067–18072 (2014).
 48. P. Freund, K. Friston, A. J. Thompson, K. E. Stephan, J. Ashburner, D. R. Bach, Z. Nagy, 
G. Helms, B. Draganski, S. Mohammadi, M. E. Schwab, A. Curt, N. Weiskopf, Embodied 
neurology: An integrative framework for neurological disorders. Brain 139, 1855–1861 
(2016).
 49. N. W. Willigenburg, A. Daffertshofer, I. Kingma, J. H. van Dieën, Removing ECG 
contamination from EMG recordings: A comparison of ICA-based and other filtering 
procedures. J. Electromyogr. Kinesiol. 22, 485–493 (2012).
 50. F. Z. Esfahlani, H. Sayama, A percolation-based thresholding method with applications in 
functional connectivity analysis. http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.05292 (2017).
 51. A. Lancichinetti, S. Fortunato, Consensus clustering in complex networks. Sci. Rep. 2, 336 
(2012).
 52. R. Kujala, E. Glerean, R. K. Pan, I. P. Jääskeläinen, M. Sams, J. Saramäki, Graph coarse–
graining reveals differences in the module–level structure of functional brain networks. 
Eur. J. Neurosci. 44, 2673–2684 (2016).
 53. S. N. Makarov, G. M. Noetscher, A. Nazarian, Low-Frequency Electromagnetic Modeling for 
Electrical and Biological Systems Using MATLAB (Wiley, 2015), pp. 89–130.
 54. A. Jacobson, Matlab toolbox for Geometry Processing, GitHub Repository, https://github.
com/alecjacobson/gptoolbox (2017).
Acknowledgment: We thank D. Marinazzo, S. Farmer, S. Bruijn, H. Schutte, and N. Dominici  
for their insightful comments. Funding: This work was supported by the Netherlands 
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO 45110-030 and 016.156.346), the ARC (Australian 
Research Council) Centre of Excellence in Integrative Brain Function, and the Australian 
National Health and Medical Research Council (APP1037196 and APP1110975). The funders 
had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of 
the manuscript. Author contributions: J.N.K., A.D., and T.W.B. conceived the study. All authors 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Kerkman et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat0497     27 June 2018
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
10 of 10
designed the experiments. J.N.K. acquired the EMG data. J.N.K. and T.W.B. performed the 
evaluation of the anatomical network. J.N.K., L.L.G., and T.W.B. performed the evaluation of the 
functional network. T.W.B. performed the statistical analyses. J.N.K. and T.W.B. wrote the 
manuscript. All authors edited the manuscript. Competing interests: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to 
evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary 
Materials. Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors. The EMG 
data used in this study are available at Zenodo (http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1185196).
Submitted 19 January 2018
Accepted 22 May 2018
Published 27 June 2018
10.1126/sciadv.aat0497
Citation: J. N. Kerkman, A. Daffertshofer, L. L. Gollo, M. Breakspear, T. W. Boonstra, Network 
structure of the human musculoskeletal system shapes neural interactions on multiple time 
scales. Sci. Adv. 4, eaat0497 (2018).
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 multiple time scales
Network structure of the human musculoskeletal system shapes neural interactions on
Jennifer N. Kerkman, Andreas Daffertshofer, Leonardo L. Gollo, Michael Breakspear and Tjeerd W. Boonstra
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aat0497
 (6), eaat0497.
4
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/6/eaat0497
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2018/06/25/4.6.eaat0497.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/6/eaat0497#BIBL
This article cites 47 articles, 5 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 2, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
