 cGAS drives non-canonical inflammasome activation in age-
related macular degeneration
Nagaraj Kerur1,2,7,*, Shinichi Fukuda1,2,8, Daipayan Banerjee1,2,7, Younghee Kim1,2,7, 
Dongxu Fu1,2, Ivana Apicella1,2, Akhil Varshney1,2, Reo Yasuma1,2,7, Benjamin J. Fowler7, 
Elmira Baghdasaryan10,11, Kenneth M. Marion10, Xiwen Huang10, Tetsuhiro Yasuma8,12, 
Yoshio Hirano8,13, Vlad Serbulea3, Meenakshi Ambati14, Vidya L. Ambati14, Yuji Kajiwara15, 
Kameshwari Ambati1,2,7, Ana Bastos-Carvalho7, Yuichiro Ogura13, Hiroko Terasaki12, 
Tetsuro Oshika8, Kyung Bo Kim9, David R. Hinton16, Norbert Leitinger3, John C. Cambier17, 
Joseph D. Buxbaum15, M. Cristina Kenney18, S. Michal Jazwinski19, Hiroshi Nagai20, Isao 
Hara21, A. Phillip West22, Katherine A. Fitzgerald23, SriniVas R. Sadda10,11, Bradley D. 
Gelfand1,2,4,7, and Jayakrishna Ambati1,2,5,6,7,*
1Center for Advanced Vision Science, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, 
Virginia, USA
2Department of Ophthalmology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, 
USA
3Department of Pharmacology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, 
USA
4Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, 
Virginia, USA
5Department of Pathology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
6Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology, University of Virginia School of 
Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
7Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, 
USA
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence should be addressed to: J.A. (ja9qr@virginia.edu) or N.K. (nk8m@virginia.edu). 
Competing interests
J.A. is a co-founder of iVeena Holdings, iVeena Pharmaceuticals, iVeena Delivery Systems and Inflammasome Therapeutics, and has 
been a consultant for Allergan, Biogen, and Olix Pharmaceuticals unrelated to this work. J.A., N.K., B.J.F., and K.A. are named as 
inventors on patent applications on macular degeneration filed by the University of Kentucky or the University of Virginia.
Author contributions
N.K., S.F., D.B., Y.K., D.F., I.A., A.V., R.Y., B.J.F., E.B, K.M.M., X.H. T.Y., Y.H., V.S., M.A., V.L.A., N.L., K.A., A.B.-C., and 
B.D.G. performed experiments or analyzed data. Y.K., D.R.H., J.C.C., J.D.B., A.P.W., S.M.J., M.C.K. K.A.F., K.B.K, Y.O, H.T., H.N., 
I.H. and T.O. provided mice, tissues or reagents. J.A. and N.K. conceived and directed the project, and wrote the paper with assistance 
from B.J.F., B.D.G., N.L., K.A., and S.R.S. All authors had the opportunity to discuss the results and comment on the manuscript.
Data availability:
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are not publicly available due to commercialization of research 
findings but are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. A Life Sciences Reporting Summary is available.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2018 January ; 24(1): 50–61. doi:10.1038/nm.4450.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 8Department of Ophthalmology, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
9Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA
10Doheny Eye Institute, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA
11Department of Ophthalmology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California –Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA
12Department of Ophthalmology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan
13Department of Ophthalmology, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Nagoya, Japan
14Center for Digital Image Evaluation, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA
15Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA
16Departments of Pathology and Ophthalmology, USC Roski Eye Institute, Keck School of 
Medicine of the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA
17Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Aurora, Colorado, USA
18Gavin Herbert Eye Institute, University of California Irvine, Irvine, California, USA
19Tulane Center for Aging and Department of Medicine, Tulane University Health Sciences 
Center, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA
20Division of Dermatology, Department of Internal Related, Kobe University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan
21Department of Urology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama, Japan
22Microbial Pathogenesis and Immunology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA
23Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA
Abstract
Geographic atrophy is a blinding form of age-related macular degeneration characterized by death 
of the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE). In this disease, the RPE displays evidence of DICER1 
deficiency, resultant accumulation of endogenous Alu retroelement RNA, and NLRP3 
inflammasome activation. How the inflammasome is activated in this untreatable disease is largely 
unknown. Here we demonstrate that RPE degeneration in human cell culture and in mouse models 
is driven by a non-canonical inflammasome pathway that results in activation of caspase-4 
(caspase-11 in mice) and caspase-1, and requires cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS)-dependent 
interferon-β (IFN-β) production and gasdermin D-dependent interleukin-18 (IL-18) secretion. 
Reduction of DICER1 levelsor accumulation of Alu RNA triggers cytosolic escape of 
mitochondrial DNA, which engages cGAS. Moreover, caspase-4, gasdermin D, IFN-β, and cGAS 
levels are elevated in the RPE of human eyes with geographic atrophy. Collectively, these data 
highlight an unexpected role for cGAS in responding to mobile element transcripts, reveal cGAS-
driven interferon signaling as a conduit for mitochondrial damage-induced inflammasome 
Kerur et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 activation, expand the immune sensing repertoire of cGAS and caspase-4 to non-infectious human 
disease, and identify new potential targets for treatment of a major cause of blindness.
Age-related macular degeneration affects over 180 million people1, and is the leading cause 
of blindness among the elderly across the world. Degeneration of the retinal pigmented 
epithelium (RPE), a monolayer of cells that provide trophic support to photoreceptors2,3, is 
the hallmark of geographic atrophy. the RNase DICER1 are reduced in the RPE of human 
eyes with geographic atrophy, leading to accumulation of toxic mobile element Alu RNA 
transcripts4; these Alu transcripts induce RPE cell death by activating the NLRP3 
inflammasome5. Although NLRP3 inflammasome activation has been widely implicated in 
macular degeneration6–8, the mechanisms regulating the inflammasome in this disease 
remain elusive. Here we demonstrate that DICER1 deficit/Alu RNA-driven RPE 
degeneration in mouse models of macular degeneration is mediated by caspase-4- and 
gasdermin D-dependent inflammasome activation. Surprisingly this non-canonical 
inflammasome is dependent on the activation of cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS)-driven 
type I interferon signaling (IFN) by cytosolic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA).
RESULTS
Caspase-4 is activated in AMD
Caspase-4 (caspase-11 is the corresponding mouse protein), which governs non-canonical 
inflammasome activation, was recently implicated in the immune response to exogenous 
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) such as intracellular LPS9,10 and 
endogenously produced oxidized phospholipids (oxPAPC)11. Caspase-4 abundance in the 
RPE and choroid of human eyes with geographic atrophy was significantly increased 
compared to normal human eyes from aged subjects, as monitored by western blotting (Fig. 
1a and Supplementary Fig. 1a). Introduction of in vitro transcribed Alu RNA or plasmid-
mediated enforced expression of Alu RNA (pAlu) induced and activated caspase-4 in 
primary human RPE cells, as evident by increased abundance of the p30 cleavage fragments 
(Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 1b, c). Anti-sense oligonucleotide-mediated knockdown of 
DICER1 similarly induced caspase-4 activation in human RPE cells (Fig. 1b), which was 
blocked by concomitant anti-sense mediated inhibition of Alu RNA (Supplementary Fig. 
1d). Caspase-11 activation was induced by subretinal injection of Alu RNA in wild-type 
(WT) C57BL/6J mice (Fig. 1c), and by Alu RNA transfection in primary RPE cells isolated 
from WT mice (Supplementary Fig. 1e). Collectively, these data identify caspase-4 as 
preferentially activated in human AMD, and indicate that dysregulation of DICER1 and Alu 
RNA lead to caspase-4 activation in this condition.
Caspase-4 is required for Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration and inflammasome 
activation
We sought to determine whether caspase-4 is required for Alu RNA-induced RPE 
degeneration, which was quantified both by binary grading and semi-automated cellular 
morphometry (Online Methods and Supplementary Fig. 3).
Kerur et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Exogenous delivery or endogenous over-expression of Alu RNA induced RPE degeneration 
in WT mice (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 1f). In contrast, subretinal injection of neither 
Alu RNA nor pAlu induced RPE degeneration in Casp11−/− mice (Fig. 1d and 
Supplementary Fig. 1f). 129S6 mice, which lack functional caspase-11 due to a passenger 
mutation12, also were resistant to RPE degeneration induced by Alu RNA or pAlu 
(Supplementary Fig. 1g). Subretinal delivery of a cell-permeable, non-immunogenic 17+2-nt 
cholesterol-conjugated siRNA13,14 targeting Dicer1 induced RPE degeneration in WT but 
not 129S6 mice (Supplementary Fig. 1h). Transgenic expression of human caspase-4 in 
caspase-11 deficient mice (Casp11−/− hCASP4TG)15 restored susceptibility to Alu RNA-
induced RPE degeneration (Fig. 1e), demonstrating that human caspase-4 can compensate 
for mouse caspase-11 in this system. Collectively, these data demonstrate the critical role of 
caspase-4 (or mouse caspase-11) in responding to pathological accumulation of endogenous 
Alu mobile element transcripts.
Previously we reported that Alu RNA does not induce RPE degeneration in caspase-1 
deficient mice5. However, this Casp1−/− strain was subsequently reported to also lack 
functional caspase-11 as a result of a passenger mutation in the 129S6 genetic background 
of this strain12; thus, the genotype of these mice is properly referred to as Casp1−/− 
Casp11129mt/129mt. We sought to clarify the molecular hierarchy of caspases-1 and 11 in 
response to Alu RNA. Whereas Alu RNA treatment induced caspase-1 activation in WT 
mice or RPE cells, Alu RNA failed to stimulate caspase-1 activation in Casp11−/− mice (Fig. 
1f), or in primary RPE cells isolated from Casp11−/− mice (Fig. 1g). Reconstitution of 
caspase-11 into Casp11−/− mouse RPE cells restored caspase-1 activation by Alu RNA 
(Supplementary Fig. 2a, b). Moreover, Alu RNA failed to induce IL-18 secretion in 
Casp11−/− mouse RPE cells (Fig. 1h). In contrast, caspase-11 was dispensable for IL-18 
secretion induced by the canonical inflammasome agonist monosodium urate (MSU) 
crystals (Supplementary Fig. 10d). These data suggest that caspase-11 is required for 
caspase-1 activation and IL-18 secretion induced by Alu RNA.
Alu RNA did not induce RPE degeneration in Casp1−/− Casp11129mt/129mt Casp11Tg mice12, 
in which mouse caspase-11 was functionally reconstituted by a bacterial artificial 
chromosome transgene (Fig. 1i and Supplementary Fig. 2c. Additionally, as previously 
observed5, Casp1−/− Casp11129mt/129mt mice were not susceptible to Alu-induced RPE 
degeneration (Fig. 1i and Supplementary Fig. 2c), suggesting that both caspase-4/11 and 
caspase-1 are required for Alu toxicity.
Given that we previously demonstrated that PYCARD, an adaptor protein involved in 
inflammasome activation, and the purinoceptor P2X7 (encoded by P2rx7) are required for 
Alu toxicity5,16,17, we next assessed whether PYCARD and P2X7 are also required for Alu 
RNA-induced caspase-11 activation. Alu RNA-induced activation of caspase-11 was 
reduced in P2rx7−/− but not Pycard−/− mouse RPE cells, suggesting that caspase-11 is 
mechanistically positioned between these signaling molecules (Supplementary Fig. 2d, e). 
Collectively these findings support a model of non-canonical inflammasome activation by 
Alu RNA wherein caspase-4/11 lies upstream of caspase-1 activation.
Kerur et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Recent studies have implicated an endogenous lipid molecule, oxidized phospholipid 
oxPAPC (oxidized 1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine), in caspase-11-
mediated non-canonical NLRP3 inflammasome activation11. To test whether Alu RNA 
promotes accumulation of this type of endogenous ligand, we extracted lipids from Alu 
RNA-treated human RPE cells and used liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to 
quantify the following products of 1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonoyl-3-phosphatidylcholine 
(PAPC): 1-palmitoyl-2-glutaryl-3-phosphatidylcholine (PGPC), 1-palmitoyl-2-(5-
oxovaleryl)-3-phosphatidylcholine (POVPC), and 1-palmitoyl-2-hydroxy-3-
phosphatidylcholine (LysoPC) (Supplementary Fig. 4a-c). Compared to control cells, Alu 
RNA-treated human RPE cells exhibited a two-fold increase in oxPAPC- PGPC and LysoPC 
levels (Supplementary Fig. 4d), concomitantly with a trend towards a reduction in precursor 
PAPC levels (Supplementary Fig. 4d). These results suggest an indirect mechanism of Alu-
driven caspase-11 engagement, possibly via oxidized phospholipid-derived damage-
associated molecular patterns (DAMPs).
Gasdermin D is required for Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration and inflammasome 
activation
Caspase-11-and caspase-1-dependent pyroptotic cell death can be executed by a pore-
forming protein, gasdermin D (encoded by Gsdmd)18–20. We found that Gsdmd−/− mice 
were resistant to Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig. 5a, 
b). Consistent with the role of gasdermin D in non-canonical inflammasome activation by 
intracellular LPS19, Alu RNA-induced caspase-1 activation and IL-18 secretion were 
reduced in Gsdmd−/− mouse RPE cells (Fig. 2b, c). However, caspase-11 activation in 
Gsdmd−/− mice was not impaired (Fig. 2d), suggesting that loss of caspase-1 activation in 
Gsdmd−/− mouse RPE cells is not due to an indirect effect of gasdermin D on caspase-11, 
and that, mechanistically, caspase-11 lies upstream of gasdermin D.
Execution of pyroptosis by gasdermin D requires its cleavage into a pore-forming p30 
fragment21. Interestingly, although gasdermin D was required for Alu RNA-induced RPE 
degeneration and IL-18 secretion, we did not observe its cleavage into a p30 fragment in Alu 
RNA-treated RPE cells in cell culture or in RPE cells in vivo (Fig. 2e); however, as 
reported19 previously19, intracellular LPS induced p30 cleavage in mouse bone marrow 
derived macrophages (BMDMs) (Fig. 2e).
Next, we directly tested whether gasdermin D p30 cleavage is dispensable for the toxicity of 
Alu RNA by reconstituting Gsdmd−/− mice with WT gasdermin D (pGSDMD-WT) or 
mutant gasdermin D (pGSDMD-D276A); pGSDMD-D276A is unable to undergo cleavage 
into the pyroptotic p30 fragment19. Notably, expression of either WT or mutant gasdermin D 
in Gsdmd−/− mice restored susceptibility to Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration (Fig. 2f), 
suggesting a non-pyroptotic function for gasdermin D in this system.
Previously we demonstrated that Alu RNA induces activation of caspase-3 (refs. 4,22), as 
well as activation of caspase-8, Fas, and FasL22, and that this well-characterized pathway of 
apoptotic induction is critical for the RPE toxicity of Alu RNA. In addition, we and others 
have provided molecular evidence consistent with apoptosis in the RPE in human eyes with 
geographic atrophy4,23. To further clarify the role of apoptosis in Alu RNA-induced cell 
Kerur et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 death, we performed live-cell imaging of annexin-V and propidium iodide (PI) staining in 
primary human RPE cells. Cells treated with Alu RNA developed plasma membrane blebs 
and displayed an annexin-V+ PI− staining pattern, findings that are consistent with early 
apoptosis. After several hours of annexin-V positivity, cells frequently swelled and became 
PI–positive, consistent with late apoptosis or secondary necrosis24 (Supplementary Fig. 6a, 
b). In vivo studies recapitulated these cell culture findings: RPE flat mounts from Alu RNA-
exposed WT mice displayed predominantly annexin-V+ PI− cell death (Supplementary Fig. 
7a). Alu RNA treatment of RPE cells induced cleavage of caspase-3 and poly(ADP-ribose) 
polymerase 1 (PARP-1) (Supplementary Fig. 7b), further supporting induction of an 
apoptotic cell death pathway. These findings, coupled with our earlier demonstration that 
neither necrostatin-1, an inhibitor of primary necrosis, nor glycine, an inhibitor of 
pyroptosis25, blocks lu RNA-induced RPE degeneration5,22, suggest that Alu RNA promotes 
cell death primarily via apoptosis rather than pyroptosis or necrosis in RPE cells.
Next, we explored the roles of IL-18 and gasdermin D in Alu RNA-induced cell death. The 
resistance of Gsdmd−/− mice to Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration was overcome by 
recombinant mature IL-18 or subretinal injection of a plasmid expressing mature IL-18, 
suggesting that this resistance is due to loss of IL-18 secretion (Fig. 2g). Supportive of this 
concept, Alu RNA failed to induce secretion of IL-18 in Gsdmd−/− mouse RPE cells, and 
this effect was rescued by reconstitution of the cells with either pGSDMD-WT or the p30 
cleavage-incompetent pGSDMD-D276A (Supplementary Fig. 5c). Additionally, whereas 
annexin-V+ cells were not visible in RPE flat mounts of Alu RNA-treated Gsdmd−/− mice, 
administration of recombinant mature IL-18 led to the appearance of numerous annexin-V+ 
PI− cells (Supplementary Fig. 8). Taken together with our previous demonstration that IL-18 
neutralization or IL-18 receptor deficiency in mice blocks Alu RNA toxicity in vivo5, these 
findings suggest that gasdermin D is required for Alu RNA-induced inflammasome 
activation, and for RPE toxicity driven via IL-18-dependent apoptosis.
Gasdermin D mRNA abundance was elevated in the RPE of human eyes with geographic 
atrophy, as compared to eyes from unaffected age-matched controls (Fig. 2h). In contrast, we 
observed similar levels of MIP-1α, IL-8, and IL-6 mRNA in geographic atrophy and normal 
specimens (Supplementary Fig. 5d), suggesting that global elevation of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines does not occur in GA, but rather a more specific increase in the expression of 
inflammasome pathway genes. We also observed increased gasdermin D protein expression 
in the RPE of human eyes with geographic atrophy, as compared to eyes from unaffected 
age-matched controls (Fig. 2i).
Alu RNA-induced non-canonical inflammasome activation is driven by Type I interferon 
(IFN) signaling
To interrogate the upstream regulation of caspase-4, we focused on interferon signaling, 
which is involved in activation of the caspase-11 driven non-canonical inflammasome10. Alu 
RNA did not induce RPE degeneration or caspase-11 activation in Ifnar1−/− mice or 
Ifnar1−/− mouse RPE cells (Fig. 3a, b), which are deficient in the type I interferon-α/β 
receptor (IFNAR). Treatment with recombinant interferon-β increased caspase-4 abundance 
in human RPE cells (Fig. 3c). Alu RNA induced secretion of interferon-β (Fig. 3d) and 
Kerur et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 phosphorylation of IRF3 (Supplementary Fig. 9a), a transcription factor that induces 
production of interferon-β. Alu RNA also induced phosphorylation of STAT2 (Fig. 3e and 
Supplementary Fig. 9a, b), a signaling molecule activated by type-I interferons downstream 
of IFNAR. Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration was blocked by administration of an IFN-β 
neutralizing antibody (Fig. 3f). Moreover, Alu RNA did not induce RPE degeneration in 
Irf3−/− or Stat2−/− mice (Fig. 3g, and Supplementary Fig. 9c, d), and induction of caspase-11 
activation by Alu RNA was reduced in Stat2−/− mouse RPE cells (Supplementary Fig. 9e). 
Human eyes with geographic atrophy displayed pronounced IFN-β expression in the RPE, 
as compared to eyes from unaffected age-matched controls (Fig. 3h, i). Taken together, these 
data suggest that Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration is dependent on regulation of the non-
canonical inflammasome by type I interferon signaling.
cGAS-driven IFN signaling licenses non-canonical NLRP3 inflammasome
We sought to identify the upstream activator of IRF3-driven interferon signaling induced by 
Alu RNA. We previously showed that Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration is independent 
of several IRF3-activating signaling molecules, including various RNA sensors: TLR3, 
TLR4, TLR9, RIG-I, MDA5, MAVS, and TRIF5. Cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS, 
encoded by Mb21d1) has emerged as an innate immune sensor that can activate type I 
interferon signaling26. Additionally, a role for cGAS in broadly inhibiting several RNA 
viruses has also been reported27.
We found that Alu RNA upregulated cGAS mRNA and protein in human RPE cells 
(Supplementary Fig. 10a, b). In contrast to WT mouse RPE cells, Alu RNA did not induce 
interferon-β (Fig. 4a), activate caspase-1 (Fig. 4b and Supplementary Fig. 10c) or 
caspase-11 (Fig. 4c), or induce IL-18 secretion (Fig. 4d) in Mb21d1−/− mouse RPE cells. In 
contrast, inflammasome activation by MSU crystals was unimpaired in Mb21d1−/− mouse 
RPE cells (Supplementary Fig. 10d). In human RPE cells, DICER1 knockdown-induced 
induction of interferon-β, STAT2 phosphorylation, and activation of caspase-4 and 
caspase-1, were all inhibited by knockdown of cGAS (Fig. 4e, f and Supplementary Fig. 
10e, f). Corroborating these data, Alu RNA did not induce RPE degeneration in Mb21d1−/− 
mice (Fig. 4g and Supplementary Fig. 10g, h). Additionally, reconstitution of mouse cGAS 
restored IFN-β induction in Mb21d1−/− mouse RPE cells and RPE degeneration in 
Mb21d1−/− mice (Fig. 4h, Supplementary Fig. 10i, and Supplementary Fig. 11a). Moreover, 
the resistance of Mb21d1−/− mice to Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration was overcome by 
recombinant IFN-β administration or IFN-β expression via subretinal plasmid transfection 
(Fig. 4i), suggesting that this resistance is indeed due to lack of IFN signaling.
cGAS protein was more abundant in the RPE of human eyes with geographic atrophy as 
compared to eyes from unaffected age-matched controls (Fig. 5a). cGAS-driven interferon 
signaling can be transduced by the adaptor protein STING (encoded by Tmem173)26. Alu 
RNA did not induce IRF3 phosphorylation (Supplementary Fig. 11b, c) or activation of 
caspase-1 (Fig. 5b) or caspase-11 (Fig. 5c) in Tmem173−/− mouse RPE cells, and did not 
induce RPE degeneration in Tmem173−/− mice (Fig. 5d), pointing to the involvement of the 
cGAS-STING signaling axis in this system. As in the case of Mb21d1−/− mice, the 
resistance of Tmem173−/− mice to Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration was overcome by 
Kerur et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recombinant IFN-β administration or IFN-β expression via subretinal plasmid transfection 
(Fig. 5e), which again points to the requirement for IFN signaling in Alu RNA-induced RPE 
degeneration.
Alu-driven cGAS activation is triggered by engagement with mtDNA
cGAS is activated by cytosolic DNA but not by poly(I:C), a synthetic double stranded RNA 
analog26. Consistent with the notion that cGAS does not recognize RNA directly, Alu RNA 
did not bind cGAS in an RNA immunoprecipitation assay (data not shown). Previous studies 
have implicated mitochondrial dysfunction in macular degeneration, including mitochondrial 
DNA (mtDNA) damage, reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, and downregulation of 
proteins involved in mitochondrial energy production and trafficking5,28,29. Cytosolic escape 
of mitochondrial components, such as DNA and formyl peptides, have been shown to 
activate innate immune pathways, including cGAS (refs. 30).
Both Alu RNA stimulation and DICER1 knockdown in human RPE cells resulted in an 
increased cytosolic abundance of mtDNA (Fig. 6a and Supplementary Fig. 12a, b). To 
examine whether Alu RNA triggers engagement of mtDNA by cGAS, we performed a 
DNA-protein interaction pull down assay in Mb21d1−/− immortalized mouse embryonic 
fibroblasts reconstituted with HA-tagged cGAS (ref. 30). As these cells express HA-cGAS 
from a genomically integrated DNA sequence, they would be expected to express HA-cGAS 
at levels similar to those of endogenous cGAS expression. We observed enrichment of 
mtDNA in cGAS immunoprecipitates of Alu RNA-stimulated but not mock- or poly(I:C)-
stimulated cells (Fig. 6b and Supplementary Fig. 12c), suggesting that mtDNA in the cytosol 
engages cGAS. As a positive control, transfected plasmid DNA in this assay was also 
enriched in the cGAS immunoprecipitate (Supplementary Fig. 12d). Additionally, subretinal 
delivery of mtDNA induced RPE degeneration in WT but not in Mb21d1−/− mice 
(Supplementary Fig. 12e). Similarly, in cell culture studies, mtDNA-induced Ifnb mRNA 
levels were reduced in Mb21d1−/− compared to WT mouse RPE cells (Supplementary Fig. 
12f). These data indicate that Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration is mediated via release of 
mtDNA into the cytosol, where it interacts with cGAS and induces interferon-β expression.
The mitochondrial permeability transition pore is required for Alu-driven mtDNA release
During conditions of cellular stress, opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition 
pore (mPTP) leads to mitochondrial swelling, rupture, and release of mitochondrial contents 
into the cytosol31. In cells lacking mitochondrial peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase F (PPIF, 
also known as cyclophilin D), a key enzyme involved in mPTP opening, mitochondria are 
resistant to swelling and the permeability transition32. Using the JC-1 and cobalt-calcein 
assays, we found that Alu RNA induced a reduction of mitochondrial membrane potential 
(ΔΨm), indicative of mPTP opening, in wild-type but not Ppif−/− mouse RPE cells, as 
determined using the potential-sensitive fluorochrome JC-1, and by quenching of the calcein 
signal (Supplementary Fig. 12g, h). In addition, cyclosporine A, which inhibits mPTP 
opening via binding to PPIF, blocked Alu RNA-induced mPTP opening in wild-type cells, 
but did not alter ΔΨm or calcein signal intensity in Ppif−/− cells (Supplementary Fig. 12g, 
h). Collectively, these findings suggest that Alu RNA induces Ppif-dependent mPTP opening 
in RPE cells.
Kerur et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Consistent with an effect of Alu RNA on mPTP opening, Alu RNA triggered mtDNA 
release into the cytosol in WT but not Ppif−/− mouse RPE cells (Fig. 6c). Ppif−/− mice were 
protected against Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration (Fig. 6d), confirming the in vivo 
importance of mPTP in Alu toxicity, and Alu RNA-induced activation of caspase-1 and 
caspase-11 were reduced in Ppif−/− mouse RPE cells (Fig. 6e, f). In human RPE cells 
lacking mitochondrial DNA (Rho0 ARPE19 cells), Alu RNA no longer activated caspase-4 
(Fig. 6g) or induced secretion of IL-18 (Fig. 6h) or IFN-β (Fig. 6i). Furthermore, the 
resistance of Ppif−/− mice to Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration was overcome by 
recombinant IFN-β administration or IFN-β expression via subretinal plasmid transfection 
(Fig. 6j). Collectively these data support a model wherein mPTP-driven mitochondrial 
permeability mediates cytosolic release of mtDNA, which in turn promotes non-canonical 
inflammasome activation, via engagement of the cytosolic DNA sensor cGAS and its 
induction of IFN signaling.
Alu driven RPE toxicity does not require macrophages or microglia
We focused on the RPE as the cellular locus of inflammasome activation because we 
previously demonstrated that the various molecular abnormalities associated with 
geographic atrophy—DICER1 deficiency, Alu RNA accumulation, and increased abundance 
of NLRP3, PYCARD, cleaved caspase-1, and phosphorylated IRAK1/4—are localized to 
the RPE layer of human eyes with geographic atrophy4,5. Our current observations that 
elevated levels of cGAS, gasdermin D, cleaved caspase-4, and IFN-β are similarly localized 
to the RPE layer in diseased eyes buttresses the notion that this cell layer is the locus of 
molecular perturbations in the non-canonical inflammasome pathway.
However, recent reports that macrophages and microglia can be observed in the vicinity of 
pathology in human eyes with geographic atrophy33 raise the question of the functional 
involvement of these immune cells. Previously we demonstrated that RPE cell-specific 
ablation of Myd88, the adaptor critical for IL-18-induced RPE cell death in this system, is 
sufficient to prevent Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration in mice5. We also demonstrated 
using mouse chimeras that ablation of Myd88 in circulating bone marrow derived cells does 
not prevent Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration5. Nevertheless, given that macrophages 
and microglia are capable of inflammasome signaling, we studied their involvement more 
directly. We depleted macrophages using clodronate liposomes34 and depleted microglia by 
administering tamoxifen to Cx3cr1CreER ROSA-DTA mice35. Although these manipulations 
successfully depleted macrophages and microglia, respectively, neither type of depletion 
blocked Alu RNA- induced RPE degeneration in vivo, providing direct evidence that these 
two cell populations are dispensable for RPE toxicity in this system (Supplementary Fig. 
13).
Although these two cell types are apparently not required by Alu RNA to elicit RPE 
degeneration in mice, they might have more subtle effects on disease pathology. Consistent 
with this possibility, we found that Alu RNA activated the non-canonical inflammasome in 
mouse BMDMs (Supplementary Fig. 14). Similarly to RPE cells, the ability of Alu RNA to 
induce caspase-1 activation was impaired in Casp11−/−, Mb21d1−/−, and Gsdmd−/− 
BMDMs, as compared to WT BMDMs (Supplementary Fig. 14). Collectively these findings 
Kerur et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 suggest that cGAS-driven licensing of the non-canonical inflammasome by Alu RNA is not 
restricted to RPE cells.
DISCUSSION
Our data identify an unexpected role for the DNA sensor cGAS, the non-canonical caspase-4 
inflammasome, and gasdermin D in mediating Alu RNA-induced RPE cell death, both in 
mice in vivo and in human cell culture. Coupled with observations that cGAS, interferon-β, 
caspase-4, and gasdermin D are at increased abundance in the RPE of human eyes with 
geographic atrophy as compared to control unaffected eyes, our findings point to the 
involvement of these proteins in the pathogenesis of this form of age-related macular 
degeneration.
cGAS was originally recognized as a sensor of exogenous and endogenous cytosolic DNA 
that mediates IRF3-driven interferon signaling, and previous studies demonstrated that the 
enzymatic activity of cGAS could not be activated by an RNA stimulus26. Nonetheless, 
cGAS has been reported to be critical for the antiviral response to multiple RNA viruses27; 
although the mechanistic underpinnings of this effect are not fully understood. In this 
context, our work provides a new view of how which endogenous RNAs can activate cGAS, 
and raise the possibility that cGAS-driven antiviral immunity involves Alu RNA, whose 
levels can be stimulated by viral infections36, leading to mitochondrial dysfunction.
Mitochondria have been increasingly implicated as gatekeepers of cell fate, with decisive 
roles in diverse cellular responses including apoptosis, autophagy, and innate immunity37. 
Mitochondria can facilitate the innate immune response to infection and injury via release of 
mitochondrial components that are recognized as DAMPs by the cell’s innate immune 
components. Of note, mtDNA can activate multiple arms of innate immunity, including the 
NLRP3 inflammasome, TLR9, and cGAS/STING-driven IFN signaling38,39. In particular, 
mtDNA can activate the NLRP3 inflammasome by directly interacting with NLRP3 (ref. 40) 
or by amplifying the response to an initial trigger, such as ATP or ROS41; and mtDNA can 
activate TLR9 on neutrophils, triggering systemic lung and liver inflammation42. In addition 
to engaging TLR9 and NLRP3 signaling, mtDNA has also recently been reported to be 
involved in the activation of cGAS signaling via cytosolic escape of mtDNA as a 
consequence of mitochondrial stress30. We previously demonstrated that TLR9 signaling is 
dispensable for Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration5, and that NLRP3 inflammasome 
priming is unaffected in mouse RPE cells lacking TLR9 (ref. 17). Instead, our findings show 
that Alu RNA-driven cytosolic mtDNA release leads to activation of both inflammasome 
and cGAS signaling pathways, highlighting the role of mitochondria as a signaling platform 
that integrates various cellular stress cues into an innate immune signaling response in 
autoimmune and chronic inflammatory diseases.
In addition to its role in responding to infections, cGAS has been implicated in mouse 
models of autoimmune diseases and mouse tumor models. Our findings expand the 
functional repertoire of this innate immune sensor to chronic degenerative diseases. 
Caspase-4/11-mediated activation of the non-canonical NLRP3 inflammasome has been 
implicated in gram-negative bacterial infection, sepsis, and antimicrobial defense at the 
Kerur et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mucosal surface10,12. To our knowledge, our report is the first example of caspase-4-driven 
non-canonical inflammasome activation in a non-infectious human disease. The involvement 
of caspase-4 and cGAS in other conditions such as systemic lupus erythematosus and 
diabetes mellitus, wherein Alu RNA accumulation has been observed43,44, bears future 
investigation. Activation of caspase-4 has been observed in conditions of endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) stress45. Given that several human diseases including Alzheimer’s disease 
and obesity driven-type 2 diabetes, both of which are driven by a hyperactive 
inflammasome, are associated with ER stress46,47, it would also be worth exploring whether 
DICER1 deficiency and/or Alu RNA-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and cGAS- and 
caspase-4 dependent-inflammasome activation are linked to ER stress.
Gasdermin D has not, to our knowledge, been shown previously to be involved in a non-
infectious human disease. Mechanistically, we found that gasdermin D lies downstream of 
caspase-11 activation and is required for Alu toxicity. The role of gasdermin D in this 
system appears not to be induction of pyroptosis, as it is in response to exogenous triggers 
such as intracellular LPS. Instead, gasdermin D supports Alu RNA-induced RPE cell 
apoptosis by promoting IL-18 secretion; notably, we did not observe cleavage of gasdermin 
into its p30 fragment, a cleavage which is required for its pyroptotic effect. Additional 
studies are required to dissect the mechanisms that disengage the pore-forming function of 
gasdermin D from the inflammasome-activating function, i.e., caspase-1 activation and 
IL-18 secretion. The effects of non-canonical inflammasome-dependent gasdermin D 
activation might be dictated by the activating trigger (e.g. exogenous versus host) or the cell 
type. For instance, the only other endogenous molecule known to activate caspase-11, 
oxPAPC, also does not induce pyroptosis, but instead triggers IL-1β release from dendritic 
cells11.
The mechanisms underlying regulation of the NLRP3 inflammasome by caspase-11/4 have 
been elusive. Previously we demonstrated that Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration and 
NLRP3 inflammasome activation depend on NF-κB and P2X7 (refs. 16,17). In our current 
work, we found that Alu RNA-induced caspase-11 activation was subdued in P2rx7−/− 
mouse RPE cells, suggesting that P2X7 is required for both caspase-1 and caspase-11 
activation.48 Taken together, our observations suggest that Alu RNA-driven NLRP3 
inflammasome activation requires both caspase-11/4 and P2X7 We also observed that Alu 
RNA induces oxPAPC synthesis, suggesting that Alu RNA might recruit other DAMPs to 
activate the non-canonical inflammasome and cause RPE cell toxicity. Earlier reports have 
implicated oxidized phospholipids in the pathophysiology of age-related macular 
degeneration49,50; future studies to unravel the underlying molecular mechanisms should be 
performed.
In recent years, numerous groups employing a variety of cell culture systems, animal 
models, and human donor eyes have reported an important role for the inflammasome in 
AMD5–8,51–54. Collectively these studies suggest that NLRP3 pathway is an important 
responder to a panoply of AMD-related molecular stressors and toxins in RPE cells, and 
there is great interest in inflammasome inhibition as a therapeutic for AMD16. Our 
identification of cGAS, interferon-β, caspase-4, and gasdermin D as critical mediators in 
inflammasome-driven RPE degeneration expands the array of therapeutic targets for AMD.
Kerur et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Although there is consensus that NLRP3 inflammasome activation is detrimental to RPE cell 
health and survival6–8, akin to the effects of NLRP3 inflammasome activation in other cell 
types55,56, there is controversy about the role of this pathway in neovascular AMD. It has 
been reported that IL-18, a cytokine produced by NLRP3 inflammasome activation, inhibits 
angiogenesis and that IL-18 neutralization augments angiogenesis in a laser injury model of 
choroidal neovascularization54. However, we and others were unable to replicate this anti-
angiogenic effect of IL-18, and it was also demonstrated that the promotion of angiogenesis 
by an IL-18 antibody is due to an excipient in its preparation57. These conflicting data in 
neovascular AMD models do not, however, bear on the conclusion from our current data and 
work by others that inflammasome activation promotes RPE degeneration, a concept that 
provides a mechanistic rationale for testing inflammasome inhibition in geographic 
atrophy57,4,58,59,3,60
In summary, this study has uncovered a contribution of endogenous retroelement transcripts 
to disease via its induction of mitochondrial dysfunction and cGAS signaling, which drives 
interferon signaling and gasdermin D and NLRP3 inflammasome activation (Supplementary 
Fig. 15). Targeting of this pathway provides a new potential therapeutic approach for 
preserving RPE health in age-related macular degeneration and for treatment of a host of 
other inflammasome-driven diseases.
Methods
Mice
All animal experiments were approved by University of Kentucky’s or University of 
Virginia’s institutional review committees and were performed in accordance with the 
Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology Statement for the Use of Animals in 
Ophthalmic and Visual Research. Both male and female mice between 6–10 weeks of age 
were used in the study. Wild-type C57BL/6J, Ppif−/−, P2rx7−/− and Stat2−/− mice were 
purchased from The Jackson Laboratory. Gsdmd−/−, Pycard−/−, Casp11−/−, Casp1−/− 
Casp11129mt/129mt and Casp1−/− Casp11129mt/129mt Casp11Tg mice, described 
elsewhere12,19,61,62, were a generous gift from V.M Dixit (Genentech). Caspase-11 deficient 
mouse transgenically expressing human caspase-4 (Casp11−/− hCasp4Tg) were described 
earlier15. Wild type 129S6 mice (that carry an inactivating passenger mutation in 
caspase-11) were purchased from Taconic Biosciences. Ifnar1−/− mice were described 
earlier63 and were a generous gift from M. Aguet. Irf3−/− mice were a generous gift from T. 
Taniguchi via M. David64. Mb21d1−/− mice were generated by K.A. Fitzgerald (University 
of Massachusetts Medical School) on a C57BL/6 background using cryopreserved embryos 
obtained from the European Conditional Mouse Mutagenesis Program (EUCOMM)65. 
Tmem173−/− mice were described earlier66. For all procedures, anesthesia was achieved by 
intraperitoneal injection of 100 mg/kg ketamine hydrochloride (Ft. Dodge Animal Health) 
and 10 mg/kg xylazine (Phoenix Scientific), and pupils were dilated with topical 1% 
tropicamide and 2.5% phenylephrine (Alcon Laboratories).
Kerur et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fundus Photography
A TRC-50 IX camera (Topcon) linked to a digital imaging system (Sony) was used for 
fundus photographs of dilated mouse eyes.
Subretinal Injection
Subretinal injections (1 μl) in mice were performed using a Pico-Injector (PLI-100, Harvard 
Apparatus) or using a 35-gauge needle (Ito Co. Fuji, Japan). In vivo transfection of plasmids 
expressing Alu sequences (pAlu)67,68, empty control vector (pNull), Flag-cGAS (pFlag-
cGAS), Flag-GFP, mouse mature IL-18 (pIL-18ss)57,69, wildtype mouse gasdermin D 
(pGSDMD-WT), the p30 cleavage incompetent mutant mouse gasdermin D ((pGSMDD-
D276A)19, IFN-β (Origene Cat# MR226101), or mtDNA (10 ng) was achieved using 10% 
Neuroporter (Genlantis) as previously described4,5. In vitro transcribed Alu RNA (0.15–0.3 
μg/μl), IFN-β neutralizing antibody (10 ng; Abcam Cat# ab24324), control isotype IgG, 
recombinant IL-18 (100 ng/μl, MBL Cat#B002-5), or IFN-β (500 mUnit/μl, PBL 
Cat#12410-1) were administered via subretinal injection4,5. Similarly, to knock down 
Dicer1, 1 μl of cholesterol conjugated siRNA (1 μg/μl) targeting mouse Dicer1 or scrambled 
control siRNAs were injected (Dicer1 siRNA sense- CUCUGUGAGAGUUGUCCdTdT; 
Control siRNA sense- UAAGGCUAUGAAGAGAUdTdT). The eye used for active versus 
control injection was chosen randomly.
Assessment of RPE Degeneration
Alu-mediated RPE degeneration was induced by exposing mice to Alu RNA, as previously 
described4,5,16,17,22. Seven days later, RPE health was assessed by fundus photography and 
immunofluorescence staining of zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) on RPE flat mounts (whole 
mount of posterior eye cup containing RPE and choroid layers). Mouse RPE and choroid flat 
mounts were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde or 100% methanol, stained with rabbit 
polyclonal antibodies against mouse ZO-1 (1:100, Invitrogen) and visualized with 
Alexa-594 (Invitrogen). All images were obtained by microscopy (model SP-5, Leica; or 
Axio Observer Z1, Zeiss). Imaging was performed by an operator masked to the group 
assignments.
Quantification of RPE Degeneration
Binary Assignment—Healthy RPE cells form a polygonal tessellation with a principally 
hexagonal “honeycomb” formation. RPE degeneration was assessed as a disruption of this 
uniformity of this polygonal sheet. Thus, RPE health was assessed as the presence or 
absence of morphological disruption in RPE flat mounts by two independent raters who 
were masked to the group assignments. Both raters deemed 100% of images as gradeable. 
Inter-rater reliability was measured by agreement on assignments, Pearson coefficient of 
determination, and Fleiss κ. Fisher’s exact test was used to determine statistical significance 
between the fraction of healthy RPE sheets across groups.
Cellular Morphometry—Quantification of cellular morphometry for hexagonally packed 
cells was performed in semi-automated fashion by three masked graders by adapting our 
previous analysis of corneal endothelial cell density70. As RPE cells when viewed en face 
Kerur et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 typically exhibit a principally hexagonal morphology similar to the corneal endothelium, 
they readily lend themselves to a similar analysis strategy. We obtained measures of cell 
size, polymegethism (coefficient of variation of cell size), and cell density. For this analysis, 
microscopy images of the RPE were captured and transmitted in deidentified fashion to the 
Doheny Image Reading & Research Lab (DIRRL). Images in which no cell borders could be 
seen were excluded from further analysis (1.8%). All images were rescaled to 304 × 446 
pixels to permit importation into the Konan CellCheck software (Ver. 4.0.1), a commercial 
U.S. FDA-cleared software that has been used for registration clinical trials. RPE cell 
metrics were generated by three certified reading center graders in an independent, masked 
fashion. Inter-grader agreement was assessed for all three metrics by computing the multiple 
adjusted coefficient of determination. The previously published center method was utilized 
which entails the user selecting the center of each identifiable cell in the image71–74. Once 
the cell centers were defined, the software automatically generated the mean cell area, cell 
density, and polymegethism values. By default, the Konan software assumes a scaling factor 
of 124 pixels per 100 μm. Based on the dimensions of the original RPE image (1,024 × 
1,024 pixels, 0.21 μm/pixel), the Konan provided values were converted to the actual 
physical values in μm.
RPE degeneration was quantified based on zonula occludens (ZO)-1-stained flat mount 
images using two strategies:
1.
Binary assignment (healthy versus unhealthy)16,17,22 by two masked raters (inter-
rater agreement = 98.6%; Pearson r2 = 0.95, P < 0.0001; Fleiss κ = 0.97, P < 
0.0001).
2.
Semi-automated cellular morphometry analysis by three masked raters adapting 
our prior analysis of the planar architecture of the corneal endothelium70, which 
resembles the RPE in its polygonal tessellation. Inter-rater agreement was high 
for all three metrics (multiple adjusted r2 = 0.99 (cell size), 0.72 (polymegethism, 
i.e., coefficient of variation of cell size), 0.99 (cell density)).
For eyes treated with Alu RNA, pAlu, and their respective controls, inter-rater agreement on 
binary assignment was 100%, and the fraction of eyes classified as healthy was 100% for 
both control groups versus 0% for Alu RNA or pAlu treatments (P < 0.0001, for both 
comparisons, Fisher exact test). All three morphometric features were significantly different 
between control treatments versus Alu RNA or pAlu treatments (P < 0.0001, t test; 
Supplementary Fig. 3). Given the similarity among all three features in differentiating 
healthy versus degenerated RPE cells, for all remaining groups, we quantified 
polymegethism, a prominent geometric feature of RPE cells in human geographic 
atrophy4,75–77.
Human Tissue
All studies on human tissue followed the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki. The 
study of deidentified tissue from deceased individuals obtained from various eye banks in 
the United States was exempted from IRB review by the University of Virginia Institutional 
Review Board for Health Sciences Research in accordance with U.S. Health & Human 
Services human subjects regulations. Donor eyes from patients with geographic atrophy, an 
Kerur et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 advanced form of AMD or age-matched patients without AMD were obtained from various 
eye banks. These diagnoses were confirmed by dilated ophthalmic examination prior to 
acquisition of the tissues or eyes or upon examination of the eye globes post mortem. 
Enucleated donor eyes isolated within six hours post mortem were immediately preserved in 
RNALater (ThermoFisher). The neural retina was removed and tissue comprising both 
macular RPE and choroidal tissue were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. For eyes with GA, 
RPE and choroidal tissue comprising both atrophic and marginal areas were collected.
Immunohistochemistry
Human eyes fixed in 2–4% paraformaldehyde were prepared for immunohistochemistry and 
stained as described earlier4,5. Briefly, immunohistochemical staining of fixed human eyes 
was performed with rabbit antibody against cGAS (0.1 μg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# 
HPA031700) or interferon β (0.2 μg/ml, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat# sc-20107) and 
mouse antibody against gasdermin D (1.5 μg/ml, Abcam, Cat# ab57785). Rabbit or mouse 
IgG controls were used to ascertain the specificity of the staining. Biotin-conjugated 
secondary antibodies, followed by incubation with VECTASTAIN® ABC reagent and 
development using Vector Blue (Vector Laboratories), were utilized to detect the bound 
primary antibody. Slides were washed in PBS, and then mounted in Vectamount (Vector 
Laboratories). All images were obtained using a Zeiss Axio Observer Z1 microscope.
Real-time PCR
Total RNA purified from cell using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s 
recommendations was DNase treated and reverse transcribed using the QuantiTect® Reverse 
Transcription kit (QIAGEN). The RT products (cDNA) were amplified by real-time 
quantitative PCR (Applied Biosystems 7900 HT Fast Real-Time PCR system) with Power 
SYBR green Master Mix. Relative gene expression was determined by the 2−ΔΔCt method 
using 18S rRNA or GAPDH as an internal control. The primers used were as follows: 
human IFNB1 (forward 5′-GCGACACTGTTCGTGTTGTC-3′ and reverse 5′-
GCCTCCCATTCAATTGCCAC-3′), human CASP4 (forward 5′-
TCTGAGGCTCTTTCCAACGC-3′ and reverse 5′-TTTGCCCAGGGATTCCAACA-3′), 
human DICER (forward 5′ AGAGGGAAAGAAAGACAACTGCT-3′ and reverse 5′-
CATGCTGAGGGGTTGCAAAG-3′), human cGAS (forward 5′-
ACGTGCTGTGAAAACAAAGAAG-3′ and reverse 5′-
GTCCCACTGACTGTCTTGAGG-3′), human 18s rRNA (forward 5′-
CGCAGCTAGGAATAATGGAATAGG-3′and reverse 5′-
GCCTCAGTTCCGAAAACCAA-3′), human mitochondrial DNA (forward 5′-
AGCCCACTGTAAAGCTAA-3′ and reverse 5′-TGGGTGATGAGGAATAGTGTA-3′), 
human GAPDH (forward 5′-TGGAAATCCCATCACCATCT-3′ and reverse 
5′GTCTTCTGGGTGGCAGTGAT-3′), human GSDMD (forward 5′-
GCTCCATGAGAGGCACCTG-3′ and reverse 5′-TTCTGTGTCTGCAGCACCTC-3′) 
mouse Ifnb1 (forward 5′-CGTGGGAGATGTCCTCAACT-3′ and reverse 5′-
CCTGAAGATCTCTGCTCGGAC-3′), mouse Gapdh (forward 5′-
CGACTTCAACAGCAACTCCCACTCTTCC-3′ and reverse: 5′- 
TGGGTGGTCCAGGGTTTCTTACTCCTT-3′), mouse 18s rRNA (forward 5′- 
TTCGTATTGCGCCGCTAGA-3′ and reverse 5′- CTTTCGCTCTGGTCCGTCTT-3′), 
Kerur et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mouse mitochondrial DNA (forward 5′-TTCGGAGCCTGAGCGGGAAT-3′ and reverse 
5′-ATGCCTGCGGCTAGCACTGG-3′). human MIP1α (forward 5′-
CATCACTTGCTGCTGACACG-3′ and reverse 5′-TGTGGAATCTGCCGGGAG-3′), 
human IL6 (forward 5′-GTAGCCGCCCCACACAGA-3′ and reverse 5′-
CATGTCTCCTTTCTCAGGGCTG-3′), human IL8 (forward 5′-
CACCGGAAGGAACCATCTCA-3′ and reverse 5′-AGAGCCACGGCCAGCTT-3′).
Mitochondrial DNA Preparation
Total DNA extracted from ARPE19 cells was used to PCR-amplify mtDNA segments as 
described earlier78. The purified mtDNA PCR products were subretinally delivered using 
10% Neuroporter (Genlantis) as described above.
Western Blotting
Cell and tissue lysates prepared in RIPA buffer where homogenized by sonication. Protein 
concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific Inc.). Equal quantities of protein (10–50 μg) prepared in Laemmli buffer were 
resolved by SDS-PAGE on Novex® Tris-Glycine Gels (Invitrogen) and transferred onto 
Immobilon-FL PVDF membranes (Millipore). The transferred membranes were blocked in 
Odyssey® Blocking Buffer (PBS) or 5% nonfat dry skim milk for 1 h at RT and then 
incubated with primary antibody at 4 °C overnight. The immunoreactive bands were 
visualized using species specific secondary antibodies conjugated with IRDye® or HRP. 
Blot images were either captured using an Odyssey® imaging system or autoradiography 
film. The antibodies used were as follows; rabbit polyclonal anti-human and mouse 
caspase-1 antibodies (1:500, Biovision Cat# 3019-100; 1:1000, Invitrogen Cat#AHZ0082; 
1:200 Santa Cruz Biotechnology Cat#sc-514), rabbit anti-caspase-1 mAb (1:1000, Abcam 
Cat# ab108362), anti-human caspase-4 (1:200, Santa Cruz Cat#1229), anti-mouse 
caspase-11 (1:200, Novus Rat mAb 17D9 Cat#NB120-10454, or 1: 1000 Abcam Rabbit 
mAb Cat# ab180673 1:500), anti-STAT2 (1:500, Cell Signaling, Cat #72604), anti-pSTAT2 
(1:250, Millipore Cat# 07-224), anti-human cGAS (1:1000, Cell Signaling Cat# 15102), 
anti-VDAC-1 (1:1000, Cell Signaling Cat# #4661), anti-mouse IRF3 (1:500, Novus 
Biologicals, Cat#NBP1-78769), anti-phospho-IRF3 (1:500, Cell Signaling Cat# 4947S, Cat# 
29047), anti-HA-tag (1:1000; Cell Signaling Cat# 2367), anti-α-tubulin mouse mAb 
(1:50000, Sigma-Aldrich), anti-β-actin mouse mAb (1:50000, Sigma-Aldrich), anti-vinculin 
(1:2000, Sigma-Aldrich), anti-cleaved caspase-3 (1:500, Cell Signaling Cat#9661), anti-
PARP (1:1000, Cell Signaling Cat#9542), anti-human GSDMD gasdermin D (1:500, Abcam 
Cat#ab57785) and anti-mouse gasdermin D mAb (1 μg/mL; a generous gift from V.M Dixit 
(Genentech). Immunoblotting for activated Caspase 1 in the supernatant was performed as 
described earlier19. Briefly, supernatants were collected and were briefly spun down to 
remove floating cells. Proteins from the cell-free supernatant were precipitated by adding 
sodium deoxycholate (0.15% final) followed by adding TCA (7.2% final) and incubating on 
ice for 30 min to overnight. Samples were spun down at 13000g for 30 mins and pellets 
were washed 2 times with ice-cold acetone. Precipitated proteins solubilized in 4X LDS 
Buffer with 2-mercaptoethanol were used for immunoblotting.
Kerur et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cell Culture
Primary mouse and human RPE cells were isolated as previously described79. All cells were 
maintained at 37 °C and 5% CO2 environment. Mouse RPE cells were cultured in Dulbecco 
Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 20% FBS and penicillin/streptomycin 
antibiotics at standard concentrations; primary human RPE cells were maintained in DMEM 
supplemented with 10% FBS and antibiotics. The human RPE cell line ARPE19 and 
ARPE19 cells lacking mitochondrial DNA (Rho0 ARPE19) were cultured as described 
earlier80. Rho0 ARPE19 cells were maintained at 37 °C in 24 mM Na2HCO3, 10% FBS, 50 
μg/ml uridine, 1 mM sodium pyruvate in DMEM-F12 (Gibco, Cat#11320-033) containing 
pen/strep, Fungizone, and gentamicin. ARPE19 cells were maintained in DMEM-F12 
containing pen/strep, Fungizone, and gentamicin. Bone marrow derived macrophages 
(BMDM) were cultured in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum and 20% L929 
supernatants. Mb21d1−/− and HA-cGAS reconstituted Mb21d1−/− mouse embryonic 
fibroblasts were cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS and antibiotics30.
Synthesis of in vitro transcribed Alu RNA
T7 promoter containing Alu expression plasmid was linearized and used for generating in 
vitro transcribed Alu RNA using AmpliScribe T7-Flash Transcription Kit (Epicenter) 
following the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting Alu RNA was DNase treated and 
purified using MEGAclear (Ambion), and its integrity was monitored by gel 
electrophoresis4,5.
Transfection
Alu expression plasmid (pAlu), empty vector control (pNull) in vitro transcribed Alu RNA 
were transfected into human and mouse RPE cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) 
following the manufacturer’s instructions. mtDNA prepared as described below was 
transfected into mouse RPE cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) following the 
manufacturer’s instructions.
LPS transfection into BMDM
Approximately 2×106 BMDM cells were cultured overnight at 37 °C in a 60-mm dish. After 
4–6 h of priming with 1 μg/ml Pam3CSK4 (Invivogen, Cat# tlrl-pms), the cells were 
transfected with LPS (5 μg/ml final concentration, Invivogen, Cat# tlrl-3pelps, ultrapure) 
with FugeneHD (Promega, Cat# E2311) using a standard transfection protocol. 16 h post-
transfection, cell lysates were collected and analyzed.
Extraction of mitochondria-free cytosolic fractions
Human and mouse RPE cells were either mock treated or stimulated with Alu RNA. 24 h 
post Alu RNA transfection or 48 h post scrambled or DICER1 AS oligonucleotide 
transfection, the cells were harvested by trypsinization. 2×106 cells were used for collecting 
mitochondria-free cytosolic fractions using the Mitochondrial Isolation kit (Thermo 
Scientific Cat#89874). Briefly, cells were resuspended in 800 μl of Reagent A and were 
placed on ice for 2 min; the suspension was then dounce homogenized (10 strokes) to lyse 
the cells and to release nuclei, and then the suspension was incubated for 5 min on ice after 
Kerur et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 addition of 10 μL Reagent B, with vortexing every minute. To this suspension 800 μl 
Mitochondria Isolation Reagent C was added and the resulting suspension was centrifuged at 
700 g for 10 min at 4 °C to pellet the nuclei. The supernatant containing the cytoplasmic 
fraction was centrifuged at 700 g for 10 min at 4 °C for a total of five times to completely 
remove nuclei or any unlysed cells. The resulting nuclei-free cytoplasmic fraction was 
centrifuged at 13,000g for 15 min at 4 °C to pellet the mitochondria. The resulting 
supernatant was further centrifuged at 13,000g for 15 min at 4 °C for an additional six times 
to remove all the mitochondria. The supernatant was then tested for an absence of 
mitochondria by immunoblotting for the mitochondrial marker protein VDAC and the 
cytosolic marker protein tubulin.
Reconstitution experiment
Mb21d1−/− mouse RPE cells were transfected with 2 μg cGAS expression plasmid26 or 
empty vector in a 60 mm dish at 70–80% confluency. 24 h post transfection, cells were 
plated on 6-well dishes. 24 h post plating, cells were transfected with Alu RNA (50 pmol) or 
were mock transfected using Lipofectamine 2000. 18 h post Alu RNA transfection, cells 
were collected for RNA extraction to examine induction of IFN-β mRNA. For Caspase-11 
reconstitution. Casp11−/− mouse RPE cells were transduced with control or caspase-11 
expressing lentiviral particles. The transduced cells were allowed to rest for three days and 
the cells were then plated in a 60 mm dish at 70–80% confluency. Control or Caspase-11 
reconstituted Casp11−/− cells were mock treated or stimulated with Alu RNA as described 
above and activation of caspase-1 was assessed by western blotting. For the caspase-1 
activity assay, Casp11−/− mouse RPE cells transfected with caspase-11 expression plasmid 
(pCasp11) or empty vector (pNull) were exposed to Alu RNA as described above and 
caspase-1 activity was assessed using the CaspaLux®1-E1D2 kit (OncoImmunin Cat # 
CPL1R1E-5). Quantification of the CaspaLux signal was performed by a blinded operator 
measuring the integrated density of fluorescent micrographs using Image J software (NIH) 
and normalizing to the number of cells.
Lentiviral transduction
Lentivirus particles were produced either by the University of Kentucky Viral Production 
Core facilities or in house. Lentivirus vector plasmids expressing scrambled sequences or 
shRNA sequences targeting human caspase-4 (Sigma Aldrich, #TRCN0000003511) and 
cGAS (Sigma Aldrich# TRCN0000150010) were purchased (MISSION®shRNA, Sigma-
Aldrich) to produce lentiviral particles. Human RPE cells at passage 3 were incubated with 
lentiviral particles at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 5 overnight in regular growth 
media containing polybrene (4 μg/ml). On day 2, cells were washed, incubated in regular 
growth media and allowed to rest for 24 h. Lentivirus transduced cells were then cultured 
under puromycin (5 μg/ml) selection pressure for 5 days. Knock-down of the target proteins 
was determined by immunoblotting.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
Secreted human and mouse interferon-β and IL-18 in the media were detected using ELISA 
kits (mouse IFN-β, R&D Systems Cat# 42400-1; mouse IL-18, R&D Systems Cat# 7625; 
human IFN-β, R&D Systems Cat# 41410; human IL-18, R&D systems Cat# DY318-05) 
Kerur et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 according to the manufacturer′s instructions. Primary mouse cells were cultured as above. 
WT, Gsdmd−/−, Casp11−/−, or Mb21d1−/− mouse RPE cells were seeded at a density of 
250,000 cells/well in a 12-well plate. When confluency reached 60–70%, cells were 
transfected with 20 pmol of in vitro transcribed Alu RNA or mock using Lipofectamine 
2000 reagent (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) following the manufacturer’s protocol. 
Media was collected to detect secreted cytokine content at 8 to 24 h post-transfection. For 
examination of the induction of IL-18 secretion by monosodium urate (MSU) crystals 
(Invivogen Cat# tlrl-msu), mouse RPE cells were primed with LPS (500 ng/ml) for 6 h and 
exposed to MSU (250 μg/ml) for 16 h, and media was collected to detect secreted cytokine.
cGAS-mtDNA interaction Immunoprecipitation assay
Immortalized cGAS−/− mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) reconstituted with HA-tagged 
mouse cGAS (HA-cGAS) were described earlier30. The interaction between mtDNA and 
cGAS was monitored using Express Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Kit (Active Motif, 
ChIP-IT® Express, cat# 53008). Briefly mock, Alu RNA, poly I:C or plasmid DNA 
(pUC19) transfected HA-cGAS reconstituted cGAS−/− MEFs were fixed with 1% 
formaldehyde per the manufacturer’s instructions. The cells were then lysed by sonication in 
the shearing buffer and centrifuged for 10 min at 18,000g in a 4 °C microfuge. The 
supernatant containing the cell lysate was collected and cGAS was immunoprecipitated from 
each sample using anti-HA tag antibody (Abcam, cat# ab9110). DNA in the IP was eluted, 
reverse crosslinked and purified using the Chromatin IP DNA Purification Kit (Active Motif, 
cat# 58002). Purified DNA was analyzed by qPCR using mouse mtDNA specific primer 
pairs. The fold enrichment of mtDNA in HA-cGAS immunoprcipitates in cells exposed to 
Alu RNA compared to mock transfected cells was calculated.
Quantification of PAPC and oxPAPC by LC-MS
Human RPE cells, mock-stimulated or stimulated with Alu RNA, were washed with cold 
PBS and trypsinized at 24 h post-stimulation. The cells were washed with cold PBS and 
2×106 cells were used for lipid extraction by a modified Bligh-Dyer extraction method81. 
Briefly, the cell pellet was manually homogenized and then mixed in a glass tube with 700 
μL HPLC-grade chloroform and 300 μL HPLC-grade Methanol (Sigma) supplemented with 
0.01% butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT from Sigma) and 189 nmol of the internal standard, 
di-nonanoyl-phosphatidylcholine (DNPC from Avanti). 1 mL of HPLC-grade water was 
added and the mixture was vigorously vortexed for 60 sec. Next, the mixture was 
centrifuged (1,000 rpm for 10 min) to separate the fractions and the organic layer (bottom) 
was removed and placed into a fresh glass tube. 1 mL of chloroform was added to the 
aqueous fraction and the extraction was performed once more. The organic layer of the 
second extraction was combined with the first, and then dried down under nitrogen. Upon 
complete evaporation of the organic solvent, the lipids were suspended in 300 μL of Solvent 
A (69% water; 31% methanol; 10 mM ammonium acetate) and stored at −80 °C. The 
determination and quantification of oxidized phosphatidylcholine and 
phosphatidylethanolamine species was performed by liquid chromatography-linked ESI 
mass spectrometry, using an ABI Sciex 4000 QTrap. Separation of the phospholipids was 
achieved by loading samples onto a C8 column (Kinetex 5 μm, 150×4.6mm from 
Phenomenex). Elution of the phospholipids was achieved using a binary gradient with 
Kerur et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Solvent A (69% water; 31% methanol; 10 mM ammonium acetate) and Solvent B (50% 
methanol; 50% isopropanol; 10 mM ammonium acetate) as the mobile phases. Detection for 
phosphatidylcholine (PC) was conducted using multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) in 
positive mode by identification of two transition states for each analyte. Quantification of 
each analyte was performed based on the peak area of the 184 m/z fragment ion for PC.
Determination of mitochondrial permeability transition pore opening
Mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) opening in WT and Ppif−/− mouse RPE 
cells was monitored by the calcein-Co2+ technique82 using the Mitochondrial Permeability 
Transition Pore Assay Kit (Biovision Inc Cat# K239-100). Mitochondrial membrane 
potential was evaluated with the JC-1 fluorochrome-based MITO-ID® Membrane Potential 
Cytotoxicity Kit (Enzo Cat# ENZ-51019-KP002)83. mPTP opening was inhibited by 
performing the above assays using cyclosporine A (10 μM)-containing media. The assay was 
performed in a 96-well microtiter plate according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Live Cell Imaging
2×104 human RPE cells were plated on each well of an 8-well chambered slide (Thermo 
Scientific Cat#155411). 18–24 h after plating, cells were transfected with 11.5 pmol in vitro 
transcribed Alu RNA (using Lipofectamine 2000) in culture medium supplemented with 2.5 
mM CaCl2 and annexin-V 488 (1:200, Invitrogen V13241) and propidium iodide (1:1500, 
Invitrogen Cat#P3566). Immediately following transfection, annexin V, propidium iodide, 
and DIC signals were acquired using a Nikon A1R confocal microscope equipped with an 
automated stage. Images were captured at 3 min intervals for a total duration of 50 h. Cells 
were maintained at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for the duration of the imaging study via a stage top 
incubator.
RPE flat mount annexin V/PI-staining
Mouse RPE/choroid flat mounts prepared in DMEM with 10% FBS were washed with 
binding buffer once and then incubated with Alexa Fluor™ 647 conjugated Annexin V 
(Invitrogen) for 15 min. The annexin V stained mouse RPE/choroid flat mounts were fixed 
with 2% paraformaldehyde for 30 min, stained with propidium iodide (PI) containing RNase 
(Invitrogen) for 30 min and mounted using ProLong™ Gold Antifade Mountant solution 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Microglia depletion
Microglia were depleted by administering tamoxifen to CX3CR1CreER; DTAflox mice which 
express Cre-ER under control of microglia specific CX3CR1 promoter and also contain 
flox-STOP-flox diphtheria toxin subunit α (DTA) gene cassette in the ROSA26 locus 
(DTAflox). Cx3cr1CreER; DTAflox mice were generated by breeding heterozygous 
Cx3cr1CreER mice with DTAflox mice (both mouse strains were generous gifts from Wai T. 
Wong and Lian Zhao, NIH). To deplete microglia, tamoxifen was administered to 
Cx3cr1CreER; DTAflox mice as described earlier35. Briefly, adult 2- to 3-month-old TG mice 
were administered with tamoxifen (TAM) dissolved in corn oil (Sigma-Aldrich; 500 mg/kg 
dose of a 20 mg/ml solution) via oral gavage (Schedule: days −2, 0, 5, 10, and 15). On day 
Kerur et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11, Alu RNA was delivered via subretinal injection. Alu RNA-induced RPE degeneration 
was assessed as described above. Microglial depletion was confirmed by staining retinal flat 
mounts for F4/80. Briefly retinal flat mounts were prepared and fixed in 2% 
paraformaldehyde for 1 h, and stained with RPE conjugated F4/80 (Bio-Rad, Cat# 
MCA497PET) and fluorescein labeled Griffonia Simplicifolia Lectin isolectin B4 (IB4, 
Vector Laboratories, Cat# FL-1201). All images were obtained using Zeiss Axio Observer 
Z1 microscope.
Macrophage depletion
Depletion of macrophages was achieved via administering clodronate liposomes, which 
eliminates macrophages, in wild-type mice34. Briefly, animals received 200 μl clodronate 
liposomes (Liposoma Cat# LIP-01) through the tail vein on days −2 and day 0. Alu RNA or 
vehicle control were subretinally injected immediately after the day 0 tail vein injection.
Statistical Analyses
Real-time qPCR and ELISA data are expressed as means ± standard error of the mean 
(SEM) were analyzed using Student t test. The binary readouts of RPE degeneration (i.e., 
presence or absence of RPE degeneration on fundus and ZO-1-stained flat mount images) 
were analyzed using Fisher’s exact test. Cell morphometry data were assessed using Student 
t test. P values < 0.05 were deemed statistically significant. Sample sizes were selected 
based on power analysis α=5%; 1–β = 80%, such that we could detect a minimum of 50% 
change assuming a sample SD based on Bayesian inference. Outliers were assessed by 
Grubbs’ test. Based on this analysis no outliers were detected and no data were excluded. 
Fewer than 5% of subretinal injection recipient tissues were excluded based on 
predetermined exclusion criteria (hemorrhage and animal death due to anesthesia 
complications, etc.) relating to the technical challenges of this delicate procedure.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Z. Chen, V. Tarallo, and P. Pinton for valuable discussions; H. Virgin for Mb21d1−/− MEFs; G. Shadel 
(Yale University) for immortalized HA-cGAS reconstituted Mb21d1−/− MEFs; and W.T. Wong and L. Zhao (NIH) 
for Cx3cr1CreER ROSA-DTA mice. We thank G. Pattison, E. Ghias, K. Langberg, D. Robertson, E. Doswell, X. 
Zhou, K. Atwood, R. Makin, O. Kirillina, A. Bobrov, E. Dinning, L. Pandya, C. Payne, G. Botzet, N. Bell, R. King, 
L. Xu, L. Toll, and A. Uittenbogaard for their technical assistance, and University of Kentucky Viral Core 
(COBRE) for providing lentivirus vectors. J.A. was supported by NIH grants (DP1GM114862, R01EY018350, 
R01EY018836, R01EY020672, R01EY022238, and R01EY024068), Doris Duke Distinguished Clinical Scientist 
Award, Burroughs Wellcome Fund Clinical Scientist Award in Translational Research, Ellison Medical Foundation 
Senior Scholar in Aging Award, John Templeton Foundation, Dr. E. Vernon Smith and Eloise C. Smith Macular 
Degeneration Endowed Chair, and DuPont Guerry, III, Professorship; N.K. by NIH (K99EY024336, 
R00EY024336) and Beckman Initiative for Macular Research (BIMR); B.J.F by NIH T32HL091812 and 
UL1RR033173; R.Y. by Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology (ARVO)/Alcon Early Career 
Clinician-Scientist Research Award; T.Y. by Fight for Sight postdoctoral award; A.B.C. by the Programme for 
Advanced Medical Education (sponsored by Fundação Calouste Gulbenkian, Fundação Champalimaud, Ministério 
da Saúde and Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia, Portugal); D.R.H. by NIH R01EY001545 and an unrestricted 
departmental grant from Research to Prevent Blindness; J.C.C. by NIH R21AI099346; S.F.by Research Grant of 
Japan Eye Bank Association; S.M.J. by NIH R37AG006168; B.D.G. by American Heart Association and by the 
National Center for Research Resources and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National 
Kerur et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Institutes of Health, through Grant UL1TR000117; V.S. by NIH (T32GM007055; F31DK108553) and N.L. by NIH 
(R01DK096076, P01 HL120840). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily 
represent the official views of the NIH.
References
1. Wong WL, et al. Global prevalence of age-related macular degeneration and disease burden 
projection for 2020 and 2040: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Glob Health. 2014; 
2:e106–116. [PubMed: 25104651] 
2. Ambati J, Ambati BK, Yoo SH, Ianchulev S, Adamis AP. Age-related macular degeneration: 
etiology, pathogenesis, and therapeutic strategies. Surv Ophthalmol. 2003; 48:257–293. [PubMed: 
12745003] 
3. Ambati J, Atkinson JP, Gelfand BD. Immunology of age-related macular degeneration. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2013; 13:438–451. [PubMed: 23702979] 
4. Kaneko H, et al. DICER1 deficit induces Alu RNA toxicity in age-related macular degeneration. 
Nature. 2011; 471:325–330. [PubMed: 21297615] 
5. Tarallo V, et al. DICER1 loss and Alu RNA induce age-related macular degeneration via the NLRP3 
inflammasome and MyD88. Cell. 2012; 149:847–859. [PubMed: 22541070] 
6. Anderson OA, Finkelstein A, Shima DT. A2E induces IL-1ss production in retinal pigment 
epithelial cells via the NLRP3 inflammasome. PloS one. 2013; 8:e67263. [PubMed: 23840644] 
7. Tseng WA, et al. NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation in Retinal Pigment Epithelial Cells by 
Lysosomal Destabilization: Implications for Age-Related Macular Degeneration. Investigative 
ophthalmology & visual science. 2013; 54:110–120. [PubMed: 23221073] 
8. Gelfand BD, et al. Iron Toxicity in the Retina Requires Alu RNA and the NLRP3 Inflammasome. 
Cell Rep. 2015; 11:1686–1693. [PubMed: 26074074] 
9. Kayagaki N, et al. Noncanonical inflammasome activation by intracellular LPS independent of 
TLR4. Science. 2013; 341:1246–1249. [PubMed: 23887873] 
10. Rathinam VA, et al. TRIF licenses caspase-11-dependent NLRP3 inflammasome activation by 
gram-negative bacteria. Cell. 2012; 150:606–619. [PubMed: 22819539] 
11. Zanoni I, et al. An endogenous caspase-11 ligand elicits interleukin-1 release from living dendritic 
cells. Science. 2016; 352:1232–1236. [PubMed: 27103670] 
12. Kayagaki N, et al. Non-canonical inflammasome activation targets caspase-11. Nature. 2011; 
479:117–121. [PubMed: 22002608] 
13. Kleinman ME, et al. Sequence- and target-independent angiogenesis suppression by siRNA via 
TLR3. Nature. 2008; 452:591–597. [PubMed: 18368052] 
14. Kleinman ME, et al. Short-interfering RNAs induce retinal degeneration via TLR3 and IRF3. 
Molecular therapy: the journal of the American Society of Gene Therapy. 2012; 20:101–108. 
[PubMed: 21988875] 
15. Kajiwara Y, et al. A critical role for human caspase-4 in endotoxin sensitivity. J Immunol. 2014; 
193:335–343. [PubMed: 24879791] 
16. Fowler BJ, et al. Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors possess intrinsic anti-inflammatory 
activity. Science. 2014; 346:1000–1003. [PubMed: 25414314] 
17. Kerur N, et al. TLR-independent and P2X7-dependent signaling mediate Alu RNA-induced 
NLRP3 inflammasome activation in geographic atrophy. Investigative ophthalmology & visual 
science. 2013; 54:7395–7401. [PubMed: 24114535] 
18. Shi J, et al. Cleavage of GSDMD by inflammatory caspases determines pyroptotic cell death. 
Nature. 2015; 526:660–665. [PubMed: 26375003] 
19. Kayagaki N, et al. Caspase-11 cleaves gasdermin D for non-canonical inflammasome signalling. 
Nature. 2015; 526:666–671. [PubMed: 26375259] 
20. Liu X, et al. Inflammasome-activated gasdermin D causes pyroptosis by forming membrane pores. 
Nature. 2016; 535:153–158. [PubMed: 27383986] 
21. Aglietti RA, et al. GsdmD p30 elicited by caspase-11 during pyroptosis forms pores in membranes. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016; 113:7858–7863. [PubMed: 27339137] 
Kerur et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 22. Kim Y, et al. DICER1/Alu RNA dysmetabolism induces Caspase-8-mediated cell death in age-
related macular degeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:16082–16087. [PubMed: 
25349431] 
23. Dunaief JL, Dentchev T, Ying GS, Milam AH. The role of apoptosis in age-related macular 
degeneration. Arch Ophthalmol. 2002; 120:1435–1442. [PubMed: 12427055] 
24. van Genderen H, et al. In vitro measurement of cell death with the annexin A5 affinity assay. Nat 
Protoc. 2006; 1:363–367. [PubMed: 17406257] 
25. Fink SL, Bergsbaken T, Cookson BT. Anthrax lethal toxin and Salmonella elicit the common cell 
death pathway of caspase-1-dependent pyroptosis via distinct mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A. 2008; 105:4312–4317. [PubMed: 18337499] 
26. Sun L, Wu J, Du F, Chen X, Chen ZJ. Cyclic GMP-AMP synthase is a cytosolic DNA sensor that 
activates the type I interferon pathway. Science. 2013; 339:786–791. [PubMed: 23258413] 
27. Schoggins JW, et al. Pan-viral specificity of IFN-induced genes reveals new roles for cGAS in 
innate immunity. Nature. 2014; 505:691–695. [PubMed: 24284630] 
28. Feher J, et al. Mitochondrial alterations of retinal pigment epithelium in age-related macular 
degeneration. Neurobiol Aging. 2006; 27:983–993. [PubMed: 15979212] 
29. Terluk MR, et al. Investigating mitochondria as a target for treating age-related macular 
degeneration. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 
2015; 35:7304–7311. [PubMed: 25948278] 
30. West AP, et al. Mitochondrial DNA stress primes the antiviral innate immune response. Nature. 
2015; 520:553–557. [PubMed: 25642965] 
31. Galluzzi L, Blomgren K, Kroemer G. Mitochondrial membrane permeabilization in neuronal 
injury. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2009; 10:481–494. [PubMed: 19543220] 
32. Baines CP, et al. Loss of cyclophilin D reveals a critical role for mitochondrial permeability 
transition in cell death. Nature. 2005; 434:658–662. [PubMed: 15800627] 
33. McLeod DS, et al. Distribution and Quantification of Choroidal Macrophages in Human Eyes With 
Age-Related Macular Degeneration. Investigative ophthalmology & visual science. 2016; 
57:5843–5855. [PubMed: 27802514] 
34. Sakurai E, Anand A, Ambati BK, van Rooijen N, Ambati J. Macrophage depletion inhibits 
experimental choroidal neovascularization. Investigative ophthalmology & visual science. 2003; 
44:3578–3585. [PubMed: 12882810] 
35. Wang X, et al. Requirement for Microglia for the Maintenance of Synaptic Function and Integrity 
in the Mature Retina. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for 
Neuroscience. 2016; 36:2827–2842. [PubMed: 26937019] 
36. Karijolich J, Abernathy E, Glaunsinger BA. Infection-Induced Retrotransposon-Derived 
Noncoding RNAs Enhance Herpesviral Gene Expression via the NF-kappaB Pathway. PLoS 
pathogens. 2015; 11:e1005260. [PubMed: 26584434] 
37. Nunnari J, Suomalainen A. Mitochondria: in sickness and in health. Cell. 2012; 148:1145–1159. 
[PubMed: 22424226] 
38. West AP, Shadel GS, Ghosh S. Mitochondria in innate immune responses. Nat Rev Immunol. 
2011; 11:389–402. [PubMed: 21597473] 
39. Fang C, Wei X, Wei Y. Mitochondrial DNA in the regulation of innate immune responses. Protein 
Cell. 2016; 7:11–16. [PubMed: 26498951] 
40. Shimada K, et al. Oxidized mitochondrial DNA activates the NLRP3 inflammasome during 
apoptosis. Immunity. 2012; 36:401–414. [PubMed: 22342844] 
41. Nakahira K, et al. Autophagy proteins regulate innate immune responses by inhibiting the release 
of mitochondrial DNA mediated by the NALP3 inflammasome. Nat Immunol. 2011; 12:222–230. 
[PubMed: 21151103] 
42. Zhang Q, Itagaki K, Hauser CJ. Mitochondrial DNA is released by shock and activates neutrophils 
via p38 map kinase. Shock. 2010; 34:55–59. [PubMed: 19997055] 
43. Yan Y, et al. Dicer expression exhibits a tissue-specific diurnal pattern that is lost during aging and 
in diabetes. PloS one. 2013; 8:e80029. [PubMed: 24244599] 
Kerur et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 44. Hung T, et al. The Ro60 autoantigen binds endogenous retroelements and regulates inflammatory 
gene expression. Science. 2015; 350:455–459. [PubMed: 26382853] 
45. Hitomi J, et al. Involvement of caspase-4 in endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis and 
Abeta-induced cell death. The Journal of cell biology. 2004; 165:347–356. [PubMed: 15123740] 
46. Katayama T, et al. Presenilin-1 mutations downregulate the signalling pathway of the unfolded-
protein response. Nat Cell Biol. 1999; 1:479–485. [PubMed: 10587643] 
47. Ozcan U, et al. Endoplasmic reticulum stress links obesity, insulin action, and type 2 diabetes. 
Science. 2004; 306:457–461. [PubMed: 15486293] 
48. Yang D, He Y, Munoz-Planillo R, Liu Q, Nunez G. Caspase-11 Requires the Pannexin-1 Channel 
and the Purinergic P2X7 Pore to Mediate Pyroptosis and Endotoxic Shock. Immunity. 2015; 
43:923–932. [PubMed: 26572062] 
49. Shaw PX, et al. Complement factor H genotypes impact risk of age-related macular degeneration 
by interaction with oxidized phospholipids. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:13757–13762. 
[PubMed: 22875704] 
50. Suzuki M, et al. Oxidized phospholipids in the macula increase with age and in eyes with age-
related macular degeneration. Mol Vis. 2007; 13:772–778. [PubMed: 17563727] 
51. Brandstetter C, Mohr LK, Latz E, Holz FG, Krohne TU. Light induces NLRP3 inflammasome 
activation in retinal pigment epithelial cells via lipofuscin-mediated photooxidative damage. J Mol 
Med (Berl). 2015; 93:905–916. [PubMed: 25783493] 
52. Kauppinen A, et al. Oxidative stress activates NLRP3 inflammasomes in ARPE-19 cells–
implications for age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Immunology letters. 2012; 147:29–33. 
[PubMed: 22698681] 
53. Marneros AG. NLRP3 inflammasome blockade inhibits VEGF-A-induced age-related macular 
degeneration. Cell Rep. 2013; 4:945–958. [PubMed: 24012762] 
54. Doyle SL, et al. NLRP3 has a protective role in age-related macular degeneration through the 
induction of IL-18 by drusen components. Nature medicine. 2012; 18:791–798.
55. Wallach D, Kang TB, Dillon CP, Green DR. Programmed necrosis in inflammation: Toward 
identification of the effector molecules. Science. 2016; 352:aaf2154. [PubMed: 27034377] 
56. Man SM, Kanneganti TD. Converging roles of caspases in inflammasome activation, cell death and 
innate immunity. Nat Rev Immunol. 2016; 16:7–21. [PubMed: 26655628] 
57. Hirano Y, et al. IL-18 is not therapeutic for neovascular age-related macular degeneration. Nature 
medicine. 2014; 20:1372–1375.
58. Wiesen JL, Tomasi TB. Dicer is regulated by cellular stresses and interferons. Mol Immunol. 2009; 
46:1222–1228. [PubMed: 19118902] 
59. van den Beucken T, et al. Hypoxia promotes stem cell phenotypes and poor prognosis through 
epigenetic regulation of DICER. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:5203. [PubMed: 25351418] 
60. Ambati J, Fowler BJ. Mechanisms of age-related macular degeneration. Neuron. 2012; 75:26–39. 
[PubMed: 22794258] 
61. Mariathasan S, et al. Differential activation of the inflammasome by caspase-1 adaptors ASC and 
Ipaf. Nature. 2004; 430:213–218. [PubMed: 15190255] 
62. Kanneganti TD, et al. Bacterial RNA and small antiviral compounds activate caspase-1 through 
cryopyrin/Nalp3. Nature. 2006; 440:233–236. [PubMed: 16407888] 
63. Muller U, et al. Functional role of type I and type II interferons in antiviral defense. Science. 1994; 
264:1918–1921. [PubMed: 8009221] 
64. Sato M, et al. Distinct and essential roles of transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 in response to 
viruses for IFN-alpha/beta gene induction. Immunity. 2000; 13:539–548. [PubMed: 11070172] 
65. Suschak JJ, Wang S, Fitzgerald KA, Lu S. A cGAS-Independent STING/IRF7 Pathway Mediates 
the Immunogenicity of DNA Vaccines. J Immunol. 2016; 196:310–316. [PubMed: 26590319] 
66. Jin L, et al. MPYS is required for IFN response factor 3 activation and type I IFN production in the 
response of cultured phagocytes to bacterial second messengers cyclic-di-AMP and cyclic-di-
GMP. J Immunol. 2011; 187:2595–2601. [PubMed: 21813776] 
67. Bennett EA, et al. Active Alu retrotransposons in the human genome. Genome research. 2008; 
18:1875–1883. [PubMed: 18836035] 
Kerur et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 68. Shaikh TH, Roy AM, Kim J, Batzer MA, Deininger PL. cDNAs derived from primary and small 
cytoplasmic Alu (scAlu) transcripts. Journal of molecular biology. 1997; 271:222–234. [PubMed: 
9268654] 
69. Nagai H, et al. Gene transfer of secreted-type modified interleukin-18 gene to B16F10 melanoma 
cells suppresses in vivo tumor growth through inhibition of tumor vessel formation. J Invest 
Dermatol. 2002; 119:541–548. [PubMed: 12230493] 
70. Huang J, et al. Comparison of Noncontact Specular and Confocal Microscopy for Evaluation of 
Corneal Endothelium. Eye Contact Lens. 2017
71. Laing RA, Sanstrom MM, Berrospi AR, Leibowitz HM. Changes in the corneal endothelium as a 
function of age. Exp Eye Res. 1976; 22:587–594. [PubMed: 776638] 
72. Doughty MJ, Muller A, Zaman ML. Assessment of the reliability of human corneal endothelial 
cell-density estimates using a noncontact specular microscope. Cornea. 2000; 19:148–158. 
[PubMed: 10746445] 
73. Inaba M, Matsuda M, Shiozaki Y, Kosaki H. Regional specular microscopy of endothelial cell loss 
after intracapsular cataract extraction: a preliminary report. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh). 1985; 
63:232–235. [PubMed: 4003052] 
74. Laing RA, Sandstrom MM, Leibowitz HM. In vivo photomicrography of the corneal endothelium. 
Arch Ophthalmol. 1975; 93:143–145. [PubMed: 1115675] 
75. Ach T, et al. Lipofuscin redistribution and loss accompanied by cytoskeletal stress in retinal 
pigment epithelium of eyes with age-related macular degeneration. Investigative ophthalmology & 
visual science. 2015; 56:3242–3252. [PubMed: 25758814] 
76. Dridi S, et al. ERK1/2 activation is a therapeutic target in age-related macular degeneration. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:13781–13786. [PubMed: 22869729] 
77. Grossniklaus HE, Nickerson JM, Edelhauser HF, Bergman LA, Berglin L. Anatomic alterations in 
aging and age-related diseases of the eye. Investigative ophthalmology & visual science. 2013; 
54:ORSF23–27. [PubMed: 24335063] 
78. Bannwarth S, Procaccio V, Paquis-Flucklinger V. Rapid identification of unknown heteroplasmic 
mutations across the entire human mitochondrial genome with mismatch-specific Surveyor 
Nuclease. Nat Protoc. 2006; 1:2037–2047. [PubMed: 17487193] 
79. Yang P, Tyrrell J, Han I, Jaffe GJ. Expression and modulation of RPE cell membrane complement 
regulatory proteins. Investigative ophthalmology & visual science. 2009; 50:3473–3481. [PubMed: 
19168900] 
80. Miceli MV, Jazwinski SM. Nuclear gene expression changes due to mitochondrial dysfunction in 
ARPE-19 cells: implications for age-related macular degeneration. Investigative ophthalmology & 
visual science. 2005; 46:1765–1773. [PubMed: 15851580] 
81. Kagan VE, et al. Oxidized arachidonic and adrenic PEs navigate cells to ferroptosis. Nat Chem 
Biol. 2017; 13:81–90. [PubMed: 27842066] 
82. Wang X, et al. Polydatin, a natural polyphenol, protects arterial smooth muscle cells against 
mitochondrial dysfunction and lysosomal destabilization following hemorrhagic shock. Am J 
Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2012; 302:R805–814. [PubMed: 22277937] 
83. Bonora M, et al. Comprehensive analysis of mitochondrial permeability transition pore activity in 
living cells using fluorescence-imaging-based techniques. Nat Protoc. 2016; 11:1067–1080. 
[PubMed: 27172167] 
Kerur et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Editorial summary
Degeneration of the retinal pigment epithelium is a hallmark of geographic atrophy, a 
type of age-related macular degeneration. Kerur et al. show that this degeneration results 
from a multi-step pathway in which mitochondrial dysfunction in RPE cells, triggered by 
accumulation of Alu RNA, leads to activation of the non-canonical inflammasome via a 
cGAS-STING-IRF3 signaling axis.
Kerur et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Caspase-4/11 in geographic atrophy and RPE degeneration
(a) Left and top quadrants, immunoblots for pro-caspase-4 (pro-Casp4) and the p30 cleavage 
product of caspase-4 (Casp4 p30) in the RPE of human eyes with geographic atrophy (dry 
AMD) as compared to unaffected controls (Ctr). Specific bands of interest are indicated by 
arrowheads. Lower right quadrant, densitometry of the bands corresponding to caspase-4 
p30 normalized to loading control. The molecular weight markers are indicated on the left 
side of the blot (Data are presented as mean ± SD; n = 3 control eyes; n = 6 dry AMD eyes; 
*P = 0.002, two-tailed t test). (b) Immunoblots for pro-Casp4 and Casp4 p30 in human RPE 
Kerur et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells mock transfected (just transfection mixture) or transfected with Alu RNA; Alu 
expression plasmid (pAlu) or empty vector (pNull); or DICER1 or control (Ctr) anti-sense 
oligonucleotides (AS). Specific bands of interest are indicated by arrowheads. (c) 
Immunoblot for pro-caspase-11 (Pro-Casp11) and the p30 cleavage product of caspase-11 
(Casp11 p30) in RPE tissue of WT mice injected subretinally with Alu RNA or vehicle 
(Vehi). n = 3 mice per group. (d,e) Top, fundus photographs of the retinas of WT (n = 8 
eyes) and Casp11−/− (n = 10 eyes) mice, (d) and Casp11−/− (n = 8 eyes) mice expressing a 
human caspase-4 transgene (Casp11−/− hCasp4Tg) (e) injected with vehicle or Alu RNA. 
The degenerated retinal area is outlined by blue arrowheads. Bottom, immunostaining with 
zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) antibody to visualize RPE cellular boundaries; loss of regular 
hexagonal cellular boundaries is indicative of degenerated RPE. (f) Immunoblots of pro-
caspase-1 (pro-Casp1) and the p20 cleavage product of caspase-1 (Casp1 p20) in RPE tissue 
of WT and Casp11−/− mice injected subretinally with vehicle (Vehi) or Alu RNA. n = 3 mice 
per group. (g) Immunoblots of pro-caspase-1 and the p20 cleavage product of caspase-1 in 
WT and Casp11−/− mouse RPE cells treated with Alu RNA. (h) IL-18 secretion by WT and 
Casp11−/− mouse RPE cells mock transfected or transfected with Alu RNA. n = 3 
independent experiments. Data presented are mean ± SD; *P = 0.014, two-tailed t test. (i) 
Top, fundus photographs of the retinas of WT (n = 8 eyes), caspase-1 and caspase-11 
deficient (n = 7 eyes) mice (Casp1−/− Casp11129mt/129mt) as well as Casp1−/− 
Casp11129mt/129mt (n = 8 eyes) mice expressing functional mouse caspase-11 from a 
bacterial artificial chromosome transgene (Casp1−/− Casp11129mt/129mt Casp11Tg) 
subretinally injected with vehicle or Alu RNA. For all immunoblots, cropped gel image of 
bands of interest of representative immunoblots of three independent experiments and 
densitometric analysis (mean (SEM)) are shown. Tubulin or β-actin or Vinculin was as a 
loading control as indicated in each blot. In d, e and i, binary (Healthy %) and morphometric 
quantification (PM, polymegethism (mean (SEM))) of RPE degeneration are shown 
(Fisher’s exact test for binary; two-tailed t test for morphometry; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; 
***P < 0.001). The degenerated retinal area is outlined by blue arrowheads in the fundus 
images. Loss of regular hexagonal cellular boundaries in ZO-1 stained flat mounts is 
indicative of degenerated RPE.
Kerur et al.
Page 28
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Gasdermin D in geographic atrophy and RPE degeneration
(a) Top, fundus photographs of eyes of WT (n = 6 eyes), and Gsdmd−/− (n = 10 eyes) mice 
subretinally injected with vehicle or Alu RNA. Bottom, immunofluorescence staining of 
zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) on RPE flat mounts of the same eyes showing RPE cell 
boundaries. (b) IL-18 secretion by WT and Gsdmd−/− mouse RPE cells mock transfected or 
transfected with Alu RNA (n = 3 independent experiments; Data presented are mean ± SD, 
*P = 0.01, two-tailed t test) (c) Immunoblots of pro-caspase-1 (pro-Casp1) and the p10 
cleavage product of caspase-1 (Casp1 p10) in WT and Gsdmd−/− mouse RPE cells mock 
Kerur et al.
Page 29
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 transfected or transfected with Alu RNA. (d) Immunoblots of pro-caspase-11 (pro-Casp11) 
and the p30 cleavage product of caspase-11 (Casp11 p30) in WT and Gsdmd−/− mouse RPE 
cells mock transfected or transfected with Alu RNA. (e) Immunoblots of Gasdermin D and 
cleavage product of Gasdermin D (Gsdmd p30) in mock transfected or Alu RNA transfected 
human primary RPE cells, WT mouse primary RPE cells, and WT BMDM as well as in 
RPE tissue from WT mice subretinally injected with vehicle or Alu RNA. (f, g) Fundus 
photographs and immunofluorescence staining of zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) on RPE flat 
mounts, (f) Gsdmd−/− mice reconstituted via in vivo subretinal transfection of empty vector 
plasmid (pNull; n = 4 eyes), plasmids expressing wild type gasdermin D (pGSDMD-WT; n 
= 4 eyes) or mutant gasdermin D incapable of undergoing p30 cleavage (pGSDMD-D276A; 
n = 5 eyes) subretinally injected with Alu RNA. (g) Gsdmd−/− mice subretinally 
administered vehicle control (Vehicle; n = 4 eyes), recombinant mature IL-18 (recIL-18; n = 
4 eyes), mature IL-18 expression plasmid (pIL-18ss; n = 5 eyes) or empty vector control 
(pNull; n = 4 eyes) were subretinally injected with Alu RNA. (h) RT-qPCR examination of 
GSDMD mRNA abundance in the RPE tissue of human AMD eyes (n = 7 eyes) and in 
healthy age-matched control eyes (n = 6 eyes). *P = 0.045, two-tailed t test; error bars 
denote geometric means with 95% confidence intervals. (i) Immunolocalization of 
gasdermin D in the RPE of human geographic atrophy eyes and age-matched healthy 
controls. For all immunoblots, cropped gel image of bands of interest of representative 
immunoblots of three independent experiments and densitometric analysis (mean (SEM)) 
are shown. In a, f and g, binary (Healthy %) and morphometric (PM, polymegethism (mean 
(SEM)) quantification of RPE degeneration are shown (Fisher’s exact test for binary; two-
tailed t test for morphometry; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001). Loss of regular 
hexagonal cellular boundaries in ZO-1 stained flat mounts is indicative of degenerated RPE. 
The degenerated retinal area is outlined by blue arrowheads in the fundus images.
Kerur et al.
Page 30
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Non-canonical inflammasome activation and RPE degeneration induced by Alu RNA is 
mediated by interferon signaling
(a) Top, fundus photographs of eyes of WT (n = 7 eyes) and Ifnar−/− (n = 14 eyes) mice 
subretinally injected with Alu expression plasmid (pAlu) or empty vector (pNull). Bottom, 
immunofluorescence staining of zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) on RPE flat mounts of the 
above eyes showing RPE cell boundaries. (b) Immunoblot of pro-caspase-11 (pro-Casp1) 
and the p30 cleavage product of caspase-11 (Casp11 p30) in WT and Ifnar−/− mouse RPE 
cells mock transfected or transfected with Alu RNA. (c) Immunoblot of pro-caspase-4 in 
Kerur et al.
Page 31
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 IFN-β-treated human RPE cells. (d) IFN-β secretion by human RPE cells transfected with 
Alu expression plasmid (pAlu) or empty vector (pNull). Data presented are mean ± SD; n = 
3 independent experiments; *P = 0.0012, two-tailed t test. (e) Immunoblot of phosphorylated 
STAT2 (pSTAT2) and total STAT2 in human RPE cells transfected with Alu expression 
plasmid (pAlu) or empty vector (pNull) or DICER1 or control (Ctr) anti-sense 
oligonucleotides (AS). (f) Fundus photographs and immunofluorescence staining of zonula 
occludens-1 (ZO-1) on RPE flat mounts of WT mice subject to Alu RNA co-administration 
with IFN-β neutralizing antibody (n = 6 eyes) or Isotype IgG (n = 4 eyes). (g) Fundus 
photographs and immunofluorescence staining of zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) on RPE flat 
mounts of WT (n = 6 eyes) or Irf3−/− (n = 6 eyes) or Stat2−/− (n = 7 eyes) mice subretinally 
injected with Alu expression plasmid (pAlu) or empty vector (pNull). (h) 
Immunolocalization of IFN-β in the RPE of human geographic atrophy eyes and age-
matched unaffected controls. Representative image from control and Dry AMD eyes are 
presented, n = 4 eyes. (i) Abundance of IFN-β mRNA in the RPE of the human geographic 
atrophy eyes compared to age-matched healthy controls, (Data presented are mean ± SEM; n 
= 4 eyes; *P = 0.018, two-tailed t test). For all immunoblots, cropped gel image of bands of 
interest of representative immunoblots of three independent experiments and densitometric 
analysis (mean (SEM)) are shown. In a, f and g, binary (Healthy %) and morphometric (PM, 
polymegethism (mean (SEM)) quantification of RPE degeneration are shown (Fisher’s exact 
test for binary; two-tailed t test for morphometry; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001). 
Loss of regular hexagonal cellular boundaries in ZO-1 stained flat mounts is indicative of 
degenerated RPE. The degenerated retinal area is outlined by blue arrowheads in the fundus 
images.
Kerur et al.
Page 32
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. cGAS driven signaling licenses non-canonical inflammasome and RPE degeneration
(a) Relative abundance of Ifnb mRNA in WT and Mb21d1−/− mouse RPE cells mock-
transfected or transfected with Alu RNA. Data presented are mean ± SEM; n = 4 cell culture 
replicates; *P = 0.0001, two-tailed t test. (b) Immunoblots of pro-caspase-1 (pro-Casp1) and 
the p20 cleavage product of caspase-1 (Casp1 p20) in WT and Mb21d1−/− mouse RPE cells 
transfected with Alu expression plasmid (pAlu) or empty vector control (pNull). (c) 
Immunoblots of pro-caspase-11 (pro-Casp1) and the p30 cleavage product of caspase-1 
(Casp11 p30) in WT and Mb21d1−/− mouse RPE cells transfected with Alu expression 
Kerur et al.
Page 33
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 plasmid (pAlu) or empty vector control (pNull). (d) IL-18 secretion by WT and Mb21d1−/− 
mouse RPE cells mock transfected or transfected with Alu RNA. Data presented are mean ± 
SD; n = 3 independent experiments; *P = 0.032, two-tailed t test. (e) Relative abundance of 
IFNB mRNA in control (sh Scramble) or cGAS shRNA knockdown human RPE cells 
transfected with or DICER1 or control (Ctr) anti-sense oligonucleotides (AS). Data 
presented are mean ± SEM; n = 3 cell culture replicates; *P = 0.0002, two-tailed t test. (f) 
Immunoblot of phosphorylated STAT2 (pSTAT2); pro-caspase-4 and casp4 p30; pro-
caspase-1 and p20 cleavage casp1 p20 in control (sh Scramble) or cGAS shRNA knockdown 
human RPE cells mock-transfected or transfected with Alu RNA. Knockdown efficiency of 
cGAS is shown by cGAS immunoblot and tubulin was used as a loading control. (g) Fundus 
photographs and immunofluorescence staining of zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) on RPE flat 
mounts of WT (n = 6 eyes) and Mb21d1−/− (n = 8 eyes) mice subretinally injected with 
vehicle or Alu RNA. (h) Fundus photographs and immunofluorescence staining of zonula 
occludens-1 (ZO-1) on RPE flat mounts of Mb21d1−/− (n = 7 eyes) mice reconstituted by in 
vivo transfection of cGAS expression plasmid (pFlag-cGAS) or control GFP expression 
plasmid (pFlag-GFP), subretinally injected with Alu RNA. (i) Fundus photographs and 
immunofluorescence staining of zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) on RPE flat mounts of 
Mb21d1−/− mice subretinally co-administered Alu RNA with recombinant IFN-β (n = 6 
eyes), vehicle control (n = 6 eyes), IFN-β expression plasmid (pIFNB; n = 5 eyes) or empty 
vector control (pNull; n = 5 eyes). For all immunoblots, cropped gel image of bands of 
interest of representative immunoblots of three independent experiments and densitometric 
analysis (mean (SEM)) are shown. In g, h and i, binary (Healthy %) and morphometric (PM, 
polymegethism (mean (SEM)) quantification of RPE degeneration are shown (Fisher’s exact 
test for binary; two-tailed t test for morphometry; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001). 
Loss of regular hexagonal cellular boundaries in ZO-1 stained flat mounts is indicative of 
degenerated RPE. The degenerated retinal area is outlined by blue arrowheads in the fundus 
images.
Kerur et al.
Page 34
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. cGAS in geographic atrophy and RPE degeneration
(a) Immunolocalization of cGAS in the RPE of human geographic atrophy eyes and age-
matched unaffected controls. Representative image from control and Dry AMD eyes are 
presented, n = 4 eyes. (b) Immunoblots of pro-caspase-1 and p20 cleavage product of 
caspase-1 (Casp1 p20) in WT and Tmem173−/− mouse RPE cells transfected with Alu 
expression plasmid (pAlu) or empty vector control plasmid (pNull). (c) Immunoblots of pro-
caspase-11 and p30 cleavage product of caspase-11 (Casp11 p30) in WT and Tmem173−/− 
mouse RPE cells mock transfected or transfected with Alu RNA. (d) Fundus photographs 
and immunofluorescence staining of zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) on RPE flat mounts of WT 
(n = 6 eyes) and Tmem173−/− (n = 10 eyes) mice subretinally injected with vehicle or Alu 
RNA. (e) Fundus photographs and immunofluorescence staining of zonula occludens-1 
Kerur et al.
Page 35
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (ZO-1) on RPE flat mounts of Tmem173−/− mice subretinally co-administered Alu RNA 
with recombinant IFN-β (n = 4 eyes) or vehicle control (n = 4 eyes); or IFN-β expression 
plasmid (pIFNB; n = 4 eyes) or empty vector control (pNull; n = 4 eyes). For all 
immunoblots, cropped gel image of bands of interest of representative immunoblots of three 
independent experiments and densitometric analysis (mean (SEM)) are shown. In d and e, 
binary (Healthy %) and morphometric (PM, polymegethism (mean (SEM)) quantification of 
RPE degeneration are shown (Fisher’s exact test for binary; two-tailed t test for 
morphometry; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001). Loss of regular hexagonal cellular 
boundaries in ZO-1 stained flat mounts is indicative of degenerated RPE. The degenerated 
retinal area is outlined by blue arrowheads in the fundus images.
Kerur et al.
Page 36
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. mtDNA in non-canonical inflammasome activation and RPE degeneration
(a) Relative abundance of cytosolic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in human RPE cells 
mock-transfected or transfected with Alu RNA (Data presented are mean ± SEM; n = 3 
independent experiments; *P = 0.0018, two-tailed t test). (b) Relative enrichment of mtDNA 
in cGAS immunoprecipitate in ChIP like pull-down assay. Mock or Alu RNA transfected, 
indicated mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) were analyzed upon HA-cGAS 
immunoprecipitation with anti-HA antibody or isotype conrol. Data presented are mean ± 
SEM; n = 3; *P = 0.008, two-tailed t test. (c) Relative abundance of cytosolic mitochondrial 
Kerur et al.
Page 37
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DNA (mtDNA) in WT and Ppif−/− mouse RPE cells mock transfected (n = 4 cell culture 
replicates) or transfected with Alu RNA (Data presented are mean ± SEM; n = 6 cell culture 
replicates; *P = 0.004, two-tailed t test). (d) Fundus photographs and immunofluorescence 
staining of zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) on RPE flat mounts of WT (n = 6 eyes) and Ppif−/− (n 
= 12 eyes) mice subretinally injected with vehicle or Alu RNA. (e) Immunoblot for 
procaspase-1 (procasp-1) and p20 cleavage product of caspase-1 in WT and Ppif−/− mouse 
RPE cells mock transfected or transfected with Alu RNA. (f) Immunoblot for procaspase-11 
(procasp-11) and p30 cleavage product of caspase-11 (Casp11 p30) in WT and Ppif−/− 
mouse RPE cells mock transfected or transfected with Alu RNA. (g) Immunoblot for 
procaspase-4 (procasp-4) and p30 cleavage product of caspase-4 (Casp4 p30) in WT and 
mitochondrial DNA deficient Rho0 ARPE19 human RPE cells mock-transfected or 
transfected with Alu RNA. (h, i) WT and mitochondrial DNA deficient Rho0 ARPE19 
human RPE cells mock-transfected or transfected with Alu RNA. (h) IL-18 secretion; data 
presented are mean ± SD; n = 4 independent experiments; *P = 0.0001, two-tailed t test. (i) 
IFN- β secretion; data presented are mean ± SD; n = 4 independent experiments; *P = 0.004, 
two-tailed t test. (j) Fundus photographs and immunofluorescence staining of zonula 
occludens-1 (ZO-1) on RPE flat mounts of the Ppif−/− mice subretinally co-administered 
Alu RNA with recombinant IFN-β (n = 5 eyes) or vehicle control (n = 5 eyes); or IFN-β 
expression plasmid (pIFNB; n = 6 eyes) or empty vector control (pNull; n = 5 eyes). For all 
immunoblots, cropped gel image of bands of interest of representative immunoblots of three 
independent experiments and densitometric analysis (mean (SEM)) are shown. In d and j, 
binary (Healthy %) and morphometric (PM, polymegethism (mean (SEM)) quantification of 
RPE degeneration are shown (Fisher’s exact test for binary; two-tailed t test for 
morphometry; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001). Loss of regular hexagonal cellular 
boundaries in ZO-1 stained flat mounts is indicative of degenerated RPE. The degenerated 
retinal area is outlined by blue arrowheads in the fundus images.
Kerur et al.
Page 38
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 27.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
