 Kesby et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:30 
DOI 10.1038/s41398-017-0071-9
Translational Psychiatry
R E V I E W A R T I C L E
Op e n A c c e s s
Dopamine, psychosis and schizophrenia:
the widening gap between basic and
clinical neuroscience
JP Kesby
1,2, DW Eyles1,3, JJ McGrath
1,3,4 and JG Scott2,3,5
Abstract
The stagnation in drug development for schizophrenia highlights the need for better translation between basic and
clinical research. Understanding the neurobiology of schizophrenia presents substantial challenges but a key feature
continues to be the involvement of subcortical dopaminergic dysfunction in those with psychotic symptoms. Our
contemporary knowledge regarding dopamine dysfunction has clarified where and when dopaminergic alterations
may present in schizophrenia. For example, clinical studies have shown patients with schizophrenia show increased
presynaptic dopamine function in the associative striatum, rather than the limbic striatum as previously presumed.
Furthermore, subjects deemed at high risk of developing schizophrenia show similar presynaptic dopamine
abnormalities in the associative striatum. Thus, our view of subcortical dopamine function in schizophrenia continues
to evolve as we accommodate this newly acquired information. However, basic research in animal models has been
slow to incorporate these clinical findings. For example, psychostimulant-induced locomotion, the commonly utilised
phenotype for positive symptoms in rodents, is heavily associated with dopaminergic activation in the limbic striatum.
This anatomical misalignment has brought into question how we assess positive symptoms in animal models and
represents an opportunity for improved translation between basic and clinical research. The current review focuses on
the role of subcortical dopamine dysfunction in psychosis and schizophrenia. We present and discuss alternative
phenotypes that may provide a more translational approach to assess the neurobiology of positive symptoms in
schizophrenia. Incorporation of recent clinical findings is essential if we are to develop meaningful translational animal
models.
Introduction
Our knowledge of the neurobiology of schizophrenia,
while still rudimentary, has advanced considerably in
recent years. However, these findings have not translated
to better treatments for those with schizophrenia. The
three primary symptom groups, positive, cognitive and
negative (Box 1), have been associated with reports of
abnormalities in virtually every neurotransmitter system1–
5. The onset of psychotic symptoms, which is strongly
associated with alterations in dopamine function, is a key
feature underpinning a clinical diagnosis6, 7. However,
results from clinical research regarding the specific loci of
dopamine dysfunction in schizophrenia8–10, have trig-
gered a reappraisal of our perspective on the neurobiology
of schizophrenia. Currently there is a disparity between
the tests for positive symptoms in animal models and
recent clinical evidence for dopaminergic abnormalities in
schizophrenia. Therefore, it is critical that this con-
temporary clinical knowledge actively influences the
agenda in applied basic neuroscience.
It is widely acknowledged that we cannot recreate the
complicated symptom profile of schizophrenia in animal
© The Author(s) 2018
OpenAccessThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,whichpermitsuse,sharing,adaptation,distributionandreproduction
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Correspondence: JP Kesby (j.kesby@uq.edu.au)
1Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD,
Australia
2Centre for Clinical Research, Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Queensland, Herston, QLD, Australia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
 models. However, animal models (the majority and focus
of the present article being rodent models) provide an
avenue to invasively explore the role of neurotransmitters
and circuitry in psychiatric diseases. To improve the poor
predictive validity of treatments in animal models11, it is
critical that our understanding and the use of animal
models evolves alongside our knowledge of schizophrenia
neurobiology. The delayed incorporation of new clinical
findings to develop better animal models highlights the
need for better communication between clinical and basic
research communities.
In this article, we discuss the challenges clinicians and
researchers are facing in understanding the neurobiology
of positive symptoms and psychosis in schizophrenia. We
discuss the implications this has for current assessments
of positive symptoms in rodents and propose a more
relevant set of tests for future study. Finally, the need for a
joint focus on bi-directional translation between clinical
and basic research is outlined.
Challenges in diagnosing schizophrenia
Psychiatric symptoms exist on continua from normal to
pathological, meaning the threshold for diagnosis of
schizophrenia in clinical practice can be challenging. The
clinical diagnosis of schizophrenia relies heavily on the
positive symptoms associated with a prolonged psychotic
episode. However, a relatively high percentage of the
general population (8–30%) report delusional experiences
or hallucinations in their lifetime12–14, but for most people
these are transient15. Psychotic symptoms are also not
specific to a particular mental disorder16. The clinical
efficacy of antipsychotic drugs is heavily correlated with
their ability to block subcortical dopamine D2 receptors17,
18, suggesting dopamine signalling is important. In spite of
this, no consistent relationship between D2 receptors and
the pathophysiology of schizophrenia has emerged19, 20.
In contrast, the clinical evidence points towards pre-
synaptic dopamine dysfunction as a mediator of psychosis
in schizophrenia19.
The neurobiology of psychosis: the centrality of
dopamine
Dopamine systems: anatomy and function
An appreciation for the neuroanatomical differences in
subcortical dopaminergic projections/circuitry between
rodents and primates is essential for effective commu-
nication between clinical and basic researchers. For
example, primates feature a more prominent substantia
nigra and less distinctive ventral tegmental area than
rodents. However, more pertinent to the current review
are homologous functional subdivisions of the striatum
observed in both rodents and primates21–24. These include
the limbic, associative and sensorimotor areas (Fig. 1).
The associative striatum, defined by its dense connectivity
from the frontal and parietal associative cortices, is key for
goal-directed action and behavioural flexibility. The lim-
bic striatum, defined by connectivity to the hippocampus,
amygdala and medial orbitofrontal cortex, is involved in
reward and motivation. The sensorimotor
striatum,
defined by connectivity to sensory and motor cortices, is
critical for habit formation. These functional subdivisions
are also interconnected by feedforward striato-nigro-
striatal projections25. The heavy basis on behavioural
outcomes in neuropsychiatry has made functional sub-
divisions such as these more relevant than ever.
Dopaminergic features of psychosis in schizophrenia
In healthy individuals, dopamine stimulants such as
amphetamine can induce psychotic symptoms26, 27 and
people with schizophrenia are more sensitive to these
effects27, 28. Studies using positron emission tomography
(PET) imaging have shown patients with schizophrenia
show increases in subcortical synaptic dopamine con-
tent29,
30,
abnormally
high
dopamine
release
after
amphetamine treatment30–35 and increased basal dopa-
mine
synthesis
capacity
(determined
indirectly
by
increased radiolabelled L-DOPA uptake)19,36, 37 compared
with healthy controls. Increased subcortical dopamine
synthesis and release capacity are strongly associated with
positive symptoms in patients33, 38, and increased sub-
cortical synaptic dopamine content is predictive of a
positive treatment response29. It was widely anticipated
that the limbic striatum would be confirmed as the sub-
division where these alterations in dopamine function
would be localised in patients. The basis for this predic-
tion was the belief that reward systems were aberrant in
schizophrenia39. However, as PET imaging resolution
improved it was found that increases in synaptic dopa-
mine content9, 10 and synthesis capacity8 were localised,
or more pronounced37, in the associative striatum (Fig. 1;
yellow). Furthermore, alterations in dopamine function
within the associative striatum likely contribute to the
misappropriate attribution of salience to certain stimuli, a
key aspect of delusions and psychosis40.
Box 1: Symptom groups in schizophrenia
●
Positive symptoms: Positive symptoms include delusions and
hallucinations, linked to aberrant salience. These symptoms are
most recognisable during periods of acute psychosis.
●
Cognitive symptoms: Impairments in learning, memory,
attention and executive functioning are all included as
cognitive symptoms.
●
Negative symptoms: Negative symptoms include blunting of
affect (lacking emotional expression), avolition (deficits in
motivation) and social withdrawal.
Kesby et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:30 
Page 2 of 12
 Clinical
studies
have
confirmed
that
dopamine
abnormalities are also present prior to the onset of psy-
chosis in schizophrenia and thus are not a consequence of
psychotic episodes or antipsychotic exposure. Similar to
what has been observed in patients with schizophrenia,
ultra-high risk (UHR) subjects show increased subcortical
synaptic dopamine content41 and basal dopamine synth-
esis capacity8, 42–44. Importantly, alterations in dopamine
synthesis capacity in UHR subjects progress over time45
and are greater in subjects who transition to psychosis
compared with those who do not46. Furthermore, higher
baseline synaptic dopamine levels in UHR subjects pre-
dicts a greater reduction in positive symptoms after
dopamine depletion41. Overall, these findings in UHR
subjects are congruent with those observed in schizo-
phrenia and provide evidence indicating that presynaptic
dopaminergic abnormalities are present prior to the onset
of psychosis.
Several avenues have been proposed to explain a
selective increase in associative striatal dopamine func-
tion, such as alterations in hippocampal control of
dopamine projections47, 48, alterations in cortical inputs to
midbrain dopamine systems2, 49 and, although little direct
evidence has been observed, developmental alterations in
dopamine neurons themselves50, 51. Furthermore, other
pathways and/or neurotransmitters may be more critical
in treatment-resistant patients52. We propose a network
model whereby dysfunction in a central circuit, including
the associative striatum, prefrontal cortex and thalamus, is
critical for the expression of psychotic symptoms in
schizophrenia. This model would suggest that dysfunction
in auxiliary circuits (both limbic and cortical) contribute
to psychotic symptoms by feeding into this primary net-
work. Ascertaining the role of dopaminergic dysfunction,
in the context of networks important for psychotic
symptoms in schizophrenia, will provide a better base for
constructing objective readouts in basic and clinical
research.
Psychosis: a consequence of network dysfunction
Psychosis is a condition that features a range of beha-
vioural alterations that relate to a loss of contact with
reality and a loss of insight. People with psychosis
experience hallucinations (primarily auditory in schizo-
phrenia53) and delusions. In schizophrenia, auditory hal-
lucinations have been associated with altered connectivity
between the hippocampus and thalamus54. During hal-
lucinations, increased activation of the thalamus, striatum
and hippocampus have also been observed55. Thus,
altered thalamocortical connectivity, especially with the
hippocampus, may impede internal/external representa-
tions of auditory processing56. In contrast, delusions in
people with schizophrenia have been associated with
overactivation of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and dimin-
ished deactivation of striatal and thalamic networks57.
Thus, the complexity of psychotic symptoms is congruent
with the highly connected nature of implicated brain
regions.
Although we still know little about the underlying
neurobiology of psychosis, focal brain lesions allow for a
better understanding of the networks involved without
the
confounds
of
medication
and
unrelated
Caudate putamen
Nucleus
accumbens
Nucleus
accumbens
Caudate
Putamen
Associative
Dorsal
Ventral
Medial
Lateral
Sensorimotor
Limbic
Primate
Rodent
Fig. 1 Functional subdivisions of the dopamine system across species. Midbrain dopamine neurons are the source of dopamine projections to
the striatum in primates (left) and rodents (right). Important neuroanatomical differences exist, especially when considering functional subdivisions of
the striatum. In the primate, the limbic system (orange) originates in the dorsal tier of the substantia nigra (the ventral tegmental area equivalent). In
the rodent, the limbic system originates in ventral tegmental area, which sits medially to the substantia nigra. The midbrain projections to the
associative striatum (yellow) and sensorimotor striatum (blue) follow a dorsomedial-to-ventrolateral topology
Kesby et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:30 
Page 3 of 12
 neuropathology. Generally speaking, lesions that induce
hallucinations are often in the brain networks associated
with the stimulus of the hallucination (i.e., auditory, visual
or somatosensory)58. Visual hallucinations have been
associated with dysfunction of the occipital lobe, striatum
and thalamus, whereas auditory hallucinations are asso-
ciated with dysfunction of the temporal lobe, hippo-
campus, amygdala and thalamus58. Insight is generally
maintained after focal brain lesions that produce hallu-
cinations and subcortical dopamine function is normal59,
unlike what is observed in schizophrenia58. In contrast, a
loss of insight (which can manifest as delusionary beliefs)
is associated with alterations in cortico-striatal networks.
For example, people with basal ganglia or caudate lesions
can present with both hallucinations and delusions60, 61.
Furthermore, a case study of religious delusions in a
patient with temporal lobe epilepsy was associated with
overactivity of the PFC62, and there are multiple lines of
evidence suggesting that the PFC is integral for delu-
sionary beliefs63. Therefore, while impairing networks
specific to certain sensory modalities can lead to halluci-
nations, dysfunctional integration of PFC input to the
associative striatum may be especially important for
delusional symptoms in schizophrenia.
Central to the networks involved in psychosis and
schizophrenia, the thalamus acts as a relay for most
information going to the cortex64. Brain imaging studies
have demonstrated that medication-naive patients with
schizophrenia have significantly reduced thalamic and
caudate volumes relative to healthy controls and medi-
cated patients65. Moreover, reduced thalamic volumes has
also been observed in UHR subjects66. A simplified
schematic of the networks that may be especially relevant
to psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia is presented in
Fig. 2. The thalamus forms a circuit with the associative
striatum and PFC whereby impairments in any of these
regions can impair the functionality of the network as a
whole. In addition, the hippocampus and amygdala, which
are both involved in sensory perception and emotional
regulation, can affect this network via their connectivity
with the thalamus (but other indirect pathways also exist).
Although this is an over simplification, it highlights how
psychotic symptoms could arise from multiple sources of
neuropathology/dysfunction or abnormal connectivity.
Why do antipsychotics work?
This raises important questions as to how antipsychotic
drugs exert their effects. In most individuals with schi-
zophrenia, antipsychotic treatment is effective in reducing
positive symptoms67; therefore, excessive D2 signalling in
the associative striatum appears to be critical. Stimulation
of D2 and D1 receptor expressing medium spiny neurons
(which are largely segregated68) in the associative striatum
feedback indirectly to the thalamus, completing a loop
that allows for feedforward-based and feedback-based
signalling. The basal ganglia acts as a gateway for, or
mediator of, cortical inputs69–71 and may represent a
common pathway through which psychotic symptoms
present. Therefore, excessive dopamine signalling in the
associative
striatum
may
directly
lead
to
psychotic
symptoms by compromising the integration of cortical
inputs. In treatment-responsive patients, antipsychotics
may attenuate the expression of psychotic symptoms by
normalising excessive D2 signalling29 to restore the bal-
ance between D1 and D2 receptor pathways72. Because
they act downstream to schizophrenia-related presynaptic
abnormalities, they fail to improve indices of cortical
function
(i.e.,
cognitive
symptoms).
Alternatively,
impaired cortical input to the associative striatum via the
thalamus, PFC or other regions could dysregulate this
system independently of, or in addition to, associative
striatal dopamine dysfunction. In this case, D2 receptor
blockade may be insufficient to restore normal function,
which is one explanation for why some individuals are
treatment refractory. For example, increases in subcortical
synaptic dopamine content29 and increases in presynaptic
striatal dopamine function52 are both associated with
increased treatment efficacy. Thus, in treatment-resistant
subjects, there is little evidence of abnormal dopaminergic
function29, 52. Medicated persons with schizophrenia, who
remain symptomatic with auditory hallucinations, show
increased thalamic, striatal and hippocampal activation55.
Moreover, treatment-refractory patients who respond
positively to clozapine treatment show alterations in
cerebral blood flow in fronto-striato-thalamic circuitry,
suggesting clozapine is restoring a functional imbalance in
symptoms
Interface
and
Insight
and
expression
Striatum
Prefrontal
Cortex
Amygdala
Hippocampus
Thalamus
Fig. 2 Network implicated in psychotic symptoms and
schizophrenia. Dysfunction in a variety of brain regions can elicit
psychotic symptoms. A primary circuit involved in psychosis includes
the thalamus and prefrontal cortex (yellow) feeding into the
associative striatum. Alterations in the thalamus and prefrontal cortex
are involved in hallucinations and also insight for delusional
symptoms. Expression of psychotic symptoms in most cases requires
increased activity in the associative striatum and specifically excessive
D2 receptor stimulation (red). Other limbic regions such as the
hippocampus and amygdala (green) can feed into this circuit
contributing to altered sensory perception and emotional context
Kesby et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:30 
Page 4 of 12
 these systems73. Taken together, this evidence suggests
that psychosis is the result of a network dysfunction that
includes
a
variety
of
brain
regions
(and
multiple
neurotransmitter-specific pathways), of which impair-
ment at any level could precipitate psychotic symptoms.
Although increased positive symptom severity has been
associated with impaired cognitive flexibility74, there is a
little evidence for subcortical hyperdopaminergia playing
a direct role in the cognitive impairments observed in
schizophrenia. Furthermore, antipsychotic treatments do
not improve patient’s cognitive function75. There is a
mounting evidence that cognitive symptoms may present
prior to positive symptoms in schizophrenia76. Given
brain networks involved in hallucinations and delusions
all involve cortical regions, the underlying pathology
causing cognitive symptoms may also contribute to psy-
chotic symptoms. Thus, in some cases psychosis may
represent the summation of broad cognitive impairments
inducing local network dysfunction (Fig. 3). Regardless,
positive symptoms are relatively distinct in the clinical
setting but the presence and severity of symptoms are
determined
interactively
with
interviews
and
questionnaires. The inability to do the same in other
species means the best avenue for assessing animal
models may be to identify outcomes that are sensitive to
the underlying neurobiology observed in schizophrenia
and psychosis. Given the action/effectiveness of anti-
psychotics, the primary downstream region of interest, in
the context of elevated dopamine transmission, is the
associative striatum.
Modelling psychosis: the use of animal models
Potentially, the most useful avenue for animal models to
assist in schizophrenia research will be identifying con-
vergent aetiological pathways77. Understanding which
neurotransmitter systems and brain regions are most
involved may help to identify the core neurobiological
features of schizophrenia. For example, changes in
dopaminergic systems are observed in animal models
after manipulation of factors based on schizophrenia
epidemiology50, 51, genetics78, pharmacology79 and related
hypotheses80. These include changes in early dopamine
specification factors50,
51, sensitivities to psychostimu-
lants50,51,78,
80
and
alterations
in
dopamine
Exessive
dopamine
signaling
Clozapine
Treatment-
refractory
The
Role
of
Dopamine
?
?
Striatal
Circuit
level
Auxiliary
Circuits
impairment
Fig. 3 Psychosis: a consequence of severe circuit specific cognitive impairment. This schematic representation highlights the potential for
cognitive symptoms to feed into psychosis networks and create positive feedback loops that spiral to psychosis. Non-specific and heterogeneous
deficits in auxiliary neurocircuitry (in the context of psychosis) lead to broad cognitive impairments unique to each individual. These systems feed
into the primary psychosis networks leading to destabilisation of associative striatal dysfunction and further cognitive impairment. In most individuals
with schizophrenia, excessive dopamine signalling in the associative striatum leads to positive symptoms. Antipsychotics antagonise downstream D2
receptor signalling to blunt the expression of symptoms. In treatment-refractory patients (those who do not respond to first-line antipsychotics)
blocking D2 receptors is insufficient to blunt positive symptoms suggesting further upstream dysfunction in the associative striatum or psychosis
networks. Clozapine may lead to improvement in some of these individuals by stabilising function throughout these networks in addition to D2
receptor antagonism. Positive symptoms in treatment-refractory patients who fail to respond to clozapine may be the result of severe impairment
throughout psychosis networks (and the associative striatum) that are independent of dopamine dysfunction. Thus, our current treatments for
positive symptoms act downstream of the source of cognitive impairments, hence their ineffectiveness in treating cognitive symptoms. While the
expression of psychotic symptoms may be a discrete outcome, separate to impairments in cognitive function, the upstream cause of these
symptoms may share common neuropathology
Kesby et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:30 
Page 5 of 12
 neurochemistry50,51,78, 79. Evidence of subcortical dopa-
minergic hyperactivity or sensitivity in animal models is
proposed to represent the face validity (i.e., mimicking the
phenomenology
of
schizophrenia)
for
psychosis
in
patients. The most commonly used behavioural assess-
ments of positive symptoms in animal models include
enhanced amphetamine-induced locomotion and deficits
in prepulse inhibition (PPI)81. These tests are widely used
because they are relatively simple to perform. However,
we propose that given current knowledge of the neuro-
biology in schizophrenia, they have outlived their useful-
ness as measures of positive symptoms.
Amphetamine-induced locomotion
Amphetamine increases dopamine release in striatal
brain regions of both humans38 and rats82. Amphetamine-
related behaviours in rodents are also strongly linked to
activity in striatal brain regions82, 83. Thus, an increased
locomotor
response
to
amphetamine
(and
other
psychostimulants, which face similar criticisms) is con-
sidered a simple test to reflect the subcortical hyperdo-
paminergia
underlying
the
psychotic
symptoms
in
schizophrenia. Most animal models of schizophrenia
report increased locomotor activation after psychosti-
mulants78. However, the recent clinical evidence descri-
bed above suggests that current assessments of animal
models does not reflect contemporaneous knowledge of
dopamine activity in those with schizophrenia.
The relative contribution of specific dopamine pathways
to amphetamine-induced locomotion provides a good
example of why a paradigm shift is required for research
using animal models for positive symptoms in schizo-
phrenia. For example, amphetamine-induced locomotion
is largely driven by limbic dopamine release. Local
administration of amphetamine84–87 or dopamine84,88, 89
into the nucleus accumbens induces locomotion. Fur-
thermore, blocking dopamine signalling in the nucleus
accumbens
attenuates
amphetamine-induced
=
Human
A.
B. Goal-directed action
C. Serial reversal learning
Rodent
=
Devaluation
Initial
learning
Reversal
1,3,5...
Reversal
2,4,6...
Responses
Responses
Outcome-specific devaluation
*
*
Human
Rodent
Human
Rodent
Action
Lever presses
or nose pokes
Reward
Food reward
Action
Button presses
Reward
Food/monetary
reward
Fig. 4 Comparisons for cognitive tests in humans and rodents. Humans and rodents can both perform cognitive tasks that feature actions to
obtain rewards (a) The primary differences in testing are that humans can receive monetary rewards whereas rodents tend to be given food rewards.
Furthermore, rodents require more initial training to learn the action (i.e., lever pressing or nose poking). To test for goal-directed action (b) both
humans and rodents are trained to associate two actions (left and right button/lever presses) with two separate food rewards. One of these rewards
is then devalued through an aversive video (cockroaches on the food item) for humans or feeding to satiety in rodents. Healthy controls will
demonstrate outcome-specific devaluation by biasing their response towards the food reward that was not devalued. Serial reversal learning (c)
requires the subject to learn a simple discrimination between two choices of which one is associated with a reward. Once certain criteria are met, the
contingencies are reversed so that the non-rewarded stimulus is now rewarded and the previously rewarded stimulus does not attain a reward. This
is classified as the first reversal. Once the criteria are met for the new contingencies, the rewarding stimulus is switched again (back to the original
pairings) for the second reversal. This switching back and forth continues until completion of the test
Kesby et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:30 
Page 6 of 12
 locomotion90. Specifically activating limbic dopamine
projections using chemogenetic tools robustly increases
locomotion, but activating associative dopamine projec-
tions does not91. Thus, there is an anatomical misalign-
ment between the primary behavioural outcome deemed
important for positive symptoms in animal models of
schizophrenia (i.e, psychostimulant-induced locomotion
driven by limbic dopamine), and clinical evidence in
patients (hyperactive associative striatal dopamine). Fur-
thermore, clinical studies directly comparing activity
levels in patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
suggest that hyperactivity may be a core feature of bipolar
disorder rather than schizophrenia92.
One argument for amphetamine-induced locomotion
is that it is predictive of antipsychotic efficacy, but this is
merely a serendipitous side effect. Systemically admi-
nistered amphetamine increases dopamine function in
both the limbic striatum (locomotion) and associative
striatum (positive symptoms). Systemically administered
antipsychotics antagonise D2 receptors throughout the
brain.
Therefore,
amphetamine-induced
locomotion
acts serendipitously to predict antipsychotic effective-
ness via dopamine release in a parallel circuit (limbic vs.
associative dopamine). Optimally, antipsychotics that
diminish
dopamine
signalling
preferentially
in
the
associative, rather than the limbic, striatum need to be
developed. Obviously, amphetamine-induced locomo-
tion would not be predictive for the latter treatment
options.
Prepulse Inhibition
One of the most consistently observed neurological
impairments in schizophrenia is impaired sensorimotor
gating in the form of decreased PPI93, 94. Deficits in PPI
may reflect an inability to gate out irrelevant information.
PPI deficits also respond to antipsychotics but are not
specific to schizophrenia93, 94. Thus, PPI deficits do not
represent a specific or diagnostic trait of schizophrenia.
Intact cortical and striatal function are critical for PPI95
and, therefore, deficits in PPI also reflect an interface
between positive and cognitive symptom groups81.
PPI is assessed almost identically in rodents and
humans and, therefore, is one of the most widely studied
deficits in schizophrenia. In rodents, the contribution of
limbic dopamine projections to PPI are well-known95,
though the associative striatum has also been impli-
cated96, 97. Thus, PPI deficits clearly lack specificity con-
cerning
the
hyperdopaminergia
observed
in
schizophrenia. Therefore, when assessing rodent models,
PPI impairments alone are insufficient for determining
positive symptom phenotypes and their predictive validity
suffers from the same criticism as that of amphetamine-
induced locomotion (parallel blockade of limbic D2
receptors).
Can we objectively test positive symptom
connectivity in rodents?
Clearly, alternative behavioural phenotypes in animal
models, consistent with the underlying neuroanatomical/
Limbic
Striatum
Striatum
Prefrontal Cortex
vmPFC
mPFC/dlPFC
Outcome
Reward
Amygdala
mOFC
ACC
Motor
Striatum
Habitual
behaviour
Motor
cortex
Midbrain Dopamine
Striatum
latOFC
Midbrain Dopamine
vmPFC
Reversal
learning
Strategy
or rule
A. Goal-directed action
B. 
Fig. 5 Behavioural tests to probe associative striatal function. a The neurocircuitry involved in goal-directed action can be split into three
primary circuits. The associative system (red), including the PFC and ACC, is required for the acquisition and expression of goal-directed action, which
is sensitive to outcome devaluation. In contrast, the limbic system (green) is critical for the formation of associations between reward predictive
stimuli and action. Habitual behaviours rely on the sensorimotor system (purple). b Behavioural flexibility involves OFC and PFC inputs to the
associative striatum. The OFC is critical for reversal learning whereas the PFC is required when shifting to new rules or strategies. The associative
striatum is the only common region required for goal-directed action that is sensitive to outcome devaluation and serial reversal learning. OFC
orbitofrontal cortex, PFC prefrontal cortex, ACC anterior cingulate cortex, vm ventromedial, m medial, dl dorsolateral, lat lateral
Kesby et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:30 
Page 7 of 12
 biological features of schizophrenia, need to be estab-
lished. This does not invalidate our current rodent mod-
els; it just emphasises that, in light of the recent
compelling PET evidence in patients, we need to review
their relevance to the positive symptoms of schizophrenia.
Psychosis, an extremely ‘human’ syndrome, will never be
truly observable in rodents. However, we can, and should,
aim to establish more translationally relevant tests for the
underlying neurobiology of psychosis. Ultimately, we need
better behavioural tests for positive symptoms in animal
models that will lead to therapies efficacious for both
positive and cognitive symptoms in patients. We contend
that tests aimed at understanding associative striatal
function are imperative. We propose that a combination
of cognitive behavioural tasks, that can be tested similarly
in humans and rodents (Fig. 4a), represents our best
opportunity to assess positive symptom neurobiology in
animal models. It is important to consider that neither
task alone is a reliable indicator of positive symptom
neurobiology (as these tasks assess cognitive function and
outcomes are therefore relevant to cognitive symptoms);
however, in combination they can help isolate associative
striatal function.
Goal-directed action: sensitivity to outcome devaluation
Goal-directed behaviour is critical for understanding
the relationship between actions and their consequences
in both humans and rodents. Moreover, goal-directed
action heavily depends on the function of the associative
striatum21,24, 98–100 and can be assessed using near iden-
tical behavioural paradigms in both humans101 and
rodents102 (Fig. 4b). To test impairments in the learning
of action-outcome associations in humans and rodents
the sensitivity to outcome-specific devaluation can be
determined. Outcome-specific devaluation is useful way
of establishing that an action is goal-directed and that the
correct action–outcome associations have been formed. In
order to test this, after training to associate actions with
specific outcomes (action–outcome association), one of
the outcomes is devalued. After devaluation, when the
subject is given the choice between the two action-
outcome pairs, healthy controls respond more for the
outcome that was not devalued. This demonstrates the
ability to establish action-outcome associations correctly
and adapt actions based on newly acquired information.
The specific neurocircuitry involved in goal-directed
behaviour is based on years of associative learning
research103. Sensitivity to outcome devaluation is depen-
dent on the PFC and associative striatum (Fig. 5a).
Impairments in goal-directed action in schizophrenia
have been associated with altered caudate function101 and
disorganised thought104. Importantly, the insensitivity to
outcome devaluation observed in persons with schizo-
phrenia was not due to impairments in reward sensitivity
after devaluation (i.e., limbic systems) but rather, reflected
an inability to use this information to direct choice101.
Behavioural flexibility: serial reversal learning
One limitation of outcome-specific devaluation is that it
does not allow for the delineation of functional deficits in
the PFC vs. associative striatum. Thus, pairing this task
with another that relies on the associative striatum, but
not the PFC, is required. The basal ganglia is also involved
in
flexible
decision-making
and
specifically
reversal
learning (the ability to adapt when outcome contingencies
are reversed) which can be tested similarly in humans and
rodents (Fig. 4c). Extensive work in rodents, primates and
humans have demonstrated that specific forms of beha-
vioural flexibility are dependent on differing neuro-
circuitry69,105, 106(Fig. 5b). For example, the orbitofrontal
cortex and associative striatum are critical for reversal
learning when re-exposed to previous contingencies (e.g.,
serial reversal learning). In contrast, the PFC is critical for
shifting from one rule or strategy to another (i.e., atten-
tional set-shifting). Thus, deficits in serial reversal learn-
ing are particularly sensitive to orbitofrontal cortex and
associative striatal dysfunction but not PFC dysfunction.
Persons with schizophrenia exhibit deficits in both
attentional set-shifting and reversal learning107. Deficits in
reversal learning are independent of working memory
deficits and have also been associated with disorganised
thought108.
A circuit level approach to positive symptoms in animal
models
Advances in behavioural neuroscience have helped to
delineate specific circuits important for aspects of com-
plex behaviour. Moreover, improvements in circuit iso-
lation
using
techniques
such
as
optogenetics109
or
chemogenetics110 mean the field is at a point now where
we can focus on particular brain regions and circuits. The
proposed tasks, outcome-specific devaluation and serial
reversal learning, provide a potential mechanism to focus
on associative striatal function (Fig. 5). For example, an
insensitivity to outcome devaluation and impaired serial
reversal learning would be predicted if associative striatal
function is compromised. In contrast, an insensitivity to
outcome
devaluation
but
maintained
serial
reversal
learning would predict impairments in PFC function. The
opposite would be true if orbitofrontal cortex dysfunction
is present. Although this is far from perfect, an under-
standing of the extended connectivity from the associative
striatum provides a starting point to probe animal models
of schizophrenia to determine whether they demonstrate
true associative striatal dysfunction rather than limbic
dysfunction. Like psychosis, deficits in goal-directed
behaviour103 and reversal learning107 are observed in a
multitude of disorders other than schizophrenia, meaning
Kesby et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:30 
Page 8 of 12
 that multiple tests assessing cognitive function and other
circuitry will still be required to determine how useful one
particular animal model will be to an individual psychia-
tric condition. This combination of tests, however, will
allow for a more selective assessment of associative
striatal function.
Challenging longstanding assumptions and
moving forward
Clozapine, discovered in the 1960’s, remains the most
effective antipsychotic medication, although its use is
restricted due to its side effect profile111. This stagnation in
drug development for schizophrenia highlights a key
weakness in schizophrenia research; a lack of effective bi-
directional translation between basic and clinical research.
The fact that the current methods of testing for psychotic
symptoms in rodents are now misaligned with recent
clinical evidence indicates a need to advance how positive
symptoms are examined in animal models. We have pro-
posed a combination of behavioural tests in rodents that are
sensitive to dysfunction at the primary site of dopaminergic
neurobiology observed in schizophrenia. There will never
be a perfect model for psychosis in rodents, but it is critical
that we acknowledge the limitations of current methods so
that an active dialogue is established.
It is also imperative that basic and clinical researchers
maintain
active
collaborations
to
prevent
the
mis-
interpretation or mistranslation of animal studies. For
example, based on the work in monkeys and rodents112–
114, the results of D1 receptor agonists on working
memory function in schizophrenia have been largely
negative115–117. One contributing factor may have been
that the preclinical studies tested delay-dependent work-
ing memory (i.e., how long a piece of information is kept
in working memory), whereas the clinical studies tested a
differing
working
memory
construct,
memory
span
capacity (i.e., how many items can be kept in working
memory at one time). Other factors such as medication
history118 may also interfere with the effectiveness of
translation between preclinical and clinical studies. To
improve
translational
schizophrenia
research
it
is
imperative that we build better avenues for communica-
tion between basic and clinical research teams to avoid
the aforementioned issues.
Conclusion
Complex syndromes like schizophrenia require a con-
stant reformulation and evolution of ideas and strategies
that cannot be achieved by either basic or clinical research
in isolation. Clinically, the point at which psychotic
symptoms become apparent has dictated our primary
diagnostic criteria. Furthermore, it has become evident
that a range of complex symptoms emerge before this
diagnostic time point. Clinical research must continue to
elucidate the features associated with the development of
psychosis and better inform a patient’s clinical trajectory
throughout the course of schizophrenia. However, our
current ability to model psychotic symptoms in animal
models is at best questionable and based on historical
presumptions rather than recent clinical evidence. Thus,
it is imperative that basic research using animal models
develops objective measures for the neurobiology under-
lying psychosis in schizophrenia. Understanding in detail
the neurobiological processes that precede these beha-
vioural abnormalities, an avenue of research that cannot
be conducted in humans, now becomes a priority. It is
only by a synthesis of such approaches that novel ther-
apeutic targets and treatments will emerge.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by an Advance Queensland Research Fellowship (to
J.P.K.), a National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Practitioner
Fellowship Grant (APP1105807 to J.G.S.), a NHMRC John Cade Fellowship
(APP1056929 to J.J.M.) and a Niels Bohr Professorship from the Danish National
Research Foundation (to J.J.M.).
Author details
1Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD,
Australia. 2Centre for Clinical Research, Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Queensland, Herston, QLD, Australia. 3Queensland Centre for Mental Health
Research, The Park Centre for Mental Health, Wacol, QLD, Australia. 4National
Centre for Register-based Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark.
5Metro North Mental Health, Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital, Herston,
QLD, Australia
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Publisher's note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Received: 18 July 2017 Revised: 10 October 2017 Accepted: 26 October
2017
References
1.
McNally, J. M. & McCarley, R.W. Gamma band oscillations: a key to under-
standing schizophrenia symptoms and neural circuit abnormalities. Curr.
Opin. Psychiatry 29, 202–210 (2016).
2.
Laruelle, M. Schizophrenia: from dopaminergic to glutamatergic interven-
tions. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 14, 97–102 (2014).
3.
Aymard, N. et al. Long-term pharmacoclinical follow-up in schizophrenic
patients treated with risperidone - Plasma and red blood cell concentrations
of risperidone and its 9-hydroxymetabolite and their relationship to whole
blood
serotonin
and
tryptophan,
plasma
homovanillic
acid,
5-
hydroxyindoleacetic acid, dihydroxyphenylethyleneglycol and clinical eva-
luations. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 26, 975–988 (2002).
4.
Egerton, A. & Stone, J. M. The glutamate hypothesis of schizophrenia: neu-
roimaging and drug development. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 13, 1500–1512
(2012).
5.
Marder, S. R. The NIMH-MATRICS project for developing cognition-
enhancing agents for schizophrenia. Dialog. Clin. Neurosci. 8, 109–113 (2006).
6.
DeLisi, L. E. The significance of age of onset for schizophrenia. Schizophr. Bull.
18, 209–215 (1992).
7.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders, DSM-5. (American Psychiatric Association, Washington, DC, 2013).
Kesby et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:30 
Page 9 of 12
 8.
Howes, O. D. et al. Elevated striatal dopamine function linked to prodromal
signs of schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychiat 66, 13–20 (2009).
9.
Kegeles, L. S. et al. Increased synaptic dopamine function in associative
regions of the striatum in schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 67, 231–239
(2010).
10.
Laruelle, M. et al. Schizophrenia is associated with increased synaptic
dopamine in associative rather than limbic regions of the striatum. Neu-
ropsychopharmacology 30, S196–S196 (2005).
11.
Jones, C. A., Watson, D. J. & Fone, K. C. Animal models of schizophrenia. Br. J.
Pharmacol. 164, 1162–1194 (2011).
12.
Saha, S., Scott, J. G., Varghese, D. & McGrath, J. J. The association between
general psychological distress and delusional-like experiences: a large
population-based study. Schizophr. Res. 127, 246–251 (2011).
13.
Laurens, K. R. & Cullen, A. E. Toward earlier identification and preventative
intervention in schizophrenia: evidence from the London Child Health and
Development Study. Soc. Psychiatry Psychiatr. Epidemiol. 51, 475–491 (2015).
14.
Kelleher, I. et al. Neurocognitive performance of a community-based sample
of young people at putative ultra high risk for psychosis: support for the
processing speed hypothesis. Cogn. Neuropsychiatry 18, 9–25 (2013).
15.
Connell, M. et al. Hallucinations in adolescents and risk for mental disorders
and suicidal behavior in adulthood: prospective evidence from the MUSP
birth cohort study. Schizophr. Res. 176, 546–551 (2016).
16.
McGrath, J. J. et al. The bidirectional associatio ns between psychotic
experiences and dsm-iv mental disorders. Am. J. Psychiatry 173, 997–1006
(2016).
17.
Creese, I., Burt, D. R. & Snyder, S. H. Dopamine receptor binding predicts
clinical and pharmacological potencies of antischizophrenic drugs. Science
192, 481–483 (1976).
18.
Seeman, P. & Lee, T. Antipsychotic drugs: direct correlation between clinical
potency and presynaptic action on dopamine neurons. Science 188,
1217–1219 (1975).
19.
Howes, O. D. et al. The nature of dopamine dysfunction in schizophrenia and
what this means for treatment. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 69, 776–786 (2012).
20.
Kegeles, L. S. et al. Striatal and extrastriatal dopamine D2/D3 receptors in
schizophrenia evaluated with [18F]fallypride positron emission tomography.
Biol. Psychiatry 68, 634–641 (2010).
21.
Liljeholm, M. & O’Doherty, J. P. Contributions of the striatum to learning,
motivation, and performance: an associative account. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16,
467–475 (2012).
22.
Joel, D. & Weiner, I. The connections of the dopaminergic system with the
striatum in rats and primates: An analysis with respect to the functional and
compartmental organization of the striatum. Neuroscience 96, 451–474
(2000).
23.
Heilbronner, S. R., Rodriguez-Romaguera, J., Quirk, G. J., Groenewegen, H. J. &
Haber, S. N. Circuit-based corticostriatal homologies between rat and pri-
mate. Biol. Psychiatry 80, 509–521 (2016).
24.
Balleine, B. W. & O’Doherty, J. P. Human and rodent homologies in action
control: corticostriatal determinants of goal-directed and habitual action.
Neuropsychopharmacology 35, 48–69 (2010).
25.
Haber, S. N. Corticostriatal circuitry. Dialog. Clin. Neurosci. 18, 7–21 (2016).
26.
Angrist, B. & Vankammen, D. P. CNS stimulants as tools in the study of
schizophrenia. Trends Neurosci. 7, 388–390 (1984).
27.
Lieberman, J. A., Kane, J. M. & Alvir, J. Provocative tests with psychostimulant
drugs in schizophrenia. Psychopharmacology 91, 415–433 (1987).
28.
Janowsky, D. S., Elyousef, M. K., Davis, J. M. & Sekerke, H. J. Provocation of
Schizophrenic Symptoms by Intravenous Administration of Methylpheni-
date. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 28, 185–191 (1973).
29.
Abi-Dargham, A. et al. Increased baseline occupancy of D-2 receptors by
dopamine in schizophrenia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 8104–8109
(2000).
30.
Abi-Dargham, A., van de Giessen, E., Slifstein, M., Kegeles, L. S. & Laruelle, M.
Baseline and Amphetamine-Stimulated Dopamine Activity Are Related in
Drug-Naive Schizophrenic Subjects. Biol. Psychiatry 65, 1091–1093 (2009).
31.
Breier, A. et al. Schizophrenia is associated with elevated amphetamine-
induced synaptic dopamine concentrations: Evidence from a novel positron
emission tomography method. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 2569–2574
(1997).
32.
Laruelle, M., Abi-Dargham, A., Gil, R., Kegeles, L. & Innis, R. Increased dopamine
transmission in schizophrenia: Relationship to illness phases. Biol. Psychiatry
46, 56–72 (1999).
33.
Laruelle, M. & Abi-Dargham, P. Dopamine as the wind of the psychotic fire:
new evidence from brain imaging studies. J. Psychopharmacol. 13, 358–371
(1999).
34.
Abi-Dargham, A. et al. Increased striatal dopamine transmission in schizo-
phrenia: confirmation in a second cohort. Am. J. Psychiatry 155, 761–767
(1998).
35.
Laruelle, M. et al. Single photon emission computerized tomography ima-
ging of amphetamine-induced dopamine release in drug-free schizophrenic
subjects. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 93, 9235–9240 (1996).
36.
Fusar-Poli, P. & Meyer-Lindenberg, A. Striatal Presynaptic Dopamine in
Schizophrenia, Part II: Meta-Analysis of F-18/C-11 -DOPA PET Studies. Schi-
zophr. Bull. 39, 33–42 (2013).
37.
Howes, O. D. et al. Midbrain dopamine function in schizophrenia and
depression: a post-mortem and positron emission tomographic imaging
study. Brain 136, 3242–3251 (2013).
38.
Howes, O. D., Fusar-Poli, P., Bloomfield, M., Selvaraj, S. & McGuire, P. From the
prodrome to chronic schizophrenia: the neurobiology underlying psychotic
symptoms and cognitive impairments. Curr. Pharm. Des. 18, 459–465
(2012).
39.
Kapur, S. Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience: a framework linking
biology, phenomenology, and pharmacology in schizophrenia. Am. J. Psy-
chiatry 160, 13–23 (2003).
40.
Winton-Brown, T. T., Fusar-Poli, P., Ungless, M. A. & Howes, O. D. Dopami-
nergic basis of salience dysregulation in psychosis. Trends Neurosci. 37, 85–94
(2014).
41.
Bloemen, O. J. et al. Striatal dopamine D2/3 receptor binding following
dopamine depletion in subjects at ultra high risk for psychosis. Eur. Neu-
ropsychopharmacol. 23, 126–132 (2013).
42.
Egerton, A. et al. Presynaptic striatal dopamine dysfunction in people at ultra-
high risk for psychosis: findings in a second cohort. Biol. Psychiatry 74,
106–112 (2013).
43.
Fusar-Poli, P. et al. Abnormal frontostriatal interactions in people with pro-
dromal signs of psychosis A Multimodal Imaging Study. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry
67, 683–691 (2010).
44.
Fusar-Poli, P. et al. Abnormal prefrontal activation directly related to pre-
synaptic striatal dopamine dysfunction in people at clinical high risk for
psychosis. Mol. Psychiatry 16, 67–75 (2011).
45.
Howes, O. et al. Progressive increase in striatal dopamine synthesis capacity
as patients develop psychosis: a PET study. Mol. Psychiatry 16, 885–886
(2011).
46.
Howes, O. D. et al. Dopamine synthesis capacity before onset of psychosis: a
prospective (18)F -DOPA PET imaging study. Am. J. Psychiatry 168,
1311–1317 (2011).
47.
Grace, A. A. Dysregulation of the dopamine system in the pathophysiology
of schizophrenia and depression. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 524–532 (2016).
48.
Stone, J. M. et al. Altered relationship between hippocampal glutamate levels
and striatal dopamine function in subjects at ultra high risk of psychosis. Biol.
Psychiatry 68, 599–602 (2010).
49.
O’Connor, W. T. & O’Shea, S. D. Clozapine and GABA transmission in schi-
zophrenia disease models: establishing principles to guide treatments.
Pharmacol. Ther. 150, 47–80 (2015).
50.
Eyles, D., Feldon, J. & Meyer, U. Schizophrenia: do all roads lead to dopamine
or is this where they start? Evidence from two epidemiologically informed
developmental rodent models. Transl. Psychiatry 2, e81 (2012).
51.
Kesby, J. P., Cui, X., Burne, T. H. J. & Eyles, D. W. Altered dopamine ontogeny in
the developmentally vitamin D deficient rat and its relevance to schizo-
phrenia. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 7, 111 (2013).
52.
Demjaha, A. et al. Antipsychotic treatment resistance in schizophrenia
associated with elevated glutamate levels but normal dopamine function.
Biol. Psychiatry 75, E11–E13 (2014).
53.
McCarthy-Jones, S. et al. Occurrence and co-occurrence of hallucinations by
modality in schizophrenia-spectrum disorders. Psychiatry Res. 252, 154–160
(2017).
54.
Amad, A. et al. The multimodal connectivity of the hippocampal complex in
auditory and visual hallucinations. Mol. Psychiatry 19, 184–191 (2014).
55.
Silbersweig, D. A. et al. A functional neuroanatomy of hallucinations in
schizophrenia. Nature 378, 176–179 (1995).
56.
Behrendt, R. P. Contribution of hippocampal region CA3 to consciousness
and schizophrenic hallucinations. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 34, 1121–1136
(2010).
Kesby et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:30 
Page 10 of 12
 57.
Larivière, S. et al. Altered functional connectivity in brain networks underlying
self-referential processing in delusions of reference in schizophrenia. Psy-
chiatry Res. 263, 32–43 (2017).
58.
Braun, C. M., Dumont, M., Duval, J., Hamel-Hebert, I. & Godbout, L. Brain
modules of hallucination: an analysis of multiple patients with brain lesions. J.
Psychiatry Neurosci. 28, 432–449 (2003).
59.
Howes, O. D. et al. Dopaminergic function in the psychosis spectrum: an F-18
-DOPA Imaging Study in healthy individuals with auditory hallucinations.
Schizophr. Bull. 39, 807–814 (2013).
60.
McMurtray, A. et al. Acute Psychosis Associated with Subcortical Stroke:
Comparison between Basal Ganglia and Mid-Brain Lesions. Case Rep. Neurol.
Med. 2014, 428425 (2014).
61.
Cheng, Y.-C. & Liu, H.-C. Psychotic symptoms associated with left caudate
infarction. Int. J. Gerontol. 9, 180–182 (2015).
62.
Arzy, S. & Schurr, R. “God has sent me to you”: right temporal epilepsy, left
prefrontal psychosis. Epilepsy Behav. 60, 7–10 (2016).
63.
Poletti, M. & Sambataro, F. The development of delusion revisited: a trans-
diagnostic framework. Psychiatry Res. 210, 1245–1259 (2013).
64.
Behrens, T. E. et al. Non-invasive mapping of connections between human
thalamus and cortex using diffusion imaging. Nat. Neurosci. 6, 750–757
(2003).
65.
Haijma, S. V., Van Haren, N., Cahn, W., Koolschijn, P. C. M. P., Hulshoff Pol, H. E.
& Kahn, R. S. Brain volumes in schizophrenia: A meta-analysis in over 18
000 subjects. Schizophr. Bull. 39, 1129–1138 (2013).
66.
Harrisberger, F. et al. Alterations in the hippocampus and thalamus in indi-
viduals at high risk for psychosis. NPJ Schizophr. 2, 16033 (2016).
67.
Sommer, I. E. et al. The treatment of hallucinations in schizophrenia spectrum
disorders. Schizophr. Bull. 38, 704–714 (2012).
68.
Calabresi, P., Picconi, B., Tozzi, A., Ghiglieri, V. & Di Filippo, M. Direct and
indirect pathways of basal ganglia: a critical reappraisal. Nat. Neurosci. 17,
1022–1030 (2014).
69.
van Schouwenburg, M., Aarts, E. & Cools, R. Dopaminergic modulation of
cognitive control: distinct roles for the prefrontal cortex and the basal
ganglia. Curr. Pharm. Des. 16, 2026–2032 (2010).
70.
Colder, B. The basal ganglia select the expected sensory input used for
predictive coding. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 9, 119 (2015).
71.
Redgrave, P., Prescott, T. J. & Gurney, K. The basal ganglia: a vertebrate
solution to the selection problem? Neuroscience 89, 1009–1023 (1999).
72.
Cazorla, M. et al. Dopamine D2 receptors regulate the anatomical and
functional balance of basal ganglia circuitry. Neuron 81, 153–164 (2014).
73.
Ertugrul, A. et al. The effect of clozapine on regional cerebral blood flow and
brain metabolite ratios in schizophrenia: relationship with treatment
response. Psychiatry Res. 174, 121–129 (2009).
74.
Waltz, J. A. The neural underpinnings of cognitive flexibility and their dis-
ruption in psychotic illness. Neuroscience 345, 203–217 (2017)..
75.
Swartz, M. S. et al. What CATIE found: results from the schizophrenia trial.
Psychiatr. Serv. 59, 500–506 (2008).
76.
Reichenberg, A. et al. Static and dynamic cognitive deficits in childhood
preceding adult schizophrenia: a 30-year study. Am. J. Psychiatry 167,
160–169 (2010).
77.
Mitchell, K. J. et al. Schizophrenia: Evolution and synthesis in: (eds Silverstein S.
M., Moghaddam B., & Wykes T.) 212–226 (MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, 2013)
78.
O’Tuathaigh, C. M. & Waddington, J. L. Closing the translational gap between
mutant mouse models and the clinical reality of psychotic illness. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 58, 19–35 (2015).
79.
du Bois, T. M. et al. Altered dopamine receptor and dopamine transporter
binding and tyrosine hydroxylase mRNA expression following perinatal
NMDA receptor blockade. Neurochem. Res. 33, 1224–1231 (2008).
80.
Moore, H., Jentsch, J. D., Ghajarnia, M., Geyer, M. A. & Grace, A. A. A neuro-
behavioral systems analysis of adult rats exposed to methylazoxymethanol
acetate on E17: Implications for the neuropathology of schizophrenia. Biol.
Psychiatry 60, 253–264 (2006).
81.
van den Buuse, M. Modeling the positive symptoms of schizophrenia in
genetically modified mice: pharmacology and methodology aspects. Schi-
zophr. Bull. 36, 246–270 (2010).
82.
Sharp, T., Zetterstrom, T., Ljungberg, T. & Ungerstedt, U. A direct comparison
of amphetamine-induced behaviours and regional brain dopamine release
in the rat using intracerebral dialysis. Brain Res. 401, 322–330 (1987).
83.
Kelly, P. H., Seviour, P. W. & Iversen, S. D. Amphetamine and apomorphine
responses in the rat following 6-OHDA lesions of the nucleus accumbens
septi and corpus striatum. Brain Res. 94, 507–522 (1975).
84.
Pijnenburg, A. J., Honig, W. M., Van der Heyden, J. A. & Van Rossum, J. M.
Effects of chemical stimulation of the mesolimbic dopamine system upon
locomotor activity. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 35, 45–58 (1976).
85.
David, H. N., Sissaoui, K. & Abraini, J. H. Modulation of the locomotor
responses induced by D-1-like and D-2-like dopamine receptor agonists and
D-amphetamine by NMDA and non-NMDA glutamate receptor agonists
and antagonists in the core of the rat nucleus accumbens. Neuropharma-
cology 46, 179–191 (2004).
86.
Kelley, A. E., Gauthier, A. M. & Lang, C. G. Amphetamine microinjections into
distinct striatal subregions cause dissociable effects on motor and ingestive
behavior. Behav. Brain Res. 35, 27–39 (1989).
87.
Staton, D. M. & Solomon, P. R. Microinjections of D-amphetamine into the
nucleus accumbens and caudate-putamen differentially affect stereotypy
and locomotion in the rat. Physiol. Psychol. 12, 159–162 (1984).
88.
Campbell, A., Villavicencio, A. T., Yeghiayan, S. K., Balikian, R. & Baldessarini, R. J.
Mapping of locomotor behavioral arousal induced by microinjections of
dopamine within nucleus accumbens septi of rat forebrain. Brain Res. 771,
55–62 (1997).
89.
Swanson, C. J., Heath, S., Stratford, T. R. & Kelley, A. E. Differential behavioral
responses to dopaminergic stimulation of nucleus accumbens subregions in
the rat. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 58, 933–945 (1997).
90.
Pijnenburg, A. J. J., Honig, W. M. M. & Vanrossum, J. M. Inhibition of D-
amphetamine-induced locomotor activity by injection of haloperidol into
nucleus accumbens of rat. Psychopharmacologia 41, 87–95 (1975).
91.
Boekhoudt, L. et al. Chemogenetic activation of dopamine neurons in the
ventral tegmental area, but not substantia nigra, induces hyperactivity in rats.
Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 26, 1784–1793 (2016).
92.
Perry, W. et al. Quantifying over-activity in bipolar and schizophrenia patients
in a human open field paradigm. Psychiatry Res. 178, 84–91 (2010).
93.
Braff, D. L. Prepulse in: Behavioral Neurobiology of Schizophrenia and Its
Treatment Vol. 4 (ed. Swerdlow N. R.) 349–371 (Springer-Verlag Berlin: Berlin,
2010)
94.
Swerdlow, N. R.. et al. Deficient prepulse inhibition in schizophrenia detected
by the multi-site COGS.Schizophr. Res. 152,503–512 (2014).
95.
Koch, M. The neurobiology of startle. Prog. Neurobiol. 59, 107–128 (1999).
96.
Baldan Ramsey, L. C., Xu, M., Wood, N. & Pittenger, C. Lesions of the dor-
somedial striatum disrupt prepulse inhibition. Neuroscience 180, 222–228
(2011).
97.
Swerdlow, N. R., Caine, S. B. & Geyer, M. A. Regionally selective effects of
intracerebral dopamine infusion on sensorimotor gating of the startle reflex
in rats. Psychopharmacology 108, 189–195 (1992).
98.
Corbit, L. H. & Janak, P. H. Posterior dorsomedial striatum is critical for both
selective instrumental and Pavlovian reward learning. Eur. J. Neurosci. 31,
1312–1321 (2010).
99.
Hikosaka, O., Kim, H. F., Yasuda, M. & Yamamoto, S. Basal ganglia circuits for
reward value-guided behavior. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 37, 289–306 (2014).
100.
Yin, H. H., Ostlund, S. B., Knowlton, B. J. & Balleine, B. W. The role of the
dorsomedial striatum in instrumental conditioning. Eur. J. Neurosci. 22,
513–523 (2005).
101.
Morris, R. W., Quail, S., Griffiths, K. R., Green, M. J. & Balleine, B. W. Corticostriatal
control of goal-directed action is impaired in schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry
77, 187–195 (2015).
102.
Matamales, M. et al. Aging-related dysfunction of striatal cholinergic inter-
neurons produces conflict in action selection. Neuron 90, 362–373 (2016).
103.
Griffiths, K. R., Morris, R. W. & Balleine, B. W. Translational studies of goal-
directed action as a framework for classifying deficits across psychiatric dis-
orders. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 8, 101 (2014).
104.
Bates, A. T., Kiehl, K. A., Laurens, K. R. & Liddle, P. F. Error-related negativity and
correct response negativity in schizophrenia. Clin. Neurophysiol.: Off. J. Int. Fed.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 113, 1454–1463 (2002).
105.
Ragozzino, M. E. The contribution of the medial prefrontal cortex, orbito-
frontal cortex, and dorsomedial striatum to behavioral flexibility. Ann. N.Y.
Acad. Sci. 1121, 355–375 (2007).
106.
Izquierdo, A. & Jentsch, J. D. Reversal learning as a measure of impulsive and
compulsive behavior in addictions. Psychopharmacology 219, 607–620 (2012).
107.
Chudasama, Y. & Robbins, T. W. Functions of frontostriatal systems in cog-
nition: comparative neuropsychopharmacological studies in rats, monkeys
and humans. Biol. Psychol. 73, 19–38 (2006).
108.
Pantelis, C. et al. Relationship of behavioural and symptomatic syndromes in
schizophrenia to spatial working memory and attentional set-shifting ability.
Psychol. Med. 34, 693–703 (2004).
Kesby et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:30 
Page 11 of 12
 109.
Cardozo Pinto D. F., Lammel S. Viral vector strategies for investigating mid-
brain dopamine circuits underlying motivated behaviors. Pharmacol. Bio-
chem. Behav. (in press) (2017).
110.
Urban, D. J. & Roth, B. L. DREADDs (designer receptors exclusively activated
by designer drugs): chemogenetic tools with therapeutic utility. Annu. Rev.
Pharmacol. Toxicol. 55, 399–417 (2015).
111.
Siskind, D., McCartney, L., Goldschlager, R. & Kisely, S. Clozapine v. first- and
second-generation antipsychotics in treatment-refractory schizophrenia:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Br. J. Psychiatry 209, 385–392
(2016).
112.
Castner, S. A., Williams, G. V. & Goldman-Rakic, P. S. Reversal of antipsychotic-
induced working memory deficits by short-term dopamine D1 receptor
stimulation. Science 287, 2020–2022 (2000).
113.
Roberts, B. M., Seymour, P. A., Schmidt, C. J., Williams, G. V. & Castner, S. A.
Amelioration of ketamine-induced working memory deficits by dopamine
D1 receptor agonists. Psychopharmacology 210, 407–418 (2010).
114.
Zahrt, J., Taylor, J. R., Mathew, R. G. & Arnsten, A. F. Supranormal stimulation of
D1 dopamine receptors in the rodent prefrontal cortex impairs spatial
working memory performance. J. Neurosci. 17, 8528–8535 (1997).
115.
Girgis, R. R. et al. A proof-of-concept, randomized controlled trial of DAR-
0100A, a dopamine-1 receptor agonist, for cognitive enhancement in schi-
zophrenia. J. Psychopharmacol. 30, 428–435 (2016).
116.
George, M. S. et al. A single 20 mg dose of dihydrexidine (DAR-0100), a full
dopamine D1 agonist, is safe and tolerated in patients with schizophrenia.
Schizophr. Res. 93, 42–50 (2007).
117.
Rosell, D. R. et al. Effects of the D1 dopamine receptor agonist dihydrexidine
(DAR-0100A) on working memory in schizotypal personality disorder. Neu-
ropsychopharmacology 40, 446–453 (2015).
118.
Gill, K. M., Cook, J. M., Poe, M. M. & Grace, A. A. Prior antipsychotic drug
treatment prevents response to novel antipsychotic agent in the methyla-
zoxymethanol acetate model of schizophrenia. Schizophr. Bull. 40, 341–350
(2014).
Kesby et al. Translational Psychiatry  (2018) 8:30 
Page 12 of 12
