 Article
In Vivo Suppression of HIV Rebound by Didehydro-
Cortistatin A, a ‘‘Block-and-Lock’’ Strategy for HIV-1
Treatment
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Didehydro-Cortistatin A (dCA) reduces HIV transcription and
reactivation from latency
d dCA suppresses viral rebound after treatment interruption in
HIV+ humanized BLT mice
d dCA promotes epigenetic silencing of the HIV-1 promoter
d ‘‘Block-and-lock’’ approach is a viable alternative for a
functional HIV cure
Authors
Cari F. Kessing, Christopher C. Nixon,
Chuan Li, ..., Lydie Trautmann,
J. Victor Garcia, Susana T. Valente
Correspondence
victor_garcia@med.unc.edu (J.V.G.),
svalente@scripps.edu (S.T.V.)
In Brief
Tat inhibitors are amenable to functional
cure approaches, which aim to reduce
residual viremia during ART and limit viral
rebound during treatment interruption.
Using didehydro-Cortistatin A (dCA),
Kessing et al. demonstrate the concept in
human CD4+ T cells from aviremic
individuals and in the bone marrow-liver-
thymus mouse model of HIV latency.
Kessing et al., 2017, Cell Reports 21, 600–611
October 17, 2017 ª 2017 The Author(s).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.09.080
 Cell Reports
Article
In Vivo Suppression of HIV Rebound
by Didehydro-Cortistatin A,
a ‘‘Block-and-Lock’’ Strategy for HIV-1 Treatment
Cari F. Kessing,1,5 Christopher C. Nixon,2,5 Chuan Li,1,5 Perry Tsai,2 Hiroshi Takata,3,4 Guillaume Mousseau,1
Phong T. Ho,2 Jenna B. Honeycutt,2 Mohammad Fallahi,1 Lydie Trautmann,3,4 J. Victor Garcia,2,*
and Susana T. Valente1,6,*
1Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL, USA
2Division of Infectious Diseases, Center for AIDS Research, University of North Carolina, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
3U.S. Military HIV Research Program, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, MD, USA
4Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, Bethesda, MD, USA
5These authors contributed equally
6Lead Contact
*Correspondence: victor_garcia@med.unc.edu (J.V.G.), svalente@scripps.edu (S.T.V.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.09.080
SUMMARY
HIV-1 Tat activates viral transcription and limited Tat
transactivation correlates with latency establish-
ment. We postulated a ‘‘block-and-lock’’ functional
cure approach based on properties of the Tat inhibi-
tor didehydro-Cortistatin A (dCA). HIV-1 transcrip-
tional inhibitors could block ongoing viremia during
antiretroviral therapy (ART), locking the HIV promoter
in persistent latency. We investigated this hypothesis
in human CD4+ T cells isolated from aviremic individ-
uals. Combining dCA with ART accelerates HIV-1
suppression and prevents viral rebound after treat-
ment interruption, even during strong cellular ac-
tivation. We show that dCA mediates epigenetic
silencing by increasing nucleosomal occupancy at
Nucleosome-1, restricting RNAPII recruitment to
the HIV-1 promoter. The efficacy of dCA was studied
in the bone marrow-liver-thymus (BLT) mouse model
of HIV latency and persistence. Adding dCA to
ART-suppressed mice systemically reduces viral
mRNA in tissues. Moreover, dCA significantly delays
and reduces viral rebound levels upon treatment
interruption. Altogether, this work demonstrates the
potential of block-and-lock cure strategies.
INTRODUCTION
HIV persists in latently infected CD4+ T cells in infected individ-
uals even after prolonged periods on suppressive antiretroviral
therapy (ART). Stable cellular reservoirs that harbor proviral
DNA are thought to be the source of viremia upon ART interrup-
tion (Chun et al., 2008; G€
unthard et al., 2001; Søgaard et al.,
2015). Continuous viral production from viral reservoirs and
transcriptional reactivation from latently infected cells are not
affected by current antiretrovirals (ARVs), highlighting the need
for novel approaches to achieve such an end (Chun et al.,
2008; G€
unthard et al., 2001; Søgaard et al., 2015).
The viral Tat protein binds HIV-1 mRNA and efficiently recruits
the necessary transcriptional factors to the HIV promoter to
initiate
exponential
viral
transcription
elongation
(Dingwall
et al., 1989, 1990; Kao et al., 1987; Toohey and Jones, 1989).
Tat has no cellular homolog and is expressed early in the virus
life cycle, making it an ideal target for therapeutic intervention.
Inhibitors of Tat have been highly sought after, but none is yet
in the clinic. We identified didehydro-Cortistatin A (dCA) as a
specific and potent Tat inhibitor (Mousseau et al., 2012). Over
time, dCA drives HIV-1 gene expression into a state of persistent
latency, refractory to viral reactivation by the usual panel of la-
tency reversal agents (LRAs) in cell lines and primary CD4+
T cells isolated from infected individuals (Mousseau et al.,
2015a). We postulated that this type of HIV-1-specific transcrip-
tional inhibitors are amenable to a ‘‘block-and-lock’’ functional
type approach to HIV-1 cure. Through increased epigenetic
repression of the HIV promoter, Tat inhibitors could promote a
durable state of latency, halting ongoing viral transcription during
ART and blocking reactivation from latency (for example,
in situations of therapy non-compliance, or blocking ‘‘blips’’
which are spontaneous reactivation events during ART), which
may contribute to replenishment of the latent reservoir and
continued
persistence
of HIV infection
(Lorenzo-Redondo
et al., 2016; Rong and Perelson, 2009).
The small number of latently infected cells in vivo has hindered
studies of molecular mechanisms of HIV latency and reactiva-
tion. So far, no single primary cellular model alone accurately
captures the response characteristics of latently infected
T cells from patients because these use clonal HIV strains, culti-
vate CD4+ T cells in cytokine cocktails that alter cell subset rep-
resentation, or transform CD4+ T cells to prolong lifespan. We
used a cell culture approach that allows expansion of large
numbers of primary CD4+ T cells from successfully treated
HIV-infected donors in the presence of ART (Trautmann et al.,
2002, 2005; Van de Griend et al., 1984). Under these conditions,
primary CD4+ T cells carrying an autologous HIV reservoir prolif-
erate for 2 weeks, return to a resting state after 3 weeks, and can
600
Cell Reports 21, 600–611, October 17, 2017 ª 2017 The Author(s).
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
 be maintained for up to 10 weeks. Cells stop producing HIV par-
ticles after 3 weeks, but the virus can be reinduced either upon
drug interruption or upon stimulation with LRAs, all while preser-
ving their in vivo representation of the HIV reservoir. Using this
approach, we explored the long-term effects of a prior exposure
to dCA on natural or induced viral rebound during treatment
discontinuation. We previously showed the lasting inhibitory
activity of dCA over a short 6 day treatment interruption period
(Mousseau et al., 2015a). Here, we report that prior treatment
with dCA inhibits viral rebound when treatment is interrupted
for an extended 25-day period, even when cells were subjected
to protein kinase C (PKC) activation or strong T cell receptor
(TCR) signaling.
Repressive nucleosomes are associated with latent provi-
ruses, and, upon reactivation from latency, rearrangement
of the nucleosomal structure and loss of protection from
Nucleosome-1 (Nuc-1) regions is observed (Rafati et al.,
2011). To investigate the epigenetic profile at the HIV-1 pro-
moter mediated by dCA, we took advantage of the previously
described OM-10.1 HIV-1 latency model, in which we had es-
tablished a state of sustained latency by dCA (Mousseau
et al., 2015a). We used micrococcal nuclease (MNase) nucle-
osomal protection assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) to histone H3 to evaluate rearrangements of the
nucleosomal structure. We observed higher nucleosomal
occupancy (histone H3) at the Nuc-1 region and small
changes in H3 occupancy upon transcriptional activation in
dCA-treated cells. This result was supported by a drastic inhi-
bition of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) recruitment to the HIV pro-
moter and genome and, thus, inhibition of transcriptional
elongation.
To evaluate the in vivo efficacy of dCA, we utilized the bone
marrow-liver-thymus (BLT) mouse model of HIV-1 latency and
persistence. Numerous studies have shown that BLT mice reca-
pitulate key features of HIV infection, pathogenesis, and latency
(Cheng et al., 2017; Denton et al., 2012; 2014; Garcia, 2016; Mel-
kus et al., 2006; Zhen et al., 2017). Administration of dCA to
ART-suppressed animals for a period of 2 weeks resulted in a
general one-log loss of viral RNA in tissues. Furthermore, co-
dosing of dCA with ART for a period of 4 weeks significantly de-
layed viral rebound and reduced viral rebound levels after all
treatments were interrupted. These results demonstrate the ac-
tivity of dCA in an in vivo model of HIV-1 infection and represent a
strong proof of concept of the block-and-lock approach for the
functional cure of HIV.
RESULTS
dCA Accelerates HIV-1 Suppression
HIV-infected memory CD4+ T cells remain in a resting state in the
presence of ART; however, periodic activation of cells is believed
to occur in subjects on ART, contributing to the basal low levels
of viremia. In cell models of latency, the virus can be reactivated
either upon ART removal or upon cellular stimulation with HIV
LRAs. To study the ability of dCA to limit viral transcription in
these contexts, we used a previously established protocol
to maintain primary CD4+ T cells from infected individuals for
up to 10 weeks in culture, while preserving their characteristic
representation of the HIV reservoir (Kessing et al., 2017; Mous-
seau et al., 2015a).
Using this model, we previously reported dCA’s block of viral
rebound for a 6-day period after ART interruption. The question
remained, though, whether this inhibitory activity was long-last-
ing and whether it could withstand strong cellular stimulation.
Here we assessed the ability of dCA to promote transcriptional
suppression for a period of 25 days while receiving strong
T cell activation 7 days after treatment interruption. Peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from five HIV-infected sub-
jects on suppressive ART for at least 3 years were collected,
and CD4+ T cells were isolated and expanded in the presence
of interleukin-2 (IL-2) (100 U/mL), phytohemagglutinin (PHA)
(1 mg/mL), and ‘‘feeder cells’’ (Figure 1A). Cells were then kept
in culture for 60 days in medium containing IL-2 (20 U/mL) and
ART (efavirenz, zidovudine, and raltegravir) and with or without
50 nM dCA (‘‘ART’’ or ‘‘ART + dCA’’ conditions) (Figure 1B). Viral
particle genomic RNA in the culture supernatant was quantified
by ultrasensitive qRT-PCR every 7 days. After 21 days of treat-
ment, virus production from all five subjects’ cells exposed to
dCA was below the limit of detection and significantly inhibited
compared with ART alone (p = 0.0238) (Figure 1B). On day 35,
supernatant HIV RNA levels from all subjects’ cells were below
detection and remained so until day 60 in both treatment groups.
The amount of total integrated HIV DNA was measured over
time. As expected, because of the presence of ART under both
conditions, no significant differences in total HIV DNA content
were observed between the cells immediately after isolation
from the patients’ blood, labeled ex vivo, and the expanded cells
in ART or ART + dCA, up to day 42 (Figure 1C). Therefore, viral
mRNA production in dCA-treated samples is the consequence
of Tat transcriptional inhibition and not a reduction in proviral
content. Moreover, because the total HIV DNA content between
ex vivo cells and expanded ones is similar, the representation of
each individual’s viral reservoir is not being lost. However, on day
49, we observed a general loss of proviral DNA content following
the cellular expansion performed on day 42. This is possibly due
to some increased cytopathic effects associated with the age of
the cells, reflecting some of the limitations of primary models.
Nevertheless, the proviral content between the ART and the
ART with dCA-treated cells remains similar, permitting compar-
isons of viral RNA expression.
dCA Limits Viral Reactivation after Stimulation
To determine the ability of dCA to effectively block viral rebound
after strong nuclear factor kB (NF-kB) activation, cells were
treated with the PKC activator, prostratin, in the absence of
any treatment (Figure 1B, orange and pink arrows), on day 35,
when viral RNA production was below detection in all groups.
HIV RNA in the supernatant was measured by qRT-PCR 24 hr
later. When ART was removed, followed by stimulation, viral
rebound was immediately observed in all subjects’ cells (Fig-
ure 1D, orange bars). In contrast, upon dCA + ART removal fol-
lowed by stimulation, viral reactivation was inhibited by 96.3%,
100%, 100%, 99.4%, and 99.8% in cells from subjects A, B,
C, D, and E, respectively, with an overall average inhibition of
99% for all five subjects after 24 hr (Figure 1D, pink bars).
Upon prostratin treatment, viral reactivation in cells with prior
Cell Reports 21, 600–611, October 17, 2017
601
 A
C
D
F
E
B
Figure 1. Addition of dCA to ART Promotes Rapid HIV-1 Suppression from Primary Human CD4+ T Cells Isolated from Infected Individuals
and Inhibits Viral Rebound during Reactivation and Treatment Interruption
(A) PBMCs are extracted from successfully treated aviremic HIV-infected individuals (at least 3 years on ART). CD4+ T cells are isolated and expanded in PHA,
IL-2, and feeder cells (irradiated PBMCs from 3 healthy donors).
(B) Expanded primary human CD4+ T cells from 5 HIV-infected individuals were kept on IL-2 alone and treated with a cocktail of ART with or without 50 nM dCA.
Viral RNA levels in the supernatant of ART- and ART + dCA-treated cells were measured every 7 days. After 35 days in culture, viral RNA production in the
supernatant was below the detection limit (*p < 0.05).
(C) Total HIV DNA was determined up to 60 days in cells treated with ART or ART + dCA. The limit of detection for qRT-PCR is 3 viral copies per million cells, and
error bars represent SE.
(D) On day 35, cells were stimulated overnight with 1 mM prostratin without ART or dCA. Viral production in the supernatant was quantified by qRT-PCR. Error bars
represent SD.
(E) Aggregate plot of data from (D). There was a significant decrease (**p < 0.01) in viral rebound after stimulation in dCA-treated mice compared with ART alone.
Error bars represent SD.
(F) Treatment interruption does not result in immediate viral rebound even during strong cellular activation. On day 35, all drugs (ART and dCA) were removed, and
viral output in the supernatant was quantified for the next 25 days by qRT-PCR. Cells were re-expanded with PHA, IL-2, and feeder cells on day 42 to maintain cell
cultures and provide stimulation. The results show viral RNA levels in the supernatant for each individual sample. Error bars represent SD. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01,
***p < 0.001. ND, not detected; sup, supernatant.
602
Cell Reports 21, 600–611, October 17, 2017
 exposure to dCA was significantly reduced compared with cells
treated with ART alone (p = 0.008), and no significant differences
were observed in viral reactivation in dCA-treated cells before or
after stimulation (Figure 1E). These results demonstrate that prior
treatment with dCA (for 35 days) results in repression of viral pro-
moter activity, a potentially effective treatment for preventing
moments of viral reactivation under suppressive ART and replen-
ishment of the reservoir in vivo.
dCA Treatment Prevents Viral Rebound after Therapy
Interruption and Strongly Reduces Viral Rebound after
Mitogenic Stimulation
ART interruption in HIV-suppressed individuals, in all but excep-
tional cases, results in viral rebound within weeks. To determine
whether prior treatment with dCA could have lasting repressive
transcriptional activity after treatment interruption, we stopped
ART or ART + dCA on day 35 and followed viral replication in
the supernatant by qRT-PCR for another 25 days (up to
day 60) (Figures 1B, purple and green arrows, and 1F). Cells
remaining on treatment showed no viral production after
day 35 (Figure 1B, red and blue arrows). Seven days after treat-
ment cessation, viral rebound was readily observed in 4 of the 5
subjects’ cells treated with ART alone. No rebound was
observed in CD4+ T cells previously cultured in the presence of
ART + dCA from all five subjects by day 7. Viral rebound was
seen in all 5 ART-treated subjects’ cells 25 days after treatment
interruption, and only 2 rebounded minimally in cells previously
treated with ART + dCA (Figure 1F). To assess whether dCA-
mediated transcriptional suppression could withstand events
of viral reactivation even in the absence of treatment, cells
were activated on day 42 with PHA, IL-2, and feeder cells. In
all ART-treated cells (no dCA), viral production continuously
increased over time, whereas it was drastically inhibited in cells
treated with ART + dCA. Our results clearly demonstrate that
combining dCA with ART can potently inhibit viral reactivation
from latency after treatment cessation even during strong
cellular activation, suggesting that dCA contributes to long-last-
ing repression of the HIV promoter.
dCA Does Not Alter T Cell Activation Levels
The phenotype of the CD4+ T cells treated with ART or ART +
dCA was monitored weekly by flow cytometry up to day 49 to
quantify the number of live cells and to ensure re-establishment
of a resting state after expansion. We used CD38+ as an activa-
tion marker and CD127+ (IL-7 receptor) for quiescence (Fig-
ure S1A). Cells reached peak activation by day 14 after initial
expansion, followed by a decrease in activation and return to a
resting state. As expected, CD38+ expression increased and
CD127+ expression decreased during peak activation. Cells
were re-expanded on day 42, and expression of activation
markers increased accordingly. Additionally, the viability of the
cultures was measured by trypan blue staining over time during
treatment and after treatment interruption (Figure S1B), and DNA
content was measured before and after stimulation to ensure
that there was no loss or variation of the number of infected cells
between treatment groups (Figure S1C). Gene expression was
also monitored using a biomark assay of 52 genes related to
various signaling pathways, including T cell activation, cell cycle,
apoptosis, transcription factors, and TCR signaling (Figure S2).
No statistically significant differences were observed over time
between the three individuals’ cell samples and between treat-
ments. Even when not significant, we observed the GATA3 and
CCR7 genes to be the most altered between ART and ART +
dCA samples on day 14. It has been reported that GATA3 and
CCR7 expression is inversely correlated with HIV expression
(Kessing et al., 2017; Ramirez et al., 2014; Rueda et al., 2012).
Therefore, in future work, we will further investigate these genes
during expansion of the cells in vitro.
Collectively, no significant differences in phenotype or gene
expression were observed in cells treated with ART compared
with ART + dCA over time. Our results suggest that long-term
treatment of primary human CD4+ T cells in vitro with dCA estab-
lishes a state of sustained latency that nearly or completely
hinders the provirus capacity for reactivation after treatment
removal without significantly affecting viability, phenotype, or
cellular gene expression patterns.
Changes in Chromatin Signature and RNA Pol II
Recruitment after dCA Treatment
Differential nucleosome organization in the HIV-1 long terminal
repeat (LTR) correlates with transcription from proviral genomes
in latently infected cells (Rafati et al., 2011). Our previous results
suggested that dCA causes effects that promote the organiza-
tion of repressive chromatin structure that prevents strongly/
rapidly reactivating transcription of latent provirus. To examine
the molecular correlates that control transcription from the
HIV-1 promoter in response to long-term dCA treatment, we
assayed histone density and chromatin accessibility as well as
Pol II recruitment at the HIV-1 provirus using MNase digestion
(Rafati et al., 2011) and ChIP in the previously described
OM-10.1 HIV-1 latency model (Mousseau et al., 2015a).
OM-10.1 cells contain a single copy of a fully replicative provirus
and were treated with ART or ART + dCA until viral production
was almost undetectable by p24 ELISA in dCA-treated samples
(Figure 2A). On days 263, 276, and 286 (shown as circles and
squares in Figure 2A), HIV-1 transcription was stimulated using
the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor suberoylanilide hy-
droxamic acid (SAHA) (2.5 mM) for 8 hr in the presence of
treatment, and cell-associated HIV-1 RNA was measured by
qRT-PCR (Figure 2B). As expected, in OM-10.1 cells treated
with ART + dCA, we observed 98% less viral rebound after
SAHA treatment compared with cells treated with ART alone
(Figure 2B). At these time points, unstimulated and SAHA-stim-
ulated cells from each treatment condition were fixed with form-
aldehyde, and nuclei were prepared and treated with MNase
under conditions to generate mono-nucleosomes. Under unsti-
mulated conditions in OM10.1 cells, we detected MNase-pro-
tected regions at the 50 end of the LTR (Nuc-0) and in two regions
immediately downstream of the transcription start site (TSS),
Nuc-1 and Nuc-2, as well as an MNase-sensitive region at the
DNaseI-hypersensitive region (DHS-1) immediately upstream
of the TSS (Figure 2C). MNase protection, and most likely nucle-
osomal occupancy, at Nuc-0 or Nuc-2 was similar in resting cells
treated with ART compared with those treated with ART + dCA.
However, there was significantly stronger MNase protection at
Nuc-1 in cells treated with ART + dCA, suggesting increased
Cell Reports 21, 600–611, October 17, 2017
603
 A
C
E
D
B
Figure 2. Characterization of Chromatin Structure and RNA Pol II Recruitment to the HIV Genome after Long-Term Treatment with dCA Using
the OM10.1 Latency Model
(A) dCA inhibits viral production in the OM-10.1 cell line to almost undetectable levels. OM-10.1 cells were split and treated on average every 3 days in the
presence of ARVs with or without dCA (100 nM). Capsid production was quantified via p24 ELISA. Data are representative of four independent experiments.
(B) On days 263, 276, and 286, cells treated with ARVs and ARVs + dCA (100 nM) were stimulated with SAHA (2.5 mM) for 8 hr (highlighted with 1/@ in (A)). cDNAs
prepared from total RNA were quantified by qRT-PCR with Nef region primers. The results were normalized as the number of viral mRNA copies per glyceral-
dehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) mRNA. Viral mRNA generated in the ARV control was set to 100%, and error bars represent the SDs of 3
independent experiments.
(C) The chromatin structure of the HIV LTR assessed by MNase protection assay. The chromatin profile of cell samples from (B) was determined by normalizing the
amount of the MNase-digested PCR product to that of the undigested product using the DC(t) method (y axis), which is plotted against the midpoint of the corre-
sponding PCR amplicon (x axis). The x axis represents base pair units, with 0 as the start of the HIV LTR. Error bars represent the SEM of 3 independent experiments.
(D) H3 ChIP of cell samples from (B). The promoter of GAPDH was used as a reference. The results are presented as percent immunoprecipitated DNA over input.
Data are the average of 3 independent experiments, and error bars represent the SEM of 3 experiments for each primer set. Statistical significance was
determined using paired t test; *p < 0.05.
(E) Distribution of Pol II on the HIV genome. ChIP to Pol II was performed using cell samples from (B). Data are the average of 3 independent experiments, and error
bars represent the SEM of 3 experiments for each primer set.
604
Cell Reports 21, 600–611, October 17, 2017
 nucleosome occupancy at this location in the presence of dCA
(Figure 2C). After SAHA treatment, MNase protection decreased
at Nuc-1 in both ART or ART + dCA-treated groups (Figure 2C).
However, occupancy at Nuc-1 in cells treated with ART + dCA
was comparable with that in unstimulated cells treated with
ART alone. This suggests that a combination of dCA + ART
decreases chromatin accessibility at the LTR, reducing the tran-
scriptional competence of latent HIV-1 genomes under condi-
tions that promote reactivation.
To determine whether increased MNase protection at the
Nuc-1 region was likely due to increased nucleosome occu-
pancy during treatment with dCA + ART, an antibody specific
for total histone H3 was used in ChIP assays (Figure 2D). A sig-
nificant increase in H3 at the Nuc-1 region was apparent in ART +
dCA-treated cells compared to ART alone, whereas we did not
observe differences in H3 occupancy at Nuc-0, DHS-1, and
Nuc-2 between any of the samples (Figure 2D, red versus blue
bars). Moreover, H3 occupancy at the Nuc-1 region in ART +
dCA-treated samples after SAHA activation was comparable
with that observed in ART-treated cells prior to activation (Fig-
ure 2D, red versus purple bars). Thus, although SAHA treatment
reduced H3 occupancy at the Nuc-1 region in both SAHA-stim-
ulated samples, the absolute amount of H3 coverage remained
high in dCA + ART-treated cells. These results provide evidence
that increased MNase protection at the Nuc-1 region in dCA-
treated cells is the result of increased nucleosome occupancy.
Next we investigated the recruitment of Pol II to the HIV provi-
rus using ChIP (Figure 2E). In cells treated with either ART alone
or ART + dCA, there was a peak of Pol II near the HIV-1 promoter,
but this peak was significantly lower in cells treated with dCA +
ART (Figure 2E, compare red and blue lines). Thus, fewer
HIV-1 proviruses have RNA Pol II recruited to their TSSs in the
presence of dCA. Furthermore, cells treated with ART + dCA
lacked detectable Pol II density within the transcribed portion
of the HIV-1 genome, whereas cells treated with only ART
exhibited a substantial Pol II signal. In the additional presence
of SAHA, cells treated with either ART alone or ART + dCA
both increased Pol II recruitment to the promoter (Figure 2E).
However, recruitment in ART + dCA-treated samples after
SAHA activation was lower than that observed in ART-treated
cells prior to activation. Moreover, there was a striking absence
of Pol II within the transcribed sequences of HIV-1 in cells treated
with dCA + ART compared with cells treated with ART only.
Taken together, our results indicate that extended inhibition of
Tat activity with dCA treatment promotes increased nucleosome
occupancy in the Nuc-1 region and that this precludes RNA pol II
recruitment to the LTR and also reduces its elongation potential
upon stimuli that normally induce HIV-1 transcription.
The Effect of dCA on Tissue Viremia in HIV-Infected,
ART-Suppressed BLT Humanized Mice
We explored the activity of dCA in vivo by asking whether dCA
administration would affect the levels of cell-associated viral
RNA that persist in lymphoid tissues despite ART (Denton
et al., 2014). We first determined that dCA had good pharmaco-
kinetic properties in mice receiving once-daily intraperitoneal
dosing at 0.50 mg/kg with no loss of body weight or adverse
effects in blood biochemistry (data not shown). Next, BLT
humanized mice (n = 14) were infected with HIV-1JRCSF and
bled weekly for the duration of the experiment to monitor plasma
viral load and human CD4+ T cells counts (Figure 3A). Two weeks
following virus exposure, systemic infection was confirmed, and
ART was initiated. Five weeks after the initiation of ART, vehicle
or dCA (0.5 mg/kg) was administered for 14 days (n = 7 in each
group). The copies of viral RNA per milliliter of plasma remained
below our level of detection in all animals, and the levels of
human CD4+ T cell levels in peripheral blood were not affected
by dCA (Figures 3B and 3C; Figure S3).
At the end of this period, mice were sacrificed, and tissues
were harvested for analysis of viral RNA and human cells. Viral
RNA levels were quantified by qRT-PCR and normalized to the
number of human CD4+ T cells in spleens, lymph nodes, bone
marrow, and PBMCs (Figure 3D, left). In the lymph node, the
mean number of copies of viral RNA per 105 CD4+ T cells was
10.5-fold lower in dCA-treated mice compared with control
mice (153.2 ± 63.28 versus 1614 ± 714.5), and this difference
was statistically significant (p = 0.0111). The reductions in RNA
levels observed in all other lymphoid tissues were not statistically
significant. However, when these four lymphoid tissues were
analyzed in aggregate, we found a statistically significant differ-
ence in the number of copies of viral RNA in dCA-treated mice
compared with controls (p = 0.0487) (Figure 3D, right). The
mean number of copies of viral RNA per 105 CD4+ T cells in these
combined tissues in dCA-treated BLT mice was 191.7 ± 49.93,
whereas it was 725.6 ± 233.9 in the same tissues from control
mice, indicating a 3.8-fold lower mean level of viral RNA in
mice treated for 14 days with dCA. Analysis of HIV RNA levels
in brains obtained from mice treated with dCA also showed a
significant (�7-fold) decrease compared with control mice
(p = 0.0326). In summary, these results indicate that dCA treat-
ment does not negatively affect suppression of HIV-1 infection
by ART or alter the levels of human CD4+ T cells in BLT mice.
Furthermore, there is a clear trend indicating lower levels of viral
gene expression in dCA-treated, HIV-infected, ART-suppressed
humanized mice compared with control mice treated with a
saline control.
Effect of dCA Treatment on Viral Rebound Following
Therapy Interruption
Next we asked whether dCA treatment would affect the kinetics
of viral rebound upon therapy interruption. Therefore, we in-
fected BLT humanized mice with HIV-1JRCSF, and infection was
confirmed 2 weeks post-exposure, at which point therapy was
initiated (Figure 4A). After 3 weeks of ART, either dCA (n = 10)
or vehicle (n = 8) treatment was combined with ART. At the
end of 4 weeks of co-administration, both dCA and ART treat-
ment were discontinued, and plasma viremia was monitored
over time. During treatment, there were no discernible differ-
ences in the levels of human CD4+ or CD8+ T cells in peripheral
blood between mice receiving ART + dCA and those receiving
ART + vehicle (Figure S4).
Control mice began to exhibit rebound viremia as early as
3 days after therapy interruption, and by day 10, all eight control
mice showed rebound viremia (Figures 4B and 4C). In stark
contrast, none of the ten mice that received dCA treatment
exhibited rebound viremia on day 3, and only one had detectable
levels of plasma viremia by day 7. By day 10, all eight control
Cell Reports 21, 600–611, October 17, 2017
605
 mice continued to show high levels of plasma viremia. In
contrast, the virus was still below detection in 6 of 10 dCA-
treated mice. Indeed, on days 13 and 16, no additional dCA-
treated mice exhibited rebound viremia. It was not until day 19
after therapy interruption that viral rebound was first detected
in the remaining five dCA-treated mice (Figures 4B and 4C).
When the means of the rebound viremia in control mice were
compared with those of the dCA-treated mice, there were statis-
tically significant differences between the two groups beginning
on day 7 and for each time point thereafter (Figure 4D; Table 1)
(Mann-Whitney U test). On day 7, the difference in mean viremia
between control and dCA-treated mice was 1,085 copies of viral
RNA/mL of plasma (1,500 copies of viral RNA/mL in control
versus 410 in dCA-treated mice, p = 0.0091). On day 10, the
mean viral load of the control mice was greater than 2 3 105
compared with only 3 3 103 copies of viral RNA/mL plasma in
the dCA-treated mice. This is a difference of greater than
2 3 105 copies of viral RNA/mL plasma (p = 0.0067). The differ-
ence in the means of viral loads at day 13 was greater that 5x105
copies of viral RNA/ml plasma (p = 0.0243). The largest differ-
ence between the viral loads of control mice and dCA-treated
mice (120-fold, p = 0.0029) was noted on day 16 after therapy
interruption. Even on day 19 after therapy interruption, a 5-fold
difference in plasma viral loads was observed (p = 0.0198)
A
B
D
E
C
Figure 3. Effect of dCA on ART-Mediated Suppression of Viremia and Residual Viral RNA Expression in Tissues of Humanized Mice
(A) Diagram outlining the experimental design and highlighting the two different treatments (red and blue).
(B) Aggregate plot of all HIV-infected BLT humanized mice receiving dCA (blue, n = 7) or vehicle (red, n = 7) in addition to ART, showing similar kinetics of viral
suppression and no increases in plasma viral load as a result of dCA treatment.
(C) dCA administration does not affect plasma viral load levels or the levels of CD4+ or CD8+ T cells in peripheral blood.
(D) Left: residual HIV-1 RNA levels in spleens, bone marrow, lymph nodes, and PBMCs from control (red) and dCA-treated mice (blue). Right: reductions in viral
RNA for all individual tissues from all animals are graphed together. Each mouse was assigned a different shape, and tissues are coded by color: spleen, red; bone
marrow, blue; lymph node, green; PBMC, black.
(E) Residual HIV-1 RNA levels in brain tissue from control and dCA-treated animals. HIV RNA levels were normalized to the levels of TATA box binding
protein RNA.
The error bars in (D) and (E) indicate SEM. Statistical significance was determined using Mann-Whitney U test.
606
Cell Reports 21, 600–611, October 17, 2017
 (Figure 4D; Table 1). It was not until day 26 after therapy interrup-
tion that the mean viral loads between the two groups were no
longer different (p = 0.7796) (Figure 4D; Table 1). Time to event
statistical analysis demonstrates that the differences in the
time to rebound for all the mice in the dCA treatment and control
groups is significantly different (p = 0.0040, exact rank test) (Fig-
ure 4E). Together, these results demonstrate that dCA treatment
can significantly delay and reduce viral rebound in HIV-infected,
ART-suppressed humanized mice.
DISCUSSION
Using two state-of-the-art models of HIV-1 latency and persis-
tence, primary CD4+ T cells isolated from infected ART-sup-
pressed individuals and BLT humanized mice, our findings
provide evidence that the Tat inhibitor dCA can potently inhibit
residual levels of HIV viral transcription during suppressive ART
and block viral reactivation upon stimulation or during treatment
interruption.
The small number of latently infected cells in patients
(�1 in 106 CD4+ T cells) has complicated studies of HIV latency
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 4. dCA Treatment Results in a Delay
in Rebound Viremia in HIV-1-Infected, Sup-
pressed BLT Humanized Mice following
Therapy Interruption
(A) Diagram outlining the experimental design and
experimental groups receiving ART + dCA (blue) or
ART alone (red).
(B and C) Rebound viremia following therapy
interruption (day 0) in individual HIV-infected ART-
treated mice administered vehicle (B) or rebound
viremia following therapy interruption (day 0) in in-
dividual HIV-infected, ART-treated mice that were
administered dCA (C).
(D) Comparison of the median viral load of mice
treated with vehicle and with dCA following therapy
interruption. In these plots, the boxes extend from
the first to the third quartiles, enclosing the middle
50% of the data. The middle line within each box
indicates the median of the data. Blue boxes indi-
cate dCA-treated mice, and red boxes indicate
control mice. * indicates statistical significant dif-
ferences between control and dCA-treated mice,
as determined by Mann-Whitney U test.
(E) Time to event (Kaplan-Meier) plot demon-
strating the significant delay in viral rebound
observed in animals treated with dCA (p = 0.0040,
exact rank test).
and reactivation (Pierson et al., 2000). To
overcome this limitation, we utilized a
method where memory CD4+ T cells are
isolated from aviremic HIV-infected sub-
jects and expanded in vitro in the pres-
ence of ART, feeder cells, IL-2, and
PHA (Trautmann et al., 2002, 2005; Van
de Griend et al., 1984). In this primary
cell system, using CD4+ T cells from
five infected, aviremic individuals, we
answered several questions regarding the long-term in vitro
activity of dCA. Does dCA have an additive activity to ART in
reducing viral replication during cellular expansion? Does pre-
treatment of cells with dCA result in long-term suppression of
the HIV promoter after treatment interruption, even when cells
are subjected to strong cellular activation? Our results demon-
strate the ability of dCA to accelerate the inhibition of viral pro-
duction during cellular expansion compared with treatment
with ART alone (Figure 1B), demonstrating the additive activity
of dCA and supporting the notion that adding Tat inhibitors to
frontline treatment might lead to faster suppression and poten-
tially reduce the size of the established reservoir. Previous
studies, in which infected individuals received ART within a
few weeks of contracting HIV, found that this early treatment
reduced total HIV DNA levels by 20-fold after a couple of weeks
and showed a 316-fold reduction after 3 years (Ananworanich
et al., 2015, 2016). Smaller reservoir sizes have also been
linked to delays in viral load rebound after ART cessation
(Hatzakis et al., 2004). For instance, this was observed in the
case of a Mississippi baby (Persaud et al., 2013), the viro-
immunological sustained control after treatment interruption
Cell Reports 21, 600–611, October 17, 2017
607
 (VISCONTI) cohort (Hatzakis et al., 2004; Sa
´ ez-Cirio
´ n et al.,
2013), and a French teenager (Frange et al., 2016).
Using primary cells from patients, we demonstrated the ability
of dCA to inhibit reactivation from latency, exemplified by dras-
tically impaired viral rebound upon cellular stimulation with the
PKC activator, prostratin, after ART and dCA treatment interrup-
tion (Figures 1D–1F). The effects of dCA are solely correlated to
inhibition of viral transcription because the total HIV DNA content
remained unchanged throughout the study (Figure 1C; Fig-
ure S1C). It is important to ensure, in primary latency models,
the maintenance of the representation of the individuals’ viral
reservoir over time and that there is no selection of a population
of cells that is non-responsive to reactivating stimuli. In our
model, we successfully demonstrated that the total proviral con-
tent before and after expansion was similar and that we had not
lost cells with the ability to reactivate the virus, as observed in
similar models (Bui et al., 2017).
The lasting activity of dCA to mediate long-term repression of
the HIV promoter was shown by demonstrating its ability to limit
viral rebound after treatment cessation. ART is known to suc-
cessfully reduce viral replication in patients, but when ART is
interrupted, HIV rebounds within weeks (Bennett et al., 2008;
Davey et al., 1999). Using our primary cell system to recapitulate
what is seen in patients, we demonstrated viral rebound within a
week after treatment cessation in cells previously treated with
ART alone for 35 days (Figure 1F). However, previous treatment
with dCA drastically reduced viral rebound in primary human
CD4+ T cells after treatment cessation up to 25 days. Most
importantly, when an extremely strong activation of the cells
was performed using PHA, IL-2, and feeder cells, 7 days after
treatment interruption, no viral rebound was observed in the cells
pretreated with dCA.
Using the previously described OM10.1 cell line model of
latency, we present evidence that dCA treatment results in a
less permissive chromatin environment downstream of the TSS
at Nuc-1 (Figure 2). This correlated with decreased Pol II recruit-
ment and elongation. Upon activation of the cells with a latency-
reversing agent such as SAHA, we observed a decrease in
nucleosome occupancy at Nuc-1 and some increase in Pol II
recruitment. However, recruited Pol II does not efficiently elon-
gate to transcribe the full-length genome because this function
is promoted by Tat. Therefore, HIV-1 mRNA transcription is dras-
tically impaired even after stimulation, supporting previous
studies that show that Tat is the master regulator of latency
and the key switch to turn transcription on/off independent of
cell activation status (Razooky et al., 2015). Collectively, our
results suggest that dCA reduces HIV-1 transcriptional activity
compared with what occurs under ART, promotes silencing of
its promoter and reduces its potential for reactivation. Future
studies will investigate how recruitment of specific cellular
activators and repressors to the HIV-1 LTR/promoter regulates
its epigenetic configurations and transcriptional potential in
response to prolonged dCA treatment.
The efficacy of dCA in vivo was shown using the BLT human-
ized mouse model validated for the analysis of HIV latency and
persistence (Cheng et al., 2017; Denton et al., 2012, 2014; Gar-
cia, 2016; Melkus et al., 2006; Zhen et al., 2017). Humanized BLT
mice are an excellent model for evaluating HIV latency because
they allow us to track HIV infection of human cells, in the context
of a complex substrate that includes mature T and B lympho-
cytes, monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells, because
they infiltrate all organs and tissues in a living organism. Treat-
ment with dCA reduced the levels of cell-associated viral RNA
in lymphoid tissues. Most striking was the 10.5-fold reduction
in the lymph node (Figure 3D). When analyzing all tissues com-
bined, we observed an approximate 1-log reduction in systemic
levels of viral RNA in a period of just 2 weeks (Figure 3D). Also
impressive was the strong reduction in HIV RNA levels observed
in the brains of dCA-treated mice. HIV infection of the brain has
long been considered of paramount importance in HIV cure
research. Recent reports indicate that the use of kick-and-kill ap-
proaches to HIV eradication might have negative consequences
because they might increase immune activation, which could
result in harmful inflammatory responses (Gama et al., 2017).
Our results indicate that dCA and the block-and-lock approach
to HIV cure might provide an important alternative of great signif-
icance. Given the feedback nature of the Tat-trans-activation
response element (TAR) activity, and as shown previously
(Mousseau et al., 2015a), the longer the treatment with dCA,
the better the outcome because the promoter becomes increas-
ingly silenced (Figure 2). This argues that we can only expect bet-
ter outcomes with longer treatment periods with dCA. These
results also support our findings in vitro, in which dCA acceler-
ated entry of HIV into latency (Figure 1B).
Table 1. Viral Load Analysis following Therapy Interruption in HIV-1-Infected ART-Suppressed BLT Humanized Mice Receiving Vehicle
(Controls) or dCA
Days after
Therapy
Interruption
Viral Load of dCA-
Treated Mice
Viral Load of
Control Mice
Difference in Viral Load
between Control and dCA-
Treated Mice
Fold Difference in Viral Load
between Control and dCA-
Treated Mice
Mann-Whitney p Value
0
344
344
0
0
> 0.9999
3
344
433
90
1
0.4444
7
411
1,496
1,085
4
0.0091
10
3,028
222,705
219,677
74
0.0067
13
9,772
565,468
555,696
58
0.0243
16
13,865
1,722,890
1,709,025
125
0.0029
19
177,190
1,023,500
846,310
6
0.0198
26
1,254,213
1,489,199
234,987
1
0.7796
608
Cell Reports 21, 600–611, October 17, 2017
 The key experiment assessing the long-lasting activity of dCA
in repressing HIV promoter transcription was performed in sup-
pressed mice after 4-week coadministration of ART with dCA,
followed by analytical treatment interruption (Figure 4). Virus
was readily detected in the plasma of all mice receiving ART
within 7 days after discontinuation of treatment. Impressively,
in BLT mice previously treated with ART + dCA, viral rebound
was significantly delayed up to 19 days after treatment interrup-
tion. It is worth noting that, in half of the dCA-treated mice, the
virus was below our level of detection until day 16 after treatment
interruption, only rebounding on day 19. In a general manner,
dCA offered an impressive 9-day protection compared with
ART alone. Future studies will investigate the relationship
between the period of treatment with dCA to time to viral
rebound. We speculate that, over time (in combination or not
with other inhibitors), transcriptional repression could be pushed
past a certain threshold where viral reactivation from latency is
extremely difficult to overcome (Weinberger and Weinberger,
2013; Weinberger et al., 2008), blocking and locking HIV into
sustained latency. Our results are the in vivo proof of principle
for a block-and-lock approach for a functional cure of HIV. An
additional benefit of HIV transcriptional inhibitors, whether they
target Tat or TAR, or other factors, such as CDK9 or Cyclin T1
(reviewed in Mousseau et al., 2015b), is their ability to reduce
morbidities associated with persistent levels of immune activa-
tion caused by low-level ongoing virus replication in subjects
on suppressive ART (Hunt, 2010). Although controversial, a po-
tential contributor to the sustained maintenance of the latent
reservoir is viral replication reflected in blips observed in plasma
that could be reseeding the reservoir even in the presence of ART
(Chun et al., 2005; Jones and Perelson, 2007; Ramratnam et al.,
2004). Additionally, therapy non-compliance or short breaks in
therapy can also result in viral production and in reservoir replen-
ishment. Including dCA in ART regimens could potentially inhibit
reservoir replenishment during these situations.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that, in the setting of full
ART suppression of HIV, dCA reduces cell-associated viral RNA
systemically, significantly delays viral rebound upon treatment
interruption, and reduces viral rebound levels by several orders
of magnitude. This is the first time pharmacological inhibition
of viral rebound after treatment interruption has been shown in
an in vivo model of HIV infection. These results strongly support
the rationale for the inclusion of specific HIV transcriptional inhib-
itors in eradication strategies.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Subject Samples
Primary human CD4+ T cells were collected from five HIV-seropositive sub-
jects on stable suppressive ART for at least 3 years. All subjects provided
signed informed consent approved by the Research Centre of the Centre Hos-
pitalier de l’Universite
´ de Montre
´ al (CR-CHUM) hospital (Montreal, Quebec,
Canada) review boards. All patients underwent leukapheresis to collect large
numbers of PBMCs.
Generation of Expanded Primary Human CD4+ T Cells
Primary CD4+ T cells from five successfully treated donors were expanded as
described previously (Mousseau et al., 2015a). Briefly, 50 3 106 PBMCs were
thawed, and sorted CD45RA�, CD27+, CD4+ T cells were expanded with
1 mg/mL of PHA (Sigma-Aldrich), 100 U/mL of IL-2 (Roche), and irradiated
feeder PBMCs (OneBlood). Cells were then kept on either ART alone
(100 nM efavirenz, 180 nM zidovudine, and 200 nM raltegravir) or ART +
50 nM dCA (kindly provided by Dr. Phil Baran, Scripps La Jolla) in medium sup-
plemented with human serum and 20 U/mL IL-2. ART reagents were obtained
through the NIH AIDS Reagent Program, Division of AIDS, NIAID, NIH. For
stimulation experiments, 1 million cells from each treatment group were iso-
lated on day 35, treatments were washed away, and cells were stimulated
with 1 mM prostratin (Sigma-Aldrich) overnight. Approximately 16 hr later,
supernatants and cell pellets were collected for PCR.
Construction of Humanized BLT Mice
BLT humanized mice were prepared as described previously (Denton et al.,
2008, 2011, 2012; Melkus et al., 2006). Briefly, a 1- to 2-mm piece of human
liver tissue was sandwiched between two pieces of autologous thymus tissue
(Advanced Bioscience Resources) under the kidney capsule of sublethally irra-
diated (300 cGy) 6- 8-week-old NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG, The
Jackson Laboratory) mice. Following implantation, mice were transplanted
intravenously with hematopoietic CD34+ stem cells isolated from autologous
human liver tissue. Human immune cell reconstitution was monitored in the pe-
ripheral blood of BLT mice by flow cytometry every 3–4 weeks. Mice were
maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions by the Division of Labora-
tory Animal Medicine at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. Animal
experiments were conducted in accordance with NIH guidelines for the hous-
ing and care of laboratory animals and in accordance with protocols reviewed
and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the Uni-
versity of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. For the study that examined the effect of
dCA on residual tissue viremia under ART, the mean weight of the mice used
was 27.18 g, and they were 11 months old. For the study that examined the
effect of dCA on viral rebound following therapy interruption, the mean weight
of the mice used was 26.31 g, and the mice were between 7 and 9 months old.
All mice used in these studies were female.
Production of Viral Stocks for Infection of BLT Mice
Stocks of HIV-1JRCSF were prepared as described previously (Wahl et al.,
2012). Briefly, the proviral clone was transfected into HEK293T cells using Lip-
ofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s protocols. Viral su-
pernatant was collected 48 hr after transfection. Viral supernatant was titered
by infecting TZM-bl cells at multiple dilutions. Virus-containing medium was
removed the next day and replaced with fresh DMEM plus 10% fetal bovine
serum, and the incubation continued for 24 hr. The cells were fixed and stained
with 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-b-d-galactopyranoside, and blue cells were
counted directly to determine infectious particles per milliliter. Each titer of
these viral stocks was performed in triplicate, and at least two different titer de-
terminations were performed for each batch of virus.
Statistical Analysis
The p values for in vitro experiments were calculated using one-way ANOVA
and Kruskal-Wallis with post hoc Dunn multiple comparisons analysis or
paired t test with 95% confidence intervals using Prism 7 for Macintosh
(GraphPad). All in vivo statistical analyses were also performed in Prism 7. A
two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare levels of viral RNA in
dCA-treated mice with control vehicle-treated mice.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
four figures, and one table and can be found with this article online at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.09.080.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Investigation, C.F.K., C.C.N., C.L., P.T.H., and P.T.; Methodology, C.F.K.,
C.C.N., C.L., H.T., G.M., J.V.G., L.T., M.F., P.T.H., and J.B.H.; Conceptualiza-
tion and Validation, C.F.K., C.C.N., J.V.G., and S.T.V.; Writing and Revisions,
C.F.K., C.C.N., S.T.V., and J.V.G.; Funding Acquisition, S.T.V.; Resources,
J.V.G. and S.T.V.; Supervision, J.V.G. and S.T.V.
Cell Reports 21, 600–611, October 17, 2017
609
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by NIH Grants R01AI097012 and R01AI118432 and
the Campbell Foundation (to S.T.V.) and MH108179 and AI-111899 (to J.V.G.).
The research in this publication was also funded by CARE, a Martin Delaney
Collaboratory, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), National Institute on
Drug Abuse (NIDA), and the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) of the
NIH, grant number 1UM1AI126619. The content is solely the responsibility of
the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH.
We thank Michael Hudgens, Camden Bay, and Katie Mollan (UNC CFAR Sta-
tistical Core, P30 AI050410) for performing the statistical analysis presented in
Table 1 and Bonnie Howell and Stephanie Barrett (Merck & Co.) for providing
antiretroviral-containing chow. We also thank former and current members of
the Garcia laboratory and the husbandry technicians at the UNC Division of
Laboratory Animal Medicine for their assistance.
Received: March 9, 2017
Revised: September 5, 2017
Accepted: September 25, 2017
Published: October 17, 2017
REFERENCES
Ananworanich, J., Dube
´ , K., and Chomont, N. (2015). How does the timing of
antiretroviral therapy initiation in acute infection affect HIV reservoirs? Curr.
Opin. HIV AIDS 10, 18–28.
Ananworanich, J., Chomont, N., Eller, L.A., Kroon, E., Tovanabutra, S., Bose,
M., Nau, M., Fletcher, J.L., Tipsuk, S., Vandergeeten, C., et al.; RV217 and
RV254/SEARCH010 study groups (2016). HIV DNA Set Point is Rapidly Estab-
lished in Acute HIV Infection and Dramatically Reduced by Early ART.
EBioMedicine 11, 68–72.
Bennett, D.E., Bertagnolio, S., Sutherland, D., and Gilks, C.F. (2008). The
World Health Organization’s global strategy for prevention and assessment
of HIV drug resistance. Antivir. Ther. (Lond.) 13 (Suppl 2), 1–13.
Bui, J.K., Halvas, E.K., Fyne, E., Sobolewski, M.D., Koontz, D., Shao, W., Luke,
B., Hong, F.F., Kearney, M.F., and Mellors, J.W. (2017). Ex vivo activation of
CD4+ T-cells from donors on suppressive ART can lead to sustained produc-
tion of infectious HIV-1 from a subset of infected cells. PLoS Pathog. 13,
e1006230.
Cheng, L., Ma, J., Li, J., Li, D., Li, G., Li, F., Zhang, Q., Yu, H., Yasui, F., Ye, C.,
et al. (2017). Blocking type I interferon signaling enhances T cell recovery and
reduces HIV-1 reservoirs. J. Clin. Invest. 127, 269–279.
Chun, T.W., Nickle, D.C., Justement, J.S., Large, D., Semerjian, A., Curlin,
M.E., O’Shea, M.A., Hallahan, C.W., Daucher, M., Ward, D.J., et al. (2005).
HIV-infected individuals receiving effective antiviral therapy for extended
periods of time continually replenish their viral reservoir. J. Clin. Invest. 115,
3250–3255.
Chun, T.W., Nickle, D.C., Justement, J.S., Meyers, J.H., Roby, G., Hallahan,
C.W., Kottilil, S., Moir, S., Mican, J.M., Mullins, J.I., et al. (2008). Persistence
of HIV in gut-associated lymphoid tissue despite long-term antiretroviral ther-
apy. J. Infect. Dis. 197, 714–720.
Davey, R.T., Jr., Bhat, N., Yoder, C., Chun, T.W., Metcalf, J.A., Dewar, R., Na-
tarajan, V., Lempicki, R.A., Adelsberger, J.W., Miller, K.D., et al. (1999). HIV-1
and T cell dynamics after interruption of highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART) in patients with a history of sustained viral suppression. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 96, 15109–15114.
Denton, P.W., Estes, J.D., Sun, Z., Othieno, F.A., Wei, B.L., Wege, A.K., Po-
well, D.A., Payne, D., Haase, A.T., and Garcia, J.V. (2008). Antiretroviral pre-
exposure prophylaxis prevents vaginal transmission of HIV-1 in humanized
BLT mice. PLoS Med. 5, e16.
Denton, P.W., Othieno, F., Martinez-Torres, F., Zou, W., Krisko, J.F., Fleming,
E., Zein, S., Powell, D.A., Wahl, A., Kwak, Y.T., et al. (2011). One percent teno-
fovir applied topically to humanized BLT mice and used according to the
CAPRISA 004 experimental design demonstrates partial protection from
vaginal HIV infection, validating the BLT model for evaluation of new microbi-
cide candidates. J. Virol. 85, 7582–7593.
Denton, P.W., Olesen, R., Choudhary, S.K., Archin, N.M., Wahl, A., Swan-
son, M.D., Chateau, M., Nochi, T., Krisko, J.F., Spagnuolo, R.A., et al.
(2012). Generation of HIV latency in humanized BLT mice. J. Virol. 86,
630–634.
Denton, P.W., Long, J.M., Wietgrefe, S.W., Sykes, C., Spagnuolo, R.A.,
Snyder, O.D., Perkey, K., Archin, N.M., Choudhary, S.K., Yang, K., et al.
(2014). Targeted cytotoxic therapy kills persisting HIV infected cells during
ART. PLoS Pathog. 10, e1003872.
Dingwall, C., Ernberg, I., Gait, M.J., Green, S.M., Heaphy, S., Karn, J., Lowe,
A.D., Singh, M., Skinner, M.A., and Valerio, R. (1989). Human immunodefi-
ciency virus 1 tat protein binds trans-activation-responsive region (TAR)
RNA in vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86, 6925–6929.
Dingwall, C., Ernberg, I., Gait, M.J., Green, S.M., Heaphy, S., Karn, J., Lowe,
A.D., Singh, M., and Skinner, M.A. (1990). HIV-1 tat protein stimulates tran-
scription by binding to a U-rich bulge in the stem of the TAR RNA structure.
EMBO J. 9, 4145–4153.
Frange, P., Faye, A., Avettand-Fenoe
¨ l, V., Bellaton, E., Descamps, D., Angin,
M., David, A., Caillat-Zucman, S., Peytavin, G., Dollfus, C., et al.; ANRS
EPF-CO10 Pediatric Cohort and the ANRS EP47 VISCONTI study group
(2016). HIV-1 virological remission lasting more than 12 years after interruption
of early antiretroviral therapy in a perinatally infected teenager enrolled in the
French ANRS EPF-CO10 paediatric cohort: a case report. Lancet HIV 3,
e49–e54.
Gama, L., Abreu, C.M., Shirk, E.N., Price, S.L., Li, M., Laird, G.M., Pate, K.A.,
Wietgrefe, S.W., O’Connor, S.L., Pianowski, L., et al.; LRA-SIV Study Group
(2017). Reactivation of simian immunodeficiency virus reservoirs in the brain
of virally suppressed macaques. AIDS 31, 5–14.
Garcia, J.V. (2016). In vivo platforms for analysis of HIV persistence and erad-
ication. J. Clin. Invest. 126, 424–431.
G€
unthard, H.F., Havlir, D.V., Fiscus, S., Zhang, Z.Q., Eron, J., Mellors, J.,
Gulick, R., Frost, S.D., Brown, A.J., Schleif, W., et al. (2001). Residual human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Type 1 RNA and DNA in lymph nodes and HIV
RNA in genital secretions and in cerebrospinal fluid after suppression of
viremia for 2 years. J. Infect. Dis. 183, 1318–1327.
Hatzakis, A.E., Touloumi, G., Pantazis, N., Anastassopoulou, C.G., Katsarou,
O., Karafoulidou, A., Goedert, J.J., and Kostrikis, L.G. (2004). Cellular HIV-1
DNA load predicts HIV-RNA rebound and the outcome of highly active antire-
troviral therapy. AIDS 18, 2261–2267.
Hunt, P.W. (2010). Th17, gut, and HIV: therapeutic implications. Curr. Opin. HIV
AIDS 5, 189–193.
Jones, L.E., and Perelson, A.S. (2007). Transient viremia, plasma viral load,
and reservoir replenishment in HIV-infected patients on antiretroviral therapy.
J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr. 45, 483–493.
Kao, S.Y., Calman, A.F., Luciw, P.A., and Peterlin, B.M. (1987). Anti-termina-
tion of transcription within the long terminal repeat of HIV-1 by tat gene prod-
uct. Nature 330, 489–493.
Kessing, C.F., Spudich, S., Valcour, V., Cartwright, P., Chalermchai, T.,
Fletcher, J.L., Takata, H., Nichols, C., Josey, B.J., Slike, B., et al. (2017).
High Number of Activated CD8+ T Cells Targeting HIV Antigens Are Present
in Cerebrospinal Fluid in Acute HIV Infection. J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr.
75, 108–117.
Lorenzo-Redondo, R., Fryer, H.R., Bedford, T., Kim, E.Y., Archer, J., Pond,
S.L.K., Chung, Y.S., Penugonda, S., Chipman, J., Fletcher, C.V., et al.
(2016). Persistent HIV-1 replication maintains the tissue reservoir during ther-
apy. Nature 530, 51–56.
Melkus, M.W., Estes, J.D., Padgett-Thomas, A., Gatlin, J., Denton, P.W., Oth-
ieno, F.A., Wege, A.K., Haase, A.T., and Garcia, J.V. (2006). Humanized mice
mount specific adaptive and innate immune responses to EBV and TSST-1.
Nat. Med. 12, 1316–1322.
Mousseau, G., Clementz, M.A., Bakeman, W.N., Nagarsheth, N., Cameron,
M., Shi, J., Baran, P., Fromentin, R., Chomont, N., and Valente, S.T. (2012).
610
Cell Reports 21, 600–611, October 17, 2017
 An analog of the natural steroidal alkaloid cortistatin A potently suppresses
Tat-dependent HIV transcription. Cell Host Microbe 12, 97–108.
Mousseau, G., Kessing, C.F., Fromentin, R., Trautmann, L., Chomont, N., and
Valente, S.T. (2015a). The Tat Inhibitor Didehydro-Cortistatin A Prevents HIV-1
Reactivation from Latency. MBio 6, e00465.
Mousseau, G., Mediouni, S., and Valente, S.T. (2015b). Targeting HIV tran-
scription: the quest for a functional cure. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 389,
121–145.
Persaud, D., Gay, H., Ziemniak, C., Chen, Y.H., Piatak, M., Jr., Chun, T.W.,
Strain, M., Richman, D., and Luzuriaga, K. (2013). Absence of detectable
HIV-1 viremia after treatment cessation in an infant. N. Engl. J. Med. 369,
1828–1835.
Pierson, T., McArthur, J., and Siliciano, R.F. (2000). Reservoirs for HIV-1:
mechanisms for viral persistence in the presence of antiviral immune re-
sponses and antiretroviral therapy. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 18, 665–708.
Rafati, H., Parra, M., Hakre, S., Moshkin, Y., Verdin, E., and Mahmoudi, T.
(2011). Repressive LTR nucleosome positioning by the BAF complex is
required for HIV latency. PLoS Biol. 9, e1001206.
Ramirez, P.W., Famiglietti, M., Sowrirajan, B., DePaula-Silva, A.B., Rodesch,
C., Barker, E., Bosque, A., and Planelles, V. (2014). Downmodulation of
CCR7 by HIV-1 Vpu results in impaired migration and chemotactic signaling
within CD4+ T cells. Cell Rep. 7, 2019–2030.
Ramratnam, B., Ribeiro, R., He, T., Chung, C., Simon, V., Vanderhoeven, J.,
Hurley, A., Zhang, L., Perelson, A.S., Ho, D.D., and Markowitz, M. (2004).
Intensification of antiretroviral therapy accelerates the decay of the HIV-1
latent reservoir and decreases, but does not eliminate, ongoing virus replica-
tion. J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr. 35, 33–37.
Razooky, B.S., Pai, A., Aull, K., Rouzine, I.M., and Weinberger, L.S. (2015). A
hardwired HIV latency program. Cell 160, 990–1001.
Rong, L., and Perelson, A.S. (2009). Modeling HIV persistence, the latent reser-
voir, and viral blips. J. Theor. Biol. 260, 308–331.
Rueda, C.M., Velilla, P.A., Chougnet, C.A., Montoya, C.J., and Rugeles, M.T.
(2012). HIV-induced T-cell activation/exhaustion in rectal mucosa is controlled
only partially by antiretroviral treatment. PLoS ONE 7, e30307.
Sa
´ ez-Cirio
´ n, A., Bacchus, C., Hocqueloux, L., Avettand-Fenoel, V., Girault, I.,
Lecuroux, C., Potard, V., Versmisse, P., Melard, A., Prazuck, T., et al.; ANRS
VISCONTI Study Group (2013). Post-treatment HIV-1 controllers with a long-
term virological remission after the interruption of early initiated antiretroviral
therapy ANRS VISCONTI Study. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003211.
Søgaard, O.S., Graversen, M.E., Leth, S., Olesen, R., Brinkmann, C.R., Nissen,
S.K., Kjaer, A.S., Schleimann, M.H., Denton, P.W., Hey-Cunningham, W.J.,
et al. (2015). The Depsipeptide Romidepsin Reverses HIV-1 Latency In Vivo.
PLoS Pathog. 11, e1005142.
Toohey, M.G., and Jones, K.A. (1989). In vitro formation of short RNA polymer-
ase II transcripts that terminate within the HIV-1 and HIV-2 promoter-proximal
downstream regions. Genes Dev. 3, 265–282.
Trautmann, L., Labarrie
` re, N., Jotereau, F., Karanikas, V., Gervois, N., Conner-
otte, T., Coulie, P., and Bonneville, M. (2002). Dominant TCR V alpha usage by
virus and tumor-reactive T cells with wide affinity ranges for their specific an-
tigens. Eur. J. Immunol. 32, 3181–3190.
Trautmann, L., Rimbert, M., Echasserieau, K., Saulquin, X., Neveu, B., Decha-
net, J., Cerundolo, V., and Bonneville, M. (2005). Selection of T cell clones ex-
pressing high-affinity public TCRs within Human cytomegalovirus-specific
CD8 T cell responses. J. Immunol. 175, 6123–6132.
Van de Griend, R.J., Van Krimpen, B.A., Bol, S.J., Thompson, A., and Bolhuis,
R.L. (1984). Rapid expansion of human cytotoxic T cell clones: growth promo-
tion by a heat-labile serum component and by various types of feeder cells.
J. Immunol. Methods 66, 285–298.
Wahl, A., Swanson, M.D., Nochi, T., Olesen, R., Denton, P.W., Chateau, M.,
and Garcia, J.V. (2012). Human breast milk and antiretrovirals dramatically
reduce oral HIV-1 transmission in BLT humanized mice. PLoS Pathog. 8,
e1002732.
Weinberger, A.D., and Weinberger, L.S. (2013). Stochastic fate selection in
HIV-infected patients. Cell 155, 497–499.
Weinberger, L.S., Dar, R.D., and Simpson, M.L. (2008). Transient-mediated
fate determination in a transcriptional circuit of HIV. Nat. Genet. 40, 466–470.
Zhen, A., Rezek, V., Youn, C., Lam, B., Chang, N., Rick, J., Carrillo, M., Martin,
H., Kasparian, S., Syed, P., et al. (2017). Targeting type I interferon-mediated
activation restores immune function in chronic HIV infection. J. Clin. Invest.
127, 260–268.
Cell Reports 21, 600–611, October 17, 2017
611
