 Impaired Epidermal to Dendritic T-Cell Signaling Slows Wound 
Repair in Aged Skin
Brice E. Keyes1,2,4, Siqi Liu1,4, Amma Asare1, Shruti Naik1, John Levorse1, Lisa Polak1, 
Catherine P. Lu1, Maria Nikolova1, Hilda Amalia Pasoli1,3, and Elaine Fuchs1,5,*
1The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065
SUMMARY
Aged skin heals wounds poorly, increasing susceptibility to infections. Restoring homeostasis after 
wounding requires the coordinated actions of epidermal and immune cells. Here we find that both 
intrinsic defects and communication with immune cells are impaired in aged keratinocytes, 
diminishing their efficiency in restoring the skin barrier after wounding. At the wound-edge, aged 
keratinocytes display reduced proliferation and migration. They also exhibit a dampened ability to 
transcriptionally activate epithelial-immune crosstalk regulators, including a failure to properly 
activate/maintain dendritic epithelial T-cells (DETCs), which promote re-epithelialization 
following injury. Probing mechanism, we find that aged keratinocytes near the wound edge don’t 
efficiently up-regulate Skints or activate STAT3. Notably, when epidermal Stat3, Skints or DETCs 
are silenced in young skin, re-epithelialization following wounding is perturbed. These findings 
underscore epithelial-immune crosstalk perturbations in general, and Skints in particular, as 
critical mediators in the age-related decline in wound-repair.
eTOC
Progressive loss of communication between epithelial and immune cells in the skin underlies the 
slow down in wound healing associated with aging.
*Corresponding Author: Elaine Fuchs, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology & Development, 
The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, Box#300, New York, NY, 10065, USA. Phone: 212-327-7953; Fax: 212-327-7954, 
fuchs@rockefeller.edu.
2Current address: Calico Life Sciences, South San Francisco, CA 94080
3Current address: Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Janelia Research Campus. Ashburn, VA 20147
4Co-first authors
5Lead Contact
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 November 17; 167(5): 1323–1338.e14. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.10.052.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
Aging; wound healing; re-epithelialization; Skint; DETC; epidermal-immune cell cross-talk; 
STAT3
INTRODUCTION
Although paper-thin, the epidermis acts as the key physical barrier to the external 
environment. It prevents dehydration, blocks damaging ultraviolet radiation, and guards 
against pathogens and infection. To maintain proper tissue homeostasis and barrier function, 
epidermis must be constantly renewed and repaired by proliferative progenitor keratinocytes 
which periodically exit the innermost basal layer, and execute a terminal differentiation 
program, eventually being sloughed as dead squames from the body surface (Fuchs, 2007).
Following injury, a wound healing response is triggered to rapidly repair epidermis and 
restore the skin barrier. While repair is ongoing, the damaged skin is exposed to pathogens, 
and delays in the re-epithelialization process can lead to higher incidence of infection and 
chronic wound formation. Wound healing is a complex biological process that involves four 
independent, yet interconnected processes beginning with: 1) coagulation of platelets to 
form an eschar (scab) to generate a temporary barrier; 2) activation of resident T-cells and 
infiltration of macrophages, monocytes and neutrophils in immune surveillance; 3) local 
proliferation of epidermal keratinocytes at the wound edge, followed by their migration into 
the wound bed to repair the damaged barrier and restore homeostasis; 4) resolution of the 
wound through repair of underlying damaged dermis and remodeling of its extracellular 
matrix (Gurtner et al., 2008).
In many tissue types and organs, the ability to repair wounds declines with age (Kennedy et 
al., 2014; Kenyon, 2010; López-Otín et al., 2013; Oh et al., 2014). Skin is particularly 
vulnerable to age-related decline, exhibiting increased dryness, roughness, hair loss, 
Keyes et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 impaired wound healing and increased susceptibility to infection and chronic wounds 
(Ashcroft et al., 2002; Keyes et al., 2013; Nishimura et al., 2005; Velarde et al., 2015). Poor 
wound healing in aged adults has been documented for well over a century, and age-related 
declines in cutaneous wound-healing contribute to a variety of health complications, and to 
decreased lifespan. Despite its importance, however, the molecular underpinnings for the 
age-related decline in wound-repair are not well understood, impeding the prospects for 
therapeutic advances.
Formation of a proper epithelial barrier after acute injury requires the coordinated action and 
cross-talk of keratinocytes and immune cells at the wound site. So-named due to their 
morphology and epidermal location, dendritic epithelial T-cells (DETCs) inhabit the 
epidermis and account for a majority of T-cells in the skin epidermis. Born in the developing 
fetal thymus and then migrating to the epidermis, ~90% of DETCs express an invariant 
Vγ5Vδ1 (also known as Vγ3Vδ1) T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) (Lewis et al., 2006). 
Vγ5Vδ1 DETCs reside in the innermost basal layer of the epidermis, but can extend their 
dendrites into the suprabasal layers, a feature thought to be used for surveillance in guarding 
against pathogenic infection (Chodaczek et al., 2012; Hayday, 2009).
DETCs have been implicated in maintaining skin function, including epidermal homeostasis, 
tumor surveillance and wound repair (Heath and Carbone, 2013). Upon injury, DETCs 
bordering the wound edge retract their dendrites, become rounded and begin to produce 
epidermal mitogens such as FGF7/10 and IGF1, facilitating wound re-epithelialization 
(Jameson et al., 2002). Mice lacking the T-cell receptor δ subunit (TCRδ) show pronounced 
delays in cutaneous wound healing (Itohara et al., 1993; Jameson et al., 2002). However, 
these mice lack all γδ T-cells, including both epidermal DETCs and dermal Vγ4Vδ1 T-
cells; each secretes a different repertoire of factors and cytokines that could impact wound-
repair (Gray et al., 2011; Sumaria et al., 2011).
Mice that selectively lack Vγ5Vδ1 DETCs have been described (Boyden et al., 2008; 
Turchinovich and Hayday, 2011), but have not been tested for possible defects in wound 
repair. They harbor a null mutation in selection and upkeep of intraepithelial T-cells 1 
(Skint1), lack canonical Vγ5Vδ1 expressing DETCs. Skint1, is the founding member of a 
family (Skint1-11) of butyrophilin-like proteins with containing transmembrane spanning 
domains and extracellular IgV, and IgC domains (Mohamed et al., 2015). During 
development, Skint1 is expressed by thymic epithelial cells, promoting functional 
differentiation of DETC progenitors (Boyden et al., 2008). A number of Skint family 
members are also expressed in the skin epidermis and intestinal epithelium (Boyden et al., 
2008). However, their functions in these adult tissues remain unexplored.
In the present study, we were drawn to DETCs and Skints through an unbiased approach in 
defining the age-related defects that underlie impaired re-epithelialization after skin 
wounding. Using mouse as a model system, we first showed that re-epithelialization to 
restore the skin barrier is delayed in aged mice. We found that aged skin epidermal 
keratinocytes are less transcriptionally dynamic after wounding, and fail to regulate key 
processes necessary for wound-repair. Many genes facilitating interactions with immune 
cells weren’t activated properly in basal keratinocytes at the wound-edge of aged skin. Most 
Keyes et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 notable were Skint genes. When we investigated the DETCs, we found that our unwounded 
aged mice harbored Vγ5Vδ1 DETCs, and hence differed from Skint1 null mice. However, 
the DETCs displayed an age-related, wound-specific defect in their behavior.
Our findings brought to the forefront prior speculation, never tested, that SKINTs or some 
other interacting ligand(s) on wound-proximal keratinocytes might function in the DETC 
response to injury (Havran et al., 1991; Jameson et al., 2004; Komori et al., 2012). We 
therefore turned to addressing whether Skints might function in adult tissue homeostasis and 
wound-repair, and whether perturbations in SKINTs might affect DETCs and/or their 
communication with epidermal cells to account for some of the age-related defects in wound 
healing.
Specifically, we discovered that young mice conditionally knocked down for Skint3 and 
Skint9 in epidermal keratinocytes display defects in wound-repair and in wound-related 
DETC behavior. Similarly, we found that young mice which a) lack Vγ5Vδ1-DETCs 
altogether, or b) display DETCs, but either lack the Skint3-4-9 gene cluster or are 
epidermally knocked down for individual Skints, also exhibit delays in skin re-
epithelialization during wound-repair. Finally, we identified conserved STAT3 binding 
motifs in Skint promoters and showed that STAT3-signaling and one of its upstream 
activators, Interleukin-6, are diminished in aged, wounded skin. Moreover, Stat3-null mice 
display DETC and wound repair defects which are strikingly similar to those in aged mice, 
and that elevating this signaling pathway can stimulate Skint expression as well as improve 
epidermal migration in aged skin. These findings not only demonstrate proof of principle, 
but in addition, offer new promise for therapeutic intervention in elderly individuals who 
need a boost in restoring skin barrier acquisition after injury.
RESULTS
Aged Animals Maintain a Functional Epidermis in Homeostasis
The dorsal (backskin) epidermis of young (2–4 month) mice is a stratified epithelial tissue 
composed of dead outer stratum corneum cells, differentiating granular and spinous layers, 
and an inner proliferative basal layer attached to an underlying basement membrane (Figure 
1A). The corresponding epidermis of aged (22–24 month) female C57BL6/J animals also 
displayed these morphological features, although an ~20% reduction in epidermal thickness 
was accompanied by an equivalent dermal thinning (Figures 1B and 1C). 
Immunofluorescence microscopy confirmed the presence of a seemingly normal 
differentiation program in aged mouse skin (Figure 1D and data not shown). In all, we 
carried out immunostaining for basement membrane protein β4 integrin (CD104), basal 
keratins 5 and 14 (K5 and K14), spinous layer keratins (K10 and K1), wound-response 
keratins (K6 and K17) and granular layer proteins filaggrin and loricrin, and observed no 
obvious structural differences between aged and young skin.
To probe more deeply for differences between young and aged epidermal keratinocytes in 
vivo, we used fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) to purify basal layer keratinocytes 
(α6-integrinhighCD34negativeSca1high) from young and aged mouse skin, followed by deep 
sequencing (RNA-seq) of their mRNAs. Comparative expression analysis of duplicates of 
Keyes et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RNA-seq data revealed 74 genes that were ±2-fold differentially expressed (q<0.05) between 
young and aged keratinocytes (Figure 1E and Table S1). Overall, however, their transcripts 
(56 up-regulated, 18 down-regulated) were relatively modestly changed (1.9-fold average), 
indicating that under homeostatic conditions, aged animals maintain an epidermis that is 
architecturally and transcriptionally similar to that of young mice.
Aged Skin is Slow to Re-epithelialize Wounds Following Injury
We next challenged the epidermis to wounding, to see if the epidermis of aged mice was 
able to mount an injury response comparable to younger mice. Six millimeter punch 
biopsies created full-thickness (epidermis + dermis) wounds on the animals’ backs, which 
typically healed by 7 days (d7). As shown in the images from representative experiments, 
young mice consistently closed their wounds faster than their aged counterparts, with little 
difference on the macroscopic level in wound contraction (Figure S1). When quantified over 
five independent wound studies, the biggest differences in wound area were consistently 
between d3 and d5 post wounding, where the rate of wound closure was always faster in 
young animals (Figure S1B and C).
To visualize the re-epithelialization process, wounded skins from mice were collected at 
intervals and subjected to K14 immunostaining (Figure 2A). Wounds at d1 post-wounding 
exhibited little or no signs of re-epithelialization, but thereafter, an epithelial tongue of 
migrating keratinocytes was visible underneath the eschar (Figure 2C). Beginning at d3 and 
culminating at d5, a marked delay in re-epithelialization was evident in the wound beds of 
aged mice. At d5 when re-epithelialization had closed the wound (96±4%) in young animals, 
the epithelial tongues from opposing sides of the wounds of aged animals had migrated less 
than half way (41±8%) into the wound site (Figure 2C). By d7, aged wounds were still not 
completely closed (92±5%).
The delay in wound closure in aged animals corresponded well to the decreased migration of 
the epithelial tongue under the eschar, as quantified in Figure 2D. Moreover, signs of 
epidermal responsiveness, as judged by enhanced epidermal thickening and associated 
wound-induced keratin K17, extended further from the wound site in young than in aged 
mice (Figure S2).
Declines in Proliferative Capacity of Aged Keratinocytes
To understand the basis of the delayed re-epithelialization of wounds in aged animals, we 
assayed the functional abilities of young and aged keratinocytes to proliferate and migrate in 
response to injury. To this end, at intervals after wounding, mice were pulsed with 5-
ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) for 3 hours before harvesting and analyzing their skins. As 
quantified both in tissue sections of wounded skin and basal keratinocytes analyzed by flow 
cytometry, significantly fewer EdU labeled cells were seen in aged versus young epidermis 
at d3 and d5 post-wound time-points (Figure 3A). This difference was not seen under 
homeostatic conditions, where basal levels of proliferation were similar (Figure 3B). 
Together, these findings suggest that the defect is rooted specifically in the wound-response. 
Consistent with our punch wound studies, we also observed a notable decrease in 
proliferation in aged versus young epidermal keratinocytes from skins that were analyzed 
Keyes et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 24hrs after waxing to depilate the skin, a procedure that stimulates basal layer proliferation 
analogous to punch wounds (Figure 3C).
Aged Keratinocytes Exhibit Intrinsic Defects in Wound Induced Migration
The age-related reduction in wound-induced proliferation did not appear to be attributable to 
an increased incidence of apoptosis, as no differences in activated caspase 3 staining were 
noted (data not shown). However, over d7 ex vivo, both the area and distance of keratinocyte 
outgrowth were reduced in aged compared to young skin explants (Figure 3D). Finally, 
when assayed by time-lapse imaging for their abilities to migrate into the ~600μm space 
created by a scratch wound, cultured keratinocytes from aged skin showed a significant 
delay in migration and scratch closure, without a corresponding reduction in proliferation 
(Figures 3E and 3F; Movies S1 and S2). Additionally, when we tracked individual cells, 
both young and aged keratinocytes migrated at the same speed and distances (Figure 3G). 
Strikingly however, young keratinocytes exhibited more robust directional migration (higher 
horizontal movement into the open area of the scratch) than their aged counterparts (Figures 
3H and 3I).
Similar intrinsic age-related migration delays were observed using Boyden chamber assays, 
in which serum-starved keratinocytes in the top chamber migrated to the bottom chamber 
containing feeder cell conditioned media (Figure S3A). In vitro adhesion assays also 
revealed defects in the ability of aged keratinocytes to attach to fibronectin, collagen and 
laminin coated plates and reduced cell spreading on these substrates (Figures S3B–S3D). 
Finally, when basal keratinocytes were FACS isolated from aged and young mice and 
compared over longer time periods in vitro, aged keratinocytes clearly displayed reduced 
colony forming efficiency and formed smaller colonies (Figures S3E and S3F). These results 
provided compelling evidence that the delayed wound re-epithelialization in aged mice was 
rooted at least in part in intrinsic defects in the proliferative and migratory behavior of aged 
epidermal keratinocytes.
Aged Skin Keratinocytes In Vivo Display a Less Dynamic Transcriptional Response to 
Wounding Than Their Youthful Counterparts
In light of the prominent age-related differences in wound re-epithelialization in vivo and 
intrinsic differences measured in vitro, we next focused on differences in gene expression 
that occur in epidermal keratinocytes at the wound edge. To capture responses at peak age-
related wound-repair differences, we profiled at d3 after wounding, when both young and 
aged keratinocytes were actively re-epithelializing their wounds. We micro-dissected an 
~1mm skin region surrounding the wound-site and then FACS-purified and transcriptionally 
profiled the basal epidermal keratinocytes by RNA-seq (Figures S4A and S4B). By 
comparing wounded and unwounded keratinocyte profiles, we could distinguish 
transcriptional differences specifically associated with age and wound-healing from those 
associated merely with age.
Differential transcription analysis of young and aged keratinocytes at the wound edge 
revealed 393 genes that were differentially regulated in replicates with a q-value <0.05 
(Table S2). Hierarchical clustering analysis showed that unwounded young and aged 
Keyes et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 epidermal samples clustered together, consistent with their similar behaviors during normal 
homeostasis. Interestingly, however, aged keratinocytes at the wound edge grouped more 
closely with young and aged homeostatic (unwounded) states than did young keratinocytes 
at the wound edge (Figure 4A). Notably, this was even true when gene expression across the 
entire transcriptome was compared (Figure S4C).
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) found 114 core GO terms (p-value<0.05) enriched in 
our age-regulated wound gene set relative to young wounded keratinocytes (Figure 4B and 
Table S3). Leading edge analysis identified 8 enriched core processes (cell cycle, cell death, 
immune system, metabolism, migration, signaling, transcription and transport) each with 
multiple GO terms enriched within them (Figure S4D).
When we compared young basal keratinocytes under homeostatic conditions (young epi) to 
young wound-edge keratinocytes (young wound) to define a molecular signature for the 
wound response. In response to injury, 1679 genes were down-regulated by young 
keratinocytes, while 500 transcripts were elevated (Table S4). Not surprisingly, these 
transcripts differentially changed by ±2-fold were enriched for GO terms including 
transcription, cell cycle regulation, migration, metabolism and epidermal development 
(Table S5).
In contrast, keratinocytes at the wound edge of older mice were much more similar to 
homeostatic conditions, revealing a much less dynamic transcriptional response to injury. 
Only 564 genes changed ±2-fold in wound-activated aged keratinocytes compared to their 
unwounded aged counterparts (Table S6). Of these changes, ~90% of the 236 up-regulated 
genes in aged, wound-induced epidermis were also up-regulated in their younger 
counterparts; and a 34% overlap was seen among genes that were down-regulated in 
response to wounding in young and old animals (Figure S4E). Taken together, these data 
suggest that not only are aged keratinocytes more refractory transcriptionally in their 
response to injury, but there are genes mis-regulated in aged keratinocytes that are not part of 
the normal wound response at this time-point.
Wounding Reveals Age-Related Defects in Cross-Talk Between Epidermal Cells and DETCs
Further inspection revealed that many genes associated with immune function failed to be 
regulated by aged keratinocytes at the wound edge (Figures 4C and 4D). This was 
particularly evident in the volcano plot, where immune function genes (blue dots in 4C) 
were often markedly under-expressed in aged versus young wounded skin keratinocytes. 
This was interesting, as the epidermis is known to undergo various forms of cross-talk with 
different immune system components, which can impact their proliferative capacity 
(Castellana et al., 2014; Depianto et al., 2010; Glitzner et al., 2014).
We used flow cytometry to analyze the overall immune response prior to and following 
wounding. We observed a clear influx of neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages into the 
wound bed d3 after wounding. However, no differences were noted which could specifically 
explain the age-related, wound-related downshift in epidermal expression of immune 
signaling genes that we unearthed at this same time-point (Figure 5A). Similarly, we did not 
observe age-specific differences in the wound response of either αβ T-cells or dermal γδ T-
Keyes et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells at this time (Figure 5B). In contrast, a striking wound site-specific reduction in 
epidermal γδ T-cells emerged that was selective to aged skin (Figure 5B). We confirmed 
their identity of these epidermal γδ T-cells as Vγ5Vδ1-DETCs based on their localization, 
dendritic morphology and high surface expression of Vγ5Vδ1 (Figure S5A).
In the homeostatic (unwounded) state, DETCs were present in equivalent numbers in young 
and aged skin (Figure 5C). Following wounding, DETC numbers declined significantly 
more in aged than in young skin; differences peaked by d3 but by d7, when re-
epithelialization neared completion, DETC numbers were still low in the repaired skins of 
aged mice. This d3–d7 time period corresponded to the time when the greatest differences 
were seen in aged versus young skin wound healing.
To characterize this age- and wound-related difference, we immunostained DETCs in 
sagittal sections and in whole mount epidermal sheets of backskins. Corroborating the flow 
cytometry data, DETC numbers were equivalent in young and aged skin, but declined 
markedly in the aged skin after wounding and remained low even at d7 (Figures 5D; S5B–
E). By whole-mount microscopy, we could analyze the temporal behavior of DETCs relative 
to the wound edge. Quantifications revealed a >5X reduction in DETCs seen in a ~400 μm 
radius of skin surrounding the d3 wound, while DETC levels remained similar at sites distal 
to the wound (Figure 5E).
In wounded skin, DETCs are known to change from a dendritic to a rounded morphology as 
they enter an activated state around a wound edge (Chodaczek et al., 2012; Jameson et al., 
2002). We therefore examined DETC morphology changes in wounded backskin of young 
and aged mice. Interestingly, the DETCs at the wound site were less rounded and displayed 
more dendrites than their younger counterparts at day 1 and day 3 after wounding (Figures 
5F and 5G).
We also examined epidermal sheet preparations of earskin, where the characteristic dendritic 
morphology of DETCs is better visualized and quantified (Figures 5H–5J). By d0.5 post-
wounding, the DETCs of young skin displayed a narrow distribution of rounded cells within 
~100 μm of the wound edge. This band was maintained at d1 post-wounding, and extended 
from the wound edge by d3. In contrast, rather than the tight transition from dendritic to 
rounded morphology in young skin, rounded DETCs were scattered from the start 
throughout a broader range from the wound site of aged skin. By d3, many were lost from 
the wound edge. Irrespective of body site, DETCs in the vicinity of the wound sites of aged 
mice showed perturbations in morphology and numbers, often sustaining more dendrites 
than their younger counterparts (Figures 5G and S5E). Together, these studies exposed age-
related, wound-specific defects in DETC morphology and maintenance.
Epidermally-Expressed Skints Function in Wound Repair and in Signaling to DETCs
Since young wound-activated DETCs are known to signal to keratinocytes to produce 
epidermal growth promoting factors (Jameson et al., 2002), it seemed plausible that intrinsic 
age-related defects in DETCs might account for delays in wound re-epithelialization. That 
said, the marked intrinsic differences in aged epidermal keratinocytes to mount a 
transcriptional cascade of immune modulatory factors following injury raised the possibility 
Keyes et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that wound-specific, epidermally-derived signals to DETCs might be altered in aged 
animals.
Returning to our RNA-seq data, we were struck by the preponderance of Skint genes, which 
were up-regulated in young wounded skin epidermis relative to its aged counterpart. 
Notably, during normal homeostasis, Skint2, Skint3, Skint5, Skint7 and Skint9 were low in 
basal epidermal keratinocytes regardless of age, but at the wound edge, their expression was 
elevated in young but not aged keratinocytes (Figure 6A). RT-qPCR on independent samples 
of wound-induced epidermis validated the age-related differential expression of these Skint 
transcripts (Figure 6B).
The functions of Skints in adult tissue homeostasis and wound-repair are unknown. 
However, the established role of Skint1 in the selective development of Vγ5Vδ1-TCR 
expressing DETCs in fetal thymus (Boyden et al., 2008) led us to posit that diminished 
epidermal Skint activation might account at least in part for the diminished ability of aged, 
wounded skin to sustain and/or activate DETCs. To test the functional relevance of Skints 
expressed by young epidermal keratinocytes in response to wounding, we engineered 
lentiviruses harboring shRNAs that target Skints 1, 2, 3 and 9 and a Scrambled control 
(Figures S6A). To identify transduced regions, we added a transgene encoding fluorescently 
tagged histone H2B-mRFP to each lentiviral vector (Figure S6B). Lentiviruses were injected 
in utero into the amniotic sacs of living E9.5 embryos, a method that specifically and 
efficiently infects the single layer of unspecified surface epithelial cells (Beronja et al., 
2010). Within a few days, lentiviral DNA integrates and is thereafter stably propagated 
throughout the epidermis (Figure 6C).
Mice transduced in utero with Skint shRNAs lived to adulthood. qPCR confirmed the 
efficient knock-down of Skints in vivo (Figures 6D and S6D). Therefore at P55, we 
administered punch wounds and monitored the activation of Skints and the re-
epithelialization process. Notably, wound-induced re-epithelialization was significantly 
impaired in these young mice whose epidermis was transduced with Skint3 and Skint9 but 
not Scrambled shRNAs (Figures 6E and 6F). At d5 post-wounding, the epithelial tongues of 
control wounds were largely sealed (90±6%) while wounds from Skint9 and Skint3 knock-
down skins showed as little as 22±5% and 49±5% closure, respectively. For Skint3 and 
Skint9, two distinct shRNAs were transduced independently and knockdowns gave 
analogous results (Figure S6D). These data reinforced the efficacy of the wound-impaired 
phenotypes in young mice lacking SKINTs.
We also assessed the numbers and morphologies of DETCs in our individual keratinocyte-
specific Skint knockdown mice. Importantly, Skint3 and Skint9 knockdown did not 
appreciably affect steady state DETC numbers in unwounded skin; however, Skint shRNA-
transduced young mice showed a modest decrease in DETCs adjacent to the wound bed 
relative to those in Scrambled control mice (Figure 6G). More noticeable was that DETCs 
displayed more dendrites than their control counterparts (Figure 6H). These alterations in 
dendrite morphology were consistent with, albeit not as marked, as we saw in aged wounded 
skin.
Keyes et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To further document the role of Skints in wound repair, we took advantage of the natural 
deletion of the Skint3, Skint4 and Skint9 gene locus in FVBjax mice (Boyden et al., 2008) 
(Figure S6F). Interestingly, young FVBjax mice displayed re-epithelialization delays when 
compared to several strains of mice that maintain the Skint3, Skint4 and Skint9 gene locus, 
including closely related NON/ShiLtJ, as well as C57BL6 and CD-1 (Figures 6I, 6J and 
S6G). The kinetics of the re-epithelialization delay in young Skint3-4-9 null mice paralleled 
those in aged C57BL6.
Similar to aged and control mice, Vγ5Vδ1-DETCs in young FVBjax animals were still in 
equivalent number during normal homeostasis (Barbee et al., 2011) (Figure S6H–I). This 
was also the case for wounded skin. However, even though FVBjax DETCs had somewhat 
fewer dendrites in the unwounded state, DETCs remaining at d1 and d3 time-points after 
wounding displayed more dendrites than normal (Figures 6K and S6J–S6K). Additionally, 
rounded DETCs were atypically intermingled with dendritic ones at the FVBjax wound edge 
(Figures 6L–6M). Overall, the perturbations in DETC morphologies at the wound edge of 
young FVBjax mice were similar to those of aged C57BL6 mice.
Finally, we also examined wound-repair in FVBTac mice, which lack Vγ5Vδ1-DETCs but 
which differ from the TCR δ-null mice previously studied in a wound context (Jameson et 
al., 2002) in that they have other γδ T-cells in their epidermis (Boyden et al., 2008) (Figure 
S6L). Indeed, FVBTac mice too displayed a pronounced wound-repair defect (Figure 6I–6J). 
This result underscored a specific role for Vγ5Vδ1-DETCs in wound-repair, extending prior 
data reporting defective wound healing in mice lacking all γδ T-cells (Jameson et al., 2002).
Skints Act Downstream of STAT3 Signaling, Which is Reduced at the Aged Wound Front
To gain mechanistic insight into why Skint genes are up-regulated in epidermal 
keratinocytes of young wounded skin and yet failed to be induced in keratinocytes at the 
wound edge of aged mice, we analyzed the promoter sequences (4000 bp up-stream of the 
start codon) for conserved motifs that maybe regulating their expression. MEME software 
analysis of up-stream sequences identified 3 highly conserved motifs, distributed across 
Skint gene promoters (Figures S7A and S7B). Within the conserved motifs were 39 
transcription factor consensus-binding sites, which when cross-referenced with our RNA-seq 
data, yielded 9 putative transcription factors that were expressed in basal epidermal 
keratinocytes at the wound edge (Figure S7C).
Among these 9 factors was the transcription factor signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 3 (STAT3) (Figure S7D). STAT3 took on particular relevance given a prior 
report that Stat3−/− mice have delays in wound-healing, with reduced keratinocyte migration 
in in vitro assays (Sano et al., 1999). Intriguingly, interleukin 6 (IL-6), a canonical up-stream 
ligand of STAT3 signaling, showed a 4.5X reduction in aged vs young keratinocytes after 
wounding (Figure 4D). However, after treatment of either young or aged keratinocytes with 
recombinant IL-6 in vitro, phosphorylated (activated) STAT3 and nuclear translocation 
occurred within 30 minutes of treatment (Figure S7E). Importantly, as judged by RT-qPCR, 
a number of Skint transcripts were appreciably elevated by IL-6 (Figure 7A).
Keyes et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 If the enhanced induction of Skints following pSTAT3-signaling is physiologically relevant, 
then the ability of keratinocytes to induce Skint expression after wounding should be 
reduced in K14-Cre;Stat3fl/fl mice. Indeed, Stat3-null epidermis from young mice showed 
significantly reduced activation of Skints following wounding (Figure 7B).
If the link between STAT3 and Skint gene expression is relevant to the age-related decline in 
the ability to activate DETCs, there should be a corresponding age-related decline in STAT3 
signaling upon wounding. Immunostaining for activated, phospho-STAT3-Tyr705 (pSTAT3) 
in d3 post-wound tissue sections revealed many fewer and much more weakly labeled 
keratinocytes in aged skin relative to their young counterparts (Figure 7C). In contrast, only 
rare pSTAT3-positive cells were seen in unwounded skin tissue regardless of age (Figure 
S7F). We corroborated a wound-closure delay in K14-Cre;Stat3fl/fl mice, and further showed 
that analogous to aged mice, it is the re-epithelialization feature of wound-repair that is 
defective and with similar slowed kinetics of healing (Figures 7D and S7G).
Given our observations that first, Skints are reduced in Stat3 cKO mice and second, that 
DETC behavior is perturbed in mice deficient in epidermal Skints, we focused on the 
DETCs in Stat3 cKO animals. In the unwounded state, DETC numbers were unaffected by 
Stat3 loss. However, following wounding, DETC numbers declined dramatically in the Stat3 
cKO skin (Figures 7E). Moreover, those DETCs that remained at the wound site displayed 
more dendrites than in Stat3 Het animals (Figure 7F). Whole mount immunofluorescence 
microscopy of wounded Stat3 cKO ear-skin revealed that at early times, wound edges lacked 
the tight distribution of rounded DETCs seen in the control mice (Figures 7G and 7H). By 
3d, there was a marked paucity of DETCs (Figure 7I). Taken together, the loss of STAT3 
recapitulated the defects in DETCs and wound healing seen in aged mice and in mice 
deficient for Skint3/9.
IL6 Treatment Improves Wound Repair in Aged Skin
Our collective findings pointed to the existence and functional importance of a key IL6-
STAT3-Skint connection in wound-repair. If as our results suggest, a decline in the ability to 
activate this pathway is at the crux of the age-related wound-repair defects, it should be 
possible to enhance keratinocyte migration in skin explants from aged mice through 
administration of IL-6. To test this hypothesis, we treated explants from young and aged skin 
with 10 and 50ng/ml IL-6 in vitro and monitored keratinocyte outgrowth at 5d and 7d time-
points. Exposure to IL-6 markedly improved keratinocyte outgrowth in aged and young 
explants (Figures 7J and 7K). However, the effects were more pronounced in aged explants, 
which showed a 2.2-fold increase in IL-6 mediated outgrowth relative to a 1.4-fold increase 
in young explants.
DISCUSSION
Wound healing is a complex biological process. It requires the interaction of diverse cell 
types and distinct signaling pathways, which must be orchestrated in a spatiotemporal 
manner to achieve proper re-epithelialization. Beginning with DuNouy’s observations of 
delayed wound healing in older soldiers in World War I, to more rigorous experimental 
evidence in rats and other animals, studies have shown that wound healing is delayed in aged 
Keyes et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tissues (Goodson and Hunt, 1979; Raja et al., 2007; Reed et al., 2003). Alterations have been 
described in almost every phase of the healing process, with delays ranging from 20 to 60% 
(Ashcroft et al., 2002; Gosain and Dipietro, 2004; Sgonc and Gruber, 2013). The molecular 
underpinnings of why such delays are observed, how age-related physiological changes 
negatively affect wound healing, and how chronic wounds develop in elderly individuals is 
poorly understood.
In our study, both intrinsic and extrinsic factors contributed to impaired healing in aged skin. 
We detected reduced proliferation and re-epithelialization at the wound sites of aged versus 
young animals, and when placed into equivalent environments in vitro, aged keratinocytes 
still displayed reductions in colony forming efficiency, explant outgrowth, and migration 
when compared with their youthful counterparts. Moreover, aged basal epidermal 
keratinocytes isolated from the wound edge appeared to be more recalcitrant to activation, as 
judged by their markedly reduced transcriptional activity of genes involved in important 
processes of wound-repair.
While these features pointed to the age-related intrinsic alterations in epidermal 
keratinocytes, marked changes in the extrinsic environment of the wound also surfaced in 
aged skin, as exemplified by the significant decline in epidermally expressed immune 
response genes. These age- and wound-specific transcriptional differences in the epidermal 
keratinocytes were accompanied by age-related perturbations in DETC behavior during 
wound-repair.
Recent lines of evidence have implicated the adaptive immune system in a number of facets 
of wound-repair in multiple tissue types (Burzyn et al., 2013; Carvalho et al., 2014; Jameson 
and Havran, 2007; McGee et al., 2013; Rani et al., 2015). Mice that lack all γδ T-cells 
display an ~2d delay in wound healing (Jameson et al., 2002). We observed similar wound-
induced delays in re-epithelialization in FVBTac mice, which specifically lack Vγ5Vδ1-
DETCs but display other γδ-T-cells in the epidermis that are normally confined to the 
dermis (Barbee et al., 2011; Lewis et al., 2006). Our finding demonstrates that Vγ5Vδ1-
DETC loss alone is sufficient to instigate wound-related problems in re-epithelialization, 
lending strong support for prior studies showing that upon wounding, DETCs produce 
signaling factors which act in paracrine to promote epidermal proliferation and healing 
(Jameson and Havran, 2007).
In light of these data, it was particularly intriguing to unearth aberrations in DETC behavior 
in aging mice, because they are wild type for γδ T-cells. Moreover, age-related DETC 
perturbations only surfaced following wounding, where DETCs which normally participate 
in re-epithelialization, were not maintained at the wound edge, resulting in delays in 
restoration of the skin barrier. This particular defect took on all the more interest given a 
previous report that a soluble form of Vγ5Vδ1-TCR binds to keratinocytes adjacent to a 
wound, but not to keratinocytes in unwounded skin (Komori et al., 2012). Such findings 
provide strong support for the notion that epidermal keratinocytes at the wound edge 
undergo a specific change that impacts their recognition by DETCs (Havran and Jameson, 
2010).
Keyes et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We traced the elusive epidermally expressed ligand(s) that can affect wound-induced DETC 
behavior to SKINTS, whose functions in adult tissues are unknown. We first discovered that 
epidermally expressed Skints are selectively up-regulated in the basal epidermal 
keratinocytes at the wound edge of young but not aged mice. We next determined that Skint 
expression is directly influenced by STAT3 signaling, which like its up-stream activator IL-6 
and its downstream Skint targets, is also diminished at the wound edge of aged mice. 
Finally, we unearthed wound-induced re-epithelialization delays in mice that are a) knocked 
down for epidermal Skint3 and Skint9, b) deleted for Skints 3, 4 and 9, or c) conditionally 
targeted for epidermal Stat3. Importantly, like aged mice, these various mutant mice were 
still replete with Vγ5Vδ1-DETCs but exhibited perturbations in DETC behavior.
Our findings provide compelling evidence that epidermal keratinocytes are powerful not 
only in responding to, but also in communicating with, their resident DETCs to achieve 
restoration of the skin barrier following injury. Moreover, they provide insights into the 
physiological significance of SKINTs, which previously until now has been limited to 
SKINT1. Our findings here expose a role for other SKINT family members in mediating 
keratinocyte-DETC crosstalk during wound-repair. Since individual Skint knockdowns 
showed a wound-delay phenotype and SKINTs are known to homo-/hetero-dimerize 
(Barbee et al., 2011), it will be interesting in the future to probe deeper into their interactions 
and functions at the wound-edge.
Finally, our data also underscore a mechanistic role for IL-6 mediated pSTAT3 signaling in 
driving Skint transcription during a youthful wound-response, and reveal an overall 
reduction in this circuitry in aged mice. Although pSTAT3’s functions in wound-induced 
immune responses no doubt extend beyond the pathway that we discovered here, the effects 
of epidermal Stat3 loss of function on the ability to retain DETCs at a wound site were 
strikingly similar to that which we observed in aged mice.
When coupled with the wound-induced re-epithelialization impairment for both aged and 
epidermal Stat3-null skin, our data demonstrate that this circuitry is critical in skin barrier 
restoration. Indeed our findings show that IL-6 can both enhance pSTAT3 and Skint 
expression in epidermal keratinocytes and also abate the wound healing impairment in aged 
mice. Given that elevated IL-6 has been associated with inflammation in aged tissue and 
observed in senescent cells (Franceschi and Campisi, 2014; Kojima et al., 2013), whether 
these chronic processes negatively impact the acute wound healing response in aged 
wounded skin was particularly intriguing, and suggests avenues for future therapeutics in 
accelerating healing in the elderly population.
STAR METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following:
Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing
Further information and requests for reagents may be directed to, and will be fulfilled by the 
Lead Contact: Elaine Fuchs (fuchslb@rockefeller.edu)
Keyes et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Experimental Model and Subject Details
Mice and Wounding Experiments—Aged (22–24) months female C57BL6 mice were 
obtained from the National Institutes of Aging (NIA). We specified to receive mice with 
“good hair coats” to avoid animals with clear signs dermatitis, fighting, scratching and 
inflammation. Animals with visible neoplasia were discarded. Young (2–4 months of aged) 
C57BL6 mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories. Stat3 cKO mice were obtained by 
crossing Stat3floxed animals from Jackson Laboratories (Stock No:016923) to K14-Cre/
Rosa26-YFP (Fuchs Lab) animals. FVBjax (FVB/NJ Stock No:001800) and NON/ShiLtJ 
(Stock No: 002423) mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories and FVBtac (FVB/
NTac) from Taconic Laboratories. All mice were maintained in an AAALAC-approved 
facility at The Rockefeller University. Procedures were performed using IACUC-approved 
protocols that adhere to NIH standards.
Method Details
Wounding Study—Punch biopsies were performed on anaesthetized mice in the telogen 
phase of the hair cycle. For backskin wounds, dorsal hairs were cut with clippers and skin 
was swabbed with EtOH prior to wounding. 6mm biopsy punches (Miltex) were used to 
make full-thickness wounds. For ear punch biopsies, animals were anesthetized and a 2mm 
biopsy was used to punch a through-and-through wound (hole) in the center of each ear. 
After wounding, tissue was collected at 0.5d, 1d and 3d after wounding for immunostaining 
(details below). Depilation was performed as described (Keyes et al., 2013). For EdU pulse 
experiments mice were injected intraperitoneally (50 μg/g) (Sigma-Aldrich) at specified 
intervals before collection.
Histology and Immunofluorescence—Backskin tissue was embedded in OCT 
compound (Tissue Tek) and frozen on dry ice, and cryo-sectioned (10–12 μm section 
thickness). Sections were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, rinsed with PBS, permeabilized 10 
minutes with 0.1% Triton X100 (Sigma) in PBS, and then blocked for 1 hr in blocking 
buffer (2.5% normal donkey serum, 2.5% normal goat serum, 1% BSA, 1% Gelatin, 0.3% 
Triton X-100). Primary antibodies (and their dilutions) used were as follows: K5 (guinea 
pig, 1:500, Fuchs lab); K14 (rabbit, 1:1000, Fuchs lab), K17 (rabbit, 1:1000, Fuchs lab), 
K10 (rabbit, 1:1000, Covance), K6 (guinea pig, 1:2000, Fuchs lab), Cleaved Caspase-3 
(Rabbit, R&D Systems, 1:1000), γδTCR (Armenian Hamster, BioLegend, 1:100), pSTAT3 
(Rabbit, Cell Signaling, 1:100), CD104 (Rat, BioLegend, 1:500), APC TCR Vγ3 (Syrian 
Hamster, Biolegend, 1:200), AlexaFluor-488 CD3 (rat, Biolegend, 1:200). Primary 
antibodies were diluted in blocking buffer and incubated at 4°C overnight. After washing 
with PBS, secondary antibodies, conjugated with Alexa488, Alexa546, or Alexa647 
(Jackson ImmunoResearch), were added for 1–3 hours at room temperature (RT). Slides 
were washed with PBS, counterstained with 4′6′-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and 
mounted in Prolong Gold (Invitrogen). EdU staining was performed using Click-iT EdU 
Alexa-Fluor Imaging Kit (Life Technologies) per manufacturer’s instructions. Wound 
images were acquired with an AxioOberver.Z1 epifluorescence microscope equipped with a 
Hamamatsu ORCA-ER camera and an ApoTome.2 (Carl Zeiss) slider. Tiled and stitched 
images of wounds were collected using a 20X objective, controlled by Zen software (Carl 
Zeiss).
Keyes et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For whole mount epidermal sheet preparations of wounded skin, skin was excised around 
the wound, fat was scraped away with a scalpel and treated with 3.8% ammonium 
thiocyanate (Sigma) for 30 minutes at 37°C. The epidermis was separated with forceps from 
dermal tissue manually. The epidermis was then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight 
and stained as above with γδTCR (BioLegend, Armenian Hamster, 1:100) antibody. Tissue 
was mounted onto slides and counterstained with 4′6′-diamidino-2′-phenylindole (DAPI) 
and mounted in Prolong Gold (Invitrogen). Imaging was performed on a Zeiss Axioplan2 
using a Plan-Apochromat 20X/0.8 air objective. Images presented are maximum projections 
of a z-series of images. For analysis of DETC dendrites, maximum projection images were 
used to count dendrites on DETCs in wounded and unwounded control skin. For whole-
mount ear-epidermal preparations, ears were split laterally, then incubated in 3.8% 
ammonium thiocyanate for 30 minutes at 37°C before ear epidermis were separated from 
dermis. Epidermal sheets were then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 1 hour at room 
temperature, before proceed for γδTCR immunostaining. Imaging was performed on a Zeiss 
Axioplan2 using a Plan-Apochromat 20X/0.8 air objective. Images presented are maximum 
projections of a z-series of images.
For semi-thin sectioning and staining, samples from backskins were fixed in 2% 
glutaraldehyde, 4% paraformaldehyde and 2 mM CaCl2 in 0.05 M sodium cacodylate buffer, 
pH 7.2, at room temperature for > 1 hr. Samples were postfixed in 1% osmium tetroxide, and 
processed for Epon embedding. Semi-thin sections (800 nm) were cut and stained with 
toluidine and examined under bright-field Zeiss Axioplan2 microscope. Figures were 
prepared using ImageJ, Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator CS5.
Cell Culture—Young and aged basal cell keratinocytes were FACS isolated from animals 
and plated on mitomycin-C treated J2 fibroblast feeder cells to establish primary cell lines. 
Independent clones were cultured and passaged in E-media supplemented with 15% serum 
and a final concentration of 0.3 mM Ca2+ for 3 passages and then moved to feeder-free cell 
culture (Rheinwald and Green, 1975). For colony forming efficiency assays, viability of 
epithelial keratinocytes was determined using trypan blue (Sigma) staining on a 
hemocytometer after FACS-isolation. Equal numbers of live cells were plated, in triplicate, 
onto mitomycin-C treated dermal fibroblasts in E-media supplemented with 15% serum and 
0.3 mM Ca2+. After 14 days in culture, cells were fixed and stained with 1% Rhodamine B 
(Sigma). Colony diameter was measured from scanned images of plates using Image J and 
colony numbers were counted. For IL-6 treatment experiments, keratinocytes were serum 
starved for 24 hours then treated with recombinant mIL-6 (R&D Systems) at 10ng/ml for 
indicated time-points. Cells were collected directly in Trizol (Invitrogen) and RNA was 
extracted for qRT-PCR (see below). Cell adhesion and cell spreading assays were performed 
as described previously (Humphries, 2009). Wells were coated using 10 μg/ml human 
plasma fibronectin (Milipore), 40 μg/ml rat tail collagen-I (Corning), 0.1% (w/v) poly-L-
lysine (Sigma), and 1 μg/ml BSA (Sigma) for 1 hour at room temperature, washed with PBS 
3-times and used in cell adhesion assays.
For scratch migration assays, keratinocytes were plated on 6-well tissue culture dishes and 
allowed to reached confluency. Scratches were then created by manual scraping of the cell 
monolayer with a pipette tip. The dishes were then washed with PBS, replenished with E 
Keyes et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 media supplemented with 1mM HEPES, and photographed for periods of 25–36 hr in 5% 
CO2 on a PerkinElmer Volocity spinning disk system equipped with a heated enclosure and 
gas mixer (Solent) and 20X/0.75 CFI Plan-Apo objective. Individual keratinocytes migration 
was manually tracked using ImageJ software. Transwell migration assays were performed in 
6-well plates (Corning). The bottom of each well was coated with 10 μg/ml fibronectin and 
fibroblast-conditioned E-media containing 0.3 mM Ca2+ was added. Young and aged 
keratinocytes were serum starved for 24 hours, and a total of 20,000 cells/well were plated 
in serum-free medium containing 0.3 mM Ca2+. At time-points indicated cells were washed 
off the top membrane and then cells were fixed to the bottom membrane. Cells were stained 
using hemotoxylin and eosin and counted under the microscope.
For explants assays, backskin tissue was harvested and hair was removed with Nair and 
washed with PBS. Subcutaneous fat was gently removed with a scalpel. Explants were cut 
out using a 1.5mm dermal biopsy punch (Miltex), then placed on fibronectin coated 24 well 
tissue culture dishes and secured to bottom of dish with 1–2 μl Matrigel (Corning), and 
submerged in E-media containing 0.3 mM Ca2+. Outgrowths from explants were imaged at 
indicated time-points and analyzed with ImageJ. For explants treated IL-6, 2mm biopsy 
punches were used to cut out explants and treated with 10ng/ml and 50 ng/ml of IL-6 in E-
media containing 0.3 mM Ca2+. Images were taken at indicated time-points and outgrowths 
measured using ImageJ.
RNA-seq and Analysis—FACS isolated keratinocytes were sorted directly into TRI 
Reagent (Sigma). Three animals were pooled per condition and all experiments were 
performed in duplicate. RNA was purified using Direct-zol RNA MiniPrep kit (Zymo 
Research) per manufacturer’s instructions. Quality of the RNA for sequencing was 
determined using Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer, all samples used had RNA integrity numbers 
(RIN) > 8. Library preparation using Illumina TrueSeq mRNA sample preparation kit was 
performed at the Weill Cornell Medical College Genomic Core facility, and RNAs were 
sequenced on Illumina HiSeq 2000 machines. Alignment of reads was done using Tophat 
with the mm9 build of the mouse genome. Transcript assembly and differential expression 
was determined using Cufflinks with Refseq mRNAs to guide assembly (Trapnell et al., 
2010). Analysis of RNA-seq data was done using the cummeRbund package in R (Trapnell 
et al., 2012). Differentially regulated transcripts were used in Gene Set Enrichment Analysis 
(GSEA) to find enriched functional GO annotations (Subramanian et al., 2005). MEME 
software suite (including TomTom) was used to identify enriched motifs in Skint promoters, 
the JASPAR vertebrate database was as a source for consensus transcription binding site 
sequences (Bailey et al., 2009).
Lentvirus Production and Injections—Production and concentration of lentivirus, as 
well as ultrasound-guided in utero injections, were performed as described elsewhere 
(Beronja et al., 2010). shRNAs were obtained from the Broad Institute’s Mission TRC-1/2 
mouse library.
Flow Cytometry—Preparation of adult mice backskins for isolation of keratinocytes and 
staining protocols were done as previously described (Nowak and Fuchs, 2009). Briefly, 
subcutaneous fat was removed from skins with a scalpel, and skins were placed dermis side 
Keyes et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 down on trypsin (Gibco) at 37 °C for 45 minutes. Single-cell suspensions were obtained by 
scraping the skin to remove the epidermis and hair follicles from the dermis. Cells were then 
filtered through 70mm, followed by 40mm strainers. Cell suspensions were incubated with 
the appropriate antibodies for 30 minutes on ice. The following antibodies were used for 
FACS: α6-integrin (BD Pharmingen), CD34 (eBiosciences) and Sca-1 (eBiosciences). DAPI 
was used to exclude dead cells. Cell isolations were performed on FACS Aria sorters 
running FACS Diva software (BD Biosciences). For EdU incorporation experiments, 
staining was performed using Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor 488 Flow Cytometry Kit (Life 
Technologies) per manufacturer’s instructions. FACS analyses were performed using LSRII 
FACS Analyzers and results were analyzed with FlowJo software.
For analysis of immune cells at the wound site, wound tissue was isolated from the 
backskin, keeping margins as close to wound as possible. Tissue was minced in media 
(RPMI with L-glutamine, Sodium pyruvate, acid free HEPES, Penicillin and streptomycin) 
then Liberase TL (Roche) was added (25μg/ml) and tissue was digested for 90 minutes at 
37°C while shaking gently. The digest reaction was stopped by addition of 20ml of 0.5M 
EDTA and 1ml of 10% DNase solution. Cells were passed through a 70mm strainer and 
stained with the following antibodies from eBiosciences: Ly6c-FITC 1:100, Ly6g-PE 1:200, 
CD11c-PECy7 1:150, CD11b-PacBlue 1:300, MHCII-AF700 1:300, CD45-A780 1:100, 
CD64-PerCP-Cy5 1:200, TCRβ-PCRP 1:200, γδTCR-APC 1:400. Dead cells were 
excluded using a LIVE/DEAD Fixable Blue Dead Cell Stain Kit (Molecular Probes), for UV 
excitation. FACS analyses were performed using LSRII FACS Analyzers and results were 
analyzed with FlowJo software.
RT-qPCR—RNA was purified from FACS sorted cells by directly sorting into TrizolLS 
(Invitrogen) and purified using Direct-zol RNA MiniPrep kit (Zymo Research). Equivalent 
amounts of RNA were reverse-transcribed by SuperScript VILO cDNA Synthesis Kit 
(Invitrogen). cDNAs were normalized to equal amounts using primers against β-actin. 
cDNAs were mixed with indicated primers and Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix 
(Applied Biosystems), and quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed on a Applied 
Biosystems 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR system. Primer sequences for RT-PCR were 
obtained from Roche Universal ProbeLibrary.
For Vγ5 qPCR, unwounded and wounded skin was incubated in 50mM EDTA for 1hour, to 
separate epidermis was separated from dermis. Epidermal cells were immediately frozen in 
liquid nitrogen. Frozen tissues were homogenized using Bessman Tissue Pulverizer 
(SpectrumTM) and collected in Trizol (Invitrogen). RNA was extracted using Direct-zol 
RNA MiniPrep kit (Zymo Research) per manufacturer’s instructions. Equivalent amounts of 
RNA were reverse-transcribed by SuperScript VILO cDNA Synthesis Kit (Invitrogen). 
cDNAs were mixed with indicated primers and Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix 
(AppliedBiosystems), and quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed on a Applied 
Biosystems 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR system.
Keyes et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Quantification and Statistical analysis
Student’s t-test was used to determine the significance between two groups with Prism5 
software. Box-and-whisker plots are used to describe the entire population without 
assumptions about the statistical distribution. Error bars plotted on graphs denote SEM. For 
all statistical tests, the 0.05 level of confidence was accepted as a significant difference.
Data Availability
RNA-seq data have been submitted to the NCBI-GEO under the accession number 
GSE74283.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Fuchs’ lab colleagues Irina Matos and E Heller for help with microscopy; Shijing Liu and N Oshimori for 
intellectual input and suggestions; M Sribour and S Hacker for technical assistance in the mouse facility; JDLCruz-
Racelis for assistance in tissue sectioning and culture; E Wong for genotyping; S Larson for assistance in tissue 
explants. Rockefeller University’s Comparative Bioscience Center (AAALAC accredited) provided care of mice in 
accordance with National Institutes of Health (NIH) guidelines and Flow Cytometry facility for FACS sorting. Weill 
Cornell Medical School Genomics Center conducted sequencing. E.F. is an Investigator of the Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute and a Senior Investigator of the Ellison Foundation for Aging Research. B.K. was funded by the 
NIH/NCI (1001328-01-CCL3350413-112580) and a Postdoctoral Fellowship from AFAR. S. Liu is a Jane Coffin 
Childs Postdoctoral Fellow and a Women & Science Fellow. A.A. is the recipient of a Merck graduate fellowship 
and a Medical Scientist Training Program traineeship. S. N. is a Damon Runyon Postdoctoral Fellow. This study 
was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (R01-AR050452) and the Ellison Foundation (E.F.).
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures, seven 
Supplemental figures, six Supplemental tables, and two Supplemental movies.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
B.K. and E.F. conceptualized the study. B.K. and E.F. wrote the manuscript. B.K., E.F., S.L. 
and S.N. designed experiments. B.K. characterized young and aged skin, performed 
wounding studies and analyzed re-epithelialization of young and aged backskin wounds; 
performed in vitro experiments and collected and analyzed in vivo RNA-seq data.; analyzed 
performed immune cell analysis and Skint knockdown studies and analysis of Skint 
expression. B.K. and S.Liu performed Stat3 cKO wounding experiments. S. Liu performed 
NON/ShiLtJ, FVBjax and FVBtac young mice wounding studies; aged ear skin wounding 
studies. Vγ5 qPCR was performed by S. Liu and C.P.L. S. Liu and S.N. performed the IL-6 
explant experiments and provided immunology expertise in characterizing immune cell 
populations. L.P. assisted with wounding procedures. J.L. performed in utero lentiviral 
injections. M.N. and B.K. performed cell adhesion assays. H.A.P performed ultrathin 
sectioning and staining of young and aged skin; A.A. and B.K. provided bioinformatics and 
quantitation/statistics expertise.
Keyes et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Guinea pig Anti-Mouse K5
Fuchs Lab
N/A
Rabbit Anti-Mouse K14
Fuchs Lab
N/A
Rabbit Anti-Mouse K17
Fuchs Lab
N/A
Guinea pig Anti-Mouse K6
Fuchs Lab
N/A
Rabbit Anti- K10 Clone: Poly19054
Biolegend (Covance)
Cat# 905401
Rabbit Anti Cleaved Caspase-3 Clone: 269518
R&D
Cat# MAB 835
Armenian Hamster Anti-gd TCR Clone: GL3 AF647
Biolgend
Cat# 118133
Armenian Hamster Anti-gd TCR Clone: GL3
Biolgend
Cat# 118101
Rabbit Anti-pStat3 (Tyr705) Clone:D3A7
Cell Signaling
Cat# 9145
Rat Anti-CD104 Clone: 346-11A
Biolegend
Cat#123602
Syrian Hamster Anti-Mouse TCR Vg3 Clone: 536
Biolegend
Cat# 137505
Rat Anti-Mouse CD3e Clone: 17A2
Biolegend
Cat# 100212
Armenian Hamster Anti-MouseTCRb Clone: H57–597
Biolegend
Cat# 109201
Armenian Hamster Anti-MouseTCRb Clone: H57–597 PerCp/
Cy5.5
Biolegend
Cat# 109227
Donkey Anti-Rabbit, AF488 conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoReseach
Cat# 711-545-152
Donkey Anti-Rabbit AF546, conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoReseach
Cat# 711-165-152
Donkey Anti-Rabbit AF647, conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoReseach
Cat# 711-605-152
Donkey Anti-Guinea pig AF488, conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoReseach
Cat# 706-545-148
Donkey Anti-Guinea pig RRX conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoReseach
Cat# 706-295-148
Donkey Anti-Guinea pig AF647, conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoReseach
Cat# 706-605-148
Donkey Anti-Rat AF488, conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoReseach
Cat# 712-545-150
Donkey Anti-Rat RRX, conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoReseach
Cat# 712-295-150
Donkey Anti-Rat AF647, conjugated secondary
Jackson ImmunoReseach
Cat# 712-605-150
Anti-Mouse Ly6c-FITC Clone: HK1.4
Biolegend
Cat# 128005
Anti-Mouse Ly6g-PE Clone:1A8
Biolegend
Cat# 127607
Anti-Mouse CD11c-PECy7 Clone: N418
Biolegend
Cat# 117317
Keyes et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Anti-Mouse CD11b-PacBlue Clone: M1/70
Biolegend
Cat# 101223
Anti-Mouse 1-A/1-E-AF700 Clone:M5/114.15.2
Biolegend
Cat# 107621
Anti-Mouse CD45-AF750 Clone: 30-F11
Biolegend
Cat# 103153
Anti-Mouse CD64-PerCP-Cy5 Clone:X54-5/7.1
Biolegend
Cat# 139307
Anti-Mouse CD34 eFluor 660 Clone: RAM34
eBiosciences
Cat# 50-0341-82
Anti-mouse Ly-6A/E (Sca-1) PerCP-Cy5.5
eBiosciences
Cat# 45-5981-82
Anti-Human CD49f (α6-integrin) PE
BD Pharmingen
Cat# 555736
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
OCT Compount Tissue Tek
VWR
Cat# 25608-930
4′6′-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# 28718-90-3
Prolong Gold
Invitrogen
Cat# P36930
Ammonium Thiocyanate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# 221988
Glutaraldehyde Solution
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# G5882
16% Paraformaldehyde Solution
Electron Microscopy Sciences
Cat#15700
Osmium Tetroxide
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# 20816-12-0
Mitomycin-C
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# M7949
Trypan Blue
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# T8154
Rhodamine B
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat # R6626
Recombinant Murine Interlukin-6
R&D
Cat# 406-ML-CF
TRI Reagent
Sigma
Cat# T3934
Poly-L-lysine
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# P4707
Bovine Serum Albumin
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# A7906
Fibronectin Human Protein, Plasma
Millipore
Cat# FC010
Corning Collagen I, Rat Taile
Corning
Cat# 354236
Matrigel Matrix (Phenol Free)
Corning
Cat# 356237
E-Media
Fuchs Lab
N/A
Trypsin-EDTA(25%)
Gibco
Cat# 25200056
RPMI with L-glutamine
ThermoFisher
Cat# 11875-093
Sodium Pyruvate (100mM)
ThermoFisher
Cat# 11360070
Acid free HEPES (1M)
ThermoFisher
Cat# 15630080
Keyes et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Liberase™ TL Research Grade
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# 5401020001
DNAse 1 from bovine pancreas
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# D4263
LIVE/DEAD Fixable Blue Dead Cell Stain Kit
ThermoFisher
Cat# L23105
SYBR Green PCR Master Mix
Appliedbiosystems
Cat# 4367659
Critical Commercial Assays
Click-IT EdU Alexa-Flour Imaging Kit
Life Technologies
Cat# C10337
Directzol™ RNA MiniPrep
Zymo
Cat# R2050
TrueSeq RNA Library PrepKit
lllumina
Cat# RS-122-2001
SuperScript VILO cDNA Synthesis Kit and Master Mix
ThermoFisher
Cat# 11752050
Deposited Data
Raw RNA-seq data files NCBI Gene Expression
This paper
GSE74283
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
J2 fibroblast feeder cells
Fuchs Lab
N/A
Primary Mouse Keratinocyte Cell Lines
Fuchs Lab
N/A
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
C57BL6 Mice
Jackson Laboratories
JAX: 000664
Aged C57BL6 Mice
NIA
K14Cre
Fuchs Lab
N/A
Stat3fl/fl
Jackson Laboratories
JAX:016923
FVB/NJ
Jackson Laboratories
JAX:001800
FVB/NTac
Taconic Biosciences
N/A
Non/ShiLtj
Jackson Laboratories
JAX:002423
Recombinant DNA
pLKO.1 TRC Cloning Vector
Moffat et al 2006
Addgene# 10878
TRC Mouse Genome shRNA Library
Dharmacon
Cat# RMM4013
Sequence-Based Reagents: See Supplemental Table 7
Software and Algorithms
Fiji (ImageJ)
https://fiji.sc/
N/A
Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator CS5
Adobe.com
N/A
R
https://www.r-project.org/
N/A
Keyes et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Bowtie2
Trapnell et. al 2012, Trapnel 
et. al., 2010
http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/index.shtml
CummeRbund package in R
http://compbio.mit.edu/cummeRbund/
N/A
Cufflinks
Trapnell et. al 2012, Trapnell 
et. al., 2010
http://cole-trapnell-lab.github.io/cufflinks/
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
Tamayo, et al. 2005, Mootha, 
Lindgren, et al. 2003
http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/index.jsp
MEME software suite (including TomTom)
Bailey TL et al. 2009
http://meme-suite.org/doc/cite.html?man_type=web
FACS Diva software
BD Biosciences
N/A
FlowJo Software
FlowJo
N/A
Prism
Graphpad
N/A
Other
Sterile 1.5mm, 2mm, 4mm and 6mm Biopsy punch (Miltex)
Integra
Cat# 33-31A, 
33-31, 33-34, 
33-36
Spectrum Tissue Pulverizer
Fisher Scientific
Cat# 189476
References
Ashcroft GS, Mills SJ, Ashworth JJ. Ageing and wound healing. Biogerontology. 2002; 3:337–345. 
[PubMed: 12510172] 
Bailey TL, Boden M, Buske FA, Frith M, Grant CE, Clementi L, Ren J, Li WW, Noble WS. MEME 
SUITE: tools for motif discovery and searching. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:W202–W208. 
[PubMed: 19458158] 
Barbee SD, Woodward MJ, Turchinovich G, Mention JJ, Lewis JM, Boyden LM, Lifton RP, Tigelaar 
R, Hayday AC. Skint-1 is a highly specific, unique selecting component for epidermal T cells. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011; 108:3330–3335. [PubMed: 21300860] 
Beronja S, Livshits G, Williams S, Fuchs E. Rapid functional dissection of genetic networks via tissue-
specific transduction and RNAi in mouse embryos. Nat Med. 2010; 16:821–827. [PubMed: 
20526348] 
Boyden LM, Lewis JM, Barbee SD, Bas A, Girardi M, Hayday AC, Tigelaar RE, Lifton RP. Skint1, 
the prototype of a newly identified immunoglobulin superfamily gene cluster, positively selects 
epidermal gammadelta T cells. Nat Genet. 2008; 40:656–662. [PubMed: 18408721] 
Burzyn D, Kuswanto W, Kolodin D, Shadrach JL, Cerletti M, Jang Y, Sefik E, Tan TG, Wagers AJ, 
Benoist C, et al. A special population of regulatory T cells potentiates muscle repair. Cell. 2013; 
155:1282–1295. [PubMed: 24315098] 
Carvalho L, Jacinto A, Matova N. The Toll/NF-κB signaling pathway is required for epidermal wound 
repair in Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:E5373–E5382. [PubMed: 25427801] 
Castellana D, Paus R, Perez-Moreno M. Macrophages contribute to the cyclic activation of adult hair 
follicle stem cells. Plos Biol. 2014; 12:e1002002. [PubMed: 25536657] 
Chodaczek G, Papanna V, Zal MA, Zal T. Body-barrier surveillance by epidermal γδ TCRs. Nat 
Immunol. 2012; 13:272–282. [PubMed: 22327568] 
Depianto D, Kerns ML, Dlugosz AA, Coulombe PA. Keratin 17 promotes epithelial proliferation and 
tumor growth by polarizing the immune response in skin. Nat Genet. 2010; 42:910–914. [PubMed: 
20871598] 
Keyes et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Franceschi C, Campisi J. Chronic inflammation (inflammaging) and its potential contribution to age-
associated diseases. J Gerontol a Biol Sci Med Sci. 2014; 69(Suppl 1):S4–S9. [PubMed: 
24833586] 
Fuchs E. Scratching the surface of skin development. Nature. 2007; 445:834–842. [PubMed: 
17314969] 
Glitzner E, Korosec A, Brunner PM, Drobits B, Amberg N, Schonthaler HB, Kopp T, Wagner EF, 
Stingl G, Holcmann M, et al. Specific roles for dendritic cell subsets during initiation and 
progression of psoriasis. EMBO Mol Med. 2014; 6:1312–1327. [PubMed: 25216727] 
Goodson WH, Hunt TK. Wound healing and aging. J Invest Dermatol. 1979; 73:88–91. [PubMed: 
448182] 
Gosain A, Dipietro LA. Aging and Wound Healing. World Journal of Surgery. 2004; 28:321–326. 
[PubMed: 14961191] 
Gray EE, Suzuki K, Cyster JG. Cutting edge: Identification of a motile IL-17-producing gammadelta T 
cell population in the dermis. J Immunol. 2011; 186:6091–6095. [PubMed: 21536803] 
Gurtner GC, Werner S, Barrandon Y, Longaker MT. Wound repair and regeneration. Nature. 2008; 
453:314–321. [PubMed: 18480812] 
Havran WL, Chien YH, Allison JP. Recognition of self antigens by skin-derived T cells with invariant 
gamma delta antigen receptors. Science. 1991; 252:1430–1432. [PubMed: 1828619] 
Havran WL, Jameson JM. Epidermal T cells and wound healing. J Immunol. 2010; 184:5423–5428. 
[PubMed: 20483798] 
Hayday AC. Gammadelta T cells and the lymphoid stress-surveillance response. Immunity. 2009; 
31:184–196. [PubMed: 19699170] 
Heath WR, Carbone FR. The skin-resident and migratory immune system in steady state and memory: 
innate lymphocytes, dendritic cells and T cells. Nat Immunol. 2013; 14:978–985. [PubMed: 
24048119] 
Humphries MJ. Cell adhesion assays. Methods Mol Biol. 2009; 522:203–210. [PubMed: 19247616] 
Itohara S, Mombaerts P, Lafaille J, Iacomini J, Nelson A, Clarke AR, Hooper ML, Farr A, Tonegawa 
S. T cell receptor delta gene mutant mice: independent generation of alpha beta T cells and 
programmed rearrangements of gamma delta TCR genes. Cell. 1993; 72:337–348. [PubMed: 
8381716] 
Jameson J, Havran WL. Skin gammadelta T-cell functions in homeostasis and wound healing. 
Immunol Rev. 2007; 215:114–122. [PubMed: 17291283] 
Jameson JM, Cauvi G, Witherden DA, Havran WL. A keratinocyte-responsive gamma delta TCR is 
necessary for dendritic epidermal T cell activation by damaged keratinocytes and maintenance in 
the epidermis. J Immunol. 2004; 172:3573–3579. [PubMed: 15004158] 
Jameson J, Ugarte K, Chen N, Yachi P, Fuchs E, Boismenu R, Havran WL. A role for skin gammadelta 
T cells in wound repair. Science. 2002; 296:747–749. [PubMed: 11976459] 
Kenyon CJ. The genetics of ageing. Nature. 2010; 464:504–512. [PubMed: 20336132] 
Keyes BE, Segal JP, Heller E, Lien WH, Chang CY, Guo X, Oristian DS, Zheng D, Fuchs E. Nfatc1 
orchestrates aging in hair follicle stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 201320301
Kojima H, Inoue T, Kunimoto H, Nakajima K. IL-6-STAT3 signaling and premature senescence. 
Jakstat. 2013; 2:e25763. [PubMed: 24416650] 
Komori HK, Witherden DA, Kelly R, Sendaydiego K, Jameson JM, Teyton L, Havran WL. Cutting 
edge: dendritic epidermal γδ T cell ligands are rapidly and locally expressed by keratinocytes 
following cutaneous wounding. J Immunol. 2012; 188:2972–2976. [PubMed: 22393149] 
Lewis JM, Girardi M, Roberts SJ, Barbee SD, Hayday AC, Tigelaar RE. Selection of the cutaneous 
intraepithelial gammadelta+ T cell repertoire by a thymic stromal determinant. Nat Immunol. 
2006; 7:843–850. [PubMed: 16829962] 
López-Otín C, Blasco MA, Partridge L, Serrano M, Kroemer G. The hallmarks of aging. Cell. 2013; 
153:1194–1217. [PubMed: 23746838] 
McGee HM, Schmidt BA, Booth CJ, Yancopoulos GD, Valenzuela DM, Murphy AJ, Stevens S, Flavell 
RA, Horsley V. IL-22 promotes fibroblast-mediated wound repair in the skin. J Investig Dermatol. 
2013; 133:1321–1329. [PubMed: 23223145] 
Keyes et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Moffat J, Grueneberg DA, Yang X, Kim SY, Kloepfer AM, Hinkle G, Piqani B, Eisenhaure TM, Luo 
B, Grenier JK, et al. A lentiviral RNAi library for human and mouse genes applied to an arrayed 
viral high-content screen. Cell. 2006; 124:1283–1298. [PubMed: 16564017] 
Mohamed RH, Sutoh Y, Itoh Y, Otsuka N, Miyatake Y, Ogasawara K, Kasahara M. The SKINT1-like 
gene is inactivated in hominoids but not in all primate species: implications for the origin of 
dendritic epidermal T cells. PLoS ONE. 2015; 10:e0123258. [PubMed: 25830554] 
Nishimura EK, Granter SR, Fisher DE. Mechanisms of hair graying: incomplete melanocyte stem cell 
maintenance in the niche. Science. 2005; 307:720–724. [PubMed: 15618488] 
Nowak JA, Fuchs E. Isolation and culture of epithelial stem cells. Methods Mol Biol. 2009; 482:215–
232. [PubMed: 19089359] 
Oh J, Lee YD, Wagers AJ. Stem cell aging: mechanisms, regulators and therapeutic opportunities. Nat 
Med. 2014; 20:870–880. [PubMed: 25100532] 
Raja Sivamani K, Garcia MS, Isseroff RR. Wound re-epithelialization: modulating keratinocyte 
migration in wound healing. Front Biosci. 2007; 12:2849–2868. [PubMed: 17485264] 
Rani M, Zhang Q, Scherer MR, Cap AP, Schwacha MG. Activated skin γδ T-cells regulate T-cell 
infiltration of the wound site after burn. Innate Immun. 2015; 21:140–150. [PubMed: 24412847] 
Reed MJ, Koike T, Puolakkainen P. Wound repair in aging. A review. Methods Mol Med. 2003; 
78:217–237. [PubMed: 12825273] 
Rheinwald JG, Green H. Serial cultivation of strains of human epidermal keratinocytes: the formation 
of keratinizing colonies from single cells. Cell. 1975; 6:331–343. [PubMed: 1052771] 
Sano S, Itami S, Takeda K, Tarutani M, Yamaguchi Y, Miura H, Yoshikawa K, Akira S, Takeda J. 
Keratinocyte-specific ablation of Stat3 exhibits impaired skin remodeling, but does not affect skin 
morphogenesis. 1999; 18:4657–4668. [PubMed: 10469645] 
Sgonc R, Gruber J. Age-related aspects of cutaneous wound healing: a mini-review. Gerontology. 
2013; 59:159–164. [PubMed: 23108154] 
Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy 
SL, Golub TR, Lander ES, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for 
interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005; 102:15545–15550. 
[PubMed: 16199517] 
Sumaria N, Roediger B, Ng LG, Qin J, Pinto R, Cavanagh LL, Shklovskaya E, Fazekas de St Groth B, 
Triccas JA, Weninger W. Cutaneous immunosurveillance by self-renewing dermal gammadelta T 
cells. J Exp Med. 2011; 208:505–518. [PubMed: 21339323] 
Trapnell C, Hendrickson DG, Sauvageau M, Goff L, Rinn JL, Pachter L. Differential analysis of gene 
regulation at transcript resolution with RNA-seq. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:46–53. [PubMed: 
23222703] 
Trapnell C, Roberts A, Goff L, Pertea G, Kim D, Kelley DR, Pimentel H, Salzberg SL, Rinn JL, 
Pachter L. Differential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA-seq experiments with 
TopHat and Cufflinks. Nat Protoc. 2012; 7:562–578. [PubMed: 22383036] 
Trapnell C, Williams BA, Pertea G, Mortazavi A, Kwan G, van Baren MJ, Salzberg SL, Wold BJ, 
Pachter L. Transcript assembly and quantification by RNA-Seq reveals unannotated transcripts and 
isoform switching during cell differentiation. Nat Biotechnol. 2010; 28:511–515. [PubMed: 
20436464] 
Turchinovich G, Hayday AC. Skint-1 identifies a common molecular mechanism for the development 
of interferon-γ-secreting versus interleukin-17-secreting γδ T cells. Immunity. 2011; 35:59–68. 
[PubMed: 21737317] 
Velarde MC, Demaria M, Melov S, Campisi J. Pleiotropic age-dependent effects of mitochondrial 
dysfunction on epidermal stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015; 112:10407–10412. 
[PubMed: 26240345] 
Keyes et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
Intrinsic and extrinsic defects impair wound re-epithelialization in aged skin
•
Loss of DETCs at the wound edge delays wound repair in aged skin
•
Epidermally expressed Skint3/9 mediates keratinocyte-DETC cross
•
IL6/STAT3 signaling regulates Skint expression and facilitates proper wound 
healing
Keyes et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Young and aged epidermis. A)
Schematic illustrating the differentiated layers of the epidermis. B) Images of semi-thin 
sections of young (2–4 months old) and aged (22–24 months old) skin stained with toluidine 
blue. Abbreviations: Epi, epidermis; Derm, dermis; HF, hair follicle; SubCu Fat, 
subcutaneous fat. Scale bars=100μm. C) Quantification of the thickness of epidermis and 
dermis of young and aged skin. N=8. Students t-test was used to measure statistical 
significance. D) Immunofluorescence images of young and aged skin labeled with 
antibodies (Abs) against keratin 14 (K14), β4-integrin (CD104), keratin 5 (K5) and keratin 
10 (K10) [secondary Abs are color-coded as shown]. Sections were co-stained with DAPI 
(blue) to visualize nuclei. Scale bars=25μm. E) Volcano plot of in vivo RNA-seq data 
comparing young:aged basal keratinocyte transcripts. Vertical red colored lines denote fold 
changes greater ±2 fold. Horizontal red line denotes p-value > 0.05. Data are represented as 
mean ± SEM. See also Table S1.
Keyes et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Re-epithelialization of young and aged cutaneous wounds. A)
Immunofluorescence images of the temporal re-epithelization process that occurs following 
skin wounding (t=0) in young and aged mice. Sections are immunolabeled for basal 
epidermal keratinocytes (K14) and co-stained with DAPI. Scale bar=500μm. “S” denotes 
scab and yellow arrows denote wound edge. B) Schematics depicting progress of the re-
epithelialization process at time-points indicated in young and aged animals. While wounds 
heal, the process is delayed in aged skin. C–D) Quantification of re-epithelialization in 
young and aged wounds (C) and of the length of the tongue of epidermal keratinocytes that 
Keyes et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 migrate in from the wound edges during the wound-repair process (D). Students t-test was 
used to measure statistical significance, N=5. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. See also 
Figures S1 and S2.
Keyes et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Functional capabilities of young and aged keratinocytes. A)
Immunofluorescence images of young and aged wounds at d3 and d5 time-points with 
proliferating cells labeled with EdU (green). Dashed lines denote epidermal/dermal 
boundaries. Scale bars=100μm. Quantifications are of EdU incorporation from independent 
samples. N=7. B) Proliferation of young and aged basal layer keratinocytes under 
homeostatic conditions. Animals were pulsed with EdU and collected after 24 hours. EdU 
incorporation was measured by flow cytometry. Young (7.9±1.2%) and aged (7.6±0.5%), 
p=0.82, N=6. C) Proliferation of young and aged basal layer keratinocytes after depilation. 
EdU was 24 hours prior to collection. Graph shows percentage of basal layer keratinocytes 
Keyes et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with EdU incorporation post-depilation at indicated time-points. At 24hours post-depilation 
young (51.5±1.5%) and aged (28.6±7.0%), p=0.018, N=4. D) DIC images of explant 
cultures from young and aged tissue biopsies. Dashed lines denote the borders of 
keratinocyte outgrowth; yellow lines denote radial distances migrated. E=explant. Scale 
bars=10μm. N=12. Quantifications are of the area and distance of outgrowth of keratinocytes 
in explants during a 7 day time-course. E–I) Scratch wound assays. E) Migration into 
600μm scratch wounds of aged and young skin keratinocytes was measured by time-lapse 
video-microscopy. Shown are DIC images of time-points indicated. Quantifications of 
wound closure are shown in the graph at right. F) EdU incorporation during the interval of 
the time-lapse imaging. G) Comparative measurements of distance migrated and velocity. 
H) Migration plots of individual cells during the wound closure. I) EdU incorporation 
during the interval of the time-lapse imaging. Students t-test was used to measure statistical 
significance. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. See also Figure S3 and Supplemental 
Movies S1 and S2.
Keyes et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Transcriptional profiling of wound response. A)
Heat map of differentially regulated transcripts between aged and young epidermal 
keratinocytes isolated from unwounded skin or the wound edge of skin and subjected 
directly to RNA-seq analyses. Yg wound, young keratinocytes isolated from the wound 
edge; aged wound, aged keratinocytes isolated from the wound edge; yg epi, young 
keratinocytes under homeostatic conditions; aged epi, aged keratinocytes under homeostatic 
conditions. Blue color denotes low FPKM expression, green high FPKM expression. B) 
Negatively and positively enriched GO terms in genes that were differentially regulated 
Keyes et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 between aged wound and young wound samples. C) Volcano plot of differentially regulated 
genes between young wound and aged wound samples. Vertical rose-colored lines denote 
fold changes greater ± 2-fold. Horizontal rose line denotes p-value > 0.05. Blue dots indicate 
genes with a GO annotation relating to immune function (note marked failure of many of 
these genes to be up-regulated in aged wounds). D) Table of selected genes for indicated GO 
term from RNA-seq analysis (blue, down-regulated by log2 of value; green, up-regulated by 
log2 of value). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. See also Figure S4 and Tables S2–S6.
Keyes et al.
Page 32
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Immune cells and wound healing in aged skin. A)
Skins from young and aged mice either unwounded or within 1mm of a wound-edge were 
subjected to flow cytometry analysis using the scheme in Figure S4A. Percentages of 
specific immune subclasses relative to total immune cells (CD45+) are shown. DC, dendritic 
cells (MHCII+CD11c+); Macs, macrophages (CD64+CD11b+); Mono, monocytes 
(Ly6chiLy6gneg); Neutro, neutrophils (Ly6cnegLy6ghi); T-cells (γδTCR+TCRβ). N=6. B) 
Quantification of skin resident T-cells by flow cytometry. Data are presented as percentages 
of specific T-cell subclasses relative to total immune cells (CD45+). N=6. C) Quantifications 
Keyes et al.
Page 33
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of DETCs numbers from 0–700μm of the wound edge at indicated times after wounding. 
N=5. D) Schematic of epidermal sheet preparation (whole mount) of wound from birds-eye-
view and maximum projections of z-series images of epidermal sheets are from skin 
adjacent to wound edge (yellow dotted lines), with immunostaining for γδ TCR to detect 
DETCs. Shown are images from d3 after wounding. E) At right are quantifications of DETC 
distribution, plotted in histograms as the distance proximal (0–400 μm) and distal (1200–
1600 μm) from the wound edge. N=10. F) Sagittal imunofluorescence images of skin 
(wounded and unwounded), immunostained for DETCs. Dashed lines denote epidermal/
dermal boundaries. Scale bars=25 μm. Insets show DETCs highlighted with arrows. G) 
Quantification of the numbers of dendrites per DETC. N=5. Students t-test was used to 
measure statistical significance. H) Whole mount DETC immunofluorescence of ear-skin. 
Shown are images prior to and at d1 and d3 after wounding. Scale bars = 100 μm. N=3. 
Yellow dotted lines denote wound edge (wd). I) Density plots of the distribution of rounded 
(no dendrites) of DETCs in ear-skin whole mount preparations at times post-wounding 
indicated. Vertical lines represent mean distance of rounded DETCs from wound edge (0 
μm). J) Quantifications of DETCs at the wound site at times after injury. Data are 
represented as mean ± SEM. See also Figure S5.
Keyes et al.
Page 34
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Failure of keratinocytes to up-regulate Skints results in impaired wound healing in 
young mice. A)
Heatmap of Skint gene family expression from RNA-seq data. Asterisks denotes splice 
variant. Yg wound=young keratinocytes isolated from the wound edge, aged wound= aged 
keratinocytes isolated from the wound edge, young epi=young keratinocytes under 
homeostatic conditions, aged epi=aged keratinocytes under homeostatic conditions. B) qRT-
PCR of Skint mRNAs from keratinocytes isolated from wound edges. C) Illustration in utero 
lentiviral infections into amniotic sacs of E9.5 embryos and selective transduction of mouse 
Keyes et al.
Page 35
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 skin epidermis. D) Knockdown efficiency of Skint shRNAs as measured by qRT-PCR of 
adult epidermis prior to wounding. E) Immunofluorescence images of d3 backskins of 
wounded young mice whose epidermises were transduced in utero for the Skint shRNAs 
indicated. Scr, scrambled. Tissue sections are immunolabeled for K14 (green) and DAPI 
(blue). S, scab; arrows denote wound-edge. Scale bar= 500 μm. F) Wound closure at d5 of 
young mice transduced for the indicated shRNAs. N=4. G) Quantification of DETC number 
and number of dendrites per DETC (H) in sections of unwounded and wounded skins 
transduced as indicated. N=4. I) Immunofluorescence images of back-skins of re-
epithelialization process following 5d or 3d after wounding of young mice of the strains 
indicated. Note that FVBJax lacks Skints 3-4-9; FVBTac lacks Vγ5Vδ1 DETCs. Tissue 
sections are immunostained for K14 (green) and DAPI (blue). S, scab; arrows denote 
wound-edge. Scale bar = 100 μm. N=2. J) Quantification of wound closure by re-
epithelialization. K) Quantificaton of dendrities per DETC from tissue sections of wounds in 
C57BL6 and FVBJax at time-points indicated. L) Whole mount immunofluorescence and 
quantifications of DETCs in ear-skin of young FVBJax versus C57BI/6 mice. Scale bars= 
100 μm. N=2. M) Density plots of the distribution of rounded (no dendrites) of DETCs in 
ear-skin whole mount preparations at times post-wounding indicated. Vertical lines represent 
mean distance of rounded DETCs from wound edge (0 μm). Data are represented as mean ± 
SEM. See also Figure S6.
Keyes et al.
Page 36
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. STAT3 signaling regulates Skint expression. A)
Skint mRNA levels after IL-6 treatment of primary WT keratinocytes in vitro. B) Relative in 
vivo expression of Skint genes in keratinocytes isolated from d3 wound edges. C) 
Immunofluorescence images of sagittal wounded skin sections from young and aged WT 
mice. Labeling is for Abs against pSTAT3 (green), K5 (red), and DAPI (grey). Dashed line 
denotes epidermal/dermal boundaries, yellow arrows denote wound edges, and “S” denotes 
scab. Scale bars = 100 μm. D) Quantification of the epithelial tongue length at backskin 
wounds at times post-wound indicated. N=4. E) Quantifications of DETC numbers and (F) 
Keyes et al.
Page 37
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 morphologies from d3 wound edges. N=4. G) Whole mount immunofluorescence of ear 
skins imaged at times indicated after wounding. Yellow dotted line denotes wound edge. 
Scale bar = 100 μm. N=2. H) Density plots of the distribution of rounded (no dendrites) 
DETCs in ear-skin whole mount preparations at times post-wounding indicated. Vertical 
lines represent mean distance of rounded DETCs from wound edge (0 μm). I) 
Quantifications of DETC numbers in ear skin whole mounts after wounding at time-points 
indicated. J) DIC images (from d5 time-point) of explant cultures from young and aged 
tissue biopsies treated with IL-6 at concentrations indicated. Dashed lines denote the borders 
of keratinocyte outgrowth; E, explant. Scale bars=10μm. N=8. K) Quantifications are of the 
distance of outgrowth of keratinocytes in explants during a 7 day time-course. N=8. Data are 
represented as mean ± SEM. See also Figure S7.
Keyes et al.
Page 38
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
