 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Common Reasons That Asymptomatic Patients
Who Are 65 Years and Older Receive Carotid Imaging
Salomeh Keyhani, MD, MPH; Eric M. Cheng, MD, MS; Ayman Naseri, MD; Ethan A. Halm, MD;
Linda S. Williams, MD; Jason Johanning, MD; Erin Madden, MPH; Soraya Rofagha, MD;
Alexandra Woodbridge, BS, BA; Ann Abraham, BS; Rosa Ahn, BA; Susan Saba, MPH;
Elnaz Eilkhani, MPH; Paul Hebert, PhD; Dawn M. Bravata, MD
IMPORTANCE National guidelines do not agree on the role of carotid screening in
asymptomatic patients (ie, patients who have not had a stroke or transient ischemic attack).
Recently, several physician organizations participating in the Choosing Wisely campaign have
identified carotid imaging in selected asymptomatic populations as being of low value.
However, the majority of patients who are evaluated for carotid stenosis and subsequently
revascularized are asymptomatic.
OBJECTIVE To better understand why asymptomatic patients who undergo revascularization
receive initial carotid imaging.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS Retrospective cohort study of 4127 Veterans Health
Administration patients 65 years and older undergoing carotid revascularization for
asymptomatic carotid stenosis between 2005 and 2009.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Indications for carotid ultrasounds were extracted using
trained abstractors. Frequency of indications and appropriateness of initial carotid ultrasound
imaging for patients within each rating category after the intervention were reported.
RESULTS The mean (SD) age of this cohort of 4127 patients was 73.6 (5.9) years; 4014 (98.8%)
were male. Overall, there were 5226 indications for 4063 carotid ultrasounds. The most
common indications listed were carotid bruit (1578 [30.2% of indications]) and follow-up for
carotid disease (stenosis/history of carotid disease) in patients who had previously documented
carotid stenosis (1087 [20.8% of indications]). Multiple vascular risk factors were the next most
common indication listed. Rates of appropriate, uncertain, and inappropriate imaging were
5.4% (227 indications), 83.4% (3387 indications), and 11.3% (458 indications), respectively.
Among the most common inappropriate indications were dizziness/vertigo and syncope.
Among the 4063 patients, 3373 (83.0%) received a carotid endarterectomy. Overall, 663
procedures were performed in patients 80 years and older.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Carotid bruit and follow-up for carotid disease accounted
for approximately half of all indications provided by physicians for carotid testing. Strong
consideration should be given to improving the evidence base around carotid testing,
especially around monitoring stenosis over long periods and evaluating carotid bruits.
Targeting carotid ultrasound ordering with decision support tools may also be an important
step in reducing use of low-value imaging.
JAMA Intern Med. 2016;176(5):626-633. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.0678
Published online April 18, 2016.
Invited Commentary page 633
Author Audio Interview at
jamainternalmedicine.com
CME Quiz at
jamanetworkcme.com and
CME Questions page 724
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Salomeh
Keyhani, MD, MPH, 4150 Clement St,
San Francisco, CA 94121 (salomeh
.keyhani@ucsf.edu).
Research
Original Investigation
626
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
S
troke is the fifth most common cause of death and is a
major cause of disability among US adults.1 Approxi-
mately 10% to 15% of ischemic strokes are attributable
toatherosclerosisofthecarotidarteries.2Secondarystrokepre-
vention guidelines support the use of carotid imaging to evalu-
ate patients with a recent cerebrovascular event to assess them
for carotid plaque.3 However, national guidelines conflict on
the role of carotid screening in asymptomatic populations (pa-
tients without a history of stroke or transient ischemic attack
[TIA]).4 For example, the US Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) has recommended against carotid screening in adult
patients without a history of stroke or TIA in both its 2007 and
updated 2014 guidance.5 Other national guidelines favor
imaging for some limited indications in patients with asymp-
tomatic carotid disease (eg, those with established stenosis,
carotid bruit, or multiple vascular risk factors) although these
recommendations are based on expert opinion rather than ro-
bust evidence.4,6
More recently, carotid imaging in asymptomatic popula-
tions has been identified by different physician specialty or-
ganizations as a low-value test and has appeared on several top
5listsinthenational“ChoosingWisely”campaign.7TheAmeri-
can Academy of Family Physicians,8 for example, has stated,
“don’
t screen for carotid artery stenosis in asymptomatic
adults.” The American Academy of Neurology9 has stated,
“don’
t perform imaging of the carotid arteries for simple syn-
cope without other neurologic symptoms,
” and the Society of
Thoracic Surgeons10 has stated, “don’
t initiate routine evalu-
ation of carotid artery disease prior to cardiac surgery in the
absence of symptoms or other high-risk criteria.”
Once imaging occurs in an asymptomatic patient, revas-
cularization can be offered to patients with carotid stenosis
based on current guidelines for primary prevention of stroke.3
Embedded in these recommendations is an understanding de-
rived from randomized clinical trials that patients undergo-
ing revascularization are expected to live for at least 5 years
so that the short-term risks such as stroke, myocardial infarc-
tion, and death posed by the procedure are offset by the long-
term benefits of stroke risk reduction.3,11 Although the evi-
dence in support of efficacy of carotid revascularization to
reduce recurrent cerebrovascular events among patients with
symptomatic carotid disease is strong, the majority of revas-
cularization procedures are performed in patients with asymp-
tomatic carotid artery disease, in whom the evidence for clini-
cal benefit is more modest and long-term outcomes are of
paramount importance.3,12,13 Therefore, ensuring that pa-
tients selected for revascularization will live long enough to
benefit is critical, and improving patient selection for carotid
imaging will ultimately improve the selection of revascular-
ization recipients.
The long-term health consequences of low-value imaging
have not been commonly studied, and the risks and benefits
of diagnostic imaging are not always clear to patients and
clinicians.14 To better understand why asymptomatic
patients receive carotid artery imaging, we examined the
indications provided by physicians for carotid ultrasounds in
a national cohort of patients who received carotid interven-
tion for asymptomatic stenosis in the Veterans Health
Administration (VHA). Because guidelines recommend that
patients who receive revascularization have a 5-year life
expectancy, we also examined long-term survival of these
patients after the intervention.
Methods
Sample and Data Sources
This study was approved by the University of California, San
Francisco, Committee on Human Research. Informed con-
sent was waived because this was a retrospective cohort study
with no human subject contact and minimal privacy risks.
Using national VHA data, we identified (N = 4127) patients 65
years and older undergoing carotid endarterectomy (CEA) and
carotid stenting (CAS) for asymptomatic carotid stenosis be-
tween 2005 and 2009. We defined asymptomatic patients as
patients who did not have evidence of any type of stroke or
TIA in the 6 months prior to receipt of first carotid imaging.
To identify asymptomatic patients, we used a previously de-
velopedhigh-sensitivityalgorithmbasedonInternationalClas-
sification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, codes to exclude pa-
tients with stroke (including retinal artery occlusion) and TIA
using administrative data.15 We then reviewed each patient’
s
medical record and further excluded any patient with any his-
tory of stroke and TIA documented in the medical record. We
examined the indication for the first carotid image each pa-
tient received in this period before revascularization. We in-
tentionally looked for the first image in this period to reduce
the number of nonspecific indications provided such as “fol-
low-up.” We limited the sample to carotid ultrasounds rather
than all imaging because other imaging modalities (eg, com-
puted tomographic angiogram or magnetic resonance angio-
gram) may also be ordered to evaluate other vascular disease
and carotid findings may be incidental, whereas carotid ultra-
sound is used primarily to identify carotid stenosis. We used
national Veterans Affairs (VA) Corporate Data Warehouse and
VAMedicalSASadministrativedatabasestoobtaindataonage,
sex, comorbidities, and CEA or CAS procedures.16 Medical rec-
ord abstraction was used to confirm that CEA or CAS was per-
formed after the first carotid image was obtained and to ob-
tain additional data on comorbidities and indications listed by
physicians for carotid imaging. Long-term survival of the co-
hort of patients who underwent CEA and CAS was extracted
from the VA vital status file.16
Key Points
Question Why do asymptomatic patients who undergo
revascularization receive initial carotid imaging?
Findings In this study of 4127 patients 65 years and older who
received carotid revascularization, the most common indications
provided by physicians for the initial carotid ultrasound were
carotid bruit and follow-up for carotid disease.
Meaning Consideration should be given to improving the
evidence base around carotid imaging.
Why Asymptomatic Patients Receive Carotid Imaging
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
May 2016
Volume 176, Number 5
627
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Identification of Indication for Imaging
All indications for the initial carotid ultrasound were identi-
fied by 4 trained abstractors (A.W., A.A., R.A., S.S.). The ab-
stractors were trained to review both the carotid report for in-
dications listed by providers and the referring providers’note.
Each carotid ultrasound could have multiple indications. If the
abstractors could not identify an indication based on these 2
sources of information or were unsure of the indication, 1 of 3
clinicians (S.K. [internist], E.M.C. [neurologist], A.N. [ophthal-
mologist]) reviewed the medical record and assigned an indi-
cation. If no indication was identified, then it was classified
as unknown and the patient was excluded from the sample.
If the indication was deemed to be unrelated to the carotid ar-
tery (eg, evaluation of a neck mass), the image was excluded
from the sample. The κ for agreement in indications from the
medical record for 2 reviewers for 2 separate samples of 20 ca-
rotid images was very good and ranged from 0.71 to 0.88.
Expert Panel Review of Indications
Expert review of indication was necessary because guideline
recommendations on screening in asymptomatic popula-
tions are limited and conflicting. Table 1 lists all the indica-
tions for which at least 1 national guideline has issued recom-
mendations. For example, some but not all guidelines
recommend screening for patients with carotid bruits.4 Given
the limited guidance available, we convened a multidisci-
plinary panel of practicing clinicians and stroke researchers in-
cluding 3 internists (S.K., E.A.H., D.M.B.), 2 vascular neurolo-
gists (E.M.C., L.S.W.), 1 vascular surgeon (J. J.), and 2
ophthalmologists (S.R., A.N.) to review and rate the indica-
tions through a consensus process. Prior to the first meeting,
each panel member received a list of indications to be rated.
Panel members were instructed to rate each indication as ap-
propriate,uncertain,orinappropriatebasedonabalanceofrisk
and benefit of imaging. The ratings were compiled and dis-
cussed among panel participants through 2 conference calls
with 1 caveat: the ocular indications were discussed and rated
separately by the ophthalmologists because many of the in-
dications were based on eye examination findings not com-
monly encountered by other clinicians. Each indication was
then discussed by the group and a final rating was assigned on
the basis of consensus. The indication was rated as uncertain
if all raters deemed it uncertain or if consensus on appropri-
atenesswasnotreached.Weconsideredpanelmembersashav-
ing agreement on ratings if all panel members agreed and dis-
agreementif1ormorepanelmembersdisagreed.Overall,there
Table 1. Current National Guideline Recommendations on Carotid Imaging in Patients Without a History of Stroke or Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA)
Guideline
USPSTF5
ASA/AHA4
AIUM6
Screening for asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis in asymptomatic
adult (ie, someone without a history of TIA or stroke)
Not recommended
…
…
Routine screening of patients who have no clinical manifestations
of or risk factors for atherosclerosis
Not recommended
No benefit
…
Asymptomatic carotid bruit
Not recommended
Recommendation in favor of procedure being
useful based on diverging expert opinion, case
studies, or standard of care
Indicated
Follow-up of established carotid stenosis >50%
…
Recommendation in favor of procedure being
useful based on diverging expert opinion, case
studies, or standard of care
…
May be considered in asymptomatic patients with symptomatic
peripheral arterial disease, coronary artery disease, or
atherosclerotic aortic aneurysm
…
Recommendation’
s usefulness/efficacy less well
established based on diverging expert opinion,
case studies, or standard of care
…
Might be considered to detect carotid stenosis in asymptomatic
patients without clinical evidence of atherosclerosis who have 2 or
more of the following risk factors: hypertension, hyperlipidemia,
tobacco smoking, family history in a first-degree relative of
atherosclerosis manifested before age 60 y, or a family history of
ischemic stroke
…
Recommendation’
s usefulness/efficacy less well
established based on diverging expert opinion,
case studies, or standard of care
…
Not recommended for routine evaluation of patients with
neurological or psychiatric disorders unrelated to focal cerebral
ischemia, such as brain tumors, familial or degenerative cerebral or
motor neuron disorders, infectious and inflammatory conditions
affecting the brain, psychiatric disorders, or epilepsy
…
No benefit
…
Noninvasive imaging of the extracranial carotid arteries is reasonable
1 mo, 6 mo, and annually after revascularization to assess patency
and exclude the development of new or contralateral lesions. Once
stability has been established over an extended period, surveillance at
longer intervals may be appropriate. Termination of surveillance is
reasonable when the patient is no longer a candidate for intervention
…
Recommendation in favor of procedure being
useful based on diverging expert opinion,
case studies, or standard of care
Indicated
Carotid duplex ultrasound screening is reasonable before elective
coronary artery bypass graft surgery in patients older than 65 y
and in those with left main coronary stenosis, peripheral arterial
disease, a history of cigarette smoking, a history of stroke or TIA,
or carotid bruit
…
Recommendation in favor of procedure being
useful based on diverging expert opinion,
case studies, or standard of care
Indicated
Annual noninvasive imaging of the carotid arteries is reasonable
initially for patients with fibromuscular dysplasia to detect changes in
the extent or severity of disease, although the effect on outcomes is
unclear
…
Recommendation in favor of procedure being
useful based on diverging expert opinion,
case studies, or standard of care
…
Abbreviations: AHA, American Heart Association; AIUM, American Institute of Ultrasound Medicine; ASA, American Stroke Association; ellipses, no
recommendation; USPSTF, US Preventative Services Task Force.
Research Original Investigation
Why Asymptomatic Patients Receive Carotid Imaging
628
JAMA Internal Medicine
May 2016
Volume 176, Number 5
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
was unanimity on 86.0% of the indications and disagree-
ment on 14.0% of the indications. Among the uncertain indi-
cations, 50.0% were uncertain based on consensus and 50.0%
wererateduncertainbecauseofdisagreementamongthepanel
members.
Analysis
First, we compared the indications abstracted from the medi-
cal record to currently available national guidelines to deter-
mine how well guidelines cover current practice. Second, we
compared the indications abstracted from the medical rec-
ords to the quality assessments made by the expert panel. For
this analysis, the sample was restricted to the 4063 patients
whose carotid ultrasound had at least 1 indication listed. If the
ultrasound had multiple indications, the rating of the test was
assigned on the basis of the most appropriate indication(s). We
calculated percentages of carotid ultrasounds rated appropri-
ate, uncertain, or inappropriate. Finally, we also compared
5-yearoverallsurvivalinpatientsreceivingcarotidimagingand
subsequent medical record–confirmed revascularization
among the 3 appropriateness categories using a log-rank test.
Analyses were conducted using SAS, version 9.4 (SAS Insti-
tute), and Stata, version 12.1.
Results
Patient Characteristics
A total of 4127 patients were in the cohort; 64 patients had no
indications provided by clinicians, leaving a final sample of
4063 patients (Table 2). The mean (SD) age of this cohort was
73.6 (5.9) years; 4014 (98.8%) were male. Comorbidities were
common and included hypertension (3583 [88.2%]), diabe-
tesmellitus(1607[39.6%]),andatrialfibrillation(442[10.9%]).
The majority of patients received CEA (3373 [83.0%]), while
684 (16.8%) received CAS, and 6 patients (0.1%) did not have
a medical record–confirmed revascularization within 5 years
after first carotid image.
Frequency and Type of Indications
Overall, there were 5226 indications for 4063 carotid ultra-
sounds in 4063 patients. Approximately 3062 (75.4%) ca-
rotid ultrasounds had a single indication while the remaining
(n = 1001) had multiple indications. Fifty-seven unique indi-
cations were identified. Among these 57 indications, 32 (56%)
were listed 10 or more times and 11 (19%) were listed only once.
Table 3 provides the entire list of indications grouped by clini-
cal themes identified. Overall, there were 6 main clinical
themes for ordering carotid images in asymptomatic popula-
tions that emerged: (1) vascular indications, (2) near-syncope/
syncope indications, (3) neuropsychiatric indications, (4) ear-
related indications, (5) ocular indications, and (6) imaging as
part of a preoperative evaluation. There were also some iso-
lated indications presented in the “other” category that were
uncommon (<1% of all indications) and could not be clini-
cally grouped. The most common indication listed was ca-
rotid bruit, which accounted for approximately one-third of
all indications (1578 [30.2%] of 5226 indications). Follow-up
for carotid disease (stenosis/history of carotid disease) in a pa-
tient who had previously documented carotid stenosis was the
second most common indication (1087 [20.8%] of 5226 indi-
cations). Carotid bruit and follow-up for carotid disease ac-
counted for half (2677 [51.2%] of 5226 indications) of all indi-
cations. Multiple vascular risk factors were the next most
common indication listed. Overall, currently available na-
tional guidelines shown in Table 1 covered 3593 (68.7%) of the
indicationsextractedfromthisnationalcohort.Themostcom-
mon areas not covered by guidelines included syncope, diz-
ziness/vertigo, remote history of stroke or TIA, and preopera-
tive evaluation.
Appropriateness of Carotid Imaging
Each indication was rated using the expert panel’
s assess-
ment. The majority of images (3421 [84.2%]) had a single in-
dication, while the remaining images had between 2 and 4 in-
dications.Atotalof398(9.8%)imageshadmultipleindications
with different levels of appropriateness. We assigned each im-
age the most appropriate quality assessment. Some carotid ul-
trasounds had multiple indications with the same quality as-
sessments (eg, 2 indications that were both appropriate). Rates
ofappropriate,uncertain,andinappropriateimagingwere5.4%
(227 indications), 83.4% (3387 indications), and 11.3% (458 in-
dications), respectively (Table 4). Whereas most of the appro-
priateindicationsassignedtoimageswererelatedtooculardis-
ease (164 [72.2%] of 227), the most common appropriate
indication listed was follow-up within 2 years of carotid in-
tervention. Carotid bruit and follow-up for established ca-
rotid disease were the most prevalent uncertain indications.
Among the inappropriate indications, dizziness/vertigo, syn-
cope, and blurred/change in vision were the most common
(Table 3).
Table 2. Characteristics of Patients Who Received a Carotid Ultrasound
Between 2005 and 2009
Characteristic
No. (%)
(N = 4063)
Age, y
65 to 74
2467 (60.7)
75 to 84
1472 (36.2)
≥85
124 (3.1)
Male sex
4014 (98.8)
Comorbidity
Hypertension
3583 (88.2)
Hyperlipidemia
3167 (77.9)
Diabetes mellitus
1607 (39.6)
Atrial fibrillation
442 (10.9)
Coronary artery disease
2019 (49.7)
Peripheral vascular disease
1107 (27.2)
Congestive heart failure
288 (7.1)
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
798 (19.6)
Procedurea
Carotid endarterectomy
3373 (83.0)
Carotid artery stenting
684 (16.8)
a Medical record review revealed that 6 patients did not receive subsequent
intervention.
Why Asymptomatic Patients Receive Carotid Imaging
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
May 2016
Volume 176, Number 5
629
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Table 3. The 57 Unique Indications Grouped by Clinical Theme (N = 5226)
All Indications, No. (%)
Vascular
Near-Syncope/
Syncope
Eye Related
Preoperative
Evaluation
Neurological/
Psychological
Other
Ear Related
3881 (74.2)
568 (10.8)
351 (6.7)
239 (4.5)
117 (2.2)
50 (0.94)
21 (0.40)
Carotid bruit, n = 1578
Stenosis/history of carotid
disease, n = 1099
Hypertension with another
vascular risk factor, n = 505
History of stroke/TIA >6 mo,
n = 199
Follow-up after CEA/CAS >2 y,
n = 175
Old stroke/silent stroke found on
neuroimaging, n = 95
Carotid calcification/finding on
x-ray or other image, n = 80
Follow-up after CEA/CAS <2 y,
n = 63
Suspected carotid disease,
n = 44
Smoking history with another
vascular risk factor, n = 35
Decreased carotid pulse, n = 5
No palpable carotid pulse, n = 2
Family history of
cerebrovascular accident, n = 1
Dizziness/
vertigo, n = 388
Syncope,
n = 147
Lighthead-
edness, n = 22
Orthostatic
hypotension,
n = 11
Blurred vision/change in
vision, n = 124
Multiple unilateral peripheral
retinal hemorrhage, n = 36
Single unilateral peripheral
retinal hemorrhage, n = 28
Hollenhorst plaque/eye
plaque, n = 59
Ocular ischemic syndrome,
n = 38
Asymmetrical intraocular
pressure, n = 1
Asymmetrical retinopathy,
n = 30
Branch retinal vein occlusion,
n = 13
Optic nerve ischemia, n = 9
Diplopia, n = 5
Anterior ischemic optic
neuropathy, n = 3
Sequential disk swelling, n = 1
Cotton wool spot, n = 1
Occasional dark spot in visual
field, n = 1
Optic nerve changes, n = 1
Cystoid macular edema,
n = 1
Other surgical
procedures,
n = 146
CABG, n = 93
Memory loss or
dementia, n = 32
Fall (without focal
weakness), n = 26
Tilting/change in gait
(without focal
weakness), n = 11
Balance problems
(without focal
weakness), n = 10
Seizure, n = 8
Tingling sensation of
body part without
other neurologic
deficit, n = 7
Nonfocal peripheral
neuropathy, n = 7
Tremor, n = 6
Mental status change,
n = 5
Staggering (without
focal weakness),
n = 4
Tingling sensation
with elevation of
head, n = 1
Headache,
n = 17
Generalized
weakness,
n = 16
Neck pain,
n = 10
Chest pain,
n = 2
Cardiac murmur
radiating to
neck, n = 2
Jaw pain, n = 2
Dyspnea, n = 1
Pulsation in
ears, n = 14
Tinnitus,
n = 5
Ringing
above ear,
n = 1
Ear tingling,
n = 1
Abbreviations: CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; CAS, carotid stenting; CEA, carotid endarterectomy; TIA, transient ischemic attack.
Table 4. Expert Panel Rating and Frequency of Indications Per Ultrasound (4774 Indications for 4063 Images)
Patients, No. (%)
Appropriate Indicationsa
(n = 227)
Uncertain Indicationsa
(n = 4028)
Inappropriate Indicationsa
(n = 519)
218 (5.4)
3387 (83.4)
458 (11.3)
Follow-up after CEA/CAS <2 y, n = 63
Hollenhorst plaque, plaque in eye, n = 59
Ocular ischemic syndrome, n = 38
Multiple unilateral peripheral retinal
hemorrhages, n = 36
Eye findings suggestive of ocular ischemic
syndrome (eg, asymmetrical intraocular
pressure), n = 1
Asymmetrical retinopathy, n = 30
Carotid bruit, n = 1572
Follow-up for stenosis/history carotid disease,
n = 1073
Hypertension with 1 other vascular risk factor,
n = 500
History of stroke/transient ischemic attack
>6 mo, n = 194
Follow-up after CEA/CAS (>2 y), n = 172
Preoperative evaluation, n = 145
Old stroke/silent stroke found on
neuroimaging, n = 93
CABG workup, n = 92
Carotid calcification or finding on x-ray
or other image, n = 79
Suspected carotid disease/rule out carotid
disease, n = 41
Smoking history with other risk factor, n = 35
Pulsation in ears, n = 14
Neck pain, n = 9
Decreased carotid pulse, n = 5
Cardiac murmur radiating to neck, n = 2
No palpable carotid pulse, n = 2
Dizziness/vertigo, n = 209
Syncope, n = 100
Blurred vision/change in vision, n = 70
Single peripheral retinal hemorrhage, n = 19
Memory loss or dementia, n = 13
Lightheadedness, n = 12
Fall without focal weakness, n = 9
Headache, n = 9
Optic nerve ischemia, n = 8
Branch retinal vein occlusion, n = 7
Generalized weakness, n = 7
Orthostatic hypotension, n = 7
Tilting/change in gait (without focal weakness), n = 7
Tingling of limb without focal weakness, n = 6
Balance problems without focal weakness, n = 5
Seizures, n = 5
Tremor, n = 4
Anterior ischemic optic neuropathy, n = 3
Diplopia, n = 3
Mental status change, n = 2
Nonfocal peripheral neuropathy, n = 2
Tinnitus, n = 2
Cotton wool spot, n = 1
Cystoid macular edema, n = 1
Dyspnea, n = 1
Family history of cerebrovascular accident, n = 1
Jaw pain, n = 1
Occasional dark spot in visual field, n = 1
Optic nerve changes, n = 1
Sequential disk swelling, n = 1
Staggering (without focal weakness), n = 1
Tingling with elevation of head, n = 1
Abbreviations: CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; CAS, carotid stenting;
CEA, carotid endarterectomy.
a If an image had multiple indications, the indication that was most appropriate
was listed in Table 3; therefore, there are fewer indications than were listed in
Table 2. Patients could have multiple appropriate indications, multiple
uncertain indications, and multiple inappropriate indications.
Research Original Investigation
Why Asymptomatic Patients Receive Carotid Imaging
630
JAMA Internal Medicine
May 2016
Volume 176, Number 5
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Long-term Survival
Among the 4063 patients in the final sample, 3373 (83.0%) re-
ceived a CEA. Overall, 663 procedures were performed in pa-
tients 80 years and older. Postintervention overall survival in
this cohort was 71.4% at 5 years. Rates of survival by age group
65 to 74, 75 to 84, and 85 years and older were 75.3% (1857 pa-
tients), 66.5% (979 patients), and 58.9% (73 patients), respec-
tively (P < .001). Rates of survival among patients who re-
ceived carotid imaging on the basis of appropriate, uncertain,
and inappropriate indications were not significantly differ-
ent (P = .07) and were 66.4%, 72.1%, and 68.8%, respectively.
Discussion
Mostcarotidimagingteststhatresultedinpatientswithasymp-
tomaticcarotiddiseaseundergoingrevascularizationwereper-
formed for indications in which the benefits of imaging are un-
certain, and 1 in 9 tests were performed for inappropriate
indications. We found that approximately one-third of indi-
cations listed by clinicians are not addressed by current na-
tional guidelines. We also found that many patients do not live
long enough to benefit from revascularization.
There is a tension between appropriate screening and ap-
propriate revascularization that necessitates further com-
ment. It is possible that a patient would be screened on the ba-
sis of an indication that would appear clinically inappropriate
for imaging but lead to an otherwise appropriate revascular-
ization procedure if severe stenosis was identified. This clini-
cal dilemma is the result of the chosen point of reference. From
an individual perspective, it may be beneficial to have screen-
ing that is not guideline based if that screening demonstrates
a true positive abnormality that is amenable to an effective evi-
dence-basedintervention.Fromasocietalperspective,screen-
ing all patients (including a patient who benefited) may not be
beneficial(andthusnotrecommended)ifthefalse-positiverate
of the screening test is high or the evidence for intervention
is weak. This tension between the individual perspective
(which often does not include consideration of the harms of
false-positive test results) and the societal perspective is at the
root of many of the current national debates on screening.
In the case of carotid disease, the tension between the
individual and population perspective is further exacerbated
by the fact that different societies have different recommen-
dations based on how they define an “asymptomatic”
individual.4,5 A patient with vascular disease may have
asymptomatic carotid disease (ie, no history of stroke or TIA),
but by virtue of the presence of systemic atherosclerosis, the
American Heart Association considers it reasonable to screen
such patients, whereas the USPSTF does not.
Other areas in which national recommendations differ in-
cludefurtherassessmentofacarotidbruit.Inourstudy,greater
than half of all imaging was performed to evaluate for carotid
bruit and monitor the progression of carotid stenosis, indica-
tions that our panel rated as of uncertain value because of a
lack of evidence in the area. For example, a patient with a ca-
rotid bruit who is of advanced age and has multiple comor-
bidities may have little clinical benefit from imaging. Such a
patient may not live long enough to benefit from interven-
tion. Another area in which improved guidance is necessary
relates to the duration of follow-up imaging for patients with
established carotid stenosis. The USPSTF has an overall rec-
ommendation against any screening in asymptomatic ca-
rotid populations, whereas the guidelines issued by the Ameri-
can Heart Association in conjunction with other specialty
societies recommend screening and follow-up for carotid dis-
easeinpatientswithcarotidbruitandalsopatientswithgreater
than 50% stenosis.4 Revisiting the evidence base and clarify-
ing, expanding, and harmonizing the guidelines for imaging
in asymptomatic populations may be warranted to reduce po-
tentially unnecessary testing.
The 2 most recent major randomized clinical trials of in-
terventioninasymptomaticpatientsshowedthatgiventhepro-
ceduralrisksinherentinCEAandCASprocedures,patientsmust
live 5 years to realize a net benefit from revascularization.3,17,18
Roughly one-quarter of the patients in our cohort who re-
ceivedinterventiondidnotsurvive5years.Thiswasmorethan
double the death rate observed in the most recent trial.17,19 The
fact that long-term survival was similar for patients who re-
ceived imaging for indications deemed appropriate or uncer-
tain vs inappropriate imaging deserves some comment. Re-
vascularization once carotid stenosis is identified may occur
without full consideration of a patient’
s life expectancy. Al-
thoughpatientreassurance,clinicianuncertainty,andotherrea-
sons might underlie test ordering regardless of patient eligi-
bility, these findings could suggest that guideline development
anddecisionsupportforcarotidimagingorderinginanasymp-
tomatic patient should more fully address eligibility for inter-
vention at the time of initial test ordering.
Our results also suggest that reducing inappropriate ca-
rotid imaging may stem a “pipeline” of low-value care be-
cause many patients who were subsequently revascularized
received initial imaging for reasons considered inappropriate
by our expert panel. Reducing low-value carotid imaging can
also reduce low-value carotid intervention in patients who will
not live long enough to benefit. Given that carotid imaging is
afairlycommonlyorderedtest,targetingcarotidimagingusing
decision support tools to reduce inappropriate use may be a
good approach to improve the value of health care without
compromising quality. Currently there is no guidance on or-
dering carotid ultrasound in the VHA or in most clinical set-
tings. Our study demonstrates that developing such decision
support is needed.
The sample chosen for this study has both strengths and
limitations. On the one hand, this cohort focuses on asymp-
tomatic patients who underwent revascularization and does
not represent all patients who receive carotid imaging. The dis-
tribution of indications may be different in a population that
did not receive intervention. On the other hand, our cohort is
an important sample to examine because it provides an as-
sessment of the primary reason for screening for carotid ste-
nosis among patients who ultimately received intervention.
The long-term consequence of this pipeline of low-value care
is more apparent. Another important limitation to consider is
the generalizability of the sample. The indications extracted
were for carotid ultrasounds ordered by physicians practic-
Why Asymptomatic Patients Receive Carotid Imaging
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
May 2016
Volume 176, Number 5
631
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
ing in the VHA, a national setting with an electronic health rec-
ord and electronic ordering system. Our results may not rep-
resent the scope of indications for which physicians order
carotid imaging in different settings. However, most VHA hos-
pitals have academic affiliations and many clinicians practice
in multiple settings; therefore, it is likely that our results are
representative of academic settings with electronic imaging
ordering. Another limitation is that our cohort was almost
entirely male; however, there is no reason to believe that
indications listed by physicians for imaging would vary by sex.
In addition, appropriateness assessment by the expert panel
was by full consensus and any disagreement resulted in a qual-
ity assessment of “uncertain.
” Our conservative approach with
a requirement of 100% agreement among panel members on
indications resulted in more quality assessments being as-
signed an “uncertain” rating than an “inappropriate” rating.
However, a slight shift in the quality assessments from uncer-
tain to inappropriate would not materially affect our conclu-
sions. Finally, the indications extracted were for the period of
2005 to 2009; it is possible that reasons for ordering carotid
images have evolved. However, national guidelines currently
still conflict.4,5
Conclusions
Themajorityofpatientswhoundergocarotidrevascularization
forasymptomaticcarotiddiseasereceivedadiagnosisontheba-
sis of results of tests ordered for uncertain or inappropriate rea-
sons. Consideration should be given to improving the evidence
base around carotid testing, especially around monitoring ste-
nosisoverlongperiodsandevaluatingcarotidbruits.Theongo-
ingNationalInstitutesofHealth–sponsoredCarotidRevascular-
ization and Medical Management for Asymptomatic Carotid
Stenosis Trial (CREST-2) should clarify the value of revascular-
ization in asymptomatic populations.20 Finally, clarifying and
harmonizing current guidelines and the development of evi-
dence-based decision support tools to support appropriate pa-
tientselectionforcarotidimaginginpracticecanreducetheuse
oflow-valueimagingandimprovelong-termpatientoutcomes.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: February 12, 2016.
Published Online: April 18, 2016.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.0678.
Author Affiliations: San Francisco Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, San Francisco, California (Keyhani,
Naseri, Madden, Rofagha, Woodbridge, Abraham,
Ahn, Saba, Eilkhani); Division of General Internal
Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
California San Francisco (Keyhani, Rofagha);
Department of Neurology, Veterans Affairs Greater
Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles,
California (Cheng); Department of Neurology,
University of California Los Angeles (Cheng);
Department of Ophthalmology, University of
California San Francisco (Naseri); Veterans Health
Administration Health Services Research and
Development Service Center of Excellence on
Implementing Evidence-Based Practice, Richard L.
Roudebush Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Indianapolis, Indiana (Williams, Bravata);
Department of Neurology, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis (Williams);
Department of Internal Medicine, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis
(Bravata); Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas (Halm); Department of Clinical Sciences,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas (Halm); Department of Surgery, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha (Johanning);
Omaha–Veterans Affairs Nebraska–Western Iowa
Health Care System, Omaha, Nebraska (Johanning);
Puget Sound Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Seattle, Washington (Hebert); School of Public
Health, University of Washington, Seattle (Hebert).
Author Contributions: Dr Keyhani had full access
to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Keyhani, Williams,
Hebert.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Keyhani, Cheng, Naseri, Halm, Johanning, Madden,
Rofagha, Woodbridge, Abraham, Ahn, Saba,
Eilkhani, Bravata.
Drafting of the manuscript: Keyhani, Madden,
Eilkhani.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Keyhani, Cheng, Naseri, Halm,
Williams, Johanning, Rofagha, Woodbridge,
Abraham, Ahn, Saba, Hebert, Bravata.
Statistical analysis: Keyhani, Cheng, Madden,
Rofagha, Hebert.
Obtained funding: Keyhani, Bravata.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Keyhani, Williams, Johanning, Woodbridge,
Abraham, Ahn, Saba, Eilkhani, Bravata.
Study supervision: Keyhani, Naseri, Halm.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Funding/Support: The project reported was
supported by National Institutes of Health/National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute grant RO1
HL114563-01A1.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funders had no
role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
REFERENCES
1. Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al; American
Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke
Statistics Subcommittee. Executive summary: heart
disease and stroke statistics—2013 update: a report
from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2013;127(1):143-152.
2. White H, Boden-Albala B, Wang C, et al. Ischemic
stroke subtype incidence among whites, blacks,
and Hispanics: the Northern Manhattan Study.
Circulation. 2005;111(10):1327-1331.
3. Chaturvedi S, Bruno A, Feasby T, et al;
Therapeutics and Technology Assessment
Subcommittee of the American Academy of
Neurology. Carotid endarterectomy—an
evidence-based review: report of the Therapeutics
and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the
American Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 2005;
65(6):794-801.
4. Brott TG, Halperin JL, Abbara S, et al; American
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines;
American Stroke Association; American Association
of Neuroscience Nurses; American Association of
Neurological Surgeons; American College of
Radiology; American Society of Neuroradiology;
Congress of Neurological Surgeons; Society of
Atherosclerosis Imaging and Prevention; Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions;
Society of Interventional Radiology; Society of
Neurointerventional Surgery; Society for Vascular
Medicine; Society for Vascular Surgery; American
Academy of Neurology and Society of
Cardiovascular Computed Tomography. 2011
ASA/ACCF/AHA/AANN/AANS/ACR/ASNR/CNS/
SAIP/SCAI/SIR/SNIS/SVM/SVS guideline on the
management of patients with extracranial carotid
and vertebral artery disease: executive summary.
Stroke. 2011;42(8):e420-e463.
5. US Preventive Services Task Force. Final Update
Summary. Carotid artery stenosis: screening. July
2014. http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce
.org/Page/Document/UpdateSummaryFinal
/carotid-artery-stenosis-screening. Accessed
December 1, 2015.
6. AIUM Practice Parameter for the Performance
of an Ultrasound Examination of the Extracranial
Cerebrovascular System. Laurel, MD: American
Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine. 2011. http:
//www.aium.org/resources/guidelines/extracranial
.pdf. Accessed November 18, 2015.
7. Cassel CK, Guest JA. Choosing wisely: helping
physicians and patients make smart decisions about
their care. JAMA. 2012;307(17):1801-1802.
8. American Academy of Family Physicians: fifteen
things physicians and patients should question.
Choosing Wisely website. http://www
.choosingwisely.org/societies/american-academy
-of-family-physicians/. Accessed August 1, 2015.
9. American Academy of Neurology: five things
physicians and patients should question. Choosing
Research Original Investigation
Why Asymptomatic Patients Receive Carotid Imaging
632
JAMA Internal Medicine
May 2016
Volume 176, Number 5
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Wisely website. 2013. http://www.choosingwisely
.org/societies/american-academy-of-neurology/.
Accessed May 1, 2015.
10. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons: five things
physicians and patients should question. Choosing
Wisely website. 2013. http://www.choosingwisely
.org/societies/the-society-of-thoracic-surgeons/.
Accessed May 1, 2015.
11. Goldstein LB, Bushnell CD, Adams RJ, et al;
American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council
on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on
Epidemiology and Prevention; Council for High
Blood Pressure Research; Council on Peripheral
Vascular Disease, and Interdisciplinary Council on
Quality of Care and Outcomes Research. Guidelines
for the primary prevention of stroke: a guideline for
healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke.
2011;42(2):517-584.
12. Karp HR, Flanders WD, Shipp CC, Taylor B,
Martin D. Carotid endarterectomy among Medicare
beneficiaries: a statewide evaluation of
appropriateness and outcome. Stroke. 1998;29(1):
46-52.
13. Halm EA, Tuhrim S, Wang JJ, Rojas M, Hannan
EL, Chassin MR. Has evidence changed practice?:
appropriateness of carotid endarterectomy after
the clinical trials. Neurology. 2007;68(3):187-194.
14. Grimes DA, Schulz KF. Uses and abuses of
screening tests. Lancet. 2002;359(9309):881-884.
15. Reker DM, Hamilton BB, Duncan PW, Yeh SC,
Rosen A. Stroke: who’s counting what? J Rehabil
Res Dev. 2001;38(2):281-289.
16. VIReC: The Researcher's Guide to VA Data. http:
//www.virec.research.va.gov/. Accessed September
19, 2011.
17. Halliday A, Mansfield A, Marro J, et al; MRC
Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial (ACST)
Collaborative Group. Prevention of disabling and
fatal strokes by successful carotid endarterectomy
in patients without recent neurological symptoms:
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2004;363
(9420):1491-1502.
18. Walker MD, Marler JR, Goldstein M, et al.
Endarterectomy for asymptomatic carotid artery
stenosis. JAMA. 1995;273(18):1421-1428.
19. Halliday A, Harrison M, Hayter E, et al;
Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial (ACST)
Collaborative Group. 10-Year stroke prevention
after successful carotid endarterectomy for
asymptomatic stenosis (ACST-1): a multicentre
randomised trial. Lancet. 2010;376(9746):1074-1084.
20. Chaturvedi S, Sacco RL. Are the current risks of
asymptomatic carotid stenosis exaggerated?:
further evidence supporting the CREST 2 Trial.
JAMA Neurol. 2015;72(11):1233-1234.
Invited Commentary
Screening for Asymptomatic Carotid Artery Stenosis
Evidence-Based Opinion
Larry B. Goldstein, MD
Evidence-based medicine is a linchpin of contemporary clini-
calpractice.Itrequires“theintegrationofthebestresearchevi-
dencewithclinicalexpertiseandthepatient’
suniquevaluesand
circumstances.”1(p1) The task can be daunting for busy clini-
cians, leading to the develop-
ment of a plethora of clinical
guidelines intended to pro-
viderecommendationsaimed
at optimizing patient care by
summarizing and evaluating
the available evidence supporting or refuting the use of diag-
nostic studies or therapeutic approaches. As of January 2016,
the US Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality listed 3348
guidelines related to diseases or conditions, 8163 addressing
treatments or interventions, and 1203 focused on health ser-
vices administration.2 As with the underlying research itself,
however, clinical practice guidelines can vary in quality, which
led to efforts to set standards to ensure their value.3(pp75-107)
Foranygivenproblem,differentprofessionalsocieties,and
indeed panels within single societies, can disagree on recom-
mendations. Because the framing of clinical questions and the
implicationsandinterpretationoftheunderlyingdatamayvary
depending on context and other factors, guideline recommen-
dations on a specific issue may differ in minor or substantial
ways among different statements. Depending on when they
were written and other factors, these documents can lack uni-
formity. There are a myriad of other potential reasons for the
disparities among guidelines, which can then understand-
ably lead to considerable uncertainty and variability in clini-
cal practice.
Against this background, Keyhani et al4 evaluated screen-
ing for asymptomatic stenosis of the extracranial carotid ar-
tery. The authors noted that although there are several rel-
evant guidelines, the recommendations lack consistency. For
example, the American Institute of Ultrasound Medicine con-
cluded that carotid artery screening is indicated for patients
with a carotid bruit whereas the US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) states that the procedure is not recom-
mended in this setting. Table 1 of Keyhani et al4 gives the simi-
larities and differences between these 2 sets of guidelines and
recommendations from the American Heart Association/
American Stroke Association (AHA/ASA) and collaborating
organizations.
It is notable that both the USPSTF and the AHA/ASA guide-
linesagreethatthereisnobenefitforroutinescreeningofpopu-
lations with no clinical manifestations or risk factors for ath-
erosclerosis. With an estimated population attributable risk of
carotid stenosis for stroke in those older than 60 years of 0.9%,
the prevalence of asymptomatic carotid stenosis would need
to be 14 times greater to reach a level similar to hyperlipid-
emia and more than 100 times greater to carry a risk similar
to hypertension.5 The USPSTF found no validated risk strati-
fication tool or physical finding, including the presence of a
cervical bruit, that was useful for identifying those who do or
do not have a clinically important asymptomatic carotid ar-
tery stenosis.6 Yet such screenings are offered in a variety of
settings.5
Screening for a disease or condition is rational only if its
identification has a meaningful effect on patient manage-
ment. Epidemiological studies conducted over the last 3 de-
cades such as the Evans County, Georgia, study find that an
anterior cervical bruit is an indicator of generalized athero-
sclerosis and is a greater risk factor for death due to coronary
heartdiseasethanstroke.7IntheEvansCounty,Georgia,study,
Author Audio Interview at
jamainternalmedicine.com
Related article page 626
Why Asymptomatic Patients Receive Carotid Imaging
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
May 2016
Volume 176, Number 5
633
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/04/2019
