 Article
The Rockefeller University Press  
$30.00
J. Exp. Med. 2016 Vol. 213 No. 13 2913–2929
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20161289
2913
IntroductIon
Most viral pathogens enter the host via mucosal barriers that 
must properly discriminate between harmful and beneficial 
antigens. However, when pathogens cross mucosal barriers, 
the host must induce an immune response (Belkaid and Naik, 
2013; Perez-Lopez et al., 2016), which often involves local-
ized inflammation and recruitment of innate immune cells 
that, upon arrival to the draining LN (dLN), instruct adap-
tive and protective immunity (Iwasaki and Medzhitov, 2015). 
Therefore, the early events of host response after mucosal viral 
infection can play a key role in determining the outcome of 
an infection. In particular, we know very little about the early 
events that result in protective immunity after vaginal infec-
tion with RNA viral pathogens.
The female reproductive tract (FRT) comprises the 
upper FRT (UFRT) and lower FRT (LFRT). The UFRT 
(endocervix, endometrium, and the fallopian tubes) is sterile 
and consists of type I mucosa with a monolayer of columnar 
epithelial cells, whereas the LFRT (vagina and ectocervix) 
is nonsterile, directly contacts semen antigens, and consists 
of type II mucosa with a multilayer of squamous epithelial 
cells (Iwasaki, 2010). The FRT must induce tolerance against 
commensals and semen antigens and also provide protection 
against harmful pathogens (Black et al., 2000; Moldenhauer 
et al., 2009; Marks et al., 2010; Ochiel et al., 2010; Kumamoto 
and Iwasaki, 2012; Stary et al., 2015). Although mouse mod-
els to study vaginal DNA viral infection such as HSV-1 and 
HSV-2 are well established, little is understood with respect 
to vaginal RNA virus infection because of the lack of suitable 
mouse models. In the face of emergent sexually transmitted 
RNA-viral pathogens, such as Zika virus (ZIKV) and Ebola 
virus (Christie et al., 2015; Musso et al., 2015; Brooks et al., 
2016), and because of the absence of proper small animal 
models to study highly prevalent sexually transmitted retro-
viruses such as HIV
, we lack a fundamental understanding of 
how the cross talk between innate and adaptive immunity 
occurs upon vaginal infection with this class of pathogens.
In this study, we established a mouse model of intra-
vaginal (i.vag.) infection with a widely used model patho-
gen, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), as well as 
with the Puerto Rican strain PR
V 
ABC59 (2015) of ZIKV in 
WT mice. LCMV is an enveloped single-stranded RNA virus 
of the Arenaviridae family (Zhou et al., 2012), and ZIKV is 
an enveloped single-stranded RNA virus of the Flaviviri-
dae family (Lazear and Diamond, 2016). ZIKV can persist 
and retain infectivity in human semen long term (Harrower 
et al., 2016; Turmel et al., 2016), and many cases of sexual 
understanding the host immune response to vaginal exposure to rnA viruses is required to combat sexual transmission of this 
class of pathogens. In this study, using lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LcMV) and Zika virus (ZIKV) in wild-type mice, we 
show that these viruses replicate in the vaginal mucosa with minimal induction of antiviral interferon and inflammatory re-
sponse, causing dampened innate-mediated control of viral replication and a failure to mature local antigen-presenting cells 
(APcs). Enhancement of innate-mediated inflammation in the vaginal mucosa rescues this phenotype and completely inhibits 
ZIKV replication. to gain a better understanding of how this dampened innate immune activation in the lower female repro-
ductive tract may also affect adaptive immunity, we modeled cd8 t cell responses using vaginal LcMV infection. We show that 
the lack of APc maturation in the vaginal mucosa leads to a delay in cd8 t cell activation in the draining lymph node and 
hinders the timely appearance of effector cd8 t cells in vaginal mucosa, thus further delaying viral control in this tissue. our 
study demonstrates that vaginal tissue is exceptionally vulnerable to infection by rnA viruses and provides a conceptual 
framework for the male to female sexual transmission observed during ZIKV infection.
Dampened antiviral immunity to intravaginal exposure  
to RNA viral pathogens allows enhanced viral replication
Shahzada Khan,1 Erik M. Woodruff,1 Martin Trapecar,1 Krystal A. Fontaine,1 Ashley Ezaki,1 
Timothy C. Borbet,1 Melanie Ott,1,2 and Shomyseh Sanjabi1,3
1Virology and Immunology, Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA 94158
2Department of Medicine and 3Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143
© 2016 Khan et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share 
Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike 3.0 Unported license, as described at http 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/3 
.0 
/).
Correspondence to Shomyseh Sanjabi: shomyseh.sanjabi@gladstone.ucsf.edu
T.C. Borbet’s present address is Sackler Institute of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, 
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016.
Abbreviations used: CpG-ODN, CpG-oligodeoxynucleotide; dLN, draining LN; DMPA, 
depomedroxyprogesterone acetate; EpCam, epithelial cell adhesion molecule; FFU, 
focus-forming unit; FRT, female reproductive tract; iLN, iliac LN; ingLN, inguinal LN; 
ISG, IFN-stimulated gene; i.vag., intravaginal; LCMV, lymphocytic choriomeningitis 
virus; LCMV-NP, LCMV-nucleoprotein; LFRT, lower FRT; medLN, mediastinal LN; 
poly(I:C), polyinosinic 
:polycytidylic acid; qRT-PCR, quantitative RT-PCR; t.c., 
transcervical; UFRT, upper FRT; ZIKV, Zika virus.
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
on June 1, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20161289
Published Online: 16 November, 2016 | Supp Info: 
 Dampened immunity to vaginal RNA virus exposure | Khan et al.
2914
transmission have now been reported (Brooks et al., 2016; 
D’Ortenzio et al., 2016). Development of animal models for 
better understanding of ZIKV pathogenesis and for evalu-
ating vaccine or therapeutic drug candidates is currently of 
utmost importance for formulating strategies to prevent and 
treat ZIKV infections. However, systemically and s.c. admin-
istered ZIKV cannot establish disease in WT mice because 
of IFN-mediated inhibition of viral replication (Grant et al., 
2016; Lazear et al., 2016; Rossi et al., 2016). Unlike ZIKV
, 
mice are the natural hosts for LCMV
, and infected animals 
also shed virus in their feces, urine, saliva, breast milk, and 
semen (Barton et al., 2002). Numerous studies have used 
LCMV as a model system to understand the basics of anti-
viral immunity in mice, although vaginal infection with this 
virus has not been reported.
Here, we report that upon i.vag. exposure to LCMV or 
ZIKV
, antiviral type I and III IFNs and inflammatory me-
diators are poorly induced in WT mouse hosts. This limited 
innate-mediated control of virus offers a window of oppor-
tunity for robust viral replication in the vaginal mucosa. In 
contrast, ZIKV fails to replicate in the LFRT tissue in the face 
of an ongoing systemic viral infection or when inflammation 
is artificially induced in the LFRT. T
o gain a better under-
standing of how this dampened innate immune activation in 
the LFRT may also affect adaptive immunity, we modeled 
CD8 T cell responses using LCMV for which T cell receptor 
transgenic mice are available. Limited early innate immune 
response during vaginal infection with LCMV also leads 
to significantly delayed maturation of migratory DCs (Mig 
DCs), causing delayed priming of CD8 
T cells compared with 
that in i.p., transcervically (t.c.), or s.c. infected mice, thus 
ultimately also delaying CD8-mediated viral control in the 
LFRT. Our results indicate that minimal induction of antiviral 
IFN response in the LFRT dampens innate-mediated early 
control of the virus, also dampening the cross talk between 
innate and adaptive immunity and thus providing a loophole 
for robust viral replication in the vaginal mucosa. These find-
ings have critical implications for understanding the mech-
anisms behind heterosexual male to female transmission of 
ZIKV
. They also support the already observed enhanced vul-
nerabilities of this particular route of infection, which causes 
high viral titers in the vaginal mucosa of pregnant female 
mice, enhancing ascending infection into the fetal compart-
ment (Y
ockey et al., 2016).
rEsuLts
Mice are susceptible to vaginal LcMV infection
To determine whether LCMV can be vaginally infected, we 
i.vag. inoculated depomedroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA; 
DMPA-Depo-Provera)–treated (1 mg/mouse) WT female 
mice with LCMV Armstrong (2 × 105 PFU), without re-
moving the mucous layer or causing any abrasion. We found 
that LCMV initially infects the epithelium and then robustly 
replicates in the lamina propria of the LFRT in the absence of 
notable virus-induced damage to the vaginal tissue (Fig. 1 A). 
Because the i.p. route of LCMV infection generates protective 
immunity within the genital mucosa (Suvas et al., 2007; Casey 
et al., 2012; Schenkel et al., 2013), we compared the kinet-
ics and extent of viral dissemination between DMPA-treated 
mice infected via i.p. (positive controls) or i.vag. routes. Using 
a quantitative RT
-PCR (qRT
-PCR) assay for LCMV (Mc-
Causland and Crotty, 2008), we detected similar levels of 
viral RNA per microgram of total RNA from the LFRT 
and iliac LN (iLN) of i.p. and i.vag. infected mice, whereas 
we observed very low levels of viral RNA in the spleen and 
other distant LNs after i.vag. infection (Fig. 1, B and C, top). 
Mice in their natural diestrus stage of their estrous cycle can 
also be infected vaginally with LCMV
, although the infection 
rate is highly variable compared with DMPA-treated animals 
(Fig. 1 D). 
These data are the first demonstration that mice are 
susceptible to vaginal infection with LCMV and that LCMV 
can replicate in vaginal mucosa with dissemination and repli-
cation of live virus in the draining iLN.
LcMV robustly replicates in the testes after i.p. infection
We next addressed whether systemically infected male mice 
harbor LCMV in their testes. We detected high levels of 
LCMV RNA copies in testes of WT male mice 3 d after i.p. 
infection (Fig. 1 E). Given that high viral loads were detected 
in the testes of type 1 IFN receptor–deficient mice infected 
with ZIKV (Lazear et al., 2016), testes may represent an organ 
in which these RNA viruses can highly replicate in and serve 
as a source for sexual transmission.
LcMV robustly replicates in the LFrt with minimal 
induction of type I or III IFn response
T
o determine when and where the host detects vaginally ad-
ministered LCMV
, we measured the induction of IFN-β in 
the FRT and other peripheral tissues after infection. In i.p. in-
fected mice, we found that IFN-β was robustly induced in the 
mediastinal LN (medLN), the dLN for i.p. infection (Olson et 
al., 2012), and in the spleen at day 1 after infection and then 
in various peripheral LNs at day 2 after infection (Fig. 1 B, 
bottom). Surprisingly, although after both i.p. and i.vag. in-
fection viral load increased exponentially in the LFRT, viral 
replication resulted in very low level of IFN-α or -β mRNA 
induction (Fig. 1 C, bottom; and Fig. 1 F). IFN-β induction 
was similar in the iLNs of i.p. and i.vag. infected mice, consis-
tent with similar kinetics and magnitude of viral replication 
(Fig. 1 C). However, robust IFN-β induction was not ob-
served in the spleen of i.vag. infected animals, consistent with 
minimal dissemination of LCMV to the spleen (Fig. 1 C). 
All nucleated cells are believed to respond to IFN-α and -β, 
but epithelial cells respond largely to IFN-λ (type III IFN; 
Mahlakõiv et al., 2015). However, IFN-λ was also variably 
and minimally induced in the LFRT after i.p. or i.vag. in-
fection (Fig. 1 F). Furthermore, no significant induction of 
IFN-α, -β, or -λ was observed in i.vag. LCMV-infected ani-
mals that were infected during their natural diestrus stage of 
estrous cycle (Fig. 1 G), demonstrating that the dampened 
 2915
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
IFN response is not caused by DMPA treatment of the ani-
mals. Thus, LCMV replicates robustly in the LFRT with lim-
ited induction of antiviral type I or III IFN response.
LcMV replication in the LFrt results in minimal induction 
of IFn signaling and inflammation
The IFN response is an important component of antiviral 
immunity, as it promotes the cross talk between innate and 
adaptive immunity. IFN produced by infected cells results in 
enhanced expression of type I IFN and other inflammatory 
cytokines in the neighboring cells, which in turn enhance 
maturation and antigen presentation by DCs and effector 
responses by T cells (Trinchieri, 2010). Although IRF-3 is 
constitutively expressed by most cells, IRF-7 is induced in 
response to IFN-α/β stimulation, and its induced expres-
sion is required to amplify the type I IFN response (Sato 
Figure 1. Vaginally administered LcMV replicates locally with minimal induction of IFns in the LFrt. (A–G) Groups of C57BL/6N mice were i.p. 
or i.vag. infected with 2 × 105 PFU of LCMV Armstrong. (A) Immunohistochemical detection of LCMV-NP in LFRT with VL-4 monoclonal antibody 2 and 4 d 
after i.vag. infection. Bar, 30 µm. (B and C) LCMV copies in total RNA from the indicated tissues were determined by qRT-PCR. IFN-β mRNA levels were nor-
malized to GAP 
DH and expressed as fold-change over uninfected (UI) controls. ALN, axillary LN; CLN, cervical LN; mLN, mesenteric LN. (D) Groups of female 
mice at the indicated stages of estrous cycle or after DMPA treatment were i.vag. infected or were left uninfected. LCMV copies were determined as in B. 
 
(E) Quantification of LCMV copies in male mice 3 d after i.p. infection. (F) IFN mRNA levels from LFRT tissues were determined as in B. (G) Levels of IFN mRNA 
from infected mice in D were normalized to GAP 
DH and expressed as fold-change over the respective group’s uninfected controls. Data are represented 
from one (A, E, and G), two (B, D, and F), or three (C) independent experiments. n = 3 (A and B; days 0.5–3 LFRT and spleen in C, E, and F), 4 (D and G), or 6 
(iLN and day 4 spleen in C). Error bars represent mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, unpaired Student’s t test.
 Dampened immunity to vaginal RNA virus exposure | Khan et al.
2916
et al., 2000). To determine whether the induced levels of 
IFN-α/β were sufficient to amplify IFN signaling in in-
fected and neighboring cells, we measured mRNA induc-
tion of IRF7 in LFRT tissue. After i.vag. LCMV infection, 
we observed poor IRF7 induction in the LFRT (Fig. 2 A). 
Interestingly however, even though we detected very low 
levels of type I/III IFN mRNA in the LFRT of i.p. in-
fected animals (Fig. 1 C, bottom), IRF7 was induced ∼10-
fold in the LFRT (Fig. 2 A). In i.p. infected animals, we also 
detected higher induction of other IFN-stimulated genes 
(ISGs), including RNA sensors RIG-I and MDA5 (Takeu-
chi and Akira, 2010) and CXCL9 and CXCL10 (Fig. 2 B), 
chemokines important for lymphocyte trafficking into in-
flamed tissues (Griffith et al., 2014), as well as those required 
for recruitment of monocytes (Fig. 2 C). Higher induction 
of various inflammatory cytokines, including IFN-γ, TNF
, 
and IL-6, was also observed in the LFRT of i.p. but not i.vag. 
infected animals (Fig. 2 D). Furthermore, no significant in-
duction of TNF
, IL-6, RIG-I, and MDA5 was observed in 
i.vag. LCMV-infected animals that were infected during 
their natural diestrus stage of estrous cycle (Fig. 2, E and F), 
demonstrating that dampened inflammation is not caused 
by DMPA treatment of the animals. These data suggest that 
the LFRT experiences qualitatively different innate immune 
response after LCMV i.p. versus i.vag. infection.
Innate-mediated viral control is impaired in the LFrt 
after vaginal LcMV infection
To determine how limited innate immune activation af-
fects viral control in the LFRT of i.vag. infected animals, 
we measured the kinetics of viral control and clearance 
in various tissues. At day 1 after infection, viral copy 
numbers are very similar in the LFRT and iLN of i.p. 
and i.vag. infected mice (Fig. 3, A and B). In i.p. infected 
animals, viral replication began to be controlled start-
ing at day 3 after infection in both the iLN and LFRT 
(Fig. 3 A). In contrast, the i.vag. infected animals showed 
a significant delay in the kinetics of viral control in the 
LFRT compared with the iLN (Fig. 3 B). In fact, viral 
growth in LFRT of i.vag. infected animals continued ex-
ponentially until day 5 after infection, reaching ∼2-log 
higher than the peak of viral load in the LFRT of i.p. 
infected animals (Fig. 3, A and B, LFRT). Although viral 
dissemination to the spleen and UFRT was observed in 
i.vag. infected mice (Fig. 3 C), the virus was rapidly con-
trolled in both tissues. Animals infected via either route 
achieved viral clearance in the LFRT by day 12 after in-
fection (Fig. 3, A and B). Thus, after i.vag. LCMV infec-
tion, viral replication predominantly occurs in the LFRT 
and iLN tissues, with significantly delayed innate-medi-
ated viral control in the LFRT.
Figure 2. Minimal induction of IFn response 
and inflammation in LFrt of vaginally infected 
mice. (A–D) WT female mice were i.p. or i.vag. 
 
infected with 2 × 105 PFU of LCMV Armstrong. 
Levels of mRNA at the indicated time points were 
determined with qRT-PCR, normalized to GAP 
DH, 
and expressed as fold-change over uninfected 
controls. (E and F) Groups of female mice at the 
indicated stage of estrous cycle or after DMPA 
treatment were i.vag. infected. Levels of mRNA for 
the indicated cytokines or RNA sensors from the 
LFRT of infected mice were normalized to GAP 
DH 
and expressed as fold-change over the respective 
group’s uninfected controls. Data are represented 
from three (A–D; DMPA in E and F) or one (diestrus 
and estrus in E and F) experiments. n = 3 (A; RIG-I 
and MDA5 in B; C; and DMPA in E and F), 4 (estrus 
and diestrus in E and F), or 6 (CXCL9 and CXCL10 
pulled from two different experiments in B). Error 
bars represent mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; 
***, P < 0.001, unpaired Student’s t test.
 2917
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
cd8 t cells regulate viral control and clearance 
after vaginal LcMV infection
T
o determine the contribution of adaptive immunity, in par-
ticular CD8 and CD4 
T cells, to LCMV control and clearance 
in the LFRT, we i.vag. infected WT, RAG1−/−, CD8−/−, and 
MHC-II−/− mice and quantitated the number of viral copies in 
the LFRT at day 12 after infection. Although MHC-II−/− and 
WT mice both efficiently cleared the virus, CD8−/− (Fig. 3 D) 
and RAG1−/− (Fig. 3 E) mice did not, which also led to systemic 
dissemination of LCMV after i.vag. infection (Fig. 3, F and G). 
These data demonstrate that CD8 
T cells control and clear vag-
inally transmitted LCMV independently of CD4 
T cells.
Next, we hypothesized that the appearance of CD8 
T cells in the LFRT is required for the clearance of the 
virus in this tissue. We adoptively transferred congenically 
marked (CD45.1+) P14 CD8 T cells (P14 cells), express-
ing a transgenic TCR that recognizes the gp33 epitope of 
LCMV (Pircher et al., 1990), and monitored their appearance 
in the LFRT of i.p. and i.vag. infected WT CD45.2 mice. 
 
Although we observed an increase in the number of host 
(CD8+ CD45.1−) and P14 cells (CD8+ CD45.1+) in the 
LFRT of i.p. infected mice as early as day 4 after infection 
(Fig. 3 H), we did not see an increase of P14 cells above 
uninfected background in i.vag. infected mice until day 7 
after infection (Fig. 3 I). 
Thus, the appearance of CD8 
T cells 
highly correlated with viral control in the LFRT of i.vag. 
infected mice. Therefore, in addition to a dampened innate 
immune control in the LFRT of i.vag. infected mice, the de-
layed appearance of virus-specific CD8 
T cells further belated 
viral control in this tissue.
Kinetics of effector cd8 t cell expansion is delayed 
after vaginal LcMV infection
To further determine the kinetics and magnitude of the vi-
rus-specific CD8 T cell response, we quantified the adop-
tively transferred P14 cells in blood and various tissues of 
Figure 3. Vaginal LcMV infection elicits delayed and dampened expansion of virus-specific effector cd8 t cells leading to delayed viral control 
in LFrt. (A–C and H–L) Naive CD45.1+ P14 CD8 T cells (P14 cells) were isolated, and 500,000 (days 0.5–4) or 20,000 (day 5 onward) P14 cells were adoptively 
transferred into CD45.2+ WT recipient mice 1 d before i.p. or i.vag. infection with 2 × 105 PFU LCMV. (A–C) Viral copies in total RNA from the indicated tissues 
of infected WT mice were determined by qRT-PCR. (D–G) WT, CD8−/−, MHC-II−/−, or RAG1−/− mice were infected i.vag., and LCMV copies at the indicated 
times and in the indicated tissues were determined as in A–C. (H) LFRT tissues from mice in A–C were digested, and extracted immune cells were analyzed 
by flow cytometry. Absolute counts of P14 cells at days 4 and 5 are shown. (I) Representative flow cytometry plots showing the abundance of CD45.1+ P14 
cells in total cells isolated from the LFRT at days 5 and 7 after infection from P14 immune chimeras in A–C. (J) Longitudinal fraction of P14s in the PBMCs 
of i.p. or i.vag. infected animals. (K–L) Total number of P14s in indicated tissues at the indicated time points after i.p. or i.vag. infection. Data represent one 
of two (A–G and J) or three (H, I, K, and L, days 7–9) independent experiments. n = 3–4 (A–C), 10 (WT in D), 3 (CD8−/− in D; F; and d4 in H), 4 (MHC−/− in D; 
d5 in H; K; and L), 7 (i.p. in J), or 5 (i.vag. in J) mice per group. Error bars represent mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, unpaired Student’s 
t test. UI, uninfected.
 Dampened immunity to vaginal RNA virus exposure | Khan et al.
2918
i.vag. and i.p. infected mice throughout the effector and 
contraction phases of the T cell response. Expansion of the 
P14 cells was significantly slower in the peripheral blood 
of i.vag. versus i.p. infected mice (Fig. 3 J). Similarly, the 
peak of P14 cell expansion was delayed in the iLN and 
inguinal LN (ingLN) in i.vag. infected mice, even though 
the magnitude of the response was similar at later times 
(day 9–15) after i.p. or i.vag. infection (Fig. 3 K). The mag-
nitude of the CD8 T cell response remained dampened in 
the spleen, LFRT, and UFRT at all effector time points 
after i.vag. infection (Fig. 3 L). Together, these data sug-
gest that, after i.vag. infection, the delayed expansion and 
appearance of antigen-specific effector CD8 T cells to the 
LFRT contributes to the delay in adaptive-mediated viral 
control at later time points.
Vaginal LcMV infection delays priming  
of virus-specific cd8 t cells
To better understand the cause of the delayed CD8 T cell 
expansion after i.vag. infection with LCMV
, we compared 
CD8 
T cell priming between i.p. and i.vag. infected mice. 
We 
adoptively transferred CFSE-labeled P14 cells into 
WT hosts 
and measured CD69 and CD25 up-regulation and CFSE 
dilution in the transferred cells. Once the P14 cells up-reg-
ulated CD25 and down-regulated CD69 (CD69loCD25hi), 
 they began to proliferate (Fig. 4 A) and up-regulate CD44 
(Fig. 4 B). The medLN is the primary dLN after i.p. in-
fection (Olson et al., 2012), whereas the iLN and ingLN 
are the dLNs after i.vag. infection (Iwasaki, 2007; Kuma-
moto and Iwasaki, 2012). However, in i.vag. infected mice, 
priming only occurred in the iLN by day 3 after infection 
but not in the ingLN, medLN, or spleen (Fig. 4 C). These 
results are consistent with viral replication in iLNs but 
not in other lymphoid tissues after i.vag. LCMV infection 
of WT mice (Fig. 1 B).
After i.p. infection, CD69 and CD25 were up-regu-
lated in the spleen as early as day 1 (Fig. 4 D), supported 
by early and robust IFN-β induction (Fig. 1 C, bottom). 
Even though the iLN had similar amounts of virus and 
IFN-β at days 1–3 after i.vag. and i.p. infection (Fig. 1 C), 
priming of P14 cells was slower in i.vag. versus i.p. infected 
mice (Fig. 4 D). Although P14 cells in the iLN were at 
the same stage of activation in i.p. and i.vag. infected mice 
at day 2, priming in i.vag. infected mice remained stalled 
at the CD69hiCD25lo stage for an extra day (Fig. 4 D). 
This stall led to a 1-d delay in P14 cell proliferation in 
the iLN and an ∼2-d delay in effector P14 cells reaching 
the circulation, as measured by percentage of CFSElo cells 
in the spleen (Fig. 4 E).
T
o determine whether a difference in the induction of 
inflammatory cytokines, other than IFN-β, in the iLN caused 
the delay in priming after i.vag. infection, we measured in-
duction of IFN-γ and IL-6 throughout the priming phase. 
Surprisingly, i.vag. infected mice expressed higher levels of 
these cytokines in the iLN than i.p. infected mice (Fig. 4 F), 
suggesting that factors other than viral dose and inflammation 
generated in the iLN caused the 1-d delay in CD8 T cell 
priming after i.vag. infection.
Vaginal LcMV infection suboptimally activates Mig dcs
Next, we hypothesized that a difference in the quantity and/
or quality of APCs may cause the difference in priming of 
CD8 T cells in the iLN at day 3 after i.p. versus i.vag. infec-
tion. Quantification of total cellularity in the iLN showed 
that i.vag. infected mice have larger LNs (Fig. 5 A) with a 
greater number of lymphocytes (Fig. 5 B) and innate cells 
(Fig. 5 C) than i.p. infected mice at day 3 after infection. 
On this day, we found that most of the DC population in 
the iLN of both i.p. and i.vag. infected mice comprised of 
migratory CD11b+ DCs (CD11cint MHC-IIhi; Fig. 5, D and 
E; and Fig. S1, A and B). Importantly, these Mig DCs dis-
played higher surface expression of various activation and 
maturation markers in i.p. infected mice, including signifi-
cantly higher levels of CD25 (Fig. 5 F). CD25 is a known 
maturation marker on DCs (Fukao and Koyasu, 2000; 
 
Granucci et al., 2002; Wuest et al., 2011), and its increase on 
DCs correlated with the expression of other classical markers 
of maturation, including CD40, CD86, and PD-L1 (Fig. S1, 
C and D). We also observed a strong correlation between 
CD25 expression on Mig DCs and P14 cell proliferation 
in the iLN of i.vag. infected mice (Fig. 5 G). Mig DCs in 
the iLN of i.p. infected mice showed faster maturation, as 
measured by the kinetics of CD25 up-regulation at days 1–4 
after infection (Fig. 5 H). In particular, the difference in ex-
pression of CD25 on Mig DCs at day 3 after i.vag. versus i.p. 
infection paralleled the delayed priming of CD8 T cells in 
i.vag. mice at this time point; conversely, the sharp increase in 
CD25 expression on Mig DCs at day 4 after i.vag. infection 
corresponded with the eventual proliferation of P14 cells at 
this time point (Fig. 4, D and E).
We hypothesized that Mig DCs show up to the iLN in 
a less mature state after i.vag. infection because they do not 
properly mature in the LFRT because of limited induction of 
antiviral IFN response. We examined the maturation state of 
Mig DCs isolated from the LFRT at days 1–2 after infection. 
We did not detect differences in the number of Mig DCs in 
the LFRT between i.p. and i.vag. infected mice (Fig. 5 I). 
However, we found that Mig DCs in the LFRT of i.p. infected 
mice had up-regulated CD40, CD86, and PD-L1, whereas 
those in i.vag. infected mice resembled that of uninfected 
mice (Fig. 5 J). These data indicate that the delay in DC 
maturation begins in the LFRT, likely because of minimal 
induction of IFN response in this tissue after i.vag. infection 
(Fig. 1, C and F; and Fig. 2). 
Therefore, Mig DCs that migrate 
from the LFRT to the iLN after i.vag. infection begin their 
maturation process only after they reach the inflammatory 
environment of the iLN (Fig. 1 C and Fig. 4 F) and, hence, 
require more time before they are fully licensed to prime CD8 
T cells (Fig. 4, D and E).
 2919
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
dc maturation and cd8 t cell priming is exceptionally 
delayed after vaginal LcMV transmission
Next, we wanted to determine whether the delay in DC 
maturation and CD8 T cell priming is unique to vaginally 
infected LCMV or whether it is a more general feature of 
mucosal and/or localized viral infection. We compared i.p. 
and i.vag. routes of LCMV infection with t.c. and s.c. (next to 
buttocks) routes of infection. Although the iLN remained the 
primary dLN of both t.c. and s.c. infected mice, T cell prim-
ing was also observed in the ingLN of i.p. and s.c. infected 
Figure 4. Vaginal LcMV infection delays priming of virus-specific cd8 t cells. (A–F) P14 immune chimeras were generated by adoptively transferring 
500,000 CFSE-labeled CD45.1+ P14 cells into naive CD45.2+ B57BL/6N mice. (A) CD69 and CD25 expression patterns and CFSE dilutions of P14s in the iLN 
3 d after infection. (B) CD44 expression on P14s from A. MedFI, median fluorescence intensity. (C and D) CD69 and CD25 expressions on P14 cells in the 
indicated tissues at day 3 (C) or the indicated days (D) after i.p. or i.vag. infection. (D) CFSE dilution of P14 cells is shown on the right. (E) Frequency of CFSElo 
P14 cells from D. UI, uninfected. (F) IFN-γ and IL-6 mRNA levels in iLN samples from D were measured by qRT-PCR, and their levels were normalized to GAP 
DH and expressed as fold-change over uninfected controls. Data are represented from one of five (D and E), three (A–C), or two (F) independent experiments. 
n = 3 (A–C; days 0–4 in E and F) or 4 (day 5 in E). Error bars represent mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, unpaired Student’s t test.
 Dampened immunity to vaginal RNA virus exposure | Khan et al.
2920
mice at day 3 after infection (Fig. 6 A). P14 cell priming 
remained significantly delayed in the iLN of i.vag. infected 
mice compared with all other groups (Fig. 6, B and C), even 
in the presence of similar copy numbers of viral RNA in 
the iLNs of i.p., i.vag., and t.c. infected mice (Fig. 6 D). In-
trigued by the highly significant difference in the priming of 
CD8 T cells after i.vag. versus t.c. infection, we hypothesized 
that infection of the UFRT may result in higher induction 
of local IFN and subsequent inflammation that leads to local 
maturation of APCs. Indeed, significant difference in IFN-β 
and IRF7 induction was detected in the FRT 24 h after t.c. 
versus i.vag. inoculation of LCMV
, which also resulted in 
significantly higher induction of various inflammatory cy-
tokines and chemokines (Fig. 6 E). Furthermore, high in-
duction of CCL2 in t.c. infected mice correlated with higher 
recruitment of Ly6chi monocytes to both UFRT and LFRT 
tissues (Fig. 6 F), and the inflammatory environment resulted 
in their local activation, as measured by CD86 and CD40 
 
Figure 5. Vaginal infection with LcMV elicits delayed activation of dcs. (A–J) Female WT mice were infected either i.p. or i.vag. (A) Total cell numbers 
in the iLN at day 3 after infection. (B) Absolute counts of various lymphocytes in the iLN at day 3 after infection. B cells: TCRβ− CD19+; CD8 T: TCRβ+ CD8+; 
CD4 T: TCRβ+ CD4+. (C) Absolute counts of various innate immune cells in the iLN at day 3 after infection. EOS: CD19− TCRβ− EpCAM-1− Ly6G− CD11b+ 
Ly6cint/− SSC+; PMNs: CD19− TCRβ− EpCAM-1− Ly6G+ CD11b+; NK: NK1.1+; Ly6clo monocytic [Mon]: CD19− TCRβ− EpCAM-1− Ly6G− CD11b+ SSC− Ly6cint/−; 
Ly6chi monocytic: CD19− TCRβ− EpCAM-1− Ly6G− CD11b+ SSC− Ly6chi; DCs: CD19− TCRβ− NK− Ly6G− Ly6c− MHC-II+ CD11c+. (D) Gating strategy showing 
proportion of Mig (CD11cint MHC-IIhi) and resident (CD11chi MHC-IIint) DCs and CD11b and CD103 expression on Mig DCs in the iLN at day 3 after infection. 
IAIE, MHC-II including both I-A and I-E. (E) Absolute numbers of CD11b+ and CD103+ Mig DCs in iLN at day 3 after infection. (F) Representative histograms 
showing surface expression of activation and maturation markers on CD11b+ and CD103+ Mig DCs in the iLNs at day 3 after infection. The numbers above 
the histogram plots indicate mean ± SEM of median fluorescence intensity. Filled light-gray histograms represent Mig DCs from uninfected mice. (G) Linear 
correlation analysis showing association of CD25 expression on Mig DCs with CFSE dilution in P14 cells in the iLN at day 3 after i.vag. infection. (H) Kinetics 
of CD25 expression on CD11b+ Mig DCs. (I) Numbers of Mig DCs in the LFRT at day 2 after infection. (J) Activation status of CD11b+ Mig DCs at days 1–2 
after infection. Day 0 represents values from uninfected mice. Data are pulled from six (A and G) or two (B, C, E, and H) independent experiments or are 
representative of one of five (D), three (F), or two (I and J) independent experiments. n = 18 (A), 6 (B, C, E, and H), or 3 (I and J). Error bars represent mean ± 
SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01. See also Fig. S1. MedFI, median fluorescence intensity; UI, uninfected.
 2921
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
up-regulation (Fig. 6 G). These higher numbers of activated 
CD11b+ monocytic cells in FRT of t.c. infected mice con-
tributed to an increase in the amount of activated CD11b+ 
Mig DCs entering the iLN starting at day 1 after infection 
(Fig. 6, H and I), with significantly higher surface expression 
of CD25, CD40, and CD86 (Fig. 6 J). 
These data demonstrate 
that local induction of type I IFN and other inflammatory cy-
tokines promotes recruitment and local maturation of mono-
cyte-derived DCs in the FRT. Mature DCs that migrate to the 
draining iLN are then licensed to quickly prime CD8 T cells.
Vaginally inoculated ZIKV replicates in the LFrt of Wt mice
Intrigued by the findings that innate-mediated immune 
control is exceptionally dampened in the LFRT of i.vag. 
 
LCMV-infected mice, we wanted to test whether this was a 
unique characteristic of LCMV or was also shared with other 
RNA viral pathogens that are sexually transmitted. High rates 
of sexual transmission of ZIKV have recently been reported 
(Brooks et al., 2016; D’Ortenzio et al., 2016), and it is known 
that ZIKV replication is potently inhibited by type I IFNs after 
systemic infection in WT animals (Grant et al., 2016; Lazear 
et al., 2016; Rossi et al., 2016). We therefore hypothesized that 
i.vag. inoculated ZIKV would elicit a similarly dampened in-
nate immune response, allowing viral replication in the LFRT 
of  
WT animals. Thus, we i.vag. inoculated WT animals with 
ZIKV and measured the kinetics of viral replication over time. 
Using a qRT
-PCR assay, we detected an about one-log in-
crease in viral RNA copies in the LFRT at day 2 compared 
with day 1 after infection, demonstrating viral replication in 
this tissue (Fig. 7 A). Similar to LCMV
, ZIKV replication in 
the LFRT resulted in minimal mRNA induction of type I and 
III IFNs (Fig. 7 B). This was also consistent with minimal and 
variable induction of IRF7 (Fig. 7 C), as well as various ISGs 
and inflammatory cytokines (Fig. 7 D), highly reminiscent of 
the poor innate response elicited after vaginal LCMV infec-
tion (Figs. 1 and 2). However, unlike minimal innate-mediated 
control of viral replication in the LFRT after i.vag. LCMV in-
fection, the induced level of innate response seemed sufficient 
to begin controlling ZIKV replication by around day 3 after 
i.vag. infection (Fig. 7 A). Furthermore, unlike i.vag. LCMV 
infection, significant viral replication and ISG induction could 
not be detected in the iLN at day 2 after i.vag. ZIKV infection 
(Fig. 7, E and F). Although, similar to the LFRT tissue, we 
detected a positive correlation between viral RNA copies and 
IRF7 induction in the iLN (Fig. 7 G), suggesting that, similar 
to LCMV
, ZIKV can also disseminate from the LFRT to the 
iLN. The innate-mediated antiviral response in the iLN is sig-
nificantly faster and stronger than in the LFRT after LCMV 
i.vag. infection (Fig. 3 B); it is therefore conceivable that viral 
replication was strongly inhibited by a robust innate immune 
response as soon as ZIKV disseminated to the iLN. Interest-
ingly, regression analyses showed that the LFRT can tolerate 
∼60 times more viral load per fold-increase of IRF7 mRNA 
than iLN can at day 2 after i.vag. infection (Fig. 7 G). Thus, 
although ZIKV can replicate in the LFRT of WT animals, 
once disseminated to the iLN, viral replication is most likely 
inhibited by the elicited antiviral innate immune response. T
o-
gether, these data suggest that, as ZIKV replication in 
WT mice 
is extremely sensitive to inhibition by type I IFNs, the limited 
induction of antiviral IFN response in LFRT, or the IFNs pro-
duced upon viral dissemination to the iLN, may be sufficient 
to eventually control viral replication in the vaginal mucosa.
ZIKV replication in the LFrt does 
not promote APc maturation
Consistent with low induction of ISGs and inflammatory 
cytokines (Fig. 7 D) and similar to what we had observed 
after i.vag. LCMV infection (Fig. 6, F and G), no signs of 
significant monocyte recruitment (Fig. 8, A and B) or their 
maturation (Fig. 8 C) were detected in the LFRT. Analysis of 
the draining iLN also did not reveal any significant increase in 
number or activation of Mig DCs in i.vag. ZIKV-infected an-
imals (Fig. 8, D and E). 
T
ogether, these data show that minimal 
induction of antiviral inflammation in the LFRT tissue is a 
common feature of both LCMV and ZIKV vaginal infection. 
This dampened early innate response accompanies significant 
viral replication in the LFRT of WT hosts without inducing 
APC recruitment or maturation in the vaginal mucosa.
Enhancement of inflammation in the LFrt 
inhibits ZIKV replication
T
o determine whether the enhancement of innate immune 
activation in LFRT would bolster ZIKV control in the LFRT 
of WT animals, we took two different approaches. As the 
first approach, we i.p. infected mice with LCMV
, knowing 
that this route of LCMV infection generates significant an-
tiviral IFN response and inflammation in the LFRT (Fig. 2), 
followed by i.vag. inoculation with ZIKV the next day. As 
hypothesized, we found that animals that were i.p. LCMV 
infected were able to completely inhibit ZIKV replication in 
the LFRT (Fig. 9 A). This strikingly high level of protection 
correlated with significantly induced mRNA levels of various 
ISGs, including RIG-I, MDA5, and IRF7 (Fig. 9 B), as well as 
expected activation of Mig DCs in the iLN (Fig. 9 C).
The second approach we took to enhance antivi-
ral innate immunity in the LFRT was to vaginally admin-
ister acitretin, which is a derivative of retinoic acid that 
 
enhances RIG-I signaling (Li et al., 2016). Vaginal treatment 
with acitretin transiently induced the expression of RIG-I 
and MDA5 in the LFRT within 2 h of treatment (Fig. 9 D), 
which was followed by transient mRNA induction of type 
I and III IFNs (Fig. 9 E) as well as inflammatory cytokines 
IL-6 and TNF (Fig. 9 F). Next, we treated the animals vagi-
nally with acitretin 1 d before (−D1) i.vag. ZIKV inoculation. 
Strikingly, animals vaginally pretreated with acitretin lacked 
any detectable viral replication in the LFRT tissue (Fig. 9 G). 
T
ogether, these data show that low level of IFNs and inflam-
mation that is naturally generated by ZIKV in the LFRT is 
insufficient to inhibit early viral replication, prolonging local-
ized viral persistence in WT animals.
 Dampened immunity to vaginal RNA virus exposure | Khan et al.
2922
Figure 6. delay in innate and adaptive immune activation is not common to all mucosal or local infections. (A–J) P14 immune chimeras were 
generated by adoptively transferring 500,000 CFSE-labeled CD45.1+ P14 cells into naive female CD45.2+ B57BL/6 mice. (A) CFSE dilution of P14 T cells in 
ingLN at day 3 after infection with LCMV via the indicated routes. (B) Representative histogram plots showing CFSE dilution of P14 cells in the iLN at day 
 2923
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
dIscussIon
In this study, we show that upon LCMV or ZIKV vaginal ex-
posure, antiviral IFN response and inflammation is minimally 
induced in the LFRT, providing a window of opportunity for 
these pathogens to replicate in the vaginal mucosa. Signifi-
cantly, the rescue of the dampened innate immune response 
in the LFRT, either by systemic infection with an unrelated 
pathogen or vaginal administration of acitretin, resulted in 
inhibition of ZIKV replication. These data suggest that the 
natural innate immune response that is elicited in response to 
ZIKV and LCMV after vaginal inoculation is not sufficient 
to control early viral replication in the LFRT. Furthermore, 
using LCMV
, we show that the dampened innate immune 
response can also delay the formation of an antiviral adaptive 
immune response after i.vag. infection.
Limited induction of antiviral immunity, including 
type I/III IFNs, is not a common feature of all vaginal viral 
infections, as vaginal HSV-2 infection in mice results in 
induction of type I and III IFNs (Iversen et al., 2016; Oh 
et al., 2016) as well as recruitment of DCs to the vaginal 
mucosa that are crucial for initiation of the protective T cell 
response (Zhao et al., 2003). Interestingly however, although 
vaginal treatment with either TLR3/RIG-I–like receptors 
agonist polyinosinic 
:polycytidylic acid (poly[I:C]) or TLR9 
agonist CpG-oligodeoxynucleotide (CpG-ODN) provides 
protection against vaginal HSV-2 infection, vaginal poly(I:C) 
treatment causes little or no inflammation compared with 
CpG-ODN treatment (Ashkar et al., 2004; Gill et al., 2006). 
Similarly, although single vaginal treatment with CpG-ODN 
results in local and peripheral organ enlargement, repetitive 
3 after infection. (C) Percentages of the CFSE-diluted fraction in P14 cells from B. (D) Quantification of LCMV copies by qRT-PCR from total RNA of iLN. 
(E) mRNA levels for the indicated genes were determined from total RNA using qRT-PCR, normalized to GAP 
DH, and expressed as fold-change over unin-
fected controls. (F) Representative flow cytometry plots showing enrichment of monocytes in the UFRT or LFRT tissue 1 d after i.vag. or t.c. infection. Cells 
were gated on Lineage− (Lin−; CD19− TCRβ− NK1.1−) Ly6G− CD11b+. (G) Activation kinetics of CD11b+ populations from D in LFRT and UFRT after i.vag. or 
t.c. infection. The values at day 0 are from uninfected mice. (H) Flow cytometry plots showing enrichment of monocytes (top) and the proportion of Mig 
and resident DCs within the Ly6c− MHC-II+ gate (bottom) in the iLN 1 d after i.vag. or t.c. infection. (I) Fraction of Mig DCs in the iLN 1 d after i.vag. or t.c. 
infection. (J) Activation state of CD11b+ Mig DCs in the iLN 1 d after i.vag. or t.c. infection. Data represent one of five (i.p. and i.vag. in A–D), four (t.c. in B 
and C), or two (D; t.c. in E–J) independent experiments. Data for i.vag. in E, G, I, and J were pulled from two independent experiments. n = 3 (A–D), 4 (t.c. in 
E–J), or 6 (i.vag. in E–J). Error bars represent mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, unpaired Student’s t test. IAIE, MHC-II including both I-A 
and I-E; MedFI, median fluorescence intensity; UI, uninfected.
Figure 7. Vaginally inoculated ZIKV replicates in the LFrt of Wt mice with minimal induction of IFn response. (A–G) Groups of C57BL/6N female 
mice were i.vag. infected with 2 × 104 FFU of ZIKV (PRV 
ABC59). (A) FFU equivalent of ZIKV in total RNA from LFRT tissues was determined by qRT-PCR at the 
indicated time points after infection. (B–D) Levels of mRNA for the indicated genes from LFRT were determined from total RNA using qRT-PCR, normalized 
to GAP 
DH, and expressed as fold-change over uninfected controls. (E and F) Viral load or ISGs from iLN at day 2 after infection were determined as in A 
and B–D. (G) Linear regression analysis of FFU equivalent of ZIKV and induced IRF7 in the iLN and LFRT tissues after i.vag. infection. Each dot represents one 
mouse. n = 3–6 pulled from two independent experiments. Data represent mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05. UI, uninfected.
 Dampened immunity to vaginal RNA virus exposure | Khan et al.
2924
i.vag. treatment with poly(I:C) does not generate the same 
effect (Herbst-Kralovetz and Pyles, 2006). Furthermore, 
when mice were i.vag. treated with poly(I:C), CpG-ODN, 
or TLR7 agonist imiquimod, only CpG-ODN promoted 
recruitment of CD11c+ DCs to the vaginal mucosa and 
strongly up-regulated MHC-I expression on both leukocytes 
and epithelial cells, whereas imiquimod and poly(I:C) induced 
weak up-regulation of MHC-I only on the epithelium and 
not in the lamina propria (Nurkkala et al., 2007). CpG-ODN 
was also the strongest stimuli for chemokine production, and 
CCL3 production remained highly elevated in CpG-ODN–
treated animals for up to 7 d after the treatment, whereas 
it waned quickly in animals treated with imiquimod and 
poly(I:C) (Nurkkala et al., 2007). Collectively, these studies 
suggest that DNA ligands have a stronger inflammatory 
effect on the vaginal mucosa, and sensing of CpG-ODN 
results in recruitment of professional APCs to the vaginal 
mucosa, whereas the same effect is not seen with RNA 
ligands. These studies indeed support our findings where 
we show for the first time that vaginal infection with two 
different RNA viral pathogens does not result in significant 
induction of type I/III IFNs or recruitment and activation of 
APCs in the vaginal mucosa.
Furthermore, in a recent study that examined early im-
mune response after i.vag. simian immunodeficiency virus in-
fection in nonhuman primates, despite ample viral replication 
in the vaginal tissue at day 1 after infection, an absence of 
induced antiviral genes, including IFN-stimulated restriction 
factors, was observed. However, the induction of these genes 
was observed during peak systemic viral replication (Barouch 
et al., 2016), suggesting that an IFN response is elicited only 
once virus disseminates to peripheral tissues. In accordance 
with these findings, we also detected very limited induction 
of type I IFN and various ISGs in the LFRT tissue after i.vag. 
LCMV or ZIKV infection, whereas systemic i.p. infection 
with LCMV resulted in enhanced expression of various ISGs 
in the LFRT, which were sufficient to inhibit ZIKV repli-
cation in this tissue. Therefore, the qualitative difference in 
innate immune activation in the LFRT after i.vag. versus i.p. 
routes of infection is most likely related to the robust pool of 
IFNs that is generated after systemic infection, which results 
in induction of global ISGs in all tissues, including the LFRT. 
These findings suggest that the natural innate response that is 
elicited by these RNA viral pathogens upon vaginal exposure 
is too dampened to provide rapid control of viral replication, 
which ultimately results in high viral titers in this tissue. It will 
be important to further determine the biological reasons and 
the exact mechanism causing this dampened innate immune 
activation against vaginally inoculated RNA viral pathogens.
In contrast to the LFRT, once LCMV and ZIKV dis-
seminate to the draining iLN, UFRT, or the spleen, the host 
rapidly elicits a protective immune response. We also detected 
a much stronger innate and faster adaptive immune response 
if LCMV was directly inoculated into the UFRT as com-
pared with i.vag. infection of the LFRT. 
This comparison sug-
gests that the dampened innate response in the LFRT, which 
Figure 8. Vaginally inoculated ZIKV induces minimal APc recruitment and activation. (A–E) Groups of C57BL/6N female mice were i.vag. infected 
with 2 × 104 FFU of ZIKV (PRV 
ABC59). (A) Representative flow cytometry plots showing CD11b+ monocytic cells in the UFRT or LFRT tissues of uninfected 
mice or 3 d after i.vag. ZIKV infection. Cells were gated on Lineage− (CD19− TCRβ− NK1.1−) Ly6G− CD11b+. (B) Percentages of different subsets of monocytic 
(Mon) cells in LFRT of i.vag. infected mice among total cells at the indicated days. (C) Surface expression of activation markers on different monocytic 
populations in A and B. (D) Percentages of different subsets of Mig DCs among total cells in iLN of i.vag. infected mice at the indicated days after infection. 
(E) Surface expression of the indicated activation markers on CD11b+ Mig DCs in D. n = 6 pulled from two independent experiments. Data represent mean ± 
 
SEM. IAIE, MHC-II including both I-A and I-E; MedFI, median fluorescence intensity; UI, uninfected.
 2925
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
also results in a delayed adaptive immune activation, is an ex-
ceptional feature of the vaginal mucosa that is not shared at 
least with this other relevant mucosal route of infection. As 
the UFRT and LFRT have different composition of resident 
innate and adaptive cells (Wira et al., 2015), it will also be im-
portant to further investigate the exact mechanism by which 
the LFRT and the UFRT differentially elicit an antiviral re-
sponse against RNA viral pathogens.
Vaginal treatment with acitretin transiently induced 
mRNA expression of RIG-I and MDA5 in the LFRT, fol-
lowed by mRNA induction of type I/III IFNs and other in-
flammatory cytokines. Importantly, vaginal pretreatment with 
acitretin inhibited ZIKV replication in the LFRT of 
WT mice. 
These results provide conceptual proof that induction of the 
RIG-I pathway may provide an attractive option for treating 
vaginal ZIKV infections. Although acitretin has never been 
administered vaginally, oral therapeutic administration for pso-
riasis in pregnant women is known to cause fetal abnormalities 
(Yiu et al., 2015). 
Therefore, it will be important to investigate 
whether RIG-I–inducing drugs other than acitretin would 
have similar effects in terms of inhibiting vaginal ZIKV in-
fection as well as their propensity to cause fetal abnormalities.
Our findings also suggest that protective immunity may 
be dampened and/or delayed during vaginal ZIKV transmis-
sion compared with the immune response that is elicited upon 
systemic spread of the virus through mosquito bites. Impor-
tantly, these findings may have critical implications for fetal 
infection and abnormalities observed upon ZIKV infection 
(Lessler et al., 2016). During pregnancy, multiple mechanisms 
originating from both mother and fetus contribute to the de-
velopment and maintenance of tolerance (Munoz-Suano et 
al., 2011; Warning et al., 2011; Erlebacher, 2013), which may 
further dampen induction of IFNs in both the LFRT and 
UFRT and favor replication of sexually transmitted ZIKV 
and potential dissemination to the fetal compartment and 
infection of the fetus, as was recently also experimentally 
demonstrated (Y
ockey et al., 2016).
As we currently lack a suitable small-animal model 
for studying how innate and adaptive immunity are elicited 
against vaginally transmitted RNA viruses, development of 
such relevant models and their validation is important toward 
gaining the knowledge required to successfully prevent or 
treat sexually transmitted infections with this class of patho-
gens. T
o this end, our study provides the first mouse models 
to study vaginal transmission of RNA viral pathogens and 
contributes insight into the plausible mechanism by which 
the LFRT supports their replication. Our i.vag. ZIKV model 
will permit rapid preclinical testing of various microbicides 
and their safety and efficacy to inhibit ZIKV replication at 
a relevant site of high viral replication in vivo. Furthermore, 
Figure 9. systemic or local induction of IFn response prevents vaginal ZIKV infection. (A) WT mice were i.p. infected with 2 × 105 PFU of LCMV or 
were left uninfected, followed by i.vag. inoculation with 2 × 104 FFU of ZIKV the next day. LFRT tissues were collected 2 d after i.vag. ZIKV inoculation and 
analyzed by qRT-PCR for ZIKV load. The dotted line indicates the level of detection. (B) Levels of mRNA for the indicated genes were determined by qRT-
PCR from LFRT samples in A, normalized to GAP 
DH, and expressed as fold-increase over uninfected controls. (C) Surface expression of activation markers 
on CD11b+ Mig DCs in iLN of mice in A and B. (D–F) Mice were vaginally treated with 20 µl of 2 mM acitretin in DMSO, and LFRT tissues were collected at 
the indicated time points after treatment. Levels of mRNA were detected as in B. (G) Groups of mice were vaginally treated with 20 µl of 2 mM acitretin 
1 d before (−D1) i.vag. inoculation with ZIKV, were untreated but infected, or were left uninfected. Viral load in the LFRT tissues was determined as in A 2 
d after infection. (A–C) Data are represented from two independent experiments. (D–G) The acitretin treatment results are represented from two separate 
experiments. n = 3 (D–F), 4–9 (G), or 5–6 (A–C). Error bars represent mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001. MedFI, median fluorescence intensity; 
UI, uninfected; UT, untreated.
 Dampened immunity to vaginal RNA virus exposure | Khan et al.
2926
because LCMV has evolved with its natural mouse host and 
already serves as an excellent model pathogen to study an-
tiviral CTL immunity, studying i.vag. LCMV will support 
modeling both the innate and the CD8 T cell–mediated im-
mune responses that are elicited after vaginal transmission of 
RNA viral pathogens. As such, future i.vag. LCMV studies 
will foster a better understanding of how a dampened and lo-
calized innate immune response may affect the establishment 
of protective immunity in the LFRT, knowledge needed 
to develop protective vaccines against current and emerg-
ing RNA viral pathogens.
MAtErIALs And MEthods
Mice
C57BL/6NCr CD45.2+ WT (NCI), B6-Ly5.1/Cr CD45.1+ 
(NCI), Rag1tm1Mom (Mombaerts et al., 1992), and Tg(TcrL-
CMV)327Sdz (Pircher et al., 1990) mice crossed to CD45.1, 
Rag1−/−, H2dlAb1-Ea (The Jackson Laboratory; Madsen et al., 
1999), and Cd8atm1Mak (The Jackson Laboratory; Fung-Leung 
et al., 1991) mice were used in this study. Mice were housed 
and bred in the Gladstone Institutes’ animal facility. Female 
mice (8–20 wk old) were used throughout this study, except 
where indicated. Age-matched animals were assigned to var-
ious treatment groups blindly. All animal experiments were 
conducted in accordance with guidelines set by the Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of 
California, San Francisco.
Adoptive transfer of t cells and viral infection
Unless stated otherwise, all female mice in all infection groups 
or uninfected group were injected s.c. with Depo-Provera 
(GE Healthcare) at 1 mg per mouse in a 200-µl volume, 7 d 
 
before infection. T
o determine the stage of natural estrous 
cycle, animals were examined visually for vaginal inflamma-
tion, and daily vaginal smears were also collected by gentle 
lavage with 50 µl of sterile PBS using a sterile 200-µl pipet-
ted tip. Stage of estrous cycle was confirmed by examining 
the proportion and morphology of leukocytes and epithelial 
cells present under a light microscope (Byers et al., 2012). 
Animals were followed for a minimum of two cycles, and 
those who did not have normal 4–5 d cycles were not used in 
this study. P14 chimeras for effector phase experiments were 
generated by adoptive transfer of ∼2 × 104 naive CD45.1+ 
P14 CD8+ T cells (P14 cells) on a RAG−/− background into 
CD45.2+ congenic WT recipient mice. For priming experi-
ments, P14 cells were labeled with 0.25 µM CFSE (Molecular 
Probes) at 37°C for 10 min, and ∼5 × 105 cells were trans-
ferred into each recipient mouse via retroorbital injection. 1 d 
later, mice were infected with 2 × 105 PFU of LCMVArm via 
i.vag., i.p., t.c, or s.c. route. Experiments were performed with 
two batches of LCMV
, with similar results. ZIKV strain PR
V 
ABC59 (Puerto Rico; 2015) was purchased from the ATCC 
(VR-1843). Stocks of ZIKV were propagated in Vero cells 
 
(CCL-81; ATCC), and viral titers were determined by fo-
cus-forming assay on LLC-MK2 cells (CCL-7; ATCC). For 
i.vag. infection, mice were anesthetized using isoflurane, and 
20 µl of viral suspension was inoculated into the vaginal cavity 
using a p200 micropipette, without causing abrasion. For t.c. 
infections, the same volume of LCMVArm was inoculated into 
one arm of the uterus using a gel-loading tip through a cut-off 
end of a P-200 pipet tip as a speculum, without causing any tis-
sue damage. 
The same dose of the virus in a 100-µl suspension 
was injected s.c. into the buttock next to the rectal opening.
Acitretin treatment
After 6 d of treatment with 1 mg/mouse Depo-provera, 20 µl 
of 2 mM acitretin (Sigma-Aldrich) in DMSO (Hsia et al., 
2008) was administered into the vaginal cavity at the indi-
cated times either before or after i.vag. ZIKV inoculation. 
All mice were anesthetized in an isoflurane chamber before 
administering the drug.
Isolation of immune cells and flow cytometry
LN and spleen tissues were processed into single-cell suspen-
sions. The vagina was separated from the urethra and cervix. 
The LFRT consisted of vaginal tissue and the transformation 
zone. LFRT or UFRT tissues from groups of mice (one to 
three mice per group) were digested in 1 mg/ml collage-
nase type IV (Worthington Biochemical Corporation) and 
75 µg/ml DNase I (Roche) in RPMI medium. Single-cell 
suspensions were obtained from the digested tissues using 
GentleMACS Dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol. For isolation of DC populations, 100 
units/ml of hyaluronidase (Sigma-Aldrich) was combined 
with collagenase IV and DNase I. Cell counts were obtained 
using an Accuri cytometer (BD), and cell numbers were nor-
malized before antibody surface staining.
After blocking Fc receptors with anti-CD16/CD32, sin-
gle-cell suspensions were incubated with a mixture of fluores-
cence-conjugated anti–mouse antibodies for 30 min at 4°C. 
Stained cells were washed once and acquired with an LSR II 
flow cytometer and FAC 
SDiva software (BD). AF700 CD8α 
(YTS169.4), PE-Cy7 CD8α (SK1), Percp-Cy5.5 CD45.1 
(A20), AF700 IAIE (MHC-II; M5/114.15.2), PE-Cy7 Ly6c 
(HK1.4), biotin EpCAM-1 (epithelial cell adhesion mole-
cule 1; G8.8), and APC-Cy7 CD11c (N418) antibodies were 
from BioLegend. BV421 CD40 (3/23), PE PD-L1 (MIH5), 
PE-CF594 Ly6G (1A8), PerCP-Cy5.5 CD11b (M1/70), 
BV605 CD44 (IM7), BV605 CD86 (GL-1), BV650 NK1.1 
(PK136), PE-CF594 CD25 (PC61), APC-Cy7 TCRβ (H57-
597), BV510 CD69 (H1.2F3), BV510 CD103 (M290), and 
biotin-conjugated NK1.1 (PK136) and TCRβ (H57-597) 
antibodies were from BD. AF488 CD25 (PC-61) and bio-
tin-conjugated CD19 (1D3) antibodies were from the Univer-
sity of California, San Francisco Monoclonal Antibody Core.
Immunohistology of LFrt tissues
For immunofluorescence staining, 4% paraformaldehyde- 
fixed cryosections were treated with 1% SDS, blocked 
with Tris-NaCl–blocking (TNB) buffer (T
yramide Signal 
 
 2927
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
Amplification kit; PerkinElmer) supplemented with 5% don-
key serum, and stained with a rat monoclonal antibody (VL4) 
against LCMV-nucleoprotein (LCMV-NP; Bio X Cell). After 
neutralizing endogenous peroxidase with 3% H2O2, sections 
were incubated with horseradish-peroxidase–coupled don-
key anti–rat immunoglobulin (Jackson ImmunoResearch 
Laboratories, Inc.). Epithelial cells were detected using an 
A647-conjugated monoclonal antibody (BioLegend) against 
EpCAM-1. LCMV-NP was visualized by incubating sections 
with tyramide-Cy3 (T
yramide Signal Amplification kit; Per-
kin Elmer). DNA/nuclei were visualized using DAPI. As 
negative controls, sections were stained without incubation 
with a primary antibody. Stained sections were observed by 
fluorescence microscopy (Axiovert 200 inverted microscope; 
 
ZEI 
SS). Green, red, and blue channel images were merged 
with AxioVision 4.8 software. Images were enhanced for 
color contrast using Photoshop CS2 software (Adobe).
rnA isolation and quantitative real-time Pcr
Isolated FRT tissues were chopped into small pieces, collected 
in TRIzol tubes filled with 3 mm of zirconium beads, and 
homogenized in three 10-s pulses using a Beadbug micro-
tube homogenizer (Benchmark Scientific). RNA was isolated 
with TRIzol reagent according to the manufacturer’s in-
structions (Invitrogen). 1–5 µg RNA was reverse transcribed 
into cDNA with a Maxima First Strand cDNA Synthesis kit 
with dsDNase (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Real-time PCR 
was performed using 2x SensiFAST probe Hi-Rox mix 
(Bioline) with gene-specific primers (Table S1) and run on an 
 
ABIPrism 7900 sequence detector with the ΔΔCt method 
from SDS 2.4 software (Applied Biosystems). The relative ex-
pression of genes was calculated with the formula 2−ΔCt, where 
ΔCt = Ct target gene − Ct endogenous control gene. Gapdh 
was used as the endogenous control housekeeping gene. 
Viral 
burden was determined from a standard curve produced using 
serial 10-fold dilutions of ZIKV RNA or LCMV plasmid.
statistical analysis
Prism 6.0 (GraphPad Software) was used for data analy-
sis. Statistical significance was determined by two-tailed 
 
Student’s t test for two groups. All experimental data were 
included in the statistical analyses. Analyses with a P-value 
≤0.05 were considered statistically significant. For lin-
ear regression analysis, the linear model was fit using fo-
cus-forming units (FFU) without log, and the log-10 
presentation is for visualization.
online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows gating strategy and maturation of Mig DCs in 
the iLN of LCMV-infected animals. Table S1 lists the primer 
sequences used for qRT
-PCR reactions used in this study.
AcKnoWLEdgMEnts
We thank M. Matloubian for LCMVArm stock and propagation protocols, J. Luong for 
help with maintaining the mouse colonies, and F. Wu for technical assistance. We are 
grateful to J. Cyster (University of California, San Francisco [UCSF]), M. Matloubian 
(UCSF), W. Greene (Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology/UCSF), and M. R. 
Jakobsen (Aarhus University) for critical reading of the manuscript and to G. Howard 
and C. Herron (Gladstone) for editorial assistance. This publication was made possible 
with help from the UCSF–Gladstone Institutes CFAR, an NIH-funded program (P30 
AI027763) supporting Gladstone’s flow core. The Gladstone Institutes received support 
for its animal care facility from a National Center for Research Resources grant (RR18928).
This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (NIH; 
DP2 AI112244), a University of California Hellman Award, a Center for AIDS Research 
(CFAR) Pilot Award (P30 AI027763 and CNI 
HR P30 AI027767 to S. Sanjabi), a 
California Institute for Regenerative Medicine/Gladstone Institutes Fellowship (TG2-
01160), a CFAR Mentored Scientist Award (P30 AI027763 to S. Khan), and a grant 
from the NIH (R01 AI097552 to M. Ott). 
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: conceptualization, S. Sanjabi and S. Khan; methodology, 
S. Khan, A. Ezaki, and S. Sanjabi; formal analysis, S. Khan; investigation, S. Khan., E.M. 
Woodruff, M. Trapecar, and T.C. Borbet; resources, M. Ott and K.A. Fontaine; writing 
(original draft), S. Sanjabi and S. Khan; writing (review and editing), S. Sanjabi, S. 
Khan, M. Trapecar, M. Ott, and K.A. Fontaine; visualization, S. Khan and S. Sanjabi; 
supervision, S. Sanjabi and S. Khan; and funding acquisition, S. Sanjabi and M. Ott.
Submitted: 8 August 2016
Revised: 17 September 2016
Accepted: 17 October 2016
rEFErEncEs
Ashkar, A.A., X.D. Yao, N. Gill, D. Sajic, A.J. Patrick, and K.L. Rosenthal. 
2004. T
oll-like receptor (TLR)-3, but not TLR4, agonist protects against 
genital herpes infection in the absence of inflammation seen with CpG 
DNA. J. Infect. Dis. 190:1841–1849. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1086 
/425079
Barouch, D.H., K. Ghneim, W
.J. Bosche, Y
. Li, B. Berkemeier, M. Hull, S. 
Bhattacharyya, M. Cameron, J. Liu, K. Smith, et al. 2016. Rapid 
inflammasome activation following mucosal SIV infection of Rhesus 
monkeys. Cell. 165:656–667. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2016 
.03 
.021
Barton, L.L., M.B. Mets, and C.L. Beauchamp. 2002. Lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis virus: emerging fetal teratogen. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 
187:1715–1716. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1067 
/mob 
.2002 
.126297
Belkaid, Y
., and S. Naik. 2013. Compartmentalized and systemic control of 
tissue immunity by commensals. Nat. Immunol. 14:646–653. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ni 
.2604
Black, C.A., L.C. Rohan, M. Cost, S.C. 
Watkins, R. Draviam, S. Alber, and R.P
. 
Edwards. 2000. Vaginal mucosa serves as an inductive site for tolerance. 
J. Immunol. 165:5077–5083. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.165 
.9 
.5077
Brooks, J.T., A. Friedman, R.E. Kachur, M. LaFlam, P
.J. Peters, and D.J. 
Jamieson. 2016. Update: Interim guidance for prevention of sexual 
transmission of Zika virus – United States, July 2016. MMWR Morb. 
Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 65:745–747. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.15585 
/mmwr 
.mm6529e2
Byers, S.L., M.V
. Wiles, S.L. Dunn, and R.A. Taft. 2012. Mouse estrous cycle 
identification tool and images. PLoS One. 7:e35538. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pone 
.0035538
Casey, K.A., K.A. Fraser, J.M. Schenkel, A. Moran, M.C. Abt, L.K. Beura, 
P
.J. Lucas, D. Artis, E.J. Wherry, K. Hogquist, et al. 2012. Antigen-
independent differentiation and maintenance of effector-like resident 
memory T cells in tissues. J. Immunol. 188:4866–4875. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.1200402
Christie, A., G.J. Davies-Wayne, T. Cordier-Lassalle, D.J. Blackley, A.S. Laney, 
D.E. Williams, S.A. Shinde, M. Badio, T. Lo, S.E. Mate, et al. Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. 2015. Possible sexual transmission of 
Ebola virus - Liberia, 2015. MMWR Morb. Mortal. 
Wkly. Rep. 64:479–481.
 Dampened immunity to vaginal RNA virus exposure | Khan et al.
2928
D’Ortenzio, E., S. Matheron, 
Y
. 
Yazdanpanah, X. de Lamballerie, B. Hubert, G. 
Piorkowski, M. Maquart, D. Descamps, F
. Damond, and I. Leparc-Goffart. 
2016. Evidence of sexual transmission of Zika virus. N. Engl. J. Med. 
374:2195–2198. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1056 
/NEJMc1604449
Erlebacher, A. 2013. Mechanisms of T cell tolerance towards the allogeneic 
fetus. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13:23–33. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri3361
Fukao, T., and S. Koyasu. 2000. Expression of functional IL-2 receptors 
on mature splenic dendritic cells. Eur. J. Immunol. 30:1453–
1457. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/(SICI)1521 
-4141(200005)30 
:5<1453::AID-IMMU1453>3.0.CO;2-W
Fung-Leung, W
.P
., M.W
. Schilham, A. Rahemtulla, T.M. Kündig, M. 
Vollenweider, J. Potter, 
W
. van Ewijk, and 
T.W
. Mak. 1991. CD8 is needed 
for development of cytotoxic T but not helper T cells. Cell. 65:443–449. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0092 
-8674(91)90462 
-8
Gill, N., P
.M. Deacon, B. Lichty, K.L. Mossman, and A.A. Ashkar. 2006. 
Induction of innate immunity against herpes simplex virus type 2 
infection via local delivery of Toll-like receptor ligands correlates with 
beta interferon production. J. Virol. 80:9943–9950. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.01036 
-06
Grant, A., S.S. Ponia, S. 
Tripathi, 
V
. Balasubramaniam, L. Miorin, M. Sourisseau, 
M.C. Schwarz, M.P
. Sánchez-Seco, M.J. Evans, S.M. Best, and A. García-
Sastre. 2016. Zika virus targets human STAT2 to inhibit type I interferon 
signaling. Cell Host Microbe. 19:882–890. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.chom 
.2016 
.05 
.009
Granucci, F
., D.M. Andrews, M.A. Degli-Esposti, and P
. Ricciardi-Castagnoli. 
2002. IL-2 mediates adjuvant effect of dendritic cells. Trends Immunol. 
23:169–171. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S1471 
-4906(02)02187 
-7
Griffith, J.W
., C.L. Sokol, and A.D. Luster. 2014. Chemokines and chemokine 
receptors: positioning cells for host defense and immunity. Annu. Rev. 
Immunol. 32:659–702. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1146 
/annurev 
-immunol 
-032713 
-120145
Harrower, J., T. Kiedrzynski, S. Baker, A. Upton, F
. Rahnama, J. Sherwood, 
Q.S. Huang, A. Todd, and D. Pulford. 2016. Sexual transmission of Zika 
virus and persistence in semen, New Zealand, 2016. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 
22:1855–1857. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3201 
/eid2210 
.160951
Herbst-Kralovetz, M.M., and R.B. Pyles. 2006. Quantification of poly(I:C)-
mediated protection against genital herpes simplex virus type 2 infection. 
J. Virol. 80:9988–9997. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.01099 
-06
Hsia, E., M.J. Johnston, R.J. Houlden, W
.H. Chern, and H.E. Hofland. 2008. 
Effects of topically applied acitretin in reconstructed human epidermis 
and the rhino mouse. J. Invest. Dermatol. 128:125–130. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/sj 
.jid 
.5700968
Iversen, M.B., L.S. Reinert, M.K. Thomsen, I. Bagdonaite, R. Nandakumar, 
N. Cheshenko, T. Prabakaran, S.Y
. Vakhrushev, M. Krzyzowska, S.K. 
Kratholm, et al. 2016. An innate antiviral pathway acting before 
interferons at epithelial surfaces. Nat. Immunol. 17:150–158. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ni 
.3319
Iwasaki, A. 2007. Mucosal dendritic cells. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 25:381–418. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1146 
/annurev 
.immunol 
.25 
.022106 
.141634
Iwasaki, A. 2010. Antiviral immune responses in the genital tract: clues for 
vaccines. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 10:699–711. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nri2836
Iwasaki, A., and R. Medzhitov. 2015. Control of adaptive immunity by the 
innate immune system. Nat. Immunol. 16:343–353. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ni 
.3123
Kumamoto, Y
., and A. Iwasaki. 2012. Unique features of antiviral immune 
system of the vaginal mucosa. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 24:411–416. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.coi 
.2012 
.05 
.006
Lazear, H.M., and M.S. Diamond. 2016. Zika virus: New clinical syndromes 
and its emergence in the Western hemisphere. J. Virol. 90:4864–4875. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.00252 
-16
Lazear, H.M., J. Govero, A.M. Smith, D.J. Platt, E. Fernandez, J.J. Miner, and 
M.S. Diamond. 2016. A mouse model of Zika virus pathogenesis. Cell 
Host Microbe. 19:720–730. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.chom 
.2016 
.03 
.010
Lessler, J., L.H. Chaisson, L.M. Kucirka, Q. Bi, K. Grantz, H. Salje, A.C. 
Carcelen, C.T. Ott, J.S. Sheffield, N.M. Ferguson, et al. 2016. Assessing 
the global threat from Zika virus. Science. 353:aaf8160. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.aaf8160
Li, P
., P
. Kaiser, H.W
. Lampiris, P
. Kim, S.A. Yukl, D.V
. Havlir, W
.C. Greene, 
and J.K. Wong. 2016. Stimulating the RIG-I pathway to kill cells in the 
latent HIV reservoir following viral reactivation. Nat. Med. 22:807–811. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm 
.4124
Madsen, L., N. Labrecque, J. Engberg, A. Dierich, A. Svejgaard, C. Benoist, D. 
Mathis, and L. Fugger. 1999. Mice lacking all conventional MHC class II 
genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 96:10338–10343. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.96 
.18 
.10338
Mahlakõiv, T., P
. Hernandez, K. Gronke, A. Diefenbach, and P
. Staeheli. 
2015. Leukocyte-derived IFN-α/β and epithelial IFN-λ constitute a 
compartmentalized mucosal defense system that restricts enteric virus 
infections. PLoS Pathog. 11:e1004782. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/
journal 
.ppat 
.1004782
Marks, E., M.A. 
Tam, and N.Y
. Lycke. 2010. 
The female lower genital tract is a 
privileged compartment with IL-10 producing dendritic cells and poor 
Th1 immunity following Chlamydia trachomatis infection. PLoS Pathog. 
6:e1001179. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.ppat 
.1001179
McCausland, M.M., and S. Crotty. 2008. Quantitative PCR technique for 
detecting lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus in vivo. J. Virol. Methods. 
147:167–176. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jviromet 
.2007 
.08 
.025
Moldenhauer, L.M., K.R. Diener, D.M. Thring, M.P
. Brown, J.D. Hayball, 
and S.A. Robertson. 2009. Cross-presentation of male seminal fluid 
antigens elicits T cell activation to initiate the female immune response 
to pregnancy. J. Immunol. 182:8080–8093. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/
jimmunol 
.0804018
Mombaerts, P
., J. Iacomini, R.S. Johnson, K. Herrup, S. Tonegawa, and V
.E. 
Papaioannou. 1992. RAG-1-deficient mice have no mature B and T 
lymphocytes. 
Cell. 
68:869–877. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0092 
-8674(92)90030 
-G
Munoz-Suano, A., A.B. Hamilton, and A.G. Betz. 2011. Gimme shelter: the 
immune system during pregnancy. Immunol. Rev. 241:20–38. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1600 
-065X 
.2011 
.01002 
.x
Musso, D., C. Roche, E. Robin, T. Nhan, A. Teissier, and 
V
.M. Cao-Lormeau. 
2015. Potential sexual transmission of Zika virus. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 
21:359–361. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3201 
/eid2102 
.141363
Nurkkala, M., I. Nordström, E. T
elemo, and K. Eriksson. 2007. MHC 
expression and chemokine production in the murine vagina following 
intra-vaginal administration of ligands to toll-like receptors 3, 7 and 9. J. 
Reprod. Immunol. 73:148–157. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jri 
.2006 
.09 
.001
Ochiel, D.O., M. Ghosh, J.V
. Fahey, P
.M. Guyre, and C.R. 
Wira. 2010. Human 
uterine epithelial cell secretions regulate dendritic cell differentiation 
and responses to TLR ligands. J. Leukoc. Biol. 88:435–444. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1189 
/jlb 
.1009700
Oh, J.E., B.C. Kim, D.H. Chang, M. Kwon, S.Y
. Lee, D. Kang, J.Y
. Kim, I. 
Hwang, J.W
. 
Yu, S. Nakae, and H.K. Lee. 2016. Dysbiosis-induced IL-33 
contributes to impaired antiviral immunity in the genital mucosa. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 113:E762–E771. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1518589113
Olson, M.R., D.S. McDermott, and S.M. Varga. 2012. The initial draining 
lymph node primes the bulk of the CD8 T cell response and influences 
 2929
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
memory T cell trafficking after a systemic viral infection. PLoS Pathog. 
8:e1003054. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.ppat 
.1003054
Perez-Lopez, A., J. Behnsen, S.P
. Nuccio, and M. Raffatellu. 2016. Mucosal 
immunity to pathogenic intestinal bacteria. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16:135–
148. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri 
.2015 
.17
Pircher, H., D. Moskophidis, U. Rohrer, K. Bürki, H. Hengartner, and R.M. 
Zinkernagel. 1990. 
Viral escape by selection of cytotoxic T cell-resistant 
virus variants in vivo. Nature. 346:629–633. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/346629a0
Rossi, S.L., R.B. Tesh, S.R. Azar, A.E. Muruato, K.A. Hanley, A.J. Auguste, 
R.M. Langsjoen, S. Paessler, N. Vasilakis, and S.C. Weaver. 2016. 
Characterization of a novel murine model to study Zika virus. Am. J. 
Trop. Med. Hyg. 94:1362–1369. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4269 
/ajtmh 
.16 
-0111
Sato, M., H. Suemori, N. Hata, M. Asagiri, K. Ogasawara, K. Nakao, 
T. Nakaya, 
M. Katsuki, S. Noguchi, N. Tanaka, and T. Taniguchi. 2000. Distinct and 
essential roles of transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 in response to 
viruses for IFN-α/β gene induction. Immunity. 13:539–548. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S1074 
-7613(00)00053 
-4
Schenkel, J.M., K.A. Fraser, 
V
. 
Vezys, and D. Masopust. 2013. Sensing and alarm 
function of resident memory CD8+ T cells. Nat. Immunol. 14:509–513. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ni 
.2568
Stary, G., A. Olive, A.F
. Radovic-Moreno, D. Gondek, D. Alvarez, P
.A. Basto, 
M. Perro, V
.D. Vrbanac, A.M. Tager, J. Shi, et al. 2015. A mucosal vaccine 
against Chlamydia trachomatis generates two waves of protective 
memory T cells. Science. 348:aaa8205. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/
science 
.aaa8205
Suvas, P
.K., H.M. Dech, F
. Sambira, J. Zeng, and T.M. Onami. 2007. Systemic 
and mucosal infection program protective memory CD8 T cells in the 
vaginal mucosa. J. Immunol. 179:8122–8127. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.179 
.12 
.8122
Takeuchi, O., and S. Akira. 2010. Pattern recognition receptors and 
inflammation. Cell. 140:805–820. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2010 
.01 
.022
Trinchieri, G. 2010. T
ype I interferon: friend or foe? J. Exp. Med. 207:2053–
2063. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20101664
Turmel, J.M., P
. Abgueguen, B. Hubert, Y
.M. Vandamme, M. Maquart, 
H. Le Guillou-Guillemette, and I. Leparc-Goffart. 2016. Late sexual 
transmission of Zika virus related to persistence in the semen. Lancet. 
387:2501. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0140 
-6736(16)30775 
-9
Warning, J.C., S.A. McCracken, and J.M. Morris. 2011. A balancing act: 
mechanisms by which the fetus avoids rejection by the maternal immune 
system. Reproduction. 141:715–724. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1530 
/REP 
-10 
-0360
Wira, C.R., M. Rodriguez-Garcia, and M.V
. Patel. 2015. The role of sex 
hormones in immune protection of the female reproductive tract. Nat. 
Rev. Immunol. 15:217–230. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nri3819
Wuest, S.C., J.H. Edwan, J.F
. Martin, S. Han, J.S. Perry, C.M. Cartagena, E. 
Matsuura, D. Maric, T.A. Waldmann, and B. Bielekova. 2011. A role 
for interleukin-2 trans-presentation in dendritic cell-mediated T cell 
activation in humans, as revealed by daclizumab therapy. Nat. Med. 
17:604–609. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm 
.2365
Yiu, Z.Z., R.B. Warren, U. Mrowietz, and C.E. Griffiths. 2015. Safety of 
conventional systemic therapies for psoriasis on reproductive potential 
and outcomes. J. Dermatolog. Treat. 26:329–334. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3109 
/09546634 
.2014 
.991673
Y
ockey, L.J., L. Varela, T. Rakib, W
. Khoury-Hanold, S.L. Fink, B. Stutz, K. 
Szigeti-Buck, A. Van den Pol, B.D. Lindenbach, T.L. Horvath, and A. 
Iwasaki. 2016. Vaginal exposure to Zika virus during pregnancy leads 
to fetal brain infection. Cell. 166:1247–1256.e4. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2016 
.08 
.004
Zhao, X., E. Deak, K. Soderberg, M. Linehan, D. Spezzano, J. Zhu, D.M. 
Knipe, and A. Iwasaki. 2003. Vaginal submucosal dendritic cells, but not 
Langerhans cells, induce protective Th1 responses to herpes simplex 
virus-2. J. Exp. Med. 197:153–162. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20021109
Zhou, X., S. Ramachandran, M. Mann, and D.L. Popkin. 2012. Role of 
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) in understanding viral 
immunology: past, present and future. Viruses. 4:2650–2669. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3390 
/v4112650
