 1 3
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43
DOI 10.1007/s00394-016-1345-3
REVIEW
Controversies about sugars: results from systematic reviews 
and meta‑analyses on obesity, cardiometabolic disease 
and diabetes
Tauseef A. Khan1,2 · John L. Sievenpiper1,2,3,4 
Received: 13 April 2016 / Accepted: 7 November 2016 / Published online: 30 November 2016 
© The Author(s) 2016. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
and cardiometabolic risk including weight gain, cardiovas-
cular disease outcomes and diabetes only when restricted 
to sugar-sweetened beverages and not for sugars from other 
sources. In fact, sugar-sweetened beverages are a marker 
of an unhealthy lifestyle and their drinkers consume more 
calories, exercise less, smoke more and have a poor dietary 
pattern. The potential for overconsumption of sugars in the 
form of sugary foods and drinks makes targeting sugars, as 
a source of excess calories, a prudent strategy. However, 
sugar content should not be the sole determinant of a healthy 
diet. There are many other factors in the diet—some provid-
ing excess calories while others provide beneficial nutrients. 
Rather than just focusing on one energy source, we should 
consider the whole diet for health benefits.
Keywords Sugars · Fructose · Obesity · Overweight · 
Diabetes · Cardiovascular disease · Review
Introduction
Overconsumption of dietary sugars with their potential to 
cause cardiometabolic disease has emerged as an important 
public health issue, highlighted by the vast coverage given 
in academic journals and the popular press. Special focus 
is on the fructose moiety within sugars due to the former’s 
unique metabolic and endocrine response. Fructose-con-
taining sugars that are ‘added’ to our diets are alleged to 
be an important risk factor for the development of obesity 
[1], cardiometabolic disease [2] including metabolic syn-
drome [3] and diabetes [4]. Leading organizations includ-
ing the World Health Organization (WHO) [5] and Cana-
dian Diabetes Association (CDA) [6] have recommended 
a reduction in added sugar. The case against the harms of 
fructose-containing sugars appears straightforward at first, 
Abstract Fructose-containing sugars are a focus of atten-
tion as a public health target for their putative role in obe-
sity and cardiometabolic disease including diabetes. The 
fructose moiety is singled out to be the primary driver for 
the harms of sugars due to its unique endocrine signal and 
pathophysiological role. However, this is only supported by 
ecological studies, animal models of overfeeding and select 
human intervention studies with supraphysiological doses or 
lack of control for energy. The highest level of evidence from 
systematic reviews and meta-analyses of controlled trials has 
not shown that fructose-containing sugars behave any differ-
ently from other forms of digestible carbohydrates. Fructose-
containing sugars can only lead to weight gain and other 
unintended harms on cardiometabolic risk factors insofar as 
the excess calories they provide. Prospective cohort studies, 
which provide the strongest observational evidence, have 
shown an association between fructose-containing sugars 
This article belongs to a supplement sponsored by Rippe Health.
This paper was previously presented by JLS in the session 
‘Controversies about sugar consumption’ at the 12th European 
Nutrition Conference FENS 2015, Berlin, Germany, 21 October 
2015.
 
* John L. Sievenpiper 
 
john.sievenpiper@utoronto.ca
1 
Department of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
2 
Toronto 3D Knowledge Synthesis and Clinical Trials Unit, 
Clinical Nutrition and Risk Factor Modification Centre, St. 
Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada
3 
Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, St. Michael’s 
Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada
4 
Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael’s Hospital, 
Toronto, ON, Canada
 S26  
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43
1 3
but in reality the debate is more nuanced. It was just in 
recent past that saturated fat was of public health concern 
for its adverse effects on obesity and cardiovascular dis-
ease—though the blame has now been shifted to fructose-
containing sugars [7, 8]. In this paper we aim to present 
a review of the highest level of evidence on dietary sug-
ars and their effect on obesity and cardiometabolic disease 
including important considerations that sheds light on some 
of the controversies around this topic.
Historical roots
The story of dietary sugars and their potential harms on our 
health has oscillated several times over the past five dec-
ades as more scientific evidence on this topic came to light. 
Hence, it is important to give a brief historical background 
to the scientific controversy surrounding dietary sugars. 
The sugar debate first started in the 1970s when opposite 
positions were presented as explanations for the epidemic 
of cardiovascular disease. In the 1970, the American bio-
chemist Ancel Keys, using his seven countries ecological 
study, argued for a role of saturated fat in heart disease [9], 
while in 1972 John Yudkin, a British nutritionist, warned 
in his book, ‘Pure, White and Deadly’ that dietary sugars 
were responsible for the rise in heart disease and diabetes 
[10]. At that time, the fat hypothesis gained general accept-
ance, and for the next four decades, low-fat dietary advice 
became part of many national nutritional guidelines with 
the aim of reducing the risk of chronic diseases like cardio-
vascular disease [11].
Dietary sugars came into forefront again in 2004 when 
Dr. George Bray, an eminent obesity researcher, published 
an ecological study that showed a parallel rise between 
overweight/obesity and fructose-containing sugars in the 
USA [12]. In an ecological study, the units of analysis are 
populations or groups of people rather than individuals; 
therefore, any conclusions derived may not apply to indi-
viduals; to do so erroneously is known as ecological fal-
lacy [13]. It is also well recognized that an ecological study 
represents a very weak level of evidence [14], and Dr. Bray, 
rightly, presented his findings as hypothesis generating 
rather than causal.
Dr. Bray’s study sparked a real interest in this field and 
kick-started a new sugar debate that has continued fiercely 
to this day. Dr. Robert Lustig, a paediatrician from Univer-
sity of California San Francisco, in 2009 made a passionate 
case against fructose in the popular YouTube video, ‘Sugar: 
The bitter truth’ [15] that currently (November 2016) has 
more than six-and-a-half million views. This YouTube 
video was followed by a steady increase in the number of 
editorials, commentaries and opinion pieces in scientific lit-
erature that denoted added fructose and its related sugars 
[sucrose and high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS)] as health 
hazards while calling for measures to restrict their intake 
[1, 16–20]. In the past several years traditional and social 
media caught up with the scientific debate and have now 
published numerous popular books, mainstream docu-
mentaries and newspaper headlines portraying fructose-
containing sugars as being toxic [21–23]. The public gets a 
confusing message as several nutrition researchers stand in 
opposite camps on the harms of fructose-containing sugars 
debate [24, 25]. Controversies regarding ties of research-
ers with the sugar industry have further fuelled the debate, 
e.g. it was recently reported that when writing an influ-
ential review paper that downplayed the harms of sugars 
several decades ago, the authors did not disclose their ties 
with the sugar industry [26]. It is debatable whether these 
ties bias the work that researchers perform; however, exist-
ence of such ties has turned a purely scientific dialogue into 
an intensely emotional one. It is clear that the message of 
the harms of sugars is much louder and dietary sugars are 
now squarely blamed for the rising epidemic of obesity and 
chronic disease in the Western nations, and with some even 
drawing strong parallels with tobacco [27]. The question 
that remains is whether, based on the best available sci-
entific evidence, this clarion call against dietary sugars is 
justified?
At first glance, the case presented against sugars is 
quite persuasive, which hinges on implicating the fruc-
tose moiety for its unique metabolic and endocrine 
responses. Fructose is present in all main dietary sugars 
except for milk. Proponents of this fructose-centric view 
present ecological data, supporting it with animal stud-
ies and human mechanistic studies that show adverse 
effects of fructose in very high doses [28]. This evidence 
is backed by sound biochemical plausibility which indi-
cates that fructose, unlike glucose, acts as an unregulated 
metabolic de novo substrate for fatty acid synthesis in the 
liver as it bypasses the main rate-limiting steps of gly-
colysis [29]. A new hypothesis of metabolic syndrome 
that involves fructose-induced increases in uric acid via 
the depletion of intracellular adenosine triphosphate fur-
ther supports the plausibility of fructose’ special meta-
bolic role [30]. Other likely mechanisms of harm relate 
to fructose’ unique endocrine signature, whereby fructose 
does not stimulate insulin, or the ‘satiety hormone’ lep-
tin, nor suppresses the ‘hunger hormone’ ghrelin, leading 
to an overall impaired satiety signalling [31]. Functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies suggest that 
fructose differentially stimulates hypothalamic centres 
associated with the regulation of food intake and reward 
compared with glucose [32]. Other mechanisms may 
relate to hedonic pathways, whereby fructose-containing 
sugary foods are over-consumed owing to their high pal-
atability and an inability to compensate for the energy 
 S27
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43 
1 3
consumed in liquid form, such as sugar-sweetened bever-
ages (SSBs) [2, 33].
It is worth noting that the bulk of the biochemical and 
metabolic evidence presented against fructose is based on 
rodent models [4, 30, 34] and human mechanistic studies 
[4, 32, 35]. As reviewed recently by Van Buul et al. [36], 
these human mechanistic studies are insufficient to dem-
onstrate a causal role of fructose in metabolic diseases as 
these often involve feeding large amounts of pure fructose 
without concomitant glucose intake. However, fructose is 
commonly ingested in an almost 1:1 ratio with glucose, e.g. 
as the table sugar sucrose, which is a disaccharide made of 
the monosaccharides fructose and glucose; as fructose and 
glucose in high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) found in SSBs; 
as fructose, glucose and sucrose found in fruit and honey. 
In parallel, ecological observations that link increase in 
fructose availability with increase in obesity, diabetes and 
hypertension [3, 12, 37] are offered as compelling proof 
that these mechanisms are indeed in operation. Even so, 
animal and ecological studies should only be considered 
to be hypothesis generating owing to their indirectness and 
many potential sources of bias. Moreover, extrapolation 
of the above mechanisms from animal models to humans 
needs to be done carefully, with the understanding of limi-
tation due to biochemical and physiological differences that 
exist [38]. In the case of dietary sugars, it is still unclear 
whether the high doses given in animal models apply to 
the median level of fructose consumption in humans, and 
whether they then lead to meaningful downstream out-
comes. For example, there are differences between rodents 
and humans on how fructose is metabolically handled 
in the liver. Typically, in the human liver, 50% of a fruc-
tose load is converted into glucose, 25% into lactate and 
approximately 15% into glycogen [39]. Stable isotope 
tracer studies have found that de novo lipogenesis pathway 
for fructose in humans is very minor (<1%) at moderate 
intake and up to 5% in overfed state, but in mice livers de 
novo lipogenesis pathway converts typically ~30% of fruc-
tose to triglycerides and reaches beyond >50% in overfed 
states [36, 40].
Several international and national health authorities have 
recently changed their dietary guidelines recommending 
a restriction in dietary sugars intake. Is this recommen-
dation based on evidence of harm in relation to obesity, 
diabetes and cardiovascular disease? A careful review of 
these guidelines reveals that most of these guidelines use 
evidence from dental harms and caloric harms associated 
with excess sugar, especially SSB intake. The WHO rec-
ommended added sugars to be <10% of total daily energy 
intake based on observational data from dental caries [5]. 
This amounts to <50 g (12 teaspoons) of added sugars/
day based on a typical 2000-kilocalorie diet. The term 
‘free sugars’ (we use the equivalent term ‘added sugars’ 
throughout this paper) is defined by WHO as ‘monosac-
charides and disaccharides added to foods and beverages 
by the manufacturer, cook or consumer, and sugars natu-
rally present in honey, syrups, fruit juices and fruit juice 
concentrates’ [5]. This definition does not include ‘intrinsic 
sugars’, which are those ‘incorporated within the structure 
of intact fruit and vegetables’ or ‘sugars from milk (lactose 
and galactose)’. Dietary Guidelines Advisory Commit-
tee (DGAC) that informs the US Department of Agricul-
ture (USDA) dietary recommendations provided a similar 
recommendation to reduce calories from added sugars to 
<10% based on dietary pattern modelling [41]. Scien-
tific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (SACN) of the UK 
(UK) used clinical trial data to show that high sugar intake 
was associated with high energy intake—so both need to 
be reduced—and recommended <5% intake of added sug-
ars [42]. The Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada fol-
lowed the WHO recommendation, but in addition to citing 
evidence from dental caries, it also assessed evidence indi-
cating that excess sugars (using SSB data from prospec-
tive cohort studies) consumption is associated with adverse 
health effects including heart disease, stroke, obesity, 
diabetes, high blood pressure, cancer to support a recom-
mendation of <10% dietary intake of energy from sugars 
[43]. Similarly, using evidence from prospective cohort 
studies of SSB intake on risk of obesity and diabetes, the 
CDA also submitted a position statement in September 
2015 recommending <10% calories to come from added 
sugars [6]. The Nordic Nutrition Recommendations of 
2012 also called for a restriction of added sugars to be kept 
below 10% total energy intake [44]. The evidence used 
in this case was threefold: (1) restriction on added sugars 
will ensure adequate intake of micronutrients and dietary 
fibre while supporting a healthy dietary pattern, (2) SSBs 
are associated with an increased risk of type-2 diabetes and 
excess weight gain and should, therefore, be limited, and 
(3) avoidance of frequent consumption of sugar-contain-
ing foods can reduce risk of dental caries. It is worth not-
ing that in all of the above guidelines, the major focus was 
on restricting calories from added sugars especially in the 
form of SSBs, which suggests that more consideration was 
given to calories rather than any unique biochemical sig-
nal from fructose-containing sugars. Indeed, there was no 
restriction on fruits and vegetables which also contribute to 
fructose-containing sugars in the diet.
Dietary sugars intake has become a charged and emotive 
issue, both academically and in the media, and it is essen-
tial that we separate statements and opinions from the clini-
cal evidence produced by high-quality research studies. 
Careful consideration should be given to the totality of evi-
dence in this debate including the highest level of evidence 
from human clinical studies. It seems premature to provide 
human mechanistic studies as proof of harm in the absence 
 S28  
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43
1 3
of clear evidence of adverse effects of fructose on clinically 
meaningful outcomes. The major question that needs to 
be answered is: is there something special about fructose 
metabolism that increases the risk of obesity and chronic 
disease, or is the harm is related just to the excess calories 
it provides. In this review, we aim to present a synthesis 
of the highest quality evidence involving human subjects to 
answer this question.
Level of evidence
Figure 1 shows the hierarchy of evidence, initially devel-
oped by the Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health 
Examination to help decide on priorities when searching 
for studies to answer clinical questions [45] and was subse-
quently adopted by the US Preventive Services Task Force 
[46]. This evidence-based framework represents a univer-
sally recognized accepted standard that informs public 
health policy and clinical practice guidelines, and it shows 
that the best source of evidence comes from randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs) because they offer the best pro-
tection from bias [47]. The only level of observational evi-
dence that informs public health policy and clinical prac-
tice guidelines is prospective cohort studies, and we will 
start our presentation from this level of evidence.
Evidence from prospective cohort studies
Prospective cohort studies are characterized by a long-
term longitudinal follow-up, good measurement of dietary 
exposures, superior ascertainment of incidence of disease 
and mortality outcomes (and not just surrogate markers) 
and the ability to adjust for multiple confounding factors 
[48]. These advantages enable prospective cohort studies to 
present some of the strongest evidence from observational 
studies for assessing the relation of dietary sugars exposure 
to obesity, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. While this 
makes prospective cohort studies a good place to look at 
the question of sugars and incidence of disease, drawing 
clear inferences from prospective cohort studies is some-
what complicated by the form in which fructose-containing 
sugars are consumed as the majority of evidence is avail-
able only from SSBs.
A WHO-commissioned systematic review and meta-
analysis of prospective cohort studies did not find any asso-
ciation between total fructose-containing sugars and body 
weight [49]. Similarly, large prospective cohort studies 
have not shown any association with diabetes [50], hyper-
tension [51] and coronary heart disease (CHD) [52]. One 
exception is gout where it was associated with fructose 
consumption in a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
prospective cohort studies [53].
Regular consumption of SSBs indicates that it can lead 
to weight gain and substantially increase risk of developing 
cardiometabolic diseases [54]. A WHO-commissioned sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of 38 prospective cohort 
studies showed a significant association between SSBs and 
the risk of overweight/obesity in children and weight gain 
in adults [49]. Another meta-analysis of 22 prospective 
cohort studies found similar results in both children and 
adults [55]. In like manner, a systematic review and meta-
analysis of 17 prospective cohort studies showed a similar 
adverse association between SSBs and incident diabetes 
[56]. Significant relationship of SSBs also exists with meta-
bolic syndrome [57], hypertension [58], CHD [59, 60], 
stroke [61] and gout [62].
Meanwhile, pooled analyses involving many of the same 
prospective cohort studies that were used in the analysis of 
SSBs did not find harmful relationships between type 2 dia-
betes and total dietary sources of sugars (liquid or solid), 
Fig. 1  Hierarchy of evidence in 
evidence-based medicine
 S29
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43 
1 3
total sucrose, total fructose [63] or other sources of added 
fructose such as 100% fruit juice [64] and cakes and cook-
ies [65]. In fact, some sources of sugars including whole-
grain cereals [66], yogurt [67] and ice cream [67] showed 
a positive benefit with type 2 diabetes (see Fig. 2). This 
does not necessarily mean that ice cream might be benefi-
cial for type 2 diabetes, but highlights the complexity of the 
relationship between the dietary source of sugars and dis-
ease outcomes [68]. To make matters even more complex, 
another important source of fructose-containing sugars, 
fruits and vegetables, has consistently shown to reduce the 
risk of type 2 diabetes [69], CHD and total mortality [70] in 
pooled analyses of large prospective cohort studies.
Are sugar‑sweetened beverages a special case?
The contrast of results between sugars provided by SSBs 
and sugars from other food sources is striking; the former 
shows a consistent signal of harm, while the latter shows 
either no harm or a benefit. These results suggest that sug-
ars from SSBs might be a special case and this assertion 
is supported by several plausible explanations. One, the 
association might be related to energy as the observed asso-
ciations between SSBs and cardiometabolic diseases only 
remain significant at the highest quantiles of exposures and 
do not remain significant at mean levels of exposures for 
USA, the exception being gout [53]. The disappearance or 
marked attenuation of the effect of SSBs on weight gain 
after adjustment for total energy in one meta-analysis [55] 
and on diabetes risk after adjustment of adiposity [56], a 
proxy of high caloric intake, in another meta-analysis sug-
gests that the effect of SSBs on cardiometabolic diseases 
appears to be highly mediated by energy. Two, it is pos-
sible that liquid calories from SSBs beverages are poorly 
compensated for by a decrease in total energy intake com-
pared to solid calories, leading to weight gain and down-
stream cardiometabolic diseases. This hypothesis, however, 
remains unproven compared to acute preload trials which 
show that liquid calories were less compensated than solid 
calories [33]. Long-term trials on this subject designed to 
assess whether this lack of compensation results in weight 
gain have been inconclusive [71, 72]. In contrast to SSBs, 
liquid calories from 100% pure fruit juice have also not 
shown reliable associations with diabetes or cardiometa-
bolic diseases [56, 64]. Three, SSBs are easier to measure 
in research studies, e.g. number of cans of sweetened bev-
erages like Coca-Cola can be recalled with precise fidelity, 
which is not the case for other sources of fructose-contain-
ing sugars. The latter are usually estimated from individual 
foods leading to increased measurement error due to the 
imprecise nature of portions and the actual content of sug-
ars. Four, compared to SSBs, others sugar sources include 
nutrient-dense fruits and vegetables as well as whole-grain 
products that contain potential health-enhancing nutrients, 
fibre and phytochemicals. In fact, these sources of sugars 
Fig. 2  Sources of sugars and incident type 2 diabetes. Adapted from 
[68]. Summary estimates (diamonds) were derived from pooled risk 
ratios for comparison of extreme quantiles (the highest level of expo-
sure compared with the lowest level of exposure). The one exception 
was for cakes and cookies, which compared the highest level of expo-
sure with the middle level of exposure; the reference exposure that 
was associated with the lowest risk. Data are expressed as risk ratios 
with 95% CIs. Asterisks indicate significant interstudy heterogeneity 
as assessed by the Cochran Q statistic and quantified by the I2 statis-
tic at a significance level of P < .10. SSBs sugar-sweetened beverages
 S30  
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43
1 3
have been associated with weight loss and improved meta-
bolic outcomes in large prospective cohort studies [69, 70, 
73] and randomized dietary trials [74, 75] and, as such, 
may balance any harms associated with sugars. Five, SSBs 
might be a marker of an unhealthy lifestyle. Individual 
foods and lifestyle choices do not exist in isolation, and 
an approach that only looks at them individually may be 
inadequate for disentangling complicated interactions 
between different foods and dietary and lifestyle patterns 
in real-world situations. In this regard, it has been shown 
that sugar-sweetened beverage consumers are different 
from those who do not consume sugary drinks; the former 
snack more, consume more calories, smoke more, exercise 
less and have a worse dietary pattern [59, 76, 77]. Such 
lifestyle and dietary factors are generally adjusted for in 
the analyses of prospective cohort studies as they may con-
found the association between sugar-sweetened beverages 
and disease outcomes. However, it is well recognized that 
complete correction of such confounding variables is not 
possible due to residual confounding. Such variables might 
not be measured, measured imprecisely or not adjusted at 
all as the total number of confounders is unknown [78–80]. 
While these important collinear effects between such life-
style factors and SSBs might bias the results in prospec-
tive cohort studies, such collinear effects can be exploited 
to an advantage by taking a larger snapshot using dietary 
patterns.
Analysis of food consumption as dietary patterns offer a 
more comprehensive approach to the relationship between 
diet and disease and as such might shed a light on what 
foods, which might in themselves be associated with dis-
ease, are taken along with SSBs. The Harvard cohorts 
(Nurses’ Health Study, the Nurses’ Health Study II and the 
Health Professionals Follow-up Study) have revealed two 
distinct dietary patterns. One is the Western dietary pattern, 
which is characterized by high intakes of SSBs, processed 
meats, red meats, refined grains, French fries, sweets and 
desserts, and the second is the prudent dietary pattern char-
acterized by high intakes of vegetables, fruit, legumes, fish, 
poultry and whole grains. The Western dietary pattern is 
associated with increased cardiometabolic disease out-
comes that includes weight gain, increased risk of diabetes, 
CHD and mortality resulting from CHD in energy-adjusted 
models [81–83]. In fact, the weight gain associated with 
a Western dietary pattern [83] appears to be greater com-
pared to the weight gain associated with SSBs alone [84, 
85]. Each individual food component of the Western 
dietary pattern also has a greater relative risk of diabetes 
(RR = 2.56–2.93) [86–89] and CHD (RR = 1.46) [90] than 
those reported for SSBs alone (RR = 1.01–1.18, per serv-
ing) [49, 55–60]. Moreover, these effects on bodyweight of 
the Western dietary pattern persist even after adjustment for 
sugar-sweetened beverage intake in studies in which this 
adjustment was made [83, 86] suggesting that the Western 
dietary pattern as a whole is a more important factor con-
tributing to increased energy intake and weight gain, com-
pared to SSBs alone.
There are some important caveats to the clear and con-
sistent relationship between SSBs and cardiometabolic dis-
ease. The associations for SSBs are only significant when 
comparing extreme comparisons, i.e. typically ≥1–2 serv-
ings/day versus none or <1 serving/month, or an increase in 
energy consumption from each additional serving/day. No 
significant associations have been seen at moderate levels 
of intake [49, 59, 61, 62, 91], which are around the mean 
estimated global intake of SSBs 0.58 servings/day [92] or 
approximately 15 g of added sugars/day.
How does a moderate consumption of SSBs contribute 
to the burden of disease at a global level? The recent Global 
Burden of Disease Study used national level data on 67 
measured risk factors for disease including SSB consump-
tion worldwide [93]. The authors estimated global, regional 
and national disease burdens using best available estimates 
of the association of each risk factor with obesity, diabe-
tes mellitus, cardiovascular disease and cancers, and com-
bined it with age-, sex- and cause-specific mortality using 
a comparative risk assessment analytic framework [94]. 
For SSBs, these estimates included both direct effects on 
disease burden but also indirect effects via increased obe-
sity. When looking at the ranking of the top 15 dietary and 
physical activity factors, high intake of SSBs was ranked 
only 12th for its burden on total global mortality and was 
the only risk factor with added sugars [93]. High blood 
pressure, tobacco smoking, household air pollution, diet 
low in fruits and alcohol use were ranked 1–5, respectively, 
as the leading global risk factors for attributable burden of 
disease. In comparison, high intake of SSBs was ranked all 
the way down at number 32nd globally for attributable bur-
den of disease. When counting total estimated deaths, the 
authors found that in 2010, dietary risk accounted for an 
estimated 11.3 million deaths worldwide [93], but SSBs 
only accounted for an estimated 184k deaths (1.6% of total 
deaths attributed to dietary risk) [94]. In only a few coun-
tries SSBs accounted for a much larger share of disease 
burden due to higher average consumption, e.g. Mexico 
had the largest absolute (405 deaths/million) and propor-
tional mortality attributable to SSBs (12.1%), with one of 
the highest mean intakes (2.6 servings/day), but such a high 
intake is an exception and not the norm across the globe as 
90 per cent of countries had an average SSB intake of <1 
serving/day [92]. USA also had a relatively high average 
consumption of SSBs (1.3 servings/day; 42.9 g/day added 
sugars) but that contributed only 2.3% of proportional mor-
tality [94]. This study underscored that compared to other 
risk factors, SSBs play a relatively minor role in global dis-
ease burden.
 S31
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43 
1 3
If we take a look at the potential risk of individual dis-
eases, the effect sizes associated with SSBs tend to be rela-
tively modest. For example, pooled relative risk (RR) for 
SSBs with cardiometabolic diseases including metabolic 
syndrome (RR = 1.20, highest vs. lowest quantile) [57], 
diabetes (RR = 1.18, per serving increase) [56], hyper-
tension (RR = 1.12, highest vs. lowest quantile) [58], 
CHD (RR = 1.17, highest vs. lowest quantile) [60], stroke 
(RR = 1.06, per serving increase) [95] is relatively modest 
and did not exceed 1.20. Focusing on type 2 diabetes, the risk 
estimate of SSBs intake is similar to or even lower than those 
of other established dietary risk factors, processed meats 
(RR = 1.51, 100 g/day) [96], red meat (RR = 1.19, 50 g/
day) [96, 97], French fries (RR = 1.16, two servings/week) 
[98]; high glycaemic index (RR = 1.33, highest vs. lowest 
quantile) [99], fried food (RR = 1.55, <1 vs. >7 time a week) 
[100] and potatoes (RR = 1.18, one serving/day) [98]. When 
we look beyond dietary factors, the association of SSBs with 
type 2 diabetes pales in comparison. The association of body 
mass index (lowest versus highest levels) with type 2 diabe-
tes ranges from 10 to 30 times [101], which is similar to risk 
levels associated with long-term smoking and lung cancer 
[102]. As these risk ratios are several fold higher than the risk 
estimates seen with SSB intake, the analogy that SSBs are to 
obesity and diabetes as cigarette smoking to lung cancer [27, 
103, 104] does not stand. Thus, the evidence suggests that 
similar to other dietary factors, the association of SSBs with 
diabetes is modest and it cannot be singled out and put in the 
bracket of other non-dietary factors.
The relatively modest risk ratios of the association of per 
serving increase in SSB intake with cardiometabolic dis-
eases begs the question, if other sources of calories in the 
diet are more important than SSBs? A pooled analyses of 
the three Harvard cohorts by Mozaffarian et al. [105] found 
that the weight gain observed for every 4 years of follow-up 
for increasing one serving of sugary beverages was smaller 
than or in range of increasing one serving of several other 
foods such as French fries, potato chips, unprocessed meat, 
processed meat, trans fat or boiled, baked or mashed pota-
toes when not adjusted for energy (see Fig. 3). It is likely 
that extra calories are driving this association of SSBs with 
weight gain, which suggests that SSBs provide fewer calo-
ries than the above foods.
Overall, the evidence we presented suggests that SSBs 
have comparatively small effect sizes seen only at the 
extremes of intake, which makes them an important source 
of excess sugary calories but not something that unusually 
contributes to increased cardiometabolic risk compared to 
many other aspects of the diet when we consider their mean 
intake globally.
Evidence from controlled trials
High-quality evidence from randomized and non-RCTs 
offers the best protection from bias as these control for 
confounding factors while allowing for the isolation of the 
effect of interest. The major limitation of nutrition trials 
of dietary sugars is the lack of clinical outcomes as these 
require long-term follow-up over years and most nutrition 
trials last only a few weeks. However, risk factors or sur-
rogate outcomes measured at intermediate times can be 
explored with good precision, thereby providing insight 
into processes that might lead to disease.
Fig. 3  Bodyweight changes (kg) over a 4-year period associated 
with an increase in the consumption of different food items. Using 
data from the Nurses’ Health Study, the Nurses’ Health Study II and 
the Health Professionals Follow-up Study as reported by Mozaffarian 
et al. [105]. Increased consumption is based on servings/day for all 
items except trans fat (per cent total energy) and fried foods (serv-
ings/week). Data represent pooled mean changes with 95% confi-
dence intervals adjusted for age, baseline body mass index at the start 
of each 4-year interval, sleep duration and changes in physical activ-
ity, smoking, alcohol use, television watching and each additional 
food item
 S32  
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43
1 3
Fructose and cardiometabolic risk factors
We can use two types of trial designs together to disen-
tangle the direct association of various risk factors with 
fructose intake from the energy it provides. One, substitu-
tion trials, in which comparisons are matched for energy, 
with fructose, in liquid or mixed format, is substituted for 
other sources of carbohydrates in the diet. The substitution 
trials can provide information on the usefulness of low-
sugar foods on shelves, which are usually backfilled with 
other carbohydrates including starch and maltodextrins, so 
in many cases the total amount of calories do not change 
[106]. The second type of trials is addition trials, in which 
comparisons are supplemented with excess energy from 
fructose compared with the same diet alone without excess 
energy, i.e. they are hypercaloric. These trials together pro-
vide information on whether it is the excess energy from 
fructose that leads to adverse effects.
In a Canadian Institute of Health Research (CIHR) 
funded series of systematic reviews and meta-analyses of 
controlled trials consisting of more than 50 trials and an 
excess of 1000 subjects, we examined the effect of fructose 
on various cardiometabolic risk factors when it was pro-
vided in isocaloric substitution for other carbohydrates (see 
Fig. 4). In the pooled analysis of the substitution trials we 
found no adverse effect on body weight [107], fasting lipids 
Fig. 4  Substitution trials. The meta-analyses are of isocaloric substi-
tution trials, in which fructose was exchanged for other carbohydrate 
sources under energy-matched conditions. Summary estimates (dia-
monds) were derived from pooled trial-level data. To allow the sum-
mary estimates for each endpoint to be displayed on the same axis, 
mean differences were transformed to standardized mean differences 
(SMDs). Pseudo-95% CIs for each transformed SMD were derived 
directly from the original mean difference and 95% CI. The scales 
were also flipped for high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-
C), whole-body insulin sensitivity and hepatic insulin sensitivity so 
that the direction of the effect for benefit or harm was in the same 
direction as that for the other endpoints. Asterisks indicate signifi-
cant interstudy heterogeneity as assessed by the Cochran Q statistic 
and quantified by the I2 statistic at a significance level of P < .10 (the 
higher significance level was chosen owing to the poor sensitivity 
of the test). ALT alanine aminotransferase, Apo-B apolipoprotein B, 
DBP diastolic blood pressure, FBG fasting blood glucose, FBI fasting 
blood insulin, GBP glycated blood proteins, HOMA-IR homoeostatic 
model assessment-insulin resistance, IHCL intrahepatocellular lipid, 
LDL-C low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, MAP mean arterial pres-
sure, SBP systolic blood pressure, TG triglycerides, No. total number 
of participants included in the meta-analysis of the controlled dietary 
trials
 S33
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43 
1 3
[108, 109], blood pressure [110], uric acid concentration 
[111], glycaemic control and insulin sensitivity [112, 113], 
postprandial lipids [114] and markers of non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease (NAFLD) [115] in individuals with varying 
metabolic phenotypes. In the above studies, the dose of 
fructose ranged from a moderate 22.5 to 300 g/day with the 
follow-up ranging from one to 52 weeks. In these studies, 
fructose shows a slight benefit for glycaemic control and 
blood pressure when isocalorically exchanged for other 
sources of carbohydrates [110, 112, 113]. The improve-
ment in glycaemic control as assessed by glycated blood 
proteins was equivalent to 0.57% reduction in haemoglobin 
A1c [112, 113], which is at the lower limit of efficacy of 
oral antihyperglycaemic agents of 0.5% [116] and exceeds 
the US Food and Drug Administration’s threshold of 0.3% 
for the development of new oral antihyperglycaemic agents 
both in individuals with and without diabetes [117]. Fur-
thermore, in a previous meta-analysis, the effect of fruc-
tose on HbA1c has been found to be dose dependent [118] 
which gives credence to the above results. In short, these 
substitution studies demonstrate that if we match calories 
with other carbohydrates, fructose is not associated with an 
increased harm for cardiometabolic parameters and may 
even be beneficial in low doses.
Conversely, the adverse effect of fructose in isoca-
loric trials is seen only under certain conditions. The dose 
threshold of harm for the effect of fructose on fasting tri-
glycerides has been reported as >60 g/day in people with 
type 2 diabetes and >100 g/day in those with mixed pheno-
types, and a threshold of >50 g/day for postprandial triglyc-
erides in those with mixed phenotypes [107, 118]. From 
pooled and individual controlled trials, the only condition 
in which isocaloric comparisons of fructose were found to 
be associated with increase in both fasting and postprandial 
triglycerides was when very high doses (>100 g/day) of 
fructose were provided [119, 120]. However, these findings 
have not been reproduced in dose–response and subgroup 
analyses in updated systematic reviews and meta-analyses 
[108, 114].
Why would fructose show benefit on HbA1c or glycated 
haemoglobin in low doses? Fructose might be needed in 
smaller amounts as it is sweeter than glucose. The relative 
sweetness in a 10% solution for fructose is 117, glucose 
is 65, and sucrose is 100 [121]. Although, in nature, fruc-
tose is always present along with glucose, a median higher 
sweetness with fructose compared to glucose would prob-
ably not lead to larger intakes. Moreover, biological evi-
dence suggests that fructose might assist in the metabolic 
handling of glucose. Fructose has a very low glycaemic 
index of 14 compared to glucose (=100) and sucrose (=65) 
[122] which might lower HbA1c levels. However, such 
an affect is not seen at very high dose of fructose, where 
it impairs insulin sensitivity driving up HbA1c [118]. The 
low glycaemic index of fructose also led to an early inter-
est for its role in diabetes management. Emerging evidence 
also suggests that low-dose fructose (approx. 10 g/meal—
equal to one apple) may benefit glycaemic control through 
its metabolite fructose-1-phosphate by inducing glucoki-
nase activity [123]. In vitro studies in cultured hepatocytes 
demonstrate that fructose-1-P, a fructose metabolite, dis-
places fructose-6-P from the regulatory glucokinase-bind-
ing protein in the nucleus, causing the translocation of glu-
cokinase to the cytosol. Glucosidase in turn increases the 
phosphorylation of incoming glucose and suppression of 
endogenous glucose production [124–127]. This catalytic 
effect of fructose has been reported in vivo also, where a 
reduction in hepatic glucose production under hyperglycae-
mic clamp conditions was seen in patients with type 2 dia-
betes and an increase in glycogen synthesis by carbon-13 
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy under euglycae-
mic clamp conditions was found in participants without 
diabetes [123, 128]. Similarly, these catalytic effects are 
also seen acute clinical studies. Catalytic doses of fructose 
at 7.5–10 g have shown to reduce postprandial glycaemic 
response to high glycaemic index meals like oral glucose 
or mashed potatoes in healthy participants [129, 130] and 
those with type 2 diabetes [131]. These mechanisms also 
appear to be sustainable over long-term intake of fructose. 
Our systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled tri-
als on the effect of small catalytic fructose doses (≤36 g/
day) in exchange for starch showed similar glycaemic ben-
efits as those in higher doses without any adverse effects 
on metabolic control over 1–52 weeks of follow-up [113]. 
Furthermore, in our re-analysis of glycaemic control trials, 
fructose-containing sugars showed harm in hypercaloric 
trials but demonstrated a strong protective effect in isoca-
loric trials [132]. These findings suggest that the metabolic 
effect of sugars should be considered separately from their 
caloric effects.
Similar to rodent studies of overfeeding where we see a 
consistent signal for harm [34], in humans a signal for harm 
is found in hypercaloric addition trials in which fructose is 
added to provide excess calories in the diet and compared 
to the same diet without the excess calories. Systematic 
reviews and meta-analysis of such trials have shown that 
fructose intake providing excess calories is associated with 
weight gain [107], increase in fasting [108, 109] and post-
prandial triglyceride levels [114], fasting glucose levels and 
insulin resistance [112, 113], uric acid concentrations [111] 
and markers of NAFLD [115] (see Fig. 5). The inability of 
fructose to demonstrate the same adverse associations in 
isocaloric substitution for other carbohydrates suggests that 
the primary determinant of these observed harms is excess 
calories rather than any unusual metabolic or endocrine 
response to fructose. Thus, the adverse effects observed 
under conditions of overfeeding appear to be no more 
 S34  
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43
1 3
mediated by fructose than by other sources of carbohydrate 
used to replace it. Also, that these adverse effects appear to 
be reversible by exercise suggests that such adverse effects 
of fructose overfeeding may not be applicable to those who 
engage in regular physical activity [120, 133].
Fructose‑containing sugars and weight
A criticism that can be levelled on the systematic reviews 
and meta-analyses of controlled trials of fructose described 
above is that in diet pure fructose is not consumed in iso-
lation but is commonly consumed together with glucose, 
either in form of HFCS or honey, or as part of the sucrose 
molecule. In other words, it can be argued that the above 
studies do not represent real-world situations for the vast 
majority of people. For this reason, we investigated the tri-
als of fructose-containing sugars (HFCS, sucrose, honey, 
etc.) found normally in the diet and examined their effects 
on cardiometabolic outcomes. To allow the direct effects of 
fructose-containing sugars to be disentangled from calories, 
four types of study designs can be described: (1) substitu-
tion trials, in which fructose-containing sugars added to 
foods and beverages are compared with other macronutri-
ent sources under energy-matched conditions; (2) addition 
trials, in which fructose-containing sugars supplemented 
a diet with excess energy compared to the same diet sup-
plemented with the equivalent amounts of non-caloric food 
and beverages or the same diet alone without the excess 
energy from fructose-containing sugars; (3) subtraction 
Fig. 5  Addition trials. The meta-analyses are of hypercaloric addi-
tion trials, in which excess calories from fructose were added to a diet 
compared with the same diet without the excess calories. Summary 
estimates (diamonds) were derived from pooled trial-level data. To 
allow the summary estimates for each endpoint to be displayed on the 
same axis, mean differences were transformed to standardized mean 
differences (SMDs). Pseudo-95% CIs for each transformed SMD 
were derived directly from the original mean difference and 95% CI. 
The scales were also flipped for high-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(HDL-C), whole-body insulin sensitivity and hepatic insulin sensitiv-
ity so that the direction of the effect for benefit or harm was in the 
same direction as that for the other endpoints. Asterisks indicate sig-
nificant interstudy heterogeneity as assessed by the Cochran Q statis-
tic and quantified by the I2 statistic at a significance level of P < .10 
(the higher significance level was chosen owing to the poor sensitivity 
of the test). ALT alanine aminotransferase, Apo-B apolipoprotein B, 
DBP diastolic blood pressure, FBG fasting blood glucose, FBI fasting 
blood insulin, GBP glycated blood proteins, HOMA-IR homoeostatic 
model assessment-insulin resistance, IHCL intrahepatocellular lipid, 
LDL-C low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, MAP mean arterial pres-
sure, SBP systolic blood pressure, TG triglycerides, No. total number 
of participants included in the meta-analysis of the controlled dietary 
trials
 S35
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43 
1 3
trials, in which energy from fructose-containing sugars 
was reduced through displacement with water and/or no-
calorie or low-calorie sweeteners or by eliminating it alto-
gether from the background diet; and (4) ad libitum trials, 
in which energy from fructose-containing sugars was freely 
replaced with other foods like complex carbohydrates and 
fat without any strict control of either the study foods or the 
background diet.
Two separate systematic reviews and meta-analyses of 
substitution trials showed no difference for fructose-con-
taining sugars on bodyweight when they were replaced iso-
calorically with other macronutrient sources (usually starch 
or other sugars) (see Fig. 6). The first one was a WHO-
commissioned systematic review and meta-analysis of 13 
RCTs involving 144 adults [49]. It found that total fruc-
tose-containing added sugars (predominantly sucrose) did 
not affect bodyweight when substituted for other sources 
of carbohydrates (predominantly starch). Our own pooled 
analysis of 31 randomized and non-randomized controlled 
dietary trials assessing the effect of consumption of chronic 
fructose-containing sugars in substitution for other sources 
of carbohydrates (mainly starch) under energy-matched 
conditions did not support an adverse effect of fructose 
on body weight in 637 adults [107]. Similar effects per-
sisted even when fructose was provided in liquid form and 
also under condition of positive energy balance. When we 
restricted the analysis to five ‘substitution’ trials with a pos-
itive energy balance but energy matched between the arms, 
there was still no evidence that fructose affects bodyweight 
differently compared to other carbohydrates.
A follow-up systematic review and meta-analysis by 
the same WHO group showed mixed effects of fructose-
containing added sugars on other cardiometabolic risk fac-
tors [134]. In this paper the authors showed that in isoca-
loric comparisons with other sources of macronutrients, 
mainly starch, the fructose-containing sugars had benefi-
cial effects on high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-
C) but adverse effects on triglyceride levels, low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and total cholesterol lev-
els. Fructose-containing sugars had no effect on systolic or 
diastolic blood pressure. While the paper findings present 
a good case against fructose-containing sugars, there are 
issues which limit their generalization. One, the author’s 
definition of sugars included non-fructose-containing 
Fig. 6  Fructose-containing sugars and weight change in controlled 
dietary trials. Forest plots of summary estimates from recent meta-
analyses of the effect of different fructose-containing sugars interven-
tions on indices of body weight in controlled dietary trials involving 
children and adults. The meta-analyses were grouped broadly based 
on the interventions in question: isocaloric sugar substitution inter-
ventions, in which sugars were exchanged for other carbohydrate 
sources under energy-matched conditions; sugar supplementation 
interventions, in which sugars supplement background diets provid-
ing excess energy compared with the background diets alone with-
out the excess energy; and sugar reduction interventions, in which 
excess from sugars is reduced in background diets compared with the 
background diets still containing the sugars. Indices of body weight 
included body weight in Sievenpiper et al. [107], Kaiser et al. [140] 
and Te Morenga et al. [49]. For isocaloric sugar substitution only; 
body fatness in Te Morenga et al. [49] for all other comparisons; and 
BMI z scores in Malik et al. [55]. Summary estimates (diamonds) 
were derived from pooled trial-level data. To allow the summary esti-
mates for each endpoint to be displayed on the same axis, mean dif-
ferences (MDs) were transformed to standardized means differences 
(SMDs). Pseudo-95% confidence intervals (CI) for each transformed 
SMD were derived directly from the original MD and 95% CI. Aster-
isks indicate significant interstudy heterogeneity as assessed by the 
Cochran Q statistic and quantified by the I2-statistic at a significance 
level of P < .10. SSBs sugar-sweetened beverages, No. total number 
of participants included in the meta-analysis of the controlled dietary 
trials
 S36  
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43
1 3
sugars including high glycaemic index sugars like glucose 
and maltose. Two, it is possible that the type of analysis 
performed did not allow separation of the effect of fructose 
from calories, as almost 40 per cent of the studies in peo-
ple who consumed ad libitum diets had no strict control of 
energy intake. Three, the isocaloric trials were not strictly 
isocaloric as the trials did not include adequate measures of 
compliance. Four, there was significant unexplained hetero-
geneity in the trials and imprecision of the summary pooled 
estimates of most endpoints. Conversely, our most recently 
concluded systematic review and meta-analysis of con-
trolled trials found that fructose-containing sugars in iso-
caloric comparisons with other sources of macronutrients 
(mainly starch) had a beneficial effect on HbA1c levels and 
no effect on fasting glucose or insulin levels [132]. There-
fore, with the above mixed signals, it is difficult to draw 
strong inferences about harm or benefit for fructose-con-
taining sugars when isocalorically exchanged with other 
carbohydrates.
How does fructose-containing sugars fare against macro-
nutrients other than carbohydrates, e.g. fat and protein? 
Most studies comparing fructose-containing sugars with 
fat and protein used SSBs as the form of dietary sugars. 
Looking at weight gain, no difference in body weight or 
total body fat was seen when SSBs were substituted isoca-
lorically for milk in a trial in children for 16 months [135] 
and in adults for 6 months [136]. The adult trial showed 
that high SSB consumption (1 l/day providing 106 g/day 
in added sugars) increased liver and visceral fat composi-
tion, total cholesterol and triglycerides which was not seen 
in calorically equivalent intake of milk [136]; in fact, milk 
was beneficial in reducing blood pressure. It should be 
noted that the dose of added sugars consumed from SSBs 
in this trial was at more than twice the average US popu-
lation intake (which is 1.3 servings or 429 ml/day) [94]. 
Another 3-week trial in pre-diabetic adults of the substitu-
tion of SSBs with dairy milk also did not show any differ-
ence in weight [137]. Two studies under a negative energy 
balance comparing isocaloric substitutions found similar 
reductions in bodyweight for comparisons of sucrose ver-
sus protein or fat [138, 139]. Thus, the overall picture from 
substitution trials indicates that fructose-containing sugars 
do not appear to behave differently from other sources of 
macronutrients in contributing to weight gain and that there 
is no clear evidence for cardiometabolic harms as results 
are not consistent across studies.
Compared to substitution trials, consistent signal of 
harm was seen in the addition trials. Four systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses found that supplementing the 
diet with excess energy from fructose-containing sugars 
resulted in significant weight gain when compared with 
the same diets alone without the excess energy (see Fig. 6). 
The first one was the WHO-commissioned systematic 
review and meta-analysis of ten RCTs involving 382 adults 
[49]. The next two systematic reviews and meta-analyses 
were based upon SSB beverages intake. The study by 
Kaiser et al. [140] included seven RCTs with 565 adults, 
and the study by Malik et al. [55] included seven RCTs 
in 292 adults. Both studies found that supplementing diet 
with fructose-containing sugars in form of SSBs, provid-
ing from 150 to 530 kcal in excess calories over a period 
of 3 weeks–24 months, resulted in significant weight gain. 
Unsurprisingly, the weight gain achieved was proportional 
to the degree of excess calories added to the diet with some 
compensation [140]. In our own systematic review and 
meta-analysis of controlled trials, we found that fructose-
containing sugars supplementing diets with excess calories, 
when compared with same diets without the excess calo-
ries, showed an adverse effect on fasting insulin but not on 
HbA1c or fasting glucose levels [132].
In the pooled analyses of subtraction trials in which cal-
ories in the diet provided by fructose-containing sugars (as 
added sugars or SSBs) are removed and replaced with water 
or non-caloric beverages, results have not shown a consist-
ent associated with weight loss [49, 55, 140]. An observed 
benefit on weight was seen only in adults in a pooled anal-
ysis of five trials comprising of 2968 participants [49], in 
a meta-analysis of seven trials involving 2637 participants 
when restricted to overweight/obese individuals [140] 
and in a meta-analysis of 15 trials with 1591 participants 
using low-calorie sweeteners [141]. However, such benefit 
was not seen in two systematic review and meta-analyses 
restricted to children [49, 55], though the study by Malik 
et al. [55] involving five trials with 1298 participants did 
show a potential benefit of subtraction trials when lim-
ited to overweight and obese children only. Interestingly, 
the interventions in the subtraction trials were more mod-
est than those in the addition trials, meaning the caloric 
difference between intervention and control arm was less 
and more representative of real-world intakes. Such mod-
est effects and also the inconsistency in the results might 
be explained by a compensatory effect, in which people 
will compensate for a decrease of energy from one source 
by increasing intake of other foods or exert less energy to 
maintain a neutral energy balance [142]. Therefore, sub-
stantial weight loss by reducing SSB intake and thus sugars 
might be difficult in free-living conditions [140]. This was 
demonstrated by the Choose Healthy Options Consciously 
Everyday (CHOICE) trial, where the weight loss from 
strategy of reducing calories from SSBs did not differ from 
general weight loss advice at 6 months [143].
Few randomized trials have assessed the effect of dis-
placing calories from sugars using no- or low-calorie 
sweeteners or water on cardiometabolic risk factors. The 
systematic review and meta-analysis by WHO group [134] 
of 39 trials only identified one subtraction trial, which used 
 S37
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43 
1 3
ad libitum sugar-free diet as the control, and it did not show 
an effect on total cholesterol, HDL-C or triglyceride levels 
in 32 hypertriglyceridemic men [144]. Our own systematic 
review and meta-analysis of five studies in 591 participants 
did not show an effect of reducing calories from fructose-
containing sugars on HbA1c, fasting glucose or fasting 
insulin levels [132].
Ad libitum trials reflect real-world patterns to assess the 
effect of replacing fructose-containing sugars with other 
nutrients on weight gain and downstream cardiometabolic 
risk beyond the calories they provide. In these studies, 
fructose-containing sugars are freely replaced with other 
sources of energy in the diet without any requirement of 
a predetermined load nor a strict control of replacement 
or the background diet. We found very few studies with 
such design. The largest and the longest duration ad libi-
tum trial was the CArbohydrate Ratio Management in 
European National Diets (CARMEN) study [145]. It com-
pared ad libitum high-sugar diet (~55% energy carbohy-
drate, 29% energy sugars), an ad libitum high complex-
carbohydrate diet (~51% energy carbohydrate, 19% energy 
sugars) and an ad libitum higher fat control diet (~46% 
energy carbohydrate, 21% energy sugars) in 398 mod-
erately obese adults over 6 months. The weight loss and 
reduction in body fat were no different between ad libitum 
high-fructose-containing sugars diet and ad libitum high 
complex-carbohydrate diet, although there was a tendency 
for greater weight loss on the ad libitum complex-carbohy-
drate diet (−0.9 vs. −1.8 kg), possibly due to higher fibre 
and protein content. Another randomized study of 46 par-
ticipants with metabolic syndrome following the same pro-
tocol over 6 months showed similar results [146]. In this 
study, those on the ad libitum high-fructose-containing 
sugars diet lost considerably more weight than those on 
the ad libitum higher fat control diet (−0.28 vs. +1.03 kg), 
although those on the high complex-carbohydrate diet 
lost the most weight (−4.25 kg). A third randomized trial 
in 20 normal-weight women followed over 2 weeks had a 
greater weight loss and lower plasma lipids in starch trial 
versus fat or sucrose arm [147]. Our own systematic review 
and meta-analysis of controlled trials showed no effect on 
HbA1c, fasting glucose or fasting insulin levels irrespective 
of comparator [132]. In short, evidence suggests that, under 
free-living conditions, it is possible to lose weight follow-
ing an ad libitum diet where fructose-containing sugars are 
replaced with complex-carbohydrate diets that are higher in 
protein and fibre, but there might not be any clear advan-
tages if replaced with other sources of energy especially 
from fat. However, the effect on other cardiometabolic 
markers is not clear and more evidence is needed.
Should we target sugars
A lesson we can learn from the fat paradigm is that there 
can be unintended consequences of focusing singly on 
one nutrient. When saturated fat was deemed harmful, the 
industry responded by producing low-fat products, with 
no resultant appreciable calorie change, as in these prod-
ucts calories from fat were replaced with calories from 
other sources, e.g. starches and other sugars like maltodex-
trins [7]. The public perception changed as ‘low-fat’ prod-
ucts were deemed ‘healthy’, and a concomitant increase in 
availability on the supermarket shelf likely led to the over-
consumption of such ‘low-fat’ products [148]. Not surpris-
ingly, the expected reduction in cardiometabolic disease 
with the ‘low-fat’ food was not seen, and instead, we saw 
an unprecedented increase in incidence of overweight/obe-
sity [149] and diabetes [150].
If a similar approach is taken by the industry who pro-
ducing ‘low-sugar’ food products, a replay of the above 
scenario looks likely. Furthermore, the unique functional 
properties of fructose-containing sugars mean that their 
replacement is not as easy as it sounds. The functions 
provided in food products by sugars are related to their 
sensory (sweetness, taste and aroma, texture and appear-
ance), physical (crystallization, viscosity, osmotic pres-
sure, hygroscopicity, consistency/bulk, grain size and 
distribution), microbial (preservation and fermentation) 
and chemical (inversion and caramelization) properties 
[151]. Therefore, reducing or replacing sugar means one 
has to replace sugars with several ingredients in order to 
fulfil the above properties which, in many cases, may not 
result in calorie reduction [106]. Most commonly sugars 
are replaced with bulking agents, and most of these bulk-
ing agents also provide energy as most are carbohydrate-
based, e.g. isomaltulose, sugar alcohols, maltodextrins 
and starch hydrolysates, and some are fat based. Thus, 
the calorie reduction in ‘low-sugar’ products might be 
negligible or in some cases might even increase [106]. 
Another side effect of a drastic reduction in sugars is 
that even good sources of sugars might be targeted like 
whole grains. For example, the calories per serving are 
the same (110 kcal/30 g) in Frosted Flakes and Reduced 
Sugar Frosted Flakes despite the total sugar content 
being 11 and versus 8 g, respectively. Despite appearing 
paradoxical, the replacement of sugars with refined corn 
starch means that glycaemic index of the flake product 
increases from 55 to 75 [152], and such an increase of GI 
at a whole diet level can potentially be associated with 
higher rates of diabetes [153]. Evidence from National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 
 S38  
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43
1 3
data suggests that while at the population level in USA, 
consumption of added sugars has decreased in past two 
decades, there has been an increase in calories from other 
sources including other carbohydrates, protein and fats—
such that average daily calories have not reduced [154].
Summary
Despite the continuing concern regarding fructose’s unique 
metabolic effects, which stems from low-quality ecologi-
cal studies, animal models and select human studies, the 
highest level of evidence from systematic review and meta-
analysis does not support a direct causal relationship with 
cardiometabolic disease. Using the totality of the highest 
quality evidence from controlled feeding trials, we dem-
onstrate that fructose-containing sugars can lead to weight 
gain, increase in cardiometabolic risk factors and disease 
only if it provides the excess calories. When the calories 
are matched, fructose-containing sugars do not appear to 
cause weight gain compared to other forms of macronutri-
ents including complex carbohydrates, fats and protein, and 
in low doses fructose might even show benefit. Prospec-
tive cohort studies, which provide the strongest observa-
tional evidence, have shown an association between fruc-
tose-containing sugars and cardiometabolic risk including 
weight gain, cardiovascular disease outcomes and diabetes 
only when restricted to SSBs and not for sugars from other 
sources. In fact, the harmful effect of SSBs is likely driven 
by a collinearity with an unhealthy lifestyle as SSB drink-
ers consume more calories, exercise less, smoke more and 
have a poor dietary pattern.
In summary, there is nothing unique about the sugar, fruc-
tose. It is harmful when in excess but potentially beneficial 
when taken in small amounts—providing evidence that it is 
the excess energy that is causing harm and not some unique 
metabolic effect. Still, the potential for overconsumption of 
sugars in form of sugary foods and drinks is substantial, and 
targeting added sugars as a source of excess calories appears 
to be a prudent strategy. However, sugar content should not 
be seen as the sole determinant of a healthy diet. There are 
many other factors in the diet—some providing excess calo-
ries while others provide beneficial nutrients. We should 
consider the whole diet for health benefits compared to 
just focusing on one nutrient. In this regard, improvements 
in dietary patterns appear to have the greatest influence on 
weight gain and cardiometabolic risk and represent the best 
opportunity for successful intervention.
Funding Aspects of this work were supported by the Canadian Dia-
betes Association, Canadian Institutes of Health Research Knowl-
edge Synthesis Program (Funding Reference Number 102078) and 
Programmatic Grants in Food and Health through the Canada-wide 
Human Nutrition Trialists’ Network (Funding Reference Number 
129920). JLS was funded by a PSI Graham Farquharson Knowledge 
Translation Fellowship, Canadian Diabetes Association (CDA), Clini-
cian Scientist Award, CIHR INMD/CNS New Investigator Partnership 
Prize and Banting and Best Diabetes Centre Sun Life Financial New 
Investigator Award. None of the sponsors had a role in any aspect of 
the present study, including design and conduct of the study; collec-
tion, management, analysis and interpretation of the data; and prepa-
ration, review, approval of the manuscript or decision to publish.
Compliance with ethical standards 
Conflict of interest JLS has received research support from the Cana-
dian Institutes of health Research (CIHR), Canadian Diabetes Asso-
ciation (CDA), PSI Foundation, Calorie Control Council, Banting and 
Best Diabetes Centre (BBDC), American Society for Nutrition (ASN), 
Dr. Pepper Snapple Group (investigator initiated, unrestricted dona-
tion), INC International Nut and Dried Fruit Council, and The Tate 
and Lyle Nutritional Research Fund at the University of Toronto. He 
has received travel reimbursement, speaker fees, and/or honoraria from 
the Canadian Diabetes Association (CDA), Canadian Nutrition Society 
(CNS), University of Alabama at Birmingham, Abbott Laboratories, 
Canadian Sugar Institute, Dr. Pepper Snapple Group, The Coca-Cola 
Company, Dairy Farmers of Canada, Nutrition Foundation of Italy 
(NFI), C3 Collaborating for Health, WhiteWave Foods, Rippe Lifestyle, 
mdBriefcase, Alberta Milk, FoodMinds LLC, Memac Ogilvy & Mather 
LLC, PepsiCo, and Pulse Canada. He has ad hoc consulting arrange-
ments with Winston & Strawn LLP, Perkins Coie LLP, and Tate & Lyle. 
He is a member of the European Fruit Juice Association Scientific Expert 
Panel. He is on the Clinical Practice Guidelines Expert Committees of 
the Canadian Diabetes Association (CDA), European Association for the 
study of Diabetes (EASD), and Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS), 
as well as an expert writing panel of the American Society for Nutrition 
(ASN).  He serves as an unpaid scientific advisor for the Food, Nutrition, 
and Safety Program (FNSP) and the Technical Committee on Carbohy-
drates of the International Life Science Institute (ILSI) North America. 
He is a member of the International Carbohydrate Quality Consortium 
(ICQC), Executive Board Member of the Diabetes and Nutrition Study 
Group (DNSG) of the EASD, and Director of the Toronto 3D Knowl-
edge Synthesis and Clinical Trials foundation. His wife is an employee 
of Unilever Canada. TAK declares no conflicts of interest.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Crea-
tive Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://crea-
tivecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a 
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were 
made.
References
 1. Malhotra A (2013) The dietary advice on added sugar needs 
emergency surgery. BMJ 346:f3199. doi:10.1136/bmj.f3199
 2. Bray GA (2012) Fructose and risk of cardiometabolic dis-
ease. Curr Atheroscler Rep 14(6):570–578. doi:10.1007/
s11883-012-0276-6
 3. Johnson RJ, Nakagawa T, Sanchez-Lozada LG, Shafiu M, 
Sundaram S, Le M, Ishimoto T, Sautin YY, Lanaspa MA (2013) 
Sugar, uric acid, and the etiology of diabetes and obesity. Dia-
betes 62(10):3307–3315. doi:10.2337/db12-1814
 4. Lustig RH (2016) Response to “Metabolic improvement with 
fructose restriction: is it the fructose or the weight loss?”. Obe-
sity. doi:10.1002/oby.21438
 S39
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43 
1 3
 5. World Health Organisation (2015) WHO calls on countries to 
reduce sugars intake among adults and children. http://who.int/
mediacentre/news/releases/2015/sugar-guideline/en/. Accessed 
15 Sep 2015
 6. Canadian Diabetes Association (2015) CDA’s position on sug-
ars.  http://www.diabetes.ca/about-cda/publicpolicy-position-
statements/sugars. Accessed 9 Sep 2016
 7. Willett W (1998) Dietary fat and obesity: an unconvincing rela-
tion. Am J Clin Nutr 68(6):1149–1150
 8. Bray GA, Popkin BM (1998) Dietary fat intake does affect obe-
sity! Am J Clin Nutr 68(6):1157–1173
 9. Keys A et al (1970) Coronary heart disease in seven countries. 
Circulation 41(1):186–195
 10. Yudkin J (1972) Pure, white and deadly: the problem of sugar. 
Davis-Poynter Limited
 11. Watts G (2013) Sugar and the heart: old ideas revisited. BMJ 
346:e7800. doi:10.1136/bmj.e7800
 12. Bray GA, Nielsen SJ, Popkin BM (2004) Consumption of high-
fructose corn syrup in beverages may play a role in the epi-
demic of obesity. Am J Clin Nutr 79(4):537–543
 13. Porta M, Greenland S, Hernán M, dos Santos SilvaI, Last JM 
(2014) A dictionary of epidemiology. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford
 14. Grimes DA, Schulz KF (2002) Descriptive studies: what they 
can and cannot do. Lancet 359(9301):145–149. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(02)07373-7
 15. The University of California (2009) Sugar: the bitter truth. 
Youtube
 16. Lustig RH, Schmidt LA, Brindis CD (2012) Public health: the toxic 
truth about sugar. Nature 482(7383):27–29. doi:10.1038/482027a
 17. Lustig RH (2013) Fructose: it’s “alcohol without the buzz”. Adv 
Nutr Int Rev J 4(2):226–235
 18. Malhotra A (2013) Saturated fat is not the major issue. BMJ 
347:f6340. doi:10.1136/bmj.f6340
 19. DiNicolantonio JJ, O’Keefe JH, Lucan SC (2015) Added 
fructose. Mayo Clin Proc 90(3):372–381. doi:10.1016/j.
mayocp.2014.12.019
 20. Macgregor GA, Hashem KM (2014) Action on sugar—lessons 
from UK salt reduction programme. Lancet 383(9921):929–
931. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60200-2
 21. Taubes G (2011) Is sugar toxic? The New York Times, 
2011/4/13
 22. Lustig R (2013) Fat chance: the bitter truth about sugar. Fourth 
Estate
 23. Gameau D (2015) That sugar film. http://www.imdb.com/title/
tt3892434/. Accessed 24 Oct 2016
 24. Lustig RH (2016) Sickeningly sweet: does sugar cause type 2 
diabetes? Yes. Can J Diabetes 40(4):282–286. doi:10.1016/j.
jcjd.2016.01.004
 25. Sievenpiper JL (2016) Sickeningly sweet: does sugar cause 
chronic disease? No. Can J Diabetes 40(4):287–295
 26. Kearns CE, Schmidt LA, Glantz SA (2016) Sugar industry and 
coronary heart disease research: a historical analysis of inter-
nal industry documents. JAMA Intern Med 176(11):1680–1685. 
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.5394
 27. Globe and Mail (2016) Sugar is the new tobacco. Here’s why. 
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/health-and-fitness/health-
advisor/sugar-is-the-new-tobacco-hereswhy/article16571374/. 
Accessed 10 Aug 2016
 28. Elliott SS, Keim NL, Stern JS, Teff K, Havel PJ (2002) Fruc-
tose, weight gain, and the insulin resistance syndrome. Am J 
Clin Nutr 76(5):911–922
 29. Stanhope KL, Schwarz JM, Keim NL, Griffen SC, Bremer 
AA, Graham JL, Hatcher B, Cox CL, Dyachenko A, Zhang W, 
McGahan JP, Seibert A, Krauss RM, Chiu S, Schaefer EJ, Ai 
M, Otokozawa S, Nakajima K, Nakano T, Beysen C, Hellerstein 
MK, Berglund L, Havel PJ (2009) Consuming fructose-sweet-
ened, not glucose-sweetened, beverages increases visceral adi-
posity and lipids and decreases insulin sensitivity in overweight/
obese humans. J Clin Invest 119(5):1322–1334. doi:10.1172/
JCI37385
 30. Johnson RJ, Perez-Pozo SE, Sautin YY, Manitius J, Sanchez-
Lozada LG, Feig DI, Shafiu M, Segal M, Glassock RJ, Shimada 
M, Roncal C, Nakagawa T (2009) Hypothesis: could excessive 
fructose intake and uric acid cause type 2 diabetes? Endocr Rev 
30(1):96–116. doi:10.1210/er.2008-0033
 31. Teff KL, Elliott SS, Tschöp M, Kieffer TJ, Rader D, Heiman M, 
Townsend RR, Keim NL, D’Alessio D, Havel PJ (2004) Dietary 
fructose reduces circulating insulin and leptin, attenuates post-
prandial suppression of ghrelin, and increases triglycerides in 
women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 89(6):2963–2972
 32. Page KA, Chan O, Arora J, Belfort-Deaguiar R, Dzuira J, Roe-
hmholdt B, Cline GW, Naik S, Sinha R, Constable RT, Sherwin 
RS (2013) Effects of fructose vs glucose on regional cerebral 
blood flow in brain regions involved with appetite and reward 
pathways. JAMA 309(1):63–70. doi:10.1001/jama.2012.116975
 33. Almiron-Roig E, Palla L, Guest K, Ricchiuti C, Vint N, Jebb 
SA, Drewnowski A (2013) Factors that determine energy com-
pensation: a systematic review of preload studies. Nutr Rev 
71(7):458–473. doi:10.1111/nure.12048
 34. Sievenpiper JL, de Souza RJ, Kendall CWC, Jenkins DJA 
(2011) Is fructose a story of mice but not men? J Am Diet Assoc 
111(2):219–220. doi:10.1016/j.jada.2010.12.001 (author reply 
220–212)
 35. Bray GA (2010) Fructose: pure, white, and deadly? Fructose, 
by any other name, is a health hazard. J Diabetes Sci Technol 
4(4):1003–1007
 36. van Buul VJ, Tappy L, Brouns FJPH (2014) Misconceptions 
about fructose-containing sugars and their role in the obe-
sity epidemic. Nutr Res Rev 27(1):119–130. doi:10.1017/
S0954422414000067
 37. Basu S, Yoffe P, Hills N, Lustig RH (2013) The relationship 
of sugar to population-level diabetes prevalence: an econo-
metric analysis of repeated cross-sectional data. PLoS One 
8(2):e57873. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0057873
 38. Gallaher DD (1992) Animal models in human nutrition 
research. Nutr Clin Pract 7(1):37–39
 39. Tappy L, Lê K-A (2010) Metabolic effects of fructose and 
the worldwide increase in obesity. Physiol Rev 90(1):23–46. 
doi:10.1152/physrev.00019.2009
 40. Sun SZ, Empie MW (2012) Fructose metabolism in humans—
what isotopic tracer studies tell us. Nutr Metab 9(1):89. 
doi:10.1186/1743-7075-9-89
 41. Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee (2015) 2015–2020 
Dietary guidelines for americans. USDA and US Department 
of Health and Human Services, Washington, DC https://health.
gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/. Accessed 24 Oct 2016
 42. Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (2015) Carbohy-
drates and Health report. https://www.gov.uk/government/publi-
cations/sacn-carbohydrates-and-health-report. Accessed 24 Oct 
2016
 43. Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada (2014) Position state-
ment on Sugar, heart disease and stroke. https://web.archive.
org/web/20160827024321/http://www.heartandstroke.com/
site/c.ikIQLcMWJtE/b.9201361/k.47CB/Sugar_heart_disease_
and_stroke.htm. Accessed 27 Aug2016
 44. Molander E, Virtanen S, Thorgeisdottir H, Aarum A, Mattis-
son I (2013) Nordic nutrition recommendations 2012 integrat-
ing nutrition and physical activity. Nordic Council of Ministers, 
Copenhagen
 45. Woolf SH, Battista RN, Anderson GM, Logan AG, Wang E, 
Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examination 
 S40  
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43
1 3
(1990) Assessing the clinical effectiveness of preventive 
maneuvers: analytic principles and systematic methods in 
reviewing evidence and developing clinical practice recom-
mendations A report by the Canadian task force on the peri-
odic health examination. J Clin Epidemiol 43(9):891–905. 
doi:10.1016/0895-4356(90)90073-X
 46. US Preventive Services Task Force (2009) The guide to clini-
cal preventive services 2009. Agency for Healthcare Research 
and 
Quality 
(US). 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK37637/. Accessed 24 Oct 2016
 47. NICE (2006) Methods for the development of NICE public 
health guidance. NICE, London
 48. Song JW, Chung KC (2010) Observational studies: cohort and 
case–control studies. Plast Reconstr Surg 126(6):2234
 49. Te Morenga L, Mallard S, Mann J (2013) Dietary sugars and 
body weight: systematic review and meta-analyses of ran-
domised controlled trials and cohort studies. BMJ 346:e7492. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.e7492
 50. Janket S-J, Manson JE, Sesso H, Buring JE, Liu S (2003) A 
prospective study of sugar intake and risk of type 2 diabetes in 
women. Diabetes Care 26(4):1008–1015
 51. Jayalath VH, Sievenpiper JL, de Souza RJ, Ha V, Mirrahimi A, 
Santaren ID, Blanco Mejia S, Di Buono M, Jenkins AL, Leiter 
LA, Wolever TMS, Beyene J, Kendall CWC, Jenkins DJA 
(2014) Total fructose intake and risk of hypertension: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohorts. J Am Coll 
Nutr 33(4):328–339. doi:10.1080/07315724.2014.916237
 52. Liu S, Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, Hu FB, Franz M, Sampson 
L, Hennekens CH, Manson JE (2000) A prospective study of 
dietary glycemic load, carbohydrate intake, and risk of coronary 
heart disease in US women. Am J Clin Nutr 71(6):1455–1461
 53. Jamnik J, Rehman S, Blanco Mejia S, Khan TA, Leiter LA, 
Wolever TMS, Kendall CWC, Jenkins DJA, Sievenpiper 
JL (2016) Fructose intake and risk of gout and hyperurice-
mia: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospec-
tive cohort studies. BMJ Open 6(10):e013191. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2016-013191
 54. Hu FB, Malik VS (2010) Sugar-sweetened beverages and risk 
of obesity and type 2 diabetes: epidemiologic evidence. Physiol 
Behav 100(1):47–54. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2010.01.036
 55. Malik VS, Pan A, Willett WC, Hu FB (2013) Sugar-sweetened 
beverages and weight gain in children and adults: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 98(4):1084–1102. 
doi:10.3945/ajcn.113.058362
 56. Imamura F, O’Connor L, Ye Z, Mursu J, Hayashino Y, Bhu-
pathiraju SN, Forouhi NG (2015) Consumption of sugar sweet-
ened beverages, artificially sweetened beverages, and fruit juice 
and incidence of type 2 diabetes: systematic review, meta-anal-
ysis, and estimation of population attributable fraction. BMJ 
351:h3576. doi:10.1136/bmj.h3576
 57. Malik VS, Popkin BM, Bray GA, Després J-P, Willett WC, Hu 
FB (2010) Sugar-sweetened beverages and risk of metabolic 
syndrome and type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Care 
33(11):2477–2483. doi:10.2337/dc10-1079
 58. Jayalath VH, de Souza RJ, Ha V, Mirrahimi A, Blanco-Mejia 
S, Di Buono M, Jenkins AL, Leiter LA, Wolever TMS, Bey-
ene J, Kendall CW, Jenkins DJ, Sievenpiper JL (2015) Sugar-
sweetened beverage consumption and incident hypertension: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohorts. Am 
J Clin Nutr. doi:10.3945/ajcn.115.107243
 59. de Koning L, Malik VS, Kellogg MD, Rimm EB, Wil-
lett WC, Hu FB (2012) Sweetened beverage consump-
tion, incident coronary heart disease, and biomarkers of 
risk in men. Circulation 125(14):1735–1741. doi:10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.111.067017
 60. Huang C, Huang J, Tian Y, Yang X, Gu D (2014) Sugar sweet-
ened beverages consumption and risk of coronary heart dis-
ease: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. Atherosclerosis 
234(1):11–16. doi:10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.01.037
 61. Bernstein AM, de Koning L, Flint AJ, Rexrode KM, Willett 
WC (2012) Soda consumption and the risk of stroke in men 
and women. Am J Clin Nutr 95(5):1190–1199. doi:10.3945/
ajcn.111.030205
 62. Choi HK, Willett W, Curhan G (2010) Fructose-rich bever-
ages and risk of gout in women. JAMA 304(20):2270–2278. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2010.1638
 63. de Souza R, Tawfik R, Sievenpiper J, Tsilas C (2014) No rela-
tion between total sugars intake and incident diabetes: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis of cohorts. In: Paper presented at 
the proceedings of the 32nd international symposium on diabe-
tes and nutrition, Reykjavik, Iceland, June 25–27
 64. Xi B, Li S, Liu Z, Tian H, Yin X, Huai P, Tang W, Zhou D, 
Steffen LM (2014) Intake of fruit juice and incidence of type 
2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 
9(3):e93471. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0093471
 65. Buijsse B, Boeing H, Drogan D, Schulze MB, Feskens EJ, Ami-
ano P, Barricarte A, Clavel-Chapelon F, de Lauzon-Guillain B, 
Fagherazzi G, Fonseca-Nunes A, Franks PW, Huerta JM, Jakob-
sen MU, Kaaks R, Key TJ, Khaw KT, Masala G, Moskal A, 
Nilsson PM, Overvad K, Pala V, Panico S, Redondo ML, Ricceri 
F, Rolandsson O, Sánchez MJ, Sluijs I, Spijkerman AM, Tjon-
neland A, Tumino R, van der DL A, van der Schouw YT, Tumino 
R, Langenberg C, Sharp SJ, Forouhi NG, Riboli E, Wareham NJ, 
InterAct C (2015) Consumption of fatty foods and incident type 
2 diabetes in populations from eight European countries. Eur J 
Clin Nutr 69(4):455–461. doi:10.1038/ejcn.2014.249
 66. Aune D, Norat T, Romundstad P, Vatten LJ (2013) Whole grain 
and refined grain consumption and the risk of type 2 diabe-
tes: a systematic review and dose–response meta-analysis of 
cohort studies. Eur J Epidemiol 28(11):845–858. doi:10.1007/
s10654-013-9852-5
 67. Aune D, Norat T, Romundstad P, Vatten LJ (2013) Dairy prod-
ucts and the risk of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and 
dose-response meta-analysis of cohort studies. Am J Clin Nutr 
98(4):1066–1083. doi:10.3945/ajcn.113.059030
 68. Sievenpiper JL, Tappy L, Brouns F (2015) Fructose as a driver 
of diabetes: an incomplete view of the evidence. Mayo Clin 
Proc 90(7):984–988. doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2015.04.017
 69. Li M, Fan Y, Zhang X, Hou W, Tang Z (2014) Fruit and veg-
etable intake and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: meta-analy-
sis of prospective cohort studies. BMJ Open 4(11):e005497. 
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005497
 70. Wang X, Ouyang Y, Liu J, Zhu M, Zhao G, Bao W, Hu FB 
(2014) Fruit and vegetable consumption and mortality from all 
causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer: systematic review 
and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. 
BMJ 349:g4490. doi:10.1136/bmj.g4490
 71. DiMeglio DP, Mattes RD (2000) Liquid versus solid carbohy-
drate: effects on food intake and body weight. Int J Obes Relat 
Metab Disord 24(6):794–800
 72. Houchins JA, Burgess JR, Campbell WW, Daniel JR, Ferruzzi 
MG, McCabe GP, Mattes RD (2012) Beverage vs. solid fruits 
and vegetables: effects on energy intake and body weight. Obe-
sity 20(9):1844–1850. doi:10.1038/oby.2011.192
 73. Bertoia ML, Mukamal KJ, Cahill LE, Hou T, Ludwig DS, 
Mozaffarian D, Willett WC, Hu FB, Rimm EB (2015) 
Changes in intake of fruits and vegetables and weight change 
in United States men and women followed for up to 24 years: 
analysis from three prospective cohort studies. PLoS Med 
12(9):e1001878. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001878
 S41
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43 
1 3
 74. Madero M, Arriaga JC, Jalal D, Rivard C, McFann K, Pérez-
Méndez O, Vázquez A, Ruiz A, Lanaspa MA, Jimenez CR, 
Johnson RJ, Lozada L-GS (2011) The effect of two energy-
restricted diets, a low-fructose diet versus a moderate natural 
fructose diet, on weight loss and metabolic syndrome param-
eters: a randomized controlled trial. Metabolism 60(11):1551–
1559. doi:10.1016/j.metabol.2011.04.001
 75. Jenkins DJA, Srichaikul K, Kendall CWC, Sievenpiper JL, 
Abdulnour S, Mirrahimi A, Meneses C, Nishi S, He X, Lee 
S, So YT, Esfahani A, Mitchell S, Parker TL, Vidgen E, Josse 
RG, Leiter LA (2011) The relation of low glycaemic index fruit 
consumption to glycaemic control and risk factors for coronary 
heart disease in type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia 54(2):271–279. 
doi:10.1007/s00125-010-1927-1
 76. Ranjit N, Evans MH, Byrd-Williams C, Evans AE, Hoelscher 
DM (2010) Dietary and activity correlates of sugar-sweet-
ened beverage consumption among adolescents. Pediatrics 
126(4):e754–e761. doi:10.1542/peds.2010-1229
 77. Bleich SN, Wolfson JA (2015) U.S. adults and child snacking 
patterns among sugar-sweetened beverage drinkers and non-
drinkers. Prev Med 72:8–14. doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2015.01.003
 78. Qi 
L 
(2009) 
Mendelian 
randomization 
in 
nutri-
tional 
epidemiology. 
Nutr 
Rev 
67(8):439–450. 
doi:10.1111/j.1753-4887.2009.00218.x.Mendelian
 79. Vandenbroucke JP, von Elm E, Altman DG, Gøtzsche PC, Mul-
row CD, Pocock SJ, Poole C, Schlesselman JJ, Egger M, Initia-
tive S (2007) Strengthening the reporting of observational stud-
ies in epidemiology (STROBE): explanation and elaboration. 
PLoS Med 4(10):e297. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0040297
 80. Sievenpiper JL, de Souza RJ (2013) Are sugar-sweetened 
beverages the whole story? Am J Clin Nutr 98(2):261–263. 
doi:10.3945/ajcn.113.067215
 81. Fung TT, Rimm EB, Spiegelman D, Rifai N, Tofler GH, Willett 
WC, Hu FB (2001) Association between dietary patterns and 
plasma biomarkers of obesity and cardiovascular disease risk. 
Am J Clin Nutr 73(1):61–67
 82. Malik VS, Schulze MB, Hu FB (2006) Intake of sugar-sweet-
ened beverages and weight gain: a systematic review. Am J Clin 
Nutr 84(2):274–288
 83. Schulze MB, Fung TT, Manson JE, Willett WC, Hu FB (2006) 
Dietary patterns and changes in body weight in women. Obesity 
14(8):1444–1453. doi:10.1038/oby.2006.164
 84. Malik VS, Willett WC, Hu FB (2009) Sugar-sweetened bev-
erages and BMI in children and adolescents: reanalyses of a 
meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 89(1):438–439. doi:10.3945/
ajcn.2008.26980 (author reply 439–440)
 85. Forshee RA, Anderson PA, Storey ML (2008) Sugar-sweetened 
beverages and body mass index in children and adolescents: a 
meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 87(6):1662–1671
 86. Schulze MB, Hoffmann K, Manson JE, Willett WC, Meigs JB, 
Weikert C, Heidemann C, Colditz GA, Hu FB (2005) Dietary 
pattern, inflammation, and incidence of type 2 diabetes in 
women. Am J Clin Nutr 82(3):675–684 (quiz 675–714)
 87. van Dam RM, Rimm EB, Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, Hu FB 
(2002) Dietary patterns and risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus in 
U.S. men. Ann Intern Med 136(3):201–209
 88. Fung TT, Schulze M, Manson JE, Willett WC, Hu FB (2004) 
Dietary patterns, meat intake, and the risk of type 2 diabetes in 
women. Arch Intern Med 164(20):2235–2240. doi:10.1001/
archinte.164.20.2235
 89. Montonen J, Knekt P, Harkanen T, Jarvinen R, Heliovaara M, Aromaa 
A, Reunanen A (2005) Dietary patterns and the incidence of type 2 
diabetes. Am J Epidemiol 161(3):219–227. doi:10.1093/aje/kwi039
 90. Fung TT, Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, Manson JE, Hu FB (2001) 
Dietary patterns and the risk of coronary heart disease in 
women. Arch Intern Med 161(15):1857–1862
 91. Cohen L, Curhan G, Forman J (2012) Association of sweetened 
beverage intake with incident hypertension. J Gen Intern Med 
27(9):1127–1134. doi:10.1007/s11606-012-2069-6
 92. Singh GM, Micha R, Khatibzadeh S, Shi P, Lim S, Andrews 
KG, Engell RE, Ezzati M, Mozaffarian D, Global Burden of 
Diseases Nutrition and Chronic Diseases Expert Group (2015) 
Global, regional, and national consumption of sugar-sweetened 
beverages, fruit juices, and milk: a systematic assessment of 
beverage intake in 187 countries. PLoS One 10(8):e0124845. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0124845
 93. Lim SS, Vos T, Flaxman AD, Danaei G, Shibuya K, Adair-
Rohani H, Amann M, Anderson HR, Andrews KG, Aryee M, 
Atkinson C, Bacchus LJ, Bahalim AN, Balakrishnan K, Balmes 
J, Barker-Collo S, Baxter A, Bell ML, Blore JD, Blyth F, Bon-
ner C, Borges G, Bourne R, Boussinesq M, Brauer M, Brooks 
P, Bruce NG, Brunekreef B, Bryan-Hancock C, Bucello C, 
Buchbinder R, Bull F, Burnett RT, Byers TE, Calabria B, Car-
apetis J, Carnahan E, Chafe Z, Charlson F, Chen H, Chen JS, 
Cheng AT-A, Child JC, Cohen A, Colson KE, Cowie BC, Darby 
S, Darling S, Davis A, Degenhardt L, Dentener F, Des Jarlais 
DC, Devries K, Dherani M, Ding EL, Dorsey ER, Driscoll T, 
Edmond K, Ali SE, Engell RE, Erwin PJ, Fahimi S, Falder G, 
Farzadfar F, Ferrari A, Finucane MM, Flaxman S, Fowkes FGR, 
Freedman G, Freeman MK, Gakidou E, Ghosh S, Giovannucci 
E, Gmel G, Graham K, Grainger R, Grant B, Gunnell D, Gut-
ierrez HR, Hall W, Hoek HW, Hogan A, Hosgood HD 3rd, 
Hoy D, Hu H, Hubbell BJ, Hutchings SJ, Ibeanusi SE, Jack-
lyn GL, Jasrasaria R, Jonas JB, Kan H, Kanis JA, Kassebaum 
N, Kawakami N, Khang Y-H, Khatibzadeh S, Khoo J-P, Kok C, 
Laden F, Lalloo R, Lan Q, Lathlean T, Leasher JL, Leigh J, Li 
Y, Lin JK, Lipshultz SE, London S, Lozano R, Lu Y, Mak J, 
Malekzadeh R, Mallinger L, Marcenes W, March L, Marks R, 
Martin R, McGale P, McGrath J, Mehta S, Mensah GA, Mer-
riman TR, Micha R, Michaud C, Mishra V, Mohd Hanafiah K, 
Mokdad AA, Morawska L, Mozaffarian D, Murphy T, Naghavi 
M, Neal B, Nelson PK, Nolla JM, Norman R, Olives C, Omer 
SB, Orchard J, Osborne R, Ostro B, Page A, Pandey KD, Parry 
CDH, Passmore E, Patra J, Pearce N, Pelizzari PM, Petzold M, 
Phillips MR, Pope D, Pope CA III, Powles J, Rao M, Razavi H, 
Rehfuess EA, Rehm JT, Ritz B, Rivara FP, Roberts T, Robinson 
C, Rodriguez-Portales JA, Romieu I, Room R, Rosenfeld LC, 
Roy A, Rushton L, Salomon JA, Sampson U, Sanchez-Riera 
L, Sanman E, Sapkota A, Seedat S, Shi P, Shield K, Shivakoti 
R, Singh GM, Sleet DA, Smith E, Smith KR, Stapelberg NJC, 
Steenland K, Stöckl H, Stovner LJ, Straif K, Straney L, Thurs-
ton GD, Tran JH, Van Dingenen R, van Donkelaar A, Veerman 
JL, Vijayakumar L, Weintraub R, Weissman MM, White RA, 
Whiteford H, Wiersma ST, Wilkinson JD, Williams HC, Wil-
liams W, Wilson N, Woolf AD, Yip P, Zielinski JM, Lopez AD, 
Murray CJL, Ezzati M, AlMazroa MA, Memish ZA (2012) A 
comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury 
attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 
regions, 1990–2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Bur-
den of Disease Study 2010. Lancet 380(9859):2224–2260. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61766-8
 94. Singh GM, Micha R, Khatibzadeh S, Lim S, Ezzati M, Mozaf-
farian D, Global Burden of Diseases Nutrition and Chronic 
Diseases Expert Group (2015) Estimated global, regional, 
and national disease burdens related to sugar-sweetened bev-
erage consumption in 2010. Circulation 132(8):639–666. 
doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.010636
 95. Xi B, Huang Y, Reilly KH, Li S, Zheng R, Barrio-Lopez MT, 
Martinez-Gonzalez MA, Zhou D (2015) Sugar-sweetened 
beverages and risk of hypertension and CVD: a dose-response 
meta-analysis. Br J Nutr 113(5):709–717. doi:10.1017/
S0007114514004383
 S42  
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43
1 3
 96. Pan A, Sun Q, Bernstein AM, Schulze MB, Manson JE, Willett 
WC, Hu FB (2011) Red meat consumption and risk of type 2 
diabetes: 3 cohorts of US adults and an updated meta-analysis. 
Am J Clin Nutr 94(4):1088–1096. doi:10.3945/ajcn.111.018978
 97. Micha R, Michas G, Mozaffarian D (2012) Unprocessed red 
and processed meats and risk of coronary artery disease and 
type 2 diabetes—an updated review of the evidence. Curr Ath-
eroscler Rep 14(6):515–524. doi:10.1007/s11883-012-0282-8
 98. Halton TL, Willett WC, Liu S, Manson JE, Stampfer MJ, Hu 
FB (2006) Potato and french fry consumption and risk of type 2 
diabetes in women. Am J Clin Nutr 83(2):284–290
 99. Bhupathiraju SN, Tobias DK, Malik VS, Pan A, Hruby A, Man-
son JE, Willett WC, Hu FB (2014) Glycemic index, glycemic 
load, and risk of type 2 diabetes: results from 3 large US cohorts 
and an updated meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 100(1):218–232. 
doi:10.3945/ajcn.113.079533
 
100. Cahill LE, Pan A, Chiuve SE, Sun Q, Willett WC, Hu FB, 
Rimm EB (2014) Fried-food consumption and risk of type 2 
diabetes and coronary artery disease: a prospective study in 2 
cohorts of US women and men. Am J Clin Nutr 100(2):667–
675. doi:10.3945/ajcn.114.084129
 
101. Hu FB, Manson JE, Stampfer MJ, Colditz G, Liu S, Solomon 
CG, Willett WC (2001) Diet, lifestyle, and the risk of type 2 
diabetes mellitus in women. N Engl J Med 345(11):790–797. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa010492
 
102. Thun MJ, Carter BD, Feskanich D, Freedman ND, Prentice 
R, Lopez AD, Hartge P, Gapstur SM (2013) 50-year trends in 
smoking-related mortality in the United States. N Engl J Med 
368(4):351–364
 
103. Le Bodo Y, Paquette MC, Vallieres M, Almeras N (2015) Is 
sugar the new tobacco? Insights from laboratory studies, con-
sumer surveys and public health. Curr Obes Rep 4(1):111–121. 
doi:10.1007/s13679-015-0141-3
 
104. Sugar is now enemy number one in the western diet|Aseem 
Malhotra|Opinion|The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/
commentisfree/2014/jan/11/sugar-is-enemy-number-one-now. 
Accessed 11 Sep 2016
 
105. Mozaffarian D, Hao T, Rimm EB, Willett WC, Hu FB (2011) 
Changes in diet and lifestyle and long-term weight gain 
in women and men. N Engl J Med 364(25):2392–2404. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1014296
 
106. Goldfein KR, Slavin JL (2015) Why sugar is added to food: 
food science 101. Compr Rev Food Sci Food Saf 14(5):644–
656. doi:10.1111/1541-4337.12151
 
107. Sievenpiper JL, de Souza RJ, Mirrahimi A, Yu ME, Carleton 
AJ, Beyene J, Chiavaroli L, Di Buono M, Jenkins AL, Leiter 
LA, Wolever TM, Kendall CW, Jenkins DJ (2012) Effect of 
fructose on body weight in controlled feeding trials: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 156(4):291–304. 
doi:10.7326/0003-4819-156-4-201202210-00007
 
108. Chiavaroli L, de Souza RJ, Ha V, Cozma AI, Mirrahimi A, 
Wang DD, Yu M, Carleton AJ, Di Buono M, Jenkins AL, Leiter 
LA, Wolever TMS, Beyene J, Kendall CWC, Jenkins DJA, 
Sievenpiper JL (2015) Effect of fructose on established lipid 
targets: a systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled 
feeding trials. J Am Heart Assoc 4(9):e001700. doi:10.1161/
JAHA.114.001700
 
109. Sievenpiper JL, Carleton AJ, Chatha S, Jiang HY, de Souza RJ, 
Beyene J, Kendall CW, Jenkins DJ (2009) Heterogeneous effects 
of fructose on blood lipids in individuals with type 2 diabetes: sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of experimental trials in humans. 
Diabetes Care 32(10):1930–1937. doi:10.2337/dc09-0619
 
110. Ha V, Sievenpiper JL, de Souza RJ, Chiavaroli L, Wang DD, 
Cozma AI, Mirrahimi A, Yu ME, Carleton AJ, Dibuono M, 
Jenkins AL, Leiter LA, Wolever TMS, Beyene J, Kend-
all CWC, Jenkins DJA (2012) Effect of fructose on blood 
pressure: a systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled 
feeding trials. Hypertension 59(4):787–795. doi:10.1161/
HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.182311
 
111. Wang DD, Sievenpiper JL, de Souza RJ, Chiavaroli L, Ha V, 
Cozma AI, Mirrahimi A, Yu ME, Carleton AJ, Di Buono M, 
Jenkins AL, Leiter LA, Wolever TMS, Beyene J, Kendall CWC, 
Jenkins DJA (2012) The effects of fructose intake on serum uric 
acid vary among controlled dietary trials. J Nutr 142(5):916–
923. doi:10.3945/jn.111.151951
 
112. Cozma AI, Sievenpiper JL, de Souza RJ, Chiavaroli L, Ha V, 
Wang DD, Mirrahimi A, Yu ME, Carleton AJ, Di Buono M, Jen-
kins AL, Leiter LA, Wolever TMS, Beyene J, Kendall CWC, Jen-
kins DJA (2012) Effect of fructose on glycemic control in diabe-
tes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled feeding 
trials. Diabetes Care 35(7):1611–1620. doi:10.2337/dc12-0073
 
113. Sievenpiper JL, Chiavaroli L, de Souza RJ, Mirrahimi A, Cozma 
AI, Ha V, Wang DD, Yu ME, Carleton AJ, Beyene J, Di Buono 
M, Jenkins AL, Leiter LA, Wolever TMS, Kendall CWC, Jen-
kins DJA (2012) ‘Catalytic’ doses of fructose may benefit gly-
caemic control without harming cardiometabolic risk factors: a 
small meta-analysis of randomised controlled feeding trials. Br 
J Nutr 108(3):418–423. doi:10.1017/S000711451200013X
 
114. David Wang D, Sievenpiper JL, de Souza RJ, Cozma AI, Chia-
varoli L, Ha V, Mirrahimi A, Carleton AJ, Di Buono M, Jen-
kins AL, Leiter LA, Wolever TMS, Beyene J, Kendall CWC, 
Jenkins DJA (2014) Effect of fructose on postprandial triglyc-
erides: a systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled 
feeding trials. Atherosclerosis 232(1):125–133. doi:10.1016/j.
atherosclerosis.2013.10.019
 
115. Chiu S, Sievenpiper JL, de Souza RJ, Cozma AI, Mirrahimi 
A, Carleton AJ, Ha V, Di Buono M, Jenkins AL, Leiter LA, 
Wolever TMS, Don-Wauchope AC, Beyene J, Kendall CWC, 
Jenkins DJA (2014) Effect of fructose on markers of non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD): a systematic review 
and meta-analysis of controlled feeding trials. Eur J Clin Nutr 
68(4):416–423. doi:10.1038/ejcn.2014.8
 
116. Harper W, Clement M, Goldenberg R, Hanna A, Main A, Retna-
karan R, Sherifali D, Woo V, Yale JF, Cheng AY (2015) Policies, 
guidelines and consensus statements: pharmacologic manage-
ment of type 2 diabetes—2015 interim update. Can J Diabetes 
39(4):250–252. doi:10.1016/j.jcjd.2015.05.009
 
117. Food and Drug Administration (2008) Guidance for industry 
diabetes mellitus: developing drugs and therapeutic biologics 
for treatment and prevention. http://www.fda.gov/downloads/
Drugs/.../Guidances/ucm071624.pdf. Accessed 24 Oct 2016
 
118. Livesey G, Taylor R (2008) Fructose consumption and conse-
quences for glycation, plasma triacylglycerol, and body weight: 
meta-analyses and meta-regression models of intervention stud-
ies. Am J Clin Nutr 88(5):1419–1437
 
119. Sievenpiper JL, de Souza RJ, Cozma AI, Chiavaroli L, Ha V, 
Mirrahimi A (2014) Fructose vs. glucose and metabolism: do 
the metabolic differences matter? Curr Opin Lipidol 25(1):8–
19. doi:10.1097/MOL.0000000000000042
 
120. Egli L, Lecoultre V, Theytaz F, Campos V, Hodson L, Schnei-
ter P, Mittendorfer B, Patterson BW, Fielding BA, Gerber PA, 
Giusti V, Berneis K, Tappy L (2013) Exercise prevents fructose-
induced hypertriglyceridemia in healthy young subjects. Diabe-
tes 62(7):2259–2265. doi:10.2337/db12-1651
 
121. Arrigoni E, Kast C, Walther B (2015) Effects of Dietary Sugars 
from Natural Sources on Health Outcomes. In: Goran M, Tappy 
L, Lê KA (eds) Dietary sugars and health. CRC Press Taylor 
Francis
 
122. Rippe JM (2014) Fructose, high fructose corn syrup, sucrose 
and health. Springer, Berlin
 
123. Hawkins M, Gabriely I, Wozniak R, Vilcu C, Shamoon H, Ros-
setti L (2002) Fructose improves the ability of hyperglycemia 
 S43
Eur J Nutr (2016) 55 (Suppl 2):S25–S43 
1 3
per se to regulate glucose production in type 2 diabetes. Diabe-
tes 51(3):606–614
 
124. Vandercammen A, Detheux M, Van Schaftingen E (1992) 
Binding of sorbitol 6-phosphate and of fructose 1-phosphate 
to the regulatory protein of liver glucokinase. Biochem J 
286(1):253–256
 
125. Detheux M, Vandercammen A, Schaftingen E (1991) Effectors 
of the regulatory protein acting on liver glucokinase: a kinetic 
investigation. Eur J Biochem 200(2):553–561
 
126. Van Schaftingen E, Detheux M, Veiga da Cunha M (1994) 
Short-term control of glucokinase activity: role of a regulatory 
protein. FASEB J 8(6):414–419
 
127. Agius L, Peak M (1993) Intracellular binding of glucokinase in 
hepatocytes and translocation by glucose, fructose and insulin. 
Biochem J 296(Pt 3):785–796
 
128. Petersen KF, Laurent D, Yu C, Cline GW, Shulman GI (2001) 
Stimulating effects of low-dose fructose on insulin-stimulated 
hepatic glycogen synthesis in humans. Diabetes 50(6):1263–1268
 
129. Heacock PM, Hertzler SR, Wolf BW (2002) Fructose prefeed-
ing reduces the glycemic response to a high-glycemic index, 
starchy food in humans. J Nutr 132(9):2601–2604
 
130. Moore MC, Cherrington AD, Mann SL, Davis SN (2000) Acute 
fructose administration decreases the glycemic response to an 
oral glucose tolerance test in normal adults. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 85(12):4515–4519. doi:10.1210/jcem.85.12.7053
 
131. Moore MC, Davis SN, Mann SL, Cherrington AD (2001) Acute 
fructose administration improves oral glucose tolerance in 
adults with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 24(11):1882–1887
 
132. Choo VL, Ha V, Blanco Mejia S, J S (2015) HFCS and sucrose 
on cardiometabolic risk: a series of systematic reviews and 
meta-analyses of controlled trials. In: Proceedings of the 2015 
IDF word diabetes congress, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Novem-
ber 30–December 4
 
133. Egli L, Lecoultre V, Cros J, Rosset R, Marques A-S, Schneiter 
P, Hodson L, Gabert L, Laville M, Tappy L (2016) Exercise 
performed immediately after fructose ingestion enhances fruc-
tose oxidation and suppresses fructose storage. Am J Clin Nutr 
103(2):348–355. doi:10.3945/ajcn.115.116988
 
134. Te Morenga LA, Howatson AJ, Jones RM, Mann J (2014) 
Dietary sugars and cardiometabolic risk: systematic review and 
meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials of the effects 
on blood pressure and lipids. Am J Clin Nutr 100(1):65–79. 
doi:10.3945/ajcn.113.081521
 
135. Albala C, Ebbeling CB, Cifuentes M, Lera L, Bustos N, Lud-
wig DS (2008) Effects of replacing the habitual consumption of 
sugar-sweetened beverages with milk in Chilean children. Am J 
Clin Nutr 88(3):605–611
 
136. Maersk M, Belza A, Stødkilde-Jørgensen H, Ringgaard S, Cha-
banova E, Thomsen H, Pedersen SB, Astrup A, Richelsen B 
(2012) Sucrose-sweetened beverages increase fat storage in the 
liver, muscle, and visceral fat depot: a 6-mo randomized inter-
vention study. Am J Clin Nutr 95(2):283–289
 
137. Maki K, Nieman K, Schild A, Kaden V, Lawless A, Kelley K, 
Rains T (2014) Effects of dairy vs. sugar-sweetened products on 
insulin sensitivity, pancreatic β-cell function and plasma lipids 
in men and women at risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus (117.3). 
FASEB J 28(1 Suppl.). http://www.fasebj.org/content/28/1_Sup-
plement/117.3.abstract.
 
138. Hendler RG, Walesky M, Sherwin RS (1986) Sucrose substi-
tution in prevention and reversal of the fall in metabolic rate 
accompanying hypocaloric diets. Am J Med 81(2):280–284
 
139. Hendler R, Bonde AA (1990) Effects of sucrose on resting 
metabolic rate, nitrogen balance, leucine turnover and oxi-
dation during weight loss with low calorie diets. Int J Obes 
14(11):927–938
 
140. Kaiser KA, Shikany JM, Keating KD, Allison DB (2013) 
Will reducing sugar-sweetened beverage consumption reduce 
obesity? Evidence supporting conjecture is strong, but evi-
dence when testing effect is weak. Obes Rev 14(8):620–633. 
doi:10.1111/obr.12048
 
141. Miller PE, Perez V (2014) Low-calorie sweeteners and body 
weight and composition: a meta-analysis of randomized con-
trolled trials and prospective cohort studies. Am J Clin Nutr 
100(3):765–777
 
142. Reid M, Hammersley R, Duffy M (2010) Effects of sucrose 
drinks on macronutrient intake, body weight, and mood state 
in overweight women over 4 weeks. Appetite 55(1):130–136. 
doi:10.1016/j.appet.2010.05.001
 
143. Tate DF, Turner-McGrievy G, Lyons E, Stevens J, Erickson K, 
Polzien K, Diamond M, Wang X, Popkin B (2012) Replacing 
caloric beverages with water or diet beverages for weight loss in 
adults: main results of the choose healthy options consciously 
everyday (CHOICE) randomized clinical trial. Am J Clin Nutr 
95(3):555–563. doi:10.3945/ajcn.111.026278
 
144. Smith JB, Niven BE, Mann JI (1996) The effect of reduced 
extrinsic sucrose intake on plasma triglyceride levels. Eur J Clin 
Nutr 50(8):498–504
 
145. Saris WH, Astrup A, Prentice AM, Zunft HJ, Formiguera X, 
Verboeket-van de Venne W, Raben A, Poppitt SD, Seppelt B, 
Johnston S et al (2000) Randomized controlled trial of changes 
in dietary carbohydrate/fat ratio and simple vs complex carbo-
hydrates on body weight and blood lipids: the CARMEN study. 
Int J Obes 24(10):1310–1318
 
146. Poppitt SD, Keogh GF, Prentice AM, Williams DEM, Sonne-
mans HMW, Valk EEJ, Robinson E, Wareham NJ (2002) Long-
term effects of ad libitum low-fat, high-carbohydrate diets on 
body weight and serum lipids in overweight subjects with meta-
bolic syndrome. Am J Clin Nutr 75(1):11–20
 
147. Marckmann P, Raben A, Astrup A (2000) Ad libitum intake 
of low-fat diets rich in either starchy foods or sucrose: effects 
on blood lipids, factor VII coagulant activity, and fibrinogen. 
Metabolism 49(6):731–735
 
148. Suher J, Raghunathan R, Hoyer WD (2016) Eating healthy or 
feeling empty? How the “healthy = less filling” intuition influ-
ences satiety. J Assoc Consum Res 1(1):26–40
 
149. Ng M, Fleming T, Robinson M, Thomson B, Graetz N, Mar-
gono C, Mullany EC, Biryukov S, Abbafati C, Abera SF (2014) 
Global, regional, and national prevalence of overweight and 
obesity in children and adults during 1980–2013: a systematic 
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet 
384(9945):766–781
 
150. Guariguata L, Whiting D, Hambleton I, Beagley J, Linnen-
kamp U, Shaw J (2014) Global estimates of diabetes prevalence 
for 2013 and projections for 2035. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 
103(2):137–149
 
151. Davis EA (1995) Functionality of sugars: physicochemical 
interactions in foods. Am J Clin Nutr 62(1 Suppl.):170S–177S
 
152. Atkinson FS, Foster-Powell K, Brand-Miller JC (2008) Interna-
tional tables of glycemic index and glycemic load values: 2008. 
Diabetes Care 31(12):2281–2283. doi:10.2337/dc08-1239
 
153. Greenwood DC, Threapleton DE, Evans CE, Cleghorn CL, 
Nykjaer C, Woodhead C, Burley VJ (2013) Glycemic index, 
glycemic load, carbohydrates, and type 2 diabetes: systematic 
review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. 
Diabetes Care 36(12):4166–4171. doi:10.2337/dc13-0325
 
154. Welsh JA, Sharma AJ, Grellinger L, Vos MB (2011) Consump-
tion of added sugars is decreasing in the United States. Am J 
Clin Nutr 94(3):726–734. doi:10.3945/ajcn.111.018366
