 November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
1
Review
published: 08 November 2017
doi: 10.3389/fnut.2017.00052
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Marilia Seelaender, 
 
University of São Paulo, Brazil
Reviewed by: 
Dario Coletti, 
Sapienza Università di Roma, Italy 
 
Emanuele Rinninella, 
 
Agostino Gemelli University 
Polyclinic, Italy
*Correspondence:
Bhawna Gupta 
 
bhawna.gupta@kiitbiotech.ac.in
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to Clinical 
Nutrition, 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Nutrition
Received: 08 August 2017
Accepted: 10 October 2017
Published: 08 November 2017
Citation: 
Khanna S, Jaiswal KS and Gupta B 
(2017) Managing Rheumatoid 
Arthritis with Dietary Interventions. 
 
Front. Nutr. 4:52. 
 
doi: 10.3389/fnut.2017.00052
Managing Rheumatoid Arthritis  
with Dietary interventions
Shweta Khanna, Kumar Sagar Jaiswal and Bhawna Gupta*
Disease Biology Laboratory, School of Biotechnology, KIIT University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
Self-help by means of dietary interventions can help in management of various disorders 
including rheumatoid arthritis (RA), a debilitating autoimmune disease. Dietary inter-
ventions necessitate a widespread appeal for both patients as well as clinicians due 
to factors including affordability, accessibility, and presence of scientific evidences that 
demonstrate substantial benefits in reducing disease symptoms such as pain, joint stiff-
ness, swelling, tenderness and associated disability with disease progression. However, 
there is still an uncertainty among the community about the therapeutic benefits of 
dietary manipulations for RA. In the present review, we provide an account of different 
diets and their possible molecular mechanism of actions inducing observed therapeutic 
benefits for remission and management of RA. We further indicate food that can be a 
potential aggravating factor for the disease or may help in symptomatic relief. We there-
after summarize and thereby discuss various diets and food which help in reducing levels 
of inflammatory cytokines in RA patients that may play an effective role in management of 
RA following proper patient awareness. We thus would like to promote diet management 
as a tool that can both supplement and complement present treatment strategies for a 
better patient health and recovery.
Keywords: rheumatoid arthritis, diets, foods, essential fatty acids, synbiotics
iNTRODUCTiON
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic, debilitating, chronic inflammatory autoimmune disorder 
affecting approximately 1% of the world population (1). The disease severely impacts quality of life 
with increased morbidity and reduced life expectancy. With the rapidly expanding population with 
RA, the disease has put a lot of economic burden on the society (2–4). Direct costs to governments 
are substantial while indirect costs owing to morbidity and mortality can be limiting for effective 
progress of a developing nation (2).
With undefined pathogenesis, different studies report a blend of environmental and genetic 
factors responsible for full expression of the disease. The shared epitopes coded by human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) alleles, non-HLA genes, epigenetic factors, and differentially glycosylated proteins 
are considered significant risk factors for progression of RA (5–11). Elevated levels of rheumatoid 
factors (RF) (12), anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide autoantibodies (13) and anti-mannose-binding 
lectin autoantibodies (14) are some examples of autoimmune responses by RA patients. These fac-
tors, however, contribute approximately 50% to the risk of development of RA while the rest may be 
contributed by host–environment interactions (15). Environmental factors responsible for develop-
ment of RA may present and act even before disease symptoms become apparent (13, 16). However, 
establishing the role of environmental factors in disease onset somehow becomes impossible due 
 2
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
to concentration during disease onset (17). Early environmental 
factors such as high birth weight promotes chances of develop-
ment of RA and early start of breast feeding reduces chances 
of development of RA (18). Other environmental factors such 
as smoking and infectious diseases also pose risk of developing 
RA (17).
The advances in understanding its pathogenesis have fostered 
the development of new and improved therapeutics; yet, with 
unknown cause and guarded prognosis, it is still an open field 
that requires special focus. The rate of progression is significantly 
rapid in the first few years of undetected or misdiagnosed RA (19). 
Early recognition and treatment of RA is complicated because of 
heterogeneous nature of the disease. No biomarker is available to 
detect the early onset of disease, and traditional biomarkers may 
not identify all patients that require early therapeutic interven-
tions (20), and thus, the patients face severe complications with 
serious joint damage and disability. The first line of treatment for 
RA includes disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) 
that suppress disease activity and reduce joint damages. With the 
development of better treatment strategies like biologic agents, 
e.g., anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α therapy (21) or combina-
tion of DMARDs with biologics, full remission could be achieved 
in a greater proportion of patients although a small group still 
show a frequent relapse post-discontinuation of TNF-α therapy 
(22). Continuous administration of biologics being the only 
option for prolonged remission, however, this being expensive 
(23) is still beyond the reach of most people in the urban and the 
rural sectors.
Furthermore, patients with RA generally complain of gas-
trointestinal tract problems particularly dyspepsia (bloating, 
postprandial fullness, nausea, early satiety, epigastric pain, and 
burning and belching), mucosal ulceration, and altered bowel 
habits (constipation/diarrhea) (24). An altered intestinal micro-
biota has thus been implicated in the etiopathogenesis of RA 
(25–27). Recently, Littman laboratory identified Prevotella copri 
significantly prevalent in RA patients than healthy controls pro-
viding the support that the “gut-joint axis” hypothesis is relevant 
for human rheumatic diseases and may lead to pathogenesis of RA 
(28). Rheumatologists do follow therapeutic regimens that target 
entero-arthropathy for rheumatic diseases, and several have been 
classified as DMARDs. Since 1940 sulfasalazine has been in use 
for the treatment of RA (29) and the triple DMARD therapy that 
combines hydroxychloroquine, sulfasalazine and methotrexate is 
still the first choice of treatment for most rheumatologists (30). As 
Streptococci found in milk was thought to be a cause of RA (31), 
sulfasalazine (combination of a sulfa antibiotic with a salicylate) 
has been proven efficacious for the treatment of RA (32). Proper 
mechanism of action of these drugs is not completely understood, 
despite the observation of encouraging clinical outcomes.
DieTARY iNTeRveNTiONS iN RA
With the increasing evidence of altered microbiota in the gut of 
RA patients being responsible for pathogenesis as well as disease 
progression (26, 28, 33), it should be desirable for rheumatologists 
to advocate a supplemental “diet therapy” to RA patients. Various 
dietary plans for RA have been reported since long (34) and are 
being repeatedly projected (35–39), such as medically supervised 
7–10 days fasting (40–43), vegan (44–47) or Mediterranean diets 
(MDs) (48). We hereby discuss the reported dietary interven-
tions that clearly indicate clinically and statistically significant 
and beneficial long-term effects for relieving symptoms, delay in 
disease progression and associated damages in RA patients. The 
outcomes of published randomized clinical trials performed on 
RA patients to observe the effect of various dietary interventions 
have been summarized in Table 1. A pictorial representation of 
effects put by various factors on progression/remission of RA is 
depicted in Figure 1.
SeveN DAYS FASTiNG FOLLOweD BY 
veGAN DieT
Fraser et al. (74) observed that subtotal fasting where patients 
were allowed to have limited amount of vitamin and min-
eral supplementation, carbohydrate, and energy in form of 
vegetable juice decreased CD4+ lymphocyte activation and 
numbers. Activation of CD4+ T cell and further differentia-
tion to Th1 and Th17 lineages are shown to be responsible 
for progression of RA (75). Thus, decreased T cell activation 
owing to 7–10 day fasting suggests a transient immunosup-
pression, thereby suppressing RA (74). Michalsen et al. have 
also shown beneficial effect of fasting on clinical improvement 
in RA patients as compared to non-fasting group, although 
the results were independent of alterations in intestinal flora 
(54).
A fasting of 7–10 days with partial nutrient intake of vegetable 
broth, herbal teas, parsley, garlic, and decoction of potatoes; juice 
extracts from carrots, beets, and celery; and a controlled daily 
energy intake followed by 1 year of a vegan diet as compared to 
omnivorous diet was studied in different trials (42, 54). Together 
these studies observed remarkable decrease in swollen and tender 
joints, pain, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive 
protein (CRP).
vegan Diet
A diet including intake of only fruits and vegetables, eliminat-
ing any animal product or by-products is vegan diet. This has 
been repeatedly reported to be clinically beneficial for disease 
remission in RA patients (44–46, 57). Studies conclude that the 
improvements in disease activity might have been a result of 
reduction in immune-reactivity to certain food antigens in the 
gastrointestinal tract that were eliminated by changing the diet 
(45, 46). Furthermore, Hafström et al. (76) observed that dur-
ing fasting there was decrease in duration of morning stiffness, 
ESR, articular index, concentrations of acute-phase reactants 
including orosomucoid, C3 and haptoglobin and an increase in 
hemoglobin. Moreover, the release of lysozyme by neutrophils 
was reduced in RA patients, the components of which are known 
to cause inflammation and destruction of joints. Leukotriene B4 
(LTB4) is a pro-inflammatory mediator, involved in activation 
of neutrophils, eosinophils, and monocytes, production of pro-
inflammatory cytokines, which further leads to tissue inflamma-
tion and neutrophil-mediated tissue damage (77). It was reported 
 TABLe 1 | Summary of clinical trials of various dietary interventions in rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Reference
Subjects, duration, and diet
Outcome
Kjeldsen-Kragh et al. 
(42)
Diet group—27 patients
7–10 days subtotal fasting (limited amount of nutritional 
supplements)
3.5 months on individually adjusted gluten-free vegan diet 
followed by lactovegetarian diet
Control group—26 patients
Ordinary diet throughout the study
After 1 month of diet
Reduction in number of tender (p < 0.0002) and swollen joints (p < 0.04), Ritchie articular index (RAI) (p < 0.0004), pain 
(p < 0.0001), morning stiffness duration (p < 0.0002), grip strength, HAQ score, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 
(p < 0.002), C-reactive protein (CRP) (p < 0.005), and WBC count (p < 0.0001) which were maintained even after 1 year of 
administration of diet
Key note: Improvement can be maintained by continuing with individually adjusted diet
Kjeldsen-Kragh et al. 
(49)
Diet group—27 patients
7–10 days subtotal fasting
3.5 months on individually adjusted gluten-free vegan diet 
followed by lactovegetarian diet
Control group—26 patients
Ordinary diet throughout the study
After 1 month of treatment
Significant decrease in leukocyte and platelet count (p < 0.003), IgM rheumatoid factors (p < 0.02), IgG, C3 (p < 0.04) and C4 
complement components (p < 0.01), calprotectin (p < 0.03) and C3 activation products in diet responders in vegetarian diet 
group
Key note: Dietary interventions can help in improvement of disease in some RA patients
Peltonen et al. (50)
Diet group—27 patients
7–10 days subtotal fasting
3.5 months on individually adjusted gluten-free vegan diet 
followed by 9 months lactovegetarian diet administration
Control group—26 patients
Ordinary diet throughout the study
Significant difference in fecal fatty acid profile at different times during the dietary intervention as compared to baseline in 
diet group was observed (p < 0.005). Fecal flora was significantly different between vegan diet (post 1 month treatment) and 
lactovegetarian diet period (p < 0.001). Significant difference in fecal flora was also observed between high improvement to low 
improvement groups (p < 0.001). This difference was also found at 1 month (vegan diet) and 13 months (lactovegetarian diet)
Key note: Study finds association between disease activity and intestinal flora indicating impact of diet on disease progression
Haugen et al. (51)
Diet group—27 patients
7–10 days subtotal fasting
3.5 months on individually adjusted gluten-free vegan diet 
followed by lactovegetarian diet
Control group—26 patients
Ordinary diet throughout the study
Post 3.5 months of vegan diet
Significant reduction in plasma fatty acid 20:3n-6 (p < 0.0001) and 20:4n-6 (p < 0.01) was observed which reversed to baseline 
concentration after lactovegetarian diet
Significant reduction in 20:5n-3 post-vegan diet (p < 0.0001) and lactovegetarian diet (p < 0.01)
No significant difference in fatty acid concentration between diet responders and non-responders after vegan or lactovegetarian
Key note: Change in fatty acid profile could not explain disease improvement
Haugen et al. (47)
Diet group—17 patients
7–10 days fasting
3.5 months on gluten-free vegan diet followed by 9 months 
lactovegetarian diet administration
Control group—17 patients
Ordinary diet throughout the study
After 1 month
Significant reduction in body mass index (BMI) and triceps skin fold thickness in diet group as compared with baseline (post 
1 month) (p < 0.001) and controls (post study) (p = 0.04; p < 0.01)
Key note: One year of dietary intervention had a minor impact on nutritional status of patients. No significant differences in other 
clinical variables studied were observed between the two groups
Kjeldsen-Kragh et al. 
(44)
Patients of above study were (42, 49) called for follow-up; 
1 year post-trial. All responders and half non-responders were 
still on diet. Most of the patients eliminated those food which 
they thought aggravated their disease
Diet responders showed greatest change in clinical variables including HAQ (p < 0.04) and RAI (p < 0.02) from the baseline. 
Significant improvements were observed in all clinical variables including pain (p < 0.005), morning stiffness duration (p < 0.005), 
tender joint (p < 0.0003), RAI (p < 0.0001) and swollen joints (p < 0.05) except grip strength as compared to non-responders 
and controls
Key note: Patients gained benefit from manipulation of diet which can be maintained for long term
Kjeldsen-Kragh et al. 
(52)
Diet group—26 RA patients
7–10 days fasting followed by 3.5 months of gluten-free 
vegetarian diet
Agalactosyl IgG antibodies reduced in RA patients and correlated significantly (p = 0.04) with clinical improvement post fasting 
which was not observed after administration of vegetarian diet
Key note: IgG glycosylation may improve disease status during fasting
Fraser et al. (53)
Diet group—10 patients
7 days subtotal fasting
13 patients—ketogenic diet for 7 days
All patients followed 2 weeks period of re-feeding on 
lactovegetarian diet
Post 7 days fasting
Significant decrease in serum IL-6 levels in fasting group (p < 0.03) on seventh day as compared to baseline and after re-feeding. 
Improvement was observed in ESR, CRP
, and tender joint counts post 7 days fasting
Key note: Fasting improves disease activity in RA patients
Michalsen  
et al. (54)
16 RA patients and 35 fibromyalgia patients
21 patients—vegetarian Mediterranean diet (MD)
30 patients—intermittent modified 8 days fasting therapy
No difference in the fecal bacterial counts, concentration of secretory immunoglobulin or pH of the stool within or between the 
two diet groups. Post 2 weeks of study, fasting RA patients showed more clinical improvement as compared to non-fasting 
patients
Key note: Clinical improvement is not related to intestinal flora
(Continued)
3
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
 Reference
Subjects, duration, and diet
Outcome
Abendroth et al. (55)
22 patients—medical fasting for 7 days
28 patient—MD
Both groups observed significant decrease in disease activity score (DAS) (p < 0.001). Significantly higher decrease in pain 
in fasting group on seventh day (p = 0.049). No significant difference was observed in total fatty acid profile, butyrate and 
propionate but acetate increased significantly (p = 0.044) in fasting group and decreased significantly in MD group. No significant 
correlation between diet induced changes in short chain fatty acids and disease activity changes was observed
Key note: Change of intestinal microflora and relation with diet needs further studies
Sköldstam et al. (48)
Diet group—26 patients—MD
Control group—25 patients
After 12 weeks of study, MD group showed significant reduction in DAS28 score (p < 0.001), decrease in HAQ (p = 0.020), and 
improvement in SF-36 health survey in two dimensions (p = 0.018). Out of 14 efficacy variables, 9 had shown improvement in 
diet group
Key note: MD administration reduced disease activity in RA patients
Hafström et al. (45)
Diet group—38 patients—gluten-free vegan diet
Control group—28 patients
Vegan group showed higher response rate and significant improvement in all variables except CRP
. The diet responders have 
significant improvement in CRP (p < 0.05). Levels of IgG anti-gliadin (p = 0.0183) and anti-β-lactoglobulin (p = 0.0162) levels 
have significantly reduced from baselines in vegan diet groups. After 6 and 12 months, there was significant increase in Larsen 
score, number of erosions and joint count in both groups
Key note: Diet change may reduce immunoreactivity to certain food antigens and some RA patients and may have certain clinical 
benefits
Peltonen et al. (56)
Diet group—uncooked vegan diet rich in lactobacilli
Control group—normal omnivorous diet.
Diet group had significant change in fecal microflora from pre-test and post-test samples (p < 0.001) but not in control group. 
Significant difference was found on comparison of test group with control group at 1 month (p < 0.001). Significant difference 
in microflora was observed between low and high improvement index group after 1 month (p = 0.001) and after intervention 
(p = 0.029) but not in pre-test samples
Key note: Fecal microflora changes with diet and helps in improvement of RA
McDougall et al. (46)
24 RA patients—very low fat vegan diet
Significant decrease in energy intake (p < 0.001), fats (p < 0.001) and proteins (p < 0.001) and significant increase in 
carbohydrate intake (p < 0.001) with decrease in weight. RA symptoms decreased including pain (p < 0.004), morning stiffness 
(p < 0.04), joint swelling (p < 0.02), and tenderness (p < 0.01) with increased joint mobility (p < 0.001)
Key note: RA symptoms significantly decrease in moderate or severe RA patients on administration of very low fat vegan diet
Elkan et al. (57)
Diet group—38 patients—gluten-free vegan diet
Control group—28 patients
After 12 months, vegan group showed decreased BMI, LDL, and weight. DAS28 (p = 0.002) and HAQ scores (p = 0.010) 
decreased significantly in at least 3 months when compared to baseline and CRP decreased (p = 0.008) at 12 months. In vegan 
group, at least in 3 months, total cholesterol (p < 0.001), LDL (p < 0.001) and LDL/HDL ratio (p < 0.001) significantly decreased 
but TGs and HDL did not change. OxLDL significantly decreased (p = 0.021) after 3 months in responders group. IgM anti-
phosphorylcholine increased significantly trend wise and was significant at twelfth month (p = 0.057)
Key note: Vegan diet (gluten free) is anti-inflammatory and atheroprotective
Sköldstam et al. (58)
Study 1: Diet group—14 patients—lactovegetarian diet
Control group—10 patients
Study 2:
13 patients—control period of 2 months
7 patients—control period of 5 months followed by vegan diet 
for following 4 months
Study 3: Diet group—26 patients—Cretan MD
Control group—25 patients
Study 1: At end of study, diet group reported reduction in pain with a significant weight loss (p < 0.001) but no change in disease 
outcome and no change in control subjects were observed
Study 2: During vegan diet, all 20 patients were reported to have significant reduction in pain score, increased functional capacity, 
and significant weight loss (p < 0.001), which was not observed during the control period
Study 3: 9 out of 14 disease outcome measures were improved with a significant loss in weight (p < 0.001) and decreased pain 
when compared to controls
Statistically significant correlation was found between diet and three disease outcome variables including ΔAcute-Phase 
Response (p = 0.007), ΔPain Score (p = 0.005), and ΔPhysical Function (p = 0.002)
Key note: Improvement of RA on administration of Vegan, Mediterranean, or lactovegetarian diet is not related to reduction of 
body weight
Ågren et al. (59)
Diet group—16 patients—vegan diet
Control group—13 patients
Significant reduction (p < 0.001) of serum total, LDL cholesterol, and phospholipid concentrations were observed in vegan 
diet group. Sitosterol concentration increased and that of campesterol decreased giving a significant greater ratio of sitosterol: 
campestrol (p < 0.001) in vegan diet group when compared to control group
Key note: Serum cholesterol, cholestanol, phospholipids, and lathosterol decrease in uncooked vegan diet
Hänninen et al. (60)
42 patients divided in two groups—Uncooked vegan diet for 
3 months and omnivorous control groups
The RA symptoms reduced in diet group and reverted on restarting omnivorous diet. There was a significant negative 
correlation between degree of subjective adaptation system and decreased activity of RA (p = 0.003)
Key note: Vegan diet rich in fibers, antioxidants, and lactobacilli improved RA in some patients
TABLe 1 | Continued
(Continued)
4
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
 Reference
Subjects, duration, and diet
Outcome
Vaghef-Mehrabany 
et al. (61)
Diet group—22 patients—108 colony-forming unit (CFU) of 
Lactobacillus casei 01 for 8 weeks
24 patients—placebo with maltodextrin for 8 weeks
Number of tender and swollen joints, serum hs-CRP levels, DAS, visual analog scale (VAS) score, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, 
and IL-12 decreased significantly in probiotic group. Significant increase in IL-10 (p = 0.02), IL-10/IL-12 (p = 0.01), and IL-10/
TNF-α (p = 0.03) was observed in the probiotic group
Key note: Disease activity and inflammatory status improved in patients on L. casei 01 supplementation
Vaghef-Mehrabany 
et al. (62)
Diet group—22 patients—108 CFU of L. casei 01 for 8 weeks
24 patients—placebo with maltodextrin for 8 weeks
No significant difference was observed within or between probiotic and placebo group in serum malondialdehyde, total 
antioxidant capacity, and catalase activity. Erythrocyte superoxide dismutase activity decreased significantly in probiotic group 
and glutathione peroxidase activity decreased in both groups. Difference between two groups was insignificant for both groups at 
the end of the study
Key note: Probiotic supplementation does not have significant effect on oxidative status of RA patients
Hatakka et al. (63)
Diet group—8 patients—L. rhamnosus GG (LGG) 
(≥5 × 109 CFU/capsule), twice a day for 12 months
13 patients—placebo group
Mean number of tender and swollen joints decreased in probiotic group. A 71% reduction in disease activity was observed in 
probiotic group and 30% in placebo group. Serum IL-1β increased in probiotic group and decreased in placebo group. At the 
end of the study, fecal recovery of LGG was increased from 25 to 86% in probiotic from baseline and decreased from 23 to 0% 
in placebo group
Key note: More patients administered with LGG reported subjective well-being
Zamani et al. (64)
Diet group—30 patients—L. acidophilus (2 × 109 CFU/g), 
L. casei (2 × 109 CFU/g), and Bifidobacterium bifidum 
(2 × 109 CFU/g)
30 patients—placebo group received capsule filled with 
cellulose
Probiotic group observed significant decrease in DAS28 score (p = 0.01), serum insulin levels (p = 0.03), HOMA-B (p = 0.03), 
serum hs-CRP concentrations (p < 0.001), LDL cholesterol (p = 0.07), and total cholesterol (p = 0.09) compared to placebo 
group. No significant effect was observed in tender and swollen joints, VAS pain, glucose homeostasis parameters, biomarkers 
of oxidative stress, and lipid profiles after probiotic administration
Key note: Patients had significant benefit by incorporating probiotic supplements in diet
Vaghef-Mehrabany 
et al. (65)
Diet group—22 patients—108 CFU of L. casei 01
24 patients—placebo group received similar capsules with 
maltodextrin
No significant difference within or between group for anthropometric and demographic parameters, physical activity was 
observed. Serum lipid did not change within any group significantly or in between the groups
Key note: L. casei 01 could not improve serum lipid in patients
Alipour et al. (66)
Diet group—22 patients—108 CFU of L. casei 01
24 patients—placebo group
Probiotic decreased serum high sensitivity CRP levels (p = 0.009), counts of swollen (p = 0.003) and tender joints (p = 0.03), 
DAS (p < 0.05), and global health score (p = 0.00). Global health score decreased significantly in placebo group as well. At the 
end of study, more patients in probiotic group showed moderate response to the supplementation according to EULAR criteria 
but all were non-responders in placebo group. The difference of IL-6, IL-12 (0.00), TNF-α (p = 0.002), and IL-10 (p = 0.007) 
cytokines between the two groups was statistically significant
Key note: Probiotic can be an adjunct therapy for relieving symptoms
de los Angeles 
Pineda et al. (67)
Diet group—15 patients—L. rhamnosus GR-1 and L. reuteri 
RC-14 with 2 billion CFU viable bacteria
14 patients—placebo
Significant difference was observed in HAQ score (p = 0.02) in probiotic group when compared to baseline but not between 
groups. The pro-inflammatory cytokines including GM-CSF, IL-6, IL-1α, TNF-α, and IL-15 decreased but not significantly in the 
probiotic group. No difference was observed in cytokine levels and DAS
Key note: Probiotics did not improve RA but functional improvements were reported
Mandel et al. (68)
Diet group—22 patients—Bacillus coagulans GBI-30, 6086 
(2 billion CFU) with green tea extract, methylsulfonylmethane, 
and vitamins and minerals (including vitamins A, B, C, D, E, 
folic acid, and selenium)
22 patients—placebo group received microcrystaline cellulose
Probiotic group showed statistically significant improvement in patient pain assessment score (p = 0.052) and pain scale 
(p = 0.046) as compared to baseline. Improvement was observed in patient global assessment, patient self-assessed disability, 
and reduction in total CRP but statistical difference was not found in physician global assessment or physician assessment of 
painful and swollen joints. Ability to walk 2 miles was marginally significant (p = 0.072) and ability to participate in daily activities 
was more in probiotic group
Key note: Adjunctive therapy with probiotics serves effective for RA patients
Kavanagh et al. (69)
Diet group—24 patients—elemental diet 028 (E028) (4 weeks) 
followed by food reintroduction where food unlikely to cause 
intolerance were introduced first followed by those which were 
known to cause intolerance one at a time. Food worsening 
RA was eliminated
23 patients—control groups were given E028 as a substitute 
to any drink along with normal diet
After 4 weeks of elemental diet, the diet group showed significant increase in grip strength (p = 0.008), decrease in RAI 
(p = 0.006), and loss of weight as compared to control diet group. CRP concentrations were different between the two 
groups but not significant. Statistically significant correlation was observed between loss of weight and grip strength at 1 week 
(p = 0.009) and 4 weeks (p = 0.027) in the diet group
Key note: Elemental diet may improve some parameters in RA patients
Podas et al. (70)
Diet group—21 patients—elemental diet E028
9 patients—oral prednisolone 15 mg/day
All clinical parameters of RA including early morning stiffness, VAS, RAI, and HAQ improved significantly (p < 0.05) in both 
groups. Clinical parameters were improved by 20% in 72% patients in elemental diet group as compared to 78% in steroid group
Key note: A 2 week treatment with elemental diet is as effective as 15 mg/day of prednisolone in improvement of clinical 
parameters. RA may start within the intestine due to reaction to various food antigens
(Continued)
TABLe 1 | Continued
5
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
 FiGURe 1 | The picture summarizes various factors contributing to severity 
of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and diets which cause remission of symptoms 
(left side of image). The effects of various factors on state of disease are 
shown at the right side of the image. The upper half of the image shows 
highly inflamed joints and synovial membrane, increased infiltration of immune 
cells in joints on exposure to environmental factors or food antigens. Lower 
half of the image shows effect of various diets in reducing inflammation, 
immune cell infiltration, and reducing the severity of disease.
Reference
Subjects, duration, and diet
Outcome
Holst-Jensen et al. 
(71)
Diet group—15 patients—commercial liquid diet (TU). 
TU contains hydrolyzed soy protein, triglycerides and 
carbohydrates, methionine, tryptophan, vitamins, and trace 
elements and is lactose free
Control group—15 patients
4 weeks of treatment caused statistical significant improvements in pain (p = 0.02), HAQ score (p = 0.03) and reduction in BMI 
(p = 0.001). After the study, the number of swollen joints, ESR and General assessment of health, average during the last week 
lowered but not statistically significant. No difference was observed in the control group. Only one patient in the diet group 
achieved complete remission
Key note: Peptide diet can improve some subjective and objective parameters of the disease. This diet may help those patients 
who have diet aggravated RA
Van de Laar and Van 
der Korst (72)
Diet group—45 patients—allergen free diet
49 patients—allergen restricted with lactoproteins and yellow 
dyes
During first 4 weeks, patients followed their normal diets 
followed by 4 weeks of assigned diets and then administration 
of normal diet for 4 weeks
No significant difference could be found in clinical effects between the allergen free and allergen restricted diet. Only 9 out of 94 
patients enrolled in the study showed favorable response but the disease relapsed after readministration of usual diets
Key note: Some patients have food-aggravated RA, and they can be controlled by administering allergen-free food
Karatay et al. (73)
20 patients—positive skin prick test (SPT) to food extracts
20 patients—negative SPT
All patients first fasted to most common allergenic food 
for 12 days. Food challenge was performed for PPG with 
allergenic food and for PNG with corn and rice for 12 days. 
Followed which allergenic foods were removed from 
respective groups
On food challenge in PPG, ESR (p < 0.05), CRP (p = 0.001), TNF-α (p < 0.01), and IL-1β (p < 0.05) increased and was also 
observed on re-elimination of food. In PNG, pain decreased significantly (p < 0.05) on food challenge. At end of re-elimination 
phase, differences were observed in between two groups in pain, duration of stiffness, number of tender and swollen joints, 
CRP levels, and RAI but not in HAQ and ESR levels. 72% patients in PPG group and 18% in PNG group suffered from disease 
aggravation on food challenge which continued in re-elimination phase
Key note: Diet changes on individual level may change disease activity in patients
TABLe 1 | Continued
6
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
that the release of LTB4 from neutrophils was markedly reduced 
at completion of the fasting week (76).
Furthermore, it has been reported that during starvation, 
ketone bodies, including β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB), increase and 
serve as an alternate source of ATP in mammals (78). NLRP3 
inflammasome regulates release of IL-18 and IL-1β (pro-inflam-
matory cytokines) in macrophages and gets activated on receiving 
damage-associated molecular patterns (79). Yun-Hee Youm et al. 
reported inhibition of activation of NLRP3 inflammasomes by 
BHB in response to various NLRP3 activators. BHB also reduced 
NLRP3-mediated release of IL-1β and IL-18 from human mono-
cytes. Thus, the study concludes that starvation or ketogenic 
diets may play an anti-inflammatory role through inflammasome 
inhibition in BHB-mediated manner (79). This has been as well 
reported in the review by Tedeschi and Costenbader (80).
Müller et al. conducted a meta-analysis in order to find the 
effect of fasting followed by vegetarian diet in patients with RA. 
The study reports clinically and statistically significant beneficial 
long-term effect on RA patients, which may be used as a treat-
ment for the disease (81).
Therefore, fasting followed by vegan diet or vegan diet alone can 
potentially reduce symptoms and disease activity in RA patients 
independent of changes in intestinal microflora. Improvements 
observed can be attributed to reduced exposure to potential 
antigens contributed by the omnivorous diet of RA patients.
Mediterranean Diet
Mediterranean diet is rich in oleic acid, omega-3 fatty acids, 
unrefined carbohydrates, and phytochemicals (82). MD and 
 7
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
improvement in clinical and symptomatic parameters helping 
patients with food-aggravated disease conditions. Patients 
treated with elemental diet showed reduced symptoms of RA but 
relapsed on discontinuation (69). These studies further indicate 
that aggravation in symptoms of RA may be an effect of certain 
food allergens that are absent in elemental diet.
elimination Diet
Certain food and food components may worsen the disease con-
ditions in RA (69, 70). Thus, an elimination diet plan may as well 
be considered wherein we eliminate those food related antigens 
that may possibly aggravate the disease symptoms (72). Intestinal 
epithelium is an interface between mucosal immune system and 
external environment, and it is the interaction between intestinal 
epithelial cells and mucosal immune system which determines 
the resultant immune response to various food antigens (88). 
There are many evidences that show food as a potential antigen 
for humans which pass through the gastrointestinal tract’s 
epithelium and further interact with mucosal immune system 
and move into circulation (89). It has been shown that the intes-
tinal mucosa is more permeable to allergens in RA patients on 
administration of non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs (90). A 
study conducted by Van de Laar and Van der Korst (72), included 
seropositive RA patients divided into two groups of which one 
was administered diet free of additives, allergens, and preserva-
tives and other was on allergen restricted diet containing yellow 
dyes and lactoproteins. No difference was observed in clinical 
effects on RA patients taking any of these diets (72). A study 
conducted by Karatay et al. enrolled 18 RA patients who gave 
a positive skin prick test (SPT) (PPG) response to at least one 
food and 17 RA patients with completely negative SPT (PNG) 
results. All patients were kept on elimination diet where patients 
in PPG were given prick positive food and PNG patients were 
given corn (most allergenic to RA patients) along with rice (not 
allergenic) in increased amount for 12 days. This phase was then 
followed by re-elimination phase. In PPG, ESR, CRP, pain, tender 
and swollen joints, RAI score, TNF-α, and IL-1β increased during 
the challenge phase and after re-elimination phase. Thus, these 
studies concluded that food allergens are potential triggers of 
the immune system leading to inflammation by the activation of 
macrophage and other effector cells.
Treatment of RA includes inhibition of TNF-α and IL-1, and 
these inflammatory mediators are observed to be increased with 
the intake of allergenic food hence excluding some of these food 
from RA patient’s diet may benefit them as well as help them to 
reduce their requirement of recombinant human IL-1 receptor 
antagonist and anti-TNF-α antibodies (73).
iNDiviDUAL FOOD iTeMS iN DieT AND 
THeiR ReLevANCe TO RA
In an average diet comprising of breakfast, lunch, and dinner, 
there are several food items which are rich source of some 
phytochemicals and their efficacy in eradication of diseases has 
been known and is included under traditional medicines on 
which 80% of the world population relies (91). Food items such 
particularly the Cretan MD involve high consumption of olive 
oil, cereals, fruits, vegetables, fish, and legumes; less red meat; 
and inclusion of moderate amount of red wine in diet. A study 
conducted by Sköldstam et al. concluded that on administration 
of Cretan MD to RA patients, inflammation was reduced, vitality 
and physical functions were improved (48). An important com-
ponent of MD is olive oil which has antioxidant properties, is 
rich in oleic acid (18:1n-9), is metabolized to form eicosatrienoic 
acid (20:3n-9), and has anti-inflammatory effects similar to those 
of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids from fish oils (48). Studies 
have also shown that incorporation of olive oil in diet decreases 
the risk of developing RA (83). Rosillo et al. (84) have shown 
that administration of extra virgin olive oil in CIA mice (type II 
collagen-induced arthritis) reduced the serum levels of cartilage 
oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) and metalloproteinase-3 
(MMP-3) that are the predictive markers of cartilage and joint 
damage in RA. The expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines 
including IL-1β, TNF-α, and IL-17, involved in progression of the 
disease, was also reduced. STAT-3 transcription factor promotes 
abnormal growth and prolonged survival of synovial cells (85) 
as well as in Th17 cell differentiation (86) in RA. Rosillo et al. 
also concluded that olive oil diet interfered with STAT-3 signaling 
by suppressing phosphorylation of STAT-3 and thus repressing 
IL-17 production (84). MAPKs induce pro-inflammatory gene 
expression, thereby promoting inflammatory processes (87). On 
investigating the effect of dietary olive oil on MAPKs (JNK and 
p38) signaling pathway in mice fed with olive oil, they found 
reduced levels of phosphorylated JNK and p38 proteins. They also 
observed reduced translocation of p65 to nucleus thus reducing 
NF-κβ mediated activation of various pro-inflammatory genes 
including TNF-α, IL-17, IL-6, and IL-1β within arthritic joint 
microenvironment where they can influence osteoclast differen-
tiation thus promoting joint destruction. Therefore, reduction in 
NF-κβ mediated activation of pro-inflammatory cytokines will 
minimize joint destruction in patients. The study concluded that 
mice fed with olive oil had reduced cartilage destruction, joint 
edema, and arthritis development, and thus, olive oil may be 
beneficial in preventing RA (84).
elemental Diet
Elemental diet provides food in simplest form consisting of 
glucose, vitamins, trace elements, and essential amino acids, is 
hypoallergenic, contains all nutrients for daily requirements, and 
is thought to be less immunogenic (71). In the clinical trial con-
ducted by Podas et al. (70), RA patients were given an elemental 
diet (E028) providing 86 kcal and 2.5 g protein/100 ml liquid 
elemental diet for 2 weeks. A large proportion of patients (72%) 
taking this elemental diet had more than 20% improvement in 
pain [on a 10 cm visual analog scale (VAS)], early morning stiff-
ness, and the Ritchie articular index (RAI). The study concluded 
that this diet was as effective as 15 mg/day of oral prednisolone. 
However, no improvement was visible in the laboratory param-
eters including ESR, CRP, hemoglobin and a relapse of symptoms 
on discontinuation of this elemental diet pointed toward food 
antigens playing a possible role in pathogenesis and progression 
of RA (70). Similarly, Kavanagh et al. (69) and Holst-Jensen 
et al. (71) reported effects of different elemental diets with 
 8
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
as dietary fibers, cooking oil, polyphenols, bioactive compounds 
from several herbs and beverages like tea are among the cheapest 
sources of medication; however, their bioavailability has always 
been a matter of concern.
Dietary Fibers and whole Grains
Most of the staple food consumed all over the world are com-
prised of dietary fibers and whole grains. A definitive explana-
tion for dietary fibers can be put as remnants of food not digested 
in small intestine, which then moves to large intestine and gets 
fermented by the microflora and induces several health promot-
ing effects (92). Insoluble fibers such as cellulose and lignin are 
found in fruits, vegetables, and whole grains; and soluble fibers 
include pectin, guar gum, and mucilage (93). Earlier studies have 
found an inverse relationship between intake of dietary fiber and 
inflammatory biomarkers such as plasma fibrinogen, hs-CRP, 
TNF-α, IL-6 levels which are indicators of RA (94). However, 
contradictory reports were published as well by Hu and the 
group (95).
When germ, endosperm, and bran are present in same propor-
tions as in intact grains, they are regarded as whole grains. Whole 
wheat, whole rice, oats, corn, rye, barley, millets, sorghum, canary 
seed, fonio, and wild rice are generally included in the category of 
common whole grains (96). Whole grains provide rich amounts 
of antioxidants, phytic acid, vitamin E and selenium, and these 
components are known to be involved in anti-inflammatory 
processes (97).
Even if no conclusive evidences are found about the role 
of dietary fibers and whole grains in RA, Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) has approved their health promoting 
claims (98). As per Dietary Reference Intakes recommendations, 
daily consumption of dietary fibers within the limit of 14 g per 
1,000 kcal intake or 25 and 38 g for an adult women and men, 
respectively (93) has health benefits.
Fruits
Apart from the botanic definition, fruits are the pulpy seeded 
tissues with sweet and tart taste (99). Bioactive components and 
phytochemicals, the non-nutrient plant compounds, present in 
fruits and vegetables are the key players and have been shown 
to diminish the symptoms of several chronic diseases such as 
atherosclerosis, arthritis, diabetes, asthma, AIDS, neoplasia, and 
cardiovascular diseases (100–102). Dietary phytochemicals are 
generally categorized into main groups as nitrogen-containing 
compounds, phenolics, organosulfur compounds, alkaloids, 
phytosterols, and carotenoids (103).
Regular consumption of fresh fruits rich in important phyto-
chemicals can reduce oxidative stress and inflammation (104). 
Several cohort studies have also reported that repeated and high 
consumption is not only associated with downregulation of dis-
ease progression but also may provide protective effects against 
RA (105–107).
In patients suffering from RA, osteoclastogenesis (the process 
of bone tissue destruction by osteoclast cells) has been identified 
as a clinical phenomenon (108). Dried plums are rich source of 
polyphenols, when consumed can suppress osteoclastogenesis by 
inhibiting the activity of TNF-α and nitric oxide (NO) synthase 
and downregulate the transcription factor-nuclear factor for 
activated T cells (NFATc1) (109).
Anthocyanins have proved themselves as potent antioxidants 
and are more abundant in black rice, eggplant, and black soybean. 
These have properties to reduce oxidative stress by increasing 
superoxide dismutase (SOD) and decreasing serum malondial-
dehyde (MDA). It has been reported in mouse models of RA that 
the uptake of anthocyanins can bring down TNF-α levels (110), 
thereby reducing disease activity. Resveratrol from black grapes 
has been found to exert protective effect in rat model of RA (111). 
It was reported that resveratrol can lower down specific RA bio-
markers such as serum RF, COMP, and MMP-3; immunological 
biomarkers as IgG and antinuclear antibody; immunomodulatroy 
cytokines (TNF-α) and oxidative stress (111). Mangiferin, a poly-
phenolic compound found in mangoes, used in an in vivo study 
on RA-induced DBA-1/J male mice reported downregulation of 
IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, inhibited NF-κβ signaling, and activated 
extracellular signal regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) (112). In 
another study with mangiferin, it was observed that mangiferin 
prevented joint destruction in RA by inducing proapoptotic 
effects on human synovium-derived synoviocytes (113).
Kaempferol, an important phytochemical found in grapefruits, 
can bring down the level of inflammatory cytokine IL-1β, inhibit-
ing the cell signaling pathways like phosphorylation of ERK1/2, 
p38, and JNK and activation of NF-κβ (114). Several enzymes 
inducing oxidative stress such as MMPs, COX-2, and PGE-2 in 
RA-derived synoviocytes were lowered down on administration 
of kaempferol (114). These molecules are reported in destruction 
of bone and articular cartilage leading to pathogenesis of RA 
(115, 116). A mixture of polyphenols composed of epigallocat-
echin, gallate, catechin, tannic acid, and querectin when injected 
at intra-articular region of rat model of RA, prevented cartilage 
destruction while reducing inflammation (117).
p-Coumaric acid is largely present in grapes, oranges, apples, 
tomatoes, spinach, and potatoes. In an in vivo study using rat 
model of adjuvant-induced arthritis, p-coumaric acid intake 
significantly reduced the expression of TNF-α (118). Genistein, 
an important isoflavone present in soybeans maintained a perfect 
balance between T helper cell, Th1 and Th2, and inhibited IFN-γ 
and IL-4 production which ultimately brings down the inflamma-
tion (119). Freshly prepared orange juice has high content of beta-
cryptoxanthin and its intake reduces the risk of RA in humans 
(120). Pineapple stem are rich source of proteolytic enzyme 
called as bromelain. In a study, bromelain was consumed orally 
by RA patients in dosages of 20 or 40 mg for 3–4 times daily up to 
13 months. About 72% of the total patients involved in the study 
came up with promising results, and there were no side effects 
detected. In spite of promising results obtained, significance of 
the study cannot be explained due to lack of control groups (121).
Spices
Ginger has been known for its therapeutic properties due to the 
presence of pungent phenolics such as shogaols and gingerols 
(122). Turmeric, rich in phenolic curcuminoids, has also proved 
its beneficial effects against several malignancies (123). In a study, 
a perfect mixture of blended ginger and turmeric were given to the 
adjuvant-induced arthritic rats. This mixture showed protective 
 9
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
effects against extra-articular complications of RA (122). In 
another study conducted by the same group, they found that 
ginger and turmeric administered at a dose of 200 mg/kg body 
weight could independently lower down the signs and symptoms 
of RA in the adjuvant-induced arthritic male Wistar albino rats. 
The results were significant with a p-value <0.05 as compared to 
the control group receiving only indomethacin (123).
Curcumin has also presented itself as a potent anti-inflamma-
tory spice by blocking the expression of IL-1 and IL-6 in an in vitro 
study with RA patient-derived fibroblast-like synoviocytes (124). 
Methotrexate is a widely prescribed antirheumatic drug for the 
treatment of RA but it increases oxidative stress, decreases NO 
levels, and leads to vascular endothelial dysfunction (124, 125). 
Curcumin and folic acid co-administration was found to lower 
down methotrexate-induced vascular endothelial dysfunctions in 
male Wistar rats (126).
Bark of Cinnamomum zeylanicum (Cinnamon bark) is widely 
used in South-East Asian dishes. Rathi et al. treated RA animal 
models involving male Swiss albino mice and Wistar rats with 
polyphenolic fraction of cinnamon barks and found inhibitory 
effects on secretion of cytokines IL-2, IL-4, and IFN-γ and reduc-
tion in levels of TNF-α (127).
essential Fatty Acids
Omega-3 or omega-6 fatty acids have shown their potential as 
immunosuppressants and anti-inflammatory agents (128–131). 
Borage seed oil provides high amount of omega-6 fatty acid or 
gamma-linolenic acid (GLA) (132). A double-blind trial was 
conducted on 37 patients with active RA, and they were assigned 
to consume borage seed oil containing 1.4 g of GLA per day 
while placebo group was given cottonseed oil. After 24 weeks of 
consumption, the group which received GLA had significantly 
reduced tender and swollen joint scores, whereas placebo group 
did not show any change (133).
Gamma-linolenic acid and omega-3 fatty acid alpha-lino-
lenic and stearidonic acid from black currant seed oil (BCSO) 
has also been investigated for their therapeutic activity. About 
10.5 g of BCSO were given to RA patients in double-blind 
fashion and soybean oil as placebo for 24 weeks continuously. 
BCSO treated group, when compared with placebo group came 
up with significant positive effects in pain relieving and joint 
tenderness (134).
Fish oils provide high amount of omega-3 fatty acids, and their 
efficacy to treat RA has been checked in several controlled trials. 
RA patients were provided with fish oil with 3.6 g of omega-3 
fatty acids per day in double-blind fashion, and placebo group 
were treated with mixture of fatty acids for 12 weeks, which was 
very much similar in amount found in average diet. The group 
which received fish oil had reduced morning stiffness, significant 
increase in grip strength compared to the placebo group (135). 
Eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic acids are ethyl ester 
derivatives of omega-3 fatty acids, and their capability to reduce 
severity of RA has been assessed. When RA patients consumed 
these derivatives in an amount of 130 mg/kg body weight/day for 
26–30 weeks, a significant decrease in pain, morning stiffness, 
and tender joints was observed in comparison with the placebo 
group that received only corn oil (136).
Synbiotics
Synbiotics are composed of probiotics and prebiotics (the 
non-digestible food products beneficial for growth of helpful 
bacteria in large intestine and provides health promoting effects) 
(137). Several reports have confirmed the reduction of oxidative 
stress in human body by consumption of synbiotics (138–141). 
As per FDA, probiotics are “live microorganisms which, when 
administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the 
host” (142). Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus are the key strains 
widely used as probiotics in commercial, pharmaceutical, and 
nutraceutical products (143, 144). Many reports have frequently 
stated that the population of gut microbes gets altered in a person 
affected with RA (56, 145–147), and several animal studies have 
already proved that any alteration in gut microbiota corresponds 
to initiation of RA (148).
In several animal and human studies, the health promot-
ing benefits of probiotics has been extensively assessed. When 
RA-induced animal models were fed Lactobacillus casei, it led 
to improvised health conditions by reduction in levels of pro-
inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-12, and 
IL-17, IFN-γ, and TNF-α, while upregulating the secretion of 
regulatory cytokines like IL-10 and TGF-β (149–152).
When yogurts fermented with live or heat killed Lactobacillus 
rhamnosus GG (LGG) and L. bulgaricus were fed to arthritis 
induced Lewis rats, it significantly reduced arthritis clinical 
scores (153). Anti-inflammatory effects of methotrexate was 
enhanced, when the medicine combined with Escherichia coli 
strain O83 (Colinfant) was administered on adjuvant-induced 
arthritis models (154).
Different strains of probiotics have also been used for human 
studies with reports of health conditions improvements (63, 67, 
68). Oxidative stress generated during metabolism has also been 
held as culprit for pathogenesis of RA and selective strains with 
high antioxidant activity may be employed to lower down disease 
progression. In a study, female RA patients were given L. casei 01 
supplement capsules containing about 108 colony-forming unit 
(CFU)/capsule and the placebo group maltodextrin for 8 weeks. 
After treatment, a significant decrease was observed in number 
of tender or swollen joints, VAS scores, hs-CRP levels, disease 
activity score (DAS), TNF-α, and IL-12 in the probiotic group 
with a significant increase in serum IL-10 levels. Alteration of gut 
microbiota is known in case of early RA disease, and probiotics 
normalize the gut fauna toward a normal healthy microbiota and 
show anti-inflammatory activity. At the end of the study, several 
oxidative stress indices were also measured wherein MDA level 
decreased insignificantly, total antioxidant capacity levels and 
catalase activity increased in probiotics groups while there were no 
changes observed in SOD and glutathione peroxidase activity (62).
In a pilot study conducted on 21 RA patients, the effect of 
LGG on their health condition has been assessed. Patients from 
test group were prescribed to take two capsules of LGG twice a 
day (Gefilus, Valio Ltd.; ≥5 × 109 CFU/capsule), and the placebo 
group took the same capsule without bacteria for 12 months and 
finally several inflammatory parameters were measured. The 
number of tender and swollen joints reduced from 8.3 to 4.4, as 
compared to an increase from 5.5 to 5.6 in placebo group, mean 
serum IL-1β decreased in placebo group but no significant change 
 TABLe 2 | Recommended anti-inflammatory food chart.
Fruits
Dried plums, grapefruits, grapes, blueberries, pomegranate, 
mango (seasonal fruit), banana, peaches, apples
Cereals
Whole oatmeal, whole wheat bread, whole flattened rice
Legumes
Black soybean, black gram
Whole grains
Wheat, rice, oats, corn, rye, barley, millets, sorghum, canary 
seed
Spices
Ginger, turmeric
Herbs
Sallaki, ashwagandha
Oils
Olive oil, fish oil, borage seed oil (in encapsulated form)
Miscellaneous
Yogurt (curd), green tea, basil (tulsi) tea
10
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
in levels of TNF-α, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, and myeloperoxiedase was 
observed (63).
Alcohol Consumption
Consumption of alcohol with pathogenesis of RA is still under 
debate. While some studies point that alcohol consumption leads 
to progression of RA (155–158), others have concluded that no 
such relationship exists (159, 160).
In a recent case–control study on Scandinavian population, 
alcohol consumption led to decrease in RA risk in a dose-depend-
ant manner when alcohol consuming subjects were compared 
with non-drinkers despite of their gender, age, and CCP status 
difference (161).
Another study focused on frequency of alcohol consump-
tion not the amount, by RA patients of Caucasian ethnicity and 
reported similar results. All measures of RA severity such as 
CRP, DAS28 score, modified health assessment questionnaire, 
and pain VAS were found to be in inverse relation with increased 
frequency of alcohol uptake (80, 162).
Tea
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) has proved its therapeutic 
potential and has been of particular interest among natural prod-
ucts for its use as a nutraceutical (163). It is a main phytochemical 
present in green tea that is obtained from dried leaves of Camellia 
sinensis and C. assamica of Theacease family (164). The protective 
effects exerted by green tea have been well proved in neurodegen-
erative disease, inflammatory disease, cardiovascular disease, and 
several types of cancer (165, 166).
In RA, the resistance of synovial fibroblasts against apoptosis 
has been set as a trademark, and this characteristic is enhanced by 
constitutive expression of proteins like AKT and NF-κβ and over-
expression of Mcl-1 and Bcl-2 (anti-apoptotic proteins) (167). 
EGCG treatment has successfully shown its ability to downregu-
late Mcl-1 in synovial fibroblasts and increases the susceptibility 
toward apoptosis (167). The reports also conclude that EGCG 
successfully suppresses the production of MMP-1, MMP-2, and 
MMP-3 in synovial fibroblasts and prevents bone and cartilage 
destruction (168, 169). EGCG treatment in RA patients inhibits 
IL-1β induced IL-6 production by synovial fibroblasts and can 
upregulate an inhibitor, i.e., soluble gp130 receptor, which in turn 
suppresses IL-6 trans signaling (170).
Herbs
Plants with effective health promoting effects are known as herbs, 
and these have a long history of being used as medicine to cure 
several diseases. Synthetic drugs used in arthropathies have been 
associated with numerous side effects on health, which in return 
has led the focus toward medicines of botanical origin (171).
Sallaki (Boswellia serrata) is widely recommended as an 
anti-inflammatory herb as prescribed in Ayurveda (172). The 
phytochemical which act as key player is boswellic acid from 
pentacyclic triterpene family (173). Boswellic acid inhibits the 
expression of lipoxygenase-5 and eventually lowering down 
leukotriene synthesis and leukotreines are well known for their 
role in inflammation (174–176). These have also proved their 
potency to block NF-κβ activation and brought down the levels 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines like TNF-α, IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, 
and IFN-γ and also prevented classical complement pathway by 
restricting the cleavage of C3 to C3b (177).
Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) is one of the plants being 
described in Ayurveda as a potent anti-inflammatory plant 
(178). It is rich in Withaferin A, a steroidal phytochemical which 
can prevent proceeding of NF-κβ signaling pathway (179). In 
vitro studies with ashwagandha extract suppressed release of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines as TNF-α, IL-12, and IL-1β from 
synoviocytes of RA patients but it failed to stop synthesis and 
subsequent release of IL-6 (180). Rats with induced arthritis 
when treated with powder of ashwagandha roots showed less 
destruction of bone collagen (181). Moreover, in a double-blind 
placebo-controlled study aqueous extract significantly reduced 
stiffness, disability to move knee and joints, and pain score (182).
CONCLUSiON
With the growing wealth of literature supporting the positive 
impact of diet therapy in decreasing disease activity in RA, 
with increasing understanding of microbiota mediated disease 
pathology and the beneficial effects of nutrients on inflammation 
and immunity, our interest in dietary interventions is growing. 
Patients are always interested in alternative treatments to relieve 
their debilitating condition. We believe that one should promul-
gate diet therapy for RA patients. Besides the regular DMARDs 
and anti-TNFs that are provided for effective cure of severe RA, 
patients should be motivated to change their eating habits. We 
should work to educate and capacitate them with the benefits of 
eating more vegetarian/vegan diets, eliminate potentially allergic 
food components, and introduce more poly unsaturated fatty acid/
oleic acid/synbiotics in their diet plans. Early signs of RA can be 
potentially delayed with these dietary interventions. Considering 
that these food are not as expensive as any regular therapeutics, 
they can be easily incorporated for patients from any societal or 
economical background. Although it will be difficult to observe 
immediate benefits of these dietary manipulations, the long-term 
benefits are already reported.
We believe that an ideal meal can include raw or moderately 
cooked vegetables (lots of greens, legumes), with addition of spices 
like turmeric and ginger (123), seasonal fruits (183), probiotic 
yogurt (184); all of which are good sources of natural antioxidants 
and deliver anti-inflammatory effects. The patient should avoid any 
processed food, high salt (185), oils, butter, sugar, and animal prod-
ucts (186). Dietary supplements like vitamin D (187, 188), cod liver 
 11
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
oil (189, 190), and multivitamins (191) can also help in managing 
RA. This diet therapy with low impact aerobic exercises can be used 
for a better degree of self-management of RA with minimal financial 
burden (192–194). A better patient compliance is, however, always 
necessary for effective care and management of RA.
Based on findings discussed in this review, we have designed 
an anti-inflammatory food chart (Table 2) that may aid in reduc-
ing signs and symptoms of RA. This may not cure the patients; 
however, an effective incorporation of these food items in the 
daily food plan may help to reduce their disease activity, delay 
disease progression, and reduce joint damage, and eventually a 
decreased dose of drugs administered for therapeutic treatment 
of patients.
AUTHOR CONTRiBUTiONS
SK, KJ, and BG designed the concept and were involved in writing 
of the manuscript.
ReFeReNCeS
1. Gibofsky A. Overview of epidemiology, pathophysiology, and diagnosis of 
rheumatoid arthritis. Am J Manag Care (2012) 18(13 Suppl):S295–302. 
2. Aggarwal A, Chandran S, Misra R. Physical, psychosocial and economic 
impact of rheumatoid arthritis: a pilot study of patients seen at a tertiary care 
referral centre. Natl Med J India (2006) 19(4):187. 
3. Uhlig T, Moe RH, Kvien TK. The burden of disease in rheumatoid arthritis. 
Pharmacoeconomics (2014) 32(9):841–51. doi:10.1007/s40273-014-0174-6 
4. Lubeck DP. The economic impact of arthritis. Arthritis Care Res (1995) 
8(4):304–10. doi:10.1002/art.1790080416 
5. Holoshitz J. The rheumatoid arthritis HLA-DRB1 shared epitope. Curr Opin 
Rheumatol (2010) 22(3):293. doi:10.1097/BOR.0b013e328336ba63 
6. Rioux JD, Abbas AK. Paths to understanding the genetic basis of autoimmune 
disease. Nature (2005) 435(7042):584–9. doi:10.1038/nature03723 
7. Raghav SK, Gupta B, Agrawal C, Chaturvedi VP, Das HR. Expression of 
TNF-α and related signaling molecules in the peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells of rheumatoid arthritis patients. Mediators Inflamm (2006) 2006:12682. 
doi:10.1155/MI/2006/12682 
8. Agrawal C, Raghav SK, Gupta B, Das RH, Chaturvedi VP, Goswami K, et al. 
Tumor necrosis factor-α microsatellite polymorphism association with 
rheumatoid arthritis in Indian patients. Arch Med Res (2005) 36(5):555–9. 
doi:10.1016/j.arcmed.2005.03.035 
9. Gupta B, Agrawal C, Raghav SK, Das SK, Das RH, Chaturvedi VP, et al. 
Association of mannose-binding lectin gene (MBL2) polymorphisms with 
rheumatoid arthritis in an Indian cohort of case-control samples. J Hum 
Genet (2005) 50(11):583–91. doi:10.1007/s10038-005-0299-8 
10. Gupta B, Hawkins RD. Epigenomics of autoimmune diseases. Immunol Cell 
Biol (2015) 93(3):271–6. doi:10.1038/icb.2015.18 
11. Raghav SK, Gupta B, Agrawal C, Saroha A, Das RH, Chaturvedi VP, et al. 
Altered expression and glycosylation of plasma proteins in rheumatoid 
arthritis. Glycoconj J (2006) 23(3):167–73. doi:10.1007/s10719-006-7922-6 
12. Eggert M, Zettl U, Neeck G. Autoantibodies in autoimmune diseases. Curr 
Pharm Des (2010) 16(14):1634–43. doi:10.2174/138161210791164144 
13. Rantapää-Dahlqvist S, de Jong BA, Berglin E, Hallmans G, Wadell G, 
Stenlund H, et al. Antibodies against cyclic citrullinated peptide and IgA 
rheumatoid factor predict the development of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis 
Rheum (2003) 48(10):2741–9. doi:10.1002/art.11223 
14. Gupta B, Raghav SK, Agrawal C, Chaturvedi VP, Das RH, Das HR. Anti-MBL 
autoantibodies in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: prevalence and clinical 
significance. J Autoimmun (2006) 27(2):125–33. doi:10.1016/j.jaut.2006.07.002 
15. Edwards CJ. Commensal gut bacteria and the etiopathogenesis of rheuma-
toid arthritis. J Rheumatol (2008) 35(8):1477–9. 
16. Nielen MM, van Schaardenburg D, Reesink HW, Van de Stadt RJ, van der 
Horst-Bruinsma IE, de Koning MH, et al. Specific autoantibodies precede the 
symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis: a study of serial measurements in blood 
donors. Arthritis Rheum (2004) 50(2):380–6. doi:10.1002/art.20018 
17. Edwards C, Cooper C. Early environmental factors and rheumatoid arthritis. 
Clin Exp Immunol (2006) 143(1):1–5. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2249.2005.02940.x 
18. Jacobsson LT, Jacobsson ME, Askling J, Knowler WC. Perinatal characteristics 
and risk of rheumatoid arthritis. BMJ (2003) 326(7398):1068–9. doi:10.1136/
bmj.326.7398.1068 
19. Van der Heijde D. Joint erosions and patients with early rheumatoid arthritis. 
Rheumatology (1995) 34(Suppl 2):74–8. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/XXXIV.
suppl_4.74 
20. Gonzalez-Alvaro I, Ortiz AM, Seoane I, García-Vicuña R, Martínez C, 
Gomariz R. Biomarkers predicting a need for intensive treatment in patients 
with early arthritis. Curr Pharm Des (2015) 21(2):170–81. doi:10.2174/ 
1381612820666140825123104 
21. Rubbert-Roth A, Finckh A. Treatment options in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis failing initial TNF inhibitor therapy: a critical review. Arthritis Res 
Ther (2009) 11(1):S1. doi:10.1186/ar2666 
22. Buch M, Marzo-Ortega H, Bingham S, Emery P. Long-term treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis with tumour necrosis factor α blockade: outcome 
of ceasing and restarting biologicals. Rheumatology (2004) 43(2):243–4. 
doi:10.1093/rheumatology/keg454 
23. Soini EJ, Leussu M, Hallinen T. Administration costs of intravenous 
biologic drugs for rheumatoid arthritis. Springerplus (2013) 2(1):531. 
doi:10.1186/2193-1801-2-531 
24. Wolfe F, Kong SX, Watson DJ. Gastrointestinal symptoms and health 
related quality of life in patients with arthritis. J Rheumatol (2000) 
27(6):1373–8. 
25. Gul’neva M, Noskov S. Colonic microbial biocenosis in rheumatoid arthritis. 
Klin Med (2010) 89(4):45–8. 
26. Vaahtovuo J, Munukka E, Korkeamäki M, Luukkainen R, Toivanen P. Fecal 
microbiota in early rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol (2008) 35(8):1500–5. 
27. Toivanen P. Normal intestinal microbiota in the aetiopathogenesis of rheuma-
toid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis (2003) 62(9):807–11. doi:10.1136/ard.62.9.807 
28. Scher JU, Sczesnak A, Longman RS, Segata N, Ubeda C, Bielski C, et al. 
Expansion of intestinal Prevotella copri correlates with enhanced susceptibil-
ity to arthritis. Elife (2013) 2:e01202. doi:10.7554/eLife.01202 
29. Rains CP, Noble S, Faulds D. Sulfasalazine. Drugs (1995) 50(1):137–56. 
doi:10.2165/00003495-199550010-00009 
30. Saag KG, Teng GG, Patkar NM, Anuntiyo J, Finney C, Curtis JR, et al. 
American College of Rheumatology 2008 recommendations for the use of 
nonbiologic and biologic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs in rheuma-
toid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum (2008) 59(6):762–84. doi:10.1002/art.23721 
31. Svartz N. The primary cause of rheumatoid arthritis is an infection – the 
infectious agent exists in milk. Acta Med Scand (1972) 192(1–6):231–9. doi:
10.1111/j.0954-6820.1972.tb04807.x 
32. Weinblatt M, Reda D, Henderson W, Giobbie-Hurder A, Williams D, Diani 
A, et al. Sulfasalazine Treatment for Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Metaanalysis of 
15 Randomized Trials. J rheumatol (1999) 26(10):2123–30.
33. Maeda Y, Matsushita M, Yura A, Teshigawara S, Katayama M, Yoshimura 
M, et al. OP0191 the fecal microbiota of rheumatoid arthritis patients differs 
from that of healthy volunteers and is considerably altered by treatment 
with biologics. Ann Rheum Dis (2013) 72(Suppl 3):A117. doi:10.1136/
annrheumdis-2013-eular.396 
34. Panush RS, Carter RL, Katz P, Kowsari B, Longley S, Finnie S. Diet therapy 
for rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum (1983) 26(4):462–71. doi:10.1002/
art.1780260403 
35. Vitetta L, Coulson S, Schloss J, Beck SL, Allen R, Sali A. Dietary recom-
mendations for patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a review. Nutr Diet Suppl 
(2012) 4(4):1–15. doi:10.2147/NDS.S6922 
36. James MJ, Cleland LG. Dietary n-3 fatty acids and therapy for rheuma-
toid arthritis. Semin Arthritis Rheum (1997) 27(2):85–97. doi:10.1016/
S0049-0172(97)80009-1
37. Darlington L, Ramsey N, Mansfield J. Placebo-controlled, blind study 
of dietary manipulation therapy in rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet (1986) 
327(8475):236–8. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(86)90774-9 
 12
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
38. Kremer J, Michalek A, Lininger L, Huyck C, Bigauoette J, Timchalk M, 
et al. Effects of manipulation of dietary fatty acids on clinical manifestations 
of rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet (1985) 325(8422):184–7. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(85)92024-0 
39. Kremer JM, Lawrence DA, Jubiz W, Digiacomo R, Rynes R, Bartholomew 
LE, et al. Dietary fish oil and olive oil supplementation in patients with rheu-
matoid arthritis clinical and immunologic effects. Arthritis Rheum (1990) 
33(6):810–20. doi:10.1002/art.1780330607 
40. Sköldstam L, Larsson L, Lindström FD. Effects of fasting and lactovegetar-
ian diet on rheumatoid arthritis. Scand J Rheumatol (1979) 8(4):249–55. 
doi:10.3109/03009747909114631 
41. Sköldstam L. Preliminary reports: fasting and vegan diet in rheumatoid arthri-
tis. Scand J Rheumatol (1986) 15(2):219–21. doi:10.3109/03009748609102091 
42. Kjeldsen-Kragh J, Borchgrevink C, Laerum E, Haugen M, Eek M, Forre O, et al. 
Controlled trial of fasting and one-year vegetarian diet in rheumatoid arthri-
tis. Lancet (1991) 338(8772):899–902. doi:10.1016/0140-6736(91)91770-U 
43. Uden A-M, Trang L, Venizelos N, Palmblad J. Neutrophil functions and 
clinical performance after total fasting in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
Ann Rheum Dis (1983) 42(1):45–51. doi:10.1136/ard.42.1.45 
44. Kjeldsen-Kragh J, Haugen M, Borchgrevink C, Førre Ø. Vegetarian diet for 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis-status: two years after introduction of the 
diet. Clin Rheumatol (1994) 13(3):475–82. doi:10.1007/BF02242946 
45. Hafström I, Ringertz B, Spångberg A, Von Zweigbergk L, Brannemark S, 
Nylander I, et al. A vegan diet free of gluten improves the signs and symptoms 
of rheumatoid arthritis: the effects on arthritis correlate with a reduction 
in antibodies to food antigens. Rheumatology (2001) 40(10):1175–9. 
doi:10.1093/rheumatology/40.10.1175 
46. McDougall J, Bruce B, Spiller G, Westerdahl J, McDougall M. Effects of a very 
low-fat, vegan diet in subjects with rheumatoid arthritis. J Altern Complement 
Med (2002) 8(1):71–5. doi:10.1089/107555302753507195 
47. Haugen M, Kjeldsen-Kragh J, Skakkebaek N, Landaas S, Sjaastad Ø, 
Movinkel P, et al. The influence of fast and vegetarian diet on parameters 
of nutritional status in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Clin Rheumatol 
(1993) 12(1):62–9. doi:10.1007/BF02231561 
48. Sköldstam L, Hagfors L, Johansson G. An experimental study of a 
Mediterranean diet intervention for patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann 
Rheum Dis (2003) 62(3):208–14. doi:10.1136/ard.62.3.208 
49. Kjeldsen-Kragh J, Mellbye O, Haugen M, Mollnes T, Hammer H, Sioud M, 
et al. Changes in laboratory variables in rheumatoid arthritis patients during 
a trial of fasting and one-year vegetarian diet. Scand J Rheumatol (1995) 
24(2):85–93. doi:10.3109/03009749509099290 
50. Peltonen R, Kjeldsen-Kragh J, Haugen M, Tuominen J, Toivanen P, Förre 
Ö, et al. Changes of faecal flora in rheumatoid arthritis during fasting and 
one-year vegetarian diet. Rheumatology (1994) 33(7):638–43. doi:10.1093/
rheumatology/33.7.638 
51. Haugen MA, Kjeldsen-Kragh J, Bjervea KS, Høstmark AT, Førre Ø. Changes 
in plasma phospholipid fatty acids and their relationship to disease activity in 
rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with a vegetarian diet. Br J Nutr (1994) 
72(4):555–66. doi:10.1079/BJN19940059 
52. Kjeldsen-Kragh J, Sumar N, Bodman-Smith K, Brostoff J. Changes in 
glycosylation of IgG during fasting in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
Rheumatology (1996) 35(2):117–9. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/35.2.117 
53. Fraser D, Thoen J, Dioseland O, Forre O, Kjeldsen-Kragh J. Serum levels 
of interleukin-6 and dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate in response to 
either fasting or a ketogenic diet in rheumatoid arthritis patients. Clin Exp 
Rheumatol (2000) 18(3):357–62. 
54. Michalsen A, Riegert M, Lüdtke R, Bäcker M, Langhorst J, Schwickert M, 
et al. Mediterranean diet or extended fasting’s influence on changing the 
intestinal microflora, immunoglobulin A secretion and clinical outcome in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis and fibromyalgia: an observational study. 
BMC Complement Altern Med (2005) 5(1):22. doi:10.1186/1472-6882-5-22 
55. Abendroth A, Michalsen A, Luedtke R, Rueffer A, Musial F, Dobos GJ, et al. 
Changes of intestinal microflora in patients with rheumatoid arthritis during 
fasting or a Mediterranean diet. Forsch Komplementmed (2010) 17(6):307–13. 
doi:10.1159/000322313 
56. Peltonen R, Nenonen M, Helve T, Hänninen O, Toivanen P, Eerola E. Faecal 
microbial flora and disease activity in rheumatoid arthritis during a vegan 
diet. Rheumatology (1997) 36(1):64–8. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/36.1.64 
57. Elkan A-C, Sjöberg B, Kolsrud B, Ringertz B, Hafström I, Frostegård 
J. Gluten-free vegan diet induces decreased LDL and oxidized LDL levels 
and raised atheroprotective natural antibodies against phosphorylcholine in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized study. Arthritis Res Ther 
(2008) 10(2):R34. doi:10.1186/ar2388 
58. Sköldstam L, Brudin L, Hagfors L, Johansson G. Weight reduction is not a 
major reason for improvement in rheumatoid arthritis from lacto-vegetarian, 
vegan or Mediterranean diets. Nutr J (2005) 4(1):15. doi:10.1186/1475-2891- 
4-15 
59. Ågren J, Tvrzicka E, Nenonen M, Helve T, Hänninen O. Divergent changes in 
serum sterols during a strict uncooked vegan diet in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis. Br J Nutr (2001) 85(02):137–9. doi:10.1079/BJN2000234 
60. Hänninen O, Kaartinen K, Rauma A-L, Nenonen M, Törrönen R, Häkkinen 
S, et al. Antioxidants in vegan diet and rheumatic disorders. Toxicology 
(2000) 155(1):45–53. doi:10.1016/S0300-483X(00)00276-6 
61. Vaghef-Mehrabany E, Alipour B, Homayouni-Rad A, Sharif S-K, Asghari-
Jafarabadi M, Zavvari S. Probiotic supplementation improves inflammatory 
status in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Nutrition (2014) 30(4):430–5. 
doi:10.1016/j.nut.2013.09.007 
62. Vaghef-Mehrabany E, Homayouni-Rad A, Alipour B, Sharif S-K, Vaghef-
Mehrabany L, Alipour-Ajiry S. Effects of probiotic supplementation on 
oxidative stress indices in women with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized 
double-blind clinical trial. J Am Coll Nutr (2016) 35(4):291–9. doi:10.1080/
07315724.2014.959208 
63. Hatakka K, Martio J, Korpela M, Herranen M, Poussa T, Laasanen T, 
et al. Effects of probiotic therapy on the activity and activation of mild 
rheumatoid arthritis – a pilot study. Scand J Rheumatol (2003) 32(4):211–5. 
doi:10.1080/03009740310003695 
64. Zamani B, Golkar HR, Farshbaf S, Emadi-Baygi M, Tajabadi-Ebrahimi 
M, Jafari P, et al. Clinical and metabolic response to probiotic supple-
mentation in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized, dou-
ble-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Int J Rheum Dis (2016) 19(9):869–79. 
doi:10.1111/1756-185X.12888 
65. Vaghef-Mehrabany E, Vaghef-Mehrabany L, Asghari-Jafarabadi M, 
Homayouni-Rad A, Issazadeh K, Alipour B. Effects of probiotic supplemen-
tation on lipid profile of women with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized 
placebo-controlled clinical trial. Health Promot Perspect (2017) 7(2):95. 
doi:10.15171/hpp.2017.17 
66. Alipour B, Homayouni-Rad A, Vaghef-Mehrabany E, Sharif SK, Vaghef-
Mehrabany L, Asghari-Jafarabadi M, et al. Effects of Lactobacillus casei sup-
plementation on disease activity and inflammatory cytokines in rheumatoid 
arthritis patients: a randomized double-blind clinical trial. Int J Rheum Dis 
(2014) 17(5):519–27. doi:10.1111/1756-185X.12333 
67. de los Angeles Pineda M, Thompson SF, Summers K, de Leon F, Pope J, Reid 
G. A randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled pilot study of probi-
otics in active rheumatoid arthritis. Med Sci Monit (2011) 17(6):CR347–54. 
doi:10.12659/MSM.881808 
68. Mandel DR, Eichas K, Holmes J. Bacillus coagulans: a viable adjunct 
therapy for relieving symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis according to a 
randomized, controlled trial. BMC Complement Altern Med (2010) 10(1):1. 
doi:10.1186/1472-6882-10-1 
69. Kavanagh R, Workman E, Nash P, Smith M, Hazleman B, Hunter J. The effects 
of elemental diet and subsequent food reintroduction on rheumatoid arthri-
tis. Rheumatology (1995) 34(3):270–3. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/34.3.270 
70. Podas T, Nightingale JM, Oldham R, Roy S, Sheehan NJ, Mayberry JF. Is 
rheumatoid arthritis a disease that starts in the intestine? A pilot study 
comparing an elemental diet with oral prednisolone. Postgrad Med J (2007) 
83(976):128–31. doi:10.1136/pgmj.2006.050245 
71. Holst-Jensen SE, Pfeiffer-Jensen M, Monsrud M, Tarp U, Buus A, 
Hessov I, et al. Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with a peptide diet: a 
randomized, controlled trial. Scand J Rheumatol (1998) 27(5):329–36. 
doi:10.1080/03009749850154339 
72. Van de Laar M, Van der Korst J. Food intolerance in rheumatoid arthritis. I. 
A double blind, controlled trial of the clinical effects of elimination of milk 
allergens and AZO dyes. Ann Rheum Dis (1992) 51(3):298–302. doi:10.1136/
ard.51.3.298 
73. Karatay S, Erdem T, Yildirim K, Melikoglu M, Ugur M, Cakir E, et al. The 
effect of individualized diet challenges consisting of allergenic foods on 
 13
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
TNF-α and IL-1β levels in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology 
(2004) 43(11):1429–33. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/keh366 
74. Fraser D, Thoen J, Reseland J, Førre Ø, Kjeldsen-Kragh J. Decreased CD4+ 
lymphocyte activation and increased interleukin-4 production in peripheral 
blood of rheumatoid arthritis patients after acute starvation. Clin Rheumatol 
(1999) 18(5):394–401. doi:10.1007/s100670050125 
75. Tripathy A, Khanna S, Padhan P, Smita S, Raghav S, Gupta B. Direct recog-
nition of LPS drive TLR4 expressing CD8+ T cell activation in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis. Sci Rep (2017) 7:933. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-01033-7 
76. Hafström I, Ringertz B, Gyllenhammar H, Palmblad J, Harms-Ringdahl M. 
Effects of fasting on disease activity, neutrophil function, fatty acid compo-
sition, and leukotriene biosynthesis in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
Arthritis Rheum (1988) 31(5):585–92. doi:10.1002/art.1780310502 
77. Crooks S, Stockley R. Leukotriene B4. Int J Biochem Cell Biol (1998) 
30(2):173–8. doi:10.1016/S1357-2725(97)00123-4 
78. Newman JC, Verdin E. Ketone bodies as signaling metabolites. Trends 
Endocrinol Metab (2014) 25(1):42–52. doi:10.1016/j.tem.2013.09.002 
79. Youm Y-H, Nguyen KY, Grant RW, Goldberg EL, Bodogai M, Kim D, et al. 
The ketone metabolite [beta]-hydroxybutyrate blocks NLRP3 inflam-
masome-mediated inflammatory disease. Nat Med (2015) 21(3):263–9. 
doi:10.1038/nm.3804 
80. Tedeschi SK, Costenbader KH. Is there a role for diet in the therapy of 
rheumatoid arthritis? Curr Rheumatol Rep (2016) 18(5):23. doi:10.1007/
s11926-016-0575-y 
81. Müller H, de Toledo FW, Resch K-L. Fasting followed by vegetarian diet in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a systematic review. Scand J Rheumatol 
(2001) 30(1):1–10. doi:10.1080/030097401750065256 
82. McKellar G, Morrison E, McEntegart A, Hampson R, Tierney A, Mackle G, 
et al. A pilot study of a Mediterranean-type diet intervention in female patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis living in areas of social deprivation in Glasgow. 
Ann Rheum Dis (2007) 66(9):1239–43. doi:10.1136/ard.2006.065151 
83. Linos A, Kaklamani VG, Kaklamani E, Koumantaki Y, Giziaki E, Papazoglou 
S, et al. Dietary factors in relation to rheumatoid arthritis: a role for olive oil 
and cooked vegetables? Am J Clin Nutr (1999) 70(6):1077–82. 
84. Rosillo MA, Sánchez-Hidalgo M, Sánchez-Fidalgo S, Aparicio-Soto M, 
Villegas I, Alarcón-de-la-Lastra C. Dietary extra-virgin olive oil prevents 
inflammatory response and cartilage matrix degradation in murine 
collagen-induced arthritis. Eur J Nutr (2016) 55(1):315–25. doi:10.1007/
s00394-015-0850-0 
85. Krause A, Scaletta N, Ji J-D, Ivashkiv LB. Rheumatoid arthritis synoviocyte 
survival is dependent on STAT3. J Immunol (2002) 169(11):6610–6. 
doi:10.4049/jimmunol.169.11.6610 
86. Ju JH, Heo YJ, Cho ML, Jhun JY, Park JS, Lee SY, et al. Modulation of STAT-3 
in rheumatoid synovial T cells suppresses Th17 differentiation and increases 
the proportion of Treg cells. Arthritis Rheum (2012) 64(11):3543–52. 
doi:10.1002/art.34601 
87. Mogensen TH. Pathogen recognition and inflammatory signaling in innate 
immune defenses. Clin Microbiol Rev (2009) 22(2):240–73. doi:10.1128/
CMR.00046-08 
88. Berin MC, Sampson HA. Mucosal immunology of food allergy. Curr Biol 
(2013) 23(9):R389–400. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.02.043 
89. Walker WA, Isselbacher KJ. Uptake and transport of macromolecules by 
the intestine. Possible role in clinical disorders. Gastroenterology (1974) 
67(3):531. 
90. Bjarnason I, So A, Levi AJ, Peters T, Williams P, Zanelli G, et al. Intestinal 
permeability and inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis: effects of non-steroi-
dal anti-inflammatory drugs. Lancet (1984) 324(8413):1171–4. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(84)92739-9 
91. Organization WH. Research Guidelines for Evaluating the Safety and Efficacy 
of Herbal Medicines. Manila: WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific 
(1993).
92. Prosky L. When is dietary fiber considered a functional food? Biofactors 
(2000) 12(1–4):289–97. doi:10.1002/biof.5520120143 
93. Slavin J. Fiber and prebiotics: mechanisms and health benefits. Nutrients 
(2013) 5(4):1417–35. doi:10.3390/nu5041417 
94. Ma Y, Griffith JA, Chasan-Taber L, Olendzki BC, Jackson E, Stanek EJ, et al. 
Association between dietary fiber and serum C-reactive protein. Am J Clin 
Nutr (2006) 83(4):760–6. 
95. Hu Y, Costenbader KH, Gao X, Hu FB, Karlson EW, Lu B. Mediterranean 
diet and incidence of rheumatoid arthritis in women. Arthritis Care Res 
(Hoboken) (2015) 67(5):597–606. doi:10.1002/acr.22481 
96. De Moura FF, Lewis KD, Falk MC. Applying the FDA definition of whole 
grains to the evidence for cardiovascular disease health claims. J Nutr (2009) 
139(11):2220S–6S. doi:10.3945/jn.109.112383 
97. Slavin JL, Martini MC, Jacobs DR, Marquart L. Plausible mecha-
nisms for the protectiveness of whole grains. Am J Clin Nutr (1999) 
70(3):459s–63s. 
98. Food and Drug Administration, HHS. Food labeling: health claims; soluble 
fiber from certain foods and risk of coronary heart disease. Interim final rule. 
Fed Regist (2008) 73(37):9938. 
99. Eilat-Adar S, Sinai T, Yosefy C, Henkin Y. Nutritional recommendations 
for cardiovascular disease prevention. Nutrients (2013) 5(9):3646–83. 
doi:10.3390/nu5093646 
100. Chu Y-F, Sun J, Wu X, Liu RH. Antioxidant and antiproliferative activities of 
common vegetables. J Agric Food Chem (2002) 50(23):6910–6. doi:10.1021/
jf020665f 
101. Choi CW, Kim SC, Hwang SS, Choi BK, Ahn HJ, Lee MY, et al. Antioxidant 
activity and free radical scavenging capacity between Korean medicinal plants 
and flavonoids by assay-guided comparison. Plant Sci (2002) 163(6):1161–8. 
doi:10.1016/S0168-9452(02)00332-1 
102. Ames BN, Shigenaga MK, Hagen TM. Oxidants, antioxidants, and the degen-
erative diseases of aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1993) 90(17):7915–22. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.90.17.7915 
103. Liu RH. Potential synergy of phytochemicals in cancer prevention: mecha-
nism of action. J Nutr (2004) 134(12):3479S–85S. 
104. Islam MA, Alam F, Solayman M, Khalil MI, Kamal MA, Gan SH. Dietary 
phytochemicals: natural swords combating inflammation and oxidation-me-
diated degenerative diseases. Oxid Med Cell Longev (2016) 2016:5137431. 
doi:10.1155/2016/5137431 
105. Pattison D, Silman A, Goodson N, Lunt M, Bunn D, Luben R, et al. Vitamin 
C and the risk of developing inflammatory polyarthritis: prospective nested 
case-control study. Ann Rheum Dis (2004) 63(7):843–7. doi:10.1136/
ard.2003.016097 
106. Cerhan JR, Saag KG, Merlino LA, Mikuls TR, Criswell LA. Antioxidant 
micronutrients and risk of rheumatoid arthritis in a cohort of older women. 
Am J Epidemiol (2003) 157(4):345–54. doi:10.1093/aje/kwf205 
107. Pattison DJ, Symmons DP, Lunt M, Welch A, Luben R, Bingham SA, et al. 
Dietary risk factors for the development of inflammatory polyarthritis: 
evidence for a role of high level of red meat consumption. Arthritis Rheum 
(2004) 50(12):3804–12. doi:10.1002/art.20731 
108. Kotake S, Yago T, Kawamoto M, Nanke Y. Effects of NSAIDs on differentia-
tion and function of human and murine osteoclasts – crucial ‘human osteo-
clastology’
. Pharmaceuticals (2010) 3(5):1394–410. doi:10.3390/ph3051394 
109. Bu SY, Lerner M, Stoecker BJ, Boldrin E, Brackett DJ, Lucas EA, et al. Dried 
plum polyphenols inhibit osteoclastogenesis by downregulating NFATc1 and 
inflammatory mediators. Calcif Tissue Int (2008) 82(6):475–88. doi:10.1007/
s00223-008-9139-0 
110. He YH, Zhou J, Wang YS, Xiao C, Tong Y, Tang JCO, et al. Anti-inflammatory 
and anti-oxidative effects of cherries on Freund’s adjuvant-induced arthritis in 
rats. Scand J Rheumatol (2006) 35(5):356–8. doi:10.1080/03009740600704155 
111. Wahba MG, Messiha BA, Abo-Saif AA. Protective effects of fenofibrate and 
resveratrol in an aggressive model of rheumatoid arthritis in rats. Pharm Biol 
(2016) 54(9):1705–15. doi:10.3109/13880209.2015.1125931 
112. Tsubaki M, Takeda T, Kino T, Itoh T, Imano M, Tanabe G, et al. Mangiferin 
suppresses CIA by suppressing the expression of TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β, and 
RANKL through inhibiting the activation of NF-κB and ERK1/2. Am J Trans 
Res (2015) 7(8):1371. 
113. Luczkiewicz P, Kokotkiewicz A, Dampc A, Luczkiewicz M. Mangiferin: 
a promising therapeutic agent for rheumatoid arthritis treatment. Med 
Hypotheses (2014) 83(5):570–4. doi:10.1016/j.mehy.2014.08.021 
114. Yoon HY, Lee EG, Lee H, Cho IJ, Choi YJ, Sung MS, et al. Kaempferol inhibits 
IL-1β-induced proliferation of rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts 
and the production of COX-2, PGE2 and MMPs. Int J Mol Med (2013) 
32(4):971–7. doi:10.3892/ijmm.2013.1468 
115. Comalada M, Camuesco D, Sierra S, Ballester I, Xaus J, Gálvez J, et al. In 
vivo quercitrin anti-inflammatory effect involves release of quercetin, which 
 14
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
inhibits inflammation through down-regulation of the NF-κB pathway. Eur 
J Immunol (2005) 35(2):584–92. doi:10.1002/eji.200425778 
116. Schett G, Tohidast-Akrad M, Smolen JS, Schmid BJ, Steiner CW, Bitzan P, 
et al. Activation, differential localization, and regulation of the stress-acti-
vated protein kinases, extracellular signal-regulated kinase, c-Jun N-terminal 
kinase, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase, in synovial tissue and 
cells in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum (2000) 43(11):2501–12. 
doi:10.1002/1529-0131(200011)43:11<2501::AID-ANR18>3.0.CO;2-K 
117. Natarajan V, Madhan B, Tiku ML. Intra-articular injections of polyphenols 
protect articular cartilage from inflammation-induced degradation: suggest-
ing a potential role in cartilage therapeutics. PLoS One (2015) 10(6):e0127165. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0127165 
118. Pragasam SJ, Venkatesan V, Rasool M. Immunomodulatory and anti-in-
flammatory effect of p-coumaric acid, a common dietary polyphenol on 
experimental inflammation in rats. Inflammation (2013) 36(1):169–76. 
doi:10.1007/s10753-012-9532-8 
119. Wang J, Zhang Q, Jin S, He D, Zhao S, Liu S. Genistein modulate immune 
responses in collagen-induced rheumatoid arthritis model. Maturitas (2008) 
59(4):405–12. doi:10.1016/j.maturitas.2008.04.003 
120. Pattison DJ, Symmons DP, Lunt M, Welch A, Bingham SA, Day NE, et al. 
Dietary β-cryptoxanthin and inflammatory polyarthritis: results from a 
population-based prospective study. Am J Clin Nutr (2005) 82(2):451–5. 
121. Cohen A, Goldman J. Bromelains therapy in rheumatoid arthritis. Pa Med 
J (1964) 67:27. 
122. Ramadan G, El-Menshawy O. Protective effects of ginger-turmeric rhizomes 
mixture on joint inflammation, atherogenesis, kidney dysfunction and other 
complications in a rat model of human rheumatoid arthritis. Int J Rheum Dis 
(2013) 16(2):219–29. doi:10.1111/1756-185X.12054 
123. Ramadan G, Al-Kahtani MA, El-Sayed WM. Anti-inflammatory and 
anti-oxidant properties of Curcuma longa (turmeric) versus Zingiber 
officinale (ginger) rhizomes in rat adjuvant-induced arthritis. Inflammation 
(2011) 34(4):291–301. doi:10.1007/s10753-010-9278-0 
124. Kloesch B, Becker T, Dietersdorfer E, Kiener H, Steiner G. Anti-inflammatory 
and apoptotic effects of the polyphenol curcumin on human fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes. Int Immunopharmacol (2013) 15(2):400–5. doi:10.1016/j.
intimp.2013.01.003 
125. Zeng L, Yan Z, Ding S, Xu K, Wang L. Endothelial injury, an intriguing effect 
of methotrexate and cyclophosphamide during hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation in mice. Transplant Proc (2008) 40(8):2670–3. doi:10.1016/ 
j.transproceed.2008.06.038
126. Sankrityayan H, Majumdar AS. Curcumin and folic acid abrogated metho-
trexate induced vascular endothelial dysfunction. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 
(2015) 94(1):89–96. doi:10.1139/cjpp-2015-0156 
127. Rathi B, Bodhankar S, Mohan V, Thakurdesai P. Ameliorative effects of a 
polyphenolic fraction of Cinnamomum zeylanicum L. bark in animal models 
of inflammation and arthritis. Sci Pharm (2013) 81(2):567–90. doi:10.3797/
scipharm.1301-16 
128. McCormick J, Neill W, Sim A. Immunosuppressive effect of linoleic acid. 
Lancet (1977) 310(8036):508. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(77)91634-8 
129. Stuyvesant VW, Jolley WB. Anti-inflammatory activity of d-α-tocoph-
erol (vitamin E) and linoleic acid. Nature (1967) 216(5115):585–6. 
doi:10.1038/216585a0 
130. Lee TH, Hoover RL, Williams JD, Sperling RI, Ravalese  J III, Spur BW, et al. 
Effect of dietary enrichment with eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic 
acids on in vitro neutrophil and monocyte leukotriene generation and 
neutrophil function. N Engl J Med (1985) 312(19):1217–24. doi:10.1056/
NEJM198505093121903 
131. Calder PC. Immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory effects of n-3 poly-
unsaturated fatty acids. Proc Nutr Soc (1996) 55(02):737–74. doi:10.1079/
PNS19960069 
132. Tasset-Cuevas I, Fernández-Bedmar Z, Lozano-Baena MD, Campos-Sánchez 
J, de Haro-Bailón A, Muñoz-Serrano A, et al. Protective effect of borage seed 
oil and gamma linolenic acid on DNA: in vivo and in vitro studies. PLoS One 
(2013) 8(2):e56986. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0056986 
133. Leventhal LJ, Boyce EG, Zurier RB. Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis 
with gammalinolenic acid. Ann Intern Med (1993) 119(9):867–73. 
doi:10.7326/0003-4819-119-9-199311010-00001 
134. Leventhal L, Boyce E, Zurier R. Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with 
blackcurrant seed oil. Rheumatology (1994) 33(9):847–52. doi:10.1093/
rheumatology/33.9.847 
135. Nielsen G, Faarvang K, Thomsen B, Teglbjaerg K, Jensen L, Hansen T, et al. 
The effects of dietary supplementation with n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids 
in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized, double blind trial. Eur 
J Clin Invest (1992) 22(10):687–91. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2362.1992.tb01431.x 
136. Kremer JM, Lawrence DA, Petrillo GF, Litts LL, Mullaly PM, Rynes RI, et al. 
Effects of high-dose fish oil on rheumatoid arthritis after stopping nonsteroi-
dal antiinflammatory drugs clinical and immune correlates. Arthritis Rheum 
(1995) 38(8):1107–14. doi:10.1002/art.1780380813 
137. Gibson GR, Roberfroid MB. Dietary modulation of the human colonic 
microbiota: introducing the concept of prebiotics. J Nutr (1995) 125(6):1401. 
138. Kullisaar T, Songisepp E, Zilmer M. Probiotics and oxidative stress. In: 
Lushchak VI, editor. Oxidative Stress - Environmental Induction and Dietary 
Antioxidants. INTECH Open Access Publisher (2012). doi:10.5772/33924
139. Lutgendorff F, Trulsson LM, van Minnen LP
, Rijkers GT, Timmerman HM, 
Franzén LE, et al. Probiotics enhance pancreatic glutathione biosynthesis 
and reduce oxidative stress in experimental acute pancreatitis. Am J Physiol 
Gastrointest Liver Physiol (2008) 295(5):G1111–21. doi:10.1152/ajpgi.00603.2007 
140. Castex M, Lemaire P, Wabete N, Chim L. Effect of probiotic Pediococcus 
acidilactici on antioxidant defences and oxidative stress of Litopenaeus 
stylirostris under Vibrio nigripulchritudo challenge. Fish Shellfish Immunol 
(2010) 28(4):622–31. doi:10.1016/j.fsi.2009.12.024 
141. Asemi Z, Zare Z, Shakeri H, Sabihi S-S, Esmaillzadeh A. Effect of multi-
species probiotic supplements on metabolic profiles, hs-CRP, and oxidative 
stress in patients with type 2 diabetes. Ann Nutr Metab (2013) 63(1–2):1–9. 
doi:10.1159/000349922 
142. Sanders ME. Probiotics: considerations for human health. Nutr Rev (2003) 
61(3):91–9. doi:10.1301/nr.2003.marr.91-99 
143. Ejtahed HS, Mohtadi-Nia J, Homayouni-Rad A, Niafar M, Asghari-Jafarabadi 
M, Mofid V. Probiotic yogurt improves antioxidant status in type 2 diabetic 
patients. Nutrition (2012) 28(5):539–43. doi:10.1016/j.nut.2011.08.013 
144. Yousefinejad A, Mazloom Z, Dabbaghmanesh MH. Effect of probiotics on 
lipid profile, glycemic control, insulin action, oxidative stress, and inflam-
matory markers in patients with type 2 diabetes: a clinical trial. Iran J Med 
Sci (2013) 38(1):38–43. 
145. McCulloch J, Lydyard P, Rook G. Rheumatoid arthritis: how well do the 
theories fit the evidence? Clin Exp Immunol (1993) 92(1):1–6. doi:10.1111/ 
j.1365-2249.1993.tb05938.x 
146. Eerola E, Möttönen T, Hannonen P, Luukkainen R, Kantola I, Vuori K, 
et al. Intestinal flora in early rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology (1994) 
33(11):1030–8. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/33.11.1030 
147. Malin M, Verronen P, Mykkänen H, Salminen S, Isolauri E. Increased bacte-
rial urease activity in faeces in juvenile chronic arthritis: evidence of altered 
intestinal microflora? Rheumatology (1996) 35(7):689–94. doi:10.1093/
rheumatology/35.7.689 
148. Scher JU, Abramson SB. The microbiome and rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Rev 
Rheumatol (2011) 7(10):569–78. doi:10.1038/nrrheum.2011.121 
149. Kato I, Endo-Tanaka K, Yokokura T. Suppressive effects of the oral adminis-
tration of Lactobacillus casei on type II collagen-induced arthritis in DBA/1 
mice. Life Sci (1998) 63(8):635–44. doi:10.1016/S0024-3205(98)00315-4 
150. So J-S, Lee C-G, Kwon H-K, Yi H-J, Chae C-S, Park J-A, et al. Lactobacillus 
casei potentiates induction of oral tolerance in experimental arthritis. Mol 
Immunol (2008) 46(1):172–80. doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2008.07.038 
151. So J-S, Kwon H-K, Lee C-G, Yi H-J, Park J-A, Lim S-Y, et al. Lactobacillus 
casei suppresses experimental arthritis by down-regulating T helper 1 
effector functions. Mol Immunol (2008) 45(9):2690–9. doi:10.1016/j.
molimm.2007.12.010 
152. Amdekar S, Singh V, Singh R, Sharma P, Keshav P, Kumar A. Lactobacillus 
casei reduces the inflammatory joint damage associated with collagen-in-
duced arthritis (CIA) by reducing the pro-inflammatory cytokines. J Clin 
Immunol (2011) 31(2):147–54. doi:10.1007/s10875-010-9457-7 
153. Baharav E, Mor F, Halpern M, Weinberger A. Lactobacillus GG bacteria 
ameliorate arthritis in Lewis rats. J Nutr (2004) 134(8):1964–9. 
154. Rovenský J, Stančíková M, Švík K, Utěšený J, Bauerova K, Jurčovičová 
J. Treatment of adjuvant-induced arthritis with the combination of 
 15
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
methotrexate and probiotic bacteria Escherichia coli O83 (Colinfant®). Folia 
Microbiol (2009) 54(4):359–63. doi:10.1007/s12223-009-0045-2 
155. Pedersen M, Jacobsen S, Klarlund M, Pedersen BV, Wiik A, Wohlfahrt J, 
et al. Environmental risk factors differ between rheumatoid arthritis with 
and without auto-antibodies against cyclic citrullinated peptides. Arthritis 
Res Ther (2006) 8(4):R133. doi:10.1186/ar2022 
156. Pedersen M, Jacobsen S, Garred P, Madsen HO, Klarlund M, Svejgaard A, 
et al. Strong combined gene-environment effects in anti-cyclic citrullinated 
peptide-positive rheumatoid arthritis: a nationwide case-control study in 
Denmark. Arthritis Rheum (2007) 56(5):1446–53. doi:10.1002/art.22597 
157. Hazes J, Dijkmans B, Vandenbroucke J, De Vries R, Cats A. Lifestyle and 
the risk of rheumatoid arthritis: cigarette smoking and alcohol consumption. 
Ann Rheum Dis (1990) 49(12):980–2. doi:10.1136/ard.49.12.980 
158. Bergstrom U, Jacobsson L, Nilsson J, Berglund G, Turesson C. Smoking, low 
level of formal education and infrequent alcohol consumption are indepen-
dent predictors of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum (2007) 56:S192. 
 
doi:10.3109/03009742.2012.723744 
159. Cerhan JR, Saag KG, Criswell LA, Merlino LA, Mikuls TR. Blood transfusion, 
alcohol use, and anthropometric risk factors for rheumatoid arthritis in older 
women. J Rheumatol (2002) 29(2):246–54. 
160. Heliövaara M, Aho K, Knekt P, Impivaara O, Reunanen A, Aromaa A. Coffee 
consumption, rheumatoid factor, and the risk of rheumatoid arthritis. Ann 
Rheum Dis (2000) 59(8):631–5. doi:10.1136/ard.59.8.631 
161. Källberg H, Jacobsen S, Bengtsson C, Pedersen M, Padyukov L, Garred P, 
et al. Alcohol consumption is associated with decreased risk of rheumatoid 
arthritis: results from two Scandinavian case-control studies. Ann Rheum Dis 
(2009) 68(2):222–7. doi:10.1136/ard.2007.086314 
162. Maxwell JR, Gowers IR, Moore DJ, Wilson AG. Alcohol consumption 
is inversely associated with risk and severity of rheumatoid arthritis. 
Rheumatology (2010) 49:2140–6. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/keq202 
163. Singh BN, Shankar S, Srivastava RK. Green tea catechin, epigallocate-
chin-3-gallate (EGCG): mechanisms, perspectives and clinical applications. 
Biochem 
Pharmacol 
(2011) 
82(12):1807–21. 
doi:10.1016/j.bcp.2011. 
07.093 
164. Weinreb O, Amit T, Mandel S, Youdim MB. Neuroprotective molecular 
mechanisms of (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate: a reflective outcome of its 
antioxidant, iron chelating and neuritogenic properties. Genes Nutr (2009) 
4(4):283–96. doi:10.1007/s12263-009-0143-4 
165. Clement Y. Can green tea do that? A literature review of the clinical evidence. 
Prev Med (2009) 49(2):83–7. doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2009.05.005 
166. Khan N, Afaq F, Saleem M, Ahmad N, Mukhtar H. Targeting multiple signal-
ing pathways by green tea polyphenol (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate. Cancer 
Res (2006) 66(5):2500–5. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-3636 
167. Ahmed S, Silverman MD, Marotte H, Kwan K, Matuszczak N, Koch AE. 
Down-regulation of myeloid cell leukemia 1 by epigallocatechin-3-gallate 
sensitizes rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts to tumor necrosis factor 
α-induced apoptosis. Arthritis Rheum (2009) 60(5):1282–93. doi:10.1002/
art.24488 
168. Ahmed S, Pakozdi A, Koch AE. Regulation of interleukin-1β-induced 
chemokine production and matrix metalloproteinase 2 activation by epi-
gallocatechin-3-gallate in rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts. Arthritis 
Rheum (2006) 54(8):2393–401. doi:10.1002/art.22023 
169. Yun H-J, Yoo W-H, Han M-K, Lee Y-R, Kim J-S, Lee S-I. Epigallocatechin-
3-gallate suppresses TNF-α-induced production of MMP-1 and-3 in 
rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts. Rheumatol Int (2008) 29(1):23–9. 
doi:10.1007/s00296-008-0597-5 
170. Ahmed S, Marotte H, Kwan K, Ruth JH, Campbell PL, Rabquer BJ, et al. 
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits IL-6 synthesis and suppresses transsignal-
ing by enhancing soluble gp130 production. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008) 
105(38):14692–7. doi:10.1073/pnas.0802675105 
171. Dragos D, Gilca M, Gaman L, Vlad A, Iosif L, Stoian I, et al. Phytomedicine in 
joint disorders. Nutrients (2017) 9(1):70. doi:10.3390/nu9010070 
172. Ammon H. Boswellic acids (components of frankincense) as the active prin-
ciple in treatment of chronic inflammatory diseases. Wien Med Wochenschr 
(2001) 152(15–16):373–8. doi:10.1046/j.1563-258X.2002.02056.x 
173. Wang H, Zhang C, Wu Y, Ai Y, Lee DYW, Dai R. Comparative pharma-
cokinetic study of two boswellic acids in normal and arthritic rat plasma 
after oral administration of Boswellia serrata extract or Huo Luo Xiao Ling 
Dan by LC-MS. Biomed Chromatogr (2014) 28(10):1402–8. doi:10.1002/ 
bmc.3182 
174. Singh S, Khajuria A, Taneja S, Johri R, Singh J, Qazi G. Boswellic acids: 
a leukotriene inhibitor also effective through topical application in 
inflammatory disorders. Phytomedicine (2008) 15(6):400–7. doi:10.1016/j.
phymed.2007.11.019 
175. Ammon H, Mack T, Singh G, Safayhi H. Inhibition of leukotriene B4 
formation in rat peritoneal neutrophils by an ethanolic extract of the 
gum resin exudate of Boswellia serrata. Planta Med (1991) 57(03):203–7. 
doi:10.1055/s-2006-960074 
176. Safayhi H, Mack T, Sabieraj J, Anazodo MI, Subramanian LR, Ammon 
H. Boswellic acids: novel, specific, nonredox inhibitors of 5-lipoxygenase. 
J Pharmacol Exp Ther (1992) 261(3):1143–6. 
177. Ammon H. Modulation of the immune system by Boswellia serrata extracts 
and boswellic acids. Phytomedicine (2010) 17(11):862–7. doi:10.1016/j.
phymed.2010.03.003 
178. Singh N, Bhalla M, de Jager P, Gilca M. An overview on ashwagandha: a 
Rasayana (Rejuvenator) of Ayurveda. Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med 
(2011) 8(5S):208–13. doi:10.4314/ajtcam.v8i5S.9 
179. Grover A, Shandilya A, Punetha A, Bisaria VS, Sundar D. Inhibition of the 
NEMO/IKKβ association complex formation, a novel mechanism associated 
with the NF-κB activation suppression by Withania somnifera’s key metabo-
lite withaferin A. BMC Genomics (2010) 11(4):S25. doi:10.1186/1471-2164- 
11-S4-S25 
180. Singh D, Aggarwal A, Maurya R, Naik S. Withania somnifera inhibits NF-κB 
and AP-1 transcription factors in human peripheral blood and synovial fluid 
mononuclear cells. Phytother Res (2007) 21(10):905–13. doi:10.1002/ptr.2180 
181. Rasool M, Varalakshmi P. Protective effect of Withania somnifera root pow-
der in relation to lipid peroxidation, antioxidant status, glycoproteins and 
bone collagen on adjuvant-induced arthritis in rats. Fundam Clin Pharmacol 
(2007) 21(2):157–64. doi:10.1111/j.1472-8206.2006.00461.x 
182. Ramakanth G, Kumar CU, Kishan P, Usharani P. A randomized, double 
blind placebo controlled study of efficacy and tolerability of Withaina som-
nifera extracts in knee joint pain. J Ayurveda Integr Med (2016) 7(3):151–7. 
doi:10.1016/j.jaim.2016.05.003 
183. Balbir-Gurman A, Fuhrman B, Braun-Moscovici Y, Markovits D, Aviram M. 
Consumption of pomegranate decreases serum oxidative stress and reduces 
disease activity in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis: a pilot study. Isr 
Med Assoc J (2011) 13(8):474–9. 
184. Shadnoush M, Shaker Hosseini R, Mehrabi Y, Delpisheh A, Alipoor E, 
Faghfoori Z, et al. Probiotic yogurt affects pro-and anti-inflammatory 
factors in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Iran J Pharm Res (2013) 
12(4):929–36. 
185. van der Meer JW, Netea MG. A salty taste to autoimmunity. N Engl J Med 
(2013) 368(26):2520–1. doi:10.1056/NEJMcibr1303292 
186. Manzel A, Muller DN, Hafler DA, Erdman SE, Linker RA, Kleinewietfeld M. 
Role of “Western diet” in inflammatory autoimmune diseases. Curr Allergy 
Asthma Rep (2014) 14(1):404. doi:10.1007/s11882-013-0404-6 
187. Merlino LA, Curtis J, Mikuls TR, Cerhan JR, Criswell LA, Saag KG, et al. 
Vitamin D intake is inversely associated with rheumatoid arthritis: results 
from the Iowa Women’s Health Study. Arthritis Rheum (2004) 50(1):72–7. 
doi:10.1002/art.11434 
188. Cutolo M, Otsa K, Uprus M, Paolino S, Seriolo B. Vitamin D in rheuma-
toid arthritis. Autoimmun Rev (2007) 7(1):59–64. doi:10.1016/j.autrev. 
2007.07.001 
189. Gruenwald J, Graubaum HJ, Harde A. Effect of cod liver oil on symptoms 
of rheumatoid arthritis. Adv Ther (2002) 19(2):101–7. doi:10.1007/
BF02850059 
190. Galarraga B, Ho M, Youssef H, Hill A, McMahon H, Hall C, et al. Cod liver 
oil (n-3 fatty acids) as an non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug sparing agent 
in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology (2008) 47(5):665–9. doi:10.1093/
rheumatology/ken024 
191. Martin RH. The role of nutrition and diet in rheumatoid arthritis. Proc Nutr 
Soc (1998) 57(02):231–4. doi:10.1079/PNS19980036 
192. Neuberger GB, Aaronson LS, Gajewski B, Embretson SE, Cagle PE, Loudon 
JK, et al. Predictors of exercise and effects of exercise on symptoms, function, 
 16
Khanna et al.
Role of Diet in Management of RA
Frontiers in Nutrition | www.frontiersin.org
November 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 52
aerobic fitness, and disease outcomes of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Care 
Res (2007) 57(6):943–52. doi:10.1002/art.22903 
193. Jong ZD, Munneke M, Zwinderman A, Kroon H, Jansen A, Ronday H, 
et al. Is a long-term high-intensity exercise program effective and safe in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis? Results of a randomized controlled 
trial. Arthritis Rheum (2003) 48(9):2415–24. doi:10.1002/art.11216 
194. Van den Ende C, Breedveld F, Le Cessie S, Dijkmans B, De Mug A, Hazes 
J. Effect of intensive exercise on patients with active rheumatoid arthritis: a 
randomised clinical trial. Ann Rheum Dis (2000) 59(8):615–21. doi:10.1136/
ard.59.8.615 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Khanna, Jaiswal and Gupta. This is an open-access article dis-
tributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). 
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the 
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this 
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution 
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
