 877
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 5 
May 15, 2018
Consumer sleep technologies (CSTs) are widespread applications and devices that purport to measure and even improve sleep. Sleep clinicians may 
frequently encounter CST in practice and, despite lack of validation against gold standard polysomnography, familiarity with these devices has become a 
patient expectation. This American Academy of Sleep Medicine position statement details the disadvantages and potential benefits of CSTs and provides 
guidance when approaching patient-generated health data from CSTs in a clinical setting. Given the lack of validation and United States Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) clearance, CSTs cannot be utilized for the diagnosis and/or treatment of sleep disorders at this time. However, CSTs may be utilized to 
enhance the patient-clinician interaction when presented in the context of an appropriate clinical evaluation. The ubiquitous nature of CSTs may further sleep 
research and practice. However, future validation, access to raw data and algorithms, and FDA oversight are needed.
Keywords: consumer sleep technology, polysomnography, patient-generated health data (PGHD)
Citation: Khosla S, Deak MC, Gault D, Goldstein CA, Hwang D, Kwon Y, O’Hearn D, Schutte-Rodin S, Yurcheshen M, Rosen IM, Kirsch DB, Chervin RD, 
Carden KA, Ramar K, Aurora RN, Kristo DA, Malhotra RK, Martin JL, Olson EJ, Rosen CL, Rowley JA; American Academy of Sleep Medicine Board of 
Directors. Consumer sleep technology: an American Academy of Sleep Medicine position statement. J Clin Sleep Med. 2018;14(5):877–880.
INTRODUCTION
The American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) is the 
leading clinical professional society dedicated to promotion 
of sleep health. The AASM improves sleep health and fosters 
high-quality, patient-centered care through advocacy, educa-
tion, strategic research, and practice standards. The AASM en-
deavors to advance sleep health policy that improves the health 
and well-being of the public.
The number of connected devices surpassed the number of 
people in the United States in 2011.1 Consumer sleep technol-
ogy (CST) utilization continues to increase, and sleep apps re-
main among the most popular apps downloaded for Apple and 
Android devices.2 See definitions in Table 1.
As CST use increases, the sleep clinician encounters these 
products with increasing frequency in a typical sleep clinic 
visit. Patients are eager to share patient-generated health data 
(PGHD) with their sleep clinician to gain a deeper understand-
ing of their sleep. There is an implicit expectation that the 
SPECIAL ARTICLES
Consumer Sleep Technology: An American Academy of Sleep Medicine 
Position Statement
Seema Khosla, MD1; Maryann C. Deak, MD2; Dominic Gault, MD3; Cathy A. Goldstein, MD4; Dennis Hwang, MD5; Younghoon Kwon, MD6;  
Daniel O’Hearn, MD7; Sharon Schutte-Rodin, MD8; Michael Yurcheshen, MD9; Ilene M. Rosen, MD, MS8; Douglas B. Kirsch, MD10; Ronald D. Chervin, MD, MS4; 
 
Kelly A. Carden, MD11; Kannan Ramar, MD12; R. Nisha Aurora, MD13; David A. Kristo, MD14; Raman K. Malhotra, MD15; Jennifer L. Martin, PhD16,17; 
Eric J. Olson, MD12; Carol L. Rosen, MD18; James A. Rowley, MD19; for the American Academy of Sleep Medicine Board of Directors
1North Dakota Center for Sleep, Fargo, North Dakota; 2eviCore Healthcare, Bluffton, South Carolina; 3Greenville Health System, University of South Carolina, Greenville, South 
Carolina; 4University of Michigan Sleep Disorders Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan; 5Southern California Permanente Medical Group, Kaiser Permanente Fontana Sleep Disorders 
Center, Fontana, California; 6Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia; 7Department of Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington; 8Division of Sleep Medicine, Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 9UR 
Medicine Sleep Center, Department of Neurology, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York; 10Carolinas Healthcare Medical Group Sleep 
Services, Charlotte, North Carolina; 11Saint Thomas Medical Partners - Sleep Specialists, Nashville, Tennessee; 12 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Center for 
Sleep Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; 13Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; 14University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 
15Washington University Sleep Center, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri; 16Veteran Affairs Greater Los Angeles Health System, North Hills, California; 17David Geffen 
School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, California; 18Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University, University Hospitals - Cleveland Medical Center, Cleveland, 
Ohio; 19Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan
pii: jc-18-00212 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.7128
sleep clinician will be able to provide guidance to the patient 
regarding the utility and accuracy of sleep apps and gadgets, 
including wearables. As CST matures, sleep clinicians need to 
understand the wide range of CST-generated data and have a 
plan for how to utilize these data in the context of a clinical visit.
BACKGROUND
The number of available CSTs is continually growing, and a 
multitude of them claim to track and define sleep-related met-
rics, improve sleep quality, and even screen for sleep disorders. 
Unfortunately, minimal validation data exist regarding the 
ability of CSTs to accurately perform these functions. Sleep 
apps infrequently utilize empirical evidence or national guide-
lines to support their purported function or the information 
they disseminate.6 Rather than being sold as medical devices 
or apps, most CSTs are self-described “lifestyle/entertainment” 
devices that are not subject to United States Food and Drug 
 878
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 5 
May 15, 2018
S Khosla, MC Deak, D Gault, et al. 
Position Statement: Consumer Sleep Technology
Administration (FDA) oversight. The FDA has published a 
position statement with accompanying documents explaining 
how (and when) they will regulate mobile applications,7 and 
to date almost no mobile sleep apps have undergone such re-
view. The lack of validation data and absence of FDA clear-
ance raises concerns about the accuracy of CST data. The 
CST-generated data is not standardized, and raw data and 
proprietary algorithms are typically unavailable to clinicians. 
Despite the lack of validation and evidence-based guidelines, 
the clinician may be asked to review and render an opinion on 
these CST-generated data.
POSITION
It is the position of the AASM that CST must be FDA cleared 
and rigorously tested against current gold standards if it is in-
tended to render a diagnosis and/or treatment. Given the un-
known potential of CST to measure sleep or assess for sleep 
disorders, these tools are not substitutes for medical evaluation. 
However, CSTs may be utilized to enhance the patient-clinician 
interaction when presented in the context of an appropriate 
clinical evaluation.
DISCUSSION
Sleep professionals must acknowledge CSTs as patients are 
gathering information at home with the aid of these devices, and 
then seeking the opinion of the sleep professional. In today’s 
reality of ever-changing technology, sleep practitioners should 
have a working knowledge of epistemology and methodology of 
these technologies, even if they are unfamiliar with the specific 
devices. See Table 2 for guiding principles for these encounters. 
An initial schema for categorization of CSTs has been sug-
gested by Watson and colleagues.8 Many CSTs share common 
traits and may utilize similar technology and reflect similar 
data. In addition, sleep clinicians should have an approach to 
the patient that recognizes the limitations of CSTs, yet capital-
izes on their popularity and public interest in them. Table 3 
highlights possible advantages and disadvantages of CSTs in 
the clinical care setting. In addition, it is quite likely as these 
devices become increasingly sophisticated that some may un-
dergo validation to have a role in clinical care and scientific 
inquiries. The uses could range from individual patient man-
agement to “big data” collection through bioinformatics tools.
Patients’ engagement with CST allows sleep professionals 
to have a dialogue with them about their expectations of the 
CST as well as their underlying sleep concerns. For example, 
a patient utilizing a sleep time tracking CST may have insom-
nia concerns and may be an ideal candidate for cognitive be-
havioral therapy for insomnia. A patient tracking their snoring 
may be at risk for obstructive sleep apnea and may require 
validated testing.
The “internet of things” is ubiquitous. The challenge is to 
provide a succinct yet flexible clinical guide for sleep profes-
sionals who are presented with CST data by a patient during 
a visit. Clinicians require a practical approach to discuss CST 
data and related sleep concerns with patients. A suggested ap-
proach is outlined in Table 4.
How should sleep professionals navigate this ever-chang-
ing technology? The initial framework for categorization 
that has been suggested by Watson will certainly evolve as 
technologies continue to progress. Why should sleep pro-
fessionals familiarize themselves with technology without 
validation data? Watson points out that patients may not be 
as concerned about this lack of validation. Furthermore, as 
consumers gain experience with wearables, limitations in 
the attainment of valid and actionable information may re-
sult in a more pragmatic assessment of their utility. While 
wearable technology has become well entrenched, there has 
been some transition in the market from the more fixed fit-
ness and health-related single use gadgets to smartwatches 
and other multifunctional platforms, focused on entertain-
ment and connectivity. Recognizing some of the limitations 
of wearables, “equity funding plummeted to around $300 
million last year [2016] from the more than $1.3 billion the 
industry raised in 2014, according to the Sports Innovation 
Lab.” 9 Consumers seem to recognize some shortcomings of 
consumer health-related technology.
Table 1—Definitions.
Consumer sleep technology (CST): Non-prescription devices 
directly marketed to consumers that may make an assertion to 
perform sleep monitoring, tracking, or sleep-related interventions.
App: An application, typically a small, specialized program 
downloaded onto mobile devices.3 This may support a wearable or 
other assessment instrument, or be an independent application.
Wearable: Technology devices that can be worn by a consumer for 
entertainment and communication that, at minimum, may track 
health and fitness information.4
Patient-generated health data (PGHD): PGHD are paper or 
electronic health-related data that are generated directly by 
patients, not health care practitioners, during or between clinical 
visits. Examples include health or treatment history, biometric 
data, self-reported observational data or symptoms, and lifestyle 
monitoring.5
 
Table 2—General principles of CST engagement.
• Clinicians should have a general awareness of CST and a readiness 
to discuss CST with patients.
• Clinicians should understand the general framework of devices and 
apps available and have a basic knowledge of available evidence or 
lack thereof.
• Most CSTs are not FDA cleared or validated clinical devices/
applications, but widespread accessibility and use by patients (and 
potential patients) may augment patient engagement.
• Data can be utilized as a tool for opening discussions with patients.
• Clinicians should recognize the patient’s use of CST as a 
commitment to focus on sleep wellness.
CST = consumer sleep technology, FDA = United States Food and Drug 
Administration.
 879
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 5 
May 15, 2018
S Khosla, MC Deak, D Gault, et al. 
Position Statement: Consumer Sleep Technology
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Further CST data validation regarding device accuracy and ap-
plication within clinical practice is necessary if these devices 
are to be considered part of medical evaluation and treatment. 
There is an evolving trend that blurs the lines between CSTs 
that are utilized for entertainment and those that are intended 
to render a diagnosis or treatment. How this new technology 
will affect the important outcomes of patient health, health 
care delivery and health care costs has yet to be determined. 
CSTs that intend to be diagnostic devices must fall under FDA 
regulations and must be rigorously tested against the current 
gold standards, while also understanding the availability and 
the limitations of current gold standards. The overwhelming 
amount of CST-derived PGHD available to clinicians and re-
searchers has vast implications. In the clinical setting, mecha-
nisms may be required for electronic health record integration, 
billing, and quality measurement. PGHD may transcend the 
one-on-one clinic visit and inform occupational health and 
safety programs as well as public policy. From a research stand-
point, CST can generate exponentially larger data sets than 
traditional protocols, which may further the understanding of 
the role of sleep in health and disease. Due to CST popularity, 
future CSTs that are evidence based have wide-reaching poten-
tial to positively impact sleep.6 Recent Fitbit data exemplifies 
Table 3—Advantages and disadvantages of consumer technologies.
Advantages
Disadvantages 
Tool to engage patient awareness and patient-
provider interaction
Largely unproven clinical tool:
• Inability for providers to analyze overwhelming amounts of unvalidated PGHD
• CST may have uncertain clinical validation: Raw data collection and algorithms are not 
standardized, disclosed, or validated for stated purposes11,*
• Resource utilization required to analyze and document PGHD may outweigh value added 
to clinical discussions
• Largely unproven to accurately measure sleep12; possible data misrepresentation or 
improper use of data
Popular, inexpensive, readily accessible for 
consumers
CST are generally advertised as “entertainment”
• May not be FDA cleared or validated for clinical use
• CST technology advances more rapidly than can be studied systematically
Real time and visual data feedback for consumers
• May increase sleep awareness and patient 
engagement
• May encourage patients to seek formal sleep 
evaluation
May have unintended clinical consequences:
• Negative impact on sleep hygiene (screen time/light)
• Overestimation of the presence of a sleep problem may cause unnecessary anxiety
• Underestimation of a sleep problem may cause delayed evaluation and treatment
Potential to become more meaningful with CST 
validation and ongoing technology advances
• For EHR integration and telemedicine use
• For remote consumer generated data between 
visits
• Long-term data collection
Potential problems with clinical use of technology and remote PGHD:
• PGHD may not adhere to HIPAA security standards13
• Unvalidated data may be documented in patient charts without provider review
• Increased CST training, personnel, and IT cost burden for clinical, EHR integration, and 
telemedicine use
• Reimbursement may be less than care delivery costs 
* = this is unlike clinical diagnostic instruments; for example, clinical guidelines for the use of portable monitoring recommend that devices must allow for 
display of raw data and manual editing or override of automated scoring. CST = consumer sleep technology, EHR = electronic health record, FDA = United 
States Food and Drug Administration, HIPAA = Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, IT = information technology, PGHD = patient-generated 
health data.
Table 4—Guidance for clinicians encountering data in a 
clinical setting.
• If/when data are presented by patients, it should be considered in 
the context of a comprehensive sleep evaluation and should not 
replace validated diagnostic instruments or treatments that have 
undergone rigorous scientific investigation.
• Discuss with the patient which biometric the CST is measuring (if 
known) and how this differs from gold-standard sleep measurement.
• Encourage the patient to evaluate their sleep based on subjective 
symptoms, clinical context, and validated diagnostic testing rather 
than CST data of unclear significance.
• Reconcile the patient’s symptoms with the data presented by the 
CST, emphasizing that CST-derived information must be interpreted 
carefully in the context of clinical signs and symptoms.
• Present options for ongoing use of the CST (eg, to set personal 
goals, assess change over time).
• Patients utilizing CST may favor engaging with validated online 
therapies such as CBT-I
• If the patient has developed anxiety, unreasonable expectations, or 
inadequate sleep hygiene related to the use of the CST, consider 
encouraging the patient to discontinue use of the device either 
temporarily or permanently.
CBT-I = cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia, CST = consumer 
sleep technology.
 880
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 14, No. 5 
May 15, 2018
S Khosla, MC Deak, D Gault, et al. 
Position Statement: Consumer Sleep Technology
a potentially powerful CST to generate significantly larger 
scope of sleep data that would not otherwise be obtainable us-
ing conventional methods.10
With rapid advances in technology, medical professionals 
should have more open-mindedness and preparedness as we 
anticipate forthcoming changes in how we manage sleep disor-
ders. Best practice would maintain an evidence-based, patient-
centric approach while being receptive to changes brought by 
advances in technology.
CONCLUSIONS
CST is widespread and may improve patient engagement.14 
Benefits of CST include increased awareness of the importance 
of sleep and the need for evaluation and treatment of sleep dis-
orders. CSTs may enhance the patient-provider interaction and 
as such, are adjuncts to clinical practice. Therefore, an under-
standing of the capabilities and limitations of CST is crucial. 
Analysis of CST data requires consideration of manufacturer 
claims in the context of the biometrics assessed and thoughtful 
interpretation of the output. PGHD derived from CST should 
be considered in the context of a comprehensive sleep evalu-
ation and should not replace validated diagnostic instruments. 
CST delivered interventions are not substitutes for treatments 
that have undergone rigorous scientific investigation. Despite 
their limitations, CSTs may allow for meaningful conversa-
tions with patients and increase active participation in their 
health care.
REFERENCES
1. Van Camp J. It’s official: mobile devices outnumber people in the U.S. 
Digital Trends website. https://www.digitaltrends.com/computing/its-official-
mobile-phones-outnumber-people-in-the-u-s/. Published October 13, 2011. 
Accessed April 10, 2018.
2. Mobile App Ranking. SimilarWeb website. https://www.similarweb.com/apps/
top/google/app-index/us/health-and-fitness/top-free. Accessed April 10, 2018.
3. App. Dictionary.com website. http://www.dictionary.com/browse/app. 
Accessed April 10, 2018.
4. Beal V. Wearable technology. Webopedia website. https://www.webopedia.
com/TERM/W/wearable_technology.html. Accessed April 10, 2018.
5. Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. Patient-
generated health data. HealthIT.gov website. http://www.healthit.gov/topic/
scientific-initiatives/patient-generated-health-data. Accessed April 10, 2018.
6. Lee-Tobin PA, Ogeil RP, Savic M, Lubman DI. Rate my sleep: examining the 
information, function, and basis in empirical evidence within sleep applications 
for mobile devices. J Clin Sleep Med. 2017;13(11):1349–1354
7. Mobile medical applications. U.S. Food & Drug Administration website. https://
www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DigitalHealth/MobileMedicalApplications/
ucm255978.htm. Updated March 26, 2018. Accessed April 10, 2018.
8. Ko PR, Kientz JA, Choe EK, Kay M, Landis CA, Watson NF. Consumer 
sleep technologies: a review of the landscape. J Clin Sleep Med. 
2015;11(12):1455–1461.
9. Tracy M. Technology Used to Track Players’ Steps Now Charts Their Sleep, 
Too. New York Times website. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/22/sports/
ncaafootball/clemson-alabama-wearable-technology.html. Published 
September 22, 2017. Accessed April 10, 2018.
10. Pogue D. Exclusive: What Fitbit’s 6 billion nights of sleep data reveals about 
us. Yahoo! Finance website: https://finance.yahoo.com/news/exclusive-fitbits-
6-billion-nights-sleep-data-reveals-us-110058417.html. Published January 4, 
2018. Accessed April 10, 2018.
11. Collop NA, Anderson WM, Boehlecke B, et al. Clinical guidelines for the use 
of unattended portable monitors in the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea in 
adult patients. J Clin Sleep Med. 2007;3(7):737–747.
12. Patel P, Kim JY, Brooks LJ. Accuracy of a smartphone application in 
estimating sleep in children. Sleep Breath. 2017;21(2):505–511.
13. Examining Oversight of the Privacy & Security of Health Data Collected by 
Entities Not Regulated by HIPAA [pdf]. HealthIT.gov website. https://www.
healthit.gov/sites/default/files/non-covered_entities_report_june_17_2016.pdf. 
Published June 17, 2016. Accessed April 10, 2018.
14. Groshek MR, Oldenburg J, Sarasohn-Kahn J, Sitler B. mHealth App 
Essentials: Patient Engagement, Considerations, and Implementation. HiMSS 
website. http://www.himss.org/mhealth-app-essentials-patient-engagement-
considerations-and-implementation. Published February 20, 2015. 
Accessed April 10, 2018.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The board of directors and the committee thank AASM staff members who assisted 
with the development of this position statement.
SUBMISSION & CORRESPONDENCE INFORMATION
Submitted for publication April 11, 2018
Submitted in final revised form April 11, 2018
Accepted for publication April 12, 2018
Address correspondence to: Seema Khosla, MD, American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine, 2510 N. Frontage Road, Darien, IL 60561; Tel: (630) 737-9700; Fax: (630) 
737-9790; Email: skhosla@medbridgegroup.com.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
This position statement was developed by the AASM Presidential Technology 
Committee for the board of directors. It is published as an advisory that is to be used 
for educational and informational purposes only.
