 Oncotarget
85349
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/             Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 51), pp: 85349-85364
Enumeration and targeted analysis of KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA 
mutations in CTCs captured by a label-free platform: Comparison 
to ctDNA and tissue in metastatic colorectal cancer
Evelyn Kidess-Sigal1,2,*, Haiyan E. Liu3,*, Melanie M. Triboulet2, James Che3, Vishnu 
C. Ramani2, Brendan C. Visser2, George A. Poultsides2, Teri A. Longacre4, Andre 
Marziali5, Valentina Vysotskaia6, Matthew Wiggin5, Kyra Heirich2, Violet Hanft2, 
Ulrich Keilholz7, Ingeborg Tinhofer8, Jeffrey A. Norton2, Mark Lee9, Elodie Sollier-
Christen3, Stefanie S. Jeffrey2
1Department of Medicine, Division of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Charité University Hospital, Berlin, Germany
2Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
3Vortex BioSciences, Inc., Menlo Park, CA, USA
4Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
5Boreal Genomics, Vancouver, BC, Canada
6Counsyl Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA
7Comprehensive Cancer Center Charité, Berlin, Germany
8Department of Radiooncology and Radiotherapy, Charité University Hospital, Berlin, Germany
9GRAIL, Redwood City, CA, USA
*These authors have contributed equally to this work
Correspondence to: Stefanie S. Jeffrey, email: ssj@stanford.edu
Keywords: colorectal cancer, circulating tumor cells, circulating tumor DNA, liquid biopsy, Vortex
Received: June 30, 2016    Accepted: October 26, 2016    Published: November 15, 2016
ABSTRACT
Treatment of advanced colorectal cancer (CRC) requires multimodal therapeutic 
approaches and need for monitoring tumor plasticity. Liquid biopsy biomarkers, 
including CTCs and ctDNA, hold promise for evaluating treatment response in 
real-time and guiding therapeutic modifications. From 15 patients with advanced 
CRC undergoing liver metastasectomy with curative intent, we collected 41 blood 
samples at different time points before and after surgery for CTC isolation and 
quantification using label-free Vortex technology. For mutational profiling, KRAS, 
BRAF, and PIK3CA hotspot mutations were analyzed in CTCs and ctDNA from 
23 samples, nine matched liver metastases and three primary tumor samples. 
Mutational patterns were compared. 80% of patient blood samples were positive 
for CTCs, using a healthy baseline value as threshold (0.4 CTCs/mL), and 81.4% 
of captured cells were EpCAM+ CTCs. At least one mutation was detected in 78% 
of our blood samples. Among 23 matched CTC and ctDNA samples, we found a 
concordance of 78.2% for KRAS, 73.9% for BRAF and 91.3% for PIK3CA mutations. 
In several cases, CTCs exhibited a mutation that was not detected in ctDNA, and vice 
versa. Complementary assessment of both CTCs and ctDNA appears advantageous 
to assess dynamic tumor profiles.
INTRODUCTION
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common 
cancer diagnosed worldwide in both men and women [1, 
2]. Although colorectal cancer screening tests can detect 
cancer at an early stage, and also prevent development 
of colorectal cancer by removal of precancerous polyps, 
only around 59% of the U.S. population undergo screening 
                  Research Paper
 Oncotarget
85350
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
[3], resulting in the diagnosis of only 39% of cancers at 
a localized stage [4]. Whereas 5-year relative survival is 
excellent for patients with localized disease (90%), it is 
substantially lower for patients with regional (70%) or 
distant (13%) metastases [5].
For CRC patients, mutation status of KRAS and 
NRAS in the primary tumor are currently routinely assessed 
after surgical resection by PCR-based methods to evaluate 
whether future therapeutic administration of EGFR 
inhibitors may be successful [6-8]. RAS (KRAS and NRAS) 
status may, however, differ between the primary tumor 
and metastatic lesions, due to intratumor heterogeneity 
and subclonal evolution [9, 10]. Nevertheless, repeat 
tissue biopsies are associated with risk of complications 
of invasive procedures, and metastatic sites may be 
difficult to access. Further, due to limited sampling, a 
tissue biopsy may only provide information on a fraction 
of the genomic variation within a tumor, and malignant 
cells may even be overlooked. Therefore, reliable markers 
more comprehensively representing the molecular makeup 
of the cancer genome in real-time would be helpful for 
detecting treatment resistance mechanisms and disease 
progression [11, 12].
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been identified 
to be an important link between primary tumors and 
metastases. CTCs are cells that can detach from the 
tumor, enter the blood stream after undergoing a process 
called epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and 
survive the shear stress as well as the immune system 
in circulation [13, 14]. Some of these cells can then 
extravasate, undergoing the reverse process called 
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) and initiate 
development of metastases at distant sites [15]. Because of 
their important role in the metastatic process, the number 
of CTCs in a cancer patient’s blood may be used to assess 
cancer prognosis [16], to evaluate treatment response, to 
monitor cancer recurrence or minimal residual disease, 
and potentially to detect cancer in a screening setting [17]. 
Beyond enumeration, analysis of the proteins, DNA and 
RNA from CTCs can inform the development of tailored 
therapies for individual patients. Despite growing interest 
in this “liquid biopsy”, it is a challenge to detect and 
characterize CTCs, as they are very rare: even in patients 
with advanced disease, as few as a single CTC may be 
present in several milliliters of blood in a background 
of millions of leukocytes (5–10×106) and billions of red 
blood cells (approximately 5×109) [18].
Although CTCs were first described over a century 
ago [19, 20], deep characterization has only recently 
become possible with advances in CTC enrichment [21] 
as well as sequencing technologies. The most common 
enrichment platforms to date have been based on the 
identification of circulating cells expressing epithelial 
markers, most notably epithelial cell adhesion molecule 
(EpCAM). As an example of this label-dependent 
approach, the CellSearch platform has been extensively 
studied in the application to CTC detection in patients 
with CRC [22–27]. Other EpCAM-dependent methods 
that have been used to detect CTCs from patients with 
CRC include: Adna Test, which uses antibodies against 
EpCAM and MUC-1 conjugated to magnetic beads 
[28], the CTC-Chip, a microfluidic platform containing 
microposts coated against EpCAM [29], and magnetic-
activated cell separation (MACS), another anti-EpCAM 
immunomagnetic enrichment method [30]. A main 
disadvantage of these platforms is their reliance on 
EpCAM expression on CTCs. Cells undergoing EMT 
may lack this marker and thus be missed with such 
an approach [31]. In this regard, multiple EpCAM-
independent technologies have been used to investigate 
CTCs in CRC, including several filter-based enrichment 
platforms, which exploit the larger size of tumor cells 
compared to blood cells [32, 33], and a fiber-optic 
array scanning technology (FAST) that combines 
immunofluorescent staining with high-throughput 
imaging to enable cytomorphometric analysis of the 
CTCs [34].
Recently, circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA), also 
known as tumor-derived cell-free DNA (cfDNA), 
has emerged as another liquid biopsy assay, with 
early evidence to support its use in many of the same 
applications as CTCs [13, 35–39]. ctDNA is thought to 
be released into the blood stream by tumor cells by active 
secretion or as a consequence of apoptosis or necrosis, 
with its presence and amount generally reflecting tumor 
burden. ctDNA needs to be distinguished from wild-
type cell-free DNA that is normally present in plasma as 
a result of usual cell turn-over; ctDNA is thus identified 
by measuring variant DNA sequences in circulation, 
which frequently mirror those seen in tumor tissue. The 
relationship of ctDNA to CTCs is under investigation at 
this time. Due to its relative abundance compared to CTCs, 
and its amenability to direct sequencing approaches, 
ctDNA may be better suited to analyses dependent on 
sensitivity. However, unlike CTCs, ctDNA is present in 
plasma in bulk form, and downstream analyses for cell-
level biology (e.g. protein and RNA expression analyses) 
are not feasible. Systematic characterization of blood 
samples with parallel CTC and ctDNA analyses are needed 
to better understand their relationships and the relative 
(and likely complementary) information contributed by 
each approach.
Here, we use the Vortex Chip, a label-free 
microfluidic platform, to isolate CTCs from the blood 
of CRC patients. The Vortex Chip utilizes laminar 
microvortices for enrichment and downstream molecular 
analyses of CTCs from blood [40–42]. We compare 
the mutational status of CTCs to that of primary and/
or metastatic tumor tissue and ctDNA as analyzed by 
SCODA (sequence-specific synchronous coefficient 
of drag alteration) mutation enrichment and detection 
technology [36] (Figure 1).
 Oncotarget
85351
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
RESULTS
Analytical performance of the Vortex platform 
on colon cancer cell lines
At a high flow rate (4 mL/min) on the Vortex 
platform, cancer cells experience large inertial shear 
gradient lift forces and are pushed into the laminar fluid 
microvortices that develop in the reservoirs, where they 
stably recirculate. The blood cells, by virtue of being 
smaller, do not experience a sufficient lift force to be 
retained in these vortices and remain in the main flow. 
An additional solution exchange with a buffer injected at 
the same overall flow rate washes away remaining blood 
cells, while still maintaining the cancer cells trapped in 
the vortices. By lowering the flow rate, vortices dissipate, 
release the enriched cancer cells from the chip and allow 
for their capture for downstream analysis.
As an initial evaluation of platform performance 
for CRC cells, HCT116 cancer cell lines were spiked 
both into PBS and 10x diluted blood from healthy 
donors to characterize capture efficiency and purity 
based on immunostaining for EpCAM (epithelial cell-
surface marker), CD45 (a leukocyte cell-surface marker), 
and DAPI (a nuclear stain) (Figure 2C, Supplementary 
Figure S1). Capture purity was 81% (Figure 2C). Capture 
efficiency was similar in PBS and blood (20% and 28%, 
respectively), which may indicate that the blood viscosity 
has a low influence on the capture rate (Supplementary 
Figure S1). Captured cells remain viable (data not shown) 
and may be collected in a concentrated volume of ~150 
μL, which is suitable for most downstream analyses [41].
Figure 1: Study Workflow and aims. A. Blood was collected from 15 patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) metastatic to the liver 
(2 tubes from each patient at several time points, respectively). B. One tube was used for CTC analysis: CTCs were enriched using the 
Vortex Gen1 Chip (Vortex BioSciences). Collected CTCs were fixed, stained and enumerated. Then, DNA was extracted for mutational 
analysis of CTC DNA by PCR based Sanger sequencing (3 genes). C. Another tube of whole blood was used for analysis of ctDNA: After 
centrifugation, plasma was collected and DNA was extracted for mutational analysis of plasma circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA). ctDNA 
mutational analysis was performed by panel sequencing (4 genes) after prior enrichment of targeted mutants using the SCODA mutation 
enrichment technology. D. While standard treatments are currently used for certain patient cohorts, E. our aim is to promote tailored cancer 
patient treatment.
 Oncotarget
85352
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Enumeration of CTCs from CRC patients
41 blood samples from 15 patients were collected 
at different time points prior to and after surgical 
resection of liver metastases and processed through the 
Vortex chip device. 10 blood samples from 10 healthy 
donors were collected and processed similarly. Patient 
information is summarized in Supplementary Table S1 and 
Supplementary Figure S2.
Briefly, in addition to morphologic criteria (see 
Supplementary Materials), cells that stained EpCAM+/
CD45-/DAPI+ or EpCAM-/CD45-/DAPI+ with both 
a nucleus size above 9 μm and a nucleus-to-cytoplasm 
(N:C) ratio above 0.6 were classified as CTCs, and cells 
with EpCAM-/CD45+/DAPI+ were classified as white 
blood cells (WBCs) (Figure 3A).“
Using the classification criteria, more cells with a 
CTC phenotype were found in preoperatively collected 
colon cancer patient samples (mean: 2.6 CTCs/mL, range: 
0.5 – 5.6 CTCs/mL) than in age-matched controls (mean: 
0.1 CTCs/mL, range: 0 – 0.4 CTCs/mL) (Figure 3B). We 
observed no significant difference in preoperative blood 
samples from patients who received or did not receive 
neoadjuvant treatment: For patients who underwent 
neoadjuvant treatment (P007-009, P011-012, P014-016, 
P018): mean 2.6 CTCs/mL, range: 0.5 – 5.6 CTCs/mL; 
for patients with no treatment (P006, P010, P013): mean 
2.2 CTCs/mL, range 0.9 – 3.8 CTCs/mL. Considering all 
blood samples independently of the time of collection, 0.1 
– 29 CTCs/mL (mean: 3.4 CTCs/mL) were collected in 
CRC patient blood samples, along with 4 – 517.4 WBCs/
mL (mean: 32.5 WBCs/mL), corresponding to a capture 
purity of 0.3 – 63.5% (mean: 14.5%). For defining a 
sample as being CTC positive, a threshold was set at 0.4 
CTCs per mL of blood. This healthy baseline threshold 
value was determined by calculating the mean number 
Figure 2: Microfluidic device design and performance. A. Blood sample processing consists of the following steps: 1) Priming 
of the device with wash solution (PBS) to eliminate air bubbles. At high flow rates (4 mL/min), laminar microvortices develop in the 
rectangular cavities. 2) Sample Infusion: The larger cancer cells get trapped in the vortices, while smaller red blood cells (RBCs) and 
white blood cells (WBCs) either pass through or transiently enter vortices. 3) Wash by switching to the wash solution at the same flow 
rate, thereby removing RBCs and WBCs, while the CTCs remain in the vortices. 4) Release of captured cells by lowering the flow rate to 
dissipate the vortices. Cells are collected into wells of a 96-well plate for further downstream analysis. B. The device consists of molded 
PDMS bonded to glass and contains one wash inlet, one sample inlet, and one outlet. C. Capture Purity in blood is evaluated by spiking 
~500 HCT116 cells into 10x-diluted blood collected from a healthy donor. After processing through Vortex device, cells were stained with 
DAPI, EpCAM and CD45, respectively, for visualization of the nucleus and to identify blood cells. Average capture purity (i.e. percentage 
of contamination with WBC) is shown for cell spiking into blood.
 Oncotarget
85353
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
of candidate CTC-like cells found in 10 age-matched 
healthy donors (HD) + 2 standard deviations [0.1+2(0.15) 
= 0.4]. In a paper by Ozkumur E et al. [43], that also used 
a microfluidic technology for CTC isolation, blood from 
13 healthy donors processed using their microfluidic 
chip showed a CTC detection cutoff at 0.5 cells per mL, 
similar to our threshold of 0.4 CTCs per mL. Using this 
baseline value as a threshold, 80% (33 of 41 samples) of 
CRC cancer samples processed were found to be positive 
for CTCs. The captured CTCs displayed varying levels 
of EpCAM expression (from low to high expression), 
with 81.4% of captured cells defined as CTCs showing 
an EpCAM+/DAPI+ phenotype (Figure 3C). This is in 
accordance to the known fact, that most CRC CTCs show 
a high EpCAM expression and was the reason to use this 
marker for visualization of CTCs in this study [44].
Comparison of CTC levels with clinical 
parameters
P009, P011, P012, P014, P015 and P018 (Figures 
4D-4I) all had received neoadjuvant therapy prior to 
surgical resection of liver metastases. In two out of nine 
cases, the number of CTCs showed consistency to clinical 
parameters (Figure 4C, 4E): P006 (Figure 4C) showed 
rapidly rising CTC numbers, which was reflected in the 
patient’s CT-scans showing progressive disease; for 
P011, CTC numbers were high, and a CT-scan revealed 
progressive disease (Figure 4E), but after administration 
of chemotherapy, CTC numbers declined, revealing good 
response to therapy.
In three out of the nine cases, (P001, P004 and P012, 
Figure 4A, 4B, and 4F) CTC numbers did not mirror 
Figure 3: CTC immunostaining and enumeration. A. Representative images of CTCs and WBCs stained with EpCAM, CD45, 
and DAPI. Scale bar represents 20 um. B. The number of CTCs per ml blood was determined for each patient. The number of CTCs in the 
preoperative blood draws are depicted by green circles for patients that received or did not receive neoadjuvant treatment. The number of 
CTCs in samples from age-matched healthy donors (HD) are depicted by red triangles. CTC numbers were higher in CRC patients compared 
to HD. A threshold was set at 0.4 CTCs per ml blood (mean HD + 2 standard deviations). C. The number of EpCAM+/DAPI+/CD45- CTCs 
compared to the number of EpCAM-/DAPI+/CD45- CTCs is shown for all patients at different time points (pre-, postoperatively and during 
follow-up visits) by green and blue stacked bars, respectively. Orange dotted lines represent the threshold of 0.4 CTCs/ml, above which 
positive cells are counted as CTCs.
 Oncotarget
85354
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
clinical findings: In patient P001, after surgical resection 
of liver metastases and postoperative chemotherapy, no 
CTCs were detectable, which was reflected in CT-scan 
results that showed ‘no evidence of disease’ (NED) (Figure 
4A). However, we later observed a transient rise in CTC 
numbers during the third follow-up visit of this patient, 
around 9 months after surgery, while at the next revisit 21 
months post-surgery, again no CTCs were detectable, even 
though no further chemotherapy had been administered. In 
P004 (Figure 4B), CTC numbers postoperatively declined, 
but remained detectable in follow-up blood draws, while 
imaging results showed no evidence of disease. For P012 
(Figure 4F), we constantly were able to detect CTCs, 
whereas CT scans showed no evidence of disease.
For the remaining four cases (Figure 4D, 4G-
4I), additional clinical follow-up is needed for final 
interpretation concerning the clinical relevance of CTC 
quantities: In P009, a CT scan around 40 days after 
surgery and prior to adjuvant chemotherapy showed no 
evidence of disease, although CTCs were still detectable 
(Figure 4D). After administration of chemotherapy to 
P009, CTC numbers declined, revealing good response 
to therapy. Following completion of the first cycle of 
adjuvant therapy, a CT-scan indicated progressive 
disease, which was accompanied by a detectable rise in 
CTCs. P014 showed a slow decline of CTC numbers 
after surgery whereas P018 showed rising numbers 
(Figure 4G and 4I), which may indicate minimal residual 
disease. Both patients received adjuvant chemotherapy 
with FOLFOX. P016 had hepatic metastases in both 
liver lobes, so that only one was resected, and resection 
was planned for the other after chemoembolization 
(Figure 4H). Interestingly, 5 days after surgery, there 
were no CTCs detectable, but later the numbers started 
to rise.
Taken together, our data show, that CTC levels 
parallel the clinical course for selected cases, but for 
others, additional clinical follow-up is needed to determine 
whether the CTCs detected may represent active residual 
tumor ultimately emerging as metastatic disease.
Figure 4: Longitudinal CTC enumeration results. Graphs A-I showthe evolution of CTC numbers during the clinical course and 
treatment of a subset of CRC patients with hepatic metastases. Orange colored bars represent Chemotherapy. Black stars behind patient 
numbers indicate status post neoadjuvant therapy prior to resection of liver metastases. Blue arrows depict computer-tomography scans. 
Orange dotted lines represent the HD threshold of 0.4 CTCs/ml, above which positive cells are counted as CTCs. NED = no evidence of 
disease. PD = progressive disease.
 Oncotarget
85355
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Comparison of CTC levels with ctDNA and CEA 
levels
Additionally, we analyzed CTC, ctDNA and CEA 
levels in two patients to simultaneously assess these 
biomarkers over time and to determine which of these 
markers best reflected the completeness of surgical 
resection, therapeutic response and disease recurrence 
(Figure 5A&5B). CTC numbers and ctDNA levels 
showed similar dynamics in both patients. Interestingly, 
postoperative CEA values were normal (<5 ng/ml) 
whenever analyzed in both patients. In P009, who had 
received neoadjuvant treatment prior to surgical resection 
of hepatic metastases (as well as the primary tumor), 
CTCs and a KRAS and a PIK3CA mutation in ctDNA 
were detectable preoperatively. On the 5th postoperative 
day, plasma analysis showed no evidence of ctDNA. 
Two months after surgery, while the PIK3CA mutation 
remained undetectable, CTCs again were detected and 
the KRAS mutation in ctDNA was detectable at higher 
levels compared to the preoperative samples, possibly 
reflecting residual disease, although CT scan results 
showed no evidence of disease. After initiation of adjuvant 
chemotherapy, both CTC numbers and the KRAS mutation 
level declined. Eventually, around day 160, the patient 
showed progressive disease on imaging, and concurrently 
rising levels of CTCs and KRAS mutant ctDNA despite 
administration of systemic therapy (Figure 5A). For 
P006, where high quantities of CTCs were identified in 
whole blood and PIK3CA mutants in plasma ctDNA, 
postoperative imaging surveillance revealed progressive 
disease which was accompanied by rapidly rising levels 
of CTCs and PIK3CA mutant DNA, with up to 29 CTCs 
per mL blood collected at the last time point. These cases 
illustrate that CTCs as well as ctDNA can potentially 
reveal disease recurrence as well as disease progression 
earlier than imaging and offer additional information 
beyond CEA.
Comparison of genomic mutational profile of 
CTCs to hepatic metastasis, primary tumors, 
and ctDNA
For nine patients in the cohort, mutational analyses 
for KRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA hotspots were available for 
matched tumor tissue, CTCs, and ctDNA.
We used cancer cells from cell lines of known 
mutational status to first verify that Sanger sequencing 
could detect target mutations for samples with a purity 
of 7.5% and above (Supplementary Figure S4). We 
then performed Sanger sequencing to detect mutations 
in CTCs, and to be consistent, in primary tumors and 
hepatic metastases. Analysis of ctDNA samples had been 
performed previously by targeted panel next generation 
sequencing (NGS) [36].
Figure 5: Longitudinal CTC enumeration results in comparison to ctDNA and CEA levels. Graphs A and B showthe 
development of CTC numbers alongside ctDNA and CEA levels during the clinical course and treatment of two CRC patients with hepatic 
metastases. Orange colored bars represent chemotherapy. Black stars behind patient numbers indicate status post neoadjuvant therapy prior 
to surgical resection of liver metastases. Blue arrows depict computer-tomography scans. Orange dotted lines represent the HD threshold of 
0.4 CTCs/ml, above which positive cells are counted as CTCs. NED = no evidence of disease. PD = progressive disease.
 Oncotarget
85356
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Of three primary tumor samples analyzed, two 
showed mutations and these same mutations were 
identified in the corresponding hepatic metastases 
(Table 1). Of three cases with no detectable mutations 
in liver metastases, two cases showed no CTC or 
ctDNA mutations and one case had identifiable KRAS 
and PIK3CA mutations in ctDNA but not in CTCs. Of 
the six cases with mutations in hepatic metastases, five 
(83%) had the same mutation identified in CTCs and 
five (83%) had the mutation identified in ctDNA. In case 
P001, a KRAS mutation was identified in CTCs but not 
ctDNA; and in case P016, a BRAF mutation was identified 
in ctDNA but not in CTCs. Overall, of 23 blood draws 
testing three genes for mutations in these 9 patients (69 
opportunities for testing CTC and ctDNA concordance 
during treatment), simultaneous mutational status of KRAS 
in CTCs and ctDNA were matched in two blood draws 
and discordant in five, with 16 blood draws showing no 
mutations in CTCs or ctDNA; mutational status of BRAF 
showed a match between CTCs and ctDNA in one blood 
draw and discordance in six, with 16 blood draws showing 
no mutations in CTCs or ctDNA; and mutational status of 
PIK3CA showed a match between CTCs and ctDNA in six 
blood draws and discordance in two, with 15 blood draws 
showing no mutations. These 13 mutationally discordant 
assays represent 59% of the 22 assays that showed any 
mutations, and 19% (13/69) of all the mutational assays 
performed. Of the 13 discordant assays for individual 
genes, four detected mutations in CTCs without detectable 
mutations in ctDNA, and nine showed mutations in 
ctDNA without corresponding mutations detected in the 
CTCs. Of these nine blood samples that showed only 
ctDNA mutations, four had CTC purity less than 7.5%, 
bringing into question whether a mutation may have gone 
undetected in these CTCs using Sanger sequencing. When 
grouping all three genes tests together as a panel, in three 
patients (P006, P009, and P013), our analysis revealed the 
presence of two different mutations concurrently (BRAF 
and PIK3CA in CTCs of P006; KRAS and PIK3CA in 
ctDNA of P009; and KRAS and PIK3CA in CTCs and 
ctDNA of P013). Overall, tissue and CTC mutational 
profiles or tissue and ctDNA profiles both matched in 7 
of 9 patients (78%). In one case, CTC analysis revealed 
a BRAF V600E mutation (P006), which was not detected 
in the corresponding liver metastasis, suggesting tumor 
heterogeneity, which would have been missed if only the 
hepatic metastasis had been analyzed. In another case 
(P009), ctDNA detected mutations that were not identified 
in the liver metastasis. In 10 age-matched healthy donors 
without a history of cancer, there were no detectable 
mutations (Supplementary Table S3).
Overall, for each gene within a blood draw, we 
found a concordance of 78.2% (18/23) for KRAS, 73.9% 
(17/23) for BRAF, and 91.3% (21/23) for PIK3CA, among 
a total of 23 blood and plasma samples. In several cases, 
CTCs exhibited a mutation that was not detected in 
ctDNA: for example, in P001 follow-up 2, a KRAS G12D 
mutation was detected, while in P014 preoperatively and 
at follow-up 2, a BRAF V600E mutation was detected in 
CTCs but not in ctDNA. On the other hand, there were 
several cases showing exactly the opposite, namely 
a mutation detected in ctDNA but not in CTCs. For 
example, in P009, KRAS mutations were detected in all 
ctDNA samples collected but neither in the tissues nor 
in the CTCs, while the preoperatively collected plasma 
ctDNA sample harbored a concurrent PIK3CA mutation. 
In P016, BRAF V600E mutations were detectable at all 
ctDNA sample collection times, which was concordant to 
primary and hepatic tumor tissue analyses, but was not 
detectable in the CTCs. Similarly, in P015, the analysis 
of the postoperative blood and plasma samples only 
showed the PIK3CA mutation in plasma ctDNA. Here, it 
needs to be kept in mind that the total number of CTCs 
per mL of sample (DNA yield), as well as sample purity 
play important roles for detecting CTC mutations with 
Sanger sequencing: The number of CTCs per mL of blood 
was very low in P016 (DNA yield < 10pg), while sample 
purity was under the 10% detection limit preoperatively 
and at follow-up 3 in P009, and postoperatively in P015 
(Table 1). This would require more sensitive techniques 
to enhance the limit of detection. In sum, while taking 
into account these limitations, our results indicate that 
CTCs and ctDNA are complementary and both should be 
evaluated in parallel to gain more detailed information on 
the mutational landscape of a patients’ tumor.
DISCUSSION
In the study presented here, we describe the use 
of a novel microfluidic device (Vortex Biosciences 
Inc.) for the label-free isolation of CTCs from blood of 
patients with surgically resectable CRC metastatic to 
the liver and compare mutational analyses of CTCs with 
ctDNA and tumor tissue. PCR-based sequencing for hot 
spot mutations of KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA genes in 
CTCs revealed similar mutations as tumor biopsies for 
77.8% of the patient samples. Comparison of CTC and 
ctDNA profiling showed similarities, but with additional 
mutations detected either in CTCs or ctDNA, which 
confirms the importance of both approaches.
The Vortex technology used here allows isolation 
and enrichment of CTCs with high purity. Whereas some 
label-free CTC isolation methods may require a red blood 
cell lysis (RBC lysis) step or buffy-coat separation prior 
to enrichment [45, 46], this is not necessary using this 
device, which avoids preprocessing and potential loss 
of rare valuable CTCs. Traditionally, CTCs have been 
captured by antibody-based methods targeting EpCAM, 
an epithelial marker not expressed on white blood cells. 
Interestingly, after DAPI/EpCAM/CD45 staining and 
enumeration of the CTCs collected, we were able to show 
that the majority of CTCs from our patient cohort were 
 Oncotarget
85357
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
EpCAM-positive. Still, EpCAM-negative subclones that 
have undergone epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition 
(EMT), which are postulated to be crucial for development 
of metastases [31], were also captured. Next, using Vortex 
technology, normalized per tube of blood, up to 217.5 
CTCs/7.5 mL of blood were captured (healthy cut-off at 
3 CTCs/7.5 mL), with a mean capture purity of 14.5%. 
This represents more CTCs with higher purity compared 
to the CellSearch system (which is associated with poor 
prognosis when > 3 CTCs/7.5 mL of blood are present) 
[25, 43, 47].
Although the Vortex platform is capable of capturing 
live CTCs, in this study we were limited by blood sample 
volume, and so used the same CTCs that had been 
collected into a well-plate, then fixed and stained for 
enumeration, for downstream genomic analysis: using the 
same sample enabled the detection of both CTC numbers 
and CTC gene mutations by using only one portion of 
blood with one time processing.
PCR-based Sanger sequencing is a traditional 
sequencing approach that allows fast and economic 
DNA sequencing, and is still considered the “gold 
standard” for validation studies in a smaller setting [48]. 
Advantageously, PCR-based Sanger sequencing does 
not require whole-genome amplification (WGA), which 
added bias when performed on fixed cells, producing false 
negative and false positive results (data not shown). For 
this purpose, we optimized a complete workflow for fixed 
Table 1: Mutation detection in primary tumor (FFPE), liver metastatic tissue, CTCs and plasma ctDNA in 
Colorectal cancer patients
Donor 
ID
Time Point 
of Collection
KRAS
BRAF
PIK3CA
CTCs/
ml
Purity 
%
Primary
Liver 
Met
CTCs ctDNA Primary
Liver 
Met
CTCs ctDNA Primary
Liver 
Met
CTCs
ctDNA
P001
Pre-Op
G12D
ND
ND
Follow up 1
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
0.1
0.6
Follow up 2
G12D
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
7.2
39.4
Follow up 3
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
0.3
3.0
P006
Pre Op
ND
ND
ND
ND
V600E
ND
H1047R H1047R H1047R
3.8
23.8
Follow up 1
ND
ND
ND
ND
H1047R H1047R
25.0
54.6
Follow up 2
ND
ND
ND
ND
H1047R H1047R
29.0
63.5
P007
Pre Op
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
2.4
14.3
P008
Pre Op
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
5.5
43.4
P009
Pre Op
ND
ND
ND
G12D
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
E542K
1.6
0.3
Follow up 1
ND
G12D
ND
ND
ND
ND
2.8
32.0
Follow up 2
ND
G12D
ND
ND
ND
ND
1.6
10.9
Follow up 3
ND
G12D
ND
ND
ND
ND
0.1
0.4
P013
Pre Op
G13D
G13D
G13D
G13D
ND
ND
ND
ND
H1047L H1047L H1047L H1047L
3.5
15.3
Post Op
G13D
G13D
ND
ND
H1047L H1047L
4.3
11.8
P014
Pre Op
ND
ND
ND
V600E V600E
ND
ND
ND
ND
5.6
9.0
Post Op
ND
ND
V600E V600E
ND
ND
5.9
22.9
Follow up 1
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
2.1
7.5
Follow up 2
ND
ND
V600E
ND
ND
ND
0.5
11.1
P015
Pre-Op
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
E542K
E542K
E542K
1.4
5.4
Post-Op
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
E542K
1.4
7.2
P016
Pre Op
ND
ND
ND
ND
V600E
V600E
ND
V600E
ND
ND
ND
ND
0.6
9.7
Post Op
ND
ND
ND
V600E
ND
ND
0.1
0.6
Follow up 1
ND
ND
ND
V600E
ND
ND
1.3
19.6
Grey indicates that no sample was available. Blue and purple represent biopsies from primary tumor (FFPE) and liver 
metastatic tissue, respectively. CTC samples and plasma ctDNA samples collected at different time points are represented in 
green and orange, respectively. ND = mutation not detected.
 Oncotarget
85358
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
cells, including optimized DNA extraction and PCR-based 
Sanger sequencing. Using this workflow, we analyzed 
captured CTCs as pooled cells and looked for the existence 
of hotspot mutations in KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA genes. 
This was possible due to the relatively high purity obtained 
in most CTC samples collected (mean purity 14.5%) given 
that Sanger sequencing detected mutations in fixed cells at 
a purity level of 7.5% or more (Supplementary Figure S4). 
In contrast, 30% (7/23) of CTC samples had a purity less 
than 7.5%, and mutations were not detected in 5 of these 
samples. Of 13 samples where no mutations were detected 
in CTCs, 5 (38%) had CTC purity less than 7.5% (Table 
1), highlighting a concern whether or not CTC mutations 
existed in these fixed CTC samples, and suggesting that 
future studies should include a more sensitive sequencing 
technique for CTCs, such as NGS on fresh cells or droplet-
based digital PCR [49-51]. 
KRAS and BRAF mutation status are predictive for 
whether a patient may respond to treatment with EGFR-
inhibitors, such as cetuximab [7-10]. Hence, detection 
of these mutations is important in the clinical setting 
for CRC. Additionally, NRAS mutations are known to 
cause resistance to anti-EGFR agents [7-9], but in in 
this study we focused on the gene mutations mentioned 
above, with higher frequency in CRC [52]. We compared 
the CTC mutational analysis results to corresponding 
hepatic metastatic tissue and primary tissue, whenever 
available. Our results indicate that CTCs can be used for 
non-invasive monitoring of the mutational pattern, as we 
observed a relatively high concordance of 77.8% (7/9) 
between mutations found in CTCs compared to tissue 
biopsies. In one case, a mutation was identified in CTCs 
but not in tissue, which may suggest that this reflects a 
rare subclone in the tissue with intratumor heterogeneity. 
Similarly, Speicher’s group has shown that mutations 
identified in single CTCs from the blood of patients 
with metastatic CRC which were not initially found in 
corresponding primary or metastatic tumor tissue could 
later be identified in the tissue using ultradeep sequencing, 
again suggesting a subclonal origin [53]. Such mutations 
may be missed if only the tumor biopsy is analyzed and 
provides evidence that CTCs may reflect the molecular 
makeup of a patients’ tumor more comprehensively than 
a tissue biopsy. Further, CTCs can be collected repeatedly 
in a non-invasive manner. Moreover, others have shown 
that CTC gene expression in metastatic CRC may better 
reflect the molecular features of metastatic deposits rather 
than primary tumor [54].
When comparing mutations detected in CTCs and 
ctDNA, we found that in some blood samples, CTCs 
revealed a mutation that was not detected in ctDNA, 
while in others, ctDNA revealed mutations that weren’t 
observable in CTCs. This suggests that CTCs and ctDNA 
are both needed to be evaluated in the clinical setting to 
enable optimal surveillance of the course of disease and 
treatment selection.
The CTC enrichment platform used in this study 
coupled with PCR-based Sanger sequencing exhibits good 
performance and offers added advantages of speed and 
simplicity in assessment of mutation in CTCs. However, 
we acknowledge that there are some limitations to our 
workflow. First, by using the Vortex platform, with a 
capture efficiency estimated around 27% from HCT116 
cells spiking experiments, some CTCs may have been 
missed. A new generation of the device made of a different 
material and that includes a significantly larger number of 
trapping chambers was developed to tackle this limitation. 
Recent testing shows higher capture efficiency while 
maintaining similar capture purity. Recovery is further 
enhanced using multiple rounds of reprocessing, with 
higher cumulative efficiency; such improvements will 
need to be tested in a future study. Second, CTCs were 
analyzed by Sanger sequencing, which has much lower 
sensitivity than NGS, and may have missed mutations in 
samples with low CTC purity. Next, by analyzing hot spot 
mutations of 3 genes in CTCs and ctDNA, other mutations 
may have been missed. Also, the number of patients and 
matched clinical samples is limited. Thus, further studies 
including a considerably larger patient cohort using the 
same mutation analysis method on both CTC and ctDNA 
and on corresponding tissue samples are needed in the 
future to verify our interesting results and especially 
to more accurately compare the different signatures in 
CTC and ctDNA samples. Finally, blood sampling site 
(e.g., CTCs or ctDNA obtained centrally from a hepatic 
vein versus from a peripheral vein) may be an important 
variable to consider in future investigations of metastatic 
CRC [55, 56], as it has been demonstrated that a 
significantly higher number of CTCs can be isolated from 
mesenteric blood of colorectal cancer patients compared to 
peripheral blood, which indicates that the liver effectively 
filters the CTCs in those patients [56].
Our study is one of a few comparing mutational 
analysis results from CTCs to the ones obtained from 
ctDNA in the same patient cohort, as well as mutational 
analyses on corresponding tissue specimens. Sundaresan et 
al. recently described the detection of a hot spot mutation 
that leads to an acquired resistance to tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors for patients with non-small cell lung cancers, 
with similar results in that complementary approaches are 
best to completely assess an individual patients’ cancer 
[57].
Biomarkers are crucial to guide treatment decisions. 
In CRC, information on KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA 
genotype is extremely valuable in systemic chemotherapy. 
Analysis of these three gene mutations in CTCs or ctDNA, 
which reflect certain subpopulations of the primary 
tumor as well as cells forming metastases, should be 
considered as an important “liquid biopsy” method to 
monitor the development of the disease and its status over 
time, and particularly for its clinical impact in guiding 
drug selection. At present, extracting CTCs with high 
 Oncotarget
85359
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
recovery and purity from the high background of blood 
cells still represents a challenge for the CTC field, and 
has limited the broad use of CTCs in clinical settings. Our 
study demonstrates the complementary use of targeted 
mutational analyses of CTCs captured by a label-free 
platform and ctDNA for monitoring of tumor evolution.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients and samples
Blood and tissue specimens, as well as clinical data, 
were collected from a total of 15 patients with stage IV 
colorectal cancer with surgically resectable metastatic 
disease to the liver. Blood specimens were also collected 
from 10 age-matched healthy donors without history of 
malignant disease. All patients were recruited at Stanford 
University Hospital, according to clinical study protocol 
approved by the ethics and Institutional Review Board 
(Stanford IRB # 5630).
Prior to being enrolled into the study, all patients 
provided written informed consent. For the cancer cases, 
eligible patients had adenocarcinoma of the colon or 
rectum with surgically resectable hepatic metastases 
(Stage IV disease) [58], as well as available blood 
samples. 10 of 15 patients (67%) received standard 
preoperative chemotherapy regimens prior to surgical 
resection of hepatic metastases (5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, 
and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) or FOLFOX + bevacizumab, 
capecitabine and oxaliplatin (XELOX) + bevacizumab, 
or 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan (FOLFIRI) 
+ cetuximab). Blood samples were collected into 10 ml 
EDTA coated tubes (BD) for CTC isolation, and Cell-
Free DNA BCT® (Streck) tubes for isolation of ctDNA. 
All cancer patients had blood samples collected prior to 
surgery. For a subset of these patients, additional blood 
collections were performed post-operatively and at follow-
up visits. 0.5-1g of metastatic tumor tissue was collected 
during surgery, transported on ice and stored at -80°C until 
further processing. Additionally, primary tumor FFPE 
samples were collected from 3 patients.
Processing of patient blood samples
Collected blood specimens were stored at room 
temperature and processed within 4 hours after blood 
was drawn. An amount of 4 to 10 ml of blood was 
collected into an EDTA tube and diluted 1:10 with PBS, 
and processed to yield CTCs collected into wells of a 
96 well-plate. Optimization of whole blood dilution has 
been previously described [41]. The enriched cells were 
then fixed, stained, imaged and enumerated similarly to 
the cancer cell lines (see below). Enriched cells were 
subsequently stored at 4°C until further processing. Blood 
samples collected into Cell-Free DNA BCT® (Streck 
Inc., Omaha, NE) tubes were subjected to centrifugation 
at 3200 rpm for 15 minutes, and plasma was subsequently 
isolated and stored at -80°C until further analysis.
Microfluidic Vortex device design and operation
Vortex technology is comprised of a PDMS 
microfluidic device which geometry has been described 
previously [41] (Figure 2B). Flow was driven through 
the device by the use of two syringe pumps (Harvard 
Apparatus), one for the sample solution and one for the 
wash solution [41]. Priming: The device was initially 
primed with PBS wash solution at 4 mL/min for 30s. 
Capture: For cell capture within the reservoirs, cell 
sample solution and wash solution were co-infused at 3.5 
mL/min and 0.5 mL/min. Wash: Solution exchange was 
performed by bringing the wash flow rate back to 4 mL/
min while stopping the sample solution flow. Release: By 
stopping the total flow, vortices can dissipate and cells 
were released from the vortices off the chip (Figure 2A). 
The captured cells were released into a 96-well plate for 
fixation, immunostaining, imaging and enumeration.
Characterization of the Vortex platform with 
cancer cell lines
The HCT116 cancer cell line was used to 
characterize device performance, and cancer cell lines 
SW620 and M395 were used to characterize DNA 
workflow. Adherent cells were released with 0.25% (w/v) 
Trypsin (Gibco®, ThermoFisher), resuspended in media 
and rocked gently on a shaker 30 min prior to spiking 
experiments. Approximately 500 cells were spiked into 
either 5 mL of PBS, or 5 mL of 10x diluted blood (0.5 
mL of blood and 4.5 mL of PBS) and infused through 
the device. Once collected, the cells were fixed, stained, 
imaged and enumerated. Capture purity was calculated as 
the number of target cells collected over the total number 
of captured nucleated cells (Figure 2C). Capture efficiency 
was calculated as the number of captured target cells over 
the total number of target cells injected through the device 
(Supplementary Figure S1).
Cell immunostaining and enumeration
Cells isolated through Vortex were fixed in 4% 
PFA (paraformaldehyde) (Electron Microscopy Sciences) 
for 10 min, blocked with 5% goat serum (Invitrogen) 
for 30 min, and then immunostained with DAPI (Life 
Technologies), anti EpCAM-fluorescein isothiocyanate 
(EpCAM-FITC, clone EBA-1, BD Biosciences), and 
anti CD45-phycoerythrin (CD45-PE, clone HI30, BD 
Biosciences). Using the Axio Observer Z1 microscope 
(Zeiss), stitched images of stained cells were acquired, and 
cells were manually enumerated by two different persons 
following the same criteria (Supplementary Figure S3). 
The classification criteria used for cell identification was 
 Oncotarget
85360
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
previously described [42]. CTCs were defined as DAPI-
positive/CD45-negative, either EpCAM-positive or 
EpCAM-negative with both a nucleus size above 9 μm and 
a nucleus-to-cytoplasm (N:C) ratio above 0.6. The number 
of EpCAM-positive and EpCAM-negative CTCs and 
leukocytes were documented, and the number of cancer 
cells per milliliter of whole blood was calculated.
Use of cell lines with known mutations to 
optimize and validate genomic workflow for 
CTCs
We used HCT116, SW620 and M395 cancer 
cells to test our mutation assays. HCT116 cells harbor 
heterozygous hotspot mutations of KRAS G13D (c.38G>A) 
and PIK3CA H1047R (c.3140A>G). SW620 cells have the 
homozygous KRAS G12V (c.35G >T) mutation. M395 
cells carry the homozygous BRAF V600E (c.T1799>A) 
mutation (Supplementary Figure S4). Because CTC cell 
number is low, giving insufficient DNA yield for use of 
next generation sequencing (NGS) technology, whole 
genome amplification (WGA) is necessary. As our CTCs 
had been previously fixed for enumeration, we found that 
WGA on fixed cell line cells followed by NGS resulted in 
both lower coverage of reads and uneven amplification, 
which caused false negative and false positive mutations 
(data not shown). Thus, all the mutational analyses on our 
fixed CTCs (and to be consistent, on tissue samples) were 
performed by PCR and Sanger sequencing as described 
below.
To determine DNA input limits for accurate Sanger 
sequencing of gene mutations, a range of cancer cell line 
DNA from 20pg to 1 ng with known mutation status were 
subjected to Sanger sequencing. To determine limitations 
in terms of sample purity of CTCs captured along with 
background WBCs, DNA from cancer cell lines cells was 
mixed with DNA from leukocytes (WBCs) in various 
ratios and processed for mutation detection using Sanger 
sequencing.
DNA extraction from CTCs and DNA 
quantification
Prior to DNA extraction from fixed CTCs, the 
best DNA extraction method leading to the highest 
yield of DNA was determined by testing different kits 
from different vendors with different protocols on fixed 
HCT116 cells (data not shown). A modified protocol 
using the QIAamp Micro Kit (Qiagen) was then used 
for the DNA extraction from CTCs collected in a well-
plate, fixed with 4% PFA and immunostained. Briefly, 
the well plates were centrifuged and PBS was cautiously 
removed. Tissue lysis buffer ATL and proteinase K were 
added to the cell suspensions followed by an overnight 
incubation at 60 °C. Then, the lysate was transferred from 
the well plate to a microcentrifuge tube. Lysis buffer AL 
was added to continue the lysis step. The whole lysate was 
then loaded into the provided column. After being washed 
by adding buffers AW1 and AW2, the bound DNA was 
eluted in 25 μl of water. As the CTC numbers are rather 
low, a sensitive and accurate method is needed to quantify 
the DNA amount. Therefore, we performed a quantitative 
PCR to determine the amount of DNA by using human 
long interspersed nuclear element-1 (hLINE-1) primers 
(Forward: 5′-TCACTCAAAGCCGCTCAACTAC-3′and 
Reverse: 
5′-TCTGCCTTCATTTCGTTATGTACC-3′). 
The hLINE-1 gene is ideal for this purpose, because 
∼100,000 of these elements exist in the human genome 
[59].
DNA extraction from tissue specimens and DNA 
quantification
DNA from 10 mg of frozen metastatic liver tissues 
was extracted by using the QIAamp DNA Micro Kit 
following the tissue protocol (Qiagen). DNA from 10 
μm of FFPE samples of primary cancer tissues (5μm 
per section, 2 sections) was extracted by using the 
GeneRead DNA FFPE Kit (Qiagen). The extracted DNA 
was quantified by Qubit Fluorometer (ThermoFisher 
Scientific). 1 ng of purified DNA was then subjected to 
PCR directly.
PCR and nested PCR
The extracted DNA was subjected to PCR in a 
total volume of 40 μl containing 20 μl of AmpliTaq 
Gold® 360 PCR Master Mix (Life Technologies), 2 μl of 
corresponding primers (10 μmol/L) and 5 μl of extracted 
CTC DNA or 1 ng of tissue DNA as the template. 
Primers of the genes KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA were 
designed to produce amplicons covering hotspot regions 
of KRAS codons 12 and 13, BRAF V600E, as well as 
PIK3CA codons 542, 545 (exon 9) and 1047 (exon 20) 
(Supplementary Table S2) and were synthesized by Elim 
Biopharmaceuticals, Inc.
Thermal cycler conditions were: 95°C for 5 min, 
35 cycles of 94°C for 30 sec, 58°C for 45 sec, 72°C for 
45 sec and finally 10 min at 72°C for the final extension. 
For PIK3CA exon 9, a nested PCR was done by using the 
nested primers and 2 μl of PCR product from the first PCR 
reaction with the following conditions: 95°C for 5 min, 
25 cycles of 94°C for 30 sec, 58°C for 45 sec, 72°C for 
45 sec and finally 10 min at 72°C for the final extension. 
All PCR experiments were done inside the AC600 PCR 
Workstation (AirClean Systems) with cautious handling 
to eliminate any contamination. The PCR products were 
checked by E-Gel Electrophoresis System (ThermoFisher 
Scientific) and measured by the Qubit. Remaining PCR 
products were then purified using the QIAquick PCR 
Purification Kit (Qiagen). The purified PCR product was 
measured by Qubit before being sent out for sequencing.
 Oncotarget
85361
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
Sanger sequencing
Purified PCR product was sent to Elim 
Biopharmaceuticals for Sanger sequencing. All reactions 
were run on a 3730XL DNA Analyzer (ThermoFisher 
Scientific) and sequenced by using the M13 forward 
primers. The Sanger sequence ABI chromatogram files 
were analyzed by using the BioEdit sequence alignment 
editor.
Analysis of ctDNA
Analysis of ctDNA mutation profiles using the 
multiplexed synchronous coefficient of drag alteration 
(SCODA) mutation enrichment and detection platform 
were performed as previously described [36]. Briefly, 
DNA was extracted from collected plasma samples, and 
after addition of internal positive controls (IPCs), the DNA 
samples were subjected to a multiplex PCR reaction, using 
primers with sample-specific barcodes. Amplified samples 
were then enriched for mutant DNA (46 mutations in the 
four genes KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA and EGFR) using the 
multiplexed SCODA mutation enrichment technology. 
The library was then constructed from the enriched mutant 
DNA, quantified by quantitative PCR and sequenced on 
the MiSeq platform (Illumina).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all patient and volunteer blood donors 
for their contributions. We acknowledge funding by the 
John and Marva Warnock Research Fund, the Debra and 
Andrew Rachleff Research Fund, and kind contributions 
from Vladimir and Natalie Ermakoff (E.K.S., S.S.J), 
a research agreement between Vortex Biosciences and 
Stanford University (E.K.S., M.T., S.S.J.), and grant 
support by the Charité Clinical Scientist Program funded 
by the Charité – Universitätsklinikum Berlin and the 
Berlin Institute of Health (E.K.S.). Additionally, we thank 
John Coller, PhD, of the Stanford Functional Genomics 
Facility and Amin Zia, PhD, of the Stanford Center for 
Genomics and Personalized Medicine for their help during 
preliminary experiments concerning NGS of fixed and 
stained CTCs.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
H. Liu, J. Che and E. Sollier-Christen have financial 
interests in Vortex Biosciences. A. Marziali and M. Wiggin 
have financial interests in Boreal Genomics. The other 
authors have declared no conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2016. CA 
Cancer J Clin. 2016;66:7-30.
2. Arnold M, Sierra MS, Laversanne M, Soerjomataram 
I, Jemal A, Bray F. Global patterns and trends in 
colorectal cancer incidence and mortality. Gut. 2016. pii: 
gutjnl-2015-310912. [Epub ahead of print].
3. Smith RA, Andrews K, Brooks D, DeSantis CE, Fedewa 
SA, Lortet-Tieulent J, Manassaram-Baptiste D, Brawley 
OW, Wender RC. Cancer screening in the United States, 
2016: A review of current American Cancer Society 
guidelines and current issues in cancer screening. CA 
Cancer J Clin. 2016;66:95-114.
4. Miller KD, Siegel RL, Lin CC, Mariotto AB, Kramer 
JL, Rowland JH, Stein KD, Alteri R, Jemal A. Cancer 
treatment and survivorship statistics, 2016. CA Cancer J 
Clin. 2016;66:271-89.
5. Siegel R, Desantis C, Jemal A. Colorectal cancer statistics, 
2014. CA Cancer J Clin. 2014;64:104-17.
6. Kin C, Kidess E, Poultsides GA, Visser BC, Jeffrey SS. 
Colorectal cancer diagnostics: biomarkers, cell-free 
DNA, circulating tumor cells and defining heterogeneous 
populations by single-cell analysis. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 
2013;13:581-99.
7. Douillard JY, Oliner KS, Siena S, Tabernero J, Burkes R, 
Barugel M, Humblet Y, Bodoky G, Cunningham D, Jassem 
J, Rivera F, Kocákova I, Ruff P, et al. Panitumumab-
FOLFOX4 treatment and RAS mutations in colorectal 
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:1023-34.
8. Allegra CJ, Rumble RB, Hamilton SR, Mangu PB, Roach 
N, Hantel A, Schilsky RL. Extended RAS Gene Mutation 
Testing in Metastatic Colorectal Carcinoma to Predict 
Response to Anti-Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 
Monoclonal Antibody Therapy: American Society of 
Clinical Oncology Provisional Clinical Opinion Update 
2015. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34:179-85.
9. Ciardiello F, Normanno N, Maiello E, Martinelli E, Troiani 
T, Pisconti S, Giuliani F, Barone C, Cartenì G, Rachiglio 
AM, Montesarchio V, Tonini G, Rizzi D, et al. Clinical 
activity of FOLFIRI plus cetuximab according to extended 
gene mutation status by next-generation sequencing: 
findings from the CAPRI-GOIM trial. Ann Oncol. 
2014;25:1756-61.
10. Kosmidou V, Oikonomou E, Vlassi M, Avlonitis S, Katseli 
A, Tsipras I, Mourtzoukou D, Kontogeorgos G, Zografos 
G, Pintzas A. Tumor heterogeneity revealed by KRAS, 
BRAF, and PIK3CA pyrosequencing: KRAS and PIK3CA 
intratumor mutation profile differences and their therapeutic 
implications. Hum Mutat. 2014;35:329-40.
11. Perkins G, Pilati C, Blons H, Laurent-Puig P. Beyond KRAS 
status and response to anti-EGFR therapy in metastatic 
colorectal cancer. Pharmacogenomics. 2014;15:1043-52.
12. Ignatiadis M, Lee M, Jeffrey SS. Circulating Tumor 
Cells and Circulating Tumor DNA: Challenges and 
Opportunities on the Path to Clinical Utility. Clin Cancer 
Res. 2015;21:4786-800.
 Oncotarget
85362
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
13. Kidess E, Jeffrey SS. Circulating tumor cells versus tumor-
derived cell-free DNA: rivals or partners in cancer care in 
the era of single-cell analysis? Genome Med. 2013;5:70.
14. Tam WL, Weinberg RA. The epigenetics of epithelial-
mesenchymal 
plasticity 
in 
cancer. 
Nat 
Med. 
2013;19:1438-49.
15. Chaffer CL, Weinberg RA. A perspective on cancer cell 
metastasis. Science. 2011;331:1559-64.
16. Budd GT, Cristofanilli M, Ellis MJ, Stopeck A, Borden E, 
Miller MC, Matera J, Repollet M, Doyle GV, Terstappen 
LW, Hayes DF. Circulating tumor cells versus imaging--
predicting overall survival in metastatic breast cancer. Clin 
Cancer Res. 2006;12:6403-9.
17. Haber DA, Velculescu VE. Blood-based analyses of cancer: 
circulating tumor cells and circulating tumor DNA. Cancer 
Discov. 2014;4:650-61.
18. Powell AA, Talasaz AH, Zhang H, Coram MA, Reddy A, 
Deng G, Telli ML, Advani RH, Carlson RW, Mollick JA, 
Sheth S, Kurian AW, Ford JM, et al. Single cell profiling 
of circulating tumor cells: transcriptional heterogeneity 
and diversity from breast cancer cell lines. PLoS One. 
2012;7:e33788.
19. Ashworth TR. A case of cancer in which cells similar to 
those in the tumours were seen in the blood after death. Aus 
Med J. 1869;14:146-149.
20. Diamond E, Lee GY, Akhtar NH, Kirby BJ, Giannakakou 
P, Tagawa ST, Nanus DM. Isolation and characterization 
of circulating tumor cells in prostate cancer. Front Oncol. 
2012;2:131.
21. Ferreira MM, Ramani VC, Jeffrey SS. Circulating tumor 
cell technologies. Mol Oncol. 2016;10:374-94.
22. Miller MC, Doyle GV, Terstappen LW. Significance of 
circulating tumor cells detected by the CellSearch System 
in patients with metastatic breast colorectal and prostate 
cancer. J Oncol. 2010;2010:617421.
23. Sastre J, Maestro ML, Puente J, Veganzones S, Alfonso 
R, Rafael S, García-Saenz JA, Vidaurreta M, Martín M, 
Arroyo M, Sanz-Casla MT, Díaz-Rubio E. Circulating 
tumor cells in colorectal cancer: correlation with clinical 
and pathological variables. Ann Oncol. 2008;19:935-8.
24. Cohen SJ, Punt CJ, Iannotti N, Saidman BH, Sabbath 
KD, Gabrail NY, Picus J, Morse M, Mitchell E, Miller 
MC, Doyle GV, Tissing H, Terstappen LW, Meropol 
NJ. Relationship of circulating tumor cells to tumor 
response, progression-free survival, and overall survival 
in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 
2008;26:3213-21.
25. Cohen SJ, Punt CJ, Iannotti N, Saidman BH, Sabbath 
KD, Gabrail NY, Picus J, Morse MA, Mitchell E, Miller 
MC, Doyle GV, Tissing H, Terstappen LW, Meropol NJ. 
Prognostic significance of circulating tumor cells in 
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Ann Oncol. 
2009;20:1223-9.
26. Gasch C, Bauernhofer T, Pichler M, Langer-Freitag S, 
Reeh M, Seifert AM, Mauermann O, Izbicki JR, Pantel 
K, Riethdorf S. Heterogeneity of epidermal growth 
factor receptor status and mutations of KRAS/PIK3CA in 
circulating tumor cells of patients with colorectal cancer. 
Clin Chem. 2013;59:252-60.
27. Lalmahomed ZS, Mostert B, Onstenk W, Kraan J, Ayez 
N, Gratama JW, Grünhagen D, Verhoef C, Sleijfer S. 
Prognostic value of circulating tumour cells for early 
recurrence after resection of colorectal liver metastases. Br 
J Cancer. 2015;112:556-61.
28. Zieglschmid V, Hollmann C, Gutierrez B, Albert 
W, Strothoff D, Gross E, Böcher O. Combination of 
immunomagnetic enrichment with multiplex RT-PCR 
analysis for the detection of disseminated tumor cells. 
Anticancer Res. 2005;25:1803-10.
29. Nagrath S, Sequist LV, Maheswaran S, Bell DW, Irimia D, 
Ulkus L, Smith MR, Kwak EL, Digumarthy S, Muzikansky 
A, Ryan P, Balis UJ, Tompkins RG, et al. Isolation of rare 
circulating tumour cells in cancer patients by microchip 
technology. Nature. 2007;450:1235-9.
30. Königsberg R, Gneist M, Jahn-Kuch D, Pfeiler G, 
Hager G, Hudec M, Dittrich C, Zeillinger R. Circulating 
tumor cells in metastatic colorectal cancer: efficacy and 
feasibility of different enrichment methods. Cancer Lett. 
2010;293:117-23.
31. Baccelli I, Schneeweiss A, Riethdorf S, Stenzinger 
A, Schillert A, Vogel V, Klein C, Saini M, Bäuerle T, 
Wallwiener M, Holland-Letz T, Höfner T, Sprick M, et al. 
Identification of a population of blood circulating tumor 
cells from breast cancer patients that initiates metastasis in 
a xenograft assay. Nat Biotechnol. 2013;31:539-44.
32. Lin HK, Zheng S, Williams AJ, Balic M, Groshen S, 
Scher HI, Fleisher M, Stadler W, Datar RH, Tai YC, Cote 
RJ. Portable filter-based microdevice for detection and 
characterization of circulating tumor cells. Clin Cancer Res. 
2010;16:5011-8.
33. Buim ME, Fanelli MF, Souza VS, Romero J, Abdallah 
EA, Mello CA, Alves V, Ocea LM, Mingues NB, Barbosa 
PN, Tyng CJ, Chojniak R, Chinen LT. Detection of 
KRAS mutations in circulating tumor cells from patients 
with metastatic colorectal cancer. Cancer Biol Ther; 
2015;16:1289-95.
34. Marrinucci D, Bethel K, Lazar D, Fisher J, Huynh E, 
Clark P, Bruce R, Nieva J, Kuhn P. Cytomorphology of 
circulating colorectal tumor cells:a small case series. J 
Oncol. 2010;2010:861341.
35. Alix-Panabières C, Pantel K. Clinical Applications of 
Circulating Tumor Cells and Circulating Tumor DNA as 
Liquid Biopsy. Cancer Discov. 2016;6:479-91.
36. Kidess E, Heirich K, Wiggin M, Vysotskaia V, Visser BC, 
Marziali A, Wiedenmann B, Norton JA, Lee M, Jeffrey SS, 
Poultsides GA. Mutation profiling of tumor DNA from plasma 
 Oncotarget
85363
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
and tumor tissue of colorectal cancer patients with a novel, 
high-sensitivity multiplexed mutation detection platform. 
Oncotarget. 2015;6:2549-61. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3041.
37. Bettegowda C, Sausen M, Leary RJ, Kinde I, Wang Y, 
Agrawal N, Bartlett BR, Wang H, Luber B, Alani RM, 
Antonarakis ES, Azad NS, Bardelli A, et al. Detection 
of circulating tumor DNA in early- and late-stage human 
malignancies. Sci Transl Med. 2014;6:224ra24.
38. Diaz LA Jr, Bardelli A. Liquid biopsies: genotyping 
circulating tumor DNA. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32:579-86.
39. Diehl F, Li M, Dressman D, He Y, Shen D, Szabo S, 
Diaz LA, Goodman SN, David KA, Juhl H, Kinzler KW, 
Vogelstein B. Detection and quantification of mutations in 
the plasma of patients with colorectal tumors. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2005;102:16368-16373.
40. Che J, Mach AJ, Go DE, Talati I, Ying Y, Rao J, Kulkarni 
RP, Di Carlo D. Microfluidic purification and concentration 
of malignant pleural effusions for improved molecular and 
cytomorphological diagnostics. PLoS One. 2013;8:e78194.
41. Sollier E, Go DE, Che J, Gossett DR, O'Byrne S, Weaver 
WM, Kummer N, Rettig M, Goldman J, Nickols N, 
McCloskey S, Kulkarni RP, Di Carlo D. Size-selective 
collection of circulating tumor cells using Vortex 
technology. Lab Chip. 2014;14:63-77.
42. Che J, Yu V, Dhar M, Renier C, Matsumoto M, Heirich K, 
Garon EB, Goldman J, Rao J, Sledge GW, Pegram MD, 
Sheth S, Jeffrey SS. Classification of large circulating tumor 
cells isolated with ultra-high throughput microfluidic Vortex 
technology. Oncotarget. 2016;7:12748-60. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.7220.
43. Ozkumur E, Shah AM, Ciciliano JC, Emmink BL, 
Miyamoto DT, Brachtel E, Yu M, Chen PI, Morgan B, 
Trautwein J, Kimura A, Sengupta S, Stott SL, et al. Inertial 
focusing for tumor antigen-dependent and -independent 
sorting of rare circulating tumor cells. Sci Transl Med. 
2013;5:179ra47.
44. Spizzo G, Fong D, Wurm M, Ensinger C, Obrist P, Hofer C, 
Mazzoleni G, Gastl G, Went P. EpCAM expression in primary 
tumour tissues and metastases: an immunohistochemical 
analysis. J Clin Pathol. 2011;64:415-20.
45. Punnoose EA, Ferraldeschi R, Szafer-Glusman E, Tucker 
EK, Mohan S, Flohr P, Riisnaes R, Miranda S, Figueiredo 
I, Rodrigues DN, Omlin A, Pezaro C, Zhu J, et al. PTEN 
loss in circulating tumour cells correlates with PTEN loss in 
fresh tumour tissue from castration-resistant prostate cancer 
patients. Br J Cancer. 2015;113:1225-33.
46. Warkiani ME, Khoo BL, Wu L, Tay AK, Bhagat AA, Han J, 
Lim CT. Ultra-fast, label-free isolation of circulating tumor 
cells from blood using spiral microfluidics. Nat Protoc. 
2016;11:134-48.
47. Allard WJ, Matera J, Miller MC, Repollet M, Connelly MC, 
Rao C, Tibbe AG, Uhr JW, Terstappen LW. Tumor cells 
circulate in the peripheral blood of all major carcinomas 
but not in healthy subjects or patients with nonmalignant 
diseases. Clin. Cancer Res. 2004;10:6897–6904.
48. Mestan KK, Ilkhanoff L, Mouli S, Lin S. Genomic 
sequencing in clinical trials. J Transl Med. 2011;9:222.
49. Denis JA, Patroni A, Guillerm E, Pépin D, Benali-Furet 
N, Wechsler J, Manceau G, Bernard M, Coulet F, Larsen 
AK, Karoui M, Lacorte JM. Droplet digital PCR of 
circulating tumor cells from colorectal cancer patients 
can predict KRAS mutations before surgery. Mol Oncol. 
2016;10:1221-31.
50. Taly V, Pekin D, Benhaim L, Kotsopoulos SK, Le Corre 
D, Li X, Atochin I, Link DR, Griffiths AD, Pallier K, 
Blons H, Bouché O, Landi B, Hutchison JB, Laurent-
Puig P. Multiplex picodroplet digital PCR to detect KRAS 
mutations in circulating DNA from the plasma of colorectal 
cancer patients. Clin Chem. 2013;59:1722-31.
51. Laurent-Puig P, Pekin D, Normand C, Kotsopoulos SK, 
Nizard P, Perez-Toralla K, Rowell R, Olson J, Srinivasan 
P, Le Corre D, Hor T, El Harrak Z, Li X, Link DR, Bouché 
O, Emile JF, Landi B, Boige V, Hutchison JB, Taly V. 
Clinical relevance of KRAS-mutated subclones detected 
with picodroplet digital PCR in advanced colorectal 
cancer treated with anti-EGFR therapy. Clin Cancer Res. 
2015;21:1087-97.
52. Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive molecular 
characterization of human colon and rectal cancer. Nature. 
2012;487:330-7.
53. Heitzer E, Auer M, Gasch C, Pichler M, Ulz P, Hoffmann 
EM, Lax S, Waldispuehl-Geigl J, Mauermann O, Lackner 
C, Höfler G, Eisner F, Sill H, et al. Complex tumor 
genomes inferred from single circulating tumor cells by 
array-CGH and next-generation sequencing. Cancer Res. 
2013;73:2965-75.
54. Onstenk W, Sieuwerts AM, Mostert B, Lalmahomed Z, 
Bolt-de Vries JB, van Galen A, Smid M, Kraan J, Van M, 
de Weerd V, Ramírez-Moreno R, Biermann K, Verhoef C, 
et al. Molecular characteristics of circulating tumor cells 
resemble the liver metastasis more closely than the primary 
tumor in metastatic colorectal cancer. Oncotarget. 2016. 
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.10175. [Epub ahead of print].
55. Connor AA, McNamara K, Al-Sukhni E, Diskin J, Chan D, 
Ash C, Lowes LE, Allan AL, Zogopoulos G, Moulton CA, 
Gallinger S. Central, But Not Peripheral, Circulating Tumor 
Cells are Prognostic in Patients Undergoing Resection of 
Colorectal Cancer Liver Metastases. Ann Surg Oncol. 
2016;23:2168-75.
56. Denève E, Riethdorf S, Ramos J, Nocca D, Coffy A, Daurès 
JP, Maudelonde T, Fabre JM, Pantel K, Alix-Panabières C. 
Capture of viable circulating tumor cells in the liver of 
colorectal cancer patients. Clin Chem. 2013;59:1384-92.
57. Sundaresan TK, Sequist LV, Heymach JV, Riely GJ, Jänne 
PA, Koch WH, Sullivan JP, Fox DB, Maher R, Muzikansky 
A, Webb A, Tran HT, Giri U, et al. Detection of T790M, 
 Oncotarget
85364
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget
the Acquired Resistance EGFR Mutation, by Tumor Biopsy 
versus Noninvasive Blood-Based Analyses. Clin Cancer 
Res. 2016;22:1103-10.
58. Poultsides GA, Schulick RD, Pawlik TM. Hepatic resection 
for colorectal metastases: the impact of surgical margin 
status on outcome. HPB (Oxford). 2010;12:43-9. 
59. Rago C, Huso DL, Diehl F, Karim B, Liu G, Papadopoulos 
N, Samuels Y, Velculescu VE, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW, 
Diaz LA Jr. Serial assessment of human tumor burdens 
in mice by the analysis of circulating DNA. Cancer Res. 
2007;67:9364-70.
