 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
NeuroImage: Clinical
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ynicl
Abnormal language-related oscillatory responses in primary progressive
aphasia
Kielar A.a,d,1, Deschamps T.a, Jokel R.a,c, Meltzer J.A.a,b,c,d,⁎
a Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Health Sciences Toronto, Ontario, Canada
b Department of Psychology University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
c Department of Speech-Language Pathology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
d Canadian Partnership for Stroke Recovery, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
MEG oscillations
Primary progressive aphasia (PPA)
Sentence comprehension
A B S T R A C T
Patients with Primary Progressive Aphasia (PPA) may react to linguistic stimuli differently than healthy controls,
reflecting degeneration of language networks and engagement of compensatory mechanisms. We used magne-
toencephalography (MEG) to evaluate oscillatory neural responses in sentence comprehension, in patients with
PPA and age-matched controls. Participants viewed sentences containing semantically and syntactically
anomalous words that evoke distinct oscillatory responses. For age-matched controls, semantic anomalies eli-
cited left-lateralized 8–30 Hz power decreases distributed along ventral brain regions, whereas syntactic
anomalies elicited bilateral power decreases in both ventral and dorsal regions. In comparison to controls, pa-
tients with PPA showed altered patterns of induced oscillations, characterized by delayed latencies and atte-
nuated amplitude, which were correlated with linguistic impairment measured offline. The recruitment of right
hemisphere temporo-parietal areas (also found in controls) was correlated with preserved semantic processing
abilities, indicating that preserved neural activity in these regions was able to support successful semantic
processing. In contrast, syntactic processing was more consistently impaired in PPA, regardless of neural activity
patterns, suggesting that this domain of language is particularly vulnerable to the neuronal loss. In addition, we
found that delayed peak latencies of oscillatory responses were associated with lower accuracy for detecting
semantic anomalies, suggesting that language deficits observed in PPA may be linked to delayed or slowed
information processing.
1. Introduction
Primary progressive aphasia (PPA) is a neurodegenerative syn-
drome in which selective degeneration of cortical areas supporting
language processing leads to a progressive impairment of language
functions,
with
initial
preservation
of
other
cognitive
domains
(Mesulam, 2003; Mesulam et al., 2009). Recent diagnostic guidelines
recognize three main variants of PPA (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2004,
2011; Mesulam et al., 2009, 2014): nonfluent/agrammatic, logopenic,
and semantic, although considerable overlap exists between these
groups, and many patients remain unclassifiable within the present
guidelines (Mesulam et al., 2014; Mesulam and Weintraub, 2014;
Wicklund et al., 2014). The language symptoms evinced by the three
variants depend largely on the distribution and location of cortical
atrophy, and there is a significant but variable link between the most
strongly affected brain networks and distinct forms of molecular
pathology, each variant being characterized by abnormal deposits of a
different protein (Davies et al., 2005; Grossman, 2010; Gorno-Tempini
et al., 2004; Mesulam et al., 2009, 2014; Snowden et al., 2007; Wilson
et al., 2012). The semantic variant, with TDP-43-based neurodegen-
eration centered in the left temporal lobe, differs strongly from the
other two, with marked impairment of single word comprehension and
object naming, with relatively preserved grammatical structure and
fluency (Mesulam et al., 2014). Agrammatic and logopenic PPA are
more difficult to distinguish, with the former characterized by break-
down of grammatical production linked to tau protein-based degen-
eration of the inferior frontal gyrus, and the latter by reduced and
slowed speech production, preserved grammar, and repetition deficits,
linked to Alzheimer's (beta-amyloid and tau protein) pathology cen-
tered in the parietal lobe.
Although the location of neurodegeneration is thus far the best
predictor of individual variation in linguistic performance across
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2018.02.028
Received 25 June 2017; Received in revised form 9 February 2018; Accepted 27 February 2018
⁎ Corresponding author at: Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Health Sciences, 3560 Bathurst Street, Toronto, Ontario M6A 2E1, Canada.
1 Aneta Kielar is now at the Department of Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, University of Arizona, 1131 E 2nd St, Tucson, AZ 85719.
E-mail addresses: akielar@email.arizona.edu (A. Kielar), jmeltzer@research.baycrest.org (J.A. Meltzer).
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
Available online 01 March 2018
2213-1582/ © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).
T
 patients, alterations in network function beyond the regions of frank
atrophy may provide valuable information on how the brain copes with
ongoing neurodegeneration, and can help explain why some patients
can maintain a high degree of function late into the disease course.
Characterization of functional alterations in PPA will also inform efforts
to develop effective interventions that harness the brain's capacity for
adaptive plasticity, including the compensatory engagement of struc-
turally intact networks to support language processing. Functional
neuroimaging studies have the potential to reveal these characteristics
of the disease and their link to cognitive preservation in PPA. Although
the variants of PPA have largely been characterized by differences in
language production, it is far easier to experimentally probe linguistic
processing through comprehension paradigms, rather than production
paradigms. Language comprehension is also strongly affected in PPA,
although these deficits have received less attention than the production
deficits.
In the semantic variant, comprehension can be severely compro-
mised on the single word level, while this is usually preserved in the
other variants. Most PPA patients exhibit some degree of comprehen-
sion impairment on the sentence level (Grossman et al., 1996;
Grossman and Moore, 2005). A recent study investigating quantitative
relationships of comprehension with patterns of cortical atrophy across
PPA patients found that single-word comprehension deficits were
strongly related to atrophy in the left anterior temporal lobe, char-
acteristic of the semantic variant, whereas impaired comprehension of
syntactically complex, semantically reversible sentences was associated
with atrophy in both frontal and temporo-parietal regions, associated
with the agrammatic and logopenic variants, respectively (Peelle et al.,
2008; Mesulam et al., 2015). Interestingly, these are the same areas in
which increased fMRI activation has been observed during compre-
hension of syntactically complex sentences relative to simpler sentences
(Chen et al., 2006; Meltzer et al., 2010; Peelle et al., 2010).
Difficulties with sentence comprehension may arise at both se-
mantic and syntactic levels, as listeners (or readers) must combine both
the meaning of words and their grammatical relationships to arrive at
the correct interpretation of the sentence. Results of word monitoring
studies have provided evidence that sentence comprehension problems
in PPA may be caused by deficits in various aspects of on-line gram-
matical processing (Grossman et al., 2005; Grossman et al., 2005; Peelle
et al., 2007). It has been suggested that PPA patients' sentence com-
prehension difficulty may be due to slowed information processing
speed (Grossman et al., 2005). Delayed processing of phonological in-
formation during naming has been also observed in logopenic and
agrammatic PPA (Mack et al., 2015).With their high temporal resolu-
tion, electrophysiological techniques such as electroencephalography
(EEG) or magnetoencephalography (MEG) can directly probe altered
neural dynamics in PPA, particularly with respect to the brain's re-
sponse to specific words within a sentence.
To date, only a few studies have examined electrophysiological
activity related to the linguistic impairments in PPA patients, and most
of them have investigated language processing at the single word level.
These studies indicate that event-related potential (ERP) responses
elicited by linguistic stimuli are altered in patients with PPA. For ex-
ample, Giaquinto and Ranghi (2009) recorded event related potentials
while participants with PPA performed a word recognition task. They
found that the N400 potential, associated with word recognition, was
delayed and reduced in amplitude in these patients, and progressively
deteriorated until it was no longer present. Similarly, PPA patients
showed abnormal N400 effects to unrelated mismatch words in an
object-word matching task (Hurley et al., 2009).
1.1. MEG oscillatory measures of task-related activation
Pathological alterations of neural activity can be identified with
high spatial and temporal resolution using MEG. This non-invasive
technique detects magnetic fields at the surface of the head and can
spatially localize post-synaptic currents generated in synchronously
firing neuronal assemblies. Compared to EEG, MEG allows for more
accurate reconstruction of source activity because magnetic fields are
only minimally affected by passing through the skull, (Hamalainen,
1993). Furthermore, MEG is ideally suited for characterization and lo-
calization of oscillatory signals generated by neural activity. These
signals may carry unique information useful for understanding the
pathophysiology of PPA and how it affects language function.
Induced oscillations in MEG have been studied using beamforming
techniques for source analysis (Vrba, 2002; Vrba and Robinson, 2001).
This method estimates a virtual signal at a particular location in the
brain while attenuating activity arising from other brain areas and
extracranial sources, such as ocular artifacts (Cheyne et al., 2006;
Robinson, 2004). Several studies with neurologically unimpaired par-
ticipants identified power decreases in the alpha (8–12 Hz) and beta
(15–30 Hz) ranges as a reliable indicator of increased neural activity,
with close correspondence to the blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD)
responses in diverse parts of the cortex (Brookes et al., 2005; Hillebrand
et al., 2005; Hanslmayr et al., 2012; Meltzer and Braun, 2011).
In a recent set of studies, we used MEG with beamforming to map
the brain regions involved in the processing of semantic and syntactic
aspects of language in healthy controls and patients with stroke-in-
duced aphasia (Kielar et al., 2015; Kielar et al., 2016). We found that
activation of specific language regions was detectable as an event-re-
lated desynchronization (ERD), or power decrease, in a broad frequency
range covering both the alpha and beta bands (8–30 Hz). Processing of
semantic anomalies was associated with 8–30 Hz ERD in a left-later-
alized
set
of
ventral
frontotemporal
regions,
whereas
syntactic
anomalies activated both dorsal and ventral regions bilaterally. Power
modulations in this frequency range have also been reported in other
MEG studies examining induced oscillations to semantically or syntac-
tically anomalous words (Bastiaansen et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2012).
Changes in language-related oscillatory responses associated with
PPA have not yet been extensively investigated with MEG. In a recent
study, Miller et al. (2013) studied changes in oscillatory responses
during a verb generation task in one patient with semantic variant of
PPA. In contrast to the left lateralized activation observed in the healthy
controls, the patient with PPA showed beta band ERD localized to the
right hemisphere. The possibility of compensatory linguistic processing
occurring in preserved brain networks is highly relevant for interven-
tion, as future treatments may focus on maximizing the compensatory
potential of such areas through behavioral therapy, noninvasive brain
stimulation, and pharmacological approaches. The engagement of
right-hemisphere homologous networks in PPA is especially intriguing,
given that this has been seen often in post-stroke aphasia, and has been
interpreted as both adaptive (Crinion and Price, 2005; Thulborn et al.,
1999) and maladaptive (Perani et al., 2003; Naeser et al., 2004) in
different contexts.
1.2. Present study
The goal of the present study is to identify patterns of MEG induced
oscillatory responses during sentence comprehension related to im-
pairment and preservation of linguistic function in PPA. We studied
both semantic and syntactic processing to identify changes in oscilla-
tory patterns and neural recruitment associated with these different
types of linguistic information. We asked whether impaired language
processing in PPA is associated with altered patterns of oscillatory re-
sponses, and whether spared language functions can be associated with
recruitment of preserved brain regions in the left and right hemi-
spheres. Finally, we wanted to determine whether the magnitude and
type of neural recruitment differs for semantic and syntactic processing.
The design of the present study allowed us to identify relationships
between neural responses to semantic and syntactic anomalies, online
and offline language performance, and patterns of cortical atrophy
within the PPA group. Because both agrammatic and logopenic variants
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
561
 are associated with sentence comprehension deficits with relatively
preserved single-word comprehension, we conducted the present study
in a group of patients with either diagnosis. To our knowledge, detec-
tion of semantic and syntactic anomalies has not been investigated
behaviorally in PPA. Although the logopenic and nonfluent variants of
PPA differ in the location of their atrophy, in temporoparietal and
frontal regions respectively, atrophy in both of these regions has been
linked to deficits in sentence comprehension, with the frontal regions
especially implicated in comprehension of grammatically complex
sentences (Peelle et al., 2008; Thompson et al., 2013). Based on this we
hypothesized that anomaly detection would be impaired in both groups
relative to controls, and that the variability in performance across pa-
tients would be related to differences in neural activity induced by the
anomalies.
2. Methods
2.1. Participants
MEG data were acquired from 13 patients with PPA and 15 age-
matched healthy controls. This study was approved by the Research
Ethics Board (REB) at Baycrest Health Sciences, University of Toronto.
All volunteers gave their written informed consent prior to the study
and were compensated for their participation. Demographic, clinical
characteristics, and cognitive scores for patients and controls are sum-
marized in Table 1.
Participants with PPA were recruited from several sources in
Toronto, Ontario and surrounding areas. These included the Memory
Clinic at Baycrest Health Sciences, the Aphasia Institute (www.aphasia.
ca), and the March of Dimes Aphasia and Communication Disabilities
Program
(http://www.marchofdimes.ca/EN/programs/acdp/Pages/
AphasiaAndCommunicationDisabilitiesProgram.aspx). Patients (7 fe-
males) ranged in age from 58 to 83 years, and had 12 to 20 years of
education.
All
participants
were
right
handed
as
measured
by
Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield, 1971; Williams, 2010).
They were all native speakers of English, and had normal hearing and
normal or corrected to normal vision. All patients retained sufficient
capacity of language comprehension to consent for the study and follow
task instructions. Exclusion criteria were earlier neurological diseases,
childhood language disorders, head traumas or brain surgery, epilepsy,
severe psychiatric disorders, and unstable or poor health. Participants
were diagnosed with PPA prior to the study by a speech language pa-
thologist and/or board certified neurologist. PPA diagnosis was based
on the basis of the convergence of the clinical presentation, narrative
speech samples, and the results of standardized tests. A diagnosis of
PPA required progressive deterioration of speech and/or language
functions, with the deficit largely restricted to speech and/or language
at the onset and throughout the early stage of the disease (first
2–3 years). All patients in this study were diagnosed as nonfluent/
agrammatic or logopenic variants based on recent guidelines (Gorno-
Tempini et al., 2011). Seven individuals with effortful, halting speech
and/or agrammatic language were classified as the nonfluent variant,
and six patients with impaired word retrieval and phrase/sentence re-
petition were classified as logopenic. The disease severity and general
cognitive status was assessed with the Montreal Cognitive Assessment
(MoCA). The mean score for patients was 19.77 points out of maximum
30 (min = 7, max = 26), indicating mild to moderately severe cogni-
tive impairment. All participants were living at home alone or with
family members.
Participants with PPA were matched with a group of healthy older
controls for age, F < 1. All healthy volunteers were recruited from the
greater Toronto area by REB approved advertisements from the
University of Toronto community and from the Baycrest Health
Sciences subject pool. All of the neurologically unimpaired participants
(4 females) were right handed native speakers of English, and reported
normal hearing and normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Participants
had no history of neurological, psychiatric, speech, language, or
learning disorders and none were taking neuroleptic or mood altering
medications at the time of the study. Age-matched controls participated
in all behavioral and neuroimaging assessments completed by the PPA
patients. All older control participants tested within normal limits on all
cognitive and linguistic tests.
2.2. Cognitive and language assessment
Prior to participation in the MEG experiment, patients and age-
matched controls completed a thorough neuropsychological battery to
assess several domains of cognitive and language functioning. General
cognitive status was measured using the Montreal Cognitive Assessment
(MoCA, Nasreddine et al., 2005). Tests of language function included
the Western Aphasia Battery Revised (Bedside Record Form, Kertesz,
1982, 2007) for classification of aphasia type, supplemented by selected
subtests of reading, spelling and repetition from the PALPA exam
(Psycholinguistic Assessments of Language Processing in Aphasia, Kay
et al., 1992). Verbal fluency was assessed using Letter fluency tests
(Letters FAS) from the Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System (D-
KEFS, Delis et al., 2001), and confrontation naming was examined using
the 60-item Boston Naming Test (BNT, Kaplan et al., 2001). Compre-
hension and production of sentences varying in syntactic complexity
were assessed using two subtests of the Northwestern Assessment of
Verbs
and
Sentences
(NAVS,
Thompson,
2011;
Cho-Reyes
and
Thompson, 2012), respectively, the Sentence Comprehension Test
(SCT) and the Sentence Production Priming Test (SPPT). Receptive
lexical semantics and vocabulary knowledge were examined using the
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, Fourth Edition (Dunn and Dunn,
Table 1
Demographic and neuropsychological characteristics for patients and controls.
PPA
Controls
Mean
SE
Mean
SE
Age(years)
69.62
2.08
69
1.77
Education(years)
14.38
0.85
17.46
0.69
Time post Onset(years)
2.54
0.22
MOCA
19.77
1.69
27
0.45
BNT
39.84
3.8
57.07
0.6
Letter fluency
4
0.5
14
0.9
SPPT
77
7.5
99.56
0.3
SCT
84
5
100
0
PPVT
92
2.6
119
3.1
C&C
77
2.9
90
1.1
WAB flu
7
0.6
WAB Rep
8
0.5
WAB Comp
8
0.7
WAB BAS
81
3.6
WAB BLS
79
4.2
MoCA: Montreal Cognitive Assessment (Nasreddine et al., 2005). Measured out of 30
points; Values from 30 to 26 points indicate normal performance. A score of 25 or lower
(from maximum of 30) is considered significant cognitive impairment.
Explanation of Abbreviations: BNT = Boston Naming Test (score out of 60); Letter flu-
ency: FAS (D-KEFS); SPPT = Northwestern Assessment of Verbs and Sentences Sentence
Production Priming Test. NAVS_SCT = Northwestern Assessment of Verbs and Sentences-
Sentence Comprehension Test, total: overall score on all sentence types; PPVT = Peabody
Picture Vocabulary Test; C&C = Camel and Cactus Test (Cambridge Semantic Battery);
WAB = Western Aphasia Battery: Bedside version, Flu = Spontaneous Speech Fluency,
Comp = Auditory Verbal Comprehension, Rep = Repetition; BAS: Bedside Aphasia Score;
BLS: Bedside Language Score.
Bedside Language Score (WAB_BLS) was determined by summing the Speech Content,
Fluency, Auditory Verbal Comprehension, Sequential Commands, Repetition, Object
Naming, Reading, and Writing scores, dividing the sum by 8 and multiplying the result by
10.
Bedside Aphasia Score (WAB_BAS) was determined by summing the Speech Content,
Fluency, Auditory Verbal Comprehension, Sequential Commands, Repetition, and Object
Naming scores, dividing the sum by 6 and then multiplying result by 10.
Italics indicate standard error of the mean (SE).
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
562
 2007). Semantic knowledge independent of expressive verbal abilities
was assessed using the Camel and Cactus Test (Adlam et al., 2010).
For further characterization of cognitive status, and to rule out the
possibility that nonlinguistic deficits could account for low performance
on an MEG comprehension task, participants were administered tests of
episodic
memory,
executive
function,
and
visuospatial
abilities.
Episodic memory was assessed using word lists (immediate and delayed
free and cued recall, and recognition) from the Kaplan Baycrest
Neurocognitive Assessment (KBNA, Leach et al., 2000) and the logical
memory subtest from WMS-IV (immediate, delayed recall, and re-
cognition, Wechsler, 2009). Non-verbal episodic memory was tested
using the Facial Recognition Test (Warrington, 1984). In addition, ex-
ecutive functions were examined using the forward and backward digit
span tests from the WAIS-IV, and the Trail Making Test (Trails A and B)
from D-KEFS.
Visuospatial abilities were assessed using the Complex Figure
subtest from KBNA (immediate: copy and recall, delayed: recall and
recognition), Symbol Cancelation also from KBNA, and a short form of
Benton's Judgement of Line Orientation Test (Calami et al., 2011;
Benton et al., 1983). Mean scores and standard errors for patients and
controls on selected measures are presented in Table 1.
2.3. Using PCA to derive a language measure
In this study, we sought to characterize associations between altered
neural responses to linguistic stimuli and linguistic impairment, both in
terms of the performance on the sentence comprehension task per-
formed during MEG, and broader measures of linguistic ability based on
the cognitive battery. To summarize the overall degree of language
impairment, we entered the scores from individual tests, from patients
and controls combined, into a Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
with Varimax Rotation. Given that the cognitive battery was heavily
weighted towards tests of language, it was expected that the first
component returned from PCA would serve as an overall measure of
language impairment, separated from other cognitive domains, thus
serving as a convenient means of dimensionality reduction. The MoCA
and WAB were excluded from the PCA, as they are multifactorial tests
covering a wide range of abilities.
PCA and related analyses were carried out with SPSS version 22
(IBM). The test scores were normalized by converting them to z-scores,
controlling for the scale differences between the various tests. In order
to increase the proportion of cases to variables for the PCA analysis, the
control group included 15 age-matched controls who took part in the
MEG study, plus an additional 16 age-matched older controls who
completed the same neuropsychological battery. A scree-plot analysis of
the variance accounted for by each component suggested that the test
scores clustered into two principal components, and the loadings in-
dicated that one component reflected language measures and the
second reflected memory and visuo-spatial abilities. The test scores
entered into the PCA and factor loadings are presented in Table 2.
Subsequently, factor scores on each component were calculated for
each participant and used to test for correlations with MEG activation
(reflected by 8–30 Hz ERD) for semantic and syntactic anomalies. To
test whether scores derived from the two principal components differ-
entiated between patients and controls, we performed repeated mea-
sures ANOVA with factor type (language component, memory compo-
nent) entered as a repeated-measures variable and group (PPA, age-
matched) as a between-subjects variable. The analysis revealed a sig-
nificant main effect of group, F(1,42) = 44.44, p < .001, and a sig-
nificant factor type by group interaction, F(1,42) = 6.19, p = .017.
Post-hoc tests of this interaction indicated that the language component
differentiated patients from controls, t(42) = 5.56, p < .001, whereas
there was no significant difference between groups on the memory and
visuo-spatial component, t(42) = 1.25, p = .232.
2.4. Sentence comprehension task
All participants completed a visual sentence-judgement task during
MEG acquisition. More detailed description of the sentence materials
and procedure can be found in our previous papers reporting results
from young healthy controls and patients with post-stroke aphasia
(Kielar et al., 2015, 2016). A brief description of the paradigm is given
below. Examples of experimental sentences are presented in Table 3.
Each trial started with a 500 ms fixation cross, followed by word-by-
Table 2
Results of Principal Component Analysis for the Neurocognitive Test Battery.
Cognitive Tests
Component loadings
Component 1
(Language)
Component 2 (Memory & visuo-
spatial)
NAVS_vnt
0.819
sentence_rep_b
0.813
lm1_recall
0.802
NAVS_sct
0.792
NAVS_sppt
0.791
animals_fluency
0.764
sentence_rep_a
0.757
BNT
0.710
digit_backward
0.705
digit_forward
0.692
letter_fluency
0.664
PPVT
0.640
trails_B
0.631
CNRT
0.578
lm2_recall
0.556
lm2_recognition
0.531
NAVS_aspt
0.497
cf2_recall
0.786
cf1_recall
0.784
cf1_copy
0.784
symbol cancelation
0.754
trails_A
0.727
wl2_recall
0.701
camel & cactus
0.680
NAVS_vct
0.676
cf2_recognition
0.667
wl1_recall
0.578
wl2_recognition
0.575
Facial recognition
0.404
jlo
0.370
Varimax rotation was applied to the components. Factor loadings below 0.35 are sup-
pressed from the display. Component 1 (language) eigenvalue = 12.77, percent variance
explained = 42.58; Component 2 (Memory & visuo-spatial) eigenvalue = 3.39, percent
variance explained = 11.29.
Explanation
of
Abbreviations:
animals_fluency = Category
Fluency
(D-KEFS);
BNT = Boston Naming Test (score out of 60); Camel & Cactus = Camel and Cactus Test
(Cambridge Semantic Battery); CNRT: Children's Nonword Repetition Test; cf. = Complex
Figure
Drawing
(KBNA);
digit
forward
and
backward = Digit
Span
(WAIS-IV);
JLO = Benton's Judgement of Line Orientations; Facial recognition = Facial Recognition
Test;
letter_fluency = Letter
Fluency
(D-KEFS);
lm = Logical
Memory
(WMS-IV);
NAVS = Northwestern Assessment of Verbs and Sentences (vnt: verb naming test, sct:
sentence comprehension test, aspt: argument structure production test, sppt: sentence
production priming test, vct: verb comprehension test); PPVT = Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test; symbol cancelation = Symbol Cancelation (KBNA); trials = Trail
Making
Test
(D-KEFS,
Trails
A
and
B);
sentence_rep = Sentence
Repetition
(Aphasiabank); wl = Word Lists (KBNA).
Table 3
Example sentences used in the experiment. The critical words in correct and anomalous
sentences are underlined.
Code
Condition
Example sentences
COR
Correct
She will go to the bakery for a loaf of bread
SEM
Semantic anomaly
She will go to the bakery for a loaf of books
SYN
Syntactic anomaly
She will going to the bakery for a loaf of bread
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
563
 word presentation of the sentence. The words were presented in white
font on a black background in the center of the screen. Each word ap-
peared for 350 ms, followed by a blank screen for 400 ms. The last word
of the sentence was followed by a blank screen of 2500 ms, after which
a response prompt (a question mark) was presented. At this point
participants performed a button-press judgement on whether the sen-
tence was correct (i.e., free of semantic and syntactic errors), or “un-
acceptable”. All participants indicated correct sentences with their right
index finger, and incorrect sentences with their right middle finger.
Participants were instructed to withhold their button-press judgement
until the response cue appeared. Visual stimuli were displayed on a
screen approximately 0.5 m from the participant's face, projected via
mirrors from an LCD projector placed outside the magnetically shielded
room to avoid interference. In order to become familiar with the pro-
cedure, participants first completed a practice block of six sentences.
2.5. MRI scans acquisition and processing
MRI data were always acquired after the MEG session, either the
same day or up to two weeks after. MRI scans were acquired on a 3-
Tesla
scanner
(Siemens
TIM
Trio)
with
1 mm
isotropic
voxels,
TR = 2000 ms, TE = 2.63 ms, FOV = 256 × 256 mm, 160 axial slices,
scan time 6 min, 26 s. The MPRAGE image was used to construct a head
model for MEG source modeling and Voxel Based Morphometry (VBM).
MR-visible markers were placed at the fiducial points for accurate re-
gistration, aided by digital photographs from the MEG session. T1
images were skull stripped in AFNI software (Cox, 1996).
2.6. Voxel-based morphometry: Image processing and analysis
Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) implemented in SPM8 software
(Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK), was used
to derive segmented, smoothed and normalized gray matter maps for
PPA patients and age-matched controls. Before processing, T1 images
were evaluated for quality and manually repositioned so that the
anterior commissure was set as the origin. This was done to ensure
consistent starting estimates for the unified segmentation routine. One
patient's scan was of insufficient quality due to excessive motion arti-
facts and was excluded from the analysis.
T1-weighted structural images were spatially normalized, bias cor-
rected, and segmented into gray matter, white matter, and cere-
brospinal fluid using the unified segmentation algorithm implemented
in the “new segment” option of SPM8 (Ashburner and Friston, 2005).
The accuracy of inter-subject alignment was increased by performing
nonlinear image registration procedures implemented in the DARTEL
(Diffeomorphic Anatomical Registration through Exponential Lie al-
gebra) toolbox (Ashburner, 2007; Ashburner and Friston, 2009). For
each participant, flow fields were calculated during template creation
that contained the nonlinear deformation information on the native
image transformation to the template. These flow fields were applied to
each participant's image. Next, the final template was registered to MNI
space using an affine transform and this transformation was in-
corporated into the warping process, so that the individual spatially
normalized scans could be brought into the common MNI space. During
this final normalization step, the gray and white matter probability
maps were scaled by their Jacobian determinants and smoothed using a
10 mm FWHM isotopic Gaussian kernel. An estimate of total in-
tracranial volume (TIV) was computed by combining the gray matter,
white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid segments derived from the seg-
mentation step.
To identify cortical atrophy at the group level, the images for the
PPA patients were compared with 25 age matched controls using an
independent sample t-test, with age, sex, and total intracranial volume
included as covariates. The control group for VBM analysis consisted of
the 15 age-matched controls who took part in the MEG study, plus an
additional 10 age-matched older controls.
2.7. MEG acquisition and analysis
MEG signals were recorded with a 151-channel whole-head system
with axial gradiometers (VSMMedTech, Coquitlam, Canada). MEG was
recorded continuously at a sampling rate of 625 Hz, and acquired with
online
synthetic
3rd-order
gradient
noise
reduction
(Vrba
and
Robinson, 2001). Continuous signals were cut into epochs surrounding
the critical word presentation times. Head position with respect to the
MEG helmet was monitored using three coils placed at anatomical
landmarks of the head (nasion, left and right pre-auricular points). The
head position was measured before and after each run, and averaged
across runs for source analysis.
To construct head models for MEG analysis, the MR-visible markers
were manually identified on the T1 image and used to mark locations of
the fiducial points in AFNI. The T1-weighted MRI was spatially trans-
formed into the coordinate space of the MEG data. The skull was
stripped using Brain Extraction Tool, and a 3-D convex hull approx-
imating the inner surface of the skull was constructed using the soft-
ware
package
Brainhull
(http://kurage.nimh.nih.gov/meglab/Meg/
Brainhull). Taking into account the position of the head relative to
the sensors, a multi-sphere model (Huang et al., 1999) was computed
for each MEG session. To normalize MEG source estimates into MNI
space, we computed a nonlinear warp of each subject's brain to a single-
subject template, the “colin27” brain, using the software package ANTS
(Avants et al., 2011). This warp was then used to transform single-
subject MEG activity maps into MNI space.
Raw MEG sensor signals were screened for artifacts, and trials
containing obvious signal disruptions were rejected (e.g., coughs,
sneezes, yawns, head movements; < 1% of all trials). Further signal
analysis was conducted in source space using SAM beamforming
(Cheyne et al., 2007; Vrba, 2002; Vrba and Robinson, 2001).
2.8. Task-related MEG analysis
2.8.1. Time-frequency analysis on virtual channels
For initial characterization of the time-frequency dynamics induced
by the paradigm in patients with PPA and age-matched control group,
we analyzed activity in 90 virtual channels placed in a priori locations
throughout the brain. Using the macroanatomical brain parcellation of
Tzourio-Mazoyer et al. (2002), consisting of 90 cortical and subcortical
regions (e.g., left superior temporal gyrus, left putamen, etc.), we took
the center of each region and warped it into the coordinate space of
each subject's MEG data.
We conducted time-frequency analysis on these virtual channels in
source space, computing virtual signals as a product of beamforming
weights and the sensor data. The beamforming weights for virtual
channels were computed with Synthetic Aperture Magnetometry
(SAM), using the MRI-derived head model and the data covariance
matrix in a broad time-frequency window (bandwidth 0–100 Hz, time
−1 to +4 s) for the critical verb for syntactic anomalies and their
correct condition, and the final word for semantic anomalies and the
corresponding correct condition. This allowed us to identify time per-
iods and frequency ranges that were maximally responsive to the con-
trasts of interest.
We performed the time-frequency analysis on the virtual channel
signals using EEGLAB software (version 9.0.4.5) running in the Matlab
2010 (v 7.6) environment. Single-trial epochs were analyzed using a
moving window short-time Fourier transform with 200 overlapping
time windows per trial. The length of the time window in the spec-
trogram analysis was 0.512 s (320 samples at a sampling rate of
625 Hz). Values at each time-frequency point were averaged over trials
of each specific condition. The average log-power in the baseline period
for all three conditions was used as a common baseline, subtracted from
log-power at each time-frequency point, yielding the measure con-
ventionally known as “event-related spectral perturbation,” or ERSP
(Makeig, 1993). This procedure ensured that the same baseline power
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
564
 values were used across all conditions; thus, any differences between
conditions could not be attributable to differences in the baseline.
Analysis of source space virtual channels is an alternative to analyzing
the raw sensor data, with the additional advantage of artifact reduction.
The initial stage of virtual channel analysis served to identify the time
and frequency windows in which induced oscillations occurred for
patients and control groups (see results). Also, the latency of responses
at specific channels (see results) was measured using the publicly
available PeakFinder Toolbox in Matlab (https://terpconnect.umd.edu/
~toh/spectrum/PeakFindingandMeasurement.htm).
2.8.2. Whole-brain mapping of oscillatory responses
Guided by the results of the time-frequency analysis on the virtual
channels and our previous findings with controls and stroke patients
using the same paradigm (Kielar et al., 2015, 2016), we generated
whole-brain maps of oscillatory responses using SAM beamforming.
These maps were computed in a specific frequency range (8–30 Hz,
comprising the alpha and beta bands) and time window (0.4–1 s re-
lative to critical word onset) to test for the statistical significance of
power changes throughout the brain. For each subject, at a regular grid
of locations spaced 7 mm apart throughout the brain, we computed the
pseudo-T value, which is a normalized measure of the difference in
signal power between two time windows (Vrba and Robinson, 2001).
Correct trials were compared with each anomaly condition within the
same time window relative to word onset. Due to this “dual-state”
analysis approach, multi-subject statistical maps were derived from
subtractive contrast images computed on the single-subject level, not
from individual conditions. Beamformer weights for this analysis were
computed from data within specific time and frequency windows,
providing greater spatial resolution than the nonspecific weights de-
rived from broadband data that we used for the virtual channel time-
frequency analysis (Brookes et al., 2008).
Maps of pseudo-T values throughout the brain were spatially nor-
malized to MNI space by applying the nonlinear transforms computed
by ANTS (by warping the T1-weighted MRI to an MNI template), en-
abling random-effects analysis at the group level.
Group statistics on SAM results were computed using parametric
statistics. For each experimental comparison, the spatially normalized
whole-brain map of pseudo-T values was submitted to a voxel-wise one-
sample t-test across subjects. All statistical tests were two-tailed. To
correct for multiple comparisons across the whole brain, resulting sta-
tistical maps were subjected to voxel-wise thresholding and a minimum
cluster-size criterion of 86 voxels, resulting in a cluster-wise corrected
family-wise error rate of p < .05. The cluster size criterion was de-
termined by Monte Carlo simulations conducted in the AFNI program
3dClustSim, with a voxel-wise threshold of p < .01. For comparisons
with stronger effects (e.g., syntactic violation – correct), we used
stricter voxel-wise threshold of p = .001. The simulations in 3dClustSim
also require an estimate of the smoothness (FWHM: full width at half
maximum) of the data in the absence of a true effect. For this, we
computed “null” SAM maps by comparing the prestimulus intervals for
two different conditions, which should not differ. Two null maps were
computed for each subject for each frequency band. Smoothness esti-
mates of these maps ranged from 18.74 to 21.77 mm, and the mean
value of 20.25 mm was used in the simulations.
3. Results
3.1. Behavioral results: Sentence comprehension performance
The reaction time for two participants could not be recorded due to
a response button malfunction. In this MEG study, participants were
required to press button A when the sentence was correct and button B
when the sentence contained an anomaly. Because the overall error rate
on the sentence comprehension task could be influenced by partici-
pants' response bias, we used a signal detection method to estimate
individual participants' ability to discriminate targets (anomalous sen-
tences) from non-targets (correct sentences). Using each participant's
proportion of hits (pressing button B after the presentation of an
anomalous sentence) and proportion of false alarms (pressing button B
after the presentation of a correct sentence) we calculated d’ values
separately for semantic and syntactic anomalies. This procedure pro-
vides an estimate of performance on each sentence type corrected for
response bias. Higher d’ values reflect a greater discrimination sensi-
tivity to anomalies and, thus, a better ability to discriminate semantic
and syntactic anomalies from correct sentences. We used d’-prime va-
lues for behavioral analyses, and to examine correlations between task
performance and 8–30 Hz ERD.
Behavioral results for the control group (n = 15) and PPA patients
(n = 13) are presented in Table 4, including the raw percent correct and
the bias-adjusted d’ values. The PPA group in this study was composed
of both nonfluent and logopenic subtypes. To investigate whether any
differences in performance were present for detecting semantic and
syntactic anomalies, we compared behavioral scores and reaction times
for the two PPA subtypes using one-way ANOVA. The analysis indicated
that there were no significant differences in accuracy (d-prime se-
mantic, d-prime syntactic, Fs < 1) or reaction time (Fs < 1) between
nonfluent and logopenic PPA patients. The d’ values for individual
patients and controls are plotted in Fig. 1 A, which illustrates that
nonfluent and logopenic patients showed similar task accuracy. As
shown in Fig. 1 B, the two PPA subtypes also did not differ on the factor
scores for language (F < 1) and memory (F(1, 12) = 1.636, p = 0.227)
components obtained from the PCA analysis. Because the two PPA
subtypes showed similar average performance in the critical online and
offline measures of language ability, with considerable individual
variability within each group, we combined them together in the sub-
sequent analyses of MRI and MEG data.
To examine behavioral differences between PPA patients and con-
trols, accuracy (d’ values) and reaction time (RT) data were entered into
separate repeated-measures analyses of variance (ANOVAs). The
anomaly condition (semantic or syntactic) was entered as a within-
subjects variable and the participant group – PPA patient (PPA) vs.
controls – was entered as a between-subjects variable.
The analysis of accuracy data revealed a significant main effect of
anomaly condition, F(1, 26) = 26.72, p < .001, a significant main ef-
fect of group, F(1, 26) = 69.47, p < .001, and a significant condition
by group interaction, F(1, 26) = 19.08, p < .001. To investigate the
source of this interaction, a separate post-hoc ANOVA with anomaly
condition as a within-subjects variable was performed for each parti-
cipant group. For PPA participants there was a significant main effect of
condition, F(1, 12) = 21.12, p = .001, indicating larger d’ prime
(higher accuracy) for detecting semantic anomalies than for syntactic
anomalies. However, for age-matched controls there was no significant
main effect of anomaly condition, F(1, 14) = 2.57, p = .131, indicating
Table 4
Mean percent accuracy (standard error of the mean) and reaction time in milliseconds
(standard error of the mean) on the sentence comprehension task for age-matched control
group (n = 15), and PPA patients (n = 13, logopenic and nonfluent variants combined).
Group
Condition
Accuracy%(SE)
RT(SE)
d’
Control
COR
93.24(1.24)
688.61(51.56)
SEM
96.8(0.70)
643.27(51.80)
3.50(0.15)
SYN
94.27(1.43)
614.58(50.58)
3.37(0.15)
PPA
COR
77.35(3.23)
979.86(80.62)
SEM
81.75(6.24)
933.22(67.01)
1.98(0.29)
SYN
39.12(7.74)
1017.17(78.22)
0.48(0.27)
d’ statistic: accuracy corrected for response bias calculated separately for semantic and
syntactic anomalies. Higher value indicates better sensitivity to discriminate violations
from correct sentences.
COR: correct sentences; SEM: semantic anomalies; SYN: Syntactic anomalies.
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
565
 similar performance for detecting both kinds of anomalies.
We also assessed the reaction time (RT) pattern for the two parti-
cipant groups and anomaly conditions (COR, SEM, SYN). For the RT
data, the ANOVA with anomaly condition as a within-subjects variable
and group as a between-subjects variable revealed no significant main
effect of anomaly condition, F(2, 48) = 1.32, p = .276, and no sig-
nificant group by condition interaction, F(2, 48) = 2.58, p = .086.
However,
there
was
a
significant
main
effect
of
group,
F(1,
24) = 16.13, p = .001, indicting longer reaction times for patients than
controls. Note that because the behavioral response was elicited by a
visual cue several seconds after the end of the sentence, RT can not
necessarily be interpreted as reflecting the speed of the brain's response
to the linguistic anomaly. However, latency of the MEG responses can
be interpreted as such.
3.2. MEG results
3.2.1. Time-frequency results on the virtual channels
To get a general overview of the timing and frequency of oscillatory
responses present in the data, we averaged the results of the time-fre-
quency analysis across all 38 left cortical virtual channels. For healthy
age-matched controls we observed strong oscillatory responses for both
kinds of violations compared to their corresponding correct words
(Fig. 2A–B), reflected in power decrease (ERD) in the 8–30 Hz range,
with an onset around 0.4 s and extending in time past 1 s. The time and
frequency distribution of these responses are very similar to what we
observed in young controls using the same paradigm (Kielar et al.,
2015). The time-course of these effects can be observed by averaging
across frequencies within the specified bands and plotting the two
conditions as lines (Fig. 2C–D).
For patients with PPA, we also observed power decreases in re-
sponse to semantic and syntactic anomalies. Compared to controls,
responses for patients were attenuated and had a later onset (Fig. 2E–F).
For semantic anomalies, ERD responses were observed from about
8–20 Hz with onset around 0.9 s and lasting till about 3 s post-stimulus
onset. For syntactic anomalies, ERD responses were found in the
8–20 Hz frequency range, with onset at 0.5 s and lasting till about 2 s
post-stimulus onset. The time-course of these effects for PPA patients
can be observed in Fig. 2G and H.
Based on the observed responses in virtual channels for the healthy
age-matched controls and our previous results with young participants
(Kielar et al., 2015), we used a time window of 0.4–1 s and 8–30 Hz
frequency range for both semantic and syntactic anomalies, as the main
analysis window for whole-brain comparisons of oscillatory responses.
Healthy controls showed fairly continuous ERD across this entire range,
and this time-frequency window encompassed most of the responses for
semantic and syntactic anomalies.
3.2.2. SAM localization of oscillatory responses
Using the selected time-frequency windows, we applied whole-brain
SAM in order to localize brain responses to semantic and syntactic
anomalies in PPA participants and the age-matched control group.
Informed by our previous results with the same paradigm, neural “ac-
tivation” is indicated by power decrease, or event-related desynchro-
nization (ERD), in the 8–30 Hz range. Power decreases are mapped in a
blue color scale on the surface of a standard reference brain in MNI
space, while power increases (associated with reduced neural activity)
are mapped in a yellow-red color scale. To correct for multiple com-
parisons at a cluster-wise level of p < .05, the statistical maps were
thresholded at a voxelwise value of p = .01 or less and subjected to a
minimum cluster size of 86 voxels (as described in methods). The
8–30 Hz ERD maps for nonfluent and logopenic subtypes are presented
separately in Supplementary Fig. S1. The supplementary figures are
shown at an uncorrected threshold to illustrate regions of overlap for
nonfluent and logopenic subgroups.
Semantic Responses: 8–30 Hz ERD. Fig. 3 A shows maps of
8–30 Hz ERD for semantic anomalies minus correct words in older, age-
matched control participants in the main analysis window (8–30 Hz and
Fig. 1. Individual scores for patients (PPA) and
age matched controls (AM). Individual control
participants, logopenic PPA, and nonfluent PPA
are indicated with different symbols. (A) D-prime
values for semantic anomalies. (B) D-prime va-
lues for syntactic anomalies. (C) Factor scores for
the language component. (D) Factor scores for
the memory and visuo-spatial component. The
box plots show the group median, interquartile
range, and full range as well as each individual
score.
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
566
 0.4–1 s). The comparison of semantic anomalies vs. correct words
produced 8–30 Hz ERD in the occipital cortex bilaterally, including
middle occipital gyrus (BA 18), primary visual cortex (BA 17), cuneus
(BA 18/19), lingual gyrus (BA 19), inferior occipital and fusiform gyri
(BA 37). From occipital areas, power decreases extended bilaterally to
the posterior superior temporal (BA 22) and inferior and superior par-
ietal lobules, including angular gyrus (BA 39), supramarginal gyrus (BA
40), and precuenus (BA 7). In the left hemisphere, power decreases
were observed along the temporal cortex including inferior (BA 20),
middle (BA 21), and superior temporal (BA 22) gyri. In the frontal re-
gions, 8-30 Hz ERD was found in the left middle and dorsolateral frontal
gyri (BA 46, 10), and extended into the most of the inferior frontal
gyrus (BAs 45/44/47).
Fig. 3B presents the average ERD maps for semantic anomalies
minus correct words for PPA participants in the main analysis window
(8–30 Hz and 0.4–1 s). Unexpectedly, the comparison of semantic
anomalies vs. correct words produced 8–30 Hz event-related synchro-
nization (ERS), or power increase, in the left posterior parietal regions,
including supramarginal and angular gyri (SMG, BA 40/39), and left
superior parietal lobule (BA 7). In the same regions, controls showed
power decreases. Subsequent analysis of ERD peak latency in this re-
gion (see below) suggested that this difference is mainly attributable to
a longer onset latency of the ERD response in PPA patients, rather than
a true reversal of sensitivity from ERD to ERS. As with age-matched
controls, 8–30 Hz power decreases were observed in the bilateral oc-
cipital gyri (BA 17/18), including cuneus (BA 18/19), lingual gyrus (BA
19), fusiform gyrus (BA 37), and cerebellum.
Syntactic Responses: 8–30 Hz ERD. For older controls, compar-
ison of syntactic anomalies with correct words in the main analysis
window (8–30 Hz and 0.4–1 s) produced widespread power decreases in
both left and right hemispheres (Fig. 3C). The 8–30 Hz ERD involved
bilateral middle and inferior occipital gyri (BA 19/18), lingual gyrus
(BA 18), fusiform gyrus (BA 37), and cuneus. 8–30 ERD was also found
in the left and right superior occipital gyri (BA 19) and precuneus (BA
7). The responses extended bilaterally into the superior and inferior
parietal lobule, including angular (BA 39) and supramarginal gyri (BA
40). Along the temporal cortex 8–30 Hz ERD power decreases were
observed in the inferior (BA 20), middle (BA 21), and superior temporal
(BA 22) gyri. Power decreases were also observed along the precentral
(BA 6/8) and postcenral gyri (BA 3, 2, 5), including motor cortex (BA
4), premotor, and supplementary motor areas (BA 6). The 8–30 Hz ERD
extended to most of the inferior frontal gyrus (BA 44/45 and 47), and
middle and superior frontal cortex (BA 9 and 8), bilaterally.
Fig. 3D presents the average ERD maps for syntactic anomalies
minus correct words in PPA participants in the main analysis window
(8–30 Hz and 0.4–1 s). Similar to age-matched controls, patients
showed extensive bilateral 8–30 Hz power decreases in response to
syntactic anomalies, including middle occipital gyri (BA 19), cuneus
(BA 17/18), lingual gyrus (BA 19), and fusiform gyri (BA 37). In the
temporal cortex significant 8-30 Hz ERD responses were found bilat-
erally in the left superior (BA 22) and in the middle (BA 21) temporal
gyri, extending into the superior and inferior parietal lobules (most of
Fig. 2. Time-frequency dynamics of SAM virtual signals averaged across 38 left hemisphere cortical channels. Age matched controls (AM, n = 15). (A) Time-frequency subtraction of
semantic violation – correct words. (B) Time-frequency subtraction of syntactic violation – correct words. (C) Average time course of power in the 8–30 Hz band, for semantic violation
and correct conditions. The bar plots show mean 8–30 Hz Event-related Desynchronization (ERD) and standard errors for each condition, in the main analysis time window from 400 to
1000 ms.
(D) Average time course of power in the 8–30 Hz band, for syntactic violation and correct conditions. PPA patients (PPA, n = 13). (E) Time-frequency subtraction of semantic violation –
correct words. (F) Time-frequency subtraction of syntactic violation – correct words. (G) Average time course of power in the 8–30 Hz band, for semantic violation and correct conditions.
(H) Average time course of power in the 8–30 Hz band, for syntactic violation and correct conditions.
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
567
 supramarginal gyrus (BA 40), angual gyrus (BA 39), and precuneus, BA
7). Power decreases were also observed along the middle and superior
frontal gyri (BAs 8/9), dorsolateral frontal cortex (BAs 49/10), and
extended into the precentral (BA 6/8) and postcentral gyri (BAs 3, 2),
motor cortex (BA 4), premotor, and supplementary motor areas (BA 6),
including most of the inferior frontal gyrus (BA 44/45/47) in both left
and right hemispheres.
3.2.3. Group comparisons of ERD responses
Comparison of Semantic Responses: 8–30 Hz ERD. Fig. 3E dis-
plays the subtraction map for patients minus age-matched controls for
responses to semantic anomalies (semantic anomalies minus correct
sentences) in the 8–30 Hz frequency range and 0.4–1 s time window. As
ERD is a negative quantity, the warm colors in Fig. 3E indicate atte-
nuated ERD in patients compared to controls. These maps show reduced
Fig. 3. Synthetic aperture magnetometry (SAM) maps of power changes in the 8–30 Hz frequency range and 0.4–1 s time window after critical word onset for healthy age-matched
controls (AM) and participants with PPA. Statistical maps were thresholded at a minimum cluster-size criterion of 80 voxels and p < .01. (A) Power changes for semantic anomalies vs.
correct words for age-matched controls. (B) Power changes for semantic anomalies vs. correct words for PPA patients. (C) Power changes for syntactic anomalies vs. correct words for age-
matched controls. (D) Power changes for syntactic anomalies vs. correct words for PPA patients. Between-group voxel-wise contrast maps of power changes in the 8–30 Hz frequency
range and 0.4–1 s time window after critical word onset. Statistical maps were thresholded at a minimum cluster-size criterion of 80 voxels and p < .01. (E) Subtraction map for PPA
patients minus age-matched controls (AM) on semantic anomalies (semantic anomalies – correct sentences). (F) Subtraction map for PPA patients minus age-matched controls on
syntactic anomalies (syntactic anomalies – correct sentences).
(G) Results of Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) analysis comparing gray matter volume in PPA patients (n = 13) versus controls (n = 25). The map shows regions of significant gray
matter loss for PPA patients. To illustrate the regions of gray matter damage, the statistical maps were set at the lowered voxelwise threshold of p < .05, and corrected for multiple
comparisons by controlling the family wise error (FWE) at the cluster level p < .05.
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
568
 ERD for patients in the left parietal areas, including inferior and su-
perior parietal lobules and precuneus (BAs 40, 39, 7), The group dif-
ferences extended into the left middle and superior temporal areas (BA
21 and 22), left fusiform (BA 37), and superior occipital gyri (BA 19). In
comparison to older controls, patients with PPA showed diminished
8–30 Hz ERD in the left middle and superior frontal gyri (BAs 46, 9, 10).
Reduced ERD was also found in the right superior parietal lobule (BA
7).
Comparison of Syntactic Responses: 8–30 Hz ERD. The group
comparison maps of brain responses to syntactic anomalies (syntactic
anomalies minus correct sentences) for patients vs. age-matched con-
trols are presented in Fig. 3F. These maps show reduced ERD for pa-
tients in the bilateral posterior middle and superior temporal gyri (BA
21, 22), along the inferior temporal gyrus (BA 20), and in the fusiform
gyrus (BA 37). The group differences were also found in the inferior and
superior parietal lobules, including angular (BA 39) and supramarginal
gyri (BA 40), bilaterally.
3.3. Gray matter volumes in PPA patients in comparison to healthy controls
The results of the independent sample t-test comparing gray matter
volumes in PPA patients versus the age-matched control group are
shown in Fig. 3G. Because the sample size was small, to illustrate re-
gions of atrophy in patients the statistical maps were thresholded at the
lowered voxelwise threshold of p < .05, and corrected for multiple
comparisons by controlling the family wise error (FWE) at the cluster
level p < .05 (Woo et al., 2014). Thus, the analysis is only sensitive to
larger clusters of atrophy. The results of VBM analysis for each sub-
group are presented separately in the Supplementary Fig. S1E and F.
Patients showed areas of reduced gray matter within the left
hemisphere perisylvian language network, affecting inferior frontal
gyrus (BA 45/44) and middle frontal areas (BA 46, 8 and 6). The areas
of reduced gray matter volume extended into the left middle and su-
perior temporal gyri (BA 21 and 22) and posterior inferior temporal
gyrus (BA 20), including fusiform gyrus (BA 37). These regions included
left IFG (BA 44/45) for semantic anomalies, and portions of the left
middle temporal gyrus (BA 21/22) for both semantic and syntactic
anomalies. A conjunction analysis revealed that there was no overlap in
voxels showing significant cortical atrophy in the PPA group, and
voxels showing significant 8–30 Hz ERD responses in this group.
3.4. MEG 8–30 Hz ERD correlations with sentence comprehension task
performance
PPA patients showed great difficulty with identifying syntactic
anomalies, while they performed relatively well on semantic anomalies
and correct sentences (although still worse than controls). As shown in
Fig. 1A and B, patients exhibited substantial variability in their per-
formance. To examine the relationship between comprehension per-
formance and 8–30 Hz event-related desynchronization (ERD) for the
two anomaly types, we performed voxel-wise rank-order correlations
(Spearman's Rho) across patients between the accuracy scores (quan-
tified using d’) and ERD in the 8–30 Hz range. Note that because ERD is
a negative quantity, most of the observed correlations are negative,
reflecting that greater 8–30 Hz ERD corresponds to better performance.
For older controls, there was a significant positive correlation be-
tween event-related power in the 8–30 Hz frequency range and com-
prehension performance on the semantic anomalies in the bilateral
superior (BA 6) and medial frontal regions (BA 10/9), and left para-
central lobule, extending into the postcentral gyrus and superior par-
ietal lobule (BA 7) (Fig. 4A). This positive correlation indicates that for
older age-matched controls, less ERD (i.e., more power in 8–30 Hz
range) for semantic anomalies relative to control words in these regions
was associated with better performance. For syntactic anomalies, ne-
gative correlations with performance were found in the left and right
insula (BA 13), superior and inferior parietal lobules (BA 7/40, right
middle occipital (BA 19) and fusiform gyri (BA 37), and along right
precentral (BA 6) and postcentral gyri (BA 2), indicating that better
accuracy was associated with greater 8–30 Hz ERD (reduced power) in
these regions (Fig. 4B).
For PPA patients Fig. 4C shows correlation maps between ERD re-
sponses in the main analysis window (8–30 Hz, 0.4–1 s) and accuracy
on semantic anomalies. For participants with PPA, 8–30 Hz ERD in the
right posterior middle and superior temporal gyri (BA 21 and 22), in-
ferior temporal (BA 20), fusiform (BA 37), and lingual gyri (BA 18) was
predictive of higher accuracy on the semantic anomalies. Better per-
formance accuracy was also associated with 8–30 Hz ERD in the bi-
lateral middle and inferior occipital cortex (BA 18/19), primary visual
cortex (BA 17), and cerebellum. There were no significant correlations
between 8-30 Hz ERD (0.4–1 s) and accuracy on syntactic anomalies for
PPA patients.
3.5. MEG 8–30 Hz ERD correlations with language measure derived from
PCA
As described in the methods section, PCA analysis revealed two
components that accounted for most of the variance in the neu-
ropsychological scores across the cohort. Language measures loaded on
the first component and tests of memory and visuo-spatial abilities
loaded on the second component (see Table 2).
Fig. 4G and H shows the results of correlational analysis examining
relationships between the overall language performance measure de-
rived from PCA and 8–30 Hz ERD responses for PPA patients. Because
the language component differentiated PPA patients from controls,
whereas there was no significant difference between groups on the
memory and visuo-spatial component, only scores for language com-
ponent were included in the correlation analysis. We performed voxel-
wise rank-order correlations (Spearman's Rho) across patients between
the factor scores derived for the language component and ERD in the
8–30 Hz range. As with correlations with task accuracy, because ERD is
a negative quantity, negative correlations reflect that greater 8–30 Hz
ERD corresponds to better language performance.
For participants with PPA, there was no significant correlation be-
tween event-related power in the 8–30 Hz frequency range for semantic
anomalies and factor scores on the language component (Fig. 4G). For
syntactic anomalies, event-related power in the 8–30 Hz frequency
range was significantly correlated with the language component in the
right superior and inferior portions of parietal lobule, including pre-
cuneus (BA 7) and supramarginal gyrus (BA 40). These effects extended
into the posterior cingulate gyrus (BA 31). Areas of significant corre-
lation were also found in the right fusiform (BA 37) and middle tem-
poral gyrus (BA 22/21). In the left hemisphere, a cluster of significant
correlation was observed in the posterior superior temporal gyrus (BA
22), and extended into the left cingulate gyrus (BA 31) (Fig. 4H). There
were no significant correlations for the age-matched control group.
3.6. Latency of 8–30 Hz responses
Visual inspection of the oscillatory power time-courses suggested
that responses were delayed in PPA patients compared to the age-
matched controls. To investigate these group differences in latency
quantitatively, we computed peak latencies of 8–30 Hz ERD from time-
courses of two virtual channels in the left hemisphere, the inferior
parietal lobule (MNI coordinates: x = −42, y = −51, z = 50) and the
inferior frontal gyrus (x = −46, y = 25, z = 18), from 100 to 2500 ms
post-stimulus onset. This was done for each participant, separately for
correct words and semantic and syntactic anomalies. The differences in
peak latencies for PPA patients and age matched controls were in-
vestigated using one-way ANOVAs.
Fig. 5 illustrates differences in peak latencies for patients and con-
trols in the selected regions. The analysis revealed that PPA patients
showed significantly delayed peak latencies of 8–30 Hz ERD responses
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
569
 compared to control participants in the left inferior parietal lobule for
sentences with semantic, F(1, 26) = 23.301, p < .001, and syntactic
anomalies, F(1, 26) = 21.15, p < .001. The comparison of semantic
anomalies vs. correct words in the time window of 0.4–1 s for PPA
patients in this region produced 8–30 Hz power increase, whereas
healthy controls showed power decreases (8–30 Hz ERD). The latencies
were also increased for correct semantic sentences, F(1, 26) = 9.49,
p = .005, but the difference between groups was not significant for the
syntactically correct, F(1, 26) = 0.183, p = .673. Visual inspection of
the timecourses of oscillatory power in this region suggested that the
large latency increase was responsible for the difference, as PPA pa-
tients did show ERD after an initial ERS, but with a greatly delayed
latency. The responses for PPA patients were also delayed in the left
inferior frontal gyrus (semantic anomalies, F(1, 26) = 14.26, p = .001;
syntactic anomalies, F(1, 26) = 8.35, p = .008). The latencies were also
increased
for
semantically
correct
sentences,
F(1,
26) = 11.26,
p = .002, but the difference between groups was not significant for the
syntactically correct sentences, F(1, 26) = 0.004, p = .950.
To investigate whether delayed oscillatory responses were linked to
behavioral deficits, we performed Spearman's correlations between
peak latencies of 8–30 Hz ERD, d-prime values of accuracy, and reac-
tion time. The analysis revealed that there was a significant negative
relationship between peak latencies and d-prime (accuracy) for se-
mantic anomalies in the left inferior parietal lobule, ρ(13) = −0.560,
p = .046, indicating that longer latencies of 8–30 Hz ERD in this brain
area were associated with lower accuracy. There was no significant
Fig. 4. Correlations (Spearman's Rho) between MEG task activity and accuracy scores (quantified with d’) for controls and patients. Statistical maps were thresholded at a minimum
cluster-size criterion of 80 voxels and p < .01. (A) Correlations between 8-30 Hz ERD for semantic anomalies and d’-values for semantic anomalies in control group. (B) Correlations
between 8-30 Hz ERD for syntactic anomalies and d’-values for syntactic anomalies in control group. (C) Correlations between 8-30 Hz ERD for semantic anomalies and d’-values for
semantic anomalies in PPA patients. (D) Correlations between 8-30 Hz ERD for syntactic anomalies and d’-values for syntactic anomalies in PPA patients.
Correlations (Spearman's Rho) between MEG task activity and factor scores for language component derived from PCA analysis for patients and controls. (E) Correlations between 8-30 Hz
ERD for semantic anomalies and factor scores derived from the language component in control group. (F) Correlations between 8-30 Hz ERD for syntactic anomalies and factor scores
derived from the language component in control group. (G) Correlations between 8-30 Hz ERD for semantic anomalies and factor scores derived from the language component in PPA
patients. (H) Correlations between 8-30 Hz ERD for syntactic anomalies and factor scores derived from the language component in PPA patients.
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
570
 relationship between latencies of 8–30 Hz ERD and d-prime values for
syntactic anomalies, ρ(13) = −0.154, p = .616. In contrast to the re-
lationship between ERD latency and accuracy (d-prime), we did not
find any significant relationship between ERD latency and reaction time
(RT),
for
either
semantic,
ρ(13) = 0.110,
p = .720
or
syntactic
anomalies, ρ(13) = 0.283, p = .348. This is not surprising, however,
given that the behavioral response was given after a visual cue fol-
lowing the end of the sentence, long after the oscillatory response to the
actual anomaly is over.
4. Discussion
4.1. Altered responses to anomalies
We evaluated MEG oscillatory responses to linguistic anomalies, in
patients with PPA and healthy age-matched controls. The results of the
present study, consistent with our earlier studies (Kielar et al., 2016,
2014) and indicate that in healthy older adults, semantic anomalies
elicit left-lateralized 8–30 Hz ERD distributed more strongly along the
ventral brain regions, and lasting from 400 to 1000 ms post-stimulus
onset. Syntactic anomalies elicit bilateral ERD, distributed along both
ventral and dorsal regions. In contrast, PPA patients showed altered
patterns of language-related oscillatory responses, characterized by
delayed peak latencies and attenuated amplitude. In response to se-
mantic anomalies, the delayed latency was particularly extreme in the
left inferior parietal region, resulting in an apparent 8–30 Hz power
increase rather than the decrease seen in age-matched controls, for the
analyzed window of 0.4–1 s. Interestingly, the distribution of this ab-
normal electrophysiological response did not overlap with regions of
significant gray matter atrophy, which were most pronounced along the
left superior and middle temporal cortex, prefrontal and inferior frontal
regions.
Correlational analyses indicated that PPA patients who exhibited
stronger ERD in right- hemisphere temporo-parietal areas had higher
performance in detecting semantic anomalies. The 8-30 Hz ERD re-
sponses in the right temporo-parietal regions were also observed in
controls. Although ERD responses in these regions were reduced in
patients, the correlational results suggest that patients who retained
functionality in these right hemisphere areas showed relatively pre-
served semantic processing. In contrast, we did not see any correlation
between performance and neural activity in the left hemisphere. This
pattern suggests that right-hemisphere processing of semantic in-
formation may take on an especially important role in PPA for sup-
porting preserved comprehension abilities as the disease progresses.
Interestingly, we observed a similar pattern of right-hemisphere activity
related to preserved semantic comprehension in post-stroke aphasia
(Kielar et al., 2016), suggesting that similar mechanisms may support
residual language processing abilities in both post-stroke and pro-
gressive forms of aphasia.
The relationship between more accurate semantic performance and
right hemisphere ERD in patients may be related to the more wide-
spread distribution and bilateral organization of semantic representa-
tions, also observed in the healthy brains (Hickok and Poeppel, 2004,
2007; Lambon Ralph et al., 2017). Previous studies in healthy controls
suggest that the involvement of the right hemisphere homologues of the
left hemisphere language regions increases as language comprehension
demands become more complex (Bookheimer, 2002; Demonet et al.,
2005). While the left hemisphere may be more specialized to perform
fine gained coding of semantic information, coding of semantic re-
presentations is more coarse and diffuse in the right hemisphere,
making it particularly well suited for tasks that place greater demands
on contextual inferences, semantic integration and prediction processes
(Beeman et al., 2000; Jung-Beeman, 2005; Kircher et al., 2001; Meyer
et al., 2000). Recent data from semantic PPA patients suggest that the
integrity of the anterior temporal lobe and left temporal pole is critical
for single word comprehension. In contrast, sentence comprehension is
supported by the heterogeneous network of brain regions that include
left supramarginal and angular gyri, inferior frontal gyrus, dorsal pre-
motor, and orbitofrontal cortices (Mesulam et al., 2014, 2015). Because
structural integrity of the anterior temporal cortex was preserved in the
current sample of nonfluent and logopenic PPA patients, semantic
processing in the sentence context could be supported by the preserved
functionality of the right hemisphere temporo-parietal regions.
Although patients with PPA showed significant ERD in response to
syntactic anomalies, with a distribution similar to that of the control
group, these regions were underactivated relative to controls, and ERD
responses in these regions were not significantly correlated with better
performance on the task. This indicates that in PPA, residual activity in
the functionally preserved regions is not sufficient to support accurate
syntactic processing. PPA patients performed very poorly on detection
of syntactic anomalies, approximately at chance levels on average,
whereas performance on semantic anomalies was above chance but
below that seen in controls. These findings suggest that, although PPA
patients retain some sensitivity to syntactic violations, this residual
activity is not sufficient to process them successfully, leading to chance-
level discrimination between syntactically anomalous and correct sen-
tences. However, for age-matched controls more accurate syntactic
performance was associated with recruitment of bilateral superior and
inferior parietal lobules, right middle occipital and fusiform gyri, and
regions along right precentral and postcentral gyri. These results sug-
gest that under-recruitment of these regions during the sentence com-
prehension task may contribute to the poor syntactic performance in
patients with PPA.
Although ERD responses to syntactic anomalies did not correlate
with performance in detecting those anomalies (as nearly all PPA pa-
tients performed near chance levels), syntactic ERD responses were
correlated with the overall level of language impairment present in the
patients, as estimated by the first PCA component derived from the
Fig. 5. Bar charts showing peak latency of 8–30 Hz ERD responses for patients and
controls in the left inferior parietal gyrus and left inferior frontal gyrus. Peak latencies
were computed for each participant from 100 to 2500 ms post-stimulus onset. The four
conditions shown are semantically correct words (sentence-final position), semantic
violations, syntactically correct words (sentence-medial position), and syntactic viola-
tions.
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
571
 neuropsychological battery. The less impaired the patients were, the
more strongly their brains exhibited ERD in response to syntactic vio-
lations, particularly in the right hemisphere, in both ventral and dorsal
regions. This pattern suggests that even though patients were not able
to detect the violations accurately, syntactic violations were still re-
gistered neurally, especially for patients with less severe language im-
pairment. The correlation underscores the behavioral difficulty of de-
tecting syntactic violations, and suggests that neural sensitivity as
indexed by electrophysiological measurements may be a more sensitive
marker of impairment than behavioral performance in sentence com-
prehension tasks, as anomaly detection can fall to chance levels even
when the anomalies still produce a distinguishable response in the brain
compared to nonanomalous words.
This pattern of results suggests that syntactic processing is uniquely
vulnerable to the neuronal loss in the left perisylvian regions and may
not be easily supported by the preserved brain regions in the right
hemisphere alone, in contrast to semantic processing which may be
adequately supported by right hemisphere engagement for much of the
course of the disease.
4.2. Relationship with peak latencies
In comparison to the control group, PPA patients showed delayed
peak latencies of 8–30 Hz ERD for semantic and syntactic anomalies.
These delays in the latency of ERD responses were associated with
lower task accuracy. Increased latency of electrophysiological responses
during word recognition has been previously observed in PPA. In a
longitudinal study of a PPA patient, Giaquinto and Ranghi (2009) found
that the latencies of the N400 ERP component increased as the disease
progressed. Together with the previous finding, the present results in-
dicate that neuropathological changes in the brains of PPA patients
result in slowed information processing, which is in turn linked with
progressive cognitive decline. The latency of the ERD response appears
to be sensitive indicator of neural dysfunction that may not be easily
obtained with other neuroimaging techniques, such as fMRI or ERPs. In
MRI because of slow nature of BOLD responses (on the order of sec-
onds), the latency delay of 400 ms observed in the present study may
not have a significant effect on the BOLD response. For ERPs, a pro-
longed latency of neural responses is likely to also increase the trial-by-
trial variability of the electrophysiological response, which reduces the
phase-locking of the signal and results in an attenuated amplitude and a
flattened peak, making latency differences in the time-domain average
signal difficult to discern. Thus, the analysis of the latency of ERD re-
sponses may be a more sensitive measure of slowed information pro-
cessing resulting from cortical dysfunction in neurodegenerative dis-
ease.
4.3. Clinical significance
We found that electrophysiological responses to linguistic stimuli
are abnormal in PPA, being attenuated in amplitude as well as delayed
in latency. The participants in the study also exhibited structural
atrophy in key language regions of the left hemisphere, including the
inferior frontal gyrus and middle temporal lobe. However, the elec-
trophysiological abnormalities were not limited to atrophied cortex.
Reduced and delayed responses were present throughout the networks
that showed sensitivity to linguistic anomalies in healthy controls. This
suggests that tissue does not need to be atrophied in order for its
function to be compromised in the disease. Possible mechanisms for this
functional compromise include: 1) remote effects of structural damage
to areas that are functionally connected to the non-atrophied regions,
depriving them of their needed input or output, and 2) subtle neuronal
or synaptic damage reflecting an earlier stage of disease pathology that
has not yet resulted in large-scale neuronal death in the area. In fact,
these two mechanisms are likely to be closely related. Recent neuro-
pathological studies have suggested that neurodegenerative disorders
characterized by abnormal protein accumulation (which describes all
three recognized variants of PPA) may spread through the brain along
synaptic pathways in a prion-like propagation process (Agosta et al.,
2015; Duyckaerts, 2013). Thus, areas that are functionally connected to
regions of atrophy are likely also to show abnormal responses in the
early stages of degeneration as the proteinopathy begins to affect them.
Recent studies of neural activity in PPA using resting-state recordings
have also shown that functional abnormalities exist in widespread
networks beyond the zones of atrophy (Bonakdarpour et al., 2017;
Ranasinghe et al., 2017), and that functional connectivity in the healthy
brain predicts the spread of atrophy in PPA (Mandelli et al., 2016).
Although these findings may seem like “more bad news” to patients
and families struggling with the challenges of PPA, in that they indicate
that dysfunction extends far beyond the regions of atrophy seen on an
MRI, they also point the way to new treatment approaches that may be
able to slow or reverse the progression of that dysfunction. Because new
neurons are not generated in most regions of adult cortex (Lepousez
et al., 2015), reversal of brain atrophy is very unlikely. Nonetheless,
some interventions have been shown to ameliorate the linguistic
symptoms of PPA, including language training (Evans et al., 2016; Jokel
et al., 2016) and noninvasive brain stimulation (Cotelli et al., 2014;
Gervits et al., 2016). Although no drugs have yet proven effective for
treating PPA, the possibility remains that some could be found, espe-
cially as the mechanisms of neural dysfunction in the disease become
more clear. Trials of novel interventions in PPA are difficult and ex-
pensive due to the relative rarity of the disease, the challenges that its
patients have in experimental participation, and the need for long-term
follow-up to test the effects of the intervention on the progression of the
disease. Thus, biomarkers of the neural dysfunction that underlies the
symptoms are greatly needed, to improve the sensitivity of such trials.
For example, even in a patient who has become mute, an improvement
in physiological parameters, such as the amplitude and latency of os-
cillatory responses to language stimuli, would be a sign that a given
intervention has modified brain activity in the right direction. We are
therefore optimistic that the increased use of neural monitoring tech-
nologies such as the MEG used in the present study will enhance the
power of interventional trials to detect a therapeutic response, and will
accelerate the discovery of effective symptomatic (or even disease-
modifying) treatments.
4.4. Limitations
The limited sample size in the present study precluded the detailed
characterization of differences in linguistic anomaly processing be-
tween nonfluent and logopenic PPA subtypes. We found similar pat-
terns of oscillatory responses in both groups (Supplementary Fig. S1),
and similar patterns of atrophy, despite the fact that the nonfluent and
logopenic groups are known to have predominantly anterior and pos-
terior distributions of atrophy respectively. Thus, our results can be
taken as an average characterization of oscillatory responses to lin-
guistic anomalies in PPA as a whole (excluding the semantic variant),
highlighting common processes such as right temporal lobe involve-
ment in semantic comprehension. It is likely that further studies with
larger sample sizes may reveal distinct patterns of impairment and
compensation in these two subtypes, with more specific implications for
treatment.
4.5. Conclusion
Electrophysiological responses to semantic and syntactic anomalies
are abnormal in PPA, being delayed in latency and attenuated in am-
plitude. The localization of these abnormalities extends beyond zones of
atrophy, suggesting an earlier stage of functional disruption as the
disease progresses. Preserved semantic processing is supported by the
functionality of preserved right hemisphere regions that are also re-
cruited in control participants. In contrast, syntactic processing seems
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
572
 to be more vulnerable to the neuronal loss in left hemisphere language
regions, and it is less likely that activity in the preserved brain regions
can successfully support syntactic computations.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2018.02.028.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a Basic Science Grant from the Ontario
Brain Institute Ontario Neurodegenerative Disease Research Initiative
(ONDRI) to JAM and RJ, an Alzheimer's Association New Investigator
Research Grant to JAM, and a postdoctoral research award from the
Ontario Research Coalition to AK. We thank the participating volun-
teers and their families.
References
Adlam, A.R., Patterson, K., Bozeat, S., Hodges, J.R., 2010. The Cambridge semantic
memory test battery: detection of semantic deficits in semantic dementia and
Alzheimer's disease. Neurocase 16, 193–207.
Agosta, F., Weiler, M., Filippi, M., 2015. Propagation of pathology through brain net-
works in neurodegenerative diseases: from molecules to clinical phenotypes. CNS
Neurosci. Ther. 21, 754–767.
Ashburner, J., 2007. A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm. NeuroImage 381,
95–113.
Ashburner, J., Friston, K.J., 2005. Unified segmentation. NeuroImage 26, 839–851.
Ashburner, J., Friston, K.J., 2009. Computing average shaped tissue probability tem-
plates. NeuroImage 45, 333–341.
Avants, B.B., Tustison, N.J., Song, G., Cook, P.A., Klein, A., Gee, J.C., 2011. A re-
producible evaluation of ANTs similarity metric performance in brain image regis-
tration. NeuroImage 54, 2033–2044.
Bastiaansen, M.C., Magyari, L., Hagoort, P., 2009. Syntactic unification operations are
reflected in oscillatory dynamics during on-line sentence comprehension. J. Cogn.
Neurosci. 22, 1333–1347.
Beeman, M.J., Bowden, E.M., Gernsbacher, M.A., 2000. Right and left hemisphere co-
operation for drawing predictive and coherence inferences during normal story
comprehension. Brain Lang. 71, 310–336.
Benton, A.L., Hamsher, K., Varney, N.R., Spreen, O., 1983. Contributions to
Neuropsychological Assessment: A Clinical Manual. Oxford University Press,
Incorporated, New York: Oxford.
Bonakdarpour, B., Rogalski, E.J., Wang, A., Sridhar, J., Mesulam, M.M., Hurley, R.S.,
2017. Functional connectivity is reduced in early-stage primary progressive aphasia
when atrophy is not prominent. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 31, 101–106.
Bookheimer, S., 2002. Functional MRI of language: new approaches to understanding the
cortical organization of semantic processing. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 25, 151–188.
Brookes, M.J., Gibson, A.M., Hall, S.D., Furlong, P.L., Barnes, G.R., Hillebrand, A., Singh,
K.D., Holliday, I.E., Francis, S.T., Morris, P.G., 2005. GLM-beamformer method de-
monstrates stationary field, alpha ERD and gamma ERS co-localisation with fMRI
BOLD response in visual cortex. NeuroImage 26, 302–308.
Brookes, M.J., Vrba, J., Robinson, S.E., Stevenson, C.M., Peters, A.M., Barnes, G.R.,
Hillebrand, A., Morris, P.G., 2008. Optimising experimental design for MEG beam-
former imaging. NeuroImage 39, 1788–1802.
Calami, M., Markon, K., Denbur, G.N.L., Tranel, D., 2011. Developing a short form of
Benton's judgment of line orientations test: an item response theory approach. Clin.
Neuropsychol. 25, 670–684.
Chen, E., West, W.C., Waters, G., Caplan, D., 2006. Determinants of bold signal correlates
of processing object-extracted relative clauses. Cortex 42, 591–604.
Cheyne, D., Bakhtazad, L., Gaetz, W., 2006. Spatiotemporal mapping of cortical activity
accompanying voluntary movements using an event-related beamforming approach.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 27, 213–229.
Cheyne, D., Bostan, A.C., Gaetz, W., Pang, E.W., 2007. Event-related beamforming: a
robust method for presurgical functional mapping using MEG. Clin. Neurophysiol.
118, 1691–1704.
Cho-Reyes, S., Thompson, C.K., 2012. Verb and sentence production and comprehension:
northwestern assessment of verbs and sentences NAVS. Aphasiology 26, 1250–1277.
Cotelli, M., Manenti, R., Petesi, M., Brambilla, M., Cosseddu, M., Zanetti, O., Miniussi, C.,
Padovani, A., Borroni, B., 2014. Treatment of primary progressive aphasias by
transcranial direct current stimulation combined with language training. J.
Alzheimers Dis. 39, 799–808.
Cox, R.W., 1996. AFNI, software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic
resonance neuroimages. Comput. Biomed. Res. 29, 162–173.
Crinion, J., Price, C.J., 2005. Right anterior superior temporal activation predicts audi-
tory sentence comprehension following aphasic stroke. Brain 128, 2858–2871.
Davies, R.R., Hodges, J.R., Kril, J.J., Patterson, K., Halliday, G.M., Xuereb, J.H., 2005. The
pathological basis of semantic dementia. Brain 128, 1984–1995.
Delis, D.C., Kaplan, E., Kramer, J.H., 2001. D-KEFS: Delis-Kaplan Executive Function
System Examiner's Manual. Pearson, Inc., San Antonio, TX.
Demonet, J.F., Thierry, G., Cardebat, D., 2005. Renewal of the neurophysiology of lan-
guage: functional neuroimaging. Physiol. Rev. 85, 49–95.
Dunn, L.M., Dunn, D.M., 2007. Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, 4th ed. Pearson, Inc.,
San Antonio, TX.
Duyckaerts, C., 2013. Neurodegenerative lesions: seeding and spreading. Rev. Neurol.
169, 825–833.
Evans, W.S., Quimby, M., Dickey, M.W., Dickerson, B.C., 2016. Relearning and retaining
personally-relevant words using computer-based flashcard software in primary pro-
gressive aphasia. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10, 561.
Gervits, F., Ash, S., Coslett, H.B., Rascovsky, K., Grossman, M., Hamilton, R., 2016.
Transcranial direct current stimulation for the treatment of primary progressive
aphasia: an open-label pilot study. Brain Lang. 162, 35–41.
Giaquinto, S., Ranghi, F., 2009. Slowing of event-related potentials in primary progressive
aphasia. A case report. Sci. World J. 9, 633–638.
Gorno-Tempini, M.L., Dronkers, N.F., Rankin, K.P., Ogar, J.M., Phengrasamy, L., Rosen,
H.J., Johnson, J.K., Weiner, M.W., Miller, B.L., 2004. Cognition and anatomy in three
variants of primary progressive aphasia. Ann. Neurol. 55, 335–346.
Gorno-Tempini, M.L., Hillis, A.E., Weintraub, S., Kertesz, A., Mendez, M., Cappa, S., Ogar,
J.M., Rohrer, J.D., Black, S., Boeve, B.F., Manes, F., Dronkers, N.F., Vandenberghe,
R., Rascovsky, K., Patterson, K., Miller, B.I., Knopman, D.S., Hodges, J.R., Mesulam,
M.M., Grossman, M., 2011. Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its
variants. Neurology 76, 1006–1014.
Grossman, M., 2010. Primary progressive aphasia: clinicopathological correlations. Nat.
Rev. Neurol. 6 (2), 88–97. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrneurol.2009.216.
Grossman, M., Moore, P., 2005. A longitudinal study of sentence comprehension difficulty
in primary progressive aphasia. Rom. J. Neurol. Psychiatry 76, 644–649.
Grossman, M., Mickanin, J., Onishi, K., Hughes, E., D'Esposito, M., Ding, X., et al., 1996.
Progressive nonfluent aphasia: language, cognitive, and PET measures contrasted
with probable Alzheimer's disease. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 8, 135–154.
Grossman, M., Rhee, J., Moore, P., 2005. Sentence processing in frontotemporal de-
mentia. Cortex 41, 767–777.
Hamalainen, M., 1993. Magnetoencephalography - theory, instrumentation, and appli-
cations to noninvasive studies of the working human brain. Rev. Mod. Phys. 65,
413–497.
Hanslmayr, S., Staudigl, T., Fellner, M.C., 2012. Oscillatory power decreases and long-
term memory, the information via desynchronization hypothesis. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 6, 1–12.
Hickok, G., Poeppel, D., 2004. Dorsal and ventral streams: a framework for understanding
aspects of the functional anatomy of language. Cognition 92, 67–99.
Hickok, G., Poeppel, D., 2007. The cortical organization of speech processing. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 8, 393–402.
Hillebrand, A., Singh, K.D., Holliday, I.E., Furlong, P.L., Barnes, G., 2005. A new approach
to neuroimaging with magnetoencephalography. Hum. Brain Mapp. 25, 199–211.
Huang, M., Mosher, J.C., Leah, R., 1999. A sensor-weighted overlapping-sphere head
model and exhaustive head model comparison for MEG. Phys. Med. Biol. 44,
423–440.
Hurley, R.S., Paller, K.A., Wieneke, C.A., Weintraub, S., Thompson, C.K., Federmeier,
K.D., Mesulam, M.M., 2009. Electrophysiology of object naming in primary pro-
gressive aphasia. J. Neurosci. 29, 15762–15769.
Jokel, R., Kielar, A., Anderson, N.D., Black, S.E., Rochon, E., Graham, S., Freedman, M.,
Tang-Wai, D.F., 2016. Behavioural and neuroimaging changes after naming therapy
for semantic variant primary progressive aphasia. Neuropsychologia 89, 191–216.
Jung-Beeman, M., 2005. Bilateral brain processes for comprehending natural language.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 9, 512–518.
Kaplan, E., Goodglass, H., Weintraub, S., 2001. Boston Naming Test, 2nd ed. Lippincott
Williams Wilkins, Philadelphia.
Kay, J., Coltheart, M., Lesser, R., 1992. Psycholinguistic Assessments of Language
Processing in Aphasia. Psychology Press, Sussex, UK.
Kertesz, A., 1982. Western Aphasia Battery. Grune and Stratton, New York.
Kertesz, A., 2007. Western Aphasia Battery – Revised. San Antonio, TX: Pearson, Inc. brief
screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 63, 695–699.
Kielar, A., Meltzer, J.A., Moreno, S., Alain, C., Bialystok, E., 2014. Oscillatory responses to
semantic and syntactic violations. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 26 (12). http://dx.doi.org/10.
1162/jocn_a_00670.
Kielar, A., Panamsky, L., Links, K.A., Meltzer, J.A., 2015. Localization of electro-
physiological responses to semantic and syntactic anomalies in language compre-
hension with MEG. NeuroImage 10, 507–524.
Kielar, A., Deschamps, T., Jokel, R., Meltzer, J.A., 2016. Functional reorganization of
language networks for semantics and syntax in chronic stroke: evidence from MEG.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 37, 2869–2893.
Kircher, T.T.J., Brammer, M., Andreu, N.T., Williams, S.C.R., McGuire, P.K., 2001.
Engagement of right temporal cortex during processing of linguistic context.
Neuropsychologia 39, 798–809.
Lambon Ralph, M.A., Jefferies, E., Patterson, K., Rogers, T.T., 2017. The neural and
computational bases of semantic cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 42–55. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2016.150.
Leach, L., Kaplan, E., Rewilak, D., Richards, B., Proulx, G.-B., 2000. Kaplan Baycrest
Neurocognitive Assessment Manual. The Psychological Corporation, United States.
Lepousez, G., Nissant, A., Lledo, P.M., 2015. Adult neurogenesis and the future of the
rejuvenating brain circuits. Neuron 86, 387–401.
Mack, J.E., Chandler, S.D., Meltzer-Asscher, A., Rogalski, E., Weintraub, S., Mesulam,
M.M., Thompson, C.K., 2015. What do pauses in narrative production reveal about
the nature of word retrieval deficits in PPA? Neuropsychologia 77, 211–222. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.08.019.
Makeig, S., 1993. Effects of exposure of pure tones on event-related dynamics of the EEG
spectrum. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 86, 283–293.
Mandelli, M.L., Vilaplana, E., Brown, J.A., Hubbard, H.I., Binney, R.J., Attygalle, S.,
Santos-Santos, M.A., Miller, Z.A., Pakvasa, M., Henry, M.L., Rosen, H.J., Henry, R.G.,
Rabinovici, G.D., Miller, B.L., Seeley, W.W., Gorno-Tempini, M.L., 2016. Healthy
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
573
 brain connectivity predicts atrophy progression in non-fluent variant of primary
progressive aphasia. Brain 139, 2778–2791.
Meltzer, J.A., Braun, A.R., 2011. An EEG-MEG dissociation between online syntactic
comprehension and post hoc reanalysis. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 5, 1–15.
Meltzer, J.A., McArdle, J.J., Schafer, R.J., Braun, A.R., 2010. Neural aspects of sentence
comprehension: syntactic complexity, reversibility, and reanalysis. Cereb. Cortex 20,
1853–1864.
Mesulam, M.M., 2003. Primary progressive aphasia: a language based dementia. N. Engl.
J. Med. 349, 1535–1542.
Mesulam, M.M., Weintraub, S., 2014. Is it time to revisit the classification guidelines for
primary progressive aphasia? Neurology 82, 1108–1109.
Mesulam, M., Wieneke, C., Rogalski, E., Cobia, D., Thompson, C., Weintraub, S., 2009.
Quantitative template for subtyping primary progressive aphasia. Arch. Neurol. 66,
1545–1551.
Mesulam, M., Rogalski, E.J., Wieneke, C., Hurley, R.S., Bigio, E.H., Thompson, C.K.,
Weintraub, S., 2014. Primary progressive aphasia and the evolving neurology of the
language network. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 10 (10), 554–569. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nrneurol.2014.159.
Mesulam, M.M., Thompson, C.K., Weintraub, S., Rogalski, E.J., 2015. The Wernicke
conundrum and the anatomy of language comprehension in primary progressive
aphasia. Brain 138 (8), 2423–2437. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awv154.
Meyer, M., Friederici, A.D., von Cramon, D.Y., 2000. Neurocognition of auditory sentence
comprehension: event-related FMRI reveals sensitivity to syntactic violations and task
demands. Cogn. Brain Res. 9, 19–33.
Miller, Z.A., Mandelli, M.L., Rankin, K.P., Henry, M.L., Babiak, M.C., Frazier, D.T., Gorno-
Tempini, M.L., 2013. Handedness and language learning disability differentially
distribute in progressive aphasia variants. Brain 136 (11), 3461–3473. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/brain/awt242.
Naeser, M.A., Martin, P.I., Baker, E.H., Hodge, S.M., Sczerzenie, S.E., Nicholas, M.,
Palumbo, C.L., Goodglass, H., Wingfield, A., Samaraweera, R., Harris, G., Baird, A.,
Renshaw, P., Yurgelun-Todd, D., 2004. Overt propositional speech in chronic non-
fluent aphasia studied with the dynamic susceptibility contrast fMRI method.
NeuroImage 22, 29–41.
Nasreddine, Z.S., Phillips, N.A., Bédirian, V., Charbonneau, S., Whitehead, V., Collin, I.,
Cummings, J.L., Chertkow, H., 2005. The Montreal cognitive assessment, MoCA: a
brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 63, 695–699.
Oldfield, R.C., 1971. The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh in-
ventory. Neuropsychologia 9, 91–113.
Peelle, J.E., Cooke, A., Moore, P., Vesely, L., Grossman, M., 2007. Syntactic and thematic
components of sentence processing in progressive nonfluent aphasia and nonaphasic
frontotemporal dementia. J. Neurolinguistics 20, 482–494.
Peelle, J.E., Troiani, V., Gee, J., Moore, P., McMillan, C., Vesely, L., Grossman, M., 2008.
Sentence comprehension and voxel-based morphometry in progressive nonfluent
aphasia, semantic dementia, and nonaphasic frontotemporal dementia. J.
Neurolinguistics 21, 418–432.
Peelle, J.E., Troiani, V., Wingfield, A., Grossman, M., 2010. Neural processing during
older adults' comprehension of spoken sentences: age differences in resource allo-
cation and connectivity. Cereb. Cortex 20, 773–782.
Perani, D., Cappa, S.F., Tettamanti, M., Rosa, M., Scifo, P., Miozzo, A., Basso, A., Fazio, F.,
2003. A fMRI study of word retrieval in aphasia. Brain Lang. 85, 357–368.
Ranasinghe, K.G., Hinkley, L.B., Beagle, A.J., Mizuiri, D., Honma, S.M., Welch, A.E.,
Hubbard, I., Mandelli, M.L., Miller, Z.A., Garrett, C., La, A., Boxer, A.L., Houde, J.F.,
Miller, B.L., Vossel, K.A., Gorno-Tempini, M.L., Nagarajan, S.S., 2017. Distinct spa-
tiotemporal patterns of neuronal functional connectivity in primary progressive
aphasia variants. Brain 140, 2737–2751.
Robinson, S.E., 2004. Localization of event-related activity by SAM (ERF). Neurol. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 109.
Snowden, J.S., Stopford, C.L., Julien, C.L., Thompson, J.C., Davidson, Y., Gibbons, L.,
Mann, …., A, D.M., 2007. Cognitive phenotypes in Alzheimer's disease and genetic
risk. Cortex 43 (7), 835–845. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0010-9452(08)70683-X.
Thompson, C.K., 2011. Northwestern Assessment of Verbs and Sentences. Evanston, IL.
Thompson, C.K., Meltzer-Asscher, A., Cho, S., Lee, J., Wieneke, C., Weintraub, S.,
Mesulam, M.M., 2013. Syntactic and morphosyntactic processing in stroke-induced
and primary progressive aphasia. Behav. Neurol. 26, 35–54.
Thulborn, K.R., Carpenter, P.A., Just, M.A., 1999. Plasticity of language-related brain
function during recovery from stroke. Stroke 30, 749–754.
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N., Landeau, B., Papathanassiou, D., Crivello, F., Etard, O., Delcroix, N.,
Mazoyer, B., Joliot, M., 2002. Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM
using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject brain.
NeuroImage 15, 273–289.
Vrba, J., 2002. Magnetoencephalography: the art of finding a needle in a haystack.
Physica C 368, 1–9.
Vrba, J., Robinson, S.E., 2001. Signal processing in magnetoencephalography. Methods
25, 249–271.
Wang, L., Jensen, O., van den Brink, D., Weder, N., Schoffelen, J.M., Magyari, L., Hagoort,
P., Bastiaansen, M., 2012. Beta oscillations relate to the N400m during language
comprehension. Hum. Brain Mapp. 33, 2898–2912.
Warrington, E.K., 1984. Warrington Recognition Memory Test (RMT). Recognition
Memory Test: Manual. NFER-Nelson, Berkshire, UK.
Wechsler, D., 2009. Wechsler Memory Scale – Fourth Edition: Administration and Scoring
Manual. Pearson, Inc., San Antonio, TX.
Wicklund, M.R., Duffy, J.R., Strand, E.A., Machulda, M.M., Whitwell, J.L., Josephs, K.A.,
2014. Quantitative application of the primary progressive aphasia consensus criteria.
Neurology 82 (13), 1119–1126. http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.
0000000000000261.
Williams, S., 2010. A Major Revision of the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory: Versions
1.1. Colchester, Essex, United Kingdom.
Wilson, S.M., Galantucci, S., Tartaglia, M.C., Gorno-Tempini, M.L., 2012. The neuralbasis
of syntactic deficits in primary progressive aphasia. Brain Lang. 122, 190–198.
Woo, C.W., Krishnan, A., Wager, T.D., 2014. Cluster-extent based thresholding in fMRI
analyses: pitfalls and recommendations. NeuroImage 92, 412–419.
A. Kielar et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 18 (2018) 560–574
574
