 Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine
Systemic Mesenchymal Stromal Cell Transplantation
Prevents Functional Bone Loss in a Mouse Model of
Age-Related Osteoporosis
JEFFREY KIERNAN,a SALLY HU,b MARC D. GRYNPAS,b,c JOHN E. DAVIES,a,d WILLIAM L. STANFORDa,e,f
Key Words. Mesenchymal stem cell x Tissue-specific stem cells x Stem cell transplantation x
Osteoporosis x Sca-1
ABSTRACT
Age-related osteoporosis is driven by defects in the tissue-resident mesenchymal stromal cells
(MSCs), a heterogeneous population of musculoskeletal progenitors that includes skeletal stem cells.
MSC decline leads to reduced bone formation, causing loss of bone volume and the breakdown of
bonymicroarchitecturecrucialtotrabecularstrength.Furthermore,thelow-turnoverstateprecipitated
by MSC loss leads to low-quality bone that is unable to perform remodeling-mediated maintenance—
replacing old damaged bone with new healthy tissue. Using minimally expanded exogenous MSCs
injected systemically into a mouse model of human age-related osteoporosis, we show long-term
engraftment and markedly increased bone formation. This led to improved bone quality and turn-
over and, importantly, sustained microarchitectural competence. These data establish proof of
concept that MSC transplantation may be used to prevent or treat human age-related osteopo-
rosis. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:683–693
SIGNIFICANCE
Thisstudyshowsthatasingledoseofminimallyexpandedmesenchymalstromalcells(MSCs)injected
systemically into a mouse model of human age-related osteoporosis display long-term engraftment
and prevent the decline in bone formation, bone quality, and microarchitectural competence. This
work adds to a growing body of evidence suggesting that the decline of MSCs associated with age-
relatedosteoporosisisamajortransformativeeventintheprogressionofthedisease.Furthermore,it
establishes proofofconceptthatMSCtransplantation maybeaviabletherapeutic strategytotreator
prevent human age-related osteoporosis.
INTRODUCTION
Almost a century ago, the axiom “form follows
function” was established by the seminal treatise
of D’Arcy Thompson, who compared, predomi-
nantly, hard tissue structures across phyla [1].
Theanisotropyandconnectivityoftrabecularbone,
and their loss in certain pathologies, are prime ex-
amples of this axiom [1, 2] and are known to affect
the mechanical performance of bone tissue [2–4].
Thus, the regeneration of such an important struc-
turaltissueshouldaimnotonlytocreatenewtissue,
but also to recapitulate its functional, anisotropic,
interconnected microstructure. It is surprising,
therefore, that current therapeutic strategies, from
bone-substitutebiomaterialstostemcelltransplan-
tation,havepaidlittleheedtotheformandfunction
of the regenerated tissue.
Bone is a dynamic tissue, with remodeling-
mediated maintenance regenerating the entire
skeleton every 10 years [5]. Bone formation and
resorption are tightly coupled in this process,
and any imbalance can manifest itself in osteopo-
rosis, a disease representing significant morbidity
and substantial health care burden [6]. Age-
related (type II, senile) osteoporosis presents
a bone formation deficit caused by age-related
changes in the proliferation and differentiation
capacity of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs)
[7, 8]. The resultant uncoupling of remodeling-
mediated maintenance leads to a low-turnover
osteoporotic state and facilitates mechanical
weakness due to loss of bone volume and micro-
architectural integrity, combined with the pres-
ence of old, hypermineralized, damaged bone
[9].
MSCs and the rare skeletal stem cells (SSCs)
present within this population hold significant
therapeutic potential, directly by mediating tissue
repair through differentiation into various muscu-
loskeletal tissues [10], or indirectly by secreting a
myriad of growth factors and immunomodulatory
aInstitute of Biomaterials and
Biomedical Engineering,
bDepartment of Laboratory
Medicine and Pathobiology,
and dFaculty of Dentistry,
University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
cLunenfeld-Tanenbaum
Research Institute, Mount
Sinai Hospital, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; eSprott
Centre for Stem Cell
Research, Ottawa Hospital
Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada;
fDepartment of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine and
Department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology, and
Immunology, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada
Correspondence: William L.
Stanford, Ph.D., Ottawa Hospital
Research Institute, Ottawa
Hospital, 501 Smyth Road, Box
511, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6,
Canada. Telephone: 613-737-
8899, ext. 73841; E-Mail:
wstanford@ohri.ca; or John E.
Davies, Ph.D., D.Sc., Institute of
Biomaterials and Biomedical
Engineering, Rosebrugh Building,
Room 407, 164 College Street,
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G9,
Canada. Telephone: 416-978-
1471; E-Mail: jed.davies@
utoronto.ca
Received September 3, 2015;
accepted for publication
November 23, 2015; published
Online First on March 17, 2016.
©AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2016/$20.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.5966/sctm.2015-0231
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:683–693 www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
TISSUE ENGINEERING AND REGENERATIVE MEDICINE
 cytokines [11]. To date, more than 500 clinical trials using MSCs
have been registered with clinicaltrials.gov, with some trials
showing significant benefit toward treating bone-related condi-
tions [12]. One particular study used intravenous delivery of MSCs
to treat children with osteogenesis imperfecta, demonstrating
an encouraging short-term therapeutic effect [13]. However, early
ambiguitiesintheidentityofMSCsmayhavecontributed to thelack
of long-term effect [14]. Recent breakthroughs elucidating the
hierarchy of musculoskeletal progenitors, particularly the char-
acterization of SSCs [15–18], will likely improve the clinical out-
come of future MSC therapy trials.
Osteoporosis could benefit from MSC therapy, particularly
because MSC depletion drives disease progression; however,
no clinical trials are currently underway or recruiting to assess
the therapeutic potential of MSCs to treat osteoporosis. Because
of poor homing abilities of culture expanded MSC to bone
[19–21], existing animal studies using MSCs to increase bone for-
mation have relied on local administration of MSCs [22], genetic
manipulation [23], or surface modification [21, 24].
Sca-1 null (Sca-12/2) mice demonstrate a cellautonomous de-
ficiencyintheabilityofMSCtosupportboneformation,facilitating
a low-turnover state with progressive bone loss and mechanical
weakness beyond 6 months of age. As such, osteopenia observed
in Sca-12/2 mice is considered a model of human type II osteopo-
rosis [25, 26]. These findings suggested that MSCs could be used as
a therapeutic target or cell-based therapy to treat age-related os-
teoporosis.Asafirststeptowardtestingthishypothesis,wesought
todetermine whether minimally expandedMSCs can engraftlong-
terminvivoandpreventtheonsetofosteopeniainSca-12/2mice.
Indeed, we now demonstrate that a single bolus of minimally ex-
panded, wild-type (WT), donor MSCs prevents the decline of bone
formation, markedly increases bone turnover, and results in the
long-term maintenance of trabecular architectural anisotropy
and connectivity. Because osteoporosis in humans is associated
with a decrease in these microarchitectural features that lead to
increased fracture risk [27], our findings suggest that such MSC
therapy may lead to broad and long-term regenerative conse-
quences that addressboththe formand functionof bone. Further-
more, this work demonstrates the therapeutic promise of
minimally expanded MSC populations.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Design
This controlled laboratory experiment was undertaken to assess
the therapeutic potential of MSCs to treat progressive age-
dependent bone loss in our Sca-12/2 model of human age-
related osteoporosis. All experiments were carried out in
age-matched Sca-12/2 or WT mice, with a majority of analysis fo-
cusing on cell engraftment and functional recovery of bone quality.
Sample size was chosen for consistency with previous investiga-
tions of the Sca-12/2 phenotype [25, 26], and outliers (data points
more than 2 standard deviations above or below the mean) were
removed from the statistical analysis. Multiple donor-cell isola-
tion procedures were carried out, and multiple litters of WT and
Sca-12/2 mice were used for transplantation and control cohorts
for this study. This study was not blinded; laboratory standard op-
erating procedures were used for analysis, and specialized, auto-
mated image analysis software (Bioquant, Nashville, TN, http://
www.bioquant.com) was used for consistent and unbiased data.
MSC Isolation and Transplant
The MSC isolation protocol was modified from that of
StemCell Technologies (Vancouver, BC, Canada, http://www.
stemcell.com). The 5- to 6-month-old male WT or C.FVB-Tg(CAG-
luc,-GFP)L2G85Chco/FathJ (or GFP-LUC) mice were euthanized by
isoflurane overdose and sprayed with 70% ethanol. Workflow
is outlined in Figure 1A. Hind legs were removed and placed on
ice. Bones from the iliac crest, femur, and tibia were removed,
and muscle tissue was removed. Bones from three or four mice
were pooled together in a mortar with 5–7 ml of buffer (PBS
with 2% FBS plus 1 mM EDTA). Bones were crushed with a pes-
tle to release marrow. Marrow was reserved at room temper-
ature, while bone fragments were cut into small fragments,
placed into a 50-ml conical tube, and digested in 0.25% type
I collagenase (StemCell Technologies) for 45 minutes in a shak-
ing incubator at 37°C and 160 rpm. This solution was then
mixed with the bone marrow, and passage 0 (P0) cells were
plated in 10-cm tissue culture dishes at a density of 333,333
per cm2 in MSC medium consisting of 80% Minimum Essential
Medium (MEM) Alpha (ThermoFisher Scientific, Oakwood Vil-
lage, OH, https://www.thermofisher.com), 20% mouse MSC
stimulatory supplements (StemCell Technologies), and 50 U/ml
penicillin and 50 mg/ml streptomycin (ThermoFisher Scien-
tific). Medium was changed every 3 days, and cells were grown
until 70%–80% confluent (7–10 days). P0 cells were harvested
by adding 0.25% trypsin-EDTA (ThermoFisher Scientific catalog
number 25200056) for 5 minutes, and any cells remaining on
the plate were discarded. To remove hematopoietic contamina-
tion, harvested P0 cells were stained with purified rat anti-
mouse antibodies against hematopoietic cell markers CD45
(clone number 30-F11, eBioscience, San Diego, CA, http://www.
ebioscience.com) and CD11b (clone number M1/70, eBioscience)
at a concentration of 1:167, followed by incubation with
immunomagnetic sheep anti-rat IgG antibody (ThermoFisher
Scientific) as per manufacturer’s instructions, and magnetic
depletion was performed to remove cells conjugated to iron
antibodies. Remaining nonhematopoietic cells were replated
as passage 1 (P1) MSCs in MSC medium at a density of 5,000
cells per cm2. P1 MSCs were grown for 3–4 days until cells were
approximately 60%–70% confluent. At this point, MSCs were
harvested with 2 ml of 0.25% trypsin-EDTA, washed twice in
PBS (without MgCl2 or CaCl2), and suspended at a concentra-
tion of 2.0 3 107 cells per ml. In all cases, mice received 2.0 3
106 (except 4.0 3 106 cells in one set of experiments; Fig. 2)
MSCs in a total volume of 100 ml via tail vein injection.
To harvest cells from recipient mice for the short-term stud-
ies, marrow was flushed with a 23-gauge needle, and compact
bone cells were isolated by crushing flushed bone and digesting
with 0.25% type I collagenase solution (StemCell Technologies).
Red blood cells were lysed with red cell lysis buffer. For long-term
engraftment studies, bone marrow and compact bone cells har-
vested from recipient mice for analysis occurred in the same
manner as in the preceding process up until the point of anti-
body staining with the following modifications. Cells were isolated
from individual mice with separate mortars and pestles, and red
blood cells were lysed with red cell lysis buffer.
Multispectral In Vivo/Ex Vivo Imaging
Micewereanesthetized,depleted,andtransferredtoaKodakInVivo
Multispectral Imaging System (Carestream Health, Rochester, NY,
684
MSC Transplantation Prevents Bone Loss
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 http://www.carestream.com). Fluorescence measurements of
1,19-dioctadecyl-3,3,39,39-tetramethylindotricarbocyanine io-
dide (DiR; ThermoFisher Scientific; 750/830 nm) were acquired
for 5 minutes, x-ray images were acquired for 2.5 minutes, and
color images were acquired by using a 1-second exposure. An-
imals were then euthanized by isoflurane overdose, and organs
and bones were harvested and underwent ex vivo imaging
(same as in vivo). Unmixed 16-bit images were background-
subtracted in ImageJ. Pixel intensity measurements were
obtained from the region of interest (ROI) (proximal tibia/distal
femur or harvested organs) and used to determine mean pixel
intensity.
Statistical Analysis
For all statistical analysis, one-way analysis of variance was per-
formed to assess significant differences across groups. If a signif-
icant difference was present, a Bonferroni post hoc test was used
forpairwisecomparisons.Datapointsthatweremorethan2stan-
dard deviations above or below the mean were considered
outliers.
Additional materials and methods can be found in the
supplemental online data.
RESULTS
Isolation and Characterization of Donor MSC Population
The cell source is a critical consideration for the development of
cell-based therapies. We reasoned that a population enriched
for clonogenic MSCs would be osteogenic and capable of main-
taining bone homeostasis for long periods. A highly clonogenic
donorMSCpopulation wasisolatedaspreviously described[28].
We empirically developed a standard procedure based on
optimized plating density, length of trypsinization, and immu-
nodepletion of hematopoietic cells (Fig. 1A). This approach
consistently yielded a MSC population capable of generating
single cell-derived colonies (Fig. 1B) and retained a high colony-
forming unit fibroblast frequency of approximately 1:6.5 (Fig. 1C).
These minimally expanded MSCs were capable of osteogenic
differentiation, robustly forming bone nodules (brown bone
surrounded by pink alkaline phosphatase-stained cells) (Fig.
1D), with a colony-forming unit osteoblast frequency of ap-
proximately 1:1,300. MSCs were also capable of adipogenic
differentiation, forming adipocytes that exhibit oil red O stain-
ing offatdeposits (Fig.1E).Passage 1MSCs expressSca-1,CD44,
CD106, and CD29, markers common to murine MSCs, and are ab-
sent for hematopoietic markers CD45 and CD11b (supplemental
online Fig. 1).
Donor MSCs Are Capable of Delivery to the Long Bones
of Recipient Mice
Short-term homing studies were performed to investigate
whether minimally expanded MSCs could migrate to, and lodge
in, the bone marrow of the Sca-12/2 mouse. Recipient mice did
not undergo myeloablative conditioning because this has been
shown to be injurious to local MSCs [29], and future clinical ad-
aptation of the protocol would prohibit such conditioning in el-
derly humans. Before transplantation, donor cells were labeled
with near-IR lipophilic carbocyanine dye DiR, and either 2 3 106
or 4 3 106 cells were injected into the tail vein. Mice were sub-
jected to in vivo imaging at 24 and 48 hours after injection, fol-
lowed by euthanasia and dissection of organs and bones that
were subsequently imaged ex vivo. Transplanted WT MSCs
were detected in the long bones (tibia and femur) of Sca-12/2
mice and were maintained for a period of at least 48 hours
(Fig. 2A, 2B). The majority of donor signal was found in the
lungs, liver, and spleen of recipient mice (Fig. 2A, 2B). No DiR
signal was detected in na¨
ıve Sca-12/2 mice (Fig. 2A, 2B). Fluo-
rescence was also observed in the tail at the injection site be-
cause of unavoidable donor cell contact with surrounding
tissue. Mice that received the higher cell dose demonstrated
a greater DiR signal at the proximal tibia/distal femur site in vivo
(supplemental online Fig. 2A) and in visceral organs and long
bones ex vivo (supplemental online Fig. 2B). Significantly, trans-
planted MSCs displayed dose-dependent delivery to the long
bones of recipient mice.
Donor MSCs Are Capable of Short-Term Residence
Within the Bone Marrow
We tracked WT MSCs for 2 weeks after transplantation to dis-
cern whether cells were maintained within the bone marrow
of treated mice. Mice were injected with 2 3 106 DiR-labeled
WT MSCs, followed by euthanasia and ex vivo imaging of dis-
sected bones at 1, 7, and 14 days after transplantation. After
imaging, the bone marrow was flushed, and cytometric anal-
ysis was performed. No DiR fluorescence was detected in the
bones or bone marrow cells of na¨
ıve Sca-12/2 mice at day 1, 7,
and 14, whereas DiR+ cells were detected in Sca-12/2 mice re-
ceiving WT MSC transplant (supplemental online Fig. 3A, 3B).
The average DiR fluorescence intensity of whole bones de-
creased with time, and was consistent with a declining number
of engrafted MSCs assessed (supplemental online Fig. 3A, 3B).
To investigate the location of the transplanted cells within the
bone, Sca-12/2 mice were transplanted as described above
and assessed 2 weeks later. The mean pixel intensity was
Figure1.
Isolationanddifferentiation capacityofdonorMSCs.(A):A
workflow diagram showing WT MSC isolation. (B): Single cell derived
colonyderivedfrompassage1donorMSCs(34magnification,Crystal
Violet stain). (C): Passage 1 donor MSCs had a CFU-F frequency of 1:
6.5 (n = 3). (D): Passage 1 donor MSCs grown under osteogenic con-
ditions form bone nodules (34 magnification, Von Kossa stain). (E):
Passage 1 donor MSCs grown under adipogenic conditions form ad-
ipocytes (310 magnification, Oil Red O stain). Abbreviations: CFU-F,
colony-forming unit fibroblast; MSCs, mesenchymal stromal cells; P1,
passage 1; WT, wild type.
Kiernan, Hu, Grynpas et al.
685
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 measured in the femurs and tibias of three treated mice, along
with na¨
ıveSca-12/2controls,followedbyisolationofbonemarrow
and compact bone cells separately. Similar DiR fluorescence was
present in femurs and tibias of individual MSC-transplanted mice
(Fig. 2C). Consistent with this finding, cytometric analyses dem-
onstrated evenly distributed donor cell residence within the
bone marrow and compact bone of individual mice.
Transplanted MSCs Are Capable of
Long-Term Engraftment
GFP-LUC mice were used to track long-term MSC engraftment.
This dual reporter transgenic mouse is on the same genetic back-
ground as the Sca-12/2 mice used here (BALB/c) and expresses
luciferase and GFP. Low-level GFP expression is present in the
MSC population [30] and absent in hematopoietic cells [31]. Male
mice were chosen as donors to allow the use of Y-chromosome
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) in female recipi-
ents as an additional marker. Consistent with published strain
data, very few GFP-positive cells were identified in the bone mar-
row and compact bone harvested from GFP-LUC mice (Fig. 3A).
Significantly, when this fraction was plated and adherent cells
grown to 60%–70% confluence (passage 0), GFP fluorescence
was detected in 40%–50% of cells (Fig. 3B). Adherent cells were
passaged, and hematopoietic cells magnetically depleted (Fig.
1A), before being replated and again grown to 70% confluence.
These passage 1 MSCs expressed low levels of GFP (Fig. 3B)
and were used as the donor cell population for the long-term
transplantation experiments.
The 10-week-old Sca-12/2 mice were transplanted with 2 3
106 GFP-LUC MSCs and assessed 24 weeks later. Mice were an-
alyzed for GFP expression and Y-chromosome presence by flow
cytometry and Taqman qPCR, respectively. Cells were har-
vested as outlined in Figure 1A and stained with purified rat an-
tibodies against hematopoietic markers CD45, CD11b, and
Ter119 endothelial marker CD31, followed by iron-conjugated
sheep anti-rat antibodies facilitating magnetic immunodepletion
of non-MSCs. The remaining 2% of enriched cells not expressing
hematopoietic or endothelial markers (data not shown) were an-
alyzed for GFP expression versus near-IR dead cell exclusion. In
the positive control GFP-LUC donor mice, only 0.06% of enriched
cells expressed detectable GFP (Fig. 3C). A low frequency
(0.002%–0.003%) of enriched cells recovered from some Sca-12/2
mice that received an MSC transplant expressed detectable
GFP signal. However, upon normalization to GFP+ cells present in
the same cell fraction of GFP-LUC mice, these numbers represent
3%–5% engraftment (Fig. 3D, 3E). No GFP signal was detected in
na¨
ıve Sca-12/2 mice (Fig. 3F).
To confirm these findings, genomic DNA was isolated from
the enriched cell population and analyzed by Taqman qPCR de-
tection of the donor male Y-chromosome presence. Donor en-
graftment of 0.0005%–0.02% was present in the enriched cell
fraction (Fig. 3G and supplemental online Fig. 4A). The enriched
cell population represented approximately 2% of total cells har-
vested from thebonemarrowandcompactbone.Therefore,do-
nor contribution of 0.00001% and 0.0005% within the total cell
population was observed (Fig. 3G). Mouse MSCs are extremely
rare in situ and comprise only 0.0003% of cells in the bone mar-
row, which equates to 3 cells per million [32]. Donor MSC con-
tribution represented significant engraftment of between 4 and
224 cells per million of the enriched cell fraction and 0.1 and
4.5 cells per million of total bone cells (Fig. 3G). Long-term en-
graftmentwasdetected in 5of15recipientmice,although levels
below the detection limit could have been present. Significantly
higher engraftment was revealed in the lungs of all recipient
mice analyzed, with an average engraftment of 0.23%, or
2,300 cells per million of total lung cells (Fig. 3G), proportionate
to the large numbers of transplanted cells detected in the lungs
within 48 hours of transplantation. No engraftment was identi-
fied in the liver of recipient animals (Fig. 3G).
A previous study documented upregulation of monocyte col-
ony stimulating factor 1 (M-CSF) expression in lung-entrapped
MSCs [33]. As M-CSF is a cytokine required for osteoclast forma-
tion, we tested whether elevated M-CSF levels were present in
the serum of transplanted animals. However, no difference in
M-CSF between MSC-transplanted and na¨
ıve Sca-12/2 control
Figure 2.
Short-term analysis confirms systemically injected purified MSCs are delivered and retained in the bone marrow, lungs, and liver. (A):
In vivo fluorescent imaging (top) and x-ray (bottom) of untreated na¨
ıve and DiR+ MSC-transplanted Sca-12/2 mice. (B): Ex vivo fluorescent
imaging of organs/bones, color (top) and fluorescence (bottom). (C): DiR fluorescence present in bones 2 weeks after DiR+ MSC transplant
in Sca-12/2 mice compared with na¨
ıve Sca-12/2 mice and percent presence of DiR-labeled cells in the BM and CB assessed via flow cytometry
(n = 3). Abbreviations: Avg, average; B, bones; BM, bone marrow; CB, compact bone; DiR, 1,19-dioctadecyl-3,3,39,39-tetramethylindotricarbo-
cyanine iodide; H, heart; K, kidney; Li, liver; Lu, lungs; MSCs, mesenchymal stromal cells; S, spleen.
686
MSC Transplantation Prevents Bone Loss
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 mice was detected (data not shown). Along with M-CSF, Receptor
Activator of Nuclear Factor k-B Ligand (RANKL) is required for os-
teoclast differentiation and is primarily produced by osteoblasts
and osteocytes. Thus, we assessed whether RANKL levels were
elevated in the serum of transplanted animals. Similar to
M-CSF levels, no significant difference in RANKL levels between
MSC-transplanted and na¨
ıve Sca-12/2 control mice was detected
(data not shown).
Figure3.
TransplantedGFP+MSCsarecapableofpersistentengraftmentinthemarrow/endostealregionofSca-12/2for6months.(A–F):Flow
cytometricanalysis.(A):GFPsignaloftotalbonemarrow/compactbonecellsfromdonorGFP-LUCmice.(B):GFPsignalofdonorMSCsatpassage
0 and 1. (C): GFP signal of enriched cells from donor GFP-LUC mice. (D, E): Two examples of mice that displayed GFP+ cells. (F): GFP signal was
absent from na¨
ıve Sca-12/2 mice. (G): Table displaying quantitative polymerase chain reaction detection of Y-chromosome engraftment; per-
cent donor engraftment and engrafted cells per million of enriched nonhematopoietic/nonendothelial fraction of bone marrow/compact bone
cells, percent donor engraftment, and cells per million in total nucleated bone marrow cells; percent donor engraftment and cells per million of
total lung cells; and percent donor engraftment in total liver cells. Abbreviations: ctrl, control; GFP, green fluorescent protein; LUC, luciferase;
MSCs, mesenchymal stromal cells; ND, not determined; PI, propidium iodide.
Kiernan, Hu, Grynpas et al.
687
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 Transplanted Sca-12/2 Mice Displayed Improved
Trabecular Bone Formation, Bone Turnover, and
Osteoclast Frequency
Previously, we demonstrated that Sca-12/2 mice have reduced
active bone formation during aging, driven by defective self-
renewalofMSCsandassociatedreductioninosteoblasts[25].De-
ficiencies in bone formation are likewise present in human aging
andclinicalosteoporosis[34,35].Wetestedwhetherasingle,sys-
temic dose of WT MSCs into Sca-12/2 mice could prevent the
bone deterioration observed by 6 months of age. Sca-12/2 mice
were transplanted as described above, and 24 weeks later, at 10
and 2 days before euthanasia, mice were injected with calcein
green, a fluorescent marker of bone formation. WT mice dis-
played greater bone formation, observed by bright green calcein
labeling in trabecular tissue of the proximal tibia, than MSC-
transplanted mice, which themselves showed more formation
than na¨
ıve Sca-12/2 mice (Fig. 4A). Quantitatively, na¨
ıve Sca-
12/2 mice exhibited a significantly reduced area undergoing
active bone formation compared with WT mice, as indicated by
mineralizing surface area normalized to total bone surface area
(MS/BS).Significantlymoreareaofactiveboneformationoccurred
in MSC-transplanted Sca-12/2 mice, with MS/BS nearly equaling
that of WT mice (Fig. 4B).
We further analyzed calcein integration to elucidate whether
the actual rate of bone formation was impaired in Sca-12/2 mice
and whether WT MSC transplant could also blunt this defect. The
width between calcein green labels in the 8-day interim specifies
the mineral apposition rate, which is used to calculate the bone
formation rate (BFR) normalized to bone surface (BFR/BS) and
bone volume (BFR/BV). Indeed, the BFRs (both BFR/BS and
BFR/BV) were significantly impaired in na¨
ıve Sca-12/2 mice ver-
sus WT controls (Fig. 4C, 4D). In contrast, Sca-12/2 mice that re-
ceived an MSC transplant displayed a significantly improved rate
of bone formation (BFR/BS and BFR/BV; Fig. 4C, 4D).
Bone resorption is also perturbed in Sca-12/2 mice because
of an intrinsic osteoclast defect in addition to an inability of Sca-
12/2 osteoblasts to support osteoclast differentiation, leading to
reduced osteoclast numbers and activity in vivo [25, 26]. There-
fore,wenextdeterminedwhetherosteoclastnumberandsurface
area were improved in transplanted animals. Sca-12/2 mice were
transplanted as described above, and osteoclast number and sur-
face area were assessed via tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase
(TRAP) positive staining. Na¨
ıve Sca-12/2 mice displayed signifi-
cantly reduced bone surface occupied by osteoclasts (OcS/BS)
and also a reduced number of osteoclasts on the bone surface
(OcN/BS) compared with WT control mice (Fig. 4E, 4F). Sca-12/2
mice transplanted with WT MSCs revealed significant improve-
ment of OcS/BS (Fig. 4E) and OcN/BS (Fig. 4F).
The reduced bone turnover that occurs in osteoporosis leads
to the highly mineralized, homogeneous, old bone, which we
have observed in Sca-12/2 mice [25, 26]. Quantitative backscat-
ter electron imaging (BSE) was used to quantify the average min-
eral content (represented by Max Gray value) and assess full
width at half-maximal height (FWHMH) values, an indicator of
mineral heterogeneity. Large FWHMH values represent a het-
erogeneous mineralization profile of highly mineralized ma-
ture bone mixed with acutely mineralized matrix and new
bone and are associated with higher bone turnover, whereas small
FWHMH values indicate the homogeneous, highly mineralized, old
bone associated with low bone turnover. Six months after MSC
transplant, Sca-12/2 treated mice had astonishingly high
FWHMH values (Fig. 4G). FWHMH values in MSC-transplanted
mice were nearly 200% above those observed for both WT and
untreated Sca-12/2 mice, indicating an exceptionally high level
of bone turnover in MSC-transplanted mice.
Transplanted Sca-12/2 Mice Displayed Improved
Microarchitectural Characteristics
We sought to determine whether bone formation and quality
gainsobservedinMSC-transplantedmicepreventthemicroarchi-
tectural defects that occur in Sca-12/2 mice [26]. The 10-week-
old Sca-12/2 mice were transplanted with 2 3 106 WT MSCs
and assessed 24 weeks later, at 8.5 months of age, the time point
whentheosteopenicconditionpeaksinSca-12/2mice[26].Com-
putedtomography(CT)isusedclinicallytoidentifymicroarchitec-
turalaberrationsintrabeculartissueassociatedwithhumanaging
and osteoporosis [36, 37]. Here, we performed microCT analyses
on the proximal tibias of mice transplanted with WT MSCs, along
with WT and na¨
ıve Sca-12/2 controls. Trabecular connectivity-
density(Conn.D),ameasure ofthe interconnectivityoftrabecular
structures that provides strength to bone, displays a characteris-
ticdeclineinosteoporosis[36].Sca-12/2micepresentedwithsig-
nificantlylowerconnectivity-densityversusWTmice(Fig.5A,5G).
However,Sca-12/2micethatreceivedasingletransplantofMSCs
displayed significantly improved connectivity-density (Fig. 5A)
and similar trabecular interactions to WT mice (Fig. 5G). Trabec-
ular bone is highly anisotropic; thus, trabeculae are orientated
preferentially in the direction of load bearing and exhibit a high
degree of anisotropy (DA). Human aging and osteoporosis are
hallmarked by decreased anisotropy [37].
Decreased anisotropy has been observed in another model of
murine age-related osteoporosis [38], and we demonstrate
herein a similar trend in the Sca-12/2 mouse (Fig. 5B), Interest-
ingly, Sca-12/2 mice transplanted with WT MSCs demonstrated
normal anisotropy (Fig. 5B).
Other clinically relevant osteopenic transformations present
in the proximal tibia of Sca-12/2 mice include decreased trabec-
ular bone volume fraction (BV/TV), fewer trabecular structures
(Tb.N), and an associated increased space between adjacent tra-
becular structures (Tb.Sp) (Fig. 5C–5E). Osteopenic increase in
Structural Model Index (SMI) was also present in Sca-12/2 mice
and represents a progression toward weaker rod-shaped trabec-
ulae in lieu of superior plate-like trabeculae (Fig. 5F). Specific sta-
tistical differences observed between WT and na¨
ıve Sca-12/2
mice regarding BV/TV, Tb.N, Tb.Sp, and SMI were lost between
WT and MSC-transplanted Sca-12/2 mice, suggesting improve-
ments in these metrics of osteoporosis (Fig. 5C–5F). Overall,
microCT images of tibia of WT, untreated Sca-12/2, and MSC-
transplanted Sca-12/2 mice clearly reveal that transplanted ani-
mals present a trabecular structure similar to WT mice, with
obvious improvements in connectivity (Fig. 5G).
DISCUSSION
Recent lineage tracing experiments have determined that within
the MSC population, SSCs do indeed exist [15–18, 39]. Stem cells
within the MSC population are required for long-term homeosta-
sis, and their loss affects bone mass [18, 25]. Subsets of the MSC
population can sense injury [40, 41] and effect repair and homeo-
stasis through extensive clonal division, differentiation [18, 39],
688
MSC Transplantation Prevents Bone Loss
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 and paracrine effects [17, 42]. The findings that defective MSC
self-renewal underlies age-related osteoporosis in a number of
models suggest that MSCs, and by extension, SSCs within the het-
erogeneous population, area potential therapeutic target for sys-
temic skeletal diseases.
In this study, we determined that transplanted syngeneic
MSCs led to persistent engraftment and improved bone forma-
tion and bone health in age-related osteopenic mice, at least
6 months after a single systemic injection. Additionally, improve-
ments in bone homeostasis that resulted from maintaining
tissue-resident MSCs further implicated the decline of MSCs as-
sociated with age-related osteoporosis as a major transforma-
tive event in the progression of the disease.
The Sca-12/2 mouse is an ideal model of human age-related
(type II) osteoporosis because, like the human condition, MSC de-
fects cause an initial decrease in bone formation, which facilitates
a reciprocal decrease in bone resorption, leading to a low-
turnover state. This is in contrast to postmenopausal (type I) os-
teoporosis, which is driven by increased osteoclast activity
causing increased bone resorption that precipitates a high-
turnover state. Sca-12/2 mice display reduced bone formation
[25], and trabeculae display higher mineralization with decreased
turnover [26], characteristics confirmed in this study. Sca-12/2
mice also exhibit reduced osteoclast numbers in vivo [25], also
verified in this study. Together, reduced bone formation coupled
with reduced osteoclast numbers and diminished bone turn-
over are indicative of fewer bone-remodeling cycles occurring
in the Sca-12/2 mice. These factors lead to older, highly miner-
alized bone, which, together with a reduction in overall bone,
caused the mechanical weakness of trabecular tissue described
previously [25, 26]. This model is consistent with human age-
related osteoporosis, with a low-turnover state hallmarked
by diminished and old, hypermineralized, mechanically inferior
bone [9].
We have shown that WT MSC transplantation into Sca-12/2
mice can indeed improve bone health. Remarkably, the Sca-12/2
mice transplanted with a single bolus of MSC showed improved
bone formation 24 weeks after transplantation. Likewise, bone
Figure 4.
Sca-12/2 mice that received a single MSC transplant display increased rate of bone formation, osteoclast activity, and bone turnover
6 months after transplant. (A): Representative fluorescent images of calcein staining in WT, na¨
ıve Sca-12/2, and MSC-transplanted Sca-12/2
mice. (B): Percent mineralizing surface normalized to bone surface. (C): Bone formation rate normalized to bone surface. (D): Bone formation
rate normalized to bone volume. (E): Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) analysis of osteoclast surface normalized to bone surface. (F):
TRAPanalysis ofosteoclast number normalized tobone surface. (G):BSE imagingquantification ofFWHMH, ameasure ofboneturnover. p,p #
.05; †0.1 $ p $ .05 [WT (n = 5 dynamic histo, n = 4 TRAP, BSE) Sca-12/2 (n = 6 dynamic histo, TRAP, n = 5 BSE), MSC Tx (n = 8, all)]. Abbreviations:
BFR/BS,boneformationratenormalizedtobonesurface;BFR/BV,boneformationratenormalizedtobonevolume;BSE,backscatteredelectron;
FWHMH, full width at half-maximal height; MS/BS, percent mineralizing surface normalized to bone surface; MSC, mesenchymal stromal cell;
MSCTx,MSC-transplanted; OcN/BS,osteoclastnumbernormalizedtobonesurface;OcS/BS,osteoclastsurfacenormalizedtobonesurface;WT,
wild type.
Kiernan, Hu, Grynpas et al.
689
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 catabolism was increased, leading to increased levels of bone
turnover. These results together suggest that transplanted MSCs
were capable of initiating or sustaining bone-remodeling cycles.
This could be because of the ability of WT transplanted stromal
cellstoinitiateandsupport osteoclastactivityand/orthe capacity
of the transplanted WT MSCs to support bone formation itself.
Old bone present in the low-turnover, age-related osteoporotic
state accumulates microdamage, possibly reducing material
toughness, and is hypermineralized, thereby increasing bone
stiffness. Together, these changes may increase the likelihood
of bone failure [9, 43, 44]. By restoring bone turnover in MSC-
transplanted animals, remodeling-mediated maintenance would
return, allowing the resolution of microdamage and hyperminer-
alization, potentially improving mechanical strength. However,
the clinical relevance of microdamage and hypermineralization
independently leading to increased fracture risk in humans re-
mains controversial [43]. Mechanical testing of our MSC trans-
plant system may be a good model to assess the mechanical
and potentially clinical relevance of improved bone health, inde-
pendent of anabolic bone growth.
It was also remarkable that one bolus of donor MSCs pre-
vented age-related osteoporosis phenotypes as observed by
Figure 5.
Sca-12/2 mice that received a single MSC transplant display improved trabecular microarchitecture 6 months after transplant.
MicroCT analysis of proximal tibias of WT, na¨
ıve Sca-12/2, and MSC-transplanted Sca-12/2 mice (MSC Tx). Parameters investigated were
as follows. (A): Connectivity density. (B): Degree of anisotropy. (C): Bone volume/total volume. (D): Trabecular number. (E): Trabecular spacing.
(F): Structural Model Index. (G): Representative microCT images of WT, Sca-12/2, and MSC Tx mice. Scale bar = 1.0 mm. p, p # .05; †, 0.1 $ p $
.05[WT(n=7),Sca-12/2 (n=9), andMSCTx (n=8)].Abbreviations: BV/TV, bonevolume/total volume; Conn.D,connectivity density; DA,degree
ofanisotropy; microCT,microcomputed tomography; MSC,mesenchymal stromal cell; MSCTx,MSC-transplanted; SMI,Structural ModelIndex;
Tb.N, trabecular number; Tb.Sp, trabecular spacing; WT, wild type.
690
MSC Transplantation Prevents Bone Loss
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 microCT6 months after transplant. In human aging/osteoporosis,
trabecular bone volume, number, and thickness decrease,
whereas spacing increases [36, 45]. Anisotropy and connectivity
decrease [36, 37], and SMI increases [46]. The Sca-12/2 model of
age-related osteoporosis displayed similar vertebral microarchi-
tectural abnormalities [26], as does the C57BL/6J model of
age-related osteoporosis [38]. Here we confirmed such micro-
architectural aberrations at the metaphyseal tibial site.
Interestingly, transplanted Sca-12/2 mice displayed com-
plete protection from the phenotypic loss of connectivity and
anisotropy, and partial protection from microarchitectural im-
pairments of bone volume fraction, trabecular shape, number,
and spacing. The mechanical integrity of trabecular bone is de-
pendent on specific factors: bone volume, microarchitectural
properties including connectivity and anisotropy, and matrix
and mineral properties [27], all of which are affected in both hu-
man and Sca-12/2 osteoporosis. First documented by D’Arcy
Thompson in 1917, trabeculae maintain strength through con-
nections with adjacent structures akin to girders in a high-rise
building [1]. Loss of connectivity (lower Conn.D) represents dis-
connected trabeculae free floating within the medullary cavity,
imparting no mechanical strength to the structure. It has been ac-
cepted, since the seminal treatise of Julius Wolff, that trabecular
orientation is also important to mechanical strength—because of
the anisotropic nature of cancellous bone—and that trabecular
architecture is compromised in bony pathologies [2]. Remodeling
results in preferential trabecular orientation in the direction of
loadbearing,whichprovidestherequisitecompressiveresistance
to ambulatory load. Loss of anisotropy (lower DA) represents a
loss of trabecular resistance to load bearing, increasing the likeli-
hood of compression fracture. Thus, the improved connectivity
and the maintenance of anisotropy realized in transplanted ani-
mals represent potential improvement in bony mechanical
strength and the restoration of a functional microarchitecture
in MSC-treated Sca-12/2 animals. Specifically, the change in tra-
becularbonevolumeobservedintransplantedanimalsalonecan-
not explain this restoration in function because bone remodeling
was also increased. However the increased trabecular remodel-
ing, without significant changes in bone volume, resulted in
microarchitectural improvements that, importantly, restored
the wild-type structural anisotropic phenotype.
Indeed, we observed increased bone formation in trans-
planted animals, which seemed to contradict the modest im-
provements in bone volume observed by microCT. It is quite
possible that improvements to overall bone formation in trans-
planted animals were being mitigated by the observed increased
osteoclast activity. This increase in bone turnover was supported
by the increase in the heterogeneity of mineral densities ob-
served by backscatter electron photomicrography. Standard
parathyroid (PTH) treatment for osteoporosis elicits a similar dy-
namic interaction between bone formation and resorption. Initial
PTH-mediatedboneformationgainsareeventuallymitigatedbya
reciprocal increase in resorption. The period where formation ex-
ceeds resorption defines the “anabolic widow” in which PTH
treatment is most effective and usually lasts approximately 1 year
[47]. To enlarge this anabolic window, combination therapy that
includes bisphosphonates to decrease resorption is often recom-
mended [48]. Thus, the use of bisphosphonates could potentially
blunt the increased osteoclast activity observed after systemic
MSC transplantation and realize more dramatic improvements
in trabecular bone formation.
Transplanted MSCsare capable of long-term, albeit low-level,
engraftment to endosteal bone and bone marrow in Sca-12/2
mice, whereas engraftment in the lungs is three orders of magni-
tude higher than in the bone/bone marrow of recipient mice.
Passive entrapment of donor cells within the vasculature cannot
be ruled out because we did not determine whether the cells
extravasated; however, the length of donor cell residency sug-
gests engraftment. Murine bone marrow MSCs are exceedingly
rare, with a frequency of 3 per million cells reported in BALB/c
mice [32]; thus, comparable presence of donor MSCs within the
recipient bone cellularity represents a significant contribution.
Rare engraftment has been documented in other long-term
MSC tracking studies that show similar therapeutic effect
[49]. Potentially, donor MSCs could have differentiated into os-
teoblasts and subsequently matured into osteocytes. Osteo-
cytes are known to survive for years within bone and are
considered to play a major role in overall bone homeostasis
[50]. Thus, a small number of donor-derived osteocytes could
make significant contribution to relief of Sca-12/2 osteopenia.
Donor MSCs were also detected in the lungs of recipient mice
24 weeks after transplant. Although not surprising that MSCs
lodged within the lungs during short-term cell transplant exper-
iments, it was interesting that they remained for an extended pe-
riod of time. Transplanted MSCs in the lung are known to secrete
therapeutic factors [33]. Thus, we cannot rule out the possibility
that donor MSCs present in the lungs of Sca-12/2 mice may con-
tribute to the therapeutic effect that we observed; however, we
demonstrated that secretion of M-CSF by lung MSCs does not un-
derlie the observed increased osteoclastogenesis in transplanted
mice.Inaddition,weinvestigatedwhetherdonorMSCspresentin
either the lung or bone marrow were acting via RANKL secretion
to increase osteoclastogenesis. Interestingly, RANKL was not ele-
vated in MSC-transplanted animals, suggesting another mecha-
nism of action. However, RANKL is presented in both secreted
andmembrane-boundformspresentonthesurfaceofosteocytes
and osteoblasts, with the latter displaying much higher osteoclas-
tic activity [51]. Our analysis of transplanted mouse plasma could
only detect the secreted form of RANKL; hence, upregulation of
membrane-bound RANKL expression in treated animals could
cause the increase in osteoclastogenesis.
Recently, it was found that a Sca-1-positive MSC population
with a similar surface profile to the MSCs used in this study
(Sca-1+CD29+CD452CD11b2) is recruited to bone-remodeling
sites, leading to bone formation. This action was mediated by
the release of active transforming growth factor b (TGF-b1) from
bone by osteoclastic catabolism and was essential in coupling re-
sorption to formation [52, 53]. Sca-1 has been shown to suppress
the accessibility of the TGF-b receptor complex to ligand binding
[54]. Therefore, any TGF-b-mediated chemotaxis to sites of
bone remodeling could be lost because of unabated TGF-b sig-
naling in Sca-12/2 MSCs, uncoupling the bone-remodeling pro-
cess. Perhaps transplanted Sca-1+ MSCs were capable of proper
recruitment to bone-remodeling sites, enabling proper initia-
tion or maintenance of bone formation, or proper coupling with
osteoclasts.
Aside from cytokine and growth factor-mediated paracrine
effects elicited by MSCs, recent evidence suggests that MSCs
can elicit effects through vesicle-mediated transport of various
proteins and RNAs[55].Oneparticular studydocumented pheno-
typic correction of secondary osteoporosis in a murine model
of lupus (Fas deficient MLR/lpr mice) via systemic WT MSC
Kiernan, Hu, Grynpas et al.
691
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 transplant. TheauthorsconcludedthatFaswasdonatedtothebone
marrow MSCs of MLR/lpr MSCs through vesicle transfer, which initi-
atedsignalingeventsthatimprovedlong-termMLR/lprbonemarrow
MSC function [56]. Sca-1 is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored
lipidraft-associatedproteinthathasbeenimplicatedinthedisruption
of broad Src kinase signaling [57], as well as inhibition of TGF-b [54]
and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor g (PPARg) signaling
[58].Wehavepreviouslyobserved high levelsof Sca-1 protein within
cell vesicles of wild-type mouse MSCs (J. Kiernan and W.L. Stanford,
unpublisheddata).Itwillbeinterestingtotestwhetherasimilarmech-
anism occurs in our transplant model, with Sca-1 being transferred via
vesicles from donor Sca-1+/+ MSCs to tissue-resident Sca-12/2 MSCs
(or other target cells) in transplanted mice, improving their function.
It has been demonstrated that culture expanded MSCs (both
humanandrodent)exhibitpoorhoming tothebonemarrow[19],
apparently because of large size [20] and inappropriate homing
receptors [21, 59, 60]. In addition, efforts to modify the surface
profile of MSCs to increase vascular attachment and homing have
been reported, although it is unclear whether such strategies are
amenable to clinical use [21, 60, 61]. Furthermore, our results
demonstrate that such manipulation may not be necessary,
andourminimallyexpandedMSCs(passage1)highlightthe utility
of limited in vitro expansion.
CONCLUSION
Asafirststep toassess thecapacity ofMSCstotreat osteoporosis,
weaskedwhethertransplantedMSCscouldmaintainresidencein
the bone marrow long-term after intravenous transplantation
and prevent the initiation of osteopenic pathologies in the Sca-
12/2 mouse model of age-related osteoporosis. We show that
unmodified, low-passage MSCs are indeed capable of long-term
bone marrow engraftment. The MSC-transplanted Sca-12/2
mice demonstrated increased bone quality and normal tra-
becular connectivity and anisotropy, suggesting that low-level
engraftment of a single bolus of MSCs is sufficient to blunt the de-
velopment of osteopenic and osteoporotic phenotypes for at
least 24 weeks. Given the numerous ongoing clinical trials utilizing
MSCs, we suggest that ancillary studies should be added to these
clinical trials to determine whether transplantation of MSCs
increase bone remodeling and improve bone health in the
MSC-treated patients. These ancillary studies, or subsequent
dedicated clinical trials, could determine whether age-related
osteoporosis—a common, debilitating, and costly disease—
could be treated by MSC transplantation. If MSC-mediated im-
provements in bone health and microarchitectural competence
lead to fewer osteoporotic fractures in humans, this would em-
phasize clinical relevance of addressing bone health, turnover,
and form, along with bone volume and density, in age-related
osteoporosis treatment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Drs. Christopher Yip, Bernhard Ganss, Andrey Shukalyuk,
and Elnaz Ajami for helpful discussion. The research was sup-
ported by a training fellowship from the Canadian Institute
of Heath Research, Training Program in Regenerative Medicine
(J.K.); Canadian Institutes of Health Research Grant FRN 62788
(to W.L.S.); and Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Coun-
cil of Canada Grant RGPIN 293170-11 (to W.L.S.). W.L.S. is sup-
ported by the Canada Research Chair in Integrative Stem Cell
Biology.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.K.: conception and design, collection and/or assembly of data,
data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing; S.H. and
M.D.G.: collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis and in-
terpretation; J.E.D.: conception and design, data analysis and in-
terpretation, manuscript writing; W.L.S.: conception and design,
financial support, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript
writing, final approval of manuscript.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors indicated no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Thompson D. On Growth and Form. New
York, NY: Macmillan Co., 1945:1116.
2
Wolff J. Das gesetz der transformation der
knochen. Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift
1892;19:1222–1224.
3
Hodgskinson R, Currey J. The effect of var-
iation in structure on the Young’s modulus of
cancellous bone: A comparison of human and
non-human material. Proc Inst Mech Eng H
1990;204:115–121.
4
Goulet RW, Goldstein SA, Ciarelli MJ
et al. The relationship between the struc-
tural and orthogonal compressive proper-
ties of trabecular bone. J Biomech 1994;27:
375–389.
5
ManolagasSC,ParfittAM.Whatoldmeansto
bone. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2010;21:
369–374.
6
Leslie WD, Morin SN. Osteoporosis epide-
miology 2013: Implications for diagnosis, risk
assessment,andtreatment.Curr OpinRheuma-
tol 2014;26:440–446.
7
Bellantuono I, Aldahmash A, Kassem M.
Aging of marrow stromal (skeletal) stem cells
and their contribution to age-related bone loss.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2009;1792:364–370.
8
Muschler GF, Nitto H, Boehm CA, Easley
KA. Age- and gender-related changes in the cel-
lularity of human bone marrow and the preva-
lence of osteoblastic progenitors. J Orthop Res
2001;19:117–125.
9
Burr DB. Bone material properties and
mineral matrix contributions to fracture risk
orageinwomenandmen.JMusculoskeletNeu-
ronal Interact 2002;2:201–204.
10
FriedensteinAJ.Osteogenicstemcellsinthe
bone marrow. In: Heersche JNM, Kanis JA, eds.
Bone and Mineral Research. Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: Elsevier Science Publishers, 1990.
11
Prockop DJ. “Stemness” does not explain
the repair of many tissues by mesenchymal
stem/multipotent stromal cells (MSCs). Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2007;82:241–243.
12
Steinert AF, Rackwitz L, Gilbert F et al.
Concise review: The clinical application of mes-
enchymal stem cells for musculoskeletal regen-
eration: current status and perspectives. STEM
CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2012;1:237–247.
13
Horwitz EM, Gordon PL, Koo WKK et al.
Isolated allogeneic bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal cells engraft and stimulate growth
in children with osteogenesis imperfecta: Im-
plications for cell therapy of bone. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2002;99:8932–8937.
14
Bianco P, Cao X, Frenette PS et al. The
meaning, the sense and the significance: Trans-
latingthe science of mesenchymal stem cells in-
to medicine. Nat Med 2013;19:35–42.
15
Sacchetti B, Funari A, Michienzi S et al.
Self-renewing osteoprogenitors in bone mar-
row sinusoids can organize a hematopoietic mi-
croenvironment. Cell 2007;131:324–336.
16
M´
endez-Ferrer S, Michurina TV, Ferraro
F et al. Mesenchymal and haematopoietic stem
cells form a unique bone marrow niche. Nature
2010;466:829–834.
17
Chan CKF, Seo EY, Chen JY et al. Identifi-
cation and specification of the mouse skeletal
stem cell. Cell 2015;160:285–298.
18
Worthley DL, Churchill M, Compton JT
et al. Gremlin 1 identifies a skeletal stem cell
with bone, cartilage, and reticular stromal po-
tential. Cell 2015;160:269–284.
19
Barbash IM, Chouraqui P, Baron J et al.
Systemic delivery of bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells to the infarcted
692
MSC Transplantation Prevents Bone Loss
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 myocardium: Feasibility, cell migration, and
body distribution. Circulation 2003;108:
863–868.
20
Toma C, Wagner WR, Bowry S et al. Fate
of culture-expanded mesenchymal stem cells in
the microvasculature: In vivo observations of
cell kinetics. Circ Res 2009;104:398–402.
21
Sackstein R, Merzaban JS, Cain DW et al.
Ex vivo glycan engineering of CD44 programs
human multipotent mesenchymal stromal cell
trafficking to bone. Nat Med 2008;14:181–187.
22
Ichioka N, Inaba M, Kushida T et al.
Prevention of senile osteoporosis in SAMP6
mice by intrabone marrow injection of alloge-
neic bone marrow cells. STEM CELLS 2002;20:
542–551.
23
Cho SW, Sun HJ, Yang J-Y et al. Transplan-
tation of mesenchymal stem cells overex-
pressing RANK-Fc or CXCR4 prevents bone
loss in ovariectomized mice. Mol Ther 2009;
17:1979–1987.
24
GuanM,YaoW,LiuRetal.Directingmes-
enchymal stem cells to bone to augment bone
formation and increase bone mass. Nat Med
2012;18:456–462.
25
BonyadiM,WaldmanSD,LiuDetal.Mes-
enchymal progenitor self-renewal deficiency
leads to age-dependent osteoporosis in Sca-
1/Ly-6A null mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2003;100:5840–5845.
26
Holmes C, Khan TS, Owen C et al. Longi-
tudinal analysis of mesenchymal progenitors
and bone quality in the stem cell antigen-1-
null osteoporotic mouse. J Bone Miner Res
2007;22:1373–1386.
27
Goldstein SA, Goulet R, McCubbrey D.
Measurement and significance of three-
dimensional architecture to the mechanical
integrity of trabecular bone. Calcif Tissue Int
1993;53:S127–S132; discussion S132–S133.
28
Short BJ, Brouard N, Simmons PJ. Pro-
spective isolation of mesenchymal stem cells
from mouse compact bone. In: Audet J,
Stanford WL, eds. Stem Cells in Regenera-
tive Medicine. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press,
2009:259–268.
29
Cao X, Wu X, Frassica D et al. Irradiation
induces bone injury by damaging bone marrow
microenvironment for stem cells [published
correction appears in Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2011:108:5921]. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011;
108:1609–1614.
30
Wang H, Cao F, De A et al. Trafficking
mesenchymal stem cell engraftment and differ-
entiation in tumor-bearing mice by biolumines-
cence imaging. STEM CELLS 2009;27:1548–1558.
31
CaoY-A,WagersAJ,BeilhackAetal.Shift-
ing foci of hematopoiesis during reconstitution
from single stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2004;101:221–226.
32
Phinney DG, Kopen G, Isaacson RL et al.
Plastic adherent stromal cells from the bone
marrow of commonly used strains of inbred
mice: variations in yield, growth, and differenti-
ation. J Cell Biochem 1999;72:570–585.
33
Lee RH, Pulin AA, Seo MJ et al. Intrave-
nous hMSCs improve myocardial infarction in
mice because cells embolized in lung are acti-
vated to secrete the anti-inflammatory protein
TSG-6. Cell Stem Cell 2009;5:54–63.
34
Vedi S, Compston JE, Webb A et al. Histo-
morphometric analysis of dynamic parameters
of trabecular bone formation in the iliac crest of
normal British subjects. Metab Bone Dis Relat
Res 1983–1984;5:69–74.
35
Arlot M, Edouard C, Meunier PJ et al. Im-
paired osteoblast function in osteoporosis:
Comparison between calcium balance and dy-
namic histomorphometry. Br Med J (Clin Res
Ed) 1984;289:517–520.
36
H¨
olzerA, PietschmannMF,R¨
oslCetal.The
interrelation of trabecular microstructural param-
eters of the greater tubercle measured for differ-
ent species. J Orthop Res 2012;30:429–434.
37
Jiang Y, Zhao J, Liao E-Y et al. Application
ofmicro-CTassessmentof3-Dbonemicrostruc-
ture in preclinical and clinical studies. J Bone
Miner Metab 2005;23(suppl):122–131.
38
Halloran BP, Ferguson VL, Simske SJ et al.
Changes in bone structure and mass with ad-
vancingageinthe maleC57BL/6Jmouse.J Bone
Miner Res 2002;17:1044–1050.
39
Sarugaser R, Hanoun L, Keating A et al.
Human mesenchymal stem cells self-renew
and differentiate according to a deterministic
hierarchy. PLoS One 2009;4:e6498.
40
Kark LR, Karp JM, Davies JE. Platelet
releasate increases the proliferation and migra-
tion of bone marrow-derived cells cultured un-
der osteogenic conditions. Clin Oral Implants
Res 2006;17:321–327.
41
Karp JM, Tanaka TS, Zohar R et al. Throm-
bin mediated migration of osteogenic cells.
Bone 2005;37:337–348.
42
Otsuru S, Gordon PL, Shimono K et al.
Transplanted bone marrow mononuclear cells
and MSCs impart clinical benefit to children
with osteogenesis imperfecta through different
mechanisms. Blood 2012;120:1933–1941.
43
Seref-Ferlengez Z, Kennedy OD, Schaffler
MB. Bone microdamage, remodeling and bone
fragility: How much damage is too much dam-
age? BoneKEy Rep 2015;4:644.
44
Turner CH. Biomechanics of bone: Deter-
minants of skeletal fragility and bone quality.
Osteoporos Int 2002;13:97–104.
45
Majumdar S, Genant HK, Grampp S et al.
Correlation of trabecular bone structure with
age, bone mineral density, and osteoporotic
status: In vivo studies in the distal radius using
high resolution magnetic resonance imaging. J
Bone Miner Res 1997;12:111–118.
46
Ding M, Hvid I. Quantification of age-
related changes in the structure model type
and trabecular thickness of humantibial cancel-
lous bone. Bone 2000;26:291–295.
47
Canalis E, Giustina A, Bilezikian JP. Mech-
anismsofanabolictherapiesforosteoporosis.N
Engl J Med 2007;357:905–916.
48
Cosman F. Anabolic and antiremodeling-
mediated therapy for osteoporosis: Combina-
tionandsequentialapproaches.CurrOsteoporos
Rep 2014;12:385–395.
49
Karp JM, Leng Teo GS. Mesenchymal
stem cell homing: The devil is in the details. Cell
Stem Cell 2009;4:206–216.
50
Bonewald LF. The amazing osteocyte. J
Bone Miner Res 2011;26:229–238.
51
Nakashima T, Kobayashi Y, Yamasaki S
et al. Protein expression and functional differ-
ence of membrane-bound and soluble receptor
activator of NF-kappaB ligand: Modulation of
the expression by osteotropic factors and cyto-
kines.BiochemBiophysResCommun2000;275:
768–775.
52
Wu X, Pang L, Lei W et al. Inhibition of
Sca-1-positive skeletal stem cell recruitment
by alendronate blunts the anabolic effects of
parathyroid hormone on bone remodeling. Cell
Stem Cell 2010;7:571–580.
53
Tang Y, Wu X, Lei W et al. TGF-beta1-
induced migration of bone mesenchymal stem
cells couples bone resorption with formation.
Nat Med 2009;15:757–765.
54
Upadhyay G, Yin Y, Yuan H et al. Stem cell
antigen-1 enhances tumorigenicity by disrup-
tion of growth differentiation factor-10 (GDF10)-
dependent TGF-beta signaling. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2011;108:7820–7825.
55
Rani S, Ryan AE, Griffin MD et al. Mesen-
chymal stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles:
Toward cell-free therapeutic applications. Mol
Ther 2015;23:812–823.
56
Liu S, Liu D, Chen C et al. MSC transplan-
tation improves osteopenia via epigenetic reg-
ulation of Notch signaling in lupus. Cell Metab
2015;22:606–618.
57
Holmes C, Stanford WL. Concise review:
stem cell antigen-1: Expression, function, and
enigma. STEM CELLS 2007;25:1339–1347.
58
Yuan H, Upadhyay G, Yin Y et al. Stem cell
antigen-1 deficiency enhances the chemo-
preventive effect of peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptorg activation. Cancer Prev Res
(Phila) 2012;5:51–60.
59
Wynn RF, Hart CA, Corradi-Perini C
et al. A small proportion of mesenchymal
stem cells strongly expresses functionally ac-
tive CXCR4 receptor capable of promoting mi-
gration to bone marrow. Blood 2004;104:
2643–2645.
60
Sarkar D, Spencer JA, Phillips JA et al.
Engineered cell homing. Blood 2011;118:
e184–e191.
61
Cheng Z, Ou L, Zhou X et al. Targeted mi-
gration of mesenchymal stem cells modified
with CXCR4 gene to infarcted myocardium im-
proves cardiac performance. Mol Ther 2008;
16:571–579.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
Kiernan, Hu, Grynpas et al.
693
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
