 REPORT
◥
MICROBIOTA
Neonatal acquisition of Clostridia
species protects against colonization
by bacterial pathogens
Yun-Gi Kim,1,2*†‡ Kei Sakamoto,1,2* Sang-Uk Seo,1,2§ Joseph M. Pickard,1,2
Merritt G. Gillilland III,3 Nicholas A. Pudlo,4 Matthew Hoostal,3 Xue Li,3
Thomas D. Wang,5 Taylor Feehley,6 Andrew T. Stefka,6 Thomas M. Schmidt,3,4
Eric C. Martens,4 Shinji Fukuda,7,8 Naohiro Inohara,1
Cathryn R. Nagler,6 Gabriel Núñez1,2†
The high susceptibility of neonates to infections has been assumed to be due to
immaturity of the immune system, but the mechanism remains unclear. By colonizing adult
germ-free mice with the cecal contents of neonatal and adult mice, we show that the
neonatal microbiota is unable to prevent colonization by two bacterial pathogens that
cause mortality in neonates. The lack of colonization resistance occurred when
Clostridiales were absent in the neonatal microbiota. Administration of Clostridiales, but
not Bacteroidales, protected neonatal mice from pathogen infection and abrogated
intestinal pathology upon pathogen challenge. Depletion of Clostridiales also abolished
colonization resistance in adult mice. The neonatal bacteria enhanced the ability of
protective Clostridiales to colonize the gut.
N
ewborns and children less than 1 year old
are highly susceptible to frequent infection
by orally acquired bacterial pathogens (1, 2).
Susceptibility to intestinal infections in
neonates has been generally ascribed to
immaturity of the innate and adaptive immune
systems; however, additional factors may play a
role because immune responses to different stimu-
li are highly variable among neonates (3). The
gut microbiota is important to the development
of the immune system (4, 5). For example, gut
microbiota–induced local responses, such as se-
cretory immunoglobulin A, as well as local T
helper 17 cells and regulatory T cells, contrib-
ute to gut homeostasis. Another major attribute
of the microbiota is to protect the host against
colonization by exogenous pathogens, a function
termed “colonization resistance” (4, 6). The gut
microbiota of neonates is less diverse than that
of adult individuals and tends to lack Clostridiales
and Bacteroidales, the dominant taxa found in
the adult intestine (7, 8).
To compare the function of the neonatal and
the adult microbiota in colonization resistance
against pathogens independently of the age of
the host, we colonized age-matched adult germ-
free (GF) mice with the cecal contents of neo-
natal mice or adult (7-week-old) mice and kept
the reconstituted mice in isolators to prevent con-
tamination with exogenous bacteria. Analysis of
the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene of the fecal
microbiota 21 days after reconstitution revealed
that the bacterial composition of adult GF mice
colonized with the microbiota from 4-day-old
mice resembled that of the donor and was
dominated by facultative anaerobes including
Lactobacillaceae but devoid of Clostridiales and
Bacteroidales (Fig. 1A and fig. S1A). The micro-
biota of GF mice reconstituted with feces from
12-day-old mice was dominated by operational
taxonomic units (OTUs) belonging to the En-
terobacteriaceae and Lactobacillaceae families,
and few OTUs belonging to the Lachnospiraceae
family compared with that of 16-day-old and
adult mice (Fig. 1A and fig. S1, A and B). In con-
trast, strict anaerobic bacteria with a large number
of Clostridiales OTUs belonging to Lachnospir-
aceae and Ruminococcaceae families, as well as
Porphyromonadaceae and unclassified Bacteroi-
dales, were prevalent in GF mice colonized with
the cecal contents of 16-day-old or adult mice
(Fig. 1A and fig. S1, A and B).
Consistently, there was a greater diversity in
the microbiota of GF mice reconstituted with
16-day-old and adult mice than in mice colonized
with the cecal contents of 4-day-old and 12-day-old
mice (Fig. 1B). To assess the ability of the different
microbiotas to control pathogen replication in the
intestine in the absence of systemic invasion, we
intragastrically infected reconstituted GF mice
with a Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium
(S. Typhimurium) mutant deficient in the type
III secretion system (T3SS) encoded by Salmonella
pathogenicity island 2 (DspiA), which replicates
normally in the intestine but is deficient in sys-
temic spread (9, 10). We found that ~50% of GF
mice colonized with the microbiota of 4-day-old
mice succumbed to S. Typhimurium infection,
whereas all GF mice colonized with the adult
microbiota survived (Fig. 1C).
The increased mortality of GF mice harbor-
ing a microbiota from 4-day-old mice was as-
sociated with marked intestinal cell damage,
submucosal edema, and inflammatory cell in-
filtrates in the cecum, which were absent in
GF mice colonized with the microbiota of adult
mice (Fig. 1, D and E). Consistent with these
findings, ~80% of 7-day-old mice infected with
S. Typhimurium DspiA succumbed, whereas all
adult mice survived the infection (fig. S2). No-
tably, GF mice colonized with the microbiota
from 4- and 12-day-old mice harbored ~4- to
5-logs-higher pathogen loads in the feces than
mice colonized with the microbiota from 16-day-
old or adult mice (Fig. 1F). To assess the func-
tion of the microbiota in colonization resistance
against another enteric pathogen, we intragas-
trically infected adult GF mice reconstituted
with the microbiota of neonatal and adult mice
with Citrobacter rodentium, a natural pathogen
of mice that is used to model human infections
with enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (11). Con-
sistent with the S. Typhimurium results, GF mice
colonized with microbiota from 4- and 12-day-old
mice were impaired in resisting colonization of
C. rodentium as shown by 6-logs-higher patho-
gen loads in the feces by day 25 to 30 after infec-
tion, in comparison with mice colonized by the
microbiota from 16-day-old or adult mice (Fig.
1G). These results indicate that the gut micro-
biota from neonatal mice are not able to mediate
colonization resistance against S. Typhimurium
and C. rodentium.
We next determined whether the adult micro-
biota can confer colonization resistance to mice
harboring a neonatal microbiota. To assess this,
GF mice colonized with the microbiota of 4-day-old
mice were orally infected with C. rodentium, and
on day 30 after infection the adult microbiota was
transferred to infected mice by cohousing. Notably,
the burden of C. rodentium in GF mice harboring
the day 4 neonatal microbiota declined by ~5 logs
after 5 days and was further reduced by ~6 logs
by day 7 of cohousing with adult mice (Fig. 2A).
These findings suggest that addition of symbiotic
bacteria present in adult mice to the neonatal
microbiota is sufficient for colonization resistance.
We asked next whether depletion of the micro-
biota of adult mice to a state comparable with that
RESEARCH
Kim et al., Science 356, 315–319 (2017)
21 April 2017
1 of 5
1Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 2Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI
48109, USA. 3Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
4Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
5Departments of Biomedical Engineering and Mechanical
Engineering, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 6Department of Pathology and
Committee on Immunology, University of Chicago, Chicago,
IL 60637, USA. 7Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Keio
University, Yamagata, Japan. 8PRESTO, Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan.
*These authors contributed equally to this work. †Corresponding
author. Email: gabriel.nunez@umich.edu (G.N.); yungikim77@
gmail.com (Y.-G.K.) ‡Present address: Division of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Pharmacy, Keio University, 1-5-30 Shibakoen, Minato-ku,
Tokyo 105-8512, Japan. §Present address: Department of Bio-
medical Sciences, Wide River Institute of Immunology, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea.
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 of the neonatal mice would affect colonization
resistance to pathogens. Accordingly, adult mice
were treated with a high dose of vancomycin,
which selectively kills anaerobes, clears Clos-
tridiales and Bacteroidales, and increases the
abundance of facultative anaerobes, including
Enterobacteriaceae and Lactobacillaceae (fig. S3).
Consistently, the microbiota of mice treated with
vancomycin showed less diversity than that of
untreated mice (Fig. 2B). Vancomycin-treated mice
showed increased pathogen colonization after
infection with C. rodentium and harbored ~6-logs-
higher pathogen loads in the feces by day 25 to
30 after infection when compared with untreated
mice (Fig. 2C). Likewise, treatment of adult mice
with vancomycin increased S. Typhimurium colo-
nization in fecal and cecal contents by 4 to 5 logs
(Fig. 2D). In another approach to alter the com-
position of the adult microbiota, we fed adult
mice a lactose- and cellobiose-rich diet for 6 weeks
and assessed the fecal microbiota by 16S rRNA
gene analysis. The composition of the microbiota
in mice fed a lactose- and cellobiose-rich diet re-
sembled that of 4-day-old and 12-day-old mice in
that it was dominated by Erysipelotrichaceae,
Enterobacteriaceae, Verrucomicrobiaceae, Lacto-
bacillaceae, and Bifidobacteriaceae and depleted
of Clostridiales and Bacteroidales (Fig. 2E). No-
tably, adult mice fed the lactose- and cellobiose-rich
diet harbored increased loads of S. Typhimurium
in fecal and cecal contents when compared with
mice fed a conventional diet (Fig. 2F).
The impaired colonization resistance of the
neonatal microbiota against enteric pathogens
is associated with the absence of or reduced num-
bers of Clostridiales and Bacteroidales compared
with the microbiota of 16-day-old or adult mice.
To determine whether Clostridiales or Bacteroi-
dales species are important in mediating colo-
nization resistance, GF mice harboring the
microbiota from 4-day-old mice were gavaged
with a consortium of mouse Clostridia species
[(12) and table S1], with a mixture of four mouse
Bacteroides species, or were left untreated. Notably,
administration of Clostridia, but not Bacteroides,
species restored colonization resistance in the
neonatal microbiota against S. Typhimurium
as determined by analysis of pathogen loads in
fecal or cecal contents (Fig. 3A). Administration
of a second independent consortium of intestinal
Clostridiales also restored colonization resistance,
whereas that of a more complex mixture of 12
mouse strains belonging to the order Bacteroidales
did not, despite efficient colonization after gavage
(fig. S4 and tables S1 and S2). The reduced patho-
gen loads observed after Clostridiales administra-
tion were associated with an increase in the length
of the cecum and colon, indicating diminished
intestinal inflammation, when compared with un-
treated mice or mice gavaged with Bacteroides
(fig. S4). Consistently, S. Typhimurium infection
induced extensive epithelial damage, submucosal
edema, and an inflammatory cell infiltrate in GF
mice harboring the microbiota from 4-day-old
mice in the absence and presence of Bacteroides
species (Fig. 3, B and C). S. Typhimurium in-
fection did not induce any detectable epithelial
damage or inflammatory pathology in GF mice
colonized with the microbiota from 4-day-old
Kim et al., Science 356, 315–319 (2017)
21 April 2017
2 of 5
Fig. 1. The early neonatal microbiota lacks
colonization resistance against enteric path-
ogens. (A) Relative abundance of operational
taxonomic units (OTUs) in fecal samples from
GF mice reconstituted with cecal contents of
4-day-old (N4) (n = 8), 12-day-old (N12) (n = 4),
16-day-old (N16) (n = 4), or 7-week-old (AD) (n =
7) mice. Analysis was performed on day 21 after
reconstitution. Colors correspond to families. Data
are combined from two independent experiments
(n = 2 to 4 in each experiment). (B) Shannon’s
diversity index of fecal samples from GF mice re-
constituted with indicated microbiota. Pooled data
from three independent experiments are shown in
Fig. 1A. ***P < 0.001, Dunnett’s multiple compar-
isons test. Results are means ± SD. (C to E) Age-
and gender-matched adult GF mice reconstituted
with N4 microbiota (M-Neonate) or AD microbiota
(M-Adult) were infected with S.Typhimurium DspiA.
(C) Mouse survival over time after infection of M-
Neonate (n = 16) and M-Adult (n = 11) mice. Data
are from two pooled experiments with n = 5 to 8
mice per group, log-rank test. (D) Representative
histology of hematoxylin and eosin (HE)–stained
cecal sections from infected M-Neonate and M-
Adult mice. Cecal tissue was processed 1 day after
infection. High-power images of marked area are
shown in inset. Scale bars, 100 mm. (E) Histo-
pathological scores of cecal tissue from M-Neonate
and M-Adult mice infected with S.T
yphimurium. Each
dot represents an individual mouse (M-Neonate, n = 8;
M-Adult, n = 5). Data are representative of two
independent experiments. ***P < 0.001, Mann-
Whitney U test. (F) Adult GF mice reconstituted
with indicated microbiota were infected with S.
Typhimurium DspiA (ST). Pathogen loads [colony-
forming units (CFU)/gram] in feces were de-
termined 1 day after infection by plating. Each dot represents an individual mouse. Data are pooled (n = 8) from two independent experiments. ***P <
0.001 versus GF mice, Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. (G) GF mice reconstituted with N4, N12, N16, and AD microbiota were infected with C.
rodentium (CR). CFU/gram of feces were determined on days 1, 3, 6, 12, 18, 24, and 30 after infection. Results are means ± SD and representative of three
independent experiments; n = 4 to 5 per experiment [4-day-old (N4), 12-day-old (N12), 16-day-old (N16), or 7-week-old (AD)]. ***P < 0.001 versus N4,
Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test.
RESEARCH
|
REPORT
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Kim et al., Science 356, 315–319 (2017)
21 April 2017
3 of 5
Fig. 2. Depletion of Clostridiales and Bacteroidales abol-
ishes colonization resistance against bacterial pathogens
in adult mice. (A) GF mice reconstituted with cecal content of
4-day-old mice (N4) were infected with C. rodentium (CR). On day 30
after infection, the mice were cohoused (red) or not cohoused (blue)
with conventionally raised mice (1:1). Pathogen loads (CFU/gram
of feces) were determined on indicated days after infection. Each
dot represents an individual mouse (n = 5 per group). Data are
representative of two independent experiments. ***P < 0.001 versus
day 0, Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. (B) Shannon’s diversity
index of fecal samples from mice before and after treatment with
vancomycin (Van). Results are means ± SD. ***P < 0.001, Dunnett’s
multiple comparisons test. (C) Untreated or vancomycin-treated
(Van) mice were infected with C. rodentium (CR). Pathogen loads
(CFU/gram) in feces were determined on days 1, 6, 12, 18, 24, and 30 after
infection. Results are means ± SD and representative of two experiments (n = 5
per group). ***P < 0.001 versus untreated, Sidak’s multiple comparisons test.
(D) Untreated or vancomycin-treated (Van) mice were infected with S.T
yphimurium
DspiA (ST). Pathogen loads in fecal (left) and cecal (right) contents were deter-
mined on day 1 after infection. Each dot represents an individual mouse (n = 8
per group). Data are pooled from two independent experiments. ***P < 0.001, Mann-
Whitney U test. (E) Relative abundance of OTUs in fecal samples from adult mice
fed a normal diet (Normal) or lactose-cellobiose–rich (LC) diet for 21 days. Colors
correspond to families. (F) Adult mice were fed a normal or LC diet for 21 days and
then were infected with S.T
yphimurium DspiA (ST). Pathogen loads (CFU/gram) in
fecal and cecal contents were determined on day 1 after infection. Each dot rep-
resents an individual mouse (n = 7 per group). Data are pooled from two inde-
pendent experiments (n = 3 to 4 per group). ***P < 0.001, Mann-Whitney U test.
Fig. 3. Administration of
Clostridia, but not
Bacteroides, restores
colonization resistance to
bacterial pathogens in the
gut. (A to D) Adult GF mice
reconstituted with microbiota
of 4-day-old mice (N4, blue),
N4 plus four Bacteroides
species [Bac: B. acidifaciens,
B. thetaiotaomicron,B. vulgatus,
and B. uniformis) (N4+Bac,
orange)], or N4 plus Clostridia
consortium (N4+CL-UC, red)
were infected with S.T
yphimurium
DspiA (ST) and analyzed 1 day
after infection. (A) Pathogen
loads (CFU/gram) in fecal and
cecal contents were determined
by plating. Each dot represents
an individual mouse (N4, n = 9;
N4+Bac, n = 8; N4+CL-UC, n =
13). Data are pooled from three independent experiments. ***P < 0.001 versus
N4, Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. (B) Representative images of HE-
stained cecal sections from N4, N4+Bac, and N4+CL-UC mice. Cecal tissue was
processed 1 day after infection. Scale bars, 100 mm. (C) Pathology scores of
cecal tissue from GF reconstituted mice. Each dot represents an individual
mouse (N4, n = 5; N4+Bac, n = 7; N4+CL-UC, n = 10). Data are pooled from
three independent experiments. ***P < 0.001; N.S., not significant; Dunnett’s
multiple comparisons test. (D) Adult GF mice (light blue) or GF mice re-
constituted with 4-day-old microbiota (N4, dark blue) or N4 plus Clostridia
consortium (N4+CL-UC, red) were infected with C. rodentium (CR). CFU/gram
of feces were determined on days 1, 6, 12, 18, 24, and 30 after infection. Results
are means ± SD and representative of two experiments (n = 4 per group).
***P < 0.001 versus GF mice, Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. (E) GF mice
reconstituted with N4 microbiota were infected with C. rodentium (CR). On day
30 after infection, the mice were cohoused with GF mice (GF, light blue) or GF
mice reconstituted with four Bacteroides species (Bac, orange) or Clostridia
consortium (CL-UC, red). CFU/gram of feces were determined in feces on days
0, 1, 3, 5, 7
, and 21 after cohousing. Each dot represents an individual mouse (GF,
light blue; n = 7), (Bac, dark blue; n = 8) and (CL-UC, red; n = 13). Data are
pooled from three independent experiments. *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001 versus
control, Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. (F) T
en-day-old littermate mice
were left untreated (blue) or given Clostridia consortium (red) by gavage and
then infected with S.T
yphimurium DspiA (ST). Mouse survival was monitored over
time after infection (n = 19 per treatment). P = 0.0054 by log-rank test.
RESEARCH
|
REPORT
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 mice and gavaged with Clostridia (Fig. 3, B and
C). Similarly to observations on S. Typhimurium,
the pathogen loads in the feces of GF mice, or
of GF mice previously reconstituted with the
microbiota of 4-day-old mice and then orally
infected with C. rodentium, were reduced by 4
to 5 logs after administration of Clostridia (Fig.
3, D and E). No loss of C. rodentium was seen
when a mixture of Bacteroides species was given
to GF mice reconstituted with the microbiota
of neonatal mice (Fig. 3, D and E).
We next asked whether host immunity plays
a role in Clostridia-mediated colonization re-
sistance against S. Typhimurium infection in the
intestine. The microbiota from 4-day-old mice
were transferred to wild-type, mutant GF mice
deficient in Myd88/Trif, two essential adaptors
for signaling via the Toll-like/interleukin-1 (IL-1)/
IL-18 receptor family, or Rag1−/− GF mice that
are devoid of B and T cells. All these recon-
stituted GF mice exhibited unimpaired coloniza-
tion resistance against S. Typhimurium infection
upon intragastric administration of Clostridia
compared with GF mice that were not gavaged
with Clostridia (fig. S5). Thus, colonization re-
sistance against S. Typhimurium in the intestine
does not require host stimulation via innate
MyD88/Trif-regulated pathways or adaptive im-
munity. Certain antimicrobial proteins, including
regenerating islet–derived 3 beta (Reg3b) and IL-
22–induced Reg3g, have been associated with
colonization resistance to pathogens in some sys-
tems (13). Notably, the expression of Reg3b, Reg3g,
Kim et al., Science 356, 315–319 (2017)
21 April 2017
4 of 5
Fig. 4. The neonatal microbiota in-
creases the abundance of protective
Clostridia in the gut. (A) Analysis of the
fecal microbiota from GF mice gavaged
with Clostridia consortium (CL-UC) (blue,
n = 6) or GF mice previously reconstituted
with the cecal microbiota of 4-day-old mice
and then gavaged with Clostridia consor-
tium (N4+CL-UC; red, n = 9).The presence
of Clostridium cluster XIVa in fecal DNA
was quantitated over time by qPCR. Results were normalized to the amounts
of Clostridium cluster XIVa DNA in fecal samples from mice bearing the
Clostridia consortium. Each dot represents an individual mouse. Data are
pooled from three independent experiments. ***P < 0.001 versus control, Sidak’s
multiple comparisons test. (B) Analysis of the fecal microbiota from GF mice
gavaged with the Clostridia consortium (CL-UC, n = 5) or GF mice pre-
viously reconstituted with mouse E. coli (Ec+CL-UC, n = 6) or B. acidifaciens
(Bac+CL-UC, n = 6). The presence of Clostridium cluster XIVa in fecal DNA
was quantified by qPCR. Results were normalized to the amounts of
Clostridium cluster XIVa DNA in fecal samples of Clostridia consortium. Each
dot represents an individual mouse. Data are pooled from two independent
experiments. ***P < 0.001 versus Control, Sidak’s multiple comparisons test.
(C) Heat-map analysis of top 33 metabolites in fecal samples from GF or GF
mice reconstituted with E. coli (EC), B. acidifaciens (Bac), or Clostridia con-
sortium (CL). (D) Succinate concentration in fecal samples from GF or GF mice
reconstituted with cecal contents of 4-day-old (N4), 12-day-old (N12), 16-day-
old (N16), or 7-week-old (AD) mice. Results are means ± SD and representative
of two experiments (n = 4 to 6 per group). ***P < 0.001 versus GF mice,
Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. (E) Succinate concentration in fecal sam-
ples from GF or GF mice reconstituted with E. coli (EC), L. murinus (LAC),
B. acidifaciens (Bac), or Clostridia consortium (CL-UC). Results are means ±
SD and representative of two experiments (n = 4 to 8 per group). *P < 0.05,
***P < 0.001 versus GF mice, Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. (F) Fecal
microbiota from GF mice reconstituted with Clostridia consortium was
gavaged into untreated GF mice (Control) or mice treated with 100 mM
succinate (Suc), 50 mM lactate (Lac), or 100 mM acetate (Ace) for 7 days.
Gavage of Clostridia consortium was performed on day 7 after treatment, and
metabolite administration was continued for another 14 days.The presence of
Clostridium cluster XIVa in fecal DNA was monitored over time by qPCR. Each
dot represents an individual mouse (n = 6 per group). Data pooled from two
independent experiments. ***P < 0.001 versus Control, Sidak’s multiple
comparisons test. (G) Untreated GF mice (Control) or GF mice treated with
succinate (Suc) for 7 days were given Clostridia consortium by gavage. The
mice were then infected with S.Typhimurium DspiA (ST), and pathogen loads
in fecal and cecal contents were determined 1 day after infection by plating.
Each dot represents an individual mouse (Untreated, n = 9; Suc, n = 10). Data
are pooled from three independent experiments. ***P < 0.001, Mann-Whitney
U test. (H) GF mice were given regular drinking water (Mock) or treated with
100 mM succinate (Suc) in the drinking water for 7 days, and rectal oxygen
concentration was determined. Each dot represents a mean oxygen concen-
tration from two to four measurements for each mouse (n = 4). Data from
three combined experiments. *P < 0.05, Mann-Whitney U test.
RESEARCH
|
REPORT
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and Il6, but not Muc2 or Tnfa, was higher in
the cecum of GF mice colonized with the adult
microbiota than in GF mice colonized with the
microbiota of 4-day-old mice (fig. S6). However,
the expression of Reg3b and Reg3g was reduced
in Myd88−/−Ticam−/− GF mice colonized with the
adult microbiota (fig. S6). Likewise, the expression
of Il22, a cytokine involved in the regulation of
intestinal barrier function and Reg3g (14), was
reduced in the intestine of GF mice colonized with
the microbiota of 4-day-old mice compared with
that of adult mice (fig. S6). However, treatment
with a neutralizing antibody to IL-22 to inhibit
IL-22–mediated protection (15) neither affected
S. Typhimurium loads in fecal and cecal contents
nor influenced colon length in infected GF mice
reconstituted with the microbiota of adult mice
(fig. S7).
To determine whether Clostridia protected
neonatal mice from pathogen challenge, 10-day-old
mice were gavaged with the Clostridia consortium
or left untreated and then intragastrically infected
with the S. Typhimurium DspiA mutant. Nota-
bly, ~50% of the neonatal mice inoculated with
S. Typhimurium succumbed to infection, whereas
>90% of the neonatal mice previously gavaged
with Clostridia survived (Fig. 3F). Collectively,
these results indicate that Clostridia mediate colo-
nization resistance against S. Typhimurium and
C. rodentium via a mechanism that is indepen-
dent of Myd88, Trif, B, and T cells. Furthermore,
administration of Clostridiaprotects neonatalmice
from mortality induced by pathogen challenge.
With the exception of a few Lachnospiraceae
OTUs, which are present in the microbiota of
12-day-old mice, taxa in the order of Clostridiales
are absent from the microbiota of 4-day-old and
12-day-old mice but robustly colonize the intes-
tine between days 12 and 16 of neonatal life, the
time frame associated with the acquisition of
colonization resistance against pathogens. To as-
sess whether neonatal bacteria promote the colo-
nization of Clostridia species, GF mice were first
colonized with the microbiota from 4-day-old
mice, and 7 days later they were gavaged with
the Clostridia consortium. The abundance of
Clostridium IV and XIVa clusters, which con-
stitute the predominant Clostridia in the con-
sortium assessed by quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR), was low after intragastric
gavage to GF mice (Fig. 4A and fig. S8A). In the
presence of the 4-day-old neonatal microbiota,
the intestinal colonization of Clostridia increased
by ~6 logs (Fig. 4A and fig. S8A). Thus, coloniza-
tion of Clostridia is reduced in the absence of
neonatal bacteria. However, if GF mice were
reconstituted with the microbiota of 4-day-old
mice, then subsequent intragastric administra-
tion of Clostridia induced robust colonization
resistance against S. Typhimurium (fig. S9). Like-
wise, preinoculation of GF mice with Lactobacillus
murinus or E. coli, species that are present in
4- and 12-day-old neonatal microbiota, respec-
tively, or with Bacteroides acidifaciens whose
colonization coincides with robust acquisition
of Clostridiales in the microbiota of 16-day-old
mice, enhanced the colonization of Clostridia by
5 to 6 logs (Fig. 4B and fig. S8B).
To assess whether bacteria-derived metabo-
lites regulate intestinal colonization by Clostridia,
we performed unbiased capillary electrophoresis–
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (CE-TOFMS)–
based metabolome analysis of the cecal contents
of GF mice and GF mice colonized with dom-
inant bacterial species present in the ceca of
neonatal and adult mice. The metabolome anal-
ysis revealed that amounts of succinate were very
low in the cecal contents of GF mice. Succinate
levels were also low in GF mice reconstituted
with Clostridia, slightly higher in GF mice col-
onized with E. coli, and significantly elevated in
GF colonized with Bacteroides when compared
with GF mice (Fig. 4, C and D). Succinate levels
were increased in GF mice reconstituted with the
microbiota of 12- and 16-day-old mice, but not in
those given microbiota of 4-day-old mice or given
lactobacilli (Fig. 4, D and E), indicating that an
increase in succinate levels is not required for
Clostridia colonization. Administration of succi-
nate, but not acetate or lactate, in drinking water
did, however, enhance colonization of Clostridia
belonging to the dominant IV and XIVa clusters
by 4 to 5 logs (Fig. 4F and fig. S8C). Consistent
with these results, succinate in the drinking water
reduced the intestinal loads of S. Typhimurium
DspiA by ~100-fold in GF mice given the
Clostridia consortium by gavage (Fig. 4G). Aero-
bic and facultative anaerobic bacteria have been
suggested to consume oxygen in the distal intes-
tine, which then promotes the colonization of
strict anaerobes (16). We found that succinate
administration did reduce the concentration of
oxygen in the intestine of GF mice (Fig. 4H).
Together, these results indicate that the neo-
natal microbiota contribute to the acquisition
of protective Clostridia before weaning and is a
critical event that prevents the growth of enteric
pathogens in the gut early in life.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1.
C. F. Lanata et al., PLOS ONE 8, e72788 (2013).
2.
M. PrabhuDas et al., Nat. Immunol. 12, 189–194
(2011).
3.
T. R. Kollmann, O. Levy, R. R. Montgomery, S. Goriely,
Immunity 37, 771–783 (2012).
4.
N. Kamada, S. U. Seo, G. Y. Chen, G. Núñez, Nat. Rev. Immunol.
13, 321–335 (2013).
5.
T. Tanoue, K. Atarashi, K. Honda, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16,
295–309 (2016).
6.
P. T. McKenney, E. G. Pamer, Cell 163, 1326–1332 (2015).
7.
M. Hasegawa et al., Infect. Immun. 78, 639–650 (2010).
8.
C. Palmer, E. M. Bik, D. B. DiGiulio, D. A. Relman, P. O. Brown,
PLOS Biol. 5, e177 (2007).
9.
R. Figueira, D. W. Holden, Microbiology 158, 1147–1161 (2012).
10. H. Ochman, F. C. Soncini, F. Solomon, E. A. Groisman, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93, 7800–7804 (1996).
11. D. Borenshtein, M. E. McBee, D. B. Schauer, Curr. Opin.
Gastroenterol. 24, 32–37 (2008).
12. A. T. Stefka et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 13145–13150 (2014).
13. M. C. Abt et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 327ra25 (2016).
14. O. B. Parks, D. A. Pociask, Z. Hodzic, J. K. Kolls, M. Good,
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 3, 85 (2016).
15. Y. Zheng et al., Nat. Med. 14, 282–289 (2008).
16. M. G. Espey, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 55, 130–140 (2013).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank L. Haynes for animal husbandry, D. Peterson for
mouse strains, Genentech for antibody to IL-22, G. Chen and
M. Zeng for critical reading of the manuscript, and the
Germ-Free Animal Core and the Host Microbiome Initiative
at the University of Michigan Medical School for support.
This work was supported by NIH grants DK095782 and DK091191
(G.N.) and AI106302 (C.R.N.); a Career Development
Award from the Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America
(Y.-G.K.); fellowships from the Japanese Society for the
Promotion of Science, Kanae Foundation for the Promotion of
Medical Science, and Mishima Kaiun Memorial Foundation
(K.S.); NIH training grant T32DK094775 (J.M.P.); and Grant-in-Aid for
Scientific Research on Innovative Areas “Stem Cell Aging and
Disease” from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and
Technology (15H01522) and the Japan Science and Technology
Agency PRESTO (S.F.). All data and code to understand and assess
the conclusions of this research are available in the main text,
supplementary material, and from the following repositories:
Microbiota data files are available at www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/
378417 in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
Sequence Read Archive under BioProject PRJNA378417 (SRA:
SRP101509), and the metabolomics data is available from the
Metabolomics Workbench at www.metabolomicsworkbench.org/data/
DRCCMetadata.php?Mode=Study&StudyID=ST000570&StudyType=
MS&ResultType=1 (accession number ST000570; Project
PR000418). Clostridia consortium from the University of Chicago
(CL-UC) is available from the University of Chicago under a material
transfer agreement with the University of Chicago. Y.-G.K. and
G.N. conceived and designed experiments. Y.-G.K. and K.S. conducted
most of the experiments, with help from S.-U.S., J.M.P., N.A.P., M.H.,
and X.L. S.F. performed metabolome analysis. T.M.S., E.C.M., T.D.W.,
and C.R.N. provided advice, discussion, and critical materials. T.F.,
A.T.S., and J.M.P. provided critical materials. Y.-G.K., K.S., S.F., N.I.,
and G.N. analyzed the data. Y.-G.K., K.S., and G.N. wrote the
manuscript, with contributions from all authors. C.R.N. is president and
cofounder of ClostraBio, Inc., a company developing microbiome-
modulating therapeutics for the treatment of food allergies. Y.-G.K.,
C.R.N., and G.N. are coinventors on patent application 62/442,527,
submitted by the University of Chicago and the University of Michigan,
which is related to the treatment of enteric disease with Clostridia.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencemag.org/content/356/6335/315/suppl/DC1
Material and Methods
Figs. S1 to S9
References (17–19)
23 May 2016; accepted 28 March 2017
10.1126/science.aag2029
Kim et al., Science 356, 315–319 (2017)
21 April 2017
5 of 5
RESEARCH
|
REPORT
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 pathogens
 species protects against colonization by bacterial
Clostridia
Neonatal acquisition of 
Cathryn R. Nagler and Gabriel Núñez
Inohara,
Li, Thomas D. Wang, Taylor Feehley, Andrew T. Stefka, Thomas M. Schmidt, Eric C. Martens, Shinji Fukuda, Naohiro 
Yun-Gi Kim, Kei Sakamoto, Sang-Uk Seo, Joseph M. Pickard, Merritt G. Gillilland III, Nicholas A. Pudlo, Matthew Hoostal, Xue
DOI: 10.1126/science.aag2029
 (6335), 315-319.
356
Science 
, this issue p. 315
Science
Salmonella typhimurium.
excludes 
drinking water. Succinate favors colonization of the neonatal gut by cluster IV and XIVa clostridia and concomitantly 
against diarrhea-causing pathogens. The protective effect is enhanced by giving mice the metabolite succinate in
found that members of the group of strictly anaerobic, spore-forming bacteria known as clostridia protect neonatal mice 
et al.
microbiota is not fully established in infants. How the microbiota might protect against pathogens is unclear. Kim 
Intestinal infections are a common problem for young animals. One explanation is that the protective gut
Gut anaerobes protect against pathogen invasion
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/356/6335/315
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/04/20/356.6335.315.DC1
REFERENCES
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/356/6335/315#BIBL
This article cites 19 articles, 5 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science 
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
