 1
ScIeNTIFIc RePoRtS |  (2018) 8:4344  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22691-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Nutritionally recommended food 
for semi- to strict vegetarian diets 
based on large-scale nutrient 
composition data
Seunghyeon Kim1,2,3, Michael F. Fenech4 & Pan-Jun Kim1,2,5,6
Diet design for vegetarian health is challenging due to the limited food repertoire of vegetarians. This 
challenge can be partially overcome by quantitative, data-driven approaches that utilise massive 
nutritional information collected for many different foods. Based on large-scale data of foods’ nutrient 
compositions, the recent concept of nutritional fitness helps quantify a nutrient balance within each 
food with regard to satisfying daily nutritional requirements. Nutritional fitness offers prioritisation of 
recommended foods using the foods’ occurrence in nutritionally adequate food combinations. Here, we 
systematically identify nutritionally recommendable foods for semi- to strict vegetarian diets through 
the computation of nutritional fitness. Along with commonly recommendable foods across different 
diets, our analysis reveals favourable foods specific to each diet, such as immature lima beans for a 
vegan diet as an amino acid and choline source, and mushrooms for ovo-lacto vegetarian and vegan 
diets as a vitamin D source. Furthermore, we find that selenium and other essential micronutrients 
can be subject to deficiency in plant-based diets, and suggest nutritionally-desirable dietary patterns. 
We extend our analysis to two hypothetical scenarios of highly personalised, plant-based methionine-
restricted diets. Our nutrient-profiling approach may provide a useful guide for designing different types 
of personalised vegetarian diets.
Recent lifestyle changes represented by the high-fat/high-sugar ‘Western’ diet have raised public concern, as they 
contribute to the growing epidemics of metabolic and cardiovascular diseases in developed and developing coun-
tries worldwide1–3. On the other hand, a high consumption of plant-derived foods such as fruits, vegetables, nuts, 
and seeds is known to be associated with a lower risk of chronic diseases and cancer4–6. In addition, cultural 
background, as well as environmental or ethical motivations against meat production, becomes a favourable 
factor for adoption of plant-based or vegetarian diets7,8. However, the strict practice of vegetarian diets is not 
devoid of drawbacks, as exemplified by a vegan diet that excludes all animal-derived foods (such as eggs and dairy 
products), which results in a high risk of vitamin B12 deficiency because this vitamin is mainly available in animal 
products9. Other essential micronutrients that may be deficient in unsupplemented vegans include vitamin D, ω
-3 
fatty acids, calcium, zinc, and iron10. Therefore, a clear need exists for the identification of foods recommended for 
vegetarian health11,12, which is a challenging task due to the narrower food repertoire of vegetarians.
Large-scale, data-driven analysis methods are now widely used for fundamental quantitative inquiries into 
various biological, technological, and social systems13–17. These techniques have even been applied to foods18,19. 
For example, a seminal analysis of a network connecting various food ingredients to flavour compounds revealed 
unforeseen regional variations in culinary cultures19. Recently, using nutritional information from over 1,000 
raw foods, we have systematically evaluated the nutrient composition of each food with regard to satisfying 
the daily nutritional requirements, and thereby quantified the food’s nutrient balance, or nutritional fitness20. 
Nutritional fitness offers an objective way to prioritise recommended foods for each physical and dietary 
1Department of Physics, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, 37673, Republic of 
Korea. 2Asia Pacific Center for Theoretical Physics, Pohang, Gyeongbuk, 37673, Republic of Korea. 3The Abdus Salam 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics, 34151, Trieste, Italy. 4Genome Health Foundation, North Brighton, 
South Australia, 5048, Australia. 5Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 
Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea. 6Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon, Hong Kong. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to P.-J.K. (email: panjunkim@hkbu.edu.hk)
Received: 8 August 2017
Accepted: 28 February 2018
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
ScIeNTIFIc RePoRtS |  (2018) 8:4344  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22691-1
condition (for example, physical conditions include ages, genders, heights, weights, and physical activity levels; 
see Supplementary Methods). Although scoring foods based on nutrient contents has also been attempted in 
other previous studies21,22, their methods generally involve rather arbitrarily structured mathematical formulas 
and explicit weighting factors of individual nutrients, which may lead to biased results. In contrast, the com-
putation of nutritional fitness takes a conceptually different and clearly defined approach, based on the food’s 
frequency of occurrence in nutritionally adequate food combinations that simultaneously constrain all nutrient 
levels within the ranges recommended for daily intake (see below). It should be noted that the broad notion of 
optimisation-based diet design is dating back to the historic use of the simplex method23.
Here, we explore a spectrum of semi- to strict vegetarian diets, with regard to food recommendations for 
those diets based on nutritional fitness. Our study identifies both nutritionally recommendable foods and key 
relevant nutrients in each vegetarian diet. To demonstrate the applicability of our method to personalised nutri-
tion24,25, we further investigate two hypothetical scenarios of semi-vegetarian, methionine-restricted diets (a 
methionine-restricted diet is a predominantly plant-based diet, with growing evidence of its metabolically unique 
health benefits, such as anti-cancer and healthy ageing effects)26. The results from this study not only help improve 
our basic understanding of the nutritional structure of diets with specific food choices, but also have a wide range 
of implications in personalised nutrition, nutritional policies, and the food industry.
Methods
Food and nutritional data and various diets. 
We adopted information on the nutrient contents and 
energy (calorie) densities of foods (quantities per 100 g for each food) in our previous study20, which was collected 
from the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, 
Release 2427. In this previous study, we considered only raw foods and other foods whose nutrient contents have 
been minimally modified. Specifically, we selected foods in their natural forms without any explicitly added or 
fortified ingredients (e.g., added salt, sugar, and vitamins). In addition, we chose similar foods that were altered 
to ground, frozen, dried, low-fat, non-fat, or ultraviolet-treated products. In total, 1,068 foods were selected, and 
we refer to them as raw foods. A systematic unification of the raw foods redundant in their nutrient contents20 
yielded a total of 653 foods (Supplementary Methods).
The categories of foods were identified through the average-linkage hierarchical clustering of foods that are 
similar in their nutrient compositions, as described in our previous study20. As a result, most foods were divided 
into four major categories, roughly based on the foods’ relative macronutrient levels20: protein-rich, fat-rich, 
carbohydrate-rich, and low-macronutrient categories (Supplementary Data S1). Accordingly, plant-derived foods 
mainly belong to the carbohydrate-rich, fat-rich, and low-macronutrient categories, and animal-derived foods 
mainly belong to the protein-rich and fat-rich categories.
In this study, we initially consider the following four diet styles of a physically active, 20-year-old male 
with standard height and weight (Supplementary Data S1): (i) control diet, which is a typical omnivorous diet 
that includes all 653 animal- and plant-derived foods, (ii) ovo-lacto vegetarian diet, which includes only 449 
plant-derived foods, eggs, and dairy products, (iii) vegan diet, which includes only 434 plant-derived foods with-
out any animal products, and (iv) methionine-restricted diet, which includes all 653 animal- and plant-derived 
foods but allows only a minimally required intake of methionine. Therefore, in practice, diet (iv) is predominantly 
vegetarian, as plant-derived foods tend to have a lower methionine content than animal-derived foods26. In addi-
tion, we later consider the following two hypothetical scenarios of highly personalised, methionine-restricted 
diets with 532 foods (Supplementary Data S2): (v) 61-year-old male with low physical activity and (vi) physi-
cally active 58-year-old female. Specifically, diets (v) and (vi) include the plant-derived foods in diet (iii), along 
with eggs [≤
2 eggs/week for diet (v) and ≤
1 egg/week for diet (vi)], whole milk [≤
150 ml/week for diet (v) and 
≤
50 ml/week for diet (vi)], certain types of fish [≤
150 g/week for diet (v) and ≤
100 g/week for diet (vi)], and 
cheese [≤
40 g/week for diet (v) and ≤
20 g/week for diet (vi)], although cheese products do not belong to raw 
foods that we primarily consider for diets (i) to (iv) (Supplementary Methods).
For the recommended daily levels of nutrient intake, we primarily referred to the Dietary Reference Intakes 
from the Institute of Medicine of the U.S. National Academies28. The data describe adequate calorie levels for 
daily activity and the lower and upper bounds of the recommended daily intake of 41 nutrients (Supplementary 
Table S1). Unlike our previous study20, here we do not impose any lower bound of sodium intake, based on the 
assumption that the recommended sodium intake is readily achievable through the consumption of added salt, 
not necessarily through raw food consumption. In the case of diet (iii), vegan diet, we do not impose any lower 
bound of vitamin B12 intake, because it is impossible to meet daily vitamin B12 demands through the combi-
nations of plant-derived foods only, without other nutritional conditions being compromised (Supplementary 
Table S1 and Supplementary Methods). For diets (iv) to (vi), we impose a very tight upper limit of methionine 
intake, as merely 10% more than the lower limit of the methionine intake (Supplementary Table S1).
Nutritional fitness of foods across diets. 
To specify food quality based on nutritional adequacy, we 
calculated the nutritional fitness of each food. Suppose that there is an ideal food that contains all necessary 
nutrients to meet, but not exceed, our daily nutrient demands. In this hypothetical scenario, consuming only this 
food will provide the optimal nutritional balance for our body. In the absence of such an ideal food, a realistic 
alternative would be to consume a set of foods, small in number, that still satisfies the nutritional recommenda-
tions. We identify these minimal food sets as the irreducible food sets, which were first introduced in our previous 
study20. For each diet, we generate irreducible food sets by solving optimisation problems with mixed-integer 
linear programming, as described in Supplementary Methods: each irreducible food set is a set of a small number 
of different foods that meet our daily nutrient demands in their entirety, and no irreducible food set is a superset 
of another set. The computed amounts of foods in irreducible food sets are provided in Supplementary Table S2. 
We only considered irreducible food sets that each has less than six different foods for diets (i) and (iv) and less 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
ScIeNTIFIc RePoRtS |  (2018) 8:4344  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22691-1
than seven for the other diets. The total weight of the foods in each irreducible food set was limited to 4 kg, which 
reflects the practical limit of daily food consumption.
Foods with a frequent occurrence across irreducible food sets are likely to provide very balanced amounts of 
different nutrients, and would be classified as having high nutritional fitness (NF). In this regard, the NF of each 
food is provided by NF = log(f + 1)/log(N + 1), where f is the number of irreducible food sets that include the 
food and N is the total number of irreducible food sets [N = 52,957, 43,924, 20,713, 4,101, 1,053, and 5,225 for 
diets (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v), and (vi), respectively]. NF ranges from zero to one, and a large NF suggests that a food 
is nutritionally favourable. Note that f is capable of quantifying NF under the condition that the number of differ-
ent foods comprising an irreducible food set is limited to a small number, as in this study. Otherwise, it may be 
difficult to estimate the true nutritional adequacy of foods solely from their f values. For example, a nutritionally 
poor food in an irreducible food set will be easily complemented by many other foods in the same food set, if the 
size of the food set is not sufficiently small.
All optimisation problems in this study were solved using Gurobi (v. 7.0.2) and IBM ILOG CPLEX (v. 12.4) 
solvers (Supplementary Methods).
Key nutrients relevant to each food or diet. 
To identify the individual nutrients responsible for high 
NFs of foods, we introduce a new quantity φ
ij for each pair of food i and nutrient j, as follows:
a x
a x
,
(1)
ij
ij i
k kj k
φ =
∑
where α
ij is the density of nutrient j in food i, xi is the weight of food i to consume per day in a given irreducible 
food set, and 〈·〉 is an average over all irreducible food sets that include the food i (if ∑
k α
kjxk = 0 in any irreduc-
ible food set, this irreducible food set is excluded from the calculation). In other words, φ
ij represents the food i’s 
contribution to the total amount of the nutrient j in an average irreducible food set. The value of φ
ij ranges from 
zero to one (Supplementary Data S1 and S2). If food i, on average, provides a certain proportion of nutrient j in 
an irreducible food set, φ
ij takes the same value as that proportion. For example, if φ
ij = 0.7, food i supplies 70% 
of nutrient j, on average, in an irreducible food set. For any high-NF food i, we hence interpret nutrient j with a 
large φ
ij as the main contributor to food i’s high NF. For a given value φ
ij, we tested its statistical significance by 
calculating the one-sided P value of how frequently φ
i’j of a randomly-chosen raw food i’ in the corresponding 
diet is greater than or equal to φ
ij (if the raw food i’ did not appear in any irreducible food sets, φ
i’j was treated as 
zero in this calculation).
For each diet, we also examined which nutrient is subjected to a risk of deficiency in its daily intake. 
Specifically, the contents of certain nutrients in irreducible food sets may merely meet and only marginally exceed 
the minimum daily requirement levels, even if food weights within the irreducible food sets are altered to max-
imise the intake of these nutrients. We consider these nutrients to be at risk of deficiency in that diet. For a given 
nutrient j, the following quantity θ
j is calculated:
(
)
(
)
(
)
a x
L
U
L
a x
L
a x
max
or
max
max
,
(2)
j
k kj k
j
j
j
j
k kj k
j
k kj k
θ
θ
=
∑
−
−
=
∑
−
∑
where Lj (Uj) is the lower (upper) bound of the recommended daily intake of nutrient j, max(·) is the maximum 
value among all multiple solutions with altered xk’s in a given irreducible food set, and 〈·〉 is an average over all 
irreducible food sets (Supplementary Methods). If nutrient j has the upper bound of its recommended daily 
intake, we calculate the former θ
j, and otherwise, the latter θ
j. In other words, θ
j quantifies nutrient j’s maximally 
possible excess over its minimally required intake level in an irreducible food set, on average. The value of θ
j 
ranges from zero to one, and a small θ
j value indicates a risk of nutrient j’s deficiency.
Dietary pattern design based on irreducible food sets. 
To aid in the design of nutritionally recom-
mendable dietary patterns, we prioritised irreducible food sets based on the overall NFs of foods within each 
irreducible food set. For the collection of irreducible food sets with the same, minimum size (e.g., irreducible 
food sets with four different foods in the case of a control diet), we sort these irreducible food sets in descending 
order by the largest NF of the foods in each irreducible food set. Next, for each collection of the irreducible food 
sets with the same largest NFs, we sort these irreducible food sets in descending order by the second largest NF 
of the foods in each irreducible food set. Sequentially, we repeat similar processes with the next largest NFs until 
every NF from each irreducible food set is examined for sorting. The top five irreducible food sets resulting from 
this sorting are designated as the select dietary food sets, which we perceive as guiding routes and benchmarks for 
the design of dietary patterns recommended for health. For each diet, we identified these select dietary food sets.
The select dietary food sets alone are based on the NFs of foods in irreducible food sets, and do not neces-
sarily resemble actual dietary patterns in regular life. Therefore, among all the irreducible food sets, it would be 
valuable to search for food sets that are relatively close to regular dietary patterns. For example, one may con-
sider the dietary patterns of people living in India, who are often familiar with vegetarian diets29. A recent study 
provides information on the major dietary patterns of an Indian population by principal component analysis of 
the consumed levels of individual food groups30. Each principal component corresponds to a dietary pattern. 
Based on this dataset, we selected irreducible food sets that closely match with each of the three dietary pat-
terns (Supplementary Data S3): one is rich in cereals and savoury foods (cereal-savoury pattern), another is rich 
in fruits and vegetables (fruit-vegetable pattern), and the other is rich in animal foods (animal-food pattern). 
Specifically, in a given irreducible food set, the total amount of each food group was weighted by its factor loaded 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
ScIeNTIFIc RePoRtS |  (2018) 8:4344  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22691-1
on a principal component, and these weighted quantities were summed across all food groups to give a compo-
nent score of that irreducible food set. The top five irreducible food sets with the largest component scores were 
identified for each of the above three dietary patterns, across four different diets—control, lacto vegetarian, vegan, 
and methionine-restricted diets. Here, a lacto vegetarian diet, which reflects typical Indian vegetarianism31,32, 
excludes all egg products from the previously defined ovo-lacto vegetarian diet.
Data availability. 
All relevant data are available in the paper and Supplementary Information. Codes are 
available from the authors upon request.
Results
Nutritional fitness of foods across diets. 
We initially considered four diet styles with different plant-
food consumption patterns: (i) control, (ii) ovo-lacto vegetarian, (iii) vegan, and (iv) methionine-restricted 
diets (see Methods). Here, diets (i) and (iv) are omnivorous, but the latter is far more plant-based. For diets 
(i) to (iv), we considered a physically active, 20-year-old male with regard to daily nutrient requirement levels 
(Supplementary Table S1). For each diet, we then obtained information on which foods can lead to good health 
outcomes by calculating the nutritional fitness (NF) of a food through the generation of nutritionally adequate 
food combinations (or irreducible food sets; see Methods). The value of NF for each food ranges from zero to one, 
and a large NF suggests that the food is nutritionally favourable (Fig. 1a,b).
From our calculations, which foods then have the highest NFs in each diet? Noticeably, across all four 
diets, the most common foods with the highest NFs were almond, chia seeds, and cherimoya (Table 1 and 
Supplementary Data S1). Specifically, almond and chia seeds were always ranked in the top three foods regardless 
of diets [NF = 0.97 ± 0.01 and 0.93 ± 0.04 (avg. ± s.d.) for almond and chia seeds across all four diets, respec-
tively]. Cherimoya was also ranked in the top three foods, except for the vegan diet where it still ranked in the 
top 5% of foods.
Before moving forward, we should stress that most foods can be grouped with each other according to their 
nutritional similarity20, and the grouping results roughly correspond to the relative levels of food macronutrients, 
i.e., protein-rich, fat-rich, carbohydrate-rich, and low-macronutrient categories (Methods and Supplementary 
Data S1). According to this classification, the above high-NF foods, almond and chia seeds, belong to the fat-rich 
category, and cherimoya to the carbohydrate-rich category. One important issue here is whether the categories 
to which the foods belong play any role in NF-driven food prioritisation. Previously, we showed that using NFs 
to prioritise foods should only be conducted for foods that belong to the same category20, because foods from 
different categories rather independently contribute to satisfying the overall nutritional requirements.
From this viewpoint, we sought high-NF foods within each separate category (Table 1 and Supplementary 
Data S1). We found that almond and chia seeds are the two highest-NF foods within the fat-rich category for 
every diet. In fact, all four diets commonly share two-thirds of the fat-rich category foods with NF > 0.5, and 
these shared, fat-rich and NF > 0.5 foods are all nuts and seeds (Supplementary Data S1). On the other hand, 
the protein-rich category exhibits a large variation in its high-NF foods across diets. Apart from the vegan 
diet with a minor role of the protein-rich category foods, the ovo-lacto vegetarian and omnivorous (control 
and methionine-restricted) diets are characterised by milk and fish products, respectively, as their highest-NF 
foods within the protein-rich category (Fig. 1a,b and Table 1). At a finer level, a clear difference is even observed 
between the two omnivorous diets, control and methionine-restricted, in their highest-NF fish products: snapper 
and ocean perch are ranked in the top two fish products in the control diet, whereas roe and coho salmon are 
ranked in the top two in the methionine-restricted diet (Table 1 and Supplementary Data S1).
In the case of the carbohydrate-rich category, besides cherimoya with very high NF [NF = 0.87 ± 0.09 
(avg. ± s.d.) across all diets], our focus was on frozen immature lima beans and frozen green peas. These two 
foods have high NFs in the vegan and ovo-lacto vegetarian diets, but not in the methionine-restricted diet. Frozen 
immature lima beans exhibit the highest and third-highest NFs within the carbohydrate-rich category in the 
vegan and ovo-lacto vegetarian diets, respectively, whereas the methionine-restricted diet shows the lowest NF 
for this food (NF = 0.28). Likewise, the methionine-restricted diet does not allow a high NF for frozen green 
peas (NF = 0.45), which are, in fact, consistently ranked in the top three NF foods within the carbohydrate-rich 
category across the other three diets. Overall, fruits tend to have higher NFs among the carbohydrate-rich foods, 
but this tendency is weaker in the vegan diet, which includes more grains, legumes, and others in the higher NF, 
carbohydrate-rich foods (Supplementary Data S1).
Lastly, in the low-macronutrient category, the ovo-lacto vegetarian and vegan diets have mushrooms as 
the highest-NF foods, such as maitake and ultraviolet-treated portabella mushrooms, whereas the control and 
methionine-restricted diets mainly have vegetables as higher-NF foods (Table 1 and Supplementary Data S1). In 
this study, we later revisit such diet- and category-specific results with a deeper nutritional analysis. A complete 
list of foods and their NFs in each diet are presented in Supplementary Data S1.
Another interesting work is to search for foods low in calories but still with high NFs. These foods might be 
comparable to, yet distinct from, foods with high micronutrient levels per calorie, which have been suggested to 
benefit weight and glycaemic control and cardiovascular risk management33,34. We first observed that the calorie 
level of each food clearly follows a bimodal distribution (Supplementary Fig. S1). In other words, every food in 
our study can be classified as having either a high or low calorie level by a natural threshold from this bimodal 
distribution (Supplementary Fig. S1). Supplementary Data S1 provides a list of low-calorie foods with high NF in 
each diet (NF > 0.7), such as cherimoya and dandelion greens in every diet.
Key nutrients relevant to each food or diet. 
The NFs of foods in our study were found to have 
diet-dependent characteristics. The next step is to deeply examine the individual nutrients responsible for the NFs 
of foods in the context of different diets. For example, in the case of vegetarian diets, what particular nutrients are 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
ScIeNTIFIc RePoRtS |  (2018) 8:4344  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22691-1
Figure 1. Nutritional fitness (NF) and underlying nutrients across diets. We here consider four different diets, 
control, ovo-lacto vegetarian, vegan, and methionine-restricted diets. For the definition of these diets, refer to 
the main text. (a) NFs of foods in a control diet, sorted in descending order. (b) NFs of foods in an ovo-lacto 
vegetarian diet, sorted in descending order. Given food i and nutrient j, φ
ij indicates the contribution of nutrient 
j to the NF of food i, as described in the main text. The specific value of φ
ij depends on diets. From each of the 
following foods in (c) to (f), φ
ij is plotted for the nutrients with φ
ij > 0.5 in any of the above considered diets: (c) 
maitake mushroom, (d) frozen immature lima beans, (e) almond, and (f) cherimoya. For each nutrient in (c) to 
(f), four φ
ij values from the four considered diets are presented sequentially in the following order: control (red), 
ovo-lacto vegetarian (green), vegan (blue), and methionine-restricted (purple) diets. In a given diet, if the NF of 
the food is >0.7, the top of φ
ij from that diet is dotted. In (d) and (f), some nutrients with intermediate φ
ij values 
are omitted for visual clarity, and all of the data can be found in Supplementary Data S1.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
ScIeNTIFIc RePoRtS |  (2018) 8:4344  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22691-1
responsible for mushrooms having the highest NFs among the low-macronutrient category foods? To identify 
these key nutrients, we defined the quantity φ
ij that measures nutrient j’s dependency on food i in irreducible 
food sets (0 ≤
 φ
ij ≤
 1; see Methods). A large φ
ij suggests that nutrient j is the main contributor to the NF of food i.
The analysis of φ
ij shows that vitamin D is the main contributor to the mushrooms’ high NF in vegetarian diets 
(Fig. 1c and Supplementary Data S1). For both the ovo-lacto vegetarian and vegan diets, every type of mush-
rooms with NF > 0.75 serves as a good source of vitamin D with φ
ij > 0.9 (P ≤
 0.01; Methods and Supplementary 
Data S1). It is worthwhile to note that, across all four diets, the low-macronutrient category foods other than 
mushrooms are mainly contributing vitamin K and vitamin A, not vitamin D (Supplementary Data S1).
In the control and methionine-restricted diets, most of the vitamin D can be provided by fish products, 
which substantially contribute to the intake of vitamin B12, selenium, essential amino acids, and choline as well 
(Supplementary Data S1). Vitamin D is one of the key players for the NFs of finfish being generally higher than 
the NFs of the other protein-rich foods (e.g., milk, pork, beef, and poultry) in these omnivorous diets, as demon-
strated through the vitamin D’s φ
ij values across the protein-rich foods (Supplementary Data S1).
Regarding a vegan diet, an important issue is to explore the food sources of essential amino acids, as this diet 
lacks protein-rich category foods in most irreducible food sets. Remarkably, we found that the aforementioned, 
frozen immature lima beans serve as an excellent amino acid source in the vegan diet (Fig. 1d), providing lysine 
(φ
ij = 0.76), isoleucine (φ
ij = 0.76), valine (φ
ij = 0.72), methionine (φ
ij = 0.62), and so forth (P = 0.002; Methods 
and Supplementary Data S1). Frozen green peas play a similar role in the vegan diet; they provide a large portion 
of lysine (φ
ij = 0.57), methionine (φ
ij = 0.54), and threonine (φ
ij = 0.50) in the vegan diet (P ≤
 0.007; Methods and 
Supplementary Data S1). These high methionine contributions may partially explain our prior observation that 
both frozen immature lima beans and green peas have lower NFs in the methionine-restricted diet.
Lastly, foods with consistently high NF across all four diets, almond, chia seeds, and cherimoya, were found 
to have very large φ
ij values (φ
ij > 0.9 and P ≤
 0.005) for two essential fatty acids, linoleic acid (almond) and 
α
-linolenic acid (chia seeds and cherimoya) (Fig. 1e,f and Supplementary Data S1). Together, Fig. 1c–f present 
the examples of nutrients with large φ
ij values from several high-NF foods.
In Methods, we have already pointed out that a vegan diet hardly meets the daily vitamin B12 demands. 
Likewise, each of the four diets may involve a set of nutrients at risk of deficiency in their daily intake levels. 
Hence, it will be important to recommend consumption of foods that can mitigate against potential nutrient 
deficiencies in each diet. To this end, we evaluated the susceptibility of nutrients to deficiency in each diet by lev-
eraging information from irreducible food sets (Methods), and then found foods with high φ
ij for the potentially 
deficient nutrients.
Surprisingly, we found that all four diets commonly involve a risk of choline, vitamin B6, and vitamin E defi-
ciency (Table 2). In addition, vegetarian and methionine-restricted diets involve selenium as a micronutrient 
of potential deficiency. Selenium is a constituent of selenoproteins35, and we indeed observed a very positive 
Food category
Food
Diet with high nutritional fitness
Protein-rich
Whole milk
O (0.86)
Nonfat dry milk, reduced fat milk, 1%-fat milk
O (0.83)
Snapper
C (0.83)
Ocean perch
C (0.80)
Roe
C (0.70), M (0.79)
Fat-rich
Almond
C (0.97), O (0.97), V (0.97), M (0.99)
Chia seed
C (0.87), O (0.95), V (0.98), M (0.93)
Dried pumpkin and squash seed kernels
C (0.84), O (0.87), V (0.87)
Pork separable fat
C (0.80)
Dried black walnut
O (0.71), V (0.77)
Carbohydrate-rich
Cherimoya
C (0.96), O (0.91), V (0.72), M (0.89)
Frozen immature lima bean
O (0.72), V (0.85)
Frozen green pea
O (0.76), V (0.80)
Tangerine
C (0.76), V (0.78), M (0.77)
Full-fat soy flour
V (0.76)
Low-macronutrient
Ultraviolet-treated portabella
O (0.87), V (0.94)
Maitake
O (0.88), V (0.87)
Dried shiitake
O (0.87)
Red cabbage
C (0.74), O (0.71), M (0.83)
Chanterelle
O (0.80), V (0.76)
Table 1. Foods with high nutritional fitness (NF) across diets. We here consider four different diets, control, 
ovo-lacto vegetarian, vegan, and methionine-restricted diets. For the definition of these diets, refer to the main 
text. In each food category, we sort foods by their highest NFs among the four diets and list only the top 5 cases 
(in the protein-rich category, several milk products with similar highest NFs are listed together in the same row 
for visual clarity). Each of these foods has NF > 0.7 in at least one diet. For each food, we specify the diets that 
give NF > 0.7 (C, control; O, ovo-lacto vegetarian; V, vegan; M, methionine-restricted; the specific value of NF is 
presented in parentheses beside each diet).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
ScIeNTIFIc RePoRtS |  (2018) 8:4344  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22691-1
correlation between selenium and protein levels across foods20 (r = 0.74 and P = 1.0 ×
 10−
41; Supplementary 
Methods). Therefore, vegetarian and methionine-restricted diets may be of concern based on the possible short-
age of selenium intake. A vegan diet among them, as well as a methionine-restricted diet, is of further concern 
due to the risk of methionine deficiency (Table 2).
Recommended foods with high φ
ij for the above nutrients of concern include fish products for choline, selenium, 
and methionine, and in a vegan diet, frozen immature lima beans for choline, selenium, methionine, and vitamin B6 
(Supplementary Data S1). We also recommend almond and cherimoya for vitamin E (φ
ij > 0.7 and P ≤
 0.002) and 
vitamin B6 (φ
ij > 0.5 and P ≤
 0.03), respectively (Supplementary Data S1). We suggest that deeper analyses into these 
nutrients at risk of deficiency may be warranted when the prioritisation of diet-specific foods is of interest.
Dietary pattern design based on irreducible food sets. 
NF offers a way to recommend individual 
foods for nutritionally adequate dietary plans. On the other hand, one can recommend nutritionally adequate 
food combinations per se (i.e., irreducible food sets), which we call the select dietary food sets (see Methods). 
They are a collection of five representative irreducible food sets in each diet, which tend to include many high-NF 
foods inside.
Supplementary Data S1 presents information on the select dietary food sets and food weights to consume. In 
the case of the vegan diet, the select dietary food sets commonly include chia seeds, almond, frozen immature 
lima beans, and ultraviolet-treated portabella mushroom. In addition, the following foods are included in the 
select dietary food sets, and each food serves as an alternative to another: dandelion greens, red leaf lettuce, 
sun-dried hot chilli peppers, paprika, and young green onions (tops only) (Supplementary Data S1). For the 
vegan diet, we hence recommend all those foods together, along with vitamin B12 supplements, as no irreducible 
food set in the vegan diet satisfies daily vitamin B12 requirements.
In the case of the ovo-lacto vegetarian diet, the select dietary food sets are composed of almond, cher-
imoya, maitake mushroom, milk, and frozen green peas. Among them, cherimoya, maitake mushroom, and 
frozen green peas can be replaced simultaneously by plums, shiitake mushroom, and chia seeds. In the case 
of the methionine-restricted diet, the select dietary food sets are composed of almond, chia seeds, cherimoya, 
roe, and red cabbage, while cherimoya can be replaced by plantains and corn (or potato) flour. Lastly, the con-
trol diet involves the select food sets with almond, cherimoya, snapper (or alternatively, ocean perch), and dan-
delion greens. In this case, dandelion greens can be replaced by red cabbage, Swiss chard, and broccoli raab 
(Supplementary Data S1).
Together, the select dietary food sets show promise for formulating nutritionally adequate dietary patterns 
based on the respective foods’ NFs. Apart from the select dietary food sets, one may seek the food sets relatively 
close to actual dietary patterns in regular life, such as those of people living in India, who are often familiar 
with vegetarian diets29. For a given diet, we selected a collection of five irreducible food sets with the closest 
match to each of the following three Indian dietary patterns (Methods): one is rich in cereals and savoury foods 
(cereal-savoury pattern), another is rich in fruits and vegetables (fruit-vegetable pattern), and the other is rich in 
animal foods (animal-food pattern).
The resulting food sets are found in Supplementary Data S3. They involve some food items other than in the 
select dietary food sets, such as rice in the cereal-savoury pattern of the control and vegan diets, grapefruit and 
melons in the fruit-vegetable pattern of the lacto vegetarian and vegan diets, and egg whites in the animal-food 
pattern of the control diet (we consider a lacto vegetarian diet instead of an ovo-lacto vegetarian diet, because 
typical Indian vegetarianism is lacto vegetarianism)31,32. As expected, the lacto vegetarian and vegan diets do 
not have any irreducible food sets of the animal-food pattern (Supplementary Data S3). Considerations of more 
regional factors such as local food repertoires would be warranted for further improvements in our analysis.
Application to personalised food recommendations. 
Thus far, this work has provided an overview 
of nutritionally recommendable foods in semi- to strict vegetarian diets compared to a control diet. Now, we 
extend our analysis to two hypothetical scenarios of highly personalised, plant-based methionine-restricted diets 
with limited animal-food consumption. The personalised case I pertains to a 61-year-old male with low physical 
Nutrient
Diet with low θ
Choline
C (0.03), O (0.03), V (0.04), M (0.03)
Vitamin B6
C (0.05), O (0.04), V (0.03), M (0.05)
Vitamin E
C (0.04), O (0.04), V (0.04), M (0.05)
Selenium
O (0.13), V (0.12), M (0.09)
Methionine
V (0.12)
Zinc
M (0.14)
Protein
V (0.14)
Table 2. Nutrients at risk of deficiency across diets. We here consider four different diets, control, ovo-lacto 
vegetarian, vegan, and methionine-restricted diets. For the definition of these diets, refer to the main text. In 
a given diet, each nutrient is assigned θ
, and low θ
 indicates a risk of the nutrient deficiency in that diet (see 
Methods). We list the nutrients that have θ
 ≤
 0.15 in at least one diet. For each nutrient, we specify the diets that 
give θ
 ≤
 0.15 (C, control; O, ovo-lacto vegetarian; V
, vegan; M, methionine-restricted; the specific value of θ
 is 
presented in parentheses beside each diet). Here, we omit rather trivial information, i.e., the risk of vitamin B12 
deficiency in a vegan diet (see the main text) and the risk of methionine deficiency in a methionine-restricted diet.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
ScIeNTIFIc RePoRtS |  (2018) 8:4344  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22691-1
Figure 2. Highly personalised, mainly plant-based diets. We here consider the following two personalised 
cases: 61-year-old male (case I) and 58-year-old female (case II), who practise a plant-based, methionine-
restricted diet, and consume a limited amount of animal products. Cases I and II are different in their 
physical conditions and specific food intakes, as described in the main text. (a) NFs of foods in case I, sorted 
in descending order. (b) NFs of foods in case II, sorted in descending order. Given food i and nutrient j, φ
ij 
indicates the contribution of nutrient j to the NF of food i, as described in the main text. The specific value of 
φ
ij depends on cases I and II. From each of the following foods in (c) to (f), φ
ij is plotted for the nutrients with 
φ
ij > 0.5 in either case I or II: (c) dried smelt, (d) frozen immature lima beans, (e) almond, and (f) hubbard 
squash. For each nutrient in (c) to (f), two φ
ij values from cases I and II are presented sequentially (case I in blue 
and case II in grey). In case I or II, if the NF of the food is >0.7, the top of φ
ij from that case is dotted. In (d) and 
(f), some nutrients with intermediate φ
ij values are omitted for visual clarity, and all of the data can be found in 
Supplementary Data S2.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
ScIeNTIFIc RePoRtS |  (2018) 8:4344  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22691-1
activity, and the personalised case II pertains to a physically active 58-year-old female. These two people also 
differ in their dietary preferences (see Methods for more details).
Through the calculation of NF as shown in Fig. 2a,b, we found that high-NF foods in both cases I and II are 
generally reminiscent of our former results for the ovo-lacto vegetarian and vegan diets, with an exception of the 
protein-rich category’s high-NF foods that are clearly distinct from the former ones (Table 3 and Supplementary 
Data S2).
Specifically, in a similar fashion to the other diets, almond and chia seeds are the two highest-NF foods with 
NF > 0.85 within the fat-rich category for both cases I and II. In the carbohydrate-rich category, cases I and II 
have frozen immature lima beans and cherimoya, respectively, as the highest-NF foods with NF > 0.7. In the 
low-macronutrient category, ultraviolet-treated portabella and maitake mushrooms, squash, and dandelion 
greens are ranked in the top four foods for both cases I and II.
In contrast to the above results, the protein-rich category of both cases I and II includes dried whitefish and 
dried smelt as the top-NF foods with NF > 0.8, which are not foods allowed by the previous vegetarian diets and 
have low NF < 0.5 in the previous control and methionine-restricted diets. Dried whitefish and smelt exhibit very 
high φ
ij > 0.97 with vitamin B12 in cases I and II (P ≤
 0.006; Fig. 2c and Supplementary Data S2), suggesting that 
both foods are an excellent source of vitamin B12 in these diets.
Despite the overall similarity between cases I and II, we observed some differences in their recommended 
foods. For example, in case I, herring shows a moderate level of NF with NF = 0.58, but does not even reach such 
NF levels in case II (Fig. 2a,b), because any irreducible food sets that we examined in case II do not contain her-
ring. It is noteworthy that the irreducible food sets do not include dairy products as well, in both cases I and II, 
although these two cases allow milk and cheese consumption. In these two cases, among animal-derived foods, 
fish would be a better dietary choice than dairy products, to meet nutritional requirements.
Consistent with the aforementioned results of the vegetarian and methionine-restricted diets, our analysis 
reveals that the dietary patterns in cases I and II involve a risk of choline, vitamin B6, vitamin E, and selenium 
deficiency (Table 4 and Methods). Recommended foods with high φ
ij for those nutrients of concern include fro-
zen immature lima beans for choline (φ
ij > 0.6 and P ≤
 0.006) and vitamin B6 (φ
ij > 0.45 and P ≤
 0.04), almond 
for vitamin E (φ
ij > 0.77 and P ≤
 0.002), cherimoya for vitamin B6 (φ
ij > 0.45 and P ≤
 0.04), and dried smelt for 
selenium (φ
ij > 0.35 and P ≤
 0.04) (Fig. 2d,e and Supplementary Data S2).
To recommend food sets that help design healthy dietary patterns for cases I and II, we obtained the select 
dietary food sets, as defined above (Methods). Supplementary Data S2 presents information on the select dietary 
food sets and food weights to consume in cases I and II. In case I, the select dietary food sets commonly include 
dried whitefish, hubbard squash, almond, chia seeds, and ultraviolet-treated portabella mushroom. In addition, 
the following foods are included in the select dietary food sets, and each food serves as an alternative to another: 
dandelion greens, broccoli raab, watercress, red cabbage, and Swiss chard (Supplementary Data S2). In case II, one 
of the select dietary food sets is composed of dried smelt, zucchini, almond, ultraviolet-treated portabella mush-
room, cherimoya, and sweet potato. Among them, cherimoya and sweet potato can be replaced simultaneously by 
dandelion greens and corn flour (or alternatively, garlic powder) (Supplementary Data S2).
In summary, our approach can be used for a systematic investigation of highly personalised, plant-based diets. 
These personalised diet results are largely reflective of our previous vegetarian and methionine-restricted diet 
results. Nevertheless, we observe clearly distinct, individualised features, particularly from the protein-rich food 
items for vitamin B12 consumption.
Food category
Food
Diet with high nutritional fitness
Protein-rich
Dried smelt
I (0.82), II (0.90)
Dried whitefish
I (0.88), II (0.87)
Dried chum salmon
II (0.74)
Common octopus
II (0.72)
Fat-rich
Almond
I (0.95), II (0.96)
Chia seed
I (0.94), II (0.87)
Dried pumpkin and squash seed kernels
I (0.82), II (0.84)
Carbohydrate-rich
Cherimoya
II (0.80)
Frozen immature lima bean
I (0.76)
Low-macronutrient
Ultraviolet-treated portabella
I (0.89), II (0.95)
Maitake
I (0.88), II (0.84)
Zucchini
II (0.87)
Hubbard squash
I (0.81)
Dandelion green
I (0.74), II (0.77)
Chanterelle
II (0.73)
Table 3. Foods with high nutritional fitness (NF) in highly personalised, mainly plant-based diets. We here 
consider the following two personalised cases: 61-year-old male (case I) and 58-year-old female (case II), who 
practise a plant-based, methionine-restricted diet, and consume a limited amount of animal products. Cases I 
and II are different in their physical conditions and specific food intakes, as described in the main text. In each 
food category, we show only the foods that have NF > 0.7 in either case I or II. For each food, we specify the case I 
or II that gives NF > 0.7 (I, case I; II, case II; the specific value of NF is presented in parentheses beside each case).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
ScIeNTIFIc RePoRtS |  (2018) 8:4344  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22691-1
Discussion
In this study, we have explored semi- to strict vegetarian, and control omnivorous diets through the systematic 
analysis of large-scale food and nutritional data. Our study offers a global and unbiased view of the nutritional 
structure of vegetarian diets, as well as enables the discovery of unconventional knowledge of foods and nutri-
ents. Nutritional fitness, which gauges the quality of a raw food according to its nutritional density and balance, 
appears to be useful to prioritise recommended foods for vegetarian health, notwithstanding vegetarians’ limited 
food repertoire compared to a standard omnivorous diet. Extending our analysis to two highly personalised, 
semi-vegetarian diets has revealed the applicability of nutritional fitness towards personalised food recommen-
dations36. People of different diets, ages, genders, body compositions, health states, and physical activity levels can 
obtain their condition-specific food information through our method, by simply adjusting the food repertoire 
and required calorie and nutrient intakes when generating irreducible food sets (Supplementary Methods). The 
resulting irreducible food sets allow one to compute the nutritional fitness and identify the key relevant nutrients, 
as well as the nutrients susceptible to deficiency. However, this study is limited to the analysis of mainly raw foods. 
Extending the analysis beyond raw foods to cooked foods is necessary to explore the comprehensive repertoire 
of the foods we consume daily, as well as their temperature-sensitive nutrients that may be destroyed by cooking, 
such as vitamins A, C, and E, thiamin, and folate37.
As a step forward, more realistic applications will be achievable if the concepts presented here are judiciously 
incorporated with other practical factors. Considerations of food taste and cultural, regional, seasonal, and finan-
cial factors in our analysis may improve the practical applicability of our methods in daily healthcare experi-
ences38,39. In particular, food taste or gastronomy may become a major factor in future studies18,40; currently, 
our select dietary food sets for dietary pattern designs tend to suggest consuming very large amounts of certain 
foods, like squash as a source of various vitamins and α
-linolenic acid in the aforementioned personalised dietary 
cases (Fig. 2f and Supplementary Data S2). Such a tendency is generally observed from the weights of foods in 
irreducible food sets, as indicated in Supplementary Table S2. Therefore, these strong preferences for particular 
foods in the select dietary food sets reflect the nature of irreducible food sets that have been optimised only on a 
nutritional basis, without considering the gastronomic aspects. Nevertheless, these results offer a primary insight 
into nutritionally beneficial foods, but warrant further realistic sophistication by gastronomic consideration. An 
interesting avenue is to incorporate regional dietary patterns into our analysis, as demonstrated above with the 
preliminary results for Indian dietary patterns.
Finally, we envision that nutritional studies adopting our systematic approach will be at the forefront of 
designing condition-specific, dietary interventions to promote wellness24,25, and may provide a useful basis for 
nutritional policy making, nutrition education, and food marketing41,42. Moreover, the combination of informa-
tion technology, healthcare services, and our approach will enforce the accessibility of nutritionally recommend-
able food items to the general public43,44.
References
 1. Cordain, L. et al. Origins and evolution of the Western diet: health implications for the 21st century. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 81, 341–354 (2005).
 2. Heinone, I. et al. The effects of equal caloric high fat and western diet on metabolic syndrome, oxidative stress and vascular 
endothelial function in mice. Acta Physiol. (Oxf). 211, 515–527 (2014).
 3. Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation. Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases: Report of a Joint WHO/FAO Expert 
Consultation (World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2003).
 4. He, K. et al. Changes in intake of fruits and vegetables in relation to risk of obesity and weight gain among middle-aged women. Int. 
J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 28, 1569–1574 (2004).
 5. Hu, F. B. Plant-based foods and prevention of cardiovascular disease: an overview. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 78, 544S–551S (2003).
 6. Finley, J. W. The antioxidant responsive element (ARE) may explain the protective effects of cruciferous vegetables on cancer. Nutr. 
Rev. 61, 250–254 (2003).
 7. Stabler, S. P. & Allen, R. H. Vitamin B12 deficiency as a worldwide problem. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 24, 299–326 (2004).
 8. Ruby, M. B. Vegetarianism. A blossoming field of study. Appetite. 58, 141–150 (2012).
 9. Institute of Medicine (US) Standing Committee on the Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference Intakes. Dietary Reference Intakes for 
Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline (National Academies Press, 1998).
 
10. Craig, W. J. Health effects of vegan diets. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 89, 1627S–1633S (2009).
 
11. Antony, A. C. Vegetarianism and vitamin B-12 (cobalamin) deficiency. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 78, 3–6 (2003).
 
12. Murphy, S. P. & Allen, L. H. Nutritional importance of animal source foods. J. Nutr. 133, 3932S–3935S (2003).
 
13. Newman, M., Barabási, A.-L. & Watts, D. J. The Structure and Dynamics of Networks (Princeton Univ. Press, 2006).
Nutrient
Diet with low θ
Choline
I (0.02), II (0.02)
Vitamin E
I (0.03), II (0.03)
Vitamin B6
I (0.04), II (0.04)
Selenium
I (0.12), II (0.15)
Table 4. Nutrients at risk of deficiency in highly personalised, mainly plant-based diets. We here consider the 
following two personalised cases: 61-year-old male (case I) and 58-year-old female (case II), who practise a 
plant-based, methionine-restricted diet, and consume a limited amount of animal products. Cases I and II are 
different in their physical conditions and specific food intakes, as described in the main text. In case I or II, each 
nutrient is assigned θ
, and low θ
 indicates a risk of the nutrient deficiency in that case (see Methods). We list the 
nutrients that have θ
 ≤
 0.15 in either case I or II. For each nutrient, we specify the case I or II that gives θ
 ≤
 0.15 
(I, case I; II, case II; the specific value of θ
 is presented in parentheses beside each case). Here, we omit rather 
trivial information of a risk of methionine deficiency in these methionine-restricted diets.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
ScIeNTIFIc RePoRtS |  (2018) 8:4344  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-22691-1
 
14. Michel, J.-B. et al. Quantitative analysis of culture using millions of digitized books. Science. 331, 176–182 (2011).
 
15. Sung, J. et al. Global metabolic interaction network of the human gut microbiota for context-specific community-scale analysis. Nat. 
Commun. 8, 15393 (2017).
 
16. Klimek, P., Aichberger, S. & Thurner, S. Disentangling genetic and environmental risk factors for individual diseases from multiplex 
comorbidity networks. Sci. Rep. 6, 39658 (2016).
 
17. Nguyen, T.-P., Scotti, M., Morine, M. J. & Priami, C. Model-based clustering reveals vitamin D dependent multi-centrality hubs in a 
network of vitamin-related proteins. BMC Syst. Biol. 5, 195 (2011).
 
18. Ahnert, S. E. Network analysis and data mining in food science: the emergence of computational gastronomy. Flavour 2, 4 (2013).
 
19. Ahn, Y.-Y., Ahnert, S. E., Bagrow, J. P. & Barabási, A.-L. Flavor network and the principles of food pairing. Sci. Rep. 1, 196 (2011).
 
20. Kim, S., Sung, J., Foo, M., Jin, Y.-S. & Kim, P.-J. Uncovering the nutritional landscape of food. PLoS One 10, e0118697 (2015).
 
21. Drewnowski, A. & Fulgoni, V. III. Nutrient profiling of foods: creating a nutrient-rich food index. Nutr. Rev. 66, 23–39 (2008).
 
22. Kennedy, E. et al. Alternative approaches to the calculation of nutrient density. Nutr. Rev. 66, 703–709 (2008).
 
23. Dantzig, G. B. The diet problem. Interfaces 20, 43–47 (1990).
 
24. Keen, C. L. & Uriu-Adams, J. Y. Assessment of zinc, copper, and magnesium status: current approaches and promising new 
directions. In Mineral Requirements for Military Personnel: Levels Needed for Cognitive and Physical Performance during Garrison 
Training 304–315 (National Academies Press, 2006).
 
25. Zeevi, D. et al. Personalized nutrition by prediction of glycemic responses. Cell 163, 1079–1094 (2015).
 
26. Cavuoto, P. & Fenech, M. F. A review of methionine dependency and the role of methionine restriction in cancer growth control and 
life-span extension. Cancer Treat. Rev. 38, 726–736 (2012).
 
27. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Release 
24. Nutrient Data Laboratory Online. http://www.ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=22808 (Accessed: 31st December 2011).
 
28. National Research Council. Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and 
Amino Acids (Macronutrients) (National Academies Press, 2005).
 
29. Katz, S. H. & Weaver, W. W. Encyclopedia of Food and Culture, Volume 2: Food Production to Nuts (Charles Scribner’s Sons, 2003).
 
30. Satija, A. et al. Dietary patterns in India and their association with obesity and central obesity. Public Health Nutr. 18, 3031–3041 
(2015).
 
31. Agrawal, S., Millett, C. J., Dhillon, P. K., Subramanian, S. V. & Ebrahim, S. Type of vegetarian diet, obesity and diabetes in adult 
Indian population. Nutr. J. 13, 89 (2014).
 
32. Jayanthi, V. Vegetarianism in India. Perit. Dial. Int. 21, S322–S325 (2001).
 
33. Sarter, B., Campbell, T. C. & Fuhrman, J. Effect of a high nutrient density diet on long-term weight loss: a retrospective chart review. 
Altern. Ther. Health Med. 14, 48–53 (2008).
 
34. Dunaief, D. M., Fuhrman, J., Dunaief, J. L. & Ying, G. Glycemic and cardiovascular parameters improved in type 2 diabetes with the 
high nutrient density (HND) diet. Open J. Prev. Med. 02, 364–371 (2012).
 
35. Brown, K. M. & Arthur, J. R. Selenium, selenoproteins and human health: a review. Public Health Nutr. 4, 593–599 (2001).
 
36. Green, H. Should foods or nutrients be the focus of guidelines to promote healthful eating? Nutr. Bull. 40, 296–302 (2015).
 
37. Riaz, M. N., Asif, M. & Ali, R. Stability of vitamins during extrusion. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 49, 361–368 (2009).
 
38. Kazama, M. et al. Sukiyaki in French style: a novel system for transformation of dietary patterns. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/1705.03487 (2017).
 
39. Teng, C.-Y., Lin, Y.-R. & Adamic, L. A. Recipe recommendation using ingredient networks, In Proceedings of the 4th Annual ACM 
Web Science Conference 298–307 (2012).
 
40. Drewnowski, A. Taste preferences and food intake. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 17, 237–253 (1997).
 
41. Boon, C. S. & Clydesdale, F. M. A review of childhood and adolescent obesity interventions. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 45, 511–525 
(2005).
 
42. Crawford, I. M. Agricultural and Food Marketing Management (Food & Agriculture Org, 1997).
 
43. Adler-Milstein, J., Embi, P. J., Middleton, B., Sarkar, I. N. & Smith, J. Crossing the health IT chasm: considerations and policy 
recommendations to overcome current challenges and enable value-based care. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 24, 1036–1043 (2017).
 
44. Pouladzadeh, P., Shirmohammadi, S. & Al-Maghrabi, R. Measuring calorie and nutrition from food image. IEEE Trans. Instrum. 
Meas. 63, 1947–1956 (2014).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) Grant NRF-
2015R1C1A1A02037045 funded by the Korean Government (MSIP) (S.K. and P.-J.K.). This work was also 
supported by the ICTP through the OEA-AC-98 (S.K.).
Author Contributions
S.K., M.F.F. and P.-J.K. designed the research. S.K. performed the research. S.K., M.F.F. and P.-J.K. analysed the 
data. S.K., M.F.F. and P.-J.K. wrote the manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-22691-1.
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2018
