 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 7 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
Introduction
The metabolic syndrome is a cluster of disorders including obe-
sity, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), hypertriglyceri-
demia, and insulin resistance, which predisposes to the devel-
opment of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease (1). This 
syndrome is also characterized by a pathogenic paradox in which 
the liver appears selectively insulin resistant: hyperinsulinemia is 
unable to appropriately suppress glucose production, but the liver 
remains sensitive to insulin’s ability to stimulate de novo lipogen-
esis (DNL) (2).
Despite extensive investigation, the mechanisms accounting 
for this apparent paradox remain controversial. Investigation at 
the level of hepatic insulin signaling suggested that different arms 
of the insulin signaling cascade might be differentially sensitive 
to insulin (3–6). For instance, insulin signaling to inhibit the tran-
scription factor forkhead box O1a (FOXO1A), which transactivates 
gluconeogenic enzyme gene expression, might be impaired, while 
insulin-mediated stimulation of a mechanistic target of rapamycin 
(MTOR)/sterol regulatory element–binding transcription factor 1 
(SREBPF1 or SREBP1) signaling axis, which upregulates a DNL gene 
program, remains intact (5). However, others reported that defects 
in hepatic insulin signaling occur at the level of the insulin recep-
tor, proximal to the proposed branch points in insulin signaling, 
thereby precluding differential insulin signaling as a mechanism 
to explain this paradox (7). It has also been suggested that insulin’s 
acute effect of reducing hepatic glucose production (HGP) is inde-
pendent of hepatic insulin signaling altogether and instead depends 
on suppression of adipose lipolysis and delivery of fatty-acid sub-
strate to the liver (8, 9). However, this contrasts with other studies 
indicating that insulin’s acute effect of reducing glucose production 
is mediated through insulin’s actions directly on the liver (10, 11). 
These studies do not address the observation that hyperinsulinemia 
fails to suppress hepatic glucose-6-phosphatase (G6PC) expression 
in insulin-resistant humans (12), a condition where increased DNL 
in association with steatosis and hypertriglyceridemia is readily 
apparent (13, 14). Understanding the signaling mechanism regulat-
ing G6pc in this context is important, as increased hepatic G6PC is 
sufficient to cause glucose intolerance and insulin resistance (15).
Another mechanism that may contribute to the paradox is 
that glucose or gluconeogenic substrate delivered to the liver can 
activate hepatic DNL independently of insulin signaling (16–19). 
Carbohydrate-responsive element-binding protein (ChREBP, also 
known as MLXIPL) is a master transcriptional regulator of glyco-
lytic and lipogenic genes and is activated by carbohydrate (CHO) 
metabolites in key metabolic tissues including liver. In insulin-resis-
tant states, when glucose disposal is impaired in peripheral tissues 
such as skeletal muscle and adipose tissue, shunting of glucose to 
the liver might activate ChREBP and enhance DNL. For instance, 
genetically ablating Glut4, the insulin-responsive glucose transport-
Obese, insulin-resistant states are characterized by a paradoxical pathogenic condition in which the liver appears to be 
selectively insulin resistant. Specifically, insulin fails to suppress glucose production, yet successfully stimulates de novo 
lipogenesis. The mechanisms underlying this dysregulation remain controversial. Here, we hypothesized that carbohydrate-
responsive element-binding protein (ChREBP), a transcriptional activator of glycolytic and lipogenic genes, plays a central role 
in this paradox. Administration of fructose increased hepatic hexose-phosphate levels, activated ChREBP
, and caused glucose 
intolerance, hyperinsulinemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and hepatic steatosis in mice. Activation of ChREBP was required for 
the increased expression of glycolytic and lipogenic genes as well as glucose-6-phosphatase (G6pc) that was associated 
with the effects of fructose administration. We found that fructose-induced G6PC activity is a major determinant of hepatic 
glucose production and reduces hepatic glucose-6-phosphate levels to complete a homeostatic loop. Moreover, fructose 
activated ChREBP and induced G6pc in the absence of Foxo1a, indicating that carbohydrate-induced activation of ChREBP 
and G6PC dominates over the suppressive effects of insulin to enhance glucose production. This ChREBP/G6PC signaling 
axis is conserved in humans. Together, these findings support a carbohydrate-mediated, ChREBP-driven mechanism that 
contributes to hepatic insulin resistance.
ChREBP regulates fructose-induced glucose production 
independently of insulin signaling
Mi-Sung Kim,1 Sarah A. Krawczyk,1 Ludivine Doridot,1 Alan J. Fowler,1 Jennifer X. Wang,2 Sunia A. Trauger,2 Hye-Lim Noh,3  
Hee Joon Kang,3 John K. Meissen,4 Matthew Blatnik,4 Jason K. Kim,3 Michelle Lai,5 and Mark A. Herman1,6
1Division of Endocrinology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 2Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 3Program in Molecular Medicine, 
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA. 4Department of Pharmacokinetics, Dynamics and Metabolism, Pfizer Global Research and Development, Groton, Connecticut, USA. 
5Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 6Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
Authorship note: M.S. Kim and S.A. Krawczyk contributed equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: J.K. Meissen and M. Blatnik are employees of Pfizer Inc.
Submitted: March 23, 2015; Accepted: August 18, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2016;126(11):4372–4386. doi:10.1172/JCI81993.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 7 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
It has recently been hypothesized that hepatocyte CHO 
metabolites (hexose- or triose-phosphates) might not only stimu-
late ChREBP and activate DNL, but might also serve as a signal 
to enhance HGP (17, 18). This hypothesis derives in part from the 
counterintuitive observation that while ChREBP is known to stim-
ulate glycolysis through transactivation of glycolytic genes (22), it 
may also transactivate expression of G6pc encoding the enzyme 
er, from skeletal muscle and adipose tissue enhances hepatic DNL 
(20). Additionally, siRNA-mediated knockdown of ChREBP in 
ob/ob mice decreases hepatic DNL in the setting of persistent hyper-
insulinemia (21). Thus, hepatic DNL may be regulated by increased 
substrate delivery independently of insulin signaling. However, 
whether increasing intrahepatic CHO metabolites might also signal 
to increase glucose production has not been fully explored.
Figure 1. High-fructose feeding induces metabolic disease. (A) Body weight and (B) fat pad weights (PG, perigonadal; SC, subcutaneous; BAT, brown 
adipose tissue) were measured in WT male mice fed chow, high-dextrose, or high-fructose diet for 9 weeks (n = 8 per group). (C) Glycemia and (D) serum 
insulin were measured in the ad libitum–fed state. (E) Serum triglyceride (TG) levels were measured after an overnight fast followed by 3 hours refeeding 
with chow, glucose, or fructose diet. (F) Hepatic TG levels and representative H&E-stained liver sections. Images were obtained at ×20 magnification. 
(G) Glucose tolerance test and (H) glycerol tolerance test with incremental areas under the curve (Δ AUC) for this cohort. P values were obtained by 1-way 
ANOVA. *P < 0.05 versus chow; **P < 0.05 versus all others. Values are the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 7 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
might stimulate hepatic expression of ChREBP-β in association 
with the development of metabolic disease, we fed mice chow, 
60% dextrose (HDD), or 60% fructose (HFrD) diets for 9 weeks. 
HFrD induced a significant increase in body weight compared 
with chow, with a trend toward increased body weight on HDD 
(Figure 1A). Adiposity was significantly increased in both HFrD 
and HDD compared with chow (Figure 1B). Ad libitum–fed insu-
lin levels were significantly higher in HFrD (Figure 1C) compared 
with chow, without differences in blood glucose levels (Figure 
1D), suggesting that fructose-fed mice are insulin resistant. HFrD, 
but not HDD, significantly increased plasma triglyceride (Figure 
1E). Both HDD and HFrD significantly increased hepatic steato-
sis (Figure 1F). HFrD, but not HDD, caused glucose intolerance 
(Figure 1G) and increased glycemic excursion following glycerol 
injection (Figure 1H): a glycerol tolerance test. Together, these 
results demonstrate that increased fructose consumption can 
induce metabolic disease including impaired glucose and lipid 
homeostasis compared with chow-fed mice and independently of 
obesity, adiposity, and hepatic steatosis when compared with dex-
trose-fed mice.
We next examined whether ChREBP might be involved in 
HFrD-induced metabolic disease by measuring hepatic gene 
expression of ChREBP and Srebp1c — another important tran-
scriptional regulator of hepatic DNL (37) — and the expression 
of glycolytic, fructolytic, lipogenic, and gluconeogenic enzymes 
(Figure 2, A–E). HFrD markedly induced hepatic ChREBP-β, but 
not ChREBP-α or Srebp1c (Figure 2A). The relative importance of 
ChREBP-α versus -β in terms of total ChREBP activity is current-
ly unknown. However, because ChREBP-β expression requires 
ChREBP-α activity and ChREBP-β is more transcriptionally potent 
than ChREBP-α, ChREBP-β expression is the best-known surrogate 
marker of total ChREBP activity (36). Increased ChREBP activity 
with HFrD was accompanied by increased glycolytic (liver pyruvate 
kinase [Pklr], glucose phosphate isomerase [Gpi1], enolase 1 [Eno1]), 
fructolytic (aldolase B [Aldob], ketohexokinase [Khk], dihydroxy-
acetone kinase [Dak]), and lipogenic (fatty acid synthase [Fasn], 
catalyzing the final step in glucose production (23, 24). Consis-
tent with this, G6pc expression is diminished in ob/ob mice when 
ChREBP is knocked down or crossed with ChREBP knockout 
(ChKO) mice (21, 25). Here, we test whether HGP may be regulat-
ed by the abundance of hepatic substrate and whether ChREBP is 
a key mechanistic link in this process.
We administered fructose to mice to model the effects of 
increased hepatic CHO metabolites, since fructose is preferential-
ly metabolized in the liver (26) and can rapidly increase hepatic 
CHO metabolite levels (27). Also, increased fructose consumption 
as a component of sucrose or high-fructose corn syrup is increas-
ingly associated with cardiometabolic disease in humans (28). 
Excessive fructose consumption in both humans and rodents can 
produce or exacerbate all of the features of metabolic syndrome 
including increased fatty liver, hepatic de novo lipogenesis, and 
increased glucose production (29, 30). Recently, Schwarz and 
colleagues demonstrated that a weight-maintaining high-fructose 
diet causes increased hepatic DNL and hepatic insulin resistance 
within 1 week (31). Thus, even short-term, weight-maintaining 
fructose administration can reproduce the pathophysiology asso-
ciated with the pathogenic paradox of hepatic insulin resistance.
ChREBP plays an important role in fructose metabolism and 
fructose-induced metabolic disease, as it has been shown that 
whole-body ChKO mice are intolerant to diets containing fructose 
(22) and knockdown of ChREBP selectively in liver and adipose 
tissue of high-fructose-fed rats reduces DNL and hypertriglycer-
idemia and improves peripheral insulin sensitivity (32). A role for 
ChREBP in HGP has not been extensively examined.
Results
High-fructose feeding activates hepatic ChREBP and induces meta-
bolic disease. High-fructose feeding has been reported to activate 
hepatic ChREBP and its transcriptional targets in rodents (32–35). 
We recently discovered a potentially novel potent isoform of 
ChREBP, ChREBP-β, which is expressed from an alternative pro-
moter in the ChREBP gene (36). To determine whether fructose 
Figure 2. High-fructose feeding activates 
hepatic ChREBP and its metabolic gene 
targets. WT male mice were ad libitum fed a 
chow, high-dextrose, or high-fructose diet for 
9 weeks (n = 8 per group) and (A–E) hepatic 
gene expression and (F) hepatic G6PC activity 
were measured. P values were obtained by 
1-way ANOVA. *P < 0.05 versus chow diet; 
**P < 0.05 versus all others. Values are the 
mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 7 5
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
activating hepatic ChREBP and increasing hepatic DNL and glu-
cose production via upregulation of lipogenic and gluconeogenic 
gene programs, respectively.
CHOs metabolized by the liver acutely activate ChREBP. We next 
planned to test whether ChREBP is essential for the fructose-in-
duced changes in gene expression using ChKO mice. However, 
because ChKO mice are intolerant to dietary fructose and cease 
eating when challenged with fructose-containing diets (ref. 22 and 
Supplemental Figure 1; supplemental material available online 
with this article; doi:10.1172/JCI81993DS1), we first established 
a gavage paradigm to deliver defined amounts of different CHOs 
and examine their acute effects on hepatic gene expression. Fruc-
tose is largely extracted by the liver first pass (26). In contrast, 
ATP-citrate lyase [Acly], acetyl-CoA carboxylase-α [Acaca]) gene 
expression compared with HDD and chow. Additionally, HFrD, but 
not HDD, induced expression of factors essential for glucose pro-
duction including G6pc and Slc37a4, which mediates transport of 
glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) into the endoplasmic reticulum lumen 
where G6PC catalytic activity resides. In contrast, expression of the 
gluconeogenic enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (Pck1) 
was affected by neither HFrD nor HDD, indicating that the effects 
of fructose and potentially ChREBP on glucose production may be 
selective for different portions of the gluconeogenic pathway.
Consistent with gene expression data, G6PC enzymatic activ-
ity was significantly increased on HFrD, but not HDD (Figure 2F), 
suggesting that HFrD may induce features of metabolic disease by 
Figure 3. Multiple different carbohydrates acutely activate hepatic ChREBP. (A–C) Five-hour-fasted, 8-week-old C3H/HeJ male mice were gavaged with 
water, glucose (4 g/kg body weight), or fructose (4 g/kg body weight) and sacrificed 100 minutes later. (A) Hepatic gene expression was measured by qPCR. 
P values were obtained by 1-way ANOVA. *P < 0.05 compared with water; **P < 0.05 compared with all others (n = 6 per group). (B) Nuclear and cytosolic 
ChREBP-α and the ratio of nuclear to cytosolic ChREBP-α from water- versus fructose-gavaged mice were measured by Western blot and quantified  
(n = 4 per group). P values were obtained by Student’s t test. *P < 0.05 compared with water. (C) ChIP was performed from liver tissue with anti-ChREBP 
antibody or IgG control and qPCR was performed on immunoprecipitated chromatin with primers spanning the E-box in the ChREBP-β promoter, the 
carbohydrate response element in the G6pc promoter, and a nonspecific genomic region. P values were obtained by 1-way ANOVA. †P < 0.05 compared 
with water- and glucose-ChREBP groups (n = 4 per group). (D) Five-hour-fasted, 8-week-old C3H/HeJ male mice were gavaged with glucokinase activator 
(PF-04991532, 100 mg/kg body weight) and then gavaged with water or glucose (4 g/kg body weight) 30 minutes later. Mice were sacrificed 100 minutes 
later and hepatic gene expression was measured by qPCR. P values were obtained by 2-way ANOVA. *P < 0.05 compared with methylcellulose (MC) within 
water- or glucose-gavaged groups; #P < 0.05 compared with water within MC- or GKA-gavaged groups (n = 6 per group). (E) Five-hour-fasted, 8-week-old 
C3H/HeJ male mice were gavaged with water or glycerol (4 g/kg body weight) and sacrificed 100 minutes later. P values were obtained by Student’s t test. 
*P < 0.05 compared with water (n = 6 per group). Values are the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 7 6
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
tional activity is likely independent of enhanced nuclear import 
(44, 45). As the majority of these studies have been conducted in 
vitro, we evaluated aspects of these models in our in vivo gavage 
paradigm. Western blots were performed in nuclear versus cyto-
solic fractions from water- versus fructose-gavaged mice (Figure 
3B). ChREBP-α protein was readily detectable in both subcellular 
fractions. ChREBP-β protein was not detectable. This may be due 
to low absolute ChREBP-β expression levels and rapid ChREBP-β 
degradation, as suggested by our prior results (36). Despite the 
fact that ChREBP-α gene expression did not change with fructose 
gavage (Figure 3A), the abundance of ChREBP-α protein in the 
cytosol increased, suggesting that fructose may enhance ChREBP-α 
stability. A tendency towards increased ChREBP-α protein was also 
observed in the nuclear fraction, though this did not achieve statisti-
cal significance. As a result, the nuclear to cytosolic ChREBP-α ratio 
actually tended to decrease with fructose gavage. This suggests that 
enhancing ChREBP-α nuclear import is not a major mechanism by 
which CHO metabolites activate ChREBP in vivo. To further assess 
mechanisms by which CHO might activate ChREBP, we assessed 
whether the fructose-mediated increases in ChREBP-β and G6pc 
expression were associated with increased ChREBP binding at CHO 
response elements within their promoters by chromatin immuno-
precipitation coupled with quantitative PCR (ChIP-qPCR) (Figure 
3C). We observed robust ChREBP binding to its genomic targets in 
basal conditions and this increased 2- to 3-fold with fructose gavage. 
This increase in ChREBP binding to genomic targets occurred with-
out a corresponding increase in nuclear ChREBP protein (Figure 
orally ingested glucose largely escapes hepatic first-pass metabo-
lism (38). This occurs in part because glucokinase (GCK), which 
catalyzes the committed step in hepatic glucose metabolism, is 
sequestered and inactivated in the nucleus under the control of the 
GCK regulatory protein (GCKR) (39). We hypothesized that fruc-
tose gavage would more robustly activate ChREBP and its targets 
compared with glucose. Indeed, fructose gavage, but not glucose 
gavage, acutely increased the expression of hepatic ChREBP-β 2.7-
fold (P < 0.001) (Figure 3A). This was accompanied by increased 
expression of glycolytic, fructolytic, and lipogenic genes as well as 
a robust, 7-fold increase in G6pc (P < 0.0001) (Figure 3A).
The mechanisms by which CHO metabolites activate ChREBP-α 
to increase expression of ChREBP-β and other ChREBP transcrip-
tional targets remains controversial (reviewed in ref. 40). Nuclear 
translocation of ChREBP-α may be important for CHO-mediated 
activation (41–43). However, ChREBP-α remains predominantly 
cytosolic in low- and high-CHO conditions and the transcription-
al activity of mutant forms of ChREBP-α, which are constitutively 
localized to the nucleus, remain glucose responsive, indicating that 
the ability of glucose metabolites to stimulate ChREBP-α transcrip-
Figure 4. ChREBP is necessary for fructose-induced hepatic gene expres-
sion. (A) Hepatic gene expression, (B) hepatic G6PC activity, and (C) hepatic 
G6P levels were measured in 5-hour-fasted, 8- to 12-week-old WT and 
ChKO male mice gavaged with water or fructose (4 g/kg body weight) and 
sacrificed 100 minutes later (n = 6–9 per group). P values were obtained by 
2-way ANOVA. *P < 0.05 compared with water within genotype; #P < 0.05 
compared with WT within gavage treatment; †P < 0.05 main effect of geno-
type. Values are the mean ± SEM.
Figure 5. ChREBP mediates the conversion of fructose to glucose. We 
measured accumulation of glucose in the media after treatment with 
fructose or lactate+pyruvate from mouse primary hepatocytes obtained 
from (A) WT mice fed chow versus HFrD for 1 week (n = 3 per group) and (B) 
chow-fed WT versus ChKO mice (n = 4 per group). P values were obtained by 
2-way ANOVA. *P < 0.05 compared with lactate+pyruvate within genotype 
or diet; #P < 0.05 compared with lactate+pyruvate condition within geno-
type or diet. (C) Serum fructose concentrations were determined by LC-MS 
at the indicated time points in 5-hour-fasted, 8- to 12-week-old WT and 
ChKO male mice after gavage with U13C-fructose (4 g/kg body weight).  
P values were obtained by Student’s t test. *P < 0.05 compared with WT  
(n = 5 per group). (D) A schematic diagram illustrating our working hypoth-
esis regarding how ChREBP regulates intracellular hexose-phosphate 
homeostasis. Increased sugar consumption increases hepatic carbohydrate 
uptake, which activates ChREBP and increases glycolysis, fatty acid synthe-
sis, and glucose production to dispose of hexose-phosphates such as G6P.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 7 7
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
3B). These results are consistent with a model in which sufficient 
ChREBP protein is constitutively present in hepatic nuclei. Some of 
this nuclear ChREBP is bound to its genomic targets in basal condi-
tions. Under the influence of increased CHO metabolites, binding of 
ChREBP to its targets is further enhanced.
To test whether the acute activation of hepatic ChREBP was 
mediated by a fructose-specific metabolite or whether other CHO 
metabolites could also activate hepatic ChREBP, we tested wheth-
er a liver-selective GCK activator (GKA, PF-04991532) might 
also activate ChREBP (46). We found that administration of GKA 
alone increased G6pc expression 3-fold, and in conjunction with 
glucose gavage, further increased G6pc expression along with 
ChREBP-β and its transcriptional targets (Figure 3D). We tested 
ChREBP activation with 1 additional CHO, glycerol, which is a 
preferred hepatic gluconeogenic substrate. Glycerol metabolites 
enter the hepatic glycolytic/gluconeogenic carbon pools at the 
triose-phosphate level, similar to fructose metabolites. Glycerol 
acutely and robustly stimulated expression of hepatic ChREBP-β 
and its transcriptional targets including G6pc (Figure 3E). Thus, 
activation of hepatic ChREBP is not specific to fructose ingestion. 
Any carbohydrate that can increase the intrahepatic hexose- and 
triose-phosphate pool can likely activate hepatic ChREBP.
ChREBP is necessary for fructose-induced hepatic gene expres-
sion and conversion of fructose to glucose. To examine whether fruc-
tose-induced gene expression in the liver depends on ChREBP, 
ChKO mice and their wild-type (WT) littermates were gavaged 
with water or fructose and changes in hepatic gene expression 
were examined 100 minutes later. Baseline levels of lipogenic 
and fructolytic enzymes and G6pc were reduced in ChKO mice 
and failed to increase with fructose gavage, demonstrating that 
ChREBP is required for basal and fructose-induced changes 
in hepatic gene expression (Figure 4A). We did not observe an 
increase in G6PC activity in association with the increased G6pc 
gene expression in WT mice in this short time frame (Figure 4B). 
Figure 6. HFrD increases HGP in association with increased G6PC activity. (A) Glycemia (B) HGP, and (C) serum insulin levels were measured after a 
4-hour fast in 4-month-old live, conscious mice fed chow vs. HFrD for 2 weeks (n = 8 or 9 per group). (D) Hepatic G6PC activity, (E) hepatic glycogen, and (F) 
hepatic G6P levels were measured in liver obtained from mice euthanized immediately after blood was obtained for the turnover measurement. P values 
were obtained by Student’s t test. *P < 0.05 compared with chow. (G) Western blot of hepatic total AKT and phospho-AKT (Ser473), with quantification of 
the AKT/phospo-AKT ratio (n = 8 per group). (H) Western blot of hepatic cytosolic FOXO1A with quantification of FOXO1A normalized for MEK1 (n = 4 per 
group). Bars represent the mean ± SEM.
Figure 7. HGP is unchanged in chow-fed ChKO. (A) Glycemia, (B) serum insu-
lin levels, and (C) HGP were measured after a 4-hour fast in 5-month-old live, 
conscious, chow-fed WT and ChKO mice (n = 5 per group). (D) Hepatic G6PC 
activity, (E) hepatic G6P levels, and (F) hepatic glycogen levels were measured 
in liver obtained from mice euthanized immediately after blood was obtained 
for the turnover measurement. P values were obtained by Student’s t test.  
*P < 0.05 compared with chow. Bars represent the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 7 8
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
However, G6PC activity was 50% reduced in both water- and 
fructose-treated ChKO mice compared with WT, consistent with 
the chronic reduction in G6pc gene expression in ChKO (Figure 
4A). This reduction in G6PC is biochemically relevant, given the 
trend towards increased hepatic G6P levels in ChKO compared 
with WT with water gavage and a marked increase in G6P in 
ChKO following fructose gavage (Figure 4C). This is consistent 
with previously reported increases in G6P levels in ChKO mice 
(22) and suggests a homeostatic model whereby increased hepa-
tocellular hexose-phosphates, and possibly G6P itself (47), might 
activate ChREBP to enhance hexose- and triose-phosphate dis-
posal. In addition to enhancing glycolytic flux and lipogenic flux 
(22), enhancing conversion of G6P to glucose through G6PC is 
another path by which activation of ChREBP might reduce intra-
hepatic hexose- and triose-phosphate levels as part of this homeo-
static mechanism.
Based on this homeostatic model, we hypothesized that the 
ability of ChREBP to activate G6PC might be an important adap-
tive mechanism to mediate conversion of dietary fructose taken up 
in the liver first pass to glucose, which can then be readily utilized 
as fuel elsewhere in the body. To test this, we measured the conver-
sion of fructose to glucose in isolated primary hepatocytes. Prima-
ry hepatocytes isolated from chow-fed WT mice generated 5-fold 
more glucose from fructose compared with equimolar lactate plus 
pyruvate in the media, demonstrating that fructose is 
readily used as a gluconeogenic substrate (Figure 5A). 
Feeding WT mice HFrD for 1 week increased glucose 
production from fructose by an additional 20%, consis-
tent with an adaptive response. In contrast, glucose pro-
duction from fructose was reduced by 60% in ChKO 
mice (Figure 5B). Following fructose gavage, peripheral 
blood fructose clearance was impaired in ChKO mice 
(Figure 5C). Together, these results are consistent with 
a role for ChREBP in mediating an adaptive response to 
fructose ingestion and intrahepatic hexose-phosphate 
homeostasis (model, Figure 5D).
Hexose- and triose-phosphates are globally increased 
in ChKO mice. If ChREBP mediates hepatocyte CHO 
metabolite homeostasis, we reasoned that knocking out 
ChREBP should not only increase hepatic G6P levels, 
but might also globally increase hepatic hexose- and 
triose-phosphate levels. To assess this, we performed 
targeted metabolomics on livers harvested from ChKO 
mice and controls after water, fructose, or glycerol 
gavage. Consistent with our hypothesis, we observed 
that all measured glycolytic hexose- and triose-phos-
phates as well as the pentose phosphate metabolite xyulose-5-phos-
phate, the fructolytic metabolite fructose-1-phosphate, and lactate 
tended to increase in ChKO livers (Supplemental Figure 2). Fruc-
tose gavage markedly increased fructose-1-phosphate levels in 
both ChKO mice and controls, and this did not occur following 
glycerol gavage (Supplemental Figure 3). Thus, increases in fruc-
tose-specific metabolites are not critical for activation of ChREBP. 
Fructose gavage tended to increase all of the measured hexose- 
and triose-phosphates and glycerol gavage tended to increase the 
majority of these same metabolites (Supplemental Figure 2). Over-
all, these results are consistent with a role for ChREBP in mediating 
hepatocyte hexose- and triose-phosphate homeostasis.
Fructose induces hepatic G6PC activity and glucose production 
in vivo. To determine whether high-fructose feeding can enhance 
glucose production in vivo, we measured glucose turnover in 
4-month-old WT mice fed chow or HFrD for 2 weeks using iso-
topic dilution and obtained liver to measure hepatic G6P levels 
immediately after blood was obtained for the turnover measure-
ment. Basal glycemia was not different between groups (Figure 
6A). HFrD increased HGP (chow 31.48 ± 1.41 mg/kg/min, HFrD 
38.59 ± 2.30 mg/kg/min, P = 0.02, Figure 6B) and this occurred 
with a trend toward higher insulin levels (chow 0.48 ± 0.08 ng/
ml, HFrD 0.70 ± 0.07 ng/ml, P = 0.06, Figure 6C), consistent with 
insulin resistance. The increased HGP in HFrD was associated 
Figure 8. G6PC activity predicts hepatic G6P levels and HGP 
4 hours after food removal. (A) Hepatic G6PC activity versus 
hepatic G6P levels (n = 44), (B) hepatic G6PC activity versus 
HGP (n = 44), (C) serum insulin levels versus HGP (n = 44), 
and (D) hepatic G6P levels versus hepatic glycogen (n = 43) 
in 3 mouse cohorts. Each data point represents an individual 
mouse. In A and B, black dashed lines represent exponential 
fits including all mice. Red dashed lines represent exponential 
fits excluding ChKO mice. In D, the black dashed line rep-
resents a linear fit excluding ChKO mice. The blue dashed line 
is the linear fit for ChKO mice only.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 7 9
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
ChKO 26.8 ± 1.3 mg/kg/min, P = 0.20). ChKO mice again demon-
strated a 50% reduction in G6PC activity (Figure 7D) with a trend 
towards increased G6P and glycogen levels (Figure 7, E and F).
As glucose production is ultimately determined by the activity 
of G6PC and the immediate availability of its substrate, G6P, we 
sought to examine the molecular factors important for regulating 
glucose production in vivo. We performed a pooled analysis assess-
ing the relationship between HGP, G6PC activity, G6P levels, and 
insulin across the cohorts described above (5-month-old, chow-
fed, ChKO, and littermate controls; 4-month-old, WT mice fed 
chow vs. HFrD for 2 weeks; and 2-month-old WT mice fed chow vs. 
HFrD for 2 weeks). In this large group of mice, G6P levels decayed 
exponentially with increasing G6PC activity (model: G6P ~ ln(G-
6PC activity), R2 = 0.47, P = 3.06 × 10–7, Figure 8A and Supplemen-
tal Figure 4A). The exponential relationship between G6PC activ-
ity and G6P is similar when ChKO mice, which appear to define 
the G6P asymptote as G6PC activity declines, are removed from 
the analysis (R2 = 0.43, P = 6.17 × 10–6, Figure 8A and Supplemental 
Figure 4B). Across this set of mice, HGP positively correlates with 
G6PC activity (R2 = 0.34, P = 3.68 × 10–5, Figure 8B and Supplemen-
tal Figure 5), with a lower limit of ~25.5 mg/kg/min (P < 2 × 10–16). 
Although G6P is the immediate substrate for glucose production, 
G6P levels inversely correlate with HGP (R2 = 015, P = 0.009, 
Supplemental Figure 6, A and B). After accounting for the strong 
effect of G6PC activity on HGP, G6P levels have no independent 
correlation with HGP (Supplemental Figure 6C). Together, these 
results indicate that G6PC activity is a major determinant of glu-
cose production and that within the physiological range tested 
here, G6PC activity is a more important factor than the immediate 
availability of substrate. The exponentially increasing G6P levels 
in both ChKO mice and chow-fed mice with lower levels of G6PC 
activity may, by mass action, compensate for reduced G6PC activi-
ty to increase HGP and help define the lower limit of HGP observed 
in Figure 8B. Similarly, the exponential decay in G6P levels with 
increasing G6PC activity may, by limiting substrate availability, 
define the upper limit of HGP. Importantly, ambient insulin lev-
els did not correlate with HGP (R2 = 0.001, P = 0.82, Figure 8C). 
Moreover, by multiple regression analysis, insulin levels had min-
imal impact on the relationship between G6PC activity and HGP 
(compare Supplemental Figures 5 and 7A). After accounting for the 
effect of G6PC activity on HGP, there is a tendency for insulin to 
negatively correlate with HGP, although this does not achieve sta-
tistical significance (R2 = 0.05, P = 0.128, Supplemental Figure 7, 
A and B). Absent evidence of impaired insulin signaling resulting 
from 2 weeks on an HFrD (Figure 6), these results indicate that the 
natural variation in endogenous insulin levels among chow- and 
with increased G6PC activity (chow 118.7 ± 5.3 nmol/mg/min, 
HFrD 243.9 ± 9.9 nmol/mg/min, P < 0.001, Figure 6D). No differ-
ences in glycogen (Figure 6E) were observed.
Whereas fructose ingestion tends to acutely increase hepatic 
hexose-phosphate levels (Supplemental Figure 2), hepatic G6P 
levels were reduced 4 hours after food removal in mice fed HFrD 
for 2 weeks (chow 0.188 ± 0.009 nmol/mg, HFrD 0.093 ± 0.006 
nmol/mg, P < 0.001, Figure 6F). These results are consistent with 
a homeostatic model whereby increased G6PC activity resulting 
from increased CHO delivery to the liver in the fed state functions 
to reduce hepatic G6P levels and this is readily apparent after food 
is withdrawn. These results also indicate that increased G6PC 
activity within the physiological range is sufficient to drive glucose 
production, even in the face of lower levels of its immediate sub-
strate, G6P. These results are consistent with the inference that 
genetic overexpression of G6PC may be sufficient to drive aber-
rant glucose production (15). Similar results were obtained in an 
independent cohort of 2-month-old mice.
We next assessed insulin signaling including the v-akt murine 
thymoma viral oncogene (AKT) (Figure 6G) and FOXO1A (Figure 
6H), both canonical factors in the insulin signaling pathway that 
regulate gluconeogenic gene expression (48). Phosphorylated 
AKT was highly variable in this cohort, but it was as high or high-
er in fructose-fed compared with chow-fed mice, consistent with 
intact insulin signaling. The abundance of cytosolic, insulin-in-
activated FOXO1A (Figure 6H) was similar between diet groups 
and was nearly undetectable in nuclear fractions (data not shown), 
again consistent with intact insulin signaling. Thus, the increas-
es in HGP and G6PC activity, and decreased G6P levels in high-
fructose-fed mice do not appear to be due to overt differences in 
hepatic insulin sensitivity.
We next asked whether ChREBP regulates glucose production 
in vivo. Because ChKO mice are intolerant to fructose, this was lim-
ited to chow-fed mice. Basal glycemia and insulin levels were not 
different between genotypes (Figure 7, A and B). There was a ten-
dency for modestly lower HGP (Figure 7C) in ChKO, although this 
did not achieve statistical significance (WT 29.2 ± 1.2 mg/kg/min, 
Figure 9. ChREBP is essential for glucagon-stimulated glucose produc-
tion. (A) Changes in blood glucose levels were measured after glucagon (20 
μg/kg body weight, ip) administration in ad libitum–fed 8- to 13-week-old 
male WT and ChKO mice (n = 6–9 per group) after 1 week on HDD. P values 
were obtained by Student’s t test. *P < 0.05 compared with ChKO at the 
indicated time point. After 2 weeks on HDD, (B) hepatic glycogen levels,  
(C) hepatic G6P levels, and (D) serum insulin levels were measured 20 min-
utes after injection with either glucagon (20 μg/kg body weight) or water  
(n = 3–5 per group). P values were obtained by 2-way ANOVA. *P < 0.05 
compared with WT within treatment; #P < 0.05 compared with water within 
genotype. †P < 0.05 main effect of genotype. Values are the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 8 0
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
metabolic enzymes including G6pc calibrates hepatocyte G6P lev-
els, which may be important for coordinated regulation of glycog-
enolysis, glucose production, and other well-established terminal 
fates of hepatic hexose- and triose-phosphates such as lipogenesis.
Given the limitation in subjecting ChKO mice to diets contain-
ing fructose and the absence of marked changes in glucose pro-
duction between chow-fed ChKO and controls, we sought anoth-
er means to test the physiological significance of reduced G6PC 
activity in ChKO mice by testing the glycemic response to gluca-
gon. Glucagon robustly increased glycemia in WT, but not ChKO 
mice (Figure 9A). We next examined the effects of glucagon on 
hepatic glycogen and G6P levels. As expected, glycogen levels 
were higher in ChKO mice (Figure 9B). Glucagon did not increase 
hepatic G6P levels in WT mice, as G6P hydrolyzed from glycogen 
was likely efficiently converted to glucose and other end fates via 
high-fructose-fed mice has minimal impact on the endogenous 
physiological mechanisms that govern the robust relationships 
between G6PC activity, hepatic G6P levels, and glucose produc-
tion shortly after food removal.
As G6P is also an important allosteric activator of glycogen 
synthesis and inhibitor of glycogenolysis, we examined the rela-
tionship between G6P and glycogen in these cohorts. Among WT 
and control mice on either diet, we observed no significant correla-
tion between hepatic G6P levels and glycogen levels (R2 = 0.02, 
 P = 0.35, Figure 8D). In contrast, in ChKO mice, hepatic glyco-
gen and G6P levels strongly correlate (R2 = 0.85, P = 0.02). This 
aberrant positive correlation may reflect inefficient flux of G6P to 
glucose due to reduced G6PC activity. This may result in aberrant-
ly increased G6P levels, thus limiting glycogen breakdown. These 
results suggest that ChREBP through regulating the expression of 
Figure 10. ChREBP upregulates G6pc despite activated hepatic insulin signaling. (A) Schematic diagram illustrating the experimental design. Insulin (1.5 
mU/kg/min) and glucose (20 mg/kg/min) were infused into 8-week-old C3H/HeJ mice after 5 hours of fasting and water or fructose (4 g/kg) was injected 
into the stomach. Mice were sacrificed 100 minutes later. P values were obtained by 1-way ANOVA. *P < 0.05 compared with saline; #P < 0.05 compared with 
insulin + glucose + water (n = 11 or 12 per group). (B) Glycemia was measured in tail vein blood throughout the duration of the experiment and (C) serum insulin 
was measured at termination. (D) Hepatic gene expression was measured by qPCR. (E) Representative Western blots of hepatic total AKT and phospho-AKT 
(Ser473), with quantification of the AKT/phospo-AKT ratio. (F) Nuclear and cytosolic FOXO1A and phospho-FOXO1A (Ser256) with quantification of total 
FOXO1A normalized for the saline group within each cellular compartment (n = 4 per group). Values are the mean ± SEM.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 8 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
and insulin infusion did not increase hepatic ChREBP-β expres-
sion (Figure 10D). Expression of ChREBP-β increased 50% in 
glucose- and insulin-infused mice when provided fructose (Fig-
ure 10D). The insulin/glucose infusion tended to suppress hepat-
ic G6pc expression. However, G6pc expression was increased in 
insulin- and glucose-infused mice following fructose treatment, 
suggesting that the effect of fructose to increase G6pc expression 
is dominant over the effect of a combination of insulin and glucose 
to suppress it (Figure 10D). As expected, the combined insulin and 
glucose infusion increased Fasn expression, and this was further 
enhanced with fructose administration (Figure 10D). The effect 
of fructose to increase G6pc expression in the setting of hypergly-
cemia and hyperinsulinemia occurs in the setting of intact insulin 
signaling as evidenced by robust phosphorylation of AKT (Figure 
10E) and FOXO1A (Figure 10F). Together, these results indicate 
that ChREBP can transactivate expression of G6pc even when 
hyperinsulinemia excludes FOXO1A from the nucleus.
FOXO1A positively regulates gluconeogenic enzyme expres-
sion including G6pc (48), and insulin-mediated inhibition of 
FOXO1A accounts for the majority of insulin-mediated suppression 
of the expression of G6pc and other gluconeogenic enzymes (49, 
50). We sought to confirm that fructose- and ChREBP-mediated 
transactivation of G6pc is independent of FOXO1A. To do so, we 
tested the ability of fructose to induce G6pc in liver-specific Foxo1a 
knockout mice (Foxo1a-LKO) versus control littermates (CTL). 
Foxo1a expression was reduced by 70% in Foxo1a-LKO (Figure 11A). 
Fructose gavage increased ChREBP-β expression similarly in both 
glycolysis (Figure 9, A and C). G6P levels were markedly elevated 
in ChKO mice compared with WT, and glucagon further increased 
G6P levels in ChKO (Figure 9C). Thus, glucagon can stimulate 
glycogenolysis in ChKO mice, but, in contrast with WT mice, G6P 
produced from glycogenolysis is trapped within the glycolytic/
gluconeogenic carbon pool. Consistent with the results from the 
turnover experiments, we observed no correlation between G6P 
and glycogen levels in WT mice (Supplemental Figure 8, A and 
B). However, within the ChKO group, by multiple regression, G6P 
levels correlate with glycogen levels independently of glucagon 
treatment (P = 0.018, Supplemental Figure 8C). No differences 
were observed in serum insulin levels between groups (Figure 9D). 
These results support an important role for ChREBP to coordinate 
hepatic G6PC activity to regulate HGP and hepatic hexose-phos-
phate homeostasis.
ChREBP regulates G6pc independently of insulin signaling. To 
examine whether sugar-induced ChREBP-mediated transactiva-
tion of G6pc might contribute to an apparent increase in hepat-
ic insulin resistance, we tested whether the effect of fructose 
to enhance hepatic G6pc expression can overcome the effect of 
insulin to suppress it. In anesthetized mice, we infused insulin (1.5 
mU/kg/min) and glucose (25 mg/kg/min) through the inferior 
vena cava (IVC) and injected water or fructose into the stomach 
(Figure 10A). We achieved marked hyperinsulinemia and hyper-
glycemia in mice infused with glucose and insulin throughout the 
duration of the experiment (Figure 10, B and C). Consistent with 
our glucose gavage data, hyperglycemia generated via glucose 
Figure 11. Fructose activates ChREBP and induces G6PC and glycerol intolerance independently of FOXO1A. Five-hour-fasted, 8- to 10-week-old CTL 
and Foxo1a-LKO mice were gavaged with water or fructose (4 g/kg body weight) and sacrificed 100 minutes later. (A–C) Hepatic gene expression was 
measured by qPCR (n = 3 or 4 per group). *P < 0.05 compared with water; #P < 0.05 compared with WT. Values are the mean ± SEM. (D) Weight gain of 
male CTL and Foxo1a-LKO mice fed chow versus HFrD for 4 weeks (n = 6–8/group). (E) Glucose tolerance test and (F) glycerol tolerance test. *P < 0.05 
for chow vs. HFrD within genotype with area under the curve (AUC) for this cohort. †P < 0.05 main effect of HFrD; #P < 0.05 vs. chow-LKO. (G) Hepatic 
G6PC activity from ad libitum–fed mice. n = 3–6/group, *P < 0.05 within genotype versus chow. Values and bars are means ± SEM. All P values were 
obtained by 2-way ANOVA.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 8 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
multiple regression analysis, the correlations between ChREBP-α 
and ChREBP-β with G6pc are independent of each other and the 
correlation between ChREBP-β with G6pc is much stronger than 
that of ChREBP-α. These data suggest that a distinct gene expres-
sion program may exist that coregulates Pck1, G6pc, and ChREBP-α 
expression. Altogether, these data are consistent with the conclu-
sion that ChREBP may contribute to lipogenic gene expression 
and apparent hepatic insulin resistance at the level of G6pc expres-
sion in humans as it does in mice.
Discussion
Here we demonstrate that fructose ingestion, but not glucose 
ingestion, robustly and acutely activates the key metabolic tran-
scription factor ChREBP in the livers of mice. This is associated 
with increased expression of genes encoding enzymes involved in 
glycolysis, fructolysis, DNL, as well as G6PC, the final step in HGP. 
ChREBP is required for fructose-induced changes in these metabol-
ic programs, as this is absent in ChKO mice. We show that ChREBP 
is also important for efficient conversion of fructose to glucose in 
hepatocytes and whole-body fructose clearance, which suggests 
that this molecular mechanism may have evolved to sense dietary 
sugar consumption in order to enhance its efficient metabolism.
When consumed in excess, fructose causes many features of 
metabolic disease. In this study, mice fed either HDD or HFrD 
developed obesity and hepatic steatosis, but only those fed an 
HFrD developed hyperinsulinemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and 
impaired glucose and glycerol tolerance, indicating that fructose 
has a specific deleterious effect on glucose homeostasis and hyper-
lipidemia independently of fatty liver. This is consistent with data 
showing that excessive fructose, but not glucose consumption, 
causes hypertriglyceridemia and impaired glucose metabolism 
in overweight human subjects (29). Fructose-induced alterations 
in lipid metabolism are likely in part due to activation of ChREBP 
and its lipogenic gene program, consistent with data showing that 
polymorphisms in the ChREBP locus are associated with circu-
lating triglycerides in human populations (51, 52). How activating 
ChREBP might participate in impaired glucose homeostasis is 
less obvious. We show that ChREBP under the influence of fruc-
tose ingestion directly transactivates G6pc expression, which is 
one mechanism by which activating ChREBP might contribute to 
impaired glucose homeostasis. This is supported by data showing 
that overexpression of G6PC is sufficient to cause hyperinsulin-
emia and impair glucose tolerance in rodents (15).
ChREBP was discovered based upon observations that glu-
cose could stimulate gene expression in primary hepatocyte 
culture independently of insulin (53). In contrast, in vivo, orally 
administered fructose, but not glucose robustly activates hepat-
ic ChREBP. Moreover, several hours of hyperglycemia resulting 
from glucose infusion did not activate hepatic ChREBP in vivo. We 
have observed marked alterations in the expression of ChREBP, 
fructolytic enzymes, and other key metabolic enzymes occurring 
CTL and Foxo1a-LKO (Figure 11B). G6pc expression was reduced 
in water-gavaged Foxo1a-LKO compared with CTL, consistent with 
FOXO1A’s known role in regulating G6pc expression (Figure 11C). 
Fructose gavage produced similar increases in G6pc expression in 
both CTL and Foxo1a-LKO, demonstrating that fructose-mediat-
ed regulation of G6pc is independent of the insulin- 
regulated fac-
tor FOXO1A (Figure 11C). No significant differences were noted 
between genotypes in serum glucose, triglyceride, or insulin follow-
ing water or fructose gavage (Supplemental Figure 9).
We next challenged CTL and Foxo1a-LKO mice with chow ver-
sus HFrD for 4 weeks. In this time frame, weight gain was similar 
across genotypes and diets (Figure 11D) and glucose intolerance 
did not develop (Figure 11E). Nevertheless, 4 weeks of HFrD was 
sufficient to enhance glucose excursion following glycerol admin-
istration in CTL and Foxo1a-LKO (Figure 11F). G6PC activity was 
increased 2-fold in both CTL and Foxo1a-LKO (Figure 11G). Thus, 
fructose-mediated activation of ChREBP stimulates expression of 
lipogenic enzymes synergistically with hepatic insulin signaling and 
stimulates enzymes essential for glucose production independently 
of insulin signaling, providing a potentially novel mechanism con-
tributing to the apparent paradox of hepatic insulin resistance.
The ChREBP-G6PC signaling axis is conserved in humans. To 
determine whether a ChREBP-G6PC axis might also partici-
pate in regulating glucose production in humans, we examined 
expression of ChREBP and its transcriptional targets in human 
liver samples. Expression of ChREBP-β positively correlated 
with canonical ChREBP targets including Pklr and Fasn and also 
strongly correlated with G6pc (Figure 12, A–C). No correlation was 
observed between the expression of ChREBP-β and Pck1, a gluco-
neogenic enzyme that is not regulated by ChREBP (Figure 12D). 
It should be noted that the expression of ChREBP-α also correlat-
ed with the expression of ChREBP target genes but less so than 
ChREBP-β (Supplemental Figure 10). By multiple regression anal-
ysis ChREBP-β, but not ChREBP-α expression correlates with the 
canonical ChREBP targets Fasn and Pklr (Supplemental Figure 
11). These results are consistent with our prior data indicating that 
ChREBP-β expression best reflects total ChREBP activity (36). By 
Figure 12. A ChREBP-G6PC signaling axis is conserved in human liver. The 
correlation between ChREBP-β gene expression and (A) Fasn, (B) Pklr, (C) 
G6pc, and (D) Pck1 were compared in liver biopsy samples from over-
night-fasted human subjects with NAFLD. Each data point represents an 
individual person (n = 95). P values were obtained by linear regression.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 8 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
induce G6pc and overcome insulin’s ability to suppress it? These 
questions are motivated by reports that ChREBP-β expression as 
a marker of ChREBP activity is increased in livers from obese, 
insulin-resistant humans (57, 58). Here we show that fructose 
feeding induces G6PC activity and HGP and this is dominant 
over insulin’s effect of reducing G6pc expression via regulation of 
FOXO1A. After food withdrawal, the fructose-mediated increase 
in G6PC reduces G6P levels to close the hexose-phosphate–
ChREBP–G6pc homeostatic loop.
Across a large cohort of chow- versus fructose-fed mice, the 
strong relationships between G6PC activity, HGP, and G6P levels 
are insulin independent. Although exogenous insulin infusions 
can readily regulate glucose production by regulating glycogeno-
lysis, G6P levels, and other mechanisms, the natural variation 
in endogenous insulin levels appears to have little impact on the 
mechanisms regulating variation in glucose production in the par-
adigm studied here. It will be important in the future to extend this 
analysis to determine whether this conclusion can be generalized 
to other nutritional and genetic contexts affecting HGP.
Our studies have focused on gluconeogenic enzyme expres-
sion and basal glucose production and do not exclude the possi-
bility that selective defects in hepatic insulin signaling also con-
tribute to the pathogenic paradox of hepatic insulin resistance 
by regulating HGP in other contexts. In fact, insulin action in 
the liver can acutely reduce glucose production (10, 11), and this 
occurs in a time frame where gluconeogenic enzyme expression is 
largely unaffected. Thus, additional mechanisms are required to 
explain resistance to insulin’s effect of acutely reducing glucose 
production, as is often observed in euglycemic-hyperinsulinemic 
clamp procedures.
Our results potentially provide a new perspective on this 
important phenomenon. We show that hepatic G6PC activity pos-
itively correlates with HGP and strongly and inversely correlates 
with hepatic G6P levels. This shows that increased G6PC activ-
ity can overcome a relative deficit in its immediate substrate to 
increase HGP. The major mechanism by which insulin is thought 
to acutely reduce HGP is by inhibiting net glycogen breakdown 
in the liver and reducing G6P availability as substrate for G6PC 
(reviewed in ref. 59). However, the effect of insulin to inhibit gly-
cogen phosphorylase and stimulate glycogen synthase is strongly 
countered by the ability of low G6P levels to stimulate glycogen 
breakdown and limit glycogen synthesis. In fact, recent evidence 
indicates that the allosteric effect of G6P on glycogen synthesis 
and breakdown are dominant over insulin’s effects (60). Thus, low 
hepatic G6P levels caused by high G6PC activity might limit insu-
lin’s ability to reduce glycogen breakdown, further reduce G6P 
levels, and limit HGP. It remains possible that in settings where 
hepatic glycogen stores are depleted, insulin may be able to acute-
ly reduce glucose production via its peripheral effects to suppress 
adipose lipolysis and delivery of substrate to the liver (8, 9). Addi-
tional studies will be required to investigate these hypotheses.
Lastly, we show that in human liver biopsy samples, ChREBP-β 
expression strongly correlates with G6pc expression as well as the 
expression of DNL enzymes, indicating that this is a major mode 
of G6pc regulation in humans in vivo. Thus, this mechanism like-
ly contributes to the apparent paradox of selective hepatic insulin 
resistance in humans as it does in mice.
during hepatocyte isolation that persist in primary hepatocyte cul-
ture, including upregulation of hexokinases not highly expressed 
in liver in vivo (data not shown). We suspect that these changes 
contribute to the reported ability of glucose to activate hepatic 
ChREBP in primary culture, in contrast with our results in vivo.
The ability of fructose, but not glucose, to acutely activate 
ChREBP in vivo is likely due to differences in how the intact liv-
er metabolizes these 2 simple sugars. The majority of an oral glu-
cose load escapes first-pass hepatic metabolism due in part to 
sequestration of GCK in an inactivated state by GCKR (39, 54). In 
contrast, fructose is largely extracted by the liver first pass (26). 
Moreover, the fructose metabolite fructose-1-phosphate produced 
by ketohexokinase destabilizes the interaction between GCK and 
GCKR, permitting hepatocellular glycolytic flux (55). Thus, fruc-
tose may activate ChREBP either directly through metabolites 
derived from fructose or indirectly by activating hepatic GCK and 
enhancing glycolytic flux, which might then activate ChREBP. Our 
results show that glucose plus a liver-specific GKA can also robustly 
activate hepatic ChREBP, which indicates that a fructose-specific 
 
metabolite is not required for ChREBP activation. The fact that 
glycerol, which is also rapidly phosphorylated in the liver, can also 
acutely activate ChREBP demonstrates that multiple substrates 
that can enter the glycolytic/gluconeogenic carbon pool are suf-
ficient for ChREBP activation and that activation of GCK is not a 
requirement. The specific metabolite and mechanism by which 
ChREBP is activated remains uncertain (56).
Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that hepatic 
ChREBP serves as a sensor for dietary sugar ingestion. Dietary 
sugar occurs predominantly in the form of sucrose — 1 glucose 
monosaccharide joined to 1 fructose monosaccharide. An evolved 
role for hepatic ChREBP in the metabolic response to dietary sugar 
would help explain the counterintuitive observation that activation 
of ChREBP increases both the expression of glycolytic enzymes 
and G6pc, the final step in glucose production. Sucrose-induced 
activation of ChREBP and G6PC would be important to enhance 
storage of ingested glucose in the liver as glycogen while simul-
taneously converting ingested fructose into glucose for use else-
where in the body. This is supported by our findings here. This 
is also consistent with the fact that fructose ingestion, through 
hepatic ChREBP activation, stimulates expression of some gluco-
neogenic enzymes (e.g., G6pc) but not others (e.g., Pck1). Fructose 
metabolites enter glycolytic/gluconeogenic carbon pools at the tri-
ose-phosphate level, distal to Pck1 in the gluconeogenic pathway. 
Thus, efficient conversion of fructose to glucose requires G6PC 
activity, but not PCK1 activity. Lastly, the fact that other substrates 
such as glycerol or the combination of glucose and a GKA stimu-
late expression of fructolytic enzymes along with ChREBP, when 
no fructose has been provided, is consistent with the notion that 
ChREBP is a major effector of the response to dietary fructose.
From an organismal perspective, hepatic ChREBP plays a role 
in dietary sugar metabolism. From a hepatocyte-centric perspec-
tive, we and others have hypothesized that ChREBP might func-
tion to regulate hepatocyte triose- and hexose-phosphate homeo-
stasis (17), and our results support this model.
Can ChREBP-mediated regulation of G6pc contribute to the 
hepatic insulin resistance paradox in obese, insulin-resistant 
subjects? More specifically, can carbohydrate-activated ChREBP 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 8 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
Immunoblotting. To generate nuclear versus cytosolic lysates, liver 
tissue was initially homogenized with 10 mM Hepes (pH 7.9), 10 mM 
KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, 50 μg/ml digitonin, 
0.5 mM PMSF, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, catalog 
P8340). Nuclei were then separated by 1,000 g centrifugation for 10 
minutes, followed by lysis in RIPA buffer containing 50 mM Tris (pH 
7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1% (w/w) NP-40, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 1% (w/v) Na 
deoxycholate, 2 mM EDTA, 50 mM NaF, and 10 mM NaPPi with 1 mM 
PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail. Nuclear and cytosolic lysates 
were then subjected to immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies: 
FoxO1 (Cell Signaling, catalog 2880), phospho-FoxO1 (Cell Signaling, 
catalog 9461), HDAC1 (EMD Millipore, catalog 06-720), phospho-Akt 
(Cell Signaling, catalog 4060), Akt (Santa Cruz, catalog sc-1618 and 
Cell Signaling, catalog 2920), MEK1 (Cell Signaling, catalog 8727), 
actin (Santa Cruz, catalog sc-1616), ChREBP (Novus Biologicals, cata-
log NB400-135), and HDAC2 (Cell Signaling, catalog 2540).
ChIP. ChIP was performed as previously described (66).
Primary hepatocyte culture and glucose production assay. Primary 
hepatocytes were isolated from 8- to 10-week-old WT and ChKO mice or 
8- to 10-week-old C3H/HeJ mice fed either chow or HFrD for 1 week by 
perfusion with Liver Digest Medium (Invitrogen) followed by 100 mm 
mesh filtration and Percoll gradient centrifugation. Isolated cells were 
seeded into 24-well plates at a density of 2 × 105 cells per well in William’s 
E medium (Invitrogen) containing 10% FBS and 2 mM glutamine. Four 
hours after seeding, the medium was replaced with 0.5 ml of glucose 
production buffer consisting of glucose-free DMEM without phenol red, 
supplemented with 5 mM sodium lactate and 0.5 mM sodium pyruvate 
or 5 mM fructose. After 3 hours of incubation, the medium was collected 
and the glucose concentration was measured with a colorimetric glucose 
assay kit (Thermo Scientific). The readings were then normalized to the 
total protein content determined from whole-cell lysates.
Basal glucose turnover measurements. In vivo assessment of basal 
glucose turnover was performed by the National Mouse Metabolic 
Phenotyping Center at UMass Medical School in male, age-matched 
WT C3H/HeJ mice fed chow or HFrD for 2 weeks or male age-matched 
ChREBP KO mice and WT littermates fed chow diet following jugular 
vein cannulation surgery and recovery. Whole-body glucose turnover 
was assessed as previously described in 2-hour-fasted mice and after 
a 2-hour equilibration period (4 hours fasted) (67). Immediately fol-
lowing blood collection, mice were anesthetized, and liver was snap 
frozen in liquid nitrogen for further analysis.
Insulin-glucose infusion. Eight-week-old C3H/HeJ mice were fast-
ed for 5 hours and then anesthetized using isoflurane. Catheters were 
inserted into the inferior vena cava. Mice were infused with insulin 
(50 mU/kg priming dose followed by 1.5 mU/kg/min constant infu-
sion) and glucose (25 mg/kg/min constant infusion) for 100 minutes. 
Mouse liver was snap frozen in situ using a Wollenberg clamp.
qPCR. TRI reagent (MRC, catalog TR118) was used for RNA iso-
lation from mouse liver and adipose tissue. RNA was reverse tran-
scribed using a SuperScript VILO kit (Invitrogen). Gene expression 
was analyzed with the ABI Prism sequence detection system (SYBR 
Green; Applied Biosystems). Gene-specific primers were synthesized 
by IDT (see Supplemental Table 1). Each sample was run in duplicate, 
and normalized to Rplp0 RNA.
LC-MS for liver metabolites. The liquid chromatography-mass 
spectrometry (LC-MS) method for measurement of liver tissue metab-
olites was adapted from Buescher et al. (68).
Methods
Materials. Glucose, fructose, G6P, G6P dehydrogenase (G6PD), 
resazurin, diaphorase, flavin mononucleotide (FMN), glycogen type 
III, amyloglucosidase, and perchloric acid were purchased from 
Sigma- 
Aldrich. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) was pur-
chased from Roche. Insulin was purchased from Eli Lilly. Glucagon 
was purchased from Bedford Laboratories. Glucose oxidase reagent 
was purchased from Thermo Scientific. Insulin ELISAs were pur-
chased from Crystal Chem (Ultra Sensitive Mouse Insulin ELISA) or 
EMD Millipore (3P Linco Insulin ELISA Kit, EZRMI13K). The GKA 
PF-04991532 was provided by J. A. Pfefferkorn (Pfizer). All metabolite 
standards for mass spectrometry were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Human liver samples. The subjects for this study were a subgroup 
of patients enrolled in an NAFLD registry at Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center (BIDMC) beginning in 2009, which is a prospective 
study that enrolls subjects with biopsy-proven NAFLD. Liver biopsy 
specimens were stored at –80°C.
Animals and diets. Both male and female mice were used at ages 
as indicated in specific experiments. ChKO mice, described previous-
ly (22), were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (stock 010537). 
ChKO mice were backcrossed onto a C3H/HeJ background (Jack-
son Laboratory, stock 000659) for more than 7 generations. Foxo1a 
floxed mice were provided by W.C. Aird (BIDMC) and have been 
previously described (61). Liver-specific Foxo1a knockout mice and 
controls were generated by crossing Foxo1a floxed heterozygous mice 
on a mixed C57BL/6J (50%) and C3H/HeJ (50%) background with 
albumin-Cre (Jackson Laboratory stock 003574)-Foxo1a floxed het-
erozygotes also on a mixed C57BL/6J (50%) and C3H/HeJ (50%) 
background. Mice were housed and bred in a temperature-controlled 
animal facility with a 12-hour light/12-hour dark cycle and free access 
to food and water, at BIDMC. Before initiation of diet studies, the 
mice were maintained on a standard laboratory chow diet (Purina 
LabDiet 5008). Both the 60% fructose (TD.89247, Harlan Teklad) 
and 60% dextrose (TD.05256) diets contained 20.2% protein, 12.9% 
fat, and 66.8% carbohydrate.
Body weight and metabolic testing. Body weight was measured 
on a weekly basis. Analyses were performed using blood samples 
drawn from overnight fasted or fasted-refed (3 hours) mice. Blood 
was collected from the tail vein except in experiments where mice 
were anesthetized in order to freeze-clamp the liver. In such exper-
iments, blood was collected from the IVC. Blood glucose was mea-
sured using a glucometer. Plasma triglyceride was measured using 
a colorimetric assay kit (Stanbio). For glucose or glycerol tolerance 
tests, mice were fasted for 5 hours and glucose (1 g/kg of body 
weight) or glycerol (1.5 g/kg body weight) was administered via 
intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection.
Biochemical and enzymatic assays. Liver metabolites were extract-
ed from mouse liver snap frozen using a freeze clamp under isoflurane 
anesthesia. Metabolites were extracted from the liver using perchlo-
ric acid (62). G6P fluorometric assays were performed as previously 
described (63). Neutral lipids were extracted from the liver based on 
the Folch method (64). A portion of the triglyceride-containing chlo-
roform phase was collected, evaporated, and resuspended in a 2:1 
mixture of butanol and Triton X-100/methanol (3:1). Triglyceride was 
then measured using a triglyceride kit purchased from StanBio accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s protocol and normalized to liver weight. 
G6PC activity assay was performed as previously described (65).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 8 5
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
 1. Ford ES, Giles WH, Dietz WH. Prevalence of 
the metabolic syndrome among US adults: 
findings from the third National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey. JAMA. 
2002;287(3):356–359.
 2. Brown MS, Goldstein JL. Selective versus total 
insulin resistance: a pathogenic paradox. Cell 
Metab. 2008;7(2):95–96.
 3. Shimomura I, Matsuda M, Hammer RE, Bashma-
kov Y, Brown MS, Goldstein JL. Decreased IRS-2 
and increased SREBP-1c lead to mixed insulin 
resistance and sensitivity in livers of lipodystro-
phic and ob/ob mice. Mol Cell. 2000;6(1):77–86.
 4. Pajvani UB, Qiang L, Kangsamaksin T, Kitajewski 
J, Ginsberg HN, Accili D. Inhibition of Notch 
uncouples Akt activation from hepatic lipid 
accumulation by decreasing mTorc1 stability. Nat 
Med. 2013;19(8):1054–1060.
 5. Li S, Brown MS, Goldstein JL. Bifurcation of 
insulin signaling pathway in rat liver: mTORC1 
required for stimulation of lipogenesis, but not 
inhibition of gluconeogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A. 2010;107(8):3441–3446.
 6. Taniguchi CM, Ueki K, Kahn R. Complementary 
roles of IRS-1 and IRS-2 in the hepatic regulation 
of metabolism. J Clin Invest. 2005;115(3):718–727.
 
7. Samuel VT, et al. Mechanism of hepatic insulin 
resistance in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.  
J Biol Chem. 2004;279(31):32345–32353.
 8. Perry RJ, et al. Hepatic acetyl CoA links adipose 
tissue inflammation to hepatic insulin resistance 
and type 2 diabetes. Cell. 2015;160(4):745–758.
 9. Titchenell PM, et al. Direct hepatocyte insulin 
signaling is required for lipogenesis but is dis-
pensable for the suppression of glucose produc-
tion. Cell Metab. 2016;23(6):1154–1166.
 10. Sindelar DK, Balcom JH, Chu CA, Neal DW, 
Cherrington AD. A comparison of the effects of 
selective increases in peripheral or portal insulin 
on hepatic glucose production in the conscious 
dog. Diabetes. 1996;45(11):1594–1604.
 11. Edgerton DS, et al. Insulin’s direct effects on the 
liver dominate the control of hepatic glucose pro-
duction. J Clin Invest. 2006;116(2):521–527.
 12. Samuel VT, et al. Fasting hyperglycemia is not 
associated with increased expression of PEPCK 
or G6Pc in patients with type 2 diabetes. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009;106(29):12121–12126.
 13. Schwarz JM, Linfoot P, Dare D, Aghajanian K. 
Hepatic de novo lipogenesis in normoinsuline-
mic and hyperinsulinemic subjects consuming 
high-fat, low-carbohydrate and low-fat, high-car-
bohydrate isoenergetic diets. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2003;77(1):43–50.
 14. Donnelly KL, Smith CI, Schwarzenberg SJ, Jes-
surun J, Boldt MD, Parks EJ. Sources of fatty acids 
stored in liver and secreted via lipoproteins in 
patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.  
J Clin Invest. 2005;115(5):1343–1351.
 15. Trinh KY, O’Doherty RM, Anderson P, Lange AJ, 
Newgard CB. Perturbation of fuel homeostasis 
caused by overexpression of the glucose-6-phos-
phatase catalytic subunit in liver of normal rats.  
J Biol Chem. 1998;273(47):31615–31620.
 16. Vatner DF, et al. Insulin-independent regulation 
of hepatic triglyceride synthesis by fatty acids. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015;112(4):1143–1148.
 17. Agius L. High-carbohydrate diets induce 
hepatic insulin resistance to protect the liver 
from substrate overload. Biochem Pharmacol. 
2013;85(3):306–312.
 18. Otero YF, Stafford JM, McGuinness OP. Path-
way-selective insulin resistance and metabolic 
disease: the importance of nutrient flux. J Biol 
Chem. 2014;289(30):20462–20469.
 19. Haas JT, et al. Hepatic insulin signaling is 
required for obesity-dependent expression of 
SREBP-1c mRNA but not for feeding-dependent 
expression. Cell Metab. 2012;15(6):873–884.
 20. Kotani K, Peroni OD, Minokoshi Y, Boss O, Kahn 
BB. GLUT4 glucose transporter deficiency increas-
es hepatic lipid production and peripheral lipid 
utilization. J Clin Invest. 2004;114(11):1666–1675.
 21. Dentin R, et al. Liver-specific inhibition of 
ChREBP improves hepatic steatosis and 
insulin resistance in ob/ob mice. Diabetes. 
2006;55(8):2159–2170.
 22. Iizuka K, Bruick RK, Liang G, Horton JD, Uyeda 
K. Deficiency of carbohydrate response ele-
ment-binding protein (ChREBP) reduces lipogen-
esis as well as glycolysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2004;101(19):7281–7286.
 23. Arden C, et al. Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate is 
essential for glucose-regulated gene tran-
scription of glucose-6-phosphatase and other 
ChREBP target genes in hepatocytes. Biochem J. 
2012;443(1):111–123.
 24. Ma L, Robinson LN, Towle HC. ChREBP*Mlx 
is the principal mediator of glucose-induced 
gene expression in the liver. J Biol Chem. 
2006;281(39):28721–28730.
 25. Iizuka K, Miller B, Uyeda K. Deficiency of carbohy-
drate-activated transcription factor ChREBP pre-
vents obesity and improves plasma glucose con-
trol in leptin-deficient (ob/ob) mice. Am J Physiol 
HJK. JKM and MB performed and interpreted metabolomics mea-
surements and LD analyzed these data. ML provided human liver 
biopsy samples. MAH conceived of, designed, and supervised the 
experimental plan, interpreted experiments, and wrote the manu-
script. MK, JKK, JKM, and MB edited the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We thank John Riley, Greg McElroy, Jason Kong, and David Kim 
for their technical assistance. We thank Lauren Janes for assis-
tance with Foxo1a floxed mice. We thank Greg Tesz and Inna Asta-
pova for helpful discussions. This work is supported by NIH grants 
P30DK057521 and R01DK100425 (to MAH), T32DK007516 
(to MK), and K23DK083439 (to ML). Part of this study was per-
formed at the National Mouse Metabolic Phenotyping Center at 
UMass funded by NIH grant UC2 DK093000 (to JKK). We thank 
the Animal Metabolic Physiology Core (grant P30DK057521) 
directed by B.B. Kahn and O. Peroni for use of their equipment for 
the infusion experiment.
Address correspondence to: Mark A. Herman, Division of Endo-
crinology and Metabolism, Duke University Medical Center, 300 
North Duke Street, Durham, North Carolina 27701, USA. Phone: 
919.684.4005; E-mail: mark.herman@duke.edu.
MAH’s present address is: Division of Endocrinology and Metabo-
lism, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
Additional details regarding the G6PC activity assay, ChIP exper-
iments, liver metabolite LC-MS, and LC-MS for fructose clearance are 
described in Supplemental Methods.
Statistics. Results are presented as the mean ± SEM. Differenc-
es between groups were examined for statistical significance by 
either 2-tailed Student’s t test, 1-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s 
post-hoc test, or 2-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s post-hoc test 
as appropriate in GraphPad Prism. A P value of less than 0.05 was 
considered significant. Statistical comparisons were performed on 
log-normalized data when variances between groups were not nor-
mally distributed. Metabolomics data were analyzed and heat maps 
were generated with R version 3.2.1. Multiple regression analysis of 
HGP data and graphs were generated with R version 3.2.4. Multiple 
regression analysis of human qPCR data was performed with SPSS 
release 18.0.0.
Study approval. Use of human liver samples was approved by the BID-
MC institutional research board. All mouse studies were approved by the 
BIDMC Institutional Animal Care and Research Advisory Committee.
Author contributions
MK, SAK, and MAH conceived of, designed, performed, and inter-
preted mouse experiments and made figures. LD and AF assisted 
with designing, performing, and interpreting mouse experiments. 
JXW and SAT performed and interpreted fructose clearance MS 
measurements. HLN, HJK, and JKK designed and interpreted glu-
cose turnover experiments, which were performed by HLN and 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
4 3 8 6
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 11   November 2016
Endocrinol Metab. 2006;291(2):E358–E364.
 26. Tran C, et al. Sex differences in lipid and glucose 
kinetics after ingestion of an acute oral fructose 
load. Br J Nutr. 2010;104(8):1139–1147.
 27. Niewoehner CB, Gilboe DP, Nuttall GA, Nuttall FQ. 
Metabolic effects of oral fructose in the liver of fast-
ed rats. Am J Physiol. 1984;247(4 Pt 1):E505–E512.
 28. Malik VS, Popkin BM, Bray GA, Després JP, 
Willett WC, Hu FB. Sugar-sweetened bever-
ages and risk of metabolic syndrome and type 
2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Care. 
2010;33(11):2477–2483.
 29. Stanhope KL, et al. Consuming fructose-sweet-
ened, not glucose-sweetened, beverages increas-
es visceral adiposity and lipids and decreases 
insulin sensitivity in overweight/obese humans.  
J Clin Invest. 2009;119(5):1322–1334.
 30. Reaven GM. Banting lecture 1988. Role of 
insulin resistance in human disease. Diabetes. 
1988;37(12):1595–1607.
 31. Schwarz JM, et al. Effect of a high-fructose 
weight-maintaining diet on lipogene-
sis and liver fat. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2015;100(6):2434–2442.
 32. Erion DM, et al. The role of the carbohydrate 
response element-binding protein in male fruc-
tose-fed rats. Endocrinology. 2013;154(1):36–44.
 33. Koo HY, Wallig MA, Chung BH, Nara TY, Cho BH, 
Nakamura MT. Dietary fructose induces a wide 
range of genes with distinct shift in carbohydrate 
and lipid metabolism in fed and fasted rat liver. 
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008;1782(5):341–348.
 34. Stamatikos AD, et al. Tissue specific effects 
of dietary carbohydrates and obesity on 
ChREBPα and ChREBPβ expression. Lipids. 
2016;51(1):95–104.
 35. Rodríguez-Calvo R, et al. Atorvastatin prevents 
carbohydrate response element binding protein 
activation in the fructose-fed rat by activating pro-
tein kinase A. Hepatology. 2009;49(1):106–115.
 36. Herman MA, et al. A novel ChREBP isoform in 
adipose tissue regulates systemic glucose metab-
olism. Nature. 2012;484(7394):333–338.
 37. Horton JD, Goldstein JL, Brown MS. SREBPs: 
activators of the complete program of cholesterol 
and fatty acid synthesis in the liver. J Clin Invest. 
2002;109(9):1125–1131.
 38. Ludvik B, et al. A noninvasive method to measure 
splanchnic glucose uptake after oral glucose 
administration. J Clin Invest. 1995;95(5):2232–2238.
 39. Agius L. Glucokinase and molecular aspects 
of liver glycogen metabolism. Biochem J. 
2008;414(1):1–18.
 40. Poupeau A, Postic C. Cross-regulation of 
hepatic glucose metabolism via ChREBP 
and nuclear receptors. Biochim Biophys Acta. 
2011;1812(8):995–1006.
 41. Kawaguchi T, Takenoshita M, Kabashima T, 
Uyeda K. Glucose and cAMP regulate the L-type 
pyruvate kinase gene by phosphorylation/
dephosphorylation of the carbohydrate response 
element binding protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2001;98(24):13710–13715.
 42. Fukasawa M, Ge Q, Wynn RM, Ishii S, Uyeda K. 
Coordinate regulation/localization of the carbo-
hydrate responsive binding protein (ChREBP) by 
two nuclear export signal sites: discovery of a new 
leucine-rich nuclear export signal site. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun. 2010;391(2):1166–1169.
 43. Benhamed F, et al. The lipogenic transcription 
factor ChREBP dissociates hepatic steatosis from 
insulin resistance in mice and humans. J Clin 
Invest. 2012;122(6):2176–2194.
 44. Davies MN, O’Callaghan BL, Towle HC. Glucose 
activates ChREBP by increasing its rate of nuclear 
entry and relieving repression of its transcriptional 
activity. J Biol Chem. 2008;283(35):24029–24038.
 45. Li MV, Chen W, Poungvarin N, Imamura M, Chan 
L. Glucose-mediated transactivation of carbohy-
drate response element-binding protein requires 
cooperative actions from Mondo conserved 
regions and essential trans-acting factor 14-3-3. 
Mol Endocrinol. 2008;22(7):1658–1672.
 46. Pfefferkorn JA, et al. Discovery of (S)-6-(3-cyclo-
pentyl-2-(4-(trifluoromethyl)-1H-imidazol-1-yl)
propanamido)nicotinic acid as a hepatoselective 
glucokinase activator clinical candidate for 
treating type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Med Chem. 
2012;55(3):1318–1333.
 47. Dentin R, et al. Glucose 6-phosphate, rather than 
xylulose 5-phosphate, is required for the acti-
vation of ChREBP in response to glucose in the 
liver. J Hepatol. 2012;56(1):199–209.
 48. Nakae J, Kitamura T, Silver DL, Accili D. The 
forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 (Fkhr) confers 
insulin sensitivity onto glucose-6-phosphatase 
expression. J Clin Invest. 2001;108(9):1359–1367.
 49. Puigserver P, et al. Insulin-regulated hepatic 
gluconeogenesis through FOXO1-PGC-1alpha 
interaction. Nature. 2003;423(6939):550–555.
 50. Matsumoto M, Pocai A, Rossetti L, Depinho 
RA, Accili D. Impaired regulation of hepatic 
glucose production in mice lacking the forkhead 
transcription factor Foxo1 in liver. Cell Metab. 
2007;6(3):208–216.
 51. Kooner JS, et al. Genome-wide scan identifies 
variation in MLXIPL associated with plasma tri-
glycerides. Nat Genet. 2008;40(2):149–151.
 52. Johansen CT, Kathiresan S, Hegele RA. Genetic 
determinants of plasma triglycerides. J Lipid Res. 
2011;52(2):189–206.
 53. Uyeda K, Repa JJ. Carbohydrate response ele-
ment binding protein, ChREBP, a transcription 
factor coupling hepatic glucose utilization and 
lipid synthesis. Cell Metab. 2006;4(2):107–110.
 54. Van Schaftingen E, Detheux M, Veiga da 
Cunha M. Short-term control of glucokinase 
activity: role of a regulatory protein. FASEB J. 
1994;8(6):414–419.
 55. Van Schaftingen E. A protein from rat liver 
confers to glucokinase the property of being 
antagonistically regulated by fructose 6-phos-
phate and fructose 1-phosphate. Eur J Biochem. 
1989;179(1):179–184.
 56. Filhoulaud G, Guilmeau S, Dentin R, Girard 
J, Postic C. Novel insights into ChREBP regu-
lation and function. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 
2013;24(5):257–268.
 57. Eissing L, et al. De novo lipogenesis in human fat 
and liver is linked to ChREBP-β and metabolic 
health. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1528.
 58. Kursawe R, et al. Decreased transcription of 
ChREBP-α/β isoforms in abdominal subcuta-
neous adipose tissue of obese adolescents with 
prediabetes or early type 2 diabetes: associations 
with insulin resistance and hyperglycemia. Dia-
betes. 2013;62(3):837–844.
 59. Lin HV, Accili D. Hormonal regulation of hepatic 
glucose production in health and disease. Cell 
Metab. 2011;14(1):9–19.
 60. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff A, et al. Glucose- 
6-
phosphate-mediated activation of liver glycogen 
synthase plays a key role in hepatic glycogen syn-
thesis. Diabetes. 2013;62(12):4070–4082.
 61. Dharaneeswaran H, et al. FOXO1-mediated 
activation of Akt plays a critical role in vascular 
homeostasis. Circ Res. 2014;115(2):238–251.
 62. Humphreys SM, Frayn KN. Micro-method for 
preparing perchloric extracts of blood. Clin 
Chem. 1988;34(8):1657.
 63. Zhu A, Romero R, Petty HR. An enzymatic flu-
orimetric assay for glucose-6-phosphate: appli-
cation in an in vitro Warburg-like effect. Anal 
Biochem. 2009;388(1):97–101.
 64. Folch J, Lees M, Sloane SGH. A simple method for 
the isolation and purification of total lipides from 
animal tissues. J Biol Chem. 1957;226(1):497–509.
 65. Alegre M, Ciudad CJ, Fillat C, Guinovart JJ. 
Determination of glucose-6-phosphatase activity 
using the glucose dehydrogenase-coupled reac-
tion. Anal Biochem. 1988;173(1):185–189.
 66. Ramadoss P, et al. Novel mechanism of positive 
versus negative regulation by thyroid hormone 
receptor β1 (TRβ1) identified by genome-wide 
profiling of binding sites in mouse liver. J Biol 
Chem. 2014;289(3):1313–1328.
 67. Kim JK. Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp 
to assess insulin sensitivity in vivo. Methods Mol 
Biol. 2009;560:221–238.
 68. Buescher JM, Moco S, Sauer U, Zamboni N. Ultra-
high performance liquid chromatography-tan-
dem mass spectrometry method for fast and 
robust quantification of anionic and aromatic 
metabolites. Anal Chem. 2010;82(11):4403–4412.
