 Cell Research (2017) 27:1309-1326.
www.nature.com/cr
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Intermittent fasting promotes adipose thermogenesis and 
metabolic homeostasis via VEGF-mediated alternative 
activation of macrophage
Kyoung-Han Kim
1, 12, *, Yun Hye Kim
2, *, Joe Eun Son
1, Ju Hee Lee
2, 3, Sarah Kim
2, Min Seon Choe
1, 
Joon Ho Moon
2, Jian Zhong
2, Kiya Fu
2, Florine Lenglin
2, Jeong-Ah Yoo
2, Philip J Bilan
4, Amira Klip
4, 
Andras Nagy
5, 6, Jae-Ryong Kim
7, Jin Gyoon Park
8, Samer MI Hussein
9, Kyung-Oh Doh
10, Chi-chung Hui
11, 
Hoon-Ki Sung
2, 3
1Developmental & Stem Cell Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
2Translational Medicine 
Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada; 
3Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobi-
ology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A1, Canada; 
4Cell Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada; 
5Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
6Department of 
Obstetrics & Gynaecology and Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
7Department of Bio-
chemistry and Molecular Biology, Smart-aging Convergence Research Center, College of Medicine, Yeungnam University, Daegu, 
Republic of Korea; 
8Virginia G. Piper Center for Personalized Diagnostics, Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, 
AZ, USA; 
9Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec Research Center and Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Quebec City, 
Quebec, Canada; 
10Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, Yeungnam University, Daegu, Republic of Korea; 
11Depart-
ment of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A1, Canada
Intermittent fasting (IF), a periodic energy restriction, has been shown to provide health benefits equivalent to 
prolonged fasting or caloric restriction. However, our understanding of the underlying mechanisms of IF-mediated 
metabolic benefits is limited. Here we show that isocaloric IF improves metabolic homeostasis against diet-induced 
obesity and metabolic dysfunction primarily through adipose thermogenesis in mice. IF-induced metabolic benefits 
require fasting-mediated increases of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression in white adipose tissue 
(WAT). Furthermore, periodic adipose-VEGF overexpression could recapitulate the metabolic improvement of IF 
in non-fasted animals. Importantly, fasting and adipose-VEGF induce alternative activation of adipose macrophage, 
which is critical for thermogenesis. Human adipose gene analysis further revealed a positive correlation of adipose 
VEGF-M2 macrophage-WAT browning axis. The present study uncovers the molecular mechanism of IF-mediated 
metabolic benefit and suggests that isocaloric IF can be a preventive and therapeutic approach against obesity and 
metabolic disorders.
Keywords: intermittent fasting; thermogenesis; vascular endothelial growth factor; adipose macrophage
Cell Research (2017) 27:1309-1326. doi:10.1038/cr.2017.126; published online 17 October 2017 
*These two authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence: Chi-chung Hui
a, Hoon-Ki Sung
b
aE-mail: cchui@sickkids.ca
bE-mail: hoon-ki.sung@sickkids.ca
12Current address: University of Ottawa Heart Institute and Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Otta-
wa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Received 3 March 2017; revised 30 June 2017; accepted 26 July 2017; 
published online 17 October 2017
Introduction
While fat (white adipose tissue, WAT) is often associ-
ated with development of obesity and type 2 diabetes, it 
is essential for energy homeostasis by storing excess en-
ergy and releasing lipids in response to energy deficits [1, 
2]. Recent studies have discovered that WAT also con-
tributes to whole-body metabolism by regulating thermo-
genic activity via the browning of WAT, which increases 
energy expenditure and improves insulin sensitivity [3]. 
In this regard, WAT browning has been suggested as a 
therapeutic approach for obesity and metabolic diseases. 
 1310
Role of adipose-VEGF in fasting-mediated metabolic benefits
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 11 | November 2017
A variety of physiological stimuli (e.g., cold exposure, 
exercise) and signaling ligands (e.g., FGF21, BMP, 
VEGF) have been identified for their potential to induce 
WAT browning [4]. In addition, recent studies highlight 
the critical role of the innate immune response with al-
ternative activation of adipose macrophage (M2 macro-
phage) in the regulation of metabolic function of adipose 
tissues, including WAT browning [5]. 
We and others have previously demonstrated that 
vascular endothelial growth factor in adipose tissues 
(adipose-VEGF) plays a key role in browning of WAT 
and maintaining the functional integrity of adipose tis-
sues, suggesting the therapeutic potential of VEGF in the 
treatment of metabolic disorders [6-9]. For example, cold 
acclimatization [10], exercise [11], and environmental 
stimuli [9] promote the expression of adipose-VEGF and 
hence WAT browning. However, the molecular mech-
anism underlying VEGF-mediated WAT browning re-
mains elusive.
Modern lifestyles favor longer periods of daily ener-
gy intake and shorter fasting periods. This erratic eating 
pattern is associated with metabolic disadvantages and 
contributes to the current global obesity and diabetes 
epidemic [12]. Fasting brings various positive health 
impacts, suggesting that modulation of fasting period 
can be used as a therapeutic intervention [13, 14]. Inter-
mittent fasting (IF), a periodic energy restriction method, 
has been shown to provide health benefits equivalent 
to prolonged fasting or caloric restriction (CR) [14-18]. 
The beneficial effects of IF against aging, cancer, cardio-
vascular diseases, and neurodegenerative diseases have 
been studied in both animal models and clinical settings 
[15, 19-21]. However, it is unclear whether the meta-
bolic benefits conferred by IF are primarily mediated by 
reduced food intake [19, 22, 23] or attributed to changes 
in eating pattern. In particular, the ‘alternate day fast-
ing’ regimen (i.e., 1 day feeding-1 day fasting, 1:1 IF), 
which is often used in rodent IF models, could result in 
underfeeding [19, 24]. In addition, while WAT is one of 
the most critical organs for fasting physiology, it is not 
known whether the molecular alteration of WAT after IF is 
a driver or an outcome of IF-mediated metabolic benefits. 
In this study, we establish a new IF regimen to inves-
tigate the impact of IF under isocaloric conditions and 
demonstrate that IF improves glucose homeostasis and 
prevents diet-induced metabolic dysfunction without 
caloric intake reduction. Mechanistically, we found that 
WAT is pivotal for mediating IF-induced metabolic ben-
efits via browning of WAT through adipose-VEGF-me-
diated alternative activation of adipose macrophage (M2 
macrophage). Our study unveils a novel mechanism by 
which IF promotes whole-body homeostasis through 
browning of WAT by VEGF-mediated macrophage 
switching. 
Results
An IF regimen protects mice from diet-induced metabolic 
abnormalities 
To minimize the differences in caloric intake which 
may be caused by the alternate day fasting [19], we de-
veloped a new IF regimen comprising 2 day feeding-1 
day fasting periods (2:1 IF; Figure 1A). This regimen 
provided mice with sufficient time to compensate for the 
decreased body weight and for the reduced amount of 
food intake after 1-day fasting, to the level of non-fasted 
animals, enabling us to examine the effects of IF, inde-
pendent of caloric intake difference (Supplementary in-
formation, Figure S1A-S1C).
Eight-week-old mice were subjected to 16 weeks of 
the 2:1 IF regimen on either normal chow diet (ND) or 
45% high-fat diet (HFD). Compared to mice fed ad li-
bitum (AL), IF mice showed lower body weight on both 
ND and HFD (Figure 1B; Supplementary information, 
Figure S1D and S1E). In further analyses, we focused 
mainly on IF and AL mice fed HFD (HFD-IF and HFD-
AL) because they showed a marked difference in weight 
gain than those fed ND (Supplementary information, 
Figure S1F). We speculated that the reduced weight gain 
of IF animals might be due to the slight decrease in accu-
mulated energy intake over 16 weeks of the diet program 
(Figure 1C). However, our pair-feeding experiments 
consistently showed that IF animals exhibited reduced 
weight gain, compared to mice pair-fed ad libitum with 
Figure 1 IF protects mice from diet-induced obesity and metabolic dysfunction. (A) Schematic illustration of the 2:1 IF regi-
men. (B) Body weight measurement during 16 weeks of IF. (C) Changes of energy intake during 16 weeks of IF cycles. The 
inset shows total energy intake during 16 weeks of IF cycles. (D) Body composition showing fat and lean mass. (E) H&E-
stained sections of adipose tissues; IWAT (subcutaneous), PWAT (visceral), and BAT. (F) Average of cross-sectioned area 
of subcutaneous white adipocytes, revealing reduced white adipocyte size for HFD-IF mice compared to HFD-AL mice. (G) 
GTT in HFD-AL and HFD-IF mice. The inset shows AUC. (H) ITT. The inset shows AUC. (I) HOMA-IR. Data are expressed 
as mean ± SEM (ND-AL: n = 7; ND-IF: n = 8; HFD-AL: n = 7; and HFD-IF: n = 8); one or two-way ANOVA with Student-New-
man-Keuls post hoc analysis and two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test; *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 vs HFD-AL. AL, ad libitum; 
AUC, area under the curve; HFD, high-fat diet; ND, normal diet.
 Kyoung-Han Kim et al.
1311
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
 1312
Role of adipose-VEGF in fasting-mediated metabolic benefits
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 11 | November 2017
exactly the same amount of food as IF mice (HFD-PF; 
Supplementary information, Figure S2A-S2C). These 
data suggest that IF-mediated decrease in body weight 
is not primarily attributed to an energy intake difference. 
Body composition analysis revealed reduced fat mass 
without changes of lean mass in IF mice (Figure 1D and 
Supplementary information, Figure S2D). Consistent-
ly, HFD-IF mice exhibited a reduction in tissue weight 
and adipocyte size of both inguinal WAT (IWAT) and 
perigonadal WAT (PWAT) depots, compared to HFD-
AL mice (Figure 1E and 1F; Supplementary information, 
Figure S1G). Lipid accumulation in brown adipose tissue 
(BAT) was also decreased in HFD-IF, compared to HFD-
AL mice (Figure 1E). Notably, HFD-IF mice showed 
improved glucose homeostasis with smaller glucose ex-
cursion in glucose tolerance test (GTT), increased insulin 
sensitivity in insulin tolerance test (ITT), and markedly 
lower homeostasis model assessment-estimated insulin 
resistance (HOMA-IR), compared to HFD-AL or HFD-
PF mice (Figure 1G-1I; Supplementary information, Fig-
ure S2E and S2F). Moreover, IF prevented HFD-induced 
hepatic steatosis. IF mice exhibited lower liver weight, 
less lipid accumulation in liver, and lower plasma ala-
nine aminotransferase (ALT) activity (Supplementary 
information, Figure S1H-S1L). Together, these findings 
demonstrate that, in the absence of any energy intake dif-
ference, IF offers metabolic benefits against diet-induced 
obesity and metabolic dysfunction.
We also tested the therapeutic potential of IF on es-
tablished metabolic abnormalities by performing 2:1 
IF on obese mice induced by HFD for 12 weeks (post 
HFD; Supplementary information, Figure S3A) and 
were able to observe beneficial effects as early as 6 
weeks of IF. This short-term 2:1 IF treatment on post 
HFD mice resulted in a slight reduction in body weight 
without changes in total caloric intake (Supplementary 
information, Figure S3B and S3C). Consistent with our 
results above, IF led to a selective decrease in fat mass, 
particularly in WAT mass and adipocyte size, whereas 
lean mass was not affected (Supplementary information, 
Figure S3D-S3F).  Liver function parameters were also 
improved by 6 weeks of IF (Supplementary information, 
Figure S3G-S3J). Importantly, short-term IF treatment 
significantly improved systemic glucose homeostasis as 
assessed by GTT and HOMA-IR, compared to untreated 
mice (Supplementary information, Figure S3K and S3L). 
Together, these data indicate that IF is not only protective 
method, but also effective therapeutics against obesity.
Transcriptome analysis of IF-treated WAT
It has been suggested that IF promotes various health 
benefits, yet the underlying mechanism is still not fully 
understood. Given that adipose tissues are pivotal for 
supplying energy to other tissues during fasting, and 
were one of the most affected organs/tissues after IF, we 
performed transcriptome analysis by RNA sequencing 
(RNA-seq) on PWAT from mice subjected to IF or AL to 
gain insight into the genome-wide alteration of adipose 
tissue gene expression by IF. Excluding HFD-AL, the 
ND-AL, ND-IF and HFD-IF groups clustered together, 
indicating that even with HFD feeding, IF induced a 
global change in transcriptome that resembles gene ex-
pression profiles of metabolically normal animals (Figure 
2A). Overall, 3 644 genes were differentially expressed 
among the four conditions and formed 6 distinct gene 
clusters. Clusters 1, 3, and 4 demonstrated significant 
gene enrichment by using terms of gene ontology (GO 
term) and KEGG pathway databases (Figure 2A; Supple-
mentary information, Figure S4 and Table S1). In partic-
ular, we focused on clusters 1 and 3 that show dramatic 
differences in gene expression profile between HFD-AL 
and HFD-IF with clearly distinguished metabolic phe-
notypes. Cluster 1 genes (i.e., upregulated specifically in 
HFD-AL compared to other groups) were strongly en-
riched in the pathways involved in the immune response 
and inflammation, which are associated with insulin re-
sistance and metabolic dysfunction [25] (Figure 2A and 
Supplementary information, Figure S4A). qPCR verified 
that genes associated with inflammatory cells and their 
chemotactic activity were significantly downregulated in 
Figure 2 Transcriptome analysis upon IF reveals browning of WAT. (A) Heatmap displaying 3 644 differentially expressed 
genes among ND-AL, ND-IF, HFD-AL, and HFD-IF groups that were clustered into six distinct gene groups. Enriched GO 
terms and representative genes are shown at the right for each cluster. Significantly enriched clusters: red boxes. Not signifi-
cantly enriched clusters: gray boxes. (B) Gene expression analysis on inflammation-related genes. (C) Marker gene expres-
sion of sympathetic activation (i.e., Adrb3) and brown/beige adipocyte (i.e., Ppargc1a, Ppargc1b, Cidea and Ucp1) (HFD, 
AL/IF: n = 6/8). (D) Representative images of whole-mount WAT of the brown/beige chaser (Ucp1-Cre;Rosa26
mT/mG) mice 
subjected to AL and IF. Beige adipocytes are visualized by membrane-targeted GFP (mG; green). (E) O2 consumption during 
fasting and feeding condition. (F) Linear regression analysis of O2 consumption as a function of body weight during feeding 
period. The  inset shows O2 consumption during feeding condition adjusted with body weight at 38.54 g using ANCOVA (HFD, 
AL/IF: n = 6/12). (G) Significant changes in O2 consumption between fasting and feeding periods in HFD-IF mice. Values are 
mean ± SEM; two-tailed unpaired and paired Student’s t-test; *P < 0.05 vs HFD-AL.
 Kyoung-Han Kim et al.
1313
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
 1314
Role of adipose-VEGF in fasting-mediated metabolic benefits
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 11 | November 2017
HFD-IF compared to HFD-AL (Figure 2B). On the other 
hand, GO term analysis of cluster 3 genes (i.e., down-
regulated specifically in HFD-AL) revealed biological 
processes including brown adipocyte differentiation (i.e., 
Ebf2) [26] (Figure 2A and Supplementary information, 
Figure S4B). This finding is aligned with cluster 6 (i.e., 
upregulated only in HFD-IF group) indicating that the 
futile metabolic cycle with concurrently elevated genes 
involved in fatty acid synthesis (e.g., Acaca, Scd1 and 
Scd2) and oxidation (e.g., Cpt2), as seen in β3-adrenergic 
receptor (β3-AR) agonist CL-316243- and cold-induced 
beige adipocytes [27, 28]. Together, these results suggest 
that IF promotes a reduction of inflammation and an in-
crease of thermogenic activities in WAT.
IF leads to adipose thermogenesis
Next, we validated browning of WAT in HFD-IF mice. 
The expression of Adrb3 (encoding β3-AR; indicative 
of sympathetic activation) as well as levels of beige/
brown adipose markers (i.e., Ppargc1a, Cidea and Ucp1) 
were significantly elevated in PWAT of HFD-IF mice, 
compared to that of HFD-AL mice (Figure 2C). Similar 
results were also observed in WAT of post HFD-IF mice 
(Supplementary information, Figure S5A). In addition, 
Ucp1 gene expression in BAT was found to be higher 
in HFD-IF mice compared to HFD-AL mice (Supple-
mentary information, Figure S5B), suggesting increased 
BAT activation by IF. To visually examine beige adipo-
cytes, we also utilized the beige-chaser mice generated 
by crossing Ucp1-Cre with Rosa26mT/mG mice. HFD-
IF WAT exhibited more GFP
+ beige adipocytes (Figure 
2D), whereas the number of GFP
+ brown adipocytes in 
BAT was indistinguishable between HFD-IF and HFD-
AL mice (Supplementary information, Figure S5C). 
Consistent with the elevated level of beige adipocytes 
and higher Ucp1 expression, indirect calorimetry, with 
normalization of body mass or adjustment for body mass 
using regression-based analysis of covariance (ANCO-
VA), revealed that O2 consumption in HFD-IF mice was 
increased, particularly during the feeding period (i.e., 
Day 2), without significant changes in physical activities, 
compared to HFD-AL mice (Figure 2E-2G; Supplemen-
tary information, Figure S5D-S5G). On the other hand, 
O2 consumption during the fasting period (i.e., Day 1) 
was not different between groups (Figure 2E and Supple-
mentary information, Figure S5E). Together, these data 
suggest that IF led to an increase in beige adipocytes, 
thereby elevating energy expenditure, particularly during 
energy intake. 
Adipose thermogenesis largely contributes to IF-mediat-
ed metabolic benefits
To examine whether the beneficial effects of IF could 
be attributed to adipose thermogenesis, we performed 
IF in a thermoneutral (TN) condition (30 ºC), where the 
thermogenic activation is significantly restricted [29]. 
Indeed, despite increased sympathetic activation (i.e., 
higher Adrb3 expression), TN-HFD-IF mice showed no 
significant changes of beige/brown adipose marker gene 
expression in PWAT, compared to TN-HFD-AL mice 
(Supplementary information, Figure S6A). This suggests 
that thermoneutrality effectively hindered IF-induced 
WAT browning. Although Ucp1 expression in BAT was 
increased by IF under TN conditions, its basal expres-
sion level was much lower (~10%) compared to that at 
normal temperature (Supplementary information, Figure 
S6B). Consistently, O2 consumption was not significant-
ly different between the two groups under TN feeding 
condition (Supplementary information, Figure S6C), 
suggesting that the increased Ucp1 in BAT of TN-HFD-
IF mice may not be functionally significant. Intriguingly, 
however, TN-HFD-IF mice still exhibited a mild im-
provement in glucose tolerance, insulin sensitivity, and 
HOMA-IR, with a reduction in body weight, fat mass, as 
well as hepatic steatosis, compared to TN-HFD-AL mice 
(Supplementary information, Figure S6D-S6L). Although 
the TN condition does not completely abolish the meta-
bolic benefits of IF, it significantly reduced the degree of 
improvement by IF (e.g., GTT difference: 9% in TN vs 
28% in normal temperature), further emphasizing the key 
contributing role of adipose thermogenesis in IF. 
Fasting induces adipose-VEGF expression 
We next aimed to identify a molecular driver of IF-in-
duced metabolic benefits and adipose thermogenesis. 
As WAT plays a crucial role in whole-body metabolic 
homeostasis through the production of numerous secre-
tory proteins including adipokines [30, 31], we examined 
changes of the chemokine and adipokine pathways be-
tween HFD-AL and HFD-IF. Out of 710 adipose secreto-
ry proteins as defined by Lehr et al. [30], several poten-
tial adipokine genes were markedly upregulated in HFD-
IF PWAT, including Vegfa (VEGF), Cfd (adipsin), Nrg4 
(neuregulin 4), and Adipoq (adiponectin), whereas Lep 
(leptin), which positively correlates with adiposity, was 
downregulated (Figure 3A and 3B). To test whether these 
genes potentially function as drivers or are simply out-
comes of repeated fasting, we examined how one-time 
fasting affects the expression of these genes. Noticeably, 
a 24-h fasting significantly increased Vegfa expression in 
WAT, while reducing Lep and Nrg4 transcripts (Figure 
3C). Given that higher expression of VEGF, leptin and 
neuregulin 4 positively correlates with adipose thermo-
genesis [8, 9, 32, 33], these results suggest that VEGF in 
 Kyoung-Han Kim et al.
1315
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
Figure 3 Fasting induces adipose-VEGF expression. (A) MA plot highlighting significantly altered mRNA expression of ad-
ipose-derived factors in PWAT of HFD-IF mice, compared to that of HFD-AL mice. Vegfa, Cfd, Nrg4, Adipoq, and Lep en-
code vascular endothelial growth factor, adipsin, neuregulin 4, adiponectin, and leptin, respectively. (B) qPCR validation of 
adipose-derived factors in PWAT (HFD, AL/IF: n = 6/8). (C) mRNA expression levels of Vegfa, Cfd, Nrg4, Adipoq, and Lep in 
PWAT at feeding and 24 h of fasting (n = 5 per group). (D) Vegfa mRNA expression in PWAT at different fasting durations (n 
= 5-6 per group). (E) Vegfa mRNA expression in PWAT at feeding, 24 h of fasting, 6 h of refeeding, fasting with β3-AR antag-
onist, SR59230A (5 mg/kg, i.p.), and fasting with non-specific β-AR antagonist, Propranolol (5 mg/kg, i.p.; n = 5 per group). 
(F) Vegfa mRNA expression in PWAT at feeding and 24 h of fasting with treatments of vehicle or clodronate (n = 5). (G) A 
representative macroscopic image illustrating increased vascularization in IWAT of HFD-IF mice, compared to HFD-AL mice. 
Black and white arrows indicate IWAT of HFD-AL and HFD-IF mice, respectively. (H) Representative microscopic images 
of adipocytes and blood vessels, visualized with perilipin and PECAM-1 antibodies, respectively, in whole-mount PWAT. (I) 
Quantification of vessel densities in PWAT. Data are mean ± SEM; one- or two-way ANOVA with Student-Newman-Keuls post 
hoc analysis and two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test; *P < 0.05 vs HFD-AL or Fed. 
#P < 0.05 vs Fast (24 h).
 1316
Role of adipose-VEGF in fasting-mediated metabolic benefits
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 11 | November 2017
WAT, but not leptin or Nrg4 (both decreased by fasting), 
is a potential modulator of IF. 
We further examined how and where fasting-induced 
VEGF expression is regulated. Vegfa expression levels 
in WAT increase progressively with the fasting duration 
and the increase can be immediately reversed by refeed-
ing (Figure 3D and 3E). Importantly, fasting-stimulated 
VEGF expression is restricted to WAT, not in BAT, other 
metabolic tissues or plasma (Supplementary informa-
tion, Figure S7A-S7D). While previous studies showed 
that sympathetic activity controls VEGF expression 
[34], total plasma catecholamine level was not increased 
by fasting (Supplementary information, Figure S7E), 
suggesting that fasting-stimulated VEGF expression in 
WAT is regulated via peripheral, not central, sympathetic 
nervous system. Moreover, fasting-induced VEGF was 
blocked markedly by the β3-AR antagonist, SR59230A, 
but less effectively by the non-specific β-AR antagonist, 
propranolol (Figure 3E). Given that β3-AR is known to 
be expressed specifically in adipocytes [35, 36], this re-
sult suggests that adipocytes may be the source of VEGF 
in response to sympathetic activation by fasting. To test 
this possibility, macrophages, which are another source 
of VEGF [37, 38], were depleted in mice by adminis-
tration of Clodronate [37, 39]. Notably, macrophage 
depletion, verified by abolished F4/80 gene expression 
(Supplementary information, Figure S7F), did not affect 
fasting-mediated VEGF induction in WAT and was even 
increased in expression levels compared to vehicle-treat-
ed control mice (Figure 3F). This finding further supports 
our conclusion that adipocytes are the major sources 
of fasting-mediated VEGF induction. Functionally, the 
acute increase of adipose-VEGF by a 24-h fasting was 
not sufficient to induce changes in vascularization (Sup-
plementary information, Figure S7G), whereas repeated 
fasting (i.e., IF) significantly increased WAT vasculariza-
tion, both macroscopically and microscopically (Figure 
3G-3I). Given that improved vascularization with adi-
pose-derived VEGF plays a positive role in adipose tis-
sue function and metabolic homeostasis against obesity 
and diabetes [6-8], our results together suggest that fast-
ing-induced adipose VEGF expression underlies IF-in-
duced metabolic benefits and adipose thermogenesis. 
Adipose-VEGF is required for IF-mediated metabolic 
benefits
We then investigated the implication of fasting-in-
duced adipose-VEGF in the metabolic benefits of IF. 
Since VEGF generated by adipocytes and resident mac-
rophages in adipose tissues could potentially influence 
and compensate each other, we utilized aP2-Cre mice 
that express Cre recombinase in preadipocytes, adipo-
cytes, and macrophages [40] to generate pan-adipose 
Vegfa KO mice (aP2-Cre;Vegfa
flox/flox; hereafter VEGF
AdKO), 
and conducted IF with this loss-of-function mouse model. 
Intriguingly, IF had no significant effect on WAT weight 
and adipocyte size in VEGF
AdKO mice fed HFD even 
with decreased body weight (Figure 4A-4C). Consistent 
with this, adipose Lep gene expression and plasma leptin 
levels, which positively correlate with adiposity, were 
also indistinguishable between VEGF
AdKO-HFD-IF and 
VEGF
AdKO-HFD-AL mice (Figure 4D and 4E). These 
data suggest that IF reduced body weight at the expense 
of lean mass. In addition, GTT and HOMA-IR revealed 
that IF does not improve glucose homeostasis in VEG-
F
AdKO mice (Figure 4F and 4G). IF-mediated improve-
ment of liver steatosis was also abolished in VEGF
AdKO 
mice (Supplementary information, Figure S8A-S8C). 
Importantly, loss of adipose-VEGF abolished IF-mediat-
ed WAT browning, and there was no difference in Ucp1 
gene expression even in the presence of sympathetic 
activation (i.e., increased Adrb3; Figure 4H). Moreover, 
IF-induced BAT activation was not observed in VEG-
F
AdKO mice (Figure 4I). Together, these findings suggest 
that adipose-VEGF is required for IF-induced metabolic 
improvement and adipose thermogenesis. 
Intermittent adipose-VEGF overexpression is sufficient 
to mimic the IF-mediated metabolic benefits
The results above prompted us to test whether period-
ic cycles of adipose-VEGF upregulation without fasting 
are sufficient to mimic the metabolic impact by IF. To 
mimic the fasting-mediated VEGF upregulation, two 
different lines of inducible adipose-VEGF mice (adipo-
cytes + macrophage: aP2-Cre;Rosa26
rtTA;Tet-O-VEGF, 
hereafter VEGF
aP2-Tg; adipocytes: Adipoq-Cre;Rosa26
rt-
TA;Tet-O-VEGF, hereafter VEGF
Adipoq-Tg) were intermit-
tently subjected to 45% HFD containing doxycycline 
(HFD-DOX), similar to IF cycle (Figure 5A). Important-
ly, both VEGF
aP2-Tg and VEGF
Adipoq-Tg mice under HFD-
DOX cycles showed very similar metabolic phenotypes 
seen in HFD-IF mice, compared to control mice (VEG-
F
CTRL; Figure 5B). Both transgenic mice showed signifi-
cantly elevated adipose Vegfa expression and vascular-
ization (Figure 5C and 5D; Supplementary information, 
Figure S9A). They also exhibited lower body weight due 
to decreased fat mass without changes of lean mass, re-
duced adipose tissue weight and cell size, and improved 
glucose homeostasis (Figure 5E-5H). Moreover, both 
transgenic mouse lines showed browning of WAT with 
elevated Ucp1 and Cidea expression (Figure 5I), compa-
rable to previous reports [6-8], without BAT activation 
(Supplementary information, Figure S9B). Together with 
the data of adipose-specific Vegfa KO mice, these results 
 Kyoung-Han Kim et al.
1317
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
illustrate the necessity and sufficiency of adipose-VEGF 
in IF-induced WAT browning and improved metabolism.
Fasting and adipose-VEGF induce alternative activation 
of adipose macrophages
Although VEGF is implicated in WAT browning in re-
sponse to cold, exercise, and environmental enrichment 
[9, 10], its underlying mechanism is not well understood. 
Recent studies have demonstrated that cold- and exer-
cise-induced WAT browning is mediated through alterna-
tive activation of adipose macrophage by type 2 immune 
cytokines [41, 42]. In addition, both cold acclimation and 
exercise, similar to our fasting condition, also increase 
adipose-VEGF expression [10, 43]. Therefore, we spec-
Figure 4 Adipose-VEGF is required for IF-mediated metabolic benefits. (A) Body weight measurements of aP2-Cre;Vegfa
flox/flox 
mice (VEGF
AdKO) subjected to AL and IF under HFD feeding (VEGF
AdKO-HFD, AL/IF: n = 5/6). (B) Tissue weight of IWAT, PWAT, 
and BAT in VEGF
AdKO-HFD-AL and -IF mice. (C) H&E-stained sections of IWAT, PWAT, and BAT show no noticeable differenc-
es between VEGF
AdKO-HFD-AL and -IF mice. (D) Lep mRNA expression of PWAT in VEGF
AdKO-HFD mice. (E) Plasma leptin 
levels. (F) GTT in VEGF
AdKO-HFD mice. (G) HOMA-IR in VEGF
AdKO-HFD mice. (H) Gene expression analysis revealed that IF 
increased sympathetic activation (Adrb3), but did not affect brown/beige adipocyte maker expression (i.e., Ucp1) in PWAT of 
VEGF
AdKO mice. (I) No changes in Ucp1 expression in BAT of VEGF
AdKO mice upon IF. Data are mean ± SEM; two-tailed un-
paired Student’s t-test; *P < 0.05 vs VEGF
AdKO-HFD-AL. Lep, leptin.
 1318
Role of adipose-VEGF in fasting-mediated metabolic benefits
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 11 | November 2017
ulated that browning of WAT in IF might be mediated 
by alternatively activated macrophage. Indeed, we found 
that IF cycles led to alternative activation of adipose 
tissue macrophage indicated by elevated expression of 
M2 macrophage marker genes (e.g., Clec10a and Il10) 
in PWAT (Figure 6A), whereas expression of classical 
M1 macrophage marker genes was unchanged by IF. As 
a result, the M1/M2 gene expression ratio was reduced 
by IF (Supplementary information, Figure S10A). On 
the contrary, but consistent with the lack of WAT brown-
Figure 5 Intermittent adipose-VEGF overexpression is sufficient to mimic the IF-mediated metabolic benefits. (A) Schematic 
illustration of the 2:1 intermittent VEGF induction regimen and two different VEGF overexpression mouse models. (B) Body 
weight measurements during 10 weeks of adipose VEGF cyclic inductions. (C) Vegfa mRNA expression in PWAT at different 
fasting durations (n = 5-6 per group). (D) Representative microscopic images of PECAM-stained blood vessels in whole-
mount PWAT. (E) Body composition showing fat and lean mass. (F) Tissue weight of IWAT, PWAT, and BAT. (G) H&E-stained 
sections of IWAT, PWAT, and BAT. (H) GTT. An insert graph shows AUC. (I) Gene expression analysis on WAT browning 
markers in PWAT. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM (VEGF
CTRL: n = 10; VEGF
aP2-Tg: n = 6; and VEGF
Adipoq-Tg: n = 5); one- or 
two-way ANOVA with Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc analysis; *P < 0.05 vs VEGF
CTRL.
 Kyoung-Han Kim et al.
1319
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
Figure 6 Fasting and adipose-VEGF induce alternative activation of macrophage. (A) M1/M2 macrophage marker gene 
expression analysis in HFD-AL and -IF mice. (B) M1/M2 macrophage marker gene expression in VEGF
AdKO-HFD-AL and -IF 
mice. (C) M1/M2 macrophage marker gene expression after intermittent adipose-VEGF upregulation in VEGF
Adipoq-Tg mice. (D) 
M1/M2 macrophage marker gene expression analysis in fed and fasted (24 h) mice. (E) Representative images of M2 marker 
Cd206-stained cells in whole-mount PWAT of fed and fasted (24 h) mice. (F) M1/M2 macrophage marker gene expression 
analysis after acute adipose-VEGF upregulation in VEGF
Adipoq-Tg mice. (G) Type 2 cytokine gene expression in fed and fasted 
(24 h) mice. (H) Type 2 cytokine gene expression after acute adipose-VEGF upregulation (48 h) in VEGF
Adipoq-Tg mice. (I) Rep-
resentative images of M2 macrophages and Ucp1 expression in WAT after acute adipose-VEGF upregulation in VEGF
Adipoq-Tg 
mice with treatments of vehicle or clodronate. Values are mean ± SEM (post HFD-AL: n = 7 and post HFD-IF: n = 9); two-
tailed unpaired Student’s t-test; *P < 0.05 vs HFD-AL, VEGF
AdKO-HFD-AL, VEGF
CTRL or fed mice. See also Supplementary 
information, Figure S7.
 1320
Role of adipose-VEGF in fasting-mediated metabolic benefits
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 11 | November 2017
ing in VEGF
AdKO-HFD-IF mice, loss of adipose-VEGF 
completely eliminated the IF-mediated increase of al-
ternatively activated adipose macrophage (Figure 6B; 
Supplementary information, Figure S10B and S10C). 
Similarly, the TN condition that blocked IF-stimulated 
WAT browning also hindered IF-induced M2 macro-
phage polarization (Supplementary information, Figure 
S10D and S10E). Notably, intermittent overexpression of 
adipose-VEGF using VEGF
Adipoq-Tg resulted in increased 
M2 marker gene expression, leading to a significant re-
duction in the M1/M2 ratio (Figure 6C; Supplementary 
information, Figure S10F and S10G). This finding was 
further verified by flow cytometry and whole-mount 
imaging, which showed that VEGF
Adipoq-Tg mice exhib-
ited increased expression of Cd206 and Cd301 in WAT 
macrophage with a reduced M1/M2 ratio (i.e., Cd11c
+/
Cd206
+ and Cd11c
+/Cd301
+), compared to VEGF
CTRL 
mice (Supplementary information, Figure S10H-S10J). 
Collectively, these data demonstrate that IF and adi-
pose-VEGF cycles promote alternative activation of adi-
pose macrophage closely linked to WAT browning. 
Importantly, even one-time 24-h fasting is sufficient 
to induce M2 macrophage polarization as evidenced 
by increased M2 macrophages and their marker gene 
expression (e.g., Clea10a, Il10, Ym1 and Arg1) as well 
as decreased expression of M1 marker genes (e.g., Nos 
and Il1b; Figure 6D and 6E; Supplementary information, 
Figure S11A). This suggests that these acute changes are 
repeated during IF, thereby facilitating its metabolic ben-
efits. In addition, acute induction (i.e., 48 h) of adipose 
Vegfa overexpression (~3.5-fold) using VEGFAdipoq-Tg 
mice, whose level is comparable to 24-h fasted mice 
(Figure 3C), is sufficient to increase M2 macrophage 
(Figure 6F; Supplementary information, Figure S11B-
S11E). However, direct administration of both mouse and 
human VEGF to Raw264.7 macrophages did not affect 
their properties, in contrast to interleukin-4 (IL-4) and 
lipopolysaccharide treatments that promote M2 and M1 
polarizations, respectively (Supplementary information, 
Figure S11F). We found that a 24-h fasting upregulates 
gene expression of Il-4, Il-5 and Il-13 (Figure 6G), type 2 
cytokines important for the activation of M2 macrophage 
[5]. Acute induction of adipose VEGF also elevated IL-5 
gene expression (Figure 6H). These results suggest that 
VEGF-mediated M2 macrophage polarization is indirect-
ly regulated, possibly via type 2 immune signaling.
Next, we tested whether adipose macrophages and 
their M2 polarization are required for VEGF-induced 
WAT browning. Consistent with a recent report [44], 
acute induction of adipose VEGF in both VEGFAdipoq-Tg 
and VEGF
aP2-Tg mice resulted in rapid browning of WAT 
with elevated Ucp1 expression (Figure 6I and Supple-
mentary information, Figure S11G). However, this effect 
was markedly blocked by clodronate-induced macro-
phage depletion. Taken together, our results suggest that 
fasting-induced adipose-VEGF is a driver of M2 macro-
phage activation, which underlies IF-mediated adipose 
thermogenesis and associated metabolic benefits. 
VEGF expression in human WAT correlates with M2 
macrophage and WAT browning
To examine whether the adipose VEGF-M2 macro-
phage-WAT browning axis described above is relevant in 
humans, we utilized RNA-seq data of 350 human adipose 
tissues from the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) 
project [45] to calculate the correlation between VEGFA 
gene expression and expression levels of M2-associated 
genes, M1-associated genes, and beige adipocyte-asso-
ciated genes [46-48] (Supplementary information, Table 
S2). The correlation heatmap using unbiased hierarchical 
clustering revealed that M2-associated genes positively 
correlated with VEGFA expression and were also clus-
tered with beige adipocyte genes (Figure 7A). In contrast, 
most M1-associated genes negatively correlated with 
VEGFA expression. For example, as shown in the scatter 
plot, expression of the M2 macrophage genes IL1R1 and 
ABHD5 [49], as well as the beige/brown adipocyte mark-
ers CIDEA and NDUFS2 [50], were positively correlated 
with VEGFA expression, whereas negative correlation 
with VEGFA was shown with the M1 macrophage genes 
NR3C2 and ITGB7 [51] (Figure 7B). After applying the 
threshold of adjusted P < 0.05 in VEGFA correlation with 
the gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), we identified 
24 out of 31 M2-associated genes displaying a positive 
correlation with VEGFA, 23 out of 30 beige adipocyte 
genes displaying a positive correlation, and 29 out of 32 
M1-associated genes displaying a negative correlation 
(Figure 7C and Supplementary information, Figure S12). 
Together with our mouse data, these results suggest that 
the adipose-VEGF expression level, which is elevated 
by IF, is not only associated with vasculature, but is also 
a metabolic index indicating M2 macrophage activation 
and beige adipocyte development in both humans and 
mice (Figure 7D). 
Discussion
Accumulating evidence suggests that IF provides vari-
ous biological benefits in animal models and humans [13, 
14]. For example, the 5:2 diet, which involves CR for 2 
non-consecutive days a week and unconstrained eating 
the other 5 days, has become a popular IF regimen and 
has a potential to be considered for medical interventions 
[13]. However, it remains elusive whether the effects 
 Kyoung-Han Kim et al.
1321
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
Figure 7 VEGF expression in human WAT correlates with M2 macrophage and WAT browning. (A) A correlation heatmap 
of VEGFA gene with unsupervised hierarchical clustering of M1/M2 macrophages- and beige/brown adipocyte-associated 
genes in human WAT. A histogram of VEGFA gene expression level (RPKM) is shown on the top of the heatmap. (B) Rep-
resentative scatter plots showing correlation of VEGFA with IL1R1 & ABHD5 (M2), CIDEA & NUDFS2 (beige), and NR3C2 
& ITGB7 (M1) genes. (C) Summary of VEGFA correlation with M2, beige, and M1-associated genes. Permutation P-values 
with the GSEA are shown. (D) Schematic model of IF-mediated VEGF expression underlying adipose thermogenesis and M2 
macrophage polarization. GSEA, gene set enrichment analysis.
 1322
Role of adipose-VEGF in fasting-mediated metabolic benefits
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 11 | November 2017
upon IF, often tested by alternate day fasting in rodent 
models [19], are attributed to reduced calorie intake and/
or modified eating pattern. The present study, using an 
isocaloric mouse model with a 2:1 IF regimen, demon-
strates calorie-independent metabolic benefits of IF. To-
gether with recent important findings on time-restricted 
feeding and a fasting-mimicking diet (FMD) [52, 53], 
our data support the significance of not only ‘what/how 
much’ but also ‘when/how often’ in energy intake to sus-
tain energy homeostasis and metabolic health. Our 2:1 IF 
rodent model provides an excellent platform for exam-
ining the mechanisms of isocaloric IF to prevent against 
various obesity-associated metabolic dysfunction.
Both IF and CR impact on nearly all metabolic organs/
tissues including hypothalamus, liver, skeletal muscle, 
and adipose tissues [13, 14]. However, the key organ/
tissue driving the IF-induced metabolic benefits is not 
clearly defined. In the present study, our results posit that 
adipose tissues are not only an energy reservoir in fast-
ing, but also play a pivotal role in IF-mediated metabolic 
benefits, particularly by regulating VEGF production. As 
sufficient vascularization is essential for adipose tissue 
development and function including cold-, exercise-, 
or environment-induced adaptive thermogenesis [9-11, 
54, 55], the activation of the adipose-VEGF pathway 
has been suggested as a new therapeutic strategy for 
the treatment of obesity and diabetes [56]. We demon-
strate in this study that fasting is a physiological means 
of increasing adipose Vegfa gene expression (Figure 
3), in addition to exercise [11] and cold exposure [10]. 
Accordingly, IF confers similar metabolic impacts as 
physical exercise and cold exposure (e.g., browning of 
WAT) with markedly increased adipose vasculature. Our 
adipose VEGF loss- and gain-of-function mouse models 
further illustrate that repetition of fasting-induced adi-
pose-VEGF expression underlies IF-mediated metabolic 
benefits. Interestingly, elevated VEGF expression was 
mainly noted in IWAT (i.e., subcutaneous WAT) or BAT 
of mice subjected to cold exposure [10, 57], whereas 
fasting-mediated augmentation of VEGF expression was 
greater in PWAT (i.e., visceral WAT) than in IWAT or 
BAT. Consistently, the profound weight loss in PWAT 
seen in our study (Supplementary information, Figure 
S1) and other study [52] indicates that visceral WAT is 
apparently more sensitive to energy restriction. Together, 
these observations suggest that, although systemic meta-
bolic outcomes by elevated VEGF expression in different 
adipose depots with different physiological stimuli ap-
pear to be comparable (i.e., improved glucose handling 
with elevated energy expenditure), subcutaneous WAT, 
visceral WAT, or BAT have their distinctive physiological 
and adaptive metabolic properties. This further suggests 
that combinatory stimuli to activate both subcutaneous 
and visceral WAT, such as IF and exercise or IF and cold 
exposure, could generate synergistic metabolic benefits.
It is now well appreciated that adipose thermogenesis, 
particularly browning of WAT, improves whole-body 
metabolism in response to various external and internal 
stimuli [3], and that adipose-VEGF is clearly implicated 
in this process [6-9]. An improved supply of oxygen and 
nutrient via increased angiogenesis in adipose tissues can 
account for the necessity of adipose-VEGF in the adap-
tive responses to physiological stimuli and stress, but 
may not fully explain the sufficiency of adipose-VEGF 
in the induction of adipose thermogenesis as seen in 
several different transgenic mouse models. Of note, it ap-
pears that VEGF receptors, such as VEGFR1 (Flt1) and 
VEGFR2 (Flk1), are not expressed in preadipocytes or 
mature adipocytes [6], leading us to postulate that VEGF 
acts indirectly in adipose tissue remodeling. Indeed, a 
recent study has demonstrated that adipose-VEGF induc-
es endothelial PDGF-CC in response to β3-adrenergic 
activation, thereby stimulating PDGFRα+-progenitor 
beige adipocytes in WAT [58]. However, we did not find 
substantial changes of Pdgfc expression in the WAT of 
fasted or VEGF
Adipoq-Tg mice (data not shown). Impor-
tantly, our data and a recent study [59] demonstrated 
that lifestyle interventions, IF, and CR triggered alter-
native activation (M2) of adipose macrophage, and the 
type 2 innate immune response that plays a critical role 
in this adipose thermogenic remodeling [5]. These im-
munological changes were also observed in mice with 
periodic overexpression of adipose-VEGF (driven by 
Adipoq-Cre and aP2-Cre), similar to a previous study [8], 
but not in the mice lacking IF-mediated WAT browning 
due to thermoneutrality (TN-HFD-IF) or loss of adi-
pose-VEGF (VEGFAdKO). In addition, both a one-time 
24-h fasting and acute adipose-VEGF overexpression 
without fasting induce alternative activation of adipose 
macrophage, whereas depletion of macrophage in the 
presence of adipose-VEGF overexpression abrogated 
the WAT browning. Together, our results demonstrate 
that (1) M2 macrophage polarization in IF mice is not 
simply a consequence of leanness, but a driving force of 
adipose thermogenesis and metabolic benefits, and (2) 
adipose-VEGF plays a role in the regulation of M2 mac-
rophage activation as a rapid adaptive response to energy 
restriction, likely even prior to angiogenesis. Further-
more, (3) the M1/M2 macrophage balance, rather than 
the number of macrophage, may be critical for adipose 
thermogenesis, as all fasted mice had reductions in the 
number of adipose macrophage regardless of conditions. 
Nevertheless, little is known about the molecular 
mechanism underlying fasting- or adipose-VEGF-me-
 Kyoung-Han Kim et al.
1323
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
diated M2 polarization. Our study showed that M2 
macrophage polarization was indirectly regulated by 
VEGF, similar to the previous study [8]. What could be 
the mechanism of this VEGF-mediated M2 transition? 
Among various upstream signaling pathways implicated 
in M2 polarization [60], we found elevated type2 cyto-
kines by both fasting (IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13) and acute 
adipose-VEGF induction (IL-5), suggesting that adi-
pose-VEGF may act on other upstream immune cells, 
such as eosinophils, T-helper cell 2 (Th2), or type 2 in-
nate lymphoid cells (ILC2), to promote M2 polarization 
[61]. Therefore, future studies delineating a precise role 
(e.g., activation or recruitment of immune cells) and its 
molecular mechanism (e.g., through VEGFR1, VEGFR2, 
and VEGFB [56]) of VEGF signaling in adipose immu-
nometabolism should uncover the fundamental mech-
anism in WAT browning. Furthermore, other adipose 
factors that we observed to be affected by IF, such as 
leptin, neuregulin 4, adiponectin and adipsin, could play 
a role in fasting-mediated immunometabolic responses. 
This might be particularly expected for leptin, whose 
expression level is reduced by IF or fasting in WAT and 
BAT (not in skeletal muscle or liver). Leptin modulates a 
wide range of immune and inflammatory processes, and 
leptin-deficient mast cells undergo M2 polarization [62]. 
Given that leptin could synergistically act with VEGF 
(e.g., in angiogenesis) [63], it will be of interest to exam-
ine the implication of leptin in fasting- and VEGF-medi-
ated metabolic benefits. On the other hand, these adipose 
factors may be involved in the non-thermogenic effects 
of IF. Although thermoneutrality markedly reduced the 
metabolic benefits of IF with inhibition of WAT brown-
ing, it did not completely eliminate the IF’s effects as 
adipose-derived factors showed similar gene expression 
(data not shown). As previous studies demonstrate that 
neuregulin 4 and adipsin are implicated in inhibition of 
hepatic steatosis [32] and improvement of insulin secre-
tion [64], respectively, the non-thermogenic benefits of 
IF may be attributed to these adipose-derived factors or 
possibly other physiological responses, such as reduced 
adipose inflammation and increased insulin sensitivity 
(Figure 2A, Cluster #3). 
IF has been practiced in human clinical settings with 
various fasting regimens, and most studies revealed 
similar beneficial health effects such as body weight 
reduction and increased insulin sensitivity [18, 21, 65, 
66]. However, IF can be stressful to body and mind, 
because 24-h fasting can reduce body weight by 2%-3% 
in humans [65] and 5%-10% in mice. Although it is not 
easy to compare the effects of fasting in mice directly 
with humans due to differences in basal metabolic rate, 
food intake, as well as age differences [67], IF appears 
to improve eating behavior and mood in humans [68]. 
It will be important to overcome potential limitations 
by developing a method to improve the practicality of 
IF if our findings are to have translational perspective. 
For example, a method like FMD that provides various 
metabolic benefits in both mice and humans [18, 21, 66] 
would improve the practicality of IF in a clinical setting. 
Further rigorous studies are required to examine: (1) 
whether the beneficial effects of IF last after stopping 
the fasting (i.e., if there is a rebound effect); (2) wheth-
er there is any potential harm of IF; and (3) whether IF 
benefits apply to all generations (i.e., an age-dependent 
issue) and disease conditions. Notably, 5 weeks of IF was 
able to drive beneficial metabolic effects in 8-month-
old mice with HFD-induced obesity (unpublished data), 
further emphasizing the therapeutic potential of IF in 
age-associated metabolic abnormalities. To further deter-
mine the mechanism of IF, it is necessary to test whether 
fasting (or IF) induces VEGF expression in human 
adipose tissues, and whether fasting-induced adipose 
VEGF promotes M2 polarization and WAT browning in 
humans. Thus, future studies are warranted to examine 
the adaptive response of human adipose tissues to fasting 
or IF intervention via thermogenic and even non-thermo-
genic pathways, in association with the proposed mecha-
nisms such as circadian rhythm [53, 69], gut microbiome 
changes [70], and sleep regulation.
In summary, our data demonstrate that metabolic 
benefits of IF are largely mediated by adipose thermo-
genesis without overall caloric reduction. We showed 
that fasting-induced adipose-VEGF plays a key role in 
WAT browning through M2 macrophage activation. This 
finding is further supported by human adipose tissue 
gene expression analysis illustrating positive correla-
tions between adipose-VEGF expression and both M2 
macrophage and WAT browning. Together, the present 
study illustrates the role of IF-induced adipose-VEGF in 
remodeling the immunometabolic property of adipose 
tissue, highlighting the importance of eating pattern and 
physiological fasting duration to sustain metabolic ho-
meostasis.
Materials and Methods
Animals
All animal experimental protocols approved by the Animal 
Care Committee of the Centre of Phenogenomics conformed to the 
standards of the Canadian Council on Animal Care. No statistical 
methods were used to predetermine sample size. The investigators 
were not blinded to allocation during experiments. The colony was 
housed in a specific pathogen-free (SPF) facility in ventilated cag-
es with controlled environment settings (21-22 ºC, 30%-60% hu-
midity for normal housing), 12-h light/dark cycles, and free access 
 1324
Role of adipose-VEGF in fasting-mediated metabolic benefits
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 11 | November 2017
to water. For the thermoneutrality experiment, mice were housed 
at 30 ºC. C57BL/6J mice were purchased from the Jackson Labo-
ratory. aP2-Cre, Adipoq-Cre, Ucp1-Cre, Vegfa
flox/flox; TetO-Vegf164, 
Rosa26
rtTA and Rosa26
mT/mG mice were described previously [6, 71, 
72]. Age-matched littermate controls were used for each experi-
ment.
IF regimen and diets
Body weight-matched 8-week-old male C57BL/6J, VEGF
AdKO, 
and Ucp1-Cre;Rosa26
mT/mG mice were randomly divided into two 
groups: AL and IF groups. Mice were fed either ND (Harlan 
#2918; 17% fat) or 45% HFD (#D12451, Research Diets). Mice 
in the IF group were subjected to the 2:1 IF regimen, comprising 1 
day of fasting followed by 2 days of feeding; the food was removed 
at 12:00 PM and then provided again the following day (24 h later) 
at 12:00 PM. Mice in the AL group were handled equivalently. To 
induce periodic VEGF overexpression in adipose tissues, VEG-
F
CTRL, VEGF
aP2-Tg, and VEGF
Adipoq-Tg mice were subjected to 45% 
HFD-DOX (Research Diets) once every 3 days (Figure 5A). 
Statistical analysis
All results are presented as mean ± SEM. Statistical signifi-
cance of differences among groups was determined by two-tailed 
unpaired and paired Student’s t-test as well as analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) with post hoc analysis, Student-Newman-Keuls, using 
Sigma Stat (SPSS) or PRISM 5.0 (GraphPad). Differences with P 
< 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Other methods are described in Supplementary information, 
Data S1.  
Acknowledgments
We thank Drs Daniel Drucker, Tony Lam, Warren Lee, and 
So-Young Park for critical reading of the manuscript; Drs Javier 
Jaldin-Fincati, Azadeh Yeganeh, and Hisato Konoeda for experi-
mental support and advice; and Jannel Liu for animal husbandry. 
We also thank Dr Jason Fung for scientific discussion and Eliz-
abeth Lebedev for illustration. This work was funded by grants 
from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council 
(NSERC) of Canada, Pilot and Feasibility Study Grant of Ban-
ting & Best Diabetes Centre (BBDC), Centre for Healthy Active 
Kids (CHAK) Micro-grant and Sickkids Start-up fund to H-KS, 
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to C-CH, and 
Medical Research Center Program (2015R1A5A2009124) through 
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by Ministry 
of Science, ICT, and Future Planning to J-RK. K-HK and JHM are 
supported by the Restracomp fellowship from The Hospital for 
Sick Children. JES is supported by a fellowship from the Canadian 
Diabetes Association. JHL is supported by the Restracomp schol-
arship from The Hospital for Sick Children.
Author Contributions
K-HK, C-CH, and H-KS conceived, designed, and supervised 
the research project. K-HK, YHK, JES, JHL, JHM, SK, MSC, 
K-OD and J-AY performed mouse metabolic experiments. K-HK 
and YHK analyzed mouse metabolic data. K-HK, YHK, and JHL 
performed gene expression analysis with assistance from SK and 
MSC. Histology was conducted by JZ, and analyzed by K-HK, 
YHK, KF, and FL. JES performed whole-mount adipose tissue 
staining for blood vessel and macrophage. JGP and SMIH ana-
lyzed mouse RNA-seq data. JGP and K-HK performed human 
gene correlation analysis. AN, AK, and J-RK provided scientific 
discussion and technical support. K-HK, C-CH, and H-KS wrote 
the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and commented 
on the manuscript.
Competing Financial Interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
References
1 
Rutkowski JM, Stern JH, Scherer PE. The cell biology of fat 
expansion. J Cell Biol 2015; 208:501-512.
2 
Stern JH, Scherer PE. Adipose tissue biology in 2014: ad-
vances in our understanding of adipose tissue homeostasis. 
Nat Rev Endocrinol 2015; 11:71-72.
3 
Kajimura S, Spiegelman BM, Seale P. Brown and beige fat: 
physiological roles beyond heat generation. Cell Metab 2015; 
22:546-559.
4 
Wang W, Seale P. Control of brown and beige fat develop-
ment. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2016; 17:691-702.
5 
Odegaard JI, Chawla A. Type 2 responses at the interface 
between immunity and fat metabolism. Curr Opin Immunol 
2015; 36:67-72.
6 
Sung HK, Doh KO, Son JE, et al. Adipose vascular endothe-
lial growth factor regulates metabolic homeostasis through 
angiogenesis. Cell Metab 2013; 17:61-72.
7 
Sun K, Wernstedt Asterholm I, Kusminski CM, et al. Dichot-
omous effects of VEGF-A on adipose tissue dysfunction. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 2012; 109:5874-5879.
8 
Elias I, Franckhauser S, Ferre T, et al. Adipose tissue overex-
pression of vascular endothelial growth factor protects against 
diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance. Diabetes 2012; 
61:1801-1813.
9 
During MJ, Liu X, Huang W, et al. Adipose VEGF links the 
white-to-brown fat switch with environmental, genetic, and 
pharmacological stimuli in male mice. Endocrinology 2015; 
156:2059-2073.
10 Xue Y, Petrovic N, Cao R, et al. Hypoxia-independent angio-
genesis in adipose tissues during cold acclimation. Cell Metab 
2009; 9:99-109.
11 Stanford KI, Middelbeek RJ, Townsend KL, et al. A novel 
role for subcutaneous adipose tissue in exercise-induced im-
provements in glucose homeostasis. Diabetes 2015; 64:2002-
2014.
12 Gill S, Panda S. A smartphone app reveals erratic diurnal 
eating patterns in humans that can be modulated for health 
benefits. Cell Metab 2015; 22:789-798.
13 Longo VD, Panda S. Fasting, circadian rhythms, and 
time-restricted feeding in healthy lifespan. Cell Metab 2016; 
23:1048-1059.
14 Longo VD, Mattson MP. Fasting: molecular mechanisms and 
clinical applications. Cell Metab 2014; 19:181-192.
15 Anson RM, Guo Z, de Cabo R, et al. Intermittent fasting 
dissociates beneficial effects of dietary restriction on glucose 
metabolism and neuronal resistance to injury from calorie in-
take. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003; 100:6216-6220.
16 Fontana L, Partridge L. Promoting health and longevity 
 Kyoung-Han Kim et al.
1325
www.cell-research.com | Cell Research | SPRINGER NATURE
through diet: from model organisms to humans. Cell 2015; 
161:106-118.
17 Harvie MN, Pegington M, Mattson MP, et al. The effects of 
intermittent or continuous energy restriction on weight loss 
and metabolic disease risk markers: a randomized trial in 
young overweight women. Int J Obes 2011; 35:714-727.
18 Patterson RE, Laughlin GA, LaCroix AZ, et al. Intermittent 
fasting and human metabolic health. J Acad Nutr Diet 2015; 
115:1203-1212.
19 Boutant M, Kulkarni SS, Joffraud M, et al. SIRT1 gain of 
function does not mimic or enhance the adaptations to inter-
mittent fasting. Cell Rep 2016; 14:2068-2075.
20 Harvie M, Wright C, Pegington M, et al. The effect of inter-
mittent energy and carbohydrate restriction v. daily energy 
restriction on weight loss and metabolic disease risk markers 
in overweight women. Br J Nutr 2013; 110:1534-1547.
21 Varady KA, Bhutani S, Klempel MC, et al. Alternate day fast-
ing for weight loss in normal weight and overweight subjects: 
a randomized controlled trial. Nutr J 2013; 12:146.
22 Martin A, Normand S, Sothier M, Peyrat J, Louche-Pelissier 
C, Laville M. Is advice for breakfast consumption justified? 
Results from a short-term dietary and metabolic experiment 
in young healthy men. Br J Nutr 2000; 84:337-344.
23 Wan R, Camandola S, Mattson MP. Intermittent food depriva-
tion improves cardiovascular and neuroendocrine responses 
to stress in rats. J Nutr 2003; 133:1921-1929.
24 Gotthardt JD, Verpeut JL, Yeomans BL, et al. Intermittent 
fasting promotes fat loss with lean mass retention, increased 
hypothalamic norepinephrine content, and increased neuro-
peptide Y gene expression in diet-induced obese male mice. 
Endocrinology 2016; 157:679-691.
25 Bapat SP, Myoung Suh J, Fang S, et al. Depletion of fat-res-
ident Treg cells prevents age-associated insulin resistance. 
Nature 2015; 528:137-141.
26 Rajakumari S, Wu J, Ishibashi J, et al. EBF2 determines and 
maintains brown adipocyte identity. Cell Metab 2013; 17:562-
574.
27 Barquissau V, Beuzelin D, Pisani DF, et al. White-to-brite 
conversion in human adipocytes promotes metabolic repro-
gramming towards fatty acid anabolic and catabolic pathways. 
Mol Metab 2016; 5:352-365.
28 Mottillo EP, Balasubramanian P, Lee YH, Weng C, Kershaw 
EE, Granneman JG. Coupling of lipolysis and de novo lipo-
genesis in brown, beige, and white adipose tissues during 
chronic β3-adrenergic receptor activation. J Lipid Res 2014; 
55:2276-2286.
29 Cui X, Nguyen NL, Zarebidaki E, et al. Thermoneutrality de-
creases thermogenic program and promotes adiposity in high-
fat diet-fed mice. Physiol Rep 2016; 4.
30 Lehr S, Hartwig S, Sell H. Adipokines: a treasure trove for the 
discovery of biomarkers for metabolic disorders. Proteomics 
Clin Appl 2012; 6:91-101.
31 Deng Y, Scherer PE. Adipokines as novel biomarkers and reg-
ulators of the metabolic syndrome. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2010; 
1212:E1-E19.
32 Wang GX, Zhao XY, Meng ZX, et al. The brown fat-enriched 
secreted factor Nrg4 preserves metabolic homeostasis through 
attenuation of hepatic lipogenesis. Nat Med 2014; 20:1436-
1443.
33 Dodd GT, Decherf S, Loh K, et al. Leptin and insulin act on 
POMC neurons to promote the browning of white fat. Cell 
2015; 160:88-104.
34 Tonello C, Giordano A, Cozzi V, et al. Role of sympathetic 
activity in controlling the expression of vascular endothelial 
growth factor in brown fat cells of lean and genetically obese 
rats. FEBS Lett 1999; 442:167-172.
35 Buzelle SL, MacPherson RE, Peppler WT, Castellani L, 
Wright DC. The contribution of IL-6 to β3 adrenergic recep-
tor mediated adipose tissue remodeling. Physiol Rep 2015; 3.
36 Granneman JG, Lahners KN, Chaudhry A. Molecular clon-
ing and expression of the rat beta 3-adrenergic receptor. Mol 
Pharmacol 1991; 40:895-899.
37 Cho CH, Koh YJ, Han J, et al. Angiogenic role of 
LYVE-1-positive macrophages in adipose tissue. Circ Res 
2007; 100:e47-e57.
38 Li YL, Zhao H, Ren XB. Relationship of VEGF/VEGFR with 
immune and cancer cells: staggering or forward? Cancer Biol 
Med 2016; 13:206-214.
39 Pang C, Gao Z, Yin J, Zhang J, Jia W, Ye J. Macrophage infil-
tration into adipose tissue may promote angiogenesis for ad-
ipose tissue remodeling in obesity. Am J Physiol Endocrinol 
Metab 2008; 295:E313-E322.
40 Jeffery E, Berry R, Church CD, et al. Characterization of Cre 
recombinase models for the study of adipose tissue. Adipocyte 
2014; 3:206-211.
41 Nguyen KD, Qiu Y, Cui X, et al. Alternatively activated mac-
rophages produce catecholamines to sustain adaptive thermo-
genesis. Nature 2011; 480:104-108.
42 Rao RR, Long JZ, White JP, et al. Meteorin-like is a hormone 
that regulates immune-adipose interactions to increase beige 
fat thermogenesis. Cell 2014; 157:1279-1291.
43 Disanzo BL, You T. Effects of exercise training on indicators 
of adipose tissue angiogenesis and hypoxia in obese rats. Me-
tabolism 2014; 63:452-455.
44 Park J, Kim M, Sun K, An YA, Gu X, Scherer PE. VEGF-A-ex-
pressing adipose tissue shows rapid beiging and enhanced 
survival after transplantation and confers IL-4-independent 
metabolic improvements. Diabetes 2017; 66:1479-1490.
45 Consortium GT. Human genomics. the Genotype-Tissue Ex-
pression (GTEx) pilot analysis: multitissue gene regulation in 
humans. Science 2015; 348:648-660.
46 Shinoda K, Luijten IH, Hasegawa Y, et al. Genetic and func-
tional characterization of clonally derived adult human brown 
adipocytes. Nat Med 2015; 21:389-394.
47 Roszer T. Understanding the mysterious M2 macrophage 
through activation markers and effector mechanisms. Media-
tors Inflamm 2015; 2015:816460.
48 Martinez FO, Gordon S. The M1 and M2 paradigm of mac-
rophage activation: time for reassessment. F1000Prime Rep 
2014; 6:13.
49 Natsuaki Y, Egawa G, Nakamizo S, et al. Perivascular leuko-
cyte clusters are essential for efficient activation of effector T 
cells in the skin. Nat Immunol 2014; 15:1064-1069.
50 Sidossis L, Kajimura S. Brown and beige fat in humans: ther-
mogenic adipocytes that control energy and glucose homeo-
stasis. J Clin Invest 2015; 125:478-486.
51 Mauer J, Chaurasia B, Goldau J, et al. Signaling by IL-6 
promotes alternative activation of macrophages to limit en-
 1326
Role of adipose-VEGF in fasting-mediated metabolic benefits
SPRINGER NATURE | Cell Research | Vol 27 No 11 | November 2017
dotoxemia and obesity-associated resistance to insulin. Nat 
Immunol 2014; 15:423-430.
52 Brandhorst S, Choi IY, Wei M, et al. A periodic diet that 
mimics fasting promotes multi-system regeneration, enhanced 
cognitive performance, and healthspan. Cell Metab 2015; 
22:86-99.
53 Hatori M, Vollmers C, Zarrinpar A, et al. Time-restricted 
feeding without reducing caloric intake prevents metabolic 
diseases in mice fed a high-fat diet. Cell Metab 2012; 15:848-
860.
54 Cao Y. Angiogenesis and vascular functions in modulation of 
obesity, adipose metabolism, and insulin sensitivity. Cell Me-
tab 2013; 18:478-489.
55 Shimizu I, Aprahamian T, Kikuchi R, et al. Vascular rarefac-
tion mediates whitening of brown fat in obesity. J Clin Invest 
2014; 124:2099-2112.
56 Robciuc MR, Kivela R, Williams IM, et al. VEGFB/VEG-
FR1-induced expansion of adipose vasculature counteracts 
obesity and related metabolic complications. Cell Metab 
2016; 23:712-724.
57 Fredriksson JM, Nikami H, Nedergaard J. Cold-induced 
expression of the VEGF gene in brown adipose tissue is in-
dependent of thermogenic oxygen consumption. FEBS Lett 
2005; 579:5680-5684.
58 Seki T, Hosaka K, Lim S, et al. Endothelial PDGF-CC regu-
lates angiogenesis-dependent thermogenesis in beige fat. Nat 
Commun 2016; 7:12152.
59 Fabbiano S, Suarez-Zamorano N, Rigo D, et al. Caloric re-
striction leads to browning of white adipose tissue through 
type 2 immune signaling. Cell Metab 2016; 24:434-446.
60 Man K, Kutyavin VI, Chawla A. Tissue immunometabolism: 
development, physiology, and pathobiology. Cell Metab 2017; 
25:11-26.
61 Molofsky AB, Nussbaum JC, Liang HE, et al. Innate lym-
phoid type 2 cells sustain visceral adipose tissue eosinophils 
and alternatively activated macrophages. J Exp Med 2013; 
210:535-549.
62 Zhou Y, Yu X, Chen H, et al. Leptin deficiency shifts mast cells 
toward anti-inflammatory actions and protects mice from obe-
sity and diabetes by polarizing M2 macrophages. Cell Metab 
2015; 22:1045-1058.
63 Cao R, Brakenhielm E, Wahlestedt C, Thyberg J, Cao Y. 
Leptin induces vascular permeability and synergistically stim-
ulates angiogenesis with FGF-2 and VEGF. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 2001; 98:6390-6395.
64 Lo JC, Ljubicic S, Leibiger B, et al. Adipsin is an adipokine 
that improves β cell function in diabetes. Cell 2014; 158:41-
53.
65 Heilbronn LK, Smith SR, Martin CK, Anton SD, Ravussin E. 
Alternate-day fasting in nonobese subjects: effects on body 
weight, body composition, and energy metabolism. Am J Clin 
Nutr 2005; 81:69-73.
66 Wei M, Brandhorst S, Shelehchi M, et al. Fasting-mimicking 
diet and markers/risk factors for aging, diabetes, cancer, and 
cardiovascular disease. Sci Transl Med 2017; 9.
67 Ellacott KL, Morton GJ, Woods SC, Tso P, Schwartz MW. 
Assessment of feeding behavior in laboratory mice. Cell Me-
tab 2010; 12:10-17.
68 Harvie M, Howell A. Potential benefits and harms of intermit-
tent energy restriction and intermittent fasting amongst obese, 
overweight and normal weight subjects - a narrative review of 
human and animal evidence. Behav Sci 2017; 7.
69 LeCheminant JD, Christenson E, Bailey BW, Tucker LA. 
Restricting night-time eating reduces daily energy intake in 
healthy young men: a short-term cross-over study. Br J Nutr 
2013; 110:2108-2113.
70 Thaiss CA, Zeevi D, Levy M, et al. Transkingdom control of 
microbiota diurnal oscillations promotes metabolic homeosta-
sis. Cell 2014; 159:514-529.
71 Kong X, Banks A, Liu T, et al. IRF4 is a key thermogenic 
transcriptional partner of PGC-1alpha. Cell 2014; 158:69-83.
72 Muzumdar MD, Tasic B, Miyamichi K, Li L, Luo L. A global 
double-fluorescent Cre reporter mouse. Genesis 2007; 45:593-
605.
(Supplementary information is linked to the online version of 
the paper on the Cell Research website.)
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 Unported License. The images or other 
third party material in this article are included in the 
article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in the 
credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons 
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder 
to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017
