 OPEN
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Rapid evolution of microbe-mediated protection
against pathogens in a worm host
Kayla C King1,2, Michael A Brockhurst3, Olga Vasieva1, Steve Paterson1, Alex Betts2,
Suzanne A Ford2, Crystal L Frost1, Malcolm J Horsburgh1, Sam Haldenby1 and
Gregory DD Hurst1
1Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK; 2Department of Zoology, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK and 3Department of Biology, University of York, York, UK
Microbes can defend their host against virulent infections, but direct evidence for the adaptive origin of
microbe-mediated protection is lacking. Using experimental evolution of a novel, tripartite interaction,
we demonstrate that mildly pathogenic bacteria (Enterococcus faecalis) living in worms (Caenorhabditis
elegans) rapidly evolved to defend their animal hosts against infection by a more virulent pathogen
(Staphylococcus aureus), crossing the parasitism–mutualism continuum. Host protection evolved in all
six, independently selected populations in response to within-host bacterial interactions and without
direct selection for host health. Microbe-mediated protection was also effective against a broad
spectrum of pathogenic S. aureus isolates. Genomic analysis implied that the mechanistic basis for E.
faecalis-mediated protection was through increased production of antimicrobial superoxide, which was
confirmed by biochemical assays. Our results indicate that microbes living within a host may make the
evolutionary transition to mutualism in response to pathogen attack, and that microbiome evolution
warrants consideration as a driver of infection outcome.
The ISME Journal (2016) 10, 1915–1924; doi:10.1038/ismej.2015.259; published online 15 March 2016
Introduction
Microbes can have effects on host biology far
beyond their core impacts on digestion (Dillon
et al., 2000; Cerf-Bensussan and Gaboriau-Routhiau,
2010; Brucker and Bordenstein, 2013; Lize et al.,
2014). Microbes can cause infectious disease, but
they can also act to protect hosts from pathogens, a
phenomenon observed in a range of animals (Dillon
et al., 2005; Dong et al., 2009; Jaenike et al., 2010;
Koch and Schmid-Hempel, 2011), including humans
(Kamada et al., 2013), and in plants at the root–soil
interface (Mendes et al., 2011; May and Nelson,
2014). These protective microbes provide an impor-
tant complement to the host's defence systems (Abt
and Artis, 2013; Hooper et al., 2012; McFall-Ngai
et al., 2013). As pathogens invade the host, they can
not only be targeted by the host immune system, but
also interact with pathogenic and commensal micro-
bial species already present within the host (McFall-
Ngai et al., 2013). Resident microbes can therefore
provide strong protection against virulent patho-
gens, and corresponding microbial traits might
be evolutionarily advantageous. Evolution of this
nature would represent microbes evolving along the
parasitism–mutualism continuum (Chamberlain et al.,
2014).
The large population sizes and short generation
times of microbes also create the potential for the
rapid evolution of such defences. Can microbes evolve
to protect their host in response to virulent pathogen
challenge, and, in doing so make an evolutionary
transition to mutualism? It is well established that
infecting pathogens can undergo rapid adaptation
(Brockhurst and Koskella, 2013) in response to
transmission opportunity and mode (Messenger et al.,
1999), prior immune exposure (Mackinnon and Read,
2004) and multi-strain coinfection (Garbutt et al., 2011)
with host defences known to reciprocally evolve to
pathogen adaptation (Schulte et al., 2010; Morran
et al., 2011). Despite this, evolutionary responses by
resident microbes against pathogen infection have not
before been considered.
Here, we use experimental evolution to test whether
a mildly pathogenic, resident microbe (Enterococcus
faecalis) can evolve to defend its host (Caenorhabditis
elegans) against infection by a more virulent pathogen
(Staphylococcus aureus), and thus cross the parasit-
ism–mutualism continuum. E. faecalis and S. aureus
frequently occur in animal and human microbiomes
(Holden et al., 2004; Martin-Vivaldi et al., 2010;
Lawley et al., 2012; Cruz et al., 2013; Kommineni
et al., 2015) wherein they can be pathogenic or
commensal. Both bacteria can colonise the gut of
C. elegans (Garsin et al., 2001), a model animal system
Correspondence: K King, Department of Zoology, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PS, UK.
E-mail: kayla.king@zoo.ox.ac.uk
Received 24 June 2015; revised 23 November 2015; accepted
1 December 2015; published online 15 March 2016
The ISME Journal (2016) 10, 1915–1924
© 2016 International Society for Microbial Ecology All rights reserved 1751-7362/16
www.nature.com/ismej
 for investigating natural and lab-based host–micro-
biota associations (Cabreiro and Gems, 2013; Clark
and Hodgkin, 2013; Petersen et al., 2015) and their
evolutionary consequences (reviewed in Gray and
Cutter, 2014). Within the lifetime of an individual
nematode, both S. aureus and E. faecalis can be
harmful. S. aureus is highly virulent, causing 100%
host mortality after approximately 2 days of exposure
(Sifri et al., 2003) by lysing the cells lining the gut wall
of nematode hosts (Gravato-Nobre and Hodgkin,
2005). By contrast, E. faecalis is lethal to C. elegans
only over the longer term, requiring more than 7 days
of
exposure (and
no
food) to cause total
host
population reduction (Sifri et al., 2002) and is only
mildly pathogenic in shorter-term infections. In our
experimental set-up, involving 2-day colonisations
(described in Figure 1), S. aureus is a highly virulent
pathogen in single infection, whereas E. faecalis is
a mildly pathogenic resident of the nematode gut,
causing c. o1% mortality of the host. E. faecalis is
under selection in this state.
We tested whether E. faecalis resident within
C. elegans evolved to protect against S. aureus
infection where its host was challenged with the
pathogen over 15 experimental host generations. Our
experiments examined the following interaction:
resident E. faecalis was allowed to evolve inside
hosts in the presence/absence of a genetically fixed
pathogen (supplied from ancestral culture each host
generation; experimental procedure in Figure 1), and
the properties of E. faecalis were compared between
the two treatments. Both treatments consisted of six
replicate populations started from a single clone of
E. faecalis that were then independently passaged,
and thus any adaptive evolution that occurred was
due to de novo mutation and selection. We passaged
E. faecalis from dead hosts to observe evolutionary
processes arising from species interactions within
hosts, rather than imposing direct selection for
host health. We found that host protection against
S. aureus by resident E. faecalis evolved rapidly
within nematode hosts in all replicate populations.
Genomic
and
subsequent
biochemical
analyses
pointed to increased production of antimicrobial
superoxide as the mechanism. Our results indicate
that resident microbes, even mildly pathogenic ones,
can rapidly evolve to defend their hosts in response
to virulent pathogenic infection.
Materials and methods
Nematode host and bacteria
C. elegans is a nematode that constantly interacts
with microbes in its natural habitat (Felix and
Braendle, 2010), and it can act as a predator or host
for numerous species (Cabreiro and Gems, 2013; Clark
and Hodgkin, 2013; Petersen et al., 2015). These
animals are thus an established model for microbial
colonisation and pathogenesis (Gravato-Nobre and
Hodgkin, 2005) and their gut can be co-colonised by
multiple pathogens and commensals (Peleg et al.,
2008; Portal-Celhay and Blaser, 2012; Montalvo-Katz
et al., 2013; Hodgkin et al., 2013).
The N2 wild-type nematode strain used herein was
obtained from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center
Figure 1
Experimental procedure for experimental evolution of E. faecalis within C. elegans populations. Treatments are shown for a
single replicate population. Six populations of E. faecalis were independently passaged from a single clone ancestor for 15 experimental
host generations through nematode hosts under one of two different selection regimes: (i) SE repeated passage of E. faecalis alone in
C. elegans and (ii) CCE repeated passage of E. faecalis in C. elegans with a fixed, non-evolving S. aureus isolate. In treatment (i), nematodes
were only exposed to E. faecalis, while in (ii), nematodes were exposed to E. faecalis first, so that the microbe could establish residency,
and then to S. aureus. We enforced within-host interactions between the bacterial species by propagating E. faecalis cells harvested from
bacteria-killed nematodes, a method that also avoided direct selection against virulence and for host health. All replicate populations were
passaged at the same time during the experiment.
Evolution of protective microbes
KC King et al
1916
The ISME Journal
 (University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA).
We used the E. faecalis lab strain OG1RF (Garsin
et al., 2001), an isolate from the human digestive tract,
and S. aureus strain MSSA476 (Holden et al., 2004),
a disease-causing pathogen.
Experimental evolution
A single, randomly selected clone of E. faecalis was
the ancestor for all evolving populations, and stock
of a single clone of S. aureus was used. Thus, only
E. faecalis was permitted to evolve in response
to species interactions whereby they inhabited the
C. elegans gut alone (single evolution, SE) or with
S. aureus (co-colonisation evolution, CCE; Figure 1).
Nematodes
also
remained
evolutionarily
static
throughout the experiment. A stock population of
N2 wild-type nematodes was derived by isolating a
single hermaphroditic female every generation from
the population for five generations to ensure genetic
homogeneity. Stock populations of the ‘isofemale’
line were routinely maintained on nematode growth
medium plates seeded with 50 ul of Escherichia coli
OP50 in Luria-Bertani broth and kept at 20 °C. The
nematodes digest E. coli after this bacterium is
consumed, and it does not accumulate in the gut.
Exposure, transfer and selection
Bacteria were cultured in Todd-Hewitt (TH) broth
at
28 °C
overnight.
Lawns
of
S.
aureus
liquid
culture (60 μl) were plated onto 9 cm petri plates
with Tryptone Soy Broth (TSB) agar, and lawns of
E. faecalis culture (60 μl) were also plated on TSB with
100 μg ml −1 rifampicin (in both experimental evolu-
tion treatments). This antibiotic is used to select for E.
faecalis OG1RF from mixed cultures. Bacterial lawns
were placed at 28 °C overnight and then cooled at
room temperature for several hours prior to use.
For
a given replicate,
approximately
900
L4
(larval) individuals, previously feeding on E. coli,
were transferred in M9 buffer to an exposure plate
with E. faecalis. In the CCE treatment, after 24 h, all
nematodes were washed off the plate with M9 buffer
and centrifuged at 3000 r.p.m. for 3 min. The super-
natant was discarded, and then 5 ml M9 buffer
was added to the test tube. This washing procedure
was repeated five times to clean excess bacterial
cells off the nematode cuticle. Nematodes were in
the M9 buffer for o10 min at any given point in time.
Nematodes were then transferred to the second
exposure plate with S. aureus from a frozen culture
stock. During exposures, nematodes were placed at
25 °C. E. faecalis populations evolved in the absence
of S. aureus during the SE treatment were simply
maintained in C. elegans on their plate without
transfer during that period.
Twenty-four hours later, 15 bacteria-killed nema-
tode carcasses were picked from a single replicate
population and placed in a 1.5 ml centrifuge tube
with 1 ml M9 buffer. The tube was centrifuged at
3000 r.p.m. for 3 min, the supernatant was discarded,
and 1 ml M9 buffer was added. The wash process
was repeated five more times. After the final rinse,
the nematode pellet was crushed with a pestle to
release the pathogens from inside the carcass. The
suspension was streaked onto selective media—TSB
agar with 100 μg ml − 1 rifampicin to isolate E. faecalis
—and individual colonies were grown up at 28 °C
overnight. Subsequently, 15 colonies of E. faecalis
were picked from a given replicate population and
mixed together in 5 ml THB overnight at 28 °C
overnight. This liquid culture was then used to make
a lawn for the next generation of exposures for that
replicate. This procedure was identical for both
experimental evolution treatments to control against
possible impacts of rifampicin.
The liquid cultures of an ancestral colony (prior to
selection) and evolved E. faecalis populations were
frozen at −80 °C in 20% glycerol every five generations.
Host mortality and bacterial fitness assays
Host mortality was assayed simultaneously for each
population in each treatment at the end of the
evolution experiment. We exposed approximately
200 L4 nematodes from the C. elegans stock to the
ancestral and each of the 12 evolved populations
of E. faecalis (from the G5, G10 and G15 experi-
mental host generations). If populations were then
tested with S. aureus, nematodes were washed off
the E. faecalis exposure plate with M9 buffer into
a 15 ml test tube, washed and transferred to the
S. aureus exposure plate as described above. After
24 h of exposure, we counted the total number of
dead nematodes. Nematodes were considered dead
if they did not respond to touch with a platinum
wire, as is standard in assays of C. elegans death.
Simultaneously, approximately 200 nematodes were
placed on each of six control plates with E. coli
OP50, but no mortality was observed after 24 h.
We also tested for within-population variation in the
protective effect exhibited by CCE E. faecalis. Four
colonies from each of the six replicate populations
at G15 were randomly picked, separately grown in
THB
media
and
plated.
Host
mortality
in
the
presence of S. aureus was tested as above.
We tested the generality of this protective effect
against six pathogenic, genetically divergent S. aureus
isolates
(COL-MRSA,
MSSA
SH-1000,
Newman,
N13-MSSA, Mu50 MRSA, MRSA 252), in addition
to MSSA476. All isolates were cultured the same way
as described above. Similar to the methods above,
approximately 50 L4 nematodes from the C. elegans
stock were exposed to only S. aureus, or initially
to populations of E. faecalis (ancestral or CCE G15)
and then to S. aureus. After 24 h of exposure at 25 °C,
we counted the total number of dead nematodes.
To examine the fitness differences of E. faecalis
(ancestor vs SE at G15 vs CCE at G15) in co-colonised
nematode hosts with S. aureus, we measured the
number of colony-forming units (cfus) of E. faecalis
Evolution of protective microbes
KC King et al
1917
The ISME Journal
 and S. aureus. Five dead nematodes were picked from
a plate, placed into 1 ml M9 buffer and washed
repeatedly. After the final rinse, the nematode pellet
was crushed with a pestle to release the bacterial cells
from inside each carcass. The mixture was spread
onto selective media to separate E. faecalis and
S. aureus colonies (TSB with 100ug ml − 1 rifampicin
and Mannitol Salt Agar, respectively), and colonies
were counted.
Mechanism of pathogen suppression
Genomic analysis.
To investigate the genetic basis of
host protection conferred by E. faecalis, whole-genome
resequencing
was
used
for
a randomly
selected
E. faecalis clone from each replicate at G15. The
phenotype of that clone was confirmed as being
consistent with population-level effects on nematodes
as assessed above. DNA was isolated using either a
DNeasy blood and tissue kit using standard methods
for Gram-positive bacteria or using a modified CTAB
extraction (von der Schulenburg et al., 2001), and
importantly, the addition of 10 mg ml − 1 of Lysozyme
(for E. faecalis) or Lyostaphin (for S. aureus) to the
digestion step in both protocols was required. Illumina
(San Diego, CA, USA) TruSeq Nano libraries were
prepared from 200 ng of DNA according to the
manufacturer's protocol and 250 bp paired-end reads
generated on an Illumina MiSeq using v2 chemistry.
Reads were trimmed for the presence of Illumina
adaptor sequences using Cutadapt v1.2.1 and for a
minimum quality score of Q20 using Sickle v1.200.
The resulting reads (between 395 Mb and 715 Mb per
sample) were then mapped to either E. faecalis OGIRF
(NC_017316) or S. aureus MSSA4776 (NC_002953.3
and NC_005951, for main chromosome and plasmid,
respectively) using BWA-MEM, duplicate reads were
removed using Picard, local realignment and single
nucleotide
polymorphism
calling
was
performed
in GATK and structural variants detected using Break-
dancer. Variants found in experimental but not ances-
tral clones were identified, and SnpEFF was used to
predict their functional effects.
The genes with revealed single nucleotide poly-
morphisms were identified in the SEED database
by ‘blasting’ the corresponding sequences against
a collection
of
E. faecalis
genomes.
The
gene
annotations were confirmed or suggested by analysis
of the sequences and the 20000 bp window neigh-
bourhoods of the corresponding genes. The compo-
sition of gene loci of the top 10 homologues in other
bacteria was also analysed. STRING database and
software was used to reconstruct gene connectivity
networks for the detected genes. This application
automatically assembles the data on gene positional
associations in genomes, genetic, regulatory and
physical protein interactions for the input genes that
satisfy a set of confidence thresholds.
In vitro biochemical assays.
We assessed for a
difference in the ability of ancestral and evolved
E. faecalis to produce superoxides as the mechanism
of
host
protection.
Ancestral
E.
faecalis,
SE
E. faecalis (at G15) and CCE E. faecalis (at G5 and
G15) were grown overnight to stationary phase in
TSB. Wells in an opaque, black 96-well plate with
a transparent bottom were then inoculated with 5 μl
from each overnight culture. Three technical repli-
cates
of
each
replicate
population
were
made.
Replicate populations that failed to grow properly
in liquid culture were excluded from the analysis.
The wells were prepared with 95 μl TSB and 100 μl
of a reaction mixture from a superoxide ion assay kit
(Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) containing
luminol: a reagent that becomes luminescent follow-
ing oxidation by superoxide, allowing the quantitative
and relativistic measure of superoxide production.
The inoculated reaction mixtures were monitored over
10 h (for which the kit was optimised by Sigma-
Aldrich) and measured every 2.5 min for both OD600
and luminescence in a Synergy 2 plate reader (BioTek,
Winooski, VT, USA). The actual luminescence pro-
duced by a sample is sensitive to starting conditions as
it is proportional to bacterial biomass concentration.
Bacterial
growth
is
sensitive
to
several
factors
(that is, media concentration, population size) and
is
exponential,
translating
small
differences
in
growth rate to large differences in luminescence.
We thus simultaneously measured bacterial biomass
concentration (OD600) and controlled for it in our
luminescence data.
To examine the impact of superoxide production by
evolved E. faecalis on S. aureus (and whether this was
the source of suppression), we tested the degree
to which the evolved enhanced suppression could
be removed by the action of catalase (CAT) and
superoxide dismutase (SOD). Superoxide dismutase
converts superoxide into hydrogen peroxide, and CAT
converts hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen.
Alone, SOD would remove superoxides by simply
replacing it with harmful hydrogen peroxide. Like-
wise, CAT on its own would only remove the
problems
caused
by
hydrogen peroxide
without
affecting superoxides. Together, these enzymes create
a pathway converting harmful superoxide into harm-
less products. If exogenous superoxides were respon-
sible for S. aureus growth inhibition, we would
therefore expect this inhibition to be lifted only when
both enzymes are administered. Overnight cultures of
all ancestral and CCE populations of E. faecalis, as
well as S. aureus, were grown separately in TSB
(standardised to an OD600 of 1.00 ± 0.05). A solution of
TSB was prepared with 0.25 M potassium phosphate
buffer containing Superoxide Dismutase E.C. 1.15.1.1
(SOD) from bovine erythrocytes (Sigma-Aldrich) and
Catalase E.C. 1.11.1.6 (CAT) from bovine liver (Sigma-
Aldrich) each at 0.25 mg ml− 1. An enzyme-free solu-
tion of TSB was also prepared as a control, containing
the 0.25 M potassium phosphate buffer alone. The
ancestor and CCE E. faecalis (two technical replicates
of each replicate population) were mixed in equal
ratios with S. aureus. From the liquid culture, 6 μl was
Evolution of protective microbes
KC King et al
1918
The ISME Journal
 used to inoculate wells in a 96-well plate with 196 μl
of the TSB solution alongside wells of an S. aureus
control (S. aureus only). The experiment was run in
duplicate on the enzyme-free and enzyme-containing
media. Cultures were shaken for 24 h at 30 °C, after
which cfu counts were performed.
Statistical analyses
All statistical analyses were conducted in SPSS 20.0.
Host mortality and bacterial fitness assays.
Mortal-
ity data met assumptions of normality and equal
variances. We performed an analysis of variance
(ANOVA) on untransformed data to test for the
difference in nematode mortality caused by E. faecalis
and S. aureus independent colonisation, as well as
their co-colonisation.
For the evolution experiment, we examined changes
in nematode mortality every G5 in both the SE and
CCE selection regimes. We performed a generalised
linear model with binomial distribution (and max-
imum likelihood estimates) on host mortality data in
the
evolution
treatments
(with
and
without
the
presence of S. aureus) over time. Treatment and
time (experimental generations) were fixed effects.
A separate ANOVA was conducted to test for variation
among isolates in within-population protective effects.
To examine the spectrum of host protection, we
quantified nematode mortality upon co-colonisation
by E. faecalis and a diverse range of S. aureus isolates
including both laboratory and human disease isolates
(Figure 4). An ANOVA was performed on host
mortality
data
collected
from
single
infections
of S. aureus across the seven isolates to examine
the variability in nematode mortality they produced.
We then performed a generalised linear model with
binomial distribution (and maximum likelihood esti-
mates) on host mortality data with treatment (‘alone’,
‘with ancestral E. faecalis’ and ‘with CCE faecalis’)
and S. aureus isolate as fixed effects.
The number of E. faecalis and S. aureus viable cfus
was square-root transformed to meet parametric
assumptions. Separate ANOVAs were performed
on transformed cfu values for each of E. faecalis
and S. aureus within a dead, co-colonised nematode
to test the effects of treatment on bacterial fitness.
Least square mean contrasts were performed to test
for differences between treatments.
Mechanism of superoxide production and pathogen
suppression.
Mean superoxide production was com-
pared between ancestral and evolved
E. faecalis
populations from the in vivo experiment during the
exponential growth phase (6–10 h) of the bacteria using
t-tests as the data met assumptions of normality.
Luminescence measurements were controlled for OD600.
S. aureus growth in liquid culture was compared
in the presence and absence of E. faecalis. We
performed a generalised linear model with Poisson
loglinear model (and maximum likelihood estimates)
on S. aureus cfu values with treatment (‘alone’, ‘with
ancestral E. faecalis’ and ‘with CCE E. faecalis’), and
enzymes (presence and absence) as fixed effects.
Their interaction was also evaluated.
Results
Changes in host mortality due to within-host microbial
evolution
Ancestral E. faecalis is mildly pathogenic within the 2-
day exposure window of this experiment, with o1% of
nematodes dying after colonisation. In contrast, 52% of
worms exposed to S. aureus died after exposure.
Colonisation of worms with E. faecalis before exposure
to S. aureus results in intermediate rates of nematode
mortality, indicating that resident E. faecalis has the
potential to suppress S. aureus virulence (Figure 2a;
ANOVA: F2,18=51.908, Po0.001).
At the end of the evolution experiment, we
assayed the protective ability of E. faecalis evolved
in nematodes, either alone or with S. aureus co-
colonisation (Figure 1). All of the six replicate CCE E.
faecalis populations evolved to further suppress its
virulence. Whereas 18% of worms died within 24 h
of S. aureus exposure in the presence of the ancestral
E. faecalis resident, this declined to 1% mortality, on
average, in the presence of resident CCE E. faecalis
from G5 onwards (Figure 2b). Although there is some
among-population variation in the mortality rates
caused by SE E. faecalis upon challenge with S. aureus,
none of the replicate populations evolved significantly
enhanced protective ability relative to the ancestor
(Figure 2b; Generalised Linear Model, Treatment: Wald
χ2=280.723,
Po0.001;
Time:
Wald
χ2=97.230,
Po0.001). When four colonies within each replicate
population of the CCE treatment were tested at G15, an
equivalently enhanced protective effect was observed
(ANOVA: F5,24=0.318, P=0.895).
Lower host mortality on S. aureus exposure was
not associated with a reduction in E. faecalis
virulence.
Rather,
whilst
mortality
remained
generally low (o2%) in all replicate populations,
E. faecalis evolved in both treatments to increase
nematode
mortality
over
time
when
tested
alone (Figure 2c; Generalised Linear Model: Treat-
ment:
Wald
χ2 = 9.126,
P = 0.003;
Time:
Wald
χ2 = 22.510, Po0.001). Thus, although highly bene-
ficial to hosts when tested in the presence of S.
aureus, on its own, CCE E. faecalis remained mildly
pathogenic and costly for the nematode host to
possess. This result clearly demonstrates the con-
text
dependence
of
the
fitness
effects
of
this
protective microbe upon hosts (Chamberlain et al.,
2014).
Spectrum of host protection
All CCE E. faecalis populations at G15 were effective
at protecting nematode hosts against a broad spectrum
of S. aureus isolates (Figure 3). In single infections,
these S. aureus isolates exhibited variation in their
Evolution of protective microbes
KC King et al
1919
The ISME Journal
 virulence towards C. elegans (Figure 3; 26–65% mean
nematode mortality; ANOVA F6,42= 10.505, Po0.001).
In co-colonised hosts, all S. aureus isolates with
ancestral E. faecalis produced intermediate rates of
host mortality, whereas with all replicate populations
of CCE E. faecalis, nematode mortality was dramati-
cally reduced to 0–1%. Both treatment and isolate
affected the virulence of pathogens on hosts (General-
ised Linear Model, Treatment: Wald χ2 = 370.961,
Po0.001; Isolate: Wald χ2 = 303.650, Po0.001).
Host protection and microbial growth within hosts
We examined whether the evolved E. faecalis sup-
pression of S. aureus virulence was associated with
increased E. faecalis proliferation and reduced S.
aureus growth (Figure 4). Compared with ancestral E.
faecalis, CCE E. faecalis (assayed at G15) suppressed
S. aureus viable bacterial counts more (Figure 4; d vs
f) and accumulated marginally more within nema-
todes (Figure 4; a vs c). By contrast, SE E. faecalis
populations did not grow to higher density on average
than the ancestor when interacting with S. aureus
(Figure 4; a vs b). These SE populations were also
associated with higher within-host growth of S. aureus
compared with CCE E. faecalis (Figure 4; Analysis for
S. aureus cfu: ANOVA across the three treatments:
F2,18= 4.072, P = 0.039; Least Square difference d4f,
P = 0.038; Least Square difference e4f, P = 0.019;
Analysis for E. faecalis cfu: ANOVA across all three
treatments: F2,18= 3.603, P = 0.053; Least Square dif-
ference aoc, P = 0.057; boc, P = 0.023 a = b, P = 0.649).
Suppression of S. aureus may occur either directly
from the presence of E. faecalis, be mediated by
E. faecalis-induced alterations to host biology or be
a product of both direct and host-mediated effects. We
assessed the importance of direct suppression using
in vitro experiments. In vitro experiments recapitu-
lated in vivo assays showing that CCE E. faecalis
populations were better able to suppress S. aureus
growth in liquid culture than ancestral E. faecalis
Figure 2
Effects of resident microbes on hosts over evolutionary
time. (a) Host mortality with ancestral E. faecalis (blue circle)
and S. aureus (red circle) separate and co-colonising (purple
circle) in the nematode. The intermediate level of virulence
from co-colonising bacteria species suggested the potential for
E. faecalis to suppress pathogenic S. aureus. Error bars, 1 s.e.
(b, c) Populations of E. faecalis were evolved under two different
selection
regimes:
SE
and
CCE
for
15
experimental
host
generations. To assess the ability of E. faecalis to protect hosts
from S. aureus, host mortality in the (b) presence and (c) absence
of S. aureus was quantified every G5 for SE (blue circles) and
CCE (purple circles) E. faecalis. Lines connect each of the six
replicate populations per treatment across time.
%Dead Nematodes 
60.0
40.0
20.0
0.0
Figure 3
Generality of host protection by evolved E. faecalis
against seven S. aureus isolates. Host mortality was evaluated after
24 h of exposure to S. aureus. Nematodes were exposed to S. aureus
alone (red circles) or were previously colonised by ancestral
E. faecalis (black circles) or CCE E. faecalis at G15 (purple circles).
MSSA476 was used in the evolution experiment. Error bars, 1 s.e.
Evolution of protective microbes
KC King et al
1920
The ISME Journal
 (Figure 5a; Generalised Linear Model, Treatment:
Wald χ2 = 3.18 × 1011, Po0.001).
Genomic and biochemical analysis of the mechanism
underpinning protection
To investigate the genetic basis of E. faecalis-mediated
protection, we whole-genome resequenced a ran-
domly picked clone of ancestral E. faecalis and
evolved E. faecalis from each of the 12 replicate
populations at G15. Each evolved E. faecalis clone
exhibited a unique set of between one and three
mutations (Supplementary Table 1). Consistent with
the distinct phenotypes that evolved under the two
contrasting treatments, the SE and CCE regimes
selected for substitutions in different, functionally
distinct gene sets. Six of 12 mutations in the CCE
E. faecalis clones—1 per clone per replicated popula-
tion—were putatively associated with superoxide
production, but no mutations associated with this
pathway were observed in clones from the SE
treatment. E. faecalis is known to produce extracel-
lular superoxide (Huycke et al., 2011), mediated by
dehydrogenase and fumarate reductase. Mutations
were found in two NADH dehydrogenases and four
genes associated with the respiratory complex func-
tion
or
purine
biosynthesis.
Purine
biosynthesis
represents the major pathway for fumarate production
which, if blocked, leads to superoxide production
(Supplementary Table 1; Supplementary Figure 1).
We therefore hypothesised that enhanced produc-
tion of antimicrobial reactive oxygen species was the
mechanism behind E. faecalis-mediated defence. In
accordance with this hypothesis, all CCE E. faecalis
populations produced more superoxide per
cell
than the ancestor, in both the G5 and G15 genera-
tions (Figure 5b; t-test: Ancestor vs G5, t = − 3.056,
df = 31.385, P = 0.005; Ancestor vs G15, t = − 2.619,
df = 14.888,
P = 0.019).
Moreover,
there
was
no
difference in superoxide production between SE
and
ancestral
E.
faecalis
(t = 0.788,
df = 20.329,
P = 0.440) suggesting that this trait only evolved
during S. aureus challenge. The addition of CAT and
SOD enzymes to growth media ablated the suppres-
sion of S. aureus growth by E. faecalis during in vitro
interactions (Figure 5a; Generalised Linear Model,
Enzymes: Wald χ2 = 8.49 × 1010, Po0.001), and had
a greater effect at reducing suppression during
interactions with CCE E. faecalis compared with
the ancestor (Generalised Linear Model, Treatment ×
Enzymes: Wald χ2 = 7.24 × 1010, Po0.001). Together
these data strongly point to increased superoxide
production by evolved CCE
E. faecalis as the
mechanism of suppression of S. aureus.
Discussion
The role of microbes in protecting their host against
virulent pathogens has traditionally focused on ecolo-
gical sources of protection, namely niche occupancy
CFU/dead nematode
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
E. faecalis ( ×104 )
S. aureus ( ×105 )
d
a
c
f
b
e
Co-Colonisation
Single
Ancestor
d
a
c
f
b
e
E.faecalis populations tested  
with S. aureus in nematode hosts  
Figure 4
Fitness (cfus/nematode) of resident E. faecalis popula-
tions and infecting S. aureus. S. aureus is co-colonising with
ancestral, SE, or CCE E. faecalis populations. Error bars, 1 s.e.
Figure 5
Evolved mechanism of suppression of S. aureus by
E. faecalis. (a) Suppression and enzyme-mediated lifting of suppres-
sion of S. aureus outside the host. S. aureus cfus were counted when
the pathogen was grown alone and co-cultured with ancestral or CCE
E. faecalis. Counts were also made upon the addition of CAT and
SOD, enzymes that remove the presence of reactive oxygen species.
Error bars, 1 s.e. (b) Mean superoxide production (measure of
luminescence controlling for OD600) across exponential growth phase
of ancestral, SE and CCE E. faecalis (the latter at G5 and G15).
Evolution of protective microbes
KC King et al
1921
The ISME Journal
 and competition for resources (for example, in insects,
Gerardo and Parker, 2014). We hypothesised that
owing to the high evolutionary potential of microbes
—associated with their short generation times and
large within-host population size—rapid de novo
microbial evolution could have a role in shaping host
resistance against infection. We observed the evolution
of host-protective effects during microbial experimen-
tal evolution within nematode hosts in all indepen-
dently passaged CCE populations, thus confirming the
potential for this process to occur. Thus, E. faecalis,
a microbe that has been observed in natural micro-
biomes to possess protective traits (Martin-Vivaldi
et al., 2010; Kommineni et al., 2015), evolved across
the parasite-mutualist continuum to become a host-
protective mutualist upon pathogen attack. Notably,
these host-protective effects evolved without any
direct
selection
against
host
mortality.
Instead,
a beneficial relationship between the host and the
resident bacterium emerged out of interactions with
a virulent pathogen and selective processes acting
upon the resident microbial populations. Although
CCE E. faecalis populations evolved the ability to
attenuate the high mortality caused by S. aureus, they
also retained mild pathology against C. elegans when
colonising alone, demonstrating the context depen-
dence of their fitness effects on the host (Chamberlain
et al., 2014). In an environment where such virulent
infection is common, E. faecalis would therefore now
represent a net mutualist with respect to its impact on
host fitness. This result reflects observations of other
protective microbes found naturally, which defend
their host whilst retaining pathogenicity (Martinez
et al., 2014; Polin et al., 2014).
The mechanisms of microbe-mediated protection
observed in nature are remarkably diverse (Gerardo
and Parker, 2014). Although niche occupation (Dillon
et al., 2005), resource competition and immune
system mediation (Abt and Artis, 2013; Hooper
et al., 2012; McFall-Ngai et al., 2013) may still have
a role in our system, the genomic evidence indicates
that selection acted predominantly through direct
E. faecalis–S. aureus interactions during host colo-
nisation. Further experiments, however, are required
to determine whether the microbial interactions
observed to evolve here are adaptive to the host
environment or whether similar evolutionary out-
comes would arise in vitro. Regardless, we observed
parallel evolution of the superoxide production
pathway in CCE E. faecalis across all replicate
populations, and we were able to ablate the evolved
suppression through enzymatic treatment to remove
superoxide radicals. These data strongly suggest
that antimicrobial superoxides, which may act to
directly suppress S. aureus or act indirectly via
oxidation of the S. aureus auto-inducing pheromone
(Rothfork et al., 2004), are a key mechanism in the
evolved protective phenotype. The lack of genotype
specificity we observed is also consistent with
a superoxide-mediated suppression system, which
represents
a
broad-spectrum
form
of
microbial
suppression. While C. elegans itself produces reac-
tive oxygen species in response to pathogen infection
(Chávez
et
al.,
2007),
reactive
oxygen
species
produced by resident bacteria may also be a common
means of broad-spectrum protection against infec-
tion, and one that is thus likely to be evolutionary
labile in its activity. For instance, lactic acid bacteria
in the guts of honeybees are able to suppress a range
of pathogens, including S. aureus and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa via reactive oxygen species production
(Olofsson et al., 2014). That our experimental treat-
ment drove the evolution of a broad-spectrum defence
mechanism, as opposed to more specific mechanisms
of suppression (for example, bacteriocin secretion), is
also
consistent
with
observations
from
natural
disease systems showing that microbes can protect
against
a
diversity
of
pathogen
isolates
(Koch
and Schmid-Hempel, 2011) and species (Martinez
et al., 2014).
The extent of the protective phenotype that evolved
here, and the rate at which it evolved, were striking.
Despite being regularly attacked by pathogens, if
nematode hosts were colonised by evolving E. faecalis,
they were almost universally protected against patho-
gens that would otherwise quickly kill most of the
population. Moreover, although the evolution in our
experiment occurred during passage through a number
of individual worms, the time frame for the evolution
of protection by E. faecalis was just 5 days of co-
colonisation. This short timescale presents the possi-
bility of the evolution of microbe-mediated protection
within the lifetime of a longer-lived host, such as
a mammal or tree, in which evolution is likely
potentiated by larger population sizes.
Future research will need to establish how within-
host evolution of microbial species would alter
disease progression. A key simplification in our
experiment is that the virulent pathogen is geneti-
cally fixed, thus mimicking a spillover zoonotic
infection whereby the pathogen normally circulates
in a different host species. An example is Salmo-
nella. Some isolates of this bacterium commonly
reside within the microbiomes of livestock animals,
but can cause serious infections if transmitted
to humans. Within a host individual, however, it
is possible that pathogen evolution would also
occur on a similar timescale, obviating any evolved
protective abilities in resident microbial species and
setting the stage for coevolutionary interactions.
Our experiment also considers only a binary micro-
bial interaction, whereas natural microbial commu-
nities are often highly diverse. The impacts of the
evolution of the microbiome on pathogen attack
(Mueller and Sachs, 2015) and on interactions within
the microbiome also warrant consideration. Notwith-
standing this, the potential for evolution of interac-
tions between resident microbes and pathogens is
clear, and future research on microbiome–pathogen
relationships should go beyond ecological responses
to examine evolved ones.
Evolution of protective microbes
KC King et al
1922
The ISME Journal
 Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to MA Félix and L Morran for advice on
C. elegans. Thanks to M Phillipo for assistance in the lab.
Sequence data are available from the European Nucleotide
Archive under accession PRJEB7382. Funding was provided
by a Royal Society Newton International fellowship to KCK.
The doi for our data is doi:10.5061/dryad.nd848.
References
Abt MC, Artis D. (2013). The dynamic influence of
commensal
bacteria
on
the
immune
response
to
pathogens. Curr Opin Microbiol 16: 4–9.
Brockhurst MA, Koskella B. (2013). Experimental coevolution
of species interactions. Trends Ecol Evol 28: 367–375.
Brucker RM, Bordenstein SR. (2013). The hologenomic
basis of speciation: gut bacteria cause hybrid lethality
in the genus Nasonia. Science 341: 667–669.
Cabreiro F, Gems D. (2013). Worms need microbes too:
microbiota, health and aging in Caenorhabditis elegans.
EMBO Mol Med 5: 1300–1310.
Cerf-Bensussan
N,
Gaboriau-Routhiau
V.
(2010).
The
immune
system
and
the
gut
microbiota:
friends
or foes? Nat Rev Immunol 10: 735–744.
Chamberlain SA, Bronstein JL, Rudgers JA. (2014). How context
dependent are species interactions? Ecol Lett 17: 881–890.
Chávez V, Mohri-Shiomi A, Maadani A, Vega LA, Garsin DA.
(2007). Oxidative stress enzymes are required for daf-16-
mediated
immunity
due
to
generation
of
reactive
oxygen species by Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics
176: 1567–1577.
Clark LC, Hodgkin J. (2013). Commensals, probiotics, and
pathogens in the Caenorhabditis elegans model. Cell
Microbiol 16: 27–38.
Cruz MR, Graham CE, Gagliano BC, Lorenz MC, Garsin DA.
(2013). Enterococcus faecalis inhibits hyphal morpho-
genesis and virulence of Candida albicans. Infect
Immun 81: 189–200.
Dillon RJ, Vennard CT, Buckling A, Charnley AK. (2005).
Diversity of locust gut bacteria protects against patho-
gen invasion. Ecol Lett 8: 1291–1298.
Dillon RJ, Vennard CT, Charnley AK. (2000). Pheromones:
exploitation of gut bacteria in the locust. Nature 403:
851–853.
Dong Y, Manfredini F, Dimopoulos G. (2009). Implication
of the mosquito midgut microbiota in the defense
against malaria parasites. PLoS Pathogens 5: e1000423.
Felix M, Braendle C. (2010). The natural history of
Caenorhabditis elegans. Curr Biol 20: R965–R969.
Garbutt J, Bonsall MB, Wright DJ, Raymond B. (2011).
Antagonistic
competition
moderates
virulence
in
Bacillus thuringiensis. Ecol Lett 14: 765–772.
Garsin DA, Sifri CD, Mylonakis E, Qin X, Singh KV,
Murray BE et al. (2001). A simple model host for
identifying Gram-positive virulence factors. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 98: 10892–10897.
Gerardo NM, Parker BJ. (2014). Mechanisms of symbiont-
conferred protection against natural enemies: an ecological
and evolutionary framework. Curr Opin Insect Sci 4: 8–14.
Gravato-Nobre MJ, Hodgkin J. (2005). Caenorhabditis
elegans as a model for innate immunity to pathogens.
Cell Microbiol 7: 741–751.
Gray JC, Cutter AD. (2014). Mainstreaming Caenorhabditis
elegans in experimental evoution. Proc R Soc B 281:
20133055.
Hodgkin J, Felix M-A, Clark LC, Stroud D, Gravato-Nobre
MJ. (2013). Two Leucobacter strains exert complemen-
tary virulence on Caenorhabditis including death by
worm-star formation. Curr Biol 23: 2157–2161.
Holden MT, Feil EJ, Lindsay JA, Peacock SJ, Day NP,
Enright MC et al. (2004). Complete genomes of two
clinical Staphylococcus aureus strains: evidence for
rapid evolution of virulence and drug resistance. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 101: 9786–9791.
Hooper LV, Littman DR, Macpherson AJ. (2012). Interac-
tions between the microbiota and the immune system.
Science 336: 1268–1273.
Huycke MM, Moore D, Joyce W, Wise P, Shepard L, Kotake Y
et al. (2011). Extracellular superoxide production by
Enterococcus faecalis requires demethylmenaquinone
and is attenuated by functional terminal quinol oxidases.
Mol Microbiol 42: 729–740.
Jaenike J, Unkless R, Cockburn SN, Boelio LM, Perlman SJ.
(2010). Adaptation via symbiosis: recent spread of a
Drosophila defensive symbiont. Science 329: 212–215.
Kamada N, Seo S-U, Chen GY, Nunez G. (2013). Role of gut
microbiota in immunity and inflammatory disease. Nat
Rev Immunol 13: 321–335.
Koch H, Schmid-Hempel P. (2011). Socially transmitted
gut
microbiota
protect
bumble
bees
against
an
intestinal parasite. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:
19288–19292.
Kommineni S, Bretl DJ, Lam V, Chakraborty R, Hayward M,
Simpson P et al. (2015). Bacteriocin production
augments
niche
competition
by
enterococci
in
the mammalian gastrointestinal tract. Nature 526:
719–722.
Lawley TD, Clare S, Walker AW, Stares MD, Connor TR,
Raisen C et al. (2012). Targeted restoration of the
intestinal microbiota with a simple, defined bacter-
iotherapy
resolves
relapsing
Clostridium
difficile
disease in mice. PloS Pathogens 8: e1002995.
Lize A, McKay R, Lewis Z. (2014). Kin recognition in
Drosophila: the importance of ecology and gut micro-
biota. ISME J 8: 469–477.
Mackinnon MJ, Read AF. (2004). Immunity promotes
virulence evolution in a malaria model. PLoS Biol 2:
E230.
Martin-Vivaldi M, Pena A, Peralta-Sánchez JM, Sánchez L,
Ananou S, Ruiz-Rodriguez M et al. (2010). Antimicro-
bial
chemicals
in
hoopoe
preen
secretions
are
produced by symbiotic bacteria. Proc R Soc B 277:
123–130.
Martinez J, Longdon B, Bauer S, Chan Y, Miller W,
Bourtzis K et al. (2014). Symbionts commonly provide
broad
spectrum
resistance
to
viruses
in
insects:
a comparative analysis of Wolbachia strains. PloS
Pathogens 10: e1004369.
May G, Nelson P. (2014). Defensive mutualisms: do
microbial interactions within hosts drive the evolution
of defensive traits? Funct Ecol 28: 356–363.
McFall-Ngai M, Hadfield MG, Bosch TC, Carey HV,
Domazet-Loso T, Douglas AE et al. (2013). Animals
in a bacterial world, a new imperative for the life
sciences. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110: 3229–3236.
Evolution of protective microbes
KC King et al
1923
The ISME Journal
 Mendes R, Kruijt M, de Bruijn I, Dekkers E, van der Voort M,
Schneider JHM et al. (2011). Deciphering the rhizo-
sphere microbiome for disease-suppressive bacteria.
Science 332: 1097–1100.
Messenger SL, Molineux IJ, Bull JJ. (1999). Virulence
evolution in a virus obeys a trade-off. Proc R Soc B 266:
397–404.
Montalvo-Katz S, Huang H, Appel MD, Berg M, Shapira M.
(2013). Association with soil bacteria enhances p38-
dependent
infection
resistance
in
Caenorhabditis
elegans. Infect Immun 81: 514–520.
Morran LT, Schmidt OG, Gelarden IA, Parrish RCI, Lively CM.
(2011). Running with the Red Queen: host-parasite
coevolution selects for biparental sex. Science 333:
216–218.
Mueller UG, Sachs JL. (2015). Engineering microbiomes
to improve plant and animal health. Trends Microbiol
23: 606–617.
Olofsson TC, Butler E, Markowicz P, Lindholm C, Larsson P,
Vasquez A. (2014). Lactic acid bacterial symbionts in
honeybees - an unknown key to honey's antimicrobial
and therapeutic activities. Int Wound J; e-pub ahead of
print 8 September 2014.
Peleg AY, Tampakakis E, Fuchs BB, Eliopoulos GM,
Moellering
RC,
Mylonakis
E.
(2008).
Prokaryote-
eukaryote interactions identified by using C. elegans.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105: 14585–14590.
Petersen C, Dirksen P, Schulenburg H. (2015). Why
we need more ecology for genetic models such as
C. elegans. Trends Genet 31: 120–127.
Polin S, Simon J-C, Outreman Y. (2014). An ecological cost
associated
with
protective
symbionts
of
aphids.
Ecol Evol 4: 836–840.
Portal-Celhay C, Blaser MJ. (2012). Competition and
resilience between founder and introduced bacteria
in the Caenorhabditis elegans gut. Infect Immun 80:
1288–1299.
Rothfork JM, Timmins GS, Harris MN, Chen X, Lusis AJ,
Otto M et al. (2004). Inactivation of a bacterial
virulence pheromone by phagocyte-derived oxidants:
new role for the NADPH oxidase in host defense.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101: 13867–13872.
Schulte
RD,
Makus
C,
Hasert
B,
Michiels
NK,
Schulenburg H. (2010). Multiple reciprocal adapta-
tions and rapid genetic change upon experimental
coevolution of an animal host and its microbial
parasite. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107: 7359–7364.
Sifri CD, Begun J, Ausubel FM, Calderwood SB. (2003).
Caenorhabditis elegans as a model host for Staphy-
lococcus aureus pathogenesis. Infect Immun 71:
2208–2217.
Sifri CD, Mylonakis E, Singh KV, Qin X, Garsin DA,
Murray BE et al. (2002). Virulence effect of Enterococ-
cus faecalis protease genes and the quorum-sensing
locus fsr in Caenorhabditis elegans and mice. Infect
Immun 70: 5647–5650.
von der Schulenburg JH, Hancock JM, Pagnamenta A,
Sloggett JJ, Majerus ME, Hurst GDD. (2001). Extreme
length and length variation in the first ribsosomal
internal transcribed spacer of ladybird beetles (Coleop-
tera: Coccinellidae). Mol Biol Evol 18: 648–660.
This work is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License. The images or other third party material in
this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in the
credit line; if the material is not included under the
Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain
permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on The ISME Journal website (http://www.nature.com/ismej)
Evolution of protective microbes
KC King et al
1924
The ISME Journal
