 Alcohol and Alcoholism, 2017, 52(6) 627–628
doi: 10.1093/alcalc/agx064
Advance Access Publication Date: 20 September 2017
Article
Article
More Alcohol, More Liver Injury: Not Always
True
Irina Kirpich1 and Craig McClain2,*
1Department of Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine, 505S Hancock Street, CTR511, Louisville, KY
40202-1617, USA, and 2Departments of Medicine, Pharmacology & Toxicology, 505S Hancock Street, CTR503,
Louisville, KY 40202-1617, USA
*Corresponding author: Department of Medicine, 505S Hancock Street, CTR511, Louisville, KY 40202-1617, USA.
Tel.: +1-502-852-7953; Fax: +1-502-852-8927; E-mail: irina.kirpich@louisville.edu
Received 16 August 2017; Revised 16 August 2017; Editorial Decision 16 August 2017; Accepted 17 August 2017
ABSTRACT
An animal model of alcoholic liver disease (ALD) that recapitulates human disease is an unmet
need. An alcohol-preferring strain and WT mice were fed alcohol by different techniques and with
different diet compositions. Interestingly, the greatest alcohol consumers did not develop the
worst ALD. This editorial highlights how diet and the gut microbiome/metabolome may influence
the development/severity of ALD.
Alcoholic liver disease (ALD) is a major health problem both in the
USA and worldwide. Models of ALD are important for evaluating
mechanisms of liver disease development/progression, as well as effi-
cacy of potential therapeutic agents. Rodents have a natural aversion
to alcohol, and thus, creating an experimental model of ALD has
been difficult. The liquid Lieber–DeCarli (LD) alcohol diet was a
major advance in that the animals consumed alcohol with the liquid
diet, usually for a 4-week period of time. This type of diet (even for
longer periods) usually only causes hepatic steatosis with limited liver
injury, inflammation and no fibrosis. The Tsukamoto-French intragas-
tric alcohol feeding model causes severe steatosis with moderate
macrophage-mediated liver injury, inflammation and mild fibrosis.
However, this complicated and labor-intensive model is performed in
only a few laboratories in the country. The NIAAA model of chronic-
plus-binge alcohol feeding produces predominantly a neutrophil-
mediated liver injury. This is a simpler, shorter model but, again, there
is no significant fibrosis (Fig. 1, Mathews et al., 2014). Thus, an animal
model in which the rodents voluntarily consume large amounts of alco-
hol to achieve sustained blood alcohol concentrations (BACs) and
subsequent liver injury, which recapitulates human disease, could
theoretically be an attractive experimental model of ALD.
The crossed high alcohol preferring (cHAP) mice were developed
through selective breeding of high alcohol preferring lines. The cHAP
mice voluntarily consume high amounts of ethanol (EtOH, ~25 g/kg/
d) and achieve mean BACs ≥ 250 mg/dl. Unfortunately, 4 weeks of
voluntary 10% EtOH consumption in drinking water [EtOH-DW]
failed to produce major liver pathology in cHAP mice (Matson et al.,
2013), suggesting a more aggressive regimen must be required.
The study by Thompson et al. (2017) demonstrated that cHAP
as well as wild-type (WT) mice developed more severe liver injury
while consuming the Lieber–DeCarli alcohol containing diet for
4 weeks followed by a single EtOH binge by gavage (LD-EtOH+B
mice) compared to animals maintained on a standard rodent chow
and voluntary alcohol intake plus an EtOH gavage (EtOH-DW+B
mice). Thus, ALT and AST levels, markers of hepatocyte damage, were
significantly higher in LD-EtOH+B compared to EtOH-DW+B mice,
although they were similar in cHAP and WT animals. Histological
evaluation of liver tissue revealed more pronounced hepatic fat accu-
mulation in LD-EtOH+B vs EtOH-DW+B mice, which was compar-
able between genotypes (cHAP and WT). A critical observation was
that the cHAP mice on the EtOH-DW regimen consumed significantly
more ethanol than cHAP or WT mice on the LD-EtOH diet; however,
this difference did not result in more severe liver injury in these mice.
In fact, greater liver injury and steatosis developed in LD-EtOH+B
mice with less (compared to EtOH-DW+B animals) ethanol consump-
tion. Intriguingly, the BACs levels were significantly elevated in LD-
EtOH+B vs EtOH-DW+B animals, with higher levels in WT compared
to cHAP animals. Taken together, these observations indicate that fac-
tors other than the total amount of alcohol consumed can affect ALD
development and progression in experimental animals.
Only a limited number of patients who drink heavily go on to
develop advanced liver disease. There are several risk factors in
Medical Council on Alcohol and Oxford University Press 2017. This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.
627
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/alcalc/article-abstract/52/6/627/4191309 by guest on 03 June 2019
 humans (Table 1) that are postulated to play a role in progressive
ALD. Among them, diet/nutrition is highly relevant to both clinical
and experimental ALD.
Although the authors in this study did not specify the compos-
ition of the control liquid LD diet, the levels of protein, carbohydrate
and fat in commonly used LD diets vary between 15–17, 35–45 and
35–40% of total energy, respectively. In alcohol containing diets,
ethanol energy is substituted for carbohydrate energy. In comparison
to LD, the mice which received EtOH in drinking water were fed a
standard rodent chow with 32, 54 and 14% total energy from pro-
tein, carbohydrate and fat, respectively. Therefore, the ways the ani-
mals were fed and their diet compositions were dramatically different
in the Thompson et al.’s study. One group received a pelleted diet
which contained much more fiber than the LD liquid diet. One group
received alcohol in their water supply and the other (LD) in their
liquid diet. Lastly, the diets were markedly different in macronutrient
composition, especially protein and fat. The LD diet was ~40% fat
and the pelleted diet 14% fat. Further, the composition of fat (e.g.
the total saturated, monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty
acids), as well as n6/n3 ratio (which was ~3-fold higher in LD com-
pared to standard chow) in these diets were different.
Accumulating evidence suggests that dietary fat and heavy alcohol
consumption interact to play critical roles in the ALD pathogenesis.
Indeed, the beneficial effects of dietary saturated fat (SF, primarily rich
in medium chain triglycerides and beef tallow) and the damaging
effects of dietary unsaturated fat (USF, specifically corn oil/linoleic
acid enriched) on experimental alcohol-induced liver injury have been
documented by several research groups. We have recently demon-
strated that dietary SF and USF differentially modulate the gut micro-
biome, intestinal barrier and liver injury in a mouse model of ALD
(Kirpich et al., 2016). Thus, compared to SF+EtOH, USF+EtOH
administration produced hepatic steatosis (micro- and macrovesicu-
lar), inflammation (determined by elevated levels of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, including TNF-α) and injury (documented by elevated ser-
um ALT levels). In parallel with liver injury, significantly elevated ser-
um LPS levels, intestinal inflammation and increased gut permeability
with intestinal tight junction and mucus layer alterations were
observed in mice fed USF+EtOH but not SF+EtOH. Major alterations
in gut microbiota, including a prominent reduction in Bacteroidetes,
and an increase in Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria, were seen in
USF+EtOH but not in SF+EtOH fed animals, suggesting that the
types of dietary fat play a critical role in ethanol-mediated changes of
the gut microbiota composition, which was linked with the ALD
development and progression. Moreover, fecal metabolites were also
changed by these different diets. Low fecal levels of the short chain
fatty acid butyrate was seen in the USF+EtOH group. In the present
study, the LD diet is high in linoleic acid compared to the chow diet,
and it is low in fiber, which is a substrate for butyrate production.
A critical role of the gut microbiome and fecal metabolites is
becoming increasingly appreciated in experimental and human ALD.
Effects of diet on the microbiome/metabolome are also well documen-
ted (but not evaluated in this project). Marked differences in the com-
position of the diets used in this study may help explain why mice
consuming the highest amounts of alcohol did not develop the most
severe liver injury. It is critical in all experimental ALD studies that
the diet composition be well defined. We suggest that diet and micro-
biome may be important variables in the different outcomes (and lack
of reproducibility) observed in various experimental ALD models.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
None declared.
REFERENCES
Kirpich IA, Petrosino J, Ajami N, et al. (2016) Saturated and unsaturated
dietary fats differentially modulate ethanol-induced changes in gut micro-
biome and metabolome in a mouse model of alcoholic liver disease. Am J
Pathol 186:765–76.
Mathews S, Xu M, Wang H, et al. (2014) Animals models of gastrointestinal
and liver diseases. Animal models of alcohol-induced liver disease: patho-
physiology,
translational
relevance,
and
challenges.
Am
J
Physiol
Gastrointest Liver Physiol 306:G819–23.
Matson L, Liangpunsakul S, Crabb D, et al. (2013) Chronic free-choice
drinking in crossed high alcohol preferring mice leads to sustained blood
ethanol levels and metabolic tolerance without evidence of liver damage.
Alcohol Clin Exp Res 37:194–201.
Thompson KJ, et al. (2017) Use of a crossed high alcohol preferring (chap)
mouse model with the NIAAA-model of chronic-binge ethanol intake to
study liver injury. Alcohol Alcohol XX:XXX–XXX.
Table 1. Risk factors for ALD
• Continued heavy drinking
• Diet/nutrition
• Age, sex
• Race
• Genetics/epigenetics/family history
• Smoking
• Obesity
• Occupational/environmental exposure
• Medication/drugs of abuse
• Other liver diseases
Fig. 1. Animal models of ALD and critical outcomes.
628
Alcohol and Alcoholism, 2017, Vol. 52, No. 6
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/alcalc/article-abstract/52/6/627/4191309 by guest on 03 June 2019
