 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 4 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
Introduction
Renal excretion of dietary Na+ under high-salt conditions occurs 
by a natriuretic principle. The assumption is that high salt intake 
triggers thirst and thereby increases fluid intake, which expands 
the extracellular fluid volume. Successful renal excretion of excess 
salt conversely increases the urine volume by osmotic diuresis and 
thereby corrects the extracellular volume (1–3). According to the 
established concept, high salt intake increases fluid intake. Sub-
sequent renal elimination of surplus dietary salt is used to excrete 
the parallel surplus water load and reduce the expanded extracel-
lular volume back to normal.
In an ultra-long-term Na+ and water balance study of 10 healthy 
humans (4), we found that increasing dietary salt intake paradoxi-
cally decreased fluid intake in all test subjects. The result has caused 
us to reinvestigate the accepted concept that increased salt intake 
leads to parallel increases in Na+ and water intake and excretion. 
We studied the physiological role of the renal concentration mecha-
nism during high salt intake, which is characterized by excretion of 
surplus dietary salt and antiparallel water movement for renal water 
conservation while the salt osmolytes are excreted. We show that 
urea metabolism plays an important role in extracellular volume 
control by maintaining the renal concentration mechanism during 
high salt intake. In this study, mice given a high-salt diet increased 
urea osmolyte production and recycling to provide the osmotic 
driving force that allows excretion of dietary salt without major 
changes in urine volume. The physiological response of this water 
conservation process during salt excretion can be summarized as 
natriuretic-ureotelic regulation for endogenous free water accrual 
within the renal urine concentration process to prevent body water 
loss. In addition, salt can induce a glucocorticoid-driven catabolic 
state with increased urea osmolyte and metabolic water generation.
Results
Surplus osmolyte and water excretion by urine concentration in mice 
and humans. We fed C57/BL6 mice either a low-salt diet (0.1% 
Natriuretic regulation of extracellular fluid volume homeostasis includes suppression of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system, pressure natriuresis, and reduced renal nerve activity, actions that concomitantly increase urinary Na+ excretion and 
lead to increased urine volume. The resulting natriuresis-driven diuretic water loss is assumed to control the extracellular 
volume. Here, we have demonstrated that urine concentration, and therefore regulation of water conservation, is an 
important control system for urine formation and extracellular volume homeostasis in mice and humans across various 
levels of salt intake. We observed that the renal concentration mechanism couples natriuresis with correspondent renal 
water reabsorption, limits natriuretic osmotic diuresis, and results in concurrent extracellular volume conservation 
and concentration of salt excreted into urine. This water-conserving mechanism of dietary salt excretion relies on urea 
transporter–driven urea recycling by the kidneys and on urea production by liver and skeletal muscle. The energy-intense 
nature of hepatic and extrahepatic urea osmolyte production for renal water conservation requires reprioritization of energy 
and substrate metabolism in liver and skeletal muscle, resulting in hepatic ketogenesis and glucocorticoid-driven muscle 
catabolism, which are prevented by increasing food intake. This natriuretic-ureotelic, water-conserving principle relies on 
metabolism-driven extracellular volume control and is regulated by concerted liver, muscle, and renal actions.
High salt intake reprioritizes osmolyte and energy 
metabolism for body fluid conservation
Kento Kitada,1 Steffen Daub,1,2 Yahua Zhang,1 Janet D. Klein,3,4 Daisuke Nakano,5 Tetyana Pedchenko,1 Louise Lantier,6  
Lauren M. LaRocque,3,4 Adriana Marton,1 Patrick Neubert,7 Agnes Schröder,7 Natalia Rakova,8 Jonathan Jantsch,9  
Anna E. Dikalova,1 Sergey I. Dikalov,1 David G. Harrison,1 Dominik N. Müller,8 Akira Nishiyama,5 Manfred Rauh,10  
Raymond C. Harris,11 Friedrich C. Luft,1,8 David H. Wasserman,6 Jeff M. Sands,3,4 and Jens Titze1,7
1Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. 2Department of Medicine II, University Medical Center Mainz, Mainz, Germany. 3 Renal Division, 
Department of Medicine, and 4Department of Physiology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. 5Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa University, Kagawa, Japan. 6Department of 
Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. 7Junior Research Group 2, Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research, University Clinic Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. 
8Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité Medical Faculty and the Max-Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany. 9Institute of Clinical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Clinic 
Regensburg and University Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. 10Department of Pediatrics, University Clinic Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. 11Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
     Related Article: p. 1932
     Related Commentary: p. 1625
Authorship note: K. Kitada and S. Daub contributed equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: May 17, 2016; Accepted: February 17, 2017.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(5):1944–1959. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI88532.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 4 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
online with this article; https:/
/
doi.org/10.1172/JCI88532DS1). 
Furthermore, the higher fluid 
intake in the HS+saline mice 
in the normal cage determined 
lower fluid intake in the same 
mice during the subsequent met-
abolic cage experiment (Supple-
mental Figure 1C). This state of 
affairs confirmed the hypothesis 
that the surplus body fluid gen-
erated earlier was excreted in 
the metabolic cage experiments.
Despite a 10-fold increase 
in urine Na+ excretion (UNaV), 
HS+saline mice showed no 
significant increase in total 
osmolyte excretion (Table 1). 
Urea was the dominating urine 
osmolyte, being 40-fold high-
er than urine Na+ in LS diet–fed 
mice and 4-fold higher than 
urine Na+ in HS+saline diet–fed 
mice. The sum of 2Na+ (2-fold 
to account for accompanying 
anions), 2K+ (2-fold to account 
for accompanying anions), and 
urea excretion (U2Na2KUreaV; 
mmol/kg/d) was dependent on 
the previous day’s food intake 
(Supplemental Figure 2), indi-
cating that Na+ salts, K+ salts, 
and 
predominantly 
protein 
intake determined surplus urine osmolyte excretion in mice in the 
metabolic cage 24 hours later.
Despite a massive difference in UNaV, neither LS- nor 
HS+saline-treated mice showed a significant increase in urine 
volume (Table 1), indicating that surplus water excretion was not 
proportional to surplus Na+ excretion. This disproportional Na+ 
and water excretion was explained by the finding that HS+saline 
mice showed an 8-fold increase in their urine Na+ concentration. 
Excretion of surplus dietary salt and water thus occurred within 
the physiological regulatory pattern of the renal concentration 
mechanism. In the renal excretion process, proportional amounts 
of osmolytes and water are first filtered from the blood plasma 
into the primary urine. The hyperosmolal microenvironment in 
the renal interstitium then drives water reabsorption and, there-
by, urine concentration. This antidromic movement of osmolytes 
and water can be assessed by calculating the negative free water 
clearance (FWC), which is an estimate of renal tubular water reab-
sorption in relation to osmolyte excretion. The average FWC in 
LS and HS+saline mice was –162 ml/kg/d (Table 1), which would 
correspond to water conservation of approximately 13 l/d by renal 
osmolyte free water reabsorption in an 80-kg human.
Dietary salt excretion did not change urine osmolality or 
FWC, because the 25.7% increase in urine 2Na+ concentration was 
balanced by a 11.7% reduction in urine 2K+ concentration and a 
NaCl chow and tap water to drink, referred to herein as LS) or 
a high-salt diet (4% NaCl chow and 0.9% saline water to drink; 
referred to herein as HS+saline) for 2 consecutive weeks and stud-
ied their 24-hour water balance in metabolic cages. To prevent 
artificial osmolyte contamination of the urine, the mice received 
their assigned fluids without food during the 24-hour urine col-
lection period. We also measured the animals’ food and fluid 
intake in normal cages in the 24-hour period before their transfer 
to the metabolic cages. In the normal cages, daily average food 
intake was 154 ± 22 g/kg body weight, corresponding to 12 kg in 
an 80-kg human. The average fluid intake was 506 ± 281 ml/kg, 
corresponding to 40 liters in an 80-kg human. The HS+saline diet 
not only increased fluid intake by 3.1-fold (714 ± 170 ml/kg versus 
228 ± 48 ml/kg; P < 0.001), but also led to a 1.2-fold increase in 
food intake (165 ± 21 g/kg versus 140 ± 15 g/kg; P < 0.05). The 
large nutrient intake suggests that not only surplus Na+ but also 
large amounts of K+ and urea osmolytes were excreted together 
with surplus water.
Food and water intake of the previous day dominated fluid 
intake behavior and osmolyte and water excretion in the subse-
quent 24-hour metabolic cage studies. It was not fluid intake on 
the same day, but fluid intake on the previous day that determined 
urine volume formation in the metabolic cage experiments (Sup-
plemental Figure 1, A and B; supplemental material available 
Table 1. Effect of increasing salt intake on urine osmolyte, volume, and glucocorticoid-hormone 
excretion in balance studies in mice and humans
Mouse balance studies
Human balance study
LS
HS + saline 
LS
HS + tap
6 g/d
12 g/d
Number of subjects
(n = 6)
(n = 8)
(n = 7)
(n = 7)
(n = 10)
(n = 10)
Osmolyte excretion
(n = 6)
(n = 8)
(n = 7)
(n = 7)
(n = 396)
(n = 739)
UNaV (mmol/kg/d)
1.3 ± 0.4
13 ± 5.5A
2.1 ± 0.9
11 ± 3.0A
1.2 ± 0.4
2.3 ± 0.5A
UKV (mmol/kg/d)
10 ± 1.9
6.6 ± 1.6A
9.3 ± 1.4
6.0 ± 1.6A
1.0 ± 0.3
1.1 ± 0.3A
UUreaV (mmol/kg/d)
53 ± 12
49 ± 11
42 ± 7.9
42 ± 11.3
4.3 ± 1.0
4.1 ± 1.1A
U2Na2KUreaV (mmol/kg/d)
76 ± 15
89 ± 22
65 ± 10
75 ± 19
8.6 ± 2.1
10.8±2.3A
Osmolyte concentration
(n = 6)
(n = 8)
(n = 7)
(n = 7)
(n = 404)
(n = 740)
U[Na+] (mmol/l)
19 ± 7
148 ± 32A
32 ± 10
130 ± 26A,E
56 ± 24
108 ± 34A
U[K+] (mmol/l)
151 ± 20
78 ± 18A
147 ± 13
73 ± 12A
50 ± 22
54 ± 21A
U[Urea] (mmol/l)
780 ± 112
575 ± 127A
665 ± 149
522 ± 81A
217 ± 99
197 ± 76A
U[2Na+2K+Urea] (mmol/l)
1,120 ± 157
1,026 ± 148
1,024 ± 168
930 ± 124
430 ± 177
520 ± 170A
Urine osmolality (mOsm/kg)
984 ± 126
895 ± 120
958 ± 146
834 ± 124
431 ± 175
508 ± 170A
Fluid intake and urine volume
(n = 6)
(n = 8)
(n = 7)
(n = 7)
(n = 396)
(n = 739)
Urine volume (ml/kg/d)
69 ± 15
89 ± 28
64 ± 13
81 ± 17B
22 ± 8
22 ± 7
Fluid intake (ml/kg/d)
48 ± 12
37 ± 14
35 ± 18
55 ± 19B,D
35 ± 7
31 ± 7A
FWC (ml/kg/d)
–154 ± 29
–169 ± 36
–138 ± 26
–143 ± 41
–6.6 ± 8.7
–12.6 ± 7.6A
Urine glucocorticoid excretionF 
(n = 6)
(n = 6)
(n = 6)
(n = 6)
(n = 404)
(n = 742)
30 ± 7
40 ± 8A
33 ± 4
31 ± 5C,D
18 ± 6
24 ± 8A
Studies in mice: Mice were fed a LS diet (0.1% NaCl chow with tap water) or a HS diet (4% NaCl chow with either 
0.9% saline water or, alternatively, tap water to drink) and were placed into metabolic cages for 24 hours with either 
tap water or saline water to drink, without food. Data were analyzed by multivariate analysis (general linear model). 
Human studies: 10 healthy men monitored their fluid intake and collected 24-hour urine samples for 6-g/d or 12-g/d 
salt intake in ultra-long-term Na+ balance studies of 105 and 205 days’ duration. Data were determined by mixed-
linear model analysis and are expressed as the average ± the SD. AP(salt) < 0.05; BP(salt) < 0.1, CP(free access to water) < 0.05; 
DP(interaction between salt and free access to water) < 0.05; and EP(interaction between salt and free access to water) < 0.1. Osmolyte excretion is given per 
24-hour urine volume (UV). FGlucocorticoid excretion in humans was quantified by 24-hour cortisol excretion (μg/d); 
glucocorticoid excretion in mice was quantified by 24-hour corticosterone excretion (ng/d).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 4 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
higher in mice than in humans, while surplus water excretion was 
3-fold higher. The mice thus had a 2-fold higher urine osmolality 
than did the human subjects. Endogenous free water accrual by 
negative FWC in the kidney was therefore 15-fold higher in the 
mice than in the human subjects (Table 1). Despite these sub-
stantial differences in body osmolyte and water homeostasis and 
across the different dietary salt interventions, the mice and human 
subjects shared the natriuretic-ureotelic regulatory principle of 
excreting surplus dietary salt by concentrating Na+ into the urine 
and in parallel reducing the urine urea concentration (Table 1).
Independent of the salt intake level, mice and humans 
eliminated surplus Na+, K+, and urea osmolytes with increasing 
amounts of surplus water (Figure 1C). Across the species and 
the different salt-intake protocols increased surplus osmolyte 
excretion was characterized by increased urine concentration 
and, thus, by reduced clearance of free water (Figure 1D). This 
finding indicates that the biological and physiological pattern of 
extracellular volume control during surplus osmolyte excretion 
substantially relies on water conservation by urine concentration. 
13.9% reduction in urine urea concentration (Table 1 and Figure 
1A). This finding suggests that K+ and urea osmolytes provided the 
primary osmotic driving force necessary to reabsorb water and 
concentrate excess dietary Na+ osmolytes into the urine. Urine 
formation by total surplus osmolyte and water excretion showed 
the expected close relationship between U2Na2KUreaV and water 
excretion (Figure 1B). These findings indicate that in HS+saline 
mice, further increase in urine volume were prevented by K+- and 
urea-driven maintenance of the renal concentration mechanism, 
thereby preventing Na+-driven extracellular volume loss.
We next tested the reproducibility of our findings in additional 
experiments in mice with dietary salt loading and free access to 
water (4% NaCl chow and tap water; HS+tap) and compared the 
responses with results from 10 human subjects whose salt intake 
was increased by 6 g/d during two 105-day and 205-day ultra-
long-term salt and water balance studies (4). Surplus Na+ and K+ 
excretion was 5-fold higher and surplus urea excretion was 10-fold 
higher in the mice than in the human subjects (Table 1). Account-
ing for unmeasured anions, surplus osmolyte excretion was 7-fold 
Figure 1. Natriuretic-ureotelic generation of urine volume by surplus osmolyte and water excretion in mice and in humans. (A) Relative contribution of 
24-hour Na+ (2UNaV), K+ (2UKV), and urea (UUreaV) excretion to total 24-hour Na+, K+, and urea osmolyte excretion in mice on a LS diet (n = 6) or a HS diet 
with isotonic saline to drink (HS+saline; n = 8), and in 10 men consuming a 6-g/d or 12-g/d salt diet. Two-fold values of UNaV and UKV are given to account for 
their unmeasured accompanying anions. (B) Relationship among surplus 2Na+, 2K+, and urea osmolyte excretion (U2Na2KUreaV) and surplus water excretion 
in mice on a 0.1% NaCl diet with tap water (LS) (n = 6) or a 4% NaCl diet with 0.9% saline (HS+saline) (n = 8) for 2 consecutive weeks. (C) Relationship between 
surplus U2Na2KUreaV and surplus water excretion in all mice and human subjects presented in Table 1. (D) Relationship between surplus U2Na2KUreaV and 
FWC in the same mice and human subjects. (E) Relationship between surplus U2Na2KUreaV and water intake in the same mice and human subjects. We 
performed regression analysis in humans, and across the species. Mouse experiment 1: HS+saline study; mouse experiment 2: HS+tap study.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 4 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
3, A–C, and see Supplemental Figure 3, A and B, for the complete, 
unedited Western blots). We found a marked increase in medul-
lary urea content in the HS+saline mice, which was paralleled by 
increased UT-A1 expression. We interpret these findings as show-
ing that UT-A1–driven urea accumulation in the renal medulla 
provides the osmotic gradient necessary to reabsorb water when 
dietary salt is excreted. This water-saving effect of urea osmolyte 
accumulation is the basis of the concentration mechanism, where-
by the kidney excretes salt without major changes in fluid intake 
or urinary water loss. HS+tap-treated mice showed a similar urine 
osmolyte excretion and concentration pro 
file (Table 1) and similar 
increases in UT-A1 expression in the renal medulla (Supplemental 
Figure 3, C and D), but no increased glucocorticoid excretion. This 
finding indicates that the renal natriuretic-ureotelic response was 
also triggered when free access to water was offered in the diet and 
that increasing glucocorticoid levels was not necessary to induce 
the urea-driven renal water conservation process.
Urea and Na+ hold water in the plasma space. We next tested 
the hypothesis that renal medullary urea accumulation not only 
facilitates renal water reabsorption but also changes plasma urea 
concentration. We found that HS+saline treatment significantly 
increased the plasma urea concentration (Figure 3D). Treatment 
with the unspecific arginase inhibitor N-ω-hydroxy-L-norarginine 
(NOHA) left plasma urea levels unchanged. Conversely, HS+saline 
decreased plasma Na+ concentrations, while NOHA treatment left 
plasma Na+ levels unchanged (Figure 3E). Plasma osmolality was 
not different between HS+saline- and HS+saline+NOHA-treated 
 
mice (Figure 3F). We conclude that both urea and Na+ act as 
osmolytes to conserve plasma water and thereby contribute to 
extracellular volume regulation. NOHA did not significantly reduce 
renal UT-A1 or UT-A2 expression (Figure 3, B and C, and see Sup-
plemental Figure 3, A and B, for the complete, unedited Western 
blots). This finding suggests that, besides transporter-driven renal 
urea recycling, extrarenal urea osmolyte production may play an 
important role in extracellular volume control.
Extrarenal urea generation is a determinant of plasma urea con-
centration. We thus tested the relationship among arginase activity, 
tissue urea content, and plasma urea levels. HS+saline increased 
renal medullary urea content and plasma urea concentration (Fig-
ure 4A); however, this increase was not dependent on renal argin-
Extracellular volume control in the mice and human subjects with 
increasing osmolyte excretion was therefore not dependent on a 
parallel adjustment of fluid intake (Figure 1E). A 6-g/d increase 
in salt intake reduced FWC in humans, and the resulting increase 
in endogenous free water accrual resulted in surplus water excre-
tion and reduced fluid intake (see Table 1 and the accompanying 
article [ref. 4] for details). This water intake and excretion pattern 
was best simulated in our metabolic cage experiments involving 
HS+saline mice (Table 1).
Glucocorticoid-coupled surplus water excretion and its associa-
tion with dietary salt loading in mice and humans. In our ultra-long-
term water balance study in humans, spontaneous rhythmical cor-
tisone release was coupled with increased urine volume formation 
and increased free water excretion without increasing fluid intake, 
indicating a rhythmical release of endogenously generated sur-
plus water (see the accompanying article [ref. 4] for details). This 
finding was reproducible in mice. In humans, increasing cortisol 
excretion augmented urine volume (Figure 2A) without increas-
ing water intake (Figure 2B), resulting in a negative water balance 
(water balance gap: difference between water intake and urinary 
output; Figure 2C) and indicating excretion of surplus water. Rel-
ative to body mass, corticosterone levels in the mice in metabolic 
cages were higher than the cortisol levels detected in the human 
subjects. These higher glucocorticoid levels were coupled with 
further increases in urine volume (Figure 2A), while water intake 
was not similarly increased (Figure 2B), resulting in a negative 
water balance across the species (Figure 2C).
We hypothesized that dietary salt loading not only promotes 
urea-driven free water accrual within the renal urine concentra-
tion process to prevent a negative water balance, but additional-
ly induces glucocorticoid-driven catabolism for metabolic urea 
osmolyte generation and increased metabolic water produc-
tion. We tested these hypotheses in HS+saline mice, which, like 
the human subjects, showed increased glucocorticoid levels in 
response to the dietary salt–loading protocol (Table 1).
Dietary salt induces urea transporter–driven urea osmolyte accu-
mulation in the kidney. After 6 weeks on their specified diets, the LS 
and HS+saline mice were studied to determine the inner medullary 
urea content and expression of the outer medullary urea transport-
er UT-A2 and the inner medullary urea transporter UT-A1 (Figure 
Figure 2. Glucocorticoid levels and water balance in mice and humans. (A) Relationship between glucocorticoid (UGlucocorticoidV) levels and water excre-
tion in the urine for all mice and human subjects presented in Table 1. (B) Relationship between glucocorticoid levels and water intake in the same mice. 
(C) Relationship between glucocorticoid levels and water balance in the same mice. Regression analysis was performed for humans and across the species. 
Mouse experiment 1: HS+saline study; mouse experiment 2: HS+tap study.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 4 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
with isotonic saline, HS+saline-treated mice had decreased RQ 
during the inactive period to a value of 0.7. We interpret these 
findings as showing that HS+saline induces catabolism with pre-
dominant fat oxidation for energy generation in mice. The time 
course of the changes in food intake and body weight in LS- and 
HS+saline-treated mice over 4 weeks of ad libitum feeding, fol-
lowed by 2 weeks of pair-feeding (Figure 5, B and C), revealed 
that with ad libitum feeding, HS+saline mice showed a 20%–30% 
increase in food intake. However, body weights remained sim-
ilar between the groups. We then pair-fed the mice and reduced 
the food intake of HS+saline diet–fed mice to that of LS diet–fed 
mice. With pair-feeding, HS+saline mice lost approximately 10% 
of their total body weight within 1 week. In contrast to salt loading 
with the HS+saline diet, the HS diet with free access to water nei-
ther increased glucocorticoid levels (Table 1), nor increased food 
intake in the ad libitum food intake phase, nor decreased body 
weight in the pair-feeding phase (Supplemental Figure 4).
We therefore next hypothesized that the observed weight 
loss in HS+saline mice after pair-feeding was due to corticoste-
rone-driven loss of muscle mass. We first tested whether elevat-
ed corticosterone levels in HS+saline mice led to glucocorticoid 
receptor (GR) activation in the muscle (Figure 5D, upper panel, 
Figure 5E, and see Supplemental Figure 5 for the complete, uned-
ited Western blots). HS+saline did not increase GR protein levels 
in the cytoplasm, the membrane, or in the soluble nuclear frac-
ase activity, suggesting that the observed decrease in medullary 
urea content and plasma urea concentration in NOHA-treated mice 
was most likely due to reduced extrarenal urea production. There-
fore, we next studied the role of urea production in the liver (Fig-
ure 4B). HS+saline increased hepatic arginase activity and thereby 
increased urea content in the liver. We found that liver urea content 
was a better predictor of plasma urea levels than was renal medul-
lary urea content. In contrast to what we observed in kidney, liver 
arginase activity strongly predicted liver urea content and plasma 
urea concentration. NOHA treatment reduced liver arginase activ-
ity and, in parallel, reduced liver urea content as well as the plas-
ma urea concentration. We interpret this finding as showing that 
liver and kidney jointly control body osmolyte content and thereby 
determine extracellular volume homeostasis. We also found that 
HS+saline increased arginase activity and urea content in skeletal 
muscle (Figure 4C). NOHA treatment reduced muscle urea content 
back to the control values. This finding suggests that the increase in 
muscle urea content was due to local urea production in the muscle, 
indicating additional extrahepatic urea generation.
Salt leads to catabolic muscle mass loss. We next tested the 
hypothesis that salt-driven urea osmolyte generation induces a 
catabolic state and studied the effect of dietary salt loading on 
the respiratory quotient (RQ) in the mice. A 4% NaCl diet did not 
significantly decrease RQ as long as mice had free access to tap 
water (Figure 5A). Immediately upon replacement of tap water 
Figure 3. Renal urea accumulation, plasma Na+ and urea concentration, and plasma osmolality in response to experimental salt loading. (A) Urea content 
in the renal medulla in mice that received less than 0.1% salt and tap water (LS; n = 6) or 4% salt and 0.9% saline (HS+saline; n = 7). (B) Representative UT-A1 
and UT-A2 expression in the outer medulla and inner medulla of mice on a LS (n = 3), HS+saline (n = 3), or HS+saline+NOHA (n = 3) diet. (C) Quantification 
of UT-A1 and UT-A2 expression in the outer and inner medullae of mice on a LS (n = 8), HS+saline (n = 8), or HS+saline+NOHA (n = 8) diet. (D) Plasma urea 
concentration in mice on a LS (n = 14), HS+saline (n = 16), or HS+saline+NOHA (n = 14) diet. (E) Plasma Na+ concentration in mice on a LS (n = 12), HS+saline  
(n = 15), or HS+saline+NOHA (n = 14) diet. (F) Plasma osmolality in mice on a LS diet (n = 13), HS+saline diet (n = 16), or a HS+saline diet plus NOHA treat-
ment (HS+saline+NOHA; n = 14). Data were determined by multivariate analysis (general linear model) and Bonferroni’s post-hoc subgroup comparisons.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 4 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
tion. In contrast, nuclear chromatin–bound GR protein expression 
increased with HS+saline, showing GR activation. In parallel with 
GR activation, microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B chain 3 (LC3, 
structural precursor protein within the autophagic pathway) was 
preferentially lipidated from the cytosolic form (LC3-I, cleaved 
from LC3) to the derivate associated with autophagosome mem-
brane expansion, LC3-II. The resulting increase in the LC3-II/
LC3-I ratio (Figure 5D, lower panel, and see Supplemental Figure 
6 for the complete, unedited Western blots), which was paralleled 
by a tendency toward higher levels of autophagy-related protein 
5 (ATG5, involved in the lipidation of LC3-I to LC3-II) and by 
reduced levels of the autophagosome carrier protein p62 (SQSTM1, 
sequestosome 1, which targets polyubiquitinated proteins for deg-
radation), indicates increased autophagosome formation (see Sup-
plemental Figure 7, A–C, for the complete, unedited Western blots). 
Additionally, skeletal muscle in HS+saline mice showed increased 
1-methyl histidine and 3-methyl histidine levels, indicating muscle 
protein breakdown (Supplemental Figure 7D).
Mice given HS+saline had increased chromatin-bound GR 
protein levels, increased autophagosome formation markers, and 
Figure 4. Relationship among tissue urea content, tissue arginase activity, and plasma urea concentration. (A) Relationship among renal medullary urea 
content, renal medullary arginase activity, and plasma urea concentration in mice fed a LS (n = 14), HS+saline (n = 15), or HS+saline+NOHA (n = 14) diet. (B) 
Relationship among liver urea content, liver arginase activity, and plasma urea concentration in the same mice. (C) Relationship among muscle urea con-
tent, muscle arginase activity, and plasma urea concentration in the same mice. Data were determined by linear regression, multivariate analysis (general 
linear model), and Bonferroni’s post-hoc subgroup comparisons.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 5 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
Figure 5. Catabolic muscle wasting by experimental salt loading. (A) RQ in mice fed a 0.1% NaCl chow (LS) (n = 8) or a 4% NaCl chow (n = 8) diet for 
7 consecutive days. To test the effect of additional isotonic saline, mice received tap water for 2 days (HS+tap, orange), followed by isotonic saline 
(HS+saline, red). The activity period at night is shown in gray, and the inactivity period during the daytime is shown in white. Food intake (B) and body 
weight (C) over a 28-day period of ad libitum feeding, followed by 14 days of pair-feeding with a LS (n = 8) or HS+saline (n = 8) diet. (D) Upper panel: 
GR binding in the cytoplasm (CP), membrane (M), soluble nuclear fraction (SN), chromatin-bound GR (CB), and cytoskeletal (CS) GR in the subcellular 
fraction in skeletal muscle in mice fed a LS (n = 5) or HS+saline (n = 5) diet. Lower panel: Protein expression of LC3 in its cytosolic form (LC3-I) and as its 
LC-3-phosphatidylethanolamine conjugate (LC3-II) in the muscle of mice fed a LS (n = 4) or HS+saline (n = 4) diet. (E) Quantification of chromatin-bound 
GR protein expression and ratio of LC3-II/LC3-I protein expression in mice fed a LS (n = 5) or HS+saline (n = 5) diet. (F) Plasma corticosterone levels in 
mice fed a LS (n = 8) or HS+saline (n = 8) diet. (G) Relationship between changes (Δ) in body weight and muscle mass, as measured by magnetic reso-
nance lean tissue mass, in mice fed a LS (n = 8) or HS+saline (n = 8) diet. (H) In vivo detection of LC3 expression (green) in skeletal muscle of LC3-GFP 
mice after pair-feeding on a LS or HS+saline diet. Data were determined by multivariate analysis of repeated measurements, by Student’s t test for 
independent samples, or by linear regression.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 5 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
glutamate. Glutamate is not actively transported out of muscle. 
OAT-initiated provision of muscle nitrogen therefore requires 
additional transfer of the amino group from glutamate to pyruvate 
to generate alanine (Supplemental Figure 9). This alanine-glu-
cose-nitrogen shuttle transfers glucose-derived carbon skeletons 
(pyruvate) and glutamate-derived nitrogen from muscle to liver 
by way of the transamination to alanine. We found reduced ala-
nine levels (Figure 7A, left), together with unchanged expression 
of the Na+/alanine cotransporters SLC38A1 and SLC38A2 (Figure 
7B, and see Supplemental Figure 10 for the complete, unedited 
Western blots) in the muscle of HS+saline mice. In contrast, the 
expression of SLC38A1 and SLC38A2 was increased in liver (Fig-
ure 7B, and see Supplemental Figure 11 for the complete, unedited 
Western blots), suggesting uptake of muscle alanine in the liver. 
Urea cycle analysis in liver showed increased arginase activity 
with increased urea levels (Figure 4) and elevated argininosucci-
nate levels (Figure 7A, right). The enzyme argininosuccinate lyase 
converts argininosuccinate to arginine and fumarate (Supplemen-
tal Figure 9). We found that liver arginine levels were reduced, 
presumably as a result of high arginase activity, while fumarate 
levels were elevated (Figure 7A, right). Despite high fumarate lev-
els, we found no changes in malate or oxaloacetate levels in liver. 
However, the alternative metabolite aspartate, which ultimately 
transfers nitrogen from the alanine-glucose-nitrogen shuttle into 
the urea cycle, was elevated (Figure 7A, right, and Supplemental 
Figure 9). We interpret these results as indicating that muscle in 
HS+saline mice increases urea production and transfers nitrogen 
and glucose via the alanine-glucose-nitrogen shuttle to the liver, 
where alanine is taken up by increased active transport and pref-
erentially metabolized to urea.
Salt induces ketogenesis, reduces gluconeogenesis, and entails fatty 
acid oxidation. We next studied the content of glycogen and inter-
mediates for energy metabolism in skeletal muscle and liver (Fig-
ure 7A). HS+saline reduced the levels of glucose, glucose-6-phos-
phate, fructose-6-phosphate, and 6-phosphoguconate in muscle 
and in liver. The glycogen branch sugars maltotriose, maltotetra-
tose, and maltopentatose were predominantly reduced in the liv-
er. Both muscle and liver showed increased ketone body content. 
This finding suggests that liver switched pyruvate substrate uti-
increased muscle protein breakdown and showed higher cortico-
sterone levels in urine (Table 1) and plasma (Figure 5F). We there-
fore investigated the relative contribution of muscle mass to body 
weight loss by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Fifty- 
nine percent of the variability of body weight was explained by 
changes in lean body mass, which was consistent with salt-induced 
muscle wasting (Figure 5G). We further confirmed the autopha-
gy component of muscle wasting in vivo in mice expressing GFP 
under the control of the LC3 promoter. We found large increases in 
LC3 promoter activity in LC3-GFP mice with HS+saline treatment 
after pair-feeding (Figure 5H). These data support the notion that 
HS+saline induces a catabolic state for urea osmolyte generation 
when excess salt is excreted.
Salt promotes nitrogen transfer from muscle to liver. We next 
hypothesized that muscle protein serves as a nitrogen source for 
accelerated ureagenesis in HS+saline mice. Metabolomic anal-
ysis of free amino acids in skeletal muscle showed a substantial 
reduction of serine, threonine, methionine, alanine, and tyrosine 
in HS+saline-treated mice (Figure 6). These amino acids are nitro-
gen donors for hepatic ureagenesis (Supplemental Figure 8). We 
found no decrease in free amino acid content in liver. However, 
liver glutamine and aspartate levels were selectively increased, 
suggesting a mobilization and redistribution of nitrogen for urea 
production from muscle to liver.
Arginase utilizes water to convert arginine to urea and orni-
thine (Supplemental Figures 8 and 9). While increased arginase 
activity coincided with increased urea levels (Figure 4), ornithine 
levels were reduced in muscle in HS+saline mice (Figure 7A, left). 
This finding suggests that other enzyme systems downstream 
of arginase further converted ornithine, which harbors 2 amino 
groups. We thus focused on the enzyme ornithine-aminotrans-
ferase (OAT) that transfers the C5-amino group from ornithine 
to 2-oxo-carbon acids, ultimately generating glutamate or pro-
line. Glutamate is the amino source for urea synthesis in the liv-
er. We found a substantial increase in muscle OAT expression in 
HS+saline mice (Figure 7B, and see Supplemental Figure 10 for 
the complete, unedited Western blots), but reduced proline levels 
(Figure 7A, left). These results suggest that the ornithine generat-
ed by elevated arginase activity was likely further metabolized to 
Figure 6. LC-MS/MS free amino acid anal-
ysis in skeletal muscle and liver in mice 
after pair-feeding. Effect of HS+saline on 
free amino acid levels (reductions in blue; 
increases in green) after pair-feeding in 
mice fed a LS (n = 6) or HS+saline (n = 6) 
diet. Data were analyzed by Student’s t test 
for independent samples.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 5 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 5 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
In contrast to muscle, liver in HS+saline mice showed reduced 
AMP levels (Figure 7A, right), suggesting no organ-specific ener-
gy deficit, despite massively increased urea production and 
reduced availability of glucose or glycogen fuels. In line with low 
AMP levels, p-AMPK and p-ACC were not elevated in the liver of 
HS+saline mice (Figure 7C). We interpret these results as indi-
cating that reduced gluconeogenesis and a switch to ketogenesis 
(Supplemental Figure 12) help prevent an energy deficit in liver, 
despite the energy-intense urea osmolyte generation that occurs 
in catabolic HS+saline mice.
Salt decreases cardiovascular energy expenditure. The observed 
reprioritization of energy metabolism in our HS+saline mice 
represents a typical adaptation pattern for water conservation in 
organisms, termed aestivation (15). In aestivators, the energy-in-
tense nature of urea osmolyte generation for body water conser-
vation also includes reduced cardiovascular energy expenditure 
(16). We therefore hypothesized that HS+saline not only repri-
oritized energy metabolism, but also induced reduced cardio-
vascular energy expenditure in mice. We therefore used radio-
telemetry to study the cardiovascular response to our 4 different 
salt-intake regimens in 6 mice (Figure 8). The diet consisting of 
4% NaCl chow with tap water increased systolic BP (SBP) from 
119 ± 13 mmHg to 124 ± 11 mmHg (P < 0.05), without significant 
changes in heart rate (Figure 8A). Replacement of water with iso-
tonic saline (HS+saline diet) not only led to a catabolic state with 
reprioritization of urea osmolyte and energy metabolism (Figures 
5–7), but also induced the expected changes in cardiovascular 
energy expenditure. The initial response to HS+saline exposure 
was characterized by a steep increase in heart rate, with a mono-
phasic short R-R interval distribution pattern (Figure 8B), and an 
increase in locomotor activity, suggesting an alarm reaction with 
predominant sympathetic drive. Within 4 days of HS+saline treat-
ment, mice had markedly lower heart rates that were even below 
the initial baseline rate and now showed a biphasic distribution of 
short and prolonged R-R intervals, consistent with high parasym-
pathetic tone (Figure 8B). SBP levels were intimately coupled with 
the cardiovascular energy expenditure level. Thirty-two percent 
of the variability in SBP was explained by changes in heart rate, 
suggesting that cardiovascular energy expenditure and sympa-
thetic nerve drive during activity and inactivity were important 
determinants of the salt-induced elevation and reduction in BP 
(Figure 8C). Additional pair-feeding not only induced total body 
energy deficit and catabolism (Figures 5–7), but also resulted in 
a robust reduction in cardiovascular energy expenditure, with a 
low heart rate, low BP, and low locomotor activity, despite mas-
sive salt intake. Finally, we tested the hypothesis that the initial BP 
increase we observed in HS+saline-fed animals was inducible by 
an acute stressor. We found that intra-arterial BP was significant-
ly elevated in mice fed a HS+saline diet for 2 consecutive weeks 
when we measured BP acutely in restrained animals (Figure 8D). 
We interpret these findings as indicating that HS+saline not only 
leads to catabolic urea production with reprioritization of energy 
metabolism, but also induces a reduction in cardiovascular energy 
expenditure with a reduced heart rate and low BP. This negative 
energy balance–driven cardiovascular response in HS+saline mice 
was rapidly reversible during acute alarm responses triggered by 
an external stressor. We conclude that the metabolic and cardio-
lization from energy-intense gluconeogenesis to energy-neutral 
ketogenesis and thereby reprioritized its energy expenditure in 
favor of urea osmolyte production (Supplemental Figure 12).
Liver ketogenesis deprives muscle of glucose. Muscle in 
HS+saline mice showed increased fatty acid carnitine esters and 
their respective 3-hydroxy isoforms (Figure 7A). This finding, cor-
roborated by the observed RQ reduction (Figure 5A), indicates 
preferential mitochondrial β-oxidation in HS+saline mice. We 
conclude that muscle in HS-saline mice utilized ketone bodies 
together with fatty acids as energy fuels, while the availability of 
glucose was reduced.
However, the reduced availability of glucose also reduces 
glycolytic pyruvate generation (Supplemental Figure 12). Pyru-
vate is an essential substrate that initiates nitrogen transfer from 
muscle to liver via the alanine-glucose-nitrogen shuttle (Supple-
mental Figure 9). Liver-driven glucose/pyruvate deprivation may 
therefore explain the autophagy and muscle protein breakdown 
observed in HS+saline mice, because muscle protein remained the 
major available source of glutamate and pyruvate.
Energetic consequences of salt in muscle and liver. In line with 
the catabolic nature of urea production and nitrogen mobilization 
in muscle, we found increased AMP and ADP levels in skeletal 
muscle in HS+saline mice (Figure 7A, left). AMPK, which acts 
as a sensor of cellular energy status, is considered a key enzyme 
in conditions of cellular energy deficit. AMPK is able to inhibit 
metabolic pathways that consume energy and increases mecha-
nisms that produce energy (5). Binding of AMP to AMPK inhibits 
dephosphorylation of the kinase (6, 7). Phosphorylated AMPK 
(p-AMPK) facilitates fatty acid oxidation in mitochondria (8) and 
promotes autophagy in skeletal muscle (9, 10). HS+saline mice 
with increased AMP levels in muscle showed increased p-AMPK 
protein and an increased p-AMPK/AMPK ratio (Figure 7C, and 
see Supplemental Figure 13 for the complete, unedited Western 
blots). p-AMPK promotes mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation 
(11, 12) by phosphorylation of its downstream target acetyl CoA 
carboxylase (ACC). ACC promotes carboxylation of acetyl CoA 
to generate malonyl-CoA and initiate fat storage (13). p-AMPK–
driven phosphorylation of ACC inhibits its carboxylase activity 
and thereby promotes mitochondrial β-oxidation (14). We found 
that HS+saline increased p-ACC levels and the p-ACC/ACC ratio 
(Figure 7C, and see Supplemental Figure 13 for the complete, 
unedited Western blots). These results indicate that a HS diet 
leads to an energy deficit in skeletal muscle, which induces an 
AMP-driven increase of fatty acid oxidation by p-AMPK–mediat-
ed phosphorylation of ACC.
Figure 7. LC-MS/MS metabolite analysis in liver and skeletal muscle of 
mice after pair-feeding. (A) Effect on key metabolites of energy metab-
olism (AMP and ADP), the TCA cycle, ketone body formation, fatty acid 
oxidation, glycogen storage, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, the alanine- 
glucose-nitrogen shuttle, and the urea cycle in muscle and liver in pair-fed 
mice given a LS (n = 6) or HS+saline (n = 6) diet (reductions in blue; increas-
es in green). (B) Protein expression of OAT and the Na+-alanine cotransport-
ers SLC38A1 and SLC38A2 in the same mice. (C) Protein expression of phos-
phorylated and unphosphorylated AMPK ACC in the same mice. Expression 
of GAPDH (37 kDa) and β-actin (42 kDa) proteins served as a loading control. 
Data were analyzed by Student’s t test for independent samples.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 5 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
natriuretic-ureotelic regulation. The water-saving principle of the 
urine concentration process by renal medullary urea accumula-
tion was established earlier (18) and has been confirmed in mice 
with targeted disruption of the renal urea transporters (19, 20). In 
line with earlier findings indicating that urea and NaCl osmolytes 
exert opposing effects on UT-A1–driven urea transport during 
acute osmotic diuresis (21), we show here that this urea-depen-
dent water conservation principle is utilized to maintain the renal 
concentration process and thereby possibly counterbalance the 
osmotic-diuretic effect of salt excretion. The resulting endoge-
nous water accrual allows constancy in urine volume formation, 
despite massive natriuresis. The reduced dependency on external 
water sources can be viewed as an advantageous physiological 
principle for body water control. Endogenous water accrual within 
the renal concentration mechanism is not restricted to mice under 
extreme salt-intake conditions, but occurs with increasing Na+, K+, 
or urea osmolyte excretion in mice and humans across all levels 
of salt intake (Figure 1, C and D). Bankir and Yang noted earlier 
that the excretion of dietary salt during the Dietary Approach-
es to Stop Hypertension (DASH) sodium trial increased the Na+ 
vascular response to HS+saline we observed in our mice is typical 
for water conservation by aestivation.
Discussion
Our major finding is that the excretion of surplus dietary salt is 
not confined to parallel osmolyte and water movement into the 
urine to induce osmotic diuresis and reduce the extracellular vol-
ume. Instead, we show that the body’s response to dietary salt 
additionally relies on the maintenance of negative FWC and urea 
accumulation in the kidneys, while Na+ and accompanying anions 
are concentrated in the urine (Supplemental Figure 14). Our find-
ings suggest that the kidneys, liver, and skeletal muscle form a 
physiological-regulatory network for extracellular volume control 
by coupling salt-dominated osmolyte excretion with antiparallel, 
urea-dominated water conservation when salt intake is high.
Water conservation by reprioritization of renal osmolyte transport 
in response to dietary salt. The natriuretic concept of extracellular 
volume control suggests that the body excretes Na+ in an effort 
to reduce the extracellular volume (1, 17). In expanding this con-
cept, we suggest that the extracellular volume is controlled by 
Figure 8. Cardiovascular responses 
to dietary salt loading. Dietary salt 
levels were as follows: black = LS 
diet; orange = 4% NaCl diet with 
tap water (HS+tap); red = 4% NaCl 
diet with additional isotonic saline 
(HS+saline); green = 4% NaCl diet 
with isotonic saline and calorie 
intake restriction (HS+saline, 
pair-fed). (A) Locomotor activity, 
heart rate, and SBP in 6 mice over 
a 21-day period. (B) R-R interval 
distribution in the same mice after 
1 (Day 9) and 4 (Day 12) days of a 
4% NaCl diet with isotonic saline. 
(C) Relationship between heart 
rate (bpm) and SBP (mmHg) in 
the same mice. (D) Mean arterial 
BP (MAP) in acutely restrained 
mice that were fed a LS (n = 20) or 
HS+saline (n = 18) diet ad libitum 
for 2 weeks. *P < 0.05 and  
**P < 0.01. P(diet): effect of dietary 
intervention versus LS level; 
P(day): effect of intervention day; 
P(inter): interaction between dietary 
intervention and day of interven-
tion. Data were determined by 
multivariate analysis of repeated 
measurements, Student’s t test for 
paired samples, Student’s t test 
for independent samples, and by 
linear regression.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 5 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
driven fatty acid oxidation (Figure 7). This finding suggests that 
skeletal muscle showed increased metabolic water production in 
HS+saline-fed mice. Furthermore, HS+saline induced a quanti-
fiable reduction in lean body mass in the animals as soon as an 
increase in food intake, to compensate for the salt-driven catabol-
ic state, was not permitted during pair-feeding (Figure 5).
We focused on the change in body fluid and body mass compo-
sition that occurs with muscle mass loss (Supplemental Figure 15). 
Independently of glucocorticoid-driven changes in metabolism, 
LS mice, HS+tap mice, and HS+saline mice accrued approximate-
ly 80% of their estimated extracellular volume by negative FWC 
within the renal concentration mechanism. Additional glucocor-
ticoid-driven catabolism in HS+saline diet–fed mice resulted in a 
lean body mass loss of 2.5 g, which had a water content of 0.7 ml/g. 
Thus, the mice must have released 1.8 ml of water stored in skele-
tal muscle cells into the extracellular space, which corresponds to 
approximately 35% of the estimated normal size of the extracel-
lular volume. In HS+tap diet–fed mice, natriuretic-ureotelic regu-
lation of salt excretion was limited to renal free water accrual by 
maintenance of the renal concentration mechanism.
The switch from gluconeogenesis to ketogenesis we observed 
in the liver in HS+saline mice represents a hypometabolic response 
that reduces metabolic energy expenditure for glucose formation 
and preferentially produces urea osmolytes for body water conser-
vation. HS+saline-fed mice showed a similar reduction in cardio-
vascular energy expenditure, with a reduced heart rate and low BP. 
The BP reduction in HS+saline mice was immediately reversible 
when the animals were exposed to an acute stressor (Figure 8).
Aestivation as an alternative pathophysiological feature of high 
salt intake. The unifying hypothesis to explain the above-men-
tioned phenotype of increased renal urea recycling, increased 
urea production in liver and skeletal muscle, and reprioritization 
of liver, muscle, and cardiovascular energy expenditure is that 
the HS diet without free access to water induced aestivation in 
our mice. Life under arid conditions often restricts water avail-
ability, especially in the heat, which is a common trigger for aes-
tivation (aestas: summer) (15). Aestivation can be summarized as 
a variety of physiological self-preservation strategies to prevent 
dehydration and death. The main underlying motif of aestivation 
success is the conservation of body water. The need to conserve 
body water when salt intake is high apparently induces an aestiva-
tion-like phenotype in mice.
Homer Smith first studied osmolyte-driven control over body 
hydration in aestivating lungfish (26). Restricted to subterranean 
mud cocoons, lungfish aestivate when surrounded by water that 
is hyperosmolal compared with their body fluids, predisposing 
the fish to body water loss. To prevent dehydration, aestivating 
lungfish increase their urea content in both plasma and tissue (27, 
28). Like our HS+saline mice, aestivating lungfish induce ener-
gy-intensive urea production in the liver (29, 30) and exploit mus-
cle protein as a nitrogen source (26). The resulting energy deficit 
leads to reprioritization of energy metabolism during aestivation. 
Also similar to our HS+saline mice, snails aestivating in the heat 
show increased p-AMPK activity in foot muscle (31), including 
phosphorylation of ACC with inhibition of lipogenesis and glyco-
gen synthesis, resulting in exploitation of available fuels. We addi-
tionally showed that liver in HS+saline mice reduced glucogene-
concentration in the subjects’ urine, without increasing the urine 
volume (22). The findings suggest that urine concentration, and 
therefore regulation of water conservation, is an important control 
system for urine formation and extracellular volume homeostasis 
in humans and mice with high salt intake.
Water conservation by reprioritization of urea osmolyte produc-
tion in response to dietary salt. The ultimate need to keep water 
in the body when salt osmolytes are excreted not only requires 
renal urea recycling, but also necessitates hepato-muscular urea 
osmolyte generation in HS+saline mice. We show how kidney, 
liver, and muscle urea content explains 87% of the variability in 
plasma urea content in mice, with liver explaining most of the 
variability and muscle explaining the least (Figure 4). Increased 
arginase activity in liver and muscle, but not kidney, explains 70% 
of the variability in plasma urea levels. This finding indicates that 
renal transport of urea osmolyte and urea osmolyte production in 
liver and skeletal muscle are integrated physiological-regulatory 
components. Pharmacological arginase inhibition prevented the 
salt-driven increase in tissue urea content and reduced plasma 
urea concentrations in HS+saline mice. These findings suggest a 
hepato-renal-musculoskeletal regulation of extracellular water 
conservation by osmolyte production in liver and muscle and 
by urea osmolyte recycling in the kidney. Given the energy-con-
sumptive nature of urea osmolyte generation, perpetuation of 
this urea-dependent water conservation process has major con-
sequences on energy metabolism when salt intake remains high.
Water conservation by reprioritization of energy expenditure in 
response to dietary salt. We have studied the salt-induced repriori-
tization of energy expenditure for urea-driven water conservation 
in liver, skeletal muscle, and the cardiovascular system. Liver urea 
production is energy intense (Supplemental Figure 12). Liver uses 
the glucose-alanine cycle to transfer the nitrogen necessary for 
urea production into the hepatic urea cycle. This transamination 
pathway is also known for the transfer of muscle pyruvate/amino 
acid from muscle to liver for gluconeogenesis during starvation 
(23–25). During energy surplus, liver thus invests energy to gen-
erate urea from amino acid–derived nitrogen and to generate glu-
cose from pyruvate. Catabolic HS+saline mice economized energy 
expenditure into the glucose-alanine cycle by reprioritizing liver 
metabolism. HS+saline mice had increased energy-intense urea 
osmolyte generation in the liver, while showing restricted energy 
expenditure for glucose generation by switching hepatic pyruvate 
substrate metabolism from energy-intense gluconeogenesis to 
energy-neutral ketogenesis. We interpret this finding as showing 
that HS+saline mice reprioritized their liver energy metabolism 
to ensure urea-driven water conservation. The large increase in 
hepatic osmolyte production occurred at the expense of ketogene-
sis to prevent a hepatic energy deficit and organ dysfunction.
In contrast to liver, skeletal muscle metabolism in HS+saline-
fed mice was characterized by catabolic substrate and fuel 
exploitation with extrahepatic urea generation (Figure 4), gluco-
corticoid receptor activation, muscle protein breakdown and auto-
phagy (Figure 5), exploitation of muscle amino acids (Figure 6), 
and provision of muscle nitrogen and pyruvate via the alanine-glu-
cose-nitrogen shuttle for urea production and ketogenesis in the 
liver (Figure 7). The resulting fuel deficit led to a negative ener-
gy balance, which mechanistically promoted p-AMPK/p-ACC–
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 5 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
phenotype. Disease states with a predisposition to extracellular 
volume contraction therefore may be characterized by increased 
energy uptake, catabolic exploitation of endogenous nitrogen and 
energy fuels, and reprioritization of energy expenditure in favor 
of alternative osmolyte production for body water conservation.
Methods
Animal experiments. After a 1-week acclimatization, during which the 
animals had unlimited access to tap water and regular chow (5LOD; 
PMI Nutrition International), as provided by our animal facility, we 
fed 8- to 10-week-old male C57/B6J mice (The Jackson Laboratory) a 
LS diet (<0.1% NaCl; TD90228; Harlan Laboratories) (Supplemental 
Table 1) with tap water (LS); a HS diet (4% NaCl; TD92034; Harlan 
Laboratories) (Supplemental Table 1) with tap water (HS+tap); or a HS 
diet with 0.9% saline to drink (HS+saline) for 4 consecutive weeks and 
then pair-fed the animals for 2 weeks to match energy intake in the HS 
and LS groups. In a separate experiment, we studied the effect of addi-
tional arginase inhibition with 40 mg/kg/d i.p. injection of NOHA 
(Bachem) in 3 experimental groups (group 1: LS; group 2: HS+saline; 
group 3: HS+saline+NOHA). These mice were also fed ad libitum for 4 
weeks, followed by 2 weeks of pair-feeding. Six weeks after the begin-
ning of the LS or HS treatment, the mice were euthanized, and blood 
and tissue samples were collected.
Pair-feeding. Mice were allowed ad libitum access to the specified 
diet for 4 weeks, followed by 2 weeks of pair-feeding. Fluid intake was 
not restricted. During the pair-feeding stage of the experiment, each 
individual animal from the HS group was administered the amount of 
a HS diet equal to the average amount of chow the LS group had con-
sumed the day before.
Urine collection. Two weeks into the LS, HS+tap, or HS+saline 
treatment, the mice were placed into metabolic cages (Hatteras Instru-
ments) for 20 hours without access to food. LS- and HS+tap-treat-
ed mice received tap water, and HS+saline-treated mice received 
0.9% saline to drink during the period of urine collection. To test the 
relationship between food and fluid intake of the previous day and 
osmolyte and water excretion in the metabolic cage, we additionally 
measured food and fluid in the normal cages 24 hours before the mice 
were transferred into the metabolic cages.
Electrolyte and osmolality measurements. Sodium and potassium con-
centrations in plasma and urine were measured by flame photometry 
(EFOX5053; Eppendorf). Plasma and urine osmolality were measured 
by vapor pressure osmometry (Wescor). FWC in the balance studies was 
calculated as follows: urine volume × (1 – urine osmolality/plasma osmo-
lality), taken from measured urine volume, measured urine osmolality, 
and an estimated constant plasma osmolality of 300 mOsm/kg.
Urea and arginase activity. Tissue was homogenized in protein 
extraction reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an added protein-
ase inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and an Omni TH homogenizer was 
used immediately after tissue collection. After homogenization, the 
samples were centrifuged at 13,000 ×g for 20 minutes. To extract urea 
from protein samples, the samples were filtered using a 10-kDa molec-
ular weight cutoff spin column (EMD Millipore). The urea-depleted 
supernatant was used for arginase activity determination, and tissue 
urea content was measured with the diluent. Urea concentration was 
measured in plasma, urine, and tissue by colorimetry using a Bio-
Vision urea assay kit. Tissue arginase activity was measured using an 
arginase assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich). Tissue arginase catalyzes the con-
sis and increased ketogenesis, thereby preventing simultaneous 
energy-intense glucose and urea generation. Finally, and also sim-
ilar to our HS+saline mice, aestivating catabolic lungfish undergo 
a reduction of their heart rate and BP in an effort to reduce their 
energy deficit (16, 32). However, and in contrast to hibernation 
(33), aestivation is characterized by fairly light dormancy involv-
ing no physiological changes that cannot be very rapidly reversed 
(15). In line with this finding, the HS+saline-fed mice in our study 
rapidly switched to the typical salt-sensitive hypertension BP phe-
notype during acute stress. The elevated corticosterone levels 
observed in our HS+saline mice may facilitate such acute stress 
reactions. The similarities between aestivators and our HS+saline 
mice demonstrate that the body’s response to high dietary salt 
consumption includes a reprioritization of body’s metabolism and 
energy expenditure to ensure sufficient urea osmolyte production 
and thereby prevent dehydration.
Limitations. Mice are an imperfect research model for simulat-
ing metabolic changes in humans. Normalized for body mass, nor-
mal fluid intake in our healthy mice on a salt-free diet would corre-
spond to 18 l/d water intake in an 80-kg human and be considered 
a disease state. Across all diets, water conservation by negative 
FWC within the renal concentration mechanism was 16-fold high-
er in our mouse water balance studies compared with our human 
water balance studies. Normal food consumption in mice corre-
sponded to 12 kg/d food intake in an 80-kg human and resulted 
in a predominance of urea osmolyte excretion compared with that 
detected in the human subjects. Even a 4% NaCl chow diet did not 
reduce this predominant urea excretion to the levels observed in 
humans. Finally, a 6-g/d increase in salt intake without free water 
restriction increased cortisol levels in humans. Comparable salt 
diet–driven increases in corticosterone levels, coupled with the 
induction of a catabolic state, were only found with the 4% NaCl 
chow diet in combination with isotonic saline water for drinking. 
Combining a 4% NaCl chow diet with free access to water nei-
ther increased glucocorticoid levels nor induced a catabolic state 
in mice. We can only speculate that nonrodent models would 
require less massive salt loading and free water restriction to study 
salt-driven catabolism experimentally.
Summary and perspective. We conclude that the biological sig-
nature of renal surplus osmolyte excretion in mice and humans is 
endogenous free water accrual and, thus, physiological conser-
vation of body water. Key in the physiological response to dietary 
salt we observed was the maintenance of the urine concentration 
mechanism. The renal medulla is a physiological barrier designed 
to excrete surplus osmolytes and to conserve filtrated water by 
tubular reabsorption. Excess intake of dietary salt challenges this 
barrier principle, because the subsequent excess salt excretion can 
induce osmotic diuresis and predisposes the organism to water 
loss. HS+tap water–fed mice and HS+saline-fed mice therefore 
strengthened the osmotic force of their renal barrier by urea trans-
porter–driven urea recycling for renal water conservation. Besides 
renal urea osmolyte conservation, natriuretic-ureotelic regulation 
additionally included a catabolic hormone profile with hepatic 
and extrahepatic urea osmolyte production in HS+saline mice. 
The energy-intense nature of urea osmolyte production couples 
urea-driven water conservation with the adverse effects of reprior-
itization of energy expenditure, which results in an aestivation-like 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 5 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
individually in the calorimetry system for 1 week. The RQ was calcu-
lated as VCO2/VO2.
Metabolomic profile analysis. Liquid nitrogen snap-frozen liver 
and muscle samples from 6 LS- and 6 HS+saline-treated mice were 
aliquoted and used for detection and relative quantification of metab-
olites by Metabolon as previously described (35). All metabolites 
except for urea were measured by ultra-high-performance LC-MS/MS 
(UPLC-MS/MS) (Metabolyn; Metabolon Inc.). We studied key meta-
bolic components of glucose, amino acid, fatty acid, and urea metab-
olism. Salt-induced differences in the scaled intensity of the metabo-
lites are reported (Δ scaled intensity, Figures 5 and 6).
Subcellular GR protein expression in skeletal muscle. Muscular tis-
sue samples were separated into cytoplasmic (CP), membrane (M), 
soluble nuclear fraction (SN), chromatin-bound (CB), and cytoskel-
etal (CS) protein extracts using a subcellular protein fractionation kit 
for tissues (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Subcellular GR expression was 
quantified from these subcellular muscle protein lysates by Western 
blotting. Proteins (20 μg/lane) were size separated by SDS-PAGE on 
8% to 16% gradient gels and then electroblotted onto PVDF mem-
branes (EMD Millipore). A rabbit polyclonal antibody against the GR 
(1:500; Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.; sc1004) and an HRP-conju-
gated anti-rabbit secondary antibody (1:5,000; Santa Cruz Biotech-
nology Inc.; sc2004) were used for Western blot analysis. We calcu-
lated subcellular GR expression levels as the percentage of total GR 
expression for each sample.
Body composition measurement. Body composition (fat mass, lean 
mass, and free fluid) was determined using a mq10 nuclear magnetic 
resonance analyzer (Minispec ND2110; Bruker) immediately before 
and 2 weeks after pair-feeding.
In vivo autophagy detection in the skeletal muscle. GFP-LC3#53 
reporter mice with GFP expression under the control of the LC3 pro-
moter were obtained from the Riken BioResource Center (Kyoto, 
Japan) (36). The skeletal muscle from a right hind limb was perfused 
with PBS and 4% paraformaldehyde and then fixed in 4% parafor-
maldehyde for 4 hours at room temperature. The skeletal muscle was 
sectioned (>100-μm thickness) and incubated with a 20% sucrose 
solution for 30 minutes. A rabbit anti-GFP antibody (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific) was used as the primary antibody. The capillary bed and 
nuclei were stained with Alexa 594–conjugated isolectin B4 and DAPI, 
respectively. The sections (10- to 50-μm thickness) were observed by 
2-photon microscopy (FV1000-MPE; Olympus).
BP, heart rate, and locomotor activity. BP, heart rate, and locomo-
tor activity were monitored in 6 mice during the experiment using 
an implantable telemetry system (Data Sciences International). Mice 
were anesthetized with an i.p. injection of ketamine-xylazine. After 
isolation of the left common carotid artery, the catheter connected to 
the transducer was introduced into the carotid artery and advanced 
until the tip was just inside the thoracic aorta. The transmitter was 
positioned along the right flank, close to the hind limb. Two weeks 
after recovery, BP, heart rate, and activity measurements were started. 
We additionally measured BP via an arterial line in acutely restrained 
mice (129/Sv background) following a 2-week LS diet (n = 20) or 
HS+saline diet (n = 18), as reported previously (37).
Statistics. All data are expressed as the mean ± SD. Differences 
in metabolite expression, urea content, arginase activity, Western 
blot results, plasma and urine osmolytes, corticosterone levels, body 
weight, lean body mass, and BP in response to experimental salt load-
version of added arginine to urea and ornithine. One unit of arginase 
is the amount of enzyme that converts 1 mmol L-arginine to ornithine 
and urea per minute at pH 9.5 and 37°C.
Western blot analysis. We quantified protein expression in liver 
and muscle by Western blotting. Protein was extracted as described 
above. Tissue protein (20–30 μg/lane) was size separated by SDS-
PAGE on 8% to 16% gradient gels and then electroblotted onto PVDF 
membranes (EMD Millipore). We used the following commercially 
available primary antibodies: rabbit polyclonal anti-ornithine amino-
transferase antibody (1:1,000; Abcam; ab137679);  mouse monoclonal 
anti-SLC38A1 antibody (1:1,000; Abcam; ab134268); rabbit polyclon-
al anti-SLC38A2 antibody (1:1,000; Abcam; ab90677); rabbit poly-
clonal anti-LC3 antibody (1:1,000; Cell Signaling Technology; 2775); 
rabbit polyclonal anti-p62 antibody (1:1,000; Cell Signaling Technol-
ogy; 5114); rabbit monoclonal anti-atg5 antibody (1:1,000; Cell Sig-
naling Technology; 12994); rabbit polyclonal anti–p–acetyl-CoA car-
boxylase (Ser79) antibody (1:1,000; Cell Signaling Technology; 3661); 
rabbit polyclonal anti–acetyl-CoA carboxylase antibody (1:1,000; 
Cell Signaling Technology; 3622); rabbit polyclonal anti–p-AMPKα 
(Thr172) antibody (1:1,000; Cell Signaling Technology; 4188); rab-
bit polyclonal anti-AMPKα antibody (1:1,000; Cell Signaling Tech-
nology; 1532); and HRP-conjugated anti–β-actin (1:10,000; Sigma- 
Aldrich; A3854) or anti-GAPDH antibody (1:10,000; Sigma-Aldrich; 
G9295). Blots were washed and then incubated with an HRP-conju-
gated secondary antibody (1:5,000; Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.; 
sc2004) before being subjected to densitometric analysis. For urea 
transporter protein expression, we first dissected inner and outer 
medullas from the mouse kidney. The tissues then were placed into 
ice-cold isolation buffer (10 mM triethanolamine, 250 mM sucrose, 
pH 7.6, 1 μg/ml leupeptin, and 2 mg/ml PMSF) and homogenized, and 
SDS was added to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were diluted 
with Laemmli sample buffer to a final protein concentration of 1 mg/
ml and boiled for 1 to 3 minutes. Proteins were separated by PAGE. 
UT-A1 (25 μg/lane) was separated on a 10% gel, then proteins were 
electroblotted to PVDF membranes (EMD Millipore). Blots were 
incubated with our antibody to the C-terminus of UT-A1 and UT-A2 
(34). Alexa Fluor 680–linked anti-rabbit IgG (Thermo Fisher Scientif-
ic) was used as the secondary antibody. Then, the secondary antibody 
was visualized and densities analyzed with the Odyssey protein anal-
ysis system (LI-COR Biosciences).
Corticosterone measurements. Corticosterone levels in plasma and 
urine were determined simultaneously using liquid chromatography–
tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS). Detection was achieved by 
atmospheric pressure chemical ionization in positive ion mode with 
multiple reaction monitoring for the transitions (qualifier transition: 
m/z 347.2/121.2 [347.2/91.1]) for corticosterone and 355.2/125.2 for cor-
ticosterone-d8 (internal standard). One hundred microliters of serum 
(10 μl urine) was deproteinized with methanol/zinc sulphate (50 g/l, 
1/1 v/v). After centrifugation, the supernatants were applied to an online 
solid-phase extraction column with subsequent high-pressure liquid 
chromatographic separation. The intra-assay variation coefficient was 
1.3%–11% for corticosterone (concentration range, 3–368 ng/ml).
Indirect calorimetry. To detect a catabolic state with increased 
fatty acid oxidation in vivo, oxygen consumption (VO2) and carbon 
dioxide production (VCO2) were continuously measured in 8 LS-treat-
ed and 8 HS-treated mice during our experiments using an Oxymax 
Indirect Calorimetry System (Columbus Instruments). Mice stayed 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 5 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
arginase assay experiments. YZ, LML, DHW, and JT designed and 
performed the metabolic in vivo studies and interpreted the data. 
DGH performed the telemetry measurements. MR performed the 
corticosterone measurements and analyzed the data. KK, SD, and 
JT designed and planned the experiments and analyzed and inter-
preted data. KK, SD, AM, RCH, FCL, and JT wrote the manuscript. 
JT designed and supervised the research project.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the NIH (RO1 HL118579-
01, to JT; R01-DK41707 and R01-DK89828, to JS; and U24 
DK059637, to DHW); the American Heart Association (AHA) 
(14SFRN20770008); the German Federal Ministry for Econom-
ics and Technology/DLR Forschung unter Weltraumbedingungen 
(50WB1624, to JT); the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) 
(SFB 643 B16, to JT and JJ; DA 1835/1-1, to SD); the TOYOBO Bio-
technology Foundation (to KK); and the Interdisciplinary Center for 
Clinical Research Erlangen (to JT). We thank N. Mizushima (Uni-
versity of Tokyo) for providing GFP-LC3#53 mice. We are grateful 
to the excellent technical assistance of Yan Zhao (Vanderbilt Uni-
versity Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA), Jenny Hähnel, and 
Ulrike Goller (University Clinic Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany).
Address correspondence to: Jens Titze, Division of Clinical Phar-
macology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 2213 Garland 
Avenue, P435F MRBIV, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA. Phone: 
615.343.1401; E-mail: jens.m.titze@vanderbilt.edu.
ing were analyzed by 2-tailed Student’s t test for unpaired samples or 
by the general linear model for independent samples, followed by post-
hoc testing using Bonferroni’s algorithm. The time course of the chang-
es in food intake, body weight, respiratory coefficient, and telemetric 
readout of locomotor activity, heart rate, R-R interval, and BP was 
analyzed using the general linear model for repeated measurements to 
test for the effect of diet and time and their interaction (day × diet). A 
P value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. SPSS 
software, version 20.0 (SPSS Inc.) was used for statistical analysis.
Study approval. Water balance in 10 human subjects was studied 
during a simulated space flight to Mars. The study was conducted at 
the Institute for Biomedical Problems in Moscow and approved by the 
Russian National Committee on Bioethics of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences. Details on the subjects and their environmental conditions, 
dietary salt intervention, and experimental procedures are presented 
in the accompanying article (4). The IACUC of Vanderbilt Universi-
ty approved all experiments, and mice were housed and cared for in 
accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals 
(National Academies Press, 2011).
Author contributions
KK, SD, YZ, TP, JDK, JMS, DN, AN, LL, DHW, SID, and JT per-
formed the animal experiments. PN, AS, NR, JJ, and DNM provided 
essential material and contributed to the design of the experiments. 
JDK, LML, and JMS analyzed UT-A expression and interpreted 
the data. DN and AN performed the experiments with LC3-GFP 
mice and analyzed the data. KK, SID, and AED performed the 
 1. Pitts RF. Physiology of the Kidney and Body Fluids: 
An Introductory Text. Chicago, Illinois: Year Book 
Medical Publishers; 1974:11–34.
 2. Rose BD. In: Rose BD ed. Clinical physiology of 
acid-base and electrolyte disorders. New York, New 
York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.; 1994:235–260.
 3. Walser M. Phenomenological analysis of electrolyte 
homeostasis. In: Seldin DW, Giebisch G, eds. The 
Kidney: Physiology and Pathophysiology (Vols 1–3). 
New York, New York: Raven Press, Ltd; 1992:31–44.
 4. Rakova N, et al. Increased salt consumption induces 
body water conservation and decreases fluid intake. 
J Clin Invest. 2017;127(5):1932–1943. 
 5. Sanchez AM, Candau RB, Csibi A, Pagano AF, 
Raibon A, Bernardi H. The role of AMP-activated 
protein kinase in the coordination of skeletal 
muscle turnover and energy homeostasis. Am J 
Physiol, Cell Physiol. 2012;303(5):C475–C485.
 6. Cheung PC, Salt IP, Davies SP, Hardie DG, 
Carling D. Characterization of AMP-activated 
protein kinase gamma-subunit isoforms and 
their role in AMP binding. Biochem J.  
2000;346 Pt 3:659–669.
 
7. Hardie DG. Sensing of energy and nutrients by 
AMP-activated protein kinase. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2011;93(4):891S–8916.
 8. Carling D, Clarke PR, Zammit VA, Hardie DG. 
Purification and characterization of the AMP-acti-
vated protein kinase. Copurification of acetyl-CoA 
carboxylase kinase and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglu-
taryl-CoA reductase kinase activities. Eur J Bio-
chem. 1989;186(1–2):129–136.
 9. Mammucari C, et al. FoxO3 controls auto-
phagy in skeletal muscle in vivo. Cell Metab. 
2007;6(6):458–471.
 10. Sanchez AM, et al. AMPK promotes skeletal 
muscle autophagy through activation of forkhead 
FoxO3a and interaction with Ulk1. J Cell Biochem. 
2012;113(2):695–710.
 11. Merrill GF, Kurth EJ, Hardie DG, Winder WW. 
AICA riboside increases AMP-activated protein 
kinase, fatty acid oxidation, and glucose  
uptake in rat muscle. Am J Physiol. 1997; 
273(6 Pt 1):E1107–E1112.
 12. Winder WW, Hardie DG. Inactivation of acetyl- 
CoA carboxylase and activation of AMP- 
activated protein kinase in muscle during exer-
cise. Am J Physiol. 1996;270(2 Pt 1):E299–E304.
 13. Winder WW, et al. Phosphorylation of rat muscle 
acetyl-CoA carboxylase by AMP-activated pro-
tein kinase and protein kinase A. J Appl Physiol. 
1997;82(1):219–225.
 14. McGarry JD, Brown NF. The mitochondrial 
carnitine palmitoyltransferase system. From 
concept to molecular analysis. Eur J Biochem. 
1997;244(1):1–14.
 15. Storey KB, Storey JM. Aestivation: signaling  
and hypometabolism. J Exp Biol. 2012; 
215(Pt 9):1425–1433.
 16. Delaney RG, Lahiri S, Fishman AP. Aestivation 
of the African lungfish Protopterus aethiopicus: 
cardiovascular and respiratory functions. J Exp 
Biol. 1974;61(1):111–128.
 17. Walser M. Phenomenological analysis of renal 
regulation of sodium and potassium balance. 
Kidney Int. 1985;27(6):837–841.
 18. Gamble JL, McKhann CF, Butler AM, Tuthill E. 
An economy of water in renal function referable 
to urea. Am J Physiol. 1934;109(1):139–154.
 19. Fenton RA, Chou CL, Sowersby H, Smith 
CP, Knepper MA. Gamble’s “economy of 
water” revisited: studies in urea transporter 
knockout mice. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 
2006;291(1):F148–F154.
 20. Weiner ID, Mitch WE, Sands JM. Urea and 
ammonia metabolism and the control of renal 
nitrogen excretion. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2015;10(8):1444–1458.
 21. Kim YM, et al. Urea and NaCl regulate UT-A1 
urea transporter in opposing directions via 
TonEBP pathway during osmotic diuresis. Am J 
Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009;296(1):F67–F77.
 22. Perucca J, Bouby N, Valeix P, Bankir L. Sex 
difference in urine concentration across dif-
fering ages, sodium intake, and level of kidney 
disease. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 
2007;292(2):R700–R705.
 23. de Blaauw I, Deutz NE, Von Meyenfeldt MF. 
In vivo amino acid metabolism of gut and liver 
during short and prolonged starvation. Am J 
Physiol. 1996;270(2 Pt 1):G298–G306.
 24. Felig P, Owen OE, Wahren J, Cahill GF. Amino 
acid metabolism during prolonged starvation.  
J Clin Invest. 1969;48(3):584–594.
 25. Felig P. The glucose-alanine cycle. Metab Clin 
Exp. 1973;22(2):179–207.
 26. Smith HW. Metabolism of the lung-fish, protopter-
us aethiopicus. J Biol Chem. 1930;88(1):97–120.
 27. Loong AM, Hiong KC, Lee SM, Wong WP, Chew 
SF, Ip YK. Ornithine-urea cycle and urea synthe-
sis in African lungfishes, Protopterus aethiopicus 
and Protopterus annectens, exposed to terrestrial 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
1 9 5 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 5   May 2017
conditions for six days. J Exp Zoolog Part A Comp 
Exp Biol. 2005;303(5):354–365.
 28. Wilkie MP, et al. The African lungfish (Protopter-
us dolloi): ionoregulation and osmoregulation 
in a fish out of water. Physiol Biochem Zool. 
2007;80(1):99–112.
 29. Loong AM, Hiong KC, Wong WP, Chew SF, Ip YK. 
Differential gene expression in the liver of the 
African lungfish, Protopterus annectens, after 6 
days of estivation in air. J Comp Physiol B, Biochem 
Syst Environ Physiol. 2012;182(2):231–245.
 30. Hiong KC, Ip YK, Wong WP, Chew SF. Dif-
ferential gene expression in the liver of the 
African lungfish, Protopterus annectens, after 
6 months of aestivation in air or 1 day of arous-
al from 6 months of aestivation. PLoS One. 
2015;10(3):e0121224.
 31. Ramnanan CJ, McMullen DC, Groom AG, Storey 
KB. The regulation of AMPK signaling in a natu-
ral state of profound metabolic rate depression. 
Mol Cell Biochem. 2010;335(1–2):91–105.
 32. Szidon JP, Lahiri S, Lev M, Fishman AP. Heart 
and circulation of the African lungfish. Circ Res. 
1969;25(1):23–38.
 33. Stenvinkel P, et al. Metabolic changes in summer 
active and anuric hibernating free-ranging  
brown bears (Ursus arctos). PLoS One. 
2013;8(9):e72934.
 34. Naruse M, Klein JD, Ashkar ZM, Jacobs JD, 
Sands JM. Glucocorticoids downregulate the 
vasopressin-regulated urea transporter in rat ter-
minal inner medullary collecting ducts. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 1997;8(4):517–523.
 35. Evans AM, DeHaven CD, Barrett T, Mitchell M, 
Milgram E. Integrated, nontargeted ultrahigh 
performance liquid chromatography/electrospray 
ionization tandem mass spectrometry platform 
for the identification and relative quantification 
of the small-molecule complement of biological 
systems. Anal Chem. 2009;81(16):6656–6667.
 36. Mizushima N, Yamamoto A, Matsui M, Yoshimori 
T, Ohsumi Y. In vivo analysis of autophagy in 
response to nutrient starvation using transgenic 
mice expressing a fluorescent autophagosome 
marker. Mol Biol Cell. 2004;15(3):1101–1111.
 37. Wiig H, et al. Immune cells control skin lymphat-
ic electrolyte homeostasis and blood pressure.  
J Clin Invest. 2013;123(7):2803–2815.
