 https://doi.org/10.1177/0269216318766430
Palliative Medicine
2018, Vol. 32(7) 1180 
–1188
© The Author(s) 2018
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0269216318766430
journals.sagepub.com/home/pmj
Deaths after feeding-tube withdrawal 
from patients in vegetative and minimally 
conscious states: A qualitative study of 
family experience
Jenny Kitzinger1 and Celia Kitzinger2
Abstract
Background: Families of patients in vegetative or minimally conscious states are often horrified by the suggestion of withdrawing a 
feeding tube, even when they believe that their relative would not have wanted to be maintained in their current condition. Very little 
is known about what it is like to witness such a death.
Aim: To understand these families’ experience of their relatives’ deaths.
Design: Qualitative study using in-depth narrative interviews analyzed inductively with thematic analysis.
Participants: A total of 21 people (from 12 families) whose vegetative or minimally conscious relative died following court-authorized 
withdrawal of artificial nutrition and hydration. All had supported treatment withdrawal.
Findings: Interviewees were usually anxious in advance about the nature of the death and had sometimes confronted resistance 
from, and been provided with misinformation by, healthcare staff in long-term care settings. However, they overwhelmingly described 
deaths as peaceful and sometimes even as a “good death.” There was (for some) a significant “burden of witness” associated with the 
length of time it took the person to die and/or distressing changes in their appearance. Most continued to voice ethical objections to 
the manner of death while considering it “the least worst” option in the circumstances.
Conclusion: Staff need to be aware of the distinctive issues around care for this patient group and their families. It is important to 
challenge misinformation and initiate honest discussions about feeding-tube withdrawal and end-of-life care for these patients. Families 
(and staff) need better support in managing the “burden of witness” associated with these deaths.
Keywords
Artificial feeding, end-of-life care, minimally conscious state, qualitative research, tube feeding, vegetative state
What is already known about the topic?
•
•
Withdrawal of artificial nutrition and hydration can be a difficult issue for families of terminally ill or dying patients in part 
because cultural conceptions of food and water as “basic care” conflict with the medico-legal definition of the feeding 
tube as a form of technological intervention.
•
•
Resistance to withdrawal of feeding tubes—by families and by some healthcare staff—can lead to inappropriate ongoing 
treatment that is not in the patient’s best interests and/or not what the patient would have wanted.
•
•
There is no research about how families of vegetative and minimally conscious patients experience their relatives’ deaths 
following withdrawal of such treatment.
What this paper adds?
•
•
Insights from an in-depth analysis of interviews with 21 family members who witnessed a death, following feeding-tube 
withdrawal, from a relative who had been sustained long term in a vegetative or minimally conscious state.
1 
School of Journalism, Media and Culture, Cardiff University, Cardiff, 
UK
2Independent Scholar, York, UK
Corresponding author:
Jenny Kitzinger, School of Journalism, Media and Culture, Cardiff 
University, Bute Building, King Edward VII Avenue, Cardiff CF10 3NB, 
UK. 
Email: kitzingerj@cardiff.ac.uk
766430 PMJ0010.1177/0269216318766430Palliative MedicineKitzinger and Kitzinger
research-article2018
Original Article
 Kitzinger and Kitzinger 
1181
•
•
Interviewees generally experience deaths as peaceful and calm—in stark contrast to what they had sometimes been told 
to expect by healthcare professionals.
•
•
For some, there is a significant “burden of witness” associated with the length of time it took their relative to die and/
or distressing changes in appearance
•
•
We explore how families’ accounts of these deaths are framed by socio-legal context.
Implications for practice, theory, or policy
•
•
Professionals involved in the care of vegetative and minimally conscious patients need to initiate open, honest, and ethi-
cally engaged discussions with families about feeding-tube withdrawal and end-of-life care.
•
•
Attempts to persuade families that feeding tubes are “medical technology” rather than “basic care” are not, by them-
selves, likely to be particularly helpful.
•
•
Families (and staff) need better support in managing the “burden of witness.”
Introduction
No one knows quite how many people are being sustained 
with long-term disorders of consciousness after profound 
brain injury; however, estimates in the United Kingdom 
(based on numbers of patients in these conditions in nurs-
ing homes) range from 4,000 to 16,000 patients in the veg-
etative state, with three times as many in minimally 
conscious states; these are people who are completely una-
ware of themselves and their environment (vegetative) or 
virtually so (minimally conscious).1 The majority are able 
to breathe on their own. Once stabilized and in the absence 
of acute infections, the only medical treatment keeping 
them alive is a feeding tube delivering artificial nutrition 
and hydration (sometimes also referred to as clinically 
assisted nutrition and hydration).
In survey research, most people report that they would 
not want to be sustained in either a permanent vegetative 
state or minimally conscious state.2 In English law, clini-
cians can provide medical treatments for patients who are 
unable to consent, on the basis of their “best interests,”3 
now usually interpreted by the courts as meaning that an 
individual should not be given life-prolonging treatment if 
it is clear that they would not consent to it themselves.4 
However, despite the recommendations of the National 
Clinical Guidelines,5 the default option in England and 
Wales is to continue tube feeding these patients indefi-
nitely6 (and this also seems to be the norm across many 
European countries).7
Barriers to withdrawal reported by families6 include 
the following: not accepting the diagnosis or its implica-
tions; believing that any life is better than none; hoping 
for “a miracle”; searching for a cure/waiting for future 
scientific breakthroughs; religious or ethical objections 
to “ending life”; and/or the belief that withdrawal is ethi-
cally equivalent to euthanasia. People also may not know 
that withdrawal of artificial nutrition and hydration can 
be lawful or may believe that even if the patient would 
rather not have their life prolonged, it would be prefera-
ble for the patient to die of “natural causes” (such as 
infection).6 It is commonly observed that cultural con-
ceptions of tube feeding as “basic care” come into con-
flict with its medico-legal definition as a form of 
technological intervention.8 The apparent requirement 
(in England and Wales) for a court hearing even with 
consensus between health professionals and family mem-
bers that withdrawal of the feeding tube is in the person’s 
best interests has also been a significant barrier.9
An additional important barrier to withdrawal—the one 
to which this article is particularly addressed—is family 
members’ expectations of what a death after feeding-tube 
withdrawal will be like. This includes the belief that it is 
cruel (even “barbaric”),10 a view also represented in some 
bioethics literature (sometimes characterized as “the slo-
ganism of starvation”11) that describes withdrawal of arti-
ficial nutrition and hydration as, for example, characterized 
by “a long period of suffering that might constitute an 
actual crime of torture” during which the patient experi-
ences “atrocious pain.”12 The belief that feeding-tube 
withdrawal leads to a “bad death” is one reason why many 
patients are continued to be given treatment that is not (or 
may not be) in their best interests.6
Most empirical research on withholding/withdrawing 
life-sustaining interventions focuses on critical care, where 
ventilation is the most commonly withdrawn treat-
ment.13–16 Research focusing specifically on withdrawing, 
withholding, or refusing nutrition and hydration17–20 has 
found that subsequent deaths are not particularly painful. 
But this research concerns very old, frail, and/or terminally 
ill patients at the end of life. By contrast, vegetative and 
minimally conscious patients are usually neither old nor 
terminally ill; they are clinically stable following sudden-
onset brain injury and are not otherwise “dying.” Advice to 
staff about how to medically manage the deaths of these 
 1182 
Palliative Medicine 32(7)
patients—as well as how to support, and what to commu-
nicate to, families—cannot simply be transferred from 
feeding-tube withdrawal in other contexts.5
It is also important to acknowledge that the context for 
families in these situations may have some distinctive 
characteristics. Family members may face having to 
watch a physically robust body that they have been car-
ing for, often for years, deteriorate as a direct result of 
treatment withdrawal and unrelated to other causes of 
decline (e.g. cancer), and most have had to initiate and 
pursue withdrawal of the feeding tube (including going to 
court), sometimes actively opposed by at least some 
healthcare staff. This makes the family experience very 
different from treatment withdrawal when the decision is 
initiated by clinicians (or indeed the patient) and then 
simply implemented after discussion with the patient 
and/or their family, as is the norm in other situations. The 
existing literature also recognizes that withdrawing or 
withholding nutrition and hydration from patients who 
are not ventilator-dependent or terminally ill can be par-
ticularly fraught.21
Despite highly publicized court cases regarding feed-
ing-tube withdrawal from patients in prolonged disorders 
of consciousness (e.g. Schiavo in the United States,22 
Englaro in Italy,23 Bland in England24), there is no pub-
lished research exploring how families experience their 
relative’s subsequent death. Our study fills that gap and 
uses empirical data to reflect upon implications for med-
ico-legal policy and practice.
Method
The research reported here arose out of a broader in-depth 
narrative interview study of families in the United 
Kingdom with experience of a relative in a prolonged dis-
order of consciousness (i.e. coma, vegetative or minimally 
conscious state; for other publications from the same study 
see the literature6,9,10 and other publications available open 
access on our research website cdoc.org.uk). Our ongoing 
study currently includes interviews with 85 family mem-
bers, but for the present analysis, we extracted from the 
broader study just the subset of interviews conducted with 
people whose relative died after court-approved with-
drawal of artificial nutrition and hydration.
Ethics
Research ethics committees at the Universities of York and 
Cardiff initially approved the study, which subsequently 
received the National Health Service (NHS) approval from 
Berkshire Research Ethics Committee (REC reference 
number: 12/SC/0495). Participants signed printed consent 
forms, which offered varying degrees of confidentiality, 
ranging from permission to use their first names and dis-
play (specified) video clips of their interviews on an online 
resource through to complete confidentiality. Where inter-
viewees consented to have film publicly displayed, it is 
possible to see a summary of the patient’s story and hear/
see quotes used in this article in the context of other parts 
of the interviewee’s account—see healthtalk resource: 
www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/nerves-brain/
family-experiences-vegetative-and-minimally-conscious-
states/peoples-profiles/confirmed-permanent-vegetative-
diagnosis. Links to specific segments from particular 
interviews have been provided where available. For those 
who wanted maximum confidentiality, great efforts have 
been taken to avoid jig-saw identification (i.e. enabling 
identification of a particular interviewee by cross-refer-
encing information provided in an article with information 
in a published court judgment or media report). This is a 
particularly acute issue because (a) the population pool is 
small (i.e. only around 100 families have been involved in 
such cases) and (b) certain clinical/legal details are already 
in the public domain (e.g. in published court judgments). 
Pseudonyms are used throughout, except where interview-
ees requested that at least their real first names be used 
(further information about our anonymizing strategies has 
been published elsewhere25,26). Quotations from our inter-
views are identified (where this is consistent with our con-
fidentiality agreements) with a name/pseudonym and a tag 
(F1, F2, F3, etc.) indicating from which of the families the 
participant originated.
Design
This was a qualitative study. Semi-structured narrative 
interviews (average length about 2 h) were conducted by 
one or the other of the two authors with the aim of elicit-
ing participants’ stories of what had happened from the 
date of the brain injury to the current day. Information 
about treatment withdrawal (how they first became aware 
it was possible, their views about what it might be like, 
and their experience of the process) was often volunteered 
without the need for specific questioning. Where ques-
tions were required, we asked, for example, “When you 
first heard about the possibility of withdrawing artificial 
nutrition and hydration, what was your reaction to that?” 
“Did clinicians explain what would happen before they 
withdrew the treatment?” “What was it like after they 
withdrew treatment?” and “How was her death?” We also 
used probes (e.g. “can you say a bit more about that?” and 
“How did you feel about that?”) to elicit more in-depth 
consideration. The subset of interviews used for the anal-
ysis reported here were recorded (audio, and sometimes 
video too) between 2013 and 2017 and constitute around 
50 h of data. Some participants volunteered for successive 
interviews at different points in time (e.g. a year or more 
before treatment withdrawal, once the court application 
had been initiated but before its completion, and after 
their relative had died).
 Kitzinger and Kitzinger 
1183
Recruitment
Recruitment was initially via snowball sampling: the 
authors are sisters and have a sister who was in a disorder 
of consciousness, a fact that informed and supported 
recruitment. We subsequently recruited via referrals from 
clinicians and lawyers working in this area and via Internet 
contacts. Everyone who volunteered and met our inclusion 
criteria was interviewed (more than once if they so 
requested). Because of the nature of our recruitment meth-
ods, it is difficult to know how many people were informed 
about our research and decided against participation.
Participants/setting
This article draws on interviews with 21 members of 12 
families, whose vegetative or minimally conscious relative 
died after court-authorized cessation of artificial nutrition 
and hydration. They represent around 10% of all families 
in England and Wales with experience of court-approved 
withdrawal of artificial nutrition and hydration from a rela-
tive in a vegetative or minimally conscious state. These 
criteria exclude two participants (from different families) 
who had experienced temporary withdrawal of artificial 
nutrition and hydration from their relative without an 
application having been made to the court (in both cases 
treatment was recommenced after about 10 days; one 
patient died of infection more than a year later and the 
other is still alive). All interviews were conducted away 
from the NHS premises (generally in people’s homes). 
Some interviewees spoke with us one-to-one; others opted 
to meet us in pairs.
Data analysis
All interviews were transcribed in full and analyzed using 
thematic analysis.27 We looked for patterns in the way that 
interviewees described their experience of the death of 
their relative and also looked for differences between dif-
ferent members of the same family and across diverse 
families. Our analysis is conducted from a largely induc-
tive and realist approach, but we interrogate and compli-
cate this analytic perspective when we discuss the 
“strengths and limitations” of the study.
Findings
We begin by describing the characteristics of our sample 
participants. We then report the three key themes that 
emerged from our analysis. As we will show, our interview-
ees were fearful in advance but describe their relatives’ 
deaths as less bad than they had feared—some even spoke 
of a “good” death. However, there was a clear “burden of 
witness” for about half of them and most retained in-princi-
ple ethical objections to the manner of death. In quoting 
from the interviews, we usually identify the speaker using a 
pseudonym; this is followed by F1, F2, F3, and so on to 
indicate which of the 12 families the speaker is from.
Characteristics of our sample
Each of the patients had been the subject of at least one 
court hearing concerning feeding-tube withdrawal, and all 
12 families had supported—and in most cases actively lob-
bied for—withdrawal, which they believed to be in accord-
ance with the wishes of the brain-injured person such that 
their death would be a much-wanted “release.” These 
characteristics are typical of the 100 or so cases that have 
thus far reached the courts in England and Wales.
Most of the patients had been in a vegetative or mini-
mally conscious state for 4 or 5 years by the time the court 
application was heard: the shortest period was just less 
than a year and the longest was 8 years. Most were between 
20 and 50 years old when moved to palliative care—the 
oldest was in her 60s. Clinicians acting as expert witnesses 
had diagnosed eight of these patients as “vegetative” and 
two as “minimally conscious”: in the remaining two cases, 
there was no definitive diagnosis but insofar as the patient 
did not conform with the then-current requirements for the 
diagnosis of “permanent vegetative state,” he or she was 
very close to doing so. These differential diagnoses made 
no difference to interviewees’ experiences of their rela-
tive’s deaths, so we do not identify individual patient diag-
noses in reporting our findings.
All but three patients died after 2010. Three died much 
earlier (in the 1990s)—two of these at our interviewees’ 
homes rather than in hospice/hospital or care home as in 
all other cases—and we have identified the relevance of 
this for our analysis where appropriate.
Themes
Three themes were identified in the analysis. They arose 
(and are presented here) as temporally related elements of 
the narrative our interviewees presented first about their 
feelings in advance of withdrawal, then about the dying pro-
cess after withdrawal, followed by their reflections about 
their own experience in witnessing the dying process.
Feelings in advance of withdrawing the feeding tube. Our 
interviewees had usually arrived at the view that it was 
right to withdraw artificial nutrition and hydration only 
after considerable time. They were prepared to support 
withdrawal, in spite of their continuing ethical concerns, 
only because they had come to believe that continuing to 
sustain their relative in their current (and likely future) 
state was a greater evil. They had also often witnessed 
attempts to allow the patient to die via repeated infections 
when antibiotics were deliberately withheld—and felt that 
to continue this, while not pursuing withdrawal of the 
 1184 
Palliative Medicine 32(7)
feeding tube had become morally untenable. Withdrawing 
the feeding tube was viewed as the “least worst” option 
under the circumstances.
Most interviewees reported being “apprehensive” 
(Lindsey, F8) or anxious in advance, for example, with 
“nightmares … about being all shriveled and like a skele-
ton” (Olivia, F1; www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/
nerves-brain/family-experiences-vegetative-and-mini-
mally-conscious-states/david-and-olivia). Such fears were 
sometimes reinforced by reactions from staff involved in 
the patient’s long-term care, for example, one interviewee 
reports that a senior staff member at her son’s care home 
told the family that the patient would die an “excruciat-
ingly painful” death if the feeding tube were removed: she 
was very grateful when a healthcare professional with 
experience of such deaths provided better information 
(Helen, 
F7; 
www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/
nerves-brain/family-experiences-vegetative-and-mini-
mally-conscious-states/helen). Likewise, Nina (F11) 
describes hostility from staff in her mother’s nursing home 
after she raised the issue of withdrawing the feeding tube. 
The contrast when (after a court hearing) she moved her 
mother to a hospice was striking: “moving into a hospice 
was a tremendous experience because [the staff] were so 
unconditionally supportive. That’s a mind blowing experi-
ence.” She found the hospice staff “respectful,” “reassur-
ing,” “non-judgmental,” and “responsive” and the 
environment was “very safe and very gentle” (https://
vimeo.com/241429026).
Families praised staff who provided excellent sup-
port—helping the family to feel informed and calm from 
the very first discussion of treatment withdrawal right 
through to the patient’s death. Olivia (F1) felt very sup-
ported by the fact that the care home staff “stood by us” 
and felt able and willing to care for her relative until she 
died rather than moving her to another facility:
They wanted her to stay and to pass [die] there … that gave us 
a lot of comfort. […] They weren’t saying, “What are you 
bloody doing? You can’t do that.” You know, it was the right 
time and it was the right thing to do […] They wanted to be 
with her to the end and to look after her to the end. (Olivia, 
F1; 
www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/nerves-brain/
family-experiences-vegetative-and-minimally-conscious-
states/david-and-olivia)
Olivia’s experience was unusual insofar, as this was 
the only example we found of a patient being supported 
to die in their long-term care home setting. In all other 
cases, the patient either moved from the care home to 
die at home cared for by parents (F3, F12) or, more 
commonly, was moved to a hospice. When a move to a 
hospice was the plan, hospice staff came to visit the 
patient and family in advance. Interviewees reported 
that this provided a strong sense that “intensive care” 
would continue to be provided after unwanted treatment 
was withdrawn. For Jonathan (F5), who initially felt 
that letting his sister die from “starvation” was “medie-
val, macabre […] barbaric” (and compared it to aban-
doning unwanted babies on hillsides), meeting with the 
hospice staff “put my fears at rest” (http://cdoc.org.uk/
wp-content/uploads/2014/04/Information-helps-
reduce-fears-F5-M.mov). His mother was equally reas-
sured—commenting on the skillful communication 
from the hospice staff and their concern for both her and 
her grandchildren (the patient’s children):
They came to see [my daughter] in the care home and were 
very gentle with her and respectful. Then they sat with me and 
the children in another room and talked us through the whole 
process. They answered all our questions very honestly and in 
as much, or as little, detail as we wanted. They were superb. It 
makes such a difference knowing where she is going and how 
she will be cared for—and I think it really helped the children. 
(Sylvia, F5)
Death was peaceful, calm, a release. Most interviewees said 
that the dying process was peaceful, and many contrasted 
this with what they had been led to expect. “They make it 
sound so awful […] but it’s not like that at all. […] It was 
very peaceful” said one (Lindsey, F8); “Her life just ebbed 
away,” said another, adding:
And we had been told all sorts of horror stories of what 
probably would happen. […]. And I think it was—they just 
got the drugs right I think. […], [she] never flinched, never 
twitched, never moved, never—yeah. It was just a very 
peaceful end. (Diana, F12)
Once the palliative care process started, some inter-
viewees felt that the patient looked more “relaxed” and 
even “more himself.” A father had the feeling his son 
had finally “come back to us,” and a daughter felt more 
connected with her mother: some linked this to the 
removal of tubes, a shift to a more homely environment 
or being able to spend time with the patient knowing 
there was an end in sight. Interviewees sometimes com-
pared this favorably with other periods (e.g. with 
infections):
The way he died, which was obviously through multiple 
organ failure because he wasn’t being fed, with his pain 
managed (and the last few days it was managed heavily) was 
far more peaceful and dignified for him and for those who 
loved him than watching him retch and heave and cough and 
be suctioned and run a high temperature, perspiring all over 
his bed sheets … There was no comparison. (Jane)
The moment of (or hours around) death was reported to 
be calm. One interviewee said, “He just lay there and he 
just made a couple of shrugs and then he just passed away 
gently” (Kevin, F3). Another described the day of her 
daughter’s death:
 Kitzinger and Kitzinger 
1185
There was no sign of distress or anything. The only difference 
was her breathing was more shallow, and sort of panting. And 
then she died half an hour later. No one could say this was a 
bad death. It was so peaceful. (Alison, F2)
Another interviewee described how, when her son 
finally died, it was reassuring to see him “without the 
stress and the tension and the fear that was tightening the 
muscles in his face. For the first time in years he looked as 
if he was peacefully asleep” (www.healthtalk.org/peoples-
experiences/nerves-brain/family-experiences-vegetative-
and-minimally-conscious-states/helen).
Families were grateful for excellent care and proactive 
palliative management: “they are absolutely tuned in to 
looking after people on an end-of-life process … and they 
do it superbly” (Helen, F7); “She only had to twitch her 
hand and they were on her with more drugs” (Sylvia, F5). 
One interviewee said she believed medication had not only 
sedated but had also hastened her son’s death—something 
she described as “merciful” and “an act of kindness”—in 
part because she had been worried about the effect on her 
other children of a prolonged dying and of them having to 
witness any signs of physiological agitation.
Only one person we spoke to, Cathy (F3), reported that 
the patient displayed any signs of physiological agitation. 
This was a home death, where there seems to have been 
very little palliative support (and this case occurred in the 
1990s prior to the National Clinical Guidelines on end-of-
life care for these patients).5 One factor contributing to 
her distress was her brother “making noises”—to which 
her mother (interviewed separately) also refers, saying 
that “in retrospect, if I had my time again, I’d still bring 
him home, but I would ask that he be more heavily sedated 
from the start.”
Most interviewees not only described the patient as 
“peaceful” following withdrawal of the feeding tube but 
also said they felt “at peace” during this time. One talked 
of the bedside vigil as a special family time—we “just sat 
with her. We were just letting her go” (David, F1) and the 
death itself was experienced as a “release”—not just from 
the dying process but from the months or years of the 
patient (and their family) being suspended (as we found 
families describing in our earlier analysis)28 “in limbo”—
“between life and death.” One interviewee commented 
“we were sad of course, but just relieved that he is finally 
at peace” (Hannah, F4). Indeed, a mother who brought her 
daughter home to die, said that the dying, death, and 
funeral were positive experiences after the preceding trau-
matic years during which her daughter had been actively 
treated:
I’ve got very fond memories of it strangely enough. I know 
that’s quite weird to say, but it wasn’t a horrible experience 
at all. It was a very calming, peaceful experience, the 
whole thing: from [my daughter] coming back home [to 
die] to her funeral. […] [And] I have much more peace of 
mind walking away from the grave knowing that she’s safe 
than I ever had walking away from the hospital knowing 
that she was vulnerable. (Diana, F12; https://vimeo.
com/241436698)
The burden of witness. Despite these relatively positive 
descriptions of the patients’ deaths, many interviewees felt 
that the dying process had been hard to witness. All inter-
viewees talked about the length of time it took their rela-
tive to die (most between 9 and 14 days after withdrawal), 
and some had been disturbed by changes in the patient’s 
physical appearance.
Although some interviewees reported very little change 
in how their relative looked (Olivia, for example, who had 
feared that her mother-in-law would “shrivel” reported 
that in practice “she looked just the same, nothing 
changed”), others described quite dramatic physical altera-
tions—indexing images of starvation. One reported that 
although the patient was “well cared for” she became 
“drawn and sunken eyed” which was “harrowing” to see 
(Steve, F6). Another described a “well managed” death but 
was distressed by changes in her daughter’s appearance 
toward the end:
For the last three days she looked dead, gaunt, hollow cheeked 
… her face was skeletal and […] her eyes didn’t close 
completely. […] It wasn’t her body anymore, never mind her 
not being there anymore.
This interviewee could not bear people to see her 
daughter like this and felt she should protect her daugh-
ter’s teenage children from remembering their mother this 
way:
That’s why I had a closed casket, I didn’t want anyone seeing 
her like that, […] and I told the children not to come at the 
end. But she wasn’t in pain, it was peaceful. (Sylvia, F5)
After years of being hypervigilant and careful tending 
to their relative’s body, it could be dreadful to see it dete-
riorate—especially, since families often felt implicated in 
this. It was also distressing for some families that the 
method of allowing death destroyed any chance of organ 
donation:
First they ignored his wishes by keeping him alive all these 
years, now they ignore his wishes to donate his organs by the 
manner of his death—so no good, no good at all, can come out 
of all this and he can’t even leave that legacy. (John)
In addition, interviewees often found the slow death 
that follows withdrawal of a feeding tube painfully pro-
longed—and it could become harder and harder to witness 
as the days passed. A husband and wife recalling the death 
of their son commented that they would have preferred a 
swifter death by lethal injection.
 1186 
Palliative Medicine 32(7)
Peter: 
 
When they removed the tube—he were 
[…] 9 days [dying] […]I would have pre-
ferred a needle.
Annette: 
 
Quicker and not see him suffer. Well, I 
don’t think he was suffering.I think it’s 
you that feels for him, don’t you, know-
ing that they are going to die anyway.
Peter: 
[…] It was just deterioration, weren’t it.
Annette: 
 
I just wish it had been quicker. (F9; http://
cdoc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/
Death-F9-Parents.m4a)
It was particularly hard on relatives if the dying process 
took longer than expected—or pushed family members 
beyond their endurance. Cathy explains: “we’d been told 
it’d take seven to ten days … I felt I could just about cope 
with the seven to ten days thing, but like not a second 
more.” In the event, it took her brother 13 days to die:
I still feel very guilty about the fact that I couldn’t—I didn’t, 
I didn’t last out the withdrawal process. [Tearful] And I think 
halfway through day eleven or something, I just couldn’t. I 
just, I just couldn’t do anymore. [Crying] I had to go back to 
London. And I still feel really bad about that. (Cathy, F3; 
www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/nerves-brain/
family-experiences-vegetative-and-minimally-conscious-
states/cathy)
This interviewee stands out in being still deeply dis-
tressed by the death, 16 years later. Although she fully sup-
ported removal of the feeding tube, she expresses deep 
ambivalence: “I simultaneously had the absolute and com-
plete conviction that it was the right thing to do, and just a 
horror of doing it.” She also says that while she thought 
her brother had gone, and wanted him to be free, she had 
given great care to his body and remained attached to it, 
even as “a thing” and she “didn’t want to starve it to death” 
and she is still troubled by the manner of his death—
although more by “the idea” of it rather than by what she 
saw:
… it was a fairly peaceful process. There was nothing 
inherently unpleasant about it, other than the idea of it … It’s 
just the idea that I found so difficult. My mother didn’t find it 
awful. […] She was really glad to nurse him; she felt like she 
was fulfilling a final duty to him. But I just found it agonising. 
(Cathy, F3; www.healthtalk.org/peoples-experiences/nerves-
brain/family-experiences-vegetative-and-minimally-
conscious-states/cathy)
Cathy is not alone in finding “the idea of it” (withdrawal 
of tube feeding) inherently deeply disturbing. Even those 
interviewees who reported witnessing what appeared to be 
a calm and peaceful death often expressed their views 
(shared with many in the larger study who did not support 
withdrawal even as a last resort) that the legal distinction 
between “allowing” and “causing” death was hard to 
maintain in relation to withdrawing artificial nutrition and 
hydration from these patients and that—if action were to be 
taken which inevitably led to death—then a lethal injection 
would be a kinder and more dignified option.
Discussion
This is the first empirical study of family accounts of 
deaths following withdrawal of artificial nutrition and 
hydration from patients in vegetative and minimally con-
scious states. Our analysis finds that these are surprisingly 
“good” deaths. In particular, they were described as peace-
ful and calm for the patient, and the death was believed to 
be “appropriate,” “in accord with [the patient’s] wishes” 
and death led to “a sense of closure.”29
All the same, these deaths can also carry a heavy “bur-
den of witness” for families associated with the prolonged 
dying process and, for some, appearance of “starvation,” 
in a context where families have had to advocate for stop-
ping treatment after many years of the patient being sus-
tained in this way. They may feel responsible for (even if 
proud of) the decision but still burdened by it; and the 
manner of these deaths also remain very problematic to 
families on principle.
The medical literature sometimes suggests that if only 
families could be persuaded to accept the medical defini-
tion of tube feeding as an “artificial” or “clinical” techno-
logical intervention, they would be more willing to accede 
to its withdrawal,13 but it was not a revised understanding 
of the meaning of tube feeding that led these families to 
support withdrawal but rather the conviction that continu-
ing to maintain their relative was morally untenable and 
that withdrawal was the only (lawful) way out.
Strengths and limitations
The small number of interviewees (and families) repre-
sented here may not be typical of all family experiences of 
withdrawal of tube feeding from patients in vegetative and 
minimally conscious patients. Even though we have inter-
viewed a substantial proportion of the overall population 
of families in England and Wales who have been through 
this experience, it is possible that that there has been a 
selection bias (e.g. those most traumatized by their rela-
tive’s death may be least willing to be interviewed). We 
also need to acknowledge gaps in our research which does 
not include interviews with family members who wit-
nessed such deaths while not believing that feeding-tube 
withdrawal was the right thing to do.
Our analytic perspective has involved treating our 
interview data as providing “transparent” (realist) 
accounts of interviewees’ experiences in relation to the 
death of their relatives. An alternative reading might focus 
on the “motivated” nature of interview accounts. Our 
interviewees’ reports of “calm” deaths are viewed through 
their clear commitment to the idea that death is a “release” 
 Kitzinger and Kitzinger 
1187
for their relative. Their descriptions may thus be selective, 
motivated in part by a need to justify the fact that they 
supported—indeed advocated for—withdrawal from their 
relative. All the same, it is also instructive to note that 
other interviewees whose relatives died after they assented 
to the withholding of other kinds of treatment (e.g. with-
holding treatment for gangrene) provided far more har-
rowing accounts.6
In a published account of Terri Schiavo’s death, her 
brother—who opposed withdrawal—claims that “one of 
the most pathetic lies out there is that killing someone by 
denying them food and water is a ‘peaceful’ and ‘pain-
less’ experience.” Writing for LifeNews (a “pro-life” 
news agency), he juxtaposes his own description of Terri 
Schiavo’s “thirteen day agonizing death” with that of her 
husband, who supported withdrawal and whose attorney 
said, days before her death: “She looked beautiful … 
I’ve never seen such a look of peace and beauty upon 
her.”30 Neither description is ethically, emotionally, and 
ideologically neutral: both support the opposing posi-
tions the speakers have taken in relation to feeding-tube 
withdrawal.
Recommendations
Our research findings point to the need for professionals 
involved in the care of patients in prolonged disorders of 
consciousness, throughout their care trajectory, to be hon-
est and open in discussion of these issues and for palliative 
care professionals involved in delivering end-of-life care 
to understand some of the challenges specific to this par-
ticular patient group and their families. Families are likely 
to imagine bad deaths after feeding-tube withdrawal—and 
may have been exposed to criticism and misinformation.
Clinical teams need to consider how best to counter 
misinformation and to provide compassionate and respect-
ful support for families, including offering psychological 
help and effective case management31. They need to be in 
a position to share high-quality information about the 
withdrawal process and ensure the delivery of appropriate 
palliative care (detailed guidance for which is included in 
the National Guidelines).5
Preparation of family members for what the dying pro-
cess may be like could emphasize a degree of unpredicta-
bility—including some uncertainty about how long it will 
take and any possible noises or movements from the 
patient and how to understand them. Information about 
how other families have arrived at a decision to support 
withdrawal and how they experienced their relative’s death 
should also be provided (e.g. via the online healthtalk.org 
resource) and this could include the information that other 
families have felt “proud” to have stood up for their rela-
tive by advocating for withdrawal of treatment that their 
relative would not have wanted—that it is a “brave” and 
“courageous” action.
Acknowledgements
The authors (who are sisters) have a sister with a catastrophic 
brain injury who has been kept alive with profound neurological 
and physical disabilities. Both authors have been involved in 
committees and working parties concerned with writing guide-
lines about the treatment provided to patients in prolonged disor-
ders of consciousness (e.g. the Royal College of Physicians (J.K.) 
and the British Medical Association (C.K.)). Thanks are due to 
all the interviewees who contributed to this research.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with 
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support 
for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: 
This work was supported by the Economic and Social Research 
Council (grant/award number: ES/K00560X/1).
References
 1. Parliamentary 
Office 
of 
Science 
and 
Technology. 
Vegetative and minimally conscious states (POSTnotes 
POST-PN-489), 2015, http://researchbriefings.parliament.
uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/POST-PN-489
 2. Demertzi A, Ledoux D, Bruno MA, et al. Attitudes towards 
end-of-life issues in disorders of consciousness: a European 
survey. J Neurol 2011; 258: 1058–1065.
 3. Mental Capacity Act 2005, http://www.legislation.gov.uk/
ukpga/2005/9/contents
 4. Kitzinger J, Kitzinger C and Cowley J. When “sanctity of 
life” and “self-determination” clash: Briggs versus Briggs 
[2016] EWCOP 53—implications for policy and practice. J 
Med Ethics 2017; 43: 446–449.
 5. Royal College of Physicians. Prolonged disorders of con-
sciousness: national clinical guidelines. London: Royal 
College of Physicians, 2013, https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/
guidelines-policy/prolonged-disorders-consciousness-
national-clinical-guidelines
 6. Kitzinger J and Kitzinger C. The “window of opportunity” 
for death after severe brain injury: family experiences. 
Sociol Health Illn 2013; 35: 1095–1112.
 7. Von Wild K, Gerstenbrand F, Dolce G, et al. Guidelines for 
quality management of apallic syndrome/vegetative state. 
Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg 2007; 33(3): 268–292.
 8. Bergstresser SM and Castellanos E. Feeding versus artifi-
cial nutrition and hydration: at the boundaries of medical 
intervention and social interaction. Int J Fem Approaches 
2015; 8(2): 204–255.
 9. Kitzinger C and Kitzinger J. Court applications for with-
drawal of artificial nutrition and hydration from patients 
in a permanent vegetative state: family experiences. J Med 
Ethics 2016; 42: 11–17.
 
10. Kitzinger C and Kitzinger J. Withdrawing artificial nutri-
tion and hydration from minimally conscious and vegeta-
tive patients: family perspectives. J Med Ethics 2015; 41: 
157–160.
 1188 
Palliative Medicine 32(7)
 
11. Ahronheim JC and Gasner MR. The sloganism of starva-
tion. Lancet 1990; 335(8684): 278–279.
 
12. Arcuri F, Cortese MD and Dolce G. New bioethical 
aspects of ending of life in unresponsive wakefulness syn-
drome/vegetative state patients. Brain Disord Ther 2016; 
5: 213.
 
13. Abbott K, Sago S, Breen C, et al. Families looking back: 
one year after discussion of withdrawal or withhold-
ing of life-sustaining support. Crit Care Med 2001; 29: 
 
197–201.
 
14. Way J, Back A and Curtis JR. Withdrawing life support and 
resolution of conflict with families. BMJ 2002; 325: 1342–
1345.
 
15. Cook DJ and Rocker GM. Dying with dignity in the inten-
sive care unit. N Engl J Med 2014; 370: 2506–2514.
 
16. Wiegand DL. Family experiences during the dying process 
after withdrawal of life-sustaining therapy. Dimens Crit 
Care Nurs 2016; 35: 160–166.
 
17. Bükki J, Unterpaul T, Nübling G, et al. Decision making at 
the end of life—cancer patients’ and their caregivers’ views 
on artificial nutrition and hydration. Support Care Cancer 
2014; 22: 3287–3299.
 
18. Somogyi-Zalud E, Likourezos A, Chichin E, et al. Surrogate 
decision-makers’ attitudes towards tube feeding in the nurs-
ing home. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2001; 32: 101–111.
 
19. Carey TS, Hansen L, Garrett JM, et al. Expectations and 
outcomes of gastric feeding tubes. Am J Med 2006; 119: 
527.e11–527.e16.
 
20. Ganzini L, Goy ER, Miller LL, et al. Nurses’ experiences 
with hospice patients who refuse food and fluids to hasten 
death. N Engl J Med 349(4): 359–365.
 
21. Geppert CMA, Andrews MR and Druyan ME. Ethical issues 
in artificial nutrition and hydration: a review. J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr 2010; 34: 79–88.
 
22. Perry JE, Churchill LR and Kirshner HS. The Terri Schiavo 
case: legal, ethical, and medical perspectives. Ann Intern 
Med 2005; 143: 744–748.
 
23. Luchetti M. Eluana Englaro, chronicle of a death foretold: 
ethical considerations on the recent right-to-die case in Italy. 
J Med Ethics 2010; 36: 333–335.
 
24. Howe J. The persistent vegetative state, treatment with-
drawal, and the Hillsborough disaster: Airedale NHS Trust 
v Bland. Pract Neurol 2006; 6: 238–246.
 
25. Saunders B, Kitzinger J and Kitzinger C. Anonymising 
interview data: challenges and compromise in practice. 
Qual Res 2015; 15: 616–632.
 
26. Saunders B, Kitzinger J and Kitzinger C. Participant ano-
nymity in the internet age: from theory to practice. Qual Res 
Psychol 2015; 12: 125–137.
 
27. Braun V and Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychol-
ogy. Qual Res Psychol 2006; 3: 77–101.
 
28. Kitzinger C and Kitzinger J. This in-between: how fami-
lies talk about death in relation to severe brain injury 
and disorders of consciousness. In: Van Brussels L and 
Carpentier N (eds) The social construction of death. 
London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014, http://cdoc.org.uk/
wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Kitzinger-This-In-Between_
ch12-copy.pdf
 
29. Kehl KA. Moving toward peace: an analysis of the concept 
of a good death. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2006; 23: 277–286.
 
30. Schindler B, 2015, http://www.lifenews.com/2015/03/30/i-
will-never-forget-the-look-of-horror-on-my-sister-terri-
schiavos-face-the-day-she-died/ (accessed 27 August 2017).
 
31. Kitzinger J and Kitzinger C. (2018) Why futile and 
unwanted treatment continues for some PVS patients (and 
what to do about it)  International Journal of Mental Health 
and Capacity Law. http://www.northumbriajournals. 
co.uk/index.php/IJMHMCL/article/view/687/1073
