 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 6 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 7   July 2018
Introduction
To promote survival, motivational circuits assign positive or nega-
tive valence to salient stimuli and the internal states they induce. 
When homeostasis is perturbed or severely challenged, such as 
during systemic inflammation, tissue damage, or intoxication, 
aversive circuit signaling induces discomfort, unease, and aver-
sion (1–7). These affective responses might be beneficial during 
acute challenges, but they are often detrimental during chronic 
inflammatory and malignant diseases. Recent studies indicate 
that the molecules and circuits controlling energy balance also 
regulate the affective state (8). For example, Agouti-related pro-
tein (AGRP) neurons in the arcuate nucleus (Arc) and calcitonin 
gene–related peptide–expressing (CGRP-expressing) neurons in 
the parabrachial nucleus are important hubs in appetite control 
(9–11) and also elicit aversion upon activation (4, 5). The mela-
nocortin system is a cornerstone of appetite and energy balance 
control (12). The appetite-reducing effect of melanocortin sig-
naling is primarily mediated by proopiomelanocortin–expressing 
(POMC-expressing) cells in the Arc that activate melanocortin 4 
receptors (MC4Rs) in the paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus 
(12, 13). Furthermore, MC4Rs in the ventral striatum have been 
shown to mediate stress-induced anhedonia (14). However, the 
possible role of MC4Rs in other types of aversive processing has 
not been investigated.
Results
Mice lacking MC4Rs display indifference or preference to aversive 
stimuli. To determine whether MC4Rs are involved in aversive pro-
cessing, we used a mouse line in which MC4R gene expression is 
blocked by a floxed STOP cassette. These mice develop obesity and 
other signs of MC4R deficiency (13, 15). We used conditioned place 
aversion (CPA) to characterize their response to aversive stimuli. 
In this paradigm, the mice are exposed to an aversive stimulus in 
a contextually specific manner and subsequently learn to avoid 
the associated environment. First, we tested to determine whether 
MC4Rs are important for aversion arising from systemic inflam-
mation induced by i.p. injections of a low dose of bacterial cell wall 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (10 μg/kg). Normal WT mice learned to 
avoid the chamber where they received LPS. In contrast, mice lack-
ing MC4Rs did not show aversion to the LPS-paired environment. 
Surprisingly, they instead showed a robust preference (Figure 1A), 
indicating that in these mice, LPS was a rewarding stimulus. To 
determine whether this unusual behavioral response was a general 
phenomenon or specific to LPS, we next examined whether mice 
lacking MC4Rs (MC4R-KO) reacted similarly to other aversive 
stimuli in the CPA paradigm. As expected, WT mice formed place 
aversions to i.p. injections of the κ opioid receptor agonist U50488 
(Figure 1B) and the nausea-inducing agent lithium chloride (LiCl) 
(Figure 1C). In contrast, MC4R-KO mice reacted with preference 
toward these stimuli. When injected with formalin into the hind 
It is critical for survival to assign positive or negative valence to salient stimuli in a correct manner. Accordingly, harmful 
stimuli and internal states characterized by perturbed homeostasis are accompanied by discomfort, unease, and aversion. 
Aversive signaling causes extensive suffering during chronic diseases, including inflammatory conditions, cancer, and 
depression. Here, we investigated the role of melanocortin 4 receptors (MC4Rs) in aversive processing using genetically 
modified mice and a behavioral test in which mice avoid an environment that they have learned to associate with aversive 
stimuli. In normal mice, robust aversions were induced by systemic inflammation, nausea, pain, and κ opioid receptor–
induced dysphoria. In sharp contrast, mice lacking MC4Rs displayed preference or indifference toward the aversive stimuli. 
The unusual flip from aversion to reward in mice lacking MC4Rs was dopamine dependent and associated with a change 
from decreased to increased activity of the dopamine system. The responses to aversive stimuli were normalized when 
MC4Rs were reexpressed on dopamine D1 receptor–expressing cells or in the striatum of mice otherwise lacking MC4Rs. 
Furthermore, activation of arcuate nucleus proopiomelanocortin neurons projecting to the ventral striatum increased the 
activity of striatal neurons in an MC4R-dependent manner and elicited aversion. Our findings demonstrate that melanocortin 
signaling through striatal MC4Rs is critical for assigning negative motivational valence to harmful stimuli.
Motivational valence is determined  
by striatal melanocortin 4 receptors
Anna Mathia Klawonn,1 Michael Fritz,1 Anna Nilsson,1 Jordi Bonaventura,2 Kiseko Shionoya,1 Elahe Mirrasekhian,1  
Urban Karlsson,1 Maarit Jaarola,1 Björn Granseth,1 Anders Blomqvist,1 Michael Michaelides,2,3 and David Engblom1
1Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. 2Biobehavioral Imaging and Molecular Neuropsychopharmacology Unit, National Institute on Drug Abuse 
Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 3Department of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
     Related Commentary: p. 2757
Authorship note: AMK and MF contributed equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: MM is a cofounder of and owns stock in Metis Laboratories Inc.
Submitted: October 4, 2017; Accepted: May 1, 2018.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2018;128(7):3160–3170. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI97854.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 6 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 7   July 2018
ciated negative affective responses. Importantly, the inhibition or 
inversion of motivational behaviors was specific to aversive stim-
uli, as MC4R-KO mice displayed normal conditioned place prefer-
ence to cocaine (Figure 2D) and palatable food (Figure 2E). They 
were also able to acquire an operant task to obtain palatable food 
more effectively than WT littermates (Supplemental Figure 1B). 
These findings indicate normal processing of rewarding stimuli in 
MC4R-KO mice.
The dopamine response to LPS is inverted in MC4R-KO mice. The 
dopamine system is critical for many reward-related functions, 
but is also involved in aversive processing (17–21). We hypothe-
sized that the abnormal response to aversive stimuli in MC4R-KO 
mice coincided with altered striatal dopamine transmission. To 
examine this, we performed [11C]raclopride displacement studies 
using small animal positron emission tomography (PET). In the 
protocol used (Figure 3A), LPS injection and radioligand uptake 
in freely moving MC4R and WT mice was followed by PET. As 
expected, [11C]raclopride accumulated in the striatum (Figure 3A), 
illustrating proper uptake into the brain. We did not find differ-
ences between MC4R-KO and WT mice in dopamine D2 recep-
tor binding using an autoradiography assay (Supplemental Figure 
1C), nor did [11C]raclopride uptake during baseline (NaCl) condi-
tions differ between the 2 genotypes (Supplemental Figure 1D). In 
line with our expectations, WT mice showed significantly higher 
[11C]raclopride binding in the striatum and other extrastriatal D2 
receptor–expressing regions after LPS than after NaCl (Figure 3, 
B and C), illustrating decreased dopamine transmission, since 
dopamine readily displaces [11C]raclopride in vivo (22). As pre-
dicted by their behavior, there was no corresponding increase of 
paw, MC4R-KO mice formed neither an aversion nor a preference 
to the formalin-paired chamber (Figure 1D), indicating indiffer-
ence toward pain. To investigate whether the loss of aversion to 
LPS was directly mediated by the lack of MC4Rs or caused by the 
resulting obesity or other developmental adaptations, we gave WT 
mice an MC4R antagonist (HS014, intranasal administration) prior 
to LPS injection. The MC4R antagonist had an antiaversive effect 
that was similar to that caused by the genetic deletion (Figure 1E), 
demonstrating that neither developmental adaptations nor obesity 
were mediating the behavioral differences observed. Furthermore, 
the MC4R antagonist also affected the real-time avoidance of ther-
mal pain. After administration of HS014, mice given the choice 
between a chamber with a hot floor and a chamber with a neu-
tral floor chose to spend a longer time on the hot floor compared 
with mice given vehicle (Figure 1F). This test involves an operant 
response and is not dependent on conditioning. Further, nocicep-
tive responses to formalin paw pain were significantly attenuated 
by MC4R inhibition (Figure 1G).
In contrast to the absent or inverted aversive phenotypes, 
MC4R-KO mice displayed normal LPS-induced anorexia (Figure 
2A) and an almost intact LPS-induced hypothalamus-pituitary- 
adrenal axis activation (i.e., serum corticosterone elevation) 
(Figure 2B and Supplemental Figure 1A; supplemental mate-
rial available online with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/
JCI97854DS1). Furthermore, MC4R-KO mice exhibited LiCl- 
induced hypothermia, which is a physiological correlate to nausea 
in rodents (16), in the same manner as WT mice (Figure 2C). These 
findings demonstrate that LPS and LiCl produce intact sickness 
symptoms in the MC4R-KO mice, but without eliciting the asso-
Figure 1. Mice lacking MC4 receptors display a preference for various aversive stimuli. (A–C) Mice with genetic deletion of MC4Rs (MC4R-KO) exhibited 
conditioned place preference in response to LPS (A, n = 6 WT; n = 5 KO), the κ receptor agonist U50488 (B, n = 6 WT; n = 6 KO), and the nausea-inducing 
agent LiCl (C, n = 12 WT; n = 6 KO). (D) The mutation also blocked aversion induced by inflammatory pain (formalin injection in the hind paw) (n = 6 WT;  
n = 6 KO). (E) Pharmacological antagonism of MC4Rs (intranasal delivery of HS014) blocked the aversion induced by LPS in WT mice (n= 6 H2O; n = 6 HS014) 
and (F) decreased operant avoidance behavior toward a chamber with a hot floor compared with that of mice that had received H2O (n = 6 H2O; n = 6 HS014). 
Veh., vehicle; antag, antagonism. (G) MC4R antagonism also decreased nociceptive responses to formalin (lifting, shaking, biting, and licking of the affected 
paw) (n = 5 H2O; n = 6 HS014). Results are displayed as mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001, Student’s t test (A–E and F); 2-way ANOVA fol-
lowed by Bonferroni’s post hoc test (G).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 6 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 7   July 2018
vention with dopamine signaling would normalize the aversive 
response of the MC4R-KO mice. Because striatal dopamine D1 
receptors (D1R) are important for motivation and reward learning 
(18, 19), we injected a D1R antagonist (SCH23390; 0.2 mg/kg) i.p. 
prior to administration of the aversive stimulus. Indeed, D1R antag-
onism blocked the development of LPS-induced place preference 
and reestablished the aversion in MC4R-KO mice (Figure 4A). D1R 
blockade also normalized the paradoxical place preference behav-
ior we had observed after injection of the κ opioid receptor agonist 
(Figure 4B) and reestablished the aversion induced by formalin 
(Figure 4C). Our PET and D1R antagonist results indicate that 
MC4R-KO mice do not develop aversion, since they do not acquire 
the aversion-related drop in dopamine levels seen in normal mice 
during exposure to negative stimuli. Accordingly, we hypothe-
sized that MC4R-KO mice would show normal aversion if their 
dopamine levels indeed were reduced, just as has been reported 
 
in WT mice (24). We tested this hypothesis using chemogenetic 
inhibition of ventral tegmental area (VTA) neurons via designer 
receptors exclusively activated by designer drug (DREADD) tech-
nology in MC4R-KO and WT mice. A viral vector (AAV8-hSyn-hM-
4Di-mCherry) expressing the inhibitory hM4Di DREADD (25) was 
injected into the VTA of mice (Figure 4, D and E). Chemogenetic 
inhibition of VTA neurons using clozapine N-oxide (CNO) induced 
a normal place aversion in both WT and MC4R-KO mice (Figure 
4F), indicating that MC4R-KO mice can form aversions if their 
dopamine transmission is inhibited. Collectively, these observa-
tions demonstrate that the transition from negative to positive 
motivational valence in the MC4R-KO mice is dependent on an 
inverted dopamine response acting on D1Rs.
MC4Rs in the ventral striatum are critical for aversion. MC4Rs 
are expressed on striatal neurons (26), including a population of 
D1R-expressing medium spiny neurons (MSNs) (14, 27). Using 
mice with reporter constructs for both MC4R and D1R, we con-
firmed that MC4Rs were expressed on D1R-expressing MSNs in 
both the dorsal (Figure 5A) and ventral striatum (Figure 5B). To 
test the involvement of MC4R-expressing D1R MSNs in aversive 
processing, we used the Cre-loxP system to selectively reacti-
vate endogenous MC4R expression in D1R neurons in MC4R-KO 
mice. Reexpression of MC4Rs in D1R neurons, accomplished by 
removing the STOP cassette with an inducible Cre expressed under 
control of the D1R promoter, made the MC4R-KO mice capable 
of forming an aversive response to LPS (Figure 5C). In contrast, 
reactivation of MC4R expression in dopamine cells, using a DAT- 
Cre-ER mouse line, had no effect (Figure 5D). In accordance with 
the normalized reaction to LPS, reexpression of MC4Rs in D1R 
neurons in MC4R-KO mice was sufficient to induce aversive behav-
iors in response to the κ receptor agonist U50488 (Figure 5E) and 
 
formalin-induced pain (Figure 5F). To determine whether this effect 
was specific to striatal MC4Rs, we used stereotaxic injection of viral 
vectors expressing Cre to selectively rescue MC4Rs in the striatum 
of MC4R-KO mice. As expected, mice with striatal reexpression of 
MC4Rs displayed normal aversion to LPS (Figure 5, G and H). Col-
lectively, these findings indicate that MC4Rs on D1R-expressing 
striatal MSNs are critical regulators of aversive signaling.
Striatum-projecting POMC neurons induce aversion. Striatal 
MC4Rs are targeted by a population of POMC neurons arising 
from the Arc (14). Accordingly, we hypothesized that activation of 
[11C]raclopride binding in MC4R-KO mice (Supplemental Figure 
1E). Instead, they displayed a significant decrease in [11C]raclo-
pride binding (equivalent to increased DA neurotransmission) 
after LPS injection (Figure 3, B and C). This decrease occurred spe-
cifically in the anterior part of the striatum between the nucleus 
 
accumbens (NAc) shell and the caudate putamen (CPu) (Figure 
3C), an area that has been suggested as encoding hedonic value 
(23). These findings demonstrate that aversion coincided with 
decreases in striatal DA neurotransmission in normal mice, while 
MC4R-KO mice exhibited the exact opposite response, a flipped 
aversion-related striatal dopamine response that matched their 
flipped aversion-related behavioral phenotypes.
The abnormal response to aversive stimuli in MC4R-KO mice 
is dopamine dependent. To determine whether the LPS-induced 
increase in dopamine in MC4R-KO mice elicited their paradoxical 
aversion-related place preference, we examined whether inter-
Figure 2. Nonmotivational responses to aversive stimuli and preference 
to rewarding stimuli are intact in MC4R-KO mice. (A and B) Systemic 
inflammation led to a normal reduction in food intake (A, n = 6 WT NaCl; 
n = 6 KO NaCl; n = 6 WT LPS; n = 7 KO LPS) and to a weakly attenuated 
corticosterone response (B, n = 5 WT NaCl; n = 5 KO NaCl; n = 7 WT LPS; 
n = 8 KO LPS) in mice lacking MC4Rs. (C) LiCl caused robust hypothermic 
responses in both WT and MC4R-KO mice (n = 10 WT NaCl; n = 11 KO NaCl; 
n = 10 WT LiCl; n = 11 KO LiCl). (D and E) Mice lacking MC4Rs displayed 
normal conditioned place preference to 15 mg/kg cocaine i.p. as compared 
with WTs (D, n = 6 WT; n = 9 KO) and had a slightly increased preference for 
palatable food (Nutella) (E, n = 12 WT; n = 10 KO). Results are displayed as 
mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001, Student’s t test (D and 
E); ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s post hoc test (A and B).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 6 3
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 7   July 2018
of [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and placed back into their home 
cage for 30 minutes, during which time FDG accumulated and was 
trapped in metabolically active cells, thereby serving as a marker 
of cell activity. Subsequently, mice were quickly anesthetized and 
scanned in a small animal PET scanner (Figure 7B). We found that 
hM3Dq activation of POMC neurons led to significant increases in 
brain FDG uptake, with the greatest effect localized in the ipsilateral 
 
ventral part of the dorsal striatum (Figure 7, C–E). Furthermore, 
increased contralateral FDG uptake occurred in both the ventral 
and dorsal striatum and the posterior insular cortex (PI). These 
structures are involved in the processing of affective states, includ-
ing aversion (3, 17, 18, 31). DREAMM responses were exclusively 
excitatory (increased metabolic activity). The upregulation of ipsi-
lateral striatal metabolic activity is in accordance with our above 
finding that optogenetic POMC neuron stimulation increased stri-
atal neuron activity in an MC4R-dependent manner. Collectively, 
these findings indicate that arcuate POMC neurons activate MC4R- 
expressing neurons in the striatum to drive aversive signaling and 
aversion-related behaviors.
Discussion
We identify striatal MC4Rs as critical regulators of aversive pro-
cessing. Our findings strongly suggest that MC4Rs induce aver-
sion by inhibiting dopamine signaling. Intriguingly, the aversions 
to some stimuli were even flipped into preferences in the mutant 
mice. In response to LPS, we consistently saw preferences in 
MC4R-KO mice. Pooled analysis of all naive MC4R-KO mice given 
 
LPS demonstrated a preference score that was highly significantly 
different from 0 (P = 0.0005; column statistics, 1-sample t test), 
strongly suggesting a real preference and not only a lack of aver-
sion. In accordance with this observation, our imaging data show 
that MC4R deletion not only eliminated the LPS-induced reduc-
tion in dopamine, but also led to an increase in dopamine in the 
striatum. However, in response to aversive stimuli, the flip to pref-
erence was generally less strong than the loss of aversion in the 
MC4R-KO mice, and the increase in dopamine signaling upon LPS 
was less extensive than the drop seen in WT mice. These findings 
suggest that, whereas the flip from aversion to preference toward 
aversive stimuli upon removal of MC4Rs is conceptually highly 
interesting, the lack of aversion and lack of dopamine decrease in 
arcuate POMC neurons would be sufficient to cause aversion. We 
expressed the stimulatory hM3Dq DREADD in POMC cells of the 
Arc by injecting Cre-dependent viral vectors (AAV8-DIO-hM3Dq-
mCherry) into POMC-Cre mice (Figure 6, A and B). Indeed, acti-
vation of POMC cells by systemic administration of CNO induced 
a robust CPA (Figure 6C). This response was not seen in a control 
group also injected with CNO, ruling out the possibility that the 
response was driven by off-target effects of CNO (28). Next, we 
selectively activated arcuate POMC neuron projections to the ven-
tral striatum by exploiting the retrograde transport of the AAV8 
serotype (Figure 6D). Injection of the vector (AAV8-DIO-hM3Dq-
mCherry) in the ventral striatum of POMC-Cre mice led to expres-
sion of hM3Dq in a subpopulation of POMC neurons in the Arc 
(Figure 6E) and selective activation of this neuronal population, 
by CNO administration, induced a robust aversion (Figure 6F).
POMC neurons activate the ventral striatum in a MC4R-dependent 
manner. To investigate the connectivity between MC4R-expressing 
 
striatal neurons and POMC terminals projecting to this region, 
we used optogenetic stimulation in slice recordings. To this end, 
we crossed POMC-Cre mice with a mouse line expressing Cre- 
inducible channelrhodopsin-2 (Chr2), resulting in mice with selec-
tive expression of Chr2 in POMC neurons. Cell-attached record-
ings revealed that optogenetic activation (20 Hz, 1 minute) of stri-
atal POMC terminals increased the firing frequency in around 
one-fourth of striatal neurons (Figure 7A). This is consistent with the 
finding that a subpopulation of striatal neurons expresses MC4Rs 
(Figure 5, A and B). We found that blockade of glutamatergic signal-
ing by DNQX moderately decreased the activity of these neurons. 
Furthermore, addition of the MC4R antagonist HS014 blocked the 
activity (Figure 7A). These data indicate that arcuate POMC neurons 
project to MC4R-expressing neurons in the striatum, where POMC 
activation increases the firing frequency of these neurons via activa-
tion of MC4Rs. This is consistent with previous work identifying a 
G-protein–independent mechanism by which MC4Rs cause burst 
firing (29). In order to demonstrate this connectivity pattern in vivo, 
we used DREADD-assisted metabolic mapping (DREAMM) (30) 
and examined how activation of POMC neurons projecting to the 
ventral striatum affected brain activity patterns in vivo in freely mov-
ing mice. Mice expressing hM3Dq in POMC neurons were injected 
i.p. with either vehicle or CNO followed by approximately 500 μCi 
Figure 3. MC4R-KO mice display an inverted dopamine 
response to inflammation. (A) Timeline for the small-animal 
PET imaging experiment with MC4R-KO and WT animals treated 
with LPS or NaCl and [11C]raclopride injections (n = 4 WT; n = 4 
KO) together with an example of [11C]raclopride uptake. (B and C) 
WT animals had increased [11C]raclopride binding (orange label-
ing in C) in the dorsal and ventral striatum, lateral septum, and 
ventral pallidum after LPS administration. No such increase was 
seen in MC4R-KO mice. **P < 0.01. (B and C) The MC4R-KO mice 
instead displayed decreased [11C]raclopride binding (blue label-
ing, P < 0.001) in a border area between the ventral and dorsal 
striatum. The labeling is superimposed onto an MRI template. 
Results in B are displayed as mean ± SEM and are based on 
analysis of both sides. Blue or orange labeling indicates changes 
identified as significant with Voxel statistics linear model 
analyses (ANOVA) in statistical parametric mapping (SPM) with 
post hoc t test; clusters of more than 500 voxels, P < 0.001. VP, 
ventral pallidum.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 6 4
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 7   July 2018
tral hippocampus, the basolateral amygdala, and the prefrontal 
cortex all induce place preference (34, 35). Similar to the POMC 
projection, glutamatergic input from the VTA and the periven-
tricular thalamic nucleus both induce aversion (36, 37), but they 
do so by targeting parvalbumin-positive GABAergic interneurons 
(36) and D2R-expressing MSNs (37), respectively. In contrast, our 
findings indicate that POMC neurons signal aversion by activation 
of a subpopulation of D1R neurons. Consistently, stress-induced 
anhedonia has been reported to be mediated by MC4R-dependent 
synaptic plasticity in D1R MSNs in the ventral striatum (14).
Pathways previously found to mediate aversion to specific 
negative stimuli are highly diverse (1, 2, 6, 7, 37–40). In contrast, 
here we show that MC4Rs, localized on striatal D1R MSNs, con-
trol behavioral responses to a variety of aversive stimuli and 
thereby play a more generalized role in aversive processing. Our 
findings indicate that MC4Rs assign negative valence to salient 
stimuli, effectively acting as gatekeepers whose role is to hinder 
aversive signals from inducing reward. Such a mechanism has 
obvious adaptive value for survival, but in the chronically ill, it 
is an unwanted cause of suffering. The very strong and broad 
antiaversive effect of MC4R inhibition makes it an interesting 
strategy for reducing malaise and depressive symptoms associ-
ated with chronic diseases, including inflammatory conditions 
and terminal states.
Methods
Animals. All experiments were done using naive mice. The animals 
were single housed for a minimum of 48 hours prior to the exper-
iments and kept in a pathogen-free facility on a regular 12-hour 
light/12-hour dark cycle. For behavioral, PET, and electrophysiology 
experiments, only male mice were used, whereas both sexes were 
used in biochemical and food-intake experiments. Each experimental 
group consisted of mice from at least 2 litters. All mice were more than 
6 weeks old at the onset of experiments, and the typical age was 8 to 
20 weeks. Food and water were provided ad libitum, and all experi-
ments were performed during the light phase, unless otherwise noted. 
response to aversive stimuli are more general and robust conse-
quences of MC4R deletion or inhibition. To learn more about the 
reinforcing properties of LPS and other aversive stimuli in MC4R-
KO mice, it would be interesting to determine whether MC4R-KO 
mice would self-administer these substances. However, LPS, LiCl, 
and κ receptor antagonists all have slow mechanisms of action that 
make operant training unlikely to succeed.
While we demonstrate that MC4Rs in the striatum are critical 
for aversive processing, previous studies show that the appetite- 
regulating effect of melanocortins is primarily mediated by MC4Rs 
in the paraventricular hypothalamus (13). Only a very minor effect 
on body weight and basal food intake was seen when MC4Rs were 
reexpressed on D1R neurons of MC4R-KO mice (32). MC4Rs have 
been suggested as being involved in inflammation-induced appetite 
loss (33), but we found an intact LPS-induced anorexia in the MC4R-
KO mice. The intact anorexia in combination with the blocked aver-
sion supports previous findings suggesting that the affective com-
ponent and the anorexic component of systemic inflammation are 
mediated by different mechanisms and circuits (7). It could be sug-
gested that the loss of aversion and the abnormal preferences seen 
in MC4R-KO mice might be indirect effects related to their obesity 
and increased appetite. For example, LPS-mediated relief of hun-
ger in the mutant mice could be rewarding and thus compensate 
for the aversive properties of the LPS-induced affective state. How-
ever, such explanations are very unlikely, since we also see a loss of 
aversion in response to formalin and a κ receptor agonist, which are 
not strongly appetite reducing. Further, in the experiments using 
MC4R inhibitors, the mice did not experience any hunger related 
to MC4R inhibition under basal conditions or in the saline-paired 
chamber. Finally, mice with rescue of MC4Rs in D1R neurons dis-
played normal aversions despite being almost as obese as MC4R-
KO mice (27, 32).
Our findings demonstrate that POMC neurons projecting to 
the ventral striatum induce aversion by activation of MC4Rs. In 
contrast, most other projections to the ventral striatum previously 
 
investigated signal reward. Thus, activation of input from the ven-
Figure 4. The preference for aversive stimuli 
in MC4R-KO mice is mediated by dopamine. 
(A–C) When a D1R antagonist, SCH23390, was 
administered prior to the aversive stimuli, 
MC4R-KO mice and WT mice responded simi-
larly to LPS (A, n = 5 WT; n = 6 KO), U50488 (B, 
n = 6 WT NaCl; n = 6 WT SCH23390; n = 10 KO 
SCH23390), and formalin-induced pain (C, n = 6 
WT; n = 6 KO). (D and E) Representative exam-
ple (out of n = 10) of hM4Di-RFP expression in 
the midbrain of mice injected with a viral vec-
tor expressing the inhibitory DREADD hM4Di. 
Arrows indicate examples of dual-labeled cells. 
(F) Chemogenetic inhibition of neurons in the 
region of the VTA induced normal aversive 
responses in both WT and MC4R-KO mice  
(n = 5 WT; n = 5 KO). Results are displayed 
as mean ± SEM. Statistical significance was 
assessed by Student’s t test (A, C, and F) and 
ANOVA (B). Scale bars: 250 μm (D); 25 μm (E).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 6 5
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 7   July 2018
MC4R-STOP-flox and Chr2-STOP-flox, POMC-Cre, Drd1 Cre-ER, and 
Dat Cre-ER mice have been previously described in the literature (13, 
41–44). The Drd1 Cre-ER line was provided by Jan Rodriguez Parkitna 
 
(Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Krakow, 
Poland). MC4R-STOP-flox, MC4R-eGFP, Drd1-tdTomato, Chr2-flox, 
POMC-Cre, and WT C57BL/6J mice were purchased from The Jackson 
Laboratory. All mice had a C57BL/6 background, with the exception of 
POMC-Cre (mixed FVB/N and C57BL/6J) and Chr2-STOP-flox (mixed 
C57BL/6 and 129). Cre-recombinase activity was induced by admin-
istering tamoxifen dissolved in sunflower seed oil/alcohol mixture at 
a 10:1 ratio. The mixture was i.p. injected at 1 mg per mouse twice a 
day for 5 days.
Blinding and randomization. All conditioning experiments were 
under blinded conditions unless otherwise stated in the text describ-
ing the specific experimental procedure. Methods using automatized 
data collection, i.e., telemetric temperature recordings, photometry- 
based corticosteroid assays, PET scans, electrophysiology recordings, 
etc., were not under blinded conditions. Animals were randomized for 
treatment throughout the study and were selected to ensure mixed 
balanced groups during conditioning sessions.
Drugs and injections. LPS from E. coli (055:B5, Sigma-Aldrich) was 
administered i.p. at a concentration of 10 μg/kg 10 minutes prior to CPA 
training or 1 hour before food-intake measurements. U50.488 (Tocris 
Bioscience) and LiCl (Sigma-Aldrich) were injected i.p. at 2.5 mg/kg 
and 130 mg/kg, respectively, directly before CPA training. Diluted for-
malin (2.5%; 20 μl) (Sigma-Aldrich) was injected below the skin on the 
dorsal side of the hind paw to induce acute inflammatory pain for CPA. 
HS014 (Tocris Bioscience) at 50 μg/5 μl was dissolved in Milli-Q water 
(MilliporeSigma) and administered in each naris 30 minute prior to LPS 
CPA training, operant thermal place aversion, or nociceptive respond-
ing to formalin. SCH23390 (Tocris Bioscience) was given i.p. (0.2 mg/
kg) 15 minutes prior to CPA training. CNO from Enzo was injected i.p. at 
2 mg/kg 10 minutes before CPA training. All compounds were diluted 
 
in physiological saline (0.9% NaCl) unless otherwise stated, and i.p. 
injections were in a volume of 100 μl/25 g mouse.
Intranasal infusions. Mice were briefly anesthetized with isoflu-
rane before receiving 50 μg HS014/5 μl Milli-Q water or just Milli-Q 
water per naris. Intranasal infusions were done according to a previ-
ously published protocol for delivery of drugs to the brain via the olfac-
tory, rostral migratory stream, and trigeminal routes (45). A micropi-
pette was used for delivering a droplet to each naris while the mouse 
was held in an upright position. When the drops had been inhaled, the 
mouse was gently tilted backwards to avoid the liquid running back 
into the pharynx. Following the infusion, the mouse was left on its 
back in its home cage before placement in the behavioral arena.
Virus generation. The viral vectors used for Cre-induced rescue 
of MC4Rs were made as previously described (7). AAV8-hSyn-hM-
4D(Gi)-mCherry for midbrain neuronal inhibition and AAV8-hSyn-
DIO-hM3D(Gq)-mCherry for POMC-Cre–dependent chemogenetic 
activation of neurons were obtained from the Vector Core at the Uni-
versity of North Carolina (Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA).
Stereotaxic surgeries. For all stereotaxic surgeries, mice were anes-
thetized with 5% isoflurane induction, placed in the stereotaxic frame 
(Leica Biosystems), and maintained at 1.0%–1.5% isoflurane during 
surgery. Adeno associated virus (AAV) vectors were bilaterally injected 
 
at a rate of 100 nl/min into either the midbrain, striatum, Arc, or 
NAc shell, using a gastight Hamilton Neuros syringe (33G). Midbrain 
injections of Gi-DREADD–expressing virus (250 nl per injection site) 
Figure 5. MC4Rs on striatal neurons expressing the D1R are critical for aversion. (A and B) Micrographs from the striatum (A, CPu; B, NAc) showing MC4R 
expression (eGFP) in green and D1R expression (tdTomato) in red. (C) MC4R-KO mice with rescue of MC4R expression selectively in D1R-expressing cells 
responded with place aversion to LPS (n = 5 WT; n = 11 KO; n = 7 MC4R-D1-rescue). resc, rescue. (D) Rescue of MC4Rs selectively on dopamine cells did not 
restore aversion (n = 5 WT; n = 4 KO; n = 6 MC4R-DAT-rescue). (E and F) Rescue of MC4Rs on D1R cells normalized the aversive responses of MC4R-KO mice 
to the κ receptor agonist U50488 (E, n = 8 WT; n = 10 KO; n = 7 MC4R-D1-rescue) and to inflammatory pain (F, n= 7 WT; n = 8 KO; n = 6 MC4R-D1-rescue) 
(F). (G) Expression of Cre in the striatum was induced by a local injection of a viral vector together with a Cre-dependent eGFP-expressing viral vector. LV, 
lateral ventricle. (H) MC4R-KO mice with rescue of MC4R expression in the striatum displayed intact aversive responses to LPS (n = 6 WT AAV5-Cre; n = 9 
KO AAV5-GFP; n = 5 MC4R-rescue in KO with AAV5-Cre). Results are displayed as mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s post 
hoc test. Scale bar: 20 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 6 6
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 7   July 2018
were done with stereotaxic coordinates: (anterior/posterior [AP], –3.4; 
medial/lateral [ML], ±0.48; dorsal/ventral [DV], –4.6). AAV5 (250 nl 
per injection site) for Cre-dependent expression was delivered in the 
striatum (AP, +1.1; ML, ±1.2; DV, –3.0). For direct activation of POMC 
neurons, Gq-DREADD–expressing virus was delivered (250 nl per 
injection site) into the Arc (AP, –1.4; ML, ±0.3; DV, –5.8). Retrograde 
activation of POMC neurons using DREADD-Gq (600 nl per injection 
site) was done by injections in the NAc shell (AP, +1.1; ML, ±0.5; DV, 
–4.5). The injection needle was left in place for 10 minutes after injec-
tion to ensure proper diffusion. Animals received analgesic treatment 
during the first 48 hours after surgery with buprenorphine (25 mg/kg; 
Temgesic, RB Pharmaceuticals). Behavioral experiments or PET imag-
ing was conducted 3 to 5 weeks after the viral injections. Following 
the behavioral experiments, construct-expression and injection-site 
location were validated with fluorescent immunohistochemistry. Only 
results from animals with correct injection placement and expression 
were included in the manuscript. The hM4DGi-VTA inhibition exper-
iment was replicated once without any subject being excluded. In the 
Cre virus rescue experiments, 2 animals were excluded due to engage-
ment of the ventricle or low viral expression. Experiments with Cre 
virus were replicated twice. For the hM3DGq-chemogenetic activa-
tion experiments, expression in 1 hemisphere was sufficient for stable 
behavior. Three animals were excluded from the DREAMM experi-
ment due to lack of expression.
CPA and preference. We used a balanced place conditioning pro-
cedure to measure aversion and preference, applying a 3-chambered 
Panlab Spatial Place Preference Box (Harvard Apparatus) as described 
previously (7). All training and test sessions were conducted during the 
light phase of the 12-hour light/12-hour dark cycle. On day 1, during a 
15-minute pretest, the individual mouse was allowed to move freely 
between the chambers of the box. Time spent in each compartment 
was manually recorded by independent experimenters blinded to gen-
otype and/or treatment, with an exception for the initial experiments 
in which the MC4R-KO mice were visually distinguishable from the 
WT mice due to their obese phenotype. To ensure explorative behav-
ior during the pretest, each mouse had to cross the corridor, entering 
the opposing chamber a minimum of 5 times to be included in the 
experiment. Any animals that spent more than 66% of their time 
during pretests in either of the conditioning chambers were discarded 
 
from the study. Mice were assigned to vehicle- or stimulus-paired 
compartments in a manner that avoided reinforcing natural bias, e.g., 
LPS injections were paired with the most preferred chamber identi-
fied during pretest and cocaine with the least preferred chamber. 
This method has been shown to produce reliable conditioned place 
responses comparable to those resulting from other paradigms (46). 
On day 2 of place aversion conditioning, mice were injected with 
aversive stimuli (LPS, U50.488, LiCl) or CNO before confinement 
for 1 hour in one of the compartments. The following day, the mice 
were injected with saline in the opposite chamber. This alternating 
training procedure was continued for 8 consecutive days, until day 10, 
when the CPA was assessed by allowing the mice to freely explore all 
compartments of the box for 15 minutes. The conditioning score was 
calculated by subtracting the time the mouse spent in the stimulus- 
paired chamber during the pretest from that spent in the same cham-
ber during the posttest. For the experiments on formalin-induced 
pain aversion, the training protocol was slightly modified. Here, the 
training spanned 2 consecutive days, with 2 sessions each day. In the 
morning session, mice were briefly anesthetized with isoflurane and 
confined to the nonpreferred chamber for 60 minutes. In the after-
noon, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane, injected with diluted 
formalin in the dorsal part of the back paw, and confined to the condi-
tioning chamber for 60 minutes. Place preference experiments using 
cocaine or palatable food were conducted using the same test protocol 
as that used for place aversion, but these employed an adjusted train-
ing schedule. In the mornings, mice were given a nonreinforcing con-
trol (saline i.p. or an empty plate) in the vehicle chamber, and in the 
afternoon, 4 hours later, mice were given a positive reinforcer (cocaine 
15 mg/kg i.p. or Nutella [Ferrero] on a small plate) in the conditioning 
chamber. Each training session lasted 15 minutes and was repeated 
over 4 consecutive days.
Operant thermal place aversion. For the operant responding to 
thermal discomfort, a 2-chamber arena with temperature-regulated 
floors and infrared beam detection (series 8, IITC Life Sciences) was 
used. The chambers had distinct patterns (checkered or striped) on the 
walls. The floor temperature of 1 chamber was set to 30 ± 0.1°C and 
the other was 45 ± 0.1°C. Thirty minutes prior to the operant test, mice 
Figure 6. Activation of POMC neurons projecting to the 
ventral striatum is aversive. (A and B) Expression of 
hM3Dq-RFP in POMC cells of the Arc after injection of a 
Cre-dependent viral vector in POMC-Cre mice (represen-
tative example from n = 5). (C) Chemogenetic activation 
of arcuate POMC cells by i.p. injection of CNO-induced 
CPA ( n = 4 WT; n = 5 POMC-Cre). (D and E) Expression of 
hM3Dq-RFP in POMC cells of the Arc after striatal injection 
of Cre-dependent viral vectors with the potential to be 
retrogradely transported in POMC-Cre mice (representative 
example from n = 6). (F) Chemogenetic activation of arcuate 
POMC neurons projecting to the striatum-induced aversion 
(n = 5 WT; n = 6 POMC-Cre). Results are displayed as mean ± 
SEM. *P < 0.05, Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 6 7
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 7   July 2018
during which time the mouse was placed back in its home cage. The 
time that an animal needs to obtain the reward (runtime) is considered 
to be inversely proportional to the strength of that specific stimulus 
(47). Each run was initiated after the mouse was carefully placed into 
the start chamber by opening the door to the corridor. The mice were 
allowed to move freely between the chambers of the runway during 
the test time, and mice that didn’t reach the goal chamber within 90 
seconds were gently guided there by the experimenter. Time spent 
until the mouse reached the goal chamber was manually recorded by 
more than one independent experimenter. After arriving in the goal 
chamber, the mouse was confined there for 2 minutes by carefully 
closing the door behind it, and the cue light was turned on. Each indi-
vidual runtime included the time the mouse spent in the start chamber 
after the door was opened and the time the mouse needed to reach the 
goal chamber. All chambers of the runway were carefully cleaned with 
isopropanol between runs.
Food intake. Before the experiments, mice were single-housed 
for at least 7 days. One hour before dark-period onset, food was with-
drawn and LPS or saline was injected i.p. At lights out, mice were given 
free access to a preweighed amount of standard chow, and food intake 
was measured 6 hours after refeeding.
Telemetric temperature recordings. Core body temperature was 
monitored using continuous telemetry with an abdominal transmit-
ter. Mice were briefly anesthetized with 5% isoflurane induction and 
maintained at 1.0%–1.5% isoflurane during i.p. implantation of trans-
mitters. Telemetric transmitters for recording core body temperature 
were obtained from Data Science International. Animals received 
analgesic treatment prior to surgery and during the first 48 hours after 
surgery with buprenorphine (25 mg/kg; Temgesic, RB Pharmaceuti-
cals) and were allowed to recover for at least 5 days before the experi-
received intranasal injections of either H2O or HS014 as described 
under Intranasal infusions. The animals were then allowed to freely 
choose between the 2 chambers during a 15-minute test, while their 
entries and time spent in each chamber were automatically recorded.
Nociceptive responding to formalin. Mice were kept in a transparent 
Plexiglas box (20 × 15 × 25 cm) for 30 minutes of acclimatization. The 
mice were then briefly anesthetized with isoflurane prior to a formalin 
injection in the right hind paw and subsequently received intranasal 
infusions of either H2O or HS014. The animals were placed back in 
the Plexiglas box and allowed to recover from anesthesia for around 5 
minutes. Their behavior was videotaped for 60 minutes with a Canon 
LEGRIA HF R48 camera. Nociceptive behaviors, such as paw lifting 
(category I) and licking, biting, and shaking time (category II), were 
measured by experimenters offline, and nociceptive scores were cal-
culated for 5-minute intervals, as follows: Nociception score (N.S.) = 
((time of paw lifting) × 1 + (time of paw shaking, biting, and licking) × 
2)/300 (6).
Operant runway. The operant runway experiment was conducted 
 
in the light phase of the 12-hour light/12-hour dark cycle, using a 
custom-made mouse runway built by AgnTho’s A/B. The runway 
was equipped with a white start chamber (14 × 14 × 25 cm) that had 
a retractable door and a gray corridor (80 cm long). At the end of the 
corridor, there was a goal chamber (same size as the start chamber) 
equipped with a retractable door and distinct visual cues: black on 
white dotted wallpaper, a black floor, and a cue light. Mice were habit-
uated to Nutella on a tile in their home cages 2 days before and food 
restricted for 4 hours prior to the experiment. On the day of the exper-
iment, at the start of each run, a small amount of Nutella was placed in 
the goal chamber and the door was left open to allow free access. Each 
mouse was recorded in 5 consecutive trials (runs) separated by 1 hour, 
Figure 7. POMC neurons projecting to 
the ventral striatum activate striatal 
neurons in a MC4R-dependent manner. 
(A) Cell-attached recordings from the 
striatum showed that optogenetic 
activation of POMC projection neurons 
increased cell firing in a glutamate recep-
tor– and MC4R-dependent manner (n =4 
out of 18 Chr2: POMCCre). Representa-
tive traces (15 seconds) from the end of a 
recording, where most action potentials 
occurred. (B) Timeline of the experiment 
using DREAMM and an image of [18F]
FDG uptake in the brain. (C–E) DREAMM 
using [18F]FDG PET after CNO-induced 
activation of POMC cells projecting to the 
ventral striatum. hM3Dq was expressed 
in the same way as in Figure 6D. Clear 
activation (orange labeling; P < 0.01) was 
seen in the striatum on the same side as 
the viral injection (n = 7 POMCCre) as well 
as in both ventral and dorsal striatum 
and the PI of the contralateral side. Voxel 
statistics analysis in MATLAB and SPM; 
clusters of more than 100 voxels,  
P < 0.01 (C and D). Results are displayed 
as mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05; **P <0.01; 
***P < 0.001, ANOVA followed by 
Bonferroni’s post hoc test (A); Student’s 
t test (E).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 6 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 7   July 2018
The slides were exposed to the screen for 5 days and imaged using a 
phosphorimager (Typhoon FLA 7000; GE Healthcare). Images were 
calibrated and analyzed using ImageJ 1.51j8 (NIH). Briefly, based on 
neuroanatomical landmarks, regions of interest (ROIs) (14 to 18 per 
animal) were drawn freehand along the border of the striatum and 
quantified by densitometry.
DREAMM and [11C]raclopride displacement PET imaging. POMC-
Cre mice expressing hM3Dq in projection neurons from the Arc to the 
ventral striatum (described as part of retrograde activation in Stereo-
taxic surgeries) were fasted overnight. The next day, the mice received 
an i.p. injection of either NaCl or CNO (2 mg/kg) and were placed in 
their home cages. NaCl or CNO administration occurred on 2 sepa-
rate days. Approximately 15 minutes later, the mice were injected 
with approximately 0.5 mCi of FDG and placed in their home cages. 
FDG was obtained commercially. Twenty-five minutes later, mice 
were anesthetized with 1.5% isoflurane, placed in a prone position on 
the bed of an ARGUS small animal PET/CT scanner (Sedecal), and 
scanned using a 20-minute static acquisition protocol. The PET data 
were reconstructed using the 2D ordered subset expectation maximi-
zation algorithm (2D-OSEM) and corrected for dead time and radio-
active decay. Image processing and analysis were performed as previ-
ously described (30, 48).
For [11C]raclopride displacement studies, procedures were identi-
cal to those described above, except that MC4R WT and MC4R-KO 
mice were injected i.v. with approximately 0.3 mCi (~1-5 nmol/kg) 
[11C]raclopride 20 minutes after pretreatment with either NaCl or LPS 
(10 μg/kg) and scanned 30 minutes later. Qualitative and quantitative 
assessments of PET images were performed using the PMOD software 
environment (PMOD Technologies). Briefly, striatal and cerebellar 
ROIs were delineated on an MRI mouse brain template provided with 
the software. Then all PET images were coregistered and spatially nor-
malized to the combined MRI-ROI template using the Fusion module 
in PMOD. This led to coregistered PET-MRI images with a voxel size 
of 0.2 mm isotropic. ROI values (counts/s) were extracted from stria-
tum and cerebellum and converted to binding ratios.
Electrophysiology. Coronal sections (250 μm) containing the stri-
atum were prepared from 11 transgenic mice expressing Chr2 in a 
Cre-dependent manner restricted to POMC neurons. Mice were deeply 
 
anesthetized with isoflurane (2.5%) and decapitated before removal of 
the front brain. Slices were cut using a vibratome in ice-cold artificial 
cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) containing elevated sucrose: 50 mM sucrose, 
95 mM NaCl, 26 mM NaHCO3, 1.8 mM KCl, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 0.5 mM 
CaCl2, 7 mM MgSO4, and 15 mM glucose. After 90 minutes, the slices 
 
were transferred to a recording chamber and perfused continuously 
with approximately 2 ml/min aCSF at 35°C containing the following: 
127 mM NaCl, 26 mM NaHCO3, 1.8 mM KCl, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 2.4 mM 
CaCl2, 1.3 mM MgSO4, and 15 mM glucose. All solutions were oxygen-
ated with 95% O2/5% CO2. Cell-attached recordings were done with 
an internal solution of high K+ concentration: 120 mM K-gluconate, 20 
mM KCl, 5 mM NaCl, 10 mM P-creatine Tris2, 10 mM HEPES, 2 mM 
Mg-ATP, and 0.3 mM Na-GTP. Recording pipettes (5–8 macrophages) 
were pulled from borosilicate glass (World Precision Instruments). 
Neurons were visualized with a ×40 water-immersion objective on 
an upright Axioskop FS microscope (Zeiss) equipped with infrared- 
differential interface contrast (IR-DIC) video microscopy via an Orca-R2 
CCD camera (Hamamatsu). After achieving Giga-seal, Chr2 was stimu-
lated by flashing 470 nm light (5 ms pulses; 20 Hz. 25% intensity) through 
ment. From the surgery to the end of the experiment, mice were kept 
in a thermoneutral environment (29°C). Baseline temperature was 
recorded for 72 hours prior to the experiment to ensure normal body 
temperature with circadian variation. On the day of the experiment, 
LiCl or saline was injected i.p. and the body core temperature was 
recorded for at least 6 hours.
Corticosterone assay. Corticosterone levels were determined from 
the heart blood of MC4R-KO mice and their WT littermates following 
LPS or saline i.p. injections. Animals were euthanized by asphyxia-
tion with CO2, and blood was taken from the hearts via a thoracotomy 
through the diaphragm using a syringe with a 23-gauge needle. Blood 
samples were collected 2 or 3.5 hours after injections. Blood samples 
were stored at 4°C overnight before being centrifuged at 2,650 rcf/g for 
20 minutes. The corticosterone content was determined using a Cor-
ticosterone EIA Kit (Enzo) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Fluorescent immunohistochemistry. Animals were euthanized 
with CO2 asphyxiation, and brains were collected after intracardial 
perfusion with saline and 4% PFA in PBS (pH 7.4). The brains were 
postfixed for 4 hours in 4% PFA and subsequently cryoprotected in a 
30% sucrose PBS solution overnight. Coronal sections (40 μm) were 
cut on freezing microtome, collected in cold cryoprotectant buffer 
(0.1 M phosphate buffer, 30% ethylene glycol, 20% glycerol), and 
stored at –20°C until further use. For immunofluorescent labeling, 
free-floating sections were washed in PBS, incubated in blocking 
solution (1% BSA and 0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS), and subsequently 
 
incubated with primary antibody (rabbit anti–red fluorescent protein 
[anti-RFP], 1:1,000 [MBL International, catalog PM005], mouse 
anti–tyrosine hydroxylase [anti-TH], 1:1,000 [ImmunoStar Inc., cat-
alog 22941] or chicken anti-GFP, 1:1,000 [Abcam, catalog ab13970]) 
in blocking solution overnight. The following day, the sections were 
washed and incubated with secondary antibody (Alexa Fluor 488/568 
anti-chicken [1:1,000, catalog A11039], anti-rabbit [1:1,000, cat-
alog A10042], or anti-mouse [1:5,000, catalog A21202], all from 
Invitrogen) in blocking solution for 2 hours. The sections were then 
washed and mounted on object glasses with VECTASHIELD Hard-
Set Antifade Mounting Medium Reagent (Vector Laboratories). Cells 
expressing Drd1-tdTomato were visualized without the use of immu-
nohistochemistry. MC4ReGFP-D1-tdTomato was analyzed in 3 mice. 
Sections were analyzed using a Nikon 80i microscope equipped with 
epifluorescence and a Zeiss Axio Observer Z1 fluorescence micro-
scope connected to a Zeiss LSM 700 confocal unit with 405, 488, 555, 
and 639 nm diode lasers.
Dopamine receptor autoradiography. Flash-frozen brains from WT 
and transgenic mice were sectioned (20 μm) on a Cryostat (Leica) and 
thaw mounted onto ethanol-washed glass slides. Slides were preincu-
bated (15 minutes, room temperature [RT]) in washing buffer (50 mM 
Tris-HCl, pH 7.4), then transferred to incubation buffer (120 minutes, 
RT; 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, with 120 mM NaCl and 10 mM MgCl2) 
containing [3H]raclopride (4 nM, 65 Ci/mmol, PerkinElmer). Another 
set of slides containing consecutive sections was incubated in the same 
conditions in the presence of butaclamol (10 μM, Tocris) to determine 
nonspecific binding. Slides were washed in ice-cold incubation buf-
fer (15 seconds) and rinsed in ice-cold water. Then slides were dried, 
placed in a Hypercassette (Amersham Biosciences), and covered with 
a BAS-TR2025 Storage Phosphor Screen (Fujifilm). A slide contain-
ing Carbon-14 Standards (American Radiolabeled Chemicals Inc.) 
was exposed simultaneously for quantitative radiometric analysis. 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 6 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 7   July 2018
Author contributions
AMK, MF, and DE were responsible for the overall study design. 
AMK, MF, and AN performed the conditioned place preference 
experiments. AMK and MF conducted the operant runway, 
thermal place aversion, and nociceptive responding to forma-
lin experiments. AMK and MF did stereotaxic injections of viral 
vectors. AMK and UK conducted the electrophysiological exper-
iments, with supervision from BG. AMK was responsible for 
the histological analysis. AN performed the food-intake exper-
iments. EM measured body temperature changes. KS and AMK 
executed the corticosterone experiments. MJ performed the 
genotyping and colony maintenance. PET scans were designed 
and conducted by MF and MM. JB did the autoradiography 
measures of dopamine-receptor binding. AB provided some of 
the mouse lines and input on the design of the study. The man-
uscript was written by AMK, MF, MM, and DE. All authors read 
and commented on the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the European Research Council, 
the Swedish Medical Research Council, the Knut and Alice Wal-
lenberg Foundation, the Swedish Brain foundation, the County 
Council of Östergötland (to DE), the National Institute on Drug 
Abuse Intramural Research Program (ZIA000069 to MM), and 
the Lars Hiertas Minne Foundation (to MF). We thank Joanna Zaj-
del for initial studies on the MC4R-reporter line, Haissa Brito for 
help in the pilot studies of LiCl-induced hypothermia, and Johan 
Jakobsson for input on viral vectors.
Address correspondence to: David Engblom, Department of 
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Center for Social and 
Affective Neuroscience, House 463, Linköping University, 
58185 Linköping, Sweden. Phone: 46702611302; Email: david.
engblom@liu.se.
the light path of the microscope using the LED powered by an LED driver 
(Colibri, Zeiss). A master 8-pulse generator (AMPI) controlled the timing 
of the light pulses. To evoke neuropeptide release, light stimulation was 
maintained for 1–2 minutes. Light intensity remained unchanged during 
the experiments, and the field of view was illuminated. Action potentials 
were recorded from neurons in the striatum in cell-attached mode using 
an EPC9 amplifier (HEKA Elektronik). Cells that increased their firing 
frequency by more than 40% during optic stimulation were considered 
responders. Out of 18 cells, 4 responded; these cells were from 4 individ-
ual animals. Out of the 4 that responded to light stimulation, 1 neuron 
went into whole-cell mode toward the end of the recording. For pharma-
cological characterization of light-evoked action potentials, 20 μM DNQX 
disodium salt (Tocris) was perfused into the bath prior to 1 minute of light 
stimulation, followed by a 1-minute nonlight baseline. Subsequently, 
HS014 was bath applied in a final concentration of 10 nM, so that it was 
present during the subsequent 1-minute light stimulation. IV curves were 
recorded before and after each experiment to verify that the cell was still 
viable. Data analysis was performed offline using Igor Pro WaveMetrics.
Statistics. Results are illustrated as mean ± SEM. All statistical anal-
ysis was based on the assumption that the samples follow a Gaussian 
distribution, and tests were selected accordingly. No statistical methods 
were used to predetermine sample sizes. Sample sizes for each experi-
ment were chosen according to our previous or similar studies with these 
experimental paradigms (7). Statistical comparison of experiments with 
2 groups was done using Student’s 2-tailed t test. When comparing 
more than 2 groups in an experiment with comparable variances, 1-way 
ANOVA or 2-way ANOVA was performed, followed by post hoc analysis 
with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison tests to evaluate pairwise group 
differences. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical 
analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism 6 software, and voxel 
statistical analysis from PET-imaging results were done in MATLAB.
Study approval. All experiments involving the use of animals fol-
lowed international and national guidelines and were approved by 
the Research Animal Care and Use Committee in Linköping, Sweden.
 1. Johansen JP, Fields HL. Glutamatergic activation 
of anterior cingulate cortex produces an aversive 
teaching signal. Nat Neurosci. 2004;7(4):398–403.
 2. Johansen JP, Fields HL, Manning BH. The 
affective component of pain in rodents: direct 
evidence for a contribution of the anterior 
cingulate cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2001;98(14):8077–8082.
 3. Craig AD. How do you feel? Interoception: the 
sense of the physiological condition of the body. 
Nat Rev Neurosci. 2002;3(8):655–666.
 4. Betley JN, et al. Neurons for hunger and thirst 
transmit a negative-valence teaching signal. 
Nature. 2015;521(7551):180–185.
 5. Han S, Soleiman MT, Soden ME, Zweifel LS, 
Palmiter RD. Elucidating an affective pain 
circuit that creates a threat memory. Cell. 
2015;162(2):363–374.
 6. Singh AK, et al. Prostaglandin-mediated inhibi-
tion of serotonin signaling controls the affective 
component of inflammatory pain. J Clin Invest. 
2017;127(4):1370–1374.
 
7. Fritz M, et al. Prostaglandin-dependent modula-
tion of dopaminergic neurotransmission elicits 
inflammation-induced aversion in mice. J Clin 
Invest. 2016;126(2):695–705.
 8. Liu C, Lee S, Elmquist JK. Circuits controlling 
energy balance and mood: inherently inter-
twined or just complicated intersections? Cell 
Metab. 2014;19(6):902–909.
 9. Luquet S, Perez FA, Hnasko TS, Palmiter RD. 
NPY/AgRP neurons are essential for feeding in 
adult mice but can be ablated in neonates. Sci-
ence. 2005;310(5748):683–685.
 10. Carter ME, Soden ME, Zweifel LS, Palmiter RD. 
Genetic identification of a neural circuit that sup-
presses appetite. Nature. 2013;503(7474):111–114.
 11. Gropp E, et al. Agouti-related peptide-expressing 
neurons are mandatory for feeding. Nat Neurosci. 
2005;8(10):1289–1291.
 12. Krashes MJ, Lowell BB, Garfield AS.  
Melanocortin-4 receptor-regulated energy 
homeostasis. Nat Neurosci. 2016;19(2):206–219.
 13. Balthasar N, et al. Divergence of melanocortin 
pathways in the control of food intake and energy 
expenditure. Cell. 2005;123(3):493–505.
 14. Lim BK, Huang KW, Grueter BA, Rothwell PE, 
Malenka RC. Anhedonia requires MC4R- 
mediated synaptic adaptations in nucleus 
accumbens. Nature. 2012;487(7406):183–189.
 15. Rossi J, et al. Melanocortin-4 receptors expressed 
by cholinergic neurons regulate energy balance  
and glucose homeostasis. Cell Metab. 
2011;13(2):195–204.
 16. Ngampramuan S, et al. Thermoregulatory  
correlates of nausea in rats and musk shrews. 
Oncotarget. 2014;5(6):1565–1575.
 17. Lammel S, et al. Input-specific control of reward 
and aversion in the ventral tegmental area. 
Nature. 2012;491(7423):212–217.
 18. Soares-Cunha C, Coimbra B, Sousa N, Rodrigues 
AJ. Reappraising striatal D1- and D2-neurons 
in reward and aversion. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 
2016;68:370–386.
 19. Pignatelli M, Bonci A. Role of dopamine neurons 
in reward and aversion: a synaptic plasticity per-
spective. Neuron. 2015;86(5):1145–1157.
 20. Schultz W, Dayan P, Montague PR. A neural 
substrate of prediction and reward. Science. 
1997;275(5306):1593–1599.
 21. Schultz W. Dopamine reward prediction-error 
signalling: a two-component response. Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2016;17(3):183–195.
 22. Morris ED, Yoder KK. Positron emission tomogra-
phy displacement sensitivity: predicting binding 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 7 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 7   July 2018
potential change for positron emission tomogra-
phy tracers based on their kinetic characteristics.  
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2007;27(3):606–617.
 23. Castro DC, Berridge KC. Opioid hedonic hotspot 
in nucleus accumbens shell: μ, δ, and κ maps for 
enhancement of sweetness “liking” and “want-
ing”. J Neurosci. 2014;34(12):4239–4250.
 24. Tan KR, et al. GABA neurons of the VTA 
drive conditioned place aversion. Neuron. 
2012;73(6):1173–1183.
 25. Roth BL. DREADDs for neuroscientists. Neuron. 
2016;89(4):683–694.
 26. Kishi T, Aschkenasi CJ, Lee CE, Mountjoy KG, 
Saper CB, Elmquist JK. Expression of melanocor-
tin 4 receptor mRNA in the central nervous system 
of the rat. J Comp Neurol. 2003;457(3):213–235.
 27. Cui H, Mason BL, Lee C, Nishi A, Elmquist JK, 
Lutter M. Melanocortin 4 receptor signaling 
in dopamine 1 receptor neurons is required for 
procedural memory learning. Physiol Behav. 
2012;106(2):201–210.
 28. Gomez JL, et al. Chemogenetics revealed: DRE-
ADD occupancy and activation via converted 
clozapine. Science. 2017;357(6350):503–507.
 29. Ghamari-Langroudi M, et al. G-protein- 
independent coupling of MC4R to Kir7.1 in hypo-
thalamic neurons. Nature. 2015;520(7545):94–98.
 30. Michaelides M, et al. Whole-brain circuit  
dissection in free-moving animals reveals cell- 
specific mesocorticolimbic networks. J Clin 
Invest. 2013;123(12):5342–5350.
 31. Contreras M, Ceric F, Torrealba F. Inactivation 
of the interoceptive insula disrupts drug crav-
ing and malaise induced by lithium. Science. 
2007;318(5850):655–658.
 32. Cui H, Lutter M. The expression of MC4Rs in 
D1R neurons regulates food intake and locomo-
tor sensitization to cocaine. Genes Brain Behav. 
2013;12(6):658–665.
 33. Marks DL, Ling N, Cone RD. Role of the central 
melanocortin system in cachexia. Cancer Res. 
2001;61(4):1432–1438.
 34. Stuber GD, et al. Excitatory transmission from 
the amygdala to nucleus accumbens facilitates 
reward seeking. Nature. 2011;475(7356):377–380.
 35. Britt JP, Benaliouad F, McDevitt RA, Stu-
ber GD, Wise RA, Bonci A. Synaptic and 
behavioral profile of multiple glutamatergic 
inputs to the nucleus accumbens. Neuron. 
2012;76(4):790–803.
 36. Qi J, Zhang S, Wang HL, Barker DJ, Miranda- 
Barrientos J, Morales M. VTA glutamatergic 
inputs to nucleus accumbens drive aversion by 
acting on GABAergic interneurons. Nat Neurosci. 
2016;19(5):725–733.
 37. Zhu Y, Wienecke CF, Nachtrab G, Chen X. 
A thalamic input to the nucleus accumbens 
mediates opiate dependence. Nature. 
2016;530(7589):219–222.
 38. Delfs JM, Zhu Y, Druhan JP, Aston-Jones G. 
Noradrenaline in the ventral forebrain is critical 
for opiate withdrawal-induced aversion. Nature. 
2000;403(6768):430–434.
 39. Bruchas MR, et al. Selective p38α MAPK deletion 
in serotonergic neurons produces stress resil-
ience in models of depression and addiction. 
Neuron. 2011;71(3):498–511.
 40. Land BB, et al. Activation of the kappa opioid 
receptor in the dorsal raphe nucleus medi-
ates the aversive effects of stress and rein-
states drug seeking. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2009;106(45):19168–19173.
 41. Balthasar N, et al. Leptin receptor signaling in 
POMC neurons is required for normal body weight 
homeostasis. Neuron. 2004;42(6):983–991.
 42. Parkitna JR, et al. Loss of the serum response 
factor in the dopamine system leads to hyperac-
tivity. FASEB J. 2010;24(7):2427–2435.
 43. Engblom D, et al. Glutamate receptors on dopa-
mine neurons control the persistence of cocaine 
seeking. Neuron. 2008;59(3):497–508.
 44. Madisen L, et al. A toolbox of Cre-dependent 
optogenetic transgenic mice for light-induced  
activation and silencing. Nat Neurosci. 
2012;15(5):793–802.
 45. Xiao C, et al. Brain transit and ameliorative 
effects of intranasally delivered anti-amyloid-β 
oligomer antibody in 5XFAD mice. J Alzheimers 
Dis. 2013;35(4):777–788.
 46. Bardo MT, Rowlett JK, Harris MJ. Conditioned 
place preference using opiate and stimulant 
drugs: a meta-analysis. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 
1995;19(1):39–51.
 47. Geist TD, Ettenberg A. A simple method for 
studying intravenous drug reinforcement 
in a runaway. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 
1990;36(3):703–706.
 48. Michaelides M, Hurd YL. DREAMM: a biobe-
havioral imaging methodology for dynamic in 
vivo whole-brain mapping of cell type-specific 
functional networks. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2015;40(1):239–240.
