 Online E-cigarette Marketing Claims: A Systematic Content and 
Legal Analysis
Elizabeth G. Klein, PhD, MPH, Micah Berman, JD, Natalie Hemmerich, JD, Cristen Carlson, 
MPH, SuSandi Htut, MPH, and Michael Slater, PhD, MPA
Elizabeth G. Klein, Associate Professor, The Ohio State University College of Public Health, 
Columbus, OH. Micah Berman, Assistant Professor, The Ohio State University College of Public 
Health and Moritz College of Law, Columbus, OH. Natalie Hemmerich, Postdoctoral Fellow, 
Center of Excellence in Regulatory Tobacco Science, The Ohio State University College of Public 
Health, Columbus, OH. Cristen Carlson, MPH, Hamilton County Public Health, Cincinnati, OH. 
SuSandi Htut, Research Assistant, Center of Excellence in Regulatory Tobacco Science, The 
Ohio State University College of Public Health, Columbus, OH. Michael Slater, Professor, School 
of Communication, The Ohio State University College of Arts & Sciences, Columbus, OH
Abstract
 Objectives—Electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS), or e-cigarettes, are heavily 
marketed online. The purpose of our study was to perform a systematic identification and 
evaluation of claims made within ENDS retailer and manufacturer websites, and the legal status of 
such claims.
 Methods—We employed a systematic search protocol with popular search engines using 6 
terms: (1) e-cigarettes; (2) e-cigs; (3) e-juice; (4) e-liquid; (5) e-hookah; and (6) vape pen. We 
analyzed English-language websites where ENDS are sold for implicit and explicit health-related 
claims. A legal analysis determined whether such claims are permissible under the US Food and 
Drug Administration’s regulations.
 Results—The vast majority of ENDS manufacturer (N = 78) and retailer (N = 32) websites 
made at least one health-related claim (77% and 65%, respectively). Modified risk claims and 
secondhand smoke-related claims were most prevalent, with an average of 2 claims per site.
 Conclusions—Health-related claims are plentiful within ENDS manufacturer and retailer 
websites. Results demonstrate that these sites focus on potential benefits while minimizing or 
eliminating information about possible harmful effects of ENDS. These claims are subject to the 
current regulatory authority by the FDA, and pose a risk of misinforming consumers.
Correspondence Dr Klein; klein.232@osu.edu. 
Conflict of Interest Statement
The authors of this manuscript have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Human Subjects Statement
The study protocol was reviewed by The Ohio State University Institutional Review Board and deemed as ineligible for ethical review 
as it involved public websites and did not involve human subjects.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
Published in final edited form as:
Tob Regul Sci. 2016 July ; 2(3): 252–262. doi:10.18001/TRS.2.3.5.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
electronic cigarettes; ENDS; claims; communications; online; health
Electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS), also known as electronic cigarettes or e-
cigarettes, are rapidly increasing in popularity in the United States (US). As ENDS sales rise 
approximately 25% a year, some estimates suggest that they may overtake combustible 
cigarette sales within the next decade.1, 2 Already, ENDS use among middle- and high-
school students is more prevalent than cigarette use.3
Current research data suggest that these devices pose some health risks.4–7 When used for 
smoking cessation, data are inconsistent regarding whether ENDS users have comparable or 
lower odds of successfully quitting compared to nicotine replacement products.8 Given the 
limited research available on these products, there is ongoing debate within the public health 
community about the likely public health impact of ENDS and the best way to regulate 
them.9 It is clear, however, that whether the public health effects of ENDS are positive or 
negative depends on who uses them, how they are used, and for what purpose. Because 
advertising shapes how, why, and by whom the products are used, careful examination and 
surveillance of the promotional efforts of ENDS manufacturers and retailers is warranted.
ENDS are heavily promoted through a various online media channels, including company 
websites, retailer websites, and social media platforms such as YouTube and Twitter.10–12 
Although there are no reliable data regarding online sales, a 2014 estimate by Wells Fargo 
Securities revealed that online purchases accounted for more than 25% of total ENDS 
sales.10 Although only 12% to 28% of consumers became aware of ENDS online,13 previous 
research suggests that consumers are paying attention to and are interested in the online 
messages conveyed about ENDS,14 and that the unfounded health claims being made in 
advertisements have the potential to mislead consumers.15, 16
Using 2011 data, Grana and Ling16 conducted a systematic content analysis of the English-
language health communication messages on websites of ENDS manufacturers; 95% of the 
websites reviewed made either explicit or implicit health-related claims. Grana and Ling’s 
paper, however, did not focus on legal distinctions between different types of claims that 
might influence how or whether the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) could respond 
to such claims. In addition, given the rapidly evolving nature of the ENDS industry and 
online advertising, more current analyses are warranted for these communication messages 
targeted to consumers.
In May 2016, the FDA announced its final “deeming” rule, which stated that the FDA deems 
all products meeting the statutory definition of a “tobacco product” subject to its 
jurisdiction.17 “Tobacco product” is defined as “any product made or derived from tobacco 
that is intended for human consumption,” and includes ENDS products that contain nicotine 
derived from tobacco.18 Under this newly deemed authority, the FDA has the authority to 
regulate Modified Risk Tobacco Product (MRTP) claims made by ENDS manufacturers and 
retailers. As we discuss below, MRTP claims are those that assert, either directly or 
indirectly, that a product reduces health risks or harmful exposures in comparison to other 
Klein et al.
Page 2
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tobacco products. Even prior to the finalized deeming rule, the FDA possessed the authority 
to regulate ENDS (whether or not they contain nicotine) that make unauthorized claims to 
assist in smoking cessation or otherwise provide therapeutic benefits.9
There is a need for detailed analysis and legal review of health claims being made about 
ENDS in online advertising. Our study aimed to identify and categorize ENDS claims 
relevant to the FDA’s regulatory authority.
 METHODS
The search protocol was designed to capture the information that ENDS users or potential 
users were likely to encounter in an online search. Researchers used software 
(disconnect.me) that prevented the use of historical data or “cookies” to ensure that the 
search results were anonymous, and thus, unaffected by previous searches. To identify 
relevant websites for analysis, we first used 3 popular search engines (Google, Yahoo, and 
Bing) to search for 6 search terms: (1) e-cigarettes; (2) e-cigs; (3) e-juice; (4) e-liquid; (5) e-
hookah; and (6) vape pen. The 3 search engines were selected because they collectively 
represent more than 95% of the search engine market,19 and these 6 terms were chosen to 
capture the range of ENDS products on the market. Sites eligible for inclusion were those 
that appeared within the first 3 pages of content produced for each search term, given that 
the vast majority of Internet users (97.4%) will not scroll beyond the first 3 pages of an 
Internet search.20 Preferences were set to load 6–10 entries per search.
Within this sampling frame, 2 types of websites were eligible for the study sample: ENDS 
manufacturers and ENDS retailers. Manufacturers were vendors that engaged in direct to 
consumer retailing of their own products, and retailers were those vendors who resold many 
different brands of products directly to consumers. Websites were included if they sold any 
ENDS-related components, including e-liquid or parts for ENDS. We excluded websites that 
did not sell products directly to consumers or websites that only provided reviews or 
opinions about products, such as blogs sites or news websites. Websites were excluded if the 
written materials were not in English, but any country of origin was eligible for inclusion in 
the sample.
All eligible identified websites were downloaded using Offline Explorer Pro software (http://
www.metaproducts.com/mp/Offline_Explorer_Pro.htm) to archive each website in its 
entirety, allowing full review of all site content off-line. Data were captured during a 7-day 
period in December 2014.
Prior to coding the website, we (MB and NH) conducted a legal analysis to review the legal 
status of ENDS advertising claims identified by previous research. This included a review 
of: (1) the relevant language of the TCA and the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act; (2) 
guidance documents issued by the FDA; and (3) federal case law drawn from the Westlaw 
database relating to the regulation of ENDS and health-related claims.
Building on this legal review, we developed a codebook by modifying a tool used in 
previous research16 to focus on characteristics relevant to potential regulatory action by the 
FDA. We pilot-tested a modified version of the codebook on 2 websites for further 
Klein et al.
Page 3
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 clarification and expansion of categories. Two trained coders pilot-coded 10 websites 
(excluded from the final sample). After ensuring clarity and understanding of the codebook 
by researchers, and using the captured websites, the 2 data coders independently reviewed 
each eligible website in its entirety to extract text relevant to a set of health-related themes 
(Table 1).
A 2-part review of content was conducted. Two independent coders (SH and CC) recorded 
all text of all relevant messaging within all pages of each website; in addition, they 
documented relevant video, photographic images, or other visual depictions of such claims. 
Consensus meetings were held to confirm that no claims were omitted between the 2 coders; 
inter-rater reliability21 of the inclusion of relevant text by the independent reviewers was 
deemed moderate (Cohen’s kappa = 0.57); although this value is not high, it was considered 
to be in an acceptable range.22 In a second phase of coding, 2 researchers (EK and NH) 
independently reviewed each text string to categorize it into the stated themes in Table 1 
(Cohen’s kappa = 0.58). To increase precision and data set quality, we held a consensus 
meeting to resolve any coding discrepancies. Descriptive, summary statistics were calculated 
using SAS 9.3 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).
 RESULTS
From the 6 search terms, we identified 163 unique sites. Ineligible sites (N = 53) included 
vendors selling only accessories (N = 14), blog/review sites (N = 14), trial or subscription 
only (N = 5), wholesale only (N = 3), in-person sales only (N = 1), or websites unable to be 
coded due to page load errors or out-of-date links (N = 16). The final eligible study sample 
included a total of 110 unique websites: 78 manufacturers and 32 retailers. Table 2 shows 
the proportion and mean number of claims made per website, by manufacturers and retailers. 
Results present a brief legal analysis of the themes identified in a content analysis, followed 
by a summary and illustrations of the study’s findings with respect to that theme. The legal 
analysis reports the interpretation of the relevant law by the lawyers on the research team. 
Although these are the researchers’ best projection of how courts would interpret the law, 
legal predictions are better construed as plausible interpretations rather than guarantees of 
how the FDA would act.
 Modified Risk Claims
 Legal status—Under the TCA, before claiming that a regulated tobacco product is (or 
may be) less harmful than other tobacco products, a manufacturer or retailer must seek 
review and approval of the claim by the FDA.23 Without such approval, these so-called 
“modified risk” claims are prohibited. When reviewing such applications, the FDA considers 
a variety of factors, set forth in the TCA, to determine whether the product can be marketed 
with a health-related claim.
More specifically, Section 911 of the TCA defines a modified risk claim as one that asserts 
that that product or its smoke:
“presents a lower risk of tobacco-related disease or is less harmful than one or more 
other commercially marketed tobacco products;
Klein et al.
Page 4
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 “contains a reduced level of a substance or presents a reduced exposure to a 
substance;” or “does not contain or is free of a substance. “23
These definitions fall into 2 general categories: (1) reduced harm/risk claims (used when 
evidence supports that there is a reduction in tobacco related disease); and (2) reduced 
exposure claims (used when longitudinal health outcome evidence is unavailable).
The reason for prior review of modified risk claims stems from tobacco industry’s history of 
promoting products (such as “light” and “low tar” cigarettes) as less harmful alternatives for 
smokers, even when it knew that these products would not, in fact, reduce tobacco-related 
harms.24 In enacting the law, Congress referenced this history and stated that “ [t]he only 
way to effectively protect the public health [is] to require that products [sold] for risk 
reduction be reviewed in advance of marketing, and to require that the evidence relied on to 
support claims be fully verified.”23 Thus, modified risk claims, even if truthful statements of 
scientific fact, require prior review by the FDA before they can be made. This requirement 
for the FDA to review “modified risk” claims and ensure their accuracy has been upheld in 
court against free speech challenges by the tobacco industry24
The TCA mandates FDA review modified risk claims, whether those claims are made 
explicitly or implicitly. Although the TCA does not define these terms, the general legal 
meaning of an explicit claim is as claim that is made outright, without hiding the meaning of 
the message. In contrast, implicit claims are those that are communicated “only vaguely or 
indirectly”25 In other words, implicit claims express a message to readers without stating 
that message overtly.
Now that the deeming rule has been finalized, ENDS products have been “deemed” to fall 
under the FDA’s authority as “tobacco products.” The FDA has indicated that a prohibition 
on unauthorized MRTP claims will be in effect as of August 8, 2016. This means that ENDS 
companies that would like to market their products as healthier or safer than other forms of 
tobacco must first apply to the FDA, providing evidentiary support for their claims, and 
obtaining an authorization from the FDA before making such claims.17
 Study results—As Table 2 shows, modified risk claims were highly prevalent on both 
manufacturer (70.5%) and retailer sites (46.9%). Several sub-themes were identified within 
this category, including claims that ENDS are safer than combustible cigarettes, include 
fewer chemicals, and reduce the risk of fire. In a further attempt to illustrate the various 
types of claims that TCA prohibits without prior authorization, several direct quotations 
from the websites are offered, along with an explanation of the characterization.
Many of the claims were stated explicitly. Specific examples of explicit reduced harm/risk 
claims included:
The realistic experience of smoking without the serious health issues associated 
with tobacco cigarettes.
(Manufacturer: Triple 7 e-cigarettes)
Klein et al.
Page 5
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 …you won’t inhale any of the carcinogens or other harmful components found in 
smoking.
(Manufacturer: Blaze Depot)
Why cause more health issues with smoking a cigarette just to get the nicotine 
addiction when you are able to get the nicotine with our product without having to 
worry about more health issues when smoking a cigarette?
(Retailer: Vape It Now)
When making what would be classified as explicit reduced exposure claims, several sites 
referenced that ENDS had far fewer than the “4000 chemicals in cigarettes.” The most 
commonly mentioned chemical constituent claimed to be absent from ENDS was tar.
An option for smokers to “smoke” nicotine without the fire, flame, tobacco, tar, 
carbon monoxide, ash, stub, smell and all the other chemicals found in traditional 
cigarette.
(Retailer: Ecig Best Save)
Traditional Cigarettes have over 4000 harmful chemicals that are not found in 
SMOOTH Disposable Electronic Cigarettes.
(Manufacturer: Smooth Cigs)
Some types of claims could be considered either implicit or explicit, depending on how they 
were framed. This was the case with claims relating to reductions in secondhand smoke 
exposure. Half of manufacturers and one-fourth of retailers made claims suggesting that 
ENDS reduced harm to bystanders, were less bothersome to bystanders, or could be used 
“anywhere” because they did not give off smoke.
To the extent these claims directly asserted a reduced exposure to chemicals or toxicants in 
the smoke, they would likely be interpreted as explicit reduced exposure claims.
Finally, the dangers of secondhand smoke are significantly lower with the use of 
electronic cigarettes. While there may still be some nicotine exposure with ecigs, 
studies have discovered that exposure to be much less with vapors from electronic 
cigarettes that with the smoke produced by conventional tobacco cigarettes.
(Manufacturer: Unlimited eCigs)
On the other hand, claims made about the well-being of bystanders or the ability to get 
around smoke-free laws could be considered implicit reduced risk or reduced exposure 
claims.
You can smoke around your family and friends and not feel bad about it.
(Retailer: Ehookah)
Many of the implicit reduced harm/risk claims demonstrate the creativity of sellers trying to 
avoid directly making a health-related claim. Whereas not explicitly saying that their 
products reduce harm or risk of disease, some companies more indirectly alluded to the use 
of their product as a way to reduce smoking related disease and death.
Klein et al.
Page 6
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Based on the World Health Organization, every 6.3 seconds a present or previous 
smoker dies because of tobacco related diseases which equates about 6.1 million 
deaths per year. Hookah Coals Company hopes to supply smokers with a different 
route to traditional cigarettes with our Portable Hookah\E-Hookah Pen.
(Manufacturer: Hookah Coals)
Do you want to be Healthier, breathe easier and live a longer and happier life?
(Manufacturer: ECigarette USA)
We are dedicated to the eradication of tobacco related illness worldwide.
(Manufacturer: NJOY)
Implicit reduced exposure claims were also present. For example, “environmentally-
friendly” claims, such as those referring to products being natural, organic, “green,” etc, 
were made by 28.2% of manufacturers and 18.8% of retailers. The term “natural” or 
“organic” implicitly leads the user to believe that the product presents a reduced exposure to 
things like chemicals or toxins. In fact, the FDA recently warned American Spirit Cigarettes 
that use of the word “natural” in marketing combustible cigarettes constituted an implied 
modified risk claim and could not be done without prior application.26 Similarly, claims that 
a product reduces pollution is healthier for the environment can also imply that the products 
reduce chemicals or toxins and are safer for the person using them.
All our Vapor Flavor products are made with all natural ingredients.
(Retailer: EHookah Electronic Cigarettes Wholesale)
At Virgin Vapor we only use USDA certified organic flavorings. Our e-liquids do 
not contain any artificial flavorings, artificial colors, or artificial sweeteners of any 
kind.
(Manufacturer: Virgin Vapor)
… you can smoke E-Cig anywhere healthily without environmental pollution.
(Manufacturer: E-cig.com)
Another category of common implicit claims was those alluding to products being “cleaner.” 
These claims were made by 43.6% of manufacturers and 21.9% of retailers. “Cleaner” 
claims could be interpreted as implicit claims because they suggest that the user is protected 
from the chemicals or toxins in the ash or odor of combustible cigarettes.
Using advanced technology, the South Beach Smoke e-cig’s revolutionary smoking 
alternative allows for a smoking experience without the flame, ash, tobacco, tar, 
carbon monoxide, or horrible and offensive smell found in traditional cigarettes.
(Manufacturer: South Beach Smoke)
A blu™ electronic cigarette simulates the smoking experience without the tobacco 
smoke, ash and smell associated with traditional tobacco cigarettes.
(Manufacturer: blu Cigs)
Klein et al.
Page 7
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Drug/Device Claims
 Legal status—In 2010, a federal court ruled that if the FDA wanted to regulate ENDS, 
it would have to regulate them under its tobacco regulatory authorities (by promulgating a 
“deeming rule”) unless the products were marketed for “therapeutic purposes.”27 ENDS 
marketed for therapeutic purposes are classified as drugs, medical devices, or combination 
drug/device products, regardless of whether or not they are derived from tobacco. Under the 
regulatory scheme applicable to such products, they cannot be sold without the FDA’s prior 
review and approval.
The FDA has issued a proposed rule intended to clarify which types of marketing claims 
would result in ENDS (or other products derived from tobacco) being classified as drugs, 
devices, or combination products.28 In general terms, that proposed rule stated that any 
product “intended for use in smoking cessation,” or that is otherwise intended to prevent 
disease or “affect… any function of the body in a way that is different from effects related to 
nicotine,” is subject to regulation as a drug, medical device, or combination drug/device. 
Because the FDA has not approved any ENDS products for sale as a drug or device, any 
ENDS products making cessation or health-benefit claims are violating the law by marketing 
unapproved products. Manufacturers and retailers of these products are subject to 
enforcement action, including seizure and monetary penalties, by the FDA.
Notably, enforcement of this type does not depend on the FDA finalizing the deeming rule 
(unlike the modified risk claims discussed above); the FDA has possessed the current 
authority to stop the marketing of unapproved drugs, devices, and combination products. 
Furthermore, even though under the deeming rule the FDA is unable to regulate e-cigarette 
products with no nicotine (because they do not meet the definition of a “tobacco product”), 
no such restriction applies to the FDA’s regulation of non-nicotine products that make 
unapproved therapeutic claims.
 Study results—There was notable variability in the presence of cessation claims, with a 
much higher proportion of ENDS manufacturers (43.6%) making such claims, as opposed to 
retailers (15.4%).
The claims varied widely in their form and specificity. Some want so far as to make specific 
claims about the rate of success in completely quitting smoking:
Have helped 85% of people to stop smoking
(Manufacturer: Cloud Cig)
By contrast, several websites, perhaps fearing legal liability, made cessation claims 
indirectly through reference to or use of customer testimonials:
Q: Can NE Where be used to quit smoking? A: NE Where is not a cessation device 
and should not be used as a way to quit smoking. That being said, many of our 
users have testified that our product has helped them in their efforts to cut down and 
transition out of their habitual behavior.
(Manufacturer: NE Where Electronic Cigarettes)
Klein et al.
Page 8
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Some of the websites also made reference to or comparisons to nicotine replacement 
therapies.
Similar to the patch and gum, Hookah Sticks with Nicotine offer the nicotine the 
smoker craves while also imitating the motion, allowing for the smoker to fulfill 
their oral fixation.
(Retailer: Hookah Shisha)
Like cessation claims, claims of an affirmative health benefit are also drug/device claims that 
are impermissible without prior approval; in the present sample, 5.1% of ENDS 
manufacturers and 6.3% of retailers made such claims on their websites.
Health benefit claims were often associated with specific e-liquid blends, and included 
claims of increased energy, sexual enhancement, relaxation, and improved sleep.
We only stock products that align with our desire to provide maximum relaxation 
and therapeutic benefit. (Retailer: Vaporizer Pen Shop)
 DISCUSSION
Our study confirms that websites offering ENDS for sale to consumers persist in making a 
wide variety of health-related claims. A majority of websites reviewed (65% of retailers and 
77% of manufacturers) made at least one of the types of marketing claims discussed above 
on their websites.
In particular, half of retailers and 70% of manufacturers made claims that could be classified 
as modified risk claims under the TCA. Now that the deeming rule is finalized, these claims 
(as of August 2016) are prohibited without prior review and authorization by the FDA.17 
Assuming that manufacturers and retailers comply with the law, this suggests that the FDA 
is likely to be inundated with applications for modified risk claims from ENDS companies.
This research also suggests that both manufacturers and retailers selling ENDS are 
aggressively moving to shape consumer perceptions of ENDS prior to the FDA’s regulation 
of modified risk claims. In explaining why it was appropriate to require FDA review of 
modified risk claims before a product could be sold, a federal appellate court noted that, 
particularly in the context of an addictive product, “it would be virtually impossible to 
unring the bell of misinformation after it has been rung.”24 Although this study did not 
verify the scientific accuracy of the modified risk claims identified, it is likely that some 
ENDS manufacturers and retailers are making unsupported health-related claims that would 
not pass the evidentiary bar needed for a MRTP authorization. Based on the powerful 
influence of cigarette advertising on consumer behavior,29 these health-related claims are 
likely influencing consumer perceptions and may be driving the increase in ENDS product 
use. Thus, it will be difficult, if not impossible, to “unring the bell” of this misinformation.
We also found that substantial proportions of ENDS manufacturer websites, and a smaller 
proportion of retailer websites, are currently making impermissible smoking cessation 
claims. It supports the assertion made in an October 2015 letter to the FDA from leading 
public health groups that “violations of federal law on a massive scale are taking place in the 
Klein et al.
Page 9
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 marketing of e-cigarettes.”30 Although the FDA promised to open an investigation in 
response to that letter,31 at press time for this publication no enforcement action has been 
taken against any ENDS company for cessation-related claims since the 2010 court ruling.
One reason for this lack of enforcement may be that the FDA only recently finalized the 
deeming rule. Prior to the finalization of the deeming rule and the prohibition of MRTP 
claims without prior authorization, an ENDS manufacturer or retailer could easily change 
the wording of a cessation claim to reframe it as a modified risk claim in order to skirt 
regulation. Now that ENDS products are deemed as tobacco products, it will be important 
for the FDA’s Center for Tobacco Products to work closely with the FDA’s other centers 
that regulate drugs and devices to ensure that the FDA acts consistently to prevent all 
unapproved claims. In its final deeming rule, the FDA noted that “if an ENDS products 
seeks to be marketed as a cessation product, the manufacturer must file an application with 
the FDA’s Center for Drug Evaluation and Research,” and it pointed out that, to date, no 
ENDS products had done so.17
Our study also suggests that the FDA may want to focus future enforcement on 
manufacturers, as both modified risk claims and cessation claims were more prevalent in this 
group. This difference in messaging between the 2 categories of sellers could be related to 
the need to explain the product and differentiate one manufacturer from another. In other 
words, manufacturers that directly sell their products to consumers need to explain the 
benefits of their products and make a case that their products are superior to other products 
on the market. Retailers, however, are selling many different brands and primarily need to 
compete with other retailers with regard to price.
Although our study did not specifically code for the scientific accuracy of the claims 
recorded, it is apparent that several of the claims being made - including both modified risk 
claims and cessation claims - may violate the TCAs prohibition on false and misleading 
claims. This is an additional requirement that the FDA is now able to enforce against newly-
deemed products, including ENDS. In the finalized deeming rule, the FDA stated that 
“labeling and advertising [for ENDS and other newly-deemed products] cannot be false or 
misleading, which will help reduce consumer confusion and misperception.”17 As an 
example of a claim that may be “false or misleading,” some websites claim that the 
emissions from ENDS are “simply… water vapor” (Manufacturer: E Cigs Brand), even 
though numerous studies have shown that there are small amounts of concerning toxicants 
found in the emissions from ENDS.32–36 Claims that lack scientific support or those that 
manipulate the science to overstate a product’s benefits may mislead consumers into 
purchasing and using ENDS products.14
There are a number of limitations of our study. The study focused on text-based health 
claims, and did not consider the role of photographs or other imagery that also may imply 
health claims. This may account for why the frequency of claims observed in our study was 
somewhat lower than previous estimates.16 Our sampling strategy used several popular 
terms for ENDS, but may not include terms used for these devices that remain popular 
among specific populations. In addition, the sampling frame included only websites in 
English, as businesses serving American consumers, regardless of their location, remain 
Klein et al.
Page 10
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 subject to the authority of the FDA; however, the sampling frame did not include foreign-
language websites that may also be selling to US consumers. Interrater reliability for coding 
was modest, yet most discrepancies during each round related to variation in category 
assignment, not disagreement on whether text was considered a claim. Whereas 
reconciliation of coding differences minimized coding error, the modest inter-coder 
reliabilities illustrate the ambiguity in the statutory standards that the FDA is tasked with 
enforcing. This ambiguity will be a challenge for regulators if the FDA does seek to regulate 
such claims more strictly. Finally, given the rapidly changing nature of online 
communications and marketing campaigns, it is possible that health claims may continue to 
change over time. In particular, ENDS websites may change their marketing significantly 
enforcement of the the deeming rule begins.
At the time of data collection and coding, ENDS products were not yet subject to the FDA’s 
authority, because the deeming rule had not been finalized. However, because the definitions 
and legal analysis were based on the TCA’s statutory language that was extended to cover 
ENDS products in the final deeming rule, the analysis was not hindered and the final rule 
only confirmed the accuracy of the methods used.
 Conclusion
Health-related claims are common on ENDS manufacturer and retailer websites. These 
claims may exaggerate potential benefits while playing down or ignoring information about 
possible harmful effects of ENDS. Now that the deeming rule has been finalized, the FDA 
can and should take action to ensure that inaccurate and misleading claims are discontinued. 
This includes addressing both unsubstantiated cessation claims and “modified risk” claims 
that have not gone through the required FDA review process. In this marketplace where the 
majority of smokers are interested in quitting, it is essential for the FDA to ensure that 
consumers are not misled into choosing products based on misleading or inaccurate health-
related claims. In this way, enforcement by the FDA can lead to the promotion of public 
health and the protection of vulnerable consumers.
 IMPLICATIONS FOR TOBACCO REGULATION
This research highlights the need for the FDA to develop a coordinated approach for 
effective and comprehensive regulation of ENDS marketing claims. Tobacco regulatory 
science researchers can support the FDA in such an effort by carefully tracking and 
categorizing ENDS marketing claims, particularly those made online. Such research and 
surveillance should be communicated directly to the FDA to assist the agency in identifying 
potential violations and in setting priorities for enforcement. The FDA should consider 
developing a designated e-mail address and website portal to facilitate the reporting of 
advertising that may violate FDA regulations (similar to the FDA’s “Bad Ad Program” that 
encourages healthcare providers to report misleading prescription drug promotions).
In addition to enforcing the prohibition against unauthorized cessation and health benefit 
claims, the FDA will need to make decisions about whether health-related claims by ENDS 
companies are truthful and not misleading, and meet the other requirements for Modified 
Risk claims, including that permitting such claims would be “appropriate to promote the 
Klein et al.
Page 11
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 public health.” Using the various types of marketing examples presented in this paper, 
researchers can assist the FDA by examining the veracity of ENDS marketing claims, 
consumer perceptions of such claims, and the impact of ENDS marketing on consumer use 
and use intentions. Research on consumer responses to ENDS-related marketing claims can 
also help to inform the FDA’s public health education efforts.
 Acknowledgments
Funding
Research reported in this publication was supported by a pilot project funded through grant number P50CA180908 
from the National Cancer Institute and FDA Center for Tobacco Products (CTP). The content is solely the 
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH or the Food and Drug 
Administration
References
1. Lopes, M. [Accessed December 21, 2015] E-cigarettes: a burning question for U.S. regulators. 
Reuters. Available at: http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/12/11/us-usa-ecigarettes-
idUSBRE9BA-0ZT20131211
2. Wahba, P. [Accessed December 20, 2015] U.S. e-cigarette sales seen rising 24.2% per year through 
2018. Fortune Magazine. Available at: http://for-tune.com/20l4/06/10/e-cigarette-sales-rising/
3. Arrazola RA, Singh T, Corey CG, et al. Tobacco use among middle and high school students - 
United States, 2011–2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015; 64(14):381–385. [PubMed: 
25879896] 
4. Callahan-Lyon P. Electronic cigarettes: human health effects. Tob Control. 20l4; 23(Suppl 2):ii36–
ii40. [PubMed: 24732161] 
5. Cheng T. Chemical evaluation of electronic cigarettes. Tob Control. 20l4; 23(Suppl 2):ii11–ii17. 
[PubMed: 24732157] 
6. Czogala J, Goniewicz ML, Fidelus B, et al. Secondhand exposure to vapors from electronic 
cigarettes. Nicotine Tob Res. 2014; 16(6):655–662. [PubMed: 24336346] 
7. Tayyarah R, Long GA. Comparison of select analytes in aerosol from e-cigarettes with smoke from 
conventional cigarettes and with ambient air. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2014; 70(3):704–710. 
[PubMed: 25444997] 
8. McRobbie H, Bullen C, Hartmann-Boyce J, Hajek P. Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation and 
reduction. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014; 12 CD010216. 
9. Lindblom EN. Effectively regulating e-cigarettes and their advertising—and the First Amendment. 
Food Drug Law J. 2015; 70:57–94.
10. Freeman B. New media and tobacco control. Tob Control. 2012; 21(2):139–144. [PubMed: 
22345236] 
11. Myslin M, Zhu SH, Chapman W, Conway M. Using Twitter to examine smoking behavior and 
perceptions of emerging tobacco products. J. Med Internet Res. 2013; 15(8):e174. [PubMed: 
23989137] 
12. Paek HJ, Kim S, Hove T, Huh JY. Reduced harm or another gateway to smoking? Source, message, 
and information characteristics of e-cigarette videos on YouTube. J. Health Commun. 2014; 19(5):
545–560. [PubMed: 24117370] 
13. Pepper JK, Emery SL, Ribisl KM, Brewer NT. How US adults find out about electronic cigarettes: 
implications for public health messages. Nicotine Tob Res. 2014; 17(9):1140–1144. [PubMed: 
24755397] 
14. Pepper JK, Emery SL, Ribisl KM, et al. Effects of advertisements on smokers’ interest in trying e-
cigarettes: the roles of product comparison and visual cues. Tob Control. 2014; 23(Suppl 3):iii31–
iii36. [PubMed: 24935896] 
Klein et al.
Page 12
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 15. Cobb NK, Brookover J, Cobb CO. Forensic analysis of online marketing for electronic nicotine 
delivery systems. Tob Control. 2015; 24(2):128–131. [PubMed: 24038037] 
16. Grana R, Ling P. “Smoking revolution”? A content analysis of electronic cigarette marketing 
websites. Am J Prev Med. 2014; 46(4):395–403. [PubMed: 24650842] 
17. US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration. Deeming Tobacco 
Products To Be Subject to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as Amended by the Family 
Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act. 21 CFR Parts 1100, 1140, and 1143. 2016. Vol. 81. 
Washington, DC: Federal Register; 2016 May 10. p. 28974-29106.
18. Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 21 U.S.C. 9. 2010
19. comScore. [Accessed March 17, 2016] comScore releases October 2013 U.S. search engine 
rankings. Available at: http://www.comscore.com/Insights/Press_Releases/2013/11/comScore_Re-
leases_October_2013_US_Search_Engine_Rankings
20. Chitika Insights. The Value of Google Result Positioning. Westborough, MA: Chitika, Inc; 2013. 
21. Cohen J. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scale. Educ Psychol Meas. 1960; 20:37–46.
22. Landis J, Koch GG. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics. 
1977:159–174. [PubMed: 843571] 
23. Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act. Pub. L. 111-31, 123 Stat 1776. 2009
24. Disc. Tobacco City & Lottery, Inc. v. United States, 674 F3d 509, 535. 6th Cir. 
25. Garner, BA. Black’s Law Dictionary. St. Paul, MN: Thomson/West; 2004. 
26. Mickle, T. [Accessed March 17, 2016] FDA warns cigarette makers on ‘natural’ labels. Wall Street 
Journal. Available at: http://www.wsj.com/articles/fda-warns-cigarette-makers-on-natural-
labeling-1440694039
27. Sottera, Inc. v. Food & Drug Administration 627 F3d 891 (D.C. Circuit 2010). 
28. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 21 CFR Parts 201, 801, and 1100. 2015. Vol. 80. 
Washington, DC: Federal Register; 2015 Sep 25. Clarification of When Products Made or Derived 
From Tobacco Are Regulated as Drugs, Devices, or Combination Products; Amendments to 
Regulations Regarding “Intended Uses”; p. 57756-57765.
29. Capella M, Webster C, Kinard BR. A review of the effect of cigarette advertising. International 
Journal of Research in Marketing. 2011; 28(3):269–279.
30. Cancer Action Network AHA, American Lung Association, Truth Initiative. [Accessed January 6, 
2016] Letter to FDA re: e-cigarette company cessation claims. Available at: https://
www.truthinadvertising.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Letter-to-FDA-re-cessation-
claims-10-14-15.pdf
31. US Food Drug Administration (FDA). [Accessed May 25, 2016] Response from FDA re: e-
cigarette company cessation claims. Available at: https://www.truthinadvertising.org/wp-content/
uploads/2015/11/FDA-Electronic-Cigarette-Response-Letter_Campaign-for-Tobacco-Free-
Kids.pdf
32. E1-Hellani A, El-Hage R, Baalbaki R, et al. Free-base and protonated nicotine in electronic 
cigarette liquids and aerosols. Chem Res Toxicol. 2015; 28(8):1532–1537. [PubMed: 26158618] 
33. Farsalinos KE, Voudris V, Poulas K. Are metals emitted from electronic cigarettes a reason for 
health concern? A risk-assessment analysis of currently available literature. Int J Environ Res 
Public Health. 2015; 12(5):5215–5232. [PubMed: 25988311] 
34. Farsalinos KE, Voudris V, Poulas K. E-cigarettes generate highlevels of aldehydes only in ‘dry 
puff’conditions. Addiction. 2015; 110(8):1352–1356. [PubMed: 25996087] 
35. Fernández E, Ballbè M, Sureda X, et al. Particulate matter from electronic cigarettes and 
conventional cigarettes: a systematic review and observational study. Curr Environ Health Rep. 
2015; 2(4):423–429. [PubMed: 26452675] 
36. Talih S, Balhas Z, Salma R, et al. “Direct dripping”: a high-temperature, high-formaldehyde 
emission electronic cigarette use method. Nicotine Tob Res. 2016; 18(4):453–459. [PubMed: 
25863521] 
Klein et al.
Page 13
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Klein et al.
Page 14
Table 1
Claims and Definitions for ENDS Manufacturers and Retailers, Modified from Grana and Ling16
Claim
Description
Modified risk
Explicit or implicit statements about the health risk of this product in relation to other products
(other ENDS or other types of tobacco products) or statements that the product contains lower
amounts of or reduces levels of exposure to the user of any harmful substance. Statements that
the product contains fewer harmful chemicals, has 50% less nicotine, or reduces risk of lung
cancer would qualify for this claim.
Health benefit
Explicit or implicit statements that the product can be used to mitigate, cure, or prevent any
disease or condition or otherwise provide some health-related benefit (other than cessation of
smoking). Claims that the product improves digestion or helps with weight loss would qualify
for this claim.
Smoking cessation
Explicit or implicit statements that convey the product will help a tobacco smoker quit smok-
ing. Examples might include: Stop smoking for good, switch completely and never use
tobacco again, or never smoke cigarettes again, or use the different strength cartridges to step
down to no-nicotine.
Secondhand smoke
exposure
Explicit or implicit statements that other people will not be harmed or have negative health
consequences from being exposed to the vapor, or that the vapor is safe, that the vapor is not
like secondhand smoke or ETS, that the products will not bother or annoy nonsmokers.
Products are cleaner
to use than tobacco
cigarettes
Explicit or implicit statements about the product being cleaner to use than tobacco products.
Statements may include the following: no ash, won’t stain teeth, fingers, fingernails, make their
hair smell, no smoke, only vapor.
Products are
environmentally
friendly
Explicit or implicit statements about the product being more environmentally-friendly, eco-
friendly or producing less waste (ie, cigarette butts) than smoking tobacco products. Also this
might be signified by recycling signs, clean earth imagery, and lush, green outdoors images.
Other
Any other health-relevant claim to target adults or any claim to target youth not previously
described.
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Klein et al.
Page 15
Table 2
Frequencies of Health Claims and Mean Number of Claims Made within ENDS Manufacturer and Retailer 
Websites (N = 110)
Health claims
Manufacturers (N= 78)
Retailers (N = 32)
Percentage
Mean
Percentage
Mean
Modified risk
70.5%
2.4
46.9%
2.3
Cessation
43.6%
2.0
15.4%
1.7
Health benefit claims
5.1%
1.5
6.3%
2.0
Secondhand smoke
50.0%
1.9
25.0%
1.9
Cleaner product
43.6%
1.4
21.9%
1.9
Environmentally-friendly
28.2%
1.1
18.8%
1.0
Tob Regul Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 19.
