 PREVENTING  CHRONIC  DISEASE
P U B L I C
 H E A L T H
 R E S E A R C H ,
 P R A C T I C E ,
 A N D
 P O L I C Y
P U B L I C
 H E A L T H
 R E S E A R C H ,
 P R A C T I C E ,
 A N D
 P O L I C Y
 
  Volume 13, E83                                                                         JUNE 2016  
 
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
 
 
Opportunities for Increased Physical
Activity in the Workplace: the Walking
Meeting (WaM) Pilot Study, Miami, 2015
 
Hannah E. Kling, MPH; Xuan Yang, MHS, MPH; Sarah E. Messiah, PhD, MPH;
Kristopher L. Arheart, EdD; Debi Brannan, PhD;
Alberto J. Caban-Martinez, DO, PhD, MPH 
 
Suggested citation for this article: Kling HE, Yang X, Messiah SE,
Arheart KL, Brannan D, Caban-Martinez AJ. Opportunities for
Increased  Physical  Activity  in  the  Workplace:  the  Walking
Meeting (WaM) Pilot Study, Miami, 2015. Prev Chronic Dis
2016;13:160111. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd13.160111.
PEER REVIEWED
Abstract
Introduction
Despite the positive impact walking has on human health, few op-
portunities exist for workers with largely sedentary jobs to in-
crease physical activity while at work. The objective of this pilot
study was to examine the implementation, feasibility, and accept-
ability of using a Walking Meeting (WaM) protocol to increase
the level of work-related physical activity among a group of
sedentary white-collar workers.
Methods
White-collar workers at a large university were invited to particip-
ate in a newly developed WaM protocol. Workers who conducted
weekly meetings in groups of 2 or 3 individuals were recruited for
the pilot study (n = 18) that took place from January 2015 to Au-
gust 2015. Seventeen participants wore an accelerometer to meas-
ure physical activity levels during 3 consecutive weeks (first week
baseline, followed by 2 weeks of organized WaMs) and particip-
ated in focus groups conducted during week 3 to document experi-
ences with the WaM protocol.
Results
The WaM protocol met study criteria on feasibility, implementa-
tion, and acceptability among study participants. The average
number of minutes (standard deviation) participants engaged in
combined work-related moderate/vigorous physical activity per
week during the 3 weeks increased from an average of 107 (55)
minutes during the baseline week to 114 (67) minutes at week 2
and to 117 (65) minutes at week 3.
Conclusion
White- collar workers were supportive of transforming regular
seated meetings into walking meetings and increased their work-
related physical activity levels.
Introduction
Prolonged periods of time sitting may increase risk of premature
death, have associations with health problems, and compromise
metabolic health (1). Walking decreases risk for all-cause mortal-
ity because of its positive impact on physical health (2). Engaging
in moderate exercise, which includes brisk walking, for as little as
15 minutes per day can add up to 3 years of life expectancy (3).
The American Heart Association recommends walking for at least
30 minutes per day to reduce the risk for chronic diseases such as
osteoporosis, breast and colon cancer, and type 2 diabetes (4). The
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends
walking at least 10,000 steps per day (5). A recent study docu-
mented that 3 brief sessions of higher-intensity physical activity
(PA) of at least 10 minutes throughout the day has benefits for
physical health (6). Despite the positive impact walking has on hu-
man health, few opportunities exist for workers with largely
sedentary jobs to increase PA while at work.
Professional white-collar work environments typically do not sup-
port PA throughout the workday (7); blue-collar workers report
greater physical demands than do white-collar workers (8,9). Find-
ing ways to incorporate PA into white-collar work settings could
benefit many workers. One way to incorporate and encourage PA
is by walking during a meeting instead of sitting. No studies have
The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors’ affiliated institutions.
www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2016/16_0111.htm • Centers for Disease Control and Prevention      1
 yet evaluated the use of walking meetings in the workplace. A re-
cent Cochrane review examining interventions to reduce sitting in
the workplace noted that no studies yet have investigated the ef-
fect of periodic breaks or standing or walking meetings (10). The
objective of our pilot study was to examine the acceptability
among white-collar workers of engaging in walking meetings dur-
ing the workday and the feasibility of organizing these meetings
around their work schedules. We also examined the implementa-
tion of the Walking Meeting (WaM) protocol and assessed the im-
pact of the protocol on work-related PA levels in a sample of
white-collar workers.
Methods
A sequential explanatory mixed-methods study design was imple-
mented to develop the WaM protocol and then assess the feasibil-
ity, acceptability, and implementation of the protocol among a
sample of white-collar workers during an 8-month period (Janu-
ary 2015–August 2015) at a university in an urban setting in
southern Florida. We recruited by email and obtained consent
from 18 university faculty members, staff leaders, and staff mem-
bers (8 groups of 2 or 3 members) to participate in a 1-week
baseline assessment and 2-week walking meeting protocol. One
participant lost an accelerometer and was released from the study,
so the final analytic sample was 17 participants.
Eligibility criteria for study participation included groups that had
an established meeting time and met at least weekly for 30 or 60
minutes. Study participants had to be aged 18 years or older, full-
time university employees, able to wear an accelerometer at the
hip for 3 consecutive work weeks, able to read and write in Eng-
lish, not absent from work for more than 1 workday during study
participation, and able and willing to walk for 30 minutes during
the group’s regular meeting time. Individuals who self-reported
chest pain; prior myocardial infarction; cardiopulmonary, spinal or
lower limb surgery in previous 6 months; or a recent history of un-
controlled hypertension were not eligible to participate.
Accelerometers were calibrated at baseline, and the WaM pro-
tocol was created and then delivered to participants in a workshop
on the first day of the baseline week. Each group was instructed to
carry on with their traditional sitting meetings and regular work
schedule during the first week of baseline data collection. After
the baseline week, each group was asked to modify one standard
sitting meeting according to the WaM protocol for 2 consecutive
weeks. At the start of the study and at the end of each of the 3
weeks of participation, researchers met with each group to admin-
ister a survey that collected self-reported PA measures. At the end
of both walking meeting implementation weeks, accelerometers
were collected, the last survey was administered, and a focus
group meeting was conducted with each walking group. The WaM
pilot study was approved by the institutional review board of the
University of Miami.
Development of the WaM protocol
We developed a 7-item core component walking meeting protocol
that included a safe 25- to 30-minute walking path on the uni-
versity campus. To develop the WaM protocol, we conducted
formative research on traditional meeting protocols. For example,
every  traditional  meeting  has  an  agenda,  an  objective,  and
someone who directs the meeting. Next, we reviewed research on
how walking meetings are conducted. The mainstream literature
outlined a common approach to conducting a walking meeting,
and the grey literature provided anecdotal tips and instructions that
suggested a similar setup and design (ie, create an agenda, assign
roles, take notes, and so on) (10–13). From this formative re-
search on traditional and walking meetings (12–14), common
themes were combined and outlined into a 7-item core component
list that reflects best practices for walking meetings and serves as
the foundation for a uniform WaM protocol (Box). The WaM pro-
tocol was assessed across a 3-week period: the first week was a
baseline observation period for each participant’s typical work-re-
lated PA levels, and the subsequent 2 weeks were observation
periods for each participant’s walking meeting–related PA levels.
Box. Core Components of the Walking Meeting Protocol in the Walking
Box. Core Components of the Walking Meeting Protocol in the Walking
Meeting (WaM) Pilot Study
Meeting (WaM) Pilot Study
Set a time and place to meet before your WaM.
•
Create an agenda for your WaM.
•
To make the walk more comfortable, bring items such as water,
sunglasses, and sunscreen. Wear comfortable shoes.
•
Have the group leader assign roles to each walking meeting group
member. (ie, time checker, note taker, path leader).
•
Follow the prescribed route.
•
Walk for at least 30 minutes.
•
After the walking meeting, sit and conclude to wrap up meeting; take
care of paperwork or other tasks that could not be accomplished dur-
ing WaM.
•
Study measures (survey and accelerometry)
After recruitment and consent, study participants were asked at
baseline to complete a paper-based survey with questions on so-
ciodemographic characteristics and standardized measures of self-
PREVENTING CHRONIC DISEASE
VOLUME 13, E83
PUBLIC HEALTH RESEARCH, PRACTICE, AND POLICY
          JUNE 2016
The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors’ affiliated institutions.
2       Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  •  www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2016/16_0111.htm
 reported PA (the International Physical Activity Questionnaire
[IPAQ]) (15). Although we administered the entire IPAQ to study
participants, for this analysis we used only the 6 work-related PA
questions. The identical survey measures were administered 3
more times: during the first week of the walking meeting, during
the second week of the walking meeting, and during the focus
groups. Participants were asked at baseline to wear a GT3XP Acti-
graph accelerometer (ActiGraph, LLC) on their waist for 21 con-
secutive days. On the first day, the accelerometer was initialized
by the research team and participants were shown how to attach
and remove the device. Participants were instructed to wear the ac-
celerometer all day except while they were sleeping, taking a
shower,  or  swimming.  Participants  also  kept  a  daily  log
throughout the 3 weeks of the pilot study documenting the begin-
ning and end of work shifts along with times they wore the accel-
erometer and when they removed it. The accelerometers recorded
data in 1-minute intervals, providing the number of counts for
each minute for 21 days. A count was defined as any activity that
was measured by the accelerometer. At the end of 21 days, the re-
searchers retrieved the accelerometer from the worker and down-
loaded its data to the study computer.
Accelerometer data were parsed by using ActiLife software ver-
sion 6 (ActiGraph, LLC) into 2 data sets: a set of minutes associ-
ated with the workday and a set of minutes associated with the
non-workday. For minutes associated with the workday, each
minute was assigned a level of PA intensity according to defini-
tions  established  by  Freedson  and  colleagues  (16):  light
(101–1,952 counts per minute), moderate (1,953–5,724 counts per
minute), vigorous (5,725–9,498 counts per minute), and very vig-
orous (≥ 9,499 counts per minute). PA levels were analyzed on the
day of the week each group had its walking meeting. For example,
if a group held its walking meeting on Wednesday during week 2
and week 3, we collected data on the number of steps taken on
those implementation days and on the previous Wednesday of
their baseline week.
Measures of WaM protocol implementation, feasibility, and ac-
ceptability were defined (Table 1). Focus group sessions were
conducted to ask participants questions about the extent to which
the WaM protocol was implemented, whether the WaM protocol
was feasible, and whether it was acceptable to study participants.
Focus groups
To complement our survey data, we conducted a 1-hour focus
group with each walking group at the end of the pilot study to dis-
cuss 3 broad domains: working experience and job organization,
organizing the walking meeting, and conducting the walking meet-
ings. The focus group team consisted of a moderator and another
researcher who collected paperwork and took notes. The focus
group questions were developed after collecting the quantitative
data and were based on the WaM protocol. We used grounded-the-
ory methodology (17,18) to develop a discussion guide, which
consisted of a mix of 4 to 7 open-ended questions for each do-
main.
Statistical analysis
To examine how the walking meetings affected objectively meas-
ured PA, we compared accelerometry data for the day of the
baseline week with the accelerometry data for the 2 days of the
walking meetings. Four levels of PA were examined: light, moder-
ate, vigorous, and very vigorous. CDC’s guidelines for adequate
PA suggest that aerobic activity of moderate intensity or higher
(vigorous or very vigorous) is important for health benefits (19).
Therefore, we combined moderate, vigorous, and very vigorous
PA levels into one category to examine changes in PA across the
3-week study period. Using STATA version 13.0 (StataCorp LP),
we calculated mean (standard deviation [SD]) number of minutes
spent during the workday for each walking meeting day and the
corresponding baseline day. Differences between periods were as-
sessed by using paired t tests. We used conservative 2-tail tests
and emphasize that this descriptive study was not designed to de-
termine cause and effect.
Focus group discussions were transcribed, and text was entered in-
to NVivo version 10 (QSR International Pty Ltd) for electronic
coding, data retrieval, and analysis. Inductive thematic analysis
was used to identify main themes across groups. Emerging themes
were verified through discussion, and a coding framework based
on the themes and domains was developed (20). Transcripts were
coded by H.E.K. and reviewed by the study team. The coding was
reviewed by 2 coauthors (A.J.C-M. and X.Y.); existing codes were
developed and new codes were identified.
Results
The 17 participants had a mean age of 39.8 years (SD, 12.2 y); 4
were men and 13 were women; 4 were white and 13 of another
race; 12 self-identified as Hispanic. Mean body mass index was
25.8 kg/m2. Two participants completed some college or technical
school, 9 were college graduates, and 6 had a master’s degree or
higher. Seven team leaders who were invited to participate ex-
pressed interest in the study but did not meet eligibility require-
ments. The overall response rate was 53% (8/15).
Initially, the sample comprised 8 team leaders, 2 groups of 3 mem-
bers, and 6 groups of 2 members; one participant eventually
dropped out. Of the 8 groups, all completed at least one walking
PREVENTING CHRONIC DISEASE
VOLUME 13, E83
PUBLIC HEALTH RESEARCH, PRACTICE, AND POLICY
          JUNE 2016
The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors’ affiliated institutions.
www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2016/16_0111.htm • Centers for Disease Control and Prevention       3
 meeting and 7 groups completed both walking meetings. Taken to-
gether, the study enrollment, response rate (17/18 participants, or
94%), and completion of walking meetings (7/8 groups, or 88%)
suggest that walking meetings were feasible for this sample of
white-collar workers.
All participants agreed to the WaM strategy after being taught how
to organize and conduct the walking meeting during study initi-
ation. Although the protocol suggested 30 minutes as a minimum
for the walking meeting, all groups walked from 30 to 40 minutes.
Five groups followed the prescribed path. Of the 3 groups that did
not follow the path, 2 groups took a different route to accomplish
tasks at other campus locations during their walking meeting; the
third group took a wrong turn but later rejoined the prescribed
path. All groups agreed that the WaM protocol was acceptable ac-
cording to the measures defined (Table 1), including the suitabil-
ity of walking meetings for their work setting.
When we asked focus group participants about the extent to which
they implemented the components of the WaM protocol, 7 groups
created and printed an agenda to take on their walk, 3 groups took
written notes, and one group engaged in a sit-and-conclude ses-
sion after their walk. All groups used their established meeting
times and places for their walking meetings, and all groups felt
they had proper attire and items to make their walk comfortable.
Six groups completed 5 of 7 prescribed WaM protocol compon-
ents. The 2 components least frequently completed were the sit-
and-conclude session and creating an agenda.
The average number of minutes (SD) participants engaged in com-
bined work-related moderate/vigorous physical activity per week
during the 3 weeks increased from an average of 107 (55) minutes
during the baseline week to 114 (67) minutes at week 2 and to 117
(65) minutes at week 3. The mean (SD) number of minutes in light
PA on walking-meeting days among all participants decreased
from 169.8 (83.3) minutes at baseline to 129.2 (62.1) minutes at
week 3 (Table 2); however, the differences between baseline and
each follow-up week were not significant. On the day of the walk-
ing meeting, the mean number of minutes spent in moderate, vig-
orous, or very vigorous PA increased from 34.1 minutes at
baseline to 43.5 minutes at week 2 (P = .31) and to 43.0 minutes at
week 3 (P = .33 for difference from baseline). Nine participants
did not meet the 10,000 steps goal during baseline week; by week
3, two of these 9 participants reached 10,000 steps.
When asked about their typical meeting at work, participants had
the following comments: “Sometimes people come into our meet-
ing. Sometimes our meetings get cut short. Sometimes we have to
come back to our meeting” [Group 4, participant 1]. “[We] talk
about personal stuff and other study-related stuff. Scheduling, va-
cation, coverage, etc. They (the meetings) are very informal”
[Group 7, participant 1]. “Most meetings go overtime” [Group 1,
participant 1].
When asked how teams organized their walking meetings, parti-
cipants stated the following:
Often times, for our meetings, I know I’m going to be in front of a
computer. So, I kinda multitask during our meetings. So I really had
to set time for these walking meetings versus plan to be in front of
my computer, talking to [another participant] and doing something
else, which is rude but you know, it’s reality” [Group 4, participant
2].
“We both agreed on a time. Scheduled it on our calendar” [Group
3, participant 1]. “Made mental bullet points. Didn’t take paper
with us” [Group 2, participant 1].
When asked about their general experience at engaging in walk-
ing meetings, participants stated, “Being outside with other
people, you’re never really alone, per se, and you never feel as if
you are this small little bubble doing some random thing, like
you’re in the world and you’re doing something” [Group 5, parti-
cipant 2]. “Today I used it as a way of letting go of my stress”
[Group 5, participant 3].
I loved it [walking meeting]. It was very energizing, very invigorating.
We got a lot done, we went through our agenda completely, effi-
ciently, and it helped us generate ideas as we were discussing a
topic. We were generating ideas for solutions and came up with
solutions and tasks, like who’s going to do what. I was incredibly ef-
ficient” [Group 6, participant 3].
Discussion
Traditional seated meetings that were converted into a walking
format using the WaM protocol increased moderate, vigorous, and
very vigorous PA levels by 10 minutes among our sample of
white-collar workers. Many jobs in the white-collar workforce in-
volve a disproportionate amount of sitting time, which can in-
crease the risk for being overweight or obese (21). Although sev-
eral interventions have aimed to increase PA levels in the work-
place (eg, by using stability balls instead of chairs and sit–stand
work stations instead of traditional desks), the scientific literature
consists of either low-quality evidence or equivocal results on the
effect of these interventions. Data from this pilot study suggest
that walking meetings might provide an alternative to the sedent-
ary workdays of white-collar workers.
PREVENTING CHRONIC DISEASE
VOLUME 13, E83
PUBLIC HEALTH RESEARCH, PRACTICE, AND POLICY
          JUNE 2016
The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors’ affiliated institutions.
4       Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  •  www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2016/16_0111.htm
 Focus groups suggest that the WaM protocol was feasible, accep-
ted, and successfully implemented by study participants. Among
the 8 participating groups, 7 completed both walking meetings.
These findings are in contrast with those of Cooper et al, who
found that university employees who reported a lack of time for
PA and perceived that fitness facilities at work were expensive did
not engage in PA (22). We found that walking meetings were ac-
cepted and implemented by white-collar university employees in
this pilot study and that these workers could easily fit a walking
meeting into the workday with little to no burden to their work-
flow.
This study has several limitations, including a small number of
participants and a short duration. Time constraints (a 7-month aca-
demic year) and a limited number of accelerometers prohibited the
research team from recruiting more participants and conducting
additional cycles. The use of accelerometers may have caused a
Hawthorne-type or reactivity event (23): participants may have in-
creased their PA at work because they knew they were being mon-
itored.
Despite these limitations, this pilot study has several strengths, in-
cluding the collection of both quantitative and qualitative data, a
flexible walking meeting protocol, and a uniform community of
workers who engaged in similar tasks. A unique aspect of this
study was the flexible walking meeting protocol. Rather than al-
lowing participants to engage in a walking meeting without guid-
ance, the research team provided participants with suggestions and
a prescribed route with the aim of eliminating confusion, provid-
ing autonomy, and stimulating productivity while walking in a
safe work environment. This study adds information on walking
meetings to the scientific literature, where little research exists.
The data collected from this pilot study suggest that walking meet-
ings, a simple modification of traditional seated meetings, were
not only well accepted by our sample of white-collar workers but
were easy to implement and feasible to conduct during regular
working hours. PA interventions such as the WaM protocol that
encourage walking and raise levels of PA in the workplace are
needed to counter the negative health effects of sedentary behavi-
or. Future studies should consider more frequent and repeated
measures of walking meetings with larger groups of white-collar
workers.
Acknowledgments
A.J.C-M., H.E.K., X.Y. and K.L.A. had full access to all of the
data in the study and take responsibility for the integrity of the
data and the accuracy of the data analysis. All authors reviewed
and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by a
startup package allowance to A.J.C-M., the senior author from the
Department of Public Health Sciences at the University of Miami,
Miller School of Medicine. The authors thank the staff members
who participated in the study. The authors have no financial, con-
sultant, institutional, or other relationships that might lead to a bi-
as or a conflict of interest in this manuscript. The findings and
conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not ne-
cessarily represent the views of their institutions.
Author Information
Corresponding Author: Alberto J. Caban-Martinez, DO, PhD,
MPH, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, 1120 NW
14th St, 10th Floor (R-669), Clinical Research Building, Rm 1025,
Miami,  Florida  33136.  Telephone:  305-243-7565.  Email:
acaban@med.miami.edu.
Author Affiliations: Hannah E. Kling, Xuan Yang, Sarah E.
Messiah, Kristopher L. Arheart, Miller School of Medicine,
University of Miami, Miami, Florida; Debi Brannan, Western
Oregon University, Monmouth, Oregon.
References
Owen N, Healy GN, Matthews CE, Dunstan DW. Too much
sitting: the population health science of sedentary behavior.
Exerc Sport Sci Rev 2010;38(3):105–13.
  1.
Lee IM, Skerrett PJ. Physical activity and all-cause mortality:
what is the dose-response relation? Med Sci Sports Exerc
2001;33(6,Suppl):S459–71, discussion S493–4.
  2.
Wen CP, Wai JP, Tsai MK, Yang YC, Cheng TY, Lee MC, et
al. Minimum amount of physical activity for reduced mortality
and extended life expectancy: a prospective cohort study.
Lancet 2011;378(9798):1244–53.
  3.
American Heart Association. Why walking? 2015. http://
www.heart.org/HEARTORG/GettingHealthy/PhysicalActivity/
W a l k i n g / W h y - W a l k i n g _ U C M _ 4 6 1 7 7 0 _
Article.jsp#.VlxkZul7f60. Accessed November 30, 2015.
  4.
US Department of Health and Human Services. Physical
Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee final report. http://
www.health.gov/PAGuidelines/Report/Default.aspx. Accessed
November 30, 2015.
  5.
Fan JX, Brown BB, Hanson H, Kowaleski-Jones L, Smith KR,
Zick CD. Moderate to vigorous physical activity and weight
outcomes: does every minute count? Am J Health Promot
2013;28(1):41–9.
  6.
Park S, Pan L, Lankford T. Relationship between employment
characteristics and obesity among employed U.S. adults. Am J
Health Promot 2014;28(6):389–96.
  7.
PREVENTING CHRONIC DISEASE
VOLUME 13, E83
PUBLIC HEALTH RESEARCH, PRACTICE, AND POLICY
          JUNE 2016
The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors’ affiliated institutions.
www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2016/16_0111.htm • Centers for Disease Control and Prevention       5
 Lin YP, McCullagh MC, Kao TS, Larson JL. An integrative
review: work environment factors associated with physical
activity among white-collar workers. West J Nurs Res 2014;
36(2):262–83.
  8.
Schreuder KJ, Roelen CA, Koopmans PC, Groothoff JW. Job
demands  and  health  complaints  in  white  and  blue  collar
workers. Work 2008;31(4):425–32.
  9.
Shrestha  N,  Kukkonen-Harjula  KT,  Verbeek  JH,  Ijaz  S,
Hermans V, Bhaumik S. Workplace interventions for reducing
sitting  at  work.  Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev  2016;
3:CD010912.
10.
Feet  first.  Guide  to  walking  meetings.  2013.  http://
www.feetfirst.org/walk-and-maps/walking-meetings. Accessed
November 30, 2015.
11.
Clayton  R,  Thomas  C,  Smothers  J.  How  to  do  walking
meetings right. Harvard Business Review 2015. https://hbr.org/
2015/08/how-to-do-walking-meetings-right.  Accessed
November 30, 2015.
12.
Vanderkam L. How to make walking meetings work. Fast
Company; 2015. http://www.fastcompany.com/3047655/how-
to-make-walking-meetings-work. Accessed November 30,
2015.
13.
Riverside  UoC.  Walking  meetings  101.  https://
wellness.ucr.edu/Walking_Meeting_Guidelines.pdf. Accessed
November 30, 2015.
14.
Craig CL, Marshall AL, Sjöström M, Bauman AE, Booth ML,
Ainsworth  BE,  et  al.  International  physical  activity
questionnaire: 12-country reliability and validity. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 2003;35(8):1381–95.
15.
Freedson  PS,  Melanson  E,  Sirard  J.  Calibration  of  the
Computer Science and Applications, Inc. accelerometer. Med
Sci Sports Exerc 1998;30(5):777–81.
16.
Annells M. Grounded theory method, Part II: options for users
of the method. Nurs Inq 1997;4(3):176–80.
17.
Annells M. Grounded theory method, Part I: within the five
moments of qualitative research. Nurs Inq 1997;4(2):120–9.
18.
Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  How  much
physical activity do adults need? Physical activity basics. http:/
/www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/basics/adults/index.htm.
Accessed November 30, 2015.
19.
Beyea SC, Nicoll LH. Collecting, analyzing, and interpreting
focus group data. AORN J 2000;71(6):1278–83.
20.
Chau JY, van der Ploeg HP, Merom D, Chey T, Bauman AE.
Cross-sectional associations between occupational and leisure-
time sitting, physical activity and obesity in working adults.
Prev Med 2012;54(3-4):195–200.
21.
Cooper K, Barton GC. An exploration of physical activity and
wellbeing in university employees. Perspect Public Health
2016;136(3):152–60.
22.
Vandoni M, Correale L, Del Bianco M, Marin L, Codrons E.
Does reactivity to accelerometers occur in a single trial? Brief
report in a sample of young adults. J Health Psychol 2016;
1359105316628758.
23.
PREVENTING CHRONIC DISEASE
VOLUME 13, E83
PUBLIC HEALTH RESEARCH, PRACTICE, AND POLICY
          JUNE 2016
The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors’ affiliated institutions.
6       Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  •  www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2016/16_0111.htm
 Tables
Table 1
Table 1. 
. Metrics Used to Assess Feasibility, Acceptability, and Implementation of the Walking Meeting (WaM) Pilot Study, 2015
Metrics Used to Assess Feasibility, Acceptability, and Implementation of the Walking Meeting (WaM) Pilot Study, 2015
Objective
Objective
Key Questions
Key Questions
Data Source
Data Source
Indicators
Indicators
Feasibility
Are white-collar workers willing to consider adopting
walking meetings?
Response rate
Number of eligible employers who agree to
participate
Can research teams and their members be trained
to deliver the walking meeting strategy?
Interviews with teams involved in
walking meeting training
Percentage of teams and team members that
complete both walking meetings (week 2 and
week 3)
How much and what types of support are needed by
worksite staff to enact walking meetings?
Interviews with WaM team
members
Time spent by research team members providing
technical assistance and other support
Acceptability
How do those involved with walking meetings view
the strategy?
Interviews with WaM team
members
Percentage of respondents who report that the
walking meetings strategy is acceptable
To what extent is the walking meetings strategy
viewed as suitable for the setting and population?
Interviews with WaM team
members
Percentage of respondents who report that the
strategy is suitable for their setting
Can the walking meeting strategy be adapted to suit
research team leadership and membership needs
and preferences?
Interviews with WaM team
members
Recommendations and preferences
communicated
Implementation
To what degree are core components of the walking
meeting strategy implemented?
Team meeting discussion plan
and process tracking
Integrated worksite policy is written and
communicated; cost and resources expended.
What noncore or adaptive elements are
implemented?
Team meeting discussion plan
and process tracking
Number and types of trainings and information
delivered
To what extent is walking meeting strategy
implemented with fidelity?
Interviews with WaM team
members
Percentage of participants that implemented the
suggested components of a walking meeting
PREVENTING CHRONIC DISEASE
VOLUME 13, E83
PUBLIC HEALTH RESEARCH, PRACTICE, AND POLICY
          JUNE 2016
The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors’ affiliated institutions.
www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2016/16_0111.htm • Centers for Disease Control and Prevention       7
 Table 2
Table 2. 
. Mean (Standard Deviation) Number of Minutes of
Mean (Standard Deviation) Number of Minutes of Work-Related
 Work-Related Physical Activity
 Physical Activitya on Baseline Day (Nonwalking Day) and Walking Days (Week 2 and Week
 on Baseline Day (Nonwalking Day) and Walking Days (Week 2 and Week
3) in the Walking Meeting (WaM) Pilot Study, 2015
3) in the Walking Meeting (WaM) Pilot Study, 2015b
Level of Physical Activity
Level of Physical Activity
Baseline
Baselineb (n = 17
 (n = 17
Participants)
Participants)
Week 2
Week 2b (n = 17 Participants)
 (n = 17 Participants)
Week 3
Week 3b (n = 14
 (n = 14
Participants)
Participants)
Light
169.8 (83.3)
143.3 (46.1)
129.2 (62.1)
Moderate
31.4 (19.9)
41.6 (25.2)
40.4 (22.4)
Vigorous
1.2 (3.2)
1.83 (6.3)
1.6 (4.4)
Very vigorous
1.5 (5.3)
0.01 (0.04)
1.1 (4.0)
Moderate, vigorous, and very vigorous
34.1 (23.6)
43.5 (29.6)
43.0 (26.6)
a Work-related physical activity is all activity that took place and was measured by accelerometry between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on a workday.
b No significant difference (using paired t test) in the number of light, moderate, vigorous, or very vigorous physical activity minutes between baseline and week 2
or week 3.
PREVENTING CHRONIC DISEASE
VOLUME 13, E83
PUBLIC HEALTH RESEARCH, PRACTICE, AND POLICY
          JUNE 2016
The opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors’ affiliated institutions.
8       Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  •  www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2016/16_0111.htm
