 Perspectives
The Stem Cell Hard Sell: Report From a Clinic’s Patient
Recruitment Seminar
PAUL S. KNOEPFLERa,b,c
aDepartment of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy and bGenome Center, University of California Davis School of Medicine, Davis, California, USA; cInstitute
of Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospital for Children Northern California, Sacramento, California, USA
SUMMARY
The growing direct-to-consumer, stem cell clinic industry in the U.S. uses a number of strategies for patient recruitment, including self-
styled educational seminars, which may reach thousands of members of the public annually. Here I report on a first-hand experience at
such a seminar that I recently attended. Numerous specific medical claims were made at the seminar: no potential for rejection; no side
effects, including no pain; proven efficacy for a variety of conditions, including in particular arthritis and pain; and U.S. Food and Drug
Administration approval. I discuss the potential impact of these kinds of seminars on the public and on the stem cell field. STEM CELLS
TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1–3
SIGNIFICANCE
This article focuses on the strategies used to recruit patients via for-profit stem cell clinic seminars and the marketing claims made as
well as the impact on the public and the stem cell translational medicine field. Although the field is very aware of the existence of such
seminars, this piece is significant and novel for reporting first-hand on the specific factual details of one such seminar. Stem cell clinics
conducting such self-described stem cell educational seminars use a number of marketing strategies to recruit customers and make
specifictestablemedicalclaims,whichmay,insomeinstances, misinformthepublicandpotentiallyposeathreat tothestemcellfield.
Potential ways to address this growing challenge are discussed.
INTRODUCTION
TheAmerican direct-to-consumer stemcell clinicindustryhasgrown
quickly in recent years to include at least 570 clinics [1], and there is
concern that it may be based more on hype than on data [2–5]. It is
increasingly common to see advertisements for stem cell interven-
tions not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) [6] and for scientists to be contacted by patients considering
these unproven therapies and who are seeking out additional infor-
mation [7]. As part of the strategy for recruiting patients, businesses
marketing stem cell “treatments” have also taken to arranging gath-
erings that are often termed “educational seminars.” Press releases
and advertisementsdescribetheseseminarsasopportunitiesfor pa-
tientstolearnmoreaboutstemcells,buttheseseminarsalsoappear
to be an effective way for clinicsto recruit newcustomers by making
a “hard sell” to attendees. For these reasons, such meetings have in-
formally been termed “infomercial” seminars. Reports on stem cell
clinic infomercial seminars have largely been anecdotal, so they re-
main a poorly understood phenomenon. Here I describe my first-
handexperienceattendingastemcellclinicinfomercialseminar.This
report includes my impressions of the strategies used by those run-
ning the seminar to sign up new customers, the marketing claims
made,andthepotentialimpactofsuchseminarsinthebroaderstem
cell translational medicine context.
FIRST IMPRESSIONS
Noting an advertisement for what I perceived to be a stem cell
clinic infomercial seminar, I traveled to the location to attend.
To enable a higher degree of frankness in this report, I am omitting
the identity of the stem cell business, the location of the seminar,
andthenamesofthespeakers.BecauseIamknowninthestemcell
clinic world, I was uncertain as to the reception I might receive. I
strove to be unobtrusive when I arrived, but soon after I sat down
in the audience at the hotel meeting room where the seminar was
about to begin shortly, one of the organizers came up to me and
indicated that he knew who I was.
My purpose was to gather information about this clinic and ex-
perience first-hand what a stem cell clinic infomercial seminar was
like. My sense was that they knew I was not there as a potential
customer. Those running the seminar frequently sat or stood im-
mediately behindmeduring the meeting,perhaps as anattempt at
intimidation or to see the notes I was taking. Because I was iden-
tified by the people running the seminar prior to its beginning, a
caveat in this piece is that they could have changed aspects of
Correspondence: Paul S.Knoepfler, Ph.D., University of California Davis, 2425 Stockton Boulevard, Sacramento, California 95817, USA. Telephone: 916-453-2289;
E-Mail: knoepfler@ucdavis.edu
Received April 25, 2016; accepted for publication June 23, 2016. ©AlphaMed Press 1066-5099/2016/$20.00/0; http://
dx.doi.org/10.5966/sctm.2016-0208
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1–3 www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
PERSPECTIVES
2017;6:14–16
ABSTRACT
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
Correspondence: Paul S. Knoepfler, Ph.D., University of California Davis, 2425 Stockton Boulevard, Sacramento, California 95817, USA. Telephone:
916-453-2289; e-mail: knoepfler@ucdavis.edu Received April 25, 2016; accepted for publication June 23, 2016; published Online First on
August 2, 2016. O
c AlphaMed Press 1066-5099/2016/$20.00/0; http:// dx.doi.org/10.5966/sctm.2016-0208
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
from
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 14:56
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160051/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160051
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2017;6:14–16 www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 the seminar because they knew I was in the audience. However, I
saw no clear evidence of that.
My initial overall observation of the seminar environment
was striking and disconcerting. There were approximately 30
people in attendance, and most were senior citizens. My im-
pression was that many of the attendees had serious medical
conditions, which sparked concern in my mind that they could
be vulnerable to a sales pitch. There were quite a few couples
in the audience.
The seminar team (mostly dressed in medical scrubs) handed
out a clipboard to each attendee with three pieces of paper very
much like those that one might be given on arriving at a new doc-
tor’s office. We were told to fill in our information and then to
return the sheets back to them before we left. Notably, the top
sheet was a credit application. On another page, the clinic asked
for extensive personal information, including name, age, birth-
date, address, e-mail, and phone number. Additional questions
asked about medical conditions, as well as medical tests that
had already been conducted.
As the seminar began, the audience was told to hold all ques-
tions until after the speakers were done, and then they would talk
one-on-one with attendees. I had hoped to ask a few questions
from my place in the audience, which others present could hear,
as a means to catalyze a meaningful discussion of key issues, but
this “rule” seemed to negate that chance, and I had no interest in
being disruptive of the meeting.
MAKING IT PERSONAL
Thespeakerintroducedhimselfasaveteranofthestemcellfield.I
will call him by the pseudonym Ted. He discussed his experience
with a successful stem cell business in another state and por-
trayed himself as a stem cell expert. Fairly quickly he began an an-
ecdote about his own family members. Ted reported that a family
member had suffered a major illness and that as a result he knew
what it meant to be facing a difficult medical situation in the fam-
ily. He then did a survey of the audience via raised hands to ask
about various medical conditions that brought them there. The
most common condition that brought people to the seminar
was arthritis and the associated pain.
Ted next asked the audience to close their eyes and ask them-
selves, “What could you do in the past that you can’t do now?”
With my eyes open, I estimated that nearly every member of
the audience had closed his or her eyes. I wondered about the
impact of this approach by the seminar organizers on the audi-
ence’s state of mind. Ted went on to speak about how the U.S.
health care system is broken before starting in on how wonderful
stem cells are as a form of medicine.
QUESTIONABLE MEDICAL CLAIMS
It was at this point that Ted began a more intense sales pitch fo-
cused on this particular clinic’s marketed kind of stem cells, am-
niotic stem cells, which is the main basis for their “treatments,”
although adipose stem cells were also mentioned briefly. He used
theanalogy ofstemcellsasthatuncleorother relativeweallhave
who is a “Mr. Fixit,” who can “fix anything.” I interpreted this as a
potential medical claim, the first in a series presented (Table 1),
meaning that their stem cells can successfully treat many condi-
tions.AtnotimeduringthemeetingdidInotedisclaimersorwaiv-
ers of any kind regarding this or other claims. He described the
different kinds of stem cells, reporting incorrectly that it is illegal
to use or even study embryonic stem cells. He described the am-
niotic cells this clinic would transplant into patients as being akin
to a “new car” and having no potential for rejection once trans-
planted. This statement of no possible immunorejection was a
second, concrete medical claim made to the audience, and it
was made with no conditions or qualifiers.
The treatment was then described in further detail, leading to
additional medical claims. For instance, Ted indicated that the
treatment would be a same-day, painless injection, so patients
would just walk out with a bandage. “There is no surgery and this
is the new gold standard,” he said. Furthermore, he reported that
theyhaveobserved“nosideeffects,”anotherunambiguousmed-
ical claim. In contrast, traditional procedures such as knee re-
placements have “many risks,” we were told, including heart
attacks. Ted claimed to the seminar audience that 5,000 people
die each year from a heart attack after knee surgery. I fact-
checked this claim and found a recent study indicating no major
long-term increase in the rate of heart attacks following knee sur-
gery [8]. Thus, the clinic statement, rather than being based on
data to accurately inform the seminar audience, was rather a
claim most likely intended to make the treatment being sold at
the seminar appear dramatically safer and more effective than
the standard of care, such as joint replacement surgery.
He made another definite, quantitative medical claim: “90%
of patients had a 50% or better improvement” with this treat-
ment. Ted went on to try to bolster the claim of efficacy with
before-and-after photos from patient x-rays and MRIs. He even
showeddatafromacompetingclinicinanotherstate.Heflashed
a slide with a table of numbers of their own data purporting to
show great improvements in patients’ perception of pain after
receiving the stem cell “treatment.” He invoked some specific
patient testimonials, including a video, and he also made a claim
that the clinic had treated a particular professional sports celeb-
rity with stem cells.
CLOSING THE DEAL
Ted then indicated that all the audience members should close
their eyes again. He told the attendees to visualize and project
themselves 6–12 months in the future. “Put yourself in the future
where now you can do those things that you couldn’t before.” I
saw a few audience members nodding in agreement. Then Ted
said, “It is your choice to be in pain or not.” My sense was that
this had a powerful impact on the audience.
During the remaining few minutes, Ted made an additional
medical claim of FDA approval: “While this treatment is FDA-
approved, it is not covered by insurance.” However, it is not
clear to me, as someone who has been following the stem cell
field for many years, that the treatment that was being sold at
Table 1. Summary of stem cell seminar marketing claims
Range of conditions successfully treated
No side effects
Safer than standard of care
No immune rejection
FDA approval
Specific efficacy for arthritis/pain
Abbreviation: FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
2
Stem Cell Clinic Seminars Sell With Claims
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 14:56
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160051/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160051
Knoepfler
15
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 this meeting was actually FDA-approved. My impression, on the
basis of all that Ted and the other speaker said, was that the
“stem cells” being marketed to the audience were living amni-
oticstem cells,but using living amniotic stemcells for treatment
of nonhomologous medical conditions such as arthritis could
squarely place a treatment of this kind into the realm of an un-
approved biological drug. In this sense, such a product would
notbe“FDA-approved.”Alternatively,iftheproductin question
is an extract of amniotic cells with no living cells, then—to me at
least—this conflicted with how the product was being por-
trayed to the audience, which again strongly implied the use
of living stem cells. More practically speaking, what the second
part of this statement from Ted meant was that the patients
would have to pay somehow because insurance would not.
The price of the treatment was quoted as $5,999, but we were
told that there was a “seminar special” under way during which
attendees could get $1,000 off the price. However, this deal was
only good “ifyou signup today at the seminar.”This felt to melike
a hard sell, and I turned back to the credit application on my clip-
board, wondering about patients going into debt. A number of
people had been filling out some of the forms during the seminar.
Finally, Ted added that monthly payment plans below $100 were
possible as well, and he said rather generally that many people
weresigning up,as reflectedby the fact thatthe clinicwasalready
booked 1–2 months out.
CONCLUSION
Overall, this experience felt more like attending a persuasive en-
tertainment show or something on a television shopping network
than an educational seminar. While I do not know what other
stem cell clinic infomercial seminars are like first-hand, my sense
from watching clinic marketing videos, including those on You-
Tube, is that the one I attended was fairly representative of what
goes on at such customer recruitment events.
Approximately 30 people attended the one clinic seminar at
which I was present, and, on the basis of an informal observation
ofadvertisements,Ihavenotedthatthesponsorshaveheldmany
of these seminars. Thus, it is possible that approximately 200
people have seen just this one type of seminar alone in one
city in the U.S. from a single clinic. Given the growing realiza-
tion that there are hundreds of stem cell clinics in the U.S. to-
day in 2016 and the observation that many hold recruitment
seminars, it is possible that thousands of members of the pub-
lic each year are attending infomercial seminars that provide
misleading or even outright factually incorrect information
about stem cells and questionable medical claims. This could
not only lead many patients to receive unnecessary, unsafe, or
ineffectual treatments, but it may also contribute to public
confusion about stem cells and the field of stem cell clinical
research. These seminars represent only one type of an as-
sortment of recruitment methods, including Internet, radio,
newspaper, and television ads for various clinics, which may
also contain dubious statements. I believe that such stem cell
clinic marketing poses a significant threat to public perception
and understanding of the legitimate stem cell translational
medicine field.
Although individual stem cell scientists such as myself can
attend such meetings, ask questions, and aim to provide cor-
rect information on stem cells, my feeling is that such efforts
alone will be insufficient to counter the negative impact from
this phenomenon. The FDA has thus far not been particularly
effective in managing the mushrooming direct-to-consumer
stem cell industry in the U.S. What may prove more effective
is contacting the Federal Trade Commission to file complaints
about misleading advertising. Another potentially effective
strategy is for stem cell and regenerative medicine organiza-
tions to take more assertive action in educating the public to
counter the negative effects of stem cell infomercial seminars.
This growing phenomenon must not be ignored, and at least
part of the solution will come from actions taken by stem cell
researchers and their organizations.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The author indicated no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Turner L, Knoepfler P. Selling stem cells in
the USA: Assessing the direct-to-consumer in-
dustry.Cell Stem Cell 2016 [Epubaheadofprint].
2
Bianco P, Sipp D. Regulation: Sell help not
hope. Nature 2014;510:336–337.
3
Turner LG. US clinics marketing unproven
and unlicensed adipose-derived autologous stem
cell interventions. Regen Med 2015;10:397–402.
4
Regenberg AC, Hutchinson LA, Schanker B
etal.Medicineonthefringe:Stemcell-basedin-
terventions in advance of evidence. STEM CELLS
2009;27:2312–2319.
5
Ogbogu U, Rachul C, Caulfield T. Reassess-
ing direct-to-consumer portrayals of unproven
stem cell therapies: Is it getting better? Regen
Med 2013;8:361–369.
6
Knoepfler PS. From bench to FDA to bed-
side: US regulatory trends for new stem cell
therapies. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2015;82-83:
192–196.
7
Knoepfler PS. When patients reach out,
scientists should reach back carefully. Nat
Med 2016;22:230.
8
Lu N, Misra D, Neogi T et al. Total joint
arthroplasty and the risk of myocardial infarc-
tion: A general population, propensity score-
matched cohort study. Arthritis Rheumatol
2015;67:2771–2779.
Knoepfler
3
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ID: jw3b2server3dgen1
Time: 14:56
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00601/160051/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM160051
16
Stem Cell Clinic Seminars Sell With Claims
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
