 EN V I R O N M E N T AL S T U D I E S
Copyright © 2018
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to
originalU.S.Government
Works. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
NonCommercial
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Saigas on the brink: Multidisciplinary analysis of the
factors influencing mass mortality events
Richard A. Kock,1* Mukhit Orynbayev,2 Sarah Robinson,3 Steffen Zuther,4,5 Navinder J. Singh,6
Wendy Beauvais,1† Eric R. Morgan,7 Aslan Kerimbayev,2 Sergei Khomenko,8
Henny M. Martineau,1 Rashida Rystaeva,2 Zamira Omarova,2 Sara Wolfs,1
Florent Hawotte,9 Julien Radoux,9 Eleanor J. Milner-Gulland3
In 2015, more than 200,000 saiga antelopes died in 3 weeks in central Kazakhstan. The proximate cause of death is
confirmed as hemorrhagic septicemia caused by the bacterium Pasteurella multocida type B, based on multiple
strands of evidence. Statistical modeling suggests that there was unusually high relative humidity and temperature
in the days leading up to the mortality event; temperature and humidity anomalies were also observed in two pre-
vious similar events in the same region. The modeled influence of environmental covariates is consistent with known
drivers of hemorrhagic septicemia. Given the saiga population’s vulnerability to mass mortality and the likely exac-
erbation of climate-related and environmental stressors in the future, management of risks to population viability
such as poaching and viral livestock disease is urgently needed, as well as robust ongoing veterinary surveillance. A
multidisciplinary approach is needed to research mass mortality events under rapid environmental change.
INTRODUCTION
In May 2015, researchers witnessed a catastrophic disease event causing
the death of some 200,000 saiga antelopes (Saiga tatarica tatarica) in
calving aggregations, across a landscape stretching for several hundreds
of kilometers near the Torgai lowland, central Kazakhstan (Fig. 1, fig. S1,
and the Supplementary Materials). The syndrome attracted global
media attention and considerable speculation as to its cause. By June,
adult numbers were reduced to around 15% of the pre-calving numbers
of this population, representing a loss of around 62% of the global pop-
ulation of this critically endangered species (1).
Mass mortality events (MMEs) of animals are demographic catas-
trophes that can simultaneously affect all life stages and rapidly remove
a substantial proportion of a population over a short period of time
relative to the generation time of the organism. They are often asso-
ciated with multiple stressors including highly transmissible infections
and exposure to toxins or extreme weather, alone or in combination
(2). There is considerable speculation as to the increasing influence of
ecological perturbations from human activities on MMEs (3, 4).
Understanding and predicting the response of opportunistic microbes
to changing environmental conditions, and of hosts to growing num-
bers of stressors, require a much greater emphasis on investigating the
ecological context of MMEs than hitherto has been the case (5). This
calls for a more multidisciplinary, or One Health, approach (6).
This paper reports one of the first investigations of a major MME
using this approach, providing a strong empirical example of the crit-
icalroleplayedby environmentalfactorsin MMEs.Weestablishthe pri-
mary cause of death in the MME in May 2015 affecting the Betpak-dala
saiga population in central Kazakhstan and investigate potential caus-
ative and predisposing factors using contemporaneous and historical
data analysis and insights from the literature. On the basis of our find-
ings, we make recommendations for future management and research
for this species and MMEs in general.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Research approach at the time of the mortality event
Given the unexpected nature of the disease event, there was no prior
experimental design for the study. A research team was in the field for
normal monitoring of calving, led by S.Z. As animals started to die, re-
searchers S.W. and S.Z. took observations and samples using the best
available methods. An emergency response team including R.A.K. and
M.O. attended within 1 week of the first observations of mortality. They
carried out field postmortems and sampling according to an outbreak
investigation protocol that had previously been agreed upon based on
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations best practice
for emergency response to disease outbreaks, customized for saiga
antelopes (7).
Because mortality and morbidity appeared to be 100%, for practi-
cal reasons, we did not attempt random sampling for epidemiological
analysis and no healthy animals remained for comparison. Unaffected
animals and survivors of the MME (approximately 30,000 individuals,
based on post-MME expeditions and aerial surveys) were either geo-
graphically far removed at the time (for example, older male groups
occur to the north at this time of the year) (8) or cryptically located
away from aggregations, in small herds widely distributed or peripheral
to the calving areas. Because of the vast landscape, neither the precise
location nor the behavior of these surviving groups could be determined.
The selection of carcasses for necropsy was not based on any ran-
domization, given that the syndrome was so universal and consistent
in character. It affected a proportion of the aggregations each day with
a few initial cases observed, but soon affected thousands daily until the
end of the die-off, which stopped abruptly when all were dead; there
was hardly any tailing off of cases. Saiga herds during calving move up
to approximately 2 km each day, and the necropsy simply followed
these movements, with a number of full postmortem examinations
(PMEs) completed on each day. It was not possible to catch healthy
saigas for comparison of clinical pathology with dead and dying
animals, because the capture technique requires specialized teams
1Royal Veterinary College, London, UK. 2Research Institute for Biological Safety
Problems, Gvardeiskiy, Kazakhstan. 3Department of Zoology, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK. 4Frankfurt Zoological Society, Frankfurt, Germany. 5Association for the
Conservation of Biodiversity of Kazakhstan, Astana, Kazakhstan. 6Swedish University
of Agricultural Sciences, Umea, Sweden. 7School of Biological Sciences, Queen’s
University Belfast, Belfast, UK. 8Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome, Italy.
9Université catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
*Corresponding author. Email: rkock@rvc.ac.uk
†Present address: Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Kock et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaao2314
17 January 2018
1 of 10
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and no unaffected saigas were within easy range of the teams, which
were situated hundreds of kilometers to the north. Unaffected female
saigas were not observed over the period of mortality.
Samples were sent to laboratoriesin Kazakhstan and overseas for anal-
ysis, following normal best practice. Once the formal scientific research
collaboration was established, to ensure that the research was carried
out in a systematic and structured manner, the characteristics of the
outbreakwerelistedbytheresearchteam.Asetofnon–mutuallyexclusive
hypotheses for the proximate cause of the outbreak was then developed,
consistent with these characteristics. These hypotheses were then ex-
plored, and refined or discarded, using a combination of review of the
English and Russian language literatures (including texts available only
in Russia or Kazakhstan), laboratory analyses, expert consultation with
field biologists who were present at the time of previous outbreaks, con-
sultationofarchivedfieldnotesandmaps,follow-upfieldexpeditions,and
statistical analysis using a range of data sets of environmental covariates.
Clinical and pathological diagnosis
Animals were observed alive from a distance. When moribund, they
were observed closely and physically examined. After death, a complete
postmortem examination (PME) and sampling were performed on
selected cases including adults and calves. Before death, 26 saigas from
Torgai and4 from Tengiz (Fig. 1) were blood-sampled from the jugular
veinusing a sterile technique, and aliquots of blood were stored whole
for parasitological examination and placed in clot tubes for removal
of serum. For microscopy, thin blood smears were prepared fresh,
fixed with 96% ethanol, and stained using the Romanovsky-Giemsa
method. Given the long distances to the laboratory and the likelihood
of a delay of more than a week before samples could be processed,
biological material was stored in cool boxes or frozen in liquid nitrogen,
and representative tissues were cut and placed in buffered formal saline.
Samples from dead saigas included feces, gut contents, tissues, and any
observed external or internal parasites. For bacteriology and virology,
samples from liver, spleen, lungs, kidney, blood, and milk were stored
frozen; 26 samples from Torgai and 6 samples from Tengiz were pro-
cessed. Whole brain and rumen and gut content were taken for plant
and toxin studies, as were feces and blood for parasite examination.
Biological samples were taken to the Research Institute for Biological
Safety Problems in Gvardeiskiy, Kazakhstan, for processing. Fresh
tissues underwent polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis for
the presence of DNA/RNA of viral or bacterial pathogens, including
microscopy of tissue imprint smears stained by Gram and Giemsa,
isolation of bacterial cultures on nutritional medium, microscopy of
cultivated bacteria and identification by biochemical methods, and
attempted isolation of viruses in cell cultures and identification
through electron microscopy. Full details of the methods used are dis-
cussed in the subsequent sections.
Polymerase chain reaction
RNA was extracted from samples and tested for foot-and-mouth dis-
ease virus (FDMV), bluetongue virus, and peste des petits ruminants
virus (PPRV) using the QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen). DNA
was extracted from samples and tested for viruses (sheep pox, Aujeszky,
and Visna-Maedi) and protozoa (Theileria, Babesia, Anaplasma, and
Coxiella) using the DNeasy blood and tissue mini kit (Qiagen) following
the manufacturer’s protocols. Detection of virusRNA/DNAof peste des
Fig. 1. 2015 MME sites showing dates of onset and the location of the two sites studied in detail in the field. Inset shows the location of the three saiga
populations within Kazakhstan (x and y units are longitude and latitude, respectively).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Kock et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaao2314
17 January 2018
2 of 10
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 petits ruminants (PPR), foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), bluetongue,
and sheep pox was carried out using Real-Time RT-PCR Target Specific
Reagents (Tetracore) (9–12). The PCR was performed following the
manufacturer’s protocols. Amplification and analysis of PCR products
were performed using LightCycler 2.0 (Roche). Detection of bacterial
DNA of Listeria monocytogenes was carried out by PCR using the kit
“Lister” (AmpliSens), again following the manufacturer’s protocols.
Detection ofDNAor antigens of Pasteurella, Mycoplasma, Clostridium
toxins,Coxiella,Akabane,malignantcatarrhalfever(MCF)andAujeszky
viruses, Theileria, Babesia, and Anaplasma was performed by PCR.
PCR was completed using the primers and conditions described in
the literature, as listed in table S1.
Virus isolation and identification
Two types of cell culture were used for virus isolation: primary lamb
kidney cells (LKCs) and Vero cells (African green monkey kidney
cells). A total of 96 tissue samples from saiga (lungs, spleen, and lymph
nodes) were inoculated onto primary LKC and Vero cells. The control
flask was inoculated with sterile phosphate-buffered saline only. The
inoculated cell cultures were observed twice daily (morning and
evening) under an inverted microscope for the appearance of cyto-
pathic effects (CPEs). A sample was considered negative for PPRV if
no CPEs were observed within 10 days after inoculation. In the case of
cells where there were no CPEs, the inoculated cultures were subjected
to freezing and thawing three times to disrupt the intact cells (blind
passages), and 1 ml of this suspension was added to a new 25-cm2 flask
of a confluent monolayer of cells. A sample was considered negative if
no CPEs were observed after three blind passages. The virus isolates
identified by characteristic CPEs observed on LKC and Vero cells
and the presence or absence of virus were confirmed by testing the cell
culture supernatant using PCR and by electron microscopy.
Electron microscopy
Samples of tissues (lungs, spleen, and lymph nodes) from all the dead
saigas were examined by electron microscopy. Preparations for electron
microscopy were prepared by negative staining with 2% phosphotung-
stic acid at pH 6.8 to 7.0. Virus was isolated from the tissue material by
ultracentrifugation at 35,000 rpm for 45 min from the clarified homog-
enate. Virus adsorption to mesh procedures used the sputtered carbon
substrate formvarovoy added to potentially virus-containing fluid
(drop) placed on the well of the Teflon plate. Adsorption time was
10 min. After sample adsorption, the mesh contrasted with a drop of
phosphotungstic acid for 5 min, and after drying, the sample was
examined under a JEM-100 CX II electron microscope (JEOL) at an
acceleration voltage of 80 kV and increased by 80,000 to 100,000.
Isolation and identification of bacterial isolates
Smears from inner organs and from broth and agar cultures were
stained using Romanovsky-Giemsa, Gram, and Loeffler methylene
blue (13). Isolation of Pasteurella was undertaken by cultivation of
pathological material samples in meat-peptone broth, Hottinger di-
gest broth, and plain agar (IPA) with 5% sterile horse serum. To obtain
pure cultures of a single bacterial colony type from blood agar and
MacConkey agar only, bacterial colonies (with the following charac-
teristics: rod, coccobacilli, rough or smooth, Gram negative, with or
with no growth on MacConkey, and presence or absence of hemolysis
on blood agar) were subjected to subculturing. Then, each bacterial
colony was characterized, and further bacterial identification was carried
out using a series of primary and secondary biochemical tests, following
standardprocedures(14).Identification ofthe isolatedPasteurellaculture
was conducted according to biochemical indicators including saccharo-
lytic andproteolytic enzyme excretion, formation of catalase, acetylmeth-
ylcarbinol, ammonia, hydrogen sulfide, indole, lysis of red blood cells and
cattle bile, and nitrate reduction (13). Typing of the isolates was con-
ducted with the use of PCR analysis applying capsular-specific primers
for determining capsular groups A, B, D, E, and F (15).
FTA analysis
Flinders Technology Associates (FTA) cards were taken from 12 dead
or dying saigas at the Tengiz site for rapid dispatch to international
reference laboratories at the Pirbright Institute (PI) and the Friedrich-
Loeffler Institute (FLI) for examination, including use of genomic tests
[next-generation sequencing (NGS)].
At PI, the following procedures were followed. Samples of dried
blood spots (approximately 2 cm in diameter) were received from
12 animals, with two spots provided per animal. These samples were
taken postmortem to eliminate the possibility of laboratory con-
tamination. RNA was extracted by taking a 1-cm-diameter disc of
blood spot and incubating in 200 ml of RLT lysis buffer (with 1%
b-mercaptoethanol) (Qiagen) before incubating at 56°C for 15 min.
Each sample was processed individually, with decontamination
periods of at least 30 min between the handling of each sample. After
the incubation, the supernatant was then decanted off and tested for
the presenceof glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)
using a previously published qualitative real-time reverse transcription
(RT)–PCR assay for porcine GAPDH (16). These results provided an
indication of the suitability of recovered/extracted nucleic acid within
the sample for further pathogen testing by real-time RT-PCR and
NGS. Testing was performed with diagnostic real-time RT-PCR assays
used by both vesicular disease and non-vesicular disease reference lab-
oratories at PI (VDRL and NVDRL, respectively). Assays used were
specific for FMDV (9), bluetongue virus (10), PPRV (11), capripox
(12), and epizootic hemorrhagic disease virus. In each case, 5 ml of
extracted RNA was tested in duplicate using established protocols
within both VDRL and NVDRL. Assays were run on an ABI 7500 Fast
[with the exception of the FMDV assay, which was run on an MX3005
(Agilent)]. All assay runs were validated to standards described within
in-house standard operating procedures (SOPs).
At FLI, the following procedures were followed. Eleven samples of
dried blood spots on FTA cards were received. For whole-genome se-
quencing, RNA was extracted and was used as a template for double-
stranded cDNA synthesis (Roche). The Covaris M220 ultrasonicator
was used for DNA fragmentation of 0.5 to 1 mg of double-stranded
DNA to an average size of about 500 base pairs (bp). For library prep-
aration of the fragmented DNA, a GeneRead DNA Library L Core Kit
and GeneRead Adapter I Set A 12-plex (both from Qiagen) were used
followed by manual size selection using AMPure XP magnetic beads
(Beckmann Coulter). The quality of the library was checked on a Bio-
analyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies) using a high-sensitivity DNA
chip and corresponding reagents. Quantity was determined by quanti-
tative PCR with the Ion Library TaqMan Quantitation Kit (Life Tech-
nologies). After emulsion PCR with a OneTouch 2 device and Ion PGM
Hi-Q OT2 reagents (both from Life Technologies), sequencing was
performed on an Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM) using
an Ion PGM Hi-Q Seq Kit (Life Technologies) for 400-bp reads. Raw
sequence data were first analyzed using Reliable Information Extracted
from Metagenomics Sequential Datasets (RIEMS) (17) and additionally
assembled using the Genome Sequencer software suite (v3.0, Roche).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Kock et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaao2314
17 January 2018
3 of 10
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Histopathology
A set of fixed tissues was sent from the Torgai site to the Department
of Pathobiology at the Royal Veterinary College for histopathological
diagnosis; the remaining tissues from Tengiz and some from Torgai
were processed at Research Institute for Biological Safety Problems,
Kazakhstan (RIBSP) for histology, and some fresh tissue were processed
for electron microscopy. Wax blocks were later sent to the Royal Veteri-
nary College and further processed including rewaxing, slide preparation,
and histological examination. A complete set of histological slides was
sent to an experienced wildlife and comparative pathologist at the
Wakefield School of Medicine Department of Pathology/Comparative
Medicine Institute in North Carolina for review.
FISH analysis
A set of fixed tissues from several different saigas was sent to the Uni-
versity of Bristol, School of Veterinary Science, for examination of the
distribution of bacterial populations using fluorescence in situ hydrid-
ization (FISH). Paraffin-embedded, slide-mounted tissue samples
were dewaxed in Histoclear for 10 min, followed by 3-min hydrations
in100, 90, and 70% ethanol and finally rinsed in water for 3 min.Slides
were hybridized with a single probe for either P. multocida (non-
specific, binding all serogroups) or Clostridium (1 ml of probe per
sample) with a FISH buffer (0.9 M NaCl, 0.02 M tris-HCl, 0.01% SDS,
and 25% formamide) in a thermos cycler at 95°C for 10 min and at
46°C for an hour. Slides were washed, dried, and mounted under a
coverslip with Vectashield (Vector Laboratories). Fluorescing bacteria
were then examined in 10 fields of view in each tissue under ×400 total
magnification.
Mineral composition analysis
A subset of saiga from Tengiz was sampled for tissue mineral analysis to
evaluate possible micronutrient deficiencies. Fresh liver was collected,
frozen, and tested at RIBSP for tissue copper, molybdenum, cobalt,
zinc, and iron using standard methods for an inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) analysis as follows: 0.2 to 0.3 g
of the sample was weighed (Shimadzu AY 220 scale) in a Teflon cu-
vette. The cuvette with the sample was placed in a Teflon autoclave
and 5 ml of nitric acid and 1 ml of hydrogen peroxide were added,
and after termination of the intensive reaction, the autoclave was sealed.
The autoclaves were placed into the microwave system SpeedWave
Four Technology (Berghof Products) and decomposed using the
program recommended by the manufacturer for the decomposition
of biological samples. At the end of the program, the autoclaves were
cooled to room temperature and depressurized, and the resulting solu-
tion was transferred to a 50.0-ml volumetric flask, filled up to the mark
with water, and thoroughly mixed. Afterward, metals were determined
in the samples through ICP-MS. Along with the samples analyzed, a
“blank” solution was prepared without any sample material, which
was treated with all stages of sample preparation and analysis.
The samples were analyzed for Fe, Co, Cu, Zn, and Mo using ICP-
MS in the Agilent 7500a mass spectrometer. Standard solutions for
ISP-MS were used to calibrate the mass spectrometer and obtain cal-
ibration characteristics. The calibration solutions were prepared by
successively diluting standard solutions with 2.5% HNO3.
Data acquisition and processing for modeling
The outcome variable
The aim of the statistical analysis was to predict the probability of an
MME (cases) versus a normal calving event (controls). Our case sites
were those corresponding to MMEs in 1988, 1981, and 2015. Locations
and dates of onset in 2015 were recorded at two sites by R.A.K. and S.Z.
Information for other sites came from rangers and other key infor-
mants in the field (fig. S1). In the case of the 1988 and 1981 events,
information was obtained from literature and maps produced at the
time (1981, Institute of Zoology and Department of Reserves and
Hunting; 1988, Institute of Zoology and Betpak-dala State Hunting Or-
ganisation). Exact calving locations were provided by the Association
for the Conservation of Biodiversity of Kazakhstan (ACBK) for the pe-
riod 2008 to 2016 from field expeditions and telemetry data from col-
lared animals. Other, more approximate, calving sites were recorded
from descriptions available in the annual official saiga aerial and
ground monitoring reports by the Institute of Zoology and Hunting
Agency of Kazakhstan (18). Of the resulting 214 sites, the climate data
used in this analysis were available for 135 sites [29 of which included
estimated dates of onset (20 cases; 9 controls) and 106 of which lacked
dates (4 cases; 202 controls)].
Predictor variables
Our “zero hour” is the start of calving or, for MME, the day of the
index case, and all predictors were aggregated over specified periods
up to these dates. MMEs in saigas appear from the literature to be
strongly associated with calving (8). We used the onset of calving,
rather than peak calving, to focus on environmental conditions before
the onset of disease, rather than when it may already have taken hold.
Field observations from 2015 suggest that, at an individual level,
the course of the disease from the first visible signs of depression to
death occurred in the course of a few hours. In addition, the MME at
each calving site occurred over the course of a number of days. These
factors are strongly suggestive of a relatively recent common risk
factor. Evidence from the literature suggests incubation periods for
hemorrhagic septicaemia (HS) lasting from 12 hours to several days
(19). These factors suggest that external triggers may have been im-
portant anytime from several days to approximately 12 hours before
the onset of clinical signs in the index case. Uncertainties in onset dates
suggest that it is better to err on the side of longer periods, and so,
predictor variables were generated for 3, 5, and 10 days before onset.
Given the large geographic scale of the study, range of variables to
be covered, long time series coverage, and high resolution, the daily
European Research Area (ERA)–Interim reanalysis data set produced
at the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts was
selected for this analysis (20). Daily aggregates (means, maxima, mini-
ma,ortotals)weregeneratedfromraw3or6hourlydatafortemperature,
dew-point temperature, soil moisture, snow depth, maximum wind gust,
and precipitation. Because of uncertainties in precipitation data from this
source, interpolated gauge-based products from the Global Precipitation
Climatology Centre (GPCC), which are independent of ERA data,
were also used, although these were available only from 1988 onward
(21). For investigation of long-term anomalies at single sites, an addi-
tional lower-resolution reanalysis data set from the National Centre
for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) was also used because it covers
the longer time period from 1948 to 2016 (22).
Normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) anomaly data
based on Systeme Probatoire pour l’Observation de la Terre (SPOT)
and PROBA-V data going back to 1998 were supplied by F.H. and
J.R. at the Université catholique de Louvain–LifeWatch Wallonia-
Brussels (WB) project (23). Snow anomaly data—unusual values at the
date of observation compared to mean probability of snow presence—
were used to look for unusual variation in winter (for example, winter
length, severity, andsudden cold shocks) andlikely to be related to spring
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Kock et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaao2314
17 January 2018
4 of 10
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 NDVI patterns derived from filtered MODIS data (24). These data sets
cover periods from 1998 and 2000 to 2016, respectively, and thus in-
clude only 2015 MME sites and a set of controls. An earlier data set
of NDVI anomalies derived from Global Inventory Modeling and Map-
ping Studies data (25) was provided by the LifeWatch project team for
the period 1982 to 1997, covering the 1988 MME.
Data extraction and processing
Values of climate metrics at saiga MME and calving sites were extracted
from the daily rasters using a polygon shapefile for sites available from
2008 onward (which represented estimates of the actual size and shape
of the aggregations). For the older sites, identified as point data from the
literature, means were extracted using buffers of 6 km, corresponding to
themedianpolygonsizeforthosesites,whichwereavailableinthatformat.
From the extracted daily climate data, various aggregate metrics
(totals, maxima, minima, or means of daily variables, depending on
the metric in question) were produced over 3, 5, and 10 days before
onset of MME or calving. In the case of precipitation, in addition to
productionofsum totals over the days before onset, the number of days
with nonzero precipitation was counted, because the duration of wet
weather may be more important than the actual total rainfall in milli-
meters. Metrics of temperature variability in the days to onset included
daily temperature variation (difference between daily maximum and
minimum temperatures) and overall temperature variation (difference
between minimum daily temperatures) over 3, 5, and 10 days before
onset or calving.
The ERA-interim daily snow depth variable was used to calculate
the date of snow melt byfinding the last three consecutive days ofsnow
cover of the season. Variables measuring the length of snow cover
(total days of snow cover from 1 January to last snow melt) and days
between end of last snowmelt and calving/onset were then produced.
The extracted 7-day LifeWatch-WB snow and NDVI anomaly data
were interpolated to daily values. These were then used to calculate
aggregates over various periods before the date of onset or calving
and for fixed periods of the year (for example, snow anomaly for the
last week of March and NDVI anomaly in the last week of April).
The process described above depended on knowing dates for onset
of calving and MME. However, calving dates were missing for many
sites. In these cases, an onset date of 9 May was used, because this is the
average date of start of calving for those sites for which dates were
available. For sites having onset dates, metrics were aggregated both
based on actualdates and using anonsetdate of9 May for comparison.
Theresultingdatabaselisted135sites,withclimatemetricsaggregated
indifferent ways and over different multidayperiods up to 9 May, with
a second set of these same variables aggregated using actual onset dates
where these were available. In addition, the database held information
on calving/MME, latitude, and longitude for each site.
Statistical analysis
Univariate analysis
We first conducted visual plotting (box plots) of all candidate variables
at case and control sites to select those that appeared to show relation-
ships with the outcome variable. Because of the structure of the data,
the results of t tests to compare means would have been unreliable.
Bayesian approaches were therefore used to compare means, taking
into account the effect of year using the BRMS package for R (26). Last,
we conducted simple t tests for differences in means between MME
and calving sites in 1988 alone, the only year for which both types of
site were available.
Multivariate analysis
From results of the univariate analysis, we selected a subset of eight
variables, which both appeared to present differences between cases
and controls and represented different types of climatic phenomena.
Principal components analysis (PCA) was then applied to these varia-
bles, resulting in the reduction of the data set into two major dimensions.
The eight selected climate variables and the PCA dimensions were both
used to build multivariate models, again using hierarchical Bayesian
approaches with year as a random variable. Latitude was also included
in these models to account for spatial autocorrelation.
In the case of models using “raw” climate variables, all predictors
were standardized using z scores. This enabled direct comparisons of
coefficientsand use of a single weakly informative prior, whichassumed
a normal distribution of coefficients with a mean of 0 and an SD of 3.
Initially, selected variables were included in the model. Those with the
smallest coefficients and having confidence intervals crossing zero were
removed one by one, and the model was rerun each time until only
significant variables were left. At each step, the WAIC (Watanabe-
Akaike, or widely applicable, information criterion) was generated
and used to compare the models (27). In the case of models using
PCA results, dimensions 1 and 2, capturing the majority of variation,
and latitude were entered into models and insignificant variables were
removed. The same prior was also used here.
Because conditions were known to be different between MME
years, models were run using subsets of the data set (i) removing
MME sites from 1981 and (ii) removing MME sites from 1981 and
1988. These models had convergence problems or did not produce
significant results. Thus, in the end, only the full data set including
all data for 1981, 1988, and 2015 was used. Taking this full data set,
models were run using climate variables aggregated over various
periods to 9 May for all sites, as well as for the “real date” data set in
which they were aggregated to the actual onset date (where available)
or 9 May (if not). In the latter case, only those MME sites having es-
timated real onset dates were used, and thus, only at controls were
dates set to 9 May.
Climate anomalies at single sites
In addition to the modeling of MME probability at case and control
sites, we also explored long-term climatic variation at single die-off
sites, to understand the extent to which climatic conditions at these sites
were exceptionalin MME years, focusing on those variables that seemed
important from the modeling. This was conducted using ERA data
aggregated over the first and second halves of May and NCEP data
for the month of May.
RESULTS
Description of the 2015 MME
In each of the two sites that were intensively monitored (Tengiz and
Torgai; 8000 and 62,000 animals, respectively; Fig. 1), the die-off lasted
approximately 9 days. Morbidity and mortality were estimated at
100%, although it is possible that a few animals survived. The affected
aggregations contained pregnant and recently calved females, their
calves, and some young males.
Carcass distribution in the main areas of mortality showed a re-
markably even spread of animals, with a spacing of approximately
30 to 50 m between individual adults, consistent with becoming ill
while grazing and then dying on the spot(fig.S2A). Individual animals’
behavior changed from apparent normality (able to run and graze) to
suffering from general depression, lethargy, and hindlimb weakness
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Kock et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaao2314
17 January 2018
5 of 10
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and ataxia while grazing or standing. Sicker animals were recumbent,
with some dyspnea and grunting, frothy fluid or saliva forming around
the mouth, and terminal diarrhea, frequently with blood and urine
staining of the soil (fig. S2B). Most died within a few hours of onset
of clinical signs.
No other wildlife species were seen ill or dead in large numbers, nor
were there significant excess livestock deaths or human disease in the
vicinity over this time period. This was confirmed during follow-up
expeditions to villages and farms in the region in summer 2015 and
spring 2016. The temporal and spatial distribution of the outbreak
suggested that horizontal transmission of a contagion was unlikely
to have been the cause. Calves were observed to suckle until and even
after maternal death (fig. S2C), and then todie. Delayed death of calves
was consistent with disease transmission from the mother, rather than
horizontal transmission of an infectious agent through saiga aggrega-
tions, which would have affected the calves before or at the same time
as their mothers.
A number of saigas were blood-sampled while moribund, and a full
PME was performed on 33 animals (24 adult females and 9 calves;
4 male, 5 female) with an even split in necropsies between the two
monitored sites; microbiological sampling included 32 saigas (26 from
Torgai and 6 from Tengiz). PMEs were performed as soon after death
as possible. The gross pathology was similar in animals from both ge-
ographical sites. Animals were generally in very good body condition,
with 76% having abundant mesenteric/omental fat (fig. S2D), which,
in small ruminants, correlates significantly with live weight and body
condition (28). In the 10 adult animals necropsied immediately after
death, all organs were diffusely congested, and there was bloodstained
fluid in serous cavities (fig. S2D), generalized hemorrhages, ecchymoses
and petechiae in the subcutis (fig S2E), hemorrhages on multiple serosal
surfaces [extensively within the sub-endocardium of the heart (fig. S2F)
andwithin lungs], lymphnodes (fig. S2G), and skeletal musculature. On
occasion, there was severe edema and congestion of the lung (fig. S2H).
Many cases showed catarrh, congestion, and intense reddening of the
intestinal mucosa, with multifocal subserosal hemorrhages and con-
gested vasculature (fig. S2I).
The preliminary diagnosis made by experienced attending veterinar-
ians (R.A.K. and M.O.) based on the clinical presentation and necropsy
was peracute HS, as described in the literature (29). This diagnosis was
supported by a pure profuse culture of P. multocida serotype B from 32
microbiologically sampled saiga, which included fresh blood, milk, and
tissues taken from lung, liver, spleen, and kidney, tested in the research
laboratory of Kazakhstan’s Research Institute for Biological Safety Prob-
lems, with similar findings to other in-country reference laboratories.
Microscopic examination of multiple tissue samples examined at the
Royal Veterinary College found necrosuppurative hepatitis, splenitis,
and lymphadenitis with intralesional and intravascular Gram-negative
bacteria (Fig. 2 and the Supplementary Materials). In lungs, there were
perivascular and intra-alveolar hemorrhage and edema. These find-
ings are consistent with a diagnosis of HS caused by P. multocida (29).
Extensive PCR testing of tissue samples from the same 32 individ-
uals sampled for microbiology for the presence of viruses in several
laboratories found one positive for sheep pox and no evidence for a
range of other viruses (table S1 and the Supplementary Materials). In
three saigas sampled in Tengiz, lung tissues showed evidence of intra-
cytoplasmic bronchial epithelial inclusions, which were suggestive of
Paramyxoviridae; however, ascribing a specific virus is highly speculative,
and to date, this finding is inconclusive. Microscopy of the blood smears
Fig. 2. Photomicrographs showing multifocal, acute degenerative tissue changes with the light blue staining indicating Gram-negative bacteria consistent
with the pure isolation of P. multocida. (A) Liver: necrosuppurative hepatitis, random with intralesional bacteria (arrow). (B) Spleen: splenitis, necrotizing with bacterial
emboli. (C) Lung, perivascular hemorrhage (arrow) and edema. (D) Lymph node: lymphadenitis, necrosuppurative.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Kock et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaao2314
17 January 2018
6 of 10
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 from sick saigas revealed Hemosporidia at various stages of develop-
ment; this was confirmed by PCR. Of 23 tested blood samples, DNA
of the theileriosis pathogen (Theileria annulata) was identified in 11,
with negative results for anaplasmosis and babesiosis.
FISH for three animals was consistent with a breach of the mucosal
immune barrier and systemic invasion of P. multocida, rather than a
general invasion of mucosal bacteria into the body, which is found in
dying or recently dead animals (fig. S3). The immediacy of the PME
made this investigation possible and relevant.
The proximate cause of death in this MME was therefore a massive
peracute HS. However, given the extraordinary mortality and extent,
this was not considered a sufficient explanation. To account for such
rapid, concurrent mortality of distant aggregations, latent infection
with P. multocida would have to be common across the entire saiga
population. Some prior influence seemed likely, priming the majority
of individuals for a breakdown of immunity to opportunistic bacteria
or increasing bacterial growth and/or virulence.
Exploration of potential underlying cofactors
To provide a more comprehensive explanation for such an extraordi-
nary phenomenon, a multidisciplinary approach was used; possible
hypotheses for the observed events were developed from the literature
and field observations and were systematically tested (table S4). These
hypotheses focused on factors that trigger pathogen invasion in the
short term, although longer-term influences on P. multocida carriage
and host susceptibility might also be important in the disease dynamics.
Given that causation might be multifactorial, competing hypotheses
were not mutually exclusive.
The existence of P. multocida as a commensal organism in healthy
saigas (30), near-simultaneous onset of clinical signs within and be-
tween large groups of animals, and our understanding of HS from
the literature (31) all suggest a possible environmental trigger. Saiga
calving aggregations in this population have been monitored regularly
since the 1970s. A review of the literature and consultation with saiga
field biologists identified two previous large-scale mortality events,
which could possibly be ascribed to HS, in 1981 and 1988 (table S2
and the Supplementary Materials). Although pathological evidence
of this syndrome was not reported at the time, the clinical signs and
morbidity were similar to those in 2015, especially in 1988 (fig. S2J),
and P. multocida of the same phylogeny and pathogenic potential was
isolated in each case (table S2). In 2015, no disease-free sites were ob-
served; in 1981, although many animals survived, their locations are
unknown, whereas in 1988, locations of unaffected and affected sites
were documented. Using these three cases, the impact of environmental
covariates on the probability of an MME versus a normal calving event
was explored using statistical modeling.
The data set represents a typical case of “rare events,” having small
sample sizes, a strong imbalance in the number of case and controls,
and autocorrelation issues. First, MME and non-MME site data were
spatially and temporally correlated; that is, there were many loca-
tions from the same year, and locations of MME sites were clustered.
Second, there was perfect separation between MME and non-MME
sites for certain environmental variables; that is, MME sites had non-
overlapping values of certain variables with non-MME sites. Last,
there was pseudo-replication in the data set; that is, locations were
not independent because many were from the same year, but the
number of levels of year compared to the overall size of the data set
precluded its use as a random variable in standard mixed models. To
resolve these issues, we used Bayesian generalized linear hierarchical
models, which enabled us to incorporate a random effect structure
for year (32).
On the basis of our hypotheses and evidence concerning triggers of
pasteurellosis from the literature, we tested for any differences between
various measures of temperature, precipitation, wind speed, atmo-
spheric moisture, soil moisture, and vegetation greenness (using the
NDVI) in 5 to 10 days before die-off, and both NDVI and snow cover
in the preceding weeks, using univariate tests (fig. S4 and table S5).
A subset of these variables with good explanatory power was then used
in the regression models, both as raw variables and combined as
dimensions within a PCA (Fig. 3 and fig. S5).
In all analyses, average maximum daily relative humidity, average
minimum daily temperature, and average maximum daily dew-point
temperature showed the strongest positive relationships with the
probability of a die-off; in particular, die-off sites were unusually hu-
mid, and in 2015, they were unusually warm. Of the Bayesian multi-
variate models, the strongest associations emerged for the 10-day
aggregates of the days preceding the die-off, whether natural climate
variables or PCA dimensions were used (see the Supplementary
Materials). The final model contained only temperature and humid-
ity metrics. There was a clear threshold association with humidity,
with most die-offs occurring at a mean average maximum daily rel-
ative humidity of more than 80% (Fig. 4A); mean daily relative humid-
ity was 84.6 ± 1.7% at die-off sites and 71.2 ± 1.7% at control sites.
There was a weak positive association between minimum temperature
and die-off events (Fig. 4B and the Supplementary Materials).
Long-term climate anomaly data at the Kostanai cluster of sites
(affected in all three MME years) support these findings (table S5 and
the Supplementary Materials). At this site, atmospheric moisture in
May 2015 not only was extreme but also exhibited the highest recorded
values of two long-term time series for certain metrics (covering 1948 to
2016 and 1979 to 2016). In 1981, in the second half of May, humidity
Fig. 3. Kernel density map of the first two components of a PCA of selected
climatic variables in the 10 days to disease onset (or 9 May for controls for
which exact date is not available), showing separation of die-off sites from
other sites. See fig. S5 for indications of the relative contribution of each climate
variable to these two components.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Kock et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaao2314
17 January 2018
7 of 10
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 levels were above the 95th percentile, precipitation was the highest of
the 1979 to 2016 time series, and minimum temperature was unusually
low for the time of year. Conditions at 1988 MME sites appear less ex-
treme than in the other two MME years; however, in that year, the
animals were in very poor condition following a harsh winter and so
may have been more vulnerable. Average minimum daily temperature
was significantly higher at the seven case sites than at the four control
sites in 1988 (cases, 6.2°C; controls, 4.0°C; t = −4.32; P = 0.03), as was
average daily maximum humidity (cases, 85%; controls, 82%; t =
−3.623; P = 0.006). In contrast, although total precipitation was overall
very high in 1988, it did not differ significantly between control and case
locations.
DISCUSSION
MMEs in the context of saiga life history
Given the precedents from other MMEs in the literature, particularly
regarding HS events, our expectation was that certain combinations of
climatic factors might be associated with the 2015 die-off, but would
be unlikely to fully explain it (table S4). We found strong, but not
complete, differentiation between climatic conditions in sites with
and without MMEs (Figs. 3 and 4). HS caused by P. multocida has
been linked to humidity and high temperatures in other studies and
species (33–35), but the total numbers of dead animals, geographic
scale, and mortality rate in other recorded outbreaks do not even ap-
proach the levels seen in saigas (table S2). Therefore, additional factors
must also be at play.
The saiga antelope appears particularly vulnerable to MMEs, espe-
cially around calving, having suffered from several such episodes in
the recorded past (table S2 and the Supplementary Materials), al-
though we found no record of MMEs in folklore or pre-Soviet litera-
ture. Apart from the 2015 event, recent years have seen high levels of
disease-induced mortality in other saiga populations; in 2010, around
two-thirds of a calving aggregation of 20,000 in the Ural population
died of a peracute respiratory disease with bloat, and this was followed
in 2011 by a smaller die-off of several hundreds of saiga with similar
clinical signs, immediately after calving, grazing in the exact same lo-
cation as the earlier MME, suggesting a site-specific cause. Pasteurel-
losis was implicated based on clinical signs and bacteriology, but very
little pathology was undertaken, putting some doubt on the diagnosis
(36). The endemic Mongolian saiga subspecies is currently expe-
riencing high levels of mortality from PPR (37, 38), caused by a mor-
billivirus of the Paramyxoviridae family. P. multocida was concurrently
isolated from tissues, but in this case, P. multocida is not implicated in
the primary pathology.
This propensity for MMEs may be a result of the species’ life
history strategy of very high investment in reproduction in a harsh
continental climate. The species has the largest recorded mass at birth
as a proportion of maternal mass of any ungulate (39), producing pre-
cocious calves and enabling large-scale seasonal migrations tracking
greenery across thousands of kilometers (40). High mortality as a re-
sult of hard winters (dzhuts), where ice forms over snow and thus re-
stricting access to pasture, and summer droughts is well documented,
and the species has a history of rapid recovery from low numbers (8).
However, high levels of poaching since the 1990s have depleted popu-
lations, holding out the possibility that an MME could reduce numbers
below the level at which recovery is possible (41).
Future research needs
The mechanisms by which climatic factors triggered bacterial invasion
in the saiga MMEs remain unknown. A trigger factor, such as stress or
infection with a paramyxovirus, is usually invoked inP.multocida out-
breaks (42, 43), but there is no serological evidence for previous viral
infection other than Akabane, in the population that died in 2015
based on samples collected opportunistically from 2012 to 2014 and
tested for bluetongue virus, PPRV, and Akabane and Schmallenberg
viruses (44). Despite the negative results to date, there is still therefore
the possibility of an undiagnosed predisposing infection, microbiome
perturbation, or environmental change that reduced the resistance of a
proportion of the individuals, enabling bacterial opportunism. In the
Fig. 4. Probability of die-off related to selected environmental variables in the 10 day period to onset, 1979 to 2015. (A) Fitted values for the probability of a
die-off event against mean maximum daily relative humidity in the previous 10 days, with the three die-off years in different colors. (B) Fitted values for the probability
of a die-off event against mean minimum daily temperature in the previous 10 days, with the three MME years in different colors.
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Kock et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaao2314
17 January 2018
8 of 10
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 light of the emerging threat from PPR, and the presence of Theileria in
approximately 40% of the sampled saigas (see the Supplementary
Materials), interactions between saigas and livestock in a changing so-
cial and ecological environment also require further study.
The fact that Pasteurella strains of near-homologous genotype are
found in both apparently healthy and sick populations of saigas through-
out their range and over decades suggests that latent infection with
endemic strains occurs, which are all potentially virulent. Studies of bac-
terial virulence in controlled environments could cast light on the mech-
anisms by which these strains become virulent, or new strains emerge.
Recent history suggests that the saiga must be managed with the
high probability of future MMEs in mind; this requires investment
in preventative measures where possible (for example, livestock vac-
cination for PPR), strong antipoaching actions so that populations are
large and resilient enough to withstand large-scale mortality, and a
sustainable landscape-level approach to coexistence between saigas,
livestock, and people to enable its migratory lifestyle to continue.
The fact that P. multocida infection in saigas, as in bovines (31),
appears strongly linked to high humidity and temperature is of con-
cern going forward, given that a climate change–induced increase in
temperature is projected for the region over the short to medium term
(45, 46) and evidence for recent change is strong (47, 48). Predicted
precipitation trends are uncertain and unreliable (46), although some
models do suggest possible increases over the saiga range, particularly
in winter (45, 47). Although recent observations do not yet reflect these
predictions with any certainty (48), there is some evidence to suggest
increasedspringprecipitationinnorthernKazakhstansince1980incom-
parison with the preceding 30-year period (49), leading to increased air
humidity. Predicted increases in extreme rainfall events (45) and abrupt
variation in primary productivity (50) also suggest that saigas might have
to adapt to increased climatic variability in the future, affecting resource
acquisition and migration patterns (18) as well as disease risks.
CONCLUSIONS
This study illustrates the power of a multidisciplinary, collaborative
approach to investigating MMEs, the importance of understanding
the contextual factors as well as the proximate cause, and taking a his-
torical, evidence-based approach to investigations. A narrow focus on
etiology of MMEs could fail to elucidate causation, where this involves
multifactorial interactions between pathogens, hosts, and environ-
ment. The scale and nature of this event also point to the need for
ongoing scientific and veterinary monitoring of wildlife populations
and the need to be prepared for rapid and rigorous responses to dis-
ease outbreaks when they occur; in the absence of a research presence
at the time of disease onset, little could have been said about the epi-
demiology of the 2015 event.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/4/1/eaao2314/DC1
Supplementary Text
fig. S1. Locations of the three P. multocida–associated disease events (1981, 1988,
and 2015) in the Betpak-dala population and control sites at which calving proceeded without
a die-off since 1979, used in the climate analysis (x and y units are longitude and latitude).
fig. S2. Photographs depicting the die-off of saiga and their clinical signs and pathology.
fig. S3. Fluorescence in situ hydridization (FISH) photomicrographs showing position of
fluorescing P. multocida bacteria.
fig. S4. Box plots for cases (die-off sites) and controls (no die-off) using the full data set, with real
dates of onset if available or 9 May if not, showing the relationship between cases/controls
and selected climate metrics aggregated over 10-day periods before onset.
fig. S5. Contributions of variables to components 1 and 2 of the PCA using the full data set,
with real dates of onset if available or 9 May if not.
table S1. PCR primers used for microorganism detection.
table S2. A summary of the largest MMEs in saiga attributed to Pasteurellaceae-related
syndromes.
table S3. Results of an ICP-MS analysis of livers (w/w) of three dead saigas from May 2015
(Tengiz group).
table S4. Assuming a diagnosis of HS as a primary cause of death, this table is a list of possible
stressors, which may cause suppressed immunity in the host or increased virulence and
invasion of a commensal parasite such as P. multocida, subsequent septicemia in infected
hosts, and/or enhanced transmission.
table S5. Comparison of means for cases and controls using the full data set (all MME years);
real dates of onset or 9 May; and climate metrics aggregated over the 10 days to onset.
table S6. Long-term climate anomaly data at Kostanai sites (ERA data using actual die-off site,
NCEP data using pixel, covering entire Torgai area).
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. H. Nicholls, Mysterious die-off sparks race to save Saiga antelope. Nature (2015);
doi:10.1038/nature.2015.17675.
2. S. B. Fey, A. M. Siepielski, S. Nusslé, K. Cervantes-Yoshida, J. L. Hwan, E. R. Huber, M. J. Fey,
A. Catenazzi, S. M. Carlson, Recent shifts in the occurrence, cause, and magnitude of
animal mass mortality events. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 1083–1088 (2015).
3. C. D. Harvell, K. Kim, J. M. Burkholder, R. R. Colwell, P. R. Epstein, D. J. Grimes,
E. E. Hofmann, E. K. Lipp, A. D. M. E. Osterhaus, R. M. Overstreet, J. W. Porter, G. W. Smith,
G. R. Vasta, Emerging marine diseases—Climate links and anthropogenic factors.
Science 285, 1505–1510 (1999).
4. K. F. Smith, D. F. Sax, K. D. Lafferty, Evidence for the role of infectious disease in species
extinction and endangerment. Conserv. Biol. 20, 1349–1357 (2006).
5. D. M. Tompkins, S. Carver, M. E. Jones, M. Krkošek, L. F. Skerratt, Emerging infectious
diseases of wildlife: A critical perspective. Trends Parasitol. 31, 149–159 (2015).
6. D. A. Travis, P. Sriramarao, C. Cardona, C. J. Steer, S. Kennedy, S. Sreevatsan, M. P. Murtaugh,
One medicine one science: A framework for exploring challenges at the intersection of
animals, humans, and the environment. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1334, 26–44 (2014).
7. CMS, “Standard Operating Procedures for detecting and reacting to incidents of health
risks for and die-offs in Saiga antelopes and other wildlife in Kazakhstan” (Convention
on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals, 2017).
8. A. B. Bekenov, Iu. A. Grachev, E. J. Milner-Gulland, The ecology and management of the
Saiga antelope in Kazakhstan. Mammal Rev. 28, 1–52 (1998).
9. J. D. Callahan, F. Brown, F. A. Osorio, J. H. Sur, E. Kramer, G. W. Long, J. Lubroth, S. J. Ellis,
K. S. Shoulars, K. L. Gaffney, D. L. Rock, W. M. Nelson, Use of a portable real-time
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assay for rapid detection of foot-and-mouth
disease virus. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 220, 1636–1642 (2002).
10. M. Hofmann, C. Griot, V. Chaignat, L. Perler, B. Thür, Blauzungenkrankheit erreicht die
Schweiz. Schweiz. Arch. Tierheilkd. 150, 49–56 (2008).
11. C. A. Batten, A. C. Banyard, D. P. King, M. R. Henstock, L. Edwards, A. Sanders,
H. Buczkowski, C. C. L. Oura, T. Barrett, A real time RT-PCR assay for the specific detection
of Peste des petits ruminants virus. J. Virol. Methods 171, 401–404 (2011).
12. T. R. Bowden, S. L. Babiuk, G. R. Parkyn, J. S. Copps, D. B. Boyle, Capripoxvirus tissue
tropism and shedding: A quantitative study in experimentally infected sheep and goats.
Virology 371, 380–393 (2008).
13. OIE, Hemorrhagic septicemia, in Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines for Terrestrial
Animals 2016 (World Organization for Animal Health, 2016), vol. 2, chap. 2.4.11.
14. P. J. Quinn, B. K. Markey, M. E. Carter, W. J. Donnelly, F. C. Leonard, Veterinary Microbiology
and Microbial Disease (Blackwell Science, 2002), pp. 137–143.
15. K. M. Townsend, J. D. Boyce, J. Y. Chung, A. J. Frost, B. Adler, Genetic organization of
Pasteurella multocida cap loci and development of a multiplex capsular PCR typing
system. J. Clin. Microbiol. 39, 924–929 (2001).
16. D. P. King, A. Burman, S. Gold, A. E. Shaw, T. Jackson, N. P. Ferris, Integrin sub-unit
expression in cell cultures used for the diagnosis of foot-and-mouth disease.
Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 140, 259–265 (2011).
17. M. Scheuch, D. Höper, M. Beer, RIEMS: A software pipeline for sensitive and
comprehensive taxonomic classification of reads from metagenomics datasets. BMC
Bioinformatics 16, 69 (2015).
18. N. J. Singh, I. A. Grachev, A. B. Bekenov, E. J. Milner-Gulland, Saiga antelope calving
site selection is increasingly driven by human disturbance. Biol. Conserv. 143, 1770–1779
(2010).
19. S. S. Bastianello, M. M. Henton, Hemorrhagic septicemia, in Infectious Diseases of Livestock,
J. A. W. Coetzer, R. C. Tustin, Eds. (Oxford Univ. Press, 1994), vol. 3, chap. 164, 1690 pp.
20. D. P. Dee, S. M. Uppala, A. J. Simmons, P. Berrisford, P. Poli, S. Kobayashi, U. Andrae,
M. A. Balmaseda, G. Balsamo, P. Bauer, P. Bechtold, A. C. M. Beljaars, L. van de Berg, J. Bidlot,
N. Bormann, C. Delsol, R. Dragani, M. Fuentes, A. J. Geer, L. Haimberger, S. B. Healy,
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Kock et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaao2314
17 January 2018
9 of 10
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 H. Hersbach, E. V. Hólm, L. Isaksen, P. Kållberg, M. Köhler, M. Matricardi, A. P. McNally,
B. M. Monge-Sanz, J.-J. Morcrette, B.-K. Park, C. Peubey, P. de Rosnay, C. Tavolato,
J.-N. Thépaut, F. Vitart, The ERA-Interim reanalysis: Configuration and performance of the
data assimilation system. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 137, 553–597 (2011).
21. K. Schamm, M. Ziese, A. Becker, P. Finger, A. Meyer-Christoffer, U. Schneider, M. Schröder,
P. Stender, Global gridded precipitation over land: A description of the new GPCC first
guess daily product. Earth Syst. Sci. Data 6, 49–60 (2014).
22. E. Kalnay, M. Kanamitsu, R. Kistler, W. Collins, D. Deaven, L. Gandin, M. Iredell, S. Saha,
G. White, J. Woollen, Y. Zhu, A. Leetmaa, R. Reynolds, M. Chelliah, W. Ebisuzaki, W. Higgins,
J. Janowiak, K. C. Mo, C. Ropelewski, J. Wang, R. Jenne, D. Joseph, The NCEP/NCAR
40-year reanalysis project. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 77, 437–471 (1996).
23. J. Radoux, C. Rousseau, C. Lamarche, T. De Maet, P. Defourny, Seasonal metrics and anomaly
detection based on SPOT-VEGETATION archive in Europe, paper presented at the
International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, Milano, Italy, 26 to 31 July 2015.
24. C. Rousseau, J. Radoux, C. Lamarche, T. De Maet, P. Defourny, Snow cover anomalies from
2000 to 2014 and highlight of two exceptional years over Europe, paper presented at the
International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, Milano, Italy, 26 to 31 July 2015.
25. J. E. Pinzon, C. J. Tucker, A non-stationary 1981–2012 AVHRR NDVI3g time series. Remote
Sens. 6, 6929–6960 (2014).
26. P. C. Buerkner, brms: Bayesian Regression Models Using Stan. R package version 0.9.0,
(2016); https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=brms.
27. A. Gelman, J. Hwang, A. Vehtari, Understanding predictive information criteria for
Bayesian models. Stat. Comput. 24, 997–1016 (2014).
28. T. Sezenler, M. Özder, M. Yildirir, A. Ceyhan, M. A. Yüksel, The relationship between
body weight and body condition score in some indigenous sheep breeds in Turkey.
J. Anim. Plant Sci. 21, 443–447 (2011).
29. J. A. W. Coetzer, R. C. Tustin, Infectious Diseases of Livestock (Oxford Univ. Press, ed. 2,
2004).
30. F. Sanchez-Monge, “Calving status and commensalism of Pasteurella multocida in the
surviving Betpak-dala saiga population in May 2016, after a mass mortality event
in May 2015,” thesis, Royal Veterinary College, University of London (2016).
31. M. C. L. De Alwis, Haemorrhagic septicaemia—A general review. Br. Vet. J. 148, 99–112
(1992).
32. R. B. Millar, M. J. Anderson, Remedies for pseudoreplication. Fish. Res. 70, 397–407 (2004).
33. J. Dutta, B. S. Rathore, S. G. Mullick, R. Singh, G. C. Sharma, Epidemiological studies
on occurrence of haemorrhagic septicaemia in India. Indian Vet. J. 67, 893–899 (1990).
34. V. G. Lunitsyn, A. S. Donchenko, S. I. Ognev, N. A. Frolov, Pantovoe Olenevodstvo
i Bolezni Olenei: Deer Farming and Disease (Barnaul, 2007).
35. X. Gao, J. Xiao, H. Qin, Z. Cao, H. Wang, Impact of meteorological factors on the
prevalence of porcine pasteurellosis in southcentral of Mainland China. Prev. Vet. Med.
125, 75–81 (2016).
36. R. Kock, “Final report of mission by Prof Richard Kock RVC to Kazakhstan September 13th
to October 1st 2011 and related analysis” (Royal Veterinary College, 2011).
37. M. Shatar, B. Khanui, D. Purevtseren, B. Khishgee, A. Loitsch, H. Unger, T. B. K. Settypalli,
G. Cattoli, B. Damdinjav, W. G. Dundon, First genetic characterization of peste des
petits ruminants virus from Mongolia. Arch. Virol. 162, 3157–3160 (2017).
38. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Crisis Management Centre for
Animal Health Mongolia. Investigation of peste des petits ruminants (PPR) among wild
animals and its potential impact on the current PPR situation in livestock. Mission Report
20th January – 1st February 2017. FAO, Rome (2017).
39. A. Kühl, A. Mysterud, G. I. Erdnenov, A. A. Lushchekina, I. A. Grachev, A. B. Bekenov,
E. J. Milner-Gulland, The ‘big spenders’ of the steppe: Sex-specific maternal allocation and
twinning in the saiga antelope. Proc. Biol. Sci. 274, 1293–1299 (2007).
40. N. J. Singh, I. A. Grachev, A. B. Bekenov, E. J. Milner-Gulland, Tracking greenery across
a latitudinal gradient in central Asia – The migration of the saiga antelope. Divers. Distrib.
16, 663–675 (2010).
41. E. J. Milner-Gulland, M. V. Kholodova, A. Bekenov, O. M. Bukreeva, I. A. Grachev,
L. Amgalan, A. A. Lushchekina, Dramatic declines in saiga antelope populations. Oryx 35,
340–345 (2001).
42. G. M. Murray, R. G. O’Neill, S. J. More, M. C. McElroy, B. Earley, J. P. Cassidy, Evolving views
on bovine respiratory disease: An appraisal of selected key pathogens—Part 1.
Vet. J. 217, 95–102 (2016).
43. J. D. Taylor, R. W. Fulton, T. W. Lehenbauer, D. L. Step, A. W. Confer, The epidemiology
of bovine respiratory disease: What is the evidence for preventive measures?
Can. Vet. J. 51, 1351–1359 (2010).
44. M. B. Orynbayev, W. Beauvais, A. R. Sansyzbay, R. A. Rystaeva, K. T. Sultankulova,
A. A. Kerimbaev, M. N. Kospanova, R. A. Kock, Seroprevalence of infectious diseases in
saiga antelope (Saiga tatarica tatarica) in Kazakhstan 2012–2014. Prev. Vet. Med. 127,
100–104 (2016).
45. V. Kattsov, V. Govorkova, V. Meleshko, T. Pavlova, I. Shkolnik, Climate Change Projections
and Impacts in Russian Federation and Central Asia States (North Eurasia Climate
Centre, 2008); http://neacc.meteoinfo.ru/research/20-research.
46. E. Lioubimtseva, G. M. Henebry, Climate and environmental change in arid Central Asia:
Impacts, vulnerability and adaptations. J. Arid Environ. 73, 963–977 (2009).
47. IPCC, Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2014).
48. V. Salnikov, G. Turulina, S. Polyakova, Y. Petrova, A. Skakova, Climate change in
Kazakhstan during the past 70 years. Quatern. Int. 358, 77–82 (2015).
49. M. Turco, E. Palazzi, J. von Hardenberg, A. Provenzale, Observed climate change hotspots.
Geophys. Res. Lett. 42, 3521–3528 (2015).
50. R. de Jong, J. Verbesselt, M. E. Schaepman, S. de Bruin, Trend changes in global greening
and browning: Contribution of short-term trends to longer-term change. Glob. Chang.
Biol. 18, 642–655 (2012).
Acknowledgments: This work was undertaken with the approval of the Royal Veterinary
College Ethical Review Board (URN 2015 1435) and under the authority of the Biosafety
Institute of the Ministry of Science and Education and the Ministry of Agriculture, Committee
for Forestry and Wildlife, Ministry of Agriculture, Republic of Kazakhstan. This work did not
involve any experimental use of animals, only routine clinical examination and sampling on
moribund animals in extremis during the MME. Funding: This study was made possible
through various funding mechanisms, the main one being the National Environment Research
Council of the United Kingdom urgency research grant (NE/N007646/1); the team also
received substantial support financially or logistically from the following agencies, which are
gratefully acknowledged: the ACBK, the Flora and Fauna International, the People’s Trust
for Endangered Species and the Saiga Conservation Alliance, the Royal Society for the
Protection of Birds, and the Frankfurt Zoological Society. We thank D. King and G. Freimanis
of the PI, S. Feroudini, and the FLI for the laboratory support on advanced diagnostics. We
also thank the Convention on Migratory Species of the United Nations and the Wildlife
Conservation Network for their support and assistance. We acknowledge cooperation from
I. Sytnyk (former Vice Director) and S. Tyulegenov (Director) and staff from the National
Reference Veterinary Centre. At the University of Bristol, we thank B. Stuijfzand and
W. Browne for advice on statistical approaches and E. Hector and T. Cogan for pathogen
visualization in tissues. We also thank A. Lushchekina and Y. Grachev for provision of key
literature and insights and A. Salemgareyev, S. Kopeyev, E. Shalgynbaev, and S. Inkarbekov for
their participation in the fieldwork. We thank N. Kock (Wake Forest School of Medicine
Winston-Salem) for review of the histopathology. Remote sensing image processing was
supported by the Fédération Wallonie-Bruxelles in the frame of LifeWatch ERIC. Author
contributions: R.A.K. led all elements of the study and carried out clinical observations, field
postmortems, and epidemiological assessment. M.O. led the laboratory testing and carried
out field postmortems. S.R. carried out the review of historical evidence and statistical
analyses. S.Z. led the fieldwork component. N.J.S. carried out statistical analyses. W.B. and
E.R.M. contributed to the evidence review and statistical analyses. A.K., R.R., and Z.O. carried
out microbiological analyses. S.K. participated in the fieldwork. H.M.M. carried out
histopathological analyses. S.W. carried out field investigations. F.H. and J.R. produced all
NDVI and snow anomaly data. E.J.M.-G. led the evidence review, statistical components, and
paper writing. R.A.K., M.O., S.R., S.Z., N.S., W.B., E.R.M., H.M.M., and E.J.M.-G. wrote the paper.
All authors contributed to hypothesis development and testing. Conflicts of interest: The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: All
data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or
the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the
authors and data presented in this paper are archived at NERC’s Environmental Information
Data Centre (accession number pending).
Submitted 28 June 2017
Accepted 14 December 2017
Published 17 January 2018
10.1126/sciadv.aao2314
Citation: R. A. Kock, M. Orynbayev, S. Robinson, S. Zuther, N. J. Singh, W. Beauvais,
E. R. Morgan, A. Kerimbayev, S. Khomenko, H. M. Martineau, R. Rystaeva, Z. Omarova,
S. Wolfs, F. Hawotte, J. Radoux, E. J. Milner-Gulland, Saigas on the brink: Multidisciplinary
analysis of the factors influencing mass mortality events. Sci. Adv. 4, eaao2314 (2018).
S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E
Kock et al., Sci. Adv. 2018;4:eaao2314
17 January 2018
10 of 10
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 events
Saigas on the brink: Multidisciplinary analysis of the factors influencing mass mortality
Hawotte, Julien Radoux and Eleanor J. Milner-Gulland
Aslan Kerimbayev, Sergei Khomenko, Henny M. Martineau, Rashida Rystaeva, Zamira Omarova, Sara Wolfs, Florent 
Richard A. Kock, Mukhit Orynbayev, Sarah Robinson, Steffen Zuther, Navinder J. Singh, Wendy Beauvais, Eric R. Morgan,
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aao2314
 (1), eaao2314.
4
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/1/eaao2314
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2018/01/12/4.1.eaao2314.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/4/1/eaao2314#BIBL
This article cites 35 articles, 3 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 1, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
