 O R I G I N A L A R T I C L E
Cholinergic Surveillance over Hippocampal RNA
Metabolism and Alzheimer’s-Like Pathology
Benjamin Kolisnyk1,2, Mohammed Al-Onaizi1,4, Lilach Soreq5,
Shahar Barbash6, Uriya Bekenstein6, Nejc Haberman5, Geula Hanin6,
Maxine T. Kish1,3, Jussemara Souza da Silva1, Margaret Fahnestock7,
Jernej Ule5, Hermona Soreq6, Vania F. Prado1,2,3,4 and Marco A. M. Prado1,2,3,4
1Robarts Research Institute, 2Graduate Program in Neuroscience, 3Department of Physiology and Pharmacology
and, 4Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada N6A5K8, 5Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology,
Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK, 6The Edmond and Lily Safra Center for Brain Science and The Silberman
Institute of Life Sciences, The Edmond J Safra Campus, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904,
Israel and 7Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada L8S 4K1
Address correspondence to Marco Prado, Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, 1151 Richmond Street, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5K8.
Email: mprado@robarts.ca; Vania Prado, Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, 1151 Richmond Street, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5K8.
Email: vprado@robarts.ca
Benjamin Kolisnyk and Mohammed Al-Onaizi are co-first authors.
Vania F. Prado and Marco A. M. Prado are co-senior authors.
Abstract
The relationship between long-term cholinergic dysfunction and risk of developing dementia is poorly understood. Here we
used mice with deletion of the vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT) in the forebrain to model cholinergic abnormalities
observed in dementia. Whole-genome RNA sequencing of hippocampal samples revealed that cholinergic failure causes
changes in RNA metabolism. Remarkably, key transcripts related to Alzheimer’s disease are affected. BACE1, for instance, shows
abnormal splicing caused by decreased expression of the splicing regulator hnRNPA2/B1. Resulting BACE1 overexpression leads
to increased APP processing and accumulation of soluble Aβ1-42. This is accompanied by age-related increases in GSK3
activation, tau hyperphosphorylation, caspase-3 activation, decreased synaptic markers, increased neuronal death, and
deteriorating cognition. Pharmacological inhibition of GSK3 hyperactivation reversed deficits in synaptic markers and tau
hyperphosphorylation induced by cholinergic dysfunction, indicating a key role for GSK3 in some of these pathological changes.
Interestingly, in human brains there was a high correlation between decreased levels of VAChT and hnRNPA2/B1 levels with
increased tau hyperphosphorylation. These results suggest that changes in RNA processing caused by cholinergic loss can
facilitate Alzheimer’s-like pathology in mice, providing a mechanism by which decreased cholinergic tone may increase risk of
dementia.
Key words: acetylcholine, Alzheimer’s disease, cognition, pathology, RNA metabolism
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhw177
Original Article
Cerebral Cortex, July 2017;27: 3553–3567
Advance Access Publication Date: 15 June 2016
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the predominant form of dementia, is
pathologically characterized by accumulation of amyloid plaques
and neurofibrillary tangles that ultimately lead to neuronal
death. One of the early alterations identified in AD-affected indi-
viduals with cognitive decline is a profound decrease in basal
forebrain cholinergic neurons (Whitehouse et al. 1982), which
gave rise to the cholinergic hypothesis of AD (Bartus et al.
1982). Accordingly, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
data reveal atrophy of the basal forebrain in individuals with mild
cognitive impairment (Grothe et al. 2014) and increased forebrain
cholinergic atrophy in Alzheimer’s-affected individuals (Grothe
et al. 2013). Cholinergic dysfunction correlates with decreased
hippocampal volume and pathology (Teipel et al. 2014). Further-
more, recent epidemiological data suggest that long-term use of
drugs with anticholinergic activity by elderly individuals in-
creases the future risk of dementia (Gray et al. 2015). These obser-
vations reveal an intimate, but poorly understood relationship,
between cholinergic dysfunction and the pathological and cogni-
tive deficits in AD. However, whether cholinergic malfunction
has a causal role in increasing the risk of dementia or regulating
pathology is unknown. Moreover, the causal and temporal rela-
tionships between cholinergic malfunctioning and long-term
changes in hippocampal neurons in AD are still unclear.
To test the capacity of cholinergic tone to regulate long-term
functions in target cells, we examined the hippocampal tran-
scriptome in genetically modified mice with compromised hip-
pocampal cholinergic tone. Using forebrain-specific deletion of
the vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChT), a protein re-
quired for acetylcholine (ACh) release (de Castro et al. 2009;
Prado et al. 2013), we unveil that long-term cholinergic deficiency
causes global changes in gene expression and alternative splicing
in the hippocampus. This leads to abnormal alternative splicing
of BACE1 with consequent age-dependent changes in amyloid
precursor protein (APP) processing, tau hyperphosphorylation,
hippocampal neuronal loss, and cognitive decline. Comparative
analyses in the AD brain enabled us to identify links between
cholinergic deficiency and AD pathology, together supporting
the notion that early cholinergic dysfunction may be a pivotal
step in AD pathology initiation and progression. Our data provide
potential mechanisms to explain how cholinergic deficiency may
facilitate pathology in AD.
Materials and Methods
Mouse Lines
Generation of VAChTflox/flox mice was previously described
(de Castro et al. 2009). VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice were generated
by crossing VAChTflox/flox (crossed for 5 generations with C57BL/6J)
with the Nkx2.1-Cre mouse line (C57BL/6J-Tg(Nkx2-1- cre)2Sand/J),
purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (JAX stock no. 008661).
Unless otherwise stated, all control mice used were VAChTflox/flox
littermates. All procedures were conducted in accordance with
guidelines of the Canadian Council of Animal Care (CCAC) and in
accordance with ARRIVE guidelines, at the University of Western
Ontario with an approved institutional animal protocol (2008-
127). Only male mice were used for all experiments.
RNA Sequencing
Mouse hippocampal tissue was rapidly dissected, and total RNA
was extracted from individual samples using the PureLink RNA
Mini Kit (Ambion). Two micrograms of total RNA were then
sent to the Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick
Children, where the cDNA library was prepared using the TruSeq
Stranded Total Sample Preparation kit (Illumina) and run in a
HiSeq 2500 platform with coverage of 200–250 million pair reads
per lane. Five animals were run per lane to obtain enough cover-
age for alternative splicing analysis (50 million pair reads per
sample). The sequenced reads were aligned to the mouse gen-
ome using the TopHat program against the mouse genome in
Ensembl (version EnsMart72) to enable quantification of splice
junctions in addition to gene-level measurements. Differential
gene expression analysis was conducted using the Bioconductor
DESeq package which accounts for the counts binomial distribu-
tion (Anders and Huber 2010). Datasets are available on Array-
Express (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/) under accession
number E-MTAB-3897.
For human brains, we used the SQUARE™ RNA library con-
struction approach that utilizes different sets of 5′- and 3′-site
specific primers to segregate all full-length transcripts into sub-
pools defined by the selective nucleotides in the respective pri-
mers. Unlike traditional sequencing, which is based on the use
of universal primers that produce a pool of fragmented RNA pro-
ducts for a given gene, we used 12 different sets of 3′-primers that
complement all distinct di-nucleotides at transcript 3′-polyade-
nylation sites and enable separate sequencing of the correspond-
ing intact RNA molecules for each of the primer sets through
barcoding. This unprecedented depth of segregated brain RNA-
Seq data was made publicly accessible by establishing a user
friendly website where the sequenced variants for any given
brain-expressed transcript can be found (http://apainad.weebly.
com/). Sequencing files were processed and analyzed for differ-
ential expression and functional enrichment.
RNA sequencing libraries made from the temporal gyrus sam-
ples yielded an average of 6.0 × 106 (STD = 2.0 × 106) uniquely
aligned 75 base pair (bp) single end reads or approximately
7.0 × 107 (STD = 1.8 × 107) total read counts when combining all
12 SQUARE fields for each sample. These reads were mapped
against the GRGCh37/hg19 version of the Homo sapiens genome
(http://genome.ucsc.edu/). Transcripts with >1 read per kilobase
per million (RPKM) per SQUARE field were defined as being
detected (Hebenstreit and Teichmann 2011). An average of 6610
± 1367 genes per field were detected across the 12 fields (details in
Supplementary Table 3). Expression criteria were set to RPKM > 1
in at least one of the SQUARE fields, in at least 80% of the tested
donor cohorts.
Immunofluorescence
Immunofluorescence experiments were performed as previously
described (de Castro et al. 2009). Primary antibodies used were
anti-Cleaved caspase-3 (1:500 Thermo Fisher Scientific, Catalog
no. PA5-16335), anti-AT180 (1:1000 Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Catalog no. EN-MN1040), and anti-PSD95. Sections were visua-
lized by Zeiss LSM 510 Meta (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany)
confocal system (×40, ×63 objectives, with an N.A. of 1.3 and 1.4,
respectively) and by Leica TCS SP8 (Leica Microsystems Inc., On-
tario, Canada) confocal system (×63 objective, with an N.A. of 1.4),
a 488-nm Ar laser and 633-nm HeNe laser were used for excitation
of fluorophores.
Western Blotting
Mouse hippocampi were collected, protein was isolated, and im-
munoblotting was performed as previously described using RIPA
lysis buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhi-
bitors (Guzman et al. 2011). Band intensities were quantified
using FluoroChemQ software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
3554
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2017, Vol. 27, No. 7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Gene Ontology Analysis
Gene ontology functional analysis was performed using the GOr-
illa software through the web application. Using the 2 unranked
lists method as described (Eden et al. 2009). KEGG pathway
analysis was performed using the ClueGO plug-in of Cytoscape
(Bindea et al. 2009).
RNA-Binding Protein Analysis
To predict potential RNA-binding proteins that may be impli-
cated in the observed changes in alternative splicing, alternative-
ly spliced sequences were run through the RBPmap software (Paz
et al. 2014) to detect potentially altered RNA-binding proteins.
The list of RNA-binding proteins that were suggested by the soft-
ware was then run through the Allen Brain Atlas (http://mouse.
brain-map.org/) to ensure that they were expressed in the murine
hippocampus. All RNA-binding proteins not expressed in the
hippocampus were excluded.
qPCR
To measure mRNA expression, total RNA was extracted from
freshly dissected hippocampal tissue, using the Aurum Total
RNA for fatty and fibrous tissue kit (Bio-Rad) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA synthesis and qPCR analysis
were performed as previously described (Guzman et al. 2011).
For alternative splicing experiments, the alternative exon levels
were normalized to a constitutively expressed exon from the
same gene.
Primary Neuronal Cultures
Primary mouse hippocampal neurons were produced from E16
embryos as previously described (Ostapchenko et al. 2013). Neu-
rons were cultured for 15 days. Knockdown of hnRNPA2/B1 from
the cultured neurons was achieved by treatment with a shRNA,
as previously described (Berson et al. 2012). A separate set of
cultured neurons was treated with 10 μM of carbachol, 10 μM of
carbachol and 100 μM Atropine, or 100 μM Atropine alone for 48 h.
APP Processing
Biochemical analysis of the processing of APP was performed as
previously described (Dewachter et al. 2002). Forebrains from
VAChT-deficient and control mice were homogenized in 50 mM
Tris–HCl (pH 8.5); samples were then ultracentrifuged at 135 000
× g for 1 h at 4 °C; and the supernatant was collected and analyzed
by western blotting and ELISA. The pellet was re-suspended and
ultracentrifuged again and diluted in 8 M guanidine HCl to obtain
the insoluble fraction for ELISA analysis.
ELISA
Murine β-amyloid was measured from the hippocampal hom-
ogenate using the Wako Human/Rat (Mouse) β-Amyloid (42)
ELISA High-Sensitive Kit (Catalog Number: 292-64501). The
ELISA assay was performed according to the manufacturer’s
protocol.
Congo Red Staining
Congo red staining was performed as previously described
(Thompson and Walker 2015), using a Congo Red solution
(Sigma C-6277) in 100% ethanol.
Silver Staining
Assessment of argyrophilic cells in the hippocampus was done
by using NeuroSilverTM staining kit II (FD NeuroTechnologies,
Inc., Baltimore, MD, USA), which provides detection of degenerat-
ing neurons, including neuronal somata, axons, and terminals.
Estimation of Hippocampal Volume
NeuN immunohistochemistry was performed to estimate the
volume of and number of neurons of hippocampal regions CA1,
CA3, and the dentate gyrus (DG) as described (Beauquis et al.
2014). Briefly, tissue sections were stained with mouse monoclo-
nal anti-NeuN (1:500 PhosphoSolutions, Catalog no. 583-FOX3),
using the ABC kit (Vector Laboratories) and developed with
2 mM diaminobenzidine (Sigma, USA) and 0.5 mM H2O2 in 0.1 M
Tris buffer. The total number of NeuN (T) cells in the various hip-
pocampal regions was estimated using the following formula:
T = (N × V)/t, where N is the cell density, V is the volume of the
structure, and t is the thickness of the section.
GSK3 Inhibition
To inhibit GSK3 in VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice, a cohort of aged
animals (12 months old, n = 5 AR-A014418 treated, n = 4 saline
treated) were implanted with Alzet micro-osmotic pumps
(Model 1004; DURECT Corp, Cupertino, CA, USA). The pumps
were implanted subcutaneously in the intrascapular region
of each mouse. The reservoir of each pump was preloaded with
96 μL of either sterile saline solution or the GSK3 inhibitor
AR-A014418. The pumps administered 5 mg/kg/day of AR-
A014418, a dose shown to produce a significant inhibition of
GSK3 in vivo (Ly et al. 2013). During the implantation procedure,
mice were anesthetized with ketamine (100 mg/kg) and xylazine
(15 mg/kg). Drug treatment lasted for 28 days.
Morris Water Maze
The spatial version of the Morris water maze (MWM) was con-
ducted as described previously to investigate spatial memory
(Vorhees and Williams 2006; Martyn et al. 2012; Kolisnyk et al.
2013a). Briefly, animals were given 4 training trials a day (90 s
each) for 4 days, with a 15-min intertrial interval. If the mice
did not find the platform after 90 s during the learning phase,
they were gently directed to the platform. On the fifth day, mem-
ory was assessed via a probe trial (60 s), during which the plat-
form is removed and time spent in the target quadrant is
measured. The task was performed in a 1.5-m diameter pool
with 25 °C water. The platform was submerged 1 cm below the
surface of the water, and spatial cues (posters, streamers, and
plastic props) were distributed around the pool. Sessions were
recorded and analyzed using the ANY-Maze Software.
The classification of search strategies mice employed during
training was defined as previously described (Garthe et al. 2009).
An experimenter blind to genotypes scored search strategies as
follows: 1) thigmotaxis, characterized by maintaining close prox-
imity to the wall (>70% trial within 10 cm of wall); 2) random
search, illustrated by global swimming with no classified strategy;
3) scanning, characterized by a preference for the central pool area
(>50% trial within 35 cm of pool center); 4) chaining, characterized
by searching near the correct radial distance of the platform to the
wall (>75% trial 20–50 cm from the pool center, <15% within 10 cm
of wall, and <10% within 20 cm of pool center); 5) directed search,
characterized by a preference for a passageway toward the
platform or platform quadrant (>80% trial within a 50-cm-wide
Cholinergic Control of Transcription and Pathology
Kolisnyk et al.
|
3555
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 region from the start point to the platform); 6) focal search, char-
acterized by a highly localized search near the platform (≥50%
trial in a circular target zone with a 15-cm radius); and 7) direct
swim, characterized by a maintained heading toward the plat-
form (little to no deviation in path to reach platform from start
point). Total block lengths were the sum of all blocks for 1 strat-
egy and 1 mouse.
Protein Isolation from Human Postmortem Brain Tissue
Samples from parietal cortical tissues from age-/sex-matched
controls (n = 6, 3 females and 3 males) and AD-affected individuals
(n = 6, 3 females and 3 males), and information related to age and
demographics have been previously published (Ostapchenko et al.
2013). The samples were homogenized in RIPA buffer supplemen-
ted with protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem), and Western
blotting was performed as described above.
Statistical Analysis
Sigmastat 3.5 software was used for statistical analysis. Student’s
t-test was used for comparison between 2 experimental groups.
Two-way ANOVA or 2-way ANOVA with repeated measures (RM)
were used when >2 groups were compared.
Results
Forebrain Cholinergic Dysfunction Modifies Expression
Levels of Hippocampal Transcripts and Alternative
Splicing
To determine the contribution of cholinergic tone to the regulation
of hippocampal transcript levels, we used VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox
mice, a mouse line with selective deletion of the VAChT gene
from forebrain regions, including the medial septum, which con-
tains cholinergic neurons that project to the hippocampus.
VAChT has been shown to be essential for ACh packaging and
release (Prado et al. 2006; de Castro et al. 2009; Lima Rde et al.
2010). Non-biased, whole-genome transcriptome RNA sequen-
cing of hippocampal samples from 3 VAChT-deficient and 4 con-
trol mice yielded a total of 14 200 expressed genes. Comparative
analysis revealed that 1098 genes were differentially expressed
in VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox hippocampi compared with control
mice (Fig. 1A,B, FDR corrected P < 0.05). Of those, 763 genes were
upregulated and 362 downregulated in the VAChT-deficient
mice. In addition, a linear regression analysis on reciprocal junc-
tion pairs detected roughly 4% of hippocampal transcripts in
VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice as alternatively spliced in high confi-
dence compared with control mice. Equal proportion of exon in-
clusion and exclusion events was observed; mainly events of
cassette exons were detected (Fig. 1C), suggesting widespread
changes in several splicing regulation-related pathways and/or
cellular mechanisms (Soreq et al. 2014).
We interrogated these differentially expressed/spliced genes
for involvement in neuronal function and AD-like pathology. A
number of genes involved in critical pathways including PI3K-
Akt signaling pathway (a regulator of neuronal vulnerability
(Gary and Mattson 2001; Endo et al. 2006)), spliceosome regula-
tion, and regulation of microtubule-based processes were identi-
fied using Gene Ontology (GO) KEGG pathway analysis (Fig. 1D;
see Supplementary Table 1). qPCR validation and correlation
between changes observed in RNA-Seq and in an independent
mouse cohort are shown in Supplementary Figure 1 for the differ-
ent gene pathways and alternative splicing events. These results
suggest that abnormal cholinergic signaling can effectively
modulate several major gene pathways with potential to influ-
ence the function of target cells in the hippocampus.
We also performed small molecule RNA-Seq and additional
miRNA microarray hybridization experiments and observed lim-
ited changes in miRNA expression in the hippocampus of VAChT-
deficient mice (see Supplementary Fig. 2). VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox
hippocampus showed a mature miRNA expression profile with
only marginal differences from controls. Only 7 of 700 detectable
miRNAs were differentially expressed, and of the 20 miRNAs
most highly expressed in the hippocampus, comprising 82% of
total counts, none were differentially expressed (see Supplemen-
tary Fig. 2). These findings point to alternative splicing and tran-
scription, or changes in mRNA turnover, rather than miRNA, as
potential main contributors to phenotypes in VAChT-deficient
mice.
Cholinergic Deficit Triggers Abnormal BACE1
Alternative Splicing and APP Processing
One of the detected abnormally alternatively spliced genes in our
database was the protease BACE1 (Fig. 1D), which is responsible
for the cleavage of APP (Luo et al. 2001). The predicted alternative
splicing event in VAChT-deficient mice is expected to increase
expression of BACE1-501, the active protein isoform (Mowrer
and Wolfe 2008). qPCR analysis validated the predicted splicing
event and demonstrated increased exon 3/4 inclusion for BACE1
(Fig. 2A).
Bioinformatics analysis using the RBP-Map tool revealed an en-
richment of binding sites for hnRNPA2/B1 in BACE1 mRNA.
hnRNPA2/B1 is part of a family of RNA-binding proteins that regu-
late pre-mRNA splicing, trafficking, and maturation (Bekenstein
and Soreq 2013). Notably, AD-associated impairments in cholin-
ergic signaling are accompanied by decreased expression of
hnRNPA2/B1 protein in the AD cerebral cortex and in cholinergic
impaired mice (Berson et al. 2012; Kolisnyk et al. 2013b). Corres-
pondingly, the hippocampus of VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice
showed reduced hnRNPA2/B1 protein levels (Fig. 2B). We then
investigated whether hnRNPA2/B1 regulates BACE1 splicing by
exposing primary hippocampal cultured neurons to lentivirus-
carrying shRNA against hnRNPA2B1. Our results showed changes
in BACE1 splicing similar to cholinergic deficiency (Fig. 2C), dir-
ectly implicating hnRNPA2/B1 in the regulation of BACE1 splicing.
To test for the role of cholinergic signaling and the different
cholinergic receptors in mediating this splicing event, we treated
cultured hippocampal neurons with the cholinergic mimetic car-
bachol. This treatment was able to decrease the proportion of
BACE1-501. This decrease was blocked by cotreatment with the
muscarinic antagonist atropine (Fig. 2D). These data implicate
muscarinic receptors in the regulation of BACE1 splicing. This
splicing event in BACE1 predicts an increase in the levels of the
mature BACE1 protein, and indeed, immunoblot analysis re-
vealed a 2-fold increase of BACE1 levels in the hippocampus of
VAChT-deficient mice (Fig. 2E).
In late-onset AD, BACE1 expression is upregulated (Hebert
et al. 2008), and it is thought to contribute to age-dependent pro-
gression in AD pathology (Ly et al. 2013). We therefore tested for
changes in APP processing in VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice. Aged
VAChT-deficient mice (11–14 month old) displayed a modified
pattern of Tris-soluble APP fragments (Fig. 2F), similar to that
of mouse models with APP/PS1 mutations (Oddo et al. 2003;
Jankowsky et al. 2004). In contrast, membrane-bound C-terminal
fragments of APP (α and β CTFs), alterations of which can suggest
impaired proteolytic processing of the protein (reviewed in
3556
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2017, Vol. 27, No. 7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 (Selkoe 2000)), were similar in VAChT-deficient mice and controls
(Fig. 2G). APP processing was not modified in aged Nkx2.1-Cre
mice (see Supplementary Fig. 3A), suggesting that this effect is
due to cholinergic dysfunction rather than to Cre expression.
We then assessed the levels of mouse amyloid peptides
using an ELISA kit validated for both mouse and human
Aβ peptides (Teich et al. 2013). The hippocampus of aged
VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice showed increased levels of soluble
mouse Aβ peptide compared with controls (Fig. 2H), reaching
about one-third of the levels of those found in aged 5XFAD
mouse model of AD, which is one of the most aggressive models
of AD amyloidosis. In comparison, insoluble amyloid peptide
was undetectable in the brains of VAChT-deficient mice, where-
as it was highly abundant in the 5XFAD mice (Fig. 2H). In
Figure 1. Forebrain deletion of VAChT induces alterations in hippocampal transcriptome. (A) Principal component analysis of transcripts from the hippocampi of control
(V
AChTflox/flox; gray circles) and VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox (red circles) mice. (B) Cluster analysis of differentially regulated transcripts in the hippocampus of VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox
(n = 3) mice compared with controls (n = 4). (C) Number of genes at indicated significance cutoff that were found to have an exon inclusion or exclusion event and summary
of alternative splicing events. (D) List of genes from the PI3K-AKT pathway (gray shading), Spliceosome pathway (blue shading), Microtubule polymerization pathway
(green shading) and other AD genes of interest (yellow shading), identified from KEGG pathway analysis of altered transcripts in VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice. For each
gene, corresponding fold change, corrected statistical significance levels, and RNA expression change are also shown. Altered mRNA expression of these genes has
been confirmed by qPCR (see Supplementary Fig. 1).
3557
Cholinergic Control of Transcription and Pathology
Kolisnyk et al.
|
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 addition, neither control nor VAChT-deficient mice displayed
positive Congo red staining, unlike brain sections from 5XFAD
mice, which exhibited numerous Congo red plaques (Fig. 2I).
These data indicate that although VAChT-deficient mice
show increased levels of soluble Aβ peptides, they do not
seem to accumulate in extracellular amyloid plaques. Indeed,
the murine amyloid peptide is much less prone to aggregation
than human Aβ due to 2 amino acid changes (Jankowsky et al.
2007).
Cholinergic Deficit Leads to Age-Dependent
Hippocampal Tauopathy
In AD, increased levels of soluble Aβ peptides are thought to pre-
cede abnormal phosphorylation of the microtubule-associated
protein tau (Iqbal et al. 2010). Previous reports suggested
that cholinergic activity and tau phosphorylation might be
interrelated (Hellstrom-Lindahl 2000). Therefore, we used im-
munofluorescence to assess levels of the AT180 tau epitope
(T231/S235) in the hippocampus of VAChT-deficient mice. This
phosphorylation-dependent antibody specific to pT231 has been
shown to label approximately 70% of paired helical filaments
(PHF) in AD brains (Goedert et al. 1994). Phosphorylation at this
epitope reduces the binding of tau to microtubules potentially
increasing its toxicity (Lim et al. 2008). Immunofluorescence
imaging revealed a robust increase of AT180 immunoreactivity
in the hippocampus of VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice compared
with aged-matched controls (Fig. 3A; 11–14 months old mice). To
test whether the positive immunoreactivity of pTau in VAChT-
deficient mice is associated with an induction of pathological
Figure 2. Disrupted APP processing and alternative splicing of BACE1 in cholinergic-deficient mice. (A) qPCR analysis of alternative splicing events for BACE1 in the
hippocampus of controls and (VAChTflox/flox; gray bars) and VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox (red bars). Alternative exon levels are normalized to a constitutive exon from
the same gene (n = 6, data are mean ± SEM; **P < 0.01). (B) Representative western blot and quantification of hnRNPA2/B1 protein expression in the hippocampus of
controls (VAChTflox/flox; gray bars) and VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox (red bars) mice. hnRNPA2/B1 expression was normalized to actin (n = 4, data are mean ± SEM;
**P < 0.01). (C) Quantification of the BACE1 alternative splicing in primary neuron cultures treated with hnRNPA2B1-shRNA (*P < 0.05). (D) Quantification of the BACE1
alternative splicing in primary neuron cultures treated with 10 mM Carbachol and Atropine (n = 4, data are mean ± SEM; **P < 0.05). (E) Representative western blot and
quantification of BACE1 protein levels in the hippocampus of controls (VAChTflox/flox; gray bars) and VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox (red bars) mice. BACE1 expression
was normalized to actin (n = 3, data are mean ± SEM; *P < 0.05). (F) Biochemical analysis and quantification of murine APP fragments in brain homogenates of aged
expressed as a % ([Signal intensity of the fragment/signal intensity of full-length protein] × 100). Eleven- to 14-month-old controls (VAChTflox/flox; gray bars),
VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox (red bars), and APPswe/PS1dE9 (green bars) hippocampal tissue extracts were resolved by western blotting (data are mean ± SEM n = 3). (G)
Analysis of membrane-bound APP fragments in aged controls (VAChTflox/flox; gray bars) and VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox (red bars) and APPswe/PS1dE9 (green bars)
(data are mean ± SEM, n = 3). (H) Murine soluble and insoluble levels of Aβ42 in aged (11–14 months old) controls (VAChTflox/flox; gray bars), VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/
flox (red bars), and 5xFAD (black bars) measured by ELISA (n = 4). (I) Congo red staining in the CA1 region of the hippocampus in aged (11–14 months old) controls,
VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox, and 5xFAD mice. Arrowheads indicate positive Congo red staining suggestive of amyloid plaques. (n = 3, Scale bar, 100 μm).
3558
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2017, Vol. 27, No. 7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 tau, immunofluorescence with MC1 antibody was performed.
Positive reactivity of conformation-dependent MC1 antibody
depends on the proximity of N-terminal (aa 7–9) and C-terminal
(313–333) amino acid sequences of tau, which is one of the
earliest alterations of tau in AD (Wolozin et al. 1986; Weaver
et al. 2000). Immunostaining with MC1 revealed positive immu-
noreactivity in the hippocampus of aged cholinergic-deficient
mice, but not in age-matched controls (Fig. 3B).
In agreement with the immunofluorescence data, hippo-
campal extracts of VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice showed approxi-
mately 4-fold increases in pTau immunoreactive bands,
including higher order oligomers detected with AT180, com-
pared with controls (Fig. 3C,D). On the other hand, total tau
and pTauS262 levels were unmodified in VAChT-deficient mice
(Fig. 3C,D). Taken together, our data indicate that deletion of
hippocampal VAChT induces hyperphosphorylation of tau and
leads to tau pathological conformation as detected by MC1,
both of which are consistently observed in AD. These data sug-
gest the potential for neuronal toxicity due to cholinergic
dysfunction.
Cholinergic Deficiency Exacerbates Age-Dependent
Neuronal Vulnerability and Impaired Learning
Synaptic health is compromised in mouse models of AD,
and synaptic loss is a consistent finding in AD-affected indivi-
duals (Klein 2006). To examine synaptic integrity, we stained
hippocampal sections with the synaptic marker PSD95. Aged
VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice displayed hippocampal decreases
in PSD95 immunoreactivity, increased microglial activation,
and upregulation of inflammatory markers, in comparison to
age-matched controls, suggesting large-scale synaptic dysfunc-
tion in these mutants (Fig. 4A–C). These observations predict
neuronal vulnerability; therefore, we stained brain sections
with silver, which accumulates in neurons that are more vulner-
able to neurodegeneration (DeOlmos and Ingram 1971). Aged
VAChT-deficient mice presented intensified silver staining com-
pared with controls; this increased silver staining was not ob-
served in young VAChT-deficient mice (Fig. 4D,E), suggesting
that long-lasting decrease in cholinergic signaling may increase
the vulnerability of hippocampal neurons. Parallel staining of
Figure 3. Hippocampal cholinergic failure triggers tauopathy in an age-dependent manner. (A) Phosphorylated Tau levels monitored by immunolabeling with
phosphorylation-dependent antibodies specific to pT231. Representative images of pT231 and Hoeschst labeling in the hippocampus of aged (11–14 month old)
controls (left) and VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox (right) mice. (n = 3, Scale bar, 100 μm). (B) Representative images of MC1 and Hoeschst labeling in the CA1 region of
the hippocampus of controls (left) and VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox (right) mice. (n = 3, Scale bar, 100 μm). (C) Western blot analysis of controls (VAChTflox/flox) and
VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox aged (11–14 months old) hippocampal samples for tau using phosphorylation-dependent anti-tau antibodies pT231, Ser 262, and for total Tau
protein expression. (D) Quantification of Western blots. pT231, Ser 262, and total tau expression were normalized to actin (n = 4, data are mean ± SEM; **P < 0.01).
3559
Cholinergic Control of Transcription and Pathology
Kolisnyk et al.
|
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 hippocampal sections from aged 5XFAD mice compared with
control mice performed as a positive control revealed similar
increases in silver staining as that for VAChT-deficient mice
(see Supplementary Fig. 4).
Activated caspase-3, a marker of apoptosis, was augmented
in young VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice compared with controls
(Fig. 4F). However, aging significantly increased the number of ac-
tivated caspase-positive cells in VAChT-deficient mice compared
with controls (Fig. 4F). Also, young VAChT-deficient mice showed
no alteration in the number of NeuN-positive cells across all re-
gions of the hippocampus (Fig. 4G; see Supplementary Fig. 4);
while NeuN-positive cells in CA1 and CA3 region, but not dentate
gyrus, were decreased in aged VAChT-deficient mice (Fig. 4G;
see Supplementary Fig. 4), predicting functional implications
for this aging-related hippocampal neuronal vulnerability.
Thus, impaired cholinergic signaling induces global changes in
transcript levels, followed by age-related exacerbation of synap-
tic and neuronal vulnerability.
To test whether long-lasting cholinergic failure may have age-
dependent consequences in cognitive function, we subjected
aged (11–14 months old) VAChT-deficient mice to the MWM
task. Young VAChT-deficient mice (3–6 months old) show
little difference from controls in acquisition performance
on the MWM task (Al-Onaizi et al. 2016). In contrast, aged
VAChT-deficient mice took significantly longer and swam a
greater distance than age-matched controls to find the platform
across the 4 days of acquisition (see Supplementary Fig. 4E,F).
Furthermore, aged VAChT-deficient mice used distinct strategy
preferences to find the platform, indicating that their deterio-
rated performance was due to modified learning capacities. Brief-
ly, the analysis of search strategies used by each animal was
based on a fixed set of criteria (Fig. 4H). At a young age, both con-
trols and VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice predominantly used a more
direct strategy to reach the platform (strategies 5/6/7, Fig. 4I). In
contrast, aged VAChT-deficient mice used random swimming
predominantly as their strategy to acquire the task (strategy 2,
Fig. 4I), while aged control mice maintained the use of more dir-
ect strategies. Aged VAChT-deficient mice also exhibited deficits
in the probe trial (see Supplementary Fig. 4G). Taken together,
these results suggest that long-term cholinergic deficiency in
VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice led to progressive loss of neurons in
the hippocampus that worsened spatial information acquisition
and cognitive functioning.
Cholinergic-induced Age-Dependent Pathology Is
Partially Mediated by GSK3 Activation
In addition to APP processing and tau hyperphosphorylation, we
observed other critical biochemical pathways altered in response
to cholinergic deficiency, including aberrant GSK3 signaling,
Figure 4. Hippocampal cholinergic failure leads to increased neuronal vulnerability and worsens cognitive functioning. (A) Immunofluorescence imaging showing PSD-95
protein levels in the hippocampus of aged controls or VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice and corresponding (B) Western blot analysis for PSD-95 protein levels in the
hippocampus of VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice compared with controls (t(6) = 4.286, P = 0.0052, n = 4). (C) Immunofluorescence imaging and quantification showing CD-68
immunoreactivity in the hippocampus of aged VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice and levels of IL-1 transcripts as measured by qRT–PCR (t(10) = 2.312, P = 0.0434, n = 6) and IL-6
transcripts as measured by qRT–PCR (t(10) = 2.882, P = 0.0204) (data are mean ± SEM, *P < 0.05, n = 6). (D) Representative images of silver staining in the CA1 region of young (3–
6 months) and aged (11–14 months) mice. Scale bar, 100 μm. (E) Quantification of silver stain-positive cells between young and aged hippocampi of controls (VAChTflox/flox;
gray bars) and VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox (red bars) (n = 5, data are mean ± SEM, **P < 0.01). (F) Representative immunofluorescence images for activated caspase 3 labeling in
the hippocampi of young (Top) and aged (Bottom) mice. Quantification of activated caspase-3 immunolabeling in young and aged hippocampi of controls (VAChTflox/flox;
gray bars) and VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox (red bars) (n = 3, data are mean ± SEM, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, Scale bar, 100 μm). (G) Distribution of neuron-specific nuclear antigen
(NeuN)-positive neurons in the CA1 region of the hippocampus in young (top) and aged (bottom) mice (Scale bar, 100 μm). Quantitative comparison of the number of
neurons labeled by NeuN in the CA1 region of the hippocampus in young (top) and aged (bottom) mice (n = 6, data are mean ± SEM, *P < 0.05). (H) Representative
examples of the 7 classified criteria to score the strategies mice used to perform in the MWM. Strategies are color coded. (I) Strategy plot reflecting the mean strategy-
recruitment values for the first and fourth trials of each day for young (left) and aged (right) mice. Quantification comparison of total block length values of individual
mice and their employed strategies over the course of 4-day training period. Gray bars represent control mice and red bars represent VAChT-deficient mice (n = 8, data
are mean ± SEM; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01).
3560
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2017, Vol. 27, No. 7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 which has also been shown to play multiple roles in AD (Gary and
Mattson 2001; Endo et al. 2006). As several genes that regulate the
PI3-AKT pathway were upregulated in VAChT-deficient mice
(Fig. 1D; see Supplementary Fig. 1), we tested for dysregulation
of PI3-AKT signaling pathway in these mice by evaluating
the phosphorylation status of the AKT protein and its down-
stream target GSK3. AKT presented decreased phosphorylation
at residue Ser473, with unmodified Thr308 phosphorylation, in
VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox hippocampus compared with controls
(Fig. 5A). Additionally, GSK3α/β tyrosine phosphorylation, which
reflects activation of GSK3, was increased in these mutants
(Fig. 5B). Hence, in addition to increased levels of proteins in-
volved in AD pathology, these results suggest potential contribu-
tions of GSK3 activation in cholinergic-induced deficits.
To test the role of GSK3 in the abnormal hippocampal changes
in cholinergic-deficient mice, we chronically treated a cohort of
aged (11 months old) VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice with the GSK3
inhibitor AR-A014418 (Fig. 5C). After 28 days of treatment, we
found that VAChT-deficient mice treated with AR-A014418
showed a significant decrease in GSK3 α and β tyrosine phosphor-
ylation compared with VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice treated with
saline (Fig. 5D). Increased phosphorylation at Tyr residues 216
or 279 augments GSK3 activity (Hur and Zhou 2010), and examin-
ing GSK3 phosphorylation at these residues has been used to de-
termine the effectiveness of AR-A014418 (Carter et al. 2014;
Yadav et al. 2014). We then assessed some of the key alterations
detected in the hippocampus of aged VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox
mice. AR-A014418 treatment was able to significantly decrease
Figure 5. Cholinergic-mediated tau hyperphosphorylation is regulated by GSK3 activation. (A) Representative Western blot and quantification analysis of pAKT(S473)
and pAKT(Thr308) levels in the hippocampus of VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice. (n = 4, data are mean ± SEM, *P < 0.05) (B) Representative Western blot and quantification
analysis of phospho-GSK3α and β in the hippocampus of aged (11–14 months old) controls (left) and VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox (right) mice. Levels of pGSK3α and β to the
respective GSK3 (n = 5 and 3, data are mean ± SEM, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001). (C) Implantation of osmotic pumps and delivery of AR-A014418 to aged VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox
mice. (D) Representative western blot and quantification analysis of phospho-GSK3α and β in the hippocampus of aged VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice treated with AR-
A014418 or saline. (E) Western blot analysis aged VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox treated with AR-A014418 or saline for Tau hyperphosphorylation at T231, MCI
immunopositive tau, and total Tau protein expression. (F) Representative immunolabeling of reduced T231 Tau in the hippocampus of aged VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox
mice (Scale bar, 100 μm). (G) Western blot analysis for PSD-95 protein levels in the hippocampus of VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice treated with AR-A014418 or saline.
(n = 4 saline treated, n = 5 AR-A014418 treated, data are mean ± SEM, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001).
3561
Cholinergic Control of Transcription and Pathology
Kolisnyk et al.
|
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 tau T231 hyperphosphorylation and MC1-immunopositive tau in
Western blots (Chai et al. 2011; Petry et al. 2014), by approximately
50% in VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice compared with saline-treated
VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice. Total levels of tau were unchanged
(Fig. 5E). Immunofluorescence staining (Fig. 5F) also demonstrated
reduced levels of T231 hyperphosphorylated tau in AR-A014418-
treated mice. Compared with saline-treated animals, AR-A014418
treatment was able to significantly increase levels of PSD-95
protein (Fig. 5G).
Interestingly, we observed no changes in protein levels of BACE1
following AR-A014418 treatment in aged VAChTNKx2.1-Cre-flox/flox
mice (see Supplementary Fig. 5A). Furthermore, AR-A014418
treatment did not alter the alternative splicing event in the
BACE1 gene (see Supplementary Fig. 5A). Together, these data
suggest that the hnRNPA2/B1-mediated alternative splicing and
subsequent increase in BACE1 protein level are not mediated by
GSK3 activation. Surprisingly, despite reduced levels of hyper-
phosphorylated tau, 1-month AR-A014418 treatment was unable
to decrease the elevated levels of activated caspase-3, (see Sup-
plementary Fig. 5C,D).
Cholinergic Dysfunction in Human AD Brains
Whether cholinergic genes are expressed in lower levels in
human AD brain compared with cognitively alert controls and
may contribute to phenotypes detected herein is not fully under-
stood. To examine that, we extracted total RNA from a cohort of
24 adult human temporal gyrus samples collected at the
Netherland Brain Bank (sample information in Supplementary
Table 2), including 8 sporadic AD patients and 16 from age-
matched controls. We then profiled AD-related transcript differ-
ences by adopting the particularly deep SQUARE™ RNA library
construction approach (Hebenstreit and Teichmann 2011). Of
those, 10 885 genes that were expressed showed a significant
change. Next, we quantified the levels of those transcripts com-
posing the expanded family of cholinergic regulator genes (Soreq
2015). Detected cholinergic transcripts showed significantly
lower expression levels than other protein-coding genes in the
temporal gyrus of AD patients compared with age-matched
controls (Fig. 6A).
Brain samples from a distinct cohort of AD patients (Ostap-
chenko et al. 2013) supported the RNA-Seq analysis results by
showing a significant VAChT loss in AD brains compared with
age- and sex-matched controls (Fig. 6B), in agreement with previ-
ous observations (Efange et al. 1997; Chen et al. 2011). Further-
more, the cohort of AD brains exhibited 50% decrease in
hnRNPA2/B1 protein levels compared with age-/gender-matched
controls (Fig. 6C), confirming previous results obtained with a dis-
tinct AD cohort (Berson et al. 2012). Additionally, we found a sig-
nificant positive correlation between VAChT and hnRNPA2/B1
protein levels (Fig. 6D). AD brain samples also showed drastic
increases in tau-Thr231 phosphorylation (Fig. 6E), which was in-
versely proportional to the levels of VAChT (Fig. 6F). Our findings
using cholinergic-deficient mice support an intricate timeline
whereby cholinergic dysfunction per se precedes and may have
strong influence in pathological changes observed in AD.
Figure 6. Cholinergic failure in human AD brain associates with loss of hnRNPA2/B1 and hyperphosporylation of tau. (A) Cholinergic genes are downregulated in the AD
temporal gyrus. Shown are cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) for the global change in the expanded family of cholinergic genes (as listed in Soreq 2015) compared
with global expression patterns between AD and control brain tissues (n = 8, Kolmogorov–Smirnov P = 0.03, red and blue lines, correspondingly). (B) Western blot analysis of
VAChT protein levels in AD brains. (C) Western blot analysis of hnRNPA2/B1 protein levels in AD brains. (D) Correlation between hnRNPA2/B1 protein levels and VAChT
protein levels in AD brains. (E) Western blot analysis of Tau-Thr231 phosphorylation levels and (F) correlation between VAChT protein levels and Tau Thr-231
phosphorylation levels. (n = 6, data are mean ± SEM, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01).
3562
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2017, Vol. 27, No. 7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Discussion
We employed transcriptome and biochemical assays on cholin-
ergic-deficient mouse brain samples to explore the impact of
long-lasting forebrain cholinergic dysfunction. Whole-genome
RNA sequencing demonstrated that cholinergic deficiency modi-
fies expression levels and isoform abundance of several key tran-
scripts related to Alzheimer’s disease in the hippocampus of
VAChT-deficient mice. Cholinergic-mediated abnormal BACE1
mRNA splicing in VAChT-mutant mice increased BACE1 protein
levels and APP processing. Accordingly, cholinergic deficiency
caused a 10-fold increase in soluble mouse Aβ peptides, age-
dependent hippocampal tauopathy, synaptic abnormalities,
neuronal inflammation, neuronal vulnerability, and cognitive
decline. We also showed that GSK3 activation is critical for cho-
linergic modulation of tau hyperphosphorylation and synaptic
vulnerability. Furthermore, we confirmed that human AD brains
present cholinergic dysfunction and showed that it correlates to
changes in the levels of hnRNP A2/B1 and hyperphosphorylated
tau. Our findings indicate that cholinergic impairments confer
widespread hippocampal damage and malfunction. Further-
more, our data support a causal role for cholinergic signaling as
a surveillance mechanism controlling hippocampal transcript
levels, maintenance of cognitive function, and neuronal viability
in mice.
Our RNA sequencing analysis revealed a group of differential-
ly expressed transcripts related to spliceosome regulation in
the hippocampus of VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-flox/flox mice, suggesting
that the splicing machinery in these mutants could be altered.
In fact, a significant number of alternative splicing event abnor-
malities were observed in the hippocampus of VAChT-deficient
mice. These results are consistent with previously reported glo-
bal changes of alternative splicing in the AD brain (Tollervey
et al. 2011; Berson et al. 2012; Bai et al. 2013). Importantly, spliceo-
some signaling pathway changes can have broad implications for
gene regulation (reviewed in (Shin and Manley 2004)).
Alternative splicing in the nervous system is particularly
widespread and is essential for multiple aspects of neuronal
function (Raj and Blencowe 2015). However, the signal transduc-
tion pathways that regulate splicing are not well known (Shin and
Manley 2004). Our study adds a role for cholinergic signaling in
the maintenance of balanced alternative splicing. At least part
of the cholinergic control of alternative splicing seems to involve
hnRNPA2/B1. We have shown that cholinergic deficiency in the
cortex (Berson et al. 2012; Kolisnyk et al. 2013b) and hippocampus
(Fig. 2B) leads to decreased expression of the hnRNPA2/B1 pro-
tein. Related work demonstrated that hnRNPA2/B1 is a choliner-
gic regulated splicing factor (Kolisnyk et al. 2016). Importantly,
knockdown of hnRNPA2/B1 in cultured hippocampal neurons
shifted splicing of BACE1 mRNA towards increased expression
of mRNA species coding for the BACE1-501 protein isoform
as observed in the hippocampus of VAChT-deficient mice. This
splicing change led to increased expression of the BACE1
protein that was accompanied by a pattern of APP processing
similar to that observed in commonly used mouse models
of AD. The alternative splicing event in BACE1 observed in
VAChT-mutant mice is regulated by M1 muscarinic receptors
(Kolisnyk et al. 2016).
Cholinergic tone has been thought to regulate APP processing
through muscarinic receptors (Nitsch et al. 1992; Davis et al.
2010). Specifically, M1 signaling has been shown to regulate the
stability of the BACE1 protein (Davis et al. 2010). BACE1-501 is a
more stable and active form of the protein (Mowrer and Wolfe
2008). Remarkably, BACE1 expression is increased in late-onset
AD (Hebert et al. 2008). Our data suggest potential mechanisms
by which cholinergic regulation can affect BACE1 expression
and AD pathology. Interestingly, our data suggest that changes
in alternative splicing occurs post-transcriptionally and inde-
pendent of GSK3 signaling. Thus, cholinergic deficiency may
affect BACE1 expression differently than previously described
in AD, in which GSK3 can regulate BACE1 transcription by in-
creasing promoter activity (Ly et al. 2013). Our findings promote
upstream cholinergic mechanisms as a target for diminishing
aberrant APP processing in AD.
In addition to increased levels of soluble Aβ, VAChTNkx2.1-Cre-
flox/flox mice also show tau hyperphosphorylation, which destabi-
lizes microtubules and significantly disrupts axonal transport.
Tau hyperphosphorylation may also contribute to increased
vulnerability leading to neuronal death (Billingsley and Kincaid
1997). In fact, VAChT-deficient mice show age-dependent
increases in hippocampal argyrophilic staining and neuronal
death.
Oligomeric protein aggregation has been linked to toxicity
and to neurodegenerative disorders, including AD (Maeda et al.
2006). The formation of NFTs alone is insufficient for neurode-
generation, yet oligomeric tau may contribute to neurodegenera-
tion and synaptic loss in AD (Berger et al. 2007; de Calignon et al.
2012). These observed changes in tau in VAChT-deficient mice
(i.e., increased oligomer formation), the associated age-dependent
increase in immunoreactivity of activated caspase-3, and ultim-
ately neuronal loss all support a relationship between cholinergic
failure and AD-like pathology in mice.
Tau hyperphosphorylation can occur due to the increased
activity of GSK3, which subsequently leads to an array of impair-
ments, including disruption of LTP (Hooper et al. 2007) and cell
death in vitro (Zheng et al. 2002). GSK3 overactivation is an
important hallmark in AD (Hooper et al. 2008). Thus, the GSK3
overactivation observed in VAChT-mutant mice represents a
potential mechanism by which reduced cholinergic activity
may have multiple influences in AD pathology in target cells.
We tested this hypothesis by pharmacological inhibition of
GSK3 in aged VAChT-deficient mice. GSK3 inhibition was able
to decrease tau hyperphosphorylation. Also, GSK3 inhibition
partially restored PSD95 protein levels, but did not decrease cas-
pase-3 activation. These findings demonstrate that cholinergic-
induced changes in tau and in amyloid processing are potentially
independent of each other and suggest that cholinergic dysfunc-
tion is contributing to the pathological outcomes in these
animals by altering multiple pathways. The pharmacological
inhibition of GSK3 was tested in mice in which pathology was al-
ready present (11- to 12-month-old mice). Hence, further experi-
ments should test longer treatments with the compound or
genetic ablation of GSK3 genes in VAChT-deficient mice to com-
prehensively dissect the contribution of overactive GSK3 in other
phenotypes.
Aged VAChT-deficient mice showed a decrease in the number
of hippocampal neurons, a result that was not observed in young
mutants, suggesting that cholinergic tone may play a role in
guarding hippocampal neuronal health. Additionally, aged
VAChT-deficient mice showed increased neuroinflammation
and reduced number of synapses, which are pathologies
observed in AD brains (DeKosky and Scheff 1990; Smale et al.
1995; Rogers and Shen 2000). Mice with excess acetylcholinester-
ase, which present decreased cholinergic function, also show
neuroinflammation (Shaked et al. 2009). Furthermore, similar to
our observation, mice lacking the β2 nicotinic receptor subunit
show age-dependent loss of hippocampal neurons (Zoli et al.
1999). Of note, hippocampal neuronal loss is a critical feature in
3563
Cholinergic Control of Transcription and Pathology
Kolisnyk et al.
|
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 AD, which is not observed in mouse models overexpressing
APP and/or presenilin 1 with human AD mutations (Stein and
Johnson 2002). Hence, long-term cholinergic deficiency may
model this aspect of AD in a better way. Potential mechanisms in-
volved in cholinergic dysfunction-induced pathology are shown
in Figure 7.
In line with an age-dependent loss of hippocampal neurons,
we found that aged VAChT-deficient mice showed significant
impairments in their learning strategy in the MWM task. Poor
performance and acquisition on the MWM task have been asso-
ciated with loss of neurons in the hippocampus (Olsen et al.
1994). This suggests that neuronal loss in the hippocampus has
functional consequences in mice as well. In AD brains,
we found evidence of cholinergic decline and showed a strik-
ing relationship between VAChT levels and tau hyperphosphor-
ylation. Together with the mouse data, these observations
support the notion that deficient cholinergic signaling in
AD may correlate to key pathological events, including tau
hyperphosphorylation.
Our data reveal that cholinergic deficiency can affect a num-
ber of transcriptional processes, disturb splicing of key genes, and
interfere with protein networks that normally protect neurons.
Interestingly, recent work revealed that basal forebrain choliner-
gic neurons present intraneuronal Aβ accumulation even in
young adults, which may contribute to their selective vulnerabil-
ity in AD (Baker-Nigh et al. 2015). Cholinergic neurons are
thought to be highly dependent on the presence of trophic factors
for their optimal function and survival (Naumann et al. 2002;
Boskovic et al. 2014), which may also contribute to their demise.
Regardless of the mechanisms for increased cholinergic vulner-
ability in AD, it seems that cholinergic dysfunction persisting
for a long period is highly related to hippocampal pathology
and amyloid accumulation (Teipel et al. 2014).
In short, our results suggest that long-term cholinergic failure
per se, which we model by disrupting synaptic cholinergic func-
tion, can trigger AD-like pathology in mice. More importantly, we
find that long-term cholinergic deficiency leads to age-dependent
cognitive decline that is related to neuronal death, a key feature
of late-onset AD that is not modeled in mice overexpressing
human genes with AD-related mutations. Our experiments pro-
vide a mechanism to explain how decreased cholinergic tone,
for example due to long-term use of anticholinergic drugs,
could lead to increased risk of dementia (Gray et al. 2015),
which may depend on global changes of RNA metabolism,
including alternative splicing and gene expression. It remains
to be determined whether rescuing cholinergic function prior
to development of AD could have an impact in the risk of demen-
tia or AD-related pathology. However, it is noteworthy that recent
observations in potential prodromal AD-affected individuals in-
dicate that cholinesterase inhibition decreases the rate of hippo-
campal atrophy by 45% during 1-year treatment (Dubois et al.
2015). Our data point towards cholinergic signaling being a global
mediator of several distinct processes that when dysfunctional
lead to pathology. Developing effective strategies to reverse the
cholinergic deficits in the AD brain may therefore prove to be
more fruitful than specific therapies based on reversing the indi-
vidual processes it regulates.
Authors’ Contribution
B.K., M.A.A-O., L.S., J.U., H.S., V.F.P., and M.A.M.P. designed experi-
ments; B.K., M.A.A-O., L.S., S.B., G.H., U.B., J.X., G.M.P., M.T. K., and
J.S.S. conducted experiments; M.F. contributed with materials; B.
K., M.A.A-O, L.S., S.B., G.H., U.B., and J.U. analyzed data; B.K., M.A.
A-O, H.S., V.F.P., and M.A.M.P. wrote the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the manuscript.
Figure 7. Summary of findings. (A) In control animals, cholinergic input from the medial septum regulates target neurons in the hippocampus, through nicotinic and
muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. Long-term cholinergic signaling maintains transcriptome integrity likely by a combination of muscarinic and nicotinic activation.
These maintain balance of signaling pathways that regulate AD-like pathology. (B) Conversely, in cholinergic-deficient mice, which models long-term cholinergic
dysfunction, lack of signaling by muscarinic and nicotinic receptors affects differential expression of spliceosome-related genes and reductions in hnRNPA2/B1.
BACE1 mRNA is abnormally spliced leading to an increase of BACE1 expression. As a consequence, APP processing is altered, yielding accumulation of soluble Aβ
peptides. Furthermore, abnormal gene expression influences AKT-GSK3 modulatory genes with consequences for AKT and GSK3 phosphorylation. These changes
contribute to increases in pathological tau phosphorylation and misfolding, neuroinflammation, synaptic loss, hippocampal neuronal death, and ultimately leading
to cognitive decline in these animals.
3564
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2017, Vol. 27, No. 7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Supplementary Material
Supplementary material can be found at: http://www.cercor.
oxfordjournals.org/.
Funding
This work was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (MOP 93651, MOP 136930, MOP 126000, MOP 89919),
National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(402524-2013), Brain Canada, Canadian Foundation for Innov-
ation, and Ontario research fund (M.A.M.P. and V.F.P.). H.S.
acknowledges support by the European Research Council (Ad-
vanced Award 321501) and the Legacy Heritage Science Initiative
(LHSI) of the Israel Science Foundation (Grant No. 378/11). S.B. is
an incumbent of the TEVA National Network of Excellence in
Neuroscience—NNE fellowship. B.K. is a recipient of the Annie
Darkens Research Fund Award from the Alzheimer’s Society of
Canada fellowship and M.A.A-O. received fellowship support
from Kuwait University. J.S.S. received a fellowship from the Sci-
ence without borders program (Brazil). L.S. was funded by a Marie
Curie Actions Intra European Fellowship, the European Commis-
sion (call FP7-PEOPLE-2013-IEF, project: PRANA).
Notes
They are grateful to Dr David E. Greenberg, Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, for fruitful discussions; to Dr Alexander Seitz and Dr
Torsten Reda, Lexogen, Vienna, and Mr Alessandro Guffanti,
Genomnia, Milan, for technical and analytic support; the Nether-
land Brain bank for tissues and data; Jue Fan, Sandra Raulic, and
Matthew Cowan for animal care and technical support; to Dr
R. Jane Rylett (University of Western Ontario, Canada) and Dr
Peter Davies (Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva Uni-
versity, USA) for providing antibodies; and to the Center for Ap-
plied Genomics, SickKids, Toronto for RNA-Seq experiments.
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no competing financial
interests.
References
Al-Onaizi MA, Parfitt GM, Kolisnyk B, Law CS, Guzman MS,
Barros DM, Leung LS, Prado MA, Prado VF. 2016. Regulation
of cognitive processing by hippocampal cholinergic tone.
Cereb Cortex. Doi:10.1093/cercor/bhv349.
Anders S, Huber W. 2010. Differential expression analysis for se-
quence count data. Genome Biol. 11:R106.
Bai B, Hales CM, Chen PC, Gozal Y, Dammer EB, Fritz JJ, Wang X,
Xia Q, Duong DM, Street C, et al. 2013. U1 small nuclear ribo-
nucleoprotein complex and RNA splicing alterations in Alz-
heimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 110:16562–16567.
Baker-Nigh A, Vahedi S, Davis EG, Weintraub S, Bigio EH,
Klein WL, Geula C. 2015. Neuronal amyloid-beta accumula-
tion within cholinergic basal forebrain in ageing and Alzhei-
mer’s disease. Brain. 138:1722–1737.
Bartus RT, Dean RL 3rd, Beer B, Lippa AS. 1982. The cholinergic hy-
pothesis of geriatric memory dysfunction. Science. 217:408–414.
Beauquis J, Vinuesa A, Pomilio C, Pavia P, Galvan V, Saravia F.
2014. Neuronal and glial alterations, increased anxiety, and
cognitive impairment before hippocampal amyloid depos-
ition
in
PDAPP
mice,
model
of
Alzheimer’s
disease.
Hippocampus. 24:257–269.
Bekenstein U, Soreq H. 2013. Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleo-
protein A1 in health and neurodegenerative disease: from
structural insights to post-transcriptional regulatory roles.
Mol Cell Neurosci. 56:436–446.
Berger Z, Roder H, Hanna A, Carlson A, Rangachari V, Yue M,
Wszolek Z, Ashe K, Knight J, Dickson D, et al. 2007. Accumula-
tion of pathological tau species and memory loss in a condi-
tional model of tauopathy. J Neurosci. 27:3650–3662.
Berson A, Barbash S, Shaltiel G, Goll Y, Hanin G, Greenberg DS,
Ketzef M, Becker AJ, Friedman A, Soreq H. 2012. Cholinergic-
associated loss of hnRNP-A/B in Alzheimer’s disease impairs
cortical splicing and cognitive function in mice. EMBO Mol
Med. 4:730–742.
Billingsley ML, Kincaid RL. 1997. Regulated phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation of tau protein: effects on microtubule
interaction, intracellular trafficking and neurodegeneration.
Biochem J. 323(Pt 3):577–591.
Bindea G, Mlecnik B, Hackl H, Charoentong P, Tosolini M,
Kirilovsky A, Fridman WH, Pages F, Trajanoski Z, Galon J.
2009. ClueGO: a Cytoscape plug-in to decipher functionally
grouped gene ontology and pathway annotation networks.
Bioinformatics. 25:1091–1093.
Boskovic Z, Alfonsi F, Rumballe BA, Fonseka S, Windels F,
Coulson EJ. 2014. The role of p75NTR in cholinergic basal fore-
brain structure and function. J Neurosci. 34:13033–13038.
Carter
YM,
Kunnimalaiyaan
S,
Chen
H,
Gamblin
TC,
Kunnimalaiyaan M. 2014. Specific glycogen synthase kinase-
3 inhibition reduces neuroendocrine markers and suppresses
neuroblastoma cell growth. Cancer Biol Ther. 15:510–515.
Chai X, Wu S, Murray TK, Kinley R, Cella CV, Sims H, Buckner N,
Hanmer J, Davies P, O’Neill MJ, et al. 2011. Passive immuniza-
tion with anti-Tau antibodies in two transgenic models: re-
duction of Tau pathology and delay of disease progression. J
Biol Chem. 286:34457–34467.
Chen KH, Reese EA, Kim HW, Rapoport SI, Rao JS. 2011. Disturbed
neurotransmitter transporter expression in Alzheimer’s dis-
ease brain. J Alzheimers Dis. 26:755–766.
Davis AA, Fritz JJ, Wess J, Lah JJ, Levey AI. 2010. Deletion of M1
muscarinic acetylcholine receptors increases amyloid path-
ology in vitro and in vivo. J Neurosci. 30:4190–4196.
de Calignon A, Polydoro M, Suarez-Calvet M, William C,
Adamowicz DH, Kopeikina KJ, Pitstick R, Sahara N, Ashe KH,
Carlson GA, et al. 2012. Propagation of tau pathology in a
model of early Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron. 73:685–697.
de Castro BM, De Jaeger X, Martins-Silva C, Lima RD, Amaral E,
Menezes C, Lima P, Neves CM, Pires RG, Gould TW, et al.
2009. The vesicular acetylcholine transporter is required for
neuromuscular development and function. Mol Cell Biol.
29:5238–5250.
DeKosky ST, Scheff SW. 1990. Synapse loss in frontal cortex biop-
sies in Alzheimer’s disease: correlation with cognitive sever-
ity. Ann Neurol. 27:457–464.
DeOlmos JS, Ingram WR. 1971. An improved cupric-silver method
for impregnation of axonal and terminal degeneration. Brain
Res. 33:523–529.
Dewachter I, Reverse D, Caluwaerts N, Ris L, Kuiperi C, Van den
Haute C, Spittaels K, Umans L, Serneels L, Thiry E, et al.
2002. Neuronal deficiency of presenilin 1 inhibits amyloid pla-
que formation and corrects hippocampal long-term potenti-
ation but not a cognitive defect of amyloid precursor protein
[V717I] transgenic mice. J Neurosci. 22:3445–3453.
Dubois B, Chupin M, Hampel H, Lista S, Cavedo E, Croisile B, Louis
Tisserand G, Touchon J, Bonafe A, Ousset PJ, et al. 2015. Done-
pezil decreases annual rate of hippocampal atrophy in sus-
pected prodromal Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement.
11:1041–1049.
3565
Cholinergic Control of Transcription and Pathology
Kolisnyk et al.
|
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Eden E, Navon R, Steinfeld I, Lipson D, Yakhini Z. 2009. GOrilla: a
tool for discovery and visualization of enriched GO terms in
ranked gene lists. BMC Bioinformatics. 10:48.
Efange SM, Garland EM, Staley JK, Khare AB, Mash DC. 1997. Ves-
icular acetylcholine transporter density and Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Neurobiol Aging. 18:407–413.
Endo H, Nito C, Kamada H, Nishi T, Chan PH. 2006. Activation of
the Akt/GSK3beta signaling pathway mediates survival of vul-
nerable hippocampal neurons after transient global cerebral
ischemia in rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 26:1479–1489.
Garthe A, Behr J, Kempermann G. 2009. Adult-generated hippo-
campal neurons allow the flexible use of spatially precise
learning strategies. PLoS One. 4:e5464.
Gary DS, Mattson MP. 2001. Integrin signaling via the PI3-kinase-
Akt pathway increases neuronal resistance to glutamate-in-
duced apoptosis. J Neurochem. 76:1485–1496.
Goedert M, Jakes R, Crowther RA, Cohen P, Vanmechelen E,
Vandermeeren M, Cras P. 1994. Epitope mapping of monoclo-
nal antibodies to the paired helical filaments of Alzheimer’s
disease: identification of phosphorylation sites in tau protein.
Biochem J. 301(Pt 3):871–877.
Gray SL, Anderson ML, Dublin S, Hanlon JT, Hubbard R, Walker R,
Yu O, Crane PK, Larson EB. 2015. Cumulative use of strong an-
ticholinergics and incident dementia: a prospective cohort
study. JAMA Intern Med. 175:401–407.
Grothe M, Heinsen H, Teipel S. 2013. Longitudinal measures
of cholinergic forebrain atrophy in the transition from
healthy aging to Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging.
34:1210–1220.
Grothe MJ, Ewers M, Krause B, Heinsen H, Teipel SJ; Alzheimer’s
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. 2014. Basal forebrain atro-
phy and cortical amyloid deposition in nondemented elderly
subjects. Alzheimers Dement. 10:S344–S353.
Guzman MS, De Jaeger X, Raulic S, Souza IA, Li AX, Schmid S,
Menon RS, Gainetdinov RR, Caron MG, Bartha R, et al. 2011.
Elimination of the vesicular acetylcholine transporter in the
striatum reveals regulation of behaviour by cholinergic-gluta-
matergic co-transmission. PLoS Biol. 9:e1001194.
Hebenstreit D, Teichmann SA. 2011. Analysis and simulation of
gene expression profiles in pure and mixed cell populations.
Phys Biol. 8:035013.
Hebert SS, Horre K, Nicolai L, Papadopoulou AS, Mandemakers W,
Silahtaroglu AN, Kauppinen S, Delacourte A, De Strooper B.
2008. Loss of microRNA cluster miR-29a/b-1 in sporadic Alz-
heimer’s disease correlates with increased BACE1/beta-secre-
tase expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 105:6415–6420.
Hellstrom-Lindahl E. 2000. Modulation of beta-amyloid precursor
protein processing and tau phosphorylation by acetylcholine
receptors. Eur J Pharmacol. 393:255–263.
Hooper C, Killick R, Lovestone S. 2008. The GSK3 hypothesis of
Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem. 104:1433–1439.
Hooper C, Markevich V, Plattner F, Killick R, Schofield E, Engel T,
Hernandez F, Anderton B, Rosenblum K, Bliss T, et al. 2007.
Glycogen synthase kinase-3 inhibition is integral to long-
term potentiation. Eur J Neurosci. 25:81–86.
Hur EM, Zhou FQ. 2010. GSK3 signalling in neural development.
Nat Rev Neurosci. 11:539–551.
Iqbal K, Liu F, Gong CX, Grundke-Iqbal I. 2010. Tau in Alzheimer
disease
and
related
tauopathies.
Curr
Alzheimer
Res.
7:656–664.
Jankowsky JL, Fadale DJ, Anderson J, Xu GM, Gonzales V,
Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Lee MK, Younkin LH, Wagner SL,
et al. 2004. Mutant presenilins specifically elevate the levels
of the 42 residue beta-amyloid peptide in vivo: evidence for
augmentation of a 42-specific gamma secretase. Hum Mol
Genet. 13:159–170.
Jankowsky JL, Younkin LH, Gonzales V, Fadale DJ, Slunt HH,
Lester HA, Younkin SG, Borchelt DR. 2007. Rodent A beta mod-
ulates the solubility and distribution of amyloid deposits in
transgenic mice. J Biol Chem. 282:22707–22720.
Klein WL. 2006. Synaptic targeting by A beta oligomers (ADDLS)
as a basis for memory loss in early Alzheimer’s disease.
Alzheimers Dement. 2:43–55.
Kolisnyk B, Al-Onaizi MA, Hirata PH, Guzman MS, Nikolova S,
Barbash S, Soreq H, Bartha R, Prado MA, Prado VF. 2013b. Fore-
brain deletion of the vesicular acetylcholine transporter re-
sults in deficits in executive function, metabolic, and RNA
splicing abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex. J Neurosci.
33:14908–14920.
Kolisnyk B, Al-Onaizi MA, Xu J, Parfitt GM, Hanin G, Soreq H,
Prado MAM, Prado VF. 2016. Cholinergic regulation of
hnRNPA2/B1 translation by M1 muscarinic receptors. J
Neurosci. in press.
Kolisnyk B, Guzman MS, Raulic S, Fan J, Magalhaes AC, Feng G,
Gros R, Prado VF, Prado MA. 2013a. ChAT-ChR2-EYFP mice
have enhanced motor endurance but show deficits in atten-
tion and several additional cognitive domains. J Neurosci.
33:10427–10438.
Lim J, Balastik M, Lee TH, Nakamura K, Liou YC, Sun A, Finn G,
Pastorino L, Lee VM, Lu KP. 2008. Pin1 has opposite effects
on wild-type and P301L tau stability and tauopathy. J Clin
Invest. 118:1877–1889.
Lima Rde F, Prado VF, Prado MA, Kushmerick C. 2010. Quantal re-
lease of acetylcholine in mice with reduced levels of the ves-
icular acetylcholine transporter. J Neurochem. 113:943–951.
Luo Y, Bolon B, Kahn S, Bennett BD, Babu-Khan S, Denis P, Fan W,
Kha H, Zhang J, Gong Y, et al. 2001. Mice deficient in BACE1, the
Alzheimer’s beta-secretase, have normal phenotype and
abolished beta-amyloid generation. Nat Neurosci. 4:231–232.
Ly PT, Wu Y, Zou H, Wang R, Zhou W, Kinoshita A, Zhang M,
Yang Y, Cai F, Woodgett J, et al. 2013. Inhibition of GSK3beta-
mediated BACE1 expression reduces Alzheimer-associated
phenotypes. J Clin Invest. 123:224–235.
Maeda S, Sahara N, Saito Y, Murayama S, Ikai A, Takashima A.
2006. Increased levels of granular tau oligomers: an early
sign of brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci Res.
54:197–201.
Martyn
AC,
De
Jaeger
X,
Magalhaes
AC,
Kesarwani
R,
Goncalves DF, Raulic S, Guzman MS, Jackson MF, Izquierdo I,
Macdonald JF, et al. 2012. Elimination of the vesicular acetyl-
choline transporter in the forebrain causes hyperactivity
and deficits in spatial memory and long-term potentiation.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 109:17651–17656.
Mowrer KR, Wolfe MS. 2008. Promotion of BACE1 mRNA alterna-
tive splicing reduces amyloid beta-peptide production. J Biol
Chem. 283:18694–18701.
Naumann T, Casademunt E, Hollerbach E, Hofmann J, Dechant G,
Frotscher M, Barde YA. 2002. Complete deletion of the neuro-
trophin receptor p75NTR leads to long-lasting increases in the
number of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons. J Neurosci.
22:2409–2418.
Nitsch RM, Slack BE, Wurtman RJ, Growdon JH. 1992. Release of
Alzheimer amyloid precursor derivatives stimulated by acti-
vation
of
muscarinic
acetylcholine
receptors.
Science.
258:304–307.
Oddo S, Caccamo A, Shepherd JD, Murphy MP, Golde TE, Kayed R,
Metherate R, Mattson MP, Akbari Y, LaFerla FM. 2003. Triple-
transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease with plaques and
3566
|
Cerebral Cortex, 2017, Vol. 27, No. 7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
 tangles:
intracellular
Abeta
and
synaptic
dysfunction.
Neuron. 39:409–421.
Olsen GM, Scheel-Kruger J, Moller A, Jensen LH. 1994. Relation of
spatial learning of rats in the Morris water maze task to the
number of viable CA1 neurons following four-vessel occlu-
sion. Behav Neurosci. 108:681–690.
Ostapchenko VG, Beraldo FH, Mohammad AH, Xie YF, Hirata PH,
Magalhaes AC, Lamour G, Li H, Maciejewski A, Belrose JC, et al.
2013. The prion protein ligand, stress-inducible phosphopro-
tein 1, regulates amyloid-beta oligomer toxicity. J Neurosci.
33:16552–16564.
Paz I, Kosti I, Ares M Jr, Cline M, Mandel-Gutfreund Y. 2014.
RBPmap: a web server for mapping binding sites of RNA-
binding proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 42:W361–W367.
Petry FR, Pelletier J, Bretteville A, Morin F, Calon F, Hebert SS,
Whittington RA, Planel E. 2014. Specificity of anti-tau anti-
bodies when analyzing mice models of Alzheimer’s disease:
problems and solutions. PLoS One. 9:e94251.
Prado VF, Martins-Silva C, de Castro BM, Lima RF, Barros DM,
Amaral E, Ramsey AJ, Sotnikova TD, Ramirez MR, Kim HG,
et al. 2006. Mice deficient for the vesicular acetylcholine trans-
porter are myasthenic and have deficits in object and social
recognition. Neuron. 51:601–612.
Prado VF, Roy A, Kolisnyk B, Gros R, Prado MA. 2013. Regulation of
cholinergic activity by the vesicular acetylcholine transporter.
Biochem J. 450:265–274.
Raj B, Blencowe BJ. 2015. Alternative splicing in the mammalian
nervous system: recent insights into mechanisms and func-
tional roles. Neuron. 87:14–27.
Rogers J, Shen Y. 2000. A perspective on inflammation in Alzhei-
mer’s disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 924:132–135.
Selkoe DJ. 2000. Toward a comprehensive theory for Alzheimer’s
disease. Hypothesis: Alzheimer’s disease is caused by the
cerebral accumulation and cytotoxicity of amyloid beta-
protein. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 924:17–25.
Shaked I, Meerson A, Wolf Y, Avni R, Greenberg D, Gilboa-
Geffen
A,
Soreq
H.
2009.
MicroRNA-132
potentiates
cholinergic anti-inflammatory signaling by targeting acetyl-
cholinesterase. Immunity. 31:965–973.
Shin C, Manley JL. 2004. Cell signalling and the control of
pre-mRNA splicing. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 5:727–738.
Smale G, Nichols NR, Brady DR, Finch CE, Horton WE Jr. 1995.
Evidence for apoptotic cell death in Alzheimer’s disease. Exp
Neurol. 133:225–230.
Soreq H. 2015. Checks and balances on cholinergic signaling in
brain and body function. Trends Neurosci. 38:448–458.
Soreq L, Guffanti A, Salomonis N, Simchovitz A, Israel Z,
Bergman H, Soreq H. 2014. Long non-coding RNA and alterna-
tive splicing modulations in Parkinson’s leukocytes identified
by RNA sequencing. PLoS Comput Biol. 10:e1003517.
Stein TD, Johnson JA. 2002. Lack of neurodegeneration in
transgenic mice overexpressing mutant amyloid precursor pro-
tein is associated with increased levels of transthyretin and the
activation of cell survival pathways. J Neurosci. 22:7380–7388.
Teich AF, Patel M, Arancio O. 2013. A reliable way to detect
endogenous murine beta-amyloid. PLoS One. 8:e55647.
Teipel S, Heinsen H, Amaro E Jr, Grinberg LT, Krause B, Grothe M;
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. 2014. Choliner-
gic basal forebrain atrophy predicts amyloid burden in Alzhei-
mer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 35:482–491.
Thompson DF, Walker CK. 2015. A descriptive and historical
review of bibliometrics with applications to medical sciences.
Pharmacotherapy. 35:551–559.
Tollervey JR, Wang Z, Hortobagyi T, Witten JT, Zarnack K,
Kayikci M, Clark TA, Schweitzer AC, Rot G, Curk T, et al.
2011. Analysis of alternative splicing associated with aging
and neurodegeneration in the human brain. Genome Res.
21:1572–1582.
Vorhees CV, Williams MT. 2006. Morris water maze: procedures
for assessing spatial and related forms of learning and
memory. Nat Protoc. 1:848–858.
Weaver CL, Espinoza M, Kress Y, Davies P. 2000. Conformational
change as one of the earliest alterations of tau in Alzheimer’s
disease. Neurobiol Aging. 21:719–727.
Whitehouse PJ, Price DL, Struble RG, Clark AW, Coyle JT,
Delon MR. 1982. Alzheimer’s disease and senile dementia:
loss of neurons in the basal forebrain. Science. 215:1237–1239.
Wolozin BL, Pruchnicki A, Dickson DW, Davies P. 1986. A neuronal
antigen in the brains of Alzheimer patients. Science.
232:648–650.
Yadav AK, Vashishta V, Joshi N, Taneja P. 2014. AR-A 014418 used
against GSK3beta downregulates expression of hnRNPA1 and
SF2/ASF splicing factors. J Oncol. 2014:695325.
Zheng WH, Kar S, Quirion R. 2002. Insulin-like growth factor-1-
induced phosphorylation of transcription factor FKHRL1 is
mediated by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt kinase and
role of this pathway in insulin-like growth factor-1-induced
survival of cultured hippocampal neurons. Mol Pharmacol.
62:225–233.
Zoli M, Picciotto MR, Ferrari R, Cocchi D, Changeux JP. 1999. In-
creased neurodegeneration during ageing in mice lacking
high-affinity nicotine receptors. EMBO J. 18:1235–1244.
3567
Cholinergic Control of Transcription and Pathology
Kolisnyk et al.
|
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cercor/article-abstract/27/7/3553/3056396 by guest on 03 June 2019
