 HISTORICAL VIGNETTE
J Neurosurg 130:1649–1654, 2019
I
n June 1968, the United States presidential campaign 
was in full swing. The leading Republican candidate, 
Richard Nixon, was challenged for the nomination by 
3 Republican governors: George Romney of Michigan, 
Nelson Rockefeller of New York, and Ronald Reagan of 
California. Nixon eventually won the Republican Party 
nomination.11 After President Lyndon B. Johnson an-
nounced that he would not run for reelection on March 
31,41 Senators Robert F. Kennedy of New York and Eugene 
McCarthy of Minnesota became the leading Democratic 
candidates in states holding presidential primaries. Hubert 
H. Humphrey, the Democratic incumbent vice president, 
campaigned mostly in states that did not hold primaries. 
Coming into the California primary, the Kennedy cam-
paign felt that a win was essential for their candidate to 
keep up with McCarthy and move into the August 26 
Democratic National Convention with a chance of beating 
Humphrey, who was leading in committed delegates.12
The Assassination
Upon winning the California presidential primary, Sen-
ator Kennedy addressed his supporters just after midnight 
on the morning of June 5 in the Embassy Ballroom of the 
Ambassador Hotel in the Wilshire district of downtown 
Los Angeles. In 1968, Secret Service personnel were not 
routinely deployed to protect presidential candidates;39 
however, Kennedy did have a small security detail, headed 
by a former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent, Wil-
liam Barry. Other members of this “security team” in-
cluded former National Football League lineman Rosey 
Grier and former Olympic gold medalist Rafer Johnson.26 
After Senator Kennedy spoke, the plan was for the can-
didate to walk through the hotel kitchen to the Colonial 
Room, where members of the press were waiting. Just af-
ter 12:15 am (Pacific daylight savings time), while walking 
through the crowded kitchen, Kennedy paused and turned 
to his left to shake hands with a busboy. At that moment, 
a Jordanian immigrant, Sirhan Sirhan, stepped in front of 
Kennedy and fired 8 shots with a .22-caliber Iver Johnson 
Cadet revolver. Three of the bullets struck the senator. Five 
other individuals standing behind Kennedy suffered non-
fatal gunshot injuries.27,38
Immediate Care of Kennedy Following the 
Shooting
Kennedy immediately fell to the floor. He was semicon-
scious during the approximately 17 minutes he lay on the 
kitchen floor.15 The senator’s campaign manager, Stephen 
ABBREVIATIONS CT = computed tomography; GCS = Glasgow Coma Scale; ICU = intensive care unit; LAPD = Los Angeles Police Department.
SUBMITTED February 11, 2018. ACCEPTED April 26, 2018.
INCLUDE WHEN CITING Published online June 19, 2018; DOI: 10.3171/2018.4.JNS18294.
The assassination of Robert F. Kennedy: an analysis of the 
senator’s injuries and neurosurgical care
Jordan M. Komisarow, MD,1 Theodore Pappas, MD,2 Megan Llewellyn, MSMI,2 and  
Shivanand P. Lad, MD, PhD1
Departments of 1Neurosurgery and 2Surgery, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina
On June 5, 1968, having won the Democratic Party presidential primary in California, Senator Robert F. Kennedy de-
livered a victory speech to supporters at the Ambassador Hotel in downtown Los Angeles. Just after 12:15 am (Pacific 
daylight savings time), a lone assassin shot Kennedy 3 times at point-blank range. One of the bullets struck Kennedy 
in the right posterior auricular region. Within the ensuing 26 hours, Kennedy was transported to 2 hospitals, underwent 
emergency surgery, and eventually died of severe brain injury. Although this story has been repeated in the press and 
recounted in numerous books, this is the first analysis of the senator’s injuries and subsequent surgical care to be re-
ported in the medical literature. The authors review eyewitness reports on the mechanism of injury, the care rendered for 
3 hours prior to the emergency craniotomy, the clinical course, and, ultimately, the autopsy.
https://thejns.org/doi/abs/10.3171/2018.4.JNS18294
KEYWORDS Robert F. Kennedy; assassination; traumatic brain injury; history
J Neurosurg Volume 130 • May 2019
1649
©AANS 2019, except where prohibited by US copyright law
 J. M. Komisarow et al.
J Neurosurg Volume 130 • May 2019
1650
Edward Smith, announced that a doctor was needed ur-
gently. Five physicians, who had been in the ballroom, re-
sponded. These included Stanley Abo, a radiologist; Rich-
ard O. Dean, an internist and relative of Reverend Martin 
Luther King Jr.; Ross M. Miller Jr., a trauma surgeon;8 and 
George Lambert, a physician with American Airlines.40 
The fifth physician, Marvin Esher, noted that the senator 
had shallow breathing with a heart rate of 50–60 beats 
per minute. Kennedy’s left eye was closed; his right eye 
was open and deviated to the right. He was still able to 
move all four extremities.26 Dr. Abo noted that Kennedy 
was losing consciousness and examined the senator’s head 
wound. A small blood clot had formed at the site of the 
bullet hole in the right posterior auricular region. Abo as-
sumed that blood was accumulating in Kennedy’s head 
and inserted his finger into the hole to disrupt the clot. 
With that action, the clot dislodged, blood flowed freely 
from the bullet hole, and Kennedy’s consciousness briefly 
improved.22 This description is eerily similar to the initial 
events surrounding Abraham Lincoln’s assassination. Af-
ter John Wilkes Booth had shot Lincoln, Dr. Charles A. 
Leale was the first physician to treat the president. When 
Leale examined the president, Lincoln’s respiratory rate 
was very irregular and slow. Dr. Leale inserted his finger 
into the entrance wound behind Lincoln’s left ear, which 
disrupted a clot, allowing blood to drain and pressure 
within the skull to decrease. Similar to what was seen with 
Senator Kennedy, this action resulted in an improvement 
in Lincoln’s respiratory effort; however, it did not change 
the ultimate outcome for Lincoln any more than it did for 
Kennedy.30
Approximately 2 minutes after the shooting, at 12:17 
am, the switchboard operator at the Ambassador Ho-
tel phoned the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) 
headquarters to report that Senator Kennedy had been 
shot. The operator did not know the type or severity of the 
injury. LAPD contacted Central Receiving Hospital and 
asked for an ambulance to be dispatched to the hotel.26 
The 40-bed Central Receiving Hospital was 2.1 miles 
from the hotel and was the main dispatch site for ambu-
lance services in central Los Angeles. The ambulance at-
tendants were surprised when they found Kennedy lying 
on the floor of the kitchen with blood around his head.34 
They loaded the senator onto a stretcher at 12:32 am and 
took him down the freight elevator to the loading dock, 
where they had parked the ambulance.15 If the dispatcher 
had known the injury was a gunshot to the head, the am-
bulance driver would likely have been instructed to bypass 
the smaller hospital and go directly to the nearby 400-
bed Good Samaritan Hospital. The ambulance arrived at 
Central Receiving Hospital at approximately 12:45 am, 30 
minutes after the shooting.26
Arrival at Central Receiving Hospital With 
Kennedy In Extremis
When the senator arrived at Central Receiving Hospital, 
he was unconscious with a fixed gaze; he was not breath-
ing, his pulse was hard to detect, and his blood pressure 
could not be measured.26 Kennedy was immediately cared 
for by Dr. V. Faustin Bazilauskas. A cutdown at the ankle 
provided intravenous access.26 The medical team inserted 
an oral airway, placed a respirator mask to provide posi-
tive pressure ventilation, and then began chest compres-
sions, which continued for 10 minutes. Kennedy received 
adrenalin and intravenous boluses of dextran and albumin. 
His blood pressure returned to 150/90 mm Hg (systolic/
diastolic) and some respiratory effort was seen.19,22 Dr. Ba-
zilauskas and a surgeon, Dr. Albert Holt, quickly realized 
that they were not able to offer the care needed for the se-
verity of the head injury. Dr. Holt knew the neurosurgeons 
at the Good Samaritan Hospital and called the senior sur-
geon, Dr. Henry Cuneo, to arrange transfer. Since he was 
uncertain whether the other bullet wounds in Kennedy’s 
right posterior chest had penetrated the thorax, Dr. Holt 
also called Dr. Bert Meyers, the chief of thoracic surgery 
at Good Samaritan.22 Dr. Holt accompanied the senator in 
the ambulance so that he could directly communicate with 
the neurosurgery and thoracic surgery teams.22
Craniotomy at Good Samaritan Hospital
The distance from Central Receiving Hospital to Good 
Samaritan Hospital was about 0.4 miles, or 2 city blocks. 
Most of the press and Kennedy supporters who had ar-
rived at Central Receiving Hospital simply walked over 
to Good Samaritan Hospital when they saw Kennedy had 
been moved.17 
Kennedy arrived at the fifth-floor intensive care unit 
(ICU) at approximately 1 am; he was initially treated by 
2 surgical residents, Drs. Paul A. Ironside and Hubert 
Humble.22 A tracheostomy tube was placed just after his 
arrival. The senator was fully disrobed, and the other 2 
injuries were inspected. There was a gunshot wound on 
the right side of his back. Radiographic findings suggested 
that the bullet was lodged in the subcutaneous tissue of 
the neck. This injury was not considered life threatening. 
In addition, there were wounds in the right axilla and right 
shoulder, but no corresponding bullets were found on x-
ray films. The chest surgeons determined that no bullets 
had entered the thorax. Kennedy had significant hyperten-
sion (systolic pressure 280 mm Hg) when he arrived at 
the Good Samaritan ICU; once the tracheostomy had been 
completed, his blood pressure improved.22 At the scene of 
the shooting, Kennedy had displayed diminished motor 
activity on the left side of his body. By the time he was 
evaluated at Good Samaritan Hospital, however, he had 
lost all motor activity in response to pain. Whole blood 
was administered to replace the continued bleeding from 
the bullet wound in the mastoid region.10
Kennedy was transferred to the operating room on the 
ninth floor of Good Samaritan at 2:45 am, 2 hours and 30 
minutes after the shooting. As the operative team began 
to transport Kennedy, they encountered members of the 
press and well-wishers who had congregated outside the 
ICU and in the waiting room, hallways, and lobby near 
the elevators. Because of the crowd, the hospital staff 
could not transfer Kennedy directly to the ninth-floor op-
erating suite as planned. Instead, they moved the senator’s 
stretcher to a back elevator. This elevator did not ascend 
all the way to the ninth floor, but instead went up to the 
sixth floor, where there was no crowd. After the stretcher 
 J Neurosurg Volume 130 • May 2019
1651
J. M. Komisarow et al.
reached the sixth floor, it was guided back to the main 
elevators and moved to the ninth floor.22 
The operation started at 3:10 am. The senior neurosur-
geon was Dr. Henry Cuneo, an associate clinical professor 
of neurosurgery at the University of Southern California. 
Dr. Cuneo had graduated from Baylor University School 
of Medicine in 1937 and had served as a lieutenant colo-
nel in the Navy Medical Corps from 1944 to 1946. Before 
coming to Los Angeles in 1961, he had also served as chief 
of neurosurgery at naval hospitals in Great Lakes, Illinois; 
New Orleans; and Parris Island, South Carolina. Other 
members of the surgical team were Dr. Maxwell Andler 
of the University of California at Los Angeles Medical 
School and Dr. Nat Downes Reid of the University of 
Southern California Medical School.16
Preoperative radiographs demonstrated significant 
bone fragments within the brain parenchyma. As was the 
standard of the day, the surgeons believed that they needed 
to remove as many bone and bullet fragments as possible 
in addition to obtaining control of intracranial bleeding. 
The operation took over 3 hours and 45 minutes to com-
plete. After the surgeons had created several burr holes 
near the bullet entrance wound, a 5-cm craniotomy flap 
was elevated. This resulted in the return of the senator’s 
spontaneous respirations. During the operation, portions 
of the occipital lobe and right cerebellum were debrided 
of devitalized tissue. Bleeding from the petrous sinus was 
eventually controlled. Intraoperatively, Kennedy was giv-
en dexamethasone and mannitol to help control cerebral 
edema. At the end of the operation, he was placed on a 
cooling blanket. Kennedy regained some motor activity 
on the right side of his body, as shown by his response to 
a pinprick, but there was still a poor response to painful 
stimulation along his entire left side.10,24
Postoperative Course
During Kennedy’s brief postoperative course, several 
neurosurgeons from around the country were consulted. 
Dr. Cuneo called Dr. J. Lawrence Pool to discuss the case. 
Dr. Pool was chief of neurosurgery at the Neurological In-
stitute of New York. He had completed his medical degree 
at the University of Pennsylvania and trained in neurosur-
gery at the Neurological Institute of New York.33 During 
his conversation with Dr. Cuneo, Dr. Pool stated that given 
the damage, even if Kennedy could survive the initial in-
sult, his neurological outcome would be tragic.
Pierre Salinger, one of the candidate’s campaign man-
agers and a friend of the Kennedy family, called Dr. James 
L. Poppen, a neurosurgeon at Boston’s Lahey Clinic, at 4 
am on June 5, while the senator was in surgery. Salinger 
asked if Poppen could fly immediately to Los Angeles and 
consult on the case. Dr. Poppen, who had attended Rush 
Medical School in Chicago and joined the Lahey Clinic 
in 1933, where he served as its chief of neurosurgery from 
1957 to 1964,5 maintained a long relationship with the 
Kennedys and had treated other members of the family. 
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey was contacted and 
arranged for the Air Force to transport Dr. Poppen to Los 
Angeles. Dr. Poppen arrived just before 10 am on June 5, 
approximately 4 hours after the operation had been com-
pleted. When he examined Kennedy, he thought the prog-
nosis was grave. He continued to consult with Dr. Cuneo 
and his team and acted as a liaison to the Kennedy family. 
In the initial postoperative period, Kennedy was rela-
tively stable. By 6 pm on June 5, approximately 12 hours 
after surgery, his condition began to deteriorate. Presum-
ably, Kennedy’s intracerebral pressure had started to rise, 
because his electroencephalogram readings became flat 
and he lost his respiratory effort. Kennedy never regained 
consciousness. He was pronounced dead at 1:44 am (Pa-
cific daylight savings time) on June 6, 1968.22
Autopsy Findings
Famed Los Angeles County Chief Medical Examiner 
Thomas Noguchi conducted the autopsy of Robert F. Ken-
nedy. Dr. Noguchi served in the chief medical examiner 
position from 1967 to 1982 and conducted autopsies of 
many famous individuals, including Marilyn Monroe, 
Sharon Tate, Natalie Wood, Janice Joplin, and John Be-
lushi.
The autopsy began on June 6. It has been called “the 
perfect autopsy” for its attention to detail.7 At its conclu-
sion, the autopsy documented 3 gunshot injuries. One bul-
let entered the right axilla posteriorly and exited near the 
right clavicle. The second bullet entered the back on the 
right side, lodging at the base of the neck in the subcuta-
neous space. Neither of these injuries caused life-threat-
ening harm.28 The lethal injury to the right posterior au-
ricular region had associated powder burns on the skin, 
and therefore Noguchi stated that the gun was within 3 
inches when the shooting occurred. Examination of the 
intracranial contents showed extensive injury to the right 
cerebellum and right occipital cortex. There were multiple 
bone and bullet fragments scattered across the brain tis-
sue, and evidence of epidural, subdural, and subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. There was also evidence of brainstem her-
niation due to cerebral edema. Damage to the brainstem 
was likely due to this herniation and not to direct trauma. 
Both the right middle cerebral artery and the petrous si-
nus were injured by bullet and bone fragments and were 
the predominant source of the bleeding (see Fig. 1). After 
physical examination of the body, Noguchi evaluated the 
gun, bullets, Kennedy’s clothes, and ballistics tests. The 
discrepancy between eyewitness reports that Sirhan came 
no closer than 12 to 18 inches from Kennedy when the 
shooting occurred and the Noguchi report, which stated 
that the gun was within 3 inches of the right ear at the time 
of the shooting, was not highlighted in the autopsy report. 
Noguchi, in his later writings, makes it clear that his report 
did not imply that Sirhan was the lone shooter, leaving the 
door open for conspiracy theorists.29
Analysis of Kennedy’s Medical Care
Kennedy suffered 3 gunshot wounds. Two of these 
injuries were relatively trivial. The injuries sustained by 
Kennedy occurred just after 12:15 am, and he was moved 
to Central Receiving Hospital at 12:32 am. This delay is 
commonplace and likely could not have been improved. 
Unfortunately, valuable time was lost with the stop at Cen-
tral Receiving Hospital. Both Central Receiving Hospi-
 J. M. Komisarow et al.
J Neurosurg Volume 130 • May 2019
1652
tal and Good Samaritan Hospital were approximately 2 
miles from the Ambassador Hotel. If the senator had been 
transported directly to the larger hospital, approximately 
45 minutes would have been saved. The resuscitation pro-
cedure initiated at Central Receiving Hospital could have 
occurred at Good Samaritan Hospital.
The Brain Trauma Foundation has compiled guidelines 
regarding the care of persons with severe traumatic brain 
injury,3 including those injured via gunshots to the head.32 
These guidelines have shaped much of the contemporary 
management of cranial gunshot injuries. Following initial 
resuscitation, care of the cranial gunshot victim focuses on 
diagnostic imaging, surgical debridement, and manage-
ment of cerebral edema to prevent elevated intracranial 
pressure.
Like many other aspects of trauma care, the manage-
ment of cranial gunshot wounds has evolved from lessons 
learned from combat situations. In 1918, Harvey Cushing 
published his observations on penetrating head trauma 
during World War I.6 Dr. Cushing proposed a grading 
scale based on the extent of projectile penetration and 
whether the ventricular system was injured. The group of 
patients in Dr. Cushing’s collection whose injuries most 
closely mirrored those of Senator Kennedy had a 54.3% 
mortality rate. This high rate of mortality unfortunately 
holds true in modern series of cranial gunshot wounds.14 
Dr. Cushing’s work is key to the discussion of penetrat-
ing head trauma, because it began to differentiate patterns 
of injury that portend a worse prognosis. Several more 
modern studies have confirmed and refined Dr. Cushing’s 
original observation that prognosis is linked to the pattern 
of cerebral injury.13,20,21,25,35 Patterns shown to be associ-
ated with higher rates of mortality include those involving 
the brainstem, the bilateral thalami, or the posterior fossa, 
as well as those traversing the ventricle.13,14
By the time Senator Kennedy was evaluated at Good 
Samaritan Hospital, where he subsequently underwent an 
emergency craniotomy, he was reported to have no motor 
function. We do not know with certainty whether his eyes 
opened to verbal or even painful cues, and thus we do not 
know his exact Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score. We do, 
however, know that his GCS verbal subscore was 1 and the 
motor subscore was 1. This would give a GCS score range 
of 3T to 6T. This finding on a presenting neurological ex-
amination predicts a poor prognosis and would prompt 
many neurosurgeons to make the controversial decision 
not to offer aggressive surgical intervention.13 During the 
craniotomy performed on Kennedy, the neurosurgeons 
noted extensive damage to the cerebellum, occipital lobe, 
and petrosal sinus.
It is the authors’ opinion that Senator Kennedy received 
aggressive and appropriate care in line with the standard 
of the day. The senator was transported to the operating 
room for decompression and then monitored in an ICU. 
Attempts were made to treat his cerebral edema with man-
nitol and glucocorticoids. The senator was also placed on 
a cooling blanket and monitored with electroencephalog-
raphy. As we face the 50th anniversary of Senator Kenne-
FIG. 1. Artist’s representation of Senator Kennedy’s injuries (lateral [left] and posterior [right] views). This representation was 
created based on data from the autopsy report and testimony, as no imaging studies are available for review. Illustrator: Megan 
Llewellyn, MSMI; copyright Duke University, with permission under a CC BY-ND 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nd/4.0/).
 J Neurosurg Volume 130 • May 2019
1653
J. M. Komisarow et al.
dy’s assassination, we can comment on several differences 
in medical practice as it is today. These differences more 
largely reflect advances in neuroimaging and neurocritical 
care than the technical aspects of surgical treatment. If the 
senator were to be shot in 2018, rather than in 1968, fol-
lowing initial stabilization he would most likely undergo 
computed tomography (CT) of his head,13,18 without addi-
tion of contrast material, as well as CT arteriography and 
venography.31 These recommendations are based on level 
III evidence. CT was not available until the 1970s and was 
thus not an option for physicians caring for the senator.2 
As far as we can tell from the available data, if the inju-
ries were to be sustained today, Senator Kennedy would 
undergo surgery similar to the craniotomy performed in 
1968. The focus of surgery would be to remove devitalized 
tissue, provide relief of intracranial pressure, and control 
hemorrhage.
The modern neurosurgeon’s task would most likely be 
made easier by use of the operating microscope. We do 
not know for sure whether the microscope was available 
to the senator’s neurosurgical team, but the first reports 
of neurosurgeons using a microscope in surgery were 
published in the 1950s, making it very possible that the 
surgical team did not have access to this relatively new ad-
vance.23 During surgery, Senator Kennedy received man-
nitol and dexamethasone to control cerebral edema. This 
was standard at the time the senator was treated. Man-
nitol remains a mainstay of therapy in the treatment of 
posttraumatic cerebral edema,3 but recent evidence argues 
against the use of steroids in the setting of nontumoral ce-
rebral edema.9 This is class I evidence. The senator was 
placed on a cooling blanket, we presume to prevent fever 
and assist with management of cerebral edema (although 
it is not specified). Therapeutic hypothermia following 
traumatic brain injury is a topic of significant interest, but 
there is enough clinical equipoise to justify fever preven-
tion both then and now.1 Last, in a patient suffering from 
a cranial gunshot wound, who required intubation like the 
senator, one would likely place a device to directly moni-
tor intracranial pressure. While there is some debate about 
this practice,4 it is largely considered standard of care in 
patients with a GCS score consistently less than 8.3 This 
type of monitoring commonly takes the form of an ex-
ternal ventricular drain. These drains were not commonly 
used in the setting of trauma until the 1980s.36 If the injury 
occurred today, the senator would likely receive antiepi-
leptic medications, as we now know they can prevent sei-
zures in the short term following trauma.37
Aftermath
Hubert Humphrey went on to win the Democratic nom-
ination in a contentious convention in Chicago. Richard 
Nixon temporarily recovered his political career by suc-
cessfully securing his party’s presidential nomination at 
the Republican National Convention in Miami Beach in 
August. Nixon won the election in November by a close 
margin but recast American history with his ultimate res-
ignation following the Watergate scandal.
Similar to the assassination of his brother, President 
John F. Kennedy, the assassination of Robert Kennedy is 
surrounded in conspiracy theory. This is despite the fact 
that many people witnessed the shooting. Much has been 
made of the fact that the assassin approached Kennedy 
from the front, but the gunshot wounds were in the back. 
Several witnesses documented that Kennedy’s head was 
turned to his left as he was shot, which explains the trajec-
tory of the bullets. In addition, witnesses claim that Sirhan 
came no closer than a foot from Kennedy when the shoot-
ing occurred, but the autopsy report estimates that the gun 
was within inches of the skin based on the presence of 
gunpowder in the wound. The same witnesses did not see 
another shooter. Despite concern over the trajectory of the 
bullet and controversy about gunpowder on the skin, there 
was never clear evidence of conspiracy and Sirhan was 
ruled the lone gunman.
Before the shooting, Sirhan Sirhan kept a diary in 
which he claimed, “Kennedy must die.” The reason given 
was related to Kennedy’s support of Israel. Sirhan was a 
Christian Jordanian of Palestinian descent. Sirhan stood 
trial and was convicted of the murder of Robert F. Ken-
nedy. He was sentenced to death, but his sentence was 
later commuted to life in prison at a correctional facility 
in California.
References
 1. Andrews PJD, Sinclair HL, Rodriguez A, Harris BA, Bat-
tison CG, Rhodes JKJ, et al: Hypothermia for intracranial 
hypertension after traumatic brain injury. N Engl J Med 
373:2403–2412, 2015
 2. Brenner DJ, Hall EJ: Computed tomography—an increasing 
source of radiation exposure. N Engl J Med 357:2277–2284, 
2007
 3. Carney N, Totten AM, O’Reilly C, Ullman JS, Hawryluk 
GWJ, Bell MJ, et al: Guidelines for the management of se-
vere traumatic brain injury, fourth edition. Neurosurgery 
80:6–15, 2017
 4. Chesnut RM, Temkin N, Carney N, Dikmen S, Rondina C, 
Videtta W, et al: A trial of intracranial-pressure monitoring in 
traumatic brain injury. N Engl J Med 367:2471–2481, 2012
 5. Chicago Tribune: How RFK died 7 hrs. before it was told. 
Knew he could not live: doctor. Chicago Tribune. June 8, 
1968; 3
 6. Cushing H: Notes on penetrating wounds of the brain. BMJ 
1:221–226, 1918
 7. DiEugenio J, Pease L: The Assassinations: Probe Maga-
zine on JFK, MLK, RFK and Malcolm X. Port Townsend, 
WA: Feral House, 2003
 8. Ebony Magazine: Robert F. Kennedy and the Negro. Ebony 
Magazine 23:29–46, 1968
 9. Edwards P, Arango M, Balica L, Cottingham R, El-Sayed H, 
Farrell B, et al: Final results of MRC CRASH, a randomised 
placebo-controlled trial of intravenous corticosteroid in 
adults with head injury-outcomes at 6 months. Lancet 
365:1957–1959, 2005
10. Federal Bureau of Investigation: Robert F. Ken-
nedy  
Assassination. (https://archive.org/stream/
RFKAssassination_201510/RFK-LA-56-156%20VOL.01-
SER.001-0250#page/n0/mode/2up) [Accessed May 30, 2018]
11. Frankel M: It all adds up for Richard Nixon. New York 
Times. August 11, 1968; 1
12. Gallup G: Humphrey favored by local Democratic leaders. 
Los Angeles Times. August 29, 1968; 6
13. Grahm TW, Williams FC Jr, Harrington T, Spetzler RF: 
Civilian gunshot wounds to the head: a prospective study. 
Neurosurgery 27:696–700, 1990
 J. M. Komisarow et al.
J Neurosurg Volume 130 • May 2019
1654
14. Gressot LV, Chamoun RB, Patel AJ, Valadka AB, Suki D, 
Robertson CS, et al: Predictors of outcome in civilians with 
gunshot wounds to the head upon presentation. J Neurosurg 
121:645–652, 2014
15. Hamill P: June 5, 1968: The last hours of RFK. New 
York Magazine. May 18, 2008 (http://nymag.com/news/
politics/47041/) [Accessed May 29, 2018].
16. Harold Weisberg Archive: Sketches of surgeons on team, 
in Hood College Harold Weisberg Archive. (http://
jfk.hood.edu/Collection/White%20Materials/White%20
Assassination%20Clippings%20Folders/Kennedy%20
Family%20Folders/Kennedy%20Robert%20F/RFK%200381.
pdf) [Accessed May 31, 2018]
17. Healy P: Robert F. Kennedy’s assassination: from ballroom 
to the hospital. Daily News. June 6, 1968 (http://www.
nydailynews.com/news/national/reporter-covers-
rfk-assassination-article-1.2237677) [Accessed May 30, 2018]
18. Helling TS, McNabney WK, Whittaker CK, Schultz CC, 
Watkins M: The role of early surgical intervention in civilian 
gunshot wounds to the head. J Trauma 32:398–400, 1992
19. Houston P: Wife was reassured by heartbeat sounds. Los 
Angeles Times. June 6, 1968; 1
20. Hubschmann O, Shapiro K, Baden M, Shulman K: Cranio-
cerebral gunshot injuries in civilian practice—prognostic 
criteria and surgical management: experience with 82 cases. 
J Trauma 19:6–12, 1979
21. Joseph B, Aziz H, Pandit V, Kulvatunyou N, Hashmi A, Tang 
A, et al: A three-year prospective study of repeat head com-
puted tomography in patients with traumatic brain injury. J 
Am Coll Surg 219:45–51, 2014
22. Kaiser RB: “R.F.K. Must Die!” Chasing the Mystery of 
the Robert Kennedy Assassination. New York: The Over-
look Press, 2008
23. Kriss TC, Kriss VM: History of the operating microscope: 
from magnifying glass to microneurosurgery. Neurosurgery 
42:899–908, 1998
24. Los Angeles Times: All-out surgical effort to save Kennedy 
told. Los Angeles Times. June 10, 1968
25. Martins RS, Siqueira MG, Santos MTS, Zanon-Collange N, 
Moraes OJS: Prognostic factors and treatment of penetrating 
gunshot wounds to the head. Surg Neurol 60:98–104, 2003
26. Moldea DE: The Killing of Robert F. Kennedy: An Inves-
tigation of Motive, Means, and Opportunity. New York: 
WW Norton & Company, 2006
27. Newsweek Staff: Robert Kennedy shot, killed in Los Ange-
les. Newsweek. June 6, 1968. (http://www.newsweek.com/
robert-kennedy-shot-killed-los-angeles-207078) [Accessed 
May 29, 2018]
28. Noguchi TT, Holloway JE, Lu AT: Robert F. Kennedy Au-
topsy: Second Draft. (http://www.autopsyfiles.org/reports/
Other/kennedy,%20robert_report.pdf) [Accessed May 30, 
2018]
29. Noguchi TT, DiMona J: Coroner. New York: Open Road 
Media, 2014
30. Papaioannou HI, Stowell D: Dr. Charles A. Leale’s report on 
the assassination of Abraham Lincoln. J Abraham Lincoln 
Assoc 34:40–53, 2013
31. Pruitt BA Jr (ed): Neuroimaging in the management of pen-
etrating brain injury. J Trauma 51 (2 Suppl):S7–S11, 2001
32. Pruitt BA Jr (ed): Surgical management of penetrating brain 
injury. J Trauma 51 (2 Suppl):S16–S25, 2001
33. Quest DO: James Lawrence Pool. Neurosurgery 55:942, 
2004
34. Rasmussen C: A pioneering public hospital checks out. Los 
Angeles Times. October 2, 2005 (http://articles.latimes.
com/2005/oct/02/local/me-then2) [Accessed May 29, 2018]
35. Shaffrey ME, Polin RS, Phillips CD, Germanson T, Shaffrey 
CI, Jane JA: Classification of civilian craniocerebral gunshot 
wounds: a multivariate analysis predictive of mortality. J 
Neurotrauma 9 (Suppl 1):S279–S285, 1992
36. Srinivasan VM, O’Neill BR, Jho D, Whiting DM, Oh MY: 
The history of external ventricular drainage. J Neurosurg 
120:228–236, 2014
37. Temkin NR, Dikmen SS, Wilensky AJ, Keihm J, Chabal S, 
Winn HR: A randomized, double-blind study of phenytoin 
for the prevention of post-traumatic seizures. N Engl J Med 
323:497–502, 1990
38. Turner W: The shooting: a victory celebration that ended 
with shots, screams, and curses. New York Times. June 6, 
1968; 21
39. United Press International: Police chief says Kennedy turned 
down security aid. New York Times. June 6, 1968; 20
40. Weaver W Jr: Kennedy shot and gravely wounded after win-
ning California primary. New York Times. June 5, 1968; 1
41. Young R: LBJ: won’t run. Stuns nation at end of TV, radio 
speech. Chicago Tribune. April 1, 1968; 1
Disclosures
The authors report no conflict of interest concerning the materi-
als or methods used in this study or the findings specified in this 
paper.
Author Contributions
Conception and design: all authors. Drafting the article: Pappas, 
Komisarow, Lad. Critically revising the article: Pappas, Komisa-
row, Lad. Reviewed submitted version of manuscript: all authors. 
Administrative/technical/material support: Llewellyn.
Correspondence
Theodore Pappas: Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, 
NC. theodore.pappas@duke.edu.
