 May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e578
Marvin A. Konstam, MD, 
Chair
Michael S. Kiernan, MD, 
MS, FAHA, Co-Chair
Daniel Bernstein, MD
Biykem Bozkurt, MD, PhD, 
FAHA
Miriam Jacob, MD
Navin K. Kapur, MD
Robb D. Kociol, MD, MS
Eldrin F. Lewis, MD, MPH, 
FAHA
Mandeep R. Mehra, MD
Francis D. Pagani, MD, 
PhD, FAHA
Amish N. Raval, MD, 
FAHA
Carey Ward, MD
On behalf of the American 
Heart Association Coun-
cil on Clinical Cardiology; 
Council on Cardiovas-
cular Disease in the 
Young; and Council on 
Cardiovascular Surgery 
and Anesthesia
© 2018 American Heart Association, Inc.
Circulation
http://circ.ahajournals.org
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The diverse causes of right-sided heart failure 
(RHF) include, among others, primary cardiomyopathies with right ventricular 
(RV) involvement, RV ischemia and infarction, volume loading caused by cardiac 
lesions associated with congenital heart disease and valvular pathologies, and 
pressure loading resulting from pulmonic stenosis or pulmonary hypertension 
from a variety of causes, including left-sided heart disease. Progressive RV 
dysfunction in these disease states is associated with increased morbidity and 
mortality. The purpose of this scientific statement is to provide guidance on the 
assessment and management of RHF.
METHODS: The writing group used systematic literature reviews, published 
translational and clinical studies, clinical practice guidelines, and expert 
opinion/statements to summarize existing evidence and to identify areas of 
inadequacy requiring future research. The panel reviewed the most relevant 
adult medical literature excluding routine laboratory tests using MEDLINE, 
EMBASE, and Web of Science through September 2017. The document is 
organized and classified according to the American Heart Association to 
provide specific suggestions, considerations, or reference to contemporary 
clinical practice recommendations.
RESULTS: Chronic RHF is associated with decreased exercise tolerance, poor 
functional capacity, decreased cardiac output and progressive end-organ damage 
(caused by a combination of end-organ venous congestion and underperfusion), 
and cachexia resulting from poor absorption of nutrients, as well as a 
systemic proinflammatory state. It is the principal cause of death in patients 
with pulmonary arterial hypertension. Similarly, acute RHF is associated with 
hemodynamic instability and is the primary cause of death in patients presenting 
with massive pulmonary embolism, RV myocardial infarction, and postcardiotomy 
shock associated with cardiac surgery. Functional assessment of the right side 
of the heart can be hindered by its complex geometry. Multiple hemodynamic 
and biochemical markers are associated with worsening RHF and can serve to 
guide clinical assessment and therapeutic decision making. Pharmacological and 
mechanical interventions targeting isolated acute and chronic RHF have not been 
well investigated. Specific therapies promoting stabilization and recovery of RV 
function are lacking.
CONCLUSIONS: RHF is a complex syndrome including diverse causes, pathways, 
and pathological processes. In this scientific statement, we review the causes and 
epidemiology of RV dysfunction and the pathophysiology of acute and chronic 
RHF and provide guidance for the management of the associated conditions 
leading to and caused by RHF.
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided 
 
Heart Failure
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
Endorsed by the Heart Failure Society of America and International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation
Key Words: AHA Scientific Statements 
◼ causality ◼ disease management  
◼ heart failure ◼ ventricular dysfunction, 
right
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e579
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
O
ver the years, there have been intermittent surges 
in interest in and investigation of the right ven-
tricle (RV). One such period was the early 1980s, 
with the emergence of novel imaging techniques, ad-
vanced surgical approaches, enhanced understanding of 
RV infarction and ischemia, and intense physiological in-
vestigation of right-sided hemodynamics and ventricular 
interdependence. Now, once again, we enjoy intense in-
terest in this area, owing in large part to advanced phar-
macology for managing pulmonary hypertension (PH) 
and a mushrooming of both diagnostic techniques and 
durable and temporary mechanical circulatory support 
(MCS) devices, yielding expanded treatment options and 
enhanced outcomes in patients with acute and chronic 
disorders of the right side of the heart.
RV dysfunction (RVD), defined here as evidence of ab-
normal RV structure or function, is associated with poor 
clinical outcomes independently of the underlying mecha-
nism of disease: across the spectrum of left ventricular (LV) 
ejection fraction (EF) in patients with acute and chronic 
heart failure (HF), after cardiac surgery, acute myocardial 
infarction (MI), congenital heart disease (CHD), and PH. To 
distinguish right-sided HF (RHF) from structural RVD, we 
define RHF as a clinical syndrome with signs and symp-
toms of HF resulting from RVD.1 RHF is caused by the 
inability of the RV to support optimal circulation in the 
presence of adequate preload. This scientific statement 
provides evidence-based guidance in the following areas: 
pathophysiology of RVD, assessment and evaluation of RV 
function, epidemiology and prognosis of RHF, medical and 
surgical management of acute (ARHF) and chronic RHF 
(CRHF), and proposed areas for future investigation.
The recommendations and suggestions/considerations 
listed in this document are, whenever possible, evidence 
based. An extensive literature review was conducted 
through May 2017, with references selected as appropri-
ate. Searches were limited to studies, reviews, and other 
evidence conducted in human subjects and published in 
English. In addition, the committee reviewed documents 
related to the subject matter previously published by clini-
cal practice guideline task forces from the American Heart 
Association (AHA) and American College of Cardiology. 
References selected and published in this document are 
representative but not all inclusive. To provide clinicians 
with a representative evidence base, whenever deemed 
appropriate or when published, it was felt that critical 
appraisal of the quality of study be maintained and, 
whenever possible, robust statistical data be provided.
ORGANIZATION OF THE WRITING 
COMMITTEE
The committee was composed of physicians with a 
broad knowledge base in the epidemiology and patho-
physiology of HF with expertise in the evaluation, care, 
and management of patients with RHF. The authors’ 
expertise included general cardiology, advanced HF and 
transplantation cardiology, cardiac surgery, interven-
tional cardiology, PH, and CHD; physicians with meth-
odological expertise also were included. The committee 
included representatives from the AHA Council on Clini-
cal Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the 
Young, and Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and An-
esthesia; the Heart Failure Society of America; and the 
International Society of Heart and Lung Transplantation.
DOCUMENT REVIEW AND APPROVAL
This document was reviewed by 5 official reviewers, 
each nominated by the AHA. All information on review-
ers’ relationships with industry was distributed to the 
writing committee and is published in this document. 
This document was approved for publication by the 
governing bodies of the AHA.
SUGGESTIONS/CONSIDERATIONS AND 
REFERENCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE 
GUIDELINE  RECOMMENDATIONS
To make certain that this document is aligned with the 
appropriate guideline statements but does not preempt 
those guidelines, the authors have opted to reference 
evidence-based clinical practice recommendations only 
and to refer the reader to the most recently published 
clinical practice guideline statement for more specific 
alignment with extant guidelines. Suggestions/con-
siderations are included when the evidence does not 
warrant recommendations but there is still a desire to 
provide some guidance to the community.
SCOPE OF THIS SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT 
WITH REFERENCE TO OTHER RELEVANT 
GUIDELINES OR STATEMENTS
This scientific statement focuses on the evaluation and 
management of RHF
. Some topics may have been reviewed 
in other clinical practice guidelines and scientific statements 
published by other working groups, including the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/AHA task forces. The writing 
committee saw no need to reiterate the recommendations 
contained in those guidelines but chose instead to provide 
current suggestions or considerations for clinical practice 
and to clarify previous discrepancies if present.
ANATOMY AND EMBRYOLOGY  
OF THE RV
Several developmental and anatomic features distin-
guish the RV from the LV.2,3 The RV and RV outflow 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e580
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
tracts originate from cells of the secondary (anterior) 
heart field, whereas the LV and left atria originate from 
the primary heart field.4 The identification of the sec-
ondary heart field has provided new insight into the 
development of congenital heart defects and may lead 
to discoveries identifying distinct intercellular signaling 
pathways and transcriptional regulation in response to 
injury by the RV in contrast to the LV.5–8 Beginning in 
the third week of embryonic development, the primi-
tive heart tube begins beating and undergoes a series 
of twisting and folding movements to generate a sin-
gle primitive ventricle that receives blood from a single 
atrium and ejects blood through a common outflow 
tube known as the truncus arteriosus (Figure 1).9 By 
the end of the fourth week, a muscular ventricular sep-
tum emerges from the floor of the primitive ventricle to 
form the earliest signs of distinct RVs and LVs. Between 
the fifth and eighth weeks, ridges within the truncus ar-
teriosus grow into the aorticopulmonary septum, which 
fuses with the endocardial cushions and muscular inter-
ventricular septum to form the membranous septum. 
At the end of the eighth week, distinct pulmonary and 
systemic circulations exist. For the remainder of fetal 
development, the RV will account for ≈60% of total 
cardiac output (CO), which provides systemic perfusion 
via the foramen ovale and the ductus arteriosus. At 
birth, the LV becomes the dominant systemic ventricle 
while the RV adapts to provide flow through the pul-
monary circulation alone, assuming that the foramen 
ovale and ductus arteriosus close appropriately.
Anatomically, the RV free wall is thin (2–3 mm) and 
compliant and forms a hemi-ellipsoid shape that ad-
heres to the LV3 (Figure 2). A large sinus for venous in-
flow and a tubular outflow tract provide a funnel-like 
configuration to the heavily trabeculated RV. Unlike the 
shared annulus of the aortic and mitral valves, the crista 
supraventricularis is a muscle bridge that is unique to 
the RV and separates the RV inflow (tricuspid annulus) 
from the outflow tract (pulmonic annulus). The crista 
supraventricularis shares muscle fibers with the inter-
ventricular septum and the RV free wall and serves to 
contract the orifice of the tricuspid valve (TV) while pull-
ing the RV free wall toward the interventricular septum 
during systole.10,11
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE RV
Normal RV function is governed by systemic venous 
return, PA load (RV afterload), pericardial compliance, 
and native contractility of the RV free wall and inter-
ventricular septum. Generating RV output requires one 
sixth the energy expenditure of the LV because much 
of RV stroke work maintains forward momentum of 
blood flow into a highly compliant, low-resistance pul-
monic circulation. This difference is exemplified by the 
RV pressure-volume (PV) loop, which lacks isovolumic 
Figure 1. Cardiac embryogenesis.  
During embryogenesis, the primary heart field is formed by early cardiac progenitor cells in the anterior mesoderm. The sec-
ondary heart field is derived from the pharyngeal mesoderm located medial and anterior to the primary heart field. Cells from 
the primary heart field migrate to the midline to form a linear heart tube, serving as a scaffold for subsequent heart growth. 
The heart tube is expanded posteriorly and anteriorly with cells migrating from the secondary heart field, giving rise to the 
arterial and venous poles. The linear heart tube undergoes a rightward looping, leading to the formation of primitive ventricles 
and atria. As a result, the venous pole moves anteriorly, positioning the future cardiac chambers for proper development. 
Heart maturation involves septation formation in the ventricles and atria, as well as valve formation. The primary heart field 
contributes to the left ventricle and right and left atria. The secondary heart field contributes to the right ventricle, outflow 
tract, and right and left atria. Cardiac neural crest cells migrating from the dorsal neural tube into the arterial pole participate 
in separation of the outflow tract. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Adapted from Xin et al.9 Nature 
Reviews Molecular Cell Biology. Copyright © 2013, Macmillan Publishers Ltd.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e581
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
phases of contraction and relaxation during systole and 
diastole, has a lower peak systolic pressure, and exists 
at a higher steady-state volume compared with the LV.12 
In contrast to the LV, peak RV pressure occurs before 
the end of systolic ejection, which leads to a more trap-
ezoid-appearing RV PV loop (Figure 3).13–15
Afterload is a primary determinant of normal RV 
function, and RVEF is inversely proportional to pulmo-
nary artery (PA) pressure (PAP).16 The RV has a shal-
lower end-systolic PV slope than the LV, which results 
in lesser change in end-systolic pressure, generating 
greater change in end-systolic volume.17,18 Accordingly, 
RV systolic function is highly sensitive to changes in 
afterload, with minor increases in afterload causing 
large decreases in stroke volume (SV)19 (Figure 4).20 As 
dictated by the law of LaPlace, wall stress (afterload) 
is directly proportional to intracavitary pressure and 
to internal ventricular diameter and inversely related 
to ventricular wall thickness. However, regional wall 
stress may vary widely as a result of the nonspherical 
RV shape. RV afterload is most appropriately defined 
as the RV wall stress during systolic ejection estimated 
by the summation of the resistive and pulsatile com-
ponents of blood flow.21,22 Commonly used measures 
of RV afterload, including PA systolic pressure (PASP) 
and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), provide an 
inadequate description of RV afterload because they 
do not account for contributions of pulsatile loading.22 
As blood ejects from the RV into the lungs, antegrade 
flow away from the pulmonic valve (PV) encounters 
waves of retrograde flow generated by multiple bifur-
cations throughout the pulmonary vasculature. This 
retrograde impedance wave reduces antegrade flow 
and increases peak PASP.23
In the setting of left-sided heart (LH) disease, eleva-
tions in left atrial pressures lead to lower PA compliance 
than would be anticipated from elevated PVR alone.24,25 
Similarly, lowering of pulmonary capillary wedge pres-
sure (PCWP) increases PA compliance more than would 
be anticipated from a fall in PVR alone.26 Thus, elevated 
LH filling pressures directly increase RV afterload, sec-
ondarily reduce PA compliance, and increase PA resis-
tance through acute vasoconstriction and chronic vas-
cular remodeling.22
Under steady-state conditions, optimal ventricu-
lar efficiency is achieved if end-systolic elastance (Ees) 
is matched by vascular load, defined by arterial elas-
tance16,27–31 (Figure 5). The ratio of Ees to arterial elas-
tance is known as ventriculo-arterial coupling, a frame-
work to consider contractility in the context of load. 
The optimal mechanical coupling of RV function to 
afterload corresponds to a ratio of Ees to arterial elas-
tance of 1.0, with uncoupling occurring below a ratio 
of 0.6 to 1.0.16,29,30 When PASP increases acutely, RV SV 
decreases significantly and arterial elastance increases 
 
out of proportion to Ees. As a result, RV function be-
comes inefficient, and more energy is expended to 
maintain adequate RV output. In contrast, an increase 
in aortic systolic pressure results in smaller decreases in 
LV SV, thereby maintaining a near-normal ventriculo-
arterial coupling ratio.
Unlike the predominantly diastolic coronary flow of 
the LV, normal RV coronary perfusion occurs during 
both systole and diastole. The pressure-overloaded RV 
is at increased risk for developing ischemia as a result 
of decreased perfusion pressure in the setting of in-
creased RV intramural pressure and decreased system-
ic arterial pressure.32,33 Any process that increases RV 
Figure 2. Right ventricular (RV) geometry in health and disease.  
Three-dimensional reconstructions of the RV illustrating its complex shape in a normal subject (A). RV remodeling in diseased 
hearts can result in profound shape change with RV dilation caused by chronic volume or pressure overload (B). The red 
mesh surface is the left ventricle (LV), and the solid blue surface is the RV. P indicates pulmonary valve; and T, tricuspid valve. 
Reprinted from Sheehan and Redington3 with permission from BMJ Publishing Group, Ltd. Copyright © 2008, BMJ Publishing 
Group, Ltd.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e582
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
end-diastolic pressure leads to decreased RV coronary 
blood flow and has the potential to induce subendo-
cardial ischemia.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF RHF
Acute RHF
ARHF can occur because of abruptly increased RV af-
terload (pulmonary embolus, hypoxia, acidemia) or de-
creased RV contractility (RV ischemia, myocarditis, post-
cardiotomy shock). Each condition represents a unique 
hemodynamic challenge for the RV. The RV is coupled 
to the high-compliance, low-resistance pulmonary cir-
culation and is suited to adapt to changes in volume 
rather than pressure.2 In a healthy individual, PVR is 
<1/10th of the systemic vascular resistance. In contrast, 
the LV is coupled to the lower-compliance, higher-re-
sistance systemic arterial circulation and adapts better 
to changes in pressure than volume. Thus, an acute in-
crease in RV afterload such as can result from a large 
pulmonary embolism (PE) may abruptly decrease RV SV, 
with minimal increase in RV systolic pressure.
Acute reductions in RV contractility may also be 
caused by direct myocardial injury from mechanisms 
such as myocardial inflammation (myocarditis) and 
ischemia. Reduced RV SV results in RV dilation, which 
promotes tricuspid regurgitation (TR), exacerbates RV 
dilation, and drives a ventricular-interdependent effect 
on LV filling. Ventricular interdependence is defined 
as the forces directly transmitted from one ventricle to 
the other through the myocardium and pericardium.16 
Mechanical flattening with a leftward shift of the inter-
ventricular septum increases LV end-diastolic pressure, 
reduces LV transmural filling pressure, and impedes LV 
diastolic filling, contributing to systemic hypoperfusion18 
(Figure 6). Diastolic interaction is described as ventricu-
lar competition for diastolic distension/filling within an 
acutely confined pericardial space. Systolic interactions 
also exist because it is estimated that 20% to 40% of 
RV systolic pressure results from LV contraction.3,34
Elevated filling pressures of the right side of the 
heart also cause coronary sinus congestion, which re-
duces coronary blood flow and can provoke RV isch-
emia.35,36 High right-sided filling pressure with systemic 
Figure 3. Right ventricular (RV) pressure-volume (PV) 
loops.  
RV PV loops obtained by a conductance catheter. White solid 
lines reflect the end-systolic PV relationships (ESPVR) of a 
series of loops generated by varying the loading conditions. 
The slope of ESPVR line reflects the RV end-systolic elastance 
(Ees). A steeper slope represents higher Ees. Loop a depicts 
a normal RV PV loop. A lower proportion of RV stroke work 
goes to pressure generation, with a higher proportion going 
to blood momentum. In the normal state, in contrast to the 
left ventricle (LV), there is a relative absence of RV isovolemic 
periods. The high momentum of blood ejecting from the RV 
into the low-pressure pulmonary circulation results in con-
tinued RV ejection after LV systolic ejection has ended into 
RV relaxation. Loop b represents a compensated, chronically 
hypertensive RV. Loop c is obtained from a decompensated 
hypertensive RV. Note the decrease in RV Ees from the com-
pensated RV depicted in loop b to the decompensated RV 
depicted by loop c. Reproduced from Friedberg and Reding-
ton13 with permission. Copyright © 2014, American Heart 
Association.
Figure 4. Relationship of right ventricular (RV) and left 
ventricular (LV) stroke volumes to increases in after-
load.  
Response of the RV and LV to an experimental increase in 
afterload. Note the comparatively steep decline in stroke 
volume associated with increases in pressure compared 
with the smaller reductions seen in LV stroke volume 
associated with similar pressure increments. Reprinted 
with permission of the American Thoracic Society. Copy-
right © 2018, American Thoracic Society. MacNee W. 
Pathophysiology of cor pulmonale in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease: part one. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
1994;150:883–852.20 The American Journal of Respira-
tory and Critical Care Medicine is an official journal of the 
American Thoracic Society. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e583
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
venous congestion also negatively affects hepatic and 
renal function, aggravating further fluid retention and 
worsening RHF.
Chronic RHF
CRHF most commonly results from gradual increases 
in RV afterload caused by PH most frequently from 
LH failure (LHF), although chronic volume overload 
from right-sided lesions such as TR can also lead to 
its development (Figure 7). Long-standing pressure 
or volume overload imposed on the RV initially pro-
motes compensatory myocyte hypertrophy and fibro-
sis analogous to the remodeling that occurs in LHF. 
If the load persists, then the RV transitions from a 
compensated to decompensated phenotype charac-
terized by myocyte loss and replacement/fibrosis.37 
During the initial compensated phase, the hyper-
trophied RV begins to develop isovolumic phases of 
contraction and relaxation with increased RV systolic 
pressure and higher end-diastolic volume (Figure 3). 
In the decompensating phase, there is a concomitant 
rise in PVR and right atrial (RA) pressure (RAP). While 
PVR remains persistently elevated, CO subsequently 
declines, followed by a reduction in PAP18,38 (Figure 8). 
Declining PAP in the setting of high PVR is an ominous 
 
clinical finding.
In the presence of an intact pericardium, RV dila-
tion eventually compresses the LV cavity, impeding LV 
filling and equalizing biventricular diastolic pressures 
(Figure 6). Although it is true that patients with CRHF 
may require higher RV end-diastolic pressure (preload), 
reduced LH filling is more likely caused by RV dilation 
and ventricular interdependence than reduced RV for-
ward output.39 That is, increased transmural pressure 
caused by RV dilation with pericardial constraint impairs 
LV filling (preload). The combination of RV systolic and 
biventricular diastolic dysfunction reduces CO, impairs 
coronary blood flow, and exacerbates peripheral and 
abdominal congestion.
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS 
OF RHF
HF With Reduced EF
Progressive RHF was first described as a component 
of the HF clinical syndrome in 1910.40 Regardless of 
pathogenesis, RVD increases in prevalence with more 
advanced LHF. In this setting, RVD may occur second-
ary to increased RV afterload from postcapillary PH, vol-
ume overload, arrhythmias, or the underlying myocar-
dial disease process affecting the LV (Table 1). The last 
factor may contribute to the higher prevalence of RVD 
observed in nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy com-
pared with ischemic cardiomyopathy, especially given 
the possible genetic predisposition in many of these 
patients. The overall prevalence of RVD in HF with re-
duced EF (HFrEF) varies widely with distinct differences 
in varied populations, but its presence is universally 
associated with increased mortality.41 The prevalence 
of RVD in a meta-analysis of patients with HFrEF was 
48%.41 In a small cohort of patients with dilated car-
diomyopathy, RVD was seen in ≈60% of patients and 
was associated with greater mitral regurgitation and 
TR, more rapid progression of clinical HF, and decreased 
survival.42 Likewise, in a separate series, patients with 
nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy had a higher pro-
portion of RVD than those with an ischemic pathogen-
esis: 65% versus 16%.43 Among patients with HFrEF 
who underwent echocardiography during acute HF 
hospitalization, 48% had RVD. These patients had a 
2.4-fold increased risk of mortality, urgent transplanta-
Figure 5. Pressure-volume (PV) loop.  
Right ventricular–pulmonary arterial (RV-PA) coupling. The 
PV loop is a comprehensive description of the relationship 
between pressure and volume during the cardiac cycle. 
The area within the loop defines the stroke work of the RV, 
with the width of the loop representing stroke volume (SV). 
End-systolic elastance (Ees), a load-independent measure 
of contractility, is determined by a tangent fitted on the 
end-systolic portions of a family of PV. RV afterload is 
determined by dividing the end-systolic pressure by the SV, 
providing the effective arterial elastance (Ea). Ea is measured 
as the slope of a straight line drawn from the end-systolic to 
end-diastolic PV relationship (to end-diastolic volume [EDV] 
at P=0). The relationship of these 2 parameters (Ees:Ea) 
provides a ratio defining RV-PA coupling, which reflects 
contractility in the context of afterload. Determinations of 
Ees and Ea require instantaneous measurements of RV pres-
sure and volume to generate sequential PV loops obtained 
by a decrease of venous return via stepwise inflation of an 
inferior vena cava balloon or a Valsalva maneuver. Reprinted 
from Guazzi and Naeije16 with permission from Elsevier. 
Copyright © 2017, Elsevier.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e584
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
tion, or urgent LV assist device (LVAD) placement at 90 
days compared with those without RVD.44
RVD is also associated with decreased exercise ca-
pacity measured by peak oxygen consumption and 
worse New York Heart Association functional class.45 
In a study of 97 patients with HFrEF, RV exercise con-
tractile reserve and RV-PA coupling were assessed with 
tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) ver-
sus PASP and the slope of mean PAP versus CO.46 Pa-
tients were grouped according to whether their rest-
ing TAPSE was ≥16 mm. Those with TAPSE <16 mm 
were further subdivided by whether TAPSE at peak 
Figure 6. Ventricular interdependence in right-sided heart failure.  
Pathological increases in right ventricular (RV) filling pressures are transmitted to the interventricular septum. As the RV is 
constrained by the pericardium (arrows), these forces result in leftward shift of the septum, altering left ventricular (LV) ge-
ometry. These changes contribute to reduced cardiac output by decreasing LV distensibility, preload, and ventricular elastance, 
adversely affecting LV diastolic filling. Leftward septal shift secondary to pericardial constraint from elevated RV end-diastolic 
pressure distorts the normal geometric ventricular relationship, also impairing RV contractile function. Adapted from Haddad 
et al18 with permission. Copyright © 2008, American Heart Association.
Figure 7. Pathophysiology of right-sided heart failure.  
LV indicates left ventricular; LVEDP
, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure; RAP
, right atrial pressure; RV, right ventricle; and 
RVEDD, right ventricular end-diastolic dimension.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e585
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
exercise was ≥15.5 mm. Although patients had similar 
baseline profiles of biventricular function, those with 
higher TAPSE in response to exercise demonstrated 
improved RV contractile reserve and some degree of 
favorable RV-PA coupling in contrast to those patients 
with persistently low TAPSE. Thus, many patients with 
resting RVD can have residual contractile reserve with 
the ability to improve RV-PA coupling during exercise. 
Data directly linking RVD to reduced performance on 
structured health-related quality of life (HRQoL) ques-
tionnaires are sparse.
HF With Preserved EF
RV function is equally important in patients with HF 
with preserved EF (HFpEF). In this population, however, 
it is difficult to distinguish primary RV pathology from 
that resulting from secondary PH, given the afterload 
dependency of RV function.47 Nevertheless, several 
small cohort studies have evaluated the prevalence of 
concomitant RV systolic dysfunction in the setting of 
HFpEF. In a Mayo Clinic cohort, 33% of patients with 
HFpEF had RVD defined as RV fractional area change 
(RVFAC) <35%.48 In a separate study of 51 patients, 
depending on the criteria used, RVD was present in 
33% to 50% of patients with HFpEF in contrast to 
63% to 76% of those with HFrEF.49 Other groups have 
reported similar findings.50 A meta-analysis including 
4835 patients reported varied prevalence depending 
partly on the modality used to assess RV function: 
31% by TAPSE, 26% by RV S’, and 13% by RVFAC.47 
Approximately 70% of these patients with HFpEF with 
RVD had concomitant PH at rest. More novel indexes 
of RV function have led to higher prevalence estimates. 
RV longitudinal systolic strain abnormalities were iden-
tified in 75% of 208 patients with HFpEF, whereas RV-
FAC <35% was seen in only 28%.51 Compared with 
patients with HFpEF without RVD, those with RVD 
were more likely to be male, to have more renal impair-
ment, and to have a higher prevalence of atrial fibrilla-
tion and coronary artery disease.48,51
Analogous to outcomes in HFrEF populations, RVD 
is associated with increased morbidity and mortality 
in HFpEF populations.51 Two-year mortality in 1 study 
was ≈45% for patients with RVD compared with 7% 
Figure 8. Hemodynamics in progressive pulmonary 
vascular disease.  
A decrease in pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) in patients 
with pulmonary hypertension may be a sign of low cardiac 
output (CO) and severe right ventricular dysfunction. 
MPAP indicates mean PAP; PCWP, pulmonary artery capil-
lary wedge pressure; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; 
and RAP, right atrial pressure. Adapted from Haddad et 
al18 with permission. Copyright © 2008, American Heart 
Association.
Table 1. Causes of RHF
 
Decreased RV Contractility
RV Volume Overload
RV Pressure Overload
Acute
Sepsis
Acidosis
LVAD support
Hypoxia
RVMI
Excessive transfusion
PE
Myocarditis
ARDS
Perioperative injury/ischemia  
(postcardiotomy)
Positive pressure ventilation
Chronic
RV cardiomyopathy
LH disease
ARVC
Single ventricle
Ebstein anomaly
Pericardial disease
PR
PAH
TGA
Chronic thromboembolic PH
TR
PS
Left-sided valvular heart disease
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
ARDS indicates acute respiratory distress syndrome; ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; LH, left-
sided heart disease; LVAD, left ventricular assist device; PAH, pulmonary arterial hypertension; PE, pulmonary embolism; 
PH, pulmonary hypertension; PR, pulmonary regurgitation; PS, pulmonary stenosis; RHF, right-sided heart failure; RV, 
right ventricular; RVMI, right ventricular myocardial infarction; TGA, transposition of the great arteries; and TR, tricuspid 
regurgitation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e586
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
in those without RVD.48 Exercise intolerance is com-
mon in people with HFpEF, and those with evidence of 
RVD have lower New York Heart Association classifica-
tion.51 In an exercise comparison between 50 patients 
with HFpEF and 24 control subjects, those with HF-
pEF had impaired RV systolic and diastolic functional 
enhancement measured by invasive cardiopulmonary 
exercise testing and simultaneous echocardiogra-
phy.52 Increased left- and right-sided filling pressures 
and limitations in CO reserve correlated with abnor-
mal augmentation in biventricular mechanics during 
stress, suggesting limited RV reserve with RV-PA un-
coupling during.
Myocarditis
Inflammatory myocardial disease has varied clinical 
presentations and outcomes. The focus of myocarditis 
studies has been predominantly on characterization of 
LV function. RV involvement, however, may reflect a 
greater burden of inflammation, preexisting vulnerabil-
ity to an acute process, or increased afterload caused 
by LHF. When treatment options are considered, the 
presence of RVD, depending on the severity, may dic-
tate the need for biventricular support. In 174 patients 
with active or borderline myocarditis, RVD was pres-
ent in 39% of patients with anti-heart autoantibodies 
compared with 17% of those without anti-heart auto-
antibodies.53 The presence of RVD by cardiac magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) in a study of patients with 
myocarditis was associated with a hazard ratio of 3.4 
for death or heart transplantation and was the stron-
gest predictor of death.53
RV Myocardial Infarction
Acute RVMI is prevalent in ≈50% of patients with an 
acute inferior MI.54 A functionally-relevant acute RVMI 
generally requires disruption of blood flow to both 
the RV free wall and a portion of the interventricu-
lar septum. It typically occurs when a dominant right 
coronary artery is occluded proximally to the major RV 
branch(es), leading to reduced RV systolic function 
and acute RV dilation. A smaller proportion of patients 
have RVMI resulting from circumflex coronary artery 
occlusion in a left-dominant coronary system and rare-
ly in association with left anterior descending coronary 
artery occlusion, in which this artery supplies collater-
als to an otherwise underperfused anterior portion of 
the RV free wall.
RVMI is associated with hemodynamic compromise 
in 25% to 50% of patients presenting with this infarct 
pattern.55 Early mortality is highest among patients with 
evidence of hemodynamic compromise.56,57 Patients 
with RVMI have a greater burden of arrhythmias, con-
tributing to mortality.57 Most patients recover RV func-
tion within days to weeks after the infarct.58 One-year 
mortality after RVMI is reported to be 18% in patients 
with isolated right coronary artery lesions compared to 
27% in the presence of combined right and left coro-
nary artery disease. In long-term follow-up, mortality 
beyond the first year remains at an additional 2%/y to 
3%/y through year 10.59 In 1 series, mortality among 
patients with inferior MI with RVMI was 25% to 30% 
compared with 6% in patients without RVMI.60 Similar-
ly, among 666 patients with acute MI undergoing per-
cutaneous coronary intervention, excluding those with 
cardiogenic shock on admission, electrocardiographic 
(ST-segment elevation of 0.1 mV in lead V3R or V4R) 
and echocardiographic evidence of RVMI (RV free wall 
motion abnormalities or RV dilatation) was associated 
with higher in-hospital and 1- and 6-month mortality 
compared with patients with either anterior or inferior 
MI without evidence of RVMI (although findings at 6 
months were not statistically significant).56 Although 
patients with inferior MI have, in general, a better 
prognosis than those with anterior MI, the presence of 
RV involvement increases the risk of death, shock, and 
arrhythmia.61 Among patients with MI complicated by 
cardiogenic shock enrolled in the SHOCK trial (Should 
We Emergently Revascularize Occluded Coronaries for 
Cardiogenic Shock), 5% had a picture of predominant 
RHF and the remainder had a shock syndrome charac-
terized by LHF.62 Despite some favorable clinical charac-
teristics among the patients with RHF, the mortality rate 
was similar between these 2 groups.
Postsurgical ARHF
ARHF may occur during or after noncardiac surgery as 
a result of the development of acute PH or intraopera-
tive myocardial ischemia.63 The prevalence of RHF after 
noncardiac surgery is difficult to determine. There is 
the potential for a survival bias whereby patients with 
more profound RHF die before full cardiac evaluation. 
Furthermore, preexisting HF may make the diagnosis of 
ARHF more challenging to differentiate.
During cardiac surgery, ARHF can be caused by hy-
poxia/myocardial ischemia, microemboli, air emboli 
leading to MI, arrhythmias, and excessive volume load-
ing.64,65 Furthermore, there is a disruption in the na-
tive RV contractile pattern after cardiothoracic surgery. 
Although overall RV function remains preserved, the 
combination of cardiopulmonary bypass and pericardi-
otomy leads to a reduction in longitudinal contraction 
and an increase in transverse shortening.66 In the nor-
mal RV, longitudinal shortening accounts for ≈80% of 
RV function.67 Whether release of pericardial constraint 
after complete pericardiotomy predisposes the at-risk 
RV to the development of ARHF remains uncertain. 
RVD is frequently seen within 5 days of cardiac surgery 
and may persist despite improvements in LV function.68 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e587
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Postoperative ARHF is associated with increased mor-
tality, prolonged length of stay, and increased resource 
use.69 In a cohort of patients undergoing coronary ar-
tery bypass graft surgery, most patients did not dem-
onstrate a significant postoperative change in RV func-
tion, although modest decreases in longitudinal strain 
were noted.70
After Cardiac Transplantation
Primary graft dysfunction (PGD) affects ≈7% or more 
of patients after cardiac transplantation and is the lead-
ing cause of early mortality.71,72 PGD may be classified 
as PGD of the LV, which includes biventricular dysfunc-
tion, versus PGD of the RV alone. Diagnosis of PGD of 
the RV alone requires both (1) RAP >15 mm 
Hg, PCWP 
<15 mm 
Hg, and cardiac index <2.0 L·min−1·m−2 and 
(2) transpulmonary gradient <15 mm 
Hg and PASP <50 
mm 
Hg or (3) the need for an RV assist device (RVAD).71 
The pathogenesis of PGD is complex and likely multifac-
torial. Contributing causes consist of donor, procedur-
al, and recipient-level factors, including inflammatory 
mediators resulting from brain death, elevated PVR, 
and ischemia/reperfusion injury associated with pres-
ervation issues.73,74 Although management of ARHF is 
discussed elsewhere, a decision on the need for right-
sided MCS should be made before leaving the opera-
tive room, pending the initial response to medical inter-
ventions.74,75
After LVAD
Twenty percent or more of patients undergoing isolated 
LVAD implantation experience ARHF, which is a lead-
ing cause of premature morbidity and mortality.76–78 
Rates of RHF associated with LVAD insertion may be 
partially dependent on the underlying cause of myopa-
thy. Patients with a history of chemotherapy-associated 
cardiomyopathy appear to be at higher risk than those 
with other forms of nonischemic or ischemic disease.79 
The physiology of ARHF after LVAD implantation is com-
plex. From a hemodynamic perspective, activation of an 
LVAD increases venous return, potentially overwhelm-
ing a functionally impaired RV, leading to RV dilatation, 
TR, leftward shift of the interventricular septum, and 
decline in RV SV. As RV output falls and the septum 
shifts leftward, LV preload and LVAD flows are reduced. 
The RV is dependent on the LV for a significant portion 
of its contractile function, and leftward septal shift re-
sulting from LV unloading can have a direct, detrimental 
effect on RV contraction.27,80 Furthermore, anchoring of 
the LVAD to the LV apex may alter the normal twisting 
contractile pattern of the heart. Whether the direction 
of apical deformation (ie, apical pull versus push, de-
pending on device configuration and placement) alters 
the risk of RVD remains uncertain.
LV unloading with mechanical support may improve 
RV contractility via a reduction in PAP after the acute 
decline in PCWP associated with LVAD activation.80,81 
PH, however, is a risk factor for the development of 
ARHF in LVAD recipients,82,83 and residual, fixed PH 
likely contributes to RV-PA uncoupling when other 
intraoperative complications are encountered. Even if 
compensated for in the preoperative period, a chroni-
cally dysfunctional RV coupled to a fixed and elevated 
pulmonary afterload may not be able to tolerate intra-
operative insults such as ischemia and volume loading, 
which then precipitate ARHF.
In addition, it is possible that a reduction in systemic 
afterload after insertion of rotary blood pumps leads 
to a decline in LV contractility with a resultant second-
ary decline in RV contractility. The Anrep effect is the 
physiological consequence whereby increases in arterial 
afterload lead to increases in ventricular contractility. 
Although this relationship remains somewhat hypo-
thetical in the LVAD-supported circulation, the converse 
of this is also true: Reductions in afterload may lead to 
reduced contractility.
Late RHF in the LVAD recipients, after initial hospital 
discharge, occurs in ≈10% of patients and is similarly 
associated with reduced survival and lower HRQoL and 
functional capacity.84,85 The development of ventricular 
and atrial tachyarrhythmias may be a significant factor 
contributing to the development of late RHF.
PE With ARHF
Acute PE can lead to acute RV strain as a result of pres-
sure overload within minutes of occlusion of a major 
PA segment and is a common cause of ARHF.33,63 Physi-
cal presentation often includes initial syncope or right-
sided atrial arrhythmias. The prevalence of ARHF in 
the setting of acute PE ranges from 25% to 60%.86,87 
Predictors of RVD include >50% of the PA tree oc-
cluded by thrombus.88 Patients with evidence of RVD 
have a 2.4- to 3.5-fold increase in mortality compared 
with those without RVD.86,87 Given the poor prognosis, 
guidelines on the management of acute PE recommend 
early detection of RVD to guide risk stratification and 
therapeutic decision making.
Arrhythmogenic RV Cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a dis-
ease of the cardiac myocytes caused by impaired des-
mosome function.89 Desmosomes are intercellular 
junctions that provide adhesion between cells. Muta-
tions in desmosomal proteins such as plakophilin and 
desmoplakin decrease the ability of the cells to toler-
ate mechanical stress, resulting in myocyte detachment 
and cell death. The inflammation that accompanies this 
process manifests as fibrofatty infiltration, causing ven-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e588
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
tricular irritability and arrhythmias and eventually ven-
tricular dysfunction. In affected patients, this process 
shows a predilection for the thinnest portions of the RV 
where mechanical stress is greatest. However, the LV 
also is often affected in advanced disease.90
The prevalence of ARVC is estimated to be 1 in 2000 
to 5000, and ARVC affects men more frequently than 
women. A familial component is identified in >50% of 
patients.91 Transmission is autosomal dominant with in-
complete penetrance. Diagnosis of ARVC can be diffi-
cult, so standardized criteria have been developed that 
are based on family history, ventricular dysfunction, 
tissue characterization, electrocardiographic changes 
(Figure 9A), and history of arrhythmias.93 The sensitivity 
of electrocardiographic criteria alone (Table 2) for the 
diagnosis of ARVC is low. Diagnosis requires a specific 
combination of major and minor criteria from the ECG, 
RV imaging, and family history that are reviewed in 
detail elsewhere.93 Genetic screening, although not re-
quired, may be helpful when screening family members 
of a recently diagnosed patient.93,94 Recommendations 
for the role of genetic testing of probands and first-
degree relatives have been published.94
ARVC is more often associated with arrhythmia than 
isolated RVD. In Italy, where young athletes undergo 
detailed screening before participation in sports, ARVC 
was a cause of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in >20%.95 In 
a registry of SCDs in athletes from the United Kingdom, 
ARVC was detected in 13% of 357 subjects.96 Among 
100 US patients diagnosed with ARVC, the median age 
at presentation was 29 years, but age at presentation 
varied widely, from 2 to 70 years.97 Thirty-one patients 
experienced SCD, and 6 patients progressed to RHF, one 
of whom died while awaiting cardiac transplantation. 
Figure 9. ECGs in patients with right-sided heart disease.   
A, ECG from a patient with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. ECG from a patient with T-wave inversion in V1 
through V4 and prolongation of the terminal activation of a 55-millisecond duration measured from the nadir of the S wave 
to the end of the QRS complex in V1. Reproduced with permission from Marcus et al.92 Copyright © 2010, American Heart 
Association. B, ECG with right ventricular hypertrophy. ECG demonstrating the changes of right ventricular hypertrophy. Long 
arrow indicates dominant R wave in V1; short arrow, right-axis deviation; black arrowhead, right atrial abnormality; and 
open arrowhead, secondary ST-T changes.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e589
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
More than 90% of patients had a life-threatening ar-
rhythmia at some point during follow-up.97 This statistic 
is, of course, influenced by selection bias because the 
presence of ventricular arrhythmia increases the prob-
ability of ascertaining the diagnosis of ARVC. Indica-
tions for implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy 
in ARVC are available.98
Tricuspid Regurgitation
TR is a common echocardiographic finding, and mild 
TR is present in 80% to 90% of individuals. Although 
less common, moderate to severe TR affects >1 mil-
lion people in the United States.99 TR can be related 
to 2 principal types: primary valvular TR and secondary 
functional TR. Functional changes of the TV related to 
annular dilation and leaflet tethering in the setting of 
RV remodeling caused by pressure and volume over-
load are the most common causes of significant TR, ac-
counting for 85% of cases.100 In contrast, primary TR 
is secondary to lesions of the valve structure itself such 
as endocardial cushion abnormalities, Ebstein anomaly, 
endocarditis, and carcinoid heart disease.
The severity of TR affects prognosis even when con-
trolling for LV dysfunction or PH. In a study of 5223 pa-
tients at 3 Veterans Affairs medical centers, 1-year sur-
vival rates were 92%, 90%, 79%, and 64% in patient 
groups with no, mild, moderate, or severe TR, respec-
tively.101 Moderate or greater TR was associated with 
increased mortality regardless of PASP or LVEF. Severe 
TR, older age, lower LVEF, inferior vena cava dilation, 
and moderate or greater RV enlargement were associ-
ated with worse survival.
PV Disease
Pulmonary stenosis (PS) occurs in ≈10% of children 
with CHD. PS can be encountered as part of tetralogy 
of Fallot (TOF), the incidence of which is 6 in 20 
000 
live births,102,103 or other complex CHDs such as trans-
position of the great arteries (TGA), ventricular septal 
defect, and PS or an isolated valve abnormality. PV atre-
sia can be seen in patients with TOF but can also be 
encountered in those with an intact ventricular septum. 
PS can also be seen in patients with Noonan syndrome, 
in whom it can be isolated or seen in combination with 
cardiomyopathy. PV disease can be found in the setting 
of endocarditis, especially in intravenous drug users, or 
in carcinoid heart disease.104,105 Patients with isolated PS 
do quite well, usually treated with balloon valvuloplasty 
alone. When treated, long-term survival of patients 
with PS is not different from that in individuals without 
PS.106 The development of RHF in patients with isolated 
PS is rare.
Pulmonary insufficiency is most often a consequence 
of balloon valvuloplasty or surgical repair of congeni-
tal abnormalities and is commonly seen after complete 
repair of TOF.107 The highest-risk group is made up of 
patients with a small PV annulus, in whom surgical re-
pair involves placement of a transannular patch, leav-
ing the patient with an incompetent PV. Historically, 
surgeons have attempted to make this patch as large 
as possible to relieve PS; however, more contemporary 
techniques use a smaller transannular patch, recogniz-
ing that a small degree of residual PS is preferable for 
preservation of long-term RV function than wide-open 
pulmonary insufficiency. MRI studies have shown RV 
fibrosis in 99% of patients with repaired TOF and LV 
fibrosis in 53%.108 In 10% to 15% of patients, pulmo-
Table 2. Revised Task Force Criteria for 
Electrocardiographic Diagnosis of ARVC
Repolarization abnormalities
 Major
Inverted T waves in right precordial leads (V1–V3) or beyond 
in individuals >14 y of age (in the absence of complete right 
bundle-branch block QRS ≥120 ms)
 Minor
Inverted T waves in leads V1 and V2 in individuals >14 y of 
age (in the absence of complete right bundle-branch block) 
or in V4, V5, or V6
Inverted T waves in leads V1–V4 in individuals >14 y of age in 
the presence of complete right bundle-branch block
Depolarization/conduction abnormalities
 Major
Epsilon wave (reproducible low-amplitude signals between 
end of QRS complex and onset of the T wave) in the right 
precordial leads (V1–V3)
 Minor
Late potentials by SAECG in ≥1 of 3 parameters in the 
absence of a QRS duration ≥110 ms on the standard ECG
Filtered QRS duration ≥114 ms
Duration of terminal QRS <40 V (low-amplitude signal 
duration) 38 ms
Root-mean-square voltage of terminal 40 ms ≤20 μV
Terminal activation duration of QRS ≥55 ms measured from 
the nadir of the S wave to the end of the QRS, including R, 
in V1, V2, or V3, in the absence of complete right bundle-
branch block
ARVC indicates arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; and 
SAECG, signal-averaged ECG.
Adapted from Marcus et al92 with permission. Copyright © 2010, American 
Heart Association.
Table 3. Classification of PH
PH Category
Characteristics
Clinical Group
Precapillary
MPAP ≥25 mm 
Hg 
PCWP ≤15 mm 
Hg
WHO class 1, 3–5
Postcapillary
MPAP ≥25 mm 
Hg 
PCWP >15 mm 
Hg
WHO class 2, 5
 Isolated postcapillary PH
DPG <7 mm 
Hg and/ 
or PVR ≤3 WU
  
Combined precapillary 
and postcapillary PH
DPG ≥7 mm 
Hg and/ 
or PVR >3 WU
DPG indicates diastolic pulmonary gradient; MPAP
, mean pulmonary 
artery pressure; PCWP
, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; PH, pulmonary 
hypertension; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; WHO, World Health 
Organization; and WU, Woods units.
Reproduced from Galiè et al109 with permission. Copyright © 2016, Oxford 
University Press.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e590
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
nary insufficiency leads to progressive RV dilatation and 
dysfunction and may require PV replacement later in 
life.103,107 Left unrepaired, RV dilatation and dysfunction 
can lead to ventricular arrhythmias with a rate of SCD 
in this population estimated to be 0.3%/y.103
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
The evaluation of a patient with RVD includes an as-
sessment for increased RV afterload. PH is characterized 
by alterations in the pulmonary vasculature leading to 
increased PVR and ultimately RVD. The increased after-
load on the RV leads to RV hypertrophy, dilation, and 
systolic dysfunction. PH is defined as a mean PAP ≥25 
mm 
Hg and when present is associated with impaired 
survival. PH is found in isolation and as a consequence 
of other diseases as detailed below. Patients are catego-
rized on the basis of the mechanism of disease (Table 3).
Group 1: Pulmonary Arterial 
Hypertension
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) describes a 
group of disorders characterized hemodynamically by 
the presence of precapillary PH, defined by a PCWP 
≤15 mm 
Hg and a PVR >3 Woods units in the absence 
of other causes of precapillary PH such as chronic lung 
disease.109,110 Initial PH screening is typically performed 
with echocardiography, but right-sided heart catheter-
ization is required for definitive diagnosis. The incidence 
for all group 1 PAH is 2.3 cases per 1 million adults with 
an overall prevalence of 12.4 per 1 million adults.111 
Group 1 includes those patients with idiopathic PAH; 
hereditary PAH; PAH caused by drugs and toxins; PAH 
associated with connective tissues disease, portal hy-
pertension, HIV, CHD with persistent pulmonary-to-
systemic shunt, Eisenmenger physiology, and schisto-
somiasis; persistent PAH of the newborn; pulmonary 
veno-occlusive disease; and pulmonary capillary hem-
angiomatosis.112
Patients with PAH benefit from care provided in cen-
ters with expertise in this condition. Despite the intro-
duction of new pulmonary vasodilator therapies, group 
1 PH continues to be associated with high morbidity 
and mortality. In a US cohort of patients in the REVEAL 
registry (Registry to Evaluate Early and Long-Term Pul-
monary Arterial Hypertension Disease Management), 1- 
and 5-year survival rates were 85% and 57%, respec-
tively.113 PAH secondary to connective tissue disease 
or portopulmonary hypertension is associated with a 
worse prognosis. The presence of RVD in patients with 
PAH is a strong predictor of adverse outcomes and 
more closely associated with clinical outcomes than the 
PAPs.114 Hemodynamic and echocardiographic mark-
ers of RVD associated with increased mortality include 
RA and RV dilation, elevated RAP
, RV systolic dysfunc-
tion, the presence of a pericardial effusion, decreased 
PA capacitance, and reduced CO.110,113,115 Assessment 
of RV strain may add prognostic value to traditional 
markers of RVD in the assessment of PAH.116,117 There is 
significant variability in the timing of the onset of RHF 
among patients, including those with similarly elevated 
PAP
.18,114,118,119 Other variables associated with reduced 
survival include lower functional class, lower blood 
pressure (BP), higher heart rate, increased BNP (B-type 
natriuretic peptide), reduced diffusion capacity of the 
lung for carbon monoxide, and reduced 6-minute walk 
distance.120 In the subset of patients with elevated RV 
pressure secondary to Eisenmenger syndrome or con-
genital PS, chronic RV pressure overload can be reason-
ably well tolerated for decades.121–123
Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease represents a small 
subgroup of group 1 PAH associated with a particularly 
poor prognosis.124 In contrast to other forms of PAH, 
pulmonary veno-occlusive disease results in postcapil-
lary PH. Vasodilatory therapy can lead to clinical wors-
ening in patients with pulmonary veno-occlusive dis-
ease, and these patients should be considered for lung 
transplantation.
Group 2: LH Disease
Chronically elevated left-sided filling pressures from LV 
systolic and diastolic dysfunction or significant left-sid-
ed valvular heart disease can lead to PH.125 A study of 
1063 patients with HF found that 68% of those with 
HFrEF and 54% with HFpEF had PH.25 The definition 
of group 2 PH requires a mean PAP ≥25 mm 
Hg with 
a PCWP >15 mm 
Hg or LV end-diastolic pressure ≥18 
mm 
Hg.110 Most patients with HF have postcapillary PH, 
characterized by low PVR (<3 Woods units) and low 
transpulmonary gradient (≤12 mm 
Hg). Others, howev-
er, have elevation of PVR and transpulmonary gradient, 
historically described as out-of-proportion or mixed PH. 
The commonly used measures of out-of-proportion PH 
include transpulmonary gradient, PVR, and the diastolic 
pulmonary gradient (diastolic pulmonary gradient=PA 
diastolic pressure–PCWP).16 A diastolic pulmonary gra-
dient ≥7 mm 
Hg suggests pulmonary vascular disease 
superimposed on left-sided pressure elevation.126 Clas-
sification of postcapillary PH in the 2015 European 
Society of Cardiology guidelines for the diagnosis and 
treatment of PH identified patients as having either 
isolated postcapillary PH, defined by a diastolic pul-
monary gradient <7 mm 
Hg, or combined precapillary 
or postcapillary PH (Cpc-PH) with diastolic pulmonary 
gradient ≥7 mm 
Hg and concomitantly elevated PVR 
>3 Woods units (Table 3).109 In 1 study, Cpc-PH was 
observed in 12% of patients with HF with an equal 
prevalence in HFrEF and HFpEF.25 Predictors of Cpc-PH 
included younger age, coexistent chronic obstructive 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e591
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
pulmonary disease, and valvular heart disease. Com-
pared with isolated postcapillary PH, Cpc-PH was asso-
ciated with increased mortality. RV–pulmonary vascular 
coupling is poor in Cpc-PH and has been proposed as 
an explanation for poor outcomes associated with this 
syndrome.25,127,128
Group 3: Chronic Lung Disease and 
Hypoxia
PH caused by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
or interstitial lung disease is usually mild to moder-
ate in severity.129 The small number of patients with 
severe PH in this category may have an additional 
underlying pathogenesis for an elevated PVR. PH is 
seen in ≈20% of patients with obstructive sleep ap-
nea.130,131 Obesity hypoventilation syndrome is similarly 
associated with a high prevalence of PH and RVD132–134 
and a high rate of overlap among patients with these 
2 diagnoses.
Group 4: Chronic Thromboembolic 
Disease
When PH is identified, exclusion of chronic thrombo-
embolic PH is required, given that surgical interven-
tion can alter the natural history of this disease. A 
significant proportion of patients without a history of 
PE are ultimately diagnosed with chronic thromboem-
bolic PH. Ventilation/perfusion scan is standard in the 
evaluation of newly diagnosed PH.109,110 Among pa-
tients undergoing pulmonary endarterectomy at expe-
rienced centers, 3-year survival is as high as 90%, and 
10-year survival is 72%.135 Limited data from obser-
vational studies describe a potential role for percuta-
neous balloon angioplasty in patients with inoperable 
disease.136–138
Group 5: Miscellaneous
Group 5 PH is characterized by diseases with multiple 
or unclear mechanisms contributing to the develop-
ment of PH. This group includes systemic illnesses such 
as sarcoidosis, chronic hemolytic disorders, and chronic 
kidney disease. Myocardial depression during sepsis is 
a well-known phenomenon, and RHF can occur inde-
pendently of PH or respiratory status.139 RVD can oc-
cur in isolation or concomitantly with LV dysfunction. A 
combination of reduced RV contractility and decreased 
preload caused by systemic vasodilation can impair 
circulation. Acute respiratory distress syndrome and 
mechanical ventilation are associated with increased 
PVR, which can also precipitate RVD. In a small study 
of septic patients evaluated with radionuclide imaging, 
patients with worsening respiratory status and PH were 
less likely to have recovery of RV function.140
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
CHD affects nearly 1% of births per year.141,142 Because 
of improved surgical techniques and advances in the 
medical care of patients with CHD, the prevalence of 
congenital heart defects in adult patients has grown 
substantially over the past decade. As of 2003, the esti-
mated 1.4 million adults in the United States living with 
CHD exceeded the number of children with CHD.143 
Many patients with CHD have significant RV involve-
ment because of right-sided valvular lesions, intracar-
diac shunting, or the presence of a systemic RV. The 
prognosis for each lesion of CHD is dependent on the 
severity of the residual hemodynamic abnormalities and 
other associated defects.
Atrial Septal Defect
There are 3 types of atrial septal defects (ASDs): ostium 
secundum (most common), ostium primum, and sinus 
venosus.102,144 Larger ASDs pose little or no resistance to 
intra-atrial flow, yielding equalization or near equaliza-
tion of left atrial pressure and RAP
. In the absence of 
pulmonary vascular obstructive disease (Eisenmenger 
physiology), the magnitude of the left-to-right shunt in 
unrestrictive ASDs relates primarily to the relative com-
pliance characteristics of the 2 ventricles. The shunt 
poses a volume load on the RV, dilating this chamber, 
as well as the pulmonary vasculature and left atrium, 
but if not complicated by additional anomalies or PH, it 
seldom results in RHF in early life. RV volume overload 
is associated with LV dysfunction secondary to altered 
chamber geometry and decreased myofiber preload, 
which is immediately reversible after ASD closure and 
reflective of the ventricular interdependence.145 Across 
multiple disease types, in the absence of primary RV 
pathology, RVEF tends to correlate with PAP
. However, 
because of increased preload associated with an ASD, 
RVEF is higher than would otherwise be expected for 
any degree of RV contractile dysfunction or afterload.146
ASDs do not close spontaneously, and in developed 
countries, they are generally surgically corrected in 
childhood. Left uncorrected, they are associated with 
pulmonary vascular obstructive disease and Eisen-
menger physiology in a small percentage of cases. 
Eisenmenger syndrome is characterized by progressive 
PVR, PH, reversal (or bidirectionality) of the intracardiac 
shunt, cyanosis, and RV hypertrophy and failure. The 
frequency of this syndrome is much lower with an ASD 
than a ventricular septal defect because in the latter 
case increased pulmonary blood flow is accompanied 
by increased pressure caused (effectively) by direct LV 
ejection into the pulmonary circulation, impeded only 
by the resistance posed by the intracardiac defect it-
self. When ASDs are allowed to persist into late adult 
life, in the absence of Eisenmenger physiology, an in-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e592
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
creased rate of morbidity and mortality may be driven 
by an increased magnitude of the left-to-right shunt, 
the result of progressive LV stiffness caused by system-
ic hypertension or aging.121,144 In these cases, RHF may 
ensue as a result of the increase in both volume and 
pressure load, the latter generally driven more by the 
increased magnitude of pulmonary flow than obstruc-
tive pulmonary vascular disease. Therefore, if the ASD 
is missed or ignored in childhood, it is not unusual 
for the patient to present symptomatically for the first 
time in late life.
Ebstein Anomaly
In Ebstein anomaly, ≥1 leaflets of the TV are adherent to 
the RV wall, leading to atrialization of a portion of the 
RV chamber with varying degrees of TR.102 In neonates, 
severe Ebstein anomaly can lead to profound cyanosis 
caused by the inability of the RV to eject into the pul-
monary circulation. In older patients with milder forms, 
it can lead to cyanosis with exercise caused by shunting 
across a foramen ovale or an ASD. The degree of long-
term RHF depends on the degree of RV hypoplasia or 
the success of TV reparative surgery.
Transposition of the Great Arteries
L-TGA is commonly referred to as corrected transposi-
tion. In this lesion, the morphological RV serves as the 
systemic ventricle and is coupled to the high-pressure 
systemic circulation. The majority of patients with L-
TGA have other significant cardiac defects, most com-
monly including ventricular septal defect and PS. The 
TV is almost always abnormal, frequently with Ebstein-
like displacement, leading to TR and RV volume over-
load. RHF occurs in up to 50% of patients with L-TGA 
by middle age, with the risk increased by the presence 
of associated lesions such as TV disease.147
D-TGA results in cyanosis in the newborn period. Be-
fore the 1980s, surgical repair involved placement of 
an atrial baffle (atrial switch, Mustard or Senning pro-
cedure) to redirect venous return, leaving the RV as the 
systemic ventricle. Analogous to patients with L-TGA, 
the RV in these patients is at increased risk of dilatation 
and failure. The arterial switch operation involves tran-
section of both great arteries and translocation of the 
vessels to the opposite root, creating ventriculoarterial 
concordance, and has become the standard corrective 
procedure for this lesion.148
Single-Ventricle (RV) Physiology
There are various forms of single-ventricle morphology. 
In the most severe forms of CHD involving hypopla-
sia or total absence of the LV (ie, hypoplastic LH syn-
drome), surgical palliative procedures result in the RV 
being used as the systemic ventricle, coupled to the 
high-resistance systemic circulation. In these patients, 
pulmonary blood flow is achieved by connecting the 
vena cavae directly to the pulmonary arteries (Glenn 
and Fontan operations). There are a number of long-
term complications in patients with a single ventricle, 
including protein-losing enteropathy, plastic bronchitis, 
and hepatic fibrosis. However, systemic RV dilation, TR, 
and RHF become increasingly common as patients en-
ter their third and fourth decades. Patients with a sys-
temic RV are at greater risk of developing HF than pa-
tients with a systemic LV.149 Fibrosis is present in >25% 
of patients with a Fontan operation.150
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF RHF
Acute RHF
ARHF is generally characterized by acute RV dilation, 
a ventricular-interdependent effect limiting LV fill-
ing, reduced RV forward flow, and elevated systemic 
venous pressure. Patients with ARHF typically show 
signs of hypoperfusion and hypotension, including 
diaphoresis, listlessness, cyanosis, cool extremities, 
hypotension, and tachycardia.151 Although chest aus-
cultation may point to underlying lung pathology, the 
finding of pulmonary edema is not consistent with 
isolated ARHF. Instead, if pulmonary edema is pres-
ent, it suggests ARHF combined with or secondary 
to LHF. In this setting, many of the common clinical 
findings of CRHF (see Chronic RHF) such as peripheral 
Table 4. Manifestations of RHF
Clinical manifestations of RHF
 Increased mortality
 Fatigue/decreased functional capacity
 Cardiorenal abnormalities
 Cardiohepatic abnormalities
 Protein malnutrition
 Coagulopathy
 Cachexia
Signs and symptoms
 Elevated jugular venous pressure with prominent V wave
 Peripheral edema
 Bloating/early satiety/abdominal discomfort
 Ascites and hepatomegaly
 Pleural effusion
 Prominent S2 (P2) (PH)
 Right-sided S3 gallop
 Holosystolic murmur LLSB (TR)
 RV parasternal heave
LLSB indicates left lower sternal border; PH, pulmonary hypertension; RHF, 
right-sided heart failure; RV, right ventricular; and TR, tricuspid regurgitation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e593
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
edema may initially be less prominent or absent al-
together. Besides systemic hypoperfusion, prominent 
clinical findings in ARHF include shortness of breath 
resulting from diminished peripheral oxygen deliv-
ery, as well as atrial and ventricular arrhythmias. On 
clinical examination, signs of ARHF include increased 
jugular venous pressure with a prominent v wave, 
prominent midprecordial cardiac impulse, right-sided 
third heart sound, and holosystolic murmur of TR. 
Hepatomegaly, ascites, and peripheral edema may be 
present when ARHF is superimposed on CRHF. Right 
upper quadrant discomfort may be caused by stretch 
of the hepatic capsule by hepatic congestion. If a pat-
ent foramen ovale is present (≈15% of adults), right-
to-left shunting at the atrial level can lead to systemic 
hypoxemia and cyanosis.
Chronic RHF
Peripheral edema is often the most prominent clinical 
feature in patients with CRHF63 (Table 4). Although pa-
tients with early stages of CRHF may initially have mild 
symptoms, as RV function worsens, the reduction in CO 
leads to progressive exercise intolerance and fatigue. 
Atrial tachyarrhythmias are common in the setting of 
elevated RAP and can lead to hemodynamic deteriora-
tion in CRHF.152 Ventricular tachycardia and heart block 
are additional electrophysiological complications and 
common causes of SCD in this population. In patients 
with PH, CRHF closely correlates with increased morbid-
ity and mortality.114,153
The hemodynamic constellation driving the del-
eterious effects of CRHF on end-organ function dif-
fers between CRHF and primary LHF, the former rep-
resenting a combination of increased central venous 
pressure (CVP) and reduced LV filling resulting from 
ventricular interdependence as a consequence of RV 
dilation.18,63 Recent studies have also suggested a pri-
mary role for elevated CVP in the pathophysiology of 
end-organ dysfunction occurring in the setting of pri-
mary LHF.39 In the later stages of CRHF when systemic 
output is reduced, impaired end-organ function may 
be caused by both elevated central venous filling pres-
sure and reduced CO (Figure 7). Increased systemic 
venous pressure impedes lung lymphatic drainage, 
decreasing lung fluid clearance and exacerbating pul-
monary edema and the development of pleural effu-
sions in the setting of concomitant postcapillary PH.18 
The organs most affected in CRHF are the kidneys and 
liver, with recent studies implicating the gastrointesti-
nal tract.154,155
Cardiorenal Syndrome
In patients with RHF, the increase in CVP and conse-
quent rise in renal vein pressure worsen renal function, 
even in the absence of decreased CO (Figure 10).157 In-
creased CVP has been identified as an independent risk 
factor for impaired renal function in patients with HF of 
diverse origins.39,157 Clinical features include decreased 
urine output, worsening fluid retention, and increased 
diuretic requirements.63 Laboratory abnormalities in-
clude increased blood urea nitrogen and creatinine.63 
Elevated and worsening levels of serum creatinine and 
blood urea nitrogen are independent predictors of ad-
verse outcomes, unless they are accompanied by signif-
icant decongestion in the setting of acute HF.158 These 
findings, connoting worsening renal function, may be 
causally linked to adverse outcomes or may, in part, 
represent epiphenomena connoting worsening HF 
and cardiac function. Furthermore, these findings may 
limit the clinician’s aggressiveness in pursuing diuresis 
and using guideline-directed medical therapy, includ-
ing renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system–inhibiting 
agents, and may promote the use of inotropic agents 
with their associated deleterious effects. Considerable 
efforts to identify treatments that simultaneously re-
solve congestion, improve clinical HF, and preserve or 
improve renal function have had limited success.159–161 
Continued investigation into the interdependency of 
right-sided heart function and the cardiorenal syn-
drome is warranted.
Increasing evidence of acute kidney injury in the set-
ting of elevated right-sided filling pressures may moti-
vate clinicians to erroneously reduce loop diuretic ther-
apy. However, this action may be deleterious because 
there is a proverbial “hump” one must get over to im-
prove hemodynamics sufficiently that diuresis becomes 
increasingly effective. If the volume status is unclear or 
there is concern that the clinical presentation represents 
isolated RHF, then placement of a PA catheter may be 
informative.
Cardiohepatic Syndrome
The term congestive hepatopathy is a misnomer be-
cause it generally results from a combination of he-
patic congestion and reduced hepatic perfusion. Over 
time, congestive hepatopathy can lead to the devel-
opment of cardiac cirrhosis.155,162 The most prominent 
laboratory abnormalities include markers of cholesta-
sis (elevated bilirubin, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, and 
alkaline phosphatase) and altered synthetic function 
(prolonged prothrombin time). These laboratory ab-
normalities are more commonly encountered than el-
evations in transaminases.163,164 Severity of TR has been 
found to be closely associated with liver function ab-
normalities,165 and markers of cholestasis are indepen-
dently associated with mortality among patients with 
HF.163,164 Likewise, hyperbilirubinemia is a risk factor 
for poor outcomes in patients with PH.166 In the set-
ting of these abnormalities, patients being considered 
for advanced HF therapies such as cardiac transplan-
tation may require a liver biopsy to exclude cirrhosis, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e594
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
particularly if hepatic imaging is also abnormal.167 
Furthermore, patients with end-stage liver disease are 
at risk for the developing portopulmonary hyperten-
sion, which is associated with worse outcomes after 
liver transplantation.168 Isolated and markedly elevated 
transaminases are more commonly caused by severely 
reduced CO/cardiogenic shock and respond better to 
inotropes than diuretic therapy. Increased serum am-
monia is also associated with adverse prognosis in de-
compensated HF.169
Gastrointestinal Involvement
Gastrointestinal tract function can be impaired by RHF 
as a consequence of increased CVP and reduced CO, 
leading to reduced absorption and malnutrition.155,169 
Splanchnic venous congestion with deficient abdominal 
Figure 10. Pathophysiology of cardiorenal disease: acute decompensated heart failure leading to kidney injury.  
ACEI indicates angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin-2 receptor blocker; CO, cardiac output; CVP
, central 
venous pressure; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; LVEDP
, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug; RAAS, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system; SNS, sympathetic nervous system; and SV, stroke volume. 
Reproduced with permission from Kiernan MS, Udelson JE, Sarnak M, Konstam M. Cardiorenal syndrome: definition, preva-
lence, diagnosis, and pathophysiology. In: Post TW, ed. UpToDate. Waltham, MA: UpToDate.156 Accessed on January 30, 2018. 
Copyright © 2017, UpToDate, Inc. For more information, visit www.uptodate.com.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e595
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
lymph flow causes interstitial edema with ensuing in-
creases in intra-abdominal pressure that may contribute 
to RHF-induced renal failure.155,170 Visceral edema also 
impairs the barrier function of the intestine, allowing 
entrance of toxins produced by microorganisms in the 
gut lumen into the bloodstream, which can further sup-
press cardiac and renal function and contribute to sys-
temic inflammation.154,171 Protein-losing enteropathy, a 
complication most commonly associated with single-
ventricle physiology, is also less commonly seen with 
other forms of RHF, including severe TR.172,173 Labora-
tory abnormalities include reduced serum albumin and 
increased stool α1-antitrypsin.
EVALUATION OF RHF
Physical Examination
Patients with severe RHF may appear emaciated, tachy-
pneic, and cyanotic. Patients with significant RHF 
typically have elevated jugular venous pressure with a 
prominent V wave from TR. Atrial fibrillation is common. 
Those in sinus rhythm may have a prominent A wave 
caused by RV diastolic abnormalities. Increased jugular 
venous pressure with inspiration (Kussmaul sign) may 
also be seen with a noncompliant RV. The abdomino-
jugular reflex test, defined as a sustained rise of >3 cm 
in the jugular venous pressure for at least 15 seconds 
with calm spontaneous respiration, may unmask subtle 
venous hypertension.174 A precordial RV heave, hepa-
tomegaly and ascites, and lower extremity or presacral 
edema may be observed. For patients with RHF second-
ary to PH, a prominent pulmonic component of the sec-
ond heart sound (P2) may be heard on auscultation. In 
contrast, for those with CHD, P2 may be soft or even 
absent in cases when there is a structural or postsurgi-
cal abnormality of the PV. A low-amplitude holosystolic 
murmur of TR may be present. An increase in the ampli-
tude of the systolic murmur during inspiration (Carvallo 
sign) may distinguish TR from mitral regurgitation. For 
patients with CHD such as repaired TOF, there may be a 
to-and-fro murmur of combined PS and insufficiency at 
the upper left sternal border, with radiation to the lungs.
Electrocardiographic Evaluation
CRHF is often associated with right-axis deviation, R:S 
amplitude ratio of >1 in lead V1, R wave >0.5 mV in V1, 
and p-wave amplitude of >2.5 mm in II, III, aVF or >1.5 
mm in V1 indicative of RA enlargement (Figure 9B). 
ARHF may be associated with sinus tachycardia and a 
qR pattern in lead V1.175,176 An initial S deflection in I, 
initial Q deflection in III, and inverted T in III (SI, QIII, TIII) 
may point to acute RV strain such as in the case of large 
PE (high specificity, low sensitivity). Atrial arrhythmias, 
especially atrial flutter, are common.
Serum Markers
In CRHF, the transaminases may be normal or mini-
mally elevated; however, in ARHF, transaminase levels 
are commonly high.177 In advanced CRHF, liver synthetic 
function may be impaired as evidenced by reduced al-
bumin and elevated international normalized ratio. In-
creased bilirubin can be related to passive congestion 
or cholestasis or could suggest the onset of fibrosis and 
cirrhosis. In more severe cases, venous congestion com-
bined with systemic hypoperfusion can lead to renal 
insufficiency characterized by an elevation in the blood 
urea nitrogen and creatinine.39
Echocardiography
Guidelines on the echocardiographic assessment of 
the RV are available elsewhere.178 There are limitations 
to the quantification of RV function by 2-dimensional 
echocardiography because of the complex geometry 
and retrosternal position of the RV, significant intrao-
bserver variability, and load and angle dependence of 
standard imaging parameters, including TAPSE, RVFAC, 
and tricuspid annular systolic velocity by tissue Dop-
pler.179 Although strain and strain rate are indepen-
dent of ventricular morphology and angle independent 
when obtained by speckle tracking, these measures are 
intrinsically load dependent.180 RV strain imaging is be-
coming an increasingly popular tool in the evaluation of 
PH and, when performed in experienced hands, is in-
dependently prognostic.116,117 However, given the high 
variability in addition to a current lack of standardiza-
tion and normative data, the American Society of Echo-
cardiography does not yet recommend tissue Doppler 
imaging for this purpose.178
RV Size
Compared with volumetric MRI, 2-dimensional mea-
surements of RV size can be erroneous because of the 
complex shape of the RV.181 RV enlargement is suggest-
ed if the RV area dimension is larger than the LV area in 
end diastole in the apical 4-chamber view. A linear RV 
basal dimension of >4.2 cm also suggests significant 
enlargement. RV end-diastolic wall thickness of >5 mm 
in the subcostal view indicates hypertrophy.178
RV Function
RV motion is restricted mainly to longitudinal (base to 
apex) shortening and systolic thickening. Longitudi-
nal shortening of the RV may be measured by TAPSE 
(normal reference limit ≥1.7 cm). TAPSE reflects systolic 
motion of a single point of tricuspid annulus, disregard-
ing the contribution of mid, apical, and free wall seg-
ments.178 Motion of the TV annulus is affected by prior 
cardiac surgery, which may render TAPSE less useful in 
this population. Additional measures of RV systolic dys-
function include RVFAC <35% and RV tissue Doppler S’ 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e596
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
velocity <10 cm/s at the plane of the tricuspid annulus. 
Three-dimensional echocardiography is emerging as a 
potential alternative, perhaps more accurate, method 
of evaluating RV size and contractility.182,183 Close corre-
lation exists between 3-dimensional echocardiography 
and MRI for RV size in patients with PH and CHD.184,185
RV diastolic dysfunction may be measured with tis-
sue Doppler early diastolic myocardial velocity at the 
tricuspid lateral annulus (E) and early diastolic tricuspid 
inflow (E’) ratio (E/E’) as demonstrated in patients with 
PH.186,187
An estimate of PASP can be made by Doppler inter-
rogation of TR, assuming an adequate Doppler enve-
lope. PASP is calculated as the Doppler gradient across 
the TV plus estimated RAP
. PASP may be underestimat-
ed with poor ultrasound alignment and overestimated 
if the patient is anemic, as well as in cases when RAP is 
severely elevated.
The TAPSE/PASP ratio has recently been proposed as 
a potential marker of RV-PA coupling because TAPSE 
reflects RV contractile function and PASP serves as a 
surrogate of afterload.188 This ratio was lower in sub-
jects who died with a similar distribution in the HFrEF 
and HFpEF populations.
The inferior vena cava diameter and collapsibility 
with respiration can be used to estimate RAP as a mark-
er of volume status. Hepatic vein flow reversal indicates 
severe TR, whereas leftward interatrial septal bowing 
also indicates RAP or volume overload. Although vol-
ume overload and pressure overload frequently occur 
simultaneously, diastolic septal flattening is associated 
with a volume-overloaded state, whereas systolic flat-
tening is more consistent with pressure overload.
Cardiac MRI
Cardiac MRI offers 3-dimensional, tomographic imaging 
of the entire heart and has become the gold standard 
for quantitative noninvasive measurement of RV vol-
ume, mass, and EF, including patients with CHD.189–193  
Delayed gadolinium enhancement methods can iden-
tify areas of RV fibrosis, although given the thinner wall 
of the RV, this may be more challenging compared with 
use for quantification of LV fibrosis. Dynamic real-time 
imaging during deep inspiration and expiration has 
been developed to detect RV volume changes and in-
termittent interventricular septal flattening.194 Velocity-
encoded methods also measure CO.
Multidetector Computed Tomography
Similar to cardiac MRI and 3-dimensional echocar-
diography, 
multidetector 
computed 
tomography 
provides volumetric information about RV size and 
function.195,196 The high spatial resolution of contrast-
enhanced computed tomography, combined with its 
rapid scan sequence, makes it an appealing modality 
for RV assessment. Limitations with computed tomog-
raphy include the need to bolus potentially nephrotoxic 
iodinated contrast material and the need for ionizing 
radiation, which is a problem for radiosensitive patient 
populations, including children, and for serial surveil-
lance studies. Although the patient must be able to lie 
flat and perform a breath hold, the scan process occurs 
over a shorter period compared with cardiac MRI. Fur-
thermore, implanted devices do not prevent the use of 
computed tomography, and claustrophobia is rarely an 
issue given the short bore length.
Radionuclide Imaging
Radionuclide imaging can be used for the assessment 
of RV size, function, and infiltration.144 It is less fre-
quently used for these purposes in the contemporary 
era given its poorer spatial resolution compared with 
other imaging modalities and the need for ionizing 
radiotracers. However, radionuclide ventriculography 
can be more accurate than echocardiography in mea-
suring RV volumes given its reliance on count density 
rather than on geometric assumptions, which may be 
stymied by complex RV geometry. Increased RV uptake 
of [11F]-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose has been described 
in cases of PH, including its potential utility in tracking 
response to pulmonary vasodilator therapy.197,198 Tech-
netium pyrophosphate imaging is a sensitive means of 
detecting certain infiltrative processes, particularly car-
diac involvement by transthyretin amyloidosis. It is most 
frequently used via ventilation/perfusion scan to screen 
for chronic thromboembolic PH in patients with PH and 
RV enlargement detected by other imaging modalities.
Chest Radiograph
In cases of significant RV enlargement, the cardiac sil-
houette on a chest radiograph will have a globular ap-
pearance. Loss of the retrosternal airspace on a lateral 
projection also indicates RV enlargement. Rightward 
displacement of the cardiac silhouette, well beyond the 
spine, almost always represents RA enlargement (the 
alterative being a giant left atrium). With coexisting PH, 
the main PA will be enlarged and the distal PA branches 
may have a “pruned” appearance.199,200 Elevated CVP 
may sometimes be recognized by an enlarged azygous 
vein. Pulmonary vascular redistribution, increased inter-
stitial markings, and Kerley lines are signs of pulmonary 
venous hypertension, evidence of which often dimin-
ishes as pulmonary vascular obstructive disease pro-
gresses and signs of RHF dominate those of LHF in the 
presence of chronic biventricular failure. Pleural effu-
sions are frequent in the presence of severe HF, particu-
larly when pulmonary and systemic venous pressures 
are both elevated.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e597
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Hemodynamic Assessment of RV 
Function
Several hemodynamic variables have been identified as 
risk factors for the development of RHF, predominantly 
after LVAD surgery (Table 5).77 As with imaging pa-
rameters of RV function, hemodynamic correlates are 
largely inconsistent across studies. Elevated RAP
, par-
ticularly when this elevation is disproportionate relative 
to the rise in PCWP
, is a marker of RVD.83,201 A normal 
RA/PCWP ratio is ≈0.5; higher ratios imply RVD.209,210 A 
preoperative RA/PCWP ratio >0.63 is associated with 
RHF after LVAD surgery.76 PA pulsatility is another po-
tential correlate of RHF.203,204 PA pulse pressure index, 
defined as the ratio of PA pulse pressure (PASP minus 
PA diastolic pressure) to RAP
, was recently proposed as 
a sensitive marker of disproportionate RVD and a pre-
dictor of post-VAD RHF.203 This metric, however, has 
also yet to be validated in larger, prospective cohorts. 
RV stroke work index [(mean PAP−RAP)×SV index] is an 
established marker of RV function. SV index is calcu-
lated by dividing cardiac index by heart rate. RV stroke 
work index is influenced by preload, however, and its 
calculation is dependent on multiple measured param-
eters susceptible to acquisition error.201,211–213
Risk Models of RHF
Durable mechanical circulatory assist devices are increas-
ingly offered to patients with advanced HF as a bridge to 
transplantation or as long-term destination therapy.214 
Despite technological advances in the use of continuous-
flow LVADs, RHF remains a major cause of morbidity and 
mortality after LVAD implantation.179,215 Postoperative 
RHF can occur immediately, before the patient leaves the 
operating room, whereas in other cases, it may develop 
over weeks, months, or even years as a result of the pro-
gression of underlying myocardial disease, worsening 
TR, or PH.84 Several clinical prediction scores have been 
developed to facilitate preoperative identification of pa-
tients at risk for post-LVAD RHF.76,78,83,201,205,207,216 Age, 
vital signs, invasive hemodynamic metrics, echocardio-
graphic parameters, indexes of end-organ function, and 
the need for cardiorespiratory support have been used 
to identify high-risk individuals. Although these scores 
perform well in their derivation cohorts, they perform 
less well in external validation studies.217 The complex 
physiology of RHF complicates accurate prediction of 
postoperative events, and these scores are unable to in-
corporate intraoperative parameters or events that can 
precipitate ARHF. Such events include volume loading 
from transfusions and short-term increases in PVR sec-
ondary to hypoxia, acidemia, or increases in airway pres-
sure from mechanical ventilation.77 Furthermore, predic-
tion models cannot model RV-LVAD interactions and the 
direct impact of LVAD hemodynamics on RV function, 
including volume loading of the right-sided circulation 
and geometric changes in the contractile pattern of the 
interventricular septum that affect RV SV.27 Other limita-
tions of risk scores include the heterogeneity of popu-
lations studied and the variability in definitions of RHF 
used.217
The overall clinical profile of the patient tends to be 
the strongest correlate of the failing RV, with greater 
acuity of illness being associated with more severe RHF. 
Severe RHF with diminished systemic perfusion is com-
monly characterized by a state of vasodilation, inter-
stitial fluid leakage, and systemic inflammation, poten-
tially with fever in the absence of infection.218 Profound 
vasodilation can be present and should not be mistaken 
for alternative causes of distributive shock. Refractory 
cardiogenic shock is generally accompanied by severe 
biventricular dysfunction.219 Given the known limita-
tions of echocardiographic and hemodynamic variables, 
no parameter in isolation can adequately identify clini-
cally significant RHF with a high sensitivity or specificity. 
The assessment of RV function requires a multimodal-
ity approach with careful evaluation of trends across 
hemodynamic, hematologic, and imaging parameters. 
Confidence in the clinical diagnosis of RHF increases 
when multiple parameters across modalities collectively 
suggest a state of RVD.
Biomarkers to Assess RV Function
There has been much interest in identifying biomarkers 
such as NT-proBNP (N-terminal pro-BNP) to help guide 
Table 5. Hemodynamic Assessment of RH Function
Hemodynamic Parameters Associated With RV Function
Variable
Calculation
Thresholds Associated With 
Clinical Events in Specific 
Populations
RAP
RAP (or CVP)
>15 mm 
Hg (RHF after LVAD)83,201
Right-to-left 
discordance of 
filling pressures
RAP:PCWP
>0.63 (RHF after LVAD)76
>0.86 (RHF in acute MI)202
PA pulsatility 
index
(PASP−PADP)/RAP
<1.0 (RHF in acute MI)203
<1.85 (RHF after LVAD)204
RV stroke work 
index
(MPAP−CVP)×SVI
<0.25–0.30 mm 
Hg·L/m2 (RHF 
after LVAD)205,206
PVR
(MPAP−PCWP)/CO
>3.6 WU (RHF after LVAD)207
PA compliance
SV/(PASP−PADP)
<2.5 mL/mm 
Hg (RHF in chronic 
HF, RV-PA coupling in PAH)26,115
CO indicates cardiac output; CVP
, central venous pressure; LVAD, left 
ventricular assist device; MI, myocardial infarction; MPAP
, mean pulmonary 
artery pressure; PA, pulmonary artery; PADP
, pulmonary artery diastolic 
pressure; PAH, pulmonary artery hypertension; PASP
, pulmonary artery systolic 
pressure; PCWP
, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; PVR, pulmonary vascular 
resistance; RAP
, right atrial pressure; RH, right-sided heart; RHF, right-sided 
heart failure; RV, right ventricular; SV, stroke volume; SVI, stroke volume index 
(SVI=cardiac index/heart rate); and WU, Woods units.
Adapted with permission from Kapur et al.208 Copyright © 2017, American 
Heart Association.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e598
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
the identification and management of patients with 
HF. The focus, however, has historically been on iden-
tifying patients with LV dysfunction.220 NT-proBNP may 
also be useful in patients with predominantly RHF but 
is relatively nonspecific.118,221 Likewise, elevated BNP is 
observed in both LH and right-sided heart dysfunction 
and is not a reliable marker to distinguish the level of 
dysfunction within each ventricle.222,223 BNP
, however, 
has emerged as a useful marker of prognosis in RHF ac-
companying PAH.224 The reliability of other biomarkers 
such as creatine phosphokinase-MB and troponins is 
less well established in the setting of RHF.225–227 Elevated 
BNP and troponin have adverse prognostic implications 
in the setting of acute PE.228,229
Several small, predominantly exploratory studies 
have examined RV-specific gene expression patterns, 
microRNAs, exosomes, and proteins associated with 
RHF, primarily in patients with CHD and PH.230–238 One 
study used unbiased RNA sequencing to identify several 
differentially expressed genes in patients with RVD.239 Of 
these, STEAP4, SPARCL1, and VSIG4 were differentially 
expressed between the RV and LV, suggesting their role 
as RV-specific biomarkers. Lewis et al240 identified 21 
metabolites that were closely related to hemodynamic 
indexes of RVD using mass spectrometry–based meth-
ods in 11 subjects with PH. Similarly, early animal stud-
ies have identified unique microRNAs associated with 
RV but not LV failure.238,241 Identifying novel RV-specific 
biomarkers may lead to targeted therapies for RHF.242
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF ARHF
Management of ARHF focuses on management of 
volume and preload, myocardial contractility, and RV 
afterload with pharmacotherapy and, if needed, MCS 
(Figure 11).243,244 Abnormalities in the pulmonary circu-
lation and LV filling should be identified as targets for 
reducing RV afterload and augmenting RV function.
Volume Management
Volume management is a critical consideration in ARHF, 
and the volume status of the patient should be deter-
mined on initial examination.245 A primary goal should be 
a reduction in left atrial pressure with an aim of reducing 
congestion and pulsatile RV loading.16 In the absence of 
gross volume overload, evident by findings such as pe-
ripheral edema, careful inspection of the jugular venous 
pulsation should allow the clinician in most cases to de-
termine the presence or absence of elevated CVP
. This 
examination may be confounded by the large A waves of 
atrial contraction against a poorly compliant RV and large 
V waves caused by a poorly compliant RA or significant 
TR. Hemodynamic monitoring with a central venous cath-
eter or PA catheter can be informative if the volume status 
is uncertain or if a patient has hemodynamic instability or 
worsening renal function in response to therapy.210,245
The teaching that ARHF is a preload-dependent 
condition requiring volume loading is overly simplistic. 
Figure 11. Management of acute right-sided heart failure.  
All management must be undertaken with an awareness of the patient’s hemodynamic status. If this status is not clear clini-
cally, then invasive assessment/monitoring should be undertaken. Hemodynamic targets provide rough guidelines for tai-
lored therapy. AV indicates atrial-ventricular; CI, cardiac index; CVP
, central venous pressure; CVVHF, continuous venovenous 
hemofiltration; DCCV, direct current cardioversion; IV, intravenous; LV, left ventricular; MAP
, mean arterial pressure; NS, normal 
saline; PAH, pulmonary arterial hypertension; PCWP
, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; PM, pacemaker; RAP
, right atrial 
pressure; RHC, right-sided heart catheterization; RV, right ventricular; UF, ultrafiltration; and UOP
, urine output.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e599
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Although it may be reasonable to consider a small in-
travenous fluid bolus in the setting of ARHF compli-
cated by hypotension, excess RV preload can lead to 
further clinical deterioration if it results in increased 
RV dilation, TR, RV afterload, and myocardial wall ten-
sion causing ischemia.18,246–248 As the RV dilates, the 
interventricular septum is pushed leftward in diastole. 
Limits of pericardial compliance result in RV constraint, 
causing impaired LV filling and a reduction in CO. This 
ventricular-interdependent effect is often more impor-
tant than impaired RVEF in reducing CO. If the CVP 
exceeds 8 to 12 mm Hg, the patient will likely benefit 
from decongestion to restore more favorable intraven-
tricular loading conditions and normalized interventric-
ular interaction.249 Invasive hemodynamic monitoring is 
very useful to help determine the optimal RAP needed 
to maintain appropriate preload. Decongestion leads 
to RV decompression, reduced ventricular interdepen-
dence, downward displacement of the effective LV dia-
stolic PV curve, improved LV filling, and augmentation 
of SV, CO, and BP.
Diuretics 
Diuretic resistance can be a significant barrier to ef-
fective therapy in the setting of acute decompensa-
tion.250,251 Patients may not respond to high doses of 
intravenous loop diuretics because of a combination 
of factors, including elevated CVP and renal venous 
congestion, hypotension, low CO, and oliguric acute 
kidney injury.252 Although efficacy has not been clear-
ly demonstrated, there is mounting evidence for the 
safety of an early, aggressive high-dose diuretic strat-
egy, with rapid titration in patients failing to respond 
to initial interventions159,160 (Table 6253). It is reasonable 
to consider adding a thiazide diuretic to augment natri-
uresis with intravenous loop diuretics.160,254 Aldosterone 
antagonists may help to maintain potassium homeo-
stasis from potassium losses, although a trial of high- 
versus low-dose spironolactone in acute HF did not lead 
to improved clinical outcomes.255 Likewise, carbonic 
anhydrase inhibitors can improve the hypochloremic 
metabolic alkalosis resulting from aggressive loop and 
thiazide diuresis.
Diuretics should not be held in a hypotensive patient 
who is clearly volume-overloaded. Hypotension in this 
setting is a marker of a critically ill patient, and mea-
sures should be taken to support the BP with vasoactive 
therapies while concomitantly attempting to improve 
clinical congestion with diuretic or renal replacement 
therapies. Hypotension requiring vasoconstrictors and 
persistent poor hemodynamics should prompt strong 
consideration for MCS.
Renal Replacement Therapies
Among patients who fail to respond to escalating di-
uretics therapy, continuous veno-venous hemofiltration 
or ultrafiltration may be needed to mechanically re-
move intravascular volume.245,254 Care should be taken 
not to remove fluid at a rate that exceeds the ability of 
the body to shift extravascular fluid into the intravas-
cular space (the plasma refill rate) because such an ex-
cess is likely to result in new or worsening acute kidney 
dysfunction or injury.249 Markers of hemoconcentration 
include increases in hemoglobin, hematocrit, serum al-
bumin, and total serum protein levels.158,256
Ultrafiltration, which refers to the removal of isoton-
ic fluid from the venous compartment via filtration of 
plasma across a semipermeable membrane, has been 
evaluated for the treatment of acute HF in multiple tri-
als, although not specifically targeting subjects with 
RHF. The UNLOAD trial (Ultrafiltration Versus IV Diuret-
ics in Patients Hospitalized for Acute Decompensated 
Table 6. Stepped Pharmacological Care: Treatment 
Algorithm From the CARRESS-HF Trial
Stepped Pharmacological Care Treatment Algorithm
UO goals to be assessed daily from randomization to 96 h
 UO >5 L/d→reduce current diuretic regimen if desired
 UO 3–5 L/d→continue current diuretic regimen
 UO <3 L/d→see diuretic grid
24-h assessment
 UO recommendations as above
 Advance to next step on grid if UO <3 L/d
48-h assessment
 UO recommendations as above
 Advance to next step on grid if UO <3 L/d
  
Consider dopamine or dobutamine at 2 μg·kg−1·h−1 if SBP <110 mm 
Hg 
and EF <40% or RV systolic dysfunction
  
Consider nitroglycerin or nesiritide if SBP >120 mm 
Hg (any EF) and 
severe symptoms
72- and 96-h assessments
 UO recommendations as above
 Advance to next step on grid if UO <3 L/d
  
Consider dopamine or dobutamine at 2 μg·kg−1·h−1 if SBP <110 mm 
Hg 
and EF <40% or RV systolic dysfunction
  
Consider nitroglycerin or nesiritide if SBP >120 mm 
Hg (any EF) and 
severe symptoms
  
Consider hemodynamic-guided IV therapy, LVAD, dialysis, or 
ultrafiltration crossover
Diuretic Grid
Suggested Dose
Current Dose
Daily Loop Dose
Thiazide
A <80 mg
40 mg IV bolus 5 mg/h
None
B 81–160 mg
80 mg IV bolus+10 mg/h
5 mg metolazone once daily
C 161–240 mg
80 mg IV bolus+20 mg/h
5 mg metolazone twice daily
D >240 mg
80 mg IV bolus+30 mg/h
5 mg metolazone twice daily
CARRESS-HF indicates Cardiorenal Rescue Study in Acute Decompensated 
Heart Failure; EF, ejection fraction; IV, intravenous; Loop, loop diuretic dose 
in furosemide equivalents; LVAD, left ventricular assist device; RV, right 
ventricular; SBP
, systolic blood pressure; and UO, urine output.
Reproduced from Bart et al253 with permission. Copyright © 2012, Elsevier.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e600
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Congestive Heart Failure) showed that early ultrafiltra-
tion produced greater weight and fluid loss compared 
with intravenous diuretics.257 The subsequent CARRESS-
HF trial (Cardiorenal Rescue Study in Acute Decompen-
sated Heart Failure), however, failed to demonstrate a 
benefit of ultrafiltration compared with a prescribed 
stepwise escalation of diuretic therapy based on uri-
nary response in patients with acute HF and worsen-
ing kidney function.253 The diuretic algorithm (Table 6) 
included high doses of loop diuretics via both bolus and 
continuous infusion, the addition of thiazide diuret-
ics, and selected intravenous inotrope and vasodilatory 
therapy. The AVOID-HF trial (Aquapheresis vs Intrave-
nous Diuretics and Hospitalizations for Heart Failure) 
was designed to clarify the role of ultrafiltration in the 
management of acute HF but was terminated prema-
turely after the sponsor withdrew financial support.258 
Whereas ultrafiltration may be helpful for fluid removal, 
available evidence does not support ultrafiltration as a 
first-line therapy for acute HF, and its use should be re-
served for patients with persistent congestion refrac-
tory to escalation of diuretic therapies.
Vasoactive Therapies
Vasoactive medical therapy plays an important role in 
the management of ARHF. Global goals of therapy in-
clude reducing RV afterload, enhancing forward flow, 
and augmenting RV perfusion. There are few clinical 
trials to guide selection of vasoactive agents for ARHF, 
and most available data are from observational se-
ries.248,259,260 Medication choice relies on clinician experi-
ence, expert consensus opinion, and a firm understand-
ing of the mechanism of action of chemotherapeutics 
and cardiovascular physiology. If a patient remains re-
sistant to therapy, a PA catheter may be helpful to mea-
sure biventricular filling pressures and CO.245
Afterload Reduction
Correcting reversible causes of elevated PVR such as hy-
poxia and acidosis is a primary consideration. By relax-
ing vascular tone, vasodilators decrease systolic stress, 
enabling more effective systolic contraction. Nonselec-
tive vasodilators, including intravenous nitroglycerin 
and sodium nitroprusside, decrease both PVR and sys-
temic vascular resistance, augmenting RV and LV SV 
and facilitating decongestion of the pulmonary and 
systemic circulations.261–263 Conceptually, vasodilator 
therapy may also relieve renal venous congestion and 
augment renal perfusion, although this strategy has 
not had positive results when studied in patients with 
acute HF and cardiorenal disease.161 Both nitroglycerin 
and sodium nitroprusside have short half-lives, which is 
advantageous in the event of hypotension.
Partially selective pulmonary vasodilators provide cli-
nicians another option to decrease PVR in an effort to 
improve RV SV.261 For appropriately selected patients, 
available agents include inhaled and parenteral epo-
prostenol and nitric oxide.260 When long-term use of 
pulmonary vasodilatory therapy is being considered, it 
should be recognized that adverse effects have been 
observed in patients with LH disease.264 Inhaled agents 
have the advantage of avoiding systemic hypotension 
and worsening ventilation/perfusion mismatch. In pri-
marily observational studies, short-term use of inhaled 
nitric oxide resulted in lower PVR, increased RV ejection, 
less RV distension, and improved oxygen consumption 
in patients with PH,265–267 RVMI, or PE268,269 and after 
LVAD implantation.270–272 In chronic HF, however, aug-
mented RV CO from inhaled nitric oxide administration 
can precipitate acute pulmonary edema caused by an 
abrupt increase in the filling of an already volume-over-
loaded or poorly compliant LV.273
Oral agents include the phosphodiesterase-5 inhibi-
tors (PDE5is). There are anecdotal reports of the ben-
eficial impact of this class of medications on persistent 
PH after LVAD implantation complicated by ARHF,274 al-
though these findings have been inconsistent.274,275
Augment Contractility
In broad terms, inotropes augment myocardial con-
tractility and augment failing RV SV while reducing 
RV end-diastolic volume and pressure. If the CO and 
BP are inadequate, inotropes should be considered to 
increase forward flow and possibly renal perfusion, 
recognizing the potential for inducing ischemia and ar-
rhythmia.276 Milrinone and dobutamine have combined 
inotropic and vasodilator properties.277–279 Therefore, 
they can precipitate or worsen hypotension, although 
this is less likely if LV preload is adequate, and their use 
results in improved CO. Overall, direct comparisons of 
dobutamine and milrinone have shown similar clinical 
outcomes, including similar hemodynamic efficacy and 
arrhythmogenic potential.280,281
Compared with dobutamine, milrinone leads to 
greater reductions in RV and LV end-diastolic pressure 
because of its potent pulmonary and systemic vasodi-
latory properties.282,283 In addition, milrinone less com-
monly causes tachycardia and may be considered a more 
rational choice in the setting of concomitant β-blocker 
therapy. Patients are also less likely to develop drug toler-
ance during prolonged infusions of milrinone. However, 
milrinone is more likely than dobutamine to provoke 
hypotension, particularly during bolus administration, 
which is subsequently less easily reversed by discontinua-
tion of therapy. Given the long half-life, vasopressor sup-
port may be necessary to counteract vasoplegia in this 
setting. In addition, milrinone is partially renally cleared, 
and the estimated glomerular filtration rate must be con-
sidered in the determination of appropriate dosing.
Dobutamine has the advantage of a short half-life 
with rapid onset and offset of effect when discontin-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e601
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
ued. It has only a modest direct vasodilator effect, me-
diated through β2-adrenergic peripheral vasodilation 
and thus a lower propensity for causing hypotension. 
Accordingly, it also has less effect on RV and LV after-
load. In rare cases, dobutamine can cause an eosino-
philic myocarditis, which may result in further deterio-
ration of cardiac function.284
Although short-term administration of inotropic 
agents leads to hemodynamic improvement, long-term 
administration is associated with increased myocardial 
oxygen consumption and possibly increased mortal-
ity.276,285–288 Clinical guidelines recommend against the 
routine use of these agents in hospitalized patients with 
acute HF.245
Maintain Perfusion
In cases of hypotension, a drug with combined ino-
tropic and vasopressor properties may be necessary to 
maintain adequate perfusion. Studies comparing out-
comes of vasoactive agents are limited.289 Given the 
inherent inotropic properties and a dose-dependent 
vasopressor effect from α1 agonism, dopamine, nor-
epinephrine, and epinephrine are useful adjuncts to 
augment contractility in the setting of significant hy-
potension (systolic BP <80–90 mm Hg).290,291 Norepi-
nephrine, for example, is a potent α1-receptor ago-
nist with weaker β-receptor activity. Its administration 
leads to vasoconstriction with less prominent inotropic 
and chronotropic effects.
Recognizing the downside of increasing ventricular 
afterload, cases of refractory hypotension caused by 
peripheral vasodilation not responding to initial inter-
ventions may require the use of more pure vasopres-
sors such as arginine vasopressin or phenylephrine.292 
Arginine vasopressin causes peripheral vasoconstric-
tion with less impact on PVR and has beneficial effects 
supporting glomerular filtration via selective efferent 
arteriole constriction.292,293 These agents can aug-
ment mean arterial pressure to improve coronary ar-
tery perfusion and to reduce the risk of RV myocardial 
ischemia. Furthermore, supportive care with arginine 
vasopressin may be beneficial to limit the arrhythmo-
genic properties of catecholamines. Attempts should 
be made to wean off these treatments as rapidly as 
possible.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF CRHF
Diuretics and Sodium Restriction
Similar to ARHF, diuretics remain the mainstay of ther-
apy to treat congestion in CRHF.109,245 The intensity of 
diuretic therapy needed may vary according to the 
pathogenesis and severity of RHF, in addition to other 
factors such as coexisting renal disease. Because pa-
tients with RHF can have normal or low LV filling pres-
sures, clinical monitoring is necessary to prevent the 
development of prerenal azotemia and worsening re-
nal function. Akin to ARHF, the goals of volume man-
agement in CRHF are to maintain sufficient preload 
for adequate cardiac filling while providing relief from 
RV volume overload, ventricular interdependence, and 
congestion.
Patients with CRHF frequently require large diuretic 
doses because of neurohormonal activation, includ-
ing upregulation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system axis, resulting in fluid and sodium retention.294 
Congestion leads to increased volume of distribution, 
visceral edema causing impaired drug absorption and 
tubular drug delivery, and rebound sodium absorp-
tion in the hypertrophied distal nephron resulting from 
chronic Na-K-2CL blockade.252,295 Combination therapy 
including loop diuretics with thiazides may be helpful 
to augment natriuresis via sequential nephron blockade 
of sodium reabsorption.160 Compared with furosemide, 
torsemide has more consistent absorption, especially 
during decompensation, and may be a preferred loop 
diuretic in CRHF.295,296
According to the AHA/American College of Cardiol-
ogy HF practice guidelines, sodium restriction is consid-
ered reasonable for patients with symptomatic HF to re-
duce symptoms of congestion.245 This recommendation 
is applicable to patients with symptomatic biventricu-
lar failure or isolated RHF, but it should be noted that 
no large-scale studies have demonstrated the safety 
or efficacy of sodium restriction in these populations. 
Clinicians should consider some degree (ie, <3 g/d) of 
sodium restriction in patients with symptomatic CRHF, 
although insufficiency of data and inconsistency of rec-
ommendations across guidelines make it difficult to 
provide precise recommendations.245,297 Similarly, fluid 
restriction (1.5–2 L/d) is considered reasonable in pa-
tients with refractory congestion and hyponatremia.245
Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System 
Inhibitors, β-Blockers, and Hydralazine
Patients with biventricular dysfunction should be man-
aged according to current practice guidelines for the 
management of chronic HF.245,298 In contrast to clear 
guidelines available for the management of HFrEF, less 
evidence is available to guide therapy of predominant 
RHF syndromes. Small-scale, single-center studies sup-
port the use of β-blockers,299–307 renin-angiotensin-al-
dosterone system inhibitors,308–311 and hydralazine,312 
although results are inconsistent and vary across popu-
lations, depending on the pathogenesis of RHF.313–315 
Early studies with systemic vasodilators, including hy-
dralazine, produced inconsistent hemodynamic benefits 
in patients with PH.312,316,317 These agents were also fre-
quently associated with serious adverse events.318–320 At 
present, the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme in-
hibitors, angiotensin-2 receptor blockers, and β-blockers 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e602
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
is not recommended in patients with PH regardless of 
RHF,321 unless associated with hypertension, coronary 
artery disease, or LHF.109 Prospective trials are also not 
available on the role of mineralocorticoid antagonists, 
including spironolactone, in the setting of RHF caused 
by PH.
Digoxin 
Few studies have evaluated the use of digoxin use for 
CRHF. In early small studies, digoxin administration was 
associated with acute increases in CO or RVEF when ad-
ministered to patients with PH and RVD.322–324 In other 
studies, digoxin in subjects with severe chronic airflow 
obstruction and RVD did not improve exercise capacity 
or RVEF.325 Likewise, a meta-analysis did not find digox-
in to be associated with improvement in RVEF, exercise 
capacity, or New York Heart Association class.326 The 
clinical efficacy of digoxin remains unknown when ad-
ministered long term in patients with RHF.327
Pulmonary Vasodilators
RHF is the final common pathway of PH, and vasodilator 
therapy relieving RV afterload has led to improved out-
comes among group 1 patients with RHF.109,110 Medical 
therapy is also now available for treatment of refractory 
group 4 disease because riociguat, a soluble guanylate 
cyclase stimulator, has been shown to improve exercise 
capacity and PVR in patients with persistent chronic 
thromboembolic PH after pulmonary endarterectomy 
or in patients with inoperable disease.328 Although 
some trials have investigated pulmonary vasodilator 
therapy in patients with LH disease (group 2), these tri-
als have not specifically targeted patients with evidence 
of PH. Comprehensive guidelines for the treatment of 
PH are available elsewhere.109 The SOPRANO trial (Clini-
cal Study to Assess the Efficacy and Safety of Maciten-
tan in Patients With Pulmonary Hypertension After Left 
Ventricular Assist Device Implantation; NCT02554930) 
is actively investigating the potential for macitentan to 
lower PVR after LVAD.
Prostacyclin Analogs
The role of pulmonary vasodilators with prostacyclin 
analogs has been extensively studied in patients with 
group 1 PH, a significant proportion of whom have 
RVD. Among patients with PAH, intravenous epopro-
stenol has long-term clinical benefits, including im-
proved survival and functional capacity.329,330 Compared 
with epoprostenol, other prostacyclin analogs, includ-
ing treprostinil and iloprost, are more easily adminis-
tered, have longer half-lives, and are able to be admin-
istered subcutaneously or by inhalation, with similar 
pharmacological actions and comparable hemodynam-
ic effects. These agents also improve exercise tolerance 
and HRQoL in group 1 PH.331–336 Parenteral prostanoids, 
however, remain the first-line therapy for patients with 
advanced disease.109,329
In contrast, epoprostenol resulted in increased mor-
tality when used to treat patients with LHF. A study of 
patients with severe HFrEF was terminated early because 
of a strong signal of decreased survival in patients treat-
ed with epoprostenol, despite increases in cardiac index 
and decreases in PCWP
.264 Similarly, epoprostenol was 
not associated with improvement in distance walked or 
HRQoL in this population. The use of prostacyclin ana-
logs is not recommended to treat group 2 PH.109
Phosphodiesterase-5 Inhibitors
Oral PDE5is, including sildenafil and tadalafil, are estab-
lished, effective, and well-tolerated therapy in patients 
with group 1 PH, either alone or as combination thera-
py with other vasodilators.337–340 PDE5is are associated 
with improvements in pulmonary vascular remodeling, 
improvements in RV contractility, and antiproliferative 
effects. They are also associated with improvements in 
exercise capacity and reduced rates of clinical events 
in patients with group 1 PH.337–345 These trials did not 
specifically select patients with RHF.
In smaller studies, PDE5i treatment has been dem-
onstrated to improve exercise capacity, exercise hemo-
dynamics, and HRQoL in patients with HFrEF and sec-
ondary PH (group 2)346–349; however, these results await 
validation in large-scale multicenter randomized clinical 
trials. A multicenter trial of PDE5i treatment in patients 
with HFpEF failed to demonstrate improvement in exer-
cise capacity or clinical status.350 This trial did not specif-
ically select patients with evidence of PH or RHF. These 
agents are well tolerated and generally not associated 
with clinically significant reductions in BP
, although 
decreases in BP may be accentuated by concomitant 
medications such as nitrates. This combination is specif-
ically contraindicated. Although treatment with PDE5is 
is beneficial in patients with group 1 PH, their role in 
patients with isolated RHF or PH caused by LH disease 
remains uncertain.
Endothelin Receptor Antagonists
Endothelin-1, a potent vasoconstrictor, is implicated in 
the pathogenesis of PAH, and endothelin receptor an-
tagonists targeting endothelin receptors type A and B 
have been extensively studied in group 1 PH. Whereas 
these studies did not explicitly select patients with PH 
with RHF, endothelin receptor antagonists are nonethe-
less associated with improvements in HF symptoms, 
exercise capacity, hemodynamics, and time to clinical 
worsening in group 1 patients.351–357
Phase II studies of endothelin receptor antagonist 
administration in patients with HFrEF have documented 
short-term hemodynamic benefits.358,359 Unfortunately, 
phase III HFrEF trials failed to demonstrate improve-
ments in morbidity or mortality in this population, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e603
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
and increases in hepatic aminotransferases were re-
ported.360,361 Because of hepatic congestion commonly 
seen in RHF, monitoring of liver function should be per-
formed routinely in patients receiving endothelin recep-
tor antagonist therapy.
Management of CRHF in CHD
Despite the significant contribution of RHF to prema-
ture morbidity and mortality in the acute CHD popula-
tion, no adequately powered clinical trials have been 
completed to elucidate the role of medical therapies in 
this population. Furthermore, although many patients 
with acute CHD have RHF, these patients have typically 
been excluded from adult HF clinical trials. Thus, most 
standard HF therapies must be regarded as LV specific 
until proven otherwise. RHF resulting from pressure and 
volume loading may be seen after repair of TOF, pul-
monary atresia, Ebstein anomaly, and pulmonary val-
votomy for congenital PS.14 A thorough evaluation at a 
center specializing in HF of patients with CHD is recom-
mended to identify and correct any hemodynamically-
significant lesions contributing to RHF.362 Specific pop-
ulations of patients with CHD with RHF are reviewed 
briefly, including those with systemic RVD (in whom the 
RV is subaortic) in patients with a 2-ventricle circulation, 
those with a single-ventricle Fontan palliation circula-
tion in whom the single ventricle is of RV morphology, 
and patients with a subpulmonary RV who are at risk 
for RV failure resulting from chronic PS or insufficiency. 
Comprehensive guidelines for the management of CHD 
are available elsewhere.363,364
Patients with a systemic RV generally include those 
who have D-TGA that has been corrected with an atrial 
switch (Mustard or Senning) procedure or those with 
congenitally corrected L-TGA. A major determinant of 
survival in patients with a systemic RV is progressive 
systolic dysfunction of the systemic ventricle, which 
is often associated with progressive atrial-ventricular 
(tricuspid) valve regurgitation.147 Worsening atrial-
ventricular regurgitation can lead to deterioration in 
systemic ventricular function.365,366 Atrial-ventricular 
valve repair or replacement can improve the course 
of disease, particularly if performed before a decline 
in systemic RVEF.364,367,368 Cardiac resynchronization 
therapy has also been proposed in patients with CHD 
and systemic RVD.369–371 These preliminary studies 
have demonstrated markers of clinical improvement 
and improvement in RV function, although larger, 
longer-term studies are necessary. Few studies have 
addressed the role of standard HF therapies in this 
population. Given the physiological and anatomic dif-
ferences in the RV, the response of the RV to standard 
HF therapies remains uncertain.
A number of small single-center reports suggest a 
potential clinical benefit of β-blockade in patients with 
systemic RV, including improvement in symptoms and 
functional capacity, less systemic atrial-ventricular valve 
regurgitation, and potential beneficial effects of reverse 
RV remodeling.301,372,373 However, in the largest clinical 
trial to date, carvedilol did not improve HF outcomes or 
echocardiographic measures of ventricular function in 
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study 
of children with systolic HF, including those with a sys-
temic RV.374 Indeed, there was instead a nonsignificant 
trend toward worsening of ventricular function in those 
patients who had a systemic RV and were treated with 
the β-blocker. Unfortunately, this study was not pow-
ered to fully address this question. Thus, routine use of 
β-blocker therapy cannot at this time be recommended 
in patients with systemic RVD375 and, if used, should be 
done so with caution. Furthermore, given an increased 
risk of sinus node dysfunction after atrial switch proce-
dures in patients with D-TGA and a risk of heart block 
in those with L-TGA, β-blocker use requires close obser-
vation in these populations.362
There have been a number of small prospective ran-
domized trials of angiotensin-2 receptor blocker311,376 
and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor309,315,377 
administration in patients a systemic RV secondary to 
D-TGA or L-TGA. These trials have demonstrated mixed 
results and generally have not demonstrated a clear 
benefit or renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhi-
bition in this population.362 In a study of 26 patients 
with atrial switch repair for D-TGA, randomization to 
eplerenone was not associated with improvement in 
MRI parameters or RV function, although there was a 
trend toward improvement in biomarkers of collagen 
turnover.378
Patients with a single-ventricle circulation in whom 
the single ventricle is of RV morphology are at greater 
risk of HF than patients whose single ventricles are of 
LV morphology.379 Manifestations of a failing Fontan cir-
cuit are variable and may include systemic venous con-
gestion, protein-losing enteropathy, plastic bronchitis, 
and cirrhosis. It is important to evaluate for potentially 
reversible conditions of HF in patients with a Fontan op-
eration such as a correctable mechanical obstruction.362 
Even small pressure gradients in the low-pressure Fon-
tan circuit can be deleterious to the single-ventricle 
circulation. Diuretics remain the mainstay therapy. In 
a multicenter randomized trial in infants with a single 
ventricle, enalapril did not improve ventricular func-
tion, HF severity, or somatic growth, although the 
duration of follow-up was too short to assess longer-
term benefits.380 Similarly, a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled crossover trial of enalapril did not 
demonstrate improvement in functional capacity or he-
modynamic measurements.381 A crossover trial of oral 
sildenafil in patients with a Fontan circulation likewise 
did not lead to increased maximal oxygen consump-
tion, although ventilatory efficiency was improved.382 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e604
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Small series of patients with protein-losing enteropathy 
report a benefit of mineralocorticoid receptor antago-
nism with high-dose spironolactone.383,384 In a separate 
report, short-term therapy with spironolactone led to 
evidence of improved endothelial function and im-
provement in cytokine profiles in patients with a Fontan 
operation.385 Data, however, remain limited.
Finally, in patients with a pulmonary RV and CHD, 
for example, those after repair of TOF with a transan-
nular patch or after repair of pulmonary atresia with 
an RV-PA conduit, the risk of RV dilation and RV failure 
persists. Few studies have shown definitive efficacy of 
any of the standard heart rate therapies in this patient 
population. In a study of adults with repaired TOF, the 
β-blocker bisoprolol did not improve echocardiographic 
or MRI parameters of RV size and function,386 and in a 
randomized trial of the angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitor ramipril in repaired TOF and pulmonary regur-
gitation, RVEF was not increased, although in a sub-
group of patients with restrictive RV physiology, ramipril 
decreased LV end-systolic volume index and increased 
LVEF.387
In summary, current data do not support the rou-
tine administration of standard HF drug therapies to 
patients with CHD with either a single RV or systemic 
RV or in patients with a pulmonary RV at risk for RV 
failure. Patients with CHD and HF should be cared for 
by clinicians with specific expertise in HF in the set-
ting of CHD. Select patients may be considered for a 
trial of these LV-specific HF therapies with close moni-
toring in these settings.238,388,389 Ultimately, many ap-
propriately selected patients with refractory symptoms 
require consideration for heart or heart-lung trans-
plantation.363
MCS AND TRANSPLANTATION  
FOR RHF
MCS is reserved for patients refractory to optimal medi-
cal management of acute or chronic RHF.327 Appropri-
ate timing of intervention to prevent delays in institut-
ing MCS therapy is critical to its success in optimizing 
patient outcomes and preventing unnecessary morbid-
ity and mortality. MCS is used for bridge to recovery; 
bridge to heart, lung, or heart-lung transplantation; or, 
in unique cases, as destination therapy (ie, permanent 
use). Recent literature suggests that 42% to 75% of 
patients with acute forms of RHF may recover sufficient 
function to allow MCS device explantation.390–392 Thus, 
appropriate application of MCS is essential to maximize 
the possibility of myocardial recovery. The appropri-
ate type of MCS device used for RHF is determined by 
whether the pathogenesis is a primary RV insult or is 
the result of disease of the pulmonary vasculature or LV 
(Figure 12). Typically, primary pathogeneses of the RV 
lend themselves to application with temporary implant-
able or percutaneous VADs.
ARHF secondary to obstructive diseases of the pul-
monary vasculature may be more appropriately treated 
with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) 
as opposed to an RVAD because increased pulmonary 
blood flow from an RVAD will further increase PAP
.393 
There is a risk that when PH is present, excessive fur-
ther increase in PAP could precipitate pulmonary hem-
orrhage. ARHF caused by LHF is often more suitably 
treated with temporary or durable MCS support of the 
LV, alongside temporary or durable RV support if need-
ed (biventricular assist device support). Not all patients 
with biventricular dysfunction need biventricular sup-
port. However, determining which patients can be ade-
quately supported by isolated LV support is challenging 
Figure 12. Mechanical circulatory support options 
based on the pathogenesis of right ventricular (RV) 
failure.  
A challenge in the management of patients with biventricu-
lar dysfunction is discriminating between patients who have 
primary RV involvement necessitating true biventricular sup-
port and those with right-sided heart failure caused primar-
ily by left-sided heart disease. Among this latter group, left 
ventricular (LV) mechanical circulatory support alone may 
provide adequate cardiac support given secondary unloading 
of the RV after LV decompression. Clinician experience and 
estimations of the probability of recovery guide decisions on 
the need for durable vs temporary support devices. The pres-
ence of pulmonary disease also influences device selection. 
BiVAD indicates biventricular assist device; ECMO, extracor-
poreal membrane support; LVAD, left ventricular assist device 
and RVAD, right ventricular assist device.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e605
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
and requires the expert review of a multidisciplinary HF 
team experienced with MCS. Patients with biventricu-
lar dysfunction who receive isolated LV support should 
be closely monitored for clinical deterioration. Evidence 
of worsening RHF should lead to rapid deployment of 
RV mechanical support. Common indications for right-
sided MCS use in ARHF include ARHF after LVAD, heart 
transplantation, RVMI, and myocarditis.
Temporary Support
Temporary MCS device options include newer percuta-
neous devices designed specifically for RV support and 
include the Impella RP (Abiomed Inc, Danvers, MA)394 
and TandemHeart pVAD395–397 with the PROTEK Duo398 
cannula (TandemLife, Inc, Pittsburgh, PA) (Figure 13). 
The Impella RP is a microaxial temporary extracorporeal 
VAD that is placed percutaneously through the femoral 
vein and positioned with the distal tip in the PA. The 
microaxial pump positioned within the catheter drains 
blood from the RA and pumps it into the PA. The ef-
ficacy and safety of this device were investigated in 
RECOVER RIGHT (The Use of Impella RP Support System 
in Patients With Right Heart Failure: A Clinical Safety 
and Probable Benefit Study), a prospective, multicenter, 
single-arm outcomes trial.394 Two groups of patients 
with RHF were enrolled, the first after LVAD placement 
and the second consisting of a mixture of patients af-
ter cardiotomy, after transplantation, and with acute 
MI. The primary outcome was a combined end point 
of either survival at 30 days or hospital discharge or 
survival to next therapy (ie, transplantation or surgical 
RVAD). Thirty patients were enrolled with 73% survival 
to discharge. The major complication was postopera-
tive bleeding, which occurred in 36.6% of patients.
The PROTEK Duo398 cannula is a dual-lumen coaxial 
cannula positioned, via the internal jugular vein, with 
its distal tip in the PA and connected to an extracorpo-
real centrifugal blood pump. Because of its internal jug-
ular cannulation site, this configuration allows ambula-
tion during support. These devices provide an option 
for MCS because of the ease of device insertion and 
removal, and they obviate the need for surgical ster-
notomy. These devices have corresponding variations 
designed specifically to support the LV so that biventric-
ular assist device support can be achieved completely 
with a percutaneous option.399,400
ECMO represents a viable alternative for acute MCS 
for ARHF that is either caused by primary RVD or is a 
consequence of PA disease, including in the presence of 
systemic oxygen desaturation.401 There has been a sig-
nificant adoption of ECMO in adults.402 The benefits of 
ECMO are that it can be applied percutaneously at the 
bedside for initiation of emergent support, it provides 
biventricular support, and it addresses pathogeneses 
of the pulmonary system that are not addressed with 
isolated RV support. The more typical support configu-
ration includes femoral venous drainage and arterial 
outflow to the femoral artery. This configuration can 
be achieved either percutaneously or by surgical pro-
cedure. Other configurations, including internal jugular 
cannulation for venous drainage and arterial outflow 
to the axillary artery, are also feasible to facilitate am-
bulation.401 An RVAD-like configuration with RA inflow 
to PA outflow with an oxygenator has also been de-
scribed. The complications of ECMO have been well 
chronicled in the literature.401,403
Intermediate Support
Surgical options of intermediate-term RV support re-
main important, particularly for patients experiencing 
postcardiotomy failure to wean from cardiopulmo-
nary bypass after open heart surgery, including heart 
transplantation, or for ARHF after implantation of a 
durable LVAD.76,216,392,404,405 Surgical implantation of an 
RVAD involves cannulation of the RA or RV for venous 
drainage and PA for arterial outflow. The cannulas are 
Figure 13. Mechanical circulatory support options for acute right ventricular (RV) support.  
LA indicates left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RVAD, right ventricular assist device; and VA-
ECMO, veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Adapted with permission from Kapur et al.208 Copyright © 2017, 
American Heart Association.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e606
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
connected to an extracorporeal centrifugal flow pump 
such as the CentriMag (Abbott Medical, Abbott Park, 
IL).392,406 Numerous reports detailing the use of a surgi-
cally implanted temporary RVAD after LVAD have dem-
onstrated that this strategy is effective in supporting 
the patient through severe ARHF during the postop-
erative period. However, patients requiring RVAD af-
ter implantation of a durable LVAD have consistently 
worse outcomes related to bleeding complications and 
hepatic and renal dysfunction compared with those 
who do not need an RVAD.76,205,214 Although effective, 
a surgical RVAD typically requires a repeat sternotomy 
if not placed at the same time as the LVAD, and a sec-
ond surgery is usually required to remove the device at 
the time of RV recovery.
Long-Term Support
Long-term, durable MCS device options for irrecover-
able forms of RHF are limited, and destination therapy 
for chronic advanced RHF is not well studied.407 Wheth-
er MCS with newer, durable, implantable continuous-
flow VADs could be of benefit in patients with refrac-
tory CRHF with a contraindication to transplantation is 
unknown. The off-label use of durable MCS devices in 
the setting of RHF caused by chronic PH is controver-
sial, and rigorous data on its efficacy in this setting are 
lacking.
Typically, durable devices used for long-term or per-
manent RV support have been designed for LV support, 
and their use for the RV represents an off-label or un-
approved indication. The most frequently used durable 
VAD for chronic RV support has been the HeartWare 
HVAD (Medtronic, Inc, Minneapolis, MN), which is a 
small, continuous-flow centrifugal device with mag-
netic and hydrodynamic levitation of the internal im-
pellor.408 Small, single-center observational series have 
demonstrated successful application of this device for 
long-term RV support. Typically, the durable RVAD has 
been used in conjunction with a durable LVAD. The in-
flow cannula of the device has been positioned within 
the diaphragmatic surface of the RV, anterior surface 
of the RV, or RA, with outflow connected to the PA. 
However, the use of durable continuous-flow rotary 
pumps for RV support raises many issues of feasibility, 
including the increased risk of thrombus generated in 
the venous system and embolizing to the pump.
The total artificial heart (TAH) represents an alter-
native therapy for biventricular support for the failing 
RV and LV. The most used TAH is the Syncardia TAH-
t (Syncardia Systems, LLC, Tucson, AZ).408,409 The Syn-
cardia TAH-t is a pneumatically-driven pulsatile device 
currently approved for bridge to transplantation in the 
United States. The device is available in 50- and 70-cm 
sizes and is being investigated for destination therapy 
indication. The use of the TAH may be advantageous 
over biventricular assist device support options in clini-
cal situations such as ARVC, restrictive cardiomyopa-
thies, biventricular failure with significant intraventricu-
lar thrombus burden, very large body size, and failed 
transplantation.408
Transplantation
In patients with advanced refractory CRHF, transplan-
tation can be considered after the exclusion of all re-
versible causes of CRHF and careful assessment of 
comorbidities, including cachexia, cardiac cirrhosis, 
chronic kidney disease, protein malnutrition, and other 
potential contraindications to transplantation. In pa-
tients with PH and CRHF (RAP >15 mm 
Hg and a cardi-
ac index <2.0 L·min−1·m−2), prognosis is generally poor, 
and referral for transplantation should be considered. 
In carefully selected patients with CRHF from severe 
pulmonary vascular disease, heart-lung or double-lung 
transplantation can be considered.18,110,363,410,411
Outcomes for isolated heart transplantation are 
generally excellent, and 1-year survival is ≈90% in the 
most recent era for all patients according to registry 
data.410,412 However, the presence of RVAD support be-
fore heart transplantation is associated with a relative 
mortality hazard of 3.03 after transplantation.410 Simi-
larly, outcomes have improved after lung transplanta-
tion, with a 1-year survival of ≈84% for all patients re-
ported in the most recent era.411
Palliative Interventions
Balloon atrial septostomy (BAS) represents a percuta-
neous option to treat RHF caused by severe PH, creat-
ing a surgical right-to-left shunt to unload the RV. The 
associated decrease in systemic oxygenation must be 
outweighed by the increased oxygen delivery mediated 
by the increased CO. BAS is typically used as a bridge to 
lung transplantation or as a palliative measure in refrac-
tory PH.413 Preoperative optimization of filling pressures 
is crucial, and periprocedural inotropic support may be 
necessary. BAS is contraindicated in severe RHF and 
should not be offered to patients with RAP >20 mm 
Hg, 
significant hypoxemia (<90% on room air), or PVR in-
dex >4400 dynes·s·cm−5/m2. Surgical shunt placement 
between the left PA and descending aorta (Potts shunt) 
has also been described as a palliative intervention for 
refractory PH.414
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF 
VALVULAR LESIONS
TV Surgery
TR is a common valve disorder; however, data clarify-
ing indications for interventions or outcomes after TV 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e607
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
repair or replacement are less robust compared with 
disorders of the aortic or mitral valves. Severe TR (ef-
fective regurgitant orifice >0.4 cm2) can result in sig-
nificant symptoms and mortality but remains under-
treated.101,415,416 Despite the morbidity and mortality 
associated with significant TR, patients are rarely re-
ferred for isolated surgical intervention, and most sur-
geries of the TV are performed in the context of other 
planned cardiac procedures. Patients with severe TR 
and signs or symptoms of CRHF are classified as having 
stage D TV disease.415 Recent data have demonstrated 
that isolated TV surgery can be performed with accept-
able risk if patients undergo intervention before the 
onset of advanced HF or severe RVD.417 Patients with 
RHF caused by severe TR from implantable cardiovert-
er-defibrillator or pacemaker leads should also be con-
sidered for surgical evaluation.418
In the setting of concomitant valve disease, severe 
TR of either a primary or functional nature may not 
improve after treatment of the left-sided valve lesions 
and reduction of RV afterload.416 The addition of TV re-
pair during surgery for left-sided valve disease does not 
add appreciable risk, whereas reoperation for severe, 
isolated TR after left-sided valve surgery is associated 
with a perioperative mortality rate of up to 25%.416 
These observations have prompted clinicians toward a 
higher rate of TV intervention during surgery for left-
sided valve disease. Moderate or even mild degrees of 
functional TR left uncorrected at the time of left-sided 
valve surgery may progress over time in approximately 
a quarter of patients and result in reduced long-term 
functional outcome and survival.419 Risk factors for per-
sistence or progression of TR include TV annular dila-
tation >40 mm or 21 mm/m2 on transthoracic echo-
cardiogram, significant RVD or dilatation, significant 
tricuspid leaflet tethering, atrial fibrillation or PH at the 
time of left-sided valve surgery, rheumatic or functional 
origin of the mitral disease, or history of RHF.419
The overwhelming majority of cases requiring sur-
gery for TR are amenable to repair. Singh et al420 demon-
strated that TV repair is associated with improved peri-
operative, midterm, and event-free survival compared 
with TV replacement for patients with organic tricuspid 
disease. Repair was associated with greater recurrence 
of TR, although reoperation rates and functional class 
were similar. Thus, repair should be pursued whenever 
possible.420 Repair should include an annuloplasty ring 
because it is associated with improved survival and 
event-free survival compared with other techniques not 
using an annuloplasty ring (eg, De Vega technique).421 
The durability of TV repair may be limited, even in cir-
cumstances when an annuloplasty ring is used, because 
of increased preoperative TV leaflet tethering height 
and area, low LVEF, and increased RV pressure. These 
factors are associated with a greater degree of TR dur-
ing follow-up.421 Patients with significant tethering, sig-
nificant distortion of the TV, significant RVD, or severe 
PH may require TV replacement to avoid long-term fail-
ure of repair and worse clinical outcome. Percutaneous 
options for TV replacement may become available in 
the future.99,422 Although the impact of concomitant TV 
repair at the time of LVAD implantation on long-term 
outcomes remains poorly defined, anecdotally, most 
operators err toward addressing moderate or worse TR 
at the time of LVAD surgery.423–425 Recommendations 
from the AHA/American College of Cardiology guide-
line for TV surgery are provided in Figure 14.415
Tricuspid Stenosis
Surgery for severe tricuspid stenosis (TS) is generally 
performed in conjunction with surgery for left-sided 
valve disease, most commonly mitral valve stenosis. 
TS is usually caused by rheumatic heart disease; car-
cinoid disease is a less common cause. TV surgery for 
relief of symptomatic TS is preferred over percutane-
ous balloon tricuspid commissurotomy because most 
cases of severe TS have important concomitant TR 
(rheumatic, carcinoid, or congenital). Indications for 
surgery for TS include stage C or D TS characterized 
by T1/2 ≥190 milliseconds and valve area <1.0 cm2 
with or without the presence of symptoms.415 Repair 
for primary TS is feasible but has a higher rate of need 
for reoperation.
Pulmonary Insufficiency
Significant PV regurgitation (PR) is uncommon but is 
most typically observed after surgery for TOF or other 
congenital lesions. Residual PR after repair of TOF is 
initially well tolerated but eventually contributes to RV 
enlargement, RVD, decreased exercise tolerance, in-
creased incidence of arrhythmias, and increased risk 
of sudden death.363,426,427 PR is less commonly seen 
in association with infective endocarditis or carcinoid 
syndrome. Secondary PR after long-standing PH and 
annular dilation is uncommon. Primary treatment 
of PR in this setting should focus on the cause(s) of 
 
elevated PAP.
Surgery for PR is considered when symptoms or 
signs of RVD have occurred and PR is severe. Surgery 
is generally recommended for asymptomatic severe PR 
in the setting of severe RV dilation or dysfunction (car-
diac MRI–derived RV end-diastolic volume index >150 
mL/m2, RV end-systolic volume index >80 mL/m2, RVEF 
<47%) or symptomatic atrial and ventricular arrhyth-
mias.363,426,427 Current guidelines support surgery for se-
vere PR along with (1) moderate to severe RVD (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence B), (2) moderate to severe RV 
enlargement (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B), (3) symp-
tomatic or sustained atrial and ventricular arrhythmias 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence C), or (4) moderate to se-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e608
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
vere TR (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B). Transcatheter 
PV replacement is also now possible. In patients with 
concomitant severe TR undergoing transcatheter PV re-
placement, transcatheter PV replacement resulted in a 
clinically relevant reduction in TR that persisted over 5 
years of follow-up.428
Pulmonic Stenosis
PS is typically caused by CHD. Acquired types are less 
common and include carcinoid disease or obstructing 
vegetations from endocarditis or obstructing tumors. 
PS may be treated with either percutaneous balloon PV 
commissurotomy or valve replacement. Surgical ther-
apy, as opposed to percutaneous therapies, is recom-
mended for patients with severe PS and associated hy-
poplastic pulmonary annulus, severe PR, subvalvular PS, 
or supravalvular PS. Surgical therapy is also generally 
preferred for a dysplastic PV or when there is associated 
severe TR or the need for a surgical Maze procedure 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).363
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE 
DIRECTIONS
We must continue to enhance our understanding of 
pathophysiology. It is remarkable how misunderstood 
are some basic concepts of right-sided heart dysfunc-
tion among practicing clinicians and the impact that 
such misunderstanding can have on appropriate pa-
tient management. Acute right-sided heart syndromes 
such as acute RV infarction or acute PE must be rec-
ognized principally as syndromes of impaired LH filling 
caused by direct ventricular interdependence to avoid 
excessive volume administration and to turn more 
rapidly to RV mechanical unloading and support. Like-
wise, central and renal venous engorgement must be 
recognized as at least as important as impaired for-
ward output in the pathogenesis of the cardiorenal 
syndrome.
Our management of these conditions remains subop-
timal, and new therapies, pharmacological and device 
based, should be sought. For example, as we continue 
to grow in our understanding of the interdependency 
of LH function, right-sided heart function, and renal he-
modynamics, it may be possible to develop drugs and 
devices tailored to alleviation of diuretic resistance and 
the cardiorenal syndrome. Ultimately, however, it may 
be time that matters most because unrecognized and 
undertreated RHF inevitably results in sequelae of end-
organ damage caused by chronic congestion and acute 
malperfusion. Early identification is critical to improve 
care targeting this complex syndrome, which remains 
frequently misjudged given the diverse pathways and 
pathological processes leading to its condition.
Figure 14. Indications for surgery for tricuspid regurgitation (TR).  
Tricuspid annular (TA) dilation is defined by >40 mm on transthoracic echocardiography (>21 mm/m2) or >70 mm on direct 
intraoperative measurement. LV indicates left ventricular; PHTN, pulmonary hypertension; RV, right ventricular; TV, tricuspid 
valve; and TVR, tricuspid valve replacement. Reproduced with permission from Nishimura et al.415 Copyright © 2014, American 
Heart Association.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e609
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
We should improve our ability to distinguish among 
RHF caused by LHF, pulmonary vascular obstructive dis-
ease, and intrinsic RV pathology through novel hemody-
namic indexes and biomarkers of load-dependent and 
load-independent forms of RHF. Although we currently 
define pulmonary vascular obstruction as either fixed or 
reversible, perhaps the notion of fixed pathology mere-
ly connotes our pathophysiological naiveté. Improved 
understanding of the pathobiology of pulmonary mi-
crovascular disease will lead us to novel approaches for 
reversing fixed pathology.
Although we have come a long way in RV imag-
ing, more advances are warranted, particularly in re-
lating measures of systolic and diastolic performance 
to indexes of load. Although we have made enormous 
strides in advanced MCS, we continue to struggle with 
patients who have biventricular disease. There is room 
for considerable advance in biventricular support tech-
nologies, particularly durable devices with applicability 
to broader patient populations.
We have seen progressive advances in our under-
standing and managing of RHF, but we have much 
more to learn. The future holds many diagnostic and 
therapeutic advances that will markedly expand our 
ability to tackle these many complex clinical challenges.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual or po-
tential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship or 
a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. 
Specifically, all members of the writing group are required to complete and 
submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that might be 
perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart Association Science 
Advisory and Coordinating Committee on October 27, 2017, and the American 
Heart Association Executive Committee on December 11, 2017. A copy of the 
document is available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using either 
“Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse by Topic” area. To purchase 
additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as 
follows: Konstam MA, Kiernan MS, Bernstein D, Bozkurt B, Jacob M, Kapur 
NK, Kociol RD, Lewis EF, Mehra MR, Pagani FD, Raval AN, Ward C; on behalf of 
the American Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Car-
diovascular Disease in the Young; and Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and 
Anesthesia. Evaluation and management of right-sided heart failure: a scientific 
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2018;137:e578–
e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560.
The expert peer review of AHA-commissioned documents (eg, scientific 
statements, clinical practice guidelines, systematic reviews) is conducted by the 
AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines 
development, visit http://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guide-
lines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/
or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express permis-
sion of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission 
are located at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permission-
Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright Permissions 
 
Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
Disclosures
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other Research Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Marvin A. Konstam
Tufts Medical 
Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Michael S. Kiernan
Tufts Medical 
Center
None
None
None
None
None
Abbott*; 
Medtronic*
None
Daniel Bernstein
Stanford 
University
Department of 
Defense (grant to 
explore mechanisms 
of defective 
angiogenesis in 
right ventricular 
failure)†
None
None
None
Regencor*
None
None
Biykem Bozkurt
Baylor College 
of Medicine and 
MEDVAMC
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Miriam Jacob
Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation Heart 
and Vascular 
Institute
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Navin K. Kapur
Tufts Medical 
Center
None
Abiomed†; Cardiac 
Assist†; St. Jude (preclinical 
research)†; Maquet 
(translational research)†
Abiomed†; 
Heartware*; 
Maquet*; 
St. Jude*
None
None
Abiomed*; 
Cardiac Assist*; 
Maquet*; St. 
Jude*
None
Robb D. Kociol
Beth Israel 
Deaconess 
Medical Center
DCRI (steering 
committee–
connect–HF)*
HFSA (executive board, 
speaker at meeting) *
AHA 
spotlight 
series–HF*
None
None
None
None
Eldrin F. Lewis
Brigham & 
Women’s Hospital
Amgen†; Novartis†; 
Sanofi†
None
None
None
None
Novartis†
None
(Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e610
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Mandeep R. Mehra
Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital 
and Harvard 
Medical School
None
Heart Failure Society of 
America (president)*; 
International Society 
for Heart and Lung 
Transplantation (editor-
in-chief of the Journal 
of Heart and Lung 
Transplantation)†
None
None
NuPulse, 
Inc†
Abbott*; 
Johnson and 
Johnson 
(Janssen)*; 
Medtronic*; 
Mesoblast*;
Portola*
None
Francis D. Pagani
University of 
Michigan Health 
System Cardiac 
Surgery
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Amish N. Raval
University of 
Wisconsin
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Carey Ward
Duke University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on 
the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if 
(a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the 
voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than 
“significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/Advisory 
Board
Other
Robert P
. 
Frantz
Mayo Clinic
None
None
None
None
None
Actelion 
(unpaid)*; Arena 
Pharmaceuticals*; 
Bayer (unpaid)*; 
Abbott*; Novartis*; 
United Therapeutics 
(unpaid)*
None
Jason N. Katz
University of 
North Carolina
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Robert L. 
Kormos
University of 
Pittsburgh
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Gregory D. 
Lewis
Massachusetts 
General Hospital
NHLBI (investigation of 
markers of right ventricular 
dysfunction)†; NHLBI 
(evaluation of metabolic 
disease in relation to 
pulmonary hypertension in
heart failure)*
Bayer 
(clinical trial 
research)†
None
None
None
Ironwood*
None
Myung Park
Houston 
Methodist 
DeBakey Heart & 
Vascular Center
None
None
Bayer*
None
None
Actelion*; Bayer*
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more 
during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns 
$10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Writing Group Disclosures Continued
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other Research Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e611
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
REFERENCES
 1. Mehra MR, Park MH, Landzberg MJ, Lala A, Waxman AB; International 
Right Heart Failure Foundation Scientific Working Group. Right heart 
failure: toward a common language. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014;33: 
123–126. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2013.10.015.
 2. Haddad F, Hunt SA, Rosenthal DN, Murphy DJ. Right ventricular function 
in cardiovascular disease, part I: anatomy, physiology, aging, and function-
al assessment of the right ventricle. Circulation. 2008;117:1436–1448. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.653576.
 3. Sheehan F, Redington A. The right ventricle: anatomy, physiology and clini-
cal imaging. Heart. 2008;94:1510–1515. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2007.132779.
 4. Zaffran S, Kelly RG, Meilhac SM, Buckingham ME, Brown NA. Right 
ventricular myocardium derives from the anterior heart field. Circ Res. 
2004;95:261–268. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000136815.73623.BE.
 5. Dyer LA, Kirby ML. The role of secondary heart field in cardiac develop-
ment. Dev Biol. 2009;336:137–144. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.009.
 6. Francou A, Saint-Michel E, Mesbah K, Théveniau-Ruissy M, Rana MS, 
Christoffels VM, Kelly RG. Second heart field cardiac progenitor cells in 
the early mouse embryo. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013;1833:795–798. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.10.003.
 7. Gittenberger-de Groot AC, Bartelings MM, Deruiter MC, Poelmann RE. 
Basics of cardiac development for the understanding of congenital heart 
malformations. Pediatr Res. 2005;57:169–176.
 8. Kelly RG, Buckingham ME, Moorman AF. Heart fields and cardiac mor-
phogenesis. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2014;4:a015750XXX. doi: 
10.1101/cshperspect.a015750.
 9. Xin M, Olson EN, Bassel-Duby R. Mending broken hearts: cardiac develop-
ment as a basis for adult heart regeneration and repair. Nat Rev Mol Cell 
Biol. 2013;14:529–541. doi: 10.1038/nrm3619.
 10. Buckberg G, Hoffman JI. Right ventricular architecture responsible for 
mechanical performance: unifying role of ventricular septum. J Thorac 
 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;148:3166–3171.e4.
 11. James TN. Anatomy of the crista supraventricularis: its importance for 
understanding right ventricular function, right ventricular infarction and 
related conditions. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1985;6:1083–1095.
 12. Hudsmith LE, Petersen SE, Francis JM, Robson MD, Neubauer S. Normal human 
left and right ventricular and left atrial dimensions using steady state free preces-
sion magnetic resonance imaging. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2005;7:775–782.
 13. Friedberg MK, Redington AN. Right versus left ventricular failure: differ-
ences, similarities, and interactions. Circulation. 2014;129:1033–1044. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.001375.
 14. Faber MJ, Dalinghaus M, Lankhuizen IM, Steendijk P
, Hop WC, Schoe-
maker RG, Duncker DJ, Lamers JM, Helbing WA. Right and left ventricu-
lar function after chronic pulmonary artery banding in rats assessed with 
biventricular pressure-volume loops. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 
2006;291:H1580–H1586. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00286.2006.
 15. Kapur NK, Paruchuri V, Aronovitz MJ, Qiao X, Mackey EE, Daly GH, 
Ughreja K, Levine J, Blanton R, Hill NS, Karas RH. Biventricular remodel-
ing in murine models of right ventricular pressure overload. PLoS One. 
2013;8:e70802. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070802.
 16. Guazzi M, Naeije R. Pulmonary hypertension in heart failure: pathophysi-
ology, pathobiology, and emerging clinical perspectives. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2017;69:1718–1734. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.01.051.
 17. Konstam MA, Cohen SR, Salem DN, Conlon TP
, Isner JM, Das D, Zile MR, Levine 
HJ, Kahn PC. Comparison of left and right ventricular end-systolic pressure-vol-
ume relations in congestive heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1985;5:1326–1334.
 18. Haddad F, Doyle R, Murphy DJ, Hunt SA. Right ventricular function in 
cardiovascular disease, part II: pathophysiology, clinical importance, and 
management of right ventricular failure. Circulation. 2008;117:1717–
1731. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.653584.
 19. Abel FL, Waldhausen JA. Effects of alterations in pulmonary vascular resistance 
on right ventricular function. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1967;54:886–894.
 20. MacNee W. Pathophysiology of cor pulmonale in chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease: part one. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1994;150:883–852.
 21. Iskandrian AS, Hakki AH, Ren JF, Kotler MN, Mintz GS, Ross J, Kane SA. 
Correlation among right ventricular preload, afterload and ejection frac-
tion in mitral valve disease: radionuclide, echocardiographic and hemody-
namic evaluation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1984;3:1403–1411.
 22. Tedford RJ. Determinants of right ventricular afterload (2013 Grover Con-
ference Series). Pulm Circ. 2014;4:211–219.
 23. Champion HC, Michelakis ED, Hassoun PM. Comprehensive invasive 
and noninvasive approach to the right ventricle-pulmonary circulation 
unit: state of the art and clinical and research implications. Circulation. 
2009;120:992–1007. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.674028.
 24. Tedford RJ, Hassoun PM, Mathai SC, Girgis RE, Russell SD, Thiemann DR, Cingo-
lani OH, Mudd JO, Borlaug BA, Redfield MM, Lederer DJ, Kass DA. Pulmonary 
capillary wedge pressure augments right ventricular pulsatile loading. Circula-
tion. 2012;125:289–297. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.051540.
 25. Gerges M, Gerges C, Pistritto AM, Lang MB, Trip P
, Jakowitsch J, Binder T, 
Lang IM. Pulmonary hypertension in heart failure: epidemiology, right ven-
tricular function, and survival. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015;192:1234–
1246. doi: 10.1164/rccm.201503-0529OC.
 26. Dupont M, Mullens W, Skouri HN, Abrahams Z, Wu Y, Taylor DO, 
Starling RC, Tang WH. Prognostic role of pulmonary arterial capaci-
tance in advanced heart failure. Circ Heart Fail. 2012;5:778–785. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.112.968511.
 27. Houston BA, Shah KB, Mehra MR, Tedford RJ. A new “twist” on right 
heart failure with left ventricular assist systems. J Heart Lung Transplant. 
2017;36:701–707. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2017.03.014.
 28. Kelly RP
, Ting CT, Yang TM, Liu CP
, Maughan WL, Chang MS, Kass DA. 
Effective arterial elastance as index of arterial vascular load in humans. 
Circulation. 1992;86:513–521. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.86.2.513.
 29. Fourie PR, Coetzee AR, Bolliger CT. Pulmonary artery compliance: its role 
in right ventricular-arterial coupling. Cardiovasc Res. 1992;26:839–844.
 30. Ghuysen A, Lambermont B, Kolh P
, Tchana-Sato V, Magis D, Gerard P
, Mom-
mens V, Janssen N, Desaive T, D’Orio V. Alteration of right ventricular-pulmo-
nary vascular coupling in a porcine model of progressive pressure overload-
ing. Shock. 2008;29:197–204. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e318070c790.
 31. Pellegrini P
, Rossi A, Pasotti M, Raineri C, Cicoira M, Bonapace S, Dini FL, 
Temporelli PL, Vassanelli C, Vanderpool R, Naeije R, Ghio S. Prognostic 
relevance of pulmonary arterial compliance in patients with chronic heart 
failure. Chest. 2014;145:1064–1070. doi: 10.1378/chest.13-1510.
 32. Goldstein JA. Pathophysiology and management of right heart ischemia. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40:841–853.
 33. Watts JA, Marchick MR, Kline JA. Right ventricular heart failure from pul-
monary embolism: key distinctions from chronic pulmonary hypertension. 
J Card Fail. 2010;16:250–259. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2009.11.008.
 34. Santamore WP
, Dell’Italia LJ. Ventricular interdependence: significant left 
ventricular contributions to right ventricular systolic function. Prog Cardio-
vasc Dis. 1998;40:289–308.
 35. Gibbons Kroeker CA, Adeeb S, Shrive NG, Tyberg JV. Compression in-
duced by RV pressure overload decreases regional coronary blood flow 
in anesthetized dogs. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2006;290:H2432–
H2438. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.01140.2005.
 36. Scheel KW, Williams SE, Parker JB. Coronary sinus pressure has a direct 
effect on gradient for coronary perfusion. Am J Physiol. 1990;258(pt 
2):H1739–H1744. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.1990.258.6.H1739.
 37. Ryan JJ, Huston J, Kutty S, Hatton ND, Bowman L, Tian L, Herr JE, Johri AM, Ar-
cher SL. Right ventricular adaptation and failure in pulmonary arterial hyper-
tension. Can J Cardiol. 2015;31:391–406. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2015.01.023.
 38. Vonk-Noordegraaf A, Haddad F, Chin KM, Forfia PR, Kawut SM, Lumens 
J, Naeije R, Newman J, Oudiz RJ, Provencher S, Torbicki A, Voelkel NF, 
Hassoun PM. Right heart adaptation to pulmonary arterial hypertension: 
physiology and pathobiology. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62(suppl):D22–
D33. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.10.027.
 39. Mullens W, Abrahams Z, Francis GS, Sokos G, Taylor DO, Starling RC, 
Young JB, Tang WH. Importance of venous congestion for worsening of 
renal function in advanced decompensated heart failure. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2009;53:589–596. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.05.068.
 40. Bernheim P
. De l’asystole veineuse dans l’hypertrophie du coeur gauche par 
stenose concomitante du ventricule droit. Rev Med. 1910;39:785–794.
 41. Iglesias-Garriz I, Olalla-Gómez C, Garrote C, López-Benito M, Martín J, Alon-
so D, Rodríguez MA. Contribution of right ventricular dysfunction to heart 
failure mortality: a meta-analysis. Rev Cardiovasc Med. 2012;13:e62–e69.
 42. Lewis JF, Webber JD, Sutton LL, Chesoni S, Curry CL. Discordance in degree 
of right and left ventricular dilation in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy: 
recognition and clinical implications. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;21:649–654.
 43. La Vecchia L, Paccanaro M, Bonanno C, Varotto L, Ometto R, Vincenzi 
M. Left ventricular versus biventricular dysfunction in idiopathic dilated 
cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol. 1999;83:120–122, A9.
 44. Frea S, Pidello S, Bovolo V
, Iacovino C, Franco E, Pinneri F
, Galluzzo A, Volpe A, 
Visconti M, Peirone A, Morello M, Bergerone S, Gaita F
. Prognostic incremental 
role of right ventricular function in acute decompensation of advanced chronic 
heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail. 2016;18:564–572. doi: 10.1002/ejhf.504.
 45. Baker BJ, Wilen MM, Boyd CM, Dinh H, Franciosa JA. Relation of right 
ventricular ejection fraction to exercise capacity in chronic left ventricular 
failure. Am J Cardiol. 1984;54:596–599.
 46. Guazzi M, Villani S, Generati G, Ferraro OE, Pellegrino M, Alfonzetti E, 
Labate V, Gaeta M, Sugimoto T, Bandera F. Right ventricular contractile 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e612
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
reserve and pulmonary circulation uncoupling during exercise challenge 
in heart failure: pathophysiology and clinical phenotypes. JACC Heart Fail. 
2016;4:625–635. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2016.03.007.
 47. Gorter TM, Hoendermis ES, van Veldhuisen DJ, Voors AA, Lam CS, Geel-
hoed B, Willems TP
, van Melle JP
. Right ventricular dysfunction in heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Eur J Heart Fail. 2016;18:1472–1487. doi: 10.1002/ejhf.630.
 48. Melenovsky V, Hwang SJ, Lin G, Redfield MM, Borlaug BA. Right heart 
dysfunction in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur Heart J. 
2014;35:3452–3462. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehu193.
 49. Puwanant S, Priester TC, Mookadam F, Bruce CJ, Redfield MM, Chan-
drasekaran K. Right ventricular function in patients with preserved and 
reduced ejection fraction heart failure. Eur J Echocardiogr. 2009;10:733–
737. doi: 10.1093/ejechocard/jep052.
 50. Mohammed SF, Hussain I, AbouEzzeddine OF, Abou Ezzeddine OF, Takaha-
ma H, Kwon SH, Forfia P
, Roger VL, Redfield MM. Right ventricular function in 
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a community-based study. Circu-
lation. 2014;130:2310–2320. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.008461.
 51. Morris DA, Gailani M, Vaz Pérez A, Blaschke F, Dietz R, Haverkamp W, 
Özcelik C. Right ventricular myocardial systolic and diastolic dysfunction 
in heart failure with normal left ventricular ejection fraction. J Am Soc 
Echocardiogr. 2011;24:886–897. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2011.04.005.
 52. Borlaug BA, Kane GC, Melenovsky V, Olson TP
. Abnormal right ventricular-pul-
monary artery coupling with exercise in heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:3293–3302. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehw241.
 53. Caforio AL, Calabrese F, Angelini A, Tona F, Vinci A, Bottaro S, Ramondo A, Car-
turan E, Iliceto S, Thiene G, Daliento L. A prospective study of biopsy-proven 
myocarditis: prognostic relevance of clinical and aetiopathogenetic features at 
diagnosis. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:1326–1333. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehm076.
 54. Kakouros N, Cokkinos DV. Right ventricular myocardial infarction: patho-
physiology, diagnosis, and management. Postgrad Med J. 2010;86:719–
728. doi: 10.1136/pgmj.2010.103887.
 55. Ondrus T, Kanovsky J, Novotny T, Andrsova I, Spinar J, Kala P
. Right ven-
tricular myocardial infarction: from pathophysiology to prognosis. Exp Clin 
Cardiol. 2013;18:27–30.
 56. Assali 
AR, 
Teplitsky 
I, 
Ben-Dor 
I, 
Solodky 
A, 
Brosh 
D, 
Battler 
A, 
Fuchs 
S, 
Kornows-
ki R. Prognostic importance of right ventricular infarction in an acute myo-
cardial infarction cohort referred for contemporary percutaneous reperfusion 
therapy. Am Heart J. 2007;153:231–237. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2006.10.038.
 57. Zehender M, Kasper W, Kauder E, Schönthaler M, Geibel A, Olschews-
ki M, Just H. Right ventricular infarction as an independent predictor 
of prognosis after acute inferior myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 
1993;328:981–988. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199304083281401.
 58. Goldstein JA. Right heart ischemia: pathophysiology, natural history, and 
clinical management. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 1998;40:325–341.
 59. Gumina RJ, Murphy JG, Rihal CS, Lennon RJ, Wright RS. Long-term sur-
vival after right ventricular infarction. Am J Cardiol. 2006;98:1571–1573. 
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2006.07.033.
 60. Lim ST, Goldstein JA. Right ventricular infarction. Curr Treat Options Car-
diovasc Med. 2001;3:95–101.
 61. Mehta SR, Eikelboom JW, Natarajan MK, Diaz R, Yi C, Gibbons RJ, Yusuf 
S. Impact of right ventricular involvement on mortality and morbidity in pa-
tients with inferior myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;37:37–43.
 62. Jacobs AK, Leopold JA, Bates E, Mendes LA, Sleeper LA, White H, Davidoff 
R, Boland J, Modur S, Forman R, Hochman JS. Cardiogenic shock caused 
by right ventricular infarction: a report from the SHOCK registry. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2003;41:1273–1279.
 63. Harjola VP
, Mebazaa A, Čelutkienė J, Bettex D, Bueno H, Chioncel O, Crespo-Leiro 
MG, Falk V
, Filippatos G, Gibbs S, Leite-Moreira A, Lassus J, Masip J, Mueller 
C, Mullens W, Naeije R, Nordegraaf AV
, Parissis J, Riley JP
, Ristic A, Rosano G, 
Rudiger A, Ruschitzka F
, Seferovic P
, Sztrymf B, Vieillard-Baron A, Yilmaz MB, 
Konstantinides S. Contemporary management of acute right ventricular failure: 
a statement from the Heart Failure Association and the Working Group on 
Pulmonary Circulation and Right Ventricular Function of the European Society 
of Cardiology. Eur J Heart Fail. 2016;18:226–241. doi: 10.1002/ejhf.478.
 64. Haddad F, Couture P
, Tousignant C, Denault AY. The right ventricle in cardiac 
surgery, a perioperative perspective, I: anatomy, physiology, and assessment. 
Anesth Analg. 2009;108:407–421. doi: 10.1213/ane.0b013e31818f8623.
 65. Haddad F, Couture P
, Tousignant C, Denault AY. The right ventricle in 
cardiac surgery, a perioperative perspective, II: pathophysiology, clinical 
importance, and management. Anesth Analg. 2009;108:422–433. doi: 
10.1213/ane.0b013e31818d8b92.
 66. Raina A, Vaidya A, Gertz ZM, Susan Chambers, Forfia PR. Marked changes 
in right ventricular contractile pattern after cardiothoracic surgery: impli-
cations for post-surgical assessment of right ventricular function. J Heart 
Lung Transplant. 2013;32:777–783. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2013.05.004.
 67. Brown SB, Raina A, Katz D, Szerlip M, Wiegers SE, Forfia PR. Longitudinal shorten-
ing accounts for the majority of right ventricular contraction and improves after 
pulmonary vasodilator therapy in normal subjects and patients with pulmonary 
arterial hypertension. Chest. 2011;140:27–33. doi: 10.1378/chest.10-1136.
 68. Diller GP
, Wasan BS, Kyriacou A, Patel N, Casula RP
, Athanasiou T, Francis 
DP
, Mayet J. Effect of coronary artery bypass surgery on myocardial func-
tion as assessed by tissue Doppler echocardiography. Eur J Cardiothorac 
Surg. 2008;34:995–999. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2008.08.008.
 69. Denault AY, Pearl RG, Michler RE, Rao V
, Tsui SS, Seitelberger R, Cromie M, Lind-
berg E, D’Armini AM. Tezosentan and right ventricular failure in patients with 
pulmonary hypertension undergoing cardiac surgery: the TACTICS trial. J Car-
diothorac Vasc Anesth. 2013;27:1212–1217. doi: 10.1053/j.jvca.2013.01.023.
 70. Rösner A, Avenarius D, Malm S, Iqbal A, Schirmer H, Bijnens B, Myrmel T. Changes 
in right ventricular shape and deformation following coronary artery bypass sur-
gery: insights from echocardiography with strain rate and magnetic resonance 
imaging. Echocardiography. 2015;32:1809–1820. doi: 10.1111/echo.12973.
 71. Kobashigawa J, Zuckermann A, Macdonald P
, Leprince P
, Esmailian F, 
Luu M, Mancini D, Patel J, Razi R, Reichenspurner H, Russell S, Segovia 
J, Smedira N, Stehlik J, Wagner F. Report from a consensus conference 
on primary graft dysfunction after cardiac transplantation. J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2014;33:327–340.
 72. D’Alessandro C, Aubert S, Golmard JL, Praschker BL, Luyt CE, Pavie A, 
Gandjbakhch I, Leprince P
. Extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation tem-
porary support for early graft failure after cardiac transplantation. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2010;37:343–349. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2009.05.034.
 73. Chen EP
, Bittner HB, Davis RD, Van Trigt P
. Right ventricular adapta-
tion to increased afterload after orthotopic cardiac transplantation in 
the setting of recipient chronic pulmonary hypertension. Circulation. 
1997;96(suppl):II-141–II-147.
 74. Stobierska-Dzierzek B, Awad H, Michler RE. The evolving management of 
acute right-sided heart failure in cardiac transplant recipients. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2001;38:923–931.
 75. Taghavi S, Zuckermann A, Ankersmit J, Wieselthaler G, Rajek A, Laufer 
G, Wolner E, Grimm M. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation is su-
perior to right ventricular assist device for acute right ventricular failure 
after heart transplantation. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;78:1644–1649. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2004.04.059.
 76. Kormos RL, Teuteberg JJ, Pagani FD, Russell SD, John R, Miller LW, Massey T, Milano 
CA, Moazami N, Sundareswaran KS, Farrar DJ; HeartMate II Clinical Investigators. 
Right ventricular failure in patients with the HeartMate II continuous-flow left 
ventricular assist device: incidence, risk factors, and effect on outcomes. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;139:1316–1324. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2009.11.020.
 77. Lampert BC, Teuteberg JJ. Right ventricular failure after left ventricu-
lar assist devices. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2015;34:1123–1130. doi: 
10.1016/j.healun.2015.06.015.
 78. Soliman OI, Akin S, Muslem R, Boersma E, Manintveld OC, Krabatsch T, 
Gummert JF, de By T, Bogers A, Zijlstra F, Mohacsi P
, Caliskan K, EURO-
MACS Investigators. Derivation and validation of a novel right-sided heart 
failure model after implantation of continuous flow left ventricular assist 
devices: the EUROMACS (European Registry for Patients With Mechanical 
 
Circulatory Support) Right-Sided Heart Failure Risk Score. Circulation. 
2018;137:891–906. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.030543.
 79. Oliveira GH, Dupont M, Naftel D, Myers SL, Yuan Y, Tang WH, Gonzalez-
Stawinski G, Young JB, Taylor DO, Starling RC. Increased need for right 
ventricular support in patients with chemotherapy-induced cardiomyopathy 
undergoing mechanical circulatory support: outcomes from the INTERMACS 
Registry (Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support). 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:240–248. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.09.040.
 80. Farrar DJ, Compton PG, Hershon JJ, Fonger JD, Hill JD. Right heart interaction 
with the mechanically assisted left heart. World J Surg. 1985;9:89–102.
 81. Farrar DJ, Compton PG, Hershon JJ, Hill JD. Right ventricular function in 
an operating room model of mechanical left ventricular assistance and its 
effects in patients with depressed left ventricular function. Circulation. 
1985;72:1279–1285. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.72.6.1279.
 82. Loghmanpour NA, Kormos RL, Kanwar MK, Teuteberg JJ, Murali S, An-
taki JF. A bayesian model to predict right ventricular failure following left 
ventricular assist device therapy. JACC Heart Fail. 2016;4:711–721. doi: 
10.1016/j.jchf.2016.04.004.
 83. Wang Y, Simon MA, Bonde P
, Harris BU, Teuteberg JJ, Kormos RL, Antaki 
JF. Decision tree for adjuvant right ventricular support in patients receiving 
a left ventricular assist device. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2012;31:140–149. 
doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2011.11.003.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e613
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 84. Rich JD, Gosev I, Patel CB, Joseph S, Katz JN, Eckman PM, Lee S, 
Sundareswaran K, Kilic A, Bethea B, Soleimani B, Lima B, Uriel N, Kiernan 
M; Evolving Mechanical Support Research Group (EMERG) Investigators. The 
incidence, risk factors, and outcomes associated with late right-sided heart 
failure in patients supported with an axial-flow left ventricular assist device. J 
Heart Lung Transplant. 2017;36:50–58. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2016.08.010.
 85. Takeda K, Takayama H, Colombo PC, Yuzefpolskaya M, Fukuhara S, 
Han J, Kurlansky P
, Mancini DM, Naka Y. Incidence and clinical signifi-
cance of late right heart failure during continuous-flow left ventricular as-
sist device support. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2015;34:1024–1032. doi: 
10.1016/j.healun.2015.03.011.
 86. Coutance G, Cauderlier E, Ehtisham J, Hamon M, Hamon M. The prognos-
tic value of markers of right ventricular dysfunction in pulmonary embo-
lism: a meta-analysis. Crit Care. 2011;15:R103. doi: 10.1186/cc10119.
 87. Konstantinides SV, Torbicki A, Agnelli G, Danchin N, Fitzmaurice D, Galiè N, 
Gibbs JS, Huisman MV, Humbert M, Kucher N, Lang I, Lankeit M, Lekakis 
J, Maack C, Mayer E, Meneveau N, Perrier A, Pruszczyk P
, Rasmussen 
LH, Schindler TH, Svitil P
, Vonk Noordegraaf A, Zamorano JL, Zompatori 
M; Task Force for the Diagnosis and Management of Acute Pulmonary 
Embolism of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). 2014 ESC guide-
lines on the diagnosis and management of acute pulmonary embolism. 
Eur Heart J. 2014;35:3033–3069, 3069a. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehu283.
 88. Kline JA, Zeitouni R, Marchick MR, Hernandez-Nino J, Rose GA. 
Comparison of 8 biomarkers for prediction of right ventricular hypo-
kinesis 6 months after submassive pulmonary embolism. Am Heart J. 
2008;156:308–314. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2008.03.026.
 89. Corrado D, Link MS, Calkins H. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomy-
opathy. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:61–72. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra1509267.
 90. Sen-Chowdhry S, Syrris P
, McKenna WJ. Genetics of right ventricular 
cardiomyopathy. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2005;16:927–935. doi: 
10.1111/j.1540-8167.2005.40842.x.
 91. Corrado D, Thiene G. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopa-
thy/dysplasia: clinical impact of molecular genetic studies. Circulation. 
2006;113:1634–1637. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.616490.
 92. Marcus FI, McKenna WJ, Sherrill D, Basso C, Bauce B, Bluemke DA, 
Calkins H, Corrado D, Cox MG, Daubert JP
, Fontaine G, Gear K, Hauer R, 
Nava A, Picard MH, Protonotarios N, Saffitz JE, Sanborn DM, Steinberg 
JS, Tandri H, Thiene G, Towbin JA, Tsatsopoulou A, Wichter T, Zareba 
W. Diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dys-
plasia: proposed modification of the task force criteria. Circulation. 
2010;121:1533–1541. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.840827.
 93. Marcus FI, McKenna WJ, Sherrill D, Basso C, Bauce B, Bluemke DA, Calkins 
H, Corrado D, Cox MG, Daubert JP
, Fontaine G, Gear K, Hauer R, Nava A, 
Picard MH, Protonotarios N, Saffitz JE, Sanborn DM, Steinberg JS, Tandri 
H, Thiene G, Towbin JA, Tsatsopoulou A, Wichter T, Zareba W. Diagnosis 
of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia: proposed 
modification of the Task Force Criteria. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:806–814. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartj/ehq025.
 94. Ackerman MJ, Priori SG, Willems S, Berul C, Brugada R, Calkins H, Camm 
AJ, Ellinor PT, Gollob M, Hamilton R, Hershberger RE, Judge DP
, Le Marec 
H, McKenna WJ, Schulze-Bahr E, Semsarian C, Towbin JA, Watkins H, 
Wilde A, Wolpert C, Zipes DP
. HRS/EHRA expert consensus statement on 
the state of genetic testing for the channelopathies and cardiomyopathies 
this document was developed as a partnership between the Heart Rhythm 
Society (HRS) and the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA). Heart 
Rhythm. 2011;8:1308–1339. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2011.05.020.
 95. Corrado D, Basso C, Schiavon M, Thiene G. Screening for hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy in young athletes. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:364–369. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJM199808063390602.
 96. Finocchiaro G, Papadakis M, Robertus JL, Dhutia H, Steriotis AK, Tome M, 
Mellor G, Merghani A, Malhotra A, Behr E, Sharma S, Sheppard MN. Etiology 
of sudden death in sports: insights from a United Kingdom regional registry. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:2108–2115. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.02.062.
 97. Dalal D, Nasir K, Bomma C, Prakasa K, Tandri H, Piccini J, Roguin A, 
Tichnell C, James C, Russell SD, Judge DP
, Abraham T, Spevak PJ, Bluemke 
DA, Calkins H. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia: a United 
States experience. Circulation. 2005;112:3823–3832. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.105.542266.
 98. Corrado D, Wichter T, Link MS, Hauer RN, Marchlinski FE, Anastasakis 
A, Bauce B, Basso C, Brunckhorst C, Tsatsopoulou A, Tandri H, Paul M, 
Schmied C, Pelliccia A, Duru F, Protonotarios N, Estes NM 3rd, McKenna 
WJ, Thiene G, Marcus FI, Calkins H. Treatment of arrhythmogenic right 
ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia: an International Task Force 
Consensus Statement. Circulation. 2015;132:441–453. doi: 10.1161/ 
CIRCULATIONAHA.115.017944.
 99. Taramasso M, Vanermen H, Maisano F, Guidotti A, La Canna G, Alfieri 
O. The growing clinical importance of secondary tricuspid regurgitation. 
 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:703–710. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.09.069.
 100. Bhave NM, Ward RP
. Echocardiographic assessment and clinical manage-
ment of tricuspid regurgitation. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2011;13:258–264. doi: 
10.1007/s11886-011-0180-7.
 101. Nath J, Foster E, Heidenreich PA. Impact of tricuspid regurgita-
tion on long-term survival. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43:405–409. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2003.09.036.
 102. Pradat P
, Francannet C, Harris JA, Robert E. The epidemiology of cardio-
vascular defects, part I: a study based on data from three large registries 
of congenital malformations. Pediatr Cardiol. 2003;24:195–221. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-002-9401-6.
 103. Wald RM, Valente AM, Marelli A. Heart failure in adult congenital heart 
disease: Emerging concepts with a focus on tetralogy of Fallot. Trends 
Cardiovasc Med. 2015;25:422–432. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2014.11.011.
 104. Elkayam U, Bitar F. Valvular heart disease and pregnancy, part I: native valves. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:223–230. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.02.085.
 105. Nishimura RA, Otto C. 2014 ACC/AHA valve guidelines: earlier inter-
vention for chronic mitral regurgitation. Heart. 2014;100:905–907. doi: 
10.1136/heartjnl-2014-305834.
 106. Hayes CJ, Gersony WM, Driscoll DJ, Keane JF, Kidd L, O’Fallon WM, 
Pieroni DR, Wolfe RR, Weidman WH. Second natural history study of 
congenital heart defects: results of treatment of patients with pulmonary 
valvar stenosis. Circulation. 1993;87(suppl):I28–I37.
 107. Meijer JM, Pieper PG, Drenthen W, Voors AA, Roos-Hesselink JW, van 
Dijk AP
, Mulder BJ, Ebels T, van Veldhuisen DJ. Pregnancy, fertility, and 
recurrence risk in corrected tetralogy of Fallot. Heart. 2005;91:801–805. 
doi: 10.1136/hrt.2004.034108.
 108. Babu-Narayan SV, Kilner PJ, Li W, Moon JC, Goktekin O, Davlouros PA, 
Khan M, Ho SY, Pennell DJ, Gatzoulis MA. Ventricular fibrosis suggested 
by cardiovascular magnetic resonance in adults with repaired tetralogy of 
Fallot and its relationship to adverse markers of clinical outcome. Circulation. 
2006;113:405–413. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.548727.
 109. Galiè N, Humbert M, Vachiery JL, Gibbs S, Lang I, Torbicki A, Simonneau G, 
Peacock A, Vonk Noordegraaf A, Beghetti M, Ghofrani A, Gomez Sanchez 
MA, Hansmann G, Klepetko W, Lancellotti P
, Matucci M, McDonagh T, 
Pierard LA, Trindade PT, Zompatori M, Hoeper M, Aboyans V, Vaz Carneiro 
A, Achenbach S, Agewall S, Allanore Y, Asteggiano R, Paolo Badano L, 
Albert Barberà J, Bouvaist H, Bueno H, Byrne RA, Carerj S, Castro G, Erol 
Ç, Falk V, Funck-Brentano C, Gorenflo M, Granton J, Iung B, Kiely DG, 
Kirchhof P
, Kjellstrom B, Landmesser U, Lekakis J, Lionis C, Lip GY, Orfanos 
SE, Park MH, Piepoli MF, Ponikowski P
, Revel MP
, Rigau D, Rosenkranz 
S, Völler H, Luis Zamorano J. 2015 ESC/ERS guidelines for the diagnosis 
and treatment of pulmonary hypertension: the Joint Task Force for the 
Diagnosis and Treatment of Pulmonary Hypertension of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European Respiratory Society (ERS). 
Eur Heart J. 2016;37:67–119. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv317.
 110. McLaughlin VV, Archer SL, Badesch DB, Barst RJ, Farber HW, Lindner JR, 
Mathier MA, McGoon MD, Park MH, Rosenson RS, Rubin LJ, Tapson VF, 
Varga J, Harrington RA, Anderson JL, Bates ER, Bridges CR, Eisenberg 
MJ, Ferrari VA, Grines CL, Hlatky MA, Jacobs AK, Kaul S, Lichtenberg RC, 
Lindner JR, Moliterno DJ, Mukherjee D, Pohost GM, Rosenson RS, Schofield 
RS, Shubrooks SJ, Stein JH, Tracy CM, Weitz HH, Wesley DJ; ACCF/AHA. 
ACCF/AHA 2009 expert consensus document on pulmonary hypertension: 
a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation Task Force 
on Expert Consensus Documents and the American Heart Association 
[published correction appears in Circulation. 2009;120:e13]. Circulation. 
2009;119:2250–2294. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192230.
 111. Frost AE, Badesch DB, Barst RJ, Benza RL, Elliott CG, Farber HW, Krichman 
A, Liou TG, Raskob GE, Wason P
, Feldkircher K, Turner M, McGoon MD. The 
changing picture of patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension in the 
United States: how REVEAL differs from historic and non-US Contemporary 
Registries. Chest. 2011;139:128–137. doi: 10.1378/chest.10-0075.
 112. Simonneau G, Gatzoulis MA, Adatia I, Celermajer D, Denton C, Ghofrani 
A, Gomez Sanchez MA, Krishna Kumar R, Landzberg M, Machado RF, 
Olschewski H, Robbins IM, Souza R. Updated clinical classification of pul-
monary hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62(suppl):D34–D41. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2013.10.029.
 113. Benza RL, Miller DP
, Barst RJ, Badesch DB, Frost AE, McGoon MD. An 
evaluation of long-term survival from time of diagnosis in pulmonary 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e614
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
arterial hypertension from the REVEAL Registry. Chest. 2012;142:448–
456. doi: 10.1378/chest.11-1460.
 114. Chin KM, Kim NH, Rubin LJ. The right ventricle in pulmonary hyperten-
sion. Coron Artery Dis. 2005;16:13–18.
 115. Mahapatra S, Nishimura RA, Sorajja P
, Cha S, McGoon MD. Relationship 
of pulmonary arterial capacitance and mortality in idiopathic pulmo-
nary arterial hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47:799–803. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2005.09.054.
 116. Fine NM, Chen L, Bastiansen PM, Frantz RP
, Pellikka PA, Oh JK, Kane GC. 
Outcome prediction by quantitative right ventricular function assessment 
in 575 subjects evaluated for pulmonary hypertension. Circ Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2013;6:711–721. doi: 10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.113.000640.
 117. Sachdev A, Villarraga HR, Frantz RP
, McGoon MD, Hsiao JF, Maalouf JF, 
Ammash NM, McCully RB, Miller FA, Pellikka PA, Oh JK, Kane GC. Right ven-
tricular strain for prediction of survival in patients with pulmonary arterial 
hypertension. Chest. 2011;139:1299–1309. doi: 10.1378/chest.10-2015.
 118. Voelkel NF, Quaife RA, Leinwand LA, Barst RJ, McGoon MD, Meldrum 
DR, Dupuis J, Long CS, Rubin LJ, Smart FW, Suzuki YJ, Gladwin M, 
Denholm EM, Gail DB; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Working 
Group on Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Right Heart Failure. 
Right ventricular function and failure: report of a National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute working group on cellular and molecular mecha-
nisms of right heart failure. Circulation. 2006;114:1883–1891. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.632208.
 119. Abraham WT, Raynolds MV, Badesch DB, Wynne KM, Groves BM, 
Roden RL, Robertson AD, Lowes BD, Zisman LS, Voelkel NF, Bristow MR, 
Perryman MB. Angiotensin-converting enzyme DD genotype in patients 
with primary pulmonary hypertension: increased frequency and associa-
tion with preserved haemodynamics. J Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone 
Syst. 2003;4:27–30. doi: 10.3317/jraas.2003.003.
 120. Benza RL, Miller DP
, Gomberg-Maitland M, Frantz RP
, Foreman AJ, Coffey 
CS, Frost A, Barst RJ, Badesch DB, Elliott CG, Liou TG, McGoon MD. 
Predicting survival in pulmonary arterial hypertension: insights from the 
Registry to Evaluate Early and Long-Term Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension 
Disease Management (REVEAL). Circulation. 2010;122:164–172. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.898122.
 121. Davlouros PA, Niwa K, Webb G, Gatzoulis MA. The right ventricle 
in congenital heart disease. Heart. 2006;92(suppl):i27–i38. doi: 
10.1136/hrt.2005.077438.
 122. Hopkins WE, Waggoner AD. Severe pulmonary hypertension without 
right ventricular failure: the unique hearts of patients with Eisenmenger 
syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 2002;89:34–38.
 123. Hopkins WE, Ochoa LL, Richardson GW, Trulock EP
. Comparison of the hemo-
dynamics and survival of adults with severe primary pulmonary hypertension 
or Eisenmenger syndrome. J Heart Lung Transplant. 1996;15(pt 1):100–105.
 124. Montani D, Price LC, Dorfmuller P
, Achouh L, Jaïs X, Yaïci A, Sitbon O, 
Musset D, Simonneau G, Humbert M. Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease. 
Eur Respir J. 2009;33:189–200. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00090608.
 125. Fang JC, DeMarco T, Givertz MM, Borlaug BA, Lewis GD, Rame JE, 
Gomberg-Maitland M, Murali S, Frantz RP
, McGlothlin D, Horn EM, 
Benza RL. World Health Organization Pulmonary Hypertension Group 2: 
pulmonary hypertension due to left heart disease in the adult: a summary 
statement from the Pulmonary Hypertension Council of the International 
Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. J Heart Lung Transplant. 
2012;31:913–933. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2012.06.002.
 126. Gerges C, Gerges M, Lang MB, Zhang Y, Jakowitsch J, Probst P
, Maurer 
G, Lang IM. Diastolic pulmonary vascular pressure gradient: a predic-
tor of prognosis in “out-of-proportion” pulmonary hypertension. Chest. 
2013;143:758–766. doi: 10.1378/chest.12-1653.
 127. Butler J, Chomsky DB, Wilson JR. Pulmonary hypertension and exercise intol-
erance in patients with heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;34:1802–1806.
 128. Murali S, Kormos RL, Uretsky BF, Schechter D, Reddy PS, Denys BG, 
Armitage JM, Hardesty RL, Griffith BP
. Preoperative pulmonary hemody-
namics and early mortality after orthotopic cardiac transplantation: the 
Pittsburgh experience. Am Heart J. 1993;126:896–904.
 129. Hurdman J, Condliffe R, Elliot CA, Davies C, Hill C, Wild JM, Capener 
D, Sephton P
, Hamilton N, Armstrong IJ, Billings C, Lawrie A, Sabroe 
I, Akil M, O’Toole L, Kiely DG. ASPIRE registry: Assessing the Spectrum 
of Pulmonary hypertension Identified at a REferral centre. Eur Respir J. 
2012;39:945–955. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00078411.
 130. Minai OA, Ricaurte B, Kaw R, Hammel J, Mansour M, McCarthy K, 
Golish JA, Stoller JK. Frequency and impact of pulmonary hyperten-
sion in patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 
2009;104:1300–1306. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2009.06.048.
 131. Ismail K, Roberts K, Manning P
, Manley C, Hill NS. OSA and pulmonary 
hypertension: time for a new look. Chest. 2015;147:847–861. doi: 
10.1378/chest.14-0614.
 132. Kessler R, Chaouat A, Schinkewitch P
, Faller M, Casel S, Krieger J, 
Weitzenblum E. The obesity-hypoventilation syndrome revisited: a pro-
spective study of 34 consecutive cases. Chest. 2001;120:369–376.
 133. Alawami M, Mustafa A, Whyte K, Alkhater M, Bhikoo Z, Pemberton J. 
Echocardiographic and electrocardiographic findings in patients with 
obesity hypoventilation syndrome. Intern Med J. 2015;45:68–73. doi: 
10.1111/imj.12620.
 134. Castro-Añón O, Golpe R, Pérez-de-Llano LA, López González MJ, 
Escalona Velasquez EJ, Pérez Fernández R, Testa Fernández A, González 
Quintela A. Haemodynamic effects of non-invasive ventilation in patients 
with obesity-hypoventilation syndrome. Respirology. 2012;17:1269–
1274. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2012.02252.x.
 135. Cannon JE, Su L, Kiely DG, Page K, Toshner M, Swietlik E, Treacy C, 
Ponnaberanam A, Condliffe R, Sheares K, Taboada D, Dunning J, Tsui S, 
Ng C, Gopalan D, Screaton N, Elliot C, Gibbs S, Howard L, Corris P
, Lordan 
J, Johnson M, Peacock A, MacKenzie-Ross R, Schreiber B, Coghlan G, 
Dimopoulos K, Wort SJ, Gaine S, Moledina S, Jenkins DP
, Pepke-Zaba J. 
Dynamic 
risk 
stratification 
of 
patient 
long-term 
outcome 
after 
pulmonary 
end-
arterectomy: results from the United Kingdom National Cohort. Circulation. 
2016;133:1761–1771. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.019470.
 136. Feinstein JA, Goldhaber SZ, Lock JE, Ferndandes SM, Landzberg MJ. Balloon 
pulmonary angioplasty for treatment of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary 
hypertension. Circulation. 2001;103:10–13. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.103.1.10.
 137. Kataoka M, Inami T, Hayashida K, Shimura N, Ishiguro H, Abe T, Tamura 
Y, Ando M, Fukuda K, Yoshino H, Satoh T. Percutaneous transluminal 
pulmonary angioplasty for the treatment of chronic thromboembolic 
pulmonary hypertension. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2012;5:756–762. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.112.971390.
 138. Mizoguchi H, Ogawa A, Munemasa M, Mikouchi H, Ito H, Matsubara 
H. Refined balloon pulmonary angioplasty for inoperable patients with 
chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 
2012;5:748–755. doi: 10.1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.112.971077.
 139. Huang SJ, Nalos M, McLean AS. Is early ventricular dysfunction or dilata-
tion associated with lower mortality rate in adult severe sepsis and septic 
shock? A meta-analysis. Crit Care. 2013;17:R96. doi: 10.1186/cc12741.
 140. Kimchi A, Ellrodt AG, Berman DS, Riedinger MS, Swan HJ, Murata GH. 
Right ventricular performance in septic shock: a combined radionuclide 
and hemodynamic study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1984;4:945–951.
 141. Bird TM, Hobbs CA, Cleves MA, Tilford JM, Robbins JM. National rates of 
birth defects among hospitalized newborns. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol 
Teratol. 2006;76:762–769. doi: 10.1002/bdra.20323.
 142. Canfield MA, Honein MA, Yuskiv N, Xing J, Mai CT, Collins JS, Devine 
O, Petrini J, Ramadhani TA, Hobbs CA, Kirby RS. National estimates 
and race/ethnic-specific variation of selected birth defects in the United 
States, 1999-2001. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2006;76:747–
756. doi: 10.1002/bdra.20294.
 143. Mazor Dray E, Marelli AJ. Adult congenital heart disease: scope of the prob-
lem. Cardiol Clin. 2015;33:503–512, vii. doi: 10.1016/j.ccl.2015.07.001.
 144. Webb G, Gatzoulis MA. Atrial septal defects in the adult: recent 
progress 
and 
overview. 
Circulation. 
2006;114:1645–1653. 
doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.592055.
 145. Walker RE, Moran AM, Gauvreau K, Colan SD. Evidence of adverse 
ventricular interdependence in patients with atrial septal defects.  
Am 
J 
Cardiol. 
2004;93:1374–1377, 
A6. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.amjcard.2004.02.033.
 146. Konstam MA, Idoine J, Wynne J, Grossman W, Cohn L, Beck JR, Kozlowski J, 
Holman BL. Right ventricular function in adults with pulmonary hypertension 
with and without atrial septal defect. Am J Cardiol. 1983;51:1144–1148.
 147. Graham TP Jr, Bernard YD, Mellen BG, Celermajer D, Baumgartner H, 
Cetta F, Connolly HM, Davidson WR, Dellborg M, Foster E, Gersony WM, 
Gessner IH, Hurwitz RA, Kaemmerer H, Kugler JD, Murphy DJ, Noonan 
JA, Morris C, Perloff JK, Sanders SP
, Sutherland JL. Long-term outcome 
in congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries: a multi- 
institutional study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;36:255–261.
 148. Hutter PA, Kreb DL, Mantel SF, Hitchcock JF, Meijboom EJ, Bennink GB. 
Twenty-five years’ experience with the arterial switch operation. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;124:790–797.
 149. Julsrud PR, Weigel TJ, Van Son JA, Edwards WD, Mair DD, Driscoll DJ, 
Danielson GK, Puga FJ, Offord KP. Influence of ventricular morphology on 
outcome after the Fontan procedure. Am J Cardiol. 2000;86:319–323.
 150. Rathod RH, Prakash A, Powell AJ, Geva T. Myocardial fibrosis identified 
by cardiac magnetic resonance late gadolinium enhancement is associ-
ated with adverse ventricular mechanics and ventricular tachycardia late 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e615
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
after Fontan operation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:1721–1728. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2009.12.036.
 151. Zochios V, Jones N. Acute right heart syndrome in the critically ill patient. 
Heart Lung Vessel. 2014;6:157–170.
 152. Tongers J, Schwerdtfeger B, Klein G, Kempf T, Schaefer A, Knapp JM, 
Niehaus M, Korte T, Hoeper MM. Incidence and clinical relevance of su-
praventricular tachyarrhythmias in pulmonary hypertension. Am Heart J. 
2007;153:127–132. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2006.09.008.
 153. D’Alonzo GE, Barst RJ, Ayres SM, Bergofsky EH, Brundage BH, Detre KM, 
Fishman AP
, Goldring RM, Groves BM, Kernis JT. Survival in patients with 
primary pulmonary hypertension: results from a national prospective 
 
registry. Ann Intern Med. 1991;115:343–349.
 154. Sandek A, Bauditz J, Swidsinski A, Buhner S, Weber-Eibel J, von Haehling 
S, Schroedl W, Karhausen T, Doehner W, Rauchhaus M, Poole-Wilson 
P
, Volk HD, Lochs H, Anker SD. Altered intestinal function in patients 
with chronic heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:1561–1569. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2007.07.016.
 155. Verbrugge FH, Dupont M, Steels P
, Grieten L, Malbrain M, Tang WH, 
Mullens W. Abdominal contributions to cardiorenal dysfunction in 
congestive heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:485–495. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2013.04.070.
 156. Kiernan M, Udelson JE, Sarnak M, Konstam MA. Cardiorenal syndrome: 
definition, prevalence, diagnosis, and pathophysiology. In: Post TW, ed. 
UpToDate. Waltham, MA: UpToDate; 2017.
 157. Damman K, van Deursen VM, Navis G, Voors AA, van Veldhuisen DJ, Hillege 
HL. Increased central venous pressure is associated with impaired renal func-
tion and mortality in a broad spectrum of patients with cardiovascular dis-
ease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53:582–588. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.08.080.
 158. Testani JM, Chen J, McCauley BD, Kimmel SE, Shannon RP. Potential 
 
effects of aggressive decongestion during the treatment of decom-
pensated heart failure on renal function and survival. Circulation. 
2010;122:265–272. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.933275.
 159. Felker GM, Lee KL, Bull DA, Redfield MM, Stevenson LW, Goldsmith SR, 
LeWinter MM, Deswal A, Rouleau JL, Ofili EO, Anstrom KJ, Hernandez AF
, 
McNulty SE, Velazquez EJ, Kfoury AG, Chen HH, Givertz MM, Semigran 
MJ, Bart BA, Mascette AM, Braunwald E, O’Connor CM; NHLBI Heart 
Failure Clinical Research Network. Diuretic strategies in patients with acute 
decompensated heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:797–805. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1005419.
 160. Bart BA, Goldsmith SR, Lee KL, Givertz MM, O’Connor CM, Bull DA, Redfield 
MM, Deswal A, Rouleau JL, LeWinter MM, Ofili EO, Stevenson LW, Semigran 
MJ, Felker GM, Chen HH, Hernandez AF
, Anstrom KJ, McNulty SE, Velazquez 
EJ, Ibarra JC, Mascette AM, Braunwald E; Heart Failure Clinical Research 
Network. Ultrafiltration in decompensated heart failure with cardiorenal syn-
drome. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2296–2304. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1210357.
 161. Chen HH, Anstrom KJ, Givertz MM, Stevenson LW, Semigran MJ, Goldsmith 
SR, Bart BA, Bull DA, Stehlik J, LeWinter MM, Konstam MA, Huggins GS, 
Rouleau JL, O’Meara E, Tang WH, Starling RC, Butler J, Deswal A, Felker 
GM, O’Connor CM, Bonita RE, Margulies KB, Cappola TP
, Ofili EO, Mann 
DL, Dávila-Román VG, McNulty SE, Borlaug BA, Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Shah 
MR, Hernandez AF, Braunwald E, Redfield MM; NHLBI Heart Failure Clinical 
Research Network. Low-dose dopamine or low-dose nesiritide in acute 
heart failure with renal dysfunction: the ROSE acute heart failure random-
ized trial. JAMA. 2013;310:2533–2543. doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.282190.
 162. Wang Y, Attar BM, Gandhi S, Jaiswal P
, Bedsore S, Paranji N, Sharma S. 
Characterization of ascites in cardiac cirrhosis: the value of ascitic fluid 
protein to screen for concurrent cardiac cirrhosis. Scand J Gastroenterol. 
2017;52:898–903. doi: 10.1080/00365521.2017.1323230.
 163. Poelzl G, Ess M, Mussner-Seeber C, Pachinger O, Frick M, Ulmer H. 
Liver dysfunction in chronic heart failure: prevalence, characteristics 
and prognostic significance. Eur J Clin Invest. 2012;42:153–163. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2362.2011.02573.x.
 164. Allen LA, Felker GM, Pocock S, McMurray JJ, Pfeffer MA, Swedberg 
K, Wang D, Yusuf S, Michelson EL, Granger CB; CHARM Investigators. 
Liver function abnormalities and outcome in patients with chronic heart 
failure: data from the Candesartan in Heart Failure: Assessment of 
Reduction in Mortality and Morbidity (CHARM) program. Eur J Heart Fail. 
2009;11:170–177. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfn031.
 165. Lau GT, Tan HC, Kritharides L. Type of liver dysfunction in heart failure 
and its relation to the severity of tricuspid regurgitation. Am J Cardiol. 
2002;90:1405–1409.
 166. Takeda Y, Takeda Y, Tomimoto S, Tani T, Narita H, Kimura G. Bilirubin as a 
prognostic marker in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension. BMC 
Pulm Med. 2010;10:22. doi: 10.1186/1471-2466-10-22.
 167. Mehra MR, Canter CE, Hannan MM, Semigran MJ, Uber PA, Baran DA, 
Danziger-Isakov L, Kirklin JK, Kirk R, Kushwaha SS, Lund LH, Potena L, Ross 
HJ, Taylor DO, Verschuuren EA, Zuckermann A; International Society for Heart 
Lung Transplantation (ISHLT) Infectious Diseases Council; International Society 
for Heart Lung Transplantation (ISHLT) Pediatric Transplantation Council; 
International Society for Heart Lung Transplantation (ISHLT) Heart Failure 
and Transplantation Council. The 2016 International Society for Heart Lung 
Transplantation listing criteria for heart transplantation: a 10-year update. J 
Heart Lung Transplant. 2016;35:1–23. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2015.10.023.
 168. Safdar Z, Bartolome S, Sussman N. Portopulmonary hypertension: an up-
date. Liver Transpl. 2012;18:881–891. doi: 10.1002/lt.23485.
 169. Frea S, Bovolo V, Pidello S, Canavosio FG, Botta M, Bergerone S, 
Gaita F. Clinical and prognostic role of ammonia in advanced decom-
pensated heart failure: the cardio-abdominal syndrome? Int J Cardiol. 
2015;195:53–60. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.05.061.
 170. Meadows J, Gauvreau K, Jenkins K. Lymphatic obstruction and protein-
losing enteropathy in patients with congenital heart disease. Congenit 
Heart Dis. 2008;3:269–276. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-0803.2008.00201.x.
 171. Arutyunov GP
, Kostyukevich OI, Serov RA, Rylova NV, Bylova NA. Collagen 
accumulation and dysfunctional mucosal barrier of the small intestine in 
patients with chronic heart failure. Int J Cardiol. 2008;125:240–245. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijcard.2007.11.103.
 172. Hiew C, Collins N, Foy A, Thomson D, Bastian B. Successful surgical treat-
ment of protein-losing enteropathy complicating rheumatic tricuspid regur-
gitation. Heart Lung Circ. 2008;17:73–75. doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2006.11.004.
 173. Itkin M, Piccoli DA, Nadolski G, Rychik J, DeWitt A, Pinto E, Rome J, Dori 
Y. Protein-losing enteropathy in patients with congenital heart disease. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:2929–2937. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.04.023.
 174. Wiese J. The abdominojugular reflux sign. Am J Med. 2000;109:59–61.
 175. Kucher N, Walpoth N, Wustmann K, Noveanu M, Gertsch M. QR in V1: 
an ECG sign associated with right ventricular strain and adverse clinical 
outcome in pulmonary embolism. Eur Heart J. 2003;24:1113–1119.
 176. Murphy ML, Thenabadu PN, de Soyza N, Doherty JE, Meade J, Baker BJ, 
Whittle JL. Reevaluation of electrocardiographic criteria for left, right and com-
bined cardiac ventricular hypertrophy. Am J Cardiol. 1984;53:1140–1147.
 177. Samsky MD, Patel CB, DeWald TA, Smith AD, Felker GM, Rogers JG, 
Hernandez AF. Cardiohepatic interactions in heart failure: an overview 
and clinical implications. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:2397–2405. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2013.03.042.
 178. Rudski LG, Lai WW, Afilalo J, Hua L, Handschumacher MD, 
Chandrasekaran K, Solomon SD, Louie EK, Schiller NB. Guidelines for 
the echocardiographic assessment of the right heart in adults: a report 
from the American Society of Echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 
2010;23:685–713; quiz 786. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2010.05.010.
 179. Hayek S, Sims DB, Markham DW, Butler J, Kalogeropoulos AP
. 
Assessment of right ventricular function in left ventricular assist de-
vice candidates. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2014;7:379–389. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.113.001127.
 180. Kato TS, Jiang J, Schulze PC, Jorde U, Uriel N, Kitada S, Takayama H, Naka 
Y, Mancini D, Gillam L, Homma S, Farr M. Serial echocardiography using 
tissue Doppler and speckle tracking imaging to monitor right ventricular 
failure before and after left ventricular assist device surgery. JACC Heart 
Fail. 2013;1:216–222. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2013.02.005.
 181. Lai WW, Gauvreau K, Rivera ES, Saleeb S, Powell AJ, Geva T. Accuracy 
of guideline recommendations for two-dimensional quantification 
of the right ventricle by echocardiography. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2008;24:691–698. doi: 10.1007/s10554-008-9314-4.
 182. Lang RM, Badano LP
, Tsang W, Adams DH, Agricola E, Buck T, Faletra FF, 
Franke A, Hung J, de Isla LP
, Kamp O, Kasprzak JD, Lancellotti P
, Marwick TH, 
McCulloch ML, Monaghan MJ, Nihoyannopoulos P
, Pandian NG, Pellikka PA, 
Pepi M, Roberson DA, Shernan SK, Shirali GS, Sugeng L, Ten Cate FJ, Vannan 
MA, Zamorano JL, Zoghbi WA; American Society of Echocardiography; 
European Association of Echocardiography. EAE/ASE recommendations for 
image acquisition and display using three-dimensional echocardiography. J 
Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2012;25:3–46. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2011.11.010.
 183. Di Bello V, Conte L, Delle Donne MG, Giannini C, Barletta V, Fabiani I, Palagi 
C, Nardi C, Dini FL, Marconi L, Paggiaro P
, Palla A, Marzilli M. Advantages 
of real time three-dimensional echocardiography in the assessment of 
right ventricular volumes and function in patients with pulmonary hyper-
tension compared with conventional two-dimensional echocardiography. 
Echocardiography. 2013;30:820–828. doi: 10.1111/echo.12137.
 184. Li Y, Wang Y, Zhai Z, Guo X, Yang Y, Lu X. Real-time three-dimension-
al echocardiography to assess right ventricle function in patients with 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e616
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
pulmonary hypertension. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0129557. doi: 10.1371/ 
journal.pone.0129557.
 185. van der Zwaan HB, Helbing WA, McGhie JS, Geleijnse ML, Luijnenburg SE, 
Roos-Hesselink JW, Meijboom FJ. Clinical value of real-time three-dimen-
sional echocardiography for right ventricular quantification in congenital 
heart disease: validation with cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. J Am 
Soc Echocardiogr. 2010;23:134–140. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2009.12.001.
 186. Surie S, Bouma BJ, Bruin-Bon RA, Hardziyenka M, Kloek JJ, Van der 
Plas MN, Reesink HJ, Bresser P
. Time course of restoration of systolic 
and diastolic right ventricular function after pulmonary endarterecto-
my for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension. Am Heart J. 
2011;161:1046–1052. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2011.03.001.
 187. Utsunomiya H, Nakatani S, Nishihira M, Kanzaki H, Kyotani S, Nakanishi N, 
Kihara Y, Kitakaze M. Value of estimated right ventricular filling pressure in 
predicting cardiac events in chronic pulmonary arterial hypertension. J Am 
Soc Echocardiogr. 2009;22:1368–1374. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2009.08.023.
 188. Guazzi M, Bandera F, Pelissero G, Castelvecchio S, Menicanti L, Ghio S, 
Temporelli PL, Arena R. Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion and pul-
monary arterial systolic pressure relationship in heart failure: an index of 
right ventricular contractile function and prognosis. Am J Physiol Heart Circ 
Physiol. 2013;305:H1373–H1381. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00157.2013.
 189. Mackey ES, Sandler MP
, Campbell RM, Graham TP Jr, Atkinson JB, Price 
R, Moreau GA. Right ventricular myocardial mass quantification with 
magnetic resonance imaging. Am J Cardiol. 1990;65:529–532.
 190. Pattynama PM, Lamb HJ, Van der Velde EA, Van der Geest RJ, Van der Wall 
EE, De Roos A. Reproducibility of MRI-derived measurements of right ventric-
ular volumes and myocardial mass. Magn Reson Imaging. 1995;13:53–63.
 191. Katz J, Whang J, Boxt LM, Barst RJ. Estimation of right ventricular mass in 
normal subjects and in patients with primary pulmonary hypertension by nu-
clear magnetic resonance imaging. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;21:1475–1481.
 192. Geva T. Repaired tetralogy of Fallot: the roles of cardiovascular magnetic 
resonance in evaluating pathophysiology and for pulmonary valve re-
placement decision support. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2011;13:9. doi: 
10.1186/1532-429X-13-9.
 193. Wald RM, Valente AM, Gauvreau K, Babu-Narayan SV, Assenza GE, 
Schreier J, Gatzoulis MA, Kilner PJ, Koyak Z, Mulder B, Powell AJ, Geva 
T. Cardiac magnetic resonance markers of progressive RV dilation and 
dysfunction after tetralogy of Fallot repair. Heart. 2015;101:1724–1730. 
doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2015-308014.
 194. Zhu Y, Liu J, Weinsaft J, Spincemaille P
, Nguyen TD, Prince MR, Bao S, Xie 
Y, Wang Y. Free-breathing 3D imaging of right ventricular structure and 
function using respiratory and cardiac self-gated cine MRI. Biomed Res 
Int. 2015;2015:819102. doi: 10.1155/2015/819102.
 195. Gopalan D. Right heart on multidetector CT. Br J Radiol. 2011;84(Spec 
No 3):S306–S323. doi: 10.1259/bjr/59278996.
 196. Plumhans C, Mühlenbruch G, Rapaee A, Sim KH, Seyfarth T, Günther 
RW, Mahnken AH. Assessment of global right ventricular function on 
64-MDCT compared with MRI. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2008;190:1358–
1361. doi: 10.2214/AJR.07.3022.
 197. Oikawa M, Kagaya Y, Otani H, Sakuma M, Demachi J, Suzuki J, Takahashi 
T, Nawata J, Ido T, Watanabe J, Shirato K. Increased [18F]fluorodeoxy-
glucose accumulation in right ventricular free wall in patients with pul-
monary hypertension and the effect of epoprostenol. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2005;45:1849–1855. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.02.065.
 198. Piao L, Fang YH, Cadete VJ, Wietholt C, Urboniene D, Toth PT, Marsboom 
G, Zhang HJ, Haber I, Rehman J, Lopaschuk GD, Archer SL. The inhibition 
of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase improves impaired cardiac function 
and electrical remodeling in two models of right ventricular hyper-
trophy: resuscitating the hibernating right ventricle. J Mol Med (Berl). 
2010;88:47–60. doi: 10.1007/s00109-009-0524-6.
 199. Lupi E, Dumont C, Tejada VM, Horwitz S, Galland F. A radiologic index of 
pulmonary arterial hypertension. Chest. 1975;68:28–31.
 200. Matthay RA, Schwarz MI, Ellis JH Jr, Steele PP
, Siebert PE, Durrance JR, Levin 
DC. Pulmonary artery hypertension in chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease: determination by chest radiography. Invest Radiol. 1981;16:95–100.
 201. Atluri P
, Goldstone AB, Fairman AS, MacArthur JW, Shudo Y, Cohen JE, 
Acker AL, Hiesinger W, Howard JL, Acker MA, Woo YJ. Predicting right 
ventricular failure in the modern, continuous flow left ventricular assist 
device era. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;96:857–863.
 202. Lopez-Sendon J, Coma-Canella I, Gamallo C. Sensitivity and specificity of 
hemodynamic criteria in the diagnosis of acute right ventricular infarc-
tion. Circulation. 1981;64:515–525. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.64.3.515.
 203. Korabathina R, Heffernan KS, Paruchuri V, Patel AR, Mudd JO, Prutkin JM, 
Orr NM, Weintraub A, Kimmelstiel CD, Kapur NK. The pulmonary artery 
pulsatility index identifies severe right ventricular dysfunction in acute 
inferior myocardial infarction. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2012;80:593–
600. doi: 10.1002/ccd.23309.
 204. Morine KJ, Kiernan MS, Pham DT, Paruchuri V, Denofrio D, Kapur NK. 
Pulmonary artery pulsatility index is associated with right ventricular fail-
ure after left ventricular assist device surgery. J Card Fail. 2016;22:110–
116. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2015.10.019.
 205. Fitzpatrick JR 3rd, Frederick JR, Hsu VM, Kozin ED, O’Hara ML, Howell E, 
Dougherty D, McCormick RC, Laporte CA, Cohen JE, Southerland KW, 
Howard JL, Jessup ML, Morris RJ, Acker MA, Woo YJ. Risk score derived 
from pre-operative data analysis predicts the need for biventricular me-
chanical circulatory support. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2008;27:1286–1292
 206. Fukamachi K, McCarthy PM, Smedira NG, Vargo RL, Starling RC, Young JB. 
Preoperative risk factors for right ventricular failure after implantable left 
ventricular assist device insertion. Ann Thorac Surg. 1999;68:2181–2184.
 207. Drakos SG, Janicki L, Horne BD, Kfoury AG, Reid BB, Clayson S, Horton 
K, Haddad F, Li DY, Renlund DG, Fisher PW. Risk factors predictive of right 
ventricular failure after left ventricular assist device implantation. Am J 
Cardiol. 2010;105:1030–1035. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2009.11.026.
 208. Kapur NK, Esposito ML, Bader Y
, Morine KJ, Kiernan MS, Pham DT
, Burkhoff 
D. Mechanical circulatory support devices for acute right ventricular failure. 
Circulation. 2017;136:314–326. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.025290.
 209. Drazner MH, Hamilton MA, Fonarow G, Creaser J, Flavell C, Stevenson LW. 
Relationship between right and left-sided filling pressures in 1000 patients 
with advanced heart failure. J Heart Lung Transplant. 1999;18:1126–1132.
 210. Campbell P
, Drazner MH, Kato M, Lakdawala N, Palardy M, Nohria 
A, Stevenson LW. Mismatch of right- and left-sided filling pres-
sures in chronic heart failure. J Card Fail. 2011;17:561–568. doi: 
10.1016/j.cardfail.2011.02.013.
 211. Reed CE, Dorman BH, Spinale FG. Assessment of right ventricular 
contractile performance after pulmonary resection. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1993;56:426–431.
 212. Grant AD, Smedira NG, Starling RC, Marwick TH. Independent and incre-
mental role of quantitative right ventricular evaluation for the prediction 
of right ventricular failure after left ventricular assist device implantation. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:521–528. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.02.073.
 213. Ochiai Y, McCarthy PM, Smedira NG, Banbury MK, Navia JL, Feng J, 
Hsu AP
, Yeager ML, Buda T, Hoercher KJ, Howard MW, Takagaki M, 
Doi K, Fukamachi K. Predictors of severe right ventricular failure af-
ter implantable left ventricular assist device insertion: analysis of 245 
 
patients. Circulation. 2002;106(suppl 1):I198–I202.
 214. Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Pagani FD, Kormos RL, Stevenson LW, Blume 
ED, Myers SL, Miller MA, Baldwin JT, Young JB. Seventh INTERMACS 
annual report: 15,000 patients and counting. J Heart Lung Transplant. 
2015;34:1495–1504
 215. Slaughter MS, Rogers JG, Milano CA, Russell SD, Conte JV, Feldman D, 
Sun B, Tatooles AJ, Delgado RM 3rd, Long JW, Wozniak TC, Ghumman 
W, Farrar DJ, Frazier OH; HeartMate II Investigators. Advanced heart fail-
ure treated with continuous-flow left ventricular assist device. N Engl J 
Med. 2009;361:2241–2251. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0909938.
 216. Matthews JC, Koelling TM, Pagani FD, Aaronson KD. The right ventricu-
lar failure risk score a pre-operative tool for assessing the risk of right 
ventricular failure in left ventricular assist device candidates. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2008;51:2163–2172. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.03.009.
 217. Kalogeropoulos AP
, Kelkar A, Weinberger JF, Morris AA, Georgiopoulou 
VV, Markham DW, Butler J, Vega JD, Smith AL. Validation of clini-
cal scores for right ventricular failure prediction after implantation of 
continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices. J Heart Lung Transplant. 
2015;34:1595–1603. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2015.05.005.
 218. Kormos RL, Gasior TA, Kawai A, Pham SM, Murali S, Hattler BG, Griffith 
BP
. Transplant candidate’s clinical status rather than right ventricular 
function defines need for univentricular versus biventricular support. 
 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;111:773–782.
 219. Pagani FD, Lynch W, Swaniker F, Dyke DB, Bartlett R, Koelling T, Moscucci 
M, Deeb GM, Bolling S, Monaghan H, Aaronson KD. Extracorporeal 
life support to left ventricular assist device bridge to heart transplant: 
a strategy to optimize survival and resource utilization. Circulation. 
1999;100(suppl):II206–II210. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.100.suppl_2.II-206.
 220. Braunwald E. Biomarkers in heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2148–
2159. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra0800239.
 221. Cepkova M, Kapur V, Ren X, Quinn T, Zhuo H, Foster E, Matthay MA, 
Liu KD. Clinical significance of elevated B-type natriuretic peptide in pa-
tients with acute lung injury with or without right ventricular dilatation: 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e617
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
an observational cohort study. Ann Intensive Care. 2011;1:18. doi: 
10.1186/2110-5820-1-18.
 222. Troughton RW, Prior DL, Pereira JJ, Martin M, Fogarty A, Morehead A, 
Yandle TG, Richards AM, Starling RC, Young JB, Thomas JD, Klein AL. 
Plasma B-type natriuretic peptide levels in systolic heart failure: importance 
of left ventricular diastolic function and right ventricular systolic function. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43:416–422. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2003.08.046.
 223. Mariano-Goulart D, Eberlé MC, Boudousq V, Hejazi-Moughari A, Piot C, 
Caderas de Kerleau C, Verdier R, Barge ML, Comte F, Bressot N, Rossi 
M, Kotzki PO. Major increase in brain natriuretic peptide indicates right 
ventricular systolic dysfunction in patients with heart failure. Eur J Heart 
Fail. 2003;5:481–488.
 224. Benza RL, Gomberg-Maitland M, Miller DP
, Frost A, Frantz RP
, Foreman 
AJ, Badesch DB, McGoon MD. The REVEAL Registry risk score calcula-
tor in patients newly diagnosed with pulmonary arterial hypertension. 
Chest. 2012;141:354–362. doi: 10.1378/chest.11-0676.
 225. Mehta NJ, Jani K, Khan IA. Clinical usefulness and prognostic value of el-
evated cardiac troponin I levels in acute pulmonary embolism. Am Heart 
J. 2003;145:821–825. doi: 10.1016/S0002-8703(02)94704-6.
 226. Lim W, Cook DJ, Griffith LE, Crowther MA, Devereaux PJ. Elevated car-
diac troponin levels in critically ill patients: prevalence, incidence, and 
outcomes. Am J Crit Care. 2006;15:280–8; quiz 289.
 227. Torbicki A, Kurzyna M, Kuca P
, Fijałkowska A, Sikora J, Florczyk M, 
Pruszczyk P
, Burakowski J, Wawrzyńska L. Detectable serum cardiac tro-
ponin T as a marker of poor prognosis among patients with chronic pre-
capillary pulmonary hypertension. Circulation. 2003;108:844–848. doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000084544.54513.E2.
 228. Cavallazzi R, Nair A, Vasu T, Marik PE. Natriuretic peptides in acute pulmo-
nary embolism: a systematic review. Intensive Care Med. 2008;34:2147–
2156. doi: 10.1007/s00134-008-1214-5.
 229. Becattini C, Casazza F, Forgione C, Porro F, Fadin BM, Stucchi A, Lignani 
A, Conte L, Imperadore F, Bongarzoni A, Agnelli G. Acute pulmonary 
embolism: external validation of an integrated risk stratification model. 
Chest. 2013;144:1539–1545. doi: 10.1378/chest.12-2938.
 230. Wang XM, Zhang K, Li Y, Shi K, Liu YL, Yang YF, Fang Y, Mao M. Screening 
miRNA and their target genes related to tetralogy of Fallot with microarray. 
Cardiol Young. 2014;24:442–446. doi: 10.1017/S104795111300053X.
 231. Li D, Ji L, Liu L, Liu Y, Hou H, Yu K, Sun Q, Zhao Z. Characterization of cir-
culating microRNA expression in patients with a ventricular septal defect. 
PLoS One. 2014;9:e106318. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106318.
 232. Lai CT, Ng EK, Chow PC, Kwong A, Cheung YF. Circulating microRNA 
expression profile and systemic right ventricular function in adults after 
atrial switch operation for complete transposition of the great arteries. 
BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2013;13:73. doi: 10.1186/1471-2261-13-73.
 233. Lai CT, Chow PC, Wong SJ, Chan KW, Cheung YF. Circulating annexin A5 
levels after atrial switch for transposition of the great arteries: relationship 
with ventricular deformation and geometry. PLoS One. 2012;7:e52125. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052125.
 234. Lai CT, Chan KW, Wong SJ, Chow PC, Cheung YF. Circulating levels of 
biomarkers of collagen synthesis and ventricular function and dyssyn-
chrony in adolescents and young adults after repair of tetralogy of Fallot. 
Am Heart J. 2011;162:467–473. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2011.05.027.
 235. Tutarel O, Röntgen P, Bode-Böger SM, Martens-Lobenhoffer J, Westhoff-
Bleck M, Diller GP, Bauersachs J, Kielstein JT. Symmetrical dimethylarginine 
is superior to NT-proBNP for detecting systemic ventricular dysfunction 
in adults after atrial repair for transposition of the great arteries. Int J 
Cardiol. 2013;168:4415–4416. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.05.030.
 236. Shah A, Feraco AM, Harmon C, Tacy T, Fineman JR, Bernstein HS. 
Usefulness of various plasma biomarkers for diagnosis of heart failure in 
children with single ventricle physiology. Am J Cardiol. 2009;104:1280–
1284. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2009.06.046.
 237. Nagendran J, Gurtu V, Fu DZ, Dyck JR, Haromy A, Ross DB, Rebeyka 
IM, Michelakis ED. A dynamic and chamber-specific mitochondrial re-
modeling in right ventricular hypertrophy can be therapeutically target-
ed. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008;136:168–178, 178.1–178.e3. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2008.01.040.
 238. Reddy S, Bernstein D. Molecular mechanisms of right ventricular failure. 
Circulation. 2015;132:1734–1742. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
114.012975.
 239. di Salvo TG, Yang KC, Brittain E, Absi T, Maltais S, Hemnes A. Right 
ventricular myocardial biomarkers in human heart failure. J Card Fail. 
2015;21:398–411. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2015.02.005.
 240. Lewis GD, Ngo D, Hemnes AR, Farrell L, Domos C, Pappagianopoulos 
PP
, Dhakal BP
, Souza A, Shi X, Pugh ME, Beloiartsev A, Sinha S, Clish CB, 
Gerszten RE. Metabolic profiling of right ventricular-pulmonary vascular 
function reveals circulating biomarkers of pulmonary hypertension. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:174–189. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.10.072.
 241. Reddy S, Zhao M, Hu DQ, Fajardo G, Katznelson E, Punn R, Spin JM, Chan 
FP, Bernstein D. Physiologic and molecular characterization of a murine 
model of right ventricular volume overload. Am J Physiol Heart Circ 
Physiol. 2013;304:H1314–H1327. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00776.2012.
 242. Di Salvo TG. Evolving targeted therapies for right ventricular failure. 
Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2015;15:1263–1283.
 243. Piazza G, Goldhaber SZ. The acutely decompensated right ventricle: 
pathways for diagnosis and management. Chest. 2005;128:1836–1852. 
doi: 10.1378/chest.128.3.1836.
 244. Price LC, Wort SJ, Finney SJ, Marino PS, Brett SJ. Pulmonary vascular and 
right ventricular dysfunction in adult critical care: current and emerg-
ing options for management: a systematic literature review. Crit Care. 
2010;14:R169. doi: 10.1186/cc9264.
 245. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey DE Jr, Drazner MH, 
Fonarow GC, Geraci SA, Horwich T, Januzzi JL, Johnson MR, Kasper EK, 
Levy WC, Masoudi FA, McBride PE, McMurray JJV, Mitchell JE, Peterson 
PN, Riegel B, Sam F, Stevenson LW, Tang WHW, Tsai EJ, Wilkoff BL. 2013 
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2013;128:e240–e327. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0b013e31829e8776.
 246. Vonk Noordegraaf A, Westerhof BE, Westerhof N. The relationship be-
tween the right ventricle and its load in pulmonary hypertension. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:236–243. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.10.047.
 247. Banerjee D, Haddad F, Zamanian RT, Nagendran J. Right ventricular fail-
ure: a novel era of targeted therapy. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2010;7:202–
211. doi: 10.1007/s11897-010-0031-7.
 248. Dell’Italia LJ, Starling MR, Blumhardt R, Lasher JC, O’Rourke RA. 
Comparative effects of volume loading, dobutamine, and nitroprusside 
in patients with predominant right ventricular infarction. Circulation. 
1985;72:1327–1335. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.72.6.1327.
 249. Marenzi G, Lauri G, Grazi M, Assanelli E, Campodonico J, Agostoni P
. 
Circulatory response to fluid overload removal by extracorporeal ul-
trafiltration in refractory congestive heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2001;38:963–968.
 250. Dupont M, Mullens W, Tang WH. Impact of systemic venous con-
gestion in heart failure. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2011;8:233–241. doi: 
10.1007/s11897-011-0071-7.
 251. Wencker D. Acute cardio-renal syndrome: progression from conges-
tive heart failure to congestive kidney failure. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 
2007;4:134–138.
 252. Ellison DH. Diuretic therapy and resistance in congestive heart failure. 
Cardiology. 2001;96:132–143.
 253. Bart BA, Goldsmith SR, Lee KL, Redfield MM, Felker GM, O’Connor 
CM, Chen HH, Rouleau JL, Givertz MM, Semigran MJ, Mann D, Deswal 
A, Bull DA, Lewinter MM, Braunwald E; Heart Failure Clinical Research 
Network. Cardiorenal rescue study in acute decompensated heart failure: 
rationale and design of CARRESS-HF,. J Card Fail. 2012;18:176–182. doi: 
10.1016/j.cardfail.2011.12.009.
 254. Boerrigter G, Burnett JC Jr. Cardiorenal syndrome in decompensated 
heart failure: prognostic and therapeutic implications. Curr Heart Fail 
Rep. 2004;1:113–120.
 255. Butler J, Hernandez AF, Anstrom KJ, Kalogeropoulos A, Redfield MM, 
Konstam MA, Tang WH, Felker GM, Shah MR, Braunwald E. Rationale 
and design of the ATHENA-HF Trial: Aldosterone Targeted Neurohormonal 
Combined With Natriuresis Therapy in Heart Failure. JACC Heart Fail. 
2016;4:726–735. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2016.06.003.
 256. van der Meer P
, Postmus D, Ponikowski P
, Cleland JG, O’Connor CM, 
Cotter G, Metra M, Davison BA, Givertz MM, Mansoor GA, Teerlink JR, 
Massie BM, Hillege HL, Voors AA. The predictive value of short-term 
changes in hemoglobin concentration in patients presenting with acute 
decompensated heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:1973–1981. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.12.050.
 257. Costanzo MR, Saltzberg M, O’Sullivan J, Sobotka P
. Early ultrafiltration in 
patients with decompensated heart failure and diuretic resistance. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:2047–2051. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.05.099.
 258. Costanzo MR, Negoianu D, Jaski BE, Bart BA, Heywood JT, Anand IS, 
Smelser JM, Kaneshige AM, Chomsky DB, Adler ED, Haas GJ, Watts JA, 
Nabut JL, Schollmeyer MP
, Fonarow GC. Aquapheresis versus intrave-
nous diuretics and hospitalizations for heart failure. JACC Heart Fail. 
2016;4:95–105.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e618
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 259. Morelli A, Teboul JL, Maggiore SM, Vieillard-Baron A, Rocco M, Conti 
G, De Gaetano A, Picchini U, Orecchioni A, Carbone I, Tritapepe L, 
Pietropaoli P
, Westphal M. Effects of levosimendan on right ven-
tricular afterload in patients with acute respiratory distress syn-
drome: a pilot study. Crit Care Med. 2006;34:2287–2293. doi: 
10.1097/01.CCM.0000230244.17174.4F.
 260. Inglessis I, Shin JT, Lepore JJ, Palacios IF, Zapol WM, Bloch KD, Semigran 
MJ. Hemodynamic effects of inhaled nitric oxide in right ventricular myo-
cardial infarction and cardiogenic shock. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:793–
798. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2004.05.047.
 261. Mullens W, Abrahams Z, Francis GS, Skouri HN, Starling RC, Young 
JB, Taylor DO, Tang WH. Sodium nitroprusside for advanced low-
output heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:200–207. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2008.02.083.
 262. Stevenson LW, Bellil D, Grover-McKay M, Brunken RC, Schwaiger M, 
Tillisch JH, Schelbert HR. Effects of afterload reduction (diuretics and va-
sodilators) on left ventricular volume and mitral regurgitation in severe 
congestive heart failure secondary to ischemic or idiopathic dilated car-
diomyopathy. Am J Cardiol. 1987;60:654–658.
 263. Elkayam U, Kulick D, McIntosh N, Roth A, Hsueh W, Rahimtoola SH. 
Incidence of early tolerance to hemodynamic effects of continuous infu-
sion of nitroglycerin in patients with coronary artery disease and heart 
failure. Circulation. 1987;76:577–584.
 264. Califf RM, Adams KF, McKenna WJ, Gheorghiade M, Uretsky BF, 
McNulty SE, Darius H, Schulman K, Zannad F, Handberg-Thurmond E, 
Harrell FE Jr, Wheeler W, Soler-Soler J, Swedberg K. A randomized con-
trolled trial of epoprostenol therapy for severe congestive heart failure: 
the Flolan International Randomized Survival Trial (FIRST). Am Heart J. 
1997;134:44–54.
 265. Cockrill BA, Kacmarek RM, Fifer MA, Bigatello LM, Ginns LC, Zapol 
WM, Semigran MJ. Comparison of the effects of nitric oxide, nitro-
prusside, and nifedipine on hemodynamics and right ventricular 
contractility in patients with chronic pulmonary hypertension. Chest. 
2001;119:128–136.
 266. Koelling TM, Kirmse M, Di Salvo TG, Dec GW, Zapol WM, Semigran 
MJ. Inhaled nitric oxide improves exercise capacity in patients with 
severe heart failure and right ventricular dysfunction. Am J Cardiol. 
1998;81:1494–1497.
 267. Pasero D, Rana NK, Bonato R, Ribezzo M, Ivaldi F, Ricci D, Grosso Marra 
W, Checco L, Lupo M, Boffini M, Rinaldi M. Inhaled nitric oxide versus 
sodium nitroprusside for preoperative evaluation of pulmonary hyper-
tension in heart transplant candidates. Transplant Proc. 2013;45:2746–
2749. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2013.07.044.
 268. Wasson S, Govindarajan G, Reddy HK, Flaker G. The role of nitric oxide 
and vasopressin in refractory right heart failure. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 
Ther. 2004;9:9–11. doi: 10.1177/107424840400900i102.
 269. Trummer G, Berchtold-Herz M, Martin J, Beyersdorf F. Successful treat-
ment of pulmonary hypertension with inhaled nitric oxide after pulmo-
nary embolectomy. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;73:1299–1301.
 270. Argenziano M, Choudhri AF, Moazami N, Rose EA, Smith CR, Levin HR, 
Smerling AJ, Oz MC. Randomized, double-blind trial of inhaled nitric ox-
ide in LVAD recipients with pulmonary hypertension. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1998;65:340–345.
 271. Kukucka M, Potapov E, Stepanenko A, Weller K, Mladenow A, Kuppe H, 
Habazettl H. Acute impact of left ventricular unloading by left ventricular 
assist device on the right ventricle geometry and function: effect of nitric 
oxide inhalation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;141:1009–1014. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2010.08.010.
 272. Lovich MA, Pezone MJ, Wakim MG, Denton RJ, Maslov MY, Murray MR, 
Tsukada H, Agnihotri AK, Roscigno RF, Gamero LG, Gilbert RJ. Inhaled 
nitric oxide augments left ventricular assist device capacity by ameliorat-
ing secondary right ventricular failure. ASAIO J. 2015;61:379–385. doi: 
10.1097/MAT.0000000000000211.
 273. Bocchi EA, Bacal F, Auler Júnior JO, Carmone MJ, Bellotti G, Pileggi F. 
Inhaled nitric oxide leading to pulmonary edema in stable severe heart 
failure. Am J Cardiol. 1994;74:70–72.
 274. Baker WL, Radojevic J, Gluck JA. Systematic review of phosphodies-
terase-5 inhibitor use in right ventricular failure following left ventric-
ular assist device implantation. Artif Organs. 2016;40:123–128. doi: 
10.1111/aor.12518.
 275. Critoph C, Green G, Hayes H, Baumwol J, Lam K, Larbalestier R, Chih S. 
Clinical outcomes of patients treated with pulmonary vasodilators early 
and in high dose after left ventricular assist device implantation. Artif 
Organs. 2016;40:106–114. doi: 10.1111/aor.12502.
 276. Felker GM, Benza RL, Chandler AB, Leimberger JD, Cuffe MS, Califf 
RM, Gheorghiade M, O’Connor CM; OPTIME-CHF Investigators. 
Heart failure etiology and response to milrinone in decompensated 
heart failure: results from the OPTIME-CHF study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2003;41:997–1003.
 277. Sonnenblick EH, Frishman WH, LeJemtel TH. Dobutamine: a new syn-
thetic cardioactive sympathetic amine. N Engl J Med. 1979;300:17–22. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJM197901043000105.
 278. Ruffolo RR Jr. The pharmacology of dobutamine. Am J Med Sci. 
1987;294:244–248.
 279. Movsesian M, Stehlik J, Vandeput F, Bristow MR. Phosphodiesterase 
inhibition in heart failure. Heart Fail Rev. 2009;14:255–263. doi: 
10.1007/s10741-008-9130-x.
 280. Aranda JM Jr, Schofield RS, Pauly DF, Cleeton TS, Walker TC, Monroe 
VS Jr, Leach D, Lopez LM, Hill JA. Comparison of dobutamine versus 
milrinone therapy in hospitalized patients awaiting cardiac transplanta-
tion: a prospective, randomized trial. Am Heart J. 2003;145:324–329. 
doi: 10.1067/mhj.2003.50.
 281. Mehra MR, Ventura HO, Kapoor C, Stapleton DD, Zimmerman D, Smart 
FW. Safety and clinical utility of long-term intravenous milrinone in ad-
vanced heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 1997;80:61–64.
 282. Colucci WS, Wright RF, Jaski BE, Fifer MA, Braunwald E. Milrinone and 
dobutamine in severe heart failure: differing hemodynamic effects and in-
dividual patient responsiveness. Circulation. 1986;73(pt 2):III175–III183.
 283. Monrad ES, Baim DS, Smith HS, Lanoue AS. Milrinone, dobutamine, and 
nitroprusside: comparative effects on hemodynamics and myocardial 
energetics in patients with severe congestive heart failure. Circulation. 
1986;73:III168–III174.
 284. Kanai-Yoshizawa S, Sugiyama Kato T, Mancini D, Marboe CC. 
Hypersensitivity myocarditis and outcome after heart transplantation. 
J Heart Lung Transplant. 2013;32:553–559. doi: 10.1016/j.healun. 
2013.01.1052.
 285. Abraham WT, Adams KF, Fonarow GC, Costanzo MR, Berkowitz RL, 
LeJemtel TH, Cheng ML, Wynne J; ADHERE Scientific Advisory Committee 
and Investigators; ADHERE Study Group. In-hospital mortality in patients 
with acute decompensated heart failure requiring intravenous vasoactive 
medications: an analysis from the Acute Decompensated Heart Failure 
National Registry (ADHERE). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:57–64. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2005.03.051.
 286. O’Connor CM, Gattis WA, Uretsky BF, Adams KF Jr, McNulty SE, 
Grossman SH, McKenna WJ, Zannad F, Swedberg K, Gheorghiade M, 
Califf RM. Continuous intravenous dobutamine is associated with an 
increased risk of death in patients with advanced heart failure: insights 
from the Flolan International Randomized Survival Trial (FIRST). Am Heart 
J. 1999;138(pt 1):78–86.
 287. Felker GM, O’Connor CM. Inotropic therapy for heart failure: an 
evidence-based approach. Am Heart J. 2001;142:393–401. doi: 
10.1067/mhj.2001.117606.
 288. Packer M, Carver JR, Rodeheffer RJ, Ivanhoe RJ, DiBianco R, Zeldis 
SM, Hendrix GH, Bommer WJ, Elkayam U, Kukin ML. Effect of oral 
milrinone on mortality in severe chronic heart failure: the PROMISE 
Study Research Group. N Engl J Med. 1991;325:1468–1475. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM199111213252103.
 289. De Backer D, Biston P
, Devriendt J, Madl C, Chochrad D, Aldecoa C, 
Brasseur A, Defrance P
, Gottignies P
, Vincent JL; SOAP II Investigators. 
Comparison of dopamine and norepinephrine in the treatment of shock. 
N Engl J Med. 2010;362:779–789. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0907118.
 290. Murphy MB, Elliott WJ. Dopamine and dopamine receptor agonists in 
cardiovascular therapy. Crit Care Med. 1990;18(pt 2):S14–S18.
 291. Löllgen H, Drexler H. Use of inotropes in the critical care setting. Crit Care 
Med. 1990;18(pt 2):S56–S60.
 292. Holmes CL, Patel BM, Russell JA, Walley KR. Physiology of vasopressin 
relevant to management of septic shock. Chest. 2001;120:989–1002.
 293. Edwards RM, Trizna W, Kinter LB. Renal microvascular effects of vaso-
pressin and vasopressin antagonists. Am J Physiol. 1989;256(pt 2):F274–
F278. doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.1989.256.2.F274.
 294. Testani JM, Khera AV, St John Sutton MG, Keane MG, Wiegers SE, 
Shannon RP
, Kirkpatrick JN. Effect of right ventricular function and ve-
nous congestion on cardiorenal interactions during the treatment of 
decompensated heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 2010;105:511–516. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjcard.2009.10.020.
 295. Vasko MR, Cartwright DB, Knochel JP
, Nixon JV, Brater DC. Furosemide 
absorption altered in decompensated congestive heart failure. Ann 
Intern Med. 1985;102:314–318.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e619
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 296. Cosín J, Díez J; TORIC Investigators. Torasemide in chronic heart failure: 
results of the TORIC study. Eur J Heart Fail. 2002;4:507–513.
 297. Ponikowski P
, Voors AA, Anker SD, Bueno H, Cleland JG, Coats AJ, Falk 
V, González-Juanatey JR, Harjola VP
, Jankowska EA, Jessup M, Linde C, 
Nihoyannopoulos P
, Parissis JT, Pieske B, Riley JP
, Rosano GM, Ruilope 
LM, Ruschitzka F, Rutten FH, van der Meer P
. 2016 ESC guidelines for the 
diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure: the Task Force 
for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute and Chronic Heart Failure of 
the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2016;37:2129–
2200. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehw128.
 298. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey DE Jr, Colvin MM, 
Drazner MH, Filippatos G, Fonarow GC, Givertz MM, Hollenberg SM, 
Lindenfeld J, Masoudi FA, McBride PE, Peterson PN, Stevenson LW, 
Westlake C. 2016 ACC/AHA/HFSA focused update on new pharma-
cological therapy for heart failure: an update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA 
guideline for the management of heart failure: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines and the Heart Failure Society of America. Circulation. 
2016;134:e282–e293. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000435.
 299. Beck-da-Silva L, de Bold A, Davies R, Chow B, Ruddy T, Fraser M, 
Struthers C, Haddad H. Effect of bisoprolol on right ventricular function 
and brain natriuretic peptide in patients with heart failure. Congest Heart 
Fail. 2004;10:127–132.
 300. Cho MJ, Lim RK, Jung Kwak M, Park KH, Kim HY, Kim YM, Lee HD. 
Effects of beta-blockers for congestive heart failure in pediatric and 
congenital heart disease patients: a meta-analysis of published studies. 
Minerva Cardioangiol. 2015;63:495–505.
 301. Doughan AR, McConnell ME, Book WM. Effect of beta blockers 
(carvedilol or metoprolol XL) in patients with transposition of great 
arteries and dysfunction of the systemic right ventricle. Am J Cardiol. 
2007;99:704–706. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2006.10.025.
 302. Giardini A, Lovato L, Donti A, Formigari R, Gargiulo G, Picchio FM, 
Fattori R. A pilot study on the effects of carvedilol on right ventricu-
lar remodelling and exercise tolerance in patients with systemic right 
ventricle. Int J Cardiol. 2007;114:241–246. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2006. 
01.048.
 303. Hiroi Y, Fujiu K, Komatsu S, Sonoda M, Sakomura Y, Imai Y, Oishi Y, 
Nakamura F, Ajiki K, Hayami N, Murakawa Y, Ohno M, Hirata Y, Ohtomo 
K, Nagai R. Carvedilol therapy improved left ventricular function in a pa-
tient with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. Jpn Heart J. 
2004;45:169–177.
 304. Quaife RA, Christian PE, Gilbert EM, Datz FL, Volkman K, Bristow MR. 
Effects of carvedilol on right ventricular function in chronic heart failure. 
Am J Cardiol. 1998;81:247–250.
 305. So PP
, Davies RA, Chandy G, Stewart D, Beanlands RS, Haddad H, 
Pugliese C, Mielniczuk LM. Usefulness of beta-blocker therapy and out-
comes in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension. Am J Cardiol. 
2012;109:1504–1509. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.01.368.
 306. Tatli E, Kurum T, Aktoz M, Buyuklu M. Effects of carvedilol on 
right ventricular ejection fraction and cytokines levels in patients 
with systolic heart failure. Int J Cardiol. 2008;125:273–276. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijcard.2007.07.166.
 307. Thenappan T, Roy SS, Duval S, Glassner-Kolmin C, Gomberg-
Maitland M. β-Blocker therapy is not associated with adverse 
outcomes in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension: a 
propensity score analysis. Circ Heart Fail. 2014;7:903–910. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.114.001429.
 308. Butorov IV, Verbitskiĭ ON, Butorov SI, Paraska VI. Efficacy of losartan 
treatment of right ventricular cardiac insufficiency in patients with chron-
ic obstructive bronchitis [in Russian]. Klin Med (Mosk). 2003;81:48–51.
 309. Hechter SJ, Fredriksen PM, Liu P
, Veldtman G, Merchant N, Freeman 
M, Therrien J, Benson L, Siu S, Webb G. Angiotensin-converting en-
zyme inhibitors in adults after the Mustard procedure. Am J Cardiol. 
2001;87:660–663, A11.
 310. Kiely DG, Cargill RI, Wheeldon NM, Coutie WJ, Lipworth BJ. 
Haemodynamic and endocrine effects of type 1 angiotensin II receptor 
blockade in patients with hypoxaemic cor pulmonale. Cardiovasc Res. 
1997;33:201–208.
 311. Lester SJ, McElhinney DB, Viloria E, Reddy GP
, Ryan E, Tworetzky W, 
Schiller NB, Foster E. Effects of losartan in patients with a systemically 
functioning morphologic right ventricle after atrial repair of transposition 
of the great arteries. Am J Cardiol. 2001;88:1314–1316.
 312. Rubin LJ, Handel F, Peter RH. The effects of oral hydralazine on right 
ventricular end-diastolic pressure in patients with right ventricular failure. 
Circulation. 1982;65:1369–1373. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.65.7.1369.
 313. Dore A, Houde C, Chan KL, Ducharme A, Khairy P
, Juneau M, Marcotte 
F, Mercier LA. Angiotensin receptor blockade and exercise capacity in 
adults with systemic right ventricles: a multicenter, randomized, pla-
cebo-controlled clinical trial. Circulation. 2005;112:2411–2416. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.543470.
 314. Morrell NW, Higham MA, Phillips PG, Shakur BH, Robinson PJ, Beddoes 
RJ. Pilot study of losartan for pulmonary hypertension in chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease. Respir Res. 2005;6:88. doi: 10.1186/ 
1465-9921-6-88.
 315. Therrien J, Provost Y, Harrison J, Connelly M, Kaemmerer H, Webb 
GD. Effect of angiotensin receptor blockade on systemic right ven-
tricular function and size: a small, randomized, placebo-controlled 
study. Int J Cardiol. 2008;129:187–192. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2008. 
04.056.
 316. Groves BM, Rubin LJ, Frosolono MF, Cato AE, Reeves JT. A comparison 
of the acute hemodynamic effects of prostacyclin and hydralazine in pri-
mary pulmonary hypertension. Am Heart J. 1985;110:1200–1204.
 317. McGoon MD, Seward JB, Vlietstra RE, Choo MH, Moyer TP
, Reeder GS. 
Haemodynamic response to intravenous hydralazine in patients with pul-
monary hypertension. Br Heart J. 1983;50:579–585.
 318. Fisher J, Borer JS, Moses JW, Goldberg HL, Niarchos AP
, Whitman HH 3rd, 
Mermelstein M. Hemodynamic effects of nifedipine versus hydralazine in 
primary pulmonary hypertension. Am J Cardiol. 1984;54:646–650.
 319. Packer M, Greenberg B, Massie B, Dash H. Deleterious effects of hy-
dralazine in patients with pulmonary hypertension. N Engl J Med. 
1982;306:1326–1331. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198206033062203.
 320. Fripp RR, Gewitz MH, Werner JC, Whitman V, Rashkind WJ. Oral hydrala-
zine in patients with pulmonary vascular disease secondary to congenital 
heart disease. Am J Cardiol. 1981;48:380–382.
 321. Maron BA, Waxman AB, Opotowsky AR, Gillies H, Blair C, 
Aghamohammadzadeh R, Loscalzo J, Leopold JA. Effectiveness of 
spironolactone plus ambrisentan for treatment of pulmonary arte-
rial hypertension (from the [ARIES] study 1 and 2 trials). Am J Cardiol. 
2013;112:720–725. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2013.04.051.
 322. Mathur PN, Powles P
, Pugsley SO, McEwan MP
, Campbell EJ. Effect of di-
goxin on right ventricular function in severe chronic airflow obstruction: 
a controlled clinical trial. Ann Intern Med. 1981;95:283–288.
 323. Rich S, Seidlitz M, Dodin E, Osimani D, Judd D, Genthner D, McLaughlin 
V, Francis G. The short-term effects of digoxin in patients with 
right ventricular dysfunction from pulmonary hypertension. Chest. 
1998;114:787–792.
 324. Smith DE, Bissett JK, Phillips JR, Doherty JE, Murphy ML. Improved 
right ventricular systolic time intervals after digitalis in patients with cor 
pulmonale and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Cardiol. 
1978;41:1299–1304.
 325. Brown SE, Pakron FJ, Milne N, Linden GS, Stansbury DW, Fischer CE, Light 
RW. Effects of digoxin on exercise capacity and right ventricular function 
during exercise in chronic airflow obstruction. Chest. 1984;85:187–191.
 326. Alajaji W, Baydoun A, Al-Kindi SG, Henry L, Hanna MA, Oliveira GH. 
Digoxin therapy for cor pulmonale: a systematic review. Int J Cardiol. 
2016;223:320–324. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2016.08.018.
 327. Skhiri M, Hunt SA, Denault AY, Haddad F. Evidence-based management 
of right heart failure: a systematic review of an empiric field [in Spanish]. 
Rev Esp Cardiol. 2010;63:451–471.
 328. Ghofrani HA, D’Armini AM, Grimminger F, Hoeper MM, Jansa P
, Kim NH, 
Mayer E, Simonneau G, Wilkins MR, Fritsch A, Neuser D, Weimann G, 
Wang C; CHEST-1 Study Group. Riociguat for the treatment of chronic 
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:319–
329. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1209657.
 329. Barst RJ, Rubin LJ, Long WA, McGoon MD, Rich S, Badesch DB, Groves 
BM, Tapson VF, Bourge RC, Brundage BH, Koerner SK, Langleben D, 
Keller CA, Murali S, Uretsky BF, Clayton LM, Jöbsis MM, Blackburn SD, 
Shortino D, Crow JW; Primary Pulmonary Hypertension Study Group. A 
comparison of continuous intravenous epoprostenol (prostacyclin) with 
conventional therapy for primary pulmonary hypertension. N Engl J Med. 
1996;334:296–301. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199602013340504.
 330. McLaughlin VV, Genthner DE, Panella MM, Rich S. Reduction in pulmonary 
vascular resistance with long-term epoprostenol (prostacyclin) therapy in 
primary pulmonary hypertension. N Engl J Med. 1998;338:273–277. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM199801293380501.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e620
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 331. McLaughlin VV, Benza RL, Rubin LJ, Channick RN, Voswinckel R, Tapson 
VF, Robbins IM, Olschewski H, Rubenfire M, Seeger W. Addition of in-
haled treprostinil to oral therapy for pulmonary arterial hypertension: a 
randomized controlled clinical trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:1915–
1922. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.01.027.
 332. Skoro-Sajer N, Lang I. The role of treprostinil in the management of pul-
monary hypertension. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2008;8:213–217.
 333. Skoro-Sajer N, Lang I. Treprostinil for the treatment of pulmonary hy-
pertension. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2008;9:1415–1420. doi: 
10.1517/14656566.9.8.1415.
 334. Channick RN, Voswinckel R, Rubin LJ. Inhaled treprostinil: a therapeutic 
review. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2012;6:19–28. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S19281.
 335. Hoeper MM, Schwarze M, Ehlerding S, Adler-Schuermeyer A, 
Spiekerkoetter E, Niedermeyer J, Hamm M, Fabel H. Long-term treat-
ment of primary pulmonary hypertension with aerosolized iloprost, 
a prostacyclin analogue. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1866–1870. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM200006223422503.
 336. Olschewski H, Simonneau G, Galiè N, Higenbottam T, Naeije R, Rubin 
LJ, Nikkho S, Speich R, Hoeper MM, Behr J, Winkler J, Sitbon O, Popov 
W, Ghofrani HA, Manes A, Kiely DG, Ewert R, Meyer A, Corris PA, 
Delcroix M, Gomez-Sanchez M, Siedentop H, Seeger W; Aerosolized 
Iloprost Randomized Study Group. Inhaled iloprost for severe pulmo-
nary hypertension. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:322–329. doi: 10.1056/ 
NEJMoa020204.
 337. Frey MK, Lang I. Tadalafil for the treatment of pulmonary arte-
rial hypertension. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2012;13:747–755. doi: 
10.1517/14656566.2012.662220.
 338. Galiè N, Barberà JA, Frost AE, Ghofrani HA, Hoeper MM, McLaughlin 
VV, Peacock AJ, Simonneau G, Vachiery JL, Grünig E, Oudiz RJ, Vonk-
Noordegraaf A, White RJ, Blair C, Gillies H, Miller KL, Harris JH, Langley J, 
Rubin LJ; AMBITION Investigators. Initial use of ambrisentan plus tadalafil 
in pulmonary arterial hypertension. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:834–844. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1413687.
 339. Prasad S, Wilkinson J, Gatzoulis MA. Sildenafil in primary pul-
monary 
hypertension. 
N 
Engl 
J 
Med. 
2000;343:1342. 
doi: 
10.1056/NEJM200011023431814.
 340. Samarzija M, Zuljević E, Jakopović M, Sever B, Knezević A, Dumija Z, Vidjak 
V, Samija M. One year efficacy and safety of oral sildenafil treatment in 
severe pulmonary hypertension. Coll Antropol. 2009;33:799–803.
 341. Galiè N, Ghofrani HA, Torbicki A, Barst RJ, Rubin LJ, Badesch D, Fleming 
T, Parpia T, Burgess G, Branzi A, Grimminger F, Kurzyna M, Simonneau G; 
Sildenafil Use in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (SUPER) Study Group. 
Sildenafil citrate therapy for pulmonary arterial hypertension. N Engl J 
Med. 2005;353:2148–2157. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa050010.
 342. Sastry BK, Narasimhan C, Reddy NK, Raju BS. Clinical efficacy of sildenafil 
in primary pulmonary hypertension: a randomized, placebo-controlled, 
double-blind, crossover study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43:1149–1153. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2003.10.056.
 343. De Santo LS, Buonocore M, Agrusta F, Bancone C, Galdieri N, Romano 
G, Maiello C, Amarelli C. Pattern of resolution of pulmonary hyperten-
sion, long-term allograft right ventricular function, and exercise capacity 
in high-risk heart transplant recipients listed under oral sildenafil. Clin 
Transplant. 2014;28:837–843. doi: 10.1111/ctr.12387.
 344. Galiè N, Brundage BH, Ghofrani HA, Oudiz RJ, Simonneau G, Safdar 
Z, Shapiro S, White RJ, Chan M, Beardsworth A, Frumkin L, Barst RJ; 
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension and Response to Tadalafil (PHIRST) Study 
Group. Tadalafil therapy for pulmonary arterial hypertension. Circulation. 
2009;119:2894–2903. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.839274.
 345. Simonneau G, Rubin LJ, Galiè N, Barst RJ, Fleming TR, Frost AE, Engel 
PJ, Kramer MR, Burgess G, Collings L, Cossons N, Sitbon O, Badesch 
DB; PACES Study Group. Addition of sildenafil to long-term intravenous 
epoprostenol therapy in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension: a 
randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2008;149:521–530.
 346. Guazzi M, Vicenzi M, Arena R. Phosphodiesterase 5 inhibition with 
sildenafil reverses exercise oscillatory breathing in chronic heart failure: 
a long-term cardiopulmonary exercise testing placebo-controlled study. 
Eur J Heart Fail. 2012;14:82–90. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfr147.
 347. Guazzi M, Vicenzi M, Arena R, Guazzi MD. PDE5 inhibition with silde-
nafil improves left ventricular diastolic function, cardiac geometry, and 
clinical status in patients with stable systolic heart failure: results of a 
1-year, prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled study. Circ Heart 
Fail. 2011;4:8–17. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.110.944694.
 348. Lewis GD, Lachmann J, Camuso J, Lepore JJ, Shin J, Martinovic ME, Systrom 
DM, Bloch KD, Semigran MJ. Sildenafil improves exercise hemodynamics 
and oxygen uptake in patients with systolic heart failure. Circulation. 
2007;115:59–66. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.626226.
 349. Lewis GD, Shah R, Shahzad K, Camuso JM, Pappagianopoulos PP, 
Hung J, Tawakol A, Gerszten RE, Systrom DM, Bloch KD, Semigran 
MJ. Sildenafil improves exercise capacity and quality of life in patients 
with systolic heart failure and secondary pulmonary hypertension. 
Circulation. 2007;116:1555–1562. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
107.716373.
 350. Redfield MM, Chen HH, Borlaug BA, Semigran MJ, Lee KL, Lewis G, 
LeWinter MM, Rouleau JL, Bull DA, Mann DL, Deswal A, Stevenson 
LW, Givertz MM, Ofili EO, O’Connor CM, Felker GM, Goldsmith SR, 
Bart BA, McNulty SE, Ibarra JC, Lin G, Oh JK, Patel MR, Kim RJ, Tracy 
RP, Velazquez EJ, Anstrom KJ, Hernandez AF, Mascette AM, Braunwald 
E; RELAX Trial. Effect of phosphodiesterase-5 inhibition on exercise ca-
pacity and clinical status in heart failure with preserved ejection frac-
tion: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;309:1268–1277. doi: 
10.1001/jama.2013.2024.
 351. Channick RN, Simonneau G, Sitbon O, Robbins IM, Frost A, Tapson 
VF, Badesch DB, Roux S, Rainisio M, Bodin F, Rubin LJ. Effects of the 
dual endothelin-receptor antagonist bosentan in patients with pulmo-
nary hypertension: a randomised placebo-controlled study. Lancet. 
2001;358:1119–1123. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(01)06250-X.
 352. Galié N, Badesch D, Oudiz R, Simonneau G, McGoon MD, Keogh 
AM, Frost AE, Zwicke D, Naeije R, Shapiro S, Olschewski H, Rubin LJ. 
Ambrisentan therapy for pulmonary arterial hypertension. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2005;46:529–535. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.04.050.
 353. Galiè N, Olschewski H, Oudiz RJ, Torres F, Frost A, Ghofrani HA, Badesch 
DB, McGoon MD, McLaughlin VV, Roecker EB, Gerber MJ, Dufton C, 
Wiens BL, Rubin LJ; Ambrisentan in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension, 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Multicenter, Efficacy 
Studies (ARIES) Group. Ambrisentan for the treatment of pulmo-
nary arterial hypertension: results of the Ambrisentan in Pulmonary 
Arterial Hypertension, Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, 
Multicenter, Efficacy (ARIES) study 1 and 2. Circulation. 2008;117:3010–
3019. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.742510.
 354. Galiè N, Rubin Lj, Hoeper M, Jansa P
, Al-Hiti H, Meyer G, Chiossi E, Kusic-
Pajic A, Simonneau G. Treatment of patients with mildly symptomatic 
pulmonary arterial hypertension with bosentan (EARLY study): a double-
blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2008;371:2093–2100. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60919-8.
 355. McGoon MD, Frost AE, Oudiz RJ, Badesch DB, Galie N, Olschewski H, 
McLaughlin VV, Gerber MJ, Dufton C, Despain DJ, Rubin LJ. Ambrisentan 
therapy in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension who discontinued 
bosentan or sitaxsentan due to liver function test abnormalities. Chest. 
2009;135:122–129. doi: 10.1378/chest.08-1028.
 356. Pulido T, Adzerikho I, Channick RN, Delcroix M, Galiè N, Ghofrani HA, 
Jansa P
, Jing ZC, Le Brun FO, Mehta S, Mittelholzer CM, Perchenet L, 
Sastry BK, Sitbon O, Souza R, Torbicki A, Zeng X, Rubin LJ, Simonneau 
G; SERAPHIN Investigators. Macitentan and morbidity and mortality in 
pulmonary arterial hypertension. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:809–818. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1213917.
 357. Rubin LJ, Badesch DB, Barst RJ, Galie N, Black CM, Keogh A, Pulido T, 
Frost A, Roux S, Leconte I, Landzberg M, Simonneau G. Bosentan therapy 
for pulmonary arterial hypertension. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:896–903. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa012212.
 358. Lüscher TF, Enseleit F, Pacher R, Mitrovic V, Schulze MR, Willenbrock R, 
Dietz R, Rousson V, Hürlimann D, Philipp S, Notter T, Noll G, Ruschitzka F; 
Heart Failure ET(A) Receptor Blockade Trial. Hemodynamic and neurohu-
moral effects of selective endothelin A (ET(A)) receptor blockade in chronic 
heart failure: the Heart Failure ET(A) Receptor Blockade Trial (HEAT). 
Circulation. 2002;106:2666–2672. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000038497. 
80095.E1.
 359. Torre-Amione G, Young JB, Durand J, Bozkurt B, Mann DL, Kobrin I, Pratt 
CM. Hemodynamic effects of tezosentan, an intravenous dual endothe-
lin receptor antagonist, in patients with class III to IV congestive heart 
failure. Circulation. 2001;103:973–980. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.103.7.973.
 360. Kelland NF, Webb DJ. Clinical trials of endothelin antagonists in heart 
failure: publication is good for the public health. Heart. 2007;93:2–4. 
doi: 10.1136/hrt.2006.089250.
 361. McMurray JJ, Teerlink JR, Cotter G, Bourge RC, Cleland JG, Jondeau 
G, Krum H, Metra M, O’Connor CM, Parker JD, Torre-Amione G, 
van Veldhuisen DJ, Lewsey J, Frey A, Rainisio M, Kobrin I; VERITAS 
Investigators. Effects of tezosentan on symptoms and clinical outcomes 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560 
May 15, 2018
e621
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
in patients with acute heart failure: the VERITAS randomized controlled 
trials. JAMA. 2007;298:2009–2019. doi: 10.1001/jama.298.17.2009.
 362. Book WM, Shaddy RE. Medical therapy in adults with congenital heart dis-
ease. Heart Fail Clin. 2014;10:167–178. doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2013.09.006.
 363. Warnes CA, Williams RG, Bashore TM, Child JS, Connolly HM, 
Dearani JA, del Nido P
, Fasules JW, Graham TP Jr, Hijazi ZM, Hunt SA, 
King ME, Landzberg MJ, Miner PD, Radford MJ, Walsh EP
, Webb GD. 
ACC/AHA 2008 guidelines for the management of adults with con-
genital heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing 
Committee to Develop Guidelines on the Management of Adults With 
Congenital Heart Disease). Circulation. 2008;118:e714–e833. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.190690.
 364. Bhatt AB, Foster E, Kuehl K, Alpert J, Brabeck S, Crumb S, Davidson WR 
Jr, Earing MG, Ghoshhajra BB, Karamlou T, Mital S, Ting J, Tseng ZH; on 
behalf of the American Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology. 
Congenital heart disease in the older adult: a scientific statement from 
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;131:1884–1931. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0000000000000204.
 365. Presbitero P
, Somerville J, Rabajoli F, Stone S, Conte MR. Corrected trans-
position of the great arteries without associated defects in adult patients: 
clinical profile and follow up. Br Heart J. 1995;74:57–59.
 366. Acar P
, Sidi D, Bonnet D, Aggoun Y, Bonhoeffer P
, Kachaner J. Maintaining 
tricuspid valve competence in double discordance: a challenge for the 
paediatric cardiologist. Heart. 1998;80:479–483.
 367. van Son JA, Danielson GK, Huhta JC, Warnes CA, Edwards WD, Schaff 
HV, Puga FJ, Ilstrup DM. Late results of systemic atrioventricular valve 
replacement in corrected transposition. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1995;109:642–652.
 368. Scherptong RW, Vliegen HW, Winter MM, Holman ER, Mulder BJ, 
van der Wall EE, Hazekamp MG. Tricuspid valve surgery in adults with 
a dysfunctional systemic right ventricle: repair or replace? Circulation. 
2009;119:1467–1472. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.805135.
 369. Janousek J, Tomek V, Chaloupecký VA, Reich O, Gebauer RA, Kautzner 
J, Hucín B. Cardiac resynchronization therapy: a novel adjunct to the 
treatment and prevention of systemic right ventricular failure. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2004;44:1927–1931. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2004.08.044.
 370. Diller GP
, Okonko D, Uebing A, Ho SY, Gatzoulis MA. Cardiac resynchro-
nization therapy for adult congenital heart disease patients with a sys-
temic right ventricle: analysis of feasibility and review of early experience. 
Europace. 2006;8:267–272. doi: 10.1093/europace/euj048.
 371. Dubin AM, Janousek J, Rhee E, Strieper MJ, Cecchin F, Law IH, Shannon 
KM, Temple J, Rosenthal E, Zimmerman FJ, Davis A, Karpawich PP
, Al 
Ahmad A, Vetter VL, Kertesz NJ, Shah M, Snyder C, Stephenson E, 
Emmel M, Sanatani S, Kanter R, Batra A, Collins KK. Resynchronization 
therapy in pediatric and congenital heart disease patients: an interna-
tional multicenter study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:2277–2283. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2005.05.096.
 372. Lindenfeld J, Keller K, Campbell DN, Wolfe RR, Quaife RA. Improved sys-
temic ventricular function after carvedilol administration in a patient with 
congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries. J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2003;22:198–201.
 373. Josephson CB, Howlett JG, Jackson SD, Finley J, Kells CM. A case se-
ries of systemic right ventricular dysfunction post atrial switch for simple 
D-transposition of the great arteries: the impact of beta-blockade. Can J 
Cardiol. 2006;22:769–772.
 374. Shaddy RE, Boucek MM, Hsu DT, Boucek RJ, Canter CE, Mahony L, Ross 
RD, Pahl E, Blume ED, Dodd DA, Rosenthal DN, Burr J, LaSalle B, Holubkov 
R, Lukas MA, Tani LY. Carvedilol for children and adolescents with heart 
failure: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2007;298:1171–1179.
 375. Alabed S, Sabouni A, Al Dakhoul S, Bdaiwi Y, Frobel-Mercier AK. Beta-
blockers for congestive heart failure in children. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2016:CD007037.
 376. van der Bom T, Winter MM, Bouma BJ, Groenink M, Vliegen HW, Pieper 
PG, van Dijk AP
, Sieswerda GT, Roos-Hesselink JW, Zwinderman AH, 
Mulder BJ. Effect of valsartan on systemic right ventricular function: a 
double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled pilot trial. Circulation. 
2013;127:322–330. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.135392.
 377. Robinson B, Heise CT, Moore JW, Anella J, Sokoloski M, Eshaghpour E. 
Afterload reduction therapy in patients following intraatrial baffle opera-
tion for transposition of the great arteries. Pediatr Cardiol. 2002;23:618–
623. doi: 10.1007/s00246-002-0046-2.
 378. Dos L, Pujadas S, Estruch M, Mas A, Ferreira-González I, Pijuan A, Serra R, 
Ordóñez-Llanos J, Subirana M, Pons-Lladó G, Marsal JR, García-Dorado 
D, Casaldàliga J. Eplerenone in systemic right ventricle: double blind ran-
domized clinical trial: the EVEDES study. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:5167–
5173. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.07.163.
 379. Gentles TL, Mayer JE Jr, Gauvreau K, Newburger JW, Lock JE, Kupferschmid 
JP
, Burnett J, Jonas RA, Castañeda AR, Wernovsky G. Fontan operation 
in five hundred consecutive patients: factors influencing early and late 
outcome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1997;114:376–391.
 380. Hsu DT, Zak V, Mahony L, Sleeper LA, Atz AM, Levine JC, Barker PC, 
Ravishankar C, McCrindle BW, Williams RV, Altmann K, Ghanayem 
NS, Margossian R, Chung WK, Border WL, Pearson GD, Stylianou 
MP
, Mital S; Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Enalapril in in-
fants with single ventricle: results of a multicenter randomized trial. 
Circulation. 2010;122:333–340. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109. 
927988.
 381. Kouatli AA, Garcia JA, Zellers TM, Weinstein EM, Mahony L. Enalapril 
does not enhance exercise capacity in patients after Fontan procedure. 
Circulation. 1997;96:1507–1512.
 382. Goldberg DJ, French B, McBride MG, Marino BS, Mirarchi N, 
Hanna BD, Wernovsky G, Paridon SM, Rychik J. Impact of oral 
sildenafil on exercise performance in children and young adults af-
ter the Fontan operation: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, crossover trial. Circulation. 2011;123:1185–1193. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.981746.
 383. Grattan MJ, McCrindle BW. Recurrent exacerbations of protein-losing 
enteropathy after initiation of growth hormone therapy in a Fontan pa-
tient controlled with spironolactone. Congenit Heart Dis. 2010;5:165–
167. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-0803.2009.00320.x.
 384. Ringel RE, Peddy SB. Effect of high-dose spironolactone on protein-los-
ing enteropathy in patients with Fontan palliation of complex congenital 
heart disease. Am J Cardiol. 2003;91:1031–1032, A9.
 385. Mahle WT, Wang A, Quyyumi AA, McConnell ME, Book WM. Impact 
of spironolactone on endothelial function in patients with single 
ventricle heart. Congenit Heart Dis. 2009;4:12–16. doi: 10.1111/j. 
1747-0803.2008.00240.x.
 386. Norozi K, Buchhorn R, Wessel A, Bahlmann J, Raab B, Geyer S, Kuehne T, 
Beibei L, Werdan K, Loppnow H. Beta-blockade does not alter plasma cy-
tokine concentrations and ventricular function in young adults with right 
ventricular dysfunction secondary to operated congenital heart disease. 
Circ J. 2008;72:747–752.
 387. Babu-Narayan SV, Uebing A, Davlouros PA, Kemp M, Davidson S, 
Dimopoulos K, Bayne S, Pennell DJ, Gibson DG, Flather M, Kilner PJ, 
Li W, Gatzoulis MA. Randomised trial of ramipril in repaired tetralogy 
of Fallot and pulmonary regurgitation: the APPROPRIATE study (Ace in-
hibitors for Potential PRevention Of the deleterious effects of Pulmonary 
Regurgitation In Adults with repaired TEtralogy of Fallot). Int J Cardiol. 
2012;154:299–305. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2010.09.057.
 388. Feinstein JA, Benson DW, Dubin AM, Cohen MS, Maxey DM, Mahle WT, 
Pahl E, Villafañe J, Bhatt AB, Peng LF, Johnson BA, Marsden AL, Daniels 
CJ, Rudd NA, Caldarone CA, Mussatto KA, Morales DL, Ivy DD, Gaynor 
JW, Tweddell JS, Deal BJ, Furck AK, Rosenthal GL, Ohye RG, Ghanayem 
NS, Cheatham JP
, Tworetzky W, Martin GR. Hypoplastic left heart syn-
drome: current considerations and expectations. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;59(suppl):S1–S42. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.09.022.
 389. Rossano JW, Shaddy RE. Update on pharmacological heart fail-
ure therapies in children: do adult medications work in chil-
dren and if not, why not? Circulation. 2014;129:607–612. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.003615.
 390. Cheung AW, White CW, Davis MK, Freed DH. Short-term mechani-
cal circulatory support for recovery from acute right ventricular failure: 
clinical outcomes. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014;33:794–799. doi: 
10.1016/j.healun.2014.02.028.
 391. Morgan JA, John R, Lee BJ, Oz MC, Naka Y. Is severe right ventricular 
failure in left ventricular assist device recipients a risk factor for unsuc-
cessful bridging to transplant and post-transplant mortality. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2004;77:859–863. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2003.09.048.
 392. John R, Long JW, Massey HT, Griffith BP, Sun BC, Tector AJ, Frazier 
OH, Joyce LD. Outcomes of a multicenter trial of the Levitronix 
CentriMag ventricular assist system for short-term circulato-
ry support. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;141:932–939. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2010.03.046.
 393. Verbelen T, Verhoeven J, Goda M, Burkhoff D, Delcroix M, Rega F, Meyns 
B. Mechanical support of the pressure overloaded right ventricle: an acute 
feasibility study comparing low and high flow support. Am J Physiol Heart 
Circ Physiol. 2015;309:H615–H624. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00246.2015.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Konstam et al 
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure
May 15, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e578–e622. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000560
e622
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 394. Anderson MB, Goldstein J, Milano C, Morris LD, Kormos RL, Bhama J, 
Kapur NK, Bansal A, Garcia J, Baker JN, Silvestry S, Holman WL, Douglas 
PS, O’Neill W. Benefits of a novel percutaneous ventricular assist device 
for right heart failure: the prospective RECOVER RIGHT study of the 
Impella RP device. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2015;34:1549–1560. doi: 
10.1016/j.healun.2015.08.018.
 395. Kar B, Adkins LE, Civitello AB, Loyalka P
, Palanichamy N, Gemmato CJ, 
Myers TJ, Gregoric ID, Delgado RM 3rd. Clinical experience with the 
TandemHeart percutaneous ventricular assist device. Tex Heart Inst J. 
2006;33:111–115.
 396. Kapur NK, Paruchuri V, Korabathina R, Al-Mohammdi R, Mudd JO, 
Prutkin J, Esposito M, Shah A, Kiernan MS, Sech C, Pham DT, Konstam 
MA, Denofrio D. Effects of a percutaneous mechanical circulatory sup-
port device for medically refractory right ventricular failure. J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2011;30:1360–1367. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2011.07.005.
 397. Kiernan MS, Krishnamurthy B, Kapur NK. Percutaneous right ventricular 
assist via the internal jugular vein in cardiogenic shock complicating an 
acute inferior myocardial infarction. J Invasive Cardiol. 2010;22:E23–E26.
 398. Aggarwal V, Einhorn BN, Cohen HA. Current status of percutaneous right 
ventricular assist devices: first-in-man use of a novel dual lumen cannula. 
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2016;88:390–396. doi: 10.1002/ccd.26348.
 399. Aghili N, Bader Y, Vest AR, Kiernan MS, Kimmelstiel C, DeNofrio D, 
Kapur NK. Biventricular circulatory support using 2 axial flow catheters 
for cardiogenic shock without the need for surgical vascular access. Circ 
Cardiovasc Interv. 2016;9:e003636.
 400. Kapur NK, Jumean M, Ghuloom A, Aghili N, Vassallo C, Kiernan MS, 
DeNofrio D, Pham DT. First successful use of 2 axial flow catheters for 
percutaneous biventricular circulatory support as a bridge to a durable 
left ventricular assist device. Circ Heart Fail. 2015;8:1006–1008. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.115.002374.
 401. Makdisi G, Wang IW. Extra corporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO): 
review of a lifesaving technology. J Thorac Dis. 2015;7:E166–E176. doi: 
10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2015.07.17.
 402. Stretch R, Sauer CM, Yuh DD, Bonde P
. National trends in the utilization of short-
term mechanical circulatory support: incidence, outcomes, and cost analysis. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:1407–1415. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.07.958.
 403. Smedira NG, Blackstone EH. Postcardiotomy mechanical support: risk 
factors and outcomes. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001;71(suppl):S60–S66.
 404. Dang NC, Topkara VK, Mercando M, Kay J, Kruger KH, Aboodi MS, Oz 
MC, Naka Y. Right heart failure after left ventricular assist device im-
plantation in patients with chronic congestive heart failure. J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2006;25:1–6. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2005.07.008.
 405. Kaul TK, Fields BL. Postoperative acute refractory right ventricular failure: 
incidence, pathogenesis, management and prognosis. Cardiovasc Surg. 
2000;8:1–9.
 406. Bhama JK, Kormos RL, Toyoda Y, Teuteberg JJ, McCurry KR, Siegenthaler 
MP
. Clinical experience using the Levitronix CentriMag system for tem-
porary right ventricular mechanical circulatory support. J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2009;28:971–976. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2009.04.015.
 407. Bernhardt AM, De By TM, Reichenspurner H, Deuse T. Isolated permanent 
right ventricular assist device implantation with the HeartWare continu-
ous-flow ventricular assist device: first results from the European Registry 
for Patients with Mechanical Circulatory Support. Eur J Cardiothorac 
Surg. 2015;48:158–162. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezu406.
 408. Cook JA, Shah KB, Quader MA, Cooke RH, Kasirajan V, Rao KK, 
Smallfield MC, Tchoukina I, Tang DG. The total artificial heart. J Thorac 
Dis. 2015;7:2172–2180. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2015.10.70.
 409. Copeland JG, Smith RG, Arabia FA, Nolan PE, Sethi GK, Tsau PH, 
McClellan D, Slepian MJ; CardioWest Total Artificial Heart Investigators. 
Cardiac replacement with a total artificial heart as a bridge to transplan-
tation. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:859–867. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa040186.
 410. Lund LH, Edwards LB, Kucheryavaya AY, Benden C, Dipchand AI, 
Goldfarb S, Levvey BJ, Meiser B, Rossano JW, Yusen RD, Stehlik J. The 
Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: 
thirty-second official adult heart transplantation report–2015; focus 
theme: early graft failure. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2015;34:1244–1254. 
doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2015.08.003.
 411. Yusen RD, Edwards LB, Kucheryavaya AY, Benden C, Dipchand AI, 
Goldfarb SB, Levvey BJ, Lund LH, Meiser B, Rossano JW, Stehlik J. The 
Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: 
thirty-second official adult lung and heart-lung transplantation re-
port–2015; focus theme: early graft failure. J Heart Lung Transplant. 
2015;34:1264–1277. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2015.08.014.
 412. Colvin M, Smith JM, Skeans MA, Edwards LB, Uccellini K, Snyder JJ, 
Israni AK, Kasiske BL. OPTN/SRTR 2015 annual data report: heart. Am J 
Transplant. 2017;17(suppl 1):286–356.
 413. Sandoval J, Gaspar J, Pulido T, Bautista E, Martínez-Guerra ML, Zeballos M, 
Palomar A, Gómez A. Graded balloon dilation atrial septostomy in severe 
primary pulmonary hypertension: a therapeutic alternative for patients non-
responsive to vasodilator treatment. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;32:297–304.
 414. Esch JJ, Shah PB, Cockrill BA, Farber HW, Landzberg MJ, Mehra MR, 
Mullen MP
, Opotowsky AR, Waxman AB, Lock JE, Marshall AC. 
Transcatheter Potts shunt creation in patients with severe pulmonary ar-
terial hypertension: initial clinical experience. J Heart Lung Transplant. 
2013;32:381–387. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2013.01.1049.
 415. Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, Carabello BA, Erwin JP 3rd, Guyton 
RA, O’Gara PT, Ruiz CE, Skubas NJ, Sorajja P
, Sundt TM 3rd, Thomas JD. 
2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients with valvular 
heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines [published corrections 
appear in Circulation. 2014;129:e651 and Circulation. 2014;130:e120]. 
Circulation. 2014;129:e521–e643. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000031.
 416. Topilsky Y, Nkomo VT, Vatury O, Michelena HI, Letourneau T, Suri RM, 
Pislaru S, Park S, Mahoney DW, Biner S, Enriquez-Sarano M. Clinical 
outcome of isolated tricuspid regurgitation. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2014;7:1185–1194. doi: 10.1016/j.jcmg.2014.07.018.
 417. Kim YJ, Kwon DA, Kim HK, Park JS, Hahn S, Kim KH, Kim KB, Sohn DW, 
Ahn H, Oh BH, Park YB. Determinants of surgical outcome in patients 
with isolated tricuspid regurgitation. Circulation. 2009;120:1672–1678. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.849448.
 418. Lin G, Nishimura RA, Connolly HM, Dearani JA, Sundt TM 3rd, Hayes 
DL. Severe symptomatic tricuspid valve regurgitation due to permanent 
pacemaker or implantable cardioverter-defibrillator leads. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2005;45:1672–1675. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.02.037.
 419. Fukuda S, Gillinov AM, McCarthy PM, Stewart WJ, Song JM, Kihara T, 
Daimon M, Shin MS, Thomas JD, Shiota T. Determinants of recurrent or resid-
ual functional tricuspid regurgitation after tricuspid annuloplasty. Circulation. 
2006;114(suppl):I582–I587. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.001305.
 420. Singh SK, Tang GH, Maganti MD, Armstrong S, Williams WG, David TE, 
Borger MA. Midterm outcomes of tricuspid valve repair versus replace-
ment for organic tricuspid disease. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;82:1735–
1741. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2006.06.016.
 421. McCarthy PM, Bhudia SK, Rajeswaran J, Hoercher KJ, Lytle BW, 
Cosgrove DM, Blackstone EH. Tricuspid valve repair: durability and risk 
factors for failure. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;127:674–685. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2003.11.019.
 422. Dreyfus GD, Martin RP
, Chan KM, Dulguerov F, Alexandrescu C. 
Functional tricuspid regurgitation: a need to revise our understanding. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:2331–2336. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.04.011.
 423. John R, Naka Y, Park SJ, Sai-Sudhakar C, Salerno C, Sundareswaran KS, 
Farrar DJ, Milano CA. Impact of concurrent surgical valve procedures in 
patients receiving continuous-flow devices. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2014;147:581–589. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.10.024.
 424. Robertson JO, Grau-Sepulveda MV, Okada S, O’Brien SM, Matthew Brennan 
J, Shah AS, Itoh A, Damiano RJ, Prasad S, Silvestry SC. Concomitant tricus-
pid valve surgery during implantation of continuous-flow left ventricular 
assist devices: a Society of Thoracic Surgeons database analysis. J Heart 
Lung Transplant. 2014;33:609–617. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2014.01.861.
 425. Piacentino V 3rd, Ganapathi AM, Stafford-Smith M, Hsieh MK, Patel CB, 
Simeone AA, Rogers JG, Milano CA. Utility of concomitant tricuspid valve 
procedures for patients undergoing implantation of a continuous-flow 
left ventricular device. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;144:1217–1221. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.07.064.
 426. Hooft van Huysduynen B, Henkens IR, Swenne CA, Oosterhof T, Draisma HH, 
Maan AC, Hazekamp MG, de Roos A, Schalij MJ, van der Wall EE, Vliegen 
HW. Pulmonary valve replacement in tetralogy of Fallot improves the repolar-
ization. Int J Cardiol. 2008;124:301–306. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2007.02.006.
 427. Oosterhof T, van Straten A, Vliegen HW, Meijboom FJ, van Dijk AP
, Spijkerboer 
AM, Bouma BJ, Zwinderman AH, Hazekamp MG, de Roos A, Mulder BJ. 
Preoperative thresholds for pulmonary valve replacement in patients with cor-
rected tetralogy of Fallot using cardiovascular magnetic resonance. Circulation. 
2007;116:545–551. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.659664.
 428. Jones TK, Rome JJ, Armstrong AK, Berger F, Hellenbrand WE, Cabalka 
AK, Benson LN, Balzer DT, Cheatham JP
, Eicken A, McElhinney DB. 
Transcatheter pulmonary valve replacement reduces tricuspid regurgita-
tion in patients with right ventricular volume/pressure overload. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2016;68:1525–1535. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.07.734.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
