 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 5 9 8
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
Introduction
Disorders of glucose homeostasis affect approximately 50% of 
patients suffering from chronic kidney disease (CKD) (1–4) and 
play a major role in their mortality (5, 6). Glucose homeostasis 
relies on sufficient production of insulin from pancreatic β cells 
and adequate insulin action on peripheral tissues. Although sev-
eral mechanisms involved in insulin resistance in CKD have been 
identified (7), few studies have considered the contribution of β 
cell dysfunction and its underlying mechanisms.
CKD is characterized by the progressive retention of metabo-
lites normally excreted by the kidney, collectively termed “uremic 
toxins,” many of which have adverse effects on numerous organs 
(8, 9). The major uremic metabolite, urea, is usually considered to 
have negligible toxicity. Addition of urea to the dialysate follow-
ing conventional dialysis is well tolerated (10), and an increase in 
the urea reduction rate from 66% to 75% has no impact on patient 
survival (11). However, the view that urea is simply an innocent 
bystander was recently challenged by the observation that daily 
dialysis (12) and hemodiafiltration (13), which improve the removal 
of uremic toxins including urea, improve survival in CKD patients. 
Furthermore, evidence for urea toxicity is beginning to emerge. 
Urea was shown to affect cellular functions indirectly, by modi-
fying serum or tissue compounds, and directly through increased 
oxidative stress (14), which impairs glucose uptake in adipocytes 
(15), decreases tight junctions in intestinal cells (16), and induces 
endothelial dysfunction (17). Recently, urea was shown to induce 
posttranslational modifications that compromise protein function. 
Urea increases O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) modifi-
cation of insulin-signaling proteins in adipocytes and endothelial 
cells (15, 17) and increases protein carbamylation indirectly via its 
degradation into the reactive compound cyanate (18). Despite the 
expanding data on its pathophysiological effects, to our knowledge, 
urea has never been linked to β cell dysfunction.
Insulin secretion is tightly regulated to maintain blood glucose 
levels within a narrow range. Rising blood glucose levels stimulate 
insulin secretion from β cells. This involves β cell glucose trans-
porters that equilibrate the extracellular and intracellular glu-
cose concentrations (19). Glucose metabolism, the key signal for 
insulin secretion, is controlled by the glycolytic enzyme glucoki-
nase (GK), generating glucose-6-phosphate (G6P), and by phos-
phofructokinase 1 (PFK-1), which converts fructose 6-phosphate 
to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate. Subsequent glucose metabolism 
leads to an increase in the ATP/ADP ratio, which induces closure 
of ATP-sensitive potassium channels (K+
ATP channels), resulting 
in membrane depolarization, opening of voltage-gated calcium 
channels, and Ca2+ influx. The resulting increase in [Ca2+] triggers 
fusion and exocytosis of insulin-containing granules.
Oxidative stress is common in CKD patients, and reduction of 
oxidative stress has a number of beneficial effects (20, 21). In the β 
cell, ROS act as second messengers in glucose-stimulated insulin 
Disorders of glucose homeostasis are common in chronic kidney disease (CKD) and are associated with increased mortality, 
but the mechanisms of impaired insulin secretion in this disease remain unclear. Here, we tested the hypothesis that 
defective insulin secretion in CKD is caused by a direct effect of urea on pancreatic β cells. In a murine model in which CKD is 
induced by 5/6 nephrectomy (CKD mice), we observed defects in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in vivo and in isolated 
islets. Similarly, insulin secretion was impaired in normal mouse and human islets that were cultured with disease-relevant 
concentrations of urea and in islets from normal mice treated orally with urea for 3 weeks. In CKD mouse islets as well as urea-
exposed normal islets, we observed an increase in oxidative stress and protein O-GlcNAcylation. Protein O-GlcNAcylation was 
also observed in pancreatic sections from CKD patients. Impairment of insulin secretion in both CKD mouse and urea-exposed 
islets was associated with reduced glucose utilization and activity of phosphofructokinase 1 (PFK-1), which could be reversed 
by inhibiting O-GlcNAcylation. Inhibition of O-GlcNAcylation also restored insulin secretion in both mouse models. These 
results suggest that insulin secretory defects associated with CKD arise from elevated circulating levels of urea that increase 
islet protein O-GlcNAcylation and impair glycolysis.
Urea impairs β cell glycolysis and insulin secretion  
in chronic kidney disease
Laetitia Koppe,1,2 Elsa Nyam,1,2,3 Kevin Vivot,1,2 Jocelyn E. Manning Fox,4 Xiao-Qing Dai,4 Bich N. Nguyen,5,6 Dominique Trudel,2,5,6 
Camille Attané,1,2 Valentine S. Moullé,1,2 Patrick E. MacDonald,4 Julien Ghislain,1,2 and Vincent Poitout1,2,3,7
1Montreal Diabetes Research Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 2Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier de l’Université de Montréal (CRCHUM), Montréal, Québec, Canada. 3Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada. 4Department of Pharmacology and Alberta Diabetes Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.  
5Department of Pathology, CHUM, Montréal, Québec, Canada. 6Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada. 7Department of Medicine,  
Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: December 22, 2015; Accepted: June 24, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2016;126(9):3598–3612. doi:10.1172/JCI86181.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 5 9 9
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
patients (Table 1). BW was slightly, but not signifi-
cantly, lower in CKD mice, and food intake was 
not different between the 2 groups (Supplemental 
Figure 1, A and B; supplemental material available 
online with this article; doi:10.1172/JCI86181DS1). 
Fat mass was decreased in CKD mice without 
changes in lean mass (Table 1). Fed blood glucose 
levels increased in the first week after surgery and 
remained high for up to 3 weeks (9.9 ± 0.4 mmol/l 
vs. 8.3 ± 0.2 mmol/l in sham mice, n = 12–13, P < 
0.001; Table 1 and Supplemental Figure 1C), which 
was associated with hypoinsulinemia (Supplemen-
tal Figure 1D). Five-hour fasted glucose levels were 
similar in CKD and sham mice, however, fasting 
insulinemia gradually decreased to approximate-
ly 50% of sham-operated levels by 3 weeks (0.49 
± 0.17 ng/ml vs. 0.92 ± 0.05 ng/ml, n = 9–10, 
 
P < 0.01; Table 1 and Supplemental Figure 1D). 
Subsequent experiments on CKD and sham mice 
were performed at 3 weeks after surgery. Intraper-
itoneal glucose tolerance tests (IPGTTs) revealed 
glucose intolerance (Figure 1, A and B) and lower 
plasma insulin levels during glucose challenge 
(Figure 1C) in CKD mice. In hyperglycemic clamps 
(HGCs), CKD mice had significantly lower insulin 
secretion in response to glucose (1.2 ± 0.1 ng/ml 
vs. 2.2 ± 0.4 ng/ml in sham mice, n = 7, P < 0.05; 
Figure 1, D–F) and a trend toward reduced insulin response to 
arginine (Figure 1, D, E, and G). Although C-peptide levels are fre-
quently used to assess endogenous β cell secretion, comparison of 
circulating C-peptide levels between CKD and sham mice is not 
informative, as the kidney is the major site of C-peptide clearance 
(32). Consistent with renal dysfunction, C-peptide levels during 
the HCG were increased in CKD mice (Figure 1H). The glucose 
infusion rate (GIR) (Figure 1I) and M/I index of insulin sensitivity 
(Supplemental Figure 1E) during the clamp were not significant-
ly different between CKD and sham mice, suggesting no major 
defect in insulin sensitivity. Nevertheless, the plasma glucose 
disappearance rate (kITT) derived from the insulin tolerance 
tests (ITTs) (33) revealed a slight decrease in insulin sensitivity in 
CKD mice (8.4% ± 0.4 %/min vs. 9.9% ± 0.3%/min in sham mice, 
 
n = 6–8, P < 0.05; Figure 1, J and K), as observed in different CKD 
models and patients (7). β Cell mass was unaffected in CKD mice 
(Supplemental Figure 2, A and B). Taken together, these data sug-
gest that CKD causes glucose intolerance at least in part because 
of impaired insulin secretion.
Insulin secretion is compromised in CKD mouse islets ex vivo. To 
confirm that the reduced insulin secretory response observed in 
CKD mice is due to β cell dysfunction, islets were isolated from 
CKD mice, and insulin secretion was measured in 1-hour static 
incubations. Three weeks after surgery, insulin secretion from 
CKD mouse islets was reduced in response to 16.8 mmol/l glu-
cose (2.9% ± 0.4% vs. 4.9% ± 0.7% content in sham mice, n = 5–7, 
P < 0.05) or 35 mmol/l KCl (1.9% ± 0.2 % vs. 4.0% ± 0.7% con-
tent in sham mice, n = 5–6, P < 0.05) (Figure 2, A and B), without 
changes in insulin content (Figure 2C), protein content (Supple-
mental Figure 2C), or in the levels of the transcription factor pan-
secretion (GSIS) (22), but persistent oxidative stress causes β cell 
dysfunction and apoptosis (23). The extreme sensitivity of β cells 
to overproduction of ROS may be explained by the cells’ relatively 
low levels of antioxidant enzymes (24). ROS-dependent glucose 
metabolism through the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway (HBP) 
has been implicated in many of the adverse effects of chronic 
hyperglycemia (25). Between 1% and 3% of the glucose that enters 
the cell is converted by the HBP to UDP-GlcNAc, the substrate for 
protein O-GlcNAcylation, a reversible posttranslational modifica-
tion that consists of the addition of carbohydrates (O-GlcNAc) on 
serine and threonine residues (26, 27). Prolonged activation of the 
HBP and O-GlcNAcylation impair insulin secretion (28–30).
Here, we tested the hypothesis that CKD is associated with 
defective insulin secretion due to the direct action of urea on 
β cells to increase oxidative stress and protein O-GlcNAcyla-
tion. Specifically, we asked the following questions: 1) Is β cell 
function impaired in a CKD mouse model, in uremic mice, and 
in urea-treated islets ex vivo? 2) What are the roles of ROS and 
O-GlcNAcylation in the insulin secretory defect? and 3) What are 
the targets of ROS and O-GlcNAcylation in the stimulus-secre-
tion coupling pathway?
Results
CKD is associated with defective insulin secretion in mice. To deter-
mine whether CKD is associated with impaired insulin secretion, 
we first examined β cell function in a CKD mouse model gener-
ated by 5/6 nephrectomy performed in 2 surgical steps (31) and 
compared function with that in sham-operated controls. Three 
weeks after the second surgery, circulating urea and creatinine 
levels were in the same range as those observed in moderate CKD 
Table 1. Biometry, organ weights, and metabolic parameters in sham and CKD 
mice 3 weeks after surgery
Sham
CKD
P value
Mice (n) 
6
9
Biometry
 
BW, g
23.7 ± 0.6
22.7 ± 0.5
NS
Organ weight
 
Liver, mg/10 g BW
454.8 ± 147.2
467.7 ± 144.5
NS
 
Gastrocnemius, mg/10 g BW
56.6 ± 4.7
51.4 ± 4.5
NS
 
Pancreas, mg/10 g BW
108.1 ± 3.7
124.6 ± 2.5
0.001
 
eWAT, mg/10 g BW
85.8 ± 9.4
42.7 ± 2.5
< 0.001
 
scWAT, mg/10 g BW
52.5 ± 4.1
28.0 ± 4.0
0.0019
 
rWAT, mg/10 g BW
14.6 ± 3.6
6.9 ± 1.9
NS
Metabolic parameters
 
Urea, mmol/l
10.1 ± 0.6
27.8 ± 0.4
< 0.001
 
Creatinine, μmol/l
8.5 ± 1.4
24.2 ± 1.8
< 0.001
 
Fed plasma insulin, ng/ml
1.18 ± 0.25
0.73 ± 0.11
NS
 
Fasting plasma insulin, ng/ml
0.92 ± 0.05
0.49 ± 0.17
0.03
 
Fed blood glucose, mmol/l
8.3 ± 0.2
9.9 ± 0.4
< 0.001
 
Fasting blood glucose, mmol/l
8.7 ± 0.3
8.8 ± 0.2
NS
 
Fed NEFA, mmol/l
0.063 ± 0.006
0.101 ± 0.015
0.03
 
Fasting NEFA, mmol/l
0.650 ± 0.050
0.846 ± 0.081
NS
Data represent the mean ± SEM. NEFA, nonesterified fatty acid; eWAT, epididymal white 
adipose tissue; rWAT, retroperitoneal WAT; scWAT, subcutaneous WAT.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 0 0
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
in pancreatic sections. Whereas islets from sham-operated mice 
were only weakly stained compared with the adjacent exocrine 
tissue, CKD islets showed stronger 8-OHG staining, indicative 
of oxidative stress (+50% ± 4% vs. sham mice, n = 3–4, P < 0.001; 
Figure 3, A and B). To investigate the contribution of ROS to 
 
β cell dysfunction, CKD mice were treated with the antioxidant 
N-acetylcysteine (NAC), and insulin secretion was measured in 
isolated islets. NAC completely restored insulin secretion to con-
trol levels (Figure 3C), without affecting insulin content (Supple-
mental Figure 4A). Furthermore, NAC treatment of CKD mice 
restored fed glucose and insulin levels (Supplemental Table 1 
and Supplemental Figure 4B). The improvement of insulin secre-
tion was not due to a reduction in plasma urea levels during NAC 
treatment (Supplemental Table 1). Protein O-GlcNAcylation was 
then assessed in CKD islets by Western blotting and immunohis-
tochemical analysis of pancreatic sections. O-GlcNAcylation of 
creatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX-1) (Supplemental Figure 
2D). Six weeks after surgery, the decrease in insulin secretion in 
response to glucose was maintained, and insulin content was also 
reduced (Supplemental Figure 3, A and B). These data indicate 
that a cell-autonomous defect in insulin secretion appears in CKD 
mouse islets prior to any significant decrease in intracellular insu-
lin stores. To examine the dynamics of insulin secretion, we per-
formed perifusion experiments using islets from CKD and sham 
mice. As shown in Figure 2D, islets from CKD mice displayed a 
clear defect in first-phase insulin secretion.
Increased oxidative stress and protein O-GlcNAcylation in CKD 
mouse and human islets. To explore the underlying mechanisms, 
we examined whether ROS and protein O-GlcNAcylation were 
increased in islets from CKD mice. ROS-dependent formation 
of the RNA damage biomarker 8-hydroxyguanosine (8-OHG), 
used to evaluate oxidative stress (34, 35), was assessed by IHC 
Figure 1. CKD mice have defective glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in vivo. (A) Blood glucose and (B) AUC during an IPGTT (1 g/kg) in CKD or 
sham-operated mice. (C) Insulin levels during the IPGTT (n = 9–10). (D) Glucose levels during HGCs. (E) Insulin levels during HGCs and in response to an 
arginine bolus (1 mM/kg). (F) Mean insulin levels during the clamp (50–80 min). (G) Arginine-induced insulin secretion (AUC) from 80 to 90 minutes  
(n = 7). (H) Mean C-peptide during the clamp (50–80 min). (I) GIR during the clamp (50–80 min). Blood glucose (J) and kITT (K) during the IPITT (0.5 IU/kg) 
(n = 6–8). Data represent the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 versus CKD for the same times; 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post-hoc test for A, C, 
D, E, and J and Student’s t test for B, F–I, and K.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 0 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
Chronic administration of urea impairs glucose 
tolerance and insulin secretion in mice. To determine 
whether β cell dysfunction in CKD mice is due to 
chronic hyperuremia, we supplemented the drinking 
water with 25 g/l urea to raise plasma urea concen-
trations in normal mice. Circulating urea levels were 
increased after 1 week and remained elevated after 
3 weeks (Figure 4A). Urea-treated mice gained less 
weight, although food intake was not different (Sup-
plemental Figure 5, A and B). Fed blood glucose levels 
were higher (10 ± 0.1 mmol/l vs. 9.1 ± 0.2 mmol/l in 
control mice, n = 4–5, P < 0.05), and fed insulin lev-
els were lower (0.6 ± 0.1 ng/ml vs. 1.2 ± 1 ng/ml in 
control mice, n = 3–4, P <0.05) in urea-treated mice 
compared with levels in controls after 1 week (Sup-
plemental Table 4 and Supplemental Figure 5, C and D). IPGTTs 
performed after 3 weeks of urea administration revealed a non-
significant trend toward glucose intolerance (Figure 4, B and D). 
Insulin levels during the glucose challenge were, however, signifi-
cantly lower in urea-treated mice (0.7 ± 0.1 ng/ml vs. 1.6 ± 0.3 ng/
ml in controls at 15 min, n = 3–4, P < 0.05; Figure 4C), suggestive 
of an insulin secretory defect. Consistent with this, islets isolated 
after 3 weeks of urea administration secreted significantly less 
insulin in response to 16.8 mmol/l glucose (4.8% ± 0.9% vs. 7.2% 
± 1.4% content in controls, n = 6–7, P < 0.05) or 35 mmol/l KCl 
(2.3% ± 0.3% vs. 3.7% ± 0.6% content in control mice, n = 4–5) 
(Figure 4, E and F), whereas insulin content was not affected (Sup-
plemental Figure 5E). Protein O-GlcNAcylation was increased in 
islets from urea-treated mice (+55% ± 1% vs. controls, n = 3–4, 
 
P < 0.05; Figure 4, G and H). Thus, administration of urea mimics 
the insulin secretory defect observed in CKD mice.
Urea impairs insulin secretion by increasing ROS production and 
protein O-GlcNAcylation in islets. To rule out the possibility that 
the insulin secretory defect observed in CKD and urea-fed mouse 
islets is indirectly due to hyperglycemia or weight loss, we exposed 
normal mouse islets to increasing concentrations of urea for 24 
hours. Exposure to 10 mmol/l urea, comparable to levels in sham 
mice and healthy patients, was inconsequential. In contrast, expo-
sure to concentrations of urea of 20 mmol/l or greater, compara-
ble to levels in CKD mice and humans, inhibited GSIS relative to 
the osmotic control mannitol (Figure 5A). Insulin content was not 
proteins was increased in islets from CKD mice (+44% ± 27% vs. 
sham mice, n = 3, P < 0.05; Figure 3, D, F and G). Importantly, a 
strong signal for protein O-GlcNAcylation was also observed in 
pancreatic sections from nondiabetic CKD patients (Supplemen-
tal Table 2) as compared with that detected in control subjects 
(2.08 ± 0.53-fold increase vs. controls, n = 3 in each group, 4–6 
islets per individual; Figure 3E). Interestingly, treatment of CKD 
mice with NAC prevented the increase in islet protein O-GlcNAc-
ylation, indicating that oxidative stress is upstream of O-GlcNAc-
ylation in this context (Figure 3, H and I). To determine wheth-
er O-GlcNAcylation in CKD affects β cell function, we inhibited 
the HBP with the glutamine analog 6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine 
(DON), an inhibitor of L-glutamine D-fructose 6-phosphate ami-
notransferase (GFAT), the rate-limiting enzyme that metaboliz-
es fructose-6-phosphate to glucosamine-6-phosphate (36). As 
expected, treatment of CKD mice with DON restored islet protein 
O-GlcNAcylation to control levels (data not shown). DON treat-
ment restored insulin secretion in CKD islets ex vivo (Figure 3J), 
without affecting insulin content (Supplemental Figure 4C), and 
normalized fed glucose levels in CKD mice (Supplemental Table 3 
and Supplemental Figure 4D). Taken together, these data suggest 
that oxidative stress impairs insulin secretion in CKD by increas-
ing the flux through the HBP and, consequently, O-GlcNAcyla-
tion of the islet proteins involved in insulin secretion, leading to 
altered glucose metabolism and/or a defect at a late step in the 
stimulus-secretion coupling pathway.
Figure 2. Isolated islets from CKD mice have reduced 
insulin release in response to glucose and KCl. (A) Insulin 
secretion, shown as the percentage of insulin content, was 
assessed in 1-hour static incubations in islets isolated from 
CKD and sham mice after 3 weeks in response to 2.8 or 16.8 
mmol/l (mM) glucose or 2.8 mmol/l glucose plus 35 mmol/l 
KCl. (B) GSIS (Δ2.8–16.8 mmol/l) in sham and CKD mice after 
3 weeks. (C) Total islet insulin content. (D) Insulin secretion 
in response to 2.8 mmol/l glucose from −5 to 0 minutes, 16.7 
mmol/l glucose from 0 to 40 minutes, and 2.8 mmol/l glu-
cose from 40 to 70 minutes in perifusion experiments. Data 
represent the mean ± SEM of 5 to 10 replicate experiments. 
*P <0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001 versus CKD for the 
same incubation condition; 1-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s 
post-hoc test for A; Student’s t test for B and C; and 2-way 
ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post-hoc test for D.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 0 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
P < 0.05; Figure 5B), whereas, in the presence of NAC, levels of 
ROS and GSIS were restored to control levels (Figure 5, B and C). 
Urea treatment also increased protein O-GlcNAcylation in isolat-
ed islets (+75% ± 37% vs. controls, n = 4, P < 0.05; Figure 5, D and 
E) and in MIN6 cells (+59% ± 14% vs. controls, n = 3, P < 0.05; Sup-
plemental Figure 7, A and B). Urea-induced protein O-GlcNAcyla-
affected in the presence of 20 mmol/l urea, but decreased at high-
er concentrations (Supplemental Figure 6A). To specifically exam-
ine insulin secretion without the confounding effects of reduced 
insulin or protein content (Supplemental Figure 6, A and B), sub-
sequent experiments were performed with 20 mmol/l urea. Urea 
treatment of islets resulted in a 1.5-fold increase in ROS (n = 8, 
 
Figure 3. CKD mice show an increase of O-GlcNAcylation in islets and oxidative  stress markers. (A and B) Immunostaining of 8-OHG in pancreatic sec-
tions of CKD and from sham-operated mice and quantification. (C) Insulin secretion, shown as the percentage of insulin content, was assessed in 1-hour 
static incubations in isolated islets from CKD or sham-operated mice in response to 2.8 or 16.8 mmol/l (mM) glucose after 3 weeks, with or without NAC 
treatment (200 mg/kg/day p.o., n = 6–7). (D and E) Immunostaining of O-GlcNAcylation (O-GlcNAc) in pancreatic sections from CKD and sham-operated 
mice (D) and from control and CKD patients (E). (F and G) Representative Western blot and quantification (n = 3) for total islet protein O-GlcNAcylation. (H 
and I) Representative Western blot and quantification (n = 4) for total protein O-GlcNAcylation in isolated islets from CKD and sham mice with or without 
NAC treatment. (J) Insulin secretion, shown as the percentage of insulin content in response to 2.8 or 16.8 mmol/l glucose, in isolated islets from CKD mice 
treated with or without DON (1.5 mg/kg 3 times/week, n = 5–8). Data represent the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05 and ***P < 0.001 versus CKD for the same 
incubation condition; Student’s t test for B and D and 1-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post-hoc test for C, I, and J. Scale bars: 50 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 0 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
tion in islets was prevented by NAC (Figure 5, D and E), confirm-
ing the relationship between ROS and O-GlcNAcylation observed 
in CKD islets. Inhibition of the HBP by DON or azaserine (AZA) 
restored insulin secretion (Figure 5C). Consistent with this phar-
macological approach, siRNA-mediated knockdown of GFAT 
(Supplemental Figure 7C) prevented the loss of insulin secretion in 
the presence of urea (Supplemental Figure 7D). Similar to mouse 
islets, the insulin secretory response to glucose of normal human 
islets (donor information in Supplemental Table 5) treated with 20 
mmol/l urea for 24 hours was strongly reduced (8.2% ± 1.7% vs. 
15.8% ± 2.1% in control islets, n = 5, P < 0.01), whereas insulin con-
tent was not affected (Figure 5, F and G). Furthermore, urea treat-
ment increased protein O-GlcNAcylation of human islets (+81% ± 
26% vs. controls, n = 5, P < 0.05; Figure 5, H and I). Taken together, 
these data indicate that urea impairs GSIS by increasing ROS and 
protein O-GlcNAcylation in both rodent and human islets.
Urea is in equilibrium with the electrophilic species cyanate, 
which can alter protein function by reacting with the amino 
group of lysine residues, resulting in the generation of ε-amino- 
carbomyl-lysine (37). Under physiological conditions, 0.8% 
of the molar concentration of urea is converted to cyanate. To 
determine whether urea affects the β cell via cyanate, mouse 
islets were exposed for 24 hours to concentrations of cyanate 
(0.2 and 1 mmol/l) corresponding to 20 mmol/l urea and con-
centrations observed in CKD patients, respectively (18, 37). Cya-
nate dose-dependently decreased GSIS without affecting insulin 
content, and addition of the antioxidant NAC restored insulin 
secretion (Figure 6, A and C). However, in contrast to urea, cya-
nate did not induce an increase in protein O-GlcNAcylation (data 
not shown), nor was impaired GSIS restored by addition of DON 
(Figure 6C). These data suggest that the increase of O-GlcNAc-
ylation and consequential decrease in insulin secretion in CKD 
and urea-treated islets is directly attributable to urea rather than 
to its degradation product cyanate.
Increased protein O-GlcNAcylation alters glucose metabolism in 
CKD and urea-treated islets. To identify which step of the stimu-
lus-secretion coupling pathway is defective in CKD and urea-treat-
ed islets, we assessed glucose metabolism, mitochondrial func-
tion, and insulin exocytosis. In both urea-treated islets and islets 
from CKD mice, we observed a reduction in glucose utilization 
(–63.3% ± 8.2% and –57.9% ± 7.8% vs. their respective controls, 
 
n = 3–4, P < 0.001; Figure 7, A and D), glucose oxidation (–54.2% 
± 8.2% and –46.1% ± 11.1% vs. their respective controls, n = 3–4, 
 
P < 0.001; Figure 7, B and E), and ATP production (–60.6% ± 7.8% 
and –56.7% ± 8.6% vs. their respective controls, n = 4, P < 0.05; 
Figure 7, C and F). Depolarization-induced exocytosis under basal 
(2.8 mmol/l) glucose conditions was unaffected by urea treatment 
in mouse islets (Figure 7G), whereas the ability of stimulatory (16.7 
mmol/l) glucose to amplify the exocytotic response was impaired 
(–60.4% ± 6.2 % vs. controls, n = 21–27 cells, P < 0.001; Figure 7G). 
These results indicate a reduction in glycolytic flux in CKD and 
urea-treated islets.
Figure 4. Exposure to urea in drinking water increases circulating urea levels and inhibits insulin secretion. (A) Urea consumption in drinking water 
(25 g/l) elevates blood urea levels independently of renal failure (n = 4–5). (B) Blood glucose and (C) corresponding insulin levels during IPGTTs (n = 3–4). 
(D) AUC during IPGTTs. (E) Insulin secretion shown as the percentage of insulin content assessed in 1-hour static incubations in response to 2.8 or 16.8 
mmol/l (mM) glucose or 2.8 mmol/l glucose plus 35 mmol/l KCl in islets from mice after 3 weeks with or without urea in drinking water (n = 5–7). (F) 
GSIS (Δ2.8–16.8 mM) (n = 5–7). (G) Representative Western blot and (H) quantification for total protein O-GlcNAcylation in islets in mice with or without 
addition of urea to the drinking water for 3 weeks (n = 3–4). Data represent the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001 versus vehicle; 2-way 
ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post-hoc test for A–C; 1-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post-hoc test for E; and Student’s t test for D, F, and H.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 0 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
We then measured the activity of rate-limiting glycolytic 
enzymes upstream of enolase. Whereas GK activity was unaf-
fected (Supplemental Figure 8, A and B), PFK-1 activity was sig-
nificantly reduced in urea-treated and CKD mouse islets (–29% 
± 9.9% and –28% ± 8.8% vs. their respective controls, n = 3–5, 
P < 0.05; Figure 8, A and B), without changes in PFK-1 protein 
expression (Supplemental Figure 8, C and D). In urea-exposed 
MIN6 cells, we observed a marked increase in O-GlcNAcylation 
of PFK-1 (Figure 8C). Since PFK-1 activity can be inhibited by 
O-GlcNAcylation (38), we asked whether blocking O-GlcNAc-
ylation restores PFK-1 activity in urea-treated islets. Indeed, 
addition of DON prevented the inhibitory effect of urea on PFK-1 
activity (Figure 8D). Addition of DON restored glucose utiliza-
tion and oxidation in islets exposed to urea (Figure 8, E and F). 
Overall, our data suggest that chronic accumulation of urea in 
CKD leads to an increase in islet protein O-GlcNAcylation, which 
inhibits PFK-1 activity, reduces glucose flux, and consequently 
impairs insulin secretion.
Figure 5. The insulin secretory defect resulting from exposure of normal mouse or human islets to urea is prevented by antioxidant treatment or GFAT 
inhibition. (A) One-hour static insulin incubations of isolated islets from normal mice cultured for 24 hours with increasing urea levels (n = 3–5). (B) ROS 
accumulation in mouse islets treated with mannitol or urea, with or without NAC (500 μmol/l), for 24 hours (n = 3–8). (C) Insulin secretion shown as the 
percentage of insulin content as assessed in 1-hour static incubations in the presence of 20 mmol/l (mM) urea or mannitol as an osmotic control, with or 
without DON (20 μmol/l), AZA (5 μmol/l), or NAC (500 μmol/l) (n = 4–15). (D) Representative Western blot and (E) quantification for total protein O-Glc-
NAcylation in urea-treated islets with or without NAC (n = 4). (F) Insulin secretion shown as the percentage of insulin content from human islets incubated 
for 24 hours with 20 mmol/l urea or mannitol (n = 5). (G) Total insulin content in urea-treated human islets. (H) Representative Western blot and (I) quan-
tification for total protein O-GlcNAcylation in urea-treated human islets (n = 5). Data represent the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 versus mannitol 
for the same incubation condition; 1-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post-hoc test for A–C, E, and F and Student’s t test for G and I.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 0 5
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
The observed defect in insulin secretion in a CKD mouse 
model supports the notion that β cell dysfunction is an important 
contributing factor to the perturbation of glucose homeostasis in 
CKD. Of note, it is likely that circulating insulin levels measured 
in CKD mice overestimate the endogenous secretion rate, since 
the kidney is responsible for approximately 30% of insulin clear-
ance (39). Likewise, the uremic environment is associated with 
inhibition of the insulin degradation system in peripheral tissues 
(40). Insulin resistance in uremic patients was demonstrated by 
deFronzo et al. (41) and is widely accepted as an underlying cause 
of altered glucose homeostasis in CKD (4). However, type 2 diabe-
tes arises from an imbalance between insulin sensitivity and secre-
tion (42). That β cell dysfunction plays a role in CKD is supported 
by several studies describing a prediabetic state in uremia that is 
characterized by both increased insulin resistance and defective 
insulin secretion (43–48).
Although urea and its breakdown product cyanate have 
emerged as important uremic toxins in recent years (49), their 
effects on islet function have not been addressed. Here, we pro-
vide evidence that defective insulin secretion associated with 
CKD is in large part mediated by urea. In adipose, endothelial, 
and renal cells, urea affects protein function by inducing ROS 
production (14, 50) and O-GlcNAcylation (15, 17). Accordingly, 
we found that urea  adversely affects insulin secretion by increas-
ing ROS and protein O-GlcNAcylation in islets. In addition to the 
direct effect of urea identified here, evidence in support of other 
uremic toxins disrupting β cell function is emerging. Recently, uric 
acid was shown to affect insulin secretion by increasing oxidative 
stress in β cells (51). In addition, the furan fatty acid metabolite 
3-carboxy-4-methyl-5-propyl-2-furanpropanoic acid (CMPF), at 
concentrations found in CKD patients, impairs insulin secretion 
by inducing mitochondrial dysfunction and inhibition of insulin 
biosynthesis in β cells (52). Furthermore, metabolic abnormalities 
associated with CKD, including hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia, 
as well as metabolic acidosis (45), low vitamin D levels (44), and 
hyperparathyroidism (48), may aggravate β cell dysfunction in 
CKD. In our study, elevated fed FFA levels in CKD mice may have 
also contributed to the β cell defect.
Circulating levels of urea in CKD can alter cellular functions 
via the breakdown product cyanate, which irreversibly forms 
carbamylated proteins by reacting with amino groups (18). The 
involvement of carbamylated proteins in mortality (53) and 
degenerative complications linked to CKD, such as atherosclero-
sis and insulin resistance (18, 54), has been highlighted in several 
studies. We found that cyanate levels, within the range present 
in CKD mice and humans (18, 37), attenuate insulin secretion in 
normal mouse islets ex vivo and that this was prevented by the 
antioxidant NAC. However, in contrast to the effects of urea, 
cyanate did not increase protein O-GlcNAcylation, and DON did 
not restore insulin secretion in the presence of cyanate. This sug-
gests that in this context, the deleterious effects of cyanate are 
not related to O-GlcNAcylation. We speculate that these may be 
due to protein carbamylation, although this remains to be directly 
tested. Nevertheless, the divergent mechanisms underlying β cell 
dysfunction following exposure to urea and cyanate imply that 
the effect of urea to increase O-GlcNAcylation is not mediated by 
its degradation product.
Discussion
This study aimed to determine whether defective insulin secre-
tion contributes to impaired glucose homeostasis in CKD and 
whether chronic accumulation of urea, a major uremic toxin, is 
the underlying cause of β cell dysfunction in CKD. Glucose toler-
ance tests (GTTs), HGCs, and ex vivo islet studies in a CKD mouse 
model revealed impaired insulin secretion as early as 3 weeks 
after surgery (Figure 1 and Figure 2), whereas insulin content and 
β cell mass were unaffected. Mechanistically, increased oxidative 
stress and protein O-GlcNAcylation in islets were shown to under-
lie the insulin secretory defect (Figure 3). Administration of urea 
in mice compromised insulin secretion and increased protein 
O-GlcNAcylation in islets, mimicking islet dysfunction in CKD 
(Figure 4). Exposure of mouse and human islets to urea impaired 
insulin secretion and similarly involved an increase in oxidative 
stress and protein O-GlcNAcylation (Figure 5). Increased protein 
O-GlcNAcylation in both CKD and urea-treated islets impaired 
GSIS by inhibiting PFK-1 activity and hence glycolysis, and urea 
exposure of MIN6 cells led to O-GlcNAcylation of PFK-1 (Figure 7 
and Figure 8). Overall, we conclude that elevated levels of circu-
lating urea in CKD alter glucose homeostasis by increasing ROS 
and protein O-GlcNAcylation in islets, inhibiting glycolysis and, 
consequently, insulin secretion.
Figure 6. Cyanate inhibits insulin secretion in islets ex vivo. (A) Insulin 
secretion shown as the percentage of insulin content as assessed in 
1-hour static incubations and (B) total islet insulin levels in the presence 
of 0, 0.2, or 1 mmol/l (mM) cyanate (n = 6). (C) Insulin secretion shown as 
the percentage of insulin content as assessed in 1-hour static incubations 
in the presence of 1 mmol/l cyanate with or without DON (20 μmol/l) or 
NAC (500 μmol/l) (n = 5–6). Data represent the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05 
and **P < 0.01 versus control for the same incubation condition; 1-way 
ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post-hoc test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 0 6
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
nomena (27). In islets, although O-GlcNAcylation of specific β cell 
proteins such as PDX-1 and FOXO1 is essential for glucose regula-
tion of gene expression (36) and insulin secretion (60), excessive 
protein O-GlcNAcylation reduces insulin secretion (28–30, 61) 
and increases β cell apoptosis (62). Interestingly, protein O-Glc-
NAcylation in CKD mouse islets and in urea-treated islets was 
normalized by antioxidant treatment, implying that in the ure-
mic context, ROS promote O-GlcNAcylation. Of note, defective 
insulin secretion in rat islets induced by overexpression of GFAT 
is mediated by elevated ROS (61), suggesting that β cell dysfunc-
tion in CKD may involve a positive feedback loop that exacerbates 
the deregulation of ROS and the HBP. An alternative possibility 
to our conclusion that urea directly leads to an increase in ROS 
and O-GlcNAcylation of islet protein is that its effect in CKD and 
urea-fed mice is indirectly mediated by chronic hyperglycemia, 
a known cause of oxidative stress and increased flux through the 
HBP. However, this possibility is not supported by our observa-
tion that exposure of isolated islets to urea also induces protein 
O-GlcNAcylation, which can be prevented by NAC. In support of 
this, experimental evidence for ROS activation of the HBP in the 
Increased levels of several plasmatic oxidative markers have 
been demonstrated in CKD (21, 55, 56), and CKD patients have 
defects in the antioxidant defense system (57). Moreover, several 
clinical studies suggest that antioxidant therapy in CKD patients 
may prevent the progression to end-stage renal disease and 
reduce CV mortality (20, 58). Oxidative stress also contributes 
to insulin resistance in CKD (15). In the β cell, ROS derived from 
glucose metabolism, such as H2O2, act as metabolic signaling mol-
ecules for GSIS (22), but persistent oxidative stress is a cause of 
 
β cell failure (23). The observed increase in oxidative stress, despite 
reduced glycolytic flux, suggests a nonmitochondrial source of 
ROS such as NADPH oxidase (59). In endothelial cells, NADPH 
oxidase activity increases upon urea exposure, suggesting a role 
for this enzyme in ROS production during uremia (17).
A link between increased protein O-GlcNAcylation and β cell 
dysfunction in the context of uremia was demonstrated by the 
improvement in insulin secretion following exposure of CKD mice 
or urea-treated islets to GFAT inhibitors and GFAT knockdown 
in MIN6 cells. Protein O-GlcNAcylation is involved in both the 
physiological regulation of protein function and pathological phe-
Figure 7. Normal mouse islets exposed 
to urea and islets from CKD mice have 
impaired glucose metabolism. Glucose 
utilization (A and D) and oxidation (B 
and E) in islets incubated for 90 minutes 
in KRBH at 3 or 16 mmol/l (mM) glucose 
with D-[5-3H]glucose and D-[U-14C]glu-
cose in urea-treated and CKD islets  
(n = 4). (C and F) Total ATP content in 
islets incubated for 15 minutes in  
KRBH at 2.8 or 16.8 mmol/l glucose  
(n = 3–4). (G) Averaged data of exocytotic 
responses of single β cells measured as 
increases in cell membrane capacitance 
by whole-cell patch clamp (arrow) per-
formed after acute pretreatment with 2.8 
or 16.7 mmol/l glucose (mean of 21 to 27 
cells from 3 mice) after urea or mannitol 
treatment. Data represent the mean ± 
SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and  
***P < 0.001 versus control; 2-way 
ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post-hoc test 
for G and 1-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s 
post-hoc test for A–F.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 0 7
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
decreased PFK-1 activity also leads to the diversion of glucose 
flux from the glycolytic pathway to the pentose phosphate (PPP) 
or glycogen synthesis pathway. Physiologically, the use of glu-
cose-6-phosphate by these pathways is very limited in β cells (68), 
yet under pathophysiological conditions, the PPP contributes to 
the inhibition of β cell function (69) and, hence, could be a con-
tributing factor to defective insulin secretion in CKD. Given that 
most enzymes in the glycolytic pathway are potentially O-GlcNAc-
ylated (38, 70), it is possible that other enzymes are deregulated in 
addition to PFK-1. Further studies will be required to determine 
the contribution of these additional mechanisms to defective insu-
lin secretion in CKD.
Stimulus-secretion coupling in the β cell involves a glu-
cose-dependent increase in the ATP/ADP ratio, which inhibits 
KATP channels, induces membrane depolarization, and opens volt-
age-gated calcium channels. The subsequent rise in intracellular 
[Ca2+] ([Ca2+]I) promotes insulin granule membrane fusion and 
exocytosis. In CKD rat islets, chronically elevated [Ca2+]I alters 
insulin secretion (71) by reducing basal and glucose-induced ATP 
levels (48). In our models, resting ATP levels were unaffected, but 
the glucose-dependent rise in ATP was impaired, suggesting that 
the major defect lies at the level of glucose metabolism, probably 
as a consequence of reduced glycolysis. This was similarly reflect-
ed downstream, where an attenuated rise in [Ca2+]I in response to 
glucose was observed in urea-treated islets (data not shown). It 
absence of hyperglycemia was provided by d’Apolito et al. (15), 
who showed that urea can directly increase O-GlcNAcylation via 
ROS production in adipose tissue, and by Jones et al. (63), who 
demonstrated an increase in O-GlcNAcylation levels following 
short-term H2O2 exposure in isolated cardiac myocytes. Together, 
these studies and our findings support our conclusion that urea 
increases O-GlcNAcylation of islet proteins via ROS production.
Glucose utilization and oxidation were reduced in CKD 
mouse islets and in islets exposed to urea. This is consistent with 
the defective glucose metabolism observed in a rat CKD model 
(48) and with reduced first-phase, glucose-induced insulin secre-
tion in CKD mouse islets. Both GK (64) and PFK-1 (65) are major 
rate-controlling enzymes of glycolysis, and β cell–specific inacti-
vation of either one impairs insulin secretion. Here, we found that 
PFK-1 activity was reduced in CKD islets as previously reported 
(48) and following exposure of islets to urea, while GK activity 
was not affected. PFK-1 activity is known to be inhibited by oxida-
tive stress (66), lipid metabolites (67), and O-GlcNAcylation (38). 
Glycosylation of PFK-1 at Ser529 inhibits its activity (38). That 
urea-induced O-GlcNAcylation of PFK-1 may account for reduced 
glucose sensing in CKD is supported by the observed increase in 
O-GlcNAcylation of PFK-1 after urea treatment of MIN6 cells and 
by the restoration of both PFK-1 activity and glucose utilization 
following the addition of DON to urea-treated islets. Reduced 
glucose metabolism compromises insulin secretion, however, 
Figure 8. Inhibiting protein O-GlcNAcylation in islets restores glucose metabolism and PFK-1 activity. Vmax of PFK-1 in islets (A) after urea treatment 
(n = 3) and (B) in CKD islets (n = 4–5). (C) Representative Western blot (WB) showing PFK-1 O-GlcNAcylation after chemoenzymatic labeling of O-GlcNAc 
residues with UDP-N-azidoacetylgalactosamine and the enzyme galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase, followed by reaction with an alkyne-biotin 
derivative, streptavidin pull-down, and elution of biotinylated proteins (n = 3). (D) Vmax of PFK-1 in islets after urea treatment with or without DON  
(n = 4–5). Glucose utilization (E) and oxidation (F) in islets incubated for 90 minutes in KRBH at 3 or 16 mmol/l (mM) glucose with D-[5-3H]glucose and 
D-[U-14C]glucose, respectively, in urea-treated islets with or without DON (20 μmol/l) (n = 4). Data represent the mean ± SEM. *P < 0.05 and ***P < 0.001 
versus control; 1-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post-hoc test for E and F and Student’s t test for A, B, and D. (G) Schematic representation of the mech-
anisms of impaired insulin secretion in CKD.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 0 8
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
activity; PFK-1 O-GlcNAcylation; impaired glycolysis that results 
in reduced glucose oxidation; ATP production; exocytosis; and 
insulin secretion (Figure 8G). Third, these deleterious effects of 
urea were also observed in human islets, indicating the relevance 
of the findings to human β cells. Finally, the central role of ROS 
and O-GlcNAcylation in β cell dysfunction suggests that clinical 
interventions such as antioxidant treatment might represent a 
therapeutic approach to reduce the metabolic complications asso-
ciated with CKD.
Methods
Reagents and solutions
RPMI-1640, FBS, and DAPI were obtained from Invitrogen. DMEM 
was from MultiCell Technologies. Fatty acid–free BSA was from Equi-
tech-Bio. Dextrose solution was from Baxter. Urea was from JT Baker. 
All other reagents were from Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise noted.
Animal models
C57BL/6N male mice were purchased from Charles River Laboratories 
and housed in an air-conditioned room with a controlled environment 
of 21°C ± 0.5°C and 60%–70% humidity, under a 12-hour light/12-hour 
dark cycle, with free access to food (Teklad Global 18% Protein Rodent 
Diet; Harlan Laboratories) and water. Mice were housed individually, 
and BW and food intake were determined biweekly. Moderate CKD 
was induced in 6-week-old mice by 5/6 nephrectomy with a 2-step 
surgical procedure, as previously described (31). NAC was dissolved in 
distilled water and administered daily by oral gavage at a dose of 200 
mg/kg/day for 3 weeks (79), beginning 2 days after the first surgery. 
Control animals received distilled water only. DON was dissolved in 
saline solution and administered i.p. 3 times per week at 0.5 mg/kg. 
The control group was injected with the same volume of vehicle. The 
chronic urea model was initiated in 6-week-old mice. Mice were pro-
vided with drinking water containing 25 g/l urea or urea-free water 
(control group) for 3 weeks.
Tissue, blood collection, and biochemical measurements
Blood samples obtained from the tail and collected in heparinized cap-
illaries were used to measure fed and fasted blood glucose and insulin 
levels. Animals were fasted at 8 am, and the samples were collected at 
8 am and 5 hours later. At the end of the experiment, mice were euth-
anized with ketamine (70 mg/kg) and xylazine (4 mg/kg), and blood 
was collected by left ventricular puncture using a syringe containing 
0.2 μM EDTA and centrifuged for 8 minutes at 10,000 g to separate 
the plasma. Blood was stored at –80°C. Urea was measured using a 
commercial colorimetric assay kit (BioVision). Creatinine was mea-
sured using a colorimetric method by the CHUM biochemistry core. 
Plasma FFA levels were measured using a kit from Wako Chemical. 
Insulin was measured by ELISA (Insulin Mouse Ultrasensitive Electro-
immunoassay; ALPCO Diagnostics).
Metabolic studies
GTT. After a 5-hour fast, animals were injected i.p. with 1 g/kg dex-
trose in sterile water. Blood glucose was measured prior to and 5, 10, 
15, 30, 45, 60, 90, and 120 minutes after injection. Blood glucose val-
ues were determined from a drop of blood sampled from the tail using 
an automatic glucose monitor (Accu-Check; Roche Applied Science). 
might seem counterintuitive that the insulin response to KCl was 
impaired in CKD islets, since KCl bypasses the glycolysis-regulat-
ed control of membrane potential and Ca2+ channels. However, 
work by Gembal et al. (72) and Sato et al. (73) has clearly shown 
that the magnitude of KCl-induced secretory responses is regulat-
ed by glucose metabolism. Our own recent work (74) showed that 
the glucose-dependent amplification of insulin exocytosis occurs 
even at basal glucose concentrations and requires cytosolic redox 
signaling. Mechanistically, KCl-induced insulin secretion may be 
reduced in two ways in the present study: 1) impaired glycolytic 
flux leading to reduced generation of coupling factors such as ATP 
can lead to reduced insulin granule priming; and 2) increased ROS 
may directly impair priming of insulin granules (74). In either case, 
this would be expected to result in fewer insulin granules available 
for KCl-induced secretion.
Insulin content of CKD mouse islets was unchanged 3 weeks 
after surgery, but was lower after 6 weeks. This suggests that in this 
model, insulin secretion is already defective after 3 weeks, while 
insulin biosynthesis is not yet affected. To specifically explore this 
early secretory defect without the confounding effect of reduced 
insulin content, we focused on the 3-week time point for all sub-
sequent experiments. We did not explore the mechanisms under-
lying the loss of insulin content at 6 weeks but can speculate that 
prolonged oxidative stress might eventually impair proinsulin 
gene expression and biosynthesis, as shown in other models (23).
Rodent models of CKD have provided important insights 
into the mechanism underlying perturbations in glucose homeo-
stasis (15, 48, 75, 76). In support of our data, defective insulin 
secretion was described in CKD rat models (48, 75). In contrast 
to the modest decrease in insulin sensitivity observed in our CKD 
mouse model, d’Apolito et al. (15) reported insulin resistance in 
CKD mice. The differences between our results may be related 
to the genetic background of the mice (C57BL/6J vs. C57BL/6N 
used in this study) and/or the prevention of acidosis in our study. 
C57BL/6J mice carry a mutation in nicotinamide nucleotide tran-
shydrogenase, a mitochondrial enzyme involved in NADPH pro-
duction, and have reduced insulin secretion relative to that seen in 
the C57BL/6N strain, without changes in insulin sensitivity (77). 
Furthermore, overproduction of H2O2, indicative of alterations in 
NADPH-dependent oxidases, plays a critical role in urea-induced 
insulin resistance in adipocytes (15). Consequently, C57BL/6J 
mice may be vulnerable to urea-induced ROS generation and insu-
lin resistance (15). Also, in our model, mice had access to drinking 
water containing 80 mmol/l sodium bicarbonate, preventing aci-
dosis and hyperkalemia, which are known contributors to insulin 
resistance in CKD (78). Notwithstanding these differences, our 
model enabled us to study the impact of CKD on β cell function 
in the absence of major changes in insulin sensitivity, although we 
cannot exclude the possibility that β cell dysfunction itself might 
contribute to insulin resistance.
In summary, our study provided key information regarding 
the mechanisms of β cell dysfunction in CKD using 3 complemen-
tary models with remarkably consistent functional defects. First, 
we uniquely demonstrated that urea, a major uremic toxin usually 
considered an innocent bystander, directly impairs insulin secre-
tion. Second, we identified underlying mechanisms that involve 
ROS production; islet protein O-GlcNAcylation; decreased PFK-1 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 0 9
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
bations, batches of 10 islets each were washed twice in KRB solution 
containing 0.1% (wt/vol) BSA and 2.8 mmol/l glucose for 20 minutes 
at 37°C, then incubated for 1 hour in the presence of 2.8 mmol/l glu-
cose, or 16.8 mmol/l glucose or 2.8 mmol/l glucose plus 35 mmol/l 
KCl. Each condition was run in triplicate. For perifusion experiments, 
batches of 120 islets each were placed in Swinnex chambers (EMD 
Millipore) and perifused for 40 minutes with KRB buffer containing 
2.8 mmol/l glucose. The glucose concentration was increased to 16.7 
mmol/l at t0 for a total of 40 minutes, then decreased to 2.8 mmol/l. 
Samples were collected at 1-minute intervals for insulin determina-
tion. Intracellular insulin content was measured after acid-alcohol 
extraction. Insulin was measured by radioimmunoassay using a rat 
insulin RIA Kit (EMD Millipore) or an AlphaLISA Insulin Immuno-
assay Kit (PerkinElmer).
Glucose metabolism and ATP content
Glucose utilization and glucose oxidation. Groups of 20 isolated islets 
were incubated at 37°C for 90 minutes in KRBH, 0.1 % BSA contain-
ing 0.5 μCi of D-[5-3H]glucose (16 Ci/mmol), and 1 μCi/ml D-[U-14C]
glucose (250 mCi/mmol) and 3 or 16 mmol/l glucose. Incubation was 
stopped by the addition of citrate buffer (400 mmol/l, pH 4.5) contain-
ing antimycin-A (10 μmmol/l), rotenone (10 μmmol/l), and potassium 
cyanide (5 nmmol/l). Glucose utilization was measured by the amount 
of 3H2O. Glucose oxidation was determined by the generation of 14CO2 
trapped by 5% KOH after a 60-minute incubation at room temperature. 
Results were normalized to the amount of protein in lysates, which was 
determined by using a BCA protein assay kit (Bio-Rad).
ATP content. ATP was extracted from islets after incubation at 
37°C for 15 minutes in KRBH and 0.1 % BSA containing 2.8 or 16.8 
mmol/l glucose and assayed using ATP bioluminescence assay 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions (ATPlite Luminescence 
Assay; PerkinElmer).
Single-cell measurement of β cell exocytosis
Prior to patch clamping, dissociated islet cells were preincubated in 
RPMI-1640 media with 2.8 mmol/l glucose for 1 hour. Media were 
then changed to a bath solution containing: 118 mmol/l NaCl, 20 
mmol/l TEA, 5.6 mmol/l KCl, 1.2 mmol/l MgCl2•6H2O, 2.6 mmol/l 
CaCl2, 5 mmol/l HEPES, and either 2.8 or 16.7 mmol/l glucose in a 
37°C chamber. After 10 minutes in the bath solution, whole-cell patch 
clamp measurement of exocytosis was performed (74). The intracellu-
lar solution contained: 125 mmol/l Cs-glutamate, 10 mmol/l CsCl, 10 
mmol/l NaCl, 1 mmol/l MgCl2•6H2O, 0.05 mmol/l EGTA, 5 mmol/l 
HEPES, 0.1 mmol/l cAMP, and 3 mmol/l Mg ATP (pH 7.15 with 
CsOH). Capacitance responses in femtofarad (fF) were normalized to 
initial cell size in picofarad (pF).
Measurement of ROS in urea-treated islets
The fluorescent probe 5-6-carboxy-2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein 
diacetate (carboxy-H2DCFDA; Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
was used to measure ROS accumulation in dissociated islets as previ-
ously described (82).
PFK-1 and GK activity in islets
Islets were lysed in lysis buffer (0.1 mol Tris, pH 8, 5 mmol/l MgCl2, 
2 mmol/l EGTA, 100 μmol/l β-mercaptoethanol). PFK-1 Vmax was 
assayed as described (48) using 10 μg islet lysate in 190 μl buffer con-
Plasma samples were collected at 0, 5, 15, 30, and 60 minutes for insu-
lin measurement. The AUC of blood glucose above basal levels was 
calculated using GraphPad Prism software.
ITT. After a 5-hour fast, animals were injected i.p. with 0.5 IU/kg 
recombinant human insulin (Actrapid; Novo Nordisk). Blood glucose 
was measured before and 15, 30, 40, 60, 90, and 120 minutes after 
injection. The glucose disappearance rate for the ITT (kITT) (per-
centage/minute) was calculated using the formula given by Lund-
beck (33). kITT = 0.693 × 100 / t1/2, where t1/2 was calculated from 
the slope of the plasma glucose concentration, considering an expo-
nential decrement of glucose concentration during the 30 minutes 
after insulin administration.
HGCs. One-step HGCs were performed on conscious animals 
(fed ad libitum before the clamp) as described previously (80). At 80 
minutes, an arginine bolus was injected (1 mmol/kg; Sandoz Canada) 
to assess the maximal insulin response. Plasma samples were collect-
ed from the tail at 0, 5, 15, 30, 50, 80, 81, and 90 minutes during the 
clamp, and the level of insulin was measured by ELISA. The insulin 
AUC in response to arginine was calculated using GraphPad Prism 
software. At the end of the clamp, the animals were sacrificed and 
the pancreas removed for morphological analyses. The M/I index of 
insulin sensitivity was calculated by dividing the average GIR during 
the second half of the glucose clamp (“M” is expressed in μmol/kg/
min) by the average circulating insulin value (“I” is expressed in ng/
ml) during the same time period.
Islet isolation, cell culture, and urea and cyanate treatment
Mouse islets were isolated by hand-picking after collagenase diges-
tion of the pancreas and dextran density gradient centrifugation as 
described previously (81). Isolated islets from CKD or sham mice 
immediately underwent static incubations following isolation. For 
urea treatment, islets were isolated from 12-week-old C57BL/6N male 
mice, and after overnight recovery in standard medium, islets were 
incubated for 24 hours in standard media containing 10–100 mmol/l 
urea, 20–100 mmol/l mannitol (osmotic control), or 0.2–1 mmol/l 
sodium cyanate. Urea, mannitol, and cyanate were dissolved in sterile 
distilled water. Islets were treated with NAC (0.5 mmol/l), DON (20 
μmol/l), or AZA (5 μmol/l) for 24 hours, with or without 20 mmol/l 
urea. NAC, DON, and AZA were dissolved in sterile ultrapure water.
The mouse insulin–secreting MIN6 cell line (passages 25–30; 
provided by Jun-ichi Miyazaki, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Osaka, Japan) were maintained in DMEM containing 25 
mmol/l glucose, 4 mmol/l L-glutamine, and 44 mmol/l NaHCO3 and 
supplemented with 10% FBS, 1 mmol/l sodium pyruvate, and 0.005% 
β-mercaptoethanol. Cells were electroporated with 350 pmol/l of 
either nontargeting (negative control) or siRNA against GFAT-1 (cat-
alog sc-60682; Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.). Twenty-four hours 
after transfection, cells were cultured under the experimental condi-
tions described in the Results. Gfat mRNA levels were measured by 
real-time RT-PCR (reverse transcription-PCR).
Insulin secretion
For static incubations of MIN6 cells, the cells were cultured at 2 mmol/l 
glucose in DMEM for 2 hours, then preincubated with Krebs-Ringer 
bicarbonate buffer plus HEPES (KRBH) containing 0.1% (wt/vol) BSA 
at 2 mmol/l glucose for 1 hour. Cells were then incubated for 1 hour in 
the presence of 2 mmol/l or 16 mmol/l glucose. For islet static incu-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 1 0
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
terstaining as described previously (84). The slides were scanned 
using a Super CoolScan 9000 scanner (Nikon), and images were 
analyzed using ImageJ software (NIH) to assess β cell and whole pan-
creas areas. The fractional β cell area was multiplied by the pancreas 
weight to obtain β cell mass.
Immunoblotting
Islet proteins were extracted using lysis buffer (20 mmol/l Tris-HCl, 
pH 7.2, containing 150 mmol/l NaCl, 1 mmol/l EDTA, 1 mmol/l EGTA, 
1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 1 μg/ml leupeptin, 10 μg/ml aproti-
nin and 20 μmol/l PUGNAc), followed by sonication. Insoluble mate-
rial was removed by centrifugation at 10,000 g at 4 °C for 10 minutes. 
Protein extracts (15 μg) were separated on 10% (wt/vol) SDS–PAGE, 
blotted to nitrocellulose membranes (Whatman). Membranes were 
blocked with 5% (w/v) BSA in Tris-buffered saline, pH 7.5, with 0.1% 
(v/v) Tween (TBS-T) for 2 hours at room temperature and incubated 
overnight at 4°C with the primary Abs listed in Supplemental Table 6. 
 
Blots were washed with TBS-T and exposed to secondary Abs for 
 
1 hour at room temperature. Membranes were washed again and devel-
oped by enhanced chemiluminescence using a standard kit (SuperSig-
nal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate; Life Technologies, Ther-
mo Fisher Scientific). Signals were detected using an HRP-labeled IgG 
(Bio-Rad) and enhanced chemiluminescence (PerkinElmer) on Kodak 
BioMax XAR films (Kodak). The bands were quantified by densitom-
etry and ImageJ. For the normalization of protein levels, membranes 
were incubated with anti-tubulin Ab. Results are expressed as a fold 
increase over control values.
Human isolated islets and pancreatic sections
Isolated islets from nondiabetic human cadaveric donors were pro-
vided by the Alberta Diabetes Institute Islet Core at the University of 
Alberta and by the Integrated Islet Distribution Program sponsored 
by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Dis-
eases (NIDDK). Characteristics of the donors are summarized in 
Supplemental Table 5.
Human pancreatic sections were prepared from autopsy samples 
from the Department of Pathology of the CHUM. CKD patients were 
selected on the basis of the absence of diabetes in their clinical history 
and an estimated glomerular filtration (eGFR) rate (by the CKD-EPI 
formula) under 60 ml/min/1.73 m2. Age- and sex-matched controls 
were selected on the basis of a normal eGFR rate. Characteristics of 
the donors are summarized in Supplemental Table 2.
Statistics
Data are expressed as the mean ± SEM. All data were analyzed using 
GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software 6). Multiple comparisons were 
performed using 1-way ANOVA followed, when appropriate, by Bon-
ferroni’s post-hoc tests for 2-by-2 comparisons. Results of GTT, ITT, 
clamps, and BW tests were compared by 2-way ANOVA (time, treat-
ment). Simple comparisons were performed using a 2-tailed Student’s t 
test. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Study approval
All procedures using animals were approved by the Institution-
al Committee for the Protection of Animals at the CHUM (protocol 
CM13041VP). The use of isolated human islets and human pancre-
atic sections was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee of 
taining 0.1 mol Tris-HCl, pH 8, 5 mmol/l EDTA, pH 8, 0.02 mmol/l 
MgCl2, 2 mmol/l fructose-6-phosphate, 0.2 mmol/l NADH, 10 U 
aldolase, 10 U triose phosphate isomerase, and 10 U α-glycerophos-
phate dehydrogenase. Islets were then incubated for 10 minutes in 
the buffer at 37°C, and the reaction was initiated by adding 2 mmol/l 
ATP to the buffer. Absorbance was recorded at 340 nm at room tem-
perature every 15 seconds for 13 minutes using a spectrofluorimeter 
(FLUOstar; BMG LABTECH) PFK-1 Vmax was estimated by the slope 
of disappearance of NADH. To measure GK Vmax, islets were lysed in 
buffer containing 50 mmol/l Tris, 5 mmol/l MgCl2, 100 mmol/l KCl, 
1 mmol/l EDTA and 4 mmol/l DTT. GK Vmax was measured using 10 
μg islet lysate in 190 μl reaction buffer containing 50 mmol/l Tris-
HCl, pH 7.5, 5 mmol/l MgCl2, 1 mmol/l ATP, 100 mmol/l glucose, 
15 mmol/l β-mercaptoethanol, 1 mmol/l NAD+, and 1 U/ml glycerol- 
6-phosphate dehydrogenase. Absorbance was recorded at 340 nm at 
30°C every 30 seconds for 60 minutes. GK Vmax was estimated by the 
slope of appearance of NADH.
PFK-1 O-GlcNAcylation
Cell extracts were lysed in 1% SDS, 50 mmol/l Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 100 
mmol/l NaCl, 10 μmol/l PUGNAc, 1 μg/ml leupeptin, and 10 μg/ml 
aprotinin. Using 200 μg proteins, chemoenzymatic labeling and bioti-
nylation were carried out as described (38, 83). Briefly, the cell lysate 
was labeled according to the Click-iT O-GlcNAc Enzymatic Labeling 
System protocol (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and conjugat-
ed with an alkyne-biotin compound according to the Click-iT Protein 
Analysis Detection Kit protocol (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientif-
ic). Negative control experiments were carried out in parallel in the 
absence of the labeling enzyme GalT. Biotinylated lysates were precipi-
tated in methanol/chloroform according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. Protein pellets were solubilized with 1% SDS and 50 mmol/l 
Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and neutralized with an equal volume of the neutral-
ization buffer (6%NP-40, 100 mmol/l Na2HPO4, 150 mmol/l NaCl). 
Lysates were then incubated with streptavidin resin (Pierce, Thermo 
Fisher Scientific) at a ratio of 30 μl resin to 100 μg proteins, with end-
to-end rotation at 4°C overnight. The following day, all samples were 
centrifuged at 5,000 g for 3 minutes, and the supernatant (input) was 
collected and assessed by Western blot analysis. Resins were washed 
5 times with 1 ml low-salt buffer (100 mmol/l Na2HPO4, 150 mmol/l 
NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate) and 5 
times with 1 ml high-salt buffer (100 mmol/l Na2HPO4, 500 mmol/l 
NaCl, 0.2% Triton X-100). After washing, biotinylated proteins were 
eluted by boiling the resin in 50 μl elution buffer (50 mmol/l Tris-HCl, 
pH 6.8, 2.5% SDS, 100 mmol/l DTT, 10% glycerol and 20 mmol/l bio-
tin) for 10 minutes at 90°C. Samples were centrifuged at 2,000 g for 
1 minute. Supernatants were collected for Western blot analysis.
Immunostaining of pancreatic sections
Pancreata were trimmed of fat, weighed, and fixed in 4% paraformal-
dehyde for 24 hours, followed by embedment in paraffin blocks. Par-
affin sections were rehydrated, and antigen retrieval was performed 
using sodium citrate buffer. Abs and dilutions are listed in Supple-
mental Table 6. Images were taken with a fluorescence microscope 
(Zeiss). To measure β cell mass, pancreatic sections were cut at 5-μm 
thickness and collected at 50-μm intervals. At least 6 slides from each 
pancreas were processed for β cell mass measurement. β cell mass 
was analyzed after insulin immunostaining and hematoxylin coun-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 1 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
betes and Pancreatic Beta-Cell Function. PEM holds the Canada 
Research Chair in Islet Biology. LK was supported by postdoctoral 
fellowships from the INSERM – Fond de Recherches Santé Qué-
bec (FRQS); the CRCHUM; and Hospices Civils de Lyon. EN was 
supported by studentships from the University of Montréal and 
the Montreal Diabetes Research Center. KV, VSM, and CA were 
supported by postdoctoral fellowships from the FRQS, CRCHUM, 
and the Canadian Diabetes Association, respectively. We thank 
G. Fergusson and M. Éthier of the Rodent Metabolic Phenotyping 
core facility of the CRCHUM for metabolic studies in mice; M. 
Guévremont, J. Morin, and the Cellular Physiology Service core of 
the CRCHUM for quantification of β cell mass and αLISA assay; C. 
Tremblay (CRCHUM) for valuable technical assistance; E. Joly for 
technical advice; and M. Ferdaoussi for fruitful discussions.
Address correspondence to: Vincent Poitout, CRCHUM, 900 
Saint-Denis Street, Montreal, Quebec, H2X 0A9, Canada. Phone: 
514.890.8044; E-mail: vincent.poitout@umontreal.ca.
the CHUM (protocols ND-05-035 and 16-048, respectively). Written 
consent for research was obtained from all donors.
Author contributions
LK conceived and performed the study, researched data, analyzed 
the results, and wrote the manuscript. EN performed the study, 
researched data, analyzed the results, and reviewed the manu-
script. KV, JEMF, XQD, BNN, DT, CA, and VSM researched data 
and analyzed the results. JG and PEM analyzed the results and 
reviewed the manuscript. VP conceived the study, analyzed the 
results, and wrote the manuscript. LK and VP are the guarantors 
of this work and, as such, take full responsibility for it.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by the US NIH (R01DK58096, to V.P.); 
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (MOP 77686, to V.P.); 
and the Quebec Research Network in Cardiometabolic Health, 
Diabetes and Obesity. VP holds the Canada Research Chair in Dia-
 1. Eldin WS, Ragheb A, Klassen J, Shoker A. 
Evidence for increased risk of prediabetes 
in the uremic patient. Nephron Clin Pract. 
2008;108(1):c47–c55.
 2. Lorenzo C, Nath SD, Hanley AJ, Abboud HE, Gel-
fond JA, Haffner SM. Risk of type 2 diabetes among 
individuals with high and low glomerular filtration 
rates. Diabetologia. 2009;52(7):1290–1297.
 3. Sahakyan K, Lee KE, Shankar A, Klein R. Serum 
cystatin C and the incidence of type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. Diabetologia. 2011;54(6):1335–1340.
 4. Mak RH. Insulin and its role in chronic kidney 
disease. Pediatr Nephrol. 2008;23(3):355–362.
 5. Menon V, et al. Glycosylated hemoglobin 
and mortality in patients with nondiabetic 
chronic kidney disease. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2005;16(11):3411–3417.
 6. Trivin C, et al. Glycated hemoglobin level and 
mortality in a nondiabetic population with CKD. 
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015;10(6):957–964.
 
7. Koppe L, et al. Insulin resistance in chronic 
kidney disease: new lessons from exper-
imental models. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2014;29(9):1666–1674.
 8. Cohen G, et al. Review on uraemic toxins III: rec-
ommendations for handling uraemic retention 
solutes in vitro--towards a standardized approach 
for research on uraemia. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2007;22(12):3381–3390.
 9. Duranton F, et al. Normal and pathologic con-
centrations of uremic toxins. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2012;23(7):1258–1270.
 10. Johnson WJ, Hagge WW, Wagoner RD, Dinap-
oli RP, Rosevear JW. Effects of urea loading in 
patients with far-advanced renal failure. Mayo 
Clin Proc. 1972;47(1):21–29.
 11. Eknoyan G, et al. Effect of dialysis dose and 
membrane flux in maintenance hemodialysis.  
N Engl J Med. 2002;347(25):2010–2019.
 12. FHN Trial Group, et al. In-center hemodialysis 
six times per week versus three times per week.  
N Engl J Med. 2010;363(24):2287–2300.
 13. Maduell F, et al. High-efficiency postdilution 
online hemodiafiltration reduces all-cause mor-
tality in hemodialysis patients. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2013;24(3):487–497.
 14. Zhang Z, Yang XY, Cohen DM. Urea-associated 
oxidative stress and Gadd153/CHOP induction. 
Am J Physiol. 1999;276(5 Pt 2):F786–F793.
 15. D’Apolito M, et al. Urea-induced ROS generation 
causes insulin resistance in mice with chronic 
renal failure. J Clin Invest. 2010;120(1):203–213.
 16. Vaziri ND, Yuan J, Norris K. Role of urea in intes-
tinal barrier dysfunction and disruption of epi-
thelial tight junction in chronic kidney disease. 
Am J Nephrol. 2013;37(1):1–6.
 17. D’Apolito M, et al. Urea-induced ROS cause 
endothelial dysfunction in chronic renal failure. 
Atherosclerosis. 2015;239(2):393–400.
 18. Wang Z, et al. Protein carbamylation links inflam-
mation, smoking, uremia and atherogenesis. Nat 
Med. 2007;13(10):1176–1184.
 19. De Vos A, et al. Human and rat beta cells differ in 
glucose transporter but not in glucokinase gene 
expression. J Clin Invest. 1995;96(5):2489–2495.
 20. Tepel M, van der Giet M, Statz M, Jankowski J, 
Zidek W. The antioxidant acetylcysteine reduces 
cardiovascular events in patients with end-stage 
renal failure: a randomized, controlled trial. Cir-
culation. 2003;107(7):992–995.
 21. Dounousi E, et al. Oxidative stress is progressive-
ly enhanced with advancing stages of CKD. Am J 
Kidney Dis. 2006;48(5):752–760.
 22. Pi J, et al. Reactive oxygen species as a signal in 
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Diabetes. 
2007;56(7):1783–1791.
 23. Poitout V, Robertson RP. Glucolipotoxicity: fuel 
excess and beta-cell dysfunction. Endocr Rev. 
2008;29(3):351–366.
 24. Lenzen S, Drinkgern J, Tiedge M. Low antioxi-
dant enzyme gene expression in pancreatic islets 
compared with various other mouse tissues. Free 
Radic Biol Med. 1996;20(3):463–466.
 25. Brownlee M. Biochemistry and molecular cell 
biology of diabetic complications. Nature. 
2001;414(6865):813–820.
 26. Lima VV, Spitler K, Choi H, Webb RC, Tostes RC. 
O-GlcNAcylation and oxidation of proteins: is 
signalling in the cardiovascular system becoming 
sweeter?. Clin Sci. 2012;123(8):473–486.
 27. Bond MR, Hanover JA. O-GlcNAc cycling: a link 
between metabolism and chronic disease. Annu 
Rev Nutr. 2013;33:205–229.
 28. Akimoto Y, et al. Elevation of the post-trans-
lational modification of proteins by O-linked 
N-acetylglucosamine leads to deterioration of 
the glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in the 
pancreas of diabetic Goto-Kakizaki rats. Glycobi-
ology. 2007;17(2):127–140.
 29. Konrad RJ, Kudlow JE. The role of O-linked pro-
tein glycosylation in beta-cell dysfunction. Int J 
Mol Med. 2002;10(5):535–539.
 30. Cooksey RC, Pusuluri S, Hazel M, McClain DA. 
Hexosamines regulate sensitivity of glucose-stim-
ulated insulin secretion in beta-cells. Am J Physiol 
Endocrinol Metab. 2006;290(2):E334–E340.
 31. Koppe L, et al. p-Cresyl sulfate promotes insu-
lin resistance associated with CKD. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2013;24(1):88–99.
 32. Covic AM, Schelling JR, Constantiner M, 
Iyengar SK, Sedor JR. Serum C-peptide con-
centrations poorly phenotype type 2 diabetic 
end-stage renal disease patients. Kidney Int. 
2000;58(4):1742–1750.
 33. Lundbaek K. Intravenous glucose tolerance as a 
tool in definition and diagnosis of diabetes melli-
tus. Br Med J. 1962;1(5291):1507–1513.
 34. Kikuchi A, et al. Systemic increase of oxidative 
nucleic acid damage in Parkinson’s disease 
and multiple system atrophy. Neurobiol Dis. 
2002;9(2):244–248.
 35. Buchwalow I, et al. L-arginine-NO-cGMP signal-
ling pathway in pancreatitis. Sci Rep. 2013;3:1899.
 36. Kebede M, et al. Glucose activates free fatty acid 
receptor 1 gene transcription via phosphatidyli-
nositol-3-kinase-dependent O-GlcNAcylation of 
pancreas-duodenum homeobox-1. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA. 2012;109(7):2376–2381.
 37. El-Gamal D, et al. The urea decomposition prod-
uct cyanate promotes endothelial dysfunction. 
Kidney Int. 2014;86(5):923–931.
 38. Yi W, et al. Phosphofructokinase 1 glycosylation 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 6 1 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 9   September 2016
regulates cell growth and metabolism. Science. 
2012;337(6097):975–980.
 39. Katz AI, Rubenstein AH. Metabolism of proinsu-
lin, insulin, and C-peptide in the rat. J Clin Invest. 
1973;52(5):1113–1121.
 40. Mondon CE, Dolkas CB, Reaven GM. Effect of 
acute uremia on insulin removal by the isolated 
perfused rat liver and muscle. Metab Clin Exp. 
1978;27(2):133–142.
 41. DeFronzo RA, Tobin JD, Rowe JW, Andres R. 
Glucose intolerance in uremia. Quantification 
of pancreatic beta cell sensitivity to glucose 
and tissue sensitivity to insulin. J Clin Invest. 
1978;62(2):425–435.
 42. Bergman RN. Minimal model: perspective from 
2005. Horm Res. 2005;64(Suppl 3):8–15.
 43. Alvestrand A, Mujagic M, Wajngot A, Efendic 
S. Glucose intolerance in uremic patients: the 
relative contributions of impaired beta-cell 
function and insulin resistance. Clin Nephrol. 
1989;31(4):175–183.
 44. Mak RH. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 corrects 
insulin and lipid abnormalities in uremia. Kidney 
Int. 1998;53(5):1353–1357.
 45. Mak RH. Effect of metabolic acidosis on insu-
lin action and secretion in uremia. Kidney Int. 
1998;54(2):603–607.
 46. Idorn T, Knop FK, Jørgensen M, Holst JJ, Hornum 
M, Feldt-Rasmussen B. Gastrointestinal factors 
contribute to glucometabolic disturbances in 
nondiabetic patients with end-stage renal dis-
ease. Kidney Int. 2013;83(5):915–923.
 47. Allegra V, Mengozzi G, Martimbianco L, Vasile 
A. Glucose-induced insulin secretion in uremia: 
effects of aminophylline infusion and glucose 
loads. Kidney Int. 1990;38(6):1146–1150.
 48. Fadda GZ, Hajjar SM, Perna AF, Zhou XJ, Lipson 
LG, Massry SG. On the mechanism of impaired 
insulin secretion in chronic renal failure. J Clin 
Invest. 1991;87(1):255–261.
 49. Duranton F, Depner TA, Argilés À. The saga of 
two centuries of urea: Nontoxic toxin or vice 
versa?. Semin Nephrol. 2014;34(2):87–96.
 50. Zhang Z, Dmitrieva NI, Park JH, Levine RL, Burg 
MB. High urea and NaCl carbonylate proteins in 
renal cells in culture and in vivo, and high urea 
causes 8-oxoguanine lesions in their DNA. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101(25):9491–9496.
 51. Jia L, et al. Hyperuricemia causes pancreatic 
β-cell death and dysfunction through NF-κB sig-
naling pathway. PLoS ONE. 2013;8(10):e78284.
 52. Prentice KJ, et al. The furan fatty acid metabolite 
CMPF is elevated in diabetes and induces β cell 
dysfunction. Cell Metab. 2014;19(4):653–666.
 53. Koeth RA, Kalantar-Zadeh K, Wang Z, Fu X, 
Tang WH, Hazen SL. Protein carbamylation 
predicts mortality in ESRD. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2013;24(5):853–861.
 54. Kraus LM, Traxinger R, Kraus AP. Uremia and 
insulin resistance: N-carbamoyl-asparagine 
decreases insulin-sensitive glucose uptake in rat 
adipocytes. Kidney Int. 2004;65(3):881–887.
 55. Oberg BP, et al. Increased prevalence of oxidant 
stress and inflammation in patients with moder-
ate to severe chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int. 
2004;65(3):1009–1016.
 56. Ruiz S, Pergola PE, Zager RA, Vaziri ND. Target-
ing the transcription factor Nrf2 to ameliorate 
oxidative stress and inflammation in chronic kid-
ney disease. Kidney Int. 2013;83(6):1029–1041.
 57. Del Vecchio L, Locatelli F, Carini M. What we 
know about oxidative stress in patients with 
chronic kidney disease on dialysis--clinical 
effects, potential treatment, and prevention. 
Semin Dial. 2011;24(1):56–64.
 58. Jun M, et al. Antioxidants for chronic kidney  
disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2012;10:CD008176.
 59. Guichard C, Moreau R, Pessayre D, Epperson 
TK, Krause KH. NOX family NADPH oxidases in 
liver and in pancreatic islets: a role in the meta-
bolic syndrome and diabetes?. Biochem Soc Trans. 
2008;36(Pt 5):920–929.
 60. Gao Y, Miyazaki J, Hart GW. The transcription 
factor PDX-1 is post-translationally modified by 
O-linked N-acetylglucosamine and this modifi-
cation is correlated with its DNA binding activity 
and insulin secretion in min6 beta-cells. Arch 
Biochem Biophys. 2003;415(2):155–163.
 61. Kaneto H, et al. Activation of the hexosamine 
pathway leads to deterioration of pancreatic beta-
cell function through the induction of oxidative 
stress. J Biol Chem. 2001;276(33):31099–31104.
 62. Fardini Y, et al. O-GlcNAcylation of FoxO1 
in pancreatic β cells promotes Akt inhibition 
through an IGFBP1-mediated autocrine mecha-
nism. FASEB J. 2014;28(2):1010–1021.
 63. Jones SP, et al. Cardioprotection by N-acetylglu-
cosamine linkage to cellular proteins. Circulation. 
2008;117(9):1172–1182.
 64. Terauchi Y, et al. Pancreatic beta-cell-specific 
targeted disruption of glucokinase gene. Diabe-
tes mellitus due to defective insulin secretion to 
glucose. J Biol Chem. 1995;270(51):30253–30256.
 65. Richard AM, et al. Tissue-dependent loss of 
phosphofructokinase-M in mice with interrupted 
activity of the distal promoter: impairment in 
insulin secretion. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 
2007;293(3):E794–E801.
 66. Tsuura Y, Ishida H, Shinomura T, Nishimura M, 
Seino Y. Endogenous nitric oxide inhibits glu-
cose-induced insulin secretion by suppression of 
phosphofructokinase activity in pancreatic islets. 
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998;252(1):34–38.
 67. Jenkins CM, Yang J, Sims HF, Gross RW. Revers-
ible high affinity inhibition of phosphofructoki-
nase-1 by acyl-CoA: a mechanism integrating 
glycolytic flux with lipid metabolism. J Biol Chem. 
2011;286(14):11937–11950.
 68. Schuit F, et al. Metabolic fate of glucose in purified 
islet cells. Glucose-regulated anaplerosis in beta 
cells. J Biol Chem. 1997;272(30):18572–18579.
 69. Goehring I, et al. Identification of an intracellular 
metabolic signature impairing beta cell function 
in the rat beta cell line INS-1E and human islets. 
Diabetologia. 2011;54(10):2584–2594.
 70. Rao X, et al. O-GlcNAcylation of G6PD promotes 
the pentose phosphate pathway and tumor 
growth. Nat Commun. 2015;6:8468.
 71. Hajjar SM, Fadda GZ, Thanakitcharu P, 
Smogorzewski M, Massry SG. Reduced activity of 
Na(+)-K+ ATPase of pancreatic islets in chronic 
renal failure: role of secondary hyperparathyroid-
ism. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1992;2(8):1355–1359.
 72. Gembal M, Gilon P, Henquin JC. Evidence that 
glucose can control insulin release independently 
from its action on ATP-sensitive K+ channels in 
mouse B cells. J Clin Invest. 1992;89(4):1288–1295.
 73. Sato Y, Aizawa T, Komatsu M, Okada N, Yamada 
T. Dual functional role of membrane depolariza-
tion/Ca2+ influx in rat pancreatic B-cell. Diabe-
tes. 1992;41(4):438–443.
 74. Ferdaoussi M, et al. Isocitrate-to-SENP1 signaling 
amplifies insulin secretion and rescues dysfunc-
tional β cells. J Clin Invest. 2015;125(10):3847–3860.
 75. Nakamura Y, Yoshida T, Kajiyama S, Kitagawa 
Y, Kanatsuna T, Kondo M. Insulin release from 
column-perifused isolated islets of uremic rats. 
Nephron. 1985;40(4):467–469.
 76. Pokrywczynska M, et al. Impact of fructose diet 
and renal failure on the function of pancreatic 
islets. Pancreas. 2014;43(5):801–808.
 77. Fergusson G, et al. Defective insulin secretory 
response to intravenous glucose in C57Bl/6J 
compared to C57Bl/6N mice. Mol Metab. 
2014;3(9):848–854.
 78. Bailey JL, Zheng B, Hu Z, Price SR, Mitch WE. 
Chronic kidney disease causes defects in signal-
ing through the insulin receptor substrate/phos-
phatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathway: impli-
cations for muscle atrophy. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2006;17(5):1388–1394.
 79. Ivanovski O, et al. The antioxidant N-acetylcys-
teine prevents accelerated atherosclerosis in 
uremic apolipoprotein E knockout mice. Kidney 
Int. 2005;67(6):2288–2294.
 80. Peyot ML, et al. Adipose triglyceride lipase 
is implicated in fuel- and non-fuel-stim-
ulated insulin secretion. J Biol Chem. 
2009;284(25):16848–16859.
 81. Alquier T, et al. Deletion of GPR40 impairs glu-
cose-induced insulin secretion in vivo in mice 
without affecting intracellular fuel metabolism in 
islets. Diabetes. 2009;58(11):2607–2615.
 82. Moore PC, Ugas MA, Hagman DK, Parazzoli SD, 
Poitout V. Evidence against the involvement of 
oxidative stress in fatty acid inhibition of insulin 
secretion. Diabetes. 2004;53(10):2610–2616.
 83. Tai HC, Khidekel N, Ficarro SB, Peters EC, 
Hsieh-Wilson LC. Parallel identification of 
O-GlcNAc-modified proteins from cell lysates.  
J Am Chem Soc. 2004;126(34):10500–10501.
 84. Fontés G, et al. Glucolipotoxicity age-dependent-
ly impairs beta cell function in rats despite a 
marked increase in beta cell mass. Diabetologia. 
2010;53(11):2369–2379.
