 1
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
Conflict of interest: Y. Koronyo,  
K.L. Black, S.R. Verdooner, and M. 
Koronyo-Hamaoui are founding 
members of NeuroVision Imaging.  
S. Frautschy and G.M. Cole are founding 
members of Optimized Curcumin 
Longvida.
Submitted: February 23, 2017 
Accepted: July 7, 2017 
Published: August 17, 2017
Reference information: 
JCI Insight. 2017;2(16):e93621. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.
insight.93621.
Retinal amyloid pathology  
and proof-of-concept imaging trial  
in Alzheimer’s disease
Yosef Koronyo,1 David Biggs,2 Ernesto Barron,3 David S. Boyer,4 Joel A. Pearlman,5 William J. Au,6 
Shawn J. Kile,6 Austin Blanco,2 Dieu-Trang Fuchs,1 Adeel Ashfaq,7 Sally Frautschy,8  
Gregory M. Cole,8 Carol A. Miller,9 David R. Hinton,10 Steven R. Verdooner,2 Keith L. Black,1  
and Maya Koronyo-Hamaoui1,11
1Department of Neurosurgery, Maxine Dunitz Neurosurgical Research Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center,  
Los Angeles, California, USA. 2NeuroVision Imaging LLC, Sacramento, California, USA. 3Doheny Eye Institute, Los Angeles, 
California, USA. 4Retina Vitreous Associates Medical Group, Beverly Hills, California, USA. 5Retinal Consultants Medical 
Group, Sacramento, California, USA. 6Sutter Neuroscience Institute, Sacramento, California, USA. 7David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA. 8Departments of Neurology and Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA; Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Los 
Angeles, California, USA; and Veterans Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, California, USA.  
9Department of Pathology Program in Neuroscience, Keck School of Medicine, and 10Departments of Pathology and 
Ophthalmology, USC Roski Eye Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA. 11Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA.
BACKGROUND. Noninvasive detection of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) with high specificity and 
sensitivity can greatly facilitate identification of at-risk populations for earlier, more effective 
intervention. AD patients exhibit a myriad of retinal pathologies, including hallmark amyloid 
β-protein (Aβ) deposits.
METHODS. Burden, distribution, cellular layer, and structure of retinal Aβ plaques were analyzed in 
flat mounts and cross sections of definite AD patients and controls (n = 37). In a proof-of-concept 
retinal imaging trial (n = 16), amyloid probe curcumin formulation was determined and protocol was 
established for retinal amyloid imaging in live patients.
RESULTS. Histological examination uncovered classical and neuritic-like Aβ deposits with increased 
retinal Aβ42 plaques (4.7-fold; P = 0.0063) and neuronal loss (P = 0.0023) in AD patients versus 
matched controls. Retinal Aβ plaque mirrored brain pathology, especially in the primary visual 
cortex (P = 0.0097 to P = 0.0018; Pearson’s r = 0.84–0.91). Retinal deposits often associated with 
blood vessels and occurred in hot spot peripheral regions of the superior quadrant and innermost 
retinal layers. Transmission electron microscopy revealed retinal Aβ assembled into protofibrils 
and fibrils. Moreover, the ability to image retinal amyloid deposits with solid-lipid curcumin and 
a modified scanning laser ophthalmoscope was demonstrated in live patients. A fully automated 
calculation of the retinal amyloid index (RAI), a quantitative measure of increased curcumin 
fluorescence, was constructed. Analysis of RAI scores showed a 2.1-fold increase in AD patients 
versus controls (P = 0.0031).
CONCLUSION. The geometric distribution and increased burden of retinal amyloid pathology in 
AD, together with the feasibility to noninvasively detect discrete retinal amyloid deposits in living 
patients, may lead to a practical approach for large-scale AD diagnosis and monitoring.
FUNDING. National Institute on Aging award (AG044897) and The Saban and The Marciano Family 
Foundations.
 2
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is an invariably fatal neurodegenerative disorder and the leading cause of senile 
dementia worldwide (1). There is no effective treatment and limited functionality for early unequivocal 
diagnosis. Aggregation and propagation of misfolded amyloid β-protein (Aβ) and hyperphosphorylated 
tau protein (pTau) present in neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) are pathological hallmarks that distinctly con-
tribute to AD diagnosis (2, 3). Cerebral Aβ accumulation may occur as early as 20 years before the onset of 
clinical dementia, an insidious phase denoted as prodromal AD (4–6). With the development of promising 
disease-modifying therapies for AD, intervention during the prodromal phase, when damage to synapses 
and neuronal tissue is minimal, would offer significantly increased treatment efficacy. Existing brain amy-
loid–imaging tools are invaluable for research and diagnosis (7), yet they present challenges for screening 
large-scale populations in clinical settings and predicting disease progression (8, 9). In part, this is due to 
high costs, limited availability, and exposure to radioactive isotopes (8–10). These factors prompted the 
investigation of amyloid pathology in the retina, a CNS tissue readily accessible for direct, noninvasive 
imaging at high resolution and low cost, to define at-risk populations for further clinical evaluation with 
gold-standard brain imaging.
Mounting evidence indicates that patients with AD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) exhibit a 
wide spectrum of ocular abnormalities, circadian rhythm disturbances, and visual impairments (reviewed 
in Hart et al., ref. 11). In addition to afflicting the brain, AD also affects the retina, a developmental out-
growth of the brain (12–14), possibly causing these symptoms. The retinas of AD patients display pathol-
ogies such as nerve fiber layer (NFL) thinning, retinal ganglion cell (RGC) degeneration, reduction of 
blood flow and vascular alterations, astrogliosis, and abnormal electroretinogram patterns (11, 15–33). 
Among the many characteristics it shares with the brain, the retina contains neurons, astroglia, microglia, 
microvasculature with similar morphological and physiological properties, and a blood barrier (12–14, 34, 
35). Axons of the optic nerve connect the retina and brain directly and facilitate vesicular transportation 
of amyloid precursor protein (APP) synthesized in RGCs (36). Further, retinal neurons and glia express 
proteins that have been implicated in the amyloid cascade (e.g., BACE1, γ-secretase, APOE) (35, 37, 38).
While the hallmark pathologies of AD have long been established in the brain, their manifestation 
in the human retina is a recent finding (11, 26, 39–42). We previously identified Aβ plaque pathology in 
postmortem retinas of definite AD patients as well as in early-stage cases (40). Neuropathological exam-
ination revealed that retinal Aβ plaque burden qualitatively corresponded to cerebral amyloid burden in 
these patients, in stark contrast to the minimal Aβ plaque findings in age-matched healthy controls (26, 40). 
Subsequent studies have corroborated these findings by demonstrating the existence of retinal Aβ deposits, 
identifying increased Aβ1–42 peptides in the human retina by biochemical analysis (albeit to a lower extent 
than those seen in neocortical tissues), and, moreover, showing the presence of pTau in retinal tissues of 
AD patients (39, 41, 42). Although a few studies were unable to detect Aβ (41, 43) or pTau (43) in the 
human AD retina, several independent groups confirmed their existence by applying specific tissue process-
ing and immunostaining protocols and screening large retinal regions that had previously been overlooked 
(11, 26, 39–42). In a recent study, notable Aβ accumulation inside and around degenerating melanop-
sin-containing RGCs (mRGCs), photoreceptors known to drive circadian photoentrainment, was found in 
AD patients (26). The presence of Aβ may be responsible for loss of this photoreceptor subtype and could 
possibly explain sleep disturbances seen in these patients (44).
In line with the above findings, numerous studies examining the retinas of sporadic and transgen-
ic animal models of AD have reported Aβ deposits, vascular Aβ, pTau, and paired helical filament-tau 
(PHF-tau), often in association with RGC degeneration, local inflammation (i.e., microglial activation), 
and impairments of retinal structure and function (11, 39, 40, 42, 45–61). These studies, which included 
a variety of transgenic rat and mouse models, as well as the sporadic rodent model of AD, Octodon degus, 
demonstrated abundant Aβ deposits, mainly in the innermost retinal layers (RGCs and NFL) (40, 42, 
45, 49, 52, 54, 57). Furthermore, several publications, including ours, have reported a positive response 
to therapy in reducing retinal Aβ plaque burden in transgenic (ADtg) murine models, often reflecting the 
reaction observed in the respective brains (40, 48, 51, 52, 56, 60). To visualize retinal Aβ pathology in vivo, 
we had previously developed a noninvasive retinal amyloid imaging method for rodent ADtg models, using 
curcumin as a contrast agent (40, 51). Curcumin is a natural and safe phytopolylphenol fluorochrome that 
binds to Aβ fibrils and oligomers with high affinity and specificity (62–68). This approach enabled noninva-
sive detection and monitoring of individual retinal Aβ deposits in live ADtg mice (40, 51).
 3
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
Here, we investigated the burden and geometrical 
and layer distribution of retinal Aβ deposits and their 
ultrastructures in definite AD patients and healthy con-
trols. In a subset of human samples, we quantitatively 
assessed the correlation between retinal and cerebral 
plaques and coexistence of retinal neuronal loss. These 
findings supported translation of our retinal optical 
imaging approach to humans, which demonstrated the 
feasibility to detect and quantify retinal amyloid depos-
its in living patients in a proof-of-concept human trial.
Results
Geometric distribution of  retinal Aβ deposits in AD patients. 
Eyes and brains were collected from 23 clinically and 
neuropathologically confirmed AD patients (mean age 
± SEM: 78.8 ± 2.9 years; range 48–98 years; 14 females 
and 9 males) and 14 healthy controls (mean age ± 
SEM: 76.7 ± 3.4 years; range: 58–95 years; 6 females 
and 8 males), as detailed in Supplemental Table 1 (sup-
plemental material available online with this article; 
https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621DS1). Reti-
nas were isolated and processed as illustrated in Figure 
1. Retinal flat mounts and cross sections were stained 
with various anti-Aβ compounds and mAbs (12F4, 
6E10, 4G8, 11A5-B10) using peroxidase- and fluores-
cent-based techniques. In all AD cases, we observed 
increased retinal Aβ immunoreactivity and deposits 
compared with age- and sex-matched controls (Figures 
2–4 and Supplemental Figure 1).
Analysis of the superior quadrants stained with 
12F4 mAb (specific to C′-terminus of Aβ42 species) 
revealed clusters of Aβ deposits in the retinas of AD 
patients (Figure 2A) versus their age- and sex-matched 
controls (Figure 2A). The representative subset of 
patients and matched controls were aged 60–90 years 
(Figure 2A; most of this subset was also analyzed in other retinal regions in La Morgia et al., ref. 26). Con-
trol individuals occasionally showed sparse and diffuse retinal Aβ deposits (Figure 2A), in accordance with 
their brain pathology. High-magnification images show diverse types of Aβ deposits in AD patient retinas, 
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of donor eye dissection, 
retinal isolation, and tissue processing for histological 
analysis. (A) Anterior chamber extraction from human 
donor eyeballs, isolation of whole retinas, and vitreous body 
removal (n = 37 AD patients and controls, Supplemental 
Table 1). (B) Preparation of retinal flat mounts and section-
ing into 12 geometric regions. (C) Representative segmenta-
tion and imaging of regional flat mount stained for Aβ (top 
right). Region dissection of Aβ-positive areas and prepa-
ration of horizontal (en face) and vertical (cross) sections 
for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis (top 
left). Microscopic image shows a vertical TEM image with 
ultrastructure of retinal Aβ plaque in a confirmed AD patient 
(bottom left). Illustration of paraffin-embedded retinal cross 
section prepared from Aβ-immunoreactive areas, showing 
cellular layers (bottom right). P. Pole, posterior pole; O.D., 
optic disc; M, macula; F, fovea.
 4
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
including classical, diffuse, and compact plaques (Figure 2A and Supplemental Figure 1, A and B). The 
classic Aβ plaque morphology often seen in AD patient brains (Figure 2B, left top image) was also detected 
in the retinas (e.g., in the 71-year-old male in Figure 2A, right boxed image). A comparison between reti-
nas and respective brains from two additional patients (cases 16 and 20, Supplemental Table 1) indicated 
resemblance in Aβ plaque morphology (Figure 2B, arrowheads). These patients were diagnosed with cere-
bral amyloid angiopathy and exhibited retinal Aβ deposits associated with vasculature (Figure 2B, purple 
Figure 2. Burden and distribution of Aβ deposits in postmortem retinas of AD patients. (A) Representative micrographs from flat-mount retinas of 
definite AD patients (n = 8) and age- and sex-matched non-AD controls (CTRLs; n = 7) at varying ages, stained with anti-Aβ42 mAb (12F4) and the standard 
peroxidase technique (plaques visible as dark brown spots). Scale bar: 20 μm. Human donor number, sex (male [M] or female [F]), and age in years (y) are 
shown (for additional details on donor eyes and brains, see Supplemental Table 1). High-magnification images display diverse morphology of Aβ aggre-
gates, including diffuse, compact, and “classical” mature plaques. Scale bar: 10 μm. (B) AD patients brain sections and their respective retinal flat mounts 
stained with 12F4 mAb. Retinal plaques are generally smaller but similar in morphology to brain plaques (arrowheads). Retinal Aβ deposits are apparent 
inside blood vessels (bv), perivascular, and along the vessel walls (purple arrowheads). Scale bar: 20 μm. (C) Correlation analyses using Pearson’s correla-
tion coefficient (r) test between retinal 12F4+-plaque burden and cerebral plaques (Gallyas silver or thioflavin-S staining), including mean plaque burden 
from 7 brain regions (see Methods), primary visual (PV) cortex (Ctx.) only, and entorhinal Ctx. only, in a subset of AD patients and CTRLs (n = 8). (D) Anti-Aβ 
antibody and Longvida curcumin (Cur) fluorescent staining of Aβ deposits in cortical and retinal tissues from the same patient subset. Sudan black B (SBB) 
was applied to quench autofluorescence. Retinal Aβ plaques positive for 6E10 single staining. Colocalization of curcumin and 6E10 in cortical and retinal 
Aβ plaques, showing patterns unique to each staining method. Scale bar: 10 μm (left retina and brain); 5 μm (right retina). (B and D) Representative paired 
retinal and brain samples from n = 5 AD patients and n = 2 controls. (E) Distribution of plaques in large retinal regions (n = 16 AD patients and controls), 
using fluorescent-based (top; scale bar: 5 μm) and peroxidase-based (bottom; scale bar: 20 μm) staining. (F) Qualitative geometric hot spot regions for 
retinal Aβ deposits found in AD patients (S, superior; T, temporal; I, inferior; N, nasal; cumulative data from multiple experiments). (G) Quantitative 
12F4-immunoreactive (IR) area of Aβ42-containing plaques (geometric regions ST1-3) in a subset of definite AD patients (n = 8) and age- and sex-matched 
controls (n = 7). Group mean and SEM are shown. **P < 0.01, unpaired 2-tailed Student’s t test.
 5
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
arrowheads), surrounding (perivascular), along, or within blood vessel walls. Retinal Aβ plaques were mor-
phologically similar to their cerebral counterparts, but their diameter was 6 to 7 times smaller on average 
(Figure 2B, black arrowheads). In a subset of AD patients and controls, correlation analyses between reti-
nal Aβ42 plaque and cerebral neuritic plaque burden (silver stain) in various brain regions showed significant 
and positive linear associations, especially in the entorhinal and primary visual cortex regions (Figure 2C; P 
< 0.01 to P < 0.005, by Pearson’s correlation coefficient [r] test). While retinal Aβ42 plaques in the superior 
temporal quadrant showed a trend of association or no association with thioflavin-S+ plaques in certain 
brain regions, there was a consistently strong correlation to thioflavin-S+ diffuse, immature, and mature 
plaques in the primary visual cortex (Figure 2C and Supplemental Figure 2).
Next, we analyzed curcumin fluorescence patterns when bound to retinal and brain Aβ deposits (Figure 
2D) using 6E10 mAb alone or in combination with lipidated curcumin (Longvida), a tracer further used for 
live imaging. Figure 2D displays retinal Aβ plaques of classical morphology using single-antibody labeling, 
which was comparable to the peroxidase-based staining patterns shown in retinas and brains (Figure 2, A 
and B, images highlighted by boxed regions). Curcumin labeled the central dense Aβ core intensely and, to 
a lesser degree, the radiating fibril arms (Figure 2D). Curcumin labeling in retinal and brain tissues consis-
tently colocalized with 6E10 mAb labeling and with other Aβ epitope–specific mAbs, such as Aβ40 C′-ter-
minus (Supplemental Figure 1B). Intracellular Aβ immunoreactivity was also detected with 12F4 and 6E10 
Figure 3. Congo red–positive amyloid fibrils 
and Gallyas silver–stained neuritic-like 
plaques found in retinas of AD patients. 
(A) Amyloid deposits stained with Congo red 
detected in flat-mount retinas of AD patients 
(top left, n = 3). Birefringence (apple-green) of 
Congo red–stained retinas under polarized light 
indicates presence of amyloid fibrils (bottom 
left). Scale bar: 25 μm. Congo red–positive amy-
loid plaques in AD patient retinas (right). Scale 
bar: 100 μm. Two intersecting blood vessels 
surrounded (along blood vessels and perivascu-
lar) by extensive Congo red–positive staining; 
matched control retina was negative (data 
not shown). Background blue counterstain 
is Toluidine blue. (B–E) Gallyas silver stain in 
Paraffin-embedded retinal cross sections from 
AD patients (n = 12) and matched CTRLs (n = 8). 
Scale bar: 20 μm, unless indicated otherwise. 
(B) Age-matched controls exhibited intact 
retinal tissue that lacked major protein aggre-
gates. (C) AD-associated neuropathologies in 
the retina (red arrowheads), notably observed 
in the ganglion cell layer (GCL). A compact 
plaque near a blood vessel (bv; left). A classic 
Aβ plaque and compact deposits (middle); a 
higher-magnification image is shown in the 
inset. Neuritic components of senile plaques 
in GCL (right); a higher-magnification image 
is shown below (scale bar: 10 μm). (D) Retinal 
deposits in GCL near and surrounding a blood 
vessel. (E) Intracellular/soma-positive silver 
stain aggregates and nuclear-dominant silver 
stain (red arrowheads) are observed in GCL and 
INL (scale bar: 5 μm).
 6
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
staining (Supplemental Figure 1, C and D). Figure 2E shows clusters of Aβ deposits, detected by curcumin 
and 6E10 fluorescent labeling, resembling those detected by peroxidase-based immunolabeling. Scanning 
large regions in human retinal flat mounts for Aβ deposits (stained with 12F4 mAb) revealed variability in 
geometric distribution of amyloid burden (Figure 2F). Our data suggest that Aβ plaques frequently appear 
in the periphery of the superior quadrant but are scarce in the posterior pole of the AD patient retina (Fig-
ure 2F). Quantitative 12F4-immunoreactive areas of Aβ42-containing plaques (Figure 2F, geometric regions 
superior temporal 1–3) in a subset of definite AD patients versus age- and sex-matched controls indicated a 
significant 4.7-fold increase in retinal Aβ deposits in AD patients (Figure 2G; P = 0.0063, Student’s t test).
Congo red staining in retinal tissues in a subset of patients and controls revealed extensive Congo red–
positive plaque along blood vessels (perivascular) in AD patients (Figure 3A), whereas the control retina 
Figure 4. Aβ deposits associated with neuronal loss are detected in the retinas of AD patients. (A and B) Paraffin-embedded retinal cross sections 
from superior quadrants of AD patients (n = 12) and matched CTRLs (n = 8) stained with anti-Aβ42 mAbs (12F4) and peroxidase-based labeling (brown). 
Hematoxylin counter stain for nuclei (violet). (A) Retinas of controls were clear of Aβ immunoreactivity. (B) Retinas of AD patients contained a multitude 
of Aβ deposits (arrowheads), especially in the ganglion cell layer (GCL). Marked loss of retinal cells apparent in the GCL, inner nuclear layer (INL), and 
outer nuclear layer (ONL); areas of nuclei loss are indicated by asterisks. Scale bar: 20 μm. Higher-magnification images are shown. Intracellular cyto-
plasmic Aβ (top; arrow). Aβ deposits near and inside blood vessel walls (middle; bv; arrowheads); these vascular and perivascular deposits are frequent in 
GCL. Scale bar: 10 μm. A compact multicore Aβ deposit found in GCL (bottom; scale bar: 5 μm). (C) Nissl staining of retinal cross sections from a definite 
AD patient and matched CTRLs (n = 17 subjects; experiment repeated 3 times). Altered Nissl neuronal staining is observed in AD patients; changes in 
cytoplasmic staining patterns (chromatolysis) that could associate with neuronal loss are observed in retinal GCL, INL, and ONL. Scale bar: 20 μm. (D) 
Quantitative Nissl neuronal count and total area in a subset of AD patients (n = 9) and age- and sex-matched CTRLs (n = 8). Percentage change com-
pared with CTRLs is in red. Group mean and SEM are shown. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, unpaired 2-tailed Student’s t test. (E–G) Representative images from 
n = 8 AD patients and n = 8 matched CTRLs; fluorescent images from AD patient retinas showing curcumin-positive Aβ deposits colocalized with various 
anti-Aβ mAbs (4G8, 6E10, 12F4), recognizing diverse N′- and C′-terminus epitopes within the Aβ sequence (arrowheads). (E) Aβ deposits detected in the 
ONL, above the outer limiting membrane (OLM), and in the GCL near and inside blood vessel walls (left, arrowheads; scale bar: 20 μm). Colocalization of 
curcumin and 4G8 in a retinal Aβ plaque near DAPI nuclear staining demonstrates each unique staining pattern (right; scale bar: 5 μm). (F) Intracellular/
somatic Aβ immunoreactivity (arrow) and colocalization of 6E10 with curcumin (arrowheads; left; scale bar: 10 μm). Compact multicore Aβ deposits 
(right; scale bar: 5 μm. (G) Curcumin-positive Aβ deposits colocalized with the anti-Aβ mAbs (12F4) in the GCL/IPL (arrowheads). Scale bar: 10 μm.
 7
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
was negative (data not shown). The birefringence of Congo red staining under polarized light indicated the 
presence of amyloid fibrils (Figure 3A).
Retinal Aβ and neuritic-like deposits, NFT-like structures, and fibrillar Aβ42 ultrastructures in the innermost layers. 
Radial cross sections, extending from the ora serrata to the optic disc (Figure 1C), were obtained from retinal 
superior temporal and inferior-nasal quadrants. Gallyas silver staining, a standard technique for detecting 
cerebral senile plaques and NFTs, was utilized to further demonstrate the presence of AD-associated neuro-
pathologies in the retinas of AD patients versus controls (Figure 3, B–E, and Supplemental Figure 3). Cross 
sections from matched controls exhibited intact retinal tissue lacking major protein aggregates (Figure 3B). 
In contrast, retinas of definite AD patients contained multiple extracellular Aβ deposits (Figure 3, C and 
D), including classical plaques (Figure 3C, middle) and deposits associated with blood vessels, especially in 
the ganglion cell layer (GCL; Figure 3, C and D). Importantly, we identified classical neuritic (senile-like) 
plaques in the RGC layers (Figure 3C, right, higher-magnification image below). Intracellular-cytoplasmic 
protein aggregates were also observed (Figure 3E). Furthermore, some neurons in the innermost retinal lay-
ers of AD patients exhibited tangle-like morphology resembling NFTs (Supplemental Figure 3).
Next, we immunolabeled retinal cross sections with various anti-Aβ mAbs and hematoxylin nuclear 
counterstain (Figure 4). While control retinas were typically clear of Aβ immunoreactivity (Figure 4A), 
definite AD patients displayed diverse forms of 12F4-positive Aβ deposits, which often associated with 
blood vessels, especially in the GCL (Figure 4B and Supplemental Figure 1, E–G). Cytoplasmic Aβ was 
also detected (Figure 4B, top, and Supplemental Figure 1E), as well as deposits within (Figure 4B, top) or 
adjacent to blood vessel walls (Figure 4B, right, and Supplemental Figure 1E). Globular plaques consisting 
of multiple amyloid cores were also observed (Figure 4B, bottom, and Supplemental Figure 1G). Intracel-
lular staining of Aβ was occasionally observed in foam-like pericytes (69) with poorly defined nuclei (Fig-
ure 4B, top, arrowhead). Importantly, along with accumulation of Aβ, a marked loss of retinal cells was 
apparent in the GCL, inner nuclear layer (INL), and outer nuclear layer (ONL) in AD patients as compared 
with retinas of matched controls (Figure 4B, red asterisks, vs. Figure 4A). Indeed, altered Nissl neuronal 
staining was observed in retinal GCL, INL, and ONL of AD patients versus controls, suggesting chro-
matolysis that may associate with neuronal degeneration (Figure 4C). Quantitative Nissl neuronal count 
and total area in a subset of AD patients and age- and sex-matched controls (n = 17) validated a significant 
neuronal loss in the retinas of AD patients (Figure 4D; P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively, Student’s t test).
Fluorescent imaging demonstrated the colabeling of curcumin with various anti-Aβ mAbs detect-
ing multiple intracellular and extracellular deposits across retinal layers in AD patients, especially in the 
GCL but also above the outer limiting membrane (Figure 4, E–G). Staining patterns of curcumin-positive 
plaques, intensely labeling the central dense Aβ core (Figure 4, E and F, right), were comparable to those 
found in retinal flat mounts and brains (Figure 2D). Globular 12F4- and 6E10-positive plaques containing 
multiple amyloid cores were also detected (Figure 4, F and G).
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of vertical and en face (horizontal) retinal sections from AD 
patients that had been immunoperoxidase labeled with 12F4 mAbs (anti-Aβ42) revealed the ultrastructures 
of retinal Aβ plaques containing a central dense amyloid core, with and without radiating fibrillar arms, 
fibrils, protofibrils, and other types of Aβ deposits (Figure 5). Similar to those in the brain, retinal Aβ pro-
tofibrils and fibrils were 10- to 15-nm wide (70, 71) (Figure 5A, higher magnification) with parallel β-sheets 
adjacent to Aβ deposition (Figure 5B). Ultrastructural examination of the Aβ plaque site adjacent to a 
blood vessel basement membrane (Figure 5C, left) revealed structures resembling paranuclei (72, 73) that 
also appeared positive for Aβ — possible Aβ42 oligomer assemblies (Figure 5C, arrowhead). TEM images 
of en face retinal sections further indicated the presence of retinal Aβ plaques with radial fibril arms ema-
nating from central cores (Figure 5D).
Development of  retinal amyloid imaging in live AD patients. Figure 6 illustrates the development of a cur-
cumin regimen and the feasibility of using a noninvasive ophthalmic device to detect increased curcumin 
fluorescence in retinas of living human subjects. Initially, several commercially available curcumin brands 
were analyzed for their absorption into the blood and brain, and the ratios of curcumin concentrations in the 
brain and red blood cells (RBCs) were determined in wild-type mice (Supplemental Figure 4). The highest 
brain concentrations were obtained with Longvida Optimized Curcumin formulation coated with lipophilic 
matrix (74, 75) (Supplemental Figure 4). The optimal curcumin formulation, dose, and regimen were fur-
ther calibrated through in vivo retinal amyloid imaging in double-transgenic APPSWE/PS1ΔE9 mouse models 
(Supplemental Figure 5). To this end, we tested water-soluble versus solid lipid–based (SLCP) curcumin 
 8
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
formulations (Supplemental Figure 5C), given intravenously or orally (Supplemental Figure 5, A and C–F) 
at varying dosages (Supplemental Figure 5, D–F). Altogether, we found that SLCP Longvida curcumin had 
better tissue bioavailability, showing maximum signal-to-noise ratio, which led to its selection for the proof-
of-concept retinal amyloid imaging clinical trial. We next tested a model human eye with various market-
ed and modified human ophthalmic devices (Supplemental Figure 6, A and B). Alterations to ophthalmic 
devices included a wide-angle view, multiple-frame capture, and insertion of fluorescent filters. Examples of 
data exclusion and retinal amyloid imaging in live AD patients, comparing postacquisition processed images 
in selected ophthalmic devices, are shown in Supplemental Figure 6, C–G.
Human subjects received oral curcumin for either 2 or 10 days. Their retinas were imaged using a scan-
ning laser ophthalmoscope (SLO) at day 0 (baseline prior to curcumin uptake) and throughout the exper-
iment (Figure 6A). Fundus images from an AD patient receiving curcumin for 10 days showed increased 
fluorescent intensity in retinal deposits at days 1 and 10 compared with baseline (Figure 6B). At day 29, a 
noticeable decay in retinal spot fluorescent intensity was observed (Figure 6B). Spot line profile analysis 
(Figure 6C) for a particular retinal plaque (Figure 6B) following curcumin uptake indicated increased flu-
orescent intensity signal at days 1 and 10 and a decay to baseline level at washout (day 29). Representative 
fundus images from another patient on a 10-day oral curcumin protocol indicated the existence of retinal 
curcumin-amyloid deposit clusters, seen at days 2 and 10 versus baseline (Figure 6D). After 10 days of 
curcumin uptake, marked increases in curcumin fluorescence, deposit number (119 spots), and area (1,269 
μm2) were detected compared with baseline (12 spots and 38 μm2, respectively; Figure 6D, bottom). Phar-
macokinetic analysis in six healthy individuals on a 10-day regimen of oral curcumin indicated a significant 
increase in curcumin levels in both free plasma and RBCs (reflecting tissue absorption), especially from 
day 3 onward (Figure 6E). Curcumin absorption peaked significantly at day 10 and decreased after 30 days 
(Figure 6E). Reduction of curcumin to its metabolites in vivo in the plasma and RBC of the above healthy 
individuals and the effect of pH on curcumin degradation ex vivo in human blood samples were also 
measured (Supplemental Figure 7). Repeated retinal imaging in a mild AD patient and a healthy control 
subject on a 2-day oral curcumin regimen indicated increased retinal integrated fluorescent intensities for 
Figure 5. Ultrastructures of Aβ deposits in 
human AD retina. Transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM) analyses of vertical (cross; 
A–C) and en face (horizontal; D) retinal 
sections from definite AD patients (n = 3; 
experiments repeated 3 times). Retinas were 
prestained with anti-Aβ42 mAb (12F4) and a 
high-sensitivity immunoperoxidase-based 
system and DAB substrate chromogen. (A) 
TEM image showing ultrastructure of Aβ 
plaque (pl), fibrils (fib), and protofibrils (pfib) 
near a blood vessel (bv) in vertical sections. 
Scale bar: 1 μm. Higher-magnification 
image (right), indicating presence of 10- to 
150-nm-wide Aβ fibrils as well as protofibrils 
and Aβ deposits (abd; scale bar: 50 nm). (B) 
Fibrillar Aβ ultrastructure surrounded by 
multiple Aβ deposits. Scale bar: 200 nm. 
(C) Aβ plaque-like structure, marked by 
an asterisk and bordering red line, in close 
proximity to basement membrane (bm) of a 
blood vessel (scale bar: 0.5 μm). Higher-mag-
nification image showing Aβ plaque-like 
area, with structures resembling paranuclei 
containing annular oligomers (arrowhead; 
scale bar: 40nm). (D) TEM images of en face 
sections demonstrating retinal Aβ plaque 
ultrastructures, with radial fibrillar arms 
emanating from a central dense core found 
in the innermost retinal layers. Darker black 
signal represents condensed Aβ aggregate 
core. Scale bar: 0.5 μm.
 9
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
Figure 6. Development of a noninvasive retinal amyloid imaging method using curcumin labeling in live human patients. (A) Curcumin regimen and 
retinal imaging protocols in living human subjects (n = 16 AD and CTRLs and n = 2 AMD patients). Oral Longvida curcumin administration for 2 or 10 days. 
Subjects’ retinas were imaged with modified ophthalmoscopes prior to (day 0, baseline image) and after curcumin intake, per the regimen. (B) Repeated 
regional fundus imaging in a mild AD patient receiving curcumin for 10 days. Increase of curcumin fluorescent intensity due to retinal amyloid deposits 
(white spots) is observed from baseline (day 0) through days 1–10. Decreased curcumin signal is observed at day 29 (washout). (C) Spot line profile analysis 
of curcumin fluorescence from an individual plaque (marked in B by red arrows), showing increased signal at days 1 and 10 versus baseline levels. At day 
29, fluorescent signal decays to baseline levels (washout). Representative spot line profile from n = 3 patients. (D) Representative retinal fundus images 
from a moderate AD patient (top) and their pseudocolor images (bottom); arrowheads mark individual plaques, and circles demarcate a cluster of deposits. 
Increased spot number and area from baseline image to day 2 and 10 images were quantified by ImageJ analysis (bottom). (B–D) Representative images 
from all human subjects (n = 16; Supplemental Table 2). (E) Longvida curcumin pharmacokinetic (PK) analyses in living healthy controls receiving curcumin 
for 10 days (n = 6 subjects; all or a subset analyzed for each time point, as shown). Tissue curcumin levels in red blood cells (RBCs) and free curcumin in 
plasma peaked at day 10 (P < 0.0001). Group mean and SEM are shown. *P < 0.05, ****P < 0.0001 for comparison between day 0 and days 3, 10, or 30, by 
1-way ANOVA and Tukey’s post test. Logarithmic transformation analysis of covariance (subject × day) demonstrated that curcumin levels increased with 
duration of treatment in RBCs (R2 = 0.654; day: P = 0.001; subject: P = 0.024) and plasma (R2 = 0.559; day: P = 0.003; subject: P = 0.09). (F) A quantitative 
longitudinal retinal curcumin imaging in a representative healthy control and mild AD patient, both receiving 2-day curcumin regimen. Exponential decay 
of integrated fluorescent intensity occurred after day 2. Decay rate = 10.4% per day, half-life = 6.3 days, offset IFI = 21.5. Scale bar: 200 μm.
 1 0
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
both AD and healthy subjects (Figure 6F). Peaks of increased curcumin fluorescence were assessed. The 
highest integrated intensity levels were measured at day 2, showing a higher peak in the AD patient, and 
their exponential decays to basal levels (washout) were observed up to day 36 (Figure 6F).
Fundus images from live patients underwent semiautomated postacquisition processing to optimize 
detection of curcumin-positive retinal amyloid spots (Figure 7A). The ability to detect individual retinal 
deposits allowed calculation of their number and area in certain regions of interest (in frame) and compari-
son among a healthy control, AD patients, and a non-AD dementia patient (Figure 7, B and C). Representa-
tive images show the superior temporal and inferior temporal quadrants (Figure 7B). The retinas of the two 
representative AD patients exhibited higher deposit number and area in the superior temporal and inferior 
temporal quadrants compared with a healthy control (Figure 7C). The patient with non-AD dementia (vas-
cular dementia) had almost no positive spots (Figure 7, B and C). To examine retinal layer location in vivo 
for a subset of deposits, we utilized optical coherence tomography (OCT; Figure 7, D–F). A representative 
Figure 7. Noninvasive detection 
of retinal amyloid deposits in live 
AD patients. (A) Multistep manual 
postacquisition image processing and 
analysis to detect and quantify spots 
with increased curcumin fluorescence 
signal in the retina (superior quadrant; 
representative images of n = 16 human 
subjects). Scale bar: 800 μm. (B) 
Representative images demonstrate 
detection of retinal curcumin spots in 
two live AD patients and contrasting 
minimal spots in a healthy control 
(Normal) and patient suffering from 
vascular dementia (Non-AD Demen-
tia). Curcumin fluorescence fundog-
raphy of superior temporal region 
(ST) reveals amyloid deposits often in 
retinal peripheries. Amyloid deposit 
detection in inferior temporal (IT) 
region of another AD patient. Regions 
of interest are indicated by white 
squares. Scale bar: 400 μm. (C) High-
er-magnification image of the above 
regions of interest. Red circles in the 
top images highlight retinal spots 
of curcumin-increased fluorescence. 
Scale bar: 400 μm. Bottom images 
display postprocessing spot number 
and fluorescent area (μm2). (D and 
E) Representative optical coherence 
tomography (OCT) of a selected cur-
cumin-positive region in an AD patient 
with no maculopathy (repeated exper-
iments in n = 3 patients). Scale bar: 
200 μm. (D) Curcumin fluorescence 
fundography indicating certain retinal 
amyloid plaque with red arrows. Green 
lines delineate region of OCT segmen-
tation. (E) Retinal cross section by 
OCT reveals amyloid plaque in outer 
retinal layers. (F) High-magnification 
OCT image displays curcumin-positive 
deposit located above retinal pigment 
epithelium (RPE), along with intact 
RPE and Bruch’s membrane.
 1 1
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
amyloid deposit (Figure 7, D–F, red arrows) within a region showing increased curcumin fluorescence in 
fundus images of an AD patient was selected for focal scanning by OCT. A higher-magnification OCT 
image demonstrates an intact retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and Bruch’s membrane and indicates the 
location of this curcumin-amyloid deposit above the RPE, at the outer retinal layers (Figure 7F).
Increased retinal amyloid index scores in AD patients. A proof-of-concept clinical trial was conducted on 16 
subjects, including 10 AD patients and 6 healthy controls (Supplemental Table 2). To determine the feasi-
bility of detecting and quantifying retinal amyloid deposits in live human subjects, we selected a group of 
mild-to-moderate AD patients (showing clear clinical symptoms and expected to be amyloid positive) and 
compared them to a group of younger, cognitively normal individuals (expected to have low or no retinal 
amyloid burden). Although these groups show a significant difference in age, we selected a subgroup of 
subjects whose age is not significantly different (see Table 1 and Supplemental Table 2) to compare retinal 
amyloid burden.
Representative images from the fully automated and blinded image-processing steps, involving con-
version of raw retinal images and calculation of retinal amyloid index (RAI) scores, are shown in Figure 
8, A–G. Retinal Z-stack images were obtained using a SLO. These fluorescent fundus images underwent 
a controlled and uniform image-processing analysis to improve signal, reduce noise, and identify spots 
with significantly increased fluorescence (Figure 8, A–C). A spot identification threshold was set for the 
processed images (Figure 8D). To determine RAI scores, only deposits with increased fluorescent intensity 
compared with baseline were included in our calculations (Figure 8E, deposits denoted as red dots above 
the threshold green line). The integrated intensity values for an AD patient with an RAI score of 55.7 and 
65 positive deposits are displayed in contrast to a healthy control with an RAI score of 11.2 and 15 posi-
tive deposits (Figure 8E, top vs. bottom, respectively). In AD patients, most amyloid deposits were found 
as clusters in the peripheral superior quadrants, often along blood vessels (Figure 8F), in agreement with 
histological data (Figures 2–5). Heatmaps and overlay images were created to illustrate overall location and 
distribution of positive amyloid signal in the context of fine retinal structures (Figure 8G). In addition, two 
cognitively normal (non-AD) patients with dry age-related macular degeneration (AMD) underwent the 
same retinal curcumin imaging protocol; their images showed increased curcumin signal in large diffuse 
lesions at the posterior pole, around and inside the macula (Supplemental Figure 8).
Analysis of RAI scores and spot numbers for human subjects included in the trial are summarized in 
Table 1 and Supplemental Table 2. There was a significant (P = 0.0005, Pearson’s r test) linear correlation 
between RAI scores and retinal deposit number (Figure 8H). AD patients showed increased RAI scores 
and spot numbers as compared with the younger healthy controls (Figure 8I, left; P = 0.0003, Student’s t 
test). In accordance with RAI scores, the number of retinal deposits (spots) was elevated in AD patients 
(Supplemental Table 2). In a subgroup of AD patients and healthy controls not differing significantly in 
mean age (n = 11; Table 1), AD patients showed a significant 2.1-fold increase in RAI scores (Figure 8I, 
Table 1. Retinal amyloid index and retinal curcumin-positive deposit number in living AD patients and healthy controls
CTRLs
AD patients
RAI
Spot no.
RAI
Spot no.
Mean
30.2 ± 5.2
24.8 ± 6.2
78.9 ± 7.2A
50.2 ± 7.3B
Minimum
18.4
2
43.9
17
Maximum
46.3
43
112.4
82
Coefficient of variation
42.0%
61.4%
29.0%
45.8%
MMSE
N/AC
19.5 ± 1.2
Age (yr) (n)
53.0 ± 7.7 (n = 6)
76.0 ± 2.7B (n = 10)
Sex
4 F, 2 M
7 F, 3 M
Age subgroup (n)
59.2 ± 5.4 (n = 5)
69.8 ± 1.7D (n = 6)
Retinal amyloid index (RAI) scores and number of curcumin-positive deposits (spot no.) in 16 human subjects across a wide age range with clinical AD 
diagnosis or healthy controls (CTRLs; extended details on human subjects in Supplemental Table 2). AP < 0.0005, BP < 0.05, 2-tailed Student’s t test in 
comparison between AD patients and CTRLs. CN/A, Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) is not available for asymptomatic CTRLs. These individuals 
show no evidence of memory or cognitive executive impairment according to self-reports and/or family members, nor any deficit in activity of daily living. 
Data presented for 10 AD patients and 6 CTRLs. Age subgroup constitutes 6 AD and 5 CTRL subjects with no statistical differenceD in mean age (RAI scores 
presented in Figure 8I, right). n, sample size. F, Female; M, Male. Data presented as mean ± SEM.
 1 2
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
right; P = 0.0031, Student’s t test). In our clinical setup, RAI scores were neither correlated with age of AD 
patients (Figure 8J) nor with their Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores (Figure 8K).
Discussion
This study demonstrates the feasibility to noninvasively detect and quantify amyloid deposits in the reti-
nas of live human subjects by using a solid lipid curcumin fluorochrome and a modified point SLO. In a 
proof-of-concept trial, the mean RAI score in AD patients was elevated compared with that of the healthy 
Figure 8. Increased retinal amyloid index in AD patients — a proof-of-concept human trial. (A–D) Representative automated image-processing sequence 
after repeated fundus image acquisition at day 0 (Baseline) and day 2, showing retinal superior temporal region in an AD patient. (A) Collection of Z-stack 
scanning laser ophthalmoscope (SLO) fundus images. Each, at baseline and on day 2, underwent illumination correction, alignment of baseline to day 2, and 
contrast enhancement. (B) Pseudocolor image for visualization. (C and D) Multistep automated postacquisition image processing. (E–G) Threshold defining 
increased curcumin fluorescent signal in left eye superior hemisphere (LS) and calculation of retinal amyloid index (RAI) scores in a mild AD patient and 
age-matched CTRL. (E) Blue lines are 1:1 reference, and green lines represent the threshold level, determined at 500 counts and above (red spots are above 
the threshold). (F) Color-coded spot overlay images. Red spots are above threshold and considered curcumin-positive amyloid deposits, green spots exceed 
1:1 reference but not threshold, and blue spots fall below reference. (G) Heatmap images with red spot centroids (left). Day 2 combined overlay images show 
heatmaps with regions of interest (right). The same automated image processing and analysis was applied on all human subjects. (H) Significant Pearson’s r 
correlation between RAI scores and retinal spot number in all data set (n = 16 living subjects, see Supplemental Table 2). (I) RAI scores in comparison between 
AD patients (n = 10) and non-age-matched CTRLs (n = 6) (left) and a comparison of RAI scores in an age-matched subgroup of AD patients (n = 6) and CTRLs 
(n = 5, see Table 1) (right). Group mean and SEM are shown. **P < 0.005, ***P < 0.0005, unpaired 2-tailed Student’s t test. (J) Pearson’s r correlation analysis 
of RAI scores and age. (K) RAI and MMSE cognitive scores in AD patient group. Scale bar: 800 μm (A–D); 400 μm (F and G).
 1 3
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
controls. A histological examination of retinas from neuropathologically confirmed AD patients revealed 
certain layer and geographical distribution of Aβ deposits, especially in previously disregarded retinal 
regions. These results expand past identification of retinal Aβ plaques and Aβ42 peptides in the retinas of 
AD patients (26, 39, 40, 42) and further demonstrate the existence of classical retinal deposits and mor-
phologies relevant to AD neuropathology, including neuritic-like plaques and NFT-like structures. Retinal 
deposits frequently appeared in clusters and, although smaller, mirrored Aβ plaque morphology and vascu-
lar pathology in the brain. Retinal plaques were also associated with retinal neuronal loss in these patients. 
Electron microscopy analysis and Congo red staining verified the existence of retinal Aβ fibrils and proto-
fibrils and the potential existence of Aβ oligomers. Importantly, AD patients showed a substantial increase 
in Aβ42-containing deposits as compared with age- and sex-matched healthy controls. Collectively, these 
findings suggest the utility of noninvasive retinal amyloid plaque imaging as a surrogate biomarker of AD.
Retinal Aβ deposits in AD patients were frequently concentrated in the mid- and far-periphery of 
the superior quadrants, matching the pattern we detected in living patients via retinal curcumin imaging. 
These findings, together with superior retina neuronal loss may elucidate previous reports of axonal loss 
and NFL thinning in these patients (24–26, 29, 76–78), detected mostly in the same retinal regions that 
amyloid pathology was evident. Similarly, Blanks and colleagues described an extensive loss of neurons, 
typically in the superior quadrant and the mid- and far-peripheries (16). The significant NFL reduction in 
the superior quadrant is consistent with recent findings of mRGC loss and Aβ accumulation in the same 
retinal regions (26). This increase in Aβ pathology in the superior quadrant, along with severe thinning of 
the NFL and loss of mRGCs, also known as intrinsically photosensitive RGCs containing melanopsin and 
implicated in regulation of circadian rhythm (26), may help explain sleep disturbances and visual field dys-
functions in AD, even at early stages (26, 32, 44, 79). Furthermore, the existence of Aβ deposits in regions 
in which rod cells are abundant could contribute to the impairments in visual motion and low-contrast 
sensitivity documented in AD patients (80, 81). In addition, the reason for the geographical predilection of 
Aβ accumulation and associated pathology in AD for the superior quadrant is unknown; we postulate that 
unique tissue properties and structural parameters of this retinal region perhaps deem it more susceptible 
to AD pathology. In the brain, Aβ plaques are also detected earlier and more frequently in certain brain 
regions; cerebral Aβ accumulation is a complex multifactorial process caused by increased production/
aggregation or decreased clearance of Aβ (reviewed in Zuroff et al., ref. 82). It is possible that differences 
in retinal blood flow, vessel diameter, choroid thickness, tissue permeability, and light stimulation in this 
retinal region are some of the factors that may adversely influence Aβ aggregation or clearance.
Histological assessment of Aβ pathology in the human retina, including plaques containing Aβ40 
and Aβ42 isoforms, was achieved by applying certain isolation techniques and tissue preparation and 
biochemical labeling protocols as well as screening of large retinal areas (Figure 1). A couple of studies 
that were unable to detect Aβ in the human AD retina analyzed horizontal cross sections spanning a 
narrow strip from the nasal to temporal quadrants (41, 43), rather than screening large regions in flat 
mounts, thus limiting their analysis to regions that are largely spared of amyloid pathology in AD 
patients. Therefore, while Ho and colleagues (43) were unable to detect Aβ, p-tau, or α-synuclein in any 
ocular tissue of AD or Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients, considerably more independent studies in fact 
reported the presence of Aβ deposits in the retina and lenses (11, 39, 40, 42, 51, 83) as well as identified 
p-tau (41) and α-synuclein (84) in the retinas of AD and PD patients, respectively. Future studies should 
apply suitable techniques and comprehensive examination of flat-mount retinas to study additional 
pathological hallmarks of AD in the retina.
Analysis of retinal cross sections derived from the superior quadrants indicated accumulation of Aβ 
deposits mostly in the innermost retinal layers (GCL, IPL, and INL). Gallyas silver stain evidenced classi-
cal plaques, neuritic (senile-like) plaques, and NFT-like structures in the GCL, although their exact identity 
requires further study employing specific antibodies against pTau and NFT. In addition, neuronal reduction 
observed in INL, ONL, and especially GCL of AD patients, quantified by Nissl stain, was accompanied by 
retinal Aβ pathology. Indeed, the abundance of deposits in the GCL may explain the ganglion cell degenera-
tion and abnormal electroretinogram patterns reported in AD patients (26, 85, 86) and animal models of AD 
(22, 54, 57, 87). The finding of intracellular Aβ accumulation in AD retinas, either somatic or perinuclear, 
suggests an alternate mode of Aβ-mediated toxicity. Recent studies have demonstrated the detrimental effects 
of intracellular Aβ, by way of oligomerization into pathological forms within the endoplasmic reticulum 
(88), as well as the formation of neuritic plaques from degenerating neurons containing intracellular Aβ (89). 
 1 4
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
Ultrastructure examination of Aβ42-containing deposits by TEM revealed the existence of retinal Aβ42 fibrils, 
protofibrils, and other intermediates in the pathway of Aβ deposition. We detected assemblies with morphol-
ogy resembling paranuclei containing annular oligomers (72, 73), the building blocks of Aβ protofibrils and 
fibrils. The concurrent existence of various Aβ structures in the retina of the same patient may suggest that 
Aβ accumulates in different disease stages. This supports the hypothesis that different types of Aβ deposits 
develop independently rather than sequentially from the same plaque type (90). It is likely that multiple factors 
contribute to the formation of each type of retinal deposit, but the underlying mechanisms of plaque and non-
fibrillar oligomer formation in the retina are not yet understood. This uncertainty merits future investigation 
of the various plaque phenotypes and distribution of each type in the human retina during normal aging and 
disease progression (AD).
In this study, we frequently found retinal Aβ deposits in association with blood vessels similar to cere-
bral vascular amyloid pathology (91). As retinal and cerebral microvasculature share many morphological 
and physiological properties (34), these vascular amyloid findings may explain the well-documented nar-
rowing of venous blood column diameter and reduced blood flow in both the retinas (19, 20, 33, 76, 92) 
and brains (93–95) of AD patients. Recently, a mechanism for such phenomena was proposed in a study 
using murine models of AD demonstrating that vascular amyloid could harden blood vessel walls and 
decrease blood flow (96). Still, larger studies are required to confirm the association between cerebral amy-
loid angiopathy and retinal vascular amyloid pathology.
To detect amyloid deposits in retinas of living patients, we translated our retinal curcumin optical 
imaging approach, previously developed in rodent models of AD (40, 51). Using a modified ophthalmic 
device, we analyzed single, cluster, and large-area deposits with increased curcumin fluorescent intensity 
in human subjects. Retinal amyloid deposits at baseline (before curcumin intake) generally exhibited faint 
autofluorescence. Previous studies also report weak autofluorescence near plaques in the brains of ADtg 
mice that had never received curcumin (40, 97). The low-grade autofluorescence of plaques in the absence 
of curcumin may result from oxidative damage-induced lipid peroxidation production of aldehydes that 
create autofluorescent Schiff’s bases in and near aggregated amyloids (98). In addition, pigmentation (i.e., 
lipofuscin accumulation) often occurs in the retinas of elderly individuals and can also generate autofluo-
rescent spots (99, 100). Therefore, measuring increased fluorescence of curcumin spots allows for specific 
detection of Aβ-containing deposits in vivo. Importantly, we previously confirmed the identity of retinal 
amyloid plaques that were imaged in vivo with curcumin in ADtg mouse models by subsequent ex vivo 
immunolabeling, demonstrating specific anti-Aβ labeling in the same plaques (40). The future availability 
of postmortem retinal tissues from previously in vivo–imaged human subjects will warrant investigation in 
order to determine the correlation between RAI scores and retinal histopathology of Aβ deposits.
Curcumin has been reported to have high affinity and specificity for the β-pleated sheets of Aβ and mod-
erately stains NFTs that are positive for PHF-tau. Moreover, curcumin has high affinity to Aβ42, oligomers, 
and fibrils, which are tightly linked to AD (62–68). Curcumin intensely stains the central dense amyloid core 
in Aβ fibrils and plaques, as was also previously demonstrated in the brain of murine models of AD (101). 
Further, it labels the nonfibrillar forms of Aβ40 and Aβ42 based on its specific binding to the Aβ-hexapeptide 
16KLVFFA21 amino acid sequence domain (64, 102). Previous reports showed that curcumin readily crosses 
the blood-retinal and -brain barriers in murine models and specifically labels Aβ aggregates (40, 51, 103). 
We found here that Longvida oral curcumin formulation consistently colabeled Aβ plaques with various 
sequence-specific mAbs in postmortem human retinas and brains, including 12F4, which recognizes the 
C′-terminus Aβ42 alloforms and not APP. Curcumin showed a distinct labeling pattern that was similar to the 
amyloid spots observed in living patients. Curcumin is considered as generally recognized as safe by the FDA 
based on previous clinical trials (74, 75, 104), and the Longvida curcumin used in this study caused minimal 
to no adverse effects. Longvida’s safety has been demonstrated in pharmacokinetic studies in humans (105) 
and extensive toxicity testing in animals (106), and its efficacy has been demonstrated in two clinical trials 
(74, 75). The choice of curcumin as an amyloid contrast agent in living patients was further supported by the 
experiments presented here (Figure 6 and Supplemental Figures 4–5 and 7), previously in vivo and ex vivo 
in ADtg mice (40, 51), and in a study using OCT imaging in MCI patients (107). The high bioavailability 
of optimized curcumin was established by increased tissue absorption of free rather than glucuronidated or 
other curcumin metabolites from the gastrointestinal system to the blood stream.
An OCT examination in a small subset of patients showed increased curcumin fluorescent spots 
indicative of amyloid deposits in AD patients, located in peripheral regions above an intact RPE layer 
 1 5
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
and Bruch’s membrane and in the absence of maculopathy. These findings are distinct from drusen 
described in AMD patients (108–110). AMD is a common ocular disease described by sub-RPE drusen 
deposits, Bruch’s membrane thickening, and outer retina degeneration of the RPE and photoreceptors 
within the macula centralis (111). Aβ immunoreactivity was detected in 30%–40% of soft drusen in 
AMD patients, often occurring in the posterior pole below a disrupted RPE and Bruch’s membrane and 
along with maculopathy (108–110). Our preliminary data on two AMD patients, using the same retinal 
curcumin imaging protocol, showed deposits with increased curcumin intensity within large diffuse 
lesions at the posterior pole/central retina, rather than plaques in the peripheral retina, as detected in 
AD patients. Further, drusen are often seen as hypofluorescent spots (108–110). Yet, this study cannot 
rule out the existence of pseudodrusen, also known as subretinal drusenoid deposits, in the retinas of 
AD patients, although these are mostly located in the macula in AMD and differ from our in vivo and 
histological observations in the AD retina. Future studies should determine through large sample sizes 
whether the location of retinal amyloid pathology in AMD and AD is different, which could help with 
differential diagnosis.
Glaucoma is another common ocular disease that was previously implicated as sharing commonalities 
with AD (reviewed in Hart et al., ref. 11). While retinal pathology found in AD has revealed NFL and 
GCL loss in addition to hallmark Aβ plaque and tauopathy, predominantly in the innermost retinal layers 
of the peripheral superior quadrant, glaucoma pathology indicated a particular pattern of central retina 
neuronal loss in the GCL along with optic disc cupping. This and other pathological evidence relating the 
two diseases remains quite controversial. Thus, further investigation is needed before positing claims of 
shared abnormalities.
Within our small AD patient group, we did not obtain a correlation between MMSE scores and RAI 
scores. Although analyses performed on a limited sample size are challenging to interpret, this result is 
comparable to amyloid burden in the brain. Cerebral amyloid-PET imaging studies predominantly indicate 
that amyloid burden plateaus early in the course of AD (112). Here, in a subset of patients, for which reti-
nal and cerebral amyloid burden was available, we found a significant correlation between superior tempo-
ral Aβ42 deposits and Gallyas silver– and thioflavin-S–positive plaques in the brain, which was seemingly 
stronger for the primary visual cortex. The apparent correlation between retinal and brain plaques calls for 
further study in larger groups of AD patients to determine their relationship during disease progression as 
well as to analyze the association with specific brain regions.
While the timing of Aβ plaque appearance in the retinas of AD patients is unknown, our previous 
histological analysis revealed its existence in early-stage cases (e.g., probable and possible AD) (40). In 
addition, we detected retinal Aβ plaques in flat mounts from ADtg mice at least 2 months prior to their 
presence in the respective hippocampi and cortices (40). These data may suggest that Aβ accumulation in 
the retina is an early event in AD pathogenesis, yet large longitudinal studies in presymptomatic AD and 
MCI patients are required to confirm retinal Aβ plaque as an early biomarker. Further, the capability of 
the RAI score to detect AD with high sensitivity and specificity should be evaluated in follow-up studies 
with a greater number of cases compared with age- and sex-matched controls. Such studies could provide 
a better understanding of AD manifestation in the retina and further validate our methodology by deter-
mining whether retinal amyloid burden is a reliable biomarker of AD.
In summary, we present here a quantitative and detailed histological report of retinal Aβ deposits and 
the pathological hallmarks of AD, including their distribution and ultrastructure in AD patients, together 
with the demonstrated feasibility to noninvasively image and quantify retinal amyloid deposits in living 
patients. Such retinal amyloid imaging technology, capable of detecting discrete deposits at high resolution 
in the CNS, may present a sensitive yet inexpensive tool for screening populations at risk for AD, assessing 
disease progression, and monitoring response to therapy.
Methods
Extended methods are provided in the Supplemental Methods.
Postmortem eyes and brains. Donor eyes and brains of AD patients and controls (n = 37) were obtained 
from the University of Southern California Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center Neuropathology Core 
(IRB HS-042071). Clinical and neuropathological data are included in Supplemental Table 1.
Aβ immunohistochemistry. Peroxidase- and fluorescent-based immunostaining of brains and retinas was 
performed. Images were acquired using a Carl Zeiss Axio Imager Z1 microscope.
 1 6
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
Aβ plaque distribution analysis. The geographical location and layer distribution were determined in flat 
mounts and cross sections, respectively.
Retinal Aβ42 plaque quantification. Aβ plaques were analyzed from retinal superior temporal quadrants.
Brain plaque quantification. Aβ plaques were examined and quantified from 7 brain regions.
Curcumin and Sudan black B staining. Tissues were stained as previously described (40).
TEM. Sections were analyzed on a JEOL JEM-2100 LaB6 TEM and imaged on a Gatan SC1000 Orius.
Curcumin bioavailability in mice. Absorption of curcumin formulations into the blood and brain was 
measured by HPLC.
Optimization of  oral curcumin formulation and regimen for retinal Aβ imaging in live ADtg mice. The proce-
dure was optimized through in vivo retinal imaging.
Curcumin administration in human subjects. A dose of 4 g Longvida containing 1 g curcumin was taken 
once a day for several days prior to imaging.
Curcumin pharmacokinetics in humans. Plasma and RBC samples were analyzed by LCMSMS as previ-
ously described (113).
Phantom eye model and ophthalmic device development. A model eye was developed to test device modifications.
Noninvasive retinal amyloid imaging in live human subjects. AD patients and controls (n = 16) were imaged; 
see details on human subjects in Supplemental Table 2.
Imaging protocol. Images were acquired and processed consistently according to a defined procedure.
Semiautomated and fully automated image analysis. Image acquisition and processing protocol was auto-
mated for quantification of retinal amyloid burden.
RAI score. RAI score encompasses a number of factors characterizing detected spot number, area, inten-
sity, and distribution.
OCT. OCT scans were performed with Heidelberg Spectralis.
Statistics. GraphPad Prism Software version 6.01 was used for analysis. A comparison of three or more 
groups was performed using 1-way ANOVA followed by a Bonferroni’s or Tukey’s multiple comparison 
post test. Logarithmic transformation analysis of covariance was also applied for pharmacokinetics data 
analysis. Two-group comparisons were analyzed using a 2-tailed unpaired Student’s t test. The statistical 
association between two or more variables was determined by Pearson’s correlation coefficient (r) test. 
Pearson’s r indicates direction and strength of the linear relationship between two variables. Results are 
expressed as mean ± SEM. P values of less than 0.05 are considered significant.
Study approval. Clinical trials were approved by Quorum Review, Seattle, Washington, USA 
(IRB00003226), and the US Department of Health and Human Services (FWA00019841). Human tissues 
are from the USC ADRC Neuropathology Core, USC, Los Angeles, CA (IRB: HS-042071). Animal studies 
were approved by the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and the 
Division on Laboratory Animal Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles.
Author contributions
MKH, YK, SRV
, and KLB conceived, designed, and supervised the study. YK, DB, SRV
, and MKH con-
tributed major experimentation and data acquisition and analysis. EB, DSB, JAP, WJA, SJK, AB, DTF, 
AA, SF, GMC, CAM, and DRH contributed to experimentation, patient recruitment, and image acquisi-
tion. MKH, YK, DB, SF, DRH, SRV
, and KLB provided data analysis, interpretation, and presentation. SF 
and GMC conducted pharmacokinetics experiments and data analysis. MKH, YK, DB, GMC, SF, CAM, 
DRH, SRV
, and KLB discussed intellectual content, supervised, and edited the manuscript. MKH and YK 
wrote, revised, and provided final approval of the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We thank Mia Oviatt, Hannah Schubloom, and Nadav J. Hart for assisting with editing of the manuscript. 
This paper is dedicated to the memory of Salomon Moni Hamaoui and Lillian Jones Black, both of whom 
died from Alzheimer’s disease. We received support from a National Institute on Aging award (AG044897, 
Koronyo-Hamaoui, PI) and The Saban and The Marciano Family Foundations (Koronyo-Hamaoui, PI).
Address correspondence to: Maya Koronyo-Hamaoui, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 127 S. San Vicente 
Boulevard, Los Angeles, California, 90048, USA. Phone: 310.423.7473; Email: maya.koronyo@cshs.org.
 1 7
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
 1. Alzheimer’s Association. 2016 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement. 2016;12 (4):459–509.
 2. De Strooper B, Karran E. The cellular phase of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell. 2016;164(4):603–615.
 3. Hardy J, Duff K, Hardy KG, Perez-Tur J, Hutton M. Genetic dissection of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias: amyloid 
and its relationship to tau. Nat Neurosci. 1998;1 (5):355–358.
 4. Bateman RJ, et al. Clinical and biomarker changes in dominantly inherited Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med. 2012;367 
(9):795–804.
 5. Bilgel M, et al. Individual estimates of age at detectable amyloid onset for risk factor assessment. Alzheimers Dement. 2016;12 
(4):373–379.
 6. Perrin RJ, Fagan AM, Holtzman DM. Multimodal techniques for diagnosis and prognosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature. 
2009;461 (7266):916–922.
 7. Klunk WE, et al. Imaging brain amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease with Pittsburgh Compound-B. Ann Neurol. 2004;55 (3):306–319.
 8. Blennow K, Mattsson N, Schöll M, Hansson O, Zetterberg H. Amyloid biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 
2015;36(5):297–309.
 9. Khan TK, Alkon DL. Alzheimer’s disease cerebrospinal fluid and neuroimaging biomarkers: diagnostic accuracy and relation-
ship to drug efficacy. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;46 (4):817–836.
 10. Tu P, Fu H, Cui M. Compounds for imaging amyloid-β deposits in an Alzheimer’s brain: a patent review. Expert Opin Ther Pat. 
2015;25 (4):413–423.
 11. Hart NJ, Koronyo Y
, Black KL, Koronyo-Hamaoui M. Ocular indicators of Alzheimer’s: exploring disease in the retina. Acta 
Neuropathol. 2016;132 (6):767–787.
 12. The Retina. In: Purves D, et al, eds. Neuroscience. 2nd ed. Chapters 11 and 12. Sunderland (MA): Sinauer Associates; 2001.
 13. Byerly MS, Blackshaw S. Vertebrate retina and hypothalamus development. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med. 2009;1 (3):380–389.
 14. Trost A, et al. Brain and Retinal Pericytes: Origin, Function and Role. Front Cell Neurosci. 2016;10:20.
 15. Bayhan HA, Aslan Bayhan S, Celikbilek A, Tanık N, Gürdal C. Evaluation of the chorioretinal thickness changes in Alzhei-
mer’s disease using spectral-domain optical coherence tomography. Clin Experiment Ophthalmol. 2015;43 (2):145–151.
 16. Blanks JC, Schmidt SY
, Torigoe Y
, Porrello KV
, Hinton DR, Blanks RH. Retinal pathology in Alzheimer’s disease. II. Regional 
neuron loss and glial changes in GCL. Neurobiol Aging. 1996;17(3):385–395.
 17. Coppola G, et al. Optical coherence tomography in Alzheimer’s disease: a meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2015;10(8):e0134750.
 18. Curcio CA, Drucker DN. Retinal ganglion cells in Alzheimer’s disease and aging. Ann Neurol. 1993;33 (3):248–257.
 19. Feke GT, Hyman BT, Stern RA, Pasquale LR. Retinal blood flow in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Alzhei-
mers Dement (Amst). 2015;1 (2):144–151.
 20. Frost S, et al. Retinal vascular biomarkers for early detection and monitoring of Alzheimer’s disease. Transl Psychiatry. 
2013;3:e233.
 21. Gao L, Liu Y
, Li X, Bai Q, Liu P. Abnormal retinal nerve fiber layer thickness and macula lutea in patients with mild cognitive 
impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2015;60 (1):162–167.
 22. Guo L, Duggan J, Cordeiro MF. Alzheimer’s disease and retinal neurodegeneration. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2010;7(1):3–14.
 23. Hinton DR, Sadun AA, Blanks JC, Miller CA. Optic-nerve degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med. 1986;315 (8):485–487.
 24. Kirbas S, Turkyilmaz K, Anlar O, Tufekci A, Durmus M. Retinal nerve fiber layer thickness in patients with Alzheimer disease. 
J Neuroophthalmol. 2013;33 (1):58–61.
 25. Kromer R, Serbecic N, Hausner L, Froelich L, Aboul-Enein F, Beutelspacher SC. Detection of retinal nerve fiber layer defects 
in Alzheimer’s disease Using SD-OCT. Front Psychiatry. 2014;5:22.
 26. La Morgia C, et al. Melanopsin retinal ganglion cell loss in Alzheimer disease. Ann Neurol. 2016;79 (1):90–109.
 27. Marziani E, et al. Evaluation of retinal nerve fiber layer and ganglion cell layer thickness in Alzheimer’s disease using spec-
tral-domain optical coherence tomography. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013;54 (9):5953–5958.
 28. Moreno-Ramos T, Benito-León J, Villarejo A, Bermejo-Pareja F. Retinal nerve fiber layer thinning in dementia associated with 
Parkinson’s disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;34 (3):659–664.
 29. Moschos MM, et al. Structural and functional impairment of the retina and optic nerve in Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Alzheimer 
Res. 2012;9 (7):782–788.
 30. Paquet C, Boissonnot M, Roger F, Dighiero P, Gil R, Hugon J. Abnormal retinal thickness in patients with mild cognitive 
impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci Lett. 2007;420(2):97–99.
 31. Shi Z, et al. Greater attenuation of retinal nerve fiber layer thickness in Alzheimer’s disease patients. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;40 
(2):277–283.
 32. Trick GL, Barris MC, Bickler-Bluth M. Abnormal pattern electroretinograms in patients with senile dementia of the Alzheimer 
type. Ann Neurol. 1989;26 (2):226–231.
 33. Williams MA, et al. Retinal microvascular network attenuation in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement (Amst). 2015;1 
(2):229–235.
 34. Patton N, Aslam T, Macgillivray T, Pattie A, Deary IJ, Dhillon B. Retinal vascular image analysis as a potential screening tool 
for cerebrovascular disease: a rationale based on homology between cerebral and retinal microvasculatures. J Anat. 2005;206 
(4):319–348.
 35. Vecino E, Rodriguez FD, Ruzafa N, Pereiro X, Sharma SC. Glia-neuron interactions in the mammalian retina. Prog Retin Eye 
Res. 2016;51:1–40.
 36. Morin PJ, et al. Amyloid precursor protein is synthesized by retinal ganglion cells, rapidly transported to the optic nerve plasma 
membrane and nerve terminals, and metabolized. J Neurochem. 1993;61 (2):464–473.
 37. Cai J, et al. β-Secretase (BACE1) inhibition causes retinal pathology by vascular dysregulation and accumulation of age pig-
ment. EMBO Mol Med. 2012;4 (9):980–991.
 38. Li L, et al. BACE1 in the retina: a sensitive biomarker for monitoring early pathological changes in Alzheimer’s disease. Neural 
Regen Res. 2016;11 (3):447–453.
 39. Alexandrov PN, Pogue A, Bhattacharjee S, Lukiw WJ. Retinal amyloid peptides and complement factor H in transgenic models 
of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroreport. 2011;22 (12):623–627.
 1 8
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
 40. Koronyo-Hamaoui M, et al. Identification of amyloid plaques in retinas from Alzheimer’s patients and noninvasive in vivo opti-
cal imaging of retinal plaques in a mouse model. Neuroimage. 2011;54 Suppl 1:S204–S217.
 41. Schön C, et al. Long-term in vivo imaging of fibrillar tau in the retina of P301S transgenic mice. PLoS ONE. 2012;7 (12):e53547.
 42. Tsai Y
, et al. Ocular changes in TgF344-AD rat model of Alzheimer’s disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014;55 (1):523–534.
 43. Ho CY
, Troncoso JC, Knox D, Stark W
, Eberhart CG. Beta-amyloid, phospho-tau and alpha-synuclein deposits similar to those 
in the brain are not identified in the eyes of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease patients. Brain Pathol. 2014;24 (1):25–32.
 44. Ju YE, et al. Sleep quality and preclinical Alzheimer disease. JAMA Neurol. 2013;70 (5):587–593.
 45. Du LY
, et al. Alzheimer’s disease-related protein expression in the retina of Octodon degus. PLoS ONE. 2015;10 (8):e0135499.
 46. Dutescu RM, Li QX, Crowston J, Masters CL, Baird PN, Culvenor JG. Amyloid precursor protein processing and retinal 
pathology in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2009;247 (9):1213–1221.
 47. Edwards MM, Rodríguez JJ, Gutierrez-Lanza R, Yates J, Verkhratsky A, Lutty GA. Retinal macroglia changes in a triple trans-
genic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Exp Eye Res. 2014;127:252–260.
 48. Gao L, et al. Neuroprotective effect of memantine on the retinal ganglion cells of APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mice and its immunomod-
ulatory mechanisms. Exp Eye Res. 2015;135:47–58.
 49. Gupta VK, et al. Amyloid β accumulation and inner retinal degenerative changes in Alzheimer’s disease transgenic mouse. Neu-
rosci Lett. 2016;623:52–56.
 50. He Y
, Zhao H, Su G. Ginsenoside Rg1 decreases neurofibrillary tangles accumulation in retina by regulating activities of nepri-
lysin and PKA in retinal cells of AD mice model. J Mol Neurosci. 2014;52 (1):101–106.
 51. Koronyo Y
, Salumbides BC, Black KL, Koronyo-Hamaoui M. Alzheimer’s disease in the retina: imaging retinal aβ plaques for 
early diagnosis and therapy assessment. Neurodegener Dis. 2012;10 (1-4):285–293.
 52. Liu B, et al. Amyloid-peptide vaccinations reduce {beta}-amyloid plaques but exacerbate vascular deposition and inflammation 
in the retina of Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. Am J Pathol. 2009;175 (5):2099–2110.
 53. More SS, Vince R. Hyperspectral imaging signatures detect amyloidopathy in Alzheimer’s mouse retina well before onset of 
cognitive decline. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2015;6 (2):306–315.
 54. Ning A, Cui J, To E, Ashe KH, Matsubara J. Amyloid-beta deposits lead to retinal degeneration in a mouse model of Alzhei-
mer disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008;49 (11):5136–5143.
 55. Park SW
, et al. Intracellular amyloid beta alters the tight junction of retinal pigment epithelium in 5XFAD mice. Neurobiol 
Aging. 2014;35 (9):2013–2020.
 56. Parthasarathy R, et al. Reduction of amyloid-beta levels in mouse eye tissues by intra-vitreally delivered neprilysin. Exp Eye Res. 
2015;138:134–144.
 57. Perez SE, Lumayag S, Kovacs B, Mufson EJ, Xu S. Beta-amyloid deposition and functional impairment in the retina of the 
APPswe/PS1DeltaE9 transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009;50 (2):793–800.
 58. Pogue AI, Dua P, Hill JM, Lukiw WJ. Progressive inflammatory pathology in the retina of aluminum-fed 5xFAD transgenic 
mice. J Inorg Biochem. 2015;152:206–209.
 59. Williams PA, et al. Retinal ganglion cell dendritic degeneration in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 
2013;34 (7):1799–1806.
 60. Yang Y
, et al. Suppressed retinal degeneration in aged wild type and APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mice by bone marrow transplantation. 
PLoS ONE. 2013;8 (6):e64246.
 61. Zhao H, et al. Hyperphosphorylation of tau protein by calpain regulation in retina of Alzheimer’s disease transgenic mouse. 
Neurosci Lett. 2013;551:12–16.
 62. Kobayashi S, et al. Quantitative analysis of brain perfusion SPECT in Alzheimer’s disease using a fully automated regional cere-
bral blood flow quantification software, 3DSRT. J Neurol Sci. 2008;264 (1-2):27–33.
 63. Kumaraswamy P, Sethuraman S, Krishnan UM. Mechanistic insights of curcumin interactions with the core-recognition motif 
of β-amyloid peptide. J Agric Food Chem. 2013;61 (13):3278–3285.
 64. Masuda Y
, et al. Solid-state NMR analysis of interaction sites of curcumin and 42-residue amyloid β-protein fibrils. Bioorg Med 
Chem. 2011;19 (20):5967–5974.
 65. Mutsuga M, et al. Binding of curcumin to senile plaques and cerebral amyloid angiopathy in the aged brain of various animals 
and to neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s brain. J Vet Med Sci. 2012;74 (1):51–57.
 66. Yanagisawa D, et al. Relationship between the tautomeric structures of curcumin derivatives and their Abeta-binding activities 
in the context of therapies for Alzheimer’s disease. Biomaterials. 2010;31 (14):4179–4185.
 67. Yanagisawa D, Taguchi H, Yamamoto A, Shirai N, Hirao K, Tooyama I. Curcuminoid binds to amyloid-β1-42 oligomer and 
fibril. J Alzheimers Dis. 2011;24 Suppl 2:33–42.
 68. Ryu EK, Choe YS, Lee KH, Choi Y
, Kim BT. Curcumin and dehydrozingerone derivatives: synthesis, radiolabeling, and evalua-
tion for beta-amyloid plaque imaging. J Med Chem. 2006;49 (20):6111–6119.
 69. Frautschy SA, Cole GM, Baird A. Phagocytosis and deposition of vascular beta-amyloid in rat brains injected with Alzheimer 
beta-amyloid. Am J Pathol. 1992;140 (6):1389–1399.
 70. Ahmed M, et al. Structural conversion of neurotoxic amyloid-beta (1-42) oligomers to fibrils. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010;17 
(5):561–567.
 71. Walsh DM, et al. Amyloid beta-protein fibrillogenesis. Structure and biological activity of protofibrillar intermediates. J Biol 
Chem. 1999;274(36):25945–25952.
 72. Lashuel HA, Hartley D, Petre BM, Walz T, Lansbury PT. Neurodegenerative disease: amyloid pores from pathogenic muta-
tions. Nature. 2002;418 (6895):291.
 73. Teplow DB. On the subject of rigor in the study of amyloid β-protein assembly. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2013;5 (4):39.
 74. Cox KH, Pipingas A, Scholey AB. Investigation of the effects of solid lipid curcumin on cognition and mood in a healthy older 
population. J Psychopharmacol (Oxford). 2015;29 (5):642–651.
 75. DiSilvestro RA, Joseph E, Zhao S, Bomser J. Diverse effects of a low dose supplement of lipidated curcumin in healthy middle 
aged people. Nutr J. 2012;11:79.
 76. Berisha F, Feke GT, Trempe CL, McMeel JW
, Schepens CL. Retinal abnormalities in early Alzheimer’s disease. Invest Ophthal-
 1 9
insight.jci.org   https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.93621
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
mol Vis Sci. 2007;48(5):2285–2289.
 77. Kesler A, Vakhapova V
, Korczyn AD, Naftaliev E, Neudorfer M. Retinal thickness in patients with mild cognitive impairment 
and Alzheimer’s disease. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2011;113(7):523–526.
 78. Lu Y
, et al. Retinal nerve fiber layer structure abnormalities in early Alzheimer’s disease: evidence in optical coherence tomogra-
phy. Neurosci Lett. 2010;480 (1):69–72.
 79. Trick GL, Trick LR, Morris P, Wolf M. Visual field loss in senile dementia of the Alzheimer’s type. Neurology. 1995;45 (1):68–74.
 80. Gilmore GC, Wenk HE, Naylor LA, Koss E. Motion perception and Alzheimer’s disease. J Gerontol. 1994;49(2):P52–P57.
 81. Risacher SL, et al. Visual contrast sensitivity in Alzheimer’s disease, mild cognitive impairment, and older adults with cognitive 
complaints. Neurobiol Aging. 2013;34 (4):1133–1144.
 82. Zuroff L, Daley D, Black KL, Koronyo-Hamaoui M. Clearance of cerebral Aβ in Alzheimer’s disease: reassessing the role of 
microglia and monocytes. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2017;74 (12):2167–2201.
 83. Goldstein LE, et al. Cytosolic beta-amyloid deposition and supranuclear cataracts in lenses from people with Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Lancet. 2003;361 (9365):1258–1265.
 84. Bodis-Wollner I, Kozlowski PB, Glazman S, Miri S. α-synuclein in the inner retina in parkinson disease. Ann Neurol. 2014;75 
(6):964–966.
 85. Blanks JC, Hinton DR, Sadun AA, Miller CA. Retinal ganglion cell degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res. 
1989;501(2):364–372.
 86. Katz B, Rimmer S, Iragui V
, Katzman R. Abnormal pattern electroretinogram in Alzheimer’s disease: evidence for retinal gan-
glion cell degeneration? Ann Neurol. 1989;26 (2):221–225.
 87. Cordeiro MF, et al. Imaging multiple phases of neurodegeneration: a novel approach to assessing cell death in vivo. Cell Death 
Dis. 2010;1:e3.
 88. Meli G, et al. Conformational targeting of intracellular Aβ oligomers demonstrates their pathological oligomerization inside the 
endoplasmic reticulum. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3867.
 89. Pensalfini A, et al. Intracellular amyloid and the neuronal origin of Alzheimer neuritic plaques. Neurobiol Dis. 2014;71:53–61.
 90. Armstrong RA. Beta-amyloid plaques: stages in life history or independent origin? Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 1998;9(4):227–238.
 91. Vinters HV
. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy. A critical review. Stroke. 1987;18(2):311–324.
 92. Frost S, Martins RN, Kanagasingam Y. Ocular biomarkers for early detection of Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 
2010;22 (1):1–16.
 93. Iadecola C. Neurovascular regulation in the normal brain and in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004;5 (5):347–360.
 94. Ruitenberg A, et al. Cerebral hypoperfusion and clinical onset of dementia: the Rotterdam Study. Ann Neurol. 2005;57 (6):789–794.
 95. Zlokovic BV
. Neurovascular pathways to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and other disorders. Nat Rev Neurosci. 
2011;12 (12):723–738.
 96. Kimbrough IF, Robel S, Roberson ED, Sontheimer H. Vascular amyloidosis impairs the gliovascular unit in a mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Brain. 2015;138 (Pt 12):3716–3733.
 97. Yang F, et al. Curcumin inhibits formation of amyloid beta oligomers and fibrils, binds plaques, and reduces amyloid in vivo. J 
Biol Chem. 2005;280 (7):5892–5901.
 98. Bieschke J, Zhang Q, Powers ET, Lerner RA, Kelly JW
. Oxidative metabolites accelerate Alzheimer’s amyloidogenesis by a 
two-step mechanism, eliminating the requirement for nucleation. Biochemistry. 2005;44 (13):4977–4983.
 99. Han M, et al. Age-related structural abnormalities in the human retina-choroid complex revealed by two-photon excited autoflu-
orescence imaging. J Biomed Opt. 2007;12 (2):024012.
 
100. Schnell SA, Staines WA, Wessendorf MW
. Reduction of lipofuscin-like autofluorescence in fluorescently labeled tissue. J Histo-
chem Cytochem. 1999;47 (6):719–730.
 
101. 
Maiti P, et al. A comparative study of dietary curcumin, nanocurcumin, and other classical amyloid-binding dyes for labeling and 
imaging of amyloid plaques in brain tissue of 5×-familial Alzheimer’s disease mice. Histochem Cell Biol. 2016;146 (5):609–625.
 
102. Rao PP, Mohamed T, Teckwani K, Tin G. Curcumin binding to beta amyloid: a computational study. Chem Biol Drug Des. 
2015;86 (4):813–820.
 
103. Garcia-Alloza M, Borrelli LA, Rozkalne A, Hyman BT, Bacskai BJ. Curcumin labels amyloid pathology in vivo, disrupts exist-
ing plaques, and partially restores distorted neurites in an Alzheimer mouse model. J Neurochem. 2007;102 (4):1095–1104.
 
104. 
Dhillon N, et al. Phase II trial of curcumin in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;14 (14):4491–4499.
 
105. Gota VS, Maru GB, Soni TG, Gandhi TR, Kochar N, Agarwal MG. Safety and pharmacokinetics of a solid lipid curcumin par-
ticle formulation in osteosarcoma patients and healthy volunteers. J Agric Food Chem. 2010;58 (4):2095–2099.
 
106. Dadhaniya P, et al. Safety assessment of a solid lipid curcumin particle preparation: acute and subchronic toxicity studies. Food 
Chem Toxicol. 2011;49 (8):1834–1842.
 
107. Kayabasi U, Sergott R, Rispoli M. Retinal examination for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. J Ophthalmic Pathol. 
2014;3(4):1–4.
 
108. Dentchev T, Milam AH, Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ, Dunaief JL. Amyloid-beta is found in drusen from some age-related macu-
lar degeneration retinas, but not in drusen from normal retinas. Mol Vis. 2003;9:184–190.
 
109. Johnson LV
, Leitner WP, Rivest AJ, Staples MK, Radeke MJ, Anderson DH. The Alzheimer’s A beta -peptide is deposited at 
sites of complement activation in pathologic deposits associated with aging and age-related macular degeneration. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2002;99 (18):11830–11835.
 
110. Ratnayaka JA, Serpell LC, Lotery AJ. Dementia of the eye: the role of amyloid beta in retinal degeneration. Eye (Lond). 2015;29 
(8):1013–1026.
 
111. 
Algvere PV
, Kvanta A, Seregard S. Drusen maculopathy: a risk factor for visual deterioration. Acta Ophthalmol. 2016;94 (5):427–433.
 
112. Jack CR, et al. Brain β-amyloid load approaches a plateau. Neurology. 2013;80(10):890–896.
 
113. Begum AN, et al. Curcumin structure-function, bioavailability, and efficacy in models of neuroinflammation and Alzheimer’s 
disease. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2008;326 (1):196–208.
