 Mechanosensing is critical for axon growth in the developing 
brain
David E. Koser#1,4, Amelia J. Thompson#1, Sarah K. Foster#1, Asha Dwivedy#1, Eva K. 
Pillai1, Graham K. Sheridan1,5, Hanno Svoboda1, Matheus Viana2, Luciano da F. Costa2, 
Jochen Guck3,6, Christine E. Holt1, and Kristian Franze1,3
1Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK
2Institute of Physics at São Carlos, University of São Paulo, São Carlos, SP
, Brazil
3Department of Physics, Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
During nervous system development, neurons extend axons along well-defined pathways. The 
current understanding of axon pathfinding is based mainly on chemical signalling. However, 
growing neurons interact not only chemically but also mechanically with their environment. Here 
we identify mechanical signals as important regulators of axon pathfinding. In vitro, substrate 
stiffness determined growth patterns of Xenopus retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons. In vivo atomic 
force microscopy revealed striking stiffness gradient patterns in the embryonic brain. RGC axons 
grew towards the tissue’s softer side, which was reproduced in vitro in the absence of chemical 
gradients. To test the importance of mechanical signals for axon growth in vivo, we altered brain 
stiffness, blocked mechanotransduction pharmacologically, and knocked down the 
mechanosensitive ion channel Piezo1. All treatments resulted in aberrant axonal growth and 
pathfinding errors, suggesting that local tissue stiffness–read out by mechanosensitive ion 
channels–is critically involved in instructing neuronal growth in vivo.
Keywords
mechanosensitivity; durotaxis; AFM; axon guidance; biomechanics; stretch-activated ion 
channels; brain stiffness; stiffness gradient
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence should be addressed to K.F. (kf284@cam.ac.uk).
4Present address: Department of Clinical Neurobiology, Medical Faculty of Heidelberg University and German Cancer Research 
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany
5Present address: School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Brighton, Brighton, UK
6Present address: Biotechnology Center, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
Author Contributions: K.F. conceived the project; J.G., C.E.H., and K.F. designed the research; D.E.K., A.J.T., S.K.F, A.D., G.K.S., 
E.P., H.S., and K.F. performed the experiments; D.E.K., A.J.T., S.K.F, G.K.S., E.P, H.S., M.V., L.F.C., and K.F. analysed the data; all 
authors discussed the data; K.F. wrote the manuscript with contributions from all authors.
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2016 December ; 19(12): 1592–1598. doi:10.1038/nn.4394.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 During the development of the central nervous system (CNS), each neuron extends an axon, 
which is the dominant cell process, and a number of finer, branched dendrites. Before 
connecting with their targets, axons grow along well-defined pathways in a stereotypic 
manner. Since the introduction of Sperry’s chemoaffinity hypothesis more than 50 years 
ago1, it has generally been accepted that axon guidance is regulated primarily by chemical 
signals2,3.
In the developing Xenopus laevis optic pathway, which is one of the best understood model 
systems of axon pathfinding, retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons leave the retina via the optic 
nerve, cross the midline at the optic chiasm, grow along the contralateral brain surface in the 
optic tract (OT), and terminate in the optic tectum. Axon guidance along the OT, and 
particularly the caudal turn of axons in the mid-diencephalon, is thought to be mainly 
controlled by the repellent chemical cues Slit1, Slit2 and Semaphorin3A (Sema3A)4–6, 
which are expressed in the telencephalon and diencephalon.
Growth implies motion, however, and motion is driven by forces. Growing axons must exert 
forces on their environment and interact with it not only chemically but also mechanically7–
10. Neuronal growth may thus be influenced by the mechanical properties of the 
environment, as originally shown in vitro11. Recent work has revealed that, in vitro, 
neuronal growth patterns, neurite extension, branching patterns, and neuronal traction forces 
all change with substrate stiffness10,12–16. Since CNS tissue is mechanically 
heterogeneous17–23, growing axons are likely to encounter tissue regions with different 
mechanical properties. While local tissue mechanics might thus provide important signals to 
growing axons, the mechanical properties of developing CNS tissue in vivo are currently 
unknown, and the potential neuronal response to mechanical signals in vivo is poorly 
understood.
Here, we used in vitro mechanosensitivity assays, in vivo atomic force microscopy (AFM), 
and interfered with brain tissue stiffness and neuronal mechanosensitivity, to investigate how 
mechanical signals affect neuronal growth. We found that axonal growth patterns depend 
strongly on the local mechanical properties of the surrounding tissue, suggesting that, in 
vivo, growing neurons respond not only to chemical but also to mechanical signals.
Results
RGC axons are mechanosensitive
To investigate Xenopus RGC axon mechanosensitivity, we first cultured eye primordia, 
which contain intact retinae from which RGCs extend their axons, on polyacrylamide 
substrates of controlled stiffness24. We used two different substrates to probe axonal 
mechanosensitivity: ‘stiff’ substrates with a shear modulus of 1 kPa and ‘soft’ substrates 
with a shear modulus of 0.1 kPa, which correspond approximately to the upper and lower 
bounds of brain tissue stiffness, respectively25. The substrates were coated with laminin, the 
density of which was independent of substrate stiffness (Supplementary Fig. 1c). Thus, cells 
cultured on soft and stiff substrates were only exposed to different mechanical signals, while 
their chemical environments were similar.
Koser et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 After 24 hours, axons grown on stiff substrates were significantly longer than those grown 
on soft substrates, as assessed by Sholl analysis (P < 10-6, One-Way-ANOVA followed by 
Bonferroni post-hoc test) (Fig. 1a,b,d,e). RGCs cultured on substrates coated with 
fibronectin, which engages different integrins from laminin26, also grew significantly longer 
axons on stiff substrates (P < 10-5, two-tailed t-test) (Supplementary Fig. 2a-d), suggesting 
that neurons were mechanosensitive irrespective of the type of integrins involved in cell 
adhesion.
In agreement with the Sholl analysis, time-lapse movies revealed that the average extension 
velocity of axons, i.e., the average distance between the proximal and distal ends of the axon 
per time interval, was significantly higher on stiff than on soft substrates (median velocities 
of 35.0 µm/h vs. 22.6 µm/h; P < 10-5, Mann-Whitney-Test) (Fig. 1g, Supplementary movies 
1-2). However, when we assessed the absolute distance growth cones, which are the tips of 
advancing axons, moved in a given time, we found that they actually moved faster and 
explored their environment more on soft as compared to stiff substrates (109 ± 3 µm/h vs. 99 
± 2 µm/h; P<0.01, two-tailed t-test) (Fig. 1h). Thus, the directionality of axonal growth, 
which is defined as the ratio between axon extension and the length of the path covered by 
the growth cone, was significantly reduced on soft substrates (P < 10-6; Fig. 1i), indicating 
that axon growth is more directionally persistent on stiffer substrates.
The more explorative motion of growth cones on soft substrates was reflected in the 
appearance of the explant cultures. While on stiff substrates, axons grew rather straight and 
parallel to each other (i.e., formed bundles), on soft substrates axons grew less coherently, 
crossed each other more frequently, and appeared to splay apart (Fig. 1j, Supplementary Fig. 
2e-g). Together, these experiments showed that, in vitro, growing Xenopus RGC axons 
respond to mechanical signals.
Mechanosensing is mediated by stretch-activated ion channels
Previous in vitro experiments have suggested an involvement of stretch-activated ion 
channels in neuronal mechanosensitivity27–30. As the opening probability of 
mechanosensitive ion channels increases on stiffer substrates27–29,31, impeding the 
channels’ activity should prevent neurons from detecting ‘stiff’ and result in the equivalent 
of a ‘soft’ phenotype.
Piezo1, which forms a mechanically activated cation channel32,33, has been identified as a 
key player in several mechanotransduction cascades in developing systems31,34,35. Using 
immunocytochemistry, we found a positive signal for Piezo1 distributed in punctate patterns 
all along axons and in growth cones of Xenopus RGCs (Fig. 1f). We then applied the spider 
venom peptide GsMTx4, which blocks the activity of mechanosensitive ion channels 
including Piezo136, to eye primordia cultures. As predicted, axons grown on stiff substrates 
and treated with GsMTx4 were significantly shorter than axons in the control group (P < 
10-7, One-Way-ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post-hoc test) and strongly resembled 
axons grown on soft substrates (P = 1.00) (Fig. 1c-e), indicating that mechanosensing of 
Xenopus RGCs is mediated by mechanosensitive ion channels.
Koser et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Stiffness gradients in developing brain tissue
In order to investigate the mechanical environment RGC axons encounter in vivo, we 
developed an atomic force microscopy (AFM)-based approach to map the local tissue 
stiffness of the exposed intact developing brain in vivo at different developmental stages by 
force-indentation measurements (Fig. 2a; for details see Methods). Tissue stiffness was 
quantified by the reduced apparent elastic modulus K; the larger K the stiffer the tissue. 
Stiffness maps had a spatial resolution of 20 - 25 µm, a length scale relevant to individual 
neuronal growth cones16. RGC axons were visualized using epifluorescence by introducing 
an Ath5/GFP reporter.
AFM measurements were carried out at two different developmental time points: when the 
first axons had left the optic chiasm and entered the ventral OT (developmental stage 33/34) 
and again when the first axons had reached the optic tectum (stages 39-40) (Fig. 2b). At both 
time points, tissue stiffness was heterogeneously distributed (Fig. 2c, d; Supplementary Fig. 
3a, b). An analysis of the average stiffness of distinct tissue regions revealed that, at stage 
33/34, the tel-/diencephalon, and, at stages 39-40, the OT, were significantly stiffer than the 
optic tectum (P33/34 < 10-8, P39-40 < 10-2) (Fig. 2f, g). Furthermore, at stages 39 - 40, tissue 
rostral to the OT was significantly stiffer than that caudal to it (P < 10-4) (Fig. 2h), resulting 
in a stiffness gradient perpendicular to the growth direction of RGC axons.
In order to determine the structural origin of this stiffness gradient in the brain, we first 
tested if RGC axons themselves were involved. We ablated eye primordia in early Xenopus 
embryos. Brains of those embryos developed normally, but no RGC axons entered the 
diencephalon. We found similar stiffness distributions in the tel-/diencephalon of these 
brains as in control brains (Supplementary Fig. 3c), suggesting that RGC axons themselves 
did not cause the observed stiffness gradients.
While the extracellular matrix (ECM) contributes to overall CNS tissue stiffness22,37, 
mechanical heterogeneities appear to be largely established by the tissue’s cellular 
constituents19,22,38. In other CNS tissues stiffness scales with cell body density22; we 
therefore used immunohistochemistry to investigate the distribution of cell nuclei in the 
vicinity of the OT. Nuclei in whole mount brain preparations were labelled using DAPI and 
the area they occupied in a given region was determined. Cell body densities rostral to the 
OT were significantly higher than those caudal to it (P < 10-5, paired two-tailed t-test) (Fig. 
2e,i), suggesting a functional connection of the local cell body distribution to the presence 
and direction of the observed stiffness gradient.
Axons grow towards soft tissue
We found that RGC axons grow perpendicular to a local stiffness gradient in the brain (Fig. 
2d, h). To assess the impact of this stiffness gradient on axon growth, we quantified the local 
curvature C = 1/R of the OT approximately every 40 µm along its length by fitting a circle of 
radius R to the OT as indicated in Figure 3a. We then calculated the local stiffness gradient 
M perpendicular to the OT at each position by subtracting the apparent elastic modulus K 
averaged over an area of (100 × 100) µm2 caudal of the OT from the average K rostral of it. 
Koser et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 This difference in K was then divided by 100 µm, resulting in a stiffness gradient M 
expressed in Pa/µm (Fig. 3a).
The local curvature C of axons at any position along the OT strongly correlated with the 
tissue’s local stiffness gradient M at that position. RGC axons encountering stiffness 
gradients in vivo clearly turned away from stiffer and grew towards softer tissue (P < 10-3, 
one-sample Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test) (Fig. 3b,c). Interestingly, the curvature of the OT 
was independent of the absolute tissue stiffness (Supplementary Fig. 4c).
To test whether mechanical signals imposed by stiffness gradients are instructive rather than 
just permissive to axon growth, we developed cell culture substrates incorporating stiffness 
gradients similar to those found in vivo (Supplementary Fig. 1, for details see Methods), 
which allowed us to reduce the complexity of the neuronal environment and to study the 
effect of stiffness gradients on axon growth in the absence of chemical guidance cues. To 
test the correlation between stiffness gradients and axon turning in these in vitro assays, eye 
primordia were cultured on stiffness gradients, imaged, and the orientation of axons 
analysed using two complementary approaches.
We first used time-lapse microscopy to quantify the dynamic turning of individual axon 
bundles growing perpendicular to the stiffness gradient (with respect to their initial growth 
direction; Fig. 3d, e). We verified these results by analyzing the orientation of all axons of an 
explant (∼2800 segments per eye primordium on average) relative to their original 
orientation at the end of an experiment (Fig. 3f, g, see Online Methods). Both approaches 
showed that axon bundles preferentially turned towards soft also in vitro (P ≤ 0.05) – in the 
absence of chemical gradients.
Softening of brain tissue leads to aberrant axon growth
As mentioned above, the ECM contributes to overall CNS tissue stiffness (although less to 
mechanical heterogeneities). To test if brain tissue stiffness provides an instructive signal for 
RGC axon growth in vivo, we first perturbed the mechanical properties of developing 
Xenopus brains by manipulating their ECM composition. Chondroitin sulphate (CS) 
proteoglycans are a main ECM component in the developing brain39. After applying CS to 
exposed brains in vivo, we still found similar stiffness gradients as in control brains; 
however, the overall tissue stiffness was significantly decreased (P < 10-9, Mann-Whitney-
Test) (Fig. 4a-c, Supplementary Fig. 3d), particularly in the region in front of the OT (P < 
10-10) (Fig. 4c).
Because the turning of RGC axons towards soft tissue did not depend on absolute brain 
stiffness but rather on the strength of the local stiffness gradient (Fig. 3b, Supplementary 
Fig. 4c), axons still preferentially turned towards softer tissue in CS treated brains 
(Supplementary Fig. 4). However, in agreement with our in vitro experiments and a previous 
study39, RGC axons in these softened brains dispersed widely from their normal trajectory, 
with reduced directionality and fasciculation (Fig. 4d), thus resembling axon behaviour on 
soft substrates in vitro (Fig. 1). To quantify OT phenotypes, we fitted ellipses around OTs 
and compared the ratios between the long and short axes of the ellipses, i.e., their 
elongation24 (Fig. 4e). The elongation of the OT in CS-treated brains was significantly 
Koser et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 decreased compared to controls (P < 10-5, two-tailed t-test) (Fig. 4f), suggesting that 
different mechanical instructions provided by CS-treated, softened brain tissue likely 
contributed to RGC axon defasciculation and aberrant growth.
Local mechanical manipulation of CNS tissue redirects axons
As CS proteoglycans are likely involved in binding and presenting various trophic and tropic 
factors to axons39, the OT phenotype observed after increasing the brain’s CS content might 
be due not only to mechanical but also to chemical changes in the tissue. To perturb brain 
mechanics without altering the chemical environment, we used AFM to apply a sustained 
compressive force F = 30 nN to exposed embryonic brains in vivo (illustrated in Fig. 4g) 
with a spheroidal probe of 87 µm diameter. The resulting mechanical stress σ = F / A ∼ 30 
pN / µm2 = 30 Pa, where A corresponds to the contact area, led to a maximum tissue strain ε 
= σ / Kmax ∼ 7.5 % (corresponding to a maximum indentation δmax = (3.6 ± 0.2) µm).
The experiment commenced at stage 35/36, when the fluorescently labelled OT was already 
visible but had not started to turn caudally in the mid-diencephalon (Supplementary Fig. 5a), 
and finished ∼6 hours later, when embryos had reached stage 39. The compressive force was 
applied to the region just caudal to the anticipated OT turn, where the tissue would normally 
be soft (cf. Fig. 2d). Importantly, brain tissue is nonlinearly elastic and stiffens under 
compression18,21,40 (P < 0.01, Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA) (Supplementary Fig. 5h).
In all experiments, axons avoided growing underneath the centre of the probe, where the 
compressive strain was largest. While in time-matched control embryos the OT grew 
normally and frequently formed a caudal bend in the mid-diencephalon (Fig. 4h), in 2 of 5 
experiments axons grew straight, passed the site of indentation laterally, and the OT did not 
substantially turn (Supplementary Fig. 5f, g). In the other 3 cases, RGC axons deviated from 
their normal path to grow either away from or around the compressed tissue (Fig. 4i, 
Supplementary Fig. 5b-e). These experiments showed that mechanically interfering with 
brain tissue alone is sufficient to alter axon growth patterns.
Mechanosensing through Piezo1 is critical for axon growth
The previous set of experiments indicated that RGC axons respond to mechanical signals in 
vivo. To test if their mechanosensitive behaviour was mediated by mechanosensitive ion 
channels, as in our in vitro experiments (Fig. 1), we either applied GsMTx4 to exposed 
brains of stage 33/34 embryos (cf. Fig. 2b), or down-regulated Piezo1 expression by ∼42% 
using morpholino knockdown in vivo (cf. Supplementary Fig. 6d,e). Following both 
manipulations, at stages 39-40 RGC axons dispersed widely from their normal trajectory and 
assumed a phenotype similar to axons grown on softer substrates in vitro (cf. Fig. 1), with 
directional incoherence, decreased length, and overall reduced elongation (P < 0.01, two-
tailed t-test) (Fig. 5).
This phenotype was maintained in the Piezo1 morpholino-treated animals at stage 42, at 
which point OT growth and tectal innervation are normally complete (∼1 day older than the 
ones shown in Fig. 5; Supplementary Fig. 6a-c), indicating that Piezo1 knockdown led to 
pathfinding abnormalities rather than merely to slowed axon growth. Hence, our 
Koser et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 experiments suggested that RGC mechanosensitivity, which is involved in controlling axon 
growth, is mediated by Piezo1 in vivo.
Discussion
We have shown that, in vitro as well as in vivo, Xenopus RGC axons respond to mechanical 
signals in their environment (summarised in Fig. 6a). Tissue stiffness regulates the length of 
axons and their degree of spreading: axons grow faster, straighter and more parallel on stiffer 
substrates (Fig. 1). A higher stiffness, causing persistent growth and facilitating 
fasciculation, thus seems favourable for tissues through which axons have to grow. A lower 
stiffness, on the other hand, promoting slowed exploratory growth and splaying of axons, 
seems beneficial for regions where axons have to search for their targets and form synapses. 
Accordingly, tissue in the vicinity of the OT, where axons are tightly bundled, is stiffer than 
the rostral part of the tectum (Fig. 2g), where axons splay apart, branch, and form synapses. 
In line with this observation, spinal cord neurons in vitro branch more on softer substrates12.
Furthermore, local stiffness gradients guide RGC axon growth. Non-neuronal cell types 
responding to stiffness gradients in vitro usually migrate towards the stiffer side of their 
substrate in a process termed durotaxis41. Durotaxis only depends on the strength of the 
gradient and is independent of the absolute substrate stiffness42, similar to what we 
observed in our in vivo experiments (Supplementary Fig. 4c, d). However, in contrast to 
other cell types, RGC axon bundles turned towards the softer side of their growth substrate, 
both in vitro and in vivo. While individual growth cones might possess neuron-specific 
mechanotransduction mechanisms causing this response27,28, growth of axon bundles 
towards soft areas could also at least partly be a collective effect (Fig. 6b). Growth velocities 
of axons are higher on stiffer substrates (Fig. 1g). When axon bundles grow perpendicular to 
a stiffness gradient, the faster axons on the stiffer side will be ‘pulled’ towards the tightly 
coupled slower axons on the softer side, and consequently turn towards them (similar to 
phototropism in plants, where cells on the side of the stem farthest from the light extend 
more than cells closer to the light).
The mechanical properties of embryonic brain tissue have been studied in two different 
systems before20,43. While Xu and colleagues suggested that embryonic chick brain is 
mechanically rather homogeneous and does not change its elastic stiffness over time43, in 
the mouse embryonic cerebral cortex, tissue stiffness is region- and developmental stage-
dependent20. Both studies were done ex vivo. Using an in vivo AFM approach, we obtained 
stiffness maps of the intact Xenopus brain with a spatial resolution on the order of the size of 
neuronal growth cones. We found that the stereotypic caudal bend of the OT in the mid-
diencephalon coincides with a strong stiffness gradient in the tissue (Fig. 2, Supplementary 
Fig. 3). Axons in that region turned away from stiffer tissue as in our in vitro experiments, 
and the curvature of the OT correlated strongly with the strength of the gradient but not with 
the absolute tissue stiffness (Fig. 3, Supplementary Fig. 4).
The stiffness gradient likely originates mostly from the change in cell body density from 
rostral to caudal of the OT. Similarly, in the mouse spinal cord higher cell densities are 
associated with larger tissue stiffness22. While RGC axons respond to the mechanical 
Koser et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 stiffness of their environment (cf. Fig. 1), the space available for axons to grow through 
might contribute an additional mechanical signal controlling axon growth in vivo. Higher 
cell body densities likely also result in a decrease in available space and thus increased steric 
hindrance, which could add to the mechanotactic growth of RGC axons in the mid-
diencephalon towards softer and less dense regions of the brain (cf. Fig. 2e).
Similarly, the change in RGC growth direction following the local application of a sustained 
compressive force to Xenopus brains (Fig. 4) is likely the result of a combination of different 
mechanical signals directly impacting neuronal growth. (1) As CNS tissue stiffens under 
compression18,21,40, the stiffness of the tissue underneath the AFM probe was increased 
(Fig 4g, Supplementary Fig. 5h). Such a change in stiffness can be read out by RGC axons 
via Piezo1, leading to slowed growth and decreased directionality (Figs. 1, 5). Also, 
compression of the tissue via a bead should lead to a local gradient in stiffness, with a 
maximum stiffening occurring at the centre of the probe where the strain is highest. This 
induced stiffness gradient might repel axon bundles as described above. (2) Local tissue 
compression could additionally lead to a local decrease in the available space, causing RGC 
axons to avoid and grow around the denser region. (3) Finally, pushing on the tissue might 
also directly trigger an immediate mechanosensitive response of neurons27, which at least at 
short time scales might contribute to changing growth directions. Moreover, all three 
mechanisms may potentially impact chemical signaling pathways, thus also indirectly 
contributing to changing RGC axon growth directions (see below).
Mechanosensitive ion channels open more frequently in neurons grown in stiffer 
environments27–29,31. Blocking these channels thus prevents neurons from detecting ‘stiff’ 
(Fig. 1c-e), suggesting a plausible mechanism by which RGC axons were shorter, grew with 
reduced directionality and fanned out from the OT in brains treated with GsMTx4 or Piezo1 
morpholinos. It is likely that there are other mechanisms involved in neuronal 
mechanotransduction25,44; however, interfering with these ion channels alone was sufficient 
to significantly impact axon growth in vitro as well as in vivo.
While we cannot rule out that our treatments also affected other cells in the tissue35, they 
indicate that changing either tissue mechanics or the cellular susceptibility for mechanical 
signals impact RGC axon growth (Figs. 4, 5). The mechanism by which CS-treatment 
disrupts axon pathfinding in the OT is still poorly understood. It has been speculated that CS 
might modulate axon pathfinding via CS-binding molecules39. We here provide an 
alternative or additional mechanism. The less directionally persistent axonal growth and the 
breakdown of fasciculation could at least partly be attributed to a softening of the tissue, 
likely due to increased hydration through the introduction of additional sulphate groups45.
It is possible that interfering with mechanotransduction not only directly but also indirectly 
altered RGC axon growth. Cells are likely to integrate all signals they can detect, chemical 
and mechanical ones alike, resulting in a response that is the consequence of all available 
information. As one signal may modulate the response of a cell to another signal46, 
perturbing mechanotransduction will likely alter the way in which neurons respond to 
chemical signals in the environment and vice versa. Furthermore, other cells in the vicinity 
of the OT, which, for example, secrete signalling molecules such as Sema3A or Slits, might 
Koser et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 also be mechanosensitive. Manipulating mechanotransduction in these cells could then 
change chemical signals that contribute to controlling RGC growth. This intimate cross-talk 
between chemical and mechanical signalling supports the view that mechanosensing is just 
as critical as biochemical signalling for axon growth in the developing brain.
Axon pathfinding is a highly complex process; several chemical guidance cues have been 
shown to be important for instructing axon growth2–6. We have identified local tissue 
stiffness as another critical signal in a developing organism, which together with membrane-
bound and diffusible chemical cues controls cell growth and tissue organisation. Similar 
mechanical cell-tissue interactions are likely to be important for the development of the CNS 
in general44 and in other organ systems across species. It is also likely to be critical for 
regenerative processes in which cells have to migrate or re-grow through damaged tissue 
with altered mechanical properties.
Online Methods
All chemicals were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and all antibodies were obtained from 
Abcam if not stated differently.
Preparation of polyacrylamide hydrogels
Plain substrates—Compliant polyacrylamide (PAA) hydrogel culture substrates were 
prepared as described previously23. Briefly, 21 mm glass-bottom Petri dishes (μ-
Dish35mm, high; IBIDI, Germany) were dabbed with a 0.1 N NaOH solution using a cotton 
bud and air-dried. The glass was then treated with 200 μl (3-aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane 
(APTMS) for 3 min and washed with distilled water. 400 μl of 0.5% glutaraldehyde solution 
was then added for 30 min. Petri dishes were again washed and air-dried. 19 mm diameter 
glass coverslips were cleaned with 70% ethanol and distilled water and then treated with 
Rain-X solution (Shell Car Care International Ltd, UK) for 10 min, resulting in a non-
adhesive coating. Rain-X solution was removed and the coverslips dried using lint-free 
wipes.
The shear storage modulus G’ of the PAA gel was adjusted using pre-defined ratios of 60% 
phosphate buffered saline (PBS; Fisher Scientific, UK), 40% (w/v) acrylamide (AA) 
solution (Sigma), and 2% bis-acrylamide (Bis-AA) solution (Fisher Scientific, UK), as 
described previously23. Gel pre-mix solutions (500 µl) corresponding to ∼0.1 kPa (5% AA 
& 0.04% Bis-AA) and 1 kPa (7.5% AA & 0.06% Bis-AA) were desiccated for 10 min. 
Polymerization was initiated by addition of 5 µL freshly prepared 10% ammonium 
persulphate (APS) and 1.5 µL N,N,N’,N’-tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED) to the PAA 
pre-mixes. 40 µl of this solution was pipetted onto the treated glass-bottom Petri dish and 
then covered with the Rain-X-coated coverslip. After 15 min, coverslips were submerged in 
PBS for a further 20 min before the top coverslip was removed. Gels were then washed in 
filter-sterilised 60% PBS three times and functionalized with 5 - 10 µg/ml laminin (from 
Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm murine sarcoma basement membrane) for 2 h before culturing, or 
1 µg/ml fibronectin (from bovine plasma) for 3 h prior to culturing. To allow laminin or 
fibronectin to adhere to the substrates, gels were either prepared by incubating them in 
hydrazine hydrate for 4 h, 5% acetic acid solution (Fisher Scientific, UK) for 1 h, sterile 
Koser et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 60% PBS (3 times thorough washing), 10 or 100 µg/ml poly-D-lysine solution (PDL; MW 
70,000-150,000) overnight at 4 °C, and sterile 60% Leibovitz L15 medium; three times 
washing23, or by incubating them in 40 µg/ml Cell-Tak™ (BD Biosciences, UK) for 2 h at 
room temperature and subsequent washing in sterile 60% PBS10.
Gradient substrates—Substrates incorporating stiffness gradients with a similar strength 
to those we found in vivo were produced by filling custom-designed chambers first with 
PAA gel premixes for ∼10 kPa (12% AA & 0.2% Bis-AA) immediately after polymerization 
was initiated, and then with 0.1 kPa gel premixes (see above). In the 10 kPa premix, 5 µl 
PBS were substituted by 5 µl of 1% (w/v) fluorescein O,O’-dimethacrylate diluted in 
DMSO. Diffusion led to a linear gradient in stiffness and fluorescence signal 
(Supplementary Fig. 1).
Gel chambers were assembled from two Parafilm-covered microscope slides, enclosing a 
glutaraldehyde-treated coverslip (22 × 22) mm2 and a RainX-treated coverslip (22 × 40) 
mm2, which were placed with the treated sides facing each other but separated by a U-
shaped Parafilm spacer. Chambers were held together with bulldog clips and stood vertically, 
with the gap between the two coverslips at the top, into which the gels premixes were 
pipetted (Supplementary Fig. 1).
Substrate coating measurements—PAA gels were coated with 10 µg/ml laminin as 
described above. Substrates were then incubated overnight (18 h) at room temperature with 
300 µL of a polyclonal rabbit anti-laminin antibody (ab11575) diluted 1:200 with PBS and 
1% bovine serum albumin (BSA). Gels were then washed (4 × 10 min) with PBS and 
subsequently incubated for 4 h in secondary antibody solution (donkey anti-rabbit Alexa 
Fluor® 488; Invitrogen, A-21206, 1:1000 dilution) containing 1% BSA in PBS. Gels were 
washed again (5 × 10 min) with PBS and imaged immediately using a Nikon Eclipse Ni-E 
microscope (60x W; NA = 1.0). 24 images were captured from each gel (three gels per 
group). For each image, six distinct regions of interest were randomly chosen and the mean 
fluorescence intensity calculated using ImageJ software (NIH, MD, USA).
Animal model
All animal experiments were approved by the Ethical Review Committee of the University 
of Cambridge and complied with Home Office guidelines. Xenopus laevis embryos of both 
sexes were obtained by in vitro fertilization, raised in 0.1x Modified Barth's Saline (MBS) at 
14 – 18 °C, and staged according to the tables of Nieuwkoop and Faber47. For AFM 
experiments, embryos were injected in one blastomere at the 4 cell stage with an Ath5-GFP 
construct (50 pg/ 5 nl) in order to label RGC axons in one retina. Fluorescently labelled 
RGC axons crossed the optic chiasm into the unlabelled brain, allowing visualization of the 
OT for AFM experiments.
For ablated eye primordia experiments, in which brains not containing RGC axons were 
measured by AFM at stages 39-40, stage 31-32 embryos were transferred to MR solution48 
(composition: 1x MBS with 0.04% (w/v) MS222 anaesthetic (3-aminobenzoic acid ethyl 
ester methanesulfonate) and 1x Penicillin / Streptomycin / Fungizone (P/S/F; Life 
Technologies, UK), pH 7.4) and both eye primordia carefully removed with 0.1 mm 
Koser et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 minutien pins. Embryos were allowed to recover at 18°C in 0.5x MBS + 0.02% (w/v) 
MS222 for 1 hour, followed by 0.25x MBS + 0.01% (w/v) MS222 overnight. Embryos were 
then transferred to 0.1x MBS and left at 18°C to reach stages 39-40.
For ex vivo eye primordia cell culture experiments, stage 33/34 or 35/36 embryos were 
transferred to a 35 mm Petri dish coated with SYLGARD® 184 and anesthetized with 
0.04% (w/v) MS222 solution (24.75 ml 10x MBS, 250 µl 100X P/S/F, and 100 mg MS222 
dissolved in 225 ml ddH2O, adjusted to pH 7.7, and filter-sterilized). Whole eye primordia 
were dissected, placed onto PAA hydrogels, and cultured at 20 °C for 24–36 h in culture 
medium. Xenopus culture medium was composed of 60% L15 medium, 100 U/ml penicillin, 
100 µg/ml streptomycin and 2.5 µg/mL amphotericin B (Life Technologies, UK), pH 7.7.
For GsMTx4 treatment experiments, 1-5 µM GsMTx4 (from Fred Sachs and Abcam, UK, 
ab141871) was added to eye primordia two hours after they had been placed on gels. After 
22 additional hours of incubation, explants were fixed in 2% PFA + 7.5% sucrose for 25 
minutes and washed several times with 100% PBS prior to imaging.
Exposed Brain Preparations—Exposed brain experiments were carried out in MR 
solution48. Stage 33/34 embryos were transferred to a 35 mm Petri dish coated with 
SYLGARD® 184 and immobilized with bent 0.2 mm minutien pins with the side of the 
body facing up. Skin, dura and eye were carefully dissected out using fine forceps and a 0.1 
mm minutien pin to expose the brain from the dorsal to ventral midline and from the 
hindbrain, just anterior of the otic vesicle, to the telencephalon. The embryos were then 
transferred to a 4 well plate and submerged in solution containing either MR alone (control), 
or MR + 25 µM GsMTx4, or MR + 15 mg/ml chondroitin sulphate, and kept in the incubator 
at 14 or 18 °C until reaching stages 39-40.
Morpholino injections—Fluorescein-tagged translation blocking morpholino 
oligonucleotides (MOs) against Piezo-1 RNA (5’- 
CACAGAGGACTTGCAGTTCCATCCC-3’) were designed and synthetized by GeneTools 
(GeneTools, OR, USA). 15 ng of MO or control scrambled MO (GeneTools, OR, USA; 5’-
CCTCTTACCTCAGTTACAATTTATA-3’) were injected into each dorsal blastomere of four 
cell-stage embryos, as described previously49. The embryos were transferred to a 14 °C 
incubator until stage 40, when they were imaged.
Western blots—Heads of stage 39-41 Xenopus embryos were dissected from control 
animals, control (scrambled) MO-injected animals and those injected with Piezo-1 MO as 
described above. While for the characterization of axon growth only the healthiest embryos, 
which looked closest in phenotype to the controls, were taken, for Western blot analysis all 
embryos containing the morpholino were used. Heads were homogenized in a protease 
inhibitor cocktail diluted in lysis buffer (NaCl 150mM , TritonX-100 1%, Sodium 
deoxycholate 0.5%, Sodium dodecyl sulphate 4 mg/ml Tris buffer 50mM, pH8), with 1x 
Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific, UK), and protein 
samples prepared for Western blot, as described previously50. The Bradford (Bio-Rad 
Protein Assay Dye Reagent Concentrate, #5000006; Bio-Rad Laboratories, UK) calorimetric 
assay was used to calculate total protein concentration, and the loading volume adjusted 
Koser et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 accordingly. Samples were run on 4-15% SDS-PAGE gradient gels (Bio-Rad Laboratories, 
UK) and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Membranes were blocked for 1 h in a 
blocking solution of 5% skim milk powder diluted in TBS-T (pH 7.4), and incubated 
overnight at 4°C with a polyclonal rabbit anti-Piezo1 (anti-FAM38A) primary antibody 
(ab82336; 1:500 dilution), and monoclonal mouse anti-α-tubulin (ab7291; 1:8 000 dilution) 
as a loading control. Excess primary antibodies were then washed off and the nitrocellulose 
membrane incubated for 1 h at room temperature in polyclonal goat anti-rabbit antibody 
conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) (ab97069; 1:2000 dilution) for Piezo1, and a 
polyclonal goat anti-mouse antibody conjugated to HRP (ab6789; 1:15 000 dilution) 
secondary for α-tubulin. Western Blots were developed using Novex ECL HRP 
Chemiluminescent Substrate Reagent kit (Invitrogen, CA, USA) and X-ray developer. 
Densitometry was performed on 8-bit greyscale images imported into Fiji software (NIH, 
MD, USA). The Gel analysis tool was used to correct for background and to measure 
relative band intensities. The ratio of relative intensities of Piezo 1 to α-tubulin was used to 
compare different groups.
Imaging of axons in situ
For morphological characterization, eye primordia were imaged after 24 hours in culture by 
phase contrast microscopy on a Nikon Eclipse TE2000-U or a Zeiss AxioObserver A1 
microscope (10x Ph1, NA = 0.3). For time-lapse imaging of axon growth, eye primordia 
were imaged after 18–24 h in culture using a Nikon Eclipse TE3000 microscope (10x Ph1 
objective, NA = 0.25). Images were captured every 30 seconds for ∼3 h using a CCD camera 
(AxioCam ERc 5s ; Zeiss, UK) and ZEN 2011 software. For turning assays (see below), 
axons were imaged after 12-24 hours in culture using a Nikon Eclipse TE3000 (20x Ph1, 
NA = 0.45). Images were captured every 30 seconds using a Hamamatsu c4742-95 camera 
(Hamamatsu Photonics, Japan) and OpenLab software.
Immunofluorescence
To visualize axons for orientation analysis (see below), eye primordia were fixed after 24 h 
in 2% PFA + 7.5% sucrose and stained for β-tubulin (primary: ab6046, 1:1000; secondary: 
ab175470, 1:1000). Actin was visualized with phalloidin (A12379; Life Technologies, UK). 
Images were taken of axons close to eye primordia using a Zeiss AxioObserver.A1 (40x 
water immersion objective, NA = 1.1) and an sCMOS camera (Zyla 4.2, Andor). To study 
the Piezo1 distribution, eye primordia were cultured on glass-bottom microwell dishes 
(MatTek corporation, MA, USA) fixed as above, stained with β-tubulin (primary: ab6046, 
1:1000; secondary: ab150075, 1:1000) and Piezo1 (primary: sc164319, 1:200; secondary: 
ab175704, 1:1000); actin was visualized with phalloidin (A12379; Life Technologies, UK). 
Images of axons and growth cones were taken using a Nikon Eclipse TE2000-U inverted 
fluorescence microscope (60x oil immersion, NA = 1.4).
OT imaging in intact brains
To visualize the OT and cell nuclei for cell density measurements, the lens primordia of 
stage 40 embryos were removed, and a plug of semidried HRP (30% HRP in 1% 
lysolecithin) was placed in the lens cavity. Embryos were fixed 30 min later in 4% 
paraformaldehyde for 1h at room temperature. After fixation, brains were dissected and 
Koser et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 reacted with diaminobenzidine (DAB; 1 tablet DAB into 15ml 0.1M Tris buffer and 12µl 
30% H2O2). Nuclei were labelled using 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, 1 μg ml−1). 
Brains were mounted in Fluoromount-G (eBioscience, UK), and the lateral view of the OT 
was imaged using a confocal microscope (SP8, Leica Microsystems, UK; 20x objective, 
N.A. = 0.75).
To visualize the OT in mechanically manipulated brains, embryos were fixed in 4% 
Paraformaldehyde overnight at 4°C. DiI crystals were diluted in ethanol and injected at the 
boundary between lens and the retina as previously described51. After 24h of incubation at 
room temperature, brains were dissected out, mounted in PBS, and the lateral view of the 
OT was imaged using a Nikon Eclipse 80i microscope (10x, NA = 0.3; and 20x, NA = 0.75).
In vivo AFM experiments
Tipless silicon cantilevers (Arrow-TL1; NanoWorld, Switzerland) were mounted on a JPK 
Nanowizard Cellhesion 200 (JPK Instruments AG, Germany), which was set up on a x/y-
motorized stage of an inverted optical microscope (Axio ObserverA1, Zeiss, UK). Cantilever 
spring constants were determined via the thermal noise method52 and cantilevers with 
spring constants between 0.01 and 0.03 N/m selected. Monodisperse polystyrene beads 
(diameter: (37.28 ±0.34) µm; microParticles GmbH, Germany) were glued to the cantilevers 
as probes53,54.
Xenopus embryos were anesthetized and one hemisphere of the intact brain exposed by 
removing skin and dura as described in Chien et al.48 (Fig. 2a). Embryos were then 
transferred to a Petri dish onto the motorized stage, and immobilized using a harp slice grid 
(ALA Scientific, NY, USA). Epifluorescence and bright field images were taken to identify 
the OT. On the exposed brains, the region containing the OT was selected. Images of the 
upper right and lower left corners of the selected region were taken with a CCD camera 
(Imaging Source, UK) mounted on a TopViewOptics™ upright imaging system (JPK 
Instruments AG, Germany), to identify the region of the brain mapped by the AFM after 
data analysis. Force-distance curves (maximum indentation force: 7 nN, approach speed: 10 
µm/s, Data rate: 1000 Hz) were taken every 20 or 25 µm apart in a raster scan using a 
custom-written script.
For local brain stiffening experiments, anaesthetised stage 35/36 Xenopus embryos with one 
brain hemisphere exposed as described above were transferred to 1.3x MR solution 
(composition: 1.3x MBS with 0.04% (w/v) MS222 and 1X P/S/F (pH 7.4); the higher 
osmolarity retards skin regrowth for the duration of the experiment.). Epifluorescence and 
bright field images were collected using a modified AxioZoom V.16 system (Zeiss, UK) 
connected to an Andor Zyla 4.2 CMOS camera to identify the position of the OT. To induce 
local strain stiffening at the mid-diencephalon, tipless silicon cantilevers (Shocon-TL; 
AppNano, CA, USA) with attached polystyrene beads of 89.3 µm diameter (microParticles 
GmbH, Germany) were used to apply a constant force of 30 nN to a region towards the front 
of the advancing OT. The force was applied for ∼6 hours at 25°C until embryos had reached 
stage ∼39. Controls were treated in the same way except for the AFM application. After 
removal of the cantilever, manipulated and control embryos were fixed in 4% PFA, and the 
optic tract labelled with DiI as described above for analysis.
Koser et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Data analysis
Image pre-processing of in vitro experiments—Images of Xenopus eye primordia 
were imported into ImageJ. Some images were corrected for uneven background 
illumination using a Fourier bandpass filter. Large features in the background were manually 
removed and images binarised. The resulting binary images were used as input for two 
independent analyses, Sholl analysis and turning angle analysis (see below). For the turning 
angle analysis, the region corresponding to the eye primordium was manually adjusted by an 
ellipse in each image. All the pixels inside this ellipse were set to zero (background), as well 
as those pixels belonging to connected components of size smaller than 45 pixels (18.8 
µm2). Each eye primordium’s centre of mass was set as the origin of a 2D coordinate system 
with the gradient orientated along the y-axis.
Sholl analysis55—Images were analyzed using the Sholl Analysis plugin in ImageJ. An 
ellipse was fit to the eye primordium and the initial radius set to 
 where A is the 
area of the ellipse. The outer radius was set beyond the extent of the longest axon bundle, 
and the radius step size (spacing between consecutive circles) was set to 6.25 µm (10px).
In vitro time-lapse experiments—8-bit greyscale images were imported into Fiji 
software. Twenty axons per eyeball were chosen at random and the path each growth cone 
traversed over a ∼3 h period was manually tracked using the ‘Tracking’ function of Fiji. 
After tracking growth cones of 60 axons on both stiff and soft substrates, we analysed the 
trajectories using a custom written MATLAB script (Mathworks, MA, USA). The growth 
velocity for each axon vGrowth was calculated by
with the vector to the start position 
 and end position 
 of the growth cone and the time t. 
The speed for each growth cone vGC was calculated by
with the position of the growth cone on the ith frame 
 and the total frame number N. The 
directionality of the growth cones’ path D was calculated by
D = 1 corresponds to straight growth, while D close to 0 corresponds to a random walk.
The direction of growth cone migration φi for the position i ∈ {x | x∈ℕ; x > 64; x ≤ N} was 
calculated as follows.
Koser et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 For the third component of 
And for the third component of 
Analysis of axon orientation on plain substrates—Images of axons stained for β-
tubulin were imported into Fiji and cropped to ∼(140 × 45) µm2 regions. These were 
analyzed using the OrientationJ plugin. Orientation values were weighted by coherency (a 
parameter between 0 and 1, which indicates how locally co-aligned image features are). The 
distribution of angles for each image was adjusted so that the median angle was 0°.
AFM data—To quantify data from in vivo AFM indentation experiments, we used a 
custom-written automated routine based in MATLAB to analyse force-distance curves18. 
This routine is based on the Hertz model56:
with applied force F, Young’s modulus E, Poisson’s ratio v, indenter radius r, indentation 
depth δ, and apparent reduced elastic modulus 
. Curves were analyzed for 
defined indentation depths (Supplementary Fig. 3) or the maximum applied force F = 7nN 
(Figs. 2, 4). K values were then colour-coded and mapped onto the image of the Xenopus 
brain using a custom-written MATLAB script (hereafter termed ‘stiffness map’).
For the quantification of the mechanical properties of different regions of interest (ROIs), we 
defined the OT by manually drawing an outline as indicated in Supplementary Figs. 3b and 
d. Rostral and caudal of the OT (Fig. 2h) was defined as an approximately 50µm wide area 
rostral and caudal to the tract, respectively, while for the quantification of local gradients 
parallel to the OT (Fig. 3b, c) ROIs were defined as described in the text and shown in Fig. 
3a. The front of the OT was defined as an approximately 50µm wide area in front of the 
tract, which was ∼25 µm wider than the OT on each side as indicated in Fig. 4a. The tectum 
was defined based on its anatomic location (cf. Figs. 2, 4). ROIs were selected 3 times by 
hand using a custom-written MATLAB script; a pixel was chosen to be part of the ROI if it 
was selected at least 2 out of 3 times. Afterwards, the image of the Xenopus brain was 
scaled down to match the resolution of the stiffness map. Element-wise multiplication of the 
stiffness map matrix with the downscaled selection matrix resulted in the selection of the 
Koser et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 measurements in the selected area. Subsequently, all selected measurements of all 
experiments were pooled and then further analyzed as described in the statistics section.
Cell density measurements—Image stacks were imported into Fiji. For each brain, the 
image where the OT was in focus at the caudal bend was determined, and a maximum 
projection of that image and the image before and after it made (2µm z-stack height). A 
Gaussian blur filter (sigma = 2.0) was used to remove noise. The resulting image was 
thresholded; thresholds were manually adjusted to ensure that most of the nuclei were 
captured. Regions of interest were selected manually at the rostral and caudal sides of the 
OT. The image was binarized and the ‘Analyze Particle’ function (size: 2-∞; circularity: 
0.5-1.00) was used to acquire the area of nuclei in each ROI. The relative cell density was 
calculated by dividing the area with nuclei by the total area of the ROI.
OT curvature—To extract the relationship between the local stiffness gradient M 
perpendicular to the OT and the curvature of the OT at each position we used the following 
algorithm. The path of the centre of the OT was drawn by hand. Every 5th point of this line 
was selected and data was smoothed to reduce irregularities in the outline (points were 
approximately 40µm apart). The curvature C at the ith selected point was calculated by:
with the radius R (which can be negative or positive, depending on A) of the circumscribed 
circle of the triangle between the (i-1)th, ith and (i+1)th point, the ‘area’ A being the 3rd 
component of 
 the three-dimensional (3D) vector  which points from the (i-1)th to 
the ith point (3rd component of  being 0), the 3D vector  which points from the (i-1)th to 
the (i+1)th point (3rd component of  being 0), the length 
 the length b of the line 
between the ith and (i+1)th point and the length 
 To calculate the corresponding local 
stiffness gradient perpendicular to the tract M we first fitted a line through 5 points to obtain 
the general direction around the middle point, for which we already calculated the curvature. 
Thereafter, we calculated the average of the apparent reduced elastic modulus of a (100 × 
100) µm2 area left, K1, and right, K2, of this line (Fig. 3a). The gradient was then calculated 
by:
For better visualization of axon turning towards softer vs. stiffer tissue, the left side of the 
coordinate system showing local curvature C as a function of local stiffness gradient M < 0 
was rotated by 180° (Fig. 3b).
In vitro turning angle analysis—To detect how many segments of axons in each half of 
the coordinate system (x < 0 and x > 0; see Image pre-processing of in vitro experiments) 
were aligned along the direction defined by the turning angle τ, binary images were rotated 
Koser et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 by this angle and searched for peaks higher than 20 pixels (∼13 µm) in the histogram of the 
rotated x-coordinate. Because the pixels that contribute to the same bin of the histogram may 
not belong to the same segment of axon in the binary image, we performed an additional 
connectivity analysis to identify how many segments contribute to each bin. This way, on 
average ∼2800 axon segments were analysed per eye primordium. To account for the 
clockwise growth of axons on 2D substrates57, turning angles were normalized by 
subtracting the median angle of the total explant from the median angle of the individual 
halves. Plotted is the distribution of median turning angles for both image halves; for better 
visualization of turning towards softer vs. stiffer substrates in Fig. 3e, the left side of the 
coordinate system (x < 0) was rotated by 180° and data points were pooled.
In a second approach, we utilized time lapse imaging of individual axons or tight axon 
bundles grown on substrates incorporating a linear stiffness gradient. The initial direction of 
the axon was determined by the most recent ∼50 µm of axon growth, and only straight axons 
growing approximately perpendicular to the stiffness gradient were selected. Axons were 
left to grow for one hour, and the new growth direction determined by determining the angle 
between the initial growth direction and the new axon segment (Fig. 3f). To correct for the 
clockwise growth of axons in 2D cultures57, equal numbers of axons were selected from 
each side of the stiffness gradient.
Shape characterization of the OT—Outlines of the OT distal of the optic chiasm were 
drawn manually in Corel Draw X5. The elongation of the OT was calculated by the major to 
minor axis ratio using an automated algorithm in MATLAB as previously described23. 
Briefly, the axes were determined by fitting ellipses – with the same normalized second 
central moment as the OT area – around OTs.
Statistics and visualization
Data were collected from at least 3 independent experiments (N ≥ 3). Sample sizes were 
chosen using a Power & Sample Size Calculator (http://www.statisticalsolutions.net/
pss_calc.php). The order of data collection was randomized, no blinding was done, and no 
data were excluded from the analysis. Normality was tested for all data sets using the 
Shapiro-Wilk test; variances were compared using a χ2 test. In case of normal distribution, 
statistical comparison between two groups was done using two-tailed unpaired or paired t-
tests, and between more than two groups using ANOVA. If data did not follow a Gaussian 
distribution, Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA, Mann-Whitney, and one-sample Wilcoxon Signed 
Rank Tests were used to statistically compare more than two groups, two groups, and data 
within one group, respectively. Data were plotted as box plots, with boxes showing the 25th, 
50th (the median), and 75th percentiles, whiskers the spread of the data (excluding outliers), 
and an ‘O’ the mean score for a group. Asterisks in figures indicate significance levels: 
*=(P<0.05), **=(P<0.01), and ***=(P<0.001). A supplementary methods checklist is 
available.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Koser et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Acknowledgements
We would like to thank D. Bray, A. Reichenbach, B. Simons, and S. Wolff for discussions about neuronal 
mechanics, K. Chalut and W. Harris for feedback on the manuscript, A. Christ for an AFM data analysis code, P. 
Moshayedi for help with establishing PAA gels, F. Sachs (University at Buffalo, USA) for providing GsMTx4, H. 
Wong for extensive help in the lab, A. Winkel and R. Field (JPK) for technical help, and the German National 
Academic Foundation (Scholarship to D.E.K.), Wellcome Trust and Cambridge Trusts (Scholarships to A.J.T.), 
Winston Churchill Foundation of the United States (Scholarship to S.K.F.), Herchel Smith Foundation (Research 
Studentship to S.K.F.), CNPq (307333/2013-2 to L.d.F.C.), NAP-PRP-USP, and FAPESP (11/50761-2 to L.d.F.C.), 
UK BBSRC (BT grant to J.G. and BB/M021394/1 to K.F.), Wellcome Trust (WT085314) and ERC (322817) grants 
(CEH); Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (Feodor Lynen Fellowship to K.F.), the Human Frontier Science 
Program (Young Investigator Grant to K.F.), the UK Medical Research Council (Career Development Award to 
K.F.), and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute Of Child Health & Human Development of the National 
Institutes of Health under Award Number R21HD080585 (to K.F.) for funding support. The content is solely the 
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of 
Health.
Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
upon request.
References
1. Sperry RW. Chemoaffinity in the Orderly Growth of Nerve Fiber Patterns and Connections. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1963; 50:703–710. [PubMed: 14077501] 
2. Tessier-Lavigne M, Goodman CS. The molecular biology of axon guidance. Science. 1996; 
274:1123–1133. [PubMed: 8895455] 
3. Erskine L, Herrera E. The retinal ganglion cell axon's journey: insights into molecular mechanisms 
of axon guidance. Dev Biol. 2007; 308:1–14. [PubMed: 17560562] 
4. Campbell DS, et al. Semaphorin 3A elicits stage-dependent collapse, turning, and branching in 
Xenopus retinal growth cones. J Neurosci. 2001; 21:8538–8547. [PubMed: 11606642] 
5. Piper M, et al. Signaling mechanisms underlying Slit2-induced collapse of Xenopus retinal growth 
cones. Neuron. 2006; 49:215–228. [PubMed: 16423696] 
6. Atkinson-Leadbeater K, et al. Dynamic expression of axon guidance cues required for optic tract 
development is controlled by fibroblast growth factor signaling. J Neurosci. 2010; 30:685–693. 
[PubMed: 20071533] 
7. Chan CE, Odde DJ. Traction dynamics of filopodia on compliant substrates. Science. 2008; 
322:1687–1691. [PubMed: 19074349] 
8. Moore SW, Biais N, Sheetz MP. Traction on immobilized netrin-1 is sufficient to reorient axons. 
Science. 2009; 325:166. [PubMed: 19589994] 
9. Betz T, Koch D, Lu YB, Franze K, Kas JA. Growth cones as soft and weak force generators. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:13420–13425. [PubMed: 21813757] 
10. Koch D, Rosoff WJ, Jiang J, Geller HM, Urbach JS. Strength in the periphery: growth cone 
biomechanics and substrate rigidity response in peripheral and central nervous system neurons. 
Biophys J. 2012; 102:452–460. [PubMed: 22325267] 
11. Weiss P. In vitro experiments on the factors determining the course of the outgrowing nerve fiber. 
Journal of Experimental Zoology. 1934; 68:393–448.
12. Flanagan LA, Ju YE, Marg B, Osterfield M, Janmey PA. Neurite branching on deformable 
substrates. Neuroreport. 2002; 13:2411–2415. [PubMed: 12499839] 
13. Georges PC, Miller WJ, Meaney DF, Sawyer ES, Janmey PA. Matrices with compliance 
comparable to that of brain tissue select neuronal over glial growth in mixed cortical cultures. 
Biophys J. 2006; 90:3012–3018. [PubMed: 16461391] 
Koser et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 14. Kostic A, Sap J, Sheetz MP. RPTPalpha is required for rigidity-dependent inhibition of extension 
and differentiation of hippocampal neurons. J Cell Sci. 2007; 120:3895–3904. [PubMed: 
17940065] 
15. Jiang FX, Yurke B, Schloss RS, Firestein BL, Langrana NA. Effect of dynamic stiffness of the 
substrates on neurite outgrowth by using a DNA-crosslinked hydrogel. Tissue Eng Part A. 2010; 
16:1873–1889. [PubMed: 20067396] 
16. Balgude AP, Yu X, Szymanski A, Bellamkonda RV. Agarose gel stiffness determines rate of DRG 
neurite extension in 3D cultures. Biomaterials. 2001; 22:1077–1084. [PubMed: 11352088] 
17. Elkin BS, Azeloglu EU, Costa KD, Morrison B 3rd. Mechanical heterogeneity of the rat 
hippocampus measured by atomic force microscope indentation. J Neurotrauma. 2007; 24:812–
822. [PubMed: 17518536] 
18. Christ AF, et al. Mechanical difference between white and gray matter in the rat cerebellum 
measured by scanning force microscopy. J Biomech. 2010; 43:2986–2992. [PubMed: 20656292] 
19. Franze K, et al. Spatial mapping of the mechanical properties of the living retina using scanning 
force microscopy. Soft Matter. 2011; 7:3147–3154.
20. Iwashita M, Kataoka N, Toida K, Kosodo Y. Systematic profiling of spatiotemporal tissue and 
cellular stiffness in the developing brain. Development. 2014; 141:3793–3798. [PubMed: 
25249464] 
21. Elkin BS, Ilankovan A, Morrison B 3rd. Age-dependent regional mechanical properties of the rat 
hippocampus and cortex. J Biomech Eng. 2010; 132:011010. [PubMed: 20524748] 
22. Koser DE, Moeendarbary E, Hanne J, Kuerten S, Franze K. CNS cell distribution and axon 
orientation determine local spinal cord mechanical properties. Biophys J. 2015; 108:2137–2147. 
[PubMed: 25954872] 
23. Weickenmeier J, et al. Brain stiffness increases with myelin content. Acta Biomater. 2016
24. Moshayedi P, et al. Mechanosensitivity of astrocytes on optimized polyacrylamide gels analyzed 
by quantitative morphometry. J Phys Condens Matter. 2010; 22doi: 
10.1088/0953-8984/1022/1019/194114
25. Franze K, Janmey PA, Guck J. Mechanics in neuronal development and repair. Annu Rev Biomed 
Eng. 2013; 15:227–251. [PubMed: 23642242] 
26. Guan W, Puthenveedu MA, Condic ML. Sensory neuron subtypes have unique substratum 
preference and receptor expression before target innervation. J Neurosci. 2003; 23:1781–1791. 
[PubMed: 12629182] 
27. Franze K, et al. Neurite branch retraction is caused by a threshold-dependent mechanical impact. 
Biophys J. 2009; 97:1883–1890. [PubMed: 19804718] 
28. Kerstein PC, et al. Mechanosensitive TRPC1 channels promote calpain proteolysis of talin to 
regulate spinal axon outgrowth. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:273–285. [PubMed: 23283340] 
29. Zhang QY, et al. Stiff substrates enhance cultured neuronal network activity. Sci Rep. 2014; 
4:6215. [PubMed: 25163607] 
30. Shibasaki K, Murayama N, Ono K, Ishizaki Y, Tominaga M. TRPV2 enhances axon outgrowth 
through its activation by membrane stretch in developing sensory and motor neurons. J Neurosci. 
2010; 30:4601–4612. [PubMed: 20357111] 
31. Pathak MM, et al. Stretch-activated ion channel Piezo1 directs lineage choice in human neural stem 
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:16148–16153. [PubMed: 25349416] 
32. Coste B, et al. Piezo1 and Piezo2 are essential components of distinct mechanically activated 
cation channels. Science. 2010; 330:55–60. [PubMed: 20813920] 
33. Coste B, et al. Piezo proteins are pore-forming subunits of mechanically activated channels. 
Nature. 2012; 483:176–181. [PubMed: 22343900] 
34. Kim SE, Coste B, Chadha A, Cook B, Patapoutian A. The role of Drosophila Piezo in mechanical 
nociception. Nature. 2012; 483:209–212. [PubMed: 22343891] 
35. Li J, et al. Piezo1 integration of vascular architecture with physiological force. Nature. 2014; 
515:279–282. [PubMed: 25119035] 
36. Gottlieb PA, Sachs F. Piezo1: properties of a cation selective mechanical channel. Channels 
(Austin). 2012; 6:214–219. [PubMed: 22790400] 
Koser et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 37. Swift J, et al. Nuclear lamin-A scales with tissue stiffness and enhances matrix-directed 
differentiation. Science. 2013; 341:1240104. [PubMed: 23990565] 
38. Majkut S, et al. Heart-specific stiffening in early embryos parallels matrix and myosin expression 
to optimize beating. Curr Biol. 2013; 23:2434–2439. [PubMed: 24268417] 
39. Walz A, Anderson RB, Irie A, Chien CB, Holt CE. Chondroitin sulfate disrupts axon pathfinding in 
the optic tract and alters growth cone dynamics. J Neurobiol. 2002; 53:330–342. [PubMed: 
12382261] 
40. Pogoda K, et al. Compression stiffening of brain and its effect on mechanosensing by glioma cells. 
New J Phys. 2014; 16:075002.
41. Lo CM, Wang HB, Dembo M, Wang YL. Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate. 
Biophys J. 2000; 79:144–152. [PubMed: 10866943] 
42. Isenberg BC, Dimilla PA, Walker M, Kim S, Wong JY. Vascular smooth muscle cell durotaxis 
depends on substrate stiffness gradient strength. Biophys J. 2009; 97:1313–1322. [PubMed: 
19720019] 
43. Xu G, et al. Opening angles and material properties of the early embryonic chick brain. J Biomech 
Eng. 2010; 132:011005. [PubMed: 20524743] 
44. Franze K. The mechanical control of nervous system development. Development. 2013; 140:3069–
3077. [PubMed: 23861056] 
45. Singh T, Meena R, Kumar A. Effect of sodium sulfate on the gelling behavior of agarose and water 
structure inside gel networks. J Phys Chem B. 2009; 113:2519–2525. [PubMed: 19193039] 
46. Hopker VH, Shewan D, Tessier-Lavigne M, Poo M, Holt C. Growth-cone attraction to netrin-1 is 
converted to repulsion by laminin-1. Nature. 1999; 401:69–73. [PubMed: 10485706] 
47. Nieuwkoop, PD., Faber, J. Normal table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin) : a systematical and 
chronological survey of the development from the fertilized egg till the end of metamorphosis. 
North-Holland Pub. Co.; 1967. 
48. Chien CB, Rosenthal DE, Harris WA, Holt CE. Navigational errors made by growth cones without 
filopodia in the embryonic Xenopus brain. Neuron. 1993; 11:237–251. [PubMed: 8352941] 
49. Leung KM, Holt CE. Live visualization of protein synthesis in axonal growth cones by 
microinjection of photoconvertible Kaede into Xenopus embryos. Nat Protoc. 2008; 3:1318–1327. 
[PubMed: 18714300] 
50. Kalous A, Stake JI, Yisraeli JK, Holt CE. RNA-binding protein Vg1RBP regulates terminal arbor 
formation but not long-range axon navigation in the developing visual system. Dev Neurobiol. 
2014; 74:303–318. [PubMed: 23853158] 
51. Wizenmann A, et al. Extracellular Engrailed participates in the topographic guidance of retinal 
axons in vivo. Neuron. 2009; 64:355–366. [PubMed: 19914184] 
52. Hutter JL, Bechhoefer J. Calibration of Atomic-Force Microscope Tips. Review of Scientific 
Instruments. 1993; 64:1868–1873.
53. Mahaffy RE, Shih CK, MacKintosh FC, Kas J. Scanning probe-based frequency-dependent 
microrheology of polymer gels and biological cells. Phys Rev Lett. 2000; 85:880–883. [PubMed: 
10991422] 
54. Franze K. Atomic force microscopy and its contribution to understanding the development of the 
nervous system. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2011; 21:530–537. [PubMed: 21840706] 
55. Sholl DA. Dendritic organization in the neurons of the visual and motor cortices of the cat. J Anat. 
1953; 87:387–406. [PubMed: 13117757] 
56. Hertz H. Über die Berührung fester elastischer Körper. Journal für die reine und angewandte 
Mathematik. 1881; 92:156–171.
57. Tamada A, Kawase S, Murakami F, Kamiguchi H. Autonomous right-screw rotation of growth 
cone filopodia drives neurite turning. J Cell Biol. 2010; 188:429–441. [PubMed: 20123994] 
Koser et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Mechanosensitivity of RGC axons in vitro.
(a, b) Cultures of Xenopus eye primordia (asterisks) on (a) ‘soft’ (0.1 kPa) and (b) ‘stiff’ (1 
kPa) substrates. Arrows indicate axons. (c) Eye primordium grown on a stiff substrate and 
treated with GsMTx4, a blocker of mechanosensitive ion channels. Scale bar: 200 µm. (d) 
Sholl analysis of axon lengths after 24 hours (normalized counts as mean ± S.E.M.). (e) 
Median distances shown in (d). Axons were significantly longer on stiffer substrates than 
either on soft ones (One-Way-ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post-hoc test; P = 2.79 × 
10-7, t = 6.354,) or after GsMTx4 treatment (P = 5.01 × 10-8, t = -6.855). Neurons grown on 
stiff substrates and treated with GsMTx4 resembled neurons grown on soft substrates (P = 
Koser et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 1.00, t = 0.082). n = number of eye primordia from three biological replicates. (f) 
Immunocytochemistry showing f-actin (green), beta-tubulin (red) and the mechanosensitive 
ion channel Piezo1 (white). Scale bar: 10 µm. (g) The extension velocity of axons was 
higher on stiff substrates (Mann-Whitney-Test; P = 9.32 × 10-6, Z = 4.432). (h) On soft 
substrates, growth cones explored their environment more and migrated significantly faster 
than on stiff ones (two-tailed t-test; P = 0.00867, t = 2.669). (i) On stiff substrates, axon 
growth was more directed (i.e., straight) than on soft substrates (Mann-Whitney-Test; P = 
1.10 × 10-6, Z = 4.873). n = number of axons from three biological replicates. (j) Processed 
fluorescence images of beta-tubulin-labelled RGC axons; colour represents local angular 
orientation of axonal segments. On soft substrates, axons grew less directionally persistent 
(from bottom to top; cf. Supplementary Fig. 2e-g). Scale bar: 15 µm. All experiments were 
repeated three times, and representative images are shown. Boxes show the 25th, 50th (the 
median), and 75th percentiles, whiskers the spread of the data.
Koser et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. In vivo brain mechanics.
(a) Schematic of the experimental setup. (b) Xenopus brain. The dashed red line indicates 
the stiffness map area. (c, d) Images of Xenopus embryos with overlaid AFM-based stiffness 
maps of exposed in vivo brain tissue. Colour encodes the apparent elastic modulus K 
assessed at an indentation force of 7 nN. Blue shape in (d) shows the OT location (based on 
fluorescence images, Supplementary Fig. 3). Scale bar: 200 µm. At both stage 33/34 (c) and 
stages 39-40 (d), brain tissue was mechanically heterogeneous and displayed clearly visible 
stiffness gradients. Green dashed lines indicate tectum boundaries. The grey dashed square 
in (d) indicates a region as shown in (e). (e) Immunohistochemistry demonstrated a 
significantly higher density of cell nuclei (blue) rostral to the OT (yellow) than caudal to it. 
Scale bar: 20 µm. (f) The tectum was softer than the tel-/diencephalon at stage 33/34 (Mann-
Whitney-Test; P = 2.26 × 10-9, Z = 5.978) and (g) than the OT at stages 39-40 (P = 0.0033, 
Z = 2.933). (h) At stages 39-40, tissue rostral of the OT was significantly stiffer than caudal 
Koser et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 of it (P = 2.97 × 10-5, Z = 4.163). (i) Quantification of cell density on both sides of the OT; 
cell density was significantly higher rostral to the OT (paired two-tailed t-test; P = 3.96 × 
10-6, t = 9.879). n = number of measurements, N = animal numbers. All representative 
images and stiffness maps shown are from three biological replicates. Boxes show the 25th, 
50th (the median), and 75th percentiles, whiskers the spread of the data.
Koser et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Neurons grow towards soft tissue.
(a) Schematic showing how local gradients in brain tissue stiffness perpendicular to the 
RGC axon growth direction M and the local OT curvature C were determined. (b) 
Relationship between M and C. (c) Same data as in (b), pooled. Axons in vivo preferentially 
turned towards the softer side of the tissue (one-sample Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test; P = 
1.44 × 10-4,Z = 3.801). n = number of measurement points from 7 animals. (d, e) Time-lapse 
imaging of individual axon bundles growing on a stiffness gradient matching that found in 
vivo (Mmax ∼ 2 Pa/µm; cf. Supplementary Fig. 1) revealed that also in vitro, in the absence 
of chemical gradients, RGC axons preferentially turned towards the softer side of the 
substrate (one-sample Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test; P = 0.0549; Z = -1.913). Scale bar: 20 
µm. Representative images from 11 biological replicates are shown. (f) Eye primordium 
cultured on a similar stiffness gradient (indicated by colour). Axons growing more clockwise 
in the left half and more counter-clockwise in the right half of the image turned towards the 
soft side of the substrate. Scale bar: 200 µm. The experiment was repeated three times, and a 
representative image is shown. (g) Quantification of individual axon segment orientations 
similarly revealed preferential turning towards the soft side of the substrate (one-sample 
Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test; P = 0.0264, Z = 2.197). Boxes show the 25th, 50th (the 
median), and 75th percentiles, whiskers the spread of the data.
Koser et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. Changing brain stiffness leads to axonal pathfinding errors.
(a) Xenopus brain treated with 15 mg/ml CS, overlaid with an AFM-based stiffness map. 
Blue curve indicates OT location (based on fluorescence images, Supplementary Fig. 3), 
green dashed curve tectum boundary, grey dashed line the region in front of the OT. Scale 
bar: 200 µm. (b) Tissue was significantly stiffer in controls (blue) compared to CS-treated 
brains (green) (Mann-Whitney-Test; P = 6.62 × 10-10, Z = 6.175), particularly in front of the 
OT (c) (P = 8.57 × 10-11, Z = 6.490). n = number of measurements, N = animal numbers. (d) 
Image of CS-treated, softened brain. The dashed black curve indicates the outline of the OT. 
RGC axons dispersed widely from their normal trajectory. Scale bar: 100 µm. (e) Example 
of a fit of an ellipse around the outline of an OT; the ratio of long and short axis determines 
the elongation. (f) CS treatment significantly decreased the elongation of the OT (two-tailed 
t-test; P = 3.12 × 10-6, t = 5.462). n = number of animals. (g) Schematic illustration of local 
mechanical brain manipulation. Soft tissue caudal to the presumptive caudal turn of the OT 
was locally indented with an AFM cantilever for ∼6 hours. (h) In control brains, the OT 
grew normally. (i) When a force was locally exerted on the tissue (position of the probe is 
indicated), axons grew away from the cantilever probe, thus deviating from their normal 
pathway. Inset: magnification of the distal part of the OT. Scale bar: 100 µm. All 
experiments were repeated three times, and representative images are shown. Boxes show 
the 25th, 50th (the median), and 75th percentiles, whiskers the spread of the data.
Koser et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 5. In vivo manipulation of mechanosensitive ion channels disrupts axon pathfinding.
(a-d) The application of 25 µM GsMTx4 disrupted axon pathfinding in vivo. Axons were 
shorter and spread more, resembling axons cultured on soft substrates in vitro. (c-d) 
Enlarged boxes shown in (a) and (b). (e-h) Similarly, MO knockdown of Piezo1 led to 
aberrant axon growth in vivo. Scale bars: 100 µm. Experiments were repeated three (a-d) or 
four times (e-h), and representative images are shown. (i) Quantification of OT morphology. 
Interfering with mechanotransduction led to a significantly decreased elongation of the OT. 
(two-tailed t-test; PGsMTx4 = 0.00243, t = 3.231; PPiezo1-MO = 0.00476, t = 2.932). 
Koser et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Phenotypes of controls were similar (P = 0.782, t = 0.278), as well as those of GsMTx4-
treated and Piezo1 knockdown animals (P = 0.0976, t = 1.692). n = number of animals. 
Boxes show the 25th, 50th (the median), and 75th percentiles, whiskers the spread of the data.
Koser et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 6. Schematics of the mechanical control of axon growth.
(a) Schematic summary of this study. Shown is the outline of a Xenopus brain and the OT. 
Mechanical signals contribute to neuronal growth in the developing CNS. RGC axons grow 
faster, straighter, and more parallel on stiffer than on softer substrates (Fig. 1). Accordingly, 
the part of the brain these axons have to pass is stiffer than the tectum (Fig. 2), where axon 
growth slows down and eventually stops. The softness of the tectum then facilitates 
unbundling and branching. On their way, axons encounter an area with a stiffness gradient, 
which contributes to the turning of the OT towards the softer side of the brain (Fig. 3). (b) 
Schematic illustration of a mechanism by which axon bundles encountering a perpendicular 
stiffness gradient might turn towards the softer side of the substrate. The velocity of axons is 
larger on stiffer substrates (upper panel). As axons in the OT fasciculate, they are 
mechanically coupled, so the faster axons growing on the stiffer side may be ‘pulled’ 
towards the slower axons on the softer side, leading to a reorientation of the axon bundle and 
overall growth towards the softer side.
Koser et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 27.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
