 October 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 168
1
Case RepoRt
published: 10 October 2017
doi: 10.3389/fvets.2017.00168
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Jan H. Spaas, 
ANACURA Group, Belgium
Reviewed by: 
Karin Wuertz-Kozak, 
 
ETH Zurich, Switzerland 
 
Ruchi Sharma, 
Stemnovate Ltd., 
 
United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Milomir Kovac 
 
kovacmilomir@gmail.com; 
Albert A. Rizvanov 
 
albert.rizvanov@kpfu.ru
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Veterinary Regenerative Medicine, 
 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Veterinary Science
Received: 06 July 2017
Accepted: 25 September 2017
Published: 10 October 2017
Citation: 
Kovac M, Litvin YA, Aliev RO, 
Zakirova EY, Rutland CS, Kiyasov AP 
and Rizvanov AA (2017) Gene 
Therapy Using Plasmid DNA 
Encoding Vascular Endothelial 
Growth Factor 164 and Fibroblast 
Growth Factor 2 Genes for the 
Treatment of Horse Tendinitis 
 
and Desmitis: Case Reports. 
Front. Vet. Sci. 4:168. 
doi: 10.3389/fvets.2017.00168
Gene therapy Using plasmid DNa 
encoding Vascular endothelial 
Growth Factor 164 and Fibroblast 
Growth Factor 2 Genes for the 
treatment of Horse tendinitis  
and Desmitis: Case Reports
Milomir Kovac1*, Yaroslav A. Litvin2, Ruslan O. Aliev1, Elena Yu Zakirova2,  
Catrin S. Rutland3, Andrey P. Kiyasov2 and Albert A. Rizvanov2*
1 
Moscow State Academy of Veterinary Medicine and Biotechnology, Moscow, Russia, 2 
Kazan Federal  
University, Kazan, Russia, 3 
Faculty of Medicine, School of Veterinary Medicine and Science,  
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom
In this clinical study, for the first time we used the direct gene therapy to restore 
severe injuries of the suspensory ligament branch and superficial digital flexor tendon 
in horses (Equus caballus). We injected the plasmid DNA encoding two therapeutic 
species-specific growth factors: vascular endothelial growth factor 164 and fibroblast 
growth factor 2 at the site of injury in the suspensory ligament branch and tendon. 
Treatment effects were evaluated with the use of clinical observation and ultrasound 
imaging during a period of a few months. We showed that gene therapy used within 
a period of 2–3 months after the injury resulted in the complete recovery of functions 
and full restoration of the severely damaged suspensory ligament and superficial digital 
flexor tendon.
Keywords: gene therapy, tendon, suspensory ligament, horse, vascular endothelial growth factor, fibroblast 
growth factor
INtRoDUCtIoN
Tendon or ligament injuries are one of the most common causes of orthopedic disorders in 
horses (Equus caballus) of any age and breed. Injuries of the digital flexor tendons (superficial 
and deep digital flexors) and the suspensory ligament are of utmost clinical importance in the 
horse resulting in more than 98% of all cases observed in practice (1). In terms of pathogenesis, 
a course of equine tendinitis (desmitis) can follow three phases: the inflammatory response, the 
fibroblastic phase and the remodeling phase, which lasts for several months and can extend up 
to 15 months in severe injuries (2). The main problem observed in ligament healing at the site 
of tendon fibril damage is the formation of granulation fibrous connective tissue (a scar) with a 
lot of type III collagen content—up to 30%, whereas in normal healthy tendon it is less than 5% 
(3). Type III collagen differs from main tendon type I collagen due to smaller sized fibers and 
reduced strength and elasticity.
A selection of treatment modalities are available for equine injured ligaments and tendons 
and their use depends upon injury type, location and extent as well as the time elapsed since the 
 2
Kovac et al.
Gene Therapy Tendinitis and Desmitis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 168
injury, type of workload that the horse undertakes, and patient 
age. There are conservative and surgical methods of treatment 
for ligament and tendon injuries in horses. Conservative treat-
ment modalities include physiotherapy, medical therapy and 
regenerative medicine methods. When using medical therapy a 
disease relapses in more than 60% of cases upon intensive physi-
cal exercise as tendon scarring is less elastic than normal tissue 
(4). Therefore, recently methods of regenerative medicine have 
been often used to treat tendon damage. Regenerative medicine 
methods of treatment for tendon and ligament injuries in horses 
imply the use of autologous bone marrow and adipose tissue 
derived mesenchymal stem cells, as well as platelet-rich plasma 
(5, 6). These methods of treatment are successful in approxi-
mately 80–90% of cases (a return to the preinjury level of sport 
workload), with the relapse frequency being less than 20%, but 
the restoration requires more than 5–6 months (4). This is due 
to low blood supply of tendon and ligament tissues, decreased 
cell turnover, and metabolism in comparison with other tissues 
 
(for example, muscles and the skin). Therefore, healing of tendon 
and ligament injuries is delayed.
The use of recombinant proteins and gene therapy are the 
most advanced and promising approaches in the treatment 
of musculoskeletal disorders in human medicine (7). To date, 
direct gene therapy of equine tendon injuries has never been 
employed. In our research, we used plasmid DNA (pDNA) 
containing species-specific vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) 164 and fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) genes because 
VEGF164 is a member of a large VEGF proteins family, which 
promotes proliferation and migration of endothelial cells. FGF2 
is a dominant protein of FGF family. This factor shows a broad 
spectrum of mitogenic and angiogenic activity and is a neuro-
trophic factor (8). This study aimed to evaluate the therapeutic 
efficacy of a gene therapy pDNA containing species-specific 
VEGF164 and FGF2 coding sequences in the treatment of severe 
injury to the suspensory ligament and superficial digital flexor 
tendon in two horses.
MateRIaLs aND MetHoDs
plasmid DNa
We have designed a pDNA-based genetic construct (named 
pBUDK-ecVEGF164-ecFGF2) to restore damaged connective 
tissue of the tendon and ligament. Recombinant plasmid contains 
coding sequences of E. caballus protein growth factors VEGF164 
(also known as VEGFA164) and FGF2 (also known as bFGF). 
The generation of pDNA pBUDK-ecVEGF164-ecFGF2 has 
been previously described (8). Based on the results of agarose 
 
gel electrophoresis the resulting sterile drug preparation con-
tained ≥95% of pDNA in a supercoiled form. Endotoxin contents 
were ≤0.03 EU/mg. A pDNA in lyophilized form (aliquoted in 
5 mg doses) was stored at −20°C.
ethics
Plasmid vectors were created in accordance with the human 
standards set by the United States Food and Drug Administration 
(9, 10), and the Committee for the Medicinal Products for Human 
Use in the European Medicines Agency (11, 12) in order that they 
could be safely injected. The Institutional Review Board of the 
Kazan Federal University approved this study (protocol no. 3; 
 
date May 05, 2015). The horses presented at the clinic with 
naturally occurring injuries and informed consent given by the 
owners. This technique has been previously used in dogs (13) 
and humans (14). Injections and care were given in accordance 
with standard veterinary practice recommendations by qualified 
clinicians with additional health and welfare checks and clinical 
observations.
preparation and administration  
of the pDNa
Plasmid DNA was dissolved in a tube in 5 ml of a sterile 0.9% 
NaCl solution to the final concentration of 1 mg/ml. The dissolved 
pDNA was stored at +4°C in a fridge overnight, with occasional 
gentle stirring and overturning. Prior to the administration into 
damaged tissue, the pDNA was warmed to +37°C. 3.5 ml of the 
pDNA solution of a total volume was filled in a syringe and under 
aseptic conditions and ultrasonic guidance the solution was 
injected into sites of injury. The filled volume was multi-injected 
into the site of tissue damage and adjacent normal tissues. Only a 
single administration of the pDNA was used to treat the tendon 
and ligament injury. After the pDNA administration the extrem-
ity was tightly dressed up, and the horses received stall rest for 
2 days, then walking for 3 weeks as routinely prescribed for these 
conditions.
Ultrasonic imaging was used to evaluate the regeneration rate.
ResULts
First Case Report
The first case was a successful dressage 13-year-old purebred 
horse, male, presenting with lameness of unknown etiology for 
more than 10 days. Upon physical examination, it was observed 
that the horse was lame on the right forelimb. The lameness 
degree was graded as 3/5 (according to the AAEP 5-score 
lameness scale (2)). A marked an- and hypoechoic zone (with 
an area of 0.6 cm2) in the lateral part of the lateral crus of the 
suspensory ligament was visualized within area 3B-3C on an 
ultrasound examination of the injured limb (Figure 1: Panels A 
and B). The width of the lateral crus of the suspensory ligament 
within zone 3°C of the injured limb was 1.1 cm, and its length 
1.0 cm. In addition to the anechoic and hypoechoic structure 
an increased cross-section volume (2.3 cm3) was detected on an 
ultrasound image of the injured ligament. A thickening of the 
peritendineum and accumulation of the synovial fluid within the 
fetlock tendon sheath were also detected. Color Doppler energy 
imaging revealed intensified vascularization of the injured liga-
ment. Based on the area of injury the final diagnosis was made as 
“Grade 2 desmitis of the lateral crus of the suspensory ligament.”
On Day 21 after the pDNA administration, a physical exami-
nation confirmed no observable lameness when walking on firm 
and soft ground both in step and at trot. A flexion test of the 
fetlock joint was negative confirming that the horse exhibited 
no pain reaction. An ultrasound examination of the lateral crus 
 FIGURe 1 | First case—transverse (Panel A) and longitudinal (Panel B) projections of the lateral crus of the suspensory ligament in zone 3C on an ultrasound  
image (an arrow indicates the anechoic and hypoechoic zone of the injury). Panels 1A and 1B: on Day 21 after the plasmid DNA (pDNA) was administered.  
Panels 2A and 2B: on Day 40 after the pDNA was administered. Panels 3A and 3B: on Day 73 after the pDNA administration.
3
Kovac et al.
Gene Therapy Tendinitis and Desmitis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 168
performed on Day 21 after drug administration visualized an 
increased echogenicity in the area of injury (Figure 1: Panels 1A 
 
and 1B), indicating there were signs of moderately decreased 
echogenicity in the ligament part and inhomogeneity of its struc-
ture due to the formation of lysed hematoma of newly formed 
connective tissue —a collagen scar. Partially reduced swelling of 
the peritendineum could also be observed. As both clinical and 
ultrasound characteristics of the injured ligament had evidently 
improved, a gradual introduction of trotting was prescribed in 
addition to walking.
On Day 40 after administration of the pDNA, a physical 
examination showed continued signs of no lameness when 
walking on firm and soft ground both in step and at trot. There 
was a clear ultrasound improvement (increased echogenicity) of 
the damaged area state. A misalignment of “new” collagen fibers 
was visualized infrequently in this region. Tissues adjacent to 
the ligament (adipose layer) demonstrated normal echogenicity. 
 
A Doppler ultrasound visualized single foci of vasculariza-
tion. These changes correlate with the beginning of reparative 
regeneration of tendon tissue, i.e., fibroplasia. As no lameness 
was observed, further load increasing (gallop, competitions) was 
prescribed. On Day 65 after pDNA injection, the horse was suc-
cessful in an international dressage tournament, and displayed 
no signs of lameness.
On Day 73 after pDNA administration, physical examination 
showed that no lameness was observed when walking on firm 
 
and soft ground both in step and at trot. A further increase of 
echogenicity in the region of injury could be seen on an ultrasound 
image; however, a “scar—collagenous” change of the injured 
ligament was hardly visualized (Figure 1: Panels 3A and 3B). 
 
The gap between edges of the partially torn ligament was entirely 
filled with newly formed tissue. Two hyperechoic regions were 
visualized within the injured part of the ligament. A Doppler 
ultrasound study revealed no enhanced vascularization. The 
ultrasonic image conformed to almost complete recovery of the 
suspensory ligament.
second Case Report
The second case was a dressage 9-year-old half-bred Trakehner 
horse, male, having lameness for more than 25 days. On a physi-
cal examination, the animal lameness on the left forelimb could 
be seen. The lameness degree was graded as 2/5. A marked an- 
and hypoechoic zone (with an area of 0.9 cm2) of the lateral part 
of the superficial digital flexor tendon was visualized in zone 2B 
on an ultrasound examination (Figure 2: Panels A and B). The 
width of the superficial digital flexor tendon in this region was 
0.5 cm, the length 3.8 cm, and the cross-section area 1.9 cm2. 
In addition, there was a thickening of the peritendineum. Based 
on the area of injury the final diagnosis in zone 2B was made as 
“Grade 3 tendinitis of the superficial digital flexor.”
On Day 21 following pDNA administration, physical exami-
nation showed no observable lameness when walking on firm 
and soft ground both in step and at trot. Increased echogenicity 
of the injured tendon as well as a reduction of the damage area 
 FIGURe 2 | Second case—transverse (Panel A) and longitudinal (Panel B) projections of the superficial digital flexor tendon in zone 2B on an ultrasound image  
(an arrow indicates an anechoic and hypoechoic zone of the injury). Panels 1A and 1B: on Day 21 after the plasmid DNA (pDNA) administration. Panels 2A and 2B:  
on Day 40 after the pDNA administration. Panels 3A and 3B: on Day 60 after the pDNA administration.
4
Kovac et al.
Gene Therapy Tendinitis and Desmitis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 168
(0.6 cm2) was visualized in zone 2B on an ultrasound image 
(Figure 2: Panels 1A and 1B). Partially reduced swelling of the 
peritendineum could also be observed. The clinical prescription 
of continued walking exercise (without trot and gallop) was given.
On Day 40 after the pDNA administration, upon physical 
examination no lameness was observed when walking on firm 
and soft ground both in step and at trot. The site of a tendon 
injury was hardly seen on an ultrasound image, therefore the 
damaged tissue had obviously improved (echogenicity increased) 
(Figure 2: Panels 2A and 2B). A misalignment of “new” collagen 
fibers was visualized in a few areas of this region. No swelling of the 
peritendineum was visualized at this stage in contrast to Day 21. 
 
As both clinical and ultrasound characteristics of the injured 
tendon had evidently improved, a gradual introduction of trot-
ting was prescribed in addition to walking.
On Day 60 after the pDNA administration, physical examina-
tion indicated absence of lameness when walking on firm and soft 
ground both in step and at trot. The site of a tendon injury was 
hardly seen on an ultrasound image (Figure 2: Panels 3A and 3B). 
No misalignment of “new” collagen fibers were visualized any 
longer in contrast to Day 40. As no lameness was observed, further 
load increasing (gallop, competitions) was prescribed.
At present (more than 12 months after treatment) having 
received gene therapy both horses have full physical load and 
participate in dressage championships. Neither horse showed any 
adverse clinical effects to the injection.
DIsCUssIoN
Injury to the digital flexor tendon including that of the suspen-
sory ligament is a very common orthopedic trauma in sporting 
horses which in a significant number of cases results in not only 
temporary lameness but in a relapse of the disease with an early 
termination of a competitive career of such animals.
Gene therapy, as one of the most advanced technologies in 
medicine, besides promising therapy of hereditary diseases, 
offers novel opportunities for the clinical treatment of numer-
ous orthopedic disorders including injuries of the tendon 
and ligament (7, 15, 16). In this study, horse tendinitis and 
desmitis treatment using injected pDNA encoding species-
specific VEGF164 and FGF2 cDNAs resulted in a return of 
animals to their preinjury level of sports load, compared with 
traditional medical and regenerative therapies (4). We used 
VEGF164 and FGF2 genes because proteins encoding these 
genes influence on the process of regeneration of the vessels 
and connective tissue at organism equine. VEGF164 in vivo 
attracts endothelial progenitor cells from the bone marrow 
and stimulates angiogenesis. Further, it enhances the activity 
of pericytes and stabilizes newly formed vessels, increases 
vascular permeability at the site of injury, which promotes the 
formation of granulation tissues. FGF2 stimulates prolifera-
tion of cells, regeneration of nervous, muscular, and connec-
tive tissue.
 5
Kovac et al.
Gene Therapy Tendinitis and Desmitis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 168
It should be emphasized that the lameness disappearance after 
treatment of tendinitis in a horse does not mean absolute tissue 
regeneration. Intensive training of a horse can be integrated into 
the training once ultrasound examinations confirm a “complete” 
healing of the injured tendon or ligament. In our cases, a rapid 
complete regeneration of both the tendon and the ligament 
occurred within 2–3 months of treatment and was observed 
after treatment with pBUDK-ecVEGF164-ecFGF2 pDNA by 
measuring echogenicity and an area of injury, the percentage of 
parallel collagen fibers.
The exact mechanisms of action behind the rapid effects 
of direct gene therapy with pBUDK-ecVEGF164-ecFGF2 on 
healing the injured equine ligament and tendon are yet to be 
determined as the horses made a full recovery and no further 
histological interventions would have been appropriate. Based 
on some previous studies, growth factors VEGF and FGF2 are 
polypeptides which are primarily released by platelets, fibroblasts, 
and endothelial cells at the site of injury (17). Their mechanisms 
of action are complex and closely related to other factors of 
inflammation and regeneration. They are considered to stimulate 
migration of tendoblasts, fibroblasts, and mesenchymal stem cells 
which are responsible for production of collagen and other con-
stituents of extracellular components of ligaments and tendons 
such as proteoglycans, glycosaminoglycans, and glycoproteins, 
via enhanced angiogenesis (the process of new blood vessel 
formation) at a site of injury (7).
The use of direct gene therapy with these growth factors is 
highly promising for the treatment of orthopedic disorders not 
only in horses but in other animal species and humans. The 
application of direct gene therapy with a similar plasmid con-
struct based on dog-specific VEGF164 and bone morphogenetic 
protein 2 genes for the treatment of an injury of the anterior 
cruciate ligament in a large breed dog has been reported previ-
ously (13). Moreover, in human clinical practice gene therapy 
pDNA encoding VEGF and FGF2 genes were used for the treat-
ment of patients with critical lower limb ischemia (14). Finally, 
pDNA pl-VEGF165, encoding human VEGF165, demonstrated 
safety and efficacy in patients with chronic lower limb ischemia 
and was approved in Russia for the treatment of atherosclerotic 
peripheral arterial disease (18, 19). The high efficacy and safety 
of the direct pDNA gene therapy has been demonstrated in all 
of these cases.
The most recent studies both in vitro and in vivo have 
demonstrated that direct FGF2 (bFGF) and VEGF-based gene 
therapy with an adenoassociated viral vector 2 in chicken flexor 
tendons resulted in significantly improved tendon strength and 
elasticity by increasing production of type I collagen and other 
extracellular tendon molecules evidently as well as by accelerat-
ing cell proliferation (16).
Reported method of using direct gene therapy for the treat-
ment of tendon and ligament injuries in horses is novel, how-
ever, it requires further research to proof safety and efficiency. 
 
A complete effect of direct VEGF and FGF2 gene therapy on 
the healing of injured tendons and ligaments in horses cannot 
be evaluated without involving a large number of experimental 
animals and methods of a double-blind study. To obtain a more 
comprehensive picture a histological examination and immu-
nohistochemistry of biopsy materials obtained from an injured 
tendon are required. These methods include a thorough analysis 
of the tissue-specific expression of a relevant gene, identification, 
density, and concentration of type I collagen, an assay of the 
structure, function, and intracellular distribution of its protein 
product as well as biochemistry of the pathological process. 
There are still a great number of challenges are to be solved before 
gene therapy will be widely used in clinical practice of veterinary 
medicine, but this study makes advances in the use of these 
therapies. Since these preliminary case reports demonstrated 
improvement in clinical outcome and no adverse side effects, 
larger clinical trial is ongoing to further study efficiency of direct 
gene therapy for the treatment of horse tendinitis and desmitis.
aUtHoR CoNtRIBUtIoNs
MK: medical diagnosis, clinical observation of horses, pDNA 
administration, design of the study (clinical part), and writing 
the manuscript. YL: purification clinical grade pDNA for gene 
therapy, assistance in pDNA administration, design of the study, 
collection of data and interpretation of results, and writing the 
manuscript. RA: collection and interpretation of clinical data. 
EZ: testing of pDNA efficiency and editing the manuscript. 
CR and AK: intellectual contribution into the discussion and 
writing the manuscript. AR: design of the study, interpretation 
of results and intellectual contribution into the discussion and 
writing the manuscript.
FUNDING
This study was supported by Program of Competitive Growth 
of Kazan Federal University and subsidy allocated to Kazan 
Federal University for the state assignment in the sphere of 
scientific activities 20.5175.2017/6.7. Some of the experiments 
were conducted using the equipment of Interdisciplinary center 
for collective use and Pharmaceutical Research and Education 
Center, Kazan (Volga Region) Federal University, Kazan, Russia.
ReFeReNCes
1. Kovac M, Nowak M, Küpers S, Tambur Z. Frequency of orthopedic diseases 
in horses: a retrospective study. Vet Glas (2002) 56:307–19. doi:10.2298/
VETGL0206307K 
2. Riley G. The pathogenesis of tendinopathy. A molecular perspective. 
Rheumatology (2004) 43:131–42. doi:10.1093/rheumatology/keg448 
3. Clegg PD, Strassburg S, Smith RK. Cell phenotypic variation in normal 
and damaged tendons. Int J Exp Pathol (2007) 88:227–35. doi:10.1111/j. 
1365-2613.2007.00549.x 
4. Kearney RS, Parsons N, Metcalfe D, Costa ML. Injection therapies for achilles 
tendinopathy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2015) 5:1–78. doi:10.1002/ 
14651858.CD010960.pub2 
5. Uysal CA, Tobita M, Hyakusoku H, Mizuno H. Adipose-derived stem cells 
enhance primary tendon repair: biomechanical and immunohistochemical 
evaluation. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg (2012) 65:1712–9. doi:10.1016/j.
bjps.2012.06.011 
6. Middleton KK, Barro V, Muller B, Terada S, Fu FH. Evaluation of the 
 
effects of platelet-rich plasma (PRP) therapy involved in the healing of 
sports-related soft tissue injuries. Iowa Orthop J (2012) 32:150–63. 
 6
Kovac et al.
Gene Therapy Tendinitis and Desmitis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
October 2017 | Volume 4 | Article 168
7. Martinek V, Huard J, Fu FH. Gene therapy in tendon ailments. Tendon 
 
Inj Basic Sci Clin Med (2005). p. 307–12. doi:10.1007/1-84628-050-8_30 
8. Litvin YA, Zakirova EY, Zhuravleva MN, Rizvanov AA. Generation of 
plasmid DNA expressing species-specific horse VEGF164 and FGF2 factors 
for gene therapy. Bionanoscience (2016) 6:550–3. doi:10.1007/s12668-016- 
0273-2 
9. FDA. Considerations for Plasmid DNA Vaccines for Infectious Disease 
Indications. USA: Food and Drug Administration (2007). p. 1–18.
10. FDA. Content and Review of Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Control (CMC) 
Information for Human Somatic Cell Therapy Investigational New Drug 
Applications (INDs). USA: Food and Drug Administration (2008). p. 1–89.
11. EMA. Reflection Paper on Design Modifications of Gene Therapy Medicinal 
Products during Development. London: European Medicines Agency (2001). 
p. 1–9.
12. EMA. Guideline on the Non-Clinical Studies Required before First Clinical 
 
Use of Gene Therapy Medicinal Products. London: European Medicines 
 
Agency (2008). EMEA/CHMP/GTWP/125459/2006.
13. Zakirova EY, Vasin NN, Zhuravleva MN, Rizvanov AA. Case report of 
application gene construction with VEGF and BMP2 in restoration of tear 
in the anterior cruciate ligament of a large breed dog. Genes Cells (2014) 
 
9:93–5. 
14. Plotnikov MV, Rizvanov AA, Masgutov RF, Mavlikeev MO, Salafutdinov II, 
Gazizov IM, et al. The first clinical experience of direct gene therapy using 
VEGF and bFGF in treatment patients with critical lower limb ischemia. 
 
Cell Transplant Tissue Eng (2012) 7:180–4. 
15. Evans CH, Ghivizzani SC, Robbins PD. Orthopedic gene therapy in 2008. 
 
Mol Ther (2009) 17:231–44. doi:10.1038/mt.2008.265 
16. Tang JB, Wu YF, Cao Y, Chen CH, Zhou YL, Avanessian B, et al. Basic 
 
FGF or VEGF gene therapy corrects insufficiency in the intrinsic healing 
capacity of tendons. Sci Rep (2016) 6:20643. doi:10.1038/srep20643 
17. Byrne AM, Bouchier-Hayes DJ, Harmey JH. Angiogenic and cell 
 
survival functions of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). J Cell Mol 
Med (2005) 9:777–94. doi:10.1111/j.1582-4934.2005.tb00379.x 
18. Deev R, Plaksa I, Bozo I, Isaev A. Results of an international postmarketing 
surveillance study of pl-VEGF165 safety and efficacy in 210 patients with 
peripheral arterial disease. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs (2017) 17(3):235–42. 
doi:10.1007/s40256-016-0210-3 
19. Deev RV, Bozo IY, Mzhavanadze ND, Voronov DA, Gavrilenko AV, 
 
Chervyakov YV, et al. pCMV-vegf165 intramuscular gene transfer is 
an effective method of treatment for patients with chronic lower limb 
ischemia. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther (2015) 20:473–82. doi:10.1177/ 
1074248415574336 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Kovac, Litvin, Aliev, Zakirova, Rutland, Kiyasov and Rizvanov. 
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums 
is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the 
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic 
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply 
with these terms.
