 Commentary
Withholding differential risk information on legal consumer
nicotine/tobacco products: The public health ethics of health
information quarantines
Lynn.T. Kozlowski a,*, David Sweanor b
a University at Buffalo, State University of New York, School of Public Health and Health Professions, Professor, Department of Community Health and Health
Behavior, Buffalo, NY, USA
b Adjunct Professor of Law and Member of the Centre for Health Law, Policy and Ethics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
This commentary focuses on the example of smokeless tobacco
and cigarettes in the United States. It arises out of revisiting
a report on information on major health websites in 2003
(Kozlowski & O’Connor, 2003) which found considerable misin-
formation or disinformation on relative risks on these sites.
Improvements have been identified, but concerns continue about
the lack of information on significant differential health risks
between cigarettes and smokeless tobacco. The ethical arguments
presented can be applied to any country where tobacco/nicotine
products (including vape or electronic cigarettes) with differential
health risks are sold and agencies and organizations can provide
health information related to these products.
Differential harm from smokeless tobacco products and
cigarettes
The American public is unaware of dramatic differential harms
from different legal tobacco/nicotine products (Kiviniemi &
Kozlowski, 
2015). 
Conflicting 
headlines 
and 
media 
reports
contribute to the compromise of public awareness (Berman,
2008; Eversman, 2015; Liu et al., 2015). The National Cancer
Institutes (NCI) national survey on health information evaluated
public beliefs about how smokeless tobacco (SLT) risks compared
to cigarette risks and asked: ‘‘In your opinion, do you think that
some smokeless tobacco products, such as chewing tobacco, snus
International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Received 2 February 2016
Received in revised form 23 March 2016
Accepted 25 March 2016
Keywords:
Smokeless tobacco
Cigarettes
Vape
Health information
Public health ethics
A B S T R A C T
The United States provides an example of a country with (a) legal tobacco/nicotine products (e.g., snus,
other smokeless tobacco, cigarettes) differing greatly in risks to health and (b) respected health
information websites that continue to omit or provide incorrect differential risk information. Concern for
the principles of individual rights, health literacy, and personal autonomy (making decisions for oneself),
which are key principles of public health ethics, has been countered by utilitarian arguments for the use
of misleading or limited information to protect public health overall. We argue that omitting key health
relevant information for current or prospective consumers represents a kind of quarantine of health-
relevant information. As with disease quarantines, the coercive effects of quarantining information on
differential risks need to be justified, not merely by fears of net negative public health effects, but by
convincing evidence that such measures are actually warranted, that public health overall is in imminent
danger and that the danger is sufficient to override principles of individual autonomy. Omitting such
health-relevant information for consumers of such products effectively blindfolds them and impairs
their making informed personal choices. Moral psychological issues that treat all tobacco/nicotine
products similarly may also be influencing the reluctance to inform on differential risks. In countries
where tobacco/nicotine products are legally sold and also differ greatly in disease risks compared to
cigarettes (e.g., smokeless tobacco and vape), science-based, comprehensible, and actionable health
information (consistent with health literacy principles) on differential risks should be available and only
reconsidered if it is established that this information is causing losses to population health overall.
� 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
* Corresponding author at: Department of Community Health and Health
Behavior, School of Public Health and Health Professions, University at Buffalo,
323 Kimball Tower, 3435 Main Street, Buffalo, NY 14214-8028, USA.
Tel.: +1 716 829 6770; fax: +1 716 829 6040.
E-mail address: lk22@buffalo.edu (Lynn.T. Kozlowski).
G Model
DRUPOL-1762; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Kozlowski, L. T., & Sweanor, D. Withholding differential risk information on legal consumer nicotine/
tobacco products: The public health ethics of health information quarantines. International Journal of Drug Policy (2016), http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2016.03.014
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Drug Policy
jo ur n al ho mep ag e: www .elsevier .c om /lo cate/d r ug p o
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2016.03.014
0955-3959/� 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/
4.0/).
 and snuff are less harmful to a person’s health than cigarettes?’’
Only 9.4% of the public answered ‘‘yes’’ (Kiviniemi & Kozlowski,
2015). This small proportion of people aware of any difference in
risk is of course not evidence that they comprehend the magnitude
of the risk differential, which would be necessary to exercise
personal autonomy.
The Surgeon-General has concluded that combustible tobacco
products are by far of greatest concern for public health (United
States Public Health Service. Office of the Surgeon General, 2014).
Though not safe, there is no scientific doubt that manufactured
smokeless tobacco (SLT) products in the U.S. (and notably, low-
nitrosamine Swedish snus) are dramatically less dangerous than
cigarettes to life-long users of each product (Benowitz, 2011; Levy
et al., 2004; Piano et al., 2010; Scientific Committee on Emerging
and Newly Identified Health Risks, 2008; Stratton, 2001). In the
U.S., the essentially complete avoidance of lung cancer risks and
other respiratory disease risks (Scientific Committee on Emerging
and Newly Identified Health Risks, 2008) alone would reduce
mortality by 54.8% (Center for Disease Control and Prevention,
2015) The American Heart Association review panel concluded:
‘‘Data from international, European, and US studies overwhelm-
ingly demonstrate that compared with ST users, active smokers are
at much greater risk for CV [Cardio-vascular] morbidity and
mortality and have shorter life spans.’’ A European review judged
that the cardio-vascular disease risk reduction is at least 50%
compared to smoking (Scientific Committee on Emerging and
Newly Identified Health Risks, 2008). Overall estimates of risk
reduction from snus versus cigarettes have been 90% or more (Lee,
2013; Levy et al., 2004).
Past and current health website deficiencies
In 2003 (Kozlowski & O’Connor, 2003) the information on the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA) web-sites was assessed on the popular question of
whether SLT was safer than cigarettes. These sites had erroneously
informed that SLT was as dangerous as cigarettes. For organiza-
tions committed to health information quality (Office of Manage-
ment and Budget, 2002), this was considered an ethical lapse and
examples of health misinformation or disinformation.
In November 2015, inspection of major health information
web-sites of CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2015). SAMHSA (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration, 2015), American Cancer Society [ACS] (American
Cancer Society, 2015), NCI (National Cancer Institute, 2015) and
the Mayo Clinic (Mayo Clinic, 2015)) found three types of examples
of information on SLT, but no to modest efforts to inform
consumers of the significantly lower risks compared to cigarettes
for lifelong users (see Table 1.) The Mayo Clinic perpetuates the
error found in 2003 with the headline: ‘‘Chewing tobacco:
Not safer than smoking.’’ (‘‘Chewing tobacco’’ refers to all SLT.)
CDC, SAMHSA, and NCI provide no cigarette-comparative risk
information that might help correct public misunderstandings.
ACS provides some comparative information: ‘‘Smokeless tobacco
products are less lethal than cigarettes: On average, they kill fewer
people than cigarettes.’’ Consumers might also value learning, and
individual rights and personal autonomy require they be informed
of, the considerable magnitude of difference in harms.
Information on comparative risks is commonplace—except for
tobacco/nicotine
If science learned that one type of alcoholic beverage caused
3 in 5 regular users to die prematurely, losing 10 years of life
(Jha et al., 2013), while another alcoholic beverage caused 95%
or even 9.5% fewer premature deaths, consumers would want to
know which legal product was which. (With alcohol the especially
dangerous item would be banned, but assume that, as with current
Food 
and 
Drug 
Administration 
(FDA) 
tobacco 
law, 
this 
is
impossible.) It would be scandalous, even criminal, to keep such
facts from consumers. Yet, such facts are being kept from adult
consumers 
of 
legal 
tobacco/nicotine 
products 
(Kiviniemi 
&
Kozlowski, 2015) either by not informing or actively misinforming
consumers (Kozlowski & O’Connor, 2003). It is as if tobacco
consumers were blindfolded and not allowed to see dramatic
differences in harm from different products.
In the U.S. there is a National Action Plan to improve health
literacy (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2010) and
all Federal agencies are required to ensure the ‘‘quality, objectivity,
utility, and integrity of information disseminated’’ (Office of
Management and Budget, 2002). ‘‘Health literacy is the degree to
which individuals have the capacity to obtain, process, and
understand basic health information and services needed to make
appropriate health decisions’’ (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, 2010) The importance of informing consumers
about meaningful differential risks of various products (e.g., crash
worthiness of cars) and the direct risks of unsafe products (e.g.,
over-the-counter and prescription drugs) is widely accepted in
consumer protection laws and in product liability litigation, and it
is viewed as negligent to fail to do so (Cornell University Law
School, 2015). However, informing consumers of differential
harms from various tobacco/nicotine products has been contro-
versial, out of fear that this personal health information may have
net negative effects on population health as a whole (Eversman,
2015; Gray & Henningfield, 2006; Hatsukami, Lemmonds, &
Tomar, 2004; Maziak, 2014; McKenna, Pechacek, & Stroup, 2003;
Tomar, Fox, & Severson, 2009; Watson & Forshaw, 2015).
The FDA is doing little to strip off the blindfold, even though the
Director of its Center for Tobacco Products has acknowledged a
significant continuum of risk (Zeller, 2012) and the differences in
risks are dramatic (Nutt et al., 2014). FDA has a mandate to do
public education on tobacco; however, FDA law fundamentally
protects cigarettes and smokeless tobacco for adults and forbids
banning. Marketing is allowed, and the law discourages requiring
any product changes that could encourage contraband markets.
Table 1
Summary of comparative information on the harms from cigarettes (Cig) versus smokeless tobacco (SLT) from current notable institutions.
Message type 
Site 
Lung cancer 
Respiratory
disease
CVD 
Health literacy quality
1 
SLT = Cig Harm 
Mayo (Mayo Clinic, 2015)*
No info 
No info 
No info 
Falsehood
2 
SLT Harm Only 
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2015) NCI (National Cancer Institute, 2015),
SAMHSA (Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration, 2015)
No info 
No info 
No info 
Correct on SLT harms;
no comparison with smoking
3 
SLT Harm less lethal 
ACS (American Cancer Society, 2015) 
No info 
No info 
No info 
Correct on SLT, Limited
comparisons with smoking
* The Mayo Clinic website changed on April 2, 2016, substituting a "not a safe product" heading for the previous "not safer than cigarettes" heading.
L.T. Kozlowski, D. Sweanor / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
2
G Model
DRUPOL-1762; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Kozlowski, L. T., & Sweanor, D. Withholding differential risk information on legal consumer nicotine/
tobacco products: The public health ethics of health information quarantines. International Journal of Drug Policy (2016), http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2016.03.014
 (Altria which controls over half of the national cigarette market
actively supported this law (Wilson, 2009).) FDA law even has a
unique provision for tobacco (United States Code, 2009) which
forbids marketing by manufacturers of any reduced-harm product
information unless it has been proven before marketing that such
marketing will not have an adverse effect on population health, a
near-impossible task, a barrier that no product has yet sur-
mounted, and one not imposed on other FDA-regulated product
categories. FDA, despite its mandate to engage in public education,
has to date transferred the responsibility for providing accurate life-
critical consumer product information to the commercial marketing
of tobacco companies. But such a high regulatory standard, likely
combined with cigarette-focused companies benefiting from not
surmounting it, contributes to smokers being ill-informed about
product risks. When the most deadly ‘‘disease’’ (smoking) is
protected by FDA, it is as if needle-exchange programs had to prove
no negative public health effects before being implemented—while
heroin given via dirty syringes was sold over-the-counter.
It is interesting to speculate how the FDA and health authorities
might treat a new pill that dramatically reduced the risk of lung
cancer. We think the focus would be on allowing the company to
market this pill, with relatively little concern about the possible
negative effects if smokers were to reduce their desire to stop
smoking because of the availability of the pill and perhaps
experience continued risks of other respiratory or cardiovascular
disease. There would likely not be as much attention to possible
net effects on population health.
Large vs. negligible harm reduction
Public 
health 
concerns 
arising 
from 
reduced-risk 
claims
(Stratton, 2001) probably arose to try to prevent repeating the
public health tragedy of ‘‘low tar’’ cigarettes which encouraged
smokers to continue smoking and yet had negligible, if any, effects
on reducing smoking-caused diseases (National Cancer Institute,
2001). Again: Lower-tar cigarettes did not significantly reduce the
harms of smoking! Public health losses were caused by consumers
being misled in a way that resulted in more dangerous behaviors –
more people smoking than would have otherwise been the case.
Ironically, the same manner of deleterious effect could flow from
allowing consumers to overestimate the risks of truly less
hazardous products, causing them to avoid switching to a product
that they do not appreciate is much less hazardous. The error of
presenting products with no meaningful risk reduction as if they
were safer cannot be redressed by committing the equally life-
threatening error of presenting products with large risk reductions
as if they are not safer or by concealing this information.
Unjustified health information ‘quarantine’
Public health ethics permits suppression of individual rights to
protect public health, as with required vaccinations and quar-
antines (Cetron & Landwirth, 2005; Kass, 2001, 2004). But these
exceptions to the rule on individual autonomy demand strong
justification, not just suspicions, even plausible ones, that it could
be warranted. Ethical analysis of public health decision-making on
quarantines emphasizes the principles of proportionality and
effectiveness. It is worth quoting Kass (2001) because it illustrates
both the issues and the complexity of the current predicament:
Programs that are coercive should be kept to a minimum,
should never be implemented when a less restrictive program
would achieve comparable goals, and should be implemented
only in the face of clear public health need and good data
demonstrating effectiveness. Nonetheless, we are a pluralistic
society, including with regard to our notions of ethics. Different
states and communities will decide differently which public
health activities are appropriate and which are overly burden-
some. [emphasis added]
Part one of Kass’s point is that coercive actions need prior
justification from a clear public health need and good data
demonstrating effectiveness. For tobacco control, (a) the most
urgent public health need is to reduce the use of combustible
tobacco, especially cigarettes (United States Public Health Service.
Office of the Surgeon General, 2014) and (b) good data is lacking to
demonstrate that restricting accurate information or engaging in
active misinformation on reduced-harm products has any good
effects on population health. Similarly, U.S. rules on information
quality do allow standards to be ‘‘waived temporarily’’ only under
‘‘urgent situations (e.g., imminent threats to public health or
homeland security)’’ (p. 8485) (Office of Management and Budget,
2002). It is simply preposterous to think the current evidence base
demonstrates there is an ‘‘imminent threat’’ to public health in this
instance.
But part two of Kass’s point is that community standards also
influence the appropriateness of public health activities. The
demonization of tobacco/nicotine products and the tobacco
industry may have distorted public health principles by acting
as if all tobacco products should be banned (Proctor, 2013). A moral
outrage has characterized views on tobacco which has been much
greater than for other unsafe, legal and even illicit consumer
products (MacCoun, 2013). Harm reduction principles have been
readily embraced for many decidedly unsafe commercial products
(cars, pharmaceuticals, alcohol), and for behaviors often illicit or
morally objectionable to others, yet cigarettes and tobacco have
been treated quite differently.
Ethical analysis, moral psychology, and anti-vice inclinations
For many people, when cigarettes were judged as (1) the largest
single cause of preventable death and disability, (2) lethal when
used as intended by manufacturers, and estimated to be more
deadly than the next several most dangerous activities combined,
they crossed a line (American Cancer Society, 1987; Warner et al.,
1986). When the behavior of cigarette companies so infuriated the
public, these companies became seen as evil, and this encouraged
an absolutist, anti-vice response (Berridge, 2013; Courtwright,
2012; McCambridge, 2015). (The matter of the predations of
tobacco industry marketing is very distinct from respected health
information websites trying to improve consumers’ knowledge
and should not be confused.) Detailed ethical analyses of tobacco/
nicotine harm reduction are available (Chapman & Daube, 2015;
Hall & Forlini, 2015; Kozlowski, 2002, 2015b; Kozlowski &
Edwards, 2005; Kozlowski & O’Connor, 2003; McCambridge,
2015; Royal College of Physicians, 2007; Savitz, Meyer, Tanzer,
Mirvish, & Lewin, 2006). They have employed standard issues like
beneficence, non-maleficence, justice, and autonomy. In an area
charged by views of vice and improper behavior, it important to
consider moral psychological perspectives that point to strong
moral emotional reactions to violations of a sense of purity, respect
for authority, and a concern about community standards (Haidt,
2007). Such violations can trigger emotionally charged moral
reactions (disgust and contempt) for tobacco use and even to the
use of much less-harmful tobacco/nicotine products (Alderman,
Dollar, & Kozlowski, 2010; Kozlowski, 2013, 2015b).
Utilitarian principles and evidence for coercive actions
In a CDC response (McKenna et al., 2003) to the 2003 critique
(Kozlowski & O’Connor, 2003) of misleading information (indicat-
ing that SLT was not safer than cigarettes), the authors, in keeping
L.T. Kozlowski, D. Sweanor / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx 
3
G Model
DRUPOL-1762; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Kozlowski, L. T., & Sweanor, D. Withholding differential risk information on legal consumer nicotine/
tobacco products: The public health ethics of health information quarantines. International Journal of Drug Policy (2016), http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2016.03.014
 with arguments from the Institute of Medicine review (Stratton,
2001), assert several ways in which SLT could cause public health
losses:
Even if some smokers who switch to SLT do reduce their
individual risk, it is plausible that overall population health risk
would increase if SLT were promoted as a potential reduced-
exposure product. This conclusion assumes that (a) some
smokers who would have otherwise quit using tobacco would
switch to SLT or continue to smoke and use SLT; (b) the number
of lifelong SLT users would rise as a result of increased youth
SLT initiation; (c) the number of smokers would rise as a result
of increased youth SLT initiation with subsequent switching to
cigarette use; and/or (d) some former smokers would relapse,
believing SLT a less hazardous way to consume tobacco. (p. 194)
Theoretical concerns are not enough, however, no matter how
plausible or how many, to justify information quarantine. Both (a)
evidence of a problem and (b) evidence that the deception/evasion
is important in dealing with the problem are needed. The rights of
SLT users to have information that might prevent their sometimes
smoking or even switching to cigarettes should not be so readily
waived. Accurate science-based, comprehensible, and actionable
health information on comparative risk is also not strictly a
‘‘promotion’’ of reduced-risk products as done by a manufacturer,
rather it is a contribution to health literacy that in the context of
systematic tobacco control efforts might ‘‘plausibly’’ even produce
public health gains. Anyone, no matter their current use of tobacco
or nicotine products, could value being knowledgeable about
differential product risks for themselves or their loved ones.
‘‘Gateway effects’’ whereby SLT causes later smoking has been a
topic of major interest in tobacco control and provides an example
of the small magnitude of confirmed adverse effects as well as
failures to find effects (e.g., Kozlowski, O’Connor, Quinio Edwards,
& 
Flaherty, 
2004; 
O’Connor, 
Flaherty, 
Quinio 
Edwards, 
&
Kozlowski, 2003; Tomar et al., 2009). The political power of
gateway fears is greater than their scientific usefulness (Bell &
Keane, 2014; Kleinig, 2015; Phillips, 2015). For many drug
researchers, causal gateway models have been abandoned in
favor of an appreciation that circumstances influence which drug
products youth start with (Degenhardt et al., 2010) and that
individual and contextual characteristics make some individuals at
higher risk (and others at lower risks) of using drug products
(Vanyukov & Ridenour, 2012). Certainly, a mere unproven
hypothesis does not provide an ethical basis for information
quarantine.
A recent review of longitudinal research shows that overall
non-smoking adults (including SLT users) are unlikely to become
cigarette smokers (Tam, Day, Rostron, & Apelberg, 2015). A study in
military recruits indicated the greatest risk of non-smoking SLT
initiators becoming smokers (Haddock et al., 2001), but it is noted
that context may reduce generalizability (Tam et al., 2015). Even
then, the minority (about 27%) of SLT tobacco users turned to
smoking, compared to about 13% for those who had not used SLT
(Haddock et al., 2001). A long-term longitudinal study has found
great stability in use of SLT or cigarettes and that beliefs about the
risks of these products influence use (Macy, Li, Xun, Presson, &
Chassin, 2015). National patterns of e-cigarette use (Delnevo et al.,
2015) or smokeless tobacco use (Tomar, Alpert, & Connolly, 2010)
do not give evidence of net public health losses in the area of
tobacco use and shifts to cigarettes that might help justify a
quarantine of information on reduced risk products. Indeed, it
seems simply absurd to justify not giving consumers sufficient
information to make informed decisions based on the view that
previously ill-informed consumers may have made poor decisions
or that well-informed consumers might make the ‘‘wrong’’
decision. Sweden provides an example of finding no evidence of
any noteworthy causal gateway effects from snus to cigarettes,
despite a close look for it (Foulds, Ramstrom, Burke, & Fagerstrom,
2003; Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified
Health Risks, 2008). Although the U.S. might be different (Tomar
et al., 2009), evidence from Sweden should be weighed more
heavily than hypotheses that lack an ethical basis and a persuasive
evidence base. Even if a smoker switching to SLT later in life would
have smaller effects on disease reductions, it is clear that those
who would stop smoking by 30 or 40 are likely to see dramatic
reductions in smoking-caused disease to near never-smoking
levels (Jha et al., 2013). Given policy options available to nudge
tobacco use behavior (such as differential taxation, marketing and
information) (Jha & Chaloupka, 1999; Kozlowski, 2007, 2015a,
2016), a more reasonable approach to any apprehension of risk
should be based on the application rather than the denial of the
principle of health literacy. Research on snus use in Norway has
found that providing accurate risk estimates to smokers can result
in increased quit-rates for smoking (Lund & Lund, 2014; Lund,
2012).
Care for autonomy and individual rights
If accurate information on relative risks of various products
helps even a few users of cigarettes to move from or stay away
from cigarettes, it is preferable to a context of providing no
information, misinformation, or disinformation to consumers of
these products (Kiviniemi & Kozlowski, 2015; Kozlowski, O’Con-
nor, & Edwards, 2003). An ethical basis for public health
communications to establish health literacy, one focused on
individual autonomy and accurate information (which FDA could
help determine), should be required (Office of Management and
Budget, 2002). Denial of information to consumers could have
similar effects as the historic efforts of cigarette companies to
mislead smokers about disease risks and to fight against health
information on cigarette advertisements and packaging. While
the industry may have been motivated by profits and the health
agencies had different motivations, the negative effects for
individual users could be the same. Evidence is growing that snus
can aid smoking cessation (Hatsukami, Severson, et al., 2015). Use
of lower-harm products (including vape) may not be for everyone,
and the ability of these to supplant smoking remains to be shaped
and delineated. If the user does not enjoy the product, it is unlikely
to be used for long (Kozlowski, 1982; Kozlowski, Heatherton,
Frecker, & Nolte, 1989; Saddleson et al., 2016). Personal satisfac-
tion with any product is important (Hatsukami, Vogel, Severson,
Jensen, & O’Connor, 2015). But the blindfolding of consumers
delays such transitions and impedes efforts to develop products
that could more effectively replace cigarettes.
For a very much lower-risk product (Nutt et al., 2014), it could
take an impossible increase in users to match public health harm of
cigarettes (Kozlowski, Strasser, Giovino, Erickson, & Terza, 2001).
For small reductions in risk (e.g., 10%), negative population health
consequences are far likelier. How many recreational users of snus
(Hatsukami, Severson, et al., 2015) or vape would avoid cigarettes
completely could be influenced by accurate information and
appropriate marketing. Until differential marketing according
to risks is actually implemented (Branston & Sweanor, 2016;
Chaloupka, Sweanor, & Warner, 2015; Kozlowski, 2007), it is hard
to know the impact that products like SLT or vaping could have on
cigarette use. But it is unethical as well as lacking a scientific basis
to maintain that there is so little reason to believe that consumers
would respond to adequate information on differential risks that
there is no point in even considering removing their blindfold.
Current FDA tobacco rules and educational practices on
prominent web-sites represent a swamp of precaution that
contributes to preventing broader awareness of products that
L.T. Kozlowski, D. Sweanor / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
4
G Model
DRUPOL-1762; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Kozlowski, L. T., & Sweanor, D. Withholding differential risk information on legal consumer nicotine/
tobacco products: The public health ethics of health information quarantines. International Journal of Drug Policy (2016), http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2016.03.014
 are known to be dramatically safer than cigarettes. Efforts should
be made to educate the public about the nature of risks from
different classes or types of tobacco products (Biener, Bogen, &
Connolly, 2007; Biener, Nyman, Stepanov, & Hatsukami, 2014;
Kiviniemi & Kozlowski, 2015) and how burning and inhalation
makes a difference (Strasser et al., 2011). Simple but effective
graphic tools like traffic-light systems can be employed (Strasser
et al., 2011). A growing evidence base on e-cigarettes indicates that
they too are dramatically less dangerous than cigarettes (Hajek,
Etter, Benowitz, Eissenberg, & McRobbie, 2014; McNeill, Calder,
Hitchman, Hajek, & McRobbie, 2015) (As with vape, long-term
epidemiology of the new imaginary wonder pill for lung cancer
would also be a work in progress; since the 1970s, 35 prescription
drugs have been removed from the market (ProCon.org, 2014).) So
once again, a mere hypothesis of a potential problem, one lacking an
evidentiary basis, is not sufficient to justify blindfolding consumers.
Complexities of ethical analysis of public health police powers
Coercive measures on behalf of public health are also called
police powers. Quarantines to prevent the spread of disease are not
the only example of public health police powers. The principles of
autonomy, privacy, liberty and personal property can conflict with
actions to try to protect public health. We have emphasized issues
arising from public health efforts to prevent net harm to
population health. A classic work on public health law (Gostin &
Wiley, 2016) does recognize that these questions must always be
posed:
. . . whether a coercive intervention truly reduces aggregate
health risks and what, if any, less-intrusive interventions might
reduce those risks as well or better? Respect for the rights of
individuals and fairness toward groups of all races, religions,
and cultures remain at the heart of public health. (p. 11)
But it should be admitted that ethical arguments have been
based on principles other than aggregate harm to the population.
Some ethicists prefer to use paternalism (or parentalism) to justify
protecting even mentally competent, adult citizens from them-
selves ‘for their own good.’ See Gostin and Wiley (2016) for a
discussion of this and other perspectives. In contrast, a focus on the
importance of liberty even in the face of utilitarian costs opposes
paternalism (e.g. Berlin, Hardy, & Harris, 2002). We prefer to give
strong emphasis on the principles of personal autonomy and
individual rights while not ignoring utilitarian issues which is
sometimes called a ‘rule-utilitarian position.’ Also, although we
have focused on issues pertaining to adult consumers of legal
products, we see no case for keeping comprehensible health
information about products away from those who may not be
legally able to purchase these products and do not know how that
could be done if made available to adults.
Summary
Table 2 outlines the main ethical and moral psychological issues
discussed. Concerns for some adverse public health effects of harm
reduction products such as SLT and vape are reasonable and worth
trying to minimize, but there is no current evidence that such
products actually represent an imminent danger to public health
overall and that withholding information about relative risks is
an effective way to promote overall public health. Efforts to
discourage the use of tobacco/nicotine products need not be
reduced, but should be done in a harm-proportionate way. Telling
consumers that all product options are as bad as cigarettes is
untrue and almost certainly as deadly for users as telling at-risk
populations that condom use affords no protection. Giving
accurate information does not guarantee that a problem will be
solved, but it stands the ethical rules on their head to not value
health literacy and information quality (Office of Management and
Budget, 2002). That reduced-harm products are not absolutely
‘safe’ and more dangerous than using no tobacco/nicotine product
does not justify keeping potential consumers of legal products
ignorant about this information any more than such arguments
would for any other product or activity.
For evidence-based health organizations to provide accurate
information on the relative harms of tobacco/nicotine products
does 
not 
even 
carry 
with 
it 
any 
concerns 
that 
apply 
to
manufacturers embedding relative-risk information in lifestyle
advertising designed to recruit customers. The straight-forward
principles of harm reduction should be as uncontroversial for
tobacco products as they are for alcohol, cars, air travel, children’s
clothing, sexual practices, electrical goods and other goods and
activities – until such time as there is compelling, proportionate
evidence of imminent danger to public health overall that would
ethically justify promoting health illiteracy with respect to these
legal products. Even then, some ethicists would never support
deceptive information as an appropriate public health option (Bok,
1978) and the risk of loss to credibility would be earnestly avoided.
Acknowledgments
LTK is funded as an investigator on two FDA-NIH grants, one on
little cigars and one on electronic cigarettes, but this report was not
funded.
Conflict of interest
No financial disclosures to report. The authors have each
written before in support of tobacco harm reduction.
References
Alderman, J., Dollar, K. M., & Kozlowski, L. T. (2010). Commentary: Understanding the
origins of anger, contempt, and disgust in public health policy disputes: Applying
moral psychology to harm reduction debates. Journal of Public Health Policy, 31, 1–16.
American Cancer Society (1987). Smoke signals: The smoking control media handbook.
American Cancer Society.
American Cancer Society (2015). Smokeless tobacco. Retrieved from http://www.
cancer.org/cancer/cancercauses/tobaccocancer/smokeless-tobacco
Bell, K., & Keane, H. (2014). All gates lead to smoking: The ‘gateway theory’, e-cigarettes
and the remaking of nicotine. Social Science and Medicine, 119, 45–52.
Benowitz, N. L. (2011). Smokeless tobacco as a nicotine delivery device: Harm or harm
reduction? Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 90, 491–493.
Berlin, I., Hardy, H., & Harris, I. (2002). Liberty: Incorporating four essays on liberty.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Table 2
Key ethical perspectives on providing accurate health information to consumers of
unsafe legal consumer products.
1 
Health Literacy and respect for autonomy are critical
2 
Utilitarian principles (greatest good for the greatest number) support
concern about science-based, comprehensible, and actionable
information that is shown to harm public health
3 
To be ethical, coercive measures (e.g., information quarantine)
require more than plausible concerns, but actual prior evidence that
the measures are proportionate and effective in protecting public
health
4 
Moral psychological reactions (disgust and contempt) arising from
the views of and nature of tobacco products and the behavior of
industry violate ‘community standards,’ ‘proper respect for authority’
and ‘a sense of purity,’ and promote acting as if all tobacco/nicotine
should be banned
5 
Omitting accurate health information that might guide behavior and
decisions of any (even a few) users of legal products is inconsistent
with health literacy and respect for autonomy
6 
To achieve utilitarian goals, other product differentiating tobacco
control/marketing methods should be exhausted before deceptive or
evasive health information are employed—if they ever are included as
an option
L.T. Kozlowski, D. Sweanor / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx 
5
G Model
DRUPOL-1762; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Kozlowski, L. T., & Sweanor, D. Withholding differential risk information on legal consumer nicotine/
tobacco products: The public health ethics of health information quarantines. International Journal of Drug Policy (2016), http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2016.03.014
 Berman, M. L. (2008). Tobacco litigation without the smoke? Cigarette companies in
the smokeless tobacco industry. Journal of Health Care Law & Policy, 11, 7–55.
Berridge, V. (2013). Demons: Our changing attitudes to alcohol, tobacco, & drugs (1st ed.).
Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
Biener, L., Bogen, K., & Connolly, G. (2007). Impact of corrective health information on
consumers’ perceptions of ‘‘reduced exposure’’ tobacco products. Tobacco Control,
16, 306–311.
Biener, L., Nyman, A. L., Stepanov, I., & Hatsukami, D. (2014). Public education about the
relative harm of tobacco products: An intervention for tobacco control profes-
sionals. Tobacco Control, 23, 385–388.
Bok, S. (1978). Lying: Moral choice in public and private life. New York: Pantheon Books.
Branston, J. R., & Sweanor, D. (2016). Big tobacco, E-cigarettes, and a road to the
smoking endgame. International Journal on Drug Policy, 29, 14–18.
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (2015). Tobacco-Related Mortality. Retrieved
from http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/health_effects/
tobacco_related_mortality/
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2015). Smokeless tobacco: Health effects.
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/
smokeless/health_effects/index.htm
Cetron, M., & Landwirth, J. (2005). Public health and ethical considerations in planning
for quarantine. The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine, 78, 329–334.
Chaloupka, F. J., Sweanor, D., & Warner, K. E. (2015). Differential taxes for differential
risks – Toward reduced harm from nicotine-yielding products. New England Journal
of Medicine, 373, 594–597.
Chapman, S., & Daube, M. (2015). Ethical imperatives assuming ENDS effectiveness and
safety are fragile. Addiction, 110, 1068–1069.
Cornell University Law School (2015). Negligence. Retrieved from https://www.law.
cornell.edu/wex/negligence
Courtwright, D. T. (2012). A Short History of Drug Policy or Why We Make War on Some
Drugs but not on Others.
Degenhardt, L., Dierker, L., Chiu, W. T., Medina-Mora, M. E., Neumark, Y., Sampson, N.,
et al. (2010). Evaluating the drug use ‘‘gateway’’ theory using cross-national data:
Consistency and associations of the order of initiation of drug use among parti-
cipants in the WHO World Mental Health Surveys. Drug and Alcohol Dependence,
108, 84–97.
Delnevo, C. D., Giovenco, D. P., Steinberg, M. B., Villanti, A. C., Pearson, J. L., Niaura, R. S.,
et al. (2015). Patterns of electronic cigarette use among adults in the United States.
Nicotine & Tobacco Research.
Eversman, M. H. (2015). Harm reduction in U.S. tobacco control: Constructions in
textual news media. International Journal on Drug Policy, 26, 575–582.
Foulds, J., Ramstrom, L., Burke, M., & Fagerstrom, K. (2003). Effect of smokeless tobacco
(snus) on smoking and public health in Sweden. Tobacco Control, 12, 349–359.
Gostin, L. O., & Wiley, L. F. (2016). Public health law: Power, duty, restraint (3rd ed.).
University of California Press.
Gray, N., & Henningfield, J. (2006). Dissent over harm reduction for tobacco. Lancet, 368,
899–901.
Haddock, C. K., Weg, M. V., DeBon, M., Klesges, R. C., Talcott, G. W., Lando, H., et al.
(2001). Evidence that smokeless tobacco use is a gateway for smoking initiation in
young adult males. Preventive Medicine, 32, 262–267.
Haidt, J. (2007). The new synthesis in moral psychology. Science, 316, 998–1002.
Hajek, P., Etter, J. F., Benowitz, N., Eissenberg, T., & McRobbie, H. (2014). Electronic
cigarettes: Review of use, content, safety, effects on smokers and potential for
harm and benefit. Addiction.
Hall, W. G. C., & Forlini, C. (2015). Ethical issues raised by a ban on the sale of electronic
nicotine devices. Addiction.
Hatsukami, D. K., Lemmonds, C., & Tomar, S. L. (2004). Smokeless tobacco use: Harm
reduction or induction approach? Preventive Medicine, 38, 309–317.
Hatsukami, D. K., Severson, H., Anderson, A., Vogel, R. I., Jensen, J., Broadbent, B., et al.
(2015). Randomised clinical trial of snus versus medicinal nicotine among smokers
interested in product switching. Tobacco Control.
Hatsukami, D. K., Vogel, R. I., Severson, H. H., Jensen, J. A., & O’Connor, R. J. (2015).
Perceived health risks of snus and medicinal nicotine products. Nicotine & Tobacco
Research.
Jha, P., & Chaloupka, F. J. (1999). Curbing the epidemic: Governments and the economics of
tobacco control. World Bank Publications.
Jha, P., Ramasundarahettige, C., Landsman, V., Rostron, B., Thun, M., Anderson, R. N.,
et al. (2013). 21st-century hazards of smoking and benefits of cessation in the
United States. New England Journal of Medicine, 368, 341–350.
Kass, N. E. (2001). An ethics framework for public health. American Journal of Public
Health, 91, 1776–1782.
Kass, N. E. (2004). Public health ethics from foundations and frameworks to justice and
global public health. Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 32, 232–242.
Kiviniemi, M. T., & Kozlowski, L. T. (2015). Deficiencies in public understanding about
tobacco harm reduction: Results from a United States national survey. Harm
Reduction Journal, 12, 21.
Kleinig, J. (2015). Ready for retirement: The gateway drug hypothesis. Substance Use
and Misuse, 50, 971–975.
Kozlowski, L. (2016). A policy experiment is worth a million lives. Issues in science and
technology, 32(2), 20–23. Winter 2016.
Kozlowski, L., Strasser, A., Giovino, G., Erickson, P., & Terza, J. (2001). Applying the risk/
use equilibrium: Use medicinal nicotine now for harm reduction. Tobacco Control,
10, 201.
Kozlowski, L. T. (1982). The determinants of tobacco use: Cigarette smoking in the
context of other forms of tobacco use. Canadian Journal of Public Health, Revue
Canadienne de Sante
´ Publique73, 236–241.
Kozlowski, L. T. (2002). Harm reduction, public health, and human rights: Smokers
have a right to be informed of significant harm reduction options. Nicotine &
Tobacco Research, 4, S55–S60.
Kozlowski, L. T. (2007). Effect of smokeless tobacco product marketing and use on
population harm from tobacco use: Policy perspective for tobacco-risk reduction.
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 33, S379–S386.
Kozlowski, L. T. (2013). Ending versus controlling versus employing addiction in the
tobacco-caused disease endgame: Moral psychological perspectives. Tobacco Con-
trol, 22, i31–i32.
Kozlowski, L. T. (2015a). Prospects for a nicotine-reduction strategy in the cigarette
endgame: Alternative tobacco harm reduction scenarios. International Journal on
Drug Policy.
Kozlowski, L. T. (2015b). The truncation of moral reasoning on harm reduction by
individuals and organizations. Addiction, 110, 1070–1072.
Kozlowski, L. T., & Edwards, B. Q. (2005). ‘‘Not safe’’ is not enough: Smokers have a right
to know more than there is no safe tobacco product. Tobacco Control, 14(Suppl. 2),
ii3–ii7.
Kozlowski, L. T., Heatherton, T. F., Frecker, R. C., & Nolte, H. E. (1989). Self-selected
blocking of vents on low-yield cigarettes. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior,
33, 815–819.
Kozlowski, L. T., & O’Connor, R. J. (2003). Apply federal research rules on deception to
misleading health information: An example on smokeless tobacco and cigarettes.
Public Health Reports, 118, 187.
Kozlowski, L. T., O’Connor, R. J., Quinio Edwards, B., & Flaherty, B. P. (2004). Most
smokeless tobacco use is not a causal gateway to cigarettes: Response to Tomar &
Loree 2004. Addiction, 99, 262–264.
Kozlowski, L. T., O’Connor, R., & Edwards, B. Q. (2003). Some practical points on harm
reduction: What to tell your lawmaker and what to tell your brother about Swedish
snus. Tobacco Control, 12, 372–373.
Lee, P. N. (2013). Epidemiological evidence relating snus to health – an updated review
based on recent publications. Harm Reduction Journal, 10, 36.
Levy, D. T., Mumford, E. A., Cummings, K. M., Gilpin, E. A., Giovino, G., Hyland, A., et al.
(2004). The relative risks of a low-nitrosamine smokeless tobacco product com-
pared with smoking cigarettes: Estimates of a panel of experts. Cancer Epidemiol-
ogy, Biomarkers and Prevention, 13, 2035–2042.
Liu, S. T., Nemeth, J. M., Klein, E. G., Ferketich, A. K., Kwan, M. P., & Wewers, M. E. (2015).
Risk perceptions of smokeless tobacco among adolescent and adult users and
nonusers. Journal of Health Communication, 20, 599–606.
Lund, I., & Lund, K. E. (2014). How has the availability of snus influenced cigarette
smoking in Norway? International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health, 11, 11705–11717.
Lund, K. E. (2012). Association between willingness to use snus to quit smoking and
perception of relative risk between snus and cigarettes. Nicotine & Tobacco Re-
search, 14, 1221–1228.
MacCoun, R. (2013). Moral outrage and opposition to harm reduction. Criminal Law and
Philosophy, 7, 83–98.
Macy, J. T., Li, J., Xun, P., Presson, C. C., & Chassin, L. (2015). Dual trajectories of cigarette
smoking and smokeless tobacco use from adolescence to midlife among males in
a Midwestern US community sample. Nicotine & Tobacco Research.
Mayo Clinic (2015). Chewing tobacco: Not safer than cigarettes. Retrieved from http://
www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/quit-smoking/in-depth/chewing-tobacco/
art-20047428
Maziak, W. (2014). Harm reduction at the crossroads: The case of e-cigarettes. Ameri-
can Journal of Preventive Medicine, 47, 505–507.
McCambridge, J. (2015). Accounting for the masters of deception. Addiction, 110, 1072–
1073.
McKenna, J. W., Pechacek, T. F., & Stroup, D. F. (2003). Health communication ethics
and CDC quality-control guidelines for information. Public Health Reports, 118,
193–196.
McNeill, A. B. L., Calder, R., Hitchman, S. C., Hajek, P., & McRobbie, H. (2015).
E-cigarettes: An evidence update. Public Health England.
National Cancer Institute (2001). Risks Associated with Smoking Cigarettes with Low
Machine-Measured Yields of Tar and Nicotine. Smoking and Tobacco Control Mono-
graph 13.
National Cancer Institute (2015). Smokeless Tobacco and Cancer. Retrieved from http://
www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/tobacco/smokeless-
fact-sheet#q7
Nutt, D. J., Phillips, L. D., Balfour, D., Curran, H. V., Dockrell, M., Foulds, J., et al. (2014).
Estimating the harms of nicotine-containing products using the MCDA approach.
European Addiction Research, 20, 218–225.
O’Connor, R. J., Flaherty, B. P., Quinio Edwards, B., & Kozlowski, L. T. (2003). Regular
smokeless tobacco use is not a reliable predictor of smoking onset when psycho-
social predictors are included in the model. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 5,
535–543.
Office of Management and Budget (2002). In Office of the President (Ed.), Guidelines for
ensuring and maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information
disseminated by Federal agencies; Republication (Vol. 67, pp. 8452–8460). Washing-
ton, DC: Federal Register.
Phillips, C. V. (2015). Gateway effects: Why the cited evidence does not support their
existence for low-risk tobacco products (and what evidence would). International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 12, 5439–5464.
Piano, M. R., Benowitz, N. L., Fitzgerald, G. A., Corbridge, S., Heath, J., Hahn, E., et al.
(2010). Impact of smokeless tobacco products on cardiovascular disease: Implica-
tions for policy, prevention, and treatment: A policy statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation, 122, 1520–1544.
L.T. Kozlowski, D. Sweanor / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
6
G Model
DRUPOL-1762; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Kozlowski, L. T., & Sweanor, D. Withholding differential risk information on legal consumer nicotine/
tobacco products: The public health ethics of health information quarantines. International Journal of Drug Policy (2016), http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2016.03.014
 ProCon.org (2014). 35 FDA-approved prescription drugs later pulled from the market.
Retrieved from http://prescriptiondrugs.procon.org/view.resource.php?resourceID=
005528
Proctor, R. N. (2013). Why ban the sale of cigarettes? The case for abolition. Tobacco
Control, 22, 27–30.
Royal College of Physicians (2007). Harm reduction in nicotine addiction: Helping people
who can’t quit. London: Royal College of Physicians.
Saddleson, M. L., Kozlowski, L. T., Giovino, G. A., Goniewicz, M. L., Mahoney, M. C.,
Homish, G. G., et al. (2016). Enjoyment and other reasons for electronic cigarette
use: Results from college students in New York. Addictive Behaviors, 54, 33–39.
Savitz, D. A., Meyer, R. E., Tanzer, J. M., Mirvish, S. S., & Lewin, F. (2006). Public health
implications of smokeless tobacco use as a harm reduction strategy. American
Journal of Public Health, 96, 1934–1939.
Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks (2008). Scientific
opinion on the Health Effects of Smokeless Tobacco Products. Retrieved from http://ec.
europa.eu/health/ph_risk/committees/04_scenihr/docs/scenihr_o_013.pdf
Strasser, A. A., Orom, H., Tang, K. Z., Dumont, R. L., Cappella, J. N., & Kozlowski, L. T.
(2011). Graphic-enhanced information improves perceived risks of cigar smoking.
Addictive Behaviors, 36, 865–869.
Stratton, K. R. (2001). Clearing the smoke: Assessing the science base for tobacco harm
reduction. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (2015). Tips for teens:
Tobacco Info. Retrieved from https://store.samhsa.gov/shin/content/PHD633/
PHD633.pdf
Tam, J., Day, H. R., Rostron, B. L., & Apelberg, B. J. (2015). A systematic review of
transitions between cigarette and smokeless tobacco product use in the United
States. BMC Public Health, 15, 258.
Tomar, S. L., Alpert, H. R., & Connolly, G. N. (2010). Patterns of dual use of cigarettes and
smokeless tobacco among US males: Findings from national surveys. Tobacco
Control, 19, 104–109.
Tomar, S. L., Fox, B. J., & Severson, H. H. (2009). Is smokeless tobacco use an appropriate
public health strategy for reducing societal harm from cigarette smoking? Inter-
national Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 6, 10–24.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2010). O.D.P.H.P. National Action Plan to
Improve Health Literacy. From http://health.gov/communication/hlactionplan/pdf/
Health_Literacy_Action_Plan.pdf
United States Code (2009). Family smoking prevention and tobacco control act United
States. In Stat 1776.
United States Public Health Service. Office of the Surgeon General (2014). The health
consequences of smoking – 50 years of progress: A report of the Surgeon General.
Rockville, MD. US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health
Service, Office of the Surgeon General.
Vanyukov, M. M., & Ridenour, T. A. (2012). Common liability to drug addictions: Theory,
research, practice. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 123(Suppl. 1), S1–S2.
Warner, K. E., Ernster, V. L., Holbrook, J. H., Lewit, E. M., Pertschuk, M., Steinfeld, J. L.,
et al. (1986). Promotion of tobacco products: Issues and policy options. Journal of
Health Politics, Policy and Law, 11, 367–392.
Watson, M. C., & Forshaw, M. (2015). Why we shouldn’t normalise the use of
e-cigarettes. BMJ, 351, h3770.
Wilson, D. (2009). A vote nears for a tobacco bill that Philip Morris can live with. The
New York Times New York.
Zeller, M. (2012). The FDA Center for Tobacco Products: 20 Years layer: Returning to FDA to
Regulate Tobacco. Retrieved from http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AboutFDA/
Transparency/Basics/UCM378104.pdf
L.T. Kozlowski, D. Sweanor / International Journal of Drug Policy xxx (2016) xxx–xxx 
7
G Model
DRUPOL-1762; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Kozlowski, L. T., & Sweanor, D. Withholding differential risk information on legal consumer nicotine/
tobacco products: The public health ethics of health information quarantines. International Journal of Drug Policy (2016), http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.drugpo.2016.03.014
