 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 3 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
Introduction
Diabetes is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD), 
which remains the leading cause of mortality worldwide (1–3). 
Atherosclerosis is the major underlying cause of CVD and is accel-
erated in people with diabetes (4, 5). How hyperglycemia acceler-
ates atherogenesis and ultimately the downstream macrovascular 
complications seen in diabetes remains unresolved. Diabetes is 
associated with an expansion and activation of myeloid cells, par-
ticularly monocytes and neutrophils, and impedes the resolution 
of atherosclerosis even when lipid levels are controlled (6). Peo-
ple with diabetes have been reported to also have significantly 
elevated platelet counts, which correlates with CVD (7). Platelets 
are small anucleated cells with a critical role in coagulation and 
have been causally implicated in the formation and progression 
of the atherosclerotic lesion along with forming thrombi and con-
tributing specifically to CVD mortality (8–11). Importantly, a large 
meta-analysis with combined data from over 140 randomized 
trials has revealed that inhibiting platelet activation significantly 
reduces the risk of vascular events (12). However, people with dia-
betes are not afforded equal benefit with respect to reduction in 
CVD risk, with antiplatelet therapies being generally less effica-
cious in this population (13–15). This is considered to be at least in 
part due to enhanced platelet turnover as reflected by the increase 
in mean platelet volume (MPV) in diabetic versus nondiabetic sub-
jects (16, 17). An increase in MPV signifies younger and more reac-
tive platelets known as reticulated platelets (14, 16, 18–22), which 
Platelets play a critical role in atherogenesis and thrombosis-mediated myocardial ischemia, processes that are accelerated 
in diabetes. Whether hyperglycemia promotes platelet production and whether enhanced platelet production contributes 
to enhanced atherothrombosis remains unknown. Here we found that in response to hyperglycemia, neutrophil-derived 
S100 calcium-binding proteins A8/A9 (S100A8/A9) interact with the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) 
on hepatic Kupffer cells, resulting in increased production of IL-6, a pleiotropic cytokine that is implicated in inflammatory 
thrombocytosis. IL-6 acts on hepatocytes to enhance the production of thrombopoietin, which in turn interacts with its 
cognate receptor c-MPL on megakaryocytes and bone marrow progenitor cells to promote their expansion and proliferation, 
resulting in reticulated thrombocytosis. Lowering blood glucose using a sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor 
(dapagliflozin), depleting neutrophils or Kupffer cells, or inhibiting S100A8/A9 binding to RAGE (using paquinimod), all 
reduced diabetes-induced thrombocytosis. Inhibiting S100A8/A9 also decreased atherogenesis in diabetic mice. Finally, we 
found that patients with type 2 diabetes have reticulated thrombocytosis that correlates with glycated hemoglobin as well as 
increased plasma S100A8/A9 levels. These studies provide insights into the mechanisms that regulate platelet production 
and may aid in the development of strategies to improve on current antiplatelet therapies and to reduce cardiovascular 
disease risk in diabetes.
Neutrophil-derived S100 calcium-binding proteins 
A8/A9 promote reticulated thrombocytosis and 
atherogenesis in diabetes
Michael J. Kraakman,1 Man K.S. Lee,1 Annas Al-Sharea,1 Dragana Dragoljevic,1 Tessa J. Barrett,2 Emilie Montenont,2,3  
Debapriya Basu,4 Sarah Heywood,1 Helene L. Kammoun,1 Michelle Flynn,1 Alexandra Whillas,1 Nordin M.J. Hanssen,1,5  
Mark A. Febbraio,6 Erik Westein,7 Edward A. Fisher,2 Jaye Chin-Dusting,8 Mark E. Cooper,9 Jeffrey S. Berger,2,3 Ira J. Goldberg,4 
Prabhakara R. Nagareddy,10 and Andrew J. Murphy1,11
1Haematopoiesis and Leukocyte Biology, Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. 2Division of Cardiology, 3Division of Hematology, and 4Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes 
and Metabolism, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA. 5Department of Internal Medicine, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), School of Cardiovascular 
Diseases, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands. 6Cellular and Molecular Metabolism Laboratory, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, Australia. 7Vascular 
Biomechanics, Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. 8Department of Pharmacology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. 9Diabetic Complications, Baker Heart 
and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. 10Department of Nutrition Sciences, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA. 11Department of Immunology, Monash 
University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
     Related Commentary: p. 2040
Authorship note: M.J. Kraakman and M.K.S. Lee contributed equally to this work.  
P
.R. Nagareddy and A.J. Murphy are co-senior authors.
Conflict of interest: M.E. Cooper has been on advisory boards of and received lecturer 
fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Eli Lilly in relation to SGLT2i’s.
Submitted: December 23, 2016; Accepted: February 16, 2017.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(6):2133–2147. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI92450.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 3 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
therapies and ultimately will reduce overall CVD risk. Therefore, 
we sought to investigate the pathways that contribute to enhanced 
platelet production in diabetes with the hope of identifying targe-
table pathways for subsequent intervention.
Results
Diabetes promotes reticulated thrombocytosis. To determine wheth-
er diabetes promotes thrombocytosis, we induced diabetes in 
C57BL/6 WT mice with streptozotocin (STZ) and observed them 
for 4 weeks (Figure 1A). Compared with nondiabetic WT control 
mice, diabetic mice had significantly elevated numbers of platelets 
in whole blood (Figure 1B). This appeared to be due to increased 
production, since both the percentage and the overall abundance 
of immature reticulated platelets were increased (Figure 1, C and 
D). We next examined some basic markers of platelet activation 
in both reticulated and mature platelets. We identified that reticu-
lated platelets expressed more P-selectin (CD62P) on the surface 
than mature platelets in both WT and diabetic mice, suggesting 
that the immature platelets are more reactive than the matured 
platelets. Interestingly, both platelet subsets expressed higher 
levels of P-selectin in diabetic mice compared to WT, indicating 
that they are circulating in an activated state (Figure 1E). We also 
examined the intraplatelet content of the potent chemokine CCL5 
and, somewhat surprisingly, found equal levels in the reticulated 
platelets from WT and diabetic mice, suggesting no changes in 
this chemokine when platelets are being produced. However, as 
the platelets matured, CCL5 levels were significantly reduced, an 
effect that was greater in the diabetic mice, suggesting enhanced 
display some resistance to standard antiplatelet therapies (15, 18, 
23). Moreover, immature platelet counts are gaining traction as an 
important additional measure of antiplatelet response indepen-
dent of traditional risk factors (24, 25).
There is a significant role for reticulated platelets and enhanced 
platelet production, not only in thrombosis, but also in promoting 
atherogenesis (8, 10). The mechanisms responsible for increased 
levels of reticulated platelets and/or platelet turnover in diabetes 
are unknown. Reticulated platelets are newly formed thrombocytes 
produced from the fragmentation of long cytoplasmic protrusions 
from large polyploid cells called megakaryocytes (26). Reticulated 
thrombocytosis occurs in individuals with elevated thrombopoie-
sis reflecting increased megakaryocyte activity. Thrombopoiesis is 
regulated primarily by the hormone thrombopoietin (TPO), which 
binds to its cognate receptor c-MPL on several bone marrow (BM) 
progenitor cells and megakaryocytes (27). While TPO is constitu-
tively produced from BM stromal cells and from the kidney, the 
predominant source of TPO is the liver (28). During periods of 
inflammation, hepatic TPO production is increased (29) through 
the actions of the pleiotropic cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) as part 
of the acute-phase response. This, in turn, promotes reticulated 
thrombocytosis (30, 31). Thrombocytosis can also occur through 
increased responsiveness to TPO, mediated by a failure in feed-
back pathways of c-MPL (10, 32) or, in the case of myeloprolifera-
tive neoplasms, activating mutations (33, 34).
It is proposed that understanding the mechanisms that con-
tribute to reticulated thrombocytosis in diabetes (16, 21, 35) will 
open new avenues to improve the efficacy of standard antiplatelet 
Figure 1. Reticulated thrombocytosis in diabetes. C57BL/6 mice were made diabetic with STZ and assessed after 4 weeks. (A) Blood glucose. (B) Circulat-
ing platelet levels from complete blood counts. (C and D) Abundance of circulating reticulated platelets expressed as percentage of platelets of total counts. 
(E–I) Markers of platelet activation: (E and F) Reticulated and mature platelet activation was measured by flow cytometry. (E) CD62P surface expression. (F) 
Intraplatelet CCL5 levels. (G) Plasma CCL5 levels were quantified by ELISA. (H and I) Platelet leukocyte aggregates (H) and leukocyte activation (CD11b levels) (I) 
were quantified by flow cytometry. n = 6 control and 8 diabetic mice. *P < 0.05 vs. WT for all graphs, except E and F, where #P < 0.05 for cell effect and *P < 0.05 
for disease effect. All data represent the mean ± SEM. P values were obtained using a t test, except in E and F, where 2-way ANOVA was used.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 3 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
Kupffer cells drive diabetes-associated thrombocytosis. As plate-
let homeostasis is controlled primarily by the hormone TPO, we 
examined whether diabetes-associated thrombocytosis was due 
to altered sensitivity to circulating TPO or increased circulat-
ing TPO levels. We measured the abundance of the TPO recep-
tor (c-MPL) on BM progenitor cells and found no difference in 
c-MPL expression between WT and diabetic mice on either the 
MEPs or MkPs within the BM (Figure 3A). Platelets also express 
c-MPL, and upon TPO binding, a receptor/ligand internalization 
process is initiated, leading to reduced plasma TPO levels and an 
attenuation in platelet production. Thus, we next tested whether 
there was a reduction in c-MPL expression on circulating platelets, 
which could also explain an altered sensitivity to circulating TPO, 
but again no difference was seen (Figure 3B). There was, howev-
er, a significant increase in plasma TPO levels in diabetic mice 
compared with control mice (Figure 3C). These data suggest that 
thrombocytosis in diabetes is most likely mediated via the direct 
effects of TPO on its receptor. As TPO is produced primarily from 
the liver and elevated in times of stress, we decided to examine the 
liver. We first examined the abundance of Kupffer cells in the liver 
and found that diabetes was associated with a significant increase 
in the number of Kupffer cells (Figure 3D). We then assessed 
Kupffer cell–specific expression of IL-6, a known TPO-promoting 
cytokine. Kupffer cells from diabetic mice expressed more IL-6 
than Kupffer cells from nondiabetic mice (Figure 3E). To support 
the hypothesis that Kupffer cells are involved in diabetes-associ-
ated thrombocytosis, we performed a Kupffer cell depletion study 
using a well-established protocol employing clodronate liposomes 
(37). As expected, the i.v. injection of clodronate liposomes result-
ed in a thorough depletion of liver Kupffer cells in both control and 
diabetic mice compared with mice injected with PBS-containing 
shedding/release (Figure 1F). Consequently, we observed high-
er plasma levels of CCL5 in the diabetic mice (Figure 1G). The 
increased abundance of these markers promoted more interac-
tions with circulating Ly6-Chi monocytes and neutrophils (Figure 
1H), thereby increasing the overall activation status of these leu-
kocytes as assessed by CD11b expression (Figure 1I).
Reticulated thrombocytosis is caused by an expansion of BM 
progenitor cells. To investigate whether the increased levels of cir-
culating reticulated platelets were due to enhanced production 
from the BM, we quantified BM progenitor cells within the lin-
eage responsible for platelet production by flow cytometry. Dia-
betes induced an overall expansion of BM progenitor cells with a 
higher percentage of common myeloid progenitor cells (CMPs), 
megakaryocyte-erythrocyte progenitor cells (MEPs), and mega-
karyocyte progenitor cells (MkPs) in the BM of diabetic mice 
(Figure 2A). As we have shown previously, the percentage of the 
upstream self-renewing BM hematopoietic stem and multipoten-
tial progenitor cells (HSPCs) was not different between the WT 
and diabetic mice (ref. 6 and data not shown). Cell cycle analysis 
revealed that a greater percentage of the MEPs and MkPs were 
in the G2M phase, indicating that these cells were proliferating at 
a significantly greater rate (Figure 2B). We also observed more 
phosphorylated STAT5 in the MkPs, which is consistent with 
enhanced proliferative signaling via the TPO receptor c-MPL in 
these cells (ref. 36 and Figure 2C). Histological assessment also 
revealed the formation of more megakaryocytes in the BM of 
diabetic mice (Figure 2D), which was confirmed by flow cytom-
etry (Figure 2E). Taken together, these data confirm that the dia-
betic state is associated with increased production/proliferation 
of platelet progenitors resulting in elevated circulating levels of 
highly activated reticulated platelets.
Figure 2. Reticulated throm-
bocytosis in diabetes is due 
to enhanced thrombopoiesis. 
C57BL/6 mice were made 
diabetic with STZ and assessed 
after 4 weeks. (A–C) The 
abundance (A) and prolifera-
tion (B) of BM progenitor cells 
and STAT5 phosphorylation 
in MkPs (C) were assessed by 
flow cytometry. (D) Bones were 
sectioned and stained with 
H&E, and megakaryocytes 
were quantified as cells per 
field (original magnification, 
×20). (E) BM megakaryocytes 
were also quantified by flow 
cytometry. n = 6 control and n 
= 8 diabetic. *P < 0.05 vs. WT; 
all data represent the mean ± 
SEM. P values were obtained 
using a t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 3 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
to reconstitute for 5 weeks before being made diabetic with STZ 
(Figure 4, A and B). After BMT, the newly recruited monocytes 
quickly seed the liver and mature to form Kupffer cells with gene 
expression signatures identical to those of the original Kupffer cell 
population (38). Further, we consciously chose to make the mice 
diabetic after reconstitution such that any newly recruited Kupffer 
cells, which we previously showed to be increased in diabetes 
(Figure 3D), would be of BM origin and thus IL-6 deficient (39). 
Consistent with earlier data, liver Kupffer cells were increased in 
diabetic mice, but the loss of IL-6 in hematopoietic cells did not 
influence Kupffer cell numbers in either the diabetic or the nondi-
abetic livers (Figure 4C). This finding is significant as alterations 
in thrombocytosis due to the loss of IL-6 occur downstream of 
liver Kupffer cells. Next, we measured the number of reticulated 
platelets and found a significant reduction in this parameter in 
liposomes (Supplemental Figure 1, A and B; supplemental mate-
rial available online with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/
JCI92450DS1). The depletion of Kupffer cells in diabetic mice 
significantly decreased the number of circulating platelets and 
reticulated platelets as well as the percentage of MkPs in the BM 
(Figure 3, F–H). Kupffer cell depletion in nondiabetic mice did not 
alter these parameters (Figure 3, F–H). These data suggest that 
hepatic inflammation in the setting of diabetes is characterized 
by increased expression of IL-6 in Kupffer cells, which plays an 
important role in diabetes-associated thrombocytosis.
Kupffer cell–derived IL-6 drives thrombocytosis in diabetes. 
To formally test the hypothesis that Kupffer cell–derived IL-6 
drives diabetes-associated thrombocytosis, we performed a BM 
transplantation (BMT) study. WT mice were engrafted with BM 
from either WT or IL-6–deficient mice (Il6–/– mice) and allowed 
Figure 3. Liver phenotype in diabetic mice. (A–E) C57BL/6 mice were made diabetic with STZ and assessed after 4 weeks. c-MPL surface expression was 
measured on BM progenitors (A) and circulating platelets (B) by flow cytometry. (C) Plasma TPO was measured by ELISA. (D and E) Abundance of Kupffer 
cells (D) and Kupffer cell IL-6 expression (E) were quantified by flow cytometry. n = 6 per group. *P < 0.05. (F–H) WT and diabetic mice were treated with 
PBS or clodronate (CLO) liposomes (250 μl/mouse/i.v. injection) at day 1 and day 3 to deplete Kupffer cells. Mice were analyzed at day 7. Total (F) and per-
centage (G) of reticulated platelets. (H) Percentage of BM MkPs was quantified by flow cytometry. n = 5 per group. *P < 0.05 for disease effect, #P < 0.05 
for treatment effect. All data represent the mean ± SEM. See also Supplemental Figure 2. P values were obtained using a t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 3 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
tes-associated thrombocytosis, we performed BMT with WT mice 
reconstituted with BM from either Rage–/– or WT mice. Further, we 
followed the same protocol and rationale as in the Il6–/– BMT stud-
ies; the mice were rendered diabetic after a 5-week reconstitution 
period (Figure 5, D and E). After 4 weeks of diabetes, we found 
that Rage–/– BMT diabetic mice had fewer platelets (Figure 5F), 
which was associated with fewer MkPs in the BM (Figure 5G). Fur-
thermore, Rage–/– BMT mice were protected from diabetes-asso-
ciated liver inflammation as characterized by fewer Kupffer cells 
(Figure 5H), which expressed less IL-6 (Figure 5I). Consistent with 
the reduced IL-6, the levels of TPO were significantly reduced in 
the plasma of the Rage–/– BMT mice (Figure 5J). To rule out the pos-
sibility that RAGE signaling induces a direct proliferative effect 
within the MEPs, we performed a competitive BMT (cBMT) study. 
Equal proportions of BM from WT CD45.1 and WT CD45.2 mice, 
or WT CD45.1 and Rage–/– CD45.2, were mixed and transplanted 
into CD45.2 WT recipients, which were then made diabetic with 
STZ (Supplemental Figure 2A). Consistent with a non–cell-auton-
omous model of RAGE-induced proliferation (i.e., in the Kupffer 
cell), we observed that the abundance of both platelets and BM 
diabetic mice that received Il6–/– BM, similar to that observed in 
nondiabetic mice (Figure 4, D and E). This paralleled a reduction 
in the abundance and proliferation of BM MkPs (Figure 4, F and 
G). Together, these data confirm that IL-6 is a key mediator in dia-
betes-associated thrombocytosis.
RAGE mediates diabetes-associated thrombocytosis. Next, 
we wanted to identify the receptor that mediates IL-6 expres-
sion in Kupffer cells. We found that the expression of receptor 
for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) was significantly 
enhanced on the Kupffer cells from diabetic mice (Figure 5A), con-
sistent with the increased inflammatory tone in the liver of these 
mice. To further investigate the role of RAGE, we rendered WT 
and Rage–/– mice diabetic with STZ. Since our Rage–/– mice express 
green fluorescent protein (GFP), we were unable to determine the 
abundance of reticulated platelets using thiazole orange. Howev-
er, consistent with our hypothesis, there were fewer circulating 
platelets in the diabetic Rage–/– mice (Figure 5B). This was associ-
ated with fewer MEPs and MkPs within the BM (Figure 5C). These 
data highlight an important role for RAGE in diabetes-associated 
thrombocytosis. To further delineate the role of RAGE in diabe-
Figure 4. IL-6 drives reticulated thrombocytosis in diabetes. (A) Experimental overview: C57BL/6 WT recipient mice were transplanted with BM from WT or 
Il6–/– donor mice, and after 5 weeks a subset of mice were rendered diabetic with STZ. After 4 weeks the mice were analyzed. (B) Blood glucose levels. (C) Per-
centage of Kupffer cells in the liver was quantified by flow cytometry. (D and E) Percentage (D) and numbers (E) of circulating reticulated platelets. TO, thiazole 
orange. (F and G) Abundance (F) and proliferation (G) of MkPs in the BM were quantified by flow cytometry. n = 5 WT groups, n = 6 Il6–/– controls, and n = 10 
Il6–/– STZ. *P < 0.05 for disease effect, #P < 0.05 for genotype effect. All data represent the mean ± SEM. P values were obtained using a 2-way ANOVA.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 3 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
MEPs was reduced in the mice that received Rage–/– CD45.2 BM, 
while the ratio of CD45.1- to CD45.2-derived cells was not signifi-
cantly different between the WT CD45.2 and Rage–/– CD45.2 trans-
planted chimeras (1.03 vs. 1.07, respectively; Supplemental Figure 
2B). This indicates that the reduction in circulating platelets and 
BM MEPs observed in Rage–/– BMT mice was due to a cell-extrinsic 
mechanism, specifically from RAGE expression in Kupffer cells. 
Further, there was no surface expression of RAGE detected on 
MEPs/MkPs from WT or diabetic mice. We have previously found 
that RAGE is expressed only on CMPs within the hematopoietic 
progenitor population (6). Overall, these data reveal an important 
role for RAGE in promoting thrombocytosis in diabetes.
Neutrophil-derived S100A8/A9 promotes thrombocytosis in dia-
betes. We next sought to identify the RAGE ligands that activate 
IL-6 signaling in the Kupffer cells. We have previously reported 
that hyperglycemia enhances neutrophil production of S100 cal-
cium-binding proteins A8/A9 (S100A8/A9), 
which when released bind to RAGE on CMPs 
in the BM to promote leukocytosis (6). Since 
we identified RAGE on Kupffer cells, we sought 
to examine whether S100A8/A9 could induce 
IL-6 expression in macrophages. We cultured 
BM-derived macrophages (BMDMs, resembling 
Kupffer cells) under high-glucose conditions and 
stimulated them with recombinant S100A8/A9. 
We observed a significant increase in Il6 mRNA 
expression in BMDMs treated with S100A8/A9 
(Figure 6A). The data from cBMT (Supplemen-
tal Figure 2) studies revealed that RAGE was 
not directly involved in a proliferative response 
in the MkPs. To confirm this, we performed an 
in vitro MkP proliferation assay and found no 
direct proliferative role for S100A8/A9 on MkPs 
(Figure 6B). To formally test the role of S100A8/
A9 in diabetes-associated thrombocytosis, we 
compared diabetic WT and S100a9–/– mice (also 
deficient in S100A8 protein) with WT controls 
(Figure 6C; glucose values). Interestingly, dele-
tion of S100a9 had no effect on the abundance of Kupffer cells 
(Figure 6D). However, the Kupffer cells from S100a9–/– mice 
failed to upregulate IL-6 production in the setting of diabetes (Fig-
ure 6E), and this was accompanied by a protection from diabe-
tes-associated thrombopoiesis (Figure 6, F and G). Myeloid cells 
largely produce S100A8/A9; thus, we performed a BMT study 
using S100a9–/– BM to confirm that hematopoietic cells were pro-
viding the source of S100A8/A9 (Figure 6H). Similar to the global 
S100a9–/– mice, hematopoietic deletion of S100A9 also protected 
mice from diabetes-induced thrombocytosis. Indeed the S100a9–/– 
BMT diabetic mice had reduced Kupffer cell IL-6 expression and 
fewer reticulated platelets and BM MkPs, which were also pro-
liferating less than those observed in the mice that received WT 
BM (Figure 6, I–L). Among the myeloid cells, neutrophils are the 
predominant source of the serum S100A8/A9 pool. To assess the 
specific contribution of neutrophils in promoting thrombopoiesis, 
Figure 5. Deletion of Rage protects from thrombo-
cytosis in diabetic mice. (A) RAGE expression on the 
surface of Kupffer cells from WT and age-matched 
4-week-diabetic mice was quantified by flow 
cytometry. n = 6 per group. *P < 0.05. (B and C) WT 
and Rage–/– mice were made diabetic with STZ, and 
4 weeks later platelets (B) and BM MEPs and MkPs 
(C) were quantified. *P < 0.05 vs. WT. #P < 0.05 vs 
WT+STZ. (D) Experimental overview: WT recipient 
mice were transplanted with BM from WT or Rage–/– 
mice and after a 5-week reconstitution period were 
rendered diabetic with STZ. After 4 weeks the mice 
were analyzed. (E) Blood glucose levels. (F) Circulating 
platelets. (G–I) Abundance of MkPs in the BM (G) and 
Kupffer cells in the liver (H) and Kupffer cell IL-6 expres-
sion (I) were quantified by flow cytometry. (J) Plasma 
TPO was quantified by ELISA. n = 7 control, and n = 11 
diabetic. *P < 0.05 vs. WT. All data represent the mean 
± SEM. P values were obtained using a t test, except in 
B and C, where 2-way ANOVA was used per cell type.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 3 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
we performed a neutrophil depletion study using an anti–Ly6-G 
antibody (Figure 6, M–Q). Similar to our previous findings, dia-
betic mice had significantly higher levels of plasma S100A8/A9 
that was neutrophil-derived (Figure 6N) (6). Consistent with our 
hypothesis, neutrophil-depleted diabetic mice had significantly 
lower levels of circulating platelets and fewer BM MEPs that were 
proliferating at a lower rate compared with isotype control–inject-
ed mice (Figure 6, O–Q). Together, these data indicate an import-
ant role for neutrophil-derived S100A8/A9 in promoting platelet 
production in diabetes.
Figure 6. Neutrophil-derived 
S100A8/A9 promotes thrombocy-
tosis in diabetic mice. (A) Il6 mRNA 
expression was quantified in BMDMs 
cultured in high glucose (25 mM) 
and incubated with S100A8/A9 for 
6 hours. n = 4. *P < 0.05 vs. 0. (B) 
BM progenitor cells were cultured in 
high glucose with S100A8/A9 for 16 
hours. MkP proliferation was quanti-
fied via EdU incorporation. n = 3 per 
group. (C–G) WT and S100a9–/– mice 
were made diabetic with STZ and 
analyzed after 4 weeks of diabetes. 
(C) Blood glucose levels. Livers were 
digested, and the abundance of 
Kupffer cells (D) and IL-6 expression 
(E) were quantified by flow cytome-
try. Circulating reticulated platelets 
(F) and BM MkPs (G) were measured 
by flow cytometry. n = 5 WT, n = 9 
STZ, and n = 10 S100a9–/– STZ. *P 
< 0.05 vs. WT (C and D) and vs. all 
groups (E–G). (H) Experimental over-
view: BM from WT or S100a9–/– mice 
was transplanted into WT recipient 
mice, and after 5 weeks a subgroup 
of mice were rendered diabetic with 
STZ. (I–L) Kupffer cell IL-6 expression 
(I), reticulated platelets (J), BM MkP 
abundance (K), and MkP prolifer-
ation (L) were quantified by flow 
cytometry. n = 5 WT control, n = 5 
WT STZ, n = 4 S100a9–/– control, n 
= 6 S100a9–/– STZ. *P < 0.05 for dis-
ease effect, #P < 0.05 for genotype 
effect. (M–Q) Neutrophil depletion 
studies: Neutrophils were depleted 
in WT and diabetic (STZ) mice after 
the onset of diabetes for 4 weeks by 
i.p. injection of the neutrophil-spe-
cific anti–Ly6-G antibody (clone 1A8, 
1 mg/injection, every 3 days), and 
these mice were compared with 
isotype control–treated mice. (M) 
Neutrophil levels were assessed by 
flow cytometry. (N) Plasma S100A8/
A9 levels. (O) Platelet levels were 
quantified by complete blood count. 
(P and Q) Abundance (P) and pro-
liferation (Q) of BM MEPs were quan-
tified by flow cytometry. n = 5 per 
group. *P < 0.05 for disease effect, 
#P < 0.05 for treatment effect. All 
data represent the mean ± SEM. P 
values were obtained using 1-way 
ANOVA (A–G) or 2-way ANOVA (I–Q).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 4 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
tal Figure 3D), which was unfortunately not reported before the 
bulk of the data were collected in this study. However, consistent 
with our mechanism, we observed a significant increase in these 
CLEC4F+ Kupffer cells and IL-6 expression (Supplemental Figure 
3, D and E). Importantly, we also confirmed that the CLEC4F+ 
Kupffer cells were increased in the STZ model (Supplemental Fig-
ure 3, F and G), suggesting that the analysis of our models prior to 
the discovery of this marker was still valid.
Reducing serum glucose improves reticulated thrombocytosis in 
diabetes. To test whether hyperglycemia is responsible for retic-
ulated thrombocytosis, we treated diabetic mice with the sodi-
um-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor (SGLT2i), dapagliflozin, 
Reticulated thrombocytosis is also observed in models of obesity/
insulin resistance/pre–type 2 diabetes. To explore whether reticulat-
ed thrombocytosis was also observed in other common metabolic 
disorders, namely obesity, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes 
(T2D), we quantified platelets in 24-week-old male WT, ob/ob, and 
diet-induced obese (DIO) mice (16 weeks of high-fat feeding). The 
ob/ob and DIO mice demonstrated reticulated thrombocytosis, 
consistent with observations in humans that reticulated thrombo-
poiesis is not specific to insulin deficiency (Supplemental Figure 3, 
A–C). We further explored the livers of the DIO mice and extend-
ed our Kupffer cell analysis to include a newly discovered marker, 
C-type lectin domain family 4 member F (CLEC4F) (Supplemen-
Figure 7. Interventions to inhibit thrombocytosis in diabetic mice. (A–F) SGLT2i studies: C57BL/6 mice were made diabetic with STZ, and blood glucose 
was lowered with the SGLT2i dapagliflozin (25 mg/kg/d) in the drinking water for 4 weeks. (A) Blood glucose levels. (B and C) Circulating reticulated 
platelets (B) and Kupffer cell IL-6 expression (C) were measured by flow cytometry. (D) Plasma TPO levels were quantified by ELISA. (E and F) BM pro-
genitor cells (E) and megakaryocytes (F) were quantified by flow cytometry. n = 6 control and STZ+SGLT2i and n = 4 STZ. *P < 0.05 vs. all groups. (G–K) 
ABR-215757 studies: C57BL/6 mice were made diabetic with STZ and treated with ABR-215757 (10 mg/kg/d) or vehicle in the drinking water for 4 weeks. 
(G) Blood glucose levels. Circulating reticulated platelets (H) and Kupffer cell IL-6 expression (I) were measured by flow cytometry. The abundance (J) and 
proliferation (K) of MkPs in the BM were quantified by flow cytometry. n = 6 control and n = 9 STZ and STZ+ABR. *P < 0.05 vs. WT (G) and vs. all groups 
(H–K). All data are mean ± SEM. P values were obtained using 1-way ANOVA.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 4 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
reticulated platelet levels (Figure 7B). We also observed that the 
Kupffer cells were producing less IL-6 (Figure 7C), which was 
associated with a significant reduction in circulating TPO (Figure 
7D). Consistent with the reduction in circulating TPO, glucose 
which lowers blood glucose in an insulin-independent manner. 
The SGLT2i reduced blood glucose levels of the diabetic mice to 
levels comparable to those of the WT control mice (Figure 7A). 
The reduction in blood glucose by SGLT2i treatment normalized 
Figure 8. Blocking S100A8/
A9 with ABR-215757 
decreases atherogenesis in 
diabetic mice. (A) Experi-
mental overview: 8-week-old 
Apoe–/– mice were divided 
into 3 groups, vehicle (Cont), 
vehicle diabetic (STZ), 
and ABR-215757 diabetic 
(STZ+ABR; 10 mg/kg/d in 
drinking water), and fed a 
chow diet for 12 weeks. (B 
and C) Blood glucose levels 
(B) and plasma cholesterol 
levels (C). (D–G) Circulating 
reticulated platelets (D), 
Kupffer cells (E), Kupffer cell 
IL-6 expression (F), and BM 
MkPs (G) were measured by 
flow cytometry. (H) Quan-
tification of mean lesion 
size. (I and J) Macrophage 
abundance was assessed by 
area of CD68+ regions (I) and 
lipid content by Oil Red O+ 
area (J). (K) Acellular regions 
were identified in H&E stain 
lesions (see arrows). (L) Per-
centage collagen content in 
the lesions was assessed by 
Picrosirius red staining and 
visualized under polarizing 
light. n = 9 control and STZ 
and n = 10 STZ+ABR. *P < 
0.05 vs. WT (B and C), vs. all 
groups (D–G), or as indicated 
by lines (H–L). All data 
represent the mean ± SEM. 
P values were obtained using 
a 1-way ANOVA. Scale bars: 
100 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 4 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
ABR-215757 inhibits diabetes-associated atherosclerosis. To 
determine whether blocking S100A8/A9 signaling would indeed 
result in a decrease in atherogenesis, we performed a study in 
atherosclerotic prone Apoe–/– mice. Eight-week-old mice were 
fed a chow diet and randomized into three groups: control (vehi-
cle), diabetic (STZ; vehicle), and diabetic plus ABR-215757 (10 
mg/kg/d in drinking water) (Figure 8A). As expected, the dia-
betic mice had higher blood glucose levels and slightly elevated 
plasma cholesterol compared with the nondiabetic controls with 
these biochemical parameters not affected by ABR-215757 (Figure 
8, B and C). Consistent with the study above, we saw a dramatic 
decrease in reticulated platelets (Figure 8D), which was accompa-
nied by fewer Kupffer cells and less IL-6 expression, along with 
fewer BM MkPs (Figure 8, E–G). We next examined the athero-
sclerotic lesion size and complexity. In line with our hypothesis, 
atherosclerotic lesion size, which was dramatically increased in 
diabetic mice, was significantly reduced when the diabetic mice 
were treated with ABR-215757 (Figure 8H and Supplemental Fig-
ure 4). Importantly, ABR-215757 also decreased the abundance of 
plaque macrophages and tended to decrease lipid content (Figure 
8, I and J). We also observed larger acellular regions in the diabetic 
mice, which was reduced in the ABR-215757 treated mice. While 
the acellular regions in the ABR-215757 mice were still significant-
ly larger than seen in the control mice, this appeared to be due to 
positive remodeling, since we detected an increase in collagen 
deposition, potentially stabilizing the lesion (Figure 8, K and L).
Subjects with T2D have reticulated thrombocytosis and increased 
S100A8/A9 levels. In our preclinical models we have discovered 
an important role for S100A8/A9 in driving reticulated thrombo-
poiesis. Furthermore, we have previously reported that S100A8/
A9 levels are increased in a cohort of individuals with type 1 dia-
betes (T1D) with complications (6). In this study we explored 
whether there was an association between plasma S100A8/A9 
and the abundance of reticulated platelets in people with T2D 
when compared with age-matched healthy subjects. As expected, 
people with T2D had moderate elevation in total platelet levels 
and a significant increase in the abundance of reticulated plate-
lets (Table 1), consistent with our preclinical data (Figure 1, C 
lowering with SGLT2i reduced the percentage of BM progenitor 
cells as well as megakaryocytes (Figure 7, E and F). Together, these 
data reveal that diabetes-associated reticulated thrombocytosis 
can be ameliorated with improved glucose control. These results 
are consistent with our previous findings that MPV is increased in 
people with poor diabetes control (40).
ABR-215757 reduces diabetes-associated thrombocytosis. We 
have identified a prominent role for S100A8/A9 in stimulating 
IL-6 production in Kupffer cells to evoke thrombopoiesis (Figure 
6). To determine whether S100A8/A9 is an effective target to 
prevent reticulated thrombocytosis, we tested a small-molecule 
inhibitor, ABR-215757 (paquinimod), that blocks the binding of 
S100A9 to TLR4 and RAGE (41). ABR-215757 (10 mg/kg/d) was 
administered to STZ diabetic mice in the drinking water for 4 
weeks. Administration of ABR-215757 had no impact on blood glu-
cose levels compared with those in nontreated diabetic mice (Fig-
ure 7G). Nevertheless, blocking S100A8/A9 with ABR-215757 led 
to a significant reduction in reticulated platelets (Figure 7H). Con-
sistent with our proposed model, ABR-215757 treatment reduced 
Kupffer cell IL-6 expression, which was accompanied by fewer 
BM MkPs that were proliferating at reduced rates (Figure 7, I–K). 
These data confirm that S100A8/A9 could be a potential target to 
reduce diabetes-associated thrombocytosis by inhibiting hepatic 
IL-6–mediated inflammation.
Table 1. Reticulated platelets and leukocyte interactions  
in people with type 2 diabetes
Control (n = 14)
Diabetes (n = 10)
P value
Platelets (×109 per liter)
219 ± 49.3
259 ± 69.6
0.117
Reticulated platelets (%)
6.6 ± 3.4
11.1 ± 4.5
0.0102
Reticulated platelets  
(×109 per liter)
14.4 ± 8.6
32.0 ± 16.7
0.0047
CD14+ monocyte-platelet 
aggregates (%)
11.2 ± 4.9
23.2 ± 12
0.0032
Data are shown as the mean ± SD. P values were obtained using a t test.
Figure 9. Reticulated thrombocytosis in people with type 2 diabetes. (A) Regression analysis of reticulated platelets versus hemoglobin A1c; n = 24. (B and 
C) Plasma S100A8/A9 (B) and CCL5 (C) levels were quantified by ELISA. n = 15 control and n = 11 diabetes. *P < 0.05 vs. control. All data are mean ± SEM.  
P values were obtained using a t test or linear regression (A).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 4 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
Diabetes is a disease that perpetuates an inflammatory state 
(6) and, despite widespread cholesterol lowering in these sub-
jects, is associated with a persistent increased risk of CVD (43). 
This residual risk of CVD in diabetes implies that there remains 
a major gap in our understanding of the underlying mechanisms 
responsible for increased CVD in diabetes. It is well established 
that people with diabetes have differences in their sensitivity 
and response to antiplatelet therapies. Increased platelet activa-
tion, particularly the release of platelet factor 4 from α-granules, 
is well documented in people with diabetes (44, 45), along with 
increased number of platelets, particularly reticulated platelets 
and MPV (14, 16–19, 21, 22). These published findings were con-
firmed in our cohort of patients with T2D (Table 1). It is likely 
that the increase in reticulated platelets plays a causative role 
in accelerating CVD, since a study of over 200,000 individuals 
revealed that MPV was predictive of mortality due to ischemic 
heart disease (46). Moreover, the increase in reticulated plate-
lets is suggested to be one of the main reasons for the decreased 
efficacy of certain antiplatelet drugs, including aspirin and clopi-
dogrel, as seen in diabetes (13, 14, 18, 47).
We have recently linked reticulated thrombocytosis to accel-
erated atherosclerosis in various genetically deficient (i.e., Abcg4–/– 
and Abcb6–/–) preclinical models (10, 48). The mechanism appears 
to relate to increased platelet-leukocyte aggregates, leukocyte acti-
vation, and plasma levels of the potent leukocyte chemokine CCL5. 
Further, it has been shown that deletion of CCL5 results in smaller 
atherosclerotic lesions (9). Interestingly, people with myelopro-
liferative neoplasms, including those biased towards  enhanced 
platelet production, such as essential thrombocytosis and polycy-
themia vera, often die of atherothrombotic disease (49). Our data 
are reminiscent of the platelet dynamics seen in people with these 
conditions, where activating JAK2 mutations (enhanced JAK/
STAT signaling) cause thrombocytosis along with enhanced clear-
ance by monocytes and neutrophils (50). The enhanced level of 
platelets in these aforementioned studies was due to cell- 
intrinsic 
mutations in MkPs and other BM progenitors resulting in uncon-
trolled proliferation. However, in the setting of diabetes we did not 
find this phenomenon, with no intrinsic differences in the MkPs. 
This suggests that external cues are responsible for the enhanced 
proliferation of these progenitors in diabetes. Accordingly, we 
detected increased plasma levels of the platelet-producing cyto-
kine TPO, as has previously been reported in people with diabetes 
(51). This finding pointed to a role for the liver, the major source of 
TPO. Generally, an increase in platelet activation or preactivated 
platelets would result in enhanced clearance.
Previous studies have shown that in response to inflammation 
the liver can dramatically upregulate TPO, which then instructs 
the BM progenitors to increase the production of myeloid cells, 
particularly platelets (29). IL-6 is the major inflammatory cyto-
kine that stimulates hepatic TPO production (31), which has been 
shown in genetically deficient mice and by administration of IL-6 
to patients with advanced malignancies (30). Moreover, paraneo-
plastic thrombocytosis in people with epithelial ovarian cancer is 
also driven by IL-6 (tumor derived) and by induction of hepatic 
TPO (52). While systemic IL-6 levels could stimulate hepatocytes 
to upregulate IL-6, there remains controversy as to the circulating 
levels of IL-6 in the setting of diabetes. Thus, we hypothesized that 
and D, and Supplemental Figure 3), signifying enhanced platelet 
production in these individuals. We also observed more CD14+ 
monocyte-platelet aggregates, consistent with our animal stud-
ies, suggesting that these platelets were circulating in an activat-
ed state (Table 1 and ref. 42). Importantly, we found a correlation 
between reticulated platelets and hemoglobin A1c levels (Figure 
9A), consistent with the hypothesis that poor glycemic control is 
associated with enhanced thrombopoiesis in people with diabe-
tes. Next we measured plasma S100A8/A9 levels and found sig-
nificantly increased levels in this cohort (Figure 9B). Again, con-
sistent with our preclinical findings, people with diabetes also had 
significantly higher plasma levels of the potent chemokine CCL5 
(Figure 9C). Together, these findings in our T2D patient cohort 
reflect those seen in our preclinical models and are consistent 
with the view that the same mechanisms of enhanced platelet 
production are conserved in humans.
Discussion
Diabetes is an insidious disease that accelerates a number of 
vascular complications, with the major outcome being increased 
mortality due to atherosclerotic CVD. Platelets are well known 
for their role in CVD, particularly in thrombus formation, but 
also in driving the initiation and progression of atherosclerot-
ic lesions (8, 10). In general, antiplatelet therapies significantly 
reduce the risk of CVD, but the effect of these drugs is some-
what attenuated in people with diabetes, perhaps because they 
have enhanced production of new platelets (16–18). Further, 
reticulated thrombocytosis could be an important factor driving 
accelerated atherosclerosis in diabetes. In this study we have 
identified that diabetes-induced liver inflammation promotes 
TPO production, which in turn stimulates thrombopoiesis with-
in the BM. One of the initiating ligands in this pathway was iden-
tified as S100A8/A9, which is mainly derived from neutrophils 
in the setting of hyperglycemia. Excitingly, we discovered 2 
tractable approaches, firstly by lowering blood glucose with an 
SGLT2i and secondly by preventing the bioactivity of S100A8/
A9 with the drug ABR-215757, could effectively normalize retic-
ulated platelet levels in diabetic mice (Figures 7 and 10). Fur-
thermore, administration of ABR-215757 mitigated the acceler-
ated atherogenesis seen in diabetes.
Figure 10. Proposed mechanism. Schematic overview of the proposed 
mechanism of diabetes-associated thrombocytosis (red arrows) and inter-
ventions (green blunted arrows). Meg, megakaryocyte.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 4 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
S100A8 and S100A9 are largely produced by neutrophils, par-
ticularly in the setting of diabetes (6). Through genetic deletion 
of S100a9 by a BMT approach, we narrowed down the role for 
S100A8/A9 from myeloid cells. Indeed, using neutrophil depletion 
studies we confirmed that neutrophils were the dominant source 
of these DAMPs. Neutrophils are almost exclusively glycolytic and 
thus are sensitive to ambient glucose concentrations. We have pre-
viously shown that normalizing blood glucose levels with an SGLT2i 
prevents the accumulation of reactive oxygen species (6), classi-
cal by-products of activated and stressed neutrophils. Using this 
approach, we found that normalization of blood glucose in an insu-
lin-independent manner with the SGLT2i prevents the activation of 
the thrombopoietic pathways that we had identified. Furthermore, 
we confirmed that poor glycemic control in people with T2D is asso-
ciated with increased MPV (40, 60, 61), a marker of more reticulat-
ed platelets. Our mouse models of obesity/insulin resistance/T2D 
revealed a similar mechanism at the level of the Kupffer cell, but the 
upstream initiating factors could be different.
While the overall management of diabetic patients has 
improved over the past few decades, maintaining glucose control 
in the optimal range still remains difficult. Epidemiological data 
have revealed an important contribution of postprandial hypergly-
cemic periods to increased cardiovascular risk (62–66). The effi-
cacy of SGLT2i’s not only on HbA1c levels, but more important-
ly glycemic variability remains to be determined. However, the 
recently published EMPA-REG study has shown that the SGLT2i 
empagliflozin significantly decreased the incidence of cardiovas-
cular events, including cardiovascular death, in people with diabe-
tes (67). The underlying explanation for decreased cardiovascular 
mortality with SGLT2 inhibition is not fully understood. Indeed, 
the key findings could be linked at least in part to actions on the 
atherothrombotic process, specifically thrombosis as a result of 
reduced reticulated platelets.
As an alternative approach independent of glucose control, 
we directly targeted the initiating ligands, S100A8/A9, with the 
small-molecule inhibitor ABR-215757. This inhibitor has been 
granted orphan medicinal product status in Europe and the US 
for the indication of systemic sclerosis. Importantly, ABR-215757 
has been reported to have few side effects and encouraging phar-
macokinetics in early-phase trials in people with systemic lupus 
erythematosus (68). Importantly, we now show that this molecule 
inhibited atherogenesis in a preclinical model of diabetes, provid-
ing a potential new therapeutic approach to reduce the cardiovas-
cular burden in diabetes. However, we should note that the reduc-
tion in atherosclerosis induced by ABR-215757 could also be via 
additional mechanisms and requires further investigation.
In summary, our study reveals that reticulated thrombocyto-
sis in diabetes is due to enhanced production in the BM. We iden-
tified that poor glycemic control stimulates neutrophil-derived 
S100A8/A9 to act on Kupffer cells to stimulate hepatic TPO in an 
IL-6–dependent manner (Figure 10). Through the use of the glu-
cose-lowering agent dapagliflozin (SGLT2i) or by inhibiting the 
bioactivity of S100A8/A9 (ABR-215757), we could dampen plate-
let production. Therefore it is anticipated that a reduction in these 
reactive reticulated platelets should lead to increased efficacy of 
current antiplatelet therapies and in turn reduce the incidence 
and severity of cardiovascular events, which remains the major 
local IL-6 production was more likely to induce TPO production. 
The liver is recognized as an important immune organ, and the 
hepatic specialized macrophages known as Kupffer cells appear to 
play a central role in recognizing invading pathogens (53), which 
in turn induce IL-6 expression (54). Indeed, we observed that not 
only were there more Kupffer cells in the livers of the diabetic 
mice, which were likely to have been recruited from the circula-
tion (38), but these cells were also manufacturing greater amounts 
of IL-6. We confirmed the role of Kupffer cells through depletion 
studies using clodronate liposomes (37), which have been previ-
ously used to confirm the source of IL-6 during listeria infections 
(54). Using a BMT approach, we also showed that engrafted Il6–/– 
Kupffer cells failed to respond to the hyperglycemic environment 
to induce reticulated thrombocytosis, confirming the importance 
of IL-6 in influencing platelet production.
Examining the pathways upstream of IL-6 led us to investigate 
RAGE, which we had previously shown to play an important role 
in diabetes-induced monocytosis by acting directly on CMPs in 
the BM (6). Competitive BMT studies ruled out a direct role for 
RAGE in promoting thrombocytosis at the progenitor cell level, 
confirming a role for peripheral signaling (i.e., hepatic). The liv-
er is an important site of sterile inflammation, where pattern rec-
ognition receptors and damage-associated molecular patterns 
(DAMPs) drive inflammatory responses (55). We found that RAGE 
was significantly upregulated on Kupffer cells from diabetic ani-
mals. Deletion, both globally or specifically within the hematopoi-
etic compartment, resulted in protection from diabetes-induced 
reticulated thrombocytosis. Importantly, we found that livers 
from Rage–/– BMT diabetic mice contained fewer Kupffer cells, 
which were also expressing less IL-6 and had lower plasma TPO 
levels. Indeed, RAGE has not been implicated in contributing to 
platelet production. Nevertheless, previous studies have revealed 
that RAGE signaling on platelets can result in their activation, pro-
moting a thrombotic phenotype and potentially encouraging leu-
kocyte recruitment to the activated endothelium (56).
To further explore the clinical translational potential of these 
findings, human studies in T2D were performed. Indeed, we 
observed that platelet activation was increased in T2D subjects 
and contributed to enhanced monocyte-platelet aggregates. 
RAGE is a promiscuous receptor binding to a host of ligands, 
including AGEs, HMGB1, and S100A8/A9. Interestingly, these 
ligands can also signal via other pattern recognition receptors 
including TLR4 and CD36. The selectivity appears to be disease 
and tissue dependent, such that we have previously determined 
that S100A8/A9 is a potent RAGE ligand in the setting of hyper-
glycemia (6), but binds to TLR4 in obesity (57). In a series of ele-
gant studies, deletion of S100A9 was shown to protect against 
ischemia, vasculitis, and atherosclerosis (58). S100A8/A9 has 
also been shown to regulate thrombosis during an acute myo-
cardial infarction, but this effect appears to be mediated through 
platelet-expressed CD36 in the setting of normoglycemia (59). 
Importantly, S100A9 was found not to be involved in hemostasis, 
suggesting that targeting this pathway will not result in uncon-
trolled bleeding (59). Nevertheless, it appears that S100A8/A9 
are key mediators of platelet activation, and furthermore we have 
now demonstrated that these DAMPs are also important regula-
tors of enhanced platelet production specifically in diabetes.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 4 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
leukocyte-platelet interactions and leukocyte activation. Viable cells 
were selected on the basis of forward and side scatter characteristics, 
and then CD45+ leukocytes were selected. Ly6-Chi monocyte-platelet 
aggregates were identified as CD115+Gr1hi (Ly6-Chi) and CD41+. Neu-
trophil-platelet aggregates were identified as CD115−Gr1+ (Ly6-G+) 
and CD41+. Platelet-dependent activation of Ly6-Chi monocytes and 
neutrophils was measured by CD11b expression (geo-mean fluores-
cence intensity [MFI]).
Neutrophil depletion. Neutrophils were depleted in WT and diabet-
ic (STZ) mice after the onset of diabetes for 4 weeks, by i.p. injection 
of the neutrophil-specific anti–Ly6-G antibody (clone 1A8; 1 mg/injec-
tion) every 3 days. This antibody is specific to neutrophils and does not 
affect monocytes (72).
BM-derived macrophages. BM-derived macrophages (BMDMs) 
were generated from the BM of hind limb bones of WT C57BL/6 mice. 
Following 7 days of culture in RPMI media containing 15% FBS and 
20% L cell–conditioned media, BMDMs were changed into fresh 
RPMI media containing 5% FBS and 2% BSA before treatment in 
high-glucose media (25 mmol/l).
RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis, and quantitative real time PCR. 
Total RNA from cells was extracted using QIAGEN RNeasy Mini or 
Micro kits and cDNA synthesized using Superscript Vilo (Invitrogen, 
Thermo Fisher Scientific). Quantitative real time PCR was monitored 
in real time with an Mx3000 sequence detection system (Stratagene) 
using SYBR Green PCR Core Reagents (Agilent Technologies) and 
normalized to m36b4.
BM megakaryocytes. Bones were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde 
for 24 hours and then decalcified with EDTA solution and sectioned. 
H&E staining was performed. Megakaryocytes were identified as 
large multinucleated cells within the marrow.
Atherosclerosis study. Apoe–/– mice were fed a chow diet, and a portion 
of mice were made diabetic with STZ. A group of STZ mice were treated 
with ABR-215757 (10 mg/kg/d in drinking water). After 12 weeks of dia-
betes the mice were sacrificed for atherosclerotic lesion analysis.
Total cholesterol. Cholesterol levels in the plasma were quantified 
using the Wako total cholesterol kit as previously described (6).
Lesion analysis. Hearts were dissected after the mice were per-
fused with saline and frozen in OCT compound. Serial 6-μm sections 
of the proximal aorta were prepared. H&E staining was performed 
as previously described (73). Lipid content was assessed by Oil Red 
O staining, and macrophage content was quantified by staining for 
CD68 (6). Acellular regions were identified as nuclei-free regions, and 
collagen was quantified by staining with Picrosirius red and capturing 
of images under polarized light. Images were captured on an Olym-
pus BX43 microscope, and quantification of all images was performed 
using Adobe Photoshop CS5.
Aortic arch lipid analysis. Lipid content in the aortic arch was mea-
sured by en face analysis. Dissected aortas were fixed in paraformal-
dehyde, and before staining, all fat and connective tissue was removed 
from the outer layers of the vessel. The aorta was cut longitudinally and 
stained with Oil Red O followed by washing and mounting on a sili-
cone-coated dish. Aortas were viewed on an Olympus SZX10 and cap-
tured using Q-Capture Pro 7 (QImaging) software. Quantification of 
Oil Red O staining was performed off-line using Adobe Photoshop CS5.
Human study. The human study was conducted at New York Uni-
versity Langone Medical Center. Exclusion criteria were use of other 
antiplatelet therapy including use of anticoagulant and NSAIDs within 
cause of morbidity and mortality in this population. By identifying 
S100A8/A9 as major glucose-responsive elements that play a sig-
nificant role in myelopoiesis (6) and now thrombopoiesis, we pro-
pose S100A8/A9 as a promising target to manage cardiovascular 
complications in diabetes.
Methods
Mice and treatments. Male mice were about 8 weeks of age when 
entered into the studies. WT C57BL/6, Rage–/–, Il6–/–, S100a9–/–, and 
ob/ob (The Jackson Laboratory) mice were bred and housed in the 
Alfred Medical Research Education Precinct Animal Centre in a 
pathogen-free facility under controlled conditions and exposed to a 
12-hour/12-hour light/dark cycle and were fed a standard chow, or in 
the case of the DIO mice a 60% kcal diet (Specialty Feeds). The total-
body S100a9–/– experiments were conducted at New York University. 
S100a9–/– mice were a gift from Karin Bornfeldt (University of Wash-
ington, Seattle, Washington, USA) originality created by Johannes 
Roth (University of Munster, Munster, Germany) (69).
Diabetes was induced by streptozotocin (STZ; 50 mg/kg i.p. injec-
tion for 5 days). The sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor (SGLT2i) 
(dapagliflozin) was a gift from Bristol-Myers Squibb and was adminis-
tered in the drinking water at a dose of 25 mg/kg/d for 4 weeks.
Kupffer cell depletion. Liposomes containing either clodronate 
or PBS were injected via the tail vein (250 μl/mouse) into a group of 
control (nondiabetic) and diabetic mice at day 1 and day 3 to deplete 
Kupffer cells.
ABR-215757 treatment. ABR-215757 was a gift from Active Biotech 
and was used to therapeutically inhibit the bioactivity of S100A8/A9. 
ABR-215757 was added to the drinking water to deliver an approxi-
mate dose of 10 mg/kg/d.
Reticulated platelets were measured as previously described (10). 
Undiluted EDTA-anticoagulated blood (5 μl) within 30 minutes of 
collection was mixed with an anti-CD41–APC antibody (eBioscience) 
and thiazole orange (final concentration 1 μg/ml) and incubated at 
room temperature in the dark for 20 minutes. Reticulated platelets 
were identified as CD41+ thiazole orangehi.
Flow cytometry. All antibody details can be found in Supple-
mental Table 1.
Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. BM cells were obtained 
from femurs and tibias and stained with a cocktail of antibodies before 
analysis by flow cytometry as previously described (10, 48, 70). Brief-
ly, lineage-committed cells were identified as CD45R, CD19, CD11b, 
CD3e, TER-119, CD2, CD8, CD4, and Ly6-C/G, all FITC positive, with 
antibodies against Sca1 and cKit to identify progenitor cell populations 
and HSPCs (Lineage–, Sca1+, cKit+) and with antibodies against CD16/
CD32 (FcγRII/III) and CD34 to separate CMPs (Lineage–, Sca1–, cKit+, 
CD34int, FcγRII/IIIint), MEPs (Lineage–, Sca1–, cKit+, CD34lo, FcγRII/
IIIlo), and MkPs (Lineage–, Sca1–, cKit+, CD34int, FcγRII/IIIint, CD41+). 
Cell cycle was quantified using DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich). The antibody to 
c-MPL was a gift from W. Tong (University of Pennsylvania, Philadel-
phia, Pennsylvania, USA) (71).
Neutrophil- and monocyte-platelet aggregates. Blood was collected 
through the tail vein into EDTA-lined tubes on ice to prevent leukocyte 
activation. Red blood cells were lysed, and the washed cells were then 
stained with CD45, CD115, Gr1 (Ly6-C/G), CD11b, and CD41 at 1:200 
dilution for 30 minutes on ice. The cells were carefully washed, resus-
pended in FACS buffer, and run on an LSRII flow cytometer to detect 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 4 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
 1. Haffner SM, Lehto S, Rönnemaa T, Pyörälä K, 
Laakso M. Mortality from coronary heart disease 
in subjects with type 2 diabetes and in nondia-
betic subjects with and without prior myocardial 
infarction. N Engl J Med. 1998;339(4):229–234.
 2. Laakso M. Cardiovascular disease in type 2 dia-
betes from population to man to mechanisms: 
the Kelly West Award Lecture 2008. Diabetes 
Care. 2010;33(2):442–449.
 3. Shah AD, et al. Type 2 diabetes and incidence 
of cardiovascular diseases: a cohort study in 
1.9 million people. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 
2015;3(2):105–113.
 4. Lüscher TF, Creager MA, Beckman JA, Cosentino 
F. Diabetes and vascular disease: pathophysiolo-
gy, clinical consequences, and medical therapy: 
part II. Circulation. 2003;108(13):1655–1661.
 5. Pasterkamp G. Methods of accelerated 
atherosclerosis in diabetic patients. Heart. 
2013;99(10):743–749.
 6. Nagareddy PR, et al. Hyperglycemia promotes 
myelopoiesis and impairs the resolution of ath-
erosclerosis. Cell Metab. 2013;17(5):695–708.
 
7. Sokunbi DO, Wadhwa NK, Suh H. Vascular dis-
ease outcome and thrombocytosis in diabetic and 
nondiabetic end-stage renal disease patients on 
peritoneal dialysis. Adv Perit Dial. 1994;10:77–80.
 8. Huo Y, et al. Circulating activated platelets exac-
erbate atherosclerosis in mice deficient in apoli-
poprotein E. Nat Med. 2003;9(1):61–67.
 9. Koenen RR, et al. Disrupting functional inter-
actions between platelet chemokines inhibits 
atherosclerosis in hyperlipidemic mice. Nat Med. 
2009;15(1):97–103.
 10. Murphy AJ, et al. Cholesterol efflux in mega-
karyocyte progenitors suppresses platelet 
production and thrombocytosis. Nat Med. 
2013;19(5):586–594.
 11. Martin JF, Kristensen SD, Mathur A, Grove EL, 
Choudry FA. The causal role of megakaryocyte–
platelet hyperactivity in acute coronary syn-
dromes. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2012;9(11):658–670.
 12. [No authors listed]. Collaborative overview of 
randomised trials of antiplatelet therapy — I: Pre-
vention of death, myocardial infarction, stroke by 
prolonged antiplatelet therapy in various catego-
ries of patients. Antiplatelet Trialists’ Collabora-
tion. BMJ. 1994;308(6921):81–106.
 13. Angiolillo DJ. Antiplatelet therapy in diabetes: 
efficacy and limitations of current treatment 
strategies and future directions. Diabetes Care. 
2009;32(4):531–540.
 14. Guthikonda S, et al. Role of reticulated plate-
lets and platelet size heterogeneity on platelet 
activity after dual antiplatelet therapy with 
aspirin and clopidogrel in patients with stable 
coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2008;52(9):743–749.
 15. Neergaard-Petersen S, Hvas AM, Kristensen SD, 
Grove EL. Platelets and antiplatelet therapy in 
patients with coronary artery disease and diabe-
tes. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2016;42(3):234–241.
 16. Papanas N, et al. Mean platelet volume in 
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Platelets. 
2004;15(8):475–478.
 17. Muscari A, et al. Determinants of mean platelet 
volume (MPV) in an elderly population: rele-
vance of body fat, blood glucose and ischaemic 
electrocardiographic changes. Thromb Haemost. 
2008;99(6):1079–1084.
 18. Guthikonda S, et al. Reticulated platelets and 
uninhibited COX-1 and COX-2 decrease the 
antiplatelet effects of aspirin. J Thromb Haemost. 
2007;5(3):490–496.
 19. Hekimsoy Z, Payzin B, Ornek T, Kandoğan G. 
Mean platelet volume in type 2 diabetic patients. 
J Diabetes Complicat. 2004;18(3):173–176.
 20. Shah B, Valdes V, Nardi MA, Hu L, Schrem E, Berg-
er JS. Mean platelet volume reproducibility and 
association with platelet activity and anti-platelet 
therapy. Platelets. 2014;25(3):188–192.
 21. Tschoepe D, et al. Large platelets circulate in 
an activated state in diabetes mellitus. Semin 
Thromb Hemost. 1991;17(4):433–438.
 22. Vaduganathan M, et al. Platelet reactivity 
and response to aspirin in subjects with 
the metabolic syndrome. Am Heart J. 
2008;156(5):1002.e1–1002.e7.
 23. Karpatkin S. Heterogeneity of human platelets. II. 
Functional evidence suggestive of young and old 
platelets. J Clin Invest. 1969;48(6):1083–1087.
 24. Kleiman NS. Are immature platelets growing up?: 
Toward a new marker of antiplatelet drug resis-
tance. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68(3):294–296.
 25. Stratz C, et al. Comparison of immature platelet 
count to established predictors of platelet reac-
tivity during thienopyridine therapy. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2016;68(3):286–293.
 26. Junt T, et al. Dynamic visualization of throm-
Author contributions
MJK, MKSL, JSB, IJG, PRN, and AJM designed and conducted 
experiments, analyzed results, and wrote the manuscript. AAS, 
DD, TJB, EM, DB, SH, HLK, MF, AW, and NMJH conducted exper-
iments and analyzed data. MAF, EW, EAF, JCD, and MEC provided 
resources and intellectual input. All authors edited the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH grants (HL092969 and 
DK095684) to IJG, an NIH grant (R00HL122505) and startup 
funds (from the University of Alabama at Birmingham) to PRN, 
and NHMRC grants (APP1083138 and APP1106154) to AJM and 
EW. TJB and EAF were supported by NIH grant DK095684. MJK is 
a Russell Berrie Foundation Scholar in Diabetes Research from the 
Naomi Berrie Diabetes Centre. MAF is a Senior Principal Research 
Fellow of the NHMRC (APP1021168). AJM is supported by a career 
development fellowship from the NHMRC (APP1085752), a future 
leader fellowship from the National Heart Foundation (100440), 
and a Viertel award from Diabetes Australia Research Trust.
Address correspondence to: Andrew J. Murphy, Haematopoiesis 
and Leukocyte Biology, Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, 75 
Commercial Road, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia. Phone: 
61.3.8532.1292; E-mail: andrew.murphy@bakeridi.edu.au. Or 
to: Prabhakara R. Nagareddy, Department of Nutrition Sciences, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1825 University Boulevard, 
Shelby Building, Room 303, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA. 
Phone: 205.934.6754; E-mail: pnreddy@uab.edu.
72 hours, platelet count less than 100 × 109 per liter or greater than 500 
× 109 per liter, hemoglobin less than 9, any hemorrhagic diathesis, or 
severe kidney disease. Peripheral blood was drawn from subjects and 
the first 5 ml was discarded, and the remaining blood was collected into 
tubes containing 3.2% sodium citrate for subsequent determination of 
platelet activity. Samples were processed within 30 minutes of collec-
tion. Flow cytometry was used to analyze monocyte-platelet aggregates 
in whole blood as previously described (42, 74). Reticulated platelets 
were measured with a previously described flow cytometry assay (75).
Statistics. Data are presented as mean ± SEM (unless stated oth-
erwise) and were analyzed using the 2-tailed Student’s t test or 1-way 
ANOVA followed by Newman-Keuls post hoc test. P less than 0.05 was 
considered significant. All tests were performed using Prism software 
(GraphPad Software Inc.).
Study approval. Animal experiments were approved by the Alfred 
Medical Research Education Precinct Animal Ethics Committee, Mel-
bourne, Australia, and conducted in accordance with the National 
Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) of Australia Guide-
lines for Animal Experimentation. The total-body S100a9–/– experi-
ments were conducted at New York University and were approved by 
the New York University animal ethics committee.
The human studies were conducted in accordance with policies of 
the New York University Langone Medical Center Institutional Review 
Board. All patients provided consent prior to participation in the study. 
From ongoing studies, we identified subjects on aspirin in an ongoing 
registry and ongoing studies (NCT02106429 and NCT01897103, 
ClinicalTrials.gov) measuring platelet activity.
Detailed methods are available in Supplemental Methods.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 1 4 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 6   June 2017
bopoiesis within bone marrow. Science. 
2007;317(5845):1767–1770.
 27. Schafer AI. Thrombocytosis. N Engl J Med. 
2004;350(12):1211–1219.
 28. Sungaran R, Markovic B, Chong BH. Localiza-
tion and regulation of thrombopoietin mRNa 
expression in human kidney, liver, bone marrow, 
and spleen using in situ hybridization. Blood. 
1997;89(1):101–107.
 29. Wolber EM, Fandrey J, Frackowski U, Jelkmann 
W. Hepatic thrombopoietin mRNA is increased 
in acute inflammation. Thromb Haemost. 
2001;86(6):1421–1424.
 30. Kaser A, et al. Interleukin-6 stimulates thrombopoi-
esis through thrombopoietin: role in inflammatory 
thrombocytosis. Blood. 2001;98(9):2720–2725.
 31. Burmester H, Wolber EM, Freitag P, Fandrey 
J, Jelkmann W. Thrombopoietin production in 
wild-type and interleukin-6 knockout mice with 
acute inflammation. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 
2005;25(7):407–413.
 32. Gieger C, et al. New gene functions in mega-
karyopoiesis and platelet formation. Nature. 
2011;480(7376):201–208.
 33. Koppikar P, et al. Efficacy of the JAK2 inhibitor 
INCB16562 in a murine model of MPLW515L-in-
duced thrombocytosis and myelofibrosis. Blood. 
2010;115(14):2919–2927.
 34. Pikman Y, et al. MPLW515L is a novel somat-
ic activating mutation in myelofibrosis with 
myeloid metaplasia. PLoS Med. 2006;3(7):e270.
 35. Eriksson U, Ewald U, Tuvemo T. Increased plate-
let volume in manifest diabetic rats. Ups J Med Sci. 
1983;88(1):17–23.
 36. Bacon CM, Tortolani PJ, Shimosaka A, Rees RC, 
Longo DL, O’Shea JJ. Thrombopoietin (TPO) 
induces tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of 
STAT5 and STAT3. FEBS Lett. 1995;370(1-2):63–68.
 37. Wong CH, Jenne CN, Petri B, Chrobok NL, Kubes 
P. Nucleation of platelets with blood-borne 
pathogens on Kupffer cells precedes other innate 
immunity and contributes to bacterial clearance. 
Nat Immunol. 2013;14(8):785–792.
 38. Scott CL, et al. Bone marrow-derived monocytes 
give rise to self-renewing and fully differentiated 
Kupffer cells. Nat Commun. 2016;7:10321.
 39. Klein I, et al. Kupffer cell heterogeneity: func-
tional properties of bone marrow derived 
and sessile hepatic macrophages. Blood. 
2007;110(12):4077–4085.
 40. Shah B, Sha D, Xie D, Mohler ER, Berger JS. 
The relationship between diabetes, metabolic 
syndrome, and platelet activity as measured by 
mean platelet volume: the National Health And 
Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999-2004. Dia-
betes Care. 2012;35(5):1074–1078.
 41. Björk P, et al. Identification of human S100A9 
as a novel target for treatment of autoimmune 
disease via binding to quinoline-3-carboxamides. 
PLoS Biol. 2009;7(4):e97.
 42. Michelson AD, Barnard MR, Krueger LA, Valeri 
CR, Furman MI. Circulating monocyte-platelet 
aggregates are a more sensitive marker of in vivo 
platelet activation than platelet surface P-selec-
tin: studies in baboons, human coronary inter-
vention, and human acute myocardial infarction. 
Circulation. 2001;104(13):1533–1537.
 43. Hiro T, et al. Diabetes mellitus is a major nega-
tive determinant of coronary plaque regression 
during statin therapy in patients with acute coro-
nary syndrome — serial intravascular ultrasound 
observations from the Japan Assessment of 
Pitavastatin and Atorvastatin in Acute Coronary 
Syndrome Trial (the JAPAN-ACS Trial). Circ J. 
2010;74(6):1165–1174.
 44. Bayraktar M, Dündar S, Kirazli S, Teletar F. Plate-
let factor 4, β-thromboglobulin and thrombos-
pondin levels in type I diabetes mellitus patients. 
J Int Med Res. 1994;22(2):90–94.
 45. Roy MS, Podgor MJ, Rick ME. Plasma fibrinopep-
tide A, beta-thromboglobulin, and platelet factor 
4 in diabetic retinopathy. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 
1988;29(6):856–860.
 46. Slavka G, et al. Mean platelet volume may repre-
sent a predictive parameter for overall vascular 
mortality and ischemic heart disease. Arterioscler 
Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011;31(5):1215–1218.
 47. Nicolucci A, Standl E. Antiplatelet therapy  
for every diabetic person? Diabetes Care.  
2011;34 Suppl 2:S150–S154.
 48. Murphy AJ, et al. Deficiency of ATP-binding 
cassette transporter B6 in megakaryocyte pro-
genitors accelerates atherosclerosis in mice. Arte-
rioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014;34(4):751–758.
 49. Murphy AJ, Tall AR. Disordered haemato-
poiesis and athero-thrombosis. Eur Heart J. 
2016;37(14):1113–1121.
 50. Maugeri N, et al. Clearance of circulating activated 
platelets in polycythemia vera and essential throm-
bocythemia. Blood. 2011;118(12):3359–3366.
 51. Grove EL, Hvas AM, Mortensen SB, Larsen SB, 
Kristensen SD. Effect of platelet turnover on 
whole blood platelet aggregation in patients 
with coronary artery disease. J Thromb Haemost. 
2011;9(1):185–191.
 52. Stone RL, et al. Paraneoplastic thrombocytosis in 
ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(7):610–618.
 53. Jenne CN, Kubes P. Immune surveillance by the 
liver. Nat Immunol. 2013;14(10):996–1006.
 54. Gregory SH, Wing EJ, Danowski KL, van Roo-
ijen N, Dyer KF, Tweardy DJ. IL-6 produced 
by Kupffer cells induces STAT protein acti-
vation in hepatocytes early during the course 
of systemic listerial infections. J Immunol. 
1998;160(12):6056–6061.
 55. Kubes P, Mehal WZ. Sterile inflammation in the 
liver. Gastroenterology. 2012;143(5):1158–1172.
 56. Fuentes E, Rojas A, Palomo I. Role of multili-
gand/RAGE axis in platelet activation. Thromb 
Res. 2014;133(3):308–314.
 57. Nagareddy PR, et al. Adipose tissue macrophages 
promote myelopoiesis and monocytosis in obesi-
ty. Cell Metab. 2014;19(5):821–835.
 58. Croce K, et al. Myeloid-related protein-8/14 is 
critical for the biological response to vascular 
injury. Circulation. 2009;120(5):427–436.
 59. Wang Y, et al. Platelet-derived S100 family mem-
ber myeloid-related protein-14 regulates throm-
bosis. J Clin Invest. 2014;124(5):2160–2171.
 60. Dindar S, Cinemre H, Sengul E, Annakkaya 
AN. Mean platelet volume is associated with 
glycaemic control and retinopathy in patients 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus. West Indian Med J. 
2013;62(6):519–523.
 61. Demirtunc R, Duman D, Basar M, Bilgi M, Teom-
ete M, Garip T. The relationship between glycemic 
control and platelet activity in type 2 diabetes mel-
litus. J Diabetes Complicat. 2009;23(2):89–94.
 62. Node K, Inoue T. Postprandial hyperglycemia as 
an etiological factor in vascular failure. Cardio-
vasc Diabetol. 2009;8:23.
 63. Leiter LA, et al. Postprandial glucose regula-
tion: new data and new implications. Clin Ther. 
2005;27(suppl B):S42–S56.
 64. Ceriello A. Postprandial hyperglycemia and dia-
betes complications: is it time to treat? Diabetes. 
2005;54(1):1–7.
 65. Cavalot F, et al. Postprandial blood glucose is a 
stronger predictor of cardiovascular events than 
fasting blood glucose in type 2 diabetes mellitus, 
particularly in women: lessons from the San Luigi 
Gonzaga Diabetes Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2006;91(3):813–819.
 66. Aryangat AV, Gerich JE. Type 2 diabetes: postpran-
dial hyperglycemia and increased cardiovascular 
risk. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2010;6:145–155.
 67. Zinman B, et al. Empagliflozin, cardiovascular 
outcomes, and mortality in type 2 diabetes.  
N Engl J Med. 2015;373(22):2117–2128.
 68. Bengtsson AA, et al. Pharmacokinetics, tolera-
bility, and preliminary efficacy of paquinimod 
(ABR-215757), a new quinoline-3-carboxamide 
derivative: studies in lupus-prone mice and a 
multicenter, randomized, double-blind, place-
bo-controlled, repeat-dose, dose-ranging study 
in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. 
Arthritis Rheum. 2012;64(5):1579–1588.
 69. Manitz MP, et al. Loss of S100A9 (MRP14) results 
in reduced interleukin-8-induced CD11b surface 
expression, a polarized microfilament system, and 
diminished responsiveness to chemoattractants in 
vitro. Mol Cell Biol. 2003;23(3):1034–1043.
 70. Murphy AJ, et al. ApoE regulates hematopoietic 
stem cell proliferation, monocytosis, and mono-
cyte accumulation in atherosclerotic lesions in 
mice. J Clin Invest. 2011;121(10):4138–4149.
 71. Tong W, Ibarra YM, Lodish HF. Signals emanat-
ing from the membrane proximal region of the 
thrombopoietin receptor (mpl) support hema-
topoietic stem cell self-renewal. Exp Hematol. 
2007;35(9):1447–1455.
 72. Daley JM, Thomay AA, Connolly MD, Reichner 
JS, Albina JE. Use of Ly6G-specific monoclonal 
antibody to deplete neutrophils in mice. J Leukoc 
Biol. 2008;83(1):64–70.
 73. Renard CB, et al. Diabetes and diabetes-associated 
lipid abnormalities have distinct effects on initia-
tion and progression of atherosclerotic lesions.  
J Clin Invest. 2004;114(5):659–668.
 74. Shah B, et al. Comparison of platelet activity mea-
surements by use of arterial and venous blood sam-
pling. J Thromb Haemost. 2013;11(10):1922–1924.
 75. Michelson AD, Barnard MR, Krueger LA, Frelinger 
AL, Furman MI. Evaluation of platelet function by 
flow cytometry. Methods. 2000;21(3):259–270.
