 ARTICLE
OPEN
Neural correlates of video game empathy training in
adolescents: a randomized trial
Tammi R. A. Kral
1,2,3, Diane E. Stodola3, Rasmus M. Birn3,4,5, Jeanette A. Mumford1,3, Enrique Solis1, Lisa Flook1, Elena G. Patsenko1,
Craig G. Anderson6,7, Constance Steinkuehler6,7,8 and Richard J. Davidson1,2,3,4
The ability to understand emotional experiences of others, empathy, is a valuable skill for effective social interactions. Various types
of training increase empathy in adolescents, but their impact on brain circuits underlying empathy has not been examined. Video
games provide a unique medium familiar and engaging to adolescents and can be used to deliver training at scale. We developed
an empathy training video game, Crystals of Kaydor (Crystals), and investigated whether playing Crystals increases empathic
accuracy (EA) and related brain activation in adolescents (N = 74; 27 female; mean age(sd) = 12.8(0.7) years; age range 11–14 years).
Participants completed a resting state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) scan and an EA task during an fMRI scan before and after 2 weeks of
daily gameplay with either the empathy training game, Crystals (N = 34), or the commercial video game Bastion (N = 40), an active
control condition. There were no group differences in EA improvement following gameplay, however, engagement with training
aspects of Crystals was associated with a higher increase in EA-related activation in right temporoparietal junction following
gameplay. Moreover, rs-fMRI connectivity in empathy-related brain circuits (posterior cingulate–medial prefrontal cortex; MPFC)
was stronger after Crystals gameplay compared to Bastion. The more individuals’ EA increased following Crystals versus Bastion, the
stronger their rs-fMRI connectivity in brain circuits relevant for emotion regulation (amygdala-MPFC). These findings suggest that a
video game designed to increase empathic accuracy produces behaviorally-relevant, functional neural changes in fewer than 6 h of
gameplay in adolescents.
npj Science of Learning  (2018) 3:13 ; doi:10.1038/s41539-018-0029-6
INTRODUCTION
Adolescence is a developmental period marked by profound
physical and psychological change. Many individuals experience
their first onset of psychiatric illness such as anxiety and
depression during this time.1,2 Further exacerbating what can be
a difficult transition, a recent meta-analysis found that approxi-
mately 36% of adolescents were victims of bullying,3 which is
associated with psychosocial adjustment problems,4 greater
suicidal ideation and suicide attempts,5 and serious health
consequences, such as increased systemic inflammation that can
persist into adulthood.6 Research indicates that empathy is a skill
that can buoy well-being by reducing the negative impact of poor
peer relations on personal adjustment—young adolescents with
higher empathic accuracy (a behavioral measure of empathic
ability) have less internalizing symptoms and are less likely to be
targets of bullying.7 Furthermore, the ability to form positive,
supportive relationships can buffer the development of both
psychological and physical suffering, particularly in the presence
of
stress.8
Thus,
training
that
increases
empathy
may
be
particularly beneficial during adolescence.
In order to effectively assess the impact of training programs for
improving empathic abilities it is critical to utilize measures as
similar as possible to real-world situations. The empathic accuracy
task is one of the more ecologically valid measures of empathy, as
the stimuli consist of videos of people (“targets”) discussing
emotional life events. This task requires identifying the target’s
emotions in line with the target’s ratings of their own emotions.
Participants are instructed to rate how the target is feeling in the
video rather than to use a specific strategy, and are thus able to
utilize either or both of the processes found to underlie empathy:
perspective
taking
and
experience
sharing.9
The
empathic
accuracy task is unique in that the videos depict the target’s
changing emotional expressions, which provides an opportunity
for mimicry,
and
also
a narrative
component
that
allows
participants to understand the event from the target’s perspective.
Conversely, much of the literature on empathy is based on
research that examines the cognitive and affective aspects of
empathy separately (i.e., perspective taking and experience
sharing, respectively), for example using cartoon vignettes or
images of bodily injury.10,11
Separable neural networks underlie perspective taking and
experience sharing,9,12–15 and these networks are both activated
when
adults
are
empathically
accurate.16
However,
as
we
previously reported, adolescents only activated regions in the
network underlying perspective taking when making empathically
accurate responses. These regions included right temporoparietal
junction (RTPJ), ventral and dorsal medial prefrontal cortex
(VMPFC
and
DMPFC,
respectively).
The
RTPJ
and
DMPFC
participate in a sub-network of the brain’s default mode network
Received: 5 February 2018 Revised: 2 July 2018 Accepted: 6 July 2018
1Center for Healthy Minds, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA; 2Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA; 3Waisman Laboratory for Brain Imaging
and Behavior, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA; 4Department of Psychiatry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA; 5Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, USA; 6Games+Learning+Society, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA; 7Department of Curriculum and Instruction, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA and
8Department of Informatics, University of California, Irvine, USA
Correspondence: Tammi R. A. Kral (kral@wisc.edu)
www.nature.com/npjscilearn
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
 during the resting state,17 which has also been implicated in
taking a third person perspective more generally.10,18–21 In
contrast, activation in regions related to experience sharing,
including right anterior insula and right inferior parietal lobule,
related to less empathic accuracy in adolescents.22 One inter-
pretation of this negative brain-behavior relationship is that the
adolescents’ accuracy was worse due to their experience of
empathic
distress
when
sharing
the
target’s
emotions,
as
experience sharing can lead to empathic distress, particularly
when emotion regulation is lacking.23–25 Notably, a large body of
research indicates that adolescents have difficulty with emotion
regulation.26 This may indicate that adolescents are better able to
empathize when utilizing perspective taking than experience
sharing, possibly due to an inability to regulate the emotions
associated with sharing another’s emotional experience. One way
to address this potential developmental shortcoming is through
training to increase the use of perspective taking as a strategy,
and to improve implicit emotion regulation.
The potential to train empathic accuracy abilities in adolescents
finds support in research by Goldstein and Winner.27 They found
that students in an intense acting class that utilized role-playing
had increased performance on an empathic accuracy task
compared to an active control group. Students in the control
group received equally intensive training in either visual arts or
music. While an important step in providing evidence for the
feasibility of training empathy in adolescence, this study required
participants to attend a special arts school. It is important to
develop and test additional modes by which to deliver training.
An intervention could have a broad impact by being accessible,
convenient, and engaging, in addition to utilizing effective
training. Delivering training with an interactive, immersive video
game on a mobile device is one way to accomplish this goal.
Adolescents consume video games daily, as a survey by the Kaiser
Family Foundation found that American children between the
ages of 8 and 18 years old spend an average of 73 min per day
playing video games (2010).28 Work by Greitemeyer and Osswald
provides additional support for the efficacy of video games as an
educational
platform.29
They
demonstrated
that
playing
a
commercially available video game (Lemmings) with a pro-social
context increased pro-social behavior. They proposed a mechan-
ism whereby video games encourage learning by providing
environments with opportunities for modeling, rehearsal and
reinforcement.29 Therefore, pro-social video games may provide a
unique opportunity to deliver training in a format that adolescents
are already utilizing, and that can be both engaging and effective.
However, the Lemmings video game was created for entertain-
ment purposes, and while it includes a pro-social context, the
game mechanics solely involve problem solving needed to pass
through a set of mazes. In the current study we sought to create a
game with mechanics that directly address processes underlying
empathy.
In order to test whether an empathy video game intervention
would improve empathic accuracy and underlying brain activation
and network connectivity, we developed a videogame with
empathy training mechanics: Crystals of Kaydor (Crystals, Fig. 1;
for a video overview see https://gearlearning.org/microsites/
kaydor/). Crystals is a story-based iPad game to train empathy
with cutting-edge animation based on the Facial Action Coding
System.30 Players learn to recognize six basic emotions (anger,
fear, happiness, surprise, disgust and sadness) by paying attention
to the avatars’ facial expressions and head movements (Fig. 1b).
Crystals also includes an in-game training tool in which players
gauge the intensity of emotions by moving a slider up for strong
intensity and down for low intensity, thereby learning how to
identify emotions across a continuum from subtle to strong (Fig.
1c). Players receive feedback on their accuracy and can re-play the
empathy game mechanics, providing additional opportunities for
training and rehearsal that has been proposed as a mechanism for
learning and transfer of pro-social skills from video games to real
life.29 When players have successfully mastered the ability to
identify and gauge the six basic emotions they have the
opportunity to respond emotionally to the avatar by choosing
one of six iconic facial expressions (Fig. 1d). Following an
empathically appropriate response the player receives interactive
feedback through a change in the emotional expression of the
avatar (Fig. 1e), which provides positive reinforcement hypothe-
sized to aid in video game-based learning.29 The positive
reinforcement is two-fold, as players receive the positive social
experience of the avatar smiling, as well as the rewarding
experience of winning by solving the problem correctly. Positive
social reinforcement has been shown to share behavioral and
neural properties with basic reinforcement reward learning
modeled in non-human primates.31 As players progress through
the game they encounter opportunities to go on quests in which
they help the avatars that reside in the game world, and in doing
so learn how the narrative context impacts the avatars’ emotions.
The emotional narratives provide cues and implicit motivation to
take the avatars’ perspectives to improve performance on the
empathy training aspects of the game. If players engage with the
quests as expected and use the narratives to inform their
responses on emotion recognition and intensity ratings this
rehearsal
may
activate
and
strengthen
perspective
taking
behavior and the underlying brain networks. The quests include
activities such as finding missing birthday presents (Fig. 1f) and
sharing a ball with an excluded child avatar. These quests drive
the narrative of the game, allowing the player to earn the avatars’
trust and progress to new areas, while simultaneously encoura-
ging the player to practice emotion recognition, emotion intensity
ratings and empathic responding.
In the current study we sought to test whether a video game
designed to train empathy (Crystals) would improve empathic
accuracy, empathy-related brain activation and connectivity of
brain networks relevant for empathic processing in adolescents.
Game-play data that tracked participants performance and in-
game behavior was used to address the question of how
engagement with different game mechanics impacted changes
in empathic behavior, brain activation and connectivity. We
hypothesized that participants who played the empathy training
game Crystals would show greater empathic accuracy on a
behavioral task, and higher self-reported empathic concern
following training (as measured by the Interpersonal Reactivity
Index, IRI)32 compared to participants in a control group who
played a similar style commercial game, Bastion, which did not
include specific mechanics for training empathy. We predicted
that increased empathic accuracy would be associated with
greater empathic concern. It is sometimes the case that while
group differences in the main effect of interest are not present,
those participants in the experimental intervention group who
showed the hypothesized neural change would be expected to
show the relevant behavioral change. Accordingly, we predicted
that increases in empathic accuracy should be accompanied by,
and related to, increased activation during the empathic accuracy
task and increased resting connectivity for the neural regions
underlying empathic accuracy in adolescents, including VMPFC,
DMPFC and RTPJ.22 We interrogated individual differences in
gameplay for participants who played Crystals and hypothesized
that participants with greater engagement with and performance
on the empathy training game mechanics (as measured by
telemetry data collected from the game) would show the most
change in empathic accuracy and related brain activation. Since
we previously found that participants had higher activation in a
network of regions related to perspective taking when they had
higher empathic accuarcy (at baseline), and since Crystals may
have encouraged players to practice perspective taking (as
described above) we expected that training adolescents to more
accurately empathize would be supported and reflected by
Neural correlates of video game empathy training in adolescents: a
TRA Kral et al.
2
npj Science of Learning (2018)  13 
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
1234567890():,;
 strengthened connectivity wihin this network. We tested for
changes in the strength of rs-fMRI connectivity between seed
regions related to empathic accuracy in our prior work (VMPFC,
DMPFC and RTPJ) with the rest of the empathic accuracy-related
network based on an independent sample (participants who were
randomized to a different pair of video games not under
investigation in this study), as well as with networks relevant for
emotion regulation (VMPFC—amygdala and DMPFC—amygdala)
since our prior work indicated a potential interaction between
emotion regulation ability and empathic accuracy as an area
where adolescents may also benefit from improvement.22 We also
examined whether changes in connectivity had behaviorally
relevant consequences in the form of changes in empathic
accuracy.
RESULTS
All results are reported after removing outliers based on Cook’s D
using a cutoff threshold of 4/(N−P) for data points disconnected
from the distribution (where N = sample size and P = number of
parameters in the model). When outliers were removed from the
model they were also removed from the corresponding figure and
table. In order to determine whether the empathy training game
Crystals improved empathic accuracy and related brain activation,
we compared the change from pre-training to post-training
measures (time 2 − time 1 difference scores) in participants
randomized to play Crystals with the active control condition (the
commercially available video game Bastion). We also conducted
follow-up tests for each group comparison to determine whether
there were significant effects within either group, and confirmed
Fig. 1
Crytsals of Kaydor empathy training game. Title screen depicting the character that a player controls from the third person perspective
(a), emotion recognition game mechanic where the player selects which of the 6 basic emotions (happy, surprise, sadness, disgust, fear or
anger) is shown by the animated alien avatar (b), emotion intensity calibration with a slider that the player moves up and down to gauge the
changing intensity of the avatar’s emotion (c), empathic responding mechanic where the player must select one of 6 iconic emotional
expressions to communicate their empathy to the avatar (d), the interactive response of the avatar where the animated emotional expression
changes following a player’s empathic response in the previous panel (e), and the helping quest in which the player engages in a mission such
as helping the avatars find missing items (f)
Neural correlates of video game empathy training in adolescents: a
TRA Kral et al.
3
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
npj Science of Learning (2018)  13 
 that there were no baseline differences between groups on any of
the dependent variables. Significant results from the region of
interest (ROI) analyses all survive family-wise correction for
multiple comparisons using the Holm-Bonferroni method across
the set of ROIs used for each test.33 Voxel-wise analyses were
thresholded at a family-wise error of p < 0.05 using threshold-free
cluster enhancement with FSL’s Randomize.34 Descriptive statistics
for variables described in the following results sections are
provided in Table 1.
Group differences in behavior and self-report
Group differences in the post- minus pre-intervention empathic
accuracy scores were tested using a two-sample t-test to examine
the effect of video game training on behavior. There was no
significant group difference in empathic accuracy change (t(71) =
−1.04, p = 0.30, b = −0.06, CI = [−0.16, 0.05]; 1 Crystals outlier
removed; Supplementary Figure 1). Nor was there a change in
empathic accuracy from pre-intervention to post-intervention
within Crystals (t(32) = -0.78, p = 0.44, b = -0.03, CI = [-0.10, 0.05];
1 Crystals outlier removed) or Bastion participants (t(39) = 0.71, p
= 0.48, b = 0.03, CI = [−0.05, 0.11]).
We also tested for relationships between self-reported empathic
concern and our behavioral measure of empathic accuracy. First,
we confirmed that there was a relationship between empathic
accuracy and self-reported empathic concern across all partici-
pants at baseline, such that participants with higher empathic
accuracy had higher self-reported empathic concern (t(72) = 2.47,
p = 0.016, b = 4.64, CI = [0.90, 8.39], r = 0.28). We tested whether
there was an association between changes in empathic accuracy
and empathic concern, and found support for this hypothesis (t
(70) = 2.23, p = 0.03, b = 2.99, CI = [0.31, 5.67], r = 0.30; 1 Bastion
outlier removed; Supplementary Figure 2). There was no group
difference in change in self-reported empathic concern (t(68) =
0.15, p = 0.88, b = 0.09, CI = [−1.12, 1.31]; 1 Bastion and 2 Crystals
outliers removed).
Training-related change in rs-fMRI connectivity: voxel-wise
analyses
We examined whether playing Crystals led to increased con-
nectivity between each of the three seed ROIs used in the task-
based analysis (VMPFC, DMPFC, and RPTJ) within the network of
regions where activation during the EA task related to higher
empathic accuracy (and which have been related to perspective
taking).15,16,20,22,35 We defined the target mask based on the same
independent sample of participants whose brain activation was
used to define the seed ROIs, and conducted a voxel-wise analysis
within the mask excluding the relevant seed regions within each
analysis. Participants who played Crystals had increased DMPFC –
posterior cingulate rs-fMRI connectivity following game-play,
relative to participants who played Bastion (Fig. 2a, in red). Within
the Crystals group, there was increased rs-fMRI connectivity
between this network of regions (Fig. 2b in blue), and there were
no regions where Bastion participants had significantly stronger
DMPFC rs-fMRI connectivity following game-play than the Crystals
group. Changes in DMPFC connectivity within the empathic
accuracy-related network mask were not related to changes in
empathic accuracy for Crystals participants (t(28) = 1.22, p = 0.23,
b = 0.15, CI = [−0.10, 0.40]; 1 outlier removed). There were no
significant group differences in changes for VMPFC or RTPJ rs-fMRI
connectivity following game-play.
We also tested for changes in rs-fMRI connectivity between the
3 seed ROIs (VMPFC, DMPFC and RTPJ) in a whole-brain, voxel-
wise analysis to determine whether there were other regions
where connectivity changed following gameplay. There were no
significant group differences in change in rs-fMRI connectivity in
Table 1.
Descriptive statistics
Measure
Group
N
Mean
S.D.
Min.
Max.
EA delta
Crystals 33 −0.03 0.21 −0.39 0.40
Bastion
40 0.03
0.25 −0.43 0.47
EC delta
Crystals 31 0.06
2.57 −6
5
Bastion
39 0.03
2.49 −5
6
VMPFC – Amygdala rs-fMRI
delta
Crystals 31 0.10
0.43 −0.75 0.88
Bastion
33 −0.03 0.28 −0.76 0.54
DMPFC – Amygdala rs-fMRI
delta
Crystals 30 0.10
0.43 −0.83 1.20
Bastion
33 0.04
0.35 −0.79 0.83
RTPJ EA-related activation
delta
Crystals 33 −0.02 0.66 −1.75 1.69
Bastion
39 −0.05 1.13 −3.55 1.83
VMPFC EA-related activation
delta
Crystals 33 −0.03 1.08 −3.04 3.15
Bastion
38 −0.26 1.43 −5.27 2.67
DMPFC EA-related activation
delta
Crystals 33 −0.29 0.56 −2.09 0.85
Bastion
39 0.05
1.00 −3.14 3.15
Emotion identification first
tries
Crystals 33 54.0
12.0 27
74
Emotion intensity first tries
Crystals 33 29.6
10.4 14
60
Game engagement
Crystals 33 0.06
0.92 −1.72 2.24
Total time playing Crystals
Crystals 33 220.2
53.2 121.0
334.1
Number taser uses
Crystals 33 19.3
18.0 3
103
Number quests completed
Crystals 33 36.1
6.7
19
57
Descriptive statistics by group for all variables used in analysis. S.D.
standard deviation, Min. minimum, Max. maximum, delta, time 2 – time 1
difference, EA empathic accuracy, EC self-reported empathic concern, rs-
fMRI
resting
state
functional
magnetic
resonance
imaging,
VMPFC
ventromedial prefrontal cortex, DMPFC dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, RTPJ
right temporoparietal junction
Z=2.5
Z=4.0
Z=2.5
Z=14.0
a)
b)
c)
Fig. 2
Training-related increases in DMPFC—PCC rs-fMRI connectivity after Crystals relative to Bastion. The significant group difference in
change in DMPFC—PCC rs-fMRI connectivity is in red (a), the significant difference (time 2 − time 1) within Crystals participants is in blue (b),
and the overlap between the two contrasts is depicted in purple (c). Results are overlaid on the independently-defined functional mask in
yellow in Montreal Neurological Institute template space at slice x = 43, thresholded and corrected for family-wise error at p < 0.05
Neural correlates of video game empathy training in adolescents: a
TRA Kral et al.
4
npj Science of Learning (2018)  13 
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
 the
whole-brain
analysis.
Since
rs-fMRI
data
is
particularly
susceptible to motion artifacts,36 we also verified that there were
no group differences in average motion across scans (t(67) = 0.33,
p = 0.74, b = 1.92, CI = [−9.8, 13.6]), or in the difference in motion
from pre-intervention to post-intervention (t(67) = 0.38, p = 0.70,
b = 4.31, CI = [−18.2, 26.9]).
Empathic accuracy in relation to rs-fMRI connectivity: ROI analyses
Given the potential interaction between emotion regulation ability
and empathic accuracy, we tested whether changes in rs-fMRI
connectivity of brain networks related to emotion regulation
(VMPFC or DMPFC with right amygdala) were associated with
improvements in empathic accuracy following Crystals game-play
compared to Bastion. Improved empathic accuracy was associated
with increased right amygdala–VMPFC rs-fMRI connectivity (T2
−T1) in participants who played Crystals (t(29) = 2.95, p = 0.01, b
= 0.90, CI = [0.27, 1.52]). The relationship between changes in
empathic accuracy and VMPFC – right amygdala rs-fMRI was
significantly greater for Crystals versus Bastion (t(60) = 2.23, p =
0.03, b = 0.79, CI = [0.08, 1.50], 1 Bastion outlier removed; Fig. 3a),
as there was no statistically significant relationship in the Bastion
group (t(31) = 0.10, p = 0.60, b = 0.10, CI = [−0.30, 0.51]). There
was no group difference in the change in VMFPC—right amygdala
rs-fMRI connectivity (t(59) = 1.46, p = 0.15, b = 0.12, CI = [−0.04,
0.28], 1 Bastion and 3 Crystals outliers removed). There was no
difference in VMPFC – right amygdala rs-fMRI connectivity
between groups at baseline (t(61) = -0.55, p = 0.59, b = −0.04,
CI = [−0.17, 0.10], 2 Crystals outliers removed), nor in the
relationship
between
empathic
accuracy
and
VMPFC—right
amygdala rs-fMRI at baseline (t(60) = −0.85, p = 0.40, b = −0.36,
CI = [-1.22, 0.49]; 1 Bastion outlier removed).
We found the same pattern of effects for change in rs-fMRI
connectivity between DMPFC and right amygdala: improved
empathic accuracy from pre-intervention to post-intervention was
associated with inreased rs-fMRI connectivity in Crystals partici-
pants compared to Bastion (t(59) = 2.42, p = 0.02, b = 0.96, CI
[0.17, 1.70]; 1 Crystals and 1 Bastion outlier removed; Fig. 3b), and
the relationship was significantly positive within Crystals (t(29) =
2.48, p = 0.02, b = 0.79, CI [0.14, 1.40]). There was no statistically
significant relationship between changes in empathic accuracy
and DMPFC—amygdala rs-fMRI for Bastion participants (t(31) =
−0.70, p = 0.95, b = −0.02, CI [−0.52, 0.49]; 1 outlier removed).
There was no group difference in change in DMPFC – amygdala rs-
fMRI (t(62) = 0.10, p = 0.92, b = 0.01, CI [−0.18, 0.20]; 1 Crystals
outlier removed). There were no baseline group differences in
DMPFC—amygdala rs-fMRI connectivity (t(62) = 1.42, p = 0.16, b
= 0.10, CI [−0.04, 0.25]; 1 Crystals outlier removed) or its
relationship with empathic accuracy (t(59) = 0.19, p = 0.85, b =
0.07, CI [−0.69, 0.84]; 1 Crystals and 1 bastion outlier removed).
We also conducted a whole-brain voxel-wise analysis and there
were no regions with significantly different change in connectivity
between groups for the VMPFC or DMPFC seed, nor for group
differences in change in VMPFC or DMPFC connectivity in relation
to change in empathic accuracy.
Group differences in empathic accuracy task-related activation
In order to test for group differences in empathic accuracy-related
blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) activation we mod-
eled the linear relationship between the trial-wise activation
estimates and the empathic accuracy score for each trial (see
Methods for additional details on the empathic accuracy paradigm
and behavioral measure). Beta estimates were extracted from each
of three independently defined functional ROIs (VMPFC, DMPFC,
and RTPJ)—the same ROIs as were used as seeds in the rs-fMRI
analysis. We tested for group differences in change scores using a
two-sample t-test. The 3 ROIs were chosen based on regions in
which activation related to empathic accuracy in an independent
sample of participants using the exact same task (drawn from
baseline data from participants randomized to one of the other 2
conditions not analyzed in this study), and which have also been
reported to be active with greater empathic accuracy in the
literature.16,22
There were no group differences in change in empathic
accuracy-related brain activation for any of the 3 ROIs: VMPFC (t
(69) = 0.76, p = 0.45, b = 0.23, CI [−0.38, 0.84]; 1 Crystals and 1
Bastion outlier removed), DMPFC (t(70) = −1.71, p = 0.09, b =
−0.33, CI [−0.72, 0.06]; 1 Crystals outlier removed) and RTPJ (t(70)
= 0.13, p = 0.90, b = 0.03, CI [−0.42, 0.47]; 1 Crystals outlier
removed). We also conducted a whole-brain voxel-wise analysis
Fig. 3
Game-related changes in empathic accuracy were associated with rs-fMRI connectivity changes in emotion regulation networks.
Participants who improved in empathic accuracy had increased right amygdala rs-fMRI connectivity with VMPFC (a) and DMPFC (b) after
Crystals game-play compared to Bastion. Independently-defined functional seed ROIs are overlaid in blue (DMPFC) and green (VMPFC) at slice
x = 47 in Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template space. The Harvard-Oxford atlas right amygdala target ROI is depicted in yellow at
slice y = 59 in MNI space. Envelopes represent 1 standard error from the point estimates and raw data points are overlaid
Neural correlates of video game empathy training in adolescents: a
TRA Kral et al.
5
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
npj Science of Learning (2018)  13 
 and there were no regions with a significant group difference in
change in empathic accuracy-related brain activation.
Effects of game-play on EA and related activation
We tested whether individual differences in Crystals’ game-play
were associated with changes in brain activation in relation to
empathic accuracy using the difference in post-intervention and
pre-intervention BOLD activation from empathy trials that were
modulated by trial-wise empathic accuracy scores and contrasted
with implicit baseline (fixation). We extracted empathic accuracy-
modulated BOLD response from each of the 3 ROIs (as described
in the ROI analysis above) and regressed the difference scores
(time 2 − time 1) onto the normalized average of the number of
attempts at emotion recognition and emotion intensity ratings
(that were collected from Crystals gameplay). The average number
of first attempts at emotion recognition was 53 (range 27–74) and
the average number of emotion intensity ratings was 29 (range
8–60). More first attempts at emotion recognition were associated
with more completed intensity ratings (t(29) = 11.67, p < 0.001, b
= 1.14, CI [0.94, 1.34], r = 0.91; 3 outliers removed). These
measures provide a proxy for participants’ engagement with the
training aspects of Crystals, and since they are so strongly related
we combined them into a single game engagement score by
computing the mean of the normalized variables, which included
mean-centering and scaling by the standard deviation. Since these
values are the number of first attempts, they reflect the number of
times participants engaged with the training aspects of the game,
rather than repeated tries due to inaccuracy. Although we
planned to examine the relationship between changes in EA-
related activation and accuracy on the empathy training game
mechanics, the accuracy measures for each of these variables
lacked sufficient variability across participants with which to make
meaningful comparisons due to ceiling effects. The average
accuracy for emotion recognition was 90% (range 73–100%) and
for the emotion intensity ratings the average accuracy was 97%
(range 83–100%).
Engagement with the training aspects of Crystals was associated
with significantly higher increases in empathic accuracy-related
RTPJ activation (t(30) = 2.92, p = 0.01, b = 0.47, CI [0.14, 0.79]; 1
outlier removed; Fig. 4) while controlling for total time playing the
game. This relationship remains consistent without the covariate
for total playtime, however it is important that our results show an
effect of the training mechanics above and beyond total time
spent playing the game. Moreover, the total time playing Crystals
was not associated with change in empathic accuracy-related RTPJ
activation (t(31) = −0.21, p = 0.84, b < −0.01, CI [−0.01, 0.004]; 1
outlier removed). Aspects of the game that were either un-related
to empathy training or did not directly target empathy-related
processes did not predict change in empathic accuracy-related
RTPJ activation (while controlling for total time playing), such as:
the number of times using a taser (t(29) = 0.90, p = 0.38, b = 0.01,
CI [−0.02, 0.04]; 1 outlier removed) and the number of quests
completed—a generically pro-social aspect of the game that did
not specifically target empathy-related processes (t(28) = 0.79, p =
0.44, b = 0.01, CI [−0.02, 0.04]; 2 outliers removed). Participants
played Crystals for an average of 217 min (range 98–334 min) over
the course of the training period. We were unable to examine
changes related to gameplay in the control group, as we could not
access gameplay data from Bastion. Change in empathic accuracy-
related activation from the other 2 ROIs was not related to
engagement with the game training tools (while controlling for
total play time): VMPFC (t(29) = 1.35, p = 0.19, b = 0.32, CI [−0.17,
0.81]; 1 outlier removed) and DMPFC (t(28) = −1.14, p = 0.26, b =
−0.14, CI = [-0.38, 0.11]; 2 outliers removed). There was no
relationship between game engagement and change in empathic
accuracy controlling for total playtime (t(30) = 1.02, p = 0.32, b =
0.06, CI [−0.06, 0.18]; 1 outlier removed).
We also conducted a whole-brain, voxel-wise analysis of change
in empathic accuracy-related BOLD activation and there were no
regions that were significantly associated with game engagement.
DISCUSSION
This study created and tested behavioral and brain effects of a
video game intervention with mechanics to train empathy in an
immersive virtual world. Another unique aspect about the
empathy training video game developed for this study was the
collection of in-game telemetry data that provided measures of
engagement with and performance on the empathy training
game mechanics. We were able to determine which aspects of
Crystals related to individual differences in improvements follow-
ing gameplay using these metrics. In addition to the empathy
training game, Crystals, we also employed the commercially
available game Bastion as an active control in this randomized
controlled trial. This study design provided a rigorous method to
test for group differences in empathic accuracy, the related brain
activation and rs-fMRI connectivity. While there was no group
difference in change in the behavioral measure, participants had
sufficient variability in change in empathic accuracy scores for us
to investigate brain activation related to increased empathic
accuracy. We found that participants who engaged more with the
empathy training game mechanics in Crystals (emotion recogni-
tion and gauging emotion intensity) had increased empathic
0
1
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Game Engagement (normalized, adjusted)
Empathic Accuracy−Related RTPJ Activation (T2−T1)
Fig. 4
Empathic accuracy-related BOLD activation and engagement
with the Crystals training video game. Participants who engaged
more with the training aspects of Crystals had increased empathic
accuracy-related
RTPJ
activation
following
game-play.
Game
engagement is the mean of the normalized values for number of
first tries at emotion recognition and intensity calibration. Raw data
points were adjusted for total time playing the game. Envelopes
represent
1
standard
error
from
the
point
estimates.
The
independently-defined ROI is inset in green
Neural correlates of video game empathy training in adolescents: a
TRA Kral et al.
6
npj Science of Learning (2018)  13 
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
 accuracy on trials in which they also increased in RTPJ activation
(from pre-intervention to post-intervention).
The ROIs (VMPFC, DMPFC and RTPJ) were defined using a
functional localizer (the empathic accuracy task) in an indepen-
dent sample of adolescents, and were chosen because activation
in these regions has been associated with greater empathic
accuracy at baseline in our full sample of adolescents22 and
separately in adults.16 Activation in these regions appears to
underlie cognitive aspects of empathic responding, as these
regions have been strongly implicated in perspective taking, and
in inferring goals and end-states as part of a broader brain
network.10,13,35,37,38,39 Thus, playing Crystals may train participants
to more effectively recruit a region involved in perspective taking
(RTPJ) to make empathically accurate responses. One mechanism
by which this change may have occurred is through rehearsal of
taking the avatars’ perspectives through consideration of the
narrative context in the game, which could facilitate accuracy on
subsequent recognition and gauging intensity of the avatars’
emotions.
We also found that playing Crystals led to increased rs-fMRI
connectivity within this same network—between DMPFC and PCC
—compared to Bastion. The change in functional connectivity was
specific to this network, as whole-brain analysis did not reveal any
additional regions where the groups differed in connectivity with
any of the seed regions (DMPFC, VMPFC, or RTPJ). Given that
Crystals included training to recognize and attend to the emotions
and thoughts of others, and the well-documented role of this
network in mentalizing/perspective taking18,35,40 in addition to
being immediately relevant for empathic accuracy in this study,
we interpret the strengthened connectivity to reflect training and
improvement in perspective taking ability following Crystals
gameplay. Rehearsal of perspective taking during the game,
paired
with
positive
reinforcement
of
subsequent
correct
responses, may have facilitated learning and strengthened the
brain network that supports perspective taking.
In addition to examining rs-fMRI connectivity changes within
the network underlying empathic accuracy in adolescents, we
examined changes in amygdala—MPFC rs-fMRI connectivity,
which has been implicated in emotion regulation.41 This analysis
was motivated by the expectation that strengthened connectivity
in networks underlying emotion regulation would be associated
with improvements in empathic accuracy, as individuals with
better self-regulatory abilities more often experience empathic
care rather than distress.25 As we previously reported that
adolescents in this study had lower empathic accuracy with
activation in regions underlying a shared emotional experience (at
baseline),22 and as such experience sharing can lead to empathic
distress through self-focus,23–25 we expected that improvements
in emotion
regulation
would
be
particularly
beneficial
for
adolescents’ empathic accuracy. Indeed, we found that Crystals
participants who had strengthened VMPFC and DMPFC rs-fMRI
connectivity with amygdala after video game training also had
improvements
in
empathic
accuracy
compared
to
Bastion
participants. Although the current study lacked direct measures
of participants’ emotion regulation abilities, the strong evidence
for connectivity in this network as underlying implicit emotion
regulation,41 together within the context of its relation to
behaviorally-relevant, hypothesized improvements in empathic
accuracy lends credibility to this interpretation.
While playing the empathy training game Crystals did not lead
to a change in the behavioral measure of empathic accuracy
across participants, this may be due to the fact that most
participants found the game to be relatively easy. However, those
participants who showed improvements in empathic accuracy
also showed increased self-reported empathic concern in addition
to the multiple measures of changes to relevant brain networks
described above. One limitation of the current study was the
relatively low level of difficulty of Crystals, as evidenced by ceiling
effects in accuracy on all of the empathy training game
mechanics. The game difficulty could be improved by using
subtler emotion expressions and a greater variety of emotion
categories and contexts. The game’s difficulty could also be
calibrated based on participants’ performance, which may create
space for improvement within the game and on the empathic
accuracy task. Conversely, Crystals may be more beneficial for
those with difficulties at reading emotional expressions and
empathizing, such as individuals with autism.42,43 Future research
could explore whether Crystals’ empathy training is effective for
improving empathic abilities for individuals on the autism
spectrum.
While this research is in the early stages, these initial results
provide evidence that video games could be utilized to improve
empathy-related brain function and connectivity in adolescents
through skillful use of game mechanics that tap into processes
underlying empathy, specifically perspective-taking and emotion
regulation. Additional research with clinical populations and/or
participant-adaptive game difficulty
is needed to elucidate
whether such training could also lead to improvements in
empathic behavior. This platform has the potential to be widely
accessed and readily consumed by adolescents who are eager to
use the newest electronic entertainment, and parents who would
like positive alternatives to the commonly available games. The
benefits of training empathy include the possibility to improve
social interactions during a time of life when social support could
be critical to overcoming hardship and improving wellness.
METHODS
Participants
We advertised in print, broadcast and online media to recruit 192 healthy
adolescents (average age 12.8 years ± 8.8 months, age range 11–15 years,
69 female) from the Madison, WI community between June 2013 and April
2014. Participants had to be enrolled in the 7th or 8th grade, fluent English
speakers, safe for MRI scanning, not using psychotropic mediations, and
with no current or previous diagnosis of a mental illness. Thirty-three
participants’ data were unusable due to technical issues (21), inability to
see or hear the stimuli (8), or not completing the task (4). Participants were
randomly assigned to play one of four games—two games for the current
study and a different set of two games for a separate study on attentional
training—after completing baseline data collection using block randomi-
zation in sets of eight. The randomization procedure and intervention
assignment were conducted by the project manager and a research
assistant in a password-locked spreadsheet that restricted data collectors
and other study personnel from access and utilized a random number
generator to create the randomization sequence with a different number
to seed the generator for each block. A different full-time research assistant
conducted participant enrollment. The sample size was determined using a
power analysis with the fmripower tool44 based on effect size estimates
from the original empathic accuracy fMRI study16 from which the task used
in the current study was designed. Two of the games were intervention
games designed for this study, and the other two games were
commercially available and served as control conditions with similar play
styles to one of the two intervention games. Approximately half of the
participants (N = 82, average age 12.9 years ± 9.0 months, 30 female)
played the empathy training game (described below) or its commercial
control game, Bastion. Participants were instructed to play the game on
their own (i.e., rather than collaboratively with peers). The remaining 77
participants played one of two games not hypothesized to affect empathic
processes. Data from those subjects were used to define independent
regions of interest for tests of group differences in functional MRI data
described below. At post-intervention (following 2 weeks of daily game-
play) 8 additional participants’ data was unusable (2 left the study, 3 due to
technical difficulties, and 3 were non-compliant with the intervention). This
left 34 participants who played the empathy training game Crystals
(average age 12.9 years ± 8.8 months, 14 female) and 40 participants who
played the control game, Bastion (average age 12.8 years ± 8.6 months, 13
female). An additional 3 Crystals and 7 Bastion participants were excluded
from rs-fMRI analysis due to technical difficulties and excessive motion that
made either one of the two scans unusable. Analysis of baseline data
Neural correlates of video game empathy training in adolescents: a
TRA Kral et al.
7
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
npj Science of Learning (2018)  13 
 across
the
full
sample
of
participants
was
previously
reported.22
Experimenters were only completely blind to group assignment during
baseline data collection due to practical limitations of administering the
intervention. UW-Madison’s Health Sciences Institutional Review Board
approved the protocol, and all participants provided informed assent and
were given monetary compensation for their participation. Legal guardians
provided written informed consent. All data was collected at the Waisman
Center at UW–Madison, Madison, WI between July 2013 and November
2014.
Questionnaires
Participants completed a battery of questionnaires as part of a larger study,
which included measures of cognitive control and response inhibition to
assess the impact of a separate attention training videogame. The
Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI32) contains 28 items and 4 sub-scales
with 7 items each, one of which measures a construct related to empathy
that is relevant to the current report: empathic concern. The test–retest
reliability of the IRI is good, with intra-class correlations ranging from 0.61
to 0.81 over 60–75 days.45
Empathic accuracy task
The empathic accuracy task used in the current study was previously
described in Kral et al. (Supplementary Figure 3).22 Stimuli in the task
consisted of videos of targets (aged 18–21 years) describing emotional
events from their adolescence, such as the death of a grandparent or
winning a sports competition. Targets watched their own videos and made
ratings of their emotions as displayed in the videos on a 1–9 Likert scale,
with 1 labeled “Very Negative”, and 9 labeled “Very Positive”.
Participants in the current study (“perceivers”) completed the empathic
accuracy task twice; first during a baseline data collection session and
again following 2 weeks of daily game-play with either Crystals or Bastion
(the active control). The task occurred in 3 fMRI scan runs, each lasting
approximately 5 min. A cue word was presented for 3 s, followed by a
fixation cross for 2 s and then a video, which ranged from 28 to 144 s
(mean = 90 s). There were two sets of videos so that participants saw a
separate, unique set of videos at baseline and post-intervention, and the
order of presentation across scans was counter-balanced across partici-
pants. The same targets appeared in both sets of videos describing distinct
events. A cue instructed participants how to rate the videos, corresponding
to three different conditions. If the word “OTHER” appeared participants
were instructed to rate the emotion of the target in the video from
negative to positive, exactly as the targets had rated themselves. If the
word “SELF” appeared participants were instructed to rate their own
emotions from negative to positive using the same scale. In the control
condition the word “GAZE” appeared and participants were instructed to
rate the direction of the target’s eye-gaze from left to right using a 1–9
Likert scale with 1 labeled “Left” and 9 labeled “Right”. The current report
focuses on responses in the “OTHER” condition, which correspond to
empathic accuracy trials. For each scan the order of trial conditions was
pseudo-randomized such that perceivers saw a different order of 6 trials in
each of the 3 blocks of the task, and targets were half male and half
female. There were 18 trials, 6 per condition, and each had a unique video
stimulus. Thus, participants rated 36 videos over the course of the study,
and 12 total videos for the empathic accuracy analysis. Prior to each scan
participants completed three practice trials with a set of videos not used in
the fMRI task. Empathic accuracy was determined by calculating the
correlation between the time course of ratings for the target and the
perceiver for each video and r- to Z-transforming with Fisher’s method.
One trial was excluded from all participants due to large disagreement
between the target’s rating and the majority of perceiver ratings, which
resulted in extremely low average empathic accuracy scores across
perceivers (r < 0.10).
Video game training intervention
In the empathy training game, Crystals, players control a robot that has
crash-landed on an alien planet and must learn how to understand,
communicate with, and ultimately collaborate with the inhabitants to find
components of the damaged spaceship in order to return home (Fig. 1a).
Crystals includes game mechanics to train recognition of the six basic
emotions (anger, fear, happiness, surprise, disgust, and sadness; Fig. 1b), to
gauge varying levels of emotion intensity (Fig. 1c), to respond empathically
(Fig. 1d) and practice helping behaviors in the virtual world (Fig. 1f). The
commercial game Bastion (version 1.2) was selected as an active control
since it has a similar story-based environment, immersive graphics and
third-person perspective. In-game performance (i.e., telemetry data) was
recorded for Crystals using Assessment Data Aggregator for Game
Environments (ADAGE).46,47
Image acquisition
Images were acquired on a GE X750-3.0 Tesla MRI scanner (Waukesha, WI)
with a 32-channel head coil (Nova Medical Inc., Wilmington, MA).
Anatomical scans consisted of a whole head 1.0 mm isotropic T1-
weighted image acquired using an in-house MPnRAGE sequence.48 Three
functional scan runs were acquired for the empathic accuracy paradigm
using a gradient echo EPI sequence (64 × 64 in-plane resolution, 220 mm
FOV, TR/TE/Flip = 2000ms/20 ms/60°, 36 × 4.5 mm), and one resting state
functional MRI run was acquired with 264 time points using the same EPI
sequence.
Image analysis
See supplementary methods for pre-preprocessing information.
Three ROIs (VMPFC, DMPFC, RTPJ) that were previously implicated in
empathic accuracy in adults16 were functionally defined based on regions
with greater empathic accuracy-related activation in an independent
sample of same-age participants at baseline (pre-intervention) that were
randomly assigned to play a game not included in the current analysis.
ROIs were transformed from Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space to
the group average space via a transformation matrix created using ANTS
for analysis,49 however all results are displayed on the MNI template brain.
A mask combining all regions with activation related to empathic accuracy
in the independent sample was also created for use in a voxel-wise rs-fMRI
analysis to examine changes in connectivity within this network (see Fig.
2). For rs-fMRI connectivity analysis with each of the seed regions (VMPFC,
DMPFC, and RTPJ) the seed was subtracted from the mask in which the
analysis was conducted (for depiction of the ROI masks see Fig. 3 for
VMPFC and DMPFC, Fig. 4 for RTPJ). The right amygdala ROI was defined
anatomically based on the Harvard-Oxford atlas (distributed with FSL50) at
50% threshold (see Fig. 3).
Statistical analysis
Resting state fMRI connectivity was assessed based on the Fisher Z
normalized correlation between each of the seeds and each of the target
ROIs (or for each voxel in the voxel-wise analysis). In order to test for
intervention
effects,
we
computed difference
maps
for
the
post-
intervention FZT-map subtracting the pre-intervention FZT-map. Average
correlation values were extracted from each of the ROIs for analysis with
the lm package in R Statistics,51 and voxel-wise analysis was also
conducted whole-brain and within the masks specified above. Voxel-
wise analyses were thresholded at p < 0.05 controlling for family-wise error
using threshold-free cluster enhancement with FSL’s Randomize.34
This study is registered as a clinical trial with ClinicalTrials.gov (number
NCT01886911) and the trial ended upon planned completion of data
collection.
Code availability
Code for statistical analysis can be found at: https://osf.io/kveyp/. Enquiries
about code access can be made to Tammi Kral, M.S. (kral@wisc.edu).
Data availability
Enquiries about data access can be made to Dr. Richard Davidson
(rjdavids@wisc.edu).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Michael Anderle, Ron Fisher, Jeanne Harris, Chris Harty, Lisa
Angelos, and Abigail Freeman for assistance with data collection. We would like to
thank Steven Loria and Nate Vack for assistance in planning and programming the
task and Andy Schoen, Cory Burghy, Reza Farajian, Nagesh Adluru, Steve Kecskemeti,
Sasha Sommerfeldt, David Perlman and Daniel Levinson for technical assistance and
input on the study design. We would like to thank Games + Learning + Society,
especially Mike Beall, Shannon Harris, Greg Vaughn, John Binzak, Kurt Squire and
Allison Salmon for design and development of Crystals of Kaydor, and/or processing
of in-game telemetry data. This work was supported by a Gates Foundation grant
OPP1033728 to RJD, a core grant to the Waisman Center from the National Institute
Neural correlates of video game empathy training in adolescents: a
TRA Kral et al.
8
npj Science of Learning (2018)  13 
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
 of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) P30 HD003352 to Marsha Seltzer,
and TRAK was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health of the National
Institutes of Health award number T32MH018931. The funding agencies did not
participate in the conceptualization, design, conduct, or reporting of research results
in this manuscript.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
T.R.A.K. processed the behavioral and fMRI task data, analyzed the data, and wrote
the manuscript. D.E.S. and R.M.B. processed the resting state fMRI data and
contributed to the analysis. J.A.M. contributed to data processing and statistical
analysis. E.S. contributed to data collection. C.A. contributed to processing and
analysis of data collected from the video game. C.S. supervised the game design and
in-game data collection and processing. R.J.D. designed and supervised the study. T.
R.A.K., C.S., E.S., L.F., and E.P. contributed to the design of the study. All authors
contributed to writing the manuscript.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information accompanies the paper on the npj Science of Learning
website (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41539-018-0029-6).
Competing interests: Dr. Richard J. Davidson is the founder, president, and serves
on the board of directors for the non-profit organization, Healthy Minds Innovations,
Inc. No donors, either anonymous or identified, have participated in the design,
conduct, or reporting of research results in this manuscript. The remaining authors
declare no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.
REFERENCES
1. Christie, K. A. et al. Epidemiologic evidence for early onset of mental disorders
and higher risk of drug abuse in young adults. Am. J. Psychiatry 145, 971–975
(1988).
2. Wittchen, H. U., Nelson, C. B. & Lachner, G. Prevalence of mental disorders and
psychosocial impairments in adolescents and young adults. Psychol. Med. 28,
109–126 (1998).
3. Modecki, K. L., Minchin, J., Harbaugh, A. G., Guerra, N. G. & Runions, K. C. Bullying
prevalence across contexts: a meta-analysis measuring cyber and traditional
bullying. J. Adolesc. Health 55, 602–611 (2014).
4. Nansel, T. R. et al. Bullying behaviors among us youth: prevalence and association
with psychosocial adjustment. JAMA 285, 2094–2100 (2001).
5. van Geel, M., Vedder, P. & Tanilon, J. Relationship between peer victimization,
cyberbullying, and suicide in children and adolescents: a meta-analysis. JAMA
Pediatr. 168, 435–442 (2014).
6. Copeland, W. E. et al. Childhood bullying involvement predicts low-grade sys-
temic inflammation into adulthood. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 111, 7570–7575 (2014).
7. Gleason, K. A., Jensen-Campbell, L. A. & Ickes, W. The role of empathic accuracy in
adolescents’ peer relations and adjustment. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 35, 997–1011
(2009).
8. Cohen, S. & Wills, T. A. Stress, social support, and the buffering hypothesis. Psy-
chol. Bull. 98, 310–357 (1985).
9. Zaki, J. & Ochsner, K. N. The neuroscience of empathy: progress, pitfalls and
promise. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 675–680 (2012).
10. Sebastian, C. L. et al. Neural processing associated with cognitive and affective
Theory of Mind in adolescents and adults. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 7, 53–63
(2012).
11. Bernhardt, B. C. & Singer, T. The neural basis of empathy. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 35,
1–23 (2012).
12. Singer, T. The neuronal basis and ontogeny of empathy and mind reading: review
of literature and implications for future research. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 30,
855–863 (2006).
13. Van Overwalle, F. & Baetens, K. Understanding others’ actions and goals by mirror
and mentalizing systems: a meta-analysis. Neuroimage 48, 564–584 (2009).
14. Ruby, P. & Decety, J. How would you feel versus how do you think she would
feel? A neuroimaging study of perspective-taking with social emotions. J. Cogn.
Neurosci. 16, 988–999 (2004).
15. Bruneau, E. G., Pluta, A. & Saxe, R. Distinct roles of the ‘shared pain’ and ‘theory of
mind’ networks in processing others’ emotional suffering. Neuropsychologia 50,
219–231 (2012).
16. Zaki, J., Weber, J., Bolger, N. & Ochsner, K. The neural bases of empathic accuracy.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 11382–11387 (2009).
17. Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Reidler, J. S., Sepulcre, J., Poulin, R. & Buckner, R. L.
Functional-Anatomic Fractionation of the Brain’s Default Network. Neuron 65,
550–562 (2010).
18. Barrett, L. F. & Satpute, A. B. Large-scale brain networks in affective and social
neuroscience: towards an integrative functional architecture of the brain. Curr.
Opin. Neurobiol. 23, 361–372 (2013).
19. Schurz, M., Aichhorn, M., Martin, A. & Perner, J. Common brain areas engaged in
false belief reasoning and visual perspective taking: a meta-analysis of functional
brain imaging studies. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7, 712–725 (2013).
20. Saxe, R. & Kanwisher, N. People thinking about thinking people: the role of the
temporo-parietal junction in “theory of mind. NeuroImage 19, 1835–1842 (2003).
21. Saxe, R. R., Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., Scholz, J. & Pelphrey, K. A. Brain regions for
perceiving and reasoning about other people in school-aged children. Child Dev.
80, 1197–1209 (2009).
22. Kral, T. Neural correlates of empathic accuracy in adolescence. Soc. Cogn. Affect.
Neurosci. 12, 1701–1710 (2017).
23. Singer, T. & Klimecki, O. M. Empathy and compassion. Curr. Biol. 24, R875–R878
(2014).
24. Decety, J. & Jackson, P. L. The functional architecture of human empathy. Behav.
Cogn. Neurosci. Rev. 3, 71–100 (2004).
25. Eisenberg, N. Emotion, regulation, and moral development. Annu. Rev. Psychol.
51, 665–697 (2000).
26. Steinberg, L. Cognitive and affective development in adolescence. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 9, 69–74 (2005).
27. Goldstein, T. R. & Winner, E.Enhancing empathy and theory of mind. J. Cogn. Dev.
13, 19–37 (2012).
28. Jan 20 & 2010. Generation M2: media in the lives of 8- to 18-year-olds. The Henry
J. Kaiser Family Foundation (2010).
29. Greitemeyer, T. & Osswald, S. Effects of prosocial video games on prosocial
behavior. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 98, 211–221 (2010).
30. Ekman, P. & Friesen, W. The Facial Action Coding System. (Consulting Psycholo-
gists, 1978).
31. Jones, R. M. et al. Behavioral and neural properties of social reinforcement
learning. J. Neurosci. 31, 13039–13045 (2011).
32. Davis, M. H. Measuring individual differences in empathy: evidence for a multi-
dimensional approach. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 44, 113–126 (1983).
33. Holm, S. A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scand. J. Stat. 6,
65–70 (1979).
34. Winkler, A. M., Ridgway, G. R., Webster, M. A., Smith, S. M. & Nichols, T. E. Per-
mutation inference for the general linear model. Neuroimage 92, 381–397 (2014).
35. Spreng, R. N., Mar, R. A. & Kim, A. S. N. The common neural basis of auto-
biographical memory, prospection, navigation, theory of mind, and the default
mode: a quantitative meta-analysis. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 21, 489–510 (2008).
36. Murphy, K., Birn, R. M. & Bandettini, P. A. Resting-state fMRI confounds and
cleanup. Neuroimage 80, 349–359 (2013).
37. Buckner, R. L. & Carroll, D. C. Self-projection and the brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11,
49–57 (2007).
38. Gunther Moor, B. et al. Social exclusion and punishment of excluders: neural
correlates and developmental trajectories. Neuroimage 59, 708–717 (2012).
39. Masten, C. L. et al. Neural correlates of social exclusion during adolescence:
understanding the distress of peer rejection. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 4,
143–157 (2009).
40. Mars, R. B. et al. On the relationship between the “default mode network” and the
“social brain”. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 6, 189–197 (2012).
41. Kim, M. J. et al. The structural and functional connectivity of the amygdala: from
normal emotion to pathological anxiety. Behav. Brain Res. 223, 403–410 (2011).
42. Demurie, E., De Corel, M. & Roeyers, H. Empathic accuracy in adolescents with
autism spectrum disorders and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder. Res. Autism Spectr. Disord. 5, 126–134 (2011).
43. Sucksmith, E., Allison, C., Baron-Cohen, S., Chakrabarti, B. & Hoekstra, R. A.
Empathy and emotion recognition in people with autism, first-degree relatives,
and controls. Neuropsychologia 51, 98–105 (2013).
44. Mumford, J. A. & Nichols, T. E. Power calculation for group fMRI studies
accounting for arbitrary design and temporal autocorrelation. Neuroimage 39,
261–268 (2008).
45. Davis, M. A multidimensional approach to individual differences in empathy. JSAS
Cat. Sel. Doc. Psychol. 10, 85–103 (1980).
46. Capturing In-Game Learner Trajectories with ADAGE (Assessment Data Aggre-
gator for Game Environments): a cross-method analysis—ProQuest. https://
search.proquest.com/openview/870bb9267879b7646024ca482c7bf68b/1?pq-
origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y. Accessed 28th December 2017.
47. Stenerson, M. E., Salmon, A., Berland, M. & Squire, K. Adage: an open API for data
collection in educational games. in Proceedings of the First ACM SIGCHI Annual
Symposium on Computer-human Interaction in Play 437–438 (ACM, 2014). https://
doi.org/10.1145/2658537.2661325
Neural correlates of video game empathy training in adolescents: a
TRA Kral et al.
9
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
npj Science of Learning (2018)  13 
 48. Kecskemeti, S., Adluru, N., Hurley, S. & Alexander, A. Multi-spectral T1 weighted
imaging and T1 quantification using 3D radial k-space trajectory. (2013).
49. Avants, B. B. et al. A reproducible evaluation of ANTs similarity metric perfor-
mance in brain image registration. Neuroimage 54, 2033–2044 (2011).
50. Smith, S. M. et al. Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and
implementation as FSL. Neuroimage 23, S208–S219 (2004).
51. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation
for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. (2015). https://www.R-project.org/.
52. Jenkinson, M., Bannister, P., Brady, M. & Smith, S. Improved optimization for the
robust and accurate linear registration and motion correction of brain images.
Neuroimage 17, 825–841 (2002).
53. Smith, S. M. Fast robust automated brain extraction. Hum. Brain Mapp. 17,
143–155 (2002).
54. Woolrich, M. W., Ripley, B. D., Brady, M. & Smith, S. M. Temporal autocorrelation in
univariate linear modeling of FMRI data. Neuroimage 14, 1370–1386 (2001).
55. Siegel, J. S. et al. Statistical improvements in functional magnetic resonance
imaging analyses produced by censoring high-motion data points. Hum. Brain
Mapp. 35, 1981–1996 (2014).
56. Greve, D. N. & Fischl, B. Accurate and robust brain image alignment using
boundary-based registration. Neuroimage 48, 63–72 (2009).
57. Cox, R. W. AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic
resonance neuroimages. Comput. Biomed. Res. 29, 162–173 (1996).
58. Ashburner, J. A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm. Neuroimage 38,
95–113 (2007).
59. Zhang, Y., Brady, M. & Smith, S. Segmentation of brain MR images through a
hidden Markov random field model and the expectation-maximization algorithm.
IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 20, 45–57 (2001).
60. Friston, K. J., Williams, S., Howard, R., Frackowiak, R. S. J. & Turner, R. Movement-
related effects in fMRI time-series. Magn. Reson. Med. 35, 346–355 (1996).
61. Weissenbacher, A. et al. Correlations and anticorrelations in resting-state func-
tional connectivity MRI: A quantitative comparison of preprocessing strategies.
Neuroimage 47, 1408–1416 (2009).
62. Biswal, B., Zerrin Yetkin, F., Haughton, V. M. & Hyde, J. S. Functional connectivity in
the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar mri. Magn. Reson.
Med. 34, 537–541 (1995).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
Neural correlates of video game empathy training in adolescents: a
TRA Kral et al.
10
npj Science of Learning (2018)  13 
Published in partnership with The University of Queensland
