 Human Stakeholders and the
Use of Animals in Drug
Development
LISA A. KRAMER AND RAY GREEK
ABSTRACT
Pharmaceutical firms seek to fulfill their responsibilities
to stakeholders by developing drugs that treat diseases.
We evaluate the social and financial costs of developing
new drugs relative to the realized benefits and find the
industry falls short of its potential. This is primarily due
to legislation-mandated reliance on animal test results in
early stages of the drug development process, leading to a
mere 10 percent success rate for new drugs entering
human clinical trials. We cite hundreds of biomedical
studies from journals including Nature, Science, and the
Journal of the American Medical Association to show ani-
mal
modeling
is
ineffective,
misleading
to
scientists,
unable to prevent the development of dangerous drugs,
and prone to prevent the development of useful drugs.
Legislation still requires animal testing prior to human
testing even though the pharmaceutical sector has better
options that were unavailable when animal modeling was
first mandated. We propose that the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and Congress should work together
Lisa A. Kramer is a Professor of Finance, at the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
E-mail: Lkramer@rotman.utoronto.ca. Ray Greek is President at the Americans for Medical
Advancement, Goleta, CA. E-mail: DrRayGreek@gmail.com.
V
C 2018 W. Michael Hoffman Center for Business Ethics at Bentley University. Published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc., 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA, and 9600 Garsington
Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK.
Business and Society Review
123:1 3–58
bs_bs_banner
 to abolish regulations and policies that require animal
use. Doing so will benefit pharmaceutical industry stake-
holders, including patients whose health depends on
drugs and the many people who rely on the financial well-
being of pharmaceutical firms.
T
here exists a significant business ethics problem related to
human well-being in the context of the drug development
industry.1 The origin of this problem rests in false assump-
tions about science in the execution of drug research. An article in
Nature highlights the problem:
In the contentious world of animal research, one question
surfaces time and again: how useful are animal experiments
as a way to prepare for trials of medical treatments in
humans? The issue is crucial, as public opinion is behind ani-
mal research only if it helps develop better drugs. Conse-
quently, scientists defending animal experiments insist they
are essential for safe clinical trials, whereas animal-rights
activists vehemently maintain that they are useless (Giles
2006, p. 981).
We provide detailed evidence that the use of animals in the drug
development process is harmful to key stakeholders. There is a
rich literature which examines ethical issues—from the perspective
of
animals2—arising
from
the
use
of
animals
in
biomedical
research, testing, and science in general. See LaFollette (2011) and
Ferdowsian and Beauchamp (2013) for recent discussions of those
ethical issues. We purposely sidestep the ethical question of animal
well-being to focus instead on other stakeholders harmed as a con-
sequence of current drug development practices.
Who are these other stakeholders?3 Investors represent one
group, since the managers of publicly traded firms are expected to
maximize shareholder value vis-�
a-vis the theory of the firm and
agency theory; see Friedman (1970) and Jensen and Meckling
(1976); also see Martin (2011) for a critique of the modern value-
maximization proposition. Pharmaceutical firms additionally have
responsibilities to employees, suppliers, the general public, and of
course perhaps most importantly the patients for whom their
drugs are intended to treat. We posit that the vast majority of
4
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 public firms in the drug development business are falling short of
their ethical responsibilities to all of these stakeholders, and we
contend this is due to a constraint imposed by regulators, specifi-
cally to require animal tests. This constraint was put in place
many decades ago and drastically and adversely affected the way
the pharmaceutical companies serve their stakeholders. Absent
this regulatory constraint, we argue drug development firms would
be naturally inclined to better serve their stakeholders. But with
the constraint, they fall woefully short of their potential to do so.
We propose a remedy—the abandonment of standards that
require the use of animal models in the drug discovery process—
that would allow firms like GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, and Pfizer to
vastly improve the way they meet their responsibilities to all of
these stakeholders, especially the patients themselves through
improved health outcomes, but also the other groups through the
improved profits that would arise from the development of safer
and more effective drugs.
We document the fact that animal-based research for drug
development is grounded on a scientific paradigm that is flawed.
We present voluminous evidence that this blind spot regarding ani-
mal modeling is depriving humans of promising treatments and
costing shareholders in the drug development business at least
scores of billions of dollars of foregone revenue annually.4 Specifi-
cally, in many cases, results from animal-based research lead to
the labeling of drugs as safe that are ultimately found to be harm-
ful to humans, and animal-based research deems as harmful
many drugs that are in fact beneficial to humans (these are occa-
sionally discovered by accident later, but there are likely many
cases where beneficial drugs are discarded and never rediscov-
ered). If such instances were rarities, they might be considered
unavoidable perils along the pathway toward medical progress.
Unfortunately, we show these failures are commonplace. Overall,
the use of animal models in medical research has poor predictive
value in terms of its ability to distinguish between treatments that
will be helpful versus harmful to humans, a point we make by cit-
ing extensive evidence from biomedical research. Reliance on
animal-based research causes much more harm to humans than
the accidental good that arises from using animals in the context
of drug development.
5
KRAMER AND GREEK
 While the public (mis)perception of the use of animals in biomed-
ical research might be succinctly characterized as an unfortunate
but still necessary evil, we show that many experts in biomedical
research across academia, industry, and government have come to
recognize that use of the animal model in drug development is
unreliable and ill-advised. The main reason for continued use of
animals is legislative—existing policies simply require, without
exception, that new drug compounds be tested on animals before
they can be explored in human clinical trials, in spite of the fact
that these tests do not help identify compounds that are safe or
effective for humans.
Fortunately, a more promising option exists. A new field called
personalized medicine is built on the recognition that in order to
determine which drugs will or will not work in any given individual,
one needs to consider that individual’s unique genetic makeup.
Not only is the
animal model a poor predictor of humans’
responses to a given drug, it is also the case that different people
can have grossly different reactions to the same treatment. As we
explain, many existing treatments are tailored to an individual’s
genetic makeup in a manner that maximizes benefit while minimiz-
ing harm. By redirecting more resources to personalized medicine,
the pharmaceutical industry will better serve its direct stakehold-
ers as well as society at large.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows. First, we
discuss the scientific basis for the view that use of the animal
model in drug development has effectively no predictive value for
humans. Next, we detail the ways in which reliance on animal
models in this context harms patients through lack of safety,
lack of efficacy, and the opportunity cost of drugs that are dis-
covered belatedly if at all. Then we consider the ways in which
use of animals in the drug development process is harmful to
stakeholders other than patients. This includes a discussion of
the economic side of the pharmaceutical industry. Next, we con-
sider why the animal model continues to be employed in spite of
its role in preventing firms from meeting their social and ethical
responsibilities, and how those hurdles can be overcome. And
finally, we discuss personalized medicine, which offers a means
of safely and effectively treating and curing illness without reli-
ance on the animal model.
6
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 CURRENT SCIENCE REGARDING ANIMAL-BASED
RESEARCH
We contend that there is an urgent need for a sea change in the
way innovation occurs in the drug development process. As we will
show in this section, the regulatory requirement to test new com-
pounds on animals is built on invalid assumptions. Consequently,
the industry spends more than a hundred billion dollars each year
(see Mullane and Williams 2012) building upon misleading results
from animal tests to develop drugs that have little chance of being
safe and effective for humans and, in fact, have a high chance of
being harmful. The end result of this undertaking is disappointing.
Researchers have identified cures for various forms of cancer in
mice, for example, yet cures for cancer in humans remain elusive.
Nevertheless, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) funding model
currently devotes about 50 percent of its grant money to fund animal
models (see Committee on Models for Biomedical Research Board on
Basic Biology 1985; Greek and Greek 2010; Monastersky 2008).
It is worthwhile to examine, briefly, the science undergirding the
fact that animal models are ineffective. Advances in the fields of
evolutionary biology and complex systems have called into question
the value of animal modeling. The issue rests on the fact that
humans and animals are evolved, complex systems.
Complex systems are characterized by being composed of many
parts that themselves have hierarchal levels of organization. They
have feedback loops, exhibit self-organization, and respond to per-
turbations in a nonlinear fashion. Because small changes in a
complex system can result in outcomes that are not proportional to
the input, one biological complex system can die because of what
at first appears to be a minor change or difference between it and
another almost identical complex system. Importantly, complex
systems are very dependent on initial conditions such as the
genetic make-up of individuals or species. This means that a very
small change in the initial conditions of two otherwise identical
complex systems might result in death for one while the other
thrives; see Pearson (2002) and Belmaker et al. (2012) for example.
The whole of a complex system is greater than the sum of its
parts, and hence complex systems have properties that cannot be
determined even with total knowledge of the components of the
7
KRAMER AND GREEK
 system. Examples of complex systems include cells, animals and
humans, ecosystems, economies, ant colonies, social interaction,
and the U.S. electrical grid. In contrast, simple systems, like an
analog watch, are nothing more than the sum of their parts. For
more
on
biological
complex
systems
see
Ahn
et
al.
(2006),
Gell-Mann (1994), Goodwin (2001), Greek (2013), Greek and Rice
(2012), Kitano (2002), Morowitz (2002), Sole and Goodwin (2002),
and van Regenmortel (2004).
Informally, evolution can be thought of as small changes in
genes (i.e., initial conditions) that occur over long periods of time,
resulting in new species with traits different from those of the
ancestor organism. In other words, chimpanzees and humans are
both different from the primate that we descended from, and we
are different from each other. But the notion that differences
among genes can result in new species is separate from the fact
that very small differences in genes can also lead to members of
the same species reacting quite differently to drugs and diseases.
Humans and animals are examples of complex systems that have
evolved over time—their initial conditions changed in the form of
genetic make-up, and these changes affected the organism in a
nonlinear fashion over time.
Even for two individuals within the same species, small differ-
ences in DNA can mean the difference between life and death. A
tiny difference of one amino acid within the human chromosome is
all that separates a patient with life-threatening sickle cell anemia
from those of us who do not suffer from that condition. Dramatic
differences can exist across species even without changes in amino
acid sequences. Genes are regulated—turned on and off—by other
genes. For example, mice and humans share the gene that allows
mice to grow a tail. The reasons humans do not normally grow a
tail during development is that the gene is never turned on (i.e.,
expressed). Differences in gene regulation and expression vary
within and between species and account for differences in response
to drugs and disease (see Kasowski et al. 2010; Marchetto et al.
2013; Morley et al. 2004; Pritchard et al. 2006; Rifkin et al. 2003;
Rosenberg et al. 2002; Sandberg et al. 2000; Storey et al. 2007;
Warren et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2008). So while it is a fact that
humans share a large percentage of their genes with other mam-
mals, the commonality is largely immaterial in terms of predicting
how humans will respond to perturbations like drugs and disease.
8
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 Our intent in this section has been to briefly summarize the theo-
retical underpinnings of the observation that animal models are not
predictive for humans. We direct readers interested in more details to
other sources and the references contained therein.5 In the next sec-
tion we turn to extensive supportive evidence that the use of animal
models in drug discovery has very dire implications for patients.
COSTS BORNE BY PATIENTS
If firms in the drug development industry are to meet their responsi-
bilities to patients seeking treatments and cures for disease, they
ought to employ research methods that lead to good outcomes. Specif-
ically, the methods should accurately identify drugs that are safe for
human consumption, and they should accurately identify drugs that
are effective in achieving cures and/or alleviation of symptoms in
humans. There is extensive empirical evidence that the use of animal
models fails on both counts, as we show. We also provide evidence
that patients bear a substantial indirect cost, namely the opportunity
cost of drugs that are identified decades later than they were ulti-
mately found to be safe and effective for humans (if they are ever iden-
tified), due to poor predictions arising from animal research. An
unknowably enormous number of patients have suffered longer or
died prematurely due to this opportunity cost alone. We also discuss
undue financial costs patients bear as a result of animal modeling.
In the remainder of this section, we detail many striking exam-
ples relating to the safety, efficacy, opportunity cost, and financial
cost categories. Space constraints naturally limit the number of
quotations and citations that we include; hundreds of additional
examples are available.
Lack of Safety
A particularly catastrophic failure of the animal model that cap-
tured the collective attention of the public is the case of fen-phen, a
combination of two diet drugs that were recalled from the market
after causing serious heart valve damage in as many as 30 percent
of people who took the drugs. The New York Times, in announcing
the recalls, wrote that Dr. Michael A. Friedman, the acting commis-
sioner of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), speculated
9
KRAMER AND GREEK
 that heart damage hadn’t been expected in humans because ani-
mal studies had not revealed any adverse effects on the heart (see
Kolata 1997).
Another well-known failure arose with thalidomide, a drug which
was prescribed in in the 1950s and 1960s for pregnant women suf-
fering from nausea. Unfortunately, it soon became apparent that
thalidomide caused infants to be born with severe abnormalities
including abbreviated or complete lack of limbs. Researchers had
tested thalidomide in animals prior to its use in humans, and
research performed after the birth-defect side effect was identified
has since shown that thalidomide does not cause birth defects in
several species, including rodents.6 See Greek et al. (2011) for
more background on the thalidomide case and the question of
drug toxicity for embryonic development in general.
Vioxx (rofecoxib) is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug that
was famously taken by more than 80 million people before it was
shown to cause heart attacks and strokes in humans; see Topol
(2004) for details. Graham et al. (2005) estimate that “88,000–
140,000 excess cases of serious coronary heart disease probably
occurred in the US over the market-life of rofecoxib” (Graham et al.
2005, p. 480). In the subset of several thousand cases the authors
evaluated directly, more than a quarter were fatal. Not only did
studies based on animal models fail to alert researchers to these
serious adverse effects, some studies actually showed the use of
rofecoxib
was
beneficial
to
cardiac
function
in
animals;
see
LaPointe et al. (2004) for instance.
Other drugs that made their way to the marketplace on the basis
of deceptive evidence from animal models and then caused signifi-
cant harm in humans include Rezulin (troglitazone) and Propulsid
(cisapride). Rezulin caused liver failure and Propulsid caused life-
threatening heart rhythm abnormalities. Many people died from
taking these drugs. Between 2001 and 2010, about one third of
drugs approved by the FDA were later withdrawn or had black box
or other safety warnings issued (Downing et al. 2017).
Many other drugs caused harm to humans enrolled in clinical trials;
that is, patients were harmed even in cases where drugs were never
marketed. For instance, the drug TGN1412 was developed to treat
some forms of cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple sclerosis.
Unfortunately, it caused life-threatening multi-organ failure and
intensive-care stays for study participants, even at doses 500 times
10
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 lower than had proven safe in animal models. Similarly, the anti-viral
drug Fialuridine caused the death of study participants after the drug
was shown to be safe in animal models at much higher doses. Details
on the failure of both drugs are discussed by Attarwala (2010).
Smoking was anecdotally linked to cancer in the first half of the
twentieth century, but animal studies failed to link the two, thus
tobacco companies continued to promote cigarettes as safe, if not
healthy, for decades (see Janofsky 1993; Lindsay 2005; Northrup
1957; Utidjian 1988). And Smith et al. (1965) reported that tests
on several animal species failed to replicate the lung cancer that
arises in humans from exposure to asbestos.
van Meer et al. (2012) retrospectively studied whether serious
adverse drug reactions in humans could have been identified using
animal models prior to the release of various drugs. They evaluated
drugs currently on the market and discovered that only 19 percent
of 93 serious adverse drug reactions were seen in animals.
Animal modelers were aware of the poor predictive value of the
animal model well before van Meer et al.’s article was published.
Sal�
en (1994), writing in the Handbook of Laboratory Animal Sci-
ence, Volume II, Animal Models stated:
It is impossible to give reliable general rules for the validity of
extrapolation from one species to another. This has to be
assessed individually for each experiment and can often only
be verified after first trials in the target species [humans] . . .
Extrapolation from animal models, like medical art itself, will
always remain a matter of hindsight . . . (Sal�
en 1994, p. 6; par-
enthetic text added).
The van Meer et al. results are consistent with other studies.
Arrowsmith (2011a,b), DiMasi et al. (2010), Morgan et al. (2012), and
Paul et al. (2010) each examine the high failure rate of drug tests at
various phases of human clinical trials, in large part due to safety
(and efficacy) problems that did not emerge during animal tests.
Lack of Efficacy
Approximately 37 percent of drugs that make it to human trials fail
in Phase I human clinical trials, 55 percent fail in Phase II, and
12.6 percent fail in Phase III. The failure rates are increasing over
11
KRAMER AND GREEK
 time; see Hurko (2006). Most of these drug failures are due to lack
of efficacy (66 percent), followed in frequency by safety issues (21
percent); see Arrowsmith (2011a,b). Here we consider a few specific
examples of lack of efficacy.
The failure of the animal model for predicting efficacy in humans
is perhaps most evident in cancer research. A former director of
the National Cancer Institute, Dr. Richard Klausner, remarked
“The history of cancer research has been a history of curing cancer
in the mouse. We have cured mice of cancer for decades—and it
simply didn’t work in humans” (Cimons et al. 1998). And an asso-
ciate director at the U.S. National Cancer Institute, Dr. Edward
Sausville, said that the use of xenograft models has led to the dis-
covery of “compounds that were good mouse drugs rather than
good human drugs” (Gura 1997, p. 1041).
Efficacy failures are rampant across a broad spectrum of drugs
intended to treat other diseases as well. A drug developed by Eli
Lilly to treat Alzheimer’s disease, semagacestat, showed great
promise in animal models. According to the NIH, clinical trials in
humans had to be halted because the drug not only failed to help
humans (see Salloway et al. 2014) but also led to “worsening of
clinical measures of cognition and the ability to perform activities
of daily living.”7 That is, patients taking the drug experienced the
opposite of its intended outcome.
Approximately 100 vaccines have been proven effective against
HIV-like viruses in animal models to date. None have been effective
in humans; see Bailey (2008), Nature Medicine Editorial (2007),
Gamble and Matthews (2010), and Greek (2012). This likely relates
to the fact that the progression of HIV to AIDS, which is common
in humans, has been very rarely observed in great apes. To that
end, Varki and Altheide (2005) write, “it is a striking paradox that
chimpanzees are in fact not good models for many major human
diseases/conditions” (p. 1746).
Around 1,000 drugs have been seen to protect against nervous
system damage in animal models of stroke, performed across hun-
dreds of experiments. None of these drugs ended up being protec-
tive in humans; see Dirnagl (2006), Dirnagl and Macleod (2009),
Macleod (2004), O’Collins et al. (2011), O’Collins et al. (2006), Sena
et al. (2007), and Sena et al. (2010). Over 20 drugs have been
shown to be protective in animal models of spinal cord injury, with
none being effective in humans (American Paraplegia Society
12
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 1988). And of the hundred-plus drugs to treat amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, commonly known as Lou Gehrig’s disease, none have
worked in the thousands of humans who have taken these drugs
in clinical trials (Perrin 2014). The drug saridegib tested success-
fully in mice for treating a particular form of cancer, showing a five
time increase in survival rates. It showed no effect in humans (See
Mak et al. 2014).
These are a handful of examples from the vast population of
drugs that seemed effective in animal models but proved to be inef-
fective for treating human diseases.
Opportunity Cost: Failure to Identify New Drugs
An indirect cost to patients comes in the form of an opportunity
cost. The drug development industry’s reliance upon animal mod-
els prevents as-yet-undiscovered safe and effective drugs from
coming to market (see Gura 1997; Lazzarini et al. 2006). Many
drugs that would have been safe and effective in humans are being
eliminated in the development process because of poor outcomes
in animal tests, and other drugs known today to be efficacious
would have been eliminated during the animal testing phase if not
for the determination of investigators. See Sankar (2005) for a gen-
eral overview of this point. Clif Barry, a researcher who specializes
in tuberculosis at the U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infec-
tious Disease observed that the tendency to conduct tests in ani-
mals before humans “has cost us a new generation of medicines”
(Engber 2011a).
For specific examples of the opportunity cost that arises from
animal testing, consider the following. The development of penicil-
lin was delayed because the researcher Dr. Alexander Fleming
thought it was ineffective in a rabbit model of systemic infection
(see Greek and Hansen 2013a). In fact, Fleming later stated “How
fortunate we didn’t have these animal tests in the 1940s, for peni-
cillin would probably never have been granted a license, and possi-
bly the whole field of antibiotics might never have been realised.”
(See Parke 1994, p. 208.) A vaccine against polio was developed in
the 1950s, but only after the animal model first misled scientists
and delayed the vaccine for decades (see Horstmann 1985; Oshin-
sky 2005; Paul 1971; Sabin 1984). The antituberculosis drug
13
KRAMER AND GREEK
 pyrazinamide demonstrated only a weak effect in mice (see Engber
2011b). Furosemide, commonly called Lasix, could have been dis-
carded because it causes liver damage in mice, rats, and hamsters,
but not humans (see Walker and McElligott 1981; Weatherall 1982).
Isoniazid, another anti-tuberculosis drug, causes cancer in many
lab animals but not humans (see Clayson 1980; Shubick 1980).
The heart medication digoxin caused high blood pressure in ani-
mals (see Jover et al. 1992; Okita 1967). Fluoride was withheld
because of its cancer-causing properties in rats (see American
Cancer Society 2013; Bucher et al. 1991). The pain reliever acet-
aminophen and the antibiotics chloramphenicol and metronidazole
were seen to cause cancer in rodents (see Anisimov et al. 2005).
Statins cause liver damage in animals (see Navarro and Senior
2006; Tolman 2002). Tacrolimus (also known as FK506), a drug
used to reduce the risk of rejection of transplanted organs, was
toxic in animals (see Calne et al. 1989; Neuberger 1991). The drug
nabilone, a synthetic version of cannabis used as a pain reliever in
humans, produced toxic reaction in dogs but not rhesus monkeys
or rats (see Morton 1990, p. 7). Phenobarbital causes cancer in
mice and rats but not humans (see Clemmensen and Hjalgrim-
Jensen 1980). The breast cancer treatment and prevention drug
tamoxifen demonstrated carcinogenesis in rats, and COX-2 inhibi-
tors were thought ineffective based on animal studies (see Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery Editorial 2003b). Many of these drugs
would not have been discovered as being safe and effective in
humans in absence of attempts by doctors of near-death patients
to try them in a “last-ditch” attempt.
Dr. Susanta Sarkar of GlaxoSmithKline stated: “High attrition
rates, particularly at the late stage of drug development, is a major
challenge faced by the entire pharmaceutical community. The aver-
age success rate . . . for all therapeutic areas combined is 11%. For
oncology, this is even lower at 5%. Approximately 59% of all oncol-
ogy compounds that enter in Phase III of development [human clin-
ical
trials]
undergo
attrition
[failure]”
(Sarkar
2009,
p.
33,
parenthetic text added).
The number of truly new drugs—new chemical entities—is drop-
ping, and the remaining other drugs being developed and marketed
are “me-too” drugs—variations on a known theme (see Modern
Drug Discovery Editorial 2002; Nature Biotechnology Editorial
2008; Nature Reviews Drug Discovery Editorial 2003a,). The new
14
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 chemical entities are the ones most valuable to industry and most
needed by patients.
Mullane and Williams (2012) discuss why pharmaceutical com-
panies and society are facing a crisis in terms of developing new
drugs that are safe, effective, and inexpensive. They cite the
decrease in number of new chemical entities entering the market
and the late failure of many drugs in development, for example,
with a success rate of only 5 percent for oncology drugs that enter
clinical trials (see Munos and Chin 2011) and an 82 percent failure
rate for drugs in Phase II proof of concept trials (see Arrowsmith
2011a). (The success rate for drugs entering clinical trials varies
slightly on a year-to-year basis but the average is around 10 per-
cent. See Munos 2009, for more on failure rates and costs.) Mul-
lane
and
Williams
(2012)
juxtapose
the
stagnation
of
the
development of new drug introductions over the past decade with
the fact that total government investment in biomedical research in
the United States reached $150 billion in 2010. They state: “The
difficulties in predicting drug efficacy from preclinical models have
been of concern for more than two decades” (Mullane and Williams
2012, p. 461).
A statement in Nature Reviews Drug Discovery puts the current
situation in stark reality: “the number of new drugs that are
approved annually is no greater now than it was 50 years ago”
(Munos 2009, p. 959). Donald Prater, then-Deputy Director in the
European Office of the FDA, said the following during an October 10,
2012 lecture at the conference “Advancing Safety Science and Health
Research Under Horizon 2020 with Innovative, Non-Animal Tools,”
which was hosted by the European Parliament at Brussels: “Product
development is increasingly costly, success rates remain low, many
uncertainties exist, including, as a major component, failures in pre-
dicting toxicity despite extensive animal testing” (Prater 2012).
A recent Reuters article profiled a computer-based method for
predicting drug toxicity. The computer chip would test for activa-
tion of genes and proteins in various human tissues:
“If things are going to fail, you want them to fail early,” Dr.
Francis Collins, the director of the NIH, told Reuters on Fri-
day. “Now you’ll be able to find out much quicker if something
isn’t going to work.” Collins said a drug’s toxicity is one of the
most common reasons why promising compounds fail. But
15
KRAMER AND GREEK
 animal tests – the usual method of checking a drug before try-
ing it on humans – can be misleading. He said about half of
drugs that work in animals may turn out to be toxic for peo-
ple. And some drugs may in fact work in people even if they
fail in animals, meaning potentially important medicines could
be rejected (Yukhananov 2011, emphasis added).
Furthermore, Gura (1997) observed in a Science article that use
of xenograft models (where human tissue is implanted in an animal
for drug testing purposes) routinely causes researchers to miss
effective drugs. In the same article, she quoted an executive at
Merck Research Laboratories, Alan Oliff, who said “The fundamental
problem in drug discovery for cancer is that the [xenograft] model
systems are not predictive at all” (p. 1041, parenthetic text added).
Financial Costs Borne by Patients
While monetary matters may seem less significant in comparison
to the mortality risk patients face as a result of animal testing, it is
worth noting that patients are also bearing costs in the form of ele-
vated health-care expenditures. Consider the case of sepsis, which
was studied extensively in mice before it became evident that sep-
sis in the mouse model very poorly mimicked the human condition.
Drugs emerging from that research have been useless in treating
sepsis in humans, and so sepsis continues to cost U.S. hospital
inpatients at least $14 billion per year; see Mayr et al. (2014). It is
impossible to estimate with any precision the total financial cost to
patients that can be attributed to the failure to identify safe and
effective treatments arising from reliance on animal models. It is
safe to say, however, that several of the most-costly-to-treat condi-
tions, including sepsis, cancer, coronary artery disease, congestive
heart failure, stroke, and lung disease, have been extensively
explored using animal models, with dismal results relative to the
volume of resources invested, and at great cost to patients in terms
of continued high cost of treatment.
Discussion
We have considered examples of costs borne by patients, including
lack of safety, lack of efficacy, opportunity costs, and financial
16
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 costs. Despite the widely held faith among members of the public
that animal modeling must take place in order to identify drugs
that are safe and effective for humans, neither theory nor the
empirical evidence supports the position. Moreover, many experts
in the drug development process cite the failure of animal modeling
as the main reason for high attrition rates and costly medications.
Additionally, directing resources to animal models stands in the
way of viable research that might have identified more promising
treatments.
The shockingly dismal state of the status quo with respect to the
use of animal models to determine human outcomes is perhaps
well demonstrated with a hypothetical analogy from the world of
marketing. Imagine a marketing firm that used octogenarians as
focus group participants to evaluate audience reaction to new mov-
ies intended for teen audiences. Such a firm would not survive in
the free market. Now imagine a world where the Motion Picture
Association of America mandated the use of octogenarians for such
market research. This is the world we live in for drug development.
If society wants to see advances in diseases like cancer and Alz-
heimer’s then researchers must use human data and perform
human-based research. Each of us has different genes and differ-
ent networks of genes. Scientists are now matching gene response
to disease, and great variation is being observed across species.
For instance, Seok et al. (2013) studied inflammatory processes
such as sepsis, burns, and trauma in mice and humans and found
no correlation between what the genes and responses did in mice
versus what they did in humans, describing the match between
gene changes in humans and mice as “close to random” (Seok
et al. 2013, p. 3507). Based on their findings, they recommend
“research to focus on the more complex human conditions rather
than relying on mouse models” (Seok et al. 2013, p. 3507). There is
urgent need to do so. The following statement by a science journal-
ist puts the Seok et al. findings in context:
Yet, despite the fact that some compounds have repeatedly
reversed the symptoms of sepsis in animal tests, not a single
drug has proven effective in human clinical trials, even
though more than 30,000 people have been included in ran-
domized control studies involving candidate antisepsis agents
over the past 25 years (Dolgin 2013, p. 118).
17
KRAMER AND GREEK
 That is, tens of thousands of people were exposed to the risks of
a new drug to treat sepsis and billions of dollars were spent on the
basis of results from animal studies that proved invalid for predict-
ing human response. Even more patients were deprived of treat-
ments that might have been identified through other means. The
failure of animal models in these cases appears to be due to differ-
ences in gene response between humans and mice; see Warren
et al. (2014) for further information. Based on the track record of
drugs that have been tested on animals to date and the fact that
animals and humans are evolved complex systems, yet-to-be-
developed
drugs
will
similarly
exhibit
profoundly
different
responses in animals versus humans.
Many medical researchers are acknowledging that animal mod-
els are inadequate for their needs. For example, Dr. Azra Raza, an
oncologist
and
Professor
of
Medicine
at
Columbia
University
recently wrote the following regarding mouse models of cancer, in
response to the question “What Scientific Idea Is Ready For
Retirement?”
An obvious truth, which is either being ignored or going unad-
dressed in cancer research, is that mouse models don’t mimic
human disease well and are essentially worthless for drug
development. We cured acute leukemia in mice in 1977 with
drugs that we are still using in exactly the same dose and
duration today in humans—with dreadful results . . . there are
no appropriate mouse models that can “mirror the human sit-
uation” (Raza 2015, pp. 231–232).
Hugo Geerts, then-Chief Scientific Officer at In Silico Biosci-
ences, stated:
The successful development of new innovative drugs for
chronic CNS [central nervous system] diseases is in jeopardy
and new paradigms need to be explored. The current drug-
discovery paradigm is based upon detection of activity and
toxicity in animal models; however, these models show a
rather limited predictability for the clinical situation (Geerts
2009, p. 924, parenthetic text added).
Eugene C. Butcher of the Department of Pathology, Stanford
University stated in Nature Reviews Drug Discovery: “Current
mouse-genetics-focused
methods
of
target
validation
cannot
18
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 reliably predict human biology; and even if a model is predictive of
human target biology, target biology cannot reliably predict drug
biology” (Butcher 2005, p. 461).
Authors of a meta-analysis which considered 2,000 articles that
had been published in the seven most highly cited scientific jour-
nals and that had individually been cited at least 500 times
reached the following conclusions about applying animal-based
research to humans: “patients and physicians should remain cau-
tious
about
extrapolating
the
findings
of
prominent
animal
research to the care of human disease” and “poor replication of
even high-quality animal studies should be expected by those who
conduct
clinical
research”
(Hackam
and
Redelmeier
2006,
p. 1731).
We have catalogued some noteworthy excerpts from journal
articles and quotes from scientists regarding the lack of predictive
value animal models have for human outcomes in the context of
drug development. These are a small sample of the many such
instances that have been recorded in the medical literature and
popular press showing the animal model’s overall lack of predictive
value. Numerous other studies as well as scientists both in and
outside of the drug development industry have made similar
statements.8
COSTS BORNE BY OTHER STAKEHOLDERS
So far, this discussion has focused only on the dire implications for
patients which arise from continued reliance on animal models. We
turn now to examining more closely the way other interested par-
ties suffer.
Financial Costs Borne by Investors, Employees, and
Suppliers
The notion that firms in the drug development industry are inade-
quately meeting their responsibilities to their investors, employees,
and suppliers requires a discussion of the industry’s costs relative
to revenues. A hint about the scale of the problem comes from a
statement by Clif Barry, then-chief of the Tuberculosis Research
Section at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases:
19
KRAMER AND GREEK
 “The vast majority of the money that we spend in clinical trials
based on mouse data is completely wasted” (Engber 2011a); also
see Engber (2011b,c).
To get a sense of the financial costs associated with the contin-
ued use of the animal model in the drug development enterprise
overall, it is useful to consider the rates of attrition for drugs in the
development process. The majority of the cost to industry in devel-
oping a new drug is associated with human clinical trials, and the
top reasons drugs fail in human clinical trials are safety/toxicity
and efficacy, the very properties animal studies are purported to
assess. (See Arrowsmith 2011a, 2011b; Khanna 2012; Kola and
Landis 2004; Koppal 2002; Paul et al. 2010.) To put in perspective
the costs associated with the scientific invalidity of animal models,
consider the fact that the pharmaceutical industry spends more
money on research and development as a percentage of revenues
than any other industrial sector.9 This includes the entire drug
development process except for what occurs in academia. Khanna
states: “From a global perspective, the total R&D investment for top
20 pharmaceutical companies amounted to 96 billion dollars [dur-
ing 2010]. This is fairly high investment considering that only 20
percent of approved drugs make more money than the associated
R&D cost” (Khanna 2012, pp. 1088–1089, parenthetic text added).
The drugs that make the most money are the new chemical entities
and they are the ones that are hardest to discover and develop and
the ones where animal models are most likely to fail as predictive
models.
Roy (2012) writes: “The true amount that companies spend per
drug approved is almost certainly even larger today. Matthew
Herper of Forbes recently totaled R&D spending from the 12 lead-
ing pharmaceutical companies from 1997 to 2011 and found that
they had spent $802 billion to gain approval for just 139 drugs: a
staggering $5.8 billion per drug” (Roy 2012, p. 1). Catherine
Shaffer, Contributing Editor of Drug Discovery & Development
agrees, having stated: “Much of [the cost of drug development] . . . is
attributable to drug failures late in development, after huge invest-
ments have been made. Drugs are equally likely to fail at that stage
for safety reasons, as for a lack of efficacy, which is often well
established by the time large trials are launched” (Shaffer 2012,
parenthetic text and emphasis added). Pharmaceutical companies
want unsafe and ineffective drugs to fail early in the development
20
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 process, before the costly clinical trials. But because the animal
data are so unreliable, pharmaceutical companies do not know
whether any given new drug is safe or effective until they try it in
humans. This can be remedied using a technique called microdos-
ing, which we describe later.
A senior editor at the journal Drug Discovery & Development,
wrote: “The major costs incurred by a drug company are for clinical
trials and marketing. The amount of money spent on initial discov-
ery and development is only about 2–5 percent of the total cost of
getting the drug to market” (Koppal 2002, p. 35). This means the
animal tests performed by a pharmaceutical company are not
extremely expensive relative to other elements of the full drug dis-
covery process. (Note that the 2–5 percent figure does not include
the money spent on basic science research conducted at universi-
ties, which supplements that paid for by industry. Later we discuss
the portion of that cost borne by taxpayers, estimated to be at least
$10–12 billion per year.) Ignoring for the moment the massive cost
of human clinical trials that are often built on misleading results
from animal tests, one might be tempted to conclude that if animal
testing is itself relatively inexpensive for pharmaceutical compa-
nies, it may still make sense to continue employing the method.
This would be an erroneous conclusion, in light of the evidence
described above that the animal model leads to poor human out-
comes in terms of safety and efficacy, and considering the fact that
resources currently devoted to animal models might be better
directed to human-based methods with better predictive value,
some of which are currently available as we discuss below.
Overall, pharmaceutical companies devote vast resources to
likely-to-fail drugs in their extremely costly human clinical trials
(and other institutions such as universities expend significant
funds on the animal-based studies that underlie the clinical trials).
These undertakings represent a massive collective investment on
the part of society. Individuals who rely directly on the returns to
these entities’ investments, including employees, suppliers, and
investors, are being consistently and predictably short-changed.
They would be better served if the drug discovery industry had the
freedom to direct their resources to drug development methods
that do not seem doomed to fail from the outset, such as the per-
sonalized medicine methods we describe later.
21
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Additional harms to employees arise as a consequence of the
bonds formed between laboratory workers and the animals under
their charge. (These bonds are fostered in part by regulations that
call for the “humane” care of animals used for research and policies
that encourage the use of procedures that “avoid or minimize, dis-
comfort, distress, and pain”; see Walshaw 1994). According to
Halpern-Lewis (1996), lab workers may experience guilt, uneasi-
ness, and frustration during a study involving live-animal research,
as well as grief and mourning when animals are harmed during a
study or killed at the end of a study. Specific medical consequences
of these experiences can include depression, headaches, sleepless-
ness, and gastric disturbances. Halpern-Lewis further reports that
these problems can spill over to the rest of the workplace through
lost days of work, low morale, diminished productivity, and high
employee turnover. The American Association for Laboratory Ani-
mal Science (2001) provides additional information about the ill-
effects suffered by workers who oversee animals used in laboratory
research.
Implications for Other Stakeholders
Independent of consumers who use drugs and individuals directly
associated with pharmaceutical firms, other stakeholders are also
suffering adverse consequences due to the use of the animal model
in drug research.
Among these stakeholders are, importantly, the human research
subjects who take part in clinical trials. (Chang 2016, discusses
the notion that these individuals should be considered stakehold-
ers even after clinical trials have ended.) These individuals are
among the first humans to be exposed to compounds that perhaps
appeared safe in animal models. Since we know compounds that
appear safe in animal models can be extremely toxic to humans,
these individuals face significant physical risks when they take
part in clinical trials. And they are likely unaware of the magnitude
of the risks; in their clinical trial recruiting materials, research sci-
entists do not typically highlight the methodological problems we
identify above.
Turning to another set of stakeholders, new generations of scien-
tists are learning how to use flawed animal models instead of
22
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 learning new, effective techniques like microdosing and gene-based
medicine, which we explain more fully below. This represents a
dead-weight loss to society, as their valuable skills are being waste-
fully devoted to a field of research that offers no predictive value for
human health when instead they could be experiencing the satis-
faction of advancing scientific progress through use of better
methods.
Importantly, taxpayers are stakeholders of pharmaceutical com-
panies by virtue of supporting the legal infrastructure and eco-
nomic
environment
in
which
the
firms
operate.
Like
other
stakeholders, taxpayers are also bearing large and unnecessary
costs as a direct result of animal testing. A lower bound on govern-
ment expenditures on animal-based research is $10–12 billion per
year simply to fund the fraction of the NIH budget that directly
funds animal-based research conducted at universities.10 There
are additional costs associated with animal testing conducted by
researchers at universities beyond that being funded by NIH
grants. These costs are often covered by funds that can be traced
back to the pocketbook of the general public, whether through
taxes that support university operations, tuition fees, or charitable
donations.
Further, while not a primary focus of this analysis, the animals
we are discussing are actually sentient and sapient organisms.11
When society allows such beings to suffer for no reason, another
societal loss is experienced.
IF THE ANIMAL MODEL IS MISLEADING, WHY IS IT
USED?
In previous sections we detailed the abysmal failure of the animal
model in drug development. A reasonable question in light of the
evidence is why the drug development industry began using and
continues to rely so heavily on the results of animal-based
research. The reasons originate with international and U.S. domes-
tic events that date back as far as World War II.
We consider first the international events. With the end of World
War II and the Doctors’ trial at Nuremburg highlighting the horrors
of Nazi experiments on humans, animal modeling became institu-
tionalized in the moral codes of research: Principle 3 of the
23
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Nuremburg Code and Principle 12 of the Declaration of Helsinki
both state firmly that medical research on humans must be based
on findings that arise from animal tests. Being ethical guidelines,
these codes are not necessarily legally binding themselves. How-
ever, the principles codified in the Nuremburg Code and Declara-
tion of Helsinki have been adopted into various countries’ laws,
including those of the United States, as we explain below. Current
laws continue to enshrine these principles in spite of the fact that
medical science and medical research methods were in their
infancy at the time the codes were developed and paradigm-
shifting advances have occurred since (see Greek et al. 2012b).
Regarding domestic laws in the United States, two key medical
disasters led to Congress formalizing the way drug safety and effi-
cacy would be regulated. First, in the 1930s, more than a hundred
people were killed in the United States when ethylene glycol (a
main component of antifreeze) was used as an additive in a sulfa
drug used to treat infections. In response to that tragedy, Congress
passed the 1938 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. Section
505 of the act required, for the first time, that anyone applying to
introduce a new drug provide “full reports of investigations which
have been made to show whether or not such drug is safe for use,”
which in practice typically involved animal tests, but as Wax (1995,
p. 459), the specific nature of the animal tests was not standard-
ized by the 1938 act.
The second medical disaster that helped to enshrine the use of
animal tests in the drug development process in the United States
was the occurrence of birth defects in the offspring of pregnant
women who had been prescribed thalidomide in the early 1960s.
Largely in response to that calamity, Senator Estes Kefauver led the
initiative to revise the regulations governing the drug development
process, and the result was the 1962 Drug Efficacy Amendment to
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, also known as the Kefau-
ver Harris Amendment. This revision formalized the notion that
both safety and efficacy must be demonstrated in new drug applica-
tions (NDAs). While the 1962 amendment did not explicitly stipulate
that animal tests must be used to demonstrate safety and efficacy,
the interpretation of the law was and continues to be such that ani-
mal tests are the primary means of supporting NDAs.
This is evident from various government sources. For instance, a
1968 government document reports that prior to conducting
24
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 human clinical trials, “The sponsor of clinical investigations must
submit to FDA the animal data from which he has concluded that
they can be conducted with reasonable safety” (Goldenthal 1968,
p. 13). Further, an article in the FDA Consumer magazine states
“Drug sponsors must show the FDA results of preclinical testing
they’ve done in laboratory animals and what they propose to do for
human testing before they can begin” (Meadows 2006).
Consistent with these sorts of government communications, the
understanding among experts in the field was and is consistent
with the belief that the FDA requires as a matter of policy that ani-
mal testing is a precursor to conducting human clinical trials. In a
book about the pharmaceutical industry, Schnee (1978, pp. 10–11,
parenthetic text added) states that the following was widely under-
stood after the 1962 amendment:
With respect to drug testing, the amendments and imple-
menting regulations empowered the FDA to specify the testing
procedure a manufacturer must use to produce acceptable
information for evaluating the new drug application (NDA).
The sponsor of a new drug was required to submit a “Notice of
Claimed Investigational Exemption for a New Drug” to the
FDA prior to human testing. The investigational new drug
(IND) form is actually required to permit the interstate ship-
ment of new drugs for clinical studies. The major impact of
the IND was to require comprehensive data on animal tests
before the FDA would allow human trials. Subsequently, ani-
mal toxicologists at the FDA formulated minimum standards
for a satisfactory animal testing program.
Of course, the FDA employs some scientists who realize, or his-
torically employed some scientists who realized, the use of the ani-
mal model is futile, and some have been quoted in previous
sections. Therefore, it may seem obvious that the FDA should be
willing to consider changing the regulations and policies that shape
the drug development initiative. In general, the FDA has been
unwilling to change policies without action from Congress; cer-
tainly the biggest changes in the way the FDA oversees drug devel-
opment were brought about by the 1938 Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act and the 1962 Drug Efficacy Amendment. It is reason-
able to assume that the abolishment of policies and regulations
that currently mandate the use of animals will likewise require
25
KRAMER AND GREEK
 some action from Congress even if the FDA may technically have
the power to decide what evidence it accepts to support safety and
efficacy. There are a few obstacles.
First, humans are generally prone to exhibit “status quo bias,”
which causes people to favor doing nothing or maintaining their
previous habits when facing a decision. This bias has been robustly
documented to be a pervasive influence on human decisions across
a wide range of contexts; see Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) for
instance. Status quo bias has likely been a strong factor interfering
with regulators’ willingness to deviate from the standard practice of
requiring animal tests, even in the face of extensive and compelling
evidence that such tests fail to ensure safety or efficacy for
humans.
Second, members of Congress who are interested in being re-
elected (and officials at the FDA interested in continued employ-
ment) are unlikely to be keen on taking responsibility for having
mistakenly told their constituents that animal testing made their
medications safe. To pursue the abolishment of animal testing
requirements, they would need to be able to recommend replacing
animal tests with methods that are able to ensure safety and effi-
cacy. In other words, lawmakers and regulators have an incentive
to keep the animal test requirements in place until science can
replace them with something that is about 100 percent predictive.
Fortunately, 100 percent predictability is feasible through person-
alized medicine, as we discuss in the next section.
Third, the pharmaceutical industry appears internally divided
regarding whether to recognize the futility of animal models. On
one hand, many scientists with ties to industry have made state-
ments acknowledging that animal testing is an impediment to the
drug development process; some are quoted above. On the other
hand, firms in the pharmaceutical industry enjoy a period of pat-
ent protections on their drug discoveries, and during that period
they have been able to implement pricing that allows them to cover
their costs and earn a favorable return on investment. In light of
these protections, pharmaceutical companies have had little incen-
tive to change the system. In cases where drugs that that tested as
safe on animals ended up harming humans in sufficient numbers
that class-action lawsuits were successfully litigated by consum-
ers, the magnitude of the fine has often been a small fraction of the
revenues the firm accrued from selling the drug to unsuspecting
26
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 patients. (See Philippidis 2014, for relevant figures associated with
some of the larger recent class-action lawsuits in the United
States.)
A related reason the regulators have not yet fixed the problem is
because the drug industry has enormous influence in Washington.
The pharmaceutical industry has more registered lobbyists than
the number of senators and congressmen combined (ABC News
2002). The relationship between that industry and the US Con-
gress is illustrated by the 21st Century Cures Act (US Congress
201522016). Introduced in January 2015 and signed into law by
President Obama in December 2016, this law does several things.
It provides more money to the NIH, much of which will go to animal
modeling. Writing in the New England Journal of Medicine, and
quoting from the 21st Century Cures Act itself, Avorn and Kesselheim
(2015, p. 2472) report that the bill also includes
the use of “shorter or smaller clinical trials” for devices and
the request that the FDA develop criteria for relying on
“evidence from clinical experience,” including “observational
studies, registries, and therapeutic use” instead of random-
ized, controlled trials for approving new uses for existing
drugs. Although such data can provide important information
about drug utilization and safety once a medication is in use,
there is considerable evidence that these approaches are not
as rigorous or valid as randomized trials in assessing efficacy.
The bill essentially takes science out of drug development in
terms of human clinical trials. The use of “observational studies”
would allow the pharmaceutical industry to sell more medications
even in absence of evidence that the drugs are safe and effective.
The bill also allows drugs to be marketed based on the response of
surrogate markers—chemical reactions that we think mimic what
we actually want the drug to do. But there are problems with this
approach, as suggested by the following example:
In 2013, patients began to receive a new drug for tuberculosis
approved on the basis of a randomized trial relying on a sur-
rogate measure of bacterial counts in the sputum—even
though patients given the drug in that trial had a death rate
four times that in the comparison group, mostly from tuber-
culosis (Avorn and Kesselheim 2015, p. 2472).
27
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Further, the bill allows some medications to be administered
after animal studies without any human clinical trials being man-
dated. This does not bode well for safety and efficacy in humans.
These are not the only problems with the bill, according to Avorn
and Kesselheim (2015).
Beyond the legislative constraint, other possible reasons that
help fortify the continued reliance upon animal modeling may
include tradition, ego, conflict of interest, and money.
Columbia University’s Dr. Azra Raza, explains:
[Another reason for the continuation of animal modeling is]
related to the frailties of human nature. Too many eminent labo-
ratories and illustrious researchers have devoted too much of
their time to studying malignant diseases in mouse models, and
they’re the ones reviewing one another’s grants and deciding
where the NIH money gets spent. They’re not prepared to con-
cede that mouse models are basically valueless for most cancer
therapeutics (Raza 2015, p. 232, parenthetic text added).
The drug development process begins in academia with basic sci-
ence grants to researchers. 40–50 percent of grant money from the
NIH funds animal models (see, for instance, Committee on Models
for Biomedical Research Board on Basic Biology 1985; Greek and
Greek 2010; Monastersky 2008). This process results in the suc-
cessful development of a new drug only a very small fraction of a
percent of the time (see Contopoulos-Ioannidis et al. 2003; Crowley
2003). The status quo still may appear to be a good deal for those
who conduct basic research, but many of the eventual failures of
drugs due to poor efficacy in human trials can be traced back to the
druggable targets found by academia. (Druggable targets are typi-
cally proteins that are involved in a disease process and that can be
potentially affected by a new medication for the benefit of the
patient.) Even though the pharmaceutical industry does not neces-
sarily fund academia directly—though sometimes it does—firms in
the industry are still failing to serve the interests of their stakehold-
ers because they take the results from academia, specifically the
results from animal models used in academia, and a vast majority
of the time those results do not result in a new drug. Nine out of ten
times the drugs that make it to costly clinical trials do not make it
to the market (see Sarkar 2009). This failure is not typically con-
firmed until after expensive human clinical trials have taken place.
28
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 Overall, researchers, institutions, and regulators have had little
incentive to publicize the shortcomings of the animal model, though
some have spoken out. As consumers and other stakeholders become
more broadly aware of these shortcomings, and the significant costs
associated with them, they may opt to mount grassroots efforts to
pressure the FDA and their congressional representatives to eradicate
policies and regulations that mandate the pointless use of animals in
the drug development industry. In lobbying to eliminate the require-
ment that drugs be tested on animals, ideally one would like to pro-
mote a better option. Fortunately, scientists currently have options
that were unavailable when the FDA regulations requiring animal
testing were originally written, and they offer a very clear path for-
ward. We now turn to discussing those options.
A BETTER OPTION: PERSONALIZED MEDICINE
We contend that by using animal models to predict human out-
comes, the drug development industry is behaving like the proverbial
drunk looking for his lost keys under a streetlamp rather than where
he dropped them, in the dark. This is especially tragic given more
promising methods are readily available. Personalized medicine is a
more modern approach to delivering healthcare that is customized to
an individual patient, taking account of her unique biological
makeup.12 To this end, instead of seeking druggable targets from ani-
mal tissues, scientists are using human tissue. Scientists are also
linking genes to diseases and designing drugs around the proteins
produced by the genes. Instead of testing drugs on animals to deter-
mine safety and efficacy, humans are being treated with drug using a
technique called microdosing (see Garner and Lappin 2006; Lappin
and Garner 2003, 2008; Lappin et al. 2006, 2013). With microdosing,
nanogram quantities of a drug (measured in billionths of a gram),
which are safe, are administered to patients, and both safety and effi-
cacy can be evaluated.13 This line of inquiry speaks to the promise of
personalized medicine, whereby doctors are already identifying the
genes that are involved in the effects and side effects of new drugs,
and in turn are optimizing the outcome for patients. The future of
medicine must continue to follow along this newly forged path,
matching a patient’s genes to her disease and drug response,
accounting
for
the
fundamentals
of
molecular
biological
and
29
KRAMER AND GREEK
 differences in genetic make-up across individuals; see Greek et al.
(2012a) for further background on personalized medicine.
Nineteenth century animal modelers thought that all species
were physiologically the same when scaled for size; see Bernard
(1957) for instance. Likewise, physicians had long believed that all
humans were more or less the same in terms of response to drugs
and disease. In the twentieth century, physicians noted differences
in responses to drugs and disease between the sexes, among races,
and even between identical twins.14
Clinical observations showed that individual patients responded
differently to medications, with each patient requiring individual-
ized dosages of drugs. (A few examples include the muscle relaxant
succinylcholine, the antituberculosis agent isoniazid, the antihy-
pertensive agent hydralazine, and the antiarrhythmic drug procai-
namide.)
It
was
discovered
that
some
of
the
enzymes
that
metabolized these drugs were inherited in different amounts: some
patients had more than one or two copies of the gene that coded
for the enzyme and thus had higher concentrations of the enzyme
and therefore lower concentrations of the drug.
The pharmaceutical industry is currently aware that individual
patients respond differently to drugs. (See Table 1, which shows there
TABLE 1
Response Rates of Patients to a Major Drug for a
Selected Class of Therapeutic Areas (Spear et al. 2001)
Therapeutic Area
Efficacy Rate (percent)
Alzheimer’s
30
Analgesics (Cox-2)
80
Asthma
60
Cardiac arrhythmias
60
Depression (SSRI)
62
Diabetes
57
HCV*
47
Incontinence
40
Migraine (acute)
52
Migraine (prophylaxis)
50
Oncology
25
Osteoporosis
48
Rheumatoid arthritis
50
Schizophrenia
60
*Hepatitis C virus.
30
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 is remarkable heterogeneity in the way different patients respond to
drug treatments for various conditions.) Allen Roses, then-worldwide
vice-president of genetics at GlaxoSmithKline, said fewer than half of
the patients prescribed some of the most expensive drugs derived any
benefit from them: “The vast majority of drugs—more than 90 per-
cent—only work in 30 or 50 percent of the people” (Connor 2003).
See also Roses (2000) and Spear et al. (2001).
In contrast, personalized medicine is “coupling established clinical–
pathological indexes with state-of-the-art molecular profiling to create
diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic strategies precisely tailored to
each patient’s requirements” (Mirnezami et al. 2012, p. 489). In other
words, personalized medicine matches a specific drug to a specific
patient in order to maximize efficacy and minimize side effects. By
understanding which genes perform what functions in the human
body and which genes are affected by specific medications, physicians
can match a drug to a particular patient in terms of efficacy and
safety. Patients who do have the gene and thus protein necessary for
a drug to be effective will not be prescribed that drug; nor will patients
who have genes known to result in severe adverse reaction for a drug.
Note that even humans do not have a high enough predictive value to
be used as a model for predicting what a drug will do for other
humans. Physicians must determine each patient’s genetic make-up
and base treatment on that unique set of information.
Craig Venter, formerly of the Human Genome Project, stated:
If you have lung cancer, as you know, the most important
thing is to sequence the cancer gene, which determines
whether Pfizer’s crizotinib [a personalized drug for non-small
cell lung cancer] will work on your type of tumor . . . . It really
depends on the pharmaceuticals. The Pfizer drug was discov-
ered almost by accident in that the clinical trial failed. Then
they found that if you had a certain point mutation you had a
60% chance of tumor regression with crizotinib (Topol and
Venter 2013).
In its 2014 report, The Case for Personalized Medicine, the Per-
sonalized Medicine Coalition documented the growth of commer-
cially available personalized medicine products from 13 in 2006 to
over 100 at the time the report was written. The report outlined
various scenarios in which personalized medicine products are
currently used:
31
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Patients with melanoma, leukemia, or metastatic lung, breast,
or brain cancers are now routinely offered a “molecular diag-
nosis” in some clinical centers; this allows their physicians to
select tailored treatments that can greatly improve the chan-
ces of survival. Melanoma can now be sub-classified by its
genetics . . . .
Treatments targeting . . . gene mutations represent a remark-
able improvement over trial-and-error medicine, and we are
not far from a time at which most cancer cases will be given a
targeted course of treatment (Personalized Medicine Coalition
2014, p. 4).
In each of the years 2014 through 2016, more than 20 percent
of all new molecular entities approved by the FDA were based on
personalized
medicine
(Personalized
Medicine
Coalition
2016).
Some of the new drugs approved in 2016 include the following.
Epclusa is a drug used for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C
infection which can be prescribed only after genetic testing. The
same is true for Venclexta for the treatment of chronic lymphocytic
leukemia and Zepatier which is used for the treatment of chronic
hepatitis C infection.
Cancer treatment is the area of medicine being most trans-
formed by personalized medicine. As reported by the Personalized
Medicine Coalition 2014, pp. 9–13), several types of cancer treat-
ment are well informed by genetic testing. For instance, patients
with particular genetic mutations can take Zelborat as a treatment
for melanoma that is surgically inoperable, and patients who
exhibit a particular genetic expression are the only ones who can
be treated effectively with Xalkori for non-small cell lung cancer.
Likewise, genetic testing is used to identify the 30 percent of breast
cancer patients who can reduce the likelihood of a tumor recur-
rence by 52 percent by taking Cerceptin. Additional genetic testing
can determine which patients are best treated with hormone ther-
apy alone or in combination with more aggressive modalities.
Personalized medicine can also help prevent adverse reactions to
drugs. Koren et al. (2006) report that genotyping can prevent infant
mortality in cases where analgesics are given to women during
childbirth (which is common practice): between 1 and 29 percent of
the population in different regions of the world exhibits a genetic
characteristic that can lead to the death of newborns who are
32
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 breastfed by mothers taking particular pain relievers. Genetic test-
ing prior to prescribing such drugs can save the lives of babies.
But personalized medicine does not just apply to prescribing
drugs. By studying tissues from human cancer patients, research-
ers at Duke-National University of Singapore Graduate Medical
School discovered that stomach cancer is actually two different dis-
eases, and a patient’s response to therapy depends on the genome
of the cancer (see Tan et al. 2011). The effect of HIV and other dis-
eases on different people is also known to vary with genetics; see Li
et al. (2014), Lu et al. (2014), Serao et al. (2011), Trivedi (2010), Xu
et al. (2012), and Xu et al. (2013).
The mutation that causes sickle cell anemia is called single
nucleotide polymorphism, and, as described above, it arises from a
small variation in DNA. Single nucleotide polymorphisms may be
the reason not all children can be protected by the same vaccine
(see King 2009; Yucesoy et al. 2009). In the future, children with a
common genotype will be given a vaccine based on that genotype.
It is estimated that “between 5 and 20 per cent of people vaccinated
against hepatitis B, and between 2 and 10 per cent of those vacci-
nated against measles, will not be protected if they ever encounter
these viruses” (King 2009, p. 11). Human variation is also caused
by copy number variation—where a person has a different number
of copies of the same gene (see Greek et al. 2012a). This can also
lead to variation in response to drugs and disease.
Even if a more promising option were not currently available, it
still would not suffice to continue with the current practice in drug
development. That is, lack of personalized medicine as a viable
option would not be sufficient grounds to continue to waste billions
of dollars every year on animal-based practices that are proven not
to work. Furthermore, the fact that scientists occasionally discover
by accident safe or effective treatments using ineffective animal-
based research methods is itself not a logical justification to continue
with the status quo. Given the billions of dollars and countless num-
ber of researchers engaged in use of the animal model, it is inevitable
that successful treatments would occasionally emerge simply due to
random chance.
Flipping coins does not make for well-reasoned science, and that
is unfortunately analogous to the practice the drug development
industry engages in today. Fortunately, a better option is available
by way of personalized medicine.
33
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Personalized medicine is not some futuristic fantasy; it is cur-
rently happening for many diseases and medications. In fact,
approximately 200 drugs currently require genetic information to
be considered before prescribing (see FDA 2017). For a sample of
recent discussions about the current practice of personalized medi-
cine from the popular press and peer-reviewed journals including
Nature Medicine, the New England Journal of Medicine and the
Lancet, see Aldous (2013), Bates (2010), Belmaker et al. (2012),
Bhathena and Spear (2008), Blair (2009), Dolgin (2013), Flaherty
et al. (2010), Froehlich et al. (2011), Hudson (2011), Hughes et al.
(2008), Lu et al. (2014), Powell et al. (2012), Serrano et al. (2011),
Spear et al. (2001), Tan et al. (2011), and Wang et al. (2011).
CONCLUSIONS
In spite of decades of research that demonstrates the lack of pre-
dictive value of animal testing for determining the safety and effi-
cacy of drugs, the pharmaceutical industry continues to rely on
data from outmoded animal-based research and animal-based
tests that are still routinely employed by scientists. This is costly to
society in many ways: patients who suffer adverse reactions to
drugs that appeared safe in animals; patients who fail to experi-
ence benefits from drugs that appeared to be effective in animals;
patients facing an opportunity cost by missing out on drugs that
might otherwise have been found to be safe and effective; harm to
investors, employees, and suppliers due to the billions of dollars
wastefully expended not only on animal tests but also on the
much-more-costly human clinical trials that build on the mislead-
ing results of animal tests; and harm to various other parties. In
contrast, the abandonment of animal modeling is in the best inter-
est of those to whom pharmaceutical companies bear responsibil-
ity, even irrespective of the interests of animals.
National drug regulatory agencies like the U.S. FDA and conven-
tions like the Nuremburg Code and the Declaration of Helsinki
require animal modeling prior to administering a drug to humans.
These regulations and codes are outdated and must be changed.
The pharmaceutical industry has one of the most powerful lobbies
on Capitol Hill and would have little trouble in updating Congress
and asking them to mandate that the FDA eliminate the animal
34
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 testing requirements. The pharmaceutical industry should also
educate Congress regarding the misleading and wasteful nature of
basic science research that relies on animal modeling. This is nec-
essary because universities, as entities that profit from animal
modeling, are a strong lobby promoting the continuation of animal
modeling.
There
is
currently
no
lobbyist
for
human-based
research. Unless the pharmaceutical industry takes these issues
seriously, patients will continue to suffer and die prematurely, and
the rest of society will continue to bear sizable, avoidable costs.
NOTES
1.
We use phrases such as drug development industry and drug develop-
ment process to include all research leading to a new drug. This includes
research performed by those in academia, by pharmaceutical companies, and
by companies that, while not pharmaceutical companies per se, are closely
associated with that sector: for example, biotechnology companies.
2.
Humans are, of course, animals, but we adhere to the convention of
using the word animal to mean non-human animal.
3.
We identify this set of stakeholders based on concepts discussed by Free-
man (1994, 2004), Phillips (1997), Mitchell et al. (1997), and Phillips et al. (2003).
4.
Precise estimates vary. We quote sources below that put the amount in
a range between 53 billion dollars per year to over a 100 billion dollars per
year.
5.
See Greek (2012), Greek (2014a,b,c), Greek and Greek (2010), Greek
and Hansen (2012, 2013a, 2013b), Greek et al. (2011, 2012a, 2012b),
Greek and Menache (2013), Greek and Pound (2002), Greek and Rice
(2012), Greek and Shanks (2009), Jones and Greek (2013), Shanks and
Greek (2008), and Shanks et al. (2009).
6.
The reader might wonder, if the animal model is so poor at predicting
birth defects in humans, then why have we not seen another thalidomide-like
disaster? The answer is both simple and disheartening: physicians simply
avoid prescribing pregnant women most drugs, adopting a “better safe than
sorry” policy. While this is an appropriate adjustment in physician behavior in
light of their current information set, it highlights one of the hidden costs of a
regime that relies so heavily on the animal model, namely a virtual freeze on
progress in some areas of medical science.
7.
See the clinical trial study record detail maintained by the U.S. National
Institutes of Health: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00594568.
35
KRAMER AND GREEK
 8.
Additional sources that discuss evidence on the poor predictability asso-
ciated with the animal model include the following (among many others):
Abbott 2005; Akhtar 2015; Alini et al. 2008; Alving 2002; Bendtsen and Møller
2008; Bj€
orquist et al. 2007; Brennan et al. 2010; Butcher 2005; Calabrese
1984, 1991; Chabner and Roberts 2005; Chapman 2011; Collins 2011;
Connors 1996; Cook et al. 2012; Dennis 2006; Dixit and Boelsterli 2007;
Dixon 1972; Dragunow 2008; Drake et al. 2012; Duyk 2003; Eason et al.
1990, Elferink et al. 2011, Engber 2011b; Enna and Williams 2009; FDA
2004, 2006; Fedorov et al. 2011; Ferdowsian and Beck 2011; Fletcher 1978;
Force and Kolaja 2011; Garattini 1985; Geerts 2009; Giri and Bader
2011; Grass and Sinko 2002; Greek and Greek 2010; Greek et al. 2011a,
2012a; Greek and Shanks 2009; Gura 1997; Hait 2010; Hampel et al. 2010;
Herper 2012; Heywood 1990; H€
orig and Pullman 2004; Holmes et al. 2011;
Horrobin 2003; Hurko 2006; Kamb 2005; Kay 2011; Khanna 2012; Kola and
Landis 2004; Ledford 2012; Lin 1995; Littman and Williams 2005; Loisel et al.
2007; Lumley 1990; Lutz 2011; Mahmood 2000; Markou et al. 2009;
Marusina 2012; Matthews 2008; McArthur 2011; McGee 2006; Meijers et al.
1997; Millan et al. 2012; Mullane and Williams 2012; Mullard 2011; Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery Editorial 2005; Nature Reviews Drug Discovery News
& Analysis 2011; Neuzil et al. 2012; Noble 2000; O’Collins et al. 2006; Opar
2012; Oser 1981; Palfreyman et al. 2002; Pammolli et al. 2011; Paul et al.
2010; Prater 2012; Raven 2012; Regenberg et al. 2009; Reynolds 2012; Rice
2012; Royal Society of Medicine 1980; Seligmann 2004; Seok et al. 2013;
Shaffer 2012; Shanks and Greek 2009; Shanks et al. 2009; Sharp and Langer
2011; Shepard and Lemire 2004; Sietsema 1989; Sitaram and Gershon 1983;
Smith and Caldwell 1977; Smith et al. 1965; Suter 1990; Taneja et al. 2012;
Taylor 2009; Uhl et al. 2012; van Meer et al. 2012; van Zutphen 2000; Wall
and Shani 2008; Weaver et al. 2003; Young 2008; Yukhananov 2011; Zbinden
1993; Zhang et al. 2010; Zielinska 2010.
9.
The U.S. pharmaceutical industry’s spending on R&D as a percentage
of revenues is 15.8 percent compared to 3.2 percent across all industries
according to Pham (2010, table 6). Total U.S. pharmaceutical industry spend-
ing on R&D is now in the range of $50 billion per year, up from $2 billion in
1990; see PhRMA (2015). For additional industry statistics, see Khanna
(2012) and Vernon et al. (2010).
10.
According to an article by Monastersky (2008) in The Chronicle of
Higher Education, the NIH has devoted a relatively constant 42 percent of
its awards since 1990 to grants and contracts involving animal-based
research. Its program-level budget was over 30 billion dollars in 2015 and
2016, and it is forecasted to be over 33 billion dollars in 2017 (see National
36
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 Institutes of Health 2016). Another approximation of how much of the gov-
ernment’s research dollars in general went to animal-based studies is pro-
vided by a government-produced table from 1985 showing that about 50
percent of such research dollars went to animal models; see Committee on
Models for Biomedical Research Board on Basic Biology (1985) and Greek
and Greek (2010). This reinforces the point that animal modeling in basic
research is very expensive for society directly and industry indirectly, since
all parties rely on the data that emerge from basic research. Despite
appeals for an update on the 1985 estimate, the NIH has not provided
these data.
11.
Studies such as those by Brosnan and de Waal (2003) and Bekoff
(2004) demonstrate that nonhuman animals exhibit precursors to morality,
such as empathy, sympathy, fairness, and cooperation. More recent work has
begun to show evidence not only of precursors to morality, but a capacity for
moral reasoning itself. For instance, Lin et al. (2008) find evidence that apes
are capable of right versus wrong value judgements. Additionally, studies have
shown that a wide range of animals are capable of feeling pain, including even
fish (see Duncan 2006). Further, animals across a broad range of species evi-
dently experience human-like emotions, for example, grieving the death of
their peers; see King (2013).
12.
In his 2015 State of the Union speech, President Obama voiced his
desire for Congress to provide additional funding for a new “Precision Medicine
Initiative,” or personalized medicine.
13.
One nanogram of the most toxic substances on earth can be safely
ingested; see Gill (1982) and National Institute of Occupational Safety and
Health (1996). This dose can be incrementally increased until efficacy is either
established or the beginning signs of toxicity are seen. See Greek (2013) for
more information on microdosing.
14.
See, for instance, Alexanderson and Borgå (1972), Bell and Spector
(2011), Bruder et al. (2008), Canto et al. (2012), Chapman and Hill (2012),
Cheung et al. (1997), Couzin (2007a,b), Czyz et al. (2012), Dempster et al.
(2011), Dewland et al. (2013), Edelstein et al. (2013), Favoni and Alama (2013),
Fraga et al. (2005), Gordon et al. (2011), Gregor and Joffe (1978), Haiman et al.
(2006), Halder et al. (2012), Herndon and Jennings (1951), Holden (2005),
Javierre et al. (2010), Kaiser (2005), Kalow (1991), Klein and Huber (2010),
Kopp et al. (2011), Lin et al. (1989), Lyons et al. (2013), Macdonald (2002),
Maiti et al. (2011), Misch et al. (2010), Muqit et al. (2008), Ollikainen and Craig
(2011), Pinto et al. (2013), Sarkar et al. (2012), Simon (2005), Sloan et al.
(2002), Spielman et al. (2007), Stamer and Stuber (2007), Stankiewicz and
37
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Lupski (2010), Wald and Wu (2010), Wilke and Dolan (2011), Willyard (2009),
Wong et al. (2005), Xu et al. (2012), and Zhao et al. (2012).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful to Joel Amernic, Len Brooks, Mark Kamstra, Chi
Liao, and Roger Martin for comments on earlier versions. We also
thank participants of the Jackman Humanities Institute’s Animals
in the Law and Humanities Working Group at the University of
Toronto.
REFERENCES
Abbott, A. 2005. “Animal testing: More than a cosmetic change,” Nature
438: 144–146.
ABC News. 2002. Transcript of Bitter Medicine – Pills, Profit and the Public
Health. (On 29 May 2002, ABC News aired Bitter Medicine – Pills, Profit
and the Public Health’, a special expose narrated by Peter Jennings.).
Ahn, A. C., Tewari, M., Poon, C. S., and Phillips, R. S. 2006. “The limits of
reductionism in medicine: Could systems biology offer an alternative?,”
PLoS Medicine 3: e208.
Akhtar,
A.
2015.
“The
flaws
and
human
harms
of
animal
experimentation,” Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics 24: 407–419.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180115000079419, accessed February 2,
2018.
Aldous, P. 2013. “Your genomic future: Personalised medicine is here,”
New
Scientist
2933.
https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg21929
333-100-your-genomic-future-personalised-medicine-is-here/, accessed
February 2, 2018.
Alexanderson, B., and Borgå, O. 1972. “Interindividual differences in
plasma protein binding of nortriptyline in man – A twin study,” Euro-
pean Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 4: 196–200.
Alini, M., Eisenstein, S. M., Ito, K., Little, C., Kettler, A. A., Masuda, K.,
Melrose, J., Ralphs, J., Stokes, I., and Wilke, H. J. 2008. “Are animal
models useful for studying human disc disorders/degeneration?,” Euro-
pean Spine Journal 17: 2–19.
Alving, C.R. 2002. “Design and selection of vaccine adjuvants: Animal
models and human trials,” Vaccine 20: S56–S64
American Association for Laboratory Animal Science. 2001. “The cost of
caring: Recognizing human emotions in the care of laboratory animals.”
https://aalaslearninglibrary.org/pdf/course2593/cost_of_caring.pdf,
accessed February 2, 2018.
American Cancer Society. 2013. “Water fluoridation and cancer risk.”
June
24,
http://www.cancer.org/cancer/cancercauses/othercarcino
38
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 gens/athome/water-fluoridation-and-cancer-risk, accessed February 2,
2018.
American Paraplegia Society. 1988. “Symposium on spinal cord injury
models. Presented at the 33rd annual meeting of the American Paraple-
gia Society. September 1987,” Journal of the American Paraplegia Soci-
ety 11: 23–58.
Anisimov, V. N., Ukraintseva, S. V., and Yashin, A. I. 2005. “Cancer in
rodents: Does it tell us about cancer in humans?,” Nature Reviews Can-
cer 5: 807–819.
Arrowsmith, J. 2011a. “Trial watch: Phase II failures: 2008–2010,” Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery 10: 328–329.
Arrowsmith, J. 2011b. “Trial watch: Phase III and submission failures:
2007–2010,” Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 10: 87.
Attarwala, H. 2010. “TGN1412: From discovery to disaster,” Journal of
Young Pharmacists 2: 332–336.
Avorn, J., and Kesselheim, A. S. 2015. “The 21st century cures act — Will
it take us back in time?,” New England Journal of Medicine 372:
2473–2475.
Bailey, J. 2008. “An assessment of the role of chimpanzees in AIDS vac-
cine research,” Alternatives to Laboratory Animals 36: 381–428.
Bates, S. 2010. “Progress towards personalized medicine,” Drug Discovery
Today 15: 115–120.
Bekoff, M. 2004. “Wild justice and fair play: Cooperation, forgiveness, and
morality in animals,” Biology and Philosophy 19: 489–520.
Bell, J.T., and Spector, T. D. 2011. “A twin approach to unraveling epi-
genetics,” Trends in Genetics: TIG 27: 116–125.
Belmaker, R., Bersudsky, Y., and Agam, G. 2012. “Individual differences
and evidence-based psychopharmacology,” BMC Medicine 10: 110.
Bendtsen, F., and Møller, S. 2008. “Pharmacological effects are model
specific in animal models of portal hypertension,” Hepatology Interna-
tional 2: 397–398.
Bernard, C. 1957. An Introduction to the Study of Experimental Medicine.
New York, NY: Dover.
Bhathena, A., and Spear, B. B. 2008. “Pharmacogenetics: Improving drug
and dose selection,” Current Opinion in Pharmacology 8: 639–646
Bj€
orquist, P., Sartipy, P., Strehl, R.,
and Hyllner, J. 2007. “Human ES
cell derived functional cells as tools in drug discovery,” Drug Discovery
World Winter 17–24.
Blair, E. 2009. “Predictive tests and personalised medicine,” Drug Discov-
ery World Fall 27–31.
Brennan, R., Federico, S.,
and Dyer, M. A. 2010. “The war on cancer:
Have we won the battle but lost the war?,” Oncotarget 1: 77–83.
Brosnan, S. F.,
and de Waal, F. M. B. 2003. “Monkeys reject unequal
pay,” Nature 425: 297–299.
Bruder, C. E., Piotrowski, A., Gijsbers, A. A., Andersson, R., Erickson, S.,
de Stahl, T. D., Menzel, U., et al. 2008. “Phenotypically concordant and
39
KRAMER AND GREEK
 discordant monozygotic twins display different
DNA copy-number-
variation profiles,” American Journal of Human Genetics 82: 763–771.
Bucher, J. R., Hejtmancik, M. R., Toft, J. D. II, Persing, R. L., Eustis, S. L.,
and Haseman, J. K. 1991. “Results and conclusions of the National
Toxicology Program’s rodent carcinogenicity studies with sodium fluo-
ride,” International Journal of Cancer 48: 733–737.
Butcher, E. C. 2005. “Can cell systems biology rescue drug discovery?,”
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 4: 461–467.
Calabrese, E. J. 1984. “Suitability of animal models for predictive toxicol-
ogy: theoretical and practical considerations,” Drug Metabolism Reviews
15(3): 505–23.
Calabrese, E. J. 1991. Principles of Animal Extrapolation. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press.
Calne, R. Y., Collier, D. S., Lim, S., Pollard, S. G., Samaan, A., White, D. J.,
and Thiru,
S.
1989.
“Rapamycin for
immunosuppression in organ
allografting,” Lancet 2(8656): 227.
Canto, J. G., Rogers, W. J., Goldberg, R. J., Peterson, E. D., Wenger, N. K.,
Vaccarino, V., Kiefe, C. I., Frederick, P. D., Sopko, G., and Zheng, Z.-J.
2012. “Association of age and sex with myocardial infarction symptom
presentation and in-hospital mortality,” Journal of the American Medical
Association 307(8): 813–822.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1998. “Fatal cercopithecine
herpesvirus 1 (B virus) infection following a mucocutaneous exposure
and interim recommendations for worker protection,” Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report 47(49): 1073–1076.
Chabner, B. A., and Roberts, T. G., Jr. 2005. “Timeline: Chemotherapy
and the war on cancer,” Nature Reviews Cancer 5(1): 65–72.
Chang, P. L. 2016. “The abandoned stakeholders: Pharmaceutical compa-
nies and research participants,” Journal of Business Ethics 1–11.
Chapman, A. R. 2011. “Addressing the ethical challenges of first-in-
human trials,” Journal of Clinical Research and Bioethics 2(4): 113.
Chapman, S. J., and Hill, A. V. S. 2012. “Human genetic susceptibility to
infectious disease,” Nature Reviews Genetics 13(3): 175–188.
Cheung, D. S., Warman, M. L., and Mulliken, J. B. 1997. “Hemangioma
in twins,” Annals of Plastic Surgery 38(3): 269–274.
Cimons, M., Getlin, J., and Maugh, T. H. 1998. “Cancer-cure story raises
new questions – New York times reporter backs out of book deal on new
therapy,” The Seattle Times, May 6, http://community.seattletimes.
nwsource.com/archive/?date=19980506&slug52749152,
accessed
February 2, 2018.
Clayson, D. 1980. “The carcinogenic action of drugs in man and animals,”
in F. Coulston and P. Shubick, eds., Human Epidemiology and Animal
Laboratory Correlations in Chemical Carcinogenesis. New York, NY:
Ablex Publishing, pp. 185–195.
Clemmensen, J., and Hjalgrim-Jensen, S. 1980. “On the absence of carci-
nogenicity to man of phenobarbital,” in F. Coulston and S. Shubick,
40
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 eds., Human Epidemiology and Animal Laboratory Correlations in Chem-
ical Carcinogenesis. New York, NY: Ablex Publishing, pp. 251–265.
Collins, F. S. 2011. “Reengineering translational science: The time is
right,” Science Translational Medicine 3(90): 90cm17.
Committee on Models for Biomedical Research Board on Basic Biology. 1985.
Committee on Models for Biomedical Research. Board on Basic Biology. Com-
mission on Life Science. National Research Council. Models for Biomedical
Research: A New Perspective. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Connor, S. 2003. “Glaxo chief: Our drugs do not work on most patients,”
The Independent, December 8, http://www.independent.co.uk/news/
science/glaxo-chief-our-drugs-do-not-work-on-most-patients-5508670.
html, accessed February 2, 2018.
Connors, T. 1996. “Anticancer drug development: The way forward,”
Oncologist 1(3): 180–181.
Contopoulos-Ioannidis, D. G., Ntzani, E. E., and Ioannidis, J. P. 2003.
“Translation of highly promising basic science research into clinical
applications,” The American Journal of Medicine 114(6): 477–484.
Cook, N., Jodrell, D. I., and Tuveson, D. A. 2012. “Predictive in vivo ani-
mal models and translation to clinical trials,” Drug Discovery Today
17(5/6): 253–260.
Couzin, J. 2007a. “Cancer research. Probing the roots of race and can-
cer,” Science 315(5812): 592–594.
Couzin, J. 2007b. “Human genetics. In Asians and whites, gene expres-
sion varies by race,” Science 315(5809): 173–174.
Crowley, W. F. 2003. “Translation of basic research into useful treat-
ments: How often does it occur?” The American Journal of Medicine
114(6): 503–505.
Czyz, W., Morahan, J., Ebers, G., and Ramagopalan, S. 2012. “Genetic,
environmental and stochastic factors in monozygotic twin discordance
with a focus on epigenetic differences,” BMC Medicine 10(1): 93.
Dempster, E. L., Pidsley, R., Schalkwyk, L. C., Owens, S., Georgiades, A.,
Kane, F., Kalidindi, S., et al. 2011. “Disease-associated epigenetic
changes in monozygotic twins discordant for schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder,” Human Molecular Genetics 20(24): 4786–4796.
Dennis, C. 2006. “Cancer: Off by a whisker,” Nature 442(7104): 739–741.
Dewland, T. A., Olgin, J. E., Vittinghoff, E., and Marcus, G. M. 2013.
“Incident
atrial
fibrillation
among
Asians,
Hispanics,
Blacks,
and
Whites,” Circulation 128(23): 2470–2477.
DiMasi, J. A., Feldman, L., Seckler, A., and Wilson, A. 2010. “Trends in
risks associated with new drug development: Success rates for investiga-
tional drugs,” Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 87(3): 272–277.
Dirnagl, U. 2006. “Bench to bedside: The quest for quality in experimental
stroke research,” Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 26(12):
1465–1478.
Dirnagl, U., and Macleod, M. R. 2009. “Stroke research at a road block:
The streets from adversity should be paved with meta-analysis and good
laboratory practice,” British Journal of Pharmacology 157(7): 1154–1156.
41
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Dixit, R., and Boelsterli, U. 2007. “Healthy animals and animal models of
human disease(s) in safety assessment of human pharmaceuticals,
including
therapeutic
antibodies,”
Drug
Discovery
Today
12(7–8):
336–342.
Dixon, R. L. 1972. “Toxicology of environmental agents: A blend of applied
and basic research,” Environmental Health Perspectives 2, 103–116.
Dolgin, E. 2013. “Animal rule for drug approval creates a jungle of con-
fusion,” Nature Medicine 19(2): 118–119.
Downing, N. S., Nilay, D. S., Aminawung, J. A., Pease, A. M., Zeitoun, J.-D.,
Krumholz, H. M., and Ross, J. S. 2017. Postmarket safety events among
novel therapeutics approved by the US Food and Drug Administration
between 2001 and 2010. JAMA 317(18): 1854–1863.
Dragunow, M. 2008. “The adult human brain in preclinical drug devel-
opment,” Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 7(8): 659–666.
Drake, D. R. III., Singh, I., Nguyen, M. N., Kachurin, A., Wittman, V.,
Parkhill, R., Kachurina, O., et al. 2012. “In vitro biomimetic model of
the human immune system for predictive vaccine assessments,” Disrup-
tive Science and Technology 1(1): 28–40.
Duncan, I. J. H. 2006. “The changing concept of animal sentience,”
Applied Animal Behaviour Science 100(1–2): 11–19.
Duyk, G. 2003. “Attrition and translation,” Science 302(5645): 603–605.
Eason, C. T., Bonner, F. W., and Parke, D. V. 1990. “The importance of
pharmacokinetic and receptor studies in drug safety evaluation,” Regu-
latory Toxicology and Pharmacology 11(3): 288–307.
Edelstein, L. C., Simon, L. M., Montoya, R. T., Holinstat, M., Chen, E. S.,
Bergeron, A., Kong, X., et al. 2013. “Racial differences in human plate-
let PAR4 reactivity reflect expression of PCTP and miR-376c,” Nature
Medicine 19(12): 1609–1616.
Elferink, M. G., Olinga, P., van Leeuwen, E. M., Bauerschmidt, S.,
Polman, J., Schoonen, W. G., Heisterkamp, S. H., and Groothuis, G. M.
2011. “Gene expression analysis of precision-cut human liver slices
indicates stable expression of ADME-Tox related genes,” Toxicology and
Applied Pharmacology 253(1): 57–69.
Engber, D. 2011a. “Black-6 lab mice and the history of biomedical
research,” Slate, November 17, http://www.slate.com/articles/health_
and_science/the_mouse_trap/2011/11/black_6_lab_mice_and_the_history_
of_biomedical_research.html, accessed February 02, 2018.
Engber, D. 2011b. “Lab mice: Are they limiting our understanding of
human disease?,” Slate, November 16, http://www.slate.com/articles/
health_and_science/the_mouse_trap/2011/11/lab_mice_are_they_limiting_
our_understanding_of_human_disease_.single.html, accessed February 02,
2018.
Engber, D. 2011c. “Naked mole rats: Can they help us cure cancer?,”
Slate. November 16, http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/
the_mouse_trap/2011/11/naked_mole_rats_can_they_help_us_cure_cancer_.
html, accessed February 02, 2018.
42
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 Enna, S. J., and Williams, M. 2009. “Defining the role of pharmacology in
the emerging world of translational research,” Advances in Pharmacol-
ogy 57, 1–30.
Favoni, R. E., and Alama, A. 2013. “Preclinical strategies targeted at non-
small-cell lung cancer signalling pathways with striking translational
fallout,” Drug Discovery Today 18(1–2): 11–24.
FDA. 2004. “Innovation or stagnation? Challenge and opportunity on the
critical path to new medical products,” FDA, http://www.fda.gov/down-
loads/ScienceResearch/SpecialTopics/CriticalPathInitiative/CriticalPA-
thOpportunitiesReports/ucm113411.pdf, accessed February 02, 2018.
FDA. 2006. “FDA issues advice to make earliest stages of clinical drug
development more efficient,” FDA, June 18, http://web.archive.org/web/
20141011121434/
http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/Press-
Announcements/2006/ucm108576.htm, accessed February 02, 2018.
FDA. 2017. “Table of pharmacogenomic biomarkers in drug labeling,”
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/scienceresearch/researchareas/pharmaco-
genetics/ucm083378.htm, accessed February 02, 2018.
Fedorov, V. V., Glukhov, A. V., Ambrosi, C. M., Kostecki, G., Chang, R.,
Janks, D., Schuessler, R. B., Moazami, N., Nichols, C. G., and Efimov,
I. R. 2011. “Effects of KATP channel openers diazoxide and pinacidil in
coronary-perfused atria and ventricles from failing and non-failing
human hearts,” Journal of Molecular and Cellular Cardiology 51(2):
215–225.
Ferdowsian,
H.
R.,
and
T.
L.
Beauchamp.
2013.
“Animal
experimentation,” The International Encyclopedia of Ethics 271–285.
Ferdowsian, H. R., and Beck, N. 2011. “Ethical and scientific consider-
ations regarding animal testing and research,” PLoS ONE 6(9): e24059.
Flaherty, K. T., Puzanov, I., Kim, K. B., Ribas, A., McArthur, G. A.,
Sosman, J. A., O’Dwyer, P. J., et al. 2010. “Inhibition of mutated, acti-
vated BRAF in metastatic melanoma,” New England Journal of Medicine
363(9): 809–819.
Fletcher, A. P. 1978. “Drug safety tests and subsequent clinical experi-
ence,” Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 71(9): 693–696.
Force, T., and Kolaja, K. L. 2011. “Cardiotoxicity of kinase inhibitors: The
prediction and translation of preclinical models to clinical outcomes,”
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 10(2): 111–126.
Fraga, M. F., Ballestar, E., Paz, M. F., Ropero, S., Setien, F., Ballestar, M. L.,
Heine-Suner, D., et al. 2005. “Epigenetic differences arise during the life-
time of monozygotic tins,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
102(30): 10604–10609.
Freeman, R. E. 1994. “The politics of stakeholder theory: Some future
directions,” Business Ethics Quarterly 4(4): 409–421.
Freeman, R. E. 2004. “A stakeholder theory of the modern corporation,”
in T. L. Beauchamp and N. E. Bowie, eds., Ethical Theory and Business.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, pp. 55–64.
Friedman, M. 1970. “The social responsibility of business is to increase
its profits,” New York Times Magazine 32–33: 123–126.
43
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Froehlich, T. E., Epstein, J. N., Nick, T. G., Melguizo Castro, M. S., Stein,
M. A., Brinkman, W. B., Graham, A. J., Langberg, J. M., and Kahn, R. S.
2011. “Pharmacogenetic predictors of methylphenidate dose-response in
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder,” Journal of the American Acad-
emy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 50(11): 1129–1139.e2.
Gamble, L. J., and Matthews, Q. L. 2010. “Current progress in the devel-
opment of a prophylactic vaccine for HIV-1,” Drug Design, Development
and Therapy 5, 9–26.
Garattini, S. 1985. “Toxic effects of chemicals: Difficulties in extrapolat-
ing data from animals to man,” Critical Reviews in Toxicology 16(1):
1–29.
Garner, R. C., and Lappin, G. 2006. “The phase 0 microdosing concept,”
British Journal Clinical Pharmacology 61(4): 367–370.
Geerts, H. 2009. “Of mice and men: Bridging the translational disconnect
in CNS drug discovery,” CNS Drugs 23(11): 915–926.
Gell-Mann, M. 1994. The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the Simple
and Complex. Boston, MA: Little, Brown and Company.
Giles, J. 2006. “Animal experiments under fire for poor design,” Nature
444(7122): 981.
Gill, D. M. 1982. “Bacterial toxins: A table of lethal amounts,” Microbiolog-
ical Reviews 46(1): 86–94.
Giri, S., and Bader, A. 2011. “Foundation review: Improved preclinical safety
assessment using micro-BAL devices: The potential impact on human dis-
covery and drug attrition,” Drug Discovery Today 16(9/10): 382–397.
Goldenthal, E. 1968. “Current views on safety evaluation of drugs,” FDA
Papers 2: 13–18.
Goodwin, B. 2001. How the Leopard Changed Its Spots: The Evolution of
Complexity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gordon, L., Joo, J. H., Andronikos, R., Ollikainen, M., Wallace, E. M.,
Umstad, M. P., Permezel, M., et al. 2011. “Expression discordance of
monozygotic twins at birth: Effect of intrauterine environment and a
possible mechanism for fetal programming,” Epigenetics 6(5): 579–592.
Graham, D.J., Campen, D., Hui, R., Spence, M., Cheetham, C., Levy, G.,
Shoor, S., and Ray, W.A. 2005. “Risk of acute myocardial infarction and
sudden cardiac death in patients treated with cyclo-oxygenase 2 selec-
tive and non-selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: Nested
case-control study,” Lancet 365(9458): 475–481.
Grass, G. M., and Sinko, P. J. 2002. “Physiologically-based pharmacoki-
netic simulation modelling,” Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 54(3):
433–451.
Greek, R. 2012. “Animal models and the development of an HIV vaccine,”
Journal of AIDS and Clinical Research 1(S8): 1–11.
Greek, R. 2013. “Evolved complex systems,” Biological Systems: Open
Access 2(4): e107.
Greek, R. 2014a. “A discussion of the role of complex evolved systems in
the development of invasive cardiovascular interventions as illustrated
44
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 by the blalock-taussig shunt and intra-arterial stents,” Biological Sys-
tems – Open Access 3: 124.
Greek, R. 2014b. “The ethical implications for humans in light of the poor
predictive value of animal models,” International Journal of Clinical Med-
icine 5(16): 966–1005.
Greek, R. 2014c. “Your dog or your child,” in J. Sorenson, ed., Critical
Animal Studies: Thinking the Unthinkable. Toronto, ON: Canadian
Scholars Press Inc, pp. 117–133.
Greek, R., and Greek, J. 2010. “Is the use of sentient animals in basic
research justifiable?” Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine
5(14): 1–16.
Greek, R., and Hansen, L. 2012. “The development of deep brain stimula-
tion for movement disorders,” Journal of Clinical Research & Bioethics
3: 338–345.
Greek, R., and Hansen, L. A. 2013a. “The strengths and limits of animal
models
as
illustrated
by
the
discovery
and
development
of
anti-
bacterials,” Biological Systems: Open Access 2(2): 109.
Greek, R., and Hansen, L. A. 2013b. “Questions regarding the predictive
value of one evolved complex adaptive system for a second: Exemplified
by the SOD1 mouse,” Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology
113(2): 231–253.
Greek, R., and Menache, A. 2013. “Systematic reviews of animal models:
Methodology versus epistemology,” International Journal of Medical Sci-
ences 10(3): 206–221.
Greek, R., Menache, A., and Rice, M. J. 2012a. “Animal models in an age
of personalized medicine,” Personalized Medicine 9(1): 47–64.
Greek, R., Pippus, A., and Hansen, L. A. 2012b. “The Nuremberg code
subverts human health and safety by requiring animal modeling,” BMC
Medical Ethics 13(1): 16.
Greek, R., and Pound, P. 2002. “Animal studies and HIV research,” British
Medical Journal 324(7331): 236–237.
Greek, R., and Rice, M. J. 2012. “Animal models and conserved proc-
esses,” Theoretical Biology and Medical Modelling 9(1): 40.
Greek, R., and Shanks, N. 2009. FAQs About the Use of Animals in Sci-
ence: A Handbook for the Scientifically Perplexed. Lanham, MD: Univer-
sity Press of America.
Greek, R., Shanks, N., and Rice, M. J. 2011. “The history and implica-
tions of testing thalidomide on animals,” The Journal of Philosophy, Sci-
ence & Law 11(3): 1–32.
Gregor, Z., and Joffe, L. 1978. “Senile macular changes in the black
African,” British Journal of Ophthalmology 62(8): 547–550.
Gura, T. 1997. “Cancer models: Systems for identifying new drugs are
often faulty,” Science 278(5340): 1041–1042.
Hackam, D. G., and Redelmeier, D. A. 2006. “Translation of research evi-
dence from animals to humans,” Journal of the American Medical Asso-
ciation 296(14): 1727–1732.
45
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Haiman, C. A., Stram, D. O., Wilkens, L. R., Pike, M. C., Kolonel, L. N.,
Henderson, B. E., and Le Marchand, L. 2006. “Ethnic and racial differ-
ences in the smoking-related risk of lung cancer,” New England Journal
of Medicine 354(4): 333–342.
Hait, W. N. 2010. “Anticancer drug development: The grand challenges,”
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 9(4): 253–254.
Halder, A., Jain, M., Chaudhary, I., and Varma, B. 2012. “Chromosome
22q11.2 microdeletion in monozygotic twins with discordant phenotype
and deletion size,” Molecular cytogenetics 5(1): 13.
Halpern-Lewis, J. C. 1996. “Understanding the emotional experiences of
animal research personnel,” Contemporary Topics in Laboratory Animal
Science 35(6): 58–60.
Hampel, H., Frank, R., Broich, K., Teipel, S. J., Katz, R. G., Hardy, J., Herholz,
K., et al. 2010. “Biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease: Academic, industry and
regulatory perspectives,” Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 9(7): 560–574.
Herndon, C. N., and Jennings, R. G. 1951. “A twin-family study of sus-
ceptibility to poliomyelitis,” American Journal of Human Genetics 3(1):
17–46.
Herper, M. 2012. “Can bush’s NIH chief fix the drug industry?,” Forbes,
May 6, http://www.forbes.com/sites/matthewherper/2012/06/06/can-
bushs-nih-chief-fix-the-drug-industry/, accessed February 2, 2018.
Heywood, R. 1990. “Clinical toxicity–Could it have been predicted? Post-
marketing experience,” in C. E. Lumley and S. Walker, eds., Animal
Toxicity Studies: Their Relevance for Man. Lancaster: Quay Publishing,
pp. 57–67.
Holden, C. 2005. “Sex and the suffering brain,” Science 308(5728): 1574.
H€
orig, H., and Pullman, W. 2004. “From bench to clinic and back: Per-
spective on the 1st IQPC translational research conference,” Journal of
Translational Medicine 2(1): 44.
Horstmann, D. 1985. “The poliomyelitis story: A scientific hegira,” Yale
Journal of Biology and Medicine 58(2): 79–90.
Holmes, A. M., Solari, R., and Holgate, S. T. 2011. “Animal models of
asthma: Value, limitations and opportunities for alternative approach-
es,” Drug Discovery Today 16(15/16): 659–670.
Horrobin, D. F. 2003. “Modern biomedical research: An internally self-
consistent universe with little contact with medical reality?,” Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery 2(2): 151–154.
Hudson, K. L. 2011. “Genomics, health care, and society,” New England
Journal of Medicine 365(11): 1033–1041.
Hughes, A. R., Spreen, W. R., Mosteller, M., Warren, L. L., Lai, E. H.,
Brothers, C. H., Cox, C., et al. 2008. “Pharmacogenetics of hypersensi-
tivity to abacavir: From PGx hypothesis to confirmation to clinical utili-
ty,” Pharmacogenomics Journal 8(6): 365–374.
Hurko, O. 2006. “Understanding the strategic importance of biomarkers
for the discovery and early development phases,” Drug Discovery World
7(2): 63–74.
46
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 Janofsky, M. 1993. “On cigarettes, health and lawyers,” New York Times,
http://www.nytimes.com/1993/12/06/business/on-cigarettes-health-
and-lawyers.html, accessed February 2, 2018.
Javierre, B. M., Fernandez, A. F., Richter, J., Al-Shahrour, F., Martin-
Subero, J. I., Rodriguez-Ubreva, J., Berdasco, M., et al. 2010. “Changes
in the pattern of DNA methylation associate with twin discordance in
systemic lupus erythematosus,” Genome Research 20(2): 170–179.
Jensen, M. C., and Meckling, W. 1976. “Theory of the firm: Managerial
behavior, agency cost, and capital structure,” Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics 3(4): 305–360.
Jones, R. C., and Greek, R. 2013. “A review of the institute of medicine’s
analysis of using chimpanzees in biomedical research,” Science and
Engineering Ethics 20(2): 481–504.
Jover, R., Ponsoda, X., Castell, J. V., and Gomez-Lechon, M. J. 1992.
“Evaluation of the cytotoxicity of ten chemicals on human cultured hep-
atocytes: Predictability of human toxicity and comparison with rodent
cell culture systems,” Toxicology in Vitro 6(1): 47–52.
Kaiser, J. 2005. “Gender in the pharmacy: Does it matter?,” Science
308(5728): 1572.
Kalow, W. 1991. “Interethnic variation of drug metabolism,” Trends in
Pharmacological Sciences 12(3): 102–107.
Kamb, A. 2005. “What’s wrong with our cancer models?,” Nature Reviews
Drug Discovery 4(2): 161–165.
Kasowski, M., Grubert, F., Heffelfinger, C., Hariharan, M., Asabere, A.,
Waszak, S. M., Habegger, L., et al. 2010. “Variation in transcription fac-
tor binding among humans,” Science 328(5975): 232–235.
Kay, M. A. 2011. “State-of-the-art gene-based therapies: The road ahead,”
Nature Reviews Genetics 12(5): 316–28.
Khanna, I. 2012. “Drug discovery in pharmaceutical industry: Productivity
challenges and trends,” Drug Discovery Today 17(19–20): 1088–1102.
King, B. J. 2013. How Animals Grieve. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
King, C. 2009. “Personalised vaccines could protect all children,” New Sci-
entist 17(2737): 11.
Kitano, H. 2002. “Systems biology: A brief overview,” Science 295(5560):
1662–1664.
Klein, S., and Huber, S. 2010. “Sex differences in susceptibility to viral
infection,” in S. Klein and C. Roberts eds., Sex Hormones and Immunity
to Infection. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 93–122.
Kola, I., and Landis, J. 2004. “Can the pharmaceutical industry reduce
attrition rates?,” Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 3(8): 711–715.
Kolata, G. 1997. “2 top diet drugs are recalled amid reports of heart
defects,” New York Times, September 16, http://www.nytimes.com/
1997/09/16/us/2-top-diet-drugs-are-recalled-amid-reports-of-heart-
defects.html, accessed February 2, 2018.
Kopp, J. B., Nelson, G. W., Sampath, K., Johnson, R. C., Genovese, G.,
An, P., Friedman, D., et al. 2011. “APOL1 genetic variants in focal
47
KRAMER AND GREEK
 segmental glomerulosclerosis and HIV- associated nephropathy,” Jour-
nal of the American Society of Nephrology 22(11): 2129–2137.
Koppal, T. 2002. “Inside the FDA,” Drug Discovery & Development 5(10): 32–38.
Koren, G., Cairns, J., Chitayat, D., Gaedigk, Al., and Leeder, S.J. 2006.
“Pharmacogenetics of morphine poisoning in a breastfed neonate of a
codeine-prescribed mother,” Lancet 368(9536): 19–25.
LaFollette H. 2011. “Animal experimentation in biomedical research,” in
T. L. Beauchamp and R. G. Frey eds., The Oxford Handbook of Animal
Ethics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 812–818.
LaPointe, M. C., Mendez, M., Leung, A., Tao, Z., and Yang, X. P. 2004.
“Inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 improves cardiac function after myocar-
dial infarction in the mouse,” American Journal of Physiology – Heart
and Circulatory Physiology 286(4): H1416–H1424.
Lappin, G., and Garner, R. C. 2003. “Big physics, small doses: The use of
AMS and PET in human microdosing of development drugs,” Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery 2(3): 233–240.
Lappin, G., and Garner, R. C. 2008. “The utility of microdosing over the
past 5 years,” Expert Opinion on Drug Metabolism & Toxicology 4(12):
1499–1506.
Lappin,
G.,
Kuhnz,
W.,
Jochemsen,
R.,
Kneer,
J.,
Chaudhary,
A.,
Oosterhuis, B., Drijfhout, W. J., Rowland, M., and Garner, R. C. 2006.
“Use of microdosing to predict pharmacokinetics at the therapeutic
dose: Experience with 5 drugs,” Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics
80(3): 203–215.
Lappin, G., Noveck, R., and Burt, T. 2013. “Microdosing and drug devel-
opment: Past, present and future,” Expert Opinion on Drug and Metabo-
lism Toxicology 9(7): 817–834.
Lazzarini, L., Overgaard, K. A., Conti, E., and Shirtliff, M. E. 2006.
“Experimental osteomyelitis: What have we learned from animal studies
about the systemic treatment of osteomyelitis?,” Journal of Chemother-
apy 18(5): 451–460.
Ledford, H. 2012. “Success through cooperation,” Nature News: Q&A,
February
1,
http://www.nature.com/news/success-through-coopera-
tion-1.9924, accessed February 2, 2018.
Li, S. S., Gilbert, P. B., Tomaras, G. D., Kijak, G., Ferrari, G., Thomas, R.,
Pyo, C.-W., et al. 2014. “FCGR2C polymorphisms associate with HIV-1
vaccine protection in RV144 trial,” Journal of Clinical Investigation
124(9): 3879–3890.
Lin, H., Franks, B., and Savage-Rumbaugh, S. E. 2008. “Precursors of
morality in the use of the symbols “good” and “bad” in two bonobos
(Pan paniscus) and a chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes),” Language and
Communication 28, 213–224.
Lin, J. H. 1995. “Species similarities and differences in pharmacokinetics,”
Drug Metabolism and Disposition 23(10): 1008–1021.
Lin, T. M., Chen, C. J., Wu, M. M., Yang, C. S., Chen, J. S., Lin, C. C.,
Kwang, T. Y., Hsu, S. T., Lin, S. Y., and Hsu, L. C. 1989. “Hepatitis B
virus markers in Chinese twins,” Anticancer Research 9(3): 737–741.
48
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 Lindsay, M. A. 2005. “Finding new drug targets in the 21st century,” Drug
Discovery Today 10(23–24): 1683–1687.
Littman, B. H., and Williams, S. A. 2005. “The ultimate model organism:
Progress in experimental medicine,” Nature Reviews Drug Discovery
4(8): 631–638.
Loisel, S., Ohresser, M., Pallardy, M., Dayde, D., Berthou, C., Cartron, G.,
and Watier, H. 2007. “Relevance, advantages and limitations of animal
models used in the development of monoclonal antibodies for cancer
treatment,” Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology 62(1): 34–42.
Lu, Y.,
Fuchs,
E.
J.,
Hendrix,
C.
W.,
and
Bumpus,
N.
N.
2014.
“Cytochrome P450 3A5 genotype impacts maraviroc concentrations in
healthy volunteers,” Drug Metabolism and Disposition 42(11): 1796–
1802.
Lumley, C. 1990. “Clinical toxicity: Could it have been predicted? Premar-
keting experience,” in C. Lumley and S. Walker, eds., Animal Toxicity
Studies: Their Relevance for Man. London: Quay Publishing, pp. 49–56.
Lutz, D. 2011. New study calls into question reliance on animal models in
cardiovascular research. Washington University, August 3, 2013. http://
news.wustl.edu/news/Pages/22540.aspx, accessed February 2, 2018.
Lyons, M. R., Peterson, L. R., McGill, J. B., Herrero, P., Coggan, A. R.,
Saeed, I. M., Recklein, C., Schechtman, K. B., and Gropler, R. J. 2013.
“Impact of sex on the heart’s metabolic and functional responses to dia-
betic therapies,” American Journal of Physiology – Heart and Circulatory
Physiology 305(11): H1584–H1591.
Macdonald, J. S. 2002. “Vive la difference: Sex and fluorouracil toxicity,”
Journal of Clinical Oncology 20(6): 1439–1441.
Macleod, M. 2004. “Systematic review and meta-analysis of experimental
stroke,” International Journal of Neuroprotection and Neuroregeneration
1: 9–12.
Mahmood, I. 2000. “Can absolute oral bioavailability in humans be pre-
dicted from animals? A comparison of allometry and different indirect
methods,” Drug Metabolism and Drug Interactions 16(2): 143–155.
Maiti, S., Kumar, K. H. B. G., Castellani, C. A., O’Reilly, R, and Singh, S.
M. 2011. “Ontogenetic De Novo copy number variations (CNVs) as a
source of genetic individuality: Studies on two families with MZD twins
for schizophrenia,” PLoS ONE 6(3): e17125.
Mak, I. W., Evaniew, N., and Ghert, M. (2014). “Lost in translation: Ani-
mal models and clinical trials in cancer treatment,” American Journal of
Translational Research 6(2): 114–118.
Marchetto, M. C., Narvaiza, I., Denli, A. M., Benner, C., Lazzarini, T. A.,
Nathanson, J. L., Paquola, A. C., Desai, K. N., Herai, R. H., Weitzman, M. D.,
Yeo, G. W., Muotri, A. R., and Gage, F. H. 2013. “Differential L1 regulation in
pluripotent stem cells of humans and apes,” Nature 503(7477): 525–529.
Markou, A., Chiamulera, C., Geyer, M. A., Tricklebank, M., and Steckler,
T. 2009. “Removing obstacles in neuroscience drug discovery: The future
path for animal models,” Neuropsychopharmacology 34(1): 74–89.
49
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Martin, R. L. 2011. Fixing the game: Bubbles, crashes, and what capitalism
can learn from the NFL. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review Press.
Marusina, K. 2012. “Animal models get closer to mimicking humans,”
Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology News 32(17): 52–55. October 1,
http://www.genengnews.com/gen-articles/animal-models-get-closer-to-
mimicking-humans/4529/?page=151, accessed February 2, 2018.
Matthews, R. A. 2008. “Medical progress depends on animal models –
Doesn’t it?,” Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 101(2): 95–98.
Mayr, F. B., and Yende, S. 2014. “Epidemiology of severe sepsis,” Viru-
lence 5 (1): 4–11.
McArthur, R. 2011. “Editorial: Many are called yet few are chosen. Are
neuropsychiatric clinical trials letting us down?” Drug Discovery Today
16(5/6): 173–175.
McGee, P. 2006. “Breeding better animal models,” Drug Discovery &
Development 18–23.
Meadows, M. 2006. “Promoting Safe & Effective Drugs for 100 Years.”
FDA, Last Modified February 1, 2018. https://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/
WhatWeDo/History/ProductRegulation/ucm2017809.htm, accessed Feb-
ruary 2, 2018.
Meijers, J. M., Swaen, G. M., and Bloemen, L. J. 1997. “The predictive
value of animal data in human cancer risk assessment,” Regulatory
Toxicology and Pharmacology 25(2): 94–102.
Millan, M. J., Agid, Y., Brune, M., Bullmore, E. T., Carter, C. S., Clayton,
N. S., Connor, R., et al. 2012. “Cognitive dysfunction in psychiatric dis-
orders: Characteristics, causes and the quest for improved therapy,”
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 11(2): 141–168.
Mirnezami, R., Nicholson, J., and Darzi, A. 2012. “Preparing for precision
medicine,” New England Journal of Medicine 366(6): 489–491.
Misch, E. A., Berrington, W. R., Vary, J. C., Jr., and Hawn, T. R. 2010.
“Leprosy and the human genome,” Microbiology and molecular biology
reviews: MMBR 74(4): 589–620.
Mitchell, R. K., B. R. Agle & D. J. Wood. 1997. “Toward a theory of stake-
holder identification and salience: Defining the principle of who and
what really counts,” Academy of Management Review 22(4): 853–886.
Modern Drug Discovery Editorial. 2002. “Rush to judgement,” Modern
Drug Discovery, July 7,
http://pubs.acs.org/subscribe/archive/mdd/
v05/i07/pdf/702editorial.pdf, accessed February 2, 2018.
Monastersky, R. 2008. Protesters fail to slow animal research. The Chroni-
cles of Higher Education, April 18, http://chronicle.com/weekly/v54/
i32/32a00102.htm, accessed February 2, 2018.
Morgan, P., Graaf, P. H. V. D., Arrowsmith, J., Feltner, D. E., Drummond,
K. S., Wegner, C. D., and Street, S. D. A. 2012. “Can the flow of medi-
cines be improved? Fundamental pharmacokinetic and pharmacological
principles toward improving phase II survival,” Drug Discovery Today
17(9/10): 419–424.
50
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 Morley, M., Molony, C. M., Weber, T. M., Devlin, J. L., Ewens, K. G.,
Spielman, R. S., and Cheung, V. G. 2004. “Genetic analysis of genome-
wide variation in human gene expression,” Nature 430(7001): 743–747.
Morowitz, H. J. 2002. The Emergence of Everything: How the World
Became Complex. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Morton, D. 1990. “Expectations from animal studies,” in C. Lumley and
S. Walker eds., Animal Toxicity Studies: Their Relevance for Ma. CMR
Workshop Series. Lancaster: Quay Publishing, pp. 3–14.
Mullane, K., and Williams, M. 2012. “Translational semantics and infra-
structure: Another search for the emperor’s new clothes?,” Drug Discov-
ery Today 17(9/10): 459–468.
Mullard, A. 2011. “Marc Kirschner,” Nature Reviews Drug Discovery
10(12): 894–894.
Munos, B. 2009. “Lessons from 60 years of pharmaceutical innovation,”
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 8(12): 959–968.
Munos, B. H., and Chin, W. W. 2011. “How to revive breakthrough inno-
vation in the pharmaceutical industry,” Science Translational Medicine
3(89): 89cm16.
Muqit, M. M., Larner, A. J., Sweeney, M. G., Sewry, C., Stinton, V. J.,
Davis, M. B., Healy, D. G., et al. 2008. “Multiple mitochondrial DNA
deletions in monozygotic twins with OPMD,” Journal of Neurology, Neu-
rosurgery, and Psychiatry 79(1): 68–71.
National Institutes of Health. 2016. Congressional Justification of the NIH,
Fiscal Year 2017 Budget Request, https://officeofbudget.od.nih.gov/
pdfs/FY17/31-Overview.pdf, accessed February 2, 2018.
National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health. 1996. Registry of
Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances (R-TECS). Cincinnati, OH: National
Institute of Occupational Safety and Health.
Nature Biotechnology Editorial. 2008. “Raising the game,” Nature Biotech-
nology 26(2): 137.
Nature Medicine Editorial. 2007. “Cold shower for AIDS vaccines,” Nature
Medicine 13(12): 1389–90.
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery Editorial. 2003a. “Facing our demons,”
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2(2): 87.
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery Editorial. 2003b. “Follow the yellow brick
road,” Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2(3): 167.
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery Editorial. 2005. “The time is now,” Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery 4(8): 613.
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery Editorial. 2007. “Same old story?,” Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery 6(2): 97.
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery News & Analysis. 2011. “Moving towards
quantitative and systems pharmacology,” Nature Reviews Drug Discov-
ery 10(12): 889.
Navarro, V. J., and Senior, J. R. 2006. “Drug-related hepatotoxicity,” New
England Journal of Medicine 354(7): 731–739.
Neuberger, J. 1991. “FK 506 – A promise of good things to come?,” Hepa-
tology 13(6): 1259–1260.
51
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Neuzil, P., Giselbrecht, S., Lange, K., Huang, T. J., and Manz, A. 2012.
“Revisiting lab-on-a-chip technology for drug discovery,” Nature Reviews
Drug Discovery 11(8): 620–632.
Noble, M. 2000. “Can neural stem cells be used as therapeutic vehicles in
the treatment of brain tumors?,” Nature Medicine 6(4): 369–370.
Northrup, E. 1957. Science Looks at Smoking: A New Inquiry into the
Effects of Smoking on Your Health. New York, NY: Coward-McCann.
O’Collins, V. E., Macleod, M. R., Cox, S. F., Van Raay, L., Aleksoska, E.,
Donnan, G. A., and Howells, D. W. 2011. “Preclinical drug evaluation
for combination therapy in acute stroke using systematic review, meta-
analysis, and subsequent experimental testing,” Journal of Cerebral
Blood Flow and Metabolism 31(3): 962–975.
O’Collins, V. E., Macleod, M. R., Donnan, G. A., Horky, L. L., van der
Worp, B. H., and Howells, D. W. 2006. “1,026 experimental treatments
in acute stroke,” Annals of Neurology 59(3): 467–477.
Okita, G. T. 1967. “Species difference in duration of action of cardiac gly-
cosides,” Federation Proceedings 26(4): 1125–1130.
Ollikainen, M., and Craig, J. M. 2011. “Epigenetic discordance at imprint-
ing control regions in twins,” Epigenomics 3(3): 295–306.
Opar, A. 2012. “Overtaking the DILI model-T,” Nature Reviews Drug Dis-
covery 11(8): 585–586.
Oser, B. L. 1981. “The rat as a model for human toxicological evaluation,”
Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health 8(4): 521–542.
Oshinsky, D. M. 2005. Polio: An American Story. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Palfreyman, M. G., Charles, V., and Blander, J. 2002. “The importance of
using human-based models in gene and drug discovery,” Drug Discov-
ery World Fall 33–40.
Pammolli, F., Magazzini, L., and Riccaboni, M. 2011. “The productivity
crisis in pharmaceutical R&D,” Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 10(6):
428–438.
Parke, D. V. 1994. “Comment: Clinical pharmacokinetics in drug safety
evaluation,” Alternatives to Laboratory Animals: ATLA 22, 207–209.
Paul, J. R. 1971. A History of Poliomyelitis. New Haven, CT: Yale Univer-
sity Press.
Paul, S. M., Mytelka, D. S., Dunwiddie, C. T., Persinger, C. C., Munos, B.
H., Lindborg, S. R., and Schacht, A. L. 2010. “How to improve R&D pro-
ductivity:
The
pharmaceutical
industry’s
grand
challenge,”
Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery 9(3): 203–214.
Pearson, H. 2002. “Surviving a knockout blow,” Nature 415(6867): 8–9.
Perrin, S. 2014. “Preclinical research: Make mouse studies work,” Nature
507: 423–425.
Personalized Medicine Coalition. 2014. The Case for Personalized Medi-
cine, 4th ed. Washington, DC: Author. http://www.personalizedmedici-
necoalition.org/Userfiles/PMC-Corporate/file/pmc_case_for_personalized_
medicine.pdf, accessed February 2, 2018.
52
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 Personalized Medicine Coalition. 2016. Personalized Medicine at FDA. Wash-
ington, DC: Author. http://www.personalizedmedicinecoalition.org/User-
files/PMC-Corporate/file/PM-at-FDA.pdf, accessed February 2, 2018.
Pham, N. D. 2010. The Impact of Innovation and the Role of Intellectual
Property Rights on U.S. Productivity, Competitiveness, Jobs, Wages, and
Exports. Washington, DC: NDP Consulting.
Philippidis, A. 2014. “Top 10 biggest biopharma marketing fines: 2014
edition,”
Genetic
Engineering
&
Biotechnology
News,
January
27,
http://www.genengnews.com/insight-and-intelligence/top-10-biggest-
biopharma-marketing-fines-2014-edition/77900021/?page52, accessed
February 2, 2018.
Phillips, R. A. 1997. “Stakeholder theory and a principle of fairness,” Busi-
ness Ethics Quarterly 7(1): 51–66.
Phillips, R., Freeman, R. E., and Wicks, A. C. 2003. “What stakeholder
theory is not,” Business Ethics Quarterly 13(4): 479–502.
PhRMA 2015. “2015 profile,” Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers
of
America,
http://www.phrma.org/sites/default/files/pdf/2015_
phrma_profile.pdf, accessed February 2, 2018.
Pinto, J. M., Schumm, L. P., Wroblewski, K. E., Kern, D. W., and
McClintock, M. K. 2013. “Racial disparities in olfactory loss among
older adults in the United States,” The Journals of Gerontology Series A:
Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 69: 323–329.
Powell, A. A., Talasaz, A. H., Zhang, H., Coram, M. A., Reddy, A., Deng,
G., Telli, M. L., et al. 2012. “Single cell profiling of circulating tumor
cells: Transcriptional heterogeneity and diversity from breast cancer cell
lines,” PLoS ONE 7(5): e33788.
Prater, D. A. 2012. “Development and use of advanced testing approaches
by the U.S. FDA,” http://www.hsi.org/issues/advancing_science/facts/
ep-workshop-oct-2012/prater.pdf, accessed February 2, 2018.
Pritchard, C., Coil, D., Hawley, S., Hsu, L., and Nelson, P. S. 2006. “The
contributions of normal variation and genetic background to mamma-
lian gene expression,” Genome Biology 7(3): R26.
Raven, K. 2012. “Rodent models of sepsis found shockingly lacking,”
Nature Medicine 18(7): 998–998.
Raza, A. 2015. “Mouse models,” in J. Brockman ed. This Idea Must Die:
Scientific Theories That Are Blocking Progress. New York: Edge Founda-
tion, pp. 231–333.
Regenberg, A., Mathews, D. J., Blass, D. M., Bok, H., Coyle, J. T.,
Duggan, P., Faden, R., et al. 2009. “The role of animal models in evalu-
ating reasonable safety and efficacy for human trials of cell-based inter-
ventions for neurologic conditions,” Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and
Metabolism 29(1): 1–9.
Reynolds, P. S. 2012. “Twenty years after: do animal trials inform clinical
resus citation research?,” Resuscitation 83(1): 16–17.
Rice, J. 2012. “Animal models: Not close enough,” Nature 484(7393): S9–S9.
Rifkin, S. A., Kim, J., and White, K. P. 2003. “Evolution of gene expression in
the Drosophila melanogaster subgroup,” Nature Genetics 33(2): 138–144.
53
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Rosenberg, N. A., Pritchard, J. K., Weber, J. L., Cann, H. M., Kidd, K. K.,
Zhivotovsky, L. A., and Feldman, M. W. 2002. “Genetic structure of
human populations,” Science 298(5602): 2381–2385.
Roses, A. D. 2000. “Pharmacogenetics and the practice of medicine,”
Nature 405(6788): 857–865.
Roy, A. S. A. 2012. “Project FDA report No. 5. Stifling new cures: The true
cost of lengthy clinical drug trials,” Manhattan Institute for Policy
Research,
http://www.manhattan-institute.org/html/fda_05.htm,
accessed February 2, 2018.
Royal Society of Medicine. 1980. “Successes, failures and hopes in cancer
chemotherapy.” Proceedings of an International Symposium by the Royal
Society of Medicine. London: Medico-Pharmaceutical Forum.
Sabin, A. 1984. Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Hospitals and
Health Care, Committee on Veterans Affairs, House of Representatives.
April 26, 1984 serial no. 98–48. Washington, DC: US Government.
Sal�
en, J. C. W. 1994. “Animal models—Principles and problems,” in P.
Svendsen and J. Hau eds., Handbook of Laboratory Science Volume II.
Animal Models, 1st ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 1–6.
Salloway, S., Sperling, R., Fox, N. C., Blennow, K., Klunk, W., Raskind,
M., Sabbagh, M., et al. 2014. “Two phase 3 trials of bapineuzumab in
mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease,” New England Journal of Medi-
cine 370(4): 322–333.
Samuelson, W., and Zeckhauser, R. 1988. “Status quo bias in decision
making,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1(1): 7–59.
Sandberg, R., Yasuda, R., Pankratz, D. G., Carter, T. A., Del Rio, J. A.,
Wodicka, L., Mayford, M., Lockhart, D. J., and Barlow, C. 2000.
“Regional and strain-specific gene expression mapping in the adult
mouse brain,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97(20):
11038–11043.
Sankar, U. 2005. “The delicate toxicity balance in drug discovery: Can
pricey late-stage failures – or dangerous drugs – be prevented with bet-
ter products for predicting drug toxicity?,” The Scientist 19(15): 32–35.
http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/16636/title/The-
Delicate-Toxicity-Balance-in-Drug-Discovery/, accessed February 2, 2018.
Sarkar, S. K. 2009. “Molecular imaging approaches,” Drug Discovery
World Fall 33–38.
Sarkar, M., Bacchetti, P., French, A. L., Tien, P., Glesby, M. J., Nowicki,
M., Plankey, M., Gange, S., Sharp, G., Minkoff, H., and Peters, M. G.
2012. “Lower liver-related death in African-American women with
human immunodeficiency virus/hepatitis C virus coinfection, compared
to Caucasian and Hispanic women,” Hepatology 56(5): 1699–705.
Schnee J. E. 1978. “Governmental control of therapeutic drugs: Intent,
impact and issues,” in C. M. Lindsay and E. Caglarcan eds. The Phar-
maceutical Industry: Economics, Performance, and Government Regula-
tion. New York: Wiley, pp. 9–14.
54
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 Seligmann, B. 2004. “Gene expression as a toxicological screening tool.
The use of microarray data in drug development and requirements for
FDA audit and approval,” Drug Discovery World 77–83.
Sena, E. S., van der Worp, H. B., Bath, P. M. W., Howells, D. W., and
Macleod, M. R. 2010. “Publication bias in reports of animal stroke studies
leads to major overstatement of efficacy,” PLoS Biology 8(3): e1000344.
Sena, E., van der Worp, H. B., Howells, D., and Macleod, M. 2007. “How
can we improve the pre-clinical development of drugs for stroke?,”
Trends in Neurosciences 30(9): 433–439.
Seok, J., Warren, H. S., Cuenca, A. G., Mindrinos, M. N., Baker, H. V., Xu,
W., Richards, D. R., et al. 2013. “Genomic responses in mouse models
poorly mimic human inflammatory diseases,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 119(9): 3507–3512.
Serao, N., Delfino, K., Southey, B., Beever, J., and Rodriguez-Zas, S.
2011. “Cell cycle and aging, morphogenesis, and response to stimuli
genes are individualized biomarkers of glioblastoma progression and
survival,” BMC Medical Genomics 4(1): 49.
Serrano, D., Lazzeroni, M., Zambon, C. F., Macis, D., Maisonneuve, P.,
Johansson, H., Guerrieri- Gonzaga, A., et al. 2011. “Efficacy of tamoxifen
based on cytochrome P450 2D6, CYP2C19 and SULT1A1 genotype in the
Italian tamoxifen prevention trial,” Pharmacogenomics J 11(2): 100–107.
Shaffer, C. 2012. “Safety through sequencing,” Drug Discovery & Develop-
ment, January 1, http://www.dddmag.com/articles/2012/01/safety-
through-sequencing, accessed February 2, 2018.
Shanks, N., and Greek, R. 2008. “Experimental use of nonhuman pri-
mates is not a simple problem,” Nature Medicine 14(10): 807–808.
Shanks, N., and Greek, R. 2009. Animal Models in Light of Evolution. Boca
Raton, FL: Brown Walker.
Shanks, N., Greek, R., and Greek, J. 2009. “Are animal models predictive
for humans?,” Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 4(1): 2.
Sharp, P. A., and Langer, R. 2011. “Promoting convergence in biomedical
science,” Science 333(6042): 527.
Shepard, T., and Lemire, R. 2004. Catalog of Teratogenic Agents, 11th ed.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins.
Shubick, P. 1980. “Statement of the problem,” in F. Coulston and
P. Shubick, eds., Human Epidemiology and Animal Laboratory Correla-
tions in Chemical Carcinogenesis. New York, NY: Ablex Publishing,
pp. 5–17.
Sietsema, W. K. 1989. “The absolute oral bioavailability of selected drugs,”
International Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, Therapy, and Toxicology
27(4): 179–211.
Simon, V. 2005. “Wanted: Women in clinical trials,” Science 308(5728):
1517.
Sitaram, N., and Gershon, S. 1983. “From animal models to clinical test-
ing–promises and pitfalls,” Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and
Biological Psychiatry 7(2–3): 227–228.
55
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Sloan, J. A., Goldberg, R. M., Sargent, D. J., Vargas-Chanes, D., Nair, S.,
Cha, S. S., Novotny, P. J., Poon, M. A., O’Connell, M. J., and Loprinzi,
C. L. 2002. “Women experience greater toxicity with fluorouracil-based
chemotherapy for colorectal cancer,” Journal of Clinical Oncology 20(6):
1491–1498.
Smith, R. L., and Caldwell, J. 1977. “Drug metabolism in non-human
primates,” in D. V. Parke and R. L. Smith, eds., Drug Metabolism –
From Microbe to Man. London: Taylor & Francis, pp. 331–356.
Smith, W. E., Miller, L., Elsasser, R. E., and Hubert, D. D. 1965. “Tests
for carcinogenicity of asbestos,” Annals of the New York Academy of Sci-
ences 132(1): 456–488.
Sole, R., and Goodwin, B. 2002. Signs of Life: How Complexity Pervades
Biology. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Spear, B. B., Heath-Chiozzi, M., and Huff, J. 2001. “Clinical application of
pharmacogenetics,” Trends in Molecular Medicine 7(5): 201–204.
Spielman, R. S., Bastone, L. A., Burdick, J. T., Morley, M., Ewens, W. J.,
and Cheung, V. G. 2007. “Common genetic variants account for differ-
ences in gene expression among ethnic groups,” Nature Genetics 39(2):
226–231.
Stamer, U. M., and Stuber, F. 2007. “The pharmacogenetics of analgesia,”
Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy 8(14): 2235–2245.
Stankiewicz, P., and Lupski, J. R. 2010. “Structural variation in the
human genome and its role in disease,” Annual Review of Medicine 61,
437–455.
Storey, J. D., Madeoy, J., Strout, J. L., Wurfel, M., Ronald, J., and Akey,
J. M. 2007. “Gene-expression variation within and among human pop-
ulations,” American Journal of Human Genetics 80(3): 502–509.
Suter, K. 1990. “What can be learned from case studies? The company
approach,” in C. Lumley and S. Walker, eds., Animal Toxicity Studies:
Their Relevance for Man. Lancaster: Quay Publishing, pp. 71–78.
Tan, I. B., Ivanova, T., Lim, K. H., Ong, C. W., Deng, N., Lee, J., Tan, S.
H., et al. 2011. “Intrinsic subtypes of gastric cancer, based on gene
expression pattern, predict survival and respond differently to chemo-
therapy,” Gastroenterology 141(2): 476–485.e11.
Taneja, A., Di Iorio, V. L., Danhof, M., and Della Pasqua, O. 2012.
“Translation of drug effects from experimental models of neuropathic pain
and analgesia to humans,” Drug Discovery Today 17(15–16): 837–849.
Taylor, D. L. 2009. “Human vs rodent,” Drug Discovery & Development
12(3): 16–18.
Tolman, K. G. 2002. “The liver and lovastatin,” American Journal of Cardi-
ology 89(12): 1374–1380.
Topol, E. J. 2004. “Failing the public health—Rofecoxib, merck, and the
FDA,” New England Journal of Medicine 351(17): 1707–1709.
Topol, E. J., and Venter, J. C. 2013. “Venter and topol on the true revolu-
tion in medicine,” Medscape, March 10, http://www.medscape.com/
viewarticle/780324, accessed February 2, 2018
Trivedi, B. 2010. “Learning from the elite,” Nature 466(7304): S4–S4.
56
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
 Uhl, E. W., Whitley, E., Galbreath, E., McArthur, M., and Oglesbee, M. J.
2012. “Evolutionary aspects of animal models,” Veterinary pathology
49(5): 876–878.
US Congress 2015–2016. “The 21st century cures act,” US Congress, Jan-
uary 4, https://www.congress.gov/114/bills/hr34/BILLS-114hr34enr.
pdf, accessed February 2, 2018.
Utidjian, M. 1988. “The interaction between epidemiology and animal
studies in industrial toxicology,” in B. Ballantyne, ed. Perspectives in
Basic
and
Applied
Toxicology.
London:
Butterworth-
Heinemann,
pp. 309–329.
van Meer, P. J. K., Kooijman, M., Gispen-de Wied, C. C., Moors, E. H. M.,
and Schellekens, H. 2012. “The ability of animal studies to detect seri-
ous post marketing adverse events is limited,” Regulatory Toxicology
and Pharmacology 64(3): 345–349.
van Regenmortel, M. 2004. “Biological complexity emerges from the ashes of
genetic reductionism,” Journal of Molecular Recognition 17(3): 145–148.
van Zutphen, L. F. 2000. “Is there a need for animal models of human genetic
disorders in the post- genome era?,” Comparative Medicine 50(1): 10–11.
Varki, A., and Altheide, T. K. 2005. “Comparing the human and chimpan-
zee genomes: Searching for needles in a haystack,” Genome Research
15(12): 1746–1758.
Vernon, J. A., Golec, J. H., and Dimasi, J. A. 2010. “Drug development
costs when financial risk is measured using the Fama-French three-fac-
tor model,” Health Economics 19(8): 1002–1005.
Wald, C., and Wu, C. 2010. “Of mice and women: The bias in animal
models,” Science 327(5973): 1571–1572.
Walker, R. M., and McElligott, T. F. 1981. “Furosemide induced hep-
atotoxicity,” Journal of Pathology 135(4): 301–314.
Wall, R. J., and Shani, M. 2008. “Are animal models as good as we
think?,” Theriogenology 69(1): 2–9.
Walshaw, S. O. 1994. “Animal death and human emotion in the labo-
ratory,” Lab Animal 23(6): 24–25.
Wang, D., Guo, Y., Wrighton, S. A., Cooke, G. E., and Sadee, W. 2011.
“Intronic polymorphism in CYP3A4 affects hepatic expression and
response to statin drugs,” Pharmacogenomics Journal 11(4): 274–286.
Warren, H. S., Tompkins, R. G., Moldawer, L. L., Seok, J., Xu, W.,
Mindrinos, M. N., Maier, R. V., Xiao, W., and Davis, R. W. 2014. “Mice
are not men,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112(4):
E347–E348.
Wax, P. M. 1995. “Elixers, dilutants, and the passage of the 1938 Federal
Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act,” Annals of Internal Medicine 122, 456–461.
Weatherall, M. 1982. “An end to the search for new drugs?,” Nature 296,
387–390.
Weaver, J. L., Staten, D., Swann, J., Armstrong, G., Bates, M., and
Hastings, K. L. 2003. “Detection of systemic hypersensitivity to drugs
using standard guinea pig assays,” Toxicology 193(3): 203–217.
57
KRAMER AND GREEK
 Wilke, R. A., and Dolan, M. E. 2011. “Genetics and variable drug
response,” JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association
306(3): 306–307.
Willyard, C. 2009. “HIV gender clues emerge,” Nature Medicine 15(8): 830.
Wong, A. H., Gottesman, I. I., and Petronis, A. 2005. “Phenotypic differ-
ences in genetically identical organisms: The epigenetic perspective,”
Human Molecular Genetics 14(Spec No 1): R11–8.
Xu, H., Cheng, C., Devidas, M., Pei, D., Fan, Y., Yang, W., Neale, G., et al.
2012. “ARID5B genetic polymorphisms contribute to racial disparities
in the incidence and treatment outcome of childhood acute lymphoblas-
tic leukemia,” Journal of Clinical Oncology 30(7): 751–757.
Xu, H., Yang, W., Perez-Andreu, V., Devidas, M., Fan, Y., Cheng, C., Pei,
D., et al. 2013. “Novel susceptibility variants at 10p12.31-12.2 for child-
hood acute lymphoblastic leukemia in ethnically diverse populations,”
Journal of the National Cancer Institute 105(10): 733–742.
Young, M. 2008. “Prediction vs attrition,” Drug Discovery World Fall 9–12.
Yucesoy, B., Johnson, V. J., Fluharty, K., Kashon, M. L., Slaven, J. E.,
Wilson, N. W., Weissman, D. N., Biagini, R. E., Germolec, D. R., and
Luster, M. I. 2009. “Influence of cytokine gene variations on immuniza-
tion to childhood vaccines,” Vaccine 27(50): 6991–6997.
Yukhananov, A. 2011. “U.S. to develop chip that tests if a drug is toxic,”
Reuters, September 16, http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/09/16/
us-drugs-chip-idUSTRE78F5KX20110916, accessed February 2, 2018.
Zbinden, G. 1993. “The concept of multispecies testing in industrial
toxicology,” Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology 17(1): 85–94.
Zhang, Q., Bhattacharya, S., Andersen, M. E., and Conolly, R. B. 2010.
“Computational systems biology and dose-response modeling in relation
to new directions in toxicity testing,” Journal of toxicology and environ-
mental health. Part B, Critical reviews 13(2–4): 253–276.
Zhang, W., Duan, S., Kistner, E. O., Bleibel, W. K., Huang, R. S., Clark,
T. A., Chen, T. X., et al. 2008. “Evaluation of genetic variation contrib-
uting to differences in gene expression between populations,” American
Journal of Human Genetics 82(3): 631–640.
Zhao, J., Goldberg, J., Bremner, J. D., and Vaccarino, V. 2012. “Global
DNA methylation is associated with insulin resistance: A monozygotic
twin study,” Diabetes 61(2): 542–546.
Zielinska, E. 2010. “Building a better mouse,” The Scientist 24(4): 34–38.
http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/28860/title/Building-
a-Better-Mouse/, accessed February 2, 2018.
58
BUSINESS AND SOCIETY REVIEW
