 Six ways not to improve patient
flow: a qualitative study
Sara Adi Kreindler1,2
ABSTRACT
Background Although well-established
principles exist for improving the timeliness and
efficiency of care, many organisations struggle to
achieve more than small-scale, localised gains.
Where care processes are complex and include
segments under different groups’ control, the
elegant solutions promised by improvement
methodologies remain elusive. This study sought
to identify common design flaws that limit the
impact of flow initiatives.
Methods This qualitative study was conducted
within an explanatory case study of a Canadian
regional health system in which multitudinous
flow initiatives had yielded no overall
improvement in system performance.
Interviews with 62 senior, middle and
departmental managers, supplemented by
∼700 documents on flow initiatives, were
analysed using the constant comparative
method.
Results Findings suggested that smooth flow
depends on linking a defined population to
appropriate capacity by means of an efficient
process; flawed initiatives reflected failure to
consider one or more of these essential
elements. Many initiatives focused narrowly on
process, failing to consider that the intended
population was poorly defined or the needed
capacity inaccessible; some introduced capacity
for an intended population, but offered no
process to link the two. Moreover, interveners
were unable to respond effectively when a
bottleneck moved to another part of the
system. Errors of population, capacity and
process, in different combinations, generated
six ‘formulae for failure’.
Conclusions Typically, flawed initiatives
focused on too small a segment of the patient
journey to properly address the impediments to
flow. The proliferation of narrowly focused
initiatives, in turn, reflected a decentralised
system in which responsibility for flow
improvement was fragmented. Thus, initiatives’
specific design flaws may have their roots in a
deeper problem: the lack of a coherent system-
level strategy.
INTRODUCTION
Ostensibly, improving patient flow should
be much easier than it is. W
ell-established
principles exist for improving timeliness
and
efficiency:
assess
capacity
and
demand, ascertain and address the causes
of variation, streamline care processes.1–3
According to the seminal theory of con-
straints, the key to process improvement
is identifying and addressing the major
bottleneck, known as ‘the constraint’;4
changes aimed at non-constraint steps
cannot improve the efficiency of the
process
as
a
whole—patients
may
advance more quickly only to pile up at
the bottleneck as badly as before. These
principles have informed a variety of
widely adopted flow interventions;5 they
have also been packaged and repackaged
into improvement methodologies (most
recently
lean)
that
organisations
can
employ to develop their own interven-
tions.6 Yet the evidence on flow initia-
tives, be they established or bespoke, is
not
encouraging;
a
recent
systematic
review of interventions to reduce emer-
gency department (ED) crowding could
confirm the effectiveness of very few.5
Among
ED-based
interventions,
even
those with the strongest evidence (triage
nurse ordering, triage liaison physicians,
minor treatment areas (MTAs) and rapid
assessment zones) have impacts that are
highly variable and seldom dramatic.7–10
In the inpatient context, the family of
discharge-planning
and
care-transition
interventions shows evidence of reducing
readmissions and potentially length of
stay (LOS); however, in recent years, only
the most complex, resource intensive of
such interventions appear to yield an
incremental benefit over usual care.11 12
Many flow interventions involve a net
addition of resources, obscuring whether
their
active
ingredient
is
efficiency
improvement
or
merely
resource
enhancement.7 11 13 Moreover, initiatives
 Original research
 
► Additional material is 
published online only. To view 
please visit the journal online 
(http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
bmjqs- 
2016- 
005438).
1Community Health Sciences, 
University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
2Health Systems Performance, 
George and Fay Yee Centre 
for Healthcare Innovation, 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
Correspondence to
Dr Sara Adi Kreindler, 
Community Health Sciences, 
University of Manitoba, 451-
753 McDermot Ave., Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada R3E 0T6;  
skreindler@ 
wrha. 
mb. 
ca
Received 27 February 2016
Revised 16 June 2016
Accepted 25 June 2016
Published Online First 
27 July 2016
To cite: Kreindler SA.  
BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:388–
394.
388
Kreindler SA. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:388–394. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438 on 27 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 that appear to succeed in one organisation may
achieve little in another, an issue that studies are only
beginning to explore.14–16 Lean, for its part, has
tended to fall short of expectations, typically produ-
cing only localised, small-scale gains.17 18 For most
health systems, providing timely access to needed care
remains a struggle.19
The
‘gold
standard’
of
the
flow-improvement
success story is the elegant process change; that is,
one that presents a simple solution to a complex
problem.2 The development of such solutions is
grounded in the understanding that complex patterns
of system behaviour may spring from the operation of
a few simple rules and parameters, which can be iden-
tified and potentially changed.20 Indeed, in some
cases, deep analysis does reveal a single problematic
parameter, whose remediation transforms system func-
tioning;2 21 notwithstanding, there is cause to doubt
whether all flow problems are truly amenable to
elegant solution. A comparative case study found that
lean, for example, produced substantial, sustained
improvement only in departments whose care pro-
cesses were relatively simple.16 In complex contexts,
the offending parameter may lie outside the interve-
ners’ control, or attempts to change it may create
worse problems; or, there may in fact be no single
critical parameter, but rather a combination of factors
that affect the outcome in non-linear and unpredict-
able ways.22 Even when one optimal intervention can
be identified, its implementation may demand a host
of facilitative interventions at other levels of the
organisation.23
When analysis of a problem fails to disclose an
elegant solution, decision-makers have displayed an
unfortunate tendency to abandon systematic inquiry
entirely, opting instead for the expedient of ‘action
without knowledge’24—or more colloquially, ‘throw-
ing a lot of spaghetti at the wall and seeing what
sticks’. This response typically engenders a grab-bag
of interventions that fail to resolve the problem,
but compete with each other for scarce time and
resources. A field that is littered with failed interven-
tions is fertile ground for research into the causes of
failure; this study, conducted within a health system in
which myriad flow initiatives had yielded no discern-
ible improvement in system performance, sought to
pinpoint why interventions faltered, and by extension,
what might have enabled them to succeed.
METHODS
Context
In Canada, healthcare is a provincial responsibility;
most provinces have devolved its administration to
regional health authorities. Serving a large city and its
surrounding area, the regional health system studied
(‘the Region’) features a matrix structure in which
programmes (eg, medicine, surgery, primary care) cut
across sites (hospitals and community areas). Three
hospitals have become operating divisions of the
Region while the other three retain their own boards;
in practice, all six are accountable to the Region but
enjoy considerable autonomy.
Scope
This paper reports a qualitative study undertaken
within the context of an embedded explanatory case
study25 of the Region’s flow-improvement efforts.
The
overall
case
study
took
a
mixed-methods
approach, incorporating (a) analysis of monthly indi-
cators of ED and inpatient volumes and LOS 1999–
2012; (b) review of ∼700 documents on the nature,
implementation and impacts of flow initiatives; (c)
in-depth interviews. Parts of the case study that are
not this paper’s focus established several things. First,
the Region showed poor flow performance; it occu-
pied last place in comparisons with similar regions,
and its ED and inpatient flow metrics gave no indica-
tion
of
improvement
(see
online
supplementary
appendix
A).
Second,
it
had
implemented
or
attempted nearly every flow initiative described in the
literature (see online supplementary appendix B),
including interventions aimed at ED input (eg, tele-
phone advice line, case management for frequent
attenders),
throughput
(eg,
MTAs,
nurse-initiated
ordering) and output (eg, short-stay unit, numerous
enhancements to discharge planning).26 The outcomes
of individual initiatives varied; some had demon-
strably increased efficiency in some part of the care
process or decreased utilisation by a certain group of
patients; some had shown no benefit; some had
mixed or uncertain impacts; some were unevaluated,
some unevaluable. However, it can be stated that col-
lectively, the initiatives had fallen far short of their
anticipated impact on flow. The present study investi-
gates whether any common design flaws might have
played a role in this disappointing performance. (A
companion study addresses system-level impediments
to improvement).
In seeking out possible design flaws, it is important
to distinguish between intervention failure and imple-
mentation
failure.
Participants
described
several
instances in which inadequate planning and prepar-
ation, limited training, insufficient staff engagement
and/or a lack of strong, in-group-based leadership pre-
vented a project from getting off the ground. These
issues are well explored in the implementation science
literature,27
28 and are not specific to flow. This
article is concerned with shortcomings of the interven-
tion itself—bearing in mind, however, that interven-
tion failure and implementation failure are sometimes
intertwined (eg, an intervention’s flaws may provoke
staff resistance).24
Methodology
This qualitative study drew primarily on data from
interviews,
supplemented
by
document
review.
Original research
389
Kreindler SA. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:388–394. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438 on 27 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 Documents (eg, evaluation reports, plans, inventories)
were a major source of information on the nature and
observed impacts of initiatives, and are paraphrased
throughout the results section (I was not at liberty to
cite or quote them directly). However, while several
described barriers and facilitators to implementation,
very few discussed strengths or weaknesses of inter-
vention design.
Interview participants included 62 senior, middle
and departmental managers of the Region and its pro-
grammes and sites, recruited on the basis of their role
and through snowball sampling. In 1 hour semistruc-
tured interviews (see online supplementary appendix
C), participants described flow initiatives in which
they had been involved and elucidated what had
worked well/poorly and why; they also discussed flow
performance, challenges and strategies at the system
level, often commenting on difficulties associated with
the matrix structure. All but one participant agreed to
be audiotaped, and analysis was based on verbatim
transcripts. Using the constant comparative method,29
I began by open-coding hard-copy transcripts to
capture all expressed opinions, experimented with
various ways of organising the codes into themes
using sticky notes, and settled on a working coding
scheme about halfway through the transcripts. I then
extracted all quotations relevant to identified themes
into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet to allow sorting
and resorting. During interpretation, the idea of the
constraint4 was used as a sensitising concept.30 Where
appropriate, quantitative data/findings were used to
verify
facts
or
test
interpretations.
The
analytic
process continued to be iterative, moving back and
forth between extracted quotations, full transcripts,
documents, relevant literature and the evolving coding
scheme.
RESULTS
The data illuminated three essential considerations in
the design of flow initiatives: population, capacity
and process. It might be postulated that smooth
flow depends on linking a defined population to
appropriate capacity by means of an efficient process
(see figure 1). Nearly all of the many, diverse
accounts of intervention failure revealed the neglect
of one or more of these dimensions. The various
interventions may in fact be grouped in categories
according to what constellation of the three they rep-
resent, yielding ‘six ways not to improve patient
flow’.
‘Just add another form’ (neither population, capacity,
nor process)
Certain initiatives apparently addressed neither popu-
lation, capacity, nor process, but merely layered on
new processes, positions and/or paperwork. Such
endeavours were described as unsustainable at best; at
worst, as invidious.
We don’t ever look at what we can get rid of…the
level of documentation we expect nurses to do [is]
ludicrous. Little wonder they can’t [help] people
walk…they’re tied to the pen. Because we just add
another form. Every time we have a new thing,
we just add another form, another piece of paper.
(Manager 3)
Among the favourite targets of criticism were ‘bed
meetings’ that, although intended to produce action
on barriers to flow, allegedly produced only talk.
It’s a huge chunk of every manager and program direc-
tor’s daily workload; they meet in the morning for
huddle…then at 11:00, there’s the whole regional bed
call; then they go to discharge planning rounds in the
afternoon… And you’re lucky if you get one or two
beds out of it. (Manager 27)
The
majority
of
flawed
initiatives,
however,
addressed one or two of the three aspects and foun-
dered on the other(s). Most common were initiatives
that focused on the ‘figure’ (process) but missed the
‘ground’ (population and/or capacity), failing to take
into account that the intended population was poorly
defined or the needed capacity inaccessible.
Improve efficiency—in the wrong part of the process
(process without capacity)
A blinkered focus on process was evident in interven-
tions that ameliorated the efficiency of some part of
the process of care, but not the locus of greatest con-
straint. For example, in an effort to expedite the dis-
charge of complex patients, one hospital piloted a
complex
case
navigator;
this
initiative
optimised
certain steps of the process, while failing to locate and
address the actual barrier to discharge.
The result was, yes we can get them ready for dis-
charge faster—but they don’t get discharged any
faster. Because there’s still nowhere for them to go.
(Manager 30)
Initiatives developed through lean were not immune
to the tendency to miss the constraint step. On the
contrary, participants suggested that lean events fre-
quently focused on too small a segment of the chain
to locate the constraint, or on groups of staff with no
control over it.
W
e get [staff] mapping out all the steps in the process
and the problems—but I’ve not seen…a brainstorming
exercise that takes a look at constraints. It’s, ‘Let’s
bring in all the links and let’s see how we can optimize
all the links’. I’ve not seen that, ‘Where’s the con-
straint?’ (Manager 44)
Staff who perceived their lack of control over the
constraint did not abort the lean process; rather, they
knowingly focused on non-constraint steps, using lean
to create workarounds that might improve patient
safety in the context of what they viewed as unavoid-
ably poor flow. One ED redesigned its processes so as
Original research
390
Kreindler SA. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:388–394. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438 on 27 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 to give patients with chest pain quicker access to elec-
trocardiograms, even though this would not translate
into quicker access to an overcrowded department
(where the constraint lay). The resulting interventions,
as providers recognised, did not improve flow—and
created new inefficiencies.
…it hasn’t done an iota to change our flow. It’s actu-
ally increased the work of the staff out front…we
over-EKG everybody who has pain remotely near their
hearts. (Manager 29)
Create a ‘parking lot’ (process with capacity that does not
match the duration of population needs)
In a variation on the theme, capacity earmarked by
certain initiatives for short-term use evolved into a
parking lot for a population with longer-term needs
but no appropriate venue. This was the reported fate
of short-stay units for ED patients, transitional facil-
ities and transition teams. The intent of such initia-
tives had been to stream patients away from a
bottleneck; however, if a stream leads nowhere, the
bottleneck is not resolved but merely relocated a short
distance.
[The] problem with a lot of these quick response teams
[is] you have to discharge them off. Otherwise, sud-
denly you’ve just filled up this program. (Manager 46)
Design services for a poorly defined population (capacity
without population)
In a few cases, new capacity was underutilised because
it turned out not to fit patient needs. In notable
examples, two hospitals experimented with—but sub-
sequently
closed—subacute
units.
While
multiple
reasons were cited for each closure, a common theme
was the difficulty of identifying a stable population of
patients who needed subacute care and not something
else. Some patients, participants reported, required
rehab and belonged in the existing rehab beds; others,
who did appear to require subacute care for part of
their hospital stay, wound up moving back and forth
between different units as their condition fluctuated,
which created inefficiency and infection hazards.
W
e decided it really was creating more delays than it
was helping, because of moving people so many times,
for one thing, and a lot of energy expended on trying
to find the person that was stable enough to be moved
there…and quite a number of years ago we had actu-
ally established our own interim [nursing home] unit
and found the same sort of thing. (Manager 25)
Data were retrieved from the most recent of these
experiences; analysis showed that when the Family
Medicine programme converted its subacute beds to
regular beds, LOS decreased sharply, suggesting that
some patients who appeared to require subacute care
may no longer have belonged in hospital at all.
Nonetheless, some participants continued to advocate
the creation of subacute units for an ill-defined
population:
There’s a difficult-to-differentiate spectrum of people
who need non-acute care [and are] not really good
rehab candidates…they don’t need our acute care
Figure 1
Population, capacity and process: key questions for critical assessment of potential initiatives.
Original research
391
Kreindler SA. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:388–394. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438 on 27 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 services but it’s clear that they need institutional
medical care, just not any of the brands or varieties
that we’ve actually decided to offer…so no one will
take them. (Manager 21)
Add capacity that is poorly targeted to its intended
population (capacity without process)
Conversely, new capacity created for a defined popu-
lation sometimes fills up with patients for whom it
was not intended. Managers charged with creating
community-based alternatives to EDs found them-
selves grappling with this problem.
They said [the Crisis Response Centre is] going to
decant a lot of the emergency population, but there
are several problems. One is that if you open some-
thing,
it
meets
unmet
needs…And
this
is
from
community-based psychiatry, so you could get a lot of
volume. (Manager 48)
Subsequent internal evaluations substantiated these
concerns; after introduction of the planned commu-
nity facilities, reduction in ED utilisation was barely
discernible; the number of ED diversions was dwarfed
by that of new users. No mechanism existed to target
the new capacity to only such patients as would other-
wise have visited the ED.
Even when new capacity can be formally linked to a
specific population, this linkage may prove difficult to
maintain. Several participants described how compet-
ing demands prevented MTAs and observation units
from
continuing
to
be
used
for
their
intended
purpose.
[The MTA] was never sustainable, ‘cause it was just
basically part of a traditional emergency space, and so it
would just always get overrun by…people who required
a stretcher stuffed into that space. (Manager 35)
When the bottleneck moves, do not follow it (population,
capacity and process must be defined anew)
One principle of the theory of constraints is ‘the
bottleneck always moves’:4 once the greatest con-
straint is resolved, the next-greatest needs to be
addressed. For continued progress, it is necessary to
follow the bottleneck—but as the following example
reveals, this is not always feasible.
Stakeholders
throughout
the
Region
expressed
enthusiasm about the early results of the Overstay
Project,
a
Medicine
Program
initiative
to
avert
unnecessarily long hospital stays. Analysis of a com-
prehensive
dataset
had
revealed
that
the
major
constraint to timely discharge was delayed decision-
making about the disposition of complex patients,
80% of whom were discharged home after protracted
indecision. Using this data, the programme developed
a predictive model to identify higher-risk patients,
who were subsequently screened to identify those at
highest risk (population). The intervention combined
changes to process—risk screening, assignment of
accountability for the discharge of each high-risk
patient, redirection of allied health resources away
from low-risk patients—with a ‘home first’ policy
implemented
in
collaboration
with
Home
Care
(capacity).
Pre/post analyses documented a significant reduc-
tion in overstay days and LOS, and participants
reported that this was achieved without increasing
staff workload. Yet as region-wide rollout proceeded
and months went by, the predicted dramatic gains did
not materialise. What happened? When contacted for
follow-up,
a
key
informant
reported
that
the
decreased LOS of patients who were discharged home
was being cancelled out by a concomitant increase in
LOS for patients discharged to a nursing home. The
Medicine Program attempted to engage the nursing
home sector in collaboratively addressing the new
constraint, but made little progress. The bottleneck
had moved where the programme could not follow—
into a sector characterised by a patchwork of for-
profit and non-profit entities, most of which are
outside the regional system.
DISCUSSION
The population-capacity-process triad emerged as a
valuable concept for understanding the shortcomings
of flow interventions. As observed, each variant of
intervention failure was characterised by the neglect
of one or more of its three essential components. It is
important to recognise that the flawed initiatives were
not arbitrary or foolish; most had some face validity,
some had an evidence base,5 and even the most
reviled ‘add-another-form’ scheme was usually mod-
elled on a successful experience elsewhere. However,
they shared a common failing: the boundaries of
inquiry
were
too
narrow
to
encompass
the
problem.20 ‘Parking lots’ are a prime illustration of
the pitfalls of considering only one segment of the
patient journey. Transitional services may indeed be
useful when they meet a need for time-limited care or
reliably connect patients to other services; dysfunction
occurs when the planned journey ends before patient
needs are met. It is noteworthy that all the studies
that have supported short-stay units investigated the
delivery of protocol-driven care to a tightly defined
population with short-term needs.13 31
In
the
mystery
of
the
disappearing
subacute
patients, a focus on a single segment of the patient
journey led to the attempt to design services for ‘a
difficult-to-differentiate
spectrum
of
people’.
‘Inpatients who do not need acute care’ are not a
population; this characterisation only tells us that
patients are in a location where their needs are not
being met; it does not describe what those needs are
or illuminate why they remain unmet. Subacute care
itself may indeed benefit some patients;32 the mistake
lies in attempting to base service design on what
patients do not need rather than on what they do.
Original research
392
Kreindler SA. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:388–394. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438 on 27 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 While an overly narrow perspective may in some
cases reveal poor understanding of flow-improvement
principles, in others, it may reflect interveners’ lack of
control over the larger system. In the Region, account-
ability was dispersed among programmes and sites,
and many important players were outside the system
altogether; often, no one had sufficient control to
manage a population’s entire journey across the con-
tinuum of care. In the Overstay Project, collaboration
enabled two programmes to improve a patient popula-
tion’s journey, but their authority did not extend far
enough to achieve those benefits for another popula-
tion. (The implications of such fragmentation of
authority will be elucidated in the companion article).
These findings help to illuminate why the ‘same’
intervention often produces different outcomes in dif-
ferent contexts. Future realist research and synthesis33
might incorporate the population-capacity-process triad
as a useful frame for conceptualising the mechanisms
by which, and contextual conditions under which, flow
interventions exert their effects.
Limitations
This study’s broad scope and retrospective nature did
not permit the collection of comprehensive informa-
tion about each initiative; although the triangulation
of multiple data sources strengthened the ability to
draw inferences, the dataset remains incomplete. Also,
the outcomes of certain evidence-informed interven-
tions (notably, nurse-initiated ordering10) could not be
assessed due to the variability of implementation.
Future research spanning multiple systems should
feature parallel evaluations of similar interventions,
with formal assessment of implementation and out-
comes. Nonetheless, the consideration of numerous,
diverse initiatives strengthened this study’s potential
to identify novel patterns.
The restriction of the interview sample to manage-
ment—a choice made to support the pursuit of
system-level issues, which managers are best situated
to observe—was a significant limitation for the investi-
gation of specific initiatives; frontline staff might have
identified additional important intervention flaws,
and should be included in future studies. The reliance
on a single coder carried a risk of bias (although it
should be noted that several participants offered
detailed comments on draft reports, injecting add-
itional perspectives into the interpretation).
As it was not possible to definitively classify each of
the many initiatives as a success or failure, no formal
comparison between successful and failed initiatives
was undertaken. Some observations may nonetheless
be made about the few initiatives that could reliably
be linked to decreased LOS or utilisation. Other than
the Overstay Project, these included MTAs (where
maintained with discipline), services enabling specific
types of patients to avoid the ED (eg, community
intravenous programme), and the early 2000s shift
towards day surgery. Each entailed the linkage of a
defined population to new or repurposed capacity
through a clear-cut process. However, as straightfor-
ward interventions are also easier to evaluate, inter-
pretations must be drawn with caution. It should also
be noted that a successful population-specific inter-
vention may make little contribution to system-level
improvement if the targeted population accounts for a
low proportion of overall utilisation. Finally, one hos-
pital did achieve a significant reduction in ED LOS
and sustained this for 5 years; however, it remains dif-
ficult to determine the relative contribution of mul-
tiple interventions (some of which had additional,
unintended consequences, as described in the com-
panion article).
Implications
Figure 1 prompts decision-makers to rigorously inter-
rogate proposed initiatives in terms of population,
capacity and
process.
In
addition,
the
following
guiding questions provide a framework for consider-
ing the three aspects in tandem.
1. What populations are experiencing flow problems, and
what are their needs? Differentiate among the major sub-
groups with different clusters of need; prioritise those
that account for the greatest amount of potentially con-
servable utilisation.
2. What capacity is most suitable for meeting the identified
needs, bearing in mind that different capacity may be
required as patients’ needs evolve? If appropriate, con-
sider multiple suitable options, noting which ones are
already present in the system.
3. What process does this population currently experience?
Map the process, using data to locate the prime con-
straint that impedes or delays access to suitable capacity;
the process’ endpoint should be defined as the point at
which the identified needs have been met.
4. What alternative process(es) could straightforwardly link
the population to suitable capacity, avoiding the con-
straint? If new capacity and/or processes are proposed,
how will these impact other populations? What is
needed to ensure that new or released capacity is used
for its intended purpose?
The suggested thought process conforms to stand-
ard
flow-improvement
methodology,
but
adds
repeated reminders to take a system view, scrutinising
how different parts of the system impinge on each
other. Such thinking may help organisations move
beyond a proliferation of piecemeal initiatives to a
coherent strategy of identifying the most important
constraints and following these as they move around
the system. Without a system perspective to inform
improvement efforts, the most promising initiative
may
become
just
another
dismal
entry
in
‘The
How-Not-To Guide’ to patient flow.
Acknowledgements I am grateful to the interview participants
for their generosity with their time and insights, and to
everyone who contributed documents and details on flow
Original research
393
Kreindler SA. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:388–394. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438 on 27 July 2016. Downloaded from 
 initiatives. I would like to extend special appreciation to those
participants who provided feedback on earlier drafts; to
preserve confidentiality, I am not acknowledging participants by
name, but their comments contributed greatly to strengthening
the analysis. My sincere thanks also go to Dr Colleen Metge for
her ongoing support, guidance and review; Liping Zhang,
Trevor Strome, Miroslava Svitlica and Anne Hakansson for
quantitative data acquisition; and Reena Kreindler for
invaluable editorial advice.
Competing interests None declared.
Ethics approval University of Manitoba Health Research Ethics
Board.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally
peer reviewed.
Data sharing statement For confidentiality reasons, qualitative
data collected for this study cannot be shared.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in
accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which permits others to
distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-
commercially, and license their derivative works on different
terms, provided the original work is properly cited and the use
is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/4.0/
REFERENCES
1
Jensen K, Mayer TA, W
elch SJ, et al. Leadership for smooth
patient flow. Cambridge, MA: Institute for Healthcare
Improvement, 2007.
2
Kreindler SA. W
atching your wait: evidence-informed strategies
for reducing health care wait times. Qual Manag Health Care
2008;17:128–35.
3
Showell C, Ellis L, Keen E, et al. An evidence-based review and
training resource on smooth patient flow. Sandy Bay, AU:
eHealth Services Research Group, University of Tasmania
(on behalf of the Ministry of Health, New South W
ales
Government, 2012.
4
Goldratt EM, Cox J. The goal: a theory of constraints.
Barrington, MA: North River Press, 1984.
5
de Grood J, Bota M, Villa-Roel C, et al. Overview of
interventions to mitigate emergency department overcrowding.
Review of the Quality of Care and Safety of Patients Requiring
Access to Emergency Department Care and Cancer Surgery
and the Role and Process of Physician Advocacy. Appendix VI.
Calgary, AB: Healthcare Quality Council of Alberta,
2012:247–322. http://www.hqca.ca (accessed 30 Jun 2014).
6
W
alshe K. Pseudoinnovation: the development and spread of
healthcare quality improvement methodologies. Int J Qual
Health Care 2009;21:153–9.
7
Abdulwahid MA, Booth A, Kuczawski M, et al. The impact of
senior doctor assessment at triage on emergency department
performance measures: systematic review and meta-analysis of
comparative studies. Emerg Med J 2016;33:504–13.
8
Bullard MJ, Villa-Roel C, Guo X, et al. The role of a rapid
assessment zone/pod on reducing overcrowding in emergency
departments: a systematic review. Emerg Med J 2012;29:372–8.
9
Oredsson S, Jonsson H, Rognes J, et al. A systematic review of
triage-related interventions to improve patient flow in
emergency departments. Scand J T
rauma Resusc Emerg Med
2011;19:43.
10
Robinson DJ. An integrative review: triage protocols and the
effect on ED length of stay. J Emerg Nurs 2013;39:398–408.
11
Gonçalves-Bradley DC, Lannin NA, Clemson LM, et al.
Discharge planning from hospital. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2016;(1):CD000313.
12
Leppin AL, Gionfriddo MR, Kessler M, et al. Preventing 30-day
hospital readmissions: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized trials. JAMA Intern Med 2014;174:1095–107.
13
Galipeau J, Pussegoda K, Stevens A, et al. Effectiveness and
safety of short-stay units in the emergency department: a
systematic review. Acad Emerg Med 2015;22:893–907.
14
Pearson M, Hunt H, Cooper C, et al. Providing effective and
preferred care closer to home: a realist review of intermediate
care. Health Soc Care Community 2015;23:577–93.
15
Pitzul KB, Lane NE, Voruganti T
, et al. Role of context in care
transition interventions for medically complex older adults: a
realist synthesis protocol. BMJ Open 2015;5:e008686.
16
Mazzocato P
, Thor J, Bäckman U, et al. Complexity
complicates lean: lessons from seven emergency services.
J Health Org Manage 2014;28:266–88.
17
Mazzocato P
, Savage C, Brommels M, et al. Lean thinking in
healthcare: a realist review of the literature. BMJ Qual Saf
2010;19:376–82.
18
Radnor ZJ, Holweg M, W
aring J. Lean in healthcare: the
unfilled promise? Soc Sci Med 2012;74:364–71.
19
Pines JM, Hilton JA, W
eber EJ, et al. International perspectives
on emergency department crowding. Acad Emerg Med
2011;18:1358–70.
20
Meadows D. Thinking in systems: a primer. White River
Junction, VT: Chelsea Green, 2008.
21
Paley J. Complex adaptive systems and nursing. Nurs Inquiry
2007;14:233–42.
22
Plsek PE, Greenhalgh T
. Complexity science: the challenge of
complexity in health care. BMJ 2001;323:625–8.
23
Pawson R, Greenhalgh J, Brennan C, et al. Do reviews of
healthcare interventions teach us how to improve healthcare
systems?. Soc Sci Med 2014;114:129–37.
24
Kreindler SA. What if implementation is not the problem?
Exploring the missing links between knowledge and action.
Int J Health Plann Manage 2016;31:208–26.
25
Yin RK. Case study research: design and methods. 4th edn.
Thousand Oaks: Sage, 2009.
26
Asplin BR, Magid DJ, Rhodes KV
, et al. A conceptual model of
emergency department crowding. Ann Emerg Med
2003;42:173–80.
27
Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, et al. Fostering
implementation of health services research findings into
practice: a consolidated framework for advancing
implementation science. Implement Sci 2009;4:50.
28
Greenhalgh T
, Robert G, Macfarlane F, et al. Diffusion of
innovations in service organizations: systematic review and
recommendations. Milbank Q 2004;82:581–629.
29
Strauss A, Corbin J. Basics of qualitative research: grounded
theory procedures and techniques. London: Sage, 1998.
30
Charmaz K. Grounded theory: objectivist and constructivist
methods. In Denzin NK, Lincoln YS, eds. Strategies for
qualitative inquiry. 2nd edn. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage,
2003:249–91.
31
Ross MA, Hockenberry JM, Mutter R, et al. Protocol-driven
emergency department observation units offer savings, shorter
stays, and reduced admissions. Health Aff 2013;32:2149–56.
32
Van Craen K, Braes T
, W
ellens N, et al. The effectiveness of
inpatient geriatric evaluation and management units: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Geriatr Soc
2010;58:83–92.
33
Pawson R, Greenhalgh T
, Harvey G, et al. Realist review—a
new method of systematic review designed for complex policy
interventions. J Health Serv Res Policy 2005;10(Suppl 1):21–33.
Original research
394
Kreindler SA. BMJ Qual Saf 2017;26:388–394. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438
 on 4 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Saf: first published as 10.1136/bmjqs-2016-005438 on 27 July 2016. Downloaded from 
