 Resource
Whole-Body Profiling of Cancer Metastasis with
Single-Cell Resolution
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d RI-optimized CUBIC protocol enables whole-body
examination of cancer models
d CUBIC is applicable to analysis of micrometastases at single-
cell resolution
d CUBIC analysis bridges the resolution gap between in vivo
imaging and histology
d CUBIC-cancer analysis is useful for profiling biological
processes in whole organs
Authors
Shimpei I. Kubota, Kei Takahashi,
Jun Nishida, ..., Kazuki Tainaka,
Kohei Miyazono, Hiroki R. Ueda
Correspondence
miyazono@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp (K.M.),
uedah-tky@umin.ac.jp (H.R.U.)
In Brief
Kubota et al. find that CUBIC-cancer
analysis can profile cancer metastasis at
a single-cell level in a whole-animal
context. In addition, CUBIC-cancer
analysis can bridge the resolution gap
between in vivo bioluminescence imaging
and histology. This analytical pipeline
would contribute to the profiling of
biological functions of whole organs.
Kubota et al., 2017, Cell Reports 20, 236–250
July 5, 2017 ª 2017 The Author(s).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.06.010
 Cell Reports
Resource
Whole-Body Profiling of Cancer Metastasis
with Single-Cell Resolution
Shimpei I. Kubota,1,5 Kei Takahashi,2,5 Jun Nishida,2 Yasuyuki Morishita,2 Shogo Ehata,2 Kazuki Tainaka,1,3
Kohei Miyazono,2,* and Hiroki R. Ueda1,4,6,*
1Department of Systems Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033,
Japan
2Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033,
Japan
3Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, 1-757 Asahimachidori, Chuo-ku, Niigata 951-8585, Japan
4Laboratory for Synthetic Biology, RIKEN Quantitative Biology Center, 1-3 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-5241, Japan
5These authors contributed equally
6Lead Contact
*Correspondence: miyazono@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp (K.M.), uedah-tky@umin.ac.jp (H.R.U.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.06.010
SUMMARY
Stochastic and proliferative events initiated from a
single cell can disrupt homeostatic balance and
lead to fatal disease processes such as cancer
metastasis. To overcome metastasis, it is necessary
to detect and quantify sparsely distributed metasta-
tic cells throughout the body at early stages. Here,
we demonstrate that clear, unobstructed brain/
body imaging cocktails and computational analysis
(CUBIC)-based
cancer
(CUBIC-cancer)
analysis
with a refractive index (RI)-optimized protocol en-
ables comprehensive cancer cell profiling of the
whole body and organs. We applied CUBIC-cancer
analysis to 13 mouse models using nine cancer cell
lines and spatiotemporal quantification of metastatic
cancer progression at single-cell resolution. CUBIC-
cancer analysis suggests that the epithelial-mesen-
chymal transition promotes not only extravasation
but also cell survival at metastatic sites. CUBIC-
cancer analysis is also applicable to pharmacothera-
peutic profiling of anti-tumor drugs. CUBIC-cancer
analysis is compatible with in vivo bioluminescence
imaging and 2D histology. We suggest that a scal-
able analytical pipeline with these three modalities
may contribute to addressing currently incurable
metastatic diseases.
INTRODUCTION
Rudolf Virchow, the father of modern pathology, declared that
the body is a ‘‘cell state, in which every cell is a citizen’’ and dis-
ease is ‘‘merely a conflict of citizens in this state brought about
by the action of external forces’’ (Nicholls, 1927). His cell theory
brought the current concept of cellular pathology based on
microscopic histological analysis to the early model of pathol-
ogy, which largely relied on clinical symptoms and gross appear-
ances in patients. Thereafter, comprehensive analysis and
decoding of the more than 100 billion cells comprising the
mammalian body have become one of the ultimate goals in
biology and medicine. Although recent advances in a series of
live-imaging systems have provided important breakthroughs
to examine dynamics at the whole-body scale, it is still difficult
to clarify the generation and progression of diseases with sto-
chastic and proliferative processes, such as autoimmune and
malignant neoplastic diseases (Saadatpour et al., 2017; Takaha-
shi et al., 2015). In particular, tumor metastasis can be initiated
by a few cancer cells, and use of current imaging systems is a
challenge due to their limited spatial resolution. Additionally,
according to metastasis images from these imaging systems,
3D reconstitution of possibly affected organs by 2D histology
is labor intensive. To bridge the spatial resolution gap between
these approaches, a fundamentally novel analytical platform is
required. To detect and quantify sparsely distributed metastatic
cells at early stages of cancer metastasis, it is necessary to
detect metastatic cells throughout the whole body and visualize
individual tumor microenvironments.
Tissue-clearing-based 3D imaging is a most promising strat-
egy for the visualization of the entire mouse body/organs at
single-cell resolution (Susaki and Ueda, 2016). Recently, various
kinds
of
tissue-clearing
protocols
have
been
developed,
including organic solvent-based methods (Dodt et al., 2007;
Ert€
urk et al., 2012; Renier et al., 2014), hydrophilic chemical-
based methods (Cuccarese et al., 2017; Hama et al., 2011; Ke
et al., 2013), and hydrogel-based methods (Chung et al.,
2013). Spalteholz (1914) first established the basic concept of
human tissue clearing based on organic solvents. Although tis-
sue-clearing protocols have been available for a century, it is still
difficult to comprehensively visualize sparsely distributed patho-
genic cells throughout the mouse body using current tissue-
clearing protocols.
In this study, we first investigate optimal refractive indices (RIs)
ranging from 1.44 to 1.52 against each organ, and we demon-
strate that an RI of 1.52 has the highest clearing efficiency among
major organs. Then, we describe a highly efficient clearing
236
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017 ª 2017 The Author(s).
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
 A
B
C
D
G
F
E
Figure 1. Whole-Body and Whole-Organ Clearing and Imaging with Optimized RI Solutions
(A) Whole-body and whole-organ clearing protocols. The whole-organ clearing protocol (left) and the whole-body clearing protocol (right) are shown.
(B) Bright-field images of whole organs (brain, heart, lung, liver, and kidney) from C57BL/6N mouse (13 weeks old, male) after RI adjustment (RI = 1.44, 1.48, and
1.52). Control organs were stocked in PBS buffer (RI = 1.33).
(C) Average parallel transmittance of RI-adjusted brain and lung. Parallel light transmittance around the visible region (450–750 nm) of organs was measured
(n = 2). Data represent mean ± SD.
(legend continued on next page)
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
237
 protocol for the whole adult mouse body using a more efficient
delipidation cocktail, clear unobstructed brain/body imaging
cocktails and computational analysis (CUBIC)-L, and an opti-
mized RI-matching medium, CUBIC-R. The specimens treated
with this clearing protocol are clear enough to use for 3D imaging
of the entire mouse body. The combination of light-sheet fluores-
cent microscopy (LSFM) and confocal laser-scanning micro-
scopy (CLSM) enables the detection of cancer micrometastases
in various kinds of mouse models. Our CUBIC-cancer analysis is
compatible with the in vivo bioluminescence imaging system
and conventional 2D histology, successfully bridging the spatial
resolution gap between these approaches. CUBIC-cancer anal-
ysis is applied here to 13 mouse models using nine cancer cell
lines, and it distinguishes different hematogenous metastatic
patterns, such as angiogenic growth and co-optive growth.
Moreover, CUBIC-cancer analysis enables the spatiotemporal
quantification of metastatic cells even in the early stages of
metastasis formation. In addition, we investigated the in vivo
role of transforming growth factor b (TGF-b) signaling in lung
metastasis, and we applied an in vivo system to evaluate the
therapeutic effect of anti-cancer drugs on cancer metastasis.
CUBIC-cancer analysis provides a fundamental platform for
the analysis of the metastatic growth and progression of cancer
throughout the body.
RESULTS
Optimized RI Cocktail Enables Whole-Body and
Whole-Organ Clearing in Adult Mice
Previously, we achieved the whole-body imaging of postnatal
day 1 mice at single-cell resolution by whole-body clearing
based on a ScaleCUBIC-1 reagent (Tainaka et al., 2014). How-
ever, it remains difficult to sensitively and comprehensively
detect the distribution of cancer cells that have metastasized
to organs throughout the body of adult mice because of an insuf-
ficient delipidation efficiency and the unoptimized RI value of the
ScaleCUBIC-1 reagent. To address these issues, we have per-
formed comprehensive chemical profiling of hydrophilic chemi-
cals to characterize highly effective delipidation reagents and
water-soluble high-RI reagents (T.C. Murakami and K. Tainaka,
unpublished data). Through a further combinatorial analysis,
we identified the optimized cocktail of 10 w%/10 w% N-butyldie-
thanolamine/Triton X-100 (termed CUBIC-L) for delipidation.
CUBIC-L enabled the complete delipidation of isolated parafor-
maldehyde (PFA)-fixed organs within 2 to 5 days, depending on
the organ without pre-treatment with CUBIC-perfusion and
quenching of proteins (Figure 1A, left). We found that CUBIC-L
could also permeabilize skin-detached body samples of adult
mice using the CUBIC-perfusion protocol and subsequent delipi-
dation for 7 days (Figure 1A, right; Supplemental Experimental
Procedures).
As for the RI-matching step, there is an ongoing controversy
about the most appropriate RI for permeabilized tissues (Tainaka
et al., 2016). The RI for each intact biological tissue may depend
on the contents and densities of lipids, proteins, and other con-
stituents (Johnsen and Widder, 1999; Tuchin, 2015). Since hy-
drophilic RI media with an RI over 1.52 were likely to precipitate
at room temperature, we evaluated RI-matching cocktails
composed of antipyrine and nicotinamide with RIs ranging
from 1.44 to 1.52 for clearing permeabilized major organs,
considering practical use. After a 2-day treatment, all major
organs appeared to be most efficiently transparentized by the
RI-matching cocktail with an RI of 1.52 (Figures 1B and S1A),
termed CUBIC-R, which is composed of 45 w%/30 w% antipy-
rine/nicotinamide. Indeed, the transmittance of the chemically
treated organs increased as the RI value increased (Figures 1C
and S1B). We noted that all organs treated with CUBIC-L and
CUBIC-R showed significantly high transmittance in the 450 to
750 nm range, probably due to the high decoloring ability of N-
butyldiethanolamine in CUBIC-L (Figure S1C). These results
prompted us to render the whole-body clearing of adult mice
using CUBIC-R (RI = 1.52) as a final RI-matching step. The trans-
mission images of adult mice demonstrated that the new proto-
col markedly transparentized adult mice to visualize caudal
vertebrae in ventral to dorsal (V-D) images (Figure 1D).
The New CUBIC Protocol Enables the Whole-Body and
Whole-Organ Imaging of Adult Mice by 3D Nuclear
Counterstaining and Immunohistochemistry
Simultaneous visualization of cancer cells, overall organ struc-
tures, and related molecular markers would facilitate our under-
standing of the underlying molecular mechanisms of cancer
metastasis. For the comprehensive analysis of cancer metas-
tasis, we initially carried out nuclear counterstaining with
RedDot2 or propidium iodide (PI) to acquire whole-body and
whole-organ structural images using LSFM according to our pre-
vious staining protocols (Figure 1E) (Susaki et al., 2014; Tatsuki
et al., 2016). The resulting 3D-reconstituted image of each organ
enabled the visualization of anatomical structural images even in
deeper regions (Figure S1D). The new CUBIC protocol allowed
the whole-body imaging of adult mice, clearly visualizing the in-
ternal structures of cardiovascular and abdominal organs (Fig-
ures 1F and S1E).
Next, we investigated whether the new CUBIC protocol is
compatible with 3D immunohistochemistry. The brains of adult
mice were co-stained with RedDot2 and anti-a-smooth muscle
(D) Bright-field images of whole body of C57BL/6N mouse (6 weeks old, male) treated with CUBIC-R. After delipidation and decolorization, adult mouse bodies
were treated with PBS buffer (upper) or CUBIC-R (lower).
(E) Whole-body and whole-organ staining protocols. The whole-body staining protocol with PI (left) and the whole-organ staining protocol with RedDot2 or
fluorescently labeled primary antibody (right) are shown.
(F) The 3D-reconstituted (3D) body images of PI-stained adult C57BL/6N mouse (10 weeks old, male). Whole-body imaging (WBI), thoracic organ imaging, and
abdominal organ imaging are shown.
(G) The 3D-immunostained organ images. The brain from C57BL/6N mouse (15 weeks old, male) was stained with RedDot2 and fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC)-conjugated anti-a-SMA antibody. 3D (upper) and x-y plane (XY) (lower) images are shown. The white inset was magnified next to the XY image.
See also Figure S1.
238
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
 A
B
C
E
F
D
Figure 2. Whole-Body Imaging of Cancer Metastasis at Single-Cell Resolution
(A) Whole-body and whole-organ staining protocols. The whole-body staining protocol with PI (left) and the whole-body staining protocol with RedDot2 (right) are
shown.
(B) Whole-body imaging of the experimental liver metastasis model by splenic injection with Panc-1 cells in BALB/c-nu/nu mice. The bioluminescence image
(leftmost), WBI, images around the metastatic sites in the liver (L) and pancreas (P) with CUBIC-cancer analysis (second and third from left), magnified 3D and XY
images (fourth and fifth from left) (Panc-1: GFP, nuclei: PI), and representative images of HE staining after CUBIC-cancer analysis (rightmost) are shown.
(legend continued on next page)
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
239
 actin (a-SMA) antibody according to the staining protocol (Fig-
ures 1E and 1G). Spatial distributions of smooth muscle cells
and lymphatic endothelial cells were simultaneously visualized
in the lung by co-staining of a-SMA and vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor 3 (VEGFR3) (Figure S1F). Hence, our
CUBIC protocol was also applicable to 3D multiple immunohis-
tochemical labeling. These results indicate that the new CUBIC
protocol is a powerful tool for comprehensive pathological
analysis.
CUBIC-Cancer Analysis Enables the Whole-Body
Imaging of Cancer Metastasis at Single-Cell Resolution
To bridge the resolution gap between in vivo bioluminescence
imaging and 2D histology with our scalable CUBIC-based can-
cer (CUBIC-cancer) analysis, we established cancer cells sta-
bly expressing firefly luciferase and fluorescence proteins,
and we used them in mouse models (Figure 2A). First, we em-
ployed an experimental liver metastasis model by splenic injec-
tion of human pancreatic cancer cells (Panc-1). Nine weeks
after injection, bioluminescence signals were detected in the
abdomens of the mice (Figure 2B, left panel). We applied the
CUBIC-cancer analysis and PI-staining protocol to this mouse
model, and then we acquired whole-body images with LSFM
(Figure 2A). As a result, fluorescence signals were successfully
visualized in several organs, suggesting that the CUBIC-cancer
analysis is applicable to the fluorescent proteins (Figure 2B,
middle panels). In addition, magnified 3D images of these or-
gans were obtained with CLSM in the CUBIC-cancer analysis.
We noted that the resolution of these 3D images was high
enough to discriminate individual cancer cells and comparable
to that of 2D hematoxylin and eosin (HE) slice images, which
were obtained after CUBIC-cancer analysis (Figure 2B, right
panels).
As another pathway of cancer metastasis, peritoneal dissem-
ination model mice were generated by the intraperitoneal injec-
tion of human pancreatic cancer cells (SUIT-2). Twenty-two
days after injection, mCherry signals from SUIT-2 cells were
observed in the liver and small intestine by CUBIC-cancer anal-
ysis (Figure 2C), roughly corresponding to those of biolumines-
cence signals from in vivo bioluminescence imaging (Figure S2A,
left panel). Combined with counterstained confocal images, we
succeeded in the direct quantification of the cell numbers of can-
cer colonies (Figures 2C and 2D). The CUBIC-cancer analysis
also recapitulated cancer dissemination in other mice with
SUIT-2 cells (Figures S2B and S2C), indicating the wide applica-
bility of the CUBIC-cancer analysis protocol.
To prepare a syngeneic tumor model, we orthotopically in-
jected murine renal cancer cells (Renca) into wild-type BALB/c
mice. Although the formation of a primary renal tumor was visu-
alized 2 weeks after injection, it was difficult to detect cancer
metastasis to other organs by in vivo bioluminescence imaging
(Figure S2A, right panel). In contrast, CUBIC-cancer analysis re-
vealed that numerous metastatic colonies had widely spread to
the lung, liver, pancreas, and mesenteric lymph nodes (Figures
2E and S2D). Using CUBIC-cancer analysis combined with
LSFM and CLSM, we also succeeded in the direct quantification
of the cell numbers of these dispersed metastatic colonies (Fig-
ures 2F and S2E). Taken together, CUBIC-cancer analysis
makes it possible to not only detect the dispersion of metastatic
cancer cells throughout the entire body with high sensitivity but
also determine the spatial distribution of individual cancer cells
at single-cell resolution. In addition, CUBIC-cancer analysis is
compatible with in vivo bioluminescence imaging and 2D
histology.
Whole-Organ CUBIC-Cancer Analysis Provides a
Systematic, Robust, Widely Applicable, and
Immunolabeling-Compatible Analytical Platform for
Cancer Metastasis
After
the
comprehensive
detection
of
cancer
metastasis
throughout the body, the whole-organ CUBIC-cancer analysis
would globally delineate the metastatic landscape of each
cancer metastasis model. To this end, whole-organ clearing
and staining were conducted according to Figure 3A. Initially,
we quantified the growth of primary tumors in orthotopic
models with SUIT-2 cells and OS-RC-2 cells (Figure S3A).
CUBIC-cancer analysis also permitted us to visualize metasta-
tic colonies in whole organs, including the lung, liver, and
intestine (Figure 3B). The colony number and volume of the
metastasis
in
each
organ
were
calculated
(Figure
S3B).
We also exemplified CUBIC-cancer analysis with a Panc-1
cell liver metastasis model (Figure S3C). This highly reproduc-
ible analysis would overcome enduring issues in our under-
standing of in vivo metastatic progression in various cancers.
Thus, CUBIC-cancer analysis enabled the complete quantifica-
tion of metastatic colonies in an individual tumor-bearing
mouse.
To verify CUBIC-cancer analysis as a general purpose plat-
form, several lung metastasis models derived from various types
of cancer cells were examined (Figure 3C). The detected red-
color signals were shown to have originated from mCherry, using
immunohistochemical staining with anti-mCherry antibody (Fig-
ures 3D and S3D). In the experimental metastasis models, all
mouse cancer cells, i.e., 4T1, B16F10, and Renca cells, tended
to grow to large colonies, while the morphologies of these col-
onies were all different. In case of experimental metastasis
(C) Whole-body imaging of the experimental peritoneal dissemination model by intraperitoneal injection with SUIT-2 cells in BALB/c-nu/nu mice. WBI and
abdominal organ images in liver (L) and intestine (I) (leftmost and second from left) and magnified 3D and XY images (third from left and rightmost) are shown
(SUIT-2, GFP; nuclei, PI).
(D) Quantification of the cell number and the volume of metastatic colonies. Spot analysis and surface analysis were applied to the magnified images in (C).
(E) Whole-body imaging of the spontaneous metastasis model with orthotopic injection of Renca cells in BALB/c mice. WBI and organ images in lung (Lu),
heart (H), liver (L), kidney (K), pancreas (P), and lymph nodes (LN) (leftmost and second from left) and magnified 3D and XY images (third from left and rightmost)
are shown (Renca, mCherry; nuclei, RedDot2).
(F) Quantification of the cell number and the volume of metastatic colonies. Spot analysis and surface analysis were applied to the magnified images in (E).
See also Figure S2 and Table S1.
240
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
 with human cancer cells, MDA-MB-231 cells also formed large
colonies throughout the lungs compared to A549 cells. In
contrast, in spontaneous lung metastasis with Caki-1 cells,
metastatic colonies were observed throughout the lungs,
but their volumes were small. Overall, we succeeded in applying
CUBIC-cancer analysis to 13 different mouse models with nine
cancer cell lines (Table S1).
These results demonstrate that whole-organ CUBIC-cancer
analysis is a systematic, robust, widely applicable, and immuno-
labeling-compatible analytical platform for cancer metastasis.
C
D
B
A
Figure 3. Whole-Organ Imaging of Various Cancer Metastasis Models
(A) Whole-organ staining protocols with RedDot2 or antibody.
(B) Whole-organ imaging of the spontaneous metastasis model with orthotopic injection of SUIT-2 cells in BALB/c-nu/nu mice. The bioluminescence image
(leftmost) and primary tumors in the pancreas and the metastatic colonization in the distant organs (second, third, and fourth from left and rightmost) are shown
(SUIT-2, mCherry; nuclei, RedDot2).
(C) Whole-lung imaging of several metastasis models. In the experimental lung metastasis model, cancer cells (MDA-MB-231, A549, 4T1, B16F10, and Renca)
were intravenously injected in mice. In case of spontaneous metastasis, Caki-1 cells were orthotopically injected into the kidney (cancer cell, mCherry; nuclei,
RedDot2).
(D) Whole-lung 3D immunohistochemistry with anti-mCherry antibody (cancer cell, mCherry; anti-mCherry, Alexa Fluor 647). White insets were magnified next to
the whole-lung images in (C) and (D).
See also Figure S3.
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
241
 A
B
C
D
Figure 4. 3D Analysis of the Metastatic Patterns in Experimental Brain Metastasis Models
(A) Scheme of the experimental procedure.
(B) Whole-brain imaging of the experimental brain metastasis models with MDA-231-D cells or OS-RC-2 cells in BALB/c-nu/nu mice. The 3D images of the
brain samples are shown (upper, MDA-231-D at day 28; lower, OS-RC-2 at day 40; cancer cell, mCherry; a-SMA, FITC; nuclei, RedDot2). Animal number of each
group is n = 6.
(legend continued on next page)
242
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
 CUBIC-Cancer Analysis Enables Monitoring of the
Different Patterns of Brain Metastasis Formation with
Blood Vessels in 3D
Brain metastasis is frequently observed in melanoma and some
other cancers, and it results in a high risk of mortality (Gavrilovic
and Posner, 2005; Nussbaum et al., 1996). Recently, two-
photon microscopy-based analytical methods have clarified
the correlation between brain metastasis and the cerebral blood
vasculature (Carbonell et al., 2009; Kienast et al., 2010). Never-
theless, quantitative and statistical analyses of the spatial
distribution of all metastatic colonies throughout the brain are
still challenging. Thus, we investigated whether our CUBIC-can-
cer analysis can be used to classify the potentially different
types of brain metastasis by quantitatively and statistically
analyzing metastatic colonies in the entire organ (Figure 4A).
The brain metastasis model of MDA-231-D cells was compared
with another model using OS-RC-2 cells. Although there ap-
peared to be no distinct difference in metastatic features be-
tween these models by in vivo bioluminescence imaging
(Figure S4A), CUBIC-cancer analysis clearly showed that meta-
static colonies in these models exhibited different histological
patterns (Figure 4B).
Many colonies of MDA-231-D cells were localized with
a-SMA-positive vascular smooth muscle cells. On the other
hand, most colonies of OS-RC-2 cells were distant from
a-SMA-positive vascular smooth muscle cells (Figure 4B). In
addition, these metastatic morphological features were also
identified by the histological analysis based on HE staining
with or without CUBIC-cancer analysis (Figure S4B). To quantify
the morphological features, we used the index ‘‘volume per sur-
face area,’’ which was positively correlated with the roundness
of the colony, and we found a significant difference between
the two metastatic models (Figure 4C). Furthermore, the col-
onies of MDA-231-D cells tended to be smaller and closer to
the blood vessels than those of OS-RC-2 cells (Figure S4C).
These results suggest that the colony formation of OS-RC-2
cells in the brain may be dependent on cancer cell-mediated
neovascularization (angiogenic growth), whereas MDA-231-D
cells may be able to migrate toward pre-existing vasculatures
and hijack them during the process of metastasis (co-optive
growth).
For elucidating the mechanism of cancer metastasis, it is
important to determine whether brain metastatic foci are gener-
ated by a single cell. To test this, equal numbers of mCherry- or
GFP-expressing OS-RC-2 cells were mixed and used for intra-
cardiac injection into the same mouse. CUBIC-cancer analysis
revealed that most mCherry-positive cells in the brain were
separate from the colonies of GFP-positive cells (Figure 4D),
thus revealing the metastatic properties of individual cancer
cells.
CUBIC-Cancer Analysis Is Applicable to Statistical
Spatiotemporal Analysis during the Initial Steps of
Metastatic Progression
The statistical spatiotemporal analysis of cancer metastasis in an
entire organ has the potential to be a powerful tool for cancer
research. To visualize time-dependent cancer metastasis, an
experimental lung metastasis model with MDA-231-D cells
was used in combination with CUBIC-cancer analysis. We then
carried out whole-lung imaging of metastatic foci or colonies
(Figure 5A). To ensure the non-biased exhaustive detection of
size-variable metastatic foci, the average volume of nuclei was
adopted as the threshold for focus detection (Figure S5A). Immu-
nodeficient BALB/c-nu/nu mice and immunocompetent BALB/c
mice were intravenously injected with MDA-231-D cells, and
metastatic foci were detected by CUBIC-cancer analysis 1 hr
after injection (Figures 5B and 5C). In total, three to four mice
at each time point were analyzed (Figures S5B and S5C).
In BALB/c-nu/nu mice, numerous metastatic foci spread
throughout the lung were drastically eliminated within 1 day after
injection (Figure 5D). Although the number of foci continued to
decrease after day 1, the average volume of the foci markedly
increased from day 3, suggesting metastatic colonization. On
the other hand, in BALB/c mice, metastatic foci were thoroughly
excluded without any colonization (Figures 5E and S5C).
Confocal images were used to quantify the emerged metastatic
colonies on day 14 in BALB/c-nu/nu mice and the accumulated
cell aggregations in BALB/c mice on day 3 (Figures 5F and 5G).
Since the mCherry signals were often surrounded by those of the
cell aggregations, the aggregations likely reflected the immune
response of the host (Figure 5H). Overall, CUBIC-cancer analysis
enabled not only a statistical time course analysis of cancer
metastasis but also direct observations of the stochastic im-
mune-mediated elimination of metastatic foci.
CUBIC-Cancer Analysis Reveals that the Epithelial-
Mesenchymal Transition Might Promote Not Only the
Extravasation but Also the Survival of Cancer Cells at
Metastatic Sites
The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is known to play a
pivotal role in cancer metastasis. Although roles of EMT in the
intravasation of cancer cells have been demonstrated (Nieto
et al., 2016; Tsai and Yang, 2013), it has not been clearly deter-
mined whether the EMT is involved in the extravasation of
cancer cells (Nieto et al., 2016; Tsai and Yang, 2013). Thus,
we aimed to elucidate the EMT involvement in the extravasation
of cancer metastasis in vivo by CUBIC-cancer analysis. In
accordance with a previous report (Saito et al., 2009), induction
of the EMT in A549 cells by TGF-b stimulation was confirmed
by gene profiling and morphological examination (Figures S6A
and S6B).
(C) Quantification of the morphological features in the two metastatic models. Magnified 3D and XY images of typical metastatic foci are shown. Surface analysis
was applied to the 3D images in (B). As a characteristic indicator of different metastatic patterns, the volume of the foci divided by its surface area was calculated.
Data represent mean ± SEM (***p < 0.001).
(D) Lineage analysis using renal cancer cell lines expressing GFP or mCherry. The 3D images of the brains stained with RedDot2 (left), the frequency of the
metastatic colonies consisting of a single color (middle), and the minimal distance between metastatic colonies expressing GFP or mCherry (right) are shown.
Data represent mean ± SD.
See also Figure S4.
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
243
 A
B
C
D
F
G
H
E
Figure 5. Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Metastatic Progression in the Experimental Lung Metastasis Model
(A) Scheme of the experimental procedure.
(B and C) Time course images of the experimental lung metastasis model with MDA-231-D cells in BALB/c-nu/nu mice (B) or BALB/c mice (C). BALB/c-nu/nu
mice or BALB/c mice were intravenously injected with MDA-231-D cells. The 3D images of the lung samples at the indicated time points are shown (MDA-231-D,
mCherry; nuclei, RedDot2).
(legend continued on next page)
244
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
 To investigate the EMT roles in cancer cell arrest in microves-
sels of distant organs and extravasation, BALB/c-nu/nu mice
were intravenously injected with A549 cells pre-treated with or
without TGF-b (Figure 6A). Metastatic foci of A549 cells were
clearly detected throughout the lung, and the colonization of
the metastatic foci gradually progressed over 14 days after the
early intensive elimination (Figure 6B). Confocal images allowed
the visualization of metastatic foci around alveoli 1 hr after injec-
tion, and they showed the appearance of spheres regardless of
TGF-b stimulation 14 days after injection. Interestingly, statistical
analysis revealed that TGF-b stimulation significantly increased
the number of metastatic foci from 1 to 14 days (Figure 6C).
In addition, the histological investigation after CUBIC-cancer
analysis revealed that there was no clear difference between un-
stimulated and TGF-b-pre-stimulated cancer cells in the expres-
sion of E-cadherin in metastatic colonies 14 days after injection
(Figure 6D). CUBIC-cancer analysis may thus be of value in eluci-
dating unresolved issues regarding the in vivo role of the EMT in
tumor metastasis.
CUBIC-Cancer Analysis Enables the
Pharmacotherapeutic Profiling of Anti-tumor Drugs
against Cancer Metastasis
Finally, we attempted to establish a therapeutic evaluation sys-
tem for metastatic whole-lung cancers by statistically profiling
metastatic cells. To assess chemotherapeutic responses in a
syngeneic mouse tumor model, wild-type BALB/c mice were in-
jected with 4T1 cells intravenously and treated with the anti-
tumor drugs doxorubicin (Dox), 5-FU, and cyclophosphamide
(CPA) (Figure 7A). Eight days after 4T1 injection, the proliferation
of metastatic colonies tended to be suppressed in the drug-
treated groups (Figures 7B and 7C). In particular, CPA signifi-
cantly reduced both the total volume and number of colonies.
The daily administration of 5-FU resulted in the drastic reduction
of metastatic colonies (Figure 7D). Importantly, many metastatic
foci were still detected in the lungs of 5-FU-treated mice, indi-
cating the high sensitivity of CUBIC-cancer analysis. Some foci
were composed of just a single cancer cell, which might be
dormant or resistant to anti-tumor drugs (Figures 7D and 7E).
Taken together, CUBIC-cancer analysis can be used to evaluate
the in vivo effects of anti-tumor drugs at the single-cell level.
DISCUSSION
RI-Optimized CUBIC Protocol Enables the Scalable
Whole-Body Cell Profiling of Various Cancer Models
The RI values of tissue and cell structures are highly diverse,
ranging from 1.34 to 1.59, because the RI for each intact biolog-
ical tissue depends on the contents and densities of lipids, pro-
teins, and other constituents (Tuchin, 2015). Therefore, optimal
RI values were likely to be dependent on each organ. The re-
sults of the transmittance evaluation of major organs mounted
on various RI media indicated that the transparency of the or-
gans tended to increase as the RI values increased (Figures
1C and S1B). Interestingly, this tendency was observed regard-
less of the organ, suggesting that these organs mostly contain
the constituents with relatively similar RI values. We noted that
the RI value-dependent increase in the transparency of most
of the organs did not reach a plateau, even at an RI of 1.52.
It would be very difficult to prepare hydrophilic RI-matching
media with higher RI values (RI > 1.52) using current chemical
candidates, because of their water solubility or low RI value per
unit mass. Future development of such RI-matching media
(RI > 1.52) may be favorable to make these organs transparent
more efficiently. Another technical challenge is to develop
whole-body-clearing protocols compatible with bone tissue
clearing. Mild, effective, and highly permeable decalcification
methods compatible with our CUBIC protocol would facilitate
our understanding of the mechanisms of cancer metastases,
including bone metastasis. We noted that perfusion-assisted
agent release in situ (PARS) and ultimate 3D imaging of sol-
vent-cleared organs (uDISCO) protocols might be also appli-
cable to whole-body profiling of cancer metastasis with a
single-cell resolution (Pan et al., 2016; Susaki et al., 2015; Tai-
naka et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2014). Therefore, comparison of
the characteristics of the proposed CUBIC-cancer protocol in
this study with those of these two methods would be important
in the future.
CUBIC-Cancer Analysis Provides a Global Analytical
Pipeline of Cancer Metastasis by Bridging the
Resolution Gap between Conventional In Vivo
Bioluminescence Imaging and 2D Histology
To obtain an overview of cancer metastasis, it would be impor-
tant to create a global analytical pipeline visualizing the overall
dynamics of metastatic progression, spatiotemporal distribution
of metastatic colonies at single-cell resolution, and their sur-
rounding microenvironments. In this study, we attempted to
bridge the resolution gap between in vivo bioluminescence im-
aging and 2D histology by our scalable CUBIC-cancer analysis,
using cancer cell lines stably expressing luciferase and fluores-
cent proteins.
We determined whether fluorescent signals in whole-body and
whole-organ images actually originated from cancer cells or
indirectly originated from some other cells, such as phagocytes
that digested labeled cancer cells. To compare the in vivo
bioluminescence imaging and CUBIC-cancer analysis, we per-
formed in vivo bioluminescence imaging before tissue clearing.
(D and E) Quantification of the metastatic foci in BALB/c-nu/nu mice (D) or BALB/c mice (E). The number and the average volume of foci from (B) or (C) are shown.
Animal number at each time point is n = 3–4. Data represent mean ± SD.
(F) Quantification of the cell number of metastatic colonies. Spot analysis and surface analysis were applied to the 3D images in (B). Data represent mean ± SD.
(G) Quantification of the cell number of cell aggregates observed in BALB/c mice. Spot analysis and surface analysis were applied to the 3D images of day 3 in (C).
Data represent mean ± SD.
(H) Representative magnified 3D and XY images of the lungs containing the cell aggregates at day 3 after injection in BALB/c mice (left and middle) (MDA-231-D,
mCherry; nuclei, RedDot2). The typical HE staining pattern after CUBIC-cancer analysis including the cell aggregates (right most) is shown.
See also Figure S5.
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
245
 (legend on next page)
246
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
 Bioluminescence images from luciferase activity roughly corre-
sponded to the fluorescent signals (Figures 2B, 3B, S2C, and
S3C), despite apparent differences in multiple organ metastases
by Renca cells (Figures 2E and S2A) and brain metastasis by
MDA-231-D cells (Figures 4B and S4A). In the former case, biolu-
minescence signals in metastatic organs may not have been de-
tected with this dynamic range because the signals were too
intense at the primary lesion. In the latter case, bioluminescence
signals may have been shielded by the skull, and they seemed to
leak out to the eyes and neck (Figure S4A). In addition, because
we could perform HE staining of CUBIC-treated organs, we
compared the CUBIC-cancer analysis results with the data ob-
tained by the conventional histological method. We found that
the basic tissue pathology was well preserved in HE staining,
and we could detect the tumors in the CUBIC-treated samples
(Figures 2B and 6B). However, the histology of the metastatic tu-
mors of OS-RC-2 cells, which are clear cell renal carcinoma and
contain high amounts of glycogen, was distinct between the
intact samples and samples after CUBIC-cancer analysis,
possibly because of the delipidation process (Figure S4B). These
observations indicated that certain CUBIC-treated samples can
be used for immunohistochemical analysis, although the cell
membrane in the samples may be damaged due to delipidation.
Together, CUBIC-cancer analysis could successfully bridge the
resolution gap between conventional in vivo bioluminescence
imaging and 2D histology.
EMT Significantly Promotes the Extravasation or
Survival of Cancer Cells In Vivo
The EMT contributes to the metastatic process of intravasation
in cancer metastasis (Nieto et al., 2016; Polyak and Weinberg,
2009). Cancer cells that have undergone EMT participate in
extravasation by enhancing the attachment of cancer cells to
metastatic sites through the induction of matrix metalloprotei-
nases or formation of filopodia-like protrusions (Labelle et al.,
2011; Shibue et al., 2012). In this study, we investigated the rele-
vance of the EMT in lung metastasis by statistical and temporal
analysis of metastatic colonies in an experimental extravasation
model (Figure 6). The nature of the in vivo dynamics of metastatic
extravasation is an ongoing controversy. While the metastatic
extravasation was postulated to proceed over 1–2 days (Tsai
and Yang, 2013), another group demonstrated using an in vitro
extravasation assay that cancer cells could extravasate from
microvessels within 3 hr (Spiegel et al., 2016). Our results
showed that the number of foci at 1 hr after injection was not
significantly different, suggesting that the EMT appears to be
not involved in the arrest of cells in microvessels. To our surprise,
the number of metastatic foci markedly increased on day 1 after
the injection of cells pre-treated with TGF-b1, and this number
was approximately sustained up to day 14 (Figure 6C). These
findings suggest that the fate of cancer cells in metastatic sites
is determined in the very early phase (within a day) after arriving
at distant organs, and that the EMT might be associated with the
survival of cancer cells at metastatic sites. The EMT is thought to
confer stem cell-like features that allow cells to disseminate and
gain resistance to apoptosis or anti-tumor therapies (Polyak and
Weinberg, 2009). Hence, the significant promotion of metastasis
by EMT induction may reflect the transformation of differentiated
cells into a stem cell-like phenotype, including the induction of
extracellular matrix production and gaining of the resistance to
apoptosis.
Plasticity between the epithelial and mesenchymal pheno-
types also plays a pivotal role in the process of metastasis (Ye
and Weinberg, 2015). In clinical studies, intravasated cancer
cells circulating in the blood have been shown to exhibit the
mesenchymal phenotype, while colonized cancer cells in organs
were found to exhibit the epithelial phenotype (Kallergi et al.,
2011; Kowalski et al., 2003). Because of the relatively short-
term stimulation of A549 cells by TGF-b1 in the present study,
we assumed that the plasticity of the EMT was maintained in
this experiment. In fact, our results suggested that A549 cells
that colonized the lung were restored to the epithelial phenotype
with the restoration of E-cadherin expression. Taken together,
our CUBIC-cancer analysis clarified the in vivo dynamics of the
plasticity between the epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes
during the progression of cancer metastasis through the statisti-
cal analysis of metastatic foci at the whole-organ level.
CUBIC-Cancer Analysis Provides an In Vivo Therapeutic
Evaluation System to Aid in the Treatment of Metastatic
Tumors
To quantitatively evaluate the therapeutic effects of anti-tumor
drugs, it is necessary to establish an ultra-sensitive detection
system that can determine whether metastatic colonies are
completely eliminated or whether single cancer cells resistant
to anti-tumor drugs still remain. This distinction is particularly
important because the emergence of chemoresistant cancer
cells eventually leads to the proliferation of cancer cells and
the development of incurable tumors. It is difficult to detect
metastasized cells at single-cell resolution by in vivo biolumines-
cence imaging, and visualizing whole-organ images by 2D
histology is labor intensive. Notably, our CUBIC-cancer analysis
of the entire lung successfully detected tiny foci consisting of
even a single cancer cell (Figures 7D and 7E). Therefore, our
Figure 6. In Vivo Role of the EMT Induced by TGF-b Pre-treatment in the Progression of Lung Metastasis
(A) Scheme of the experimental procedure.
(B) Time course images of the experimental lung metastasis model with A549 cells. A549 cells pre-treated without (left) or with (right) TGF-b1 were intravenously
injected in BALB/c-nu/nu mice. The 3D images of the lung samples at the indicated time points are shown (A549, mCherry; nuclei, RedDot2). Representative
images of HE staining after CUBIC-cancer analysis are also shown.
(C) Quantification of the volume and the number of foci of metastatic colonies pre-treated with or without TGF-b1. Surface analysis was applied to the 3D images
in (B). Animal number at each time point is n = 4. Data represent mean ± SD.
(D) Immunohistochemistry of E-cadherin. Samples on day 14 after CUBIC-cancer analysis were subjected to immunohistochemistry with anti-E-cadherin
antibody.
See also Figure S6.
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
247
 CUBIC-cancer analysis may provide critical information for the
development of a curative treatment for metastasis.
Furthermore, we wish to emphasize another important advan-
tage of CUBIC-cancer analysis: it allows a seamless connection
between in vivo live imaging and 2D histology, complementing
the shortcomings of each modality. The global analytical pipe-
line consisting of these methods is quite robust and reliable,
because the experimental data could be thoroughly verified
A
B
C
E
D
Figure 7. Quantitative Evaluation of Therapeutic Effects of Anti-tumor Drugs in an Experimental Lung Metastatic Model
(A) Scheme of the experimental procedure.
(B) In vivo therapeutic efficacy of anti-tumor drugs. The 3D images of the lung samples are shown (4T1, mCherry; nuclei, RedDot2).
(C) Quantification of pharmacotherapeutic effects of anti-tumor drugs. Animal number of each group is n = 4. Data represent mean ± SD.
(D) In vivo therapeutic evaluation of once daily treatment with 5-FU. The 3D images of the lung samples are shown (4T1, mCherry; nuclei, RedDot2).
(E) Quantification of pharmacotherapeutic effect of once daily treatment with 5-FU. Animal number of each group is n = 4 (5-FU) and n = 5 (saline). Data represent
mean ± SD.
248
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
 by the three modalities. An in vivo therapeutic evaluation system
is urgently needed not only for malignant neoplastic diseases
but also for autoimmune diseases, which remain a challenge
clinically, and emerging induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-
based regenerative therapies. This analytical pipeline would
have great potential for becoming a de facto standard for an
in vivo therapeutic evaluation system for complex systemic
diseases.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Details are also supplied in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
Preparation of Clearing Solutions
Clearing solutions were composed of four chemicals, which were selected
from chemical screening (T.C. Murakami and K. Tainaka, unpublished
data). CUBIC-L for decolorization and delipidation was prepared as a
mixture of 10 w% polyethylene glycol mono-p-isooctylphenyl ether/Triton
X-100 (12967-45, Nacalai Tesque) and 10 w% N-buthyldiethanolamine
(B0725, Tokyo Chemical Industry). CUBIC-R for RI matching was prepared
as
a
mixture
of
45
w%
2,3-dimethyl-1-phenyl-5-pyrazolone/antipyrine
(D1876, Tokyo Chemical Industry) and 30 w% nicotinamide (N0078, Tokyo
Chemical Industry) (Table S2). See also the Supplemental Experimental
Procedures.
Microscopy
Whole-body and whole-organ images were acquired with a custom-build
LSFM (developed by Olympus). High-resolution images for cell profiling
were acquired with CLSM (FLUOVIEW FV1200, Olympus). The RI-matched
sample was immersed in a mixture of silicon oil HIVAC-F4 (Shin-Etsu Chemi-
cal) and mineral oil (RI = 1.467, M8410, Sigma-Aldrich) during image acquisi-
tion. See also the Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
Experimental and Spontaneous Mouse Metastatic Tumor Models
Inbred wild-type BALB/c mice, C57BL/6 mice, and BALB/c-nu/nu mice were
purchased from Sankyo Labo Service. All experiments were approved and
carried out according to the Animal Care and Use Committee of the Graduate
School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo. Each metastasis model is
described briefly. For experimental liver metastasis, BALB/c-nu/nu mice
(5 weeks old, female) were injected with Panc-1 cells by open injection in
the spleen. For peritoneal dissemination, SUIT-2 cells were injected into
pancreas orthotopically or intraperitoneally in BALB/c-nu/nu mice (5 weeks
old female). For experimental lung metastasis by intravenous injection,
BALB/c-nu/nu (5 weeks old, female), BALB/c mice (5 weeks old, female or
male), or C57BL/6 mice (5 weeks old, female) were injected with each cell
line (MDA-MB-231, MDA-231-D, A549, 4T1, Renca, and B16F10 cells). For
spontaneous lung metastasis by renal subcapsule injection, BALB/c (5 weeks
old, male) or BALB/c-nu/nu (5 weeks old, male) mice were injected with
Renca, OS-RC-2, or Caki-1 cells orthotopically. For experimental brain
metastasis by intracardiac injection, BALB/c-nu/nu (4 weeks old, female
MDA-231-D, male OS-RC-2) mice were injected with MDA-231-D or OS-
RC-2 cells by puncture into the left ventricle of heart. For the stimulation
with TGF-b, A549 cells were pre-treated with or without TGF-b1 (5 ng/mL)
for 72 hr in culture and subjected to in vivo experiment. See also the Supple-
mental Experimental Procedures.
Statistical Analysis
An unpaired t test was used to compare the index of volume per surface area of
brain metastasis and to compare the pharmacotherapeutic effects of 5-FU for
statistical significance. Multiple t tests were used to compare the effect of
TGF-b1 stimulation for statistical significance. Dunnett’s multiple comparisons
test was used to examine the pharmacotherapeutic effects of anti-tumor drugs
for statistical significance. All statistical analyses were performed with
GraphPad Prism6 software.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
six figures, and four tables and can be found with this article online at http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.06.010.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
H.R.U., K.M., S.I.K., K. Takahashi, K. Tainaka, and S.E. designed the study.
S.I.K. performed most of the imaging and analysis of metastasis model
mice. K. Takahashi and J.N. performed most of the establishment of cancer
cell lines for CUBIC-cancer analyses and preparation of metastasis model
mice. Y.M. contributed to the histological experiments. H.R.U., K.M., S.I.K.,
K. Takahashi, K. Tainaka, and S.E. wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed
the results and commented on the manuscript text.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all lab members at The University of Tokyo and RIKEN QBiC, in
particular, A. Millius for editing, T.C. Murakami and C. Shimizu for chemical
screening for tissue clearing, S. Kitamura and K. Nakamura for developing
optimized delipidation medium, M. Fujiwara for developing RI-optimized me-
dium, E.A. Susaki and A. Kuno for developing 3D staining methods, S. Shoi
for helping with statistical analysis, R. Ohno for housing mice, and Bitplane
for instruction on Imaris 8.1.2. We also thank Y. Katsuno and F. Murai for
plasmid preparation and H. Miyoshi (RIKEN) for providing the lentiviral vectors.
This work was supported by grants from AMED-CREST (Japan Agency for
Medical Research and Development [AMED]/Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology, Japan [MEXT], H.R.U.); CREST (JST/
MEXT, H.R.U.); Brain/MINDS (AMED/MEXT, H.R.U.); Basic Science and Plat-
form Technology Program for Innovative Biological Medicine (AMED/MEXT,
H.R.U.); Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS) (KAKENHI grant 14J01180 to S.I.K., grant
17J30007 to S.I.K., grant 13J10991 to K. Takahashi, and grant 16J05993 to
J.N.), Grant-in-Aid for Challenging Exploratory Research (JSPS KAKENHI
grant 16K15124 to K. Tainaka), Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (S)
(JSPS KAKENHI grants 25221004 to H.R.U. and 15H05774 to K.M.), and
Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas (JSPS KAKENHI
grant 23115006 to H.R.U.); and Brain Protein Aging and Dementia Control
(17H05688 to K. Tainaka) from MEXT; a grant for Practical Research for Inno-
vative Cancer Control (16ck0106193h0001) from AMED (K.M.); and a Specific
Research Grant from The Tokyo Society of Medical Sciences (S.E.). T.C. Mur-
akami, K. Tainaka, and H.R.U. have filed a patent application for CUBIC-re-
agents. A part of this study was done in collaboration with the Olympus
Corporation.
Received: March 24, 2017
Revised: May 2, 2017
Accepted: May 29, 2017
Published: July 5, 2017
REFERENCES
Carbonell, W.S., Ansorge, O., Sibson, N., and Muschel, R. (2009). The vascular
basement membrane as ‘‘soil’’ in brain metastasis. PLoS ONE 4, e5857.
Chung, K., Wallace, J., Kim, S.Y., Kalyanasundaram, S., Andalman, A.S.,
Davidson, T.J., Mirzabekov, J.J., Zalocusky, K.A., Mattis, J., Denisin, A.K.,
et al. (2013). Structural and molecular interrogation of intact biological sys-
tems. Nature 497, 332–337.
Cuccarese, M.F., Dubach, J.M., Pfirschke, C., Engblom, C., Garris, C., Miller,
M.A., Pittet, M.J., and Weissleder, R. (2017). Heterogeneity of macrophage
infiltration and therapeutic response in lung carcinoma revealed by 3D organ
imaging. Nat. Commun. 8, 14293.
Dodt, H.U., Leischner, U., Schierloh, A., Ja
¨ hrling, N., Mauch, C.P., Deininger,
K., Deussing, J.M., Eder, M., Zieglga
¨ nsberger, W., and Becker, K. (2007).
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
249
 Ultramicroscopy: three-dimensional visualization of neuronal networks in the
whole mouse brain. Nat. Methods 4, 331–336.
Ert€
urk, A., Becker, K., Ja
¨ hrling, N., Mauch, C.P., Hojer, C.D., Egen, J.G., Hellal,
F., Bradke, F., Sheng, M., and Dodt, H.U. (2012). Three-dimensional imaging of
solvent-cleared organs using 3DISCO. Nat. Protoc. 7, 1983–1995.
Gavrilovic, I.T., and Posner, J.B. (2005). Brain metastases: epidemiology and
pathophysiology. J. Neurooncol. 75, 5–14.
Hama, H., Kurokawa, H., Kawano, H., Ando, R., Shimogori, T., Noda, H., Fu-
kami, K., Sakaue-Sawano, A., and Miyawaki, A. (2011). Scale: a chemical
approach for fluorescence imaging and reconstruction of transparent mouse
brain. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1481–1488.
Johnsen, S., and Widder, E.A. (1999). The physical basis of transparency in
biological tissue: ultrastructure and the minimization of light scattering.
J. Theor. Biol. 199, 181–198.
Kallergi, G., Papadaki, M.A., Politaki, E., Mavroudis, D., Georgoulias, V., and
Agelaki, S. (2011). Epithelial to mesenchymal transition markers expressed
in circulating tumour cells of early and metastatic breast cancer patients.
Breast Cancer Res. 13, R59.
Ke, M.T., Fujimoto, S., and Imai, T. (2013). SeeDB: a simple and morphology-
preserving optical clearing agent for neuronal circuit reconstruction. Nat.
Neurosci. 16, 1154–1161.
Kienast, Y., von Baumgarten, L., Fuhrmann, M., Klinkert, W.E., Goldbrunner,
R., Herms, J., and Winkler, F. (2010). Real-time imaging reveals the single
steps of brain metastasis formation. Nat. Med. 16, 116–122.
Kowalski, P.J., Rubin, M.A., and Kleer, C.G. (2003). E-cadherin expression in
primary carcinomas of the breast and its distant metastases. Breast Cancer
Res. 5, R217–R222.
Labelle, M., Begum, S., and Hynes, R.O. (2011). Direct signaling between
platelets and cancer cells induces an epithelial-mesenchymal-like transition
and promotes metastasis. Cancer Cell 20, 576–590.
Nicholls, A.G. (1927). The fourth chapter in the history of pathology. Can. Med.
Assoc. J. 17, 843–845.
Nieto, M.A., Huang, R.Y., Jackson, R.A., and Thiery, J.P. (2016). EMT: 2016.
Cell 166, 21–45.
Nussbaum, E.S., Djalilian, H.R., Cho, K.H., and Hall, W.A. (1996). Brain metas-
tases. Histology, multiplicity, surgery, and survival. Cancer 78, 1781–1788.
Pan, C., Cai, R., Quacquarelli, F.P., Ghasemigharagoz, A., Lourbopoulos, A.,
Matryba, P., Plesnila, N., Dichgans, M., Hellal, F., and Ert€
urk, A. (2016).
Shrinkage-mediated imaging of entire organs and organisms using uDISCO.
Nat. Methods 13, 859–867.
Polyak, K., and Weinberg, R.A. (2009). Transitions between epithelial and
mesenchymal states: acquisition of malignant and stem cell traits. Nat. Rev.
Cancer 9, 265–273.
Renier, N., Wu, Z., Simon, D.J., Yang, J., Ariel, P., and Tessier-Lavigne, M.
(2014). iDISCO: a simple, rapid method to immunolabel large tissue samples
for volume imaging. Cell 159, 896–910.
Saadatpour, Z., Rezaei, A., Ebrahimnejad, H., Baghaei, B., Bjorklund, G.,
Chartrand, M., Sahebkar, A., Morovati, H., Mirzaei, H.R., and Mirzaei, H.
(2017). Imaging techniques: new avenues in cancer gene and cell therapy.
Cancer Gene Ther. 24, 1–5.
Saito, R.A., Watabe, T., Horiguchi, K., Kohyama, T., Saitoh, M., Nagase, T.,
and Miyazono, K. (2009). Thyroid transcription factor-1 inhibits transforming
growth factor-beta-mediated epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in lung
adenocarcinoma cells. Cancer Res. 69, 2783–2791.
Shibue, T., Brooks, M.W., Inan, M.F., Reinhardt, F., and Weinberg, R.A. (2012).
The outgrowth of micrometastases is enabled by the formation of filopodium-
like protrusions. Cancer Discov. 2, 706–721.
Spalteholz, W. (1914). U
¨ ber das Durchsichtigmachen von menschlichen und
tierischen Pra
¨ paraten und seine theoretischen bedingungen, nebst Anhang
(Leipzig: S Hierzel), pp. 1–93.
Spiegel, A., Brooks, M.W., Houshyar, S., Reinhardt, F., Ardolino, M., Fessler,
E., Chen, M.B., Krall, J.A., DeCock, J., Zervantonakis, I.K., et al. (2016). Neu-
trophils suppress intraluminal NK cell-mediated tumor cell clearance and
enhance extravasation of disseminated carcinoma cells. Cancer Discov. 6,
630–649.
Susaki, E.A., and Ueda, H.R. (2016). Whole-body and whole-organ clearing
and imaging techniques with single-cell resolution: Toward organism-level
systems biology in mammals. Cell Chem. Biol. 23, 137–157.
Susaki, E.A., Tainaka, K., Perrin, D., Kishino, F., Tawara, T., Watanabe, T.M.,
Yokoyama, C., Onoe, H., Eguchi, M., Yamaguchi, S., et al. (2014). Whole-brain
imaging with single-cell resolution using chemical cocktails and computational
analysis. Cell 157, 726–739.
Susaki, E.A., Tainaka, K., Perrin, D., Yukinaga, H., Kuno, A., and Ueda, H.R.
(2015). Advanced CUBIC protocols for whole-brain and whole-body clearing
and imaging. Nat. Protoc. 10, 1709–1727.
Tainaka, K., Kubota, S.I., Suyama, T.Q., Susaki, E.A., Perrin, D., Ukai-Tade-
numa, M., Ukai, H., and Ueda, H.R. (2014). Whole-body imaging with single-
cell resolution by tissue decolorization. Cell 159, 911–924.
Tainaka, K., Kuno, A., Kubota, S.I., Murakami, T., and Ueda, H.R. (2016).
Chemical principles in tissue clearing and staining protocols for whole-body
cell profiling. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 32, 713–741.
Takahashi, K., Nagai, N., Ogura, K., Tsuneyama, K., Saiki, I., Irimura, T., and
Hayakawa, Y. (2015). Mammary tissue microenvironment determines T cell-
dependent breast cancer-associated inflammation. Cancer Sci. 106, 867–874.
Tatsuki, F., Sunagawa, G.A., Shi, S., Susaki, E.A., Yukinaga, H., Perrin, D., Su-
miyama, K., Ukai-Tadenuma, M., Fujishima, H., Ohno, R., et al. (2016). Involve-
ment of Ca(2+)-dependent hyperpolarization in sleep duration in mammals.
Neuron 90, 70–85.
Tsai, J.H., and Yang, J. (2013). Epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity in carcinoma
metastasis. Genes Dev. 27, 2192–2206.
Tuchin, V.V. (2015). Tissue optics and photonics: Light-tissue interaction.
J. Biomed. Photonics Eng. 1, 98–135.
Yang, B., Treweek, J.B., Kulkarni, R.P., Deverman, B.E., Chen, C.K., Lubeck,
E., Shah, S., Cai, L., and Gradinaru, V. (2014). Single-cell phenotyping within
transparent intact tissue through whole-body clearing. Cell 158, 945–958.
Ye, X., and Weinberg, R.A. (2015). Epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity: A central
regulator of cancer progression. Trends Cell Biol. 25, 675–686.
250
Cell Reports 20, 236–250, July 5, 2017
