 Parallel processing by cortical inhibition enables context-
dependent behavior
Kishore V. Kuchibhotla1,2, Jonathan V. Gill1,2, Grace W. Lindsay3, Eleni S. Papadoyannis1,2, 
Rachel E. Field1,2, Tom A. Hindmarsh Sten1,2, Kenneth D. Miller3, and Robert C. 
Froemke1,2,*
1Skirball Institute, Neuroscience Institute, Departments of Otolaryngology, Neuroscience and 
Physiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, 10016, USA
2Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, NY, 10003, USA
3Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, Department of Neuroscience, Swartz Program in 
Theoretical Neuroscience, Kavli Institute for Brain Science, Columbia University, New York, NY 
10032, USA
Abstract
Physical features of sensory stimuli are fixed, but sensory perception is context-dependent. The 
precise mechanisms that govern contextual modulation remain unknown. Here, we trained mice to 
switch between two contexts: passively listening to pure tones vs. performing a recognition task 
for the same stimuli. Two-photon imaging showed that many excitatory neurons in auditory cortex 
were suppressed, while some cells became more active during behavior. Whole-cell recordings 
showed that excitatory inputs were only modestly affected by context, but inhibition was more 
sensitive, with PV, SOM+, and VIP+ interneurons balancing inhibition/disinhibition within the 
network. Cholinergic modulation was involved in context-switching, with cholinergic axons 
increasing activity during behavior and directly depolarizing inhibitory cells. Network modeling 
captured these findings, but only when modulation coincidently drove all three interneuron 
subtypes, ruling out either inhibition or disinhibition alone as sole mechanism for active 
engagement. Parallel processing of cholinergic modulation by cortical interneurons therefore 
enables context-dependent behavior.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence to: robert.froemke@med.nyu.edu. 
ACCESSION CODES
Not applicable
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
K.V.K. and R.C.F. designed experiments and wrote the manuscript. K.V.K., J.V.G., R.E.F, and E.S.P. conducted experiments. K.V.K., 
T.A.H.S. and J.V.G. performed analysis. G.W.L. and K.D.M. performed network modelling.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors have no competing financial interests.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
All code related to the modeling work is available at http://froemkelab.med.nyu.edu/. The data that support the findings of this study 
are available from the corresponding author upon request.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2017 January ; 20(1): 62–71. doi:10.1038/nn.4436.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 INTRODUCTION
Sensory stimuli convey critical information about various types of opportunities and threats, 
including access to nourishment, the presence of predators, or the needs of infants. The same 
sensory stimulus, however, can have different meanings based on previous learned 
associations and the contexts within which it is presented1–9. For example, in language 
processing, the same words often have multiple meanings. Humans determine the meaning 
of these words by integrating prior knowledge with context to converge on a relevant 
interpretation10,11. How does the brain enable such interpretation of sensory cues based on 
behavioral context? We propose that three network features would enable context-dependent 
processing of external stimuli by neural circuits: some components must be stable and 
provide a high fidelity representation of a sensory stimulus independent of context, other 
components must be dynamic and rapidly adjust when context changes, and finally there 
must be instructive signals that convey the global contextual milieu.
The mammalian auditory cortex is a major site of contextual modulation during acoustic 
behaviors, such that task engagement alters the spiking of principal neurons even when there 
is no change in the external sensory cue 1–4,12–18. Whether or not a stimulus will produce 
one or more action potentials depends on the strength and timing of excitatory and inhibitory 
synaptic inputs. In the adult, excitatory and inhibitory inputs are correlated during passive 
presentation of acoustic stimuli; this co-tuning and correlation of synaptic responses is 
referred to as ‘excitatory-inhibitory balance’ 19–24. However, episodes of learning and 
periods of heightened attention or arousal activate neuromodulatory systems that can lead to 
the transient uncoupling of excitation from inhibition. This temporary period of increased 
excitability is effective at inducing long-term modifications of synaptic strength and 
receptive field organization25–27. For example, pairing stimulation of the cholinergic nucleus 
basalis with presentation of an acoustic stimulus leads to long-term changes in receptive 
field properties of auditory cortical neurons28,29, via changes in inhibition25. Cholinergic 
activity also contributes to task performance by signaling positive and negative 
reinforcement, potentially through cortical interneurons6,30–32. These links between 
neuromodulation, inhibitory synaptic transmission, and behavioral changes may be a general 
feature of nervous system organization. For example, a recent study showed that cholinergic 
activation of dendritic inhibition in the hippocampus can enable fear learning33.
Context-dependent activity, however, requires rapid changes on a trial-to-trial basis. 
Neuronal ensembles must adjust their firing rate in a reversible manner based solely on 
contextual cues2,4,13,15. These types of context-dependent responses diverge from the 
longer-term memory traces and reinforcement mechanisms that have been previously 
described6,25,30,33 but may co-opt some of the underlying circuitry. The relationship between 
excitation and inhibition may simply scale (up or down) based on attentional demands. 
However, such co-tuned scaling might restrict state-dependent flexibility. Instead, theoretical 
work suggests that inhibitory inputs can be preferentially regulated by neuromodulation34. 
These synaptic and circuit mechanisms have been difficult to resolve because of the need to 
monitor complex input-output dynamics of excitatory, inhibitory and neuromodulatory 
inputs. Here we take an integrative approach to measure, manipulate and model the impact 
of behavioral engagement on a cortical circuit in behaving mice. We combine (i) cell-type 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 specific two-photon calcium imaging to measure network output, (ii) whole-cell voltage-
clamp recordings of excitatory and inhibitory inputs, (iii) calcium imaging of cholinergic 
axons to monitor neuromodulatory inputs, (iv) optogenetics to manipulate all core 
components of the circuit, and (v) a theoretical model to integrate and test the robustness of 
our findings.
RESULTS
A context-switching task that depends on the auditory cortex
To determine how behavioral context influence network dynamics, we trained head-fixed 
mice on an active versus passive context-switching task using a block-based experimental 
design (Fig. 1a, Supplementary Figure 1a). For the active listening context (“active 
context”), we trained animals on an auditory go/no-go stimulus recognition task. Mice 
learned to lick for a water reward provided through a lick tube after hearing the reinforced 
conditioned stimulus (the target tone, Supplementary Figure 1b) and to withhold from 
licking after hearing an unrewarded pure tone of a different frequency (the foil tone, 
Supplementary Figure 1c). In the passive context, the lick tube was removed and mice were 
exposed to the same sounds (target and foil) but animals did not produce a behavioral 
response (Supplementary Video 1). Importantly, the absence of licking in the passive context 
(i.e., the sensorimotor response in response to the target tone) was completely voluntary 
since it was not reinforced with reward or punishment. The choice to behave was therefore 
externally triggered by the presence or absence of the lick tube. This task required auditory 
cortex, as bilateral muscimol infusions into auditory cortex significantly impaired behavioral 
performance in the active context (Fig. 1b; n=3 animals, d′=3.0±0.2, muscimol d
′=0.8±0.3%, mean±s.e.m., p<0.05, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test).
Rapid and reversible context-dependent changes in A1 network output
To determine how auditory cortex responds to the conditioned stimuli in both contexts, we 
first imaged the activity of 1,595 neurons in cortical layer 2/3 in five mice in the two 
different contexts. To select the target and foil tones, we performed two-photon imaging in 
awake mice virally expressing GCaMP6s while presenting pure tones between 4–64 kHz at 
70 dB sound pressure level (SPL) before behavioral training (Fig. 1c, d). We used two 
criteria in selecting the stimuli: 1) the imaged focal planes had neurons with tone-evoked 
calcium responses to the target and foil (Fig. 1c), and 2) both tones were within one octave 
of each other (Fig. 1d). After selecting the target and foil, we conducted behavioral training 
(Fig. 1e, Supplementary Figure 1d) until mice reliably responded to the target tone with 
licking (hits) and withheld licking responses to the foil tone (correct rejects) (Fig. 1e, n=23 
mice, d′=2.5±0.3, hit rate=92.5±1.7%, mean±s.e.m.). All mice reached threshold within 3–
13 sessions (Supplementary Figure 1d). All imaging data underwent a detailed motion-
correction protocol (see Experimental Procedures, Supplementary Figures 2–3, 
Supplementary Videos 2–3) and were similar to established methods33.
We observed broad-based suppression of neural responses to both the target and foil tones 
during the active context in a majority of neurons we imaged (Fig. 2a–d, n=135/227 target-
responsive cells, n=146/210 foil-responsive cells, neurons were tested for responsiveness by 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 comparing tone-evoked response to baseline values, p<0.05, Student’s paired two-tailed t-
test), consistent with previous extracellular recordings1,2,9. Surprisingly, some neurons 
showed an increase in activity during the task when compared to the responses in the passive 
context (Fig. 2b–d, n=92/227 target-responsive cells, n=64/210 foil-responsive cells, p<0.05 
for responsiveness per neuron, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test). A continuum of context-
dependent changes, from suppression to facilitation, was clear across animals (Fig. 2e; 
p<0.001, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test). The continuum from broad suppression to selective 
facilitation was also apparent when we restricted GCaMP6s expression to excitatory neurons 
(Fig. 2f–h; n=620 neurons, n=142 responsive, 67% suppressed, 33% activated in the active 
context).
Neurons responsive to either the target or foil tones showed a similar modulation by 
behavioral context (median context modulation for target tones: −13.8±4.8%, median 
context modulation for foils: −16.8±4.0%, median ± 95% confidence intervals, Fig. 2c, d, 
bottom; dashed lines denote significance threshold generated from a shuffled dataset). This 
indicates that task-related modulation was not due to expectation of reward on a given trial 
or delivery of water. Changes in neural activity occurred rapidly, within 1–2 trials of 
switching contexts (Supplementary Figure 4), supporting the existence of an ensemble-level 
switch. Neurons whose best frequency was close to either the target or foil (best frequency 
<0.25 octaves from target or foil; target, n=51 cells, foil, n=24 cells) were most likely to be 
suppressed during the active context (Supplementary Figure 5). Conversely, neurons with 
best frequencies that were further from the target or foil (best frequency ≥0.25 octaves from 
target and foil) were more likely to be more responsive during the active context 
(Supplementary Figure 5). Thus, behavioral context rapidly alters A1 responses, leading to a 
continuum of response suppression and facilitation.
Cell-type specific activity profiles in auditory cortex
The activity of diverse inhibitory subpopulations may play a key role in generating the 
network output phenotype of both suppression and facilitation. We focused on the three 
interneuron subtypes that make up ~80% of cortical interneurons: PV-positive, SOM-
positive, and VIP-positive interneurons35. These three interneuron subtypes are thought to 
make up a canonical cortical circuit7,31,36. To examine the responses of inhibitory cells, we 
expressed GCaMP6s in PV-tdTomato, SOM-tdTomato or VIP-tdTomato mice and imaged 65 
PV+, 159 SOM+ and 90 VIP+ layer 2/3 interneurons in A1 during active and passive 
contexts (Fig. 3; cell inclusion approach in Supplementary Figure 6). In contrast to the 
excitatory pool (Fig. 3b), inhibitory neurons showed robust change in baseline activity, with 
VIP+ interneurons showing the largest changes, followed by SOM+ interneurons and then 
PV+ interneurons (Fig. 3b). Tone-evoked responses were also modulated in all subtypes 
with PV+ and SOM+ interneurons (Fig. 3c–f) preferring the active context unlike the 
excitatory pool (Fig. 3c–d; ‘PV+’, n=31 tone-responsive PV+ interneurons, 19/31 increased 
activity, p<0.01 compared to excitatory pool where 47/142 increased activity, Fisher’s exact 
test; Fig. 3e–f, ‘SOM+’, n=20 tone-responsive SOM+ interneurons, 12/20 increased activity, 
p<0.01 compared to excitatory pool where 47/142 increased activity, Fisher’s exact test). 
While VIP+ interneurons showed the strongest baseline modulation, tone-evoked responses 
from VIP+ interneurons were muted in comparison and preferred the passive context, similar 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to excitatory neurons (Fig. 3g, h). Thus, cortical interneurons are highly sensitive to 
behavioral context in unique ways suggesting that local inhibition may gate contextual 
information.
Synaptic inhibition acts as a switch to gate the flow of contextual information
Given the context-dependent neural output dynamics observed in inhibitory and excitatory 
networks, we wondered whether changes in excitatory-inhibitory balance might underlie the 
shifts in network activity. Balanced inhibition helps to control overall excitability and 
information processing. It may be a general property of developed cortical circuits in the 
auditory system20,24,26 and other sensory modalities23,35. Co-tuning of inhibition with 
excitation may be disrupted in epochs of high attention or arousal and differentially affect 
inhibitory transmission or inhibitory neuron activity25,34,38–40. Behavioral context might 
modulate both tone-evoked excitation and inhibition in the same direction (increasing or 
decreasing excitatory and inhibitory inputs together). Alternatively, changes in context might 
transiently disrupt excitatory-inhibitory balance, enhancing perceptual salience by selective 
modulation of either excitation or inhibition.
We tested these hypotheses by measuring synaptic activity onto putative excitatory neurons 
with whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings in behaving animals (Fig. 4a). We measured 
excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs and IPSCs) in both the active and 
passive contexts (n=12 cells, n=4 mice). We observed significantly more context-dependent 
changes in IPSCs than EPSCs (Fig. 4b–e). Interestingly, the sign of inhibitory modulation 
was heterogeneous. In some cells, the active context enhanced tone-evoked inhibition (Fig. 
4b–d), whereas inhibition was decreased in other cells, with an overall broader distribution 
of inhibitory changes (Fig. 4d). Comparing the absolute values of inhibitory vs. excitatory 
changes revealed that during the active context, IPSC amplitudes were more than twice as 
affected as EPSC amplitudes (Fig. 4e, ΔIPSC: 34.9±4.1%, ΔEPSC: 16.1±3.5%, n=12 cells, 
p<0.009, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test, green circles denote significant changes in 
currents; ΔIPSC median p-value per cell is 0.03; ΔEPSC median p-value is 0.30; Student’s 
paired two-tailed t-test within neuron). Tone-evoked EPSCs and IPSCs in behaving animals 
could be measured before the onset of licking, providing further evidence that motor-related 
suppression was not confounding our experiments.
We predicted firing rates using an integrate-and-fire model with our measured IPSCs and 
EPSCs. We observed both functional classes of neurons (activated and suppressed) that we 
observed with calcium imaging (Supplementary Figure 7a–c, n=5 neurons showing 
suppression, p<0.01, two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum test for active versus passive context; 
Supplementary Figure 7d–f, n=2 neurons showing activation, p<0.01, two-sided Wilcoxon 
rank sum test; n=5 neurons with no significant change in model-derived spiking). In two 
instances, we were able to record spiking activity in cell-attached configuration in the same 
cells where we later measured IPSCs and EPSCs after breaking in (Supplementary Figure 
7g–i). In both cases, the IPSC context modulation governed whether neuronal spiking was 
suppressed (Supplementary Figure 7h) or activated (Supplementary Figure 7i) in the active 
context. Moreover, the measured spiking output (Supplementary Figure 7g–i, top row) was 
similar to the predicted spiking output calculated from the synaptic measurements 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Supplementary Figure 7g–i, bottom row), validating the model output. Overall, changes in 
inhibition can explain both response facilitation and suppression in excitatory output.
Optical inactivation of inhibitory subtypes impairs context-dependent switching
We next asked how the different elements of the inhibitory networks contribute to the 
context-dependent modulation between active and passive contexts, employing an 
optogenetic inactivation strategy (Fig. 4f–i). We expressed the hyperpolarizing opsin 
(eNpHR3.0) in a Cre-dependent manner in PV-Cre, SOM-Cre, and VIP-Cre mice in auditory 
cortex unilaterally.
Interestingly, optical suppression via cortical illumination of all three interneuron subtypes 
significantly impaired context-dependent changes in IPSCs and ultimately behavioral 
performance in the active context (Fig. 4g, h, Supplementary Figure 8b) implicating all three 
in contextual regulation. Importantly, the neuronal subtypes differed in their downstream 
effect on pyramidal neurons. Suppression of PV+ and SOM+ interneurons in the active 
context increased pyramidal neuron spiking in the active context while reducing spiking 
modulation between contexts (Fig. 4i, top; +53.4±31%, p<0.01, Wilcoxon signed-rank test, 
n=9 total (5 neurons with SOM+ inactivation, and 4 neurons with PV+ inactivation). In 
contrast, suppressing VIP+ interneurons in the active context strongly decreased pyramidal 
neuron output (Fig. 4i, bottom; −93.0±6%, p<0.01, Wilcoxon signed-rank test, n=6 
neurons). PV+ and SOM+ interneurons thus appear to directly inhibit pyramidal neurons 
while VIP+ interneurons disinhibit pyramidal neurons during active task engagement, 
suggesting that multiple interneurons are operating in parallel to achieve the observed 
network output.
Cholinergic tone signals a transition to the active context
Next we asked how behavioral context was initially communicated to A1 for control of 
network output in this complex manner. Cholinergic modulation from the nucleus basalis is 
a likely candidate for providing attentional signals to the auditory cortex25,28,38,40–45, 
implicated in theoretical models34,39 and shown experimentally to selectively control 
cortical inhibition under certain conditions6,25,40.
To determine how these neuromodulatory signals are regulated by behavioral context, we 
measured the activity of 1,600 axonal segments, including putative boutons, arising from the 
nucleus basalis and projecting to auditory cortex. We targeted GCaMP6s to nucleus basalis 
in two wild-type mice and three ChAT-Cre mice to specifically target cholinergic neurons 
(Fig. 5a–c, Supplementary Figure 9a–e). We monitored axonal activity in auditory cortex in 
behaving mice using two-photon calcium imaging (Supplementary Video 4). To ensure 
motion stability, we restricted our analysis to epochs of time (10–20 secs or 40–80 frames) 
in which the movement in the x-y plane was similar between the active and passive contexts. 
We observed clear changes in baseline activity levels of axon segments from the nucleus 
basalis only when switching contexts (Fig. 5b–e, p<10−4 within-animal comparing active to 
passive context baseline calcium levels, Student’s paired two-tailed test). During the active 
context, there was a substantial increase in the tonic activity of nucleus basalis axon 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 segments (Fig. 5d, e, n=1,600 axonal segments in 5 mice; n=3 ChAT-cre animals, p<0.02, 
Student’s paired two-tailed t-test).
If increased cholinergic modulation is critical for active task engagement, we should observe 
changes in cholinergic activity that predict behavioral engagement on a trial-by-trial basis. 
To test this, we implemented a trial-by-trial Bayesian decoder using the pre-tone baseline 
calcium signal in cholinergic axonal segments to predict behavioral context. We performed a 
two-fold cross-validation by dividing our dataset into non-overlapping training and test sets, 
repeating this process 1,000 times with random allocation of trials to either set. We achieved 
77.9±3.9% accuracy in predicting context from these calcium signals compared to a shuffled 
dataset (50.6±2.0%) strongly implicating cholinergic modulation in the behavior (Fig. 5f, g). 
Next, we tested whether our decoder could predict key trial-to-trial variables of stimulus and 
action. Stimulus decoding accuracy was better-than-chance (real data versus shuffled data) 
only during tone presentation and not before (Supplementary Figure 9f; pre-tone, p=0.95; 
tone, p=0.04; post-tone, p=0.18; Student’s t-test) suggesting that cholinergic terminals can 
carry stimulus information in a time-locked manner. Surprisingly, action decoding accuracy 
(lick correctly for the target tone, withholding correctly for the foil tone) was elevated even 
before tone onset and became significant during the tone period (Supplementary Figure 9g; 
pre-tone, p=0.06; tone, p-0.01; post-tone, p=0.04; Student’s t-test) strongly implicating 
fluctuations in cholinergic terminal activity as a key driver of trial-by-trial fluctuations in 
performance.
Given these underlying neural dynamics of elevated cholinergic signaling in the active 
context, we next examined whether acetylcholine receptor activation was required for task 
performance. Unilateral topical application of atropine impaired performance on this task by 
reducing hit rate (Fig. 5h, i, atropine hit rate: 0.65±0.06 in 11 sessions, saline hit rate: 
0.82±0.04 in 12 sessions, p<0.05, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test, Supplementary Figure 
9h, i). Trial-by-trial analysis showed that the animal’s response rate was most impaired 
immediately after context switches (Fig. 5j). In control conditions, when transitioning to the 
active context, the animal’s hit rate immediately reached steady state (first trial hit rate = 
92±8%, steady state = 90±1.8%, p=0.85 Wilcoxon sign-rank test when comparing hit rate 
for trials 1–4 in the active context versus trials 11–14). In atropine conditions, the animal’s 
hit rate started significantly lower before reaching steady state (first trial hit 
rate=57.1±20.2%, stead state=80.6±4.0%, p<0.05, Wilcoxon sign-rank test when comparing 
hit rate for trials 1–4 in the active context versus trials 11–14). We next asked whether direct 
activation of cholinergic terminals in auditory cortex could trigger task-like behavior even in 
the passive context (i.e. no licktube present, Fig. 5k–m, Supplementary Figure 10). 
Surprisingly, illumination of the auditory cortex in the passive context of trained animals 
induced tone-evoked licking. In the passive context, behavioral responses to the target tone 
(licking) are minimal (12±5%) but they are increased when activating cholinergic inputs to 
auditory cortex of trained mice (22±10%), an 80% increase in passive-context licking (Fig. 
5m; n=9 sessions in 3 mice, p<0.05, Wilcoxon signed rank test). This partial restoration of 
active-context behavior argues that the cholinergic system plays a critical role in signaling 
context. Other key factors, including those that continuously update the animal on the 
contextual environment such as water reinforcement and somatosensation of the tongue to 
the licktube, likely counterbalance the cholinergic activation. Overall, these behavioral 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 manipulations argue that cholinergic signaling is necessary for contextual transitions and can 
even partially recover task-like behavior in the passive context.
Can this elevation in cholinergic tone drive the inhibitory dynamics that appear to control 
network output? To directly measure how this cholinergic modulation may affect layer 2/3 
neurons in the auditory cortex, we performed whole-cell recordings in acute brain slices and 
examined the membrane potential of specific neuronal subtypes in response to a cholinergic 
agonist (1 μM muscarine) while blocking NMDA, AMPA and GABAA receptors. As 
suggested from previous studies in mouse barrel cortex and visual cortex38,40, inhibitory 
interneurons were generally depolarized more during muscarine application than excitatory 
neurons (Fig. 6a–c; n=19 interneurons, n=15 excitatory neurons, p<0.001, Student’s two-
tailed t-test, spikes removed). Excitatory neurons exhibited the least depolarization of all cell 
types (Fig. 6b, c; n=15 neurons, median depolarization: 1.6 mV, interquartile range: 0–4.3 
mV); PV+ interneurons were modestly depolarized (Fig. 6b, c; PV+: n=7, +5.6mV, 
interquartile range: 5.1–9.4) while SOM+ and VIP+ interneurons were more strongly 
depolarized (Fig. 6b, c; SOM+: n=7, +8.2mV, interquartile range: 7.2–18.3; VIP+: n=5, 
+8.6mV, interquartile range: 3.8–9.6). These data support our calcium imaging 
measurements from behaving animals, given that VIP and SOM neurons exhibited the 
largest baseline changes in activity while PV+ neurons experienced increases in tone-evoked 
responses. These results, however, do not preclude network level effects of ACh on 
interneuron spiking; for example, ACh may act indirectly on interneuron spiking by 
modulating synaptic inputs, both excitatory and inhibitory, onto interneurons. Regardless, 
cholinergic modulation of cortical inhibition provides a powerful, cell-type selective 
mechanism for contextual regulation of network output and behavioral control.
Cholinergic modulation drives changes in synaptic inhibition
We then examined how cholinergic modulation directly affected excitatory and inhibitory 
inputs during behavior. First, we made additional whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings 
during behavior while applying the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor antagonist atropine (1 
mM) locally to auditory cortex (Fig. 6d–f). Atropine significantly reduced contextual 
modulation of tone-evoked inhibition (Fig. 6e, f). Remarkably, six out of seven neurons did 
not show significant changes in IPSCs (Fig. 6f, ΔIPSC: 19.7±5.6%, ΔEPSC: 30.3±5.6%, 
n=7 cells, p<0.02, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test; green circles denote significant changes 
in currents, p<0.05, Student’s two-tailed t-test within neuron). Moreover, atropine altered the 
timing of synaptic inputs such that the time lag between excitation and inhibition was more 
variable and consistently larger than in control conditions (Supplementary Figure 11). 
Cholinergic activity therefore controls network activity by modulating the amplitude of 
inhibitory inputs and sharpening the timing of synaptic inputs.
If acetylcholine is required for contextual changes in inhibition, we reasoned that direct 
activation of the cholinergic system should preferentially modulate inhibition. We performed 
whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings in awake ChAT-ChR2 mice and optogenetically 
activated cholinergic terminals in A1 (Fig. 6g–i). Optogenetic release of endogenous 
acetylcholine desynchronized cortical activity (Supplementary Figure 12), and significantly 
altered tone-evoked inhibition to a greater extent than excitation (Fig. 6h, i). Similar to 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 context-switching, the sign of inhibitory context modulation was heterogeneous, even within 
the same cell. For example, at one frequency (13.5 kHz), optogenetic stimulation enhanced 
tone-evoked inhibition in a single neuron (Fig. 6h) while at a different frequency (26.9 kHz), 
optogenetic stimulation reduced tone-evoked inhibition (Fig. 6h). In either case, however, 
inhibition changed more than excitation (Fig. 6h, i). Overall IPSC amplitudes were nearly 
50% more dynamic than EPSC amplitudes after optogenetic illumination (Fig. 6i, ΔIPSC: 
17.8±2.5%, ΔEPSC: 12.6±1.7%, n=5 cells, p<0.03, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test; green 
circles denote significant changes in currents, p<0.05, Student’s two-tailed t-test within 
neuron). Taken together, our results show that cholinergic switching is required in awake 
mice to control cortical inhibition.
Recurrent model recapitulates network output only with parallel activation of inhibition
Our data indicate that multiple sources of inhibition are recruited in parallel by cholinergic 
activity to adjust input-output dynamics in the cortex. Could similar results arise from only 
the activation of VIP+ interneurons alone, or perhaps just the PV+ or SOM+ sub-
populations? Alternatively, appropriate switching of cortical activity might arise from 
multiple inhibitory and disinhibitory interactions, required to generate the observed task-
related modulation while maintaining an overall level of excitatory/inhibitory balance. To 
examine this central question requires network modeling in order to fully explore the 
complex dynamics between multiple cell types and neuromodulatory signaling. Thus we 
built a four population rate-based network model that incorporated known connectivity 
parameters across neuronal subtypes24,25 (Fig. 7a). We then simulated the effects of context 
switching via cholinergic modulation of all inhibitory cell types. Importantly, the model 
recapitulated known features of cortical responses at baseline and to sensory inputs in all cell 
types (Fig. 7b, bars denote model output, circles denote measured spike rates from 
literature26,28). If the model only incorporated cholinergic activation of VIP+ interneurons, 
the network dynamics from the model were nearly opposite that of what we observed 
experimentally (Fig. 7c). Likewise, if acetylcholine only activated SOM+ or PV+ 
interneurons, the network dynamics were similar to the mean excitatory suppression we 
observed experimentally, but other circuit responses were not captured (Fig. 7c). In contrast, 
if acetylcholine simultaneously acted on all three interneuron subtypes, the model could 
recapitulate all key network responses and was robust to various changes in parameters (Fig. 
7c, Supplementary Figure 13).
We analyzed the model dynamics to determine how the network state was switched by 
change in context. These results arise, in part, because of the inter-connectivity between 
interneuron subtypes. For example, cholinergic activation of PV+ neurons alone suppresses 
excitatory and VIP neurons, but also incorrectly suppresses SOM+ neurons. Activation of 
PV+ and SOM+ neurons together, overcomes the mutual suppression, but leads to direct 
suppression of VIP even at baseline. Activation of all three in parallel, however, creates the 
right balance for all three subtypes for both tone-evoked and baseline activity levels. A 
multi-unit rate model generated excitatory diversity about a mean suppression, including 
neurons with robust facilitation due to the diffuse nature of the acetylcholine signal and the 
underlying stochastic connectivity properties (Fig. 7d). Importantly, this diversity emerged 
largely due to diverse changes in inhibitory inputs (Fig. 7e). Together, the network model 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 provides strong theoretical foundation for parallel processing by cortical interneurons of 
neuromodulatory signals during behavior.
DISCUSSION
A major challenge in neural systems is to provide logic to complex neural dynamics. We 
present a cohesive model, based on experiments and theory, which shows how parallel 
processing of cholinergic modulation by diverse cortical interneurons enables the same 
sensory stimuli to trigger different behaviors depending on context. Surprisingly, excitatory 
synaptic inputs themselves are only modestly affected by context. Instead, during active 
engagement, cholinergic input co-activates multiple interneurons thereby adjusting 
inhibitory synaptic inputs and consequently modulating neuronal output. A network model 
captured these dynamics across neuronal subtypes only when neuromodulation coincidently 
drove inhibitory and disinhibitory circuit elements, ruling out either as sole computational 
responses to cholinergic modulation.
Task engagement drives a continuum of responses, from suppression to facilitation, in A1
Most excitatory neurons in A1 were suppressed when the animal was engaged in the task, 
but many also showed response facilitation. This synthesizes findings from different groups 
that showed suppression during task engagement2 and different forms of facilitation3,4. The 
behavioral significance of this bidirectional modulation remains an important question. 
During locomotion, neuronal responses to auditory stimuli are systematically suppressed 
with no facilitation in the auditory cortex and the auditory thalamus12,17,46. Moreover, while 
thalamic neurons exhibit locomotion-induced suppression, they are less sensitive to task 
engagement with higher cognitive load2,12. Thus, facilitation of a pool of excitatory neurons 
appears to be cortical in nature, independent of processing earlier in the auditory pathway, 
and may be critical for task performance.
Imaging of inhibitory networks in the cortex demonstrated the diversity of responses both 
within and across interneuron sub-types. PV+ and SOM+ interneurons preferred the active 
context at baseline and for tone-evoked responses. In contrast, VIP+ interneurons showed 
large and uniform increases in baseline activity but exhibited suppressed tone-evoked 
responses in the active context. This suggests that inhibitory networks regulate cortical 
output at both a tonic and phasic level. These results are consistent with these three 
interneuron subtypes being sensitive to cholinergic regulation and having strong levels of 
interconnectivity6,31,47. Most importantly, it suggests multiple interneurons are involved in 
regulating cortical activity during the active context.
Inhibition as a synaptic switch to control network output and context-dependent behavior
Direct recording of synaptic inputs onto single neurons during behavior is a powerful 
approach to dissect input-output dynamics. Our data show that inhibitory inputs were more 
sensitive to changes in behavioral context than excitatory inputs, under the control of 
cholinergic neuromodulation in a context-switching behavioral paradigm. Optical 
suppression of PV+ and SOM+ neurons during active behavior increased layer 2/3 
pyramidal neuron output, implicating these neurons in suppression of excitatory output. In 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 contrast, optical suppression of VIP+ interneurons during active behavior decreased layer 
2/3 pyramidal output, implicating these neurons in disinhibition. Moreover, unilateral 
optogenetic suppression of any of these interneurons reduced the strength of contextual 
modulation of IPSCs and impaired task performance. This shows that multiple interneurons 
play a key role in gating contextual information.
Cholinergic signaling activates multiple interneurons in parallel during behavior
Task engagement was conveyed to the cortex by the cholinergic projections of the nucleus 
basalis. Calcium imaging of neuromodulatory axons in recipient regions, such as the 
auditory cortex, allows us to better understand how neuromodulatory systems selectively 
engage during behaviorally relevant epochs. In the context-switching behavioral paradigm, 
the activity of cholinergic axons from the nucleus basalis increased during task engagement. 
We showed in cortical brain slices that a cholinergic agonist (muscarine) depolarized 
inhibitory interneurons significantly more than excitatory neurons. Our data does not 
preclude the possibility that other basal forebrain projections that release GABA, glutamate, 
or peptides may also show differences in activity48. However, we note that blocking cortical 
muscarinic acetylcholine receptors reduced changes in IPSCs and impaired behavioral 
performance, suggesting that cholinergic modulation of synaptic inhibition is critical for 
control of cortical state. Moreover, tone-evoked licking could be partially recovered in the 
passive context by optically activating cholinergic axons in the auditory cortex of trained 
mice. Our focus has been on the activation of muscarinic receptors in cortical neurons. A 
complementary and important future avenue of work will further dissect the role of nicotinic 
receptor activation. This further dissection may also show that cholinergic activity may 
impact other important mechanisms for task-related responses, including modulation of 
thalamocortical activity49.
These findings complement recent work showing how phasic responses of cholinergic 
neurons30. The cholinergic system likely modulates behavior both by setting the contextual 
tone and providing rapid phasic signals during behavior30. Our findings, however, do not 
preclude a role for other neuromodulatory centers or long-range cortical connections from 
influencing context-dependent activity in auditory cortex. In addition, basal forebrain 
projections to the visual cortex have been shown to yield opposite direction of modulation; 
namely, visual cortical neurons show increased activity during cholinergic stimulation50. 
These cortical differences may arise due to the preferential and region-specific innervation 
of specific subtypes of interneurons7,31. Moreover, it is likely that other key 
neuromodulatory centers may be critical for maintaining full performance. Other circuits 
may impinge on cortical circuits to further influence this switching time as well as steady-
state performance. Overall, these results show how cortical inputs and outputs are 
transformed by behavioral context. Parallel processing by diverse cortical interneurons of 
long-range inputs may therefore be a general feature of cortical activity during cognitive 
behaviors.
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ONLINE METHODS
Surgical preparation
All procedures were approved under an NYU IACUC protocol. To generate PV-tdTomato, 
SOM-tdTomato and VIP-tdTomato mice, PV-cre, SOM-cre, and VIP-cre animals were 
crossed with the Ai9 (Allen Institute) tdTomato-flox reporter line. ChAT-cre mice were used 
for imaging cholinergic axon terminals (JAX) and ChAT-ChR2 mice were used for 
optogenetic experiments. C57/BL6 mice were used in all other experiments. In all cases, 
male and female mice 2–3 months old were anesthetized with isoflurane (2.0% during 
induction and surgery, 0.75% during physiology). A craniotomy was performed over the 
temporal lobe to expose the auditory cortex (3 mm craniotomy, centered 1.75 mm anterior to 
the lambda suture on the ridge line). Pure tones at 70 dB SPL and 4–64 kHz frequencies (50 
msec, 3 msec cosine on/off ramps, quarter-octave spacing) were delivered in pseudo-random 
sequence at 0.5–1 Hz. The location of A1 was determined by mapping multiunit responses 
500–700 μm below the surface using tungsten electrodes in a sound-attenuating chamber. An 
adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector encoding the calcium indicator GCaMP6s (AAV1-
SYN-GCAMP6s, UPENN vector core) was injected for expression in layer 2/3 neurons in 
right A1 (n=5 mice for Fig. 2a–e; in Fig. 3, n=2 mice for PV-tdTomato, n=2 mice for SOM-
tdTomato, and n=2 mice for VIP-tdTomato). For isolation of excitatory neurons, we used an 
AAV encoding the calcium indicator GCaMP6f (AAV9.CamKII.GCaMP6f) (n=2 mice). 
Above the injection coordinates, a cranial window was implanted replacing a circular piece 
of skull by a glass coverslip (diameter of 3 mm, Warner Instruments) that was secured in 
place using a mix of dental cement and Krazy Glue. A custom-made stainless-steel headpost 
(Ponoko) was affixed to the skull using C&B Metabond dental cement (Parkell). A small 
burr hole was drilled anterior to bregma and a ground wire was placed under the skull above 
the pial surface. The ground wire was then connected to the metal headpost to allow for lick-
detection. Each animal was allowed to recover for at least 2–3 weeks.
For experiments imaging the activity of axonal projections from the basal forebrain, we 
carefully leveled the head and drilled a small burr hole targeting the right nucleus basalis 
(AP, −0.5 mm; ML, 1.8 mm; DV, 4.5 mm). We injected 1.5 μl of an AAV vector encoding 
the calcium indicator AAV1-SYN-GCAMP6s (U. Penn vector core) into C57 mice (JAX), or 
1.5 μl of AAV1-SYN-FLEX-GCAMP6s (U. Penn vector core) into ChAT-Cre mice to 
specifically target cholinergic neurons. We injected at a rate of 100 nl/min and waited 15 
minutes before extracting the injection needle. We filled the burr hole with bone wax and 
sealed it with dental cement.
Behavioral training and control for imaging experiments
All behavioral events (imaging time-stamping, stimulus delivery, water delivery, and lick 
detection) were monitored and controlled by custom-written programs in MATLAB 
interfacing with an RZ6 auditory processor (Tucker-Davis Technologies). Training began 
after at least 7 days of water restriction. Training took place during the day and began with 
habituation to head-fixation, which was immediately followed by water-sampling sessions 
while animals were immobilized in a plexiglass tube. Mice typically learned to lick 
aggressively for 3–5 μl droplets of water within 1–2 sessions. Once the animals would lick 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 reliably, they were immediately placed in the complete behavioral task with minimal 
shaping. We utilized a go/no-go behavior task with the target and foil chosen based on the 
two-photon targeted imaging. Importantly, the initial training session included passive 
context behavior (i.e., the tones but no behavioral responses), as animals would continue to 
lick even in the absence of the lick tube if the passive context was not introduced early in the 
training procedure. For active context, a behavioral block typically consisted of 100 trials 
with 4 blocks of training conducted per day (total of ~400 trials per day). Target versus foil 
trials were pseudo-randomly ordered, each of which consisted of scan onset (imaging), pre-
stimulus period (1.25 s), stimulus period (500 ms), delay (250 ms), a response period (1.75 
s), and an inter-trial interval (ITI with variable duration as described below). Mice only 
received water for correct responses to the target during the response period. Incorrect licks 
recorded after the foil presentation (a false alarm) were mildly punished by increasing the 
ITI. Animals were not punished if they licked during any other time epoch (i.e., if animal 
licked in the pre-stimulus period, tone presentation or delay period, the trial continued). This 
enabled us to confirm that animals were actively increasing lick rate for target tones during 
hit trials and reducing lick rate for foil tones during correct rejects (from baseline lick rate to 
zero during response window). This measurement confirmed that both the target and foil 
tone had behavioral effects on the animal; without this, animals could take a single-tone 
strategy (i.e., learn to lick only for the target tone or withhold licking for the foil tone).
Hit trial ITIs were 4–5 s (to enable full licking of reward), miss trials were not punished and 
had an ITI of 2–3 s, false alarm trials were punished with an ITI lasting 7–9 s, and correct 
rejects immediately moved to the next trial with an ITI of 2–3 s. Passive context was 
initiated immediately after completion of active context trial blocks. For layer 2/3 imaging 
experiments in Fig. 2, a chamber light cue was briefly turned on, the lick tube was rotated 
out of place, and the light turned back off. Care was taken to not physically alter the position 
of the animal. For cell-type specific imaging including excitatory neurons, interneuron 
imaging (Fig. 3) and axonal imaging of ChAT-cre animals (Fig. 5), lick tube removal was 
automated using a micromanipulator and images were acquired for the entire duration of the 
experiment. For physiology experiments (Figs. 4–6, Supplementary Figure 11), lick tube 
removal was performed within 5–10s either manually or with an automated actuator and 
licks were detected with an infrared beam. In a subset of mice, licking was monitored using 
an infrared camera or beam to determine whether presentation of sound stimuli elicited a 
licking movement from the animal. Only in rare cases did mice lick for the target tone in the 
absence of the lick tube and if it did, this behavior only lasted for 1–2 trials. In a subset of 
animals (n=2), we established that the animals were still thirsty immediately after the 
passive trial, i.e., the animals would lick for ad-libitum access to water, confirming that any 
changes in neuronal responses were not due to “satiety”..
For muscimol experiments, animals were injected bilaterally with either saline vehicle or 
muscimol (1 μL of 1 mg/mL) at a depth of ~600 μm below the pial surface. The drug was 
allowed to diffuse while the animals were head-fixed for 10–15 minutes before behavior was 
initiated. In all cases, animals were tested with either saline injection or no injection the day 
after muscimol injections to determine if behavior recovered.
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Behavior for physiology experiments
For physiology experiments, animals were trained on target and foil that were pre-selected 
before any physiological recordings (target=9.5 kHz, foil=5.6 kHz, 0.75 octave spacing). 
Given the typically shorter durations of whole-cell recordings, passive presentation was 
restricted to the target and foil, and lick tube removal (from active-to-passive) or insertion 
(passive-to-active) was performed in 5–7 s using either a manual manipulator or automated 
linear actuator. On the day immediately preceding whole-cell recordings, animals performed 
with d′>1.5. Tone duration was set to 100 ms for training and experimentation. During 
training, hit ITIs were 4–5 s (to enable full licking of reward), miss trials were not punished 
and had an ITI of 2–3 s, false alarm trials were punished with an ITI lasting 7–9 s, and 
correct rejects immediately moved to the next trial with an ITI of 2–3 s. After animals were 
trained, false alarms were no longer punished during whole-cell recordings in order to 
maximize the number of trials while recordings were stable.
In vivo calcium imaging
Two-photon fluorescence of GCaMP6s was excited at 900 nm using a mode locked 
Ti:Sapphire laser (MaiTai, Spectra-Physics, Mountain View, CA) and detected in the green 
channel (GFP emission). Imaging was performed on a multiphoton imaging system 
(Moveable Objective Microscope, Sutter Instruments) equipped with a water immersion 
objective (20X, NA=0.95, Olympus) and the emission path was shielded from external light 
contamination. Images were collected using ScanImage (HHMI). To image auditory cortex, 
the objective was tilted to an angle of 50–60°. To record time courses of auditory-evoked 
neuronal activity, awake animals were head-fixed under the microscope and a speaker was 
placed adjacent to the microscope (microphone-ear distance ~10 cm). During auditory 
stimulation, ~300 μm2 areas in layer 2/3 of A1 containing multiple GCaMP6s expressing 
neurons were selected and imaged (scan rate ~4 Hz, 0.26 s/frames, laser power ≤40 mW). 
For passive context, pure tones (70 dB SPL, 4–64 kHz, 500 msec, 10 msec cosine on/off 
ramps, quarter-octave spacing) were delivered in pseudo-random sequence every 20 frames 
(~5s per passive context trial).
Motion correction
We used a multi-step approach to compensate for x-y motion due to movements of the 
awake mouse. First, we performed a frame-by-frame, rigid registration of the imaging 
frames that accounts for x-y changes in displacement, rotation and translation. Similar to 
published reports, a mean luminance-stable epoch from the middle of the session was 
chosen as the reference frame53. Second, in animals with a structural marker (tdTomato in 
PV+ and VIP+ interneurons) we separated the functional channel (green, GCaMP6s) from 
the structural channel (red, tdTomato). We then computed the tone-evoked response for both 
the fluorescent signal from the functional green channel (GCaMPs) and the structural red 
channel (tdTomato). The red channel (tdTomato) had a small amount of fluorescence 
bleedthrough from the green fluorophore (GCaMP6s) that we could spectrally resolve using 
linear unmixing. We excluded data when the red channel exhibited stimulus-evoked 
“transients” that could not be explained by fluorescence bleedthrough (Supplementary 
Figure 6). Third, in animals without a structural marker, we assessed the probability of 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 motion-induced artifacts particularly at the moment of lick onset54 by comparing the 
frequency of negative deflections with those of positive deflections during period of intense 
licking (Supplementary Figure 2). Negative deflections in the fluorescent traces were 
immediately flagged and investigated as potentially due to motion out of the z-plane and 
were assumed to be highly correlated with false positives for positive deflections 35. To 
remain conservative in our data inclusion criteria, any imaging planes that exhibited greater 
than 5% of cells with statistically-defined negative deflections (pairwise t-test of baseline 
versus negative peak) was excluded from the analysis (n=2 planes out of 14 imaging planes). 
Fourth, for axonal imaging we focused our analysis entirely on tonic activity levels. After 
motion correct in the x-y plane, we identified epochs of time (10–20s, 40–80 frames) where 
the amount of motion-correction in the active context (abs(dx)+abs(dy)) was similar to that 
in the passive context and less than 1.5 μm in either the x- or y-direction. This significantly 
reduced the probability that motion was contaminating the baseline activity levels of the 
measured axon segments. Fifth, to compare responses between contexts, we utilized a strict 
rule that the outline or shape of the cell, or axonal structure must be present in both contexts. 
We used the average intensity projection, the maximum intensity projection, and the motion-
corrected time series to confirm this. Cells, in some instances, did not show up in both 
contexts (Supplementary Figure 3) and were excluded from active-passive comparisons.
At all stages of the motion correction process, manual inspection was performed to identify 
motion out-of-the plane that was not able to be corrected by the above approach. In these 
rare cases, the data were excluded from further analysis.
Image processing and data analysis
Semi-automated data analysis was performed using custom-written software in ImageJ 
(NIH) and Matlab (MathWorks). Images were aligned as described above, cellular regions of 
interest (ROI) were manually drawn, and raw time-courses were extracted. For each cellular 
ROI and each behavioral condition, the response during tone stimulation was compared to 
background and “responsive” cells were identified statistically. We classified neurons as 
responsive if they showed a significant difference in their fluorescence signal immediately 
after tone presentation versus baseline (p<0.05, Wilcoxon sign-rank test). Only responsive 
cells were used for further analysis. Deconvolution of calcium signals was performed and 
used for all comparisons across cells53. Results of behavior were analyzed in custom-written 
MATLAB programs with behavioral performance quantified in terms of fraction of correct 
trials, behavioral d′, and hit rate. For calcium imaging experiments, modulation index was 
calculated from the deconvolved calcium signals as [ΔSpike(active)− ΔSpike(passive)/
ΔSpike(active)+ ΔSpike(passive)] similar to published reports using spiking data (Otazu et 
al., 2009).
In Vitro Electrophysiology
Acute slices of auditory cortex were prepared from adult mice (PV-tdTomato, SOM-
tdTomato, and VIP-tdTomato). Animals were deeply anesthetized with a 1:1 ketamine/
xylazine cocktail, perfused with dissection buffer and decapitated. The brain was rapidly 
placed in ice-cold dissection buffer containing (in mM): 87 NaCl, 75 sucrose, 2 KCl, 1.25 
NaH2PO4, 0.5 CaCl2, 7 MgCl2, 25 NaHCO3, 1.3 ascorbic acid, and 10 dextrose, bubbled 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with 95%/5% O2/CO2 (pH 7.4). Slices (300–400 μm thick) were prepared with a vibratome 
(Leica), placed in warm dissection buffer (33–35° C) for <30 min, then transferred to a 
holding chamber containing warmed artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) (in mM: 124 
NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1.5 MgSO4, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 2.5 CaCl2, and 26 NaHCO3). Slices were kept 
at room temperature (22–24° C) for >25 minutes before use. For experiments, slices were 
transferred to the recording chamber and perfused (2–2.5 ml min−1) with oxygenated ACSF 
at 33° C.
Somatic whole-cell recordings were made from layer 2/3 pyramidal cells. Recordings were 
performed in current-clamp mode with a Multiclamp 700B amplifier (Molecular Devices) 
using IR-DIC video microscopy (Olympus). Patch pipettes (5–8 MΩ) were filled with 
intracellular solution (in mM: 135 K-gluconate, 5 NaCl, 10 HEPES, 5 MgATP, 10 
phosphocreatine, and 0.3 GTP). For blocking synaptic activity, we used DNQX (10 mM), 
APV (25 mM), Picrotoxin (10 mM), and 1–2 μM muscarine. The mean series resistance (Rs) 
was 27.4±10.4 MΩ (standard deviation, s.d.) and the mean input resistance (Ri) was 
88.7±25.8 MΩ, determined by monitoring cells with hyperpolarizing pulses (40 pA for 50 
msec). Recordings were excluded from analysis if Rs or Ri changed >30% compared to the 
baseline period. Data were digitized at 10 kHz and analyzed with Clampfit 10 (Molecular 
Devices). Picrotoxin, DNQX, and APV were purchased from Sigma. All statistics and error 
bars are reported as means±s.e.m. and statistical significance assessed with paired two-tailed 
Student’s t-tests.
In Vivo Electrophysiology
In vivo whole-cell recordings were performed in a sound-attenuating chamber, and 
recordings obtained from auditory cortical neurons with a Multiclamp 700B amplifier 
(Molecular Devices). For voltage-clamp recordings, pipettes contained: 130 Cs-
methanesulfonate, 1 QX-314, 4 TEA-Cl, 0.5 BAPTA, 4 MgATP, 20 phosphocreatine, 10 
HEPES, pH 7.2. Whole-cell recordings from A1 neurons were obtained from cells located 
within 400 μm of the pial surface, in putative layer 2/3. Data were filtered at 5 kHz, digitized 
at 20 kHz, and analyzed with Clampfit 10 (Molecular Devices). Rs: 47.4±31.6 MΩ; Ri: 
154±150 MΩ (s.d.) in 38 cells. Recordings were excluded from analysis if Rs or Ri changed 
>30% relative to the either passive or active context. For all included cells, we also examined 
the correlation between changes to synaptic currents and changes to Ri and Rs, for both 
IPSCs and EPSCs and observed no correlation (ΔIPSC: r=−0.13, p=0.62 for Rs, r=−0.17, 
p=0.51 for Ri; ΔEPSC: r=−0.06, p=0.82 for Rs, r=−0.05, p=0.85 for Ri). We utilized a 
preparation which enabled access to auditory cortex via a ~200 μm hole in a 3 mm piece of 
round glass, providing the stability required to hold cells across conditions54 (Fig. 4a).
Pure tones (100 msec duration, 3 msec cosine on/off ramps) for target and foil (5–10 kHz) 
were played at 70 dB SPL. Tone-evoked responses were measured in a tone onset and offset 
window (150 ms) starting at tone onset. Power analysis was performed to determine sample 
size for statistical significance with a power of β:0.7; these studies required at least three 
neurons for differences in synaptic currents during regular behavior between contexts, five 
neurons for pharmacology experiments, and three neurons for optogenetics experiments, all 
satisfied in the experiments of Figs. 4,6 and Supplementary Figure 11. For all patch-clamp 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experiments, IPSCs and EPSCs values were calculated using the peak amplitude during the 
tone (for tone onset neurons) or during and immediately after the tone (for tone offset 
neurons). The modulation index was calculated relative to the active context (Active-
Passive)/Active.
For atropine experiments, 1 mM atropine was topically applied through a hole in the cranial 
window for at least 30 minutes prior to patch-clamp experiments or behavior; control 
experiments were performed with saline. For cholinergic modulation via optogenetic 
stimulation in ChAT-ChR2-EYFP mice, blue light was delivered to the brain surface via a 
200 μm fiber (Thorlabs) positioned ~0.5 mm above the brain surface, coupled to a 473 nm 
laser (CrystaLaser). During whole-cell recordings, blue light pulses were triggered 100 ms 
before tone onset and lasted for 375 ms (473 nm wavelength, 2–2.5 mW) at the surface of 
the brain. During desynchronization experiments (Supplementary Figure 12), 473 nm light 
was delivered in a 5 sec square pulse at 5 mWmm−2. LFP recordings were made using a 0.5 
MΩ tungsten electrode, and were acquired at 20 kHz. For spectral analysis in Supplementary 
Figure 12, we down-sampled LFP recordings to 200 Hz, then performed time-frequency 
decomposition of the LFP using custom software written in Matlab. We used a 1 s sliding 
window with 50 ms steps and averaged spectra across trials. The spectra shown in 
Supplementary Figure 12 were obtained from 10 trials of 5 sec square laser pulses delivered 
to auditory cortex. Each frequency band was normalized by the average power in the 2 s 
baseline period preceding cortical optical stimulation. Changes in synaptic responses in Figs. 
4,5 and Supplementary Figures 8, 11 were compared by Student’s paired two-tailed t-tests as 
data passed Kolmogorov-Smirnov normality tests.
For interneuron inactivation experiments, AAV1.EF1a.DIO.eNpHR3.0 was injected 
unilaterally into the auditory cortex of PV-cre, SOM-cre, or VIP-cre mice at least 2 weeks 
prior to any electrophysiological or optogenetic experiments.. On the first day of recording, 
we removed the skull only above auditory cortex and implanted a cranial window for optical 
illumination with a small access hole for the patch electrode. We then restricted optical 
illumination to auditory cortex with a fiber-coupled laser. During whole-cell recordings or 
behavioral sessions, blue light pulses were triggered 100 ms before tone onset and lasted for 
300 ms (532 nm wavelength, 10–20 mW/mm2) at the surface of the brain.
Integrate-and-fire model of synaptic currents
The simulations in Supplementary Figure 7 used a conductance-based integrate-and-fire 
model neuron similar to our previous study relating synaptic currents and spike 
generation 28. For simulating the spiking patterns of each cell, we used EPSCs and IPSCs 
from experiments in Fig. 4. On each trial, one EPSC and one IPSC were randomly chosen 
from the set of recorded responses. Excitatory and inhibitory synaptic conductances (ge and 
gi, respectively) were computed from currents as previously described 28, and then ge and gi 
were randomly rescaled on each trial to have peak instantaneous conductance over the range 
1.0–1.7 nS. Membrane voltage was computed as: 
, with τm = 10 ms, resting membrane 
potential Vrest = −70 mV, excitatory reversal potential Ee = 0 mV, and inhibitory reversal 
potential Ei = −70 mV. A spike was evoked in the postsynaptic neuron if the membrane 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 voltage reached threshold of −40 mV, at which point the membrane potential was reset to 
−80 mV in the next time step. Spike rates and trial-by-trial correlation were determined over 
100–200 trials (to ensure sampling from the full set of EPSCs and IPSCs), and full rasters 
for all modeled trials are displayed in Supplementary Figure 7c for each simulation. Code 
can be obtained at: http://froemkelab.med.nyu.edu/kuchibhotla_etal_simulations.
Network model: 4-unit Model
We built a circuit model of auditory cortex containing four populations: one excitatory and 
one for each of the three inhibitory subtypes (PV, VIP, and SOM). Each population is 
represented by a single rate-based equation:
with
where rx is the firing rate of the X cell population (with X=E,P,V,S). The time constants 
were the same for all I subtypes (τP,V,S = 10ms) and slower for the E population (τE = 
20ms). f is the neural activation function. Here we use a rectified power-law (Miller and 
Troyer, 2002):
with k =.01 and n =2.2. Use of a rectified linear activation function (k =1, n =1) provided 
qualitatively similar results.
Connections between populations are given via a weight matrix:
Values for inhibitory connections were determined using data from visual cortex (Pfeffer et 
al., 2013), with the addition of a VIP to PV connection known to exist in auditory cortex (Pi 
et al., 2013) (note, the results do not depend on this connection). Values for excitatory 
connections were determined from empirical and modeling studies (Hofer et al., 2011, 
Litwin-Kumar et al., 2016), and all weights were fit to ensure they produced reasonable 
firing rates. This produced the following set of values:
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Constant background input is given to all four populations in order to create reasonable 
spontaneous rates (IEB=12.8, IPB=24, IVB=8, ISB=9.6). Tone-related input is given only to 
the excitatory and PV populations, for the duration of the tone (IET=93, IPT=74, 100ms) (Ji 
et al., 2016). The strength of the tone-related inputs were chosen such that they elicited tone-
evoked firing rates in each of the four populations that were consistent with reported rates in 
auditory cortex (Chen et al., 2015, Mesik et al., 2015).
For modeling of the passive condition, no Ach inputs are given (IA=0). In the active 
condition, the effects of Ach are modeled as a small additional input to all three inhibitory 
populations (unless otherwise noted), based on the reported depolarizing effects of Ach on 
these cell types (IpA = IVA = ISA = 5, though the results are robust to differences in IA 
across subtypes (Supplementary Figure 13). Spontaneous and evoked rates in both 
conditions were determined using steady state values of the model. However, measuring 
tone-evoked rates using either peak values or rates averaged over the initial tone-evoked 
transients (50ms) produced qualitatively similar results.
To test for robustness, the following parameters of the model were varied independently 
from −10% to +10% of their current values: IET, IPT, IpA, IVA, ISA, and all nonzero entries 
of W. Out of 5000 simulations run with these randomly chosen parameters, all but one 
produced correct directional changes due to Ach in all four cell types. Thus, the model is 
robust to parameter variations in this range. All simulations were run using the forward 
Euler method with 0.5ms time step.
Network model: multi-unit
In order to explore diversity within a cell type population, the four unit model described 
above was expanded into a multi-unit model, wherein each cell subtype was represented by 
multiple individual rate-based units rather than just one. The number of cells per population 
varied by subtype (NE=800, NP=100, NV=50, NS=50). Assuming the following connection 
probabilities between subtypes (though results are comparable for a range of connection 
probabilities):
The mean synaptic strength between different cell types was calculated by dividing the 
weight between the cell types by the product of the connection probability and the number 
of cells in the presynaptic population: GXY=WXY/(NY*PXY). This gives:
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Actual synaptic strengths were drawn from a lognormal distribution with the given mean and 
variance equaling one-ninth the mean. (Note, the mean E to VIP connection was lowered 
slightly as compared to the 4-unit model, as it provided a better fit to the desired firing rates 
in the multi-unit model).
Similar to the 4-unit model, background input was given to all cells to maintain reasonable 
spontaneous rates with values as in the 4-unit model. Tone inputs were given to all E and PV 
cells only; tone-related inputs were drawn independently for each cell on each trial from a 
Gaussian with mean values as in the 4-unit model and a variance of 2. Ach inputs were given 
to all PV, VIP, and SOM cells but drawn independently for each cell, and held constant 
across trials, from a Gaussian with a mean value of 5 and variance of 10 (truncated so that 
all values remain positive). This variance of cholinergic effects was intended to represent the 
likely variability in the nature of cholinergic innervation in auditory cortex.
Results were calculated using 20 realizations of the network, run with 15 trials each for 
passive and active conditions. The multi-unit model matches the 4-unit model in terms of 
average spontaneous and evoked firing rates, and average changes in firing rate due to Ach.
Histology
To confirm the specific expression of the genetically encoded calcium indicator GCaMP6s in 
nucleus basalis cholinergic neurons following injection in ChAT-Cre mice, we performed 
ChAT immunohistochemistry. We performed similar histology with different antibodies to 
confirm eNpHR3.0 expression in interneuron Cre lines and selective expression of CAMK2-
GCaMP6f in excitatory neurons preferentially (Supplementary Figure 14). Mice were 
transcardially perfused using ~45 mL PBS followed by ~ 45 mL 4% PFA under deep 
anesthesia. Brains were extracted from the skull and post-fixed in 4% PFA for ~2 hours at 4° 
C, then cryoprotected overnight in 30% sucrose solution and sliced coronally with 16 μm 
thickness on a cryostat. Fixed brain sections were washed with PBS, then incubated for 2–3 
hours at room temperature in blocking buffer containing PBS with 0.5% v/v Triton X-100 
(Sigma), 2% v/v normal goat serum (Life Technologies) and 50 mg/mL BSA. The blocking 
solution was aspirated and the slices were incubated in primary antibody (1:1000 dilution of 
chicken anti-GFP IgY, catalog # ab13970 (Abcam); 1:200 rabbit anti-ChAT IgG, cat. # 
AB143 (Millipore); 1:1000 dilution of VIP antibody IgG, product. #20077 (Immunostar); 
1:1000 dilution of anti-parvalbumin IgG, code #235 (Swant); 1:500 dilution of anti-
somatostatin IgG, clone YC7, cat. #MAB354 (Millipore)) overnight at 4°C. Afterwards, 
slices were washed and incubated for 1–2 hours at room temperature in secondary antibody 
(1:1000 dilution, goat anti-chicken IgY Alexa Fluor 488, cat. # A11039; goat anti-rabbit IgG 
Alexa Fluor 555, cat. # A21430, both from Life Technologies; 1:1000 dilution of goat anti-
mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 555, cat. #A21422 (Life Technologies); 1:500 dilution of goat anti-
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 rat IgG, Alexa Fluor 555, cat. #A21434 (Life Technologies)). Finally, slides were washed, 
incubated at room temperature in DAPI/Hoechst solution (1:1000 in PBS), washed, then 
coverslipped using Fluoromount (Sigma). Images were acquired from nucleus basalis with a 
20x air objective on a Zeiss LSM 710 Confocal Microscope (Carl Zeiss Inc.) and cell counts 
were performed in Image J (NIH). All cells stained with both anti-ChAT and anti-GFP 
antibodies were considered cholinergic and expressing GCaMP6s. Overall, 95.2±2.6% (n=3 
mice) of GCaMP6s+ cells were ChAT+ (n=3 mice, 15 images), and 50% of ChAT+ cells 
were GCaMP6s+ (n=3 mice, 15 images). All cells counted had confirmed nuclear DAPI 
staining.
Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed in MATLAB or GraphPad Prism 6. Datasets were 
tested for normality, and appropriate statistical tests applied as described in the text (e.g., t-
test for normally distributed data, Fischer’s exact test for categorical observations, Mann 
Whitney U-test for non-parametric data, Friedman test with Dunn post-hoc for non-
parametric data with repeated measurements). Shaded regions surrounding line-plots 
indicate ± s.e.m unless otherwise stated. Unless otherwise indicated in the methods, no 
statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes but our sample sizes are similar 
to those reported in previous publications7,8,48,53. Data collection and analysis were not 
performed blind to the conditions of the experiments.
Code and Data availability
All code related to the modeling work is available at http://froemkelab.med.nyu.edu/. The 
data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon 
request.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank I. Carcea, G. Fishell, B. Kripkee, M. Long, M. Picardo, D. Rinberg, R. Tsien and D. Vallentin for 
comments on earlier versions of this manuscript; K. Katlowitz, X. Lin, H. Lu, J. Merel, and L. Paniniski for 
assistance with statistics and analysis; and G. Kosche, E. Morina, A. Resulaj, and C. Wilson for technical 
assistance. We thank the GENIE Program and the Janelia Farm Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute for provision of GCaMP6s and ScanImage. Artwork in Figures 1, 4, and 6 was made by S.E. Ross. This 
work was funded by grants from NIDCD (DC009635 and DC012557), a Sloan Research Fellowship, and a 
Klingenstein Fellowship (R.C.F.); and NIDA (T32 DA007254), the Charles H. Revson Senior Fellowship in 
Biomedical Sciences, and the NIDCD (DC05014) (K.V.K.).
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. Fritz J, Shamma S, Elhilali M, Klein D. Rapid task-related plasticity of spectrotemporal receptive 
fields in primary auditory cortex. Nature neuroscience. 2003; 6:1216–1223. DOI: 10.1038/nn1141 
[PubMed: 14583754] 
2. Otazu GH, Tai LH, Yang Y, Zador AM. Engaging in an auditory task suppresses responses in 
auditory cortex. Nature neuroscience. 2009; 12:646–654. DOI: 10.1038/nn.2306 [PubMed: 
19363491] 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3. Atiani S, et al. Emergent selectivity for task-relevant stimuli in higher-order auditory cortex. 
Neuron. 2014; 82:486–499. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.02.029 [PubMed: 24742467] 
4. Rodgers CC, DeWeese MR. Neural correlates of task switching in prefrontal cortex and primary 
auditory cortex in a novel stimulus selection task for rodents. Neuron. 2014; 82:1157–1170. DOI: 
10.1016/j.neuron.2014.04.031 [PubMed: 24908492] 
5. Leonard MK, Chang EF. Dynamic speech representations in the human temporal lobe. Trends in 
cognitive sciences. 2014; 18:472–479. DOI: 10.1016/j.tics.2014.05.001 [PubMed: 24906217] 
6. Letzkus JJ, et al. A disinhibitory microcircuit for associative fear learning in the auditory cortex. 
Nature. 2011; 480:331–335. DOI: 10.1038/nature10674 [PubMed: 22158104] 
7. Fu Y, et al. A cortical circuit for gain control by behavioral state. Cell. 2014; 156:1139–1152. DOI: 
10.1016/j.cell.2014.01.050 [PubMed: 24630718] 
8. Niell CM, Stryker MP. Modulation of visual responses by behavioral state in mouse visual cortex. 
Neuron. 2010; 65:472–479. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.01.033 [PubMed: 20188652] 
9. David SV, Fritz JB, Shamma SA. Task reward structure shapes rapid receptive field plasticity in 
auditory cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
2012; 109:2144–2149. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1117717109 [PubMed: 22308415] 
10. Tabossi P. Effects of Context on the Immediate Interpretation of Unambiguous Nouns. J Exp 
Psychol Learn. 1988; 14:153–162. DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.14.1.153
11. Gennari SP, MacDonald MC, Postle BR, Seidenberg MS. Context-dependent interpretation of 
words: Evidence for interactive neural processes. Neuroimage. 2007; 35:1278–1286. DOI: 
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.01.015 [PubMed: 17321757] 
12. Williamson RS, Hancock KE, Shinn-Cunningham BG, Polley DB. Locomotion and Task Demands 
Differentially Modulate Thalamic Audiovisual Processing during Active Search. Current biology: 
CB. 2015; 25:1885–1891. DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.05.045 [PubMed: 26119749] 
13. Jaramillo S, Borges K, Zador AM. Auditory Thalamus and Auditory Cortex Are Equally 
Modulated by Context during Flexible Categorization of Sounds. The Journal of neuroscience: the 
official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2014; 34:5291–5301. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
4888-13.2014 [PubMed: 24719107] 
14. McGinley MJ, David SV, McCormick DA. Cortical Membrane Potential Signature of Optimal 
States for Sensory Signal Detection. Neuron. 2015; 87:179–192. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.
2015.05.038 [PubMed: 26074005] 
15. Miller JM, et al. Single cell activity in the auditory cortex of Rhesus monkeys: behavioral 
dependency. Science. 1972; 177:449–451. [PubMed: 4625421] 
16. Hubel DH, Henson CO, Rupert A, Galambos R. Attention units in the auditory cortex. Science. 
1959; 129:1279–1280. [PubMed: 13658956] 
17. Zhou M, et al. Scaling down of balanced excitation and inhibition by active behavioral states in 
auditory cortex. Nature neuroscience. 2014; 17:841–850. DOI: 10.1038/nn.3701 [PubMed: 
24747575] 
18. Kato HK, Gillet SN, Isaacson JS. Flexible Sensory Representations in Auditory Cortex Driven by 
Behavioral Relevance. Neuron. 2015; 88:1027–1039. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.10.024 
[PubMed: 26586181] 
19. Tan AY, Wehr M. Balanced tone-evoked synaptic excitation and inhibition in mouse auditory 
cortex. Neuroscience. 2009; 163:1302–1315. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.07.032 [PubMed: 
19628023] 
20. Wehr M, Zador AM. Balanced inhibition underlies tuning and sharpens spike timing in auditory 
cortex. Nature. 2003; 426:442–446. DOI: 10.1038/nature02116 [PubMed: 14647382] 
21. Volkov IO, Galazjuk AV. Formation of spike response to sound tones in cat auditory cortex 
neurons: interaction of excitatory and inhibitory effects. Neuroscience. 1991; 43:307–321. 
[PubMed: 1922775] 
22. Anderson JS, Carandini M, Ferster D. Orientation tuning of input conductance, excitation, and 
inhibition in cat primary visual cortex. Journal of neurophysiology. 2000; 84:909–926. [PubMed: 
10938316] 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 23. Ferster D. Orientation selectivity of synaptic potentials in neurons of cat primary visual cortex. The 
Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 1986; 6:1284–1301. 
[PubMed: 3711980] 
24. Froemke RC. Plasticity of cortical excitatory-inhibitory balance. Annual review of neuroscience. 
2015; 38:195–219. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-071714-034002
25. Froemke RC, Merzenich MM, Schreiner CE. A synaptic memory trace for cortical receptive field 
plasticity. Nature. 2007; 450:425–429. DOI: 10.1038/nature06289 [PubMed: 18004384] 
26. Marlin BJ, Mitre M, D’Amour JA, Chao MV, Froemke RC. Oxytocin enables maternal behaviour 
by balancing cortical inhibition. Nature. 2015; 520:499–504. DOI: 10.1038/nature14402 [PubMed: 
25874674] 
27. Kuhlman SJ, et al. A disinhibitory microcircuit initiates critical-period plasticity in the visual 
cortex. Nature. 2013; 501:543–546. DOI: 10.1038/nature12485 [PubMed: 23975100] 
28. Bakin JS, Weinberger NM. Induction of a physiological memory in the cerebral cortex by 
stimulation of the nucleus basalis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America. 1996; 93:11219–11224. [PubMed: 8855336] 
29. Kilgard MP, Merzenich MM. Cortical map reorganization enabled by nucleus basalis activity. 
Science. 1998; 279:1714–1718. [PubMed: 9497289] 
30. Hangya B, Ranade SP, Lorenc M, Kepecs A. Central Cholinergic Neurons Are Rapidly Recruited 
by Reinforcement Feedback. Cell. 2015; 162:1155–1168. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.07.057 
[PubMed: 26317475] 
31. Pi HJ, et al. Cortical interneurons that specialize in disinhibitory control. Nature. 2013; 503:521–
524. DOI: 10.1038/nature12676 [PubMed: 24097352] 
32. Chubykin AA, Roach EB, Bear MF, Shuler MG. A cholinergic mechanism for reward timing 
within primary visual cortex. Neuron. 2013; 77:723–735. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.12.039 
[PubMed: 23439124] 
33. Lovett-Barron M, et al. Dendritic inhibition in the hippocampus supports fear learning. Science. 
2014; 343:857–863. DOI: 10.1126/science.1247485 [PubMed: 24558155] 
34. Vogels TP, Abbott LF. Gating multiple signals through detailed balance of excitation and inhibition 
in spiking networks. Nature neuroscience. 2009; 12:483–491. DOI: 10.1038/nn.2276 [PubMed: 
19305402] 
35. Rudy B, Fishell G, Lee S, Hjerling-Leffler J. Three groups of interneurons account for nearly 
100% of neocortical GABAergic neurons. Developmental neurobiology. 2011; 71:45–61. DOI: 
10.1002/dneu.20853 [PubMed: 21154909] 
36. Kepecs A, Fishell G. Interneuron cell types are fit to function. Nature. 2014; 505:318–326. DOI: 
10.1038/nature12983 [PubMed: 24429630] 
37. Xue M, Atallah BV, Scanziani M. Equalizing excitation-inhibition ratios across visual cortical 
neurons. Nature. 2014; 511:596–600. DOI: 10.1038/nature13321 [PubMed: 25043046] 
38. Xiang Z, Huguenard JR, Prince DA. Cholinergic switching within neocortical inhibitory networks. 
Science. 1998; 281:985–988. [PubMed: 9703513] 
39. Hasselmo ME, Bower JM. Acetylcholine and memory. Trends in neurosciences. 1993; 16:218–
222. [PubMed: 7688162] 
40. Kruglikov I, Rudy B. Perisomatic GABA release and thalamocortical integration onto neocortical 
excitatory cells are regulated by neuromodulators. Neuron. 2008; 58:911–924. DOI: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2008.04.024 [PubMed: 18579081] 
41. Froemke RC, et al. Long-term modification of cortical synapses improves sensory perception. 
Nature neuroscience. 2013; 16:79–88. DOI: 10.1038/nn.3274 [PubMed: 23178974] 
42. Dorrn AL, Yuan K, Barker AJ, Schreiner CE, Froemke RC. Developmental sensory experience 
balances cortical excitation and inhibition. Nature. 2010; 465:932–936. DOI: 10.1038/nature09119 
[PubMed: 20559387] 
43. Metherate R, Weinberger NM. Cholinergic modulation of responses to single tones produces tone-
specific receptive field alterations in cat auditory cortex. Synapse. 1990; 6:133–145. DOI: 
10.1002/syn.890060204 [PubMed: 2237776] 
44. Pinto L, et al. Fast modulation of visual perception by basal forebrain cholinergic neurons. Nature 
neuroscience. 2013; 16:1857–1863. DOI: 10.1038/nn.3552 [PubMed: 24162654] 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 45. Lin SC, Nicolelis MA. Neuronal ensemble bursting in the basal forebrain encodes salience 
irrespective of valence. Neuron. 2008; 59:138–149. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.04.031 [PubMed: 
18614035] 
46. Schneider DM, Nelson A, Mooney R. A synaptic and circuit basis for corollary discharge in the 
auditory cortex. Nature. 2014; 513:189–194. DOI: 10.1038/nature13724 [PubMed: 25162524] 
47. Lee S, Kruglikov I, Huang ZJ, Fishell G, Rudy B. A disinhibitory circuit mediates motor 
integration in the somatosensory cortex. Nature neuroscience. 2013; 16:1662–1670. DOI: 
10.1038/nn.3544 [PubMed: 24097044] 
48. Mayse JD, Nelson GM, Avila I, Gallagher M, Lin SC. Basal forebrain neuronal inhibition enables 
rapid behavioral stopping. Nature neuroscience. 2015
49. Kawai H, Lazar R, Metherate R. Nicotinic control of axon excitability regulates thalamocortical 
transmission. Nature neuroscience. 2007; 10:1168–1175. DOI: 10.1038/nn1956 [PubMed: 
17704774] 
50. Goard M, Dan Y. Basal forebrain activation enhances cortical coding of natural scenes. Nature 
neuroscience. 2009; 12:1444–1449. DOI: 10.1038/nn.2402 [PubMed: 19801988] 
51. Huber D, et al. Multiple dynamic representations in the motor cortex during sensorimotor learning. 
Nature. 2012; 484:473–478. DOI: 10.1038/nature11039 [PubMed: 22538608] 
52. Chen JL, Pfaffli OA, Voigt FF, Margolis DJ, Helmchen F. Online correction of licking-induced 
brain motion during two-photon imaging with a tunable lens. The Journal of physiology. 2013; 
591:4689–4698. DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2013.259804 [PubMed: 23940380] 
53. Vogelstein JT, et al. Fast nonnegative deconvolution for spike train inference from population 
calcium imaging. Journal of neurophysiology. 2010; 104:3691–3704. DOI: 10.1152/jn.01073.2009 
[PubMed: 20554834] 
54. Vallentin D, Kosche G, Lipkind D, Long MA. Neural circuits. Inhibition protects acquired song 
segments during vocal learning in zebra finches. Science. 2016; 351:267–271. DOI: 10.1126/
science.aad3023 [PubMed: 26816377] 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Task design and auditory cue selection. a, Behavioral schematic showing trial structure. In 
the active context, pure tones are played for 0.5 s at 70 db SPL, followed by a 0.25 s grace 
period, and a 1.75 s response window. The inter-trial interval (ITI) varied based on 
behavioral outcome with false alarms eliciting a 4 s time-out. In the passive context, the 
target and foil tones were played in a pseudo-random sequence with other pure tones (500 
ms, 70 db SPL). There was no punishment for licking in the passive context (i.e., the 
absence of licking was completely voluntary). b, Schematic of bilateral muscimol 
inactivation (1 μl of 1 mg/ml). Muscimol inactivation severely impaired behavioral 
performance (d′=3.0±0.2, muscimol d′=0.8±0.3%, mean±s.e.m., n=3 animals, Student’s 
paired two-tailed t-test, t(2)=7.733, p=0.0163; hit rate=98.7±0.9, muscimol hit 
rate=25.3±4.4%, mean±s.e.m., n=3 animals, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test, t(2)=20.79, 
p=0.0023) c, Example field-of-view for 2-photon Ca2+ imaging of tone-evoked activity in 
A1 of an awake mouse. Color indicates best frequency of each neuron. Gray, neurons that 
did not significantly respond to any tones played for baseline mapping between 4–64 khz. 
Note consistent low-frequency tuning in this field-of-view. d, Best frequency histogram 
(number of neurons with a certain best frequency). For this animal, the target was chosen to 
be 8 khz (green arrow) and the foil chosen to be 4.7 khz (red arrow). e, Summary of 
behavioral performance in 23 trained mice (hits: 47.2±0.9%, misses: 4.2±0.9%, false alarms: 
15.2±1.7%, correct rejects: 33.9±1.6%; mean±s.e.m.).
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Task engagement elicits suppression and facilitation of A1 neurons. a, Two example neurons 
(top, target tone responsive, ΔF/F=38±6%, passive, 11±2%, active; bottom, foil tone 
responsive, ΔF/F=29±3%, passive, 14±2%, active, mean±s.e.m.) from the same mouse 
showing suppression in the active context (left, traces and shading indicate mean±s.e.m.; 
right, 10 trial heatmap showing only correct trials, which include hits and correct rejects). 
Green and red horizontal bars indicate time of target or foil tone presentation, respectively. 
b, Two example neurons showing elevated tone-evoked responses in the active context (top, 
target tone responsive, ΔF/F=156±13%, passive, 200±2%, active; bottom, foil tone 
responsive, ΔF/F=40±4%, passive, 96±3%, active, mean±s.e.m.) in the active context (left, 
mean±s.e.m.; right, 10 correct trials). c, Putative spiking activity from deconvolved calcium 
signals of all target-responsive neurons, correct trials only in active context. Top, cells 
(n=227 from 5 animals) sorted from most suppressed to most activated when the context was 
switched from passive (‘P’) to active (‘A’). Bottom, modulation index for target-responsive 
neurons. Dashed lines indicate the 95% confidence intervals of a shuffled distribution. d, 
Deconvolved spiking activity for foil-responsive neurons, correct trials only in active 
context. Top, cells (n=210 from 5 animals) sorted from most suppressed to most activated in 
the active context. Bottom, modulation index for foil-responsive neurons. Dashed lines 
indicate the 95% confidence intervals of a shuffled distribution. e, Cumulative distribution of 
mean tone-evoked responses for the active and passive contexts (n=227 cells, p=0.0009, 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test). f, Example images of GCaMP6s (green) expressed specifically 
in excitatory neurons. g, Example of passive-context preferring excitatory neuron (top) and 
an active-context preferring neuron (bottom). h, Context modulation for all tone-responsive 
excitatory neurons (n=142 cells from 5 animals, correct trials only).
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Contextual modulation of inhibitory neurons. a, Example images of GCaMP6s (green) 
expressed in VIP+ interneurons. b, Comparison of trial-by-trial baseline calcium signal 
modulation across cell types (n=144 excitatory neurons, n=94 PV+ neurons, n=159 SOM+ 
neurons, n=79 VIP+ neurons, one-way ANOVA, F(3,472)=14.97, p<0.0001; p<0.05 in 
comparison to excitatory neurons for all cell types (*), Tukey’s post-hoc test). Baseline 
levels were computed as the non-evoked calcium levels either before or after tone-evoked 
responses. c, Example of increased activity in PV+ interneuron during the active context, 
correct trials only. d, Modulation index for all tone-responsive PV+ interneurons (n=31 cells, 
correct trials only, p=0.0065, Fisher’s Exact Test). e, Example of increased activity in SOM+ 
interneuron during the active context, correct trials only. f, Modulation index for all tone-
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 responsive SOM+ interneurons (n=20 cells, correct trials only, p=0.0335, Fisher’s Exact 
Test). g, Example of decreased activity in VIP+ interneuron during the active context. h, 
Modulation index for all tone-responsive VIP+ interneurons (n=36 neurons, correct trials 
only, p=0.0407, Fisher’s Exact Test). i, Comparison of context preference for each neuronal 
subtype (p<0.05 for excitatory pool (n=437 neurons) versus PV+ and SOM+, PV+ versus 
VIP+, and SOM+ versus VIP+, Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s post-hoc test).
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Inhibition acts as a synaptic switch when changing contexts. a, Schematic of whole-cell 
recording experiments during behavior with exposed hole in cranial window for electrode 
access. b, An example cell showing greater change in inhibitory peak (34.9%) than 
excitation peak (9.4%) when switching contexts. c, An example cell showing a large change 
in inhibition (40.0%,) compared to excitation (15.5) when switching contexts. d, Histograms 
of changes in inhibition and excitation for all neurons (n=12 neurons, n=4 mice). e, 
Magnitude (absolute value) of inhibitory and excitatory changes in active versus passive 
contexts for all neurons (ΔIPSC: 34.9±4.1%, ΔEPSC: 16.1±3.5%, mean±s.e.m., n=12 cells, 
Student’s paired two-tailed t-test, t(11)=3.242, p=0.0079 (*); green circles denote significant 
context-dependent changes in currents within neuron, p<0.05, Student’s paired two-tailed t-
test. f, Schematic of whole-cell recording experiments during behavior and optogenetic 
illumination. Circuit diagrams indicating inactivation of each interneuron subtype in separate 
experiments (optical suppression begins 100 ms before tone onset and continues for 100 ms 
after tone offset). g, Behavioral performance with and without optical suppression of PV, 
SOM or VIP interneurons (all: n=15 animals, control d′=2.6±0.2, opto d′=1.1±0.2, 
Student’s paired two-tailed t-test, t(14)=6.999, p<0.0001; ‘PV’: n=5 animals, control d
′=1.9±0.2, opto d′=0.7±0.3, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test, t(4)=3.5736, p=0.0233; 
‘SOM’: n=5 animals, control d′=3.2±0.3, opto d′=1.7±0.4, Student’s paired two-tailed t-
test, t(4)=5.3464, p=0.0059; ‘VIP’: n=5 animals, control d′=2.7±0.5, opto d′=1.1±0.3), 
Student’s paired two-tailed t-test, t(4)=3.3833, p=0.0277. h, Summary of whole-cell voltage 
clamp recordings (all: n=13 neurons in 8 mice, ΔIPSC(control): 42.0±6.0%, ΔIPSC(opto): 
19.6±3.5%, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test, t(12)=5.764, p<0.0001; ‘PV+’: n=7 neurons in 
3 mice, ΔIPSC(control): 50.8±9.7%, ΔIPSC(opto): 21.1±5.6%, Student’s paired two-tailed t-
test, t(6)=5.350, p=0.0017; ‘SOM+’: n=5 neurons, ΔIPSC(control): 30.7±6.1%, 
ΔIPSC(opto): 23.6±3.7%, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test, t(4)=3.109, p=0.0529; VIP: n=2 
neurons, ΔIPSC(control): 23.5±7.5%, ΔIPSC(opto): 9.3±5.4%, Student’s paired two-tailed t-
test, t(1)=7.003, p=0.0903). i, top; Optical suppression of PV+ or SOM+ interneurons 
increases pyramidal spiking in the active context (control=1.9±0.6 spikes per bin, 
opto=2.9±0.9 spikes per bin, Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.0039, n=5 neurons with SOM+ 
inactivation (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.0039), and 4 neurons with PV+ inactivation 
(Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.0313)). bottom; Optical suppression of VIP+ interneurons 
reduces pyramidal spiking in the active context (control=0.34±0.05 spikes per bin, 
opto=0.02±0.02 spikes per bin, Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.0313, n=6 neurons).
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Cholinergic activity is necessary and partially sufficient to control behavior via inhibitory 
networks. a, Grayscale image of cholinergic axon segments in a ChAT-cre mouse. b, Image 
from a, pseudocolored to show differences in activity between two adjacent epochs of 
passive context behavior. c, Image from a pseudocolored to compare differences in average 
activity between two adjacent epochs (switching from active to passive). d, Axonal segments 
from one mouse. Each row represents the responses of one axon segment, where the 
grayscale indicates ΔF/F across contexts (n=333 axon segments). e, Comparison of overall 
activity levels in the active versus passive context across animals (ChAT-cre: n=3 mice, 
n=542 cholinergic axon segments, p<0.0001 intra-animal, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test; 
inter-animal, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test, t(2)=7.321, p=0.0181; c57: n=2 mice, 
n=1,058 axon segments, p<0.0001 intra-animal, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test). f, 
Performance of a Bayesian decoder on the axons shown in a–c. Red line denotes actual 
position of licktube and the associated behavioral context and the black circles and line 
indicates the decoded licktube position based solely on the cholinergic signal. g, Summary 
of decoding performance across animals and sites (Predicted: 77.9±3.9%, Shuffled: 
50.6±2.0%, n=4 sites in 3 animals, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test, t(3)=6.394, p=0.0077). 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 h, Behavioral schematic showing local unilateral application of atropine during behavior. i, 
Hit rate for unilateral application over auditory cortex (atropine hit rate: 0.65±0.06 in 11 
sessions, saline hit rate: 0.82±0.04 in 12 sessions, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test, 
t(21)=2.439, p=0.0237, n=12 control sessions; n=11 sessions with unilateral application of 
atropine to auditory cortex). j, In control conditions, when transitioning to the active context, 
the hit rate immediately reached steady state (first trial hit rate = 92±8%, steady state = 
90±1.8%, p=0.85, Wilcoxon sign-rank test when comparing hit rate for trials 1–4 in the 
active context versus trials 11–14). In atropine conditions, the animal’s hit rate started 
significantly lower before reaching steady state (first trial hit rate=57.1±20.2%, stead 
state=80.6±4.0%, p=0.03, Wilcoxon sign-rank test when comparing hit rate for trials 1–4 in 
the active context versus trials 11–14). k, Behavioral schematic showing optical illumination 
of auditory cortex during behavior. l, ChAT-ChR2 animals can learn the active context 
behavioral task within the same time frame as other genotypes (n=3 mice, trained d
′=3.1±0.5). m, left, The hit rate in the active context is not effected by optical activation of 
cholinergic terminals (n=8 sessions in 3 mice, p=0.2188, Wilcoxon signed rank test). right, 
The hit rate is significantly elevated by ~80% in the passive context during optical activation 
of cholinergic terminals (control: 12±5%, opto: 22±10%, n=9 sessions in 3 mice, p=0.0156, 
Wilcoxon signed rank test).
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Cholinergic activity impacts inhibition directly. a, Schematic of slice recordings in mice 
expressing tdTomato in either PV, SOM, or VIP interneurons. b, Example in vitro recordings 
from adult mouse auditory cortex showing average resting membrane potential (RMP) in 2s 
and 10s sweeps. Please note that spikes have been removed in the SOM+ recordings. 
Synaptic blockers (DNQX, APV and Picrotoxin) were washed in for at least 5 minutes prior 
to muscarine wash-in (1–2 μM). c, Summary of in vitro recordings showing significantly 
greater depolarization of cortical interneurons in comparison to excitatory neurons (overall: 
n=19 interneurons, n=15 excitatory neurons, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test, t(32)=4.44, 
p=0.0001, spikes removed; cell-type specific responses: PV+: n=7, median=+5.6mV, 
interquartile range: 5.1–9.4; SOM+: n=7, median=+8.2mV, interquartile range: 7.2–18.3; 
VIP+: n=5, median=+8.6mV, interquartile range: 3.8–9.6; one-way ANOVA, F(4,30)=9.015, 
p=0.0001; p<0.05 for all interneuron subtypes versus excitatory neurons (PV: p=0.0218; 
SOM: p<0.0001; VIP: p=0.0182), Tukey’s post-hoc test). d, Setup for whole-cell recording 
with local pharmacology in behaving head-fixed mice. e, Two example cells from two 
different animals that showed only modest contextual changes in tone-evoked IPSCs in 
presence of atropine (1 mM). f, Absolute value of change in inhibition versus excitation in 
atropine (ΔIPSC: 19.7±5.6%, ΔEPSC: 30.3±5.6%, n=7 cells, Student’s paired two-tailed t-
test, t(6)=3.3252, p=0.0159, green circles denote significant context-dependent changes in 
currents within neuron, p<0.05, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test within neuron). g, Setup 
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 for whole-cell recording and optogenetics in ChAT-ChR2 mice. h, Example recordings from 
the same cell, showing tone-evoked responses to 13.5 kHz (left) and 26.9 kHz (right) with 
and without optogenetic cholinergic modulation in auditory cortex. Left, 13.5 kHz responses 
showed greater increase in inhibitory peak (+38.8%) and integral (+23.4%) than decrease in 
excitatory peak (−35.9%) and integral (+0.0%). Right, 26.9 kHz responses showed greater 
decrease in inhibitory peak (−85.2%) and integral (−30.0%,) than increase in excitatory peak 
(+35.6%) and integral (+24.3%) when switching optogenetic illumination on and off. i, 
Magnitude (absolute value) of inhibitory and excitatory changes between optogenetic 
illumination on and off for all neurons across complete tuning curve (ΔIPSC: 17.8±2.5%, 
ΔEPSC: 12.6±1.7%, n=5 cells, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test, t(4)=3.399, p=0.0273, 
green circles denote significant context-dependent changes in currents within neuron, 
p<0.05, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test within neuron).
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 33
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. 
Network model demonstrates requirement for co-activation of inhibitory and disinhibitory 
circuit elements. a, Schematic of the four-unit rate-based model. b, Evoked and baseline 
firing rates of each cell type in the 4-unit model. Gray circles represent experimental values 
derived from the literature. c, Changes in activity of all subtypes due to context (Active – 
Passive). The top plot shows the experimental values in terms contextual modulation index. 
The remaining plots relate to the network model and show changes in firing rates when 
acetylcholine activates PV+, VIP+, & SOM+ populations either simultaneously (second 
plot) or individually (third through fifth plots). Red outlines indicate directional changes that 
do not match the observed direction of change. d, Schematic of the multi-unit model in 
which each population is comprised of several rate units. The gray box shows the 
distribution of active and passive preferring excitatory cells in the model. e, Histograms of 
the changes in synaptic inputs due to context (in terms of percent of total input in passive 
condition) for total excitatory (left) and inhibitory (right) input to individual E cells in the 
multi-unit model. Note the diversity in inhibitory inputs.
Kuchibhotla et al.
Page 34
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
