 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 2 9 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
Introduction
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) is a major cause of infec-
tious diarrhea in the developing world (1, 2). These organisms are 
estimated to be responsible for millions of infections and hundreds 
of thousands of deaths, particularly of young children (3). Like-
wise, these pathogens are a principal cause of diarrhea in travelers 
to endemic areas and an occasional cause of illness in developed 
countries (4–7). Despite significant declines in deaths from acute 
diarrhea (8), enteric infections caused by ETEC and other patho-
gens remain inextricably associated with malnutrition, stunted 
growth, and impaired intellectual development (9), poorly under-
stood sequelae that appear to result from gut dysfunction that fol-
lows repeated episodes of diarrhea in childhood (10). The ultimate 
impact of these illnesses is further amplified by poor responses to 
vaccines, increased mortality from other infections, and emerging 
evidence that early gut dysfunction may be reflected in the subse-
quent development of obesity and its attendant metabolic compli-
cations (11, 12). Consequently, these infections continue to exact 
an extraordinary toll on global health.
The ETEC pathovar is defined by the production of plasmid-
encoded heat-labile (LT) and/or heat-stable (ST) enterotoxins 
(13). Effective delivery of these toxins to cognate receptors on the 
surface of intestinal epithelial cells is ultimately required to drive 
net salt and water efflux into the lumen of the small intestine, 
which results in diarrhea. Although ETEC was originally identified 
in individuals suffering from severe cholera-like diarrhea (14), the 
manifestations of infection may range from asymptomatic coloni-
zation to fulminant illness clinically indistinguishable from that 
caused by Vibrio cholerae (15–17). The molecular basis for these 
varied clinical presentations is presently unclear.
In the classic paradigm for ETEC virulence, these organisms 
adhere to small intestinal epithelia via plasmid-encoded fimbrial 
colonization factors to effect toxin delivery. However, recent stud-
ies suggest that the molecular pathogenesis of this diverse group 
of pathogens may involve a repertoire of additional virulence fea-
tures (18–20), including a variety of different adhesins to interact 
with the intestinal epithelium (21).
Because of their impact on global health, these pathogens are 
a principal target for vaccine development (22). Although there is 
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) infections are highly prevalent in developing countries, where clinical presentations 
range from asymptomatic colonization to severe cholera-like illness. The molecular basis for these varied presentations, 
which may involve strain-specific virulence features as well as host factors, has not been elucidated. We demonstrate 
that, when challenged with ETEC strain H10407, originally isolated from a case of cholera-like illness, blood group A 
human volunteers developed severe diarrhea more frequently than individuals from other blood groups. Interestingly, 
a diverse population of ETEC strains, including H10407, secrete the EtpA adhesin molecule. As many bacterial adhesins 
also agglutinate red blood cells, we combined the use of glycan arrays, biolayer inferometry, and noncanonical amino 
acid labeling with hemagglutination studies to demonstrate that EtpA is a dominant ETEC blood group A–specific lectin/
hemagglutinin. Importantly, we have also shown that EtpA interacts specifically with glycans expressed on intestinal 
epithelial cells from blood group A individuals and that EtpA-mediated bacterial-host interactions accelerate bacterial 
adhesion and effective delivery of both the heat-labile and heat-stable toxins of ETEC. Collectively, these data provide 
additional insight into the complex molecular basis of severe ETEC diarrheal illness that may inform rational design of 
vaccines to protect those at highest risk.
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli–blood group A 
interactions intensify diarrheal severity
Pardeep Kumar,1 F. Matthew Kuhlmann,1 Subhra Chakraborty,2 A. Louis Bourgeois,2 Jennifer Foulke-Abel,3 Brunda Tumala,1  
Tim J. Vickers,1 David A. Sack,2 Barbara DeNearing,2 Clayton D. Harro,2 W. Shea Wright,4 Jeffrey C. Gildersleeve,4  
Matthew A. Ciorba,5 Srikanth Santhanam,5 Chad K. Porter,6 Ramiro L. Gutierrez,6 Michael G. Prouty,6 Mark S. Riddle,6  
Alexander Polino,7 Alaullah Sheikh,7 Mark Donowitz,3 and James M. Fleckenstein1,7,8
1Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. 2Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School  
of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 3Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 4Center for Cancer Research,  
Chemical Biology Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, Fredrick, Maryland, USA. 5Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,  
Missouri, USA. 6Enteric Disease Department, Infectious Disease Directorate, Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA. 7Molecular Microbiology and Microbial Pathogenesis Program, 
Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. 8Medicine Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
Authorship note: PK and FMK are co–first authors. CDH is deceased.
Conflict of interest: JMF is listed as the inventor on US patent 12/079,304, involving the 
EtpA adhesin.
Submitted: September 25, 2017; Accepted: May 3, 2018.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2018;128(8):3298–3311. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI97659.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 2 9 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
ness following H10407 challenge tends to be significantly more 
severe than that associated with other ETEC strains (42, 43), the 
severity of diarrhea can vary substantially among volunteers with-
in the same cohort, implicating the involvement of one or more 
host factors in disease outcome.
Here, we demonstrate that, when challenged with H10407, 
naive human volunteers with blood group A are at substantially 
increased risk for severe diarrhea relative to other blood groups. In 
addition, we found that the EtpA adhesin is a lectin that selectively 
promotes interaction of ETEC with human small intestinal epithe-
lial cells expressing blood group A glycans. These EtpA-dependent 
ETEC-host interactions potentially provide a molecular basis for 
selection and an accelerated course of illness in blood group A–
positive hosts.
Results
Blood group A volunteers challenged with ETEC have more severe dis-
ease. Because pathogen interactions with human blood group anti-
gens can influence the outcome of infection by other gastrointes-
tinal pathogens (44, 45), we questioned whether diarrheal severity 
following ETEC infection was determined by blood group. To exam-
ine the impact of ABO blood groups on the development of diarrhe-
al illness, we analyzed samples from 106 adult human volunteers 
who had participated in any 1 of 4 earlier controlled human infec-
tion model studies in which they were challenged with ETEC strain 
H10407 at the Johns Hopkins Center for Immunization Research 
(Baltimore, Maryland, USA) and for whom prospectively collected 
metadata on diarrheal severity were available. Each volunteer was 
currently no vaccine based on the classical virulence paradigm that 
affords significant broad-based protection against ETEC (23), more 
recently discovered virulence factors and an improved understand-
ing of ETEC microbial pathogenesis could offer additional avenues 
to protect those at highest risk for severe disease and uncover novel 
molecular targets for future vaccine development (24).
Among the more recently described putative virulence mol-
ecules not targeted in the current generation of ETEC vaccines 
is EtpA, a high–molecular weight secreted adhesin (25) bridge 
between ETEC and intestinal epithelia (26). EtpA appears to be 
conserved among a phylogenetically and geographically diverse 
population of ETEC strains (27–29) and has shown promise as a 
protective antigen in preclinical vaccine studies (30–33). Never-
theless, many questions remain to be answered about the contri-
bution of this antigen and other molecules to disease pathogen-
esis and their potential use in vaccines relative to canonical ETEC 
pathovar–specific adhesins.
One approach that has been used to explore ETEC pathogen 
biology is the controlled human infection model, in which healthy 
immunologically naive volunteers are challenged by ingestion of 
enterotoxigenic E. coli. Notably, this model was used initially to 
establish these toxin-producing E. coli as a cause of diarrheal ill-
ness in humans (34) and subsequently to examine virulence fea-
tures of ETEC (35) and immune responses to experimental infec-
tion (36) and to conduct vaccine studies (37–40). The majority of 
ETEC human-challenge studies conducted to date have involved 
H10407, a prototype strain originally isolated from an adult with 
severe, cholera-like illness in Bangladesh (41). While diarrheal ill-
Figure 1. Diarrheal severity is increased in blood group A–positive volunteers relative to those in the non-A blood groups. (A) Development of severe 
diarrheal illness is accelerated in A blood group hosts. Kaplan-Meier curves indicate the proportion of subjects treated following the development of severe 
diarrheal illness in volunteers belonging to A and non-A blood groups. Time-to-treatment data were available for 79 of the 106 subjects (18 subjects in the 
A blood group and 61 subjects in the non-A group). Data were censored at 120 hours, when all remaining untreated individuals received antibiotics to clear 
their infection. P = 0.015, log-rank (Mantel-Cox) testing. (B) Individuals of A blood group are more likely to develop MSD. Shown are relative risk data  
from 4 independent controlled human infection model challenge studies of H10407 involving a total of 106 volunteers. Study numbers at left refer to  
ClinicalTrials.gov designations. Box size indicates relative study size, and lines represent 95% CIs for the relative risk of severe diarrhea. The width of the 
diamond indicates the 95% CIs for the pooled effect. The relative risk (pooled fixed effects) of MSD illness dichotomized by A (blood groups A and AB) vs. 
non-A (O and B) was 1.441 (95% CI, 1.097 to 1.893; P = 0.009). Cochran’s Q test of heterogeneity was insignificant (P = 0.667, Q = 1.5682, df = 3).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 0 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
ments, we found that EtpA interacted with blood group A–related 
glycans with high affinity when the glycan was presented as a 
multivalent trisaccharide conjugated to polyacrylamide (PAA): 
GalNAcα1-3 (Fucα1,2)Galβ-PAA, where Gal indicates galactose; 
kD, ~9 × 10–8 M (Figure 2B). Similarly, we demonstrated that EtpA 
can engage N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) (kD, ~1.6 × 10–8 M), 
the terminal sugar in blood group A, with higher affinity than Gal 
(kD, ~1.9 × 10–7), the terminal sugar of blood group B (Figure 2C). 
Collectively, these studies suggest that the EtpA adhesin is a blood 
group A–specific lectin.
Many bacterial adhesins possess the ability to agglutinate 
RBCs. Included among these adhesins is filamentous hemag-
glutinin from Bordetella pertussis (50), a component of acellular 
pertussis vaccines (51), which, like EtpA, belongs to the 2-partner 
family of bacterial exoproteins (25). We found that EtpA could 
decorate the surface of human RBCs belonging to blood group 
A1 (Figure 3A) and, to a lesser extent, cells from those individuals 
from blood group A2 who exhibit lower levels of the glycosyltrans-
ferase enzyme activity required for addition of terminal GalNAc 
residues that determine the A blood group (52); however, only a 
small percentage of blood group B or O erythrocytes had detect-
able EtpA on the surface. Similarly, in RBC pull-down assays, more 
rEtpA remained associated with erythrocytes from the A1 and A2 
blood groups (Figure 3B) than those from the B or O blood groups. 
In addition, incubation of EtpA with RBCs from blood group A1 
resulted in agglutination, but yielded poor agglutination activity 
with other RBCs (Figure 3C). In addition, pretreatment of target 
A1 cells with α-N-acetylgalactosaminidase completely abrogated 
the hemagglutinin activity of EtpA (Figure 3D) as did addition of 
excess GalNAc, but not GlcNAc or Gal, the terminal sugar of blood 
group B (Supplemental Figure 2). We also demonstrated that latex 
microparticles coated with EtpA specifically agglutinated A1 RBCs 
(Figure 3E). EtpA therefore belongs to a large family of bacterial 
adhesins that possess lectin/hemagglutinin activity (46), and this 
protein preferentially targets GalNac residues presented in the 
context of the A blood group.
EtpA is a predominant blood group A–binding partner in ETEC. 
Next, to determine whether EtpA is the predominant blood group 
A–binding partner in ETEC, we examined interaction of A blood 
group glycans with subcellular protein fractions isolated from 
H10407. Blood group A glycans interacted only with a high molecu-
lar weight species (in excess of 150 kD) in culture supernatants, 
with no detectable interaction with preparations from the inner or 
outer membranes (Figure 4A). Because the EtpA adhesin is the only 
known ETEC-specific virulence molecule in the ETEC secretome 
of this size (53), we next compared binding of blood group A gly-
cans to secreted proteins from the WT H10407 strain and isogenic 
etpA mutants. Binding occurred only in supernatants prepared from 
WT ETEC or the complemented etpA mutant strain, but not the 
etpA isogenic deletion mutant (Figure 4, B–D). Interestingly, blood 
group A erythrocytes have been traditionally used to screen for the 
presence of CFA/I fimbriae in ETEC (54). However, we found that 
CFA/I mediated nonspecific hemagglutination of RBCs regardless 
of blood type, a result that is consistent with the idea that CFA/I 
interactions are mediated via sialic acid (55) (Supplemental Figure 
3). To further confirm the role of EtpA in mediating interaction with 
the A blood group, we next tagged the ETEC proteome using the 
challenged with 1 to 2 × 107 colony-forming units of ETEC H10407 
and was ETEC-naive prior to experimental challenge. All subjects 
were treated with antibiotics upon meeting early treatment criteria 
(Supplemental Table 1; supplemental material available online with 
this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/JCI97659DS1) or at 120 hours 
after inoculation to clear their infections.
Interestingly, we found that development of severe diarrheal 
illness was significantly (P = 0.015) accelerated in individuals 
with blood group A relative to those in non-A blood groups (Fig-
ure 1A), with volunteers in the A blood group requiring early ini-
tiation of antibiotic therapy more frequently (72%) than those in 
blood group B or O (43%). Despite earlier antibiotic administra-
tion, maximal diarrheal volumes over 24 hours, total diarrheal vol-
ume prior to treatment, and the frequency of diarrheal episodes 
tended to be higher in A versus non-A individuals (Supplemental 
Figure 1, A–D). Notably, individuals with blood groups B or O were 
considerably more likely to remain free of diarrhea or have mild 
diarrhea (44%) following challenge than volunteers expressing 
the A blood group (19%) (Table 1). Conversely, of the 106 subjects, 
81% of those expressing the A blood group antigen (type A or AB) 
had moderate-to-severe diarrhea (MSD) compared with 56% of 
individuals with non-A (B or O) blood types (P = 0.017), and the 
overall relative risk of MSD among individuals with the A blood 
group compared with the non-A blood groups was 1.44 (95% CI 
= 1.1–1.9, P = 0.009) (Figure 1B and Supplemental Table 2). These 
data therefore suggest that, upon challenge with H10407, blood 
group A volunteers (Supplemental Tables 3 and 4) are markedly 
more likely to manifest the severe, cholera-like spectrum of illness 
originally associated with this isolate.
EtpA interacts specifically with blood group A glycans. Patho-
gens use adhesins possessing glycan-specific lectin activity (46) 
to engage blood group antigens expressed on mucosal surfaces, 
including the gastrointestinal tract (47). The apical surface of 
intestinal epithelial cells is heavily decorated with a variety of 
glycoproteins that form the glycocalyx (48), and glycosylation pat-
terns of these proteins are in part determined by blood group (47, 
49). Because earlier studies had suggested that EtpA, a secreted 
adhesin molecule discovered in H10407 (25), engages the surface 
of gastrointestinal epithelia, we conducted glycan-array screening 
to further elucidate the nature of EtpA-mediated bacterial adhe-
sion. Using recombinant EtpA (rEtpA) to probe arrays contain-
ing more than 400 unique glycan species, we found that rEtpA 
interacted almost exclusively with glycans related to blood group 
A. In contrast, we observed little or no binding to other glycans, 
including those of blood group B or blood group O (Figure 2A and 
Supplemental Data Set 1). Next, in biolayer interferometry experi-
Table 1. Diarrheal illness and severity by blood group
Blood group
Diarrheal severity
O or B
A or AB
Total subjects (%)
None to mild
35 (44)
5 (19)
40 (38)
MSD
44 (56)
22 (81)A
66 (62)
Total subjects
79
27
106
APearson χ2 = 5.694, 1 df, P = 0.017.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 0 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
glycans on the surface of intestinal enterocytes might therefore 
direct EtpA-mediated interactions required for effective bacte-
rial adhesion and toxin delivery. Using HT-29 intestinal cells 
derived from a blood group A–positive host, we found that EtpA 
bound to the surface of these cells and colocalized with blood 
group A glycans (Figure 5A). Conversely, rEtpA bound very poorly 
to the surface of HT-29A–/– cells, an HT-29–derived line that was 
CRISPR-Cas9 engineered to eliminate the gene encoding the gly-
cosyltransferase responsible for the addition of terminal GalNac 
residues to the core H (blood group O) antigen (45). Likewise, 
we found that EtpA from ANL-tagged WT ETEC interacted pref-
erentially with HT-29 parental cells compared with the mutant 
HT-29A–/– cells (Figure 5B). Interestingly, EtpA-expressing ETEC 
localized to regions of blood group A expression on the surface 
of HT-29 cells (Figure 5C), and EtpA-expressing ETEC adhered 
noncanonical amino acid azidonorleucine (ANL) (56) and incu-
bated tagged supernatant and outer membrane protein (OMP) frac-
tions with erythrocytes. Again, we found that a single band from 
tagged WT supernatant, corresponding to EtpA, bound apprecia-
bly only to A1 erythrocytes (Figure 4E). However, testing of ANL-
labeled OMPs purified from H10407 failed to detect any specific 
interactions of ETEC OMPs with RBCs of any major blood group 
(Supplemental Figure 4), further suggesting that the secreted EtpA 
molecule is the dominant blood group A–specific lectin expressed 
on the surface of ETEC. We also demonstrated that EtpA expression 
by a geographically diverse group of ETEC conferred the ability to 
bind blood group A, suggesting that these findings are not limited to 
the H10407 prototype strain (Supplemental Figure 5, A–D).
EtpA directs ETEC interaction with blood group A on host intes-
tinal epithelial cells. We questioned whether blood group A–related 
Figure 2. EtpA interacts preferentially with blood group A glycans. (A) Glycan-array data (top row) demonstrating EtpA binding predominately to blood 
group A glycans. The top 100 of 411 glycans are ranked in order of diminishing binding activity from left to right. BSA (middle row) is shown as a control. 
Values represent background-corrected median data from 2 experimental replicates. Distribution of blood group (bg) binding is shown in the bottom row 
of the figure. Heatmap key (lower right) shows relative fluorescence units (rfu) and coding for blood group antigens. Names for glycans correspond to 
Supplemental Data Set 1. (B) EtpA binding to blood group A glycans assessed by Bio-Layer Interferometery (Pall ForteBio Corp.) assays. Data are represen-
tative of 3 independent experiments. Blood group A3 refers to the biotinylated trisaccharide-PAA conjugate GalNAcα1-3 (Fucα1,2)Galβ-PAA-biotin; blood 
group A2 refers to the disaccharide conjugate GalNAcα1-3Galβ-PAA-biotin. (C) EtpA binding to terminal GalNAc residues relative to Gal schematic (right) 
shows structures of blood groups A and B terminating in GalNAc and Gal sugars, respectively. Blood group O (core H) lacks either terminal sugar residue.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 0 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
adhesin bound very poorly to cells expressing either B or O blood 
groups (Figure 6, A and B). We also found EtpA-expressing bacte-
ria within areas of blood group A expression on the epithelial sur-
face of polarized enteroids (Figure 6C), and interestingly, we also 
observed apparent rearrangement or “footprints” of the A blood 
group at sites of bacterial attachment, suggesting an intimate 
interaction of ETEC with these cell-surface glycans (Figure 6D). 
Finally, we found that ETEC adhered much more readily to polar-
ized intestinal monolayers derived from individuals with blood 
group A compared with other blood groups (Figure 6E) and that 
adhesion of WT ETEC to A blood group enteroids was significant-
ly accelerated relative to that of bacteria lacking etpA (Figure 6F), 
culminating in enhanced toxin delivery by the EtpA-expressing 
WT (Figure 6, G and H). EtpA therefore appears to be a dominant 
pathovar-specific lectin uniquely capable of preferentially engag-
ing A blood group glycans expressed on small intestinal epithelial 
surfaces to accelerate effective ETEC pathogen-host interactions.
Discussion
Blood group–dependent microbial-host interactions can dictate 
clinical outcomes of infection with important gastrointestinal 
pathogens. In the case of Helicobacter pylori, the BabA adhesin 
facilitates attachment to the gastric mucosae by engaging ABO 
(60) and Leb, blood group antigens potentiating the delivery of 
other secreted virulence factors that lead to development of gastric 
ulcers and cancer (44, 60, 61). Similarly, the clear epidemiologic 
more readily to parental cells expressing blood group A (Figure 
5, D and E, and Supplemental Figure 6A). Importantly, we found 
that optimal delivery of LT toxin required both EtpA (Supple-
mental Figure 6B) and the presence of the A blood group antigen 
(Figure 5F). Similarly, we noted that addition of exogenous Gal-
NAc impaired both EtpA-mediated adhesion and toxin delivery to 
HT29 parental cells (Supplemental Figure 7, A and B), suggesting 
that this terminal glycan on blood group A is important for EtpA 
pathogen–epithelial cell interactions. Notably, while purified LT 
was significantly less potent than cholera toxin (CT) in activating 
cAMP in target cells, direct toxin-mediated activation of this cyclic 
nucleotide was actually enhanced in cells lacking the A blood 
group (Supplemental Figure 8), recapitulating recent observations 
with CT (45). Collectively, these data suggest that the presence of 
blood group A effectively promotes bacterial adhesion and ETEC-
host interactions that culminate in enhanced toxin delivery.
HT-29 cells are derived from a metastatic colorectal carci-
noma, and glycan distribution can vary significantly with location 
within the gastrointestinal tract (57). In addition, ETEC are thought 
to preferentially target the small intestine, where the bulk of fluid 
secretion occurs following colonization, rather than the colon.
We sought, therefore, to confirm these interactions using 
small intestinal enteroids (58, 59) derived from human stem 
cells obtained from individuals belonging to each of the major 
ABO blood groups. Using ileal enteroids, we found that, while 
EtpA clearly bound to cells from group A individuals, the purified 
Figure 3. EtpA is a blood group A–specific hemagglutinin. 
(A) Binding of rEtpA to the surface of group A1 and A2 RBC 
ghosts relative to B and O RBCs is shown in FACS data and 
a graph. (B) RBC pull-down of rEtpA with different blood 
group ghost erythrocytes. Shown in the immunoblot is 
rEtpA-myc-his identified by anti-myc antibodies. (C) EtpA 
agglutinates A1 RBCs, but exhibits minimal or no hemag-
glutination activity with RBCs from those with A2, B, or O 
blood groups. The column on the right includes anti–A blood 
group antibodies as a positive control. (D) EtpA-mediated 
hemagglutination is dependent on terminal GalNac residues. 
A1 RBCS pretreated with α-N-acetylgalactosaminidase (top 
row) fail to agglutinate in the presence of rEtpA. Shown (row 
2, left) are positive controls (no enzyme pretreatment) and 
blood group O–negative controls (bottom rows). (E) EtpA-
coated latex microspheres (top row) agglutinate RBCs from 
blood group A, but not B or O. Bottom row shows BSA-coated 
particles as controls. Each of the images are representative 
of 3 experimental replicates. Original magnification, ×40.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 0 3
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
associations between severe V. cholerae infections and the O blood 
group (62–66) are reflected in recent observations that CT prefer-
entially activates enterocytes of blood group O lineage (45). Both 
CT and the closely related LT toxin of enterotoxigenic E. coli appear 
to share in a differential binding of blood group antigens that favors 
intoxication of blood group O enterocytes (67, 68). Interestingly, 
because of the molecular similarity between CT and LT, some ear-
lier field studies examined ETEC outcomes relative to blood group 
with the implicit assumption that LT-producing ETEC would lead 
to more severe disease following infection of O blood group hosts; 
however, these studies yielded conflicting results (69, 70).
In contrast, from the human volunteer ETEC challenge stud-
ies, a surprising, but clear, relationship between the A blood group 
and disease severity began to emerge. The ETEC controlled 
human infection model has a number of potential advantages 
over prior field studies (3, 62, 69, 70) in defining a molecular basis 
for disease. First, the present studies were confined to ETEC-
naive adults challenged with a defined inoculum of a single strain 
(H10407) isolated from an individual with severe cholera-like ill-
ness (41). The controlled human infection model may have there-
fore permitted us to unmask somewhat subtle molecular asso-
ciations that might have otherwise been hidden by confounding 
variables common to field studies of enteric infections in devel-
oping countries, including malnutrition, breast feeding, altered 
microbiota, and coinfection with other enteric pathogens as well 
as the genetic variability inherent in the infecting ETEC strains.
The studies presented here provide an expanded view of ETEC 
pathogen-host interactions beyond a classical paradigm in which 
these organisms engage the intestinal surface via fimbrial coloni-
zation factors and deliver LT and/or ST enterotoxins. The present 
studies of ETEC paint a more complex picture in which A blood 
group expression potentially facilitates EtpA-mediated lectin- 
specific bacterial interactions with intestinal epithelia that culmi-
nate in effective toxin delivery and symptomatic diarrheal illness.
Our studies suggest that the many ETEC strains that produce 
the EtpA adhesin (27, 29) may be particularly well equipped to 
preferentially infect hosts who express the A blood group antigen 
on mucosal surfaces. When infected with H10407, an EtpA-pro-
ducing strain, immunologically naive subjects with blood group 
A appear to be at significantly increased risk for diarrheal illness, 
and the ensuing diarrhea tends to be more severe relative to the 
other major blood groups. Intriguingly, the ETEC H10407 strain, 
isolated from a case of severe cholera-like diarrheal illness more 
than 40 years ago, is typically among the most virulent strains to 
be tested in human-challenge studies (43, 71).
It is likely however, that while EtpA leads to enhanced viru-
lence in blood group A hosts, other putative virulence factors iden-
tified in H10407, including the mucin-degrading EatA protease 
(19), collectively augment virulence by accelerating toxin delivery 
that culminates in severe diarrhea.
Several additional features of our studies deserve comment. 
We were not able to examine “secretor status,” i.e., expression 
Figure 4. EtpA is a dominant blood group A–binding partner of ETEC 
H10407. (A) Blood group A antigen far-Western blot with subcellular 
fractions of ETEC H10407 including supernatant (S), outer membrane 
(OM), and inner membrane (IM) demonstrates binding of biotinylated 
blood group A to high molecular weight protein in concentrated cul-
ture supernatant. (B) Coomassie-stained gel of supernatant proteins 
from H10407 (WT), etpA mutant jf1668, etpA mutant complemented 
with the etpBAC locus plasmid pJY019 (etpA(P+); etpA(P–)) equals 
mutant complemented with cloning vector alone. (C) EtpA immu-
noblot confirming the presence of EtpA in culture supernatants from 
H10407 and the complemented mutant. (D) Far-Western blot of 
culture supernatants shown in B and C shows binding of biotinylated 
blood group A only in the presence of EtpA. (E) EtpA is the dominant 
A blood group–specific interacting partner among ETEC proteins from 
ANL-labeled bacteria. Shown is a fluorescence image of ANL-labeled 
proteins from ETEC H10407 that interact with erythrocyte ghosts 
from A1, A2, B, and O blood groups (middle, RBCs/ANL). RBC ghosts 
alone are shown at left, and input protein (ANL) from H10407 and the 
etpA deletion mutant (jf1668) are shown at right. The migration of 
EtpA is indicated by the arrow, and TAMRA-labeled rEtpA is shown 
at far right as a positive control. Each image is representative of 3 
experimental replicates.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 0 4
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
of the FUT2 α1,2 fucosyltransferase required to synthesize ABO 
blood group antigens on intestinal epithelia (52). Because approxi-
mately 20% of the population are nonsecretors due to defects 
in FUT2 (72), it is likely that some of the A blood group–positive 
individuals did not express the A antigen on their gastrointestinal 
epithelia. Theoretically, this might account for some individuals 
in the A blood group who failed to become ill following challenge. 
Conversely, while the A blood group is a risk factor in this model, 
the development of severe diarrheal illness among non-A volun-
teers demonstrates that expression of A glycans is not an absolute 
requirement for disease. V. cholerae infections provide an impor-
tant analogous paradigm for severity of illness related to blood 
group. While severe cholera is significantly associated with the O 
blood group, it is not exclusively observed in blood group O indi-
viduals (66). We should also note that the ETEC-challenge stud-
ies were done with a relatively high inoculum of bacteria (~107) 
designed to assure a reasonable attack rate (73), a feature that may 
not be reflected in naturally occurring infections in young children 
where the A blood group also appears to be a risk for development 
of symptomatic infections (3). It is also worth noting that volun-
teers in these studies were treated with antibiotics to clear the 
infection once they met the definition of severe diarrheal illness, a 
feature that might also have affected the ultimate outcome.
The secreted EtpA lectin likely acts in concert (21) with at least 
2 additional glycan-binding tip adhesins of ETEC fimbriae with 
different substrate specificities. These include FimH of the chro-
mosomally encoded type 1 pili, which binds to mannosylated sur-
face proteins on epithelial cells (74), and the CfaE adhesin located 
at the tips of canonical plasmid-encoded CFA/I pili, which puta-
tively binds to sialylated glycoproteins (55, 75). The latter is con-
sistent with the observation that ETEC expressing CFA/I medi-
ates mannose-resistant (54) and neuraminidase-sensitive (75, 76) 
hemagglutination in all major blood groups and across species to 
include chicken and bovine erythrocytes. Therefore, it appears 
that EtpA is the only blood group A–specific lectin identified in 
ETEC to date. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out the possibility that 
our studies failed to identify another blood group A lectin that was 
not efficiently expressed under laboratory culture conditions.
Figure 5. A blood group–dependent interactions of EtpA and ETEC with 
intestinal epithelia. (A) EtpA binds to regions of blood group A expression 
on the surface of HT-29 epithelial cells. Shown in columns from left to right 
are blood group A (green, antibodies against blood group A and fluores-
cent conjugate αbgA/AF488); nuclei (blue, DAPI); biotinylated EtpA (red, 
SA-coated Qdots594); and merged images. Middle row: no EtpA control. 
Bottom row: no EtpA binding to the surface of HT29A–/– cells engineered 
to remove the α1→3 GalNac glycosyltransferase required for A antigen 
expression. Original magnification, ×100. (B) EtpA preferentially engages 
cells expressing A blood group. Key: upper left indicates the target (bait) 
cell lines used to attract ANL-labeled bacterial (prey) proteins from H10407 
(WT) or the etpA mutant. Labeled rEtpA and the arrow at left are shown 
to indicate the predicted migration of EtpA. Lanes at far right show input 
proteins from the EtpA-expressing H10407 WT and the etpA mutant. (C) 
Localization of EtpA-expressing ETEC to areas of blood group A expres-
sion on the surface of HT-29 cells. Original magnification, ×63. Images in 
A–C represent 1 of 3 experimental replicates. (D) EtpA and blood group A 
are required for optimal adhesion. Data are representative of 4 indepen-
dent experiments. HT-29A–/– data include results from 2 independently 
generated engineered blood group A glycosyl transferase mutant lines 
(1e6, circular symbols; and 1g10, square symbols; n = 8 technical replicates 
in total). *P = 0.03, ANOVA, Kruskal-Wallis. (E) Blood group A accelerates 
adhesion of ETEC to target intestinal epithelial cells (n = 8 technical repli-
cates for HT-29 cells and n = 6 technical replicates for HT-29–/– cells; repre-
sentative of 2 independent experiments); symbols represent mean ± SEM. 
**P = 0.003; ***P = 0.0003, Mann-Whitney U test, 2-tailed comparison. 
(F) Presence of A blood group and EtpA are required for optimal delivery 
of heat-labile toxin by ETEC (n = 5 technical replicates representative of 3 
independent experiments). **P < 0.01, ANOVA, Kruskal-Wallis.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 0 5
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
cation of EtpA as blood group A lectin could focus antigen develop-
ment and inform vaccine design to specifically protect individuals 
that are at highest risk for severe cholera-like diarrheal illness.
Methods
ETEC controlled human infection volunteer challenge studies. Samples for 
blood group analysis were obtained from a convenience sample of 106 
human volunteers from 4 prior independent controlled human infec-
tion model ETEC challenge studies conducted at the Johns Hopkins 
Center for Immunization Research (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01739231, 
NCT01060748, NCT00844493, and NCT01922856). All volunteers 
were experimentally infected with 1 to 2 × 107 colony-forming units 
of the EtpA-expressing ETEC strain H10407. Subjects in these studies 
Interestingly, findings presented here are in keeping with 
earlier birth-cohort studies of children under the age of 2 years in 
Bangladesh who also demonstrated an association between the 
A blood group and symptomatic ETEC infection (3). Therefore, 
while our recent studies have potentially important clinical and 
vaccinology implications, further study of the relationship among 
blood group, disease severity, and antigen expression could guide 
and inform use of these antigens in vaccines.
These additional molecular details regarding the nature of 
ETEC pathogen–host interactions could promote an improved 
understanding of the virulence elements and host determinants 
related to the most severe forms of illness that are clinically indis-
tinguishable from severe cholera (15–17). Consequently, identifi-
Figure 6. EtpA and EtpA-expressing ETEC interact preferentially with the surface of blood group A enteroids. (A) Confocal imaging of EtpA binding to 
surface of polarized small intestinal enteroid monolayers from a blood group A subject. Differential interference contrast (DIC) image at bottom shows 
architecture of polarized enteroids on Transwell filter. Original magnification, ×63. (B) Kinetic ELISA quantification of biotinylated EtpA binding to surface 
of small intestinal enteroid cells from blood groups A, B, and O (n = 4 technical replicates representative of 3 separate experiments). *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, 
ANOVA, Kruskal-Wallis. (C) Association of EtpA-expressing ETEC H10407 with A blood group on surface of small intestinal cells. Images represent volocity-
processed confocal laser-scanning microscopy (CLSM) data of ETEC H10407 (red) to blood group A (green) and nuclei (blue). Lower panel shows polarized 
orientation of cells with bacteria adherent to the apical surfaces of enterocytes. Original magnification, ×63. (D) Top panel: CLSM of ETEC (green) and 
A blood group (red) on jejunal enteroids. Bottom panel: A blood group “footprints” (arrows) at sites of bacterial attachment. Data shown in C and D are 
representative of 3 experimental replicates. Original magnification, ×60. (E) Bacterial density on surface of small intestinal enteroids determined by CLSM 
quantification of H10407 (serotype O78). Quantitation based on imaging 10 fields per blood group, at ×20 magnification. *P = 0.039; #P < 0.0001, ANOVA, 
Kruskal-Wallis. (F) Adhesion of WT H10407 and etpA mutant bacteria to blood group A small intestinal enteroids (n = 5 technical replicates; representa-
tive of 3 biological replicates). Bars represent geometric mean values. (G) Production of cAMP by blood group A target enteroids following infection by WT 
(H10407) or the etpA mutant. Data represent total of 5 technical replicates from 2 separate experiments. (H) Production of cGMP by blood group A small 
intestinal enteroids following infection with WT (n = 6) or the etpA mutant (n = 4). Data are representative of 3 independent biological replicates. Inset 
graph indicates relative (mean ± SD, n = 6 technical replicates) production of heat stable toxin (ST) by the WT (blue bars) vs. the mutant (gray bars).  
**P < 0.01, Mann-Whitney U test, 2 tailed nonparametric testing.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 0 6
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
(Millipore), and rEtpA-myc-6His protein was purified using immobi-
lized metal affinity chromatography as described previously (81).
ETEC subcellular fractionation and far-Western analysis. ETEC 
H10407 was grown overnight in 10 ml cultures of LB at 37°C as 
described above, diluted into 500 ml cultures the next morning, and 
grown for 3 hours at 37°C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 
5000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C and the pellet resuspended in 8 ml 50 mM 
Tris buffer pH 7.8 containing 1 mM EDTA and 1 mg DNAse. Subcellu-
lar fractions were then prepared as previously described (82). Briefly, 
cells were disrupted using a French press, followed by the addition of 
2 mM MgCl2 to E. coli lysate and centrifugation at 5000 g for 10 min-
utes at 4°C to remove large debris/intact cells. Supernatant was col-
lected, supplemented with PMSF to a final concentration of 1 mM, and 
ultracentrifuged at 100,000 g for 1 hour at 4°C. Supernatant from this 
step was saved as a cytosolic fraction. The remaining cell pellet was 
resuspended in ice-cold 10 mM HEPES pH 7.4, layered over a gradi-
ent of 69%, 52.8%, and 26.4% sucrose in HEPES pH 7.4 and ultracen-
trifuged at 113,000 g for 16 hours at 4°C. The visible upper layer con-
taining inner membranes and the lower high-density layer with outer 
membranes were collected. Membrane proteins were reconstituted in 
ice-cold HEPES pH 7.4 and centrifuged for 1 hour at 100,000 g, 4°C. 
Finally, the protein pellets from the inner and outer membranes were 
resuspended in 0.25 and 0.5 ml dH2O, respectively.
Far-Western blotting was used to test blood group A glycan inter-
action with ETEC proteins. Briefly, approximately 10 μg of ETEC pro-
teins were resolved by SDS-PAGE on NuPAGE 4%–20% Tris-Glycine 
Gel (Life Technologies) and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. 
Membranes were blocked with 5% BSA in TBS-T (Tris[hydroxymethyl]
aminomethane–buffered saline, 0.01% Tween-20) for 1 hour and then 
incubated with a final concentration of 5 μg/ml of biotinylated multi-
valent blood group A trisaccharide (Glycotech; 01-032) overnight at 
4°C. Biotinylated glycans were detected using streptavidin-HRP (SA-
HRP) conjugate (1:20,000), and EtpA was detected by immunoblot-
ting using anti-EtpA rabbit polyclonal antibody.
Hemagglutination studies. We examined the ability of EtpA to 
agglutinate human erythrocytes belonging to blood groups A1, A2, B, 
and O (Immucor, catalog 0002338). Briefly, 2-fold dilutions of rEtpA 
in PBS in a final volume of 10 μl were mixed with 40 μl of approxi-
mately 1% cell suspensions (in PBS) of RBCs expressing the A1, A2, B, 
and O antigens in 96-well round-bottom plates, then incubated for 30 
minutes at 4°C. Plates were then imaged to show agglutinated versus 
nonagglutinated (settled) RBCs. In parallel experiments, recombinant 
polyhistidine-tagged EtpA was immobilized onto cobalt-impregnated 
super-paramagnetic polystyrene beads (Dynabeads TALON, Thermo 
Fisher, catalog 101.01D) that were then incubated with RBCs.
To examine the specificity of EtpA-induced agglutination of RBCs 
expressing the A antigen, agglutination assays were performed in the 
presence of excess terminal sugars specific to individual blood types: 
GalNAc (blood group A), Gal (blood group B), or control GlcNAc at 50 
mM final concentration. α-N-acetylgalactosaminidase (P0734S; New 
England Biolabs) was used to remove terminal GalNAc from the A 
blood group antigen by incubating 50 μl of a 1% RBC suspension with 
20 U α-N-acetylgalactosaminidase for 4 hours at 37°C.
To examine the potential contribution of the CFA/I colonization 
factor to hemagglutination, we followed a protocol similar to that 
previously described by Evans (54). Briefly, bacteria were grown over-
night on CYE agar (1% casamino acids; BD), 0.15% yeast extract (BD), 
were treated with antibiotics once they met previously defined end-
point criteria (summarized in Supplemental Table 1) or at 120 hours 
after inoculation to clear their infections. Additional details of the of 
the study design are included in the Supplemental Methods.
Glycan-array screening. Glycan arrays containing 411 separate fea-
tures were fabricated as previously reported, except for the addition 
of a washable fluorescent dye, the free acid of DyLight 649 (0.7 μg/
ml, Thermo Scientific), to the print buffer as an indicator of success-
ful liquid deposition and spot morphology. The array format and assay 
have been described previously (77) along with analysis of reproduc-
ibility (78) and validation with numerous antibodies and lectins (79, 
80). Slides were blocked overnight at 4°C with 3% BSA (w/v; 200 μl/
well) in PBS and then washed 6 times with PBST (PBS with 0.05% 
Tween 20; 200 μl/well). Polyhistidine-tagged rEtpA-6His was diluted 
to final concentrations of 20 and 200 μg/ml in PBST buffer containing 
3% BSA (MilliporeSigma) and 1% HSA (MilliporeSigma), and then 50 
μl of each sample was added into 2 different wells on different slides. 
Incubation buffer alone served as the negative control for samples 
analyzed in duplicate. After incubation with rEtpA for 2 hours at 37°C 
in an orbital shaker (100 rpm), arrays were washed and then probed 
with mouse monoclonal IgG anti-His5 antibody (QIAGEN, 34660) 
diluted 1:500 to a final concentration of 0.4 μg/ml (1 hour at 37°C; 100 
rpm), followed by DyLight 549–conjugated affinity purified goat anti-
mouse IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch, 115-505-071; 1 hour at 37°C; 
100 rpm). After washing 7 times with PBST (200 μl/well), slides were 
immersed in wash buffer for 5 minutes and centrifuged at 200 g for 
5 minutes. Slides were scanned at 10 μm resolution with a GenePix 
4000B Microarray Scanner (Molecular Devices Corp.) with excita-
tion/emission wavelengths of 532/575 nm and analyzed with GenePix 
Pro 6.0 software, as previously reported (77). Heatmaps were assem-
bled in R version 3.2.2 (The R Foundation for Statistical Computing), 
using the gplots and RColorBrewer packages made available through 
the Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN; http:/
/cran.wustl.
edu/). Additional details of the glycan-array screening can be found 
in Supplemental Methods.
Bacterial strains and culture conditions. ETEC strain H10407 was 
provided from GMP stock produced at the Walter Reed Army Institute 
of Research (Silver Spring, Maryland, USA). The etpA mutant H10407 
(jf1668) and complemented (jf1697) strains were generated in previous 
studies. ETEC strains were routinely grown in Luria broth (LB) or LB 
agar (2% agar) at 37°C from glycerol stocks preserved at –80°C. Bacte-
rial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Supplemental 
Table 5. Strains 100137, 200145, 30051, 400643, 500632, 601142, and 
700241 were provided by David Rasko (Institute for Genome Scienc-
es, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, 
USA). Strain 12005000131-1 was provided by Elizabeth Cebelinski 
(Molecular Epidemiology Section of the Infectious Diseases Labora-
tory, Minnesota Department of Health, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA).
Protein expression and purification. The 2-partner secreted EtpA 
glycoprotein was purified from culture supernatants of E. coli Top10 
coexpressing plasmids pJL017 and pJL030 (81). Briefly, E. coli Top10 
carrying pJL017 and pJL030 (Supplemental Table 5) was grown in LB 
with ampicillin (100 μg/ml) and chloramphenicol (15 μg/ml) at 37°C, 
in a shaking incubator at 230 rpm, until OD 600 nm reached approxi-
mately 0.5–0.6. Recombinant protein expression was then induced 
with 0.0002% arabinose for 6 hours at 37°C. Culture supernatant was 
concentrated using a 100 kD Molecular Weight Cutoff (MWCO) filter 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 0 7
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
gation, packed RBCs were hemolyzed by mixing with 5 mM sodium 
phosphate, pH 8.0, and incubating on ice for 1 minute. The resulting 
membranes were then harvested by centrifugation at 22,000 g for 10 
minutes and the supernatant removed by aspiration.
HT-29 membranes or membranes from the HT-29A–/– line were 
prepared as follows. Cells grown in monolayers on a T25 flask were 
washed with PBS and the supernatant decanted. After addition of 4 
ml fresh PBS, cells were recovered by scraping and the suspension 
centrifuged for 5 minutes at 4,200 g. Cell pellets were resuspended 
in 1 ml of ice-cold lysis buffer (5 mM PO4, pH 8, 0.5 mg/ml DNase I, 
 
containing Pierce Protease Inhibitor; Thermo Fisher, 88665) and 
transferred to a microfuge tube spun for 5 minutes at 3,400 g. Superna-
tant was removed and replaced with 1 ml fresh lysis buffer. Cells were 
then incubated on ice for 30 minutes, flash-frozen in an ethanol-dry 
ice bath, and thawed at 37°C. After repeating the freeze-thaw cycles 
twice, the extract was passed through a 26-gauge needle 4 to 5 times to 
sheer DNA and spun at 25,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The resulting 
translucent membrane pellets were then resuspended in PBS.
Erythrocyte ghosts or HT-29 membrane preparations were incu-
bated with ANL-labeled bacterial proteins at 4°C overnight, pelleted 
by centrifugation, washed in 1 ml of ice-cold PBS, then resuspended 
and boiled in click buffer (50 mM HEPES, 0.5% [w/v] SDS, pH 7.5). 
ANL-containing proteins were labeled for 1 hour at 37°C in the dark 
with 5 μM tetramethylrhodamine-alkyne (TAMRA-alkyne) (Molecular 
Probes) in the presence of 25 mM ascorbate, 1.5 mM CuSO4, and 2.5 
mM Tris (3-hydroxypropyltriazolylmethyl)amine. Labeled proteins 
were separated by SDS-PAGE in the dark and the gel scanned on a 
Typhoon FLA 9500 phosphorimager (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) 
using excitation at 532 nm and a 575 nm long-pass filter. Positive con-
trol TAMRA-labeled rEtpA was produced by reacting EtpA with 120 
μM azidobutyric acid NHS ester (Lumiprobe). The unreacted label 
was then removed by dialysis, and the azide-labeled EtpA reacted with 
TAMRA-alkyne, as before.
Bio-layer interferometry. Bio-layer interferometry was used to 
determine affinity of EtpA–blood group binding using Octet Red96 
(Pall ForteBio Corp.). Briefly, biotinylated blood group A antigens 
conjugated to PAA (either as the disaccharide GalNAcα1-3Galβ-PAA-
biotin; GlycoTech, catalog 01-017; or the trisaccharide GalNAcα1-3 
[Fucα1,2]Galβ-PAA-biotin, GlycoTech 01-032) or related target sugars 
(α-d-Gal-PAA-biotin, GlycoTech 01-003; GalNAcα1,3GalNAcβ-PAA-
biotin, GlycoTech 01-026; αGalNAc-PAA-biotin, GlycoTech 08-010) 
were immobilized onto the SA biosensors (18-5019; Pall ForteBio 
Corp.). These were then incubated with 2-fold serial dilutions (2000–
500 nM) of purified rEtpA or control BSA (2000 nM) prepared in 1× 
PBS as analyte. Affinity constant (kD) values were calculated using 
Octet software version 8.1.
Growth and differentiation of human enteroids from different blood 
groups. Enteroid experiments were conducted at either John Hopkins 
University School of Medicine or at Washington University School of 
Medicine, and detailed experimental protocols for both institutions 
are included in the Supplemental Methods. In brief, biopsy samples 
were obtained from adult patients undergoing routine endoscopy at 
each institution. Small intestinal epithelial (enteroid) cell lines were 
then generated from dissociated crypts as previously described (85–
87), stored, and then accessed from the Washington University Diges-
tive Diseases Research Core Center Biospecimens Core or the respec-
tive aligned program at John Hopkins University School of Medicine. 
2% agar, 0.005% MgSO4, and 0.0005% MnCl2. Bacteria were resus-
pended in PBS (A600 3.0) and diluted 4-fold prior to use. Human eryth-
rocytes (Immucor, 2%–4% suspension) were diluted 1:4 in PBS, and 25 
μl each of bacterial and RBC suspension were added to a flat-bottomed 
96-well plate and rotated at 1,000 g at RT for 15 minutes, after which 
agglutination was visualized. Control anti–A IgM antibodies (Immu-
cor) were used at 1:32 dilution.
FACS. RBC ghosts were prepared at 4°C. 800 μl of a 2%–4% sus-
pension of RBCs was washed once in PBS, resuspended in 1.5 ml of 
ghost buffer (50 mM NaPO4, pH 8.0), and incubated on ice for 1 min-
ute. RBCs were pelleted at 25,000 g for 10 minutes, then washed twice 
in ghost buffer. Ghosts were resuspended in 400 μl PBS.
For FACS analysis, 15 μg biotinylated EtpA or BSA was added 
to 190 μl of RBC ghosts and rotated at RT for 1.5 hours. Cells were 
washed twice in PBS and pelleted by spinning at 25,000 g for 5 min-
utes, rotated for 30 minutes with a 1:200 dilution of SA-conjugate 
nanocrystals (Qdot 525, Q10141MP, Thermo Fisher), and then 
washed twice in PBS and resuspended in 200 μl of PBS. Fluorescence 
was measured using FACSCalibur (BD Biosciences), and data were 
analyzed using FlowJo software, v10.
Molecular cloning of mutant Met-RS. To permit noncanonical 
amino acid labeling of ETEC proteins with azidonorlucine (Anl), a 
mutant form of the methionyl-tRNA synthetase (NLL-MetRS) gene 
from pAM1 (56) was cloned (In-Fusion, Clontech) into the NcoI and 
EcoRI sites of pBAD/Myc-His B (Supplemental Table 5) using primers 
jf091715.1 and jf091715.2 (Supplemental Table 6). The resulting plas-
mid pBAD-MetRS was transformed into WT H10407 or the jf1668 
etpA mutant to generate jf3422 and jf3904, respectively.
Protein interaction studies using noncanonical amino acid labeling 
of ETEC. Proteomes of strains jf3422 and jf3904 bearing the MetRS 
expression plasmid were labeled by growth with azidonorleucine as 
previously described. Briefly, strains were grown overnight in LB con-
taining 100 μg/ml ampicillin, 0.2% arabinose, and 1 mM azidonor-
leucine (HAA1625, Iris Biotech GmbH). Cell-free supernatants were 
concentrated 10-fold using 10 kD MWCO centrifugal concentrators 
and dialyzed against PBS prior to use.
OMPs were prepared from ANL-tagged bacteria grown in the 
same fashion using an established protocol (83). Briefly, labeled bacte-
ria were resuspended in 20 ml ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, 1 mM 
EDTA, pH 7.8) and lysed by sonication (4 × 20-second bursts). Approx-
imately 1 mg of DNase I (MilliporeSigma) was added to each tube 
and the extracts adjusted to 2 mM MgCl2 and 100 μM PMSF. Intact 
cells and large debris were removed by low-speed centrifugation at 
3,000 g for 10 minutes, and membranes were pelleted from clarified 
lysates by ultracentrifugation for 1 hour at 100,000 g. Membrane pel-
lets were then resuspended in 2 ml 10 mM HEPES pH 7.4 and layered 
onto discontinuous sucrose gradients consisting of a top layer of 0.77 
M sucrose, a middle layer of 1.44 M sucrose, and a bottom layer of 2.02 
M sucrose. After centrifugation at 113,000 g for 16 hours at 4°C, the 
OMPs were recovered from the interface between the 1.44 and 2.02 
M layers. OMP pellets were washed by resuspension in 14 ml 10 mM 
HEPES pH 7.4, collected by centrifugation at 100,000 g for 1 hour, and 
resuspended in 0.5 ml PBS.
Erythrocyte membranes were prepared using the method previ-
ously described by Steck et al. (84). Briefly, suspensions of RBCs were 
sedimented at 2,300 g for 10 minutes at 4°C, the pellet recovered, and 
then resuspended in 5 volumes of cold PBS, pH 8.0. After centrifu-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 0 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
(1:6,000) were used to stain cellular membranes and nuclei, respec-
tively. ETEC H10407 (serotype O78:H11) was visualized with poly-
clonal rabbit antibodies against O78 obtained from the Penn State 
University E. coli Reference Center, followed by detection with goat 
anti-rabbit IgG (H&L) cross-absorbed Alexa Fluor (488 or 594) sec-
ondary antibody conjugates (Invitrogen, A11070, A11072).
Confocal microscopy images were captured using a Zeiss LSM 510 
Meta Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope. Image files were saved in 
LSM format and processed using Fiji (89), Image J v 2.0.0 (NIH), and 
Volocity 3D analysis software (version 6.3, PerkinElmer).
Blood group typing. Coded, deidentified samples forwarded to 
Washington University were used in a blinded fashion to type for the 
major ABO blood group antigens. Plasma or serum was used in reverse 
immunotyping for antibodies directed at the ABO antigens, which was 
performed using standard methods. Briefly 2 μl RBCs (Immucor) from 
each blood group were incubated with 4 μl of patient sera or plasma at 
RT for 5 minutes in a 96-well plate, then examined microscopically for 
agglutination. For available saliva, DNA was extracted from 50 μl of 
sample (QIAGEN 69504), and genotyping by PCR was performed as 
previously described (90). Salivary genotyping results were confirmed 
by dot immunoblotting. Briefly, 0.5 μl saliva diluted 1:4 in PBS was 
dotted onto nitrocellulose membranes that were then incubated in a 
solution of H2O2 (3%) for 5 minutes. Membranes were then incubated 
with 1:20 dilutions of anti-A, anti-B, or anti-H antibodies (Millipore-
Sigma) for 30 minutes, washed 3 times in PBS with 0.05% Tween, and 
probed with goat anti-mouse IgM HRP-conjugate (1:5,000 dilution; 
Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., sc-2064) and developed using the ECL 
Western Blotting Substrate (Thermo Fisher).
ABO determinations were then matched to diarrheal outcomes in 
which the severity of illness was dichotomized into none (no or mild 
disease) and MSD using established criteria (71).
Statistics. We used log-rank (Mantel-Cox) testing to compare 
time-to-treatment outcomes, with P < 0.05 considered significant. 
Meta-analysis (pooled fixed effects) was used to compare the relative 
risk of moderated to severe diarrheal illness. Pearson χ2 testing was 
used to compare diarrheal illness and severity by blood group. Mann-
Whitney U testing was used to compare nonparametric data. More 
than 2 groups of data were analyzed using Kruskal-Wallis testing for 
multiple comparisons of nonparametric data.
Study approval. Institutional Review Board approval was obtained 
at each participating study site (Washington University, the Naval 
Medical Research Center, and Johns Hopkins University) prior to 
sample interrogation and analysis. Written, informed consent was 
received from all participants prior to inclusion in the studies.
Author contributions
JMF, MAC, and MD were involved in study design, data curation, 
manuscript preparation, and project administration. TJV, AP, and 
PK conducted cloning of MetRS and ANL-labeling experiments. 
SC, ALB, DAS, BD, CDH, RLG, CKP, MGP, and MSR designed 
and conducted ETEC controlled human infection model studies 
in volunteers and processed the data and samples. WSW and JCG 
conducted glycan-array experiments. PK FMK, JFA, and BT were 
involved in protein interaction, hemagglutination, microscopy, 
adhesion, and toxin delivery studies. AS and MK conducted flow 
cytometry experiments. MAC, SS, JFA, MD, MK, and BT acquired, 
maintained, and propagated small intestinal stem cell banks or 
Purified cell lines of each of the described ABO types were thawed 
and resuspended in Matrigel (BD Biosciences) and then propagated 
at 37°C, 5% CO2 with advanced DEM/F12 media (Invitrogen) supple-
mented with Wnt3a, R-spondin 1, and Noggin (WRN). Protocols for 
cellular differentiation and growth of polarized epithelial monolayers 
were performed as described in detail in the Supplemental Methods. 
Blood typing by PCR and immunofluorescence microscopy was per-
formed as previously described.
α1-3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase–deficient cell line. Cells 
lacking α1-3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase (GI 55773627; Gen-
Bank D82843.2) were constructed from HT-29 cells (ATCC HTB-
38) by CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing in the Genome Engineering 
and iPSC Center at Washington University (http:/
/geic.wustl.edu) as 
previously reported (45). Both parental HT-29 cells and the resulting 
HT-29A–/– line were propagated in McCoy’s-5A medium (Gibco, Life 
Technologies) supplemented with 10% FBS.
ETEC adhesion and toxin delivery assays. To examine delivery 
of the LT toxin, cultures of HT-29 or HT-29A–/– were differentiated 
by growing cultures at confluence for 1 week prior to use in 96-well 
plates. Where indicated, phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitors varde-
nafil HCL·3H20 (MilliporeSigma, Y0001647), cilostazol (Millipore-
Sigma, PHR1503), and rolipram (MilliporeSigma, R6520) were added 
to cell cultures 1 hour prior to infections at a final concentration of 
6.125 μM (88). ETEC (H10407) or the etpA mutant (jf1668) was grown 
overnight in 1 ml of LB media. The following morning, bacteria were 
diluted 1:100 for 90 minutes to mid-log growth phase. HT-29 and HT-
29A–/– were infected with bacteria at an MOI of approximately 100. 
MOI was determined by plating serial dilutions of bacterial suspen-
sions and counting HT-29 cells on a hemocytometer after trypsiniza-
tion of adherent cells. Infection of HT-29 cells by H10407 or the etpA 
mutant proceeded for 2 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2 in media contain-
ing PDE inhibitors. After 2 hours, the cells were washed once in pre-
warmed media and the infection continued for an additional hour in 
media with PDE inhibitors. Cellular cAMP (Arbor Assays) levels were 
used to assess the efficiency of LT delivery.
Adhesion assays were performed as previously described using 
mid-log phase bacterial cultures. After 30 minutes, the monolayers 
were washed 3 times with prewarmed media, then treated with 0.1% 
Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 minutes. Ten-fold dilutions of the Triton 
X-100 lysates were plated on Luria agar, and bacterial adherence was 
calculated as the percentage of organisms recovered per colony-form-
ing unit of inoculum. Adherence assays for enteroids were performed 
in the same fashion, but washed at different time points, as indicated 
in the figure legends.
Confocal laser scanning microscopy. HT-29 cells were seeded 
onto glass coverslips pretreated with poly-l-lysine in 24-well tissue 
culture plates. Enteroids grown on Transwell filters were processed 
by removing the filter from the well and then treated as below. Cells 
were blocked with 1% BSA in PBS and incubated with biotinylated 
EtpA (50 μg/ml final concentration) for 2 hours at 37°C or overnight 
at 4°C. After washing with PBS 3 times, EtpA was detected using 
Qdot 605 SA conjugate (Life Technologies). A blood group antigen 
was detected using mouse monoclonal antibody (IgM; Santa Cruz 
Biotechnology Inc., sc-69951) against human blood group A, fol-
lowed by Alexa Fluor 647–conjugated goat anti-mouse IgM heavy 
chain (Molecular Probes, A21238). CellMask deep red plasma mem-
brane stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific, C10046) (1:2,000) and DAPI 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 0 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
Diseases. Its contents are solely the responsibility of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent the official views of the PATH, 
the VA, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 
(NIAID), the NIH, the Department of the Navy, the Department 
of Defense, or the US Government. Some of the authors are mili-
tary service members (RLG, MGP, MSR) or employees of the US 
government (CKP). This work was prepared as part of their official 
duties. Title 17 U.S.C. §105 provides that “Copyright protection 
under this title is not available for any work of the United States 
government.” Title 17 U.S.C. §101 defines a US government work 
as a work prepared by a military service member or employee of 
the US government as part of that person’s official duties.
Address correspondence to: James M. Fleckenstein, Washington 
University School of Medicine, Campus Box 8051, St. Louis, Mis-
souri 63110-1093, USA. Phone: 314.362.9218; Email: jflecken@
wustl.edu.
intestinal epithelial cells. PK and TJV were responsible for recom-
binant protein production.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Margaret A. Olsen (Center for Admin-
istrative Data Research at Washington University) for her expert 
help and advice in analysis of clinical metadata associated with 
these studies, and David A. Rasko (University of Maryland) and 
Elizabeth Cebelinski (Minnesota Department of Health) for send-
ing additional ETEC isolates. This work was supported by fund-
ing from The Enteric Vaccine Initiative of PATH; The Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs (VA) (5I01BX001469-05); NIH grants 
R01AI89894, R01AI126887, K23 AI130389-01, and P01AI125181; 
Clinical and Translational Sciences Award UL1TR000448 from 
the NIH; the Digestive Diseases Research Core Center at Wash-
ington University School of Medicine; and grant P30 DK52574 
from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney 
 1. Kotloff KL, et al. Burden and aetiology of diar-
rhoeal disease in infants and young children in 
developing countries (the Global Enteric Multi-
center Study, GEMS): a prospective, case-control 
study. Lancet. 2013;382(9888):209–222.
 2. Liu J, et al. Use of quantitative molecular diag-
nostic methods to identify causes of diarrhoea in 
children: a reanalysis of the GEMS case-control 
study. Lancet. 2016;388(10051):1291–1301.
 3. Qadri F, Saha A, Ahmed T, Al Tarique A, Begum 
YA, Svennerholm AM. Disease burden due to 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli in the first 2 
years of life in an urban community in Bangla-
desh. Infect Immun. 2007;75(8):3961–3968.
 4. Roels TH, Proctor ME, Robinson LC, Hulbert K, 
Bopp CA, Davis JP. Clinical features of infections 
due to Escherichia coli producing heat-stable 
toxin during an outbreak in Wisconsin: a rarely 
suspected cause of diarrhea in the United States. 
Clin Infect Dis. 1998;26(4):898–902.
 5. Beatty ME, et al. Epidemic diarrhea due to 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. Clin Infect Dis. 
2006;42(3):329–334.
 6. Jain S, et al. An outbreak of enterotoxigenic Esch-
erichia coli associated with sushi restaurants in 
Nevada, 2004. Clin Infect Dis. 2008;47(1):1–7.
 
7. Medus C, et al. Long-term sentinel surveillance 
for enterotoxigenic escherichia coli and non-o157 
shiga toxin-producing E. coli in Minnesota. Open 
Forum Infect Dis. 2016;3(1):ofw003.
 8. Walker CL, et al. Global burden of child-
hood pneumonia and diarrhoea. Lancet. 
2013;381(9875):1405–1416.
 9. MAL-ED Network Investigators. The MAL-ED 
study: a multinational and multidisciplinary 
approach to understand the relationship between 
enteric pathogens, malnutrition, gut physiology, 
physical growth, cognitive development, and 
immune responses in infants and children up to 2 
years of age in resource-poor environments. Clin 
Infect Dis. 2014;59(Suppl 4):S193–S206.
 10. Keusch GT, et al. Environmental enteric dys-
function: pathogenesis, diagnosis, and clinical 
consequences. Clin Infect Dis. 2014; 
59(Suppl 4):S207–S212.
 11. Guerrant RL, DeBoer MD, Moore SR, Scharf RJ, 
Lima AA. The impoverished gut--a triple burden 
of diarrhoea, stunting and chronic disease. Nat 
Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013;10(4):220–229.
 12. Colombara DV, et al. Chronic health consequenc-
es of acute enteric infections in the developing 
world. Am J Gastroenterol Suppl. 2016;3(2):4–11.
 13. Fleckenstein JM, Hardwidge PR, Munson GP, 
Rasko DA, Sommerfelt H, Steinsland H. Molecu-
lar mechanisms of enterotoxigenic Escherichia 
coli infection. Microbes Infect. 2010;12(2):89–98.
 14. Sack RB. The discovery of cholera - like entero-
toxins produced by Escherichia coli causing 
secretory diarrhoea in humans. Indian J Med Res. 
2011;133:171–180.
 15. Sack RB, Gorbach SL, Banwell JG, Jacobs B, Chat-
terjee BD, Mitra RC. Enterotoxigenic Escherichia 
coli isolated from patients with severe cholera-
like disease. J Infect Dis. 1971;123(4):378–385.
 16. Finkelstein RA, Vasil ML, Jones JR, Anderson 
RA, Barnard T. Clinical cholera caused by 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. J Clin Microbiol. 
1976;3(3):382–384.
 17. Vicente AC, et al. Outbreaks of cholera-like diar-
rhoea caused by enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli 
in the Brazilian Amazon rainforest. Trans R Soc 
Trop Med Hyg. 2005;99(9):669–674.
 18. Dorsey FC, Fischer JF, Fleckenstein JM. 
Directed delivery of heat-labile enterotoxin by 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. Cell Microbiol. 
2006;8(9):1516–1527.
 19. Kumar P, Luo Q, Vickers TJ, Sheikh A, Lewis 
WG, Fleckenstein JM. EatA, an immunogenic 
protective antigen of enterotoxigenic Escherichia 
coli, degrades intestinal mucin. Infect Immun. 
2014;82(2):500–508.
 20. Luo Q, et al. Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli 
secretes a highly conserved mucin-degrading 
metalloprotease to effectively engage intestinal 
epithelial cells. Infect Immun. 2014;82(2):509–521.
 21. Kansal R, et al. Transcriptional modulation of 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli virulence genes 
in response to epithelial cell interactions. Infect 
Immun. 2013;81(1):259–270.
 22. Bourgeois AL, Wierzba TF, Walker RI. Sta-
tus of vaccine research and development for 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. Vaccine. 
2016;34(26):2880–2886.
 23. Svennerholm AM, Lundgren A. Recent progress 
toward an enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli vac-
cine. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2012;11(4):495–507.
 24. Fleckenstein J, Sheikh A, Qadri F. Novel antigens 
for enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli vaccines. 
Expert Rev Vaccines. 2014;13(5):631–639.
 25. Fleckenstein JM, Roy K, Fischer JF, Burkitt M. 
Identification of a two-partner secretion locus of 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. Infect Immun. 
2006;74(4):2245–2258.
 26. Roy K, Hilliard GM, Hamilton DJ, Luo J, 
Ostmann MM, Fleckenstein JM. Enterotoxi-
genic Escherichia coli EtpA mediates adhe-
sion between flagella and host cells. Nature. 
2009;457(7229):594–598.
 27. Luo Q, Qadri F, Kansal R, Rasko DA, Sheikh A, 
Fleckenstein JM. Conservation and immuno-
genicity of novel antigens in diverse isolates of 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. PLoS Negl Trop 
Dis. 2015;9(1):e0003446.
 28. Sahl JW, et al. A comparative genomic analysis 
of diverse clonal types of enterotoxigenic Esch-
erichia coli reveals pathovar-specific conserva-
tion. Infect Immun. 2011;79(2):950–960.
 29. Del Canto F, et al. Distribution of classical and 
nonclassical virulence genes in enterotoxigenic 
Escherichia coli isolates from Chilean children 
and tRNA gene screening for putative inser-
tion sites for genomic islands. J Clin Microbiol. 
2011;49(9):3198–3203.
 30. Luo Q, Vickers TJ, Fleckenstein JM. Immu-
nogenicity and protective efficacy against 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli colonization 
following intradermal, sublingual, or oral vacci-
nation with EtpA adhesin. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 
2016;23(7):628–637.
 31. Roy K, Hamilton D, Allen KP, Randolph MP, 
Fleckenstein JM. The EtpA exoprotein of entero-
toxigenic Escherichia coli promotes intestinal 
colonization and is a protective antigen in an 
experimental model of murine infection. Infect 
Immun. 2008;76(5):2106–2112.
 32. Roy K, Hamilton D, Ostmann MM, Fleckenstein 
JM. Vaccination with EtpA glycoprotein or flagel-
lin protects against colonization with enterotoxi-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 1 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
genic Escherichia coli in a murine model. Vaccine. 
2009;27(34):4601–4608.
 33. Roy K, Hamilton DJ, Fleckenstein JM. Coop-
erative role of antibodies against heat-labile 
toxin and the EtpA Adhesin in preventing toxin 
delivery and intestinal colonization by entero-
toxigenic Escherichia coli. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 
2012;19(10):1603–1608.
 34. DuPont HL, et al. Pathogenesis of Escherichia 
coli diarrhea. N Engl J Med. 1971;285(1):1–9.
 35. Satterwhite TK, Evans DG, DuPont HL, 
Evans DJ. Role of Escherichia coli colonisa-
tion factor antigen in acute diarrhoea. Lancet. 
1978;2(8082):181–184.
 36. Skrede S, et al. Experimental infection of healthy 
volunteers with enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli 
wild-type strain TW10598 in a hospital ward. 
BMC Infect Dis. 2014;14:482.
 37. Harro C, et al. A combination vaccine consisting 
of three live attenuated enterotoxigenic Esch-
erichia coli strains expressing a range of coloniza-
tion factors and heat-labile toxin subunit B is well 
tolerated and immunogenic in a placebo-con-
trolled double-blind phase I trial in healthy adults. 
Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2011;18(12):2118–2127.
 38. Tacket CO, et al. Protection by milk immuno-
globulin concentrate against oral challenge with 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. N Engl J Med. 
1988;318(19):1240–1243.
 39. Freedman DJ, Tacket CO, Delehanty A, Maneval 
DR, Nataro J, Crabb JH. Milk immunoglobulin 
with specific activity against purified coloniza-
tion factor antigens can protect against oral chal-
lenge with enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli.  
J Infect Dis. 1998;177(3):662–667.
 40. Darsley MJ, et al. The oral, live attenuated 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli vaccine ACE527 
reduces the incidence and severity of diarrhea in 
a human challenge model of diarrheal disease. 
Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2012;19(12):1921–1931.
 41. Evans DJ, Evans DG. Three characteristics associ-
ated with enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli iso-
lated from man. Infect Immun. 1973;8(3):322–328.
 42. Porter CK, et al. A systematic review of experi-
mental infections with enterotoxigenic Escherich-
ia coli (ETEC). Vaccine. 2011;29(35):5869–5885.
 43. Coster TS, et al. Immune response, ciprofloxacin 
activity, and gender differences after human 
experimental challenge by two strains of 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. Infect Immun. 
2007;75(1):252–259.
 44. Borén T, Falk P, Roth KA, Larson G, Normark 
S. Attachment of Helicobacter pylori to human 
gastric epithelium mediated by blood group anti-
gens. Science. 1993;262(5141):1892–1895.
 45. Kuhlmann FM, Santhanam S, Kumar P, Luo 
Q, Ciorba MA, Fleckenstein JM. Blood group 
O-dependent cellular responses to cholera 
toxin: parallel clinical and epidemiological 
links to severe cholera. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 
2016;95(2):440–443.
 46. Esko JD, Sharon N. Microbial lectins: hemag-
glutinins, adhesins, and toxins. In: Varki A, et al. 
eds. Essentials of Glycobiology. Cold Spring Har-
bor, NY; Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 
2009:1–13.
 47. Bergstrom KS, Xia L. Mucin-type O-glycans and 
their roles in intestinal homeostasis. Glycobiology. 
2013;23(9):1026–1037.
 48. Johansson ME, Sjövall H, Hansson GC. The gastro-
intestinal mucus system in health and disease. Nat 
Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013;10(6):352–361.
 49. McGuckin MA, Lindén SK, Sutton P, Florin TH. 
Mucin dynamics and enteric pathogens. Nat Rev 
Microbiol. 2011;9(4):265–278.
 50. Locht C, Bertin P, Menozzi FD, Renauld G. The 
filamentous haemagglutinin, a multifaceted 
adhesion produced by virulent Bordetella spp. 
Mol Microbiol. 1993;9(4):653–660.
 51. Greco D, et al. A controlled trial of two acellular 
vaccines and one whole-cell vaccine against per-
tussis. Progetto Pertosse Working Group. N Engl J 
Med. 1996;334(6):341–348.
 52. Cooling L. Blood groups in infection and host sus-
ceptibility. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2015;28(3):801–870.
 53. Roy K, Bartels S, Qadri F, Fleckenstein JM. 
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli elicits immune 
responses to multiple surface proteins. Infect 
Immun. 2010;78(7):3027–3035.
 54. Evans DG, Evans DJ, Tjoa W. Hemagglutination 
of human group A erythrocytes by enterotoxi-
genic Escherichia coli isolated from adults with 
diarrhea: correlation with colonization factor. 
Infect Immun. 1977;18(2):330–337.
 55. Bartus H, Actor P, Snipes E, Sedlock D, Zajac 
I. Indications that the erythrocyte receptor 
involved in enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli 
attachment is a sialoglycoconjugate. J Clin Micro-
biol. 1985;21(6):951–954.
 56. Mahdavi A, et al. Identification of secreted bacte-
rial proteins by noncanonical amino acid tagging. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;111(1):433–438.
 57. Robbe C, et al. Evidence of regio-specific glyco-
sylation in human intestinal mucins: presence of 
an acidic gradient along the intestinal tract. J Biol 
Chem. 2003;278(47):46337–46348.
 58. In JG, Foulke-Abel J, Estes MK, Zachos NC, 
Kovbasnjuk O, Donowitz M. Human mini-guts: 
new insights into intestinal physiology and host-
pathogen interactions. Nat Rev Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2016;13(11):633–642.
 59. Sato T, Clevers H. Growing self-organizing 
mini-guts from a single intestinal stem 
cell: mechanism and applications. Science. 
2013;340(6137):1190–1194.
 60. Aspholm-Hurtig M, et al. Functional adaptation of 
BabA, the H. pylori ABO blood group antigen bind-
ing adhesin. Science. 2004;305(5683):519–522.
 61. Moonens K, et al. Structural insights into poly-
morphic ABO glycan binding by Helicobacter 
pylori. Cell Host Microbe. 2016;19(1):55–66.
 62. Glass RI, et al. Predisposition for cholera of 
individuals with O blood group. Possible 
evolutionary significance. Am J Epidemiol. 
1985;121(6):791–796.
 63. Barua D, Paguio AS. ABO blood groups and chol-
era. Ann Hum Biol. 1977;4(5):489–492.
 64. Clemens JD, et al. ABO blood groups and chol-
era: new observations on specificity of risk and 
modification of vaccine efficacy. J Infect Dis. 
1989;159(4):770–773.
 65. Swerdlow DL, et al. Severe life-threatening chol-
era associated with blood group O in Peru: impli-
cations for the Latin American epidemic. J Infect 
Dis. 1994;170(2):468–472.
 66. Harris JB, et al. Blood group, immunity, and risk of 
infection with Vibrio cholerae in an area of ende-
micity. Infect Immun. 2005;73(11):7422–7427.
 67. Heggelund JE, Burschowsky D, Bjørnestad VA, 
Hodnik V, Anderluh G, Krengel U. High-resolu-
tion crystal structures elucidate the molecular 
basis of cholera blood group dependence. PLoS 
Pathog. 2016;12(4):e1005567.
 68. Holmner A, Askarieh G, Okvist M, Krengel 
U. Blood group antigen recognition by Esch-
erichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin. J Mol Biol. 
2007;371(3):754–764.
 69. van Loon FP, et al. ABO blood groups and the risk 
of diarrhea due to enterotoxigenic Escherichia 
coli. J Infect Dis. 1991;163(6):1243–1246.
 70. Black RE, Levine MM, Clements ML, Hughes T, 
O’Donnell S. Association between O blood group 
and occurrence and severity of diarrhoea due 
to Escherichia coli. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 
1987;81(1):120–123.
 71. Porter CK, et al. An evidenced-based scale of 
disease severity following human challenge 
with enteroxigenic Escherichia coli. PLoS ONE. 
2016;11(3):e0149358.
 72. Kelly RJ, Rouquier S, Giorgi D, Lennon GG, Lowe 
JB. Sequence and expression of a candidate 
for the human Secretor blood group alpha(1,2)
fucosyltransferase gene (FUT2). Homozygosity 
for an enzyme-inactivating nonsense mutation 
commonly correlates with the non-secretor phe-
notype. J Biol Chem. 1995;270(9):4640–4649.
 73. Harro C, et al. Refinement of a human chal-
lenge model for evaluation of enterotoxigenic 
Escherichia coli vaccines. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 
2011;18(10):1719–1727.
 74. Sheikh A, et al. Highly conserved type 1 pili pro-
mote enterotoxigenic E. coli pathogen-host inter-
actions. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017;11(5):e0005586.
 75. Li YF, Poole S, Rasulova F, McVeigh AL, 
Savarino SJ, Xia D. A receptor-binding site as 
revealed by the crystal structure of CfaE, the 
colonization factor antigen I fimbrial adhesin 
of enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem. 
2007;282(33):23970–23980.
 76. Evans DG, Evans DJ, Clegg S, Pauley JA. Purifica-
tion and characterization of the CFA/I antigen of 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. Infect Immun. 
1979;25(2):738–748.
 77. Campbell CT, Zhang Y, Gildersleeve JC. Con-
struction and use of glycan microarrays. Curr 
Protoc Chem Biol. 2010;2(1):37–53.
 78. Oyelaran O, McShane LM, Dodd L, Gildersleeve 
JC. Profiling human serum antibodies with a 
carbohydrate antigen microarray. J Proteome Res. 
2009;8(9):4301–4310.
 79. Manimala JC, Roach TA, Li Z, Gildersleeve 
JC. High-throughput carbohydrate microar-
ray profiling of 27 antibodies demonstrates 
widespread specificity problems. Glycobiology. 
2007;17(8):17C–23C.
 80. Manimala JC, Roach TA, Li Z, Gildersleeve 
JC. High-throughput carbohydrate microarray 
analysis of 24 lectins. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 
2006;45(22):3607–3610.
 81. Fleckenstein JM, Roy K. Purification of recombi-
nant high molecular weight two-partner secre-
tion proteins from Escherichia coli. Nat Protoc. 
2009;4(7):1083–1092.
 82. Fleckenstein JM, Kopecko DJ, Warren RL, Elsing-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 1 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 8   August 2018
horst EA. Molecular characterization of the tia 
invasion locus from enterotoxigenic Escherichia 
coli. Infect Immun. 1996;64(6):2256–2265.
 83. Schnaitman CA. Protein composition of the cell 
wall and cytoplasmic membrane of Escherichia 
coli. J Bacteriol. 1970;104(2):890–901.
 84. Steck TL, Kant JA. Preparation of imperme-
able ghosts and inside-out vesicles from 
human erythrocyte membranes. Meth Enzymol. 
1974;31:172–180.
 85. VanDussen KL, et al. Development of an 
enhanced human gastrointestinal epithelial 
culture system to facilitate patient-based assays. 
Gut. 2015;64(6):911–920.
 86. Foulke-Abel J, et al. Human enteroids as an ex-
vivo model of host-pathogen interactions in the 
gastrointestinal tract. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 
2014;239(9):1124–1134.
 87. In J, et al. Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli 
reduce mucus and intermicrovillar bridges in 
human stem cell-derived colonoids. Cell Mol Gas-
troenterol Hepatol. 2016;2(1):48–62.e3.
 88. Read LT, Hahn RW, Thompson CC, Bauer DL, 
Norton EB, Clements JD. Simultaneous exposure 
to Escherichia coli heat-labile and heat-stable 
enterotoxins increases fluid secretion and 
alters cyclic nucleotide and cytokine produc-
tion by intestinal epithelial cells. Infect Immun. 
2014;82(12):5308–5316.
 89. Schindelin J, et al. Fiji: an open-source platform 
for biological-image analysis. Nat Methods. 
2012;9(7):676–682.
 90. Taki T, Kibayashi K. A simple ABO genotyp-
ing by PCR using sequence-specific primers 
with mismatched nucleotides. Leg Med (Tokyo). 
2014;16(3):168–172.
