 Host community perspectives on trainees participating
in short-term experiences in global health
Tiffany H Kung,1 Eugene T Richardson,2 Tarub S Mabud,1 Catherine A Heaney,3 Evaleen Jones4,5 & Jessica
Evert5,6
CONTEXT High-income country (HIC) trai-
nees are undertaking global health experi-
ences in low- and middle-income country
(LMIC) host communities in increasing num-
bers. Although the benefits for HIC trainees
are well described, the benefits and drawbacks
for LMIC host communities are not well cap-
tured.
OBJECTIVES This study evaluated the per-
spectives of supervising physicians and local
programme coordinators from LMIC host
communities who engaged with HIC trainees
in the context of the latter’s short-term experi-
ences in global health.
METHODS Thirty-five semi-structured inter-
views were conducted with LMIC host commu-
nity collaborators with a US-based, non-profit
global health education organisation. Inter-
views took place in La Paz, Bolivia and New
Delhi, India. Interview transcripts were assessed
for recurrent themes using thematic analysis.
RESULTS Benefits for hosts included
improvements in job satisfaction, local
prestige, global connectedness, local
networks, leadership skills, resources and
sense of efficacy within their communities.
Host collaborators called for improvements
in HIC trainee attitudes and behaviours,
and asked that trainees not make promises
they would not fulfil. Findings also
provided evidence of a desire for parity
between the opportunities afforded to
US-based staff and those available to LMIC--
based partners.
CONCLUSIONS This study provides impor-
tant insights into the perspectives of LMIC
host community members in the context of
short-term experiences in global health for
HIC trainees. We hope to inform the beha-
viour of HIC trainees and institutions with
regard to international partnerships and
global health activities.
Medical Education 2016: 50: 1122–1130
doi: 10.1111/medu.13106
Discuss ideas arising from the article at
www.mededuc.com discuss.
1Department of Medicine-Infectious Disease, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA
2Division of Global Health Equity, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
3Prevention Research Center, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California, USA
4Department of Medicine-General Disciplines, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA
5Child Family Health International, San Francisco, California,
USA
6Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA
Correspondence: Tiffany H Kung, Department of Medicine -
Infectious Disease, Stanford University School of Medicine, 291
Campus Drive, Stanford, California 94305-5107, USA. Tel: 00 1
650 723 4000; E-mail: tkung@stanford.edu
1122
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and The Association for the Study of Medical Education;
MEDICAL EDUCATION 2016 50: 1122–1130
globalisation
 INTRODUCTION
Although medical students from high-income coun-
tries (HICs) have been participating in rotations in
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) for
many decades, these international experiences have
recently increased in popularity, as has the presence
of global health curricula in medical schools.1
Short-term experiences in global health (STEGHs)
allow students to witness health care in unique cul-
tural and geopolitical contexts.2,3 Students are gen-
erally supervised by local or HIC health care
providers, and experience varying levels of indepen-
dence in their clinical activities: depending on the
global health programme, some students may be
placed in foreign contexts strictly as observers,
whereas others actively participate in, or indepen-
dently provide, medical services.4,5
An abundance of benefits to students visiting from
HICs, referred to in this paper as ‘HIC trainees’,
have been described. These include increases in
skills and confidence, a better understanding of the
social determinants of health, the ability to function
optimally with limited resources, cultural sensitivity,
novel disease familiarity, appreciation of the physi-
cian–patient relationship, and the desire to enter
primary care and work with medically underserved
populations.2,6–15 Whereas an abundance of
research has focused on the benefits to HIC trai-
nees, the benefits and drawbacks for LMIC host
communities have not been well described.6,7 Some
speculate that LMIC host communities benefit from
the provision of health care or capacity building,
particularly when trainees are placed as providers,
educators or caregivers.8
However, many take issue with these alleged benefits
and refer to the unlicensed nature of HIC trainees,
the novelties of language, culture and resources
within LMIC host communities, and the relatively
short-term duration of HIC trainee international
experiences. Direct improvements to community
health resulting from HIC trainee clinical activities
are not supported broadly in the literature.9 Others
argue that HIC trainees may actually have adverse
effects on host community members, contributing to
negative self-images and feelings of dependence,
objectification or unworthiness.10–12 For community
benefits to be realised, it is likely that HIC trainee glo-
bal health experiences should be nested within longi-
tudinal partnerships between HIC organisations and
LMIC communities, and should recognise the costs
of hosting HIC trainees.5,13–15
Power imbalances between globally mobile HIC trai-
nees, their home institutions and LMIC host com-
munities complicate global health immersion
programmes, as do differences in objectives.16,17
Personal development appears to be the overarch-
ing motive for trainees interested in travelling to
LMICs.18,19 Consequently, critics of these pro-
grammes decry them as representing ‘developmen-
tal tourism’ or ‘voluntourism’.20,21 Some suggest
that the intent of the trainee is – like that of the
tourist – short term, and that there is little sense of
responsibility for continuity or follow-up.
To date there has been scant research into host
community perceptions of HIC trainees in STEGHs
through qualitative interviews.22 The majority of
host perspective studies have focused on the impact
of sending fully trained HIC medical providers to
LMICs7,23 or have utilised surveys as their methodol-
ogy.24 This study aims to describe in depth the ben-
efits and drawbacks of such programmes from the
perspectives of those hosting and supervising HIC
trainees. Importantly, we also aim to investigate host
views on the long-term partnership within which
individual trainee activities are nested. We capture
here the perspectives of LMIC host community col-
laborators, including physician preceptors, social
workers, non-governmental organisation (NGO)
directors, home-stay families, and programme
administrators.
METHODS
Study setting
We conducted semi-structured interviews with LMIC
host community collaborators with the US-based
non-profit NGO Child Family Health International
(CFHI) in La Paz, Bolivia and New Delhi, India.25
Child Family Health International facilitates year-
round global health education programmes and
sends 600–700 undergraduate, graduate and post-
graduate HIC interprofessional trainees annually to
nine countries. From 1995 to 2010, CFHI ran a med-
ical donation programme in which medical supplies
donated by HIC organisations were transported by
HIC trainees to international programme sites.
We selected La Paz, Bolivia and New Delhi, India as
study sites because CFHI has organised HIC trainee
programmes in both locations for over 10 years,
which allowed us to make inquiries about the host
communities’ perceptions of the long-term partner-
ship. The clear cultural differences between the two
1123
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and The Association for the Study of Medical Education;
MEDICAL EDUCATION 2016 50: 1122–1130
Host perspectives on global health trainees
 countries are conducive to a more dynamic inter-
view sample and add breadth to the research data.
In both sites, trainees rotate among various clinical
settings (governmental hospitals, rural clinics and
traditional medicine clinics). In India, trainees have
additional opportunities to rotate in community-
based health outreach efforts (local NGOs [e.g. nee-
dle exchange or domestic violence centres]). The
programmes are generally 4 weeks in length, but
can range from 2 to 16 weeks. When they undertake
CFHI’s pre-departure online module, students are
made aware of their roles as ‘learners’ and are told
not to practise beyond their level of training while
overseas.
Data collection
Study participants were selected by the administra-
tive coordinators or head physicians of the CFHI
sites in Bolivia and India. Thirty-five of the selected
study participants were available for interview (re-
sponse rate unknown); 34% were LMIC host com-
munity physicians (n = 12), 26% were directors or
social workers of local NGOs that offered opportuni-
ties for CFHI trainees (n = 9), 17% were pro-
gramme administrators (n = 6), and 23% were
home-stay family members (n = 8). All study partici-
pants had been born in their respective LMIC host
community or had lived there for at least 20 years.
Additionally, all participants had interacted with
HIC trainees for 3–8 years. Women constituted 40%
of the sample (n = 14). The programme site in
India offered trainees additional opportunities to
work with Indian NGOs and social workers, and
consequently we were able to interview this addi-
tional cohort. Participant characteristics are dis-
played in Table 1.
Participants engaged in 45-minute, semi-structured,
face-to-face interviews with a third-party interviewer,
unaffiliated with CFHI. Interviews were conducted
in the participant’s office, home or hospital, accord-
ing to the participant’s preference. In Bolivia, inter-
views were conducted in Spanish, whereas in India,
interviews were conducted in English. All partici-
pants in India were fluent in English. Interviews
allowed for exploration of unanticipated statements
and were tape-recorded to ensure accuracy and pre-
serve organic speech flow. Data collection continued
until data saturation. Interviewees were not compen-
sated for their participation in the study. Institu-
tional review board approval was granted by
Stanford University.
Data analysis
We transcribed all interviews verbatim. To facilitate
data analysis, we translated Spanish transcripts into
English, and asked translators to listen to a sample
of interviews and verify translations. We developed a
grounded coding scheme based on previous studies
of host perspectives of trainee impact in US service-
learning placements.26,27 We applied codes manu-
ally to a line-by-line analysis of each transcript. We
subsequently analysed using thematic analysis,28
using the qualitative data analysis software NVivo
Version 10.0 (QSR International Pty Ltd, Mel-
bourne, Vic, Australia) to apply codes and compare
data. Throughout the coding process, we noted
emergent themes and identified relationships and
contrasts between original themes.29 After at least
three rounds of coding, we applied multiple matri-
ces to identify similarities, contrasts and interrela-
tions among the perspectives of the four key
populations across India and Bolivia.29 Once analy-
sis was completed, we sent our results to two partici-
pants in both countries to seek feedback and
confirmation through member checking. These par-
ticipants expressed satisfaction that the research
accurately reflected their opinions.
RESULTS
Rise in local prestige
Nearly all physicians in both India and Bolivia
(83%, n = 10/12) claimed that working with a
US-based organisation and hosting HIC trainees
Table 1
Low- and middle-income country host interviewee
characteristics
Participant group
Bolivian, n
Indian, n
Physician preceptor
5
7
Local NGO director or social
worker*
0
9
Programme administrator
2
4
Home-stay family member
5
3
Total
12
23
* Unlike the Bolivian programme site, the Indian site offered
trainees additional opportunities to work with Indian NGOs
and social workers; consequently, we interviewed this addi-
tional cohort
NGO = non-government organisation
1124
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and The Association for the Study of Medical Education;
MEDICAL EDUCATION 2016 50: 1122–1130
TH Kung et al
 increased the prestige of their medical centre in the
eyes of the community. Physicians reported that
their patients were impressed that HIC trainees had
travelled from far away to learn from the patient’s
local personal physician. An Indian physician stated:
‘Most of our patients are appreciative, and some
think, “My doctor has visitors from other coun-
tries. Okay, the doctor is so learned because he is
teaching the foreign student.”’
The presence of HIC trainees was perceived by
patients to elevate the local physician’s skills and
the quality of care provided.
This effect appeared to be more pronounced for
rural or small town-based providers and those serv-
ing predominantly low-income patients. A homeo-
pathic medicine physician described the HIC
trainees as a ‘racial advertisement’ for his clinic. A
programme administrator reported that rural clinics
hosting HIC trainees had grown in popularity since
trainees had begun to arrive about 10 years earlier
and attributed this growth to the ‘name and fame’
that accompanies the title of CFHI preceptor.
Local physicians told stories in humorous tones
about patients who cherished the knowledge of
HIC trainees, perceiving the trainees as possessing
high qualifications beyond their actual level of
training. One doctor described patients who
brought in their old medical files for HIC trainees
to look over, hoping they could recommend addi-
tional treatment or an astute diagnosis. The physi-
cians unanimously agreed they did not find their
patients’ attention to the trainees frustrating. One
physician noted:
‘White skin is an advantage for us. . . we should
use it.’
Physicians explained that local community members
equated the trainees’ visible foreignness (White or
other race) with wealth, power and influence.
High-income country trainees bolstered the legiti-
macy of local NGOs serving socially marginalised
populations. The director of an Indian transgender
centre explained:
‘Your visits help us because the community can
see that other people are also supporting us.
Maybe they see you, foreign students, and fund-
ing agencies, and then the community thinks we
are doing good work.’
Host community collaborators regarded their HIC
collaborators’ willingness to work with them as rep-
resenting recognition of their skills, and endorse-
ment of their clinic, hospital or NGO.
Serving as global citizens
Global health immersion programmes transform
local physicians’ day-to-day clinical duties by requir-
ing them to engage in the role of educator; they
teach HIC trainees and broaden their perspectives
of the world. Multiple physicians stated that their
motivation for receiving HIC trainees was to fulfil
their role as a ‘global citizen’ and that they were
happy to have an influence beyond their country’s
geographic borders. A Bolivian physician said:
‘This opportunity makes me feel important. . . I
can build something more that is not only in my
country, but outside my country.’
All physicians reported that the ability to teach HIC
trainees from around the globe leads to greater job
satisfaction.
Although the stay of HIC trainees is short, physi-
cians were eager to use this opportunity to inspire
civic engagement among HIC trainees. Physicians
felt a sense of duty to teach HIC trainees from afflu-
ent nations about the difficulties of LMIC health
care systems. One physician stated of US-based
trainees:
‘I believe they are leaving Disneyland.’
Host community physicians hoped that HIC trainees
would draw from these experiences when making
career decisions. Although 25% (n = 3) of physi-
cians reported hoping that HIC trainees would
come back to work in Bolivia or India after finishing
training, the remaining 75% (n = 9) of physicians
did not expect students to reappear. Rather, they
expressed a desire for HIC trainees to return home
with a dedication to public service and a better
understanding of underserved populations in their
own countries. Some Bolivian physicians hoped that
HIC trainees would develop a deeper sensitivity
towards Latino patients. One Bolivian physician
said:
‘I believe the American students come here to
become world leaders. If you only know your
place, you are going to be a local leader. But if
you open yourself to the world, you’re going to
be a world leader.’
1125
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and The Association for the Study of Medical Education;
MEDICAL EDUCATION 2016 50: 1122–1130
Host perspectives on global health trainees
 Physicians expressed gratitude for the opportunity
to shape young HIC trainees.
Broadening world views
Although several LMIC physicians wished that their
local Bolivian and Indian students had opportuni-
ties to work in HIC health care settings first hand,
all felt these aspirations were unrealistic as a result
of cost-related barriers and a lack of infrastructure.
In light of this, some physicians saw hosting HIC
trainees as an opportunity to expose their local stu-
dents to foreign health care, albeit indirectly. This
exposure led to a number of benefits to local stu-
dents according to local physicians; realising the
minimal differences in skill and ability between
themselves and HIC trainees, LMIC students gained
increased communication skills, self-confidence and
maturity.
Both home-stay families and physicians stated that
local youth developed enhanced English language
skills and broadened perspectives with regard to
future career opportunities through working with
HIC trainees. A physician running a rural adoles-
cent clinic noted that, through interactions with
HIC trainees, local youth now ‘expect to have the
opportunity to travel to other countries and study’.
In both India and Bolivia, home-stay families com-
mented that HIC trainees motivate adolescent
home-stay children to develop their proficiency in
English in the hope of increasing their travel oppor-
tunities and professional potential.
Resource enhancement
All host physicians reported that outside donations
and funds enabled them to provide better health
care services. Some HIC trainees transported medi-
cal supplies donated by HIC organisations to
international host clinics. Doctors highly valued
these donations, which included items such as
gloves, syringes, bandages and stethoscopes. Physi-
cians perceived the quality of these HIC supplies
as superior to those available in their own country
and said that having these supplies elevated their
confidence.
Improved local networks and leadership
development
Medical directors – local physicians who lead medi-
cal initiatives for each CFHI programme – are
responsible for developing long-term relationships
with a network of community-based physician
educators. They reported that, in creating a cadre
of local community-based preceptors, they were able
to build a network of like-minded, public service-
oriented colleagues. Programme administrators also
reported benefiting from CFHI’s local network,
claiming to have gained increased leadership skills
by managing relationships with the physicians and
NGOs who precept HIC trainees.
Perceived hesitancy and apathy of trainees
In both Bolivia and India, 50% of physicians
(n = 6/12) expressed exasperation that some HIC
trainees were reluctant to touch patients in clinic.
Physicians agreed that the HIC trainees stood at a
distance and watched as if, in the words of one
interviewee:
‘. . .they want to sit in a glass cubicle and look at
people.’
Referencing the historic caste system, one Indian
doctor felt HIC trainees behaved as if his patients
were ‘untouchables’. Summarising the general senti-
ment, one physician stated:
‘Some students have had a lot of fear about sick-
ness. Then I didn’t know why they are studying
medicine.’
Many physicians (67%, n = 8) noted that some HIC
trainees were not proactive and did not ask ques-
tions. An Indian physician said:
‘Quite a lot of them have been, you know, not
interested much. . . But something has to come
from them. I cannot just go blabbering on and
on and on. So if the student is not showing an
initiative. . . then maybe we don’t feel like teach-
ing those students. Then the rapport is not
good.’
Physicians were largely involved with CFHI because
they loved teaching, and they recalled hurtful
moments when students had appeared bored in the
clinic.
All physicians and programme administrators across
both countries commented that HIC trainees gener-
ally did not take the initiative to do community
work beyond required rotations. In these situations,
it became apparent to host communities that the
students’ intentions were to enjoy themselves
instead of giving back. A programme administrator
stated:
1126
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and The Association for the Study of Medical Education;
MEDICAL EDUCATION 2016 50: 1122–1130
TH Kung et al
 ‘Students can do more, but don’t do more.
That’s the sad part. Students want to have fun:
rafting, trucking, going [to] the mall, partying
late into the night. Students want to have fun.
But it should not be fun only.’
This carefree behaviour contributed to the percep-
tion that trainees’ intent to undertake the pro-
gramme abroad was based mainly on the wish to
build their r�
esum�
e and gain enjoyment.
Unfulfilled promises
Programme administrators and physicians recounted
their disappointment at the lack of continuity in rela-
tionships with HIC trainees. A physician stated:
‘They just come and go. In their perspective, it’s
just a programme they’re doing, and then they
go back.’
Host communities in LMICs were hurt by the short-
term mentality of some HIC trainees.
Programme administrators in both Bolivia and India
stated that the worst thing an HIC trainee could do
was to make unfulfillable promises. Many HIC trai-
nees had promised physicians or NGOs that, upon
returning home, they would fundraise, send sup-
plies or return to India or Bolivia the following sum-
mer; the majority of HIC trainees had not yet
carried out their commitments. Some host commu-
nity members expressed resentment towards HIC
trainees for whom they had helped set up research
projects; the majority of these students did not
remain in touch or provide collaborators with
research results.
Lack of cultural sensitivity
A common frustration for host community collabo-
rators was HIC trainees’ insensitive and, at times,
ignorant behaviour. Trainees were cited as taking
insensitive photographs and rejecting customary
hospitality offerings of tea and food. Host commu-
nity members noted that HIC trainees travelling
together in large groups of classmates or friends
tended to be particularly insular.
Lack of equal opportunity
An observation that came up in conversations with
LMIC host community collaborators was the fre-
quency of visits by US-based staff of CFHI. Host
community collaborators recognised the importance
of face-to-face meetings to develop relationships,
but believed it was possible for US staff to visit too
often. After a certain point, host community mem-
bers questioned the purpose of the frequent visits
and sometimes tallied travel costs. A programme
administrator stated:
‘[CFHI] is gathering the medical directors [and
US staff] and flying them in for one night, during
the peak holiday time. And paying for the hotel
stays and food. . . I don’t think that, as a socially
responsible organisation, we should do that.’
Host community members recognised the great
expense of these trips and sometimes felt that such
spending did not align with their mission.
Some LMIC host community collaborators expressed
disappointment that they had not received recogni-
tion or promotions commensurate with those of US-
based staff. Local programme administrators saw US
employees promoted from the position of coordina-
tor to that of director and wondered why they had
not received similar acknowledgement, given their
long tenures with CFHI. Additionally, some LMIC
host community collaborators wished that they had
opportunities to travel to the US or to visit CFHI
sites in other countries. Although many acknowl-
edged the positive impacts of working with HIC trai-
nees and US-based staff on their careers and
personal development, some felt CFHI did not pro-
vide professional development opportunities compa-
rable with those offered to US-based staff.
DISCUSSION
Although global health continues to gain momen-
tum both within the medical field and interprofes-
sionally, there are gaps in LMIC perspectives.30 Our
study begins to address the lack of understanding
about LMIC community perspectives in the context
of hosting HIC trainees. Multiple benefits and sev-
eral drawbacks of hosting HIC trainees were
reported by LMIC-based supervising physicians
(Table. 2). The other key host community stake-
holders consistently reported benefiting in other
ways: (i) programme administrators gained
improved networking and leadership skills; (ii) local
NGOs attained increased prestige and networking,
and (iii) home-stay families developed enhanced
proficiency in English and broadened world views.
In reflecting upon the benefits of HIC trainee visits,
host community members did not mention
1127
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and The Association for the Study of Medical Education;
MEDICAL EDUCATION 2016 50: 1122–1130
Host perspectives on global health trainees
 improved patient care or community health out-
comes, although these are the benefits perceived
by some HIC trainees and are often touted in
recruitment for global health international pro-
grammes.31,32 Rather, locally practising physicians
commonly cited the presence of HIC trainees as
boosting their job satisfaction, global connectedness
and prestige. Our findings reinforce the belief that
the presence of HIC trainees improves the profes-
sional image of the host clinical site.24,33 This sup-
ports the notion that HIC trainees in the roles of
learner, admirer and observer of local physicians
support global health. Our results confirm the sug-
gestion that a main motivation for teaching HIC
trainees is to fulfil the supervising physician’s role
as a global citizen, indicating that benefits are per-
ceived to extend beyond the individual HIC trai-
nee.22,33,34 These results have implications for those
establishing or continuing international pro-
grammes as the presence of HIC trainees can be
seen to represent an endorsement of a particular
clinic or provider. This may be a reason to ensure
that HIC trainees are placed with quality health
care providers within the community so that the
locally defined, highest standard of care is endorsed
by global partnerships. Further research exploring
the intersections of race and international health-
related programmes, as well as LMIC host precep-
tors’ conceptualisations of ‘global citizenship’ are
needed.
Our study is limited by several factors. Interviewees
were recruited by local CFHI leadership, which
potentially may have skewed the pool of respon-
dents. However, recruitment was carried out by host
community collaborators rather than by HIC-based
CFHI employees as these individuals maintained the
best networks of potential interviewees. The inter-
viewer came from an HIC, which potentially may
have altered the manner in which questions were
asked or answered. As the majority of study partici-
pants are paid an honorarium by CFHI for teaching
and hosting, interviewees may have feared that neg-
ative feedback might compromise their relationship
with CFHI and present an economic risk. To min-
imise these concerns, participants were assured of
their anonymity and of the interviewer’s indepen-
dence of CFHI. The distribution of participants (23
in India and 12 in Bolivia) was weighted towards
Indian participants as the Indian site had a larger
network of preceptors and an additional community
health outreach component. Although we sought to
confirm our findings with interview participants by
member checking, we received feedback from only
two participants. Furthermore, the generalisability
of results may be limited as LMIC host community
members are not homogeneous globally, and HIC
trainee activities may take place in different philo-
sophical contexts with NGOs other than CFHI.14
Our findings reveal conflicts that may result from
activities that are considered to be best practice in
global health.5 Physicians in both countries cited
HIC trainees’ reluctance to physically touch
patients, which was interpreted as indicative of trai-
nees’ prejudice against ‘unclean’ or ‘untouchable’
patients, as well as trainees appearing ‘bored’.
Meanwhile, increasingly stringent standards originat-
ing in HICs are calling for the activities of pre-
health students to involve observation only, and for
all students to avoid practising beyond their level of
training, or even to narrow their scope of practice
when in novel international settings.5,35 Our results
indicate a need for discussions between LMIC host
community collaborators, HIC institutions and HIC
trainees to detail how trainees can touch patients in
a humanistic way without overstepping ethical or
safety boundaries, while demonstrating active learn-
ing and engaged observation.
Host community collaborators were particularly sen-
sitive to the making of unfulfilled promises by visit-
ing HIC trainees. The short duration of STEGHs
often transfers to a short-term mentality regarding
commitments. Sending novice clinicians and trai-
nees with short-term commitments, yet relatively
Table 2
Benefits and drawbacks of hosting high-income
country (HIC) trainees as reported by host supervising
physicians
Benefits
Increased prestige for local physicians and their practices
Opportunities for leadership, networking, and developing
global connectedness
Increased job satisfaction
Health resources and supplies brought by HIC trainees
Opportunities for local students to interact with HIC trainees
Increased motivation to pursue professional development
opportunities commensurate to HIC-based staff
Drawbacks
Frustration associated with HIC trainee hesitancy and apathy
Disappointment regarding short-term, transactional
relationships between HIC trainees and hosts
Disappointment in HIC trainee failure to fulfill commitments
Frustration with lack of parity in professional development
opportunities between HIC and host country staff
1128
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and The Association for the Study of Medical Education;
MEDICAL EDUCATION 2016 50: 1122–1130
TH Kung et al
 massive financial capital, raises concern that such
programmes confer inappropriate amounts of influ-
ence to young travellers. Our results indicate that
pre-departure training for HIC trainees should
include the provision of information on the
potential detrimental impact of making unfulfilled
promises and lack of follow-through with host com-
munities.36
Host community programme leaders believe that
organisational spending and professional develop-
mental opportunities disproportionately benefit
HIC-based staff. Although HIC-based universities
and non-profit organisations often have obligations
to conduct site visits for risk management, monitor-
ing and evaluation, and other reasons, these trips
can appear unnecessary and even frivolous in the
eyes of LMIC partners, particularly when they are
coupled with tourism. Our results reinforce the
tenets of Fair Trade Learning with regard to
reciprocity for international partners of HIC-based
organisations.37 Programme leaders from LMIC host
communities want parity with US-based staff in
terms of travel opportunities, professional develop-
ment and promotion structure; this unique finding
is important for continuing quality improvements
towards equitable global health partnerships.
CONCLUSIONS
This study describes the perspectives of LMIC host
community supervising physicians and local pro-
gramme leadership in the context of STEGHs. Our
results indicate numerous benefits to host commu-
nity members, including improvements in job satis-
faction, local prestige, global connectedness, local
networks, leadership skills, resources and sense of
efficacy within their communities. Host collabora-
tors call for improvements in HIC trainee attitudes
and behaviours and the avoidance of unfulfilled
promises. Findings also provide cautionary tales to
ensure parity of opportunities for US-based staff
and LMIC-based partners. Overall, this study begins
to capture LMIC host community perspectives about
the placement of HIC trainees. Additional studies in
diverse geographic settings and disciplines, and
within differing global health partnership structures,
are needed.
Contributors: THK, CAH, EJ and JE contributed to the study
conception and design. All authors contributed to the anal-
ysis and interpretation of data. THK, CAH and JE con-
tributed to the preparation of the first draft of the
manuscript. All authors contributed to the critical revision
of the paper. All authors approved the final manuscript and
have agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work.
Acknowledgements: The authors wish to thank Hema Pan-
dey, Sudarshan Pandey, Dra. Cecilia Uribe, Gonzalo
Claure, Sanjay Chakraborty, and Nick Penco for helping
facilitate this study. We are grateful to all the members of
CFHI in India and Bolivia who dedicated their time to
this project. THK would like to thank Dr. Jennifer Wolf
for her excellent course on qualitative data analysis, and
Dr. Clayton Hurd for his mentorship.
Funding: Funding was provided by the Department of
Human Biology, Stanford University and Stanford Univer-
sity UAR Major Grant.
Conflicts of interest: JE is executive director and EJ is foun-
der of Child Family Health International (CFHI) and
hence are not independent of the organisation that is the
subject of this research. Data collection and analysis were
completed independently.
Ethical approval: this study was approved by the Institu-
tional Review Board, Human Subjects Department, of
Stanford University (protocol no. 24004; 27 April 2012).
REFERENCES
1
Rowson M, Smith A, Hughes R et al. The evolution of
global health teaching in undergraduate medical
curricula. Global Health 2012;8 35.
2
Drain PK, Holmes KK, Skeff KM, Hall TL, Gardner P.
Global health training and international clinical
rotations during residency: current status, needs, and
opportunities. Acad Med 2009;84 (3):320–5.
3
Loh LC, Cherniak W, Dreifuss BA, Dacso MM, Lin
HC, Evert J. Short term global health experiences and
local partnership models: a framework. Global Health
2015;11 (1):1.
4
Rassiwala J, Vaduganathan M, Kupershtok M, Castillo
FM, Evert J. Global health educational engagement –
a tale of two models. Acad Med 2013;88 (11):1651–7.
5
Crump JA. Sugarman J; Working Group on Ethics
Guidelines for Global Health Training (WEIGHT).
Ethics and best practice guidelines for training
experiences in global health. Am J Trop Med Hyg
2010;83 (6):1178–82.
6
DeCamp M, Enumah S, O’Neill D, Sugarman J.
Perceptions of a short-term medical programme in
the Dominican Republic: voices of care recipients.
Glob Public Health 2014;9 (4):411–25.
7
Kraeker C, Chandler C. ‘We learn from them, they
learn from us’: global health experiences and host
perceptions of visiting health care professionals. Acad
Med 2013;88 (4):483–7.
8
Crabtree RD. Asking hard questions about the impact
of international service learning. Conversations on Jesuit
Higher Education 2007;31 (2):39–42.
9
Melby MK, Loh LC, Evert J, Prater C, Lin H, Khan O.
Beyond medical ‘missions’ to impact-driven short-term
experiences in global health (STEGH): ethical
1129
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and The Association for the Study of Medical Education;
MEDICAL EDUCATION 2016 50: 1122–1130
Host perspectives on global health trainees
 principles to optimise community benefit and learner
experience. Acad Med 2016;91 (5):633–8.
10
Geertz C. The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays.
New York, NY: Basic Books 1973.
11
Hudgins K. Student development tourism: a growing
trend to what end? Anthropol News 2010;51 (8):29.
12
Jones SR. The underside of service learning. About
Campus 2002;7 (4):10–5.
13
Kim JY, Farmer P, Porter ME. Redefining global
health-care delivery. Lancet 2013;382 (9897):1060–9.
14
Evert J. Teaching corner: Child Family Health
International. J Bioeth Inq 2015;12 (1):63–7.
15
Binagwaho A, Kyamanywa P, Farmer PE, et al. The
human resources for health programme in Rwanda – a
new partnership. N Engl J Med 2013;369 (21):2054–9.
16
Foucault M. The Birth of the Clinic. London: Tavistock
1973.
17
Suchdev P, Ahrens K, Click E, Macklin L, Evangelista
D, Graham E. A model for sustainable short-term
international medical trips. Ambul Pediatr 2007;7
(4):317–20.
18
Crane J. Scrambling for Africa? Universities and
global health Lancet 2011;377 (9775):1388–90.
19
Crane JT. Scrambling for Africa: AIDS, Expertise, and the
Rise of American Global Health Science. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press 2013.
20
Salazar NB. Developmental tourists vs. development
tourism: a case study. In: Raj A, ed. Tourist Behaviour:
A Psychological Perspective. Delhi: Kanishka Publishers
2004;85–106.
21
Seymour B, Benzian H, Kalenderian E. Voluntourism
and global health: preparing dental students for
responsible engagement in international
programmes. J Dent Educ 2013;77 (10):1252–7.
22
Kumwenda B, Dowell J, Daniels K, Merrylees N.
Medical electives in sub-Saharan Africa: a host
perspective. Med Educ 2015;49 (6):623–33.
23
Green T, Green H, Scandlyn J, Kestler A.
Perceptions of short-term medical volunteer work: a
qualitative study in Guatemala. Global Health 2009;5
(4):1–13.
24
Lukolyo H, Rees C, Keating EM, Swamy P, Schutze
GE, Marton S, Turner TL. Perceptions and
expectations of host-country preceptors of short-term
learners at four clinical sites in sub-Saharan Africa.
Acad Pediatr 2015;16 (4):387–393.
25
Child Family Health International. https://
www.cfhi.org. [Accessed 16 January 2015.]
26
Stoecker R, Tryon EA, Hilgendorf A. The Unheard
Voices: Community Organizations and Service Learning.
Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press 2009.
27
Sandy M, Holland BA. Different worlds and common
ground: community partner perspectives on campus–
community partnerships. Mich J Commun Serv Learn
2006;13 (1):30–43.
28
Clarke V, Braun V. Teaching thematic analysis:
overcoming challenges and developing strategies for
effective learning. Psychologist 2013;26 (2):120–3.
29
Miles MB, Huberman AM. Qualitative Data Analysis:
An Expanded Sourcebook. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications 1994.
30
Liu Y, Zhang Y, Liu Z, Wang J. Gaps in studies of
global health education: an empirical literature
review. Glob Health Action 2015;88:25709.
31
Evert J. How does global service learning become a
dis-service in healthcare settings? http://globalsl.org/
cfhi. [Accessed 1 October 2015.]
32
Bui T, Evert J, McCarthy V, Asokan I, Mehta A, Miller
K, Tsai C, Wen S, eds. Reflection in Global Health: An
Anthology. San Francisco, CA: Global Health
Collaborations Press 2015.
33
Bozinoff N, Dorman KP, Kerr D, Roebbelen E,
Rogers E, Hunter A, O’Shea T, Kraeker C. Toward
reciprocity: host supervisor perspectives on
international medical electives. Med Educ 2014;48
(4):397–404.
34
O’Brien AJ. Global citizenship and the Stanford
Cross-Cultural Rhetoric Project. JNUSTA 2011;1
(1):32–43.
35
Forum on Education Abroad. Guidelines for
Undergraduate Health-Related Programs Abroad.
2014. https://www.forumea.org/resources/standards-
of-good-practice/standards-guidelines/undergraduate-
health-related-programs-abroad. [Accessed 2
September 2015.]
36
Barry M, Sugarman J, DeCamp M, Richardson G,
Rodriguez J. Ethical challenges in short-term global
health training. http://ethicsandglobalhealth.org.
[Accessed 16 January 2015.]
37
Hartman E, Paris CM, Blache-Cohen B. Fair trade
learning: ethical standards for community-engaged
international volunteer tourism. Tourism Hospital Res
2014;14 (1–2):108–16.
Received 7 January 2016; editorial comments to author 14
March 2016, accepted for publication 7 April 2016
1130
ª 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and The Association for the Study of Medical Education;
MEDICAL EDUCATION 2016 50: 1122–1130
TH Kung et al
