 REVIEW
published: 08 May 2018
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00166
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
1
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 166
Edited by:
Jintao Zhang,
Beijing Normal University, China
Reviewed by:
Guangheng Dong,
Zhejiang Normal University, China
Vasileios Stavropoulos,
Cairnmillar Institute, Australia
*Correspondence:
Daria J. Kuss
daria.kuss@ntu.ac.uk
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Psychopathology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychiatry
Received: 16 October 2017
Accepted: 11 April 2018
Published: 08 May 2018
Citation:
Kuss DJ, Pontes HM and Griffiths MD
(2018) Neurobiological Correlates in
Internet Gaming Disorder: A
Systematic Literature Review.
Front. Psychiatry 9:166.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00166
Neurobiological Correlates in
Internet Gaming Disorder: A
Systematic Literature Review
Daria J. Kuss*, Halley M. Pontes and Mark D. Griffiths
International Gaming Research Unit, Psychology Department, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, United Kingdom
Internet Gaming Disorder (IGD) is a potential mental disorder currently included in the
third section of the latest (fifth) edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental
Disorders (DSM-5) as a condition that requires additional research to be included in the
main manual. Although research efforts in the area have increased, there is a continuing
debate about the respective criteria to use as well as the status of the condition as mental
health concern. Rather than using diagnostic criteria which are based on subjective
symptom experience, the National Institute of Mental Health advocates the use of
Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) which may support classifying mental disorders based
on dimensions of observable behavior and neurobiological measures because mental
disorders are viewed as biological disorders that involve brain circuits that implicate
specific domains of cognition, emotion, and behavior. Consequently, IGD should be
classified on its underlying neurobiology, as well as its subjective symptom experience.
Therefore, the aim of this paper is to review the neurobiological correlates involved in
IGD based on the current literature base. Altogether, 853 studies on the neurobiological
correlates were identified on ProQuest (in the following scholarly databases: ProQuest
Psychology Journals, PsycARTICLES, PsycINFO, Applied Social Sciences Index and
Abstracts, and ERIC) and on MEDLINE, with the application of the exclusion criteria
resulting in reviewing a total of 27 studies, using fMRI, rsfMRI, VBM, PET, and EEG
methods. The results indicate there are significant neurobiological differences between
healthy controls and individuals with IGD. The included studies suggest that compared to
healthy controls, gaming addicts have poorer response-inhibition and emotion regulation,
impaired prefrontal cortex (PFC) functioning and cognitive control, poorer working
memory and decision-making capabilities, decreased visual and auditory functioning,
and a deficiency in their neuronal reward system, similar to those found in individuals
with substance-related addictions. This suggests both substance-related addictions
and behavioral addictions share common predisposing factors and may be part of an
addiction syndrome. Future research should focus on replicating the reported findings
in different cultural contexts, in support of a neurobiological basis of classifying IGD and
related disorders.
Keywords: Internet Gaming Disorder, IGD, fMRI, rsfMRI, VBM, PET, EEG, review
 Kuss et al.
Neurobiological Correlates in IGD
KEY CONCEPTS
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) measures
changes neuronal activity via levels of blood oxygen (BOLD)
in the brain, as blood flow in “active” brain areas increases
to transport more glucose, whilst transporting additional
oxygenated hemoglobin molecules.
Resting State Magnetic Resonance Imaging (rsfMRI) is a subtype
of fMRI which measures blood oxygen levels (BOLD) to assess
brain activity whilst the subject is in a resting state (i.e., not
engaged in a specific activity). The aim is to investigate whether
there are differences in brain function in individuals with
particular conditions in comparison to healthy controls.
Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) helps characterize subtle
structural changes in the brain without the need of prior
knowledge. This is especially important given videogame use
can affect brain functioning in various ways that may result in
changes at the behavioral and cognitive levels.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) measures metabolic
activity in the brain by detecting gamma rays which are emitted
through a tracer substance, which are then depicted through
computer analysis.
Studies using Electroencephalography (EEG) are employed to
detect neural activity from the underlying cortical areas (anterior,
posterior, right, and left) in an individual’s cerebral cortex using
electrodes attached to the scalp. Using this technique, voltage
fluctuations (i.e., current flow produced by excitation of neuronal
synapses) are measured between pairs of electrodes.
INTRODUCTION
Internet Gaming Disorder (IGD) is a potential mental disorder
currently included in the third section of the latest (fifth) edition
of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders
(DSM-5) as a condition that requires additional research to be
included in the main manual (1). Although research efforts in
the area have increased, there is a continuing debate about the
respective criteria to use as well as the status of the condition as
mental health concern [e.g., (2, 3)].
The controversies regarding the proposed classification of
IGD in the DSM-5 concern the conceptual, theoretical, as well
as methodological issues that have been raised by a number of
scholars in the field. Firstly, it has been stated that the addiction
framework is restricting because rather than being an addiction,
problematic gaming may be the result of maladaptive coping
and seeking to satisfy previously unmet needs (4). However,
research (5) has also shown that dysfunctional coping and
Internet addiction do not have to be mutually exclusive, but that
the former predicts the latter, and may therefore suggest that
gaming is a form of self-medication, and which is similar to
other addictions (6). Secondly, it has been argued that if IGD
results from other mental disorders it cannot be considered a
bona fide addiction (7). However, from a clinical perspective,
it is clear that comorbidity is the norm, not an exception, and
this holds not just for Internet and gaming addiction (6, 8), but
also for other psychopathology (9) including other addictions
(6). Thirdly, previous research on IGD has been criticized for
its methodological limitations, given that most research in the
area has been conducted using non-clinical populations using
psychometric (and therefore subjective) measures (10). However,
there are increasing numbers of studies evaluating treatment-
seeking clinical patients with IGD [e.g., (11–23)]. Furthermore,
methodological limitations of research in the young field of IGD
are limiting our understanding and generalization of findings,
and therefore it is of utmost importance to continue researching
the phenomenon both from a clinical perspective and using
methods that can be considered more objective, such as assessing
the neurobiological underpinnings of IGD.
Rather than assessing IGD subjectively by relying on diag-
nostic criteria which are based on subjective symptom exp-
erience, the National Institute of Mental Health (24) advocates
the use of Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) which may support
classifying mental disorders based on dimensions of observable
behavior and neurobiological measures because mental disorders
are viewed as biological disorders that involve brain circuits that
implicate specific domains of cognition, emotion, and behavior.
Consequently, IGD should be classified on its underlying
neurobiology as well as its subjective symptom experience.
Therefore, the aim of this paper is to review the neurobiological
correlates in IGD based on the current literature base.
METHODS
Inclusion criteria used for the present review were: (i) assessing
neurobiological mechanisms in IGD, (ii) empirical studies,
(iii) using neuroimaging techniques, (iv) published in a peer-
reviewed journal, (v) written in English, and (vi) published since
2012 as previous reviews have covered the timeframe before
then (25). The database ProQuest was searched, including the
following databases: Applied Social Sciences Index and Abstracts
(ASSIA), ERIC, ProQuest Psychology Journals, PsycARTICLES,
and PsycINFO, with another search performed on MEDLINE.
The search included the most common types of neuroimaging
techniques used in IGD research [i.e., electroencephalogram
(EEG), positron emission tomography (PET), single-photon
emission computed tomography (SPECT), functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), structural magnetic resonance
imaging (sMRI), diffusion-tensor imaging (DTI)] as reported
in a previous systematic review [i.e., (25)], leading to the
following search strategy: (patholog∗ OR problem∗ OR addict∗
OR compulsive OR dependen∗ OR disorder∗) AND (video OR
computer OR internet) gam∗ AND (neuroimaging OR eeg OR
pet OR spect or fmri OR smri OR dti). Each study’s title and
abstract were screened for eligibility. Full texts of all potentially
relevant studies were then retrieved and further examined for
eligibility.
RESULTS
A total of 853 studies (ProQuest n = 745; MEDLINE n =
108) were initially identified, with the search performed on
the ProQuest website yielding the following results: ProQuest
Psychology Journals n = 524; PsycARTICLES n = 115; PsycINFO
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
2
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 166
 Kuss et al.
Neurobiological Correlates in IGD
FIGURE 1 | Flow diagram of the study selection process.
n = 106; Applied Social Sciences Index and Abstracts n = 0; and
ERIC n = 0. All 853 papers had their titles and abstracts screened,
resulting in the exclusion of 820 papers that were of no relevance
for the present review, leaving 33 studies which were eligible for
further review. Of these, six papers had to be further excluded
because they were either duplicates (n = 2), did not assess IGD (n
= 1), or review papers (n = 3). A total of 27 studies were deemed
eligible for further analysis as they met the inclusion criteria. The
selection process is detailed in the flow chart in Figure 1.
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI)
With fMRI, changes in the levels of blood oxygen (BOLD) in
the brain are measured because they denote neuronal activity.
The ratio of oxyhemoglobin (i.e., hemoglobin which contains
oxygen in the blood) to deoxyhemoglobin (i.e., hemoglobin
which has released oxygen) in the brain is measured as
blood flow in “active” brain areas increases to transport more
glucose, whilst transporting additional oxygenated hemoglobin
molecules. Measuring this metabolic activity in the brain allows
for finer and more detailed imaging of the brain relative to
structural MRI. Moreover, the benefits of fMRI comprise the
speed of brain imaging, spatial resolution, and no possible health
risk in comparison to PET scans (26). A total of four studies were
identified that used fMRI in the study of IGD (27–30). The details
of these studies are presented in Table 1 below.
Taken together, the fMRI studies using adolescent samples
in China diagnosed with IGD (28, 30) suggested that there
were differences between these individuals in comparison to
healthy controls with regards to their neurobiology. Specifically,
adolescents with IGD were found to have a higher activity in
the superior medial frontal gyrus, right anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC), right superior and middle frontal gyrus, the left inferior
parietal lobule, the left precentral gyrus, and the left precuneus
and cuneus, indicating worse response-inhibition and impaired
prefrontal cortex (PFC) functioning (28) given previous research
as shown that the left frontoparietal network is responsible for
response inhibition (31). There was less activity in the bilateral
middle and inferior temporal gyri which are responsible for
visual processing (such as face recognition), and the right
superior parietal lobule (responsible for spatial orientation),
suggesting decreased visual and auditory functioning (28).
Another fMRI study included in this review included male
gamers in the Netherlands (29) and used Go-NoGo and Stroop
tasks to assess impulsivity and inhibitory control, finding that
problem video game players have lower brain activity in the left
inferior frontal gyrus, right inferior parietal lobe in comparison
to matched casual gaming controls, indicating that problem
gamers have a lower inhibitory control [similar to the results
regarding impaired inhibitory control outlined in Ding et al.’s
study (28)], with no differences found in attention control and
error processing.
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
3
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 166
 Kuss et al.
Neurobiological Correlates in IGD
TABLE 1 | Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies of Internet Gaming Disorder (IGD).
Author
Sample
Aims
Findings
Ding et al. (28)
N = 34 adolescents recruited from a
mental health center in China (50 male;
mean age = 16.4, SD = 3.2 years)
To assess whether sub-facets of trait
impulsivity are linked to brain regions
associated with impaired impulse inhibition
in individuals with IGD
PFC involved in circuit modulating
impulsivity. Impaired PFC function related
to high impulsivity in adolescents with IGD,
and may contribute to IGD process
Sun et al. (30)
N = 39 adolescents and adults with IGD
recruited form mental health center, and
healthy controls in China (83% male; mean
age = 20.5, SD = 3.55 years)
To investigate whether diffusional kurtosis
imaging (DKI) can be used to detect
changes in gray matter (GM) in individuals
with IGD
DKI can detect subtle differences in GM
microstructure between IGD and healthy
individuals. DKI model can provide
sensitive imaging biomarkers for assessing
IGD severity.
Dieter et al. (27)
N = 32 adults with IGD recruited in mental
health center, and healthy controls in
Germany (91% male; mean age = 26.7,
SD = 6.3 years)
To measure psychological and
neurobiological correlates of relationship
between avatar and concepts of self and
ideal self in individuals with IGD
Disordered gamers identify significantly
more with their avatar than non-disordered
individuals. Avatar may replace gamers’
ideal self-whilst addiction develops.
Luijten et al. (29)
N = 34 male gamers in the Netherlands
(mean age = 20.8, SD = 3.1 years)
To assess cognitive control deficits in
individuals with IGD (e.g., inhibitory
control, error processing, attention control)
Reduced inhibitory control, but error
processing and attention control normal.
Moreover, diffusional kurtosis imaging (measuring water
diffusion processes in the brain to assess microstructures)
and voxel-based morphometry indicated that adolescents with
IGD had lower kurtosis parameters in gray matter (GM) in
various neuronal areas, whilst their GM volume in the temporal
and parahippocampal gyri was higher, and lower in their left
precentral gyrus. Based on the differences found in the assessed
mean kurtosis metrics (i.e., water diffusion) between Internet
gaming addicts and healthy controls and the brain areas detailed
above (30), it appears there are significant differences in the
microstructure of the brain between these groups, pointing
to a particular IGD pathophysiology (30). [For a detailed
representation of the peak MNI coordinates of the voxel and
cluster analysis of this study, please refer to the summary
provided regarding the MK changes, differences in axial and
radial kurtosis between the Internet gaming addiction and the
control groups (Sun et al., pp. 48ff.)].
The final fMRI study using adult players of Massively
Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games (MMORPGs) with IGD
in Germany (27) showed that they identify with their in-game
avatar (i.e., their virtual character), which leads to activation of
brain areas associated with self-identification and self-concept-
relate processing, i.e., the left angular gyrus, suggesting avatar-
identification may be a consequence of compensating for social
anxiety, resulting in developing IGD.
Resting State Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (rsfMRI)
rsfMRI is a subtype of fMRI which measures blood oxygen
levels (BOLD) to assess brain activity whilst the subject is in a
resting state (i.e., not engaged in a specific activity). The aim is
to investigate whether there are differences in brain function in
individuals with particular conditions in comparison to healthy
controls (32). In the present review, a total of seven studies used
rsMRI to study IGD were included (33–39). Study details are
provided in Table 2.
Taken together, the rsfMRI studies identified in the present
review suggest individuals with IGD have an impaired cognitive
control [(34)–(36, 38, 39)], and a deficiency in their ventral
striatum
reward
system
(33).
Cognitive
control
in
IGD
individuals was assessed using a color-word Stroop task,
decreased fractional anisotropy (FA) in the right salience
network, indicating reduced fiber density, axonal diameter, and
myelination in white matter (WM), which may explain problem
in regulating the salience network in individuals with IGD
that may be associated with impaired cognitive control (36).
Decreased WM density in the inferior frontal gyrus, insula,
amygdala and anterior cingulate have been demonstrated in
individuals with Internet gaming addiction relative to healthy
controls, indicating decreased capacities of decision-making,
behavioral inhibition and emotion regulation in the IGA group
(34). In addition to this, it has been shown that individuals
with IGD have decreased fractional amplitudes of low-frequency
fluctuation (measuring local brain activity which has been
linked to psychiatric disorders) in the cerebellum and increased
values in the superior temporal gyrus, suggesting impaired
executive function, working memory and decision-making in
IGD subjects relative to healthy controls, but also more brain
activity that may be associated with increased sensory-motor
coordination in IGD (35). Research has also indicated an
increased volume of the right caudate and nucleus accumbens
(driving the experience of pleasure in the human brain) and
reduced strength of resting state functional connectivity in
the PFC, tied to decreased cognitive control, similar to these
found in substance-related disorders (38). Furthermore, research
has found that individuals with IGD have decreased voxel-
mirrored homotopic connectivity (measuring the connectivity
between brain hemispheres) between the left and right superior
frontal gyrus, frontal and middle frontal gyrus, indicating
reduced interhemispheric communication in the brain of IGD
individuals relative to healthy controls, impacting decision-
making, craving and inhibitory errors (39). Moreover, it has been
found that individuals who frequently play MMORPGs such as
World of Warcraft have a lower physiological responsiveness
in the ventral striatum when anticipating monetary rewards
with ventral striatum activity differing both with task-based
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
4
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 166
 Kuss et al.
Neurobiological Correlates in IGD
TABLE 2 | Resting state magnetic resonance imaging (rsfMRI) studies of Internet Gaming Disorder (IGD).
Author
Sample
Aims
Findings
Xing et al. (36)
N = 34 adolescents in China (61% male;
mean age = 19.1, SD = 0.7 years)
To assess the relationship between the
salience network and cognitive control in
adolescents with IGD
Right salience network associated with
impaired executive function. Structural
connectivity differences between
adolescents with IGD and healthy controls.
Yuan et al. (38)
N = 87 adolescents and young adults in
China (75% male; mean age = 19, SD =
1.4 years, range = 15–23)
To assess differences in striatum volume
and resting-state functional connectivity
(RSFC) networks between individuals with
IGD and healthy controls
Differences in striatum volume and
frontostriatal circuits RSFC between
individuals with IGD and healthy controls.
Cognitive control deficits in IGD correlated
with reduced frontostriatal RSFC strength.
Yuan et al. (33)
N = 33 young male gamers and
non-gamers in Germany (mean age =
25.5, SD = 4.2, range = 18–34)
To assess whether World of Warcraft
layers have deficient reward system
Evidence for reward system deficiency in
frequent online gamers, including
significantly decreased neural activation
during anticipation of small and large
monetary rewards in ventral striatum
Lin et al. (34); Lin
et al. (35)
N = 52 male young individuals in China
(mean age = 22.2, SD = 3.1 years)
To assess abnormal spontaneous brain
activity in IGD with low-frequency
fluctuation (fALFF) at different frequency
bands
Individuals with IGD had lower fALFF
values in superior temporal gyrus and
higher fALFF values in cerebellum
Wang et al. (39)
N = 41 adolescents in China (mean age =
16.9, SD = 2.7 years; range = 14–17)
To assess interhemispheric resting state
functional connectivity of individuals with
IGD using voxel-mirrored homotopic
connectivity (VMHC)
Individuals with IGD had decreased VMHC
between orbital part of left and right
superior, middle and inferior frontal gyrus
as well as resting-state fMRI, with the deficient sensitivity to
reward predisposing individuals to excessive gaming (rather than
reward system deficiency being the result of excessive gaming)
(33).
Voxel-Based Morphometry (VBM)
VBM is a useful technique for understanding IGD as it helps
characterize subtle structural changes in the brain without the
need of prior knowledge (40). This is especially important given
videogame use can affect brain functioning in various ways that
may result in changes at the behavioral and cognitive levels (41).
This subsection will briefly outline some of the key findings
obtained from IGD studies using VBM, and more information
is provided in Table 3.
Lee et al. (42) utilized VBM to investigate the association
between GM abnormalities and impulsivity in IGD, and found
that IGD subjects exhibited smaller GM volume in brain
regions related to executive control, such as the ACC and the
supplementary motor area (SMA). It was also found that GM
volumes in the ACC and the SMA were negatively associated
with impulsiveness, and that IGD subjects exhibited smaller GM
volume in the lateral prefrontal and parietal cortices comprising
the left ventrolateral PFC and the left inferior parietal lobule
when compared to healthy controls. Lee et al. (42) also found
that GM volumes in the left ventrolateral PFC were negatively
correlated with lifetime usage of videogames. Similarly, further
research showed links between GM and impulsivity in IGD
individuals. More specifically, Du et al. (43) found that IGD
individuals present with higher levels of impulsivity associated
with GM volume of the right dorsomedial prefrontal cortex
(DMPFC), the bilateral insula and the orbitofrontal cortex
(OFC), the right amygdala and decreased left fusiform gyrus.
Taken together, these findings suggest GM abnormalities in
areas related to executive control may contribute to greater
impulsivity in young male adults with IGD, and that dysfunction
of these brain areas involved in behavior inhibition, attention
and emotion regulation might contribute to impulse control
problems in adolescents with IGD (44).
Further research showed that GM density of the bilateral
amygdala decreased and the connectivity between the PFC/insula
and
the
amygdala
increased
in
IGD
individuals,
which
suggests emotion dysregulation (44). Furthermore, the altered
correlations between impulsivity and GM volume in the DMPFC,
OFC, insula, amygdala and the fusiform in IGD adolescents
indicate that dysregulation in the brain networks involved in
behavior inhibition, attention and emotion regulation might
contribute to higher impulsivity levels in adolescents presenting
with IGD.
VBM research has helped identifying specific brain regions
with GM changes in IGD. Jin et al. (45) found that IGD
adolescents showed decreased GM volume in the frontal regions
including the bilateral dorsolateral PFC, OFC, ACC, the right
SMA and cerebellum after controlling for age and gender effects.
These findings are in line with previous studies suggesting GM
deficits in the OFC can occur in IGD individuals (46), the
involvement of several PFC regions and related PFC –striatal
circuits in the process of IGD, and IGD may share similar neural
mechanisms with substance dependence at the circuit level.
VBM research has also identified potential detrimental effects
of IGD on cognitive control functioning. Wang et al. (39)
reported that GM volume of the bilateral ACC, precuneus, SMA,
superior parietal cortex, left dorsal lateral PFC, left insula, and
bilateral cerebellum decreased significantly in IGD individuals.
This study suggests that the alteration of GM volume is associated
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
5
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 166
 Kuss et al.
Neurobiological Correlates in IGD
TABLE 3 | Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) studies of Internet Gaming Disorder (IGD).
Author
Sample
Aims
Findings
Lee et al. (42)
N = 61 adolescents and young adults in
South Korea (100% male; mean age =
23.5, SD = 2.7 years, range = 18–28
years)
To identify gray matter (GM) changes
associated with IGD and assess difficulties
in executive control by evaluating
impulsivity
IGD subjects showed smaller GM volume
in brain areas related to executive control.
The GM volume in the anterior cingulate
cortex and the supplementary motor area
were negative associated to impulsivity
Du et al. (43)
N = 52 adolescents and young adults in
China (100% male; mean age = 17, SD =
3 years)
To investigate potential altered structural
correlates of impulsivity in IGD adolescents
compared to healthy controls
IGD individuals presented with dysfunction
in different brain areas involved in the
behavior inhibition, attention and emotion
regulation
Ko et al. (44)
N = 60 adolescents and young adults in
Taiwan (100% male; mean age = 23.6, SD
= 2.5 years)
To evaluate GM density and functional
connectivity (FC) in individuals with IGD
IGD individuals showed altered GM
density over the amygdala. Further
analysis of the amygdala indicated
impaired FC to the frontal lobe
Jin et al. (45)
N = 46 young adults in China (65% male;
mean age = 19.1, SD = 1.1 year)
To assess the abnormal structural
resting-state properties of several frontal
regions in individuals with IGD
IGD individuals showed significant
decreased GM volume in the prefrontal
cortex (PFC) regions including the bilateral
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC),
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC), and the right
supplementary motor area (SMA)
Weng et al. (46)
N = 34 adolescents in China (82% female;
mean age = 16.3, SD = 3.0 years)
To investigate the differences in the brain
morphology between IGD subjects and
healthy controls, and to explore the neural
possible mechanism of IGD
IGD individuals showed significant GM
atrophy in the right OFC, bilateral insula,
and right SMA. Overall, microstructure
abnormalities of GM and white matter
(WM) were found in IGD subjects
Wang et al. (39)
N = 56 adolescents in China (67% male;
mean age = 18.8, SD = 1.3 year)
To investigate cognitive control function
and potential alteration of brain GM
volume in IGD individuals
GM volume of the bilateral ACC,
precuneus, SMA, superior parietal cortex,
left DLPFC, left insula, and bilateral
cerebellum decreased in IGD individuals in
comparison to healthy controls
Lin et al. (34)
N = 71 young adults in China (100% male;
mean age = 22.2, SD = 3.1 years)
To assess if IGD contributes to cerebral
structural changes by examining GM and
WM density changes in IGD individuals
IGD individuals showed significant lower
GM and WM density in several areas of
the brain involved in decision-making,
behavioral inhibition, and emotional
regulation
with performance change of cognitive control in adolescents
with IGD, highlighting substantial brain image effects induced
by IGD.
Previous VBM research has reported abnormal GM and WM
volume in IGD. Lin et al. (34) found that IGD individuals
exhibited significantly lower GM density in the bilateral inferior
frontal gyrus, left cingulate gyrus, insula, right precuneus, and
right hippocampus. It was also found that IGD individuals
showed significantly lower WM density in the inferior frontal
gyrus, insula, amygdala, and anterior cingulate than healthy
controls (34). These findings converge with those reported in
earlier studies where IGD subjects were shown to present smaller
insular GM density [e.g., (46, 47)], and IGD can negatively affect
processes involved in decision-making, behavioral inhibition and
emotion.
Overall, VBM research has been helpful in demonstrating
potential structural brain changes of IGD individuals. Many
of the brain regions found to be altered in IGD individuals
have been previously linked to functions contributing to
the development of addictive or compulsive behaviors (48).
For example, decreased OFC thickness has been identified
in individuals with substance-use disorders and behavioral
addictions, further implying the development of IGD may
involve brain regions similar to those involved in these
conditions (49, 50). Although some of the studies reported found
changes across different brain regions, these discrepancies help
illustrate different ways in which IGD can affect overall brain
functioning and the changes it may produce at the behavioral
and cognitive level (41), further highlighting the complexity
of the phenomenon. Moreover, given that many of the VBM
studies reviewed were conducted in adolescent samples and that
their brain is still developing, the results reported may not be
generalizable across all age groups. One potential avenue to
control for this would be to conduct similar studies in samples
of children and adults to compare the findings obtained.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
PET has been utilized to demonstrate that dopamine is released
in the human striatum during videogame play, and that
playing videogames can lead to significant changes in brain
chemistry similar to pharmacologically induced changes (51).
The PET studies are summarised in Table 4. Much evidence
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
6
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 166
 Kuss et al.
Neurobiological Correlates in IGD
TABLE 4 | Positron emission tomography (PET) studies of Internet Gaming Disorder (IGD).
Author
Sample
Aims
Findings
Park et al. (54)
N = 20 young adults in South Korea
(100% male; mean age = 24.7, SD = 2.4
years)
To investigate the differences in regional
cerebral glucose metabolism at resting
state in IGD individuals
IGD individuals showed greater impulsivity
and severity of IGD and impulsiveness
were associated. IGD individuals had
increased glucose metabolism in the
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), striatum, and
sensory regions that are implicated in
impulse control, reward processing, and
somatic representation of previous
experiences
Tian et al. (55)
N = 26 adolescents and young adults in
China (100% male; mean age = 23.5, SD
= 2.6 years)
To assess brain dopamine D2
(D2)/Serotonin 2A (5-HT2A) receptor
function and glucose metabolism in IGD
individuals
IGD individuals showed decreased
glucose metabolism in the prefrontal,
temporal, and limbic systems. Further
dysregulation of D2 receptors was found
in the striatum and associated to years of
IGD
has implicated the dopaminergic system in the regulation of
rewarding behaviors and behavioral addictions, such as IGD
(52, 53).
In a 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose PET study conducted by Park
et al. (54) using a male sample of nine healthy controls and
11 IGD gamers, the authors found greater impulsiveness in
IGD players in comparison to healthy controls. Additionally, the
imaging data showed IGD gamers had significantly increased
glucose metabolism in the right middle orbitofrontal gyrus, left
caudate nucleus, and right insula, and decreased metabolism
in the bilateral postcentral gyrus, left precentral gyrus, and
bilateral occipital regions compared to the control group.
In summary, these findings suggest that IGD may share
psychological and neural mechanisms with other types of impulse
control disorders and substance/nonsubstance-related addiction
experiences.
Further research using PET has been carried out in an attempt
to shed light on the neurobiological mechanisms of IGD. Tian
et al. (55) investigated brain dopamine D2 (D2)/Serotonin 2A (5-
HT2A) receptor function and glucose metabolism and whether
there was an association between D2 receptor and glucose
metabolism in a sample of 12 drug-naïve adult males meeting
the criteria for IGD and 14 healthy controls using PET and
11C-N-methylspiperone to assess the availability of D2/5-HT2A
receptors and with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose to assess regional
brain glucose metabolism, a marker of brain function. The
findings o suggested IGD individuals presented with significantly
decreased glucose metabolism in the prefrontal, temporal, and
limbic systems. Additionally, dysregulation of D2 receptors
was observed in the striatum and associated with history of
excessive videogame play. Further, low levels of D2 receptors
in the striatum were significantly associated with decreased
glucose metabolism in the OFC. Taken together, these findings
suggest D2/5-HT2A receptor-mediated dysregulation of the OFC
underlies a mechanism for loss of control and compulsive
behavior in IGD individuals.
Although there is a general scarcity of PET studies on IGD,
regarding the imaging techniques utilized, fMRI is preferable
to PET because it does not require exposing individuals to
radiation (56). However, advantages of PET studies may include
its usefulness to ascertain the efficacy of pharmacotherapy and
predict treatment outcomes (57).
Electroencephalography (EEG)
Studies using EEG are employed to detect neural activity from
the underlying cortical areas (anterior, posterior, right, and
left) in an individual’s cerebral cortex using electrodes attached
to the scalp. Using this technique, voltage fluctuations (i.e.,
current flow produced by excitation of neuronal synapses) are
measured between pairs of electrodes (58). More specifically,
the relationships between an individual’s brain and behavior
are assessed via electrophysiological neuronal responses to
stimuli (59). However, when compared to other neuroimaging
techniques (such as fMRI) the spatial resolution in the subcortical
areas is poorer. Up to 2013, most of the published studies
utilizing EEG [e.g., (60–64)] assessed young adult males with
Internet addiction rather than IGD, although the samples used
included gamers. Regarding more recent IGD studies using
EEG, the main types of study comprise studies examining (i)
excessive and addictive gaming, (ii) gaming addiction and other
comorbid disorders, and (iii) gaming addiction (miscellaneous).
The included studies are presented in Table 5.
Excessive and Addictive Gaming
In the first study to actually include a sample specified as
gamers rather than Internet addicts, Littel et al. (65) investigated
response inhibition and error-processing. ERPs of 25 excessive
gamers were compared to a control group utilizing the Go/NoGo
paradigm. Compared to the control group, excessive gamers had
poor error-processing (as indicated by reduced fronto-central
ERN amplitudes following incorrect trials in the Go/NoGo
task). Moreover, the excessive gamers displayed less inhibition
on both behavioral and self-report measures, and results were
similar to those with impulse control disorders and substance
dependence. The authors speculated that poor error processing,
trait impulsivity, and diminished behavioral response inhibition
may underlie IGD.
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
7
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 166
 Kuss et al.
Neurobiological Correlates in IGD
TABLE 5 | EEG studies examining gaming addiction/Internet Gaming Disorder.
Author
Sample
Aims
Findings
Littel et al. (65)
25 excessive gamers (mean age 20.52
years; SD = 2.95) compared to 27
non-excessive gamers (mean age 21.42
years; SD = 2.59) in The Netherlands
(100% male)
To investigate response inhibition and
error-processing among excessive gamers
compared to casual gamers utilizing the
Go/NoGo paradigm
Excessive gamers had poorer error-processing
and displayed less inhibition compared to
controls
Duven et al. (66)
14 pathological gamers (mean age 24.29
years; SD = 5.84) compared to 13 casual
gamers (mean age 23.31 years; SD =
3.01) in Germany (100% male)
To investigate whether there is enhanced
motivational attention or tolerance effects
in IGD patients compared to casual
gamers
An attenuated P300 for IGD patients in
response to rewards compared to controls
Park et al. (67)
26 patients with IGD (20 males; mean age
23.04 years; SD = 4.15) compared to 23
healthy controls (20 males; mean age
25.04 years; SD = 4.29) in South Korea
To examine dysfunctional information
processing among individuals with IGD
compared to controls
Those with IGD demonstrated a significant
reduction in response to the deviant tones in
the P300 amplitudes at the midline
centro-parietal electrode regions
Kim et al. (68)
20 patients with IGD (mean age 22.71
years; SD = 5.47) compared to 29 healthy
controls (mean age 23.97 years; SD =
4.36) in South Korea (100% male)
To locate bio-markers associated with IGD
compared to controls
Those with IGD showed increased resting-state
EEG activity at baseline (delta and theta bands)
Kim et al. (69)
27 patients with IGD (24 males; mean age
26.5 years; SD = 6.1) compared to 24
with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (19
males; mean age 25.0 years; SD = 5.7),
and 26 healthy controls (18 males; mean
age 24.7 years; SD = 4.7) in South Korea
To compare the neurophysiological
correlates of altered response inhibition
among individuals with IGD and
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).
The IGD group demonstrated a delayed
NoGo-N2 latency at the central electrode site
compared to controls.
Son et al. (70)
34 patients with IGD (mean age 22.71
years; SD = 5.47) compared to 17 with
Alcohol Use Disorder (mean age 29.71
years; SD = 4.88), and 29 healthy controls
(mean age 23.88 years; SD = 4.66) in
South Korea (100% male)
To compare the resting-state QEEG
patterns among those with IGD, Alcohol
Use Disorder, and healthy controls
IGD group had lower absolute beta power than
the other two groups. No significant
correlations between the IGD severity and
QEEG were found.
Park et al. (48)
16 adolescents with IGD+ADHD (mean
age 14.6 years; SD = 1.9) compared to
15 adolescents with ADHD (mean age
13.7 years; SD = 0.8), and 15 adolescent
healthy controls (mean age 14.4 years; SD
= 1.7) in South Korea (100% male)
To compare adolescent males with ADHD
and IGD, male ADHD-only, and a male
control group using QEEG
Compared to the ADHD-only group, the
IGD/ADHD group had lower relative delta
power and greater relative beta power in
temporal regions
Youh et al. (71)
14 patients with IGD and Major Depressive
Disorder (MDD; mean age 20.00 years;
SD = 5.9) compared to 15 patients with
MDD (mean age 20.3 years; SD = 5.5) in
South Korea (100% male)
To compare the neurobiological
differences between IGD+MDD patients
and MDD patients using QEEG
Compared to those with MDD-only,
inter-hemispheric coherence value for the alpha
band between Fp1–Fp2 electrodes was
significantly lower in those with IGD+MDD
Peng et al. (72)
16 patients with IGD (13 males; mean age
20.75 years; SD = 0.36) compared to 15
healthy controls (12 males; mean age
20.25 years; SD = 0.4) in China (100%
male)
To examine the unconscious processing of
facial expressions among those with IGD
compared to controls using EEG
Those with IGD exhibited decreased
amplitudes in ERP component N170 in
response to neutral expressions compared to
happy expressions in the happy–neutral
expressions context
A study by Duven et al. (66) examined whether enhanced
motivational attention or tolerance effects are present in IGD
patients. IGD patients (n = 14) and a control group played
a videogame during the recording of ERPs to assess reward
processing. The findings demonstrated an attenuated P300 for
IGD patients in response to rewards compared to controls. It was
also reported that among IGD patients, the latency of N100 was
prolonged and the amplitude of N100 was increased. The authors
concluded that when playing videogames, tolerance effects are
present in IGD patients.
Park et al. (67) used EEG to examine dysfunctional
information processing among individuals with IGD. More
specifically, they investigated differences in the P300 component
of the ERP while participants performed an auditory oddball task.
Compared to controls, those with IGD demonstrated a significant
reduction in response to the deviant tones in the P300 amplitudes
at the midline centro-parietal electrode regions. The authors also
reported a negative correlation between IGD severity and P300
amplitudes. It was concluded that the reduced P300 amplitudes
may be a neurobiological marker for IGD.
Another study using EEG to try and locate bio-markers
associated with IGD was that carried out by Kim et al. (68).
The study compared 20 IGD patients with healthy controls over
a 6-month period. Using resting-state EEG, participants were
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
8
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 166
 Kuss et al.
Neurobiological Correlates in IGD
scanned prior to and after treatment. Those with IGD showed
increased resting-state EEG activity at baseline (delta and theta
bands). After 6 months of treatment, increased delta band activity
was normalized and significantly correlated with a reduction
in IGD symptoms. It was also reported that higher absolute
theta activity at baseline predicted a greater improvement in
IGD addiction symptoms following treatment. The authors
argued that the increased slow-wave activity represented a state
neurophysiological marker for those with IGD.
Gaming Addiction and Other Comorbid Disorders
Kim et al. (69) compared the neurophysiological correlates
of altered response inhibition among individuals with IGD
and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). A total of 27 IGD
patients, 24 OCD patients, and 26 healthy controls participated
in a Go/NoGo task while undergoing EEG. The groups were
compared on the N2-P3 complexes elicited during Go and NoGo
task. The IGD group demonstrated a delayed NoGo-N2 latency
at the central electrode site compared to controls. OCD patients
had a smaller NoGo-N2 amplitude at the frontal electrode site
than those with IGD. The authors concluded that prolonged
NoGo-N2 latency may be as a marker of trait impulsivity in
IGD and that reduced NoGo-N2 amplitude may be a differential
neurophysiological feature between OCD from IGD in regard to
compulsivity.
Son et al. (70) compared the resting-state QEEG patterns
among those with IGD (n = 34), alcohol use disorder (AUD; n
= 17), and healthy controls (n = 25). Results demonstrated that
the IGD group had lower absolute beta power than the other two
groups. The AUD group had higher absolute delta power than the
two other groups. No significant correlations between the IGD
severity and QEEG were found. The authors suggested that lower
absolute beta power may be a potential trait marker of IGD and
that IGD was neurophysiologically distinct from AUD.
In a study by Park et al. (48), the authors noted that IGD
is often comorbid with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD). Using quantitative electroencephalogram (QEEG) they
compared three adolescent groups: males with ADHD and IGD
(n = 16), male ADHD-only (n = 15), and a control group (n =
15). Amongst other findings, results showed that compared to the
ADHD-only group, the (i) IGD/ADHD group had lower relative
delta power and greater relative beta power in temporal regions,
(ii) intra-hemispheric coherence values for the bands between
P4–O2 electrodes (i.e., delta, theta, alpha, and beta bands)
were higher in IGD/ADHD group, and (iii) intra-hemispheric
coherence values for the theta band between Fz–Cz and T4–
T6 electrodes were higher in IGD/ADHD group. The authors
concluded that ADHD adolescents appear to continuously play
online videogames to unconsciously enhance attentional ability.
They also speculated that “repetitive activation of brain reward
and working memory systems during continuous gaming may
result in an increase in neuronal connectivity within the parieto-
occipital and temporal regions for the ADHD/IGD group” (p. 514).
Youh et al. (71) noted that IGD is comorbid with major
depressive disorder (MDD). In a study utilizing QEEG, they
compared the neurobiological differences between MDD without
comorbidity (MDD-only; n = 15) and MDD comorbid with IGD
(MDD+IGD; n = 14). EEG coherences were measured using a
21-channel digital EEG system and computed to assess synchrony
in the frequency ranges of alpha and beta between 12 electrode
site pairs. The results demonstrated that compared to those with
MDD-only (i) inter-hemispheric coherence value for the alpha
band between Fp1–Fp2 electrodes was significantly lower in
those with IGD, (ii) intra-hemispheric coherence value for the
alpha band between P3–O1 electrodes was higher in those with
IGD, and (iii) intra-hemispheric coherence values for the beta
band between F8–T4, T6–O2, and P4–O2 electrodes were higher
in those with IGD. The authors concluded that excessive online
gaming may lead to increased intra-hemisphere connectivity in
the fronto-temporo-parieto-occipital areas.
Gaming Addiction (Miscellaneous)
One of the more unusual studies examining IGD with EEG
is a study by Peng et al. (72) who examined the unconscious
processing of facial expressions among those with IGD. The
authors claimed that “IGD is characterized by impairments in
social communication and the avoidance of social contact. Facial
expression processing is the basis of social communication” (p. 1).
Consequently, they investigated how those with IGD process
facial expressions. To examine the differences between the
processing of subliminally presented facial expressions (happy,
neutral, sad) with ERPs, those with IGD (n = 16) and controls
participated in a backward masking task. The findings showed
those with IGD were slower than controls in response to both
sad and neutral expressions in the sad–neutral context. The
ERP results demonstrated those with IGD exhibited “decreased
amplitudes in ERP component N170 (an index of early face
processing) in response to neutral expressions compared to happy
expressions in the happy–neutral expressions context, which might
be due to their expectancies for positive emotional content” (p. 1).
Controls exhibited similar N170 amplitudes in response to
both sad and neutral expressions in the sad–neutral expressions
context, and happy and neutral expressions in the happy–neutral
expressions context. The authors concluded those with IGD
have different unconscious neutral facial processing patterns
compared to normal controls.
Examining the ten EEG studies as a whole, there is little
similarity in any of the 10 studies except that they all have small
sample sizes and all found significant differences between those
with IGD and the control groups concerning the variable(s)
under focus. Two studies reported those with IGD had lower
inhibition compared to controls (65, 68) but other than this,
no other studies compared the same variables so little can be
concluded from EEG studies.
DISCUSSION
The research of neurobiological correlates in IGD is relevant
particularly in light of the National Institute of Mental Health’s
(NIMH) support for establishing research domain criteria based
on which mental disorders should be classified and may offer a
solution to the ongoing debates in the IGD field [e.g., (5)]. IGD
neuroimaging is a nascent field that is developing at a fast pace,
which has been highlighted by the present review. Taken together,
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
9
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 166
 Kuss et al.
Neurobiological Correlates in IGD
the fMRI and rsfMRI studies presented indicate that there appear
to be significant neurobiological differences between healthy
controls and individuals with IGD. The included studies suggest
gaming addicts have worse response-inhibition and emotion
regulation, impaired PFC functioning and cognitive control,
worse working memory and decision-making capabilities,
decreased visual and auditory functioning, and a deficiency in
their neuronal reward system. These deficiencies are similar to
those found in individuals with substance-related addictions,
suggesting that both substance-related and behavioral addictions
share common predisposing factors and may be part of an
addiction syndrome (73, 74). For example, research in the
context of alcohol abuse has found that P300 amplitudes are
reduced in individuals who have an increased genetic risk for
alcoholism (75, 76). This may suggest that similar findings
with reduced P300 amplitudes in individuals with IGD have an
elevated genetic risk to developing addiction-related problems.
Consequently, future research needs to assess possible genetic
vulnerability for developing IGD-related problems to verify
such conjecture. However, in the fMRI and rsfMRI studies, no
differences were found in attention control and error processing
between IGD individuals and healthy controls. Moreover, more
brain activity was found in gaming addicts relative to healthy
controls, suggesting an increased sensory-motor coordination in
IGD. Recent research suggests that regular gaming may have
therapeutic benefits and gaming can be used to improve a variety
of cognitive and motor skills, and is successfully used in the
training of professionals, such as soldiers and surgeons (77).
Despite the invaluable contributions offered by neuroimaging
studies on IGD, several limitations potentially compromising
the generalizability of the results of these studies need to be
highlighted. As the majority of these studies are cross-sectional,
it is not possible to ascertain the causal relationships between
IGD and the altered structures in the brain reported across
these studies, particularly the VBM studies. Future research
should adopt other research designs that help overcome these
shortcomings. For example, further prospective studies are
necessary to understand the roles of altered brain structures
in the mechanism of IGD. In addition to this, further studies
would benefit from larger sample sizes, as the presently reviewed
studies were limited with regards to the number of participants
that have been included. Another well-known problem in these
studies is the use of generalized Internet addiction assessment
tools to assess IGD [see (78), for a review on the topic].
Finally, other major psychiatric disorders were excluded from
most VBM studies, thus there is some inherent limitation
regarding generalizing the results to subjects with IGD with other
substance-use or psychiatric disorders.
Moreover, EEG is commonly used in experimental situations
because of its generally non-invasive and unobtrusive nature.
Another key strength of EEG studies is that they are all
strictly controlled laboratory experiments that can identify causal
relationships between the variables assessed. Overall, the EEG
findings demonstrate that compared to control groups, gaming
addicts have decreased P300 amplitudes and an increased P300
latency (reflecting attention allocation). These differences suggest
that those with IGD have an impaired attention capacity or they
are unable to adequately allocate attention. Findings of these
studies also appear to be similar to EEG studies examining other
more traditional addictions, such as those to alcohol and cocaine
[e.g., (79–81)]. However, one of the key weaknesses in EEG
research is that is unable to provide any direct insights into active
transmitter systems of the brain when monitoring brain activity.
In a review of electrophysiological correlates of problematic
Internet use, D’Hondt et al. (82) noted that problematic internet
use which often includes gaming is particularly associated with
a reduction of inhibitory control and an increase in cue-
reactivity. The EEG literature demonstrates “that most studies
have found that impaired self-control abilities (i.e., inhibition
and error monitoring) are associated with underactivated frontal
regions in problematic Internet users” (p. 64). Furthermore,
they noted that some EEG studies in the area demonstrate
alterations in the processing of emotional stimuli and Internet-
related cues, suggesting that “both reflective (top-down) and
automatic/affective (bottom-up) systems, postulated by dual-
process models as being determinants in decision making, are
impaired among [problematic internet users” (p. 64). Overall, the
present EEG studies agree with these conclusions because EEG
studies reviewed in this section indicate that the brains of those
with IGD appear to be less efficient in information processing and
response inhibition compared to controls. Consequently, such
individuals have low impulse control, use increased cognitive
resources to complete specific tasks, and appear to have impaired
executive control, again demonstrating similarities with other
more traditional addictions (79).
In summary, the presented studies suggest that there may
be a particular IGD pathophysiology, in support of the NIMH’s
advocacy of utilizing RDoC criteria for diagnosing mental
disorders (24). Future research should focus on replicating the
reported findings in different cultural contexts, in support of a
neurobiological basis of classifying IGD and related disorders.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
DK has reviewed, analyzed and written the sections of fMRI and
rsfMRI and written the introduction, methods and discussion.
MG has reviewed, analyzed and written the section on EEG and
contributed to the full manuscript. HP has reviewed, analyzed
and written the sections on VBM and PET and contributed to
the full manuscript.
REFERENCES
1. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-5). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association (2013).
2. Griffiths MD, van Rooij A, Kardefelt-Winther D, Starcevic V, Király O,
Pallesen S, et al. Working towards an international consensus on criteria for
assessing Internet Gaming Disorder: a critical commentary on Petry et al.
(2014). Addiction (2016) 111:167–78. doi: 10.1111/add.13057
3. Kuss DJ, Griffiths MD, Pontes HM. Chaos and confusion in DSM-5 diagnosis
of Internet Gaming Disorder: issues, concerns, and recommendations for
clarity in the field. J Behav Addict. (2016) 7:1–7. doi: 10.1556/2006.5.
2016.062
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
10
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 166
 Kuss et al.
Neurobiological Correlates in IGD
4. Kardefelt-Winther D. A conceptual and methodological critique of Internet
addiction research: towards a model of compensatory Internet use. Comput
Hum Behav. (2014) 31:351–4. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2013.10.059
5. Kuss
DJ,
Griffiths
MD,
Pontes
HM.
DSM-5
diagnosis
of
Internet
Gaming
Disorder:
some
ways
forward
in
overcoming
issues
and
concerns in the gaming studies field. J Behav Addict. (2017) 6:133–41.
doi: 10.1556/2006.6.2017.032
6. Griffiths MD. Behavioural addiction and substance addiction should be
defined by their similarities not their dissimilarities. Addiction (2017)
112:1718–20. doi: 10.1111/add.13828
7. Starcevic V. Internet gaming disorder: inadequate diagnostic criteria wrapped
in a constraining conceptual model: commentary on: chaos and confusion
in DSM-5 diagnosis of Internet Gaming Disorder: issues, concerns, and
recommendations for clarity in the field (Kuss et al. 2017). J Behav Addict.
(2017) 6:110–3. doi: 10.1556/2006.6.2017.012
8. Kuss DJ, Griffiths MD. Intenet Addiction in Psychotherapy. Palgrave Pivot
(2015). London.
9. Starfield B. Threads and yarns: weaving the tapestry of comorbidity. Ann Fam
Med. (2006) 4:101–3. doi: 10.1370/afm.524
10. Van Rooij AJ, Kardefelt-Winther D. Lost in the chaos: flawed literature
should not generate new disorders: commentary on: chaos and confusion
in DSM-5 diagnosis of Internet Gaming Disorder: issues, concerns, and
recommendations for clarity in the field (Kuss et al.). J Behav Addict. (2017)
6:128–32. doi: 10.1556/2006.6.2017.015
11. Beranuy M, Carbonell X, Griffiths MD. A qualitative analysis of online
gaming addicts in treatment. Int J Ment Health Addict. (2013) 11:149–61.
doi: 10.1007/s11469-012-9405-2
12. Frölich
J,
Lehmkuhl
G,
Orawa
H,
Bromba
M,
Wolf
K,
Görtz-
Dorten A. Computer game misuse and addiction of adolescents in a
clinically referred study sample. Comput Hum Behav. (2016) 55:9–15.
doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2015.08.043
13. Kuss DJ. ‘I can’t do it by myself’ - an IPA of clients seeking psychotherapy
for their MMORPG addiction. In: Bishop J, editor. Psychological and Social
Implications Surrounding Internet and Gaming Addiction. Hershey, PA: IGI
Global. (2015). p. 78–110.
14. Kuss DJ, Lopez-Fernandez O. Internet addiction and problematic Internet use:
a systematic review of clinical research. World J Psychiatry (2016) 6:143–76.
doi: 10.5498/wjp.v6.i1.143
15. Li W, Garland EL, O’Brien JE, Tronnier C, McGovern P, Anthony B, et al.
Mindfulness-oriented recovery enhancement for video game addiction in
emerging adults: preliminary findings from case reports. Int J Ment Health
Addict. (2017) 1–18. doi: 10.1007/s11469-017-9765-8
16. Li H, Wang S. The role of cognitive distortion in online game addiction
among Chinese adolescents. Child Youth Serv Rev. (2013) 35:1468–75.
doi: 10.1016/j.childyouth.2013.05.021
17. Shek D, Tang V, Lo CY. Evaluation of an internet addiction treatment.
Adolescence (2009) 44:359–73.
18. Su W, Fang X, Miller JK, Wang Y. Internet-based intervention for the
treatment of online addiction for college students in China: a pilot study of
the Healthy Online Self-helping Center. Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw. (2011)
14:497–503. doi: 10.1089/cyber.2010.0167
19. Torres-Rodriguez
A,
Griffiths
MD,
Carbonell
X.
The
treatment
of
Internet Gaming Disorder: a brief overview of the PIPATIC program.
Int
J
Ment
Health
Addict.
(2017)
1–16.
doi:
10.1007/s11469-017-
9825-0
20. Torres-Rodriguez A, Griffiths MD, Carbonell X, Farriols-Hernando N,
Torres-Jimenez E. Internet gaming disorder treatment: a case study evaluation
of four adolescent problematic gamers. Int J Ment Health Addicti. (2017) 1–12.
doi: 10.1007/s11469-017-9845-9
21. Voss A, Cash H, Hurdiss S, Bishop F, Klam WP, Doan AP. Case report: internet
Gaming Disorder associated with pornography use. Yale J Biol Med. (2015)
88:319–24.
22. Young KS. Treatment outcomes using CBT-IA with Internet-addicted
patients. J Behav Addict. (2013) 2:209–15. doi: 10.1556/JBA.2.2013.4.3
23. Kim JU. The effect of a R/T group counseling program on the Internet
addiction level and self-esteem of Internet addiction in university students.
Int J Real Ther. (2008) 27:4–12.
24. National Institute of Mental Health Research Domain Criteria (RoDC).
(2011). Available online at: https://www.nimh.nih.gov/research-priorities/
rdoc/index.shtml (Accessed December 10, 2017).
25. Kuss DJ, Griffiths MD. Internet and gaming addiction: a systematic
literature review of neuroimaging studies. Brain Sci. (2012) 2:347–74.
doi: 10.3390/brainsci2030347
26. Huettel SA, Song AW, McCarthy G. Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
2nd ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer (2008).
27. Dieter J, Hill H, Sell M, Reinhard I, Vollstadt-Klein S, Kiefer F, et al. Avatar’s
neurobiological traces in the self-concept of Massively Multiplayer Online
Role-Playing Game (MMORPG) addicts. Behav Neurosci. (2015) 129:8–17.
doi: 10.1037/bne0000025
28. Ding WN, Sun JH, Sun YW, Chen X, Zhou Y, Zhuang ZG, et al.
Trait impulsivity and impaired prefrontal impulse inhibition function in
adolescents with internet gaming addiction revealed by a Go/No-Go fMRI
study. Behav Brain Funct. (2014) 10:1744–9081. doi: 10.1186/1744-9081-
10-20
29. Luijten M, Meerkerk GJ, Franken IH, van de Wetering BJ, Schoenmakers TM.
An fMRI study of cognitive control in problem gamers. Psychiatry Res. (2015)
231:262–8. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2015.01.004
30. Sun Y, Sun J, Zhou Y, Ding W, Chen X, Zhuang Z, et al. Assessment of in
vivo microstructure alterations in gray matter using DKI in internet gaming
addiction. Behav Brain Funct. (2014) 10:37. doi: 10.1186/1744-9081-10-37
31. Zhang S, Li CS. Functional networks for cognitive control in a stop signal
task: independent component analysis. Hum Brain Mapp. (2012) 33:89–104.
doi: 10.1002/hbm.21197
32. Buckner RL, Krienen FM, Yeo BTT. Opportunities and limitations of
intrinsic functional connectivity MRI. Nat Neurosci. (2013) 16:832–7.
doi: 10.1038/nn.3423
33. Hahn T, Notebaert KH, Dresler T, Kowarsch L, Reif A, Fallgatter AJ. Linking
online gaming and addictive behavior: converging evidence for a general
reward deficiency in frequent online gamers. Front Behav Neurosci. (2014)
8:385. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00385
34. Xiao L, Dong G, Wang Q, Du X. Abnormal gray matter and white
matter volume in ’Internet gaming addicts’. Addict Behav. (2014) 40:137–43.
doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2014.09.010
35. Lin X, Jia X, Zang YF, Dong G. Frequency-dependent changes in the
amplitude of low-frequency fluctuations in Internet Gaming Disorder. Front
Psychol. (2015) 6:1471. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01471
36. Xing L, Yuan K, Bi Y, Yin J, Cai C, Feng D, et al. Reduced fiber integrity and
cognitive control in adolescents with Internet Gaming Disorder. Brain Res.
(2014) 24:109–17. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.08.044
37. Yuan K, Jin C, Cheng P, Yang X, Dong T, Bi Y, et al. Amplitude of
low frequency fluctuation abnormalities in adolescents with online gaming
addiction. PLoS ONE (2013) 8:e78708. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078708
38. Yuan K, Yu D, Cai C, Feng D, Li Y, Bi, Y, et al. Frontostriatal circuits,
resting state functional connectivity and cognitive control in Internet Gaming
Disorder. Addict Biol. (2017) 22:813–22. doi: 10.1111/adb.12348
39. Wang Y, Yin Y, Sun YW, Zhou Y, Chen X, Ding WN, et al. Decreased
prefrontal lobe interhemispheric functional connectivity in adolescents with
Internet Gaming Disorder: a primary study using resting-state fMRI. PLoS
ONE (2015) 10:e0118733. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118733
40. Ashburner
J,
Friston,
KJ.
Voxel-Based
Morphometry—the
methods.
Neuroimage (2000) 11:805–21. doi: 10.1006/nimg.2000.0582
41. Palaus M, Marrón EM, Viejo-Sobera R, Redolar-Ripoll D. Neural basis of
video gaming: a systematic review. Front Hum Neurosci. (2017) 11:248.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00248
42. Lee D, Namkoong K, Lee J, and Jung YC. Abnormal gray matter volume and
impulsivity in young adults with Internet gaming disorder. Addict Biol. (2017)
8:12552. doi: 10.1111/adb.12552
43. Du X, Qi X, Yang Y, Du G, Gao P, Zhang Y, et al. Altered structural correlates
of impulsivity in adolescents with internet gaming disorder. Front Hum
Neurosci. (2016) 10:4. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00004
44. Ko C-H, Hsieh T-J, Wang P-W, Lin W-C, Yen C-F, Chen C-S, et al. Altered
gray matter density and disrupted functional connectivity of the amygdala
in adults with Internet gaming disorder. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry (2015) 57:185–92. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2014.11.003
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
11
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 166
 Kuss et al.
Neurobiological Correlates in IGD
45. Jin C, Zhang T, Cai C, Bi Y, Li Y, Yu D, et al. Abnormal prefrontal cortex resting
state functional connectivity and severity of internet gaming disorder. Brain
Imaging Behav. (2016) 10:719–29. doi: 10.1007/s11682-015-9439-8
46. Weng C-B, Qian R-B, Fu X-M, Lin B, Han X-P, Niu C.-S, et al. Gray matter
and white matter abnormalities in online game addiction. Eur J Radiol. (2013)
82:1308–12. doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2013.01.031
47. Zhou Y, Lin F-C, Du Y-S, Qin L-D, Zhao Z-M, Xu J-R, et al. Gray matter
abnormalities in Internet addiction: a voxel-based morphometry study. Eur
J Radiol. (2011) 79:92–5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2009.10.025
48. Park JH, Hong JS, Han DH, Min KJ, Lee YS, Kee BS, et al. Comparison of
QEEG findings between adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder
(ADHD)
without
comorbidity
and
ADHD
comorbid
with
Internet
gaming
disorder.
J
Korean
Med
Sci.
(2017)
32:514–21.
doi: 10.3346/jkms.2017.32.3.514
49. Everitt BJ, Hutcheson DM, Ersche KD, Pelloux Y, Dalley JW, Robbins TW.
The orbital prefrontal cortex and drug addiction in laboratory animals and
humans. Ann NY Acad Sci. (2007) 1121:576–97. doi: 10.1196/annals.1401.022
50. Lucantonio F, Stalnaker TA, Shaham Y, Niv Y, Schoenbaum G. The impact
of orbitofrontal dysfunction on cocaine addiction. Nat Neurosci. (2012)
15:358–66. doi: 10.1038/nn.3014
51. Koepp MJ, Gunn RN, Lawrence AD, Cunningham VJ, Dagher A, Jones T, et al.
Evidence for striatal dopamine release during a video game. Nature (1998)
393:266–8. doi: 10.1038/30498
52. Craighead B, Huskey R, Weber R. Video game addiction: what can we learn
from a media neuroscience perspective? Rev Argent Cienc Comport. (2015)
7:119–31.
53. Karim R, Chaudhri P. Behavioral addictions: an overview. J Psychoactive
Drugs (2012) 44:5–17. doi: 10.1080/02791072.2012.662859
54. Park HS, Kim SH, Bang SA, Yoon EJ, Cho SS, Kim SE. Altered
regional cerebral glucose metabolism in Internet game overusers: a 18F-
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography study. CNS Spectr. (2010)
15:159–66. doi: 10.1017/S1092852900027437
55. Tian M, Chen Q, Zhang Y, Du F, Hou H, Chao F, et al. PET imaging
reveals brain functional changes in Internet Gaming Disorder. Eur J
Nucl Med Mol Imaging (2014) 41:1388–97. doi: 10.1007/s00259-014-
2708-8
56. Ko C-H. Internet gaming disorder. Curr Addict Rep. (2014) 1:177–85.
doi: 10.1007/s40429-014-0030-y
57. Park B, Han DH, Roh S. Neurobiological findings related to Internet use
disorders. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. (2017) 71:467478. doi: 10.1111/pcn.12422
58. Niedermeyer E, da Silva, FL. Electroencephalography: Basic Principles, Clinical
Applications, and Related Fields. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincot Williams and
Wilkins (2004).
59. Luck SJ, Kappenman ES. The Oxford Handbook of Event-Related Potential
Components. New York, NY: Oxford University Press (2011).
60. Choi JS, Park S. M, Lee J, Hwang JY, Jung HY, Choi SW, et al. Resting-state
beta and gamma activity in Internet addiction. Int J Psychophysiol. (2013)
89:328–33. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2013.06.007
61. Dong G, Zhou H. Is impulse-control ability impaired in people with internet
addiction disorder: electrophysiological evidence from ERP studies. Int J
Psychophysiol. (2010) 77:334–5. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2010.06.271
62. Dong G, Zhou H, Zhao X. Male Internet addicts show impaired executive
control ability: evidence from a color-word Stroop task. Neurosci Lett. (2011)
499:114–8. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.05.047
63. Ge L, Ge X, Xu Y, Zhang K, Zhao J, Kong X. P300 change and
cognitive behavioral therapy in subjects with Internet addiction disorder.
A
3-month
follow-up
study.
Neural
Regen
Res.
(2011)
6:2037–41.
doi: 10.3969/j.issn.1673-5374
64. Yu H, Zhao X, Li N, Wang M, Zhou P. Effect of excessive Internet use on
the time-frequency characteristic of EEG. Progr Natural Sci. (2009) 19:1383–7.
doi: 10.1016/j.pnsc.2008.11.015
65. Littel M, van den Berg I, Luijten M, van Rooij AJ, Keemink L, Franken
IHA. Error processing and response inhibition in excessive computer game
players: an event-related potential study. Addict Biol. (2012) 17:934–47.
doi: 10.1111/j.1369-1600.2012.00467.x
66. Duven EC, Müller KW, Beutel ME, Wölfling K. Altered reward processing
in pathological computer gamers–ERP-results from a semi-natural Gaming-
Design. Brain Behav. (2015) 5:e00293. doi: 10.1002/brb3.293
67. Park M, Choi JS, Park SM, Lee JY, Jung HY, Sohn BK, et al. Dysfunctional
information processing during an auditory event-related potential task in
individuals with Internet gaming disorder. Transl. Psychiatry (2016) 6:e721.
doi: 10.1038/tp.2015.215
68. Kim M, Lee TH, Choi JS, Kwak YB, Hwang WJ, Kim T, et al.
Neurophysiological correlates of altered response inhibition in internet
gaming disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder: perspectives from
impulsivity and compulsivity. Sci Rep. (2017) 7:41742. doi: 10.1038/srep41742
69. Kim YJ, Lee JY, Oh S, Park M, Jung HY, Sohn BK, et al. Associations
between prospective symptom changes and slow-wave activity in patients
with Internet gaming disorder: a resting-state EEG study. Medicine (2017)
96:e6178. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000006178
70. Son KL, Choi JS, Lee J, Park SM, Lim JA, Lee JY, et al. Neurophysiological
features of Internet gaming disorder and alcohol use disorder: a resting-state
EEG study. Transl. Psychiatry (2015) 5:e628. doi: 10.1038/tp.2015.124
71. Youh J, Hong JS, Han DH, Chung US, Min KJ, Lee YS, et al.
Comparison of electroencephalography (EEG) coherence between major
depressive disorder (MDD) without comorbidity and MDD comorbid
with Internet Gaming Disorder. J. Korean Med. Sci. (2017) 32:1160–5.
doi: 10.3346/jkms.2017.32.7.1160
72. Peng X, Cui F, Wang T, Jiao, C. Unconscious processing of facial expressions
in individuals with Internet Gaming Disorder. Front Psychol. (2017) 8:1059.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01059
73. Shaffer
HJ,
LaPlante
DA,
LaBrie
RA,
Kidman
RC,
Donato
AN,
Stanton
MV.
Toward
a
syndrome
model
of
addiction:
multiple
expressions, common etiology. Harv Rev Psychiatry (2004) 12:367–74.
doi: 10.1080/10673220490905705
74. Spechler PA, Chaarani B, Hudson KE, Potter A, Foxe JJ, Garavan H. Response
inhibition and addiction medicine: from use to abstinence. Progr Brain Res.
(2016) 223:143–64. doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2015.07.024
75. Ehlers CL, Phillips E, Finnerman G, Gilder D, Lau P, Criado J. P3 components
and adolescent binge drinking in Southwest California Indians. Neurotoxicol
Teratolol. (2007) 29:153–63. doi: 10.1016/j.ntt.2006.11.013
76. Suresh S, Porjesz B, Chorlian DB, Choi K, Jones KA, Wang K, et al.
Auditory P3 in female alcoholics. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. (2003) 27:1064–74.
doi: 10.1097/01.ALC.0000075549.49800.A0
77. Griffiths MD, Kuss DJ, Ortiz de Gortari A. Videogames as therapy: an
updated selective review of the medical and psychological literature. Int
J Privacy Helath Inform Manage. (2017) 5:71–96. doi: 10.4018/IJPHIM.
2017070105
78. Pontes HM, Kuss DJ, Griffiths MD. Psychometric assessment of Internet
Gaming Disorder in neuroimaging studies: a systematic review. In Montag
C, Reuter M, editors, Internet Addiction: Neuroscientific Approaches and
Therapeutical Implications Including Smartphone Addiction. Cham: Springer
International Publishing. (2017). p. 181–208.
79. Nichols JM, Martin F. P300 in heavy social drinkers: the effect of lorazepam.
Alcohol (1993) 10:269–74. doi: 10.1016/0741-8329(93)90004-8
80. Polich J, Pollock VE, Bloom FE. Meta-analysis of P300 amplitude
from males at risk for alcoholism. Psychol Bull. (1994) 115:55–73.
doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.115.1.55
81. Sokhadze E, Stewart C, Hollifield M, Tasman A. Event-Related Potential study
of executive dysfunctions in a speeded reaction task in cocaine addiction. J
Neurother. (2008) 12:185–204. doi: 10.1080/10874200802502144
82. D’Hondt F, Billieux J, Maurage P. Electrophysiological correlates of
problematic Internet use: critical review and perspectives for future research.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. (2015) 59:64–82. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.10.005
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Kuss, Pontes and Griffiths. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) and the copyright owner are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
12
May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 166
