 ORE Open Research Exeter
TITLE
Effectiveness of the Mindfulness in Schools Programme: non-randomised controlled feasibility study
AUTHORS
Kuyken, W; Weare, K; Ukoumunne, Obioha C.; et al.
JOURNAL
British Journal of Psychiatry
DEPOSITED IN ORE
28 June 2013
This version available at
http://hdl.handle.net/10871/11441
COPYRIGHT AND REUSE
Open Research Exeter makes this work available in accordance with publisher policies.
A NOTE ON VERSIONS
The version presented here may differ from the published version. If citing, you are advised to consult the published version for pagination, volume/issue and date of
publication
 Childhood and adolescence are important formative developmental
stages that lay the groundwork for well-being and mental health
in adulthood.1,2 The evidence base for school-based programmes
that aim to promote well-being, support emotional and social
learning and prevent mental heath problems in adulthood is
growing.3,4 Interventions that target important and clearly
articulated mechanisms have larger effects.5 Moreover, inter-
ventions that are designed with implementation in mind are likely
to prove more acceptable.6
There is substantial and growing evidence for mindfulness-
based approaches for adults with chronic physical and mental
health problems.7 The evidence for using mindfulness-based
approaches with young people is preliminary, but growing.8 The
Mindfulness in Schools Programme (MiSP) has been developed
as a universal intervention for young people in secondary schools.
It is a complex intervention that includes elements that are
applicable to young people who are stressed and experiencing
mental health difficulties, are in the normal range of mental health
or who are flourishing. By teaching mindfulness as a way of
working with everyday stressors and experiences, participants
across the full range of the normal distribution of well-being
can potentially benefit.9 As a universal intervention it also
minimises inequalities in accessing the intervention and the
acceptability, stigma and social comparison that often arise when
targeting interventions at subgroups of young people within
schools. Finally, the MiSP curriculum is designed to fit into the
school curriculum and, following appropriate training, be taught
by school teachers embedded in the schools, which reviews suggest
is necessary for long-term sustainability.5 This non-randomised
controlled feasibility study investigated the acceptability of the
programme for teachers and students in schools with young
people aged 12–16, taught as a 9-week programme by the original
course developers and by those trained by them. We reasoned that
the 12–16 age range represents a key developmental window for
self-regulation and is a period when young people need to
negotiate many academic and social stressors for the first time.
The study further aimed to establish the first test of the MiSP’s
efficacy in terms of well-being and mental health immediately
following the programme and 3 months later, when students were
faced with the challenge of end of year exams.
Method
Design and procedures
This feasibility study was a non-randomised controlled parallel
group (MiSP programme v. matched control group) study, with
assessment of outcomes at baseline (pre-intervention), post-
intervention and follow-up (3 months after baseline). Students’
views of the acceptability of the MiSP programme were assessed
at post-intervention and follow-up. The MiSP curriculum was
offered in schools as part of the normal curriculum, typically
replacing classes in religious studies or personal, social and health
education.
Schools were invited to participate via the head teacher.
Participating schools then informed parents, with an option for
parents to opt their children out of the study. Students who
opted out were provided with alternative activities during the
mindfulness classes and were not asked to complete the study
measures. Control schools delivered their curriculum as they
would normally, including any social or emotional components
of the curriculum.
The participating intervention and control schools were
selected from the pool of schools that either had teachers trained
in the MISP curriculum or who had expressed an interest in being
trained. Schools were chosen for the intervention arm on the basis
1
Effectiveness of the Mindfulness in Schools
Programme: non-randomised controlled
feasibility study
Willem Kuyken, Katherine Weare, Obioha C. Ukoumunne, Rachael Vicary, Nicola Motton,
Richard Burnett, Chris Cullen, Sarah Hennelly and Felicia Huppert
Background
Mindfulness-based approaches for adults are effective at
enhancing mental health, but few controlled trials have
evaluated their effectiveness among young people.
Aims
To assess the acceptability and efficacy of a schools-based
universal mindfulness intervention to enhance mental health
and well-being.
Method
A total of 522 young people aged 12–16 in 12 secondary
schools either participated in the Mindfulness in Schools
Programme (intervention) or took part in the usual school
curriculum (control).
Results
Rates of acceptability were high. Relative to the controls,
and after adjusting for baseline imbalances, children who
participated in the intervention reported fewer depressive
symptoms post-treatment (P = 0.004) and at follow-up
(P = 0.005) and lower stress (P = 0.05) and greater well-being
(P = 0.05) at follow-up. The degree to which students in the
intervention group practised the mindfulness skills was
associated with better well-being (P50.001) and less stress
(P = 0.03) at 3-month follow-up.
Conclusions
The findings provide promising evidence of the programme’s
acceptability and efficacy.
Declaration of interest
R.B. is Co-Founder and Director and C.C. is Co-Founder of
the Mindfulness in Schools Project.
The British Journal of Psychiatry
1–6. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.113.126649
 that they had a teacher who was either one of the MISP developers
or had been trained by the team who had developed the
curriculum. Control schools were selected to match intervention
schools on several key matching criteria: fee-paying private
schools v. publicly funded schools, year group and published
school-level academic results. To balance any teacher allegiance/
motivation effects, we chose control schools where teachers were
interested in the mindfulness programme, but had not yet been
trained or delivered the MiSP curriculum.
Baseline data were collected at the beginning of school term 2
(January 2012). The intervention was delivered in the first term of
the 2012 calendar year (January to March 2012). Post-treatment
data were collected at the end of term 2 (March 2012) and
follow-up data in term 3 (May 2012). The third follow-up was
designed to test the MiSP curriculum’s stress reduction potential
at a time of high stress, the summer exam period. To maximise
data completeness, data were collected either through an online
portal or through paper and pencil measures, whichever was
preferred by the school, teacher and/or students. The study was
ethically approved by the University of Exeter Psychology
Department Ethics Committee (Ref. 2011/527, December 2011).
Participants
As a universal intervention, all consenting young people in
participating classes were included.
The MiSP curriculum and teachers
The MiSP curriculum is a set of nine scripted lessons tailored to
secondary
schools,
supported
by
tailored
teacher
training.
Mindfulness involves learning to direct attention to immediate
experience, moment by moment, with open-minded curiosity
and acceptance.10 New skills are learned in a highly practical
way, through experience of mindfulness practices and application
in everyday life.11 The intention is that when young people use
mindfulness to work with mental states, everyday life and stressors
this will cultivate well-being and promote mental health (see
Meiklejohn et al12).
The
MiSP
curriculum
is
drawn
from
a
lineage
of
contemplative mindfulness traditions,13 from mindfulness-based
stress
reduction14
and
from
mindfulness-based
cognitive
therapy.15 The MiSP curriculum was developed iteratively over 4
years, with the input of more that 200 teachers who have been
trained to teach the MiSP curriculum and more than 2000 young
people who have participated in the programme. It was designed
in line with principles identified as important for effectiveness in
several reviews of schools-based programmes that promote mental
health and well-being and teach social and emotional competence.
These principles include: explicitly teaching skills and attitudes;
shortening and adapting components to suit young people; using
a range of age-appropriate, interactive, experiential and lively
teaching methods; providing age-appropriate resources to bring
mindfulness to life (including a course booklet and a set of
mindfulness exercises on CD or MP3 audio files); intensive,
focused teacher education to build teachers’ self-efficacy and
well-being; and programme implementation that pays close
attention to clarity and fidelity, in this case supported by a manual
and indicative script.5,6
The teachers were either the MiSP curriculum programme
developers, or had been trained and approved as ready to teach
the MiSP curriculum by its developers. This means that teachers
could deliver the curriculum with a high degree of understanding
and fidelity.
Study measures
Standard participant demographic information (age, gender and
ethnicity) was collected at baseline. The outcome measures were
collected at the three time points (baseline, post-intervention
and follow-up) and the programme acceptability measures were
collected from participants at post-intervention and follow-up.
Acceptability measures
To assess the acceptability of the programme students completed a
feedback evaluation questionnaire immediately after the end of
the MiSP curriculum. This included questions about the number
of lessons attended, the number of times participants had prac-
tised mindfulness outside of class, how much they felt they had
learnt during the course, how much they enjoyed the course,
how helpful they found the classes and whether they thought they
would continue to use what they had learnt in their lives.
At the final follow-up, 2–3 months after the end of the MiSP
course, students were asked to complete a further evaluation
questionnaire to establish the extent to which they continued to
make use of the main mindfulness practices taught within the
programme. This included a general question abount mindfulness
practice and four questions about specific mindfulness practices
taught in the MiSP curriculum. The frequency with which these
practices had been used since completing the course was assessed
on a six-point scale (never to almost every day).
Two months after the course the MiSP teachers were asked to
rate their perceptions of the level of pupil engagement and
interest, how much they felt the pupils ‘got it’ (i.e. understood
what mindfulness is about) and their confidence and enjoyment
in teaching the course on a ten-point Likert scale.
Outcome measures
Well-being.
To
assess
well-being
we
used
the
Warwick–
Edinburgh Mental Well-being Scale (WEMWBS).16–18 The scale
is designed to capture a broad conception of well-being including
affective–emotional aspects, cognitive–evaluative dimensions and
psychological functioning. The scale consists of 14 items each
answered on a five-point scale, ranging from none of the time
(1) to all of the time (4), and is scored by summing all the items
into a total well-being score (range 14–70). A sample item is ‘I’ve
been feeling optimistic about the future’
. The WEMWBS has been
shown to have good validity, internal consistency and test–retest
reliability with a large sample of students (n = 354) and a general
population sample (n = 2075).18
Mental health.
To assess mental health we used two measures,
each assessing specific dimensions that we hypothesised should
be amenable to change in mindfulness-based interventions. The
ten-item version of the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS)19–21 was used
to assess the degree to which life in the past month was perceived
as stressful, unpredictable and uncontrollable on a five-point
scale (never to very often) that is summed into a total score (range
0–40). A sample item is ‘In the last month, how often have you
felt nervous and stressed?’ This scale has demonstrated good
reliability, validity and sensitivity to change.20–22
To assess the presence and severity of depressive symptoms in
the past week we used the eight-item Center for Epidemiologic
Studies Depression Scale (CES-D)23 rated on a five-point scale
(never (1) to often (5)) and summed into a total score (range
8–40). A sample item is ‘How much of the time during the past
week have you felt depressed?’ The CES-D is extensively used,
including with young people, and the 20-item version for
adolescents has shown evidence of good reliability, validity and
2
Kuyken et al
 Mindfulness in schools
sensitivity to change.24,25 This short version was used in a large-
scale European study and demonstrates adequate reliability and
validity, although cut-offs for ‘caseness’ with the short version
are as yet not established.26
Mindfulness practice.
For the participants in the MiSP group
only we assessed mindfulness practice using five questions about
sustained use of mindfulness practices in the 3 months following
completion of the MiSP curriculum.
Statistical analyses
Participants that provided data at follow-up were included in the
analysis (i.e. analysis of completers) with participants analysed
according to the study arm to which they were allocated.
Quantitative
characteristics
are
reported
using
means
and
standard deviations (or medians and interquartile ranges) and
categorical characteristics using percentages. We report summaries
for the acceptability measures, the baseline characteristics of
each trial arm and the results of outcome comparisons at post-
intervention and 3-month follow-up between the intervention
and control arms. Unadjusted between-arm comparisons and
comparisons that are adjusted for the potential confounders
gender, age and the baseline score of the outcome are estimated
using random-effects linear regression models to allow for the
correlation between the outcomes of children from the same
school
(cluster).
Confidence
intervals
and
P-values
were
constructed using degrees of freedom based on the number of
school clusters rather than the number of children. Random-
effects linear regression models were fitted within the intervention
arm to examine whether children that showed the greatest use
of the MiSP’s core mindfulness practices had better outcomes.
All analyses were carried out using Stata software version 2.1 for
Windows.
Results
Six schools received the MiSP curriculum with a total of 256
children participating in the trial from those schools. Each of these
schools was matched to a control school with a total of 266
children recruited into the control group. Six fee-paying private
schools and 6 publicly funded schools participated and there
was one selective grammar school in each arm. We included
schools with varying academic results, including small cohorts
in special needs schools in each arm.
The nine-lesson (weekly) manualised MiSP curriculum was
taught by seven different teachers, six of whom were male. They
had taught the curriculum for an average of 1.8 years, with the
two authors of the course having taught it for 3 years each (i.e.
since its inception) and all the rest for between 1 and 2 years. They
had been teaching for a mean of 12 years.
Five schools in the intervention arm offered the MiSP
curriculum programme as a universal intervention with the whole
class participating in the course as part of the regular school
curriculum, but in one school a single class of 26 children
participated voluntarily during the lunch break. The rate of
student participation varied across the schools from a single class
within a single year group to all classes in a year group. The rate of
attrition from the MiSP classes was less than 1%.
Of the children recruited in the schools receiving the MiSP
curriculum, 99.6% (255/256) provided data for at least one
outcome at post-intervention compared with 87.2% (232/266)
in the control arm. At the 3-month follow-up 95.3% (244/256)
of children in the intervention arm and 85.0% (226/266) in the
control arm provided data for at least one outcome. The
characteristics of the children at recruitment are summarised for
each of the trial arms in Table 1. Overall, the characteristics were
similar between the two arms except a slightly greater proportion of
females in the MiSP group. Two-thirds of the children were male.
Acceptability of the MiSP curriculum
On completing the course, 248 young people (97%) in the
intervention arm schools completed programme evaluations. They
attended a mean of 7.5 (out of 9) lessons (median 8, range 0–9).
On ten-point Likert scales, mean enjoyment and interest was 7.0
(median 8; range 0–10) and mean amount learnt was 6.6 (median
7, range 0–10). When asked to respond to the question ‘In the
future, how likely are you to use the techniques you have learned?’
on a ten-point Likert scale, the mean response was 5.9 (median 6,
range 0–10).
A total of 242 participants in the intervention arm (95%)
completed a second evaluation 2–3 months after the end of the
programme to establish how much they were still using the
mindfulness
practices
taught
in
the
programme.
Table
2
summarises the responses children in the intervention group gave
on the extent to which they practiced the principles of the
programme after completing the course. Around 80% of the
children had used the practices to varying levels. A similar
percentage of the children had focused on their breathing. Far
fewer children, however, had used beditation (44%), walked a
short distance or eaten a mouthful of food mindfully (52%) or
noticed where in the body they were feeling stress (60%).
Two months after the course all the MiSP curriculum teachers
were asked to rate their experience of teaching the curriculum on a
ten-point Likert scale. Mean perceived pupil engagement and
interest was 7.6 (median 8, range 5.5–9). The mean ratings for
how much the pupils ‘got it’ (i.e. understood what mindfulness
is about) was 6.8 (median 7, range 6–8). Teachers rated their
confidence in teaching the course as 8.7 (median 9, range 7–10);
and their own enjoyment of teaching the course as 8.6 (median
9, range 6.5–10).
The impact of the MiSP curriculum on well-being
and mental health
Table 3 summarises the results from the comparison of outcomes
between the two trial arms at post-intervention and 3-month
follow-up,
showing
mean differences
both
unadjusted
and
adjusted for baseline imbalances. In the unadjusted analyses,
there was little evidence of a difference between the trial arms at
3
Table 1
Participant characteristics at baselinea
Trial arm
Variable
Intervention
(n = 256)
Control
(n = 266)
Female, %
37.0
23.1
Age at enrolment, years: mean (s.d.)
14.9 (1.5)
14.7 (1.4)
Ethnicity, %
White
74.9
68.8
Asian
15.9
16.5
Black
1.3
4.9
Mixed
6.7
5.4
Other
1.3
4.5
Well-being (WEMWBS), mean (s.d.)
48.6 (7.6)
50.0 (7.4)
Stress score (PSS), mean (s.d.)
17.5 (6.8)
16.3 (6.2)
Depression score (CES-D), mean (s.d.)
15.1 (4.0)
14.9 (3.7)
WEMWBS, Warwick–Edinburgh Mental Well-being Scale; PSS, Perceived Stress Scale;
CES-D, Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale.
a. Sample size ranges from 224 to 256 in the intervention arm and 175 to 259 in the
control arm.
 Kuyken et al
post-intervention with respect to mental health and well-being.
However, after adjusting for gender, age and ethnicity there was
strong evidence of lower depression scores in the intervention
arm (P = 0.004).
At 3-month follow-up, the adjusted analyses showed evidence
of increased well-being (P = 0.05), lower stress (P = 0.05) and
lower depression scores (P = 0.005) in the intervention compared
with the control arm.
The relationship between mindfulness practice
and outcomes
In the within-group analyses of the relationship between the trial
outcomes and practice of the MiSP curriculum principles
(adjusted for gender, age and baseline outcome score) there was
evidence that children who reported more frequent use of the
mindfulness practices had higher well-being scores at post-
intervention
(P = 0.003)
and
follow-up
(P50.001),
lower
depression scores at post-intervention (P = 0.04) and lower stress
scores at follow-up (P = 0.03).
Discussion
Main findings
Although
there
is
growing
interest
in
mindfulness-based
approaches for young people in schools8,27 there are as yet few
controlled trials, very few trials using a universal intervention and
no trials of the MiSP curriculum. Results from this non-randomised
controlled feasibility trial of the MiSP curriculum provide clear
evidence of its acceptability, evidence of its impact on depressive
symptoms and promising evidence of its efficacy in reducing stress
and enhancing well-being.
The MiSP curriculum’s primary aim is to teach young people
skills to work with mental states, everyday life and stressors so as
to cultivate well-being and promote mental health. One of the
strengths of the study was the choice of a follow-up period in
the most stressful part of the school year to test whether the MiSP
curriculum conferred protection as evidenced through less self-
reported stress and greater well-being. Moderate evidence for
effects in the adjusted analyses suggests that the programme
may confer resilience at times of greatest stress. Moreover, in line
with other studies our findings suggest that young people who
engaged more with the mindfulness practices also reported better
outcomes (e.g. Biegel et al,28 Huppert & Johnson29).
This study provides preliminary evidence that the programme
ameliorates low-grade depressive symptoms both immediately
following the programme and at 3-month follow-up. This is a
potentially very important finding given that low-grade depressive
symptoms not only impair functioning but are also a powerful
risk factor for depression in adolescents and adults.4,30 Our
findings are comparable with other mindfulness-based approaches
with young people that also shown reductions in depressive
symptoms (e.g. Biegel et al28); however, this is the first study of
a universal mindfulness-based intervention that appears to
address a risk factor for depression and is consistent with a
meta-analysis suggesting that preventing the onset of depression
in adolescence is possible.4
4
Table 2
Summary of ongoing mindfulness practice 2–3 months after completing the Mindfulness in Schools Programme (MiSP)
curriculum (n = 242)
Participants endorsing each response category, %
Question
Never
Once
Two or three
times
About once
a week
Several times
a week
Almost
every day
During the course you were taught a range of mindfulness practices.
Since the end of the course, how often have you used these practices?
18
22
39
15
5
1
During the course you were invited to pause and focus on your breathing
by doing a 7–11 or a .b (i.e. ‘stop, breathe and be’). Since the end of the
course, how often have you done this?
22
27
29
14
6
2
During the course you were taught to use beditation as a way of
helping you get to sleep. How often have you done this?
56
22
13
7
1
1
During the course you were asked to walk a short distance mindfully, or eat
a mouthful of food mindfully. Since the course, how often have you done this?
48
25
18
4
3
1
During the course you were asked to notice your stress signature in difficult
times, noticing where in the body you were feeling stress. Since the course,
how often have you done this?
40
18
25
10
6
1
Table 3
Outcome comparisons at post-intervention and 3-month follow-upa
Trial arms, mean (s.d.)
Adjusted
Outcomes
Intervention
group
Control
group
Unadjusted
Mean differenceb
Mean differenceb
(95% CI)
P
ICC
Post-intervention
Well-being score (WEMWBS)
50.1 (7.7)
48.8 (8.6)
1.6
2.1 (70.8 to 4.9)
0.13
0.037
Stress score (PSS)
17.4 (3.8)
16.8 (4.7)
0.5
0.7 (70.3 to 1.7)
0.15
0.0006
Depression score (CES-D)
14.3 (3.5)
15.4 (4.0)
71.1
71.6 (72.5 to 70.7)
0.004
0.007
3-month follow-up
Well-being score (WEMWBS)
50.0 (7.9)
48.7 (10.0)
1.2
3.0 (0.0 to 6.0)
0.05
0.035
Stress score (PSS)
17.1 (6.2)
17.7 (7.2)
70.3
71.8 (73.6 to 0.0)
0.05
0.021
Depression score (CES-D)
14.6 (3.7)
15.6 (4.6)
70.8
71.4 (72.3 to 70.5)
0.005
0
ICC, intraclass correlation coefficient; WEMWBS, Warwick–Edinburgh Mental Well-being Scale; PSS, Perceived Stress Scale; CES-D, Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale.
a. At post-intervention, the sample sizes for unadjusted analyses range from 240 to 242 in the intervention arm and 221 to 223 in the control arm; and for adjusted analyses range
from 210 to 231 in the intervention arm and 152 to 153 in the control arm. At 3-month follow-up, the sample sizes for unadjusted analyses range from 240 to 242 in the intervention
arm and 206 to 223 in the control arm; and for adjusted analyses range from 201 to 231 in the intervention arm and 134 to 153 in the control arm.
b. Mean difference: intervention – control.
 Mindfulness in schools
Although the effects of the MiSP curriculum on depressive
symptoms in the intervention arm are significantly greater than
those found in the control group, the change scores suggest these
would prove to be small effects in a larger-scale randomised study
(See Table 3 for the confidence intervals around the change
scores). However, moving the population mean even a small
amount on key variables that confer resilience, through a universal
intervention, at a key developmental stage could potentially have
more impact on mental health than interventions targeting young
people either at risk for mental health problems or young people
who have already developed mental health problems.9 Indeed, a
recent pragmatic cluster randomised controlled trial (n = 5030)
targeting young people at risk for depression compared a
cognitive–behavioural intervention with an attention control
intervention and usual school provision.31 They found no benefit
of the cognitive–behavioural arm over the other two arms; indeed,
there was some suggestion of an exacerbation of depressive
symptoms in the intervention arm that the authors attribute to
increased awareness of problems.
Strengths, limitations and future directions
This feasibility study had several strengths. We chose a design that
enabled the intervention schools to be compared with schools
matched on several key variables. We selected measurement time
points that enabled the intervention’s effects to be assessed both
immediately following the intervention but also during a stressful
period for many students. We selected measures that have been
shown to be sensitive to change and acceptable to students and
teachers.5
The study had several limitations. First, as a feasibility study
we were not able to randomly assign schools or students and
therefore some inevitable baseline imbalances were observed.
Although we adjusted for these statistically, there may have been
imbalance on other key prognostic factors. Our study used a small
set of self-report measures. Future studies should broaden beyond
self-report
outcome
measures
to
look
at
schools-
and/or
classroom-based measures, observer measures, biobehavioural
measures of stress reactivity and/or resilience12 and mental health
outcomes such as new onsets of depression that can establish
numbers needed to treat and cost-effectiveness.4
As an initial test of the MiSP curriculum we intentionally
selected schools interested in the programme, which were also
ready
to
participate
in
our
study.
However,
to
test
the
generalisability of the intervention larger scale studies should
extend to a greater diversity of schools. Similarly, future research
should extend to a broader set of teachers, assessing intervention
fidelity.32 The next phase of work requires an appropriately
designed, pragmatic randomised controlled trial, with longer
follow-ups, powered to examine key processes and outcomes that
pays close attention to generalisability.
In
summary,
although
schools-based
interventions
can
sometimes be implemented as a result of short-term policy drivers
or
charismatic
innovators,
interventions
that
demonstrate
acceptability,
efficacy,
cost-effectiveness
and
potential
for
implementation are most likely to be sustainable. This feasibility
study is the first step towards evaluating the MiSP curriculum
and provides preliminary evidence of acceptability and efficacy.
Willem Kuyken, Katherine Weare, Obioha C. Ukoumunne, Rachael Vicary,
Nicola Motton, University of Exeter, Exeter; Richard Burnett, Chris Cullen,
Mindfulness in Schools Project; Sarah Hennelly, University of Oxford, Oxford;
Felicia Huppert, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Correspondence: Willem Kuyken, Exeter Mindfulness Network, University of
Exeter, EX4 4QG, UK. Email: w.kuyken@exeter.ac.uk
First received 21 Jan 2013, final revision 11 Apr 2013, accepted 17 Apr 2013
Funding
This research was supported in part by the University of Exeter and the National Institutes
of Health Research (NIHR) Peninsula Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health
Research and Care. The views and opinions expressed in this paper are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Health Service, the NHR or the
Department of Health.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the participating schools (Altrincham Grammar School, Broadlands
School, The Cherwell School, Colyton Grammar School, Charterhouse School, Cheney
School, Hampton School, The Link School, Oxford Spires Academy, The Perse School,
Tonbridge School), teachers (Amanda Bailey, Richard Burnett, Chris Cullen, Suzannah
Easton, James Gibbs, Mike Grundmann, Fiona Harvey, Kieran McCarthy, Mark Nicholson,
Chris O’Neil and Nicola Turner) and students. In addition, the following teachers provided
support for the project: Jo Bentley, Caroline Freeman and Marion Pahlen.
References
1 Luthar SS. Vulnerability and resilience – a study of high-risk adolescents.
Child Dev 1991; 62: 600–16.
2 Ford T, Goodman R, Meltzer H. The British child and adolescent mental
health survey 1999: the prevalence of DSM-IV disorders. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry 2003; 42: 1203–11.
3 Durlak JA, Wells AM. Primary prevention mental health programs for children
and adolescents: a meta-analytic review. Am J Community Psychol 1997; 25:
115–52.
4 Cuijpers P, van Straten A, Smit F, Mihalopoulos C, Beekman A. Preventing
the onset of depressive disorders: a meta-analytic review of psychological
interventions. Am J Psychiatry 2008; 165: 1272–80.
5 Weare K, Nind M. Mental health promotion and problem prevention in
schools: what does the evidence say? Health Promot Int 2011; 26: 129–69.
6 Durlak JA, DuPre EP. Implementation matters: a review of research on the
influence of implementation on program outcomes and the factors affecting
implementation. Am J Community Psychol 2008; 41: 327–50.
7 Williams JMG, Kuyken W. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy: a promising
new approach to preventing depressive relapse. Br J Psychiatry 2012; 200:
359–60.
8 Harnett PH, Dawe S. Review: The contribution of mindfulness-based
therapies for children and families and proposed conceptual integration.
Child Adolesc Ment Health 2012; 17: 195–208.
9 Huppert FA. A new approach to reducing disorder and improving well-being.
Perspect Psychol Sci 2009; 4: 108–11.
10 Bishop SR, Lau M, Shapiro S, Carlson L, Anderson ND, Carmody J, et al.
Mindfulness: a proposed operational definition. Clin Psychol Sci Prac 2004;
11: 230–41.
11 Kabat-Zinn J. Mindfulness-based interventions in context: past, present, and
future. Clin Psychol Sci Prac 2003; 10: 144–56.
12 Meiklejohn J, Phillips C, Freedman ML, Griffin ML, Biegel GM, Roach A, et al.
Integrating mindfulness training into K-12 education: fostering the resilience
of teachers and students. Mindfulness 2012 (Epub March 14).
13 Goldstein J, Kornfield J. Seeking the Heart of Wisdom. Shambhala
Publications, 1987.
14 Kabat-Zinn J. Full Catastrophe Living: How to Cope with Stress, Pain and
Illness using Mindfulness Meditation. Delacorte, 1990.
15 Segal ZV, Williams JMG, Teasdale JD. Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy
for Depression: A New Approach to Preventing Relapse. Guilford Press, 2002.
16 Stewart-Brown SL, Tennant A, Tennant R, Platt S, Parkinson J, Weich S.
Internal construct validity of the Warwick-Edinburgh Mental Well-being Scale
(WEMWBS): a Rasch analysis using data from the Scottish Health Education
Population Survey. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2009; 7: 15.
17 Stewart-Brown SL, Platt S, Tennant A, Maheswaran H, Parkinson J, Weich S,
et al. The Warwick-Edinburgh Mental Well-Being Scale (WEMWBS): a valid and
reliable tool for measuring mental well-being in diverse populations and
projects. J Epidemiol Community Health 2011; 65: A38–9.
18 Tennant R, Hiller L, Fishwick R, Platt S, Joseph S, Weich S, et al. The Warwick-
Edinburgh Mental Well-being Scale (WEMWBS): development and UK
validation. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2007; 5: 63.
19 Cohen S. Contrasting the Hassles Scale and the Perceived Stress Scale –
who’s really measuring appraised stress. Am Psychol 1986; 41: 716–8.
20 Hewitt PL, Flett GL, Mosher SW. The perceived stress scale – factor structure
and relation to depression symptoms in a psychiatric sample. J Psychopathol
Behav 1992; 14: 247–57.
5
 Kuyken et al
21 Pbert L, Doerfler LA, Decosimo D. An evaluation of the Perceived Stress Scale
in 2 clinical populations. J Psychopathol Behav 1992; 14: 363–75.
22 Jacobs PD, Thornton JW. Scale sensitivity of perceived stress index. Percept
Motor Skill 1970; 30: 944.
23 Coyle CP, Roberge JJ. The psychometric properties of the Center for
Epidemiologic Studies-Depression Scale (CES-D) when used with adults with
physical-disabilities. Psychol Health 1992; 7: 69–81.
24 Radloff LS. The use of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale
in adolescents and young adults. J Youth Adolesc 1991; 20: 149–66.
25 Fendrich M, Weissman MM, Warner V. Screening for depressive disorder in
children and adolescents – validating the center for epidemiologic studies
depression scale for children. Am J Epidemiol 1990; 131: 538–51.
26 Bracke P, Levecque K, Van de Velde S. The psychometric properties of the
CES-D 8 depression inventory and the estimation of cross-national
differences in the true prevalence of depression. University of Leuven, 2008
(http://soc.kuleuven.be/ceso/dagvandesociologie/papers/CESD8%20in%20
comparative%20perspective%20Vandevelde-Bracke-Levecque.pdf).
27 Burke CA. Mindfulness-based approaches with children and adolescents: a
preliminary review of current research in an emergent field. J Child Fam Stud
2010; 19: 133–44.
28 Biegel GM, Brown KW, Shapiro SL, Schubert CA. Mindfulness-based
stress reduction for the treatment of adolescent psychiatric outpatients:
a randomized clinical trial. J Consult Clin Psychol 2009; 77: 855–66.
29 Huppert FA, Johnson DM. A controlled trial of mindfulness training
in schools: the importance of practice for an impact on well-being.
J Posit Psychol 2010; 5: 264–74.
30 Rao U, Ryan ND, Birmaher B, Dahl RE, Williamson DE, Kaufman J, et al.
Unipolar depression in adolescents – clinical outcome in adulthood.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1995; 34: 566–78.
31 Stallard P, Sayal K, Phillips R, Taylor JA, Spears M, Anderson R, et al.
Classroom based cognitive behavioural therapy in reducing symptoms
of depression in high risk adolescents: pragmatic cluster randomised
controlled trial. BMJ 2012; 345: e6058.
32 Crane RS, Kuyken W, Williams JMG, Hastings RP, Cooper L, Fennell M.
Competence in teaching mindfulness-based courses: concepts, development
and assessment. Mindfulness 2012; 3: 8.
6
