 Immune-centric network of cytokines and cells in disease 
context identified by computational mining of PubMed
Ksenya Kveler1, Elina Starosvetsky1, Amit Ziv-Kenet1,≠, Yuval Kalugny1,2, Yuri Gorelik1, 
Gali Shalev-Malul1, Netta Aizenbud-Reshef1, Tania Dubovik1, Mayan Briller1, John 
Campbell3, Jan C. Rieckmann4,¥, Nuaman Asbeh1, Doron Rimar1,5, Felix Meissner4, Jeff 
Wiser3,±, and Shai S. Shen-Orr1,6,*
1Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3525433, Israel
2CytoReason, Tel-Aviv, 67012, Israel
3Northrop Grumman IT Health Solutions, Rockville, MD 20850, USA
4Experimental Systems Immunology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Bayern, 82152, 
Germany
5Rheumatology Unit, Bnai Zion Medical Center, Haifa 31048, Israel
6Faculty of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel
Abstract
Cytokines are signaling molecules secreted and sensed by immune and other cell types, enabling 
dynamic inter-cellular communication. Although a vast amount of data on these interactions 
exists, this information is not compiled, integrated or easily searchable. Here we report 
immuneXpresso, a text mining engine that structures and standardizes knowledge of immune 
inter-cellular communication. We applied immuneXpresso to PubMed to identify relationships 
between 340 cell types and 140 cytokines across thousands of diseases. The method distinguishes 
between incoming and outgoing interactions, and includes the effect of the interaction and the 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence: shenorr@technion.ac.il.
≠Present address: Augury
±Present address: Medidata Solutions
¥Present address: Roche
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
K.K. designed, performed and interpreted the analyses, led design and development of the software, implemented relation extraction, 
filtering and network assembly, and wrote the manuscript, E.S. interpreted the analyses, performed quality control, designed and 
carried out the experimental validations and wrote the manuscript, A.Z.K. implemented indexing, ontology support, reference book 
annotation software and broadly contributed to the entire computational pipeline development, Y.K. conceived the pipeline 
architecture and broadly contributed to the software formation, Y.G. assisted with cell entity recognition, G.S.M. performed quality 
control on Text Mining output and assisted with cytokine ontology development, T.D. assisted with quality control on Text Mining 
output, M.B. contributed to quality control and prediction evaluation, N.A.R. wrote the software and implemented the website 
backend, J.C. and J.W. designed and developed the user interface, J.C.R. and F.M. provided and interpreted the proteomic data, N.A. 
assisted with machine learning for quality control, D.R. contributed to quality control and interpretation of disease profiles, S.S.O. 
conceived the idea, oversaw, designed and interpreted the analyses, and wrote the manuscript.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
K.K. and Y.K are employees and co-founders of CytoReason. S.S.O. and E.S. are co-founders and serve as scientific advisors and/or 
consultants to CytoReason.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Biotechnol. 2018 August ; 36(7): 651–659. doi:10.1038/nbt.4152.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cellular function involved. These factors are assigned a confidence score and linked to the disease. 
Leveraging the breadth of this network, we predict and experimentally verify previously 
unappreciated cell-cytokine interactions. We also build a global immune-centric view of diseases 
and use it to predict cytokine-disease associations. This standardized knowledgebase 
(www.immunexpresso.org) opens up new directions for interpretation of immune data and model-
driven systems immunology.
Protective immunity is mediated through a complex system of interacting cells whose 
communication network is primarily governed by secreted molecules, chiefly the cytokines 
and chemokine family proteins. Until recently, the high complexity of the immune system 
was approached by researchers using reductionist approaches, but technological advances 
now enable acquisition of large data sets, with broad enumeration of cell subset types and 
functions, protein, gene expression and more1. In addition, papers in immunology alone are 
being published at the rate of approximately one every 30 minutes. To maximize discovery, 
research results must transition to organized standardized models of knowledge, on which 
automated computational processing is deployed.
Biomedical text mining efforts have been an important means of grasping at the breadth and 
complexity of biological systems. With efforts invested into recognizing biologically 
relevant entities, such as genes, diseases, chemicals and genomic variants2–8, driven by gold-
standards9,10 and community-wide efforts11,12,13,14, text mining is enabling automatic 
identification of complex biological relations15,16 and full-scale networks.. Recent research 
has expanded to additional types of molecular events17–19, with relation extraction methods 
ranging from co-occurrence15,19, pattern-matching and rule-based methods, to dependency 
parse graph analysis20,21 and machine learning21. However, to date, text mining approaches 
have not addressed large-scale inter-cellular communication networks and, in particular, 
those describing directional cell-cytokine interactions.
Biological literature mining has shown utility for hypothesis generation, particularly in 
disease contexts22–24. Similarly, data-driven disease classifications have shown benefit in 
understanding shared mechanisms, empowering target identification and drug repositioning 
choices25–28. Yet to date, such classifications have not addressed cellular cross-talk and how 
the immune system may impact disease.
To establish a foundation for systematic reasoning over the inter-cellular network, we built 
immuneXpresso (iX), a comprehensive high-resolution knowledgebase of directional inter-
cellular interactions, text-mined from all available PubMed abstracts across a broad range of 
disease conditions. Interactions captured by iX include both direct cytokine binding/
secretion events and more distant, indirect influencing relations, scored and filtered to 
emphasize precision. We use the resulting knowledge standardization to characterize the 
immune inter-cellular network and to predict and experimentally validate cell-cytokine 
interactions. Leveraging the breadth and context-awareness of the knowledgebase, we build 
an immune-centric view of diseases and explore its modularity to predict cytokine-disease 
associations.
Kveler et al.
Page 2
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RESULTS
A text mining pipeline to extract inter-cellular interactions
We designed a computational pipeline focused on mining the primary literature for 
identification of cells, inter-cellular signaling molecules (i.e., cytokines) and the directional 
relations between them (Fig. 1a, Online Methods) and applied it across the entire PubMed 
(approximately 16 million articles published electronically by July 2017). Briefly, for each 
individual sentence, the analysis pipeline tags cells, cytokines and diseases, as well as 
standardizes terminology through official ontologies to allow for hierarchical data analysis at 
multiple resolutions (Supplementary Tables 1-4). We examine sentence structure to identify 
syntactically related cell, verb and cytokine. From each such ‘evidence record’, we the 
relation’s directionality, polarity (representing its positive, negative or neutral effect) and 
when possible, the resulting cellular biological function (Supplementary Table 5). We 
distinguish between ‘outgoing’ relations, describing cytokine secretion by a given cell type, 
and ‘incoming’ relations, describing events in which a cytokine affects a cell type, either 
directly via binding or indirectly. Finally, for each unique triple of cell, cytokine and 
directionality, summarized across all its evidence records, we use a trained machine learning 
classifier to make a call on whether the collected evidence indeed describes an interaction 
(Online Methods). We assign confidence scores to these and link to the conditions (e.g., 
diseases) co-mentioned in the same abstracts. In addition, we annotate independent entity 
mentions, without interaction, of cells and cytokines to allow for entity co-occurrence and 
enrichment statistics.
To assess the precision of entity recognition, expert human curators evaluated 100 randomly 
chosen annotations each for cells, cytokines and diseases and found the automatic annotation 
to be 91%, 96% and 93% correct, respectively (Online Methods, Supplementary Tables 6-8). 
Similarly, for precision of relation extraction, randomly chosen 590 interaction evidence 
records (i.e., particular sentence instances) and manually evaluated entity recognition, 
ontology mapping, verb and relation detection, directionality, polarity and cellular function 
identification (Online Methods, Supplementary Tables 9, 10). We observed a conservative 
true positives rate of 75% when all metrics were considered, 82% when assessing triple 
precision (cell-cytokine-directionality) and 93% when checking cell-cytokine relation pair 
extraction only, ignoring directionality, polarity and other relation characteristics (Fig. 1b).
To evaluate performance in interaction recall (i.e., identifying known interactions), we 
manually curated directional interactions from a reference book covering up-to-date 
knowledge of cytokines29, and used it as a gold standard (Online Methods). Our machine 
learning derived knowledgebase covered 79% of the interactions described in the reference 
book, yet was close to five times larger, containing an additional 3,055 directional 
interactions. Manual assessment of 200 of these yielded an 11.5% false positive rate, 
suggesting that a large amount of biologically meaningful interactions appear only in the 
primary literature.
Finally, we unified all identified interactions (manual and machine derived) into a single 
knowledgebase which we named immuneXpresso (iX) (Fig. 1c). To quantify the advantages 
of this semantic-based approach, we compared its precision and recall with an alternative of 
Kveler et al.
Page 3
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 assuming cells and cytokines co-occurring in the same sentence interact, without sentence 
structure analysis (Online Methods). Though the full set of co-occurrence based relations 
showed 98% recall of both the reference book-curated and iX cell-cytokine pairs, 75.6% of 
these relations appeared in neither resource, suggesting a very high false positive rate for a 
co-occurrence approach, even when we threshold by a minimal number of repeat co-
occurrences (Fig. 1d).
At present, iX contains a total of 4,118 directional cell-cytokine interactions (Supplementary 
Table 11), three times as many incoming interactions as outgoing ones, an enrichment 
qualitatively echoed in reference book annotated interactions. These interactions stem from 
more than 31,000 articles (Supplementary Table 12). In addition, using the iX pipeline, we 
collected annotations of thousands of diseases (11,260 distinct disease terms. 2,179 of them 
appearing in at least 100 papers) and identified mentions of 1,300 cell types, 360 of which 
are hematopoietic, and 170 cytokines in these disease contexts (Supplementary Table 11, 
13). iX is freely accessible for querying through www.immunexpresso.org, as well as via the 
ImmPort web site30.
System-level characterization of inter-cellular interactions
iX offers a unique opportunity for a system-level view of inter-cellular information flow. 
Given the large number of cells and cytokines, many of which are poorly understood, we 
first grouped cells into 16 major categories based on the cell ontology hierarchy, and 
cytokines into families based on structure and function (Online Methods). This yielded a bi-
partite inter-cellular interaction network showing information flow between cell types and 
cytokine families (Fig. 2a). We noted that cell-types, irrespective of the number of identified 
cell subsets in their lineage, interacted with a large number of cytokine families. Replotting 
the network using the highest cell and cytokine resolution in iX we observed an increase in 
distinct cell subset -cytokine profiles per cell-type, particularly for outgoing interactions 
(Supplementary Fig. 1a, shown for CD4+ T-cells). Yet, the bulk of interactions were still 
described solely at a low cellular resolution, indicating that the unique cytokine milieu 
profile of distinct cellular subsets is for the most part still lacking.
Signaling of some cytokines may be highly specific or broadly affecting multiple cell 
subsets, constituting hubs of the inter-cellular interaction network. iX enables to study global 
properties of the intercellular interaction network. For each interaction, we identified the 
highest cellular resolution it was reported for and calculated for each cytokine the number of 
cellular interactions it was associated with (i.e., its degree), covering both hematopoietic 
(HPC) and non-hematopoietic cell types. This demonstrated the existence of only a few hubs 
in the network, followed by a long tail of modestly and low interacting cytokines (Fig. 2b for 
incoming and Supplementary Fig. 1b for outgoing interactions). We noted that 50% of the 
incoming interactions in the network were formed by 23 (16% of total) cytokines. These 
included the top hubs TNF, TGFB, IL6 and IFNG. Similarly, in the reverse outgoing 
direction, we attributed 50% of edges to 17 (15% of total) cytokines. Cytokine degrees in 
incoming and outgoing directions showed high correlation (Fig. 2c, r=0.86 Pearson’s), as in 
the gold-standard reference book (Supplementary Fig. 1c, r=0.69 by Pearson). This 
correlation was lower yet still observed upon removal of autocrine interactions which may 
Kveler et al.
Page 4
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 inflate similarity (r=0.73 and 0.36 for iX and the reference book respectively) and following 
removal of low degree cytokines (r=0.5 by Pearson), suggesting that hubs in the literature-
derived inter-cellular interaction network appear to be bi-directional, both targeting and 
secreted by a large number of cell-types.
Immune inter-cellular network knowledge is biased
Analyzing the cytokine degree distribution, we could not reject power-law distribution for 
either incoming or outgoing interactions (Supplementary Fig. 2, p=0.73 and p=0.47 
respectively for incoming and outgoing, Online Methods). Heavy-tailed network 
distributions may arise due to a research bias, yielding a “rich get richer” phenomenon31,32. 
Conversely, such degree distributions may arise naturally due to biological network 
structure33. Analysis of cytokine interaction knowledge accumulation showed the existence 
of one or two connection-rich leaders per cytokine family, with other family members 
trailing well behind (Fig. 3a, Supplementary Fig. 3). These were predominantly founding 
cytokine family members, such as IL6, IFNG, IL10 and TNF, and maintained their 
overwhelming dominance even when we discarded all explicit references to global family 
mentions in the text (e.g. TNF-family). We detected a low global correlation between a 
cytokine’s date of discovery and its degree, suggesting inter-cellular communication 
knowledge has not reached saturation, either for hubs or for less connected cytokines 
(Supplementary Fig. 4, r=−0.27, −0.26 Pearson’s for incoming and outgoing interactions 
respectively, driven by a few highly dominant hubs). Analysis of recent 5-year change in 
connectivity degree suggested for some hubs, such as FGF2, their iX degree likely reflects 
cellular interactivity potential, whereas others, such as IL6 and IL22, were still accumulating 
new connections at a high rate (Fig. 3b).
To assess how well the literature-derived knowledge represents experimental data, we 
compared iX cytokine degrees to those obtained from ImmProt, a high-resolution 
proteomics compendium quantifying proteins’ expression in rested and activated states in 
more than 20 sorted immune cell types34. We approximated outgoing and incoming 
interactions based on the expression of cytokine and cytokine receptor proteins in ImmProt 
cellular profiles. Comparison of incoming cytokine degrees in the resulting experimental 
network with the literature-derived ones (Fig. 3c) demonstrated significant correlation 
(ρ=0.38 by Spearman, p-val<0.001, based on 82 cytokines present in both datasets), with 
lower correlation for the opposite direction (ρ=0.26 by Spearman p-val=0.1, 41 shared 
cytokines), likely due to ImmProt secretion profiles measured in a single condition.
Prediction of cell-cytokine interactions
Using the iX knowledgebase up to 2014, we systematically predicted cell-cytokine 
interactions, using three orthogonal approaches (Fig. 4a, Online Methods): an unsupervised 
or supervised analysis of cytokine-cell interactions iX profiles independent of external data 
or by contrasting iX information versus receptor/cytokine gene expression data on cell 
subsets as reflected in the ImmProt34 and ImmGen databases35 (e.g., LTA in Fig. 3c). This 
systematic prediction process yielded 472 incoming and 367 outgoing ranked interaction 
candidates (Supplementary Tables 14, 15). Of these, we manually evaluated 78 predictions 
by extensive literature searches (Fig. 4b). This process identified 55% of candidates as 
Kveler et al.
Page 5
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 already observed, true positive interactions, 3% with evidence published only following the 
prediction 2014 training set and 3% with evidence of cytokine receptor expression only. This 
high rate of recovery of known interactions was reassuring and suggested that the remaining 
40% of candidate interactions were enriched for previously unrecognized interactions.
We tested the validity of two top-rated candidate interaction predictions: For IL7, our 
supervised cytokine family prediction approach suggested an outgoing interaction (i.e. 
secretion) in monocytes (the literature currently describes the opposite interaction only, that 
is, IL7 affects monocytes36). In agreement with the prediction, we observed IL7 production 
by monocytes in activated human PBMC population. In addition, as expected, we detected 
dendritic cell production of IL7 and no IL7 production in CD8+ T cells, as reported in the 
literature (Fig. 4c). Similarly, our unsupervised prediction approach suggested that IL34 
activates signaling in T-cells. We also detected expression of a corresponding receptor, 
CSF1R, on resting CD8+ T cell subsets in ImmProt34 (Supplementary Fig. 5). We stimulated 
human PBMCs with IL34 and observed robust phosphorylation of Erk in monocytes, as has 
previously been reported37. We also observed activation of pNFKB, pSTAT5 by IL34 in 
CD8+ effector memory T cells (Fig. 4e). Moreover, our prediction also supported our recent 
validation of CD4+ memory cells induction by IL34 signaling following upregulation of the 
CSF1R during activation34.
Immune-centric classification of diseases
We reasoned that the structured format and breadth of iX can be leveraged to obtain an 
immune-centered perspective on diseases and their relations. To do so, we picked a set of 
188 broadly studied diseases whose associated abstracts we sampled to obtain a 
characteristic inter-cellular immune profile (Fig. 5a, Supplementary Fig. 6, Supplementary 
Table 16). These we clustered in an unsupervised manner to assemble an immune-centered 
map of disease similarities and differences (Online Methods).
Analysis of this clustering outcome divided diseases into 18 modules based on associated 
cells, cytokines and interactions (Fig. 5b). We observed mixed agreement of this 
classification with a clinically based one (SNOMED): Some modules clustered clinically 
similar phenotypes: for example, Module 2 showed strong clustering of cardiovascular 
diseases, whereas Module 9 captured inflammatory bowel disorders and psoriasis. Similarly, 
cancers were grouped into four modules based on tissue type. In contrast, in some cases the 
immune-centered clustering yielded modules that included diseases from presumably 
unrelated clinical conditions: Modules 14 and 15 suggested a high degree of immune 
similarity between metabolic disorders and a subset of cardio-vascular diseases (e.g., 
Myocardial infarction and Acute coronary syndrome) - an observation also supported by 
high inter-connectivity of Modules 14 and 15 with Module 2.
We used iX to automatically generate an inter-cellular immune interaction map for type 2 
diabetes, based on 5,484 abstracts (Fig. 5c, Online Methods). The network recapitulated the 
molecular basis of the disease, capturing the key role of tissue resident inflammatory 
macrophages, monocytes, fat cells and pre-adipocytes in secreting the pro-inflammatory 
cytokines TNF, IL6 and IL1B, triggering the release of adipokines that contribute to 
development of insulin resistance38. This profile co-clustered with other diseases in Module 
Kveler et al.
Page 6
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 15, consisting of metabolic and cardiovascular diseases, an appreciated link39. Enrichment 
analysis of Module 15, as well as its closely associated Module 2, compared to all others 
(Fig. 5d, Online Methods), showed a strong association with the pro-inflammatory adipokine 
RETN and its interaction with monocytes. RETN has been proposed to link the heightened 
inflammatory state in aged and obese individuals to insulin resistance, vascular 
inflammation and LDL cholesterol levels thus contributing to the risk of developing 
metabolic syndrome40. Moreover, elevated RETN directly induces IL6 secretion41, 
contributing to the constant low-grade inflammatory state associated with age and cardio-
vascular conditions42,43. Thus, whereas phenotypically Modules 15 and 2 represent different 
pathological conditions, their molecular commonalities suggest consideration for common 
therapeutic interventions.
Prediction of cytokine-disease associations
Analysis of cytokine profiles across the 188 diseases revealed three predominant cytokine 
classes with respect to disease: disease-specific, module specific and backbone cytokines 
that are associated with the overwhelming majority of tested diseases (Fig. 6a, 
Supplementary Table 17, Online Methods). We noted a high overlap between backbone 
cytokines and those previously identified as hubs (Fig. 2b), suggesting that their pan-disease 
universality stems from the dominant role in the overall inter-cellular interaction network.
We hypothesized that given the unequal within-module knowledge per disease we may be 
able to predict de-novo cytokine-disease associations. For each module, we hierarchically 
clustered disease subsets across all cytokines and systematically predicted cytokine-disease 
associations (Online Methods). This yielded over 466 ranked candidates, stemming from all 
18 modules (Supplementary Table 18). As we assembled the disease immune profiles by 
sampling, we checked the predicted cytokine-disease associations on the full, non-sampled, 
iX knowledgebase, which validated 81% of predicted interactions as true positives, 
suggesting a likely enrichment for unappreciated cytokine-disease associations in the 
remaining set (Supplementary Fig. 7).
To test this, we looked for experimental confirmation of two of the top-rated candidate 
associations, CCL8 and CCL24 in psoriasis, which to the best of our knowledge have not 
been reported. We analyzed two publicly available gene expression data sets for 
psoriasis44,45 and found CCL24 and CCL8 to be significantly upregulated in psoriatic 
lesions vs healthy skin in one45 and both datasets respectively (paired two-sided Wilcoxon 
signed rank test, p-val=0.0048, 2.47e-05 and 1.04e-07 respectively, Fig. 6b and Fig. 6c).
DISCUSSION
Knowledge of the immune inter-cellular network is crucial for understanding immune 
response in health and disease. However, the high system complexity leaves even expert 
researchers struggling to maintain a mental picture of the immune milieu and often leads to 
knowledge biases. We leverage a computational model of inter-cellular interaction network 
knowledge to accelerate discovery of novel interactions and the context in which they occur, 
identify disease-associated immune profiles and build an immune centric disease 
Kveler et al.
Page 7
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 classification. Viewing diseases from such an angle yields a modular disease organization 
with partial overlap with clinical disease classification.
The knowledge we capture is unique in breadth and resolution, yet it can be expanded even 
further. Full-text article support, as well as identification of interactions described beyond 
sentence boundaries and using more complex sentence structures, would boost the volume of 
captured evidence and our ability to obtain more reliable and richer view of interactions, 
with less bias, particularly those that are understudied. We foresee extension of this 
approach to also include additional events such as direct cell-cell interactions and 
downstream inter-cellular signaling to capture complex cellular interaction cascades. The 
extensive meta-data we extract for each article, including MESH terms and bibliographic 
information, together with detailed characterization of the captured interactions, may be 
used for advanced filtering, allowing focus on the most authoritative knowledge. Beyond 
this, we envision that the structured formatting of knowledge we have achieved can be 
leveraged by machine learning applications, using statistical analyses of domain frequency 
and chronological pattern biases to identify potential discrepancies and erroneous claims in 
the published knowledge.
Technological advances now enable to step beyond assaying a narrow set of measures to 
high dimensional phenotyping across the breadth of the immune system at an unprecedented 
scale. This data is primarily analyzed by statistical analysis methods which are geared to 
identify differences and correlations, yet lacking any backend model of the immune system’s 
structure and function, lack in their ability to leverage domain knowledge or interpret what 
these differences mean. This results in an interpretation process which primarily manual, not 
systematized and relies strongly on investigator conjecture. Intelligent systematized 
interpretation requires having a machine-readable map of how immune components are 
connected and a formalized reasoning framework on which one could test hypotheses and 
refine knowledge. Here we built immuneXpresso, a framework that structures and 
standardizes our knowledge of immune intercellular interactions, under many conditions, 
and updates periodically. Its integration with high-dimensional immune data will enable 
paradigms of reasoning over heterogeneous cell populations, making first steps towards 
transforming immunology to systemized, model-based science; a true ‘systems 
immunology’.
ONLINE METHODS
iX pipeline execution environment
The computational pipeline assembling the iX knowledgebase was executed on a high-
performance computing cluster, running a batch job scheduling system with up to 150 
simultaneous jobs allowed. Details of the specific pipeline steps appear below. It typically 
takes roughly 2 weeks to generate the iX database from start to finish for the entire corpus.
Corpus selection, parsing and indexing
Abstracts of all English articles published electronically between 1960 and July 2017 (~16 
million) were downloaded from PubMed using the EFetch utility. For each abstract, we 
Kveler et al.
Page 8
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 extracted additional metadata, such as the article title, year of publication, whether it is a 
review or not and its assigned MESH terms. We focus on the mammalian immune system 
due to the rapid evolution of the immune system46,47, and in particular restrict our analysis 
to abstracts assigned a mouse and/or human MESH term, as these are the prime organisms 
relevant for biomedical research for which information is available. We used the Stanford 
Parser engine48 to split abstract text to sentences and words, perform part-of-speech tagging, 
extract sentence syntactic structure and grammatical relations (i.e. “typed dependencies”). 
This information was then indexed within the Elasticsearch engine (https://www.elastic.co/), 
to allow querying for sub-corpora potentially containing biological entities of interest. 
Moreover, preserving text processing products in the index eliminates the need for future 
time-consuming abstract reparsing, if entity recognition is expanded to support additional 
entity types (e.g., drugs, tissues or pathways).
Entity recognition and ontologies
To identify mentions of biological entities of interest (diseases, cells and cytokines) within 
article abstracts, we applied a dictionary-based approach with dictionaries either adapted 
from standard public knowledgebases or assembled from scratch. For diseases, we first 
queried elasticsearch for articles containing synonym phrases, listed by manually curated 
compilation of UMLS Metathesaurus49, and then post-processed the returned abstracts, 
sentence-by-sentence, to look for the matches and extract precise information for them. In 
particular, for each identified disease mention, we recorded its position in the sentence, the 
particular synonym used, as well as the public Concept Unique Identifier (CUI) and concept 
name, as defined by the SNOMED CT controlled vocabulary of the Metathesaurus 
(Supplementary Tables 8, 13). This post-processing stage drops conditions contained within 
longer disease entities (e.g., “deficiency”, “vitamin deficiency” are dropped, retaining only 
the most specific “vitamin A deficiency” term within the sentence “The essential role of 
vitamin A in kidney development has been demonstrated in vitamin A deficiency and gene 
targeting studies.”). To achieve this, we automatically examined all diseases with 
overlapping sentence positions to retain those with the longest position span and, among 
them, containing the highest number of words.
For cells, initial testing suggested that straightforward lookup of terms contained within the 
official Cell Ontology50 would miss a substantial fraction of cell occurrences in text due to 
the large number of possible forms of describing cell subsets. This pluralism in naming is 
hard to anticipate automatically, both when describing cells by name (e.g. “human CD8+ 
terminally differentiated memory cell” does not appear in the Cell Ontology and would not 
be captured by straightforward dictionary lookup) or by cell surface marker combination 
(e.g. “CD3+CD4+CD45RA+ cell”), whose delineation in the Cell Ontology is limited. To 
resolve this, we expanded the Cell Ontology with manually curated set of synonyms, and, 
more importantly, introduced a small lexicon of seed words that served a starting point, an 
anchor, for cell recognition in sentences (e.g., cell, lymphocyte, macrophage; see 
Supplementary Table 1 for the full list).
Cytokine dictionary was assembled manually, due to lack of an established lexicon 
(Supplementary Note 1).
Kveler et al.
Page 9
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For cell and cytokine entity recognition, we query elasticsearch for articles containing either 
a mention of a cytokine synonym or a cell “seed” word. The focus is on articles mentioning 
either or both cell and/or cytokine, to serve the basis for further relation extraction. Akin to 
diseases, we post-process candidate articles to better characterize the matches and, for cells, 
to expand from seeds to often multi-word hard-to-anticipate cell name phrases, using typed 
dependencies (Supplementary Note 2, Supplementary Fig. 8). In addition, the captured cell 
phrases are mapped to the Cell Ontology (Supplementary Note 3).
Last, following cell and cytokine mention candidate extraction, we analyzed their within-
sentence positions to filter out erroneous identification of overlapping entities from different 
ontologies (e.g., erroneous “granulocyte” or “macrophage” cell matches within the cytokine 
entity “granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor”). For all remaining cell and 
cytokine mentions, we recorded their start and end positions in sentence, the particular 
phrase/synonym used, as well as the representative ID and concept name, assigned either by 
official Cell Ontology for cells or by our manually constructed dictionary for cytokines 
(Supplementary Tables 6, 7; see Supplementary Tables 1, 3 for frequencies of terms captured 
per each cell seed and cytokine lexicon concept respectively).
Relation extraction
Following extraction of articles containing either cytokine synonym or cell seed word 
mentions, we applied sentence-by-sentence post-processing to detect verbs, and when 
possible, link cells, cytokines and verbs into relations. We analyze sentence typed 
dependencies48 to detect semantically related cells and cytokines within sentence boundaries 
and identify the directionality (i.e., a cytokine acting on a cell, like “IL6 promotes Th17 cell 
differentiation”, or the opposite, a cell producing a cytokine, like “T cells secrete IL2”), 
polarity (i.e., positive, negative or neutral effect of the interaction, such as up-regulation, 
inhibition or just alteration of a cell function respectively), as well as the cellular biological 
function impacted by this relation (e.g., cell proliferation or apoptosis elicited by the acting 
cytokine).
Per-sentence relation extraction process included several steps: First, we found verbs in 
sentence by looking for words tagged as VB, VBD, VBG, VBN, VBP or VBZ by part-of-
speech tagger. For each verb we examined all typed dependencies it was governing, 
attempting to resolve verb tense. In particular, we marked verbs tagged as VBN and 
governing either “passive nominal subject”, “passive auxiliary” or “agent” dependencies as 
passive. Second, to allow further relation directionality detection, we performed cell-
cytokine semantic linking by examining all possible entity combinations with a verb located 
between a cell and a cytokine. We considered a candidate (verb, cell, cytokine) tuple as 
semantically related, if the sentence contained a directional dependency tree path from one 
of the elements to the other two. For example, in the sentence “These results suggest that 
IL6 promotes IL22 secreting Th17 subset differentiation” on Fig. 1a, there is a path from the 
verb “promotes” to the cytokine IL6 and to the Th17 cell, allowing (promote, IL6, Th17) 
relation identification. Third, we used the verb tense and the cell/cytokine order in sentence 
to resolve relation directionality. In the example above, since verb tense is active, and the 
cytokine precedes the cell entity, we identify the cytokine as acting on the cell. Finally, we 
Kveler et al.
Page 10
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 applied a manually assembled verb classification lexicon (Supplementary Table 5) to assign 
relation polarity (i.e. positive in the example above). Verb classification lexicon lookup was 
performed using stemmed forms for both lexicon terms and the relation verb.
For the special case of cell-cytokine relations included within cell descriptions, “noun 
phrase-internal relations” (e.g. “IFNγ-producing CD4+ T cells”, “IL2-activated NK cells” or 
“NK cell IFN-gamma”), we applied a tailored rule-based approach (Supplementary Note 4).
If relation directionality could be deduced directly from the verb (e.g., express or stimulate), 
as marked by human curators of the verb lexicon, we preferred the directionality denoted by 
the lexicon to directionality-related decisions made by the algorithm above.
Finally, we applied cell entity-containing noun phrase analysis to detect cellular biological 
functions elicited by the interacting cytokine, such as “migration” in the “GM-CSF 
enhanced reactive oxygen species release and neutrophil migration in vitro”. We examined 
noun phrase words on right of the recognized cell entity to look for one or more matches 
from a manually curated cellular function list.
In terms of terminology, we refer to each detected (cell entity occurrence, cytokine entity 
occurrence, directionality, polarity, cellular function) relation in a sentence as a relation 
evidence record, while summarization of evidence records through representative labels and 
IDs of the entities produces unique candidate (cell, cytokine, directionality) interactions. 
Polarity and cellular function are ignored during summarization. We defined interaction 
context by the disease entities co-occurring in the same abstracts with the identified relation 
evidence records.
Filtering and scoring
We choose to put strong emphasis on precision over recall to ensure benefit and increase 
adoption by the community. To do so, we developed a confidence scoring methodology for 
both individual relation evidence records and summarized interactions, as well as performed 
four filtering stages as follows:
1.
Baseline filtering: For each putative relation evidence record (i.e., a directional 
cell-cytokine relation extracted from an individual sentence), we compiled a set 
of sentence level features to capture the complexity of the sentence from which 
this evidence emerged. These included sentence length, number of typed 
dependencies, entities and relations detected, suspect for negation presence, cell 
ontology mapping score, as well as the distance between the cell and the 
cytokine occurrences. Next, we filtered evidence with potentially lower 
confidence, such as negated sentences or sentences with more than one non-noun 
phrase-internal relation detected or evidence with low cell ontology mapping 
score (Supplementary Note 3). This yielded a “baseline” subset of putative 
interaction evidence records used in the subsequent scoring and filtering stages.
2.
Evidence record confidence scoring: all individual records were assigned 
confidence scores, based on sentence-level features (Supplementary Note 5) to 
allow focus on the highest confident evidence, both when queried by iX web-
Kveler et al.
Page 11
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 based interface users and during analyses, as well as serve a feature for further 
filtering, as detailed below.
3.
Summary scoring: All summarized interaction (i.e., unique cell-cytokine-
directionality triples summarized across the corpus) were assigned with summary 
and enrichment scores (Supplementary Note 6) to allow focusing on highly cited 
interactions.
4.
Lasso-based filtering of summarized interactions: Last, to choose optimal 
parameters for classifying and further filtering of summarized interactions (i.e., 
unique cell-cytokine-directionality triples), we built a lasso logistic regression 
model51. Here, we summarized evidence level features into the interaction level 
across all evidence records, such as minimal/maximal sentence length, minimal/
maximal cell-cytokine entity distance in sentence, the presence of mouse/human 
MESH term annotation in any of the evidence papers and minimal/maximal 
evidence confidence scores described in (2) above. Additionally, we defined 
interaction-level features, such as the overall number of evidence records, the 
summary and enrichment scores defined in (3) above. For all verbs in the training 
set, we added an interaction-level feature reflecting verb presence in any of the 
evidence records, producing 178 features in total. We trained the lasso regression 
model on a set of 203 randomly selected interactions, summarizing 788 baseline 
evidence records identified by iX. We labeled the summarized interaction as 
positive if an only if at least one of its evidence records was manually classified 
as having cell, cytokine and directionality identified correctly. The resulting set 
of manually labeled (cell-cytokine-directionality) triples was used for training 
the lasso model, separately for incoming and outgoing interactions, with leave-
one-out cross-validation. This procedure identified a linear combination of sparse 
feature weightings which we then applied to all putative summarized 
interactions, classifying them as either “true” or “false”. Most prominent features 
included maximal evidence confidence score, having “mouse” MESH assigned 
for evidence record articles, as well as presence of several verbs, such as 
“produce”, “synthesize” and “affect”. We enforced classification of “true” for 
interactions having at least one noun phrase-internal evidence record, due to their 
very high identification precision. Filtering out summarized interactions 
classified as “false”, together with all their evidence records, yielded the 
resulting dataset which we used for further performance evaluation and system-
wide analyses (Supplementary Table 11 for a breakdown of the articles, records, 
entities and interactions remaining at various stages; Supplementary Table 12 for 
PubMed articles for the resulting cell-cytokine relation evidence)
Named Entity Recognition performance evaluation
NER precision for all entity types was assessed by human curators. In addition, for cells, 
both precision and recall were examined by comparing to the gold standard Colorado Richly 
Annotated Full Text (CRAFT) corpus9 (Supplementary Note 7).
Kveler et al.
Page 12
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Relation precision evaluation
Relation extraction precision assessment was based on manual evaluation of randomly 
chosen relation evidence records (Supplementary Note 8).
Reference book network assembly and relation recall evaluation
To the best of our knowledge, no gold standard for directional cell-cytokine relations exist as 
of now. Thus, to assess iX text mining process performance in capturing existing knowledge 
in general, and, evaluate relation recall in particular, 11 human curators manually annotated 
interaction mentions, specifying the cell/cytokine terms and interaction direction from a 
reference book with encyclopedic display of up-to-date knowledge about cytokines and their 
interactions29. These we mapped to the Cell Ontology and the cytokine lexicon respectively 
to summarize and acquire reference IDs consistent with those used in iX. This process 
yielded 725 unique (cell, cytokine, directionality) interaction triples which we compared to 
those captured by iX, while allowing non-exact cell type match along the Cell Ontology 
hierarchy to account for the varying level of granularity of cell type reporting in literature. 
This comparison assessed the proportion of reference book triples captured by iX, as well as 
the number of triples unique to either the reference book or iX. For the latter, to estimate 
false positive proportion, we manually evaluated 200 (cell, cytokine, directionality) triples, 
randomly selected from the iX knowledgebase not covered by the reference book. An 
interaction was classified as false positive by the human curators, if none of the evidence 
records collected by iX for that triple reported the directional interaction in question. 
Following the assessment, we unified the list of interactions identified via literature text-
mining and reference book annotation into a single knowledgebase.
Evaluation of co-occurrence based relation extraction performance
A co-occurrence based approach would not be able to capture interaction directionality, an 
essential characteristic of inter-cellular communication, as our typed dependency-based 
method inherently does. Still, we aimed to assess quality of those easier-to-extract relations. 
To the best of our knowledge, no gold standard for cell-cytokine relations exist as of now. 
Thus, to evaluate co-occurrence based relation extraction performance and contrast it with 
the typed dependency-based approach, we used the interaction network we manually 
assembled from the reference book (see “Reference book network assembly and relation 
recall evaluation” section above) and discarded interaction directionality for both reference-
derived and typed dependency-based interactions (post-lasso filtering, hereafter referred to 
as iX interactions), producing two sets of cell-cytokine pairs to compare with. We linked cell 
and cytokine entities, previously recognized as co-appearing within sentence boundaries, 
into relation evidence records and summarized them into interactions, with the number of 
distinct articles mentioning the relation defining the strength of evidence.
Cytokine degrees and power law fit
The literature-derived nature of the iX network inherently reflects the fact that study of 
cellular interactions is performed at a varying level of granularity, rather than necessarily 
using the most specific cell type. As such, to avoid situations whereby the same interaction 
is counted multiple times when calculating degree distributions, we discarded interactions of 
Kveler et al.
Page 13
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 less specific cell types, if a more specific cell type was known to interact with the same 
cytokine in the same direction. Cytokine degree counts, calculated separately per direction, 
took into account interactions with both hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic cells. Discrete 
power-law and log-normal distribution fit calculations were performed using the poweRlaw 
R package52.
Proteome comparison
We examined the similarity of iX and proteome interactions by inspecting each interaction 
direction separately and comparing cytokine degrees in these data sets. For outgoing 
interactions, we compared the number of distinct interacting cell types captured by iX and 
the number of those reported to express the particular cytokine in the ImmProt 
compendium34. For incoming interactions, we examined the proteomic profiles of cytokine 
receptor genes and approximated cytokine-cell interactions by mapping expressed receptors 
to the respective cytokines, based on the KEGG “Cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction - 
Homo sapiens (human)” (hsa04060) pathway entry53,54. We then compared the resulting 
proteome-derived degrees to those captured by iX for each cytokine. To avoid situations 
whereby the same interaction is counted multiple times due to literature reporting at varying 
levels of cell type granularity, we discarded iX interactions of less specific cell types, if a 
more specific cell type was known to interact with the same cytokine in the same direction. 
Moreover, to focus on similar cellular compartments, we discarded non-hematopoietic cell 
interactions from iX, thereby calculating cytokine degrees across hematopoietic cell types 
only in both data sets.
Novel cell-cytokine interaction prediction
To systematically predict novel interactions between immune cells and cytokines, we 
applied several strategies, separately for each interaction direction:
1.
Based on similarity of global signaling profiles - we assembled a global 
literature-derived Boolean matrix indicating whether an interaction has been 
described for each cell-cytokine pair. We used hierarchical clustering to group 
together cytokines with similar interaction profiles across all cell types and 
hypothesized that non-interacting cell-cytokine pairs located within highly 
connected clusters might actually interact. Therefore, we scanned clusters, 
confined to all possible combinations of column and row dendrogram branches, 
and derived interaction candidates for “gaps” in clusters with at least 85% of 
interacting pairs. We scored the resulting candidates by counting the number of 
clusters that predicted the interaction to be novel.
2.
Based on similarity of cytokine structure or function - we calculated the 
proportion of cytokine family members known from the literature to interact with 
each cell type and derived novel interaction candidates by hypothesizing that 
cells interacting with at least 30% of a cytokine family and with its most 
interactive member (i.e. usually the founding family member), might interact 
with other cytokines in the family as well. We used the aforementioned 
proportion to rank the resulting cell-cytokine interaction candidates.
Kveler et al.
Page 14
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3.
Based on differences between literature-derived knowledge and experimental 
data (Supplementary Note 9)
Manual evaluation of novel cell-cytokine interaction candidates
We evaluated 78 interactions with the best overall scoring (Supplementary Tables 14, 15). 
Candidates were scored by manual evaluation (e.g. we considered predictions made by 
multiple methodologies stronger), however incorporated multiple other criteria in defining 
which candidate interaction to validate. For example, we considered a candidate interaction 
whose reverse directionality was not reported yet, stronger than the one for which it has been 
captured by iX (as that reverse directionality might result from erroneous identification, 
invalidating prediction novelty). A subset of candidate interactions with no evidence 
identified using manual search were then chosen for experimental validation.
Experimental validation of novel cell-cytokine interaction predictions
Whole blood was obtained by consent from healthy volunteers through venipuncture. PBMC 
fraction was separated by a standard centrifugation at 1500RPM on Ficoll gradient without 
brake. For phospho-flow, cells were washed twice with Dulbecco’s PBS and subjected to 
stimulation for 15min with IL34 and CSF1 (Peprotech, Asia) at 100ng/ml. Cells were fixed 
for 10min at RT with 1.6% PFA (Pierce) and stained for 1hr at RT with a mix of metal-
tagged antibodies. Further, cells were permeabilized with ice-cold methanol, followed by 
intracellular staining with metal-tagged antibodies against a phosphorylated form of 
Erk-36/38, p-NFKB, pSTAT1 and pSTAT5. Antibodies for phosphorylated targets were 
obtained from Fluidigm.
For intracellular cytokine staining, PBMC’s were stimulated with PMA (150ng/ml)/
ionomycin(1mM) (Sigma) for 4 hours at 37C in complete medium containing monensin and 
brefeldin-A at 1:1000 dilution (e-bioscience). Extracellular epitopes were stained for one 
hour with metal-tagged antibody mix, cells were fixed with PFA as described above and 
permeabilized for 1 hour on ice with saponin permeabilization buffer (e-Bioscience). 
Intracellular staining of IL7 was performed on ice in saponin-containing buffer. All 
extracellular and cytokine-specific antibodies were conjugated in-house using MaxPar kits 
from Fluidigm or pre-conjugates purchased from Fluidigm. Cells were stained with Cell-ID 
Ir191/193 for viability stain and acquired on a CyTOF1 (DVS, Fluidigm) instrument.
Assembling disease similarity modules
We defined a context for cells, cytokines and cell-cytokine interactions by diseases co-
occurring in the same abstracts, while disease mentions were captured using manually 
curated compilation of the UMLS Metathesaurus49. To identify disease similarity modules, 
we focused on 188 top-cited diseases (co-mentioned in at least 500 papers with cytokines 
and at least 500 papers with hematopoietic cells), that we could classify as pertaining to at 
least one of the eight predefined clinical categories (e.g., disorder of cardiovascular system, 
generalized metabolic disorder, neoplasm of hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic cell 
types, autoimmune diseases and hypersensitivity conditions). To define clinical categories, 
we used SNOMED CT ontology available through UMLS Metathesaurus49 and manually 
expanded its autoimmune disease category with publicly available autoimmune-related 
Kveler et al.
Page 15
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 disease list (http://www.aarda.org/autoimmune-information/list-of-diseases). As a 
preliminary step to module assembly, we extracted a non-specific across-disease control 
profile by repeated paper sampling from the entire corpus of 521,625 disease-HPC and 
438,012 disease-cytokine co-occurrence papers respectively, without limiting to any 
particular context (200 iterations of 200 papers each). We examined cells and cytokines 
mentioned in the sampled papers, assembling the distribution of hits for each HPC and 
cytokine across sampling iterations, to serve a control for further disease-specific profile 
assembly.
Next, for each of the 188 diseases of interest, we assembled its underlying signaling profile 
by applying several steps: (1) performing 200 samplings of 200 random papers from the 
disease-specific sub-corpus, to control for differences in corpus size, followed by extraction 
of the distribution of hits for each cell and cytokine across sampling attempts (2) filtering out 
under-represented entities, that is, those with a hit proportion median lower in disease-
specific than in the control sampling and (3) linking cells and cytokines co-occurring in the 
same disease profile to interacting pairs, using interaction potential captured in the overall 
iX network. Last, we performed unsupervised clustering of the resulting Boolean disease 
profiles (0/1 indicating whether the particular cell, cytokine or pair is a part of the profile) 
using WGCNA R package55,56 to assemble the set of immune-centric disease similarity 
modules based on the binary distance metric.
Disease module signature extraction
To extract features (i.e. cells, cytokines and their interacting pairs) characterizing disease 
modules, we applied a hypergeometric test, independently for each feature, examining 
whether the feature is over-represented in the particular module comparing to the entire set 
of 188 diseases. We corrected for multiple testing using Benjamini-Hochberg.
Novel cytokine-disease association prediction
To test cytokine utilization across conditions, we repeatedly sampled papers from disease-
specific sub-corpora, separately for each of the 188 top-cited diseases (200 iterations of 200 
papers each). We extracted the distribution of paper hit proportions for each cytokine-disease 
pair across iterations, and used the median proportion as the measure of cytokine mention 
frequency in that particular context.
To systematically predict novel cytokine-disease associations, we employed global within-
module immune similarity and applied the following steps separately for each disease 
module: (1) assembly of literature-derived Boolean matrix indicating whether a cytokine 
was a part of the disease profile, for each disease in the module (2) hierarchical clustering to 
group together module diseases displaying similar profiles across all cytokines and 
hypothesizing that an association should exist between currently unlinked cytokine-disease 
pairs within highly linked clusters. Therefore, we scanned clusters, confined to all possible 
combinations of column and row dendrogram branches, and derived cytokine-disease 
association candidates for “gaps” in clusters with at least 30% of linked cytokine-disease 
pairs. We scored the resulting candidates by counting the number of clusters that predicted 
the particular association to be novel.
Kveler et al.
Page 16
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Life Sciences Reporting Summary
Further information on experimental design is available in the Life Sciences Reporting 
Summary.
Data availability
Data of the inter-cellular communication network and disease context is hosted on ImmPort 
with periodic updates and available for query and download with standardization to 
ontologies at www.immunexpresso.org.
Code availability
Analysis code available upon request.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank A. Butte and M. Davis for fruitful discussions and advice, N. Geifman for assistance with cytokine 
ontology development, D. Dougall for contribution to the cell lexicon, members of the Shen-Orr lab for reference 
book curation, D. Cohen for the high-performance computing cluster support, R. Reichart for Text Mining insights, 
P. Dunn and S. Bhattacharya for the user interface development support. This work was supported by the National 
Institutes of Health, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases [BISC contract number 
HHSN272201200028C] and the Rappaport Family Institute for Research in the Medical Sciences award to SSO.
References
1. Maecker HT, et al. New tools for classification and monitoring of autoimmune diseases. Nat Rev 
Rheumatol. 8:317–28.2012; [PubMed: 22647780] 
2. Hoffmann R, Valencia A. Implementing the iHOP concept for navigation of biomedical literature. 
Bioinformatics. 21:252–258.2005; 
3. Jimeno A, et al. Assessment of disease named entity recognition on a corpus of annotated sentences. 
BMC Bioinformatics. 9:1–10.2008; [PubMed: 18173834] 
4. Leaman R, Dogan RI, Lu Z. DNorm: Disease name normalization with pairwise learning to rank. 
Bioinformatics. 29:2909–2917.2013; [PubMed: 23969135] 
5. McDonald RT, et al. An entity tagger for recognizing acquired genomic variations in cancer 
literature. Bioinformatics. 20:3249–3251.2004; [PubMed: 15180929] 
6. Tanenblatt M, Coden A, Sominsky I. The ConceptMapper Approach to Named Entity Recognition. 
Proc Seventh Conf Int Lang Resour Eval Lr. :546–551.2010
7. Funk C, et al. Large-scale biomedical concept recognition: an evaluation of current automatic 
annotators and their parameters. BMC Bioinformatics. 15:59.2014; [PubMed: 24571547] 
8. Shah NH, et al. Comparison of concept recognizers for building the Open Biomedical Annotator. 
BMC Bioinformatics. 10:S14.2009; 
9. Bada M, et al. Concept annotation in the CRAFT corpus. BMC Bioinformatics. 13:161.2012; 
[PubMed: 22776079] 
10. Kim JD, Ohta T, Tateisi Y, Tsujii J. GENIA corpus - A semantically annotated corpus for bio-
textmining. Bioinformatics. 192003; 
11. Arighi CN, et al. Overview of the BioCreative III Workshop. BMC Bioinformatics. 12:1–9.2011; 
[PubMed: 21199577] 
12. Kim J, Ohta T, Pyysalo S, Kano Y. Overview of BioNLP 2009 shared task on event extraction. 
Process Shar Task. :1–9.2009
Kveler et al.
Page 17
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 13. Kim, JD, , et al. Proceedings of the BioNLP Shared Task 2011 Workshop. Association for 
Computational Linguistics; 2011. Overview of BioNLP Shared Task 2011; 1–6. 
14. Kim JD, Ohta T, Tsujii J. Corpus annotation for mining biomedical events from literature. BMC 
Bioinformatics. 9:1–25.2008; [PubMed: 18173834] 
15. Ananiadou S, Pyysalo S, Tsujii J, Kell DB. Event extraction for systems biology by text mining the 
literature. Trends Biotechnol. 28:381–390.2010; [PubMed: 20570001] 
16. Pyysalo S, et al. Event extraction across multiple levels of biological organization. Bioinformatics. 
28:575–581.2012; 
17. Mahmood ASMA, Wu TJ, Mazumder R, Vijay-Shanker K. DiMeX: A text mining system for 
mutation-disease association extraction. PLoS One. 11:1–26.2016; 
18. Lee K, et al. BRONCO: Biomedical entity Relation ONcology COrpus for extracting gene-variant-
disease-drug relations. Database. 2016:1–13.2016; 
19. Verspoor KM, Heo GE, Kang KY, Song M. Establishing a baseline for literature mining human 
genetic variants and their relationships to disease cohorts. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 162016; 
20. Liu H, Hunter L, Kešelj V, Verspoor K. Approximate Subgraph Matching-Based Literature Mining 
for Biomedical Events and Relations. PLoS One. 82013; 
21. Björne, J, , et al. Proceedings of the Workshop on Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language 
Processing: Shared Task. Association for Computational Linguistics; 2009. Extracting Complex 
Biological Events with Rich Graph-based Feature Sets; 10–18. 
22. Rzhetsky A, Seringhaus M, Gerstein MB. Getting started in text mining: part two. PLoS Comput 
Biol. 5:e1000411.2009; [PubMed: 19649304] 
23. Zhu F, et al. Biomedical text mining and its applications in cancer research. J Biomed Inform. 
46:200–11.2013; [PubMed: 23159498] 
24. Jensen LJ, Saric J, Bork P. Literature mining for the biologist: from information retrieval to 
biological discovery. Nat Rev Genet. 7:119–129.2006; [PubMed: 16418747] 
25. Goh KI, et al. The human disease network. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America. 104:8685–8690.2007; [PubMed: 17502601] 
26. Linghu B, Snitkin ES, Hu Z, Xia Y, Delisi C. Genome-wide prioritization of disease genes and 
identification of disease-disease associations from an integrated human functional linkage 
network. Genome Biol. 10:R91.2009; [PubMed: 19728866] 
27. Hu G, Agarwal P. Human disease-drug network based on genomic expression profiles. PLoS One. 
4:e6536.2009; [PubMed: 19657382] 
28. Kilpinen S, et al. Systematic bioinformatic analysis of expression levels of 17,330 human genes 
across 9,783 samples from 175 types of healthy and pathological tissues. Genome Biol. 
9:R139.2008; [PubMed: 18803840] 
29. Dembic, Z. The Cytokines of the Immune System: The Role of Cytokines in Disease Related to 
Immune Response. Elsevier Science; 2015. 
30. Bhattacharya S, et al. ImmPort: disseminating data to the public for the future of immunology. 
Immunol Res. 58:234–9.2014; [PubMed: 24791905] 
31. Edwards AM, et al. Too many roads not taken. Nature. 470:163–165.2011; [PubMed: 21307913] 
32. Barabasi AL, Albert R. Emergence of scaling in random networks. 509:11.1999; 
33. Barabási AL. Scale-free networks: a decade and beyond. Science. 325:412–413.2009; [PubMed: 
19628854] 
34. Rieckmann JC, et al. Social network architecture of human immune cells unveiled by quantitative 
proteomics. Nat Immunol. 2017; doi: 10.1038/ni.3693
35. Heng TSP, Painter MW. The Immunological Genome Project: networks of gene expression in 
immune cells. Nat Immunol. 9:1091–4.2008; [PubMed: 18800157] 
36. Moller P, Bohm M, Czarnetszki BM, Schadendorf D. Interleukin-7. Biology and implications for 
dermatology. Exp Dermatol. 5:129–137.1996; [PubMed: 8840152] 
37. Lin H, et al. Discovery of a Cytokine and Its Receptor by Functional Screening of the Extracellular 
Proteome. Science (80-). 320:807–811.2008; 
38. Asghar A, Sheikh N. Role of immune cells in obesity induced low grade inflammation and insulin 
resistance. Cell Immunol. 2017; doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2017.03.001
Kveler et al.
Page 18
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 39. Peter G, et al. Multifactorial Intervention and Cardiovascular Disease in Patients with Type 2 
Diabetes. N Engl J Med. 348:383–393.2003; [PubMed: 12556541] 
40. Park HK, Kwak MK, Kim HJ, Ahima RS. Linking resistin, inflammation, and cardiometabolic 
diseases. Korean J Intern Med. 32:239–247.2017; [PubMed: 28192887] 
41. Hillenbrand A, Weiss M, Knippschild U, Wolf AM, Huber-Lang M. Sepsis-Induced Adipokine 
Change with regard to Insulin Resistance. Int J Inflam. 2012:972368.2012; [PubMed: 22272381] 
42. Shen-Orr SS, et al. Defective Signaling in the JAK-STAT Pathway Tracks with Chronic 
Inflammation and Cardiovascular Risk in Aging Humans. Cell Syst. 3:374–384.e4.2016; 
[PubMed: 27746093] 
43. Furman D, et al. Expression of specific inflammasome gene modules stratifies older individuals 
into two extreme clinical and immunological states. Nat Med. 23:174–184.2017; [PubMed: 
28092664] 
44. Russell CB, et al. Gene expression profiles normalized in psoriatic skin by treatment with 
brodalumab, a human anti-IL-17 receptor monoclonal antibody. J Immunol. 192:3828–3836.2014; 
[PubMed: 24646743] 
45. Yao Y, et al. Type I interferon: potential therapeutic target for psoriasis? PLoS One. 3:e2737.2008; 
[PubMed: 18648529] 
46. Hughes, AL. eLS. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2001. Vertebrate Immune System: Evolution. 
47. Du Pasquier L. The immune system of invertebrates and vertebrates. Comp Biochem Physiol Part 
B Biochem Mol Biol. 129:1–15.2001; 
48. De Marneffe M-C, MacCartney B, Manning CD. Generating typed dependency parses from phrase 
structure parses. Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC 2006). 2006
49. Bodenreider O. The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS): integrating biomedical 
terminology. Nucleic Acids Res. 32:D267–D270.2004; [PubMed: 14681409] 
50. Bard J, Rhee SY, Ashburner M. An ontology for cell types. Genome Biol. 6:R21.2005; [PubMed: 
15693950] 
51. Tibshirani R. Regression Shrinkage and Selection Via the Lasso. J R Stat Soc Ser B. 58:267–
288.1994; 
52. Gillespie CS. Fitting Heavy Tailed Distributions: The {poweRlaw} Package. J Stat Softw. 64:1–
16.2015; 
53. Kanehisa M, Goto S. KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 
28:27–30.2000; [PubMed: 10592173] 
54. Kanehisa M, Sato Y, Kawashima M, Furumichi M, Tanabe M. KEGG as a reference resource for 
gene and protein annotation. Nucleic Acids Res. 44:D457–62.2016; [PubMed: 26476454] 
55. Langfelder P, Horvath S. WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation network analysis. BMC 
Bioinformatics. 5592008; 
56. Langfelder P, Horvath S. Fast {R} Functions for Robust Correlations and Hierarchical Clustering. J 
Stat Softw. 46:1–17.2012; [PubMed: 22837731] 
Kveler et al.
Page 19
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. immuneXpresso assembles a system level directional inter-cellular interaction network
(a) Pubmed abstracts were mined to identify cell, cytokine and context entities and map 
them to ontologies. Semantically linked cells, cytokines and verbs were extracted and 
characterized to assign interaction directionality, polarity, and the biological function this 
interaction yields. Results were scored and filtered to yield a global machine-readable view 
of immune inter-cellular signaling across a large breadth of conditions. (b) Evaluation of 
cell-cytokine relation extraction precision,. 590 randomly selected evidence records (i.e., 
relations extracted from individual sentences) were evaluated by a human curator, post 
machine learning based filtering, to assess entity recognition performance, cell-cytokine 
relation extraction, including detection of verb, directionality, polarity and, where relevant. 
Kveler et al.
Page 20
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 biological function. (c) Venn diagram depicting the precision (90%) of literature-derived 
cell-cytokine interactions (i.e. cell-cytokine-directionality triples) and coverage (76%) of the 
manually annotated reference book29. (d) Evaluation of precision and recall of co-
occurrence based relation extraction. Cell-cytokine pairs, linked by co-occurrence within 
sentence boundaries, are filtered by their evidence strength (x-axis). Coverage of relations 
derived from the reference book and from the semantic parsing approach (“iX interactions”) 
is shown, as well as the percentage (or amount as a dotted line, right y-axis) of co-occurring 
pairs appearing in none of the resources above, likely reflecting false positive rate.
Kveler et al.
Page 21
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. System level characteristic of inter-cellular information flow in the literature-derived 
network
(a) Sankey plots showing bi-partite information flow between cellular secretion of cytokine 
families and those cytokine families affecting a variety of cell subsets. (b) A sorted 
histogram illustrating the number of unique cell types affected by each of the 144 cytokines 
(incoming interactions). Second y-axis displays the information as a cumulative sum (blue 
line). 50% of incoming edges are attributed to only 23 (16%) cytokines (grey area). 
Cytokine family classification appears as coloring of individual members along x-axis. (c) 
Kveler et al.
Page 22
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Scatter plot highlighting the strong correlation in cytokine degrees between incoming and 
outgoing directions (n=145 cytokines, r=0.86 pval <0.001 Pearson’s).
Kveler et al.
Page 23
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Immune inter-cellular network knowledge is biased and far from saturated
(a) Unequal information gain within cytokine families. Representative plot using the CC 
chemokine subfamily of the incoming interaction knowledge gain over time, in a 5-year 
window from initial date of the chemokine’s identification in the text. Colored lines 
represent individual chemokine family members and display the total number of distinct cell 
types known as interacting with the chemokine by the respective year (x-axis). (b) The 
number of distinct cell types a cytokine is known to act on (x-axis) is positively correlated 
with the number of new cytokine-cell interactions added in recent years (y-axis; n=134 
cytokines, r=0.76 pval<0.001, Pearson’s), yet up-and-coming hubs, such as IL22, are 
identifiable as well. (c) Cytokine degrees in the iX knowledgebase (incoming interactions, 
restricted to hematopoietic cells) are positively correlated with those derived from the 
characterization of cytokine receptors on cells in the ImmProt project34 (n=82 cytokines 
present in both datasets, ρ=0.38 pval<0.001, spearman). Cytokines below the line suggest 
putative currently unknown interactions.
Kveler et al.
Page 24
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Prediction and validation of cell-cytokine interactions
(a) Diagram illustrating three different methodologies for predicting novel cell-cytokine 
interactions: (1) by unsupervised clustering and filling in of missing ‘gaps’ (2) through 
supervised analysis of cytokine families (3) by comparison to measured external mRNA or 
proteome data. (b) Manual evaluation of the predicted high-confidence interactions using 
free literature search. (c) IL7 production by monocyte, dendritic cell and CD8 T cell subsets 
of freshly isolated PBMC’s from 2 healthy donors (PMA/ionomycin, 4hrs) by intra-cellular 
cytokine staining (CyTOF).. (d) Heatmap summary of pNFKB and pSTAT5 phosphorylation 
in CD8+ effector memory cell subsets, triggered by IL34 stimulation (100ng/ml, 15min) of 
freshly isolated human PBMCs.
Kveler et al.
Page 25
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Global interaction profile analysis across diseases
(a) Diagram illustrating the methodology of disease similarity module extraction: for 188 
top-cited diseases, papers co-mentioning the disease either with cytokines or with 
hematopoietic cells were repeatedly sampled to identify cells and cytokines mentioned 
frequently in the particular context. Those entities, together with their potential interactions 
(as reported in the overall iX knowledgebase), form disease signaling profiles, used to build 
a global disease similarity map. (b) The immune-centered global map of disease similarities 
and differences, assembled in an unsupervised manner for 188 top-cited diseases. Nodes in 
Kveler et al.
Page 26
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 graph correspond to diseases (colored by their known clinical disease categories), edges to 
significant correlation between diseases. Modules are colored by the most abundant 
SNOMED category, demonstrating large overlap between module separation and clinical 
classification. (c) iX extracts context-specific cells (purple), cytokines (orange) and 
interactions for a variety of conditions (here Diabetes mellitus type 2, as reported in the 
overall iX knowledgebase), providing a global view of the condition-specific immune 
signaling and emphasizing its key players. In red are cells and cytokines forming the 
sampling-based disease immune profile. (d) Circos plot showing enriched module signatures 
(cell, cytokine and interactions) compared to background for cardiovascular and metabolic 
syndrome diseases (Modules 2 and 15).
Kveler et al.
Page 27
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. iX informs less studied diseases
(a) Heatmap showing cytokine mention frequencies across 188 top-cited diseases. Color 
scale indicates the median percentage (log2-transformed) of paper hits for each cytokine 
(rows) in the context of each disease (columns, sorted by the unsupervised module 
classification), across 200 paper sampling iterations. An unequal immune system utilization 
is observed with respect to three cytokine classes: backbone cytokines highly observed 
across most modules, module specific and those specifically enriched in select diseases. 
Class examples highlighted in red. Annotation tracks on left indicate cytokine degrees. (b, c) 
CCL8 is differentially expressed in psoriasis. Shown is the expression of CCL8 in healthy 
skin versus lesion biopsies of psoriatic patients at baseline (paired two-sided Wilcoxon 
Kveler et al.
Page 28
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 signed rank test, p-val=2.47e-05 and 1.04e-07, n=24 and n=28 independent samples). Box-
plot elements: center line, median; box limits, first to third quartile (Q1 to Q3); whiskers, 
extend to the most extreme data point within 1.5 × IQR from the box; data points.
Kveler et al.
Page 29
Nat Biotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 December 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
