 ARTICLE
OPEN
Long-term reduction in hyperglycemia in advanced type 1
diabetes: the value of induced aerobic glycolysis with BCG
vaccinations
Willem M. Kühtreiber1, Lisa Tran1, Taesoo Kim1, Michael Dybala1, Brian Nguyen1, Sara Plager1, Daniel Huang
1, Sophie Janes1,
Audrey Defusco1, Danielle Baum1, Hui Zheng2 and Denise L. Faustman1
Mycobacterium are among the oldest co-evolutionary partners of humans. The attenuated Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus Calmette
Guérin (BCG) strain has been administered globally for 100 years as a vaccine against tuberculosis. BCG also shows promise as
treatment for numerous inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. Here, we report on a randomized 8-year long prospective
examination of type 1 diabetic subjects with long-term disease who received two doses of the BCG vaccine. After year 3, BCG
lowered hemoglobin A1c to near normal levels for the next 5 years. The BCG impact on blood sugars appeared to be driven by a
novel systemic and blood sugar lowering mechanism in diabetes. We observe a systemic shift in glucose metabolism from oxidative
phosphorylation to aerobic glycolysis, a state of high glucose utilization. Confirmation is gained by metabolomics, mRNAseq, and
functional assays of cellular glucose uptake after BCG vaccinations. To prove BCG could induce a systemic change to promote
accelerated glucose utilization and impact blood sugars, murine data demonstrated reduced blood sugars and aerobic induction in
non-autoimmune mice made chemically diabetic. BCG via epigenetics also resets six central T-regulatory genes for genetic re-
programming of tolerance. These findings set the stage for further testing of a known safe vaccine therapy for improved blood
sugar control through changes in metabolism and durability with epigenetic changes even in advanced Type 1 diabetes.
npj Vaccines  (2018) 3:23 ; doi:10.1038/s41541-018-0062-8
INTRODUCTION
The bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine is one of the oldest
vaccines in the world, developed for tuberculosis (TB) protection
and for early stage bladder cancer therapy. BCG is an attenuated
version of the virulent
Mycobacterium
bovis. The avirulent
Mycobacterium bovis is a close relative of pathologic Mycobacter-
ium leprae and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The co-evolution of
humans and Mycobacterium is not recent but extends back some
90,000 years.1 This is the longest time span for any identified
pathogen co-evolution. It is essential to understand the adaptive
changes of the human genome to such prolonged coevolution
and the impact of re-introduction of this attenuated form of this
microorganism.2
The past 10 years has seen a surge of clinical trials that re-
introduce BCG for a diversity of autoimmune, allergic, and induced
adaptive immune responses to childhood infections.3–11 In multi-
ple sclerosis, BCG halts new onset disease, yet the clinical effect is
most dramatic nearly 5 years later.12 In type 1 diabetes (T1D),
three BCG vaccines administered in childhood lowered the
incidence of T1D by age 12.10 In a Phase I trial with multi-
dosing BCG in long-term T1Ds promising biomarker responses
such as increased beneficial T-regulatory (Treg) cells and transient
restoration of small amounts of pancreatic insulin were observed,
but at the end of the 20-week trial, the established clinical marker
for disease reversal, lowered hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), was not
observed.4 BCG vaccination confers a survival advantage in low
birthweight infants against mortality from a diversity of infections
unrelated to tuberculosis, and BCG vaccinations in healthy
populations confer long term survival advantages.13–16
Many autoimmune NOD (non-obese diabetic) murine studies
have shown a beneficial effect of BCG or CFA (Complete Freund’s
Adjuvant) in preventing the onset of autoimmune diabetes and
even reversing full blown established disease in mice.17,18 The
NOD mouse is a well-studied spontaneous model of autoimmune
diabetes and mimics some but not all the features of human
disease.19 Prior data has also taught us important lessons on BCG
dosing and the timing of BCG administrations in BCG effi-
cacy.17,18,20–24 The commonly
used NOD
mouse
model of
spontaneous autoimmune diabetes illustrates the value of BCG
for both disease progression, early disease treatment, and
remarkably even disease reversal in advanced murine diabetes,
an uncommon result for immune interventions.17,18,20–22 If NOD
mice are administered BCG after the NOD mice exhibit signs of
diabetes, i.e., pre-diabetes, new onset diabetes, or full-blown
diabetes, the BCG permanently cures diabetes. In contrast,
administration of BCG at birth in diabetes-prone humans or
NOD mice as a single injection has no or a detrimental effect, so
the disease must be present and the underlying autoimmune
state allows BCG to be effective in mice and humans when the
autoimmunity is ongoing in genetically prone models17,18,20–24
The lessons learned from mouse studies include the increased
efficacy of multi-dosing BCG when the disease is apparent and the
Received: 13 November 2017 Revised: 25 April 2018 Accepted: 15 May 2018
1Immunobiology Laboratories, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Bldg 149, 13th Street, Boston, MA 02116, USA and 2Department of Biostatistics,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA
Correspondence: Denise L. Faustman (faustman@helix.mgh.harvard.edu)
www.nature.com/npjvaccines
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
 variable efficacy of different BCG strains.25 These lessons have
been mirrored by human studies as well. A single dose of the
Moreau BCG substrain appears to decrease new onset human
diabetes progression, but three subsequent human studies using
less potent BCG strains, such as TICE, demonstrated no clinical
effect in humans, at least with the limited follow-up times utilized
in these studies.26–28 The TICE strain of BCG for instance is known
to have poor immune regulatory properties in both NOD mice and
humans and in culture experiments has weakened efficacy for TNF
and
NFkB
induction.27
This
published
data
illustrates
the
importance of BCG dose, BCG strain, and timing of BCG
administration as critical for murine autoimmune disease reversal
and maybe even early signs of efficacy or failed efficacy in human
type 1 diabetes.
The rational of this study was to investigate in established T1D
subjects (average disease duration of 19 years), the possible long
term immune, metabolic and clinical benefits of two doses of BCG
vaccine as the Connaught strain (given two times, 4 weeks apart).
This 8-year-long Phase 1 trial shows the long-term lowering of
blood sugars after year 3 measured by HbA1c. The lowering of
blood sugars to a range near normal was maintained for the next
5 years of monitoring. We mechanistically dissect these durable
clinical results. Repeat BCG appears to reset the immune system
by de-methylating in CD4 T cells all six key T-regulatory genes by
8 weeks, resulting in enhanced mRNA expression, according to
epigenetic analysis. T regulatory cells are critical for immune
balance and are believed to facilitate a decrease in inflammation
and to prevent or slow the autoimmune process. BCG appears to
switch
the
immune
system
of
T1Ds
from
high
oxidative
phosphorylation to augmented early aerobic glycolysis, a systemic
metabolic shift that occurs gradually and allows cells to consume
in a regulated fashion large amounts of glucose to safely lower
hyperglycemia to near normal levels. Taken together, the findings
suggest the benefit of targeted reintroduction with attenuated
Mycobacterium bovis as a BCG vaccine for blood sugar control
through epigenetics and altered metabolism.
RESULTS
This is a study of 282 human research participants for both in vivo
BCG vaccine clinical trial studies (n = 52) and in vitro mechanistic
studies (n = 230). Of these total research subjects 211 had type 1
diabetes and 71 were non-diabetic control subjects. The details of
all subjects and corresponding clinical subject data are depicted in
Supplementary Table S1.
Long-term and stable blood sugar reduction with BCG
vaccinations
BCG-vaccinated T1Ds were compared to a placebo group as well
as a reference group of T1Ds receiving standard of care at the
Massachusetts General Hospital in part reported after 20 weeks in
the Phase I double blinded clinical trial4 (Supplementary Table
S1b). We extended this trial with 8 year long monitoring
(Supplementary Table 1b—8 year long subjects) and additional
in vivo BCG treated subjects (Supplementary Table S1a—up to 5
year long subjects).
The 8 year long followed and BCG-treated T1Ds showed a
reduction in HbA1c levels of greater than 10% after year 03, 18%
at year 04, and the HbA1c remained low for the next 5 years (p =
0.0002 at year 8) (Fig. 1a, b). Subject numbers and traits are given
in Supplementary Table S1a, S2. In contrast, the placebo group (n
= 3) and the reference T1D groups (n = 40) had consistently
higher HbA1c over the entire monitoring period of 8 years and 5
years, respectively (Fig. 1a, b, Supplementary Table S2). The
efficacy of BCG was also apparent with raw HbA1c values, which
show the BCG-treated TIDs by year 8 declined to a HbA1c value of
6.65% (Supplementary Table S2, Fig. 1b). BCG treatment subjects
with the improved and tight blood sugar control demonstrated
blood sugar stability and lowered blood sugar persistently for 5
continuous years after the initial drop in values. Semi-annual
surveys confirmed that during year 03 to year 08 after BCG
vaccinations there were no reports of severe hypoglycemia by any
patient, even with lowered HbA1Cs near the normal range, and no
change in their care as it related to new insulin pumps or
continuous glucose monitoring devices. The placebo group of
subjects continued to show hypoglycemia events during the same
time periods of monitoring.
We presumed at this point that the return of near normogly-
cemia in the BCG treated human T1D (8 year long followed
subjects) was by the same mechanism as was observed in the
NOD mouse treated with BCG, i.e., restored insulin from pancreas
regeneration. In the genetically prone non-obese diabetic (NOD)
mouse model of type 1 diabetes, the mechanism of stable blood
sugar restoration after BCG is driven in large part by the
regeneration of insulin-secreting islets in the pancreas.17,18 As
previously published, the elevations in tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
from the BCG vaccine stimulate cytotoxic T cell death and
beneficial Treg expansion.4,29,30 We sought proof of a similar
mechanism in humans of pancreatic islet regeneration as the
cause for restored blood sugar control by measuring endogenous
insulin secretion through the co-secreted C-peptide levels. C-
peptide is co-secreted with insulin from the pancreas and can be
used to selectively detect the secretion of endogenous insulin.
Insulin levels cannot be used to look for pancreas regeneration
since all subjects take exogenous insulin.
Stimulated C-peptide was measured with a glucagon challenge
in the BCG and placebo type 1 diabetic subject groups at three
time points (pre-BCG, post-BCG 12 weeks, and 208 weeks) to look
for pancreas recovery or regeneration (Fig. 1c, Supplementary
Table S1b). C-peptide is co-secreted with insulin from the pancreas
and can be used to selectively detect the secretion of endogenous
insulin. Insulin levels cannot be used to look for pancreas
regeneration since all subjects take exogenous insulin.
In this study we observe the long term and stable lowering of
blood sugars in humans after BCG vaccinations. In the human, this
stable blood sugar control was not driven primarily in these
human subjects by pancreas recovery or regeneration. The human
pancreas after BCG even at four years after repeat vaccinations did
not secrete significant insulin as clinically measured by C-peptide.
The mechanism for lowered HbA1c values was not equivalent to
the NOD diabetic mouse pancreas regeneration after BCG
treatment, despite equally restored and long term improved
blood sugar control. The BCG-treated type 1 diabetic subjects at
year 4 after glucagon challenge had a negligible to no return of
clinically significant C-peptide. The C-peptide values after gluca-
gon were in the range of 2–3 pmol/L of C-peptide (Fig. 1c), but
with no known clinical significance. Therefore we concluded that
BCG vaccinations did not induce a clinically meaningful return of
C-peptide levels in the pancreas by regeneration, as observed in
the NOD mouse model of diabetes17,18 Thus pancreas rescue or
regeneration could not fully account for the persistent and long
term HbA1c lowering in humans receiving BCG.
After BCG vaccinations, regulatory T cell signature genes are de-
methylated in vivo resulting in enhanced mRNA expression
The beneficial effect of BCG in humans, as previously documented
in mouse experiments, could be due to an induction of the
beneficial Treg cells. The co-evolution of Mycobacterium and
humans has resulted in Mycobacterium-modulated host cell
machinery, including de-novo host gene expression by de-
methylation of important immune response genes.31–34 Chronic
infections by Mycobacterium evade host recognition on a cellular
level by measurable increases in Treg cell numbers and cellular
functions.35 Treg cells are believed deficient in numbers or
Long-term lowering of blood sugars with BCG through aerobic glycolysis
W M Kühtreiber et al.
2
npj Vaccines (2018)  23 
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
1234567890():,;
 function in diverse autoimmune diseases and induction through
BCG therapy would be a first step in restoring the immune balance
that has been quantified by only flow cytometric methods after
BCG.4,36 Transcriptional start site (TSS) clusters are located within
the Treg-specific demethylation region (TSDR) that is critical for
Treg function and that are modulated by de-methylation as was
monitored in this study (Supplementary Table S3).
BCG’s impact on methylation was studied at various methyla-
tion sites of the following Treg signature genes: Foxp3, TNFRSF18,
IL2RA, IKZF2, IKZF4 and CTLA4. T1D subjects were studied before
and after (at week 8) in vivo BCG dosing (Supplementary Table
S1a). CD4 cells were isolated and genomic DNA was prepared,
bisulphite-converted, and then analyzed on Illumina Infinium
Human Methylation450 BeadChips (Fig. 2a, Supplementary Fig.
S1). Results are expressed in Fig. 2a as change in methylation (after
BCG treatment minus before BCG treatment) of the multiple
methylation target sites for each gene represented on the
BeadChip (Mean ± SEM) or as total change in methylation of all
targets per gene (Supplementary Fig. S1). After BCG treatment, the
majority of the targets of all six signature genes showed
demethylation of most of the methylation control sites. For
Foxp3, the false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted p-value was 0.004;
for TNFRSF18, the FDR adjusted p-value was 0.0008; for CTLA4, the
FDR adjusted p-value was >0.51; for IL2RA, the FDR adjusted p-
value was 0.003; for IKZF2, the FDR adjusted p-value was 0.10; for
IKZF4, the FDR adjusted p-value was 0.04.
To confirm the observed in vivo epigenetic de-methlyation in
the many Treg signature genes after BCG administration, we next
profiled the ability of BCG to reciprocally turn on mRNA levels of
the same genes. Using transcription profiling we confirmed that
the BCG-induced demethylation at the gene level did cause
increased mRNA expression of the Treg signature genes; the
methylation trends inversely correlated with the mRNA expression
levels (Fig. 2b). T1D peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) were
cultured for 48 h. with and without BCG. For comparison, averaged
data across all methylation sites per Treg signature gene also
inversely correlated with increased mRNA for the gene products
(Supplementary Fig S1).
A novel mechanism for treatment of hyperglycemia: induction of
the early steps of aerobic glycolysis
Two clinical methods are typically used for improved blood sugar
control: increased insulin delivery or decreased peripheral insulin
resistance. Because long-term monitoring after BCG treatment
failed to show a substantial increase in pancreatic insulin secretion
Fig. 1
Long-term improvement of glycemic control in T1Ds after BCG treatment. a, b Glucose control was tracked through measurements of
HbA1c. HbA1c levels in the control T1D groups (saline-treated placebo group n = 3 or the untreated reference group n = 40) remained
unchanged over the 8-year observation period (placebo) or 5-year observation period (untreated reference group) as measured by a %
change (a) or as raw HbA1c values (b) (p = 0.73). The percentage change was calculated from pre-trial values to post-trial values measured
every 6 months or yearly. In contrast, a decrease in HbA1c for the 8 year long followed BCG-treated patients uniformly occurred after year 03
and thereafter showed sustained lowering, with an 18% decrease from baseline at year 04. After the drop in HbA1c values in the BCG-treated
group, HbA1c values remained lower for the next 5 years of monitoring and was statistically different from placebo (p = 0.0002 at year 8) and
from reference subjects (p = 0.02 at year 5). In short, relative (percent) change rate of HbA1c was compared using the linear mixed effects
model with subject-level random effects. The change rates in the control, placebo and BCG groups were compared based on the statistical
significance of the interaction term between time and group indicator in the linear mixed effects model. The subject traits and sample sizes
are given in Supplementary Figure S1a, S1b. c An in vivo glucagon stimulation test was performed to induce pancreatic insulin secretion as
measured with C-peptide assays at trial enrollment (baseline), at 12 weeks and at 208 weeks after two BCG vaccinations in 6 T1D subjects
(Supplementary Table S1b—8 year long treated subjects). The BCG-treated patients showed a clinically negligible, but statistically significant,
return of stimulated serum C-peptide levels upon glucagon administration only at 208 weeks (upper panel), whereas the C-peptide response
to glucagon in the reference-T1D and placebo-T1D groups remained unchanged (lower panel). For the glucagon stimulation test statistics, we
used the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test. On all 8 year followed subjects with the data presented at year 04 i.e., 208 weeks. Figure inserts at
208 weeks after treatment highlight the minor changes and the standard error bars
Long-term lowering of blood sugars with BCG through aerobic glycolysis
W M Kühtreiber et al.
3
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
npj Vaccines (2018)  23 
 Fig. 2
BCG treatment reduces DNA methylation and upregulates expression of Treg signature genes. a CD4 T cells were isolated from T1D
patients before and after BCG treatment (n = 3 subjects; Supplementary Table S1a). DNA was isolated, bisulfite converted and analyzed on the
Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation 450 BeadChip array. The data shows that after BCG treatment all six Treg signature genes are
demethylated at multiple CpG methylation sites. For a table of the CpG sites used please see Supplementary Table S3. This data compares the
methylation state in BCG-treated diabetics 8 weeks after administration of the two BCG vaccines against their pre-treatment baseline. For the
Foxp3 gene, all nine methylation sites on the BeadChip were significantly demethylated after BCG treatment (FDR adjusted p = 0.004). For the
TNFRSF18 gene (also known as GITR receptor), 16 out of 17 methylation sites on the Beadchip were demethylated after BCG and one site was
unchanged (FDR adjusted p = 0.0008). For the IL2RA gene all 9 methylation sites on the chip showed decreases in methylation after BCG
treatment (FDR adjusted p = 0.003). For the IKZF2 gene, also known as IKAROS family zinc finger 2 (Helios), there are 17 sites on the chip. After
BCG treatment, 13 of those sites were de-methylated, 1 site showed augmented methylation, and 3 sites were unchanged. Overall,
demethylation of the IKZF2 sites after BCG treatment was not statistically significant with FDR adjusted p = 0.106. For the IKZF4 gene, also
known as IKAROS family zinc finger 4 (Eos), there are 11 methylation sites represented on the chip. After BCG treatment, 8 sites were de-
methylated and 3 sites showed augmented methylation. Overall the IKZF4 sites were significantly demethylated after BCG treatment (FDR
adjusted p = 0.038). For the CTLA4 gene, there were 7 sites represented on the chip. After BCG treatment, 5 sites were demethylated and
2 sites showed increases in methylation. Overall there was no significant difference in CTLA4 sites before and after BCG treatment (FDR
adjusted p = 0.509). This data is from 3 subjects receiving BCG therapy (Supplementary Table S1a). b RNA was isolated from PBLs of three T1D
before and after in vitro culture with BCG for 48 h and analyzed using RNAseq or transcription profiling. BCG treatment caused a sharp
increase in the amount of mRNA as expressed by the number of RNAseq reads for each of the six Treg signature genes that promote Treg
function and correlated with the de-methylation patterns
Long-term lowering of blood sugars with BCG through aerobic glycolysis
W M Kühtreiber et al.
4
npj Vaccines (2018)  23 
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
 (Fig. 1c), we sought evidence for BCG-induced change in
peripheral insulin resistance equivalent to the commercially
available Quantose™ IR test (Metabolon, Morrisville, NC). BCG-
treated diabetic samples were studied before BCG and up until 4
years after BCG treatment looking for a decrease in insulin
resistance. (Supplementary Table S1b; 8 year long followed
subjects). In the commercially available Quantose IR test, four
metabolites were quantified that are indicative of changes in
insulin resistance: alpha-hydroxybutyrate (α-HB), also named 2-
hydroxybutyrate, 1 and 2-linoleoyl-glycerophospocholine (L-GPC),
and oleic acid.37 We therefore analyzed our metabolomics data for
changes in these 4 insulin resistance markers. Lowered α-HB is
associated with decreased insulin resistance. In our subjects
average pre-BCG values were not significantly different from post-
BCG values at any time during weeks 4 through year 04 after BCG
vaccinations
(1.14 ± 0.08
vs.
1.09 ± 0.10;
p = 0.34).
L-GPC
is
negatively correlated with insulin resistance and impaired glucose
tolerance. Pre-treatment diabetic values for 1-LGPC and 2-LGPC
were 1.03 ± 0.05 and 1.07 ± 0.05, respectively, whereas post-BCG
treatment values were 1.120 ± 0.07 and 1.14 ± 0.07 (p = 0.16 and
0.20). Oleic acid is positively correlated with increased lipolysis and
insulin resistance. The average pre-BCG value was 1.18 ± 0.10 and
post-BCG was 1.38 ± 0.16 (p = 0.15). Since the differences for all 4
metabolites were thus not significant, it was unlikely that
decreased insulin resistance defined at least from this screening
test
could
explain
the
reduction
in
HbA1c
due
to
BCG
vaccinations.
We then investigated a full panel of serum metabolites in BCG-
treated and Placebo T1Ds (n = 6; sampled bi-weekly from 7 to
20 weeks and then yearly through year 05 compared to untreated
T1D diabetic and non-diabetic control subjects (Supplementary
Table S1b,c; 8 year long followed subjects). We found two
categories of metabolites significantly altered by BCG treatment as
compared to the placebo group: glucose processing metabolites
and pathway intermediates for de novo purine synthesis (Fig. 3a,
b). 1,5-Anhydroglucitol, a sugar metabolite known to increase with
lower blood sugar, was lower in untreated T1Ds compared to non-
diabetic controls (p < 0.001, q = 0.001). After BCG treatment it
showed a significant increase compared to untreated T1Ds (Fig.
3a, b, p = 0.007, q < 0.001). Sugar metabolite alpha-ketobutyrate is
known to be higher in T1D as compared to non-diabetic controls;
we observed this as well (p = .026, q < 0.001). After BCG treatment
alpha-ketobutyrate levels were even slightly lower than control
suggesting a meaningful lowering of blood sugars in those
cohorts (p = 0.008, q < 0.001). To demonstrate that the changes
after BCG in glucose metabolism and purine synthesis were likely
due to the BCG vaccine, the same comparisons of metabolites
from the placebo T1D compared to untreated T1D yielded no
statistically significant trends toward corrections thus correlating
the specificity of the metabolic shifts to BCG vaccinations (Fig. 3b).
The T1D to T1D post-placebo comparison for alpha-ketobutyrate
yielded a significant p and q value but this was due to the placebo
group having a very low and uncorrected level of this metabolite.
While the age of the untreated T1D was slightly shorter (34+/−2
years) compared to the untreated nondiabetic controls (39+/−2
years), all other clinical parameters of age of onset, duration of
diabetes and age were closely matched for the BCG-treated T1D
subjects compared to the T1D placebo subjects (Supplementary
Table S1c).
Three purine intermediates measured by mass spectrometry
also showed changes after BCG treatment (Fig. 3a, b, Supplemen-
tary Table S1c). Adenine was lower in untreated T1Ds compared to
controls (p = 0.002, q = 0.002). After BCG treatment, adenine levels
were closer to normal and were significantly higher than
untreated T1D levels (p = 0.029, q = 0.001). The same trends were
observed for two additional purine synthesis intermediates: N6-
carbamoylthreonyladenosine (p = 0.003, q = 0.0005) and methyl-
guanine (p < 0.001, q = 0.0006) that were both lower in untreated
T1D
compared
to
controls.
After
BCG
treatment,
N6-
carbamoylthreonyladenosine levels were closer to normal and
were significantly higher than untreated T1D levels (p = 0.013, q
= 0.001). After BCG treatment, methylguanine levels were closer
to normal and were significantly higher than untreated T1D levels
(p = 0.014, q = 0.001). The same comparisons were done at the
same monitoring time points for the simultaneously studied
placebo subjects and no significant changes in purines were
observed (Fig. 3b; Supplementary Table S4).
The finding that BCG treatment improved glucose metabolism
and augmented purine biosynthesis suggests a novel mechanism
to explain the BCG-induced reduction of HbA1c: a cellular switch
from primarily oxidative phosphorylation, a low glucose utilization
state, to augmented early aerobic glycolysis, a high glucose
utilization state associated with high purine metabolism (Fig. 3c). It
is known that aerobic glycolysis is active at the site of many local
infections with low oxygen, including tuberculosis, but not on a
systemic level. Indeed the local environment of infections often
have
augmented
glucose
utilization
and
enhanced
purine
synthesis.38 Aerobic glycolysis fuels a dramatic uptake of glucose
through regulated cell surface glucose transport and secondary
utilization of the pentose phosphate shunt for increased purine
synthesis. Our data enabled us to test the hypothesis that the
apparently long-term lowering of blood sugars after BCG, even in
advanced diabetes, was due to BCG’s systemic induction of
aerobic glycolysis and switch from an overactive oxidative
phosphorylation metabolism (Fig. 3c).
To help demonstrate that the BCG vaccine was inducing a state
of augmented aerobic glycolysis resulting in higher systemic
glucose utilization, we examined PBLs and monocyte cultures at
baseline and after brief BCG exposures (48 h) for induction of
Hypoxia-Inducible Factor 1 Alpha subunit (HIF1A). HIF1A is a
master transcription factor that regulates the conversion to high
aerobic glycolysis states.39 We found that, after brief BCG
exposures in vitro, HIF1A mRNA was rapidly upregulated in both
PBLs and monocytes of both T1Ds and controls compared to
baseline (Supplementary Fig. S2). While this was not a functional
outcome, the findings supported our hypothesis of a BCG-
mediated switch to augmented aerobic glycolysis on a systemic
level similar to what has been observed at local infection sites in
the lungs for tuberculosis.40
Further corroboration of the concept that BCG treatment
switches cellular metabolism towards aerobic glycolysis came
from transcription profiling studies (mRNAseq) performed on
freshly isolated lymphocytes from T1Ds after BCG treatment.
Figure 4b shows the sequential steps of the pathway of glucose
metabolism from transport across the cell membrane, early
glycolysis, late glycolysis and finally entry into the Krebs cycle
both as it relates to enzymes and to metabolites. We examined
mRNA for alterations in key enzymes of glucose metabolism
in vitro and also for corresponding changes for in vivo metabolites
after BCG vaccinations (Fig. 4).
T1D PBLs (n = 6 samples; 3 paired samples before vs. after
in vitro BCG) were isolated and cultured in the presence of BCG in
culture for 48 h. Cells were collected before and after BCG and
analyzed by transcription profiling. BCG upregulates expression of
early
glucose
transporters
and
enzymes
involved
in
early
glycolysis (HK2, PFKFB3) (Fig. 4a). BCG downregulates enyzmes
involved in late glycolysis (ALDOAP2, PGM1) (Fig. 4a). Consistent
with a switch from oxidative phosphorylation to high aerobic
glycolysis, Krebs cycle enzymes were also down-regulated (DLST,
IDH3B, IDH3G, MDH2, OGDH) (overall Fisher’s p-value of 0.005)
(Fig. 4a). This data supports a BCG-driven process of a shift in
energy metabolism. To further confirm this shift to accelerated
glucose utilization through aerobic glycolysis, we studied in vivo
serum lactate production and in vitro cellular lactate production
and glucose uptake rates after BCG exposures to cultured
lymphocytes. Serum lactate levels in Phase I BCG-treated subjects
Long-term lowering of blood sugars with BCG through aerobic glycolysis
W M Kühtreiber et al.
5
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
npj Vaccines (2018)  23 
 Fig. 3
BCG treatment switches cellular metabolism from oxidative phosphorylation to early aerobic glycolysis. a, b Metabolomic comparisons
of the relative levels of intermediates of glucose metabolism and purine synthesis for non-diabetic controls, untreated T1D subjects and T1D
patients after treatment with BCG or placebo (sampled biweekly from week 7 to 20 and then yearly through year 5). The results indicate that
glucose metabolism is shifted towards aerobic glycolysis in the BCG treated T1D. Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences, which
are listed in Fig. 3b. For all metabolomics data, we used an unpaired one-tail Student’s t-test that was then corrected for the multiple
comparisons with p and q values. p values are given in Fig. 3b. Note that q values maintained significance for the T1D results for the BCG
treated cohorts. c The systemic lowering of blood sugars in T1Ds after BCG vaccines combined with the increased glucose uptake and purine
synthesis is consistent with BCG switching cellular metabolism to early aerobic glycolysis. This hypothesis holds that BCG causes
downregulation of the Krebs cycle, accelerated aerobic glycolysis, increased glucose uptake, and shunting of glucose to the Pentose
Phosphate Shunt for augmented purine biosynthesis
Long-term lowering of blood sugars with BCG through aerobic glycolysis
W M Kühtreiber et al.
6
npj Vaccines (2018)  23 
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
 (n = 3) vs. untreated T1D (n = 50) was determined with mass
spectrometry analysis up to the one year time point compared to
baseline values. The post-treatment lactate levels rose more in
BCG-treated subjects as compared to T1D subjects that received
placebo vaccines (p = 0.001) (Fig. 4c). This metabolic switch after
BCG to aerobic glycolysis could also be observed in vitro (Fig. 4d).
T1D PBLs incubated with BCG for 48 h followed by a fresh 4-h
collection of media again demonstrated more lactate production
(p = 0.025, n = 25 paired samples) and also accelerated glucose
uptake even with even a short 4 h monitoring time (p = 0.02,
n = 27 paired samples). Taken together these results suggest BCG
both in vitro and in vivo activated early steps in glucose transport
Long-term lowering of blood sugars with BCG through aerobic glycolysis
W M Kühtreiber et al.
7
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
npj Vaccines (2018)  23 
 and downregulated the Krebs cycle. This creates in BCG-treated
T1Ds an increase in serum lactate. In culture with BCG, lactate was
higher as well as the rapid increase in glucose uptake into the T1D
lymphoid cells.
A consequence of elevated or restored early aerobic glycolysis
should be greater utilization of the pentose phosphate shunt (Fig.
5a, Supplementary Fig. S3). The pentose phosphate shunt yields
increased synthesis of purine and pyrimidine metabolites.41,42 Our
transcription profiling of 48-hour BCG-treated PBLs from T1D
subjects showed upregulation of the pentose phosphate shunt
consistent with the in vivo metabolomics data (Fig. 5a). There are
changes in gene expression for positive regulators and negative
regulators of the pentose phosphate shunt, as well as downstream
enzymes that divert the pentose phosphate pathway away from
purines. A schematic of this pathway and connecting nodes is
provided
(Supplementary
Fig.
S3).
Seven
positive
pentose
phosphate shunt protein regulators were upregulated (ATM,
HSP27, PI3K, SRC, SREBP, K-ras, and TAp73) after BCG treatment
of T1D lymphocytes. Fisher’s method combined p-value for the
positive regulators was 0.005. For example, TAp73 was upregu-
lated by more than 650%. Increases in expression of positive
regulators suggest increased throughput of glucose via the
pentose phosphate pathway. In contrast, gene expression for
negative regulators, such as PTEN of the pentose phosphate
shunt, was almost two fold lower (p = 0.06), and the downstream
pentose phosphate shunt also appeared to be downregulated,
consistent with a switch to aerobic glycolysis and diversion
towards purine pathways.
We studied serum metabolites of BCG-treated T1Ds to confirm
the mRNA expression findings of augmented pentose phosphate
shunt utilization and increased purine and pyrimidine metabolites
(Fig. 5b, Supplementary Table S1c). Non-diabetic control subjects
have significantly higher serum levels of purine and pyrimidine
intermediates than untreated TIDs (Fig. 5b, Supplementary Table
S4). After two vaccinations of BCG in T1D subjects almost all
purine intermediates increased. In the purine pathway, adenine,
N6-carbamoylthreonyladenosine, 7-methylguanine and N2,N2-
dimethylguanosine all statistically showed significant increases
in BCG-treated T1Ds compared to untreated T1Ds (p = 0.029, q =
0.001; p = 0.013, q = < 0.001; p = 0.014, q = < 0.001; p = 0.002, q
= <0.001, respectively). Allantoin and N1-methyladenosine also
rose in BCG-treated T1Ds, but not significantly. Pseudouridine, a
member of the pyrimidine metabolic pathway, was significantly
lower in the untreated T1D group as compared to the non-
diabetic controls, again suggesting underutilization of early
aerobic glycolysis (p < 0.001, q = 0.001). After BCG, pseudouridine
showed a small increase in BCG-treated as compared to untreated
T1D that approached statistically significance (p = 0.057, q =
0.002).
p and q values
for all comparisons are listed in
Supplementary Table S4. The BCG-induced switch to high glucose
transport and shunting to the pentose phosphate pathway is
illustrated in Supplementary Fig. S3 as it relates to the monitored
proteins (ovals) and metabolites (rectangles) of this pathway.
BCG-induced aerobic glycolysis: implications for all forms of
hyperglycemia
We next tested the hypothesis that BCG should be able to lower
blood sugars regardless of the cause of hyperglycemia. The data
presented above suggests a novel way to systemically regulate
blood sugars, independent of insulin. This novel approach for
blood sugar regulation appears to hinge on a systemic switch
from primarily oxidative phosphylation to early aerobic glycolysis
resulting in the acceleration of glucose uptake. If this novel
mechanism of systemic blood sugar control is driving the return
towards normoglycemia after BCG treatment, the data would
suggest that this mechanism is independent of the underlying
etiology of hyperglycemia—in this case autoimmune type 1
diabetes. Autoimmunity was not essential for BCG to lower blood
sugars.
To test the hypothesis that BCG in vivo can induce a switch to
systemic
aerobic
glycolysis
with
clinical
significance,
i.e.,
sufficient to lower blood sugars, we turned to murine testing.
We used Streptozotocin (STZ) as a chemical that selectively
destroys the insulin secreting islet β-cells in the pancreas to
induce hyperglycemia as a way to elevate blood sugars and test
for glucose utilization. We wanted to determine the impact of
BCG vaccinations in normal mice with and without hyperglyce-
mia and in the absence of autoimmunity. Normal C57BL/6 mice
(n = 24) were divided into two groups. One group (n = 12) was
treated with 0.1 mg BCG whereas the other group (n = 12)
remained untreated. For this series of experiments all the mice
remained normoglycemic. Weight and blood sugars were
determined weekly for 6 weeks. Figure 6a (upper left) shows
that BCG-treated mice gained weight at the same rate as
controls. Likewise, blood sugars in the BCG-treated mice were
indistinguishable from controls (Fig. 6a, lower left). Thus BCG
alone affected neither weight nor glycemic control in healthy
mice.
We tested the effects of hyperglycemia induction with STZ
when one group of mice received BCG (n = 12) and one group of
mice received saline (n = 12) six weeks earlier (Fig. 6b). Control
mice given only STZ rapidly started to lose weight (Fig. 6b, upper
right) and became severely hyperglycemic (lower right). In
contrast, the BCG-treated mice maintained their weight at a
constant level (upper right; p < .0001) and their blood sugars did
not rise as high as the controls and plateaued at a much lower
level (Fig. 6b, lower right; p = 0.002). At week 8 after STZ
treatment, the BCG-treated mice had a significantly lower HbA1C
as compared to the control mice (Fig. 6b, p = 0.02). It should be
Fig. 4
Analysis of mRNA expression and of Metabolites corroborates with the switch from the Krebs Cycle to augmented early aerobic
glycolysis after BCG. a mRNA expression analysis of type 1 diabetic PBLs before and after BCG treatment in vitro. BCG causes upregulation of
mRNA for early glycolysis (HK2, PFKB3), downregulation for late glycolysis (ALDOAP2, PGM1), and a strong downregulation of mRNA for late
Krebs cycle steps (bottom). p and q values for the genes shown are HK2 (p = 0.049, q = 0.017), PFKB3 (p = 0.016, q = 0.017), ALDOAP2 (p =
0.113, q = 0.017), PGM1 (p = 0.022, q = 0.017), DLST (p = 0.074, q = 0.017), IDH3B (p = 0.084, q = 0.017), IDH3G (p = 0.084, q = 0.017), MDH2 (p
= 0.090, q = 0.017) and OGDH (p = 0.070, q = 0.017). Combined p values for the Krebs cycle genes using Fisher’s method is 0.005. b The
schematic summarizes the normal pathway for glucose oxidation via the Krebs cycle and the connecting nodes to the Pentose Phosphate
Shunt. Blue rectangles and blue ovals represent upregulated metabolites and mRNA, respectively, after BCG. Gray rectangles and gray ovals
represent downregulated metabolites and mRNA, respectively, after BCG. Three BCG-treated T1D subjects were studied. Bars on Fig. 4a, c, d
depict SD. The blue shading in Fig. 4b represents the upregulated mRNAs (ovals) and metabolites (rectangles). c Serum lactate levels in Phase
1 BCG-treated vs. placebo patients as determined by Metabolon’s GC/HPLC and MassSpec platform one year after treatment. Lactate levels
were significantly higher in the BCG-treated patients than placebo-treated patients (p = 0.001 and q = 0.003) (data from subjects represented
in Supplementary Table S1e). d Cultured CD4 cells from T1D subjects in the presence or absence of BCG for 48 h (n = 25 paired samples)
showed both augmented lactate production and accelerated glucose uptake. A short 4-hour collection time of media from either glucose
uptake or for lactate secretion after 48 h of BCG or media exposures (control) showed significantly more lactate production after BCG
exposures (p = 0.025, n = 25) and accelerated glucose consumption (p = 0.02, n = 27) as compared to control lymphocytes that were cultured
without BCG
Long-term lowering of blood sugars with BCG through aerobic glycolysis
W M Kühtreiber et al.
8
npj Vaccines (2018)  23 
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
 noted, that the at least 6 week dosing lag in the administration of
BCG prior to a glucose challenge was obligatory to see the
maximal protective effect of improved blood sugar control.
BCG
can
thus
significantly
lower
blood
sugars
without
underlying autoimmunity, and BCG has no deleterious effect by
lowering blood sugars lower than normal. BCG treatment does not
carry the risk of hypoglycemia as is the case for intense
insulin therapy.
DISCUSSION
Our 8-year long clinical trial of monitoring subjects receiving
Mycobacterium re-introduction through the BCG vaccine triggers
two clinical effects in humans with established T1D: stable and
long-term reductions in blood sugar and epigenetic changes in
Treg signature genes for restored tolerance. Both beneficial effects
appear to be driven by a systemic metabolic shift from oxidative
phosphorylation towards accelerated and early aerobic glycolysis.
Fig. 5
Effect of BCG on induction of the Pentose Phosphate shunt pathway and resulting purine and pyrimidine synthesis. a mRNA expression
analysis of T1D PBLs treated in vitro with BCG. The graph shows the percent change in gene expression before vs. after in vitro treatment with
BCG for 48 h. Positive regulators are mostly upregulated, whereas negative regulators and downstream mediators are mostly downregulated.
Three BCG-treated T1D subjects were studied. Bars on the Fig. 5 represent means + /− SEM. Fisher’s Method combined p-value for the positive
regulators is 0.005. The p-values for PTEN in the negative regulators and for TKT in the downstream regulators are almost significant at 0.06
and 0.08, respectively. b In vivo metabolomics data of BCG-treated T1D supports the BCG-induced utilization of the Pentose Phosphate Shunt
and shows that purine and pyrimidine metabolism are upregulated after BCG treatment. This is consistent with accelerated pentose shunt
utilization. Data shows metabolite levels in serum from CTRL (non-diabetic controls) (n = 25), T1D subjects (n = 50) and post-BCG T1D (n =
3 subjects after treatment with two BCG vaccinations). The asterisks represents statistical differences of <0.05; actual statistical values for both
p and q values are given in Supplementary Table S4
Long-term lowering of blood sugars with BCG through aerobic glycolysis
W M Kühtreiber et al.
9
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
npj Vaccines (2018)  23 
 The significant clinical effects, using BCG with intradermal dosing,
took three years to occur but then held steady for at least five
additional years without further interventions.
Aerobic glycolysis is a metabolic state with high cellular glucose
utilization and rapid ATP production.38 This beneficial metabolic
switch after BCG administration in vivo is detected by diverse
methodologies
including
transcription
profiling,
epigenetics,
metabolomics and clinical monitoring. The BCG-specific effect
on metabolism included increases in key early glycolytic enzymes,
upregulation of glucose uptake with systemic lowering of blood
Fig. 6
BCG pre-administration reduces hyperglycemia in chemically-induced (Streptozocin) mice but does not induce hypoglycemia in
normal mice. a Normal BALB/c mice were first studied in a normoglycemic state with (n = 12) and without BCG (n = 12) treatment for blood
sugars and weight (left panels). BALB/c mice were rendered chemically diabetic (arrows) and studied with and without BCG treatment six
weeks earlier with preventative pre-injections (right panels). Most mice became severely hyperglycemic after treatment with streptozocin
(STZ) which selectively kills the insulin-secreting cells in the pancreas. All mice were monitored for blood sugar levels and weighed on a
weekly basis. BCG-treated mice gained weight at the same rate as untreated control mice and had normal blood sugars with no indication of
hypoglycemia (left panels, blue lines). After STZ induction of hyperglycemia, the control mice rapidly started to lose weight and became
severely hyperglycemic within one week (right, black lines). In contrast, mice first treated with BCG before STZ treatment were able to
maintain their weight and had markedly lower levels of hyperglycemia (right, blue line). b Measurements of HbA1c values in STZ-treated
BALB/c mice after 6 weeks with and without prior BCG treatment show the protection afforded by BCG and the resulting lower HbA1c values
of 85 ± 6.6 mmol/mol (9.9 ± 0.6% NGSP) without BCG vs. 67 ± 5.5 mmol/mol (8.3 ± 0.5% NGSP) with BCG treatment; p = 0.02, n = 19 surviving
mice). c At 8 weeks after the induction of hyperglycemia, the BCG-treated mice had statistically lowered HbA1c values
Long-term lowering of blood sugars with BCG through aerobic glycolysis
W M Kühtreiber et al.
10
npj Vaccines (2018)  23 
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
 sugars, shunting the accelerated glucose utilization through the
pentose phosphate pathway, decreased utilization of the late
glycolytic steps including the Krebs cycle, increased lactate
production and decreased oxidative phosphorylation. Taken
together, the findings suggest a novel way to regulate blood
sugars levels using attenuated Mycobacterium bovis.
BCG also demethylated Treg signature genes. Treg-specific DNA
hypomethylation
is
central
in
gene
upregulation
for
Treg
function.43 The demethylation of Treg signature genes also
correlated with increased mRNA expression of the genes involved
in the de-methylation process.43 Published studies confirm that
Treg-specific DNA hypomethlylation is instrumental in gene
upregulation in steady state Tregs. Mycobacterium especially in
the form of tuberculosis and leprosy are known to create
granulomas encircled with T-regulatory cells.33 BCG induces a
similar systemic induction of Treg cells4 and supplements the
decrease in systemic inflammation that also drives type 1 diabetes
inflammation.44 Epigenetic reprogramming of the host by diverse
infections, including Mycobacterium tuberculosis, or beta-glycan, a
component of Candida albicans occurs at the levels of key
checkpoints, including methyltransferases and key steps in
aerobic glycolysis such as HIF1α.45–48 Here, we observed these
same immune and metabolic changes as it relates to genes
involved
in
the
reestablishment
of
tolerance
and
glucose
utilization in humans in vivo in response to BCG vaccinations.
The changes in receptor controlled glucose utilization in this case
are therapeutically useful for blood sugar lowering in type 1
diabetes.
An induced metabolic shift in diabetic human subjects toward
aerobic glycolysis, resulting in accelerated glucose utilization
represents another advantage of this novel metabolic method to
regulate blood sugars. Although this is a cellular mechanism to
increase glucose utilization, no reported cases of severe hypogly-
cemia occurred in BCG vaccination subjects during 5 years of
monitoring after the HbA1Cs returned to the near normal range.
Clinical trials have shown similar, albeit less uniform, lowered
blood sugar with introduction of intense insulin treatments
combined with intense monitoring, insulin pumps, glucose
sensing equipment, diet, exercise and frequent health care
supervision. Such intense treatments come with greatly increased
risk of hypoglycemic episodes with morbidity and mortality. In
general, a clinical goal of a HbA1c near 7.0 mg% is set to prevent
the lethal effects of hypoglycemia from the lowering of blood
sugars by conventional insulin therapy. Lowering of hyperglyce-
mia, measured with HbA1c measurements, is associated with
clinically significant declines in death, eye disease, kidney disease,
nervous system disease and microvascular and macrovascular
disease.49,50 For each 10% change or 11 mmol/mol (1% NGSP,
National Glucose Standardization Program) reduction in absolute
HbA1c values there is a relative risk reduction of 21% in diabetes
outcomes, 21% in diabetes deaths, and 37% in microvascular
complications. We now introduce a simple and inexpensive way to
achieve long lasting lowered blood sugars without hypoglycemia,
even in long-standing disease. We achieve these lowered blood
sugars uniformly in all treated subjects for over 5 years with no
additional health care costs or subject compliance requirements.
To confirm the systemic benefits of aerobic glycolysis we modeled
the impact of administering BCG to normal mice. Both treated and
untreated mice had normal blood sugars, demonstrating, that
unlike insulin, the BCG-induced metabolic shift to aerobic
glycolysis does not induce hypoglycemia and the increased
glucose utilization by BCG is receptor regulated. Importantly when
BCG-treated normal mice were made diabetic with STZ, a chemical
that destroys pancreatic insulin-secreting cells, blood sugar
reductions of at least 30% were achieved. This suggests BCG
induction of aerobic glycolysis is naïve to the underlying cause of
the elevated blood sugars and might have broader applicability to
other forms of hyperglycemia like type 2 diabetes.
Alterations in immune metabolism are known to be closely
linked to infections including Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In the
infected granulomas of murine lung tissue, there is up regulation
of key glycolysis enzymes and transporters for glucose uptake,
down regulation of enzymes participating in the Krebs cycle and
downregulated oxidative phosphorylation.51 Tuberculosis, similar
to the systemic BCG vaccines described here, induces hypoxia
inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1a), a key enzyme in aerobic
glycolysis control. BCG also changed glycolysis in vitro with
increased glucose uptake of infected monocytes, a process similar
but not identical to the Warburg effect.40,52 Before this 8-year long
trial, it was not appreciated that infection with mycobacterium as a
avirulent strain could have such a profound and permanent
therapeutic effect on a systemic basis.
Why does BCG’s reduction of HbA1c in humans take 3–4 years?
This crucial question cannot be directly answered by our clinical
trial. We can speculate that since autoimmune disease takes years
to develop, the reversal or halt of autoimmunity may share similar
time dependence. It is important to note that the 3-year lag time
was also found in a human clinical trial of BCG’s benefits for
multiple sclerosis.12 In our study of STZ-treated mice, a lag time of
at least 6 weeks was needed to show a reduction in HbA1c, which,
given the 2.5 year lifespan of a mouse, translates to approximately
3.5 years in humans. Since BCG is a live vaccine, it is assumed that
BCG’s effects have to become systemic for its correction of HbA1c.
It is speculated that the first signs of a Treg induction effect at six
weeks after two vaccinations may need to become systemic. The
shift to aerobic glycolysis may involve additional cells and organs
beyond what was examined here. More research is needed to
understand the kinetics of BCG’s effects, including whether more
frequent dosing of BCG can shorten the lag time and if the
systemic delay but durability of the clinical response is related to
co-infection of stem cells that then create an entire immune
reservoir for blood sugar regulation.
The health benefits of the BCG vaccine reported here suggest
reconsideration of vaccine policy in areas of the world without
endemic tuberculosis. Not one, but multiple, BCG doses are
necessary to prevent T1D, based on epidemiological and animal
studies.10,25 Studies have already reported that the BCG vaccine
alters the susceptibility to infections with unrelated organisms at
later times during life. Animals injected with Mycobacterium bovis
as the BCG vaccine demonstrate acquired resistance to Stapylo-
coccus aureus, Herpes virus, Salmonella, Listeria monocytogenes and
Candida albicans.53–55 This has also been observed in humans
since 1928. Researchers at the Institute Pasteur observed that the
BCG vaccine conferred mortality protection, and additional human
studies continue to observe this benefit on a global level.54,55 We
are only beginning to appreciate the evolutional synergy of the
reintroduction
of
the
Mycobacterium
bovis
attenuated
BCG
organism into modern day humans.
In conclusion, we show that re-introduced avirulent Mycobac-
terium bovis in the form of BCG vaccine holds benefits for human
disease blood sugar control and re-establishment of tolerance
through Treg cells. Although this study is centered on T1D this
novel mechanism might be speculated to also be applicable to
T2D. The limitations of this therapy as it is currently formatted as
intradermal vaccinations are the almost 3+ year lag time for a
systemic effect. Also to prove efficacy in the broadest T1D subject
populations, including pediatric subjects, there is now the need to
expand the trial to larger number of subjects of all ages and
durations of diabetes. The advantages of this therapy are its
durability, simplicity, safety, and cost-effectiveness. Exploitation of
safe versions of Mycobacterium for systemic changes in immune-
metabolism may recapitulate the immense benefit of co-evolution
of
the
virulent
genetic
organisms,
genomic
modeling
by
epigenetics and restoration of a beneficial host partnership in
modern societies. Perhaps attenuated Mycobacterium are primary
Long-term lowering of blood sugars with BCG through aerobic glycolysis
W M Kühtreiber et al.
11
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
npj Vaccines (2018)  23 
 organisms for reestablishing host-environment interactions for
improved health.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Clinical trial and research study participants
This is a study of 282 human research participants for both in vivo BCG
vaccine clinical trial studies (n = 52) and in vitro mechanistic studies (n =
230). Of these total research subjects 211 had type 1 diabetes and 71 were
non-diabetic control subjects.
The in vivo study of BCG vaccinations is comprised of adult T1D subjects
receiving BCG, receiving placebo vaccinations and simultaneously studied
reference type 1 diabetic subjects followed with the same standard of care
(Supplementary Table S1a, b). For all BCG treated subjects followed for up
to 5 years, in total of 52 subjects, their clinical traits are represented in
Supplementary Table S1a. Some BCG and placebo treated Type 1 diabetic
subjects were enrolled and were studied for 8 years (Supplemental Table
S1b, n = 6 subjects); other BCG treated (n = 9), placebo treated T1D (n = 3)
and reference T1D (n = 40) were studied for up to 5 years (Supplemental
Table S1a). Eight year-long studied subjects all participated in the Phase I
BCG
clinical
trial
of
20-weeks
duration
(Study
#2007P001347;
NCT00607230); all participated in this Phase I BCG long-term clinical
follow-up study for up to 8-years duration after study start (Study
#2012P002243). Details of the Phase I BCG clinical trial have been
previously published after 20 weeks of observation.4 All other BCG treated
T1D subjects with under 5 years of participation were subgroups of
subsequent BCG clinical trial studies (Study #2013P002633).
T1D and control subjects in this study also included volunteers who
donated blood for in vitro studies under Study #2001P001379 and were
compared to the in vivo studied subjects receiving BCG or placebo
vaccination or compared to in vitro studied subjects. Supplementary Table
S1c are the clinical traits of the 106-untreated type 1 diabetic subjects and
50 non-diabetic control subjected used in the metabolonic studies for
comparison to the in vivo treated BCG or Placebo subjects. Supplementary
Table S1d are the clinical traits of the type 1 diabetes subjects used in the
RNAseq studies to understand the change in lymphocyte gene expression
after in vitro BCG exposures (n = 3). Supplementary Table S1e are the
clinical traits of T1D (n = 23) or control non-diabetic subjects (n = 10) used
to study lactate production in vitro after BCG exposures. The production of
lactate after BCG or placebo vaccinations in vivo are represented by the
T1D subjects in SupplementaryTable S1b (n = 3 BCG treated, n = 3 placebo
treated). Supplementary Table S1f are T1D (n = 27) and non-diabetic
control (n = 27) subjects used in Fig. 4d, Supplementary Fig. 2 and
Supplementary Fig S5c, in vitro studies related to lactate production and
glucose uptake, in vitro PBL and monocyte production of HIF1A and
NR1H3 induction with BCG. All human studies had full MGH institutional
approval through Massachusetts General Hospital and Partners Health
Care; the BCG interventional studies were also formerly approved through
the FDA IND#2007P001347 and IND#2013P16434.
All subjects provided informed consent. It is important to note that all
BCG-dosed subjects, for the duration of this 8-year study, especially during
the 3–4 year period where they had a major drop in their HbA1c, had no
change in their BMI, no change in their use of associated technologies (i.e.,
insulin pumps, continuous glucose meters), and no adoption of ketotic
diets and we were all in this study blinded to this data until we re-opened
the study to examine previously collected HbA1c values.
For this BCG trial, the Connaught strain of BCG was utilized twice and
administered intradermally in the right and left upper arm with a syringe
4 weeks apart. Hypoglycemia was defined and monitored by the
hypoglycemia survey forms developed by Clark et al.56
All
human
subjects
studied
in
this
paper
are
represented
in
Supplementary Table S1 with their clinical traits and reference to the
manuscript Figure or Table site where the data is presented. Supplemen-
tary Table S1 also statistically compares the varies study group for parity as
it relates to their age, age of onset (AOO) and duration of type 1 diabetes
(two-sided unpaired t-test) to show in almost all cases close parity of the
clinical traits between contrasting treatment and control groups.
Mice
BALB/c male mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar
Harbor, ME) and housed at five animals per cage at the MGH animal
facilities (four animals per cage after they reached a weight of >25 g).
Studies had full IACUC approval under protocol #2008N000176 and
involved at all times the ethical treatment of animals. We determined
HbA1c from mouse blood samples using the A1CNow + kit from PTS
Diagnostics (Indianapolis, IN). For mouse blood sugars we used an ACCU-
CHEK Aviva blood glucose meter (Roche, Indianapolis, IN). BCG was
administered by hind footpad injection (0.10 mg BCG in 25 μL saline in one
footpad). Induction of hyperglycemia was performed using a single
intraperitoneal injection of Streptozotocin (Sigma-Aldrich, Milwaukee, WI)
at 150 mg/kg in PBS.
Clinical chemistries.
All human HbA1c, glucose levels were processed
directly from fresh blood by certified diagnostic laboratories approved by
The Massachusetts General Hospital. Human serum samples were assayed
for C-peptide using regular (Cat# 10-1136-01) or ultrasensitive (Cat# 10-
1141-01) C-peptide ELISA kits from Mercodia AB (Uppsala, Sweden) using
−80 ℃ frozen serum as previously described.57
Intravenous glucagon stimulation test.
Subjects were asked to consume at
least 150 g of carbohydrates for the 3 days prior to the intravenous
glucagon stimulation test (GST) and fast for 8 h the night before. On the
morning of the GST, subjects were asked to withhold insulin until after
they had completed the test. The GST was only administered when blood
sugars were between 3.9 mmol/L (70 mg/dL) and 12.5 mmol/L (225 mg/
dL). A 20-22 gauge angiocatheter was placed and a 5 mL blood sample
taken for baseline glucose and for baseline C-peptide levels. Six minutes
later, 1 mg of glucagon was administered intravenously. An additional
5 mL blood sample was then collected at 6 min. Serum was prepared from
the blood samples and frozen at −80 ℃ for subsequent C-peptide Elisa as
previously described.3
Isolation of CD4 T cells.
CD4 T cells were isolated from blood from purple
tops using magnetic EasySep Direct Human CD4+ T Cell isolation kits from
Stemcell Technologies (Vancouver, BC, Canada, Cat# 19662), following the
instructions of the manufacturer. Briefly, 1200 μL of Isolation Cocktail and
1200 μL of RapidSpheres were mixed with 24 mL of whole blood in a 50 mL
centrifuge tube and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. Twenty-four
milliliter of PBS was then added and the tube placed into a “Easy 50”
magnet (Stemcell Technologies, Cat# 18001). This immobilized the
unwanted non-CD4 cells at the side of the tube. After 10 min, the CD4-
enriched cell suspension was then transferred into a new tube and the
magnetic separation process repeated for 5 min with fresh Isolation
Cocktail and RapidSpheres. The resulting highly CD4 enriched cell
suspension was transferred into a new tube and purified for a third time
using the magnet. The resulting final CD4 cell preparations had purities of
>95%.
Methylation analysis.
Female BCG-treated T1D subjects were studied at
several time points before and after BCG administrations for changes in
methylation of their peripheral blood CD4 T cells. These T1D subjects had
blood drawn before the first BCG injection on Day 0 and then again at
8 weeks after receiving the second BCG vaccination at week 4. CD4 cells
were then isolated and DNA prepared and stored at −80 ℃. For each
sample, 1 μg of DNA was bisulfite-converted using the EZ-96 DNA
Methylation™ Kit (Shallow Well Format) (Zymo Research Corporation,
Irvine, CA) following the manufacturer’s protocol with modifications in
incubation conditions as recommended for the Illumina Infinium Methyla-
tion Assay. To verify the quality of bisulfite conversion assay, standard PCR
of the highly methylated P19 gene was performed using primers targeting
known methylation sites. These primers will anneal to these sites only if the
bisulfite conversion is successful. The primers for the methylated targets
are:
Bisulfite_QC.F
(CTAAAACCCCAACTACCTAAA)
and
Bisulfite_QC.R
(TAGGTTTTTTAGGAAGGAGAG). PCR cycling conditions are 95 ℃ for
15 min, 5 cycles of 95 ℃ for 30 s, 60 ℃ for 2 min, 72 ℃ for 1 min, 30 cycles
of (95 ℃ for 30 s, 65 ℃ for 1 min, 72 ℃ for 1 min), and 72 ℃ for 5 min. PCR
products were run on a 2% agarose gel and a single band at 286 bp
indicated successful conversion.
The methylation assay was then performed on the Human Methyla-
tion450 BeadChip (Illumina, San Diego, CA) using 200–400 ng of bisulfite-
converted DNA product for each sample according to the Infinium HD
Methylation Assay protocol (Illumina). This assay targets over 450,000
known and potential methylation sites across the genome via 50-mer
probes attached to the Infinium BeadChips. The bisulfite converted DNA
was hybridized to the probes on the BeadChip followed by a single base
extension to incorporate a fluorescent-labeled nucleotide (Cy3 or Cy5) at
the target position to differentiate methylation status. The BeadChips were
then imaged on the Illumina iScan reader and the methylation level of
Long-term lowering of blood sugars with BCG through aerobic glycolysis
W M Kühtreiber et al.
12
npj Vaccines (2018)  23 
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
 each CpG locus was calculated in the GenomeStudio® Methylation module
as methylation beta-value (β = intensity of the methylated allele (M)/
(intensity of the unmethylated allele (U) + intensity of the methylated
allele (M) + 100).
Transcription profiling analysis (RNAseq).
Total RNA was isolated from
peripheral blood lymphocytes using the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit of QIAGEN
(QIAGEN Sciences, MD, Cat# 74104) and processed by the CCCB (Center for
Cancer Computational Biology) at Dana Farber Cancer Institute (Boston,
Mass). RNA quality was determined using the Agilent 2100 bioanalyzer.
RNA with a RIN value greater than 6 and less than 10% DNA contamination
was used for library preparation. Using an input of 100 ng of total RNA,
poly-A selection was performed using a NEBNext® Poly(A) mRNA Magnetic
Isolation Module. The resulting mRNA was used for library preparation
using the NEBNext® Ultra™ Directional RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina®.
The RNAseq libraries were run on a high sensitivity DNA chip on the
Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer, and the functional concentration of the library
was determined through qPCR using the KAPA Biosystems Illumina Library
Quantification kit. Libraries to be sequenced were pooled at a concentra-
tion of 2 nM, and were denatured and diluted to a final concentration of
2 pM and loaded onto the Illumina NextSeq 500. Alignment of reads
against reference genome HG19 was performed using TopHat and
analyzed using Cufflinks.
The resulting data was then normalized using DESeq, part of the R—
Bioconductor package.58 Normalized data was analyzed using the
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software from QIAGEN, the R Statistical
Programming language,59 and Microsoft Excel.
Metabolomic analysis.
The metabolomic study compared serum samples
from control non-diabetic subjects (n = 50) to serum samples from
untreated T1Ds (n = 106). It also compared the untreated T1Ds (n = 50)
to post-BCG T1Ds (n = 3, sampled biweekly from 7 to 20 weeks and at year
05). All metabolomics study samples were sent for metabolic profiling and
statistical analysis to Metabolon Inc (Durham, NC). Serum samples were
analyzed on Metabolon’s integrated discovery platform consisting of gas
and liquid chromatography for separation and mass spectrometry for
detection and identification. This high throughput platform, among other
studies, has been used for the identification of biomarkers of insulin
resistance in patients at risk for Type 2 diabetes.60 This resulted in the
development of the Quantose IR test, which measures four metabolites for
the assessment of insulin resistance37 In our serum samples, the platform
was able to distinguish a total of 690 different metabolites.
In vitro glucose utilization assay on CD4 cells.
CD4 cells were isolated from
whole blood using the Direct Human CD4+ T Cell Isolation kit from
Stemcell Technologies, (Vancouver, Canada) as per the manufacturer’s
instructions. The cells were then incubated in 24 well plates for 48 h at 37 °
C at 1 × 106 cells per well in assay medium (1 mL RPMI with Glutamax, 2%
FBS, Pen/Strep, 400 Units of IL-2 (Gibco), 25 μL CD3/CD28 (Stemcell
Technologies)). Wells were then supplemented with 156 × 103 CFU of BCG.
Control wells did not receive BCG. After culture, the cells were washed with
PBS and resuspended in fresh assay medium and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C
at a concentration of 250,000 cells/50 μL. Following this incubation period,
media supernatants were collected and stored at −80 °C. Baseline glucose
control media consisted of assay medium that was incubated for 4 h at 37 °
C without cells. Supernatants were analyzed using the Glucose Colori-
metric Assay Kit (BioVision, Milpitas, CA) as per the manufacturer’s
instructions. Samples were diluted 100× then filtered using Amicon
Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal filters (15 min at 14,000×g) before analysis.
Lactate assay.
Serum samples and culture supernatants were analyzed
using the Lactate Colorimetric Assay Kit II (BioVision, Milpitas, CA) as per
the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were diluted 30× in assay buffer
then filtered using Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal filters (15 min at 14,000 ×
g) before analysis.
Statistical methods.
Statistical significance for flow cytometer data
and metabolomics was determined using the unpaired one-tail Student’s
t-test. For non-normal distributed data we used the Wilcoxon Signed Rank
test for glucagon stimulated C-peptide data and for Treg Signature Genes
RNAseq data. Where indicated, combined p-values were calculated in R
using Fisher’s method, also called Sum of Logs method or Chi-Square (2)
method, using the METAP library.61–63 Relative (percent) change rate of
HbA1c was compared using the linear mixed effects model with subject-
level random effects. The change rates in the control, placebo and BCG
groups were compared based on the statistical significance of the
interaction term between time and group indicator in the linear mixed
effects model. For statistical analysis of the methylation data, we calculated
the differences between the triplicate T1D treated BCG and untreated T1D
samples Beta values for each CG-target of the 6 Treg signature genes (see
Supplementary Fig. 3); then for each signature gene calculated mean
methylation changes and SEM’s using these differences; and then
calculated the T-statistic for each gene, assuming a population average
of 0, i.e., no change in methylation in the absence of BCG treatment. The p-
value was then calculated using the T statistic and adjusted for false
discovery rate using a Bonferroni correction. Statistics were performed
using SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc, Cary, NC), the R Statistical
Computing Language,5 or in Microsoft Excel. Confidence levels were set
to 0.05.
Data availability
The raw metabolomic and epigenetic data presented in this paper is
available upon request.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge the support of this project by The Iacocca Foundation and the
many other contributors to this non-profit program to improve the care of diabetes.
We appreciate the support of Dr. Miriam Davis in the pre-review and copy editing of
this paper and the secretarial assistance of Ms. Lynne Murphy.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
W.M.K. is the senior scientist who daily performed experiments and oversaw the
science on this project, processed data, reviewed the paper and data for accuracy. L.T.
is the laboratory-based scientist who prepared CD4 T cells, prepared DNA and mRNA
from study samples. T.K. is the medical student who worked on the epigenetic data
and analysis of that data set, S.P., D.H., S.J., A.D., and D.B. are the clinical trial
coordinators who recruited human subjects for this study and interfaced with the
subjects for blood donations and tended to the regulatory steps for this FDA clinical
trial. D.B. and R.H. also worked on the graphic arts for this paper. B.N. performed the
serum and culture glucose update and lactate assays. M.D., and W.M.K. calculated and
processed p and q values for the mRNA data and the metabolomic data with the
statistical staff of Metabolon Inc. H.Z. is the statistician who performed the rest of the
statistical studies in this paper. D.L.F. oversaw the designed and creation of the
experiments, oversaw the data and study design, interpreted the experiments and
clinical trial as the principal investigator. She also wrote the paper and weekly
reviewed the data and data processing.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the npj Vaccines website
(https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-018-0062-8).
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.
REFERENCES
1. Comas, I. et al. Out-of-Africa migration and neolithic coexpansion of Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis with modern humans. Nat. Genet. 45, 1176–1182 (2013).
2. Barnes, I., Duda, A., Pybus, O. G. & Thomas, M. G. Ancient urbanization predicts
genetic resistance to tuberculosis. Evolution 65, 842–848 (2011).
3. Faustman, D. L. The Value of BCG and TNF in Autoimmunity. 1st edn, (Academic
Press, 2014).
4. Faustman, D. L. et al. Proof-of-concept, randomized, controlled clinical trial of
Bacillus-Calmette-Guerin for treatment of long-term type 1 diabetes. PLoS One 7,
e41756 (2012).
5. Ristori, G. et al. Effects of Bacille Calmette-Guerin after the first demyelinating
event in the CNS. Neurology 82, 41–48 (2014).
6. Arnoldussen, D. L., Linehan, M. & Sheikh, A. BCG vaccination and allergy: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 127, 246–253 (2011).
7. Shann, F. The nonspecific effects of vaccines and the expanded program on
immunization. J. Infect. Dis. 204, 182–184 (2011).
Long-term lowering of blood sugars with BCG through aerobic glycolysis
W M Kühtreiber et al.
13
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
npj Vaccines (2018)  23 
 8. Kristensen, I., Aaby, P. & Jensen, H. Routine vaccinations and child survival: follow
up study in Guinea-Bissau, West Africa. BMJ 321, 1435–1438 (2000).
9. Goodridge, H. S. et al. Harnessing the beneficial heterologous effects of vacci-
nation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16, 392–400 (2016).
10. Karaci, M. in The Value of BCG and TNF in Autoimmunity. Ch. 4, 52–62 (Academic
Press, 2014).
11. Kiraly, N., Allen, K. J. & Curtis, N. BCG for the prevention of food allergy—exploring
a new use for an old vaccine. Med. J. Aust. 202, 565–566 (2015).
12. Ristori, G. et al. Use of Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) in multiple sclerosis. Neu-
rology 53, 1588–1589 (1999).
13. Higgins, J. P. et al. Association of BCG, DTP, and measles containing vaccines with
childhood mortality: systematic review. BMJ 355, i5170 (2016).
14. Biering-Sørensen, S. et al. Early BCG-Denmark and neonatal mortality among
infants weighing <2500 g: a randomized controlled trial. Clin. Infect. Dis. 65,
1183–1190 (2017).
15. Rieckmann, A. et al. Vaccinations against smallpox and tuberculosis are asso-
ciated with better long-term survival: a Danish case-cohort study 1971–2010. Int.
J. Epidemiol. 46, 695–705 (2017).
16. Pollard, A. J., Finn, A. & Curtis, N. Non-specific effects of vaccines: plausible and
potentially important, but implications uncertain. Arch. Dis. Child 102(11),
1077–1081 (2017).
17. Ryu, S., Kodama, S., Ryu, K., Schoenfeld, D. A. & Faustman, D. L. Reversal of
established autoimmune diabetes by restoration of endogenous beta cell func-
tion. J. Clin. Invest. 108, 63–72 (2001).
18. Kodama, S., Kuhtreiber, W., Fujimura, S., Dale, E. A. & Faustman, D. L. Islet
regeneration during the reversal of autoimmune diabetes in NOD mice. Science
302, 1223–1227 (2003).
19. Reed, J. C. & Herold, K. C. Thinking bedside at the bench: the NOD mouse model
of T1DM. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 11, 308–314 (2015).
20. McInerney, M. F., Pek, S. B. & Thomas, D. W. Prevention of insulitis and diabetes
onset by treatment with complete Freund’s adjuvant in NOD mice. Diabetes 40,
715–725 (1991).
21. Harada, M., Kishimoto, Y. & Makino, S. Prevention of overt diabetes and insulitis in
NOD mice by a single BCG vaccination. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 8, 85–89 (1990).
22. Sadelain, M. W. J., Hui-Yu, Q., Lauzon, J. & Singh, B. Prevention of type I diabetes in
NOD mice by adjuvant immunotherapy. Diabetes 39, 583–589 (1990).
23. McDevitt, H., Munson, S., Ettinger, R. & Wu, A. Multiple roles for tumor necrosis
factor-alpha and lymphotoxin alpha/beta in immunity and autoimmunity.
Arthritis Res. 4, S141–152 (2002).
24. Huppmann, M., Baumgarten, A., Ziegler, A. G. & Bonifacio, E. Neonatal Bacille
Calmette-Guerin vaccination and type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 28, 1204–1206
(2005).
25. Shehadeh, N. et al. Repeated BCG vaccination is more effective than a single dose
in preventing diabetes in non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice. Isr. J. Med. Sci. 33,
711–715 (1997).
26. Shehadeh, N. et al. Effect of adjuvant therapy on development of diabetes in
mouse and man [see comments]. Lancet 343, 706–707 (1994).
27. Pozzilli, P. BCG vaccine in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. IMDIAB Group.
Lancet 349, 1520–1521 (1997).
28. Allen, H. F. et al. Effect of Bacillus Calmette-Guerin vaccination on new-onset type
1 diabetes. A randomized clinical study. Diabetes Care 22, 1703–1707 (1999).
29. Ban, L. et al. Selective death of autoreactive T cells in human diabetes by TNF or
TNF receptor 2 agonism. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 13644–13649 (2008).
30. Okubo, Y., Mera, T., Wang, L. & Faustman, D. L. Homogeneous expansion of human
T-regulatory cells via tumor necrosis factor receptor 2. Sci. Rep. 3, 3153 (2013).
31. Hamon, M. A. et al. Histone modifications induced by a family of bacterial toxins.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 13467–13472 (2007).
32. Thuong, N. T. et al. Identification of tuberculosis susceptibility genes with human
macrophage gene expression profiles. PLoS Pathog. 4, e1000229 (2008).
33. Parente, J. N., Talhari, C., Schettini, A. P. & Massone, C. T regulatory cells (TREG)
(TCD4+ CD25+ FOXP3+) distribution in the different clinical forms of leprosy
and reactional states. Anais Bras. Dermatol. 90, 41–47 (2015).
34. Ohkura, N. et al. T cell receptor stimulation-induced epigenetic changes and
Foxp3 expression are independent and complementary events required for Treg
cell development. Immunity 37, 785–799 (2012).
35. Odeh, A. N. & Simecka, J. W. Regulatory CD4+ CD25+ T cells dampen inflam-
matory disease in murine Mycoplasma Pneumonia and promote IL-17 and IFN-
gamma responses. PLoS One 11, e0155648 (2016).
36. Okubo, Y., Torrey, H., Butterworth, J., Zheng, H. & Faustman, D. L. Treg activation
defect in type 1 diabetes: correction with TNFR2 agonism. Clin. Transl. Immunol. 5,
e56 (2016).
37. Cobb, J. et al. A novel fasting blood test for insulin resistance and prediabetes. J.
Diabetes Sci. Technol. 7, 100–110 (2013).
38. Shi, L., Eugenin, E. A. & Subbian, S. Immunometabolism in Tuberculosis. Front.
Immunol. 7, 150 (2016).
39. Semenza, G. L. HIF-1: upstream and downstream of cancer metabolism. Curr.
Opin. Genet. Dev. 20, 51–56 (2010).
40. Gleeson, L. E. et al. Cutting edge: Mycobacterium tuberculosis induces aerobic
glycolysis in human alveolar macrophages that is required for control of intra-
cellular bacillary replication. J. Immunol. 196, 2444–2449 (2016).
41. Tannahill, G. M. et al. Succinate is an inflammatory signal that induces IL-1beta
through HIF-1alpha. Nature 496, 238–242 (2013).
42. Krawczyk, C. M. et al. Toll-like receptor-induced changes in glycolytic metabolism
regulate dendritic cell activation. Blood 115, 4742–4749 (2010).
43. Morikawa, H. et al. Differential roles of epigenetic changes and Foxp3 expression
in regulatory T cell-specific transcriptional regulation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
111, 5289–5294 (2014).
44. Scott-Browne, J. P. et al. Expansion and function of Foxp3-expressing T regulatory
cells during tuberculosis. J. Exp. Med. 204, 2159–2169 (2007).
45. Yadav, V. et al. Understanding the host epigenetics in mycobacterium tuberculos
infection. J. Genet. Genome Res. 2, 016 (2015).
46. Yaseen, I., Kaur, P., Nandicoori, V. K. & Khosla, S. Mycobacteria modulate host
epigenetic machinery by Rv1988 methylation of a non-tail arginine of histone H3.
Nat. Commun. 6, 8922 (2015).
47. Cheng, S. C. et al. mTOR- and HIF-1alpha-mediated aerobic glycolysis as meta-
bolic basis for trained immunity. Science 345, 1250684 (2014).
48. Kleinnijenhuis, J. et al. Bacille Calmette-Guerin induces NOD2-dependent non-
specific protection from reinfection via epigenetic reprogramming of monocytes.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 17537–17542 (2012).
49. The Working Group of the DCCT. Intensive diabetes treatment and cardiovascular
disease in patients with type 1 diabetes. N. Engl. J. Med. 353, 2643–2653 (2005).
50. DCCT. The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on the development and
progression of long-term complications in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group. N. Engl. J. Med.
329, 977–986 (1993).
51. Shi, L. et al. Infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis induces the Warburg effect
in mouse lungs. Sci. Rep. 5, 18176 (2015).
52. Arts, R. J. et al. Immunometabolic pathways in BCG-induced trained immunity.
Cell Rep. 17, 2562–2571 (2016).
53. Masson, L. & Cie. Vaccination preventative de la tuberculose de l’homme et des
animaux par le BCG. Rapports et documents provenant des divers pays (la France
exceptee) transmis a l’Institut Pasteur en 1932. JAMA 99, 940–941 (1932).
54. Aronson, J. D. Protective vaccination against tuberculosis, with special reference
to BCG vaccine. Minn. Med. 31, 1336 (1948).
55. Levine, M. I. & Sackett, M. F. Results of BCG immunization in New York City. Am.
Rev. Tuberc. 53, 517–532 (1946).
56. Clarke, W. & Cox, D. J. et al. Reducted awareness of hypolgycemia in adults with
IDDM: A prospective study of hypoglycmeic frequency and associated symptoms.
Diabetes Care 18, 517 (1995).
57. Wang, L., Lovejoy, N. F. & Faustman, D. L. Persistence of prolonged C-peptide
production in type 1 diabetes as measured with an ultrasensitive C-peptide assay.
Diabetes Care 35, 465–470 (2012).
58. Anders, S. & Huber, W. Differential expression analysis for sequence count data.
Genome Biol. 11, R106 (2010).
59. Team, R. D. C. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. (R Foun-
dation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2015).
60. Milburn, M. V. & Lawton, K. A. Application of metabolomics to diagnosis of insulin
resistance. Annu. Rev. Med. 64, 291–305 (2013).
61. Becker, B. J. in (eds Cooper, H. & Hedges, L. V.) A Handbook of Research Synthesis.
Ch.15, 215–230 (Russell Sage, New York, 1994).
62. Rosenthal, R. Combining the results of independent studies. Psychol. Bull. 85,
185–193 (1978).
63. Sutton, A. J., Abrams, K. R., Jones, D. R., Sheldon, T. A. & Song, F. Methods for Meta-
analysis in Medical Research. (Wiley, Chechester, 2000).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
Long-term lowering of blood sugars with BCG through aerobic glycolysis
W M Kühtreiber et al.
14
npj Vaccines (2018)  23 
Published in partnership with the Sealy Center for Vaccine Development
