 REVIEW
Anxiety, Depression, and the Microbiome: A Role for Gut Peptides
Gilliard Lach1 & Harriet Schellekens1,2,3 & Timothy G. Dinan1,4 & John F. Cryan1,3
Published online: 13 November 2017
# The American Society for Experimental NeuroTherapeutics, Inc. 2017
Abstract The complex bidirectional communication be-
tween the gut and the brain is finely orchestrated by
different systems, including the endocrine, immune, au-
tonomic, and enteric nervous systems. Moreover, in-
creasing evidence supports the role of the microbiome
and microbiota-derived molecules in regulating such in-
teractions; however, the mechanisms underpinning such
effects are only beginning to be resolved. Microbiota–
gut peptide interactions are poised to be of great signif-
icance in the regulation of gut–brain signaling. Given
the emerging role of the gut–brain axis in a variety of
brain disorders, such as anxiety and depression, it is
important to understand the contribution of bidirectional
interactions between peptide hormones released from the
gut and intestinal bacteria in the context of this axis.
Indeed, the gastrointestinal tract is the largest endocrine
organ in mammals, secreting dozens of different signal-
ing molecules, including peptides. Gut peptides in the
systemic circulation can bind cognate receptors on im-
mune cells and vagus nerve terminals thereby enabling
indirect gut–brain communication. Gut peptide concen-
trations are not only modulated by enteric microbiota
signals, but also vary according to the composition of
the intestinal microbiota. In this review, we will discuss
the gut microbiota as a regulator of anxiety and depres-
sion, and explore the role of gut-derived peptides as
signaling molecules in microbiome–gut–brain communi-
cation. Here, we summarize the potential interactions of
the microbiota with gut hormones and endocrine pep-
tides, including neuropeptide Y, peptide YY, pancreatic
polypeptide, cholecystokinin, glucagon-like peptide,
corticotropin-releasing factor, oxytocin, and ghrelin in
microbiome-to-brain signaling. Together, gut peptides
are important regulators of microbiota–gut–brain signal-
ing in health and stress-related psychiatric illnesses.
Key Words Gut–brain axis . Gut peptides . Gut microbiota .
Anxiety . Depression
Introduction
In the last decade, the physiological significance of gut pep-
tides has been expanded beyond gastrointestinal (GI) diges-
tion and absorption of nutrients. The more than 20 signaling
molecules released from specialized enteroendocrine cells
(EECs) in the GI tract have significant endocrine and meta-
bolic functions and are able to communicate with the brain [1].
It is now also becoming clear that the activity of EECs, which
represent no more than 1% of the total gut epithelium cell
population, is modulated by the gut microbiota [2–4].
Enteric bacterial diversity and composition uniquely influence
the release of gut peptides, including glucagon-like peptide
(GLP-1), peptide YY (PYY), cholecystokinin (CCK),
corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), oxytocin, and ghrelin
[1, 5–7]. However, the mechanisms underlying EEC–micro-
biota interactions have yet to be fully resolved.
* John F. Cryan
j.cryan@ucc.ie
1
APC Microbiome Institute, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
2
Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, University College Cork,
Cork, Ireland
3
Food for Health Ireland, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
4
Department of Psychiatry and Neurobehavioural Science, University
College Cork, Cork, Ireland
Neurotherapeutics (2018) 15:36–59
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-017-0585-0
 Relatedly, increased emphasis has been given to the role of
the microbiota and its metabolites in health and disease.
Alterations in the gut microbiota may influence conditions
such as obesity, allergies, autoimmune disorders, irritable
bowel syndrome (IBS), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD),
and psychiatric disorders [8–13]. Although, several animal
studies have demonstrated that the gut microbiota modulates
behaviors relevant to psychiatric disorders such as anxiety-
like [14–19] and depressive-like behaviors [20–22], the mech-
anisms underpinning such microbe–host communication has
not yet been figured out. Of note, several of the same peptides
and their receptors that are released into the gut are also widely
expressed in the brain or signal to the brain, where these pep-
tides play well-established roles in the neurobiology of anxi-
ety and depression (for review, see [23, 24]).
Since the expression of these gut-derived peptides is likely
to be modulated by changes in the gut microbiota, it has been
proposed that these peptide hormones may have an important
role in gut–brain communication [21, 25–27].
The majority of the gut-derived peptides also play a role in
the central regulation of appetite and food intake, in particular
via hypothalamus nuclei [28–32]. Interestingly, obesity and
psychiatric disorders are commonly associated [33–37], and
a Westernized diet appears to exceed beyond nutrition, mod-
ulating behavioral reward and the development of psychopa-
thologies [38–43].
Thus, an understanding of gut peptide signaling may pro-
vide new insights into gut–brain communication to help ex-
plain how the gut microbiota may modulate pathophysiolog-
ical processes relevant to brain disorders such as anxiety and
depression. The latter disorders are major causes of disability
and contribute considerably to the global health burden [44,
45]. Although antidepressants and anxiolytics are usually ef-
fective, these drugs are frequently associated with serious side
effects [46–48]. Conversely, some patients are resistant to the
therapeutic effects of conventional pharmacological therapies.
Recent data from human cohorts support preclinical findings
suggesting that the modulation of the gut microbiota can in-
fluence brain function [49–53]. It is therefore clear that new
therapeutic strategies should be developed to prevent and/or
alleviate the symptoms of depression and anxiety.
Psychobiotics, which target the gut microbiota to affect mental
health for the better, may be one such innovative strategy (for
review, see [54–56]). In this review we will discuss the role of
the microbiota–gut–brain axis in anxiety and depression, and
how gut-derived signaling peptides are likely important medi-
ators in this process.
The Gut Microbiota
We live in a microbial world where each daily action can
shape our microbiome. Mammalian microbial colonization
likely begins at birth [57, 58] although a diverse range of
microbes have been detected in umbilical cord blood, amniot-
ic fluid, the placenta, and the fetal membranes [59–62].
Following parturition, the gut microbiota is refined and mod-
ified until adult-like communities reach homeostasis in its
diversity [63]. A variety of factors can influence the infant
microbiota, including birth delivery mode, breast feeding,
weaning age, and maternal lifestyle [64–66]. In addition, the
use of antibiotics, diet, exercise, and disease shape the micro-
bial landscape creating interindividual differences within the
gut microbiota [25, 67–69]. Typically, within healthy adults,
the composition of the intestinal microbiota remains stable
over time, and the bacterial phyla Firmicutes (including
Lactobacillus, Clostridium, and Enterococcus genus) and
Bacteroidetes (e.g., Bacteroides genus) represent > 90% of
the intestinal community [70]. These phyla are frequently cor-
related with the health outcomes in human and animal studies
(for review, see [71, 72]).
The diversity and stability of the microbiota are important
indices for the overall health of an individual. The gut micro-
biota may impact host health via the conversion of
nondigestible carbohydrates to short-chain fatty acids
(SCFAs) [15], transformation of bile acids [73, 74], action
against pathogenic bacteria [75], and the modulation of host
innate and adaptive immune systems [76]. For example, a
reduction in microbial diversity or the complete absence of
the gut microbiota alters normal immune system function
[77, 78] and decreases the capacity for harvesting energy from
the diet [79, 80]. Consumption of complex carbohydrates rich
in dietary fibers changes the composition of the gut microbiota
often increasing the abundance of Firmicutes and Bacteroides
[43, 81, 82]. Prebiotic supplements, here defined as
nondigestible fibers selectively metabolized by the enteric
microbiome, increase the production of SCFA [15, 83].
SCFA act on G-protein-coupled receptors [free fatty acid
(FFA) receptors] located along the GI tract to regulate energy
homeostasis via the stimulation of leptin production in adipo-
cytes, and the secretion of gut peptides from colonic EECs
[84–87].
The Microbiota–Gut–Brain Pathways: Focus on Gut
Peptides
The brain and the gut are engaged in continuous bidirectional
communication. Such communication may be important in
mediating physiological effects ranging from GI function to
the brain and behavior, bringing about the perception of vis-
ceral events such as nausea, satiety, and pain. In turn, stressful
experiences lead to altered GI secretions and motility. The
clinical relevance of such bidirectional communication, along
with the modification of the gut microbiota composition, is
now being investigated. Bidirectional gut–brain
Microbiome and Gut Peptides
37
 communication may begin as sensory information from the GI
tract [88], and is consequently transformed into neural, hor-
monal, and immunological signals. These signals can inde-
pendently or cooperatively relay information to the central
nervous system (CNS). The neural and immune pathway,
when relevant, are discussed throughout the paper. For an
in-depth review of the literature regarding the neural and im-
mune pathway, please see [2, 89, 90] and [11, 76, 91], respec-
tively. Figure 1 also provide a schematic view of the gut mi-
crobiota–brain axis, including both neural and immune
pathways.
The gut endocrine system is comprised of gut peptides and
other signaling molecules (i.e., serotonin), which are released
by different types of EECs along the GI tract in response to
food intake, particularly after ingestion of carbohydrates and
fats. EECs represent approximately 1% of epithelial cells in
the gut lumen and are divided into subtypes according to lo-
cation in the gut and class of molecules released, including
peptides (Fig. 2). Recently, in an elegant study, Bellono et al.
[88] demonstrated that EECs, in particular enterochromaffins,
control serotonin release onto 5-HT3 receptor-expressing pri-
mary afferent nerve fibers that extend into intestinal villi,
enabling them to detect and transduce information from the
gut to the nervous system.
Peptides are short chains of amino-acid monomers linked
by amide bonds (approximately ≤ 50 amino-acid residues)
that can be released from specialized neurons in the brain
(where they are called neuropeptides) or in EECs as a signal-
ing molecule through binding G protein-coupled receptors
[88, 92, 93]. Peptides are able to reach receptors far from the
site of their release, and are efficiently metabolized by endog-
enous enzymes and do not accumulate in tissues [92, 94].
There are > 100 peptides in mammals, with those relevant to
gut–brain communication being mostly involved in regulating
digestion and satiety. Many of the peptides found in EECs and
in CNS regulating the GI tract are also found in the enteric
nervous system. For example, tachykinins (i.e., substance P)
and calcitonin gene-related peptide are expressed in intrinsic
sensory neurons [95, 96]. Gastrin-releasing peptide stimulates
the release of gastrin from G cells of the stomach and regulates
gastric acid secretion and enteric motor function [97].
Vasoactive intestinal peptide communicates with adjacent
postsynaptic targets to regulate circadian rhythm and inhibit
gastric acid secretion and absorption from the intestinal lumen
Pituitary gland/
CRF release
GLP-1
PYY
CCK
Ghrelin
CRF
EECs
GABA
Tryptophan
Catecholamines
Hypothalamus
Oxytocin release
Cytokines
Vagus
nerve
SCFAs
Amino acids
Glucose
Gut peptide 
release
Ca2+
[Ca2+]
SCFAs
Amino acids
Glucose
NPY
CCK
GLP-1 release 
all over the 
brain
NPY 
release
Gut peptide 
receptor
Fig. 1 Major communication
pathways of the microbiota–gut–
brain axis. There are numerous
mechanisms through which the
gut microbiota may signal the
brain to control physiological
processes. These include the
release of gut peptides by
enteroendocrine cells (EECs)
where they activate cognate re-
ceptors of the immune system and
on vagus terminals in the gut. Gut
peptides such as neuropeptide Y
(NPY) can also be released by
cytokines under immune stimula-
tion. There have been numerous
reports of alterations in the gut
microbiota in neuropsychiatric
conditions, where gut peptides
may play a key signaling role.
Only a few examples of gut–brain
pathway and gut peptides are
represented in this figure
CCK = cholecystokinin; GLP-1 =
glucagon-like peptide; CRF =
corticotropin-releasing factor;
PYY = peptide YY; GABA = γ-
aminobutyric acid; SCFA = short-
chain fatty acid
38
Lach et al.
 [98, 99]. Structurally similar to vasoactive intestinal peptide,
the pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide can
stimulate enterochromaffin-like cells, a type of EEC [100].
Other peptides include the opioid peptides (enkephalin, endor-
phins), insulin, calcitonin gene-related peptide,
oxyntomodulin, glucagon, enteroglucagon, GLP-2, somato-
statin, and gastrin inhibitory polypeptide, among others.
Owing to their privileged location in the GI tract, it is possible
that those peptides may be influenced by changes in the gut
microbiota and modulate (directly or indirectly) upstream sig-
naling to the brain. In this review we focus on peptides with
known roles in anxiety and depression; for an in-depth review
of others, please see [7, 101–104].
For the peptides discussed in this review, beyond the
role in satiety, they can be stimulated by bacterial prod-
ucts that come into contact with the gut epithelium [83,
105, 106]. Distinct subtypes of EECs release different
peptides in the gut. For example, the stomach contains
X/A-like cells that secrete ghrelin, an orexigenic peptide.
Increased ghrelin is associated with the timing of a meal.
The proximal small intestine contains I cells and K cells
that produce CCK and glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide, respectively [5, 107]. In the distal small
and large intestines are L cells, which produce GLP-1/2
and PYY. CRF, which is found in the colon and ileum, is
expressed by enterochromaffin cells [108]. Moreover, an
additional subset of EECs has the ability to co-express
peptides, including CCK, GLP-1, and PYY [109, 110].
Following secretion, gut peptides diffuse throughout the
lamina propria, which is occupied by a variety of immune
cells, ultimately to reach the bloodstream, to stimulate sensory
neurons and potentially to act on the vagus nerve, thereby
creating an intersection for gut peptidergic signaling to the
brain [111]. In a complementary manner, the blood–brain bar-
rier (BBB) selectively facilitates the transport of some pep-
tides in the blood-to-brain direction, suggesting a direct path-
way for some gut peptides that are not quickly degraded after
their release [112–115].
Owing to the wide expression of peptides and their recep-
tors in both brain and gut, in addition to their facilitated transit
into the bloodstream, it seems reasonable to assume that these
peptides can act beyond their primary signaling function, sug-
gesting a possible role (most likely indirect) of the gut pep-
tides in neuropsychiatric disorders [5]. The dynamic profile of
gut peptides, including their direct link with mood disorders,
and their broad role in the gut suggests that the microbiota–gut
peptide–brain communication axis can be a target for
psychobiotics to prevent and treat such disorders (Table 1).
The Gut Microbiota in Anxiety and Depression
The link between gut function and mental health is well ap-
preciated (for review, see [134–136]. Depression and anxiety
are often accompanied by changes in colonic motility, which,
in turn, alters the composition and stability of the gut micro-
biota, as well as the colonic physiology and morphology
[137–140]. Stress-related disorders can also alter the intestinal
barrier, triggering a Bleaky gut^, which could allow a
microbiota-driven proinflammatory response through the
translocation of certain bacterial products from the gut
[141–143]. For example, Maes et al. [142, 143] found in 2
different studies that lipopolysaccharide (LPS) produced by
gut bacteria could increase immune responses in depressed
patients. Likewise, in IBS, a disease linked to alterations in
the immune system [144], a correlation was found between
gut microbiota composition and brain volumes in patients
with IBS with early life trauma, suggesting a shift in the
Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, with Firmicutes increased
and Bacteriodetes decreased [53]. Interestingly, this study
failed to identify correlations between anxiety or depression
symptoms scores. However, in depressive patients without
IBS symptoms, the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio was in-
versely correlated with the microbiota composition profiled
in patients with IBS [145–147].
Similar observations have been made in animal studies. Yu
et al. [148] found that depressive-like rats had the relative
Stomach
Small 
intestine
Colon
Fig. 2 Gut peptide distribution in the gastrointestinal tract. Gut peptides
are released from different subgroups of enteroendocrine cells (EECs)
following appropriate stimulation. The stomach is rich in ghrelin expres-
sion from A cells (brown circles), cholecystokinin (CCK) is expressed in
the proximal segment of the small intestine by I cells (blue circles). The
small and large intestine secretes glucagon-like peptide (GLP-1) and pep-
tide YY (PYY) from L cells (red and green circles, respectively). Only
some examples of EEC subgroups and relative hormones secreted are
represented in the figure
Microbiome and Gut Peptides
39
 abundances of Bacteroidetes significantly increased, whereas
that of Firmicutes was markedly decreased. In mice that
underwent chronic stress, reductions in the genus
Bacteroides were identified [149]. Stressed mice also have
been shown to have greater populations of the genus
Clostridium, which agrees with the gut microbiota profile in
maternally separated rodents [149–151]. The genus
Clostridium is commonly altered as a result of changes mod-
ulated by gut metabolites, such as phenylalanine, tryptophan,
and tyrosine [152, 153]. Such metabolites are part of the me-
tabolism of key neurotransmitters in mammals, including se-
rotonin, with implications for ENS and CNS function and thus
gut–brain axis signaling [154–158].
Antidepressants are well known to have antimicrobial ef-
fects, modulating the pathophysiology of the anxiety and de-
pression by reshaping not only brain biochemistry, but also the
gut microbiota [159, 160]. Conversely, certain antibiotics,
such as β-lactams and tetracyclines have potential antidepres-
sant properties in rodents and humans [161, 162].
Epidemiologic studies have suggested that some classes of
antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones are associated with the
development of depression and anxiety [163–166].
Although the altered gut microbiota and its effects on host
metabolic phenotype during psychiatric illness remains un-
known, these observations highlight the potential association
of the gut microbiota with host depression and anxiety. Thus,
the manipulation of the gut microbiota may be a useful tool to
decode the physiological role of the gut–brain axis in
psychiatric disorders [167]. The use of germ-free rodents, an-
imals with pathogenic bacterial infections, animals exposed to
probiotic agents or to antibiotics, prebiotics, and fecal micro-
biota transfer from another animal or human may lead to im-
portant new findings for the development of new therapeutic
strategies to treat or prevent anxiety and depression.
The Neuropeptide Y Family
The members of the neuropeptide Y (NPY) family com-
prise NPY itself, PYY, and pancreatic polypeptide (PP).
The functional role of the NPY family in gut–brain sig-
naling is supported by the wide distribution of the 4 main
NPY receptors in mammals (Y1,Y2, Y4, and Y5 receptor)
(for a review, see [168]). NPY has higher affinity than
PYY for the Y1 and Y5 receptors, whereas PYY is the
stronger agonist at Y2 receptors [168, 169]. The Y2 recep-
tors might also act as an autoreceptor, regulating the re-
lease of NPY, as well as other neurotransmitters, such as
γ-amino butyric acid (GABA) [170–172]. The Y4 recep-
tors are preferentially bound by PP [169]. The Y1,Y2, and
Y4 receptors are found in the colon and small intestine
[173]. In addition, the Y1 and Y2 receptors are also widely
distributed within the brain, but both Y4 and Y5 receptors
are restricted to particular areas in the brain, including the
nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), hypothalamus, and
amygdala [174, 175].
Table 1 Summary of the impact
of altered microbiota on peptides
Microbial manipulation
Effects
Reference
Germ-free, and mice treated with antibiotics, probiotics
and prebiotics
Increases NPY and PYY
[25, 116,
117]
Mice treated with antibiotics
Decreases Y1 and Y2 receptors
[25]
Rodents treated with antibiotics, probiotics, and
prebiotics
Increases GLP-1
[116–122]
GLP-1 knockout mice
Increases Bacteroidetes and reduced
Firmicutes
[123]
Glucose-tolerant volunteers treated with Lactobacillus
reuteri for 8 weeks
Increases GLP-1
[124]
Germ-free mice
Decreases CCK
[125, 126]
Germ-free mice and rats treated with prebiotics
Decreases ghrelin
[127–130]
Fasted germ-free mice
Increases ghrelin
[121]
Germ-free mice
Decreases CCK
[125, 126]
Intracerebral administration of CRF
Changes in the gut microbiota
[111]
Stress-inducing CRF expression
Decreases in Bacteroidetes and
increases in Firmicutes
[131]
Mice treated with antibiotics from adolescence onwards
No change in CRF and decrease
oxytocin
[21]
Mice treated with Lactobacillus reuteri
Increases oxytocin
[132, 133]
Offspring mice from high fat diet-treated
dam/Lactobacillus reuteri treatment
Decreases oxytocin/restored after
treatment
[26]
NPY = neuropeptide Y; PYY = peptide YY; GLP-1 = glucagon-like peptide; CCK = cholecystokinin; CRF =
corticotropin-releasing factor
40
Lach et al.
 The NPY family is expressed at all levels of the gut–brain
axis. NPY is the most abundant peptide in the brain and is
expressed from the medullary brainstem to the cerebral cortex
(for review, see [175]). The presence of NPY in the NTS and
the ventral hypothalamus deserves special mention since these
areas are the main relays for peripheral signaling, which are
particularly important for the gut–brain signaling [24].
Moreover, NPY is also found in enteric nerve plexuses and
postganglionic sympathetic neurons [24, 176]. The gut pep-
tides PYYand PP are released mainly by EECs, where PYYis
expressed from L cells of the ileum and colon and released in
response to feeding (Fig. 2) [5], whereas PP is synthesized
from F cells of pancreatic islets and under vagal control
[176, 177]. Both PYY and PP are able to cross the BBB by
transmembrane diffusion and bind cognate receptors located
in the area postrema [115, 178]. Moreover, these gut peptides
can activate their cognate receptors located in vagal afferents
to signal to the brainstem [179, 180]. In addition, PYY-
positive neurons are also found in the NTS, and nerve termi-
nals containing PYY are located in the pons, hypothalamus,
and spinal cord [177].
Microbiota and the NPY, PYY, and PP: Relevance
to Anxiety and Depression
There is abundant evidence that the central NPY system af-
fects stress-related disorders such as anxiety and depression
(for a review, see [181, 182]). Additionally, NPY signaling
also has modulatory properties involving neuroprotection,
neurogenesis, and neuroinflammation [183, 184]. The Y4 re-
ceptor, which is mainly activated by peripheral PP, modulates
anxiety and fear-related disorders in rodents [174, 185, 186].
PP is about 100 times more potent than NPY in Y4 activation,
suggesting that PP/Y4 receptors can be an important route of
gut–brain communication in the pathogenesis of anxiety and
depression.
Following a meal, PP and PYY are released and inhibit
gastric emptying via the targeting of receptors on the intestinal
epithelium, as well as vagus nerve signaling [187–189]. By
activating Y4 receptors in the gut, PP reduces intestinal motor
activity and facilitates nutrient absorption, an effect likewise
exerted by PYY [24, 188, 190]. Interestingly, it has been sug-
gested that hunger in rodents could promote fear extinction
through Y4 receptor signaling [185, 191]. Although the gut
microbiota was not investigated in these studies, the results
strongly suggest a potential role for gut–brain communication
through Y4 signaling. The expression of NPY in the hypothal-
amus (where NPY plays a major role in feeding behavior and
stress response) is increased in adult, healthy, germ-free mice
when compared with conventionally raised mice [116]. In
addition, Schéle et al. [116] found that administration of leptin
reduced NPYexpression in germ-free mice but not in conven-
tionally raised mice, suggesting that the gut microbiota may
decrease leptin sensitivity, effects that are dependent on vagal
signaling [192].
Despite its elevation by food intake, circulating PYY can
also be increased by exercise and stress [193, 194], conditions
that also modify the gut microbiota [195, 196]. It is important
to note that more studies linking changes in PYY and the gut
microbiota are needed. Correlative evidence exists between
PYYand the gut microbiota, where elevation in PYY in obese
individuals was associated with changes in the gut microbiota
[197]. Interestingly, PYY secretion is influenced by activation
of FFA receptors by SCFA [85, 198–200]. Moreover, the
SCFA butyrate can increase the expression of receptors that
sense microbial compounds (Toll-like receptors), which, in
turn, increases the expression of PYY [201]. Given the impor-
tance of microbiota-generated SCFAs such as butyrate, the
role of the SCFA in mediating PYY expression through im-
mune cells could be an important link in microbial–host com-
munication and PYY signaling. The use of dietary compounds
to modulate the gut microbiota has been a useful approach to
investigating the role of intestinal bacteria in PYYexpression.
For instance, PYYexpression is upregulated in the ileum after
treatment with prebiotic galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS)
[202]. Although plasma PYY is increased after oligofructose
treatment in healthy rats [202, 203], oligofructose did not alter
plasma PYY levels in obese mice [204]. A separate study in
rodents demonstrated that bacterial proteins produced after
nutrient-induced Esherichia coli growth may signal the CNS
via increased plasma PYY [205]. The same effect was ob-
served after the intake of probiotics. Hong et al. [202] found
an upregulation of intestinal PYY with the commensal bacte-
ria Bifidobacterium bifidum in rats. However, a study in
humans showed that plasma PYY was unaffected after treat-
ment with barley kernel bread, an indigestible carbohydrate
source, and a mixture of the probiotics Bifidobacterium
animalis, Lactobacillus reuteri, and Lacobacillus plantarum
[206]. Despite the interspecies variability, the contrasting re-
sults found in humans and animals could be owing to the
selective spectrum of bacteria that can modulate PYY expres-
sion. For this, Rajpal et al. [207] investigated selective spec-
trum antibiotics and found that only an alteration of Gram-
negative bacteria (which, in turn, increased the population of
Firmicutes) improved metabolic aspects, including PYY, in
rodents.
Evidence of direct involvement interaction between the
NPY system and the gut microbiota modulating behavior is
lacking. Perhaps the most convincing evidence of the gut
NPY family signaling brain function is found within the
context of depression and anxiety associated with colitis.
For example, in a colitis disease model, it was found that
an increase in the colonic synthesis of NPY was associated
with decreased colonic Y1 receptor expression [208, 209].
Moreover, circulating levels of plasma PYY and NPY are
also enhanced in patients with IBD, suggesting that the
Microbiome and Gut Peptides
41
 epithelial levels of NPY and PYY are exhausted by exces-
sive release of these peptides from EECs and intestinal
neurons [173]. In addition, NPY-depleted mice are resis-
tant to developing colitis and the levels of colonic PYY are
decreased in rats with chemically induced colitis or pa-
tients with IBS [24, 173, 208]. The effects of colitis on
behavior are also modified by NPY or PYY. For example,
depletion of NPY or PYY in mice prevents the anxiogenic
and depressive-like behavior often promoted by colitis
[210]. Moreover, the effect of increased expression of
NPY on immune function, is mediated mainly via NPY
receptors located on immune cells [173, 211], as well as
through the modulatory role of TLR on PYY expression
[201]. Crosstalk between the immune system and the brain
neurocircuitry can drive the development of depression
and raise anxiety [212]. Thus, it is likely that gut microbi-
ota contributes indirectly to NPY release and signaling to
affect its homeostatic role in balancing the brain’s response
to stress in the brain. Recently, it was shown that the de-
pletion of the gut microbiota in adult mice upregulated
NPY expression within the amygdala and hypothalamus,
followed by cognitive deficits [25], an effect also observed
in rats housed in environmental enrichment [213].
However, anxiety- or depression-like behaviors were unaf-
fected in these animals [25]. Interestingly, hypothalamic
NPY was also found increased in germ-free mice [116].
Germ-free mice usually present an anxiolytic phenotype
behaviorally [214]. In fact, the anxiolytic profile of NPY
is associated with its central levels to promote a change in
the anxiety phenotype of the animals [215]. Moreover,
Schéle et al. [116] demonstrated the role of NPY in
counteracting the increased plasma levels of corticosterone
in germ-free rodents. Of note, germ-free rodents have an
exaggerated release of corticosterone after acute restraint
stress [27, 216]. In contrast, plasma NPY levels decreased
after the introduction of conventional intestinal microbiota
in germ-free mice [217], a shift also observed by Sudo
et al. [216] with the corticosterone levels after recoloniza-
tion of germ-free mice. Interestingly, a fiber-supplemented
diet did not affect plasma PYY in germ-free rats, a result
that was not observed in conventional mice [218]. Finally,
NPY and PYY are also antimicrobial peptides, influencing
the composition and function of the gut microbiota [219].
Although a mechanism pointing to how the gut microbiota
influence the NPY system and then modulate brain function
and behavior, it is worth noting that NPY receptors are
expressed on immune cells, brain neurons, primary afferents
in the gut, and sympathetic neurons. Thus, in addition to the
literature mentioned above, this indicates that NPY, PYY, and
PP somehow participate in the reciprocal interaction between
the brain, the gut, and the immune system, therefore
warranting investigation of their pathophysiological implica-
tions within the context of the microbiota–gut–brain axis.
GLP-1
GLP-1, an incretin hormone, is a 30 amino-acid peptide de-
rived from the post-translational processing of
preproglucagon, which is involved in the neural regulation
of food intake, body weight, the modulation of the hypotha-
lamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, and overall response to
stress via activation of the GLP-1 receptor (for review, see
[220–223]).
In the brain, GLP-1 is present in the NTS and the olfactory
bulb [5, 224]. In the NTS, GLP-1 fibers directly innervate
hypophysiotrophic CRF neurons in the paraventricular nucle-
us (PVN), where GLP-1 activates the HPA axis response
[225]. GLP-1 receptor is abundantly found in brain regions
that are critical for the regulation of both metabolic and endo-
crine responses [226]. In the periphery, GLP-1 is secreted by L
cells, which also secrete PYY in the ileum and the colon in
response to neuronal and hormonal signals (Fig. 2) [5, 110],
whereas the GLP-1 receptors are distributed in the gut, pan-
creatic β-cells, kidney, and in the vagus nerve [222, 227].
Following release into the bloodstream, GLP-1 is rapidly
degraded, resulting in < 10% of secreted GLP-1 reaching sys-
temic circulation as a result of enzymatic degradation [221].
Thus, it is likely that GLP-1 acts locally in a paracrine fashion
in the intestine. Indeed, vagal afferent neurons express the
GLP-1 receptor, activation of which induces firing of the re-
spective vagal afferent neurons and most likely stimulation of
NTS [228, 229]. As the NTS projects GLP-1 neurons directly
to the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, it is plau-
sible to affirm that GLP-1 restricts feeding behavior, which is
dependent of the vagal pathway [230–232]. Although it is
unlikely that nutrient-induced GLP-1 enters the circulation
to act centrally to lower food intake, it has been proposed that
rather than entering the systemic circulation, GLP-1 is re-
leased into the lymph [233–235]. GLP-1 levels in the lymph
were found to be higher, lasting longer than in the blood-
stream, supporting a plausible model where GLP-1 does reach
the brain given its transport via the lymph [233]. If not, it is
also known that intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes can
modulate energy availability, host microbial responses, and
mucosal integrity through the activation of GLP-1 receptors
in immune cells, and regulate the migration of lymphocytes
and natural killer T cells [123, 236].
Gut Microbiota and GLP-1: Relevance to Anxiety
and Depression
GLP-1 is widely recognized for its role in lowering postpran-
dial blood glucose via augmentation of glucose-dependent
insulin release and inhibition of glucagon secretion (for re-
view, see [237]). Interestingly, brain abnormalities and cogni-
tive deficits similar to those found in depressive patients are
also frequently identified in individuals with metabolic
42
Lach et al.
 disorders [238–241]. It is particularly relevant that patients
with diabetes are twice as likely to suffer from anxiety and
depression than the general population [242, 243]. Growing
evidence supports the role of GLP-1 in the central effects of
metabolic syndrome, as GLP-1 in anxiety appears to be relat-
ed to the improvement of the glucoregulation in diabetic
states, with subsequent reduction in proinflammatory cyto-
kines and an increase in neuroprotection [244, 245]. For ex-
ample, reduction of the phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes in
the gut ameliorates insulin resistance under conditions of a
high-fat diet by stimulating GLP-1 secretion in mice [246].
Moreover, anxiety-like behavior in diabetic mice was blunted
by a GLP-1 receptor agonist [247, 248], whereas in nondia-
betic animals, the impact of a GLP-1 receptor agonist was less
clear in reducing anxiety-like behavior [249–251]. However,
chronic systemic stimulation of GLP-1 receptors promoted
antidepressant-like effects in rodents, coupled with increasing
hippocampal neurogenesis, suggesting plasticity-related ef-
fects could underpin such effects [252–255]. Furthermore, a
GLP-1 receptor agonist was able to reverse LPS-induced de-
pressive-like behavior without directly affecting inflammatory
cytokines [256]. Taken together, it is likely that attenuation of
glucose fluctuations by GLP-1 is responsible for its neuropro-
tective effects, especially during plasma hyperglycemia.
Evidence suggests a key role for SCFA in modulating GLP-1
expression through the stimulation of FFA2 and FFA3 receptors
in rodents [83, 105, 257–260]. Moreover, butyrate-induced
GLP-1 secretion is attenuated in FFA3 receptor-depleted mice
[105], thereby supporting a role for the gut microbiota in GLP-1
release. Indeed, germ-free or antibiotic-treated mice have elevat-
ed plasma and intestinal GLP-1 levels, as well as increased
proglucagon expression in the colon [118, 205, 246,
261–263]. The expression of GLP-1 in the hypothalamus of
germ-free mice is higher than in conventionally colonized ani-
mals [116]. Probiotics such as Bifidobacterium animalis and
Bifidobacterium bifidum increase intestinal and plasma GLP-1
levels in rodents [119, 202, 259]. GLP-1 is also upregulated in
mice after treatment with the prebiotics GOS, oligofructose, and
inulin-type fructans [127, 202, 264–266]. The depletion of
GLP-1 in rodents alters the composition of the enteric microbi-
ota [123] and abolishes the antidiabetic actions of oligofructose
in mice [266]. Collectively, these findings suggest the gut
microbiome influences central and peripheral GLP-1 production
through L cells in the gut.
The effects observed in animals can also be found in
humans. In healthy volunteers, a mixture of barley kernel
bread and Bifidobacterium animalis, Lactobacillus reuteri,
and Lactobacillus plantarum increased levels of plasma of
GLP-1 without affecting metabolic outcomes [206]. The result
was observed in glucose-tolerant volunteers, where the daily
administration of Lactobacillus reuteri or the commercially
available VSL#3 (a formulation with 8 strains of commensal
bacteria, including different strains of Bifidobacterium and
Lactobacillus) increased GLP-1 release into the blood, with-
out a change in insulin sensitivity or body fat distribution
[120, 124]. In patients with mood disorders and the presence
of cognitive deficits, it was found that 4-week treatment with a
GLP-1 agonist reverted the cognitive deficits without affect-
ing metabolic parameters, suggesting GLP-1 target offers ben-
eficial effects in some symptoms that can be overrepresented
in psychiatric disorders [267].
Taken together, the localization of GLP-1 and the GLP-1
receptors in the gut–brain axis underscores the importance of
the microbiota in the modulatory role for GLP-1 in the central
regulation of energy homeostasis, which may influence de-
pression and anxiety associated with metabolic dysfunctions.
CCK
CCK is derived from a 115 amino-acid precursor and is con-
verted into multiple isoforms, which range from 4 to 58 amino
acids in length, with a wide range of physiological effects such
as the control of gastric emptying, gallbladder contraction,
pancreatic enzyme release, and suppression of appetite (for
review, see [268]). Generally, CCK acts through the G
protein-coupled receptors CCK1 and CCK2 receptors to mod-
ulate other neurotransmitters, such as GABA, glutamate, do-
pamine, and acetylcholine.
CCK is also found abundantly in the peripheral and central
nervous systems [23]. Within limbic areas, CCK is generally
co-localized with 5-HT3 and CB1 receptors, which participate
in regulation of mood (for review, see [269–271]). In the gut,
CCK is released postprandially from I cells of the small intes-
tine (Fig. 2), although mature EECs have the ability to co-
express CCK with GLP-1 and PYY [5, 110]. Both CCK1
and CCK2 receptors have distinct patterns of expression.
CCK1 is found mainly within the periphery, including vagal
afferent terminals along the mucosal epithelium, whereas
CCK2 is widely distributed in the brain, overlapping with
CCK distribution [23, 272].
Gut Microbiota and CCK: Relevance to Anxiety
and Depression
The role of CCK in emotional behaviors is seen primarily
through the activation of the CCK2 receptors in limbic re-
gions, mainly the basolateral amygdala and, to some extent,
cortical areas and the hippocampus. Both human and rodents
studies indicate a positive correlation of CCK levels and in-
creased anxiety-like behavior [273–275]. Moreover, systemic
administration of CCK-8 elevated the levels of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor in the rat hippocampus, suggesting a
neuroplasticity-related effect mediated by CCK [276].
CCK is the first peptide released postprandially to reduce
food intake in both obese and lean individuals, remaining in
Microbiome and Gut Peptides
43
 the bloodstream for about 3 h [277, 278]. Then, CCK acts on
its cognate receptors in the periphery located mainly on vagal
afferent neurons that project to the NTS [2, 279, 280]. Indeed,
vagotomy in mice attenuates the effects of CCK on gastric
emptying, whereas the administration of LPS abolishes
CCK-induced inhibition of food intake [281, 282]. Gut CCK
has also been implicated in the pathophysiology of both IBS
and IBD. The densities of CCK cells are reduced in IBD,
which may lower the levels of gastric secretion, such as bicar-
bonate, pancreatic enzymes, and bile salts, resulting in the
development of IBS [283, 284]. Interestingly, a potential role
for CCK in regulating the immune system has also been sug-
gested in mice. Mice lacking T-cell receptors, which develop
inflammation on the colonic epithelium, have been associated
with a decrease in the number of EEC cells specialized in
secreting CCK [285]. As CCK has been reported to have
anti-inflammatory effects, reduced expression of CCK in the
gut may have an impact on gut inflammatory diseases, with
subsequent consequences in IBD or IBS comorbidity.
CCK signaling is also modulated by the gut microbiota.
Obese rodents, which have drastic changes in the composition
of gut microbiota, exhibit reduced response to CCK in the
nodose ganglia [286], as well as decreased CCK signaling in
the brain [287, 288]. Moreover, depletion of CCK1 in mice
reduces firing in NTS neurons, indicating that the activation of
the vagal afferent neurons was inhibited [289]. However,
germ-free mice have reduced concentrations of gut CCK and
delayed intestinal transit [125, 126], whereas infection of
germ-free rodents with Giardia increased colonic expression
of CCK [283], corroborating previous studies showing that
intestinal infection could facilitate CCK stimulation of vagal
afferent neurons [290, 291].
Despite the changes observed in CCK levels in obese ani-
mals, plasma concentrations of CCK were not different in
severely obese patients versus normal-weight individuals
[292]. Federico et al. [292] did not observe changes in the
gut microbiota after obese patients underwent bariatric sur-
gery. Taken together, the results from this study show that
circulating CCK may not be modulated by changes in the
gut microbiome facilitated by alterations in energy
metabolism.
The importance of the microbiota in the modulatory role
for CCK in the central regulation of energy homeostasis may
influence depression and anxiety associated with obesity and
represent a potential target in this specific aspect of
emotionality.
Ghrelin
Ghrelin is a 28 amino-acid stomach-derived peptide known
for its powerful physiological orexigenic and adipogenic ef-
fects, as well as for its contribution toward the stress response,
anxiety, and depression [293–297]. Ghrelin is the endogenous
ligand of the growth hormone secretagogue receptor type 1a
and was first discovered for its stimulation of growth hormone
secretion from the pituitary [293]. The ghrelin receptor
(growth hormone secretagogue receptor type 1a) is expressed
in the brain predominantly in the anterior pituitary gland, ar-
cuate nucleus, amygdala, substantia nigra, ventral tegmental
area, and raphe nuclei, whereas peripheral expression is found
in the pancreatic islets, adrenal gland, and thyroid [298, 299].
Ghrelin is secreted by A cells of the stomach (Fig. 2) [293,
299], although other peripheral organs such as the testis, pla-
centa, kidney, small intestine, and pancreas also express low
levels of ghrelin [28]. There is also evidence for the synthesis
of ghrelin in the brain, albeit at a much lower level, in specific
neuronal cells of the hypothalamus [28, 300]. Of note, central
ghrelin expression remains highly controversial as no signifi-
cant amounts could be detected in rodent neuronal cells, and
ghrelin receptor-expressing neurons did not receive synaptic
inputs from ghrelin-immunoreactive nerve terminals in these
species, suggesting considerable inconsistency between dif-
ferent studies [299, 301].
Peripherally produced ghrelin exerts its appetite-inducing
effects centrally after passing through the BBB [112,
302–304]. In addition, ghrelin axon terminals were found to
innervate other hypothalamic peptidergic systems, such as
agouti-related peptide- and proopiomelanocortin neurons in
the arcuate nucleus and CRF in the PVN, suggesting that
interactions between ghrelin and NPY/AGPR,
proopiomelanocortin, and CRF circuits are critical for energy
homeostasis and stress responses [305–307]. Nevertheless, it
appears that in addition to its effects on feeding, ghrelin en-
hances the release of NPY onto GABAergic nerve terminals
adjacent to CRH neurons, disinhibiting these neurons and
stimulating CRF release into the pituitary–hypophyseal portal
circulation, driving increased ACTH secretion from the pitu-
itary [28, 308].
Gut Microbiota and Ghrelin: Relevance to Anxiety
and Depression
Ghrelin crosses the BBB via active transport and direct diffu-
sion, making the ghrelinergic system ideally placed to play an
important role in the stress response [112, 297, 302].
Physiological state, such as fasting, strongly affects the trans-
port of ghrelin into the brain [302]. However, different
stressors, such as social defeat and restraint stress in rodents,
can increase long-term ghrelin levels in the stomach
[309–311]. Mice lacking endogenous ghrelin have a damp-
ened circulating glucocorticoid response following an acute
stressor due a deficit in the PVN response needed to stimulate
ACTH from the pituitary [295, 311]. Moreover, mice lacking
growth hormone secretagogue (GHS) receptors are more sus-
ceptible to stress and exhibit anxiety- and depressive-like
44
Lach et al.
 behavior [309, 312]. Recently, some studies have demonstrat-
ed that hunger (which increases ghrelin levels) can instigate
the search for food even under stressful and anxiogenic con-
ditions, a sign of adaptation for survival [185, 313, 314]. In
agreement with the survival theory, recent studies have shown
that repeated injection of GHS receptor agonists into the
amygdala increases stressor-inducing fear memory formation,
whereas antagonists of GHS receptor administered during re-
peated stressors prevented fear memory formation, as well as
anxiety and depression-like phenotypes in mice [296, 315].
Thus, ghrelin may regulate the network designed to enhance
survival potential by increasing vigilance, fear, and controlling
anxiety. This framework provides a model through which
ghrelin could have myriad actions on mood, depending on
contextual states and physiological feedback mechanisms.
Although released in the stomach, the regulatory role of
ghrelin in appetite is mainly achieved centrally within the
arcuate nucleus and the brainstem [316, 317]. Thus, the regu-
latory role of ghrelin in the CNS may be affected by the gut
microbiota via vagus nerve to the NTS. Indeed, germ-free
mice have lower levels of plasma ghrelin under basal condi-
tions than conventional mice [128, 129]. However, after a
period of fasting, germ-free mice have higher plasma ghrelin
concentrations than conventionally colonized mice, which
could reflect a direct effect of fasting and not the microbiota
profile on ghrelin release [121]. Interestingly, serum ghrelin
levels are negatively correlated with the abundance of certain
gut bacteria, including the commensal Bifidobacterium and
Lactobacillus strains [318]. In addition, chronically elevated
plasma ghrelin, associated with changes in the gut microbiota,
can prevent anxiety- and depression-like behavior through
ghrelin receptors [309]. Ghrelin has also been shown to de-
crease in response to the prebiotic supplementation inulin and
oligofructose uniquely in obese and lean rodents, with obese
rats showing attenuated ghrelin levels [117, 122, 127].
However, oligofructose does not change plasma ghrelin levels
in obese rats fed a high fat/high sucrose diet [203]. In addition,
ingestion of conjugated linoleic acid induced changes in the
gut microbiota, increasing Bacteroides/Prevotella species and
ghrelin levels in the gastric mucosa of mice [319]. Increased
ghrelin was also observed in rats after treatment with a
diet containing 10% cocoa or cocoa fiber, which was
negatively associated with Bifidobacterium and
Streptococcus [320], whereas infection with pathogenic
Toxoplasma gondii lowered ghrelin serum levels in rats
[321]. A negative correlation between Firmicutes and
ghrelin levels was observed both in humans and rodents
[322, 323]. Moreover, the SCFA butyrate, as well as
physical exercise, reduce serum ghrelin levels through
involvement of FFA3 receptor [105, 318]. Of note,
physical exercise alters the composition of the microbi-
ota in the cecum and increases the concentration of
butyrate in the cecal content of rats [324].
In humans, the relationship between the gut microbiota and
ghrelin levels seems to mirror that in rodents where the rela-
tive abundance of bacterial taxa such as Bacteroides was neg-
atively correlated with plasma ghrelin, which, in obese pa-
tients, was increased [130, 197, 292]. Interestingly, plasma
ghrelin did not return to levels found in normal weight indi-
viduals after obese patients underwent bariatric surgery, de-
spite a postoperative increase of Lactobacillus and
Streptococcus [292]. The use of dietary capsaicin was shown
to increase the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, which was as-
sociated with decreased plasma ghrelin levels and an increase
in butyrate [325]. Although dietary capsaicin was given to
healthy subjects, this study may warrant future investigations
into how the manipulation of the enteric microbiome may
achieve lowered ghrelin levels in people. Reduced ghrelin
levels could have implications in daily stress, minimizing in-
cidence of psychiatric disorders. For example, injection of
ghrelin in healthy humans increased plasma glucocorticoids
levels [326].
Ghrelin has recently attracted attention not only as a hunger
hormone, but also because of its role in modulating aspects of
stress, including anxiety-like behavior and fear. In concert
with other gut peptides, ghrelin signaling through the gut–
brain axis may tune communication between the periphery
and brain during daily life stressors. Nevertheless, a direct link
between the gut microbiota and the modulation of ghrelin
remains absent.
CRF
CRF is a 41 amino-acid residue peptide that plays a key role in
orchestrating the endocrine, behavioral, and GI responses to
stress (for review, see [327–329]). CRF is abundantly
expressed in neurons of the PVN of the hypothalamus where
it is released through effector neurons, which, in turn, mediate
neural control of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) re-
lease from pituitary corticotrophs. Then, ACTH passes into
systemic circulation to cause the release of cortisol (in
humans) or corticosterone (in rodents) from the adrenal glands
[328, 330]. Apart from hypothalamic CRF, this peptide and its
receptors are also expressed throughout several other limbic
regions and in the gut [331, 332]. In the gut, CRF is mainly
localized in enterochromaffin cells of the colon [333, 334],
and in submucosal and lamina propria cells, but not in epithe-
lial cells in the ileum [335]. CRF can bind two G protein-
coupled receptor subtypes, namely CRF1 and CRF2 receptors,
with different affinities. Apart from receptor binding, CRF
also binds to CRF-binding protein with high affinity. CRF-
binding protein is thought to play an inhibitory role in which
it binds CRF to prevent the activation of CRF receptors [336].
CRF is centrally expressed on GABAergic, glutamatergic, and
dopaminergic neurons [337], and can modulate the
Microbiome and Gut Peptides
45
 catecholaminergic response to stress by activating the norad-
renergic neurons in the locus coeruleus or regulating the syn-
thesis and release of adrenaline in the adrenals [329, 330].
Bethin et al. [338] found that immune activation induced by
endotoxin produced a robust rise in plasma corticosterone in
CRF or CRF1 receptor knockout mice, comparable with wild-
type mice. Since the gut microbiota strongly affects the im-
mune system, intestinal diseases where the gut microbiota is
changed, such as IBS and IBD, may induce the expression of
inflammatory cells, which, in turn, can increase expression of
glucocorticoids but not CRF.
Gut Microbiota and CRF: Relevance to Anxiety
and Depression
Functional CRF1 receptors are essential for the activation of
the endocrine response to stress [169]. However, when acute
stress reactions become more frequent, it can lead to the de-
velopment of stress-related disorders, including anxiety and
depression (for review, see [329, 339]). Whereas the absence
of CRF1 receptors impairs basal and stress-induced HPA axis
response and induces an anxiolytic- and antidepressant-like
effect [329, 340, 341], CRF1 overexpression results in an
anxiogenic- and depressive-like profile in rodents and humans
[342–346]. Interestingly, antidepressant treatment normalizes
expression of CRF and CRF1 receptors in association with
remission of depression [329, 344, 346].
The CRF system also induces functional changes within
the gut, including slowed gastric emptying, colonic motile
stimulation, and impairment of the intestinal epithelial barrier,
each an effect independent of a stressful situation [347, 348].
Recently, a study has found that a single administration of
CRF modified the gut microbiota in rats, with specific reduc-
tions in Lactobacillus [349]. Although the inhibitory effect of
central CRF on gut motility and permeability does not change
with peripheral injection of CRF or the removal of different
HPA axis components [108, 350–352], acute stress in mice
induced the release of intestinal CRF independently of the
HPA axis [131]. Sun et al. [131] also observed changes in
gut microbiota composition, which was reverted with a probi-
otic supplement. The central administration of CRF in rodents
induces depressive and anxiolytic-like behavior, which was
followed by changes in the intestinal microbial community
[138]. Furthermore, the intestinal microbiota can interfere in
host CRF signaling. Germ-free rodents have increased hypo-
thalamic CRF gene expression, as well as circulating levels of
ACTH and corticosterone to acute restraint stress in adulthood
[27, 216]. These effects in the HPA axis are normalized in
recolonized germ-free mice [216]. Taken together, such data
indicate that CRF-mediated activation of the HPA axis de-
pends on the gut microbiota. Interestingly, the depletion of
the gut microbiota via antibiotic treatment in mice from
weaning onward does not alter hypothalamic mRNA CRF
expression in adulthood, even when mice underwent acute
restraint stress [21], suggesting gut microbiota-mediated
CRF signaling may occur during early life. Prenatal stress
induced depressive-like behavior in adulthood mice, which
led to a long-lasting change of the enteric microbiota compo-
sition associated with an exaggerated HPA axis response to
stress [353–355]. Early-life stress such as maternal separation
results in changes in the gut microbiota followed by an in-
crease in stress reactivity, including a decrease in
Lactobacillus in adult mice [137]. Lactobacillus also sup-
pressed plasma corticosterone and hypothalamic CRF-
expressing cells in rats that underwent water-avoidance stress
[356]. Using a mixture of 8 bacterial strains, including
Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, Abildgaard et al. [357]
observed lowered hippocampal transcript levels of CRF re-
ceptors followed by marked reduction in depressive-like be-
havior in rats. Furthermore, social stress in mice also induced
changes in the microbiota, which were accompanied by
changes in cytokine and chemokine levels [149]. Taken to-
gether, these data support a role for the gut microbiota as a
potential treatment intervention to blunt stress reactivity.
Preclinical data from prenatal stress studies have been
confirmed in clinical trials. Infants of mothers with high
self-reported stress and high levels of salivary cortisol
during pregnancy had a significantly higher relative
abundance of Proteobacteria and lower relative abun-
dances of lactic acid bacteria (i.e., Lactobacillus,
Lactoccus, Aerococcus) and Bifidobacteria [358].
Nonetheless, those infants with altered microbiota com-
position exhibited a higher level of infant GI symptoms
and allergic reactions, highlighting the functional conse-
quences of aberrant colonization patterns in early life,
which can contribute to psychiatric comorbidities.
Increased CRF concentration in the cerebrospinal fluid
was also reported in depressive patients and victims of
suicide [359, 360]. Interestingly, administration of
Clostridium butyricum from the phylum Firmicutes can
block increased CRF levels in patients before surgical
procedures [361]. These patients also presented a re-
duced degree of anxiety before surgery, suggesting an
interesting effect of probiotics in mediating CRF expres-
sion to modulate stress reactivity. However, how gut
microbes initiate such a response through CRF signaling
is still unknown. A better understanding of CRF–micro-
biota interactions may identify potential gut microbiota-
targeted interventions to enhance resilience in stress
situations.
Oxytocin
Although oxytocin facilitates parturition and lactation in fe-
males, decreased oxytocin levels have been linked with
46
Lach et al.
 depression (not only postpartum depression) and maternal ne-
glect [362, 363]. Oxytocin is synthesized by the
magnocellular neurons in the supraoptic and paraventricular
nucleus of the hypothalamus and secreted to the circulation by
the posterior pituitary or to nerve terminals located mainly in
the anterior pituitary, amygdala, hippocampus, and the bed
nucleus of the stria terminalis (for review, see [364]).
Peripherally, oxytocin and OXT receptors are mainly
expressed in the uterus, with low expression in many other
tissues and organs, including kidney, pancreas, adrenal, and
adipose tissue [365]. Interestingly, oxytocin can be found in
enteric neurons; however, gut OXT receptors are not only
found in enteric neurons, but they are also found in
enterocytes [366]. There is little evidence that oxytocin is
modulated by gut bacteria, although gut microbiota seems to
influence oxytocin in the brain [21, 26]. Moreover, there is
cross reactivity in binding of oxytocin and vasopressin with its
respective receptor, where oxytocin binds its receptor with
only 10 times greater affinity than vasopressin [367].
Gut Microbiota and Oxytocin: Relevance to Anxiety
and Depression
Oxytocin-expressing neurons within the hypothalamus are
stimulated by stress-mediated noradrenaline release, which
elevates oxytocin levels in mammals to counteract the physi-
ologic actions of stressors (for review, see [368–371]).
Oxytocin secretion is also directly modulated by various clas-
sical immune cytokines, such as inteleukin-1β and
interleukin-10 [372, 373], an effect that minimizes immuno-
logic insults and exerts protective effects by restoring host
homeostasis. Moreover, the administration of oxytocin exerts
an antidepressant-like effect in rodents [374–377], whereas
lowered oxytocin levels observed in nonweaned rats induces
a depressive-like phenotype, which correlates positively with
changes in the gut bacterial taxa [378]. Experimental stress in
rodents is associated with the downregulation of OXT recep-
tors in the amygdala [378]. Since stress can alter the gut mi-
crobiota composition, it is not surprising that there is interac-
tion between oxytocin and the gut microbiome. Interestingly,
gut microbiota depletion from early adolescence impacts oxy-
tocin signaling, reducing both hypothalamic oxytocin and va-
sopressin levels in mice subjected to stress [21, 379].
Normalized oxytocin levels in stressed animals was followed
by a reduction of anxiety-like behavior and correction in cog-
nitive deficits [21]. However, mice fed with L. reuteri restored
hypothalamic oxytocin neurons, as well as social behaviors, in
a study investigating the effects of maternal high-fat diet on
the offspring [26]. Interestingly, the effects observed above are
dependent on vagal signaling, which blunted the effects of
Lactobacillus on host plasma and hypothalamic oxytocin
[132, 133]. Oleoylethanolamide, a product of fat absorption,
which has antidepressant-like and neuroimmune properties
[380, 381], excites vagal afferent neurons and stimulates both
axonal and somatodendritic oxytocin secretion [382–384].
Oleoylethanolamide-inducing activation of the NTS in ro-
dents precedes the activation of oxytocinergic neurons in the
PVN, and the latter response appears to be mediated by nor-
adrenergic projections from the NTS to the PVN [383], sug-
gesting that gut-signaling oxytocin may be mediated by
oleoylethanolamide. Nonetheless, plasticity in the oxytocin
system is likely a protective coping mechanism in response
to stress shaped by the gut microbiota during the early life
stage, mainly through maternal exchange, which can contrib-
ute to depressive phenotypes when offspring become adults.
However, additional studies are needed to demonstrate a func-
tional role of the gut microbiota in the host oxytocin system.
Psychobiotics: Towards a New Class of Psychiatric
Treatments
Psychobiotics are defined as an exogenous intervention to effect
changes in mental health via modulation of the gut microbiome
(forreview,see[54,56]).Thismayincludenotonlyprebioticsand
probiotics, but also diet and exercise that affect enteric bacterial
communities [54]. Few studies have shown results that may sup-
port a clinical role for psychobiotic intervention. For example,
changesindietevenforashortduration(24h)candrasticallyalter
the composition of the gut microbiota [385]. Moreover, the qual-
ity of the diet (i.e., a typical Western diet rich in fat and protein)
drastically reduces Bifidobacteria and butyrate-producing bacte-
ria [386, 387], whereas a Mediterranean diet, which is thought of
as a healthy diet, shows significant increases in SCFAs [43]. An
overview of epidemiological studies showing the impact of diet
on SCFA produced by the gut microbiota can be found in Ríos-
Covián et al. [388].
Regarding direct administration of probiotic or other com-
mercially available formulations to manipulate the gut microbi-
ota, a study found that students who ingested Lactobacillus spp.
had lower plasma cortisol, which can be interpreted as a mea-
sure indicative of reduced anxiety during a stressful situation
[389]. In a separate investigation, participants consumed a
fermented milk product containing Lactobacillus casei self-
reported the same as the control subjects [49]. However, when
only participants whose baseline mood scores were lower (in-
dicative of an antidepressive state), probiotic supplementation
resulted in significantly more of this group of participants self-
scoring as happy rather than depressed compared with placebo
[49]. In yet another study, healthy participants who ingested
Lactobacillus helveticus and Bifidobacterium longum showed
less self-reported negative mood and decreased urinary cortisol
[50, 390]. A similar effect was also observed in healthy partic-
ipants who consumed a mixture of Bifidobacterium bifidum and
Bifidobacterium lactis, and Lactobacillus acidophilus,
Brevibacillus brevis, Brevibacterium casei, Bifidobacterium
Microbiome and Gut Peptides
47
 salivarius, and Lactococcus lactis [51]. Allen et al. [52] found
that healthy individuals fed Bifidobacterium longum had atten-
uated levels of cortisol and reduced subjective anxiety in re-
sponse to the socially evaluated cold stress pressor test. A sim-
ilar effect was observed following consumption of a commer-
cially available prebiotic Bimuno® galacto-oligosaccharides,
where individuals showed a reduction in waking-cortisol re-
sponse and decreased attentional vigilance to negative versus
positive information, suggesting a role in modulating depression
[391]. Schmidt et al. [391] found that Bimuno galacto-
oligosaccharides intake decreased attentional vigilance to nega-
tive versus positive information. However, the probiotic
Lactobacillus rhamnosus failed to alter mood, anxiety, and
stress-related measures when subjects faced a socially evaluated
cold pressor test [392], an effect previously observed in rodents
[20]. Taken together, the above findings highlight the challenges
associated with translating promising preclinical studies to
healthy human subjects. Studies in populations with mental dis-
orders are therefore required to assess the potential benefit of the
manipulation of the gut microbiota as a therapeutic strategy. In
recent studies investigating patients with depression and anxiety,
a mixture of the probiotics Lactobacillus acidophilus,
Lactobacillus casei, and Bifidobacterium bifidum found a sig-
nificant decrease in depression scores [393], whereas a separate
investigation of the effects of Bifidobacterium longum on anx-
iety and depression in patients with IBS demonstrated probiotic
treatment reduced depression but not anxiety scores and in-
creased the quality of life in patients with IBS [167], indicating
that this probiotic may reduce limbic reactivity.
Psychobiotics: Targeting Gut Peptides
There are major challenges associated with the development
of peptide therapeutics, including limited peptide stability, a
short duration of action, and the ability to cross the BBB [394,
395]. Such limitations may reduce the potential of exogenous-
delivered peptides to reach specific target sites, which may fail
to reflect the effect of the endogenously derived peptide [396].
Although several approaches have been designed to address
the efficacy of the peptide delivery, the majority are concerned
with targeted modification of peptide chemistry.
Targeting the release of the gut peptides may be an ap-
proach to be considered in conjunction with future break-
throughs in psychobiotics. Advances in the field of
pharmacomicrobiomics, which focuses on the interpretation
of intraindividual human microbiomes stratified according to
different lifestyles, may highlight how an improved under-
standing of the human microbiome may lead to the develop-
ment of psychobiotic therapeutic agents [397, 398].
Thus, psychobiotics could be designed to target, for exam-
ple, specific EECs to elicit the release of controlled endoge-
nous peptides without upstream consequences. Personalized
medicine may consider questions of the individual’s own
microbiome, thereby necessitating the personalization of
psychobiotics. This could focus potential peptide-mediated
immune responses, improve vagal signaling, or modulate neu-
ropeptide expression in brain regions associated with mental
health.
Another interesting approach is the development of
targeted antimicrobials. Since the nature of bacteria that occu-
py overlapping niches is to compete for the same nutrients,
antimicrobials such as bacteriocins may help gain terrain over
neighbor competitors. Bacteriocins are ribosomally synthe-
sized peptides that are produced by bacteria to eliminate
neighboring cells through toxic and immune functions, while
protecting itself and its progeny [399–402]. Moreover, a re-
cent paper described that commensal bacteria are able to pro-
duce G-protein-coupled receptor agonists to regulate the GI
tract physiology, including metabolic hormones and glucose
homeostasis [4].
Therefore, the manipulation of gut peptides via
psychobiotics may represent a promising opportunity to target
mental disorders from the site of the GI tract. Identification of
the mechanism(s) underlying the activity of gut peptides and
how might the gut microbiota modulate the peptide physiolo-
gy may facilitate greater understanding of gut to brain com-
munication and its role in the neurobiology of the anxiety and
depression.
Conclusion
We are at the very early stages of understanding the complex-
ities of communication along the microbiota–gut–brain axis.
However, there is already strong evidence to support the in-
fluence of the enteric microbiome on brain function in health
and disease, suggesting the gut microbiome plays a crucial
role in normal brain development, as well as modulation of
host physiological systems important in stress-related disor-
ders. Among the diverse pathways by which the gut can signal
the brain, the endocrine system seems to play an important
role, as it is capable of modulating not only other endocrine
functions, but also the neural and immune systems. As sug-
gested here, peptides released by specialized cells in the gut
participate in gut-to-brain communication. Peptides may be
envisaged to orchestrate the molecular, functional, behavioral,
and autonomic reactions that take place in response to alter-
ations of the gut microbial community. There is significant
anatomical and functional overlap of peptides released in the
gut and brain, suggesting that these peptides exert common
downstream effects on neural systems involved in mental
health. Nevertheless, the dynamic changes in peptides and
respective receptor expression in the gut and brain of rodents
and humans with altered microbiota attests to a profound role
of the gut bacteria on peptides. Understanding how the gut
48
Lach et al.
 microbes might influence peptide physiology should be a cen-
tral objective of future research in this field. The generation of
specialized psychobiotics to modify gut hormone secretion
from EECs may represent feasible and therapeutic
microbiota-based strategies for the treatment of depression
and anxiety disorders. Interestingly, microbiota-derived me-
tabolites might be able directly to modify gut-peptide recep-
tors, displaying gut-peptide mimicry. Rising interest in this
area of research will no doubt lead to greater insights into
the mechanism(s) underlying microbiome–gut–brain commu-
nication, and provide novel understanding of the potential for
microbial-based therapeutic strategies that may aid in the
treatment of mood disorders.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by Science Foundation
Ireland in the form of a center grant (APC Microbiome Institute; Grant
No. SFI/12/RC/2273). The advice of Dr. Joshua M. Lyte, Dr. Kiran
Sandhu and Simon Spichak is gratefully acknowledged.
References
1.
Dockray GJ. Gastrointestinal hormones and the dialogue between
gut and brain. J Physiol 2014;592:2927–2941.
2.
Dockray GJ. Enteroendocrine cell signalling via the vagus nerve.
Curr Opin Pharmacol 2013;13:954–958.
3.
Cani PD, Everard A, Duparc T. Gut microbiota, enteroendocrine
functions and metabolism. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2013;13:935–
940.
4.
Cohen LJ, Esterhazy D, Kim S-H, et al. Commensal bacteria make
GPCR ligands that mimic human signalling molecules. Nature
2017;549:48–53.
5.
Latorre R, Sternini C, De Giorgio R, Greenwood-Van Meerveld B.
Enteroendocrine cells: a review of their role in brain-gut commu-
nication. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2016;28:620–630.
6.
Psichas A, Reimann F, Gribble F. Gut chemosensing mechanisms.
J Clin Invest 2015;125:908–917.
7.
Gribble FM, Reimann F. Enteroendocrine cells: chemosensors in
the intestinal epithelium. Annu Rev Physiol 2016;78:277–299.
8.
De Palma G, Collins SM, Bercik P. The microbiota-gut-brain axis
in functional gastrointestinal disorders. Gut Microbes 2014;5:
419–429.
9.
Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Melancholic microbes: a link between gut
microbiota and depression? Neurogastroenterol Motil 2013;25:
713–719.
10.
Burcelin R. Gut microbiota and immune crosstalk in metabolic
disease. Mol Metab 2016;5:771–781.
11.
Geuking MB, Köller Y, Rupp S, McCoy KD. The interplay be-
tween the gut microbiota and the immune system. Gut Microbes
2014;5:411–418.
12.
Patterson E, Ryan PM, Cryan JF, et al. Gut microbiota, obesity and
diabetes. Postgrad Med J 2016;92:286–300.
13.
van de Wouw M, Schellekens H, Dinan TG, Cryan JF.
Microbiota-gut-brain axis: modulator of host metabolism and ap-
petite. J Nutr 2017;147:727–745.
14.
Arentsen T, Raith H, Qian Y, Forssberg H, Heijtz RD. Host mi-
crobiota modulates development of social preference in mice.
Microb Ecol Health Dis 2015;26:29719.
15.
Burokas A, Arboleya S, Moloney RD, et al. Targeting the
microbiota-gut-brain axis: prebiotics have anxiolytic and
antidepressant-like effects and reverse the impact of chronic stress
in mice. Biol Psychiatry 2017;39:763–781.
16.
Clarke G, Grenham S, Scully P, et al. The microbiome-gut-brain
axis during early life regulates the hippocampal serotonergic sys-
tem in a sex-dependent manner. Mol Psychiatry 2013;18:666–
673.
17.
Heijtz RD, Wang S, Anuar F, et al. Normal gut microbiota mod-
ulates brain development and behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2011;108:3047–3052.
18.
Neufeld K-AM, Kang N, Bienenstock J, Foster JA. Effects of
intestinal microbiota on anxiety-like behavior. Commun Integr
Biol 2011;4:492–494.
19.
Savignac HM, Kiely B, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Bifidobacteria exert
strain-specific effects on stress-related behavior and physiology in
BALB/c mice. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2014;26:1615–1627.
20.
Bravo JA, Forsythe P, Chew MV, et al. Ingestion of Lactobacillus
strain regulates emotional behavior and central GABA receptor
expression in a mouse via the vagus nerve. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2011;108:16050–16055.
21.
Desbonnet L, Clarke G, Traplin A, et al. Gut microbiota depletion
from early adolescence in mice: implications for brain and behav-
iour. Brain Behav Immun 2015;48:165–173.
22.
Wong M-L, Inserra A, Lewis MD, et al. Inflammasome signaling
affects anxiety- and depressive-like behavior and gut microbiome
composition. Mol Psychiatry 2016;21:797–805.
23.
McGonigle P. Peptide therapeutics for CNS indications. Biochem
Pharmacol 2012;83:559–566.
24.
Holzer P, Reichmann F, Farzi A. Neuropeptide Y, peptide YYand
pancreatic polypeptide in the gut-brain axis. Neuropeptides
2012;46:261–274.
25.
Fröhlich EE, Farzi A, Mayerhofer R, et al. Cognitive impairment
by antibiotic-induced gut dysbiosis: analysis of gut microbiota-
brain communication. Brain Behav Immun 2016;56:140–155.
26.
Buffington SA, Di Prisco GV, Auchtung TA, Ajami NJ, Petrosino
JF, Costa-Mattioli M. Microbial reconstitution reverses maternal
diet-induced social and synaptic deficits in offspring. Cell
2016;165:1762–1775.
27.
Crumeyrolle-Arias M, Jaglin M, Bruneau A, et al. Absence of the
gut microbiota enhances anxiety-like behavior and neuroendo-
crine response to acute stress in rats. Psychoneuroendocrinology
2014;42:207–217.
28.
Cowley MA, Smith RG, Diano S, et al. The distribution and
mechanism of action of ghrelin in the CNS demonstrates a novel
hypothalamic circuit regulating energy homeostasis. Neuron
2003;37:649–661.
29.
Joly-Amado A, Cansell C, Denis RGP, et al. The hypothalamic
arcuate nucleus and the control of peripheral substrates. Best Pract
Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 2014;28:725–737.
30.
Valassi E, Scacchi M, Cavagnini F. Neuroendocrine control of
food intake. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2008;18:158–168.
31.
Stanley S, Wynne K, McGowan B, Bloom S. Hormonal regulation
of food intake. Physiol. Rev 2005;85.
32.
Cummings DE, Overduin J. Gastrointestinal regulation of food
intake. J Clin Invest 2007;117:13–23.
33.
Gariepy G, Wang J, Lesage A, Schmitz N. The interaction of
obesity and psychological distress on disability. Soc Psychiatry
Psychiatr Epidemiol 2010;45:531–540.
34.
Goldbacher EM, Matthews KA. Are psychological characteristics
related to risk of the metabolic syndrome? A review of the litera-
ture. Ann Behav Med 2007;34:240–252.
35.
Kloiber S, Ising M, Reppermund S, et al. Overweight and obesity
affect treatment response in major depression. Biol Psychiatry
2007;62:321–326.
36.
Marijnissen RM, Bus BAA, Holewijn S, et al. Depressive symp-
tom clusters are differentially associated with general and visceral
obesity. J Am Geriatr Soc 2011;59:67–72.
Microbiome and Gut Peptides
49
 37.
McElroy SL, Kotwal R, Malhotra S, Nelson EB, Keck PE,
Nemeroff CB. Are mood disorders and obesity related? A review
for the mental health professional. J Clin Psychiatry 2004;65:634–
651.
38.
Lang UE, Beglinger C, Schweinfurth N, Walter M, Borgwardt S.
Nutritional aspects of depression. Cell Physiol Biochem 2015;37:
1029–1043.
39.
Steele CC, Pirkle JRA, Kirkpatrick K. Diet-induced impulsivity:
effects of a high-fat and a high-sugar diet on impulsive choice in
rats. PLOS ONE 2017;12.
40.
Beilharz JE, Kaakoush NO, Maniam J, Morris MJ. Cafeteria diet
and probiotic therapy: cross talk among memory, neuroplasticity,
serotonin receptors and gut microbiota in the rat. Mol Psychiatry.
2017.
41.
Ochoa-Repáraz J, Kasper LH. The second brain: is the gut micro-
biota a link between obesity and central nervous system disorders?
Curr Obes Rep 2016;5:51–64.
42.
Veniaminova E, Cespuglio R, Cheung CW, et al. Autism-like be-
haviours and memory deficits result from a Western diet in mice.
Neural Plast 2017;2017:1–14.
43.
De Filippis F, Pellegrini N, Vannini L, et al. High-level adherence
to a Mediterranean diet beneficially impacts the gut microbiota
and associated metabolome. Gut 2016;65:1812–1821.
44.
Pratt LA, Brody DJ, Gu Q. Antidepressant use in persons aged 12
and over: United States, 2005–2008. NCHS Data Brief 2011;127:
1–8.
45.
Pratt LA, Brody DJ. Depression in the U.S. household population,
2009–2012. NCHS Data Brief 2014;1–8.
46.
Pozzi M, Radice S, Clementi E, Molteni M, Nobile M.
Antidepressants and, suicide and self-injury: causal or casual as-
sociation? Int J Psychiatry Clin Pract. 2016;20:47–51.
47.
Gartlehner G, Gaynes BN, Amick HR, et al. Comparative benefits
and harms of antidepressant, psychological, complementary, and
exercise treatments for major depression: an evidence report for a
clinical practice guideline from the American College of
Physicians. Ann Intern Med 2016;164:331–341.
48.
Coupland C, Hill T, Morriss R, Moore M, Arthur A, Hippisley-
Cox J. Antidepressant use and risk of cardiovascular outcomes in
people aged 20 to 64: cohort study using primary care database.
BMJ 2016;352:i1350.
49.
Benton D, Williams C, Brown A. Impact of consuming a milk
drink containing a probiotic on mood and cognition. Eur J Clin
Nutr 2007;61:355–361.
50.
Messaoudi M, Violle N, Bisson J-F, Desor D, Javelot H, Rougeot
C. Beneficial psychological effects of a probiotic formulation
(Lactobacillus helveticus R0052 and Bifidobacterium longum
R0175) in healthy human volunteers. Gut Microbes 2011;2:256–
261.
51.
Steenbergen L, Sellaro R, van Hemert S, Bosch JA, Colzato LS. A
randomized controlled trial to test the effect of multispecies
probiotics on cognitive reactivity to sad mood. Brain Behav
Immun 2015;48:258–264.
52.
Allen AP, Hutch W, Borre YE, et al. Bifidobacterium longum 1714
as a translational psychobiotic: modulation of stress, electrophys-
iology and neurocognition in healthy volunteers. Transl
Psychiatry 2016;6:e939.
53.
Labus JS, Hollister EB, Jacobs J, et al. Differences in gut microbial
composition correlate with regional brain volumes in irritable
bowel syndrome. Microbiome 2017;5:49.
54.
Sarkar A, Lehto SM, Harty S, Dinan TG, Cryan JF, Burnet PWJ.
Psychobiotics and the manipulation of bacteria–gut–brain signals.
Trends Neurosci 2016;39:763–781.
55.
Allen AP, Dinan TG, Clarke G, Cryan JF. A psychology of the
human brain-gut-microbiome axis. Soc Personal Psychol
Compass 2017;11:e12309.
56.
Dinan TG, Stanton C, Cryan JF. Psychobiotics: a novel class of
psychotropic. Biol Psychiatry 2013;74:720–726.
57.
Yatsunenko T, Rey FE, Manary MJ, et al. Human gut microbiome
viewed across age and geography. Nature 2012;486:222–227.
58.
Dominguez-Bello MG, Costello EK, Contreras M, et al. Delivery
mode shapes the acquisition and structure of the initial microbiota
across multiple body habitats in newborns. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 2010;107:11971–11975.
59.
Aagaard K, Ma J, Antony KM, Ganu R, Petrosino J, Versalovic J.
The placenta harbors a unique microbiome. Sci Transl Med
2014;6:237ra65.
60.
Chu DM, Ma J, Prince AL, Antony KM, Seferovic MD, Aagaard
KM. Maturation of the infant microbiome community structure
and function across multiple body sites and in relation to mode
of delivery. Nat Med 2017;23:314–326.
61.
Jiménez E, Fernández L, Marín ML, et al. Isolation of commensal
bacteria from umbilical cord blood of healthy neonates born by
cesarean section. Curr Microbiol 2005;51:270–274.
62.
Markenson GR, Adams LA, Hoffman DE, Reece MT. Prevalence
of Mycoplasma bacteria in amniotic fluid at the time of genetic
amniocentesis using the polymerase chain reaction. J Reprod Med
2003;48:775–779.
63.
Charbonneau MR, Blanton LV, DiGiulio DB, et al. A microbial
perspective of human developmental biology. Nature 2016;535:
48–55.
64.
Nicholson JK, Holmes E, Kinross J, et al. Host-gut microbiota
metabolic interactions. Science 2012;336:1262–1267.
65.
Ziętak M, Kovatcheva-Datchary P, Markiewicz LH, Ståhlman M,
Kozak LP, Bäckhed F. Altered microbiota contributes to reduced
diet-induced obesity upon cold exposure. Cell Metab 2016;23:
1216–1223.
66.
De Vadder F, Kovatcheva-Datchary P, Zitoun C, Duchampt A,
Bäckhed F, Mithieux G. Microbiota-produced succinate improves
glucose homeostasis via intestinal gluconeogenesis. Cell Metab
2016;24:151–157.
67.
Desbonnet L, Garrett L, Clarke G, Kiely B, Cryan JF, Dinan TG.
Effects of the probiotic Bifidobacterium infantis in the maternal
separation model of depression. Neuroscience 2010;170:1179–
1188.
68.
Welly RJ, Liu TW, Zidon TM, et al. Comparison of diet versus
exercise on metabolic function and gut microbiota in obese rats.
Med Sci Sports Exerc 2016;48:1688-1698.
69.
Campbell SC, Wisniewski PJ, Noji M, et al. The effect of diet and
exercise on intestinal integrity and microbial diversity in mice.
PLOS ONE 2016;11:e0150502.
70.
Qin J, Li R, Raes J, et al. A human gut microbial gene catalogue
established by metagenomic sequencing. Nature 2010;464:59–65.
71.
Hidalgo-Cantabrana C, Delgado S, Ruiz L, Ruas-Madiedo P,
Sánchez B, Margolles A. Bifidobacteria and their health-
promoting effects. Microbiol Spectr 2017;5:1–19.
72.
Sánchez B, Delgado S, Blanco-Míguez A, Lourenço A,
Gueimonde M, Margolles A. Probiotics, gut microbiota, and their
influence on host health and disease. Mol Nutr Food Res 2017;61:
1600240.
73.
Swann JR, Want EJ, Geier FM, et al. Systemic gut microbial
modulation of bile acid metabolism in host tissue compartments.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;108:4523–4530.
74.
Golubeva AV, Joyce SA, Moloney G, et al. Microbiota-related
changes in bile acid & tryptophan metabolism are associated with
gastrointestinal dysfunction in a mouse model of autism.
EBioMedicine 2017;24:166-178.
75.
Ostaff MJ, Stange EF, Wehkamp J. Antimicrobial peptides and gut
microbiota in homeostasis and pathology. EMBO Mol Med
2013;5:1465–1483.
76.
Honda K, Littman DR. The microbiota in adaptive immune ho-
meostasis and disease. Nature 2016;535:75–84.
50
Lach et al.
 77.
O’Mahony SM, Clarke G, McKernan DP, Bravo JA, Dinan TG,
Cryan JF. Differential visceral nociceptive, behavioural and neu-
rochemical responses to an immune challenge in the stress-
sensitive Wistar Kyoto rat strain. Behav Brain Res 2013;253:
310–317.
78.
Olszak T, An D, Zeissig S, et al. Microbial exposure during early
life has persistent effects on natural killer T cell function. Science
2012;336:489–493.
79.
Xu P, Hong F, Wang J, et al. DBZ is a putative PPARγ agonist that
prevents high fat diet-induced obesity, insulin resistance and gut
dysbiosis. Biochim Biophys Acta 2017;1861:2690–2701.
80.
Lippert K, Kedenko L, Antonielli L, et al. Gut microbiota
dysbiosis associated with glucose metabolism disorders and the
metabolic syndrome in older adults. Benef Microbes 2017;8:545–
556.
81.
Liu X, Cao S, Zhang X. Modulation of gut microbiota-brain axis
by probiotics, prebiotics, and diet. J Agric Food Chem 2015;63:
7885–7895.
82.
Wu G, Feder A, Wegener G, et al. Central functions of neuropep-
tide Y in mood and anxiety disorders. Expert Opin Ther Targets
2011;15:1317–1331.
83.
Tolhurst G, Heffron H, Lam YS, et al. Short-chain fatty acids
stimulate glucagon-like peptide-1 secretion via the G-protein-
coupled receptor FFAR2. Diabetes 2012;61:364–371.
84.
Kaji I, Karaki S, Kuwahara A. Short-chain fatty acid receptor and
its contribution to glucagon-like peptide-1 release. Digestion
2014;89:31–36.
85.
Psichas A, Sleeth ML, Murphy KG, et al. The short chain fatty
acid propionate stimulates GLP-1 and PYY secretion via free fatty
acid receptor 2 in rodents. Int J Obes 2015;39:424–429.
86.
Simpson HL, Campbell BJ. Review article: dietary fibre-
microbiota interactions. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015;42:158–
179.
87.
Smith PM, Howitt MR, Panikov N, et al. The microbial metabo-
lites, short-chain fatty acids, regulate colonic Treg cell homeosta-
sis. Science 2013;341:569–573.
88.
Bellono NW, Bayrer JR, Leitch DB, et al. Enterochromaffin cells
are gut chemosensors that couple to sensory neural pathways. Cell
2017;170:185–198.e16.
89.
Carabotti M, Scirocco A, Maselli MA, Severi C. The gut-brain
axis: interactions between enteric microbiota, central and enteric
nervous systems. Ann Gastroenterol 2015;28:203–209.
90.
Kentish SJ, Page AJ. Plasticity of gastro-intestinal vagal afferent
endings. Physiol Behav 2014;136:170–178.
91.
Duerkop BA, Vaishnava S, Hooper LV. Immune responses to the
microbiota at the intestinal mucosal surface. Immunity 2009;31:
368–376.
92.
Fricker LD. Neuropeptides and other bioactive peptides: from
discovery to function. Colloq Ser Neuropeptides 2012;1:1–122.
93.
Côté CD, Zadeh-Tahmasebi M, Rasmussen BA, Duca FA, Lam
TKT. Hormonal signaling in the gut. J Biol Chem 2014;289:
11642–11649.
94.
Mulvihill EE, Drucker DJ. Pharmacology, physiology, and mech-
anisms of action of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors. Endocr Rev
2014;35:992–1019.
95.
Grider JR. Neurotransmitters mediating the intestinal peristaltic
reflex in the mouse. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2003;307:460–467.
96.
Johnson PJ, Bornstein JC. Neurokinin-1 and -3 receptor blockade
inhibits slow excitatory synaptic transmission in myenteric neu-
rons and reveals slow inhibitory input. Neuroscience 2004;126:
137–147.
97.
Spindel ER, Chin WW, Price J, Rees LH, Besser GM, Habener JF.
Cloning and characterization of cDNAs encoding human gastrin-
releasing peptide. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984;81:5699–5703.
98.
Ebeid AM, Escourrou J, Fischer JE. Vasoactive intestinal peptide
inhibition of stimulated gastric secretion. I. Inhibition of meat-
stimulated gastric secretion. Am J Surg 1980;139:817–823.
99.
Vosko AM, Schroeder A, Loh DH, Colwell CS. Vasoactive intes-
tinal peptide and the mammalian circadian system. Gen Comp
Endocrinol 2007; 152:165–175.
100.
Zeng N, Athmann C, Kang T, et al. PACAP type I receptor acti-
vation regulates ECL cells and gastric acid secretion. J Clin Invest
1999;104:1383–1391.
1 0 1 .
F u r n e s s J B . T h e e n t e r i c n e r v o u s s y s t e m a n d
neurogastroenterology. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;9:
286–294.
102.
Berg CJ, Kaunitz JD. Gut chemosensing: implications for disease
pathogenesis. F1000Research 2016;5:2424.
103.
Yoo BB, Mazmanian SK. The enteric network: interactions be-
tween the immune and nervous systems of the gut. Immunity
2017;46:910–926.
104.
Mansouri A, Langhans W. Enterocyte-afferent nerve interactions
in dietary fat sensing. Diabetes Obes Metab 2014;16:61–67.
105.
Lin HV, Frassetto A, Kowalik EJ, Jr, et al. Butyrate and propionate
protect against diet-induced obesity and regulate gut hormones via
free fatty acid receptor 3-independent mechanisms. PLOS ONE
2012;7:e35240.
106.
Gao Z, Yin J, Zhang J, et al. Butyrate improves insulin sensitivity
and increases energy expenditure in mice. Diabetes 2009;58:
1509–1517.
107.
Drazen DL, Vahl TP, D’Alessio DA, Seeley RJ, Woods SC.
Effects of a fixed meal pattern on ghrelin secretion: evidence for
a learned response independent of nutrient status. Endocrinology
2006;147:23–30.
108.
Larauche M, Gourcerol G, Wang L, et al. Cortagine, a CRF1
agonist, induces stresslike alterations of colonic function and vis-
ceral hypersensitivity in rodents primarily through peripheral path-
ways. AJP Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2009;297:G215–G227.
109.
Cho HJ, Kosari S, Hunne B, et al. Differences in hormone
localisation patterns of K and L type enteroendocrine cells in the
mouse and pig small intestine and colon. Cell Tissue Res
2015;359:693–698.
110.
Egerod KL, Engelstoft MS, Grunddal KV, et al. A major lineage of
enteroendocrine cells coexpress CCK, secretin, GIP, GLP-1, PYY,
and neurotensin but not somatostatin. Endocrinology 2012;153:
5782–5795.
111.
Okano-Matsumoto S, McRoberts JA, Taché Y, Adelson DW.
Electrophysiological evidence for distinct vagal pathways mediat-
ing CCK-evoked motor effects in the proximal versus distal stom-
ach. J Physiol 2011;589:371–393.
112.
Banks WA, Tschop M, Robinson SM, Heiman ML. Extent and
direction of ghrelin transport across the blood-brain barrier is de-
termined by its unique primary structure. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
2002;302:822–827.
113.
Whitcomb DC, Taylor IL, Vigna SR. Characterization of saturable
binding sites for circulating pancreatic polypeptide in rat brain.
Am J Physiol 1990;259:G687-G691.
114.
Kastin AJ, Akerstrom V, Pan W. Interactions of glucagon-like
peptide-1 (GLP-1) with the blood-brain barrier. J Mol Neurosci
2002;18:7–14.
115.
Nonaka N, Shioda S, Niehoff ML, Banks WA. Characterization of
blood-brain barrier permeability to PYY3-36 in the mouse. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther 2003;306:948–953.
116.
Schéle E, Grahnemo L, Anesten F, Halleń A, Backhed, F, Jansson
JO. The gut microbiota reduces leptin sensitivity and the expres-
sion of the obesity-suppressing neuropeptides proglucagon (Gcg)
and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf) in the central nervous
system. Endocrinology 2013;154:3643–3651.
Microbiome and Gut Peptides
51
 117.
Parnell JA, Reimer RA. Prebiotic fibres dose-dependently increase
satiety hormones and alter Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes in lean
and obese JCR:LA-cp rats. Br J Nutr 2012;107:601–613.
118.
Wichmann A, Allahyar A, Greiner TU, et al. Microbial modula-
tion of energy availability in the colon regulates intestinal transit.
Cell Host Microbe 2013;14:582–590.
119.
Stenman LK, Waget A, Garret C, et al. Probiotic B420 and prebi-
otic polydextrose improve efficacy of antidiabetic drugs in mice.
Diabetol Metab Syndr 2015;7:75.
120.
Yadav H, Lee JH, Lloyd J, Walter P, Rane SG. Beneficial meta-
bolic effects of a probiotic via butyrate-induced GLP-1 hormone
secretion. J Biol Chem 2013;288:25088–25097.
121.
Khosravi Y, Seow SW, Amoyo AA, et al. Helicobacter pylori
infection can affect energy modulating hormones and body weight
in germ free mice. Sci Rep 2015;5:8731.
122.
Cani PD, Dewever C, Delzenne NM. Inulin-type fructans modu-
late gastrointestinal peptides involved in appetite regulation (glu-
cagon-like peptide-1 and ghrelin) in rats. Br J Nutr 2004;92:521–
526.
123.
Yusta B, Baggio LL, Koehler J, et al. GLP-1R agonists modulate
enteric immune responses through the intestinal intraepithelial
lymphocyte GLP-1R. Diabetes 2015;64:2537–2549.
124.
Simon M-C, Strassburger K, Nowotny B, et al. Intake of
Lactobacillus reuteri improves incretin and insulin secretion in
glucose tolerant humans: a proof of concept. Diabetes Care
2015;38:dc142690.
125.
Woods SE, Leonard MR, Hayden JA, et al. Impaired
cholecystokinin-induced gallbladder emptying incriminated in
spontaneous Bblack^ pigment gallstone formation in germfree
Swiss Webster mice. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol
2015;308:G335-G349.
126.
Pen J, Welling GW. Influence of the microbial flora on the amount
of CCK8- and secretin21-27-like immunoreactivity in the intesti-
nal tract of mice. Comp Biochem Physiol B 1983;76:585–589.
127.
Cani PD, Neyrinck AM, Maton N, Delzenne NM. Oligofructose
promotes satiety in rats fed a high-fat diet: involvement of
glucagon-like peptide-1. Obes Res 2005;13:1000–1007.
128.
Duca FA, Swartz TD, Sakar Y, Covasa M. Increased oral detec-
tion, but decreased intestinal signaling for fats in mice lacking gut
microbiota. PLOS ONE 2012;7:e39748.
129.
Perry RJ, Peng L, Barry NA, et al. Acetate mediates a
microbiome–brain–β-cell axis to promote metabolic syndrome.
Nature 2016;534:213–217.
130.
Glintborg D, Andersen M, Hagen C, et al. Evaluation of metabolic
risk markers in polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Adiponectin,
ghrelin, leptin and body composition in hirsute PCOS patients and
controls. Eur J Endocrinol 2006;155:337–345.
131.
Sun Y, Zhang M, Chen CC, et al. Stress-induced corticotropin-
releasing hormone-mediated NLRP6 inflammasome inhibition
and transmissible enteritis in mice. Gastroenterology 2013;144:
1478–1487.e8.
132.
Poutahidis T, Kearney SM, Levkovich T, et al. Microbial symbi-
onts accelerate wound healing via the neuropeptide hormone oxy-
tocin. PLOS ONE 2013;8:e78898.
133.
Varian BJ, Poutahidis T, DiBenedictis BT, et al. Microbial lysate
upregulates host oxytocin. Brain Behav Immun 2017;61:36–49.
134.
Nardone G, Compare D. The psyche and gastric functions. Dig
Dis 2014;32:206–212.
135.
Lach G, Morais LH, Costa APR, Hoeller AA. Envolvimento da
flora intestinal na modulação de doenças psiquiátricas. Vittalle -
Rev. Ciên. Saúde 2017;29:64–82.
136.
Vuong HE, Yano JM, Fung TC, Hsiao EY
. The microbiome and
host behavior. Annu Rev Neurosci 2017;40:21–49.
137.
Bailey MT, Coe CL. Maternal separation disrupts the integrity of
the intestinal microflora in infant rhesus monkeys. Dev Psychobiol
1999;35:146–155.
138.
Park AJ, Collins J, Blennerhassett PA, et al. Altered colonic func-
tion and microbiota profile in a mouse model of chronic depres-
sion. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2013;25:733-e575.
139.
Rodes L, Paul A, Coussa-Charley M, et al. Transit time affects the
community stability of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium species
in an in vitro model of human colonic microbiotia. Artif Cells
Blood Substit Immobil Biotechnol 2011;39:351–356.
140.
O’Malley D, Julio-Pieper M, Gibney SM, Dinan TG, Cryan JF.
Distinct alterations in colonic morphology and physiology in two
rat models of enhanced stress-induced anxiety and depression-like
behaviour. Stress 2010;13:114–122.
141.
Kelly JR, Kennedy PJ, Cryan JF, Dinan TG, Clarke G, Hyland NP.
Breaking down the barriers: the gut microbiome, intestinal perme-
ability and stress-related psychiatric disorders. Front Cell Neurosci
2015;9:392.
142.
Maes M, Kubera M, Leunis J-C, Berk M. Increased IgA and IgM
responses against gut commensals in chronic depression: Further
evidence for increased bacterial translocation or leaky gut. J Affect
Disord 2012;141:55–62.
143.
Maes M, Kubera M, Leunis J-C. The gut-brain barrier in major
depression: intestinal mucosal dysfunction with an increased
translocation of LPS from gram negative enterobacteria (leaky
gut) plays a role in the inflammatory pathophysiology of depres-
sion. Neuro Endocrinol Lett 2008;29:117–124.
144.
O’Brien SM, Scully P, Scott L V, Dinan TG. Cytokine profiles in
bipolar affective disorder: Focus on acutely ill patients. J Affect
Disord 2006;90:263–267.
145.
Jiang H, Ling Z, Zhang Y, et al. Altered fecal microbiota compo-
sition in patients with major depressive disorder. Brain Behav
Immun 2015;48:186–194.
146.
Naseribafrouei A, Hestad K, Avershina E, et al. Correlation be-
tween the human fecal microbiota and depression.
Neurogastroenterol Motil 2014;26:1155–1162.
147.
Kelly JR, Borre Y, O’Brien C, et al. Transferring the blues:
Depression-associated gut microbiota induces neurobehavioural
changes in the rat. J Psychiatr Res 2016;82:109–118.
148.
Yu M, Jia H, Zhou C, et al. Variations in gut microbiota and fecal
metabolic phenotype associated with depression by 16S rRNA
gene sequencing and LC/MS-based metabolomics. J. Pharm
Biomed Anal 2017;138:231–239.
149.
Bailey MT, Dowd SE, Galley JD, Hufnagle AR, Allen RG, Lyte
M. Exposure to a social stressor alters the structure of the intestinal
microbiota: implications for stressor-induced immunomodulation.
Brain Behav Immun 2011;25:397–407.
150.
De Palma G, Blennerhassett P, Lu J, et al. Microbiota and host
determinants of behavioural phenotype in maternally separated
mice. Nat Commun 2015;6:7735.
151.
O’Mahony CM, Clarke G, Gibney S, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Strain
differences in the neurochemical response to chronic restraint
stress in the rat: relevance to depression. Pharmacol Biochem
Behav 2011;97:690–699.
152.
Duncan SH, Louis P, Thomson JM, Flint HJ. The role of pH in
determining the species composition of the human colonic micro-
biota. Environ Microbiol 2009;11:2112–2122.
153.
El-Zaatari M, Chang Y-M, Zhang M, et al. Tryptophan catabolism
restricts IFN-γ–expressing neutrophils and Clostridium difficile
immunopathology. J Immunol 2014;193:807–816.
154.
El Aidy S, Ramsteijn AS, Dini-Andreote F, et al. Serotonin trans-
porter genotype modulates the gut microbiota composition in
young rats, an effect augmented by early life stress. Front Cell
Neurosci 2017;11:222.
155.
Yang M, Fukui H, Eda H, et al. Involvement of gut microbiota in
the association between gastrointestinal motility and 5-HT
expression/M2 macrophage abundance in the gastrointestinal
tract. Mol Med Rep 2017;16:3482–3488.
52
Lach et al.
 156.
Saraf MK, Piccolo BD, Bowlin AK, et al. Formula diet driven
microbiota shifts tryptophan metabolism from serotonin to trypt-
amine in neonatal porcine colon. Microbiome 2017;5:77.
157.
Hata T, Asano Y, Yoshihara K, et al. Regulation of gut luminal
serotonin by commensal microbiota in mice. PLOS ONE 2017;12:
e0180745.
158.
Ge X, Ding C, Zhao W, et al. Antibiotics-induced depletion of
mice microbiota induces changes in host serotonin biosynthesis
and intestinal motility. J Transl Med 2017;15:13.
159.
Lieb J. The immunostimulating and antimicrobial properties of
lithium and antidepressants. J Infect 2004;49:88–93.
160.
Munoz-Bellido JL, Munoz-Criado S, Garcìa-Rodrìguez JA.
Antimicrobial activity of psychotropic drugs. Selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2000;14:177–180.
161.
Ferreira Mello BS, Monte AS, McIntyre RS, et al. Effects of
doxycycline on depressive-like behavior in mice after lipopoly-
saccharide (LPS) administration. J Psychiatr Res 2013;47:1521–
1529.
162.
Miyaoka T, Wake R, Furuya M, et al. Minocycline as adjunctive
therapy for patients with unipolar psychotic depression: an open-
label study. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry
2012;37:222–226.
163.
Ahmed AIA, van der Heijden FMMA, van den Berkmortel H,
Kramers K. A man who wanted to commit suicide by hanging
himself: an adverse effect of ciprofloxacin. Gen Hosp Psychiatry
2011;33:82.e5-e7.
164.
Grassi L, Biancosino B, Pavanati M, Agostini M, Manfredini R.
Depression or hypoactive delirium? A report of ciprofloxacin-
induced mental disorder in a patient with chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease. Psychother Psychosom 2001;70:58–59.
165.
Kaur K, Fayad R, Saxena A, et al. Fluoroquinolone-related neu-
ropsychiatric and mitochondrial toxicity: a collaborative investi-
gation by scientists and members of a social network. J
Community Support Oncol 2016;14:54–65.
166.
Rollof J, Vinge E. Neurologic adverse effects during concomitant
treatment with ciprofloxacin, NSAIDS, and chloroquine: possible
drug interaction. Ann Pharmacother 1993;27:1058–1059.
167.
Pinto-Sanchez MI, Hall GB, Ghajar K, et al. Probiotic
Bifidobacterium longum NCC3001 reduces depression scores
and alters brain activity: a pilot study in patients with irritable
bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology 2017;153:448–459.e8.
168.
Lindner D, Stichel J, Beck-Sickinger AG. Molecular recognition
of the NPY hormone family by their receptors. Nutrition 2008;24:
907–917.
169.
Alexander SPH, Mathie A, Peters JA. Guide to receptors and
channels (GRAC), 5th edition. Br J Pharmacol 2011;164:S1-
S324.
170.
Chen X, DiMaggio DA, Han SP, Westfall TC. Autoreceptor-
induced inhibition of neuropeptide Y release from PC-12 cells is
mediated by Y2 receptors. Am J Physiol 1997;273:H1737-
H1744.
171.
Greber S, Schwarzer C, Sperk G. Neuropeptide Y inhibits
potassium-stimulated glutamate release through Y2 receptors in
rat hippocampal slices in vitro. Br J Pharmacol 1994;113:737–
740.
172.
Wood J, Verma D, Lach G, et al. Structure and function of the
amygdaloid NPY system: NPY Y2 receptors regulate excitatory
and inhibitory synaptic transmission in the centromedial amygda-
la. Brain Struct Funct 2016;221:3373–3391.
173.
El-Salhy M, Hausken T. The role of the neuropeptide Y (NPY)
family in the pathophysiology of inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD). Neuropeptides 2016;55:137–144.
174.
Tasan RO, Lin S, Hetzenauer A, Singewald N, Herzog H, Sperk
G. Increased novelty-induced motor activity and reduced
depression-like behavior in neuropeptide Y (NPY)-Y4 receptor
knockout mice. Neuroscience 2009;158:1717–1730.
175.
Kask A, Harro J, von Hörsten S, Redrobe JP, Dumont Y, Quirion
R. The neurocircuitry and receptor subtypes mediating anxiolytic-
like effects of neuropeptide Y. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2002;26:
259–283.
176.
Cox HM. Neuropeptide Y receptors; antisecretory control of in-
testinal epithelial function. Auton Neurosci 2007;133:76–85.
177.
Ekblad E, Sundler F. Distribution of pancreatic polypeptide and
peptide YY. Peptides 2002;23:251–261.
178.
Dumont Y, Moyse E, Fournier A, Quirion R. Distribution of pe-
ripherally injected peptide YY ([125I] PYY (3-36)) and pancreatic
polypeptide ([125I] hPP) in the CNS: enrichment in the area
postrema. J Mol Neurosci 2007;33:294–304.
179.
Koda S, Date Y, Murakami N, et al. The role of the vagal nerve in
peripheral PYY3-36-induced feeding reduction in rats.
Endocrinology 2005;146:2369–2375.
180.
Ueno H, Yamaguchi H, Mizuta M, Nakazato M. The role of PYY
in feeding regulation. Regul Pept 2008;145:12–16.
181.
Farzi A, Reichmann F, Holzer P. The homeostatic role of neuro-
peptide Y in immune function and its impact on mood and behav-
iour. Acta Physiol 2015;213:603–627.
182.
Reichmann F, Holzer P. Neuropeptide Y: a stressful review.
Neuropeptides 2016;55:99–109.
183.
Malva JO, Xapelli S, Baptista S, et al. Multifaces of neuropeptide
Y in the brain – Neuroprotection, neurogenesis and neuroinflam-
mation. Neuropeptides 2012;46:299–308.
184.
dos Santos VV, Santos DB, Lach G, et al. Neuropeptide Y (NPY)
prevents depressive-like behavior, spatial memory deficits and ox-
idative stress following amyloid-β (Aβ1–40) administration in
mice. Behav Brain Res 2013;244:107–115.
185.
Verma D, Wood J, Lach G, Herzog H, Sperk G, Tasan R. Hunger
promotes fear extinction by activation of an amygdala microcir-
cuit. Neuropsychopharmacology 2016;41:431–439.
186.
Painsipp E, Wultsch T, Edelsbrunner ME, et al. Reduced anxiety-
like and depression-related behavior in neuropeptide Y Y4 recep-
tor knockout mice. Genes Brain Behav 2008;7:532–542.
187.
Field BCT, Chaudhri OB, Bloom SR. Bowels control brain: gut
hormones and obesity. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2010;6:444–453.
188.
Fujimiya M, Inui A. Peptidergic regulation of gastrointestinal mo-
tility in rodents. Peptides 2000;21:1565–1582.
189.
Yang H, Li WP, Reeve JR, Rivier J, Taché Y. PYY-preferring
receptor in the dorsal vagal complex and its involvement in
PYY stimulation of gastric acid secretion in rats. Br J Pharmacol
1998;123:1549–1554.
190.
Tough IR, Holliday ND, Cox HM. Y(4) receptors mediate the
inhibitory responses of pancreatic polypeptide in human and
mouse colon mucosa. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2006;319:20–30.
191.
Verma D, Hörmer B, Bellmann-Sickert K, et al. Pancreatic poly-
peptide and its central Y 4 receptors are essential for cued fear
extinction and permanent suppression of fear. Br J Pharmacol
2016;173:1925–1938.
192.
De Lartigue G, Lur G, Dimaline R, Varro A, Raybould H,
Dockray GJ. EGR1 is a target for cooperative interactions be-
tween cholecystokinin and leptin, and inhibition by ghrelin, in
vagal afferent neurons. Endocrinology 2010;151:3589–3599.
193.
Charlot K, Faure C, Antoine-Jonville S. Influence of hot and cold
environments on the regulation of energy balance following a
single exercise session: a mini-review. Nutrients 2017;9:592.
194.
Schubert MM, Sabapathy S, Leveritt M, Desbrow B. Acute exer-
cise and hormones related to appetite regulation: a meta-analysis.
Sport Med 2014;44:387–403.
195.
Moloney RD, Desbonnet L, Clarke G, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. The
microbiome: stress, health and disease. Mamm Genome 2014;25:
49–74.
196.
Clark A, Mach N. Exercise-induced stress behavior, gut-
microbiota-brain axis and diet: a systematic review for athletes.
J Int Soc Sports Nutr 2016;13:43.
Microbiome and Gut Peptides
53
 197.
Liu R, Zhang C, Shi Y, et al. Dysbiosis of gut microbiota associ-
ated with clinical parameters in polycystic ovary syndrome. Front
Microbiol 2017;8:324.
198.
Cox HM. Peptide YY: a neuroendocrine neighbor of note.
Peptides 2007;28:345–351.
199.
Fu-Cheng X, Anini Y, Chariot J, Voisin T, Galmiche JP, Rozé C.
Peptide YY release after intraduodenal, intraileal, and intracolonic
administration of nutrients in rats. Pflugers Arch 1995;431:66–75.
200.
Brooks L, Viardot A, Tsakmaki A, et al. Fermentable carbohydrate
stimulates FFAR2-dependent colonic PYY cell expansion to in-
crease satiety. Mol Metab 2017;6:48–60.
201.
Larraufie P, Doré J, Lapaque N, Blottière HM. TLR ligands and
butyrate increase Pyy expression through two distinct but inter-
regulated pathways. Cell Microbiol 2017;19:e12648.
202.
Hong KB, Kim JH, Kwon HK, Han SH, Park Y, Suh HJ.
Evaluation of prebiotic effects of high-purity galacto-
oligosaccharides in vitro and in vivo. Food Technol Biotechnol
2016;54:156–163.
203.
Cluny NL, Eller LK, Keenan CM, Reimer RA, Sharkey KA.
Interactive effects of oligofructose and obesity predisposition on
gut hormones and microbiota in diet-induced obese rats. Obesity
2015;23:769–778.
204.
Steensels S, Cools L, Avau B, et al. Supplementation of
oligofructose, but not sucralose, decreases high-fat diet induced
body weight gain in mice independent of gustducin-mediated gut
hormone release. Mol Nutr Food Res 2017;61:1600716.
205.
Breton J, Tennoune N, Lucas N, et al. Gut commensal E. coli
proteins activate host satiety pathways following nutrient-
induced bacterial growth. Cell Metab 2016;23:324–334.
206.
Nilsson A, Johansson-Boll E, Sandberg J, Björck I. Gut microbi-
ota mediated benefits of barley kernel products on metabolism, gut
hormones, and inflammatory markers as affected by co-ingestion
of commercially available probiotics: a randomized controlled
study in healthy subjects. Clin Nutr ESPEN 2016;15:49–56.
207.
Rajpal DK, Klein JL, Mayhew D, et al. Selective spectrum anti-
biotic modulation of the gut microbiome in obesity and diabetes
rodent models. PLOS ONE 2015;10:e0145499.
208.
Chandrasekharan B, Bala V, Kolachala VL, et al. Targeted dele-
tion of neuropeptide Y (NPY) modulates experimental colitis.
PLOS ONE 2008;3:e3304.
209.
Pang XH, Li TK, Xie Q, et al. Amelioration of dextran sulfate
sodium-induced colitis by neuropeptide Y antisense
oligodeoxynucleotide. Int J Colorectal Dis 2010;25:1047–1053.
210.
Painsipp E, Herzog H, Sperk G, Holzer P. Sex-dependent control
of murine emotional-affective behaviour in health and colitis by
peptide YY and neuropeptide Y. Br J Pharmacol 2011;163:1302–
1314.
211.
Dimitrijević M, Stanojević S. The intriguing mission of neuropep-
tide Y in the immune system. Amino Acids 2013;45:41–53.
212.
Prinz M, Priller J. The role of peripheral immune cells in the CNS
in steady state and disease. Nat. Neurosci 2017;20:136–144.
213.
Lach G, Bicca MA, Hoeller AA, da Silva Santos EC, Costa APR,
de Lima TCM. Short-term enriched environment exposure facili-
tates fear extinction in adult rats: the NPY-Y1 receptor modulation.
Neuropeptides 2016;55:73–78.
214.
Luczynski P, McVey Neufeld K-A, Oriach CS, Clarke G, Dinan
TG, Cryan JF. Growing up in a bubble: using germ-free animals to
assess the influence of the gut microbiota on brain and behavior.
Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2016;19:1–7.
215.
Lach G, de Lima TCM. Role of NPY Y1 receptor on acquisition,
consolidation and extinction on contextual fear conditioning: dis-
sociation between anxiety, locomotion and non-emotional memo-
ry behavior. Neurobiol Learn Mem 2013;103:26–33.
216.
Sudo N, Chida Y, Aiba Y, et al. Postnatal microbial colonization
programs the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system for stress re-
sponse in mice. J Physiol 2004;558:263–275.
217.
Husebye E, Hellström PM, Sundler F, Chen J, Midtvedt T.
Influence of microbial species on small intestinal myoelectric ac-
tivity and transit in germ-free rats. Am J Physiol Gastrointest
Liver Physiol 2001;280:G368-G380.
218.
Goodlad RA, Ratcliffe B, Fordham JP, et al. Plasma
enteroglucagon, gastrin and peptide YY in conventional and
germ-free rats refed with a fibre-free or fibre-supplemented diet.
Q J Exp Physiol 1989;74:437–442.
219.
El Karim IA, Linden GJ, Orr DF, Lundy FT. Antimicrobial activity
of neuropeptides against a range of micro-organisms from skin,
oral, respiratory and gastrointestinal tract sites. J Neuroimmunol
2008;200:11–16.
220.
Ghosal S, Myers B, Herman JP. Role of central glucagon-like
peptide-1 in stress regulation. Physiol Behav 2013;122:201–207.
221.
Holst JJ. The physiology of glucagon-like peptide 1. Physiol Rev
2007;87:1409–1439.
222.
Marathe CS, Rayner CK, Jones KL, Horowitz M. Glucagon-like
peptides 1 and 2 in health and disease: a review. Peptides 2013;44:
75–86.
223.
Willard FS, Sloop KW. Physiology and emerging biochemistry of
the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor. Exp Diabetes Res
2012;2012:470851.
224.
Vrang N, Larsen PJ. Preproglucagon derived peptides GLP-1,
GLP-2 and oxyntomodulin in the CNS: role of peripherally secret-
ed and centrally produced peptides. Prog Neurobiol 2010;92:442–
462.
225.
Rinaman L. Interoceptive stress activates glucagon-like peptide-1
neurons that project to the hypothalamus. Am J Physiol 1999;277:
R582-R590.
226.
Dickson SL, Shirazi RH, Hansson C, Bergquist F, Nissbrandt H,
Skibicka KP. The glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) analogue,
exendin-4, decreases the rewarding value of food: a new role for
mesolimbic GLP-1 receptors. J Neurosci 2012;32:4812–4820.
227.
Nakagawa A, Satake H, Nakabayashi H, et al. Receptor gene
expression of glucagon-like peptide-1, but not glucose-
dependent insulinotropic polypeptide, in rat nodose ganglion cells.
Auton Neurosci 2004;110:36–43.
228.
Kakei M, Yada T, Nakagawa A, Nakabayashi H. Glucagon-like
peptide-1 evokes action potentials and increases cytosolic Ca2+ in
rat nodose ganglion neurons. Auton Neurosci 2002;102:39–44.
229.
Katsurada K, Maejima Y, Nakata M, et al. Endogenous GLP-1
acts on paraventricular nucleus to suppress feeding: projection
from nucleus tractus solitarius and activation of corticotropin-
releasing hormone, nesfatin-1 and oxytocin neurons. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 2014;451:276–281.
230.
Abbott CR, Monteiro M, Small CJ, et al. The inhibitory effects of
peripheral administration of peptide YY(3-36) and glucagon-like
peptide-1 on food intake are attenuated by ablation of the vagal-
brainstem-hypothalamic pathway. Brain Res 2005;1044:127–131.
231.
Secher A, Jelsing J, Baquero AF, et al. The arcuate nucleus medi-
ates GLP-1 receptor agonist liraglutide-dependent weight loss. J
Clin Invest 2014;124:4473–4488.
232.
Krieger JP, Arnold M, Pettersen KG, Lossel P, Langhans W, Lee
SJ. Knockdown of GLP-1 receptors in vagal afferents affects nor-
mal food intake and glycemia. Diabetes 2016;65:34–43.
233.
D’Alessio D, Lu W, Sun W, et al. Fasting and postprandial con-
centrations of GLP-1 in intestinal lymph and portal plasma: evi-
dence for selective release of GLP-1 in the lymph system. Am J
Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2007;293:R2163-R2169.
234.
Kohan A, Yoder S, Tso P. Lymphatics in intestinal transport of
nutrients and gastrointestinal hormones. Ann N Y Acad Sci
2010;1207:E44-E51.
235.
Ohlsson L, Kohan AB, Tso P, Ahrén B. GLP-1 released to the
mesenteric lymph duct in mice: effects of glucose and fat. Regul
Pept 2014;189:40–45.
54
Lach et al.
 236.
Hogan AE, Tobin AM, Ahern T, et al. Glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1) and the regulation of human invariant natural killer T
cells: lessons from obesity, diabetes and psoriasis. Diabetologia
2011;54:2745–2754.
237.
Zietek T, Rath E. Inflammation meets metabolic disease: gut feel-
ing mediated by GLP-1. Front Immunol 2016;7:154.
238.
Bornstein NM, Brainin M, Guekht A, Skoog I, Korczyn AD.
Diabetes and the brain: issues and unmet needs. Neurol Sci
2014;35:995–1001.
239.
Seto SW, Yang GY, Kiat H, Bensoussan A, Kwan YW, Chang D.
Diabetes mellitus, cognitive impairment, and traditional Chinese
medicine. Int J Endocrinol 2015;2015:1–14.
240.
Rivera HM, Christiansen KJ, Sullivan EL. The role of maternal
obesity in the risk of neuropsychiatric disorders. Front Neurosci
2015;9:194.
241.
den Heijer T, Vermeer SE, van Dijk EJ, et al. Type 2 diabetes and
atrophy of medial temporal lobe structures on brain MRI.
Diabetologia 2003;46:1604–1610.
242.
Anderson RJ, Freedland KE, Clouse RE, Lustman PJ. The preva-
lence of comorbid depression in adults with diabetes: a meta-anal-
ysis. Diabetes Care 2001;24:1069–1078.
243.
Collins MM, Corcoran P, Perry IJ. Anxiety and depression symp-
toms in patients with diabetes. Diabet Med 2009;26:153–161.
244.
Lee C-H, Jeon SJ, Cho KS, et al. Activation of glucagon-like
peptide-1 receptor promotes neuroprotection in experimental au-
toimmune encephalomyelitis by reducing neuroinflammatory re-
sponses. Mol Neurobiol 2017 29.
245.
Harkavyi A, Abuirmeileh A, Lever R, Kingsbury AE, Biggs CS,
Whitton PS. Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor stimulation by
exendin-4 reverses key deficits in distinct rodent models of
Parkinson’s disease. J Neuroinflammation 2008;5:19.
246.
Hwang I, Park YJ, Kim Y-R, et al. Alteration of gut microbiota by
vancomycin and bacitracin improves insulin resistance via
glucagon-like peptide 1 in diet-induced obesity. FASEB J
2015;29:2397–2411.
247.
Komsuoglu Celikyurt I, Mutlu O, Ulak G, et al. Exenatide treat-
ment exerts anxiolytic- and antidepressant-like effects and re-
verses neuropathy in a mouse model of type-2 diabetes. Med Sci
Monit Basic Res 2014;20:112–117.
248.
Sharma AN, Pise A, Sharma JN, Shukla P. Glucagon-like peptide-
1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist prevents development of tolerance to
anti-anxiety effect of ethanol and withdrawal-induced anxiety in
rats. Metab Brain Dis 2015;30:719–730.
249.
Kinzig KP, D’Alessio DA, Herman JP, et al. CNS glucagon-like
peptide-1 receptors mediate endocrine and anxiety responses to
interoceptive and psychogenic stressors. J Neurosci 2003;23:
6163–6170.
250.
Krass M, Volke A, Rünkorg K, et al. GLP-1 receptor agonists have
a sustained stimulatory effect on corticosterone release after chron-
ic treatment. Acta Neuropsychiatr 2015;27:25–32.
251.
Möller C, Sommer W, Thorsell A, Rimondini R, Heilig M.
Anxiogenic-like action of centrally administered glucagon-like
p e p t i d e - 1 i n a p u n i s h e d d r i n k i n g t e s t . P r o g
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2002;26:119–122.
252.
Isacson R, Nielsen E, Dannaeus K, et al. The glucagon-like pep-
tide 1 receptor agonist exendin-4 improves reference memory per-
formance and decreases immobility in the forced swim test. Eur J
Pharmacol 2011;650:249–255.
253.
Anderberg RH, Richard JE, Hansson C, Nissbrandt H, Bergquist
F, Skibicka KP. GLP-1 is both anxiogenic and antidepressant;
divergent effects of acute and chronic GLP-1 on emotionality.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 2016;65:54–66.
254.
DellaValle B, Brix GS, Brock B, et al. Glucagon-like peptide-1
analog, liraglutide, delays onset of experimental autoimmune en-
cephalitis in Lewis rats. Front Pharmacol 2016;7:433.
255.
Gejl M, Rungby J, Brock B, Gjedde A. At the centennial of
Michaelis and Menten, competing Michaelis-Menten steps ex-
plain effect of GLP-1 on blood-brain transfer and metabolism of
glucose. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 2014;115:162–171.
256.
Ventorp F, Bay-Richter C, Nagendra AS, et al. Exendin-4 treat-
ment improves LPS-induced depressive-like behavior without af-
fecting pro-inflammatory cytokines. J Parkinsons Dis 2017;7:
263–273.
257.
Cherbut C, Ferrier L, Rozé C, et al. Short-chain fatty acids modify
colonic motility through nerves and polypeptide YY release in the
rat. Am J Physiol 1998;275:G1415-G1422.
258.
Margolskee RF, Dyer J, Kokrashvili Z, et al. T1R3 and gustducin
in gut sense sugars to regulate expression of Na+-glucose
cotransporter 1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:15075–
15080.
259.
Aoki R, Kamikado K, Suda W, et al. A proliferative probiotic
Bifidobacterium strain in the gut ameliorates progression of met-
abolic disorders via microbiota modulation and acetate elevation.
Sci Rep 2017;7:43522.
260.
Everard A, Cani PD. Gut microbiota and GLP-1. Rev Endocr
Metab Disord 2014;15:189–196.
261.
Selwyn FP, Csanaky IL, Zhang Y, Klaassen CD. Importance of
large intestine in regulating bile acids and GLP-1 in germ-free
mice. Drug Metab Dispos 2015;5:1544–1556.
262.
Yu Y, Wang X, Liu C, et al. Combined contributions of over-
secreted glucagon-like peptide 1 and suppressed insulin secretion
to hyperglycemia induced by gatifloxacin in rats. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 2013;266:375–384.
263.
Grasset E, Puel A, Charpentier J, et al. A specific gut microbiota
dysbiosis of type 2 diabetic mice induces GLP-1 resistance
through an enteric NO-dependent and gut-brain axis mechanism.
Cell Metab 2017;25:1075–1090.
264.
Bomhof MR, Saha DC, Reid DT, Paul HA, Reimer RA.
Combined effects of oligofructose and Bifidobacterium animalis
on gut microbiota and glycemia in obese rats. Obesity 2014;22:
763–771.
265.
Cani PD, Lecourt E, Dewulf EM, et al. Gut microbiota fermenta-
tion of prebiotics increases satietogenic and incretin gut peptide
production with consequences for appetite sensation and glucose
response after a meal. Am J Clin Nutr 2009;90:1236–1243.
266.
Delzenne NM, Cani PD, Neyrinck AM. Modulation of glucagon-
like peptide 1 and energy metabolism by inulin and oligofructose:
experimental data. J Nutr 2007;137:2547S–2551S.
267.
Mansur RB, Ahmed J, Cha DS, et al. Liraglutide promotes im-
provements in objective measures of cognitive dysfunction in in-
dividuals with mood disorders: a pilot, open-label study. J Affect
Disord 2017;207:114–120.
268.
Wang H, Wong PT-H, Spiess J, Zhu YZ. Cholecystokinin-2
(CCK2) receptor-mediated anxiety-like behaviors in rats.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2005;29:1361–1373.
269.
Freund TF. Interneuron diversity series: rhythm and mood in
perisomatic inhibition. Trends Neurosci 2003;26:489–495.
270.
McLaughlin RJ, Hill MN, Gorzalka BB. A critical role for
prefrontocortical endocannabinoid signaling in the regulation of
stress and emotional behavior. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2014;42:
116–131.
271.
Park SM, Williams CL. Contribution of serotonin type 3 receptors
in the successful extinction of cued or contextual fear conditioned
responses: interactions with GABAergic signaling. Rev Neurosci
2012;23:555–569.
272.
Schäfer U, Harhammer R, Boomgaarden M, et al. Binding of
cholecystokinin-8 (CCK-8) peptide derivatives to CCKA and
CCKB receptors. J Neurochem 1994;62:1426–1431.
273.
Del Boca C, Lutz PE, Le Merrer J, Koebel P, Kieffer BL.
Cholecystokinin knock-down in the basolateral amygdala has
Microbiome and Gut Peptides
55
 anxiolytic and antidepressant-like effects in mice. Neuroscience
2012;218:185–195.
274.
Rezayat M, Roohbakhsh A, Zarrindast M-R, Massoudi R,
Djahanguiri B. Cholecystokinin and GABA interaction in the
dorsal hippocampus of rats in the elevated plus-maze test of anx-
iety. Physiol Behav 2005;84:775–782.
275.
Desai SJ, Borkar CD, Nakhate KT, Subhedar NK, Kokare DM.
Neuropeptide Y attenuates anxiety- and depression-like effects of
cholecystokinin-4 in mice. Neuroscience 2014;277:818–830.
276.
Tirassa P, Costa N. CCK-8 induces NGF and BDNF synthesis and
modulates TrkA and TrkB expression in the rat hippocampus and
septum: effects on kindling development. Neurochem Int 2007;50:
130–138.
277.
Mishra AK, Dubey V, Ghosh AR. Obesity: an overview of possi-
ble role(s) of gut hormones, lipid sensing and gut microbiota.
Metabolism 2016;65:48–65.
278.
Rehfeld JF. The predominant cholecystokinin in human plasma
and intestine is cholecystokinin-33. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2001;86:251–258.
279.
Baptista V, Zheng ZL, Coleman FH, Rogers RC, Travagli RA.
Cholecystokinin octapeptide increases spontaneous glutamatergic
synaptic transmission to neurons of the nucleus tractus solitarius
centralis. J Neurophysiol 2005;94:2763–2771.
280.
Burdyga G, de Lartigue G, Raybould HE, et al. Cholecystokinin
regulates expression of Y2 receptors in vagal afferent neurons
serving the stomach. J Neurosci 2008;28:11583–11592.
281.
de La Serre CB, de Lartigue G, Raybould HE. Chronic exposure
to low dose bacterial lipopolysaccharide inhibits leptin signaling
in vagal afferent neurons. Physiol Behav 2015;139:188–194.
282.
Bauer P V., Hamr SC, Duca FA. Regulation of energy balance by a
gut–brain axis and involvement of the gut microbiota. Cell Mol
Life Sci 2016;73:737–755.
283.
Hsu L-T, Hung K-Y, Wu H-W, et al. Gut-derived cholecystokinin
contributes to visceral hypersensitivity via nerve growth factor-
dependent neurite outgrowth. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;31:
1594–1603.
284.
El-Salhy M, Hatlebakk JG, Hausken T. Reduction in duodenal
endocrine cells in irritable bowel syndrome is associated with stem
cell abnormalities. World J Gastroenterol 2015;21:9577–9587.
285.
Rubin DC, Zhang H, Qian P, Lorenz RG, Hutton K, Peters MG.
Altered enteroendocrine cell expression in T cell receptor alpha
chain knock-out mice. Microsc Res Tech 2000;51:112–120.
286.
Daly DM, Park SJ, Valinsky WC, Beyak MJ. Impaired intestinal
afferent nerve satiety signalling and vagal afferent excitability in
diet induced obesity in the mouse. J Physiol 2011;589:2857–2870.
287.
Anini Y, Brubaker PL. Role of leptin in the regulation of glucagon-
like peptide-1 secretion. Diabetes 2003;52:252–259.
288.
Covasa M, Grahn J, Ritter RC. High fat maintenance diet attenu-
ates hindbrain neuronal response to CCK. Regul Pept 2000;86:
83–88.
289.
Whited KL, Thao D, Lloyd KCK, Kopin AS, Raybould HE.
Targeted disruption of the murine CCK1 receptor gene reduces
intestinal lipid-induced feedback inhibition of gastric function.
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006;291:G156-G162.
290.
Leslie FC, Thompson DG, McLaughlin JT, Varro A, Dockray GJ,
Mandal BK. Plasma cholecystokinin concentrations are elevated
in acute upper gastrointestinal infections. QJM An Int J Med
2003;96:870–871.
291.
McDermott JR, Leslie FC, D’Amato M, Thompson DG, Grencis
RK, McLaughlin JT. Immune control of food intake:
enteroendocrine cells are regulated by CD4+ T lymphocytes dur-
ing small intestinal inflammation. Gut 2006;55:492–497.
292.
Federico A, Dallio M, Tolone S, et al. Gastrointestinal hormones,
intestinal microbiota and metabolic homeostasis in obese patients:
effect of bariatric surgery. In Vivo 2016;30:321–330.
293.
Kojima M, Hosoda H, Date Y, Nakazato M, Matsuo H, Kangawa
K. Ghrelin is a growth-hormone-releasing acylated peptide from
stomach. Nature 1999;402:656–660.
294.
Nakazato M, Murakami N, Date Y, et al. A role for ghrelin in the
central regulation of feeding. Nature 2001;409:194–198.
295.
Spencer SJ, Xu L, Clarke MA, et al. Ghrelin regulates the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and restricts anxiety after
acute stress. Biol Psychiatry 2012;72:457–465.
296.
Huang H-JJ, Zhu X-CC, Han Q-QQ, et al. Ghrelin alleviates
anxiety- and depression-like behaviors induced by chronic unpre-
dictable mild stress in rodents. Behav Brain Res 2017;326:33–43.
297.
Schellekens H, Finger BC, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Ghrelin signal-
ling and obesity: at the interface of stress, mood and food reward.
Pharmacol Ther 2012;135:316–326.
298.
Alvarez-Crespo M, Skibicka KP, Farkas I, et al. The amygdala as a
neurobiological target for ghrelin in rats: neuroanatomical, elec-
trophysiological and behavioral evidence. PLOS ONE 2012;7:
e46321.
299.
Furness JB, Hunne B, Matsuda N, et al. Investigation of the pres-
ence of ghrelin in the central nervous system of the rat and mouse.
Neuroscience 2011;193:1–9.
300.
Hou Z, Miao Y, Gao L, Pan H, Zhu S. Ghrelin-containing neuron
in cerebral cortex and hypothalamus linked with the DVC of
brainstem in rat. Regul Pept 2006;134:126–131.
301.
Sakata I, Nakano Y, Osborne-Lawrence S, et al. Characterization
of a novel ghrelin cell reporter mouse. Regul Pept 2009;155:91–
98.
302.
Schaeffer M, Langlet F, Lafont C, et al. Rapid sensing of circulat-
ing ghrelin by hypothalamic appetite-modifying neurons. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:1512–1517.
303.
Cabral A, Fernandez G, Perello M. Analysis of brain nuclei acces-
sible to ghrelin present in the cerebrospinal fluid. Neuroscience
2013;253:406–415.
304.
Banks WA. The blood-brain barrier: connecting the gut and the
brain. Regul Pept 2008;149:11–14.
305.
Kalra SP, Dube MG, Pu S, Xu B, Horvath TL, Kalra PS.
Interacting appetite-regulating pathways in the hypothalamic reg-
ulation of body weight 1. Endocr Rev 1999;20:68–100.
306.
Müller TD, Nogueiras R, Andermann ML, et al. Ghrelin. Mol
Metab 2015;4:437–460.
307.
Willesen MG, Kristensen P, Rømer J. Co-localization of growth
hormone secretagogue receptor and NPY mRNA in the arcuate
nucleus of the rat. Neuroendocrinology 1999;70:306–316.
308.
Arvat E, Maccario M, Di Vito L, et al. Endocrine activities of
ghrelin, a natural growth hormone secretagogue (GHS), in
humans: comparison and interactions with hexarelin, a nonnatural
peptidyl GHS, and GH-releasing hormone. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2001;86:1169–1174.
309.
Lutter M, Sakata I, Osborne-Lawrence S, et al. The orexigenic
hormone ghrelin defends against depressive symptoms of chronic
stress. Nat Neurosci 2008;11:752–753.
310.
Patterson ZR, Ducharme R, Anisman H, Abizaid A. Altered met-
abolic and neurochemical responses to chronic unpredictable
stressors in ghrelin receptor-deficient mice. Eur J Neurosci
2010;32:632–639.
311.
Spencer SJ, Emmerzaal TL, Kozicz T, Andrews ZB. Ghrelin’s role
in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis stress response: impli-
cations for mood disorders. Biol Psychiatry 2015;78:19–27.
312.
Walker AK, Rivera PD, Wang Q, et al. The P7C3 class of neuro-
protective compounds exerts antidepressant efficacy in mice by
increasing hippocampal neurogenesis. Mol Psychiatry 2015;20:
500–508.
313.
Hirano Y, Masuda T, Naganos S, et al. Fasting launches CRTC to
facilitate long-term memory formation in Drosophila. Science
2013;339:443–446.
56
Lach et al.
 314.
Plaçais P-Y, Preat T, Ghalambor C, et al. To favor survival under
food shortage, the brain disables costly memory. Science
2013;339:440–442.
315.
Meyer RM, Burgos-Robles A, Liu E, Correia SS, Goosens KA. A
ghrelin-growth hormone axis drives stress-induced vulnerability
to enhanced fear. Mol Psychiatry 2014;19:1284–1294.
316.
Date Y, Murakami N, Toshinai K, et al. The role of the gastric
afferent vagal nerve in Ghrelin-induced feeding and growth hor-
mone secretion in rats. Gastroenterology 2002;123:1120–1128.
317.
Howick K, Griffin B, Cryan J, Schellekens H. From belly to brain:
targeting the ghrelin receptor in appetite and food intake regula-
tion. Int J Mol Sci 2017;18:273.
318.
Queipo-Ortuño MI, Seoane LM, Murri M, et al. Gut microbiota
composition in male rat models under different nutritional status
and physical activity and its association with serum leptin and
ghrelin levels. PLOS ONE 2013;8:e65465.
319.
Chaplin A, Parra P, Serra F, Palou A. Conjugated linoleic acid
supplementation under a high-fat diet modulates stomach protein
expression and intestinal microbiota in adult mice. PLOS ONE
2015;10:e0125091.
320.
Massot-Cladera M, Mayneris-Perxachs J, Costabile A, et al.
Association between urinary metabolic profile and the intestinal
effects of cocoa in rats. Br J Nutr 2017;117:623–634.
321.
Parvin Z, Iraj MD, Minoo S, Fatemeh K. Effects of Toxoplasma
gondii infection on anxiety, depression and ghrelin level in male
rats. J Parasit Dis 2016;40:688–693.
322.
Nilaweera KN, Cabrera-Rubio R, Speakman JR, et al. Whey pro-
tein effects on energy balance link the intestinal mechanisms of
energy absorption with adiposity and hypothalamic neuropeptide
gene expression. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2017;313:E1–
E11.
323.
Tubbs E, Theurey P, Vial G, et al. Mitochondria-associated endo-
plasmic reticulum membrane (MAM) integrity is required for in-
sulin signaling and is implicated in hepatic insulin resistance.
Diabetes 2014;63:3279–3294.
324.
Matsumoto M, Inoue R, Tsukahara T, et al. Voluntary running
exercise alters microbiota composition and increases n-butyrate
concentration in the rat cecum. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem
2008;72:572–576.
325.
Kang C, Zhang Y, Zhu X, et al. Healthy subjects differentially
respond to dietary capsaicin correlating with specific gut
enterotypes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:4681–4689.
326.
Schmid DA, Held K, Ising M, Uhr M, Weikel JC, Steiger A.
Ghrelin stimulates appetite, imagination of food, GH, ACTH,
and cortisol, but does not affect leptin in normal controls.
Neuropsychopharmacology 2005;30:1187–1192.
327.
Vale W, Spiess J, Rivier C, Rivier J. Characterization of a 41-
residue ovine hypothalamic peptide that stimulates secretion of
corticotropin and beta-endorphin. Science 1981;213:1394–1397.
328.
Turnbull A V, Rivier C. Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) and
endocrine responses to stress: CRF receptors, binding protein, and
related peptides. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1997;215:1–10.
329.
Aubry J-M. CRF system and mood disorders. J Chem Neuroanat
2013;54:20–24.
330.
Tsatsanis C, Dermitzaki E, Venihaki M, et al. The corticotropin-
releasing factor (CRF) family of peptides as local modulators of
adrenal function. Cell Mol Life Sci 2007;64:1638–1655.
331.
Muramatsu Y, Fukushima K, Iino K, et al. Urocortin and
corticotropin-releasing factor receptor expression in the human
colonic mucosa. Peptides 2000;21:1799–1809.
332.
Tache Y, Perdue MH. Role of peripheral CRF signalling pathways
in stress-related alterations of gut motility and mucosal function.
Neurogastroenterol Motil 2004;16:137–142.
333.
Kawahito Y, Sano H, Kawata M, et al. Local secretion of
corticotropin-releasing hormone by enterochromaffin cells in hu-
man colon. Gastroenterology 1994;106:859–865.
334.
Liu S, Chang J, Long N, et al. Endogenous CRF in rat large
intestine mediates motor and secretory responses to stress.
Neurogastroenterol Motil 2016;28:281–291.
335.
Wlk M, Wang CC, Venihaki M, et al. Corticotropin-releasing hor-
mone antagonists possess anti-inflammatory effects in the mouse
ileum. Gastroenterology 2002;123:505–515.
336.
Seasholtz AF, Valverde RA, Denver RJ. Corticotropin-releasing
hormone-binding protein: Biochemistry and function from fishes
to mammals. J Endocrinol 2002;175:89–97.
337.
Refojo D, Schweizer M, Kuehne C, et al. Glutamatergic and do-
paminergic neurons mediate anxiogenic and anxiolytic effects of
CRHR1. Science 2011;333:1903–1907.
338.
Bethin KE, Vogt SK, Muglia LJ. Interleukin-6 is an essential,
corticotropin-releasing hormone-independent stimulator of the ad-
renal axis during immune system activation. Proc Natl. Acad Sci
U S A 2000;97:9317–9322.
339.
Fox JH, Lowry CA. Corticotropin-releasing factor-related pep-
tides, serotonergic systems, and emotional behavior. Front
Neurosci 2013;7:169.
340.
Habib KE, Weld KP, Rice KC, et al. Oral administration of a
corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor antagonist significantly
attenuates behavioral, neuroendocrine, and autonomic responses
to stress in primates. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:6079–
6084.
341.
Smith GW, Aubry JM, Dellu F, et al. Corticotropin releasing factor
receptor 1-deficient mice display decreased anxiety, impaired
stress response, and aberrant neuroendocrine development.
Neuron 1998;20:1093–1102.
342.
Kasahara M, Groenink L, Breuer M, Olivier B, Sarnyai Z. Altered
behavioural adaptation in mice with neural corticotrophin-
releasing factor overexpression. Genes Brain Behav 2007;6:598–
607.
343.
Timpl P, Spanagel R, Sillaber I, et al. Impaired stress response and
reduced anxiety in mice lacking a functional corticotropin-
releasing hormone receptor 1. Nat Genet 1998;19:162–166.
344.
Fernández Macedo GV, Cladouchos ML, Sifonios L, Cassanelli
PM, Wikinski S. Effects of fluoxetine on CRF and CRF1 expres-
sion in rats exposed to the learned helplessness paradigm.
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2013;225:647–659.
345.
Merali Z, Kent P, Du L, et al. Corticotropin-releasing hormone,
arginine vasopressin, gastrin-releasing peptide, and neuromedin B
alterations in stress-relevant brain regions of suicides and control
subjects. Biol Psychiatry 2006;59:594–602.
346.
Stout SC, Owens MJ, Nemeroff CB. Regulation of corticotropin-
releasing factor neuronal systems and hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis activity by stress and chronic antidepressant treat-
ment. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2002;300:1085–1092.
347.
Rodiño-Janeiro BK, Alonso-Cotoner C, Pigrau M, Lobo B,
Vicario M, Santos J. Role of corticotropin-releasing factor in gas-
trointestinal permeability. J Neurogastroenterol Motil 2015;21:
33–50.
348.
Galley JD, Bailey MT. Impact of stressor exposure on the interplay
between commensal microbiota and host inflammation. Gut
Microbes 2014;5:390–296.
349.
Murakami T, Kamada K, Mizushima K, et al. Changes in intestinal
motility and gut microbiota composition in a rat stress model.
Digestion 2017;95:55–60.
350.
Nozu T, Martinez V, Rivier J, Taché Y. Peripheral urocortin delays
gastric emptying: role of CRF receptor 2. Am J Physiol 1999;276:
G867–G874.
351.
Bueno L, Fioramonti J. Effects of corticotropin-releasing factor,
corticotropin and cortisol on gastrointestinal motility in dogs.
Peptides 1986;7:73–77.
352.
Stengel A, Taché Y. Neuroendocrine control of the gut during
stress: corticotropin-releasing factor signaling pathways in the
spotlight. Annu Rev Physiol 2009;71:219–239.
Microbiome and Gut Peptides
57
 353.
Jašarević E, Howerton CL, Howard CD, Bale TL. Alterations in
the vaginal microbiome by maternal stress are associated with
metabolic reprogramming of the offspring gut and brain.
Endocrinology 2015;156:3265–3276.
354.
Golubeva AV, Crampton S, Desbonnet L, et al. Prenatal stress-
induced alterations in major physiological systems correlate with
g u t
m i c r o b i o t a
c o m p o s i t i o n
i n
a d u l t h o o d .
Psychoneuroendocrinology 2015;60:58–74.
355.
Abe H, Hidaka N, Kawagoe C, et al. Prenatal psychological stress
causes higher emotionality, depression-like behavior, and elevated
activity in the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis. Neurosci Res
2007;59:145–151.
356.
Takada M, Nishida K, Kataoka-Kato A, et al. Probiotic
Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota relieves stress-associated symp-
toms by modulating the gut–brain interaction in human and ani-
mal models. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2016;28:1027–1036.
357.
Abildgaard A, Elfving B, Hokland M, Wegener G, Lund S.
Probiotic treatment reduces depressive-like behaviour in rats in-
dependently of diet. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2017;79:40–48.
358.
Zijlmans MAC, Korpela K, Riksen-Walraven JM, de Vos WM, de
Weerth C. Maternal prenatal stress is associated with the infant
intestinal microbiota. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2015;53:233–
245.
359.
Sanders J, Nemeroff C. The CRF system as a therapeutic target for
neuropsychiatric disorders. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2016;37:1045–
1054.
360.
Wasserman D, Wasserman J, Sokolowski M. Genetics of HPA-
axis, depression and suicidality. Eur Psychiatry 2010;25:278–280.
361.
Yang H, Zhao XX, Tang S, et al. Probiotics reduce psychological
stress in patients before laryngeal cancer surgery. Asia Pac J Clin
Oncol 2016;12:e92–e96.
362.
Leng G, Ludwig M. Intranasal oxytocin: myths and delusions.
Biol Psychiatry 2015;79:243–250.
363.
Neumann ID, Landgraf R. Balance of brain oxytocin and vaso-
pressin: implications for anxiety, depression, and social behaviors.
Trends Neurosci 2012;35:649–659.
364.
Gimpl G, Fahrenholz F. The oxytocin receptor system: structure,
function, and regulation. Physiol Rev 2001;81:629–683.
365.
Baribeau DA, Anagnostou E. Oxytocin and vasopressin: linking
pituitary neuropeptides and their receptors to social neurocircuits.
Front Neurosci 2015;9:335.
366.
Welch MG, Tamir H, Gross KJ, Chen J, Anwar M, Gershon MD.
Expression and developmental regulation of oxytocin (OT) and
oxytocin receptors (OTR) in the enteric nervous system (ENS)
and intestinal epithelium. J Comp Neurol 2009;512:256–270.
367.
Kimura T, Makino Y, Saji F, et al. Molecular characterization of a
cloned human oxytocin receptor. Eur J Endocrinol 1994;131:385–
390.
368.
Olff M, Frijling JL, Kubzansky LD, et al. The role of oxytocin in
social bonding, stress regulation and mental health: an update on
the moderating effects of context and interindividual differences.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 2013;38:1883–1894.
369.
Amico JA, Mantella RC, Vollmer RR, Li X. Anxiety and stress
responses in female oxytocin deficient mice. J Neuroendocrinol
2004;16:319–324.
370.
DeVries AC, Young WS, Nelson RJ. Reduced aggressive behav-
iour in mice with targeted disruption of the oxytocin gene. J
Neuroendocrinol 1997;9:363–368.
371.
MacDonald K, Feifel D. Oxytocin’s role in anxiety: a critical ap-
praisal. Brain Res 2014;1580:22–56.
372.
Landgraf R, Neumann I, Holsboer F, Pittman QJ. Interleukin-1β
stimulates both central and peripheral release of vasopressin and
oxytocin in the rat. Eur J Neurosci 1995;7:592–598.
373.
Erdman SE, Poutahidis T. Probiotic Bglow of health^: it’s more
than skin deep. Benef Microbes 2014;5:109–119.
374.
Cohen H, Kaplan Z, Kozlovsky N, Gidron Y, Matar MA, Zohar J.
Hippocampal microinfusion of oxytocin attenuates the behaviour-
al response to stress by means of dynamic interplay with the
glucocorticoid-catecholamine responses. J Neuroendocrinol
2010;22:889–904.
375.
Landgraf R, Wigger A. Born to be anxious: neuroendocrine and
genetic correlates of trait anxiety in HAB rats. Stress 2003;6:111–
119.
376.
Slattery DA, Neumann ID. Chronic icv oxytocin attenuates the
pathological high anxiety state of selectively bred Wistar rats.
Neuropharmacology 2010;58:56–61.
377.
Norman GJ, Karelina K, Morris JS, Zhang N, Cochran M,
Courtney DeVries A. Social interaction prevents the development
of depressive-like behavior post nerve injury in mice: a potential
role for oxytocin. Psychosom Med 2010;72:519–526.
378.
Farshim P, Walton G, Chakrabarti B, et al. Maternal weaning
modulates emotional behavior and regulates the gut-brain axis.
Sci Rep 2016;6:21958.
379.
Desbonnet L, Clarke G, Shanahan F, Dinan TG, Cryan JF.
Microbiota is essential for social development in the mouse.
Mol Psychiatry 2014;19:146–148.
380.
Jin P, Yu H-L, Tian-Lan, Zhang F, Quan Z-S. Antidepressant-like
effects of oleoylethanolamide in a mouse model of chronic unpre-
dictable mild stress. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2015;133:146–
154.
381.
Yu HL, Sun LP, Li MM, Quan ZS. Involvement of norepinephrine
and serotonin system in antidepressant-like effects of
oleoylethanolamide in the mice models of behavior despair.
Neurosci Lett 2015;593:24–28.
382.
Gaetani S, Fu J, Cassano T, et al. The fat-induced satiety factor
oleoylethanolamide suppresses feeding through central release of
oxytocin. J Neurosci 2010;30:8096–8101.
383.
Romano A, Cassano T, Tempesta B, et al. The satiety signal
oleoylethanolamide stimulates oxytocin neurosecretion from rat
hypothalamic neurons. Peptides 2013;49:21–26.
384.
Wang X, Miyares RL, Ahern GP. Oleoylethanolamide excites va-
gal sensory neurones, induces visceral pain and reduces short-term
food intake in mice via capsaicin receptor TRPV1. J Physiol
2005;564:541–547.
385.
David LA, Maurice CF, Carmody RN, et al. Diet rapidly and
reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. Nature
2014;505:559–563.
386.
Brinkworth GD, Noakes M, Buckley JD, Keogh JB, Clifton PM.
Long-term effects of a very-low-carbohydrate weight loss diet
compared with an isocaloric low-fat diet after 12 mo. Am J Clin
Nutr 2009;90:23–32.
387.
Russell WR, Gratz SW, Duncan SH, et al. High-protein, reduced-
carbohydrate weight-loss diets promote metabolite profiles likely
to be detrimental to colonic health. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;93:1062–
1072.
388.
Ríos-Covián D, Ruas-Madiedo P, Margolles A, Gueimonde M, de
los Reyes-Gavilán CG, Salazar N. Intestinal short chain fatty acids
and their link with diet and human health. Front Microbiol 2016;7:
185.
389.
Kato-Kataoka A, Nishida K, Takada M, et al. Fermented milk
containing Lactobacillus casei strain shirota preserves the diversi-
ty of the gut microbiota and relieves abdominal dysfunction in
healthy medical students exposed to academic stress. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2016;82:3649–3658.
390.
Messaoudi M, Lalonde R, Violle N, et al. Assessment of
psychotropic-like properties of a probiotic formulation
(Lactobacillus helveticus R0052 and Bifidobacterium longum
R0175) in rats and human subjects. Br J Nutr 2010;105:755–764.
391.
Schmidt K, Cowen PJ, Harmer CJ, Tzortzis G, Errington S, Burnet
PWJ. Prebiotic intake reduces the waking cortisol response and
58
Lach et al.
 alters emotional bias in healthy volunteers. Psychopharmacology
(Berl) 2015;232:1793–1801.
392.
Kelly JR, Allen AP, Temko A, et al. Lost in translation? The
potential psychobiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus (JB-1) fails to
modulate stress or cognitive performance in healthy male subjects.
Brain Behav Immun 2017;61:50–59.
393.
Akkasheh G, Kashani-Poor Z, Tajabadi-Ebrahimi M, et al.
Clinical and metabolic response to probiotic administration in
patients with major depressive disorder: a randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. Nutrition 2016;32:315–320.
394.
Rafferty J, Nagaraj H, McCloskey AP, et al. Peptide therapeutics
and the pharmaceutical industry: barriers encountered translating
from the laboratory to patients. Curr Med Chem 2016;23:4231–
4259.
395.
Yin L, Yuvienco C, Montclare JK. Protein based therapeutic de-
livery agents: contemporary developments and challenges.
Biomaterials 2017;134:91–116.
396.
Pillai O, Dhanikula AB, Panchagnula R. Drug delivery: an odys-
sey of 100 years. Curr Opin Chem Biol 2001;5:439–446.
397.
ElRakaiby M, Dutilh BE, Rizkallah MR, Boleij A, Cole JN, Aziz
RK. Pharmacomicrobiomics: the impact of human microbiome
variations on systems pharmacology and personalized therapeu-
tics. OMICS 2014;18:402–414.
398.
Maldonado-Gómez MX, Martínez I, Bottacini F, et al. Stable en-
graftment of Bifidobacterium longum AH1206 in the human gut
depends on individualized features of the resident microbiome.
Cell Host Microbe 2016;20:515–526.
399.
Walsh CJ, Guinane CM, Hill C, Ross RP, O’Toole PW, Cotter PD.
In silico identification of bacteriocin gene clusters in the gastroin-
testinal tract, based on the Human Microbiome Project’s reference
genome database. BMC Microbiol 2015;15:183.
400.
Zheng X, Zhang X, Kang A, Ran C, Wang G, Hao H. Thinking
outside the brain for cognitive improvement: Is peripheral
immunomodulation on the way? Neuropharmacology 2015;96:
94–104.
401.
Kommineni S, Bretl DJ, Lam V, et al. Bacteriocin production
augments niche competition by enterococci in the mammalian
gastrointestinal tract. Nature 2015;526:719–722.
402.
Corr SC, Li Y, Riedel CU, O’Toole PW, Hill C, Gahan CGM.
Bacteriocin production as a mechanism for the antiinfective activ-
ity of Lactobacillus salivarius UCC118. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2007;104:7617–7621.
Required Author Forms
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with the online
version of this article.
Microbiome and Gut Peptides
59
