 https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361316671012
Autism
2017, Vol. 21(6) 690 
–702
© The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1362361316671012
journals.sagepub.com/home/aut
Introduction
Autism spectrum condition/disorder (henceforth ‘autism’) 
has a life-long impact on individual development. Adult 
presentation and outcome vary substantially (Howlin and 
Moss, 2012). Those who are diagnosed in childhood tend 
to show reduced autistic symptoms over time, but only 
 
a minority show satisfactory social functioning (Howlin 
et al., 2013). In contrast to individuals who receive diagno-
ses in childhood, some individuals are only identified later 
in life and may ‘fly under the radar’ for many years partly 
because of learnt strategies to conceal social difficulties. 
These late-diagnosed individuals tend to suffer from con-
current mental health challenges potentially related to long-
term stress in adaptation to daily life in the society (Lai and 
Baron-Cohen, 2015). Given long-standing environmental 
support but also pressure to ‘fit in’ with neurotypical social 
communication, individuals with autism (irrespective of 
timing of diagnosis) may develop coping strategies over 
development. One such coping strategy is that they may 
‘camouflage’ difficulties during social situations (Attwood, 
2007) by either hiding behaviour that might be viewed as 
socially unacceptable or artificially ‘performing’ social 
behaviour deemed to be more neurotypical – they Pretend 
to be Normal (Willey, 1999).
Quantifying and exploring camouflaging  
in men and women with autism
Meng-Chuan Lai1,2,3,4,5, Michael V Lombardo4,6,  
Amber NV Ruigrok4, Bhismadev Chakrabarti4,7,  
Bonnie Auyeung4,8, Peter Szatmari1,2,3, Francesca Happé9  
and Simon Baron-Cohen4,10; MRC AIMS Consortium
Abstract
Autobiographical descriptions and clinician observations suggest that some individuals with autism, particularly females, 
‘camouflage’ their social communication difficulties, which may require considerable cognitive effort and lead to increased 
stress, anxiety and depression. Using data from 60 age- and IQ-matched men and women with autism (without intellectual 
disability), we operationalized camouflaging in adults with autism for the first time as the quantitative discrepancy between 
the person’s ‘external’ behavioural presentation in social–interpersonal contexts (measured by the Autism Diagnostic 
Observation Schedule) and the person’s ‘internal’ status (dispositional traits measured by the Autism Spectrum Quotient 
and social cognitive capability measured by the ‘Reading the Mind in the Eyes’ Test). We found that the operationalized 
camouflaging measure was not significantly correlated with age or IQ. On average, women with autism had higher camouflaging 
scores than men with autism (Cohen’s d = 0.98), with substantial variability in both groups. Greater camouflaging was 
associated with more depressive symptoms in men and better signal-detection sensitivity in women with autism. The 
neuroanatomical association with camouflaging score was largely sex/gender-dependent and significant only in women: 
from reverse inference, the most correlated cognitive terms were about emotion and memory. The underlying constructs, 
measurement, mechanisms, consequences and heterogeneity of camouflaging in autism warrant further investigation.
Keywords
adults, autism, brain structure, camouflage, camouflaging, cognition, coping, gender, sex, sex differences
1Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Canada
2The Hospital for Sick Children, Canada
3University of Toronto, Canada
4University of Cambridge, UK
5National Taiwan University Hospital, Taiwan
6University of Cyprus, Cyprus
7University of Reading, UK
8The University of Edinburgh, UK
9King’s College London, UK
10Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, UK
Corresponding author:
Meng-Chuan Lai, Child, Youth and Emerging Adult Program, Centre for 
Addiction and Mental Health, 80 Workman Way, Toronto, ON M6J 
1H4, Canada. 
Email: mengchuan.lai@utoronto.ca
671012 AUT0010.1177/1362361316671012AutismLai et al.
research-article2016
Special Issue Article
 Lai et al. 
691
Examples of camouflaging include making eye contact 
during conversation, using learned phrases or pre-prepared 
jokes in conversation, mimicking other’s social behaviour, 
imitating facial expressions or gestures, and learning and 
following social scripts (Lai and Baron-Cohen, 2015). One 
may also learn to consciously speak more quietly or not 
 
to stand too close to another person or not to make per-
sonal remarks, perhaps following feedback that these 
may be hurtful or uncomfortable for others or perhaps as 
a conscious goal to model their behaviour on a neuro-
typical peer in order to gain greater social acceptance. 
Autobiographical descriptions and clinician observations 
often suggest that camouflaging unfortunately comes at a 
cost: it often requires substantial cognitive effort, can be 
exhausting and may lead to increased stress responses, 
meltdown due to social overload, anxiety and depression, 
and even a negative impact on the development of one’s 
identity (Attwood, 2007; Boyd et al., 2011; Lai et al., 
2011; Simone, 2010; Willey, 1999; Williams, 1992).
Camouflaging may also play a role in the observed 
male-preponderance in autism prevalence, if it is the 
 
case that females are more likely or more motivated to 
camouflage, and thereby go undetected and undiagnosed 
for longer. Thus, the male-preponderance may reflect 
aetiological sex/gender differences, but may also be a 
product of under- or misrecognition of autism in females, 
potentially associated with gender stereotypes and the 
historically male-based behavioural characterization of 
autism, with insufficient acknowledgement of how 
females may present some behaviours characteristic of 
autism in a qualitatively or quantitatively different way 
from their male counterparts – camouflaging being one 
example (Lai et al., 2015). Population-based data show 
that females are often diagnosed at later ages (Begeer 
et al., 2013; Giarelli et al., 2010; Rutherford et al., 2016; 
Shattuck et al., 2009) and less easily than males with 
autism (Russell et al., 2011; Wilson et al., 2016), unless 
there are concurrent behavioural or cognitive challenges 
(Dworzynski et al., 2012). One of the potential reasons for 
this may be the heightened tendency to camouflage diffi-
culties in many females on the spectrum: when difficulties 
in social interaction and communication are masked, their 
signs of autism are less likely to be picked up by families, 
teachers or primary care providers in order to trigger an 
assessment. If the diagnostician further misses signs of 
camouflaging, superficially ‘typical’ non-verbal skills and 
social manner may be wrongly taken as evidence to rule 
out the presence of autism (Lai and Baron-Cohen, 2015).
In the 1980s, investigating sex/gender ratio in the 
autism spectrum, Wing (1981) wrote that ‘The possibility 
that girls with the triad of impairments who had higher 
 
levels of intelligence were missed in the search for cases 
has to be considered’ (p. 134). Ten years later, Gillberg 
(1991) noted that ‘Asperger syndrome can occur in girls 
[…] on the surface, symptoms of impairment of social 
interaction might be less conspicuous than corresponding 
symptoms in boys’ (p. 129). He suggested that girls might 
have more advanced social skills to conceal their autistic 
characteristics. Attwood (2007) also pointed out in his 
highly influential book The Complete Guide to Asperger’s 
Syndrome that ‘Some girls and women with Asperger’s 
syndrome, and adults of considerable intellectual ability, 
can be more difficult to diagnose due to an ability to cam-
ouflage their difficulties’ (p. 40). Women with autism and 
their parents regularly echo this observation and consider 
camouflaging as one of the major reasons females on 
 
the autism spectrum often go under-recognized until they 
can no longer compensate (Ernsperger and Wendel, 2007; 
Hendrickx, 2015; Lawson, 1998; Miller, 2003; Simone, 
2010; Willey, 1999; Zaks, 2006).
Clinicians and researchers have also increasingly 
described camouflaging in females, in contrast to males, 
with autism (Attwood, 2006; Gould and Ashton-Smith, 
2011; Kopp and Gillberg, 1992; Lai et al., 2015; Marshall, 
2015). Recent large-scale, population-based epidemio-
logical studies (many of them included active case ascer-
tainment) show a 2–3:1 male-preponderance compared to 
the widely cited 4–5:1 ratio from earlier studies (Baxter 
et al., 2015; Idring et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2011; Mattila 
et al., 2011; Zablotsky et al., 2015), possibly suggesting 
better recognition of females in recent years owing to 
increased clinical awareness or more sensitive measure-
ment. Longitudinal population-based studies in the Nordic 
regions particularly confirm this trend (Jensen et al., 2014; 
Kocovska et al., 2012). Improving our understanding 
 
of camouflaging, along with other possible ‘female- 
phenotypes of autism’, may further facilitate the identifi-
cation of masked symptoms and difficulties and enhance 
timely diagnosis and support.
Although camouflaging has been frequently described 
as a major characteristic of women with autism (e.g. by the 
findings from the European Union (EU)-funded Autism in 
Pink project, http://autisminpink.net/), it has received 
surprisingly limited systematic scientific investigation. In 
a recent qualitative study, Tierney et al. (2016) interviewed 
10 teenage girls with autism on the social challenges 
 
associated with adolescence and analysed the data using 
Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis. These teenage 
girls reported that they developed explicit strategies to 
manage social relationships, in particular imitation and 
masking. Hiller et al. (2014) compared school-age boys 
and girls who were clinically diagnosed with autism and 
discovered that they met the clinical criteria in somewhat 
different ways. Notably, some differences may underpin or 
reflect higher camouflaging in females. For example, girls 
were more likely to be able to integrate non-verbal and 
verbal behaviours, to have better imagination (at least at 
face value), to maintain a reciprocal conversation and 
 
to initiate (but not maintain) friendships. These character-
istics seem to have ecological impacts, as school teachers 
 692 
Autism 21(6)
reported far fewer concerns about girls than boys with 
autism regarding their social skills, friendship and exter-
nalizing behavioural problems (Hiller et al., 2014).
Head and colleagues found that teenage girls with 
autism scored higher on the Friendship Questionnaire 
(indicative of better/more friendship) than did teenage 
boys with autism and at a level comparable to that of 
typically developing teenage boys. One interpretation is 
that females with autism may ‘develop a capacity to 
camouflage or hide their social insecurities in order to 
 
fit in’ (Head et al., 2014: 6). Lai et al. (2011) alluded 
 
to higher camouflaging in women than men with autism 
based on the observation that, given similar levels of 
childhood autistic symptoms measured by the Autism 
Diagnostic Interview–Revised (ADI-R), women with 
autism tended to show less pronounced autistic features in 
interpersonal–social contexts as measured by the Autism 
Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS).
By analysing behaviour from the demonstration 
 
activities in the ADOS-2, Rynkiewicz et al. (2016) found 
girls with autism used gestures more vividly than boys 
with autism and suspected this to be one component of 
enhanced camouflaging in females which ‘may pose risk 
of underdiagnosis or not receiving the appropriate diagno-
sis for this population’ (p. 6). Finally, Lehnhardt and col-
leagues studied cognitive profiles in late-diagnosed men 
and women with autism, both presumably missing early 
diagnosis partly due to camouflaging. They found that 
men with autism had higher verbal abilities than women 
with autism, whereas women with autism had higher pro-
cessing speed and better executive function than men with 
autism. They proposed that this sex/gender-differential 
finding might indicate ‘different strategies being applied 
to camouflage the autistic background during childhood 
and adolescence’ (Lehnhardt et al., 2016: 150).
These pioneering studies indicate that camouflaging can 
 
be conceptualized as using learned social communicative 
behaviours (e.g. imitation, gestures and conversation skills) 
to mask underlying difficulties related to autism. Females 
with autism tend to employ more camouflaging than males 
with autism. This skill is probably supported by verbal 
ability and executive function. Since camouflaging involves 
real-time monitoring of the environment to make careful 
and appropriate responses, we hypothesize that in order to 
successfully camouflage, at the cognitive level one requires 
sensitive monitoring of the environment (i.e. being highly 
vigilant) and/or a more conservative response strategy (i.e. 
being highly cautious). Nevertheless, camouflaging may 
also be supported by other skills deemed to be relevant by 
its definition, such as social imitation ability, and/or other 
as yet unrecognized cognitive or behavioural abilities.
None of the above studies have operationalized and 
quantified camouflaging in autism or clarified its neuro-
cognitive correlates. We consider there are at least 
 
two complementary approaches needed to advance our 
understanding. The first is to take a grounded theory 
approach (Glaser and Strauss, 2009), starting from 
research questions such as ‘what is camouflaging in 
autism?’ and ‘what are the required abilities and skills for 
camouflaging?’ and to collect qualitative data to inform 
concept formation. The second is to take a positivist 
approach and operationalize camouflaging using exist-
ing, standardized measures and to test for relevant 
hypotheses derived from the observations and findings 
summarized above. Here we take the latter approach, 
using existing standardized and validated measures to 
 
(1) derive an estimate of camouflaging in adults with 
autism, (2) compare camouflaging between males and 
females, (3) test whether more camouflaging is associ-
ated with more severe anxiety and depression and (4) test 
whether more camouflaging is associated with better 
 
verbal ability, better signal detection from background 
events and more conservative responses. In addition, in a 
hypothesis-free manner, we explore the neuroanatomical 
correlates of individual differences in camouflaging and 
then use the ‘big data’ from the neuroscience literature to 
draw a ‘reverse inference’ to identify other potentially 
associated cognitive correlates of camouflaging.
Methods
Participants
Participants comprised 30 adult females and 30 adult males 
with autism (none with intellectual disability) matched for 
age (18–49 years), verbal IQ (VIQ), performance IQ (PIQ) 
and full-scale IQ (FIQ). All participants had a formal clini-
cal diagnosis of International Classification of Diseases, 
Tenth Edition (ICD-10; World Health Organization (WHO), 
1992) childhood autism or Asperger’s syndrome and/or 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
 
(4th ed., text rev.; DSM-IV-TR; American Psychiatric 
Association (APA), 2000) autistic disorder or Asperger’s 
disorder, as assessed by a psychiatrist or clinical psycholo-
gist in the National Health Service, United Kingdom. 
Additionally, all but two participants reached the diagnostic 
algorithm cut-offs on the ADI-R (Lord et al., 1994). The 
two exceptions were female participants where ADI-R was 
unavailable due to childhood caregivers being unable to be 
interviewed. One of these individuals scored above the cut-
off for ‘autism spectrum’ on the ADOS (Lord et al., 2000) 
and the other was positive for a diagnosis on the Adult 
Asperger Assessment (AAA) which incorporates caregiver 
reports of childhood behaviours and developmental his-
tory (Baron-Cohen et al., 2005). Scoring one point below in 
only one of the three core symptom domains of ADI-R was 
permitted, to allow for possible underestimation of early 
developmentally atypical behaviours in the recall of car-
egivers whose children are now adults. ADOS module 4 
was performed, but the score was not used as an inclusion 
criterion.
 Lai et al. 
693
Behavioural, cognitive and neuroanatomical characteri-
zations of this cohort have been reported previously (Ecker 
et al., 2012, 2013; Lai et al., 2011, 2012, 2013; Wilson 
et al., 2014), along with detailed project and recruitment 
information. The sample included in this study comprises 
the autism groups reported in a previous neuroimaging 
study (Lai et al., 2013).
Behavioural and cognitive measures
All participants were assessed using the Wechsler 
Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (Wechsler, 1999) for 
estimation of VIQ, PIQ and FIQ. ADI-R was conducted to 
assess childhood autism characteristics (Lord et al., 1994). 
Module 4 of the ADOS (Lord et al., 2000) was used 
 
to quantify current, adult (‘external’) behavioural charac-
teristics related to autism. The ADOS is a standardized 
activity- and interview-based semi-structured assessment 
for current behavioural presentation in a quasi-natural, 
interpersonal context. Behaviours of the participant were 
coded immediately after the assessment session into 
 
31 items, of which 16 were entered into the ‘diagnostic 
 
algorithm’. The diagnostic algorithm score quantifies the 
adult’s cardinal social interactive and communicative 
behaviours associated with autism.
Among a battery of self-report questionnaires obtained 
in this project (Lai et al., 2011), the Autism Spectrum 
Quotient (AQ) (Baron-Cohen et al., 2001b) was selected 
to measure participants’ self-reflection (‘internal’ percep-
tion) of their personal characteristics related to autism. 
The AQ contains 50 items measuring autistic-like traits in 
terms of social skills, attention switching, attention to 
detail, communication and imagination. Among a battery 
of cognitive tests in this project, the ‘Reading the Mind in 
the Eyes’ Test (RMET) (Baron-Cohen et al., 2001a, 2015) 
was selected to measure participants’ actual (‘internal’) 
capability in advanced mentalizing and complex emotion 
recognition. The 36-item RMET requires participants to 
infer mental status solely from photos of a person’s eyes 
and immediate surrounding areas of the face.
Based on our hypotheses, to test for the clinical and 
cognitive correlates of camouflaging, we selected the 
21-item Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI; Beck et al., 1988) 
to measure anxiety symptoms and the 21-item Beck 
Depression Inventory (BDI; Beck et al., 1961) to measure 
symptoms of depression. VIQ was selected to indicate the 
verbal ability of an individual. From our available cogni-
tive measures, performance on executive function tasks 
most closely reflects our construct of interest (i.e. monitor-
ing the environment and patterns of behavioural response). 
We therefore selected an online version of the Go/No-Go 
task and derived performance measures using the signal-
detection theory (SDT) framework (Green and Swets, 
1966), namely, sensitivity (d′ = ZHit − ZFA, where ZHit is the 
corresponding Z value in the normal distribution for the 
probability of Hit, that is, signal present and the response 
is ‘present’, and ZFA is the same for False Alarm, that 
 
is, signal absent but the response is ‘present’) and crite-
rion (response bias) (C = −0.5 × (ZHit + ZFA)). Sensitivity d′ 
indicates the participant’s ability to discriminate signal 
from background noise, and criterion C quantifies how 
liberal (i.e. C < 0) or conservative (i.e. C > 0) the response 
strategy (bias) is. Additional details of the implementation 
of cognitive tasks were reported earlier (Lai et al., 2012).
Operationalizing camouflaging using 
standardized measures
As camouflaging could be defined as (consciously or 
unconsciously) compensating for and/or masking difficul-
ties in social and interpersonal situations, we operational-
ized camouflaging as the discrepancy between the person’s 
‘external’ behavioural presentation in social–interpersonal 
contexts and the person’s ‘internal’ status (i.e. dispositional 
traits and/or social cognitive capability).
We used the ADOS diagnostic algorithm score as 
reflecting external presentation and both the AQ score 
 
and RMET correct score as reflecting internal status 
 
(self-rated dispositional traits and performance-based 
socio-cognitive capability, respectively). We used the 
ADOS diagnostic algorithm score to characterize one’s 
behavioural presentation because it is the only psycho-
metrically tested, reliable measure of social communica-
tion behaviours in interpersonal contexts for individuals 
with autism. Although we have previously questioned the 
validity of using ADOS module 4 diagnostic algorithm 
cut-off for making diagnostic judgement for autism in 
adults without intellectual disability, particularly in females, 
we do not question the validity of ADOS in quantitatively 
measuring and describing cardinal social communication 
behaviours (Lai et al., 2011). The internal (i.e. latent) status 
of autism ideally is captured by a wide array of measures 
on the cognitive and psychological characteristics of the 
individual. Relying on one particular measure risks biases 
resulting from the measure’s inherent limitation (e.g. a 
self-report measure is dependent on one’s perception of 
their own behavioural/cognitive styles). We were confined 
by available data but were able to capture two key aspects, 
namely, one’s perception of their personal characteristics 
associated with autism and one’s cognitive performance 
on a mentalizing and emotion recognition task; both are 
integral parts in the assessment and understanding of indi-
vidual characteristics of autistic people.
The three scores were first standardized (termed 
 
as SADOS, SAQ and SRMET) by mean-centring (to the 
 
whole autism sample in this study, N = 60) and scaling 
 
(i.e. divided by the maximum possible score of each) to 
generate uniformly scaled measures that can be arithmeti-
cally manipulated (i.e. added to or subtracted from each 
other); the uniformly scaled measures were derived in this 
 694 
Autism 21(6)
way rather than using z-scores because z-standardization 
was problematic for the ADOS score, as (1) there was no 
available autistic population mean and standard deviation, 
and (2) sample mean and standard deviation were not 
valid substitutes here as the distribution was skewed. 
 
A first measure of camouflaging was quantified as the 
 
difference between self-rated autistic-like traits and 
external behaviours (CF1 = SAQ − SADOS), and a second 
measure between mentalizing ability and external behav-
iours (CF2 = −SRMET − SADOS); higher scores on CF1 and 
CF2 indicate more camouflaging. Finally, using principal 
component analysis, the first principal component score 
of CF1 and CF2 was taken as a single, parsimonious 
measure (the ‘camouflaging score’, CF) that incorporates 
information from all relevant measures for further 
analyses.
Neuroimaging measures
Participants were scanned using a contemporary 3 T 
MRI scanner (GE Medical Systems HDx) fitted with an 
8-channel receive-only RT head-coil using Driven 
Equilibrium Single Pulse Observation of T1 (DESPOT1) 
(Deoni et al., 2008). Simulated T1-weighted inversion 
recovery (IR) images were created via ImageJ. Pre-
processing was conducted using the SPM12 software 
(Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging): tissue seg-
mentation was done by Segment (previously New 
Segment), and the segmented grey matter (GM) images of 
the 60 participants were non-linearly normalized (with 
modulation) to the standard Montreal Neurological 
Institute (MNI) space using DARTEL (Ashburner, 2007) 
and smoothed with a 4-mm full-width at half maximum 
Gaussian kernel. Additional information about image 
acquisition has been reported previously (Lai et al., 2013).
Statistical analysis
Statistical distribution of CF was examined for skewness 
and kurtosis. Independent-samples t-tests were used 
 
for comparisons between men and women with autism. 
Pearson’s correlation was used to examine the correlation 
patterns between CF and clinical/cognitive measures. Sex/
gender difference in correlation patterns was tested by 
constructing a multiple regression model with clinical/
cognitive measures as the dependent variable and CF, sex/
gender and CF-by-sex/gender interaction as predictors, 
and then examining the significance of β on the interaction 
term: a significant interaction suggests that the correlation 
between CF and the dependent variable is dependent on 
sex/gender. Critical level for statistical significance was 
set at α = 0.05. These analyses were implemented using the 
IBM SPSS Statistics version 22.
Hypothesis-free exploration of the neuroanatomical 
correlates of CF was performed using mass-univariate 
tests with SPM12. Prior to statistical modelling, each 
 
modulated GM map was rescaled by individual total GM 
volume (i.e. voxel value divided by individual total GM 
volume) to derive relative regional GM volume estimates. 
First, for all participants, we fit a parsimonious general 
linear model (GLM) at each voxel, with sex/gender and 
CF as fixed factors, along with their interaction term, and 
age as a nuisance covariate. When significant CF-by-sex/
gender interaction was found, we subsequently performed 
sex/gender-stratified whole-GM mass-univariate tests 
again to identify CF–GM volume association separately 
for the male and female groups; here, CF was the fixed 
factor and age was a nuisance covariate. All whole-GM 
voxel-level tests were restricted to voxels with a partial 
volume estimate >0.25. Multiple comparison correction 
was performed at the cluster level by controlling topologi-
cal false discovery rate (FDR) calculated under Gaussian 
Random Field Theory (Chumbley and Friston, 2009), 
using a cluster-forming voxel-level height threshold of 
p < 0.01 for each contrast and a spatial extent threshold 
(corrected for non-stationarity (Hayasaka et al., 2004)) 
that ensures a cluster-wise FDR at q < 0.05.
Results
Statistical characteristics and sex/gender 
differences in the CF measure
Sample characteristics are given in Table 1. In the present 
sample, CF did not significantly deviate from the normal 
distribution in either males with autism (skewness 
z-score = −1.351, kurtosis z-score = −0.363, Shapiro–Wilk 
test p = 0.288) or females with autism (skewness z-score 
= −1.710, kurtosis z-score = 1.013, Shapiro–Wilk test p = 
0.213). Across the whole sample, CF was not significantly 
correlated with age (Pearson’s r = 0.188, p = 0.151), VIQ 
(r = 0.180, p = 0.168), PIQ (r = 0.053, p = 0.685), or FIQ 
(r = 0.136, p = 0.301); this was also the case when data 
were split into males only (age r = 0.303, p = 0.103; VIQ 
r = 0.095, p = 0.617; PIQ r = 0.099, p = 0.604; FIQ r = 0.120, 
p = 0.527) or females only (age r = 0.053, p = 0.783; VIQ 
r = 0.277, p = 0.138; PIQ r = 0.116, p = 0.540; FIQ r = 0.215, 
p = 0.253). Women with autism on average scored signifi-
cantly higher on CF than men with autism (p < 0.001), 
with an effect size showing almost 1 standard deviation of 
difference (Cohen’s d = 0.98). However substantial varia-
bility on this measure was present in both males and 
females (see Figure 1(a)).
Testing correlations between CF and  
anxiety/depression
Across the whole sample, CF was positively correlated 
with the total score on the BDI (r = 0.301, p = 0.019) but 
not the BAI (r = 0.202, p = 0.121). When sex/gender-
stratified, the CF-BDI correlation was significant in males 
(r = 0.533, p = 0.002) but not females (r = 0.030, p = 0.876). 
 Lai et al. 
695
Table 1. Characteristics of the sample: men and women with autism.
Mean (SD) [range]a
Men (M) (n 
= 
30)
Women (F) (n 
= 
30)
Statisticsb
Effect size (d)
Age (years)
27.2 (7.3)
27.8 (7.6)
ns (p 
= 
0.761)
0.08
Verbal IQ
114.3 (12.9)
115.8 (13.1)
ns (p 
= 
0.656)
0.12
Performance IQ
113.3 (15.0)
110.4 (16.7)
ns (p 
= 
0.492)
0.18
Full-scale IQ
115.4 (14.1)
114.9 (13.8)
ns (p 
= 
0.904)
0.04
ADI-Rc
 Reciprocal social
18.0 (5.1) [10–27]
16.4 (4.3) [11–26]
ns (p 
= 
0.215)
0.34
 Communication
15.3 (3.5) [8–22]
13.1 (3.9) [8–22]
M 
> 
F (p 
= 
0.029)
0.59
 RRSB
5.6 (2.5) [2–10]
4.3 (1.7) [2–8]
M 
> 
F (p 
= 
0.023)
0.60
ADOS
 Social communication
8.5 (5.0) [1–17]
4.3 (3.6) [0–13]
M 
> 
F (p 
< 
0.001)
1.04
 RRSB
1.0 (1.0) [0–4]
0.1 (0.3) [0–1]
M 
> 
F (p 
< 
0.001)
1.25
Autism Spectrum Quotient
32.7 (7.3)
37.5 (6.7)
F 
> 
M (p 
= 
0.010)
0.69
RMET correct score
22.8 (5.8)
23.4 (6.2)
ns (p 
= 
0.700)
0.10
CF
−0.168 (0.388)
0.168 (0.294)
F 
> 
M (p 
< 
0.001)
0.98
Go/No-Go taskd
 Sensitivity, d′
3.60 (0.67)
3.71 (1.16)
ns (p 
= 
0.660)
0.12
 Response bias, C
−0.027 (0.198)
0.029 (0.232)
ns (p 
= 
0.327)
0.26
Beck Depression Inventory
14.5 (10.3)
14.6 (9.0)
ns (p 
= 
0.958)
0.01
Beck Anxiety Inventory
14.1 (9.9)
15.5 (10.1)
ns (p 
= 
0.580)
0.14
SD: standard deviation; ns: non-significant (p 
> 
0.05, two-tailed, not corrected for multiple comparisons); ADI-R: Autism Diagnostic Interview–Revised; 
RRSB: repetitive, restrictive and stereotyped behaviour; ADOS: Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule.
aFor ADI-R and ADOS scores.
bIndependent-samples t-tests, except Mann–Whitney tests for ADOS scores (distribution significantly deviant from normal).
cn 
= 
30 for men, n 
= 
28 for women (n 
= 
2 data missing due to childhood caregiver unavailability).
dn 
= 
29 for men (n 
= 
1 data missing due to technical failure), n 
= 
30 for women.
Figure 1. Sex/gender differences in camouflaging and its association with depressive symptoms and signal-detection sensitivity: (a) 
a dot and box-and-whisker plot showing the distribution of camouflaging (quantified by the measure CF) in men and women with 
autism; (b) CF-BDI score correlations stratified by sex/gender; (c) CF-sensitivity correlations stratified by sex/gender.
 696 
Autism 21(6)
Male–female difference in correlation patterns approached 
significance (p = 0.068), testing the significance of CF- 
by-sex/gender interaction in a multiple regression model 
(see Figure 1(b)). Partialling out the effect of either PIQ or 
FIQ did not change any of these correlation patterns and 
significance.
Testing correlations between CF and VIQ, signal 
detection and response bias
As reported above, across the whole sample, CF was not 
significantly correlated with VIQ (r = 0.180, p = 0.168); 
this was also true when examining only males (r = 0.095, 
p = 0.617) or only females (r = 0.277, p = 0.138). The Go/
No-Go data for one male were missing due to technical 
failure, so data from only 29 men were included in the 
analysis. Across the whole sample, CF was positively 
correlated with Go/No-Go sensitivity d′ (r = 0.311, 
p = 0.017) but not response bias C (r = 0.108, p = 0.416). 
When sex/gender-stratified, the CF-d′ correlation was 
significant in females (r = 0.432, p = 0.017) but not males 
(r = 0.233, p = 0.223). Male–female difference in correla-
tion patterns approached significance (p = 0.072) (see 
Figure 1(c)). Partialling out the effect of either PIQ or 
VIQ did not change any of these correlation patterns and 
significance.
Exploring the neuroanatomical correlates of 
CF and using reverse inference to identify 
associated cognitive terms
The hypothesis-free, whole-GM voxel-based GLM identi-
fied no regions showing significant main effects of CF, but 
there were two significant clusters showing significant 
CF-by-sex/gender interaction, indicating sex/gender-
dependent correlation patterns between CF and regional 
GM volume, at left medial temporal lobe (cluster size 
ke = 4248, cluster-level FDR-corrected q < 0.001, peak-
coordinate MNI (−26, −11, −28), Z = 4.04) and cerebellum 
(ke = 3638, q < 0.001, peak-coordinate MNI (20, −70, 
−14), Z = 3.96), where increased CF was associated with 
decreased volume in females yet to a significantly dif-
ferent extent in males. To further identify anatomical cor-
relates specific for females and males, we ran whole-GM 
voxel-based GLM again but separately by sex/gender. 
 
In females, there were significant negative correlations 
between CF and GM volume at bilateral cerebellum, 
occipital and medial temporal structures which substan-
tially overlapped with the above-mentioned regions show-
ing CF-by-sex/gender interaction (right-lateralized cluster 
ke = 3605, q = 0.001, peak-coordinate MNI (15, −65, −8), 
Z = 4.04; left-lateralized cluster ke = 1922, q = 0.027, 
 
peak-coordinate MNI (−15, −53, −25), Z = 3.81); no 
regions showed significant positive correlation with CF 
(see Figure 2). In males, there were no regions positively 
or negatively correlated with CF that survived multiple 
comparison corrections.
In order to identify the terms in the scientific literature 
that are mostly associated with the identified voxels show-
ing significant association with camouflaging in women 
with autism (i.e. making reasonable ‘reverse inference’ 
(Poldrack, 2006)), we submitted the statistical map to 
 
the Neurosynth Image Decoder (http://neurosynth.org/
decode/; Gorgolewski et al., 2016) and visualized the top 
60 terms showing highest correlation (r = 0.07–0.17) by 
 
a word-cloud (produced using R and the ‘wordcloud’ 
library; see Figure 3(a)). This qualitatively shows terms 
 
of anatomical regions (e.g. cerebellum, medial temporal 
lobe, para/hippocampus, amygdala) and terms about emo-
tion and memory – see Figure 3(b) for the top 30 terms 
(r = 0.07–0.10) after filtering out anatomical terms.
Discussion
In this exploratory study, we used an existing, well- 
characterized dataset in which standardized and widely 
used measures of behavioural characteristics, self-rated 
traits and ability to infer others’ mental states were avail-
able. We attempted to operationalize and quantify cam-
ouflaging in adults with autism, for the first time in 
 
the scientific literature, as the quantitative discrepancy 
between the person’s ‘external’ behavioural presentation 
in social–interpersonal contexts (measured by the ADOS) 
and the person’s ‘internal’ status (dispositional traits 
measured by the AQ and social cognitive capability 
measured by the RMET).
We found that the operationalized camouflaging meas-
ure was not significantly correlated with age, VIQ, PIQ 
or FIQ. On average, women with autism showed more 
camouflaging than men with autism, but there was sub-
stantial variability in both groups. Greater camouflaging 
was associated with more depressive symptoms in men 
with autism and better signal-detection sensitivity in 
women with autism. The brain volumetric associations 
with camouflaging were largely sex/gender-dependent.
Following a positivist approach, our first aim was to 
quantitatively describe camouflaging in autism through an 
operationalization using existing measures. We acknowl-
edge that our operationalization is not a direct measure-
ment of camouflaging, which, in our view, could only be 
created in a valid way after careful concept formation via 
 
a qualitative (e.g. grounded theory) research approach 
(Glaser and Strauss, 2009). Nevertheless, our operationali-
zation (i.e. the external–internal discrepancy) is a first step 
and may provide a reasonable proxy.
Using this proxy measure, which follows a normal dis-
tribution in our sample, we observed that individual differ-
ences in the degree of camouflaging were independent of 
age and IQ, in men and women with autism without intel-
lectual disability. This suggests that the extent of camou-
flaging in adults with autism does not merely mirror degree 
 Lai et al. 
697
Figure 3. Word-clouds showing (a) the top 60 terms correlated with brain regions associated with camouflaging in women with 
autism, based on reverse inference using the Neurosynth Image Decoder, and (b) the top 30 terms after excluding anatomical terms.
Figure 2. Sagittal slices illustrating grey matter regions showing sex/gender-differential associations between CF and regional 
volume (in red, involving left medial temporal lobe and cerebellum), overlaid with regions showing negative correlations between 
CF and regional volume in women with autism (in blue, involving cerebellum, occipital and medial temporal structures); threshold 
for visualization follows that described in the ‘Methods’ section.
 698 
Autism 21(6)
of experience (reflected in chronological age). If camou-
flaging is partly learnt, one might expect a correlation 
with age/experience at younger ages. Recent studies have 
alluded to the presence of camouflaging in teenage (Head 
et al., 2014; Tierney et al., 2016) or even school age years 
(Hiller et al., 2014; Rynkiewicz et al., 2016). The develop-
mental course of camouflaging remains to be revealed 
by longitudinal studies. In particular, how it affects one’s 
clinical experience (e.g. getting a timely autism diagnosis, 
developing mental health challenges) should be a focus of 
investigation. We also surprisingly found no significant 
association between camouflaging and VIQ, PIQ and FIQ 
in either men or women with autism. This suggests in this 
population, the extent of camouflaging does not merely 
reflect general reasoning ability or speed of processing. 
Instead, it may be more specifically associated with par-
ticular aspects of cognitive ability (discussed below) or 
personality, motivational or contextual factors.
We observed an on-average higher extent of camou-
flaging in women than men with autism of rather large 
effect size (Cohen’s d = 0.98). This fits well with previous 
findings from contrasting current ADOS and childhood 
ADI-R scores in men and women separately (Lai et al., 
2011). It also corresponds well with the reports from 
women with autism and their parents as well as expert 
clinician’s observations (summarized in ‘Introduction’ 
section). Here, we are not able to delineate what contrib-
utes to this difference between men and women, but we 
suspect that socio-cultural factors, in particular gender-
based expectations and gender socialization across devel-
opment, may be key players (Kreiser and White, 2014). 
For example, protective same-gender friendship (i.e. being 
‘mothered’) may conceal a girl or woman’s social diffi-
culties; gender-based expectations may prompt a girl or 
woman with autism to ‘act like a girl/woman’ and ‘be more 
social’, and she may therefore develop higher censuring of 
own behaviours and more imitation or emulation of gen-
der-normative social behaviours. Behavioural compo-
nents contributing to the presentation and developmental 
course of camouflaging should be explored via qualitative 
research (Tierney et al., 2016) as an immediate future 
research direction (Lai et al., 2015).
It is important to note from our data that although cam-
ouflaging might have been portrayed as an integral part 
 
of the ‘female-phenotype of autism’, it is not specific to 
females. Even with sex/gender differences of large effect, 
the distributions of camouflaging score overlapped sub-
stantially between men and women with autism: there 
were women who showed little camouflaging and men 
who presented marked camouflaging (Figure 1(a)). On 
average, a sex/gender difference in camouflaging is 
 
evident, but it should be viewed as a phenomenon reflect-
ing individual differences in social coping, rather than a 
diagnostic behavioural pattern distinguishing females 
versus males with autism at an individual level.
We tested the hypotheses that higher camouflaging is 
associated with higher anxiety and depression, and cogni-
tively with better verbal ability, better signal detection 
from background events and more conservative responses. 
Findings confirmed some of the hypotheses, yet in a 
potentially sex/gender-dependent manner. When taking 
sex/gender into consideration, trend-level significant sex/
gender-differential correlation patterns were observed 
between camouflaging and the clinical and cognitive 
correlates.
We predicted that camouflaging is exhausting and 
brings excessive stress and, therefore, may be associated 
with anxiety and depressive symptoms. Based on the back-
ground that men and women with autism in this study 
showed no differences in either symptom scores (but both 
had elevated scores approaching clinical range; Table 1), 
we found a pattern in support of the prediction for depres-
sive symptoms in men (r = 0.533, p = 0.002) but not women 
with autism (r = 0.030, p = 0.876); we found no significant 
relationship between camouflaging and anxiety symptoms 
in either sex or gender. The nature of this study does not 
allow for testing causal relationships, yet based on the 
cross-sectional correlational patterns we suspect that the 
lack of association with anxiety might indicate that camou-
flaging in adults is an already adapted behavioural pattern. 
Investigation into the child and youth autistic population is 
necessary to address any potential associations between 
camouflaging and anxiety at younger ages. The positive 
association with depressive symptoms (as predicted) in 
men raises the possibility that they are more susceptible to 
the burden of camouflaging than women with autism are 
– perhaps women would have had more practice with, and 
might be better adapted to, implementing camouflaging 
due to gender-related social experience and demands. 
These ideas await rigorous investigation of the causal 
relationships between stress, anxiety/depression, cognitive 
features, camouflaging and social adaptation, using struc-
tural equation modelling (for cross-sectional data) or lon-
gitudinal designs.
The association between camouflaging and cognitive 
performance may shed light on potential cognitive under-
pinnings of camouflaging. Lehnhardt et al. (2016) sus-
pected that verbal abilities might serve an important role 
for males with autism when it comes to camouflaging. 
Contrary to this prediction, we did not find a significant 
correlation between verbal ability and camouflaging in 
either men or women with autism. This suggests that the 
extent of camouflaging does not merely reflect verbal 
knowledge or reasoning; rather, it might be associated 
with verbal skills beyond these or might be underpinned 
by other cognitive capabilities.
We then examined performance on a response inhibition 
Go/No-Go task because among our available measures in 
this project, the SDT parameters from the Go/No-Go task 
most closely reflect the theoretical constructs of interest 
 Lai et al. 
699
(i.e. one requires sensitive real-time monitoring of the 
environment, and/or a cautious, conservative response 
strategy, to successfully camouflage). The background is 
that men and women with autism in this study equally 
showed on-average poorer sensitivity in detecting signal 
from background compared to neurotypical controls, but 
were no more liberal or conservative in response strategy 
(see a previous study on a slightly larger but highly over-
lapping sample (Lai et al., 2012)). In this context, we again 
found a potentially sex/gender-differential pattern. Women 
(but not men) with higher camouflaging showed better sig-
nal-detection sensitivity, whereas there was no significant 
association between camouflaging and response strategy 
in either sex or gender. Lehnhardt et al. (2016) alluded to 
possible sex/gender-differential cognitive underpinnings of 
camouflaging by the indirect evidence that women with 
autism show higher processing speed and better executive 
functions (mainly in trail-making and verbal fluency tests) 
than men with autism. Our findings echo this suggested 
association between executive functions and camouflaging 
in women with autism by directly showing a predicted rela-
tionship. Again, causal inference cannot be made: it could 
be the case that better signal-detection supports and prompts 
more camouflaging or that more frequent camouflaging 
enhances cognitive control and signal-detection sensitivity. 
In sum, the converging message points to the need for stud-
ying the relationships between camouflaging and executive 
functions, particularly in females. Whether this is equally 
important in males with autism is unclear. Direct hypothe-
sis testing concerning the cognitive bases of camouflaging 
(and the examination of sex/gender-differential relation-
ships) is much needed.
Our last aim was purely exploratory and hypothesis gen-
erating. When testing for association between regional GM 
volume and camouflaging, we found statistically signifi-
cant sex/gender-dependent association patterns while not 
finding any region that showed a significant overall corre-
lation with camouflaging across sex/gender at the same sta-
tistical threshold. This indicates that the neuroanatomical 
association of camouflaging in autism may be largely sex/
gender-dependent, particularly around the medial temporal 
and cerebellar structures. When dissecting the sex/gender-
differential pattern, we found a lack of association in males 
but a significant negative correlation in females (i.e. the 
higher camouflaging, the smaller regional volume).
When using the Neurosynth Image Decoder for reverse 
inference (Gorgolewski et al., 2016; Poldrack, 2006), that 
is, to identify scientific terms in the ‘big data’ of the neuro-
science literature mostly associated with the voxels show-
ing significant correlation with camouflaging in women 
with autism, we found anatomical terms (e.g. cerebellum, 
medial temporal lobe, para/hippocampus, amygdala) as 
well as cognitive terms about emotion and memory. This 
exploratory, hypothesis-generating approach, in association 
 
with the cognitive findings regarding executive functions 
(for which the cerebellum is closely involved), gives 
candidate neurocognitive components for future hypothe-
sis testing to uncover the bases of camouflaging, particu-
larly for females.
As the first study operationalizing and quantifying cam-
ouflaging, the findings should be considered exploratory 
and have to be interpreted with caution, keeping in mind 
the following limitations. First, camouflaging was quanti-
fied by a mathematical manipulation of available measures 
based on our operationalization as the discrepancy between 
the person’s ‘external’ behavioural presentation in social–
interpersonal contexts and the person’s ‘internal’ status. 
Factors potentially affecting scoring of these contributing 
measures will have impacts on the derived camouflaging 
measure, and therefore, findings need to be interpreted 
considering these potentially confounding factors. For 
example, social communication behaviours measured by 
the ADOS may be affected by one’s anxiety level during 
the assessment, and gender stereotype of the examiner 
may affect how behaviours are scored; dispositional traits 
measured by the AQ may be influenced by one’s self- 
referential ability and even intuitive/automatic masking 
 
of difficulties; social cognitive ability measured by the 
RMET may be affected by one’s lexicon and verbal abili-
ties. Additionally, although the content validity of the 
camouflaging measure is ensured based on the concept of 
external–internal discrepancy, whether this measure 
shows satisfactory concurrent validity awaits comparisons 
with future studies that also quantify camouflaging. For 
example, when a substantially large sample is available, 
quantifying camouflaging by regression methods (e.g. the 
residuals after regressing out the variances of ‘internal/
actual’ characteristics from ‘external’ behavioural mani-
festations) could provide another metric to be examined. 
In addition, instead of operationalizing camouflaging as 
external–internal discrepancy, one could also operational-
ize it by social imitation capacities based on the hypothesis 
that camouflaging heavily involves social imitation and 
adaptation; these capacities could be measured by compo-
nents of well-established instruments such as the Self-
Monitoring Scale (Snyder, 1974), its revision (Lennox and 
Wolfe, 1984) and the Multidimensional Iowa Suggestibility 
Scale (Kotov et al., 2004).
Second, all analyses of the relationships between cam-
ouflaging and clinical symptoms, cognitive abilities and 
regional brain volume were correlational in nature, and no 
causal relationships could be inferred. Mechanisms dis-
cussed above are speculations and have to be tested using 
longitudinal or intervention designs or hypothesis-based 
modelling with more comprehensive data collection rele-
vant to this topic.
Third, due to the limitation of the dataset (i.e. we did 
not perform ADOS for the control sample in the cohort), 
we were not able to compare sex/gender difference in cam-
ouflaging in autism in the context of probable neurotypical 
sex/gender difference. If there is an underlying neurotypi-
cal sex/gender difference, then the findings need to be 
 700 
Autism 21(6)
interpreted accordingly (Lai et al., 2015). This further 
examination is crucial but will be available only with stud-
ies capable of quantifying camouflaging in neurotypical 
individuals, based on the same operationalization (i.e. the 
external–internal discrepancy) but using measures other 
than the ADOS that can quantify social communicative 
behaviour and are sensitive enough to pick up individual 
differences in the neurotypical population.
Fourth, the findings are derived from a moderate-sized 
adult sample with autism and without intellectual disabil-
ity. The extent to which the findings generalize to the full 
autism spectrum has to be further examined. We suspect 
that beyond individual general and specific cognitive 
 
factors, one’s personality, social experience and develop-
mental stage (which are associated with age-relevant 
social demands), as well as the socio-cultural context, will 
all have particular influences.
In conclusion, this study provides a first attempt to oper-
ationalize and quantify camouflaging in men and women 
with autism, showing substantial inter-individual variabil-
ity but on-average higher levels in women than men, and 
demonstrates potentially sex/gender-dependent associations 
with depressive symptoms, signal-detection sensitivity and 
regional brain volume. We urge more investigations into 
this clinically important phenomenon to better delineate 
the construct. Ideally, this should include (1) qualitative (or 
mixed-design) approaches to reveal first-person account 
and second/third-person observation about what triggers 
(e.g. when and why one camouflages) and constitutes cam-
ouflaging (e.g. what the behavioural components are, and 
which of them are automatic/intuitive vs requiring one to 
act/perform with effort, and which of them are simply 
masking vs compensating); (2) psychological studies to 
understand the personality, cognitive and contextual bases 
of camouflaging; and (3) clinical studies to assess the posi-
tive and negative consequences of camouflaging, as well as 
how camouflaging has an impact on the diagnosis of autism 
(e.g. whether higher levels of camouflaging result in delayed 
or missed diagnosis) and the identification of relevant 
 
clinical issues. These studies will benefit from examining 
camouflaging-related factors not only in individuals cur-
rently having a clinical diagnosis of autism but also those 
who may be on the spectrum (e.g. those having high-level 
autistic-like traits and/or social adaptation difficulties yet 
who have failed or have not yet to be diagnosed with autism), 
in order to inform how camouflaging may have a real-world 
healthcare impact. A thorough understanding of camouflag-
ing in autism may improve the diagnosis of autism across 
sex/gender, the identification of needs and assets for each 
person and the tailored individualized supports.
Acknowledgements
The Medical Research Council Autism Imaging Multicentre 
Study Consortium (MRC AIMS Consortium) is a UK collabora-
tion between the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & 
Neuroscience (IoPPN) at King’s College, London, the Autism 
Research Centre, University of Cambridge, and the Autism 
Research Group, University of Oxford. The Consortium mem-
bers are in alphabetical order: Anthony J. Bailey (Oxford), 
Simon Baron-Cohen (Cambridge), Patrick F. Bolton (IoPPN), 
Edward T. Bullmore (Cambridge), Sarah Carrington (Oxford), 
Marco Catani (IoPPN), Bhismadev Chakrabarti (Cambridge), 
Michael C. Craig (IoPPN), Eileen M. Daly (IoPPN), Sean C. L. 
Deoni (IoPPN), Christine Ecker (IoPPN), Francesca Happé 
(IoPPN), Julian Henty (Cambridge), Peter Jezzard (Oxford), 
Patrick Johnston (IoPPN), Derek K. Jones (IoPPN), Meng-
Chuan Lai (Cambridge), Michael V. Lombardo (Cambridge), 
Anya Madden (IoPPN), Diane Mullins (IoPPN), Clodagh M. 
Murphy (IoPPN), Declan G. M. Murphy (IoPPN), Greg Pasco 
(Cambridge), Amber N.V. Ruigrok (Cambridge), Susan A. 
Sadek (Cambridge), Debbie Spain (IoPPN), Rose Stewart 
(Oxford), John Suckling (Cambridge), Sally J. Wheelwright 
(Cambridge) and Steven C. Williams (IoPPN).
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with 
respect to the research, authorship and/or publication of this 
article.
Funding
The study was supported by the UK Medical Research Council 
(grant number GO 400061) and European Autism Interventions 
– a Multicentre Study for Developing New Medications (EU- 
AIMS); EU-AIMS has received support from the Innovative 
Medicines Initiative Joint Undertaking under grant agreement no 
115300, resources of which are composed of financial contribu-
tion from the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme 
(FP7/2007–2013) and EFPIA companies’ in-kind contribution. 
The study was conducted in association with the National 
Institute for Health Research Collaborations for Leadership in 
Applied Health Research and Care (NIHR CLAHRC) East of 
England (EoE). During the period of the study, Dr Lai was sup-
ported by the William Binks Autism Neuroscience Fellowship 
and Wolfson College, Cambridge, UK, and the O’Brien Scholars 
Program within the Child and Youth Mental Health Collaborative 
at the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health and The Hospital 
for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada. Drs Baron-Cohen, Lombardo, 
Ruigrok, Chakrabarti, and Auyeung were supported by the 
Autism Research Trust during the period of this work.
References
American Psychiatric Association (APA) (2000) Diagnostic 
 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR). 
4th ed. Text revision. Washington, DC: APA.
Ashburner J (2007) A fast diffeomorphic image registration 
algorithm. Neuroimage 38(1): 95–113.
Attwood T (2006) The pattern of abilities and development of 
girls with Asperger’s syndrome. In: Attwood T, Bolick T, 
Faherty C, et al. (eds) Asperger’s and Girls. Arlington, TX: 
Future Horisons, Inc., pp. 1–8.
Attwood T (2007) The Complete Guide to Asperger’s Syndrome. 
London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Baron-Cohen S, Bowen DC, Holt RJ, et al. (2015) The ‘Reading 
the Mind in the Eyes’ test: complete absence of typical sex 
difference in ~400 men and women with autism. PLoS ONE 
10(8): e0136521.
 Lai et al. 
701
Baron-Cohen S, Wheelwright S, Hill J, et al. (2001a) The 
‘Reading the Mind in the Eyes’ test revised version: a study 
with normal adults, and adults with Asperger syndrome or 
high-functioning autism. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines 42(2): 241–251.
Baron-Cohen S, Wheelwright S, Robinson J, et al. (2005) The 
Adult Asperger Assessment (AAA): a diagnostic method. 
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 35(6): 
807–819.
Baron-Cohen S, Wheelwright S, Skinner R, et al. (2001b) The 
autism spectrum quotient (AQ): evidence from Asperger 
syndrome/high-functioning autism, males and females, 
scientists and mathematicians. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders 31(1): 5–17.
Baxter AJ, Brugha TS, Erskine HE, et al. (2015) The epide-
miology and global burden of autism spectrum disorders. 
Psychological Medicine 45(3): 601–613.
Beck AT, Epstein N, Brown G, et al. (1988) An inventory 
for measuring clinical anxiety: psychometric properties. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 56(6): 
893–897.
Beck AT, Ward CH, Mendelson ML, et al. (1961) An inventory 
for measuring depression. Archives of General Psychiatry 
4(6): 561.
Begeer S, Mandell D, Wijnker-Holmes B, et al. (2013) Sex dif-
ferences in the timing of identification among children and 
adults with autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism 
and Developmental Disorders 43(5): 1151–1156.
Boyd K, Woodbury-Smith M and Szatmari P (2011) Managing 
anxiety and depressive symptoms in adults with autism-
spectrum disorders. Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience 
36(4): E35–E36.
Chumbley JR and Friston KJ (2009) False discovery rate revis-
ited: FDR and topological inference using Gaussian random 
fields. Neuroimage 44(1): 62–70.
Deoni SC, Williams SC, Jezzard P, et al. (2008) Standardized 
structural magnetic resonance imaging in multicentre 
studies using quantitative T1 and T2 imaging at 1.5 T. 
Neuroimage 40(2): 662–671.
Dworzynski K, Ronald A, Bolton P, et al. (2012) How different 
are girls and boys above and below the diagnostic thresh-
old for autism spectrum disorders? Journal of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 51(8): 788–797.
Ecker C, Ginestet C, Feng Y, et al. (2013) Brain surface anatomy 
in adults with autism: the relationship between surface area, 
cortical thickness, and autistic symptoms. JAMA Psychiatry 
70(1): 59–70.
Ecker C, Suckling J, Deoni SC, et al. (2012) Brain anatomy and 
its relationship to behavior in adults with autism spectrum 
disorder: a multicenter magnetic resonance imaging study. 
Archives of General Psychiatry 69(2): 195–209.
Ernsperger L and Wendel D (2007) Girls under the Umbrella 
of Autism Spectrum Disorders: Practical Solutions for 
Addressing Everyday Challenges. Shawnee Mission, KS: 
Autism Asperger Publishing Company.
Giarelli E, Wiggins LD, Rice CE, et al. (2010) Sex differences 
in the evaluation and diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders 
among children. Disability and Health Journal 3(2): 107–116.
Gillberg C (1991) Clinical and neurobiological aspects of 
Asperger syndrome in six families studied. In: Frith U (ed.) 
Autism and Asperger Syndrome. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 122–146.
Glaser BG and Strauss AL (2009) The Discovery of Grounded 
Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. London: 
Transaction Publishers.
Gorgolewski KJ, Varoquaux G, Rivera G, et al. (2016) 
NeuroVault.org: a repository for sharing unthresholded 
statistical maps, parcellations, and atlases of the human 
brain. Neuroimage 124(Pt B): 1242–1244.
Gould J and Ashton-Smith J (2011) Missed diagnosis or mis-
diagnosis: girls and women on the autism spectrum. Good 
Autism Practice 12(1): 34–41.
Green DM and Swets JA (1966) Signal Detection Theory and 
Psychophysics. New York: Wiley.
Hayasaka S, Phan KL, Liberzon I, et al. (2004) Nonstationary 
cluster-size inference with random field and permutation 
methods. Neuroimage 22(2): 676–687.
Head AM, McGillivray JA and Stokes MA (2014) Gender differ-
ences in emotionality and sociability in children with autism 
spectrum disorders. Molecular Autism 5(1): 19.
Hendrickx S (2015) Women and Girls with Autism Spectrum 
Disorder: Understanding Life Experiences from Early 
Childhood to Old Age. London: Jessica Kingsley 
Publishers.
Hiller RM, Young RL and Weber N (2014) Sex differences in 
autism spectrum disorder based on DSM-5 criteria: evidence 
from clinician and teacher reporting. Journal of Abnormal 
Child Psychology 42(8): 1381–1393.
Howlin P and Moss P (2012) Adults with autism spectrum dis-
orders. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 57(5): 275–283.
Howlin P, Moss P, Savage S, et al. (2013) Social outcomes in 
mid- to later adulthood among individuals diagnosed with 
autism and average nonverbal IQ as children. Journal of 
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
52(6): 572.e1–581.e1.
Idring S, Rai D, Dal H, et al. (2012) Autism spectrum disorders 
in the Stockholm Youth Cohort: design, prevalence and 
validity. PLoS ONE 7(7): e41280.
Jensen CM, Steinhausen HC and Lauritsen MB (2014) Time 
trends over 16 years in incidence-rates of autism spec-
trum disorders across the lifespan based on nationwide 
Danish register data. Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders 44(8): 1808–1818.
Kim YS, Leventhal BL, Koh YJ, et al. (2011) Prevalence of 
autism spectrum disorders in a total population sample. 
American Journal of Psychiatry 168(9): 904–912.
Kocovska E, Biskupsto R, Carina Gillberg I, et al. (2012) The 
rising prevalence of autism: a prospective longitudinal study 
in the Faroe Islands. Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders 42(9): 1959–1966.
Kopp S and Gillberg C (1992) Girls with social deficits and 
learning problems: autism, atypical Asperger syndrome or 
a variant of these conditions. European Child & Adolescent 
Psychiatry 1(2): 89–99.
Kotov R, Bellman S and Watson D (2004) Multidimensional 
Iowa Suggestibility Scale (MISS). Stony Brook, NY: Stony 
Brook University.
Kreiser NL and White SW (2014) ASD in females: are we over-
stating the gender difference in diagnosis? Clinical Child 
and Family Psychology Review 17(1): 67–84.
 702 
Autism 21(6)
Lai MC and Baron-Cohen S (2015) Identifying the lost gen-
eration of adults with autism spectrum conditions. Lancet 
Psychiatry 2(11): 1013–1027.
Lai MC, Lombardo MV, Auyeung B, et al. (2015) Sex/gender 
differences and autism: setting the scene for future research. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry 54(1): 11–24.
Lai MC, Lombardo MV, Pasco G, et al. (2011) A behavioral 
comparison of male and female adults with high function-
ing autism spectrum conditions. PLoS ONE 6(6): e20835.
Lai MC, Lombardo MV, Ruigrok AN, et al. (2012) Cognition in 
males and females with autism: similarities and differences. 
PLoS ONE 7(10): e47198.
Lai MC, Lombardo MV, Suckling J, et al. (2013) Biological 
sex affects the neurobiology of autism. Brain 136(Pt 9): 
2799–2815.
Lawson W (1998) Life behind Glass: A Personal Account of 
Autism Spectrum Disorder. London: Jessica Kingsley 
Publishers.
Lehnhardt FG, Falter CM, Gawronski A, et al. (2016) Sex-related 
cognitive profile in autism spectrum disorders diagnosed 
late in life: implications for the female autistic phenotype. 
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 46(1): 
139–154.
Lennox RD and Wolfe RN (1984) Revision of the self-monitor-
ing scale. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 46: 
1349–1364.
Lord C, Risi S, Lambrecht L, et al. (2000) The autism diagnostic 
observation schedule-generic: a standard measure of social 
and communication deficits associated with the spectrum 
of autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 
30(3): 205–223.
Lord C, Rutter M and Le Couteur A (1994) Autism Diagnostic 
Interview-Revised: a revised version of a diagnostic inter-
view for caregivers of individuals with possible perva-
sive developmental disorders. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders 24(5): 659–685.
Marshall TA (2015) I am AspienWoman: The Unique 
Characteristics, Traits, and Gifts of Adult Females on 
the Autism Spectrum. Sunshine Coast, QLD, Australia: 
AspienGirl®.
Mattila ML, Kielinen M, Linna SL, et al. (2011) Autism spectrum 
disorders according to DSM-IV-TR and comparison with 
DSM-5 draft criteria: an epidemiological study. Journal of 
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
50(6): 583.e11–592.e11.
Miller JK (2003) Women from Another Planet? Our Lives in the 
Universe of Autism. Bloomington, IN: 1st Books Library.
Poldrack RA (2006) Can cognitive processes be inferred from 
neuroimaging data? Trends in Cognitive Sciences 10(2): 
59–63.
Russell G, Steer C and Golding J (2011) Social and demographic 
factors that influence the diagnosis of autistic spectrum 
disorders. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 
46(12): 1283–1293.
Rutherford M, McKenzie K, Johnson T, et al. (2016) Gender 
ratio in a clinical population sample, age of diagnosis and 
duration of assessment in children and adults with autism 
spectrum disorder. Autism 20: 628–634.
Rynkiewicz A, Schuller B, Marchi E, et al. (2016) An investi-
gation of the ‘female camouflage effect’ in autism using a 
computerized ADOS-2 and a test of sex/gender differences. 
Molecular Autism 7: 10.
Shattuck PT, Durkin M, Maenner M, et al. (2009) Timing of 
identification among children with an autism spectrum dis-
order: findings from a population-based surveillance study. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry 48(5): 474–483.
Simone R (2010) Aspergirls: Empowering Females with 
Asperger Syndrome. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Snyder M (1974) Self-monitoring of expressive behavior. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology 30(4): 526–537.
Tierney S, Burns J and Kilbey E (2016) Looking behind the 
mask: social coping strategies of girls on the autistic spec-
trum. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders 23: 73–83.
Wechsler D (1999) Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence 
(WASI). New York: The Psychological Corporation.
Willey LH (1999) Pretending to Be Normal: Living with 
Asperger’s Syndrome. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Williams D (1992) Nobody Nowhere: The Remarkable 
Autobiography of an Autistic Girl. London: Jessica Kingsley 
Publishers.
Wilson CE, Happe F, Wheelwright SJ, et al. (2014) The neu-
ropsychology of male adults with high-functioning autism 
or Asperger syndrome. Autism Research 7(5): 568–581.
Wilson CE, Murphy CM, McAlonan G, et al. (2016) Does sex 
influence the diagnostic evaluation of autism spectrum dis-
order in adults? Autism 20: 808–819.
Wing L (1981) Sex ratios in early childhood autism and related 
conditions. Psychiatry Research 5(2): 129–137.
World Health Organization (WHO) (1992) The ICD-10 
Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: 
Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines. Geneva: 
WHO.
Zablotsky B, Black LI, Maenner MJ, et al. (2015) Estimated 
prevalence of autism and other developmental disabili-
ties following questionnaire changes in the 2014 National 
Health Interview Survey. National Health Statistics Reports 
87: 1–20.
Zaks Z (2006) Life and Love: Positive Strategies for Autistic 
Adults. Shawnee Mission, KS: Autism Asperger Publishing 
Company.
