 ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 11 September 2018
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01992
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
1
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
Edited by:
Rudolf Lucas,
Augusta University, United States
Reviewed by:
Denise D. Belsham,
University of Toronto, Canada
Hugo Caire Castro-Faria-Neto,
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (Fiocruz),
Brazil
*Correspondence:
Djurdjica Coss
djurdjica.coss@ucr.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Inflammation,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Immunology
Received: 04 June 2018
Accepted: 13 August 2018
Published: 11 September 2018
Citation:
Lainez NM, Jonak CR, Nair MG,
Ethell IM, Wilson EH, Carson MJ and
Coss D (2018) Diet-Induced Obesity
Elicits Macrophage Infiltration and
Reduction in Spine Density
in the Hypothalami of Male
but Not Female Mice.
Front. Immunol. 9:1992.
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01992
Diet-Induced Obesity Elicits
Macrophage Infiltration and
Reduction in Spine Density
in the Hypothalami of Male
but Not Female Mice
Nancy M. Lainez, Carrie R. Jonak, Meera G. Nair, Iryna M. Ethell, Emma H. Wilson,
Monica J. Carson and Djurdjica Coss*
Division of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA, United States
Increasing prevalence in obesity has become a significant public concern. C57BL/6J
mice are prone to diet-induced obesity (DIO) when fed high-fat diet (HFD), and
develop chronic inflammation and metabolic syndrome, making them a good model
to analyze mechanisms whereby obesity elicits pathologies. DIO mice demonstrated
profound sex differences in response to HFD with respect to inflammation and
hypothalamic function. First, we determined that males are prone to DIO, while females
are resistant. Ovariectomized females, on the other hand, are susceptible to DIO,
implying protection by ovarian hormones. Males, but not females, exhibit changes
in hypothalamic neuropeptide expression. Surprisingly, ovariectomized females remain
resistant to neuroendocrine changes, showing that ovarian hormones are not necessary
for protection. Second, obese mice exhibit sex differences in DIO-induced inflammation.
Microglial activation and peripheral macrophage infiltration is seen in the hypothalami of
males, while females are protected from the increase in inflammatory cytokines and do
not exhibit microglia morphology changes nor monocyte-derived macrophage infiltration,
regardless of the presence of ovarian hormones. Strikingly, the anti-inflammatory cytokine
IL-10 is increased in the hypothalami of females but not males. Third, this study posits a
potential mechanism of obesity-induced impairment of hypothalamic function whereby
obese males exhibit reduced levels of synaptic proteins in the hypothalamus and fewer
spines in GnRH neurons, located in the areas exhibiting macrophage infiltration. Our
studies suggest that inflammation-induced synaptic remodeling is potentially responsible
for hypothalamic impairment that may contribute to diminished levels of gonadotropin
hormones, testosterone, and sperm numbers, which we observe and corresponds to
the observations in obese humans. Taken together, our data implicate neuro-immune
mechanisms underlying sex-specific differences in obesity-induced impairment of the
hypothalamic function with potential consequences for reproduction and fertility.
Keywords: sex-specific, cytokine, GnRH, neuroinflammation, obesity, hypothalamus
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
INTRODUCTION
Over half of the US population is classified as overweight
and a full third is classified as obese (1). The number of
obese people has increased steadily over the last 30 years (2).
This increase in obesity has coincided with an increase in co-
morbidities, such as type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease,
stroke, and hypothalamic disorders, including reproductive
disorders that cause infertility (3–6). Deleterious effects of
obesity on fertility include irregularities in menstrual cycles,
abnormalities in the oocyte development, anovulation, and
increased risk of miscarriages in women (3); and inferior
sperm quality, reduced sperm quantity, and lower testosterone
levels in men (7). Currently, 18% of couples require assisted
reproductive technologies to become pregnant (8), a portion
of which may stem from widespread obesity (9, 10). Although
several hypotheses have been put forth (11–15), mechanisms
whereby obesity negatively affects reproductive function are
unknown.
The hypothalamus in the basal forebrain controls feeding and
satiety, thermoregulation, thirst, circadian rhythms, metabolism,
and mammalian reproduction. In the control of reproduction,
the hypothalamic decapeptide gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) is the final brain output that regulates expression
and secretion of gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH) and
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) from the anterior pituitary
gonadotropes (16), which in turn stimulate steroidogenesis
and gametogenesis in the gonads (17, 18). In the rodent
hypothalamus, the majority of GnRH cell bodies are scattered
in the preoptic area surrounding organum vasculosum laminae
terminalis (OVLT), while secretion occurs at the terminals
in the median eminence (ME). Both OVLT and ME are
circumventricular areas with a leaky blood-brain barrier, whereby
hypothalamic neurons perceive changes in the circulation and
neuropeptides reach the portal circulation (19). GnRH secretion
is synchronized by upstream regulatory neuronal populations
(20). These regulatory neurons integrate sex steroid feedback
from the gonads (21), and external or environmental factors, such
as stress (22, 23), and exposure to endocrine disruptors (24, 25).
Metabolic stimuli and energy status, such as anorexia nervosa,
excessive exercise, malnutrition, and obesity are also integrated
with reproductive function at the level of the hypothalamus (11–
13, 15, 26, 27). However, since metabolic signals do not influence
GnRH neurons directly (28–30), we investigated other potential
mechanisms.
Obesity is characterized by chronic inflammation, in addition
to changes in metabolic markers (31). Increased adiposity elicits
an increase in inflammatory cytokines in the circulation (32, 33),
such as: tumor necrosis factor (TNFα), and interleukins, IL-1β,
IL-6 (34), primarily due to macrophage infiltration to adipose
tissue and their subsequent activation. Inflammatory cytokines
have been demonstrated to negatively affect reproductive
function (35). Influence of acute inflammation on reproduction
was an area of intense investigation and these studies determined
that LPS or cytokine administration in the brain ventricle reduces
gonadotropin levels, diminishes GnRH neuropeptide release and
represses GnRH and LH gene expression (36–38). As opposed to
the acute, high level of inflammatory cytokines used in previous
studies, obesity elicits low grade, chronic inflammation and we
investigated its effects on reproduction via GnRH neurons.
To analyze the effects of obesity-induced inflammation on
reproductive function we used diet-induced obese (DIO) mice.
Significant strain differences were observed in response to
high-fat diet (HFD) and A/J, FVB/NJ and BALB/cJ strains
are resistant to DIO, while DBA/2J and C57BL/6J gain
weight (39–41). The C57BL/6J mouse is a particularly faithful
model of the human metabolic syndrome because it develops
obesity, hyperinsulinemia, hyperglycemia, and hypertension,
when allowed ad libitum access to a HFD (42, 43). Herein,
we demonstrate profound sex differences in response to HFD.
Specifically, C57BL/6J male mice exhibit neuroinflammation,
with a resultant decrease in the number of synaptic spines
on GnRH neurons and reduction in GnRH mRNA levels. On
the other hand, female mice are resistant to neuroendocrine
and inflammatory changes, and this protection is independent
of ovarian hormones. Together, our data implicate sex-specific
effects in obesity-induced neuroinflammation with functional
consequences on GnRH neurons.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
C57BL/6J mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory at 3
weeks of age. After a week acclimatization, they were randomly
assigned to the high-fat diet fed group (HFD, D12492, 60% kcal
from fat; Research Diet, New Brunswick, NJ) and control group
(Ctr, D12450J, 10% kcal; Research Diet, New Brunswick, NJ) for
an indicated number of weeks. Animals were maintained under
a 12-h light, 12-h dark cycle and received food and water ad
libitum. All experiments were performed with approval from the
University of California Animal Care and Use Committee and in
accordance with the National Institutes of Health Animal Care
and Use Guidelines using 16-week-old animals (3 weeks before
weaning, 1 week normal chow, 12 weeks high fat or control diet)
unless indicated otherwise. During the week between weaning
and experimental diet, while fed normal chow, all animals were
handled daily by experienced personnel to assure habituation and
minimize stress (44).
For fluorescently labeled microglia, CX3CR1-GFP mice were
obtained from Jackson labs (strain 005582) and randomly placed
on the respective diets at 4 weeks of age to analyze change
in microglia morphology. Doubly fluorescent GFP and RFP
transgenic mice obtained after crossing CX3CR1-GFP (strain
005582) and CCR2-RFP (strain 017586), and heterozygous mice
for both alleles were used to distinguish monocyte recruitment
to the hypothalamus from resident microglia. GnRH-GFP mice
were kindly provided by Dr. Suzanne Moenter (45). Males and
females were analyzed separately to determine sex differences.
At least 10 animals per sex per genotype were analyzed, unless
indicated otherwise for a specific analysis in the materials
and methods section. Statistical differences (p < 0.05) between
control (Ctr) and high fat diet (HFD) fed mice were determined
by Student’s T-test or 2-way ANOVA where appropriate, and
Tukey’s test for multiple comparison.
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
2
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
Estrous Cyclicity
Starting at 12 weeks of the Ctr or HFD, female mice were
assessed for estrous cycle stage with daily vaginal smears for 6
weeks. Vaginal lavage was performed daily (between 9-10 am)
by flushing the vagina with distilled H2O. Collected smears
were mounted on glass slides and examined microscopically
for cell types. Both groups of animals were handled daily, at
the same time of day, to account for any potential stress that
handling may cause. Estrous cycle stages determined during
the first week of vaginal smears were not included in the
analysis to allow for acclimatization. Female mice on control
diet exhibited normal 4-5 day-long estrous cycles, indicating
habituation to handling. Estrous cycle length was calculated
as the length of time between two successive occurrences
of estrus. For subsequent studies, females were estrous cycle
staged and tissue samples collected in diestrus between 9 and
11 a.m.
Sperm Count
After 12 weeks on the respective diet, males were sacrificed
between 9 and 11 a.m. The epididymides were dissected,
macerated, and then incubated in 1 ml DMEM at room
temperature for 30 min with shaking. Sperm was cleared with a
70 µm cell strainer, diluted with sterile water and counted with a
hemocytometer.
Cytokine and Hormone Analyses
For serum collection, mice were sacrificed between 9 and
11 a.m. by isoflurane inhalation and blood was obtained from
the inferior vena cava. The blood was left to coagulate for
15 min at room temperature, and then centrifuged at 2000
RCF for 15 min for serum separation. Cytokine levels in
serum and hypothalamic protein lysates were measured using
Luminex MagPix instrument and mouse ProcartaPlex 7 plex
(Affymetrix eBioscience, San Diego, CA). Hormone assays were
performed by the University of Virginia, Ligand Core. The
University of Virginia Center for Research in Reproduction
Ligand Assay and Analysis Core is a fee-for-service core
facility and is supported in part by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver
NICHD/NIH U54-HD28934 Grant. LH was measured by the
ultra-sensitive mouse LH ELISA, an in-house method. The
capture monoclonal antibody (anti-bovine LH beta subunit,
518B7) is provided by Janet Roser, University of California.
The detection polyclonal antibody (rabbit LH antiserum,
AFP240580Rb) is provided by the National Hormone and
Peptide Program (NHPP). HRP-conjugated polyclonal antibody
(goat anti-rabbit) is purchased from DakoCytomation (Glostrup,
Denmark; D048701-2). Mouse LH reference prep (AFP5306A;
NHPP) is used as the assay standard. Intra-assay coefficient
of variation is 2.2% and inter-assay coefficient of variation
is 7.3% at the low end of the curve. Functional sensitivity is
0.016 ng/ml. FSH was assayed by RIA using reagents provided
by Dr. A.F. Parlow and the National Hormone and Peptide
Program, as previously described (46). Mouse FSH reference
prep AFP5308D was used for assay standards. Steroid hormone
levels were analyzed using validated commercially available
assays, information for which can be found on the core’s website:
http://www.medicine.virginia.edu/research/institutes-and-
programs/crr/lab-facilities/assay-methods-page
and
reported
in Haisenleder et al. (47). Limits of detection were 2.4 ng/ml
for FSH, 3 pg/ml for estradiol, and 10 ng/dL for testosterone.
Intra- and inter-assay coefficients of variation were 6.9%/7.5%,
6.0%/11.4%, and 4.4%/6.4% for the FSH, estrogen (E2) and
testosterone (T), respectively. Ten animals per group were
used for each hormone analysis. Statistical differences in
hormone levels between Ctr and HFD groups were determined
by Student’s T-test, and Tukey-Kramer HSD for multiple
comparisons using JMP software (SAS Institute; Cary, North
Carolina).
Flow Cytometry
Antibodies used for flow cytometry, immunohistochemisty and
western blotting are listed in Table 1. Microglial activation and
immune cell influx into the hypothalamus and prefrontal cortex
were characterized as previously described (48). Tissues from
the hypothalamus and cortex from each mouse was processed
separately as part of a 5-mouse cohort per group, with each
experiment repeated 3 times. In brief, mice were perfused with
ice cold PBS, brains rapidly removed and hypothalami and
prefrontal cortex cell suspensions were generated by mechanical
dissociation and applied to a discontinuous 1.03/1.088 percoll
gradient. Cells were collected from the interface, blocked with
anti-CD16/CD32 (1:300, 553141, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA),
and incubated with anti-CD45 APC-eFluor� 780 (1:300, 47-
0451, eBioscience, San Diego, CA) and anti-CD11b PerCP-
Cyanin5.5 (1:300, 45-0112, eBioscience, San Diego, CA) in PBS,
5% EDTA, 0.4% BSA. SytoxTM Green dead stain (30 nM, S-
34860, ThermoFisher, Chino, CA) was used to exclude dead cells
and flow analysis performed using BD LSR II Flow Cytometer.
Results were analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star, Inc.) and
statistical differences were determined by Student’s T-test and
Tukey’s posthoc test.
TABLE 1 | Antibodies.
Antibody
Species
Dilution
Provider, cat # and RRID
GFP
chicken
1:5,000
Abcam, ab13970; AB_300798
Iba-1
rabbit
1:300
Wako, 019-19741; AB_839504
PSD-95
rabbit
1:2,000
Cell Signaling, 3409; AB_1264242
Synaptophysin
(SYPH)
rabbit
1:1,000
Cell Signaling, 4329; AB_1904154
MAP2
chicken
1:5,000
Abcam, ab5392; AB_2138153
GnRH
rabbit
1:1,000
ThermoFisher, PA1-121;
AB_325077
β-tubulin
rabbit
1:1,000
Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
sc-9104; AB_2241191
CD45
APC-eFluor
780
rat
1:300
eBioscience, 47-0451 (clone
30-F11), AB_1548781
CD11b
PerCP-Cy5.5
rat
1:300
eBioscience, 45-0112 (clone
M1/70), AB_953558
Bold indicates: RRID, RESEARCH RESOURCE IDENTIFIERS (RRIDs) number.
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
3
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
Histological Analyses and
Immunohistochemistry
Following Ctr or HFD mice were anesthetized, perfused
with 20 ml PBS and 20 ml 4% paraformaldehyde; and tissues
collected. Brains were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, embedded
in paraffin, and cut to 20 µm. Slides were deparaffinized in
xylene and rehydrated. Antigen unmasking was performed
by heating for 10 min in a Tris-EDTA-0.3% Triton X and
endogenous
peroxidase
was
quenched
by
incubating
for
10 min in 0.3% hydrogen peroxide. Slides were then blocked
with 20% goat serum and incubated with primary antiserum
against GnRH (1:1000 PA1-121, Thermo Sci.) or Iba-1 for
microglia (1:300 cat # 019-19741, Wako) overnight at 4◦C.
After PBS washes, slides were incubated with biotinylated
goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:300, BA-1000, Vector Laboratories,
Burlingame,
CA)
for
30 min.
The
Vectastain
ABC
elite
kit
(Vector
Laboratories)
was
used
per
manufacturer’s
instructions, after which the DAB peroxidase kit was used
for colorimetric staining. Slides were dehydrated in ethanol
and xylene, and cover-slipped with Vectamount (Vector
Laboratories).
To visualize GFP-labeled microglia from CX3CR1-GFP
mice, and activated macrophages labeled red and microglia
labeled green from CCR2-RFP x CX3CR1-GFP mice, after
12 weeks of Ctr or HFD mice were anesthetized, perfused
with 20 ml PBS followed by 20 ml of 4% paraformaldehyde;
brains
were
post-fixed
in
4%
paraformaldehyde,
frozen
in OCT, and cut to 20 µm sections using Leica cryostat.
Endogenous
fluorescence
was
visualized
with
Leica
microscope.
Hypothalami from GnRH-GFP mice were sectioned to
100 µm sections and sections containing organum vasculosum
laminae terminalis (OVLT) where GnRH neurons are located,
stained for GFP to visualize GnRH neurons. Slides were blocked
with 20% goat serum and incubated with primary antibodies
against GFP (1:5000 raised in chicken), at 4◦C for 48 h. After
PBS washes, slides were incubated with FITC/Alexa 488 goat
anti-chicken IgG (1:300, Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) for
30 min. Secondary antibody-only controls were performed to
determine antibody specificity. Images were obtained using
confocal Leica SP2 microscope. To determine spine density, we
followed our established protocol as published before (49–53),
with modifications that correspond to previously described
procedures for analysis of spines in GnRH neurons (54, 55).
Spines, that were identified as protrusions from the soma or
axon greater than 1 µm, were counted in the individual neurons
where at least 75 um of the axon proximal to soma can be
observed using z-stack. The full length of every GFP-labeled
GnRH neuron, including soma and the visible length of the
main process, was imaged and analyzed using confocal Leica
SP2 microscope. Images were encoded for blind analysis. Spine
numbers were quantified by scrolling through the series of
captured images in the z-stack using LAS X software and
counted for each GFP-labeled GnRH soma and along the
75 µm length of axon, at 15-µm intervals. We counted at least
3 individual neurons from 4 different sets of mice marked
by hand and using Neurolucida program (MBF Bioscience,
Vermont).
Western Blot
Whole cell lysates were obtained from the dissected hypothalami
from Ctr and HFD fed mice and after protein determination,
the
same
amount
of
protein
was
run
on
SDS-PAGE,
transferred
on
nitrocellulose
membrane
and
probed
for:
Postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD-95; 1:1000, Cat #3409,
Cell Signaling), Synaptophysin (SYPH; 1:1000, cat. #4329,
Cell
Signaling),
neuronal
marker,
Microtubule-associated
protein 2 (MAP2; 1:5000, cat #ab5392, Abcam) or β-tubulin
(1:1000, cat #sc-9104, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Bands
were quantified using ChemiDoc imaging system (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA).
qPCR Analyses
Hypothalami were dissected, total RNA extracted and reverse
transcribed using Superscript III (Invitrogen, CA). qPCR
was performed using an iQ SYBR Green supermix and an
IQ5 real-time PCR machine (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules,
CA) with primers listed in Table 2 under the following
conditions: 95◦C for 15 min, followed by 40 cycles at 95◦C
for 20 s, 56◦C for 30 s, and 72◦C for 30 s. The amount
of the gene of interest was calculated by comparing the
threshold cycle obtained for each sample with the standard
TABLE 2 | Primers.
Primers
Forward
Reverse
Gnrh (GnRH)
CTACTGCTGACTGTGTGTTTG
CATCTTCTTCTGCCTGGCTTC
Avp (AVP)
ACACTACGCTCTCCGCTTGT
CGAAGCAGCGTCCTTTGC
Pomc (POMC)
CAGTGCCAGGACCTCACC
CAGCGAGAGGTCGAGTTTG
Il6 (IL-6)
TTCTCTGGGAAATCGTGGAAAT
TCCAGTTTGGTAGCATCCATCA
Tnfa (TNFα)
ATGTCTCAGCCTCTTCTCATTCC
GCTTGTCACTCGAATTTTGAGAA
Lif (LIF)
ATGTGCGCCTAACATGACAG
TATGCGACCATCCGATACAG
Il10 (IL-10)
GCTGGACAACATACTGCTAACC
ATTTCCGATAAGGCTTGGCAA
B2m (beta-2-microglobulin)
TGACCGGCCTGTATGCTATCCA
CAGTGTGAGCCAGGATATAGAAAGAC
Gapdh
TGCACCACCAACTGCTTAG
GGATGCAGGGATGATGTTC
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
4
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
curve generated in the same run. Replicates were averaged
and divided by the mean value of the beta-2-microglobulin
(B2M) housekeeping gene in the same sample using ��Ct
method. Preliminary studies analyzing GAPDH, Ywaz, TBP
and B2M housekeeping genes determined that B2M doesn’t
change with diet and was subsequently used for normalization.
After each run, a melting curve analysis was performed to
confirm that a single amplicon was generated in each reaction.
Statistical differences in expression between genotypes were
determined by Student’s T-test, and Tukey’s HSD for multiple
comparisons using JMP software (SAS Institute; Cary, North
Carolina).
RESULTS
Male Mice on High-Fat Diet Exhibit Lower
Levels of Reproductive Hormones
C57BL/6J male and female mice were placed on high-fat diet
(HFD) or control diet (Ctr) 1 week after weaning and their
weights measured twice a week. As demonstrated previously
(26), male mice gained weight on HFD, while female mice were
resistant to diet-induced obesity (DIO) and required longer
exposure to HFD to exhibit the same weight difference from
mice on control diet (Figure 1A, male; Figure 1B, female).
Preliminary studies indicated that females exposed to the HFD
for the same length of time as males do not exhibit adverse
effects of obesity illustrated bellow, while much longer exposure
would increase the risk of confounding our results with negative
effects of aging; thus, we opted to keep the females on the HFD
until they reach similar weight gain as males. To determine if
ovarian estrogens, or other ovarian hormones, play a role in
this sex difference, we ovariectomized (OVX) the females at 4
weeks of age and placed them on the HFD and Ctr. OVX females
became susceptible to DIO (Figure 1C). These results indicate
that ovarian hormones are protective of DIO.
After 12 weeks on their respective diets for males and 19
weeks for unmodified females, when mice on HFD reached 175%
of the weight observed in mice on Ctr diet, we analyzed the
adipose tissue deposition by measuring fat depots. We dissected
inguinal fat pad from subcutaneous depots, and gonadal fat
pad from visceral fat depots, from one side of each animal.
Fat pad weights were then compared between Ctr and HFD in
both males and females. Weight comparison of fat pads from
Ctr and HFD-fed mice indicates that both males (Figure 1D)
and females (Figure 1E) deposit fat in both subcutaneous
(inguinal) and gonadal fat depots, since fat pads from either
depot were heavier in HFD than controls animals. When we
compared males to females, Ctr males had significantly heavier
subcutaneous fat pads and gonadal fat pads than Ctr females
(compare Figures 1D,E). HFD fed males had significantly heavier
gonadal fat pads than HFD females. Given the individual weight
difference and profound sex differences in size, we also compared
fat depots after normalizing fat pad weight to total body weight.
There was a significant difference in normalized weight between
gonadal fat pads in Ctr males compared to gonadal fat pads
in Ctr females, indicating that male mice fed low-fat control
HFD
Ctr
grams
48
36
24
12
0
0
5
10
15
20
grams
48
36
24
12
0
0
5
10
15
20
grams
48
36
24
12
0
0
5
10
15
20
weeks:
weeks:
weeks:
HFD
Ctr
OVX
HFD
Ctr
HFD
Ctr
A
B
C
D
E
F
0.6
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
grams
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
grams
fat depot / body weight  
0.015
0.018
0.012
0.003
0.009
0.006
0
*
*
Ctr
HFD
fat depot:  subcut.     gonadal
*
*
Ctr
HFD
fat depot:  subcut.     gonadal
male                female
Ctr
HFD
subc.     gon.     subc.     gon.
*
#
FIGURE 1 | Ovarian hormones provide resistance to diet-induced obesity in
female C57Black/6J mice. Ten C57BL/6J mice per group were placed on
control (Ctr,10 kcal%fat, Research Diet) or high fat diet (HFD, 60 kcal%fat
Research Diet) with the same sucrose levels, at 4 weeks of age. Their weights
were recorded twice a week (A), males; (B), females. (C), ♀ OVX, female mice
were ovariectomized at weaning and one week later, at 4 weeks of age placed
on diets. (D), following exposure to their respective diets, mice were sacrificed
and subcutaneous (subcut.) fat depots and gonadal fat depots removed from
one side of each animal and weights recorded (D), males; (E), females. (F),
Subcutaneous (subc.) and gonadal (gon.) fat depot weight from (D,E) was
normalized to the whole body weight for each animal. *Indicates significant
difference p < 0.05 between Ctr (gray bars) and HFD (black bars), while # sign
indicates difference between sexes; determined by ANOVA followed by
Tukey’s HSD test.
diet exhibit higher visceral adiposity than females (Figure 1F,
indicated with a pound sign). We did no detect sex differences
between other fat depots. Comparison of fat pads between control
and HFD revealed preferential fat accumulation in select depots.
Significantly, there was a difference in subcutaneous fat pad from
HFD female mice compared to subcutaneous fat pad from Ctr
females, even after normalizing to the body weight (Figure 1F,
asterisk), implying that females preferentially increase adiposity
in the subcutaneous depot. Therefore, examination of fat pads
may demonstrate that male mice have higher visceral adiposity
in control conditions, which corresponds to observations in
humans. On the other hand, female obesity may lead to
preferential increase in subcutaneous fat, which exhibits less
adverse health outcomes (56).
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
5
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
Following 12 weeks on diets for males and OVX females,
which gain weight at the same rate as males, and 19 weeks for
unmodified females, we measured gonadotropin hormone and
sex steroid hormone levels. Male mice on HFD exhibited 57%
lower luteinizing hormone (LH), 35% lower follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH), and 40% lower intra-testicular testosterone
levels (Figure 2A). Consequently, HFD males had 50% fewer
sperm in their epididymides (Figure 2A), 22% lower seminal
vesicle weight, which is dependent on the level of testosterone,
while testis weight was unaffected (data not shown). Female
mice exhibited longer estrous cycles (4.6 days, controls and 6.4
days, HFD), but LH, FSH or estradiol level (E2) in diestrus
were not significantly changed (Figure 2B). Thus, female mice,
although obese as a result of prolonged exposure to HFD, do
not exhibit changes in gonadotropin hormone levels. LH and
FSH levels in OVX females were significantly higher than LH
and FSH in unmodified females due to the lack of negative
feedback (compare Figure 2B and Figure 2C), which confirms
A
B
C
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Ctr HFD
LH
4
3
2
1
0
Ctr HFD
FSH
*
*
150
120
90
60
30
0
HFD
18
15
12
9
6
0
HFD
Ctr
Ctr
♂
♀
0
Ctr HFD
0
Ctr HFD
5
4
3
2
1
0
Ctr HFD
60
48
36
24
12
0
Ctr HFD
♀
OVX
HFD
0
HFD
Ctr
Ctr
T or E
 LH ng/ml
FSH ng/ml
T ng/ml
sperm 106/ml
LH ng/ml
 E2 pg/ml
days per cycle
LH ng/ml
FSH ng/ml
*
0.15
0.12
0.09
0.06
0.03
4
3
2
1
FSH ng/ml
*
4
3
2
1
0
3
*
6
5
4
3
2
1
7
FIGURE 2 | Reproductive hormones are lower in obese male mice, while both
unmodified and ovariectomized females are protected from diet-induced
changes. Male mice (A) on the HFD have reduced levels of luteinizing
hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and intra-testicular
testosterone (T), and fewer sperm. Female mice (B) lack changes in LH, FSH,
and estrogen (E2), but exhibit longer estrous cycles. Ovariectomized (OVX)
females (C) are protected from hormonal changes similarly to unmodified
females, indicating that the ovarian hormones are dispensable for protection.
Differences (*p < 0.05) between control (Ctr, gray bars) and high fat diet (HFD,
black bars) were determined by Student’s T-test followed by Tukey’s HSD test.
that ovariectomy was successful. However, neither LH nor FSH
in OVX females were affected by diet (Figure 2C). Thus, there are
profound sex differences and females are resistant to diet-induced
changes in reproductive hormones. Additionally, these results
demonstrate that ovarian hormones contribute to resistance to
obesity, but are not necessary for the protection from hormonal
changes exhibited by female mice.
Since LH levels are strictly regulated by GnRH neuropeptide
from the hypothalamus, GnRH (Gnrh) expression was analyzed
and revealed that male mice on HFD exhibited 46% reduced
levels of Gnrh mRNA. To analyze specificity of repression,
FIGURE 3 | HFD elicits changes in hypothalamic neuropeptides expression.
(A), Male mice on HFD had 46% lower expression of Gnrh mRNA and 132%
higher Pomc while Avp was not affected. (B), Female mice did not exhibit
changes in Gnrh, but had increased Pomc mRNA. (C), There was no change
in Gnrh expression in HFD compared to Ctr in ovariectomized (OVX) females,
although Gnrh mRNA was higher in OVX females than unmodified females.
*Indicates difference between Ctr (gray bars) and HFD (black bars), determined
by Student’s T-test followed by Tukey’s HSD test.
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
6
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
FIGURE 4 | GnRH neuron number or axon targeting is unchanged in DIO
mice. Coronal sections of the preoptic area (A, top) and median eminence (B,
bottom) from Ctr and HFD fed male mice, were stained with anti-GnRH
antibodies. No diet-mediated changes in GnRH neuron number, nor axon
targeting were detected.
additional neuropeptides were assessed, and we determined that
Pomc (POMC, proopiomelanocortin) mRNA was increased by
132%, while Avp (arginine vasopressin) mRNA was unchanged
(Figure 3A). Neither unmodified or OVX female mice, on the
other hand, exhibited diet-induced changes in Gnrh mRNA
level, although OVX females exhibited ∼10-fold higher Gnrh
mRNA levels compared to unmodified females due to the lack of
negative feedback (Figures 3B,C). These results again illustrate
sex specific DIO-induced alterations in the neuropeptide gene
expression in the hypothalamus, independent of the presence of
ovarian hormones.
To determine whether a reduction in Gnrh mRNA levels
in male mice stems from fewer GnRH neurons after exposure
to HFD, we analyzed GnRH neuron number and detected
no difference between diets (Figure 4A). We also detected no
difference in response to diet in GnRH neuron axon targeting
to the median eminence (Figure 4B). Thus, decrease in Gnrh
mRNA levels correlates with the reduction in LH, testosterone
and sperm count in male mice following HFD.
Sex-Specific Differences in Inflammatory
Cytokines in the Circulation and the
Hypothalami of HFD-fed Mice
Obesity is characterized by hyperleptinemia, hyperinsulinemia,
hyperlipidemia, hyperglycemia, and chronic inflammation.
Significant effort has been devoted to determine the effects
of increased leptin, insulin, fatty acids, or glycose on GnRH
neuronal function without clear outcomes (13). We analyzed
inflammatory cytokine levels following DIO in our mice and
determined that inflammatory cytokines were elevated in the
FIGURE 5 | Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is increased in the serum and the
hypothalamus of both male and female mice. Following Ctr (gray bars) and
HFD (black bars) serum and hypothalami were collected from male (A),
unmodified female (B) and ovariectomized (OVX) female mice (C). Cytokine
levels in serum and hypothalamic protein lysates were measured using
Luminex MagPix instrument and mouse ProcartaPlex 7 plex (Affymetrix
eBioscience, San Diego, CA), while mRNA was assayed with qPCR. *Indicates
significant difference (p < 0.05) between diets determined by Student’s T-test
and Tukey’s posthoc comparison.
circulation as well as in the hypothalami of obese mice. There
was no difference in serum levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) between
males, unmodified females or ovariectomized females on control
diet (compare Figures 5A,B,C), and all three groups exhibited
significantly elevated serum IL-6 following HFD. Increased IL-
6 in the serum of HFD-fed male mice (Figure 5A) was previously
demonstrated (57). IL-6 levels were also increased in the
hypothalamic lysates, at the protein and mRNA levels, indicating
that IL-6 was induced locally in the hypothalami of the DIO mice.
Additionally, hypothalamic IL-6 was increased in both male and
female mice (Figures 5B,C). However, increased cytokine levels
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
7
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
FIGURE 6 | Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α and leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) are increased specifically in the male mice regardless of the presence of ovarian
estrogens. Serum and hypothalami were collected from male (A), unmodified female (B) and ovariectomized (OVX) female mice (C) following Ctr and HFD. Cytokine
levels in serum and hypothalamic protein lysates were measured using Luminex MagPix instrument and mouse ProcartaPlex 7 plex (Affymetrix eBioscience, San
Diego, CA), while mRNA was assayed with qPCR. Difference (*p < 0.05) between Ctr (gray bars) and HFD (black bars) were determined by Student’s T-test followed
by Tukey’s HSD test.
were not detected in the cortex of neither male nor female mice
(data not shown), indicating that neuroinflammation is specific
for the hypothalamus.
We sought to identify cytokines that may exhibit sex
differences in response to HFD. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
α and leukemia inhibitor factor (LIF) were examined, since
shown to increase in DIO (58). There was no sex difference in
TNFα or LIF levels in serum of Ctr males and Ctr unmodified
females, while removal of ovaries significantly increased TNFα
concentration, but not LIF, in the serum of Ctr OVX females
compared to unmodified Ctr females. TNFα and LIF increased
specifically in male mice on HFD in the serum (3-fold or 300%
and 4.83-fold or 483%, respectively), hypothalamic protein levels
(112% and 155.6%, respectively) and mRNA expression levels
in the hypothalamus (TNFα, 161% and LIF, 200%; Figure 6A),
but were not changed in the cortex (data not shown); nor in
unmodified or OVX female mice (Figures 6B,C). Therefore, IL-
6 was increased in both sexes solely in the hypothalami, while
TNFα and LIF are induced specifically in the hypothalami of male
mice. Furthermore, while OVX females became susceptible to
DIO, they remain protected from the increase in TNFα and LIF
inflammatory cytokines in the hypothalamus.
To explain possible protection of female mice, we analyzed
anti-inflammatory cytokines. Female mice on Ctr diet exhibit
significantly higher concentration of anti-inflammatory IL-10
than Ctr male mice (3.7 pg/ml female, 1.3 pg/ml male, Figure 7)
in the hypothalamus, while IL-10 was below detection limit in the
serum in both sexes. Exposure to HFD decreased level of IL-10
protein by 50.2% and Il10 mRNA by 28% in male mice; however,
HFD increased IL-10 protein to 188% and Il10 mRNA to 165%
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
8
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
FIGURE 7 | IL-10 is higher in female mice. IL-10 protein was higher in the
hypothalami of female mice than male mice, and below detection in the serum
in both sexes. After exposure to the HFD, IL-10, both protein and mRNA,
decreased in males and increased in females. Statistical significance (*p <
0.05) between Ctr (gray bars) and HFD (black bars) were determined by
Student’s T-test followed by Tukey’s test.
in the female hypothalami (Figure 7). These results indicate
that following HFD, inflammatory cytokines are increased, while
anti-inflammatory cytokines are decreased in male hypothalami
compared to the male mice on control diet. In contrast, female
mice on HFD increase anti-inflammatory IL-10 concentration
in their hypothalami, while lacking heightened inflammatory
response.
Regional Differences in Microglia
Activation in the Hypothalamus
Microglia activation in response to the HFD in the arcuate
nucleus of the mediobasal hypothalamus has been demonstrated
previously (59–62). Using CX3CR1-GFP mice on Ctr and HFD,
we also observed changes from ramified cell body with longer
processes, to amoeboid, rounded cells body morphology with
retracted processes, indicating activation of the microglia in the
arcuate nucleus, (Figure 8A, top). These morphological changes
were not observed in the female mice (Figure 8A, bottom).
Quantification of CX3CR1-GFP positive cells demonstrated that
there is no difference in the number of cells between Ctr males
and Ctr females. Exposure to HFD increases the number of
GFP-labeled cells in the arcuate nucleus in males, but not in
females.
FIGURE 8 | Iba-1 positive cells were more abundant in the circumventricular
areas of the hypothalamus following HFD in male mice, but not in the female.
(A), Microglia, genetically labeled with CX3CR1-GFP
, exhibit activated
morphology in the arcuate nucleus after HFD specifically in male mice, but not
in the female. Quantification determined that there is no difference in microglia
numbers in Ctr males compared to Ctr females, or Ctr females compared to
HFD females, while male mice on HFD had increased number of
CX3CR1-GFP cells in the arcuate nucleus compared to the Ctr mice, indicated
with an asterisk. (B), Increased number of Iba-1 positive cells around the
organum vasculosum laminae terminalis (OVLT) in DIO male mice fed HFD
than Ctr mice, but the same numbers in the lateral preoptic area (LPO). (C),
Increased Iba-1 positive cell number in the median eminence (ME) and arcuate
nucleus but not in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) in male mice on HFD.
(A-C), Bar indicates 100 µm. Difference (*) between Ctr (gray bars) and HFD
(black bars) were determined by ANOVA followed by Tukey’s HSD test.
Identification of an increase in cell number in the arcuate
nucleus in male mice on HFD prompted investigation of the
regional changes in the number of Iba-1 positive cells (Iba-1,
is expressed by the microglia in the brain and activated bone-
derived macrophages). Increased number of Iba-1 positive cells
was detected particularly around the organum vasculosum of the
lamina terminalis (OVLT, Figure 8B) in the rostral hypothalamus
and in the median eminence (ME) and arcuate nucleus in the
mediobasal hypothalamus (Figure 8C), but not in the lateral
preoptic area (LPO) or the paraventricular nucleus (PVN). Since
PVN is located adjacent to the 3rd ventricle as is the arcuate
nucleus, findings that PVN does not exhibit changes in Iba-
1 positive cell number, while arcuate nucleus does, imply that
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
9
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
FIGURE 9 | Infiltration of peripheral macrophages in the hypothalamus of the
male mice on HFD but not female. (A), Flow cytometry plot indicating
presence of the CD45high macrophage population that can be distinguished
from the CD45low microglia specifically in the hypothalami of HFD male mice,
but not in the female. This population is not present in the cortex in either male
or female mice. (B), Quantification of A. Statistical significance (*) between Ctr
(gray bars) and HFD (black bars) were determined by Student’s T-test followed
by Tukey’s posthoc test.
the distance to the 3rd ventricle is not a contributing factor.
Consistent with a lack of morphological changes, and lack of
changes in the cell number in the arcuate nucleus, female mice
did not exhibit any differences in Iba-1 cell number in either
ME or OVLT hypothalamic area (data not shown). Therefore,
solely in male mice, but not in female mice, HFD elicits an
increase in Iba-1 positive cells in the circumventricular areas of
the hypothalamus that are known to have a leaky blood-brain
barrier.
Infiltration of Peripheral Macrophages to
the Hypothalamus of Obese Male Mice
Given that the increased Iba-1 cell numbers are observed in the
areas that contain fenestrated capillaries, and that this increase is
not dependent on the distance from the ventricle, we considered
two possibilities, that either microglia sense the metabolic
changes in the circulation that leads to their activation and
proliferation, or that activated monocyte-derived macrophages
enter the hypothalamus from the periphery, since increased
FIGURE 10 | CCR2-positive macrophages localize to the parenchyma of the
arcuate nucleus. Doubly fluorescent mice, where activated macrophages are
genetically labeled red with CCR2-RFP and resident microglia are labeled
green with CX3CR1-GFP
, were placed on the control and HFD. Arcuate nuclei
of mice on control diet contain only green fluorescence, while arcuate nuclei of
mice on HFD contain green fluorescence of resident microglia, and red
fluorescence indicating infiltration of peripheral macrophages.
adiposity leads to macrophage activation (33). Microglia and
macrophages can be distinguished by flow cytometry from other
CNS resident cells due to the presence of CD11b, and can be
distinguished from each other by their differential expression of
CD45, since microglia are CD11b+ CD45low and macrophages
are CD11b+ CD45high (48, 63). Hypothalamus and prefrontal
cortex were dissected, cells dissociated and subjected to flow
analysis, which determined that macrophages are present in
the hypothalami of obese male mice, but not in the cortex
(Figure 9A). Consistent with the increase in inflammatory
cytokines, macrophage recruitment to the hypothalamus is only
noted in male mice, and is not observed in the female mice on
HFD (Figures 9A,B).
To localize resident microglia and recruited monocyte-
derived macrophages, we generated CX3CR1-GFP and CCR2-
RFP double transgenic male mice. CX3CR1 is a fractalkine
receptor expressed specifically by the microglia in the brain.
CCR2 is a chemokine receptor involved in monocyte chemotaxis
and infiltration; thus, the presence of RFP expression under
CCR2-promoter control would indicate infiltrating activated
macrophages. These mice were placed on a Ctr and HFD. In
the Ctr, only green-labeled microglia positive for CX3CR1 are
present in the arcuate nucleus of the mediobasal hypothalamus
(Figure 10, coronal section with 3rd ventricle on the right
side of the image), while in the HFD, RFP-labeled infiltrating
macrophages are localized to the brain parenchyma in addition
to the GFP-labeled resident microglia. Collectively, these
results indicate that peripheral macrophage recruitment to the
hypothalamic parenchyma following HFD only occurs in male
mice.
Decrease in GnRH Neuron Spines Density
in the Hypothalamus of Obese Male Mice
Macrophage infiltration and elevated inflammatory cytokines in
the hypothalamus may lead to synapse elimination (64–66); and
subsequent dysregulation of GnRH neurons, which can explain
reduced GnRH, LH and testosterone levels in male mice on
the HFD. Given that we detected no changes in the number of
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
10
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
FIGURE 11 | Decreased levels of PSD-95 synaptic protein in the hypothalami
of male mice on the HFD. Western blot using hypothalamic lysates indicate
lower levels of post-synaptic density protein 95 (PSD-95), but not of
pre-synaptic protein synaptophysin (SYPH) in males (A) but not in females (B).
*Indicates statistical significance p < 0.05 determined by Student’s t-test and
Tukey’s post hoc analysis, after quantification of PSD-95, neuronal marker
MAP2 and housekeeping control β-tubulin.
GnRH neurons, we next determined if there are synaptic changes
in the hypothalami of HFD male mice and specifically GnRH
neurons. Western blot analyses revealed lower levels of excitatory
post-synaptic density (PSD) 95 protein in the hypothalami of
HFD male mice, while no changes were seen in the overall
levels of the pre-synaptic protein synaptophysin (SYPH), usually
detected in both excitatory and inhibitory pre-synaptic sites
(Figure 11A). In contrast, PSD-95 and synaptophysin levels
were unchanged in the hypothalami of female mice on HFD as
compared to Ctr females (Figure 11B). Our results show changes
in synaptic protein levels in the hypothalamus of male mice that
are susceptible to DIO, but not neuro-inflammation resistant
female mice.
To assess synapses of specifically GnRH neurons, we placed
GnRH-GFP mice (45) on the Ctr or HFD for 12 weeks and
analyzed spine density, since changes in the number of spines
have been linked to alterations in neuron connectivity (49–53).
Spine density was analyzed in the GnRH-GFP neurons of the Ctr
and HFD male mice, using the method described previously (54).
Spines were identified as protrusions, 1–5 µm, from the soma or
from the proximal axon of these mostly unipolar neurons (67). By
scrolling through the z-stack obtained by confocal microscopy,
we counted the spines on the soma and along the first 75 µm
of the length of axon at 15-µm intervals. GnRH neurons from
male mice on Ctr exhibited the same number of spines on the
soma and in each of the 15 µm segments as determined before
(55). GnRH neurons from HFD male mice exhibit fewer spines,
especially in the region of the axon that is 45 µm proximal to
FIGURE 12 | GnRH neuron spine density is lower in male mice on HFD. (A),
Coronal sections of the preoptic area in the hypothalamus of the GnRH-GFP
mice following control and HFD were stained for GFP (green) to allow for spine
count. (B), Spines, identified as protrusions indicated with white arrows in (A),
were counted in the soma and in the visible length of the main axon in 15 µm
intervals, which are indicated in the graph in comparison to the distance from
the soma. *Indicates statistical significance p < 0.05 determined by one-way
ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc analysis.
soma (Figure 12). Therefore, obese male mice following HFD
exhibit neuroinflammation and lower number of spines that
may indicate reduced connectivity of the GnRH neurons, which
in turn may lead to reduction in LH, testosterone and sperm
numbers.
DISCUSSION
Herein we report several novel findings: (1) we identify sex
differences underlying the neuroendocrine response to diet-
induced obesity (DIO), and that ovarian hormones protect from
DIO, but are dispensable for female resistance to neuropeptide
and hormonal changes; (2) we show sex-specific differences
associated with inflammatory cytokines, microglial activation
and macrophages infiltration in the hypothalamus; in HFD male
but not female mice; and (3) we posit a potential mechanism of
obesity-induced impairment of hypothalamic function whereby
obese males exhibit lower number of synaptic proteins, which
may underlie negative effects of obesity on reproductive function.
Sex differences in response to DIO were reported before in
mice and in rats (56). Based on these studies and observations
in menopausal women it was hypothesized that a lack of
estrogen increased adiposity, whereas estrogen replacement
diminished it. Increase in adiposity following ovariectomy and
removal of ovarian estrogen was observed in rodents (68,
69) and in monkeys (70). Our results concur that ovarian
estrogen is protective from DIO, but do not support the
assumption that ovarian estrogen is protective from hormonal
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
11
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
and immunological changes. Hormonal and immune changes
have not been examined in response to DIO in unmodified
and ovariectomized (OVX) females before. It was assumed that
hormonal changes would follow weight gain in females after
ovariectomy, however our data indicate that is not the case.
We demonstrate that females are protected from hormonal and
immune changes regardless of the gonadal status.
Sex differences we observe may stem from variety of
other factors, besides ovarian estrogen. In fact, extra-ovarian
estrogen may play a role since the Cyp19a1 gene, which
encodes for aromatase that mediates estrogen synthesis, is
expressed in other tissues, especially the brain and adipose.
Brain-produced estrogen may regulate GnRH neuron function
(71), while estrogen synthesis in adipose tissue may regulate
deposition in various depots (72). There are also profound
sex differences in the immune system (73), metabolic rate
and oxidative phosphorylation (74), fat deposition (69) and
adipocyte number and size (75), all of which may or may not be
dependent on sex steroids, gonadally or locally produced. Our
results indicate that sex differences may stem from differences
in inflammation or alternate fat deposition, both of which
may be interdependent. Females have higher prevalence of
autoimmune diseases, but exhibit lower rates of infections and
fewer chronic inflammatory diseases (73). Resistance to chronic
inflammatory diseases may protect them from obesity-mediated
chronic inflammation. Female mice in our study had elevated
levels of anti-inflammatory IL-10 in the hypothalamus, which
may provide them protection from neuroinflammation. On the
other hand, we and others also determined differences in fat
deposition (68, 76). Our results agree that males have larger
visceral fat depots, or gonadal fat pad, with observation in
other models and humans, and that premenopausal females
preferentially deposit fat into the subcutaneous depot (56).
Difference in fat deposition may also be sex steroid dependent
(77, 78); and likely provides protection for females, since
subcutaneous fat is less adversely correlated with negative
effects of obesity than visceral fat. Variances in fat depots,
not only absolute adiposity, may impact obesity induced
inflammation, since visceral fat, more abundant in males,
contains more infiltrating macrophages and higher expression
of inflammatory cytokines (58, 79) This may increase male
propensity for tissue inflammation, in other tissue including the
brain.
A few studies have analyzed the effects of the high fat diet
(HFD) on the gonadotropin hormones in mice concentrating
on females, since they determined that females have longer
estrous cycles, findings our results support (26, 80, 81). Due
to the significant differences of various mouse strains to DIO,
it is difficult to draw a direct comparison between some of
these studies and ours, if other studies used a different strain
or mixed strain mice (80). Several studies identified significantly
different responses to HFD and some strains, such as BALBc
and FVB, were surprisingly resistant to DIO (40). In DBA
and C57BL/6J strains, that are prone to DIO, sex differences
vary. Females of the DBA strain are prone to DIO, have lower
pregnancy rates and lower Gnrh mRNA (39), while C57BL/6J
females are resistant to DIO, as we have also shown herein.
C57BL/6J mice, used in our study, are most often used in
DIO studies since they develop insulin resistance and metabolic
syndrome that matches human condition (42, 43). Reproductive
hormones analyses in DIO C57BL/6J mice determined that
diestrus females do not exhibit changes in LH, which agrees
with our results (81). However, preovulatory levels of LH are
lower following HFD, also aligning with the longer estrous cycles
in our studies (26). While male mice exhibited lower FSH in
both of our studies, employing the new ultra-sensitive assay
we also detected decreased LH levels. Therefore, male mice
have lower LH, testosterone and sperm count likely due to
lower Gnrh mRNA and reduced number of spines in the GnRH
neuron.
Lower Gnrh mRNA expression is a consistent finding in
mice fed HFD. Repression of Gnrh mRNA in DIO mice has
been reported previously [(26, 39), Supplemental Information].
Interestingly, another report analyzing obesity-induced genome-
wide changes in the brain, detected GnRH as one of the most
repressed genes (82). As stated above, acute cytokine infusion
in the hypothalamus also represses Gnrh expression (36),
suggesting that DIO repression of Gnrh mRNA may be mediated
by increased cytokine concentration. Our studies agree that DIO
diminishes Gnrh mRNA, and further demonstrate reduction
in spine density in GnRH neurons. This may indicate that
Gnrh expression may be regulated in an activity-dependent
manner (83, 84), or alternatively, Gnrh gene may be repressed
by cytokines independently of synaptic connectivity. Activity-
dependent GnRH gene regulation by afferent neurons has
been implied. Hypothalamic factors involved in reproductive
function, such as RFamide-related peptide 3 (RFRP-3), a
mammalian
gonadotropin-inhibitory
hormone
ortholog;
senktide, a neurokinin B receptor agonist; and oxytocin;
elicit changes in LH serum levels, by altering both GnRH
secretion and Gnrh transcription (85–87). On the other hand,
GnRH neurons express cytokine receptors (88), and Gnrh
may be repressed via activation of cytokine receptor signaling
pathways.
Reduction in GnRH spine density may indicate lower neuron
excitability. A decrease in synapses following HFD was reported
previously in the arcuate nucleus in both NPY and POMC
neurons, which are widely studied neuronal populations in
response to DIO, since they comprise feeding and satiety
circuitry in the hypothalamus (89). Specifically, elimination of
inhibitory synapses on POMC neurons and excitatory synapses
on NPY neurons was described. Reduction in inhibitory synapses
may lead to increased POMC expression that was previously
reported (89) and is consistent with our findings. Synaptic
stripping, reduced levels of synaptic proteins and fewer spines
following diet-induced obesity in male C57BL/6J mice were
observed in hippocampal neurons as well (90). A decreased
performance of HFD mice in cognitive tasks was attributed to
the loss of synapses, fewer dendritic spines and a decrease in
synaptic proteins in the prefrontal cortex (91). Since number
of spines and the levels of PSD-95 synaptic protein are linked
to neuronal connectivity, fewer spines and reduced levels of
synaptic proteins, may indicate changes in neuronal activity.
It was postulated that either estrogen induces changes in a
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
12
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
number of synapses on POMC neurons, since sex differences
were detected in the previous study as well (92); or that leptin
is involved in synapse remodeling, since leptin is elevated in
obesity and targets POMC neurons (89). Given that POMC and
NPY neurons are located in the arcuate nucleus, in light of our
results, their synapses may be also eliminated by macrophages
or activated microglia. Microglia, brain resident immune cells,
are involved in synapse prunning and synapse maturation during
development (64) and in the regulation synaptic transmission
and activity-dependent structural remodeling in adults (93).
Peripheral, monocyte-derived macrophages, however, enter the
brain in pathological conditions phagocytosing damaged cells
and engulfing synapses (94, 95). Obesity-induced damage to
POMC neurons that ultimately decreases POMC neuron number
was postulated to elicit hypothalamic inflammation (96). We
determined that GnRH neurons have fewer spines following
HFD, without changes in GnRH neuron number. GnRH neuron
cell bodies are located in the preoptic area around the OVLT,
which has fenestrated capillaries, which allow for macrophage
infiltration. POMC and NPY neurons are located in the arcuate
nucleus, which is dorsal to the median eminence that also
contains fenestrated capillaries. Thus, specificity in synaptic
elimination may stem from the location of the neurons and
proximity to the circumventricular areas with leaky blood brain
barrier that allows for macrophage infiltration.
Previous studies analyzing effects of obesity identified
that neuroinflammation is specific for the hypothalamus and
determined that microglia changes morphology specifically
in the arcuate nucleus (59, 62). In agreement, our studies
also failed to detect microglia morphology changes in the
cortex and detected them specifically in the hypothalami. Sex
differences in microglia activation in response to obesity have
also been reported previously (97). Our studies similarly detected
morphology changes specifically in the male mice. To assess
the regional specificity, we further analyzed other areas besides
arcuate nucleus and determined that microglia morphology
changes around other circumventricular areas with fenestrated
capillaries, such as OVLT. We considered two possibilities,
that either microglia sense metabolic changes in the circulation
via fenestrated capillaries in circumventricular areas or that
increased numbers indicate that peripheral cells which label with
anti-Iba-1 cross into the brain parenchyma specifically in these
areas due to the lack of the blood-brain barrier. That prompted
us to investigate potential peripheral cells and determine that
monocyte-derived macrophages enter the hypothalamus.
Macrophages are functionally dominant cells in obesity-
induced chronic inflammation (98). With increased adiposity,
proportion of macrophages in adipose tissue increases from 10
to 50%, and they change from less inflammatory M2 phenotype
to pro-inflammatory M1 phenotype (33, 58, 99, 100). Elevated
macrophage infiltration and cytokines secretion is more highly
correlated with visceral adiposity (56). Inflammatory cytokines
secreted by the adipose tissue macrophages contribute to the
increase in TNFα and IL-6 in the circulation and chronic
inflammation in obese mice and people (34). We determined
that activated macrophages infiltrate the hypothalamus in the
DIO male mice. Macrophages are recruited to adipose tissue
in part via CCR2 interaction with CCL2 that is upregulated in
obesity (101). CCR2 is involved in the macrophage recruitment
to the liver in obese mice, which contributes to insulin resistance
(102). Thus, macrophages activated by increased adiposity
infiltrate parenchyma of other tissues. We demonstrated that
macrophages recruited to the hypothalamus of obese mice
likewise express CCR2. Macrophage switch to pro-inflammatory
phenotype with increasing obesity also entails a decrease in
the anti-inflammatory IL-10 expression in obese adipose tissue
(32, 103). Thus, protective role of IL-10 in adipose tissue in
DIO has been postulated previously but sex differences were
not examined (104, 105). We determined that female mice have
higher basal levels of IL-10 in the hypothalamus and that obesity
exacerbates sex differences since IL-10 is further decreased in
obese males in the hypothalamus as well. In the brain, IL-10
is expressed by glial cells (106) and has a protective function
(107). We postulate that females, due to the need to handle larger
weight changes during pregnancy and lactation, exhibit higher
levels of protective anti-inflammatory IL-10 and that increased
levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines in female may afford them
protection from obesity-induced inflammation.
We demonstrated that male mice, but not females, on HFD
exhibit macrophage infiltration to the hypothalamus in addition
to the microglia activation, however future studies will identify
which of these cells is activated first. Our studies also demonstrate
that synaptic proteins are decreased in the hypothalami of obese
male mice, and that specifically GnRH neurons have fewer
spines and lower Gnrh mRNA expression. Diminished Gnrh
mRNA transcription and reduction in GnRH neuron activity
may contribute to lower LH levels, reduced testosterone and
diminished sperm numbers. Previous studies analyzing crosstalk
between metabolism and reproductive function determined that
GnRH neurons may integrate obesity-induced changes in glucose
directly (108), but changes in insulin (29) and leptin (28, 30)
are most likely relayed indirectly via neuronal afferents that
synapse to GnRH neurons. In this manuscript, we show that
GnRH neurons may also mediate the effects of obesity-induced
synaptic changes on reproductive function. Future studies will
determine if synaptic changes result in changes in the secretion
of the neuropeptide that regulates gonadotropin hormone levels
and reproduction. Furthermore, we report sex specific changes
in neuroinflammation and fat deposition that may explain sex
differences in adverse effects of obesity. Future studies will further
elucidate sex differences in adipose tissue accumulation and
obesity-induced inflammation. Herein, we combine hormonal
and immune parameters to identify sex-specific effects of obesity
on neuroendocrine function.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
NL: performed most of the experiments; CJ: performed some
experiments; MN: provided expertise in flow analyses and edited
the manuscript; IE: provided expertise in neuron and dendritic
spine count; EW: provided expertise in flow cytometry and
edited the manuscript; MJC: provided expertise in microglia
biology, supplied transgenic mice used in the study and revised
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
13
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
the manuscript; DC: conceived the experiments and wrote the
manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by UCR School of Medicine start-
up funds to DC; NS071160 and NS072298 to EW; R21AI137830
and R21AI135500 to MN; and AG048099 to MJC. University
of Virginia, Ligand Core is supported by U54-HD28934. The
authors thank Dr. Suzanne Moenter for the GnRH-GFP mice.
We are grateful to Danielle Worth, Abdullah Madany, Hashini
Batugedara, Jordan Koeppen, Jesica Jang, Tyler Landrith, and
Kathryn McGovern for technical expertise and thoughtful
discussion.
REFERENCES
1. The Lancet Public H. Tackling obesity seriously: the time has come. Lancet
Public Health (2018) 3:e153. doi: 10.1016/S2468-2667(18)30053-7
2. NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD-RisC) Trends in adult body-mass
index in 200 countries from 1975 to 2014: a pooled analysis of 1698
population-based measurement studies with 19.2 million participants.
Lancet (2016) 387:1377–96. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30054-X
3. Nelson
SM,
Fleming
R.
Obesity
and
reproduction:
impact
and
interventions.
Curr
Opin
Obstetr
Gynecol.
(2007)
19:384–9.
doi: 10.1097/GCO.0b013e32825e1d70
4. Le Thuc O, Stobbe K, Cansell C, Nahon JL, Blondeau N, Rovere C.
Hypothalamic inflammation and energy balance disruptions: spotlight on
chemokines. Front Endocrinol. (2017) 8:197. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2017.00197
5. Li X, Li X, Fang F, Fu X, Lin H, Gao Q. Is metabolic syndrome
associated
with
the
risk
of
recurrent
stroke:
a
meta-analysis
of
cohort
studies.
J
Stroke
Cerebrovasc
Dis.
(2017)
26:2700–5.
doi: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2017.03.014
6. Agusti A, Garcia-Pardo MP, Lopez-Almela I, Campillo I, Maes M, Romani-
Perez M, et al. Interplay between the gut-brain axis, obesity and cognitive
function. Front Neurosci. (2018) 12:155. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00155
7. Du Plessis SS, Cabler S, McAlister DA, Sabanegh E, Agarwal A. The effect
of obesity on sperm disorders and male infertility. Nature Rev Urol. (2010)
7:153–61. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2010.6
8. Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Ventura SJ, Osterman MJ, Mathews TJ. Births:
final data for 2011. Natl Vital Stat Rep. (2013) 62:1-69, 72.
9. Klenov
VE,
Jungheim
ES.
Obesity
and
reproductive
function:
a
review of the evidence. Curr Opin Obstetr Gynecol. (2014) 26:455–60.
doi: 10.1097/GCO.0000000000000113
10. Talmor A, Dunphy B. Female obesity and infertility. Best Pract Res Clin
Obstetr Gynaecol. (2015) 29:498–506. doi: 10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2014.10.014
11. Mircea CN, Lujan ME, Pierson RA. Metabolic fuel and clinical implications
for female reproduction. J Obstet Gynaecol Can. (2007) 29:887–902.
doi: 10.1016/S1701-2163(16)32661-5
12. Hill JW, Elmquist JK, Elias CF. Hypothalamic pathways linking energy
balance and reproduction. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. (2008) 294:E827–
832. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00670.2007
13. Evans MC, Anderson GM. Neuroendocrine integration of nutritional
signals
on
reproduction.
J
Mol
Endocrinol.
(2017)
58:R107–28.
doi: 10.1530/JME-16-0212
14. Hohos NM, Skaznik-Wikiel ME. High-fat diet and female fertility.
Endocrinology (2017) 158:2407–19. doi: 10.1210/en.2017-00371
15. Manfredi-Lozano M, Roa J, Tena-Sempere M. Connecting metabolism and
gonadal function: novel central neuropeptide pathways involved in the
metabolic control of puberty and fertility. Front Neuroendocrinol. (2018)
48:37–49. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2017.07.008
16. Stojilkovic SS, Krsmanovic LZ, Spergel DJ, Catt KJ. Gonadotropin-
releasing hormone neurons: intrinsic pulsatility and receptor-mediated
regulation. Trends Endo Metab. (1994) 5:201–9. doi: 10.1016/1043-2760(94)
90078-7
17. Kaprara
A,
Huhtaniemi
IT.
The
hypothalamus-pituitary-gonad
axis:
tales
of
mice
and
men.
Metabolism
(2017)
86:3–17.
doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2017.11.018
18. Coss D. Regulation of reproduction via tight control of gonadotropin
hormone
levels.
Mol
Cell
Endocrinol.
(2018)
463:116–30.
doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2017.03.022
19. Miyata S. New aspects in fenestrated capillary and tissue dynamics in the
sensory circumventricular organs of adult brains. FRONT Neurosci. (2015)
9:390. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00390
20. Herbison AE. Control of puberty onset and fertility by gonadotropin-
releasing hormone neurons. Nat Rev Endocrinol. (2016) 12:452–66.
doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2016.70
21. Goodman
RL,
Lehman
MN.
Kisspeptin
neurons
from
mice
to
men: similarities and differences. Endocrinology (2012) 153:5105–18.
doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1550
22. Rivier C, Rivest S. Effect of stress on the activity of the hypothalamic-
pituitary-gonadal axis: peripheral and central mechanisms. Biol Reprod.
(1991) 45:523–32. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod45.4.523
23. Moenter SM. GnRH neurons on LSD: a year of rejecting hypotheses that
may have made karl popper proud. Endocrinology (2018) 159:199–205.
doi: 10.1210/en.2017-03040
24. Gore AC, Patisaul HB. Neuroendocrine disruption: historical roots, current
progress, questions for the future. Front Neuroendocrinol. (2010) 31:395–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2010.07.003
25. Wadas BC, Hartshorn CA, Aurand ER, Palmer JS, Roselli CE, Noel
ML, et al. Prenatal exposure to vinclozolin disrupts selective aspects of
the gonadotrophin-releasing hormone neuronal system of the rabbit.
J
Neuroendocrinol.
(2010)
22:518–26.
doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2826.2010.
01973.x
26. Sharma S, Morinaga H, Hwang V, Fan W, Fernandez MO, Varki N, et al. Free
fatty acids induce Lhb mRNA but suppress Fshb mRNA in pituitary LbetaT2
gonadotropes and diet-induced obesity reduces FSH levels in male mice and
disrupts the proestrous LH/FSH surge in female mice. Endocrinology (2013)
154:2188–99. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-2218
27. Seli E, Babayev E, Collins SC, Nemeth G, Horvath TL. Minireview:
metabolism
of
female
reproduction:
regulatory
mechanisms
and
clinical
implications.
Mol
Endocrinol.
(2014)
28:790–804.
doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1413
28. Quennell JH, Mulligan AC, Tups A, Liu X, Phipps SJ, Kemp CJ, et al. Leptin
indirectly regulates gonadotropin-releasing hormone neuronal function.
Endocrinology (2009) 150:2805–12. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1693
29. Evans MC, Rizwan M, Mayer C, Boehm U, Anderson GM. Evidence
that insulin signalling in gonadotrophin-releasing hormone and kisspeptin
neurones does not play an essential role in metabolic regulation of fertility in
mice. J Neuroendocrinol. (2014) 26:468–79. doi: 10.1111/jne.12166
30. Ratra DV, Elias CF. Chemical identity of hypothalamic neurons engaged by
leptin in reproductive control. J Chem Neuroanatomy (2014) 61–62:233–8.
doi: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2014.05.005
31. Odegaard JI, Chawla A. Pleiotropic actions of insulin resistance and
inflammation
in
metabolic
homeostasis.
Science
(2013)
339:172–7.
doi: 10.1126/science.1230721
32. Lumeng CN, Bodzin JL, Saltiel AR. Obesity induces a phenotypic switch in
adipose tissue macrophage polarization. J Clin Invest. (2007) 117:175–84.
doi: 10.1172/JCI29881
33. Chawla A, Nguyen KD, Goh YP. Macrophage-mediated inflammation in
metabolic disease. Nat Rev Immunol. (2011) 11:738–49. doi: 10.1038/nri3071
34. Olefsky
JM,
Glass
CK.
Macrophages,
inflammation,
and
insulin
resistance.
Annu
Rev
Physiol.
(2010)
72:219–46.
doi: 10.1146/annurev-physiol-021909-135846
35. Dozio E, Ruscica M, Galliera E, Corsi MM, Magni P. Leptin, ciliary
neurotrophic
factor,
leukemia
inhibitory
factor
and
interleukin-6:
class-I cytokines involved in the neuroendocrine regulation of the
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
14
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
reproductive function. Curr. Protein Peptide Sci. (2009) 10:577–84.
doi: 10.2174/138920309789630561
36. Rivest S, Lee S, Attardi B, Rivier C. The chronic intracerebroventricular
infusion of interleukin-1 beta alters the activity of the hypothalamic-
pituitary-gonadal
axis
of
cycling
rats.
I
Effect
on
LHRH
and
gonadotropin biosynthesis and secretion.Endocrinology (1993) 133:2424–30.
doi: 10.1210/endo.133.6.8243260
37. Feleder C, Refojo D, Jarry H, Wuttke W, Moguilevsky JA. Bacterial
endotoxin inhibits LHRH secretion following the increased release of
hypothalamic GABA levels. Different effects on amino acid neurotransmitter
release. Neuroimmunomodulation (1996) 3:342–51. doi: 10.1159/0000
97294
38. Dondi D, Limonta P, Montagnani Marelli M, Piva F. Mechanism of action
of interleukin-1 in modulating gonadotropin secretion. In vivo and in vitro
studies. Biol Signals Recept. (1998) 7:55–60. doi: 10.1159/000014528
39. Tortoriello DV, McMinn J, Chua SC. Dietary-induced obesity and
hypothalamic infertility in female DBA/2J mice. Endocrinology (2004)
145:1238–47. doi: 10.1210/en.2003-1406
40. Montgomery MK, Hallahan NL, Brown SH, Liu M, Mitchell TW, Cooney
GJ, et al. Mouse strain-dependent variation in obesity and glucose
homeostasis in response to high-fat feeding. Diabetologia (2013) 56:1129–39.
doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-2846-8
41. Farrell GC, Mridha AR, Yeh MM, Arsov T, Van Rooyen DM, Brooling J, et al.
Strain dependence of diet-induced NASH and liver fibrosis in obese mice is
linked to diabetes and inflammatory phenotype. Liver Int. (2014) 34:1084–93.
doi: 10.1111/liv.12335
42. Collins S, Martin TL, Surwit RS, Robidoux J. Genetic vulnerability
to
diet-induced
obesity
in
the
C57BL/6J
mouse:
physiological
and
molecular
characteristics.
Physiol
Behav.
(2004)
81:243–8.
doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2004.02.006
43. Wang C-Y, Liao JK. A mouse model of diet-induced obesity and
insulin resistance. Methods Mol Biol. (Clifton, NJ) (2012) 821:421–33.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-430-8_27
44. Breen KM, Thackray VG, Hsu T, Mak-McCully RA, Coss D, Mellon
PL.
Stress
levels
of
glucocorticoids
inhibit
LHbeta-subunit
gene
expression in gonadotrope cells. Mol Endocrinol. (2012) 26:1716–31.
doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1327
45. Suter KJ, Song WJ, Sampson TL, Wuarin JP, Saunders JT, Dudek FE, et al.
Genetic targeting of green fluorescent protein to gonadotropin- releasing
hormone neurons: characterization of whole-cell electrophysiological
properties
and
morphology.
Endocrinology
(2000)
141:412–9.
doi: 10.1210/endo.141.1.7279
46. Gay VL, Midgley AR Jr, Niswender GD. Patterns of gonadotrophin secretion
associated with ovulation. Fed Proc. (1970) 29:1880–7.
47. Haisenleder DJ, Schoenfelder AH, Marcinko ES, Geddis LM, Marshall
JC. Estimation of estradiol in mouse serum samples: evaluation of
commercial estradiol immunoassays. Endocrinology (2011) 152:4443–7.
doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1501
48. Hernandez A, Donovan V, Grinberg YY, Obenaus A, Carson MJ. Differential
detection of impact site versus rotational site injury by magnetic resonance
imaging and microglial morphology in an unrestrained mild closed
head injury model. J Neurochem. (2016) 136:18–28. doi: 10.1111/jnc.
13402
49. Shi Y, Pontrello CG, DeFea KA, Reichardt LF, Ethell IM. Focal adhesion
kinase acts downstream of EphB receptors to maintain mature dendritic
spines by regulating cofilin activity. J Neurosci. (2009) 29:8129–42.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4681-08.2009
50. Dansie
LE,
Ethell
IM.
Casting
a
net
on
dendritic
spines:
the
extracellular matrix and its receptors. Dev Neurobiol. (2011) 71:956–81.
doi: 10.1002/dneu.20963
51. Pontrello CG, Sun MY, Lin A, Fiacco TA, DeFea KA, Ethell IM. Cofilin under
control of beta-arrestin-2 in NMDA-dependent dendritic spine plasticity,
long-term depression (LTD), and learning. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2012)
109:E442–451. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1118803109
52. Sidhu H, Dansie LE, Hickmott PW, Ethell DW, Ethell IM. Genetic
removal
of
matrix
metalloproteinase
9
rescues
the
symptoms
of
fragile X syndrome in a mouse model. J Neurosci. (2014) 34:9867–79.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1162-14.2014
53. Koeppen J, Nguyen AQ, Nikolakopoulou AM, Garcia M, Hanna S, Woodruff
S, et al. Functional consequences of synapse remodeling following astrocyte-
specific regulation of Ephrin-B1 in the adult hippocampus. J Neurosci. (2018)
38:5710–26. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3618-17.2018
54. Campbell RE, Han S-K, Herbison AE. Biocytin filling of adult gonadotropin-
releasing hormone neurons in situ reveals extensive, spiny, dendritic
processes. Endocrinology (2005) 146:1163–9. doi: 10.1210/en.2004-1369
55. Chan H, Prescott M, Ong Z, Herde MK, Herbison AE, Campbell RE.
Dendritic spine plasticity in gonadatropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
neurons activated at the time of the preovulatory surge. Endocrinology (2011)
152:4906–14. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1522
56. Palmer BF, Clegg DJ. The sexual dimorphism of obesity. Mol Cell Endocrinol.
(2015) 402:113–9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.11.029
57. Steppan
CM,
Lazar
MA.
Resistin
and
obesity-associated
insulin
resistance.
Trends
Endocrinol
Metabol.
(2002)
13:18–23.
doi: 10.1016/S1043-2760(01)00522-7
58. Weisberg SP, McCann D, Desai M, Rosenbaum M, Leibel RL, Ferrante AW,
et al. Obesity is associated with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue.
J Clin Invest. (2003) 112:1796–808. doi: 10.1172/JCI200319246
59. De Souza Cu T, Araujo EP, Bordin S, Ashimine R, Zollner RL, Boschero AC,
et al. Consumption of a fat-rich diet activates a proinflammatory response
and induces insulin resistance in the hypothalamus. Endocrinology (2005)
146:4192–9. doi: 10.1210/en.2004-1520
60. Valdearcos M, Robblee MM, Benjamin DI, Nomura DK, Xu AW,
Koliwad SK. Microglia dictate the impact of saturated fat consumption
on hypothalamic inflammation and neuronal function. Cell Rep. (2014)
9:2124–38. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.11.018
61. Dorfman
MD,
Thaler
JP.
Hypothalamic
inflammation
and
gliosis
in obesity. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. (2015) 22:325–30.
doi: 10.1097/MED.0000000000000182
62. Valdearcos M, Douglass JD, Robblee MM, Dorfman MD, Stifler DR, Bennett
ML, et al. Microglial inflammatory signaling orchestrates the hypothalamic
immune response to dietary excess and mediates obesity susceptibility. Cell
Metabol. (2017) 26:185–197.e183. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2017.05.015
63. Mishra SK, Kumar BS, Khushu S, Singh AK, Gangenahalli G. Early
monitoring and quantitative evaluation of macrophage infiltration after
experimental traumatic brain injury: a magnetic resonance imaging
and flow cytometric analysis. Mol Cell Neurosci. (2017) 78:25–34.
doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2016.11.008
64. Kettenmann H, Kirchhoff F, Verkhratsky A. Microglia: new roles for the
synaptic stripper. Neuron (2013) 77:10–8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.12.023
65. Mir
S,
Sen
T,
Sen
N.
Cytokine-induced
GAPDH
sulfhydration
affects PSD95 degradation and memory. Mol. Cell (2014) 56:786–95.
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.10.019
66. Ru W, Tang SJ. HIV-associated synaptic degeneration. Mol Brain (2017)
10:40. doi: 10.1186/s13041-017-0321-z
67. Herde
MK,
Iremonger
KJ,
Constantin
S,
Herbison
AE.
GnRH
neurons
elaborate
a
long-range
projection
with
shared
axonal
and
dendritic
functions.
J
Neurosci.
(2013)
33:12689–97.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0579-13.2013
68. Grove KL, Fried SK, Greenberg AS, Xiao XQ, Clegg DJ. A microarray analysis
of sexual dimorphism of adipose tissues in high-fat-diet-induced obese mice.
Int J Obesity (2010) 34:989–1000. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2010.12
69. Stubbins RE, Holcomb VB, Hong J, Nunez NP. Estrogen modulates
abdominal
adiposity
and
protects
female
mice
from
obesity
and
impaired
glucose
tolerance.
Eur
J
Nutr.
(2012)
51:861–70.
doi: 10.1007/s00394-011-0266-4
70. Sullivan EL, Daniels AJ, Koegler FH, Cameron JL. Evidence in female rhesus
monkeys (Macaca mulatta) that nighttime caloric intake is not associated
with weight gain. Obesity Res. (2005) 13:2072–80. doi: 10.1038/oby.
2005.257
71. Terasawa E. Neuroestradiol in regulation of GnRH release. Horm Behav.
(2018). doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2018.04.003. [Epub ahead of print].
72. Rubinow
KB.
An
intracrine
view
of
sex
steroids,
immunity,
and
metabolic
regulation.
Mol
Metabol.
(2018).
15:92–103.
doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2018.03.001
73. Gubbels Bupp MR. Sex, the aging immune system, and chronic disease. Cell
Immunol. (2015) 294:102–10. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2015.02.002
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
15
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
 Lainez et al.
Obesity Elicits Neuroinflammation and Fewer Synapses
74. Gaignard P, Frechou M, Liere P, Therond P, Schumacher M, Slama A,
et al. Sex differences in brain mitochondrial metabolism: influence of
endogenous steroids and stroke. J Neuroendocrinol. (2018) 30:e12497.
doi: 10.1111/jne.12497
75. Pallier E, Aubert R, Lemonnier D. Effect of diet and ovariectomy on
adipose tissue cellularity in mice. Reprod Nutr Dev. (1980) 20:631–6.
doi: 10.1051/rnd:19800404
76. Shulman
GI.
Ectopic
fat
in
insulin
resistance,
dyslipidemia,
and
cardiometabolic
disease.
N
Engl
J
Med.
(2014)
371:1131–41.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMra1011035
77. Clegg DJ, Brown LM, Woods SC, Benoit SC. Gonadal hormones determine
sensitivity to central leptin and insulin. Diabetes (2006) 55:978–87.
doi: 10.2337/diabetes.55.04.06.db05-1339
78. True C, Abbott DH, Roberts CT Jr, Varlamov O. Sex differences in androgen
regulation of metabolism in nonhuman primates. Adv Exp Med Biol. (2017)
1043:559–74. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-70178-3_24
79. Strissel
KJ,
Stancheva
Z,
Miyoshi
H,
Perfield
JW
II,
DeFuria
J,
Jick
Z,
et
al.
Adipocyte
death,
adipose
tissue
remodeling,
and
obesity
complications.
Diabetes
(2007)
56:2910–8.
doi:
10.2337/
db07-0767
80. Brothers KJ, Wu S, DiVall SA, Messmer MR, Kahn CR, Miller RS, et al.
Rescue of obesity-induced infertility in female mice due to a pituitary-
specific knockout of the insulin receptor. Cell Metab. (2010) 12:295–305.
doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2010.06.010
81. Fernandez MO, Sharma S, Kim S, Rickert E, Hsueh K, Hwang V, et al.
Obese neuronal ppargamma knockout mice are leptin sensitive but show
impaired glucose tolerance and fertility. Endocrinology (2017) 158:121–33.
doi: 10.1210/en.2016-1818
82. Nam KN, Mounier A, Wolfe CM, Fitz NF, Carter AY, Castranio
EL, et al. Effect of high fat diet on phenotype, brain transcriptome
and lipidome in Alzheimer’s model mice. Sci Rep. (2017) 7:4307.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-04412-2
83. Bao J, Lin H, Ouyang Y, Lei D, Osman A, Kim TW, et al. Activity-dependent
transcription regulation of PSD-95 by neuregulin-1 and Eos. Nat Neurosci.
(2004) 7:1250–8. doi: 10.1038/nn1342
84. Ebert
DH,
Greenberg
ME.
Activity-dependent
neuronal
signalling
and
autism
spectrum
disorder.
Nature
(2013)
493:327–37.
doi: 10.1038/nature11860
85. Grachev P, Li XF, Kinsey-Jones JS, di Domenico AL, Millar RP, Lightman
SL, et al. Suppression of the GnRH pulse generator by neurokinin B
involves a kappa-opioid receptor-dependent mechanism. Endocrinology
(2012) 153:4894–904. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1574
86. Xiang W, Zhang B, Lv F, Ma Y, Chen H, Chen L, et al. The inhibitory effects
of RFamide-related peptide 3 on luteinizing hormone release involves an
estradiol-dependent manner in prepubertal but not in adult female mice. Biol
Reprod. (2015) 93:30. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.128777
87. Salehi MS, Khazali H, Mahmoudi F, Janahmadi M. Oxytocin intranasal
administration affects neural networks upstream of GNRH neurons. j Mol
Neurosci. (2017) 62:356–62. doi: 10.1007/s12031-017-0943-8
88. Jasoni CL, Todman MG, Han SK, Herbison AE. Expression of mRNAs
encoding receptors that mediate stress signals in gonadotropin-releasing
hormone neurons of the mouse. Neuroendocrinology (2005) 82:320–8.
doi: 10.1159/000093155
89. Horvath TL, Sarman B, Garcia-Caceres C, Enriori PJ, Sotonyi P, Shanabrough
M, et al. Synaptic input organization of the melanocortin system predicts
diet-induced hypothalamic reactive gliosis and obesity. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. (2010) 107:14875–80. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1004282107
90. Hao S, Dey A, Yu X, Stranahan AM. Dietary obesity reversibly induces
synaptic stripping by microglia and impairs hippocampal plasticity.
Brain
Behav
Immunity
(2016)
51:230–9.
doi:
10.1016/j.bbi.2015.
08.023
91. Bocarsly ME, Fasolino M, Kane GA, LaMarca EA, Kirschen GW, Karatsoreos
IN, et al. Obesity diminishes synaptic markers, alters microglial morphology,
and impairs cognitive function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2015) 112:15731–6.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1511593112
92. Gao Q, Mezei G, Nie Y, Rao Y, Choi CS, Bechmann I, et al. Anorectic
estrogen mimics leptin’s effect on the rewiring of melanocortin cells and Stat3
signaling in obese animals. Nat Med. (2006) 13:89. doi: 10.1038/nm1525
93. Schafer DP, Lehrman EK, Stevens B. The “quad-partite” synapse: microglia-
synapse interactions in the developing and mature CNS. Glia (2013) 61:24–
36. doi: 10.1002/glia.22389
94. Kim E, Cho S. Microglia and Monocyte-Derived Macrophages in Stroke.
Neurotherapeutics (2016) 13:702–18. doi: 10.1007/s13311-016-0463-1
95. London A, Cohen M, Schwartz M. Microglia and monocyte-derived
macrophages:
functionally
distinct
populations
that
act
in
concert
in CNS plasticity and repair. FRONT
Cell
Neurosci. (2013) 7:34.
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00034
96. Thaler JP, Yi CX, Schur EA, Guyenet SJ, Hwang BH, Dietrich MO, et al.
Obesity is associated with hypothalamic injury in rodents and humans. J Clin
Invest. (2012) 122:153–62. doi: 10.1172/JCI59660
97. Dorfman
MD,
Krull
JE,
Douglass
JD,
Fasnacht
R,
Lara-Lince
F,
Meek TH, et al. Sex differences in microglial CX3CR1 signalling
determine obesity susceptibility in mice. Nat Commun. (2017) 8:14556.
doi: 10.1038/ncomms14556
98. Barnes MA, Carson MJ, Nair MG. Non-traditional cytokines: how
catecholamines and adipokines influence macrophages in immunity,
metabolism and the central nervous system. Cytokine (2015) 72:210–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.01.008
99. Osborn O, Olefsky JM. The cellular and signaling networks linking the
immune system and metabolism in disease. Nat Med. (2012) 18:363–74.
doi: 10.1038/nm.2627
100. Hill AA, Reid Bolus W, Hasty AH. A decade of progress in adipose
tissue
macrophage
biology.
Immunol
Rev.
(2014)
262:134–52.
doi: 10.1111/imr.12216
101. Weisberg SP, Hunter D, Huber R, Lemieux J, Slaymaker S, Vaddi K, et al.
CCR2 modulates inflammatory and metabolic effects of high-fat feeding. J
Clin Invest. (2006) 116:115–24. doi: 10.1172/JCI24335
102. Obstfeld AE, Sugaru E, Thearle M, Francisco AM, Gayet C, Ginsberg HN,
et al. C-C chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) regulates the hepatic recruitment of
myeloid cells that promote obesity-induced hepatic steatosis. Diabetes (2010)
59:916–25. doi: 10.2337/db09-1403
103. Lumeng CN, DelProposto JB, Westcott DJ, Saltiel AR. Phenotypic
switching of adipose tissue macrophages with obesity is generated
by spatiotemporal differences in macrophage subtypes. Diabetes (2008)
57:3239–46. doi: 10.2337/db08-0872
104. Fujisaka S, Usui I, Bukhari A, Ikutani M, Oya T, Kanatani Y, et al.
Regulatory mechanisms for adipose tissue M1 and M2 macrophages
in diet-induced obese mice. Diabetes (2009) 58:2574–82. doi: 10.2337/
db08-1475
105. Nakata M, Yamamoto S, Okada T, Yada T. AAV-mediated IL-10 gene
transfer counteracts inflammation in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus
and obesity induced by high-fat diet. Neuropeptides (2017) 62:87–92.
doi: 10.1016/j.npep.2016.11.009
106. Ledeboer A, Breve JJ, Wierinckx A, van der Jagt S, Bristow AF,
Leysen
JE,
et
al.
Expression
and
regulation
of
interleukin-10
and
interleukin-10
receptor
in
rat
astroglial
and
microglial
cells.
Eur
j
Neurosci.
(2002)
16:1175–85.
doi:
10.1046/j.1460-9568.2002.
02200.x
107. Strle K, Zhou JH, Shen WH, Broussard SR, Johnson RW, Freund GG,
et al. Interleukin-10 in the brain. Crit Rev Immunol. (2001) 21:427–49.
doi: 10.1615/CritRevImmunol.v21.i5.20
108. Roland AV, Moenter SM. Regulation of gonadotropin-releasing hormone
neurons
by
glucose.
Trends
Endocrinol
Metab.
(2011)
22:443–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2011.07.001
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Lainez, Jonak, Nair, Ethell, Wilson, Carson and Coss. This is an
open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
with these terms.
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
16
September 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 1992
