 Article
The Rockefeller University Press  
$30.00
J. Exp. Med. 2017 Vol. 214 No. 7 1949–1972
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20161759
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
1949
IntroductIon
Acute respiratory infections are the leading cause of acute 
illness worldwide (Global Burden of Disease Study 2013 Col-
laborators, 2015). Of these, upper respiratory infections are 
estimated at 18.8 billion per yr, and lower respiratory infec-
tions at 150 million per yr. Most upper respiratory infections, 
including common colds that are characterized by runny and 
congested nose, sore throat, and cough, are caused by viruses, 
with human rhinoviruses (HR
V) comprising >100 serotypes 
identified in up to half of cases (Mäkelä et al., 1998; Heikkinen 
and Järvinen, 2003; Byington et al., 2015). Although common 
colds are usually mild and self-limited, they can be compli-
cated by sinus or middle ear infections and croup that also in-
volve other regions of the upper respiratory tract (Greenberg, 
2011). They can also spread to cause lower respiratory tract 
infections such as bronchiolitis and pneumonia, or worsen 
asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Among 
MdA5 is a cytosolic sensor of double-stranded rnA (ds)rnA including viral byproducts and intermediates. We studied a child 
with life-threatening, recurrent respiratory tract infections, caused by viruses including human rhinovirus (HrV), influenza 
virus, and respiratory syncytial virus (rSV). We identified in her a homozygous missense mutation in IFIH1 that encodes MdA5. 
Mutant MdA5 was expressed but did not recognize the synthetic MdA5 agonist/(ds)rnA mimic polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid. 
When overexpressed, mutant MdA5 failed to drive luciferase activity from the IFnB1 promoter or promoters containing ISrE 
or nF-κB sequence motifs. In respiratory epithelial cells or fibroblasts, wild-type but not knockdown of MdA5 restricted HrV 
infection while increasing IFn-stimulated gene expression and IFn-β/λ. However, wild-type MdA5 did not restrict influenza 
virus or rSV replication. Moreover, nasal epithelial cells from the patient, or fibroblasts gene-edited to express mutant MdA5, 
showed increased replication of HrV but not influenza or rSV. thus, human MdA5 deficiency is a novel inborn error of innate 
and/or intrinsic immunity that causes impaired (ds)rnA sensing, reduced IFn induction, and susceptibility to the common 
 
cold virus.
Recurrent rhinovirus infections in a child with inherited 
MDA5 deficiency
Ian T. Lamborn,1,5* Huie Jing,1* 
Yu Zhang,1 Scott B. Drutman,8,9** Jordan K. Abbott,6** Shirin Munir,2 
Sangeeta Bade,10 Heardley M. Murdock,1 Celia P
. Santos,2 Linda G. Brock,2 Evan Masutani,3 
Emmanuel Y
. Fordjour,1 Joshua J. McElwee,11 Jason D. Hughes,11 Dave P
. Nichols,7 Aziz Belkadi,12,13 
Andrew J. Oler,4 Corinne S. Happel,1 Helen F
. Matthews,3 Laurent Abel,8,12,13 Peter L. Collins,2 
Kanta Subbarao,2 Erwin W
. Gelfand,6 Michael J. Ciancanelli,8 Jean-Laurent Casanova,8,12,13,14,15  
and Helen C. Su1,5
1Laboratory of Host Defenses, 2Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, 3Laboratory of Immunology, and 4Bioinformatics and Computational Biosciences Branch,  
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
5Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute for Immunology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
6Immunodeficiency Diagnosis and Treatment Program, Division of Allergy and Immunology and 7Division of Pediatric Pulmonary Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO
8St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
9Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10Medical Science & Computing, LLC, Rockville, MD
11Merck Research Laboratories, Merck and Co, Boston, MA
12Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale UMR1163 and 13Paris Descartes 
University, Imagine Institute, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France
14Pediatric Immuno-Hematology Unit, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, AP-HP, Paris, France
15Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY
This is a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Foreign 
copyrights may apply. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share 
Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms 
/). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike 4.0 International license, as described at https 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/4 
.0 
/).
*I.T. Lamborn and H. Jing contributed equally to this paper.
**S.B. Drutman and J.K. Abbott contributed equally to this paper.
Correspondence to Helen C. Su: hsu@niaid.nih.gov
Abbreviations used: CARD, caspase activation recruitment domains; CTD, C-terminal 
domain; DPBS, Dulbecco’s PBS; (ds)RNA, double-stranded RNA; HRV, human rhi-
novirus; ISRE, IFN-stimulated response element; LTA, lipoteichoic acid; MAF, minor 
allele frequency; MAVS, mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein; MDA5, melanoma 
differentiation-associated protein 5; MOI, multiplicity of infection; poly(I:C), poly-
inosinic-polycytidylic acid; RIG-I, retinoic acid-inducible gene I; RLR, RIG-I-like heli-
case receptors; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; SeV, Sendai virus; UTR, untranslated 
region; WES, whole exome sequencing.
on June 2, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20161759
Published Online: 12 June, 2017 | Supp Info: 
 Rhinovirus susceptibility in human MDA5 deficiency | Lamborn et al.
1950
lower respiratory infections, influenza virus is identified in 
∼4–22% of cases, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) in ∼30–
75%, and HR
V in ∼15–50% (Greenberg, 2011; Pavia, 2011; 
Hasegawa et al., 2014; Jain et al., 2015). Of all commonly cir-
culating respiratory viruses, influenza leads in causing disabil-
ity and death in hospitalized adults, whereas RSV
, followed by 
HR
V
, leads in hospitalized infants and children (Gaunt et al., 
2011). Influenza, RSV
, and HR
V are the three leading causes 
of disease burden in the elderly, further underscoring the 
pathogenic importance of these viruses (Gaunt et al., 2011).
Host immunity to many viruses, including those tar-
geting the respiratory tract, can be initiated in mice by the 
RIG-I-like helicase receptors (RLR) melanoma differentia-
tion-associated protein 5 (MDA5) and retinoic acid-inducible 
gene I (RIG-I). MDA5 and RIG-I, which are encoded by 
the IFIH1 and DDX58 genes, function as intracellular cy-
tosolic sensors of double-stranded (ds)RNA viral replica-
tive intermediates or byproducts. Both sensors send signals 
through the adaptor mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein 
(MAVS, also known as IPS-1, Cardif, and VISA) to activate 
IFN production and IFN-regulated gene transcription. This 
can inhibit virus replication and modulate cellular immune 
responses. MDA5 has a major role in recognizing and limiting 
picornavirus replication in mice and in vitro in human cells 
(Gitlin et al., 2006; Kato et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2009, 2010, 
2011; Slater et al., 2010; McCartney et al., 2011; Triantafilou 
et al., 2011; Jin et al., 2012). 
T
ogether with RIG-I, MDA5 can 
also recognize and limit replication of other positive sense 
single-stranded RNA viruses of the coronavirus, calicivi-
rus, and flavivirus families (Loo et al., 2008; McCartney et 
al., 2008; Roth-Cross et al., 2008; Li et al., 2010; Züst et al., 
2011; Errett et al., 2013), (ds)RNA viruses of the orthoreo-
virus family (Loo et al., 2008), negative sense single-stranded 
(ss)RNA viruses of the paramyxovirus and orthomyxovirus 
families (Kato et al., 2006; Shingai et al., 2007; Gitlin et al., 
2010; Baños-Lara et al., 2013; Grandvaux et al., 2014; Kim 
et al., 2014), and even a DNA virus of the poxvirus family 
(Delaloye et al., 2009; Pichlmair et al., 2009). However, those 
studies were conducted in vivo in MDA5-deficient mice and 
in vitro using mouse and human cells. In contrast, the role 
of MDA5 deficiency in the course of natural infections in 
humans is not yet known.
rESultS
clinical and virologic characterization
We have intensively studied a 5-yr-old child who had recur-
rent viral respiratory infections requiring frequent hospital-
izations (Fig. 1 A; see Clinical description in Materials and 
methods). At birth, she had a suspected congenital infection, 
although prenatal infectious screening was normal. At 40 d 
of age, she had respiratory failure from concurrent HR
V/
enterovirus and influenza B virus infections, which required 
mechanical ventilation, including extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation. Since then, she has been repeatedly infected 
with HR
V/enteroviruses detected in nasopharyngeal secre-
tions and respiratory distress. She had two more episodes of 
influenza A (H3 subtype) and adenovirus, infections with 
three different coronaviruses (OC43, NL63, and HKU1), and 
one episode each of RSV and parainfluenza virus type 4. 
T
ests 
for human metapneumovirus were negative. She continues 
to require supplemental oxygen and had ground glass opac-
ities, but no bronchiectasis on chest-computed tomography. 
She has had bacterial superinfections of the respiratory tract, 
but no opportunistic or chronic systemic virus infection, in-
cluding EBV or CMV
. Although she initially had low serum 
immunoglobulin levels and lymphopenia (effecting T, NK, 
and B cell subsets), these all normalized between 3 and 4 yr 
of age. Replacement immunoglobulin therapy, which started 
at 70 d of age when she was severely ill, was discontinued, 
and she has since responded with functional antibodies to 
tetanus, diphtheria, and Haemophilus influenzae vaccines. An 
older brother died of an unknown infectious cause at age one 
month in a refugee camp. The patient’s parents and two other 
older siblings were healthy.
Because HR
V/enterovirus infection preceded the onset 
of chronic lung disease and HR
V/enterovirus infections fre-
quently precipitated hospitalization, we molecularly typed 
positive samples from the proband. RT
-PCR and sequencing 
of the conserved 5′ UTR used primers that preferentially 
amplify HR
V species A, B, and C and distinguish between 
HR
V and enterovirus (Bochkov et al., 2014). Analysis of 
PCR-amplified products from seven nasopharyngeal samples 
collected sequentially from the patient over a 2-yr window 
demonstrated shedding of HR
V-A, but not -B or -C (Fig. 1, 
B and C). Each sample contained only one HR
V-A serotype 
from 96 clones sequenced, and no two samples (excepting 
“b” and “c” which were collected within five d of each other) 
contained the same serotype. Phylogenetic analysis did not re-
veal any clustering of the identified serotypes (Fig. 1 C). 
Thus, 
the frequent detection of HR
V/enterovirus was not caused 
by defective clearance of individual serotypes, but rather re-
sulted from frequent infection with unrelated HR
V serotypes.
Genetic analysis
Because the patient was from an isolated small people group 
of Burma (Myanmar), we hypothesized an autosomal reces-
sive inheritance with a probable founder effect. 
Whole exome 
sequencing (WES) was performed on the patient and her 
healthy immediate relatives, which revealed 1.8% homozy-
gosity in the patient, 2.7% in the mother, and 2.0% in the 
father. 
These values were within the upper range of eight pre-
viously sequenced exomes from nonconsanguineous individ-
uals (unpublished data) and were consistent with the lack of 
known consanguinity in this family. When suitable filtering 
on the variants was performed, a single homozygous missense 
mutation in IFIH1 NM_022168.3: c.1093A>G, p.K365E 
was identified in the patient and confirmed by Sanger dide-
oxy sequencing (Fig. 2 B; and Tables S1 and S2). This variant 
(rs117608083) was extremely rare, with an average minor al-
lele frequency (MAF) in the Exome Aggregation Consor-
 1951
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
tium (ExAC) database of 0.06%, where it was found mainly in 
East and South Asian populations, although no homozygotes 
were observed. The patient’s missense mutation occurred at 
a location that was conserved across species (PhastCons, 1) 
and under evolutionary constraint (GERP
, 3.96). Substitution 
of glutamate for lysine resulted in loss of physicochemical 
conservation (Grantham score, 56) and was predicted to have 
deleterious effects on protein structure and function (Poly-
Phen2, 0.998). The patient also carried 14 other homozygous 
missense mutations, 2 compound heterozygous missense mu-
tations, and 3 de-novo missense mutations, but of these, the 
IFIH1 mutation was computationally predicted to be most 
deleterious (CADD score of 25, surpassing mutation signif-
icance cutoff threshold for IFIH1 of 19.3; Itan et al., 2016), 
with its normal gene product being highly expressed in im-
mune cells and lung (Table S2). For these reasons, we focused 
our attention on this variant. Both parents and a brother were 
carriers of this mutation (Fig. 2 A).
consequences of the MdA5 mutation
The MDA5 protein encoded by IFIH1 consists of N-terminal 
tandem caspase activation recruitment domains (CARD) 
and a C-terminal domain (CTD), which surround a cen-
tral tripartite helicase core (Wu et al., 2013). MDA5 forms 
a “C”-shaped ring encircling (ds)RNA, such that its mono-
mers stack together along the (ds)RNA stem to form long fil-
aments necessary for recognition of viral RNA. Lysine at 365 
is located in the Hel1 domain of the helicase core (Fig. 2 B), 
where it interacts with the 2’-hydroxyl group of ribose in the 
target RNA backbone (Wu et al., 2013). Substitution with 
glutamic acid introduces a negative charge that is predicted 
to abolish the protein–nucleic acid interaction and MDA5 
Figure 1. Infection history in a human with recurrent respiratory tract infections. (A) Timeline of pathogens recovered from the respiratory tract. 
These were classified as positive single-stranded RNA virus, negative single-stranded RNA virus, double-stranded DNA virus, or bacteria as indicated in the 
adjacent symbol key. (B) RT-PCR molecular typing of RNA isolated from nasopharyngeal samples, using primer sets that preferentially amplify the indicated 
HRV species. Patient’s samples a to h, as indicated in A, were collected between 2 and 4 yr of age. Sample a was negative for respiratory pathogens and h 
positive for influenza A. Purified HRV-B14 and -A16 virus stocks, and a sample from a different subject having respiratory symptoms but negative for HRV/
enterovirus, were also tested. Results are representative of three repeats. (C) Phylogenetic tree based on nucleotide sequences of 5′UTR of HRV isolates 
showing evolutionary relationship of the patient’s samples to closest serotypes and representative HRV species.
 Rhinovirus susceptibility in human MDA5 deficiency | Lamborn et al.
1952
oligomerization (Fig. 2 C). Consistent with our prediction, 
either before or after induction by IFN-α treatment, the 
endogenous MDA5 protein in homozygous mutant patient 
cells was expressed at levels comparable to those in cells from 
healthy controls or heterozygous or homozygous wild-type 
family members (Fig. 2 D and not depicted). Levels of endog-
enous RIG-I or MAVS proteins were unaffected (Fig. 2 D). 
However, when overexpressed in cells that lack endogenous 
protein, mutant MDA5 failed to bind to a synthetic MDA5 li-
gand, poly(I:C) (Fig. 2 E; Gitlin et al., 2006; Kato et al., 2006).
These data suggested that K365E, although normally 
expressed in patient cells, could not assemble to activate 
downstream signals. We therefore overexpressed wild-type or 
mutant MDA5 to test whether they could drive expression 
of luciferase from several promoters. Cells transfected with 
wild-type MDA5 increased baseline IFNB1 promoter activity 
and further augmented IFNB1 promoter activity after stim-
ulation with intracellular poly(I:C) (Fig. 3, A and B). In con-
trast, those cells transfected with the K365E mutant showed 
minimal activity above nontransfected cells, which did not 
increase upon stimulation. K365E also failed to drive lucifer-
ase activity from IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE)– 
and NF-κB-driven promoters (Fig. 3, C and D). Notably, the 
fold induction of luciferase activity of the K365E mutation 
after poly(I:C) stimulation, relative to that at baseline, was 
larger than that of wild-type, suggesting that the defect of 
this mutant lies in MDA5 dimerization or oligomerization 
upon binding or detecting RNA, although we did not test 
this further. Co-transfections of the mutant with wild-type 
MDA5 showed no dominant-negative effect (Fig. 3, E and 
F). Although biallelic loss-of-function mutations in IFIH1 
have not been previously identified in humans, monoallelic 
gain-of-function mutations have been reported in humans 
with Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (Oda et al., 2014; Rice et 
al., 2014; Rodero and Crow, 2016), Singleton-Merton syn-
drome (Rutsch et al., 2015), and systemic lupus erythemato-
Figure 2. Autosomal recessive, homozygous IFIH1 mutation in the proband. (A) Pedigree indicating genotypes. (B) Confirmatory Sanger sequencing. 
Schematic below showing mutation location relative to MDA5 protein domains. (C) Ribbon diagram of the MDA5 structure with close-up showing lysine 
365 interaction with ribose in RNA, and effects of glutamic acid substitution on distances (Å) between charged groups (yellow sphere, positive; red spheres, 
negative). (D) Immunoblot of MDA5, RIG-I, and MAVS proteins, relative to β-actin, in cycling T cells, either untreated or treated for 20 h with IFN-α. NC, 
healthy normal control. Pt, patient. (E) Immunoblot of overexpressed MDA5 (WT or K365E) after affinity precipitation with biotinylated-poly(I:C). D and E 
are representative of four repeats.
 1953
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
sus with IgA deficiency (Van Eyck et al., 2015). Our patient 
had neurodevelopmental delay, but lacked the cerebral calcifi-
cations or white matter abnormalities characteristic of Aicar-
di-Goutières syndrome or congenital infection (unpublished 
data). Moreover, her K365E mutation did not increase lucif-
erase activity, either at baseline or after stimulation, in contrast 
to the known gain-of-function MDA5 mutants R337G or 
R779H (Fig. 2, A, C, and D; Rice et al., 2014). Additionally, 
the patient’s cells did not express a type I IFN transcriptional 
signature characteristic of gain-of-function IFIH1 mutations 
(unpublished data; Rice et al., 2013). Thus, we conclude that 
the K365E missense mutation was loss-of-function.
Virus replication in respiratory epithelial cells
The patient’s infection history suggested that MDA5 might 
function as a general sensor of viruses infecting the respi-
ratory tract in humans, including HR
V
, RSV
, and influenza 
virus. Alternatively, HR
V
, as a member of the picornavirus 
family characterized by a single positive sense strand RNA 
genome, would be more likely to have extended stretches 
of RNA double helices during the generation of viral rep-
licative intermediates that might bind effectively to MDA5 
(Palmenberg et al., 2009). T
o test innate immune responses in 
respiratory epithelium, we infected a transformed respiratory 
epithelial cell line A549, in which genes of the RLR pathway 
were silenced by transient transfection of siRNA. Silencing 
of MDA5, RIG-I, or MAVS expression increased both HR
V 
transcripts and production of infectious virus (Fig. 4, A–F; and 
Fig. S1, A and B). The requirement for MDA5 or MAVS in 
optimal virus control occurred not only for HR
V-B (Fig. 4, 
A–F; and Fig. S1, A and B), but also for HR
V-A in human 
primary fibroblasts (Fig. 4, G and H; and Fig. S1 C). In A549 
cells, HR
V minimally induced low levels of IFN-regulated 
transcripts, which were decreased upon MDA5 silencing, 
consistent with further impairment in virus recognition and 
antiviral responses (Fig. 5, A and B). Both IFN-β (IFNB1) 
Figure 3. loss-of-function IFIH1 muta-
tion. (A, C, and D) Relative increase in nor-
malized luciferase activity driven by the IFNΒ1 
promoter (A), ISRE (C), or NF-κB (D) reporter 
constructs. Cells were cotransfected with WT 
or mutant MDA5, and with (filled) or with-
out (open) transfected poly(I:C) as indicated. 
R337G and R779H are gain-of-function mu-
tants. (B) Immunoblot for MDA5 proteins after 
transient transfection of 20 ng WT or mutant 
K365E MDA5, both under CMV promoters. 
 
(E) Similar to A, except that cells were cotrans-
fected with 20 ng WT MDA5 (under CMV 
promoter) and either K365E MDA5 or empty 
vector (EV; under MSCV promoter). (F) Immu-
noblot for MDA5 proteins in lysates from E. 
Data show means ± SD from four (A and E), 
three (C), and five experiments (D). Data in B 
and F are examples from experiments shown 
in A and C–E, respectively. 293T cells lack en-
dogenous MDA5 expression (not depicted). 
Equivalent lysates from ∼30,000 cells were run 
across lanes. **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 
0.0001, by one-way ANO 
VA.
 Rhinovirus susceptibility in human MDA5 deficiency | Lamborn et al.
1954
and IFN-λ (IFNL3, IL-28) transcripts were decreased upon 
MDA5 or MAVS silencing in primary human fibroblasts 
infected with HR
V (Fig. 5, C–E). Increased HR
V replica-
tion was also observed in primary respiratory nasal epithelial 
cells from the patient as compared with healthy controls or 
her parents (Fig. 6 A and Fig. S1 D). Furthermore, increased 
HR
V replication was observed in SV40-transformed fibro-
blasts in which CRI 
SPR/Cas9 genome editing had been 
used to generate single-cell clones either hemizygous for 
the patient’s mutant IFIH1 allele or completely lacking both 
IFIH1 alleles (Fig. 6 B and Fig. S1 E). Importantly, trans-
duction with wild-type but not mutant K365E MDA5 in 
Figure 4. loss of MdA5 function results in increased replication of HrV in respiratory epithelial cells. (A) HRV transcripts, normalized to nonspe-
cific siRNA negative (siNeg) control at 20 h. HRV-B14–infected (MOI: 1) A549 cells were previously transfected with the indicated siRNA. (B) Immunoblot 
showing efficiencies of MDA5 and RIG-I knockdown in A. Transfected cells were left uninfected or infected with HRV-B14 for 48 h. 120 µg of lysates were 
run per lane. (C) Similar to A, at 48 h after infection and two rounds of transient transfection with the indicated siRNA. (D) Immunoblot showing efficiencies 
of MAVS and MDA5 knockdown in C. (E) HRV transcripts and HRV simultaneously quantitated by infectious plaque assay, at 60 h after HRV-B14 infection. 
(F) Number of HRV reads in RNA-seq data during HRV-B14 infection. A549 cells were previously transfected with MDA5 or nonspecific negative control 
siRNA (siNeg). Mean of triplicate expression ratios from triplicate infections were shown for each time point. (G) HRV transcripts, normalized to nonspecific 
siRNA negative (siNeg) control at 48 h, HRV-A16–infected (MOI: 10). Human primary fibroblasts were previously transfected with the indicated siRNA. (H) 
Immunoblot showing efficiencies of MDA5 and MAVS knockdown in G, except that cells were treated overnight with IFN-α. Data show means ± SD from 
six (A); eight (C), four (E), and seven experiments (G). Representative experiments are shown in B, D, and H. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 
0.0001, by Kruskal-Wallis test (A, C, and G); Mann-Whitney U test in (E); and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (F); other comparisons in A and F were nonsignificant.
 1955
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
A549 cells improved control of HR
V replication (Fig. 6, C 
and D). Thus, these data supported a role for MDA5 in the 
control of HR
V infection in humans and for the patient’s 
recurrent HR
V infections.
Although RIG-I is thought to function as the major sen-
sor for the orthomyxoviruses and paramyxoviruses especially 
in mice, a few studies have suggested a role also for MDA5 
in responding to influenza A/B viruses and RSV (Sirén et 
al., 2006; Loo et al., 2008; Grandvaux et al., 2014; Kim et al., 
2014; Benitez et al., 2015). We investigated these possibilities, 
as the patient had been hospitalized for severe influenza (in-
fluenza B in 2011 and influenza A H3N2 in 2011 and 2014) 
Figure 5. MdA5 effects on IFn response during HrV infection. (A) “Response to type I interferon” genes (GO term GO0034340) versus all genes. 
 
(B) Heatmap representation of RNA-seq data showing HRV-induced IFN-regulated gene transcripts (RPKM) over the course of infection with HRV-B14 
(MOI: 1). Data in A show box-and-whisker plots from triplicate infections. A549 cells were previously transfected with MDA5 or nonspecific negative control 
siRNA (siNeg) and correspond to Fig. 4 F. Mean of triplicate expression ratios from triplicate infections were shown for each time point in B. *, P < 0.05, by 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test in A and B; other comparisons were nonsignificant. (C) IFNB1 transcripts were first normalized to β-actin expression and then 
shown relative to uninfected cells for each siRNA. HRV-A16-infected (MOI: 10) primary human fibroblasts were previously transfected with the indicated 
siRNA. (D) Similar to C, except for IFNL3 (IL-28) transcripts. (E) Immunoblot showing efficiencies of MAVS and MDA5 knockdown in C and D, except that 
cells were treated overnight with IFN-α. Data show means ± SD from four independent experiments in C and D, and a representative experiment in E. 
 
*, P < 0.05, by Kruskal-Wallis test comparing areas under the curves in C and D.
 Rhinovirus susceptibility in human MDA5 deficiency | Lamborn et al.
1956
and RSV infections. We silenced MDA5, RIG-I, or MAVS 
expression by transfecting siRNA in A549 cells, which were 
then infected with a pathogenic influenza A strain (H3N2) 
isolated in 2011. Consistent with the literature using other 
influenza virus strains, silencing of either RIG-I or MAVS 
expression increased influenza transcripts (Fig. 7, A and B; 
and Fig. S1 F). However, silencing of MDA5 did not increase 
influenza virus replication, nor did it produce the notable in-
crease in proinflammatory cytokines observed with silencing 
of RIG-I (Fig. 7, C–F). Infection of primary nasal epithelial 
cells from the patient also did not show any increased influ-
enza virus replication as compared with her parents (Fig. 8 A 
and Fig. S1 G). Production of infectious influenza (H1N1) 
virus was also unaltered in SV40-transformed fibroblasts in 
which CRI 
SPR/Cas9 genome editing had been used to 
generate single-cell clones either hemizygous for the patient’s 
mutant IFIH1 allele or completely lacking both IFIH1 alleles, 
in contrast to the increased virus production in cells lacking 
STAT1 (Fig. 8 B and not depicted). The infected cells that 
were either hemizygous for the patient’s mutant IFIH1 allele 
or completely lacking both IFIH1 alleles did not exhibit in-
creased cytotoxicity or decreased IFN-β production (Fig. 8, 
C and D). Finally, using a recombinant RSV that expresses 
enhanced GFP as a marker of virus replication, we observed 
that silencing MDA5 did not increase RSV transcripts, al-
though it did decrease IFN-regulated transcripts, especially 
at 6 h, which were more rapidly induced to higher levels 
than during HR
V infection (Fig. 9, A–D). Unlike HR
V
, RSV 
transcripts or infectivity and spread were not increased in pri-
mary respiratory nasal epithelial cells from the patient (Fig. 9, 
E and F; and Fig. S1 H). RSV replication was also unaltered 
in gene-edited fibroblasts either hemizygous for the patient’s 
mutant IFIH1 allele or completely lacking both IFIH1 alleles 
(unpublished data). T
ogether, these results show that under 
the same conditions where MDA5 deficiency results in in-
creased HR
V replication, influenza virus and RSV replication 
remain unaffected. Hence, MDA5 has a nonredundant role 
in innate and/or cell-intrinsic immunity against respiratory 
infections caused by HR
V
.
IFIH1 variants at the population level
To explore further whether the IFIH1 variant found in 
our patient was disease-causing, we analyzed the mutation 
burden at this locus in the general population. The ExAC 
database contains 63 loss-of-function (nonsense, splice ac-
ceptor/donor, frameshift) and 392 nonsynonymous mis-
sense IFIH1 variants. Of the loss-of-function variants, five 
had MAF of 0.065% or higher, with homozygotes reported 
for most of these variants. Homozygotes for the three most 
frequent loss-of-function variants (rs35732034, rs35337543, 
and rs35744605) were observed at slightly higher than ex-
pected, frequencies in the Icelandic population (Sulem et 
al., 2015). However, the earliest death of these homozygotes 
was recorded at 81 yr of age, and there were no childhood 
deaths from the offspring of heterozygous couples, which are 
predicted to be 25% homozygotes. No data were available 
regarding the early medical history of these homozygous in-
dividuals, including incidence of childhood HR
V or other 
respiratory virus infections. Given these preexisting data, 
we determined whether nonsynonymous missense IFIH1 
mutations that compromised function had similar popula-
tion-level representations. Missense variants having MAF of 
0.01% and higher were overexpressed and tested for ability 
to drive luciferase expression from an IFNB1 promoter after 
Figure 6. loss of MdA5 function results 
in increased replication of HrV in respi-
ratory epithelial cells and fibroblasts. (A) 
HRV transcripts, normalized to father control 
at 48 h. Primary nasal epithelial cells from the 
patient, parents, and six normal healthy con-
trols were infected with HRV-B14 (MOI: 1) as 
indicated. (B) HRV transcripts in maternal fi-
broblasts, gene-edited to have IFIH1 genotypes 
WT/- (2 clones), WT/K365E (1 clone), K365E/- 
(2 clones), −/− (3 clones), after infection with 
HRV-B14 (MOI: 1). (C) HRV transcripts in A549 
cells previously transduced with empty vector 
(EV), WT, or K365E MDA5, at 72 h after infec-
tion with HRV-B14 (MOI:1). (D) Immunoblot 
showing MDA5 overexpression and compa-
rable RIG-Iexpression in C. 10.5 µg of lysates 
were run per lane. Data show means ± SD from 
two (A), six (B), and five experiments (C). *, P 
< 0.05; ***, P < 0.001 by Kruskal-Wallis test; 
comparisons in B and C were nonsignificant.
 1957
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
stimulation with intracellular poly(I:C), with loss-of-function 
(nonsense, splice acceptor/donor, frameshift) and two known 
gain-of-function variants included for comparison (Fig. 10 
and Table S3). Among the 38 missense variants we tested, 
all showed equivalent protein expression (unpublished data), 
whereas 11 exhibited >40% decreases in luciferase activ-
ity compared with wild-type MDA5, when stimulated by 
transfected poly(I:C). Although variants demonstrating more 
Figure 7. loss of MdA5 function does not affect replication of influenza virus or production of proinflammatory cytokines in respiratory ep-
ithelial cells. (A) Influenza (MOI: 0.1) transcripts, normalized to siNeg control at 24 h. Influenza-infected A549 cells were previously transfected with the 
indicated siRNA. (B) Immunoblotting showing efficiencies of MDA5, RIG-I, and MAVS protein expression, relative to HSP90 loading control, after transient 
transfection with the indicated siRNA into A549 cells. Transfected cells were left uninfected or infected with influenza strain A/Victoria/361/2011 (MOI: 
0.5) for 24 h or treated with IFN-β (10 IU/ml) for 24 h. 20 µg of lysates were run per lane. Shown is a representative experiment corresponding to A. (C–F) 
Proinflammatory gene transcripts quantitated by qRT-PCR from A. Levels of IL-1α (C), IL-6 (D), IL-8 (E), and TNF (F) were normalized to β-actin and are 
shown relative to normalized levels at 8 h after infection. Data show means ± SD from six to seven experiments (A) and three independent experiments in 
(C–F). *, P < 0.05, by Kruskal-Wallis test (A); all other comparisons were nonsignificant.
 Rhinovirus susceptibility in human MDA5 deficiency | Lamborn et al.
1958
severely impaired luciferase activity tended to occur above 
the mutation significance cutoff, activity levels were gen-
erally not well correlated with CADD scores (Fig. 10 A; 
Itan et al., 2016). The experimentally validated variants 
having decreased luciferase activity had MAF ranging from 
0.01 to 1.1%, and were found in homozygote form in as 
many as 22 people (Fig. 10 B and Table S3). Furthermore, 
the presence of complete loss-of-function homozygotes in 
the population was consistent with little purifying selec-
tion. This conclusion was also supported by the computed 
f-value, which estimates the proportion of nondeleterious 
nonsynonymous mutations remaining in the population and 
is inversely proportional to the level of purifying selection 
(Eilertson et al., 2012). Specifically, the f-values for IFIH1 
and the related RLR sensor DDX58 were higher than that 
for STAT1 (0.5968 and 0.4434, respectively vs. 0.1949), sug-
gesting that the RLR sensors are individually nonessential 
for the control of most pathogenic viruses (Deschamps et 
al., 2016). Thus, these data indicate that deleterious IFIH1 
variants exist at rare frequency in the normal population. 
This implies that there are even rarer homozygous or com-
pound heterozygous individuals, further supporting the role 
of MDA5 deficiency in our patient's HR
V disease, which is 
a rare infectious phenotype. These data further suggest that 
other patients with severe HR
V disease may carry bi-allelic 
deleterious variants in IFIH1.
dIScuSSIon
Studies in single patients can establish causality between gen-
otype and phenotype in humans, provided that the mutant 
genotype is only found in the affected patient, the specific 
variant impairs corresponding protein function, and cellular 
Figure 8. loss of MdA5 function does not affect influenza virus replication, or influenza-induced IFn production or cytotoxicity, in respira-
tory epithelial cells or fibroblasts. (A) Influenza transcripts, normalized to father control at 24 h. Primary nasal epithelial cells from the patient, parents, 
and two normal healthy controls were infected with influenza (MOI: 0.02). (B) Influenza virus quantitated by infectious plaque assay, after infection 
(MOI: 1) of SV40-transformed fibroblasts having the indicated genotypes: empty squares, IFIH1−/−; empty inverted triangles, IFIH1K365E/-; solid triangles, 
 
IFIH1K365E/WT; empty circles, STAT1−/−; solid circles or solid squares, healthy controls. (C) IFN-β released into supernatants as measured by ELI 
SA after infec-
tion with influenza strain A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (MOI: 0.37–54). Decreasing MOI of influenza virus correspond to the bars proceeding from left to right for 
each cell line. Sendai Virus (SeV) was included as positive control of IFN induction as the right-most bar for each cell line. Genotypes of SV40-transformed 
fibroblasts are as indicated, with each cell line separated by vertical dotted lines. (D) LDH released into samples from C. Data show means ± SD from four 
experiments (A) and three independent experiments (B) that are representative of 11 experiments with varying MOIs (0.1–30) and three different influenza 
strains (A/Netherlands/602/2009, A/California/4/2009, and A/Puerto Rico/8/1934), and three independent experiments (C and D) that are representative of 
6 and 7 experiments, respectively, in which the MOI were varied.
 1959
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
Figure 9. loss of MdA5 function does not affect rSV replication, whereas affecting rSV-induced IFn-regulated transcripts. (A) Number of RSV 
reads in RNA-seq data during RSV infection. RSV-infected (MOI: 1) A549 cells were previously transfected with MDA5 or nonspecific negative control siRNA 
(siNeg). (B) Immunoblotting showing efficiencies of MDA5 protein expression, after transient transfection of A549 cells with the indicated siRNA, or with-
out transfection (MOCK). Cells were either left uninfected or infected with RSV, as indicated. 20 µg of lysates were run per lane. Shown is a representative 
experiment corresponding to A. (C) “Response to type I interferon” genes (GO term GO0034340) versus all genes, from A. (D) Heatmap representation of 
RNA-seq data showing the expression change between MDA5 siRNA and nonspecific siRNA control of IFN-regulated gene over the course of RSV infection. 
Mean of triplicate expression ratios from triplicate infections were shown for each time point in A, C, and D. (E) RSV transcripts in primary nasal epithelial 
cells from the patient (open bar), parents (hatched bars), and two normal healthy controls (solid bars), normalized to father at 6 h, after RSV-GFP infection 
(MOI: 0.2). (F) Percent GFP+ of gated live RSV-infected cells from (E). Data show means ± SD from four experiments (E and F). *, P < 0.05, by Kruskal-Wallis 
test (C and D); other comparisons were nonsignificant.
 Rhinovirus susceptibility in human MDA5 deficiency | Lamborn et al.
1960
phenotype can be recapitulated or rescued at the molecular 
level (Casanova et al., 2014; Ciancanelli et al., 2015). By 
these criteria, we have shown that human MDA5 protects 
against respiratory infections caused by HR
V
. HR
V accounts 
for a substantial disease burden of acute lower respiratory 
infections requiring hospitalization, especially in infants and 
children where it surpasses that of influenza (Gaunt et al., 
2011). Additionally, HR
V is primarily responsible for half 
of upper respiratory infections, but has not been adequately 
studied as it is often dismissed as innocuous (Heikkinen and 
Järvinen, 2003; Global Burden of Disease Study 2013 Col-
laborators, 2015). This has impeded clinical recognition of 
additional patients with genetic susceptibility to severe re-
spiratory disease associated with the common cold. 
Whether 
MDA5 provides physiological protection against other respi-
ratory viruses that we did not test such as human coronavi-
ruses and adenovirus, or against systemic RNA viruses that 
our patient has not been exposed to such as poliovirus and 
Hepatitis A virus, is not yet known. Interestingly, our patient 
has not had hand-foot-mouth disease, nor has she had de-
tectable nonrespiratory enteroviruses associated with acute 
viral gastroenteritis, possibly due to a differential dependence 
of MDA5 virus-sensing on the virus or cell type, as well as 
protective effects of intravenous immunoglobulin treatment 
that variably contains neutralizing antibodies to enterovi-
ruses (Galama et al., 2000; Arora et al., 2011). The type 1 
diabetes mellitus that she developed at two yr of age might 
have been precipitated by persistent infection with pancrea-
tropic enteroviruses which have been detected in pancreatic 
autopsy specimens from recent-onset disease (Jaïdane et al., 
2010; Rodriguez-Calvo and von Herrath, 2015). Moreover, 
her intrauterine growth retardation was compatible with 
congenital infection by untested viruses that might be poorly 
controlled in multiple organ systems when MDA5 is lack-
ing. Nonetheless, respiratory infections are the most frequent 
type of infection among the general population, and thus, 
exposure history most likely accounts for what seems at first 
glance to be a “site-specific” susceptibility.
Our patient reveals the important protective and nonre-
dundant role MDA5 exerts in the human respiratory tract, 
where it senses and initiates innate immune responses to HR
V
. 
Importantly, by carrying out in vitro infection experiments 
in MDA5-silenced respiratory epithelial cells—and also in 
the patient’s own MDA5-deficient nasal epithelial cells and 
gene-edited fibroblasts—we have established that the MDA5 
genotype is responsible for the increased HR
V replication and 
HR
V clinical phenotype in our patient. In contrast, the lack 
of in vitro susceptibility to influenza virus or RSV in the 
same cell types suggests that the MDA5 genotype is not re-
sponsible for these infections in our patient. These results also 
indicate that, surprisingly, other viruses such as influenza virus 
and RSV
, which have (ds)RNA intermediates or byproducts 
that can be recognized by MDA5, are recognized and con-
trolled by other means when MDA5 is deficient. Although 
it is possible that defective responses to these other viruses 
might occur in other MDA5-deficient cell types, our results 
show that this does not occur at the initial site of infection in 
the lung within respiratory epithelial cells. Additionally, in our 
patient, the decreased incidence of infections with age coin-
cided with the maturation of antibody responses. This ability 
of antibodies to compensate for defective innate immunity 
is similarly observed in other deficiencies of innate immu-
nity. For example, in IRF7 deficiency associated with isolated 
influenza susceptibility, the absence of repeated influenza in-
fection was associated with initiation of annual seasonal in-
fluenza vaccination (Ciancanelli et al., 2015). Moreover, in 
TIR 
AP deficiency associated with isolated staphylococcal 
susceptibility, staphylococcal lipoteichoic acid (LTA)–specific 
antibodies were able to prevent disease by rescuing defective 
TLR2-dependent recognition of LTA (Israel et al., 2017).
HR
V is generally considered relatively nonpathogenic 
when additional factors such as respiratory co-infection or 
Figure 10. Functional activity of population-level missense variants in IFIH1. (A) IFNB1-driven luciferase activity of overexpressed IFIH1 variants, 
measured as means % of the wild-type from at least three independent experiments, plotted against CADD score (A) or MAF (B). Black, missense variants. 
Orange, patient K365E variant. Red, loss-of-function (nonsense, splice acceptor/donor, frameshift) variants. Blue, gain-of-function variants. MSC, mutation 
significance cutoff. Variant information with corresponding plotted values (100 ng of construct) are presented in Table S3.
 1961
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
underlying respiratory disease are absent. Thus, unlike other 
primary immunodeficiencies characterized by susceptibility 
to highly pathogenic microbes, the lack of strong purifying 
selection is not unexpected for MDA5. It is still possible 
that heterozygous variants that impair activity also exert 
protective advantage as has been suggested by genome-wide 
association studies of type 1 diabetes mellitus (Smyth et al., 
2006; Nejentsev et al., 2009). As shown by our knockdown 
experiments, MDA5 function appears to be partially redun-
dant with RIG-I function for controlling HR
V replication, 
where other sensors can contribute to protection when 
MDA5 function is lacking. Although other genetic variants 
in the patient might have contributed to her susceptibility 
to influenza virus or RSV
, this seems less likely since rep-
lication of influenza virus or RSV in her nasal epithelial 
cells was comparable to that in cells from healthy controls. 
Alternatively, it instead seems possible that in the setting of 
chronic lung disease— which is probably multifactorial from 
ventilator-induced lung injury, recurrent HR
V infections in 
infancy, or other cofactors—secondary complications in-
cluding susceptibility to other viruses such as influenza and 
RSV and bacterial superinfections ensued. Thus, in some 
individuals, a selective genetic susceptibility to HR
V could 
under certain circumstances contribute more broadly to the 
pathogenesis of severe respiratory disease during childhood. 
Furthermore, in light of the known association of HR
V 
infections as a trigger of asthma exacerbations, it will be 
interesting to explore whether loss-of-function mutations 
in IFIH1 are associated with worsened asthma outcome in 
susceptible individuals.
MAtErIAlS And MEtHodS
Patients
Whole blood, serum, skin biopsies, and nasal airway epithe-
lial scrapings were obtained from the patient, her relatives, 
or paid healthy volunteers. These individuals gave written 
informed consent to participate in research protocols ap-
proved by Institutional Review Boards at the National Insti-
tute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and National Jewish 
Health, which are registered in ClinicalTrials.gov under 
NCT00246857, NCT00128973, and NCT00895271. Buffy 
coat cells, which were byproducts of volunteer donor blood 
units, were distributed in an anonymized manner, and thus 
were exempted from need for informed consent and Institu-
tional Review Board review.
rhinovirus molecular typing
TRIzol LS reagent (Ambion) was used to extract total RNA 
from 350 µl of nasopharyngeal washes/aspirates obtained 
from patients or anonymized controls, or from laboratory 
virus preparations. 20 µl RNA was reverse-transcribed using 
a high-capacity cDNA reverse transcription kit with RNase 
inhibitor (Applied Biosystems). PCR was performed as de-
scribed previously (Bochkov et al., 2014), except that 32 cy-
cles of a single round of PCR amplification were performed 
in a 25 µl volume using 2 µl cDNA template and 0.5 µM 
of forward and reverse primers. The previously published 
primers, which were relatively species-specific, were used for 
amplification of the 5′UTR of Rhinovirus (5′UTRn-A1, 
5′UTRn-A2, 5′UTRn-B1, and 5′UTRn-Cc, 5′UTR-rev). 
The PCR-amplified products were resolved by electropho-
resis on 2% agarose gel. PCR-amplified products were also 
purified by QIAquick Gel Extraction kit (QIA 
GEN) and 
cloned using 
TOPO 
TA Cloning kit for Sequencing (Invitro-
gen). Plasmid DNA were isolated from transformed TOP10 
E. coli colonies using the R.E.A.L. Prep 96 Plasmid kit 
 
(QIA 
GEN). For each PCR product, 96 cloned inserts were 
Sanger dideoxy sequenced using plasmid-specific M13 For-
ward and Reverse primers. Sequences were analyzed using 
Sequencher 5.1 software, and BLA 
ST searches of GenBank 
 
sequences were performed to identify the virus sero-
type. The phylogenetic analysis was performed using the 
UPG 
MA method of MEGA 7 software, and all positions con-
taining gaps and missing data were eliminated. The phyloge-
netic trees were drawn to scale, with branch lengths in the 
same units as those of the evolutionary distances used to infer 
the phylogenetic tree. The evolutionary distances were com-
puted using the Maximum Composite Likelihood method 
and are in the units of the number of base substitutions per 
site. 
The NCBI HR
V reference sequences included in the tree 
are HR
V-A89 (NC_001617.1), HR
V-B14 (NC_001490.1), 
and HR
V-C (NC_009996,1).
Genomic analyses
Genomic DNA from the patient and family members were 
isolated from PBMC using the DNeasy kit (QIA 
GEN). 
Whole exome sequencing, using SureSelect Human All 
Exon 50 Mb kit (Agilent Technologies) coupled with mas-
sively parallel sequencing by Illumina HiSeq Sequencing 
System, was performed using 3 µg of genomic DNA col-
lected from patient, both parents, and an unaffected sister. 
Sequenced DNA reads were mapped to the hg19 human 
genome reference by Burrows-Wheeler Aligner with de-
fault parameters. Single-nucleotide variant and indel calling 
were performed using the Genome Analysis Toolkit (Broad 
Institute). All SNVs/indels were annotated by SeattleSeq 
Annotation, and an in-house custom analysis pipeline was 
used to filter and prioritize for nonsynonymous and novel/
rare variants (MAF < 0.001) under autosomal recessive or 
de novo genetic models. UCSC gene sorter Microarray data 
(GNF Expression Atlas 2 Dta from U133A and GNF1H 
chips) and Illumina Human BodyMap RNA-seq data were 
used to prioritize variants for functional validation. For 
confirmation of IFIH1 mutations and genotyping of the 
brother, genomic DNA was PCR-amplified using forward 
primer 5′-CAA 
TGA 
CAC 
AAA 
TGC 
CAT 
CA-3′ and reverse 
primer 5′-CAG 
GGA 
GTG 
GAA 
AAA 
CCA 
GA-3′. Sanger 
dideoxy sequencing of purified PCR-amplified products 
was performed by the Genomics Unit of the Rocky Moun-
tain Laboratories Research Technologies Section of the 
 Rhinovirus susceptibility in human MDA5 deficiency | Lamborn et al.
1962
NIA 
ID. The WES data were deposited under dbGaP acces-
sion no. phs001235.v1.p1.
Homozygosity was computed as the proportion of 
the autosomal genome belonging to runs of homozygosity. 
The runs of homozygosity were defined as ranging at least 
1 Mb in length and containing at least 100 SNPs, and were 
estimated using the homozyg option of the PLI 
NK software 
(Purcell et al., 2007). 
The centromeres were excluded because 
they are long genomic stretches devoid of SNPs and their in-
clusion might inflate estimates of homozygosity if both flank-
ing SNPs were homozygous. The length of the autosomal 
genome was fixed at 2,673,768 kb, as previously described 
(McQuillan et al., 2008).
Molecular modeling
Molecular dynamics simulations were performed using the 
Assisted Model Building with Energy Refinement (AMB 
ER14) simulation package (Case et al., 2015) with GPU 
acceleration (Salomon-Ferrer et al., 2013). The FF99SB 
all-atom potential (Hornak et al., 2006) was used along 
with parameters for ATP (Meagher et al., 2003) and 
Zn2+ (Li et al., 2013). Starting with the crystal structure 
of MDA5 (Protein Data Bank ID 4GL2; Wu et al., 2013), 
ANP was changed to ATP and lysine at position 365 was 
mutated to glutamic acid in PyMol (The PyMol Molec-
ular Graphics System, Version 1.7.2.1; Schrödinger, LLC). 
The system was protonated in tleap, solvated with TIP3P 
explicit water in a periodic truncated octahedron extend-
ing 10A beyond the MDA5 complex, neutralized with 
Na+, and brought to ∼150 mM of sodium chloride by 
randomly exchanging solvent molecules with Na+ or Cl−. 
The system was then subjected to energy minimization 
with diminishing harmonic restraints, followed by heating 
from 100K to 303K over 30 ps at constant volume with 
a Berendsen thermostat. Production runs were generated 
by switching the heated system to a constant pressure and 
temperature ensemble and allowing the system to equil-
ibrate over 120 ps. All simulations were run in triplicate 
using the SHA 
KE algorithm.
Primary t cells
PBMCs were isolated by density centrifugation through Fi-
coll-Hypaque PLUS (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). Pan T 
cells were isolated by negative selection using Pan T Cell 
Isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotec) to ≥98% purity. Pan T cells 
were stimulated with anti-CD2/CD3/CD28 coated beads 
from the T Cell Activation/Expansion kit (Miltenyi Biotec), 
at a bead to cell ratio of 1:1. T cells were cultured in RPMI 
medium supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco), 100 U/ml 
recombinant human IL-2 (Aldesleukin, Prometheus), 2 mM 
l-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin 
(all from Gibco), and 55 µM 2-ME (Sigma-Aldrich). Where 
indicated, previously activated cycling T cells were treated 
with 100 IU/ml recombinant human IFN-alpha-2b (Intron 
A; Merck) for 20 h to induce MDA5 expression.
Primary and SV40-transformed fibroblasts
Fibroblasts were isolated from skin punch biopsies, as previ-
ously described (Jing et al., 2014). In brief, dermal and epi-
dermal layers were dissociated after overnight incubation of 
biopsy tissue with Dispase (BD). The dermis was minced and 
cultured in complete DMEM-Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle 
Medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM l-glu-
tamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin (all from 
Gibco), and 55 µM 2-ME (Sigma-Aldrich) to allow fibroblasts 
to grow out. Where indicated, human primary fibroblasts 
were treated with 100 IU/ml recombinant human IFN- 
alpha-2b (Intron A; Merck) overnight to induce MDA5 ex-
pression. Fibroblasts isolated from a healthy normal donor or 
the patient’s mother were used for IFIH1 genome editing. Cells 
from the patient’s mother were used to generate wild-type/
null, mutant (c.1093A>G, p.K365E)/null, and null/null gen-
otypes. U6gRNA-Cas9-2A-GFP plasmids (HS0000455078; 
Sigma-Aldrich) were transfected into the fibroblasts using the 
P3 Primary Cell 96-well Nucleofector kit with Nucleofec-
tor Program 96-DT
-130 (Lonza). 3 d after transfection, cells 
highly expressing GFP were single-cell sorted into 96-well 
plates using a FAC 
SAria Fusion cell sorter (BD) and cultured 
until confluent. Cells from the patient’s mother, or from a 
healthy normal donor that had not undergone genome edit-
ing were also single-cell sorted and cultured in parallel for use 
as controls. Genotypes for each genome-edited clone were 
screened by agarose gel electrophoresis of PCR amplified 
products using forward primer 5′-AAA 
GGG 
GAA 
ATA 
CGG 
AAT 
TGG-3′ and reverse primer 5′-GAG 
TCA 
ATG 
ACA 
CAA 
ATG 
CCA 
TC-3′, followed by confirmation by Sanger 
dideoxy sequencing. Three to five clones each of IFIH1 gen-
otypes wild-type/null, mutant/null, wild-type/mutant, and 
null/null were selected and expanded for experiments.
T
o generate SV40-transformed fibroblast lines, 3 × 106 
primary dermal fibroblasts were electroporated in 400 µl of 
complete DMEM with 3 µg of pLAS plasmid (de Chasseval 
and de Villartay, 1992) in a 0.4-cm cuvette using the Gene 
Pulser II electroporation system (1 pulse; 250 V
, 1,400 µF
, re-
sistance = ∞; Bio-Rad Laboratories). Cells were divided into 
three 75 cm2 flasks and monitored 1 to 2 wk for outgrowth of 
rapidly growing colonies. Cultures were then passaged more 
than four times to ensure elimination of primary fibroblasts. 
STAT1-deficient SV40-transformed fibroblasts were de-
scribed previously (Chapgier et al., 2006).
Primary nasal epithelial cells
Nasal airway epithelial cells were collected from the lower 
surface of the inferior nasal turbinate using a sterile cytology 
brush (Cytosoft; Medical Packaging Corporation) as previ-
ously described (Poole et al., 2014; Reynolds et al., 2016). Cells 
were placed in Ham’s F-12 medium (Gibco) supplemented 
with 10% DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich), 30% heat inactivated FBS 
(Gibco), and 0.1% Y
-27632 Rho kinase inhibitor (ApexBio). 
The collection medium was also supplemented with 1.25 
µg/ml amphotericin B (Sigma-Aldrich), 2 µg/ml fluconazole 
 1963
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
(Gallipot), and 50 µg/ml gentamicin (Gibco). Cells were 
stored cryopreserved until needed for culture, using adapted 
methods that combined use of an irradiated fibroblast feeder 
layer and Rho kinase inhibition (Suprynowicz et al., 2012). 
The major modification was the use of irradiated 3T3 fibro-
blasts (ATCC) as the feeder cell layer. Nasal airway epithelial 
cells were cultured in 
T75 flasks to ∼80% confluence and har-
vested using the previously described multistep trypsinization 
procedure (Suprynowicz et al., 2012). Harvested cells were 
cryopreserved using the aforementioned medium but without 
antibiotic supplementation. Cells of the same passage number 
and no greater than passage three were used for experiments.
other cell lines
The human embryonic kidney 293T cell line (ATCC) was 
cultured in DMEM medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% 
FBS (Gibco or Hyclone), 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/ml pen-
icillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin (all from Gibco), and 55 µM 
2-ME (Sigma-Aldrich) for all experiments, or Iscove’s Modi-
fied Dulbecco’s Medium (IMDM; Gibco) supplemented with 
10% FBS (Gibco or Hyclone) and 55 µM 2-ME (Sigma- 
Aldrich) for lentivirus production. The monkey kidney cell 
line 
Vero E6 (ATCC) was cultured in DMEM supplemented 
with 10% FBS, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 
µg/ml streptomycin, and 55 µM 2-ME. The lung epithelial 
carcinoma cell line A549 (ATCC) was cultured in F-12K 
medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM glu-
tamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and 
55 µM 2-ME. The H1-HeLa cell line (gift from W
.-M. Lee, 
Biological Mimetics, Inc., Frederick, MD) was cultured in 
MEM suspension medium with Earle’s salts and no calcium 
(Gibco), supplemented with 10% FBS (Hyclone), 1x MEM 
nonessential amino acids, 2 mM l-glutamine, 100 U/ml 
penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, 0.1% Pluronic F-68 (all 
from Gibco), and 55 µM 2-ME (Sigma-Aldrich). H1-Hela 
cells were maintained in suspension by growth at 37°C on an 
incubator shaker set at 230 rpm. The Madin-Darby Canine 
Kidney (MDCK; ATCC) cell line was cultured in DMEM 
medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco).
Immunoblotting
5 million cells were lysed in 2% SDS or LDS sample loading 
buffer (Pierce), with 5% 2-ME (Sigma-Aldrich), and heated 
to 95°C for 10 min. Proteins contained within the super-
natants were quantified by BCA (Pierce). Unless otherwise 
indicated, 40 µg of protein were loaded per lane and were 
separated on NuPAGE Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gels with MOPS 
running buffer (Invitrogen), followed by semi-dry transfer 
onto nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad Laboratories). After 
blocking with 5% nonfat dry milk (Bio-Rad Laboratories) in 
PBS containing 0.1% T
ween 20 (Sigma-Aldrich), membranes 
were incubated with the antibodies directed against MDA5 
(clone #D74E4), RIG-I (clone #D14G6), MAVS (clone 
#3993; all from Cell Signaling T
echnologies), β-actin (clone 
#AC-15; Sigma-Aldrich), and HSP90 (clone 68; BD). Signal 
was detected by incubation with appropriate HRP-conju-
gated secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch Lab-
oratories or Southern Biotech), followed by application of 
SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent substrate or Su-
perSignal West Dura Extended Duration Substrate (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific) and exposing to film.
Plasmids and molecular cloning
Firefly luciferase plasmid driven by the human IFN-β pro-
moter (IFNB-pGL3; Promega; Lin et al., 2000) and the 
constitutively expressed Renilla luciferase reporter plas-
mid (pRL-TK; Promega) were gifts from Y
. He (National 
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 
Bethesda, MD). The firefly luciferase plasmids driven by the 
IFN-stimulated response element (pGL4.33-luc2P/ISRE/
Hygro; Promega) and the NF-κB response element lucif-
erase (pGL4.32-luc2P/NF-κB-RE/Hygro; Promega) were 
modified to express GFP instead of the hygromycin resis-
tance cassette. In brief, pGL4.33-luc2P/ISRE/Hygro and 
pGL4.32-luc2P/NF-κB-RE/Hygro plasmids were digested 
with BamHI and NotI (New England Biolabs) and gel- 
purified (QIAquick Gel Extraction kit; QIA 
GEN) to remove 
the hygromycin resistance cDNA. The coding sequence of 
EGFP was PCR-amplified from pcDNA3-EGFP (Addgene 
#13031) using AccuPrime Pfx SuperMix (Invitrogen) and 
subcloned into the linearized vector backbones using the 
In-Fusion HD Cloning kit (Clontech), to generate pGL4.33-
luc2P/ISRE/EGFP and pGL4.32-luc2P/NF-κB-RE/EGFP
.
pCL20c MSCV-GFP-T2A is a modified version of 
the lentiviral transfer vector pCL20c MSCV-GFP (Hanawa 
et al., 2004). In brief, a self-cleavage T2A peptide sequence 
plus additional restriction sites were added in-frame to the 
3′ end of the GFP cDNA from pCL20c MSCV-GFP
. This 
was accomplished by PCR amplification of pCL20c MSCV-
GFP using AccuPrime Pfx SuperMix (Invitrogen) with for-
ward primer 5′-CTA 
GGC 
GCC 
GGA 
ATT 
ACC 
GGT 
GGC 
CGG 
CCG 
CGG 
GCC 
ACC 
ATG 
GTG 
AGC 
AAG 
GGC 
GAG 
GAG-3′ and reverse primer 5′-GGC 
ATC 
GAT 
GCG 
GCC 
GCA 
TGC 
TCA 
CCT 
GCA 
GGG 
GCC 
GGG 
GTT 
CTC 
CTC 
CAC 
GTC 
GCC 
GCA 
GGT 
CAG 
CAG 
GCT 
GCC 
CCG 
GCC 
CTC 
CTT 
GTA 
CAG 
CTC 
GTC 
CAT 
GCC 
GAG 
AGT 
GAT 
CC-3′. The PCR-amplified product was resolved by agarose 
gel electrophoresis, gel-purified (QIAquick Gel Extraction 
kit; QIA 
GEN), and ligated using the In-Fusion HD Cloning 
kit (Clontech) into the EcoRI- and NotI-digested (New En-
gland Biolabs) and gel-purified vector backbone of pCL20c 
MSCV-GFP (digested and purified to remove the original 
GFP and multiple cloning site).
The lentiviral transfer vector pLenti-III-UbC/mCherry 
was generated by replacing the puromycin resistance cDNA 
in pLenti-III-UbC with mCherry cDNA from pLenti-PGK-
mCherry (both from Applied Biological Materials). The 
mCherry cDNA was PCR-amplified with primers that ap-
pended 15 bp that are homologous with the pLenti vector. 
pLenti-III-UbC/Puro was linearized by restriction digest 
 Rhinovirus susceptibility in human MDA5 deficiency | Lamborn et al.
1964
with BsiWI. Homologous recombination of the linearized 
vector and mCherry cDNA was performed by mixing the 
vector, cDNA, and Cold Fusion Cloning kit master mix (Sys-
tem Biosciences) as per the manufacturer’s protocol.
Human IFIH1 sequence-verified cDNA was purchased 
from Open Biosystems (clone ID: 40008600) and subcloned 
into pcDNA3.1 (Invitrogen), pCL20 MSCV GFP T2A 
(immediately 3′ to T2A sequence), and pLenti-III-UbC/
mCherry (under the ubiquitin C promoter) mammalian 
expression plasmids using the In-Fusion HD Cloning kit 
(Clontech). Site-directed mutagenesis was used to generate 
constructs encoding the MDA5 mutants K365E, gain-of-
function mutants R337G and R779H, and 38 other MDA5 
constructs containing point mutations found in ExAC data-
base with MAF ranging from 0.01 to 9.3%. In brief, wild-
type MDA5-expressing plasmids were PCR-amplified using 
AccuPrime Pfx SuperMix (Invitrogen) and primers contain-
ing appropriate point mutations (Table S3). 
This was followed 
by Dpn1 digestion (New England Biolabs) and transforma-
tion into 
TOP10 competent cells (Invitrogen). Constructs en-
coding MDA5, skipping either Exon 8 or Exon 14 because 
of splicing mutations, were generated using In-Fusion HD 
Cloning kit. Plasmid DNA was purified using the PureLink 
HiPure Filter Plasmid kit (Invitrogen), and the introduced 
mutations were confirmed by Sanger dideoxy sequencing.
Affinity precipitations
500,000 293T cells were seeded per well in tissue cul-
ture-treated 6-well plates (Corning). 12–16 h later, cells were 
transfected with 4 µg of pCL20c MSCV GFP-T2A-WT 
MDA5, pCL20c MSCV GFP-T2A-K365E MDA5, or 
pmaxGFP (Lonza), complexed with Lipofectamine 2000 
(Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s recommenda-
tions. 48 h later, cells were lysed in 0.05% Nonidet P-40 
(Calbiochem), 20 mM Hepes, 1.5 mM magnesium chloride 
(both from Quality Biological), 150 mM sodium chloride, 
0.038% of 2-ME (both from Sigma-Aldrich), and 1x cOm-
plete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). After 
incubating on ice for 20 min, cell lysates were mechanically 
disrupted by passing through a 25-gauge needle 10 times. 
Lysates were centrifuged at 13,200 g for 15 min at 4°C, be-
fore collecting supernatants. Proteins contained within the 
supernatants were quantified by BCA (Thermo Fisher Sci-
entific). β,γ-methyleneadenosine 5′-triphosphate (ADP 
CP; 
Sigma-Aldrich) was added to 2 mg of protein to a final con-
centration of 2 mM before adding 1 µg of biotin-labeled 
high molecular weight (HMW) poly(I:C) (InvivoGen). After 
incubating at 37°C for 10 min, the mixture was added to 
M-270 hydrophilic streptavidin Dynabeads (Invitrogen) that 
had been preblocked for 20 min at 4°C with 600 µg to 1 
mg of lysate from pmaxGFP-transfected (Lonza) control 
293T cells. After incubation at 4°C for 3 min, the beads were 
washed three times with lysis buffer containing 2 mM ADP 
CP
. MDA5 protein was eluted by incubating at 95°C for 5 
min in 2X SDS buffer protein gel loading solution (Quality 
Biological) supplemented with 0.3 M sodium chloride and 
5% vol/vol 2-ME. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, 
and immunoblotting for MDA5 was performed as described 
in the Immunoblotting section.
luciferase reporter gene assays
50–100,000 293T cells were seeded per well in 24-well tissue 
culture plates. After culture for 18–24 h to ∼70–80% conflu-
ency, Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) was used for co-trans-
fections of cells with pcDNA3.1 mammalian expression 
plasmids expressing wild-type MDA5 and/or mutants (20 
ng or 100 ng), a firefly luciferase reporter plasmid (200 ng) 
driven by human IFN-β promoter, and a constitutively ex-
pressed Renilla luciferase reporter plasmid (20 ng). For some 
experiments, firefly luciferase reporter plasmids driven by the 
interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) or NF-κB re-
sponse element were instead used. In dominant interference 
experiments, 20 ng pcDNA3.1 plasmid expressing wild-type 
MDA5, 100 ng pCL20 MSCV plasmid expressing GFP-
T2A-K365E MDA5, and/or 100 ng pCL20 MSCV plas-
mid expressing GFP-T2A (empty vector) were transfected, 
along with luciferase reporter plasmids. 6 h later, cells were 
stimulated with a mixture of 1.2 µg high molecular weight 
poly(I:C) (InvivoGen) complexed with 1.5 µl Lipofectamine 
2000 in 100 µl Opti-MEM I reduced serum medium (Gibco), 
added to cells for an additional 18–24 h before lysis. 
The Dual 
Luciferase Reporter assay (Promega) was used on a Fluostar 
Omega plate reader (BMG Labtech) to measure luciferase ac-
tivities contained in cell lysates. Firefly luciferase activity was 
normalized to Renilla luciferase activity. Fold-increase in the 
normalized activity in MDA5-transfected cells was reported 
relative to normalized activity in untransfected cells.
HrV stocks
Virus stocks were prepared from HR
V-B14 and HR
V-A16 
seed stocks (a gift from W
.-M. Lee) as previously described 
(Lee et al., 2015a). In brief, H1-HeLa cells were maintained in 
suspension at 37°C using an incubator shaker set at 230 rpm. 
Cells were cultured in MEM suspension medium with Earle’s 
salts and no calcium (sMEM; GIB 
CO BRL #11380-037), 
supplemented with 10% FBS (Hyclone), 1x MEM nonessen-
tial amino acids, 2 mM l-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 
µg/ml streptomycin, and 0.1% Pluronic F-68 (Gibco). Cells 
were incubated with high-titer HR
V-B14 at a multiplicity of 
infection (MOI) of 15, in Dulbecco’s PBS (DPBS) containing 
calcium and magnesium (Lonza) for 1 h at room temperature. 
After adsorption, infected H1-HeLa cells were cultured in 
complete medium for an additional 8 h at 35°C, with shaking 
at 120 rpm. Cell pellets were subjected to three freeze-thaw 
cycles in 10 mM Hepes, pH 7.2 (Quality Biological), and 0.5% 
Nonidet P-40 (Calbiochem) added before lysates were clar-
ified by high-speed centrifugation. After incubating clarified 
lysates with 400 µg RNase A (Invitrogen) for 30 min at 35°C, 
0.9% N-laurylsarcosine (Sigma-Aldrich) and 28.5 µM 2-ME 
(Sigma-Aldrich) were added. Virions were concentrated and 
 1965
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
partially purified by ultracentrifuging for 2 h at 40,000 rpm, 
16°C, over a 30% (wt/vol) sucrose cushion (Sigma-Aldrich) 
containing 16.7 mM 
Tris acetate pH 7.5 (Sigma-Aldrich) and 
0.833 M sodium chloride (Quality Biological). 
The virus pel-
let was resuspended in DPBS containing calcium and mag-
nesium, with 0.01% BSA fraction V (Sigma-Aldrich). Virus 
aliquots were stored at –80°C until use.
HrV plaque assay
Plaque assays quantitating infectious HR
V were performed as 
previously described, with modifications (Lee et al., 2015b). 
In brief, HR
V-B14 virus stock or cell supernatants were se-
rially diluted in DPBS containing calcium, magnesium, and 
0.1% BSA fraction V (Sigma-Aldrich). 200 µl diluted sam-
ples were added in duplicate to confluent monolayers of H1-
HeLa cells in 6-well plates. After virus adsorption for 1 h at 
room temperature, the cells were overlaid with 0.8% Noble 
agar (Sigma-Aldrich) in 1x P6 medium (1x sMEM [Gibco], 
26.2 mM sodium bicarbonate, 40.6 mM magnesium chlo-
ride hexahydrate, and 0.1% BSA fraction 
V [Sigma-Aldrich]). 
Nutritive medium was then overlaid to obtain final con-
centrations of 1x P6 medium, 2 mM l-glutamine (Gibco), 
1.2 mM pyruvic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), 2 mM oxaloacetic acid 
 
(Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.1% glucose (Corning). After incuba-
tion at 35°C for 2 to 3 d, monolayers were fixed with 10% 
buffered formalin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min at room tem-
perature, overlaid agar removed, and plaques visualized by 
staining with 0.1% crystal violet (Sigma-Aldrich) in 20% eth-
anol for 1 h. Plaques were counted and calculated as PFU/ml 
of original virus stock or cell supernatant.
HrV Infections
For in vitro infections, A549 cells, seeded at 100,000 per well 
in 12-well tissue culture plates 1 d prior, were transfected 
when ∼50–70% confluent with Stealth siRNA to MDA5 
(HSS127414), RIG-I (HSS119008), and nonsilencing nega-
tive control (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 nM in triplicate 
wells using siLentFect transfection reagent (Bio-Rad Labora-
tories). For silencing of MAVS in parallel with controls, cells 
underwent a second round of Stealth siRNA (HSS183886) 
transfection 3 d after the first round. After transfection, cells 
were cultured for 48–72 more h at 37°C before infection. 
HR
V-B14 virus stock, diluted in DPBS containing calcium 
and magnesium (Lonza), and 0.1% BSA fraction V (Sigma- 
Aldrich), was added at a MOI of 1. 
Virus was adsorbed for 1 h 
at room temperature followed by 1 h at 35°C. After washing 
five times with DPBS containing calcium and magnesium to 
remove unbound virus, infected cells were cultured in Ham’s 
F-12K (Kaighn’s) medium (Gibco), supplemented with 5% 
FBS (Hyclone), for 24–72 h at 35°C. Cell supernatants were 
collected to measure virion release by plaque assay, and total 
RNA was isolated from cells to measure virus transcripts by 
qRT
-PCR, as described in the Pan-HR
V and type I/III IFN 
qRT
-PCR section. In some experiments, A549 cells were 
transfected with a silencer siRNA to MDA5 (S34498) and 
Silencer Select Negative Control (Cat# 4390843; Thermo 
Fisher Scientific) before HR
V infection.
In some experiments, human primary dermal fibroblasts 
were transfected with negative siRNA control, Stealth siRNA 
to MDA5 (HSS127414), or siRNA to MAVS (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific; HSS148537), each at 2 µM, using the P3 Primary 
Cell 96-well Nucleofector kit and Nucleofector Program 96-
DT
-130 (Lonza). 3 d after transfection, cells were infected 
with HR
V-A16 in DPBS buffer with 0.25% BSA fraction V 
(Sigma-Aldrich) at MOI of 10. 
Virus was adsorbed for 1 h at 
room temperature, and then another h at 35°C. Cells were 
washed with DPBS and then cultured in DMEM medium 
supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/ml 
penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and 55 µM 2-ME. Cells 
were infected for the indicated times. Uninfected cells were 
used for qRT
-PCR normalization purposes, as described 
below in the next section.
In other experiments, nasal epithelial cells were digested 
from feeder cells and seeded in 12-well plates at 100,000 
cells per well in 1 ml epithelial culture medium (Promocell; 
C21060) with 10 µM Y
-27632 (ApexBio) and incubated at 
37°C 5% CO2. The cells were seeded into plates that had 
been previously coated with 300 µl rat tail collagen (BD; 
354236) at 30 µg/ml in PBS for 45 min at room tempera-
ture, washed twice with PBS, and air dried for 20 min. The 
next d, the cells were washed once with DPBS and then in-
fected with HR
V-B14 at a MOI of 1 in DPBS with 0.25% 
BSA (Sigma-Aldrich). 
Virus was adsorbed for 40 min at room 
temperature and then 90 min at 35°C. After washing three 
times with DPBS, the cells were cultured in epithelial culture 
medium with 10 µM Y
-27632, for 48 or 72 h at 35°C. T
otal 
RNA isolated from cells was used to measure virus transcripts 
by qRT
-PCR, as described below in the next section.
Pan-HrV and type I/III IFn qrt-Pcr
After washing off nonadherent cells twice with PBS, total 
RNA was isolated using TRIzol extraction (Invitrogen). 2 
µg total RNA was reverse transcribed using High-Capacity 
cDNA Reverse Transcription kit with RNase Inhibitor (Ap-
plied Biosystems). Diluted cDNA was analyzed by quanti-
tative real-time PCR using TaqMan Universal PCR Master 
Mix on a 7500 Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosys-
tems), as previously described (Lee et al., 2015c). The for-
ward primer D110 was 5′-CTA 
GCC 
TGC 
GTGG-3′, reverse 
primer R
VQ1 was 5′-AAA 
CAC 
GGA 
CAC 
CCA 
AAG 
TAGT
-
3′, and probe R
VQ2 was 5′-6FAM-TCC 
TCC 
GGC 
CCC 
TGA-MGB-NFQ-3′. Viral copy numbers were calculated 
based upon a standard curve generated from HR
V-B14 virion 
RNA and were shown relative to siRNA negative control. 
For infection of nasal epithelial cells, viral copy numbers were 
shown relative to values from father’s cells.
For measurement of IFN-β (IFNB1) and IFN-λ 
(IFNL3, IL-28), 0.5 µg of total RNA was reverse transcribed 
using High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit with 
RNase Inhibitor (Applied Biosystems). Diluted cDNA was 
 Rhinovirus susceptibility in human MDA5 deficiency | Lamborn et al.
1966
analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR using SYBR Green 
PCR Master Mix on a 7500 Real Time PCR System (Ap-
plied Biosystems). 
The primer sequences used were as follows: 
IFNB1 forward primer 5′-CAG 
GAG 
AGC 
AAT 
TTG 
GAG 
GA-3′, IFNB1 reverse primer 5′-CTT 
TCG 
AAG 
CCT 
TTG 
CTC 
TG-3′, IFNL3 forward primer 5′-TCC 
TTC 
AGC 
AGA 
AGC 
GAC 
TC-3′, IFNL3 reverse primer 5′-GCC 
ACA 
TAG 
CCC 
AGT 
TCA 
AG-3′, ACTB forward primer: 5′-GCA 
CAG 
AGC 
CTC 
GCC 
TT
-3′, ACTB reverse primer 5′-GTT 
GTC 
GAC 
GAC 
GAG 
CG-3′. IFNB1 or IFNL3 transcripts were 
first normalized to β-actin expression, and then shown as 
fold-changes relative to 0 h for each siRNA (uninfected cells).
lentivirus particle production
Specific lentiviral transfer vectors (all in pLenti-III-UbC/
mCherry) were constructed as described in the Plasmids 
and molecular cloning section. VSV-G–pseudotyped lenti-
virus particles were generated by transient co-transfection 
into 293T cells of the specific transfer vector together with 
the packaging plasmids pCMV delta R8.2 (HIV-1 GAG/
POL, Tat, and Rev expressing plasmid, Addgene #12263) 
and pCMV VSV-G (VSV-G envelope expressing plasmid; 
Addgene #8454; Stewart et al., 2003) using calcium phos-
phate precipitation (Kingston et al., 2003). In brief, 13 mil-
lion 293T cells were seeded in poly-l-lysine (Sigma-Aldrich) 
coated Cell Culture Treated TripleFlasks (Nunc). When cells 
reached 95% confluency, 250 µg of specific transfer vector, 
125 µg pCMV delta R8.2, and 42 µg of pCMV 
VSV-G were 
precipitated with calcium phosphate, mixed with 100 ml of 
complete IMDM, and added to the cells. DNA precipitates 
were washed out 12 h after transfection and cell supernatants 
were collected daily for 3 d (stored at 4°C), filtered through 
0.22 µm pore-size filter (GE), concentrated by centrifugation 
at 18,000× g for 3 h at 4°C, and resuspended in Opti-MEM 
I reduced serum media (Gibco). Lentivirus preparations were 
stored at −80°C until use.
All lentivirus preparations were titered on 293T cells 
to determine the concentration of infectious units. 100,000 
293T cells were resuspended in complete IMDM containing 
8 µg/ml polybrene (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10 µl of diluted len-
tivirus to a final volume of 1 ml. 
The suspension was added to 
a 24-well plate (Corning) and spin-infected at 1,350× g for 
30 min at 35°C. 48 h later, cell monolayers were washed twice 
with PBS, trypsinized (Gibco), transferred to 14 ml round 
bottom FACS tubes (Falcon), washed with PBS, and resus-
pended in PBS containing 0.5 µg/ml propidium iodide (Sig-
ma-Aldrich). Single cell suspensions were analyzed on a BD 
FAC 
SCanto II to determine the percentages of GFP+ cells 
among the propidium iodide low (live) populations. Lentivi-
rus dilutions transducing between 2 and 15% of target cells 
were used to determine concentration of each preparation.
Wild-type IFIH1 (GenBank accession BC111750), 
or K365E IFIH1 cDNA were subcloned under the human 
ubiquitin C promoter. VSV-G–pseudotyped lentivirus parti-
cles were generated by transient co-transfection into 293T 
cells of the specific transfer vector with the packaging plas-
mids pCMV delta R8.2 (HIV-1 GAG/POL, Tat, and Rev 
expressing plasmid) and pVSV-G (VSV-G envelope express-
ing plasmid; Stewart et al., 2003). Cell supernatants were col-
lected daily for 3 d, filtered through 0.22 µm pore-size filter, 
concentrated by centrifugation at 18,000× g for 3 h at 4°C, 
resuspended in Opti-MEM I reduced serum media (Gibco), 
and stored at −80°C until use.
Assessment of in vitro antiviral function of K365E MdA5
A549 cells, seeded at 50,000 per well in 24-well tissue cul-
ture plates 20 h prior, were transduced with lentivirus stocks 
for 48 h to similar transduction efficiencies (Dittmann et 
al., 2015). In brief, the cell culture medium was replaced 
with lentivirus particles diluted in F-12K medium (Gibco) 
containing 8 µg/ml polybrene (Sigma-Aldrich) and spin- 
infected at 1,350 g for 30 min at 35°C. Transduced cells were 
infected with HR
V-B14 at MOI of 1 for 72 h, as described 
in the HR
V infections section. Transduction efficiencies were 
assessed by flow cytometry after gating on dead negative–
transduced (Zombie Aqua; BioLegend; mCherry+) cells. 
HR
V-B14–infected cultures were washed with DPBS con-
taining calcium and magnesium (Lonza), and pan-HR
V qRT
-
PCR was performed as described in the Pan-HR
V and type 
I/III IFN qRT
-PCR section.
Influenza virus stocks
A/Victoria/361/2011 (H3N2), A/California/4/2009 (H1N1), 
 
and A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (H1N1) were propagated 
 
in embryonated chicken eggs from virus stocks as previously 
described (Balish et al., 2013). A/Netherlands/602/2009 
was propagated in cell culture on MDCK cells as previ-
ously described (Balish et al., 2013). All virus stocks were 
titered by infectious plaque assay on Madin-Darby Canine 
Kidney (MDCK) cells (ATCC) as previously described 
 
(Balish et al., 2013).
Influenza virus replication
For infection of A549 cells, cells were seeded at 100,000 per 
well in 12-well tissue culture plates 1 d before and trans-
fected when ∼50–70% confluent with Stealth siRNA tar-
geting MDA5 (HSS127414), RIG-I (HSS119008), MAVS 
(HSS127415), and nonsilencing negative control (12935300; 
all from 
Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 nM in triplicate wells 
using siLentFect transfection reagent (Bio-Rad Laboratories). 
After transfection, cells were cultured for an additional 72 h 
at 37°C before infection. Alternatively, primary nasal ep-
ithelial cells were digested from feeder cells and seeded in 
24-well plates at 100,000 cells per well in 0.5 ml epithelial 
culture medium (C21060; Promocell) with 10 µM Y
-27632 
(ApexBio) and incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2. The cells were 
seeded on plates previously coated with 150 µl rat tail colla-
gen (354236; BD) at 30 µg/ml in PBS for 45 min at room 
temperature, washed twice with PBS, and air dried for 20 
min. 36 h later, the cells were washed twice with PBS be-
 1967
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
fore infection. Transfected A549 cells were infected with A/
Victoria/361/2011 (H3N2) at MOI of 0.1 (diluted in PBS 
containing 0.3% BSA (Sigma-Aldrich) to a final volume of 
300 µl/12-well) for 1 h at room temperature, washed twice 
with PBS to remove unadsorbed virus, and the medium was 
replaced with F-12K supplemented with 0.1% BSA, 0.1% 
FBS (Hyclone), 2 mM glutamine, 55 µM 2-ME, and 1 µg/ml 
TPCK-trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich). Primary nasal epithelial cells 
were infected with A/Victoria/361/2011 (H3N2) at MOI: 
0.02 (diluted in complete epithelial culture medium without 
Y
-27632 to a final volume of 150 µl/24-well) for 1 h at room 
temperature, washed twice with PBS to remove unadsorbed 
virus, and medium was replaced with complete epithelial cul-
ture medium plus 1 µg/ml TPCK-trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) 
and without Y
-27632. After infection, all cultures were re-
turned to 37°C in 5% humidified CO2.
SV40-transformed fibroblasts were seeded at 50,000 
cells/well in 48-well tissue cultures plates in complete 
DMEM. 16–24 h later, cells were infected with A/Nether-
lands/602/2009 (H1N1) or A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (H1N1) 
at the indicated MOI for 60 min at 37°C in HBSS supple-
mented with 0.3% BSA (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were washed 
twice with PBS and cultured at 37°C in DMEM supple-
mented with 0.1% FBS (Hyclone) and 0.3% BSA, 2 mM 
glutamine (Gibco), and 55 µM 2-ME (Sigma-Aldrich) in the 
presence of 1 µg/ml TPCK-trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich). Cell su-
pernatants were collected at the indicated time points after 
infection and stored at –80°C. Once all samples were col-
lected, supernatants were thawed and influenza titers were 
determined by infectious plaque assay on MDCK cells, as 
previously described (Balish et al., 2013). In brief, MDCK 
cells were plated in 12-well plates and grown to 100% conflu-
ency. Cells were washed twice with PBS, and serial dilutions 
of influenza infection supernatants diluted in PBS were ab-
sorbed onto MDCK cells for 1 h at room temperature. Cells 
were then overlaid with agar medium of MEM, 28 mM so-
dium bicarbonate, 2 mM l-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, 
100 µg/ml streptomycin (all from Gibco), 0.4% BSA, 1 µg/
ml TPCK-trypsin (both from Sigma-Aldrich), and 1% Oxoid 
Agar (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After 36–60 h, plaques were 
counted by direct visualization or by fixation and crystal vi-
olet counterstain as described in HR
V plaque assay, and then 
calculated as PFU/ml of influenza infection supernatant.
qrt-Pcr for influenza-induced proinflammatory cytokines
A549 cells in which MDA5, RIG-I, MAVS, or negative 
control were silenced by transfecting in siRNA were in-
fected with influenza strain A/Victoria/361/2011 (H3N2) 
as described above. T
otal RNA were isolated from influen-
za-infected A549 cells using TRIzol extraction (Invitrogen). 
2 µg total RNA per sample was reverse transcribed using 
High-Capacity cDNA Reverse 
Transcription kit with RNase 
Inhibitor (ABI). All quantitative RT
-PCR were performed 
by the SYBR green method on a 7500 Real Time PCR 
System (ABI). Primer sequences are as follows: human TNF 
forward primer, 5′-CTG 
CTG 
CAC 
TTT 
GGA 
GTG 
AT
-3′; 
human TNF reverse primer, 5′-AGA 
TGA 
TCT 
GAC 
TGC 
CTG 
GG-3′; human IL-1α forward primer, 5′-ACT 
GCC 
CAA 
GAT 
GAA 
GAC 
CA-3′; human IL-1α reverse primer, 5′-
CCG 
TGA 
GTT 
TCC 
CAG 
AAG 
AA-3′; human IL-6 forward 
primer, 5′-AGT 
GAG 
GAA 
CAA 
GCC 
AGA 
GC-3′; human 
IL-6 reverse primer, 5′-GTC 
AGG 
GGT 
GGT 
TAT 
TGC 
AT
-
3′; human IL-8 forward primer, 5′-TCC 
TGA 
TTT 
CTG 
CAG 
CTC 
TGT
-3′; human IL-8 reverse primer, 5′-AAA 
TTT 
GGG 
GTG 
GAA 
AGG 
TT
-3′; human β-actin forward primer, 
5′-GCA 
CAG 
AGC 
CTC 
GCC 
TT
-3′; human β-actin reverse 
primer, 5′-GTT 
GTC 
GAC 
GAC 
GAG 
CG-3′.The expression 
of mRNA for proinflammatory cytokine genes of interest 
was normalized to the expression of β-actin, and then nor-
malized to the control groups at 8 h after infection.
Influenza induced IFn-β and cytotoxicity
SV40-transformed fibroblasts were infected with influenza 
(A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 [H1N1]) at the indicated MOI 
for 60 min at 37°C in HBSS supplemented with 0.3% BSA. 
Cells were washed twice with PBS and cultured at 37°C in 
DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. Cell supernatants were 
collected at the indicated time points after infection. Sendai 
Virus (SeV) infections were performed in parallel as positive 
controls, in which cells were infected with 5 hemagglutina-
tion units of SeV Cantell strain in DMEM supplemented 
with 10% FBS and left in the well until the time of collection. 
For quantitation of IFN-β, supernatants were diluted two-
fold and were assayed for Human IFN-β using the VeriKine 
Human Interferon Beta ELI 
SA kit (PBL Assay Science). For 
quantitation of influenza-induced cytotoxicity, supernatants 
were diluted 2.5-fold and were assayed for LDH release using 
the Cytotoxicity Detection kit Plus (Roche) to measure 
enzymatic activity. Colorimetric absorbance was measured 
according to kit manufacturers’ recommendations, using a 
 
VIC 
TOR X4 Multi-label Plate Reader (PerkinElmer).
rSV infections
Recombinant wild-type RSV strain A2 in which enhanced 
GFP was inserted between the P and M genes was propa-
gated, sucrose-purified, and titered by plaque assay on Vero 
cells, as previously described (Munir et al., 2008). The virus 
stock was sequenced and had no adventitious mutations, as 
confirmed by Sanger dideoxy sequencing. A549 cells were 
seeded and transfected with siRNA to MDA5, RIG-I, 
MAVS, or a nonsilencing negative control as described for 
HR
V infections. Alternatively, primary nasal epithelial cells 
were digested from feeder cells and seeded in 12-well plates 
at 150,000 cells per well in 1 ml epithelial culture medium 
(Promocell) with 10 µM 
Y
-27632 (ApexBio) and incubated at 
37°C in 5% CO2. The cells were seeded on plates previously 
coated with 300 µl rat tail collagen (BD) at 30 µg/ml in PBS 
for 45 min at room temperature, washed twice with PBS, and 
air dried for 20 min. 36 h later, the cells were washed once 
with PBS. Transfected A549 cells or primary nasal epithelial 
 Rhinovirus susceptibility in human MDA5 deficiency | Lamborn et al.
1968
cells were infected with RSV-GFP at an MOI of 1 or 0.2, 
respectively (diluted in appropriate complete medium, 300 µl 
per 12-well), for 1 h at room temperature, and washed twice 
with PBS to remove unadsorbed virus, and then medium was 
replaced (complete F-12K for A549; epithelial culture media 
without Y
-27632 for nasal epithelial cells) and cultures were 
returned to 37°C in 5% humidified CO2.
rSV-GFP qrt-Pcr
At 6, 24, or 48 h of RSV-GFP infection, infected cell cultures 
were washed twice with PBS to remove nonadherent cells, 
and total RNA was isolated using TRIzol extraction (Invi-
trogen) according to manufacturer’s instructions. 0.5 to 2.0 
µg total RNA was reverse transcribed using High-Capacity 
cDNA Reverse Transcription kit with RNase Inhibitor (Ap-
plied Biosystems). Diluted cDNA (1:5 to 1:10 in H2O) was 
analyzed for RSV N gene transcripts by quantitative real-time 
PCR using TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix on a 7500 
Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) per the manu-
facturer’s instructions. The N gene forward primer sequence 
was 5′-TGG 
CAT 
GTT 
ATT 
AAT 
CAC 
AGA 
AGA 
TGCT
-3′, N 
gene reverse primer sequence was 5′-TTC 
TCT 
TCC 
TAA 
CCT 
AGA 
CAT 
CGC 
ATA-3′, and the N gene probe sequence 
was 5′-6FAM-AAC 
CCA 
GTG 
AAT 
TTA 
TG-MGB-NFQ-3′. 
Viral copy numbers were calculated based upon a standard 
curve generated from RSV-GFP virion RNA and were 
shown relative to the RSV transcript levels in the father’s cells.
rSV-GFP flow cytometry
At 24 and 48 h after RSV-GFP infection, whole well contents 
were collected for flow cytometric analysis. First, cell super-
natants followed by sequential PBS washes were collected in 
5 ml FACS tubes (Falcon). Next, single-cell suspensions were 
collected after treating with 0.25% trypsin/EDTA (Gibco) 
for 10 min and combining with cell supernatants and washes. 
Contents were washed 1 time with PBS and stained with 
LIVE/DEAD Fixable Near-IR Dead Cell Stain (Molecular 
Probes) or Zombie NIR Fixable 
Viability kit (BioLegend) for 
20 min at room temperature, fixed in BD Cytofix/Cytoperm 
solution (BD) or 1% paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy 
Sciences) in PBS for 20 min, washed, and resuspended in PBS 
containing 1% FCS or 1% BSA and 0.09% sodium azide. The 
stained and fixed cells were acquired on a BD FACS Canto 
II or BD LSR II flow cytometers without compensation 
controls given the negligible spectral overlap between fluor-
ophores. FlowJo 9.8.3 or 10.0.8 (Tree Star Inc.) software was 
used to enumerate singlet live cells expressing GFP
. 
The values 
of % GFP+ cells treated with siRNA to MDA5 are shown 
relative to the values for negative control siRNA.
rnA-Seq
A549 cells that had been transfected 48 h earlier with 
siRNA to MDA5 or nonspecific negative control siRNA, 
were uninfected or infected for 6, 12, 24, and 48 h with 
HR
V-B14 or RSV
, as described in the RSV infections sec-
tion. For each time point, infections were performed in 
triplicate. Total cellular RNA were isolated using RNeasy 
Mini kit (QIA 
GEN). Multiplexed RNA libraries were 
prepared using the Truseq RNA sample prep kit (Illu-
mina). In brief, poly(A)-containing mRNA were captured 
with oligodT beads, fragmented, reverse-transcribed, and 
the cDNA was ligated to Illumina adapters containing in-
dexing barcodes. Libraries were quantified using KAPA Li-
brary Quant kits (KAPA Biosystems), before running on a 
HiSeq 2000 Sequencing System (Illumina) to produce 50 
bp single end reads. Sequencing reads were aligned with 
ELA 
ND to the human reference genome version hg19. 
Count data of the annotated transcripts from individual 
samples were normalized for sequence depth. Analyses of 
differentially expressed genes were performed using the 
Statistical R package DESeq2. Sequencing reads were also 
aligned with Bowtie2 to the HR
V-B14 or RSV reference 
genomes to count the read number corresponding to the 
virus transcripts. The RNA-seq coverage across the virus 
transcripts were checked for normal distribution and count 
data of the virus transcripts were also normalized for over-
all sequence depth. Fold changes were calculated by com-
paring the RPKM expression values (Reads Per Kilobase 
per Million mapped reads) under siNeg vs. siMDA5 con-
ditions. For human genes, log2-transformed (base 2) ex-
pression fold changes from DESeq2 output were analyzed 
for distribution (box-and-whisker diagrams) and hierar-
chical clustering (heat map of expression values) using R. 
“Response to type I interferon” genes were selected based 
on the GO term definition (GO term GO0034340). The 
comparisons for the fold change distributions of different 
gene sets were performed using two sample Kolmogor-
ov-Smirnov tests (KS tests). RNA-seq data were depos-
ited into the NCBI BioProject database and the Sequence 
Read Archive (SRA) under accession no. PRJ 
NA387035.
clinical description
In brief, the patient is (at the time of publication) a 5-yr-old 
girl of Karenni descent, whose infection history is presented 
below. Other clinical and immune history will be detailed in 
a separate publication to follow.
At birth (37 wk), she was found to have intrauterine 
growth retardation. Infection screening during routine pre-
natal care had indicated past maternal infection with HSV-1, 
Toxoplasma, and CMV
. At 40 d of age, she had an upper 
respiratory infection that was PCR-positive for both HR
V/
enterovirus and influenza B virus. She developed respira-
tory failure, which required mechanical ventilation including 
extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation. Tracheal aspirates 
grew out Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus viridans, 
Acinetobacter spp., enterococcus, Escherichia coli, and other 
coliform bacteria. Subsequently, she had more than 15 hos-
pital admissions for respiratory distress precipitated by viral 
respiratory infections. Multiplex PCR revealed two episodes 
of influenza A; three prolonged intervals of repeated HR
V/
 1969
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
enterovirus recovery; four episodes of coronaviruses (OC43, 
NL63, HKU1); two episodes of adenovirus; and one each of 
RSV and human parainfluenza virus type 4. 
Wedge lung bi-
opsy histology, performed when she was 6 mo of age, revealed 
adequate alveolar architecture with evidence of chronic small 
airways disease (mucous stasis and collection of foamy al-
veolar macrophages), but without evidence of active bron-
chiolitis, pneumonitis, or other inflammatory processes. She 
continues to require supplemental oxygen, and had ground 
glass opacities but no bronchiectasis on chest computed to-
mography. She has been hospitalized on multiple occasions 
for coliform urinary tract infection and acute gastroenteritis 
with dehydration, but without detectable viral pathogens. 
She had an abscess near her G-tube insertion site that grew 
out Klebsiella pneumoniae and Enterobacter cloacae. Al-
though she initially had low serum immunoglobulin levels 
and decreased lymphocyte counts (affecting T, NK, and B 
cell subsets), these all normalized between 3 to 4 yr old. 
Replacement immunoglobulins were discontinued and she 
has since responded with functional antibodies to tetanus, 
diphtheria, and Haemophilus influenzae vaccines. She has 
no history of opportunistic or chronic systemic virus infec-
tion including EBV or CMV despite serological evidence of 
past exposure. Additionally, when 2 yr of age, she developed 
new-onset type 1 diabetes mellitus with detectable GAD65 
autoantibodies. She has short stature, low weight, hypotonia, 
weakness, and delays in motor and language development. 
Brain MRI has shown low periventricular white matter 
volume with ventriculomegaly, and structural abnormalities 
of hippocampus, olfactory bulbs, septum pellucidum, and 
corpus callosum. High-resolution chromosomal microarray 
analysis identified a 4-kb deletion on chromosome 2 that 
included the TM4SF20 gene. 
This copy number variant has 
been associated with language delay, white matter hyperin-
tensities, and varied developmental abnormalities in South 
Asian populations (Wiszniewski et al., 2013). Several regions 
of absence of heterozygosity totaling 45 MB on five separate 
chromosomes were also identified. She also had de novo or 
rare autosomal recessive variants that were identified in genes 
highly expressed in the brain (Table S2). The convergence 
of these multiple genetic problems in our patient illustrate 
how two or more distinct monogenic diseases can occur in a 
significant proportion of the population examined by WES 
(Yang et al., 2013, 2014; Retterer et al., 2016).
Statistical analyses
One-way ANO 
VA with Dunnett’s multiple comparisons, 
Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons, and 
Mann-Whitney U testing were performed using Prism soft-
ware (GraphPad). T
wo sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov testing 
were performed using the Statistical R package.
online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows absolute virus transcripts in representative ex-
periments. Table S1 enumerates WES variants found after 
each biotinformatics filtering stage. Table S2 lists nonsynon-
ymous rare variants found in the patient. Table S3 lists IFIH1 
population variants and their associated luciferase activities.
AcKnoWlEdGMEntS
We thank the following people: for technical assistance, Hyoungjun Ham and Mi-
chael Leney-Greene; for technical advice and reagents, Gary Fahle, Ronald Germain, 
Yong He, Wei-Ming Lee, and Charles Rice; for clinical assistance and support, Patricia 
Littel, Martha Marquesen, Arianne Soldatos, and Angela Wang; for helpful discus-
sions and/or critically reading the manuscript, Avinash Bhandoola, Sara Cherry, Mi-
chael Lenardo, Pamela Schwartzberg, and Qian Zhang. We also thank the patient, her 
family, and National Jewish Health staff for participating in this study. The data pre-
sented in this work are presented in the main paper and the supplemental material, 
and are archived under dbGaP database accession no. phs001235.v1 and BioProject 
accession no. PRJ 
NA387035. 
This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, the Na-
tional Center for Research Resources, and the National Center for Advancing Sci-
ences of the National Institutes of Health (grant 8UL1TR000043), the St. Giles 
Foundation, the Rockefeller University, and National Jewish Health. S.B. Drutman is 
supported by T32CA009207, and J.K. Abbot was supported by a fellowship from CSL 
Behring. I.T. Lamborn is a Medical Scientist Training Program student in the Graduate 
Program in Immunology at the University of Pennsylvania.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: Y. Zhang, J.J. McElwee, J.D. Hughes, A. Belkadi, and L. 
Abel analyzed WES, and Y. Zhang and J.J. McElwee discovered the IFIH1 mutation. 
I.T. Lamborn and H.M. Murdock assessed MDA5 expression, E.M. performed molec-
ular modeling, and H.M. Murdock performed immunoprecipitations. S.B., H. Jing, 
and I.T. Lamborn performed luciferase reporter assays. H. Jing and I.T. Lamborn 
performed HRV experiments. S. Munir developed methods for A549 siRNA trans-
fections. I.T. Lamborn, S. Munir, and L.B. performed RSV experiments. I.T. Lamborn, 
S.B. Drutman, M.J. Ciancanelli, C.P. Santos, and H. Jing performed influenza experi-
ments. Y. Zhang and A.J. Oler evaluated transcriptomes. Y. Zhang performed rhino-
virus molecular typing for phylogenetic analysis. H.M. Murdock, S. Bade, and 
E.Y.Fordjour assisted with immunoblotting. I.T. Lamborn, H. Jing, and M.J. Cian-
canelli generated CRI 
SPR fibroblast lines, and D.P. Nichols generated nasal epithe-
lial cell lines. J.K. Abbott and E.W. Gelfand cared for the patient, and collected and 
analyzed clinical data with assistance from H.C. Su and C.S. Happel. H.F. Matthews 
coordinated clinical study protocol and sample collection. H.C. Su planned and 
supervised the experimental work and data analyses. J.L. Casanova, M.J. Ciancanelli, 
K. Subbarao, and P.L. Collins provided advice and assisted in supervising experi-
mental work. H.C. Su and I.T. Lamborn prepared the manuscript. All authors dis-
cussed and revised the manuscript.
Submitted: 18 October 2016
Revised: 13 April 2017
Accepted: 26 May 2017
rEFErEncES
Arora, R., M. Kaplan, and M. Nelson. 2011. Enterovirus-specific IgG in 
intravenous immunoglobulin preparations. Ann. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 
106:544–545. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.anai 
.2011 
.03 
.007
Balish, A.L., J.M. Katz, and A.I. Klimov. 2013. Influenza: propagation, quan-
tification, and storage. Curr Protoc Microbiol Chapter 15:Unit 15G 11.
Baños-Lara, M.R., A. Ghosh, and A. Guerrero-Plata. 2013. Critical role of 
MDA5 in the interferon response induced by human metapneumovirus 
infection in dendritic cells and in vivo. J. Virol. 87:1242–1251. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.01213 
-12
Benitez, A.A., M. Panis, J. Xue, A. Varble, J.V
. Shim, A.L. Frick, C.B. López, 
D. Sachs, and B.R. tenOever. 2015. In Vivo RNAi Screening Identifies 
MDA5 as a Significant Contributor to the Cellular Defense against 
Influenza A Virus. Cell Reports. 11:1714–1726. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.celrep 
.2015 
.05 
.032
 Rhinovirus susceptibility in human MDA5 deficiency | Lamborn et al.
1970
Bochkov, 
Y
.A., K. Grindle, F
. 
Vang, M.D. Evans, and J.E. Gern. 2014. Improved 
molecular typing assay for rhinovirus species A, B, and C. J. Clin. Microbiol. 
52:2461–2471. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JCM 
.00075 
-14
Byington, C.L., K. Ampofo, C. Stockmann, F
.R. Adler, A. Herbener, T. Miller, X. 
Sheng, 
A.J. Blaschke, R. Crisp, and 
A.T. Pavia. 2015. Community Surveillance 
of Respiratory 
Viruses Among Families in the Utah Better Identification of 
Germs-Longitudinal Viral Epidemiology (BIG-LoVE) Study. Clin. Infect. 
Dis. 61:1217–1224. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/cid 
/civ486
Casanova, J.L., M.E. Conley, S.J. Seligman, L. Abel, and L.D. Notarangelo. 
2014. Guidelines for genetic studies in single patients: lessons from 
primary immunodeficiencies. J. Exp. Med. 211:2137–2149. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20140520
Case, D.A., J.T. Berryman, R.M. Betz, D.S. Cerutti, and I. Cheatham. T.E., 
T.A. Darden, R.E. Duke, T.J. Giese, H. Gohlke, A.W
. Goetz, N. Homeyer, 
S. Izadi, P
. Janowski, J. Kaus, A. Kovalenko, T.S. Lee, S. LeGrand, P
. Li, 
T. Luchko, R. Luo, B. Madej, K.M. Merz, G. Monard, P
. Needham, H. 
Nguyen, H.T. Nguyen, I. Omelyan, A. Onufriev, D.R. Roe, A. Roitberg, 
R. Salomon-Ferrer, C.L. Simmerling, W
. Smith, J. Swails, R.C. Walker, J. 
Wang, R.M. Wolf, X. Wu, D.M. Y
ork, and P
.A. Kollman. 2015. AMB 
ER 
2015. In University of California, San Francisco.
Chapgier, A., R.F
. Wynn, E. Jouanguy, O. Filipe-Santos, S. Zhang, J. Feinberg, 
K. Hawkins, J.L. Casanova, and P
.D. Arkwright. 2006. Human complete 
Stat-1 deficiency is associated with defective type I and II IFN responses 
in vitro but immunity to some low virulence viruses in vivo. J. Immunol. 
176:5078–5083. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.176 
.8 
.5078
Ciancanelli, M.J., S.X. Huang, P
. Luthra, H. Garner, Y
. Itan, S. Volpi, F
.G. 
Lafaille, C. Trouillet, M. Schmolke, R.A. Albrecht, et al. 2015. Infectious 
disease. Life-threatening influenza and impaired interferon amplification 
in human IRF7 deficiency. Science. 348:448–453. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.aaa1578
de Chasseval, R., and J.P
. de Villartay. 1992. High level transient gene 
expression in human lymphoid cells by SV40 large T antigen boost. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 20:245–250. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/nar 
/20 
.2 
.245
Delaloye, J., 
T. Roger, Q.G. Steiner-Tardivel, D. Le Roy, M. Knaup Reymond, 
S. Akira, V
. Petrilli, C.E. Gomez, B. Perdiguero, J. Tschopp, et al. 2009. 
Innate immune sensing of modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) is 
mediated by TLR2-TLR6, MDA-5 and the NALP3 inflammasome. 
PLoS Pathog. 5:e1000480. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.ppat 
.1000480
Deschamps, M., G. Laval, M. Fagny, Y
. Itan, L. Abel, J.L. Casanova, E. Patin, 
and L. Quintana-Murci. 2016. Genomic Signatures of Selective Pressures 
and Introgression from Archaic Hominins at Human Innate Immunity 
Genes. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 98:5–21. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ajhg 
.2015 
.11 
.014
Dittmann, M., H.H. Hoffmann, M.A. Scull, R.H. Gilmore, K.L. Bell, M. 
Ciancanelli, S.J. 
Wilson, S. Crotta, 
Y
. 
Yu, B. Flatley, et al. 2015. A serpin shapes 
the extracellular environment to prevent influenza A virus maturation. 
Cell. 160:631–643. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2015 
.01 
.040
Eilertson, K.E., J.G. Booth, and C.D. Bustamante. 2012. SnIPRE: selection 
inference using a Poisson random effects model. PLOS Comput. Biol. 
8:e1002806. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pcbi 
.1002806
Errett, J.S., M.S. Suthar, A. McMillan, M.S. Diamond, and M. Gale Jr. 2013. 
The essential, nonredundant roles of RIG-I and MDA5 in detecting and 
controlling 
West Nile virus infection. J. 
Virol. 87:11416–11425. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.01488 
-13
Galama, J.M., M. Gielen, and C.M. Weemaes. 2000. Enterovirus antibody 
titers after IVIG replacement in agammaglobulinemic children. Clin. 
Microbiol. Infect. 6:630–632. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1046 
/j 
.1469 
-0691 
.2000 
.00173 
.x
Gaunt, E.R., H. Harvala, C. McIntyre, K.E. Templeton, and P
. Simmonds. 
2011. Disease burden of the most commonly detected respiratory viruses 
in hospitalized patients calculated using the disability adjusted life year 
(DALY) model. J. Clin. Virol. 52:215–221. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jcv 
.2011 
.07 
.017
Gitlin, L., W
. Barchet, S. Gilfillan, M. Cella, B. Beutler, R.A. Flavell, M.S. 
Diamond, and M. Colonna. 2006. Essential role of mda-5 in type 
I IFN responses to polyriboinosinic 
:polyribocytidylic acid and 
encephalomyocarditis picornavirus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 103:8459–
8464. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0603082103
Gitlin, L., L. Benoit, C. Song, M. Cella, S. Gilfillan, M.J. Holtzman, and M. 
Colonna. 2010. Melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) is 
involved in the innate immune response to Paramyxoviridae infection in 
vivo. PLoS Pathog. 6:e1000734. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.ppat 
.1000734
Global Burden of Disease Study 2013 Collaborators. 2015. Global, regional, 
and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 301 
acute and chronic diseases and injuries in 188 countries, 1990-2013: a 
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet. 
386:743–800. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0140 
-6736(15)60692 
-4
Grandvaux, N., X. Guan, F
. 
Y
oboua, N. Zucchini, K. Fink, P
. Doyon, L. Martin, 
M.J. Servant, and S. Chartier. 2014. Sustained activation of interferon 
regulatory factor 3 during infection by paramyxoviruses requires MDA5. 
J. Innate Immun. 6:650–662. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1159 
/000360764
Greenberg, S.B. 2011. Update on rhinovirus and coronavirus infections. 
Semin. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 32:433–446. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1055 
/s 
-0031 
-1283283
Hanawa, H., P
. Hematti, K. Keyvanfar, M.E. Metzger, 
A. Krouse, R.E. Donahue, 
S. Kepes, J. Gray, C.E. Dunbar, D.A. Persons, and A.W
. Nienhuis. 2004. 
Efficient gene transfer into rhesus repopulating hematopoietic stem cells 
using a simian immunodeficiency virus-based lentiviral vector system. 
Blood. 
103:4062–4069. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1182 
/blood 
-2004 
-01 
-0045
Hasegawa, K., J.M. Mansbach, and C.A. Camargo Jr. 2014. Infectious 
pathogens and bronchiolitis outcomes. Expert Rev. Anti Infect. Ther. 
12:817–828. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1586 
/14787210 
.2014 
.906901
Heikkinen, T., and A. Järvinen. 2003. The common cold. Lancet. 361:51–59. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0140 
-6736(03)12162 
-9
Hornak, 
V
., R. Abel, A. Okur, B. Strockbine, A. Roitberg, and C. Simmerling. 
2006. Comparison of multiple Amber force fields and development of 
improved protein backbone parameters. Proteins. 65:712–725. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/prot 
.21123
Israel, L., Y
. Wang, K. Bulek, E. Della Mina, Z. Zhang, V
. Pedergnana, M. 
Chrabieh, N.A. Lemmens, V
. Sancho-Shimizu, M. Descatoire, et al. 
2017. Human Adaptive Immunity Rescues an Inborn Error of Innate 
Immunity. Cell. 168:789–800.e10. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2017 
.01 
.039
Itan, Y
., L. Shang, B. Boisson, M.J. Ciancanelli, J.G. Markle, R. Martinez-
Barricarte, E. Scott, I. Shah, P
.D. Stenson, J. Gleeson, et al. 2016. The 
mutation significance cutoff: gene-level thresholds for variant predictions. 
Nat. Methods. 13:109–110. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nmeth 
.3739
Jaïdane, H., P
. Sauter, F
. Sane, A. Goffard, J. Gharbi, and D. Hober. 2010. 
Enteroviruses and type 1 diabetes: towards a better understanding of the 
relationship. Rev. Med. Virol. 20:265–280. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/
rmv 
.647
Jain, S., D.J. Williams, S.R. Arnold, K. Ampofo, A.M. Bramley, C. Reed, 
C. Stockmann, E.J. Anderson, C.G. Grijalva, W
.H. Self, et al. CDC 
EPIC Study Team. 2015. Community-acquired pneumonia requiring 
hospitalization among U.S. children. N. Engl. J. Med. 372:835–845. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1056 
/NEJMoa1405870
Jin, Y
.H., S.J. Kim, E.Y
. So, L. Meng, M. Colonna, and B.S. Kim. 2012. 
Melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 is critical for protection 
against Theiler’s virus-induced demyelinating disease. J. Virol. 86:1531–
1543. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.06457 
-11
 1971
JEM Vol. 214, No. 7
Jing, H., Q. Zhang, 
Y
. Zhang, B.J. Hill, C.G. Dove, E.W
. Gelfand, 
T.P
. Atkinson, 
G. Uzel, H.F
. Matthews, P
.J. Mustillo, et al. 2014. Somatic reversion 
in dedicator of cytokinesis 8 immunodeficiency modulates disease 
phenotype. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 133:1667–1675. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2014 
.03 
.025
Kato, H., O. Takeuchi, S. Sato, M. Y
oneyama, M. Yamamoto, K. Matsui, S. 
Uematsu, A. Jung, T. Kawai, K.J. Ishii, et al. 2006. Differential roles of 
MDA5 and RIG-I helicases in the recognition of RNA viruses. Nature. 
441:101–105. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature04734
Kim, W
.K., D. Jain, M.D. Sánchez, C.J. Koziol-White, K. Matthews, M.Q. 
Ge, A. Haczku, R.A. Panettieri Jr., M.B. Frieman, and C.B. López. 2014. 
Deficiency of melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 results in 
exacerbated chronic postviral lung inflammation. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care 
Med. 189:437–448. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1164 
/rccm 
.201307 
-1338OC
Kingston, R.E., C.A. Chen, and H. Okayama. 2003. Calcium phosphate 
transfection. Curr Protoc Cell Biol Chapter 20:Unit 20 23.
Lee, W
.M., Y
. Chen, W
. Wang, and A. Mosser. 2015a. Growth of human 
rhinovirus in H1-HeLa cell suspension culture and purification of 
virions. Methods Mol. Biol. 1221:49–61. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/978 
-1 
-4939 
-1571 
-2 
_5
Lee, W
.M., Y
. Chen, W
. Wang, and A. Mosser. 2015b. Infectivity assays of 
human rhinovirus-A and -B serotypes. Methods Mol. Biol. 1221:71–81. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/978 
-1 
-4939 
-1571 
-2 
_7
Lee, W
.M., K. Grindle, R. 
Vrtis, T. Pappas, F
. 
Vang, I. Lee, and J.E. Gern. 2015c. 
Molecular identification and quantification of human rhinoviruses in 
respiratory samples. Methods Mol. Biol. 1221:25–38. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/978 
-1 
-4939 
-1571 
-2 
_3
Li, J., 
Y
. Liu, and X. Zhang. 2010. Murine coronavirus induces type I interferon 
in oligodendrocytes through recognition by RIG-I and MDA5. J. Virol. 
84:6472–6482. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.00016 
-10
Li, P
., B.P
. Roberts, D.K. Chakravorty, and K.M. Merz Jr. 2013. Rational 
Design of Particle Mesh Ewald Compatible Lennard-Jones Parameters 
for +2 Metal Cations in Explicit Solvent. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 
9:2733–2748. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1021 
/ct400146w
Lin, R., P
. Génin, Y
. Mamane, and J. Hiscott. 2000. Selective DNA binding 
and association with the CREB binding protein coactivator contribute 
to differential activation of alpha/beta interferon genes by interferon 
regulatory factors 3 and 7. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20:6342–6353. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/MCB 
.20 
.17 
.6342 
-6353 
.2000
Loo, 
Y
.M., J. Fornek, N. Crochet, G. Bajwa, O. Perwitasari, L. Martinez-Sobrido, 
S. Akira, M.A. Gill, A. García-Sastre, M.G. Katze, and M. Gale Jr. 2008. 
Distinct RIG-I and MDA5 signaling by RNA viruses in innate immunity. 
J. 
Virol. 82:335–345. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.01080 
-07
Mäkelä, M.J., T. Puhakka, O. Ruuskanen, M. Leinonen, P
. Saikku, M. 
Kimpimäki, S. Blomqvist, 
T. Hyypiä, and P
. Arstila. 1998. 
Viruses and bac-
teria in the etiology of the common cold. J. Clin. Microbiol. 36:539–542.
McCartney, S.A., L.B. Thackray, L. Gitlin, S. Gilfillan, H.W
. Virgin, and M. 
Colonna. 2008. MDA-5 recognition of a murine norovirus. PLoS Pathog. 
4:e1000108. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.ppat 
.1000108
McCartney, S.A., W
. Vermi, S. Lonardi, C. Rossini, K. Otero, B. Calderon, S. 
Gilfillan, M.S. Diamond, E.R. Unanue, and M. Colonna. 2011. RNA 
sensor-induced type I IFN prevents diabetes caused by a β cell-tropic 
virus in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 121:1497–1507. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI44005
McQuillan, R., A.L. Leutenegger, R. Abdel-Rahman, C.S. Franklin, M. Pericic, 
L. Barac-Lauc, N. Smolej-Narancic, B. Janicijevic, O. Polasek, A. T
enesa, 
et al. 2008. Runs of homozygosity in European populations. Am. J. Hum. 
Genet. 83:359–372. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ajhg 
.2008 
.08 
.007
Meagher, K.L., L.T. Redman, and H.A. Carlson. 2003. Development of 
polyphosphate parameters for use with the AMB 
ER force field. J. 
Comput. Chem. 24:1016–1025. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/jcc 
.10262
Munir, S., C. Le Nouen, C. Luongo, U.J. Buchholz, P
.L. Collins, and A. 
Bukreyev. 2008. Nonstructural proteins 1 and 2 of respiratory syncytial 
virus suppress maturation of human dendritic cells. J. Virol. 82:8780–
8796. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.00630 
-08
Nejentsev, S., N. Walker, D. Riches, M. Egholm, and J.A. T
odd. 2009. Rare 
variants of IFIH1, a gene implicated in antiviral responses, protect 
against type 1 diabetes. Science. 324:387–389. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1167728
Oda, H., K. Nakagawa, J. Abe, T. Awaya, M. Funabiki, A. Hijikata, R. 
Nishikomori, M. Funatsuka, 
Y
. Ohshima, 
Y
. Sugawara, et al. 2014. Aicardi-
Goutières syndrome is caused by IFIH1 mutations. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 
95:121–125. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ajhg 
.2014 
.06 
.007
Palmenberg, A.C., D. Spiro, R. Kuzmickas, S. Wang, A. Djikeng, J.A. Rathe, 
C.M. Fraser-Liggett, and S.B. Liggett. 2009. Sequencing and analyses of 
all known human rhinovirus genomes reveal structure and evolution. 
Science. 324:55–59. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1165557
Pavia, A.T. 2011. Viral infections of the lower respiratory tract: old viruses, 
new viruses, and the role of diagnosis. Clin. Infect. Dis. 52(Suppl 4):S284–
S289. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/cid 
/cir043
Pichlmair, A., O. Schulz, C.P
. 
Tan, J. Rehwinkel, H. Kato, O. 
Takeuchi, S. Akira, 
M. Way, G. Schiavo, and C. Reis e Sousa. 2009. Activation of MDA5 
requires higher-order RNA structures generated during virus infection. 
J. Virol. 83:10761–10769. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.00770 
-09
Poole, A., C. Urbanek, C. Eng, J. Schageman, S. Jacobson, B.P
. O’Connor, 
J.M. Galanter, C.R. Gignoux, L.A. Roth, R. Kumar, et al. 2014. 
Dissecting childhood asthma with nasal transcriptomics distinguishes 
subphenotypes of disease. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 133:670–8.e12. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.jaci 
.2013 
.11 
.025
Purcell, S., B. Neale, K. Todd-Brown, L. Thomas, M.A. Ferreira, D. Bender, J. 
Maller, P
. Sklar, P
.I. de Bakker, M.J. Daly, and P
.C. Sham. 2007. PLI 
NK: 
a tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage 
analyses. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81:559–575. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1086 
/519795
Retterer, K., J. Juusola, M.T. Cho, P
. 
Vitazka, F
. Millan, F
. Gibellini, A. 
Vertino-
Bell, N. Smaoui, J. Neidich, K.G. Monaghan, et al. 2016. Clinical 
application of whole-exome sequencing across clinical indications. 
Genet. Med. 18:696–704. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/gim 
.2015 
.148
Reynolds, S.D., C. Rios, A. Wesolowska-Andersen, Y
. Zhuang, M. Pinter, C. 
Happoldt, C.L. Hill, S.W
. Lallier, G.P
. Cosgrove, G.M. Solomon, et al. 
2016. Airway Progenitor Clone Formation Is Enhanced by Y
-27632-
Dependent Changes in the Transcriptome. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 
55:323–336. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1165 
/rcmb 
.2015 
-0274MA
Rice, G.I., G.M. Forte, M. Szynkiewicz, D.S. Chase, A. Aeby, M.S. Abdel-
Hamid, S. Ackroyd, R. Allcock, K.M. Bailey, U. Balottin, et al. 2013. 
Assessment of interferon-related biomarkers in Aicardi-Goutières 
syndrome associated with mutations in TREX1, RNA 
SEH2A, RNA 
SEH2B, RNA 
SEH2C, SAM 
HD1, and ADAR: a case-control study. 
Lancet 
Neurol. 
12:1159–1169. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S1474 
-4422(13)70258 
-8
Rice, G.I., 
Y
. del T
oro Duany, E.M. Jenkinson, G.M. Forte, B.H. Anderson, G. 
Ariaudo, B. Bader-Meunier, E.M. Baildam, R. Battini, M.W
. Beresford, 
et al. 2014. Gain-of-function mutations in IFIH1 cause a spectrum of 
human disease phenotypes associated with upregulated type I interferon 
signaling. Nat. Genet. 46:503–509. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ng 
.2933
Rodero, M.P
., and Y
.J. Crow. 2016. T
ype I interferon-mediated monogenic 
autoinflammation: The type I interferonopathies, a conceptual overview. 
J. Exp. Med. 213:2527–2538. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20161596
Rodriguez-Calvo, 
T., and M.G. von Herrath. 2015. Enterovirus infection and 
type 1 diabetes: closing in on a link? Diabetes. 64:1503–1505. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.2337 
/db14 
-1931
Roth-Cross, J.K., S.J. Bender, and S.R. Weiss. 2008. Murine coronavirus 
mouse hepatitis virus is recognized by MDA5 and induces type I 
 Rhinovirus susceptibility in human MDA5 deficiency | Lamborn et al.
1972
interferon in brain macrophages/microglia. J. Virol. 82:9829–9838. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/JVI 
.01199 
-08
Rutsch, F
., M. MacDougall, C. Lu, I. Buers, O. Mamaeva, 
Y
. Nitschke, G.I. Rice, 
H. Erlandsen, H.G. Kehl, H. Thiele, et al. 2015. A specific IFIH1 gain-of-
function mutation causes Singleton-Merten syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 
96:275–282. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ajhg 
.2014 
.12 
.014
Salomon-Ferrer, R., A.W
. Goetz, D. Poole, S. Le Grand, and R.C. Walker. 
2013. Routine microsecond molecular dynamics simulations with AMB 
ER – Part II: Particle Mesh Ewald. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 9:3878–
3888. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1021 
/ct400314y
Shingai, M., T. Ebihara, N.A. Begum, A. Kato, T. Honma, K. Matsumoto, H. 
Saito, H. Ogura, M. Matsumoto, and T. Seya. 2007. Differential type I 
IFN-inducing abilities of wild-type versus vaccine strains of measles 
virus. J. Immunol. 179:6123–6133. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.179 
.9 
.6123
Sirén, J., T. Imaizumi, D. Sarkar, T. Pietilä, D.L. Noah, R. Lin, J. Hiscott, R.M. 
Krug, P
.B. Fisher, I. Julkunen, and S. Matikainen. 2006. Retinoic acid 
inducible gene-I and mda-5 are involved in influenza A virus-induced 
expression of antiviral cytokines. Microbes Infect. 8:2013–2020. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.micinf 
.2006 
.02 
.028
Slater, L., N.W
. Bartlett, J.J. Haas, J. Zhu, S.D. Message, R.P
. Walton, A. Sykes, 
S. Dahdaleh, D.L. Clarke, M.G. Belvisi, et al. 2010. Co-ordinated role 
of TLR3, RIG-I and MDA5 in the innate response to rhinovirus in 
bronchial epithelium. PLoS Pathog. 6:e1001178. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.ppat 
.1001178
Smyth, D.J., J.D. Cooper, R. Bailey, S. Field, O. Burren, L.J. Smink, C. Guja, 
C. Ionescu-Tirgoviste, B. Widmer, D.B. Dunger, et al. 2006. A genome-
wide association study of nonsynonymous SNPs identifies a type 1 
diabetes locus in the interferon-induced helicase (IFIH1) region. Nat. 
Genet. 38:617–619. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ng1800
Stewart, S.A., D.M. Dykxhoorn, D. Palliser, H. Mizuno, E.Y
. Yu, D.S. An, 
D.M. Sabatini, I.S. Chen, W
.C. Hahn, P
.A. Sharp, et al. 2003. Lentivirus-
delivered stable gene silencing by RNAi in primary cells. RNA. 9:493–
501. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1261 
/rna 
.2192803
Sulem, P
., H. Helgason, A. Oddson, H. Stefansson, S.A. Gudjonsson, F
. Zink, 
E. Hjartarson, G.T. Sigurdsson, A. Jonasdottir, A. Jonasdottir, et al. 2015. 
Identification of a large set of rare complete human knockouts. Nat. 
Genet. 47:448–452. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ng 
.3243
Suprynowicz, F
.A., G. Upadhyay, E. Krawczyk, S.C. Kramer, J.D. Hebert, X. 
Liu, H. Yuan, C. Cheluvaraju, P
.W
. Clapp, R.C. Boucher Jr., et al. 2012. 
Conditionally reprogrammed cells represent a stem-like state of adult 
epithelial cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 109:20035–20040. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1213241109
Triantafilou, K., E. Vakakis, E.A. Richer, G.L. Evans, J.P
. Villiers, and M. 
Triantafilou. 2011. Human rhinovirus recognition in non-immune 
cells is mediated by Toll-like receptors and MDA-5, which trigger a 
synergetic pro-inflammatory immune response. Virulence. 2:22–29. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4161 
/viru 
.2 
.1 
.13807
Van Eyck, L., L. De Somer, D. Pombal, S. Bornschein, G. Frans, S. Humblet-
Baron, L. Moens, F
. de Zegher, X. Bossuyt, C. Wouters, and A. Liston. 
2015. IFIH1 mutation causes systemic lupus erythematosus with 
selective IgA-deficiency. Arthritis Rheumatol. 67:1592–1597. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/art 
.39110
Wang, J.P
., A. Cerny, D.R. Asher, E.A. Kurt-Jones, R.T. Bronson, and R.W
. 
Finberg. 2010. MDA5 and MAVS mediate type I interferon responses 
to coxsackie B virus. J. Virol. 84:254–260. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/
JVI 
.00631 
-09
Wang, Q., D.R. Nagarkar, E.R. Bowman, D. Schneider, B. Gosangi, J. Lei, 
Y
. Zhao, C.L. McHenry, R.V
. Burgens, D.J. Miller, et al. 2009. Role of 
double-stranded RNA pattern recognition receptors in rhinovirus-
induced airway epithelial cell responses. J. Immunol. 183:6989–6997. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.4049 
/jimmunol 
.0901386
Wang, Q., D.J. Miller, E.R. Bowman, D.R. Nagarkar, D. Schneider, Y
. 
Zhao, M.J. Linn, A.M. Goldsmith, J.K. Bentley, U.S. Sajjan, and M.B. 
Hershenson. 2011. MDA5 and TLR3 initiate pro-inflammatory 
signaling pathways leading to rhinovirus-induced airways inflammation 
and hyperresponsiveness. PLoS Pathog. 7:e1002070. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.ppat 
.1002070
Wiszniewski, W
., J.V
. Hunter, N.A. Hanchard, J.R. Willer, C. Shaw, Q. Tian, 
A. Illner, X. Wang, S.W
. Cheung, A. Patel, et al. 2013. TM4SF20 ancestral 
deletion and susceptibility to a pediatric disorder of early language delay 
and cerebral white matter hyperintensities. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93:197–
210. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ajhg 
.2013 
.05 
.027
Wu, B., A. Peisley, C. Richards, H. 
Yao, X. Zeng, C. Lin, F
. Chu, T. Walz, and S. 
Hur. 2013. Structural basis for dsRNA recognition, filament formation, 
and antiviral signal activation by MDA5. Cell. 152:276–289. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2012 
.11 
.048
Yang, Y
., D.M. Muzny, J.G. Reid, M.N. Bainbridge, A. Willis, P
.A. Ward, A. 
Braxton, J. Beuten, F
. Xia, Z. Niu, et al. 2013. Clinical whole-exome 
sequencing for the diagnosis of mendelian disorders. N. Engl. J. Med. 
369:1502–1511. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1056 
/NEJMoa1306555
Yang, 
Y
., D.M. Muzny, F
. Xia, Z. Niu, R. Person, 
Y
. Ding, P
. Ward, A. Braxton, 
M. Wang, C. Buhay, et al. 2014. Molecular findings among patients 
referred for clinical whole-exome sequencing. JAMA. 312:1870–1879. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1001 
/jama 
.2014 
.14601
Züst, R., L. Cervantes-Barragan, M. Habjan, R. Maier, B.W
. Neuman, 
J. Ziebuhr, K.J. Szretter, S.C. Baker, W
. Barchet, M.S. Diamond, et al. 
2011. Ribose 2′-O-methylation provides a molecular signature for the 
distinction of self and non-self mRNA dependent on the RNA sensor 
Mda5. Nat. Immunol. 12:137–143. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ni 
.1979
