 September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
1
Review
published: 19 September 2017
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01159
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Wesley H. Brooks, 
University of South Florida, 
United States
Reviewed by: 
Jieliang Li, 
 
Temple University, 
United States 
 
Ruchi Tiwari, 
 
Veterinary University (DUVASU), India 
 
Maryam Dadar, 
 
Razi Vaccine and Serum 
 
Research Institute, Iran 
 
Ashok Munjal, 
Barkatullah University, India
*Correspondence:
Ralf Weiskirchen 
 
rweiskirchen@ukaachen.de
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Microbial Immunology, 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Immunology
Received: 14 July 2017
Accepted: 01 September 2017
Published: 19 September 2017
Citation: 
Lambertz J, Weiskirchen S, Landert S 
and Weiskirchen R (2017) Fructose: 
A Dietary Sugar in Crosstalk with 
Microbiota Contributing to the 
Development and Progression of 
Non-Alcoholic Liver Disease. 
 
Front. Immunol. 8:1159. 
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01159
Fructose: A Dietary Sugar in 
Crosstalk with Microbiota 
Contributing to the Development  
and Progression of Non-Alcoholic 
Liver Disease
Jessica Lambertz1, Sabine Weiskirchen1, Silvano Landert2 and Ralf Weiskirchen1*
1 
Institute of Molecular Pathobiochemistry, Experimental Gene Therapy and Clinical Chemistry (IFMPEGKC), RWTH University 
Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany, 2 
Culture Collection of Switzerland AG (CCOS), Wädenswil, Switzerland
Fructose is one of the key dietary catalysts in the development of non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease (NAFLD). NAFLD comprises a complex disease spectrum, including ste-
atosis (fatty liver), non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, hepatocyte injury, inflammation, and 
fibrosis. It is also the hepatic manifestation of the metabolic syndrome, which covers 
abdominal obesity, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, glucose intolerance, or type 2 
diabetes mellitus. Commensal bacteria modulate the host immune system, protect 
against exogenous pathogens, and are gatekeepers in intestinal barrier function and 
maturation. Dysbalanced intestinal microbiota composition influences a variety of 
NAFLD-associated clinical conditions. Conversely, nutritional supplementation with 
probiotics and preobiotics impacting composition of gut microbiota can improve the 
outcome of NAFLD. In crosstalk with the host immune system, the gut microbiota is 
able to modulate inflammation, insulin resistance, and intestinal permeability. Moreover, 
the composition of microbiota of an individual is a kind of fingerprint highly influenced 
by diet. In addition, not only the microbiota itself but also its metabolites influence the 
metabolism and host immune system. The gut microbiota can produce vitamins and 
a variety of nutrients including short-chain fatty acids. Holding a healthy balance of the 
microbiota is therefore highly important. In the present review, we discuss the impact 
of long-term intake of fructose on the composition of the intestinal microbiota and its 
biological consequences in regard to liver homeostasis and disease. In particular, we 
will refer about fructose-induced alterations of the tight junction proteins affecting the 
gut permeability, leading to the translocation of bacteria and bacterial endotoxins into 
the blood circulation.
Keywords: fructose, gut-liver-axis, inulin, insulin resistance, microbiota, SCFA, probiotics, prebiotics
Abbreviations: AMPK, adenosine monophosphate kinase; BDL, bile duct ligation; DNL, de novo lipogenesis; ENL, 
enterolactone; F-1-P, fructose-1-phosphate; FOS, fructooligosaccharides; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; IL-1β, interleukin-1β; 
IL-6, interleukin-6; LPS, lipopolysaccharide(s); MD, Mediterranean diet; NAFLD, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; NASH, 
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis; PAMP(s), pathogen-associated molecule(s); SCFA, short-chain fatty acid(s); TLR(s), toll-like 
receptor(s); TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor α.
 2
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
DieT iNFLUeNCeS MiCROBiOTA
Diet and connected nutritional status depict important, 
modifiable factors of human health. Major determinants are 
gut microbial community (microbiota) and its genes (micro-
biome) (1, 2). In turn, the gastrointestinal microbiota is highly 
influenced by the diet of the host. Turnbaugh et al. showed that 
a shift from a Mediterranean diet (MD) rich in polysaccharides 
to a Western diet, high in fat and sugar, low in fiber, is able to 
alter microbiota within a day (1). Similarly, diets high in sugar 
significantly decrease the microbial diversity in the gut after just 
1 week (3).
Also another more recent study has shown that the consum-
ing of a MD promotes a gut flora enriched in polysaccharide-
degrading microbes and end products of polysaccharide 
fermentation, whereas in contrast, a Western diet leads to a 
community of microorganisms in the digestive tract that mostly 
contain proteolytic microbes and end products of protein and 
fat metabolism (4).
During metabolism, a part of the ingested food such as 
dietary fiber or resistant starch escapes digestion in the small 
intestine, reaches the colon and is fermented by gut microbes, 
which produce products such as short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), 
trimethylamine, ammonia, and hydrogen sulfide, which have 
beneficial impact on its host. With the diet also the economy of 
microbiota changes, because the different strains favor different 
environment and nutrients. Differences in microbial structure 
and function are reflected in the diversity of intestinal metabo-
lites. For example, SCFA such as acetate, butyrate and propionate 
representing end products of fermentation of complex carbohy-
drates, were significant higher in samples taken from Egyptian 
teenagers consuming a MD than in teenagers from the United 
States absorbing a typical Western diet (4). SCFA are known to 
inhibit inflammation and obesity (5), while the end products 
resulting from lipid and protein degradation are associated 
with arteriosclerosis and colon cancer (6). Moreover, intestines 
of teenagers consuming a Western diet have elevated amino 
acid content and higher levels of lipid metabolism-associated 
compounds, and higher concentrations of 1-methylhistamine 
indicating allergic reactions and suggesting that the intestinal 
microbiota is majorly determined by the host diet (4). In line 
with these findings, the Western diet was found to be one of the 
causes for metabolic diseases such as non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD). In combination with stress exposure, diets 
enriched in fat and fructose are even able to modulate brain 
immunity, and increase metabolic vulnerability to conditions 
associated with NAFLD, arteriosclerosis and cardiovascular 
disease (7). In contrast, the consumption of components of 
the MD enriched in olive oil, fish, nuts, whole grains, fruits, 
and vegetables is negatively correlated with the pathogenesis of 
NAFLD (8).
FRUCTOSe iN HUMAN DieTS
Fructose is an integral part of human diets. This monosac-
charide appears naturally in ripe fruits, honey, and in small 
amounts in vegetables including carrot, onion, sweet potato, 
and paprika. In the 1960s, fructose has been shown to have 
positive effects in the treatment of diabetes because it does 
not need insulin to be metabolized. Fructose feeding had no 
influence on fasting blood glucose and its excretion into the 
urine (9, 10). This sugar was described as a “useful therapeutic 
agent” stabilizing blood glucose in diabetic patients to the 
normal fasting level, improving the overproduction of acetone, 
restoring the nitrogen balance, and decreasing the loss of water 
(9). All these changes were induced without any changes in 
insulin therapy, just by substitution of fructose for glucose 
(9). Similarly, intravenous administration of fructose was 
effective in the treatment of diabetic ketosis (11). In the 1960, 
high fructose corn syrup was inserted in the food industry as 
a substitute of sugar and the intake increased, while the clini-
cal importance of this sugar is still discussed controversially 
and in the focus of research (12). In particular, fructose was 
identified as a sugar affecting lipid metabolism by rising plasma 
triglycerides and fasting plasma free fatty acids. Therefore, the 
usage of this sugar was challenged for treatment of diabetes 
(10). Today, the view on fructose has changed dramatically. It is 
now handled as a risk factor in the development of obesity and 
several metabolic disturbances. In addition, fructose worsens 
symptoms in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), an inflammatory 
condition characterized by abdominal pain, diarrhea, and 
bloating (13). Human studies performed in patients suffering 
from IBS showed a high prevalence of fructose malabsorption 
up to 64% (14). Interestingly, also patients tested negative for 
disorders in fructose metabolism showed abdominal symptoms 
after fructose ingestion suggesting fructose intolerance as a 
highly common condition (13). In both studies, 25 g of fruc-
tose were orally administered in a fructose breath test to prove 
malabsorption. Noteworthy, beverages usually contain 10 g 
sugar/100 mL. On the other side, if beverages are sweetened 
with high-fructose corn syrup such as HFCS-55 containing 
55% of fructose, consumers absorb 27.5 g fructose drinking 
a volume of 500 mL. This amount is more than tested in the 
mentioned human studies and again emphasizes the fact that 
fructose in beverages and food nutrients should be critically 
considered as risk factors for inflammatory diseases.
MiCROBiOTA iMPACTS THe HOST 
iMMUNe SYSTeM
Bacteria in the gut are responsible for digestion and producing 
essential vitamins and minerals (2). In addition, they are impor-
tant for host physiology, digestion of indigestible food materials, 
and production of bile acids (15). Moreover, the gut microbiota 
has an influence on several immune functions, protects against 
pathogens, and joins in the maturation of the gut barrier (16).
Our intestine is an individual immunological site where inter-
action between microbiota and its host takes place (17). If the 
homeostasis between microbiota and host is disturbed, inflam-
mation and cancer can occur (17). The crosstalk of the intestinal 
microbiota with the immune system of the host can modulate 
insulin resistance and intestinal permeability (16). Furthermore, 
it has an impact on the body weight. This could be demonstrated 
by transplant experiments in which gut communities isolated 
 3
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
from obese mice fed a Western diet were transplanted into germ-
free recipient mice. The colonization produced adiposity in the 
recipient mice within 2 weeks (1).
SHORT-CHAiN FATTY ACiDS, 
MeTABOLiTeS OF MiCROBiOTA AFFeCT 
THe iMMUNe SYSTeM AND iNFLUeNCe 
DiSeASe PROGReSSiON
Not only the microbiota itself but also its products influence 
the metabolism, energy intake and immunity (18). The human 
digestive system is restricted of debranching enzymes neces-
sary to digest fibers and higher non-digestible carbohydrates 
such as pectin, inulin, gums, and cellulose (15). When these 
nutrients reach the distal gut, they stimulate growth and activity 
of bacteria that can ferment these compounds (19). During this 
microbial fermentation, SCFAs are formed influencing gut health 
and affecting as signaling molecules metabolism and function 
of peripheral tissues (20). There are three main SCFA, namely 
acetate, propionate and butyrate, which are the most important 
gut-derived products, acting as signal transduction molecules 
with epigenetic impact (21). Almost 10% of the human energy 
requirement per day is provided by SCFA via the host colonic epi-
thelial cells (22). In particular, butyrate is the main energy source 
for normal colonic epithelial cells, protecting against colorectal, 
cancer, and inflammation (23). Especially, the fermentation of 
butyrate is highly inducible by lactate through lactate-utilizing 
bacterial strains converting starch and fructooligosaccharides 
(FOS) into butyrate (24, 25). In line, high intake of non-digestible 
fibers caused an accumulation of lactate exhibiting a low pKa 
value and provoking metabolic acidosis (25). Therefore, the 
utilization of lactate by lactate-utilizing microbiota is important 
in the context of SCFAs formation. SCFAs are absorbed by both 
passive diffusion and via monocarboxylic acid transporters (26). 
However, the production and molecular effects of SCFAs is pres-
ently controversially discussed. On one hand, SCFAs provide 
energy for the body (17, 21), while on the other site they can lead 
to extra fat deposition in the body and obesity (27). Moreover, 
SCFAs can directly influence several different functions such as 
satiety and host metabolism, improve glucose homeostasis, and 
insulin sensitivity (20). Although SCFAs are a rich source of 
calories, their intestinal production is associated with lean body 
weight, reduced inflammation, and increased satiety (28). They 
are ligands for receptors regulating appetite, inhibiting gastric 
emptying, while at the same time stimulating insulin secretion. 
Thereby SCFAs influence eating habits and the metabolism of 
the host and prevent exaggerate energy intake and obesity (15). 
Moreover, butyrate is an important molecule in the lipid metabo-
lism of the host used to synthesize cholesterol and palmitate, while 
propionate is the principal gluconeogenic substrate decreasing 
hepatic glucose production (22, 29). Furthermore, butyrate has 
direct anti-inflammatory potential in the gut and the brain that 
helps to maintain the gut-barrier integrity and protects against 
the influx of toxins (29, 30).
Acetate promotes antilipolytic activity and it may also have 
metabolically beneficial effects in white adipose tissue (17). 
Furthermore, it mediates effects in the central nervous system 
suppressing appetite (31). So it is obviously that SCFAs affect 
metabolism and energy homeostasis by impacting glucose 
homeostasis, insulin sensitivity, skeletal muscle and liver tissue 
functions, adipose tissue biology (20, 21). With regard to the 
current literature, there is no reported direct interaction between 
the monosaccharide fructose and SCFA. Fructose consumption 
influences the microbiota and therefore affects the composition 
of SCFA in the gut. Interestingly, cross-feeding studies between 
Bifidobacterium and two acetate-converting, butyrate-producing 
strains (i.e., Anaerostipes caccae DSM 14662 and Roseburia 
intestinalis DSM 14610) in which fructose was used as the sole 
energy source allowed oligofructose breakdown by the strains not 
able to degrade the substrate itself (32). In this coculture study, 
Bifidobacterium releases small amounts of free fructose and 
acetate during degradation of fructooligosacharides.
Noteworthy, all three SCFA were able to decrease tight junc-
tion permeability, protecting barrier properties during increased 
microvascular leakage, which is the reason for several disease 
conditions (33). However, the effective concentration of each 
SCFA necessary to mediate these effects is different. The most 
effective concentration of butyrate (0.5 mmol/L) to decrease 
paracellular permeability was lower than that of propionate 
(1 mmol/L) and acetate (32 mmol/L) suggesting that in par-
ticular butyrate producers in the gut strengthens the gut barrier 
(33). SCFAs can influence the enteric nerve system, stimulating 
motility and secretion activity or affecting immune cells thereby 
reducing inflammation and tumorigenesis (34). Similar to the 
effect of histone deacetylases, SCFAs have anti-inflammatory and 
immune-suppressive functions and act as modulators in immune 
homeostasis and cancerogenesis (17, 21).
Short-chain fatty acids are able to reduce the pH of the gut, 
altering the composition of microbiota. Changing the pH from 
5.5 to 6.7 favors the population of gut microbiota that produces 
propionate, while reducing the pH to 5.5 favored bacteria produc-
ing butyrate (35). This process maintains the gut homeostasis and 
economy. As outlined above, butyrate is already more effective at 
lower concentrations than propionate and acetate, and it need to 
be considered that butyrate at higher concentrations may provide 
too much energy which can promote obesity.
Dietary fiber is known to promote weight loss and improve 
glycemic control. High fat diet enriched in SCFAs protected from 
obesity and improved glucose tolerance (36). However, studies 
on propionate have shown that the effects of SCFA are tissue 
specific. While propionate-dependent gluconeogenesis had a 
beneficial effect on metabolic health in the small intestine, it was 
detrimental in the liver (17).
The gut microbiota also produces diet-dependent many 
other metabolites such as secondary bile acids and amino acid 
derivatives that have essential functions in the body. An increased 
production of intestinal bile acid occurs in a high fat diet. Bile 
plays important roles in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism 
and also in mediating inflammatory responses (37). Diets rich 
in saturated fatty acids can change the composition of the bile 
acids and promote dysbiosis. The changed microbiota is then 
able to inhibit hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycolysis and impact 
insulin sensitivity (16). As a consequence, bile-sensitive bacteria, 
 4
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
such as Prevotella will be less prevalent, and more bile-tolerant 
bacteria will be predominant. In contrast to these findings, the 
bile acids chenodeoxycholic acid and cholic acid have been 
shown to improve the conditions of fructose-induced NAFLD by 
regulating intestinal transepithelial permeability and prohibiting 
the translocation of bacterial endotoxin from the gut into the 
portal plasma, thereby diminishing the activation of hepatic 
Kupffer cells (38). Additionally, these bile acids protected against 
the loss of tight junctions proteins in the intestinal epithelium. 
 
Vice versa the composition of bile acids is mutual influenced by 
diet and microbiota modulating the immune system of the host 
and impacting the development of diseases such as NAFLD.
HOw DOeS FRUCTOSe CONTRiBUTe TO 
NAFLD AND NON-ALCOHOLiC 
STeATOHePATiTiS (NASH)
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is one of the most frequent hepatic 
disease (39). It incorporates a disease spectrum, which includes 
steatosis (fatty liver), NASH, and cirrhosis. While simple steatosis 
is reversible, NASH provokes hepatocyte injury, inflammation, 
and fibrosis that can aggravate to cirrhosis, liver failure, and even 
hepatocellular carcinoma (40). Moreover, NAFLD is associated 
with characteristics of the metabolic syndrome, which includes 
abdominal obesity, insulin resistance, glucose intolerance or type 
2 diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia syndrome (41–43).
Gut microbiota has been recognized as the main environmen-
tal factor promoting metabolic diseases (28). Multiple studies 
reported fructose as a critical factor contributing to NAFLD 
progression by modulating intestinal microbiota (Table 1). It 
performs crosstalk with its host, maintaining the host’s energy 
homeostasis and stimulating the host’s immunity. Shifts in this 
composition can result in alterations of the symbiotic relationship, 
which can promote metabolic diseases (28). The key bacterial 
products involved in the pathogenesis of NAFLD are lipopolysac-
charides (LPS) (44). LPS is derived from gram-negative bacteria 
and are known to critically contribute to inflammation-related 
processes and insulin resistance. It is able to cross the gastrointes-
tinal mucosa via leaky tight junctions or infiltrating chylomicrons 
(28). Recent studies connected NAFLD to disturbances in the 
gut microbial environment. The microbial composition differed 
between healthy individuals and NAFLD patients (45). In line, 
a diet enriched in fructose not only induced NAFLD but also 
negatively affected the gut barrier and the microbiota, leading to 
dysbiosis (46).
In addition, the microbiota itself was shown to contribute 
to the progression of liver disease and injury and diet-induced 
NAFLD resulted in dysbiosis and a strong decrease in microbial 
diversity (66). Although the underlying mechanisms are not fully 
discovered yet, fructose is known to be highly involved in the 
development of NAFLD by altering gut metabolites (52, 60). 
Fructose increased the intestinal translocation of endotoxins and 
endotoxin levels in plasma (49, 64) contributing to inflamma-
tion and degrading of the mucosa barrier. Consequently, acute 
and chronic exposure to high fructose increased circulating 
endotoxin in patients with NAFLD, accompanied by markers of 
insulin resistance and inflammation (65). Interestingly, hepatic 
damage implicated by epitopic fat deposition occurred rapidly 
and significantly in non-human primates, even in the absence of 
weight gain (64) suggesting that arising periportal inflammation 
is the result of bacterial products overwhelming immune system 
and being presented to Kupffer cells (64). Altogether these studies 
indicate that fructose is able to induce inflammation promoting 
the development of NAFLD in two ways: it contributes to the 
formation of excessive fat triggering inflammation and it causes 
microbial dysbiosis promoting NAFLD pathogenesis.
In line, NAFLD and NASH patients were shown to consume 
more carbohydrates and particularly fructose (50). In a study, in 
which rats were fed a diet enriched in fructose, Wei et al. showed 
that the fecal metabolome profile was associated with the dietary 
fructose (60). Moreover, the chosen diet provoked formation of 
high quantities of SCFAs as well as C15:0 and C17:0 long chain 
fatty acids that are only produced by a special set of bacteria. 
This suggests that fructose-induced alterations in microbiota and 
not fructose itself are responsible for alterations in metabolome 
profile.
FRUCTOSe SAvAGeS THe iNTeSTiNAL 
BARRieR
The intestinal barrier represents a physiological boundary 
protecting the host by preventing entry of intestinal microbiota 
and microbial products (Figure 1). In particular, tight junctions, 
adherens junctions, and desmosomes connect epithelial cells, 
which together form a selective permeable epithelial barrier 
limiting the penetration of potentially pathogen substances (47).
Chronic intake of fructose is associated with a loss of tight 
junction proteins in the duodenum, elevated translocation of 
endotoxin, and induction of toll-like receptors (TLRs) in the liver 
(50, 53, 54, 56, 58). TLRs can be activated by microbial pathogen-
associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). LPS is the most common 
PAMP, occurring in the cell membrane of gram-negative bacteria. 
LPS binds to its receptor TLR4, inducing nuclear translocation 
of transcription factor nuclear factor kappa (NF-κB)-light-chain 
enhancer of activated B cells resulting in an increased expression 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines including tumor necrosis factor-α 
(TNF-α), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interleukin-1β (IL-1β) (63). 
Especially the tight junction proteins occludin and claudin-1 
have been shown to decrease during fructose consumption (53, 
58, 67). This process causes mucosal inflammation and intestinal 
epithelial barrier disruption, increasing the translocation of 
microbial products (47). A recent study of Volynets et al. pointed 
out that a sucrose-rich diet and a fructose-rich diet affected the 
intestinal microbiome in different ways (55). While a Western-
diet high in sucrose primarily promoted weight gain, the intake 
of fructose, especially in combination with a Western diet, caused 
barrier dysfunction accompanied with loss of mucus thickness 
and endotoxin translocation (55).
Mice with a knockout in the F11r gene encoding the tight 
junction adhesion molecule A showed increased infiltration of 
intrahepatic macrophages, elevated recruitment of inflammatory 
monocytes to the liver, upregulation of TLRs and higher content 
 TABLe 1 | Fructose in the crosstalk with microbiota in the pathogenesis of NAFLD.
Species
Treatment
Findings
Conclusion
Reference
Mouse
Diet high in saturated fat, 
fructose, and cholesterol for 
8 weeks
F11r−/− mice with defects in intestinal epithelial permeability developed more severe 
steatohepatitis than control mice.
Diet-induced microbial dysbiosis contribute to the 
development of NASH.
Rahman et al. (47)
High fat diet with 10% fructose
Addition of Lactobacillus paracasei reduced expression of inflammatory markers (Tlr4, Nox-4, 
Tnf-α, MCP-1, IL-4) and number of Kupffer cells, and induced M2-dominant Kupffer cell 
polarization.
Lactobacillus paracasei attenuates hepatic steatosis 
with M2-dominant Kupffer cell polarization.
Sohn et al. (48)
30% fructose in drinking water
Endotoxin levels in portal blood and lipid peroxidation as well as TNF-α expression were 
significantly increased in fructose-fed mice. Hepatic lipid accumulation was lowered by 
concomitant treatment with antibiotics.
Fructose increase intestinal translocation of endotoxin 
leading to liver damage.
Bergheim et al. 
(49)
30% fructose in drinking water 
for 8 weeks
In fructose-fed tlr4 mice, hepatic triglyceride accumulation was significantly reduced by 
approximately 40% in comparison to fructose-fed wild type mice.
Fructose-induced NAFLD is associated with intestinal 
bacterial overgrowth and increased intestinal 
permeability.
Spruss and 
Bergheim (50)
Chronic consumption of 30% 
fructose solution with or without 
Lactobacillus casei Shirota
Treatment with Lactobacillus casei Shirota attenuated activation of TLR4 signaling.
Treatment with Lactobacillus casei Shirota protects 
against the onset of fructose-induced NAFLD.
Wagnerberger 
et al. (51)
30% fructose solution for 
8 weeks
Occludin expression was lowered in the duodenum during fructose feeding without changes 
in microbiota.
Increased intestinal translocation of microbial 
components is involved in the onset of fructose-
induced NAFLD.
Wagnerberger 
et al. (52)
high-fat diet plus 30% fructose 
solution (HFHF)
HFHF diet promoted changes in intestinal tight-junctions proteins, increased insulin resistance 
and plasma cholesterol. HFHF increased hepatic Lipocalin 2 (Lcn2) mRNA expression and 
plasma levels indicating hepatic inflammation.
Diets high in fat and fructose increase the vulnerability 
to metabolic syndrome-related conditions associated 
with NAFLD.
de Sousa 
Rodrigues et al. 
(7)
30% fructose solution for 
8 weeks with or without 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG
Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG increased number of beneficial bacteria, reduced duodenal 
IkB protein levels and restored the duodenal tight junction proteins. Portal LPS and hepatic 
expression of TNF-α, IL-8R and IL-1β was reduced and increase of fat accumulation and 
alanine-aminotransferase was attenuated.
Treatment with Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG protects 
against fructose-induced NAFLD.
Ritze et al. (53)
30% fructose solution for 
8 weeks and combination of bile 
acids chenodeoxycholic acid 
and cholic acid
The additional treatment with bile acids downregulated hepatic TNF-α, SREBP1, FAS mRNA 
expression, and lipid peroxidation. Bile acid treatment normalized expression of occludin, 
markers of Kupffer cell activation, and portal endotoxin levels.
Bile acids prevent fructose-induced hepatic steatosis 
through mechanisms that protect against the fructose-
induced translocation of intestinal bacterial endotoxin
Volynets et al. (38)
30% fructose solution for 
8 weeks with or without 
concomitantly treatment with 
metformin (300 mg/kg body 
weight/day) in drinking water
Chronic consumption of fructose caused a significant increase in hepatic triglyceride and 
plasma AST levels. This effect was attenuated by metformin, which protected against loss 
of the tight-junction proteins occludin and zonula occludens-1 in the duodenum, thereby 
preventing increased translocation of bacterial endotoxin.
Metformin protects the liver from the onset of fructose-
induced NAFLD through mechanisms involving 
its direct effects on hepatic insulin signaling and 
by altering intestinal permeability and subsequent 
endotoxin-dependent activation of Kupffer cells.
Spruss et al. (54)
Sugar- and fat-rich Western-
style diet (WSD) for 12 weeks 
plus fructose-supplemented 
water (30%)
Fructose intake increased endotoxin translocation, induced a loss of mucus thickness in the 
colon (246%) and reduced defensin expression in the ileum and colon. Microbiota analysis 
revealed that fructose increased the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio.
The consumption of a WSD or high fructose 
differentially affects gut permeability and microbiome. 
Fructose, especially when combined with a WSD, 
results in pronounced gut barrier dysfunction.
Volynets et al. (55)
30% fructose solution, a high-fat 
diet, or a combination of both 
for 8 and 16 weeks
The combined diet induced development of hepatic steatosis and progression to 
steatohepatitis. Bacterial endotoxin levels in portal plasma increased, while levels of the 
tight junction protein occludin and zonula occludens-1 were reduced in the duodenum of all 
treated groups after 8 and 16 weeks.
Chronic intake of fructose and/or fat lead to the 
development of NAFLD over time which is associated 
with an increased translocation of bacterial endotoxin.
Sellmann et al. 
(56)
5
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
(Continued)
 Species
Treatment
Findings
Conclusion
Reference
Normal diet and high fat diet 
(HFD) with or without fructose 
for 16 weeks 
Livers of mice fed with HFD and fructose showed a higher infiltration of lymphocytes and 
a lower inflammatory profile of Kupffer cells than livers of mice fed with the HFD without 
fructose. In the resulting dysbiosis, fructose specifically prevented the decrease of mouse 
intestinal bacteria in HFD-fed mice and increased Erysipelotrichi, independently of fat amount.
Fructose induces dysbiosis which is modulated by 
the presence of dietary fat. Combined diet of fat and 
fructose prevents fat-induced activation of Kupffer 
cells.
Ferrere et al. (57)
High fat (40%)/high fructose 
(10%) diet with or without 
Lactobacillus paracasei 
supplementation for 10 weeks
Hepatic fat deposition, serum ALT level, and urinary 51Cr-EDTA clearance were significantly 
lower when mice received L. paracasei. The probiotics caused lower expression of TLR4 
protein and mRNA for TNF-α, IL-4, MCP-1, PPAR-γ, and PPAR-α. The activation of Kupffer 
cells was lowered by L. paracasei.
Lactobacillus paracasei attenuates hepatic steatosis 
and Kupffer cell activation during progression of 
NASH.
Sohn et al. (48)
Rat
Diet enriched in fat and fructose
The diet induced a marked (i) increase in A. muciniphila in cecal microbiota, (ii) dramatic 
changes in the colon mucosa-associated microbiota, with a significant decrease in total 
bacteria, Clostridium leptum, Bacteroides/Prevotella and Lactobacillus/Leuconostoc, (iii) 
decreased expression of claudin-1, and (iv) increased expression of Tnf-α and Tlr4.
Diets enriched in fructose reduce bacterial 
colonization, lead to dysbiosis, increase numbers of 
mucin-degrading bacteria, and provoke inflammation 
in colon mucosa, thereby supporting NAFLD 
progression.
Jegatheesan et al. 
(58)
Fructose-rich diet in combination 
with antibiotics for 8 weeks
After 4 weeks of treatment, fructose-fed rats exhibited higher values of fasting plasma 
insulin and homeostatic model assessment (HOMA) index. Antimicrobial therapy prevented 
diet-induced decrease of ileal occludin expression, increase of hepatic transaminases, lipid 
oxidation, and increase myeloperoxidase activity in ileum, liver, and visceral white adipose 
tissue. Similarly, quantities of portal TNF-α and LPS, as well as ileal TNF-α were induced 
by fructose. Fructose increased levels of plasma and hepatic triglycerides, irrespectively of 
antimicrobial treatment. Fructose increased oxidative damage to mitochondrial lipids and 
proteins, together with a significant decrease in antioxidant activity, while antibiotic treatment 
reversed all of these effects. A diet-dependent increase in Coprococcus and Ruminococcus 
was prevented by antibiotics.
Fructose promotes alterations in the gut microbiota 
profile triggering inflammation and metabolic 
dysregulation in the gut, liver, and visceral white 
adipose tissue. These obesity-related features can be 
experimentally reversed by treatment with antibiotics.
Crescenzo et al. 
(59)
Diet enriched in copper 
combined with drinking water 
containing 30% fructose
The abundance of 38 fecal metabolites changed after dietary doses of copper or high 
fructose. Four SCFAs (valeric acid, butyric acid, isovaleric acid, and isobutyric acid) showed 
major abundance changes. The bacterial-derived long-chain fatty acid margaric was 
increased by excessive fructose intake.
Dietary fructose modifies the gut microbiota phylum 
profile contributing to the metabolic phenotype in 
NAFLD.
Wei et al. (60)
60% isonitrogenous fructose 
diet for 4 weeks
Isonitrogenous fructose diet decreased Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus and tended to 
increase endotoxemia without altering glucose homeostasis, liver function, or gut permeability.
Fructose provokes dysbiosis and fructose-induced 
hepatic alterations associated with NAFLD can be 
blunted by nitrogen supply.
Jegatheesan et al. 
(46)
HFD for 5 weeks with or 
without a synbiotic composed 
out of Lactobacillus 
fermentum (CECT5716) and 
fructooligosaccharides
HFD for 5 weeks caused hepatic steatosis, insulin resistance, endotoxemia, increased 
production of SCFA, and increased numbers of Bacteroidetes in feces with an augmented 
Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes ratio. In addition, HFD weakened barrier function with increased 
LPS plasma levels. Saturation of absorptive mechanisms for fructose increased fructose 
availability in the distal and dysbiosis. Treatment with the synbiotic prevented some of the 
pathological effects, improved dysbiosis, and barrier function.
The synbiotic composed of L. fermentum CECT5716 
and fructooligosaccharides has beneficial effects in the 
pathogenesis of HFD-induced metabolic syndrome.
Rivero-Gutiérrez 
et al. (61)
70% (w/w) high-fructose diet 
for 3 weeks with or without 
oral addition of Lactobacillus 
curvatus and Lactobacillus 
plantarum
Fructose increased plasma glucose, insulin, triglycerides, total cholesterol, oxidative stress, 
liver mass, and liver lipids. Probiotic treatment lowered plasma glucose, insulin, triglycerides, 
and oxidative stress levels, while liver mass and cholesterol were only reduced at high-doses 
of probiotics. Probiotic treatment reduced lipogenesis via downregulation of SREBP1, FAS 
and SCD1 mRNA and increased β-oxidation via upregulation of PPARα and CPT2.
The combined administration of probiotic L. curvatus 
HY7601 and L. plantarum KY1032 suppress the 
clinical characteristics of high-fructose-induced 
metabolic syndrome.
Park et al. (37)
Fructose-rich diet for 8 weeks 
combined with oral treatment 
with either antibiotics or fecal 
samples from control rats
The fructose-rich diet induced markers of metabolic syndrome, inflammation, oxidative stress 
and numbers of Coprococcus and Ruminococcus. These effects were reduced by both 
antimicrobial therapy and fecal treatments.
The development of fructose-induced metabolic 
syndrome is correlated with variations in the gut 
content of specific bacterial taxa.
Di Luccia et al. 
(62)
6
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
TABLe 1 | Continued
(Continued)
 Species
Treatment
Findings
Conclusion
Reference
10% fructose in drinking 
water for 6 weeks plus orally 
administered Juglanin
Juglanin prevented fructose-induced systemic increase of LPS levels, ALT, AST, ALP
, and 
upregulation of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-18. The flavonol suppressed fructose-feeding-
induced activation of signaling pathways related to hepatic injury and inflammation.
Juglanin represses inflammatory responses and 
apoptosis through TLR4-regulated MAPK/NF-κB and 
JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathways.
Zhou et al. (63)
Monkey
Chronic ad libitum and short-
term calorically controlled 
consumption of a high-fructose 
diet
Fructose increased biomarkers of liver damage, endotoxemia, and microbial translocation 
index.
Fructose rapidly causes liver damage secondary 
to changes in endotoxemia levels and microbial 
translocation.
Kavanagh et al. 
(64)
Human
Fructose feeding study
After 24-h fructose feeding, endotoxin levels in NAFLD adolescents increased after fructose 
beverages (consumed with meals) as compared to healthy children. Similarly, endotoxin was 
significantly increased after adolescents consumed fructose beverages for 2 weeks.
Fructose induces low level endotoxemia contributing 
to pediatric NAFLD.
Jin et al. (65)
7
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
TABLe 1 | Continued
of inflammatory cytokines when fed a diet high in fructose and 
fat (47). High fructose consumption promotes gut inflammation 
accompanied by rising endotoxin release, epithelial dysfunction, 
and decline of tight junctions proteins (50, 55, 56) independent of 
the fat content in the diet and energy intake (55). These data again 
illustrate the high impact of nutritional fructose on the intestinal 
barrier function.
The hepatic portal system connects the liver and the intestine, 
commonly called the “gut-liver-axis” (44). Consequently, the liver 
is the first organ exposed to gut-derived exotoxins, receiving 70% 
of the blood supply from the intestine. Therefore, the liver acts 
as a first defense against bacterial pathogens possibly explaining 
the relation between the influx of endotoxin and the progression 
of NAFLD and other liver diseases (68). Additionally, the gut 
microflora is able to stimulate hepatic fat deposition contributing 
to NAFLD and NASH (68). Fructose-induced impairment of 
intestinal gut barrier function enables the entering of bacterial 
products into the portal vein system and the liver, leading to 
Kupffer cell-mediated activation of inflammasomes and inflam-
mation, increased formation of reactive oxygen species and 
proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α that are major causes 
of insulin resistance and dyslipidemia (16, 50, 67). Long periods 
of feeding a high fructose and high fat cause a rise in serum LPS, 
liver TLR4 expression and circulating cytokines suggesting that 
LPS and TLR4 are key molecules in the pathogenesis of NAFLD 
(3, 44, 47). In combination with dysbiosis, impaired gut func-
tion can promote metabolic endotoxemia as it was observed in 
animals that received a high sugar diet (3).
In addition, endotoxins are able to damage hepatocytes, caus-
ing activation of Kupffer cells that produce and release inflam-
matory cytokines and oxygen radicals. These products further 
aggravate liver damage (44). In line, mice fed fructose, fat or a 
combination of both showed elevated endotoxin and TLR4 levels, 
which were associated with changing the polarization of Kupffer 
cells and infiltrating macrophages, contributing to NAFLD (56). 
Infiltration of lymphocytes in the liver was increased when mice 
were fed a high fat diet supplemented with high fructose compared 
to mice fed a high fat diet alone (54, 69). In the respective model, 
fructose consumption induced increased lymphocyte recruit-
ment that was accompanied by higher inflammation indicated by 
the elevated mRNA expression of TNF-α (54).
FRUCTOSe CAUSeS DYSBiOSiS
The structure and biology of gut microbiota are highly individu-
ally so that individuals can be identified simply on the basis of 
their “microbiota fingerprint” (15). Mostly six different bacterial 
phyla colonize the healthy gut (Figure 2), namely Firmicutes, 
Bacteriotedes, 
Proteobacteria, 
Actinobacteria, 
Fusobacteria, 
and Verrucomicrobia (70). About 90% of total bacteria in the 
gut of an adult are represented by three major divisions, the 
Firmicutes (gram-positive), Bacteroidetes (gram-negative), and 
Actinobacteria (gram-positive) (15).
Microbial diversity significantly decreases when consuming 
a high sugar diet already after 1 week, independent of the fat 
content (3). Fructose was shown to induce a different pattern of 
dysbiosis than a high fat diet.
 FiGURe 1 | Impact of fructose on microbiome. Under healthy conditions, the intestine is organized into large numbers of self-renewing crypt-villus units 
guaranteeing effective secretory and absorptive functions. Elevated concentrations of fructose favor pro-inflammatory microbiota producing endotoxins and 
suppressing production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) that are essential for intestinal barrier function. Pro-inflammatory microbiota and their products [i.e., 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS); pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs)] recruit macrophages and bind to toll-like receptors (e.g., TLR4) leading to the release of 
cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) causing mucosal inflammation. Subsequently, inflammation decreases expression of tight junction proteins 
resulting in a higher permeability of the gut barrier. In addition, endotoxins enter the leaky barrier leading to epithelial disruption and increase penetration of 
pathogens into the blood stream. Reaching the liver, endotoxins increase inflammation by activation Kupffer cells through binding to TLR4 and formation of reactive 
oxygen (ROS). The formed radicals induce hepatic damage and fibrosis. Furthermore, in the liver the fructokinase generate fructose-1-phosphate from fructose that 
is degraded into products providing substrate for de novo lipogenesis promoting steatosis.
8
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
Ferrere et al. found increased hepatic lymphocyte infiltration 
when mice were fed with a high fat and fructose diet compared 
to mice fed with high fat without fructose (57). Dysbiosis was 
observed in several studies when fructose was added to a normal 
diet (57). Mostly, a decrease of Bacteriodes and an increase of 
Firmicutes were observed when consuming a Western diet (27, 
71–73). Independent studies comparing lean and diet-induced 
obese subjects suggested that Firmicutes promotes body fat 
accumulation (71, 72). Turnbaugh et al. reported that Firmicutes 
helps obese subjects to get more calories from the ingested 
food, which in turn leads to obesity (74). Also an increase 
in Betaproteobacteria, genera Sutterella was associated with 
enhanced hepatic fat deposition (3). Other studies demonstrated 
Proteobacteria as the main bacteria contributing to hepatic 
fibrosis and liver damage (47, 66). Furthermore, Proteobacteria 
is observed to be increased in several forms of dysbiosis and 
associated with NAFLD (75).
Rats subjected to different diets, marked changes in the micro-
biota already occurred already 1 week after the dietary switch 
to a diet enriched with high fat and high sugar (3). In a kind of 
circle, the increase in body fat mass correlated with shifts in the 
gut microbiota and gut-brain communication, possibly providing 
the basis for the pathogenesis of obesity (3).
Jegatheesan reported about alterations in colon mucosa-
associated microbiota feeding a Western diet high in fat and 
fructose for 8 weeks (58). This was associated with lower levels 
of Clostridium leptum, Bacteroides/Prevotella, and Lactobacillus/
Leuconostoc, while the content of Akkermansia muciniphila was 
not affected (58). A. muciniphila is known to strengthen the 
epithelial barrier function and to impact the systemic health of 
the host (76). It has been shown that this cross-talk between the 
host and gut microbiota protects against high fat diet-induced 
LPS endotoxemia in obese mice (77). In the above mentioned 
study of Sen et al., a high fat/high sugar diet resulted in a specific 
 FiGURe 2 | Bacterial phyla colonizing the healthy or diseased gut. (A) Bifidobacterium longum is a gram-positive, rod-shaped, health-promoting lactic acid 
bacterium present in the human gastrointestinal tract contributing to the production of butyrate. (B) Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron is a gram-negative, anaerobic 
microbe which dominates the intestinal tract flora of most mammals and provides the host with metabolic capabilities. (C) Enterobacter cloacae is a gram-negative, 
facultative-anaerobic, rod-shaped bacterium of the normal gut flora helping to debranch organic substances for energy production. (D) Citrobacter freundii is a 
common component of the gut microbiome of healthy humans. It is a facultative anerobic, rod-shaped gram-negative bacteria. (e) Escherichia coli is a gram-
negative, facultative anaerobic, rod-shaped, “coliform” bacterium, which is commonly found in the lower intestine of warm-blooded organisms. Although most E. coli 
strains are harmless and part of the normal gut flora, some serotypes are occasionally responsible for food contamination causing serious intoxication in their hosts. 
They have capacity to produce vitamin K2 and prevent colonization of the intestine with pathogenic bacteria. (F) Enterococcus faecalis is a gram-positive, 
commensal bacterium inhabiting the gastrointestinal tracts. They are often arranged in pairs or in chain form and have both an anaerobic and aerobic metabolism. 
(G) Salmonella enterica is a gram-negative bacterium, flagellated, facultative anaerobic with a rod-shaped phenotype. A number of Salmonella variations are serious 
human pathogens provoking (spontaneous healing) diarrhea. (H) Clostridium difficile is a gram-positive, anaerobic, spore-forming bacterium able to produce multiple 
toxins causing diarrhea and inflammation. It may become opportunistically established in the human colon during antibiotic therapy. (A–H) All images were taken 
from cultures deposited in the national Culture Collection of Switzerland AG (CCOS, Wädenswil, Switzerland, https://www.ccos.ch/). The respective CCOS strain 
numbers are: CCOS 606, CCOS 632, CCOS 668, CCOS 669, CCOS 684, CCOS 688, CCOS 739, and CCOS 958. All images were taken using a phase contrast 
microscope at 1,000×. Space bars, 10 µm.
9
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
increase in Anaeroplasmatales, which are an order of Mollicutes 
bacteria, a class of Tenericutes which is linked to diet-induced fat 
deposition and obesity (3). Adipose tissue inflammation plays a 
major role in the pathogenesis of NAFLD, intestinal dysbiosis 
might therefore be an additional factor leading to disease pro-
gression (78).
In line with this assumption, Raman et al. discovered a sig-
nificant difference in the fecal microbiome in NAFLD patients 
and healthy subjects (75). In patients with NAFLD, the dysbiosis 
is mainly characterized by a decrease in Bacterioides (Prevotella) 
and an increase of Clostridium coccoides (45). Consistently, 
patients with IBS showed a similar dysbiosis characterized by an 
increase in Clostridium cluster XIVa and Ruminococcaceae with a 
concomitant decrease in Bacteroidetes and Bifidobacteria (79). In 
a more recent study, Xue et al. detected an increase of serum LPS 
and aerobic bacteria, such as Escherichia coli and Enterococcus 
and a decrease in the amounts of Lactobacillus, Bifidobacteria, 
and Bacteriodes in rats that were subjected to diets inducing 
experimental NAFLD (44).
De Minics et al. investigated the transformation of the micro-
biome in animal models of NAFLD, and compared high fat diet-
induced NAFLD and bile duct ligation-induced liver damage. In 
the respective study, it was found that intestinal permeability and 
bacterial translocation are the key pathogenetic events trigger-
ing progression of liver damage. Moreover, the authors showed 
that the main effector in the degree of liver damage is related 
to microbiota changes (66). Similarly, fructose induced altera-
tions in the microbiome of rats were associated with metabolic 
dysregulation and inflammation in gut, liver, and fat tissue that 
could be attenuated by antibiotic treatment or treatment with 
control fecal samples (59, 62). These observations again underpin 
the importance of microbiota in the development of metabolic 
diseases. Therefore, the authors of respective studies concluded 
that manipulation of the gut bacteria interferes with liver injury 
and progression of NAFLD.
To sum up, the human gut is colonized by several strains of 
microbiota, some with pro- and some with anti-inflammatory 
effects. A healthy gut is characterized by a homeostasis requiring 
a balance between the gut flora and the immune system of its host. 
Triggers that provoke intestinal leakage such as fructose cause a 
shift in this homeostasis favoring proinflammatory microbiota, 
suppression of anti-inflammatory microbiota, and reduction of 
their overall diversity.
FRUCTOSe-iNDUCeD PRODUCTiON OF 
URiC ACiD FURTHeR PROvOKeS LiveR 
DAMAGe
It was demonstrated that a Western diet leads to an increase in 
uric acid within the blood and that measured serum levels of uric 
acid directly correlate to the intake of fructose (80). The primary 
producers of uric acid are the hepatocytes and an anomalous 
metabolism of uric acid causes hepatocyte damage and produce 
oxidative stress (81). When fructose from dietary sources is 
absorbed through the fructose transporter GLUT5 within the 
 FiGURe 3 | Hepatic fructose metabolism and uric acid. The metabolism of fructose in the liver starts with a phosphorylation to fructose-1-phosphate. This happens 
quickly and causes an accumulation of AMP
, which stimulates the AMP deaminase and the xanthine oxidase. This results in elevated production of uric acid in liver 
and serum. Uric acid triggers adipose tissue formation, glucose intolerance, elevated blood pressure, and dyslipidemia. Uric acid also promotes mitochondrial 
oxidative stress and release of superoxide anion (
)
O2
−  and hydrogen peroxidase (H2O2). This gives rise to reduced aconitase activity resulting in citrate accumulation. 
This results in increased cytosolic acetyl-CoA which is a substrate for de novo lipogenesis. In addition, uric acid can induce endoplasmatic reticulum stress in 
hepatocytes, thereby leading to a direct activation of genes such as SREBP-1c stimulating hepatic steatosis.
10
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
intestinal epithelium and transported to the liver, it is rapidly 
phosphorylated in the liver by fructokinase, causing hepatic 
accumulation of fructose-1-phosphate (F-1-P) and a simultane-
ously increase in AMP (82) (Figure 3). Subsequently, the elevated 
hepatic concentration of F-1-P induces changes of several other 
metabolites such as glucose, lactate and uric acid (82). F-1-P is 
converted in triosephosphate providing substrates for de novo 
lipogenesis (DNL) (80, 82). Simultaneously, the decrease in 
intracellular phosphate stimulates AMP deaminase stimulating 
the generation of uric acid via xanthine oxidase and produc-
tion of superoxide anion (
)
O2
−  and hydrogen peroxidase (H2O2) 
(80, 83, 84). This process is reinforced under inflammatory condi-
tions (80). Lanaspa et al. suggested that uric acid plays a pivotal 
role in the lipogenic ability of fructose. In the respective study, 
triglyceride accumulation was decreased by adding an inhibitor of 
xanthine oxidase (84). Likewise, Choi et al. showed that uric acid 
induced fat accumulation in HepG2 and in primary hepatocytes 
as a result of endoplasmatic reticulum stress induction, which 
could activate SREBP-1c and stimulate steatosis (85).
Mitochondrial oxidative stress inhibited aconitase resulting 
in accumulation of cytosolic citrate. This tricarboxylic acid 
promoted DNL by activating ATP-sensitive lipase converting 
citrate to acetyl-CoA, thereby inducing fatty acid synthesis 
(84). Simultaneously, oxidative stress in the liver mitochondria 
induced by uric acid leads to alterations of mitochondrial func-
tion and cell damage (81, 84). Even a single administration of 
fructose attenuates uric acid excretion in the ileum (83), and 
long-term consumption of fructose was shown to suppress renal 
uric excretion resulting in increased serum uric acid levels (86). 
Consequently, high uric acid impaired glucose tolerance, causing 
insulin resistance and inhibition of insulin signaling (87).
iMPROveMeNT OF DieT-iNDUCeD NAFLD
Currently, there is no real effective drug therapy for treatment of 
NAFLD. However, interventions in lifestyles, health-promoting 
diets, application of probiotics, nutritional supplementation with 
prebiotics inducing growth or activity of beneficial microorgan-
isms, and exercise resulting in weight loss (88) have been shown 
to improve NAFLD (Figure 4). Some aspects of the beneficial 
effects of each intervention are discussed later.
HeALTH-PROMOTiNG eFFeCTS OF 
MeDiTeRRANeAN DieTS
The traditional MD is based on high intake in mono- and poly-
unsaturated fatty acids derived from olive oil or fish, vegetables, 
fruits, and nuts providing high fiber entry. MD has been shown 
to correlate negatively with NAFLD, and in combination with 
salt restriction, MD was shown to lower blood pressure, improve 
blood lipids, and improve steatosis and steatohepatitis, while 
omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids have been shown to reduce 
accumulation of lipid and liver enzymes, improve insulin sensi-
tivity, and act as an anti-inflammatory compound (8). The high 
amount of fibers in the MD is accompanied by polyphenols, anti-
oxidants and phytochemicals, plant metabolites capable to inhibit 
DNL, liver steatosis, and inflammation. Furthermore, fiber and 
phytochemicals enriched in whole grain are able to reduce energy 
 FiGURe 4 | Intervention strategies for the treatment of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). NAFLD is a multifactorial disease manifesting in liver steatosis, 
hepatocyte injury, inflammation, and fibrogenesis. It is further associated with abdominal obesity, insulin resistance, diabetes, and dyslipidemia. Recent evidence 
suggests that the gut microbiome represent a significant environmental factor contributing to NAFLD. Dysbiosis induces deregulation of the gut endothelial barrier 
function facilitating bacterial translocation. Bacterial-derived products [e.g., lipopolysaccharide (LPS)] are key driver of hepatic inflammation. Although effective 
pharmacological therapies for NAFLD are not available, lifestyle changes (modulation of diet), exercise, and weight loss have been shown to be beneficial on NAFLD 
outcome. Supplementation with probiotics and prebiotics restoring the microbial balance and changing the “bad microbiota” to “good microbiota” have health-
promoting effects by generation of short-chain fatty acids (e.g., acetate, propionate, and butyrate) interfering with NAFLD progression.
FiGURe 5 | Structure, regulation and functional aspects of adenosine 
monophosphate kinase (AMPK) biology. (A,B) The AMPK is a heterotrimeric 
protein kinase complex comprised of α-, β-, and γ-subunits. AMPK is 
activated by phosphorylation of a critical threonine residue located within the 
α-subunit that is triggered by binding of AMP and/or ADP to the γ-subunit. 
ATP competitively inhibits the binding of both AMP and ADP to the γ-subunit 
suggesting that AMPK is a critical sensor of AMP/ATP or ADP/ATP ratios 
(93). The space bar represents 10 Å. The CPK representation in (A) was 
generated with the interactive web-based tool NGL (94) and the ribbon 
drawing in (B) with Ribbons XP Version 3.0 (95) using the structure 
coordinates 5UFU deposited in the PDB Brookhaven database. More 
structural details of human AMPK are given elsewhere (96, 97).
11
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
intake, promote SCFA-producing gut bacteria, and have signifi-
cant prebiotic effects. Based on these positive health-promoting 
effects, it is obvious that changing to a MD is one therapeutically 
effective mean to improve the outcome or severity of NAFLD (8).
SCFA iNFLUeNCe FAT MeTABOLiSM VIA 
ACTivATiON OF ADeNOSiNe 
MONOPHOSPHATe KiNASe (AMPK)
Adenosine monophosphate kinase is an important enzyme 
expressed mainly in the liver and skeletal muscles, playing a 
crucial role in cellular energy homeostasis (15). It is one of the 
central regulators of the body’s metabolisms by promoting cata-
bolic pathways to generate more ATP and inhibition of anabolic 
pathway. The enzyme is a heterotrimer composed of a catalytic 
α-subunit and two regulatory subunits (β and γ) (Figure 5). The 
activity of AMPK is strongly influenced by the gut microbiota 
(Figure 6). Drugs increasing expression of AMPK stimulate fatty 
acid oxidation in liver and muscle tissues, resulting in energy loss 
and prohibition of obesity (89). Specifically, certain food com-
pounds and dietary strategies are suitable to activate AMPK and 
to mediate antidiabetic effects. Some intestinal bacteria are able 
 FiGURe 6 | Adenosine monophosphate kinase (AMPK) activity and gut microbiota. In subjects with a balanced “good” microbiota (left), AMPK phosphorylates key 
regulatory factors [e.g., acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 (ACC1); sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1c (SREB1c)] that inhibit synthesis of fatty acids, cholesterol, and 
triglycerides. It further stimulates β-oxidation and glucose uptake in skeletal muscle and inhibits gluconeogenesis in the liver. During dysbiosis (right), “bad” gut 
microbiota inhibits phosphorylation of AMPK thereby negatively influencing hepatic fatty oxidation and favoring lipogenesis resulting in excessive fat storage in the 
liver and obesity.
12
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
to digest polyphenols and isoflavones from plants and convert it 
to enterolactone (ENL) or to equol, which both activates AMPK 
(63, 90). Furthermore, ENL ameliorates abnormal lipid metabo-
lism, inhibits anabolic glycogen storage, and improves insulin 
sensitivity (63, 90). In the respective study it was shown that ENL 
dose dependently promoted glucose uptake under insulin absent 
condition, which was completely eliminated by an AMPK inhibi-
tor suggesting that ENL is an antidiabetic substance. Conversely, 
the inhibition of AMPK prevented fatty acid oxidation in several 
organs and tissues, promoted the synthesis of cholesterol and 
triglycerides, and favored lipogenesis leading to excess fat storage 
and obesity (28). Therefore, food enriched in such pharmacologi-
cal active substances including grapes, plums, strawberries, pas-
sion fruit, white tea, and soy are predicted to improve diet-induced 
NAFLD. Another study focusing on the beneficial impact of 
butyrate on the gut barrier reported that butyrate activates AMPK 
and induced a redistribution of the tight junction proteins zonula 
occudens-1 (ZO-1) and occludin (91). Additionally, butyrate 
activated AMPK induced SIRT1 phosphorylation that influences 
glucose homeostasis and insulin sensitivity in a positive way (92).
PROBiOTiCS
There is now ample evidence showing the importance of 
probiotics in host health. As already discussed above, the main 
bacterial bioproduct, which is associated with the pathogenesis of 
NAFLD, is LPS. Xue et al. detected a positive correlation between 
serum LPS and aerobic bacteria, such as Escherichia coli and 
Enterococcus and a negative correlation between the amount of 
Lactobacillus, Bifidobacteria, and Bacteriodes in rats subjected to 
NAFLD inducing diets (44). Interestingly, it was demonstrated 
in the respective study that the amounts of anaerobic bacteria 
such as Lactobaiullus and Bifidobacteria could be restored by 
probiotics (44). The application of probiotics ameliorated the 
intestinal barrier in NAFLD and tight junctions were shown to be 
more complete in comparison to NAFLD rats without probiotics 
(44, 48). Furthermore, serum levels of LPS and TLR4 decreased 
significantly after administration of probiotics in a NAFLD rat 
model. In addition, the livers of the respective animals showed 
less hepatocyte swelling, less cell infiltration, lower degree of 
inflammation, and overall milder steatosis (44, 48). Along with 
that, serum levels of triglycerides, total cholesterol, LDL, and 
free fatty acids were diminished. Interestingly, the amount of 
high density lipoprotein (HDL) was increased compared to the 
control group and animals exhibited better glucose tolerance in 
comparison to NAFLD rats without probiotic treatment (44). 
Moreover, different Lactobacillus strains were identified that 
diminished hepatic fat accumulation, increased of serum alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT) levels, and improved intestinal gut 
barrier in a NASH model (48, 51). The combination of multiple 
 13
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
Lactobacillus strains reduced plasma glucose and insulin levels, 
triglycerides, and oxidative stress. Moreover, high probiotic 
treatment reduced liver mass and liver cholesterol by increasing 
β-oxidation and lowering the expression of sterol regulatory 
element-binding transcription factor 1 (SREBP-1), stearoyl-CoA 
desaturase-1 (SCD-1), and fatty acid synthase (FAS) mRNA levels 
that are critically associated with fructose-induced metabolic 
syndrome (37). In similar studies, Lactobacillus casei was shown 
to decrease fat storage, oxidative stress, and hepatic inflammation 
in a NASH mouse model and to diminish the activation of the 
TLR4 signaling cascade (51, 98).
In a rat model, treatment with the butyrate-producing gram 
positive strain Clostridium butyricum prevented the progres-
sion of nutrient-induced NAFLD (92). When given as dietary 
supplement (i.e., MIYAIRI 588), this bacterial strain suppressed 
the diet-induced increase in endotoxin levels, and restored the 
expression of the tight junction proteins ZO-1 and occludin (92). 
It altered the intestinal flora and restored gut-barrier functions, 
reduced hepatic levels of cytokines as TNF-α and was able to 
regulate the activation of NF-κB (92).
Toll-like receptor 4 is the main receptor that detects gut-
derived endotoxins and regulates hepatic inflammation in NASH 
and probiotics were shown to decelerate the progress of NAFLD 
by inhibiting the LPS-TLR4-signaling pathway, improving 
intestinal flora dysbiosis, restoring normal gut homeostasis, and 
upregulating expression of tight junction proteins strengthen-
ing the gut barrier (44, 48). Patients with IBS exhibited a high 
activity of intestinal serine proteases, which could be biologically 
sequestered by Bifidobacteria acting as an antagonist of this 
endopeptidase (79). Therefore, probiotics are presently discussed 
as new therapeutics in clinical management of NAFLD (99).
PReBiOTiCS
In addition, gut microbial modulation can also be achieved 
by intake of substances that induce the growth or activity of 
beneficial microorganisms. These prebiotics act as substrate for 
respective bacteria and can be supplied as a functional food 
component. Prototypically, the plant polyphenol Quercetin 
found in many fruits has been shown to modulate diet-induced 
dysbiosis in mice with NAFLD by increasing the production of 
SCFA, thereby improving the intestinal gut barrier and inhibi-
tion of diet-induced hepatic inflammasome activation (100). In 
addition, Quercetin supplementation counteracted the upregula-
tion of lipogenic genes and reduced the amount of Helicobacter, 
which is more frequent in diet-induced NAFLD (100). In a 
FiGURe 7 | Chemical structure of inulin and fructooligosaccharides. (A) Inulins are naturally occurring indigestible polysaccharides belonging to the class of dietary 
fibers. Inulin from the blue Agave (Agave tequilana) is composed of linear and branched fructose chains that are connected via β-2,1 and β-2,6 linkages to each 
other with a total degree of polymerization between 25 and 34. The depicted structure was constituted with Jmol (version 14.2.15_2015.07.09) using the PubChem 
CID file 24763 deposited in the PubChem Compound Database. (B) Fructoligosaccharides contain a variable number of β-D-fructofuranosyl units with one glucosyl 
unit. (C) Representative fructooligosaccharides (FOS) are kestose (GF2), nystose (GF3), fructosylnystose (GF4) differing in number of fructose residues. The general 
molecular formula of a FOS is C6(n+1)H10(n+1)+2O5(n+1)+1 giving rise to a molecular mass of (n + 1) × 180.156 − n × 18.015 g/mol when n is the total number fructose 
residues.
 14
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
similar study from Baldwin et al., the feeding of powdered grape 
extracts reduced fat gain and hepatic lipid accumulation in a 
high fat mouse model (101). Also fructooligosaccharides (FOS) 
were shown to act as prebiotics in a metabolic syndrome model 
(61). FOS are composed of relative short chains of less than 
20 molecules of fructose that are linked to a glucose terminal 
residue and cannot be digested by humans (Figure 7). They can 
be extracted from many plants (e.g., blue Agarve) and naturally 
occur in high concentration in many fruits and vegetables such as 
bananas, artichokes, onions, chicory root, garlic, asparagus, and 
leeks. In combination with Lactobacillus fermentum, FOS were 
effective in preventing intestinal permeability, systemic inflam-
mation, hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance without inducing 
an innate immune system reaction at the intestinal level during 
high fat diet (61). Similarly, the mentioned study of Baldwin et al. 
showed that FOS mediated an increase in A. muciniphila, which 
was accompanied by decreased metabolic endotoxemia and 
reduced expression of inflammatory markers in white adipose 
tissue (101). Increased abundance of this mucin degrader resid-
ing in the mucus layer correlated with improvement of high-fat 
diet-induced metabolic disorders, reduction of obesity, reduced 
metabolic endotoxemia, adipose tissue inflammation, and insulin 
resistance (77).
PHYSiCAL ACTiviTY
It is already well established that exercise is associated with the 
production and release of potent, pharmacologically active, 
anti-inflammatory mediators, which can principally counteract 
liver inflammation and chronic low-grade inflammation (102). 
In a recent study, Batacan et al. investigated the combined effect 
of exercise and diet treatments on intestinal microbiota in a rat 
model (103). The authors found that the development of the 
microbiota in response to physical activity depends on basic 
starting microbiota. Moreover, training could induce a micro-
biota composition which is able to break down carbohydrates 
more effectively, improving the performance through energy 
provision, and increasing the production of SCFAs. Therefore, 
the authors suggested exercise as a factor for remodeling micro-
biota and gut health which is negatively influenced by high 
fat diets preventing microbiota differentiation in response to 
exercise (103).
CONCLUSiON
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is a systemic disease induced 
and modulated by different metabolic components, in which the 
liver is the main affected organ. Fructose consumption causes 
dysbiosis in the microbiota, leading to an increased perme-
ability of the gut barrier, hepatic inflammation, progressive 
development of metabolic syndrome, and insulin resistance 
(57, 62, 69). Microbiota is highly influenced by diet and life-
style of its host and a major factor influencing the outcome of 
metabolic diseases. Changing gut flora by intake of dietary fiber 
(i.e., roughage), probiotics, prebiotics, as well as intensifying 
frequency and duration of physical activity, leads to improve-
ment of hepatic inflammation and fibrosis. These dietary and 
lifestyle interventions affecting microbiota are presently the 
most effective treatment options to improve NAFLD. Therefore, 
these nutritional and behavioral therapies should be combined 
with diets that lack excessive NAFLD-promoting compounds 
such as fructose and fat that are majorly contributing to the 
pathogenesis of NAFLD.
AUTHOR CONTRiBUTiONS
JL and RW have written this review. SW prepared the final 
Figures 1, 3, 4 and 6. SL provided images of bacterial cultures 
depicted in Figure 2. RW prepared Figures 5 and 7 and has made 
the final editorial assignments. All authors agreed to submit this 
review and to be accountable for the content of the work.
FUNDiNG
RW is supported by grants from the German Research Foundation 
(DFG, SFB/TRR 57 P13 and Q3) and the Interdisciplinary Centre 
for Clinical Research (IZKF) within the Faculty of Medicine at the 
RWTH Aachen University (E7-6). None of the funding sources 
exerted influence on content of this review or decision to submit 
this article for publication.
ReFeReNCeS
1. Turnbaugh PJ, Ridaura VK, Faith JJ, Rey FE, Knight R, Gordon JI. The 
effect of diet on the human gut microbiome: a metagenomic analysis in 
humanized gnotobiotic mice. Sci Transl Med (2009) 1(6):6ra14. doi:10.1126/
scitranslmed.3000322 
2. Houghton D, Stewart CJ, Day CP, Trenell M. Gut microbiota and lifestyle 
interventions in NAFLD. Int J Mol Sci (2016) 17(4):447. doi:10.3390/
ijms17040447 
3. Sen T, Cawthon CR, Ihde BT, Hajnal A, DiLorenzo PM, de La Serre CB, et al. 
Diet-driven microbiota dysbiosis is associated with vagal remodeling and 
obesity. Physiol Behav (2017) 173:305–17. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2017.02.027 
4. Shankar V, Gouda M, Moncivaiz J, Gordon A, Reo NV, Hussein L, et al. 
Differences in gut metabolites and microbial composition and functions 
between Egyptian and U.S. children are consistent with their diets. mSystems 
(2017) 2(1):e169–116. doi:10.1128/mSystems.00169-16 
5. Guilloteau P, Martin L, Eeckhaut V, Ducatelle R, Zabielski R, Van Immerseel F. 
 
From the gut to the peripheral tissues: the multiple effects of butyrate. Nutr Res 
Rev (2010) 23:366–84. doi:10.1017/S0954422410000247 
6. Wang Z, Klipfell E, Bennett BJ, Koeth R, Levison BS, Dugar B, et al. Gut flora 
metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease. Nature 
(2011) 472:57–63. doi:10.1038/nature09922 
7. de Sousa Rodrigues ME, Bekhbat M, Houser MC, Chang J, Walker DI, 
 
Jones DP, et al. Chronic psychological stress and high-fat high-fructose diet 
disrupt metabolic and inflammatory gene networks in the brain, liver, and 
gut and promote behavioral deficits in mice. Brain Behav Immun (2017) 
59:158–72. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2016.08.021 
8. Zelber-Sagi S, Salomone F, Mlynarsky L. The Mediterranean dietary pattern as 
the diet of choice for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: evidence and plausible 
mechanisms. Liver Int (2017) 37:936–49. doi:10.1111/liv.13435 
9. Moorhouse JA, Kark RM. Fructose and diabetes. Am J Med (1957) 23(1):46–58. 
doi:10.1016/0002-9343(57)90357-1 
 15
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
10. Pelkonen R, Aro A, Nikkilä EA. Metabolic effects of dietary fructose in insu-
lin dependent diabetes of adults. Acta Med Scand Suppl (1972) 542:187–93. 
11. Darragh JH, Womersley RA, Meroney WH. Fructose in the treatment of 
diabetic ketosis. J Clin Invest (1953) 32:1214–21. doi:10.1172/JCI102848 
12. White JS. Challenging the fructose hypothesis: new perspectives on fructose 
consumption and metabolism. Adv Nutr (2013) 4:246–56. doi:10.3945/
an.112.003137 
13. Melchior  C, Gourcerol G, Déchelotte P, Leroi AM,  Ducrotté P. Symptomatic 
fructose malabsorption in irritable bowel syndrome: A prospective study. 
United European Gastroenterol J (2014) 2:131–7. doi:10.1177/2050640614 
521124
14. Goebel-Stengel M, Stengel A, Schmidtmann M, van der Voort I, Kobelt P, 
Mönnikes H. Unclear abdominal discomfort: pivotal role of carbohydrate 
malabsorption. J Neurogastroenterol Motil (2014) 20:228–35. doi:10.5056/
jnm.2014.20.2.228 
15. Dahiya DK, Renuka, Puniya M, Shandilya UK, Dhewa T, Kumar N, et al. 
Gut microbiota modulation and its relationship with obesity using prebiotic 
fibers and probiotics: a review. Front Microbiol (2017) 8:563. doi:10.3389/
fmicb.2017.00563 
16. Mazzotti A, Caletti MT, Sasdelli AS, Brodosi L, Marchesini G. Pathophysiology 
of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: lifestyle-gut-gene interaction. Dig Dis 
(2016) 34(Suppl 1):3–10. doi:10.1159/000447275 
17. Koh A, De Vadder F, Kovatcheva-Datchary P, Bäckhed F. From dietary fiber 
to host physiology: short-chain fatty acids as key bacterial metabolites. Cell 
(2016) 165:1332–45. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.05.041 
18. Zhou D, Pan Q, Xin FZ, Zhang RN, He CX, Chen GY, et al. Sodium butyr-
ate attenuates high-fat diet-induced steatohepatitis in mice by improving 
gut microbiota and gastrointestinal barrier. World J Gastroenterol (2017) 
23:60–75. doi:10.3748/wjg.v23.i1.60 
19. Gibson GR, Probert HM, Loo JV, Rastall RA, Roberfroid MB. Dietary mod-
ulation of the human colonic microbiota: updating the concept of prebiotics. 
Nutr Res Rev (2004) 17:259–75. doi:10.1079/NRR200479 
20. Canfora EE, Jocken JW, Blaak EE. Short-chain fatty acids in control of 
body weight and insulin sensitivity. Nat Rev Endocrinol (2015) 11:577–91. 
doi:10.1038/nrendo.2015.128 
21. Kasubuchi M, Hasegawa S, Hiramatsu T, Ichimura A, Kimura I. Dietary gut 
microbial metabolites, short-chain fatty acids, and host metabolic regulation. 
Nutrients (2015) 7:2839–49. doi:10.3390/nu7042839 
22. den Besten G, van Eunen K, Groen AK, Venema K, Reijngoud DJ, Bakker BM. 
The role of short-chain fatty acids in the interplay between diet, gut microbi-
ota, and host energy metabolism. J Lipid Res (2013) 54:2325–40. doi:10.1194/
jlr.R036012 
23. Gonçalvesa P, Martel F. Regulation of colonic epithelial butyrate transport: 
focus on colorectal cancer. Porto Biomed J (2016) 1:83–91. doi:10.1016/j.
pbj.2016.04.004 
24. Bourriaud C, Robins RJ, Martin L, Kozlowski F, Tenailleau E, Cherbut C, 
et al. Lactate is mainly fermented to butyrate by human intestinal microfloras 
but inter-individual variation is evident. J Appl Microbiol (2005) 99:201–12. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2672.2005.02605.x 
25. El Aidy S, Van den Abbeele P, Van de Wiele T, Louis P, Kleerebezem M. 
Intestinal colonization: how key microbial players become established 
in this dynamic process: microbial metabolic activities and the interplay 
between the host and microbes. Bioessays (2013) 35:913–23. doi:10.1002/
bies.201300073 
26. Samuel BS, Shaito A, Motoike T, Rey FE, Backhed F, Manchester JK, et al. 
Effects of the gut microbiota on host adiposity are modulated by the short-
chain fatty-acid binding G protein-coupled receptor, Gpr41. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A (2008) 105:16767–72. doi:10.1073/pnas.0808567105 
27. Riva A, Borgo F, Lassandro C, Verduci E, Morace G, Borghi E, et al. 
Pediatric obesity is associated with an altered gut microbiota and discor-
dant shifts in firmicutes populations. Environ Microbiol (2017) 19:95–105. 
doi:10.1111/1462-2920.13463 
28. Boulangé CL, Neves AL, Chilloux J, Nicholson JK, Dumas ME. Impact of the 
gut microbiota on inflammation, obesity, and metabolic disease. Genome Med 
(2016) 8(1):42. doi:10.1186/s13073-016-0303-2 
29. den Besten G, Lange K, Havinga R, van Dijk TH, Gerding A, van Eunen K, 
et al. Gut-derived short-chain fatty acids are vividly assimilated into host 
carbohydrates and lipids. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol (2013) 
305:G900–10. doi:10.1152/ajpgi.00265.2013 
30. Noble EE, Hsu TM, Jones RB, Fodor AA, Goran MI, Kanoski SE. Early-life 
sugar consumption affects the rat microbiome independently of obesity. J Nutr 
(2017) 147:20–8. doi:10.3945/jn.116.238816 
31. Frost G, Sleeth ML, Sahuri-Arisoylu M, Lizarbe B, Cerdan S, Brody L, et al. 
The short-chain fatty acid acetate reduces appetite via a central homeostatic 
mechanism. Nat Commun (2014) 5:3611. doi:10.1038/ncomms4611 
32. Falony G, Vlachou A, Verbrugghe K, De Vuyst L. Cross-feeding between 
Bifidobacterium longum BB536 and acetate-converting, butyrate-producing 
colon bacteria during growth on oligofructose. Appl Environ Microbiol (2006) 
72:7835–41. doi:10.1128/AEM.01296-06 
33. Miyoshi M, Usami M, Ohata A. Short-chain fatty acids and trichostatin A 
alter tight junction permeability in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. 
Nutrition (2008) 24:1189–98. doi:10.1016/j.nut.2008.06.012 
34. Soret R, Chevalier J, De Coppet P, Poupeau G, Derkinderen P, Segain JP, et al. 
Short-chain fatty acids regulate the enteric neurons and control gastrointes-
tinal motility in rats. Gastroenterology (2010) 138(5):1772–82. doi:10.1053/j.
gastro.2010.01.053 
35. Duncan SH, Louis P, Thomson JM, Flint HJ. The role of pH in determining 
the species composition of the human colonic microbiota. Environ Microbiol 
(2009) 11:2112–22. doi:10.1111/j.1462-2920.2009.01931.x 
36. Robertson MD, Bickerton AS, Dennis AL, Vidal H, Frayn KN. Insulin-
sensitizing effects of dietary resistant starch and effects on skeletal muscle and 
adipose tissue metabolism. Am J Clin Nutr (2005) 82:559–67. 
37. Park DY, Ahn YT, Huh CS, McGregor RA, Choi MS. Dual probiotic strains 
suppress high fructose-induced metabolic syndrome. World J Gastroenterol 
(2013) 19:274–83. doi:10.3748/wjg.v19.i2.274 
38. Volynets V, Spruss A, Kanuri G, Wagnerberger S, Bischoff SC, Bergheim I. 
Protective effect of bile acids on the onset of fructose-induced hepatic steatosis 
in mice. J Lipid Res (2010) 51:3414–24. doi:10.1194/jlr.M007179 
39. Francque SM, van der Graaff D, Kwanten WJ. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
and cardiovascular risk: pathophysiological mechanisms and implications. 
J Hepatol (2016) 65:425–43. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2016.04.005 
40. de Alwis NM, Day CP. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: the mist gradually 
clears. J Hepatol (2008) 48:S104–12. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2008.01.009 
41. Ratziu V, Bellentani S, Cortez-Pinto H, Day C, Marchesini G. A position 
statement on NAFLD/NASH based on the EASL 2009 special conference. 
J Hepatol (2010) 53:372–84. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2010.04.008 
42. Kotronen A, Yki-Järvinen H. Fatty liver: a novel component of the metabolic 
syndrome. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol (2008) 28:27–38. doi:10.1161/
ATVBAHA.107.147538 
43. Vanni E, Bugianesi E, Kotronen A, De Minicis S, Yki-Järvinen H, Svegliati-
Baroni G. From the metabolic syndrome to NAFLD or vice versa? Dig Liver 
Dis (2010) 42:320–30. doi:10.1016/j.dld.2010.01.016 
44. Xue L, He J, Gao N, Lu X, Li M, Wu X, et al. Probiotics may delay the pro-
gression of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease by restoring the gut microbiota 
structure and improving intestinal endotoxemia. Sci Rep (2017) 7:45176. 
doi:10.1038/srep45176 
45. Mouzaki M, Comelli EM, Arendt BM, Bonengel J, Fung SK, Fischer SE, 
et al. Intestinal microbiota in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. 
Hepatology (2013) 58:120–7. doi:10.1002/hep.26319 
46. Jegatheesan P, Beutheu S, Ventura G, Sarfati G, Nubret E, Kapel N, et al. Effect 
of specific amino acids on hepatic lipid metabolism in fructose-induced 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Clin Nutr (2016) 35:175–82. doi:10.1016/j.
clnu.2015.01.021 
47. Rahman K, Desai C, Iyer SS, Thorn NE, Kumar P, Liu Y, et al. Loss of junctional 
adhesion molecule A promotes severe steatohepatitis in mice on a diet high in 
saturated fat, fructose, and cholesterol. Gastroenterology (2016) 151:733–46.
e12. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2016.06.022 
48. Sohn W, Jun DW, Lee KN, Lee HL, Lee OY, Choi HS, et al. Lactobacillus 
paracasei induces M2-dominant Kupffer cell polarization in a mouse model 
of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Dig Dis Sci (2015) 60:3340–50. doi:10.1007/
s10620-015-3770-1 
49. Bergheim I, Weber S, Vos M, Krämer S, Volynets V, Kaserouni S, et al. 
Antibiotics protect against fructose-induced hepatic lipid accumulation in 
mice: role of endotoxin. J Hepatol (2008) 48:983–92. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2008. 
01.035 
50. Spruss A, Bergheim I. Dietary fructose and intestinal barrier: potential risk 
factor in the pathogenesis of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. J Nutr Biochem 
(2009) 20:657–62. doi:10.1016/j.jnutbio.2009.05.006 
 16
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
51. Wagnerberger S, Spruss A, Kanuri G, Stahl C, Schröder M, Vetter W, 
et al. Lactobacillus casei Shirota protects from fructose-induced liver 
steatosis: a mouse model. J Nutr Biochem (2013) 24:531–8. doi:10.1016/j.
jnutbio.2012.01.014 
52. Wagnerberger S, Spruss A, Kanuri G, Volynets V, Stahl C, Bischoff SC, et al. 
Toll-like receptors 1–9 are elevated in livers with fructose-induced hepatic 
steatosis. Br J Nutr (2012) 107:1727–38. doi:10.1017/S0007114511004983 
53. Ritze Y, Bárdos G, Claus A, Ehrmann V, Bergheim I, Schwiertz A, et al. 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG protects against non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
in mice. PLoS One (2014) 9(1):e80169. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0080169 
54. Spruss A, Kanuri G, Stahl C, Bischoff SC, Bergheim I. Metformin protects 
against the development of fructose-induced steatosis in mice: role of the 
intestinal barrier function. Lab Invest (2012) 92:1020–32. doi:10.1038/
labinvest.2012.75 
55. Volynets V, Louis S, Pretz D, Lang L, Ostaff MJ, Wehkamp J, et al. Intestinal 
barrier function and the gut microbiome are differentially affected in mice 
fed a Western-style diet or drinking water supplemented with fructose. J Nutr 
(2017) 147:770–80. doi:10.3945/jn.116.242859 
56. Sellmann C, Priebs J, Landmann M, Degen C, Engstler AJ, Jin CJ, et al. Diets 
rich in fructose, fat or fructose and fat alter intestinal barrier function and 
lead to the development of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease over time. J Nutr 
Biochem (2015) 26:1183–92. doi:10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.05.011 
57. Ferrere G, Leroux A, Wrzosek L, Puchois V, Gaudin F, Ciocan D, et al. 
Activation of Kupffer cells is associated with a specific dysbiosis induced 
by fructose or high fat diet in mice. PLoS One (2016) 11(1):e0146177. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0146177 
58. Jegatheesan P, Beutheu S, Freese K, Waligora-Dupriet AJ, Nubret E, 
 
Butel MJ, et al. Preventive effects of citrulline on Western diet-induced 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in rats. Br J Nutr (2016) 116:191–203. 
doi:10.1017/S0007114516001793 
59. Crescenzo R, Mazzoli A, Di Luccia B, Bianco F, Cancelliere R, 
 
Cigliano L, et al. Dietary fructose causes defective insulin signalling and 
ceramide accumulation in the liver that can be reversed by gut microbiota 
modulation. Food Nutr Res (2017) 61(1):1331657. doi:10.1080/16546628.
2017.1331657 
60. Wei X, Song M, Yin X, Schuschke DA, Koo I, McClain CJ, et al. Effects 
of dietary different doses of copper and high fructose feeding on rat 
fecal metabolome. J Proteome Res (2015) 14:4050–8. doi:10.1021/acs.
jproteome.5b00596 
61. Rivero-Gutiérrez B, Gámez-Belmonte R, Suárez MD, Lavín JL, Aransay AM, 
 
Olivares M, et al. A synbiotic composed of Lactobacillus fermentum 
CECT5716 and FOS prevents the development of fatty acid liver and 
glycemic alterations in rats fed a high fructose diet associated with 
changes in the microbiota. Mol Nutr Food Res (2017) 61(8). doi:10.1002/
mnfr.201600622 
62. Di Luccia B, Crescenzo R, Mazzoli A, Cigliano L, Venditti P, Walser JC, et al. 
Rescue of fructose-induced metabolic syndrome by antibiotics or faecal 
transplantation in a rat model of obesity. PLoS One (2015) 10(8):e0134893. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0134893 
63. Zhou Y, Zheng J, Li Y, Xu DP, Li S, Chen YM, et al. Natural polyphenols for 
prevention and treatment of cancer. Nutrients (2016) 8(8):E515. doi:10.3390/
nu8080515 
64. Kavanagh K, Wylie AT, Tucker KL, Hamp TJ, Gharaibeh RZ, Fodor AA, 
et al. Dietary fructose induces endotoxemia and hepatic injury in calori-
cally controlled primates. Am J Clin Nutr (2013) 98:349–57. doi:10.3945/
ajcn.112.057331 
65. Jin R, Willment A, Patel SS, Sun X, Song M, Mannery YO, et al. Fructose 
induced endotoxemia in pediatric nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Int 
J Hepatol (2014) 2014:560620. doi:10.1155/2014/560620 
66. De Minicis S, Rychlicki C, Agostinelli L, Saccomanno S, Candelaresi C, 
 
Trozzi L, et al. Dysbiosis contributes to fibrogenesis in the course of 
chronic liver injury in mice. Hepatology (2014) 59:1738–49. doi:10.1002/
hep.26695 
67. Ochoa M, Lallès JP, Malbert CH, Val-Laillet D. Dietary sugars: their detection 
by the gut-brain axis and their peripheral and central effects in health and 
diseases. Eur J Nutr (2015) 54:1–24. doi:10.1007/s00394-014-0776-y 
68. Mouzaki M, Allard JP. The role of nutrients in the development, progression, 
and treatment of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. J Clin Gastroenterol (2012) 
46:457–67. doi:10.1097/MCG.0b013e31824cf51e 
69. Dupas J, Goanvec C, Feray A, Guernec A, Alain C, Guerrero F, et al. Progressive 
induction of type 2 diabetes: effects of a reality-like fructose enriched diet in 
young Wistar rats. PLoS One (2016) 11(1):e0146821. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0146821 
70. Woting A, Blaut M. The intestinal microbiota in metabolic disease. Nutrients 
(2016) 8(4):202. doi:10.3390/nu8040202 
71. Turnbaugh PJ, Backhed F, Fulton L, Gordon JI. Marked alterations in the 
distal gut microbiome linked to diet-induced obesity. Cell Host Microbe (2008) 
3:213–23. doi:10.1016/j.chom.2008.02.015 
72. Khan MJ, Gerasimidis K, Edwards CA, Shaikh MG. Role of gut microbiota in 
the aetiology of obesity: proposed mechanisms and review of the literature. 
J Obes (2016) 2016:7353642. doi:10.1155/2016/7353642 
73. Ley RE, Bäckhed F, Turnbaugh P, Lozupone CA, Knight RD, Gordon JI. Obesity 
alters gut microbial ecology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005) 102:11070–5. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.0504978102 
74. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA, Magrini V, Mardis ER, Gordon JI. An 
obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy harvest. 
Nature (2006) 444:1027–31. doi:10.1038/nature05414 
75. Raman M, Ahmed I, Gillevet PM, Probert CS, Ratcliffe NM, Smith S, et al. 
Fecal microbiome and volatile organic compound metabolome in obese 
humans with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
(2013) 11:868–75.e1–3. doi:10.1016/j.cgh.2013.02.015 
76. Reunanen J, Kainulainen V, Huuskonen L, Ottman N, Belzer C, Huhtinen H, 
et al. Akkermansia muciniphila adheres to enterocytes and strengthens the 
integrity of the epithelial cell layer. Appl Environ Microbiol (2015) 81:3655–62. 
doi:10.1128/AEM.04050-14 
77. Everard A, Belzer C, Geurts L, Ouwerkerk JP, Druart C, Bindels LB, et al. 
Cross-talk between Akkermansia muciniphila and intestinal epithelium 
controls diet-induced obesity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013) 110:9066–71. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1219451110 
78. Doulberis M, Kotronis G, Gialamprinou D, Kountouras J, Katsinelos P. Non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease: an update with special focus on the role of gut 
microbiota. Metabolism (2017) 71:182–97. doi:10.1016/j.metabol.2017.03.013 
79. Rajilić-Stojanović M, Jonkers DM, Salonen A, Hanevik K, Raes J, Jalanka J, 
et al. Intestinal microbiota and diet in IBS: causes, consequences, or epiphe-
nomena? Am J Gastroenterol (2015) 110:278–87. doi:10.1038/ajg.2014.427 
80. Caliceti C, Calabria D, Roda A, Cicero AF. Fructose intake, serum uric acid, 
and cardiometabolic disorders: a critical review. Nutrients (2017) 9(4):E395. 
doi:10.3390/nu9040395 
81. Yang Y, Zhou Y, Cheng S, Sun JL, Yao H, Ma L. Effect of uric acid on mito-
chondrial function and oxidative stress in hepatocytes. Genet Mol Res (2016) 
15(2). doi:10.4238/gmr.15028644 
82. Tran C. Inborn errors of fructose metabolism. What can we learn from them? 
Nutrients (2017) 9(4):E356. doi:10.3390/nu9040356 
83. Kaneko C, Ogura J, Sasaki S, Okamoto K, Kobayashi M, Kuwayama K, et al. 
Fructose suppresses uric acid excretion to the intestinal lumen as a result of the 
induction of oxidative stress by NADPH oxidase activation. Biochim Biophys 
Acta (2017) 1861:559–66. doi:10.1016/j.bbagen.2016.11.042 
84. Lanaspa MA, Sanchez-Lozada LG, Choi YJ, Cicerchi C, Kanbay M, Roncal-
Jimenez CA, et al. Uric acid induces hepatic steatosis by generation of 
mitochondrial oxidative stress: potential role in fructose-dependent and - 
independent fatty liver. J Biol Chem (2012) 287:40732–44. doi:10.1074/jbc.
M112.399899 
85. Choi YJ, Shin HS, Choi HS, Park JW, Jo I, Oh ES, et al. Uric acid induces fat 
accumulation via generation of endoplasmic reticulum stress and SREBP-1c 
activation in hepatocytes. Lab Invest (2014) 94:1114–25. doi:10.1038/
labinvest.2014.98 
86. Nakagawa T, Hu H, Zharikov S, Tuttle KR, Short RA, Glushakova O, et al. A 
causal role for uric acid in fructose-induced metabolic syndrome. Am J Physiol 
Renal Physiol (2006) 290:F625–31. doi:10.1152/ajprenal.00140.2005 
87. Zhu Y, Hu Y, Huang T, Zhang Y, Li Z, Luo C, et al. High uric acid directly 
inhibits insulin signalling and induces insulin resistance. Biochem Biophys Res 
Commun (2014) 447:707–14. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.04.080 
88. Kenneally S, Sier JH, Moore JB. Efficacy of dietary and physical activity inter-
vention in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: a systematic review. BMJ Open 
Gastroenterol (2017) 4(1):e000139. doi:10.1136/bmjgast-2017-000139 
89. Kim KA, Gu W, Lee IA, Joh EH, Kim DH. High fat diet-induced gut micro-
biota exacerbates inflammation and obesity in mice via the TLR4 signaling 
pathway. PLoS One (2012) 7(10):e47713. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0047713 
 17
Lambertz et al.
Fructose in Crosstalk with Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of NAFLD
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 1159
90. Zhou F, Furuhashi K, Son MJ, Toyozaki M, Yoshizawa F, Miura Y, et al. 
Antidiabetic effect of enterolactone in cultured muscle cells and in type 2 
diabetic model db/db mice. Cytotechnology (2017) 69:493–502. doi:10.1007/
s10616-016-9965-2 
91. Peng L, Li ZR, Green RS, Holzman IR, Lin J. Butyrate enhances the intestinal 
barrier by facilitating tight junction assembly via activation of AMP-activated 
protein kinase in Caco-2 cell monolayers. J Nutr (2009) 139:1619–25. 
doi:10.3945/jn.109.104638 
92. Endo H, Niioka M, Kobayashi N, Tanaka M, Watanabe T. Butyrate-producing 
probiotics reduce nonalcoholic fatty liver disease progression in rats: new 
insight into the probiotics for the gut-liver axis. PLoS One (2013) 8(5):e63388. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0063388 
93. Jeon SM. Regulation and function of AMPK in physiology and diseases. Exp 
Mol Med (2016) 48(7):e245. doi:10.1038/emm.2016.81 
94. Rose AS, Hildebrand PW. NGL Viewer: a web application for molecular visu-
alization. Nucleic Acids Res (2015) 43(W1):W576–9. doi:10.1093/nar/gkv402 
95. Carson M. Ribbons. Methods Enzymol (1997) 277:493–505. doi:10.1016/
S0076-6879(97)77027-7 
96. Cameron KO, Kurumbail RG. Recent progress in the identification of 
adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activators. 
Bioorg Med Chem Lett (2016) 26(21):5139–48. doi:10.1016/j.bmcl.2016. 
09.065 
97. Cokorinos EC, Delmore J, Reyes AR, Albuquerque B, Kjøbsted R, 
 
Jørgensen NO, et al. Activation of skeletal muscle AMPK promotes glucose 
disposal and glucose lowering in non-human primates and mice. Cell Metab 
(2017) 25(5):1147–59.e10. doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2017.04.010 
98. Nardone G, Compare D, Liguori E, Di Mauro V, Rocco A, Barone M, et al. 
Protective effects of Lactobacillus paracasei F19 in a rat model of oxidative 
and metabolic hepatic injury. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol (2010) 
299:G669–76. doi:10.1152/ajpgi.00188.2010 
99. Putignani L, Alisi A, Nobili V. Pediatric NAFLD: the future role of patient-tai-
lored probiotics therapy. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (2016) 63(Suppl 1): 
S6–8. doi:10.1097/MPG.0000000000001220 
100. Porras D, Nistal E, Martínez-Flórez S, Pisonero-Vaquero S, Olcoz JL, 
 
Jover R, et al. Protective effect of quercetin on high-fat diet-induced non- 
alcoholic fatty liver disease in mice is mediated by modulating intestinal 
microbiota imbalance and related gut-liver axis activation. Free Radic Biol 
Med (2017) 102:188–202. doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.037 
101. Baldwin J, Collins B, Wolf PG, Martinez K, Shen W, Chuang CC, et al. Table 
grape consumption reduces adiposity and markers of hepatic lipogenesis and 
alters gut microbiota in butter fat-fed mice. J Nutr Biochem (2016) 27:123–35. 
doi:10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.08.027 
102. Schon HT, Weiskirchen R. Exercise-induced release of pharmacologically 
active substances and their relevance for therapy of hepatic injury. Front 
Pharmacol (2016) 7:283. doi:10.3389/fphar.2016.00283 
103. Batacan RB, Fenning AS, Dalbo VJ, Scanlan AT, Duncan MJ, Moore RJ, et al. 
A gut reaction: the combined influence of exercise and diet on gastrointes-
tinal microbiota in rats. J Appl Microbiol (2017) 122:1627–38. doi:10.1111/
jam.13442 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Lambertz, Weiskirchen, Landert and Weiskirchen. This is an 
open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, 
provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publica-
tion in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, 
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
