 Research
An app with remote support achieves better adherence to home exercise
programs than paper handouts in people with musculoskeletal
conditions: a randomised trial
Tara E Lambert a, Lisa A Harvey b,c, Christos Avdalis a, Lydia W Chen a, Sayanthinie Jeyalingam a,
Carin A Pratt a, Holly J Tatum a, Jocelyn L Bowden b,c, Barbara R Lucas a
a Physiotherapy Department, Royal North Shore Hospital; b John Walsh Centre for Rehabilitation Research, Sydney School of Medicine; c Kolling Institute,
Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia
Introduction
Home exercise programs (HEPs) are an integral component of
treatment for many different types of musculoskeletal conditions,
and are typically designed by physiotherapists to suit the
individual needs of patients during face-to-face sessions.1,2 These
HEPs are usually provided to patients on a paper handout.3 The
prescription of HEPs encourages patients to take responsibility for
their rehabilitation and self-manage their conditions over the long
term.4 Adherence to these programs has been directly associated
with improved patient outcomes;5,6 however, reports indicate that
up to 70% of patients do not perform HEPs as prescribed and that
adherence tends to decline over time.6
Non-adherence to HEPs can be due to patient-related factors
including low motivation, pain, poor self-efficacy, limited past
experience with exercise, and reduced social support. Also, the
benefits of HEPs may not be immediately recognised by patients.7
Some researchers suggest that adherence to HEPs could be
improved if physiotherapists increased their amount of face-to-
face time with patients,8,9but this is costly and rarely feasible given
finite resources. Therefore, other solutions to improve adherence
and better utilise physiotherapy resources are needed.
Whilst the research to date has addressed many patient-related
factors, little attention has been directed at evaluating different
modes of delivering HEPs and how this affects adherence. Those who
have investigated the influence of mode of delivery on adherence
Journal of Physiotherapy xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
K E Y 
W O R D S
Patient compliance
Physical therapy modalities
Exercise therapy
Mobile applications
A B S T R A C T
Question: Do people with musculoskeletal conditions better adhere to their home exercise programs
when these are provided to them on an app with remote support compared to paper handouts? Design:
Randomised, parallel-group trial with intention-to-treat analysis. Participants: Eighty participants with
upper or lower limb musculoskeletal conditions were recruited to the trial. Each participant was
prescribed a 4-week home exercise program by a physiotherapist at a tertiary teaching hospital in
Australia. Participants were randomly assigned via a computer-generated concealed block randomisation
procedure to either intervention (n = 40) or control (n = 40) groups. Intervention: Participants in the
intervention group received their home exercise programs on an app linked to the freely available
website www.physiotherapyexercises.com. They also received supplementary phone 
calls and
motivational text messages. Participants in the control group received their home exercise programs
as a paper handout. Outcome measures: Blinded assessors collected outcome measures at baseline and
4 weeks. The primary outcome was self-reported exercise adherence. There were five secondary
outcomes, which captured functional performance, disability, patient satisfaction, perceptions of
treatment effectiveness, and different aspects of adherence. Results: Outcomes were available on
77 participants. The mean between-group difference for self-reported exercise adherence at 4 weeks was
1.3/11 points (95% CI 0.2 to 2.3), favouring the intervention group. The mean between-group difference
for function was 0.9/11 points (95% CI 0.1 to 1.7) on the Patient-Specific Functional Scale, also favouring
the intervention group. There were no significant between-group differences for the remaining
outcomes. Conclusion: People with musculoskeletal conditions adhere better to their home exercise
programs when the programs are provided on an app with remote support compared to paper handouts;
however, the clinical importance of this added adherence is unclear. Trial registration:
ACTRN12616000066482. [Lambert TE, Harvey LA, Avdalis C, Chen LW, Jeyalingam S, Pratt CA, Tatum
HJ, Bowden JL, Lucas BR (2017) An app with remote support achieves better adherence to home
exercise programs than paper handouts in people with musculoskeletal conditions: a randomised
trial. Journal of Physiotherapy XX: XX–XX]
© 2017 Australian Physiotherapy Association. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
G Model
JPHYS-342; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Lambert TE, et al. An app with remote support achieves better adherence to home exercise programs
than paper handouts in people with musculoskeletal conditions: a randomised trial. J Physiother. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jphys.2017.05.015
J o u r n a l o f
PHYSIOTHERAPY
jou r nal h o mep age: w ww.els evier .co m/lo c ate/jp hys
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jphys.2017.05.015
1836-9553/© 2017 Australian Physiotherapy Association. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
 have reported mixed results. For example, studies examining the use
of video or audio tapes to deliver HEPs have not demonstrated any
added benefit over paper handouts or brochures.10–12More recently,
a randomised, controlled trial in an outpatient stroke population
compared smart device technology (video and built-in reminder
functions) to paper handouts, and also failed to demonstrate any
difference in adherence.13 In contrast, a randomised, controlled trial
recently reported greater adherence to HEPs delivered through
mobile phones with an internet-based self-monitoring system in
patients with haemophilia-related knee dysfunction.14
Given that more than 85% of Australians are internet users, with
an estimated 32 million mobile phone subscriptions,15 apps are
potentially highly feasible for delivering and encouraging adher-
ence to HEPs. Promising results have already been reported with
the use of apps to improve adherence and outcomes in other health
areas, such as weight loss16 and diabetic management.17 There
could be several reasons for this success, including the potential for
apps to send alerts, motivating messages or reminders.18 In
addition, it may be more convenient for patients to access their
HEPs via a mobile phone or device rather than a paper handout. A
recent systematic review suggested that the ability of apps to
include self-monitoring systems, for example an electronic log of
completed exercises, could also increase adherence in people with
chronic musculoskeletal pain.19 Furthermore, patients’ adherence
could be positively influenced by their knowledge that their
physiotherapists can remotely monitor their adherence and
provide feedback via an app. Therefore, this study aimed to
investigate the potential of an app to promote adherence to HEPs in
an effort to optimise patient outcomes.
Therefore, the research questions for this randomised, parallel-
group trial were:
1. Do people with musculoskeletal conditions better adhere to
their HEPs when delivered through an app with remote support
compared to paper handouts?
2. Do people with musculoskeletal conditions report better
function, more improvement in their condition, less disability
and greater satisfaction with healthcare service delivery when
their HEPs are delivered through an app with remote support
compared to paper handouts?
Method
Design
A randomised, parallel group trial was undertaken in 80 people
with upper or lower limb musculoskeletal conditions (Figure 1).
The study commenced on 25 February 2016 and finished on
24 February 2017. Participants were randomly assigned via a
computer-generated, concealed, fixed block randomisation proce-
dure to either intervention (n = 40) or control (n = 40) groups.
Intervention group participants received their 4-week HEPs on an
app with remote support, and control group participants received
their HEPs on paper handouts. Data were obtained prior to
randomisation by treating physiotherapists, and then 4 weeks later
by blinded assessors.
Participants, therapists and centres
Participants were recruited from patients receiving physiother-
apy for musculoskeletal conditions at Royal North Shore Hospital,
Sydney, Australia. Patients were initially screened by one of nine
experienced physiotherapists working in either the musculoskel-
etal outpatients, plaster room or hand therapy departments. They
were included if they had an upper or lower limb injury or
condition, had been provided with 4 weeks of home exercises by a
physiotherapist and were expected to complete these exercises at
least three times per week. Patients were only eligible for inclusion
Control Grou
 
p 
• HEP
 
 on
 
 pape
 
r 
handouts
 
 
Patients with
  upper
 
 or
  lower limb 
musculoskeletal cond
 
itions
  scree
 
ned
 
 for
  
inclusion (n = 108
 
) 
Exc
 luded
 
 (n = 28
 
) 
•
decl
 
ined (n = 10)
 
 
•
limited
 
 Eng
 
lish
 
 (n = 7)
 
 
•
sche
 
dul
 ed physiothe
 
rapy within
  4 wk (n = 4)
 
 
•
seri
 
ous medi
 
cal con
 
dition
 
 (n = 3)
 
 
•
ag
 
ed <18
 
 yr (n = 
 2) 
•
expect
 
ed ho
 
spital
  admis
 
sion
  within
  4 wk (n = 2)
 
 
Measured
 
 PS
 
FS, W
 
HODAS
 
 2.0 
Randomi
 
sed
 
 (n = 80)
 
 
(n = 40
 
)  
 
 
 
 
 
(n = 40) 
Wee
 
k 0 
Experi
 mental
 
 Grou
 
p 
• HEP
 
 on
 
 app
 
 
• weekly SM
 
S 
• ph
 
one
 
 call
  at Week
 
 
2
• ph
 
one
 
 call
  at Week
 
 
1 and/or Week
 
 3 as
  
indicate
 d
Wee
 
k 4 
Measured
 
 sel
 f-repor
 
ted adhe
 
rence
 
, PS
 
FS, W
 
HODAS
 
 2.0, perc
 
eived
 
 glob
 
al impression of 
change, satisfaction
 
 with
  ser
 
vice deli
 
very, 
 assess
 or-reported
 
 adherence 
 (n = 37) a 
 
 
 
 
 
(n = 40) a
Lost to
  foll
 
ow-up
 
 (n
  = 3) 
• un
 
able
 
 to contac
 t (n = 1)
 
 
• refused
 
 fo
 llow-up
 
 (n = 1)
 
 
• withd
 
rew befo
 
re starting
 
 
intervention
 
 (n
  = 1)
 
 
Lost to
  foll
 
ow-up
 
 (n
  = 0) 
Figure 1. Design and flow of participants through the trial.
HEP = home exercise program, PSFS = Patient-Specific Functional Scale, WHODAS 2.0 = World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0.
a Indicates number of participants analysed for the primary outcome. Some data were missing for some secondary outcomes; see Tables 2 to 4 for details.
Lambert et al: App delivery of home exercise programs
2
G Model
JPHYS-342; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Lambert TE, et al. An app with remote support achieves better adherence to home exercise programs
than paper handouts in people with musculoskeletal conditions: a randomised trial. J Physiother. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jphys.2017.05.015
 if they: had access to a smart phone, tablet or computer with an
active email account; were aged over 18 and able to provide
informed consent; were willing to participate; and were not
expected to require re-admission to hospital or further surgery
during the trial period. Patients were excluded from the trial if
they: were unlikely or unwilling to participate in the trial (for
reasons such as serious medical conditions, cognitive impairment,
psychiatric illness or drug dependency); were scheduled to receive
any face-to-face physiotherapy over the course of the trial; or had
limited English.
A person not involved in participant recruitment compiled a
computer-generated, random allocation schedule. Participants’
allocations were placed in opaque, sequentially numbered and
sealed envelopes that were held offsite by an independent person
to ensure that allocation was concealed. Upon successful patient
screening and completion of the baseline assessment, an envelope
was opened and the group allocation was revealed. At this point
the participant was considered to have entered the trial.
Whilst it was not possible to blind participants, every effort was
made to keep participants naïve to the details of the two groups.
For example, at the time of recruitment, participants were only
told that they might receive their HEPs in an alternative way to
their paper handouts. They were not given any further details as to
how the HEPs would be delivered or if one method was deemed
superior to another.
Intervention
All participants were prescribed a 4-week HEP by their treating
physiotherapist prior to randomisation. Typically, three to six
exercises were prescribed and participants were instructed to
complete the exercises at least once a day, three to seven times per
week. The most commonly prescribed exercises were simple range
of motion, strengthening and proprioception exercises. The details
of the HEPs were not changed for participants of either group after
randomisation. The only differences between the two groups were
the mode in which the exercises were provided to participants and
the additional telephone and text support provided to participants
in the intervention group.
Intervention group
Participants allocated to the intervention group received their
HEPs on an app associated with www.physiotherapyexercises.com,
which is free web-based software used by physiotherapists
worldwide for a multitude of conditions (see Figure 2). The
exercises delivered through the app were identical to the exercises
prescribed by each patient’s treating physiotherapist prior to
randomisation; however, the trial physiotherapist generated them
from a paper copy of the original exercise program. The app was
sent to participants within 1 day of randomisation by a link
embedded within an email or text message. The link opened their
individualised, web-based app. Subsequently, participants were
phoned, informed that they were to use the app, given telephone
support as they installed the app, and instructed in its use.
Participants were advised to complete their exercises as recom-
mended by their treating physiotherapist and to use the app to
record adherence, which would be monitored remotely by the trial
physiotherapist. They were instructed to dispose of the original
paper handout of their HEP provided to them prior to randomisa-
tion. All intervention group participants were phoned again at
2 weeks, regardless of their adherence, to ensure that they
understood how to use the app and provide them with an
opportunity to ask any questions. In addition, those participants
who had not logged any activity on their app for 7 consecutive days
were phoned at 1 week and/or 3 weeks to ensure they were not
experiencing difficulties using the app and to encourage them to do
their exercises. The trial physiotherapist also sent out weekly
motivational text messages to all participants in the intervention
group stating ‘keep up the hard work’, ‘have you logged your exercises
onyourapptoday?’, or‘welldone completing4 weeks ofhomeexercises’.
Control group
Participants allocated to the control group continued with their
prescribed HEPs using the original paper handouts provided to
them by their treating physiotherapist prior to randomisation.
Participants in the control group did not receive any encourage-
ment or feedback about their progress, and were not contacted
again until their 4-week follow-up assessment.
Outcome measures
Assessments were taken at baseline (Week 0) for two outcomes
and 4 weeks after randomisation for all outcomes by experienced
and blinded physiotherapists. The baseline assessments were
conducted through a face-to-face interview and the 4-week
assessments were performed through a combination of telephone
interview and online survey. Participants were instructed not to
reveal their allocation group or method of HEP delivery to the
assessor during their telephone interview at 4 weeks. There were
one primary and five secondary outcomes.
Primary outcome
Self-reported exercise adherence: Participants were asked at
follow-up to rate their adherence to their HEPs over the 4 weeks
since randomisation on a numerical scale ranging from 0 = ‘never
performed my exercises’ to 10 = ‘always performed my exercises’. This
method of capturing adherence was selected because there are few
alternative ways of determining adherence that does not involve
full-time surveillance.1,20 A similar tool has been used in previous
clinical trials examining exercise adherence in musculoskeletal
populations21 but psychometric testing has not been performed.
Numerical rating scales such as this have also been widely used in
medication adherence trials, and have good validity and reliabili-
ty.22 A between-group difference of 2/11 points was deemed to be
the minimum worthwhile treatment effect prior to commence-
ment of the study, based on the consensus of several expert
physiotherapists after taking into account the potential benefits of
increased adherence to HEPs.
Secondary outcomes
The Patient-Specific Functional Scale (PSFS): This is a valid and
reliable tool that is widely used by physiotherapists. It allows
participants to report on their function at baseline and follow-up.23
At baseline, participants were asked to identify up to three
activities that they found difficult to perform as a result of their
condition. Participants were then asked to rate each of their
identified activities on a numerical scale ranging from 0 = ‘unable
to perform activity’ to 10 = ‘able to perform activity at the same level
Figure 
2. 
Example 
of 
home 
exercise 
program 
provided 
on 
the 
free
www.physiotherapyexercises.com app.
Research 
3
G Model
JPHYS-342; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Lambert TE, et al. An app with remote support achieves better adherence to home exercise programs
than paper handouts in people with musculoskeletal conditions: a randomised trial. J Physiother. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jphys.2017.05.015
 as before the injury or problem’. At 4 weeks, the participants were
asked to rate their current abilities performing the same activities
they had identified at baseline. Analysis was conducted on the
mean of scores for the nominated activities, with higher scores
reflecting greater function.
The World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule
(WHODAS) 2.0: This was used to determine degree of disability
based on 12 items capturing mobility, self-care and community
participation.24 The simple scoring method was utilised, providing
a total score out of 48 points,25with higher scores reflecting greater
disability. These data were collected at baseline and follow-up.
Perceived global impression of change: This score was obtained at
follow-up by asking participants to ‘Rate the change in your condition
over the past 4 weeks’. Participants were provided with a numerical
scale ranging from 0 = ‘a great deal worse’ to 10 = ‘a great deal better’.
Global change scales are considered relevant instruments that are
sensitive to change in both clinical and research settings.26
Patient satisfaction with healthcare service: This was deter-
mined by asking the following two questions at follow-up: ‘How
satisfied have you been with the delivery of your home exercise
program over the past 4 weeks?’ and ‘How satisfied have you been with
the support you have received over the past 4 weeks?’ Participants
were instructed to rate their satisfaction on a numerical scale
ranging from 0 = ‘not at all satisfied’ to 10 = ‘extremely satisfied’.27
Responses to the two questions were analysed separately.
Assessor-reported exercise adherence: The blinded assessor
scored this over the phone at follow-up after asking the
participants any questions deemed appropriate to formulate an
opinion regarding the adherence of participants to their HEPs. The
blinded assessor then provided a score on a numerical scale in
response to the question ‘How adherent do you think the participant
has been with his/her home exercise program over the last 4 weeks?’
The scale ranged from 0 = ‘never did his/her exercises’ to 10 = ‘always
did his/her exercises’.
In addition to the above outcome measures, data were collected
from the intervention group for descriptive purposes. Nine
questions were asked to capture participant satisfaction with
the app and any barriers to its use, with five possible answers
ranging from ‘strongly agree’ to ‘strongly disagree’.
The success of blinding was determined after completion of
the 4-week follow-up assessments, by asking the assessors if
participants had revealed their group allocation or if they had
been unblinded in any other way. Additionally, the naïvety of
participants to the hypothesis of the trial was also assessed at
4 weeks. Specifically, participants were asked ‘Do you think you
were allocated to the better group?’ They were given three possible
answers: ‘yes,’ ‘no’ or ‘unsure’.
Data analysis
A sample size of 80 participants was pre-determined based on
a minimum worthwhile treatment effect of 2/11 points and likely
SD of 3 points for self-reported exercise adherence,28,29 respec-
tively, an alpha of 0.05, and a worst-case scenario of loss to follow-
up of 10%. All analyses were conducted on an intention-to-treat
basis. Between-group comparisons were conducted using linear
regression. Baseline scores for the PSFS and WHODAS (Week 0)
were included in the model to increase statistical precision. A post-
hoc sensitivity analysis was performed on the primary analysis to
ensure the findings were robust to the assumption of normality.
For this purpose, the analysis on the primary outcome was
repeated using a Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test, which is a non-
parametric test that makes no assumptions about the distribution
of the data. Details of the statistical analysis plan are presented in
the study protocol, which is available in Appendix 1 (see eAddenda
for Appendix 1). The code used to conduct the analyses in the
statistical software is presented in Appendices 2 and 3 (see
eAddenda for Appendices 2 and 3).
Results
Flow of participants through the study
A total of 108 patients were screened for inclusion over the
duration of the trial. Of these, 80 were eligible and willing to
participate and were subsequently randomised into two similar
groups. The flow of participants through the trial is illustrated in
Figure 1. Table 1 outlines the participants’ baseline characteristics.
Females represented 65% of those recruited to the trial. Partici-
pants were 18 to 88 years of age, with a mean age of 48 years (SD
17). Fractures were the most commonly treated conditions (n = 37,
46%) and the majority of participants experienced a median pain
intensity of 3/10 (IQR 1 to 5) whilst performing their prescribed
HEPs.
Compliance with the study protocol
Compliance with the study intervention was excellent, with 39/
40 intervention group participants receiving and accessing their
HEPs via the app. One participant from the intervention group
dropped out of the study before commencing the intervention.
Eight intervention group participants were contacted at either 1 or
3 weeks post randomisation because they had not logged activity
on their app in the preceding 7 days.
Table 1
Baseline characteristics of participants.
Characteristic 
Exp
(n = 40)
Con
(n = 40)
Age (yr), median (IQR) 
56 (34 to 59) 
47 (35 to 58)
Gender (M:F), n (%) 
13 (33): 27 (68) 
15 (38): 25 (63)
Time since injury/condition onset (mth), median (IQR) 
4.5 (3.3 to 7.9) 
5.3 (2.0 to 6.3)
Site of injury/condition, n (%)
upper limb 
23 (58) 
17 (43)
lower limb 
17 (43) 
23 (58)
Injury/condition type, n (%)
fracture 
19 (48) 
18 (45)
elective surgery (eg, TKR, ACL reconstruction) 
7 (18) 
9 (23)
soft tissue injury (eg, ankle sprain, rotator cuff tear) 
10 (25) 
10 (25)
other (eg, osteoarthritis) 
4 (10) 
3 (8)
Face-to-face physiotherapy contacts within prior 3 mth, n (%)
1 
7 (18) 
4 (10)
2 to 5 
19 (48) 
24 (60)
6 to10 
14 (35) 
9 (23)
> 10 
0 (0) 
3 (8)
Regular exercise (>30 mins 3 x weekly) at baseline, n (%) 
32 (80) 
28 (70)
Pain VAS during prescribed exercise (0 to 10), median (IQR) 
3 (0.75 to 5) 
2.5 (1 to 5)
Some percentages do not tally to 100 due to rounding.
ACL = anterior cruciate ligament, Con = control group, Exp = experimental group, F = female, M = male, TKR = total knee replacement, VAS = visual analogue
scale.
Lambert et al: App delivery of home exercise programs
4
G Model
JPHYS-342; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Lambert TE, et al. An app with remote support achieves better adherence to home exercise programs
than paper handouts in people with musculoskeletal conditions: a randomised trial. J Physiother. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jphys.2017.05.015
 Post-intervention data were missing for three participants on
the primary outcome. This was mostly due to participants not
being contactable at 4 weeks or declining to complete follow-up
assessments. In addition, data were missing for between five and
eight participants for the secondary outcomes (see Tables 2 and 3)
and descriptive data (see Figure 3) due to participants declining to
complete these items. Sometimes the 4-week assessment was
conducted later than intended and consequently occurred a
median of 5 weeks (IQR 5 to 6) after randomisation. The only
reported adverse events were pain during exercise (n = 26);
however, this was reported by the same participants at baseline
and occurred equally within both intervention and control groups.
With regard to blinding, assessors were inadvertently unblind-
ed in nine instances at follow-up. With regard to maintaining
participant naïvety about which intervention was anticipated to be
superior, 58% of the experimental group and 18% of the control
group indicated that they believed they were in the superior group,
with most of the remaining participants indicating that they were
unsure.
Effect of HEPs provided on an app with remote support
The results for all outcomes, including between-group differ-
ences, are displayed in Tables 2 and 3. Individual participant
outcome data are presented in Table 4 (see eAddenda for Table 4).
Primary outcome
The mean between-group difference for self-reported exercise
adherence was 1.3/11 points (95% CI 0.2 to 2.3) in favour of the
intervention group. This result was also statistically significant
with the post-hoc Wilcoxon Signed Rank test (p = 0.01).
Secondary outcomes
There was a statistically significant between-group difference
for the PSFS, with a mean between-group difference of 0.9/11
points (95% CI 0.1 to 1.7) in favour of the intervention group.
However, there were no significant between-group differences for
the WHODAS 2.0 (95% CI –2.9 to 1.7), perceived global impression
of change (95% CI –0.3 to 1.3), patient satisfaction with healthcare
service-delivery (95% CI –0.5 to 1.1), patient satisfaction with
healthcare service-support (95% CI –0.5 to 1.5) or assessor-
reported exercise adherence (95% CI –0.6 to 1.3) scores.
The results of descriptive data collected from intervention
group participants regarding their satisfaction with the app and its
use are depicted in Figure 3. Most participants either strongly
agreed or agreed with all nine domains of the questionnaire. For
example, 87% of respondents found the app useful and 90% felt
they would use the app to view their HEP again in the future.
Discussion
It is believed that this is the first randomised, controlled trial to
examine the effect of using an app on adherence to HEPs in patients
with musculoskeletal conditions.4 In addition, there has been little
high-quality research to establish the effectiveness of such
technology in the field of physiotherapy, despite a rapid uptake
of apps within the health community.30 Our study examined the
effectiveness of delivering HEPs on an app in combination with text
messaging and phone calls, with the intention of answering a
pragmatic question about the effectiveness of a ‘package’ of
interventions compared to paper handouts. Studies have shown
that telephone coaching and text messaging have the ability to
elicit behaviour change, which may encourage adherence21 and
improve health outcomes.31 Therefore, it is not possible to know
whether the same results would have been obtained if the
effectiveness of the app alone had been compared to paper
handouts.
The results of this study (Tables 2 and 3) indicate that
participants who received their HEPs on an app with remote
support reported greater adherence and greater improvements in
function compared to participants who received paper handouts. A
minimum worthwhile treatment effect of two points in self-
reported adherence was articulated prior to commencement of the
study, yet the 95% CI associated with the mean between-group
Table 2
Mean (SD) of groups and mean (95% CI) difference between groups for all outcomes measured only at Week 4.
Outcome 
Exp
(n = 37)
Con
(n = 40)
Exp minus Con
Self-reported exercise adherence (0 to 10) 
7.8
(2.2)
6.5
(2.4)
1.3
(0.2 to 2.3)
Perceived global impression of change (0 to 10) 
7.9
(1.6)a
7.4
(1.9)b
0.5
(–0.3 to 1.3)
Patient satisfaction with healthcare service (0 to 10)
satisfaction with service delivery 
8.8
(1.6)
8.5
(1.8)b
0.3
(–0.5 to 1.1)
satisfaction with support received 
8.5
(1.9)a
8.1
(2.4)b
0.5
(–0.5 to 1.5)
Assessor-reported exercise adherence (0 to 10) 
7.0
(2.2)c
6.7
(1.9)b
0.3
(–0.6 to 1.3)
Con = control group, Exp = experimental group.
a n = 35.
b n = 39.
c n = 36.
Table 3
Mean (SD) of groups, mean (SD) within-group difference and mean (95% CI) between-group difference for all outcomes measured at Week 0 and Week 4.
Outcome 
Groups 
Within-group difference 
Between-group difference
Week 0 
Week 4 
Week 4 minus Week 0 
Week 4 minus Week 0
Exp
(n = 40)
Con
(n = 40)
Exp
(n = 36)
Con
(n = 39)
Exp
(n = 36)
Con
(n = 39)
Exp minus Con
PSFS
(0 to 10)
4.4
(1.9)
4.6
(1.9)
7.2
(1.6)
6.4
(2.1)
2.7
(2.2)
1.8
(2.0)
0.9
(0.1 to 1.7)
WHODAS 2.0
(0 to 48)
6.9
(5.4)
7.9
(6.1)
5.1
(5.1)a
6.5
(6.5)
–1.5
(5.0)a
–1.5
(5.5)
–0.6
(–2.9 to 1.7)
Con = control group, Exp = experimental group, PSFS = Patient-Specific Functional Scale, WHODAS 2.0 = World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0.
a n = 35.
Research 
5
G Model
JPHYS-342; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Lambert TE, et al. An app with remote support achieves better adherence to home exercise programs
than paper handouts in people with musculoskeletal conditions: a randomised trial. J Physiother. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jphys.2017.05.015
 difference spanned this value (95% CI 0.2 to 2.3). Therefore, there is
uncertainty about the clinical importance of the added adherence
with the intervention. Similarly, there is uncertainty regarding the
improvements in function. So together, these two sets of results do
not provide convincing evidence about the superiority of HEPs
provided on apps. Whether these increases in adherence and
function are worth pursuing will ultimately depend on various
patient, clinician and circumstantial factors, for example, patients’
and therapists’ computer literacy and access to mobile devices.
Importantly, the intervention group participants reported high
levels of satisfaction with the app. Nearly 90% of participants
strongly agreed or agreed with the nine statements about the app
posed to them (see Figure 3). Of course, these data are only
descriptive and may have been vulnerable to bias. Nonetheless,
participants’ perceptions about the benefits of using technology
should be considered, particularly if HEPs can be provided through
apps at no direct cost.
In the absence of any satisfactory alternate measure, the study
relied on participants’ self-reports of adherence. The limitations of
self-report are recognised, in that individuals may overestimate (or
underestimate) their own adherence.20 This would be problematic
if one group were to systematically overestimate (or underesti-
mate) compared to the other. To guard against this, we attempted
to keep all participants naïve to the specific purpose of the study
and to the modes of delivery; however, participants were aware
that we were comparing two modes of providing HEPs. The
effectiveness of keeping participants naïve to the details of the
study was tested by asking them at follow-up whether they felt
they had been allocated to the superior group: 58% of the
intervention participants and 18% of control participants indicated
that they believed they were in the superior group, with most of
the remaining participants indicating that they were unsure. These
findings suggest that we were not very successful at keeping
participants naïve to what was deemed the superior intervention,
and this may have introduced bias.
In summary, providing HEPs on an app in combination with
remote support increases adherence and function compared to
paper handouts for people with musculoskeletal conditions, but
the clinical importance of these increases is unclear. This
uncertainty probably should not discourage the use of apps for
HEPs, given that physiotherapists can use freely available online
software at www.physiotherapyexercises.com to generate individ-
ualised apps for their patients and users report high levels of
satisfaction with it. In addition, generating individualised HEPs
with the online software is probably quicker and easier than
reproducing the equivalent with paper handouts (once therapists
have learnt how to use the software) and provides a more
professional-looking HEP that patients and therapists can use to
record and monitor adherence, respectively. Regardless, there is
still scope for further research about the potential benefits of apps
and other similar technology for encouraging adherence to HEPs
and understanding the effects on patient outcomes.
What is already known on this topic: Home exercise
programs are commonly prescribed on paper for people with
musculoskeletal conditions. Adherence to these programs is
typically low.
What this study adds: People with musculoskeletal condi-
tions who receive their home exercise program on an app with
remote support reported greater adherence and greater
improvements in function than when paper handouts were
used. It remains uncertain whether this effect on adherence is
clinically worthwhile. This uncertainty should not discourage
the use of the app for home exercise programs, given that it: is
freely available, has high user satisfaction, permits adherence
monitoring, and is quick and easy to use.
eAddenda: Table 4 and Appendices 1, 2 and 3 can be found
online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jphys.2017.05.015.
Ethics approval: The Northern Sydney Local Health District
Ethics Committee approved this study. All participants gave
written informed consent before data collection began. All
applicable institutional and governmental regulations concerning
the use of human volunteers were followed.
Competing interests: Professor Lisa Harvey is the senior project
manager of www.physiotherapyexercises.com
I woul
 
d use the
 
 physiothe
 rapy exercises ap
 p 
to record my
 
 exercis
 
e progress
  in
  the
 
 future
I woul
 
d use the
 
 physiothe
 rapy exercises app
to view my
 
 exercise program in
  the
 
 future
The text
 
 accompa
 nying the
 
 exercis
 
es 
described
 
 the
  exercise
 s well
The diagrams
 
 illustrating
 
 the
 
 exercises
 
 were 
clear an
 d demon
 str
 ated
  the
 
 exercis
 
es well
The physiothe
 rapy exercises ap
 p 
worked
  well on
  my
 
 ph
 one
I would recommend
 
 the
  ph
 ysiothe
 
rapy
 
 
exercises ap
 p to
  my
 
 frien
 
ds
The physiothe
 rapy exercises ap
 p 
was easy to
  use
Having
 
 my
 
 ph
 ysiothe
 
rapy exerc
 ise program on
  my
 
 phone
 
 
or tabl
 
et is
  a good
 
 way
 
 to
  keep track
 
 of
  my
 
 exercis
 
es
I think
 
 it
  is
  useful to
  have my
 
 physiotherap
 y exercis
 
e 
program on
  my
 
 ph
 one or
  tablet
0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
100%
Strongly 
agree
Agree
No
opini
 on
Disagree
Strongly 
disagree
Percenta
 
ge of pa
 rti
 cipant
 
s
Figure 3. App satisfaction survey responses from intervention group participants (n = 32).
Lambert et al: App delivery of home exercise programs
6
G Model
JPHYS-342; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Lambert TE, et al. An app with remote support achieves better adherence to home exercise programs
than paper handouts in people with musculoskeletal conditions: a randomised trial. J Physiother. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jphys.2017.05.015
 Source(s) of support: The research was funded by a grant from
the Ramsay Research and Teaching Fund, Australia. In-kind support
was provided by the Royal North Shore Hospital Physiotherapy
Department.
Acknowledgements: We would like to thank the staff of the
Royal North Shore Hospital Physiotherapy Department and the
John Walsh Centre for Rehabilitation Research, in particular: Gary
Rolls, Deborah Taylor, Patricia Evans, Raymond Jongs, Isaac
Cockroft, Susan Chance, Katrina Ferguson, Joanna Prior, Rysia
Pazderski, Christina Mills, Joanne Glinsky and Mohit Arora. We also
wish to thank Catherine Sherrington from The George Institute for
Global Health and Peter Messenger for his ongoing support of
www.physiotherapyexercises.com.
Provenance: Not invited. Peer reviewed.
Correspondence: Lisa Harvey, John Walsh Centre for Rehabili-
tation Research, Kolling Institute, Northern Sydney Local Health
District, Sydney, Australia. Email: lisa.harvey@sydney.edu.au
References
1. Spetch LA, Kolt GS. Adherence to sport injury rehabilitation: implications for sports
medicine providers and researchers. Phys Ther Sport. 2001;2:80–90.
2. Bassett SF, Prapavessis H. A test of an adherence-enhancing adjunct to physiother-
apy steeped in the protection motivation theory. Physiother Theory Pract.
2011;27:360–372.
3. Schneiders AG, Zusman M, Singer KP. Exercise therapy compliance in acute low
back pain patients. Man Ther. 1998;3:147–152.
4. Peek K, Sanson-Fisher R, Mackenzie L, Carey M. Interventions to aid patient
adherence to physiotherapist prescribed self-management strategies: a systematic
review. Physiotherapy. 2015;102:127–135.
5. Pisters MF, Veenhof C, de Bakker DH, Schellevis FG, Dekker J. Behavioural graded
activity results in better exercise adherence and more physical activity than usual
care in people with osteoarthritis: a cluster-randomised trial. J Physiother. 2010;
56:41–47.
6. Beinart NA, Goodchild CE, Weinman JA, Ayis S, Godfrey EL. Individual and inter-
vention-related factors associated with adherence to home exercise in chronic low
back pain: a systematic review. Spine J. 2013;13:1940–1950.
7. Jack K, McLean SM, Moffett JK, Gardiner E. Barriers to treatment adherence in
physiotherapy outpatient clinics: a systematic review. Man Ther. 2010;15:220–228.
8. Sluijs EM, Kok GJ, van der Zee J. Correlates of exercise compliance in physical
therapy. Phys Ther. 1993;73:771–782.
9. Reilly K, Lovejoy B, Williams R, Roth H. Differences between a supervised and
independent strength and conditioning program with chronic low back syn-
dromes. J Occup Med. 1989;31:547–550.
10. Schoo AMM, Morris ME, Bui QM. The effects of mode of exercise instruction on
compliance with a home exercise program in older adults with osteoarthritis.
Physiotherapy. 2005;91:79–86.
11. Sacomori C, Berghmans B, Mesters I, de Bie R, Cardoso FL. Strategies to enhance self-
efficacy and adherence to home-based pelvic floor muscle exercises did not
improve adherence in women with urinary incontinence: a randomised trial. J
Physiother. 2015;61:190–198.
12. Lysack C, Dama M, Neufeld S, Andreassi E. Compliance and satisfaction with home
exercise: a comparison of computer-assisted video instruction and routine reha-
bilitation practice. J Allied Health. 2005;34:76–82.
13. Emmerson KB, Harding KE, Taylor NF. Home exercise programmes supported by
video and automated reminders compared with standard paper-based home
exercise programmes in patients with stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Clin
Rehabil. 2016. 0269215516680856.
14. Goto M, Takedani H, Haga N, Kubota M, Ishiyama M, Ito S, et al. Self-monitoring
has potential for home exercise programmes in patients with haemophilia.
Haemophilia. 2014;20:e121–e127.
15. International Telecommunication Union. ICT Statistics. 2016. http://www.itu.int/
en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/default.aspx. Accessed 06/09/2016
16. Cotter AP, Durant N, Agne AA, Cherrington AL. Internet interventions to support
lifestyle modification for diabetes management: A systematic review of the evi-
dence. J Diabetes Complications. 2014;28:243–251.
17. Hutchesson MJ, Rollo ME, Krukowski R, Ells L, Harvey J, Morgan PJ, et al. eHealth
interventions for the prevention and treatment of overweight and obesity in adults:
a systematic review with meta-analysis. Obes Rev. 2015;16:376–392.
18. Buller DB, Borland R, Bettinghaus EP, Shane JH, Zimmerman DE. Randomized trial of
a smartphone mobile application compared to text messaging to support smoking
cessation. Telemed J E Health. 2014;20:206–214.
19. Jordan JL, Holden MA, Mason EE, Foster NE. Interventions to improve adherence to
exercise for chronic musculoskeletal pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2010;1:CD005956.
20. Bollen JC, Dean SG, Siegert RJ, Howe TE, Goodwin VA. A systematic review of
measures of self-reported adherence to unsupervised home-based rehabilitation
exercise programmes, and their psychometric properties. BMJ Open. 2014;4:
e005044.
21. Bennell KL, Campbell PK, Egerton T, Metcalf B, Kasza J, Forbes A, et al. Telephone
coaching to enhance a home-based physical activity program for knee osteoarthri-
tis: a randomized clinical trial. Arthritis Care Res. 2017;69:84–94.
22. Williams CM, Maher CG, Latimer J, McLachlan AJ, Hancock MJ, Day RO, et al. Efficacy
of paracetamol for acute low-back pain: a double-blind, randomised controlled
trial. The Lancet. 2014;384(9954):1586–1596.
23. Horn KK, Jennings S, Richardson G, Vliet DV, Hefford C, Abbott JH. The patient-
specific functional scale: psychometrics, clinimetrics, and application as a clinical
outcome measure. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. Jan 2012;42:30–42.
24. Andrews G, Kemp A, Sunderland M, Von Korff M, Ustun TB. Normative data for the
12 item WHO Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0. PloS one. 2009;4:e8343.
25. Ustun TB, Chatterji S, Kostanjsek N, Rehm J, Kennedy C, Epping-Jordan J, et al.
Developing the World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0.
Bulletin of the World Health Organization. Nov 1 2010;88:815–823.
26. Kamper SJ, Maher CG, Mackay G. Global rating of change scales: a review of
strengths and weaknesses and considerations for design. J Man Manip Ther.
2009;17:163–170.
27. Henschke N, Wouda L, Maher CG, Hush JM, van Tulder MW. Determinants of patient
satisfaction 1 year after presenting to primary care with acute low back pain. Clin J
Pain. 2013;29:512–517.
28. Wahi Michener SK, Olson AL, Humphrey BA, Reed JE, Stepp DR, Sutton AM, et al.
Relationship among grip strength, functional outcomes, and work performance
following hand trauma. Work. 2001;16:209–217.
29. Evans L, Hardy L. Injury rehabilitation: a goal-setting intervention study. Res Q
Exerc Sport. 2002;73:310–319.
30. Burke LE, Ma J, Azar KMJ, Bennett GG, Peterson ED, Zheng Y, et al. Current
science on consumer use of mobile health for cardiovascular disease prevention:
a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;132:
1157–1213.
31. Chow CK, Redfern J, Hillis GS, Thakkar J, Santo K, Hackett ML, et al. Effect of lifestyle-
focused text messaging on risk factor modification in patients with coronary heart
disease: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2015;314:1255–1263.
Research 
7
G Model
JPHYS-342; No. of Pages 7
Please cite this article in press as: Lambert TE, et al. An app with remote support achieves better adherence to home exercise programs
than paper handouts in people with musculoskeletal conditions: a randomised trial. J Physiother. (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jphys.2017.05.015
