 Preventing Criminal Recidivism Through Mental Health
and Criminal Justice Collaboration
J. Steven Lamberti, M.D.
Criminal justice system involvement is common among
persons with serious mental illness in community treat-
ment settings. Various intervention strategies are used to
prevent criminal recidivism among justice-involved indi-
viduals, including mental health courts, specialty probation,
and conditional release programs. Despite differences in
these approaches, most involve the use of legal leverage
to promote treatment adherence. Evidence supporting the
effectiveness of leverage-based interventions at preventing
criminal recidivism is mixed, however, with some stud-
ies suggesting that involving criminal justice authorities
in mental health treatment can increase recidivism rates.
The effectiveness of interventions that utilize legal leverage
is likely to depend on several factors, including the ability of
mental health and criminal justice staff to work together.
Collaboration is widely acknowledged as essential in
managing justice-involved individuals, yet fundamental
differences in goals, values, and methods exist between
mental health and criminal justice professionals. This article
presents a six-step conceptual framework for optimal
mental health–criminal justice collaboration to prevent
criminal recidivism among individuals with serious mental
illness who are under criminal justice supervision in the
community. Combining best practices from each field, the
stepwise process includes engagement, assessment, planning
and treatment, monitoring, problem solving, and transition.
Rationale and opportunities for collaboration at each step
are discussed.
Psychiatric Services 2016; 67:1206–1212; doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.201500384
Various intervention strategies are commonly used to prevent
criminal recidivism among justice-involved individuals with
serious mental illness in community treatment settings. Broadly
referred to as “jail diversion” strategies, they include mental
health courts, specialty probation and parole, pretrial diversion
programs, and conditional release programs. Whereas some
diversion strategies simply involve a handoff of patients from the
criminal justice system to care providers, most use legal leverage
to promote adherence to necessary treatments and services.
Despite the widespread use of leverage-based diversion
interventions, evidence supporting their effectiveness at pre-
venting criminal recidivism is mixed at best. In a 2009 review
of 21 jail diversion studies, Sirotich (1) stated that the literature
“revealed little evidence of the effectiveness of jail diversion
in reducing recidivism among persons with serious mental
illness.” Studies have likewise examined involuntary outpatient
commitment, a strategy based on civil law rather than criminal
law that also uses legal leverage to promote adherence and
prevent recidivism (2,3). Of two randomized controlled trials
published to date, only one showed reduced rates of violence
and arrest (3). Most recently, a 2014 Cochrane literature review
of various forms of legally mandated treatment concluded that
“compulsory community treatment results in no significant
difference in service use, social functioning or quality of life
compared with standard voluntary care” (4).
The effectiveness of leverage-based interventions at pre-
venting criminal recidivism is likely to depend on several
factors, including the ability of mental health and criminal
justice staff to work together toward common goals. Mental
health–criminal justice collaboration is widely recognized as
essential in managing justice-involved individuals with seri-
ous mental illness in community settings (5–8). In addition,
the sequential intercept model has emerged to highlight
various points in the criminal justice process that call for such
collaboration (9). However, major differences in goals, values,
and methods exist between mental health and criminal justice
professionals (7,10,11). These differences can directly affect
recidivism rates. For example, research by Solomon and
Draine (11,12) has shown that involving probation officers in
mental health treatment can result in increased threats of jail
and increased use of incarceration as a sanction. The authors
concluded that this enforcement-oriented approach to col-
laboration, which uses mental health professionals primarily
to report infractions, “significantly enhances the coercive
interactions between officers and their clients” (11).
To address this challenge, specialized mental health
court, probation, and parole programs have emerged as new
models of community supervision designed to “integrate
roles, rules and relationships between the two systems” (5).
However, studies of these models have continued to show
1206
ps.psychiatryonline.org
Psychiatric Services 67:11, November 2016
ARTICLES
 great variability in how mental health–criminal justice col-
laboration occurs (13–15). In addition, most justice-involved
individuals remain in standard rather than specialty commu-
nity supervision programs. Also, many mental health profes-
sionals remain reluctant to collaborate with criminal justice
authorities because of dual-agency concerns (16). These issues
have raised the need for a conceptual framework to guide
how mental health and criminal justice professionals might
collaborate most effectively.
WHAT WORKS
Effective collaboration requires combining best practices in
treating mental illness and co-occurring addiction with cor-
rectional best practices aimed at preventing criminal re-
cidivism. This strategy is based on strong evidence that the
causes of recidivism are essentially the same for people with
mental illness and those without mental illness. Therefore,
preventing criminal recidivism is likely to require similar
intervention approaches for both populations. With over
30 years of research, the field of corrections has examined
the effectiveness of various community-based interventions
at preventing criminal recidivism (17–19). Interventions have
included specialty courts, probation and parole, residen-
tial programs, home detention, electronic monitoring, boot
camp, and “scared straight”–type programs. These studies
have shown that relying primarily on surveillance and
punishment is ineffective at preventing criminal recidivism,
and the studies underscore the need for rehabilitative ap-
proaches to corrections. Research on a variety of rehabilitative
strategies—including case management, various forms of
counseling, self-help programs, bibliotherapy, pet therapy,
acupuncture, and yoga—has consistently shown the superi-
ority of behavioral treatments over nonbehavioral treatments
(19,20). Effective correctional programs have been found to
share three central characteristics. First, they target risk fac-
tors known to drive criminal behavior. Second, they are action
oriented, requiring individuals to demonstrate appropriate
behaviors. Third, based on social learning theory, they use
interventions that reinforce appropriate behaviors while
extinguishing inappropriate behaviors. These principles of
effective correctional intervention and associated evidence-
based practices have become known as the “what works”
movement within the field of corrections (17,21,22).
A common misconception about jail diversion programs
is that they “divert” justice-involved individuals from one
system into another. However, persons with serious mental
illness who are under community correctional or judicial
supervision in such programs will have ongoing contact with
both mental health and criminal justice professionals over a
span of months to years. This time frame presents a series of
opportunities to combine best practices through mental
health–criminal justice collaboration. These opportunities
become evident in considering how mental health and
criminal justice staff perform similar tasks when managing
justice-involved clients in community settings. Both groups
of professionals must engage and assess each client, and they
must generate and implement individualized service plans.
Both groups will also monitor each individual’s progress, and
both must respond in some manner when problematic be-
haviors occur. Although the content of these activities differs
substantially between mental health and criminal justice
professionals, the process by which they are performed has
important parallels. These similarities can provide a foun-
dation for effective collaboration in serving justice-involved
clients in community settings.
Table 1 provides a basic framework for mental health–
criminal justice collaboration in intervention strategies that
use legal authority and supervision to promote treatment
adherence. The framework conceptualizes the collaborative
process as a series of steps with corresponding activities for
mental health and criminal justice professionals. It is im-
portant to note that Table 1 presents these activities as being
separate and distinct in order to provide a clear and logical
starting point for discussion between prospective collabo-
rators. However, these activities can and should overlap for
effective collaboration, as discussed below.
Step 1: Engagement
Justice-involved individuals should be engaged in each step
of the collaborative process (8,23,24). Collaborating mental
health and criminal justice staff can begin by engaging their
mutual clients around a common goal—to be healthy and free
from criminal justice involvement. This approach requires
prospective collaborators to embrace public health and
public safety as complementary rather than as competing
goals. As noted by Matejkowski and colleagues (25), “An
approach that pairs evidence-based treatment with ac-
countability under close supervision for offenders with
psychiatric or substance use disorders could be more ef-
fective at promoting public health and safety than either
treatment or supervision alone.”
Rapport with justice-involved clients can be strength-
ened by informing them of the nature and purpose of the
mental health–criminal justice collaboration, including
what information about them will be shared and how it
will be used. As observed by Draine and Solomon, however,
such details often are not provided to justice-involved in-
dividuals. In a study of clients on probation and parole,
those investigators noted that “client comments to researchers
reflected a poor understanding—sometimes an overestimation,
other times an underestimation—of the nature or extent of
collaboration in their case. Such misunderstandings may
undermine client trust in both systems” (11). Given that
persons with serious mental illness can have significant
cognitive deficits, using written materials or pictures and
other visual aids to inform them about collaboration can be
helpful (26).
Collaborating mental health and criminal justice staff can
further engage their shared clients by treating them with
respect and empathy, offering them choices, providing en-
couragement, and being nonjudgmental (27). Although such
Psychiatric Services 67:11, November 2016
ps.psychiatryonline.org
1207
LAMBERTI
 strategies may seem contrary to the correctional ethos, using
relationship skills to enhance motivation is recognized as a
best practice both in correctional rehabilitation (21) and in
health care (28). In addition, evidence suggests that when
people feel they have been treated fairly by authorities, they
are more likely to accept an authority’s decisions (29) and
they may have better mental health outcomes (30,31).
Step 2: Assessment
Persons with serious mental illness are overrepresented
throughout the criminal justice system (32). Many have at-
tributed this problem to deinstitutionalization and lack of
access to psychiatric services (33). However, the lack of as-
sociation between mental illness and crime (34,35) and the
failure of standard mental health treatment to prevent crime
(36,37) led mental health researchers to seek a criminolog-
ically informed understanding of recidivism among adults
with serious mental illness (38,39). These efforts drew atten-
tion to the importance of targeting risk factors that drive
criminal recidivism in this population, which is a basic prin-
ciple of effective correctional intervention. It is now widely
accepted that criminal recidivism is driven by “criminogenic”
risk factors of individuals with or without mental illness
(9,40,41). The eight central risk factors are history of antisocial
behavior, antisocial personality pattern, antisocial cognition,
having criminal companions, family/marital problems, work/
school problems, lack of healthy leisure/recreational pursuits,
and substance abuse (17). Although mental illness in general is
not associated with criminality (42), research
has also established that psychosis and mania
can sometimes directly lead to criminal justice
system involvement (43,44).
The process of identifying criminogenic
risk factors and what is needed to prevent
criminal recidivism is called risk and needs
assessment, or simply “risk assessment” (17).
Standardized tools for criminogenic risk
assessment such as the Level of Service
Inventory–Revised and the Wisconsin Risk
and Needs have been shown to reliably predict
the likelihood of criminal recidivism among
diverse offender groups, including individuals
with mental illness (17,45). In general, as
outlined in Table 1, criminal justice authorities
conduct criminogenic risk and needs assess-
ments, which focus on public safety, whereas
mental health professionals conduct psycho-
social assessments, which focus on client
health. However, there is substantial overlap
in these assessments. Although the psycho-
social assessment process is not designed to
assess risk of criminal recidivism, it involves
assessment of risk for other adverse out-
comes, including violence, homicide, suicide,
and relapse. Also, both types of assessments
examine substance use, employment status,
financial status, family supports, and residential stability.
Sharing respective results can thus improve evaluation
accuracy and identification of clients at greatest risk of
recidivism while laying the groundwork for collaborative
planning and treatment.
Step 3: Planning and Treatment
A recent review examining the applicability of criminogenic
risk assessment to persons with mental illness suggests that
addressing both mental health problems and criminogenic
risk factors together will enhance prevention of criminal
recidivism (46). In addressing mental health problems, it is
noteworthy that mental health professionals routinely ad-
dress four of the eight central risk factors (substance abuse,
work/school problems, family/marital problems, and lack of
healthy leisure/recreation pursuits). This process includes
the use of evidence-based practices, such as integrated
dual-diagnosis treatment for co-occurring substance use
disorders (47), individual placement and support for un-
employment (48), and family-based interventions for family
and marital problems (49). In addition, mental health
professionals routinely apply best practices to address
“responsivity factors” that influence how justice-involved
individuals respond to correctional intervention. Respon-
sivity factors can include trauma, homelessness, cultural
differences, and symptoms of serious mental illness, such as
paranoia and impaired cognition (21). However, uncertainty
exists concerning who should address the problematic
TABLE 1. The process of mental health and criminal justice collaboration for
justice-involved adults with serious mental illness
Mental health activities
Criminal justice activities
Engagement
Discuss available treatments and
services with client
Discuss legal stipulations and conditions
with client
Assessment
Conduct psychosocial assessment
Conduct criminogenic risk and needs
assessment
Planning and treatment
Plan treatments and services
Plan supervision method and frequency
Provide treatment
Provide supervision
Monitoring
Monitor adherence to treatments and
services
Monitor adherence to legal stipulations
and conditions
Submit progress reports to criminal
justice partner
Review progress reports with mental
health partner
Problem solving
Consider therapeutic options
Consider rewards and graduated
sanctions
Present recommendations to criminal
justice partner
Discuss alternatives to punishment with
mental health partner
Transition
Discuss transitional supports with client
Discuss termination of supervision with
client
1208
ps.psychiatryonline.org
Psychiatric Services 67:11, November 2016
MENTAL HEALTH AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE COLLABORATION TO PREVENT RECIDIVISM
 thinking that leads to antisocial behaviors. Although Table 1
suggests that criminal justice professionals have no role in
treatment, they sometimes use cognitive-behavioral treat-
ment to address criminal thinking (50). Cognitive-behavioral
best practices have been developed with correctional pop-
ulations to address antisocial cognitions and attitudes
(51,52), and they have shown promise for people with mental
illness (46). Yet these interventions are rarely used by
mental health professionals to address criminal thinking
within outpatient treatment settings. Also, new models, such
as effective practices in community supervision (the
“EPICS” model), have been developed to teach probation
and parole officers evidence-based principles of effective
behavioral management (53). Unlike cognitive-behavioral
therapies for criminal thinking, however, behavioral man-
agement principles are often used by mental health profes-
sionals within residential and day programs for persons with
co-occurring mental illness and substance use disorders
(54,55). These observations provide a clear rationale for
mental health–criminal justice collaboration in planning and
treatment, including deciding who is responsible for pro-
viding which treatments and services for each client.
Step 4: Monitoring
Consistent with principles of effective correctional in-
tervention, collaborating service providers should monitor
for both nonadherence and for signs of progress. Because
treatment adherence is generally a stipulation of leverage-
based intervention strategies, clinicians should submit reg-
ular progress reports to their criminal justice partners as
part of the monitoring process. Communication is the key to
effective monitoring, and it should include face-to-face
meetings between representatives of the outpatient mental
health team and the supervising criminal justice agency
when possible. Such meetings can help build rapport be-
tween collaborators while enabling them to better under-
stand and address adherence issues.
Face-to-face meetings also provide a forum for joint
meetings with clients. Joint meetings provide collaborators
with an opportunity to formally recognize and reinforce
clients’ progress. In addition, they can foster both engage-
ment and accountability by directly involving clients in the
process of identifying and addressing problem behaviors.
However, joint meetings are unlikely to reduce recidivism if
based on a philosophy of enforcement and control (11,12,56).
Evidence suggests that the most effective approach to
monitoring clients involves building a therapeutic alliance
while incorporating principles of procedural justice to
create an environment that is firm, fair, and caring
(29,56–58).
Step 5: Problem Solving
Working with justice-involved clients rarely goes smoothly,
especially when multiple criminogenic risk factors and
responsivity factors are present. Even clients who make
good progress can be expected to take backward steps.
Responding to these setbacks should reflect a balance be-
tween recognizing that such problems are an inevitable part
of the recovery process, and the need for accountability
and public safety. This balance can be supported by con-
sidering the following three principles when addressing
nonadherence and other behavioral issues as part of the
collaborative process.
Shared problem solving. Shared problem solving is a prin-
ciple of collaboration whereby decisions about how to
manage clients’ problem behaviors are informed by input
from both their treating clinicians and their supervising
criminal justice professionals. This process requires mental
health and criminal justice representatives to actively dis-
cuss their opinions and ideas in the interest of preventing
recidivism. While criminal justice authorities are ultimately
responsible for making legal decisions, the decision-making
process should involve shared problem solving rather than
just enlisting mental health professionals to report client
infractions. Simply put, two heads are better than one.
Therapeutic alternatives to punishment. Whenever behav-
ioral problems may be due to inadequately treated mental
illness, co-occurring addiction, or associated issues, their
management should include careful consideration of treat-
ment and support-based intervention options. Examples of
therapeutic alternatives can include offering long-acting
injectable medications to clients with nonadherence to oral
medications, offering inpatient chemical dependency treat-
ment to outpatients who relapse into substance use, and
providing outreach to homeless clients who miss their court
hearings.
Rewards and graduated sanctions. A fundamental principle
of effective correctional practice is to reinforce appropriate
behaviors and extinguish inappropriate behaviors through
use of rewards and sanctions. Examples of rewards can in-
clude verbal praise or feedback, special activities, or level
advancement. Sanctions are generally applied when a cli-
ent’s problematic behavior is attributed to volitional mis-
conduct rather than to a manifestation of illness (25).
Making this difficult distinction can benefit from collabo-
rative discussion. When sanctions are deemed necessary,
their assignment should occur quickly and predictably, and
their level of restrictiveness should be increased gradually
(17,59). Graduated sanctions can include negative verbal
feedback, writing assignments, community service hours,
curfew restrictions, increased frequency of monitoring, and
detention time. A hallmark of effective correctional pro-
grams is the use of more rewards than sanctions by a ratio of
at least 4:1 (60). As noted by Latessa and colleagues, “It is one
thing to have a strong conceptual understanding of behav-
ioral management techniques. It is another to implement a
behavior management model in a real-world setting” (21).
Collaborating partners should work together in identifying
appropriate target behaviors, in selecting reinforcements
Psychiatric Services 67:11, November 2016
ps.psychiatryonline.org
1209
LAMBERTI
 and sanctions to be used, and in deciding whether rein-
forcements and sanctions will be tied to treatment progress
(21,61).
Step 6: Transition
The transition step involves the conclusion of criminal jus-
tice oversight. This event marks a significant change for
justice-involved individuals, one that can place them at in-
creased risk of relapse into drug use and other problematic
behaviors. Collaborating mental health and criminal justice
professionals can help their mutual clients prepare for this
event by offering transitional services and supports. Pro-
viding extra outpatient appointments can give clients tran-
sitional support while enabling clinicians to observe them
more closely for warning signs of illness exacerbation. In-
volving supportive family members, friends, and residential
service providers can further give clients the physical and
emotional resources necessary for a successful transition. As
an added benefit, such individuals are generally well posi-
tioned to alert care providers to early warning signs of re-
lapse into psychosis, addiction, or both. Another example of
transitional support is offering a representative payee for
clients who may be tempted to buy illicit drugs and alcohol
in the absence of criminal justice oversight. Among persons
with serious mental illness and co-occurring substance
use disorders, having a representative payee has been asso-
ciated with decreased substance use and improved quality
of life (62). Also, hosting graduation ceremonies and other
recognition events may help clients adjust to this major
transition (63).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Outpatient mental health treatment alone is unlikely to re-
duce criminal recidivism. In a recent study of 143 justice-
involved individuals with serious mental illness, only 18% of
their crimes were directly motivated by mental illness (64).
Likewise, simply relying on intensive supervision and con-
trol may increase justice system involvement among persons
with serious mental illness (11,12,56). Effective prevention
requires mental health and criminal justice professionals to
have a shared appreciation of the issues driving each client’s
recidivism and of their respective profession’s best practices.
Collaborators should also appreciate how the availability
of community resources can affect outcomes (65). Unfor-
tunately, mental health treatment providers rarely assess
criminogenic risk factors in a systematic manner, even
within programs that specialize in serving justice-involved
clients (66). Similarly, community corrections officials often
have little knowledge of their clients’ mental health issues
(13). These findings highlight the need for training in mental
health–criminal justice collaboration in working with
justice-involved persons with serious mental illness.
Mental health and criminal justice service providers
typically lack training in collaborative care (7,13,67). To help
address the issue, this article has presented a framework
for understanding the collaborative process as a series of
opportunities to combine best practices from each field.
Further research is needed to identify the key elements
and principles of collaboration, to promote their imple-
mentation within leverage-based interventions, and to
examine the effectiveness of optimized leverage-based
interventions in achieving both criminal justice and
therapeutic outcomes.
AUTHOR AND ARTICLE INFORMATION
Dr. Lamberti is with the Department of Psychiatry, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, New York (e-mail: steve_lamberti@urmc.
rochester.edu).
This work was supported in part by grant R34-MH078003-01A from the
National Institute of Mental Health.
Dr. Lamberti is a cofounder of Community Forensic Interventions, Inc.,
a company that provides training and technical assistance related to
community-based care of justice-involved adults with serious mental
illness.
Received September 7, 2015; revisions received December 28, 2015, and
February 15, 2016; accepted March 11, 2016; published online July 15,
2016.
REFERENCES
1. Sirotich F: The criminal justice outcomes of jail diversion pro-
grams for persons with mental illness: a review of the evidence.
Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law 37:
461–472, 2009
2. Steadman HJ, Gounis K, Dennis D, et al: Assessing the New York
City involuntary outpatient commitment pilot program. Psychiat-
ric Services 52:330–336, 2001
3. Swartz MS, Swanson JW, Hiday VA, et al: A randomized con-
trolled trial of outpatient commitment in North Carolina. Psychi-
atric Services 52:325–329, 2001
4. Kisely SR, Campbell LA: Compulsory community and involuntary
outpatient treatment for people with severe mental disorders.
Cochrane Library 12:CD004408, 2014
5. Morrissey JP, Fagan JA, Cocozza JJ: New models of collaboration
between criminal justice and mental health systems. American
Journal of Psychiatry 166:1211–1214, 2009
6. Justice and Mental Health Collaboration Program: Bureau of Justice
Assistance. https://www.bja.gov/ProgramDetails.aspx?Program_ID=66
7. Criminal Justice/Mental Health Consensus Project. New York,
Council of State Governments, 2002
8. Osher F, Steadman HJ, Barr H: A best practice approach to
community reentry from jails for inmates with co-occurring dis-
orders: the APIC model. Crime and Delinquency 49:79–96, 2003
9. Griffin PA, Heilbrun K, Mulvey EP, et al (eds): The Sequential
Intercept Model and Criminal Justice. New York, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2015
10. Lamb HR, Weinberger LE, Gross BH: Community treatment of
severely mentally ill offenders under the jurisdiction of the crim-
inal justice system: a review. Psychiatric Services 50:907–913, 1999
11. Draine J, Solomon P: Threats of incarceration in a psychiatric
probation and parole service. American Journal of Orthopsychia-
try 71:262–267, 2001
12. Solomon P, Draine J: One-year outcomes of a randomized trial of
case management with seriously mentally ill clients leaving jail.
Evaluation Review 19:256–273, 1995
13. Epperson MW, Canada K, Thompson J, et al: Walking the line:
specialized and standard probation officer perspectives on super-
vising probationers with serious mental illnesses. International
Journal of Law and Psychiatry 37:473–483, 2014
1210
ps.psychiatryonline.org
Psychiatric Services 67:11, November 2016
MENTAL HEALTH AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE COLLABORATION TO PREVENT RECIDIVISM
 14. Erickson SK, Campbell A, Lamberti JS: Variations in mental health
courts: challenges, opportunities, and a call for caution. Commu-
nity Mental Health Journal 42:335–344, 2006
15. Honegger LN: Does the evidence support the case for mental
health courts? A review of the literature. Law and Human Be-
havior 39:478–488, 2015
16. Cervantes AN, Hanson A: Dual agency and ethics conflicts in
correctional practice: sources and solutions. Journal of the
American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law 41:72–78, 2013
17. Andrews DA, Bonta J: The Psychology of Criminal Conduct, 5th ed.
New York, Routledge, 2010
18. Gendreau P: The principles of effective intervention with of-
fenders; in Choosing Correctional Options That Work: Defining
the Demand and Evaluating the Supply. Edited by Harland AT.
Thousand Oaks, Calif, Sage, 1996
19. Andrews DA: An Overview of Treatment Effectiveness: Research
and Clinical Principles. Ottawa, Carleton University, Department
of Psychology, 1994
20. Dowden C, Andrews DA: What works in young offender treatment:
a meta-analysis. Forum on Corrections Research 11:21–24, 1999
21. Latessa EJ, Listwan SL, Koetzle D: What Works (and Doesn’t) in
Reducing Recidivism. Waltham, Mass, Anderson, 2014
22. Latessa EJ, Lowenkamp C: What works in reducing recidivism?
University of St Thomas Law Journal 3:521–535, 2006
23. Scott DA, McGilloway S, Dempster M, et al: Effectiveness of
criminal justice liaison and diversion services for offenders with
mental disorders: a review. Psychiatric Services 64:843–849, 2013
24. Han W, Redlich AD: The impact of community treatment on re-
cidivism among mental health court participants. Psychiatric
Services, 2015 (doi 10.1176/appi.ps.201500006)
25. Matejkowski J, Festinger DS, Benishek LA, et al: Matching con-
sequences to behavior: implications of failing to distinguish be-
tween noncompliance and nonresponsivity. International Journal
of Law and Psychiatry 34:269–274, 2011
26. Ahmed M, Boisvert CM: Enhancing communication through visual
aids in clinical practice. American Psychologist 58:816–817, 2003
27. Lamberti JS, Russ A, Cerulli C, et al: Patient experiences of au-
tonomy and coercion while receiving legal leverage in forensic
assertive community treatment. Harvard Review of Psychiatry 22:
222–230, 2014
28. Rollnick S, Miller WR, Butler CC: Motivational Interviewing
in Health Care: Helping Patients Change Behavior. New York,
Guilford, 2007
29. Kopelovich S, Yanos P, Pratt C, et al: Procedural justice in mental
health courts: judicial practices, participant perceptions, and out-
comes related to mental health recovery. International Journal of
Law and Psychiatry 36:113–120, 2013
30. Mahoney MK: Procedural justice and the judge-probationer re-
lationship in a co-occurring disorders court. International Journal
of Law and Psychiatry 37:260–266, 2014
31. Calton J, Cattaneo LB: The effects of procedural and distributive
justice on intimate partner violence victims’ mental health and
likelihood of future help-seeking. American Journal of Orthopsy-
chiatry 84:329–340, 2014
32. Ditton PM: Mental Health and Treatment of Inmates and Proba-
tioners: Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report. Washington,
DC, Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, 1999
33. Prins SJ: Does transinstitutionalization explain the over-
representation of people with serious mental illnesses in the
criminal justice system? Community Mental Health Journal 47:
716–722, 2011
34. Steadman HJ, Mulvey EP, Monahan J, et al: Violence by people
discharged from acute psychiatric inpatient facilities and by others
in the same neighborhoods. Archives of General Psychiatry 55:
393–401, 1998
35. Junginger J, Claypoole K, Laygo R, et al: Effects of serious mental
illness and substance abuse on criminal offenses. Psychiatric Ser-
vices 57:879–882, 2006
36. Fisher WH, Packer IK, Simon LJ, et al: Community mental health
services and the prevalence of severe mental illness in local jails:
are they related? Administration and Policy in Mental Health and
Mental Health Services Research 27:371–382, 2000
37. Fisher WH, Packer IK, Banks SM, et al: Self-reported lifetime
psychiatric hospitalization histories of jail detainees with mental
disorders: comparison with a non-incarcerated national sample.
Journal of Behavioral Health Services and Research 29:458–465,
2002
38. Fisher WH, Silver E, Wolff N: Beyond criminalization: toward a
criminologically informed framework for mental health policy and
services research. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and
Mental Health Services Research 33:544–557, 2006
39. Lamberti JS: Understanding and preventing criminal recidivism
among adults with psychotic disorders. Psychiatric Services 58:
773–781, 2007
40. Campbell MA, Canales DD, Wei R, et al: Multidimensional eval-
uation of a mental health court: adherence to the risk-need-
responsivity model. Law and Human Behavior 39:489–502, 2015
41. Skeem JL, Winter E, Kennealy PJ, et al: Offenders with mental
illness have criminogenic needs, too: toward recidivism reduction.
Law and Human Behavior 38:212–224, 2014
42. Bonta J, Law M, Hanson K: The prediction of criminal and violent
recidivism among mentally disordered offenders: a meta-analysis.
Psychological Bulletin 123:123–142, 1998
43. Swanson JW, Swartz MS, Van Dorn RA, et al: A national study of
violent behavior in persons with schizophrenia. Archives of Gen-
eral Psychiatry 63:490–499, 2006
44. Christopher PP, McCabe PJ, Fisher WH: Prevalence of in-
volvement in the criminal justice system during severe mania and
associated symptomatology. Psychiatric Services 63:33–39, 2012
45. Bonta J, Blais J, Wilson HA: The Prediction of Risk for Mentally
Disordered Offenders: A Quantitative Synthesis. User Report
2013-01. Ottawa, Public Safety Canada, 2013
46. Skeem JL, Steadman HJ, Manchak SM: Applicability of the risk-
need-responsivity model to persons with mental illness involved in
the criminal justice system. Psychiatric Services 66:916–922, 2015
47. Mueser KT (ed): Integrated Dual Diagnosis Treatment: A Guide to
Effective Practice. New York, Guilford, 2003
48. Bond GR: Principles of the individual placement and support
model: empirical support. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal 22:
11–23, 1998
49. Shadish WR, Ragsdale K, Glaser RR, et al: The efficacy and ef-
fectiveness of marital and family therapy: a perspective from meta-
analysis. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy 21:345–360, 1995
50. Milkman H, Wanberg K: Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment: A Re-
view and Discussion for Corrections Professionals. Washington,
DC, National Institute of Corrections, 2007
51. Bush J, Glick B, Taymans J: Thinking for a Change: Integrated
Cognitive Behavior Change Program. Washington, DC, National
Institute of Corrections, 2011
52. Ross R, Fabiano E: Reasoning and Rehabilitation: A Handbook for
Teaching Cognitive Skills. Ottawa, T3 Associates, 1991
53. Smith P, Schweitzer M, Labrecque RM, et al: Improving probation
officers’ supervision skills: an evaluation of the EPICS model.
Journal of Criminal Justice 35:189–199, 2012
54. DeLeon G (ed): Community as Method: Therapeutic Communities
for Special Populations and Special Settings. Westport, Conn,
Praeger, 1997
55. Kelly TM, Daley DC, Douaihy AB: Contingency management for
patients with dual disorders in intensive outpatient treatment for
addiction. Journal of Dual Diagnosis 10:108–117, 2014
Psychiatric Services 67:11, November 2016
ps.psychiatryonline.org
1211
LAMBERTI
 56. Manchak SM, Skeem JL, Kennealy PJ, et al: High-fidelity specialty
mental health probation improves officer practices, treatment access,
and rule compliance. Law and Human Behavior 38:450–461, 2014
57. Kennealy PJ, Skeem JL, Manchak SM, et al: Firm, fair, and caring
officer-offender relationships protect against supervision failure.
Law and Human Behavior 36:496–505, 2012
58. Wales HW, Hiday VA, Ray B: Procedural justice and the mental
health court judge’s role in reducing recidivism. International
Journal of Law and Psychiatry 33:265–271, 2010
59. A Guide to Mental Health Court Design and Implementation. New
York, Council of State Governments, 2005
60. Widahl EJ, Garland B, Culhane SE, et al: Utilizing behavioral in-
terventions to improve supervision outcomes in community-based
corrections. Criminal Justice and Behavior 38:386–405, 2011
61. Elbogen EB, Tomkins AJ: From the psychiatric hospital to the
community:
integrating
conditional
release
and
contingency
management. Behavioral Sciences and the Law 18:427–444, 2000
62. Conrad KJ, Lutz G, Matters MD, et al: Randomized trial of
psychiatric care with representative payeeship for persons
with serious mental illness. Psychiatric Services 57:197–204,
2006
63. Desmond BC, Lenz PJ: Mental health courts: an effective way for
treating offenders with serious mental illness. Mental and Physical
Disability Law Reporter 34:525–530, 2010
64. Peterson JK, Skeem J, Kennealy P, et al: How often and how
consistently do symptoms directly precede criminal behavior
among offenders with mental illness? Law and Human Behavior
38:439–449, 2014
65. Draine J, Wolff N, Jacoby JE, et al: Understanding community re-entry
of former prisoners with mental illness: a conceptual model to guide
new research. Behavioral Sciences and the Law 23:689–707, 2005
66. Lamberti JS, Weisman R, Faden DI: Forensic assertive community
treatment: preventing incarceration of adults with severe mental
illness. Psychiatric Services 55:1285–1293, 2004
67. Louden JE, Skeem JL: How do probation officers assess and
manage recidivism and violence risk for probationers with mental
disorder? An experimental investigation. Law and Human Behavior
37:22–34, 2013
1212
ps.psychiatryonline.org
Psychiatric Services 67:11, November 2016
MENTAL HEALTH AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE COLLABORATION TO PREVENT RECIDIVISM
