 Public Health
700 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   February 17, 2018
Evidence-based guidelines for supportive care of patients 
with Ebola virus disease
François Lamontagne, Robert A Fowler, Neill K Adhikari, Srinivas Murthy, David M Brett-Major, Michael Jacobs, Timothy M Uyeki, Constanza Vallenas, 
Susan L Norris, William A Fischer 2nd, Thomas E Fletcher, Adam C Levine, Paul Reed, Daniel G Bausch, Sandy Gove, Andrew Hall, Susan Shepherd, 
Reed A Siemieniuk, Marie-Claude Lamah, Rashida Kamara, Phiona Nakyeyune, Moses J Soka, Ama Edwin, Afeez A Hazzan, Shevin T Jacob, 
Mubarak Mustafa Elkarsany, Takuya Adachi, Lynda Benhadj, Christophe Clément, Ian Crozier, Armando Garcia, Steven J Hoffman, Gordon H Guyatt
The 2013–16 Ebola virus disease outbreak in west Africa was associated with unprecedented challenges in the 
provision of care to patients with Ebola virus disease, including absence of pre-existing isolation and treatment 
facilities, patients’ reluctance to present for medical care, and limitations in the provision of supportive medical care. 
Case fatality rates in west Africa were initially greater than 70%, but decreased with improvements in supportive care. 
To inform optimal care in a future outbreak of Ebola virus disease, we employed the Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology to develop evidence-based guidelines for the 
delivery of supportive care to patients admitted to Ebola treatment units. Key recommendations include administration 
of oral and, as necessary, intravenous hydration; systematic monitoring of vital signs and volume status; availability of 
key biochemical testing; adequate staffing ratios; and availability of analgesics, including opioids, for pain relief.
Introduction
The 2013–16 Ebola virus disease outbreak in west Africa 
was associated with unprecedented challenges in the 
provision of care to patients with the disease, including a 
need for acute care that exceeded the number of health 
workers available, the absence of pre-existing treatment 
and isolation facilities, a dearth of treatments specific to 
Ebola virus, and, possibly, limitations in the provision of 
supportive medical care.1,2
Ebola virus disease is a febrile, multisystem illness, 
with a predominance of gastrointestinal symptoms and 
signs—namely nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, and ab-
dominal pain—that frequently lead to hypovolaemia, 
metabolic acidosis, renal dysfunction, and multi-system 
organ dysfunction.1–5
With initial severe mismatches between care demand 
and system capacity, and the reluctance of people to 
present for treatment, the initial risk of mortality was 
greater than 70%. Individualised clinical supportive care 
improved as community health and Ebola treatment 
units developed.6 This care included better symptom 
control, laboratory-facilitated diagnosis of organ dys-
function, treatment of shock with enteral and parenteral 
fluids and electrolytes, and rapid diagnosis or empirical 
treatment of concomitant illnesses such as malaria and 
bacterial infections. Associated with these measures, 
the case fatality rate decreased to approximately 40% 
through 
out west Africa, and declined further while 
clinical and health system experience and capacity 
increased.6,7
These experiences suggested the need to develop an 
evidence-based approach to the supportive care of 
patients with Ebola virus disease. Therefore, we developed 
evidence-informed guidelines for the delivery of 
supportive care to patients admitted to Ebola treatment 
units during a future outbreak using the Grading of 
Recommendations 
Assessment, 
Development, 
and 
Evaluation (GRADE) methodology.8
Scope and definitions
These guidelines focus on the delivery of supportive care 
measures to patients in Ebola treatment units where health 
care resources are limited, a context typical in outbreaks of 
Ebola virus disease. The guidelines could be relevant to 
other infectious diseases with clinical syndromes similar to 
Ebola that are managed in isolation facilities (eg, other 
haemorrhagic fevers). The target audiences include health 
workers, governmental and non-governmental health 
agencies, public health organisations, local and clinical 
facility managers, and health policy makers at all levels.
Group composition and meeting
The 
multidisciplinary 
guidelines 
panel 
comprised 
34 participants: ten critical care physicians (two specialists 
in paediatric care), one critical care nurse, two emergency 
medicine physicians, two general practice physicians, five 
infectious diseases physicians, one lawyer, one psychologist 
Lancet 2018; 391: 700–08
Published Online 
October 17, 2017 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(17)31795-6
Department of Medicine, 
Université de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, QC, Canada 
(F Lamontagne MD); Centre de 
recherche du CHUS de 
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, 
Canada (F Lamontagne); 
Department of Medicine, 
Interdepartmental Division of 
Critical Care Medicine, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada 
(Prof R A Fowler MD, 
N K Adhikari MD); Department 
of Critical Care Medicine and 
Sunnybrook Research Institute, 
Sunnybrook Health Sciences 
Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada 
(Prof R A Fowler, N K Adhikari); 
Department of Paediatrics, 
University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada 
(S Murthy MD); US Military HIV 
Research Program, Henry M. 
Jackson Foundation, Bethesda, 
MD, USA (D M Brett-Major MD); 
Royal Free London NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK 
(M Jacobs FRCP); US Centers for 
Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA 
(T M Uyeki MD); World Health 
Organization, Geneva, 
Switzerland (C Vallenas MD, 
S L Norris MD, D G Bausch MD); 
Division of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine, 
University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 
USA (W A Fischer 2nd, MD); 
Liverpool School of Tropical 
Medicine, Liverpool, UK 
(T E Fletcher MD); Ebola 
Research Team, International 
Medical Corps, Washington, 
DC, USA (A C Levine MD); 
Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Warren Alpert 
Medical School, Providence, RI, 
USA (A C Levine); Center for 
Global Health Engagement—
Uniformed Services University 
of the Health Sciences, 
Bethesda, MD, USA
Search strategy and selection criteria 
We searched MEDLINE, MEDLINE In-Process, Embase, 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Cochrane Central, 
African Index Medicus, and PubMed for papers published in 
any language between the first available date in each database 
and February, 2016. For our systematic scoping review of 
interventions for shock and shock-like syndromes in 
resource-limited settings, we included an extensive list of 
illnesses that share characteristics with Ebola virus disease 
(Ebola, shock, cholera, sepsis, and other severe diarrhoeal 
illnesses) and we did not limit the search to specific 
interventions. Additional data to populate the evidence 
summaries was acquired by a more targeted search of 
PreMEDLINE and grey literature (eg, medical history 
textbooks, literature that is not controlled by commercial 
publishers). The complete systematic scoping review appears 
in the appendix.
 Public Health
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   February 17, 2018 
701
and bioethicist, four public health experts, three health 
research methodologists, one qualitative researcher, 
one survivor of Ebola virus disease, and three WHO staff 
observers (appendix).
The panel met for two days in London, UK, in 
August, 2016, and voted on six recommendations. The 
panel finalised two additional recommendations during 
two follow-up teleconferences in October, 2016. Voting 
panellists participated as individuals rather than as 
representatives of the organisations of which they were 
members.
Formulating questions
The steering committee (FL, RAF, NKA, SM, GHG) used 
data from a quantitative survey and structured interviews 
of health workers involved in the international response to 
the west African Ebola virus disease outbreak to inform 
the questions addressed by these guidelines.
Formulating recommendations
The panel voted on the direction and the strength (strong 
or conditional) of each recommendation. Voting on 
recommendations was by secret ballot. For a strong 
recommendation, we required 80% of votes in favour, and 
a smaller proportion in favour of a strong recommendation 
would result in a conditional recommendation. In making 
recommendations, the panel considered the magnitude of 
benefits and harms,9 the quality of supporting evidence, 
and underlying values and preferences. Following the 
GRADE framework,10 we report our overall confidence in 
estimates of effect (ie, the quality of supporting evidence) 
using the ratings very low, low, moderate, or high. The 
confidence in effect estimates from randomised controlled 
trials starts as high, whereas confidence in the evidence 
from observational studies starts as low. Confidence ratings 
could be decreased if there was risk of bias,11 imprecision,12 
inconsistency,13 indirectness,14 and likeli 
hood of publication 
bias.15 The rating of observational evidence could be 
increased in the presence of a large magnitude of assoc-
iation, a dose-response gradient, or if all unaccounted 
confounders increase confidence in estimates of effect. 
The steering committee suggested confidence ratings for 
each evidence summary, and the final assessments were 
achieved by consensus among voting panel members.
Table 1 presents interpretations of strong and conditional 
recommendations from the perspectives of patients, 
clinicians, and policy makers.8 We restricted strong rec-
ommendations, when evidence was of low or very low 
quality, to situations of very high mortality in which almost 
all informed individuals would choose a possibly effective 
intervention, even if evidentiary support is limited.9
Values and preferences
We specified the following value and preference 
judgments that informed the recommendations. We 
placed a very high value on uncertain, substantial mortality 
reduction associated with any of the interventions and a 
lower value on very uncertain increase in Ebola virus 
transmission to health-care providers. We placed a much 
lower value on rare complications of antibiotic therapy 
than on uncertain mortality benefit associated with 
antibiotic administration. We placed a high value on 
uncertain improvement in psychological wellbeing of 
patients and a lower value on very low and uncertain risk 
of Ebola virus transmission to the family. We placed a very 
high value on the reduction of pain suffered by patients 
with Ebola virus disease, and a lower value on potential 
negative perceptions associated with the use of specific 
medications, particularly opioids.
Other considerations
We discussed but did not make recommendations 
regarding resources, feasibility, and equity; recommend-
ations for interventions considered routine in high-income 
countries; diagnosis and treatment of malaria; distinct 
susceptible populations; the limitations of making infer-
ences from data collected in high-resource settings; and 
the importance of continuing clinical research during 
outbreaks of infectious diseases and, more generally, in 
low-income and middle-income countries. A description 
of the group consensus on these issues appears in 
the appendix.
Recommendations
The clinical questions, strength of each recommendation, 
and confidence in the underlying evidence are summarised 
in table 2.
(1) Oral rehydration
We strongly recommend, with moderate confidence, 
administering oral rehydration solution in an adequate 
amount rather than non-standardised rehydration
Indirect evidence gathered from other febrile gastrointestinal 
syndromes with relevance to Ebola—ie, cholera
Although the pathophysiology of Ebola virus and cholera 
infections differ, both often result in profuse diarrhoea 
leading to intravascular volume depletion, hypotension, 
organ hypoperfusion, and, in severe cases, shock. The 
first case series of oral rehydration therapy for cholera 
reported a reduction in the fatality rate of severe cases in 
(P Reed MD); US Public Health 
Service, Rockville, MD, USA 
(P Reed); Tulane School of 
Public Health and Tropical 
Medicine, New Orleans, LA, 
USA (D G Bausch); London, UK 
(A Hall BSc); Integrated 
Management of Adolescent 
and Adult Illness–Integrated 
Management of Childhood 
Illness) Alliance, San Francisco, 
CA, USA (S Gove MD); Alliance 
for International Medical 
Action, Dakar, Senegal 
(S Shepherd MD); Department 
of Health Research Methods, 
Evidence, and Impact 
(R A Siemieniuk MD, 
A A Hazzan PhD, 
Prof S J Hoffman PhD, 
Prof G H Guyatt MD) and 
Department of Medicine 
(Prof G H Guyatt), McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, 
Canada; Doctors Without 
Borders, Conakry, Guinea 
(M-C Lamah MD); Ministry of 
Health and Sanitation, 
Freetown, Sierra Leone 
(R Kamara MD); London School 
of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, 
London, UK 
(P Nakyeyune MBChB); Ministry 
of Health, Monrovia, Liberia 
(M J Soka MD); Palliative Care 
Service, Korle Bu Teaching 
Hospital, Accra, Ghana 
(A Edwin MD); Ghana Health 
Service Ethical Review 
Committee, Accra, Ghana 
(A Edwin); Department of 
Healthcare Studies, The College 
at Brockport, State University 
of New York, NY, USA 
(A A Hazzan); Division of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
Department of Medicine, 
University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA 
(S T Jacob MD); Karary 
University, Khartoum, Sudan 
(M M Elkarsany MD); 
Department of Infectious 
Diseases, Toshima Hospital, 
Tokyo, Japan (T Adachi MD);
Strong recommendations
(we recommend)
Conditional recommendations
(we suggest)
Patients
Most people in this situation will want 
the recommended course of action, 
and only a few will not
The majority of people in the situation would 
want the recommended course of action, but a 
substantial minority would not
Clinicians
Most patients should receive the 
recommended course of action
Different choices will be appropriate for 
different patients. Patients will need help to 
arrive at a management decision consistent 
with their values and preferences
Policy makers
The recommendation could be 
adopted as policy
There is a need for substantial debate and 
involvement of stakeholders
Table 1: Strength of recommendations and their implications
 Public Health
702 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   February 17, 2018
 Department of Community 
Health Sciences, Université de 
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, 
Canada (L Benhadj MSc); 
Polyclinique Bordeaux Nord 
Aquitaine, Bordeaux, France 
(C Clément MD); Infectious 
Diseases Institute, College of 
Health Sciences, Makerere 
University, Kampala, Uganda 
(I Crozier MD); Doctors Without 
Borders, Geneva, Switzerland 
(A Garcia); Global Strategy Lab, 
Dahdaleh Institute for Global 
Health Research, Faculty of
a British prison from approximately 50% to 3%.16 In the 
most severe cases, mortality approached 100% without 
rehydration, but less than 9% of those on oral rehydration 
therapy died.16 In a before and after study of Bangladeshi 
refugees with cholera and cholera-like illness in India 
in 1971, the case fatality rate decreased from approx-
imately 30% to 3·6% after the introduction of oral 
rehydration therapy.17
Human-to-human Ebola virus transmission
Ebola virus is transmitted by direct contact with blood or 
body fluids and possibly through direct skin contact with 
a person with symptomatic Ebola virus disease; airborne 
transmission has never been conclusively reported.18 
Ebola virus transmission risk is extremely low with 
proper infection prevention and control (IPC) practices, 
including appropriate personal protective equipment.18–20 
In 2007, 14 health workers were infected with Ebola 
virus in Uganda before an isolation ward with basic IPC 
was established, and none afterwards.21 An unrecognised 
case of Ebola virus disease in South Africa had direct 
contact with over 300 health workers; only one was 
infected with Ebola virus.18,22 Although more than 
800 health workers were infected with Ebola virus 
Recommendation
Population
Intervention
Comparator
Outcomes
Strength of 
recommendation
Confidence*
Comment
1
Oral rehydration
Patients with suspected, 
probable, or confirmed 
Ebola virus disease
Administration of oral rehydration 
solution in adequate amount
Non-standardised 
rehydration
Mortality; 
transmission of 
Ebola virus to 
health workers
Strongly in favour
Moderate
Rating increased 
because of large 
effect size
2
Parenteral 
administration of 
fluids
Patients with suspected, 
probable, or confirmed 
Ebola virus disease who are 
unable to drink or who 
have inadequate oral intake
Parenteral administration of fluids
No parenteral 
administration 
of fluids
Mortality; 
transmission of 
Ebola virus to 
health workers
Strongly in favour
Moderate
Rating increased 
because of large 
effect size
3
Systematic 
monitoring and 
charting of vital 
signs and volume 
status
Patients with suspected, 
probable, or confirmed 
Ebola virus disease
Systematic frequent monitoring and 
charting of vital signs and volume 
status, at least three times per day
No monitoring 
and charting
Mortality; 
transmission of 
Ebola virus to 
health workers
Strongly2 in favour
Low
Rating decreased 
because of 
inconsistency 
and indirectness
4
Serum 
biochemistry
Patients with suspected, 
probable, or confirmed 
Ebola virus disease
Measurement and charting of serum 
biochemistry (eg, electrolytes, 
glucose, and blood gas) with 
correction of abnormalities when 
clinically necessary
No measurement or 
charting of serum 
biochemistry or 
correction of 
abnormalities
Mortality; 
transmission of 
Ebola virus to 
health workers
Strongly in favour
Low
NA
5
Staffing ratio
Patients with suspected, 
probable, or confirmed 
Ebola virus disease
Higher intensity clinician care of 
patients, with Ebola treatment unit 
ratio of ≥1 clinician at the bedside per 
4 patients, including the following 
considerations: patient assessment 
≥3 times per day, continuous (24 h 
per day) presence of personnel inside 
the Ebola treatment unit to allow 
prompt recognition of and reaction 
to acute changes in condition
Appreciably lower 
intensity clinician 
care, not including 
elements above
Mortality; 
transmission of 
Ebola virus to 
health workers
Strongly in favour
Moderate
Rating increased 
because of 
evidence of a 
dose-response in 
observational 
data
6
Communication 
with family and 
friends
Patients with suspected, 
probable, or confirmed 
Ebola virus disease
Facilitating communication with 
family and friends while isolated in 
the Ebola treatment unit
Not facilitating 
communication 
with family and 
friends while 
isolated in the Ebola 
treatment unit
Psychological 
distress; Ebola 
virus transmission 
to family and 
friends
Conditionally in 
favour
Low
NA
7
Analgesic therapy
Patients with suspected, 
probable, or confirmed 
Ebola virus disease who are 
in pain
Use of analgesic therapy sufficient to 
control pain, including parenteral 
opioids if necessary
No pain medication
Pain; adverse 
effects of analgesic 
medications
Strongly in favour
High
NA
8
Antibiotics
Patients with suspected, 
probable, or confirmed 
Ebola virus disease with 
high severity of illness
Prompt administration of 
broad-spectrum antibiotics
No administration 
of broad-spectrum 
antibiotics
Mortality; 
transmission of 
Ebola virus to 
health workers; 
adverse effects of 
antibiotics; 
antibiotic resistance
Strongly in favour
Moderate
Rating increased 
because of large 
effect but 
decreased for 
indirectness
NA=not applicable. *Confidence is based on the quality of the evidence for main outcome. 
Table 2: Clinical recommendations
 Public Health
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   February 17, 2018 
703
Health, and Osgoode Hall Law 
School, York University, 
Toronto, ON, Canada 
(Prof S J Hoffman); and Centre 
de recherche, Hôpital 
Charles-Le Moyne, Longueuil, 
QC, Canada (L Benhadj)
Correspondence to: 
Dr François Lamontagne, 
Université de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, QC J1H 5N4, Canada 
francois.lamontagne@
usherbrooke.ca
See Online for appendix
during the 2013–16 west Africa outbreak, most 
transmissions occurred in situations without adequate 
IPC measures (eg, early in the outbreak, at non-Ebola 
treatment units where patients were not identified as 
having the disease, when IPC practices were infrequently 
or improperly applied, or in the community).18 Our 
recommendations apply to contexts in which health 
workers will use appropriate IPC practices and will have 
contact with patients for reasons other than encouraging 
oral intake. Therefore this intervention will not con-
stitute large incremental exposure.
Conclusion and remarks
Oral rehydration therapy probably reduces mortality and 
is unlikely to increase transmission of Ebola virus to 
health workers. This recommendation focuses on en-
suring actual fluid intake rather than simply the delivery 
of an oral rehydration solution. Patients who are too 
young or ill to prepare and drink oral rehydration 
solution independently require active assistance from 
health-care providers. Adequacy of oral fluid intake refers 
to the volume that will prevent or correct signs of 
hypovolaemia and should be considered on an individual 
basis (see third recommendation).
(2) Parenteral administration of fluids
We strongly recommend, with moderate confidence, 
parenteral administration of fluids rather than no 
parenteral administration for patients who are unable to 
drink or whose volume losses are larger than oral 
volume intake
Low-income versus high-income countries
Early in the 2013–16 west African Ebola virus disease 
outbreak, systematic administration of intravenous 
fluids was uncommon and 1230 (70·8%) of 1737 patients 
with Ebola virus disease died,19 compared with 5 (18·5%) 
of 27 patients with the disease who were treated with 
intravenous fluid rehydration in the USA and Europe 
(relative risk [RR] 0·26, 95% CI 0·12–0·58; risk difference 
[RD] –52.4%, 95% CI –62·3 to –29·7; p<0·0001).23 Care 
in high-income countries included many interventions 
beyond those we recommend, and their relative con-
tribution is uncertain. Nevertheless, parenteral fluids 
constitute a key component of the care that patients in 
high-income settings received.
Time series of single outbreaks
The Hastings Police Training Centre clinic in Freetown, 
Sierra Leone, reported a decreasing case fatality rate over 
time from 47·7% (n=151) in the first month, to 31·7% 
(n=126) in the second month, to 23·4% (n=304) in the 
third month24 (first month vs third month RR 0·49, 95% CI 
0·38–0·64; RD –24·3%, 95% CI –29·7 to –17·3; p<0·0001). 
Similarly, the case fatality rate across west Africa was 
greater than 70% between January and March, 2014, 
and decreased to less than 40% between July and 
September, 2015.6,7 This decrease coincided with increased 
efforts towards improved supportive care, including 
parenteral fluid therapy when necessary. During the 
1995 Ebola outbreak in Democratic Republic of Congo, 
231 (79·1%) of 292 people died before intravenous fluids 
were available, and 14 (56·0%) of 25 people died after 
fluids were introduced (RR 0·71, 95% CI 0·50–1·00; 
RD –23·1%, 95% CI –39·7 to 0·6; p=0·055).25 Improved 
access to parenteral therapy represents one potential 
explanation for lower case fatality rates in these analyses.
Case series of hypovolaemic shock
Intravenous fluid resuscitation was first studied clinically 
during World War 2, and the survival of many soldiers 
was attributed to the administration of colloids and blood 
transfusions.26 Intravenous crystalloid sol 
ution was 
introduced during the Vietnam War and associated to a 
reduction in case fatality rate from hypovolaemic shock.26 
However, original reports of the military case series are 
not readily available. On the basis of these initial reports, 
intravenous fluid resuscitation became standard of care 
for hypovolaemic shock.26 All 140 patients with cholera 
and hypotension survived in a case series of patients 
treated with intravenous fluid in India in 1965.27
Human-to-human Ebola virus transmission
See evidence summary for the first recommendation. 
Additional use of open-bore needles, which are used 
during venous cannulation to administer parenteral 
fluids, potentially increases the risk of Ebola virus 
transmission. Although deep needle-stick injuries are 
probably a high risk for Ebola virus transmission,28 they 
remain infrequent events when precautions are taken, 
such as using needles with safety features.29
Conclusion and remarks
Parenteral administration of fluids probably reduces 
mortality in patients who are unable to drink or who have 
inadequate oral intake to keep up with current volume 
losses. Options for parenteral fluid admin 
istration 
include peripheral and central intravenous30,31 or intra-
osseous routes.32 Enteral fluids via nasogastric tube could 
be an acceptable alternative for selected patients (eg, 
children with difficult intravenous access with adequate 
gastrointestinal motility, mild to moderate volume 
depletion, and tolerance of a nasogastric tube), and with 
sufficient provider technical skill. Results from a three-
arm randomised clinical trial comparing albumin fluid 
boluses, saline solution boluses, or no boluses in 
3141 children younger than 12 years with severe febrile 
illness and impaired perfusion, showed better survival 
among patients who were treated without fluid boluses.33 
We did not consider data from this trial relevant 
to patients with Ebola virus disease because few 
patients in this trial (<10%) suffered from volume 
depletion, patients with gastroenteritis-like syndromes 
were excluded, patients in both study arms received 
 Public Health
704 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   February 17, 2018
maintenance intravenous fluids, which we recom 
-
mend, and because we did not address the issue of 
fluid boluses.
(3) Systematic monitoring and charting of vital signs 
and volume status
In all patients with Ebola virus disease, we strongly 
recommend, with low confidence, systematically mon-
itoring and charting of vital signs and volume status 
rather than no systematic monitoring or charting.
Hypovolaemia in adults
A systematic review of hypovolaemia in adults identified 
several diagnostically helpful clinical signs.34 A pulse 
increment of 30 beats per min or more, or severe dizziness 
when standing up from lying down, are highly sensitive 
(0·97, 95% CI 0·91–1·0) and specific (0·98, 0·97–0·99) 
physical findings for severe hypo 
volaemia, defined as 
acute blood volume loss of more than 600 mL. Supine 
tachycardia (pulse >100 beats per min; specificity 0·96, 
95% CI 0·88–0·99) and supine hypotension (systolic blood 
pressure <95 mm Hg; specificity 0·97, 0·90–1·0) are 
helpful to confirm hypovolaemia. Stool output can be 
measured reliably and can guide rehydration requirements: 
in a case series, all 41 patients with severe cholera, who 
received intravenous rehydration in a 1:1 ratio with stool 
output volume, survived.27
Hypovolaemia in children
A systematic review of hypovolaemia in children identified 
helpful clinical signs.35 Prolonged capillary refill was the 
most reliable predictor of volume depletion (likelihood 
ratio positive test 4·1 [95% CI 1·7–9·8], likelihood ratio 
negative test 0·57 [0·39–0·82]). A prospective cohort 
study36 found that the 12-point DHAKA score, combining 
mental status, respiration, skin pinch, and the presence 
of tears, might improve detection of hypovolaemia 
(appendix).
Early warning scores in adults
Two cluster-randomised controlled trials have examined 
the effects of medical outreach and early-warning 
systems. In the first,37 23 hospitals were randomly 
assigned to continue functioning as usual or to 
introduce a medical emergency team system. There was 
no significant effect on the composite outcome of 
cardiac arrest, unexpected death, or unplanned ICU 
admission (adjusted odds ratio [OR] for composite 
outcome 0–98, 95% CI 0·83–1·16).37 The second trial38 
involved 16 hospital wards and found that the 
introduction of a critical care outreach service reduced 
in-hospital mortality (adjusted OR 0·52, 0·32–0·85).39 
A meta-analysis was not possible due to heterogeneity.38 
A systematic review included four before and after 
studies of variable quality, in the UK and Australia.40 
Results from three of these studies suggested that using 
an early warning score improves outcomes.
Early warning scores in children
The Paediatric Early Warning Score was used in a case-
control study of 2074 children who were evaluated in four 
hospitals, to identify those at risk of cardiac arrest (area 
under the receiver operating characteristics curve 0·87, 
95% CI 0·85–0·89).41
Human-to-human Ebola virus transmission
See evidence summary for the first recommendation.
Conclusion and remarks
Monitoring and documentation of vital signs to detect 
hypovolaemia and early warning signs of poor outcomes 
might reduce mortality and are unlikely to increase 
transmission of Ebola virus to health workers.
Vital 
signs 
are 
components 
of 
the 
physical 
examination that can ascertain volume status (ie, heart 
rate, blood pressure, gastrointestinal fluid loss, urine 
output, and, in children, capillary refill, skin pinch, and 
tears), as well as mental status, respiratory rate, oxygen 
saturation, and temperature. A detailed discussion of 
specific aspects of the management of fluid depletion is 
beyond the scope of these guidelines. These specific 
decisions should be made by clinicians exercising their 
clinical judgment after considering, case by case, all 
context-specific benefits and risks.42,43 Clinicians seeking 
such guidance can, however, consult several useful 
sources.44,45
(4) Serum biochemistry
We strongly recommend, with low confidence, that 
provision for serum biochemistry be made available, 
that testing be done as deemed desirable by the attending 
clinicians, that results be charted, and that interventions 
in response to the results be implemented according to 
clinicians’ judgment.
Observational study of Ebola virus disease
In a cohort study46 of 150 patients with Ebola virus 
disease in Sierra Leone, serum potassium and acid-base 
disturbances were associated with increased risk of death. 
Three (4%) of 69 survivors and ten (36%) of 28 non-
survivors had a potassium measurement greater than 
5·1 mmol/L (p<0·001 after adjusting for severe acute 
kidney injury). In patients with Ebola virus disease, low 
total carbon dioxide (7 [39%] of 18), hyponatraemia 
(36 [32%] of 113), hypokalaemia (19 [20%] of 97), and 
hyperkalaemia (13 [13%] of 97) were common in patients 
with Ebola virus disease;46 all are independent predictors 
of mortality.47–51 Although all of these factors are surrogate 
markers for risk of death—mostly from cardiac arrhyth-
mias or brain oedema—reversal of electrolyte derange-
ments might mitigate the risk.
Low-income versus high-income countries
See evidence summary for the second recommendation. In 
the USA and Europe, clinical management syste 
matically 
 Public Health
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   February 17, 2018 
705
included close monitoring and correction of biochemical 
abnormalities.23
Human-to-human Ebola virus transmission
Blood sampling, transport, and laboratory testing carries 
some risk of Ebola virus transmission. As mentioned 
previously, the absolute risk of transmission is small and 
can be mitigated by proper IPC practices and equipment, 
including needles with safety features. Moreover, viro-
logical testing for Ebola diagnosis already requires blood 
sampling from infected patients. Therefore, the measure-
ment of serum electrolytes is possibly associated with a 
small incremental risk of Ebola virus transmission.
Conclusion and remarks
Measuring and charting serum biochemistry with a 
clinically relevant correction of abnormalities might reduce 
mortality. This intervention could result in a small increase 
in the risk for Ebola virus transmission to health workers. 
Whenever possible, biochemistry tests should be con-
solidated with Ebola virus testing and with blood sampled 
via an existing intravenous line or needles with safety 
features to minimise the risk of needle-stick injury. In 
addition to the expected survival benefits associated with 
treatment of severe biochemical abnormalities, the inter-
vention could reduce iatrogenic deaths caused by 
inappropriate administration of electrolytes (eg, potassium 
in acute renal failure),46 and brain oedema associated 
with rapid correction of hypernatraemia with hypo-
tonic solutions.
(5) Staffing ratio
We strongly recommend, with moderate confidence, an 
Ebola treatment unit staffing ratio of at least one clinician 
to four patients, including the following considerations—
patient assessment at least 3 times per day and continuous 
(24 h per day) monitoring of patients to allow prompt 
recognition of and reaction to acute changes in condition.
Observational data in high-income countries
A meta-analysis52 of five observational studies found that 
an increase by one nurse full-time equivalent per patient-
day was associated with a reduced risk of death in intensive 
care units (OR 0·91, 95% CI 0·86–0·96). There was a clear 
dose-response relationship.
Low-income versus high-income countries
See evidence summary for the second recommendation. 
In the USA and Europe, patients were treated in units with 
a nurse:patient ratio of 1:1 or more and had continuous 
monitoring.23
Human-to-human Ebola virus transmission
See evidence summary for the first recommendation. 
Increasing the clinician-to-patient ratio probably in 
creases 
the contact time between health workers and patients. 
However, increased clinician:patient ratios could also 
prevent fatigue, especially when working in full personal 
protective equipment for extended periods, thereby 
preventing IPC mistakes. However, no published data has 
addressed this issue.
Conclusion and remarks
Increased clinician-to-patient ratios probably reduce 
mortality. The direction of effect, if any, on the risk of 
Ebola virus transmission is unknown. The term clinician 
encompasses nurses, clinical officers, and physicians. In 
practice, clinicians work with a partner or team in the 
isolation zone to ensure adherence to appropriate IPC 
practices. The minimum recommended clinician:patient 
ratio is an average (eg, could vary within Ebola treatment 
units on the basis of clinical severity). The clinical contact 
time likely influences care more than staffing ratios 
per se. Monitoring of patients can be facilitated by Ebola 
treatment unit design and technology.53 Non-clinician 
health workers can support clinical staff (eg, to assist in 
administration of oral rehydration solution).
(6) Communication with family and friends
We conditionally suggest, with low confidence, facili 
tating 
communication with family and friends for patients 
admitted to the treatment unit with suspect, probable, or 
confirmed Ebola virus disease
Psychological distress
Results from four studies showed that patients admitted to 
hospital who were isolated had higher depression and 
anxiety scores than those who were not isolated, whereas 
one study did not.54 Other effects on psychological wellbeing 
included anger or hostility, fear, and lone 
liness.54 In west 
Africa, community distress about unknown activities in 
Ebola treatment units generated resistance, on occasions 
ranging from denying health-care workers access to 
communities to violent opposition to the Ebola response.55
Human-to-human Ebola virus transmission
Risk of Ebola virus transmission to visitors is zero under 
strict isolation. The risk is probably extremely low if contact 
is allowed across a sufficient distance or a barrier to prevent 
droplet spread.
Conclusion and remarks
Facilitating the communication of isolated patients with 
family and friends, including enabling the use of cell 
phones or the internet, might reduce psychological distress 
and can be achieved without increasing the risk of Ebola 
virus transmission. Closer contact situations, including 
burials,56 can be safe if appropriate IPC practices, such as 
use of physical barriers, are employed.
(7) Analgesic therapy
We strongly recommend, with high confidence, the use 
of analgesic therapy, including parenteral opioids, if 
necessary to reduce pain.
 Public Health
706 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   February 17, 2018
Pain
Analgesic medications are beneficial for acute pain in 
almost all scenarios. For example, all opioid analgesics 
tested in a network meta-analysis of randomised trials 
improved pain scores, compared with placebo.57 A review58 
of morphine for post-surgical analgesia found a large, 
immediate, and dose-dependent effect on pain after 
administration compared with placebo.
Adverse effects
Analgesic medications may be associated with adverse 
effects, some of them serious, but evidence of the 
magnitude of risk applicable to the clinical management 
of patients admitted to Ebola treatment units is un-
available. This recommendation assumes that the risk of 
serious adverse effects can be minimised through good 
clinical practice.
Human-to-human Ebola virus transmission
See evidence summary for the second recommendation.
Conclusion and remarks
Analgesic therapy reduces pain. With the available 
evidence, it was not possible to assess whether non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory analgesics (particularly those 
that inhibit cyclooxygenase-1) should be avoided because 
of anti-platelet effects or risks of acute kidney injury in the 
setting of Ebola virus disease. Satisfactory implementation 
of this recommendation will probably require the edu-
cation of local health workers, family members, and 
communities to address negative views of opioids.59
(8) Antibiotics
We strongly recommend, with moderate confidence, 
prompt administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics to 
patients with suspect, probable, or confirmed Ebola virus 
disease and high severity of illness.
Mortality
Multiple time series and randomised clinical trials 
done between 1930 and 1950 consistently show that 
antimicrobials reduce mortality associated with bacterial 
infections.60,61
Antibiotic-related complications
In a multicentre prospective cohort study of 4143 patients, 
the overall incidence of healthcare-associated Clostridium 
difficile infection was 28·1 cases per 10 000 patient-days.62 
The OR of C difficile infection for antibiotics was 5·25 
(95% CI 2·2–12·8). In a retrospective cohort study of 
34 298 adult inpatients in a large acute-care teaching 
hospital, the overall incidence of C difficile infection was 
5·95 per 10 000 patient-days.63 Each 10% increase in ward-
level antibiotic exposure (measured in days of antibiotic 
therapy per 100 patient-days) was associated with a 
2·1 per 10 000 (p<0·001) increased incidence in C difficile. 
In a longitudinal cohort study of 110 656 adults aged 
66 years or older who resided in nursing homes, the risk 
of allergic reactions to antibiotics varied from 0% in 
homes with low antibiotic exposure to 0·1% in homes 
with high antibiotic exposure.64
Antibiotic resistance
Antibiotic use can increase antibiotic resistance. 
However, the degree of antibiotic use we recommend 
for the management of patients during an Ebola virus 
disease outbreak probably represents a negligible 
increase in the overall use of antibiotics, and it is 
therefore unlikely to have a significant effect on 
antibiotic resistance.
Human-to-human Ebola virus transmission
See evidence summary for recommendation 2.
Conclusion and remarks
Prompt administration of antibiotics probably reduces 
mortality among patients with bacterial infections. 
Antibiotic administration might result in a small 
increase in antibiotic-related complications and risk of 
Ebola virus transmission to health workers. Patients 
with suspect, probable, or confirmed Ebola virus disease 
and high severity of illness might be ill because of Ebola 
virus infection, bacterial infection, malaria, other 
infectious illnesses, or a combination of these infections. 
WHO provides guidance for the investigation and 
management of malaria.65 This eighth recommendation 
addresses the possibility of bacterial infection as a 
primary or concurrent cause of illness when micro-
biology laboratory infra 
structure is insufficient. The 
rationale is that when ruling out bacterial infections is 
not 
possible, 
the 
consequence 
of 
not 
treating 
undiagnosed bacterial infections would probably lead to 
serious incremental morbidity and mortality.66 In 
situations when micro 
biological analyses are available, 
consideration should be given to obtaining cultures (eg, 
blood, urine, or respiratory, as relevant) before initiating 
antibiotics if this can be achieved without delaying 
therapy. This approach would plausibly reduce the 
duration 
of 
initiated 
broad-spectrum 
antibiotics, 
considering that bacterial co-infection might affect a 
minority of patients.67 In all cases, patients should be 
reassessed 48 h after initiation of treatment to determine 
whether antibiotics are still necessary (on the basis of 
clinical condition and culture results, if available). In 
adults, clinicians can infer high severity of illness from 
early warning scores discussed for recommendation. In 
African patients younger than 15 years who are admitted 
to hospital for a febrile illness, the prevalence of bac-
teraemia is high and therefore we recommend prompt 
use of antibiotics, regardless of illness severity.68 
Critically ill patients will generally receive intravenous 
antibiotics, but clinicians could choose to administer 
oral antibiotics after considering bioavailability and 
likelihood of absorption (ie, if there is no vomiting).
 Public Health
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   February 17, 2018 
707
Conclusion
First-hand accounts of the care that was delivered during 
the 2013–16 west African outbreak of Ebola virus disease 
provided impetus for these guidelines, which address 
interventions that are otherwise considered routine.69
Indirectness considerably limits the quality of the 
evidence that informed these recommendations. One of 
the reasons for this dearth of evidence is that during 
the past 40 years, after 18 outbreaks and more than 
30 000 reported cases of Ebola virus disease, clinical 
descriptions were mostly limited to the presenting signs 
and symptoms for a very small proportion of all cases 
(ie, this was an unrepresentative sample).23 Applying these 
recommendations could not only improve outcomes but 
enable data collection that will inform future practice.
Contributors
The steering committee (FL, RAF, SM, and GHG) contributed to the 
conception and design of the study. FL, RAF, NKA, SM, DMBM, MJ, 
TMU, CV, SLN, WAF, TEF, ACL, PR, DGB, SG, AH, SS, RAS, M-CL, 
RK, PN, MJS, AE, AAH, STJ, MME, TA, LB, CC, IC, AG, SJH, and GHG 
contributed to the search strategy, data extraction, interpretation of the 
data, and formulation of the recommendations. FL, RAF, NKA, SM, 
and GHG drafted the report. DMB-M, MJ, TMU, CV, SLN, WAF, TEF, 
ACL, PR, DGB, SG, AH, SS, RAS, M-CL, RK, PN, MJS, AE, AAH, STJ, 
MME, TA, LB, CC, IC, AG, and SJH revised the report. All authors 
approved the final version.
Declaration of interests
STJ is a senior medical adviser for Shift Labs. SLN, RAS, and GHG are 
members of the GRADE Working Group. SLN has published numerous 
papers related to GRADE, and her career benefited from this 
relationship. TEF and SJH have been consultants to WHO. All other 
authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent the official position of the CDC. 
The authors alone are responsible for the views expressed in this article 
and they do not necessarily represent the views, decisions or policies of 
the institutions with which they are affiliated. FL is supported by the 
Fonds de Recherche du Québec-Santé (award number 33132). This 
project was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research 
(grant number 143490). We thank Ani Orchanian-Cheff and 
Rachel Couban for their contribution to the systematic scoping review 
that informed these guidelines. We also thank Christine Loignon, 
François Couturier, Sharmistha Mishra, Adrienne Chan, 
Catherine Hudon, and Ibrahima Elhadj Bah for their contribution to 
the mixed methods project that informed these guidelines. We thank 
Adnan Haj Mustafa for his support in organising the guidelines 
meeting. We thank Armand Sprecher for his contributions to the 
recommendations and participation to the guidelines meeting. 
We thank Marie-Claude Battista and Marie-Ève Côté and the Unité de 
Recherche Clinique et Épidémiologique of the Centre de recherche du 
CHU de Sherbrooke for their support in coordinating the preparation 
and revisions of the guidelines.
References
1 
Fowler RA, Fletcher T, Fischer WA 2nd, et al. Caring for critically ill 
patients with ebola virus disease. Perspectives from west Africa. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014; 190: 733–37
.
2 
Lamontagne F, Clement C, Fletcher T, Jacob ST, Fischer WA 2nd, 
Fowler RA. Doing today’s work superbly well--treating Ebola with 
current tools. N Engl J Med 2014; 371: 1565–66.
3 
Brett-Major DM, Jacob ST, Jacquerioz FA, et al. Being ready to treat 
Ebola virus disease patients. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2015; 92: 233–37
.
4 
Leligdowicz A, Fischer WA 2nd, Uyeki TM, et al. Ebola virus 
disease and critical illness. Crit Care 2016; 20: 217
.
5 
Murthy S, Ebola Clinical Care authors group. Ebola and provision of 
critical care. Lancet 2015; 385: 1392–93.
6 
Agua-Aqum J, Allegranzi B, Ariyarajah A, et al. After Ebola in 
west Africa—unpredictable risks, preventable epidemics. 
N Engl J Med 2016; 375: 587–96.
7 
Garske T, Cori A, Ariyarajah A, et al. Heterogeneities in the case 
fatality ratio in the west African Ebola outbreak 2013–2016. 
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2017; 372: 20160308.
8 
Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Akl EA, et al. GRADE guidelines: 1. 
Introduction-GRADE evidence profiles and summary of findings 
tables. J Clin Epidemiol 2011; 64: 383–94.
9 
Andrews J, Guyatt G, Oxman AD, et al. GRADE guidelines: 14. 
Going from evidence to recommendations: the significance and 
presentation of recommendations. J Clin Epidemiol 2013; 
66: 719–25.
10 
Balshem H, Helfand M, Schunemann HJ, et al. 
GRADE guidelines: 3. Rating the quality of evidence. 
J Clin Epidemiol 2011; 64: 401–06.
11 
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist G, et al. GRADE guidelines: 4. 
Rating the quality of evidence—study limitations (risk of bias). 
J Clin Epidemiol 2011; 64: 407–15.
12 
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. GRADE guidelines 6. 
Rating the quality of evidence—imprecision. J Clin Epidemiol 2011; 
64: 1283–93.
13 
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. GRADE guidelines: 7
. 
Rating the quality of evidence—inconsistency. J Clin Epidemiol 2011; 
64: 1294–302.
14 
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. GRADE guidelines: 8. 
Rating the quality of evidence—indirectness. J Clin Epidemiol 2011; 
64: 1303–10.
15 
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Montori V, et al. GRADE guidelines: 5. 
Rating the quality of evidence—publication bias. J Clin Epidemiol 
2011; 64: 1277–82.
16 
Stevens W. Observations on the nature and the treatment of the 
Asiatic cholera. New York: Hippolyte Bailliere, 1853.
17 
Mahalanabis D, Choudhuri AB, Bagchi NG, Bhattacharya AK, 
Simpson TW. Oral fluid therapy of cholera among Bangladesh 
refugees. Johns Hopkins Med J 1973; 132: 197–205.
18 
US Centers for Disease Control. Review of human-to-human 
transmission of Ebola virus. Atlanta: CDC, 2015.
19 
WHO. Health worker Ebola infections in Guinea, Liberia, 
and Sierra Leone. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2014.
20 Hageman JC, Hazim C, Wilson K, et al. Infection prevention and 
control for Ebola in health care settings—west Africa and United 
States. MMWR Suppl 2016; 65: 50–56.
21 
Wamala JF, Lukwago L, Malimbo M, et al. Ebola hemorrhagic fever 
associated with novel virus strain, Uganda, 2007–2008. 
Emerg Infect Dis 2010; 16: 1087–92.
22 Richards GA, Murphy S, Jobson R, et al. Unexpected Ebola virus in 
a tertiary setting: clinical and epidemiologic aspects. Crit Care Med 
2000; 28: 240–44.
23 Uyeki TM, Mehta AK, Davey RT Jr, et al. Clinical management of 
Ebola virus disease in the United States and Europe. N Engl J Med 
2016; 374: 636–46.
24 
Ansumana R, Jacobsen KH, Sahr F, et al. Ebola in Freetown area, 
Sierra Leone—a case study of 581 patients. N Engl J Med 2015; 
372: 587–88.
25 Guimard Y, Bwaka MA, Colebunders R, et al. Organization of 
patient care during the Ebola hemorrhagic fever epidemic in 
Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1995. J Infect Dis 1999; 
179 (suppl 1): S268–73.
26 Moore FA, McKinley BA, Moore EE. The next generation in shock 
resuscitation. Lancet 2004; 363: 1988–96.
27 
Carpenter CC, Mitra PP, Sack RB, Dans PE, Wells SA, Chaudhuri RN. 
Clinical evaluation of fluid requirements in Asiatic cholera. Lancet 
1965; 1: 726–27
.
28 Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al. A case-control study of 
HIV seroconversion in health care workers after percutaneous 
exposure. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Needlestick 
Surveillance Group. N Engl J Med 1997; 337: 1485–90.
29 Trim JC, Elliott TS. A review of sharps injuries and preventative 
strategies. J Hosp Infect 2003; 53: 237–42.
30 Cotte J, Cordier PY, Bordes J, et al. Fluid resuscitation in Ebola virus 
disease: a comparison of peripheral and central venous accesses. 
Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 2015; 34: 317–20.
 Public Health
708 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 391   February 17, 2018
31 
Rees PS, Lamb LE, Nicholson-Roberts TC, et al. Safety and 
feasibility of a strategy of early central venous catheter insertion in a 
deployed UK military Ebola virus disease treatment unit. 
Intensive Care Med 2015; 41: 735–43.
32 Ker K, Tansley G, Beecher D, et al. Comparison of routes for 
achieving parenteral access with a focus on the management of 
patients with Ebola virus disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 
2: CD011386.
33 Maitland K, Kiguli S, Opoka RO, et al. Mortality after fluid bolus in 
African children with severe infection. N Engl J Med 2011; 
364: 2483–95.
34 
McGee S, Abernethy WB 3rd, Simel DL. The rational clinical 
examination. Is this patient hypovolemic? JAMA 1999; 281: 1022–29.
35 Steiner MJ, DeWalt DA, Byerley JS. Is this child dehydrated? JAMA 
2004; 291: 2746–54.
36 Levine AC, Glavis-Bloom J, Modi P, et al. External validation of the 
DHAKA score and comparison with the current IMCI algorithm for 
the assessment of dehydration in children with diarrhoea: 
a prospective cohort study. Lancet Glob Health 2016; 4: e744–51.
37 
Hillman K, Chen J, Cretikos M, et al. Introduction of the medical 
emergency team (MET) system: a cluster-randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet 2005; 365: 2091–97
.
38 McGaughey J, Alderdice F, Fowler R, Kapila A, Mayhew A, 
Moutray M. Outreach and early warning systems (EWS) for the 
prevention of intensive care admission and death of critically ill 
adult patients on general hospital wards. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2007; 3: CD005529.
39 Priestley G, Watson W, Rashidian A, et al. Introducing Critical Care 
Outreach: a ward-randomised trial of phased introduction in a 
general hospital. Intensive Care Med 2004; 30: 1398–404.
40 
McNeill G, Bryden D. Do either early warning systems or 
emergency response teams improve hospital patient survival? 
A systematic review. Resuscitation 2013; 84: 1652–67
.
41 
Parshuram CS, Duncan HP, Joffe AR, et al. Multicentre validation 
of the bedside paediatric early warning system score: a severity of 
illness score to detect evolving critical illness in hospitalised 
children. Crit Care 2011; 15: R184.
42 
Hjortrup PB, Haase N, Bundgaard H, et al. Restricting volumes of 
resuscitation fluid in adults with septic shock after initial 
management: the CLASSIC randomised, parallel-group, 
multicentre feasibility trial. Intensive Care Med 2016; 42: 1695–705.
43 
Marik PE, Linde-Zwirble WT, Bittner EA, Sahatjian J, Hansell D. 
Fluid administration in severe sepsis and septic shock, patterns and 
outcomes: an analysis of a large national database. 
Intensive Care Med 2017; 43: 625–32.
44 
NICE. Intravenous fluid therapy: intravenous fluid therapy in adults 
in hospital. London: National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence, 2013.
45 
Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign: 
international guidelines for management of sepsis and septic 
shock: 2016. Intensive Care Med 2017; 43: 304–77
.
46 
Hunt L, Gupta-Wright A, Simms V, et al. Clinical presentation, 
biochemical, and haematological parameters and their association 
with outcome in patients with Ebola virus disease: an observational 
cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis 2015; 15: 1292–99.
47 
Maciel AT, Park M. Differences in acid-base behavior between 
intensive care unit survivors and nonsurvivors using both a 
physicochemical and a standard base excess approach: a prospective, 
observational study. J Crit Care 2009; 24: 477–83.
48 
Islam SS, Khan MU. Risk factors for diarrhoeal deaths: a case-control 
study at a diarrhoeal disease hospital in Bangladesh. Int J Epidemiol 
1986; 15: 116–21.
49 
Siegel D, Hulley SB, Black DM, et al. Diuretics, serum and 
intracellular electrolyte levels, and ventricular arrhythmias in 
hypertensive men. JAMA 1992; 267: 1083–89.
50 Juurlink DN, Mamdani MM, Lee DS, et al. Rates of hyperkalemia 
after publication of the Randomized Aldactone Evaluation Study. 
N Engl J Med 2004; 351: 543–51.
51 
Fisch C. Relation of electrolyte disturbances to cardiac arrhythmias. 
Circulation 1973; 47: 408–19.
52 Kane RL, Shamliyan TA, Mueller C, Duval S, Wilt TJ. The association 
of registered nurse staffing levels and patient outcomes: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Med Care 2007; 45: 1195–204.
53 Steinhubl SR, Feye D, Levine AC, Conkright C, Wegerich SW, 
Conkright G. Validation of a portable, deployable system for 
continuous vital sign monitoring using a multiparametric wearable 
sensor and personalised analytics in an Ebola treatment centre. 
BMJ Glob Health 2016; 1: e000070.
54 
Abad C, Fearday A, Safdar N. Adverse effects of isolation in 
hospitalised patients: a systematic review. J Hosp Infect 2010; 
76: 97–102.
55 ACAPS. Ebola in west Africa. Guinea: resistance to the Ebola 
response. 2015. https://www.acaps.org/sites/acaps/files/products/
files/h_guinea_resistance_to_the_ebola_response_24_april_2015.pdf 
(accessed June 13, 2017).
56 Nielsen CF, Kidd S, Sillah AR, et al. Improving burial practices and 
cemetery management during an Ebola virus disease epidemic—
Sierra Leone, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015; 64: 20–27
.
57 
Zeppetella G, Davies A, Eijgelshoven I, Jansen JP. A network 
meta-analysis of the efficacy of opioid analgesics for the management 
of breakthrough cancer pain episodes. J Pain Symptom Manage 2014; 
47: 772–85.
58 Aubrun F, Mazoit JX, Riou B. Postoperative intravenous morphine 
titration. Br J Anaesth 2012; 108: 193–201.
59 Berterame S, Erthal J, Thomas J, et al. Use of and barriers to access 
to opioid analgesics: a worldwide, regional, and national study. 
Lancet 2016; 387: 1644–56.
60 Gaisford WF. Results of the treatment of 400 cases of lobar 
pneumonia with M & B 693: (Section of Medicine). Proc R Soc Med 
1939; 32: 1070–76.
61 
Plummer N, Ensworth H. Preliminary report of the use of 
sulfapyridine in the treatment of pneumonia. Bull NY Acad Med 
1939; 15: 241–48.
62 Loo VG, Bourgault AM, Poirier L, et al. Host and pathogen factors 
for Clostridium difficile infection and colonization. N Engl J Med 
2011; 365: 1693–703.
63 Brown K, Valenta K, Fisman D, Simor A, Daneman N. Hospital ward 
antibiotic prescribing and the risks of Clostridium difficile infection. 
JAMA Intern Med 2015; 175: 626–33.
64 
Daneman N, Bronskill SE, Gruneir A, et al. Variability in antibiotic 
use across nursing homes and the risk of antibiotic-related adverse 
outcomes for individual residents. JAMA Intern Med 2015; 
175: 1331–39.
65 WHO. Guidelines for the treatment of malaria, 3rd edn. 
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2015.
66 Kreuels B, Wichmann D, Emmerich P, et al. A case of severe Ebola 
virus infection complicated by gram-negative septicemia. 
N Engl J Med 2014; 371: 2394–401.
67 
Lamb L, Robson J, Ardley C, et al. Bacterial co-infection is rare in 
patients with Ebola virus disease in a military Ebola virus disease 
treatment unit in Sierra Leone. J Infect 2015; 71: 406–07
.
68 Reddy EA, Shaw AV, Crump JA. Community-acquired bloodstream 
infections in Africa: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Lancet Infect Dis 2010; 10: 417–32.
69 Boozary AS, Farmer PE, Jha AK. The Ebola outbreak, fragile health 
systems, and quality as a cure. JAMA 2014; 312: 1859–60.
