   1
Lancellotti P, et al. Heart 2017;0:1–7. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311682
Stress echocardiography in patients with native 
valvular heart disease
Patrizio Lancellotti,1,2 Raluca Dulgheru,1 Yun Yun Go,1 Tadafumi Sugimoto,1 
Stella Marchetta,1 Cécile Oury,1 Madalina Garbi3
AbStrAct
Valve stress echocardiography (VSE) can be performed 
as exercise stress echocardiography (ESE) or dobutamine 
stress echocardiography (DSE) depending on the 
patient’s clinical status, severity and type of valve disease. 
ESE combines exercise testing with two-dimensional grey 
scale and Doppler echocardiography during exercise. 
Thus, it provides objective assessment of symptomatic 
status (exercise test), as well as exercise-induced 
changes of a series of echocardiographic parameters 
(different depending on the valve disease type), which 
yield prognostic information in individual patients and 
help in a better treatment planning. DSE is useful in 
symptomatic patients with low-gradient aortic stenosis. 
It clarifies its severity and helps in assessing surgical risk 
in patients with severe disease and systolic dysfunction. 
It can be also used to test valve haemodynamics in 
asymptomatic patients with significant mitral stenosis 
unable to perform an exercise test or to test the left 
ventricle response, namely to test viability, in patients 
with ischaemic secondary mitral regurgitation. VSE has 
taught us that history taking, clinical examination and 
resting echocardiography give an ’incomplete picture’ 
of the disease in patients presenting with a severe valve 
disease. Therefore, its use should be encouraged in such 
patients.
IntroductIon
Functional testing at its inception was used to assess 
symptoms during exertion, and it has evolved to 
answer several clinical questions with the help of 
stress echocardiography.1 Valve stress echocardi-
ography (VSE) helps refine diagnosis of severity, 
prognosis and management planning based on 
changes in various parameters induced by exercise 
or by dobutamine.2 3 The indications for VSE have 
expanded in parallel with the growing evidence for 
early intervention benefit in valvular heart disease.
Currently, there is extensive evidence that VSE 
can benefit decision-making for a wide range of 
patients being followed up in valve clinics or those 
with newly diagnosed valvular heart diseases.4 
Consequently, the recently published European 
Association of Cardiovascular Imaging and the 
American Society of Echocardiography joint 
recommendations for the use of stress echocardi-
ography in non-ischaemic heart disease address the 
use of stress echocardiography in valvular heart 
disease.5 VSE is recommended for the following 
clinical scenarios: corroborating the severity of 
valve disease with symptoms prior to intervention, 
detecting severe valve disease with left ventricular 
systolic dysfunction or other signs of haemodynamic 
compromise.4 For diagnosis of severe valve disease 
with symptoms, VSE is performed in two catego-
ries of patients: asymptomatic patients with severe 
valve disease with the aim to detect symptoms and 
symptomatic patients with non-severe valve disease 
with the aim to regrade valve disease severity. For 
diagnosis of severe valve disease with left ventric-
ular systolic dysfunction, VSE is also performed in 
two categories of patients: patients with low-flow 
aortic stenosis with the aim to clarify aortic stenosis 
severity and patients with asymptomatic severe 
valve disease with the aim to detect subclinical left 
ventricular systolic dysfunction.6 7 Furthermore, 
other signs of haemodynamic compromise may be 
demonstrated with VSE in asymptomatic patients 
with severe valve disease.8 9 A simplified classifi-
cation of VSE indications groups them into three 
categories: severe valve disease without symptoms, 
non-severe valve disease with symptoms and valve 
disease with low flow. A more detailed and compre-
hensive classification of VSE indications assigns 
them to the respective valve disease.
Methodology
Stress echocardiography with both dobutamine and 
exercise can be used for the assessment of valvular 
heart disease, depending on indication and on the 
aim of the test. Exercise testing can be performed 
with a treadmill; however, the postexercise rather 
than during exercise image acquisition in this case 
may result in peak exercise-related phenomena 
being underestimated or missed, and low work-
load-related phenomena cannot be assessed. Ideally, 
VSE should be performed with supine bicycle 
exercise to allow imaging throughout the test and 
particularly at low workload and at peak effort. 
Imaging at low workload allows assessment of 
contractile reserve and changes in global longitu-
dinal strain, both helping to detect subclinical left 
ventricular systolic dysfunction. Furthermore, the 
increase in systolic pulmonary artery pressure from 
low workload has higher specificity for a patho-
logical response as haemodynamic consequence of 
severe valve disease.
Dobutamine stress is the only currently recom-
mended VSE modality for the assessment of 
low-flow, low-gradient aortic stenosis with reduced 
left ventricular ejection fraction.10 11 Dobuta-
mine stress can be used as an alternative to exer-
cise in low-flow, low-gradient aortic stenosis with 
preserved left ventricular ejection fraction and in 
the assessment of mitral stenosis severity. Dobuta-
mine stress does not allow assessment of systolic 
pulmonary artery pressure and the assessment of 
mitral regurgitation severity.
review
to cite: Lancellotti P, 
Dulgheru R, Go YY, et al. 
Heart Published Online 
First: [please include Day 
Month Year]. doi:10.1136/
heartjnl-2017-311682
1Departments of Cardiology, 
Heart Valve Clinic, University 
of Liège Hospital, GIGA 
Cardiovascular Sciences, CHU 
Sart Tilman, Liege, Belgium
2Gruppo Villa Maria Care and 
Research, Anthea Hospital, 
Bari, Italy
3King’s Health Partners, 
King’s College Hospital NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK
correspondence to
Professor Patrizio Lancellotti, 
Domaine Universitaire du 
Sart Tilman, Batiment B35 
Department of Cardiology, 
University Hospital, Université 
de Liège, CHU du Sart 
Tilman 4000 Liège, Belgium;  
plancellotti@ 
chu. 
ulg. 
ac. 
be
Received 6 September 2017
Revised 30 October 2017
Accepted 15 November 2017
 
Heart Online First, published on December 7, 2017 as 10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311682
Copyright Article author (or their employer) 2017. Produced by BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (& BCS) under licence. 
group.bmj.com
 on January 23, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 2
Lancellotti P, et al. Heart 2017;0:1–7. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311682
review
Exercise echocardiography allows the assessment of exer-
cise tolerance and symptoms together with the assessment of 
haemodynamic parameters under physiological stress. The 
exercise tolerance is compared with age-matched, sex-matched 
and weight-matched normals.12 Symptoms of shortness of 
breath are witnessed and can be occasionally found to be due 
to cardiac asthma—interstitial pulmonary oedema resulting 
in prolonged expiration and expiratory wheeze. Being symp-
toms-limited, the exercise test is usually terminated before 
development of alveolar pulmonary oedema with wet lungs; 
on the contrary, alveolar pulmonary oedema may be occa-
sionally induced by dobutamine stress echo in the assessment 
of low-flow, low-gradient aortic stenosis or mitral stenosis. 
Exercise echocardiography allows the assessment of systolic 
pulmonary artery pressure response, of mitral regurgitation 
severity and of severe mitral regurgitation consequences. 
Exercise echocardiography allows the assessment of the true 
left ventricular contractile reserve, as a physiological phenom-
enon, rather than the left ventricular inotropic reserve, defined 
as the increase in ejection fraction in response to intravenous 
dobutamine infusion. Exercise echocardiography is used in 
the assessment of severe valve disease with no symptoms but 
also non-severe valve disease with symptoms and paradoxical 
low-flow aortic stenosis.
Parameters assessed depend on the VSE indication; thus, 
a specific protocol is used in each case, predefining necessary 
images and their order of acquisition appropriate for the aim of 
the test (figure 1).
clInIcAl ApplIcAtIonS
The VSE clinical application depends on the valve disease 
in question and on the indication for the test (tables 1 and 2, 
figures 2–5).
In case of asymptomatic severe valve disease, the test should 
be always performed with exercise stress to detect symptoms 
and haemodynamic consequences of the valve disease in phys-
iological circumstances, reproducible in daily life. Further-
more, dobutamine stress is contraindicated in severe valve 
disease, particularly in high-gradient severe aortic stenosis. 
The administration of dobutamine in severe aortic stenosis 
can result in cardiogenic shock due to dobutamine-induced 
peripheral vasodilation with consequent systemic hypotension 
and concomitant acute pulmonary oedema. Exercise testing to 
detect symptoms is well established and recommended in all 
valve disease management guidelines, because symptoms are a 
class I indication for intervention, although having a subjective 
nature; furthermore, sedentary patients do not give themselves 
the opportunity to experience symptoms, and many active 
Figure 1 Schematic representation of different parameters that may be acquired during exercise stress echocardiography in each type of 
asymptomatic severe heart valve disease. AR, aortic regurgitation; AS, aortic stenosis; Ch, chamber; E, early diastolic wave velocity; ESE, exercise stress 
echocardiography; LV, left ventricle; MG, mean pressure gradient; MR, mitral regurgitations; MS, mitral stenosis; PISA, proximal isovelocity surface 
area; SV, stroke volume; TAPSE, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion; TTG, transtricuspid pressure gradient.
group.bmj.com
 on January 23, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 3
Lancellotti P, et al. Heart 2017;0:1–7. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311682
review
patients instinctively slow down their pace to avoid symptoms. 
In severe valve disease, given that the valve disease severity 
is already established, VSE image acquisition should begin 
with left ventricular views, tricuspid regurgitation for systolic 
pulmonary artery pressure estimation and other parameters 
suggestive of decompensation, for example exertion-induced 
mitral regurgitation in patients with aortic valve disease.
In case of symptoms but non-severe valve disease, the test 
performed with exercise stress allows corroboration of symp-
toms with exertion-induced changes. However, dobutamine 
can be used to assess inducible ischaemia as reason for symp-
toms or to regrade low-gradient aortic stenosis severity. Echo-
cardiography is essential for diagnosis in this case, and the VSE 
image acquisition should begin with parameters of valve disease 
severity.
In case of low-flow aortic stenosis, exercise is recommended 
only if the ejection fraction is preserved and the patient is 
asymptomatic by history taking. The VSE image acquisition 
should begin with parameters of valve disease severity and 
flow reserve, which is the degree of blood flow increase in 
response to maximal stimulation, with left ventricular views 
acquired subsequently.
AortIc StenoSIS
Asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis
Severe aortic stenosis is not an indication for intervention in the 
absence of symptoms if the left ventricular ejection fraction is 
preserved. Exercise testing to detect symptoms is long well estab-
lished in the follow-up of severe aortic stenosis in valve clinics 
for timing of intervention. The addition of echocardiography 
provides diagnostic and prognostic parameters.13 Classically, 
during treadmill exercise testing, ST depression on ECG and drop 
in systolic blood pressure are indications for intervention.14 15 The 
ST depression on ECG translates into induced regional myocardial 
hypokinesia during VSE. Left ventricular ejection fraction drop 
on exertion and inducible mitral regurgitation are also echocar-
diographic signs of haemodynamic compromise. Reduced global 
longitudinal strain at rest and on exertion suggests subclinical left 
ventricular systolic dysfunction.16 17 Furthermore, mean gradient 
increase by more than 20 
mm Hg is a sign of adverse prognosis, 
suggestive of possible decompensation during follow-up.8 14
Symptoms despite non-severe aortic stenosis
In patients with non-severe aortic stenosis based on current 
classification criteria, symptoms should trigger stress testing to 
table 1 Stress echocardiographic parameters in native valvular heart disease
Symptom
type of stress
echocardiographic parameters with 
guideline recommendations1 2
echocardiographic parameters with 
clinical recommendations3
Severe high-gradient AS
Asymptomatic
ESE
–
Flow reserve/contractile reserve
Ex-induced PAP >60 mm Hg
Ex-MG increase >20 mm Hg1
Severe low-gradient AS with preserved LVEF
Asymptomatic
ESE
–
MG and AVA during exercise
Ex-induced PAP >60 mm Hg
  
Symptomatic
DSE
–
MG and AVA at DES
Severe low-gradient AS with reduced LVEF
– 
DSE
MG and AVA at DES,1 2 flow reserve/
contractile reserve1
Flow reserve/contractile reserve
Severe AR
Asymptomatic
ESE
–
Flow reserve/contractile reserve
Ex-induced PAP >60 mm Hg
Severe primary MR
Asymptomatic
ESE
–
Ex-induced PAP >60 mm Hg1
Flow reserve/contractile reserve
Ex-increase in EROA >10 mm2
Haemodynamically significant MS
Asymptomatic
ESE or DSE
Ex-MG increase >15 mm Hg for ESE2
Ex-MG increase >15 mm Hg for ESE or 
>18 mm Hg for DES
Ex-induced PAP >60 mm Hg for ESE
AR, aortic regurgitation; AS, aortic stenosis; DSE, dobutamine stress echocardiography; EROA, effective regurgitant orifice area; ESE, exercise stress echocardiography; Ex, 
exercise; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; MG, mean pressure gradient; MR, mitral regurgitations; MS, mitral stenosis; PAP, systolic pulmonary artery pressure. 
table 2 Comparison of exercise versus dobutamine stress echocardiography
upright/treadmill
Semisupine bicycle
dobutamine
Does not allow imaging at intermediate level
Allows for imaging at intermediate and peak levels
Allows for imaging at intermediate and peak levels
Postpeak/postexercise imaging (within 90 s after 
termination)
Postpeak/postexercise imaging (recovery period)
Postpeak/postdobutamine imaging (recovery period)
–
Dynamic LV function assessment, E/e’ assessment (at low 
levels)
Dynamic LV function assessment, E/e’ assessment (at low 
levels)
–
Changes in valve disease severity (gradients across 
stenotic valve, regurgitant volume or effective regurgitant 
orifice area for mitral regurgitation)
Changes in valve disease severity (gradients across 
stenotic valve)
–
Slope of change in sPAP
–
–
Biphasic wall motion changes
Biphasic wall motion changes
–
Ischaemic threshold
Ischaemic threshold
Change in loading condition due to change in posture
–
–
Potential drop in heart rate
–
–
E, early diastolic wave velocity; LV, left ventricle; sPAP, systolic pulmonary artery pressure.
group.bmj.com
 on January 23, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 4
Lancellotti P, et al. Heart 2017;0:1–7. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311682
review
regrade aortic stenosis severity based on stress-induced changes 
of echocardiographic parameters and to detect signs of haemo-
dynamic significance described for severe aortic stenosis.6 7
classical low-flow, low-gradient aortic stenosis
Low-flow, low-gradient aortic stenosis with reduced left 
ventricular ejection fraction needs low-dose dobutamine 
VSE to assess the severity of aortic stenosis and the existence 
of flow reserve. At rest, because of low transvalvular flow 
as a result of reduced left ventricular ejection fraction, the 
echocardiographic assessment of aortic stenosis severity gives 
contradictory findings with calculated functional aortic valve 
area in the severe range and gradients in the moderate range. 
The diagnosis of aortic stenosis severity necessitates assess-
ment of calculated functional aortic valve area and gradi-
ents in conditions of increased transvalvular flow as a result 
of dobutamine.18 19 Gradients increase with no or minimal 
increase in calculated functional aortic valve area suggest 
severe aortic stenosis. The assessment of aortic stenosis 
severity depends on the existence of flow reserve. In case of 
limited flow reserve, the projected aortic valve area can be 
used for diagnosis of severity.19 In case of no flow reserve, the 
assessment of aortic valve calcification with CT may help with 
the diagnosis.20 Caution is required in case of induced isch-
aemia with consequent drop in left ventricular ejection frac-
tion; interpretation of findings at this stage as representing 
a higher flow state would lead to an erroneous diagnosis of 
non-severe aortic stenosis and lack of contractile reserve.21 To 
avoid missing the peak increase in flow, continuous acquisi-
tion is recommended.
low-flow, low-gradient aortic stenosis with preserved left 
ventricular ejection fraction
Low-flow, low-gradient aortic stenosis with preserved left 
ventricular ejection fraction may benefit from dobutamine or 
exercise VSE to assess the severity of aortic stenosis, although 
caution ought to be exercised in patients with small hypertro-
phic hearts.18 22 An increase in gradients with minimal or no 
increase in calculated functional valve area during dobutamine 
stress points towards severe aortic stenosis physiology. Exercise 
testing allows concomitant assessment of exercise tolerance and 
symptoms. Often the test with dobutamine or exercise is termi-
nated early due to heart failure symptoms as a result of diastolic 
Figure 2 Summary of different valve stress echocardiography modalities and parameters to assess according to each type of heart valve disease. 
AR, aortic regurgitation; AS, aortic stenosis; AVA, aortic valve area; DSE, dobutamine stress echocardiography; EROA, effective regurgitant orifice 
area; ESE, exercise stress echocardiography; Ex, exercise; Ex-MG, mean pressure gradient during exercise; GLS, global longitudinal strain; LVEDD, left 
ventricle end diastolic diameter; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; LVESD, left ventricle end systolic diameter; LVESI, left ventricle end systolic 
index; MR, mitral regurgitation; MS, mitral stenosis; MVA, mitral valve area; PAP, systolic pulmonary artery pressure; RV, regurgitant volume; sPAP, 
systolic pulmonary artery pressure.
group.bmj.com
 on January 23, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 5
Lancellotti P, et al. Heart 2017;0:1–7. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311682
review
dysfunction and intolerance of sinus tachycardia or development 
of atrial fibrillation.
AortIc regurgItAtIon
In asymptomatic severe aortic regurgitation, exercise testing to 
detect symptoms is crucial because of the high mortality they 
portent.23 In both severe and non-severe aortic regurgitation, 
with or without symptoms, exercise VSE allows assessment of 
subclinical systolic dysfunction based on contractile reserve and 
on the global longitudinal strain at rest and at low workload 
exercise.24 25 Furthermore, it allows assessment of inducible isch-
aemia and of signs of left ventricular decompensation—ejection 
Figure 3 Exercise stress echocardiography in an asymptomatic patient with severe AS. Rest echocardiographic evaluation confirms the presence of 
normal-flow, high-gradient severe AS in a patient with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (>50%) and LV global longitudinal strain, and no 
pulmonary arterial hypertension (systolic pulmonary artery pressure <50 mm Hg). The patient stopped the test prematurely for leg pain (peak heart 
rate 102  beats per minute). Several parameters of poor outcome were identified during exercise: an increase in mean transaortic pressure gradient 
by 19 mm Hg, a rapid increase in LV filling pressure (as assessed by E/e’) and the development of pulmonary arterial hypertension, despite preserved 
LV contractile reserve (increase in global longitudinal strain (GLS)). AS, aortic stenosis; E, early diastolic wave velocity; LV, left ventricle; MG, mean 
transaortic pressure gradient; TTG, transtricuspid pressure gradient; Vel, velocity.
Figure 4 Exercise stress echocardiography in an asymptomatic patient with degenerative mitral regurgitation. At exercise the degree of mitral 
regurgitation increased moderately while the global longitudinal strain decreased, identifying the absence of contractile reserve. EROA, effective 
regurgitant orifice area; GLS, global longitudinal strain.
group.bmj.com
 on January 23, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 6
Lancellotti P, et al. Heart 2017;0:1–7. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311682
review
fraction drop and development of mitral regurgitation.26 The 
assessment of inducible ischaemia can be also performed with 
dobutamine.
VSE has no role in the assessment of aortic regurgitation 
severity; the aortic regurgitation appears less severe with tachy-
cardia and consequent shortening of diastole.
MItrAl StenoSIS
The assessment of mitral stenosis severity and haemody-
namic consequences based on stress echocardiography is long 
well established.27 VSE has changed the way mitral stenosis is 
perceived and managed because mitral stenosis with valve area 
in the range of moderate is often demonstrated to have severe 
stress-induced rise in mean gradient and systolic pulmonary 
artery pressure28; this is mainly the case for rheumatic mitral 
stenosis, characterised by lack of valve compliance to flow. VSE 
is recommended to assess asymptomatic mitral stenosis prior to 
major surgery or planned pregnancy to predict haemodynamic 
reserve or likelihood of decompensation with increase in flow.29 
Current guidelines recommend VSE for management planning 
to inform decision-making for balloon valvotomy in asymptom-
atic patient, and on the other hand proceed to intervention in 
symptomatic patients.11 12
Supine bicycle exercise VSE allows assessment of systolic 
pulmonary pressure rise at low workload and assessment of 
mean gradient rise at low workload and peak.30 Dobutamine 
VSE allows assessment of mean gradient rise.31 The threshold 
for severe rise in mean gradient is 15 
mm Hg for exercise and 
18 
mm Hg for dobutamine VSE.
MItrAl regurgItAtIon
primary mitral regurgitation
The role of supine bicycle exercise VSE in the assessment of 
asymptomatic severe primary mitral regurgitation is well estab-
lished, and the test is recommended for surgical timing by 
the European Society of Cardiology (ESC)/European Association 
for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS) valve disease management 
guidelines.11 The test is essential for an early repair strategy in 
degenerative mitral regurgitation, detecting symptoms, subclin-
ical left ventricular systolic dysfunction or pathological systolic 
pulmonary artery pressure rise.32 33 Following a complete assess-
ment at rest, images are acquired at low workload and at peak 
for systolic pulmonary artery pressure assessment and for assess-
ment of the left ventricle. A rise in systolic pulmonary artery 
pressure to over 60 
mm Hg is a harbinger of poor outcomes.34–37
The use of supine bicycle exercise VSE for the assessment of 
primary mitral regurgitation severity in symptomatic patients 
with moderate regurgitation at rest is underpinned by robust 
evidence.38–40 Primary mitral regurgitation, regardless of aeti-
ology, can have a dynamic component, increasing on exertion 
and thus explaining the symptoms. The assessment of mitral 
regurgitation severity is mainly based on images acquired at 
low workload and intermediate level of exercise because mitral 
regurgitation quantification becomes more difficult at heart 
rate >115 beats per minute.
Secondary mitral regurgitation
Supine bicycle exercise VSE can be used for the assessment of 
secondary mitral regurgitation of ischaemic aetiology or due to 
non-ischaemic dilated cardiomyopathy. VSE can demonstrate 
an increase in secondary mitral regurgitation severity during 
exertion in patients with exertional symptoms not explained by 
the severity of mitral regurgitation and left ventricular systolic 
dysfunction at rest.41 However, often the severity of secondary 
mitral regurgitation decreases with exertion in patients with 
non-ischaemic dilated cardiomyopathy because of contractile 
recruitment; the decrease in severity confirms the secondary 
nature of the regurgitation and a good prognosis because of 
the existence of contractile reserve. In patients with coronary 
disease, an increase in mitral regurgitation severity during VSE 
suggests need for mitral valve repair at the time of surgical 
revascularisation.
concluSIon
The use of VSE is a fruitful complementary technique to assess 
patients with valve disease and adds important missing pieces 
to the puzzle. In our view, it enhances diagnostic accuracy and 
enables a better treatment planning. Exercise stress echocardi-
ography is safe and should be encouraged especially in heart 
valve clinics to understand the complex response of the left 
ventricle and valve haemodynamics during exercise in asymp-
tomatic patients. Dobutamine stress echocardiography has an 
undeniable role in severity assessment and risk stratification 
of patients with low-flow, low-gradient aortic stenosis and 
reduced left ventricular ejection fraction. It proved useful in the 
severity assessment of symptomatic patients with low-gradient 
aortic stenosis and preserved ejection fraction. Larger scale 
studies on the role of VSE in each type of severe valve disease 
are needed.
Figure 5 Exercise stress echocardiography in an asymptomatic patient 
with mitral stenosis and significant increase in mean mitral pressure 
gradient (MG).
group.bmj.com
 on January 23, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 7
Lancellotti P, et al. Heart 2017;0:1–7. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2017-311682
review
contributors PL and MG wrote the first draft. TS, YYG, RD, CO, SM provided critical 
review and the figures (practical cases).
competing interests CO is Senior Research Associate at the belgian Funds for 
Scientific Research (FRS-FNRS).
provenance and peer review Commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
reFerenceS
 1 Lancellotti P, Magne J. Stress echocardiography in regurgitant valve disease. Circ 
Cardiovasc Imaging 2013;6:840–9.
 2 Wu WC, Aziz GF, Sadaniantz A. The use of stress echocardiography in the assessment 
of mitral valvular disease. Echocardiography 2004;21:451–8.
 3 Piérard LA, Lancellotti P. Stress testing in valve disease. Heart 2007;93:766–72.
 4 Garbi M, Chambers J, Vannan MA, et al. Valve stress echocardiography: a practical 
guide for referral, procedure, reporting, and clinical implementation of results from the 
HAVEC group. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2015;8:724–36.
 5 Lancellotti P, Pellikka PA, Budts W, et al. The clinical use of stress echocardiography 
in non-ischaemic heart disease: recommendations from the European Association of 
Cardiovascular Imaging and the American Society of Echocardiography. Eur Heart J 
Cardiovasc Imaging 2016;17:1191–229.
 6 Rafique AM, Biner S, Ray I, et al. Meta-analysis of prognostic value of stress testing in 
patients with asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis. Am J Cardiol 2009;104:972–7.
 7 Das P, Rimington H, Chambers J. Exercise testing to stratify risk in aortic stenosis. Eur 
Heart J 2005;26:1309–13.
 8 Lancellotti P, Lebois F, Simon M, et al. Prognostic importance of quantitative exercise 
Doppler echocardiography in asymptomatic valvular aortic stenosis. Circulation 
2005;112(9 Suppl):I377–82.
 9 Maréchaux S, Hachicha Z, Bellouin A, et al. Usefulness of exercise-stress 
echocardiography for risk stratification of true asymptomatic patients with aortic valve 
stenosis. Eur Heart J 2010;31:1390–7.
 
10 Vahanian A, Alfieri O, Andreotti F, et al. Guidelines on the management of valvular 
heart disease (version 2012). Eur Heart J 2012;33:2451–96.
 
11 Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, et al. AHA/ACC guideline for the management 
of patients with valvular heart disease: executive summary: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.  
J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;2014:2438–88.
 
12 Masri A, Goodman AL, Barr T, et al. predictors of long-term outcomes in asymptomatic 
patients with severe aortic stenosis and preserved left ventricular systolic function 
undergoing exercise echocardiography. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2016;9:e004689.
 
13 Leurent G, Donal E, de Place C, et al. Argument for a Doppler echocardiography 
during exercise in assessing asymptomatic patients with severe aortic stenosis. Eur J 
Echocardiogr 2009;10:69–73.
 
14 Alborino D, Hoffmann JL, Fournet PC, et al. Value of exercise testing to evaluate the 
indication for surgery in asymptomatic patients with valvular aortic stenosis. J Heart 
Valve Dis 2002;11:204–9.
 
15 Amato MC, Moffa PJ, Werner KE, et al. Treatment decision in asymptomatic aortic 
valve stenosis: role of exercise testing. Heart 2001;86:381–6.
 
16 Donal E, Thebault C, O’Connor K, et al. Impact of aortic stenosis on longitudinal 
myocardial deformation during exercise. Eur J Echocardiogr 2011;12:235–41.
 
17 Lancellotti P, Karsera D, Tumminello G, et al. Determinants of an abnormal response 
to exercise in patients with asymptomatic valvular aortic stenosis. Eur J Echocardiogr 
2008;9:338–43.
 
18 Clavel MA, Ennezat PV, Maréchaux S, et al. Stress echocardiography to assess stenosis 
severity and predict outcome in patients with paradoxical low-flow, low-gradient 
aortic stenosis and preserved LVEF. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2013;6:175–83.
 
19 Blais C, Burwash IG, Mundigler G, et al. Projected valve area at normal flow rate 
improves the assessment of stenosis severity in patients with low-flow, low-gradient 
aortic stenosis: the multicenter TOPAS (Truly or Pseudo-Severe Aortic Stenosis) study. 
Circulation 2006;113:711–21.
 
20 Cueff C, Serfaty JM, Cimadevilla C, et al. Measurement of aortic valve calcification 
using multislice computed tomography: correlation with haemodynamic severity of 
aortic stenosis and clinical implication for patients with low ejection fraction. Heart 
2011;97:721–6.
 
21 Dulgheru R, Magne J, Davin L, et al. Left ventricular regional function and maximal 
exercise capacity in aortic stenosis. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2016;17:217–24.
 
22 Pibarot P, Dumesnil JG. Aortic stenosis suspected to be severe despite low gradients. 
Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2014;7:545–51.
 
23 Bonow RO, Lakatos E, Maron BJ, et al. Serial long-term assessment of the natural 
history of asymptomatic patients with chronic aortic regurgitation and normal left 
ventricular systolic function. Circulation 1991;84:1625–35.
 
24 Wahi S, Haluska B, Pasquet A, et al. Exercise echocardiography predicts development 
of left ventricular dysfunction in medically and surgically treated patients with 
asymptomatic severe aortic regurgitation. Heart 2000;84:606–14.
 
25 Kusunose K, Agarwal S, Marwick TH, et al. Decision making in asymptomatic aortic 
regurgitation in the era of guidelines: incremental values of resting and exercise 
cardiac dysfunction. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2014;7:352–62.
 
26 Vinereanu D, Ionescu AA, Fraser AG. Assessment of left ventricular long axis 
contraction can detect early myocardial dysfunction in asymptomatic patients with 
severe aortic regurgitation. Heart 2001;85:30–6.
 
27 Carabello BA. Modern management of mitral stenosis. Circulation 2005;112:432–7.
 
28 Brochet E, Détaint D, Fondard O, et al. Early hemodynamic changes versus peak 
values: what is more useful to predict occurrence of dyspnea during stress 
echocardiography in patients with asymptomatic mitral stenosis? J Am Soc 
Echocardiogr 2011;24:392–8.
 
29 Cheitlin MD. Stress echocardiography in mitral stenosis: when is it useful? J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2004;43:402–4.
 
30 Grimaldi A, Olivotto I, Figini F, et al. Dynamic assessment of ’valvular reserve 
capacity’ in patients with rheumatic mitral stenosis. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 
2012;13:476–82.
 
31 Reis G, Motta MS, Barbosa MM, et al. Dobutamine stress echocardiography for 
noninvasive assessment and risk stratification of patients with rheumatic mitral 
stenosis. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;43:393–401.
 
32 Lee R, Haluska B, Leung DY, et al. Functional and prognostic implications of 
left ventricular contractile reserve in patients with asymptomatic severe mitral 
regurgitation. Heart 2005;91:1407–12.
 
33 Magne J, Mahjoub H, Dulgheru R, et al. Left ventricular contractile reserve in 
asymptomatic primary mitral regurgitation. Eur Heart J 2014;35:1608–16.
 
34 Magne J, Lancellotti P, Piérard LA. Exercise pulmonary hypertension in asymptomatic 
degenerative mitral regurgitation. Circulation 2010;122:33–41.
 
35 Magne J, Pibarot P, Sengupta PP, et al. Pulmonary hypertension in valvular disease: a 
comprehensive review on pathophysiology to therapy from the HAVEC Group. JACC 
Cardiovasc Imaging 2015;8:83–99.
 
36 Lancellotti P, Martinez C, Bernard A. Pulmonary pressures and outcome in 
primary mitral regurgitation: paradigm shift from rung to ladder. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2016;67:2962–4.
 
37 Magne J, Donal E, Mahjoub H, et al. Impact of exercise pulmonary hypertension on 
postoperative outcome in primary mitral regurgitation. Heart 2015;101:391–6.
 
38 Magne J, Lancellotti P, Piérard LA. Exercise-induced changes in degenerative mitral 
regurgitation. J Am Coll Cardiol 2010;56:300–9.
 
39 Lancellotti P, Magne J. Stress testing for the evaluation of patients with mitral 
regurgitation. Curr Opin Cardiol 2012;27:492–8.
 
40 Magne J, Lancellotti P, Pierard LA. Stress echocardiography and mitral valvular heart 
disease. Cardiol Clin 2013;31:311–21.
 
41 Piérard LA, Lancellotti P. The role of ischemic mitral regurgitation in the pathogenesis 
of acute pulmonary edema. N Engl J Med 2004;351:1627–34.
group.bmj.com
 on January 23, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 native valvular heart disease
Stress echocardiography in patients with
Stella Marchetta, Cécile Oury and Madalina Garbi
Patrizio Lancellotti, Raluca Dulgheru, Yun Yun Go, Tadafumi Sugimoto,
 published online December 7, 2017
Heart
 
http://heart.bmj.com/content/early/2017/12/07/heartjnl-2017-311682
Updated information and services can be found at: 
These include:
References
 
ef-list-1
http://heart.bmj.com/content/early/2017/12/07/heartjnl-2017-311682#r
This article cites 41 articles, 22 of which you can access for free at: 
service
Email alerting
box at the top right corner of the online article. 
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article. Sign up in the
Notes
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions
To request permissions go to:
http://journals.bmj.com/cgi/reprintform
To order reprints go to:
http://group.bmj.com/subscribe/
To subscribe to BMJ go to:
group.bmj.com
 on January 23, 2018 - Published by 
http://heart.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
