 Home Health Care Management & Practice
2016, Vol. 28(4) 262 
–278
© The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1084822316666368
hhc.sagepub.com
Special Article
Introduction
America is experiencing a dramatic shift in demographics, 
and in 2019, people older than 65 years will outnumber those 
younger than five. As Americans age and live longer, increas-
ing numbers of them will live with multiple chronic condi-
tions, such as diabetes or dementia, and functional 
impairments, such as difficulty with the basics of life like 
mobility and managing one’s household. One of the greatest 
health care challenges facing our country is ensuring that 
older Americans with serious chronic illness and other mala-
dies of aging can remain as independent as possible. Our suc-
cess with this challenge will help ensure that Americans age 
with dignity in a manner that meets their expectations, pref-
erences and care needs. The financial health of our federal 
and state governments also hangs in the balance because of 
the implications for Medicare and Medicaid costs. Meeting 
this challenge will require envisioning the potential value of 
home-based health care, creating a pathway for home-based 
care to maximize its potential, and integrating it fully into the 
U.S. health care system.
We propose an initial vision and bold first steps in this arti-
cle to support the transformation of home health agencies and 
home-based care and its recognition in the overall health care 
system. In this article, the terms “home-based care” and “home 
health care” have distinct meanings. “Home-based care” refers 
to the spectrum of services provided in the home to support 
patients, including caregiving and personal care services, 
skilled services (such as nursing and therapy) provided in the 
666368 HHCXXX10.1177/1084822316666368Home Health Care Management & PracticeLanders et al
research-article2016
1Visiting Nurse Association Health Group, Red Bank, NJ, USA
2Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA
3Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
4Interim HealthCare Inc, Sunrise, FL, USA
5Kindred Healthcare, Essex, CT, USA
6LHC Group, Inc, Lafayette, LA, USA
7Amedisys Inc, Baton Rouge, LA, USA
8University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, Philadelphia, PA, USA and 
Center for Home Care Policy and Research, Visiting Nurse Service of 
New York, New York City, USA
9Columbia University, New York, NY, USA and Center for Home Care 
Policy and Research, Visiting Nurse Service of New York, New York City, 
USA
10Alliance for Home Health Quality and Innovation, Arlington, VA, USA
11Visiting Nurse Associations of America, Arlington, VA, USA
12Avalere Health LLC, Washington, DC, USA
Corresponding Author:
Teresa Lee, JD, MPH, Alliance for Home Health Quality and Innovation, 
2121 Crystal Drive, Suite 750, Arlington, Virginia 22202, USA. 
Email: tlee@ahhqi.org
The Future of Home Health Care:  
A Strategic Framework for  
Optimizing Value
Steven Landers, MD, MPH1, Elizabeth Madigan, PhD, RN, FAAN2,  
Bruce Leff, MD3, Robert J. Rosati, PhD1, Barbara A. McCann, MA4,  
Rodney Hornbake, MD5, Richard MacMillan, JD, RN6,  
Kate Jones, MSN, RN, CCM7, Kathryn Bowles, PhD, RN, FAAN, FACMI8, 
Dawn Dowding, PhD, RN9, Teresa Lee, JD, MPH10,  
Tracey Moorhead, MA11, Sally Rodriguez, MPH12, and Erica Breese, MBA12
Abstract
The Future of Home Health project sought to support transformation of home health and home-based care to meet the 
needs of patients in the evolving U.S. health care system. Interviews with key thought leaders and stakeholders resulted in 
key themes about the future of home health care. By synthesizing this qualitative research, a literature review, case studies, 
and the themes from a 2014 Institute of Medicine and National Research Council workshop on “The Future of Home 
Health Care,” the authors articulate a vision for home-based care and recommend a bold framework for the Medicare-
certified home health agency of the future. The authors also identify challenges and recommendations for achievement of 
this framework.
Keywords
home health, home-based care, hospital at home, hospice, palliative care, technology, workforce, quality
 Landers et al 
263
home, home-based primary care, hospital-at-home, and even 
hospice when it is provided at home. “Home health care” in 
this article refers to Medicare skilled home health care, which 
is paid for under the Medicare home health benefit and deliv-
ered by Medicare-certified home health agencies. Home 
health care is one type of home-based care.
The article builds upon the themes that arose at an Institute 
of Medicine (IOM) and National Research Council (NRC) 
workshop on the “Future of Home Health Care,” which was 
held on September 30 and October 1, 2014.1 The research 
and discussion in this article are intended to be a call for 
action among home health agencies and home-based care 
providers, policy makers, providers, patients, caregivers, and 
others interested in the field. The article seeks to clarify and 
define the spectrum of home-based care, the relevance of this 
spectrum to overall health care, and the critical roles, charac-
teristics, and capabilities of the home health agency of the 
future. The article also identifies key needs to address to 
enable home health agencies to serve patients and the health 
care system in the future.
Of foremost importance is leadership to build toward a 
clarified vision for high-value home health care in the U.S. 
health care system. The authors seek to provide a strategic 
framework to enable home health care to pursue concrete, 
meaningful change. The history of home-based care is at 
least as old as the beginnings of the nursing and medical pro-
fessions given that health care delivered in the home (in the 
form of house calls) was the standard of practice, long before 
the development of hospitals and office-based medical care. 
The changes that this report seeks to propel are the major 
next steps in the long history of home-based care.
Background: Factors Driving Change
Demographic impetus and cost. The graying of the U.S. popu-
lation is a major impetus for change in health care. Accord-
ing to the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission 
(MedPAC), Medicare enrollment is projected to increase by 
more than 50% over the next 15 years from 54 million ben-
eficiaries today to more than 80 million in 2030.2 This 
reflects an overall aging of the United States population: the 
Census projects that by 2030, the proportion of U.S. resi-
dents older than 65 will have nearly doubled from 2010 (20% 
vs. 13%).3 Among the oldest Americans, the Census predicts 
that the population age 85 and above will double by 2036 and 
triple by 2049.2
Although by some accounts the upcoming Medicare pop-
ulation is healthier than previous generations—life expectan-
cies are longer and smoking rates have declined—baby 
boomers have higher rates of obesity and diabetes compared 
with previous generations.4 According to a 2002 study, 88% 
of people 65 years or older have at least one chronic condi-
tion, with a quarter of these having four or more conditions.5 
The effect of these chronic conditions on spending is mas-
sive: Estimates suggest that chronic illness accounts for three 
quarters of total national health care expenditures.4 As the 
number of older beneficiaries with multiple chronic condi-
tions continues to rise, providing care in the most effective 
and efficient setting will become even more critical.
Health care delivery system reform: The Triple Aim and HHS 
goals. With demographic trends and spending concerns as a 
backdrop, the Medicare program began to emphasize achieve-
ment of the “Triple Aim” in 2009. A framework initially con-
ceived by the Institute for Healthcare Improvement, but now 
almost universally accepted in health care policy and deliv-
ery, the Triple Aim has focused efforts to innovate in the 
Medicare program and has propelled considerable change. 
The Triple Aim declares that to improve the U.S. health care 
system, it is vital to pursue three goals simultaneously:
1. 
Improving the patient experience of care (including 
quality and satisfaction);
2. 
Improving the health of populations; and
3. 
Reducing the per capita cost of health care.6
The Triple Aim has been used by policy makers and other 
leaders in health care delivery to focus their goals in reform-
ing the health care delivery system.
Policy movement toward achievement of the Triple Aim 
can be seen in the many initiatives undertaken by the Center 
for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (CMMI), and in the 
time-specific goals to move Medicare reimbursements from 
volume to value that the secretary of the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS) announced in early 2015. 
HHS’s goals are twofold:
1. 
To tie 30% of traditional (fee-for-service [FFS]) 
Medicare payments to quality and value through 
alternative payment models (APMs; including bun-
dled payments or Accountable Care Organizations 
[ACOs]) by the end of 2016 and 50% by the end of 
2018 and
2. 
To tie 85% of all traditional payments to quality or 
value by 2016 and 90% by 2018 through programs 
such as Hospital Value-Based Purchasing Program 
(HVBP) and Hospital Readmissions Reduction 
Program (HRRP).7
HHS has made strides toward achieving these goals. 
While quality programs in the Affordable Care Act (ACA) 
primarily focused on hospitals, recent legislation and regu-
latory actions have expanded quality and value programs to 
post–acute care with the skilled nursing facility (SNF) 
value-based purchasing program and the home health 
value-based purchasing demonstration. In addition, post–
acute care providers are increasingly finding themselves 
affected “downstream” by programs directed at other enti-
ties, such as bundled payments and hospital value-based 
purchasing. A summary of some of the most recently 
 264 
Home Health Care Management & Practice 28(4)
developed current and future mandated quality and value 
programs for Medicare providers and the legislation creat-
ing them are provided in Figure 1.8 A description of the 
estimated impact of these alternative payment models is 
provided in Figure 2.
There are also more established programs that leverage 
home-based care. Examples include the Veterans 
Administration’s 
Home-Based Primary Care program, which administers longi-
tudinal interdisciplinary home-based medical care to veterans in 
need of skilled services, case management, or activities of daily 
living (ADLs),9 and the Program of All-Inclusive Care for the 
Elderly (PACE), a Medicare and Medicaid program in which 
PACE organizations contract with providers and specialists to 
offer nursing home-level medical and supportive services in the 
community.10
Misaligned incentives persist and block progress. Despite these 
new and existing initiatives, misalignment of incentives 
remains common in traditional Medicare and in the health 
care system overall. This misalignment remains a barrier for 
better care coordination and continues to be a driving force 
behind initiatives that focus on the Triple Aim and HHS’s 
goals. A further challenge is that the vast majority of the 
above-mentioned APMs and value-based programs pursued 
to date are built on FFS architecture. In other words, the 
APMs pursued tend to use delivery models that are triggered 
by the delivery of certain services or by a certain episode of 
care that is paid for under traditional Medicare, with a retro-
active opportunity for shared savings or risk against a histori-
cal cost target or benchmark; few, if any, APMs are truly 
pursuing population-based payment. As a result, even within 
many of these APMs, many of the core issues with traditional 
Medicare persist, hindering progress toward the Triple Aim.
Consumers driving care. As patients become increasingly 
engaged with their care and the health care system strives to 
empower patients in their care, patient preference and satis-
faction are increasingly becoming key measures of perfor-
mance. When asked about their care preferences, older 
Americans overwhelmingly articulate a desire to age in place 
and receive care at home rather than in institutional settings. 
A 2010 AARP (formerly the American Association of Retired 
Persons) survey found that nearly three quarters of a survey 
population of those age 45+ strongly agreed with the state-
ment, “what I’d really like to do is stay in my current resi-
dence for as long as possible.”15 This is echoed in the last 
stages of life, where the Dartmouth Atlas researchers found 
that more than 80% of patients say that they “wish to avoid 
hospitalization and intensive care during the terminal phase 
of life.”16
Figure 1. Medicare value-based programs and authorizing legislation.
Source. Avalere Health, 2016.
Note. HHRP=Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program; HH-VBP = Home Health Value Based Purchasing model.
Figure 2. Medicare alternative payment models impact.
Source. Avalere Health (2016).
Note. ACO = accountable care organization; BPCI = Bundled Payments 
for Care Improvement Initiative; MSA = Metropolitan Statistical Area.
aAvalere Analysis of BPCI participant list.
 Landers et al 
265
Recognizing these preferences and the potential for home-
based care to reduce care delivery costs system-wide, poli-
cies have begun to prioritize noninstitutional care settings. 
State Medicaid offices have led this trend toward consumer-
based care. In 2013, in the context of Medicaid long-term 
services and supports, there were more home- and commu-
nity-based service providers than institutional providers, an 
18% increase since 1995.17 Medicaid expenditures for home- 
and community-based services have also grown signifi-
cantly, reflecting the rise in use of home-based services as 
opposed to institutional care, more than doubling from $25.1 
billion in 2002 to $55 billion in 2012.18
Shifting to a Community- and Home-Based 
Model for Health Care
All of these drivers of change point to a shift in the delivery 
system toward clinically appropriate care in the community, 
with the home as a central node.1 As illustrated in Figure 3, 
technology and policy will need to shift to accommodate 
these changes and deliver appropriate care to patients.1
Consistent with this paradigm shift, payers and provid-
ers engaged in APMs are developing a key strategic 
emphasis on shifting the site of care toward the community 
and the home.
The spectrum of home-based care. As the health care system 
shifts toward additional care in the community, the spec-
trum of available services and supports for home-based 
care becomes critical. Medicare skilled home health is part 
of this broad spectrum of home-based care services. In this 
article, it is important to understand the differences in terms 
between “home-based care” and “Medicare skilled home 
health.”
As captured in Table 1, “Medicare skilled home health” 
care or “home health care” refers to services offered by 
Medicare-certified home health agencies under the Medicare 
home health benefit. By contrast, “home-based care” refers 
to a wide array of different types of care provided in the 
home by a wide range of parties. The continuum of different 
types of home-based care delivered in the home varies in 
terms of different dimensions, including acuity, type of care 
provided, and degree of physician involvement. Home-based 
care includes both formal and informal personal care ser-
vices, Medicare skilled home health, physician house calls, 
and even “hospital-at-home” services.
Figure 3. Strategy for innovation.
Source. Eric Dishman, Intel Corporation (presented October 1, 2014, IOM-NRC Workshop on “The Future of Home Health Care”).
Note. IOM = Institute of Medicine; NRC = National Research Council; ICU = intensive care unit.
Table 1. Home-Based Care and Medicare Skilled Home Health Care.
Term
Definition
“Medicare skilled home health” 
care or “home health care”
Services offered by Medicare-certified home health agencies under the Medicare home health 
benefit.
“Home-based care”
A wide array of different types of care provided in the home by a wide range of parties.
The continuum of different types of home-based care delivered in the home varies in terms 
of different dimensions, including acuity, type of care provided, and degree of physician 
involvement. Home-based care includes both formal and informal personal care services, 
Medicare skilled home health, physician house calls, and even “hospital-at-home” services.
 266 
Home Health Care Management & Practice 28(4)
As captured in Figure 4, which is drawn from the work-
shop summary of the IOM-NRC workshop on “The Future 
of Home Health Care,” it is important to note that the vast 
majority of services provided in the home are provided 
by family caregivers, sometimes referred to as “informal 
services.”19 This phrase grossly underestimates the critical 
role family caregivers play in the care of patients at home. 
Particularly among patients with multiple limitations on 
ADLs, caregiving is crucial. Without caregivers in the home, 
health care at home is simply impossible for those with 
functional limitations. Upward of 10 to 15 million individu-
als receive help from family caregivers. AARP estimates 
that 34.2 million adults have served as caregivers in the last 
year alone.18
According to the Urban Institute’s “The Retirement 
Project,” in 2000, approximately 2.2 million individuals 
received “formal personal care services,” defined as personal 
care services that are paid for by various means; this increased 
to 2.5 million in 2010 and is projected to increase to 2.9 mil-
lion in 2020.19 Some patients may be eligible for Medicaid or 
other state programs that provide coverage for such services; 
however, there is considerable variation in such programs 
and their scope. Some may have private long-term care 
insurance that enables coverage. Still other patients may 
have no private or public insurance coverage for formal per-
sonal care services and may need to pay out of pocket for 
such services.
Approximately 3.4 million people receive Medicare 
skilled home health care, which supports homebound patients 
by providing coverage for intermittent skilled nursing and 
therapy services that are provided by Medicare-certified 
home health agencies subject to a physician’s plan of care. In 
2014, Medicare spent $17.7 billion on home health care.20
Home-based primary care and hospital-at-home are 
models of care that serve patients with conditions that are 
more acute or severe are less commonly used. The skill 
needed to provide the services increases accordingly. 
Home-based primary care is a model that makes use of 
home care physicians and nurse practitioners, in connection 
with an interdisciplinary team of professionals, including 
skilled home health professionals. The hospital-at-home 
model serves to supplant hospital admission for certain 
patients with intensive, hospital-level care in the home. 
Those receiving this highest acuity level of home-based 
care have been shown to experience 19% lower costs, 
higher satisfaction, and equal-to-better care outcomes when 
compared with similar inpatients.21
In addition to these varied services along the spectrum of 
home-based care, it is also critical to include mention of the 
role of palliative care and end-of-life care. For patients that 
have been diagnosed with severe or serious illness, palliative 
care is often a core element of treatment of the patient in a 
holistic fashion that emphasizes function.22 Palliative care 
may be delivered outside of the Medicare hospice benefit in 
various settings, including at home by home health agencies, 
or in facilities including hospitals. For many patients who 
use palliative care, the Medicare hospice benefit may eventu-
ally be used at home or in a facility-based setting as well. 
Including palliative care and hospice in the spectrum of 
home-based care services enables a full understanding of 
how care may be shifted toward the community and the 
home from birth to death.
Methodology
The Future of Home Health project was a multiphase project 
initiated by the Alliance for Home Health Quality and 
Innovation (the “Alliance”). As part of this project, the 
Alliance sponsored an IOM-NRC workshop on “The Future 
of Home Health Care” held on September 30 and October 1, 
2014. The themes that surfaced during this workshop then 
became the subject of a literature review and qualitative 
research to further explore the key considerations for the 
future of home health care.
Informal 
Services
(10 million–
15 million 
people)
Formal 
Personal
Care
Services
(2 million
people)
Medicare
Skilled 
Home
Health Care
(3.4 million
people)
Home
Based-
Primary 
Care
(500,000
people)
Hospital
at Home
(1,000– 
2,000
people)
Low acuity 
High acuity
Chronic care 
Acute care
Little or no medical doctor (MD) involvement 
High-level MD involvement
Figure 4. Patients receiving home-based services and supports.
Source. Bruce Leff and Elizabeth Madigan, 2014 (presented September 30, 2014, IOM-NRC Workshop on “The Future of Home Health Care”).
Note. IOM = Institute of Medicine; NRC = National Research Council.
 Landers et al 
267
The literature review and qualitative research were com-
missioned by the Alliance. The work was performed by 
Avalere Health, an independent research firm. As a first step, 
Avalere Health conducted an extensive literature review of 
both scholarly and trade publications on the value and role of 
home health care. Building upon that literature review, 
Avalere Health conducted unstructured interviews with indi-
viduals considered key stakeholders. These key stakeholders 
were identified by virtue of their leadership in organizations 
representing patients and caregivers, or their experience as 
policy makers and payers. The individuals were interviewed 
regarding priorities to address the needs of these constituents 
for the future and to understand their perspectives on the role 
and relevance of home health care.
Specifically, Avalere Health conducted 16 interviews with 
key stakeholders in health policy and innovative providers 
throughout the fall of 2015. The key stakeholders in health 
policy included current and former policy makers from the 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS; and the 
Innovation Center or CMMI), advocates for Medicare bene-
ficiaries, caregivers and disease groups, and payers (large 
commercial and Medicare Advantage plans). Due to the sen-
sitive nature of their positions and to promote full honesty, 
Avalere Health promised anonymity to the stakeholders. 
Appendix C at http://ahhqi.org/images/uploads/APP_C_
Interview_Methodology.pdf describes the stakeholders inter-
viewed as well as 12 questions that Avalere Health drew 
from as the basis for the unstructured interviews.
After completing the interviews with the key stakeholders 
in health policy, Avalere Health conducted interviews with a 
diverse array of individuals from provider organizations pur-
suing new and alternative models of care that leverage home 
health or home-based care to develop case studies and 
vignettes that shed light on the framework for the future of 
home health care. As a general reference, a case study com-
pendium developed by the Visiting Nurse Associations of 
America (VNAA) was also used to better understand innova-
tions in home health and home-based care. 33
Institutional Review Board approval was not required for 
this research activity because it did not meet the regulatory 
definition of human subjects research. This project involved 
interviews and information gathering about services and pol-
icies, rather than living individuals. All of the people who 
agreed to be interviewed were volunteers.
Limitations
This article has limitations due to the nature of the qualitative 
research performed. Individuals were selected for interviews 
based on the assumption that policy maker, payer, and con-
sumer perspectives would be of highest priority in under-
standing the future of home health care. This assumption 
may have skewed the resulting themes by emphasizing gov-
ernment, payer, and consumer priorities for the future.
Results
The unstructured interviews with key stakeholders in health 
policy yielded a number of key themes involving (1) the 
future of payment and delivery system reform and (2) the 
future of home health care. In the context of these interviews, 
“home health care” was defined as services provided under 
the Medicare home health benefit by Medicare-certified 
home health agencies.
The Future of Payment and Delivery Reform
 1. Payment and delivery reform is here to stay.
The interviewees emphasized that payment reform will con-
tinue in the direction of emphasizing value-based longitudi-
nal payments where an entity—such as a hospital, physician 
group, or post–acute care provider—is financially responsi-
ble for services provided beyond their immediate care set-
ting. There was consensus among interviewees that CMS 
will meet its goal of 50% of traditional Medicare payments 
through APMs by 2018. One interviewee stated that “[t]hese 
models are here to stay.”
 2. No dominant model is emerging. Continued hetero-
geneity across markets is expected.
Key thought leaders interviewed were in consensus that no 
single payment and delivery model is emerging as the domi-
nant model. There was consensus that bundling and ACOs, 
for example, will have an increasing role over the next 3 to 5 
years; however, one model will not dominate across all mar-
kets. In general, payment reform will continue in the direc-
tion of emphasizing value-based episodic payments where 
an entity, such as an ACO, is financially responsible for ser-
vices provided.
 3. Greater momentum around bundling and Medicare 
Advantage than ACOs.
While some strongly supported bundled payment arrange-
ments as a model for future payment and delivery reform, 
others noted that bundling currently represents a relatively 
small fraction of Medicare expenditures, which will likely 
remain the case for the next 3 to 5 years. For example, the 
Comprehensive Care for Joint Replacement (CJR) model is 
an expansive use of bundling for Medicare relative to the 
Bundled Payments for Care Improvement Initiative (BPCI), 
but CJR accounts for a small proportion of payments. The 
movement toward bundled payments suggests that CMS will 
be growing the base of a small percentage of payments. The 
interviewees also noted that continued growth of Medicare 
Advantage plans is expected, potentially with increased pro-
vider (i.e., hospital)-owned plans.
 268 
Home Health Care Management & Practice 28(4)
 4. 
Locus of control (physician vs. hospital) unclear.
Key thought leaders varied in their perspectives about 
whether the locus of control for payment and delivery will lie 
with hospitals or physicians. Several key thought leaders 
noted that markets will likely be a hybrid of control, in which 
hospitals will predominate in most locations because they 
have more resources and market power, but other markets 
will have multispecialty physician practices that are sophisti-
cated enough to succeed. For example, the CMMI was very 
intentional when giving hospitals control of the CJR bundles, 
but it is foreseeable that different entities would be in control 
in other clinical episodes or models.
Other key thought leaders stated that absent policy sup-
port to buttress physician practice capacity to be the conve-
ner of ACOs, hospitals will likely retain and grow control. 
One interviewee noted that early evidence indicates that 
physician-led services may lead to better outcomes, but 
there is not sufficient evidence to have clarity on this issue. 
Several interviewees also acknowledged that as hospitals 
increasingly acquire physician practices, the distinction may 
be moot.
 5. Payment and delivery will continue to rely on FFS 
systems with retrospective reconciliation. No large-
scale movement toward prospective, capitated mod-
els for bundling and ACOs.
Currently, almost all of the APMs involve continued FFS 
payment with a retrospective reconciliation. While capita-
tion and prospective payment offers more opportunity to 
experiment with services covered and service delivery, key 
thought leaders agreed that the original Medicare payment 
system will not move to prospective payment system in the 
near future. Ultimately, the system is moving toward capi-
tated payment, but the time frame to get there is unclear. It 
will be important to continue watching CMS to see how 
quickly the system evolves. Within 3 to 5 years, the Medicare 
system will still largely emphasize a retrospective shared 
savings model.
6. Flexibility greater with shared risk but limitations on 
innovation persist within existing FFS structure.
When providers are operating in an at-risk environment 
(with both upside and downside risk) and bear the conse-
quences, then policy makers (e.g., Congress and CMS) may 
be more amenable to expanding or altering the home health 
benefit.
For example, CMS has offered waivers of certain home 
health benefit requirements for providers participating in 
APMs where they take on downside risk. CMS is willing to 
provide additional flexibility, including toward the home 
health benefit, where providers take on risk. However, 
providers are currently bound by the existing home health 
FFS payment structure, limiting potential innovation.
The Future of Home Health Care
 7. Home health “big winner” in payment and delivery 
reforms.
All key thought leaders interviewed stated that home health 
stands to be a “big winner” with a substantial increase in 
utilization as a result of payment and delivery reforms. 
Payment reforms create incentives for upstream referral part-
ners to utilize home health more substantially because it is a 
lower cost setting of post–acute care. In addition, patients 
prefer to receive care at home. The economic trend more 
generally is toward personalized, on-demand, direct-to-con-
sumer services; the health care industry will similarly see 
shifts in consumer demand for how people consume health 
services.
The timing of the shift toward home health is a big ques-
tion, as it is currently unclear when more services will be 
covered in the home. However, ultimately, the system is 
moving toward a broader use of home health.
 8. Lack of consensus around modifying the home health 
benefit.
Stakeholders and key thought leaders were not in consensus 
about whether to revise the Medicare home health benefit, 
and if so, how to redefine the benefit. A majority of inter-
viewees thought that the Medicare home health benefit 
needed to be more flexible, to be provided based on patients’ 
care need, and more integrated with a patient’s care, that is, 
more integrated with the primary care physician.
Several noted that it was not politically viable to expand 
the Medicare home health benefit to cover more services, 
and others went further to suggest it was unnecessary to 
alter the eligibility for services covered by the benefit 
because payments are increasingly going to shift to bun-
dling, ACOs, and Medicare Advantage, where entities tak-
ing on risk will have more flexibility to define home health 
care coverage.
Some suggested removing the homebound requirement 
and instead focusing on whether beneficiaries have a certain 
number of ADL limitations or chronic conditions. One key 
thought leader noted the Medicare benefit should be more 
“nimble,” rather than being defined by a 60-day episode.
A variety of stakeholders discussed the need for home 
health care that is more responsive to patients’ needs and 
preferences, particularly as it relates to significant unmet 
need for long-term care. Some acknowledged that Medicare 
does not provide a long-term care benefit. Others asserted 
that the Medicare benefit must evolve to respond to the needs 
of the Medicare population, which increasingly live for a 
 Landers et al 
269
period of time with a variety of ADL limitations and chronic 
conditions.
 9. No single model identified for managing patients
Key thought leaders did not identify a single emerging 
model for managing post–acute care patients, high-risk 
patients, or patients with chronic conditions and long-term 
care needs. Some noted that there is not enough evidence in 
post–acute care around exactly what clinical care pathways 
are most effective. There is not one single post–acute care 
model, and it will be impossible to establish a single post–
acute care model for Medicare patients because their needs 
and socioeconomic status are so varied.
ACO providers and hospitals in bundled payments will 
increasingly give attention to evidence regarding efficient, 
high-quality care for determining clinical care pathways and 
post-acute care (PAC) utilization. ACOs are concerned about 
the lack of evidence-based protocols for different patient 
populations. Managed care plans generally report having a 
more firm understanding of post–acute care, which they 
manage through selective contracting and prior authoriza-
tion. However, one health plan representative stated that they 
are struggling to address their home health network because 
the industry is so fragmented.
Within Medicare FFS spending, post–acute care spend-
ing has the most variation; within post–acute care spending, 
home health has the most variation. Therefore, providers 
under pressure to manage bundles are probably going to be 
taking a close look at their home health utilization and 
network.
Several noted that the definition of rehabilitation and cri-
teria for when rehabilitation is appropriate should be recon-
sidered. For example, people may need assistance with ADL 
limitations to avoid falls. Rehabilitation to improve mobility 
or speech may prevent loss of function.
10. Needs of community-referred beneficiaries less well 
understood.
Interviewees agreed that the composition and care needs of 
community-referred beneficiaries receiving home health 
under Medicare Part B are less clear.
Stakeholders varied on how they characterized the com-
munity-referred beneficiaries. Some noted that the increased 
number of episodes covered by Part B is indicative of the 
problem that the United States does not have long-term care 
coverage, and in this instance, the benefit may be acting as a 
long-term care benefit.
Stakeholders representing patients and caregivers empha-
sized that eligible patients sometimes have trouble accessing 
the benefit for the duration of the time that they would ben-
efit from home health episodes. For example, physicians 
may be resistant to recertifying home health episodes for 
patients who do not have any post–acute care needs. Other 
practitioners may not recognize the eligibility of and benefit 
to certain patient populations, such as people with dementia. 
Several noted that the Part B population is where there is 
opportunity for innovation.
11. Home health agencies must adapt to the changes to 
Medicare payment and delivery.
Agencies will need to develop the capabilities to contract with 
Medicare Advantage plans and providers that are taking on 
financial risk. Some interviewees noted that agencies tend to 
focus on maximizing volume under the current episodic-payment 
FFS payment system, but that paradigm will quickly fade. 
Agencies will need to be able to articulate the value they bring 
to upstream referral partners, which requires being able to report 
on quality metrics, being able to regularly communicate with a 
nurse liaison, and having disease management programs.
Some interviewees suggested that the industry might 
undergo a period of significant consolidation. Payers and pro-
viders taking on risk will start to more carefully vet and man-
age their post–acute care network, including their home 
health agency partners. Agencies that cannot cover a large 
market for around-the-clock care may be excluded. The 
industry is currently very fragmented with many operators 
that may be unsuited to meeting referral partner and payer 
needs for a home health partner that can manage care across 
an episode and potentially over a large geographic area. In 
addition, referral partners and payers may be looking for 
agencies that can support patients with higher acuity postdis-
charge to prevent readmissions.
Linking payments to value and putting upstream referral 
partners (e.g., hospitals) at risk will contribute to reigning in 
potential fraud and abuse in home health because payers and 
providers will not refer patients to agencies providing unnec-
essary care.
12. Caregiver burden is a crisis necessitating a long-term 
care solution.
The growth in unmet home care needs, particularly for long-
term care, is resulting in an increasing burden on family care-
givers. Stakeholders indicated that caregivers are expected to 
provide medical services in the home with minimal training 
or advance notice. Many stakeholders noted that Medicare 
does not cover long-term care and Medicare coverage of 
home health care services should be expanded to include 
unskilled services and other long-term care services. 
However, some acknowledged that original Medicare pro-
gram is a medical benefit and should not be expanded to pro-
vide a long-term care benefit.
Discussion
Based on the information gained in the interviews, the IOM-
NRC workshop, the literature review, and case studies, we 
 270 
Home Health Care Management & Practice 28(4)
have identified key issues and themes for future focus and 
synthesis. The framework and recommendations presented 
in the “Discussion” section of this article represent synthesis 
drawn from these various primary and secondary research 
approaches to understanding the future of home health care.
Vision and Framework for the Future of Home-
Based Care
Home-based care is well positioned to drive progress toward 
key U.S. health care system–wide goals. As discussed, many 
patients prefer to receive care in the home, so the use of high-
quality home-based care could support the goal of patient-
centered care. Home health care is also a relatively low-cost 
setting of care. As the health care system grapples with high 
costs and expenditures, home health’s efficiency could sup-
port the goal of high-quality, low-cost care.
Despite its alignment with key goals, the home health 
industry must evolve to capture the opportunities stemming 
from changes in the health care system. Specifically, the 
home health industry must develop the capabilities necessary 
to treat higher acuity patients with broader care needs in the 
home and community. The spectrum of home-based care ser-
vices described in Figure 5 could serve as an array of offer-
ings that are flexibly and seamlessly leveraged depending on 
patient need and preference. To achieve this vision, home 
health agencies also need to develop new capabilities to 
coordinate and collaborate with other care providers, ensur-
ing that the patient receives appropriate, high-quality care 
regardless of the setting or location.
To allow home health agencies to fulfill this mandate to 
provide high-quality, efficient care as part of ongoing 
reforms, the regulatory environment needs to shift to allow 
greater flexibility for care in the home when appropriate. A 
variety of new and alternative health care delivery models 
are creating incentives for increased use of home health and 
home-based care, but additional flexibility would allow 
home-based care to be deployed in innovative ways based on 
patient’s needs and preferences. The following vision for the 
future outlines the characteristics and capabilities that would 
be needed to support broader use of home health, as well as 
some of the barriers that may inhibit the broader use of 
appropriate home-based care.
Although the vision for home-based care is broader than 
the Medicare context, it is important to understand the spe-
cific role and relevance of Medicare-certified home health 
agencies in achieving this goal of providing high-quality, 
efficient care to more beneficiaries in the community and the 
home. Medicare home health agencies are by no means the 
only stakeholder that will be key to achieving this broad 
vision, but this article seeks to focus on the key characteris-
tics and roles of Medicare home health agencies as a first 
evolutionary step.
Today’s Home Health Agency and the Medicare 
Benefit
Today, Medicare-certified home health agencies are special-
ists in providing in-home skilled nursing and therapy ser-
vices to homebound patients who (1) have had a prior 
hospitalization and are recovering from acute illnesses or 
conditions and/or (2) need community-based care manage-
ment to address their chronic conditions. Home health agen-
cies are unique as the only Medicare providers that are 
specifically certified to provide skilled care to beneficiaries 
at home for acute, chronic, or rehabilitative conditions. 
Home health agencies use interdisciplinary clinical teams of 
health professionals, including nurses, physical therapists, 
occupational therapists, speech-language pathologists, medi-
cal social workers, and home health aides.
Care coordination and management performed by home healthcare 
professionals is an evolving area of service 
 
Family 
Caregiving 
(Informal 
Personal 
Care 
Services) 
 
 
Private Duty 
Home Care 
(Formal 
Personal 
Care 
Services) 
 
 
 
 
Skilled Home 
Health Care 
 
 
 
 
 
Home-  
Based 
Primary Care 
(MD/NP) 
 
 
 
 
 
Hospice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Care 
Coordination 
and 
Management 
 
 
Acuity & Medical Involvement  
Low 
High 
Routine & Palliative Care 
 
 
 
Hospital At 
Home  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Spectrum of home-based services and supports. 
Source. Avalere Health, 2016.
Note. MD = Physicians; NP = Nurse Practitioners.
 Landers et al 
271
The traditional Medicare program pays in separate pay-
ment systems for different health care provider and profes-
sional services. Thus, Medicare pays short-term acute care 
hospitals under the hospital inpatient prospective payment 
system, Medicare pays physicians under the physician fee 
schedule, and Medicare pays home health agencies under the 
home health prospective payment system. Each payment sys-
tem is separate and unrelated to the other payment systems.
Under the home health prospective payment system, 
Medicare beneficiaries are eligible to receive home health 
care services delivered by a certified home health agency if 
the beneficiary is homebound, needs intermittent skilled 
nursing and/or therapy services, and is under the care of a 
physician and needs reasonable and necessary home health 
services that have been certified by a physician and estab-
lished in a 60-day plan of care. Medicare pays for home 
health care services with both Medicare Parts A and B funds 
in 60-day episodes of care, and pays agencies by home health 
resource groups (HHRGs) that are based on clinical and 
functional status (drawn from the Outcome and Assessment 
Information Set [OASIS] instrument), and service use. In 
general, Medicare pays with Part A funds if the home health 
care services follow discharge from an acute care hospital, or 
Medicare pays with Part B funds if a physician refers the 
beneficiary for home health care services as part of commu-
nity-based care.
Given that traditional Medicare is largely FFS (and fee for 
episode in Medicare home health care), it is not surprising 
that the federal government is now emphasizing value over 
volume, and coordination over fragmentation. Each provider 
is paid only for delivering their own services, not for deliver-
ing quality care as defined by key measures. Providers and 
professionals historically have not been paid to coordinate 
care across the continuum. Home health agencies are no 
exception. Notwithstanding, it is clear that the health care 
system is evolving toward a value-based system and that 
home health agencies will need to change in the future to 
support achievement of the Triple Aim.
As the health system evolves, home health agencies increas-
ingly will need to partner with entities formally accepting risk 
and even accept risk on their own. The evolving role of 
Medicare home health agencies is captured in Figure 6. This 
will be a gradual process as more agencies develop the capa-
bilities to fully manage care and handle risk. As a first step, 
home health agencies must provide value to their partners 
(often other providers or payers) that are accepting risk in 
value-based arrangements. Going forward, home health agen-
cies must partner with risk-bearing entities and actively man-
age patient care across settings, going beyond their current role. 
Finally, longer term, home health agencies can expand their 
role to formally accept risk under new payment models, shar-
ing in potential savings and losses with their care partners.
Figure 6. The evolving role of Medicare home health.
Source. Avalere Health, 2016.
Note. APMs = alternative payment models; MA = Medicare Advantage; HH = Home Health Care.
 272 
Home Health Care Management & Practice 28(4)
The Medicare benefit’s emphasis on skilled nursing and 
therapy could allow home health agencies to play a pivotal 
and unique role supporting patients, caregivers, and other 
health care providers and professionals in pursuit of the 
Triple Aim. Nurses and therapists could help teach patients 
and caregivers self-management skills, and the home health 
interdisciplinary team could serve as critical boots on the 
ground, acting as an extension of primary care practices to 
manage patient care in the home and community.
Home Health Care and Recent Changes in the 
Health Care Delivery Environment
As stated above, the interviews with key policy and health 
care stakeholders confirmed their unanimous belief that 
these payment and delivery reforms are “here to stay” and 
already have broad reach in the health care system. They 
believed that there will continue to be variation across mar-
kets as to whether Medicare Advantage, bundled payments, 
ACOs, or some combination emerges as the dominant risk-
based model, either nationally or regionally.
As a result of the ongoing payment and delivery reforms, 
all key thought leaders stated that home health had the poten-
tial to be a “big winner” with substantial increases in patient 
volume because of its relatively low cost compared with 
institutional setting.
As reflected in the evaluation of the CMS BPCI, risk-
bearing providers are increasingly utilizing home health care 
as they look to reduce total cost throughout episodes or 
enrollment periods. In BPCI SNF initiated episodes, overall 
unadjusted average Medicare payments were lower com-
pared with comparison groups ($11,311 vs. $16,896), but 
“[a]verage Part A payments for home health agency services 
increased significantly relative to comparison group patients 
during the 90-day post-discharge period.”23 If such patterns 
continue under the CJR demonstration, increased utilization 
of home health could lead to significant savings under an 
episode of care. An Avalere analysis of 2012 to 2013 
Medicare claims data indicates that about 31% of joint 
replacement episodes are discharged directly to home health, 
compared with nearly 40% discharged to an SNF. However, 
when comparing the total average episode spending, 
Medicare spends nearly twice as much ($27,990 on average) 
for episodes where the beneficiary is discharged to SNF 
compared with those discharged to home health ($16,755; 
Avalere analysis of 2012 and 2013 Standard Analytic Files 
[SAF]; episodes initiated between January 1, 2012, and 
September 30, 2013; excludes Part B physician spending). 
We note, however, that this analysis did not control for dif-
ferences in patients who receive care in nursing facilities ver-
sus home health care; the determination of whether a patient 
receives SNF-based or home health care after a joint replace-
ment requires assessment of clinical appropriateness and the 
needs of the patient, in addition to considerations related to 
cost-effectiveness.
The Medicare Home Health Agency of the Future
To fulfill critical roles in the health care system, Medicare 
home health agencies of the future would need to have newly 
strengthened capabilities and characteristics. Home health 
agencies would need to possess key characteristics (articu-
lated in “four pillars”) to meet “three critical roles” that the 
home health agency will play in the health care system.
Four pillars: Key characteristics of the home health agency of the 
future. Home health agencies must develop the capabilities 
and workforce to achieve the following key characteristics 
that are organized into four pillars. Home health agencies of 
the future must provide care that is:
1. 
Patient and person centered: The IOM defines 
patient-centered care as “providing care that is 
respectful of and responsive to individual patient 
preferences, needs, and values, and ensuring that 
patient values guide all clinical decisions,” and 
includes it as one of the key components of high-
quality health care.24 Because home health is, by 
definition, provided in a patient’s home, it offers an 
optimal opportunity to identify and respond to the 
needs of individual beneficiaries and families. A par-
ticipant in the IOM workshop on home health 
described this more intimate relationship as one 
“around the kitchen table,” where health care deci-
sions are truly made and managed.1 As the home 
health industry begins to care for patients more 
broadly, the industry needs to identify what consti-
tutes person-centered home health care and how it is 
defined and measured.
2. 
Seamlessly connected and coordinated: The home 
health agency of the future must be part of a seam-
less, connected and coordinated home-based care 
continuum, as well as being connected with primary 
care, and facility-based care. Many of the stakehold-
ers interviewed highlighted the potential role that 
home health could play in coordinating care for ben-
eficiaries. As health care moves toward paying for 
value, not volume, home health agencies must coor-
dinate patient care and ensure successful transitions 
from institutional care to the home. During this tran-
sition, beneficiaries interact with a wide range of 
health care providers, professionals, services, sup-
ports, and suppliers, so home health agencies must 
have the tools to manage care across these disparate 
entities and coordinate care and services in the transi-
tion home. In the future, all home health agencies 
should have these capabilities; however, the home 
health agency’s care coordination activities could 
expand beyond coordinating care after an acute 
event. Home health is well positioned to manage 
medical care with nonmedical supports, including 
 Landers et al 
273
family and other social supports (e.g., food assis-
tance, transportation, etc.) and provide other services 
such as nurse visits. As more services are provided in 
the home, home health agencies are a natural partner 
for risk-sharing entities under APMs but would need 
to build additional capabilities that allow them to 
manage care not only after an acute event but also 
across the care continuum.
3. 
High quality: Home health agencies must ensure that 
they can consistently deliver the highest quality care 
for their patients. Medicare home health providers 
already serve a vulnerable population. Users of 
Medicare home health services are more likely to be 
older than 85, live alone, have multiple chronic con-
ditions and ADL limitations, and generally have 
lower incomes than beneficiaries who do not use 
home health.25 Home health is and will continue to be 
a critical tool in ensuring that these beneficiaries 
received skilled nursing and therapy services, thereby 
supporting the patient’s goal of remaining safely at 
home and out of more expensive institutional set-
tings. While home health agencies must be able to 
reliably care for a wide range of patients, in the cur-
rent environment, some interviews with innovative 
home health agencies suggested the increasing need 
to provide specialized care for clinical conditions, 
such as heart failure or major joint replacement (as 
required by the CJR model), particularly under con-
dition-specific bundled payment arrangements. In 
other cases, gerontological expertise or palliative 
care may be critical competencies. With the transition 
to value-based care, the home health industry must be 
flexible and responsive to changes in patient popula-
tion and consistently provide reliable, high-quality 
care that allows patients to get and remain at home as 
safely and quickly as possible.
4. 
Technology enabled: Finally, technology is changing 
how health care is performed in this country. It allows 
patients to more easily connect with health care pro-
fessionals and receive more intensive services in new 
settings. While this can improve access to care for 
many patients, it will also change the way care is 
delivered and chronic conditions are treated. Many of 
the innovative organizations Avalere Health inter-
viewed as part of this study reported using technol-
ogy, such as remote monitoring, to improve patient 
care, but they also noted that Medicare generally does 
not reimburse for this technology. Health information 
technology also promises to enable improved care 
coordination, quality, and efficiency, but home health 
agencies were not eligible for meaningful use incen-
tive payments to implement electronic health records. 
Thus, going forward, home health agencies may face 
a “catch-22,” as they are expected to implement new 
technology without any associated reimbursement.
Three critical roles for the home health agency of the future. With 
these “four pillars” of characteristics in mind, and within the 
emerging value-based payment world, the home health 
agency of the future should serve three critical roles:
1. 
Post–acute care and acute care support: Home health 
agencies should serve as key partners that support 
patients’ transition home and facilitate high-quality 
care in the community. When deemed clinically 
appropriate for the patient, home health agencies 
could serve as posthospital and postemergency 
department resources for intense episodes of skilled 
nursing, care coordination, therapy, and related 
services.
2. 
Primary care partners: Home health agencies should 
be partners with longitudinal, outpatient primary care 
medical homes and home-based primary care, with 
responsive skilled nursing, care coordination, ther-
apy, and related services during time-limited epi-
sodes where care recipients need an escalation in 
home-based care to avoid hospitalization or other 
undesired outcomes. Home health agencies should 
also provide limited ongoing skilled nursing services 
to enable ongoing primary care in the community 
(e.g., providing catheter care, ostomy care, and so 
forth, to support primary care efforts to enable 
patients to stay healthy at home).
3. 
Home-based long-term care partners: Home health 
agencies should be partners in home-based long-term 
care and social support models (i.e., formal and infor-
mal personal care providers) with responsive skilled 
nursing, therapy, and related services during episodes 
where care recipients need a brief escalation of home-
based care to avoid hospitalization or institutionaliza-
tion. Occasionally, home health agencies should 
provide limited ongoing skilled nursing services to 
that enable ongoing long-term care in the community 
(e.g., catheter care, ostomy care, etc.).
The home health agency of the future increasingly has new 
payment incentives and shared savings contracts for per-
forming these roles capably and efficiently. In many 
instances, the home health agency of the future is structurally 
and formally more connected (as the owners, partners, or 
subsidiaries) of entities that integrate a range of home-based 
services beyond home health agency care.
Capabilities
In the context of the above-mentioned four pillars and three 
critical roles, home health agencies must develop new capa-
bilities and business models to maximize their potential as a 
high-quality provider within the financial constraints that are 
inherent in most Medicare APMs. Figure 7 captures the over-
all framework for the future of home health care, which hinges 
 274 
Home Health Care Management & Practice 28(4)
on the home health providers’ ability to provide broader ser-
vices allowing them to keep high-risk beneficiaries safely in 
the home for as long as possible. In addition to the proven 
expertise of providing skilled care in the home, agencies may 
be responsible for offering services to high-risk beneficiaries 
that substitute for institutional care, prevent unnecessary acute 
care utilization, improve patient experience and adhere to 
patient preference for care in the home, and maintain function 
and clinical condition for as long as possible.
A subset of home health providers are already developing 
these capabilities and can be seen as harbingers of the future 
for how home health providers may ultimately progress and 
experience risk-based payments. Case studies highlighting 
innovative agencies can be found in Appendix A at http://
ahhqi.org/images/uploads/APP_A_Case_Studies.pdf. In the 
future, these types of agencies and activities should become 
the norm, rather than the exception. Vignettes that illustrate 
the key roles, characteristics, and capabilities of the home 
health agency of the future can be found in Appendix B at 
http://ahhqi.org/images/uploads/APP_B_Vignettes.pdf.
Interviews with providers suggest that some home health 
agencies are finding solutions and promoting value-based 
care by leveraging existing capabilities and partnering to 
improve patient experience and outcomes. These new capa-
bilities were relatively constant across innovative providers 
suggesting areas for additional investment.
The majority of these interventions, summarized in Figure 
8, particularly physician house calls, telehealth, remote mon-
itoring, and care transitions support, are intended to prevent 
high-cost events, including emergency department visits and 
hospital readmissions. Many of the providers described 
focus on specific clinical conditions, most often chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), congestive heart 
failure (CHF), and diabetes. Notably, most of the interview-
ees said that they were not currently reimbursed separately 
for providing these services. One organization said that they 
fund these programs as part of their mission statement. 
Another noted that within their health system, the cost avoid-
ance for the system as a whole through the care coordination 
program far outweighed any direct costs of running the care 
coordination program. However, this stakeholder noted that 
freestanding home health agencies likely face significantly 
greater reimbursement concerns if costs incurred and avoided 
are seen only within siloes. Interviewees indicate that innova-
tive home health agencies were able to increase their value sig-
nificantly in population health management initiatives primarily 
because of their connections to or integration within (and sup-
port from) a larger health system or network. This trade-off 
represents a fundamental challenge with the current home 
health reimbursement system: Home health agencies incur 
higher costs for care coordination and other services that pre-
vent future health care system spending, but stand-alone pro-
viders often are not recognized for driving the decreased 
spending for the health care system.
Challenges to Address in the Current 
Environment
There is abundant literature describing the challenges that 
home health providers face to provide the type and quality of 
care that beneficiaries, and the health care system as a whole, 
High-Quality 
Technology- 
Enabled 
Regulatory and Financial Flexibility 
Quality and Spending Targets 
Risk 
Ambulatory 
Care 
Outpatient 
Care 
Acute 
Care 
Post-
Acute 
Care 
Palliative 
Care & 
Hospice  
Figure 7. Framework for home health of the future.
Source. Avalere Health, 2016.
Note. ACO = accountable care organization.
Figure 8. Capabilities of home health agencies for the future.
Source. Avalere Health, 2016. 
Note. HIT = Health Information Technology.
 Landers et al 
275
will demand in the future. These challenges can be loosely 
categorized into eight groups:
1. 
Financing mechanisms
The standard 60-day episode payment under the home health 
prospective payment system (PPS) includes payment for all 
services and supplies, including various skilled nursing ser-
vices, therapy, and medical supplies (with the exception of 
durable medical equipment).26 However, in interviews with 
stakeholders, multiple people noted that the FFS payment 
system does not reimburse for services that are essential for 
integrating patient care, including health information tech-
nology (HIT) capabilities, telehealth, and staffing for care 
coordination and care transition support. Numerous home 
health providers also brought up the need for better commu-
nication and coordination across the spectrum, including 
referring hospitals, physicians, and other medical and non-
medical providers. These providers often created mecha-
nisms to improve this communication but did so without 
additional Medicare reimbursement. CMS acknowledged in 
recent rulemaking that “effective adoption and use of health 
information exchange and health IT tools will be essential . . . 
[to] improve quality and lower costs,” yet home health agen-
cies, like all post–acute care providers, were ineligible for 
Medicare EHR (Electronic Health Records) Incentive 
Programs to offset the significant costs of acquiring these 
capabilities.27 Recently, CMS announced that home health 
agencies may be among the parties who can be eligible for 
Medicaid meaningful use incentive payments, but it is 
unclear as yet whether such incentives alone will be able to 
support investments in HIT for the future.
2. 
Regulatory constraints
Stakeholder interviews also highlighted several regulatory 
barriers within the structure of the home health benefit that 
preclude effective care coordination, provisions that prevent 
the necessary level of integration and coordination with 
other providers. Other stakeholders highlighted the Medicare 
requirement that the beneficiary be homebound, which does 
not include all beneficiaries who truly have limited capabili-
ties to seek services outside the home. When discussing the 
homebound requirement, some interviewees recommended 
determining eligibility based on whether the beneficiary had 
a certain number of ADLs or chronic conditions, as well as 
using Hierarchical Condition Categories (HCC) scores, sim-
ilar to Medicare Advantage, but there was no consensus 
among interviewees on the best method to establish eligibil-
ity. In the context of APMs, where there is accountability for 
overarching costs in a bundled payment or shared savings 
construct, selective waiver of the homebound requirement 
was often mentioned as a means to increase access to home 
health services for those who need it.28
3. 
Addressing program integrity and fraud and abuse
As with any service in which demand rises significantly in a 
short period of time, instances of fraud and abuse have 
occurred in the home health space. These issues must be 
addressed while also allowing patients access to needed ser-
vices. CMS lists on its web site a range of actions the agency 
is taking and has taken to support fraud and abuse detection. 
To prevent fraud, these include efforts around timely licen-
sure and accreditation, transparency, and auditing. These 
efforts are critical to eliminating bad actors and ensuring that 
patients maintain access to high-quality home health ser-
vices. Notwithstanding, it is imperative that such measures 
do not hinder patient access to quality care, and place undue 
burden on agencies.
4. 
Measuring 
performance: 
Quality 
and 
patient 
experience
To improve quality of care and address variation across home 
health agencies, CMS and others have pursued value-based 
purchasing, quality ratings, and other forms of reporting.1 In 
the context of the health care system’s shift toward value, 
these initiatives to link payment to performance and to pro-
vide public reporting have been important changes. Over 
time, it will be critical to identify a parsimonious measure set 
that enables home health agencies to focus on core measures 
that matter most for performance improvement. Today, a par-
simonious measure set has not yet been identified; CMS’s 
home health value-based purchasing model demonstration 
project began on January 1, 2016, with 24 different perfor-
mance measures that will be used to determine whether 
agencies in the selected states will receive positive or nega-
tive payment updates that will begin in 2018. The IOM 
recently called attention to the risks inherent in using too 
many measures in its report on Vital Signs: Core Metrics for 
Health and Health Care Progress.29 A key consideration for 
the future will be to identify the core measures that home 
health agencies should focus on as it aligns with the rest of 
the health care system to achieve the Triple Aim.
5. 
Workforce limitations
Studies have raised a number of concerns related to the home 
health workforce, particularly for registered nurses (RNs), 
including turnover and clinical training in skilled areas of 
care.30 One study identified nursing residency programs as 
an opportunity to gain skills and reduce turnover, but found 
that the prevalence of these programs in home health and 
hospice providers was relatively low (only 2.2% vs. 42.9% 
for hospitals).30 The IOM workshop on the future of home 
health raised additional concerns about the home health 
workforce, including availability of family caregivers, 
changing demographics of care workers and patients, the 
 276 
Home Health Care Management & Practice 28(4)
need to improve geriatrics training among the home health 
workforce, the need to address low wages and benefits, and 
the overall health of the U.S. economy.1 The workshop 
describes the Department of Veterans Affairs’ (VA) home-
based primary care as a comprehensive model, one in which 
care is provided by an interdisciplinary team of nurses, phy-
sicians, social workers, rehabilitation therapists, dieticians, 
pharmacists, and psychologists. This model is effective, but 
potentially expensive, and therefore the VA targets high-cost 
veterans for the intervention. In scaling such a program to the 
general Medicare population, the skills and workforce to 
staff such a comprehensive, interdisciplinary team would be 
critical. CMS’s Independence at Home demonstration is 
based on home-based primary care and may be one model 
that could be expanded more broadly to support the use of 
interdisciplinary teams.
6. 
Clinical capabilities related to diseases focused on by 
APMs
While some APMs require a focus on population health (e.g., 
ACOs), others would require home health agencies to 
develop increased clinical capabilities to address specific 
conditions. For example, the CJR model discussed above 
requires an increased focus on caring for joint replacement 
patients, whereas the HRRP currently focuses on heart fail-
ure, acute myocardial infarction, pneumonia, COPD, and 
total hip/knee replacements.31 Home health agencies would 
need to develop key capabilities to not only better manage 
patient care across a population of patients but also handle 
patients with specific needs or conditions.
7. 
Operational capabilities
As discussed previously, home health agencies would need 
to develop new capabilities in a changing health care envi-
ronment. Many of these capabilities require home health 
agencies to provide new services or interact with a broader 
range of providers. However, beyond these capabilities 
focused on care delivery, home health agencies would need 
to make operational changes to align their systems with the 
current environment. For example, home health agencies 
may need to hire or otherwise develop relationships with 
new staff, such as medical directors to link home health ser-
vices with those offered by other providers or emergency 
medical technicians to provide rapid responses in the case of 
acute events.1 Current staff may need to be trained to handle 
new responsibilities and functions, such as using information 
technology and developing and following patient centered-
care plans.1 Similarly, as home health providers become 
greater care partners and accept risk under APMs, they may 
need to change their financial or accounting practices to be 
able to accept risk-based payments and ensure accurate rev-
enue recognition and reserves to handle bonus payments or 
potential losses.
8. 
Long-term care
All told, the discussion about patients’ preferences and the 
appropriateness of care speaks more broadly to the clinical 
imperative of addressing each patient’s full range of needs, 
which may go beyond Medicare home health benefits. These 
long-term care needs, which include functional capacity, 
care transitions, care coordination, and support for caregiv-
ers, are not strictly medical.1 However, they have been shown 
to have meaningful impacts on patients’ ability to maintain 
their health and remain in the community. Stakeholders, 
including MedPAC, have expressed concern that the increase 
in community-referred (or “Part B”) home health episodes 
may be indicative of Medicare home health being used as 
long-term care.32 The United States faces an unmet long-
term care need due to a relatively weak and fragmented ben-
efit system. Some home health agencies have separate lines 
of business that currently provide long-term care services 
through Medicaid and private duty and so are important to 
the broader long-term care discussion.
Recommendations and Conclusions
The demographic imperative of the quickly aging popula-
tion, the shift from siloed to coordinated, value-based care, 
and the need to meet consumer preferences demand that 
home health agencies provide care consistent with the four 
pillars of characteristics and three roles laid out in this arti-
cle’s framework for the future. The future of health care 
delivery hinges on the ability of payers and providers to 
leverage the spectrum of home-based care, with Medicare 
skilled home health as a formidable linchpin in that 
spectrum.
Medicare officials have already signaled their willingness 
to enable some flexibility in new payment models when pro-
viders have a financial stake in their performance against 
quality and cost targets; however, current challenges and 
structures do not allow home health care to be used opti-
mally. We offer the following recommendations to enable the 
future of home health care:
•
•
To develop the capabilities needed to fully integrate 
and coordinate with high-quality, population-driven 
health systems, home health care needs to be empow-
ered as a full partner that both shares in risk and has 
freedom to deploy the best care to the patient popula-
tions who can undoubtedly benefit. Policy makers 
should consider opportunities to reduce regulatory 
barriers to risk sharing, creating the incentive to pro-
vide seamless, coordinated care.
•
•
CMS should address financing and regulatory chal-
lenges in the context of APMs as means of enabling 
appropriate use of Medicare home health care in these 
contexts. Testing waiver of regulatory limits such as 
the homebound requirement in select cases may lead 
 Landers et al 
277
the way toward using clinically appropriate and cost-
effective care. Further reforms that enable greater 
flexibility in the delivery of home health care in APMs 
should also be considered.
•
•
Program integrity and fraud should be addressed in a 
targeted fashion, directed toward fraud “hot spot” 
areas that are identified for further investigation 
through aberrant claim patterns. Removing the alba-
tross of fraud in home health care will enable greater 
confidence in using Medicare home health by multi-
ple stakeholders in the future.
Consistent with this report, the home health industry must 
commit to pursuing a process to transform home health and 
home-based care to benefit patients and the U.S. health care 
system. Through collaboration with multiple stakeholders, 
including patients, caregivers, policy makers, payers, and 
providers and professionals across the spectrum of care, pur-
suit of this transformation process has the potential to 
improve the way health care is delivered in America.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge Jennifer Schiller for assisting in prepara-
tion of this manuscript.
Authors’ Note
A version of this article was presented at the National Leadership 
Forum on “The Future of Home-Based Care” on June 21, 2016, in 
Cincinnati, Ohio, and at a briefing sponsored by the Alliance for 
Home Health Quality and Innovation on June 30, 2016, in 
Washington, D.C.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect 
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support 
for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: The 
authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the following organi-
zations that provided funding for the Future of Home Health proj-
ect: Axxess, CHAP (Community Health Accreditation Partner), 
UnityPoint at Home, Corridor, and Simione Healthcare Consultants.
References
 1. Institute of Medicine. The Future of Home Health Care: 
Workshop Summary. Washington, DC: National Academies 
Press; 2015. http://www.nap.edu/catalog/21662. Accessed 
August 2, 2016.
 2. Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. Health Care 
Spending and the Medicare Program: A Data Book. http://
www.medpac.gov/documents/data-book/june-2016-data-
book-health-care-spending-and-the-medicare-program.
pdf?sfvrsn=0. Published June 2016. Accessed August 2, 
2016.
 3. Ortman JM, Velkoff VA, Hogan H. An aging nation: the older 
population in the United States, current population reports, 
P25-1140. US Census Bureau. https://www.census.gov/
prod/2014pubs/p25-1140.pdf. Published May 2014. Accessed 
August 1, 2016.
 4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center 
for Health Statistics. Health, United States, 2015. http://www.
cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus15.pdf#058. Published May 2016. 
Accessed August 2, 2016.
 5. Bodenheimer T, Wagner EH, Grumbach K. Improving pri-
mary care for patients with chronic illness: the chronic care 
model, part 2. JAMA. 2002;288(15):1909-1914. doi:10.1001/
jama.288.15.1909.
 6. Berwick DM, Nolan TW, Whittington J. The triple aim: care, 
health, and cost. Health Aff (Millwood). 2008;27(3):759-769. 
doi:10.1377/hlthaff.27.3.759.
 7. Burwell SM. Setting value-based payment goals—HHS efforts 
to improve U.S. health care. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(10):897-
899. doi:10.1056/NEJMp1500445.
 8. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Value based 
programs. https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-
Patient-Assessment-Instruments/Value-Based-Programs/
Value-Based-Programs.html. Published January 14, 2016. 
Accessed August 22, 2016.
 9. U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. Home based primary 
care—geriatrics and extended care. General information. http://
www.va.gov/geriatrics/guide/longtermcare/home_based_pri-
mary_care.asp. Published 2016. Accessed March 30, 2016.
 
10. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. PACE. https://
www.medicare.gov/your-medicare-costs/help-paying-costs/
pace/pace.html. Accessed March 30, 2016.
 
11. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. New hospitals 
and health care providers join successful, cutting-edge federal 
initiative that cuts costs and puts patients at the center of their 
care. http://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2016/01/11/new-hospi-
tals-and-health-care-providers-join-successful-cutting-edge-
federal-initiative.html. Published January 11, 2016. Accessed 
August 22, 2016.
 
12. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Bundled 
Payments for Care Improvement (BPCI) initiative: general 
information. 
https://innovation.cms.gov/initiatives/bundled-
payments/. Published July 19, 2016. Accessed August 2, 2016.
 
13. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation. Comprehensive 
Care for Joint Replacement (CJR) model: provider and tech-
nical fact sheet. Department of Health and Human Services. 
https://innovation.cms.gov/Files/fact-sheet/cjr-providerfs-fin-
alrule.pdf. Accessed August 2, 2016.
 
14. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Affordable 
Care Act payment model saves more than $25 million in 
first performance year. https://www.cms.gov/Newsroom/
MediaReleaseDatabase/Press-releases/2015-Press-releases-
items/2015-06-18.html. Published June 18, 2015. Accessed 
August 22, 2016.
 
15. Keenan TA. Home and community preferences of the 45+ pop-
ulation. AARP. http://www.aarp.org/research/topics/commu-
nity/info-2014/home-community-services-10.html. Published 
November 2010. Accessed August 2, 2016.
 
16. The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care. Inpatient days per dece-
dent during the last six months of life, by gender and level 
of care intensity. End of life care. The Dartmouth Institute 
 278 
Home Health Care Management & Practice 28(4)
for Health Policy and Clinical Practice. http://www.dart-
mouthatlas.org/data/topic/topic.aspx?cat=18. Published 2012. 
Accessed August 2, 2016.
 
17. Ng T, Harrington C, Musumeci M, Reaves EL. Medicaid home 
and community-based services programs: 2012 data update. 
Kaiser Family Foundation. http://kff.org/medicaid/report/
medicaid-home-and-community-based-services-programs-
2012-data-update/. Published November 2015. Accessed 
August 22, 2016.
 
18. AARP. Caregiving in the U.S. research report. AARP Public 
Policy Institute. http://www.aarp.org/content/dam/aarp/ppi/2015/
caregiving-in-the-united-states-2015-report-revised.pdf. 
Published June 2015. Accessed August 2, 2016.
 
19. Johnson RW, Toohey D, Weiner JM. Meeting the long-term care 
needs of the baby boomers: how changing families will affect 
paid helpers and institutions. The Urban Institute. http://www.
urban.org/sites/default/files/alfresco/publication-pdfs/311451-
Meeting-the-Long-Term-Care-Needs-of-the-Baby-Boomers.
PDF. Published May 2007. Accessed August 2, 2016.
 
20. Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. Report to Congress: 
Medicare payment policy. http://medpac.gov/documents/
reports/march-2016-report-to-the-congress-medicare-pay-
ment-policy.pdf?sfvrsn=2. Published March 2016. Accessed 
August 2, 2016.
 
21. Cryer L, Shannon SB, Van Amsterdam M, Leff B. Costs 
for “hospital at home” patients were 19 percent lower, with 
equal or better outcomes compared to similar inpatients. 
Health Aff (Millwood). 2012;31(6):1237-1243. doi:10.1377/
hlthaff.2011.1132.
 
22. Dahlin C. Clinical Practice Guidelines for Quality Palliative 
Care. 3rd ed. National Consensus Project for Quality 
Palliative Care; 2013. http://www.nationalconsensusproject.
org/Guidelines_Download2.aspx. Accessed August 2, 2016.
 
23. The Lewin Group. CMS Bundled Payments for Care 
Improvement (BPCI) initiative models 2-4: year 1 evalua-
tion & monitoring annual report. Prepared for CMS. P 17. 
https://innovation.cms.gov/Files/reports/BPCI-EvalRpt1.pdf. 
Published February 2015. Accessed August 2, 2016.
 
24. Institute of Medicine. Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New 
Health System for the 21st Century. National Academy of 
Sciences; 2001. https://iom.nationalacademies.org/~/media/
Files/Report%20Files/2001/Crossing-the-Quality-Chasm/
Quality%20Chasm%202001%20%20report%20brief.pdf. 
Accessed August 2, 2016.
 
25. Avalere Health. Home Health Chartbook 2015: prepared for 
the alliance for home health quality and innovation. http://
ahhqi.org/images/uploads/AHHQI_2015_Chartbook_FINAL_
October.pdf. Published October 2015. Accessed August 2, 
2016.
 
26. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The Medicare 
home health benefit. Medicare Learning Network, Department of 
Health and Human Services. https://www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-
Education/Medicare-Learning-Network-MLN/MLNProducts/
Downloads/Home-Health-Benefit-Fact-Sheet-ICN908143.pdf. 
Published December 2015. Accessed August 2, 2016.
 
27. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Home 
health prospective payment system rate update. https://
www.federalregister.gov/articles/2015/11/05/2015-27931/
medicare-and-medicaid-programs-cy-2016-home-health-
prospective-payment-system-rate-update-home#h-28. 80 FR 
68623. Published January 2016. Accessed August 22, 2016.
 
28. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Medicare shared 
savings program proposed rule. https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
pkg/FR-2014-12-08/pdf/2014-28388.pdf. 79 Fed. Reg. 72760. 
Published 2014. Accessed August 2, 2016.
 
29. Institute of Medicine. Vital Signs: Core Metrics for Health 
and Health Care Progress. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press; 2015. http://www.nap.edu/catalog/19402/
vital-signs-core-metrics-for-health-and-health-care-progress. 
Accessed August 2, 2016.
 
30. Pittman P, Horton K, Terry M, Bass E. Residency programs 
for home health and hospice nurses: prevalence, barriers, and 
potential policy responses. Home Health Care Manag Pract. 
2014;26(2):86-91. doi:10.1177/1084822313511457.
 
31. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Readmissions 
Reduction 
Program. 
https://www.cms.gov/medicare/medi-
care-fee-for-service-payment/acuteinpatientpps/readmissions-
reduction-program.html. Published January 15, 2016. Accessed 
August 22, 2016.
 
32. Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. Report to Congress: 
Medicare payment policy. Chapter on home health services. 
http://www.medpac.gov/documents/reports/mar13_ch09.
pdf?sfvrsn=0. Published 2013. Accessed August 2, 2016.
 
33. Visiting Nurse Associations of America. VNAA case study 
compendium: innovative models for the evolving home health 
and hospice industry. http://www.vnaa.org/files/Education-
Quality/VNAA%20CSfinal.pdf. Published October 2013. 
Accessed August 30, 2016.
