 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 
1
The reporting of studies conducted using observational routinely 
collected health data statement for pharmacoepidemiology  
(RECORD-PE)
Sinéad M Langan,1 Sigrún AJ Schmidt,2 Kevin Wing,1 Vera Ehrenstein,2 Stuart G Nicholls,3,4  
Kristian B Filion,5,6 Olaf Klungel,7 Irene Petersen,2,8 Henrik T Sorensen,2 William G Dixon,9  
Astrid Guttmann,10,11 Katie Harron,12 Lars G Hemkens,13 David Moher,3  
Sebastian Schneeweiss,14 Liam Smeeth,1 Miriam Sturkenboom,15 Erik von Elm,16  
Shirley V Wang,14 Eric I Benchimol10,17,18
 In pharmacoepidemiology, routinely 
collected data from electronic health 
records (including primary care 
databases, registries, and 
administrative healthcare claims) are a 
resource for research evaluating the 
real world effectiveness and safety of 
medicines. Currently available 
guidelines for the reporting of research 
using non-randomised, routinely 
collected data—specifically the 
REporting of studies Conducted using 
Observational Routinely collected 
health Data (RECORD) and the 
Strengthening the Reporting of 
OBservational studies in Epidemiology 
(STROBE) statements—do not  
capture the complexity of 
pharmacoepidemiological research. 
We have therefore extended the 
RECORD statement to include  
reporting guidelines specific to 
pharmacoepidemiological research 
(RECORD-PE). This article includes the 
RECORD-PE checklist (also available on 
www.record-statement.org) and 
explains each checklist item with 
examples of good reporting. We 
anticipate that increasing use of the 
RECORD-PE guidelines by researchers 
and endorsement and adherence by 
journal editors will improve the 
standards of reporting of 
pharmacoepidemiological research 
undertaken using routinely collected 
data. This improved transparency will 
benefit the research community, 
patient care, and ultimately improve 
public health.
Routinely collected health data are a by-product of 
the daily operations of healthcare systems, collected 
independently of specific a priori research questions.1 2 
A broad range of sources (eg, disease registries, 
health administrative data, quality/safety surveillance 
databases, electronic health records, and pharmacy 
data) contain routinely collected data and have both 
drug exposure and clinical outcomes that are of 
potential use in pharmacoepidemiology.3 4
In 
pharmacoepidemiology, 
routinely 
collected 
health data are a broadly accepted, necessary, and cost 
effective resource widely used for evaluating the real 
world effectiveness and safety of medicines. Studies 
conducted with routinely collected data are necessary 
for many reasons. Clinical trials might not be available, 
or ethical, and could have limitations owing to restrictive 
inclusion and exclusion criteria. Primary data collection 
could be costly or infeasible, have limited statistical 
power to detect safety events, or have durations that 
prevent the assessment of long term safety outcomes. 
In many cases, routinely collected health data can be 
used to provide timely answers and reduce waste in 
biomedical research when analysing important and 
novel healthcare issues. The use of routinely collected 
health data not only leverages existing investment but 
also could reduce the need for additional investment in 
de novo data collection.5 6 Research based on real world 
evidence, such as routinely collected data, has been 
conducted on health system planning and evaluation, 
drug utilisation, comparative drug effectiveness, 
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to:  
S M Langan  
sinead.langan@lshtm.ac.uk
Additional material is published 
online only. To view please visit 
the journal online.
Cite this as: BMJ 2018;363:k3532 
http:/
/dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.k3532
Accepted: 30 July 2018
SUMMARY POINTS
•  
The RECORD reporting guidelines represent the current best practice standard 
to ensure the clarity and completeness of reporting of non-interventional 
research using routinely collected health data
•  
The RECORD-PE statement was derived by use of rigorous methodology 
and endorsed by the International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology. 
It is intended to act as a guideline to improve the reporting of 
pharmacoepidemiological research undertaken using routinely collected 
health data
•  
The 15 item checklist should be used in parallel with the RECORD and STROBE 
guidelines to ensure transparent reporting of pharmacoepidemiology studies 
using routinely collected health data
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
2 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | the bmj
epidemiological surveillance, and postmarketing drug 
surveillance (phase IV studies).7-9
Although routinely collected health data are 
commonly used in pharmacoepidemiological research, 
these studies are often suboptimally reported.10-12 
Reporting guidelines have been developed for a 
range of study designs, and represent a minimum 
standard or items that should be reported in academic 
manuscripts.13 14 The main purposes of reporting 
guidelines are to ensure that readers can easily 
determine the research question, the methodology 
used, and the study findings; facilitate understanding 
of study strengths and limitations, specifically 
providing insight regarding possible biases; and 
facilitate replication. Reporting guidelines can also 
indirectly improve the quality of research by indicating 
which items to address during study design.15 16
The RECORD (REporting of studies Conducted using 
Observational Routinely collected Data) guideline 
represents the current best practice standard for the 
reporting of research using non-randomised routinely 
collected health data. The guideline was the product 
of an international collaboration focused on improving 
the reporting of observational studies using routinely 
collected data.1 17 RECORD consists of a checklist 
of 13 items that supplement or modify the earlier 
best practice guideline, STROBE (STrengthening the 
Reporting of OBservational studies in Epidemiology), 
which focused on the reporting of observational 
studies.1 18 The RECORD statement was informed by a 
systematic review that highlighted major deficiencies 
in the reporting of studies using routinely collected 
health data.11 Since its publication, RECORD has been 
endorsed by more than 20 major journals (for more 
information, see www.record-statement.org).
However, 
the 
methodological 
complexity 
of 
pharmacoepidemiological research means that certain 
reporting requirements are beyond the scope of either 
RECORD or STROBE. Here, we aimed to extend the 
RECORD statement to include reporting guidelines 
specific to pharmacoepidemiological research—that 
is, the reporting of research focusing on the uses and 
effects of drugs.19 This initiative is complementary 
to existing guidance in the field that mainly 
focuses on methods for doing (instead of reporting) 
pharmacoepidemiological research and evaluating 
the quality of published papers.20 21 We welcome 
global community engagement in this endeavour and 
comments from interested parties by email as these 
guidelines will be updated periodically.
The RECORD for Pharmacoepidemiology (RECORD-PE) 
checklist
Creation and development of the checklist
We convened a group of international experts in 
pharmacoepidemiology, routinely collected health 
data research, reporting guidelines, journalology 
(that is, the science of publication practices), the joint 
International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology/
International Society for Pharmacoeconomics and 
Outcomes Research consensus paper on reporting 
requirements to make database studies reproducible,22 
and knowledge users to adapt RECORD for non-
interventional 
pharmacoepidemiological 
research 
(RECORD-PE), as presented below. Draft items 
to be considered in a RECORD-PE checklist were 
proposed by authors and considered during regular 
teleconferences 
and 
electronic 
communication, 
resulting in a draft checklist. A face-to-face meeting 
was then held in Montreal, Canada, on 25 August 
2017. At this meeting, attendees voted on the inclusion 
of proposed statements and the appropriate wording 
of these statements, using the approach previously 
described for the creation of the RECORD statement.17 
Items were included in the checklist if more than 80% 
of participants agreed on the concept, wording, and 
message of the item. The draft manuscript and checklist 
were subsequently revised and circulated to all authors 
and the RECORD steering committee for comment and 
approval. It was also circulated to the members of the 
International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology for 
comment after completion of the draft and revised 
accordingly.
RECORD-PE checklist items
Table 1 shows the complete RECORD-PE checklist, 
which is organised according to standard manuscript 
sections and follows the conventions set out in 
STROBE (and subsequently RECORD).1 18 The checklist 
consists of 15 additional items, of which 13 focus 
on the methods section. Because this checklist is an 
extension of RECORD, which in turn is an extension 
of available STROBE items, the statements specific 
to pharmacoepidemiology are presented next to 
corresponding STROBE and RECORD checklist items. 
STROBE additionally has specific checklists for study 
designs including cohort, cross sectional, and case-
control studies. For RECORD and RECORD-PE, we 
have extended the general STROBE checklist.10 18 
Authors will be expected to consider each checklist 
item when drafting their manuscript and include items 
in their manuscript submissions. Below, we provide 
explanatory text for each RECORD-PE checklist item, 
organised by manuscript section, and provide a 
glossary in supplementary table 1. 
For content sufficiently covered under STROBE or 
RECORD, no additional items are provided, although 
explanatory text regarding particular aspects that 
might be more pertinent to pharmacoepidemiological 
studies is provided. All relevant explanations are 
presented under the respective RECORD-PE item or 
article section. The RECORD-PE statement is intended 
for use only in reporting on pharmacoepidemiology 
studies conducted with routinely collected health 
data, and represents a minimum standard of reporting 
for such research in published papers. Such studies 
include investigation of the use, effectiveness, and 
safety of drugs or drug eluting devices (eg, drug 
eluting stents) used in clinical practice. In addition 
to the widely accepted uses of routinely collected 
health data for pharmacoepidemiology, in recent 
years, the concept has emerged that cohort studies of 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 
3
Item No
STROBE items
RECORD items
RECORD-PE items
Page No
Title and abstract 
1
(a) Indicate the study’s design with a 
commonly used term in the title or the 
abstract.  
(b) Provide in the abstract an informative 
and balanced summary of what was done 
and what was found.
1.1: The type of data used should be specified in 
the title or abstract. When possible, the name of the 
databases used should be included. 
1.2: If applicable, the geographical region and 
timeframe within which the study took place should 
be reported in the title or abstract. 
1.3: If linkage between databases was conducted for 
the study, this should be clearly stated in the title or 
abstract.
—
Introduction 
Background rationale
2
Explain the scientific background and 
rationale for the investigation being reported.
—
—
Objectives
3
State specific objectives, including any 
prespecified hypotheses.
—
—
Methods 
Study design
4
Present key elements of study design early 
in the paper.
—
4.a: Include details of the specific study design 
(and its features) and report the use of multiple 
designs if used. 
4.b: The use of a diagram(s) is recommended 
to illustrate key aspects of the study design(s), 
including exposure, washout, lag and observation 
periods, and covariate definitions as relevant.
Setting
5
Describe the setting, locations, and relevant 
dates, including periods of recruitment, 
exposure, follow-up, and data collection.
—
—
Participants
6
(a) Cohort study—give the eligibility criteria, 
and the sources and methods of selection 
of participants. Describe methods of follow-
up. Case-control study—give the eligibility 
criteria, and the sources and methods of 
case ascertainment and control selection. 
Give the rationale for the choice of cases 
and controls. Cross sectional study—give 
the eligibility criteria, and the sources and 
methods of selection of participants. 
(b) Cohort study—for matched studies, give 
matching criteria and number of exposed 
and unexposed. Case-control study—for 
matched studies, give matching criteria and 
the number of controls per case.
6.1: The methods of study population selection (such 
as codes or algorithms used to identify participants) 
should be listed in detail. If this is not possible, an 
explanation should be provided. 
6.2: Any validation studies of the codes or algorithms 
used to select the population should be referenced. 
If validation was conducted for this study and not 
published elsewhere, detailed methods and results 
should be provided. 
6.3: If the study involved linkage of databases, 
consider use of a flow diagram or other graphical 
display to demonstrate the data linkage process, 
including the number of individuals with linked data 
at each stage.
6.1.a: Describe the study entry criteria and the 
order in which these criteria were applied to 
identify the study population. Specify whether 
only users with a specific indication were included 
and whether patients were allowed to enter the 
study population once or if multiple entries were 
permitted. See explanatory document for guidance 
related to matched designs.
Variables
7
Clearly define all outcomes, exposures, 
predictors, potential confounders, and 
effect modifiers. Give diagnostic criteria, if 
applicable.
7.1: A complete list of codes and algorithms used 
to classify exposures, outcomes, confounders, and 
effect modifiers should be provided. If these cannot 
be reported, an explanation should be provided.
7.1.a: Describe how the drug exposure definition 
was developed. 
7.1.b: Specify the data sources from which drug 
exposure information for individuals was obtained. 
7.1.c: Describe the time window(s) during which 
an individual is considered exposed to the drug(s). 
The rationale for selecting a particular time window 
should be provided. The extent of potential left 
truncation or left censoring should be specified. 
7.1.d: Justify how events are attributed to current, 
prior, ever, or cumulative drug exposure. 
7.1.e: When examining drug dose and risk 
attribution, describe how current, historical or time 
on therapy are considered. 
7.1.f: Use of any comparator groups should be 
outlined and justified. 
7.1.g: Outline the approach used to handle 
individuals with more than one relevant drug 
exposure during the study period.
Data sources/measurement
8
For each variable of interest, give sources of 
data and details of methods of assessment 
(measurement). Describe comparability of 
assessment methods if there is more than 
one group.
—
8.a: Describe the healthcare system and 
mechanisms for generating the drug exposure 
records. Specify the care setting in which the 
drug(s) of interest was prescribed.
(Continued)
Table 1 | The RECORD statement for pharmacoepidemiology (RECORD-PE) checklist of items, extended from the STROBE and RECORD statements,1 18 
which should be reported in non-interventional pharmacoepidemiological studies using routinely collected health data
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
4 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | the bmj
Item No
STROBE items
RECORD items
RECORD-PE items
Page No
Bias
9
Describe any efforts to address potential 
sources of bias.
—
—
Study size
10
Explain how the study size was arrived at.
—
—
Quantitative variables
11
Explain how quantitative variables were 
handled in the analyses. If applicable, 
describe which groupings were chosen, and 
why.
—
—
Statistical methods
12
(a) Describe all statistical methods, 
including those used to control for 
confounding. 
(b) Describe any methods used to examine 
subgroups and interactions. 
(c) Explain how missing data were addressed. 
(d) Cohort study—if applicable, explain 
how loss to follow-up was addressed. 
Case-control study—if applicable, explain 
how matching of cases and controls was 
addressed. Cross sectional study—if 
applicable, describe analytical methods 
taking account of sampling strategy. 
(e) Describe any sensitivity analyses.
—
12.1.a: Describe the methods used to evaluate 
whether the assumptions have been met. 
12.1.b: Describe and justify the use of multiple 
designs, design features, or analytical approaches.
Data access and cleaning methods
12
—
12.1: Authors should describe the extent to which 
the investigators had access to the database 
population used to create the study population. 
12.2: Authors should provide information on the data 
cleaning methods used in the study.
—
Linkage
12
—
12.3: State whether the study included person level, 
institutional level, or other data linkage across two or 
more databases. The methods of linkage and methods 
of linkage quality evaluation should be provided.
—
Results 
Participants
13
(a) Report the numbers of individuals 
at each stage of the study (eg, numbers 
potentially eligible, examined for eligibility, 
confirmed eligible, included in the study, 
completing follow-up, and analysed). 
(b) Give reasons for non-participation at 
each stage. 
(c) Consider use of a flow diagram.
13.1: Describe in detail the selection of the 
individuals included in the study (that is, study 
population selection) including filtering based on 
data quality, data availability, and linkage. The 
selection of included individuals can be described in 
the text or by means of the study flow diagram.
—
Descriptive data
14
(a) Give characteristics of study participants 
(eg, demographic, clinical, social) and 
information on exposures and potential 
confounders. 
(b) Indicate the number of participants with 
missing data for each variable of interest. 
(c) Cohort study—summarise follow-up time 
(eg, average and total amount).
—
—
Outcome data
15
Cohort study—report numbers of outcome 
events or summary measures over time. 
Case-control study—report numbers in each 
exposure category, or summary measures 
of exposure. Cross sectional study—report 
numbers of outcome events or summary 
measures.
—
—
Main results
16
(a) Give unadjusted estimates and, if 
applicable, confounder adjusted estimates 
and their precision (eg, 95% confidence 
intervals). Make clear which confounders were 
adjusted for and why they were included. 
(b) Report category boundaries when 
continuous variables are categorised. 
(c) If relevant, consider translating estimates 
of relative risk into absolute risk for a 
meaningful time period.
—
—
Table 1 | Continued
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 
5
interventions using such data could also be considered 
attempts to emulate a target trial of the intervention 
of interest. This concept has been considered helpful 
within epidemiology and pharmacoepidemiology.23 24 
Routinely collected health data can also help studies 
with baseline randomisation or pragmatic trials, 
because the data are frequently collected as part of 
routine care or health system administration; however, 
guidance for the reporting of pragmatic trials or trials 
using these data is beyond the scope of RECORD-PE.
Keywords and medical subject headings terms
The STROBE and RECORD statements do not 
address the use of specific keywords or medical 
subject headings (MeSH) terms to identify studies 
using routinely collected health data.1 25 There are 
currently no specific MeSH terms to identify these 
studies, and researchers use a range of search terms 
to identify these studies, which is a clear limitation 
in terms of undertaking systematic reviews and meta-
epidemiological research and highlights a need for 
future research focus.11
Title and abstract
No items specific to the RECORD-PE guidelines are 
needed in addition to the STROBE and RECORD items 
for the title and abstract. STROBE guidelines advise 
that an abstract should provide “an informative and 
balanced summary of what was done and found.”18 
Providing such a summary in the abstract highlights 
that the study is a pharmacoepidemiological study, 
and details the research question, the approach taken, 
and the study findings. Because screening of titles and 
abstracts is a key step in knowledge syntheses (eg, 
scoping reviews, systematic reviews), clarity in wording 
the title and abstract will facilitate appropriate reuse of 
research findings, thus reducing the waste of research 
resources. In describing the conduct of a study using 
routinely collected health data, the RECORD guideline 
items recommend reporting the type of data used and 
the name of the database(s), including highlighting 
whether linked data were used; these specifications 
are also directly relevant to pharmacoepidemiological 
studies.1
Introduction
No items specific to the RECORD-PE guidelines are 
needed in addition to the STROBE and RECORD items 
for the introduction section. The STROBE guidelines 
advise authors to detail “specific objectives, including 
any 
prespecified 
hypotheses.”18 
The 
RECORD 
explanatory paper further recommends that authors 
be explicit about whether analyses were exploratory 
or confirmatory, post hoc or prespecified, or a mixture 
Item No
STROBE items
RECORD items
RECORD-PE items
Page No
Other analyses
17
Report other analyses done—eg, analyses of 
subgroups and interactions, and sensitivity 
analyses.
—
—
Discussion 
Key results
18
Summarise key results with reference to 
study objectives.
—
—
Limitations
19
Discuss limitations of the study, taking 
into account sources of potential bias or 
imprecision. Discuss both direction and 
magnitude of any potential bias.
19.1: Discuss the implications of using data 
that were not created or collected to answer the 
specific research question(s). Include discussion of 
misclassification bias, unmeasured confounding, 
missing data, and changing eligibility over time, as 
they pertain to the study being reported.
19.1.a: Describe the degree to which the chosen 
database(s) adequately captures the drug 
exposure(s) of interest.
Interpretation
20
Give a cautious overall interpretation of 
results considering objectives, limitations, 
multiplicity of analyses, results from similar 
studies, and other relevant evidence.
—
20.a: Discuss the potential for confounding by 
indication, contraindication or disease severity 
or selection bias (healthy adherer/sick stopper) 
as alternative explanations for the study findings 
when relevant.
Generalisability
21
Discuss the generalisability (external 
validity) of the study results.
—
—
Other information 
Funding
22
Give the source of funding and the role of 
the funders for the present study and, if 
applicable, for the original study on which 
the present article is based.
—
—
Accessibility of protocol, raw data, and programming code
22
—
22.1: Authors should provide information on how 
to access any supplemental information such as the 
study protocol, raw data, or programming code.
—
RECORD=reporting of studies conducted using observational routinely collected data; RECORD-PE=RECORD for pharmacoepidemiological research; STROBE=strengthening the reporting of 
observational studies in epidemiology. This table can be downloaded as a separate document in the web appendix; page numbers can be added electronically to the PDF document.
Table 1 | Continued
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
6 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | the bmj
of these characteristics. Authors should highlight how 
interested readers can access the study protocol. These 
recommendations are needed to enable stakeholders 
to interpret pharmacoepidemiological studies.
Methods (study design)
RECORD-PE item 4.a
Include details of the specific study design (and its 
features) and report the use of multiple designs if used.
Explanation
STROBE recommends that researchers present key 
elements of the study design early in the paper.18 
Because routinely collected health data are typically 
collected in advance of undertaking a study, researchers 
can theoretically use a range of study designs (eg, self 
controlled case-series, cohort or case-control studies) 
or design features (eg, new user designs) depending on 
the research question. Use of a range of study designs 
within papers was not directly considered by RECORD. 
Two aspects of pharmacoepidemiological research 
warrant an extension to the STROBE statement. Firstly, 
researchers in the field often use specific study design 
features (eg, the active comparator new user design) 
not covered by existing STROBE guidance. Secondly, it 
is common to use more than one such design or design 
feature in one publication. Readers should be able to 
determine which study designs or design features were 
used. This information will facilitate those readers 
interested in replicating the methods used.
Study authors should describe such study designs or 
design features with as much detail as is necessary to 
make clear to readers what the design involved. If using 
multiple study designs or design features, authors 
should comment on which was used for the primary 
analysis. Authors also should comment on and justify 
deviations from any study protocol or explicitly state 
that there was no changes from the protocol.
Examples
Specific design feature (active comparator new user 
design)—“A new-user cohort design was used to 
compare patients initiating dabigatran or rivaroxaban 
at standard doses for treatment of non valvular 
AF [atrial fibrillation]. We identified all patients 
with any inpatient or outpatient diagnoses of AF or 
atrial flutter, based on International Classification of 
Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9), coding, who filled 
their first prescription for either drug from November 
4, 2011, when rivaroxaban was approved for AF in the 
United States, through June 30, 2014. Patients were 
excluded if they had less than 6 months of enrolment 
in Medicare Parts A, B, and D, were younger than 65 
years, had received prior treatment with warfarin 
or any NOAC [novel oral anticoagulant], resided in 
a skilled nursing facility or nursing home, or were 
receiving hospice care on the date of their cohort-
qualifying prescription (index date) . . . Because our 
purpose was to directly compare dabigatran and 
rivaroxaban, we did not include a warfarin-treated 
cohort.”26
Specific design feature (interrupted time series 
analysis)—“To estimate trend changes in antibiotic 
prescribing over time, we used segmented linear 
regression analysis of interrupted time series data, a 
common quasi-experimental method to assess trend 
changes after clearly defined events. Separately for 
each birth week cohort, we estimated the 1-year risk of 
redeeming at least 1 prescription for an antibiotic, with 
subanalysis for amoxicillin and penicillin V.”27
Specific design feature (drug utilisation/evaluation of 
the effectiveness of risk minimisation interventions)—
“Following a centralised authorisation within the 
European Union, on 1 August 2011, dabigatran was 
marketed in two doses (either 150 or 110 mg bid) for 
stroke prevention in patients with NVAF [non-valvular 
atrial fibrillation] and having one or more stroke risk 
factors. . . . Following early post-marketing reports of 
bleedings, cautionary recommendations were issued 
by regulatory authorities. In the safety update from 
the European Medicines Agency (EMA) (18 November 
2011), it was recommended that low doses should 
be prescribed to elderly patients. Also, this update 
emphasised the importance of monitoring of renal 
function, in particular in patients over 75 years. The 
impact of this safety update, as well as the features of 
the framework previously described, is assessed in the 
case study described below.”28
RECORD-PE item 4.b
The use of a diagram(s) is recommended to illustrate 
key aspects of the study design(s), including exposure, 
washout, lag and observation periods, and covariate 
definitions as relevant.
Explanation
We recommend the inclusion of a diagram or figure 
that illustrates the overall study design or timeline 
for patient inclusion (including key study aspects 
such as prescription start and end, risk periods, 
exposed periods, unexposed periods, grace periods, 
induction periods, and washout periods). Exposure 
periods are complex in pharmacoepidemiology and 
are often difficult for readers to follow; this item was 
not specifically recommended by RECORD. If more 
than one type of design or analysis is included in 
the study, a diagram for each is recommended. This 
allows potentially complex analysis designs, including 
multiple at-risk periods between or within patients, 
to be visually summarised in a way that can prevent 
misinterpretation of paragraphs of text describing the 
design and implementation.
Examples
Illustration of exposure assessment periods in self 
controlled case series studies—a paper by Douglas and 
colleagues29 relates to the use of orlistat and risk of 
acute liver injury and contains a figure describing a 
typical timeline for a patient in the study (fig 1). The 
study used a self controlled case series design, and 
the diagram provides an example of the distribution 
of unexposed and exposed periods for one patient 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 
7
(baseline, pretreatment, and multiple time periods of 
orlistat exposure) and highlights the liver injury risk 
periods.
Illustration of exposure assessment periods in 
cohort studies—this study by Kim and colleagues30 on 
tolciluzimab use and the risk for cardiovascular events 
describes an active comparator new user comparing 
two biological medicines to treat rheumatoid arthritis 
(fig 2). The figure shows two key inclusion criteria (use 
of ≥1 biological medicine and a diagnosis of rheumatoid 
arthritis without prior exposure to the specific drug), 
and the follow-up periods for the two exposure groups, 
including washout windows. Time periods are clearly 
marked and censoring events described.
Methods (setting)
RECORD-PE items
No additional RECORD-PE items are needed to broaden 
the existing STROBE items.
Explanation
As discussed in the RECORD explanatory document, 
readers need to understand both the reasons and 
context of data collection to be able assess the 
potential for information bias, for example, were the 
data collected for clinical care or billing purposes. 
Readers also should be able to determine whether 
the population in the database represents the source 
population in order to evaluate the generalisability of 
findings.
Methods (participants)
RECORD-PE item 6.1.a
Describe the study entry criteria and the order in 
which these criteria were applied to identify the 
study population. Specify whether only users with a 
specific indication were included and whether patients 
were allowed to enter the study population once 
or if multiple entries were permitted. See below for 
guidance related to matched designs.
Explanation
When patients are included in a study on the basis of 
their exposure status to one (or more) drugs, there are 
likely to be several ways of defining the entry criteria; 
hence an extension to RECORD is required. We refer 
here to three levels of population hierarchy described 
in detail in the RECORD explanatory text—namely, 
the source population, database population, and 
study population. In many Scandinavian databases, 
the source population and database population 
might represent the same individuals because they 
comprise the entire population of the specific country.1 
The database population is derived from the study 
population and contains people who meet eligibility 
criteria (eg, in the case of primary care databases, they 
are in primary care practices and have not opted out of 
inclusion in the database). It is important to provide 
details of the inclusion and exclusion criteria applied 
to identify the study population, which includes 
clearly specification of how exposure status and other 
eligibility criteria are defined. Authors should also be 
clear whether the exclusion criteria are applied before 
or after selection of study entry dates. Reporting these 
details would greatly enhance study reproducibility 
and ability to evaluate the relevance and validity of 
findings.
A detailed description of matching procedures 
should be provided. For control sampling, the time 
axis on which the risk set or incidence density 
sampling was conducted should also be reported. The 
procedure for handling cases without eligible controls 
should be explained (eg, loosening of matching 
criteria, exclusion). A description should further 
include whether frequency or individual matching 
was used, whether matching was done with or without 
replacement, and the algorithm used (eg, greedy v 
nearest neighbour matching).
Examples of selection of the population
A study by van Staa and colleagues included users of 
oral corticosteroids who were defined as “permanently 
registered patients aged 18 years or older who received 
one or more prescriptions for oral corticosteroids 
during the period of time from the enrolment date 
in their practice in GPRD up to the end of the study 
(December 1997).”31
Shin and colleagues report: “The index date for cases 
was defined by the day of follow-up on which hospital 
admission occurred. For each case, up to 10 controls 
were randomly selected using risk set sampling, with 
controls matched on sex, age (±1 year), cohort entry 
date (±90 days), and follow-up duration; for one case, 
the age caliper was widened to 2 years to identify an 
eligible control.”32
Methods (variables)
RECORD-PE item 7.1.a
Describe how the drug exposure definition was 
developed.
Explanation
Authors should specify clearly how drug exposure code 
lists were obtained. This information could include 
which dictionary was searched (eg, the Anatomical 
Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification, or database 
or country specific codes such as the National Drug 
Codes in the US)33 and how these dictionaries or data 
sources were searched (eg, automated or manual), 
as well as which drug substance name(s) and what 
route of administration was used for the search and 
which ATC classification level was applied. This level 
of detail allows readers to interpret the completeness 
and veracity of the exposure definition and permits 
replication of study findings, and goes beyond the 
detail of RECORD.
Example
Defining the drug exposure definition—“The main 
exposures evaluated were first-trimester exposure to 
any antidepressants (medications with Anatomical 
Therapeutic Chemical Classification [ATC] codes 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
8 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | the bmj
beginning with N06A) and selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; medications with ATC 
codes beginning with N06AB). Exposure was defined 
according to two sources of information: maternal 
self-reports (available for offspring born between 
1996 and 2012) and dispensation records (available 
for both parents of offspring born between 2006 and 
2012). Information about maternal self-reported 
medication use during the first trimester of pregnancy 
came from the Medical Birth Register . . . Information 
about medication use based on dispensation records 
came from the Prescribed Drug Register, which covers 
all medication dispensations and accompanying 
prescriptions written in Sweden since July 2005.”34
RECORD-PE item 7.1.b
Specify the data sources from which drug exposure 
information for individuals was obtained.
Explanation
Authors should make clear what the data source 
is and whether the electronic records represent 
issued prescriptions from electronic health records 
or redeemed prescriptions. Readers also need to 
understand whether a database contains information 
on 
reimbursed 
prescriptions, 
out-of-network 
dispensations, drugs directly dispensed by healthcare 
providers (samples), or over-the-counter drug use and 
the completeness of these variables.
Example
Specifying the data sources for drug exposure 
identification—“In Denmark, the study population 
included users of OHAs [oral hypoglycaemic agents] 
identified in the Aarhus University Prescription 
Database (AUPD). The database’s catchment area covers 
the North and Central Regions of Denmark (hereafter 
referred to as ‘northern Denmark’), with a combined 
population in mid-2010 of 1.8 million persons, which 
is about one-third of the Danish population. AUPD 
captures reimbursed prescriptions redeemed in the 
regions’ outpatient pharmacies since 1998. In the UK, 
OHA users were identified from the General Practice 
Research Database (GPRD), currently also known as 
the Clinical Practice Research Datalink.”35
RECORD-PE item 7.1.c
Describe the time window(s) during which an 
individual is considered exposed to the drug(s). The 
rationale for selecting a particular time window should 
be provided. The extent of potential left truncation or 
left censoring should be specified.
Explanation
The time of exposure can be, for instance, the number 
of days after the start of a first prescription (see also 
recommendation for figure in RECORD-PE item 4). 
The number of days may be derived from the number 
of tablets prescribed, the number of recorded refills, 
or the number of tablets taken per day for the stated 
or assumed indication. Frequently, for researchers 
using routinely collected health data, there might be 
no access to data regarding the instructions for taking 
the medicine. Readers should be able to know whether 
duration was assumed, based on usual prescribing or 
directly ascertained from instructions. A description of 
specific variables generated in association with drug 
exposure also should be provided. These could include 
variables capturing information related to dosage 
information or the total number of prescriptions 
redeemed within a defined period. Examples include 
duration, cumulative dose, and recency (that is, 
current, new, recent, former use). Authors should 
specify whether only initiators or both initiators 
and prevalent users are included. They should 
clearly outline whether they included new users and 
treatment naive new users by defining the required 
washout period before a patient is categorised as new 
user (eg, a new user, by contrast to a treatment naive 
new user, could be a re-initiator). Authors should 
detail assumptions about the prescribed daily dose (if 
not recorded), the duration of prescription coverage, 
and the length of grace periods used in defining 
characteristics such as switching, discontinuation, 
persistence, and adherence.36
To account for variation in refill behaviour, refills 
that are sufficiently close together usually are 
considered to represent continuous use. A drug is often 
considered discontinued, in the absence of a new refill, 
if a prespecified time interval goes past the assumed 
expiration date supplied in a given prescription 
(based on the estimated number of days prescribed). 
This issue could be important in systems such as 
electronic health records, which have variable coding 
dates. Readers may want to consult recently published 
recommendations on how to compute such durations 
of exposure and how to report methodology.37 The 
definition of the exposed period also can be used 
to assess the outcome of discontinuation. Because 
prescription or redemption records are an imperfect 
measure of true drug intake, the algorithms and 
assumptions used by authors to define exposed time 
should be reported. Different definitions of the exposed 
period can be examined by researchers in sensitivity 
analyses, which should be reported in the manuscript 
or appendices.
In routinely collected health data, issues of left or 
right truncation and censoring might also affect the 
definition of drug exposure and outcome data, and 
might result in important misclassification and bias—
hence, these issues should be reported in publications 
of routinely collected health data.38 For example, right 
truncation could exist in an electronic health records 
setting because patients transfer between practices or 
within administrative systems if they become ineligible 
for insurance coverage; decisions around these aspects 
should be made clear to the reader.
Examples of defining exposure time windows
Patorno and colleagues report: “Exposure was defined 
as at least one filled prescription for lithium during 
the first trimester (first 90 days after the date of the 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 
9
last menstrual period). The primary reference group 
included women with no lithium or lamotrigine 
dispensings during the 3 months before the start of 
pregnancy or during the first trimester. The criterion 
of no dispensing during the 3 months before the start 
of pregnancy was imposed to avoid misclassifying as 
unexposed women who still had medications from an 
earlier filling available at the start of pregnancy.”39
Larivée and colleagues report: “As is true with 
most healthcare databases, data are left truncated, 
resulting in the incomplete capture of medical 
history and previous use of medications. This issue is 
particularly important in insurance databases, where 
no information is available outside of the coverage 
period, and databases such as US Medicare, which 
only cover patients aged 65 years or older. This 
truncation is partially mitigated in the CPRD [Clinical 
Practice Research Datalink] by the transfer of patient 
records from one practice to another when patients 
change practices, but such transfers are only feasible 
between practices that use the same software and it is 
not possible to link patient records across practices.”40
RECORD-PE item 7.1.d
Justify how events are attributed to current, prior, ever, 
or cumulative drug exposure.
Explanation
In pharmacoepidemiological studies, it is common 
to compare rates of adverse events between two 
drug groups or two or more periods. The adverse 
event rate is defined as the number of adverse events 
divided by the total time at risk for a given exposure. 
It is important to consider and report transparently 
how the time at risk is defined. The definition 
of time at risk depends on the pharmacokinetic 
properties of the drug, the nature of the endpoint of 
interest, patient related factors, and the plausible 
hypothesis about the induction period linking the 
drug and the endpoint. Outcomes can be attributed 
to drug exposure anywhere along the spectrum 
from “currently exposed” to “ever exposed” when a 
binary exposure variable is considered. Another risk 
attribution model within this spectrum is “on drug 
plus a lag window.” In this model, an event can be 
attributed to treatment for a given time period beyond 
drug discontinuation, thereby allowing time for the 
drug to continue having a residual effect within the 
body, or for delayed presentation of the outcome. 
Different risk attribution models can lead to different 
conclusions based on the same data. This issue 
has led to guidelines for rheumatology biological 
medicine registers, suggesting that research groups 
use similar risk attribution models when addressing 
the same research question, to increase comparability 
of findings.41 When defining the risk attribution 
model, researchers may also consider the possibility 
of protopathic bias, for example, starting a drug to 
treat early symptoms of the undiagnosed outcome.42 If 
protopathic bias is possible, authors should describe 
it in their manuscript.
Example
Describing how events are attributed to drug exposure—
[In the] “statistical analysis TB [tuberculosis] cases 
were attributed to anti-TNF [tumour necrosis factor] 
therapy using two different models: “on drug” (if the 
patient was actively receiving that drug at the time of 
diagnosis) and “most recent drug.”43
RECORD-PE item 7.1.e
When examining drug dose and risk attribution, 
describe how current treatment, historical treatment, 
or time on treatment are considered.
Explanation
The risk of an adverse event could be influenced by 
current or historical treatment. Therefore, researchers 
should look at how current and past drug exposure are 
considered in analyses. Modelling only current use, 
either as a binary variable or as current dose, assumes 
that previous use has no effect on the outcome of 
interest. Recent use, such as exposure in the past 30 
days, allows historical exposure to be considered, but 
assumes that exposure 29 days ago was important 
but exposure 31 days ago was not. Selection of an 
appropriate risk window varies according to the 
research question and the biological mechanism 
through which the exposure might lead to the outcome. 
For example, historical drug exposure is unlikely to 
influence a hypersensitivity reaction today, while drug 
exposure months or years ago could contribute to 
current risk of malignancy.44 Complex models, such 
as the weighted cumulative exposure model, allow 
history of drug use to be modelled flexibly up to the 
time point when risk is assessed.45 Although no model 
is perfect, researchers should consider and report 
how past exposure was taken into consideration. The 
approach for handling individuals who were exposed 
to more than one of the drug exposures of interest 
during the study period also should be outlined and 
authors will want to report their approach to time 
varying confounding. Authors might also want to 
directly address the issue of depletion of susceptible 
people or healthy adherer bias.46 47
Examples describing how current and historical 
exposures are considered
Movahedi and colleagues report: “Because 
of 
uncertainty about mechanisms linking glucocorticoid 
(GC) exposure and diabetes mellitus (DM), we 
fitted 7 conventional models, each using a different 
representation of time-varying GC exposure . . . Models 
5 and 6 used continuous time-varying measures of 
cumulative dose until a given time point, either in the 
last year or since study entry, respectively. Model 7 
categorized cumulative dose since cohort entry, with 
cutoff points (based on quartiles) at 0, 960, 3,055, and 
7,300 mg PED [prednisolone equivalent dose].”48
Larivée and colleagues report: “The aim of this study 
was to describe the challenge of studying the risk of 
VTE [venous thromboembolism] among first-time 
users of drospirenone-containing COCs [combined oral 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
10 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | the bmj
contraceptives] in a healthcare database and assess the 
risk among first-time users and restarters . . . The first-
time user cohort included all women aged 16-45 years 
who received a first ever prescription of drospirenone- 
or levonorgestrel-containing COCs between May 2002 
and March 2015. The restarter cohort included those 
who were restarting a COC after a period of non-use of 
≥6 months.”40
RECORD-PE item 7.1.f
Use of any comparator groups should be outlined and 
justified.
Explanation
Confounding by indication has also been called an 
“intractable” bias in epidemiology,49 because the 
choice of treatment is guided foremost by the risk of 
a particular outcome; hence this item has particular 
relevance to pharmacoepidemiology. This bias might 
lead to strong confounding, perhaps greater than that 
arising from associations due to underlying common 
causes. Moreover, the degree of confounding by 
indication is difficult to assess, because it is based on 
an expected prognosis, and that expectation is formed 
in the mind of an individual health professional 
dealing with an individual patient.
An appropriate choice of a comparator treatment is 
key to reducing confounding by indication or severity 
(see RECORD-PE item 4.a). If there is no comparator 
group or cohort, authors should state why. Clear 
description of the use and justification of comparator 
groups is needed for the assessment of the potential 
for confounding by indication or severity. Comparators 
might include alternative drug exposures for the same 
indication, differing time windows for the same drug 
exposures, use of historical comparators, unexposed 
periods, or unexposed individuals. In the absence of 
randomisation, confounding (by indication) deserves 
close attention. Therefore, researchers can use more 
than one comparison group and make inferences 
based on whether the estimate of association changes 
in response to better control of confounding (eg, 
whether an odds ratio based on an active comparator 
differs with or without adjustment for confounders), 
and these analyses should be reported in the published 
paper. Historical active comparator groups can be 
assembled from routinely collected health data for 
single arm studies or when a contemporaneous active 
comparator is not available; any of these approaches 
should be clearly reported.
Examples of consideration of comparator drugs
In a study examining the association between use of 
antidepressants and pregnancy/offspring outcomes, 
Sujan and colleagues dealt with confounding by 
indication by using exposures during non-relevant 
gestational periods: “To explore whether intrauterine 
exposure was specifically associated with outcomes 
over and above maternal depression treatment around 
the time of pregnancy, associations for maternal first-
trimester antidepressant dispensations were compared 
with associations for dispensations before pregnancy, 
while adjusting for measured pregnancy covariates, 
maternal covariates, and paternal covariates . . . 
Additionally, the fit of models that included separate 
parameters for before-pregnancy dispensations and 
first trimester dispensations were compared with 
models that included 1 parameter for both dispensation 
windows. Paternal first trimester antidepressant 
dispensations were used as a negative control to 
further explore the role of familial confounding.”34
Filion 
and 
colleagues 
report: 
“Our 
primary 
reference group was patients receiving treatment 
with combinations of oral antidiabetic drugs. With 
guidelines recommending that incretin-based drugs 
be used as second-line or third-line therapy, the 
use of this reference group both reduced potential 
confounding by indication and provided a clinically 
relevant treatment comparison.”50
RECORD-PE item 7.1.g
Outline the approach used to handle individuals with 
more than one relevant drug exposure during the study 
period.
Explanation
In a cohort study comparing the incidence of an 
adverse reaction between two or more drug exposures, 
the method of handling individuals who receive 
multiple drugs at the start of their exposure period 
(or drug 1 initially, followed by drug 2) should be 
described to enable readers to interpret findings (see 
also RECORD-PE items 7.1.d and 7.1.e). Some studies 
exclude patients who, according to the prescription or 
dispensing record, receive more than one treatment 
at the same time at cohort entry, since attribution of 
risk is difficult. Censoring is used most often if more 
than one treatment is experienced during follow-up 
(see below). Alternatively, exposure to more than one 
treatment (eg, while switching from an old treatment 
to a novel treatment) can be handled through time 
varying exposure, whereby each patient’s person time 
is segmented, based on the dispensing record, with 
appropriate methods for handling time dependent 
confounding (eg, marginal structural models, g 
estimation). The approach taken by authors should 
be reported transparently, including defining risk 
attribution models and lag periods.
Examples of handling multiple drug exposures
Use 
of 
time 
varying 
exposures 
was 
reported 
clearly 
by 
Xue 
and colleagues in an international pharmacovigilance 
study of women with postmenopausal osteoporosis 
treated with denosumab: “because a large proportion 
of new Prolia users may have been previously treated 
with a bisphosphonate, a new-user designwhich 
mitigates biases associated with previous treatments, 
if adopted, will be based on a very small number of 
patients. Also, patients with osteoporosis tend to 
switch treatments over time, so an open-cohort design 
combined with an ‘as treated’ analysis was selected to 
account for time-varying medication exposure.”51
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 
11
Wong and colleagues report: “Based on age within 
five years, sex, and calendar year at use, we matched 
one clarithromycin user with one or two amoxicillin 
users. In both groups we excluded patients who had 
been prescribed clarithromycin up to four years before 
the date of first antibiotic prescription during the 
observation period. However, amoxicillin users could 
be classified as using clarithromycin at a later date. 
The observation period commenced from the date 
of the first antibiotic prescription (index date) and 
ended at the earliest occurrence of the outcome, death, 
subsequent use of clarithromycin or amoxicillin, or 
end of study (31 December 2012).”52
Methods (data sources)
RECORD-PE item 8.a
Describe the healthcare system and mechanisms for 
generating the drug exposure records. Specify the care 
setting in which the drug(s) of interest was prescribed.
Explanation
The type of healthcare system, the characteristics 
of patients for whom drug data are available, and 
the extent to which patients are reimbursed for 
prescription drugs could affect the likelihood of drug 
use, and the likelihood of a record of drug use being 
included in the study data—for example, formulary 
restrictions could preclude the use of drugs. 
Understanding this context will be important for 
interpretation of generalisability or understanding 
the limitations in availability of drugs in different 
settings. For example, although Canada has a 
government funded, universal healthcare system, 
some provinces reimburse all prescription drug costs, 
whereas other provinces only cover drug costs in 
specific age groups or in people with low incomes 
who are receiving social assistance. In this second 
group of provinces, supplemental private insurance 
might be common among non-covered groups, 
and therefore drug records could be incomplete in 
provincial health administrative data. This missing 
information could result in partial ascertainment, 
because complete prescription records are available 
only for certain patients. Left truncation also could 
create bias if public insurance coverage is available 
only for older patients. Therefore, characteristics of 
the health system and context of drug data collection 
should be provided.
Examples describing the healthcare system within 
which drugs were prescribed
Larivée and colleagues report: “Restarters of COCs 
[drospirenone-containing combined oral contraceptives] 
can also be misclassified as first-time users in UK 
databases as oral contraceptives are commonly 
prescribed at family planning clinics (i.e., community 
contraception clinics, genitourinary medicine clinics, 
sexual health clinics). In England, approximately 7.9% 
of women aged under 16 attended a family planning 
clinic from 2009 to 2010 and 21.5% of women aged 
16–19 years visited a family planning clinic from 2008 
to 2009. The CPRD [Clinical Practice Research Datalink] 
only captures prescriptions issued by the general 
practitioner, and the availability of oral contraceptives 
at family planning clinics makes the identification of 
first-time users difficult. To attempt to overcome this 
issue, we applied several exclusion criteria, such as 
the exclusion of all women with previous prescriptions 
for hormonal contraception issued by the general 
practitioner and those with diagnostic codes indicating 
previous use of hormonal contraception. In addition, we 
excluded all women with a diagnostic or referral code 
indicating previous visits to a family planning clinic any 
time before cohort entry.”40
Khan and colleagues report: “Using unique patient 
identifiers, stroke patients identified in the registry 
were linked to the Ontario Drug Benefits Database, 
which contains information on antihypertensive drug 
prescriptions, including the quantity and dates of 
drugs dispensed as well as the number of days supplied 
from each prescription, for patients ≥65 years of age. 
Residents may fill prescriptions at any outpatient 
pharmacy in Ontario with a maximum copayment of 
$6.11 (Canadian) for each prescription after a yearly 
$100 (Canadian) deductible. Low income seniors have 
a $2 (Canadian) maximum copayment with no yearly 
deductible. Using postal codes, patients in the registry 
are also linked to data from the 2006 Canada Census to 
determine median neighborhood income.”53
Methods (bias)
RECORD-PE items
No items specific to the RECORD-PE guidelines are 
needed in addition to the RECORD and STROBE items.
Explanation
Biased studies are characterised by systematic 
error in observed associations, and readers need to 
understand the approaches taken to manage bias 
in order for them to judge whether the results are 
biased. Several potential biases are likely to arise 
within pharmacoepidemiological studies, and could 
be more prominent when routinely collected data are 
used. Recent papers describing use of triangulation 
could be helpful in discussions about bias.54 The 
ROBINS-I (risk of bias in non-randomised studies of 
interventions) tool might also help to focus discussions 
of bias.55 We list below some potential sources of bias 
in pharmacoepidemiological studies that should be 
reported.
• 
Confounding 
in 
pharmacoepidemiological 
analyses might be addressed by design or 
analytical approaches.56 Examples of designs or 
design features include the use of self controlled 
case series, instrumental variables, regression 
discontinuity design, and active comparators. 
Examples of analytical approaches include 
the use of multivariable regression analysis or 
propensity scores, although these approaches 
will not guarantee absence of confounding. 
The study design or analytical approach 
used to address confounding should be 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
12 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | the bmj
reported, and the authors should note in the 
discussion the extent to which these methods 
potentially addressed or failed to address the 
risk of confounding. If more than one method 
was used, authors should make clear which 
approach was the main analysis and which 
were sensitivity analyses.
• 
For example, in studies applying the propensity 
score 
methodology 
to 
handle 
baseline 
confounding, the method of propensity score 
estimation should be reported (eg, logistic 
regression). These scores can be used to adjust 
for baseline confounding by several methods: 
propensity score matching, propensity score 
stratification, 
covariate 
adjustment, 
and 
inverse probability of treatment weighting.57 
The specific approach (or approaches) used 
should be clearly described, together with 
any attempts to assess the similarities of the 
resulting treated and untreated groups for each 
baseline variable.58 59 If investigators have used 
trimming approaches, they should discuss the 
resulting number of excluded participants. In 
particular, high dimensional proxy adjustment 
based on propensity score methods has been 
reported to reduce residual confounding in 
studies using claims data and if this approach 
is used, it should be described.60 Lists of 
empirically identified potential confounders 
should be reported in online appendices.39 
If other approaches (such as instrumental 
variables) were used, these should be clearly 
described in the publication with similar detail 
to those outlined for propensity scores.61
• 
Of particular relevance when considering 
confounding in studies of drug treatment 
is the type of treatment effect that the non-
interventional study is attempting to measure. 
Types include the intention-to-treat effect 
(the comparative effect of being assigned to 
treatment strategies at baseline carried forward, 
regardless of whether study individuals adhere 
to the specific treatment) and the as-treated 
effect (the comparative effect of a drug while it is 
actually used). In cases in which observational 
studies based on routinely collected data are 
designed to emulate a hypothetical or real trial, 
authors should clearly specify any relevant 
existing or hypothetical trial that is being 
emulated. For studies that allow individuals to 
switch drug treatments as part of the analysis, 
the role of potential time varying confounders 
should be considered and reported in the text, 
along with details of any complex statistical 
methods applied (such as inverse probability 
weighting of marginal structural models). For 
example, in their study of the effect of aspirin 
on cardiovascular mortality,62 Cook and 
colleagues include a directed acyclical graph 
of the hypothetical relation between aspirin 
use, cardiovascular death, and intervening 
cardiovascular events to show the role of non-
fatal cardiovascular events as potential time 
varying confounders or intermediate steps 
in the association between aspirin use and 
cardiovascular mortality.
• 
Confounding by health status (healthy initiator 
bias or depletion of susceptibles) can be dealt 
with at the design stage by aligning the start of 
observation with treatment initiation (the active 
comparator new user design; see RECORD-PE 
item 4.a). The reasoning behind the decision to 
use such a design feature as well as the extent to 
which selection bias was or was not addressed 
should be discussed.
• 
Information 
and 
selection 
bias 
due 
to 
potential misclassification of drug exposure 
by prescription or redemption records can be 
dealt with in a sensitivity analysis that includes 
different definitions of exposures (eg, when 
different algorithms are used to define duration 
of prescribing episodes63). An alternative 
approach is to include only people with more 
than one prescription or redemption over a 
given period (eg, within six months), because 
those individuals with just one prescription 
or redemption might never have used the 
treatment. Use of different washout periods to 
define new episodes of treatment could also 
affect the interpretation of data. Each issue 
should be clearly described and discussed in 
reports of pharmacoepidemiological studies 
based on routinely collected health data.
Methods (statistical methods)
RECORD-PE item 12a
Describe the methods used to evaluate whether the 
assumptions have been met.
Explanation
In reporting all study designs, authors should discuss 
whether the underlying study assumptions have been 
met. A failure of the assumptions being met could 
undermine the methods used. Determining whether 
the methods used were appropriate, given the data, 
is important for readers to understand whether the 
resulting analysis requires further consideration. 
A pharmacoepidemiological example is the use of 
self controlled studies, in which participants act as 
their own controls, and include the case crossover 
design and self controlled case series studies.64 When 
applying the self controlled case series method, 
several assumptions must be met to obtain valid 
and unbiased estimates,65 for instance, exposure 
to the drug of interest must not be influenced by a 
previous outcome event.66 67 Authors should specify 
clearly how the assumptions of self controlled 
or other study designs were evaluated. Detailed 
guidance on the conduct and reporting of self 
controlled case series are beyond the scope of these 
guidelines, but are currently being developed by 
the SCOPE (self controlled crossover observational 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 
13
pharmacoepidemiology) 
initiative.68 
All 
reports 
should explain any assumptions that were not 
evaluated or not met. Discussions should also address 
the possibility of time related bias (eg, immortal time 
bias),69 if these are likely to be a problem.
Example on testing study assumptions
Wilson and colleagues report: “We graphed the 
number of combined endpoint events in the days 
before and after vaccination. In the self-controlled 
case series model, the date of vaccination serves as 
the index date for exposure for each patient. Previous 
studies have identified that children are at increased 
risk for systemic reactions at different times from 
5–14 days after vaccination . . . Because a priori we 
did not know with certainty the time period following 
vaccination for which there would be an increased risk 
of our combined endpoint, we modified the standard 
self-controlled case series approach by looking for 
an elevation in risk during each post-vaccination 
day up to day 17 . . . We then classified days 20–28 
as unexposed, establishing a washout period in 
between the exposed and unexposed periods . . . 
When multiple events occurred to a given individual, 
the first occurrence of the composite outcome in the 
post-vaccination period was used (e.g., someone 
attending the ER [emergency department] who was 
then admitted would have one event counted in that 
period). The relative incidence rate of the composite 
endpoint during the exposed period compared with 
the unexposed period was analyzed using a fixed 
effects Poisson regression model. This model included 
a term for exposure period and a term for patient, 
thereby allowing each individual to serve as his or 
her own control and accounting for intra-individual 
correlation. An offset term was also included to 
account for the differing durations of the exposed and 
unexposed periods.”70
RECORD-PE item 12.b
Describe and justify the use of multiple designs, design 
features, or analytical approaches.
Explanation
As discussed in RECORD-PE item 4.a, the use 
of multiple designs or design features in the 
same report is a commonly used strategy in 
pharmacoepidemiological studies to assess the 
potential for bias and residual confounding. If 
authors have used multiple approaches to analysis, 
these should be clearly outlined for readers to assess 
strengths and limitations. The authors also should 
state clearly how they approached reproducibility 
across different databases, including issues such 
as variability in coding and healthcare systems. If 
authors used a common data model71 (see the second 
example72 below) to analyse data across different data 
sources, they should describe this and specify which 
common data model they used. If any data pooling 
across data sources was done, the approaches used 
should be described.
Examples describing each design, design feature, or 
analytical approach
Wong and colleagues report: “We used Poisson 
regression to estimate the rate ratios for clarithromycin 
users compared with amoxicillin users during current, 
recent, and past use . . . For the self-controlled case 
series analysis, we estimated incidence rate ratios 
using conditional Poisson regression, comparing the 
rate of events during risk windows with the rate during 
baseline periods . . . we also performed a post hoc case 
crossover analysis, which is not vulnerable to this 
limitation of the self controlled case series. The case 
crossover design is applied for studies investigating the 
association between transient drug use and outcome 
with abrupt time of onset. We estimated odds ratios 
using conditional logistic regression, comparing drug 
use before the event (current period) with that at other 
earlier control periods within patients.”52
But and colleagues report: “The individual-level 
data from the five cohorts were standardised by each 
research partner locally using the common data 
model. We then conducted centralised analyses by 
uploading the unified data to a server at Statistics 
Denmark, where for each cohort we constructed the 
individual-level dataset to assess insulin exposure and 
other variables in exactly the same way. We employed 
a semi-aggregate level approach to combine the 
datasets, which were tabulated by cancer site as the 
number of cancer cases and person-years aggregated 
by categorical variables.”72
Methods (data access and cleaning methods)
RECORD-PE items
No items specific to the RECORD-PE guidelines are 
needed in addition to the RECORD items.
Explanation
RECORD 
states 
that 
“authors 
should 
provide 
information on the data cleaning methods used in the 
study.”1 This information is particularly important 
for 
pharmacoepidemiological 
studies, 
because 
the preparation of drug exposure data is complex 
and reflects serial assumptions that are typically 
not disclosed. Therefore, data cleaning extends 
substantially beyond the removal of outlying values. 
When data require preparation for analysis (eg, 
conversion of raw prescription data to exposed and 
unexposed episodes of person time), authors should be 
transparent about the steps undertaken in cleaning the 
data. These steps might include decisions on deriving 
start and stop dates; and assumptions made when 
instructions on administration instructions provide 
for flexibility (eg, prescriptions as needed), when 
prescriptions are overlapping, and when clinically 
implausible values are encountered.
Results
RECORD-PE items
For the results section, no items specific to RECORD-
PE are needed in addition to the earlier STROBE and 
RECORD recommendations.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
14 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | the bmj
Explanation
STROBE guidelines recommend that researchers 
report the number of individuals included at each 
stage of the study, including reasons for exclusion.18 
The RECORD guidelines further underscore the 
importance of reporting how results were filtered 
based on data quality, availability, and linkage.1 
Use of a flow diagram to illustrate the selection of 
the study population is encouraged by both STROBE 
and RECORD—note that this diagram is distinct from 
the study design diagram discussed in RECORD-
PE item 4.b. A high level of transparency is equally 
important in pharmacoepidemiological studies in 
which additional eligibility criteria are often used 
(eg, based on indications for use, washout periods, 
and lag periods), adding further complexity to the 
selection process. Researchers should report the 
number of participants included at all stages of the 
study, including the analysis stage and for analyses 
performed to assess different objectives (eg, subgroup 
and sensitivity analyses).
Pharmacoepidemiological studies that examine 
adverse drug events or reactions should report 
whether and how researchers assessed or validated 
the outcome on the individual case level (eg, through 
record review by a specialist blinded to the exposure(s) 
under study, in order to try and rule out other more 
likely causes of the event). This process should be 
clear from the text, a table, or a flowchart describing 
how many events were considered to be caused by the 
study drug(s) after record review. Presenting numbers 
of potential cases that lacked sufficient data to be 
classified as non-cases or definite cases (and were 
assigned a final status such as possible or uncertain) is 
also encouraged. In an article by Kaye and colleagues 
on the risk of liver injury associated with use of oral 
antimicrobials, figure 1 provides a good example.73 
Clear delineation of the selection process facilitates 
critical appraisal, applicability, and reproducibility of 
the study findings.
Regarding results from descriptive analyses, STROBE 
recommends that authors present detailed data on 
the distribution of demographic, clinical, and social 
variables, including the number of participants with 
missing data. Missing data are frequently encountered 
in pharmacoepidemiological studies based on routinely 
collected data. In studies using routinely collected 
data, we might not know whether there is non-recorded 
or unmeasured information on diagnoses, symptoms, 
and management. Cohort studies also should provide 
summary measures of follow-up time. For studies 
based on routinely collected data, RECORD does not 
include additional items.1 However, in terms of clinical 
variables, pharmacoepidemiological studies should 
report the distribution of indications for the drug of 
interest. It is also advised that authors summarise 
person time on and off drug exposure, including the 
sensitivity of “at risk” periods to different definitions 
of risk attribution if appropriate. Furthermore, in the 
case of time varying variables, which are increasingly 
used in pharmacoepidemiology, authors should 
consider reporting the number and characteristics of 
individuals with time varying data.
RECORD-PE supports the STROBE recommendations 
for presentation of outcome data, main results, and 
other analyses.18 Thus, researchers should report the 
number of events or summary measures of outcomes 
(or exposures in case-control studies), unadjusted and 
adjusted estimates and their precision, confounder 
variables adjusted for, category boundaries when 
continuous 
variables 
are 
categorised, 
absolute 
measures of risk for a meaningful time period (if 
relevant), and other analyses performed (including 
subgroup, interaction, and sensitivity analyses). 
Authors should present the results determined 
using the different approaches, which could include 
conventional methods and more complex approaches.
If multiple approaches have been used in an 
attempt to account for confounding (eg, matching 
and adjustment), the results of all methods should be 
presented and any differences discussed. It is advisable 
to present descriptive results showing covariate 
distribution (number and percentages) in exposure 
groups before propensity score matching, as well as 
the distribution after propensity score matching if 
appropriate. Authors should explicitly state whether an 
analysis was prespecified or post hoc. Researchers also 
are advised to report in detail the results of analyses 
used to explore and handle missing data, which are 
frequently encountered in pharmacoepidemiological 
studies based on routinely collected data.
Discussion (limitations)
RECORD-PE item 19.1.a
Describe the degree to which the chosen database(s) 
adequately captures the drug exposure(s) of interest.
Explanation
Authors should report whether the drug exposure in 
question could be ascertained by an alternative source, 
if not fully captured in the database used for the study. 
Some of the explanation outlined in RECORD-PE item 
8.a is also relevant here. An additional issue relates is 
whether a drug exposure of interest could have been 
obtained over the counter, and whether such use is 
captured by the data source.74 If not, authors may 
want to discuss the likely extent of misclassification. 
A similar issue is that if patients are admitted to 
hospital for extended periods and the database does 
not capture inhospital dispensing of drug treatments, 
misclassification also might occur.69 75 Authors 
should also discuss whether the database is likely to 
have had information on diagnoses, symptoms, and 
management, and discuss the implications for study 
findings.
Examples on adequacy of capture of drug exposure 
in database
Weinstein and colleagues report: “This analysis 
was restricted to prescription use of paracetamol 
and ibuprofen, and it is unknown whether these 
results 
would 
generalize 
to 
non-prescription 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 
15
exposures. There are several reasons for a GP 
[general practitioner] to prescribe these medications 
in the CPRD [Clinical Practice Research Datalink], 
including record keeping and giving the patient 
access to the medication at a lower cost because the 
patient qualifies for free filling of prescriptions. In 
addition, those using these medications chronically 
may need larger quantities than typically available 
over the counter. Thus, it is likely that, by relying 
on prescriptions, we skewed our study population 
toward elderly subjects with chronic conditions 
who may also be at the low end of the economic 
spectrum.”76
Suissa reports: “In our illustration, the naive 
approach that does not account for the immeasurable 
hospitalized time during the 30-day period prior 
to the index date estimated a significant 40 percent 
reduction in mortality associated with a prescription 
of inhaled corticosteroids during this period. 
However, there were 806 cases (deaths) that had been 
hospitalized during this same 30-day period and that 
were considered unexposed by this analysis since they 
did not receive a prescription. These cases had spent 
16.2 out of the 30 days in the hospital, time during 
which they could not receive outpatient prescriptions, 
compared with 8.8 days for the corresponding 253 
such controls. In fact, 190 of these 806 cases (24 
percent) had spent the entire 30-day period in the 
hospital, compared with seven of the 253 controls (3 
percent), and could not possibly have received any 
prescription at all.”69
Discussion (interpretation)
RECORD-PE item 20.a
Discuss the potential for confounding by indication, 
contraindication, or disease severity or for selection 
bias (healthy adherer or sick stopper) as alternative 
explanations for the study findings when relevant.
Explanation
As discussed in the methods section, confounding 
by indication is a major issue in interpreting the 
findings 
of 
pharmacoepidemiological 
studies, 
beyond studies of routinely collected data in general. 
Particularly in the case of insurance or billing data 
(such as health administrative data), identification 
of study participants, drug exposures, confounders, 
and outcomes are based on coded data. Little or 
no information might be available to describe the 
indication for drug treatment, personal preferences 
and values of the patient and prescriber, any potential 
contraindications to use, or disease severity, all of 
which could confound the association between the 
drug and the outcome of interest. Even in clinical 
data (such as data from electronic health records), 
the indication or contraindication for drugs might not 
be recorded or might be contained in free text fields, 
and not accessible to investigators using these data 
for pharmacoepidemiological research. Important 
confounding variables thus might not be available 
for investigators or readers of the research report. 
Therefore, to the best of their ability, authors should 
report such potential confounding in the routinely 
collected health data and how the confounding was 
managed overall.
We recommend the inclusion of a clear statement 
in the conclusions (or other discussion section) 
to explain whether the results could be explained 
by confounding by indication. Such a statement 
would help reduce misguided decision making and 
increase the trustworthiness of the evidence and its 
interpretation. This statement could report any post 
hoc analyses designed to evaluate the robustness of 
the finding and alternative explanations—for instance, 
to evaluate whether patients in different exposure 
groups were likely to have been prescribed the drugs 
for similar conditions. If moving of an individual 
to another practice or insurance database cannot 
be tracked, authors should clearly outline whether 
that individual’s person time is unique (that is, only 
considered from the new registration date) and discuss 
the effect of missing past exposures or events on the 
study findings. A histogram of people leaving for 
reasons other than death by year of age also might 
be useful, as well as the age distribution of people 
entering the population.
Further, as per RECORD-PE item 12.1.b, authors 
should include explicit consideration of results from 
different approaches when they have used multiple 
designs, design features, or analytical approaches. 
This information is especially pertinent if such efforts 
yield inconsistent results and thus guidance on 
interpretation is needed.
Examples on alternative explanation for findings
Sujan and colleagues report: “The findings from the 
present study should be considered in light of several 
limitations. First, and most important, observational 
designs such as these cannot fully rule out all sources 
of confounding. In particular, like other register-based 
approaches, this study could not comprehensively 
assess maternal depression or its severity, nor could it 
compare different antidepressant treatment regimens. 
Thus, associations could have been influenced by 
confounding by antidepressant indication . . . the 
study used multiple designs to address this limitation, 
each of which could help rule out some but not all 
sources of confounding, to provide complementary 
evidence. For example, sibling comparisons ruled 
out all stable confounders (e.g., chronic maternal 
depression), but that design may not have been able 
to account for confounding from maternal depression 
that varied across pregnancies. Thus, the within-
family associations with preterm birth may plausibly 
be driven by unmeasured time-varying maternal 
depression rather than by antidepressant use.”34
Filion and colleagues report: “Our study was designed 
to examine the impact of drug formulary restrictions on 
the validity of pharmacoepidemiologic studies using 
the example of fluticasone/salmeterol combination 
therapy. We found that the implementation of these 
restrictions had a profound effect on drug utilization, 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
16 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | the bmj
with the policy resulting in an important decrease in 
the rates of prescription and of new use of fluticasone/
salmeterol. These prescription changes resulted in 
channeling and confounding by indication, with new 
users of fluticasone/salmeterol having a significantly 
higher crude rate of hospitalization for respiratory 
causes during the restricted period (crude HR [hazard 
ratio] = 1.41, 95%CI [confidence interval] = 1.32, 1.51) 
because of the presence of more severe underlying 
respiratory 
disease. 
Adjustment 
for 
potential 
confounders attenuated and reversed the association, 
with new users during the restricted period having 
a significantly lower rate of hospitalization for 
respiratory causes compared with those during the 
liberal period (fully adjusted HR = 0.78, 95%CI = 
0.73, 0.83). These results suggest that drug formulary 
restrictions can result in substantial and unexpected 
confounding by indication that threatens the validity of 
study results. These results also suggest that adjusting 
for patient demographic and clinical characteristics 
is insufficient to account for channeling because of 
formulary restrictions. Consequently, such restrictions 
must be considered in the design and analysis of 
pharmacoepidemiologic studies.”77
Schneeweiss and colleagues report: “Aprotinin 
rather than aminocaproic acid was used in sicker 
patients, and the modest reduction in the relative 
mortality estimates after the control of confounding 
by covariates is consistent with the hypothesis of 
confounding on the basis of indication. Multivariate 
analyses resulted in weaker associations between 
aprotinin and death than those reported in unadjusted 
analyses (unadjusted relative risk, 1.83; adjusted 
relative risk, 1.64). Matching according to propensity 
score permitted us to control for an additional 10 
covariates in a highly selected cohort, which further 
reduced the relative-risk estimate.
“Our analyses were adjusted for some, but not all, 
covariates typically included in risk-prediction scores 
for patients undergoing CABG [coronary artery bypass 
grafting]. However, we adjusted for many covariates 
not typically included, and controlling for proxies 
of confounders results in control of the confounders 
themselves if the proxies capture the relations with the 
true confounding variable, exposure, and outcomes. 
Our joint adjustment for 41 characteristics before 
CABG was performed resulted in the prediction of 
in-hospital death that is as good as that from widely 
accepted clinical risk-prediction models for patients 
undergoing CABG. Prediction was almost identical for 
patients receiving aprotinin and for those receiving 
aminocaproic acid.”78
Discussion of the RECORD-PE checklist
The complete and accurate reporting of research 
is an ethical requirement endorsed by leading 
declarations and recommendations internationally.79 80 
The RECORD-PE guidelines have been developed to 
meet an identified need and are designed to improve 
the reporting of pharmacoepidemiological studies 
undertaken using routinely collected data. They are 
an extension of the STROBE and RECORD statements 
and should be used in conjunction with the existing 
guidelines.1 18 81 RECORD-PE represents a minimum 
standard of reporting and complements a recent set of 
comprehensive methodological and reporting items 
created 
with 
the 
aim 
of 
making 
pharmacoepidemiological 
research more reproducible.22 Better reporting is a 
prerequisite of replication, but replication requires much 
more detail. However, RECORD-PE also guides authors 
on the transparency of reporting and helps readers to 
understand strengths and potential limitations of the 
work. Therefore, RECORD-PE represents a minimum 
standard of reporting for pharmacoepidemiological 
studies undertaken using routinely collected health 
data.
Limitations
We consulted widely in the creation of these 
guidelines, 
including 
international 
experts 
in 
pharmacoepidemiology, journalology, editors, and 
policy makers. Despite wide consultation, we may 
have missed some key points. In addition, members of 
our guideline development working committee were 
primarily from western Europe and North America.
Pharmacoepidemiology is a rapidly changing field 
with frequent new methodological developments, 
reflecting the growth of big data, the development 
of integrated or distributed data systems, and the 
innovative approaches being developed to reduce 
bias associated with the use of non-randomised 
data to assess drug effects. Increasing collaborative 
approaches across traditional geographical and data 
source boundaries are leading to new discoveries 
for patient benefit in pharmacovigilance and 
pharmacoepidemiology to overcome problems such 
as sample sizes insufficient to detect less common 
safety signals. We have included some recent 
developments briefly in this article, for example, the 
use of common data models. We recognise that these 
guidelines will need to be updated to encompass 
new developments.
The RECORD-PE guidelines are an extension of the 
STROBE guidelines for non-interventional research, 
hence the focus of these guidelines is largely on non-
interventional research in pharmacoepidemiology. 
There is much discussion in the literature about 
whether the term “observational” should be 
used as opposed to the term “non-interventional 
studies,” because all studies involve observation. 
For RECORD-PE, we have continued with the term 
“observational” in the title because RECORD-PE 
is an extension of RECORD which, in turn, is an 
extension of the STROBE guidance.1 18 We have 
briefly mentioned the use of pragmatic trials using 
routinely collected health data in the RECORD-PE 
guidelines; however, the increasing use of pragmatic 
randomised controlled trials (and particularly the 
development of registry based trials and trials within 
cohorts82 83) will likely necessitate expansion of the 
currently available guidance with both RECORD and 
CONSORT as guiding documents.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 
17
Conclusions of the RECORD-PE checklist
The RECORD-PE statement aims to extend existing 
STROBE and RECORD guidelines providing guidance 
for the reporting of pharmacoepidemiological studies 
using routinely collected data. It aims to enable readers 
to understand what was planned, what was done, 
and what was found in the research. This essential 
information is critical for users of research to optimally 
interpret the findings, including their strengths and 
limitations. Poor research reporting hampers the use 
of research findings and is an important component of 
research waste.84 We anticipate that with increasing 
use of the RECORD-PE guidelines by researchers 
and endorsement and adherence by journal editors, 
the reporting of pharmacoepidemiological research 
undertaken using routinely collected health data will 
improve. The improved transparency and accuracy 
will benefit the research community, and ultimately 
improve patient care.
AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS
1Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of 
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London WC1E 7HT, UK
2Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark
3Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada; 
4School of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, ON, Canada
5Departments of Medicine and of Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and 
Occupational Health, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
6Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish 
General Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada
7Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Clinical Pharmacology, 
Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, 
Utrecht, Netherlands
8Department of Primary Care and Population Health, University 
College London, London, UK
9Arthritis Research UK Centre for Epidemiology, Division of 
Musculoskeletal and Dermatological Sciences, School of Biological 
Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK 
10Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, Toronto, ON, Canada
11Hospital for Sick Children, Department of Paediatrics, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
12ICH Population, Policy, and Practice Programme, University 
College London, Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, 
London, UK
13Basel Institute for Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
Department of Clinical Research, University Hospital Basel, 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland
14Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, 
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
15Julius Global Health, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
Netherlands
16Cochrane Switzerland, Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, 
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
17Department of Pediatrics and School of Epidemiology and Public 
Health, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada
18Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, 
ON, Canada
Contributors: SML and EIB conceived and designed the study, carried 
out the statistical analysis, had full access to all the data in the study, 
take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the 
data analysis, and are guarantors. All authors acquired data, analysed 
and interpreted data, drafted the manuscript, and critically revised 
the manuscript for important intellectual content. The corresponding 
author attests that all listed authors meet authorship criteria and that 
no others meeting the criteria have been omitted.
Funding: We gratefully acknowledge funding from the International 
Society for Pharmacoepidemiology as well as comments received 
from its membership. SML is supported by a Wellcome Senior Clinical 
fellowship in Science (205039/Z/16/Z); EIB is supported by a New 
Investigator Award from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, 
Canadian Association of Gastroenterology, and Crohn’s and Colitis 
Canada; EIB is also supported by the career enhancement programme 
of the Canadian Child Health Clinician Scientist Programme; KBF is 
supported by a salary support award from the Fonds de recherche du 
Québec—Santé (FRQS; Quebec Foundation for Health Research); HTS 
is supported by the Programme for Clinical Research Infrastructure 
(PROCRIN) Programme.
Competing interests: All authors have completed the ICMJE 
uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf 
and declare: main support from the International Society for 
Pharmacoepidemiology for the submitted work; no financial 
relationships with any organisations that might have an interest in the 
submitted work in the previous three years; no other relationships or 
activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.
Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer 
reviewed.
This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, 
for commercial use, provided the original work is properly cited. See: 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
1  
Benchimol  EI, Smeeth  L, Guttmann  A, et al, RECORD  
Working Committee. The REporting of studies Conducted  
using Observational Routinely-collected health Data (RECORD) 
statement. PLoS Med 2015;12:e1001885. 10.1371/journal.
pmed.1001885 
2  
Spasoff  R. Epidemiologic methods for health policy. Oxford University 
Press, 1999.
3  
Mor  A, Petersen  I, Sørensen  HT, Thomsen  RW. Metformin and 
other glucose-lowering drug initiation and rates of community-
based antibiotic use and hospital-treated infections in patients 
with type 2 diabetes: a Danish nationwide population-
based cohort study. BMJ Open 2016;6:e011523. 10.1136/
bmjopen-2016-011523 
4  
Nørgaard  M, Johnsen  SP. How can the research potential of the 
clinical quality databases be maximized? The Danish experience. J 
Intern Med 2016;279:132-40. doi:10.1111/joim.12437 
5  
Hemkens  LG, Contopoulos-Ioannidis  DG, Ioannidis  JP. Current use of 
routinely collected health data to complement randomized controlled 
trials: a meta-epidemiological survey. CMAJ Open 2016;4:E132-40. 
doi:10.9778/cmajo.20150036 
6  
Moher  D, Glasziou  P, Chalmers  I, et al. Increasing value  
and reducing waste in biomedical research: who’s listening?. 
Lancet 2016;387:1573-86. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(15)00307-4 
7  
Canadian Institutes of Health Research. Canada’s strategy for patient-
oriented research. Improving health outcomes through evidence-
informed care. Canadian Institutes of Health Research, 2011.
8  
Hoffman  S, Podgurski  A. The use and misuse of biomedical 
data: is bigger really better? Am J Law Med 2013;39:497-538. 
doi:10.1177/009885881303900401 
9  
Cohen  IG, Amarasingham  R, Shah  A, Xie  B, Lo  B. The legal and 
ethical concerns that arise from using complex predictive analytics in 
health care. Health Aff (Millwood) 2014;33:1139-47. doi:10.1377/
hlthaff.2014.0048 
10  Benchimol  EI, Manuel  DG, To  T, Griffiths  AM, Rabeneck  L, Guttmann  
A. Development and use of reporting guidelines for assessing the 
quality of validation studies of health administrative data. J Clin 
Epidemiol 2011;64:821-9. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2010.10.006 
11  Hemkens  LG, Benchimol  EI, Langan  SM, et al. The reporting 
of studies using routinely collected health data was often 
insufficient. J Clin Epidemiol 2016;79:104-11. doi:10.1016/j.
jclinepi.2016.06.005 
12  Wang  SV, Verpillat  P, Rassen  JA, Patrick  A, Garry  EM, Bartels  DB. 
Transparency and reproducibility of observational cohort studies 
using large healthcare databases. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2016;99:325-
32. doi:10.1002/cpt.329 
13  Altman  DG, Simera  I, Hoey  J, Moher  D, Schulz  K. EQUATOR: 
reporting guidelines for health research. Lancet 2008;371:1149-50. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60505-X 
14  Moher  D, Hopewell  S, Schulz  KF, et al. CONSORT 2010 explanation 
and elaboration: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group 
randomised trials. BMJ 2010;340:c869. doi:10.1136/bmj.c869 
15  Plint  AC, Moher  D, Morrison  A, et al. Does the CONSORT checklist 
improve the quality of reports of randomised controlled trials? A 
systematic review. Med J Aust 2006;185:263-7.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
18 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3532 | BMJ 2018;363:k3532 | the bmj
16  Enhancing the QUAlity and Transparency Of health Research 
(EQUATOR) Network Library 2015. www.equator-network.org/library/. 
Accessed March 7 2015.
17  Nicholls  SG, Quach  P, von Elm  E, et al. The REporting of Studies 
Conducted Using Observational Routinely-Collected Health Data 
(RECORD) Statement: methods for arriving at consensus and 
developing reporting guidelines. PLoS One 2015;10:e0125620. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0125620 
18  von Elm  E, Altman  DG, Egger  M, Pocock  SJ, Gøtzsche  PC, 
Vandenbroucke  JPSTROBE Initiative. The Strengthening 
the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology 
(STROBE) statement: guidelines for reporting observational 
studies. Epidemiology 2007;18:800-4. doi:10.1097/
EDE.0b013e3181577654 
19  Strom  B. Pharmacoepidemiology. 1.What is pharmacoepidemiology? 
Wiley, 2005: 3-16.
20  Dreyer  NA, Schneeweiss  S, McNeil  BJ, et al, GRACE Initiative. 
GRACE principles: recognizing high-quality observational  
studies of comparative effectiveness. Am J Manag 
Care 2010;16:467-71.
21  European Network of Centres for Pharmacoepidemiology and 
Pharmacovigilance (ENCePP). Guide on methodological standards 
in pharmacoepidemiology. 2011. www.encepp.eu/standards_and_
guidances/methodologicalGuide.shtml.
22  Wang  SV, Schneeweiss  S, Berger  ML, et al, joint ISPE-ISPOR 
Special Task Force on Real World Evidence in Health Care Decision 
Making. Reporting to improve reproducibility and facilitate 
validity assessment for healthcare database studies V1.0. 
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2017;26:1018-32. doi:10.1002/
pds.4295 
23  Hernán  MA, Robins  JM. Using big data to emulate a target trial when 
a randomized trial is not available. Am J Epidemiol 2016;183:758-
64. doi:10.1093/aje/kwv254 
24  Sterne  JA, Hernán  MA, Reeves  BC, et al. ROBINS-I: a tool for 
assessing risk of bias in non-randomised studies of interventions. 
BMJ 2016;355:i4919. doi:10.1136/bmj.i4919 
25  Vandenbroucke  JP, von Elm  E, Altman  DG, et al. Strengthening 
the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE): 
explanation and elaboration. PLoS Med 2007;4:e297doi:10.1371/
journal.pmed.0040297.
26  Graham  DJ, Reichman  ME, Wernecke  M, et al. Stroke, 
bleeding, and mortality risks in elderly Medicare beneficiaries 
treated with dabigatran or rivaroxaban for nonvalvular atrial 
fibrillation. JAMA Intern Med 2016;176:1662-71. doi:10.1001/
jamainternmed.2016.5954 
27  Kinlaw  AC, Stürmer  T, Lund  JL, et al. Trends in antibiotic use by 
birth season and birth year. Pediatrics 2017;140:e20170441. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2017-0441 
28  Nyeland  ME, Laursen  MV, Callréus  T. Evaluating the effectiveness 
of risk minimisation measures: the application of a conceptual 
framework to Danish real-world dabigatran data. Pharmacoepidemiol 
Drug Saf 2017;26:607-14. doi:10.1002/pds.4203 
29  Douglas  IJ, Langham  J, Bhaskaran  K, Brauer  R, Smeeth  L. Orlistat 
and the risk of acute liver injury: self controlled case series study 
in UK Clinical Practice Research Datalink. BMJ 2013;346:f1936. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.f1936 
30  Kim  SC, Solomon  DH, Rogers  JR, et al. Cardiovascular safety of 
tocilizumab versus tumor necrosis factor inhibitors in patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis: a multi-database cohort study. Arthritis 
Rheumatol 2017;69:1154-64. doi:10.1002/art.40084 
31  van Staa  TP, Leufkens  HG, Abenhaim  L, Begaud  B, Zhang  B, 
Cooper  C. Use of oral corticosteroids in the United Kingdom. 
QJM 2000;93:105-11. doi:10.1093/qjmed/93.2.105 
32  Shin  JY, Eberg  M, Ernst  P, Filion  KB. Statin potency and the risk 
of hospitalization for community-acquired pneumonia. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol 2017;83:1319-27. doi:10.1111/bcp.13208 
33  Huerta  C, Abbing-Karahagopian  V, Requena  G, et al.  
Exposure to benzodiazepines (anxiolytics, hypnotics and  
related drugs) in seven European electronic healthcare  
databases: a cross-national descriptive study from the  
PROTECT-EU Project. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf  
2016;25(suppl 1):56-65. doi:10.1002/pds.3825 
34  Sujan  AC, Rickert  ME, Öberg  AS, et al. Associations of maternal 
antidepressant use during the first trimester of pregnancy 
with preterm birth, small for gestational age, autism spectrum 
disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in offspring. 
JAMA 2017;317:1553-62. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.3413 
35  Ehrenstein  V, Hernandez  RK, Ulrichsen  SP, et al. Rosiglitazone 
use and post-discontinuation glycaemic control in two European 
countries, 2000-2010. BMJ Open 2013;3:e003424. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2013-003424 
36  Vrijens  B, Vincze  G, Kristanto  P, Urquhart  J, Burnier  M. Adherence 
to prescribed antihypertensive drug treatments: longitudinal study 
of electronically compiled dosing histories. BMJ 2008;336:1114-7. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.39553.670231.25 
37  Pye  SR, Sheppard  T, Joseph  RM, et al. Assumptions made when 
preparing drug exposure data for analysis have an impact on results: An 
unreported step in pharmacoepidemiology studies. Pharmacoepidemiol 
Drug Saf 2018;27:781-8. doi:10.1002/pds.4440 
38  Vandenbroucke  J, Pearce  N. Point: incident exposures, prevalent 
exposures, and causal inference: does limiting studies to persons 
who are followed from first exposure onward damage epidemiology? 
Am J Epidemiol 2015;182:826-33. doi:10.1093/aje/kwv225 
39  Patorno  E, Huybrechts  KF, Bateman  BT, et al. Lithium use 
in pregnancy and the risk of cardiac malformations. N Engl J 
Med 2017;376:2245-54. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1612222 
40  Larivée  N, Suissa  S, Coulombe  J, Tagalakis  V, Filion  KB. 
Drospirenone-containing oral contraceptive pills and the risk of 
venous thromboembolism: an assessment of risk in first-time users 
and restarters. Drug Saf 2017;40:583-96. doi:10.1007/s40264-
017-0525-2 
41  Dixon  WG, Carmona  L, Finckh  A, et al. EULAR points to consider 
when establishing, analysing and reporting safety data of biologics 
registers in rheumatology. Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69:1596-602. 
doi:10.1136/ard.2009.125526 
42  Horwitz  RI, Feinstein  AR. The problem of “protopathic bias” in 
case-control studies. Am J Med 1980;68:255-8. doi:10.1016/0002-
9343(80)90363-0 
43  Dixon  WG, Hyrich  KL, Watson  KD, et al, BSRBR Control Centre 
ConsortiumBSR Biologics Register. Drug-specific risk of tuberculosis in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with anti-TNF therapy: results 
from the British Society for Rheumatology Biologics Register (BSRBR). 
Ann Rheum Dis 2010;69:522-8. doi:10.1136/ard.2009.118935 
44  Pottegård  A, Friis  S, Stürmer  T, et al. Considerations for 
pharmacoepidemiological studies of drug-cancer associations. Basic 
Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 2018;122:451-9. doi:10.1111/bcpt.12946 
45  Abrahamowicz  M, Beauchamp  ME, Sylvestre  MP. Comparison of 
alternative models for linking drug exposure with adverse effects. 
Stat Med 2012;31:1014-30. doi:10.1002/sim.4343 
46  Moride  Y, Abenhaim  L. Evidence of the depletion of susceptibles effect 
in non-experimental pharmacoepidemiologic research [correction in: J 
Clin Epidemiol 2004;57:111]. J Clin Epidemiol 1994;47:731-7. 
47  Guess  HA. Behavior of the exposure odds ratio in a case-control 
study when the hazard function is not constant over time. J Clin 
Epidemiol 1989;42:1179-84. doi:10.1016/0895-4356(89)90116-9 
48  Movahedi  M, Beauchamp  ME, Abrahamowicz  M, et al. Risk of 
incident diabetes mellitus associated with the dosage and duration 
of oral glucocorticoid therapy in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
Arthritis Rheumatol 2016;68:1089-98.
49  Miettinen  OS. The need for randomization in the study of intended 
effects. Stat Med 1983;2:267-71. doi:10.1002/sim.4780020222 
50  Filion  KB, Azoulay  L, Platt  RW, et al, CNODES Investigators. A 
multicenter observational study of incretin-based drugs and 
heart failure. N Engl J Med 2016;374:1145-54. doi:10.1056/
NEJMoa1506115 
51  Xue  F, Ma  H, Stehman-Breen  C, et al, Denosumab Global Safety 
Assessment Team. Design and methods of a postmarketing 
pharmacoepidemiology study assessing long-term safety of Prolia 
(denosumab) for the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. 
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2013;22:1107-14.
52  Wong  AY, Root  A, Douglas  IJ, et al. Cardiovascular outcomes 
associated with use of clarithromycin: population based study. 
BMJ 2016;352:h6926. doi:10.1136/bmj.h6926 
53  Khan  NA, Yun  L, Humphries  K, Kapral  M. Antihypertensive 
drug use and adherence after stroke: are there sex differences?. 
Stroke 2010;41:1445-9. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.579375 
54  Lawlor  DA, Tilling  K, Davey Smith  G. Triangulation in aetiological 
epidemiology. Int J Epidemiol 2016;45:1866-86.
55  Sterne  JA, Hernán  MA, Reeves  BC, et al. ROBINS-I: a tool for 
assessing risk of bias in non-randomised studies of interventions. 
BMJ 2016;355:i4919. doi:10.1136/bmj.i4919 
56  Schneeweiss  S, Avorn  J. A review of uses of health care utilization 
databases for epidemiologic research on therapeutics. J Clin 
Epidemiol 2005;58:323-37. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2004.10.012 
57  Williamson  EJ, Forbes  A. Introduction to propensity scores. 
Respirology 2014;19:625-35. doi:10.1111/resp.12312 
58  Austin  PC. Balance diagnostics for comparing the distribution of 
baseline covariates between treatment groups in propensity-score 
matched samples. Stat Med 2009;28:3083-107. doi:10.1002/
sim.3697 
59  Stürmer  T, Schneeweiss  S, Brookhart  MA, Rothman  KJ, Avorn  
J, Glynn  RJ. Analytic strategies to adjust confounding using 
exposure propensity scores and disease risk scores: nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs and short-term mortality in the elderly. Am J 
Epidemiol 2005;161:891-8. doi:10.1093/aje/kwi106 
60  Schneeweiss  S, Rassen  JA, Glynn  RJ, Avorn  J, Mogun  
H, Brookhart  MA. High-dimensional propensity score 
adjustment in studies of treatment effects using health care 
claims data. Epidemiology 2009;20:512-22. doi:10.1097/
EDE.0b013e3181a663cc 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions 
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
61  Swanson  SA, Hernán  MA. Commentary: how to 
report instrumental variable analyses (suggestions 
welcome). Epidemiology 2013;24:370-4. doi:10.1097/
EDE.0b013e31828d0590 
62  Cook  NR, Cole  SR, Hennekens  CH. Use of a marginal structural 
model to determine the effect of aspirin on cardiovascular mortality 
in the Physicians’ Health Study. Am J Epidemiol 2002;155:1045-53. 
doi:10.1093/aje/155.11.1045 
63  Støvring  H, Pottegård  A, Hallas  J. Refining estimates of prescription 
durations by using observed covariates in pharmacoepidemiological 
databases: an application of the reverse waiting time distribution. 
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2017;26:900-8. doi:10.1002/
pds.4216 
64  Gault  N, Castañeda-Sanabria  J, De Rycke  Y, Guillo  S, Foulon  S, 
Tubach  F. Self-controlled designs in pharmacoepidemiology 
involving electronic healthcare databases: a systematic review. BMC 
Med Res Methodol 2017;17:25. doi:10.1186/s12874-016-0278-0 
65  Petersen  I, Douglas  I, Whitaker  H. Self controlled case series 
methods: an alternative to standard epidemiological study designs. 
BMJ 2016;354:i4515. doi:10.1136/bmj.i4515 
66  Whitaker  H. The self controlled case series method. 
BMJ 2008;337:a1069. doi:10.1136/bmj.a1069 
67  Whitaker  HJ, Farrington  CP, Spiessens  B, Musonda  P. Tutorial 
in biostatistics: the self-controlled case series method. Stat 
Med 2006;25:1768-97. doi:10.1002/sim.2302 
68  Cadarette  S, Tadrous  M, Delaney  J, et al. Control yourself: 
guidance for the application and reporting of self-controlled study 
designs in pharmacoepidemiology. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug 
Saf 2017;26(suppl 2):3.
69  Suissa  S. Immeasurable time bias in observational studies of 
drug effects on mortality. Am J Epidemiol 2008;168:329-35. 
doi:10.1093/aje/kwn135 
70  Wilson  K, Hawken  S, Kwong  JC, et al. Adverse events following 12 
and 18 month vaccinations: a population-based, self-controlled case 
series analysis. PLoS One 2011;6:e27897. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0027897 
71  Reisinger  SJ, Ryan  PB, O’Hara  DJ, et al. Development  
and evaluation of a common data model enabling active  
drug safety surveillance using disparate healthcare databases. 
J Am Med Inform Assoc 2010;17:652-62. doi:10.1136/
jamia.2009.002477 
72  But  A, De Bruin  ML, Bazelier  MT, et al. Cancer risk among insulin 
users: comparing analogues with human insulin in the CARING 
five-country cohort study. Diabetologia 2017;60:1691-703. 
doi:10.1007/s00125-017-4312-5 
73  Kaye  JA, Castellsague  J, Bui  CL, et al. Risk of acute liver 
injury associated with the use of moxifloxacin and other oral 
antimicrobials: a retrospective, population-based cohort study. 
Pharmacotherapy 2014;34:336-49. doi:10.1002/phar.1367 
74  Schmidt  M, Hallas  J, Friis  S. Potential of prescription registries to 
capture individual-level use of aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs in Denmark: trends in utilization 1999-2012. 
Clin Epidemiol 2014;6:155-68. doi:10.2147/CLEP.S59156 
75  Suissa  S. Co-morbidity in COPD: the effects of cardiovascular drug 
therapies. Respiration 2010;80:3-7. doi:10.1159/000315387 
76  Weinstein  RB, Ryan  P, Berlin  JA, et al. Channeling in the use 
of nonprescription paracetamol and ibuprofen in an electronic 
medical records database: evidence and implications. Drug 
Saf 2017;40:1279-92. doi:10.1007/s40264-017-0581-7 
77  Filion  KB, Eberg  M, Ernst  P. Confounding by drug formulary 
restriction in pharmacoepidemiologic research. Pharmacoepidemiol 
Drug Saf 2016;25:278-86. doi:10.1002/pds.3923 
78  Schneeweiss  S, Seeger  JD, Landon  J, Walker  AM. Aprotinin 
during coronary-artery bypass grafting and risk of death. N Engl J 
Med 2008;358:771-83. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa0707571 
79  Nicholls  SG, Langan  SM, Benchimol  EI. Reporting and transparency 
in big data: the nexus of ethics and methodology. In: Mittelstadt  
BD, Floridi  L, eds. The ethics of biomedical big data . Springer 
International Publishing, 2016:339-65. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-
33525-4_15.
80  Nicholls  SG, Langan  SM, Benchimol  EI, Moher  D. Reporting 
transparency: making the ethical mandate explicit. BMC 
Med 2016;14:44. doi:10.1186/s12916-016-0587-5 
81  Etminan  M. Reporting guidelines for pharmacoepidemiological 
studies are urgently needed. BMJ 2014;349:g5511. doi:10.1136/
bmj.g5511 
82  Mathes  T, Buehn  S, Prengel  P, Pieper  D. Registry-based randomized 
controlled trials merged the strength of randomized controlled trails 
and observational studies and give rise to more pragmatic trials. J 
Clin Epidemiol 2018;93:120-7. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2017.09.017 
83  Mc Cord  KA, Al-Shahi Salman  R, Treweek  S, et al. Routinely collected 
data for randomized trials: promises, barriers, and implications. 
Trials 2018;19:29. doi:10.1186/s13063-017-2394-5 
84  Glasziou  P, Altman  DG, Bossuyt  P, et al. Reducing waste 
from incomplete or unusable reports of biomedical research. 
Lancet 2014;383:267-76. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62228-X
Supplementary table 1: Glossary of terms
Supplementary table 2: RECORD-PE checklist
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.k3532 on 14 November 2018. Downloaded from 
