 PERSPECTIVE
published: 23 January 2019
doi: 10.3389/fped.2018.00415
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
1
January 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 415
Edited by:
Kenneth Joseph Friedman,
University of New Jersey,
United States
Reviewed by:
Terence Dwight Naumann,
University of Vermont, United States
Malcolm S. Schwartz,
Drexel University, United States
*Correspondence:
Charles W. Lapp
cwlapp@drlapp.net
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Pediatric Neurology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Pediatrics
Received: 25 October 2018
Accepted: 13 December 2018
Published: 23 January 2019
Citation:
Lapp CW (2019) Initiating Care of a
Patient With Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome (ME/CFS).
Front. Pediatr. 6:415.
doi: 10.3389/fped.2018.00415
Initiating Care of a Patient With
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS)
Charles W. Lapp*
Hunter-Hopkins Center PLLC, Charlotte, NC, United States
This paper introduces the primary care physician to the unique and challenging aspects
of initially diagnosing and managing a complex condition for which there are a plethora
of symptoms, few physical findings, no known cause, and no specific treatments. While
daunting, the rewards are many, and those who pursue an interest in ME/CFS find
themselves at the forefront of medicine.
Keywords: myalgia, encephalomyelitis, chronic fatigue, patient care, management—healthcare
The approach to any complex problem is to break it down into small steps, and ME/CFS is no
exception. The first office visit should be devoted to a history of the present illness, a physical
examination, and collection of exclusionary laboratory tests. On follow-up the differential diagnosis
and a treatment plan can be addressed. Many individuals with ME/CFS have been humiliated or
dismissed by other providers, so one will need to be as non-judgmental as possible and acknowledge
that ME/CFS is not a psychological condition but a real illness. They need reassurance that you will
work with them to seek a unifying diagnosis and prioritize management.
HISTORY OF THE PRESENT ILLNESS
At the start of the interview process it is helpful to know the patient’s chief concerns, focusing at
first on the major symptoms. Since most patients are seeking to confirm a diagnosis of ME/CFS, you
may wish to clarify the core symptoms (1). By “fatigue” does the patient mean a lack of energy and
stamina, or more sleepiness? If the former, does he or she describe exertion intolerance and post-
exertional malaise after over-exertion? Is this fatigue severe enough to markedly affect lifestyle,
work or educational activities? Is there chronic widespread pain? If so, is it severe enough to
affect mood, mobility, and sleep? Is he or she experiencing new or different headaches? Does the
patient report significant problems with attention, concentration, comprehension, short term
memory loss, recall, multitasking, distractibility, forgetfulness, difficulty with mental math (like
making change or calculating a tip), disorientation or confusion? Are there changes in the sleep
pattern or non-restorative sleep? Is he or she noting orthostatic dizziness, “stars,” tunnel vision,
or feeling uncomfortable standing in place?
In addition to these core symptoms of ME/CFS, many patients have co-morbidities including
fibromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome, overactive bladder, sicca syndrome (dry eyes and mouth),
dysautonomia, and others (Table 1). Thus, a detailed review of symptoms is important, and a large
list of co-morbidities is supportive of the diagnosis.
In 2015, the Institute of Medicine provided a simple and practical diagnostic tool that
practitioners might find helpful for screening (1):
 Lapp
Care of Patient With ME/CFS
The diagnosis requires that the patient have the following three symptoms:
A substantial reduction or impairment in the ability to engage in pre-illness levels of
occupational, educational, social or personal activities, that persists for more than 6
months and is accompanied by fatigue, which is often profound, is of new or definite
onset (not lifelong), is not the result of excessive ongoing exertion, and is not
substantially alleviated by rest.
Post-exertional malaise
Un-refreshing sleep
At least one of the two following manifestations is also required:
Cognitive impairment
Orthostatic intolerance
The diagnosis of ME/CFS should be questioned if patients do not have these
symptoms at least half of the time with moderate, substantial, or severe intensity.
This is meant to be a preliminary diagnostic tool. If the
diagnosis seems probable it is best to confirm it with a
more detailed instrument such as the Canadian Consensus
Criteria (Appendix A in Supplementary Material) or the 1994
International Diagnostic Criteria (Appendix B in Supplementary
Material).
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
It has been said that the physical examination is mostly normal in
ME/CFS, but a careful exam can reveal many clues to this illness.
The physical is also used to exclude other plausible causes for
fatigue and other symptoms:
• The resting heart rate is typically higher than normal and body
temperature may be subnormal.
• Blood pressures tend to be low. It is important to check
orthostatic heart rate and blood pressure supine, after 1–
2 min standing, and again after 5 min standing since many
individuals have orthostatic hypotension or tachycardia
(POTS) (2). A smaller number have Neurally Mediated
Hypotension, but this is a delayed phenomenon that usually
does not occur before 15–20 min of upright posture (3).
• Slowly reacting, non-reacting, or unequal pupils may reflect
parasympathetic imbalance.
• Check for temperomandibular joint tenderness or crepitus.
• Non-exudative pharyngitis with “crimson crescents” in the
posterior pharynx is frequently seen (4).
• Check for cervical, occipital, and axillary lymphadenopathy or
tenderness.
• Check for carotidynia.
• Muscle tension in the neck and shoulders will frequently cause
a loss of cervical lordosis and/or forward (“sniffing”) posture.
• Right upper quadrant tenderness without guard or rebound is
common.
• Tenderness of the sacroiliac joints is very common.
• Check for joint hyperextensibility (5).
• Perform a manual tender point examination for fibromyalgia
tender points or have the patient complete the 2011 clinical
fibromyalgia survey (6).
• Finger-to-nose and rapid alternating movements may reveal
dysmetria, dysdiadokinesia, or tremor.
TABLE 1 | ME/CFS overlap syndromes.
These co-morbidities have been associated with ME/CFS or occur more
commonly in Persons with Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (PWCs) than the general
population:
Fibromyalgia
Myofascial Pain Syndrome
Irritable Bowel Syndrome
Overactive bladder or Interstitial Cystitis
Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome
Neurally Mediated Hypotension
Mast Cell Activation Syndrome
Hypogonadism and premature menopause
Sleep disorders (sleep apnea, myoclonus / PLMS, non-restorative sleep)
Restless Leg Syndrome / Periodic Leg Movement syndrome
Multiple Chemical Sensitivities
Hypersensitivities to light, sound, smell, touch, chemicals or odors
Sacroiliac joint tenderness
Hypoglycemia
Mitral valve prolapse
Premenstrual Syndrome or Premenstural Dysphoric Disorder
Allergies
Vasomotor (autonomic or non-allergic) rhinitis
B12 deficiency
Gut motility disorder with dysphagia, early satiety, nausea, and/or constipation
Celiac- or sprue-like disorders with sensitivity to wheat, grains, or gluten
Autonomic dysfunction with low blood pressure, orthostatic symptoms
Sicca complex or Sjogren’s syndrome
Bronchostriction (reactive airways or asthma)
Macrocytosis (large red cells, causes low sedimentation rate)
Abdomino-pelvic pain
Vulvodynia or vulvar vestibulitis
Joint hyperlaxity with or without hyperelasticity (Ehlers-Danlos Stigmata)
Milk protein intolerance
Costochondritis
Endometriosis
Metabolic Syndrome
Temperomandibular Dysfunction
• Balance testing and tandem stance (10 s) is frequently tenuous
in patients.
• Romberg testing is frequently abnormal and may correlate
with illness severity (7).
• Check deep tendon reflexes. Asymmetry and clonus are
significant.
• Is there acne rosacea, livido reticularis, or dependent rubor?
• Ask the subject to perform Serial 7 Subtractions and the Digit
Span Test.
LABORATORY
Lab studies are mostly performed to exclude other plausible
causes for fatigue and are generally unremarkable. The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention has recommended (8):
Complete blood count (CBC).
Comprehensive
Metabolic
Panel
(electrolytes,
BUN,
creatinine, glucose, calcium, phosphorus, total protein,
albumin,
globulin,
alkaline
phosphatase,
SGOT/ALT,
SGPT/AST).
C-reactive protein or Westergren sedimentation rate.
Thyroid function tests.
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
2
January 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 415
 Lapp
Care of Patient With ME/CFS
TSH is least important due to HPA Axis suppression in
ME/CFS.
Free T4 and/or total T3.
Urinalysis.
Additionally, obtain any other laboratory studies indicated by
your history and exam, such as:
ANA, Rheumatoid Factor or anti-CCP antibodies.
Cranial MRI if Multiple Sclerosis or other neurological
disorder suspected, although small T2 weighted high intensity
white matter lesions are seen in about 80% of cases.
Overnight sleep study (primary sleep disorders such as apnea
and periodic leg movement syndrome occur in up to 60% of
patients).
Sjogren’s antibodies [SSA (Ro)/SSB (La)] if dry eyes and
mouth are present.
Lyme serology (ELISA) or Western Blot if patient has had
tick exposure or comes from an endemic area (Northeast US,
Wisconsin area, California, and others).
Hepatitis C serology if “at risk” or has had elevated liver
function tests.
CPK if muscle tenderness is present and myositis is suspected.
Obtain consultation if a significant psychiatric condition is
present or suspected.
EXCLUSIONARY CONDITIONS, MIMICS,
AND FALSE DIAGNOSES
A grave concern with ME/CFS is that the symptoms are so
diverse that other conditions may seem to overlap, and one
does not want to diagnose ME/CFS when another, perhaps
treatable, condition is actually at fault. Of course, a diagnosis of
ME/CFS should not be entertained if there is an active medical
condition such as narcolepsy or thyroiditis that could plausibly
explain the fatigue and other symptoms. Some disorders
confound the diagnosis so profoundly that they exclude the
diagnosis of ME/CFS. These include melancholic depression,
bipolar depression, schizophrenia, frank psychoses, active eating
disorders, alcohol and substance abuse. Individuals with a
BMI > 40–45 actually experience so much fatigue that it is
difficult to discriminate from ME/CFS. Conditions such as sleep
apnea, sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel disease, and rheumatic
conditions can all cause fatigue but if they are treated and
stable the fatigue and systemic symptoms are generally much
less than experienced in persons with ME/CFS and would not
be considered exclusions. If there is a questionable diagnosis,
then a diagnosis of Idiopathic Chronic Fatigue should be made,
and the patient followed periodically over time (Diagram 1 in
Supplementary Material).
MANAGEMENT
Many patients will be seeking rapid relief and even a cure for
their illness, but foremost they must have realistic expectations:
ME/CFS is a chronic illness for which there is currently no known
cure. Nevertheless, there are many treatments that can be helpful
to reduce symptoms and improve functionality.
Most experts would agree (9) that it is most important
to address exertion intolerance and post-exertional malaise
first; then sleep and pain, followed by cognition and the
co-morbidities. Experts will agree that patients must avoid over-
exerting and then flaring or relapsing—referred to as “pushing
and crashing”—which clearly exacerbates the illness and hinders
improvement. The controversy surrounds how to best prevent
that.
One technique is interval activity or time-based activity. If an
individual knows that they can be active for a period of time
without triggering symptoms—say 15 min—then he or she can
shop or work for 15 min, take a break, then shop or work for
another 15 min, and so on. Over time, the activity interval can
be increased (10).
Another technique is to monitor steps per day by wearing a
step meter or pedometer (11). It is important for patients to take
at least 1,000 steps per day in order to avoid deconditioning; but
patients are encouraged to calculate their average steps per day
during a good week with no flares or relapses. This is typically
about 2,500–3,500 steps per day. They are then encouraged to
not exceed that number of steps. So if a patient went shopping or
sightseeing one day and reached her average limit of 3,500 steps,
she would know to quit and rest as soon as possible to avoid a
flare or relapse.
Scientific evidence is mounting that patients should not
exceed their Anaerobic Threshold, an activity level at which
the heart and lungs cannot supply enough oxygen to the
mitochondria. In the absence of oxygen, glucose metabolism is
much less efficient and produces lactic acid and other toxins that
seem detrimental to our patients. The Anaerobic Threshold is
usually determined by specialized exercise testing, but is related
to one’s heart rate. So if a patient can monitor heart rate, he or
she can estimate the maximum heart rate (frequently under 110
in adults) that can be tolerated without triggering a flare. Then
avoid exceeding that heart rate except for short periods (12).
In short, it is very important to balance any activity with
generous amounts of rest. So the patient should be encouraged
to remain active, but not so active as to trigger flares and relapses.
Sleep is the next most important area to address. Start with
typical sleep hygiene principles. Patients may consider over-
the-counter sleep aids such as melatonin, theanine, valerian,
tryptophan, antihistamines (diphenhydramine, doxylamine),
or proprietary sleep aids. Low dose tricyclic or tetracyclic
antidepressants, cyclobenzaprine, or low dose tizanidine are
frequently prescribed to maintain sleep. If necessary, consider
prescribing the usual benzodiazepine -based sleep medications
to initiate sleep. Between 18 and 62% of persons with ME/CFS
have primary sleep disorders, so highly consider referral to a sleep
specialist if a sleep disorder is suspected (13).
Pain is another major symptom to address as it may affect
sleep, mood, mobility and other domains. First identify the
sources of pain: Fibromyalgia? Myofascial pain? Headache?
Arthralgia? Inflammatory joint pain? Then assess the patient’s
need for pain intervention. Will non-pharmacologic therapy
suffice such as hot packs, cold packs, liniments, baths or showers,
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
3
January 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 415
 Lapp
Care of Patient With ME/CFS
massage, chiropractic, acupuncture, or TENS? If pharmacologic
therapy is indicated, have non-opioid therapies been tried such as
Cymbalta/duloxetine, Savella/milnacipran, or Lyrica/pregabalin?
(7) In the last 10 years Low Dose Naltrexone has become a
primary consideration in opioid-naïve individuals (14). If opioid
medications are indicated, tramadol has been very effective, but
many providers would be most comfortable referring to a pain
specialist for anything more potent. In the case of migraine or
rheumatic pain, specialists might also be indicated.
Cognitive problems tend to wax and wane, much as fatigue
does. Patients need to be reassured that they are not developing
Alzheimer’s or dementia, and there is no evidence that such
cognitive losses are permanent. While medication has helped
little to improve cognition, the provider can suggest helpful
techniques such as:
• Keep a calendar, notebook and calculator at hand.
• Always carry a cell phone to call for assistance, use as a GPS, or
photograph your location in a parking lot or unfamiliar area.
• Develop the habit of always putting up important items such
as keys, purses, wallets, and glasses in the same place.
• Plan important tasks to be done during the “best time of your
day.”
• Avoid chaotic, stressful, or multisensory situations or events.
Autonomic, (auto)immune, (neuro)endocrine, psychological and
co-morbid issues are managed as you would normally in your
medical practice. It is imperative to address co-morbidities
because they confound the ME/CFS. Consultants may be
required. It is very important not to attribute all new symptoms
to ME/CFS alone. Lastly, patients must maintain adequate
hydration and nutrition although they tend to neglect these areas
due to fatigue.
DISABILITY
It is estimated that more than 50% of persons with ME/CFS
are disabled and up to 75% are unable to work or attend
school regularly (1), so many patients may want to discuss the
possibility of obtaining disability. Those who have a private
disability contract are bound to the terms of that contract, and
need to apply through their human resources department at
work or directly to the insurer. If the policy is work-related it
will probably be governed by ERISA regulations, which are very
stringent. In that case, the individual is highly recommended
to seek the advice of an ERISA-knowledgeable attorney. Those
who apply for Social Security should check with their local Social
Security office first to assure that they qualify with enough work
credits. One must apply for Social Security within 5 years of
stopping work. Patients should expect an initial rejection of their
claim and then move on to an appeal and a hearing before an
Administrative Law Judge. Attorney representation is strongly
urged here.
Regardless of the type of disability insurance, documentation
of disability will be key. The provider must document any
inability
to
perform
Activities
of
Daily
Living
(ADLs:
bathing,
dressing,
feeding
oneself,
toileting,
etc.)
and
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADLS: cooking,
housekeeping, shopping, laundering, socializing, managing
finances, driving, traveling).
In addition it is important
to comment on physical abilities to lift, carry, sit, walk,
or stand; and how often is the patient homebound or
bedbound.
This
information
can
be
obtained
informally
during the interview or by using checklists and forms at each
visit.
Regardless of such testimony, objective evidence is most
important, so supportive findings on the physical exam
(especially orthostatic hypotension or tachycardia on the
“stand test,” Fibromyalgia tender points, abnormal neurological
findings), abnormalities on the cranial MRI, high titers of
EBV VCA-IgG and/or EBV Early Antigen, are very helpful.
If available, neuropsychiatric testing, tilt table testing, and 1-
or 2-day Cardio-Pulmonary Exercise Testing can be extremely
supportive.
MAKING TIME FOR THE PATIENT
Persons with ME/CFS (PWCs) are admittedly very complex
and challenging but eternally grateful for any help that you
provide. Many providers find this challenge both fascinating
and rewarding, but it may also be time consuming. Many of
us who first started seeing PWCs found that we had to limit
the number of such patients seen each week until we developed
proficiency. It was also helpful to see patients regularly—perhaps
every 2–4 weeks—and limit them to 1 or 2 problems at each
visit. Many practitioners will reserve the last appointment of the
day for such patients so that they can spend more time, if they
wish.
A few practitioners will recognize that in order to treat
ME/CFS one needs not only to understand the disorder itself,
but one has to also develop proficiency in the many overlap
disorders/co-morbidities that frequently complement ME/CFS
(Table 1). This requires considerable knowledge and special skill
sets that will challenge the practitioner and provide a lifetime of
learning opportunities! Those who are drawn to care for ME/CFS
full time frequently need to spend more time with patients, and
therefore have to work outside the typical medical office schedule.
Many find it necessary to privately contract with patients and
charge an hourly fee-for-service rate, based on what the provider
could have earned if he or she was seeing 4–6 patients per
hour in a general practice setting. Since Medicare and Medicaid
have no such provisions, it is necessary to opt out of such
programs.
CONCLUSION
ME/CFS is an “invisible illness” in that the patient appears
normal despite tremendous hardship and impairments. For this
reason these patients are frequently dismissed or mistaken as
hypochondriacs. The patients greatly appreciate a provider who
is knowledgeable about ME/CFS and who takes an interest
in the disorder and is empathetic to their cause. Because
ME/CFS is a chronic illness, regular follow-up and continuity
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
4
January 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 415
 Lapp
Care of Patient With ME/CFS
of care is extremely important. Also, due to the many co-
morbidities, one provider should assume the role of “gatekeeper”
or “monitor” and provide a central source of information
and prescriptions for the patient. This provider might follow-
up with the patient on a monthly or quarterly basis; obtain
periodic lab studies; insure that health maintenance is up-to-date;
and maintain a repository of the patient’s outside records and
labs.
Many patients will seek information on the internet. Although
much of the public information is misleading, there are several
sites that can be recommended. These include:
Centers for Disease Control at http://cdc.gov/cfs
New Jersey Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Association at http://
www.njcfsa.org
Massachusetts ME/CFS and FM Association at https://www.
massmecfs.org
Treating CFS & FM: An Integrated Approach at http://www.
treatcfsfm.org
A comprehensive Primer for physicians (2014 edition) can
be found at: http://iacfsme.org/portals/0/pdf/Primer_Post_
2014_conference.pdf.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author confirms being the sole contributor of this work and
has approved it for publication.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fped.
2018.00415/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
1. Institute
of
Medicine.
Beyond
Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome: Redefining an Illness. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press (2015). Available online at: http://www.nationalacademies.
org/hmd/Reports/2015/ME-CFS.aspx (Accessed October 13, 2018).
2. Garland EM, Caledonio JE, Raj SR. Postural tachycardia syndrome:
beyond orthostatic intolerance. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. (2015) 15:60.
doi: 10.1007/s11910-015-0583-8
3. Bou-Holaigah I, Rowe PC, Kan J, Calkins H. The relationship between
neurally mediated hypotension and the chronic fatigue syndrome. JAMA
(1995) 274:961–7.
4. Cunha BA. Crimson crescents—a possible association with the chronic fatigue
syndrome. Ann Intern Med. (1992) 116:347.
5. Hakim A, De Wandele I, O’Callaghan C, Pocinki A, Rowe P. Chronic fatigue
in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome-hypermobile type. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med
Genet. (2017) 175:175–80. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31542
6. Wolfe F, Clauw DJ, Fitzcharles MA, Goldenberg DL, Häuser W, Katz RS,
et al. Fibromyalgia criteria and severity scales for clinical and epidemiological
studies: a modification of the ACR Preliminary Diagnostic Criteria for
Fibromyalgia. J Rheumatol. (2011) 38:1113–22. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.100594
7. Miwa K. A positive Romberg test is associated with more orthostatic
symptoms and illness severity in CFS. In: 12th International IACFS/ME
Research and Clinical Conference. Fort Lauderdale, FL (2016).
8. Fukuda K, Straus SE, Hickie I, Sharpe MC, Dobbins JG, Komaroff A. The
chronic fatigue syndrome: a comprehensive approach to its definition and
study. International Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Study Group. Ann Intern
Med. (1994) 121:953–9.
9. Friedberg F, Bateman L, Bested AC, Davenport T, Friedman KJ, Gurwitt
A, et al. CFS/ME: A Primer for Clinical Practitioners (2014). Available
online at: http://iacfsme.org/portals/0/pdf/Primer_Post_2014_conference.pdf
(Accessed October 14, 2018).
10. Williams PA, Carey M. Improve Your Functioning Through Effective Pacing.
University of Michigan Health Service (2003).
11. Natelson B. Facing and Fighting Fatigue: A Practical Approach. New Haven,
CT: Yale Press (1998).
12. VanNess
JM,
Snell
CR,
Strayer
DR,
Dempsey
L
IV,
Stevens
SR.
Subclassifying chronic fatigue syndrome through exercise testing. Med
Sci Sports Exerc. (2003) 35:908–13. doi: 10.1249/01.MSS.0000069510.587
63.E8
13. Lapp CW. Sleep and CFS/ME/FM. In: 9th International IACFS Research and
Clinical Conference. Reno, NV (2009).
14. Younger J, Parkitny L, McLain D. The use of low-dose naltrexone (LDN) as a
novel anti-inflammatory treatment for chronic pain. Clin Rheumatol. (2014)
33:451–9. doi: 10.1007/s10067-014-2517-2
Conflict of Interest Statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Lapp. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Pediatrics | www.frontiersin.org
5
January 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 415
