 In-patient suicide: selection of people at risk,
failure of protection and the possibility of
causation
Matthew Michael Large, Daniel Thomas Chung, Michael Davidson, Mark Weiser and
Christopher James Ryan
Background
Being a current psychiatric in-patient is one of the strongest
statistical risk factors for suicide. It is usually assumed that this
strong association is not causal but is a result of the
combination of the selection of high-risk patients for admission
and the imperfect protection from suicide afforded by
psychiatric wards. Logically, a third factor, which is causal,
might play a role in the association. It has recently been
suggested that adverse experiences in psychiatric units such
as trauma, stigma and loss of social role might precipitate
some in-patient suicides.
Aims
To consider whether there is a causal association between
psychiatric hospitalisation and suicide.
Method
We used the framework of Austin Bradford Hill’s criteria for
assessing causality in epidemiology to consider the possibility
that psychiatric hospitalisation might causally contribute to the
extent and variation in in-patient suicide rates.
Results
The association between psychiatric hospitalisation and
suicide clearly meets five of the nine Hill’s criteria
(strength of association, consistency, plausibility, coherence
and analogy) and partially meets three of the remaining four
criteria (gradient of exposure, temporality and experimental
evidence).
Conclusions
Admission to hospital itself might play a causal role in
a proportion of in-patient suicides. The safety of being in
hospital with respect to suicide could be examined
with a large-scale randomised controlled trial (RCT). In the
absence of an RCT, the possibility of a causal role provides
further impetus to calls to make care in the community
more available and psychiatric hospitals more acceptable to
patients.
Declaration of interest
M.M.L. and C.J.R. have provided expert testimony in legal
proceedings following in-patient suicide.
Copyright and usage
© The Royal College of Psychiatrists 2017. This is an open
access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Non-Commercial, No Derivatives (CC BY-NC-ND)
license.
Rates of suicide by current psychiatric in-patients greatly exceed
those of the general community. A recent meta-analysis of studies
published worldwide in the past 60 years estimated that current
psychiatric in-patients (including those on approved and unapproved
leave) had a pooled suicide rate of 147 suicides per 100 000 in-patient
years,1 a figure that is more than 12 times global population suicide
rates.2 The meta-analysis also found extraordinary variation in
suicide rates between studies, with the highest reported rate of in-
patient suicide being 10 490 per 100 000 patient years,3 which was
more than a 1000 times higher than the study with the lowest rate of
9 per 100 000 patient years.4 The high between-study variation in
suicide rates was not confined to these two outliers: the first quartile
suicide rate was 99 per 100 000 per annum, the third quartile rate was
808 per 100 000 per annum and the I2 measure of between-study
heterogeneity was 98% of its maximum value. This between-study
variation was partially explained by a significant rise in in-patient
suicide rates over recent decades (Z=6.00, P<0.001). For example, the
pooled rate of in-patient suicides reported worldwide between 1960
and 1979 was 68 per 100 000 patient years, whereas the equivalent
figure for suicides after 1999 was 646 per 100 000 in-patient years,
a rate of suicide that is almost 60 times the 2012 global suicide rate.2
This suggests that in-patient status might confer a higher suicide risk
than any other known suicide risk factor.
When considered as a risk factor for suicide, admission to
hospital is complex and multifaceted. Furthering understanding of
the component factors that contribute to the strength of the
association between in-patient status and suicide might assist in
reducing in-patient suicide rates.
The most obvious and easily accepted reason for the high rate of
psychiatric in-patient suicide is a selection effect. This explanation
posits that the generally high rate of in-patient suicide is because
of patient factors that lead to both admission to hospital and suicide,
factors that include mental illness, suicidal behaviour, substance
dependence, unemployment, marital breakdown and low socio-
economic status. Such a selection effect might also operate by the
earlier discharge of lower-risk patients. Selection might account
for some variation in in-patient suicide rates between studies
because hospitals are likely to vary in their admission and discharge
practices. The rise in in-patient suicide rates over recent decades
and an observed inverse relationship between average length of in-
patient stay and in-patient suicide rates1 both point to the
importance of selection in explaining high rates of in-patient suicide.
Implicit in the belief that high rates of in-patient suicide are a
result of a selection process is an acknowledgment that stays in
hospital do not protect every patient from suicide. Variation in in-
patient suicide rates might also be explained by differences in the
extent to which different wards protect patients from suicide.
Differences in the therapeutic milieu, the built environment, levels
of observation, containment policies and staffing ratios might
all alter in-patient suicide rates. This hypothesis is supported by a
fall in in-patient suicide rates in the UK between 1997 and 2007
that was associated with measures to improve ward safety.5
There can be little doubt about the role of patient selection and
subsequent failures of protection in in-patient suicide rates.
However, these two factors might not be the only explanations for
the high and variable rates of in-patient suicide. In previous papers,
BJPsych Open (2017)
3, 102–105. doi: 10.1192/bjpo.bp.116.004309
102
 we have considered whether factors that can be part of the
experience of admission to hospital, and that are known to be
associated with suicide in the general community, might also be
associated with some in-patient suicides. These factors include
trauma, stigma, despair and loss of social role. If some in-patient
suicides are associated with these factors, they could be labelled
nosocomial suicides.6,7 Differences between hospitals in the extent
to which they cause trauma, stigma, despair and loss of social role
might be an under-recognised, but important, third factor explain-
ing the extent and variation in in-patient suicide rates.
That some suicides might result from the inability of hospitals
to prevent suicide whereas others might be due to elements
intrinsic in the hospital care has parallels in other areas of
medicine. For example, intensive care units prevent many deaths,
but cannot prevent all; and in some instances, factors associated
with intensive care itself, such as hospital-acquired infections, will
cause some deaths that might otherwise not have occurred.8
Although it is well known that microorganisms endemic to
hospitals can cause serious infection and even death, it has rarely
been considered that adverse factors associated with psychiatric
hospitalisation might result in suicide.
In general hospitals, the word ‘nosocomial’ is usually used to
describe a causal association between an organism and a hospital-
acquired infection. Here we use the term to describe suicides that
would not have occurred had the patient not been admitted to a
psychiatric hospital. In both instances, the term nosocomial has the
caveat that it does not imply that being in hospital is the single
cause of the adverse outcome. In relation to infection, host factors
(such as age and debility) and non-hospital treatment factors (such
as the previous use of antibiotics or current use of immunosup-
pressive medication) might also be important causes of a
nosocomial infection. In relation to nosocomial suicide, we
acknowledge that no suicide should be considered to be the result
of any single factor and that host factors are likely to be very
relevant. For example, it is very likely that the patient’s perception
of trauma, stigma, despair and loss of social role is what is most
relevant and that the patient’s perception is likely to be influenced
by their presenting illness and vulnerabilities.
Do observational data support the concept of
nosocomial suicide?
Half a century ago, in a landmark article – ‘The Environment and
Disease: Association or Causation?’ – the English epidemiologist and
statistician Austin Bradford Hill laid out guidelines as to how to
proceed when there is an observed relationship between an environ‐
mental factor and disease that is ‘clear cut, and beyond what we
would care to attribute to the play of chance’ and when experi‐
mental evidence was lacking or not practicable to obtain.9 Using
what was learned from studies of the association between tobacco
smoking and lung cancer, Hill proposed nine criteria that might
influence belief in a causal association over a non-causal association.
We chose to examine the concept of nosocomial suicide using
Hill’s criteria primarily because of their historic role in highlighting
potential risk factors for closer examination with respect to causality.
Although we acknowledge that modern statistical methods can
be used to generate stronger causal inferences than Hill’s criteria
allow,10 databases examining the suicide trajectory of admitted and
not admitted patients are few and the experimental evidence in
relation to admission to hospital and suicide is slight.
Consideration of Hill’s criteria cannot prove that a proportion
of in-patient suicides are nosocomial; Hill did not consider the nine
criteria to be ‘hard-and-fast rules of evidence’. He did not think that
any single criterion was proof of causality, nor that failure to fulfil
any criterion was indisputable evidence against causation. Instead,
he regarded the criteria as an aid to balancing the evidence to ‘help
us to make up our minds on the fundamental question – is there any
other way of explaining the set of facts before us, and is there any
other answer equally, or more likely, than cause and effect?’
Method
Here, we utilise Hill’s criteria to weigh how seriously we should
take the possibility that there might be a causal association
between psychiatric hospitalisation and suicide. Hill’s criteria are
strength, consistency, specificity, temporality, biological gradient
or dose response, plausibility, coherence, experiment and analogy.
Results
Strength
Hill considered that a causal association was more likely when those
exposed to an environmental factor were much more likely to
experience the disease than those not exposed. Hill did not specify
what would constitute a strong association, but the examples he
used – lung cancer among smokers and scrotal cancer among
chimney sweeps – had odds ratios of 10–30 and 200 respectively.
The association between psychiatric hospitalisation and in-patient
suicide is statistically stronger than the association between
smoking and lung cancer. Rates of in-patient suicide of over 600
per 100 000 per annum found in modern psychiatric wards1 are
40 to 120 times higher than annual rates of suicide in the general
community of between 5 and 15 per 100 000.11 A strong association
persists when non-admitted psychiatric patients, rather than the
general community, are considered to be the control group. Rates of
suicide among admitted patients are significantly higher than
never-admitted patients with similar demographics and psychiatric
disorders.12
Consistency
Hill considered that a causal association was more likely when an
association was repeatedly observed by different researchers, in
different places and in different circumstances. Acknowledging that
there is very marked variation in suicide rates described in different
studies, there is a consistent association between in-patient care and
suicide, because rates of in-patient suicide are similarly high in
studies from Australasia, Continental Europe, Nordic countries, the
UK and the USA.1
Specificity
Hill considered that a stronger argument in favour of causation
could be made if those exposed to an environmental factor had
mortality because of the specific disease, but were not at increased
risk of other forms of dying. Although suicide is probably the most
common cause of death in psychiatric hospitals, the qualitative
difference between suicide and other causes of death suggests this
criterion might be less relevant.
Temporality
Although it is straightforwardly the case that gaining in-patient
status comes before in-patient suicide, other temporal aspects are
relevant. Although suicidal ideas and suicidal behaviour commonly
precede admission to hospital and suicide, a meta-analysis found
that the majority of people who completed suicide while they were
in-patients had not expressed suicidal ideation at the point of
admission and were not admitted after suicide attempts.13 In this
sense, some suicidal behaviour is temporally related to psychiatric
hospitalisation. Moreover, the very high rate of suicide immedi-
ately after discharge from hospital14,15 may also represent evidence
of a temporal relationship between being in hospital and suicide.16
103
In-patient suicide
 Biological gradient
Hill considered that belief in a causal association was strengthened
by a ‘dose-response curve’. By this he meant that hypotheses of
causality were consistent with increased rates of disease in those
who incurred a greater dose or exposure to the environmental
factor. Meta-analysis suggests that in-patients with a greater
number of previous admissions to hospital and with longer stays
in hospital are at an increased risk of in-patient suicide compared
with patients with fewer admissions and shorter admissions.13
Although longer admissions might also be associated with more
suicides because of the increased time at risk and patients with
more risk factors for suicide might have longer admissions, neither
of these possibilities excludes a causal dose-related association
between being in hospital and suicide.
Plausibility
Hill considered that a causal association was more likely if there was
an understandable mechanism by which the environmental factor
might be linked to disease. There is a plethora of literature about the
adverse psychosocial consequences of in-patient psychiatric care.
These adversities include humiliation,17 stigmatisation,18 loss of
autonomy,19 perceived trauma20 and exposure to actual violence.21
Psychiatric in-patients can also experience a loss of accommodation
and employment, and losses in social support and social role.22 It is
known that negative emotional states, stigma23 and trauma24 are
associated with suicide in the wider community, and there is no
reason to think this is not the case in in-patient settings. In fact,
it is likely that already vulnerable patients are more susceptible to
the adversity associated with in-patient care.25 Variation in the
type and extent of adversity between hospitals might also explain
some of the variation in in-patient suicide rates.
Coherence
Hill considered that a causal mechanism should not ‘seriously
conflict with the generally known facts of the natural history … of
the disease’. Situational suicide is a well-known phenomenon
referring to self-destruction in a variety of adverse social circum-
stances.26 Moreover, suicide rates are elevated in custodial settings
such as prisons27 and immigration detention centres.28 There is no
incoherence in the notion that admission to hospital might cause
some suicides.
Experiment
Hill considered that experimental or ‘semi-experimental’ evidence
might impact one’s belief with regard to causation. He gave
examples of a change in the degree of exposure resulting in a
change in the incidence of the disease. Psychiatric deinstitutiona-
lisation might be regarded as a ‘semi-experiment’ for our purposes.
Here the results of the relevant studies are conflicting, some finding
psychiatric bed closures were associated with reduction in suicide,29
including in-patient suicides,30 some finding possible increases
in suicide31 and some finding no change in suicide rates.32
Analogy
Hill considered that weaker evidence could be more readily
accepted if there was a similar type of causal association that had
been unequivocally accepted. Although analogy is a weaker form of
argument than argument from specifics, the comparison between
suicides in psychiatric hospitals and hospital-acquired illness,
including infection, surgical accidents and medication errors, is
obvious. In these examples, elements of the stay in hospital
contribute substantially to morbidity and mortality.
Discussion
The relationship between psychiatric hospitalisation and suicide
fulfils five of Hill’s criteria – strength of association, consis‐
tency, plausibility, coherence and analogy. A further three
criteria – temporality, biological gradient and experiment – are
partially met. On weighing these results, the possibility that
nosocomial suicides account for a proportion of in-patient suicides
is worthy of serious consideration. But what more can be done to
investigate the potential relationship between admission to hospital
and suicide and what, if anything, should be done while we await the
results of these investigations?
To date, only two experimental studies have examined the
effects of any form of hospital admission on suicide outcomes.
Neither study had sufficient sample size to examine whether
admission to a hospital saves lives or causes suicide. Waterhouse
& Platt conducted a small randomised controlled trial (RCT) of
admission to a general hospital v. community care after suicide
attempt and found no difference in a variety of outcomes.33
Van de Sande and colleagues conducted a larger RCT comparing
brief admission to a suicide crisis intervention unit with problem-
solving aftercare v. care as usual. They also found no differences in
a variety of outcomes.34
The two RCTs of hospitalisation v. out-patient manage-
ment33,34 suggest that a larger study with suicide as the main
outcome measure might be possible. However, such a study would
face very significant practical and ethical difficulties. The single
biggest methodological issue would be the very large number of
people that would need to be randomised. Compounding the need
for a very large sample size are practical and ethical difficulties
of recruiting patients for randomisation, because it is inevitable
that, at any given crisis point, patients and clinicians will have
preferences for either hospital or community treatment.
If a large-scale RCT could be performed, it would be a very
direct test of whether in-patient psychiatric care caused more
suicides than it prevented. A finding that admission to hospital was
associated with a lower suicide mortality would not totally preclude
the possibility that a smaller number of suicides result from the
adverse effects of being in hospital but it would be very reassuring.
Excess mortality in the hospitalisation arm would be alarming and
would suggest that nosocomial suicides account for an important
proportion of in-patient suicides.
In the final paragraphs of his article, under the heading ‘The
Case for Action’, Hill argued that in deciding whether a known
association could represent causation, we should ‘have to consider
what flows from that decision’. Whether or not to take action on a
suspected causal link would, he said, depend heavily, not only on the
strength of the evidence, but also on the costs of reducing exposure
and the impact of disease to be prevented. Even if we only have
a strong suspicion that some in-patient suicides are a direct result
of psychiatric hospitalisation, it must be the case that the costs of
some efforts to reduce exposure are so low, and the cost and impact
of suicide are so high that we should take some action now.
Perhaps the most obvious step would be to pay more attention
to the adverse aspects of being in hospital from the patient’s
perspective. Perceptions of trauma, stigma and loss of social support
could easily be measured using self-report at the time of discharge.
This sort of administrative clinical data would serve as a driver for
improvements in hospital care and might provide important clinical
information, potentially assisting some patients who have found
hospital care unhelpful. Concerns about nosocomial suicide should
also lead us to seek ways of admitting fewer patients, especially
those patients who might find hospital treatment unacceptable. We
should make greater efforts to maintain and increase resources for
treatment in the community and discover ways to treat patients
Large et al
104
 consensually and in their own homes rather than involuntarily in
hospital. When admission to hospital is unavoidable, as it will often
be, we must maximise the therapeutic aspects of in-patient
psychiatric care and develop suicide-specific prevention strategies.35
We should do whatever possible to make in-patient care less
traumatic and less stigmatising, and we should try to ensure that
patients maintain social roles and social supports during their stay.
We acknowledge that there might be costs associated with
admitting fewer patients, not least because treating patients safely
in their own homes might be more expensive than admitting
them. There might also be costs in measures to improve the
therapeutic elements of hospital admission and in reducing its
adverse aspects. However, we believe that the weight of arguments
is sufficiently strong to support some measures to reduce
nosocomial suicide.
Hill warned that that one should not advocate for change
unless there is strong evidence, but he also emphasised that ‘this
does not imply crossing every “t,” and [crossing] swords with every
critic, before we act’. We agree. Although continued investigation
into the impact of nosocomial suicide is important, we need not
be certain that adverse factors associated with being in hospital
contribute to the high rate of in-patient suicide before we take steps
that might ameliorate them.
Matthew Michael Large, DMedSci FRANZCP, School of Psychiatry, University of New
South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; Daniel Thomas Chung, MD
(candidate), Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia; Michael Davidson, MD, University of Nicosia Medical School,
University of Nicosia, Nicosia, Cyprus; Mark Weiser, MD, Department of Psychiatry,
Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel; Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel; Christopher James Ryan, MBBS, MHL, FRANZCP,
Discipline of Psychiatry and the Centre for Values, Ethics and the Law in Medicine,
University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
Correspondence: Matthew Michael Large, Mental Health Services, The Prince of
Wales Hospitals, Barker Street, Randwick, NSW 2031, Australia. Email: mmclarge@gmail.
com
First received 8 Nov 2016, final revision 25 Feb 2017, accepted 27 Mar 2017
References
1 Walsh G, Sara G, Ryan CJ, Large M. Meta-analysis of suicide rates among
psychiatric in-patients. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2015; 131: 174–84.
2 World Health Organization. Suicide Data. WHO, 2017. Available at http://www.
who.int/mental_health/prevention/suicide/suicideprevent/en/
3 Bassett D, Tsourtos G. Inpatient suicide in a general hospital psychiatric unit. A
consequence of inadequate resources? Gen Hospital Psychiatry 1993; 15: 301–6.
4 Copas JB, Robin A. Suicide in psychiatric in-patients. Br J Psychiatry 1982; 141:
503–11.
5 Kapur N, Hunt IM, Windfuhr K, Rodway C, Webb R, Rahman MS, et al. Psychiatric
in-patient care and suicide in England, 1997 to 2008: a longitudinal study. Psychol
Med 2013; 43: 61–71.
6 Large M, Ryan C, Walsh G, Stein-Parbury J, Patfield M. Nosocomial suicide.
Australas Psychiatry 2014; 22: 118–21.
7 Large MM, Ryan CJ. Disturbing findings about the risk of suicide and psychiatric
hospitals. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2014; 49: 1353–5.
8 Reunes S, Rombaut V, Vogelaers D, Brusselaers N, Lizy C, Cankurtaran M, et al.
Risk factors and mortality for nosocomial bloodstream infections in elderly
patients. Eur J Intern Med 2011; 22: e39–44.
9 Hill AB. The environment and disease: association or causation? Proc R Soc Med
1965; 58: 295–300.
10 Höfler M. The Bradford Hill considerations on causality: a counterfactual
perspective. Emerg Themes Epidemiol 2005; 2: 11.
11 Varnik P. Suicide in the world. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2012; 9: 760–71.
12 Hjorthoj CR, Madsen T, Agerbo E, Nordentoft M. Risk of suicide according to level
of psychiatric treatment: a nationwide nested case-control study. Soc Psychiatry
Psychiatr Epidemiol 2014; 49: 1357–65.
13 Large M, Smith G, Sharma S, Nielssen O, Singh SP. Systematic review and
meta-analysis of the clinical factors associated with the suicide of psychiatric
in-patients. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2011; 124: 18–29.
14 Meehan J, Kapur N, Hunt IM, Turnbull P, Robinson J, Bickley H, et al. Suicide in
mental health in-patients and within 3 months of discharge. National clinical
survey. Br J Psychiatry 2006; 188: 129–34.
15 Qin P, Nordentoft M. Suicide risk in relation to psychiatric hospitalization:
evidence based on longitudinal registers. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2005; 62: 427–32.
16 Chung DT, Ryan CJ, Large MM. Adverse experiences in psychiatric hospitals might
be the cause of some postdischarge suicides. Bull Menninger Clin 2016; 80:
371–5.
17 Svindseth MF, Dahl AA, Hatling T. Patients’ experience of humiliation in the
admission process to acute psychiatric wards. Nord J Psychiatry 2007; 61: 47–53.
18 Moses T. Stigma apprehension among adolescents discharged from brief
psychiatric hospitalization. J Nerv Ment Dis 2011; 199: 778–89.
19 Sheehan KA, Burns T. Perceived coercion and the therapeutic relationship: a
neglected association? Psychiatr Serv 2011; 62: 471–6.
20 Paksarian D, Mojtabai R, Kotov R, Cullen B, Nugent KL, Bromet EJ. Perceived
trauma during hospitalization and treatment participation among individuals with
psychotic disorders. Psychiatr Serv 2014; 65: 266–9.
21 Iozzino L, Ferrari C, Large M, Nielssen O, de Girolamo G. Prevalence and
risk factors of violence by psychiatric acute inpatients: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. PLoS One 2015; 10: e0128536.
22 Kinard EM, Klerman LV. Changes in life style following mental hospitalization.
J Nerv Ment Dis 1980; 168: 666–72.
23 Schomerus G, Evans-Lacko S, Rusch N, Mojtabai R, Angermeyer MC, Thornicroft G.
Collective levels of stigma and national suicide rates in 25 European countries.
Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci 2015; 24: 166–71.
24 Panagioti M, Gooding PA, Tarrier N. Hopelessness, defeat, and entrapment in
posttraumatic stress disorder: their association with suicidal behavior and
severity of depression. J Nerv Ment Dis 2012; 200: 676–83.
25 Gallop R, McCay E, Guha M, Khan P. The experience of hospitalization and
restraint of women who have a history of childhood sexual abuse. Health Care
Women Int 1999; 20: 401–16.
26 Pridmore S, Auchincloss S, Walter G. Predicament suicide: an update. Australas
Psychiatry 2015; 23: 411–4.
27 O’Driscoll C, Samuels A, Zacka M. Suicide in New South Wales Prisons, 1995–
2005: towards a better understanding. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2007; 41: 519–24.
28 Procter NG, De Leo D, Newman L. Suicide and self-harm prevention for people in
immigration detention. Med J Aust 2013; 199: 730–2.
29 Pirkola S, Sohlman B, Heila H, Wahlbeck K. Reductions in postdischarge suicide
after deinstitutionalization and decentralization: a nationwide register study in
Finland. Psychiatr Serv 2007; 58: 221–6.
30 Levi L, Werbeloff N, Pugachova I, Yoffe R, Large M, Davidson M, et al. Has
deinstitutionalization affected inpatient suicide? Psychiatric inpatient suicide
rates between 1990 and 2013 in Israel. Schizophr Res 2016; 173: 75–8.
31 Yoon J, Bruckner TA. Does deinstitutionalization increase suicide? Health Serv Res
2009; 44: 1385–405.
32 Johannessen HA, Dieserud G, Jakhelln F, Zahl PH, De Leo D. Changes in
institutional psychiatric care and suicidal behaviour: a follow-up study of inpatient
suicide attempters in Baerum, Norway. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2009;
44: 845–51.
33 Waterhouse J, Platt S. General hospital admission in the management of
parasuicide. A randomised controlled trial. Br J Psychiatry 1990; 156: 236–42.
34 van der Sande R, van Rooijen L, Buskens E, Allart E, Hawton K, van der Graaf Y,
et al. Intensive in-patient and community intervention versus routine care after
attempted suicide. A randomised controlled intervention study. Br J Psychiatry
1997; 171: 35–41.
35 Ellis TE, Rufino KA, Allen JG, Fowler JC, Jobes DA. Impact of a suicide-specific
intervention within inpatient psychiatric care: The Collaborative Assessment and
Management of Suicidality. Suicide Life Threat Behav 2015. 12 January, doi:
10.1111/sltb.12151 (Epub ahead of print).
105
In-patient suicide
