 Uncertainty is the psychological state of being unsure, of
having doubt, of not fully knowing. Uncertainty is central to
modern medicine, where its recognition drives diagnostic
efforts and leads to the pursuit of evidence-based practice.
All medical decision-making occurs under conditions of
varying uncertainty about diagnosis, optimal treatment and
prognosis. This is true in the assessment of suicidal patients.
Uncertainty has two underlying components: epistemic
uncertainty that results from a lack of knowledge, and
aleatory uncertainty that results from random or chance
events.1-3 In medical practice, both types of uncertainty are
at play. A teenage tobacco user might or might not develop
cancer later in life. This is mostly a matter of chance, a
chance that will increase with heavier and longer tobacco
use. This longitudinal cancer risk is probabilistic, akin to the
throw of a die, and further knowledge might not greatly
reduce uncertainty about what will eventually happen. In
middle age, the same smoker might develop haemoptysis. A
chest X-ray would reduce uncertainty about the presence or
absence of lung cancer, but it might be more clearly resolved
by a biopsy. Uncertainty in this case is not probabilistic -
the smoker either has or does not have cancer. This is now a
question that can be resolved with more information.
Chance is no longer playing a part.
It is generally considered that uncertainty in suicide
risk assessment can be greatly reduced by a detailed
assessment of the patient’s suicidal thoughts, plans and
actions, and attention to other demographic and clinical
factors. Suicide risk assessment guidelines and relevant
peer-reviewed publications often contain long lists of
questions to ask and factors to consider.4-7 This approach
assumes that more substantial knowledge of the patient, their
illness,
circumstances
and
intentions
will
reduce
the
epistemic uncertainty in the assessment. Few would doubt
that chance also plays a major part in suicide. The course of
underlying illness, the vagaries of individual decision-making
and impulsivity, and the patient’s future circumstances are all
sources of aleatory uncertainty.
In this article we consider the uncertainty surrounding
suicide using the framework of epistemic and aleatory
uncertainty. In order to do this, we use recent meta-analytic
research to interrogate the proposition that uncertainty
about suicide risk can be reduced by knowing more about
suicidal thoughts and behaviours, or by the knowledge of a
wider range of suicide risk factors.
Can knowing about suicidality reduce uncertainty
about suicide?
No small number of references could begin to do justice to
the importance that suicidal ideation and behaviours have
assumed in suicide research. Several recent systematic
meta-analyses have synthesised the quantitative peer-
reviewed literature on the statistical relationship between
BJPsych Bulletin (2017) 41, 160-163, doi: 10.1192/pb.bp.116.054940
1University of New South Wales,
Australia; 2University of Adelaide,
Australia; 3Royal Adelaide Hospital,
Australia; 4University of Sydney,
Australia
Correspondence to Matthew M. Large
(mmbl@bigpond.com)
First received 26 Jul 2016, final revision
26 Jul 2016, accepted 14 Sep 2016
B 2017 The Authors. This is an open-
access article published by the Royal
College of Psychiatrists and distributed
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http:/
/
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work
is properly cited.
Summary
Suicide risk assessment aims to reduce uncertainty in order to focus
treatment and supervision on those who are judged to be more likely to die by suicide.
In this article we consider recent meta-analytic research that highlights the difference
between uncertainty about suicide due to chance factors (aleatory uncertainty) and
uncertainty that results from lack of knowledge (epistemic uncertainty). We conclude
that much of the uncertainty about suicide is aleatory rather than epistemic, and
discuss the implications for clinicians.
Declaration of interest
None.
REVIEW ARTICLE
Known unknowns and unknown unknowns in suicide
risk assessment: evidence from meta-analyses of
aleatory and epistemic uncertainty
Matthew Large,1 Cherrie Galletly,2 Nicholas Myles,3 Christopher James Ryan,4 Hannah Myles2
160
 suicidality and suicide. Each of these meta-analyses has cast
doubt on the notion that knowing more about suicide ideas,
or suicidality more broadly, reduces uncertainty about
suicide.
Two meta-analyses published in 2011, one examining
risk factors for suicide by psychiatric in-patients8 and the
other
examining
risk
factors
for
suicide
by
recently
discharged patients,9 found that the association between
suicidal ideation and suicide was statistically weak, with
diagnostic odds ratios (OR) of less than 3. In 2015, Chapman
et al 10 published a meta-analysis finding that suicidal
ideation was significantly associated with suicide among
patients with schizophrenia spectrum conditions. However,
suicidal ideation was not significantly more likely to lead to
suicide than no suicidal ideation among patients with mood
disorders (OR = 1.49, 95% CI 0.92-2.42).
A 2016 meta-analysis11 examined the broader question
of whether self-injurious thoughts and behaviours deserve
their status as strong predictors of future suicidal behaviour.
This study found that self-injurious thoughts and behaviours
are only weakly associated with later suicide attempts
(OR = 2.14, 95% CI 2.00-2.30) and death from suicide
(OR = 1.54, 95% CI 1.39-1.71). The authors concluded that
assessments of suicidality provided an improvement in
prognostic accuracy that was only marginally above chance.
Another 2016 meta-analysis examined the psycho-
metric properties of both individual risk factors and suicide
risk assessment scales (the Beck Hopelessness Scale, Suicide
Intent
Scale
and
Scale
for
Suicide
Ideation)
among
populations of people who self-harm.12 The authors found
a modest statistical association between previous self-harm
and suicidal intent and later suicide, concluding that
individual risk factors are ‘unlikely to be of much practical
use because they are comparatively common in clinical
populations’. With respect to use of suicide risk scales they
considered that they ‘may provide false reassurance and
[are], therefore, potentially dangerous’.
Thus, five recent meta-analytic summaries of the
peer-reviewed
literature
have
each
reached
similar
conclusions -
knowing
about
suicide
thoughts
and
behaviours can only reduce uncertainty about future suicide
to a modest extent.
Can knowing about a wider range of risk factors
reduce uncertainty about suicide?
If enquiries about our patients’ suicide ideas, plans and
actions do not help very much, what else should mental
health professionals do to reduce uncertainty? The most
common and obvious answer is to consider a comprehensive
range of other suicide risk factors. Again it is simply not
possible to describe the full range of articles, guidelines and
peer-reviewed papers that consider the range of potentially
important risk factors for suicide. A weakness of this
literature is that although very large numbers of risk factors
for suicide have been identified, there is no widely accepted
way in which this information can be combined to improve
the predictive strength of suicide risk assessment. Further,
despite widespread recommendations for a comprehensive
consideration of suicide risk factors, there are doubts as to
whether combining risk factors can ever produce clinically
useful predictive models. More than 30 years ago, Pokorny13
concluded his paper describing a landmark prospective
suicide prediction study with the statement that it ‘is
inescapable that we do not possess any item of information
or any combination of items that permit us to identify to a
useful degree the particular persons who will commit
suicide, in spite of the fact that we do have scores of
items available, each of which is significantly related to
suicide’.
We recently published a meta-analysis that further
examined the dilemma posed by Pokorny.14 We synthesised
the results of all the published longitudinal prospective
studies that used multiple risk factors to model future
suicide among cohorts of psychiatric patients. We included
experimental studies that employed multiple regression or
survival analysis and studies that validated suicide risk
prediction instruments. Our main outcome measure was the
odds of suicide in high-risk patients compared with lower-
risk patients. One of the aims of the meta-analysis was to
determine if the observed between-study variability in this
OR could be explained by the number of risk factors used in
the predictive modelling. The results were very clear. We
found a pooled OR of 4.84 (95% CI 3.79-6.20) derived from
37 studies and 53 samples of patients. This indicates that
the rate of suicide among high-risk patients can be expected
to be about 5 times the rate of suicide of low-risk patients.
While this sounds like it might be a clinically useful finding,
these odds do not meaningfully improve on the pooled ORs
of about 4 that are associated with some individual suicide
risk factors among psychiatric patients - factors such as
depression, hopelessness and prior suicide attempts.8,9 The
meta-analysis also found that 56% of suicides occurred in
high-risk groups (sensitivity) and 44% occurred among the
lower-risk group. Over an average follow-up of 5 years, 5.5%
of high-risk patients, but 1% of low-risk patients, died by
suicide. This 5.5% suicide mortality over a period of 5 years
means the probability of suicide of high-risk patients over
clinically
important
durations
is
extremely
low.
For
example, the weekly probability of suicide of a high-risk
patient over the 5-year follow-up can be estimated at 0.055/
(5652) = 0.0002115 or 1 in 4700 people. In practical terms,
what this means is that if a patient is deemed at higher risk
of suicide because of the presence of one or more risk
factors (recall that the number of risk factors seems
unimportant), our best estimate of the incidence of suicide
in the following week is about 1 in 4700. Even if there was a
hypothetical dynamic risk factor that transiently increased
the next-week risk of suicide by 10 times, strict supervision
of almost 500 high-risk people for 1 week would be needed
to prevent one suicide - assuming that such supervision
were 100% effective.
Relevant to the present paper, the meta-analysis found
that the predictive models that used more suicide risk
factors had no more statistical strength, and no better
discrimination between high-risk and lower-risk groups,
than studies that used fewer factors (slope 0.007, 95%
CI70.016 to 0.03, P = 0.53). In fact, studies that employed
two factors had a similar predictive strength to studies that
employed ten or more factors. Figure 1 plots the diagnostic
odds with 95% confidence intervals effect size of models
using 2 or 3 factors (8 samples), 4 or 5 factors (11 samples), 6
REVIEW ARTICLE
Large et al Aleatory and epistemic uncertainty in suicide risk
161
 or 7 factors (7 samples), 8 or 9 factors (5 samples) and 10 or
more factors (22 samples) with obviously overlapping
confidence
intervals.
We
concluded
that
multivariate
models offered little advantage over single risk factors and
that multivariate models that relied on more suicide risk
factors performed no better than those that use fewer risk
factors.
Implications of the limits to epistemic uncertainty
The findings of these recent meta-analytic studies undermine
one of our profession’s main assumptions about suicide risk
assessment. Suicidal ideation,10 suicide behaviour11,12 and
more complex modelling14 offer predictive advantages only
a little better discrimination than chance. Hence, most of
our uncertainty about suicide risk is aleatory; knowing more
does not help because epistemic uncertainty plays only a
minor part.
So what should clinicians do? First, we believe that
this fundamental problem with suicide risk assessment
needs to be acknowledged. We need to acknowledge our
powerlessness to usefully classify individuals or groups of
patients according to future suicide risk. We need to
acknowledge this to ourselves, and communicate this to
health departments, to the courts, and most importantly,
to our patients and their families.
Second, we need to provide a more universal standard
of care, involving a complete and sympathetic assessment of
every patient, their illness and their circumstances. Such
assessment is needed to guide individualised treatment
plans, and might also have the intrinsic benefit of reducing
suicidality.15 Where modifiable risk factors are found, we
need to try to modify them. For example, patients who
present with suicidal ideation when intoxicated should not
be summarily discharged when sober and denying suicidal
ideation, but should be offered access to addiction services
that have some prospect of reducing suicide risk and
improving their lives, irrespective of their overall risk
category.
Third, we need to be very sparing in our use of
involuntary treatment as a reaction to suicide risk. It is
likely that very few patients who we admit to hospital would
have died by suicide as out-patients over the period of time
usually associated with a contemporary length of stay.
Patients making ongoing immediate threats might still be
admitted
to
hospital,
as
such
threats
are
a
crucial
communication
and
legitimate
focus
of
care
without
recourse to notions of probability. However, suicide risk is
simply not a sufficient warrant for making paternalistic
decisions about involuntary hospital care. Equally, we
should be careful not to automatically deny low-risk
patients voluntary in-patient treatment when they want it.
Many suicides are by low-risk patients and we should not
pretend we are able to peer into their future any more than
we can discern the future of a higher-risk patient.
About the authors
Matthew Large, Conjoint Professor, School of Psychiatry, University of
New South Wales, and Senior Psychiatrist, Prince of Wales Hospital,
Sydney, Australia; Cherrie Galletly, Professor, School of Psychiatry,
Adelaide University, and Psychiatrist, Ramsay Health Care (SA) Mental
Health, Adelaide, Australia; Nicholas Myles, Registrar, The Royal Adelaide
Hospital, Adelaide, Australia; Christopher James Ryan, Associate Professor,
Discipline of Psychiatry and Centre for Values, Ethics and the Law in
Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, and Senior Psychiatrist, Depart-
ment of Psychiatry, Westmead Hospital, Australia; Hannah Myles, PhD
candidate, School of Psychiatry, Adelaide University, and Registrar, Country
Health Local Health Network, Adelaide, Australia.
References
1
Aven T. On different types of uncertainties in the context of the
precautionary principle. Risk Anal 2011; 31: 1515-25.
2
Buchanan A. Violence risk assessment in clinical settings: being sure
about being sure. Behav Sci Law 2013; 31: 74-80.
3
Large M. The relevance of the early history of probability theory to
current risk assessment practices in mental health care. Hist Psychiatry
2013; 24: 427-41.
4
O’Connor N, Warby M, Raphael B, Vassallo T. Changeability, confidence,
common sense and corroboration: comprehensive suicide risk
assessment. Australas Psychiatry 2004; 12: 352-60.
5
Silverman MM, Berman AL. Suicide risk assessment and risk
formulation part I: a focus on suicide ideation in assessing suicide
risk. Suicide Life Threat Behav 2014; 44: 420-31.
6
Antai-Otong D. What every ED nurse should know about suicide risk
assessment. J Emerg Nurs 2016; 42: 31-6.
7
Motto JA, Heilbron DC, Juster RP. Development of a clinical instrument
to estimate suicide risk. Am J Psychiatry 1985; 142: 680-6.
REVIEW ARTICLE
Large et al Aleatory and epistemic uncertainty in suicide risk
2 or 3 factors
4 or 5 factors
6 or 7 factors
8 or 9 factors
more than 9 factors
Overall
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
lower odds ratio
higher odds ratio
Fig. 1 Odds ratios of the predictive strength of multivariate suicide risk assessment according to the number of factors in the predictive model.
Diamonds indicate the pooled estimate and the (overlapping) 95% confidence intervals. Data from Large et al.14
162
 8 Large M, Smith G, Sharma S, Nielssen O, Singh SP. Systematic review
and meta-analysis of the clinical factors associated with the suicide of
psychiatric in-patients. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2011; 124: 18-29.
9 Large M, Sharma S, Cannon E, Ryan C, Nielssen O. Risk factors for
suicide within a year of discharge from psychiatric hospital: a
systematic meta-analysis. Aust NZ J Psychiatry 2011; 45: 619-28.
10 Chapman CL, Mullin K, Ryan CJ, Kuffel A, Nielssen O, Large MM. Meta-
analysis of the association between suicidal ideation and later suicide
among patients with either a schizophrenia spectrum psychosis or a
mood disorder. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2015; 131: 162-73.
11 Ribeiro JD, Franklin JC, Fox KR, Bentley KH, Kleiman EM, Chang BP, et al.
Self-injurious thoughts and behaviors as risk factors for future suicide
ideation, attempts, and death: a meta-analysis of longitudinal studies.
Psych Med 2016; 46: 225-36.
12 Chan MKY, Bhatti H, Meader N, Stockton S, Evans J, O’Connor RC, et al.
Predicting suicide following self-harm: systematic review of risk factors
and risk scales. Br J Psychiatry 2016; 209: 277-83.
13 Pokorny AD. Prediction of suicide in psychiatric patients. Report of a
prospective study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1983; 40: 249-57.
14 Large M, Kaneson M, Myles N, Myles H, Gunaratne P, Ryan C. Meta-
analysis of longitudinal cohort studies of suicide risk assessment among
psychiatric patients: heterogeneity in results and lack of improvement
over time. PLoS ONE 2016; 11: e0156322.
15 Carroll R, Metcalfe C, Steeg S, Davies NM, Cooper J, Kapur N, et al.
Psychosocial assessment of self-harm patients and risk of repeat
presentation: an instrumental variable analysis using time of hospital
presentation. PloS ONE 2016; 11: e0149713.
REVIEW ARTICLE
Large et al Aleatory and epistemic uncertainty in suicide risk
163
