 Stress-induced structural plasticity of medial amygdala stellate 
neurons and rapid prevention by a candidate antidepressant
T. Lau1, B. Bigio2, D. Zelli1, BS. McEwen1, and C. Nasca1
1Laboratory of Neuroendocrinology, The Rockefeller University, New York; 10065, USA.
2The Rockefeller University, Center for Clinical & Translational Science, New York, USA
Abstract
The adult brain is capable of adapting to internal and external stressors by undergoing structural 
plasticity, and failure to be resilient and preserve normal structure and function is likely to 
contribute to depression and anxiety disorders. While the hippocampus has provided the gateway 
for understanding stress effects on the brain, less is known about the amygdala, a key brain area 
involved in the neural circuitry of fear and anxiety. Here, in mice more vulnerable to stressors, we 
demonstrate structural plasticity within the medial and basolateral regions of the amygdala in 
response to prolonged 21day chronic restraint stress (CRS). Three days before the end of CRS, 
treatment with the putative, rapidly acting antidepressant, acetyl-L-carnitine (LAC) in the drinking 
water opposed the direction of these changes. Behaviorally, the LAC treatment during the last part 
of CRS enhanced resilience, opposing the effects of CRS, as shown by an increased social 
interaction and reduced passive behavior in a forced swim test. Furthermore, CRS mice treated 
with LAC show resilience of the CRS-induced structural remodeling of medial amygdala (MeA) 
stellate neurons. Within the basolateral (BLA) amygdala, LAC did not reduce, but slightly 
enhanced, the CRS-increased length and number of intersections of pyramidal neurons. No 
structural changes were observed in MeA bipolar neurons, BLA stellate neurons, or in lateral 
amygdala (LA) stellate neurons. Our findings identify MeA stellate neurons as an important 
component in the responses to stress and LAC action and show that LAC can promote structural 
plasticity of the MeA. This may be useful as a model for increasing resilience to stressors in at risk 
populations.
INTRODUCTION
The adult brain possesses remarkable epigenetic structural and functional plasticity in 
response to environmental influences, such as stress1, 2. Stress-induced structural remodeling 
of neuronal architecture is a sign of adaptation; however, failed resilience contributes to the 
onset and recurrence of psychiatric disorders, such as depression3, 4. Such structural 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Address all correspondence to: Carla Nasca, PhD (cnasca@rockefeller.edu), Bruce S. McEwen, PhD (mcewen@rockefeller.edu), 
Laboratory of Neuroendocrinology, The Rockefeller University, New York, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY, 10065, US, p: 
212-327-8624, f: 212-327-8634. 
Authors declare no conflict of interest.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Published in final edited form as:
Mol Psychiatry. 2017 February ; 22(2): 227–234. doi:10.1038/mp.2016.68.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 plasticity is evident in the hippocampus, where 21 days of CRS or 10 days of the more 
severe chronic immobilization stress (CIS) in the rat and mouse lead to shrinkage of 
hippocampal CA3 and DG neuron dendrites as well as loss of spines in hippocampal CA1 
neurons5. Similar shrinkage of dendrites after chronic stress is also observed in neurons of 
the medial prefrontal cortex (PFC)6. Hippocampal and PFC atrophy has been detected in 
depressed human subjects using magnetic resonance imaging7, 8.
Growing out of findings in the hippocampus, a landmark study found that another limbic 
brain structure, the amygdala, shows a different type of structural plasticity in response to 
stress9. The amygdala, which consists of a group of nuclei with different cytoarchitecture 
and connectional features, is an essential component of the neural circuitry of stress8 and 
Pavlovian fear conditioning10 and is also critical for the processing of emotions and social 
interactions11-13. Pyramidal and stellate neurons in the BLA exhibit enhanced dendritic 
arborization in response to chronic immobilization stress (CIS), in contrast to the dendritic 
shrinkage seen within the hippocampus9. Opposite patterns of structural plasticity have also 
been observed within other nuclei of the amygdala complex: repeated 21 days of CRS leads 
to synapse spine formation in the BLA, while it causes a loss of spines in the MeA, an effect 
dependent on the extracellular matrix proteases (tPA), which is not involved in stress-
induced structural effects within the BLA8, 14-16.
Thus, the amygdala has a substantial cellular and anatomical complexity that warrants 
further studies toward the understanding of how stress and antidepressant action may affect 
this brain region, which is critical for behaviors associated with psychiatric disorders such as 
alterations in social behavior and anxiety. Furthermore, this diversity of stress-induced 
plasticity within the sub-regions of the amygdala complex raises the question as to whether 
the different nuclei of the amygdala may contribute to different features in the pleiotropic 
spectrum of psychiatric disorders and whether some of the structural changes triggered by 
stress in one limbic area may influence changes in other brain areas, such as the ventral 
hippocampus and PFC which have a dense connectivity with the amygdala17, 18.
Here, we found that the input and output nuclei of the BLA and MeA showed differential 
responses to the same CRS paradigm, which also did not affect the neurons of the LA. Stress 
increased elongation and complexity of BLA pyramidal neurons and induced shrinkage of 
MeA stellate neurons, whereas no effect was observed in BLA stellate neurons and MeA 
bipolar neurons. We also report that oral treatment in drinking water with the novel 
antidepressant candidate acetyl-L-carnitine (LAC)19-21 3 days prior to the end of CRS, 
enhanced behavioral resilience to stress in at-risk individuals defined by increased anxiety-
like avoidance in a light-dark test22, 23. Also, CRS mice treated with LAC show recovery of 
dendritic remodeling of MeA stellate neurons but continued to show the increased 
elongation and complexity of BLA pyramidal neurons, suggesting that a counter-regulatory 
mechanism between the microcircuit of MeA and BLA may be involved in the rapid 
antidepressant-like actions of LAC.
Lau et al.
Page 2
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Materials and Methods
All experimental procedures were carried out in accordance with the National Institutes of 
Health and The Rockefeller University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee 
guidelines. All efforts were made to minimize animal suffering.
Animals
Charles River C57BL/6N male mice (6wk old, 20-25g) were used in this study. Mice were 
housed five per cage under controlled conditions (12-h light/dark cycle, 22 °C, food and 
water ad libitum) and were allowed to recover from any potential stress for a week after their 
arrival before any experiments were performed. Stress began when the animals were 7wks 
old. LD screening was performed on a n of 45 mice; from 6 to 9 biological replicates were 
used for the behavioral experiments; from 8 to 10 biological replicates were used for 
assessment of stress effects on adrenal glands; from 4 to 6 biological replicates were used 
for the structural analyses.
Stress challenge procedure
We devised a CRS paradigm by restraining 7-week-old male mice two hours per day in the 
morning (9-11AM) for 21 consecutive days. The restraint device contained two 0.4 cm air 
holes and allowed mice to stretch the legs but did not permit locomotion within the tube. 
Naïve age- and sex-matched animals were used as controls. Control mice were left 
undisturbed in their home cage and were not subjected to any type of stress. The whole 
stress procedure is schematized in Figure 1a. Behavioral and structural stress effects were 
evaluated 24hrs after the last restraint stressor. The weight of the animals was recorded once 
a week and, as expected, the stressed mice show a lower gain weight than control mice, 
reflecting the progression of the stress procedure. Adrenal glands were collected 24hrs after 
the last episode of restraint stress for the CRS group and according to a matched time for the 
control group.
Screening method for inherent susceptibility
At-risk individuals used for assessment of CRS and LAC effects have been identified using a 
recent devised screening method22 (Fig.SI1), which employs a modified version of the light 
dark test (LDT) and allow identification of at-risk individuals with an array of behavioral 
and molecular features of increased endogenous susceptibility to depressive-like 
behaviors22, 23. Details are available elsewhere22. Briefly, naïve male mice were videotaped 
and the time spent by each mouse in the light chamber was measured and scored by two 
independent blind observers. Mice were considered to have entered a chamber when all four 
paws were positioned into the chamber. No pretest (habituation session) was carried out 
before the test session. At-risk mice with an anxiety-prone phenotype are characterized by a 
molecular signature (i.e: high MR hippocampal levels) and by a behavioral signature of 
susceptibility (i.e.: low time spent in the light chamber, less than 110sec, in the modified 
version of the light-dark box24). At-risk mice were used for the CRS experiment with and 
without LAC treatment.
Lau et al.
Page 3
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Prophylactic treatment
LAC (acetyl-L-carnitine, Sigma Aldrich) was orally administered, at a concentration of 
0.3% dissolving the drug in the drinking water, for 3 days prior to the end of CRS. 
Additional animal groups were used to assure that the animals’ fluid intake and hydration 
state were not altered by the oral LAC administration. This was carried out evaluating the 
skin turgor, body weight and daily food and fluid consumption for 3 days. C57black 6N 
male mice in the LAC treatment group showed a fluid intake with an average of 4,5ml per 
day per mouse as non-stressed control animals. For example, when housed 4 per cage, the 
fluid intake per cage show an average of about 18ml regardless of the stress and LAC 
treatment.
Behavioral assessment after CRS and LAC treatment
Forced swim test (FST) was performed as previously described19, 22. Mice were placed 
individually into a vertical glass cylinder (25 cm in height and 12 cm in diameter) filled with 
12-cm deep water at 23–24°C and videotaped for 6min. Two blind observers, who were not 
aware of the groups, scored the duration of immobility for 6min. Mice were considered 
‘immobile’ if they showed only minimal movements to keep the head above water or 
floating.
Social interaction test was performed as previously described25 under red light. Mice were 
placed in an open-field arena (42×42×42cm) with a small wire animal box (10×6.5×42cm) 
placed at one side of the arena. Two blind observers scored exploratory behavior for 2.5min, 
respectively, in the absence and presence of a CD-1 mouse in the small wire animal box with 
one minute interval between the sessions. Social interaction behavior was calculated as the 
ratio of the time spent in an interaction zone near the novel animal divided by the time spent 
in the same area near the empty box. Impairment in social interaction is defined by a ratio 
below 1, namely animals spent less time near the empty cage than the novel animal.
Tissue processing
Mice were sacrificed immediately after the end of a 6-min FST to minimize any effects due 
to the minimal stress manipulation (Fig.1a). Fresh brains were extracted and processed for 
morphological analysis following the FD Rapid GolgiStain protocol (PK401, FD 
Neurotechnologies, Inc, Columbia, US) with few changes. When extracted, brains were 
coded for quantitative analysis. Both hemispheres were used to obtain 100μm sections using 
a vibratome. Sections were collected serially, dehydrated, cleared in xylene, and then cover-
slipped.
Structural Analysis
Structural analysis was carried out by two observers who were blind to the sample 
conditions. We examined three sub-regions of the amygdala complex: lateral amygdala (LA, 
bregma −1.155 to −2.155), basolateral amygdala (BLA, bregma −1.155 to −2.255) and 
medial amygdala (MeA, bregma −1.155 to −2.055) using the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas26. 
We used the parahippocampal formation, the optic tract, and the endorhinal sulcus as 
anatomical references to localize the amygdala complex. To be selected for Golgi analysis, 
Lau et al.
Page 4
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 we established several criteria for Golgi-impregnated neurons: 1) no truncated dendrites are 
present on the neuron, 2) have neuronal cell bodies located within the boundaries of the 
MeA, LA and BLA, respectively 3) consistent staining along the entire length of the 
dendrites, 3) neurons had to be relatively isolated from other neurons to avoid interference 
during tracing with other dendrites. Neurons of the amygdala were also distinguished as 
pyramidal cells or stellate cells based on their morphology. Neurolucida tracings were 
obtained at 40x objective. We report that very few bipolar neurons have been depicted in the 
BLA to be included in the structural throughput.
Statistics
Statistical analyses were performed using a 2-way analysis of variances (ANOVA) followed 
by Sidak test for the post hoc analysis or unpaired t-Test.
Results
Prolonged 21day stress decreases dendritic elongation and arborization in MeA stellate, 
but not bipolar, neurons
We established the efficacy of our CRS paradigm (Fig.1a) to increase adrenal to body weight 
ratio compared with non-stressed mice (Fig.SI2) that is consistent with elevated 
glucocorticoid production contributing to dendritic remodeling in CA3 hippocampus27 and 
with the occurrence of depressive-like behavior as suggested by the increased immobility 
time in the forced swim test (FST) (Fig.1b) and decreased social interaction (Fig.1c). These 
were done on at-risk mice (Fig.SI1) identified by the LD screening (see Methods and SI) as 
susceptible individuals, which, in previous reports, have been characterized by behavioral 
and molecular signatures of susceptibility (e.g.: light avoidance, high expression of 
mineralocorticoid receptors MR in hippocampus, reduced ability to cope with stress)22. 
Morphological analysis of Golgi impregnated tissue revealed novel findings regarding 
stress-induced structural changes in the MeA (Fig.3). The MeA consists of two principal 
cell-types: stellate and bipolar neurons. The stellate neurons have a round cell body with 
more than two primary dendrites with no clear separation of basal and apical dendrites, 
whereas the bipolar neurons have an ovoid soma with two primary dendrites that start from 
two opposite poles of the cell body (Fig.2).
Golgi analysis revealed that MeA stellate neurons from CRS male mice have shorter total 
dendritic length and decreased number of total intersections compared to non-stressed 
controls (Fig.3c,e). In-depth morphometric analysis with the Sholl method, where densities 
and length of dendrites arising from the soma are determined within concentric three-
dimensional shells of increasing diameter (15μm) centered around the cell body, showed that 
the dendrites of stellate neurons from the CRS group were less elaborate starting from a 
distance of 105μm from the soma compared to the control group (Fig. 3d,f; SIFig.3).
In contrast to the stellate neurons, the bipolar neuronal subpopulation was unaffected by 
CRS, as the dendritic length and number of intersections remained at baseline with the 
control group (Fig.3g,h). Hence, structural CRS effects in the MeA were specific to the more 
Lau et al.
Page 5
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 elaborate stellate neurons that showed a dendritic shrinkage reminiscent of previous studies 
reporting that prolonged stress leads to a loss of spines in the output neurons of the MeA16.
Effects of acetyl-L-carnitine (LAC)
Recent work showed that the novel antidepressant candidate, L-acetylcarnitine (LAC, i.p.), 
rapidly corrected hippocampal deficits along with behavioral abnormalities (e.g.: sucrose 
preference and immobility at FST) in a genetic animal model of depression and in animals 
that develop depressive-like behaviors after chronic unpredictable stress (CUS)19-21. 
Therefore, we next tested the effects on behavior and the responses of the MeA to LAC 
treatment, orally administered 3 days prior to the end of the CRS (Fig.1a). We found that, 
after LAC treatment, dendrites of the MeA stellate neurons were more complex and longer 
as compared to the CRS group that received vehicle (Fig.3c,e). Behaviorally, LAC reduced 
passive behavior in a FST and increased social interaction ratio in the social avoidance test, 
opposing the effects of CRS, indicating an action of LAC to enhance resilience to stress 
(Fig.1b,c). In agreement with previous findings28, LAC had no effect upon the immobility 
time or social interaction ratio of non-stressed control animals (Fig.1b,c).
Additional Sholl analysis in incremental steps of 15μm from the soma showed that dendritic 
length and number of intersections of CRS LAC-treated MeA neurons underwent the most 
pronounced reduction of the stress-induced dendritic shrinkage within a distance of 75μm 
from the soma (Fig.3d,f, SIFig.3), indicating that LAC prophylactic treatment leads to the 
growth of novel primary and secondary dendrites rather than reversing a pathological 
phenotype by elongation of CRS-shrink dendrites. This is consistent with previous work 
showing that recovery from chronic stress involves morphological changes different from the 
initial dendritic shrinkage29. Furthermore, even in segments that did not exhibit a 
statistically significant difference after CRS as compared to non-stressed male mice, LAC-
treated stellate neurons tended to have higher average values relative to CRS-untreated 
neurons (Fig.3d,f, Fig.SI3). Representative camera lucida drawings of control and CRS MeA 
stellate neurons along with LAC-treated CRS MeA stellate neurons are depicted in Figure 
3b.
Responses of the BLA to 21 days of stress and to the novel antidepressant LAC
The BLA contains two principal cell-types: pyramidal and stellate neurons (Fig.2). These 
cell-types are similar to cortical pyramidal neurons and cortical spiny stellate cells, 
respectively, and no clear separation into basal and apical dendrites is evident. Pyramidal 
neurons are characterized by a pyramidal-shape soma with several principal dendrites 
originating from all directions of the cell body (Fig.2)9. Interestingly, BLA stellate neurons 
show a more complex tree than MeA stellate neurons (Fig.2). It is noteworthy that stellate 
neurons from naïve mice in the BLA appear longer and with a more sophisticated 
complexity than stellate neurons in the MeA, and this observation may be related to the 
connectivity of the BLA with the hippocampus, whereas the shorter dendrites of the MeA 
output nuclei may play a role in integrating the responses of the amygdala complex via their 
projections to the nearby BLA30.
Lau et al.
Page 6
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Previous studies have shown opposite effects of a chronic immobilization stress paradigm 
within the sub-regions of the amygdala complex as indicated by increased spine density in 
the BLA and spine loss in the MeA8. Here, we also found opposite structural effects within 
the sub-regions of the amygdala in which CRS resulted in a significant increase in total 
dendritic length and number of intersections in BLA pyramidal neurons compared to mice 
that were not subjected to stress (Fig.4c,e). Sholl-segmental analysis in incremental steps of 
15μm from the soma revealed that dendrites from the CRS group were more elaborate at a 
close distance to the soma compared to the non-stressed group (Fig.4d,f), revealing that 
BLA pyramidal neurons underwent the most pronounced increase within a distance of 60μm 
from the soma (Fig. 4d,f).
Interestingly, after LAC treatment, BLA pyramidal neurons continued to show increased 
length and complexity. Indeed, CRS mice treated with LAC showed slightly increased total 
length and number of intersections of pyramidal neurons as compared to CRS mice (Fig.
4c,e). Additional Sholl-segmental analysis to evaluate LAC treatment effects showed no 
increase in the dendritic length at the various incremental shells from the soma, but revealed 
a consistent increase in the number of intersections at 30μm from the soma, suggesting that 
LAC treatment led to branching of dendrites at a close distance from the cell body. 
Representative camera lucida drawings of control and CRS BLA pyramidal neurons along 
with LAC-treated CRS BLA pyramidal neurons are shown in Figure 4b.
CRS structural effects appeared to be specific to the BLA pyramidal neurons as the BLA 
stellate neurons were unaffected by CRS and LAC treatment as shown by the finding that 
dendritic length and number of intersections remained at baseline with the control group 
(Fig.4g,h).
Responses of the LA to prolonged 21day stress: divergent effects with the BLA and MeA
We extended our analysis on the effects of CRS to the lateral amygdala (LA, Fig.5a), which 
anatomically is next to the BLA, although the two subregions show a different 
cytoarchitectonic organization. In the LA, we restricted our structural analysis to stellate 
neurons, which appeared with a round-to ovoid-shaped soma with variable size and 
dendrites staring from different parts of the cell body and no clear distinction of basal and 
apical dendrites was observed. As for the stellate neurons depicted within the BLA, we 
found that CRS mice showed no change in the dendritic length and number of intersections 
in LA stellate neurons. No structural change was observed in LA stellate neurons of CRS 
mice treated with LAC (Fig.5b,c). Thus, CRS resulted in a specific structural plasticity of 
the BLA pyramidal neurons, which are excitatory neurons9, while not affecting the neurons 
of the near LA9.
DISCUSSION
Despite the well-known role of the hippocampus and basolateral amygdala in behavioral, 
autonomic and endocrine responses to epigenetic environmental influences8, less is known 
about the role of the medial amygdala in these processes. Here, we have uncovered 
contrasting signs of structural plasticity within the three sub-regions of the amygdala - MeA, 
BLA and LA - in response to prolonged 21day CRS and a prophylactic treatment with LAC. 
Lau et al.
Page 7
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Moreover, LAC also promoted pro-resilient effects in at-risk individuals as suggested by 
better outcomes of CRS mice on social interaction and forced swim tests.
Structural contrast between MeA and BLA
Prolonged 21day CRS leads to growth of BLA pyramidal neurons in agreement with 
previous studies showing that 10 day chronic immobilization stress (CIS) leads to dendritic 
expansion of BLA pyramidal neurons15. No effect of CRS was observed in the BLA stellate 
neurons in contrast to effects of CIS, suggesting that, although both stress paradigms induce 
arborization of BLA pyramidal neurons and increased production of adrenal steroids8, other 
processes may be involved in mediating the structural effects of stress on the brain, although 
this may also be a difference between rats and mice.
In contrast to the dendritic growth of BLA pyramidal neurons, chronic stress leads to 
dendritic shrinkage of MeA stellate neurons with a non-significant trend in the less complex 
MeA bipolar neurons. Such contrasting structural plasticity between the MeA and BLA is in 
line with published findings showing that stress induced spine loss in the MeA and spine 
formation in the BLA along with leading to opposite effects on the serine protease tissue-
plasminogen activator (tPA), a key mediator of morphological plasticity and synaptic re-
organization16. No structural effect was found in the stellate neurons of the LA, which is 
anatomically localized close to the BLA.
Recently, we have shown that the same CRS paradigm opens windows of epigenetic 
plasticity in hippocampus and alters the responses to familiar and novel stressors31. We 
showed these behavioral outcomes were accompanied by a glutamatergic hyperactivity of 
the ventral hippocampus based on the continued down-regulation of the regulator of 
glutamate release, mGlu2 receptors, which normally inhibit glutamate release32. Therefore, 
stress-induced structural shrinkage in the MeA may be a homeostatic response to the 
increased glutamatergic overflow from the nearby hippocampus, which directly projects to 
the MeA33. Previous studies have also shown bidirectional connectivity between the BLA 
and ventral hippocampus, a target of antidepressants34. Hence, it is possible that the stress-
induced elongation of BLA pyramidal neurons may be a sign of adaptive plasticity to limit 
this dissociation effect between the BLA and MeA in the attempt to reestablish direct and 
indirect synaptic connectivity with the stress-induced shorter dendrites of the MeA. Such 
potential adaptive plasticity of the BLA is also supported by the lack of a reversal effect of 
LAC on CRS-induced increased dendritic length and complexity of BLA pyramidal neurons.
Effects of acetyl-L-carnitine in at-risk individuals
Thus, as an approach to promote resilience to stress, we found that three days of oral 
administration with acetyl-L-carnitine (LAC) - a novel antidepressant that was shown to be 
more rapidly effective than fluoxetine and chlorimipramine in humans and animal 
models19-21, 35, 36 – enhances behaviors impaired by 21 days CRS and promotes structural 
plasticity of a key limbic brain region, the medial amygdala, that is in a direction opposite to 
the effects of CRS.
LAC is a nutritional supplement and is also synthesized from lysine and methionine in the 
brain, liver and kidney. Among its beneficial effects on the brain and the body35, 37, LAC 
Lau et al.
Page 8
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 regulates mitochondrial homeostasis by facilitating transfer of fatty acids from the cytoplasm 
to the mitochondrial matrix for subsequent β-oxidation38. Thus, it is expected that LAC has 
other beneficial effects, the extent of which remains to be fully elucidated. Also, it has been 
shown that LAC exerts antidepressant-like effects in several animal models, similar to what 
SSRIs do more slowly in the same animal model39. Here, we show that LAC prophylactic 
treatment - administered 3 days prior to the end of chronic stress - exerted pro-resilient 
effects upon at-risk individuals selected for a reduced ability to cope with stress22. Using a 
recently developed screening method22 built upon a modified version of a simple light-dark 
test24 that allows identification of mice with behavioral and molecular signatures of 
susceptibility (e.g.: high hippocampal mineralocorticoid receptors MR levels, light 
avoidance and reduced ability to cope with stress due to a robust down-regulation of mGlu2 
receptors in hippocampus22), we demonstrated that the windows of epigenetic plasticity 
opened by CRS in the immediate aftermath of stress32 in at-risk individuals can be 
manipulated by LAC pharmacological intervention. We propose that LAC increases 
resilience by reestablishing balanced neural circuitry in limbic brain regions, doing so by 
promote dendritic growth of the MeA stellate neurons while not shortening dendrites of the 
BLA pyramidal neurons in at-risk individuals that are increased by CRS.
Thus, regulation of MeA stellate neuron structural plasticity is one sign of increased ability 
to cope with stress following LAC treatment that also reduces the occurrence of anxiety- and 
depressive-like behaviors. The rapid LAC effects to increase MeA dendrite branching and 
length show again that the cytoskeleton can rapidly depolymerize and repolymerize when 
needed. This has been shown in the hippocampus of hibernating animals where rapid 
shrinkage of CA3 dendrites is seen within hours of the onset of hibernation and growth of 
those dendrites occurs within hours of termination of hibernation40-42. Importantly, we 
found that LAC increased the growth of novel primary and secondary dendrites in MeA 
rather than reversing CRS-induced shrinkage of distal dendrites. This has been found 
previously for neurons in the PFC during recovery from chronic stress29.
Function of the medial amygdala
Here, we found that CRS mice, which show dendritic shrinkage of MeA stellate neurons, 
have a reduced social interaction ratio and that such behavior along with CRS-increased 
passive behavior at the FST was not found in CRS mice administered with LAC for 3d at the 
end of CRS. Such emerging role of the MeA in social and passive behaviors12, hallmarks of 
psychiatric disorders as depression, anxiety and autism43 is in agreement with previous brain 
imaging studies showing a positive correlation between the volume of the amygdala and 
social interactions in humans44. Of note, mice here identified as at-risk individuals, using the 
LD screening, that show MeA impairments after CRS are the same mice that show high 
vulnerability to social defeat stress45, which results in susceptible and unsusceptible 
subpopulations, with the susceptible mice showing impairments in social interactions46. 
Therefore, future studies using the social defeat stress model of susceptibility and resilience 
are warranted to further investigate the role of the MeA in resilience vs. susceptibility to 
stress, and particularly for social interactions.
Lau et al.
Page 9
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Dysfunction of MeA is increasingly considered to be an integral component of the olfactory 
system, so important in mice for social interactions, that includes also olfactory bulb and 
piriform cortex. Interestingly, the accessory olfactory bulb and piriform cortex form dense 
synaptic contacts with the MeA, while the basolateral nuclei of the amygdala do not receive 
projections from the olfactory bulb and form weak connections with the piriform 
cortex47, 48. In animal models, for example, exposure to a predator odor results in increasing 
freezing behaviors associated with amygdaloidal changes in the expression of the sub-unit 
α2-δ1 that regulate calcium-signaling24 reminiscent of lesions studies showing that ablation 
of the medial amygdala reduce freezing in response to predator odor exposure49.
In conclusion, the use of a screening test to identify at-risk individuals and the rapid effects 
of LAC upon such at-risk individuals are important as translational models because 
antidepressants are typically used to treat depressive symptoms, and a therapeutic treatment 
that has rapid, pro-resilient effects to restore or maintain normal function can be useful to 
reduce a reoccurrence of depressive episodes in at-risk individuals. Future research is needed 
to uncover the molecular signaling that regulates the cytoskeletal assembly and disassembly 
processes that drive structural plasticity within the MeA, a limbic brain region here 
identified as a novel target of structural and functional remodeling by stressors.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Anjali Ferris for her commitment in blind analyses for structural and behavioral experiments. This work 
was supported by the AFSP (American Foundation for Suicide Prevention), HDRF (Hope for Depression Research 
Foundation), NIH Grant RO1 MH41256 and by Grant UL1 TR000043 from the National Center for Advancing 
Translational Sciences (NCATS), National Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical and Translational Science Award 
(CTSA) program.
References
1. McEwen BS. Physiology and Neurobiology of Stress and Adaptation: Central Role of the Brain. 
Physiological Reviews. 2007; 87(3):873–904. [PubMed: 17615391] 
2. McEwen BS. Stress, sex, and neural adaptation to a changing environment: mechanisms of neuronal 
remodeling. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 2010; 1204:38–59.
3. McEwen BS. Recognizing Resilience: Learning from the Effects of Stress on the Brain. 
Neurobiology of Stress. 2015; 1:1–11. [PubMed: 25506601] 
4. Southwick SM, Charney DS. The Science of Resilience: Implications for the Prevention and 
Treatment of Depression. Science. 2012; 338(6103):79–82. [PubMed: 23042887] 
5. McEwen BS. STRESS AND HIPPOCAMPAL PLASTICITY. Annual Review of Neuroscience. 
1999; 22(1):105–122.
6. Radley JJ, Sisti HM, Hao J, Rocher AB, McCall T, Hof PR, et al. Chronic behavioral stress induces 
apical dendritic reorganization in pyramidal neurons of the medial prefrontal cortex. Neuroscience. 
2004; 125:1–6. [PubMed: 15051139] 
7. Sheline YI, Wang PW, Gado MH, Csernansky JG, Vannier MW. Hippocampal atrophy in recurrent 
major depression. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 1996; 93(9):3908–3913.
8. McEwen BS, Nasca C, Gray JD. Stress Effects on Neuronal Structure: Hippocampus, Amygdala, 
and Prefrontal Cortex. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015
Lau et al.
Page 10
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 9. Vyas A, Mitra R, Shankaranarayana Rao BS, Chattarji S. Chronic stress induces contrasting patterns 
of dendritic remodeling in hippocampal and amygdaloid neurons. The Journal of neuroscience : the 
official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2002; 22(15):6810–6818. [PubMed: 12151561] 
10. JE L. Differential contribution of amygdala and hippocampus to cued and contextual fear 
conditioning. 1992:106.
11. Vinkers CH, Bijlsma EY, Houtepen LC, Westphal KG, Veening JG, Groenink L, et al. Medial 
amygdala lesions differentially influence stress responsivity and sensorimotor gating in rats. 
Physiology & behavior. 2010; 99(3):395–401. [PubMed: 20006965] 
12. Wang Y, Zhao S, Wu Z, Feng Y, Zhao C, Zhang C. Oxytocin in the regulation of social behaviours 
in medial amygdala-lesioned mice via the inhibition of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
signalling pathway. Clinical and experimental pharmacology & physiology. 2015; 42(5):465–474. 
[PubMed: 25707920] 
13. Pitkanen A, Savander V, LeDoux JE. Organization of intra-amygdaloid circuitries in the rat: an 
emerging framework for understanding functions of the amygdala. Trends in neurosciences. 1997; 
20(11):517–523. [PubMed: 9364666] 
14. Vyas A, Jadhav S, Chattarji S. Prolonged behavioral stress enhances synaptic connectivity in the 
basolateral amygdala. Neuroscience. 2006; 143(2):387–393. [PubMed: 16962717] 
15. Mitra R, Jadhav S, McEwen BS, Vyas A, Chattarji S. Stress duration modulates the spatiotemporal 
patterns of spine formation in the basolateral amygdala. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America. 2005; 102(26):9371–9376. [PubMed: 15967994] 
16. Bennur S, Shankaranarayana Rao BS, Pawlak R, Strickland S, McEwen BS, Chattarji S. Stress- 
induced spine loss in the medial amygdala is mediated by tissue-plasminogen activator. 
Neuroscience. 2007; 144(1):8–16. [PubMed: 17049177] 
17. Felix-Ortiz AC, Tye KM. Amygdala inputs to the ventral hippocampus bidirectionally modulate 
social behavior. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 
2014; 34(2):586–595. [PubMed: 24403157] 
18. Tejeda HA, O'Donnell P. Amygdala Inputs to the Prefrontal Cortex Elicit Heterosynaptic 
Suppression of Hippocampal Inputs. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the 
Society for Neuroscience. 2014; 34(43):14365–14374. [PubMed: 25339749] 
19. Nasca C, Xenos D, Barone Y, Caruso A, Scaccianoce S, Matrisciano F, et al. L-acetylcarnitine 
causes rapid antidepressant effects through the epigenetic induction of mGlu2 receptors. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2013; 110(12):
4804–4809. [PubMed: 23382250] 
20. Russo SJ, Charney DS. Next generation antidepressants. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America. 2013; 110(12):4441–4442. [PubMed: 23471996] 
21. Flight MH. Antidepressant epigenetic action. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013; 14:226.
22. Nasca C, Bigio B, Zelli D, Nicoletti F, McEwen BS. Mind the gap: glucocorticoids modulate 
hippocampal glutamate tone underlying individual differences in stress susceptibility. Molecular 
psychiatry. 2015; 20(6):755–763. [PubMed: 25178162] 
23. McEwen BS, Nasca C, Hodes GE, Kana V, Nestler EJ, Russo SJ. Glucocorticoids-IL6 crosstalk 
allows identification of inherent individual differences that predict and promote vulnerability to 
social stress. 2015 SfN Abstract. 
24. Nasca C, Orlando R, Marchiafava M, Boldrini P, Battaglia G, Scaccianoce S, et al. Exposure to 
predator odor and resulting anxiety enhances the expression of the alpha2 delta subunit of voltage-
sensitive calcium channels in the amygdala. Journal of neurochemistry. 2013; 125(5):649–656. 
[PubMed: 22849384] 
25. Hodes GE, Pfau ML, Leboeuf M, Golden SA, Christoffel DJ, Bregman D, et al. Individual 
differences in the peripheral immune system promote resilience versus susceptibility to social 
stress. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2014; 
111(45):16136–16141. [PubMed: 25331895] 
26. Lein ES, Hawrylycz MJ, Ao N, Ayres M, Bensinger A, Bernard A, et al. Genome-wide atlas of 
gene expression in the adult mouse brain. Nature. 445:168–176.
Lau et al.
Page 11
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 27. Magarinos AM, McEwen BS. Stress-induced atrophy of apical dendrites of hippocampal CA3c 
neurons: involvement of glucocorticoid secretion and excitatory amino acid receptors. 
Neuroscience. 1995; 69(1):89–98. [PubMed: 8637636] 
28. Nasca C, Xenos D, Barone Y, Caruso A, Scaccianoce S, Matrisciano F, et al. L-acetylcarnitine 
causes rapid antidepressant effects through the epigenetic induction of mGlu2 receptors. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2013; 110(12):4804–4809.
29. Goldwater DS, Pavlides C, Hunter RG, Bloss EB, Hof PR, McEwen BS, et al. Structural and 
functional alterations to rat medial prefrontal cortex following chronic restraint stress and recovery. 
Neuroscience. 2009; 164(2):798–808. [PubMed: 19723561] 
30. Sah P, Faber ES, Loped De Armentia M, Power J. The amygdaloid complex: anatomy and 
physiology. Physiol Rev. 2003; 83:803–834. [PubMed: 12843409] 
31. Nasca C, Zelli D, Bigio B, Piccinin S, Scaccianoce S, Nisticò R, et al. Stress dynamically regulates 
behavior and glutamatergic gene expression in hippocampus by opening a window of epigenetic 
plasticity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015; 112:14960–14965. [PubMed: 26627246] 
32. Nasca C, Zelli Danielle, Bigio Benedetta, Piccinin Sonia, Scaccianoce Sergio, Nisticò Robert, 
McEwen Bruce S. Stress dynamically regulates behavior and glutamatergic gene expression in 
hippocampus by opening a window of epigenetic plasticity. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences. 2015
33. Kishi T, Tsumori T, Yokota S, Yasui Y. Topographical projection from the hippocampal formation 
to the amygdala: a combined anterograde and retrograde tracing study in the rat. The Journal of 
comparative neurology. 2006; 496(3):349–368. [PubMed: 16566004] 
34. O'Leary OF, Cryan JF. A ventral view on antidepressant action: roles for adult hippocampal 
neurogenesis along the dorsoventral axis. Trends in pharmacological sciences. 2014; 35(12):675–
687. [PubMed: 25455365] 
35. Pettegrew JW, Levine J, McClure RJ. Acetyl-L-carnitine physical-chemical, metabolic, and 
therapeutic properties: relevance for its mode of action in Alzheimer's disease and geriatric 
depression. Molecular psychiatry. 2000; 5(6):616–632. [PubMed: 11126392] 
36. Wang W, Lu Y, Xue Z, Li C, Wang C, Zhao X, et al. Rapid-acting antidepressant-like effects of 
acetyl-l-carnitine mediated by PI3K/AKT/BDNF/VGF signaling pathway in mice. Neuroscience. 
2015; 285:281–291. [PubMed: 25463525] 
37. Schaevitz LR, Nicolai R, Lopez CM, D'Iddio S, Iannoni E, Berger-Sweeney JE. Acetyl-L-carnitine 
improves behavior and dendritic morphology in a mouse model of Rett syndrome. PloS one. 2012; 
7(12):e51586. [PubMed: 23227269] 
38. Fritz IB, McEwen BS. Effects of carnitine on fatty-acid oxidation by muscle. Science. 1959; 
129:334–335. [PubMed: 13624727] 
39. Nasca C, Zelli D, Lau T. McEwen BS mGlu2 is a key mediator in the responses to next-generation 
antidepressant treatments: epigenetic mechanisms of neuronal plasticity. 2014 SfN Abstract 2014. 
40. McEwen BS. Stress-induced remodeling of hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurons. Brain research. 
2015
41. Magariños AM, McEwen BS, Saboureau M, Pevet P. Rapid and reversible changes in 
intrahippocampal connectivity during the course of hibernation in European hamsters. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2006; 103(49):18775–
18780. [PubMed: 17121986] 
42. Arendt T, Stieler J, Strijkstra AM, Hut RA, Rudiger J, Van der Zee EA, et al. Reversible paired 
helical filament-like phosphorylation of tau is an adaptive process associated with neuronal 
plasticity in hibernating animals. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society 
for Neuroscience. 2003; 23(18):6972–6981. [PubMed: 12904458] 
43. Steger MF, Kashdan TB. Depression and Everyday Social Activity, Belonging, and Well-Being. 
Journal of counseling psychology. 2009; 56(2):289–300. [PubMed: 20428460] 
44. Bickart KC, Wright CI, Dautoff RJ, Dickerson BC, Barrett LF. Amygdala Volume and Social 
Network Size in Humans. Nature neuroscience. 2011; 14(2):163–164. [PubMed: 21186358] 
45. McEwen BS, Nasca C, Hodes GE, Kana V, Nestler EJ, Russo SJ. Glucocorticoids-IL6 crosstalk 
allows identification of inherent individual differences that predict and promote vulnerability to 
social stress. 2015 SfN Abstract. 
Lau et al.
Page 12
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 46. Krishnan V, Han MH, Graham DL, Berton O, Renthal W, Russo SJ, et al. Molecular adaptations 
underlying susceptibility and resistance to social defeat in brain reward regions. Cell. 2007; 
131(2):391–404. [PubMed: 17956738] 
47. Swanson LW, Petrovich GD. What is the amygdala? Trends Neurosci. 1998; 8:323–331.
48. Mouly, AM., Sullivan, R. Memory and plasticity in the olfactory system: from infancy to 
adulthood.. In: Menini, A., editor. The Neurobiology of Olfaction. CRC Press; Boca Raton, FL, 
USA: 2010. Chap 15
49. Li CI, Maglinao TL, Takahashi LK. Medial amygdala modulation of predator odor-induced 
unconditioned fear in the rat. Behavioral neuroscience. 2004; 118(2):324–332. [PubMed: 
15113258] 
Lau et al.
Page 13
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Rapidity and efficacy of LAC oral prophylactic treatment in enhancing resilience to 
stress
(a) Time course and design of LD screening to identify at-risk individuals and CRS 
paradigm, LAC prophylactic treatment and behavioral outcomes. (b,c) An oral treatment 
with LAC, 3 days prior to the end of the chronic stress, decreased immobility time in CRS 
mice at the forced swim test (b) and increased social interaction ratio in CRS mice (c), thus 
exerting a pro-resilient effects in blocking the occurrence of a depressive-like phenotype and 
social interaction impairments associated with prolonged 21day CRS. (FST: F1,24=20.03, 
p<0.001 (treatment), F1,24=14.87, p<0.001 (stress); SI: F1,28=19.9, p<0.001 (treatment), 
F1,28=6.09, p<0.05 (stress)). Bars represent mean+s.e.m., *indicate significant comparisons 
with all of the other groups, **P<0.01.***P<0.001.
Lau et al.
Page 14
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. MeA and BLA neuronal cell-types
Neurons within the sub-regions of the amygdala were distinguished as pyramidal, stellate or 
bipolar cells based on the morphology of the cell body and arborization of dendrites. 40x z-
stack photomicrographs of Golgi-impregnated neurons show MeA stellate neurons (top-left: 
round soma with more than two principal dendrites and no clear separation of basal and 
apical dendrites), MeA bipolar neurons (bottom-left: ovoid soma with two primary dendrites 
originating from two opposite poles of the cell body), BLA stellate neurons (top-right: 
cortical-like stellate cells with a round cell body and a complex dendritic tree with several 
radiating primary and secondary dendrites that extend in all directions), BLA pyramidal 
neurons (bottom-right: pyramidal-like shape soma with a thick principle dendrite that arises 
from the apex of the cell body, and multiple thinner principal dendrites that arises from the 
base and the sides of the soma). We note that stellate neurons in the BLA and MeA differ 
each other, whereby the first show a dendritic tree with a higher complexity as reflected by 
the longer dendrites and higher number of intersections.
Lau et al.
Page 15
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. LAC oral prophylactic treatment rapidly promotes structural plasticity of MeA 
stellate, but not bipolar, neurons
(a) Schematic of brain regional details along the dorso-ventral axis of the mouse brain with 
the bregma coordinates for the medial amygdala (MeA: highlighted in red), available from 
2015 Allen Institute for Brain Science. Allen Mouse Brain Atlas26. (b) Representative 
tracing of Golgi-impregnated stellate neurons in the MeA. (c,e) CRS induced retraction and 
decreased the number of intersections of MeA stellate neurons, whereas 3 days of oral 
treatment with LAC, administered prior to the end of CRS, promoted structural plasticity of 
MeA stellate neurons (Length: F1,24=6.7, p<0.05 (treatment); F1,24=4.26, p<0.05 (stress); 
Intersections: F1,24=4.58, p<0.05 (treatment); F1,24=3.03, p=0.09 (stress)). (d,f) 
Morphometric Sholl analysis in incremental steps of 15μm from the soma shows that MeA 
stellate neurons underwent the most pronounced decrease in length and number of 
intersections in CRS mice starting from a distance of 105μm from the soma (see also SIFig.
3). To note, Sholl analysis reveals that 3 days of LAC oral treatment promotes dendritic 
plasticity of MeA stellate neurons at the closer distance (75μm) from the soma (see also 
SIFig.3), suggesting that LAC prophylactic treatment induced growth of novel primary and 
secondary dendrites rather than reversing a pathological phenotype by elongation of CRS-
shrink dendrites. (g,h) MeA bipolar neurons were not affected by CRS and LAC treatment 
as the total dendritic length and number of intersections appeared similar to non-stressed 
control mice. Bars represent mean+s.e.m.,*indicate significant comparisons with all of the 
other groups, *P<0.01.**P<0.001.
Lau et al.
Page 16
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. BLA pyramidal, but not stellate, neurons show dendritic elongation in responses to 
prolonged 21day chronic stress and LAC antidepressant treatment
(a) Schematic of brain regional details along the dorso-ventral axis of the mouse brain with 
the bregma coordinates for the basolateral amygdala (BLA: highlighted in red), available 
from 2015 Allen Institute for Brain Science. Allen Mouse Brain Atlas26. (b) Representative 
tracing of Golgi-impregnated pyramidal neurons in the BLA. (c) CRS induced elongation of 
BLA pyramidal neurons and LAC treatment, administered prior to the end of CRS, further 
increased the total length of CRS pyramidal neurons in the BLA while promoting plasticity 
of the CRS-shrink MeA stellate neurons, as shown in Fig.3. (Length: F1,26=4.78, p<0.05 
(treatment); F1,26=38.86, p<0.0001 (stress)). (e) CRS resulted in increased number of total 
dendritic intersections in the BLA pyramidal neurons and this increase was further boosted 
by LAC oral treatment. (Intersections: F1,26=6.21, p<0.05 (treatment); F1,26=26.51, 
p=0.0001 (stress)). (d,f) Sholl-segmental analysis in incremental steps of 15μm from the 
soma shows that BLA pyramidal neurons underwent the most pronounced increase in length 
and number of intersections after CRS at a distance of 60μm from the soma. In CRS mice 
treated with LAC no increase was observed in the dendritic length at the various incremental 
shells, whereas the number of dendritic intersections showed an increase at a close distance 
of 30μm from the soma. (g,h) BLA stellate neurons were not affected by CRS and LAC 
treatment as the total dendritic length and number of intersections appeared similar to non-
stressed control mice. Bars represent mean+s.e.m., *indicate significant comparisons with 
all of the other groups, *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001.
Lau et al.
Page 17
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. LA stellate neurons are unaffected by prolonged 21day CRS and LAC treatment
(a) Schematic of brain regional details along the dorso-ventral axis of the mouse brain with 
the bregma coordinates for the lateral amygdala (LA: highlighted in red), available from 
2015 Allen Institute for Brain Science. Allen Mouse Brain Atlas26. (b,c) The dendritic 
length and number of intersections of LA stellate neurons were unaffected by 21day CRS 
and LAC treatment.
Lau et al.
Page 18
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
