 OPEN
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Glucose deficit triggers tau pathology and synaptic dysfunction
in a tauopathy mouse model
E Lauretti, J-G Li, A Di Meco and D Praticò
Clinical investigations have highlighted a biological link between reduced brain glucose metabolism and Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
Previous studies showed that glucose deprivation may influence amyloid beta formation in vivo but no data are available on the
effect that this condition might have on tau protein metabolism. In the current paper, we investigated the effect of glucose deficit
on tau phosphorylation, memory and learning, and synaptic function in a transgenic mouse model of tauopathy, the h-tau mice.
Compared with controls, h-tau mice with brain glucose deficit showed significant memory impairments, reduction of synaptic
long-term potentiation, increased tau phosphorylation, which was mediated by the activation of P38 MAPK Kinase pathway. We
believe our studies demonstrate for the first time that reduced glucose availability in the central nervous system directly triggers
behavioral deficits by promoting the development of tau neuropathology and synaptic dysfunction. Since restoring brain glucose
levels and metabolism could afford the opportunity to positively influence the entire AD phenotype, this approach should be
considered as a novel and viable therapy for preventing and/or halting the disease progression.
Translational Psychiatry (2017) 7, e1020; doi:10.1038/tp.2016.296; published online 31 January 2017
INTRODUCTION
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and related tauopathies are neurode-
generative disorders pathologically defined by the presence of
abundant and highly phosphorylated forms of the microtubule-
associated tau protein which later aggregates into fibrils and
finally forms the neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs).1 Although it is
known that the presence and abundance of NFTs correlates with
the severity of dementia and neuronal loss,2,3 the mechanisms
leading to the abnormal high phosphorylation of tau in the brain
of these patients remain unclear.
Consistent evidence has provided support for the notion that
that exposure to physiological and psychological stressors can
trigger tau phosphorylation in rodents. Among the different type
of stress, in recent years a lot of attention has been devoted to the
relationship between metabolic stress and brain function.4,5
Despite the fact that the brain can use ketone bodies in order
to maintain its basal functions, glucose is the main source of
energy for the organ and its depletion has been shown to induce
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress.5
Glucose deprivation can occur in a variety of conditions
including
cerebral
ischemia,
aging
and
neurodegenerative
diseases.6,7 Interestingly, positron emission tomography imaging
studies have shown that glucose utilization is lower in AD than in
age-matched healthy control brains.8 In support to this observa-
tion, previous studies have demonstrated that in the transgenic
mice Tg2576 (overexpressing the Swedish mutant of human APP),
energy
metabolism
inhibition
causes
a
post-transcriptional
increase in BACE‐1 levels, which leads to elevated Aβ formation
and deposition.9 On the other hand, we have previously reported
that in response to glucose deprivation neuronal cells manifest an
increase in tau phosphorylation via the activation of the P38
MAPK pathway.10 This in vitro observation supported the novel
hypothesis that energy deprivation may also have a role in the
development of tau neuropathology, the second most important
hallmark lesion of the AD brain. However, to the best of our
knowledge, so far no data are available supporting these in vitro
findings and their functional significance by demonstrating that
indeed a condition of glucose deprivation by increasing tau
phosphorylation will result in memory deficit and synaptic
dysfunction in vivo.
In the current study, we used a pharmacological model of
glucose deprivation and investigated its effect on tau phosphor-
ylation, synaptic function and cognition in a relevant transgenic
mouse model of tauopathy, the h-tau mouse. Under our
experimental condition, we found that, compared with controls,
glucose-deprived mice had impaired memory and reduced
synaptic long-term potentiation, which associated with a sig-
nificant increase in tau phosphorylation and apoptosis.
Taken together, to our knowledge, our findings provide the first
in vivo evidence that this metabolic stressor by influencing tau
metabolism
is
a
pleiotropic
and
active
modulator
of
the
pathogenesis of AD and related tauopathies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals and treatment
All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and
Usage Committee, in accordance with the US National Institutes of Health
guidelines. The h-tau mouse model implemented in this study was
previously described.11 Briefly, the mouse line, designed to express only
human tau, was generated by crossing of 8c tau mice, which express
all human tau isoforms, and tau knock-out mice. Animals were kept
in a pathogen-free environment, on a 12-h light/dark cycle and fed a
normal chow and water ad libitum. Male and female mice were used
throughout the studies and randomized into two groups: control (CTR) and
Department of Pharmacology and Center for Translational Medicine, Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence: Dr D Praticò,
Department of Pharmacology and Center for Translational Medicine, Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Temple University, 947, Medical Education and Research Building, 3500 North
Broad Street, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.
E-mail: praticod@temple.edu
Received 5 October 2016; revised 22 November 2016; accepted 15 December 2016
Citation: Transl Psychiatry (2017) 7, e1020; doi:10.1038/tp.2016.296
www.nature.com/tp
 2-deoxyglucose (DG). Starting at 6 months of age, each mouse was
administered with an intraperitoneal injection of 1 × PBS (CTR) (n = 10), or
1 g kg − 1 2-Deoxyglucose (DG) (n = 10) (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) once a
week. When they reached 10 months of age, mice underwent behavioral
testing as described below and then euthanized. After perfusion brains
were removed, gently rinsed in cold 0.9% phosphate-buffered saline and
immediately dissected in two halves. One half was immediately stored at
− 80 °C for biochemistry; the other half was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
in phosphate-buffered saline, pH7.4 for immunohistochemistry studies.
Behavioral tests
All the animals were handled for at least 3–4 consecutive days before
testing. They were tested in random order and the experimenter
conducting the tests was unaware of the treatment.
Y-maze
The Y-maze apparatus consisted of 3 arms 32 cm (long) 610 cm (wide) with
26 cm walls (San Diego Instruments, San Diego, CA, USA). Testing was
always performed in the same room and at the same time of the day to
ensure environmental consistency, as previously described.12 Briefly, each
mouse was placed in the center of the Y-maze and allowed to explore
freely through the maze during a 5-min session for the assessment of
spontaneous alternating behavior. The sequence and total number of arms
entered were video-recorded. Any entry into an arm was considered valid
if all four paws entered the arm. An alternation was defined as three
consecutive entries in three different arms (1,2,3 or 2,3,1 and so on). The
percentage alternation score was calculated using the following formula:
total alternation number/total number of entries − 2) × 100.
Morris water maze
A white circular plastic tank (122 cm in diameter) with walls 76 cm high,
filled with water maintained at 22° ± 2 °C, made opaque by the addition of
a nontoxic white paint, was used to perform the Morris water maze test, as
previously described.13 Briefly, mice were trained to swim to a submerged
Plexiglas platform from 4 different starting points, on a daily basis for a
total of 5 days. If they failed to find the platform within 60 s, they were
manually guided to the platform and allowed to remain there for 15 s.
Mice were trained to reach the training criterion of 20 s (escape latency).
Mice were assessed in the probe trial 24 h after the last training session.
The probe consisted in a free 180 s swim in the pool without platform.
Each animal’s performance was monitored using the Any-Maze video
tracking system, which provided data for the acquisition parameters
(latency to find the platform and distance swam and ) and the probe trial
parameters (number of entries in the target platform zone of the platform
and time in quadrants).
Immunoblot analyses
Primary antibodies used in the paper are summarized on Table 1.
Immunoblot analyses were performed as previously described.10,12 Briefly,
proteins were extracted in enzyme immunoassay buffer (RIPA) containing
250 mM Tris base, 750 mM NaCl, 5% NP-40, 25 mM EDTA, 2.5% sodium
deoxycholate, 0.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate and an EDTA-free protease and
phosphatase inhibitors cocktail tablet (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis,
IN, USA), sonicated, centrifuged at 45 000 r.p.m. for 45 min at 4 °C, and
supernatants used for the analysis. Total protein concentration was
determined by using BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA).
Samples were electrophoretically separated using 10% Bis–Tris gels or 3–
8% Tris–acetate gel (Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA, USA), according to the
molecular weight of the target molecule, and then transferred onto
nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad). They were blocked with Odyssey
blocking buffer for 1 h; and then incubated with primary antibodies
overnight at 4 °C. After three washing cycles with T-TBS, membranes were
incubated
with
IRDye
800CW
or
IRDye
680CW-labeled
secondary
antibodies (LI-COR Bioscience, Lincoln, NE, USA) at 22 °C for 1 h. Signals
were
developed
with
Odyssey
Infrared
Imaging
Systems
(LI-COR
Bioscience). Actin was always used as an internal loading control.
Formic acid insolubility assay
Mouse brain homogenates were sequentially extracted first in RIPA for the
tau soluble fractions and then in formic acid (FA) for the tau insoluble
fractions as previously described.12,13 Insoluble fractions were then
immunoblotted with HT-7 antibody.
Immunohistochemistry
Primary antibodies used in this study are listed on Table 1. Immunostaining
was performed as reported previously.12,13 Briefly, serial 6-μm thick coronal
sections were mounted on 3-aminopropyl triethoxysilane-coated slides.
Every eighth section from the habenular to the posterior commissure (8–
10 sections per animal) was examined using unbiased stereological
principles. The sections for testing total tau (HT-7), phospho-tau (PHF-1,
AT8, AT270), synaptophysin (SYP) and microtubule-associated protein-2
(MAP-2) were deparaffinized, hydrated, subsequently pretreated with 3%
H2O2 in methanol and then treated with citrate (10 mM) for antigen
retrieval. Sections were blocked in 2% fetal bovine serum and then
incubated with primary antibody overnight at 4 °C. The following day,
sections were incubated with biotinylated anti-mouse immunoglobulin G
(Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) and then developed by using
the avidin–biotin complex method (Vector Laboratories) with 3,3′-
diaminobenzidine as a chromogen. Consecutives sections were incubated
in the absence of primary antibodies to ensure specificity of staining.
Table 1.
Antibodies used in the study
Antibody
Immunogen
Host
Application
Source
HT7
aa of human Tau
Mouse
WB/IHC
Pierce
AT8
Peptide containing phospho-S202/T205
Mouse
WB/IHC
Pierce
AT180
Peptide containing phospho-T231/S235
Mouse
WB
Pierce
AT270
Peptide containing phospho-T181
Mouse
WB/IHC
Pierce
PHF-1
Peptide containing phospho-Ser396/S404
Mouse
WB/IHC
Dr Davies P.
PHF-13
Peptide containing phospho-Ser396
Mouse
WB
Pierce
JNK2/3
aa of human JNK2
Rabbit
WB
Cell Signaling
pJNK2/3
Peptide containing phospho-T183/185
Mouse
WB
Cell Signaling
P38
aa of human P38 MAPK
Rabbit
WB
Cell Signaling
pP38
aa around Thr180/182 of human P38 MAPK
Rabbit
WB
Cell Signaling
SYP
aa 221-313 of SYP of human origin
Mouse
WB/IHC
Santa Cruz
PSD95
Purified recombinant rat PSD-95
Rabbit
WB
Cell Signaling
MAP2
Bovine brain microtubule protein
Rabbit
WB/IHC
Millipore
Caspase 12
aa near the N-terminus of caspase 12 of mouse origin
Rabbit
WB
Cell Signaling
Caspase 3
aa 1-227 of procaspase 3 of human origin
Rabbit
WB
Santa Cruz
Caspase 7
aa near the N-terminus of caspase 7 of human origin
Rabbit
WB
Santa Cruz
Actin
aa C-terminus of Actin of human origin
Rabbit
WB
Santa Cruz
Abbreviations: aa, amino acid; IHC, immuno-histochemistry; PSD-95, postsynaptic density protein 95; SYP, synaptophysin; WB, western blot.
Glucose deficit and tau pathology
E Lauretti et al
2
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 Electrophysiology
Ten-month-old mice ((n = No. of slices/No. of animals): h-tau (n = 6/4); h-tau
+DG (n = 6/4)) were euthanized by rapid decapitation and brains placed
into ice-cold artificial cerebral spinal fluid (ACSF) in which sucrose (248 mM)
was
substituted
for
NaCl.
Analysis
was
performed
as
previously
described.14 Briefly, transverse hippocampal slices (400-μm thick) were
cut using a Vibratome 3000 plus (Vibratome, Bannockburn, IL, USA) and
placed in ACSF (124 nM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 2 mM NaH2PO4, 2.5 mM CaCl2,
2 mM MgSO4, 10 mM dextrose and 26 mM NaHCO3) at room temperature to
recover for 1 h and bubbled with 95% O2/5% CO2. Slices were transferred
to a recording chamber (Warner Instruments, Hamden, CT, USA) and
continuously perfused with ACSF at 1.5–2.0 ml min − 1 flow, bubbled with
95%O2/5% CO2 and maintained by an in-line solution heater (TC-324;
Warner Instruments) at 32–34 °C. Field excitatory postsynaptic potentials
(fEPSPs) from the CA1 stratum radiatum were recorded by using an
extracellular glass pipette (3–5 MΩ) filled with ACSF. Schaffer collateral/
commissural fibers in the stratum radiatum were stimulated with a bipolar
tungsten electrode placed 200–300 μm from the recording pipette.
Stimulation intensities were chosen to produce a fEPSP that was 1/3 of
the maximum amplitude, based on an input/output (I/O) curve using
stimulations of 0–300 μA, in increments of 20 μAs. Paired-pulse facilitation
experiments were performed using a pair of stimuli of the same intensity
delivered 20, 50, 100, 200 and 1000 ms apart. Baseline was recorded for
20 min before tetanization with pulses every 30 s. Long-term potentiation
(LTP) at CA3–CA1 synapses was induced by four trains of 100 Hz
stimulation delivered in 20 s intervals. Recordings were made every 30 s
for 2 h following tetanization. The fEPSP rise/slope (mV ms − 1) between 30
and 90% was measured offline using Clampfit 10.3 (Molecular Devices,
Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and normalized to the mean rise/slope of the baseline.
Slices were eliminated if an unstable baseline was produced or if the
normalized rise/slope dropped 420–50 mV ms − 1 in an ~ 10 min period.
All the tests were always performed by an experimenter who was unaware
of the treatment.
Primary neuron studies
Cortices from h-tau mouse pups (P0) were isolated and incubated in 1%
papain/Hanks balanced salt solution/.5 mmol l − 1 EDTA without Ca++ or
Mg++(Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) as previously described.14
Briefly, cells were plated in Neurobasal-A medium (Gibco Life Technolo-
gies, Grand Island, NY, USA) plus 10% fetal bovine serum on poly-D-lysine-
coated six-well plates at a density of 106 cells per well and kept at 37 °C. At
24 h after plating, medium was removed and replaced with Dulbecco's
modified Eagle’s medium plus B27 supplements and GlutaMAX (Gibco Life
Technologies) to promote neuronal survival and inhibit growth of non-
neuronal cells. Neurons were used for experimentation 7 days after plating,
when at ~ 70% confluence and treated with either Neurobasal-A medium
with glucose and without glucose for 24 h. After treatment, supernatants
were collected, and cells were harvested in lytic buffer for biochemical
analyses.
Data analysis
Unpaired Student’s t-test (two-sided) was performed using Prism 5.0
(GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA). All data are presented as mean ± s.
e.m. Significance was set at Po0.05.
RESULTS
Effect of glucose deprivation on memory
Starting at 6 months of age h-tau mice were randomized to
receive an intraperitoneal injection of DG or vehicle once a week
for 4 months. During the treatment no macroscopic differences
between the two groups were observed in terms of general daily
and motor activity, food and water intake, social behavior or
weight gain (Figure 1a). To assess the effect of glucose deprivation
on cognition, at the end of the treatment mice were tested in the
Y-maze and Morris water maze. No significant differences were
detected among the 2 groups of mice in regard to their general
motor activity, as assessed by the number of arm entries in the
Y-maze (Figure 1b). However, when we analyzed their exploratory
ability the DG group showed a statistically significant lower
percentage of alternations compared with the control group
(Figure 1b). Animals were then tested in the Morris water-maze
paradigm consisting on a visible platform training followed by
hidden platform testing with 4 probe trials per day. All mice in
each group were able to reach the training criterion within 5 days
and no differences were found during the training session as well
as in the number of entries and latency to first entry the target
platform zone in the probe test trial between the two groups
(Figure 1c).
Figure 1.
Glucose deprivation impairs cognition in the h-tau mice. (a) Body weights (g) of 2-deoxyglucose (DG)-treated and control (CTR) mice
were recorded at the beginning of the study and each month until the end when the mice were 10 months old. (b) Total number of entries
and percentage of alternation in the Y-maze for controls (CTR) and h-tau mice that underwent DG treatment (DG; *Po 0.05). (c) Morris water
maze test results for controls (CTR) and h-tau mice undergoing DG treatment (DG). Mice were tested initially in the cue test and then trained
for 5 days to reach a platform (training phase). After the last training session, for the probe trials phase mice were put back in the water maze
and the number of entries to the target platform zone as well as the distance until the first entry in the target platform zone recorded. Results
are mean ± s.e.m. (n = 9 mice per group).
Glucose deficit and tau pathology
E Lauretti et al
3
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 Glucose deprivation impairs synaptic function
Next, we explored the effect of the treatment with DG on synaptic
function. To this end, we investigated the basal synaptic transmission
in both groups by generating I/O curves and measuring fEPSPs
elicited in CA1 by stimulation of the Schaffer collaterals at increasing
strength of stimulus intensities. No differences were observed in the
I/O curves between the 2 groups of mice (Figure 2a). Measure of
short-term plasticity by examining paired-pulse facilitation, which is
due to an activity-dependent presynaptic modulation of transmitter
release, revealed also no differences between the two groups
analyzed (Figure 2b). Finally, we investigated LTP in the CA1 region of
the hippocampus, which is thought to be a measure of neuronal
plasticity and a major player in cognition. In this test, we found that,
compared with CTR, DG-treated mice had a statistically significant
reduction in LTP responses (Figure 2c to e).
Glucose deprivation promotes tau phosphorylation
Brains from the 2 groups of mice were harvested and cortices
assayed for the levels of total tau and its phosphorylation at
several epitopes. Levels of soluble total tau, as recognized by the
antibody HT7, were not different between the treated and
untreated mice (Figure 3a). In a similar manner, no differences
were noted for tau phosphorylation at Thr181 (AT270), Thr231/
ser235 (AT180) and, Ser396 (PHF-13) between the 2 groups
(Figure 3a). By contrast, compared with controls DG-treated mice
showed an increase in tau phosphorylated at Ser202/Thr205, as
recognized by AT8 antibody, and at Ser396/404, as recognized by
PHF1 antibody (Figure 3a and b). Immunohistochemical analyses
for tau and its phosphorylated isoforms confirmed the biochem-
ical results (Figure 3e). Finally, compared with controls brain
homogenates from DG-treated mice displayed a significant
increase in the level of total insoluble (formic acid-soluble) tau
fraction as recognized by the antibody HT7 (Figure 3c and d).
Glucose deprivation triggers P38 MAPK kinase activation
Because we observed changes in tau phosphorylation in the brain
cortex region of mice undergoing DG treatment, next we assayed
some of the kinases, which have been implicated in post-
translational modification of tau secondary to metabolic stress
conditions such as JNK and P38 MAPK.15 Immunoblot analysis of
JNK and its phosphorylated form (pJNK), did not show any
significant
differences
between
the
2
experimental
groups
(Figure 4a). By contrast, although there was no significant
difference in the levels of total P38 MAPK between the two
groups, compared with controls we observed that brains from DG-
treated mice had a significant increase in the levels of its active
phosphorylated form pP38 MAPK (Figure 4a and b).
Glucose deprivation affects synaptic integrity
Because changes in tau phosphorylation state and solubility have
been correlated with the extent of synaptic loss in AD,16 next brain
cortices were assayed for steady-state levels of three major
synaptic
proteins:
MAP2,
SYP
and
postsynaptic
density
protein 95 (PSD-95), indices of pre- and post-synaptic integrity,
respectively. As shown in Figure 5a, no differences were observed
between the two groups when PSD-95 levels were measured. By
contrast, compared with the control group, DG-treated mice
displayed a significant decrease in the levels of the main synaptic
proteins SYP and the dendritic protein MAP2 (Figure 5a and b).
These results were further confirmed in brain sections of the same
mice
when
assessed
by
immunohistochemical
analyses
(Figure 5c).
Glucose deprivation induces apoptosis
Since chronic energy deprivation as well as activation of the P38
MAPK pathway can also lead to cell apoptosis,17 we performed
immunoblotting
analysis
for
some
of
the
most
important
caspases, which have been involved in this pathway. As shown
in Figure 6, compared with control, DG-treated mice showed a
statistically significant increase in the level of the active-cleaved
forms of caspase‐3 and caspase‐12. By contrast, no significant
differences were observed between the two conditions when
procaspase‐12, pro‐caspase‐7, and caspase 7 steady‐state levels
were assayed (Figure 6).
Figure 2.
Glucose deprivation impairs synaptic function in the h-tau mice. (a) Input/output (I/O) curves and representative field excitatory
postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) at increasing stimulus strengths (0–300 μA) are shown for CTR and 2-deoxyglucose (DG) treated h-tau mice at
10 months of age. (b) Mean fEPSP slopes as a function of interpulse interval between the first and second fEPSPs evoked at CA3–CA1 synapses
in slices from the same mice at 20, 50, 100, 200, and 1000 milliseconds in the same animals. (c) fEPSP slopes were recorded for 2 h and
expressed as the percentage of pretetanus baseline in the same mice. (d) Long-term potentiation (LTP) magnitudes expressed as the
percentages of baseline for 0 to 10 min post-tetanus (***Po0.001). (e) For the same groups of mice, LTP magnitudes expressed as the
percentages of baseline for 110 to 120 min post-tetanus (***Po0001). Values represent mean ± s.e.m.
Glucose deficit and tau pathology
E Lauretti et al
4
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 Glucose deprivation modulates tau phosphorylation via P38 MAPK
To further confirm our observation, we used primary neuronal
cells isolated form the same h-tau transgenic mice. Neurons were
incubated overnight in either DMEM with glucose, or DMEM
without glucose and then cell lysate collected. Compared with
controls, we observed that glucose deprived cells did not show
any changes in total tau (HT7) levels (Figure 7). By contrast, we
observed that the same cells had a significant increase in tau
phosphorylation at epitopes Ser202/Thr205, as recognized by AT8
antibody and, at Ser396/404, as recognized by PHF1 antibody
(Figure 7). In addition, similar to the in vivo data, we observed a
significant increase in the levels of the phosphorylated form of
P38 MAPK kinase, but no changes in its total un-phosphorylated
form (i.e., P38) (Figure 7).
DISCUSSION
In recent years, growing experimental evidence has suggested a
direct association between altered glucose metabolism, brain
function and neurodegeneration.18,19
Consistent data have indeed established a link between
systemic metabolic dysfunction, such as diabetes, and dementing
Figure 3.
Glucose deprivation increases tau phosphorylation. (a) Representative western blot analyses of soluble total tau (HT-7) and
phosphorylated tau at residues S396/S404 (PHF-1), S396 (PHF-13), T231/S235 (AT180), T181 (AT270), and S202/T205 (AT8) in brain cortex
homogenates of CTR and 2-deoxyglucose (DG)-treated h-tau mice. (b) Densitometric analyses of the immunoreactivities shown in the
previous panel (*Po0.05). (c) Representative western blot analyses of sarkosyl-soluble tau (HT7) in brain cortex homogenates from CTR and
DG-treated h-tau. (d) Densitometric analyses of the immunoreactivities shown in the previous panel (*Po0.05). (e) Representative images of
immunohistochemistry analyses for soluble total tau (HT-7) and phosphorylated tau at residues S396/S404 (PHF-1), S202/T205 (AT8), and T181
(AT270) in brain sections of CTR and DG-treated h-tau mice (Scale bar: 100μm). Results are mean ± s.e.m.
Figure 4.
Glucose deprivation triggers P38 MAPK kinase activation. (a) Representative western blot analyses of JNK, pJNK, P38 and pP38 in
brain cortex homogenates from CTR and 2-deoxyglucose (DG)-treated h-tau mice (*Po0.05). (b) Densitometric analyses of the
immunoreactivities shown in the previous panel (*Po0.05). Results are mean ± s.e.m.
Glucose deficit and tau pathology
E Lauretti et al
5
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 disorders, suggesting that their recently observed significant
increase in incidence could be in part justified by the worldwide
dramatic rise in insulin resistance,
obesity and diabetes.20
The complexity of this relationship has been more recently
underscored by new evidence suggesting that the interaction
between altered metabolism and brain dysfunction can be also
bidirectional.21
In an effort to shed light into such a complicated matter, the
implementation of different mouse models has been widely
sought. To this end, it is of interest that together with human
studies, the investigations using these models have all convened
on a common final point: dysregulated glucose levels and
impaired energy metabolism secondary to reduced glucose
utilization are not only a clinical feature of AD but also important
contributors to its pathogenesis by activating the unfolded
protein response, increasing Aβ formation and deposition and,
in extreme cases, resulting in neuronal death.22,23 Velliquette
et al.24 reported that energy inhibition significantly increased Aβ
levels in the Tg2576 mouse model. More recently, this finding was
confirmed in an in vitro model of energy deficiency and in vivo, in
two APP transgenic mouse models of AD-like amyloidosis (that is,
Tg2576 and 5xFAD mice) in which pharmacological energy
deprivation promoted amyloidogenesis via BACE‐1‐dependent
mechanism.9 However, since these mice do not develop tau
neuropathology it remained to be fully investigated whether
energy deprivation was also capable to alter tau metabolism and
phosphorylation.
In a recent paper, we investigated the effect of glucose
deprivation on tau metabolism using a neuronal cell line, and
showed that under this experimental condition cells manifest an
increase in tau phosphorylation via the activation of the p38
MAPK.10 On the basis of our in vitro studies we predicted that the
increase in tau phosphorylation in an in vivo model of chronic
energy depletion would be ultimately responsible for cognitive
impairments and synaptic dysfunction.
To test this hypothesis, in the current paper we used a well‐
established model of impaired energy metabolism, by implement-
ing chronic administration of DG, a synthetic glucose analog in
which the C-2 hydroxyl group is substituted by hydrogen. DG
competitively inhibits glucose cellular uptake since it uses the
same system to enter the cell, the glucose transporters (that is,
GLUTs).25 Once inside the cell, DG is quickly phosphorylated to
Figure 5.
Glucose deprivation induces synaptic pathology in h-tau mice. (a) Representative western blot analyses of synaptophysin (SYP), post-
synaptic protein-95 (PSD-95), and MAP2 in brain cortex homogenates from CTR and DG-treated h-tau mice (*Po0.05). (b) Densitometric
analyses of the immunoreactivities shown in the previous panel (*Po0.05; n = 9 mice per group). Results are mean ± s.e.m. (c) Representative
images of immunohistochemistry analyses for SYP and MAP2 in brain sections of CTR and DG-treated h-tau mice (scale bar: 100μm).
Figure 6.
Glucose deprivation‐dependent neuronal apoptosis is mediated by caspases 12 and 3. (a) Representative western blot analysis for
procaspase‐12, procaspase‐3, procaspase‐7, caspase‐12, caspase‐3, and caspase‐7 in brain cortex homogenates from CTR and DG-treated
h-tau mice (*Po0.05). (b) Densitometric analyses of the immunoreactivities shown in the previous panel (*Po0.05). Results are mean ± s.e.m.
Glucose deficit and tau pathology
E Lauretti et al
6
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 form DG-6-phosphate which cannot be further metabolized via
the glycolytic pathway and starts accumulating. This event by
inhibiting cellular glycolysis at the initial step ultimately results in
intra-cellular glucose deprivation.26
At the end of the 4 months of treatment, behavioral tests
assessing learning and memory were performed in DG-treated
mice compared with controls. Interestingly, although we did not
observe any significant difference between the two groups in the
Morris water maze paradigm, a learning and memory retrieval test,
we found that DG-treated mice displayed cognitive impairment as
assessed in the Y-maze paradigm, which is considered a reliable
measure of spatial working memory in rodents.27 Considering that
both tests assay hippocampal-dependent memory tasks, we
hypothesize that the Y-maze at this particular age is probably a
more sensitive test for detecting early behavioral impairments in
this transgenic mouse model of tauopathy.28
In search for a biochemical substrate of the behavioral data, we
evaluated the direct effect of glucose deprivation on synaptic
function
and
transmission
by
performing
electrophysiology
studies. First, we observed that between the two groups of mice
there were no significant differences in the basal synaptic
transmission, indicating that this function is not altered by the
treatment. Additionally, no significant differences were noted also
when we measured short-term plasticity by examining paired-
pulse facilitation, which is secondary to an activity-dependent
presynaptic modulation of transmitter release.29 This observation
suggests that the transient increase in the concentration of intra-
terminal calcium produced by an invading action potential is
similar between the two groups. However, when we assessed the
LTP response, which is a type of neuronal plasticity that is thought
to have a major role in learning and memory functions,30 we
found that DG-treated mice had a statistically significant reduc-
tion at 10 min as well as 120 min when compared with the
control group.
Considering the age of the mice in our study, we hypothesize
that the DG treatment acts as a trigger to exacerbate and
accelerate the ongoing pathological changes secondary to the
transgene expressed by the mice. Thus, it is known that in the
h-tau mice both the behavior deficits as well as LTP changes are
typically observed at a later age-time point than the one we have
chosen.11,28
Memory deficits were associated with a significant increase in
pP38 MAPK-dependent tau phosphorylation at specific epitopes
as recognized by the AT8 and PHF1 antibodies along with a
significant accumulation of tau in its insoluble form.
Accumulating evidence suggest that P38 MAPK may play an
important role in the development of AD pathology.31,32 Several
studies have shown that the active form of this kinase is
associated
with
neuritic
Aβ‐amyloid
plaques
and
tau
NFT
pathology in postmortem brains of AD patients and that it occurs
at very early stage of the disease.33,34 This kinase exists in four
different isoforms (α, β, γ, δ) and, when activated by dual
phosphorylation at Thr180 and Tyr182, directly promotes tau
phosphorylation.34 The activation of this kinase can be triggered
by many stimuli and stressors such as UV light, heat, osmotic
shock,
inflammatory
cytokines,
ER
stress
and
glucose
deprivation.35 Thus, it is not surprising that under our experi-
mental conditions we observed a specific and selective activation
of this kinase. Of interest in the context of our paper, is also the
recent report that an increased activity of pP38 MAPK is a
significant
contributor
to
LTP
inhibition
and
synaptic
dysfunction.36
Besides synaptic dysfunction, aberrant accumulation of hyper-
phosphorylated tau isoforms and its insoluble fibrils can also lead
to synaptic loss, typically represented by decreased levels of pre-
and post-synaptic protein markers of synaptic integrity.37 Thus,
confirming this aspect of the neurobiology of phosphorylated tau
we found that compared with controls DG-treated h-tau mice had
a significant reduction in the steady state levels of 2 major of
these synaptic markers, SYP and MAP2, which further explains the
deficit in working memory observed in the same animals.
Tau phosphorylation is known to influence not only neuroplas-
ticity, but also neuronal survival by affecting the dendritic/synaptic
remodeling seen in the hippocampus as a response to environ-
mental stimuli and stress.38 Supporting these observations, in our
study we found that compared with controls glucose-deprived
Figure 7.
Glucose deprivation modulates tau phosphorylation via P38 MAPK kinase. (a) Representative western blots of total tau (HT7) and
phosphorylated tau at residues S202/T205 (AT8) and S396/S404 (PHF-1) in primary cortical neuronal cells from h-tau mice incubated with
normal medium (CTR) or glucose-deprived (-GLU) medium. (b) Densitometric analyses of the immunoreactivities to the antibodies shown in
the previous panel (*Po0.05, **Po0.01). (c) Representative western blot analyses for P38 and pP38 in primary cortical neurons from h-tau
mice incubated with normal medium (CTR) or glucose-deprived (-GLU) medium. (d) Densitometric analyses of the immunoreactivities to the
antibodies shown in the previous panel (*Po0.05). Values represent mean ± s.e.m.
Glucose deficit and tau pathology
E Lauretti et al
7
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 mice in addition to higher phosphor-tau displayed biochemical
markers of apoptosis, as shown by the increased steady state
levels of the cleaved forms of caspase 3 and 12.
Taken together our findings could provide a novel and plausible
molecular mechanism linking repeated episodes of hypoglycemia
to the development of AD neuropathology.
In fact there are reports that super tight glucose control with
insulin Rx increases risk for hypoglycemic episodes, and repeated
hypoglycemic episodes have been implicated as part of the
diabetes-dementia syndrome.39
In summary, the findings presented in this paper provide the
first
in
vivo
experimental
evidence
that
impaired
glucose
metabolism and utilization by activating the P38 MAPK kinase
pathway triggers tau phosphorylation, neuronal apoptosis, impairs
memory, synaptic integrity and function in a relevant transgenic
mouse model of tauopathy. Therefore, drugs targeting this kinase
in the brain may represent a suitable therapeutic approach for the
treatment of both AD and related tauopathies for which impaired
glucose utilization is an established risk factor.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was in part supported by the Wanda Simone Endowment fund for
Neuroscience. We kindly thank Dr Peter Davies for generous gift of the PHF-1
antibody.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
EL and DP designed the study, developed the experimental design, performed
data analyses, and wrote the paper. EL and J-GL performed the experiments. EL
and ADM designed and performed the electrophysiology experiments. All
authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.
REFERENCES
1 Iqbal K, Liu F, Gong CX. Tau and neurodegenerative disease: the story so far. Nat
Rev Neurol 2016; 12: 15–27.
2 Arriagada PV, Growdon JH, Hedley‐Whyte ET, Hyman BT. Neurofibrillary tangles
but not senile plaques parallel duration and severity of Alzheimer's disease.
Neurology 1992; 42: 631–639.
3 Riley KP, Snowdon DA, Markesbery WR. Alzheimer's neurofibrillary pathology and
the spectrum of cognitive function: findings from the Nun Study. Ann Neurol
2002; 51: 567–577.
4 Rissman RA. Stress-induced tau phosphorylation: functional neuroplasticity or
neuronal vulnerability? J Alzheimer’s Dis 2009; 18: 453–457.
5 De Felice FG, Lourenco MV. Brain metabolic stress and neuroinflammation at the
basis of cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease. Front Aging Neurosci 2015; 7:
94.
6 González-Moreno EI, Cámara-Lemarroy CR, González-González JG, Góngora-Rivera
F. Glycemic variability and acute ischemic stroke: the missing link?. Transl Stroke
Res 2014; 5: 638–646.
7 Castellano CA, Nugent S, Paquet N, Tremblay S, Bocti C, Lacombe G et al. Lower
brain 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake but normal 11C-acetoacetate metabolism
in mild Alzheimer's disease dementia. J Alzheimer’s Dis 2015; 43: 1343–1353.
8 Lange C, Suppa P, Frings L, Brenner W, Spies L, Buchert R. Optimization of sta-
tistical single subject analysis of brain FDG PET for the prognosis of mild cognitive
impairment-to-Alzheimer's disease conversion. J Alzheimer’s Dis 2015; 49:
945–959.
9 O'Connor T, Sadleir KR, Maus E, Velliquette RA, Zhao J, Cole SL et al. Phosphor-
ylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2α increases BACE1 levels and pro-
motes amyloidogenesis. Neuron 2008; 60: 988–1009.
10 Lauretti E, Pratico’ D. Glucose deprivation increases tau phosphorylation via P38
mitogen‐activated protein kinase. Aging Cell 2015; 14: 1067–1074.
11 Andorfer C, Kress Y, Espinoza M, de Silva R, Tucker KL, Duff K et al. Age-dependent
impairment of cognitive and synaptic function in the htau mouse model of tau
pathology. J Neurosci 2009; 29: 10741–10749.
12 Di Meco A, Lauretti E, Vagnozzi A, Praticò D. Zileuton restores memory impair-
ments and reverses amyloid and tau pathology in aged AD mice. Neurobiol Aging
2014; 35: 2458–2464.
13 Giannopoulos PF, Chu J, Joshi YB, Sperow M, Li JG, Kirby LG et al. 5-lipoxygenase
activating protein reduction ameliorates cognitive deficit, synaptic dysfunction,
and neuropathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Biol Psychiatry
2013; 74: 348–356.
14 Giannopoulos PF, Chu J, Sperow M, Li JG, Yu WH, Kirby LG et al. Pharmacologic
inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase improves memory, rescues synaptic dysfunction, and
ameliorates tau pathology in a transgenic model of tauopathy. Biol Psychiatry
2015; 78: 693–701.
15 Cheung WD, Hart GW. AMP-activated protein kinase and p38 MAPK activate
O-GlcNAcylation of neuronal proteins during glucose deprivation. J Biol Chem
2008; 283: 13009–13020.
16 Lasagna-Reeves CA, Castillo-Carranza DL, Sengupta U, Clos AL, Jackson GR, Kayed
R. Tau oligomers impair memory and induce synaptic and mitochondrial dys-
function in wild-type mice. Mol Neurodegen 2011; 6: 39.
17 De la Cadena SG, Hernández-Fonseca K, Camacho-Arroyo I, Massieu L. Glucose
deprivation induces reticulum stress by the PERK pathway and caspase-7- and
calpain-mediated caspase-12 activation. Apoptosis 2014; 19: 414–427.
18 Mergenthaler P, Lindauer U, Dienel GA, Meise A. Sugar for the brain: the role of
glucose in physiological and pathological brain function. Trends Neurosci 2013; 36:
587–597.
19 Sato N, Morishita R. The roles of lipid and glucose metabolism in modulation of β-
amyloid, tau, and neurodegeneration in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease.
Front Aging Neurosci 2015; 7: 199.
20 Stoeckel LE, Arvanitakis Z, Gandy S, Small D, Kahn CR, Pascual-Leone A et al.
Complex mechanisms linking neurocognitive dysfunction to insulin resistance
and other metabolic dysfunction. F1000Research 2016; 5: 353.
21 Biessels GJ, Strachan MW, Visseren FL, Kappelle LJ, Whitmer RA. Dementia and
cognitive decline in type 2 diabetes and prediabetic stages: towards targeted
interventions. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2014; 2: 246–255.
22 Chung J, Yoo K, Kim E, Na DL, Jeong Y. Glucose Metabolic Brain Networks in Early-
Onset vs. Late-Onset Alzheimer's Disease. Front Aging Neurosci 2016; 8: 159.
23 Fonseca AC, Ferreiro E, Oliveira CR, Cardoso SM, Pereira CF. Activation of the
endoplasmic reticulum stress response by the amyloid-beta 1-40 peptide in brain
endothelial cells. Biochim Biophys Acta 2013; 1832: 2191–2203.
24 Velliquette RA, O'Connor T, Vassar R. Energy inhibition elevates beta-secretase
levels and activity and is potentially amyloidogenic in APP transgenic mice:
possible early events in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis. J Neurosci 2005; 25:
10874–10883.
25 Kurtoglu M, Maher JC, Lampidis TJ. Differential toxic mechanisms of 2-deoxy-D-
glucose versus 2-fluoredeoxy-D-glucos in hypoxic and normoxic tumor cells.
Antioxid Redox Signal 2007; 9: 1383–1390.
26 Combs DJ, Reuland DS, Martin DB, Zelenock GB, D'Alecy LG. Glycolytic inhibition
by 2-Deoxyglucose reduces hyperglycemia-associated mortality and morbidity in
the ischemic rat. Stroke 1986; 17: 989–994.
27 Aggleton JP, Hunt PR. Rawlins JNP. The effects of hippocampal lesions upon
spatial and non-spatial tests of working memory. Behav Brain Res 1986; 19:
133–146.
28 Gerson J, Castillo-Carranza DL, Sengupta U, Bodani R, Prough DS, DeWitt DS et al.
Tau oligomers derived from traumatic brain injury cause cognitive impairment
and accelerate onset of pathology in htau mice. Neurotrauma 2016; 33:
2034–2043.
29 Zucker RS, Regehr WG. Short-term synaptic plasticity. Annu Rev Physiol 2002; 64:
355–405.
30 Kandel ER, Schwartz JH. Molecular biology of learning: modulation of transmitter
release. Science 1982; 218: 433–443.
31 Wang Q, Walsh DM, Rowan MJ, Selkoe DJ, Anwyl R. Block of long-term poten-
tiation by naturally secreted and synthetic amyloid beta-peptide in hippocampal
slices is mediated via activation of the kinases c-Jun N-terminal kinase, cyclin-
dependent kinase 5, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase as well as meta-
botropic glutamate receptor type 5. J Neurosci 2004; 24: 3370–3378.
32 Dai HL, Hu WY, Jiang LH, Li L, Gaung XF, Xiao ZC. p38 MAPK inhibition improves
synaptic plasticity and memory in angiotensin II-dependent hypertensive mice.
Sci Rep 2016; 6: 27600.
33 Peel AL, Sorscher N, Kim JY, Galvan V, Chen S, Bredesen DE. Tau phosphorylation
in Alzheimer's disease: potential involvement of an APP-MAP kinase complex.
Neuro Mol Med 2004; 5: 205–218.
34 Reynolds CH, Betts JC, Blackstock WP, Nebreda AR, Anderton BH. Phosphorylation
sites on tau identified by nano-electrospray mass spectrometry: differences in vitro
between the mitogen activated protein kinases ERK2, c-Jun N-terminal kinase and
P38, and glycogen synthase kinase-3beta. J Neurochem 2000; 74: 1587–1595.
35 Zarubin T, Han J. Activation and signaling of the p38 MAP kinase pathway. Cell Res
2005; 15: 11–18.
Glucose deficit and tau pathology
E Lauretti et al
8
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
 36 Munoz L, Ammit AJ. Targeting p38 MAPK pathway for the treatment of
Alzheimer's disease. Neuropharmacology 2010; 58: 561–568.
37 Jadhav S, Cubinkova V, Zimova I, Brezovakova V, Madari A, Cigankova V et al.
Tau-mediated synaptic damage in Alzheimer’s disease. Transl Neurosci 2015; 6:
214–226.
38 Kopeikina KJ, Hyman BT, Spires-Jones TL. Soluble forms of tau are toxic in
Alzheimer’s disease. Transl Neurosci 2012; 3: 223–233.
39 Geijselaers SL, Sep SJ, Stehouwer CD, Biessels GJ. Glucose regulation, cognition,
and brain MRI in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2015; 3: 75–89.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017
Glucose deficit and tau pathology
E Lauretti et al
9
Translational Psychiatry (2017), 1 – 9
