 Age and Ageing 2017; 46: 600–607
doi: 10.1093/ageing/afx005
Published electronically 24 January 2017
© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British Geriatrics Society.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
STOPPFrail (Screening Tool of Older Persons
Prescriptions in Frail adults with limited life
expectancy): consensus validation
AMANDA HANORA LAVAN1,2, PAUL GALLAGHER1,2, CAROLE PARSONS3, DENIS O’MAHONY1,2
1Cork University Hospital Group – Geriatric Medicine, Cork, Ireland
2University College Cork – National University of Ireland, Medicine, Cork, Ireland
3Queen’s University Belfast – School of Pharmacy, Belfast BT9 7BL, Northern Ireland, UK
Address correspondence to: A. H. Lavan. Department of Medicine (Geriatrics), University College Cork, Cork University
Hospital, Wilton, Cork T12DC4A, Ireland. Tel: +353 21 4922396; Fax: +353 851561039/+353 21 4922829.
Email: amandalavan@gmail.com
Abstract
Objective: to validate STOPPFrail, a list of explicit criteria for potentially inappropriate medication (PIM) use in frail older
adults with limited life expectancy.
Design: a Delphi consensus survey of an expert panel comprising academic geriatricians, clinical pharmacologists, palliative
care physicians, old age psychiatrists, general practitioners and clinical pharmacists.
Setting: Ireland.
Subjects: seventeen panellists.
Methods: STOPPFrail criteria were initially created by the authors based on clinical experience and literature appraisal. Criteria
were organised according to the physiological system; each criterion accompanied by an explanation. Using Delphi consensus
methodology, panellists ranked their agreement with each criterion on a 5-point Likert scale and provided written feedback.
Criteria with a median Likert response of 4/5 (agree/strongly agree) and a 25th centile of ≥4 were included in the final list.
Results: all panellists completed three Delphi rounds. Thirty criteria were proposed, 27 were accepted. The first two criteria sug-
gest deprescribing medications without indication or where compliance is poor. The remaining 25 criteria include lipid-lowering
therapies, alpha-blockers for hypertension, anti-platelets, neuroleptics, memantine, proton-pump inhibitors, H2-receptor antago-
nists, anti-spasmodic agents, theophylline, leukotriene antagonists, calcium supplements, bone anti-resorptive therapy, selective
oestrogen receptor modulators, non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, corticosteroids, 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors, alpha-1-selective
blockers, muscarinic antagonists, oral diabetic agents, ACE-inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, systemic oestrogens, multi-
vitamins, nutritional supplements and prophylactic antibiotics. Consensus could not be reached on the inclusion of acetylcholi-
nesterase inhibitors. Full consensus was reached on the exclusion of anticoagulants and antidepressants from the list.
Conclusion: STOPPFrail comprises 27 criteria relating to medications that are potentially inappropriate in frail older
patients with limited life expectancy. STOPPFrail may assist physicians in deprescribing medications in these patients.
Keywords: frail, life expectancy, deprescribing, polypharmacy, explicit criteria older people
Introduction
Population demographics are changing globally, with the great-
est proportional increases seen in those aged ≥70 years [1].
Many older people are surviving longer with complex co-
morbid illnesses including dementia, chronic kidney disease,
cardiovascular disease, chronic lung disease and cancer,
many of which contribute to frailty and poor survival prog-
nosis [2, 3]. Chronic illnesses coupled with normal physio-
logical ageing can have a negative impact on cognition and
functional ability. In such patients, the final months of life
are often characterised by frailty and increased dependency
thus requiring re-evaluation of treatment goals, particularly
medications intended to have long-term preventative effects
600
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/4/600/2948308 by guest on 02 June 2019
 such as lipid-lowering drugs, anti-diabetic agents and cogni-
tive enhancing drugs.
Nursing home residents are usually frail, with high levels
of functional dependency, multiple co-morbid illnesses and
high levels of medication use [4, 5]. In Ireland, 6% of adults
aged ≥65 years live in nursing homes, increasing to 12% in
those 80–84 years and 25% in those over 85 years [6]. In
the United States, similar figures are seen with ~5% of
adults’ ≥67 years living in institutional care [7]. These pro-
portions are likely to increase with current demographic trends.
Currently, the median length of time from nursing home
admission to death in the United States is 5 months and within
1 year of admission, 65% of residents have died [8]. Clearly,
the majority of older patients requiring admission to nurs-
ing homes have a limited life expectancy compared with
those residing in the community. However, this frail group
represents some of the highest consumers of prescription
medications, despite a clearly reduced likelihood of long-
term clinical benefit. The SHELTER study reports the rate
of polypharmacy (5–9 drugs) and excessive polypharmacy
(≥10 drugs) in nursing home residents to be 48.7 and
24.3%, respectively [9].
Inappropriate prescribing (IP) is also prevalent in older
adults. IP pertains to the mis-prescribing, overprescribing
and under prescribing of medications in the context of a
person’s co-morbidities, full medication regime, functional
and cognitive status as well as treatment goals and life
expectancy [10]. In one US study of nursing home residents
with dementia, more than half received at least one daily
drug of questionable benefit [11]. Polypharmacy and IP in
older adults are linked to adverse drug events (ADEs),
which can have a negative impact particularly on frail,
multi-morbid nursing home residents [12].
Despite the high prevalence rates of polypharmacy and
IP in the nursing home population, there is a paucity of evi-
dence regarding the deprescribing of medications in older
frail people with poor survival prognosis. Deprescribing
refers to the process of tapering or stopping medications,
aimed at reducing polypharmacy and improving patient
outcomes. Although healthcare professionals, patients and
their relatives all acknowledge the burden of polypharmacy
for older people including administration time, adverse
effects and cost, all groups display passivity towards depre-
scribing [13]. General practitioners (GPs) cite many chal-
lenges to deprescribing including organisational factors,
suboptimal medical and pharmacy records, limited time and
limited training of nursing staff. Consequently, less than
half use a consistent approach to deprescribing [14]. The
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence recom-
mend annual medication reviews in care home residents,
during which appropriateness of medications should be
optimised including deprescribing where necessary [15]. For
community dwelling older adults with chronic diseases, no
time frame is suggested [16, 17].
Although frailty is sometimes difficult to define, it is
common in later life and increases with age [18]. Over
50% of nursing home residents [4] and 17% of community
dwelling older adults are considered frail [19]. In the
United Kingdom, 14% of hospital admissions have at least
one frailty syndrome [20]. Not all patients who are frail have
a limited life expectancy, however, numerous studies link
frailty to worsening disability, hospitalisation and death [21].
In patients with frailty and limited life expectancy, medication
review should primarily focus on deprescribing and symptom
management, rather than aggressive preventative strategies.
Numerous explicit prescribing tools aim to guide clini-
cians on cessation of PIMs including Beers [22], STOPP/
START [23] and FORTA criteria [24]. STOPP/START cri-
teria have been shown to improve medication appropriate-
ness [25, 26] and reduce the incidence of adverse drug
reactions in hospitalised older adults [27]. However, these
comprehensive tools are designed to detect common and
preventable PIMs in the general older population and not
specifically in frailer people with limited life expectancy.
Indeed, STOPP/START criteria have limited applicability
in this cohort. For instance, patients with limited life expect-
ancy would be unlikely to survive long enough to derive
benefit from most medications listed in the START criteria.
Furthermore, STOPP criteria do not suggest discontinuing
major drugs classes that are least likely to have benefits in
the last year of life, e.g. statins. Therefore, with the accepted
need for deprescribing in the frail older population, there is
a clear associated need for specific explicit criteria to guide
the prescriber. To date, no explicit guidelines exist for depre-
scribing in frailer older people with limited life expectancy,
other than NORGEP-NH criteria, which are specific to the
nursing home population [28].
We aimed to develop an explicit tool, called STOPPFrail,
to assist clinicians with deprescribing medications in frailer old-
er adults with limited life expectancy in all healthcare settings.
Methods
Draft STOPPFrail criteria
The authors, all of whom have recognised expertise in geriat-
ric pharmacotherapy, compiled the initial draft of STOPPFrail
indicators and arranged them according to physiological sys-
tems, similar to STOPP/START criteria. We then identified
the target population for whom these criteria would be applic-
able, i.e. persons with (i) end-stage irreversible pathology,
(ii) poor one year survival prognosis, (iii) severe physical func-
tional impairment or cognitive impairment of both and those
patients where (iv) symptom control is the priority rather than
prevention of disease. Since the most consistent predictors of
mortality are co-morbidities and functional impairment [29],
our definition of patients who are appropriate for deprescrib-
ing according to STOPPFrail criteria was based on these
essential indicators, rather than the presence of specific dis-
eases, such as dementia or cancer. Also incorporated in the
tool are challenges associated with medication use in this
population, such as administration time and physical discom-
fort, as these have been reported by healthcare professionals,
patients and their families to be of concern [13].
STOPPFrail: consensus validation
601
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/4/600/2948308 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Following this, the evidence base for each drug or drug
class was checked using the British National Formulary and
an extensive literature review, limited to the last 20 years.
Literature searches of PubMed, Cinahl and Google Scholar
were undertaken. Searches included the drug in question with
key words such as ‘life expectancy’, ‘frailty’, ‘older adults’,
‘poor prognosis’, ‘deprescribing’, ‘IP’ and ‘ADEs’. The draft
criteria were agreed on a consensus basis by the authors and
subsequently distributed to a panel of experts for validation
by the Delphi technique [30], an established method for
achieving consensus. The Delphi method was used for this
research because of the lack of rigorous randomised con-
trolled evidence supporting the long-term benefits of pre-
ventive drugs in frailer older adults with complex co-
morbidities and limited life expectancy; such patients are
commonly excluded from clinical trials of drug therapies [31].
Expert panel selection
In June 2015, 25 experts were invited to participate in the
Delphi process. Panellists were selected on the basis of their
recognised academic credentials, clinical practice, experience
and geographical diversity. After the study design and aims
were explained to each participant, 17 agreed to participate.
The panel consisted of consultant geriatricians (n = 6), clin-
ical pharmacologists (n = 3), old age psychiatrists (n = 1),
palliative care physicians (n = 3), as well as senior academic
primary care physicians (n = 2) and clinical pharmacists with
an interest in geriatric pharmacotherapy (n = 2). All of the
panellists were affiliated with Irish university teaching hospi-
tals (two in Northern Ireland). The panel was provided with
an electronic repository containing supporting references for
the proposed STOPPFrail criteria. Panellists’ competed the
Delphi process between July 2015 and February 2016.
Data collection and analysis
Each round was sent to the panellists using an online survey
(SurveyMonkey®). The first Delphi round consisted of 30
criteria. Each criterion was presented in the same format,
i.e. a drug or drug class deemed potentially inappropriate
followed by an explanatory sentence. Panellists rated their
agreement with each statement on a 5-point Likert scale,
where 5 = strongly agree, 4 = agree, 3 = neutral, 2 = dis-
agree, 1 = strongly disagree, 0 = unable to offer an opinion
[32]. In Round 1, panellists were also asked to offer sugges-
tions or comments (including new drugs) as appropriate.
Statistical analysis
For each statement, consensus was based on the median
Likert response and interquartile range. A median value of 4
or 5 with a 25th centile of ≥4 was accepted for inclusion in
the tool, i.e. only statements with at least 75% of respon-
dents agreeing or strongly agreeing were included. Proposed
criteria with a median value of ≤3 were rejected: those with
a median value of 4 or 5 and a 25th centile of <4 were
rephrased in accordance with panellists’ suggestions and
included in the next Delphi round. Statistical analysis was
performed using IBM SPSS® Statistics version 22.
Results
All panellists completed the Delphi validation process in
three rounds (Figure 1); 27 criteria comprise the final
STOPPFrail tool (Table 1). Full statistical analysis (i.e. the
phrasing of criteria and the distribution of the responses
for each round) is available in the Supplementary data,
available in Age and Ageing online.
In Round 1, 20 criteria were accepted. The first pro-
posed criterion included in STOPPFrail was a general state-
ment that any drug prescribed without a clinical indication
should be discontinued. The remaining 19 criteria accepted
included lipid-lowering agents, alpha-blockers for hyperten-
sion, neuroleptics, proton-pump inhibitors, theophyllines,
leukotriene receptor antagonists, selective oestrogen receptor
modulators (SEORMs), non-steroidal anti-inflammatories,
steroids, 5-alpha reductase inhibitors and alpha-blockers in
catheterised patients, muscarinic antagonists, diabetic oral
agents, angiotension-converting-enzyme inhibitors, angio-
tensin receptor antagonists, multivitamins and nutritional
supplements.
Two criteria were rejected in Round 1. The first was the
prescription of anticoagulants as a preventative measure.
Our research group proposed discontinuation of anticoa-
gulants as we considered that the bleeding risk and cost of
treating outweighed the potential benefits to patients in
whom cognition and function were poor. Panellists agreed
that in the majority of people meeting the criteria for
STOPPFrail, anticoagulants should be stopped; however,
this criterion was rejected due to their concern over the
minority of patients in whom stopping anticoagulants
would be potentially inappropriate. Specifically, the major-
ity considered that, regardless of frailty and life expectancy,
stroke was an unfavourable outcome. Both panellists and
the authors agreed that individual clinical judgement
should be applied based on individual preferences and pri-
orities with regard to anti-coagulation. In recent years, anti-
coagulation has become easier, safer and more efficient
Final STOPPfrail criteria
27 criteria
Round 3 [2 criteria]
0 accepted
0 rejected
2 inconclusive after 3
rounds despite inclusion
of panel's suggestions
Round 2 [8 criteria]
6 accepted
0 rejected
2 prepared for round 3
following the panel's 
suggestions
Round 1 [30 criteria]
20 accepted
2 rejected
8 prepared for round 2
following panel's suggestions
Figure 1. Flow chart of Delphi process.
A. H. Lavan et al.
602
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/4/600/2948308 by guest on 02 June 2019
 due to novel anticoagulant drugs. Therefore, panellists felt
that in patients receiving anticoagulants with minimal side
effects, continuation was warranted.
The second criterion rejected in Round 1 was the use of
antidepressants
in
patients
with
advanced
dementia.
Reasons for rejection included possible benefits outside
Table 1. Final STOPPFrail criteria
STOPPFrail is a list of potentially inappropriate prescribing indicators
designed to assist physicians with stopping such medications in older
patients (≥65 years) who meet ALL of the criteria listed below:
(1) End-stage irreversible pathology
(2) Poor one year survival prognosis
(3) Severe functional impairment or severe cognitive impairment or both
(4) Symptom control is the priority rather than prevention of disease progression
The decision to prescribe/not prescribe medications to the patient,
should also be influenced by the following issues:
(1) Risk of the medication outweighing the benefit
(2) Administration of the medication is challenging
(3) Monitoring of the medication effect is challenging
(4) Drug adherence/compliance is difficult
Section A: General
A1: Any drug that the patient persistently fails to take or tolerate despite
adequate education and consideration of all appropriate formulations.
A2. Any drug without clear clinical indication.
Section B: Cardiovascular system
B1. Lipid lowering therapies (statins, ezetimibe, bile acid sequestrants,
fibrates, nicotinic acid and acipimox)
These medications need to be prescribed for a long duration to be of benefit.
For short-term use, the risk of ADEs outweighs the potential benefits [43–45]
B2. Alpha-blockers for hypertension
Stringent blood pressure control is not required in very frail older people. Alpha
blockers in particular can cause marked vasodilatation, which can result in
marked postural hypotension, falls and injuries [46]
Section C: Coagulation system
C1: Anti-platelets
Avoid anti-platelet agents for primary (as distinct from secondary)
cardiovascular prevention (no evidence of benefit) [47]
Section D: Central Nervous System
D1. Neuroleptic antipsychotics
Aim to reduce dose and gradually discontinue these drugs in patients taking
them for longer than 12 weeks if there are no current clinical features of
behavioural and psychiatric symptoms of dementia (BPSD) [48–52]
D2: Memantine
Discontinue and monitor in patients with moderate to severe dementia, unless
memantine has clearly improved BPSD (specifically in frail patients who meet
the criteria above) [53–56]
Section E: Gastrointestinal system
E1. Proton Pump Inhibitors
Proton Pump Inhibitors at full therapeutic dose ≥8/52, unless persistent
dyspeptic symptoms at lower maintenance dose [57]
E2: H2 receptor antagonist
H2 receptor antagonist at full therapeutic dose for ≥8/52, unless persistent
dyspeptic symptoms at lower maintenance dose [57]
E3. Gastrointestinal antispasmodics
Regular daily prescription of gastrointestinal antispasmodics agents unless the
patient has frequent relapse of colic symptoms because of high risk of anti-
cholinergic side effects [57]
Section F: Respiratory system
F1. Theophylline.
This drug has a narrow therapeutic index, requires monitoring of serum levels
and interacts with other commonly prescribed drugs putting patients at an
increased risk of ADEs [58–60]
F2. Leukotriene antagonists (Montelukast, Zafirlukast)
These drugs have no proven role in COPD, they are indicated only
in asthma [61]
Section G: Musculoskeletal system
G1: Calcium supplementation
Unlikely to be of any benefit in the short term
G2: Anti-resorptive/bone anabolic drugs FOR OSTEOPOROSIS
(bisphosphonates, strontium, teriparatide, denosumab)
Unlikely to be of any benefit in the short term
G3. SORMs for osteoporosis
Benefits unlikely to be achieved within 1 year, increased short–intermediate term
risk of associated ADEs particularly venous thromboembolism and stroke [57]
G4. Long-term oral NSAIDs
Increased risk of side effects (peptic ulcer disease, bleeding, worsening heart
failure, etc.) when taken regularly for ≥2 months [62–64]
G5. Long-term oral steroids
Increased risk of side effects (peptic ulcer disease, etc.) when taken regularly for
≥2 months. Consider careful dose reduction and gradual discontinuation [65]
Section H: Urogenital system
H1. 5-Alpha reductase inhibitors
No benefit with long-term urinary bladder catheterisation [66, 67]
H2. Alpha blockers
No benefit with long-term urinary bladder catheterisation [66, 67]
H3. Muscarinic antagonists
No benefit with long-term urinary bladder catheterisation, unless clear history of
painful detrusor hyperactivity [66, 67]
Section I: Endocrine system
I1. Diabetic oral agents
Aim for monotherapy. Target of HbA1c < 8%/64 mmol/mol. Stringent
glycaemic control is unnecessary [68]
I2. ACE-inhibitors for diabetes
Stop where prescribed only for prevention and treatment of diabetic
nephropathy. There is no clear benefit in older people with advanced frailty with
poor survival prognosis [69]
I3. Angiotensin receptor blockers
Stop where prescribed only for prevention and treatment of diabetic
nephropathy. There is no clear benefit in older people with advanced frailty with
poor survival prognosis [69]
I4. Systemic oestrogens for menopausal symptoms
Increases risk of stroke and VTE disease. Discontinue and only consider
recommencing if recurrence of symptoms [57]
Section J: Miscellaneous
J1. Multi-vitamin combination supplements
Discontinue when prescribed for prophylaxis rather than treatment
J2. Nutritional supplements (other than vitamins)
Discontinue when prescribed for prophylaxis rather than treatment [70]
J3: Prophylactic antibiotics
No firm evidence for prophylactic antibiotics to prevent recurrent cellulitis or
UTIs [71–73]
Disclaimer (STOPPFrail)
Whilst every effort has been made to ensure that the potentially inappropriate prescribing criteria listed in STOPPFrail are accurate and evidence-based, it is
emphasized that the final decision to avoid or initiate any drug referred to in these criteria rests entirely with the prescriber. It is also to be noted that the evidence
base underlying certain criteria in STOPPFrail may change after the time of publication of these criteria. Therefore, it is advisable that prescribing decisions should
take account of current published evidence in support of or against the use of drugs or drug classes described in STOPPFrail.
STOPPFrail: consensus validation
603
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/4/600/2948308 by guest on 02 June 2019
 antidepressant effects such as analgesic effects, appetite
stimulation and anxiolytic properties. Feedback suggested
that cessation in patients with severe dementia was a rea-
sonable approach, but not in all patients with limited life
expectancy. Panellists feared that antidepressant therapy
could be stopped in patients who derived benefit from
treatment and that the risk of relapse outweighed the
potential benefit of discontinuation.
Eight criteria were deemed inconclusive after Round 1.
The first was a general criterion of deprescribing any drug
with which patients fail to comply. Feedback suggested that
the explanatory sentence should remind users to try all appro-
priate measures to improve compliance before deprescribing;
this criterion was rephrased accordingly for Round 2. Other
drugs for which there was uncertainty among the panel were
anti-platelets,
memantine,
acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors,
H2-receptor antagonists, calcium and vitamin D supplements,
bone anti-resorptive/anabolic agents and prophylactic anti-
biotics. Feedback was incorporated into rephrasing the criteria
for Round 2.
Panellists agreed with the inclusion of anti-platelet agents,
but raised concerns over their cessation when their indica-
tion was secondary prevention. Similar to the feedback for
anti-coagulation, panellists were concerned about the minor-
ity of patients where deprescribing may be inappropriate. It
was felt that secondary prevention should incorporate spe-
cialist judgement, and that a generalised statement would
not be appropriate. Hence, it was decided that primary pre-
vention should be the focus of this criterion. Panellists wel-
comed the inclusion of calcium supplementation and anti-
resorptive therapy in STOPPFrail, but asked for clarity
around the explanatory sentence, i.e. cessation where the
indication was osteoporosis and not malignancy. Evidence is
lacking on whether long-term use of calcium is beneficial
due to methodological flaws in studies and high dropout
rates [33]. Patient compliance with calcium supplements is
poor; those most likely to be non-compliant have a history
of smoking, poor mobility and previous fractures [34]. Anti-
resorptive medications are challenging to administer, have a
less favourable side effect profile and in some cases have
been shown to continue to have clinical benefits after cessa-
tion, e.g. bisphosphonates. For these reasons, the panellists
agreed to cessation in those with limited life expectancy.
Consensus could not be reached on two criteria after
Round 2, i.e. cessation of (i) memantine and (ii) acetylcholi-
nesterase inhibitors in advanced dementia. A third Delphi
round was therefore prepared for circulation. In this round,
consensus was obtained for memantine and it was included
in the STOPPFrail tool. Consensus was not achieved for
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors with no trend towards accept-
ance (Table 2). Panellists reported that the evidence base
for acetylcholinesterase inhibitors in advanced dementia was
still developing, and the possibility that unrecognised bene-
fits existed could not be dismissed. The DOMINO-AD
trial was cited to support their exclusion [35, 36]. This trial
suggests that in patients where acetylcholinesterase inhibi-
tors are stopped, the admission rate to nursing homes in
the following year is increased compared with those who
continue acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. However, this dif-
ference is only seen in the first year following cessation.
After three rounds, no additional concerns were raised by
the panel thus it was decided by the authors that a fourth
Delphi round was unnecessary.
The final consensus STOPPFrail criteria are presented
in Table 1. An explanatory sentence to aid the decision to
deprescribe the medication in question is present for clari-
fication purposes, particularly to guide deprescribing drugs
which cannot be stopped abruptly, i.e. neuroleptics and
long-term steroids.
Discussion
STOPPFrail is an explicit list of 27 PIMs in frail older
adults with limited life expectancy. The criteria are not
designed to replace clinical judgement, but rather to assist
clinicians with medication reviews and assessment of treat-
ment goals in this specific patient cohort. Recognition of
those patients to whom STOPPFrail is applicable may be
challenging for less experienced physicians; in these circum-
stances, the use of simple mortality predictive tools may be
helpful to guide life expectancy, e.g. the Walter Index [37]
or the CIRS-geriatric scale [38]. However, we anticipate that
the majority of clinicians who will use this tool will be
experienced in recognising patients who are appropriate for
its application, i.e. GPs or senior hospital specialists with
prognostic knowledge of the diseases they manage. In the
interest of simplicity and for the tool to be user friendly, we
did not want STOPPFrail to be contingent on the use of
another tool to determine eligibility.
Polypharmacy is a well-described problem in this cohort.
This research aims to put a framework on the guiding prin-
ciple of deprescribing in late life, i.e. that the benefits of many
preventive medications are negligible in those with a limited
life expectancy. Although many IP explicit tools exist, there
has been an unmet need for a concise explicit tool to assist
deprescribing in this specific patient cohort. STOPPFrail is a
short tool, focusing on 27 key indicators, suggesting that it will
be easy to use, time efficient and therefore more likely to be
implemented. Like STOPP/START criteria [23], STOPPFrail
criteria are listed according to physiological system, thereby
allowing users to structure their approach to deprescribing.
We aimed for a concise set of criteria that can be easily deployed
in paper and electronic format. Electronic application of medi-
cation assessment criteria are challenging and the discussion
of their potential benefits and implementation is beyond the
scope of this paper. However, electronic implementation of
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Table 2. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors Delphi results
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitor
Round 1
Round 2
Round 3
Median
4.000
4.000
4.000
25th centile
3.250
3.000
3.250
A. H. Lavan et al.
604
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/4/600/2948308 by guest on 02 June 2019
 the STOPP/START criteria is the focus of the SENATOR
clinical trial [39], currently recruiting patients, and similarly
there is the potential for the electronic implementation of
STOPPFrail criteria.
Developing this tool required discussing many controver-
sial treatments, e.g. those used in the treatment of hyperten-
sion. The authors and panellists agreed that a generalised
statement about discontinuing all anti-hypertensives would be
contentious. Therefore, it was decided to focus on the drug
class least likely to be prescribed as a first line agent and most
likely to cause orthostatic hypotension and falls in an older
cohort, i.e. alpha-blockers.
Inevitably, explicit STOPPFrail criteria will be compared
with implicit deprescribing criteria designed for use in older
populations, such as the Garfinkel algorithm [40] and the
CEASE criteria [41, 42], which have small-scale clinical trial
evidence to support their efficacy. Despite this evidence,
implicit criteria for prescribing and deprescribing have not
come into routine clinical practice. It remains to be seen
whether STOPPFrail, as the first systematic set of explicit
deprescribing criteria designed specifically for older people
with advanced frailty and poor survival prognosis, holds a
greater likelihood of being applied in the routine clinical
situation than implicit criteria sets.
Finally, appropriate use of STOPPFrail criteria may have
pharmaco-economic benefits. Older frail adults with a poor
survival prognosis account for a growing proportion of the
population and a disproportionately high level of medica-
tion consumption. Implementation of safe, evidence-based
deprescribing in this population, may improve patients’
quality of life through reduced ADEs, related hospitalisa-
tions and mortality. The true value of STOPPFrail will need
to be tested by means of randomised controlled trials exam-
ining its impact as an intervention on patient quality of life,
healthcare utilisation, medication costs and mortality.
Key points
• STOPPFrail comprises 27 criteria for potentially inappro-
priate medications in frail older adults with limited life
expectancy.
• STOPPFrail may serve to assist physicians in deprescrib-
ing medications in a structured fashion in this group.
• STOPPFrail can be applied in frail older adults with lim-
ited life expectancy in any healthcare setting.
Supplementary data
Supplementary data are available at Age and Ageing online.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the panel of experts with-
out whom this research would not be possible (listed
alphabetically):
Health Research Board Clinical Research Facilities at
University College Cork [HRB CRF-C].
(1) Prof. Michael Barry, Department of Clinical pharma-
cology, Trinity College Dublin & St James’s Hospital,
Dublin;
(2) Prof. Stephen Byrne, Professor of Clinical Pharmacy
Practice, University College Cork;
(3) Dr Brian Creedon, Senior Clinical Lecturer, Department
of Medicine & Consultant in Palliative Medicine,
University Hospital Waterford;
(4) Prof. Joe Harbison, Department of Medicine for the
Elderly, Trinity College Dublin & Consultant Stroke
Physician and Geriatrician, St James’s Hospital, Dublin;
(5) Prof.
Lorraine
Kyne,
Department
of
Medicine,
University College Dublin & Consultant Geriatrician,
Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin;
(6) Prof. Brian Lawlor, Department of Psychiatry, Trinity
College Dublin & Consultant in Old Age Psychiatry,
St James’s Hospital, Dublin;
(7) Prof. Riona Mulcahy, Department of Medicine, Royal
College of Surgeons of Ireland & Consultant Geriatrician,
University Hospital Waterford;
(8) Prof. Tony O’Brien, Department of Medicine, University
College Cork & Consultant in Palliative Medicine,
Marymount Hospice and Cork University Hospital;
(9) Prof. Tom O’Dowd, Department of General Practice,
Trinity College, Dublin;
(10) Prof.
Sean
O’Keeffe,
Department
of
Medicine,
National University or Ireland Galway & Consultant
Geriatrician, University College Hospital Galway;
(11) Prof.
Peter
Passmore,
Department
of
Geriatric
Medicine, Queen’s University Belfast;
(12) Dr Cristin Ryan, Senior Lecturer, School of Pharmacy,
Royal College of Surgeons of Ireland, Dublin;
(13) Prof.
Henry
Smithson,
Department
of
General
Practice, University College Cork;
(14) Prof. John Stinson, Department of Clinical Pharmacology,
Trinity College Dublin;
(15) Dr
Suzanne
Timmons,
Department
of
Clinical
Gerontology & Rehabilitation, University College Cork
& Consultant Geriatrician, Mercy University Hospital,
Cork;
(16) Prof. Max Watson, Medical Director of the Northern
Ireland Hospice Belfast and visiting Professor at the
University of Ulster;
(17) Prof.
David
Williams,
Department
of
Geriatric
Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons of Ireland &
Consultant Stroke Physician and Clinical Pharmacologist,
Beaumont Hospital, Dublin.
Disclaimer and intellectual property
of STOPPFrail
STOPPFrail recommendations are based partly on evi-
dence base and partly on expert consensus and are
intended to guide prescribers and others who routinely
STOPPFrail: consensus validation
605
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/4/600/2948308 by guest on 02 June 2019
 review the medication of older people with advanced frailty
(physical and/or cognitive) and poor survival prognosis.
As such, the STOPPFrail criteria are offered as a clinical
tool to assist the process of considered deprescribing in
this particular patient population. STOPPFrail criteria are
not meant to over-ride the clinical judgement of the pre-
scriber/medication reviewer in individual cases and do not
replace the responsibility of the prescriber/medication rev-
iewer in the matter of medication selection or deselection
for individual patients.
STOPPFrail criteria, now published and in the public
domain, may be used by any appropriately trained person
as an assistive tool in the process of medication review of
this particular cohort of older people. STOPPFrail criteria
are not constrained by copyright and in themselves are not
patentable as intellectual property. The term ‘STOPPFrail’
is, however, protected by copyright and cannot be used for
commercial purposes except by University College Cork,
Ireland or with the expressed written consent of University
College Cork, Ireland.
Funding
This research has been funded as part of the SENATOR
project funded by the EU FP7 programme (grant number
305930).
References
Note: There is a long list of references to support this research.
Those that are not listed here can be found in the supplementary
data, available in Age and Ageing online.
1. World Health Organisation. Global Health and Ageing. 2011.
2. Jiaquan Xu MD, Sherry L, Murphy BS et al. Deaths: Final
Data for 2013. National vital statistics reports: from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center
for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System. 2016; 64.
4. Kojima G. Prevalence of frailty in nursing homes: A system-
atic review and meta-analysis. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2015; 16:
940–5.
5. Moore KL, Boscardin WJ, Steinman MA, Schwartz JB.
Patterns of chronic co-morbid medical conditions in older resi-
dents of U.S. nursing homes: differences between the sexes and
across the agespan. J Nutr Health Aging 2014; 18: 429–36.
6. The Centre of Ageing Research and Development in Ireland
[CARDI]. Illustrating Ageing in Ireland North and South:
Key Facts and Figures. 2010.
7. Ribbe MW, Ljunggren G, Steel K et al. Nursing homes in 10
nations: a comparison between countries and settings. Age
Ageing 1997; 26(Suppl 2):3–12.
8. Kelly A, Conell-Price J, Covinsky K et al. Length of stay for
older adults residing in nursing homes at the end of life.
J Am Geriatr Soc 2010; 58: 1701–6.
9. Onder G, Liperoti R, Fialova D et al. Polypharmacy in nurs-
ing home in Europe: results from the SHELTER study.
J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2012; 67: 698–704.
11. Tjia J, Briesacher BA, Peterson D, Liu Q, Andrade SE,
Mitchell SL. Use of medications of questionable benefit in
advanced dementia. JAMA Intern Med 2014; 174: 1763–71.
13. Palagyi A, Keay L, Harper J, Potter J, Lindley RI. Barricades
and brickwalls – a qualitative study exploring perceptions of
medication use and deprescribing in long-term care. BMC
Geriatr 2016; 16: 1–11.
14. Harriman K, Howard L, McCracken R. Deprescribing medi-
cation for frail elderly patients in nursing homes: a survey of
Vancouver family physicians. B C Med J 2014; 56: 436–41.
15. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
[NICE]. Managing medicines in care homes. 2014.
18. Song X, Mitnitski A, Rockwood K. Prevalence and 10-year
outcomes of frailty in older adults in relation to deficit accu-
mulation. J Am Geriatr Soc 2010; 58: 681–7.
19. Santos-Eggimann B, Cuénoud P, Spagnoli J, Junod J.
Prevalence of frailty in middle-aged and older community-
dwelling Europeans living in 10 countries. J Gerontol A Biol
Sci Med Sci 2009; 64: 675–81.
20. Soong J, Poots A, Scott S et al. Quantifying the prevalence of
frailty in English hospitals. BMJ Open 2015; 5: e008456.
21. Fried LP, Tangen CM, Walston J et al. Frailty in older adults:
evidence for a phenotype J Gerontol. A Biol Sci Med Sci
2001; 56:M146–57.
22. Panel. ABCUE. American Geriatrics Society 2015 updated
Beers criteria for potentially inappropriate medication use in
older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 2015; 63: 2227–46.
23. O’Mahony D, O’Sullivan D, Byrne S, O’Connor MN, Ryan C,
Gallagher P. STOPP/START criteria for potentially inappro-
priate prescribing in older people: version 2. Age Ageing 2015;
44: 213–8.
24. Kuhn-Thiel AM, Weiss C, Wehling M. Consensus validation
of the FORTA [Fit fOR The Aged] List: a clinical tool for
increasing the appropriateness of pharmacotherapy in the eld-
erly. Drugs Aging 2014; 31: 131–40.
25. Gallagher PF, O’Connor MN, O’Mahony D. Prevention of
potentially inappropriate prescribing for elderly patients: a
randomized controlled trial using STOPP/START. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2011; 89: 845–54.
26. Dalleur O, Boland B, Losseau C et al. Reduction of poten-
tially inappropriate medications using the STOPP criteria in
frail older inpatients: a randomised controlled study. Drugs
Aging 2014; 31: 291–8.
27. O’Connor M, O’Sullivan D, Gallagher P, Eustace J, Byrne S,
O’Mahony D. Prevention of hospital-acquired adverse drug
reactions in older people using STOPP/START criteria: a
cluster randomized controlled trial. J Am Geriatr Soc 2016;
64: 1558–1566.
28. Nyborg
G,
Straand
J,
Klovning
A,
Brekke
M.
The
Norwegian
General
Practice–Nursing
Home
criteria
[NORGEP-NH] for potentially inappropriate medication
use: a web-based Delphi study. Scand J Prim Health Care
2015; 33: 134–41.
29. Yourman LC, Lee SJ, Schonberg MA, Widera EW, Smith
AK. Prognostic indices for older adults: a systematic review.
Jama 2012; 307: 182–92.
30. Dalkey NC Delphi. P-3704 RAND. Santa Monica, CA:
RAND Corp, 1967.
31. Crome P, Lally F, Cherubini A et al. Exclusion of older peo-
ple
from
clinical
trials:
professional
views
from
nine
European countries participating in the PREDICT study.
Drugs Aging 2011; 28: 667–77.
32. Matell MS, Jacoby J. Is there an optimal number of alterna-
tives for Likert scale items? Study. Educ Psychol Meas 1971;
31: 657–74.
A. H. Lavan et al.
606
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/4/600/2948308 by guest on 02 June 2019
 33. Seeman E. Evidence that calcium supplements reduce frac-
ture risk is lacking. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2010; 1: S3–11.
35. Jones R, Sheehan B, Phillips P et al. DOMINO-AD protocol:
donepezil and memantine in moderate to severe Alzheimer’s
disease – a multicentre RCT. Trials 2009; 10: 57.
36. Howard R, McShane R, Lindesay J et al. Nursing home place-
ment in the Donepezil and Memantine in Moderate to Severe
Alzheimer’s Disease [DOMINO-AD] trial: secondary and
post-hoc analyses. Lancet Neurol 2015; 14: 1171–81.
37. Walter LC, Brand RJ, Counsell SR et al. Development and
validation
of
a
prognostic
index
for
1-year
mortality
in older adults after hospitalization. JAMA 2001; 285:
2987–2994.
39. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02097654
Received 11 June 2016; editorial decision 22 November
2016
Age and Ageing 2017; 46: 607–613
doi: 10.1093/ageing/afw245
Published electronically 7 January 2017
© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British Geriatrics Society.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
Potentially inappropriate medication prescribing
is associated with socioeconomic factors:
a spatial analysis in the French
Nord-Pas-de-Calais Region
JEAN-BAPTISTE BEUSCART1,2, MICHAEL GENIN1, CORRINE DUPONT3, DAVID VERLOOP3, ALAIN DUHAMEL1,
MARGUERITE-MARIE DEFEBVRE3, FRANÇOIS PUISIEUX2
1Univ. Lille, EA 2694 – Santé publique: épidémiologie et qualité des soins, F-59000 Lille, France
2CHU Lille, Geriatric Department, F-59000 Lille, France
3Agence Régionale de Santé Nord-Pas-de-Calais, Lille, France
Address correspondence to: J.-B. Beuscart. Tel: +33 32062 3494; Fax: +33 32062 6881. E-mail: jean-baptiste.beuscart@univ-lille2.fr
Abstract
Background: potentially inappropriate medication (PIM) prescribing is common in older people and leads to adverse
events and hospital admissions.
Objective: to determine whether prevalence of PIM prescribing varies according to healthcare supply and socioeconomic status.
Methods: all prescriptions dispensed at community pharmacies for patients aged 75 and older between 1 January and 31
March 2012 were retrieved from French Health Insurance Information System of the Nord-Pas-de-Calais Region for
patients affiliated to the Social Security scheme. PIM was defined according to the French list of Laroche. The geographic
distribution of PIM prescribing in this area was analysed using spatial scan statistics.
Results: overall, 65.6% (n = 207,979) of people aged 75 years and over living in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais Region were
included. Among them, 32.6% (n = 67,863) received at least one PIM. The spatial analysis identified 16 and 10 clusters of
municipalities with a high and a low prevalence of PIM prescribing, respectively. Municipalities with a low prevalence of
PIM were characterised by a high socioeconomic status whereas those with a high prevalence of PIM were mainly charac-
terised by a low socioeconomic status, such as a high unemployment rate and low household incomes. Markers of healthcare
supply were weakly associated with high or low prevalence clusters.
Conclusion: significant geographic variation in PIM prescribing was observed in the study territory and was mainly asso-
ciated with socioeconomic factors.
Keywords: inappropriate prescribing, older people, scan statistics, pharmacoepidemiology
Potentially inappropriate medication prescribing is associated with socioeconomic factors
607
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/46/4/600/2948308 by guest on 02 June 2019
