 Innate Immune Landscape in Early Lung Adenocarcinoma by 
Paired Single-Cell Analyses
Yonit Lavin1,2,3, Soma Kobayashi1,2,3,&, Andrew Leader1,2,3,&, El-Ad David Amir2,3,11, Naama 
Elefant4, Camille Bigenwald1,2,3, Romain Remark1,2,3,*, Robert Sweeney8,9, Christian D. 
Becker5, Jacob H. Levine6, Klaus Meinhof5, Andrew Chow1,2,3, Seunghee Kim-Shulze2,3,11, 
Andrea Wolf8, Chiara Medaglia4, Hanjie Li4, Julie A. Rytlewski11, Ryan O. Emerson11, 
Alexander Solovyov1,3,7,10, Benjamin D. Greenbaum1,3,7,10, Catherine Sanders11, Marissa 
Vignali11, Mary Beth Beasley10, Raja Flores8, Sacha Gnjatic2,3,7,11, Dana Pe’er6, Adeeb 
Rahman2,3,9,11, Ido Amit4, and Miriam Merad1,2,3,11,13
1Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai New York, NY
2The Precision Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai New York, NY
3Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai New York, NY
4Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute, Rehovot 76100, Israel
5Division of Pulmonology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai New York, NY
6Computational and Systems Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute
7Division of Hematology/Oncology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai New York, NY
8Department of Thoracic Surgery, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai New York, NY
9Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai New 
York, NY
10Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai New York, NY
11Human Immune Monitoring Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai New York, NY
12Adaptive Biotechnologies Inc., Seattle, WA
Summary
Corresponding author: Miriam Merad: miriam.merad@mssm.edu.
13Lead Contact
*Current: Innate Pharma, 117 avenue de Luminy, 13009 Marseille, France
&These authors have equally contributed to this study.
Author contributions
Conceptualization, M.M., Y.L., and C.D.B.; Methodology, M.M., Y.L., A.R., I.A., E.D.A. and J.H.L.; Software, E.D.A., A.L.; Formal 
Analysis, Y.L., A.L., E.D.A., N.E., S.K., A.S., B.G., J.A.R., R.O.E., C.S., M.V. ; Investigation, Y.L., S.K., C.B., R.S., C.M., R.R., 
K.M., and A.R.; Resources, R.F. and A.W.; Data Curation, S.K., C.B., R.S., and C.D.B.; Writing- Original, M.M., Y.L., A.L., and 
S.K.; Writing- Review & Editing, M.M., Y.L., A.L., and S.K.; Visualization, Y.L., S.K., and A.L.; Supervision, M.M., A.R., I.A., D.P., 
C.D.B., S.K-S., M.B.B., S.G., and A.C. ; Project Administration, M.M.; Funding Acquisition, M.M.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2017 May 04; 169(4): 750–765.e17. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.04.014.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To guide the design of immunotherapy strategies for patients with early stage lung tumors, we 
developed a multiscale immune profiling strategy to map the immune landscape of early lung 
adenocarcinoma lesions to search for tumor-driven immune changes. Utilizing a barcoding method 
that allows a simultaneous single cell analysis of the tumor, non-involved lung and blood cells 
together with multiplex tissue imaging to assess spatial cell distribution, we provide a detailed 
immune cell atlas of early lung tumors. We show that stage I lung adenocarcinoma lesions already 
harbor significantly altered T cell and NK cell compartments. Moreover, we identified changes in 
tumor infiltrating myeloid cell (TIM) subsets that likely compromise anti-tumor T cell immunity. 
Paired single cell analyses thus offer valuable knowledge of tumor-driven immune changes, 
providing a powerful tool for the rational design of immune therapies.
eTOC
Comparing single tumor cells with adjacent normal tissue and blood from patients with lung 
adenocarcinoma charts early changes in tumor immunity and provides insights to guide 
immunotherapy design.
Keywords
Human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC); lung adenocarcinoma; CD141+ DC; CD1c+ DC; 
Tumor Macrophage; T Cell; NK Cell; TLS; TIM; immune cell atlas
INTRODUCTION
Current checkpoint blockade therapies mainly function to rescue T cells from exhaustion or 
deplete T regulatory cells (Treg) and studies have begun to dissect the details of T cell 
function and distribution in advanced tumor lesions to identify novel strategies to further 
strengthen anti-tumor T cell immunity. Myeloid cells through their ability to present tumor-
associated antigens to T cells and to produce critical T cell differentiation cytokines, have a 
unique ability to control T cell function at the tumor site. Yet much less is known about the 
diversity of the myeloid compartment at the tumor site.
Myeloid cells are a diverse population of immune cells that share the ability to sense and 
respond to tissue injuries by clearing damaged cells and by promoting the recruitment of 
immune effector cells that will help restore tissue integrity (Lavin and Merad, 2013; Pham, 
Lavin et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2006). Tumor infiltrating myeloid cells (TIM) consist of granulocytes and mononuclear 
phagocytes at varying stages of differentiation and have been shown to contribute to shaping 
tumor progression and response to treatment (Engblom et al., 2016; Gabrilovich et al., 
2012). Of these, mononuclear phagocytes refer to monocytes, macrophages and dendritic 
cells (DC), which in addition to their innate immune function, share the ability to present 
tumor-associated antigens to T cells (Ginhoux and Jung, 2014). Among TIM, DC are the 
best equipped to drive T cell activation (Merad et al., 2013) and a subset of DC, named 
CD103+ DC, was shown to control local CD8+ T cell activation (Broz et al., 2014; Hildner 
et al., 2008; Salmon et al., 2016; Sánchez-Paulete et al., 2016). Thus, TIM composition 
appear to control TIL composition, activation, and anti-tumor function, and harnessing the 
TIM compartment may provide a powerful synergistic strategy to potentiate T cell targeting 
immunotherapies.
Currently, the majority of lung cancer cases are diagnosed at advanced stage. However, this 
is likely to change as low-dose CT screening programs in populations at risk have shown 
benefits and are being widely implemented (Aberle et al., 2011; Black et al., 2015). Five-
year survival rates for patients with pathologic stage IA and IB NSCLC are only 83% and 
71%, respectively, and these numbers drop to 50% for stage II disease (Goldstraw et al., 
2016) with minimal improvement from adjuvant chemotherapy (Pignon et al., 2008). 
Preliminary data suggest impressive activity of neoadjuvant immunotherapy in a small 
number of early stage resectable lung NSCLC lesions treated with anti-PD-1 mAb blockade 
(Forde et al., 2016). Although these studies need to be confirmed in a larger cohort, these 
results are consistent with the notion that immunotherapy agents are most efficient at low 
tumor burden and in patients naïve of immunomodulatory chemotherapy agents. The design 
of immunomodulatory strategies for the treatment of NSCLC will, however, tremendously 
benefit from a detailed understanding of the immune cell landscape that develops 
specifically in response to tumor cues.
To this end, we developed a multiscale immune profiling strategy to map the immune 
microenvironment of early lung adenocarcinoma lesions. As tissue cues significantly impact 
the biology of tissue-resident immune cells and specifically innate cells (Lavin et al., 2014), 
we designed a barcoding strategy that allowed the simultaneous single cell analysis of the 
distinct immune cell compartments that reside in the tumor site, non-involved lung tissue 
(nLung) and blood of each patient to distinguish tumor-driven immune signatures from those 
caused by normal tissue-imprinting cues. Using mass cytometry by time-of-flight (CyTOF) 
combined with single cell transcriptomics and multiplex tissue imaging of the lung tumor, 
we identify NK and myeloid cell responses that are unique to tumor lesions and absent from 
nLung or blood from the same patients. We show that these changes are present as early as 
in stage I tumors and likely compromise anti-tumor immunity. These data suggest that 
neoadjuvant immunotherapy strategies targeting innate immune cells in early lung 
adenocarcinoma lesions have the potential to reactivate the TIL microenvironment and 
transform tumor response to checkpoint blockade.
Lavin et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RESULTS
High-dimensional single cell profiling of lung tumors
To map the immune microenvironment of lung adenocarcinoma lesions, we designed a 
clinical multiscale immune profiling study of freshly resected tumors. Patients selected were 
treatment naïve at the time of surgery. For each patient, we obtained NSCLC tumor tissues 
including invasive margins, nLung tissue, and blood cells (Figure 1A, STAR methods). Of 
32 patients, 28 were diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma. Patients were representative of 
the lung adenocarcinoma distribution across age, gender, mutational status, and predominant 
histological subtype (Table 1).
To distinguish tumor-specific immune changes from the lung tissue immune environment, 
we sought to simultaneously map the immune compartment of the lung tumor lesion, the 
nLung tissue, and the peripheral blood. To this end, we developed a novel barcoding method 
that allows a simultaneous analysis of cells from all three sample types. In the first 18 
patient cohort, immune cells isolated from the tumor lesion, nLung, and blood were 
barcoded with anti-CD45 antibodies (Ab) conjugated to unique metal isotopes before 
samples were pooled. Pooled samples were then stained with two panels of more than 30 
antibodies each and analyzed by CyTOF, thus allowing the measurement of single cell 
expression on immune cells residing in each tissue type of each patient (Figure 1A). The 
mass cytometry panels were subsequently extended to include cytokine measurement in a 
cohort of 10 additional lung adenocarcinoma patients, as described (STAR methods).
T cells and mononuclear phagocytes dominate the early lung adenocarcinoma 
microenvironment
Using viSNE to visualize high-dimensional data in two-dimensions while preserving single 
cell resolution (Amir et al., 2013), we analyzed the distribution of the different immune cell 
lineages that accumulated in lung tumor lesions, nLung, and blood circulation across 
patients (Table 1 and Data S1). A higher number of immune cells accumulated in the tumor 
tissues compared to nLung (Figure S1A). The tumor-resident immune cell compartment 
comprised all major immune lineages, and the most abundant were the T lymphocytes and 
mononuclear phagocytes (Figures 1B, 1C, 1D and S1B). Mononuclear phagocytes and 
granulocytes were equally represented in tumor lesions compared to nLung. In contrast, T 
and B lymphocytes were present at a higher frequency in the tumor microenvironment 
compared to the nLung, whereas the frequency of NK cells was significantly reduced across 
all lung adenocarcinoma patients examined (Figures 1C, 1D, and S1C).
We also analyzed the cytokines and chemokines produced in the tumor milieu. Whereas 
many chemokines and cytokines were expressed at much higher levels in the tumors 
compared to the blood, similar chemokine levels were often detected in tumors and adjacent 
nLung, which could potentially reflect the local diffusion of tumor-produced soluble 
molecules to the adjacent lung tissue (Figures S1D and S1E). Interestingly, CX3CL1 
(fractalkine) was expressed at slightly higher levels in tumors compared to nLung and 
correlated with the frequency of the mononuclear phagocyte infiltrate (Figure S1F).
Lavin et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Recent studies have shown that in addition to cell composition, the spatial distribution of 
immune cells at the tumor site may affect tumor outcome (Germain et al., 2014). Using a 
new tissue profiling method named multiplexed immunohistochemical consecutive staining 
on a single slide (MICSSS) that we recently developed in the laboratory (Remark et al., 
2016), we assessed the distribution of immune cells in the tumor and nLung sections. 
Immune cells accumulated mainly in the stroma and invasive margin surrounding the tumor 
islets as previously described (Salmon et al., 2012; Turley et al., 2015), although some 
macrophages and T cells were able to infiltrate into the tumors (Figures 1E and S1I). We 
also observed an abundance of macrophages and T cells at the tumor site across patients 
supporting the CyTOF results (Figures 1D, 1E and S1B). Importantly, many patients had 
tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS), which accumulated near the tumor invasive margin and 
were absent from nLung (Figure 1F and S1I). Tumor lesions enriched in TLS had 
significantly more T lymphocytes and less macrophages as measured by CyTOF at the 
tumor site (Figure S1H).
To further probe the nature of the immune response induced at the tumor site in an unbiased 
manner, we analyzed the CyTOF data using the Phenograph algorithm to systematically 
identify common cellular communities across the three tissues and across all patients 
(Levine et al., 2015). We first clustered single cells based on shared protein expression 
across tumor lesions, nLung, and PBMC within each patient, then merged clusters from each 
patient using a secondary clustering analysis to identify metaclusters common across 
patients and tissues (Figure 1A).
Tumor lesions are enriched in Treg and non-functional T cells
Phenograph clustering across tissues and across all patients revealed distinct T lymphoid 
metaclusters (Figures 2A, 2B, and S2A) that corresponded to known immune cell 
populations and had a unique distribution across tissue sites (Figures 2C and S2B).
Paired mass cytometry analysis revealed a distinct composition and phenotype of T cell 
subsets (Figures 2C and S2B). Specifically, Treg were significantly increased in the tumor 
lesion across all patients even at early stages (Figure 2C). Importantly, Treg at the tumor 
sites expressed high levels of CTLA4, CD39, ICOS, and 41BB compared to other T cells 
(Figures 2D and S2D). They were also clearly distinguishable from Treg that resided in 
nLung based on higher expression of Foxp3, CTLA4, PD-1, CD39, ICOS, CD38, and 41BB, 
whereas CCR4 was decreased (Figures 2E, S2E, and S2F). In contrast, cytolytic CD8+ T 
cells were significantly reduced in frequency in the tumor compared to nLung and blood 
from the same patients (Figure 2C). Moreover, total CD8+ T cells present in tumors 
expressed significantly less granzyme B and IFNγ upon stimulation compared to their 
nLung counterparts (Figure S2G). A reduced T-effector/Treg ratio was thus a strong 
signature of the lung tumor lesion (Figure S2C).
Given the success of anti-PD-1 checkpoint blockade in lung cancer patients, we examined 
the expression of the checkpoint molecule PD-1 on all T cell metaclusters identified across 
tissues. PD-1 was distinctly expressed on a small subset of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells that 
were a unique feature of the tumor (Figure 2C and S2H) and at a lower level on Treg at the 
tumor site (Figure 2D). CD8+ T cells accumulate at the tumor site and in TLS where they 
Lavin et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 preferentially expand (Figures 2F and S2I; (Goc et al., 2014; Joshi et al., 2015), and 
clonality of the T cell receptor (TCR) repertoire has been associated with TLS density (Zhu 
et al., 2015). Consistent with these findings, T cells were significantly increased in TLS-
enriched tumors (Figure S1H). Moreover, while there was no enrichment in TCR clonality in 
tumors compared to nLung, the CD8+PD-1+ T cell subset uniquely and significantly 
correlated with increased TCR clonality at the tumor site but not in nLung (Figures 2G and 
Figure S2J). These results suggest that CD8+ T cells expressing PD-1 are clonally expanded 
at the tumor site and this expansion may preferentially occur in TLS-enriched tumor lesions.
Cytolytic NK cells are excluded from lung adenocarcinoma lesions
In addition to measuring adaptive lymphocyte responses to tumors, we also analyzed the 
distribution of innate lymphocytes and in particular NK cells in lung tumor lesions. 
Strikingly, NK cells were the least abundant immune cell lineage in lung adenocarcinoma 
lesions compared to nLung (Figures 1C and 1D). Importantly, the NK cell subset expressing 
CD16 was most dramatically reduced in the tumor compared to nLung (Figures 3A and 
S3A). NK cells that infiltrated the tumor lesion, expressed higher CXCR3 levels, a molecule 
shown to be required for NK infiltration of tumors (Figures 3B and 3C, Wendel et al., 2008). 
Moreover, NK cells that remained at the tumor site were less cytolytic as they expressed 
lower levels of granzyme B and CD57 as well as less IFNγ (Figures 3C, 3D, 3E and S3C). 
Conversely, since NK cells function to eliminate MHC class I deficient cells, we assessed 
the distribution of MHC class I throughout the tumor cells using MICSSS (Figure 3F). 
Tumor lesions with reduced frequency of MHC class I expressing tumor cells had higher 
numbers of tumor infiltrating CD16+ NK cells suggesting that the presence of cytolytic NK 
cells may have led to MHC class I immuno-editing (Figures 3G and S3D).
Deciphering the diversity of TIM in lung adenocarcinoma lesions
To fully capture the heterogeneity of the TIM compartment, we first performed an unbiased 
single cell transcriptomic analysis of non-lymphocyte cells that accumulated in the tumor 
lesion and in the nLung of a stage I patient using massively parallel single cell RNA-
sequencing (MARS-seq; Figure 4A and Data S2B, STAR methods, Jaitin et al., 2014). 
Single cell RNA-seq analysis of TIM-enriched cells, using an unbiased expectation-
maximization algorithm previously described (STAR methods; Paul et al., 2015), revealed 
several immune cell types distinguished based on characteristic gene expression profiles 
identified according to highly expressed and differential genes. Specifically, we identified 
three distinct clusters expressing high levels of MHC class II molecules, CD1C, CCL22 and 
CD207 (Figure 4A, clusters 2-4) and slightly higher BATF3 and CSF2RA expression levels 
(Figures S4A and 4E) which we inferred to be DC. Other clusters were identified as 
macrophages (Figure 4A, cluster 5-8) and monocytes (cluster 9-10) based on the differential 
expression of CD68, MAFB, and CSF1R (Figures 4E and S4A). A macrophage cluster 
comprised predominantly of cells from tumor lesions (cluster 7), were distinct from those 
comprised predominantly of cells from nLung (cluster 5-6), indicating that tumor-associated 
macrophages were distinct from their nLung-resident macrophage counterparts.
To detail the TIM compartment across patients, we systematically defined myeloid cell 
populations across patients using simultaneous CyTOF analysis of PBMC, nLung, and 
Lavin et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tumor immune cells. Phenograph clustering of all tissues in all patients confirmed the 
diversity of myeloid cells in the tumor and macrophages, DC subsets, and monocytes subsets 
were identified based on expression of protein markers including CD68, CSF1-R, CSF2-R, 
CD11C, CD1C, CD141, and HLA-DR among others (Figure 4B, 4C, 4E, and S4B). TIM 
were distinct from their lung and PBMC counterparts (Figures 4D and S4C). Indeed, paired 
CyTOF analysis revealed unique distributions and functions of CD14+ and CD16+ 
monocyte subsets in the tumor site (Figures 4D and S4D). While CD14+ monocytes were 
robust cytokine producers compared to other mononuclear phagocytes (Figures 4F, S4E, and 
S4F), they produced less IL-8 and less IL-1β at the tumor site compared to the nLung 
(Figures 4G and S4G). In contrast to the CD14+ monocytes that equally infiltrated tumor 
and lung tissues, CD16+ monocytes were significantly reduced in tumor tissues and highly 
correlated with NK cell infiltration at the tumor site (Figures 4D, S4D, and S3B).
Finally, while tumor lesions were equally enriched in neutrophils and eosinophils compared 
to nLung, they contained significantly less basophils and were strongly depleted of mast 
cells (Figure 4D).
Paired immune cell mapping reveals a distinct macrophage signature in lung 
adenocarcinoma
Single-cell transcriptomic analysis revealed distinct macrophage clusters that were 
differentially distributed in the tumor and nLung (Figure 4A, clusters 5-8). Comparing the 
macrophage cluster enriched in tumors (cluster 7) to those comprised primarily of nLung 
cells (clusters 5, 6) revealed many differentially expressed genes suggesting that tumor 
associated macrophages have a distinct transcriptional signature (Figure 5B).
We extended these result using paired CyTOF analyses. We found that while macrophages 
were not enriched in frequency in the tumor site compared to nLung (Figures 5A and S5A), 
tumor macrophages exhibited a distinct signature compared to their lung resident 
counterparts across all patients (Figures 5C and 5D). CyTOF analysis validated several of 
single cell transcriptomics findings revealing that tumor macrophages expressed higher 
levels of the immunomodulatory transcription factor PPARγ, higher CD64, CD14, and 
CD11c levels and lower CD86 and CD206 levels compared to macrophages that resided in 
nLung (Figure 5D).
Single cell transcriptional analysis identified additional transcripts up-regulated on the tumor 
macrophage cluster compared to their nLung counterparts (cluster 7) including triggering 
receptor expressed on myeloid cells-2 (TREM2), tetraspanin CD81, macrophage receptor 
with collagenous structure (MARCO), and apolipoprotein E (APOE; Figure 5B). To 
understand whether this differential transcriptional signature extends to other patients, we 
stratified 515 lung adenocarcinoma patients from the TCGA database according to the 
differential transcriptional profile. A significant survival disadvantage was observed in 
patients with a high ratio of tumor macrophages to lung macrophage gene expression profile 
(Figure S5G) suggesting that the macrophage signature identified in this study may include 
novel myeloid targets for lung cancer treatment.
Lavin et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Given the clinical success of anti-PD-L1 in lung cancer (Besse et al., 2015; Fehrenbacher et 
al., 2016) we examined the distribution of PD-L1 in lung tumor lesions using paired mass 
cytometry analysis. Strikingly, PD-L1 was most highly expressed on macrophages and mast 
cells both in tumor and nLung (Figures 5E, S5B, and S5C). These results are consistent with 
our data in mice (data not shown), and suggest a potential role for PD-L1 in the 
physiological regulation of lung immune homeostasis which could explain the increased rate 
of pneumonitis in patients treated with PD-L1 inhibitors (Naidoo et al.; Nishino et al., 2016). 
Given the impact of PD-L1+ cells on tumor outcome, we analyzed the spatial distribution of 
PD-L1+ macrophages and found that they accumulate in tight clusters at the tumor invasive 
margin (Figures 5E and S5D) and negatively correlated with T cell infiltration in tumor 
lesions but not in nLung (Figure S5E).
Tumor macrophages also spontaneously produced significantly more IL-6 than macrophages 
in nLung (Figures 5F and S5F). Given the potential role for IL-6 in tumor invasiveness 
(Chang et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2014) and the negative correlation between the presence of 
macrophages and T cells at the tumor site, these data emphasize the immunosuppressive role 
of tissue resident macrophages in early lung adenocarcinoma lesions.
CD141+ DC have a distinct phenotype and are excluded from lung tumor lesions
Dendritic cells (DC) excel at antigen presentation and play a key role in the induction of 
anti-tumor T cell immunity. Single cell transcriptional analysis of the tumor and nLung 
revealed the presence of two DC clusters (Figures 4A, clusters 2, 4), one of which expressed 
high CD207, CLEC9A and XCR1 levels and likely represent CD141+ DC (Dutertre et al., 
2014; Haniffa et al., 2013). We also detected a second DC cluster expressing higher levels of 
CD1c, CX3CR1 and IRF4, which we inferred to be CD1c+ DC (Figures 6A, 6B, and S6B). 
The CD1c+ DC cluster also expressed higher levels of CCL22 and CCL17, ligands for 
CCR4, a molecule expressed mainly by CD4+ T cells (Yoshie and Matsushima, 2015) and 
higher lysozyme transcripts compared to the CD141+ DC (Figure 6B). These findings are in 
line with the increased potency to interact with CD4+ T cells and increased degradative 
potential of CD1c+ DC, in contrast to CD141+ DC which interact preferentially with CD8+ 
T cells (Dutertre et al., 2014; Haniffa et al., 2013; Merad et al., 2013). Lymphotoxin Beta 
(LTB) transcript, encoding a membrane-bound protein important for the formation of 
secondary lymphoid organs and potentially TLS (Pitzalis et al., 2014), was highly expressed 
by DC and at slightly higher levels by the CD141+ DC cluster (Figure 6E).
Paired CyTOF analyses identified the presence of two DC subsets at the tumor site across 
patients. Strikingly, CD141+ DC but not CD1c+ DC were significantly reduced in tumors 
compared to nLung and the CD1c+ DC/CD141+ DC ratio was thus increased in tumor 
lesions (Figures 6C, S6A and S6C). Importantly, CD1c+ DC expressed a very similar 
cytokine profile to CD14+ monocytes and produced IL-6, IL-8 and IL-1β cytokines in the 
tumor and nLung (Figure S4E). Using MICSSS, we found that in lesions infiltrated with 
TLS, DC localized in TLS and close to T cells (Figures 6D and S6D), in line with their role 
in T cell activation and clonal expansion (Dieu-Nosjean et al., 2008).
Lavin et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Lung adenocarcinomas have a unique immune signature that is independent of TNM stage
Altogether our results establish an immune cell atlas of early untreated lung adenocarcinoma 
lesions. We show that these lesions are enriched in PD-L1hiCD64hiCD14hiPPARγhiIL-6hi 
macrophages, CD1c+ DC, Treg, and exhausted T cells and depleted of CD141+ DC, CD16+ 
monocytes, NK cells and Granzyme B+ effector cells (Figure 6F and S6E). These 
differences compared to nLung likely work in concert to promote an immunosuppressive 
microenvironment.
As TNM staging is used to determine both prognosis and treatment options, we examined 
whether the immune contexture of the tumor lesions significantly differed between early 
stage (stage I) and later stage tumors (stages II and III). With the exception of increased 
neutrophils and TNFα production in stage II and stage III patients (Figure 6G), all immune 
changes detected in later stage tumor lesions were already present in stage I tumors. The 
distribution of immune cell subsets including macrophages, monocytes, NK cells, DC as 
well as B and T cell subsets did not significantly differ in frequency across stages (Figures 
6F and S6F). In addition, expression levels of PD-1 and PD-L1 on macrophages and T cells, 
respectively, were stable across TNM stages (Figure S6G and S6H), suggesting that 
immunomodulatory strategies could benefit early stage tumors.
DISCUSSION
Driven by the premise that the myeloid cell compartment and most specifically the tumor-
infiltrating antigen presenting cells critically shape the composition of anti-tumor T cells, the 
objective of this study was to provide an innate immune cell atlas of early lung 
adenocarcinoma lesions. Using paired single cell analyses of the immune cells that reside in 
the tumor, nLung, and peripheral blood, we distinguished the immune changes driven by the 
tumor lesion from those driven by the lung tissue emphasizing the relevance of this type of 
analysis for the study of the tumor microenvironment.
Strikingly, as early as in stage I disease, lung adenocarcinoma lesions had a strongly reduced 
CD8+ T effector/Treg ratio compared to nLung. This altered T cell ratio resulted from a 
significant reduction of CD8+ T cells expressing granzyme B and IFNγ combined with 
significant expansion of CD39hiCD38hiPD-1hiCTLA4hiFoxp3hi Tregs at the tumor site. In 
line with previous results showing that Foxp3/CD3 ratio is a strong predictor of recurrence 
in early stage tumors (Suzuki et al., 2013), reduced CD8+ Granzyme B+/
CD39hiCD38hiPD-1hiCTLA4hiFoxp3hi Treg ratio may be useful as a refined biomarker of 
disease course or response to treatment.
The distinct TIL tumor signature was accompanied by significant alterations of tumor 
CD16+ NK cells as they were strongly reduced in tumors and the few remaining NK cells 
expressed lower levels of granzyme B and less IFNγ compared to lung NK cells. Tumor 
infiltrating NK cells were thus poorly cytolytic and expansion or activation of NK cells 
could provide a strategy to restore anti-tumor immunity in early lung tumors.
Strikingly, we also identified distinct changes in all antigen presenting cell subsets that 
resided in lung adenocarcinoma tumor lesions across TNM stages. Specifically, as early as 
Lavin et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 stage I, lung adenocarcinoma lesions were significantly depleted in CD141+ DC and 
enriched in PPARγhi macrophages. Monocytes include two main subsets, the CD16+ and 
CD14+ monocyte subsets, shown to have different fates and functions in tissues (Yona and 
Jung, 2010). CD16+ monocytes but not CD14+ monocytes were strongly reduced at the 
tumor site, and significantly correlated with reduced CD16+ NK cells in tumors. 
Interestingly, CD16+ monocytes have been shown to promote NK cell recruitment to tumors 
(Hanna et al., 2015) and thus reduced CD16+ monocytes in lung tumors might have 
contributed to NK cell paucity in tumor lesions. CD14+ monocytes in the tumor produced 
high levels of the cytokine IL-8 but those in nLung produced even more. IL-8 can promote 
lung cancer growth and metastasis (Chen et al., 2003; Zhu et al., 2004) and in smokers, IL-8 
expression in non-tumor lung tissue is part of a lung cancer biomarker signature (Spira et al., 
2007). Given the potential role of monocytes in lung metastasis (Qian et al., 2011), 
monocyte-derived IL-8 in nLung may have contributed to tumor cell engraftment. 
Interestingly, while we identified a drastic increase in cytokine production in the tumor 
tissue compared to the blood, many cytokines were equally expressed in the tumor and 
nLung. CX3CL1, however, tended to be expressed at higher levels at the tumor site and 
significantly correlated with mononuclear phagocytes, particularly CD14+ monocytes in the 
tumor lesion. CX3CL1 was found to be increased in patients that failed to respond to PD-1 
(Herbst et al., 2014). Therefore, it will be important to further assess CX3CL1 and CD14+ 
monocytes as biomarkers of treatment response.
Tissue resident DC consist of two main subsets that are transcriptionally and functionally 
distinct. In mice tissues, these include the CD103+ DC subset, which derive from DC-
restricted precursors and excel in the cross-presentation and priming of CD8+ T cells, and 
the CD11b+ DC subset, which has a higher degradative potential than CD103+ DC and 
mainly interact with CD4+ T cells (Merad et al., 2013). Human CD141+ DC and CD1c+ DC 
share similar transcriptional profiles with murine CD103+ DC and CD11b+ DC, 
respectively, and are thought to represent their human counterparts (Dutertre et al., 2014; 
Haniffa et al., 2013).
We and others found that the absence of CD103+ DC abolishes tumor response to 
checkpoint blockade in experimental tumor models, while expansion and activation of 
CD103+ DC dramatically increased T cell recruitment to the tumor site and transformed 
response to checkpoint blockade (Broz et al., 2014; Hildner et al., 2008; Roberts et al., 2016; 
Salmon et al., 2016; Sánchez-Paulete et al., 2016). Here, we found that early lung 
adenocarcinoma tumors were significantly depleted in CD141+ DC compared to nLung, 
while CD1c+ DC were slightly increased in tumors, resulting in an increased CD1c+/
CD141+ DC ratio at the tumor site.
We also found that tumor CD1c+ DC shared the same innate cytokine profile with 
monocytes, consistent with the notion that CD1c+ DC likely represent monocyte-derived 
cells generated upon entry at the tumor site, whereas CD141+ DC are thought to arise from 
DC-restricted precursors (Dutertre et al., 2014; Haniffa et al., 2013). Interestingly, DC 
localized close to T cells in TLS, in line with their potential key role in T cell activation and 
clonal expansion (Dieu-Nosjean et al., 2008). DC-derived LT has recently been shown to 
directly act on high endothelial venules (HEV) to promote lymphocyte homing to peripheral 
Lavin et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 lymph nodes in vivo (Moussion and Girard, 2011). Our finding that DC and especially the 
CD141+ DC subset expressed Lymphotoxin beta (LTB) transcripts in lung tumor tissues 
likely reflects that CD141+ DC contribute to TLS formation, potentially through HEV-
mediated recruitment of lymphocytes. This hypothesis is consistent with our finding that 
TLS-enriched tumors have increased T cells, and strengthens the mechanistic understanding 
of the positive prognostic value conferred by TLS when identified by DC-LAMP 
immunostaining (Dieu-Nosjean et al., 2008; Germain et al., 2014; Pitzalis et al., 2014). 
Altogether, these results suggest that expansion of intra-tumoral CD141+ DC may provide a 
key strategy for the induction of potent anti-tumor immunity.
Importantly, while macrophages were not enriched in the tumor lesion compared to nLung, 
tumor macrophages expressed a unique phenotype compared to macrophages in nLung. In 
particular, tumor macrophages expressed higher levels of PPARγ, a transcription factor 
known to drive an immunosuppressive program (Reddy, 2008; Ricote et al., 1998), and 
lower levels of the co-stimulatory molecule CD86. They also produced higher levels of IL-6, 
indicating that these tumor macrophages are pro-tumorigenic. CD206, thought to represent a 
marker of alternatively activated macrophages and tumor macrophages, was expressed at 
lower or similar levels on tumor macrophages compared to lung macrophages, consistent 
with recent data showing that CD206 is a marker of lung alveolar macrophages (Desch et al., 
2016; Yu et al., 2016). This emphasizes the importance of paired analyses to distinguish 
tumor-driven immune changes from normal tissue-imprinting. Single cell transcriptomic 
analysis of myeloid cells further extended these results and identified a unique gene 
signature of tumor macrophages that included among other genes, TREM2, recently shown 
to promote chronic lung diseases through inhibition of macrophage apoptosis after acute 
viral infection (Wu et al., 2015). Finally, using multiplex tissue imaging, we identified 
clusters of PD-L1+ macrophages at the tumor invasive margin, suggesting their potential 
contribution to modulating T cell entry in the tumor lesion. Accordingly, increased 
macrophages correlated with reduced T cells at the tumor site and, in contrast to TLS-
enriched tumors, lesions devoid of TLS were mostly enriched in macrophages. Thus, lung 
tumors enriched in macrophages and reduced in TLS may specifically benefit from 
immunotherapy strategies to deplete macrophages while expanding DC prior to treatment 
with checkpoint blockade.
By combining multiplex tissue imaging and paired single cell analysis of the tumor, nLung, 
and blood, this study provides a detailed immune cell atlas of early lung adenocarcinoma 
and identifies, along with specific T cell alterations, innate immune cell changes that are 
unique to the tumor lesion and absent from nLung. Our identification of significant innate 
immune cell changes in early stage lung adenocarcinoma lesions suggests that neo-adjuvant 
or adjuvant immunotherapy strategies tailored to restore innate immune changes might be 
uniquely poised to shape the tumor T cell microenvironment and transform tumor response 
to checkpoint blockade.
Lavin et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 STAR METHODS
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be 
fulfilled by the lead contact Miriam Merad (miriam.merad@mssm.edu).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Human Specimens—Blood, non-involved lung and tumor tissues were obtained from 
patients undergoing lung resection surgery at the Mount Sinai Medical Center (New York, 
NY) after obtaining informed consent. All protocols were reviewed and approved by the 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai (IRB 
08-1236).
Patient Clinical Characteristics—Samples were collected from 32 patients, 28 of 
whom were diagnosed with adenocarcinoma and thus included in the study (Table S1). The 
28 patients consisted of 12 males and 16 females and ranged from ages 47 to 83 years old, 
with a median of 67 years old.
METHOD DETAILS
Sample Collection—From the patients described above, blood was collected 
intraoperatively into sodium heparin tubes (BD). For solid tissues, care was taken to collect 
tumor with invasive margin and non-involved lung as distant as possible from the tumor and 
anatomic abnormalities. Tissue samples were placed in RPMI media (Corning) on ice. For 
all collected tissue samples, H&E slides were reviewed by a pathologist, and non-involved 
lung tissue samples with tumor infiltration (2 patients) were excluded from the analysis.
Collection of Histological Sections—Non-involved lung and tumor tissue were briefly 
washed in PBS. From each sample, two histological sections were carefully cut so as to not 
disturb tissue architecture. One histological slice was placed in 10% buffered formalin 
phosphate (Fisher Scientific) for 24 hours and stored in 70% ethanol before being embedded 
in paraffin. The other slice was placed in OCT (Tissue-Tek) and placed on dry ice before 
storage at -80°C.
Multiplexed Immunohistochemical Consecutive Staining on a Single Slide—
Five μm-thick formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue sections on glass slides were 
backed at 37°C overnight, deparaffinized in xylene, and rehydrated in decreasing 
concentrations of ethanol. Then, tissue sections were incubated in retrieval solution (Citrate 
buffer, pH6) for antigen retrieval at 95°C for 30 minutes. Tissue sections were incubated in 
3% hydrogen peroxide and in serum-free protein block solution (Dako, X0909) before 
adding the primary antibody (CD68, clone KP1, Dako) for 1 hour at room temperature. 
After signal amplification using biotinylated-secondary antibody and streptavidin-
horseradish peroxidase, chromogenic revelation was performed using 3-amino-9-
ethylcarbazole (AEC). Slides were counterstained with hematoxylin, mounted with a 
glycerol-based mounting medium and scanned for digital imaging (Pannoramic 250 Flash III 
whole-slide scanner, 3DHISTECH). Then the same slides were successively stained as 
Lavin et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 described (Remark et al., 2016). Primary antibodies were: anti-human CD3 (2GV6, 
Ventana), anti-human CD8 (C8/144b, Dako), anti-human CD20 (L26, Dako), anti-human 
DC-LAMP (1010E1.01, Novus biologicals), anti-human PD-L1 (E1L3N, Cell Signaling 
Technologies), anti-human CD206 (polyclonal, Abcam), and anti-human HLA Class I 
(EMR8-5, Abcam).
Histological Quantification—A piece of tumor sample was embedded in paraffin, and 
tumors and lung tissue included in the study were stained with H&E, and assessed by a lung 
pathologist for inclusion in the study. For tertiary lymphoid structure grading, adjacent slices 
were cut and stained for CD20 according to the above immunohistochemistry protocol. 
Analysis using Halo Software (IndicaLabs) was performed on tumor, excluding normal lung, 
empty space, and necrotic areas. B cell follicles were identified, and number and area of B 
cell follicles/mm2 were quantified. Only B cell follicles larger than 0.0014mm² were 
counted. MHC Class I immune-staining was quantified by the percent of tumor cells 
expressing the molecule.
TCR Variable Beta Chain Sequencing—Immunosequencing of the CDR3 regions of 
human TCRβ chains was performed using the ImmunoSEQ™ Assay (Adaptive 
Biotechnologies, Seattle, WA). Extracted genomic DNA was amplified in a bias-controlled 
multiplex PCR, followed by high-throughput sequencing. Sequences were collapsed and 
filtered in order to identify and quantitate the absolute abundance of each unique TCRβ 
CDR3 region for further analysis as previously described (Carlson et al., 2013; Robins et al., 
2012; Robins et al., 2009)
Statistical Analyses of TCR-β Sequencing—Clonality was defined as 1- Peilou’s 
eveness (Kirsch et al., 2015) and was calculated on productive rearrangements by:
where pi is the proportional abundance of rearrangement i and N is the total number of 
rearrangements. Clonality values range from 0 to 1 and describe the shape of the frequency 
distribution: clonality values approaching 0 indicate a very even distribution of frequencies, 
whereas values approaching 1 indicate an increasingly asymmetric distribution in which a 
few clones are present at high frequencies. Clonality between experimental groups was 
compared using a two-tailed Wilcoxon Rank Sum test; correlations between T-cell fraction 
or clonality and CyTOF data were assessed using Spearman’s Rank Correlation after 
running a Shapiro-Wilk test for normality. Statistical analyses were performed in R version 
3.3.
Tissue Digestion—Complete media was prepared with RPMI (Corning), 10% FBS (Life 
Technologies), 1% non-essential amino acids (Corning), 1% sodium-pyruvate (Corning), 1% 
L-glutamine (Corning), 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Life Technologies) and 1% HEPES 
buffer (Corning). The non-involved lung and tumor tissue remaining after collecting the 
Lavin et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 histological sections were each minced with scissors in separate 6-well plates (Costar) and 
enzymatically digested in complete media supplemented with 0.225 mg/mL collagenase 
type IV (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 minutes at 37°C. The samples were passed through a syringe 
and a 16-gauge needle to further separate and yield single cell suspensions. The cells were 
then filtered through a 70 μm cell strainer, washed, lysed in RBC buffer (BioLegend) and 
refiltered through a 70 μm cell strainer. The cells were resuspended in complete media and 
counted by hemocytometer.
PBMC Isolation—The PBMCs were collected via a Ficoll-Paque PLUS (GE Healthcare) 
gradient. PBMCs were washed and resuspended in complete media to create a single cell 
suspension. Cells were counted with a hemocytometer.
Secreted Soluble Factor Profiling—Single cell suspensions from non-involved lung, 
tumor, and PBMCs were cultured overnight for secreted soluble factor profiling. From each 
sample type, 200,000 cells were plated in duplicate into individual wells of a flat-bottom 96-
well plate (Corning) in 250μL of complete media and incubated at 37°C overnight. 200μL of 
supernatant were collected and stored at -80°C until multiplex biomarkers assay was 
performed.
Measurement of Multiplex Biomarkers—The overnight supernatant collected for the 
secreted soluble factor profiling was used for the Luminex-200 multiplex biomarker assay, 
which was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cell suspension 
supernatants collected in microcentrifuge tubes were thawed and spun at 12,000 RPM for 10 
minutes at 4°C to remove precipitates. Duplicates of 25 μl of each supernatant were 
analyzed undiluted to determine the concentrations of 41 biomarkers using a Milliplex MAP 
Human Cytokine/Chemokine 41plex kit (EMD Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts) on the 
Luminex-200 multiplex immunoassay system. Data were analyzed using Milliplex Analyst 
5.1 software (EMD Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts). Measurements were corrected for 
noise by subtracting the average of two technical control wells for each secreted soluble 
factor.
CyTOF Sample Preparation—Antibodies were either purchased pre-conjugated from 
Fluidigm (formerly DVS Sciences) or purchased purified and conjugated in-house using 
MaxPar X8 Polymer Kits (Fluidigm) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For the 
first cohort of 22 patients (18 with adenocarcinoma), cells from each tissue (blood, non-
involved lung, and tumor) were labelled with a unique barcode by incubating with CD45-
antibodies conjugated to distinct metal isotopes before pooling. The pooled sample was 
stained for viability with 5μM cisplatin in PBS (Fluidigm) for 2 minutes at RT. Cells were 
then washed and split into two equal aliquots. One aliquot was stained with a T-cell focused 
panel of antibodies (Panel 1, see below) and the other aliquot was stained with a myeloid 
focused panel of antibodies (Panel 2) for 30 min on ice. Samples were washed, fixed, and 
permeabilized (eBiosciences) at 4°C overnight before being stained with intracellular 
antibodies (see below, highlighted). They were washed and incubated in 0.125nM Ir 
intercalator (Fluidigm) diluted in PBS containing 2% formaldehyde, and stored at 4°C until 
acquisition.
Lavin et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For the second cohort of 10 patients, cells were stained with a mass cytometry panel 
including cytokines (Panel 3). Cells from each tissue type (blood, non-involved lung, tumor) 
were split into two fractions for a total of 6 aliquots. Aliquots from each tissue were 
incubated in 20μg/mL Brefeldin A (Sigma) alone or 20μg/mL Brefeldin A, 1.6μg/mL PMA 
(Sigma) and 6μg/mL Ionomycin (Sigma) for 4 hours at 37°C. Rhodamine vi ability stain 
(Fluidigm) was added for the last 20 minutes of incubation. Cells were washed and stained 
with cell surface antibodies for 30 minutes on ice, before being fixed and permeabilized (BD 
Biosciences). Samples were washed and incubated with a unique Pd barcode (Fluidigm) for 
30 minutes at RT, washed, then pooled. The pooled sample was stained with intracellular 
antibodies for 30 minutes on ice, washed, and incubated in 0.125nM Ir intercalator 
(Fluidigm) diluted in PBS containing 2% formaldehyde and stored at 4°C until acquisition.
CyTOF Data Acquisition—Immediately prior to acquisition, samples were washed once 
with PBS, once with de-ionized water and then resuspended at a concentration of 1 million 
cells/ml in deionized water containing a 1/20 dilution of EQ 4 Element Beads (Fluidigm). 
The samples were acquired on a CyTOF2 (Fluidigm) equipped with a SuperSampler fluidics 
system (Victorian Airships) at an event rate of <500 events/second. After acquisition, the 
data were normalized using bead-based normalization in the CyTOF software. Barcodes 
were deconvoluted using the Fluidigm debarcoding software, or by manual Boolean gating 
in the case of CD45-barcoded samples. The data were gated to exclude residual 
normalization beads, debris, dead cells and doublets, leaving DNA+CD45+Cisplatinlow 
events for subsequent clustering and high dimensional analyses.
CyTOF Clustering: viSNE and Phenograph—CyTOF data was visualized using 
viSNE (Amir et al., 2013), a dimensionality reduction method which uses the Barnes-Hut 
acceleration of the t-SNE algorithm (van der Maaten, 2014; van der Maaten and Hinton, 
2008). viSNE was implemented using either the Rtsne R package (Krijthe, 2015) or 
Cytobank (Chen and Kotecha, 2014). viSNE plots were generated separately for each patient 
incorporating all tissues.
Single cell data was clustered within and across samples using Phenograph (Levine et al., 
2015), a clustering method based on the Louvain community detection algorithm (Blondel et 
al., 2008). The graph for Louvain was built using the FNN R package (Blondel et al., 2008), 
and the method was implemented using the igraph package (Csardi and Nepusz, 2006). In 
brief, Louvain communities of single cells were generated for each patient based on marker 
expression levels and independent of the sample source (blood, non-involved lung, or 
tumor). To detect common cell populations across patients, the mean protein expression 
levels among each Louvain community were then used to form larger Louvain communities 
(called metaclusters).
For the first patient cohort, 3 separate Phenograph analyses were performed using (1) CD3+ 
cells and Panel 1, (2) CD3- cells and Panel 1, and (3) CD3- cells and Panel 2. One patient 
was excluded from analysis of NK cells from Phenograph analysis (3) due to faulty antibody 
staining. The use of Phenograph analysis (2) was limited to the analysis of NK cells in 
Figures 3B and C, and B cells in Figure S1C. For the second cohort, Phenograph was run on 
CD45+ cells using Panel 3. To identify the major immune lineages, cell counts for the 
Lavin et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 metacluster populations comprising lineages were manually added up across 18 patients 
(Panel 2) or 10 patients (Panel 3). Absolute numbers were assessed from second cohort 
(Panel 3).
CyTOF Statistical Analysis—Heatmaps of normalized marker expression, relative 
marker expression, and relative difference of population frequency were generated by 
GENE-E or Morpheus from the Broad Institute (http://www.broadinstitute.org/cancer/
software/morpheus/). Paired tissue analyses were performed on the frequency of 
metaclusters and major lineages by performing paired T-tests using GraphPad Prism across 
tissues (*p<0.05, **p<0.01 and ***p<0.001). Correlation analyses between population 
frequencies and average normalized expression of protein markers in metaclusters were 
performed by computing Spearman’s rank-based correlation coefficient in GraphPad Prism.
Single-Cell Sorting—Over 700 cells were extracted from non-involved lung and over 
1100 cells extracted from the tumor lesion of a pathological stage IA lung adenocarcinoma 
patient, were single-cell sorted according to the gating strategy shown in Data S2B into 384-
well cell capture plates containing 2 μL of lysis solution and barcoded poly(T) reverse- 
transcription (RT) primers for single- cell RNA-seq. Barcoded single cell capture plates 
were prepared with a Bravo automated liquid handling platform (Agilent) as described 
previously (Jaitin et al., 2014). Four empty wells were kept in each 384-well plate as a no-
cell control during data analysis. Immediately after sorting, each plate was spun down to 
ensure cell immersion into the lysis solution, snap frozen on dry ice, and stored at -80°C 
until processed.
Massively Parallel Single Cell RNA-Seq—Single-cell libraries were prepared as 
previously described (Jaitin et al., 2014). Briefly, mRNA from cells sorted into massively 
parallel single cell RNA-Seq (MARS-Seq) capture plates was barcoded and converted into 
cDNA and pooled using an automated pipeline. The pooled sample was then linearly 
amplified by T7 in-vitro transcription. The resulting RNA was fragmented and converted 
into a sequencing ready library by tagging the samples with pool barcodes and Illumina 
adaptor sequences during ligation, followed by reverse transcription and PCR. Each pool of 
cells was tested for library quality and concentration was assessed as described earlier (Jaitin 
et al., 2014). All RNA-seq libraries (pooled at equimolar concentration) were sequenced 
using Illumina sequencers at an average sequencing depth of ~40,000 reads per cell for 
RNA-seq. RNA-seq reads were aligned using hisat 0.1.5 and assigned to exons defined by a 
reference set obtained from the UCSC genome browser. We used statistics on empty-well 
spurious unique molecular identifier (UMI) detection to ensure that the batches we used for 
analysis show a low level of cross-single-cell contamination.
Single-Cell RNA-seq Clustering Analysis—MARS-seq reads were processed as 
previously described (Paul et al., 2015). In brief, we implemented a multiplicative 
probabilistic model that represented the probability of sampling UMIs for each gene as a 
function of the cell’s cluster and batch. We then inferred cluster and batch parameters using 
an expectation maximization (EM)-like procedure using non-linear optimization of the batch 
and cluster parameters’ likelihoods in iterations. After cells and genes with low expression 
Lavin et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 levels were excluded, 1473 remaining cells were grouped into 15 clusters. Of these, 8 
clusters demonstrated high expression of genes specific to mononuclear phagocytes and thus 
were selected for a final re-clustering analysis, producing 10 sub-clusters. These clusters 
were then identified as distinct immune cell types based on literature review of highly and 
differentially expressed genes. For Figures 5B, 6A, and 6B, transcript expression profiles of 
clusters 5 and 6 were combined by weighted average using the respective frequencies of 
each cluster among mononuclear phagocytes. Scatter plots and lists of differentially 
expressed genes between clusters were generated using the 50% most highly expressed 
transcripts among those detected after averaging expression profiles of compared clusters.
RNA Isolation for Bulk RNA-seq—A minimum of 5000 cells were sorted according to 
the gating strategy in Data S2A in 200ul of Lysis/Binding Buffer (Life technologies), lysed 
for 5 min and frozen at -8 °C. Cell lysates were thawed and messenger RNA was captured 
with 12 ul of Dynabeads oligo(dT) (Life technologies), and washed according to 
manufacture guidelines. Purified messenger RNA was eluted at 70C with 10ul of 10mM 
Tris-Cl pH 7.5 and stored at -80°C.
Bulk RNA-seq—We used the MARS-seq protocol (Jaitin et al., 2014), developed for 
single cell RNA-seq and discussed above, to produce RNA-seq libraries for bulk RNA-seq. 
One step of linear amplification of the initial mRNA pool was performed, followed by a 
library construction. A minimum of 2 replicate libraries were prepared for each sorted 
population. Libraries were sequenced using Illumina sequencers. RNA-seq reads were 
aligned as above, and expression levels were calculated and normalized for each sample to 
the total number of identified UMIs. Differential expression analysis was performed using 
the R-package Limma (Ritchie et al., 2015). Heatmaps were generated with genes 
differentially expressed with unadjusted p-value<0.01 and greater than 2-fold differential 
expression.
TCGA Analysis—Tumor RNAseq counts data from 515 lung adenocarcinoma patients 
were downloaded from Genomic Data Commons Portal https://gdc-portal.nci.nih.gov/. 
Normalized log-transformed expression was computed as log2(CPM) (counts per million 
reads) using the TMM normalization (Robinson and Oshlack, 2010). For each patient, 
expression levels of the genes differentially expressed between tumor macrophages and lung 
macrophages according to the scRNAseq experiment (Figure 4A) were centered so that the 
mean across all samples was zero. Consensus expression of tumor macrophage and lung 
macrophage genes for each sample were computed as the median across all the signature 
genes. Concordance index was calculated as the ratio of the consensus expression of tumor 
macrophage signature genes to the consensus expression of the lung macrophage signature 
genes. Patients were divided into the top and bottom 50th percentiles of the concordance 
index. Survival analysis was performed in R.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Several data types, such as CyTOF meta-clusters, secreted soluble factor concentration, or 
normalized transcript counts, were stratified. Bar graphs show mean ± SEM. Student’s 
paired t test, Spearman’s rank-based correlation coefficient, Fisher’s exact test, and the 
Lavin et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Long-rank test were used to determine significance. P-values are indicated on plots and in 
figure legends. (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001).
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
The data discussed in this publication have been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression 
Omnibus (Edgat et al., 2002) and are accessible through GEO Series accession number 
GSE97168 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE97168).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Merad laboratory for helpful discussions and input. We would like to thank Helene Salmon for critical 
review of the manuscript. We would like to thank the Human Immune Monitoring Core (HIMC) for their excellent 
technical support and assistance throughout the project, in particular Adeeb Rahman and the members of the CyToF 
core, Oksana Mayovska and Victor Guo, and Manishkumar Patel. We would like to thank the Biorepository & 
Pathology Core and the Flow Cytometry facility. We would like to thank Jill Gregory for her assistance with the 
artwork. C.B. is funded by Foundation pour la Recherche Medicale DEA20150633125. M.M. is funded by NIH 
grants R01, R01 CA173861, U19AI128949, U24 AI 118644, U19 AI 117873-01.
References
Aberle DR, Adams AM, Berg CD, Black WC, Clapp JD, Fagerstrom RM, Gareen IF, Gatsonis C, 
Marcus PM, Sicks JD, et al. Reduced lung-cancer mortality with low-dose computed tomographic 
screening. N Engl J Med. 2011; 365:395–409. [PubMed: 21714641] 
Amir E-A, Davis KL, Tadmor MD, Simonds EF, Levine JH, Bendall SC, Shenfeld DK, Krishnaswamy 
S, Nolan GP, Pe’er D. viSNE enables visualization of high dimensional single-cell data and reveals 
phenotypic heterogeneity of leukemia. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:545–552. [PubMed: 23685480] 
Besse B, Johnson M, Janne PA, Janne PA, Garassino MC, Eberhardt WE, Peters S, Toh CK, Kurata T, 
Li Z, et al. 16LBA Phase II, single-arm trial (BIRCH) of atezolizumab as first-line or subsequent 
therapy for locally advanced or metastatic PD-L1-selected non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). 
European Journal of Cancer. 2015; 51
Black WC, Keeler EB, Soneji SS. Cost-effectiveness of CT screening in the National Lung Screening 
Trial. N Engl J Med. 2015; 372:388. [PubMed: 25607437] 
Blondel VD, Guillaume J-L, Lambiotte R, Lefebvre E. Fast unfolding of communities in large 
networks. Journal of statistical mechanics: theory and experiment. 2008; 2008:P10008.
Broz ML, Binnewies M, Boldajipour B, Nelson AE, Pollack JL, Erle DJ, Barczak A, Rosenblum MD, 
Daud A, Barber DL, et al. Dissecting the tumor myeloid compartment reveals rare activating 
antigen-presenting cells critical for T cell immunity. Cancer cell. 2014; 26:638–652. [PubMed: 
25446897] 
Carlson CS, Emerson RO, Sherwood AM, Desmarais C, Chung M-W, Parsons JM, Steen MS, 
LaMadrid-Herrmannsfeldt MA, Williamson DW, Livingston RJ, et al. Using synthetic templates to 
design an unbiased multiplex PCR assay. Nature Communications. 2013; 4:2680.
Chang Q, Bournazou E, Sansone P, Berishaj M, Gao SP, Daly L, Wels J, Theilen T, Granitto S, Zhang 
X, et al. The IL-6/JAK/Stat3 Feed-Forward Loop Drives Tumorigenesis and Metastasis. Neoplasia. 
2013; 15:848–IN845. [PubMed: 23814496] 
Chen JJ, Yao PL, Yuan A, Hong TM, Shun CT, Kuo ML, Lee YC, Yang PC. Up-regulation of tumor 
interleukin-8 expression by infiltrating macrophages: its correlation with tumor angiogenesis and 
patient survival in non-small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2003; 9
Chen TJ, Kotecha N. Cytobank: providing an analytics platform for community cytometry data 
analysis and collaboration. High-Dimensional Single Cell Analysis (Springer). 2014:127–157.
Lavin et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Csardi G, Nepusz T. The igraph software package for complex network research. InterJournal, 
Complex Systems. 2006; 1695:1–9.
Desch AN, Gibbings SL, Goyal R, Kolde R, Bednarek J, Bruno T, Slansky JE, Jacobelli J, Mason R, 
Ito Y, et al. Flow Cytometric Analysis of Mononuclear Phagocytes in Nondiseased Human Lung 
and Lung-Draining Lymph Nodes. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2016; 193:614–626. [PubMed: 
26551758] 
Dieu-Nosjean MC, Antoine M, Danel C, Heudes D, Wislez M, Poulot V, Rabbe N, Laurans L, Tartour 
E, de Chaisemartin L, et al. Long-term survival for patients with non-small-cell lung cancer with 
intratumoral lymphoid structures. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:4410–4417. [PubMed: 18802153] 
Dutertre CA, Wang LF, Ginhoux F. Aligning bona fide dendritic cell populations across species. Cell 
Immunol. 2014; 291:3–10. [PubMed: 25262488] 
Engblom C, Pfirschke C, Pittet MJ. The role of myeloid cells in cancer therapies. Nat Rev Cancer. 
2016; 16:447–462. [PubMed: 27339708] 
Fehrenbacher L, Spira A, Ballinger M, Kowanetz M, Vansteenkiste J, Mazieres J, Park K, Smith D, 
Artal-Cortes A, Lewanski C, et al. Atezolizumab versus docetaxel for patients with previously 
treated non-small-cell lung cancer (POPLAR): a multicentre, open-label, phase 2 randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2016; 387:1837–1846. [PubMed: 26970723] 
Forde PM, Smith KN, Chaft JE, Hellmann M, Merghoub T, Wolchok JD, Yang SC, Battafarano RJ, 
Gabrielson E, Georgiades CS, et al. Neoadjuvant anti-PD1, nivolumab, in early stage resectable 
non-small-cell lung cancer. ESMO 2016 Congress. 2016; 27:1–36.
Gabrilovich DI, Ostrand-Rosenberg S, Bronte V. Coordinated regulation of myeloid cells by tumours. 
Nat Rev Immunol. 2012; 12:253–268. [PubMed: 22437938] 
Germain C, Gnjatic S, Tamzalit F, Knockaert S, Remark R, Goc J, Lepelley A, Becht E, Katsahian S, 
Bizouard G, et al. Presence of B cells in tertiary lymphoid structures is associated with a protective 
immunity in patients with lung cancer. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014; 189:832–844. [PubMed: 
24484236] 
Ginhoux F, Jung S. Monocytes and macrophages: developmental pathways and tissue homeostasis. Nat 
Rev Immunol. 2014; 14:392–404. [PubMed: 24854589] 
Goc J, Germain C, Vo-Bourgais TK, Lupo A, Klein C, Knockaert S, de Chaisemartin L, Ouakrim H, 
Becht E, Alifano M, et al. Dendritic cells in tumor-associated tertiary lymphoid structures signal a 
Th1 cytotoxic immune contexture and license the positive prognostic value of infiltrating CD8+ T 
cells. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:705–715. [PubMed: 24366885] 
Goldstraw P, Chansky K, Crowley J, Rami-Porta R, Asamura H, Eberhardt WEE, Nicholson AG, 
Groome P, Mitchell A, Bolejack V, et al. The IASLC Lung Cancer Staging Project: Proposals for 
Revision of the TNM Stage Groupings in the Forthcoming (Eighth) Edition of the TNM 
Classification for Lung Cancer. Journal of Thoracic Oncology. 2016; 11:39–51. [PubMed: 
26762738] 
Haniffa M, Collin M, Ginhoux F. Ontogeny and functional specialization of dendritic cells in human 
and mouse. Adv Immunol. 2013; 120:1–49. [PubMed: 24070379] 
Hanna RN, Cekic C, Sag D, Tacke R, Thomas GD, Nowyhed H, Herrley E, Rasquinha N, McArdle S, 
Wu R, et al. Patrolling monocytes control tumor metastasis to the lung. Science. 2015; 350:985–
990. [PubMed: 26494174] 
Herbst RS, Soria JC, Kowanetz M, Fine GD, Hamid O, Gordon MS, Sosman JA, McDermott DF, 
Powderly JD, Gettinger SN, et al. Predictive correlates of response to the anti-PD-L1 antibody 
MPDL3280A in cancer patients. Nature. 2014; 515:563–567. [PubMed: 25428504] 
Hildner K, Edelson BT, Purtha WE, Diamond M, Matsushita H, Kohyama M, Calderon B, Schraml 
BU, Unanue ER, Diamond MS, et al. Batf3 Deficiency Reveals a Critical Role for CD8α+ 
Dendritic Cells in Cytotoxic T Cell Immunity. Science. 2008; 322:1097–1100. [PubMed: 
19008445] 
Jaitin DA, Kenigsberg E, Keren-Shaul H, Elefant N, Paul F, Zaretsky I, Mildner A, Cohen N, Jung S, 
Tanay A, et al. Massively parallel single-cell RNA-seq for marker-free decomposition of tissues 
into cell types. Science. 2014; 343:776–779. [PubMed: 24531970] 
Lavin et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Joshi NS, Akama-Garren EH, Lu Y, Lee DY, Chang GP, Li A, DuPage M, Tammela T, Kerper NR, 
Farago AF, et al. Regulatory T Cells in Tumor-Associated Tertiary Lymphoid Structures Suppress 
Anti-tumor T Cell Responses. Immunity. 2015; 43:579–590. [PubMed: 26341400] 
Kirsch I, Vignali M, Robins H. T-cell receptor profiling in cancer. Mol Oncol. 2015; 9:2063–2070. 
[PubMed: 26404496] 
Krijthe, J. Rtsne: T-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding using Barnes-Hut Implementation. R 
package version 010. 2015. URL http://CRANR-projectorg/package=Rtsne
Lavin Y, Merad M. Macrophages: Gatekeepers of Tissue Integrity. Cancer Immunology Research. 
2013; 1:201–209. [PubMed: 24777851] 
Lavin Y, Winter D, Blecher-Gonen R, David E, Keren-Shaul H, Merad M, Jung S, Amit I. Tissue-
Resident Macrophage Enhancer Landscapes Are Shaped by the Local Microenvironment. Cell. 
2014; 159:1312–1326. [PubMed: 25480296] 
Levine JH, Simonds EF, Bendall SC, Davis KL, Amir E-A, Tadmor MD, Litvin O, Fienberg HG, Jager 
A, Zunder ER, et al. Data-Driven Phenotypic Dissection of AML Reveals Progenitor-like Cells 
that Correlate with Prognosis. Cell. 2015; 162:184–197. [PubMed: 26095251] 
Merad M, Sathe P, Helft J, Miller J, Mortha A. The Dendritic Cell Lineage: Ontogeny and Function of 
Dendritic Cells and Their Subsets in the Steady State and the Inflamed Setting. Annual review of 
immunology. 2013; 31doi: 10.1146/annurev-immunol-020711-074950
Moussion C, Girard JP. Dendritic cells control lymphocyte entry to lymph nodes through high 
endothelial venules. Nature. 2011; 479:542–546. [PubMed: 22080953] 
Naidoo J, Wang X, Woo KM, Iyriboz T, Halpenny D, Cunningham J, Chaft JE, Segal NH, Callahan 
MK, Lesokhin AM, et al. Pneumonitis in Patients Treated With Anti–Programmed Death-1/
Programmed Death Ligand 1 Therapy. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 0 JCO.2016.2068.2005. 
Nishino M, Giobbie-Hurder A, Hatabu H, Ramaiya NH, Hodi F. Incidence of programmed cell death 1 
inhibitor–related pneumonitis in patients with advanced cancer: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA Oncology. 2016; 2:1607–1616. [PubMed: 27540850] 
Paul F, Arkin Ya, Giladi A, Jaitin DA, Kenigsberg E, Keren-Shaul H, Winter D, Lara-Astiaso D, Gury 
M, Weiner A. Transcriptional heterogeneity and lineage commitment in myeloid progenitors. Cell. 
2015; 163:1663–1677. [PubMed: 26627738] 
Pham CT. Neutrophil serine proteases: specific regulators of inflammation. Nat Rev Immunol. 2006; 
6:541–550. [PubMed: 16799473] 
Pignon JP, Tribodet H, Scagliotti GV, Douillard JY, Shepherd FA, Stephens RJ, Dunant A, Torri V, 
Rosell R, Seymour L, et al. Lung adjuvant cisplatin evaluation: a pooled analysis by the LACE 
Collaborative Group. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:3552–3559. [PubMed: 18506026] 
Pitzalis C, Jones GW, Bombardieri M, Jones SA. Ectopic lymphoid-like structures in infection, cancer 
and autoimmunity. Nat Rev Immunol. 2014; 14:447–462. [PubMed: 24948366] 
Qian B-Z, Li J, Zhang H, Kitamura T, Zhang J, Campion LR, Kaiser EA, Snyder LA, Pollard JW. 
CCL2 recruits inflammatory monocytes to facilitate breast-tumour metastasis. Nature. 2011; 
475:222–225. [PubMed: 21654748] 
Reddy RC. Immunomodulatory Role of PPAR-γ in Alveolar Macrophages. Journal of Investigative 
Medicine. 2008; 56:522–527. [PubMed: 18317435] 
Remark R, Merghoub T, Grabe N, Litjens G, Damotte D, Wolchok JD, Merad M, Gnjatic S. In-depth 
tissue profiling using multiplexed immunohistochemical consecutive staining on single slide. 
Science Immunology. 2016; 1:aaf6925. [PubMed: 28783673] 
Ricote M, Li AC, Willson TM, Kelly CJ, Glass CK. The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-
gamma is a negative regulator of macrophage activation. Nature. 1998; 391:79–82. [PubMed: 
9422508] 
Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Wu D, Hu Y, Law CW, Shi W, Smyth GK. limma powers differential 
expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic acids research. 
2015:gkv007.
Roberts EW, Broz ML, Binnewies M, Headley MB, Nelson AE, Wolf DM, Kaisho T, Bogunovic D, 
Bhardwaj N, Krummel MF. Critical Role for CD103(+)/CD141(+) Dendritic Cells Bearing CCR7 
for Tumor Antigen Trafficking and Priming of T Cell Immunity in Melanoma. Cancer Cell. 2016; 
30:324–336. [PubMed: 27424807] 
Lavin et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Robins H, Desmarais C, Matthis J, Livingston R, Andriesen J, Reijonen H, Carlson C, Nepom G, Yee 
C, Cerosaletti K. Ultra-sensitive detection of rare T cell clones. Journal of immunological 
methods. 2012; 375:14–19. [PubMed: 21945395] 
Robins HS, Campregher PV, Srivastava SK, Wacher A, Turtle CJ, Kahsai O, Riddell SR, Warren EH, 
Carlson CS. Comprehensive assessment of T-cell receptor beta-chain diversity in alphabeta T cells. 
Blood. 2009; 114:4099–4107. [PubMed: 19706884] 
Robinson MD, Oshlack A. A scaling normalization method for differential expression analysis of 
RNA-seq data. Genome Biol. 2010; 11:R25. [PubMed: 20196867] 
Salmon H, Franciszkiewicz K, Damotte D, Dieu-Nosjean MC, Validire P, Trautmann A, Mami-
Chouaib F, Donnadieu E. Matrix architecture defines the preferential localization and migration of 
T cells into the stroma of human lung tumors. J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:899–910. [PubMed: 
22293174] 
Salmon H, Idoyaga J, Rahman A, Leboeuf M, Remark R, Jordan S, Casanova-Acebes M, 
Khudoynazarova M, Agudo J, Tung N, et al. Expansion and Activation of CD103(+) Dendritic 
Cell Progenitors at the Tumor Site Enhances Tumor Responses to Therapeutic PD-L1 and BRAF 
Inhibition. Immunity. 2016; 44:924–938. [PubMed: 27096321] 
Sánchez-Paulete AR, Cueto FJ, Martínez-López M, Labiano S, Morales-Kastresana A, Rodríguez-
Ruiz ME, Jure-Kunkel M, Azpilikueta A, Aznar MA, Quetglas JI, et al. Cancer Immunotherapy 
with Immunomodulatory Anti-CD137 and Anti–PD-1 Monoclonal Antibodies Requires BATF3-
Dependent Dendritic Cells. Cancer Discovery. 2016; 6:71–79. [PubMed: 26493961] 
Spira A, Beane JE, Shah V, Steiling K, Liu G, Schembri F, Gilman S, Dumas YM, Calner P, Sebastiani 
P, et al. Airway epithelial gene expression in the diagnostic evaluation of smokers with suspect 
lung cancer. Nat Med. 2007; 13:361–366. [PubMed: 17334370] 
Suzuki K, Kadota K, Sima CS, Nitadori J, Rusch VW, Travis WD, Sadelain M, Adusumilli PS. 
Clinical impact of immune microenvironment in stage I lung adenocarcinoma: tumor 
interleukin-12 receptor beta2 (IL-12Rbeta2), IL-7R, and stromal FoxP3/CD3 ratio are independent 
predictors of recurrence. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:490–498. [PubMed: 23269987] 
Turley SJ, Cremasco V, Astarita JL. Immunological hallmarks of stromal cells in the tumour 
microenvironment. Nat Rev Immunol. 2015; 15:669–682. [PubMed: 26471778] 
van der Maaten L. Accelerating t-SNE using tree-based algorithms. Journal of machine learning 
research. 2014; 15:3221–3245.
van der Maaten L, Hinton G. Visualizing Data using t-SNE. Journal of Machine Learning Research. 
2008; 9:2579–2605.
Wendel M, Galani IE, Suri-Payer E, Cerwenka A. Natural killer cell accumulation in tumors is 
dependent on IFN-gamma and CXCR3 ligands. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:8437–8445. [PubMed: 
18922917] 
Wu K, Byers DE, Jin X, Agapov E, Alexander-Brett J, Patel AC, Cella M, Gilfilan S, Colonna M, 
Kober DL, et al. TREM-2 promotes macrophage survival and lung disease after respiratory viral 
infection. J Exp Med. 2015; 212:681–697. [PubMed: 25897174] 
Yona S, Jung S. Monocytes: subsets, origins, fates and functions. Curr Opin Hematol. 2010; 17:53–59. 
[PubMed: 19770654] 
Yoshie O, Matsushima K. CCR4 and its ligands: from bench to bedside. Int Immunol. 2015; 27:11–20. 
[PubMed: 25087232] 
Yu H, Lee H, Herrmann A, Buettner R, Jove R. Revisiting STAT3 signalling in cancer: new and 
unexpected biological functions. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:736–746. [PubMed: 25342631] 
Yu YR, Hotten DF, Malakhau Y, Volker E, Ghio AJ, Noble PW, Kraft M, Hollingsworth JW, Gunn 
MD, Tighe RM. Flow Cytometric Analysis of Myeloid Cells in Human Blood, Bronchoalveolar 
Lavage, and Lung Tissues. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2016; 54:13–24. [PubMed: 26267148] 
Zhu W, Germain C, Liu Z, Sebastian Y, Devi P, Knockaert S, Brohawn P, Lehmann K, Damotte D, 
Validire P, et al. A high density of tertiary lymphoid structure B cells in lung tumors is associated 
with increased CD4+ T cell receptor repertoire clonality. OncoImmunology. 2015; 4:e1051922. 
[PubMed: 26587322] 
Zhu YM, Webster SJ, Flower D, Woll PJ. Interleukin-8/CXCL8 is a growth factor for human lung 
cancer cells. Br J Cancer. 2004; 91:1970–1976. [PubMed: 15545974] 
Lavin et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
Paired analysis reveals a unique tumor immune signature independent of TNM stage
Depletion of CD141+ DC and enrichment of PPARγhi macrophages in stage I lung 
cancer
Reduced and impaired NK cells in stage I lung cancer
Harnessing TIM compartment may help enhance T-cell immunotherapies
Lavin et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Robust immune response to early lung adenocarcinoma tumor lesions
(A) Schematic for defining the immune composition of lung tumors. Blood, non-involved 
lung (nLung), and tumor tissue were collected from patients undergoing surgical resection of 
primary tumors, processed, barcoded, pooled, and stained with antibodies conjugated to 
metal isotopes. Mass cytometry (CyTOF) single cell data was clustered using Phenograph to 
identify common populations across patients.
(B) viSNE analysis of immune cells from tumor colored by relative expression of CyTOF 
markers, with populations indicated (top).
Lavin et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (C, D) Frequency of immune lineages based on summation of Phenograph metaclusters 
(STAR methods; n=18). Composition of the CD45+ compartment showing average 
frequencies of major immune lineages for each tissue (C; n=18) across patients and bar plots 
showing frequencies for each patient (D; *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001 by paired t-test). 
Bar plots show mean ± SEM.
(E, F) MICSSS for CD3, CD68, and CD20 of immune infiltrate (E) and a tertiary lymphoid 
structure (TLS; F) at the tumor invasive margin and non-involved lung from representative 
patients. See also Figure S1
Lavin et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Lymphoid function is dysregulated at the tumor site
(A) viSNE analysis of CD3+ immune cells colored and labeled by Phenograph metacluster 
(left) and tissue (right) for a representative patient.
(B) Heatmap of Phenograph clusters of CD3+ cells. Rows represent clusters of single cells 
within individual patients grouped by metacluster across patients.
(C) Bar plots of frequencies of metaclusters from (B) across tissue for 18 lung 
adenocarcinoma patients (*p<0.05, **p<0.01 and ***p<0.001 by paired t-test).
(D) Normalized expression of PD-1, CTLA-4, and CD39 on tumor CD3+ cells shown by 
viSNE plot for a representative patient (left) and bar pots of normalized expression across 
patients for indicated metaclusters (n=18; right).
Lavin et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (E) Heatmap showing relative normalized protein expression on tumor Tregs as ratio to 
nLung Tregs for 15 patients (left) and average expression of indicated markers across 
patients on tumor Tregs, PD-1+ CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (right).
(F) MICSSS for CD8 and CD20 showing a TLS in tumor of a representative patient.
(G) Clonality of T cell receptor (TCR) repertoire across tissues (n=16; left), and frequency 
of CD8+ PD-1+ T cells in tumor correlated to overall TCR clonality (Spearman’s rank-
based correlation; right). Bar plots show mean ± SEM.
See also Figure S2
Lavin et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Cytolytic NK Cells are excluded from tumor and produce less granzyme B and IFNγ
(A) Bar plots of frequencies of CD16+ and CD16- NK cell metaclusters across tissue for 17 
lung adenocarcinoma patients (see Figure 4C).
(B) Heatmap showing relative normalized protein expression on tumor NK cell as ratio to 
those from nLung for 14 patients (see STAR Methods).
(C) Bar plots of normalized expression of indicated proteins on NK cells from nLung and 
tumor (n=14).
(D) viSNE plots showing CD56 expression (left), and IFNγ expression in tumor and nLung 
upon stimulation in a representative patient.
Lavin et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (E) Bar plot showing normalized IFNγ expression upon stimulation (n=9).
(F) Immunohistochemical staining from representative patients depicting greater (>50%) or 
less than 50% (<50%) of tumor cells staining for MHC I in the tumor.
(G) Bar plot stratifying the frequency of CD16+ NK cells and CD16- NK cells in patients by 
tumor cells staining for MHC I (n=8; *p<0.05, by unpaired t-test).
Bar plots show mean ± SEM; *p<0.05, **p<0.01 and ***p<0.001 by paired t-test.
See also Figure S3
Lavin et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Unbiased characterization of the mononuclear phagocyte compartment
(A) MARS-seq of 1473 cells pooled from tumor and nLung of a Stage IA adenocarcinoma 
patient. Cells were gated in silico and clustering on 770 mononuclear phagocytes is shown 
(see STAR methods). Columns represent single cells, with most variable genes from low 
(white) to high (purple). Normalized frequency of each cluster in tumor or nLung (top). 
Macrophages (MΦ), monocytes (Mono).
(B) viSNE analysis of CD3- immune cells colored and labeled by Phenograph metaclusters 
(left) and tissue (right), for a representative patient.
(C) Heatmap of Phenograph clusters of CD3- cells; rows represent clusters of single cells 
within individual patients grouped by metacluster across multiple patients.
Lavin et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (D) Bar plots of metacluster frequencies from 18 lung adenocarcinoma patients across tissue 
(*p<0.05, **p<0.01 and ***p<0.001 by paired t-test).
(E, F) Expression of corresponding transcript and protein by MARS-seq and CyTOF, 
respectively. Normalized transcript expression of MARS-seq clusters (left) and normalized 
protein expression of select Phenograph metaclusters in the tumor (right) for phenotypic 
markers (E; n=18), and cytokines (F; n=10) with corresponding viSNE plots.
(G) Bar plot of normalized IL-8 expression by CD14+ monocytes across tissue (n=10; 
*p<0.05, **p<0.01 and ***p<0.001 by paired t-test).
Bar plots show mean ± SEM.
See also Figure S4
Lavin et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. The TME contains macrophages with a distinct phenotype
(A) Bar plot of macrophage metacluster frequency from 18 lung adenocarcinoma patients 
across tissue (see Figure 4C).
(B) Comparison of average transcript expression between macrophage clusters enriched in 
tumor (cluster 7) or lung (weighted average of clusters 5 and 6; Figure 4A), showing highly 
expressed transcripts, genes with FC > 2 colored red (left), bar plots of indicated transcript 
expression (right).
(C) viSNE plots showing single-cell expression of CD68, CD163, PD-L1, and PPARγ 
across tissues in a representative patient.
Lavin et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (D) Heatmap showing relative normalized protein expression of tumor macrophages as ratio 
to those from nLung for 16 patients (left) and average expression across patients of indicated 
markers on mononuclear phagocyte metaclusters in tumor (right). Bar plots of normalized 
expression of indicated proteins by macrophages in tumor and nLung (n =18)
(E) Bar plot of normalized PD-L1 expression across metaclusters in tumor (n=18; top). 
MICSSS for CD3, CD68, and PD-L1 showing a macrophage-dense region at the tumor 
invasive margin (bottom).
(F) IL-6 expression in nLung and tumor macrophages. viSNE plots showing IL-6 expression 
of a representative patient (top). Bar plot showing expression of IL-6 transcripts (left) and 
normalized protein expression across macrophages in nLung and tumor (right; n=10).
Bar plots show mean ± SEM; *p<0.05, **p<0.01 and ***p<0.001 by paired t-test. Fold-
change (FC).
See also Figure S5
Lavin et al.
Page 32
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. CD141+ DC are excluded from lung tumors and immune signature of lung 
adenocarcinoma tumors
(A, B) Comparison of the average transcript expression between DC clusters (Figure 4A, 
clusters 2 and 4), showing highly expressed transcripts in these clusters, genes with FC > 2 
colored red (A), and bar plots showing expression of indicated transcripts (B).
(C) Bar plots of DC metacluster frequencies across tissue (Figure 4C; n=18; *p<0.05, 
**p<0.01 and ***p<0.001 by paired t-test).
(D) MICSSS for CD3 and DC-LAMP showing a TLS at the tumor margin in a 
representative patient.
(E) MARS-seq transcript levels normalized across mononuclear phagocyte clusters (Figure 
4A).
Lavin et al.
Page 33
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (F) Heatmap showing the relative differences in metacluster frequency between tumor and 
nLung across 16 patients, grouped by stage.
(G) Bar plots showing neutrophil metacluster frequency and secreted soluble TNFα (pg/ml) 
at thetumor, stratified by stage (*p<0.05 by unpaired t-test).
Bar plots show mean ± SEM.
See also Figure S6.
Lavin et al.
Page 34
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Lavin et al.
Page 35
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Anti-Human CD45 (clone HI30)
Biolegend
Cat#: 304002;
RRID: AB_314390
Anti-Human HLA-ABC (clone W6/32)
Biolegend
Cat#: 311402;
RRID: AB_314871
Anti-Human CD19 (clone HIB19) – 142Nd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3142001B
Anti-Human CD117 (clone 104D2) – 143Nd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3143001B
Anti-Human CD141 (clone BDCA-3)
Biolegend
Cat#: 344102;
RRID: AB_2201808
Anti-PE (clone PE001) – 145Nd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3145006B
Anti-Human CD64 (clone 10.1) – 146Nd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3146006B
Anti-Human Gata6 (clone 2F10G3)
Abcam
Cat#: Ab175425
Anti-Human CD16 (clone 3G8) – 148Nd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3148004B
Anti-Human CD123 (clone 6H6) – 151Eu
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3151001B
Anti-Human CD66b (clone 80H3) – 152Sm
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3152011B
Anti-Human CD1c (clone BDCA-1)
Fluidigm
Cat#: 331502;
RRID: AB_1088995
Anti-Human CD163 (clone GHI/61) – 154Sm
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3154007B
Anti-Human CD86 (clone IT2.2) – 156Gd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3156008B
Anti-Human CD33 (clone WM53) – 158Gd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3158001B
Anti-Human CD14 (clone M5E2) – 160Gd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3160001B
Anti-Human CD11c (clone Bu15) – 162Dy
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3162005B
Anti-APC (clone APC003) – 163Dy
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3163001B
Anti-Human CCR3 (clone 5E8)
Biolegend
Cat#: 310702;
RRID: AB_345394
Anti-Human CD116 (clone 4H1)
Biolegend
Cat#: 305902;
RRID: AB_314568
Anti-Human CD24 (clone ML5) – 166Er
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3166007B
Anti-Human CD206 (clone 15-2) – 168Er
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3168008B
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Lavin et al.
Page 36
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Anti-Human PPARγ (clones 3A4A9, 1E6A1)
Abcam
Cat#: Ab70405;
RRID: AB_1269873
Anti-Human CD3 (clone UCHT1) – 170Er
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3170001B
Anti-Human CD68 (clone Y1/82A) – 171Yb
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3171011B
Anti-Human CD11b (clone M1/70) – 172Yb
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3172012B
Anti-Human HLA-DR (clone L243) – 174Yb
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3174001B
Ant-Human PD-L1 (clone 29E.2A3) -175Lu
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3175017B
Anti-Human CD56 (clone NCAM16.2) – 176Yb
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3176008B
Anti-Human CCR2 PE (clone K036C2)
Biolegend
Cat#: 357026;
RRID: AB_2562059
Anti-Human CD115 APC (clone 9-4D2-1E4)
Biolegend
Cat#: 347306;
RRID: AB_2562441
Anti-Human CCR6 (clone G034E3) – 141Pr
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3141003A
Anti-Human CD45RA (clone HI100) -143Nd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3143006B
Anti-Human CD38 (clone HIT2) -144Nd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3144014B
Anti-Human CD4 (clone RPA-T4) – 145Nd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3145001B
Anti-Human CD8a (clone RPA-T8) – 146Nd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3146001B
Anti-Human CD73 (clone AD2)
Biolegend
Cat#: 344002;
RRID: AB_2154067
Anti-Human CD127 (clone A019D5) – 149Sm
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3149011B
Anti-Human LAG3 (clone874501) -150Nd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3150016B
Anti-Human ICOS (clone DX29) – 151Eu
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3151008B
Anti-Human TCRγδ (clone 11F2) – 152Sm
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3152008B
Anti-Human TIM3 (clone F38-2E2) – 153Eu
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3153008B
Anti-Human CD27 (clone L128) – 155Gd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3155001B
Anti-Human CXCR3 (clone G025H7) – 156Gd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3156004B
Anti-Human CCR4 (clone 205410) – 158Gd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3158006A
Anti-Human CD39 (clone A1) – 160Gd
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3160004B
Anti-Human CTLA4 (clone 14D3) – 161Dy
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3161004B
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Lavin et al.
Page 37
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Anti-Human Foxp3 (clone PCH101) – 162Dy
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3162011A
Anti-Human 41BB (clone 4B4-1)
Biolegend
Cat #: 309802;
RRID: AB_314781
Anti-Human CD161 (clone HP-3G10) – 164Dy
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3164009B
Anti-Human BTLA (clone MIH26)
Biolegend
Cat#: 344502;
RRID: AB_2043950
Anti-Human CCR7 (clone G043H7) – 167Er
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3167009A
Anti-Human CD25 (clone 2A3) – 169Tm
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3169003B
Anti-Human Granzyme B (clone GB11) – 
171Yb
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3171002B
Anti-Human GITR (clone 621)
Biolegend
Cat#: 311602;
AB_314885
Anti-Human PD-1 (clone EH12.2H7) – 175Lu
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3175008B
Anti-Human CD57 (clone HCD57)
Biolegend
Cat#: 322302;
RRID: AB_535988
Anti-Human CD326 (clone 9C4)
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3141006B
Anti-Human CD19 (clone HIB19)
Biolegend
Cat#: 302202;
RRID: AB_314232
Anti-Human CD45RA (clone HI100)
Biolegend
Cat#: 304102;
RRID: AB_314406
Anti-Human CD4 (clone RPA-T4)
Biolegend
Cat#: 300501;
RRID: AB_314069
Anti-Human CD8a (clone RAP-T8)
Biolegend
Cat#: 301002;
RRID: AB_314120
Anti-Human IL-1ß (clone H1b-98)
Biolegend
Cat#: 511602;
RRID: AB_1236518
Anti-Human CD16 (clone 3G8)
Biolegend
Cat#: 302002;
RRID: AB_314202
Anti-Human CD127 (clone A019D5)
Biolegend
Cat#: 351302;
RRID: AB_10718513
Anti-Human CD1c (BDCA-1)
Biolegend
Cat#: 331502;
RRID: AB_1088995
Anti-Human CD123 (clone 6H6)
Biolegend
Cat#: 306002;
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Lavin et al.
Page 38
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
RRID: AB_314576
Anti-Human CD66b (clone G10F5)
Biolegend
Cat#: 305102;
RRID: AB_314494
Anti-Human TNFα (clone Mab11)
Biolegend
Cat#: 502902;
RRID: AB_315254
Anti-Human CD86 (clone IT2.2)
Biolegend
Cat#: 305402;
RRID: AB_314522
Anti-Human CD27 (clone O323)
Biolegend
Cat#: 302802;
RRID: AB_314294
Anti-Human IL-6 (clone MQ2-13A5)
Fluidigm
Cat#: 501102;
RRID: AB_315150
Anti-Human IFNγ (clone B27)
Fluidigm
Cat#: 506502;
RRID: AB_315435
Anti-Human CCL3 (clone 93342)
R&D SystemsCat#: MAB2701;
RRID: AB_2259652
Anti-Human CD14 (clone M5E2)
Biolegend
Cat#: 301802;
RRID: AB_314184
Anti-Human CD56 (clone B159)
BD Biosciences
Cat#: 555514;
RRID: AB_395904
Anti-Human CD169 (clone 7-239)
Biolegend
Cat#: 346002;
RRID: AB_2189031
Anti-Human CD68 (clone Y1/82A)
Biolegend
Cat#: 333802;
RRID: AB_1089058
Anti-Human CCL4 (clone 24006)
R&D SystemsCat#: MAB271;
RRID: AB_2071178
Anti-Human CD25 (clone M-A251)
Biolegend
Cat#: 356102;
RRID: AB_2561752
Anti-Human CD11c (clone Bu15)
Biolegend
Cat#: 337202;
RRID: AB_1236381
Anti-Human CD3 (clone UCHT1)
Biolegend
Cat#: 300402;
RRID: AB_314056
Anti-Human PD-L1 (clone 29E.2A3)
Biolegend
Cat#: 329702;
RRID: AB_940372
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Lavin et al.
Page 39
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Anti-Human CD38 (clone HB-7)
Biolegend
Cat#: 356602;
RRID: AB_2561794
Anti-Human CD161 (clone HP-3G10)
Biolegend
Cat#: 339902;
RRID: AB_1501090
Anti-Human CD206 (clone 15-2)
Biolegend
Cat#: 321102;
RRID: AB_571923
Anti-Human IL-8 (clone E8N1)
Biolegend
Cat#: 511402;
RRID: AB_893460
Anti-Human HLADR (clone L243)
Biolegend
Cat#: 307602;
RRID: AB_314680
Anti-Human PD-1 (clone EH12.2H7)
Biolegend
Cat#: 329902;
RRID: AB_940488
Anti-Human Granzyme B (clone GB11)
ThermoFisherCat#: MA1-80734;
RRID: AB_931084
Anti-Human CD11b (clone ICRF44)
Fluidigm
Cat#: 3209003B
Anti-Human CD3 (clone 2GV6)
Ventana
Cat#: 790-4341
Anti-Human CD8 (clone C8/144b)
Dako
Cat#: M7103
Anti-Human CD20 (clone L26)
Dako
Cat#: 0755
Anti-Human DC-LAMP (clone 1010E1.01)
Novus Biologicals
Cat#: DDX0191P
Anti-Human CD163 (clone EPR4166(2))
Abcam
Cat#: ab129202
Anti-Human FoxP3 (clone 236A/E7)
Abcam
Cat#: ab20034
Anti-Human PD-L1 (E1L3N)
CST
Cat#: 13684
Anti-Human Pan-Cytokeratins (clone Ae1/Ae3)
Dako
Cat#: ab27988
Anti-Human Ki-67 (clone 30-9)
Ventana
Cat#: 790-4286
Anti-Human Granzyme B (clone GrB-7)
Dako
Cat#: M723501-2
Anti-Human HLA-ABC (clone EMR8-5)
Abcam
Cat#: ab70328
Anti-Human CD68 (clone KP1)
Dako
Cat#: M081401-2
Biological Samples
Blood, non-involved lung, and tumor tissue
Fresh 
resections 
from 
patients 
with 
informed 
N/A
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Lavin et al.
Page 40
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
consent 
for an 
IRB-
approved 
study. 
Surgeries 
were 
performed 
by the 
Departme
nt of 
Cardiotho
racic 
Surgery, 
Mount 
Sinai 
Hospital.
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Brefeldin A
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#: B7651
Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#: 79346
Ionomycin
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#: I0634
Cell-ID Intercalator-103Rh
Fluidigm
Cat#: 201103A
Collagenase from Clostridium Histolyticum, 
Type IV
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#: C5138
Ficoll-Paque™ PLUS
GE Healthcare
Cat#: 17144003
Critical Commercial Assays
Foxp3 / Transcription Factor
eBioscience
Cat#: 00-5521-00
Fixation/Permeabilization Concentrate and 
Diluent
Permeabilization Buffer (10X)
eBioscience
Cat#: 00-8333-56
Cytofix/Cytoperm
BD Biosciences
Cat#: 51-2090KZ
Perm/Wash
BD Biosciences
Cat#: 51-2091KZ
Maxpar® X8 Multimetal Labeling Kit
Fluidigm
Cat#: 201300
Deposited Data
Raw Data Files from MARS-Seq
NCBI Gene
GEO: GSE97168
Expression Omnibus
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Recombinant DNA
Sequence-Based Reagents
Software and Algorithms
R
SOURCE
: R Core 
https://www.R-project.org/.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Lavin et al.
Page 41
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Team 
(2016). R: 
A 
language 
and 
environm
ent for 
statistical 
computin
g. R 
Foundatio
n for 
Statistical 
Computin
g, Vienna, 
Austria. 
URL
tidyverse
Hadley 
Wickham 
(2016). 
tidyverse: 
Easily 
Install 
and 
Load ’Tid
yverse’ 
Packages. 
R 
package 
version 
1.0.0.
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=tidyverse
ggplot2
H. 
Wickham. 
ggplot2: 
Elegant 
Graphics 
for Data 
Analysis. 
Springer-
Verlag 
New 
York, 
2009.
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ggplot2/index.html
viSNE
Nat 
Biotechno
l. 2013 
Jun; 
31(6): 
545–552.
N/A
Phenograph
Cell. 2015 
Jul 
2;162(1):
184-97.
N/A
Other
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 04.
