  
 
 
 
 
This is an Accepted Article that has been peer-reviewed and approved for publication in the The 
Journal of Physiology, but has yet to undergo copy-editing and proof correction. Please cite this 
article as an 'Accepted Article'; doi: 10.1113/JP273557. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Cover Page  
 
Title:  Effect of gravity and microgravity on intracranial pressure 
 
Authors:  Justin S Lawley1,2, Lonnie G Petersen3, Erin J Howden1,2, Satyam Sarma1,2, William K 
Cornwell 3rd1,2, Rong Zhang1,2, Louis A Whitworth1, Michael A. Williams4, Benjamin D Levine1,2*† 
Affiliations: 
1Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine, Texas Health Presbyterian Dallas, Dallas, TX, 
USA 
2University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA 
3Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 
Denmark  
4University of Washington School of Medicine, Departments of Neurology and Neurological Surgery, 
Seattle, WA USA 
*Correspondence to: BenjaminLevine@texashealth.org  
Running header: Gravity on intracranial pressure  
 
†Address for correspondence to: Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine, Texas Health Presbyterian 
Hospital Dallas, 7232 Greenville Avenue, Suite 435, Dallas, TX 75231, USA. 
 
Key Points Summary 
 
Astronauts have recently been discovered to have impaired vision, with a presentation that 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
2 
 
resembles syndromes of elevated intracranial pressure on Earth. 
 
Gravity has a profound effect on fluid distribution and pressure within the human circulation. In 
contrast to prevailing theory, we observed that microgravity reduces central venous and 
intracranial pressure. 
 
This being said, intracranial pressure is not reduced to the levels observed in the 90º seated 
upright posture on earth. Thus, over twenty-four hours in zero gravity, pressure in the brain is 
slightly above that observed on earth, which may explain remodeling of the eye in astronauts.  
 
ABSTRACT 
Astronauts have recently been discovered to have impaired vision, with a presentation that resembles 
syndromes of elevated intracranial pressure (ICP).  This syndrome is considered the most mission 
critical medical problem identified in the past decade of manned spaceflight. We recruited five men 
and three women who had an Ommaya reservoir inserted for the delivery of prophylactic central 
nervous system chemotherapy, but were free of their malignant disease for at least 1 year. ICP was 
assessed by placing a fluid-filled 25 ga butterfly needle into the Ommaya reservoir. Subjects were 
studied in the upright and supine position, during acute zero gravity (parabolic flight) and prolonged 
simulated microgravity (6˚ head down tilt bedrest). ICP was lower when seated in the 90˚ upright 
posture compared to lying supine (Seated, 4±1 vs supine, 15±2 mmHg). Whilst lying in the supine 
posture, central venous pressure (supine, 7±3 vs microgravity, 4±2 mmHg) and ICP (supine, 17±2 vs 
microgravity, 13±2 mmHg) were reduced in acute zero gravity, although not to the levels observed in 
the 90˚ seated upright posture on earth. Prolonged periods of simulated microgravity did not cause 
progressive elevations in ICP (supine, 15±2 vs 24 hours head down tilt, 15±4 mmHg). Complete 
removal of gravity does not pathologically elevate ICP but does prevent the normal lowering of ICP 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
3 
 
when upright.  These findings suggest the human brain is protected by the daily circadian cycles in 
regional ICPs, without which pathology may occur.  
Key words: Space, Posture, bedrest, Ocular remodeling, Idiopathic intracranial hypertension.  
 
INTRODUCTION  
When humans sit upright on Earth, the head-to-foot hydrostatic gradient (Gz) pulls fluid towards the 
feet. Conversely when lying in the supine posture, typically whilst asleep at night, fluid redistributes 
towards the head (Rowell, 1986). Thus, gravity profoundly affects pressure, volume and flow in the 
human circulation with habitual changes in posture causing diurnal fluctuations in the distribution of 
fluid and regional pressures.  
On Earth, these pressure fluctuations are normal and generally do not cause pathology.  However, 
there are specific human conditions that are exacerbated, or in some cases caused by these fluid shifts.  
For example, idiopathic intracranial hypertension and its symptoms are worse in the supine position, 
and in some cases may be detectable only at night (Torbey et al., 2004).  Intracranial hypotension 
occurs primarily in the upright position, and both of these conditions can cause severe and intractable 
headache (Ducros & Biousse, 2015).  
In the absence of gravity, e.g., the microgravity environment encountered by astronauts on the 
International Space Station, this cephalad redistribution of body fluids, and in particular, the cephalad 
redistribution of cerebral spinal fluid (CSF), has been hypothesized to cause a newly-discovered 
syndrome of deterioration of visual acuity in astronauts (Mader et al., 2011). In microgravity, 
redistribution of fluid towards the brain is hypothesized to elevate intracranial pressure (ICP) in a 
manner disproportionate to intraocular pressure (IOP), thus resulting in an reduced pressure gradient 
(IOP-ICP) across the lamina cribrosa at the posterior aspect of the eye. Indeed, in an acute model of 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
4 
 
simulated microgravity, head-down tilt (-9º and -10º) caused increased intracranial pressure (Petersen 
et al., 2015; Eklund et al., 2016) but not intraocular pressure (Eklund et al., 2016). Astronauts with 
this syndrome develop physical findings suggestive of elevated ICP including papilledema, flattening 
of the globe of the eye, and dilation of the optic nerve sheath. This analogy and the theoretical link 
between cephalad fluid shift and intracranial hypertension has led NASA flight surgeons to refer to 
the syndrome as the Visual Impairment / Intracranial Pressure syndrome, or “VIIP” and it is 
considered to be NASA’s top health risk for long-duration spaceflight, including exploration missions 
to Mars (Mader et al., 2011). In addition to the exposure to microgravity on the International Space 
Station, it has been hypothesized that other environmental conditions (i.e., elevated ambient CO2 
concentration) and rigorous strength based exercises regularly performed by astronauts to avoid 
musculoskeletal loss, create a “perfect storm” that causes raised ICP and visual impairments in 
astronauts (Nelson et al., 2014; Michael & Marshall-Bowman, 2015).  
Despite the attractiveness of this theory however, no direct ICP measurements in microgravity with 
or without elevated CO2 or resistance exercise. Moreover, invasive studies of cardiovascular 
adjustments to microgravity have demonstrated that microgravity physiology is complex and at 
times counter-intuitive; for example, central venous pressure, (CVP) originally thought to be 
increased in astronauts, was decreased (Buckey et al., 1993; Videbaek & Norsk, 1997). Despite our 
conceptual understanding of these fundamental relationships between gravity and human 
physiology, no investigation has documented the simultaneous adjustments in arterial, venous and 
cerebral spinal fluid pressures due to the influence of gravity.  
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
5 
 
METHODS 
PARTICIPANTS. 
Five men (age, 35±13 yrs; height, 177±13 cm; weight 87±22lbs) and three women (age, 36±4 yrs; 
height, 167±11 cm; weight 63±10 lbs) who previously had an Ommaya reservoir (catheter placed 
from the lateral ventricle to a cerebral spinal fluid filled reservoir under the scalp) inserted for the 
delivery of prophylactic central nervous system chemotherapy as part of their treatment for 
hematologic malignancy were recruited to take part in this study.  E-mails were sent to the medical 
directors of most major medical centers in the US managing adults with hematologic malignancies 
describing the inclusion/exclusion criteria and requesting referrals.  A Facebook page was created, 
and patient support groups were messaged, though the physicians of all interested volunteers were 
also consulted. All participants had structurally normal brains documented with MRI, were free of 
their malignant disease for at least one year, had normal cardiovascular systolic and diastolic function 
documented by echocardiography, had normal complete blood counts including hematocrit, white 
blood cell count, and platelets, and were on no regular medications that affect cerebral 
hemodynamics. All participants were informed of the purpose and risks of each procedure and signed 
an informed consent form, which was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center and NASA Johnson Space Centre and followed guidelines set 
forth in the Declaration of Helsinki.  
 
DATA COLLECTION 
Intracranial pressure: After a single intravenous dose of cefazolin, a fluid-filled 25 gauge butterfly 
needle was inserted in the Ommaya reservoir and connected to a pressure transducer (Transpac IV; 
Abbott, Fig. 1). The wings of the butterfly needle were sutured to the scalp surrounding the Ommaya 
reservoir and secured with a head dressing so participants could move freely without dislodging the 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
6 
 
butterfly needle. The presence of cardiac and respiratory oscillations concomitant with the 
appropriate response to cough, Valsalva maneuver, and head turning was used to confirm that the 
pressure waveform reflected intracranial pressure (ICP). The transducer was fixed at the level of the 
external acoustic meatus throughout all experimental conditions. As such, ICP was accurate through 
changes in posture and during microgravity. The pressure transducer was periodically zeroed to the 
atmospheric reference point. 
 
Central venous pressure: A fluid-filled 4 French peripherally inserted central catheter was placed 
using ultrasound guidance into a brachial vein. Thereafter, the catheter was advanced to the level of 
right atrium under fluoroscopic guidance and the correct position was confirmed by fluoroscopy and 
the presence of characteristic central venous pressure (CVP) waveforms (Fig. 1). Position of the right 
atrium was marked on the body in the anteroposterior and lateral planes; the pressure transducer 
(Transpac IV; Abbott) was fixed to the body at level of the right atrium during parabolic flight (study 
2). During changes in posture (study 1) and bedrest (study 3) the pressure transducer was fixed to a 
pole and leveled to the right atrium with each change in posture. The pressure transducer was 
periodically zeroed to the atmospheric reference point. Both ICP and CVP pressure transducers were 
connected to a patient monitor (Tram-rac, Marquette, USA) with analog signal digitized through an 
analog to digital converter (MP-150, Biopac Systems, USA). 
 
Hemodynamics: With changes in posture (study 1) and throughout HDT (study 3), steady-state 
arterial blood pressure was measured by electrosphygmomanometry (SunTechMedical Instruments 
Inc., USA, (Fig. 1)) with a microphone placed over the brachial artery to detect Korotkoff sounds. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
7 
 
During parabolic flight (study 2), bedrest (Study 3) and throughout leg press exercise (study 4), beat-
by-beat arterial blood pressure was also measured by photoplethysmography (Nexfin; BMEYE, 
Netherlands, (Fig. 1)), with changes in cardiac stroke volume calculated using the Modelflow method 
(Wesseling et al., 1993; Shibata & Levine, 2011). Beat-by-beat blood pressure device was turned off 
during sleep (study 3). Prior to steady state data collection with changes in posture and during HDT, 
hemodynamic stability was confirmed by stable cardiac outputs [data not shown] via the acetylene 
rebreathing technique (model MGA1100, Marquette, USA) (Jarvis et al., 2007). 
 
Jugular venous diameter: As an indirect indicator of cephalad fluid volume (fluid shifts above the 
heart), the cross-sectional area of the right internal jugular vein was measured by cardiac gated B 
mode ultrasonography using a 7 - 12 MHz linear transducer (IE33, Phillips, USA, (Fig. 1)). The internal 
jugular vein was imaged 2 cm below the carotid bifurcation with care taken not to compress the 
vein. Identification of the Jugular vein was confirmed by color Doppler and by asking subjects to 
perform a small Valsalva maneuver. The maximum cross-sectional area was measured off-line at the 
ECG T-wave in triplicate for each condition (OsiriX, USA).     
 
Experimental Protocols 
Study one assessed changes in ICP with change in posture from the 90º sitting upright to supine 
position. Moreover, whilst in the supine position, subjects placed their head on a pillow to assess the 
influence of this common procedure in patients obligated to long-term bed rest. Measurements 
were performed in a quiet, environmentally controlled laboratory with an ambient temperature of 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
8 
 
~25°C. Five minutes of steady state hemodynamics were obtained in the 90° sitting and supine 
positions. Study two assessed changes in ICP during removal of all hydrostatic gradients with brief 
(~20 sec) exposure to microgravity during parabolic flight. Subjects received a single dose of weight 
adjusted intramuscular Scopolamine (<110 lbs, 0.1 mg; 111-160 lbs, 0.2 mg; 161-220 lbs, 0.3 mg; 
>220 lbs, 0.4 mg;) ~1 hour before flight to prevent nausea and vomiting, which would confound the 
data. Continuous data were averaged over at least one minute during 1G and over six sequential, 20-
second periods of 0G.  Gravity was measured continuously from the onboard accelerometer. 
Moreover, to document any effect of changes in cabin pressure during parabolic flight, separate 
pressure transducers were setup to measure cabin pressure directly and pressure within a closed, 
fluid-filled length of tubing positioned perpendicular to the direction of flight (i.e. the same direction 
as the subjects). No changes were observed in either pressure system during parabolic flight.  
Study three assessed changes in ICP during prolonged exposure to simulated microgravity using a 
model of -6º HDT. During data analysis, careful attention was paid to identify pathological pressure 
waves as a sign of intracranial instability (Torbey et al., 2004). Furthermore, the pulse amplitude of 
the ICP waveform was used to assess the compliance of the craniospinal system (Qvarlander et al., 
2013a). Protocol four assessed change in ICP associated with increased ambient Carbon Dioxide 
(CO2) equal to that measured on the International Space Station (FIO2 of 0.7% (4 mmHg (Law et al., 
2014)), and with leg press exercise typically undertaken by astronauts to avoid musculoskeletal 
atrophy in space. Additional CO2 was delivered by a tight fitting face mask. During parabolic flight, 
participants breathed this gas mixture for 3 to 5 minutes during the 1G turn around (supine 
condition) and throughout one set of 5 to 10 parabolas. During bedrest, subjects breathed this CO2 
mixture for 5 minutes in the supine position and after 5 minutes (acute) and 24 hours (prolonged) of 
-6º HDT.  Onboard parabolic flight, data were averaged over the final minute of CO2 breathing in 1G 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
9 
 
and averaged over the following 5 - 10 periods of 0G.  In the supine and head down tilt conditions, 
data were averaged over the last minute of steady state.  
 
To replicate the typical exercise regimes undertaken by astronauts to avoid musculoskeletal 
atrophy during spaceflight, leg press exercise was performed whilst breathing additional CO2. 
Therefore, during parabolic flight (5 -10 parabolas), the supine position and after 5 minutes and 24 
hours head down tilt, participants continued to breathe additional CO2 whilst performing moderate to 
heavy (7-8 on a 0-10 BORG rating of perceived exertion scale (Cooper et al., 1979)) leg press 
exercise with self-paced breathing. During head down tilt, participants also completed 5 repetitions 
whilst performing Valsalva maneuvers during the contraction phase and 5 repetitions whilst forcefully 
inhaling (Muller maneuver) during the contraction phase. Onboard parabolic flight, data were 
averaged over 1 minute in 1G and during the following 5 - 10 periods of 0G with leg press exercise.  
In the supine and head down tilt conditions, data were averaged over one minute prior to and 
throughout leg press exercise. Data are expressed as the average ICP at baseline and during each 
exercise condition..   
 
RESULTS 
Study one: Changes in posture typically experienced during normal life on earth. Transitioning from 
the 90° sitting to the supine posture (Fig. 2A), which removes the Gz hydrostatic gradient, caused an 
immediate increase in ICP that peaked in ~13 seconds and then declined slightly to reach steady 
state by 3 minutes (Fig. 2B). At rest in the 90° sitting posture, the CVP was 2±3 mmHg and ICP was 
4±1 mmHg (Fig 2C). Despite the large hydrostatic gradient from the brain to the heart, it is likely that 
the ICP was not lower than this value because the jugular veins are partially collapsed in the upright 
position (Fig 2D), functioning as Starling resistors that interrupt the venous fluid column between 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
10 
 
the dural venous sinuses and the right atrium, thus isolating the dural sinus pressure from the CVP 
(Qvarlander et al., 2013b).  The ICP was higher in the supine compared to the 90° sitting posture in 
every subject (Δ11±2·5 mmHg, Fig. 2C). The immediate rise in ICP upon becoming supine was likely 
due to rapid redistribution of CSF and venous blood (Δ CVP 4·4±3·5 mmHg, Fig. 2C) toward the head. 
Furthermore, in the supine posture, the jugular veins are widely patent (Fig. 2D), which permits the 
CVP to be transmitted directly to the dural venous sinuses, thereby influencing CSF resorption and 
ICP.  This principle, that dural venous sinus pressure dictates ICP with changes in posture (Davson 
equation; (Davson et al., 1973; Qvarlander et al., 2013b)), is supported by our data, which also found 
that the prediction of ICP based on a simple hydrostatic indifference point for the CSF system slightly 
underestimated the measured ICP (30º, -0·1±1·6; 60º, -0·8±2.1 mmHg, Fig. 2E), implying that 
another factor, such as collapsibility of the jugular veins, contributes to the absolute change in 
upright ICP.  
The mean BP referenced at the heart, fell (Δ13±7·1 mmHg, Fig. 2C) with the transition from the 90° 
sitting posture to the supine posture, predominantly because of a decrease in diastolic blood 
pressure from vasodilation.  But when the BP was referenced to the external auditory meatus, to 
account for the heart-to-head hydrostatic fluid column to calculate cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP 
= mean BP – ICP), the BP was actually higher in the supine posture (90° sitting, 74±18 vs supine, 
84±16 mmHg, P=0·01). As a result of these balanced changes in BP and ICP at the level of the brain, 
CPP remained stable regardless of body posture (90° sitting, 70±18 vs supine, 66±18 mmHg, P=0·13). 
While in the supine position, placing the head on a pillow consistently reduced ICP (supine 14±2 vs 
pillow, 10±2 mmHg, P=0·05). 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
11 
 
Study two: Acute Microgravity. To investigate the effect of acute microgravity on supine ICP, we 
examined subjects during parabolic flight (Fig. 3A), which creates periods of true 0G and its 
associated fluid shifts (Fig. 3B) (Petersen et al., 2011). Throughout the parabolic flight, participants 
remained in the supine position with their spinal axis (z axis) perpendicular to the direction of flight 
to minimize any fluid shifts associated with change in the angle of the aircraft. As the aircraft flew 
level (1G) for baseline measurements, ICP was stable and comparable to supine measurements 
made in Study 1 (~16 mmHg, Fig. 3C). As the aircraft pulled-up to an angle of 45°, gravity almost 
doubled in the Gx (front-to-back) direction, which increased the CVP and ICP (Fig. 3B), presumably 
due to an increase in intrathoracic pressure (Videbaek & Norsk, 1997). During descent of the aircraft, 
when gravity was reduced to zero, the ICP fell immediately (Fig. 3B) and was followed a further 
gradual decline to ~20% below the 1G supine value (Δ-3·8±2·9 mmHg, Fig. 3C). Importantly, although 
the ICP in 0G decreased compared to the supine posture, it was not as low as the ICP in the 90° 
sitting posture on earth (1G) (Zero G, 13±2·6 mmHg, vs. 90° sitting, 4·1±1·4  mmHg, P<0·0001, Fig. 4).  
As noted in previous parabolic flight experiments (Buckey et al., 1993; Videbaek & Norsk, 1997), the 
CVP fell consistently upon entering 0G (Δ-2·8±2.5 mmHg, Fig. 3C), which is likely due to the reduction 
of intrathoracic pressure in microgravity (Videbaek & Norsk, 1997). Ultrasound demonstrated that 
the cross-sectional area of the jugular veins increased during 0G (Fig. 3D), which implies that a 
continuous venous fluid column between the dural venous sinuses and the right atrium exists in 
microgravity, which influences the ICP (Davson et al., 1973).  The location of the hydrostatic 
indifference point for the CSF was not related to the fall in ICP in 0G (Fig. 3E); however there was a 
modest predictive trend between body weight (a surrogate measure of weight on the chest which is 
eliminated in 0G) and the fall in ICP in 0G (40% of the variance, P=0·097, Fig. 3F).  Arterial blood 
pressure was stable between the supine and 0G conditions (Δ-1·85 ±5·1 mmHg, Fig. 3C).   
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
12 
 
 
Study three: Twenty-four hours simulated microgravity with -6  head down tilt  Although the 
reduction in ICP during acute microgravity (Study 2) was clear and unequivocal, the duration of 
microgravity with each parabolic arc lasted only ~20 – 30 seconds. Therefore the effect of longer 
periods of microgravity on ICP remained unknown. To address this question, we placed subjects in 
the -6° head down tilt position for 24 hours (Fig. 5A).  This widely used earth-based model of 
prolonged microgravity has been shown to cause cephalad fluid shifts similar to those observed in 
space (Pavy-Le Traon et al., 2007). Transition from supine to -6° head down tilt caused an 
immediate, albeit slight increase in ICP (Fig. 5B) in every subject (Δ1·8±0·5 mmHg, Fig. 5C). In 
contrast, the CVP was unchanged (Δ-0·49±0.5 mmHg, Fig. 5C).   
Because the head is below the heart in the -6° head down tilt position, the pressure of the cerebral 
venous and CSF systems, when compared to their respective hydrostatic indifference points, is 
increased proportional to the length of the hydrostatic column which explains the increase in ICP (Fig 
6). After 3 hours of head down tilt, the ICP returned to the supine value (Δ1·1±2.3 mmHg, Fig. 5C) 
likely due to the reduction in CVP, which equates to sagittal sinus pressure in the head down tilt 
position. At night, during quiet rest and sleep, the ICP was slightly reduced compared to the supine 
posture (Δ-3·1±1·4 mmHg), also corresponding to a slight fall in CVP (Δ-3·45±1.6 mmHg, Fig. 5C). By 
the end of 24 hours head down tilt simulated microgravity, when subjects were awake, the ICP and 
CVP had returned to baseline supine values (ICP, 14·8±3·7; CVP, 5·3±3·2 mmHg, Fig. 5C). This 
normalization of ICP occurred despite a persistent hydrostatic gradient from the heart to the head 
over the previous 24 hours as evidenced by persistent jugular venous distension (Fig 5D).   
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
13 
 
During quiet rest and sleep in head down tilt, the ICP pulse amplitude was slightly reduced compared 
to the supine posture, implying that intracranial compliance was unchanged or slightly improved 
(Fig. 7). One subject was noted to have B-waves (normally associated with impaired intracranial 
compliance) sporadically during quiet rest and sleep during head down tilt; however, the same 
pattern was seen while this subject was awake in the supine posture; thus, the B-waves seen during 
sleep in the head down tilt posture were not necessarily due to simulated microgravity.  
 
Study four: Elevated inspired carbon dioxide concentration and leg press resistance exercise. When 
compared to the resting condition while breathing ambient air, the addition of 0.7% CO2 (which is 
the maximum 24-hour peak concentration on the International Space Station (Alexander, 2012)) had 
no effect on ICP either in the supine posture, or at any time during the 24 hours of simulated 
microgravity with head down tilt bedrest (Fig. 8A).  Furthermore, the addition of 0.7% CO2 during 
parabolic flight slightly exaggerated the fall in ICP during acute zero gravity (normocapnia, -3·8±2·9; 
0·7% CO2, -5·4±2·6mmHg, Fig. 8B). 
CVP and ICP generally increased during the contraction phase of leg press exercise (Fig. 9A). 
However. there were important differences observed based on the subject breathing pattern.  For 
example, when participants performed a Valsalva maneuver during leg press thereby markedly 
increasing intrathoracic pressure, BP, CVP, and ICP rose (Fig. 9B), and during the relaxation phase, 
ABP, CVP, and ICP fell immediately (Fig. 9B). The synchronized rise and fall in all pressures resulted in 
an almost constant arterial-venous pressure gradient throughout the brain (Haykowsky et al., 2003) 
and therefore cerebral perfusion was maintained throughout exercise. When participants performed 
a Muller maneuver, which reduces intrathoracic pressure and CVP, during the leg extension phase, 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
14 
 
the rise in ICP was attenuated (Fig. 9C). These observations were consistent in the supine, acute 
microgravity and prolonged microgravity conditions (Fig. 9D - G).   
 
DISCUSSION 
This series of experiments, which are the first to make direct ICP measurements in humans during 
0G and prolonged simulated microgravity, provide convincing evidence against the hypothesis that 
ICP is pathologically elevated in 0G. In fact, removing gravity reduced the ICP compared to the supine 
posture. Other key findings of this study that are relevant for the physiology of gravity and 
hydrostatic influences on the circulation of the brain include: a) in 1G conditions on earth, upright 
ICP is always lower (and substantially so) than supine ICP; b) gravitational effects on fluid pressures 
in the head with postural adjustments occur rapidly, with no evidence for a slow progressive rise 
over time in the prolonged simulated microgravity condition; c) the reduction in ICP upon exposure 
to acute microgravity led to a microgravity ICP that was consistently above the upright values; and d) 
neither mildly elevated inspired CO2 levels, nor resistance exercise are likely to contribute to, or 
exacerbate an elevation of ICP in space.   
Humans typically spend 2/3 of their time in the upright position (lower ICP) while awake, 
and 1/3 of their time supine (higher ICP) while sleeping at night. Thus, due to the influence of 
gravity, ICP in humans is low for ~2/3 of each day. While ground based models of microgravity 
(Petersen et al., 2015; Eklund et al., 2016) suggests ICP may be elevated in space, in true 0G, the 
influence of gravity is removed and ICP falls to an equilibrium point between the upright and supine 
postures. We here speculate that the absence of diurnal, postural reductions in ICP  relative to 
intraocular pressure (Anderson et al., 2015; Petersen et al., 2015; Eklund et al., 2016) in microgravity 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
15 
 
creates a persistently lower pressure gradient at the posterior aspect of the eye (i.e., a lower 
translaminar pressure gradient (IOP-ICP) that may result in optic remodeling (Zhao et al., 2015). 
Interestingly, IOP is elevated in 0G relative to the upright posture on earth; (Anderson et al., 2015) 
thus the effect of microgravity on the pressure gradient at the posterior aspect of the eye 
(translaminar pressure)  maybe smaller than expected, yet over prolonged periods of time, possibly 
sufficient to cause optic remodeling.  
This proposed pathophysiology of visual impairment is in line with the observed time dependent, 
mild-moderate clinical pattern and persistent presence of optic remodeling seen in astronauts on 
their return to earth (Mader et al., 2011). The fact that simply placing the head on a pillow lowers 
ICP, which would be greater with head of bed elevation (Qvarlander et al., 2013b), explains why 
individuals clinically or experimentally confined to bed rest do not commonly present with visual 
abnormalities. The hypothesis of persistent “overloading” of the ICP in zero G is analogous to the 
pathological left ventricular remodeling due to regurgitant valvular heart disease, whereby volume 
loading of the left ventricle occurs with every heartbeat (Gaasch & Meyer, 2008). In contrast, the 
normal diurnal variation of ICP on earth may be considered analogous to the intermittent volume 
loading of the left cardiac ventricle, with endurance training, which causes beneficial remodeling. 
Thus the adaptive “stress-recovery” of exercise improves heart health, while unremitting stress 
causes cardiac dysfunction. 
Clinically, female astronauts appear to have less severe visual impairment during long duration space 
missions than men (Platts et al., 2014). Although the number of females we studied was small, some 
observations of apparent gender differences may be informative. Compared to males, hemodynamic 
changes were similar, yet females typically displayed an ICP in 0G closer to their estimated 24 hour 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
16 
 
ICP on earth (calculated as 1/3rd supine; 2/3rd sitting; Fig 4B). Such a smaller dissociation between 
average earth and microgravity conditions would result in a lower relative pressure gradient behind 
the eye in females than males; possibly explaining the similar incidence but decreased severity of 
visual impairment in females astronauts (Platts et al., 2014).  
In conclusion, normal changes in posture cause very large changes in intracranial pressure in humans.  
Complete removal of gravitational gradients (zero gravity of space) does not pathologically elevate 
intracranial pressure but does prevent the normal lowering of ICP when standing. Importantly, despite 
the acute short duration of OG during parabolic flight, we saw no evidence of a progressive rise in 
ICP due to cephalad fluid shifts with prolonged simulated microgravity in the head down tilt position. 
Thus, at present, we have no physiological data to support the hypothesis that ICP should be greater 
than that observed in OG during parabolic flight. The clinical implication of these findings is that the 
human brain and eye are protected by the daily circadian cycles in regional intracranial pressures, 
without which pathology occurs. Creative strategies to maintain relative circadian cycles in 
intracranial pressure should be employed in astronauts and clinical patients obligated to bed rest.  
 
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the National Space Biomedical Research Institute 
through NCC 9-58. We especially want to thank the participants for dedicating their time and effort 
towards these challenging experiments. We would also like to thank Dean Palmer, Mitchell Samels, 
Braden Everding, Sheryl Livingston, Margot Morris, Cyrus Oufi, Ramanathan Murugappan (Institute 
for Exercise and Environmental Medicine), Doug Ebert, David Ham, Terry Guess, Kathleen Garcia and 
Melinda Hailey (Wyle Industries) for their technical support in performing the experiments. We 
would like to acknowledge the staff at the Clinical Translational Science Center at University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, the pilots, engineers and coordinators of the Flight Opportunities 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
17 
 
Program (NASA), the Interventional Radiology Team at St. John Medical Center, Clear Lake, TX and 
the physicians, nurses, and staff of MM Haq Medical Oncology Center, Houston, TX for their 
expertise and assistance in performing the experiments. Finally, we would like to acknowledge all 
the oncologists and oncology nurse practitioners for patient referrals for this project. 
 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION SECTION 
Competing interests: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.  
 
Author Contributions: R.Z., L.A.W., M.A.W., B.D.L conceived and designed the experiments J.S.L., 
L.G.P., E.J.H., S.S., W.K.C., R.Z., L.A.W., M.A.W., B.D.L. performed the experiments. All authors 
contributed to writing the paper. 
 
Funding: This work was supported by the National Space Biomedical Research Institute 
through NCC 9-58. 
 
Authors Translational perspective: The human brain and eye are subject to large habitual variations 
in intracranial pressure simply by moving from the supine to the upright posture. Removal of gravity 
did not pathologically elevate pressure in the brain, but does prevent the normal lowering of ICP 
when standing. Thus, over twenty-four hours in zero gravity, pressure in the brain is slightly above 
that observed on earth, which may explain remodeling of the eye in astronauts. Clinically these data 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
18 
 
suggest that circadian cycles in intracranial pressure should be maintained in astronauts and in 
patients obligated to bed rest. Moreover, in contrast to contemporary thinking, these data imply 
that, if chronic, subtle deviations in pressure behind the eye may cause optic remodeling and visual 
impairment. 
 
Figure 1. Diagrammatic presentation of experimental setup (a) Intracranial pressure and (b) central 
venous pressure were measured directly via fluid coupled pressure transducers. (c) Beat-by-beat 
arterial blood pressure, (d) arterial cuff pressure and (e) jugular venous cross-sectional area were 
measured non-invasively. Note that intracranial, central venous, and arterial pressure recordings 
were referenced to the external auditory meatus and right atrium respectively (dashed lines).  
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
19 
 
Figure 2. Changing from the sitting to supine posture on Earth increases ICP. (A) Experimental 
setup used to quantify pressures changes associated with change in posture on earth. Gz, head-to-
foot hydrostatic gradient irrespective of position, which is eliminated in the supine posture. Gx, 
front-to-back hydrostatic gradient, which is present in the supine posture. Gy, side-to-side 
hydrostatic gradient. Needle access to an Ommaya reservoir and placement of a peripherally 
inserted central catheter permitted intracranial pressure (ICP) and central venous pressure (CVP) 
measurement by fluid-coupled pressure transducers, which were referenced to the external auditory 
meatus and right atrium, such that ICP and CVP were accurate throughout changes in posture. 
Arterial blood pressure (BP) was obtained by electrosphygmomanometry. (B) Original recording of 
changes in ICP in 1 participant by changing from the 90° sitting upright posture to the supine 
posture. (C)  Mean ICP and CVP are higher, whereas BP is slightly lower in the 90° sitting upright 
posture compared to supine; n = 8, paired t-tests. Black circles, males; white diamonds, females. (D) 
Original 2D images of jugular veins in the 90° sitting upright posture and supine posture from one 
participant. Jugular vein volume is smaller in the 90° sitting upright posture compared to supine; n = 
8, paired t-test. (E) Participants (n = 4) were passively placed in the 90º, 60º, 30º and 0º positions for 
two minutes (left). The HIPCSF, where CSF pressure remains constant despite changes in posture, was 
calculated for each individual from the 90° seated upright and supine ICP. Prediction of ICP in the 
30º and 60º position (right) by subtraction of the height of the fluid column superior to the HIPCSF 
with tilt angle (α)   
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
20 
 
Figure 3. Microgravity reduces ICP in the supine posture. (A) Successive brief periods of 
microgravity (~20 sec) were generated during parabolic flight as participants lay in the supine posture, 
in which the Gz hydrostatic gradient is eliminated but the Gx gradient remains. In 0G all hydrostatic 
gradients are absent. (B) Original recordings in 1 participant of changes in intracranial pressure (ICP), 
central venous pressure (CVP), left ventricular stroke volume (SV), and gravity throughout 6 
parabolas. Increased SV despite a fall in CVP during 0G confirms cardiac ventricular distension due 
to a fall in intrathoracic pressure and thus an increase in the transmural cardiac filling pressure. The 
solid line and the dashed line indicate the beginning and end of the first 0G period. ICP increases at 
the beginning of the parabola as gravity almost doubles in the Gx direction. However, immediately 
upon entering 0G, ICP falls rapidly to approximately the supine 1G value. ICP then continues to fall, 
and by the end of the OG period, ICP is lower than the supine 1G value. (C) Mean ICP and CVP 
decrease, and BP remains stable in 0G compared to the supine 1G posture; n = 8, paired t-tests. (D) 
Original 2D images of jugular veins show further distension in 0G compared to the supine 1G posture. 
Relationships between the fall in ICP in 0G with (E) body weight and (F) HIPCSF; n = 8, linear 
regression. Black circles, males; white diamonds, females 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
21 
 
Figure 4. Dissociation between 24 hour ICP on earth versus microgravity as a characteristic for 
optic remodeling during long duration space flight. (A) Difference between 24 hours intracranial 
pressure (ICP) on earth (calculated as 2/3*90º sitting upright ICP + 1/3*supine ICP, where supine ICP 
is assumed to reflect sleep) and during 0G parabolic flight (assumed to reflect ICP throughout long 
duration space flight). (B) The same data split into males versus females. Although subject numbers 
are too low for conclusive between group statistical analysis, removal of a single suspected outlier (>2 
standard deviations from the mean) in the male cohort (dashed circle) suggests that females may have 
a smaller pressure differential between earth and microgravity n = 7, males; 3, females, unpaired t-
test. Black circles, males; white diamonds, females. This calculation reflects the 24 hour difference in 
ICP between earth and microgravity environments, assuming short term measurements during 
parabolic flight reflect long-term measurements in space. Due to gravity, the brain and eye expect to 
“see” a low pressure environment throughout two thirds of the day, therefore in microgravity a greater 
relative posterior optic pressure would be “felt” throughout spaceflight, especially in males, which 
may explain the increased severity of optic remodeling observed in male versus female astronauts. 
The single male “outlier” may also explain the atypical male astronauts completely devoid of visual 
impairment in space. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
22 
 
Figure 5. Twenty-four hours simulated microgravity does not elevate ICP. (A) Diagram of the 
experimental setup used to simulate microgravity. Note that in -6° head down tilt (HDT), the Gx 
hydrostatic gradient and a slight foot-to-head Gz hydrostatic gradient exist. (B) Original recordings in 
1 participant of changes in arterial blood pressure (BP), intracranial pressure (ICP), and central 
venous pressure (CVP) throughout 24 hours simulated microgravity. The beat-to-beat blood pressure 
device was turned off during sleep. Arrow indicates onset of passive tilt to the -6º HDT position. Note 
the compressed time scale in the 2nd graph to demonstrate the transition from supine to HDT. (C) In 
every subject, ICP was slightly higher in the -6° HDT position compared to the supine posture, which 
is entirely explained by the increase in the Gz, foot-to-head hydrostatic column within the CSF and 
venous compartments (Fig S4). During sleep, ICP falls below the supine value, and importantly, ICP 
returns to the supine baseline value after 24 hours of -6° HDT; n = 4, one-way ANOVA, *P < 0·05 vs 
0º. (C) During sleep in -6° HDT, CVP is lower than the supine value, and remains slightly lower than 
the supine value in 3 of the 4 subjects after 24 hours of -6° HDT; n = 4, one-way ANOVA, *P < 0·05 
vs 0º. (D) Jugular vein distension persists throughout 24 hours of -6º HDT, one-way ANOVA with 
follow up test, 5min (P = 0·0), 3hrs (P = 0·09) and 24hrs (P = 0·15) vs 0º. Black circles, males.  
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
23 
 
Figure 6. Simple hydrostatics explain the increase in intracranial pressure with acute -6º head 
down tilt. (A) In the -6º head down tilt model, the head is placed below the heart. Therefore, the 
slight foot-to-head (Gz) hydrostatic gradient causes pressure within both the venous and cerebral 
spinal fluid systems to increase proportional the length of the hydrostatic column superior to their 
respective hydrostatic indifference points. (B) From the supine measurement of central venous 
pressure and the L-HIPvein, dural sinus pressure (Pd) was predicted to increase by 2.9±0.2 mmHg. 
Thus according to the Davson equation, intracranial pressure (ICP) must rise to exceed dural sinus 
pressure to maintain cerebral spinal fluid absorption into the sinus. Indeed, the predicted increase in 
ICP based on the L-HIPCSF model (1.2±0.6 mmHg) and the measured increase in ICP were similar 
(1.8±0.5 mmHg). Nevertheless, the important take home message, is that ICP did not increase 
substantially beyond that expected by simple hydrostatic gradients, thus cephalad fluid shifts do not 
cause disproportionate and pathological increases in ICP.  
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
24 
 
Figure 7. Sleeping in simulated microgravity does not reduce intracranial compliance. (A)  
Original recordings of pulsatile changes in intracranial pressure (ICP) in the awake supine position 
(top), in the -6º head down tilt position (HDT) just prior to sleep (middle) and during quiet 
rest/sleeping as document by Registered Nurse in one human participant. (B) Pressure-volume 
intracranial complaince curve.  In the steep part of the compliance curve, 1 ml change in volume 
(during each heart beat), causes a much larger increase in ICP pulsatility than in the flat portion of the 
curve; therein intracranial pulse amplitude (ICPAMP) reflects the compliance state of the intracranial 
compartment. (C) Sucsessive diastolic and systolic peaks were detected form continous ICP data by 
an automated ECG gated time-windowing algorithm.  ICPAMP was averaged over a two minutes of 
steady-state in each condition. (D) Compared to the supine position, ICPAMP fell slightly in three of 
the four participants just prior to falling asleep and remained below the supine value while resting 
quietly/asleep.  
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
25 
 
Figure 8. 0.7% carbon dioxide inhalation does not increase ICP during real or simulated 
microgravity. Carbon dioxide (CO2) was administered via a tight fitting facemask for 3 – 5 minutes 
prior to a set of parabolas or steady-state data collection during bedrest. (A) The intracranial pressure 
(ICP) response to 0.7% CO2 is similar between the supine and acute (5min) and prolonged (24 hrs) 
simulated microgravity conditions. Note that 0.7% CO2 did not clinically increase ICP even after 
5min of head down tilt despite mean ICP being slightly elevated; n = 4, one-way ANOVA. (B) 
Comparison of the decrease in ICP during microgravity whilst breathing normal air (normoapnia) 
versus 0.7% CO2; n = 8, paired t-test. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
26 
 
Figure 9.  Resistance exercise transiently increased ICP if combined with a Valsalva maneuver. 
Original recordings in one participant of changes in intracranial pressure (ICP), central venous 
pressure (CVP) and arterial blood pressure (BP) during repetitive leg press exercise while breathing 
0.7% carbon dioxide. (A) During 0G, ICP rises during leg extension and falls with leg flexion 
(relaxation). The synchronized rise and fall in CVP and BP indicates that the participant performed a 
Valsalva during each leg extension. (B) In the head down tilt position, ICP, CVP and BP rise during leg 
extension and fall with leg flexion (relaxation) during 5 leg press exercises with a controlled Valsalva 
maneuver. (C) In the head down tilt position, ICP and BP remain mostly stable during 5 leg press 
exercises performed with a controlled Muller maneuver.  Individual and mean intracranial pressure 
responses to the combination of 0.7% carbon dioxide and leg press exercise in the (D) supine 
posture, (E) during acute microgravity, and during (F) acute simulated microgravity and (G) 
prolonged simulated microgravity. Microgravity, n = 8, paired t-tests; supine and head down tilt 
conditions, n = 4, one way ANOVA, * P≤0 05 vs baseline. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
27 
 
REFERENCES 
Alexander DJea (2012). Risk of Spaceflight-Induced Intracranial Hypertension and Vision Alterations. 
. 
 
Anderson AP, Swan JG, Phillips SD, Knaus DA, Kattamis NT, Toutain-Kidd CM, Zegans ME, Fellows AM 
& Buckey JC (2015). Acute effects of changes to the gravitational vector on the eye. J Appl 
Physiol (1985), jap.00730.02015. 
 
Buckey JC, Gaffney FA, Lane LD, Levine BD, Watenpaugh DE & Blomqvist CG (1993). Central venous 
pressure in space. N Engl J Med 328, 1853-1854. 
 
Cooper DF, Grimby G, Jones DA & Edwards RH (1979). Perception of effort in isometric and dynamic 
muscular contraction. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 41, 173-180. 
 
Davson H, Domer FR & Hollingsworth JR (1973). The mechanism of drainage of the cerebrospinal 
fluid. Brain 96, 329-336. 
 
Ducros A & Biousse V (2015). Headache arising from idiopathic changes in CSF pressure. Lancet 
Neurol 14, 655-668. 
 
Eklund A, Johannesson G, Johansson E, Holmlund P, Qvarlander S, Ambarki K, Wahlin A, Koskinen LO 
& Malm J (2016). The pressure difference between eye and brain changes with posture. Ann 
Neurol 80, 269-276. 
 
Gaasch WH & Meyer TE (2008). Left ventricular response to mitral regurgitation: implications for 
management. Circulation 118, 2298-2303. 
 
Haykowsky MJ, Eves ND, DE RW & Findlay MJ (2003). Resistance exercise, the Valsalva maneuver, 
and cerebrovascular transmural pressure. Med Sci Sports Exerc 35, 65-68. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
28 
 
 
Jarvis SS, Levine BD, Prisk GK, Shykoff BE, Elliott AR, Rosow E, Blomqvist CG & Pawelczyk JA (2007). 
Simultaneous determination of the accuracy and precision of closed-circuit cardiac output 
rebreathing techniques. J Appl Physiol (1985) 103, 867-874. 
 
Law J, Van Baalen M, Foy M, Mason SS, Mendez C, Wear ML, Meyers VE & Alexander D (2014). 
Relationship between carbon dioxide levels and reported headaches on the international 
space station. J Occup Environ Med 56, 477-483. 
 
Mader TH, Gibson CR, Pass AF, Kramer LA, Lee AG, Fogarty J, Tarver WJ, Dervay JP, Hamilton DR, 
Sargsyan A, Phillips JL, Tran D, Lipsky W, Choi J, Stern C, Kuyumjian R & Polk JD (2011). Optic 
disc edema, globe flattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic shifts observed in astronauts 
after long-duration space flight. Ophthalmology 118, 2058-2069. 
 
Michael AP & Marshall-Bowman K (2015). Spaceflight-Induced Intracranial Hypertension. Aerosp 
Med Hum Perform 86, 557-562. 
 
Nelson ES, Mulugeta L & Myers JG (2014). Microgravity-induced fluid shift and ophthalmic changes. 
Life (Basel) 4, 621-665. 
 
Pavy-Le Traon A, Heer M, Narici MV, Rittweger J & Vernikos J (2007). From space to Earth: advances 
in human physiology from 20 years of bed rest studies (1986-2006). Eur J Appl Physiol 101, 
143-194. 
 
Petersen LG, Damgaard M, Petersen JC & Norsk P (2011). Mechanisms of increase in cardiac output 
during acute weightlessness in humans. J Appl Physiol (1985) 111, 407-411. 
 
Petersen LG, Petersen JC, Andresen M, Secher NH & Juhler M (2015). Postural influence on 
intracranial and cerebral perfusion pressure in ambulatory neurosurgical patients. Am J 
Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol, ajpregu.00302.02015. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
29 
 
 
Platts SH, Bairey Merz CN, Barr Y, Fu Q, Gulati M, Hughson R, Levine BD, Mehran R, Stachenfeld N & 
Wenger NK (2014). Effects of sex and gender on adaptation to space: cardiovascular 
alterations. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 23, 950-955. 
 
Qvarlander S, Lundkvist B, Koskinen LO, Malm J & Eklund A (2013a). Pulsatility in CSF dynamics: 
pathophysiology of idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 
84, 735-741. 
 
Qvarlander S, Sundstrom N, Malm J & Eklund A (2013b). Postural effects on intracranial pressure: 
modeling and clinical evaluation. J Appl Physiol (1985) 115, 1474-1480. 
 
Rowell LB (1986). Human Circulation: Regulation During Physical Stress. Oxford University Press. 
 
Shibata S & Levine BD (2011). Biological aortic age derived from the arterial pressure waveform. J 
Appl Physiol (1985) 110, 981-987. 
 
Torbey MT, Geocadin RG, Razumovsky AY, Rigamonti D & Williams MA (2004). Utility of CSF pressure 
monitoring to identify idiopathic intracranial hypertension without papilledema in patients 
with chronic daily headache. Cephalalgia 24, 495-502. 
 
Videbaek R & Norsk P (1997). Atrial distension in humans during microgravity induced by parabolic 
flights. J Appl Physiol (1985) 83, 1862-1866. 
 
Wesseling KH, Jansen JR, Settels JJ & Schreuder JJ (1993). Computation of aortic flow from pressure 
in humans using a nonlinear, three-element model. J Appl Physiol (1985) 74, 2566-2573. 
 
Zhao D, He Z, Vingrys AJ, Bui BV & Nguyen CT (2015). The effect of intraocular and intracranial 
pressure on retinal structure and function in rats. Physiol Rep 3. 
