   179
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
Critical research gaps and recommendations 
to inform research prioritisation for more 
effective prevention and improved outcomes in 
colorectal cancer
Mark Lawler,1 Deborah Alsina,2 Richard A Adams,3 Annie S Anderson,4 Gina Brown,5 
Nicola S Fearnhead,6 Stephen W Fenwick,7 Stephen P Halloran,8 Daniel Hochhauser,9 
Mark A Hull,10 Viktor H Koelzer,11 Angus G K McNair,12 Kevin J Monahan,13 
Inke Näthke,14 Christine Norton,15 Marco R Novelli,16 Robert J C Steele,4 
Anne L Thomas,17 Lisa M Wilde,2,18 Richard H Wilson,1 Ian Tomlinson,19 on behalf of 
the Bowel Cancer UK Critical Research Gaps in Colorectal Cancer Initiative
AbstRAct
Objective Colorectal cancer (CRC) leads to significant 
morbidity/mortality worldwide. Defining critical research 
gaps (RG), their prioritisation and resolution, could 
improve patient outcomes.
Design RG analysis was conducted by a 
multidisciplinary panel of patients, clinicians and 
researchers (n=71). Eight working groups (WG) 
were constituted: discovery science; risk; prevention; 
early diagnosis and screening; pathology; curative 
treatment; stage IV disease; and living with 
and beyond CRC. A series of discussions led to 
development of draft papers by each WG, which were 
evaluated by a 20-strong patient panel. A final list of 
RGs and research recommendations (RR) was endorsed 
by all participants.
Results Fifteen critical RGs are summarised below: 
RG1: Lack of realistic models that recapitulate 
tumour/tumour micro/macroenvironment; RG2: 
Insufficient evidence on precise contributions of 
genetic/environmental/lifestyle factors to CRC risk; 
RG3: Pressing need for prevention trials; RG4: Lack 
of integration of different prevention approaches; 
RG5: Lack of optimal strategies for CRC screening; 
RG6: Lack of effective triage systems for invasive 
investigations; RG7: Imprecise pathological assessment 
of CRC; RG8: Lack of qualified personnel in genomics, 
data sciences and digital pathology; RG9: Inadequate 
assessment/communication of risk, benefit and 
uncertainty of treatment choices; RG10: Need for 
novel technologies/interventions to improve curative 
outcomes; RG11: Lack of approaches that recognise 
molecular interplay between metastasising tumours 
and their microenvironment; RG12: Lack of reliable 
biomarkers to guide stage IV treatment; RG13: Need to 
increase understanding of health related quality of life 
(HRQOL) and promote residual symptom resolution; 
RG14: Lack of coordination of CRC research/funding; 
RG15: Lack of effective communication between 
relevant stakeholders.
conclusion Prioritising research activity and funding could 
have a significant impact on reducing CRC disease burden 
over the next 5 years.
IntRODuctIOn
The global burden of colorectal cancer (CRC) is 
rising, with 2.2 
million predicted new cases (and 
1.1 
million deaths) by 2030.1 In the UK, >41 
000 
new cases were diagnosed in 2014, and ~16 
000 
people died of the disease.2 Estimates of the global 
economic burden of CRC approach $100 
billion;3 
in the USA, medical expenditure alone is predicted 
to rise to >$20 billion by 2020.4 In the UK, total 
economic costs of CRC exceeded £1.6 billion in 
2009.5 
In 2014, the US National Cancer Institute 
(NCI) spent $223 million for CRC research, 
placing it fourth behind breast cancer ($530 
million), 
lung 
cancer 
($254 
million) 
and 
leukaemia ($237 million).6 Cancer Research UK 
(CRUK) figures indicated that its annual expense 
specifically on CRC research in 2016–2017 was 
£35 million, second behind lung cancer research 
(£43 million) and ahead of breast cancer research 
(£33 million).7 Recognising the need to identify 
current and emerging CRC research gaps (RG) to 
inform research policy and prioritisation, the UK 
charity Bowel Cancer UK (BCUK), aided by the 
UK National Cancer Research Institute (NCRI) 
Colorectal Cancer Clinical Studies Group and The 
Association of Coloproctology of Great Britain 
and Ireland (ACPGBI), drew together health 
professionals, scientists and those affected by 
CRC to identify those research priorities which, 
if addressed, would make the greatest impact on 
lessening global CRC burden.
MethODOlOgy
During 2015–2016, BCUK recruited an all-encom-
passing panel of 71 CRC healthcare professionals 
(HCP), scientists and individuals affected by CRC 
to participate in the BCUK Critical Research Gaps in 
Colorectal Cancer Initiative. The process is outlined 
in figure 1 and reflects previous approaches to iden-
tifying RGs in other diseases.8 A detailed descrip-
tion of the process/methodology is provided in 
online supplementary appendix 1.
 
► to cite: Lawler M, 
Alsina D, Adams RA, et al. 
Gut 2018;67:179–193.
 
► Additional material is 
published online only. To view 
please visit the journal online 
(http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
gutjnl- 
2017- 
315333).
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
correspondence to
Professor Mark Lawler, Centre 
for Cancer Research and Cell 
Biology Queen’s University 
Belfast, University Road, Belfast 
BT7 1NN, UK;  
mark. 
lawler@ 
qub. 
ac. 
uk
Received 22 September 2017
Revised 24 October 2017
Accepted 25 October 2017
www. 
goo. 
gl/ 
k5bXPb
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 180
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
Results
Fifteen critical RGs were identified through the process indi-
cated in figure 1 and described in detail in online supplemen-
tary appendix 1. These RGs are summarised in table 1, and 
the evidence base for the RGs, together with accompanying 
research recommendations (RR), is detailed below in relevant 
thematic areas.
evIDence bAse fOR ReseARch gAPss AnD 
RecOMMenDAtIOns
Discovery science
Current status
Interrogating colorectal biology has revealed important clues to 
key events driving CRC growth, including aberrant Wnt signal-
ling and specific defects in DNA mismatch repair (MMR).9–13 
Gene expression profiling efforts are identifying specific CRC 
molecular subtypes, although their clinical relevance requires 
further elucidation.13–18
Many key areas require further in-depth study. While 
intracancer molecular diversity has been highlighted,16–18 we 
are only starting to understand the greater complexity asso-
ciated with CRC evolution and metastasis.19 Transforming 
growth factor-beta/bone morphogenic protein signalling appears 
important for CRC growth and metastasis,20 but there is scant 
knowledge of the key proteins involved. Other pathways, for 
example, Hippo, and STING, are intriguing players in CRC 
biology, but are currently of uncertain relevance.21 22 The tumour 
micro/macroenvironment, including the microbiome, is largely 
unexplored. Crucially, the dearth of reliable CRC model systems 
is compromising both relevant fundamental research and devel-
opment of novel therapies.
Research Gap (RG1): A need for realistic in silico, in vitro and in 
vivo models that more precisely recapitulate the tumour and its mi-
cro/macroenvironment, to enable comprehensive dissection of the 
relevant mechanisms governing the transition from normal colorec-
tum to the different malignant stages of the disease.
Model systems for CRC research
While cell line models have informed our overall understanding 
of CRC biology, the recognition that they may not represent a 
specific tumour within its particular genetic context and micro-
environment milieu has prompted researchers to develop more 
realistic models that recapitulate different premalignant/malig-
nant stages of CRC. Genetically engineered mouse models,23 for 
example, the ApcMin/+ mouse,24 have allowed interrogation of 
particular disease biology, while the advent of patient-derived 
xenografts has underpinned development of animal models 
representing different stages of human CRC.25 Organoids have 
allowed the 3D structure/microenvironment of the CRC tumour 
to be recreated and manipulated.26 However, as our molecular 
knowledge of CRC expands,13–17 we require models that map 
to distinct disease subtypes, and others that address issues such 
as CRC evolution, intratumoural heterogeneity and treatment 
resistance.
Research Recommendation 1.1 (RR1.1): Develop and share appro-
priate model systems that mimic different premalignant/malignant 
stages of colorectal cancer (CRC), to ensure discovery research 
questions are addressed in the relevant genetic/clinical context.
Investigating CRC signalling pathways and their tractability
Given that pathogenic adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) muta-
tions are rare outside CRC, performing a comprehensive, cell 
type-specific molecular analysis of the normal and APC-mutant 
colorectal crypt would improve understanding of the critical 
pathways/processes underpinning malignant colorectal epithe-
lium development. A concerted Wnt pathway investigation 
programme in normal cells, benign tumours, and primary and 
metastatic CRC (mCRC) tissue is warranted. Challenges include 
development of appropriate quantitative readouts of signalling 
pathways, and novel model systems, perhaps including large 
animal models with greater resemblance to humans. Precise 
elucidation of specific malignant cellular processes could 
underpin identification of novel targets, both for prevention and 
treatment.
RR1.2: Comprehensively interrogate the normal and APC-mutant 
colorectal crypt to reveal differences that may be exploitable for 
CRC prevention/control.
The CRC micro/macroenvironment
We need to consider the role of non-neoplastic cells, particularly 
stromal cells/fibroblasts and immune infiltrates as important arbi-
ters of CRC processes and treatment responses, to better under-
stand the tumour microenvironment and how it is controlled by 
the cancer itself.16–18 Organoid models, or appropriate animal 
figure 1 Bowel Cancer UK Critical Research Gaps in Colorectal 
Cancer Initiative process.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 181
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
models encompassing both neoplastic clones and realistic micro-
environments are paramount. Development of in silico systems 
biology platforms that capitalise on these rich data sources 
will allow modelling and deciphering of the complex interplay 
between CRC tumour cells and their microenvironment.
Macroenvironmental effects from gut microbes have been 
implicated in CRC development in experimental animal models, 
but their relevance in humans is less clear. Recent evidence 
published in this journal suggests that altered mucosal micro-
biota are present throughout the colorectum,27 that they have a 
role in regulating the host immune-inflammatory response, and 
may have prognostic relevance for patients with CRC. A deeper 
understanding of the gut microbiome in CRC will also facili-
tate its therapeutic manipulation for improved outcomes in both 
preventative and treatment settings.
RR1.3: Better understand the molecular/cellular interplay between 
the CRC tumour and its microenvironment.
RR1.4: Determine the role of the gut microbiome and how it can 
be exploited to improve CRC disease outcomes.
Risk
Current status
Identifying individuals at increased risk of CRC allows intro-
duction of appropriate screening/surveillance approaches, 
leading to earlier cancer diagnosis and underpinning improved 
survival. However, there is currently an incomplete picture of 
the absolute risk attributable to inherited, environmental or life-
style factors for CRC. Understanding global risk will underpin 
stratified interventions tailored to individual patients for disease 
modification and precision medicine interventions.28
Known Mendelian conditions account for a relatively small 
proportion of inherited risk, with the remainder thought to 
be due to lower penetrance risk factors, including common/
rare genetic variants.29 Approximately 40 common, low pene-
trance CRC risk alleles have been identified.29 Estimations from 
whole-exome sequencing (WES) studies suggest that higher 
penetrance rare variants may additionally account for 16% of 
hereditary risk.30 However, much of the ‘missing heritability’ 
remains unidentified. Additionally, the interaction between 
the microbiome, epigenetics and heritable risk factors remains 
poorly characterised.31
A better understanding of environmental/lifestyle risk factors 
is also required. While associations with diet,32–34 comorbidi-
ties including diabetes35 and aspirin/non-steroidal anti-inflam-
matory drug use,36 have been identified, the interplay between 
these risk factors is complex. A greater understanding would 
permit targeted public health approaches to increase risk factor 
awareness in the general population, leading to reduced CRC 
incidence.37
RG2: Insufficient evidence on the precise contributions of genet-
ic, environmental and lifestyle factors, and in particular how they  
interact together to influence the risk of developing CRC.
Genetic risk factors for CRC
There is incomplete elucidation of CRC heritable risk factors, 
especially of polygenic risk (ie, where the contribution of 
multiple genes must be enumerated/quantified). Collabora-
tive initiatives such as GECCO (Genetics and Epidemiology 
of Colorectal Cancer Consortium)38 and GAME-ON (Genetic 
Associations and Mechanisms in Oncology Consortium)39 have 
significantly contributed to identification of risk-susceptibility 
loci.40–42 However, additional gene discovery initiatives are 
required, with increased concentration on evaluation of genetic 
risk in a broader diversity of populations/ethnic groups.43 44 
International data sharing collaboratives will be required, partic-
ularly to evaluate significance of rare genetic variants. Devel-
oping a gene panel for common CRC risk variants, mirroring a 
similar recently applied approach in breast cancer,45 may allow 
more precise delineation of CRC risk.
table 1 Critical RGs in colorectal cancer
Research area
critical Rgs
Discovery science
RG1: A need for realistic in silico, in vitro and in vivo models that more precisely recapitulate the tumour and its micro/macroenvironment, to enable 
comprehensive dissection of the relevant mechanisms governing the transition from normal colorectum to the different malignant stages of the 
disease.
Risk
RG2: Insufficient evidence on the precise contributions of genetic, environmental and lifestyle factors, and in particular how they interact together, to 
influence the risk of developing CRC.
Prevention
RG3: A need for intervention trials of preventive strategies addressing ‘dose’, timing, target group and acceptability, as well as mechanism of action.
RG4: Lack of interdisciplinary collaboration is undermining evaluation of real-life preventative interventions in CRC.
Early diagnosis and 
screening
RG5: Lack of an optimal strategy for screening for CRC.
RG6: Lack of an effective triage system for symptomatic patients that can determine who will benefit most from invasive investigation.
Pathology: diagnosis – 
prognosis – prediction
RG7: Imprecise pathological assessment of CRC is an unmet challenge.
RG8: Lack of qualified personnel to apply state-of-the-art knowledge in genomics, big data science and digital pathology.
Curative treatment
RG9: Inadequate assessment and communication of risk, benefit and uncertainty of treatment choices where cure is possible.
RG10: A need for novel technologies/interventions that have the potential to improve curative outcomes.
Stage IV disease
RG11: Lack of approaches that take cognisance of the molecular interplay between the metastasising tumour and its microenvironment and help 
guide evolution of innovative treatments that deliver improved health outcomes for the stage IV patient.
RG12: Lack of reliable prognostic and predictive biomarkers to help guide stage IV patient pathways.
Living with and beyond 
CRC
RG13: The need to increase understanding of health-related quality of life (HRQOL) issues and resolve residual symptoms as part of a research effort 
to enhance survivorship for those living with and beyond CRC.
Overarching RGs that need 
to be addressed
RG14: Lack of coordination of CRC research and its funding, leading to fragmented efforts to elucidate the biology of the disease and translate this 
knowledge into new preventative agents, screening tools, diagnostics and therapeutics.
RG15: Lack of effective communication strategies between healthcare professionals, patients with CRC/survivors, those at elevated risk of developing 
CRC, and the general public and varying levels of awareness of key risk factors, prevention options and benefits/risks associated with different 
treatment options.
CRC, colorectal cancer; RG, research gap.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 182
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
RR2.1: Conduct comprehensive genetic susceptibility studies, sup-
ported by enabling data sharing platforms, in appropriately diverse 
human populations to maximise identification of genetic risks fac-
tors that have general applicability, or are relevant to specific ethnic 
populations.
Environmental/lifestyle contributions to CRC risk
There are significant environmental/lifestyle contributors to 
enhanced CRC risk. Increasingly, we require precise data-ana-
lytic tools to evaluate, assign and quantify gene-gene,46 gene-en-
vironment and gene-lifestyle risk.47 48 Recent studies have linked 
high-quality diets (assessed by diet quality indices) with low 
CRC risk in a multiethnic cohort,49 while a genome-wide diet–
gene interaction analysis indicated a novel association between 
processed meat consumption, a particular genetic variant and 
increased CRC risk.48 Studies have also investigated interactions 
between gene variants, smoking/alcohol consumption and risk 
of developing CRC.50 Ensuring the robustness of data-analytic 
methodologies and applying them to high-quality large data sets 
will help confirm current hypotheses, and identify novel nature–
nurture interactions for further modelling and testing in diverse 
populations and cohorts, to determine the universality of their 
ability to predict increased/reduced risk.
RR2.2: Develop robust data analytical tools that define and quanti-
fy the precise interplay between genetic and environmental/lifestyle 
factors to attributable CRC risk. 
Population-based assessment of CRC risk
International collaboration is continually cataloguing potential 
independent lifestyle risk indicators in population studies.34 
However, we need prospective high-quality pan-population 
studies of CRC risk factors, with complete ascertainment, accu-
rate longitudinal clinical and pathological data, and supporting 
blood/tissue samples. Collection of high-quality treatment 
response and toxicity data should also be mandated to help 
identify risk factors for relapse or treatment-related side effects. 
A national registry approach to managing risk may be the best 
way to identify an unbiased population set of high-risk patients. 
This should be linked to clinical networks, including national 
approaches to surveillance and screening, enabling development 
of enhanced prevention and surveillance programmes for high-
risk patients,51 and reallocation of valuable resources for those 
at low risk.52
RR2.3: Design and implement prospective high-quality pan-pop-
ulation studies of risk factors for CRC, with robust clinical/patho-
logical data, supporting blood and tissue samples, to inform a  
population-based assessment of risk.
Prevention
Current status
Despite widespread awareness that efforts to avoid CRC devel-
opment are critical,53 prevention research is under-represented 
in the CRC research portfolio. The UK NCRI funding in 2015 
for all cancers was £498 million, but only 3% was spent on 
prevention.54 The gap in CRC prevention research is particu-
larly notable in high-risk populations, such as patients with 
Lynch syndrome.55 The preventability estimate (World Cancer 
Research Fund) indicates that ~45% of CRCs are accounted 
for by lifestyle factors (dietary factors, obesity, lack of physical 
activity and alcohol consumption56). Dietary factors (low dietary 
fibre intake, high red/processed meat intake) are considered the 
main lifestyle area of concern.56 An evolving understanding of 
the gut microbiome and diet–microbial interactions has high-
lighted the potential for modulation of the diet-microbiome-me-
tabolome axis for cancer prevention.57
The global impact of obesity on cancer is significant, contrib-
uting to ~10% of the overall cancer burden in North America, 
Europe and the Middle East.58 This is reflected in a significant 
association between increasing body mass index (BMI) and 
CRC development.59 The International Agency for Research on 
Cancer recently convened a working group (WG) to assess body 
fatness and cancer risk. For CRC, their findings confirmed the 
association between increased BMI and CRC risk and indicated 
that a significant body of preclinical data supported a preven-
tative effect of calorific restriction;60 this should be actively 
pursued. Increased physical activity also has an important role in 
CRC prevention strategies.61
There is compelling evidence that chemopreventive interven-
tions such as aspirin55 62 63 in high-risk patients can be effective, 
prompting the US Preventive Services Task Force to recom-
mended its use in primary CRC prevention.64 However, compli-
cations, including GI bleeding, need to be considered, although 
the harm-versus-benefit ratio is frequently exaggerated.65 
Additionally, a recent study has indicated a lack of awareness 
of aspirin’s chemopreventive effects by >50% of primary care 
physicians surveyed,66 particularly for high-risk populations (eg, 
Lynch syndrome carriers), highlighting the need for appropriate 
education/guidance strategies. Many intervention trials (of diet, 
physical activity or chemoprevention) occur in the postdiagnosis 
setting—we need to ensure more CRC preventive trials which 
target specific high-risk populations with robust endpoints are 
conducted prior to CRC onset.
RG3: A need for intervention trials of preventive strategies address-
ing ‘dose’, timing, target group and acceptability, as well as mech-
anism of action.
RG4: Lack of interdisciplinary collaboration is undermining evalu-
ation of real-life preventative interventions in CRC.
Integrating dietary, lifestyle and chemopreventive interventions
There is an increasing need to reflect how interventions can 
be delivered in ‘real life’ (eg, combining screening, lifestyle 
interventions and chemoprevention), going beyond traditional 
discipline boundaries when designing efficacy and, particularly, 
effectiveness studies. New research models and transdisciplinary 
paradigms must be established in CRC prevention, perhaps in 
an approach analogous to NCI’s Transdisciplinary Research 
on Energetics and Cancer Initiative,67 which brought together 
expertise in behaviour, biostatistics, computer science, discovery 
science, endocrinology, engineering, epidemiology, genetics, 
health economics, medicine, nutrition and physical activity. We 
need multidisciplinary approaches to help define optimal ways 
to implement lifestyle change programmes. Another example 
is the microbiome,68 where our increased understanding of gut 
microbiota69 and their manipulation is highlighting how diet/
nutrient/physical activity-based interventional approaches can 
help prime the microbiome as a preventative agent.
RR3.1: Encourage transdisciplinary, multimodal approaches to 
CRC prevention, through cross-community collaboration.
The need for long-term studies
There is a dearth of studies which enable observational (and 
other) evidence to be tested robustly in long-term studies. Chal-
lenges include recruitment (due to incorrect perceptions about 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 183
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
disease prevention, particularly lifestyle interventions, and lack 
of HCP support), protocol implementation and adherence, and 
lack of appropriate endpoints. We need longer term analysis of 
robust interventions demonstrating feasibility and acceptability 
with promising indicative outcomes,70 which can then be tested 
in full-scale trials of relevant duration, with clinically relevant 
outcomes in at-risk patients.
RR3.2: Ensure future delivery of high-quality robust long-term 
studies that identify the appropriate level of intervention including 
dose, duration, timing, feasibility and acceptability as well as clini-
cally relevant outcome(s).
Ensuring coordination of intervention trials and research into 
barriers to uptake
Intervention trials and research into barriers to uptake of 
research findings and clinical impact must occur concurrently. 
We also need to break down current regulatory and funding 
hurdles to timely and cost-effective prevention research, particu-
larly for interventions employing off-licence drugs, undesignated 
drugs (eg, food supplements), or requiring human resource, 
for example, a counsellor/dietitian/trained volunteer/phys-
ical activity trainer. Stronger public involvement in evaluating 
optimal ways to promote more effective diet and lifestyle inter-
ventions, including the need to optimise teachable moments71 
should be encouraged.
RR4.1: Coordinate interventional trial activity to ensure maximum 
impact of precise and effective prevention strategies across the  
population.
Defining mechanism of action of selected interventions
A better understanding of mechanism(s) of action of prevention 
interventions is needed in order to define the most effective 
intervention, its timing and ‘dose’, as well as identifying indi-
viduals most likely to benefit. Intervention trials and observa-
tional cohorts could usefully include blood/tissue biobanks as 
key enablers of mechanistic research. Specific research calls 
for multimodal intervention studies should be developed with 
emphasis on effectiveness (including non-cancer secondary 
endpoints) and health economic outcomes.
RR4.2: Promote studies that help elucidate mechanism of action of 
prevention interventions.
RR4.3: Develop precise individual risk stratification approaches to 
ensure prevention interventions are employed most effectively.
early diagnosis and screening
Current status
Although colonoscopy is widely employed for screening asymp-
tomatic individuals in the USA, most countries have adopted a 
single biennial faecal immunochemical test (FIT) for blood in the 
stool for programmatic screening.72 As a population screening 
tool, colonoscopy is expensive, associated with low uptake and 
is potentially hazardous. FIT is easy to deliver and affordable in 
cost-limited or colonoscopy-limited settings, by simply adjusting 
the FIT sensitivity thresholds. High sensitivity from low FIT 
thresholds decreases specificity and test precision, leading to 
higher false-positive rates, increased patient anxiety and pressure 
on colonoscopy services.73 74
Population screening using a single flexible sigmoidoscopy 
(FS) has proven efficacy with reduced CRC incidence and 
mortality.75 FS at age 55 has been adopted by the English Bowel 
Screening Programme prior to guaiac-based Faecal Occult Blood 
Test at age 60. Limited FS resource and poor pathology yield in 
the age group chosen for the English programme may challenge 
the prospective clinical benefits observed in randomised clinical 
trials (RCT).
Early diagnosis by prompt recognition and reporting of symp-
toms by the public has been advocated, but to date has only 
succeeded in increasing rates of referral for investigation (usually 
colonoscopy), with no impact on rates of diagnosis of early 
disease.76 77 These initiatives have created increased pressure on 
diagnostic services; the need for effective triage of symptomatic 
patients is urgent. There is interest in the use of ‘low threshold 
FIT’ as an aid to decision-making.78 The National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence has recently issued guidance recom-
mending highly sensitive FIT testing in patients with low-risk 
colorectal symptoms.79
Colonoscopy in population screening is being examined world-
wide, but mortality data will not be available for 10–15 years.80 
CT colonography is another screening modality, but pilot RCTs 
have yet to provide mortality data.81 82 Aside from expediting 
adoption of FS at an appropriate age(s), future developments in 
population screening include refining use of FIT by cost analysis 
of different thresholds, introduction of risk-adjusted screening 
with conventional or machine learning techniques and develop-
ment of new markers.
RG5: Lack of an optimal strategy for screening for CRC.
RG6: Lack of an effective triage system for symptomatic pa-
tients that can determine who will benefit most from invasive  
investigation.
Risk adjustment
The threshold of faecal haemoglobin concentration that triggers 
a colonoscopy can be adjusted to increase sensitivity.73 74 While 
modelling studies have assessed the cost-effectiveness of changes 
to the FIT threshold, RCTs would supplement these studies.
RR5.1: Embed research RCTs in FIT-based screening programmes 
to explore the optimal FIT threshold and/or the role of flexible 
sigmoidoscopy, incorporating risk adjustment algorithms.
Another approach to FIT-based risk assessment is to incor-
porate age, gender83 84 and participant’s screening history (eg, 
adherence to biennial screening, previous FS or colonoscopy, 
and so on, and other risk markers such as primary care blood 
results,85 BMI or smoking status). An alternative or additional 
approach is to vary the screening interval, depending on FIT 
concentration or concentration trends or more comprehensive 
risk scores which incorporate age, gender and specific symptoms.
New technologies
Several technologies including analysis of DNA from faecal 
samples86 and use of peripheral blood biomarkers such as meth-
ylated Septin 987 have not yet proven to be as clinically sensitive 
as FIT in population screening. Current developments include 
the detection of volatile metabolites in breath,88 use of liquid 
biopsies,89 the potential role of changes in the microbiome90 
and colon capsule endoscopy.91 These emerging technologies 
could be combined with morpho-molecular parameters if not 
for screening, then for risk stratification in early-stage disease 
and predicting disease recurrence.92 93
RR6.1: Establish accurate risk-based assessment of symptomatic 
patients, incorporating FIT and promising novel technologies.
RR6.2: Develop and trial sensitive and specific tests that could be 
employed in both screening and symptomatic services.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 184
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
Pathology: diagnosis–prognosis–prediction
Current status
The present gold standard to assign patients with CRC to prog-
nostic groups is the TNM (tumour, node, metastases) classifi-
cation.94 95 This anatomic staging approach frequently clusters 
patients with biologically different diseases and allows only 
approximate estimates of survival outcomes. Increasing the accu-
racy and reproducibility of morphological prognostic factors is 
therefore a major challenge for pathologists.96–98
Ongoing research promotes incorporation of an increasing 
number of molecular biomarkers into the CRC specimen 
reporting.99 Well-established elements include immunohis-
tochemistry testing of MMR protein expression, analysis of 
microsatellite instability and MLH1 promoter hypermethyl-
ation. Clinical next-generation sequencing can underpin the 
fast, reliable, broadly applicable and cost-effective detection 
of mutations for prognostication and prediction of response 
to targeted agents.100–102 Understanding the patient’s genetic 
context is also important for prognosis, treatment response and 
toxicity.103 104 Clinical success of immune-checkpoint inhibitor 
therapy in hypermutated CRC is driving the search for novel 
biomarkers to help stratify immunotherapy-based approaches.105 
Advances in gene expression profiling106–108 have culminated in 
a consensus molecular subtype classification,13 but its clinical 
value is currently unclear.
Overall, there is a critical need to revitalise CRC biomarker 
research, which has previously been limited by inconsistent 
methodologies and lack of reproducibility. Digital pathology, 
translational bioinformatics and machine learning must become 
critical components of modern pathology,109 integrating rapidly 
expanding clinical and laboratory data sets to underpin algo-
rithm development for risk prediction/disease stratification. This 
creates a presently unmet demand for large numbers of highly 
qualified personnel in the pathology sector.
RG7: Imprecise pathological assessment of CRC is an unmet  
challenge.
Risk stratification in early-stage disease
RGs are evident in the morphology-based risk stratification 
of colorectal precursor lesions and in clinical surveillance of 
patients with IBD. Although pathologists are mostly effective 
at diagnosing high-grade lesions, morphological categories are 
broad and interobserver reproducibility is limited.110 Translation 
of discovery research findings on the molecular pathogenesis of 
IBD-associated neoplasia will help improve utility and cost-ef-
fectiveness of screening approaches at the population level.
In stage I disease, most patients are cured by endoscopic polyp 
removal. However, up to 20% of cases may have occult nodal 
micrometastasis at time of resection.111 112 Stratification through 
assessment of additional histomorphological risk factors is heter-
ogeneously reported and prone to variable reproducibility.98 99 113 
Methodological standardisation and integration of biological 
data is needed to improve risk prediction in early-stage disease.
RR7.1: Precisely define the morpho-molecular taxonomy of pre-
cursor lesions and early-stage disease to help inform risk stratifi-
cation in CRC.
Predicting disease recurrence and treatment response
Better approaches to predict recurrence, therapy response and 
toxicity are required to guide personalised treatment of patients 
with CRC. Reliable identification of high-risk stage II patients is 
a presently unmet challenge.114–117 Most patients with stage III 
disease will receive standard chemotherapy or radiotherapy.118 
However, up to 70% will not relapse following potentially cura-
tive resection, derive no benefit from chemotherapy and suffer 
toxic side effects.119 In stage IV disease, there is a need for accu-
rate stratification for surgical treatment and early detection of 
evolving drug resistance. Further integration of genomic,102 
immune120 and transcriptomic approaches13–17 106–108 into patho-
logic tumour staging is a critical enabler for personalised treat-
ment of patients with CRC.
RR7.2: Develop new standardised molecularly informed multipa-
rameter algorithms to permit improved prediction of disease recur-
rence and therapy response.
Developing robust molecular signatures for precision pathology 
analysis
Molecular taxonomy studies have highlighted the important 
contribution of the stroma to CRC, and its association with poor 
prognosis disease.16 17 However, intratumoural heterogeneity, 
due to variations in stromal content,15–18 can compromise clin-
ical application of molecular profiling. The recent discovery of 
a CRC intrinsic signature14 may have more robust prognostic/
predictive relevance,15 and should be considered for inclusion 
in molecular pathology workflows. A key enabling technology 
is the improved analysis of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded 
tissues (and alternative non-formalin-based fixatives), given the 
logistical challenges with use of fresh-frozen tissue.
RR7.3: Use our evolving understanding of the CRC tumour and 
its microenvironment to underpin standardised approaches for pa-
thology specimen analysis.
Growing the talent pool and skilling the pathology workforce
Genomic medicine is given limited space in medical curricula 
and pathology training. Know-how in digital image anal-
ysis, bioinformatics and machine learning is currently lacking, 
compromising development and application of next-generation 
diagnostic tools. Pathologists are thus at risk of losing their meth-
odological competence to lead, evaluate and guide biomarker 
testing in personalised medicine and biomedical research.
RG8: Lack of qualified personnel to apply state-of-the-art knowl-
edge in genomics, big data science and digital pathology.
The UK government’s life sciences strategy lists molecular 
diagnostics, digital pathology and artificial intelligence as key 
strategic areas for further development.121 Structured educa-
tional programmes in genomics/bioinformatics should be offered 
to complement existing training. Exemplary efforts to promote 
genomic pathology education have been made (eg, Health 
Education England’s Medical Genomics Programme (UK)122; 
Training Residents in Genomics Working Group (USA)).123 A 
network approach in conjunction with national/international 
pathological societies is warranted to advance learning for the 
present and future workforce. Funded programmes should be 
established to encourage collaboration of histopathologists with 
molecular geneticists, bioinformaticians and physical scientists 
to establish optimal methodologies of data accumulation/inte-
gration, thus retooling and empowering the emerging molecular 
pathology generation.
RR8.1: Embed interdisciplinary education/training within un-
dergraduate/postgraduate 
and 
continuing 
professional 
educa-
tion curricula to ensure recruitment, retention and upskilling of  
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 185
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
qualified personnel to deliver modern pathology to the CRC com-
munity.
curative treatment
Current status
Recent technological advances have improved the quality of cura-
tive therapies: the advent, evaluation and widespread adoption 
of laparoscopic colorectal surgery, for example, have improved 
short-term recovery at no expense to survival.124 125 However, 
there are significant regional variations in the delivery of certain 
innovations because of a lack of definitive research studies.126
Cure is becoming increasingly feasible, but effective 
patient-centred care requires consideration of broader treatment 
effects. Patients with advanced disease may have access to novel 
therapies with only limited survival benefits but which cause 
major morbidity. Similarly, patients with very ‘curable’ disease 
may want to explore treatment options with reduced chance 
of cure but minimal impact on health-related quality of life 
(HRQOL).127 Current research continues to investigate treat-
ments that minimise toxicity (SCOT and IDEA trials)128 129 or 
amplify survival for patients undergoing established treatments 
(eg, ADD-ASPIRIN, CHALLENGE and FOxTROT trials).130–132
RG9: Inadequate assessment and communication of risk, benefit 
and uncertainty of treatment choices where cure is possible.
RG10: A need for novel technologies/interventions that have the po-
tential to improve curative outcomes.
Informing shared decision-making
Great advances have been made in understanding, implementing 
and optimising patient-centred care;133 however, further work is 
needed to address the specific issues in new and evolving CRC 
therapies. Appropriate research, answering key questions that 
inform shared decision-making, must be conducted.
It is now accepted, for example, that definitive radiotherapy 
and organ preservation may be a viable alternative to major resec-
tional surgery.134 135 Communicating the balance between patient 
experience and maximising survival in rectal cancer is extremely 
relevant. A non–surgical approach may lead to better HRQOL 
but with a reduced chance of cure, while a major surgery has 
greater immediate risks, but may have a higher chance of cure.
RR9.1: Develop an appropriate evidence base to inform shared  
decision-making for potentially curative therapies for patients.
Establishing optimum peritherapeutic interventions
Critical to shared decision-making is anaesthetic risk assess-
ment136 but currently there remain limitations in tools that give 
us a valid risk assessment for more frail patients and/or those 
with significant comorbidities.137 Mitigating risk or optimally 
reducing its impact is a vital component in improving outcomes. 
We need to improve pre/post/perioperative management to 
enhance patient experience (both short term and long term) and 
survival after ‘curative therapies’.
RR10.1: Establish optimum peritherapeutic interventions to im-
prove curative outcomes.
Optimising health-preserving benefit in metastatic/recurrent disease
We have continued to push the boundaries of curative interven-
tions in CRC.138 Selecting an individual for potentially more 
aggressive approaches when the disease has spread beyond 
the confines of the bowel has become commonplace, but each 
time we extend these boundaries, further evaluation to fill our 
knowledge gap is required. Specifically, questions arise such as: 
‘How should we select patients for novel curative therapeutic 
interventions for oligometastatic disease?’, ‘What is the role of 
ablative technologies for cure in metastatic disease?’ and ‘What 
is the evidence for highly aggressive surgical intervention for 
recurrent/locally advanced disease?’
RR10.2: Optimise curative approaches for metastatic or recurrent 
disease that balance patients’ expectations with treatment efficacy 
and health-preserving benefit.
Biomarkers for optimal treatment selection
Broad technological advances have been made in CRC therapy 
including surgery, radiotherapy and molecular-based treat-
ment.139–141 These advances may impact upon existing therapeutic 
options, for example, by optimising the use of chemotherapies 
in the adjuvant setting to avoid excessive toxicities, or by under-
pinning newer biomarker-driven treatment selection. This aims 
to move beyond the standard of care to a more individualised 
approach.
RR10.3: Develop biomarkers that define the optimal curative ther-
apeutic strategy for an individual or group, preventing overtreat-
ment and improving treatment selection.
New methodologies
Methods to ensure optimal evaluation of new surgical and 
radiotherapy-related devices and procedures142 143 are needed 
to demonstrate appropriately robust clinical and cost-effective 
outcomes. Such methods have been promoted by the IDEAL 
(Idea, Development, Exploration, Assessment, Long-term 
follow-up) collaboration,144 but further methodological devel-
opment is needed, particularly in early phase studies. This will 
promote consistency in standard therapeutic pathway develop-
ment, ensuring that the best therapies are more widely used, 
based on compelling evidence at an earlier stage. It is critically 
important to define the interventions to be tested, but equally 
important are methodologies for their evaluation, providing the 
evidence base to encourage their integration into clinical prac-
tice to enhance curative outcomes.
RR10.4: Develop research methodologies to optimally evaluate 
new curative approaches.
stage Iv disease
Current status
Around 20% of patients presenting with CRC have metastatic 
disease (mCRC) at time of diagnosis.145 A further 20%–25% 
will 
develop mCRC during follow-up after initial curative intent 
treatment of their primary tumour. Recently, there has been an 
expansion in the range of modalities available for treating stage 
IV CRC. More aggressive approaches to resection of mCRC 
(particularly major liver resection), combined with ablative tech-
nologies and loco-regional treatments, are allowing potentially 
curative options to be offered to more patients. For chemo-
therapy, the single agent (5-fluorouracil) available 20 years ago 
has multiplied into 13 available drugs in 2016.146 Despite these 
incremental advances in patient treatment, disease cure remains 
unattainable for many.
Genomic technologies have given valuable insights into CRC 
heterogeneity, leading to identification of distinctive molec-
ular subtypes.13–15 Knowledge of the associated clinical rami-
fications of these subtypes should help optimise treatment 
strategies. Recent advances in immunotherapy have resulted 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 186
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
in significant clinical benefit in non-small cell lung cancer and 
melanoma.147–149 We need to translate these successes into new 
treatment approaches in CRC, beyond the benefit already seen 
with immune-checkpoint inhibition in the ~5% of patients with 
metastatic disease whose tumours have deficient DNA MMR.150
RG11: Lack of approaches that take cognisance of the molecular 
interplay between the metastasising tumour and its microenviron-
ment and help guide evolution of innovative treatments that deliver 
improved health outcomes for the stage IV patient.
Multimodality treatment in stage IV disease
There have been major developments in surgical resection of 
both primary and metastatic diseases, with advanced techniques 
permitting radical resection.151 However, fundamental questions 
remain unanswered such as whether primary tumour resection 
in the presence of synchronous inoperable metastatic disease 
affects the natural history of the disease. It is now possible to 
perform radical peritonectomies and major pelvic exenterations 
for primary and recurrent disease,152 153 but significant varia-
tions in practice from preoperative imaging through to clinical 
intervention remain. Understanding which patients to select for 
which procedure is challenging, and outcome data, including 
increasingly relevant long-term patient-reported outcome 
measures (PROMs) are not robust.
Minimally invasive surgical techniques are being evaluated in 
mCRC management,154 and in the UK a trial is open comparing 
resection and percutaneous ablation in operable liver metas-
tases.155 Disappointingly, the initial promise observed in trials 
investigating radioembolisation in patients with inoperable liver 
metastases has not translated into improved overall survival.143 
Currently, only patients with low-burden, circumscribed metas-
tases are potentially curable. Consensus guidelines on the 
sequence, setting (eg, supraregional centres for certain aspects of 
care) and timing of multimodality treatment, including systemic 
therapy to downsize inoperable disease, would translate into 
more patients being cured, including those with multisite meta-
static disease. Even in non-curable disease, the role of multi-
modality therapy combining downstaging systemic therapies, 
resection and ablation of the majority of multiorgan mCRC, may 
allow prolonged survival with good HRQOL and freedom from 
symptoms. This concept of ‘optimal debulking’, based on clinical 
practice in ovarian cancer, is now being investigated in CRC, in 
clinical trials such as ORCHESTRA,156 and should be explored 
more widely.
RR11.1: Develop evidence-based approaches utilising multimodal-
ity treatment for patients with stage IV CRC to maximise the utility 
of cutting-edge technologies to improve outcomes.
RG12: Lack of reliable prognostic and predictive biomarkers to help 
guide stage IV patient pathways.
Stratification of patients
The lack of widely accepted prognostic and predictive 
biomarkers results in limited consensus to guide stage IV patient 
pathways. For example, how should we adopt WES/whole-ge-
nome sequencing into our standard of care and how do we 
interpret and transmit large-scale multiomics data for clinical 
decision-making? Transcriptomic analysis is starting to yield clin-
ically relevant results which can help inform molecular stratifi-
cation of patients with CRC to improve outcomes. Trials such as 
FOCUS-4, a multistage multiarm approach in CRC, may provide 
the appropriate model going forward.157 An important consid-
eration is the increasing age of the population, as more frail 
patients with complex medical needs are diagnosed. Accurately 
recognising and understanding which aspects of patient frailty 
are reversible (and potentially be amenable to prehabilitation) 
remains challenging.
RR12.1: Establish robust prognostic and predictive biomarkers to 
stratify patients to ensure every patient receives ‘bespoke’ treat-
ment, relevant to their particular disease course.
Understanding the microenvironment to help develop innovative 
treatments
Colon carcinogenesis occurs within an inflammatory microen-
vironment where gut bacteria provide constant immune stim-
ulation. Therefore, many immunosuppressive processes have 
been developed in colonic epithelium to prevent these bacte-
ria-induced inflammatory triggers.158 Interplay between the gut 
microbiome, inflammation and carcinogenesis is complex but is 
critical to understand to improve CRC treatment.
CRC stem cells play a significant role in intratumoural hetero-
geneity.159 As a dynamic population of cells, they respond to 
genetic and epigenetic factors along with microenvironmental 
signals to influence key processes such as metastatic potential 
and chemotherapy resistance. CRC cells can thus continuously 
adapt to their environment, highlighting the difficulty of devel-
oping suitable models to target cancer stem cells by directed 
therapies.
To date, despite significant efforts, immune-mediated 
approaches in CRC have had limited success. High gene muta-
tional load160 and the presence of DNA MMR deficiency and 
DNA polymerase E proofreading mutations150 161 correlate with 
improved outcomes to immune-checkpoint inhibitors. Immuno-
score is a scoring system based on quantifying the number of 
cytotoxic and memory T cells infiltrating the core and leading 
edge of the tumour.97 162 Using this approach may allow iden-
tification of a prognostic biomarker of responsiveness to 
immune-checkpoint inhibitors. Significant work is ongoing to 
understand how the role of the microenvironment (including 
the gut microbiome) influences immune-evading mechanisms 
or immune-editing in CRC,163 and this should help unlock the 
potential of immunotherapy in this disease.
RR12.2: Employ our evolving understanding of the role of the tu-
mour microenvironment in CRC to develop innovative therapies 
that modulate the microenvironment for clinical benefit.
living with and beyond cRc
Current status
Congruent with prioritisation of research to promote effective 
prevention, enable earlier more precise diagnosis and deliver 
optimal treatments to enhance CRC outcomes, there is a need 
for more research-informed approaches to improve HRQOL 
and enhance survivorship for the expanding population now 
living with and beyond CRC. Instruments such as the EORTC 
QLQ-CR29 questionnaire are invaluable in assessing HRQOL 
in CRC,164 while the recently introduced ESMO Magnitude of 
Clinical Benefit Scale165 includes HRQOL in its evaluation of 
benefit/value of new treatments. Despite this progress, there 
are still substantial gaps in our knowledge about optimising 
HRQOL; thus further research is required to inform appropriate 
intervention(s) and promote a responsive HRQOL agenda for 
the CRC survivor over the coming decade.
RG13: The need to increase understanding of health-related quali-
ty of life (HRQOL) issues and promote their resolution as part of 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 187
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
a research effort to enhance survivorship for those living with and 
beyond CRC.
Health-related quality of life
A recent systematic review indicated that >75% of reported 
studies addressing HRQOL in CRC were of inadequate meth-
odological/reporting quality.166 Additionally, many HRQOL 
studies are retrospective; introduction of preplanned analyses 
would significantly enhance data quality,167 and identify those 
patients who might benefit from early discontinuation of induc-
tion therapy or continuation/de-escalation of active maintenance 
treatment. Immune-checkpoint targeting is an exciting new ther-
apeutic modality, with unparalleled efficacy in MMR-deficient 
CRC,105 160 161 but knowledge of both short-term and long-term 
HRQOL issues and PROMs are limited. More precise research 
is also required to improve understanding of the psychological 
consequences (eg, emotional reactions, survivorship guilt, lack 
of reintegration into normal life) and social challenges (eg, 
employment, self-esteem, discrimination) for those living with 
and beyond CRC. Development of evidence-based models that 
elucidate relevant predictors of HRQOL168 would help pinpoint 
individuals at risk and provide potential solutions to help resolve 
the clinical/psychosocial sequelae of CRC and their treatment.
RR13.1: Precisely characterise the landscape of HRQOL sequelae 
in patients living with and beyond CRC, including those in receipt 
of novel treatment approaches (eg, immunotherapy).
Symptom management
A high proportion of patients have troublesome, embarrassing 
and potentially disabling symptoms after surgery/radiotherapy 
for CRC. Many patients experience a permanent change in bowel 
habit after anterior rectal resection (AR),169 with major nega-
tive impacts on daily living.170 171 A meta-analysis of >3300 
AR 
patients has found a 35% incidence of faecal incontinence 
(FI).172 Following pelvic radiotherapy, GI symptoms are the most 
common chronic side effect, with 50% of patients reporting 
significant effects on HRQOL.173 Chronic FI frequently occurs 
after radiotherapy for rectal cancer.173
Published systematic reviews have found remarkably few 
intervention studies and no RCTs in patients with anterior resec-
tion syndrome.174–176 Hyperbaric oxygen has frequently been 
used to treat patients following pelvic radiotherapy, but a recent 
RCT demonstrated no benefit, highlighting the urgent need for 
new approaches.177 After radiotherapy, it is possible to improve 
symptoms with relatively low-cost interventions,178 179 but 
studies of lifestyle interventions, self-management and choice of 
optimal support services are lacking.
We need to better understand which aspects of treatment cause 
symptoms and define their underlying mechanism, in order to 
test measures to prevent/ameliorate symptom development and 
treat symptoms when they are troublesome.
RR13.2: Elucidate the causes of symptoms following CRC treat-
ment and develop viable solutions for their prevention and/or man-
agement.
Lifestyle interventions
Emerging 
evidence 
suggests 
that 
lifestyle 
interventions 
promoting increased physical activity,180 healthy eating181 and 
weight control can have significant benefits, but research on 
their impact following CRC treatment or during recurrence is 
limited.182 183 More longitudinal studies are required to underpin 
the evidence base for introduction of such interventions and to 
identify appropriate tools to measure their proposed benefits.184
RR13.3: Evaluate the evidence base and impact of lifestyle inter-
ventions, including increased physical activity and better nutrition 
in CRC.
Survivorship
Survivorship care planning must involve meaningful two-way 
dialogue. However, surveys reveal that only a minority of HCPs 
regularly discuss survivorship issues or provide survivorship 
care plans to those living beyond CRC.185 186 It is imperative 
to implement research-informed National Cancer Survivorship 
Plans.187–189 Research to develop appropriate CRC survivorship 
care guidelines190 can underpin creation of relevant tools to 
nurture open and effective interactions between HCPs and CRC 
survivors, empowering a shared decision-making culture.
RR13.4: Develop research to support survivorship care planning 
and promote shared decision-making for people living with and 
beyond CRC.
Overarching Rgs that need to be addressed
In addition to the thematic RGs outlined above, there are also 
several cross-cutting RGs raised by a number of the WGs.
RG14: Lack of coordination of CRC research and its funding, lead-
ing to fragmented efforts to elucidate the biology of the disease and 
translate this knowledge into new preventative agents, screening 
tools, diagnostics and therapeutics.
The need for a national cancer research forum
Congruent with the multidisciplinary team approach delivering 
optimal care to patients with CRC is the need to bring together 
the diverse expertise increasingly required to answer the complex 
research challenges outlined in this paper. Linking biologists, 
physical scientists and mathematicians can fuel development of 
testable chemoprevention models. Integrating epidemiological, 
bioinformatic, pathological and clinical expertise can underpin 
rational biomarker-informed clinical trial design. Capturing all 
of this expertise under the umbrella of a national CRC research 
conference in the UK, for example, would provide the impetus 
for a coordinated interdisciplinary approach to successfully 
address the critical challenges in CRC research.
RR14.1: Establish an annual national multidisciplinary CRC re-
search conference that draws together the entire CRC community 
in a coordinated research effort.
The need for data sharing
A recurrent theme from a number of the WGs was the need to 
provide mechanisms and tools that enable sharing of the ever-ex-
panding data outputs generated through CRC research. Sharing 
of genomic, clinical, epidemiological and lifestyle data can be 
challenging, but international collaborative efforts such as the 
Global Alliance for Genomics and Health191 provide a blueprint 
for effective but responsible data sharing in cancer that addresses 
the technical, ethical, legal and security barriers.192 193 Devel-
opment of bespoke data-analytic platforms,194 tailored to the 
requirements of the CRC community, could maximise the value 
of the rich sources of data being generated and yield significant 
benefits for CRC researchers, patients and society.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 188
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
RR14.2: Develop bespoke data-analytic platforms that maximise 
the value of CRC genomic, clinical, epidemiological and lifestyle 
data.
Prioritising funding for CRC research
As well as prioritising research activity, the BCUK’s Critical 
Research Gaps in Colorectal Cancer Initiative provides an excel-
lent opportunity for research funders (eg, research councils, 
cancer charities, non-governmental organisations) to concen-
trate their funding in particular areas of focus where there is 
a defined research need, and/or investigate the potential for 
collaborative research grant calls between complimentary 
research funding organisations. An example of this approach is 
the Medical Research Council-CRUK jointly funded Stratified 
Medicine in Colorectal Cancer consortium,157 195 which brings 
together diverse stakeholders in a research collaborative to 
develop predictive and prognostic markers that drive precision 
medicine approaches in CRC.
RR14.3: Prioritise research resource allocation to recognise re-
search gaps and encourage collaborative research grant calls be-
tween complimentary research funding organisations.
RG15: Lack of effective communication strategies between health-
care professionals, patients with CRC/survivors, those at elevated 
risk of developing CRC, and the general public and varying levels of 
awareness of key risk factors, prevention options and benefits/risks 
associated with different treatment options.
Closing the communication gap
There are distinct challenges around CRC health literacy and 
communication between HCPs and patients with CRC/survivors, 
those at elevated risk of developing CRC and the general public. 
Patients are becoming increasingly empowered to make their 
own personalised health decisions; this should be encouraged 
and nurtured. However, awareness of personal CRC risk/risk 
factors,196 197 appropriate prevention options198 and benefits/
risks associated with treatments199 is variable. Patient-adapted 
educational materials and shared decision-making tools200 201 
must be made available, empowering individual choice while 
facilitating formal assessment of ‘what is or was the right choice’ 
for that individual.
RR15.1: Development of patient and person-adapted educational 
materials and shared decision-making tools in order to empower 
individual choice.
Research into the most appropriate communication strategies 
for explaining risk and benefit in different settings (eg, cancer 
risk modification, surgery, adjuvant therapy) is crucial. Recent 
work on knowledge of, and attitudes to, CRC chemoprevention 
has highlighted that a majority of primary care physicians were 
unaware of the chemopreventive properties of aspirin.202 There 
is a need for better communication with patients about treat-
ment-related symptoms, emphasising that it is legitimate to seek 
help (and not simply accept treatment-related complications as 
the price of a successful cure) and investigate both professionally 
led and self-help interventions.
From a patient communication perspective, PROMs play a key 
role in identifying specific needs, while also providing important 
information on outcomes.203 However, there are major varia-
tions in how PROMs are measured and employed.204 Studies 
should identify which PROMs best reflect the views/experiences 
of individuals living with and beyond CRC, and how they may 
signpost early indicators of disease recurrence.
Evidence is also required as to whether long-term access to 
a CRC nurse or other relevant HCP improves communication 
and shared decision-making, empowering survivors as active 
participants in their own care.205 A better understanding of why 
patients with CRC do or do not participate in RCTs would help 
facilitate recruitment and allow development of RCT protocols 
more relevant/acceptable to patients.206 A recent multinational 
survey indicated a high awareness of patients with breast, lung 
or CRC regarding the potential of precision medicine to deliver 
personalised care,207 but highlighted important regional varia-
tions and the patient’s need for additional information.
RR15.2: Embedding strategies that ensure appropriate communi-
cation of risk and benefit and best capture patient-reported out-
come measures (PROM) in order to ensure optimal outcomes for 
patients, their families and carers, and those at risk of developing 
CRC.
Research addressing these diverse communications issues can 
help ensure that patients with CRC/survivors and those at risk of 
developing CRC receive optimal information and participate in 
their health-preserving decisions as equals.
cOnclusIOns
In this position paper, we present the informed considerations 
of a wide-ranging multidisciplinary group of experts from 
UK-based research institutions, complemented by significant 
input from those affected by CRC. We articulate their collec-
tive viewpoint in a series of critical RGs and RRs (see online 
supplementary table 1), which if appropriately implemented 
would significantly impact on the prevention, early diagnosis, 
treatment and improved quality of life for people living with and 
beyond CRC. Prioritisation of CRC research activity, supported 
by effective policy decisions and appropriate resource alloca-
tions, will help us tackle this life-threatening, debilitating disease 
that kills ~800 
000 of our citizens globally each year.
Author affiliations
1Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, UK
2Bowel Cancer UK, London, UK
3School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
4Research into Cancer Prevention and Screening, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK
5Department of Radiology, Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton, UK
6Department of Colorectal Surgery, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, UK
7Hepatobiliary Surgery Unit, Aintree University Hospital, Liverpool, UK
8Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
9Department of Oncology, University College London Cancer Institute, London, UK
10Leeds Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
11Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
12Centre for Surgical Research, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
13Family History of Bowel Cancer Clinic, Imperial College London, London, UK
14School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK
15Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery, King’s College London, 
London, UK
16Research Department of Pathology, University College London Medical School, 
London, UK
17Leicester Cancer Research Centre, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK
18Atticus Consultants Ltd, Croydon, UK
19Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, 
UK
Acknowledgements We would like to thank the contribution of all our Working 
Group members and those who took part in the BCUK-RG Evaluation Day (online 
supplementary appendix 2). Bowel Cancer UK staff member Sam Pearce was 
responsible for coordinating and delivering the logistics of the process, and Dr Julia 
Ambler was responsible for manuscript coordination. We thank Dr Alexis Willet who 
provided editorial assistance on behalf of Punch Consulting. We are grateful to 
Charles Russel Speechlys (5 Fleet Place, London) and Lewis PR (30 Millbank, London) 
for providing meeting spaces pro bono.
collaborators Working Group members (* denotes Bowel Cancer UK Medical 
Advisory Board member, + denotes Bowel Cancer UK Scientific Advisory Board 
member, and β denotes former or current Bowel Cancer UK Trustee): Professor 
Emeritus Sam H Ahmedzai, Dr Jervoise Andreyev*, Professor Wendy Atkin*, Mr 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 189
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
Simon Bach, Dr David Brewster, Professor Karen Brown, Professor Sir John Burn*+, 
Professor Jean-Baptiste Cazier, Dr Ian Chau, Professor Jeremy Cheadle, Dr Vicky 
Coyle, Professor David Cunningham, Professor Julian Downward, Professor Malcom 
Dunlop, Professor Callum Fraser, Dr Marco Gerlinger, Dr Adam Glaser, Professor 
Vicky Goh, Professor David González de Castro, Professor Trevor Graham, Mr John 
Griffith, Professor Steve Halligan, Professor Willie Hamilton*, Mrs Rachel Haynes, 
Dr Georgina Hold, Professor Richard Houlston, Dr Gill Hubbard, Dr Tariq Iqba, Mrs 
Sandra Irvine, Dr Tim Iveson*, Professor Dan Longley, Dr Ultan McDermott, Mr 
Michael Machesney*, Professor Jane Maher, Professor Julian Marchesi, Professor Tim 
Maughan, Professor Gary Middleton, Mrs Barbara Moss, Mr Mark Moss, Dr Peter 
Murchie, Professor Matt Rutter, Dr Leslie Samuel, Professor Owen Sansom, Professor 
John Saxton, Dr Ed Seward, Dr Ricky Sharma, Dr Andrea Sottoriva, Professor Will 
Steward, Dr Christian Von Wagner, Professor Ann Williams, and Professor Doug 
Winton. BCUK-RG Evaluation Day participants: Mr Nicholas Arbuthnot, Mrs Lindy 
Berkman, Miss Nicola Bloor, Mr Victor Boulter, Mrs Ann Cole, Mr Mark Davies, Mrs 
Julie Hepburn, Mr Joe Higginsβ, Mr Georgy Holden, Dr Alexandra E Irvine, Mr Nick 
Jakowiw, Mr Ian Jackson, Mrs Monica Jefford, Mrs Barbara Moss, Mr Mark Moss, 
Mr Peter O’Sullivan, Mr Clint Robertson, Mrs Tracy Smith, Mr Phil Stocker, and Mrs 
Gillian Sweetman.
contributors Conception and design of study: ML, DA, LMW, RHW, IT. Acquisition 
of data through questionnaires, attending meetings and drafting of initial reports: 
ML, DA, RAA, ASA, GB, NSF, SWF, SPH, DH, MAH, AGKM, KJM, IN, CN, MRN, RJCS, 
ALT, LMW, RHW, IT, SHA, JA, NA, WA, SB, LB, NB, VB, DB, KB, JB, JBC, IC, JC, AC, VC, 
DC, MD, JD, MD, CF, MG, AG, VG, DGdC, TG, JG, SH, WH, JH, RH, JH, GH, GH, RH, GH, 
TI, SI, TI, NJ, IJ, MJ, DL, UM, MM, JM, JM, TM, GM, BM, MM, PM, POS, CR, MR; LS, 
OS, JS, ES, RS, TS, AS, WS, PS, GS, CVW, AW, DW. Drafting of the manuscript: ML, DA, 
RAA, ASA, GB, NSF, SWF, SPH, DH, MAH, VHK, AGKM, KJM, IN, CN, MN, RJCS, ALT, 
LW, RHW, IT. Revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content: ML, 
DA, RAA, ASA, GB, NSF, SWF, SPH, DH, MAH, VHK, AGKM, KJM, IN, CN, MN, RJCS, 
ALT, LW, RHW, IT. Approval of the version of the manuscript to be published: ML, DA, 
RAA, ASA, GB, NSF, SWF, SPH, DH, MAH, VHK, AGKM, KJM, IN, CN, MN, RJCS, ALT, 
LW, RHW, IT. 
funding The study was funded by Bowel Cancer UK, the Norman Foster 
Foundation and the Tom Simms Memorial Fund at Queen’s University Belfast.
competing interests ML reports support from Pfizer, outside the submitted work; 
DA reports grants from the Norman Foster Foundation, grants from the Tom Simms 
Memorial Fund at Queen’s University Belfast, during the conduct of the study; Dr 
Andreyev reports other from Entrinsic Health Solutions, Inc and personal fees from 
Macmillan Cancer Support, outside the submitted work; Professor Atkin reports 
grants from Cancer Research UK, outside the submitted work; Mr Bach reports 
personal fees from Ethicon Inc, outside the submitted work; Professor Burn has a 
patent A novel panel of short coding repeats suitable for high-throughput detection 
of microsatellite instability pending to Newcastle University; Dr Chau reports grants 
from Eli-Lily, Janssen-Cilag, Sanofi Oncology, Merck-Serono, and Novartis, personal 
fees from Taiho, Pfizer, Amgen, Eli-Lily, outside the submitted work; Professor 
Cheadle has a patent MUTYH gene variants licensed to Myriad Genetics and receives 
royalties; Professor Cunningham reports grants from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, 
Celgene, Medimmune, Merck Serono, Merrimack, and Sanofi, outside the submitted 
work; Professor Fraser reports personal fees from Immunostics Inc, Ocean, NJ, USA, 
Kyowa, Tokyo, Japan, and support for travel from Alpha Labs Ltd, Eastleigh, Hants, 
UK, during the conduct of the study; DH reports MRC CASE Award with Merck 
Serono for project unrelated to this submission and research support from Merck 
Serono for project unrelated to this submission; MH reports other from consultancy 
for Thetis Pharma, outside the submitted work; CN reports personal fees from Takeda 
and Ferring, outside the submitted work; Dr Sharma reports grants, personal fees 
and other from Sirtex, grants, personal fees and other from BTG, during the conduct 
of the study; AT reports personal fees from BMS Advisory Board, Roche Speaker 
Panel, Amgen Advisory Board, and Servier Advisory Board, outside the submitted 
work; LMW reports personal fees from Atticus Consultants Ltd, during the conduct 
of the study; RW reports personal fees from BMS Advisory Board, Clovis Oncology 
Advisory Board, Halozyme Advisory Board, Amgen Advisory Board, Servier Advisory 
Board, and Sirtex Independent Data Monitoring and Safety Committee, all outside 
the submitted work. RA, Professor Ahmedzai, ASA, Mr Arbuthnot, Mrs Berkman, Miss 
Bloor, Mr Boulter, Mrs Cole, Dr Brewster, GB, Professor Cazier, Dr Coyle, Mr Davies, 
Professor Downward, Professor Dunlop, NSF, SF, Dr Gerlinger, Dr Glaser, Professor 
Goh, Professor González De Castro, Dr Graham, Mr Griffith, Professor Halligan, 
SPH, Professor Hamilton, Mrs Hepburn, Dr Hold, Mr Holden, Professor Houlston, 
Dr Hubbard, Dr Iqbal, Dr Irvine, Dr Iveson, Mr Jackson, Mr Jakowiw, Mrs Jefford, 
Professor Longley, Dr McDermott, AGKM, Mr Machesney, Professor Maher, Professor 
Marchesi, Professor Maughan, Professor Middleton, Mr Moss, Mrs Moss, KJM, Dr 
Murchie, IN, MRN, Mr O’Sullivan, Mr Robertson, Professor Rutter, Dr Sansom, Dr 
Samuel, Professor Saxton, Dr Seward, Mrs Smith, Dr Sottoriva, RS, Professor Steward, 
Mr Stocker, Mrs Sweetman, IT, Dr Von Wagner and Professor Williams have nothing 
to disclose.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work 
is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by- 
nc/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1 Arnold M, Sierra MS, Laversanne M, et al. Global patterns and trends in colorectal 
cancer incidence and mortality. Gut 2017;66:683–91.
 2 Cancer Research UK. Bowel cancer statistics. http://www. 
cancerresearchuk. 
org/ 
health- 
professional/ 
cancer- 
statistics/ 
statistics- 
by- 
cancer- 
type/ 
bowel- 
cancer (accessed 
08 Sep 2017).
 3 The American Cancer Society. http://www. 
cancer. 
org/ 
acs/ 
groups/ 
content/@ 
internationalaffairs/ 
documents/ 
document/ 
acspc- 
026203. 
pdf (accessed 08 Sep 
2017).
 4 Mariotto AB, Yabroff KR, Shao Y, et al. Projections of the cost of cancer care in the 
United States: 2010-2020. J Natl Cancer Inst 2011;103:117–28.
 5 Luengo-Fernandez R, Leal J, Gray A, et al. Economic burden of cancer across 
the European Union: a population-based cost analysis. Lancet Oncol  
2013;14:1165–74.
 6 National Cancer Institute. https:// 
fundedresearch. 
cancer. 
gov/ 
nciportfolio/ 
search/ 
get? 
site= 
Colon% 
2fRectum& 
fy= 
PUB2014 (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 7 Cancer Research UK. How much we spend on research. http://www. 
cancerresearchuk. 
org/ 
how- 
much- 
we- 
spend- 
on- 
research (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 8 Eccles SA, Aboagye EO, Ali S, et al. Critical research gaps and translational priorities 
for the successful prevention and treatment of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res 
2013;15:R92.
 9 Lobert VH, Mouradov D, Heath JK. Focusing the spotlight on the zebrafish 
intestine to illuminate mechanisms of colorectal cancer. Adv Exp Med Biol 
2016;916:411–37.
 10 Rasmussen LJ, Heinen CD, Royer-Pokora B, et al. Pathological assessment of 
mismatch repair gene variants in Lynch syndrome: past, present, and future. Hum 
Mutat 2012;33:1617–25.
 11 Nusse R, Clevers H. Wnt/β-catenin signaling, disease, and emerging therapeutic 
modalities. Cell 2017;169:985–99.
 12 Maccaroni E, Bracci R, Giampieri R, et al. Prognostic impact of mismatch repair 
genes germline defects in colorectal cancer patients: are all mutations equal? 
Oncotarget 2015;6:38737–48.
 13 Guinney J, Dienstmann R, Wang X, et al. The consensus molecular subtypes of 
colorectal cancer. Nat Med 2015;21:1350–6.
 14 Isella C, Brundu F, Bellomo SE, et al. Selective analysis of cancer-cell intrinsic 
transcriptional traits defines novel clinically relevant subtypes of colorectal cancer. 
Nat Commun 2017;8:15107.
 15 Dunne PD, Alderdice M, O’Reilly PG, et al. Cancer-cell intrinsic gene expression 
signatures overcome intratumoural heterogeneity bias in colorectal cancer patient 
classification. Nat Commun 2017;8:15657.
 16 Isella C, Terrasi A, Bellomo SE, et al. Stromal contribution to the colorectal cancer 
transcriptome. Nat Genet 2015;47:312–9.
 17 Calon A, Lonardo E, Berenguer-Llergo A, et al. Stromal gene expression defines poor-
prognosis subtypes in colorectal cancer. Nat Genet 2015;47:320–9.
 18 Dunne PD, McArt DG, Bradley CA, et al. Challenging the cancer molecular 
stratification dogma: intratumoral heterogeneity undermines consensus molecular 
subtypes and potential diagnostic value in colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res 
2016;22:4095–104.
 19 Naxerova K, Reiter JG, Brachtel E, et al. Origins of lymphatic and distant metastases 
in human colorectal cancer. Science 2017;357:55–60.
 20 Villalba M, Evans SR, Vidal-Vanaclocha F, et al. Role of TGF-β in metastatic colon 
cancer: it is finally time for targeted therapy. Cell Tissue Res 2017:29–39.
 21 Hong AW, Meng Z, Guan KL. The Hippo pathway in intestinal regeneration and 
disease. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;13:324–37.
 22 Xia T, Konno H, Ahn J, et al. Deregulation of STING signaling in colorectal carcinoma 
constrains DNA damage responses and correlates with tumorigenesis. Cell Rep 
2016;14:282–97.
 23 Jackstadt R, Sansom OJ. Mouse models of intestinal cancer. J Pathol 
2016;238:141–51.
 24 Su LK, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, et al. Multiple intestinal neoplasia caused by a 
mutation in the murine homolog of the APC gene. Science 1992;256:1114.
 25 Bertotti A, Migliardi G, Galimi F, et al. A molecularly annotated platform of patient-
derived xenografts (“xenopatients”) identifies HER2 as an effective therapeutic 
target in cetuximab-resistant colorectal cancer. Cancer Discov 2011;1:508–23.
 26 Sato T, Vries RG, Snippert HJ, et al. Single Lgr5 stem cells build crypt-villus structures 
in vitro without a mesenchymal niche. Nature 2009;459:262–5.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 190
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
 27 Omar Al-Hassi H, Ng O, Brookes M. Tumour-associated and non-tumour-associated 
microbiota in colorectal cancer. Gut 2017 (Epub ahead of print: 04 May 2017).
 28 Simonds NI, Ghazarian AA, Pimentel CB, et al. Review of the gene-environment 
interaction literature in cancer: what do we know? Genet Epidemiol 
2016;40:356–65.
 29 Peters U, Bien S, Zubair N, et al. Genetic architecture of colorectal cancer. Gut 
2015;64:1623–36.
 30 Chubb D, Broderick P, Dobbins SE, et al. Rare disruptive mutations and their 
contribution to the heritable risk of colorectal cancer. Nat Commun  
2016;7:11883.
 31 Vogtmann E, Goedert JJ. Epidemiologic studies of the human microbiome and 
cancer. Br J Cancer 2016;114:237–42.
 32 Torres Stone RA, Waring ME, Cutrona SL, et al. The association of dietary 
quality with colorectal cancer among normal weight, overweight and obese 
men and women: a prospective longitudinal study in the USA. BMJ Open 
2017;7:e015619.
 33 Aleksandrova K, Pischon T, Jenab M, et al. Combined impact of healthy lifestyle 
factors on colorectal cancer: a large European cohort study. BMC Med 2014;12:168.
 34 van Duijnhoven FJ, Bueno-De-Mesquita HB, Calligaro M, et al. Blood lipid and 
lipoprotein concentrations and colorectal cancer risk in the European Prospective 
Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition. Gut 2011;60:1094–102.
 35 González N, Prieto I, Del Puerto-Nevado L, et al. 2017 update on the relationship 
between diabetes and colorectal cancer: epidemiology, potential molecular 
mechanisms and therapeutic implications. Oncotarget 2017;8:18456–85.
 36 Nan H, Hutter CM, Lin Y, et al. Association of aspirin and NSAID use with risk of 
colorectal cancer according to genetic variants. JAMA 2015;313:1133–42.
 37 Weinberg DS, Myers RE, Keenan E, et al. Genetic and environmental risk assessment 
and colorectal cancer screening in an average-risk population: a randomized trial. 
Ann Intern Med 2014;161:537–45.
 38 Cancer Prevention Program. Genetics and epidemiology of colorectal cancer 
consortium (GECCO). http://www. 
fredhutch. 
org/ 
en/ 
labs/ 
phs/ 
projects/ 
cancer- 
prevention/ 
projects/ 
gecco. 
html (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 39 National Cancer Institute. Epidemiology and genomics research program. https:// 
epi. 
grants. 
cancer. 
gov/ 
gameon/ (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 40 Zeng C, Matsuda K, Jia WH, et al. Identification of susceptibility loci and genes for 
colorectal cancer risk. Gastroenterology 2016;150:1633–45.
 41 Hsu L, Jeon J, Brenner H, et al. A model to determine colorectal cancer risk using 
common genetic susceptibility loci. Gastroenterology 2015;148:1330–9.
 42 Scarbrough PM, Weber RP, Iversen ES, et al. A cross-cancer genetic association 
analysis of the DNA repair and DNA damage signaling pathways for lung, 
ovary, prostate, breast, and colorectal cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 
2016;25:193–200.
 43 Zhang B, Jia WH, Matsuda K, et al. Large-scale genetic study in east asians identifies 
six new loci associated with colorectal cancer risk. Nat Genet 2014;46:533–42.
 44 Wang H, Burnett T, Kono S, et al. Trans-ethnic genome-wide association study 
of colorectal cancer identifies a new susceptibility locus in VTI1A. Nat Commun 
2014;5:4613.
 45 Evans DG, Brentnall A, Byers H, et al. The impact of a panel of 18 SNPs on breast 
cancer risk in women attending a UK familial screening clinic: a case-control study. J 
Med Genet 2017;54:111–3.
 46 Shi J, Park JH, Duan J, et al. Winner’s curse correction and variable thresholding 
improve performance of polygenic risk modeling based on genome-wide association 
study summary-level data. PLoS Genet 2016;12:e1006493.
 47 Kantor ED, Hutter CM, Minnier J, et al. Gene-environment interaction involving 
recently identified colorectal cancer susceptibility Loci. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers 
Prev 2014;23:1824–33.
 48 Figueiredo JC, Hsu L, Hutter CM, et al. on behalf of CCFR; GECCO. Genome-
wide diet-gene interaction analyses for risk of colorectal cancer. PLoS Genet 
2014;10:e1004228.
 49 Park SY, Boushey CJ, Wilkens LR, et al. High-quality diets associate with reduced 
risk of colorectal cancer: analyses of diet quality indexes in the multiethnic cohort. 
Gastroenterology 2017;153:386–94.
 50 Gong J, Hutter CM, Newcomb PA, et al. Genome-wide interaction analyses between 
genetic variants and alcohol consumption and smoking for risk of colorectal cancer. 
PLoS Genet 2016;12:e1006296.
 51 Monahan KJ, Alsina D, Bach S, et al. Urgent improvements needed to diagnose and 
manage Lynch syndrome. BMJ 2017;356:j1388.
 52 Chamnan P, Simmons RK, Khaw KT, et al. Estimating the population impact of 
screening strategies for identifying and treating people at high risk of cardiovascular 
disease: modelling study. BMJ 2010;340:c1693.
 53 Anderson AS, Caswell S, Macleod M, et al. Awareness of lifestyle and colorectal 
cancer risk: findings from the BeWEL study. Biomed Res Int 2015;2015:1–5.
 54 National Cancer Research Center. How was research funding from NCRI Partners 
spent in 2015? http://www. 
ncri. 
org. 
uk/ 
wp- 
content/ 
uploads/ 
2016/ 
06/ 
2016- 
NCRI- 
CaRD- 
210- 
x- 
297. 
pdf (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 55 Movahedi M, Bishop DT, Macrae F, et al. Obesity, aspirin, and risk of colorectal 
cancer in carriers of hereditary colorectal cancer: a prospective investigation in the 
CAPP2 study. J Clin Oncol 2015;33:3591–7.
 56 World Cancer Research Fund. How was research funding from NCRI Partners spent 
in 2015? http://www. 
wcrf. 
org/ 
sites/ 
default/ 
files/ 
CUP% 
20Colorectal% 
20Report_ 
2017_ 
Digital. 
pdf (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 57 Garrett WS. Cancer and the microbiota. Science 2015;348:80–6.
 58 Arnold M, Leitzmann M, Freisling H, et al. Obesity and cancer: An update of the 
global impact. Cancer Epidemiol 2016;41:8–15.
 59 Ma Y, Yang Y, Wang F, et al. Obesity and risk of colorectal cancer: a systematic review 
of prospective studies. PLoS One 2013;8:e53916.
 60 Lauby-Secretan B, Scoccianti C, Loomis D, et al. Body fatness and cancer-viewpoint 
of the IARC working group. N Engl J Med 2016;375:794–8.
 61 Wolin KY, Yan Y, Colditz GA, et al. Physical activity and colon cancer prevention: a 
meta-analysis. Br J Cancer 2009;100:611–6.
 62 Burn J, Gerdes AM, Macrae F, et al. Long-term effect of aspirin on cancer risk in 
carriers of hereditary colorectal cancer: an analysis from the CAPP2 randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 2011;378:2081–7.
 63 Drew DA, Cao Y, Chan AT. Aspirin and colorectal cancer: the promise of precision 
chemoprevention. Nat Rev Cancer 2016;16:173–86.
 64 Bibbins-Domingo K, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Aspirin use for the primary 
prevention of cardiovascular disease and colorectal cancer: U.S. preventive services 
task force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med 2016;164:836–45.
 65 Cuzick J, Thorat MA, Bosetti C, et al. Estimates of benefits and harms of prophylactic 
use of aspirin in the general population. Ann Oncol 2015;26:47–57.
 66 Smith SG, Foy R, McGowan J, et al. General practitioner attitudes towards prescribing 
aspirin to carriers of Lynch Syndrome: findings from a national survey. Fam Cancer 
2017:509–16.
 67 Patterson RE, Colditz GA, Hu FB, et al. The 2011-2016 transdisciplinary research on 
energetics and cancer (TREC) initiative: rationale and design. Cancer Causes Control 
2013;24:695–704.
 68 Bhatt AP, Redinbo MR, Bultman SJ. The role of the microbiome in cancer 
development and therapy. CA Cancer J Clin 2017;67:326–44.
 69 Bultman SJ. The microbiome and its potential as a cancer preventive intervention. 
Semin Oncol 2016;43:97–106.
 70 Moug SJ, Bryce A, Mutrie N, et al. Lifestyle interventions are feasible in patients with 
colorectal cancer with potential short-term health benefits: a systematic review. Int J 
Colorectal Dis 2017;32:765–75.
 71 Anderson AS, Mackison D, Boath C, et al. Promoting changes in diet and physical 
activity in breast and colorectal cancer screening settings: an unexplored opportunity 
for endorsing healthy behaviors. Cancer Prev Res 2013;6:165–72.
 72 Benson VS, Atkin WS, Green J, et al. And international colorectal cancer screening 
network. toward standardizing and reporting colorectal cancer screening indicators 
on an international level: the international colorectal cancer screening network. Int J 
Cancer 2012;130:2961–73.
 73 Moss S, Mathews C, Day TJ, et al. Increased uptake and improved outcomes 
of bowel cancer screening with a faecal immunochemical test: results from 
a pilot study within the national screening programme in England. Gut 
2017;66:1631–44.
 74 Digby J, Fraser CG, Carey FA, et al. Interval cancers using a quantitative faecal 
immunochemical test (FIT) for haemoglobin when colonoscopy capacity is limited. J 
Med Screen 2016;23:130–4.
 75 Atkin W, Wooldrage K, Parkin DM, et al. Long term effects of once-only flexible 
sigmoidoscopy screening after 17 years of follow-up: the UK flexible sigmoidoscopy 
screening randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2017;389:1299–311.
 76 Peacock O, Clayton S, Atkinson F, et al. ’Be Clear on Cancer’: the impact of the UK 
national bowel cancer awareness campaign. Colorectal Dis 2013;15:963–7.
 77 Bethune R, Marshall MJ, Mitchell SJ, et al. Did the ’be clear on bowel cancer’ public 
awareness campaign pilot result in a higher rate of cancer detection? Postgrad Med 
J 2013;89:390–3.
 78 Mowat C, Digby J, Strachan JA, et al. Faecal haemoglobin and faecal calprotectin 
as indicators of bowel disease in patients presenting to primary care with bowel 
symptoms. Gut 2016;65:1463–9.
 79 NICE. Quantitative faecal immunochemical tests to guide referral for colorectal 
cancer in primary care. https://www. 
nice. 
org. 
uk/ 
guidance/ 
dg30  
(accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 80 Bretthauer M, Kaminski MF, Løberg M, et al. Nordic-european initiative on colorectal 
cancer (NordICC) study group. population-based colonoscopy screening for 
colorectal cancer: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2016;176:894–902.
 81 You JJ, Liu Y, Kirby J, et al. Virtual colonoscopy, optical colonoscopy, or fecal occult 
blood testing for colorectal cancer screening: results of a pilot randomized controlled 
trial. Trials 2015;16:296.
 82 Sali L, Mascalchi M, Falchini M, et al. Reduced and full-preparation CT colonography, 
fecal immunochemical test, and colonoscopy for population screening of colorectal 
cancer: a randomized trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 2016;108:djv319.
 83 Hewitson P, Glasziou P, Watson E, et al. Cochrane systematic review of colorectal 
cancer screening using the fecal occult blood test (hemoccult): an update. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2008;103:1541–9.
 84 McDonald PJ, Strachan JA, Digby J, et al. Faecal haemoglobin concentrations by 
gender and age: implications for population-based screening for colorectal cancer. 
Clin Chem Lab Med 2011;50:935–40.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 191
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
 85 Birks J, Bankhead C, Holt TA, et al. Evaluation of a prediction model for colorectal 
cancer: retrospective analysis of 2.5 million patient records. Cancer Med 
2017;6:2453–60.
 86 Imperiale TF, Ransohoff DF, Itzkowitz SH, et al. Multitarget stool DNA testing for 
colorectal-cancer screening. N Engl J Med 2014;370:1287–97.
 87 Song L, Yu H, Jia J, et al. A systematic review of the performance of the SEPT9 
gene methylation assay in colorectal cancer screening, monitoring, diagnosis and 
prognosis. Cancer Biomark 2017;18:425–32.
 88 Sonoda H, Kohnoe S, Yamazato T, et al. Colorectal cancer screening with odour 
material by canine scent detection. Gut 2011;60:814–9.
 89 Tan CR, Zhou L, El-Deiry WS. Circulating tumor cells versus circulating tumor DNA in 
colorectal cancer: pros and cons. Curr Colorectal Cancer Rep 2016;12:151–61.
 90 Yu J, Feng Q, Wong SH, et al. Metagenomic analysis of faecal microbiome as 
a tool towards targeted non-invasive biomarkers for colorectal cancer. Gut  
2017;66:70–8.
 91 Muguruma N, Tanaka K, Teramae S, et al. Colon capsule endoscopy: toward the 
future. Clin J Gastroenterol 2017;10:1–6.
 92 Tie J, Wang Y, Tomasetti C, et al. Circulating tumor DNA analysis detects minimal 
residual disease and predicts recurrence in patients with stage II colon cancer. Sci 
Transl Med 2016;8:346ra92.
 93 Schøler LV, Reinert T, Ørntoft MW, et al. Clinical implications of monitoring circulating 
tumor DNA in patients with colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2017;23:5437–45.
 94 Brierley JD, Gospodarowicz MK, Wittekind C, eds. TNM classification of malignant 
tumours. 8th ed. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2016.
 95 Edge SB. American Joint Committee on Cancer. AJCC cancer staging manual. 7th ed. 
New York: Springer, 2010.
 96 Lugli A, Kirsch R, Ajioka Y, et al. Recommendations for reporting tumor budding in 
colorectal cancer based on the international tumor budding consensus conference 
(ITBCC) 2016. Mod Pathol 2017;30:1299–311.
 97 Galon J, Mlecnik B, Bindea G, et al. Towards the introduction of the ’Immunoscore’ 
in the classification of malignant tumours. J Pathol 2014;232:199–209.
 98 Pathology and prognostic determinants of colorectal cancer. https://www. 
uptodate. 
com/ 
contents/ 
pathology- 
and- 
prognostic- 
determinants- 
of- 
colorectal- 
cancer  
(accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 99 Amin MB, Greene FL, Edge SB, et al. The eighth edition AJCC cancer 
staging manual: continuing to build a bridge from a population-based to a 
more “personalized” approach to cancer staging. CA Cancer J Clin 2017;67:93–9.
 
100 Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive molecular characterization of human 
colon and rectal cancer. Nature 2012;487:330–7.
 
101 Paasinen-Sohns A, Koelzer VH, Frank A, et al. Single-center experience with a 
targeted next generation sequencing assay for assessment of relevant somatic 
alterations in solid tumors. Neoplasia 2017;19:196–206.
 
102 De Roock W, De Vriendt V, Normanno N, et al. KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, and PTEN 
mutations: implications for targeted therapies in metastatic colorectal cancer. Lancet 
Oncol 2011;12:594–603.
 
103 Lee AM, Shi Q, Pavey E, et al. DPYD variants as predictors of 5-fluorouracil 
toxicity in adjuvant colon cancer treatment (NCCTG N0147). J Natl Cancer Inst 
2014;106:dju298.
 
104 Yeh YS, Tsai HL, Huang CW, et al. Prospective analysis of UGT1A1 promoter 
polymorphism for irinotecan dose escalation in metastatic colorectal cancer patients 
treated with bevacizumab plus FOLFIRI as the first-line setting: study protocol for a 
randomized controlled trial. Trials 2016;17:17–46.
 
105 Le DT, Uram JN, Wang H, et al. PD-1 Blockade in tumors with mismatch-repair 
deficiency. N Engl J Med 2015;372:2509–20.
 
106 De Sousa E Melo F, Wang X, Jansen M, et al. Poor-prognosis colon cancer is defined 
by a molecularly distinct subtype and develops from serrated precursor lesions. Nat 
Med 2013;19:614–8.
 
107 Sadanandam A, Lyssiotis CA, Homicsko K, et al. A colorectal cancer classification 
system that associates cellular phenotype and responses to therapy. Nat Med 
2013;19:619–25.
 
108 Marisa L, de Reyniès A, Duval A, et al. Gene expression classification of colon cancer 
into molecular subtypes: characterization, validation, and prognostic value. PLoS 
Med 2013;10:e1001453.
 
109 Li G, Bankhead P, Dunne PD, et al. Embracing an integromic approach to tissue 
biomarker research in cancer: Perspectives and lessons learned. Brief Bioinform 
2017;18:634–46.
 
110 Harpaz N, Polydorides AD. Colorectal dysplasia in chronic inflammatory bowel 
disease: pathology, clinical implications, and pathogenesis. Arch Pathol Lab Med 
2010;134:876–95.
 
111 Coverlizza S, Risio M, Ferrari A, et al. Colorectal adenomas containing invasive 
carcinoma. pathologic assessment of lymph node metastatic potential. Cancer 
1989;64:1937–47.
 
112 Beaton C, Twine CP, Williams GL, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of 
histopathological factors influencing the risk of lymph node metastasis in early 
colorectal cancer. Colorectal Dis 2013;15:788–97.
 
113 von Karsa L, Patnick J, Segnan N, et al. European guidelines for quality assurance 
in colorectal cancer screening and diagnosis: overview and introduction to the full 
supplement publication. Endoscopy 2013;45:51–9.
 
114 Kannarkatt J, Joseph J, Kurniali PC, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy for stage II colon 
cancer: a clinical dilemma. J Oncol Pract 2017;13:233–41.
 
115 Gray R, Barnwell J, McConkey C, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy versus observation in 
patients with colorectal cancer: a randomised study. Lancet 2007;370:2020–9.
 
116 O’Connell MJ, Campbell ME, Goldberg RM, et al. Survival following recurrence 
in stage II and III colon cancer: findings from the ACCENT data set. J Clin Oncol 
2008;26:2336–41.
 
117 Kopetz S, Tabernero J, Rosenberg R, et al. Genomic classifier ColoPrint predicts 
recurrence in stage II colorectal cancer patients more accurately than clinical factors. 
Oncologist 2015;20:127–33.
 
118 André T, Boni C, Mounedji-Boudiaf L, et al. Oxaliplatin, fluorouracil, and leucovorin as 
adjuvant treatment for colon cancer. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2343–51.
 
119 Kobayashi H, Mochizuki H, Sugihara K, et al. Characteristics of recurrence and 
surveillance tools after curative resection for colorectal cancer: a multicenter study. 
Surgery 2007;141:67–75.
 
120 Stålhammar G, Fuentes Martinez N, Lippert M, et al. Digital image analysis 
outperforms manual biomarker assessment in breast cancer. Mod Pathol 
2016;29:318–29.
 
121 Life SciencesIndustrial Strategy. A report to the Government from the life sciences 
sector. https://www. 
gov. 
uk/ 
government/ 
uploads/ 
system/ 
uploads/ 
attachment_ 
data/ 
file/ 640696/ 
life- 
sciences- 
industrial- 
strategy. 
pdf (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 
122 Genomics Education Programme. Developing people for health and healthcare. 
https://www. 
genomicseducation. 
hee. 
nhs. 
uk/ (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 
123 Haspel RL, Rinder HM, Frank KM, et al. The current state of resident training 
in genomic pathology: a comprehensive analysis using the resident in-service 
examination. Am J Clin Pathol 2014;142:445–51.
 
124 Kuhry E, Schwenk WF, Gaupset R, et al. Long-term results of laparoscopic colorectal 
cancer resection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008;2:CD003432.
 
125 Veldkamp R, Kuhry E, Hop WC, et al. Laparoscopic surgery versus open surgery 
for colon cancer: short-term outcomes of a randomised trial. Lancet Oncol 
2005;6:477–84.
 
126 Morris EJA, Finan PJ, Spencer K, et al. Wide Variation in the Use of Radiotherapy in 
the Management of Surgically Treated Rectal Cancer Across the English National 
Health Service. Clin Oncol 2016;28:522–31.
 
127 Klinkhammer-Schalke M, Lindberg P, Koller M, et al. Direct improvement of quality 
of life in colorectal cancer patients using a tailored pathway with quality of life 
diagnosis and therapy (DIQOL): study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. 
Trials 2015;16:460.
 
128 Department of Oncology. Roosevelt Drive Oxford. https://www. 
oncology. 
ox. 
ac. 
uk/ 
trial/ 
scot (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 
129 Shi Q, Sobrero AF, Shields AF, et al. Prospective pooled analysis of six phase III trials 
investigating duration of adjuvant (adjuv) oxaliplatin-based therapy (3 vs 6 months) 
for patients (pts) with stage III colon cancer (CC): the IDEA (International Duration 
Evaluation of Adjuvant chemotherapy) collaboration. J Clin Oncol 2017;35(18_
suppl):LBA1.
 
130 Coyle C, Cafferty FH, Rowley S, et al. ADD-ASPIRIN: A phase III, double-blind, 
placebo controlled, randomised trial assessing the effects of aspirin on disease 
recurrence and survival after primary therapy in common non-metastatic solid 
tumours. Contemp Clin Trials 2016;51:56–64.
 
131 Courneya KS, Booth CM, Gill S, et al. The colon health and life-long exercise change 
trial: a randomized trial of the national cancer institute of canada clinical trials 
group. Curr Oncol 2008;15:279–85.
 
132 Foxtrot Collaborative Group. Feasibility of preoperative chemotherapy for locally 
advanced, operable colon cancer: the pilot phase of a randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet Oncol 2012;13:1152–60.
 
133 Richards T, Coulter A, Wicks P. Time to deliver patient centred care. BMJ 
2015;350:h530.
 
134 Heald RJ, Beets G, Carvalho C. Report from a consensus meeting: response to 
chemoradiotherapy in rectal cancer - predictor of cure and a crucial new choice for 
the patient: on behalf of the Champalimaud 2014 Faculty for ’Rectal cancer: when 
NOT to operate’. Colorectal Dis 2014;16:334–7.
 
135 Renehan AG, Malcomson L, Emsley R, et al. Watch-and-wait approach versus 
surgical resection after chemoradiotherapy for patients with rectal cancer (the 
OnCoRe project): a propensity-score matched cohort analysis. Lancet Oncol 
2016;17:174–83.
 
136 Ackland GL, Iqbal S, Paredes LG, et al. Individualised oxygen delivery targeted 
haemodynamic therapy in high-risk surgical patients: a multicentre, randomised, 
double-blind, controlled, mechanistic trial. Lancet Respir Med 2015;3:33–41.
 
137 O’Connor ME, Kirwan CJ, Pearse RM, et al. Incidence and associations of acute 
kidney injury after major abdominal surgery. Intensive Care Med 2016;42:521–30.
 
138 Sievers CK, Kratz JD, Zurbriggen LD, et al. The multidisciplinary management 
of colorectal cancer: present and future paradigms. Clin Colon Rectal Surg 
2016;29:232–8.
 
139 Albert MR, Atallah SB, deBeche-Adams TC, et al. Transanal minimally invasive surgery 
(TAMIS) for local excision of benign neoplasms and early-stage rectal cancer: efficacy 
and outcomes in the first 50 patients. Dis Colon Rectum 2013;56:301–7.
 
140 Andratschke NH, Nieder C, Heppt F, et al. Stereotactic radiation therapy for liver 
metastases: factors affecting local control and survival. Radiat Oncol 2015;10:69.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 192
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
 
141 Palma S, Zwenger AO, Croce MV, et al. From molecular biology to clinical 
trials: toward personalized colorectal cancer therapy. Clin Colorectal Cancer 
2016;15:104–15.
 
142 Moris D, Pawlik TM. Personalized treatment in patients with colorectal liver 
metastases. J Surg Res 2017;216:26–9.
 
143 Sharma RA, Plummer R, Stock JK, et al. Clinical development of new drug-
radiotherapy combinations. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2016;13:627–42.
 
144 McCulloch P, Altman DG, Campbell WB, et al. No surgical innovation without 
evaluation: the IDEAL recommendations. Lancet 2009;374:1105–12.
 
145 Cancer Research UK. Bowel cancer incidence statistics. http://www. 
cancerresearchuk. 
org/ 
health- 
professional/ 
cancer- 
statistics/ 
statistics- 
by- 
cancer- 
type/ 
bowel- 
cancer/ 
incidence# 
heading Three (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 
146 National Cancer Institute. Drugs approved for colon and rectal cancer. https://www. 
cancer. 
gov/ 
about- 
cancer/ 
treatment/ 
drugs/ 
colorectal (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 
147 Garon EB, Rizvi NA, Hui R, et al. Pembrolizumab for the treatment of non-small-cell 
lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2015;372:2018–28.
 
148 Robert C, Thomas L, Bondarenko I, et al. Ipilimumab plus dacarbazine for previously 
untreated metastatic melanoma. N Engl J Med 2011;364:2517–26.
 
149 Larkin J, Chiarion-Sileni V, Gonzalez R, et al. Combined nivolumab and ipilimumab or 
monotherapy in untreated melanoma. N Engl J Med 2015;373:23–34.
 
150 Overman MJ, McDermott R, Leach JL, et al. Nivolumab in patients with metastatic 
DNA mismatch repair-deficient or microsatellite instability-high colorectal cancer 
(CheckMate 142): an open-label, multicentre, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol 
2017;18:1182–91.
 
151 Rentsch M, Schiergens T, Khandoga A, et al. Surgery for colorectal cancer – trends, 
developments, and future perspectives. Visc Med 2016;32:184–91.
 
152 Mirnezami R, Moran BJ, Harvey K, et al. Cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal 
chemotherapy for colorectal peritoneal metastases. World J Gastroenterol 
2014;20:14018–32.
 
153 Lee DJ, Sagar PM, Sadadcharam G, et al. Advances in surgical management for 
locally recurrent rectal cancer: How far have we come? World J Gastroenterol 
2017;23:4170–80.
 
154 van Dam RM, Wong-Lun-Hing EM, van Breukelen GJ, et al. Open versus laparoscopic 
left lateral hepatic sectionectomy within an enhanced recovery ERAS® programme 
(ORANGE II-trial): study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. Trials  
2012;13:54.
 
155 ISRCTN registry. LAVA: Liver resection surgery versus thermal ablation for colorectal 
liver metastases. http://www. 
isrctn. 
com/ 
ISRCTN52040363 (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 
156 U.S National Library of Medicine. Chemotherapy and Maximal Tumor Debulking of 
Multi-organ Colorectal Cancer Metastases (ORCHESTRA). https:// 
clinicaltrials. 
gov/ 
ct2/ 
show/ 
NCT01792934 (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 
157 Lawler M, Kaplan R, Wilson RH, et al. Changing the paradigm—multistage multiarm 
randomized trials and stratified cancer medicine. Oncologist 2015;20:849–51.
 
158 Cho M, Carter J, Harari S, et al. The interrelationships of the gut microbiome and 
inflammation in colorectal carcinogenesis. Clin Lab Med 2014;34:699–710.
 
159 Zeuner A, Todaro M, Stassi G, et al. Colorectal cancer stem cells: from the crypt to 
the clinic. Cell Stem Cell 2014;15:692–705.
 
160 McGranahan N, Furness AJ, Rosenthal R, et al. Clonal neoantigens elicit T cell 
immunoreactivity and sensitivity to immune checkpoint blockade. Science 
2016;351:1463–9.
 
161 Le DT, Durham JN, Smith KN, et al. Mismatch repair deficiency predicts response of 
solid tumors to PD-1 blockade. Science 2017;357:409–13.
 
162 Galon J, Costes A, Sanchez-Cabo F, et al. Type, density, and location of immune cells 
within human colorectal tumors predict clinical outcome. Science 2006;313:1960–4.
 
163 Wang X, Yang Y, Huycke MM. Microbiome-driven carcinogenesis in colorectal cancer: 
models and mechanisms. Free Radic Biol Med 2017;105:3–15.
 
164 Whistance RN, Conroy T, Chie W, et al. European organisation for the research and 
treatment of cancer quality of life group. clinical and psychometric validation of the 
EORTC QLQ-CR29 questionnaire module to assess health-related quality of life in 
patients with colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer 2009;45:3017–26.
 
165 Cherny NI, Sullivan R, Dafni U, et al. A standardised, generic, validated approach to 
stratify the magnitude of clinical benefit that can be anticipated from anti-cancer 
therapies: the european society for medical oncology magnitude of clinical benefit 
scale (ESMO-MCBS). Ann Oncol 2015;26:1547–73.
 
166 Wong CK, Guo VY, Chen J, et al. Methodological and reporting quality of 
comparative studies evaluating health-related quality of life of colorectal cancer 
patients and controls: a systematic review. Dis Colon Rectum 2016;59:1073–86.
 
167 Quidde J, Hegewisch-Becker S, Graeven U, et al. Quality of life assessment in 
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer receiving maintenance therapy after first-
line induction treatment: a preplanned analysis of the phase III AIO KRK 0207 trial. 
Ann Oncol 2016;27:2203–10.
 
168 Bours MJ, van der Linden BW, Winkels RM, et al. Candidate predictors of health-
related quality of life of colorectal cancer survivors: a systematic review. Oncologist 
2016;21:433–52.
 
169 Bryant CL, Lunniss PJ, Knowles CH, et al. Anterior resection syndrome. Lancet Oncol 
2012;13:e403–8.
 
170 Andreyev J. Gastrointestinal symptoms after pelvic radiotherapy: a new understanding 
to improve management of symptomatic patients. Lancet Oncol 2007;8:1007–17.
 
171 Battersby NJ, Juul T, Christensen P, et al. Predicting the risk of bowel-related 
quality-of-life impairment after restorative resection for rectal cancer: a multicenter 
cross-sectional study. Dis Colon Rectum 2016;59:270–80.
 
172 Scheer AS, Boushey RP, Liang S, et al. The long-term gastrointestinal functional 
outcomes following curative anterior resection in adults with rectal cancer: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Dis Colon Rectum 2011;54:1589–97.
 
173 Birgisson H, Påhlman L, Gunnarsson U, et al. Late adverse effects of radiation 
therapy for rectal cancer – a systematic overview. Acta Oncol 2007;46:504–16.
 
174 Maris A, Devreese AM, D’Hoore A, et al. Treatment options to improve anorectal 
function following rectal resection: a systematic review. Colorectal Dis 
2013;15:e67–78.
 
175 Lin KY, Granger CL, Denehy L, et al. Pelvic floor muscle training for bowel dysfunction 
following colorectal cancer surgery: a systematic review. Neurourol Urodyn 
2015;34:703–12.
 
176 Visser WS, Te Riele WW, Boerma D, et al. Pelvic floor rehabilitation to improve 
functional outcome after a low anterior resection: a systematic review. Ann 
Coloproctol 2014;30:109–14.
 
177 Glover M, Smerdon GR, Andreyev HJ, et al. Hyperbaric oxygen for patients with 
chronic bowel dysfunction after pelvic radiotherapy (HOT2): a randomised, double-
blind, sham-controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2016;17:224–33.
 
178 Andreyev HJ, Benton BE, Lalji A, et al. Algorithm-based management of patients with 
gastrointestinal symptoms in patients after pelvic radiation treatment (ORBIT): a 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2013;382:2084–92.
 
179 Andreyev HJ, Muls AC, Norton C, et al. Guidance: The practical management of 
the gastrointestinal symptoms of pelvic radiation disease. Frontline Gastroenterol 
2015;6:53–72.
 
180 Rodriguez JL, Hawkins NA, Berkowitz Z, et al. Factors associated with health-
related quality of life among colorectal cancer survivors. Am J Prev Med 
2015;49:S518–S527.
 
181 Demark-Wahnefried W, Rogers LQ, Alfano CM, et al. Practical clinical interventions 
for diet, physical activity, and weight control in cancer survivors. CA Cancer J Clin 
2015;65:167–89.
 
182 Wu W, Guo F, Ye J, et al. Pre- and post-diagnosis physical activity is associated with 
survival benefits of colorectal cancer patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Oncotarget 2016;7:52095–103.
 
183 Soares-Miranda L, Abreu S, Silva M, et al. Cancer survivor study (CASUS) on 
colorectal patients: longitudinal study on physical activity, fitness, nutrition, and its 
influences on quality of life, disease recurrence, and survival. Rationale and design. 
Int J Colorectal Dis 2017;32:75–81.
 
184 Alfano CM, Bluethmann SM, Tesauro G, et al. NCI funding trends and priorities in 
physical activity and energy balance research among cancer survivors. J Natl Cancer 
Inst 2016;108.
 
185 Blanch-Hartigan D, Forsythe LP, Alfano CM, et al. Provision and discussion of 
survivorship care plans among cancer survivors: results of a nationally representative 
survey of oncologists and primary care physicians. J Clin Oncol 2014;32:1578–85.
 
186 Numico G, Pinto C, Gori S, et al. Clinical and organizational issues in the 
management of surviving breast and colorectal cancer patients: attitudes and 
feelings of medical oncologists. PLoS One 2014;9:e101170.
 
187 de Lorenzo F, Haylock P. Preface. Cancer 2013;119(Suppl 11):2089–93.
 
188 Richards M, Corner J, Maher J. The National Cancer Survivorship Initiative: new 
and emerging evidence on the ongoing needs of cancer survivors. Br J Cancer 
2011;105(Suppl 1):S1–4.
 
189 Macmillan Cancer Support. Care after Cancer. htt 
p:/ 
/www.macmi 
llan.org.uk/ 
documents/ 
getinvolve 
d/campaigns/c 
ampa 
igns 
/sur 
vivo 
rship/ 
sur 
vivorshipr 
eport2009. 
pdf (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 
190 El-Shami K, Oeffinger KC, Erb NL, et al. American cancer society colorectal cancer 
survivorship care guidelines. CA Cancer J Clin 2015;65:427–55.
 
191 Global Alliance for Genomics and Health. Enabling genomic data sharing for the 
benefit of human health. https:// 
genomicsandhealth. 
org/ (accessed 08 Sep 2017).
 
192 Siu LL, Lawler M, Haussler D, et al. Facilitating a culture of responsible and effective 
sharing of cancer genome data. Nat Med 2016;22:464–71.
 
193 Lawler M, Haussler D, Siu LL, et al. Sharing clinical and genomic data on cancer – 
the need for global solutions. N Engl J Med 2017;376:2006–9.
 
194 McArt DG, Blayney JK, Boyle DP, et al. PICan: An integromics framework for dynamic 
cancer biomarker discovery. Mol Oncol 2015;9:1234–40.
 
195 Tannock IF, Hickman JA. Limits to precision cancer medicine. N Engl J Med 
2017;376:96–7.
 
196 Power E, Simon A, Juszczyk D, et al. Assessing awareness of colorectal cancer 
symptoms: measure development and results from a population survey in the UK. 
BMC Cancer 2011;11:366.
 
197 Keighley MR, O’Morain C, Giacosa A, et al. Public awareness of risk factors and 
screening for colorectal cancer in Europe. Eur J Cancer Prev 2004;13:257–62.
 
198 Gray SW, Armstrong K, Demichele A, et al. Colon cancer patient information seeking 
and the adoption of targeted therapy for on-label and off-label indications. Cancer 
2009;115:1424–34.
 
199 Brown S, Greenfield D, Thompson J. Knowledge and awareness of long-term and late 
treatment consequences amongst colorectal cancer survivors: a qualitative study. Eur 
J Oncol Nurs 2016;20:191–8.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
 193
Lawler M, et al. Gut 2018;67:179–193. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333
Recent advances in clinical practice
 
200 Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, et al. Developing and evaluating complex 
interventions: the new medical research council guidance. BMJ 2008;337:a1655.
 
201 Moore GF, Audrey S, Barker M, et al. Process evaluation of complex interventions: 
medical research council guidance. BMJ 2015;350:h1258.
 
202 Cancer Research UK. Understanding gpattitudes to cancerpreventing drugs. 
http://www. 
cancerresearchuk. 
org/ 
sites/ 
default/ 
files/ 
understanding_ 
gp_ 
attitudes_ 
to_ 
cancer_ 
preventing_ 
drugs_ 
full_ 
evidence_ 
report. 
pdf (accessed 08 
Sep 2017).
 
203 Glaser AW, Fraser LK, Corner J, et al. Patient-reported outcomes of cancer 
survivors in england 1-5 years after diagnosis: a cross-sectional survey. BMJ Open 
2013;3:e002317.
 
204 McNair AG, Whistance RN, Forsythe RO, et al. Synthesis and summary of patient-
reported outcome measures to inform the development of a core outcome set in 
colorectal cancer surgery. Colorectal Dis 2015;17:O217–229.
 
205 Lawler M, Le Chevalier T, et al. European Cancer Concord (ECC). Lancet Oncol 
2014;15:258–60.
 
206 Kehl KL, Arora NK, Schrag D, et al. Discussions about clinical trials among patients with 
newly diagnosed lung and colorectal cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2014;106 pii: dju216.
 
207 Ciardiello F, Adams R, Tabernero J, et al. Awareness, understanding, and adoption 
of precision medicine to deliver personalized treatment for patients with cancer: 
a multinational survey comparison of physicians and patients. Oncologist 
2016;21:292–300.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://gut.bmj.com/
Gut: first published as 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315333 on 12 December 2017. Downloaded from 
