 Clinical Infectious Diseases
Estimating GBS Disease Worldwide • CID 2017:65 (Suppl 2) • S89
Clinical Infectious Diseases®  2017;65(S2):S89–99
Group B Streptococcal Disease Worldwide for Pregnant 
Women, Stillbirths, and Children: Why, What, and How to 
Undertake Estimates?
Joy E. Lawn,1 Fiorella Bianchi-Jassir,1 Neal J. Russell,1,2 Maya Kohli-Lynch,1,3 Cally J. Tann,1,4 Jennifer Hall,5 Lola Madrid,1,6 Carol J. Baker,7  
Linda Bartlett8, Clare Cutland,9 Michael G. Gravett,10,11 Paul T. Heath,12 Margaret Ip,13 Kirsty Le Doare,12,14 Shabir A. Madhi,9,15 Craig E. Rubens,10,16  
Samir K. Saha,17 Stephanie Schrag,18 Ajoke Sobanjo-ter Meulen,19 Johan Vekemans,20 and Anna C. Seale1,21
1Maternal, Adolescent, Reproductive and Child Health Centre, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, United Kingdom; 2King’s College London, United Kingdom; 3Centre for Child and 
Adolescent Health, School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, United Kingdom; 4Neonatal Medicine, University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom; 
5Department of Reproductive Health Research, University College London Institute for Women’s Health, United Kingdom; 6ISGlobal, Barcelona Centre for International Health Research, Hospital 
Clinic–University of Barcelona, Spain; 7Departments of Pediatrics and Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; 8Department of International Health, Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; 9Medical Research Council: Respiratory and Meningeal Pathogens Research Unit, and Department of Science and Technology/
National Research Foundation: Vaccine Preventable Diseases, University of the Witwatersrand, Faculty of Health Sciences, Johannesburg, South Africa; 10Global Alliance to Prevent Prematurity and 
Stillbirth 11Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Washington, Seattle; 12Vaccine Institute, Institute for Infection and Immunity, St George’s Hospital, University of London and St 
George’s University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom; 13Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chinese University of Hong Kong; 14Centre for International Child Health, 
Imperial College London, United Kingdom; 15National Institute for Communicable Diseases, National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg, South Africa; 16Department of Global Health, University 
of Washington, Seattle; 17Bangladesh Institute of Child Health, Dhaka; 18National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia; 
19Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, Washington; 20World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland; and 21College of Health and Medical Sciences, Haramaya University, Dire Dawa, Ethiopia
Improving maternal, newborn, and child health is central to Sustainable Development Goal targets for 2030, requiring accel-
eration especially to prevent 5.6 million deaths around the time of birth. Infections contribute to this burden, but etiological 
data are limited. Group B Streptococcus (GBS) is an important perinatal pathogen, although previously focus has been primarily 
on liveborn children, especially early-onset disease. In this first of an 11-article supplement, we discuss the following: (1) Why 
estimate the worldwide burden of GBS disease? (2) What outcomes of GBS in pregnancy should be included? (3) What data and 
epidemiological parameters are required? (4) What methods and models can be used to transparently estimate this burden of 
GBS? (5) What are the challenges with available data? and (6) How can estimates address data gaps to better inform GBS interven-
tions including maternal immunization? We review all available GBS data worldwide, including maternal GBS colonization, risk 
of neonatal disease (with/without intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis), maternal GBS disease, neonatal/infant GBS disease, and 
subsequent impairment, plus GBS-associated stillbirth, preterm birth, and neonatal encephalopathy. We summarize our methods 
for searches, meta-analyses, and modeling including a compartmental model. Our approach is consistent with the World Health 
Organization (WHO) Guidelines for Accurate and Transparent Health Estimates Reporting (GATHER), published in The Lancet 
and the Public Library of Science (PLoS). We aim to address priority epidemiological gaps highlighted by WHO to inform poten-
tial maternal vaccination.
Keywords. group B Streptococcus; global burden; stillbirth; neonatal; maternal.
 
Despite remarkable progress for child survival during the 
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) era to 2015 [1], halv-
ing deaths for children aged <5 years, still an estimated 5.9 
million children die per year. Almost half (45%) of these 
deaths are in the first month of life (neonatal period), where 
investment and progress has been much slower [2, 3]. In addi-
tion to the 2.7 million neonatal deaths, an estimated 2.6 mil-
lion third-trimester stillbirths occur each year, but are often 
left out of impact and cost-effectiveness analyses [4]. More 
innovation and investment are required to reduce these 5.3 
million deaths, plus 0.3 million maternal deaths, which also 
occur around the time of birth.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) aim to end pre-
ventable maternal and child deaths by 2030 [5], and include the 
first ever target for newborns, aiming that every country should 
have ≤12 neonatal deaths per 1000 livebirths by 2030 (Table 1) 
[2, 6]. Because these targets are national, the countries with 
the highest mortality risk now, which are mostly in Africa, will 
have to make major shifts in their rates of mortality reduction. 
For example, 49 countries need to at least double their cur-
rent average annual reduction for neonatal mortality rates to 
meet 2030 targets [7]. Investments should be prioritized based 
on the best epidemiological data, including more detailed eti-
ology of infectious causes, and prioritizing strategies that are 
S U P P L E M E N T  A R T I C L E
© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America.  This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted 
reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/cix653
Correspondence: J. E. Lawn, MARCH Centre, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, 
Keppel St, London WC1E 7HT, UK (joy.lawn@lshtm.ac.uk). 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/suppl_2/S89/4589584 by guest on 02 June 2019
 S90 • CID 2017:65 (Suppl 2) • Lawn et al
more likely to reach the poorest families where most of these 
deaths occur.
Worldwide from 2000 to 2015, 9 of the 10 most rapidly 
reducing causes of child death were infections [8]. The fastest 
progress has been made for AIDS deaths in children, reducing 
at 6.7% per year and now down to 103 000 deaths. Crucial to 
this rapid progress were disease burden estimates for all coun-
tries, and targeted interventions with drugs or vaccines, with 
coverage data to monitor progress. Data are critical for public 
health decision making, to prioritize investment in the larg-
est-burden conditions affecting the poorest populations. Yet 
while the poorest and most vulnerable populations have the 
highest risk of most diseases, they also have the least data—the 
“inverse data law.” This particularly applies to the estimated 
600 000 child deaths due to neonatal infections, which is more 
than that for malaria and AIDS combined (Figure 1). Yet data 
Table 1. Progress for Ending Preventable Deaths for Women, Neonates, Children, and Stillbirths
Maternal Deaths
Stillbirths
Neonatal Deaths
Child Deaths (0–59 mo, Including 
Neonatal)
Global numbers of deaths during the Millennium Development Goal era (1990–2015) [1]
1990
0.53 million
Not available
5.1 million
12.7 million
2000
0.44 million
3.2 million
3.9 million
9.8 million
2015
0.33 million
2.6 million
2.7 million
5.9 million
Targets for the Sustainable Development Goal era from 2016 to 2030 [5]
Target
Every country should reduce its maternal 
mortality ratio by at least two-thirds 
from the 2010 baseline, and no country 
should have a rate >140 deaths per 
100 
000 live births (twice the global 
target). The global averagea target of 
maternal mortality ratio should be <70 
maternal deaths per 100 
000 live births
Every country should have 
a stillbirth rate of ≤12 
per 1000 total births. 
This would result in an 
average global neonatal 
mortality rate of 9 per 
1000 total births.
Every country should have 
a national neonatal mor-
tality rate of ≤12 per 1000 
live births. This would 
result in an average global 
neonatal mortality rate of 
9 per 1000 live births.
Every country should have a 
national under-5 mortality rate 
of ≤25 per 1000 live births. 
This would result in an average 
global under-5 mortality rate of 
17
.2 per 1000 live births.
Action plan or strategy 
linked to Sustainable 
Development Goals
Ending preventable maternal mortality
Global Strategy for Women’s, Children’s 
and Adolescents’ Health [61]
Every Newborn Action Plan
Global Strategy for Women’s, Children’s and Adolescents’ 
Health [62]
A Promise Renewed
Global Strategy for Women’s, 
Children’s and Adolescents’ 
Health [63]
Number of deaths in 
2030 if target is meta
Not estimated
1.1 million
0.8 million
2.4 million
Number of countries to 
at least double rate of 
progress
Not estimated
56
49
19
aAssuming same average annual rate of mortality reduction (2000–2015), while taking account of predicted national demographic change.
Sources: World Health Organization (WHO), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Population Fund, World Bank Group, United Nations Population Division. Trends in 
maternal mortality: 1990 to 2015.
Lawn JE, et al [2].
Lawn JE, et al [7].
WHO, UNICEF [62].
United Nations Interagency Group for Child Mortality Estimation. Levels and Trends in Child Mortality 2015.
Figure 1. Causes of deaths for neonates and children aged <5 years in 2015. Source: Liu et al [64].
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/suppl_2/S89/4589584 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Estimating GBS Disease Worldwide • CID 2017:65 (Suppl 2) • S91
are lacking regarding the etiology of these deaths. The current 
global intervention strategy is to use sensitive but nonspecific 
algorithms to identify possible serious bacterial infection and 
then to treat all these neonates and infants with antibiotics 
[9, 10]. With improved diagnostics, targeted treatment could 
be delivered to support care, and reduce use of broad-spec-
trum antibiotics that select for antimicrobial resistance. With 
improved etiological data, targeted interventions, such as pre-
vention by immunization, may also be possible.
Group B Streptococcus (GBS), or Streptococcus agalactiae, is a 
β-hemolytic gram-positive coccus. It can be part of the normal 
human and animal microflora, and was first identified as a path-
ogen in animals, causing bovine mastitis, in 1887 [11]. GBS was 
subsequently identified as a human pathogen causing puerperal 
sepsis in London, United Kingdom, in 1938 [12]. Later, GBS 
emerged as an important cause of neonatal septicemia and men-
ingitis in the United States, with cases increasing from the 1960s 
[13, 14], followed by increases in other high-income contexts, 
such as the United Kingdom, by the 1980s [15]. The reasons for 
the emergence of GBS are unclear; theories have included the 
mechanization of dairy farming increasing the spread of GBS 
[16], a species jump from bovines [17], and/or the spread of a 
virulent GBS clone [18, 19], possibly related to the development 
of tetracycline resistance, with its widespread use [20].
In this article, the first of 11 covering the most comprehen-
sive assessment to date of data regarding disease burden of GBS, 
we address 6 questions that guide the methodological approach 
taken throughout the supplement (Table 2).
QUESTION 1. WHY ESTIMATE 
THE WORLDWIDE 
BURDEN OF GROUP B STREPTOCOCCUS DISEASE?
In high-income contexts, where there is good capture of cases 
and routine laboratory surveillance, S. agalactiae or GBS is now 
well-recognized as one of the leading cause of infant deaths, 
particularly in the early neonatal period (first week). Strategies 
of intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis have been applied to 
address this burden, notably early-onset disease. GBS is also a 
candidate for maternal vaccine development.
However, there remains uncertainty regarding the geo-
graphic distribution of GBS and the reasons why large etiology 
studies in low- and middle-income contexts in the 1990s [21, 
22] and more recently [23] have not identified GBS, whereas 
facility studies from some of the same countries, notably in 
South Africa, Kenya, and The Gambia, reported much higher 
incidence [24–26]. There are particular uncertainties in South 
Asia, where reported differences may be real, or at least partly 
explained by differences in case ascertainment. Gram-negative 
infections dominate in both facility-based [27] and communi-
ty-based [28, 29] studies. Especially in some South Asian set-
tings where most births are at home, and given the high case 
fatality with GBS, deaths may occur before reaching a facility or 
before community workers come to the home [25]. In addition, 
the use of peripartum antibiotics over the counter (which is also 
very high in South Asia) could reduce detection and/or GBS 
disease. Hence, regional differences may be due to challenges 
in case ascertainment, or they may be true epidemiological and 
microbiological variation linked to the emergence of GBS dis-
ease or regional differences in virulence—for example, higher 
prevalence of the most virulent clone, usually associated with 
serotype III [30].
Estimating the burden of disease informs global public health 
policy, exemplified by the annual global burden of disease esti-
mates for 310 diseases and injuries [31]. Systematic and trans-
parent estimates of the worldwide burden of GBS disease are 
required to guide investment in interventions, and specifically 
to be able to assess the potential value of candidate GBS mater-
nal vaccines.
Therefore, we have made extensive attempts to access all data 
available from as many countries as possible—published and 
also unpublished—in collaboration with investigators world-
wide. We report input data and results for the United Nations 
subregions shown in Figure 2.
QUESTION 2. WHAT OUTCOMES OF GROUP B 
STREPTOCOCCUS MATERNAL COLONIZATION 
SHOULD BE CONSIDERED IN ESTIMATES?
For the half-century history of GBS, most focus has been on 
infant invasive disease, particularly early-onset disease in the 
early neonatal period (first week); including how to identify, 
treat, and then how to prevent, primarily with intrapartum 
antibiotic prophylaxis. While early-onset disease is an impor-
tant consequence of maternal GBS colonization, a focus only 
on neonatal and infant disease has missed other important out-
comes and contributors to the burden of GBS disease (Figure 3).
Learning from other global health conditions, the woman 
should be included in her own right as well as to improve out-
comes for her child [32]. Although puerperal sepsis was the 
first clinical syndrome in which GBS was identified as a human 
pathogen, there have been limited reviews focused on maternal 
GBS disease.
GBS-associated stillbirths are also rarely considered. 
Stillbirths are often not included in global monitoring data sys-
tems [7] due to the stigma, which is seen even in high-income 
Table 2. Group B Streptococcus Estimates and Questions to Be Addressed 
to Inform the Methodological Approach Applied
1. Why estimate the worldwide burden of group B Streptococcus (GBS) 
disease?
2. What outcomes of GBS should be considered in estimates?
3. What data and epidemiological parameters are therefore required?
4. What methods and models can be used to transparently estimate this 
burden of GBS?
5. What are the challenges with the available data?
6. How can estimates address data gaps to better inform GBS interventions 
including maternal immunization?
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/suppl_2/S89/4589584 by guest on 02 June 2019
 S92 • CID 2017:65 (Suppl 2) • Lawn et al
contexts, and fatalism regarding prevention [33]. It was not 
until 2017 that the World Health Organization (WHO) offi-
cially asked countries for stillbirth data, alongside other mor-
tality data reporting. Not counting stillbirths is misleading in 
terms of the total burden of GBS disease, and from a family and 
society perspective. The death of an infant in the last weeks of 
pregnancy, or after birth, is a catastrophic event [34]. GBS is a 
cause of stillbirth and, although data are limited, recent studies 
from Kenya and South Africa are available [25, 35].
The classic invasive GBS disease syndromes of sepsis and 
meningitis may overlap with other leading causes of neonatal 
death, such as neonatal encephalopathy. Globally hypoxic insult 
Figure 3. Disease schema for outcomes of perinatal group B Streptococcus. Abbreviations: GBS, group B Streptococcus; NE, neonatal encephalopathy.
Figure 2. Map of United Nations subregions that will be used for reporting input data and results. Borders of countries/territories in map do not imply any political 
statement.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/suppl_2/S89/4589584 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Estimating GBS Disease Worldwide • CID 2017:65 (Suppl 2) • S93
is the most common cause of neonatal encephalopathy [36], but 
infection exposure likely increases the risk of hypoxic damage. 
To date, very few studies have examined the proportion of cases 
of neonatal encephalopathy that are culture positive, including 
for GBS.
In addition, while preterm birth is a known risk factor for 
invasive GBS disease, several studies have suggested that mater-
nal GBS colonization may increase the risk of preterm birth. 
However, published data are somewhat contradictory and 
may inappropriately combine different study designs [37]. The 
WHO and others have highlighted this as a priority for more 
analysis [38], especially now that preterm birth is the leading 
cause of under-5 deaths (Figure 1).
Nonfatal outcomes, particularly impairment and associated 
disability, have consequences for families and societies. The 
Global Burden of Disease study underlines that as mortality 
reduces, the risk of disability among survivors may actually 
form a greater burden than the deaths, and impairment is an 
important consequence of neonatal infection [39]. As GBS is 
a leading contributor to neonatal infection, its contribution to 
this should also be assessed.
Therefore, in this exercise we aim to consider all the relevant 
outcomes from GBS colonization in pregnant women [40], 
maternal GBS disease [41], stillbirths [42], and preterm births 
[43] associated with GBS, neonatal and infant GBS disease [44], 
GBS-associated neonatal encephalopathy [45], and impairment 
after neonatal/infant GBS disease [46]. These outcomes are 
shown in a disease schema (Figure 3) indicating the main path-
way of mother-to-child transmission, and some of the potential 
overlaps, for example, between preterm birth and GBS disease 
in neonates.
The case definitions for the main outcomes of interest are in 
Figure 3; for each we sought a definition including GBS isola-
tion from a sterile site, knowing that this is conservative and 
may undercount cases, as discussed below.
QUESTION 3. WHAT INPUT DATA AND 
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL PARAMETERS ARE 
THEREFORE 
REQUIRED?
The most important principle is to maximize the available data, 
applying explicit inclusion and exclusion criteria. The lack of 
systematic surveillance data, especially for the highest-burden 
countries, means that modeling is inevitable for worldwide esti-
mates. Given the complexity of methods and variable reporting 
approaches, there has been an erosion of public trust in esti-
mates [47]. Hence, to promote transparency, WHO with the 
Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation, Seattle, and some 
independent experts including some authors on this series, have 
published the Guidelines for Accurate and Transparent Health 
Estimates Reporting (GATHER), as a standard for reviewing 
data inputs, biases, and reporting methods [48]. The articles 
in this supplement follow the GATHER checklist through the 
process from data assessment to final publication, including 
open access data and code (Table 3).
To maximize data inputs, we review all published literature on 
GBS worldwide, applying prespecified criteria and case defini-
tions (Figure 3). Databases searched include Medline, Embase, 
the WHO library database (WHOLIS), Scopus, and Literature 
in the Health Sciences in Latin America and the Caribbean 
(LILACS). For each paper, the particular search for GBS disease 
outcome is given according to international guidelines [49]. In all 
papers we used Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) terms related 
to GBS: Streptococcus OR Streptococcal OR Streptococci AND 
(Group AND B) or agalactiae; Streptococcus agalactiae. When 
needed, secondary analyses were requested from authors. In 
addition, searches of trial and study registries were undertaken 
and investigators were approached. Data were abstracted by at 
least 2 people and assessed for biases as described in each of 
the relevant papers. Biases that apply to GBS data generally are 
discussed below and, where specific to a given parameter, are 
covered in the relevant paper. Meta-analyses were undertaken 
using random-effects modeling to estimate pooled measures of 
effect using the DerSimonian and Laird method [50].
QUESTION 4. WHAT MODELS CAN BE USED 
TO 
TRANSPARENTLY ESTIMATE 
THIS BURDEN OF 
GROUP B STREPTOCOCCUS?
Modeling complexity increased during the MDG era, exempli-
fied by the Global Burden of Disease project, where the num-
ber of outcomes, the modeling complexity, and the time load 
increased markedly [37]. Here we will not attempt to summa-
rize the plethora of statistical modeling methodologies, but 
briefly summarize some methodological options for estimating 
the worldwide burden of GBS disease.
For GBS, as with most infections, there is not just one param-
eter but multiple outcomes even in one individual, and the aim is 
to predict this mix of outcomes at the population level. The most 
well-known approaches for infectious disease modeling focus on 
epidemic conditions [51], where transmission rates are high, and 
are based on a dynamic infection compartmental model. The sim-
plest of these is a 3-compartment SIR model as follows: S = num-
ber susceptible, I = number infectious, and R = number recovered 
(immune). For epidemiological exposures around the time of 
birth, which are either noninfections (eg, hypoxia) or where the 
infection is mainly passed from mother to child (including GBS), 
then the main factors affecting cases are the risk at birth and demo-
graphic factors affecting births. In this case, a stable compartment 
model is appropriate and has been used for other estimates of per-
inatal outcomes [52] and operates in 4 steps as follows:
Step 1. Exposure
For a given condition, what is the exposure prevalence at the 
population level (eg, an infection among pregnant women, or a 
blood group type such as rhesus negative)?
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/suppl_2/S89/4589584 by guest on 02 June 2019
 S94 • CID 2017:65 (Suppl 2) • Lawn et al
Step 2. Cases
For exposed pregnant women, risk data are required to predict 
adverse birth outcomes such as stillbirths or preterm births. If 
these risks vary in different geographies or with other comorbid-
ities (eg, human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]), then popula-
tion-specific data would also be required as to how much these 
conditions prevail in the population and how they affect the risk.
Step 3. Deaths
The number of deaths can be estimated from the number of 
cases, given adequate case fatality risk data, and the number of 
maternal deaths from the maternal cases, or neonatal deaths 
from the neonatal cases.
Step 4. Impaired Survivors
A final step can then predict the risk of neurodevelopmental 
impairment among survivors.
In the case of GBS, a stable compartmental approach is the best 
method to achieve the estimates of deaths and disability. This 
can be developed either sequentially or by applying Bayesian 
modeling, such as used in the Global Burden of Disease study 
[53]. A multiple regression model could be an option to esti-
mate the prevalence of maternal GBS colonization by country, 
predicting the national prevalence based on national covariates, 
as an alternative to using reported data by country, or subregion 
[40]. We explore and report this option, which depends on suc-
cessful model fitting [54].
A compartmental modeling approach to estimate the world-
wide burden of GBS would require the following parameters for 
the 4 steps:
Step 1. Exposed: Maternal Colonization With Group B Streptococcus
For the first step of the compartmental model, we begin with 
estimates of live births in 195 countries, and apply maternal 
GBS colonization prevalence for each country or, if not availa-
ble, then meta-analysis for the relevant region.
Step 2. Cases of Group B Streptococcus
For the exposed population of pregnant women in each coun-
try, risk data would be required to predict the number of 
Table 3. Guidelines for Accurate and Transparent Health Estimates Reporting (GATHER)
Item #
Checklist Item
Reported in Paper No.
Objectives and funding
1
Define the indicator(s), populations (including age, sex, and geographic entities), and time period(s) for which estimates 
were made.
 All papers
2
List the funding sources for the work.
 All papers
Data inputs
 For all data inputs from multiple sources that are synthesized as part of the study:
3
Describe how the data were identified and how the data were accessed.
 All papers
4
Specify the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Identify all ad hoc exclusions.
 All papers
5
Provide information on all included data sources and their main characteristics. For each data source used, report reference 
information or contact name/institution, population represented, data collection method, year(s) of data collection, sex 
and age range, diagnostic criteria or measurement method, and sample size, as relevant.
 All papers
6
Identify and describe any categories of input data that have potentially important biases (eg, based on characteristics listed 
in item 5).
 All papers
7
Describe and give sources for any other data inputs.
 All papers
8
Provide all data inputs in a file format from which data can be efficiently extracted (eg, a spreadsheet rather than a PDF), 
including all relevant metadata listed in item 5. For any data inputs that cannot be shared because of ethical or legal rea-
sons, such as third-party ownership, provide a contact name or the name of the institution that retains the right to the data.
 All papers
Data analysis
9
Provide a conceptual overview of the data analysis method. A diagram may be helpful.
 All papers
10
Provide a detailed description of all steps of the analysis, including mathematical formulae. This description should cover, 
as relevant, data cleaning, data preprocessing, data adjustments and weighting of data sources, and mathematical or 
statistical model(s).
 All papers
11
Describe how candidate models were evaluated and how the final model(s) were selected.
[1, 2, 11]
12
Provide the results of an evaluation of model performance, if done, as well as the results of any relevant sensitivity analysis.
[2, 11]
13
Describe methods for calculating uncertainty of the estimates. State which sources of uncertainty were, and were not, 
accounted for in the uncertainty analysis.
[1, 11]
14
State how analytic or statistical source code used to generate estimates can be accessed.
[2, 11]
Results and discussion
15
Provide published estimates in a file format from which data can be efficiently extracted.
[11]
16
Report a quantitative measure of the uncertainty of the estimates (eg, uncertainty intervals).
[11]
17
Interpret results in light of existing evidence. If updating a previous set of estimates, describe the reasons for changes in 
estimates.
[1, 11]
18
Discuss limitations of the estimates. Include a discussion of any modeling assumptions or data limitations that affect inter-
pretation of the estimates.
[1, 11]
Source: [48].
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/suppl_2/S89/4589584 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Estimating GBS Disease Worldwide • CID 2017:65 (Suppl 2) • S95
cases of GBS associated with GBS maternal colonization for 
each of the following outcomes: neonatal/infant invasive GBS 
disease, neonatal encephalopathy with GBS invasive disease, 
maternal sepsis, stillbirth, and preterm birth. To adjust these 
risks, we would also require population-specific data on var-
iables affecting risk such as policy/coverage for intrapartum 
antibiotic prophylaxis, and how much the risk is reduced (or 
increased).
However, for some of these desired risk parameters, the 
compartmental model approach is not feasible. For example, 
research reporting eliminate stillbirths is more recent [7] and 
GBS associated stillbirths is usually reported as a proportion of 
stillbirths with GBS in a sterile site, rather than risk given mater-
nal GBS colonization [42]. Similarly, incidence and risk data are 
rarely available for maternal disease, or neonatal encephalopa-
thy [45] or preterm birth rate [43]. Hence, as detailed in papers 
3, 4, and 5, the parameters sought were the incidence of GBS in 
a sterile site (Figure 3). To estimate the cases, this incidence is 
applied at a country level to the relevant denominator, which 
is national births in 2015 (for maternal GBS disease and GBS-
associated neonatal encephalopathy) or to the specific denomi-
nator (ie, stillbirths or preterm births by country in 2015).
Step 3. Deaths
Based on adequate data for case fatality rates, the number of 
neonatal/infant deaths can be estimated from the neonatal/
infant cases, and the number of maternal deaths from the 
maternal cases. Challenges with accurate, population-based 
case fatality risk data are an important limitation in most com-
partmental models, whether stable or dynamic.
Step 4. Impaired Survivors
Finally, the risk of neurodevelopmental impairment is applied 
to the number of GBS survivors per country, to estimate the 
number of children with disability. This step requires data on 
risk of impairment after GBS disease in neonates/infants, which 
is best derived from cohort studies.
Based on the outcomes to estimate and the parameters 
required (Figure 3), the following 9 articles in this series will 
describe the case definitions and data available (Figure 4). The 
final article will provide details of the estimation methods. 
Uncertainty estimates are made, which is highlighted as an 
imperative in the GATHER statement [48].
As stated by Lord George Box, “All models are wrong, but 
some are useful” [55]. Based on this principle, we will undertake 
sensitivity analyses in each article regarding the key parameters 
being used for estimation, and we will also triangulate results 
where possible, for example, comparing the number of cases 
worldwide and by region and country for neonatal invasive 
disease as found in published literature compared to predicted, 
using the compartmental model outputs.
QUESTION 5. WHAT ARE 
THE CHALLENGES WITH 
THE AVAILABLE DATA?
Modeling cannot overcome lack of data or very biased data. 
With respect to these data gaps and data biases, transparency is 
Figure 4. Overview of the articles in this supplement to estimate the worldwide burden of group B Streptococcus. Abbreviations: EOGBS, early-onset group B Streptococcus; 
GBS, group B Streptococcus; LOGBS, late-onset group B Streptococcus; NE, neonatal encephalopathy; NDI, neurodevelopmental impairment.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/suppl_2/S89/4589584 by guest on 02 June 2019
 S96 • CID 2017:65 (Suppl 2) • Lawn et al
critical, and an important principle in GATHER is to recognize 
and describe biases [48].
In terms of GBS disease (whether in women or children), 
case ascertainment reduces at each stage of the care cascade 
[56], introducing measurement gaps and therefore biases that 
affect accuracy (Figure 5).
Cases That Seek Care
In settings where most births are at home, the majority of ear-
ly-onset cases may be missed. For example, in some parts of 
South Asia, in Ethiopia, and in northern Nigeria, 90% of births 
may be at home. Globally this may be the single greatest source 
of bias in the data, often differentially missing cases in the poor-
est settings. In our estimates, we will take into account for each 
country the proportion of births that are at home, since cases 
among home births are least likely to access care, and most 
likely to die uncounted.
Cases That Are Assessed
In settings where quality of care in hospitals is lacking for neo-
nates and sick young infants, cases may not be assessed, or 
infants may die before being effectively examined or managed. 
In South Africa, although >95% of births are in hospitals, the 
reported incidence for GBS early-onset disease based on pas-
sive surveillance from across all provinces varied from 0.00 
to 1.23/1000 live births, and 0.03 to 1.04/1000 live births for 
late-onset disease [57].
Cases That Have an Appropriate Microbiological Specimen Taken
Even where treatment is delivered, only a small proportion of 
hospital admissions may have investigations. An example is The 
Gambia, where 99% of neonates admitted with suspected infec-
tion did not have a blood culture and even fewer had a lumbar 
puncture [58]. Considering this bias, we will use risk data from 
settings with complete case ascertainment and appropriate 
investigation. The proportion of the world’s 2.6 million still-
births that have a microbiological specimen taken is tiny [7]. In 
our estimates, we use data from studies where most stillbirths 
identified were investigated for GBS, so within these datasets 
the internal bias is lower.
Specimens That Are Appropriately Processed in the Laboratory
In many low-resource contexts, laboratories are only open a 
few hours a day or have limited skilled staff or microbiologi-
cal culture facilities, notably for blood culture. Detection by 
culture is also affected by previous antibiotic treatment, par-
ticularly where there is widespread use of “over the counter” 
antibiotics.
At each point along this cascade, the reduction in case 
ascertainment decreases the observed incidence of GBS dis-
ease, and introduces more bias, and those biases are greatest 
in low-resource settings. Therefore, in this exercise we aim to 
do all that is possible to minimize these biases, or, where this 
is not possible, describe and analyze the direction of bias, as 
follows:
Figure 5. Data cascade for GBS disease showing the gap for care and measurement and the biases at added at each step. Adapted from Fitchett et al [59] and applied to 
the framework of the human immunodeficiency virus identification and treatment cascade. Abbreviation: GBS, group B Streptococcus.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/suppl_2/S89/4589584 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Estimating GBS Disease Worldwide • CID 2017:65 (Suppl 2) • S97
• Increase the input data from as many countries as possible, 
aiming to use national-level data if adequate, otherwise pool-
ing by relevant subregion (Figure 2).
• Collate details for each study/dataset regarding context of 
care seeking, case definitions, and laboratory methods, to 
allow assessment of case ascertainment and bias.
• Adjust where biases are predictable (eg, low sensitivity of 
laboratory detection due to method used) and report both 
adjusted and unadjusted data.
• Apply sensitivity analyses to examine the effect of different 
biases in the data, including varying case definitions.
• Compare estimates from the model with those reported from 
countries with complete or very high case ascertainment.
This examination of the available data also provides insights on 
how to improve research and routine data collection regarding 
GBS. Standardized reporting is critical, as described for neona-
tal infections in the Strengthening Reporting of Observational 
Studies in Epidemiology–Neonatal Infections (STROBE-NI) 
checklist [59] and case definitions, with the Brighton 
Collaborative regarding maternal immunization being espe-
cially relevant [60].
QUESTION 6. HOW CAN ESTIMATES ADDRESS 
DATA GAPS 
TO BETTER INFORM GROUP B 
STREPTOCOCCUS INTERVENTIONS INCLUDING 
MATERNAL IMMUNIZATION?
The potential for maternal vaccines to use in high-, middle- and 
low-income contexts has been highlighted by WHO. The value 
proposition of new vaccines should be based on data. As part of 
a WHO-sponsored technical roadmap regarding GBS vaccine 
development to facilitate decision making by funders, vaccine 
researchers, and industry, improved disease burden and poten-
tial public health impact estimates have been highlighted as an 
important priority [38]. Based on WHO’s scoping, we have prior-
itized the following data gaps to address in this series of articles:
Geographic Data From as Many Countries as Possible
This scoping stated that “the most important gap identified was 
regarding availability and quality of data on disease burden, and 
notably the limited information so far from some of the world’s 
poorest regions” [38]. Therefore, in this exercise we have made 
extensive attempts to identify data from as many countries as 
possible, also involving investigator groups and calls for unpub-
lished data through regional and global networks. The details 
are provided in each article as relevant.
Total Burden With All Relevant Outcomes of Group B Streptococcus 
Disease for Pregnant Women, Stillbirths, and Children
The potential role of vaccines to impact stillbirth and prematu-
rity, and women, as well as to reduce long-term complications 
of invasive infections are major drivers of the estimated health 
and economical vaccine impact.
Serotype Data to Inform Possible Regional Risk Variation and 
Vaccine Design
There were no published systematic assessments of GBS sero-
types worldwide. Differences in geographical distribution of 
specific bacterial serotypes and strains need to be determined 
to guide optimal selection of vaccine targets, and this may 
also help to explain reported regional variation in GBS inva-
sive disease. A future vaccine will need to overcome bacterial 
diversity of capsular polysaccharide serotype or target protein 
polymorphism. The characterization of virulence factors and 
frequency of capsular switching are important considerations. 
Therefore, we have systematically searched for serotypes in the 
GBS data identified regarding maternal colonization, maternal 
GBS infection, and neonatal/infant disease.
Other important data gaps highlighted by WHO are not cov-
ered in this supplement, notably cost-effectiveness analyses. 
In addition, epidemiological outcomes are not translated into 
Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYS). These secondary anal-
yses will be part of later work by WHO and partners on the 
investments required and other benefits from a maternal GBS 
vaccine, such as the reduction in maternal antibiotic exposure. 
The effect on the child’s microbiome is increasingly recognized 
as important. The final article in the series considers what 
would be required for a comprehensive investment case regard-
ing GBS, and current vaccine candidates.
CONCLUSIONS
The lack of etiological data for infections occurring in pregnant 
women, stillbirths, and infants, in the regions where most births 
occur, makes the worldwide burden of GBS one of the great 
“black holes” for public health data worldwide. Other pathogens 
are also important, including the old foes such as syphilis and 
gaps for newer foes like HIV/AIDS where stillbirth data have 
also been neglected. However, among perinatal pathogens, GBS 
presents specific opportunities, with interventions and poten-
tially high-impact innovation, through maternal vaccination. 
The following 9 papers outline the most comprehensive data 
yet, including all relevant outcomes, comprehensive data on 
serotypes, and extensive attempts to highlight gaps and biases 
to also inform data improvement. If indeed a significant pro-
portion of the burden occurs before birth, in terms of stillbirths, 
preterm birth, neonatal encephalopathy, and maternal disease, 
then this evidence should shift the focus from strategies around 
the time of birth, such as intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis , 
to more upstream prevention such as maternal immunization.
Notes
Author contributions. The concept of the estimates and the technical 
oversight of the series was led by J. E. L. and A. C. S. The manuscript was 
written by J. E. L. with A. C. S. and F. B.-J., and the first authors of articles 
2–10 (N. R., J. H., K. L. D., L. M., C. T., M. K.-L.). The GBS Estimates Expert 
Advisory Group (C. J. B., L. B., C. C., M. G. G., P. T. H., M. I., S. A. M., C. E. 
R., S. K. S., S. S., A. S.-t. M., J. V.) provided input to the conceptual process 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/suppl_2/S89/4589584 by guest on 02 June 2019
 S98 • CID 2017:65 (Suppl 2) • Lawn et al
throughout, notably on the disease schema and data inputs. All the authors 
reviewed and provided input to the manuscript.
Acknowledgments. The authors thank Claudia da Silva for administra-
tive assistance and Alegria Perez for coordinating author signatures.
Disclaimer. The findings and conclusions in this work are those of the 
authors, and do not necessarily represent the official position of any of the 
agencies or organizations listed.
Financial support. This supplement was supported by a grant to the 
London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine from the Bill & Melinda 
Gates Foundation (Grant ID: OPP1131158).
Supplement sponsorship. This article appears as part of the supple-
ment “The Burden of Group B Streptococcus Worldwide for Pregnant 
Women, Stillbirths, and Children,” sponsored by the Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation and coordinated by the London School of Hygiene & Tropical 
Medicine.
Potential conflicts of interest. Many contributors to this series have 
received funding for their research from foundations, especially the Bill 
& Melinda Gates Foundation, and several from Wellcome Trust, Medical 
Research Council UK, the Thrasher Foundation, the Meningitis Research 
Foundation, and one individual from the US National Institutes of Health. 
Members of the Expert Advisory Group received reimbursement for travel 
expenses to attend working meetings related to this series. A. S.-t. M. works 
for the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. C. J. B. has served as a member 
of the Presidential Advisory Committee for Seqirus Inc and of the CureVac 
Inc Scientific Advisory Committee, as well as undertaken consultancy work 
for Pfizer Inc. C. C. has received institutional compensation from Novartis 
for conducting GBS studies. P. T. H. has been a consultant to Novartis and 
Pfizer on GBS vaccines but received no funding for these activities. M. I. has 
undertaken sponsored research from Pfizer on pneumococcal disease in 
adults and from Belpharma Eumedica (Belgium) on Temocilin antimi-
crobial susceptibility in Enterobacteriaceae. K. L. D. has received fund-
ing by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to work on research on GBS 
serocorrelates of protection to inform vaccine trials, and travel expenses 
from Pfizer to attend a meeting on an investigator led project on GBS. S. A. 
M. has collaborated on GBS grants funded by Glaxo Smith Kline and by 
Pfizer and received personal fees for being member of its advisory commit-
tee; he has also collaborated on a GBS grant funded by Minervax. All other 
authors report no potential conflicts of interest. All authors have submitted 
the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts 
that the editors consider relevant to the content of the manuscript have been 
disclosed.
References
1. United Nations. Millennium Development Goals and beyond 2015. Available at: 
http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/. Accessed 13 July 2017.
2. Lawn JE, Blencowe H, Oza S, et al; Lancet Every Newborn Study Group. Every 
Newborn: progress, priorities, and potential beyond survival. Lancet 2014; 
384:189–205.
3. Pitt C, Grollman C, Martínez-Álvarez M, Arregoces L, Lawn JE, Borghi J. 
Countdown to 2015: an analysis of donor funding for prenatal and neonatal 
health, 2003–2013. BMJ Global Health 2017; 2.
4. Frøen JF, Friberg IK, Lawn JE, et al; Lancet Ending Preventable Stillbirths 
Series Study Group. Stillbirths: progress and unfinished business. Lancet 2016; 
387:574–86.
5. United Nations. Sustainable Development Goals. Available at: http://www.un.org/
sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/. Accessed 13 July 2017.
6. Chou D, Daelmans B, Jolivet RR, Kinney M, Say L. Ending preventable maternal 
and newborn mortality and stillbirths. BMJ 2015; 351.
7. Lawn JE, Blencowe H, Waiswa P, et al. Stillbirths: rates, risk factors, and accelera-
tion towards 2030. Lancet 2016; 387:587–603.
8. Liu L, Oza S, Hogan D, et al. Global, regional, and national causes of child mor-
tality in 2000 & 2013; with projections to inform post-2015 priorities: an updated 
systematic analysis. Lancet 2015; 385:430–40.
9. Seale AC, Blencowe H, Manu AA, et al. Estimates of possible severe bacterial 
infection in neonates in sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and Latin America for 
2012: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2014; 14:731–41.
10. World Health Organization. Managing possible serious bacterial infection in 
young infants when referral is not feasible. Guidelines and WHO/UNICEF rec-
ommendations for implementation. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO, 2015.
11. Nocard M. Sur une mammite contagieuse des vaches laitieres. Ann Inst Pasteur 
1887; 1: 109–27.
12. Fry RM. Fatal infections by haemolytic Streptococcus group B. Lancet 1938; 
1:100–201.
13. Baker CJ, Barrett FF, Gordon RC, Yow MD. Suppurative meningitis due to strep-
tococci of Lancefield group B: a study of 33 infants. J Pediatr 1973; 82:724–9.
14. Barton LL, Feigin RD, Lins R. Group B beta hemolytic streptococcal meningitis in 
infants. J Pediatr 1973; 82:719–23.
15. Communicable Disease Surveillance Centre London. Neonatal meningitis: a 
review of routine national data 1975–83. BMJ 1985; 290:778–9.
16. Ismail AQ, Yeates DG, Marciano A, Goldacre M, Anthony M. Cow’s milk and 
the emergence of group B streptococcal disease in newborn babies. Neonatology 
2011; 100:404–8.
17. Bisharat N, Crook DW, Leigh J, et al. Hyperinvasive neonatal group B Streptococcus 
has arisen from a bovine ancestor. J Clin Microbiol 2004; 42:2161–7.
18. Arnold KE, Schweitzer JL, Wallace B, et al. Tightly clustered outbreak of group 
A streptococcal disease at a long-term care facility. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
2006; 27:1377–84.
19. Héry-Arnaud G, Bruant G, Lanotte P, et al. Mobile genetic elements provide evi-
dence for a bovine origin of clonal complex 17 of Streptococcus agalactiae. Appl 
Environ Microbiol 2007; 73:4668–72.
20. Da Cunha V, Davies MR, Douarre PE, et al; DEVANI Consortium. Streptococcus 
agalactiae clones infecting humans were selected and fixed through the extensive 
use of tetracycline. Nat Commun 2014; 5:4544.
21. Mulholland E, Ogunlesi OO, Adegbola RA, et al. Etiology of serious infections in 
young Gambian infants. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1999; 18:S56–61.
22. Muhe L, Tilahun M, Lulseged S, et al. Etiology of pneumonia, sepsis and menin-
gitis in infants younger than three months of age in Ethiopia. Pediatr Infect Dis J 
1999; 18:S56–61.
23. Hamer DH, Darmstadt GL, Carlin JB, et al; Young Infants Clinical Signs Study 
Group. Etiology of bacteremia in young infants in six countries. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2015; 34:e1–8.
24. Madhi S, Radebe K, Crewe-Brown H, Frasch CE, Arakere G, Mokhachane M, 
Kimura A. High burden of invasive Streptococcus agalactiae in South African 
infants. Ann Trop Paediatr 2003; 23: 15–23.
25. Seale AC, Koech AC, Sheppard AE, et al. Maternal colonization with Streptococcus 
agalactiae and associated stillbirth and neonatal disease in coastal Kenya. Nat 
Microbiol 2016; 1:16067.
26. Le Doare K, Jarju S, Darboe S, et al. Risk factors for group B Streptococcus colon-
isation and disease in Gambian women and their infants. J Infect 2016; 72:283–94.
27. Investigators 
of 
the 
Delhi 
Neonatal 
Infection 
Study 
Collaboration. 
Characterisation and antimicrobial resistance of sepsis pathogens in neonates 
born in tertiary care centres in Delhi, India: a cohort study. Lancet Glob Health 
2016; 4: e752–60.
28. Zaidi AK, Thaver D, Ali SA, Khan TA. Pathogens associated with sepsis in 
newborns and young infants in developing countries. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2009; 
28:S10–8.
29. Darmstadt GL, Saha SK, Choi Y, et al; Bangladesh Projahnmo-2 (Mirzapur) Study 
Group. Population-based incidence and etiology of community-acquired neona-
tal bacteremia in Mirzapur, Bangladesh: an observational study. J Infect Dis 2009; 
200:906–15.
30. Jones N, Bohnsack JF, Takahashi S, et al. Multilocus sequence typing system for 
group B Streptococcus. J Clin Microbiol 2003; 41:2530–6.
31. Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disabil-
ity for 310 diseases and injuries, 1990–2015: a systematic analysis for the Global 
Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet 2016; 388:1545–602.
32. Rosenfield A, Figdor E. Where is the M in MTCT? The broader issues in mother-
to-child transmission of HIV. Am J Public Health 2001; 91:703–4.
33. Flenady V, Wojcieszek AM, Middleton P, et al; Lancet Ending Preventable 
Stillbirths Study Group; Lancet Stillbirths in High-Income Countries Investigator 
Group. Stillbirths: recall to action in high-income countries. Lancet 2016; 
387:691–702.
34. Heazell AE, Siassakos D, Blencowe H, et al; Lancet Ending Preventable Stillbirths 
Series Study Group; Lancet Ending Preventable Stillbirths Investigator Group. 
Stillbirths: economic and psychosocial consequences. Lancet 2016; 387: 
604–16.
35. Nan C, Dangor Z, Cutland CL, Edwards MS, Madhi SA, Cunnington MC. 
Maternal group B Streptococcus-related stillbirth: a systematic review. BJOG 2015; 
122:1437–45.
36. Tann CJ, Nkurunziza P, Nakakeeto M, et al. Prevalence of bloodstream pathogens 
is higher in neonatal encephalopathy cases vs. controls using a novel panel of real-
time PCR assays. PLoS One 2014; 9:e97259.
37. Valkenburg-van den Berg AW, Sprij AJ, Dekker FW, Dörr PJ, Kanhai HH. 
Association between colonization with Group B Streptococcus and preterm deliv-
ery: a systematic review. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2009; 88:958–67.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/suppl_2/S89/4589584 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Estimating GBS Disease Worldwide • CID 2017:65 (Suppl 2) • S99
38. Kobayashi M, Schrag SJ, Alderson MR, et al. WHO consultation on group B 
Streptococcus vaccine development: report from a meeting held on 27–28 April 
2016. Vaccine 2016; doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.12.029.
39. Seale AC, Blencowe H, Zaidi A, et al. Neonatal severe bacterial infection impair-
ment estimates in South Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, and Latin America for 2010. 
Pediatr Res 2013; 74(suppl 1): 73–85.
40. Russell N, Seale AC, O’Driscoll M, et al. Maternal colonization with group 
B Streptococcus and serotype distribution worldwide: systematic review and 
meta-analyses. Clin Infect Dis 2017; 65(suppl 2):S100–11.
41. Hall J, Hack Adams N, Bartlett L, et al. Maternal disease with group B Streptococcus 
and serotype distribution worldwide: systematic review and meta-analyses. Clin 
Infect Dis 2017; 65(suppl 2):S112–24.
42. Seale AC, Blencowe H, Bianchi-Jassir F, et al. Stillbirth with group B Streptococcus 
disease worldwide: systematic review and meta-analyses. Clin Infect Dis 2017; 
65(suppl 2):S125–32.
43. Bianchi-Jassir F, Seale AC, Kohli-Lynch M, et al. Preterm birth associated with 
group B Streptococcus maternal colonization worldwide: systematic review and 
meta-analyses. Clin Infect Dis 2017; 65(suppl 2):S133–42.
44. Madrid L, Seale AC, Kohli-Lynch M, et al. Infant group B streptococcal disease 
incidence and serotypes worldwide: systematic review and meta-analyses. Clin 
Infect Dis 2017; 65(suppl 2):S160–72.
45. Tann CJ, Martinello K, Sadoo S, et al. Neonatal encephalopathy with group B 
Streptococcus disease worldwide: systematic review, investigator group datasets, 
and meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 2017; 65(suppl 2):S173–89.
46. Kohli-Lynch M, Russell N, Seale AC, et al. Neurodevelopmental impairment in 
children after group B Streptococcus disease worldwide: systematic review and 
meta-analyses. Clin Infect Dis 2017; 65(suppl 2):S190–99.
47. Byass P. In retrospect: global health estimated over two decades. Nature 2017; 
545:421–2.
48. Stevens GA, Alkema L, Black RE, et al; GATHER Working Group. Guidelines 
for accurate and transparent health estimates reporting: the GATHER statement. 
Lancet 2016; 388:e19–23.
49. Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J, et al. The PRISMA statement for reporting 
systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate healthcare interven-
tions: explanation and elaboration. BMJ 2009; 339.
50. DerSimonian R, Laird N. Meta-analysis in clinical trials. Control Clin Trials 1986; 
7:177–88.
51. Vynnycky E, White R. An introduction to infectious disease modelling. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2010.
52. Blencowe H, Vos T, Lee AC, et al. Estimates of neonatal morbidities and disa-
bilities at regional and global levels for 2010: introduction, methods overview, 
and relevant findings from the Global Burden of Disease study. Pediatr Res 2013; 
74(suppl 1):4–16.
53. Vos T, Allen C, Arora M, et al. Global, regional, and national incidence, preva-
lence, and years lived with disability for 310 diseases and injuries, 1990–2015: a 
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet 2016; 
388:1545–602.
54. Seale AC, Bianchi-Jassir F, Russell N, et al. Estimates of the burden of group B 
streptococcal disease worldwide for pregnant women, stillbirths, and children. 
Clin Infect Dis 2017; 65(suppl 2):S200–19.
55. Statistics. Available at: https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Statistics. Accessed 1 August 
2017.
56. Medland NA, McMahon JH, Chow EP, Elliott JH, Hoy JF, Fairley CK. The HIV 
care cascade: a systematic review of data sources, methodology and comparability. 
J Int AIDS Soc 2015; 18:20634.
57. Quan V, Verani JR, Cohen C, et al. Invasive group B streptococcal disease in South 
Africa: importance of surveillance methodology. PLoS One 2016; 11:e0152524.
58. Okomo UA, Dibbasey T, Kassama K, et al. Neonatal admissions, quality of care 
and outcome: 4 years of inpatient audit data from The Gambia’s teaching hospital. 
Paediatr Int Child Health 2015; 35:252–64.
59. Fitchett EJ, Seale AC, Vergnano S, et al; SPRING (Strengthening Publications 
Reporting Infection in Newborns Globally) Group. Strengthening the Reporting 
of Observational Studies in Epidemiology for Newborn Infection (STROBE-NI): 
an extension of the STROBE statement for neonatal infection research. Lancet 
Infect Dis 2016; 16:e202–13.
60. World Health Organization Meeting to Develop Brighton Collaboration 
Definitions of Key Terms Used for Monitoring the Safety of Immunization in 
Pregnancy in Mothers and Newborn Children. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO, 
2014.
61. World Health Organization. Strategies toward ending preventable maternal mor-
tality (EPMM). Available at: http://who.int/reproductivehealth/topics/maternal_
perinatal/epmm/en/. Accessed 13 July 2017.
62. World Health Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund. Every Newborn: 
an action plan to end preventable deaths. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO, 2014. 
Available at: http://www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/topics/newborn/
enap_consultation/en/. Accessed 1 August 2017.
63. United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). Committing to child survival: a 
promise renewed, New York: UNICEF, 2015. Available at: http://files.unicef.org/
publications/files/APR_2014_web_15Sept14.pdf. Accessed 1 August 2017.
64. Liu L, Oza S, Hogan D, et al. Global, regional, and national causes of under-5 
mortality in 2000-15: an updated systematic analysis with implications for the 
Sustainable Development Goals. Lancet 2016; 388:3027–35.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/suppl_2/S89/4589584 by guest on 02 June 2019
