  
1 
 
Research Techniques Made Simple: Workflow for Searching Databases to Reduce 
Evidence Selection Bias in Systemic Reviews 
Laurence Le Cleach, M.D, associate professor, faculty1, Elizabeth Doney, information 
specialist, faculty 2, Kenneth A Katz dermatologist MD, faculty 3, Hywel C Williams, DSc, 
professor, faculty 2, Ludovic Trinquart, PhD, biostatistician, faculty 4 
1Department of Dermatology, AP-HP, Hôpitaux Universitaires Henri Mondor; Université 
Paris-Est; EA EpiDermE, INSERM, Créteil, France 
2Cochrane Skin Group, The University of Nottingham, Centre of Evidence-Based 
Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, UK 
3Department of Dermatology, Kaiser Permanente, San Francisco, California, US 
4Cochrane France; INSERM U1153 METHODS team, Paris, France 
 
E Doney: elizabeth.doney@nottingham.ac.uk,  
KA Katz: kenneth.katz@gmail.com,  
HC Williams: Hywel.Williams@nottingham.ac.uk,  
L Trinquart: ludovic.trinquart@aphp.fr 
 
Corresponding author: Laurence Le Cleach,  
Service de Dermatologie 
Hôpital Henri Mondor 
51 avenue du Maréchal de Lattre de Tassigny 
94010 Créteil 
laurence.lecleach@free.fr 
Phone: +33 1 49 81 25 12 
Fax : +33 1 49 81 25 08 
Conflict of interests: None to declare
  
2 
 
Abstract 
Clinical trials and basic-science studies without statistically significant results are less 
likely to be published than studies with statistically significant results. Systematic reviews and 
meta-analyses that omit unpublished data are at high risk of distorted conclusions. Here, we 
describe methods to search beyond bibliographical databases to reduce evidence selection bias 
in systematic reviews. By searching conference proceedings, unpublished studies may be 
identified. Moreover, clinical trial registries – databases of planned and ongoing trials–, and 
regulatory agency websites – such as the European Medicine Agency (EMA) and the United 
States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) – may provide summaries of efficacy and safety 
data. Primary and secondary outcomes are pre-specified in trial registries, thus allowing the 
assessment of outcome reporting bias by comparison with the trial report. The sources of trials 
data and documents are still evolving, with ongoing initiatives promoting broader access to 
clinical study reports and individual patient data. There is currently no established 
methodology to ensure that the multiple sources of information are incorporated. Nonetheless, 
systematic reviews must adapt to these improvements and cover the new sources in their 
search strategies. 
 
 
  
3 
 
Introduction 
As highlighted in related Research Techniques Made Simple articles, reporting bias 
remains one of the greatest threats to the validity of systematic reviews (2016; Abuabara et 
al., 2012).  
To obtain a fair assessment of the effects of an intervention, systematic reviews of 
interventions for skin diseases should use stringent efforts to include all relevant evidence. An 
exhaustive search of trials is the most important step in systematic review methodology to 
reduce evidence selection bias. Yet many published articles labeled as "systematic reviews" 
search only a fraction of the evidence by limiting the search to one or two convenient 
databases.  
In this article, we describe a workflow for searching sources beyond bibliographical 
databases (Figure). These techniques will be useful for systematic reviewers for planning an 
optimal search strategy and for readers of systematic reviews to judge whether suboptimal 
methods to identify trials may have introduced bias. 
First, find the published trials 
For a systematic review of dermatological interventions, the least one can do is to make 
every effort to identify all published randomized trials. Searching the Cochrane Central 
Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, and EMBASE will likely allow the 
researcher to find the majority of published trials. CENTRAL is particularly important to 
search because it offers a concentrated source of reports of randomized trials. Other 
specialized bibliographical databases may be relevant to specific topics (Online Appendix 1). 
Searching bibliographical databases should follow the methodological principles for 
information retrieval (Lefebvre et al., 2011). In particular, search equations should seek 
increased sensitivity and use ad hoc filters to identify randomized trials (such as the Cochrane 
  
4 
 
Highly Sensitive Search Strategies or filters listed at 
https://sites.google.com/a/york.ac.uk/issg-search-filters-resource/home). Such a search should 
be complemented by screening the reference lists of all selected trials and by searching for 
previous systematic reviews on the same topic and screening the lists of selected trials. 
Next, find the unpublished trials 
About 50% of clinical trial results that are presented at meetings and congresses remain 
unpublished (Scherer et al., 2007). As a consequence, conference abstracts should be searched 
in order to identify trials with unpublished results. Data reported in conference abstracts may 
be not be reliable as full publication, as abstracts may contain preliminary results and may not 
contain sufficient information to assess methodological quality. However, abstracts allow 
documenting the existence of unpublished trials (more specifically, their number and sample 
size), and unpublished outcomes. It allows statistical analysis to gauge the sensitivity of the 
systematic review conclusions to the non-dissemination of these trials.  
Some databases index conference proceedings. However, there is currently no centralized 
registry of abstracts from all conferences. Systematic reviewers most frequently hand search 
or electronically search abstracts made available by the corresponding societies (e.g. 
American Academy of Dermatology, European Society for Dermatological Research, Society 
for Investigative Dermatology, Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology) through 
journal supplements or on their websites. The Cochrane Skin Group has hand searched and 
added to its Specialized Register 42 journals and 28 conference proceedings (Appendix 1). 
The value of trial registries for identifying missing outcome data 
Clinical trial registries - databases of planned and ongoing trials - have become essential 
sources for identifying unpublished trials. In 2005, the International Committee of Medical 
Journal Editors (ICMJE) stated that to be considered for publication, trials need to have been 
  
5 
 
registered in a public ICMJE-approved registry before the beginning of enrollment. 
Systematic review authors can search the World Health Organization International Clinical 
Trials Registry Platform Search Portal, which gathers records of trials registered on 16 data 
providers including clinicaltrials.gov and the European Union (EU) Clinical Trials Register. 
Besides institutional registries, pharmaceutical companies have also developed clinical trial 
registries. When a relevant completed trial is identified but no published article can be 
matched, the systematic review authors can contact the trialists or sponsors to inquire about 
the trial status and ask for results. Some authors have even suggested that only prospectively 
registered trials should be included in meta-analyses because the risk of bias with any other 
form of trials is too great (Roberts et al., 2015). 
Trial registries also allow identifying unreported outcomes since the primary and 
secondary outcomes are documented in each trial record. In cases of publication, one can 
compare the reported outcomes to the registered outcomes and assess selective outcome 
reporting bias, i.e. when negative outcomes remain unreported (Nankervis et al., 2012). An 
example of outcome reporting bias is the Multicenter Selective Lymphadenectomy Trial -1 
study that sought to determine whether wide excision followed by sentinel node biopsy and 
immediate lymphadenectomy for nodal metastases is better than wide excision followed by 
nodal observation for melanoma. The trial produced much valuable data, yet the primary 
outcome of overall survival which was identified in the original trial registration was never 
published in the “final” report. Derivation of overall survival data from the study report 
suggested no overall survival increase for sentinel biopsy plus selective lymphadenectomy 
(Williams, 2015). 
Clinical trial registries may also contain summary trial data. In clinicaltrials.gov, the results 
of applicable clinical trials as defined by Section 801 of the Food and Drug Administration 
Amendments Act are required to be posted and the results of many other trials are also posted 
  
6 
 
voluntarily. For systematic reviewers, it is therefore crucial to use clinicaltrials.gov to find 
trial results, in particular safety information. The European Medicines Agency (EMA) has 
also enacted a proactive publication of summary results through the EU Clinical Trials 
Register. Some pharmaceutical companies have also developed their own clinical trial result 
databases.  
The untapped data buried in regulatory agency websites 
Regulatory agencies, such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the EMA, also 
offer access to additional data through the pharmaceutical companies’ approval applications 
(Online Appendix 2). The FDA provides a searchable catalog of approved drug products. 
These unpublished trial data are directly usable for systematic reviews and their inclusion can 
result in modification of the conclusions. In a re-analysis of 41 meta-analyses based on 
published data only, the addition of unpublished FDA trial data changed the outcome to a 
lower treatment effect in 46.3% of meta-analyses, did not change the estimate in 7.4%, and 
changed the outcome to a larger treatment effect in 46.3% (Hart et al., 2012). The EMA 
publishes European Public Assessment Reports for every medicine application, whether it has 
been granted or refused a marketing authorization. A comparison of FDA and EMA data for 
27 drugs has shown that detailed data on efficacy and harms were available; the information 
were easier to find on the EMA than on the FDA website, however more data on harms were 
available on the latter (Schroll et al., 2015).  
The benefit of searching regulatory agency websites is exemplified in studies on use of 
imiquimod cream for molluscum contagiosum. In a Cochrane review published in 2009, the 
one published trial comparing imiquimod to placebo in 23 patients showed a relative risk of 
3.67 (95% confidence interval [CI] from 0.48 to 28.0) for complete clearance of lesions. 
However, 3 industry-sponsored unpublished trials were included in a FDA’s publicly 
available review (Papadopoulos, 2007). These 3 trials randomized a total of 827 patients. 
  
7 
 
When added to the published trial, the pooled relative risk was 0.93 (95% CI from 0.73 to 
1.19) suggesting that imiquimod is ineffective in that indication.  
Lastly, health technology assessment agencies, through their requests to industry, may 
have access to unpublished data and make them publicly available by publishing benefit 
assessment dossiers online (Online Appendix 1). 
Limitations of statistical diagnosis or correction for bias 
A comprehensive search is even more important when considering that no statistical 
method allows complete documenting or excluding of reporting bias in a systematic review 
with certainty. Asymmetry of the funnel plot may reveal that smaller trials give different 
findings from larger trials. But funnel plot asymmetry has several possible causes, in 
particular heterogeneity, and its presence or absence cannot be equated with the presence or 
the absence of reporting bias. Moreover, many statistical methods have been introduced to 
detect or adjust for reporting bias. But, their use is inappropriate in most meta-analyses 
because of too few trials or excessive heterogeneity (Ioannidis, 2008). 
Potential challenges to handle with multiple sources of data 
Comprehensive searching adds to the resources needed to complete the systematic review, 
but searching some sources may not always yield additional evidence. Among 114 systematic 
reviews that searched FDA documents, unpublished data was available from the FDA for 
17%. (McDonagh et al., 2013)The extent and depth of the search strategy might be adapted 
according to the review question and context. For example, in a systematic review of a drug 
for an unapproved indication, searching the FDA documents is unlikely to provide 
unpublished evidence. But attributes of reviews that will most likely benefit from searching 
additional sources such as the FDA are still unknown.  
  
8 
 
Another challenge is that multiple reports for the same trial may be identified and 
discrepancies for results can exist between different sources (Hartung et al., 2014). Systematic 
review authors then have to link all reports of the same trial together, and decide and describe 
clearly which report is to be chosen as the primary source of information. Although there is no 
established consensus, an order of priority may be pre-specified. For instance, FDA-prepared 
documents may be considered as more reliable than journal articles. In fact, FDA statistical 
reviewers reanalyze raw data, while journal articles may be affected by selective reporting of 
a subset of statistical analyses based on the results. 
The way forward 
Trial registration is now a legal requirement in the United States, EU, and many countries, 
but compliance is far from perfect. Enhanced transparency is encouraged by the alltrials.net 
campaign, an initiative of several organizations such as Cochrane, the BMJ and the Centre for 
Evidence-Based Medicine calling for registration and reporting of results of all clinical trials. 
Another project, OpenTrials.net, will aggregate information from a wide variety of existing 
sources to provide a comprehensive picture of all the data and documents available for all 
trials. One key source of trial data are clinical study reports, which are prepared by trial 
sponsors and transmitted to regulators. These documents are still infrequent, but are becoming 
increasingly publicly available through requests to the EMA and FDA. Moreover, the goal to 
obtain reporting transparency will be reached as prominent journals continue to establish clear 
requirements for making trial data available (Taichman et al., 2016). The 
clinicalstudydatarequest.com and the Yale University Open Data Access websites allow 
researchers to request access to individual patient data and supporting documents from 
industry-sponsored clinical trials. Moreover, the European Medicines Agency policy has 
released guidance on the publication of clinical data for medicinal products. This policy has 
  
9 
 
entered into force in 2015 for the publication of clinical reports but, in a later stage, it will 
also concern the publication of individual patient data. 
Systematic reviews must adapt to these improvements and cover the multiple new 
information sources in their search strategies. Conference proceedings, clinical trial registries, 
regulatory agency reviews, and health technology assessment reports contain unpublished 
evidence that can be essential in resolving publication bias and selective outcome reporting. 
  
10 
 
References 
2016. Assessing Risk of Bias in Systematic Reviews. J Invest Dermatol. 
Abuabara K, Freeman EE, Dellavalle R: 2012. The role of systematic reviews and meta-
analysis in dermatology. J Invest Dermatol 132:e2. 
Hart B, Lundh A, Bero L: 2012. Effect of reporting bias on meta-analyses of drug trials: 
reanalysis of meta-analyses. BMJ 344:d7202. 
Hartung DM, Zarin DA, Guise JM, McDonagh M, Paynter R, Helfand M: 2014. Reporting 
discrepancies between the ClinicalTrials.gov results database and peer-reviewed publications. 
Ann Intern Med 160:477-483. 
Ioannidis JP: 2008. Interpretation of tests of heterogeneity and bias in meta-analysis. J Eval 
Clin Pract 14:951-957. 
Lefebvre C, Manheimer E, Glanvill J: 2011. Chapter 6: Searching for Studies, in: Higgins J, 
Green S eds., Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions:  Version 5.1.0 
(updated March 2011),  The Cochrane Collaboration. 
McDonagh MS, Peterson K, Balshem H, Helfand M: 2013. US Food and Drug 
Administration documents can provide unpublished evidence relevant to systematic reviews. J 
Clin Epidemiol 66:1071-1081. 
Nankervis H, Baibergenova A, Williams HC, Thomas KS: 2012. Prospective registration and 
outcome-reporting bias in randomized controlled trials of eczema treatments: a systematic 
review. J Invest Dermatol 132:2727-2734. 
Papadopoulos E: 2007. Clinical Review NDA 20723 Aldara, Imiquimod 5% Cream. 
Roberts I, Ker K, Edwards P, Beecher D, Manno D, Sydenham E: 2015. The knowledge 
system underpinning healthcare is not fit for purpose and must change. BMJ 350:h2463. 
Scherer RW, Langenberg P, von Elm E: 2007. Full publication of results initially presented in 
abstracts. Cochrane Database Syst Rev:MR000005. 
Schroll JB, Abdel-Sattar M, Bero L: 2015. The Food and Drug Administration reports 
provided more data but were more difficult to use than the European Medicines Agency 
reports. J Clin Epidemiol 68:102-107. 
Taichman DB, Backus J, Baethge C, et al.: 2016. Sharing Clinical Trial Data: A Proposal 
From the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors. Ann Intern Med 164:505-506. 
Williams HC: 2015. Place your bet and show us your hand. Br J Dermatol 173:1104-1105. 
 
  
11 
 
Summary points 
- Trials without statistically significant results are less likely to be published than trials that 
show apparent differences (publication bias). Moreover, trial outcomes that do not support the 
use of the new treatment are less likely to be published than those that do support its use 
(outcome reporting bias). 
- Systematic reviews and meta-analyses that omit unpublished data are at high risk of 
biased conclusions. To increase their validity, systematic reviews should rely on a thorough 
search for published and unpublished trials. 
- The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE, and EMBASE should be 
searched for published trials. 
- Sources for finding unpublished trials have expanded recently. Conference proceedings, 
clinical trial registries, regulatory agency reviews, and health technology assessment reports 
should be searched for unpublished trials. 
- A limitation is that there is no standard methodology yet to decide which sources of 
unpublished trials to search and how to search them. 
  
12 
 
Multiple choice questions 
1) Which of the following would result in publication bias? 
a. Trials with negative results were not published and could not be selected in the 
systematic review 
b. Trials with statistically significant results were cited more often by subsequent articles, 
increasing the likelihood of being selected in the systematic review 
c. Trials were published in languages other than English and could not be selected in the 
systematic review 
d. Trials were published more than once, increasing the likelihood of the trial being 
selected in the systematic review 
e. All of the above 
 
2) Searching beyond bibliographical databases for a systematic review potentially reduces 
a. Publication bias 
b. Validity of the systematic review 
c. Outcome reporting bias 
d. Labor intensity of the search 
e. A and C 
 
3) The sources to search for published trials include 
a. MEDLINE only 
b. the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials 
c. the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
d.  EMBASEe. B C and D 
  
13 
 
 
4) The sources to search for unpublished trials include 
a. clinicaltrials.gov 
b. alltrials.net 
c. Drugs@FDA 
d. Proceedings to the American Academy of Dermatology Annual Meeting 
e. A, C and D 
 
5) Some limitations of sources of unpublished trials are 
a. Clinical trial registries include ongoing and completed trials and potentially posted trial 
results 
b. Reviews obtained from regulatory agencies typically lack sufficient detail to assess the 
risk of bias for a trial 
c. Conference abstracts are not restricted by treatment type (pharmacological and non 
pharmacological)  
d. Searching conference abstracts, clinical trial registries, regulatory and health technology 
assessment agency website is burdensome 
e. B and D 
 
Answers: 
1) Only a. corresponds to publication bias (the whole trial results are made or not made 
publicly available according to the nature and direction of the results); b. corresponds to 
citation bias (citation or non-citation of a trial report, depending on the nature and direction of 
the results); c. corresponds to language bias (the publication of trial results in a particular 
  
14 
 
language) and d. corresponds to duplicate publication bias (multiple publication of trial 
results). e. All of the above correspond to reporting biases 
2) a. and c. Searching sources such as conference proceedings, clinical trial registries, or 
regulatory agency websites may allow identifying trials with unpublished results, thus 
reducing publication bias; in particular, primary and secondary outcomes are pre-specified in 
clinical trial registries, thus allowing reducing outcome reporting bias. 
3) b. c. and d. Searching MEDLINE only is insufficient as many relevant published trials 
are indexed in other databases such as EMBASE and CENTRAL . Searching c. would allow 
identifying previous systematic reviews on the same topic and screening the lists of selected 
trials. 
4) a., c. and d correspond respectively to a clinical trial registry, a regulatory agency 
website, and a conference proceedings repository. d. corresponds to the website of an 
initiative calling for registration and reporting of results of all clinical trials 
5) b. and d. Reviews obtained from regulatory agencies typically include few details about 
the trial methodology itself but they can be complemented with information from the trial 
protocol or a journal article. Another limitation is that comprehensive searching adds to the 
resources needed to complete the systematic review 
  
15 
 
Figure: Summary Workflow for Searching Databases in a Systemic Review 
A Cochrane systematic review about oral antiviral therapy for prevention of genital herpes 
outbreaks in immunocompetent and nonpregnant patients is used as an illustration of this 
workflow (Le Cleach et al. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;8:CD009036. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD009036.pub2). Details can be found in Online Appendix 1 and a 
tutorial to search FDA drug approval packages and EMA public assessment reports can be 
found in Online Appendix 2 
  
16 
 
A. First, find the published trials
1) Bibliographical databases (CENTRAL, 
MEDLINE, EMBASE)
2) Reference lists of all selected trials
3) Systematic review databases (Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 
Database of Abstracts of Reviews of 
Effects)
“We searched a range of bibliographical 
databases, including the Cochrane Central 
Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL); 
the specialized registers of the Cochrane 
Infectious Diseases Group, the Cochrane 
Skin Group, and the Cochrane Sexually 
Transmitted Infections Group; MEDLINE, 
EMBASE, and LILACS, with no restriction 
on language or date. […] We screened the 
reference lists of all selected trials.
Workflow
Example from Cochrane review
CD009036 on genital herpes
B. How to find the unpublished trials
1) Conference abstracts
2) Clinical trial registries and results                  
databases
3) Contact trialists and sponsors
4) Industry trial registries and results 
databases
C. The untapped data buried in 
regulatoryagencywebsites
1) Regulatoryagency online databases
2) Healthtechnologyassessmentagencies
“We contacted the main authors in the field to 
identify any additional published or unpublished 
data. We searched the proceedings of the 
following conferences: European Congress 
International Union Against Sexually 
Transmitted Infections (IUSTI), […]. We 
contacted the pharmaceutical companies […] 
and searched the clinical trial results database 
of each company to […] identify ongoing and 
unpublished trials. We also searched the 
search portal of the World Health Organization 
International Clinical Trials Registry Platform.”
“We searched reviews submitted to the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for 
drug registration.”
 
 
