 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / September 2, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 34 
917
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
On August 30, 2016, this report was posted as an MMWR 
Early Release on the MMWR website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr). 
Congenital infection with Zika virus causes microcephaly 
and other brain abnormalities (1). Hearing loss associated with 
other congenital viral infections is well described; however, 
little is known about hearing loss in infants with congenital 
Zika virus infection. A retrospective assessment of a series of 
70 infants aged 0–10 months with microcephaly and labora-
tory evidence of Zika virus infection was conducted by the 
Hospital Agamenon Magalhães in Brazil and partners. The 
infants were enrolled during November 2015–May 2016 
and had screening and diagnostic hearing tests. Five (7%) 
infants had sensorineural hearing loss, all of whom had severe 
microcephaly; however, one child was tested after receiving 
treatment with an ototoxic antibiotic. If this child is excluded, 
the prevalence of sensorineural hearing loss was 5.8% (four 
of 69), which is similar to that seen in association with other 
congenital viral infections. Additional information is needed 
to understand the prevalence and spectrum of hearing loss 
in children with congenital Zika virus infection; all infants 
born to women with evidence of Zika virus infection during 
pregnancy should have their hearing tested, including infants 
who appear normal at birth.
The most well-described feature of congenital Zika syndrome 
is microcephaly (2,3). Clinical aspects appear to be predomi-
nantly neurologic, with neuroimaging showing calcifications 
between cortical and subcortical zones, cortical development 
errors, and pachygyria/agyria (2–4). In addition to the neu-
rologic manifestations, ophthalmic (5) and orthopedic (1) 
lesions have been described as a component of the syndrome. 
A single study in Brazil investigated auditory function among 
23 neonates with microcephaly and presumed congenital Zika 
virus infection, using otoacoustic emissions testing without 
a confirmatory examination, and found 9% with auditory 
deficits (4). In all of the studies described, Zika virus infec-
tion was a diagnosis of exclusion because, at the time, specific 
testing for Zika virus was not readily available. Hearing loss 
is a well established feature of other congenital infections, 
including cytomegalovirus (CMV), rubella, toxoplasmosis, 
herpes simplex, and syphilis. In these syndromes, the hearing 
loss is sensorineural, usually bilateral, and severe or profound; 
it is often undetectable at birth, and sometimes it is progressive 
or fluctuating (6,7).
During November 2015–May 2016, as part of the protocol for 
evaluation of children who were born with microcephaly during 
the Zika virus disease epidemic, 150 children were referred to 
Hospital Agamenon Magalhães, a reference center for diagnosis 
of hearing loss and hearing rehabilitation in Pernambuco, Brazil; 
the 23 children previously evaluated in Pernambuco (4) were 
not part of this cohort. This report is a retrospective analysis 
of hearing assessments in 70 infants aged 0–10 months with 
microcephaly and laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection 
evaluated during that time. Zika virus–associated microcephaly 
was defined as head circumference ≤32 cm for term newborns 
(gestational age at birth 37 weeks to 41 weeks and 6 days), or at 
least two standard deviations below the mean for gestational age 
and sex using the Fenton curve for preterm newborns (8), with 
the characteristic radiologic findings from cranial computerized 
tomography or magnetic resonance imaging, and laboratory 
confirmation of Zika virus by a positive Zika virus-specific 
immunoglobulin M (IgM) capture enzyme-linked immuno-
sorbent assay (ELISA) performed on cerebrospinal fluid (9).* 
Other infectious causes of congenital sensorineural hearing loss, 
including CMV, toxoplasmosis, herpes simplex, and syphilis, 
were excluded by serologic testing of infants and their mothers. 
Information was collected concerning the presence and timing 
of rash during pregnancy and on maternal or perinatal risk fac-
tors for congenital hearing loss, such as alcohol consumption, 
familial hearing loss, ototoxic drug exposure, birth trauma, and 
postnatal infections. The degree of microcephaly was evaluated, 
with severe microcephaly defined as head circumference at 
birth of at least three standard deviations below the mean for 
gestational age and sex.
Auditory evaluation was carried out by screening and 
diagnostic tests as recommended by the American Academy 
of Pediatrics’ Joint Committee on Infant Hearing (10). The 
screening test consisted of measurement of the short latency 
auditory brainstem response (ABR) to click stimuli, and was 
considered to be normal when wave V (the fifth and most 
prominent and consistent wave) was identified in two con-
secutive averaged waveforms at 35 decibels normal hearing 
level (dB nHL). If the first screening test was not normal, 
it was repeated approximately 1 month later. If the second 
test also indicated hearing loss, a diagnostic confirmatory 
Hearing Loss in Infants with Microcephaly and Evidence of Congenital Zika 
Virus Infection — Brazil, November 2015–May 2016
Mariana C. Leal, PhD1,2; Lilian F. Muniz, PhD2; Tamires S.A. Ferreira, MD1; Cristiane M. Santos, MD1; Luciana C. Almeida2;  
Vanessa Van Der Linden, MD3,4; Regina C.F. Ramos, MD5; Laura C. Rodrigues, PhD5; Silvio S. Caldas Neto, PhD2
* Used in accordance with the CDC emergency use authorization protocol.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
918 
MMWR / September 2, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 34
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
frequency-specific ABR was conducted, in which the stimuli 
were tone bursts at frequencies of 500 and 2,000 Hz. The 
diagnosis of hearing loss was confirmed if hearing thresholds 
exceeded 25 dB nHL. No behavioral auditory testing was 
performed. Conductive hearing loss was not considered to 
be related to Zika virus infection because the hearing impair-
ment caused by congenital viral infections is sensorineural. 
All children considered normal on hearing evaluation will be 
regularly assessed for evidence of late-onset hearing impair-
ment. Associations between sensorineural hearing loss and 
presence of maternal rash during pregnancy, timing of maternal 
rash during pregnancy, and severe microcephaly were analyzed 
using contingency tables and tested using Fisher’s exact test, 
with statistical significance defined as p<0.05. Although all 
investigations were carried out as part of routine clinical 
care, and human subjects review was not required, the proto-
col was submitted for ethical review and approved by Hospital 
Agamenon Magalhães.
The mean age at the first auditory testing was 114 ± 
59.1 days (range = 16–315 days, median = 97 days). Among 
all 70 infants, 16 (22.8%) failed the first screening test in at 
least one ear; among these, eight failed the repeat test and 
were evaluated by frequency-specific ABR. The diagnosis of 
hearing impairment was confirmed by ABR in seven (10%) 
children, including two with conductive hearing loss and five 
with sensorineural hearing loss. Sensorineural hearing loss was 
bilateral in three children and unilateral in two. One child with 
bilateral profound sensorineural hearing loss had been treated 
for sepsis with intravenous amikacin, an antibiotic with known 
ototoxicity, before the first test. A second child with bilateral 
profound sensorineural hearing loss had a twin brother with 
normal head circumference and cerebrospinal fluid negative 
for Zika-specific IgM. A third infant with sensorineural hear-
ing loss had moderate impairment on the left and profound 
impairment on the right. One of the two infants with unilateral 
sensorineural hearing loss had mild impairment, and the other 
had profound impairment.
Information on presence of rash during pregnancy was 
obtained from 63 mothers, 54 (86%) of whom reported a 
rash during pregnancy (Table). Among these 54 mothers, 
41 (76%) experienced the rash during the first trimester. The 
mothers of four infants with confirmed sensorineural hearing 
loss, including the one infant treated with amikacin, reported 
having had a rash during the first 3 months of pregnancy; the 
mother of the fifth infant with confirmed sensorineural hear-
ing loss reported having had a rash in the fourth month of 
pregnancy. Timing of maternal rash during pregnancy did not 
differ between infants with and without sensorineural hearing 
loss (p = 0.64). Information needed to determine the degree 
of microcephaly was available for 65 (93%) infants, among 
whom 44 (68%) had severe microcephaly; all five children 
with sensorineural hearing loss were in this group; however, 
no significant association was detected between the presence of 
sensorineural hearing loss and severe microcephaly (p = 0.55).
Discussion
In this report of complete auditory function evaluation in 
a series of 70 children with microcephaly and laboratory evi-
dence of congenital Zika virus infection, five (7.1%) infants 
had sensorineural hearing loss. The hearing loss varied in 
severity and laterality, which has been reported in hearing loss 
associated with other congenital infections (6,7). If the one 
infant with bilateral profound sensorineural hearing loss who 
had been treated with amikacin (a known ototoxic antibiotic) 
before the hearing testing is excluded, the proportion of infants 
with sensorineural hearing loss was 5.8% (four of 69). This 
proportion, although lower than the 9% reported from a 
small sample of newborns with microcephaly associated with 
presumed Zika-virus infection tested by otoacoustic emissions 
(4), is within the range (6%–65%) reported for other congeni-
tal viral infections (6,7). In the majority of cases of hearing 
loss associated with congenital viral infection, the damage to 
the auditory system is within the cochlea (7). It is likely that 
TABLE. Number of infants with microcephaly and laboratory evidence 
of congenital Zika virus infection (N = 70), by hearing test status, and 
selected characteristics — Brazil, November 2015–May 2016
Characteristic (number with 
information available)
No hearing loss  
or conductive 
hearing loss  
(n = 65) No. (%)
Sensorineural 
hearing loss  
(n = 5) No. (%)
Gestational age at birth 
(n = 59)
(n = 5)
37–41 weeks (term)
50 (85)
5 (100)
<37 weeks (preterm)
8 (14)
0 (—)
≥42 weeks (postterm)
1 (2)
0 (—)
Self-reported rash during pregnancy
(n = 58)
(n = 5)
Yes
49 (84)
5 (100)
No
9 (16)
0 (—)
Timing of rash during pregnancy
(n = 49)
(n = 5)
First trimester
37 (76)
4 (80)
Second trimester
10 (20)
1 (20)
Third trimester
2 (4)
0 (—)
Infant sex
(n = 65)
(n = 5)
Male
36 (55)
3 (60)
Female
29 (45)
2 (40)
Degree of microcephaly 
(n = 60)
(n = 5)
Severe (>3 SD below mean for 
gestational age)
39 (65)
4 (100)
Other (≤3 SD below mean for 
gestational age)
21 (35)
0 (—)
Age at testing (days)
(n = 70)
(n = 5)
Mean
114
105
Median
98
60
SD
59
57
Range
16–315
36–171
Abbreviation: SD = standard deviation.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / September 2, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 34 
919
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
similar lesions account for the hearing deficit in children with 
congenital Zika virus infection, although histologic studies 
are needed to confirm this. However, a concomitant central 
origin cannot be discounted, and behavioral auditory evalua-
tion might provide additional information.
The findings in this report are subject to at least two limi-
tations. First, auditory behavioral tests, in which an infant’s 
responses (e.g., quieting, eye-widening, or startle) to various 
calibrated sounds are recorded, and which can complement the 
hearing evaluation and provide information about processing 
of auditory signals, were not used. Second, this series includes 
only children with microcephaly. It is possible that the full 
spectrum of congenital Zika virus infection includes children 
without microcephaly, but with auditory deficits, as occurs 
in congenital rubella and CMV infections, in which children 
born with no apparent structural anomaly can be found to 
have hearing loss at birth or later in life.
Although no statistically significant associations of hear-
ing loss with timing of rash during pregnancy and degree of 
microcephaly were detected, sensorineural auditory impair-
ment occurred predominantly in infants whose mothers had a 
rash illness during the first trimester of pregnancy, and all the 
infants with sensorineural hearing loss had severe microceph-
aly. Therefore, severe microcephaly in infants with evidence 
of congenital Zika virus infection should be considered a risk 
factor for auditory impairment.
The prevalence of progressive hearing loss associated with 
congenital Zika virus infection is not known. To elucidate the 
full spectrum of hearing loss in infants with congenital Zika virus 
infection, testing and follow-up of all children born to women who 
had Zika virus infection during pregnancy, including infants with 
no apparent anomalies at birth, is needed. Sensorineural hearing 
loss should be considered part of the spectrum of clinical findings 
associated with congenital Zika virus infection, and congenital 
Zika virus infection should be considered a risk factor for hearing 
loss in auditory screening programs. Children with evidence of 
congenital Zika virus infection who have normal initial screening 
tests should receive regular follow-up, because onset of hearing 
loss could be delayed and the loss could be progressive.
Acknowledgments
Marli Tenório, MD, Ernesto Marques, MD, Virology and 
Experimental Therapy Department, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, 
Pernambuco, Brazil.
 1Hospital Agamenon Magalhães; 2Federal University of Pernambuco; 
3Association for Assistance of Disabled Children; 4Oswaldo Cruz University 
Hospital; 5London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
Corresponding author: Mariana C. Leal, marianacleal@hotmail.com.
References
 1. Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA, Petersen LR. Zika virus 
and birth defects—reviewing the evidence for causality. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:1981–7.
 2. Schuler-Faccini L, Ribeiro EM, Feitosa IML, et al. Possible association 
between Zika virus infection and microcephaly. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2016;65:59–62. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6503e2
 3. Aragão MFV, Van der Linden V, Brainer-Lima AM, et al. Clinical features 
and neuroimaging (CT and MRI) findings in presumed Zika virus related 
congenital infection and microcephaly: retrospective case series study. BMJ 
2016;353:i1901. http://www.bmj.com/content/353/bmj.i1901
 4. Microcephaly Epidemic Group. Microcephaly in infants, Pernambuco 
State, Brazil, 2015. Emerg Infect Dis 2016;22:1090–3. http://wwwnc.
cdc.gov/eid/article/22/6/16-0062_article
 5. Ventura CV, Maia M, Bravo Filho V, Gois AL, Belfort R Jr. Zika virus 
in Brazil and macular atrophy in a child with microcephaly. Lancet 
2016;387:228. http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/
PIIS0140-6736(16)00006-4/abstract
 6. Goderis J, De Leenheer E, Smets K, Hoecke HV, Keymeulen A, 
Dhoogeet I. Hearing loss and congenital CMV infection: a systematic 
review. Pediatrics 2014;134:972–82. http://pediatrics.aappublications.
org/content/134/5/972
 7. Cohen BE, Durstenfeld A, Roehm PC. Viral causes of hearing loss: 
a review for hearing health professionals. Trends Hear 2014;18. 
pii: 2331216514541361
 8. Brazilian Ministry of Health. Protocol for monitoring and response to 
microcephaly occurrence relating to ZikaV infection [Portuguese]. http://
www.combateaedes.saude.gov.br/images/sala-de-situacao/Microcefalia-
Protocolo-de-vigilancia-e-resposta-10mar2016-18h.pdf
 9. Cordeiro MT, Pena LJ, Brito CA, Gil LH, Marques ET. Positive IgM for 
Zika virus in the cerebrospinal fluid of 30 neonates with microcephaly 
in Brazil. Lancet 2016;387:1811–2.
 
10. American Academy of Pediatrics, Joint Committee on Infant Hearing. 
Year 2007 position statement: principles and guidelines for early hearing 
detection and intervention programs. Pediatrics 2007;120:898–921.
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Congenital Zika virus infection is characterized by microcephaly 
and other abnormalities of the brain and eye; orthopedic 
lesions have also been documented. While the full clinical 
spectrum of the syndrome is not yet known, the neurologic 
damage and corresponding radiologic brain imaging have been 
well described. Other congenital infections can cause hearing 
loss, which is diagnosed at birth or during later follow-up; 
however, few data exist regarding hearing loss associated with 
confirmed congenital Zika virus infection.
What is added by this study?
Congenital infection with Zika virus appears to be associated 
with sensorineural hearing loss. Among 70 children with 
microcephaly and laboratory evidence of congenital Zika virus 
infection, four of 69 (5.8%) were found to have sensorineural 
hearing loss without other potential cause.
What are the implications for public health practice?
Congenital infection with Zika virus should be considered a risk 
factor for hearing loss. Children with evidence of congenital 
Zika virus infection who have normal initial screening tests 
should receive regular follow-up, because onset of hearing loss 
associated with other congenital viral infections can be delayed 
and the loss can be progressive.
