 Comparing on-road real-time simultaneous in-cabin and outdoor 
particulate and gaseous concentrations for a range of ventilation 
scenarios
Anna Leavey1, Nathan Reed1, Sameer Patel1, Kevin Bradley1, Pramod Kulkarni2, and Pratim 
Biswas1,*
1Aerosol and Air Quality Research Laboratory, Department of Energy, Environmental & Chemical 
Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri 63130, USA
2CDC/NIOSH, Cincinnati, OH 45213, USA
Abstract
Advanced automobile technology, developed infrastructure, and changing economic markets have 
resulted in increasing commute times. Traffic is a major source of harmful pollutants and 
consequently daily peak exposures tend to occur near roadways or while traveling on them. The 
objective of this study was to measure simultaneous real-time particulate matter (particle numbers, 
lung-deposited surface area, PM2.5, particle number size distributions) and CO concentrations 
outside and in-cabin of an on-road car during regular commutes to and from work. Data was 
collected for different ventilation parameters (windows open or closed, fan on, AC on), whilst 
traveling along different road-types with varying traffic densities. Multiple predictor variables 
were examined using linear mixed-effects models. Ambient pollutants (NOx, PM2.5, CO) and 
meteorological variables (wind speed, temperature, relative humidity, dew point) explained 5–44% 
of outdoor pollutant variability, while the time spent travelling behind a bus was statistically 
significant for PM2.5, lung-deposited SA, and CO (adj-R2 values = 0.12, 0.10, 0.13). The 
geometric mean diameter (GMD) for outdoor aerosol was 34 nm. Larger cabin GMDs were 
observed when windows were closed compared to open (b = 4.3, p-value = <0.01). When windows 
were open, cabin total aerosol concentrations tracked those outdoors. With windows closed, the 
pollutants took longer to enter the vehicle cabin, but also longer to exit it. Concentrations of 
pollutants in cabin were influenced by outdoor concentrations, ambient temperature, and the 
window/ventilation parameters. As expected, particle number concentrations were impacted the 
most by changes to window position / ventilation, and PM2.5 the least. Car drivers can expect their 
highest exposures when driving with windows open or the fan on, and their lowest exposures 
during windows closed or the AC on. Final linear mixed-effects models could explain between 88–
97% of cabin pollutant concentration variability. An individual may control their commuting 
exposure by applying dynamic behavior modification to adapt to changing pollutant scenarios.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: pbiswas@wustl.edu. 
Supporting Information
This document provides information on the predictor variables used in regression analysis (Table S1), the basic descriptive statistics 
for measured outdoor and cabin pollutant concentrations (Table S2 and S3), the results for Pearson’s product-moment correlation (r) 
(Table S4) and Spearman’s Rank correlation (rs) (for non-parametric data) (Table S5). It also presents photos of the experimental setup 
(Figure S1), and discusses the issue of self-pollution (Section 4.)
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Published in final edited form as:
Atmos Environ (1994). 2017 October ; 166: 130–141. doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2017.07.016.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
Car commuting; exposure assessment; ventilation; pollution; aerosols
1. Introduction
Ambient air pollution is a complex mixture of primary and secondary organic and inorganic 
particulates and gases generated from both anthropogenic (combustion and non-combustion) 
and natural sources. Recent estimates have put the global annual mortality rate from ambient 
particulate matter (PM) pollution at more than 3 million, especially from cardiovascular and 
circulatory diseases, lower respiratory infections, chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder 
(COPD), and lung cancer, making it the 9th most important risk factor to human health 
globally, and the number one environmental risk factor (Lim et al., 2012). The positive 
association with lung cancer lead, in 2013, to the International Agency for Research on 
Cancer (IARC) Working Group to unanimously classify outdoor air pollution as 
carcinogenic to humans (Group 1); PM was evaluated separately and also classified as 
Group 1 (Loomis et al., 2013). In developed countries, transport contributes 25–40% to 
ambient pollutant concentrations collectively, although for some pollutants such as carbon 
monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and ultrafine particles (UFP), traffic may contribute 
up to 90% (Keuken et al., 2005; Greenbaum, 2013). In fact, diesel and gasoline exhaust have 
both been classed by the IARC as Group 1 and Group 2B carcinogens, respectively(Russell, 
2013). Because traffic emissions are a major source of pollutants, peak concentrations tend 
to occur near or on roads, which is where an individual may receive a disproportionately 
large fraction of their total daily personal exposures. Indeed studies have reported elevated 
risks for developing asthma and reduced lung function in children living near to heavily-
trafficked roads (Brugge et al., 2007), as well as measured changes in cardiac biomarkers 
and pulmonary function in adults driving or working in private vehicles (cars) (Riediker et 
al., 2004; Heinrich et al., 2005; Sarnat et al., 2014).
Cars continue to dominate the commuting landscape in the US. According to the 2009 
National Household Travel Survey (NHTS) conducted by the US Department of Transport 
(USDOT) (Usdot, 2009), 91% of US commuters travel an average of 24.4 miles (46 
minutes) to and from work by private vehicle; the vast majority (~80%), commute alone 
(Mckenzie, 2015). Indeed, private vehicle ownership has continued to rise since surveys 
began in 1969, so that by 2009 the number of personal vehicles far exceeded the number of 
drivers. In addition, the average age of the US vehicle fleet has also increased so that 40% of 
all private cars are now 10 years of age or older (Usdot, 2009). This has potential 
environmental and health consequences given that older vehicles tend to generate higher 
emissions, due to age-related deterioration of vehicle control systems (Borken-Kleefeld e 
Chen, 2015), impurity-enriched lubricating oil in the crankcase (Russell, 2013), abrasion and 
wear and tear of metallic components (Greenbaum, 2013), and generally more permissive 
emission standards (Krasenbrink et al., 2005). The persistent lack of investment and public 
support continues to hamper the development of transport alternatives, thus vehicle 
ownership and traffic flows are only expected to increase.
Leavey et al.
Page 2
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Many laboratory and field studies have examined pollutant concentrations and commuter 
exposures during car travel (Kaur et al., 2007; Zuurbier et al., 2010; De Nazelle et al., 2012; 
Kingham et al., 2013; Ragettli et al., 2013; Suarez et al., 2014; Good et al., 2016). Factors 
such as vehicle age, fuel type, driving patterns (acceleration / idling), vehicle speed, 
proximity to other cars, road-type, position on the road, self-pollution, traffic mix, 
meteorology, topography, and road condition, have all been reported to influence the local 
pollutant environment outside of a vehicle (Van Wijnen et al., 1995; Knibbs et al., 2010; 
Knibbs et al., 2011; Kingham et al., 2013). And although studies investigating car 
commuting exposures have highlighted elevated cabin pollutant concentrations whilst 
traveling through tunnels and on freeways (Kaminsky et al., 2009; Knibbs et al., 2010), with 
both increasing and decreasing vehicle speeds (Hudda et al., 2012; Ding et al., 2016), and 
higher road and traffic densities (Weichenthal et al., 2015), the air exchange rate (AER) 
(dependent on ventilation parameters such as window position, the ventilation system (fan/
AC), natural leakage from door seals and window cracks) is highlighted as among the most 
important determinants of cabin concentrations, or cabin particle removal (Hudda et al., 
2011; Knibbs et al., 2011). Kaminsky et al., (2009) observed the highest UFP concentrations 
with AC followed by windows open then windows closed, while Hudda et al., (2012) and 
Ding et al., (2016) reported lower indoor / outdoor ratios when the fan was operating under 
re-circulation (compared to non-recirculation) mode. The duration of the commute has also 
been highlighted when cumulative exposures were considered (Good et al., 2016), 
something that is often neglected when averages are the main metric with which results are 
described.
Only a few studies have previously obtained simultaneous in-cabin / outdoor measurements. 
Hudda and Fruin (2013) collected multiple particle metrics (UFP, PM2.5, PM10, black 
carbon (BC), particle-bound PAHs) during 3 ventilation modes: fan off, fan on (recirculation 
mode), fan on (outside air). They also conducted earlier studies measuring particle number 
size distributions (PNSD) and total particle number concentrations (Hudda et al., 2011; 
Hudda et al., 2012). Zhu et al., (2007) also measured in-cabin / outdoor PNSD and particle 
number concentrations in 3 vehicles for the same ventilation modes as the previous study. 
Bigazzi and Figliozzi (2012) measured UFP in 3 vehicles for a range of ventilation 
scenarios, however simultaneous in-cabin / outdoor measurements were only collected 
during the latter part of the study. Finally, Weichenthal et al., (2015) measured simultaneous 
in-cabin / outdoor UFP, BC, CO, and PM2.5 concentrations in 3 cities in Canada in one 
vehicle type; however, the different ventilation scenarios were not investigated.
Existing studies provide invaluable insights into the factors controlling cabin concentrations. 
However, one of the main objectives and largest contributions of this work was to collect / 
present simultaneously collected in-cabin and outdoor data for multiple pollutant metrics 
during realistic car commutes. To the authors’ knowledge, no other study has incorporated 
real home-to-work-to-home commutes, thus capturing a real-world, non-contrived 
commuting experience, as well as related complexities. The next objective was to examine 
the parameters effecting both outdoor concentrations and outdoor and cabin associations. 
This study is also unique in conducting regression analysis on potential variables influencing 
the air directly outside of a vehicle, before then trying to ascertain how these variables 
influence the air inside of the vehicle. Four commonly used ventilation parameters were 
Leavey et al.
Page 3
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 investigated: windows open, windows closed, fan on, AC on, and rigorous analysis was 
performed using linear regression and mixed-effects models. No other study has previously 
measured these 4 ventilation scenarios using multiple pollutant metrics, and results will 
show how they impact pollutants differently. This is also the first commuting study to 
incorporate lung-deposited surface area (SA) measurements, despite being increasingly cited 
as the particle metric which correlates the most strongly with inflammatory responses 
(Oberdorster, 1996; Brown et al., 2001; Karakoçak et al., 2016). It is also the first study of 
its kind in the Midwest, in spite of the overwhelming reliance of the private motor vehicle in 
this region. The overall aim of this study was to identify when and during which ventilation 
scenarios commuters may receive their highest exposures, and how this may be mitigated 
through behavior modification.
2. Methods
2.1 Site / location
Measurements were collected along 2 routes from Washington University in St Louis’ south-
east parking lot (work destination) to 2 residential locations: one in Shaw (63110), an inner-
city residential neighborhood with a grid layout approximately 6 miles south-east of the 
university, and one in Hazelwood (63042), a residential / industrial suburban location, 
around 18 miles north-west of the university and 4 miles north of Lambert International 
airport (Figure 1). These routes comprise both freeways and non-freeway roads with varying 
aspect (width-to-height) ratios and surroundings. They also pass several industries including 
an aircraft manufacturing facility, a mail shipping center, a pharmaceutical and chemical 
business, a coffee roasting factory, and various stores, restaurants, and fast-food eateries. 
Traffic densities differed depending on the road-types being traversed and the time of day.
2.2 Experimental plan
Real-time simultaneous particulate matter and CO measurements were collected outside and 
inside of an on-road car operating under different ventilation scenarios: windows open, 
windows closed, fan on (midway, no recirculation), AC on (midway, no recirculation). When 
either the fan or AC were operating, the windows were closed. Two vehicles with gasoline-
fueled internal combustion engines and cabin filters were used in this study: a Hyundai 
Sonata 2013 (Car 1), and a Subaru Outback 2010 (Car 2). Car 1 had driven 18,500 miles 
since the cabin filter had been changed, and the Hyundai, 15,000 miles. Each vehicle was 
fitted with five pairs of instruments. The first set of instruments sampled outdoor air: the 
inlet was located 3 cm outside of the back left passenger window. A 2 cm strip of foam was 
fitted into a crack in the window with feed-through for the tubing and a CO sensor. A second 
set of identical instruments sampled cabin air: this inlet was located in what would be 
considered the breathing zone of a front seat passenger. A schematic of the experimental 
setup is presented in Figure 2, while photographs of the cars and experimental setup are 
provided in the Supporting Information (Figures S1). Minimal amounts of conductive 
silicone tubing were used for all aerosol instruments to minimize particle losses, and all 
tubing lengths were replicated for each set of instruments so that results would be 
comparable. No tubing was necessary for the CO sensors. The instrument setup was 
identical within each vehicle.
Leavey et al.
Page 4
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Data from a total of 56 commutes were collected across 25 non-consecutive days from 
September – November, 2014, between 8–10am, and 4–7 pm - capturing at least some of the 
morning and evening rush hours. Due to instrument and personnel limitations, sometimes 
more than 2 commutes were performed in one day. Each ventilation scenario was measured 
a minimum of 12 times. A dashboard surveillance camera (dashcam) (Figure 2) was also 
installed on the front windshield to provide real-time geopositioning information (location 
and speed). This enabled traffic density and type to be recorded and categorized post hoc, 
and pollutant data to be matched with precise vehicle location and surrounding traffic. Other 
relevant events were also either captured visually – such as times the vehicle was following a 
bus or truck, or communicated verbally via the driver, such as vehicles travelling to the left 
of the measurement vehicle (close to the outdoor inlet), or smells - cigarette smoke, or food 
from restaurants. Meteorological data (temperature, wind speed, relative humidity, dew point 
and wind direction), and ambient pollutant data (NOx, PM2.5, CO) are known to influence 
urban particulate concentrations (Hitchins et al., 2000; Charron e Harrison, 2003; Janhäll et 
al., 2004; Zhang e Wexler, 2004; Kuhn et al., 2005; Longley et al., 2005; Westerdahl et al., 
2005; Hussein et al., 2006; Leavey, 2009) and were collected post-hoc from nearby fixed site 
monitors (FSM), operated by NOAA’s National Climate Data Center (NCDC) and the US 
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), respectively (Ncdc, 2015; Usepa, 2015) to be 
used in subsequent regression analysis. A complete list of the explanatory variables collected 
in this study is provided in the Supporting Information (Table S1). Given that one inlet was 
outside without shelter, no measurements were collected when it was raining.
2.3 Instruments
All instruments were light-weight, portable, and battery-powered with fast response times so 
that changes in pollutant concentrations could be easily captured. A P-TRAK Ultrafine 
Particle Counter 8525 (TSI, Inc.) measured particle numbers. It uses isopropyl alcohol to 
grow the particle, and condensation particle counter (CPC) technology to count particles in 
the size range 0.02 to 1 μm for concentrations up to 5×105 #/cc. A DustTrak II Aerosol 
Monitor 8532 (TSI Inc.) measured particle mass (PM2.5) concentrations up to 150 mg/m3 
using the principles of light-scattering. Lung-deposited surface area (SA) was measured 
using an AeroTrak 9000 Nanoparticle Aerosol Monitor (TSI Inc.), reporting the fraction of 
SA of particles in the size range 0.01 to 1 μm2/cm3 that would deposit in different regions of 
the respiratory tract according to the IARC. A more complete description is provided in 
Leavey et al., (2013). For this study, the fraction of particles depositing in the alveolar (A) 
region was collected. A Portable Aerosol Mobility Spectrometer (PAMS) (Kanomax, Japan, 
Inc.) was used to measure particle number size distributions (PNSD) in the size range 0.014 
to 0.863 μm. PAMS uses a bipolar charger to charge particles which can then be classified 
using a differential mobility analyzer (DMA) (Qi e Kulkarni, 2016), and a CPC to count 
these classified particles (Kulkarni et al., 2016). Finally, a Lascar EL-USB-CO300 sensor 
(Lascar Electronics) was used to measure CO with one reading every 10 seconds for 
concentrations between 0–300 ppm. All instrument and laptop timestamps were 
synchronized to the dashcam time prior to each measurement, to ensure that location and 
pollutant data were matched. Zero calibration and maintenance protocols were followed 
between samples. All instruments had been recently calibrated by the manufacturer. In 
addition, they were collocated and calibrated in the laboratory before and after the 
Leavey et al.
Page 5
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 measurement study, using sodium chloride generated from a nebulizer. Only minimal 
correction factors (<5%) were applied to the older Ptrak, AeroTrak, and DustTrak to 
facilitate comparisons.
2.4 Data analysis
All instrument data were imported into TrakPro software (version 4.6.1.0, TSI Inc.) and 
subsequently exported into Excel 2013, where they were checked manually and cleaned. 
Although a total of 56 commutes were made, one was abandoned due to rain. Another 4 
commutes only collected particle number concentrations (P-TRAK) and particle number 
size distributions (PAMS). Instrument malfunctions caused some data losses. The final 
dataset was comprised of between 47–51 samples for every instrument. A matrix was 
generated and imported into R version 3.2.5 (2016-04-14) Copyright © 2016 The R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing), for statistical analysis. The following R packages 
were also used: lme4 (Bates et al., 2015), car (Fox e Weisberg, 2011), ggplot2 (Wickham, 
2009), nortest (Gross e Ligges, 2015), matrix (Bates e Maechler, 2016), sjmisc (Lüdecke, 
2016a), and sjPlot (Lüdecke, 2016b). All graphics were generated in SigmaPlot 11.0.0.75 
Copyright © 2008 Systat Software, Inc.
Many statistical tests require data be normally distributed. All continuous variables were 
tested for normality using a range of graphical analysis tools (histograms, boxplots, stem 
plots, qq-plots), combined with formal hypothesis tests (Shapiro-Wilk and Anderson-
Darling). Those that did not satisfy these tests of normality were log-transformed and 
retested. All dependent variables were positively skewed and were log-transformed, thus 
ensuring normality. Analyses were conducted on data for the whole car journey. Because the 
CO data contained many zero data points they were problematic to transform, and so the 
total area under the curve was selected as the dependent variables’ statistical metric to 
examine both cabin and outdoor concentrations for all pollutants, log-transformed to ensure 
normality (Osborne e Waters, 2002), with the exception of PNSD where GMD was used.
Regression analysis was the primary method of statistical testing used in this study to 
ascertain the factors influencing measured outdoor and cabin pollutant concentrations. 
However, samples collected on either the same or consecutive days may have more in 
common with each other than with other days. This may have an “unpredictable” and 
“random” influence on the data (Winter, 2013). Therefore linear mixed-effects models 
(LME), which are extensions of linear regression models and fit by maximum likelihood, 
were built for each dependent pollutant variable, with instruction from several tutorials 
(Winter, 2013; Iqss, 2016; Lüdecke, 2016b). The fixed-effect was one independent variable, 
and the random-effect (intercept) was day (i.e. the day of data collection). For multiple 
predictors, each model started with the random intercept variable day, while the fixed-effects 
were left empty (null model). Next, one new explanatory fixed-effects variable was added to 
the model (newer model), and the output was then compared to the previous (reduced) 
model using the Likelihood Ratio Test approach (Winter, 2013). If the likelihood of the 
newer model was significantly different from the reduced model (p=<0.05), then the effects 
of this additional explanatory variable were significant and retained as a fixed-effect. This 
methodology was repeated until the model could no longer be improved. All models for the 
Leavey et al.
Page 6
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 outdoor pollutants included the journey duration variable, which was used to control for the 
different commute times.
3 Results and Discussion
3.1 Descriptive statistics
The final dataset was comprised of 55 commutes: 20 for Car 1 and 35 for Car 2. Twenty-one 
of these commutes were in the morning, and the remaining 34 were in the afternoon. 
Average temperature over the course of the field campaign was 66.9 °F (SD 12.0), while 
wind speeds ranged from 1.5 to 20.7 m/s; no particular wind direction dominated. 
Background nitrogen oxide (NOx) concentrations, a good indicator of general air quality in 
urban areas, also fluctuated between 2.5–58 ppb. Descriptive statistics were calculated for all 
pollutant metrics for the entire journey, and results are presented in Tables S2 and S3 of the 
Supporting Information. In addition, a matrix of both Pearson’s product-moment correlation 
(r) and Spearman’s Rank correlation (rs) (for non-parametric data) is also presented (Tables 
S4 and S5). However, it is worth highlighting here that the average geometric mean diameter 
(GMD) of measured outdoor PNSD was 34 nm (minimum 23 nm, maximum 52 nm). 
Similar, though frequently lower GMDs, are reported in the literature, and tend to be 
affected by road incline/decline, vehicle speeds, meteorology, distance from source, and 
sulfur content of the fuel (Palmgren et al., 2003; Kittelson et al., 2004; Zhang e Wexler, 
2004; Dahl et al., 2006; Cheng et al., 2010; Yamada et al., 2016). The relatively high lower 
cut-off of the instrument (14 nm) might explain the higher GMD reported here. The 
following sections will seek to identify the most important parameters effecting a) outdoor 
and b) cabin pollutant concentrations during a commute. The influence of window position / 
ventilation scenarios (windows open, windows closed, fan on, AC on) on the outdoor / cabin 
correlations will also be examined using time-series, and regression analyses with linear 
mixed-effects models.
3.2 Outdoor pollutant concentrations
The pollutant concentrations present directly outside of a vehicle during a commute are a 
combination of ambient pollutant concentrations and pollutant concentrations from nearby 
sources such as traffic and self-pollution, both of which are modified by meteorological, 
geological and topographical conditions. The fixed-effects terms for each LME model was 
one of the selected independent variables (i.e. NOx, wind speed etc. Table S1), controlled for 
journey duration. The random-effects term was the measurement day.
Table 1 presents the results of simple regression analysis for all variables demonstrating a 
significant association with measured outdoor pollutant concentrations (log area under the 
curve) at the 90th, 95th, or 99th % confidence interval (CI). For PNSD, the GMD was the 
dependent variable. In general, the pollutant data collected from a nearby fixed-site monitor, 
and representing ambient pollutant conditions log(NOx, PM2.5 and CO) demonstrated the 
highest positive correlations with outdoor commuting concentrations. Ambient log(NOx) 
proved the strongest predictor of particle number concentrations (#/cc) with an adj-R2 of 
0.36, which is not surprising given they share a common principal source in urban areas: 
vehicular emissions (Aqeg, 2005). Perhaps again unsurprisingly, ambient log(PM2.5) was the 
Leavey et al.
Page 7
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 best ambient pollutant metric to represent commuting PM2.5 (μg/m3), explaining about 33% 
of the variance. Lung-deposited SA (μm2/m3) was explained to some degree by all 3 
ambient metrics (with adj-R2 values of between 0.24 – 0.31), again highlighting traffic as a 
major source; while CO (ppm) correlated only with ambient log(PM2.5). While a major 
source of CO and NOx in urban areas are engine emissions from automobiles, PM2.5 is 
derived from both engine and non-engine sources if measured close to traffic (Palmgren et 
al., 2003; Thorpe e Harrison, 2008), but also from crustal matter, dust, and long-range 
transport as well (Querol et al., 2001; Hueglin et al., 2005). No correlation between the 
ambient pollutants and GMD was observed. These findings highlight that ambient pollutants 
may not represent local pollutant metrics equally, thus they should be selected carefully 
depending on which pollutant metric is of most concern.
The majority of meteorological variables also proved to be significantly correlated with 
outdoor commuting particulate pollutants, for example increasing wind speed was associated 
with a decrease in particle numbers, lung-deposited SA, and to a certain extent particle size 
(GMD) (adj-R2 = 0.25, 0.28, and 0.05 respectively). This is likely due to increased dilution 
and mixing with the cleaner background air (Shi et al., 1999; Hitchins et al., 2000; Zhu and 
Hinds, 2005), as well as increased transport and deposition rates (Zhang and Wexler, 2004). 
According to Pirjola et al (2006), the correlation between particles and wind speed is 
especially strong within 10 m of a roadside, primarily for particles below 100 nm, while 
Charron & Harrison (2003) only reported correlations for particles 30–450 nm in size. 
Ambient temperature demonstrated a negative association with particle numbers – with 
higher particle concentrations at lower temperatures (adj-R2 0.18). Temperature also 
correlated, this time positively, with PNSD, so that for every 1 unit increase in temperature 
there was a 0.31 nm increase in GMD (adj-R2 of 0.18; p-value 0.02). These trends may be 
explained in part by: 1) increased coagulation and diffusion in warmer temperatures in part 
from the increased vertical mixing of air masses (Shi et al., 1999; Hussein et al., 2006), 
causing a shift to larger particles and thus fewer numbers; 2) decreased secondary particle 
formation from the condensation of precursor gases (Wehner et al., 2002), and 3) a reduction 
in the rate of condensation growth of fresh particles (Yao et al., 2007). A positive correlation 
was also observed for PM2.5, which has been associated in previous studies with increased 
sulfate formation in warmer temperatures from SO2 oxidation (Ito et al., 2007; Tai et al., 
2010), and atmospheric stagnation (Tai et al., 2010), and in a more localized setting 
decreased brake-pad efficiency and increased dust generation (Grigoratos e Martini, 2014). 
Different wind direction patterns in warmer temperatures have also been reported (Ito et al., 
2007); indeed in this study easterlies dominated during warmer temperatures, and higher 
PM2.5 concentrations were measured during these easterlies (Table 1). It is important to add 
that driving behavior, traffic-type, and surface-to-tire interactions may also differ during 
warmer temperatures.
The time spent (seconds) travelling behind a bus (TimeBB, Table 1) was positively 
associated with PM2.5, lung-deposited SA, and CO. This is not surprising as old diesel buses 
are considered gross-polluters, and many studies have linked them with elevated on-road 
pollutant concentrations (Dennekamp et al., 2002; Weijers et al., 2004; Kaur et al., 2007; 
Briggs et al., 2008). However, the associations between the explanatory traffic variables - 
traffic density (0,1,2), presence of buses / trucks (0,1), direction (0,1) and the measured 
Leavey et al.
Page 8
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 outdoor pollutants were generally weak, and may come down to classification issues, for 
example: 1) It was difficult to reduce an entire commute into a single traffic-density class, 
because the commutes were comprised of many roads with different traffic densities. 2) 
Commuting traffic was often unidirectional and many of the commutes were counter-traffic 
congestion. For instance, the drive home from work was often moderate traffic but the 
freeway on the other side of the road was completely jammed. Therefore allocating a 
moderate classification to the commute may neglect the potential influence of counter 
traffic. 3) Wind variables, especially wind direction, may influence the degree that the other 
side of the road is influencing the road commuted. 4) Siegmann et al., (2008) discusses 
“superpolluters” – attributing much of the pollution emitted locally to a small percentage of 
poorly maintained vehicles. Therefore, a relevant traffic variable may focus less on traffic 
density, and more on the type of surrounding traffic, traffic mix, or its upkeep. As such, a car 
commuter’s exposure may be influenced more by the type of traffic in the immediate 
surroundings than the density of traffic and route selection. Of course, the chance of 
interacting with a superpolluter is increased with a higher traffic density, and no examination 
of the effects of idling and acceleration with increasing traffic density was conducted. The 
traffic density variable was also compared to the ambient pollution variables log(NOx, 
PM2.5, and CO), which had correlated fairly well with measured outdoor pollutant 
concentrations. While ambient log(NOx) and log(CO) demonstrated some correlation with 
traffic density (R2 = 0.04 and 0.06, p-values = <0.07), when regressions were controlled for 
the time of day, then traffic was no longer important, thus reinforcing the points made 
previously. Although pollutant concentrations were generally higher during morning 
commutes compared to afternoon, once the regressions included the ambient pollutants, this 
variable was no longer significant. Finally, no statistical difference between the routes driven 
by the 2 cars were observed. When the linear mixed-effects models were generated using 
one ambient pollutant metric and one meteorological metric, the random variable day was 
able to explain 32%, 45%, 45%, 6%, and 19% of the random variability for particle 
numbers, lung-deposited SA, PM2.5, CO, and GMD, respectively (Iqss, 2016). In general, 
PM2.5 was the easiest pollutant metric to predict, and CO and GMD the most difficult.
3.3 In-cabin and outdoor time-series
The influence of window position and ventilation parameters on cabin / outdoor correlations 
was a key focus of this study. The following section compares two scenarios: a) windows 
open, and b) windows closed, for the different pollutant metrics, highlighting where the 
similarities and differences lie. The influence of window position as well as the fan and AC 
will also be examined during subsequent regression analysis.
Figures 3(a–h) presents multiple time-series of the 4 pollutant metrics depicting 
simultaneous outdoor and cabin concentrations for windows open and closed. All commutes 
began in a fairly quiet environment (university or residential parking lot / private drive) 
where lower concentrations are expected, before progressing through varying concentration 
fields (including freeways, street canyons, multiple traffic lights, and cross roads), before 
terminating again in a quiet environment. Outdoor concentrations are a combination of both 
local sources and ambient conditions (traffic, weather, topography, other sources), while 
cabin concentrations are typically the product of outdoor concentrations which have been 
Leavey et al.
Page 9
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 subsequently modified by the presence of the vehicle cabin and AER. Contamination due to 
self-pollution was minimal (see Supporting Information Section 4 for more information). In 
general, when windows were open cabin concentrations tracked outdoor concentrations, 
albeit with some reduced variability and slight time lags. This is especially true for particle 
number counts, and to a lesser extent CO. Particle numbers also demonstrated the highest 
outdoor variability of the particle metrics, highlighting the high spatiotemporal variability of 
UFP (<100 nm), the dominant size of particle numbers close to source (traffic). At times 
cabin concentrations even exceeded outdoor concentrations, while other times outdoor 
spikes failed to influence cabin concentrations at all, which is likely due to the short duration 
of the outside elevation.
In contrast, closed windows generally produced a smoothing effect on cabin concentrations, 
with pollutants demonstrating reduced variability, fewer in-cabin spikes, and more 
pronounced time-lags between outdoor-to-cabin elevations, so that as the vehicle passed 
through a high concentration environment the cabin concentrations slowly rose, but equally 
as the vehicle returned to a lower concentration environment the cabin concentrations 
remained elevated, taking a longer time to dilute/diffuse, see Figure 3g (CO). It should also 
be noted that cabin PM2.5 and lung-deposited SA profiles frequently differed from those of 
particle counts and CO, often exhibiting elevated cabin concentrations, at least for periods of 
time, which was exacerbated when windows were closed. This will be examined in more 
detail in further work. Figure 4(a–b) presents cabin and outdoor PNSD averaged across a 
single commute. Distributions were bimodal with outdoor mode diameters around 10–30 
and 90–110 nm (compared to a mean GMD for all runs around 34 nm), with slightly larger 
cabin GMDs when windows were closed. According to Zhu et al (2007), smaller GMDs 
occur when sampling roads with higher diesel emissions which in turn are modified to a 
greater extent by ambient temperature and relative humidity. However, no information on 
diesel versus gasoline emission ratios were collected in this study. Finally, Figure 4(c–j) 
displays 20, 60, 100, and 250nm particle counts, for windows opens and closed. Similar to 
previous observations, cabin particle size and concentration track outdoors most closely 
when windows are open, while larger cabin sizes and reduced variability are observed when 
windows are closed. The degree to which cabin concentrations are influenced by outdoor 
concentrations depends on the AER and the particle penetration factor which is dependent 
on particle size, with higher ratios generally reported for larger particles (Zhu et al., 2005); 
however more data is required before conclusions for this study can be drawn.
3.4 In-cabin pollutant concentrations
This section provides a more rigorous assessment of commuter exposure by examining cabin 
pollutant concentrations using LME. The dependent variables were the log-transformed 
measured cabin pollutant concentrations, the fixed-effect variables were the log-transformed 
outdoor measured concentrations, and the categorical ventilation variable: windows open 
(reference level), windows closed, fan on, AC on. The random intercept variable was day. 
Models were not controlled for journey duration because the outdoor pollutant variable was 
now included. Results demonstrated that cabin pollutants were predominantly influenced by 
the outdoor concentrations, which in this study were able to explain 64%, 28%, 92%, 28%, 
and 16% of cabin variability for particle numbers, lung-deposited SA, PM2.5, CO 
Leavey et al.
Page 10
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 concentrations, and GMD, respectively (p-values <0.01). Lung-deposited SA demonstrated 
lower cabin concentrations compared to outdoor (b = 0.5257, p-value <0.01) while the size 
of cabin particles tended to be slightly smaller than outside (b = 0.71, p-value = <0.01).
However, the vehicle’s ventilation scenario exerted a significant influence on cabin / outdoor 
correlations for all pollutants (Figure 6). For particle numbers, cabin concentrations tracked 
outdoor concentrations most closely when windows were open (reference level). 
Associations were significantly modified when the fan was running (b = −0.217), and even 
more so when the AC was running (b = −0.416), or the windows were closed (b = −0.563) 
(p-values <0.05). This ventilation variable explained 7% of the total cabin variation in 
particle numbers. In fact, running the AC or keeping the windows closed provided such a 
protective influence that cabin / outdoor correlations were no longer significantly correlated. 
A similar trend was also observed for lung-deposited SA. While the ambient variable 
temperature was not significant for outdoor lung-deposited SA concentrations, it was a 
strong predictor of cabin SA concentrations with higher concentrations measured in warmer 
temperatures (b = 0.04, p-value = <0.01). This may indicate some secondary organic aerosol 
(SOA) formation due to the correlation between ambient temperature and ambient ozone, 
and ambient ozone and SOA (Lamorena and Lee, 2008), although this was not observed for 
any other measured pollutant. Cabin PM2.5 concentrations tracked measured outdoor 
concentrations the most closely, and were the least influenced by any change in ventilation 
parameters (<1%). Cabin CO concentrations were lower than their outdoor counterparts (b = 
0.889, p-value <0.01), and modified the most when windows were closed, closely followed 
by running the AC. In fact, for 33% of journeys, no cabin CO was recorded, and 75% of 
these cases were observed when either the AC was running or windows were closed, again 
highlighting the protective effect of these ventilation parameters. Running the fan generated 
cabin concentrations that tracked outdoor concentrations the most closely (b = 0.875) but 
results were not statistically significant. Larger cabin particle sizes (GMD) were observed 
when windows were closed compared to open (b = 4.3, p-value <0.05), which may be 
explained by a lower penetration factor and higher deposition rates for particles <100 nm 
(Xu et al., 2010), and reduced dilution permitting increased time for coagulation (Cyrys et 
al., 2004). Finally, the effect of the car make was examined to establish whether the cabin / 
outdoor correlations and ventilation parameters were different between cars. None was 
observed for any of the pollutants. The final LME models presented in Figure 5a–d were 
able to predict 97%, 88%, 96% and 90% of the measured cabin concentrations for particle 
numbers, lung-deposited SA, PM2.5, and GMD, respectively. The LME model for CO was 
unstable and was not included in the final figure. All final models satisfied the normality 
requirements during residual diagnostics (residual plots, histograms, qq-plots). Satisfactory 
validation of these models was also completed (results not shown).
When either the fan or AC were operating, air was not being recirculated in the vehicle 
cabin. However, the AC consistently resulted in lower cabin concentrations compared to the 
fan. The process of thermophoretic deposition is proposed as a possible explanation. When 
air enters the vehicle duct, it passes through the filter and then a fan which accelerates the 
air. Next, it passes through an evaporator which, when the AC is operating, cools the air 
depending on the temperature setting, the amount of Freon in the system, and ambient 
temperature and humidity, before entering the vehicle cabin via the vents. When the fan is 
Leavey et al.
Page 11
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 operating, the outdoor air follows the same trajectory with the only exception being that the 
evaporator is no longer cooling the air. The increased temperature gradient that exists 
between ambient air and the evaporator surface when the AC is operating results in a higher 
thermophoretic velocity and subsequently a higher particle deposition rate, i.e. more 
particles are depositing in the duct and so fewer particles are entering the cabin. The same 
explanation may be used to explain the higher GMD observed when the AC was operating 
where again the increased temperature gradient causes a higher thermophoretic velocity and 
particle deposition rate especially for the smaller particles.
There are many factors that complicate cabin / outdoor pollutant correlations. 1) The 
location of a source (in front of / adjacent to car) may impact the cabin and outdoor inlets 
differently, as will the lane the measurement vehicle is in (its traffic density, proximity to 
other lanes, proximity to moving traffic). 2) Vehicle speed will affect the generation of tail-
pipe and non-engine emissions (resuspension from mechanical turbulence) (Kittelson et al., 
2004; Dahl et al., 2006), the infiltration of particulates to the cabin by altering the AER of 
the vehicle (Xu et al., 2010; Hudda et al., 2011; Knibbs et al., 2011; Ding et al., 2016), and 
how long a vehicle spends in a given location (see point 4 below). Because speed is 
dynamic, it was too difficult to capture for the whole commute; however, its importance will 
be examined in future work. 3) Wind speed and direction will affect how emissions are 
diluted, and whether they are channeled towards or away from the measurement vehicle; it 
may also influence the penetration of these emissions into the vehicle. 4) Time-scale: the 
longer a vehicle is exposed to high outdoor concentrations the more they may penetrate the 
vehicle cavity. This can be observed in the time-series in Figure 3. If a vehicle passes only 
briefly through a polluted environment, its cabin may offer protection from the pollutants; 
conversely if it spends a prolonged time in elevated concentrations, the cabin may trap 
pollutants inside of the vehicle. This again is dependent on AER and ventilation parameters. 
5) Self-pollution from the engine, resuspension of dust inside the vehicle, and isopropyl 
emissions from the 4 particle number instruments may have also complicated the cabin and 
outdoor correlations (See Supporting Information). Some contribution from SOA is also 
likely, especially given the higher cabin concentrations sometimes observed at the start of 
the commute (which is not believed to be related to instrument emissions).
While there are smart cars currently on the market with HEPA filters installed to remove 
particulates including pollen and viruses, most vehicles are not equipped with such efficient 
removal devices. This study demonstrates that a driver may still be able to control their 
commuting exposure by being cognizant of their pollutant environment and applying 
dynamic behavior modification to adapt to changing scenarios. For example, when a driver 
enters a high pollutant environment they could turn on the AC to reduce intake of the dirty 
air; when they enter a clean environment they could open their windows thus flushing 
pollutants from the vehicle. Of course, knowing when the air is clean or dirty is not always 
intuitive. Although much research is currently being conducted on mapping street pollution 
using multiple distributed wireless sensors, or disseminating local air quality along with 
local weather using a mobile app, a driver’s ability to access information on the real-time air 
quality of a specific driving route is presently beyond the grasp of most commuters. What is 
more, this data will not provide information on what is actually occurring inside of a vehicle. 
Perhaps in the future cars may be equipped with pollutant sensors that can measure the 
Leavey et al.
Page 12
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 outdoor air and automatically apply mechanisms to prevent its infiltration indoors. Until that 
technology is available, further examination of the data collected during this campaign will 
be performed with the aim of examining the different roadway microenvironments, and 
providing some interim solutions to reduce commuter exposure.
4. Conclusion
The objective of this study was to collect simultaneous real-time particulate and CO 
measurements outside and inside of an on-road car, to identify the parameters effecting both 
outdoor concentrations and outdoor and cabin associations, and to examine when commuters 
receive their highest exposures and how this may be mitigated. Four ventilation parameters 
were investigated: windows open, windows closed, fan on, AC on, and rigorous analysis was 
performed using linear regression and mixed-effects models. The final dataset was 
comprised of 55 commutes. Ambient NOx and PM2.5 were important predictors of pollutant 
concentrations outside of a moving vehicle, explaining 18–36% of variability, while the 
meteorological variables (for example wind speed and temperature) explained between 5–
44%. Of the traffic variables, only the time spent travelling behind a bus was significantly 
significant for PM2.5, lung-deposited SA, and CO. The lack of significance for the other 
traffic variables is likely due to coding difficulties and this will be examined in further work. 
Time-series analysis demonstrated that cabin concentrations tended to track measured 
outdoor concentrations albeit with some reduced variability and time-lags when windows 
were open. When windows were closed, a smoothing effect occurred so that whether a 
pollutant entered the cabin was in part due to the outside pollutant concentration and the 
time spent in that elevated concentration. In general, pollutants took longer to enter the 
vehicle, but also longer to exit it. The vehicle cabin may therefore be viewed as acting both 
as a buffer - reducing the penetration of pollutants into the vehicle, and as a sink – capturing 
pollutants and slowing dispersion. In-cabin pollutants were predominantly influenced by the 
measured outdoor concentrations, which were able to explain 64%, 28%, 92%, 28%, and 
16% of cabin variability for particle numbers, lung-deposited SA, PM2.5, CO concentrations, 
and GMD, respectively (p-values <0.01). The vehicle’s ventilation parameters, which effect 
the AER and thus particle penetration or removal, were also important. Cabin pollutant 
concentrations tracked outdoor concentrations most closely when windows were open or the 
fan was running. Commuting with the windows closed or the AC on reduced cabin 
concentrations significantly enough to disrupt cabin / outdoor correlations for the majority of 
measured pollutants, and frequently prevented the diffusion of CO into the vehicle. Running 
the AC also significantly increased the mean size of particle numbers measured inside the 
vehicle. Particle number concentrations were the most effected by changing ventilation 
scenarios, with PM2.5 largely immune to such changes. In general however, car drivers can 
expect their highest exposures when driving with windows open or the fan on, and their 
lowest with windows closed or the AC running. A driver may be able to control their 
commuting exposures by being cognizant of their pollutant environment and applying 
dynamic behavior modification to adapt to changing scenarios. A more detailed examination 
of these changing pollutant scenarios in different roadway microenvironments will be 
conducted in follow-up work in an attempt to further identify important parameters 
influencing a commuter’s exposure, from which mitigation strategies can be developed.
Leavey et al.
Page 13
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the Lopata Environment and the McDonnell Academy Global Energy and 
Environmental Partnership (MAGEEP) at Washington University in St. Louis (WUSTL). The authors thank 
Professor Jay Turner for his guidance on data analysis and model preparation. S. Patel thanks the McDonnell 
International Scholars Academy of WUSTL, and Arch Coal Inc. for the graduate fellowship.
References
AQEG, A. Q. E. G.. Particulate Matter in the United Kingdom. Department of Environment, Food and 
Rural Affairs (DEFRA); London: 2005. p. 1-444.
BATES, D., MAECHLER, M. [Acesso em: 10-04-16] Sparse and Dense Matrix Classes and Methods. 
2016. Disponível em: < http://Matrix.R-forge.R-project.org/ >
BATES D, et al. Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software. 
2015; 67(1):1–48.
BIGAZZI AY, FIGLIOZZI MA. Impacts of freeway traffic conditions on in-vehicle exposure to 
ultrafine particulate matter. Atmospheric Environment. 2012; 60:495–503.
BORKEN-KLEEFELD J, CHEN Y. New emission deterioration rates for gasoline cars - Results from 
long-term measurements. Atmospheric Environment. 2015; 101:58–64.
BRIGGS DJ, et al. Effects of travel mode on exposures to particulate air pollution. Environment 
International. 2008; 34:12–22. [PubMed: 17688949] 
BROWN DM, et al. Size-dependent proinflammatory effects of ultrafine polystyrene particles: a role 
for surface area and oxidative stress in the enhanced activity of ultrafines. Toxicology and applied 
pharmacology. 2001; 175(3):191–199. [PubMed: 11559017] 
BRUGGE D, DURANT JL, RIOUX C. Near-highway pollutants in motor vehicle exhaust: A review of 
epidemiologic evidence of cardiac and pulmonary health risks. Environmental Health. 2007; 6(23)
CHARRON A, HARRISON RM. Primary particle formation from vehicle emissions during exhaust 
dilution in the roadside atmosphere. Atmospheric Environment. 2003; 37:4109–4119.
CHENG Y-H, LIU Z-S, CHEN C-C. On-road measurements of ultrafine particle concentration profiles 
and their size distributions inside the longest highway tunnel in Southeast Asia. Atmospheric 
Environment. 2010; 44:763–772.
CYRYS J, et al. Relationship between indoor and outdoor levels of fine particle mass, particle number 
concentrations and black smoke under different ventilation conditions. J Expo Anal Environ 
Epidemiol. 2004; 14(4):275–283. Disponível em: < http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/sj.jea.7500317 >. 
[PubMed: 15254474] 
DAHL A, et al. Traffic-generated emissions of ultrafine particles from pavement–tire interface. 
Atmospheric Environment. 2006; 40:1314–1323.
DE NAZELLEA, et al. A travel mode comparison of commuters’ exposures to air pollutants in 
Barcelona. Atmospheric Environment. 2012; 59:151–159.
DENNEKAMP M, et al. Exposure to Ultrafine Particles and PM2.5 in Different Micro-environments. 
Annual of Occupational Hygiene. 2002; 46(1):412–414.
DING H, et al. Analysis of PM2.5 distribution and transfer characteristics in a car cabin. Energy and 
Buildings. 2016; 127:252–258.
FOX, J., WEISBERG, S. An {R} Companion to Applied Regression. 2. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 
2011. Disponível em: < http://socserv.socsci.mcmaster.ca/jfox/Books/Companion >
GOOD N, et al. The Fort Collins Commuter Study: Impact of route type and transport mode on 
personal exposure to multiple air pollutants. Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental 
Epidemiology. 2016; 26:397–404. [PubMed: 26507004] 
Leavey et al.
Page 14
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 GREENBAUM, DS. SOURCES OF AIR POLLUTION. World Health Organization; 2013. 
GASOLINE AND DIESEL ENGINES. STRAIF, K.,COHEN, A., et al: IARC Scientific 
Publication No.161
GRIGORATOS, T., MARTINI, G. Brake and tyre wear PM: Literature Review. European 
Commission; 2014. Non-exhaust traffic related emissions. (EUR 26648 EN)
GROSS, J., LIGGES, U. Tests for Normality. 2015. 
HEINRICH, J., et al. Health effects of transport-related air pollution. World Health Organization 
(WHO); 2005. Studies on health effects of transport-related air pollution; p. 
125-183.KRZYZANOWSKI, M.,KUNA-DIBBERT, B., et al
HITCHINS J, et al. Concentrations of submicrometre particles from vehicle emissions near a major 
road. Atmospheric Environment. 2000; 34:51–59.
HUDDA N, et al. Linking in-vehicle ultrafine particle exposures to on-road concentrations. 
Atmospheric Environment. 2012; 59:578e586. [PubMed: 23888122] 
HUDDA N, FRUIN S. Models for predicting the ratio of particulate pollutant concentrations inside 
vehicles to roadways. Environmental science & technology. 2013; 47(19):11048–11055. [PubMed: 
23957386] 
HUDDA N, et al. Vehicle and Driving Characteristics That Influence In-Cabin Particle Number 
Concentrations. Environmental Science & Technology. 2011 Oct 15; 452011(20):8691–8697. 
Disponível em: < http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es202025m >. [PubMed: 21928803] 
HUEGLIN C, et al. Chemical characterisation of PM2.5, PM10 and coarse particles at urban, near-city 
and rural sites in Switzerland. Atmospheric Environment. 2005; 39:637–651.
HUSSEIN T, et al. Meteorological dependence of size-fractioned number concentrations of urban 
aerosol particles. Atmospheric Environment. 2006; 40:1427–1440.
IQSS. [Acesso em: 05-25-2016] Institute for Quantitative Social Science, Harvard University: 
Multilevel Modeling. 2016. Disponível em: < http://tutorials.iq.harvard.edu/R/Rstatistics/
Rstatistics.html#orgheadline36 >
ITO K, THURSTON GD, SILVERMAN RA. Characterization of PM2.5, gaseous pollutants, and 
meteorological interactions in the context of time-series health effects models. Journal of Exposure 
Science and Environmental Epidemiology. 2007; 17:S45–S60. [PubMed: 18079764] 
JANHÄLL S, et al. Size resolved traffic emission factors of submicrometer particles. Atmospheric 
Environment. 2004; 38:4331–4340.
KAMINSKY JA, et al. In-Cabin Commuter Exposure to Ultrafine Particles on Commuter Roads in and 
around Hong Kong’s Tseung Kwan O Tunnel. Aerosol and Air Quality Research. 2009; 9:353–
357.
KARAKOÇAK BB, et al. Biocompatibility of gold nanoparticles in retinal pigment epithelial cell line. 
Toxicology in Vitro. 2016; 37:61–69. [PubMed: 27599945] 
KAUR S, NIEUWENHUIJSENB MJ, COLVILE RN. Fine particulate matter and carbon monoxide 
exposure concentrations in urban street transport microenvironments: a review. Atmospheric 
Environment. 2007; 41:4781–4810.
KEUKEN, M., et al. Health effects of transport-related air pollution. World Health Organization 
(WHO); 2005. Contribution of traffic to levels of ambient air pollution in Europe; p. 
53-80.KRZYZANOWSKI, M.,KUNA-DIBBERT, B., et al: WHO Library Cataloguing in 
Publication Data
KINGHAM S, et al. Variations in exposure to traffic pollution while travelling by different modes in a 
low density, less congested city. Environmental Pollution. 2013; 181:211–218. [PubMed: 
23871818] 
KITTELSON DB, WATTS WF, JOHNSON JP. Nanoparticle emissions on Minnesota highways. 
Atmospheric Environment. 2004; 38:9–19.
KNIBBS LD, COLE-HUNTER T, MORAWSKA L. A review of commuter exposure to ultrafine 
particles and its health effects. Atmospheric Environment. 2011; 45:2611–2622.
KNIBBS LD, DE DEAR RJ, MORAWSKA L. Effect of Cabin Ventilation Rate on Ultrafine Particle 
Exposure Inside Automobiles. Environ Sci Technol. 2010; 44:3546–3551. [PubMed: 20369882] 
KRASENBRINK, A., et al. Health effects of transport-related air pollution. World Health Organization 
(WHO); 2005. Factors determining emissions in the WHO European Region; p. 
Leavey et al.
Page 15
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 7-52.KRZYZANOWSKI, M.,KUNA-DIBBERT, B., et al: WHO Library Cataloguing in 
Publication Data
KUHN T, BISWAS S, SIOUTAS C. Diurnal and seasonal characteristics of particle volatility and 
chemical composition in the vicinity of a light-duty freeway. Atmospheric Environment. 2005; 
39:7154–7166.
KULKARNI P, QI C, FUKUSHIMA N. Development of Portable Aerosol Mobility Spectrometer for 
Personal and Mobile Aerosol Measurement. Aerosol Science and Technology. 2016; 50:1167–
1179.
LAMORENA RB, LEE W. Influence of ozone concentration and temperature on ultra-fine particle and 
gaseous volatile organic compound formations generated during the ozone-initiated reactions with 
emitted terpenes from a car air freshener. Journal of Hazardous Materials. 2008; 158:471–477. 
[PubMed: 18336999] 
LEAVEY, A. Ph.D. School of Earth, Atmospheric and Environmental Sciences, University of 
Manchester; Manchester: 2009. Insights into the variables controlling human exposure to ultrafine 
particle concentrations in urban affinity zones; p. 397
LEAVEY A, et al. Comparison of Measured Particle Lung-Deposited Surface Area Concentrations by 
an Aerotrak 9000 Using Size Distribution Measurements for a Range of Combustion Aerosols. 
Aerosol Science and Technology. 2013; 47:966–978.
LIM SS, et al. A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk 
factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a systematic analysis for the Global 
Burden of Disease Study 2010. The Lancet. 2012; 380:2224–60.
LONGLEY ID, et al. Using NOx and CO monitoring data to indicate fine aerosol number 
concentrations and emission factors in three UK conurbations. Atmospheric Environment. 2005; 
39:5157–5169.
LOOMIS D, GROSSE Y, LAUBY-SECRETAN BEA. The carcinogenicity of outdoor air pollution. 
The Lancet Oncology. 2013; 14(13):1262–1263. [PubMed: 25035875] 
LÜDECKE, D. [Acesso em: 05-23-2016] Data Transformation and Labelled Data Utility Functions. 
2016a. Disponível em: < https://github.com/sjPlot/sjmisc >
LÜDECKE, D. [Acesso em: 05-24-16] sjPlot: Data Visualization for Statistics in Social Science. 
2016b. Disponível em: < https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/sjPlot/index.html >
MCKENZIE, B. American Community Survey Reports. US Department of Commerce. Economics and 
Statistics Administration. US Census Bureau; 2015. Who Drives to Work? Commuting by 
Automobile in the United States: 2013; p. 1-28.(ACS-32)
NCDC, N. C. F. E. I. Quality Controlled Local Climatological Data (QCLCD). 2015. 
OBERDORSTER G. Significance of particle parameters in the evaluation of exposure-dose-response 
relationships of inhaled particles. Inhalation toxicology. 1996; 8:73–89. [PubMed: 11542496] 
OSBORNE J, WATERS E. Four assumptions of multiple regression that researchers should always 
test. Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation. 2002; 8(2) Disponível em: < http://
PAREonline.net/getvn.asp?v=8&n=2 >. 
PALMGREN F, et al. Characterisation of particle emissions from the driving car fleet and the 
contribution to ambient and indoor particle concentrations. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth. 
2003; 28:327–334.
PIRJOLA L, et al. Dispersion of particles and trace gases nearby a city highway: Mobile laboratory 
measurements in Finland. Atmospheric Environment. 2006; 40:867–879.
QI C, KULKARNI P. Miniature Differential Mobility Analyzer for Compact Field-Portable 
Spectrometers. Aerosol Science and Technology. 2016; 50:1145–1154.
QUEROL X, et al. PM10 and PM2.5 source apportionment in the Barcelona Metropolitan area, 
Catalonia, Spain. Atmospheric Environment. 2001; 35:6407–6419.
RAGETTLI MS, et al. Commuter exposure to ultrafine particles in different urban locations, 
transportation modes and routes. Atmospheric Environment. 2013; 77:376–384.
RIEDIKER M, et al. Particulate Matter Exposure in Cars is Associated with Cardiovascular Effects in 
Healthy Young Men. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004; 169:934–940. [PubMed: 14962820] 
RUSSELL, A. Air Pollution and Cancer. World Health Organization; 2013. COMBUSTION 
EMISSIONS. STRAIF, K.,COHEN, A., et al: IARC Scientific Publication No.161
Leavey et al.
Page 16
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 SARNAT JA, et al. Exposure to traffic pollution, acute inflammation and autonomic response in a 
panel of car commuters. Environmental Research. 2014; 133:66–76. [PubMed: 24906070] 
SHI JP, KHAN AA, HARRISON RM. Measurements of ultrafine particle concentration and size 
distribution in the urban atmosphere. The Science of the Total Environment. 1999; 235:51–64.
SIEGMANN P, et al. A probabilistic source attribution model for nanoparticles in air suspension 
applied on the main roads of Madrid and Mexico City. Atmospheric Environment. 2008; 42:3937–
3948.
SUAREZ L, et al. Personal exposure to particulate matter in commuters using different transport 
modes (bus, bicycle, car and subway) in an assigned route in downtown Santiago, Chile. Environ 
Sci: Processes Impacts. 2014; 16:1309–1317.
TAI APK, MICKLEY LJ, JACOB DJ. Correlations between fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and 
meteorological variables in the United States: Implications for the sensitivity of PM2.5 to climate 
change. Atmospheric Environment. 2010; 44:3976–3984.
THORPE A, HARRISON RM. Sources and properties of non-exhaust particulate matter from road 
traffic: A review. Science of the Total Environment. 2008; 400:270–282. [PubMed: 18635248] 
USDOT, U. D. O. T. [Acesso em: FHWA-PL-ll-022] SUMMARY OF TRAVEL TRENDS: 2009 
National Household Travel Survey; 2009. p. 1-82.Disponível em: < file:///C:/Users/aleavey/
Documents/Commuting_Study/Literature/US%20DOT.%20Summary%20of%20travel%20trends
%20in%20the%20US.pdf >
USEPA, U. E. P. A. Air Quality System Data Mart internet database. 2015. 
VAN WIJNENJH, et al. The exposure of cyclists, car drivers and pedestrians to traffic-related air 
pollutants. International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health. 1995; 67(3):187–
193. EISSN 1432-1246. [PubMed: 7591177] 
WEHNER B, et al. Particle number size distributions in a street canyon and their transformation into 
the urban-air background: measurements and a simple model study. Atmospheric Environment. 
2002; 36:2215–2223.
WEICHENTHAL S, et al. In-Vehicle Exposures to Particulate Air Pollution in Canadian Metropolitan 
Areas: The Urban Transportation Exposure Study. Environ Sci Technol. 2015; 49:597–605. 
[PubMed: 25469563] 
WEIJERS EP, et al. Variability of particulate matter concentrations along roads and motorways 
determined by a moving measurement unit. Atmospheric Environment. 2004; 38:2993–3002.
WESTERDAHL D, et al. Mobile platform measurements of Ultrafine particles and associated 
pollutant concentrations on freeways and residential streets in Los Angeles. Atmospheric 
Environment. 2005; 39:3597–3610.
WICKHAM, H. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Springer-Verlag; New York: 2009. 
Disponível em: < http://ggplot2.org >
WINTER, B. Linear models and linear mixed effects models in R with linguistic applications. 2013. 
Disponível em: < http://arxiv.org/pdf/1308.5499.pdf >
XU B, LIU S, ZHU Y. Ultrafine particle penetration through idealized vehicle cracks. Journal of 
Aerosol Science. 2010; 41(9):859–868. Disponível em: < http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0021850210001205 >. 
YAMADA H, HAYASHI R, TONOKURA K. Simultaneous measurements of on-road/in-vehicle 
nanoparticles and NOx while driving: Actual situations, passenger exposure and secondary 
formations. Science of the Total Environment. 2016; 563–564:944–955.
YAO X, et al. Size distributions and condensation growth of submicron particles in on-road vehicle 
plumes in Hong Kong. Atmospheric Environment. 2007; 41(16):3328–3338.
ZHANG KM, WEXLER AS. Evolution of particle number distribution near roadways – Part 1: 
analysis of aerosol dynamics and its implication for engine emission measurement. Atmospheric 
Environment. 2004; 38:6643–6653.
ZHU Y, et al. In-Cabin Commuter Exposure to Ultrafine Particles on Los Angeles Freeways. 
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY. 2007 Apr 01; 412007(7):2138–2145. 
Disponível em: < http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es0618797 >. [PubMed: 17438754] 
ZHU Y, HINDS WC. Predicting particle number concentrations near a highway based on vertical 
concentration profile. Atmospheric Environment. 2005; 39:1557–1566.
Leavey et al.
Page 17
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ZHU Y, et al. Penetration of freeway ultrafine particles into indoor environments. Aerosol Science. 
2005; 36:303–322.
ZUURBIER M, et al. Commuters’ Exposure to Particulate Matter Air Pollution Is Affected by Mode 
of Transport, Fuel Type, and Route. Environmental Health Perspectives. 2010; 118(6):783–89. 
[PubMed: 20185385] 
Leavey et al.
Page 18
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Map of route travelled during measurement campaign
Leavey et al.
Page 19
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Schematic of the experimental setup.
Leavey et al.
Page 20
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3(a–h). 
Leavey et al.
Page 21
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Time-series depicting simultaneous in-car / outdoor concentrations during windows open 
and windows closed for (a–b) particle number counts, (c–d) lung-deposited SA, (e–f) PM2.5, 
and (g–h) CO. The shaded rectangle is the time spent on the freeway
Leavey et al.
Page 22
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Leavey et al.
Page 23
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4(a–j). 
Simultaneous in-car / outdoor concentrations during windows open and closed for (a–b) 
PNSD, (c–d) 20 nm, (e–f) 60 nm, and (g–h) 100 nm, (i–j) 250 nm.
Leavey et al.
Page 24
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5(a–d). 
Sensitivity models comparing measured and predicted in-car data from LME analysis for: a) 
particle number concentration, b) lung-deposited SA (A), c) PM2.5, and d) GMD.
* = statistically significant at the 95th CI; ** = statistically significant at the 99th CI; all 
dependent variables, with the exception of GMD, were log-transformed, hence all 
coefficients are for the log of the data; b = estimates of regression coefficients; SE = 
standard error; Var = variance; SD = standard deviation. Windows open is the reference level 
for the categorical ventilation variable. 1The intercept for the mean of the explanatory 
variables which is also the mean of all random intercepts.
Leavey et al.
Page 25
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Leavey et al.
Page 26
Table 1
Variables for whole journey outdoor concentrations (log-transformed area under the curve)
Variable
Pollutant metric
Particle numbers (#/cc)
PM2.5 (μg/m3)
Lung-deposited SA (μm2/m3)
CO (ppm)
GMD (nm)
b
p
adj-R2
b
p
adj-R2
b
p
adj-R2
b
p
adj-R2
b
p
adj-R2
log WindSp
−0.333
0.05
0.25
-
-
-
−0.362
0.02
0.28
-
-
-
−4.868
0.07
0.05
Temp
−0.014
0.05
0.18
0.032
<0.01
0.13
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.306
0.02
0.18
RH
0.017
<0.01
0.25
0.029
<0.01
0.09
0.016
<0.01
0.18
-
-
-
-
-
DewPoint
-
-
-
0.053
<0.01
0.44
0.026
<0.01
0.26
0.090
0.01
0.21
-
-
WindDir
 W*
16.25
<0.01
0.17
9.634
<0.01
0.29
10.03
<0.01
0.21
-
-
-
-
-
-
 E
0.253
0.19
0.850
<0.01
0.493
<0.01
-
-
-
-
 N
0.140
0.50
0.440
0.12
0.275
0.15
-
-
-
-
 S
0.354
<0.01
0.618
0.02
0.376
0.02
-
-
-
-
log NOx ^
0.334
<0.01
0.36
0.437
<0.01
0.15
0.368
<0.01
0.24
-
-
-
-
-
-
log PM2.5 ^
0.354
0.01
0.18
0.622
<0.01
0.33
0.389
<0.01
0.27
1.191
0.02
0.16
-
-
log CO ^
0.599
<0.01
0.27
0.867
<0.01
0.13
0.731
<0.01
0.31
-
-
-
-
-
AM*
16.63
<0.01
0.25
9.914
<0.01
0.07
10.52
<0.01
0.12
2.586
0.12
0.08
30.57
<0.01
0.04
PM
−0.403
<0.01
−0.611
<0.01
−0.371
<0.01
−1.447
<0.01
2.587
0.08
TimeBB
-
-
-
0.003
<0.01
0.12
0.002
0.01
0.10
0.008
0.04
0.13
-
-
-
This table presents all continuous and categorical explanatory variables that were significant at the 90th, 95th, or 99th % CI. The metric used to present all dependent variables (except GMD) was area under 
the curve. These data were log-transformed to meet normality assumptions. Because of this metric, all regressions were controlled for the duration of a journey, so that any bias is removed.
GMD = geometric mean diameter. # = number;
*= the reference level of the categorical variable;
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Leavey et al.
Page 27
b = estimates of regression coefficient; p = p-value of b; adj-R2 = coefficient of determination.
^Measured at a fixed-site monitor, part of the EPA distribution network, and log-transformed to meet normality assumptions.
Atmos Environ (1994). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 26.
