 1 
 
 The Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) related to Ebola in West 
Africa was lifted on 29 March 2016. A total of 28 616 confirmed, probable and suspected 
cases have been reported in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, with 11 310 deaths. 
 In the latest cluster, seven confirmed and three probable cases of Ebola virus disease 
(EVD) were reported between 17 March and 6 April from the prefectures of N’Zerekore 
(nine cases) and Macenta (one case) in south-eastern Guinea. In addition, three 
confirmed cases were reported between 1 and 5 April from Monrovia in Liberia; these 
cases, the wife and two children of the Macenta case, travelled from Macenta to 
Monrovia.  
 The index case of this cluster (a 37-year-old female from Koropara sub-prefecture in 
N’Zerekore) had symptom onset on or around 15 February and died on 27 February 
without a confirmed diagnosis. The source of her infection is likely to have been due to 
exposure to infected body fluid from an Ebola survivor.  
 Having contained the last Ebola virus outbreak in March 2016, Sierra Leone has 
maintained heightened surveillance with testing of all reported deaths and prompt 
investigation and testing of all suspected cases. The testing policy will be reviewed on the 
30 June. 
 In Guinea, the last case tested negative for Ebola virus for the second time on 19 April. 
Guinea declared an end to Ebola virus transmission on 1 June. 
 On 9 June the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the end of the most recent 
outbreak of EVD in Liberia. This follows 42 days since the last case tested negative for the 
second time on 28 April. 
Risk assessment:  
Guinea and Liberia declared the end of the most recent outbreak of EVD on 1 and 9 June, 
respectively.  The performance indicators suggest that Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone 
still have variable capacity to prevent, detect and respond to new outbreaks (Table 1). The 
risk of additional outbreaks originating from exposure to infected survivor body fluids 
remains and requires sustained mitigation through counselling on safe sex practices and 
testing of body fluids. 
 
ZIKA VIRUS 
 SITUATION REPORT 
 
 
EBOLA VIRUS DISEASE  
10 JUNE 2016 
 2 
 
Table 1. Key performance indicators in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone for the three 
weeks to 5 June 2016 
 
All data provided by WHO country offices. For definitions of key performance indicators see Annex 1 in previous Ebola Situation Reports.1 
*Data correspond to the three weeks ending 20 December 2015. 
                                                          
 
1 http://apps.who.int/ebola/ebola-situation-reports  
